Control Theory Tech, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 145–159, May 2018
Control Theory and Technology
http://link.springer.com/journal/11768
Experimental evaluation of a real-time GPU-based
pose estimation system for autonomous landing
of rotary wings UAVs
Alessandro BENINI†, Matthew J. RUTHERFORD, Kimon P. VALAVANIS
DU Unmanned Systems Research Institute (DU2SRI), University of Denver (DU), Denver, CO 80208, U.S.A.
Received 22 December 2017; revised 10 April 2018; accepted 10 April 2018
Abstract
This paper proposes a real-time system for pose estimation of an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) using parallel image
processing and a fiducial marker. The system exploits the capabilities of a high-performance CPU/GPU embedded system in
order to provide on-board high-frequency pose estimation enabling autonomous takeoff and landing. The system is evaluated
extensively with lab and field tests using a custom quadrotor. The autonomous landing is successfully demonstrated, through
experimental tests, using the proposed algorithm. The results show that the system is able to provide precise pose estimation
with a framerate of at least 30 fps and an image resolution of 640×480 pixels. The main advantage of the proposed approach is
in the use of the GPU for image filtering and marker detection. The GPU provides an upper bound on the required computation
time regardless of the complexity of the image thereby allowing for robust marker detection even in cluttered environments.
Keywords: UAV, Vision, GPU, Kalman filter
DOI
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11768-018-7297-9
1
Introduction
Fully-autonomous operation of unmanned aerial ve-
hicles (UAVs) requires support for takeoff and landing.
Autonomous landing has proven to be one of the most
difficult aspects concerning the unmanned navigation of
UAVs [1]. There are many variables involved in landing
an aircraft of any kind, such as wind, weather, dust and
obstacles. Furthermore, the limitations on the payload
and endurance of small-scale electric UAVs makes long-
duration and long-distance missions impossible without
an automatic refueling/recharging system. Automatic
recharging requires the UAV to land on a recharging
pad with high accuracy in order to allow the recharg-
†Corresponding author.
E-mail: alessandro.benini@outlook.com.
This work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under the Computer and Network Systems (CNS) award
(Nos. 1229236, 1446285).
© 2018 South China University of Technology, Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, CAS and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature

146
A. Benini et al. / Control Theory Tech, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 145–159, May 2018
ing system to work properly. Takeoff and landing au-
tonomously requires a precise estimation of the UAV
pose (x, y, z, roll, pitch and yaw) relative to the landing
site that can not typically be accomplished with satellite-
based navigation systems at the precision and framerate
required by flight control systems (typically equal or
greater than 50 Hz).
The position accuracy that can be achieved with GPS
is around 1 meter in military applications, and around 5
meters in civilian applications. However, using differen-
tial corrections, civilian accuracy may be drastically im-
proved. Furthermore, GPS typically provides data with a
rate of 5–10 Hz. During unmanned flight, and especially
during landing, the aircraft must have the capability to
make precise decisions based on the current state of
the system. Therefore, providing high-frequency pose
estimation becomes mandatory for more precise local-
ization and control performance especially during take-
off and landing. Visual sensors can be successfully used
during the landing process since they are able to pro-
vide the pose with an accuracy typically greater than
GPS, sufficient to complete the autonomous landing
task. However, vision systems provide a considerable
amount of information that must be processed in order
to be effective.
In this paper, we explore the use of GPU-based image
processing, in order to perform fast and precise pose
estimation of the UAV with respect to the landing pad.
The use of the GPU allows fast image analysis even in
cluttered environments that otherwise would be difficult
to achieve with CPU-based algorithms. The results show
that our system is able to provide pose estimation with
a minimum framerate of 30 fps and an image dimension
of 640×480 pixels. Furthermore, the use of a GPU/CPU
embedded board allows the UAV to process the video
on-board in real time. This avoids the necessity of a
powerful ground control station for image processing
that would inevitably increase the delay between the
acquisition of the image and the use of the data from
the image within the control system. Vision-based pose
estimation data are further processed using a 12-state
extended Kalman filter, in order to remove spikes, noise
and to estimate translational and angular velocity on the
three axes. The resulting state of the system is provided
as input to the autopilot in order to perform smooth
control of the quadrotor.
The main advantage of our approach is in the use of
a GPU for detecting the marker in order to achieve on-
board high-frequency pose estimation and marker de-
tection in cluttered environments. The use of the GPU
for image filtering and marker detection provides an up-
per bound on the required computation time regardless
of the complexity of the image. The pose estimation al-
gorithm proposed previously has been tested for indoor
localization and autonomous landing of a small scale
quadrotor.
The paper is organized as follows. After the analysis
of the current state of art on autonomous landing using
artificial markers (Section 2), in Section 3 we describe
the hardware/software architecture of the system. Sec-
tion 4 describes the pose estimation algorithm in detail,
while Section 5 shows the results obtained in on-field ex-
periments. Experimental tests for autonomous hovering
and autonomous landing are carried out indoors, where
position and velocity estimation rely only on the pro-
posed system. Section 6 describes briefly the on-going
and future work, while Section 7 concludes the paper.
2
Related work
Considerable research focuses on vision-based au-
tonomous landing systems, using solutions based on
artificial or natural markers [2]. In [3], the authors pro-
pose a system for autonomous landing based on two
cooperating quadrotors operating at different altitudes.
The high-altitude quadrotor is responsible to provide an
estimation of the low-altitude quadrotor position, which
will use its camera for the landing procedure when the
marker is detected. The control commands to the low-
altitude quadrotor are sent by a ground control station
that is also responsible for analyzing the video stream
from both quadrotors. The method proposed in [4] is
based on image matching between the current view of
the on board camera and a previously known database
of geo-referenced images in order to provide position
tracking, localization failure recovery and safe landing
even when GPS is not available. Keypoints are extracted
using SURF. In [5] and [6] the authors propose a visual
SLAM algorithm for autonomous navigation in order to
search for a predefined landing site based on a known
marker. The code runs in real-time using a dual-core
CPU, integrating inertial data for reducing geometrical
ambiguities. The visual SLAM is based on PTAM [7]. The
authors of [8] present an autonomous landing system
using a predefined marker based on ellipse geometry.
The code provides real-time position estimation using
an on-board dual-core CPU and high-frequency embed-
ded camera. In [9], the authors propose an algorithm

A. Benini et al. / Control Theory Tech, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 145–159, May 2018
147
for detecting a marker composed of an H letter (for far-
detection of the marker) and concentric ellipses during
the last stage of the landing procedure, using a small
embedded industrial multi-core platform.
In [10], an algorithm for real time pose estimation
using a predefined marker is proposed. The UAV uses
GPS for navigation and then switches to vision when
the marker is recognized. The code runs on an on-board
embedded system. Masselli et al. in [11] describe three
different methods using two commercial quadrotors for
6 degrees of freedom (DOF) pose estimation. All of the
proposed methods are able to achieve real-time perfor-
mance without using external aids. In [12], the authors
propose a low-cost vision-based localization system us-
ing an on-board infrared tracking sensor and infrared
markers. They are able to provide 6 DOF pose esti-
mation at high rate. The authors in [13] use a simple
marker composed by one circle, to detect the pose of
the UAV with respect to a mobile ground platform used
for landing. The video stream gathered from the on-
board camera is sent to the ground control station to
be processed, then, the pose estimation is sent back
to the UAV. In [14] the authors describe the design of a
landing pad and a vision based detection algorithm to es-
timate the 3D position of the UAV relative to the landing
pad. A cascaded controller structure stabilizes velocity
and position in the absence of GPS signals by using a
dedicated optical flow sensor. The technology described
in [15] improves the height estimation provided by the
GPS with a stereo camera during the landing procedure.
In [16] a vision-based algorithm designed to enable an
autonomous helicopter to land on a moving target is
proposed. The helicopter is required to identify the tar-
get, track it, and land on it while the target is in motion.
Authors use Hu’s moments of inertia for precise target
recognition and a Kalman filter for target tracking.
The authors in [17] propose an algorithm for providing
visually-guided unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) control
using visual information that is processed on a mobile
graphic processing unit (Tegra TK1 Processor + GPU).
In [18] the authors propose a pose estimation algorithm
based on Particle Filter, able to estimate the 6 DOF of the
camera with a computation-time of 39 ms per frame and
image resolution of 320×240 pixels. Table 1 provides a
comparison of the analyzed papers.
Table 1 State of the art on autonomous landing using artificial markers.
Ref.
Y.
H.E.
A.M.
P.
GPU
M.R.
I.D.
F.R.
O.B.P.
E.P.
[3]
2014
No
No
No
No
No
176×144
60
Yes
26–38 cm
[4]
2012
No
N/A
Yes
Yes
N/A
320×240
<5
Yes
N/A
[5]
2013
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
640×480
60
Yes
<1.5 cm
[6]
2013
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
640×480
60
Yes
<1.5 cm
[8]
2014
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
640×480
90
Yes
<2 cm
[9]
2014
No
No
No
No
Yes
N/A
30
No
N/A
[10]
2015
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
N/A
N/A
Yes
<10 cm
[11]
2014
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
640×480
60
Yes
<5 cm
[12]
2013
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
N/A
N/A
Yes
<10 cm
[13]
2013
No
No
No
No
No
640×480
N/A
No
<35 cm
[14]
2009
No
No
No
No
Yes
320×240
10
Yes
N/A
[15]
2010
No
No
No
No
No
640×480
N/A
Yes
<10 cm
[16]
2009
No
No
No
No
No
N/A
N/A
Yes
N/A
[17]
2015
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
640×480
30
Yes
N/A
[18]
2008
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
320×240
25
No
N/A
[19]
2012
No
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
[20]
2008
Yes
No
No
No
No
320×240
25
No
N/A
This paper
2017
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
640×480
30
Yes
<2 cm

148
A. Benini et al. / Control Theory Tech, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 145–159, May 2018
Table 1 shows a comparison of the recent paper on
autonomous landing: Y. is year of publication, H.E. de-
scribes if the proposed approach is able to estimate the
heading, A.M. means asymmetry of the marker and de-
scribes if the eventual asymmetry of the marker can be
used to estimate the yaw, P. means parallelism on code
and describes if the proposed algorithm exploits multi-
threading for speed-up the image elaboration, GPU de-
scribes if parallel computing on GPU is used, M.R. stands
for marker replication and describes if the marker is
replicated to allow the UAV to estimate is pose on the
final stage of the autonomous landing, I.D. reports the
image dimension of the frame, F.R. describes the frame
rate, O.B.P. reports if the proposed approach uses on-
board processing for image processing, and E.P. de-
scribes the error position of the corresponding proposed
algorithm.
The use of GPU for real-time on-board image process-
ing is still limited. Most applications rely on CPU-based
systems, some others leverage a more powerful ground
control station to process the stream video. The pro-
posed approach, compared to the state of art, aims to
evaluate and exploit the use of an on-board GPU-based
embedded system for precise pose estimation with real-
time performance, using a pre-defined marker. Our ap-
proach exploits the GPU not only for image processing
but also for parallel computation in order to discriminate
the marker even in cluttered environments. The marker
used for pose estimation is based on a series of circles
organized such that is possible to estimate the 6 DOF
of the camera. The pose estimation is carried out using
the pin-hole model and the intrinsic parameters of the
camera, obtained through a calibration procedure. Fur-
thermore, the center of the marker contains a replication
of the marker itself, which is used to estimate the pose
when the camera is close to the landing pad. This paper
is an extension of our previous work [21]. The algorithm
described in [21] has been implemented on the nVidia
Jetson TK1 mounted on a custom quadrotor, in order to
perform the actual autonomous landing task. The algo-
rithm has been tested extensively in laboratory before
implementing it on the embedded system. More details
about the laboratory evaluation can be found in our pre-
vious paper. Furthermore the whole system has been
re-designed in order to be adapted to different VTOL
UAVs.
3
Hardware system description
The system for autonomous landing is based on the
detection of a fiducial marker the dimensions of which
are known a priori. From an hardware point of view, the
sensor is composed by the following items (see Fig. 1):
 USB 3.0 camera with a resolution of 640×480 and a
maximum framerate of 60 fps.
 Camera mount with antivibration support.
 GPU-based pose estimation algorithm implemented
on Jetson TK1.
 Landing surface with fiducial marker. The marker
is composed of a series of circles that allows the pose
estimation of the helicopter w.r.t. to the center of the
marker (see Section 3.4). The pose estimation is pro-
vided as input to the control system in order to let the
UAV land at the center of the marker. The landing plat-
form is mounted on the top of a self-leveling mobile
ground robot like the one described in [22].
For our experiments, the vision-system is mounted
on a customized quadrotor equipped with the PixHawk
autopilot. A detailed representation of the hardware con-
figuration is shown in Section 3.3. The following para-
graphs describe all the hardware and software compo-
nents; the pose estimation algorithm is described in de-
tail in Section 4.
Fig. 1 Block diagram of the pose estimation system. The mod-
ule responsible for image processing and pose estimation is
included in the dashed rectangle. The interface with the au-
topilot is based on serial communication. The data provided
by the pose estimation module are: 3D position, 3D attitude,
3D velocity. Other information (such as a flag describing the
detection of the marker) is also included in the packet of data.
3.1
USB 3 camera
The camera used in these experiments is a commer-
cial camera, produced by IDS®, equipped with a wide
angle lens. The camera model is UI-3241LEC and is char-

A. Benini et al. / Control Theory Tech, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 145–159, May 2018
149
acterized by a maximum resolution of 1280×1024 pixels
(1.31 MP), an image sensor of 1/1.8", global shutter and
a pixel size of 5.3 μm 1. The UI-3241LEC has been se-
lected among many other cameras since:
 Use of global shutter: As explained in Section 3.2,
the acquisition of frames from cameras using rolling
shutter creates distortions on the acquired frame, es-
pecially when the cameras is subject to vibrations. Our
algorithm for the detection of the marker is based on
geometrical considerations of the marker: distortions
of the frames could make the marker more difficult or
impossible to detect. The use of global shutter along
with anti-vibration systems improves the detection of
the marker.
 High frame rate: The selected camera allows to ac-
quire videos with a frame rate of 60 fps and image qual-
ity up to 1280×1024. Transfer is done using USB 3.0
protocol.
 Very high sensitivity to light in CCD quality.
 Compatibility with the Jetson TK1 board.
 The provided SDK allows to modify all the camera
parameters from code.
The camera sensor is calibrated using the chess-board
pattern. The set of intrinsic coefficients and distortion
coefficients are used for the frame undistortion (per-
formed in the GPU as part of the frame pre-processing
(see Section 4).
3.2
Anti-vibration camera mount
Preliminary tests were conducted using a USB camera
with rolling shutter. Because of the high frequency vibra-
tions that affect the quadrotor during flight, the images
acquired using such mechanism were difficult to pro-
cess. In particular, the rolling shutter caused skew effect
and wobble effect on most of the frames, as visible in
Fig. 2.
In order to reduce the vibrations caused by the spin-
ning motors while in flight, in addition to global shutter,
a camera mount with anti-vibration system has been de-
signed. The components have been constructed using
3D printing technology. Several tests have been carried
out while choosing the correct dampeners. Based on ex-
perimental tests, the stiffness of the damping ball plays
an important role. Considering the weight of the cam-
era and the distance of the camera center of mass from
the based of the anti-vibration system, a too soft set of
damping balls would not be able to reduce effectively
the vibrations caused by the motors. In Fig. 3, the actual
realization of the anti-vibration system mounted on the
bottom side of the quadrotor is shown. The camera is
aligned with the center of mass of the quadrotor, in or-
der to avoid lever-arm effect on x and y axes. We did not
consider the lever-arm on the z axis since the distance
between the camera and the IMU is around 5 cm and
the effect during the landing phase (when the quadrotor
is mainly in hovering position with roll and pitch close
to 0 degrees) can be neglected.
Fig. 2 Effects caused by the rolling shutter mechanism. On
the left, it is possible to notice a discrepancy in the image.
The lower part of the image has been acquired at a different
time with respect to the upper part. On the right the “wobble
effect” (or jello effect) is visible.
Fig. 3 Antivibration camera system mounted on the bottom
of the quadrotors. The camera is mounted using 4 standoffs
to ensure that the rigidity of the cable doesn not reduce the
benefit of the anti-vibration system.
1 More information about the camera used can be found at https://en.ids-imaging.com/store/ui-3241le.html

150
A. Benini et al. / Control Theory Tech, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 145–159, May 2018
3.3
Quadrotor and autopilot
The quadrotor is based on the Arducopter frame and
is equipped with four motors 980 kV, four 10 × 4.5 pro-
pellers and two 3S Lipo batteries connected in parallel.
The autopilot used for controlling the quadrotor is the
well known PixHawk 2. The autopilot is connected with
the Jetson TK1 using a serial connection (Fig. 4). A logic
level adapter has been used in order to allow the com-
munication between the 1V8 Jetson UART and the 3V3
Pixhawk UART.
Fig. 4 Serial connection between the PixHawk autopilot and
the Jetson TK1. On the left the logic level converter is visible.
The ground pins are shorted. The 3V3 power is provided by
the Serial 4/5 connector on the PixHawk. The 1V8 reference
voltage is provided on Pin n.3 on the Jetson TK1.
A software interface for the communication between
the autopilot and the Jetson board has been imple-
mented and tested. The software interface, implemented
as a library, called AP_VisionPose, can be found on
GitHub 3. A detailed representation of the hardware con-
figuration is shown in Figs. 5 and 6.
Fig. 5 3D model of the quadrotor.
The system is composed by 4 layers: the PixHawk
Autopilot connected with the Jetson TK1 through serial
port, the Jetson TK1 for image processing, the frame
with power distribution modules and lipo batteries, and
the USB3 camera with plastic support and 4 dampeners.
The 4 damping balls allow the reduction of the vibrations
that would affect the quality of the image.
Fig. 6 The quadrotor configured to test the pose estimation
algorithm.
3.4
Structure of the marker
Fig. 7 shows the marker used for pose estimation.
The main structure of the marker is composed of two
concentric circles. The inner area contains four circles
arranged in such a way that their centers corresponds
to the vertices of a square. The center of the square
coincides with the center of the two concentric circles.
The two concentric circles, named main structure of the
marker are used to detect the marker on the video stream
while the four circles, named inner ellipses are used for
estimating the pose of the UAV. The central circle con-
tains a replication of the marker with opposite colors in
order to estimate the pose of the helicopter even during
the last stage of the landing phase, when the camera
is close to the landing surface and the field of view of
the camera does not allow to capture the outer marker.
We will refer to the replication of the marker as inner
marker.
2 More information about the PixHawk can be found at the following link: https://pixhawk.org/
3 https://github.com/alessandro-benini/ardupilot/tree/master/libraries

A. Benini et al. / Control Theory Tech, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 145–159, May 2018
151
Fig. 7 Overview of the system. On the left, the landing system with the description of the main components of the helicopter
and the ground robot. On the right, the actual shape of the fiducial marker.
4
Pose estimation algorithm
The proposed algorithm for pose estimation is part of
a system that will allow the UAV to achieve full auton-
omy, from take-off to landing. The proposed algorithm
improves the position estimation of the UAV during the
approach of the landing area, where the marker is in
the field of view of the camera. Until the UAV does not
reach the landing area, the algorithm does not produce
any information and the navigation of the UAV is based
on other sensors such as GPS and IMU. In this section,
we will focus on the design and implementation of the
pose estimation system, providing a detailed description
of the algorithm implemented.
Fig. 8 shows the high-level flow chart of the proposed
algorithm. The main steps that compose the algorithm
can be summarized as follows:
 Frame pre-processing: the first phase consists of ap-
plying filtering algorithms in order to enhance the frame
quality before the detection phase. After the raw frame
is acquired from the camera, it is sent to the GPU mem-
ory, where the image is first converted to gray and then
blurred in order to reduce the noise. The filtered frame
is then used as input for the Canny edge detection rou-
tine. The threshold used on the Canny edge function
has been chosen through experiments with different
light conditions. All the above operations, conversion
to gray, blurring and Canny edge detection are carried
out using gpu-based OpenCV functions. The resulting
pre-processed frame is sent back to the CPU memory
for contour searching, since the OpenCV library cur-
rently does not provide a GPU version for this function.
The transfer of data between the host memory and the
device memory represents the typical bottleneck in us-
ing the GPU for parallel computing: the time required
for uploading and downloading data between the host
and the device memory could make the use of GPU
not effective. Our algorithm has been optimized in or-
der to minimize the transfer of data between CPU and
GPU: the pre-processing of the frame is carried out on
the GPU with just one transfer of data. After uploading
the raw frame, the results of the subsequent operations
(conversion to gray, noise filtering, edge detection) are
stored directly in GPU memory, using pre-defined vari-
ables. Only the final processed frame is sent back to the
CPU memory for the second phase of the algorithm.
 Contour detection: the contour detection is carried
out on CPU using the findContour function provided
by the OpenCV 4 library with the flag RETR_CCOMP.
This flag retrieves all the contours and arranges them
on a 2-level hierarchy: external contours of the object
(i.e., its boundary) are placed in hierarchy-1, while in-
ner contours are placed on hierarchy-0. All the contours
belonging to the hierarchy-1 and with at least 6 vertices
4 http://opencv.org/

152
A. Benini et al. / Control Theory Tech, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 145–159, May 2018
are placed to the list foundEllipses. This list contains,
for each ellipse, the following information: index, cen-
ter coordinates, area of the ellipse, height and width of
the bounding box. The index is a progressive number
assigned to each ellipse during the detection phase. The
ellipses that does not satisfy the above constraint or are
too small, are discarded. The area of each ellipse is eval-
uated considering the moment of each contour (m00).
(see Fig. 9).
 Find Marker Routine: the list foundEllipses is up-
loaded to the GPU in order to detect the marker, follow-
ing the schema described in Fig. 10. This phase will be
described in detail, in Section 4.1.
 Detection of coordinates of inner ellipses: after the
detection of the main structure of the marker, the algo-
rithm starts looking for the four inner ellipses in the area
delimited by the two concentric circles. The coordinates
of each inner ellipse, expressed considering the center
of the marker as origin of the reference system, will be
used for the pose estimation function.
 Pose estimation: the coordinates of the four inner
ellipses, along with the information about the structure
of the marker, are passed as input to the pose estima-
tion function. This function is based on the GPU version
of the solvePnPRanscac, provided by the OpenCV li-
brary. Since the image is undirstorted before the initial
frame pre-processing, the cameraMatrix and distCoeffs
are both set to zero.
 Pose filtering: the pose estimation provided by the
iterative algorithm of SolvePnPRansac function is filtered
in order to reduce the noise, mainly on the estimation of
the roll and pitch angle, but also to provide an estima-
tion when the marker is not detected (see Fig. 11). The
filtering algorithm is based on the extended Kalman filter
and it allows the estimation of the camera pose also dur-
ing occlusions and vibrations. The mathematical model
used in the Kalman filter, along with the coefficients
used for the covariance matrices, are described later in
the paper.
Fig. 8 High level flow chart.
Fig. 9 Find contours algorithms flow chart.
Fig. 10 GPU-based find marker algorithm flow chart.

A. Benini et al. / Control Theory Tech, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 145–159, May 2018
153
Fig. 11 Pose filtering algorithm flow chart.
4.1
Marker detection on GPU
The detection of the marker is composed by two dif-
ferent stages: search of the main structure of the marker
and detection of inner ellipses. The input of the GPU-
based marker detection routine is the list of all the el-
lipses found in the current frame. The marker detection
algorithm on the GPU is composed by 5 steps described
as follows.
4.1.1
Detection of the main structure of the marker
The detection of the main structure of the marker is
carried out using a dedicated GPU kernel function. The
GPU kernel will search all the sets of concentric ellipses
evaluating all the possible combinations between the el-
lipses provided as input. Each set of concentric ellipses,
found during this step, is labeled as a possible marker
and will be further processed in the next step of the al-
gorithm, described below. The evaluation of all the pos-
sible combinations is carried out on the GPU declaring
a number of threads equal to the square of the number
n of ellipses found (n2), as described on Algorithm 1 in
pseudo-code. It is worth mentioning that all the steps of
the algorithm for marker detection are carried out using
the same location of GPU memory, without transferring
data from the GPU memory to the CPU memory and
vice versa.
Algorithm 1 (List of neighbors for every ellipse)
1: procedure FIND NEIGHBORS
2:
for each ellipse Ei do
3:
Instantiate a row of n threads on the GPU
4:
for each ellipse Ej  Ei do
5:
if distance(Ej, Ei) ⩽Threshold then
6:
Add Ej to the list of neighbors of Ei
7:
end if
8:
end for
9:
end for
10: end procedure
All the operations use pointers to the same memory,
avoiding the creation of temporary copies of the initial
set of data. The distance between two ellipses is calcu-
lated as the euclidean distance between their centers,
expressed in pixel coordinates. The threshold has been
determined experimentally.
In the GPU kernel function, each comparison between
the generic ellipse Ei and the ellipse Ej is carried out by
a dedicated thread. Therefore, all the comparisons be-
tween all the ellipses are made simultaneously: no for
loops are required to make all the comparisons. The
output of this kernel function is a matrix where for each
ellipse Ei, a list of all the ellipses concentric with Ei is
encoded. We will refer to the concentric ellipses with Ei
as neighbors of ellipse Ei. Every ellipse is concentric with
itself. Furthermore if the ellipse Ei is concentric with Ej,
then the converse is also true. This leads to a symmetric
matrix. If a pair of ellipses (Ei, Ej) are concentric, a 1
will be stored in the position (i, j), otherwise a 0 will be
stored.
The output of this routine is the list of all sets of con-
centric ellipse candidates to be possible markers. Each
row of this matrix with a number of elements set to 1
greater than 2 describes a possible marker. This list will
be provided in input to the second stage of the algo-
rithm, in order to detect the real marker and estimate
the pose of the helicopter.
4.1.2
Detection of the inner ellipses of the marker
In order to detect the inner ellipses for every pos-
sible marker, we first estimate the area on which the
inner ellipses should be present. This is done detecting
for every ellipse Ei the neighbor with the smallest and
the biggest area. Since those ellipses are concentric (as
determined by the previous phase), the center of ev-
ery inner ellipse, if present, must be contained in the
area bounded by these two ellipses. The search of the

154
A. Benini et al. / Control Theory Tech, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 145–159, May 2018
smallest and biggest ellipse corresponds to the search of
the ellipses with the minimum and the maximum area.
The search of maximum and minimum of a vector in a
GPU kernel can be easily carried out using the reduction
algorithm [23]. After the detection of the smallest and
biggest area, the algorithm proceeds counting the num-
ber of inner ellipses for every set of concentric ellipses.
At this stage, only one set of ellipses should contain 4
inner ellipses. The typical output of this stage will be one
set of ellipses corresponding to the marker. This phase
is also implemented on the GPU in a way similar to the
one described in Section 4.1.1.
4.1.3
Orientation of the inner ellipses
From the marker candidate produced as output of the
previous routine, the algorithm starts evaluating the ori-
entation of the 4 inner ellipses. In order to estimate the
orientation, the algorithm searches for the inner ellipse
with the biggest area, and then continues searching for
the remaining 3 inner ellipses. The position of the three
inner ellipses is predicted using the coordinates of the
center of the marker and the coordinates of the center
of the biggest ellipse. Then, the algorithm scan the list of
inner ellipses, looking for the one with the center closer
to the predicted position, as described from Algorithm 2
in pseudo-code.
Algorithm 2 (Search of the inner ellipses)
1: procedure SEARCH INNER ELLIPSES COORDINATES
2:
Get coord. of the center of the marker M (cx, cy)
3:
Get coord. of the biggest inner ellipse B (bx, by)
4:
for each inner ellipse E do
5:
Predict the position Pi of E considering
the square triangle formed by M, B and E
6:
for each ellipse Ei do
7:
if distance(Ei, Pi) ⩽Threshold then
8:
Retrieve the coord. of the center of Ei
9:
Add the coord. of Ei to the marker point list
10:
Remove Ei from the inner ellipses list
11:
end if
12:
end for
13:
end for
14: end procedure
The different dimension of the inner ellipses is nec-
essary in order to make the marker asymmetric and es-
timate not only the position of the camera w.r.t. to the
center of the marker but also its orientation (in terms of
roll, pitch and yaw angles).
4.1.4
Detection of outer/inner marker
A simple algorithm based on the color of the center
of the biggest inner ellipse is used in order to detect the
outer/inner marker (see Algorithm 3).
In order to have a transition from the outer marker
to the inner marker and viceversa, the algorithm must
detect the new condition for at least 10 consecutive
frames.
Algorithm 3 (Detection of outer/inner marker)
1: procedure INNER/OUTER MARKER DETECTION
2:
Get RGB of the center of the bigger inner ellipse
3:
Calculate the mean value μ = R + G + B
3
4:
if μ ⩽125 then
5:
Inner ellipse
6:
else
7:
Outer ellipse
8:
end if
9: end procedure
4.2
Pose estimation
The pose estimation is carried out by comparing the
coordinates of the centers of the inner ellipses with
the information provided in input of the algorithm. The
comparison is carried out through the GPU-based func-
tion solvePnPRansac, available as part of the OpenCV
libraries. The output of this function is the current pose
of the camera w.r.t to the center of the marker. The
solvePnPRansac function is based on the pinhole cam-
era model [24]. In this model, each point of the view is
formed by projecting each image point into the corre-
sponding image plane point using the perspective trans-
formation sm = A[R|t]M where the matrix A contains
the coefficients (cx, cy) and (fx, fy) representing respec-
tively the coordinates of the principal point, that is usu-
ally at the image center, and the focal lengths expressed
in pixel units. These coefficients are estimated experi-
mentally through the calibration procedure of the cam-
era. The matrix [R|t] is used to describe the camera pose
w.r.t. to a static scene. The pose estimation is carried
out by comparing the estimated coordinates of the cen-
ters of the inner ellipses in the camera reference frame
with the known coordinates of the same ellipses in the
world reference frame (with origin in the center for the
marker). Fig. 12 shows the reference system (NED) used
for expressing the pose of the helicopter with respect to
the center of the marker.

A. Benini et al. / Control Theory Tech, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 145–159, May 2018
155
Fig. 12 Reference system used for the pose estimation system
based on NED (North-east-down) representation.
4.3
Pose estimation ﬁltering
The output of the algorithm is filtered using a discrete
extended Kalman filter in order to reduce the noise on
the pose estimation when the camera is subject to vi-
brations and provide an estimation of the pose when the
camera is occluded. The state vector is represented by
the pose and velocity of the camera w.r.t. the marker
(equation (1)):
x(t) = [x y z ˙x ˙y ˙z φ θ ψ ˙φ
˙θ
˙ψ],
(1)
where (x, y, z) represents the translation of the cam-
era and (φ, θ, ψ) represents the attitude. The states
(x, y, z, φ, θ, ψ) are observable.
The covariance measurement matrix has been eval-
uated experimentally through static measurements: an
extended data acquisition with the camera standing on
a fixed point above the marker (using the xFrame ma-
chine, described in [21]) has been performed. The vari-
ance of each measurement has been evaluated and used
as the default value for the corresponding state variable
(equation (2)):
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
Σxyz O3×3 O3×3 O3×3
O3×3 O3×3 Σφθψ O3×3
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦.
(2)
The triad Σxyz = (σ2
x, σ2
y, σ2
z) represents the variance of
the position of the camera along x, y and z axes while
Σφθψ = (σ2
φ, σ2
θ, σ2
ψ) is the variance of the roll, pitch and
yaw angles respectively. The estimated variance for the
six observable state variables is σ2 = (0.01)2 mm2. When
the marker is not detected or the pose estimation is dis-
carded, the diagonal elements of the R matrix are in-
creased by a constant k, σ2 = k × (0.01)2 mm2, where
k = 100 (this value has been chosen experimentally).
When the marker is detected, the diagonal elements are
set to their default value (see Fig. 11). The measurements
used in the Kalman filter are expressed in the world ref-
erence frame (origin in the center of the marker).
5
Field evaluation
In this section, we describe the results obtained while
testing the pose estimation system for the autonomous
landing task. An extensive laboratory evaluation has
been carried out before testing our algorithm on a real
system. The results of the laboratory evaluation are de-
scribed in detail in our previous paper [21]. The au-
tonomous landing is performed in an indoor environ-
ment in order to test the effectiveness of the proposed
system when the GPS is not available.
The tests are focused on the autonomous landing
only: after the manual takeoff, the system is switched to
autonomous mode. The hovering and the landing phase
are carried-out autonomously, without any intervention
of the pilot. The experimental setup is composed by a
landing pad mounted on a mobile self-leveling robot and
the quadrotor shown in Figs. 5 and 6 5.
5.1
Hovering
In this section, we shows the results obtained while
testing the autonomous hovering. The hovering mode
is designed in order to keep the center of the camera
aligned with the center of the marker at 1.5 meters of
altitude. Because of the limited view of the lens used, the
test of hovering is performed with the quadrotor close
to the hovering point. The purpose of this experiment
is mainly focused on evaluating the capability of the
quadrotor to remain on the desired position (with few
centimiters of errors) without the use of GPS. Figs. 13–
15 shows respectively the position of the quadrotor dur-
ing the hovering test. After the manual take-off (from
t = 0 s to t = 35 s) the control system is switched to
autonomous mode. The quadrotor, then, moves to and
keeps the desired position (x, y, z) = (0, 0, 1.5) using the
vision system as only position measurement. The maxi-
mum error on x and y axes is below 10 cm. Concerning
5 A video of the field tests can be found at the following link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rBtXPDjK_QE

156
A. Benini et al. / Control Theory Tech, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 145–159, May 2018
the z axis, the maximum steady-error is also around than
10 cm.
Fig. 13 Position along x axis during the autonomous hovering.
Fig. 14 Position along y axis during the autonomous hovering.
Fig. 15 Position along z axis during the autonomous hovering.
5.2
Autonomous landing
In this section, we show the results obtained during
the autonomous landing. The autopilot is programmed
to autonomously land the quadrotor after 10 seconds
of hovering if the error remains below 15 cm for all the
hovering procedure. After 10 seconds of hovering, the
altitude set-point is decreased gradually until 0.5 me-
ters. During the descending phase, the autopilot keeps
controlling also the x and y position, assuring that the
camera is always aligned with the center of the marker.
For the last phase of the autonomous landing, from 0.5
meters to touch down, the quadrotor decrease gradually
the propeller rotation until landing on the platform (see
Figs. 16–18).
Fig. 16 Position along x axis during the autonomous landing.
Fig. 17 Position along y axis during the autonomous landing.
Fig. 18 Position along z axis during the autonomous landing.

A. Benini et al. / Control Theory Tech, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 145–159, May 2018
157
6
On-going and future work
The proposed algorithm for the pose estimation has
been successfully tested using a small-scale quadrotor.
A new version of the autonomous landing system based
on an electric helicopter is under finalization. The goal
is to prove the validity of the proposed approach with
both types of rotary wing UAVs.
A new version of the algorithm based on sensor fusion
between GPS, IMU and vision data is currently under de-
velopment. Furthermore, the current algorithm for pose
estimation is based on a custom fiducial marker. How-
ever, the overall architecture of the code can be adapted
in order to detect different marker, such as the classical
helipad. Concerning the software, additional work will
be focused on investigating a theoretical approach in or-
der to develop a GPU-based contour finding algorithm.
Our algorithm has been tested using the devel-
opment board of Tegra TK1 system-on-chip (SOC)
(www.nvidia.com/object/jetson-tk1-embedded-dev-kit). The
current solution represents a proof-of-concept before
porting our algorithm on a custom-board based on the
same SOC. The custom-board will reduce drastically
the weight of the hardware needed for processing while
keeping the same performances.
The current system based on a high-frame rate USB 3
camera and Jetson TK1 board for on-board image pro-
cessing will be extended with a dedicated 9 DOF IMU
and Real-time kinematics GPS (RTK-GPS) (see Fig. 19).
The RTK-GPS allows to estimate the position of the he-
licopter with an accuracy of around 2 cm. The differen-
tial GPS correction are based on a ground GPS antenna
with which the helicopter communicates exploiting a
915 MHz telemetry. The main purpose of the differen-
tial GPS will be to measure the accuracy of the proposed
system in outdoor environments.
Fig. 19 Block diagram of the pose estimation system for elec-
tric helicopter.
Fig. 20 shows a picture of the helicopter under devel-
opment.
Fig. 20
Electric helicopter (Synergy E5) equipped with the
vision-based pose estimation system proposed in this paper.
The system is enhanced with RTK GPS and a 9 DOF
inertial measurement unit. On the left nose of the he-
licopter the Jetson TK1 board is visible. The 9 DOF is
mounted on the bottom of the helicopter. The z axis
of the IMU is aligned with the rotor axis. The GPS an-
tenna is placed right behind the body of the helicopter,
while the GPS module is places on the rudder, in order
to avoid interference between the GPS module and the
USB3 camera. The lever-arm between the GPS, the IMU
and the vision system is taken into account.
7
Conclusions
The obtained results show that the proposed algo-
rithm is able to provide accurate pose estimation with
a minimum framerate of 30 fps and an image dimen-
sion of 640×480 pixels with error less than 8% of the
marker diameter, allowing for autonomous takeoff and
landing. The possibility to use a frame dimension of
640×480 allows the system to detect the complex land-
ing markers even from greater distances. The system is
able to perform autonomous landing in indoor environ-
ment, exploiting the camera as the only position sensor.
Concerning the vision-based based pose estimation sys-
tem, the time required only by the GPU-computation is
around 3 ms, regardless of the complexity of the im-
age. This allows the possibility to provide an estimate
of the maximum time required by the pose estimation
estimation system.
References
[1]
C. Bu, Y. Ai, H. Du. Vision-based autonomous landing for
rotorcraft unmanned aerial vehicle. IEEE International Conference
on Vehicular Electronics and Safety (ICVES), Beijing: IEEE, 2016: 1
– 6. DOI 10.1109/ICVES.2016.7548174.
[2]
A. Gautam, P. B. Sujit, S. Saripalli. A survey of autonomous landing

158
A. Benini et al. / Control Theory Tech, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 145–159, May 2018
techniques for UAVs. International Conference on Unmanned
Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), Orlando: IEEE, 2014: 1210 – 1218. DOI
10.1109/ICUAS.2014.6842377.
[3]
M. F. R. Lee, S. F. Su, J. W. E. Yeah, et al. Autonomous
landing system for aerial mobile robot cooperation. The Joint
7th International Conference on Soft Computing and Intelligent
Systems (SCIS) and 15th International Symposium on Advanced
Intelligent Systems (ISIS), Kitakyushu: IEEE, 2014: 1306 – 1311.
DOI 10.1109/SCIS-ISIS.2014.7044826.
[4]
X. Guan, H. Bai. A GPU accelerated real-time self-contained visual
navigation system for UAVs. IEEE International Conference on
Information and Automation, Shenyang: IEEE, 2012: 578 – 581.
DOI 10.1109/ICInfA.2012.6246879.
[5]
S. Yang, S. A. Scherer, K. Schauwecker, et al. Onboard monocular
vision for landing of an MAV on a landing site specified by a
single reference image. International Conference on Unmanned
Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), Atlanta: IEEE, 2013: 318 – 325. DOI
10.1109/ICUAS.2013.6564704.
[6]
S. Yang, S. A. Scherer, K. Schauwecker, A. Zell. Autonomous
Landing of MAVs on an arbitrarily textured landing site using
onboard monocular vision. Journal of Intelligent & Robotic
Systems, 2014, 74(1/2): 27 – 43.
[7]
G. Klein, D. Murray. Parallel tracking and mapping for small AR
workspaces. The 6th IEEE and ACM International Symposium on
Mixed and Augmented Reality, Nara: IEEE, 2007: 225 – 234. DOI
10.1109/ISMAR.2007.4538852.
[8]
F. Cocchioni, A. Mancini, S. Longhi. Autonomous navigation,
landing and recharge of a quadrotor using artificial vision.
International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS),
Orlando: IEEE, 2014: 418 – 429. DOI 10.1109/ICUAS.2014.
6842282.
[9]
Y. Jung, D. Lee, H. Bang. Study on ellipse fitting problem
for
vision-based
autonomous
landing
of
an
UAV.
The
14th International Conference on Control, Automation and
Systems (ICCAS), Seoul: IEEE, 2014: 1631 – 1634. DOI
10.1109/ICCAS.2014.6987819
[10] K. Li, P. Liu, T. Pang, et al. Development of an unmanned
aerial vehicle for rooftop landing and surveillance. International
Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), Denver:
IEEE, 2015: 832 – 838. DOI 10.1109/ICUAS.2015.7152368.
[11] A. Masselli, S. Yang, K. E. Wenzel, et al. A cross-platform
comparison of visual marker based approaches for autonomous
flight of quadrocopters. International Conference on Unmanned
Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), Atlanta: IEEE, 2013: 685 – 693. DOI
10.1109/ICUAS.2013.6564749.
[12] W. Roozing, A. H. Goktogan. Low-cost vision-based 6-DOF MAV
localization using IR beacons. IEEE/ASME International Conference
on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics, Wollongong: IEEE, 2013:
1003 – 1009. DOI 10.1109/AIM.2013.6584225.
[13] H. Cheng, Y. Chen, X. Li, et al. Autonomous takeoff, tracking and
landing of a UAV on a moving UGV using onboard monocular
vision. Proceedings of the 32nd Chinese Control Conference,
Xi’an: IEEE, 2013: 5895 – 5901.
[14] S. Lange, N. Sunderhauf, P. Protzel. A vision based onboard
approach for landing and position control of an autonomous
multirotor UAV in GPS-denied environments. International
Conference on Advanced Robotics, Munich, 2009: 1 – 6.
[15] K. H. Hsia, S. F. Lien, J. P. Su. Height estimation via stereo
vision system for unmanned helicopter autonomous landing.
International Symposium on Computer, Communication, Control
and Automation (3CA), Tainan: IEEE, 2010: 257 – 260. DOI
10.1109/3CA.2010.5533535.
[16] S. Saripalli, G. S. Sukhatme. Landing on a moving target using
an autonomous helicopter. Field and Service Robotics: Recent
Advances in Research and Applications. Berlin: Springer, 2006:
277 – 286. DOI 10.1007/10991459_27.
[17] D. Jeon, D.-H. Kim, Y.-G. Ha, et al. Image processing acceleration
for intelligent unmanned aerial vehicle on mobile GPU. Soft
Computing, 2016, 20(5): 1713 – 1720. DOI http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s00500-015-1656-y.
[18] F. Ababsa, M. Mallem. A robust circular fiducial detection
technique
and
real-time
3D
camera
tracking.
Journal
of
Multimedia, 2008, 3(4): 34 – 41
[19] L. Calvet, P. Gurdjos, V. Charvillat. Camera tracking using
concentric circle markers: Paradigms and algorithms. The 19th
IEEE International Conference on Image Processing, Orlando: IEEE,
2012: 1361 – 1364. DOI 10.1109/ICIP.2012.6467121.
[20] F. Ababsa, M. Mallem. A robust circular fiducial detection
technique
and
real-time
3D
camera
tracking.
Journal
of
Multimedia, 2008, 3(4): 34 – 41.
[21] A. Benini, M. J. Rutherford, K. P. Valavanis. Real-time, GPU-
based pose estimation of a UAV for autonomous takeoff
and landing. IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), Stockholm: IEEE, 2016: 3463 – 3470. DOI
10.1109/ICRA.2016.7487525.
[22] S. A. Conyers, N. I. Vitzilaios, M. J. Rutherford, et al. A mobile
self-leveling landing platform for VTOL UAVs. IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Seattle: IEEE,
2015: 815 – 822. DOI 10.1109/ICRA.2015.7139272.
[23] CUDA Programming Guide: http://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-
programming-guide.
[24] Pinhole Camera Model: https://docs.opencv.org/2.4/modules/
calib3d/doc/camera_calibration_and_3d_reconstruction.html.
Alessandro BENINI is a Research Scientist
at the University of Denver (DU) Unmanned
Systems Research Institute (DU2SRI). He re-
ceived his Ph.D. degree in Automation En-
gineering at the Universita Politecnica delle
Marche, Ancona, Italy. His research inter-
ests include the development of cooperat-
ing autonomous mobile systems (UAV and
UGV) with high safety performance and re-
liability, simulation and control of dynamic systems, computer vision

A. Benini et al. / Control Theory Tech, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 145–159, May 2018
159
and sensor fusion. Dr. Alessandro Benini is IEEE Member. E-mail:
alessandro.benini@outlook.com.
Matthew J. RUTHERFORD is an Associate
Professor in the Department of Computer
Science with a joint appointment in the De-
partment of Electrical and Computer En-
gineering. He is also Deputy Director of
the DU Unmanned Systems Research In-
stitute (DU2SRI). His research portfolio in-
cludes: the development of advanced con-
trols and communication mechanisms for
autonomous aerial and ground robots; applications of real-time com-
puter vision to robotics problems using GPU-based parallel process-
ing; testing and dynamic evaluation of embedded, real-time systems;
development of complex mechatronic systems (mechanical, electrical,
and software); the development of software techniques to reduce the
amount of energy being consumed by hardware; and development
of a high-precision propulsion system for underwater robots. E-mail:
Matthew.Rutherford@du.edu.
Kimon P. VALAVANIS is John Evans Pro-
fessor and Chair, Department of Electri-
cal and Computer Engineering, with a joint
appointment in the Department of Com-
puter Science. He is also Director of the
DU Unmanned Systems Research Institute
(DU2SRI). His research interests are in the
areas of intelligent control, robotics and
automation, and distributed intelligent sys-
tems. He has more than 400 total referred publications including 16
books and edited books. He is Fellow of the American Association for
the Advancement of Science (AAAS), Fellow of the U.K. Institute of
Measurement and Control, Senior Member of IEEE, Editor-in-Chief of
the Journal of Intelligent and Robotic Systems (Springer), and Fulbright
Scholar. E-mail: Kimon.Valavanis@du.edu.

