5348
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022
Low-Complexity Control for Vision-Based
Landing of Quadrotor UAV on
Unknown Moving Platform
Jie Lin
, Yaonan Wang
, Zhiqiang Miao
, Member, IEEE, Hang Zhong
, Member, IEEE,
and Rafael Fierro
, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—This article addresses the vision-based land-
ing problem of a low-cost quadrotor on an unknown moving
platform. A robust landing controller is developed, which
consists of the design of the low-complexity outer-loop
controller and the geometric inner-loop attitude controller.
First, an error transformation based on prescribed perfor-
mance is designed to guarantee the landing behaviors and
deal with the intermediate control signal of backstepping
approaches, resulting in a low-complexity position-based
visual servoing (PBVS) design. In addition, the proposed
PBVS controller exhibits strong robustness against an un-
certain relative dynamic system due to no incorporation
of any prior knowledge of the moving platform. Next, a
modiﬁed geometric attitude controller is presented by char-
acterizing the geometric properties of rotation matrices in-
trinsically. Finally, the stability analysis is presented using
Lyapunov stability theory, and the effectiveness of the pro-
posed control strategy is demonstrated through numerical
simulations and experiments.
Index Terms—Autonomous landing, dynamic position-
based visual servo, low-complexity, prescribed perfor-
mance, unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV).
I. INTRODUCTION
D
UE to the vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL) as well as
hovering capabilities, the past few decades have witnessed
Manuscript received September 15, 2021; revised October 25, 2021;
accepted November 12, 2021. Date of publication November 22, 2021;
date of current version May 6, 2022. This work was supported in part
by the Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61733004
and Grant 61903135, in part by the Natural Science Foundation of
Hunan Province under Grant 2021JJ20029, in part by the Science
and Technology Innovation Program of Hunan Province under Grant
2021RC3060, in part by the Youth Talent Support Project of the Chinese
Association for Science and Technology, and in part by the Postgraduate
Scientiﬁc Research Innovation Project of Hunan Province under Grant
QL20210080. Paper no. TII-21-3992. (Corresponding author: Yaonan
Wang.)
Jie Lin, Yaonan Wang, Zhiqiang Miao, and Hang Zhong are
with the College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Na-
tional
Engineering
Laboratory
for
Robot
Visual
Perception
and
Control, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China (e-mail: lin-
jie0275@hnu.edu.cn; yaonan@hnu.edu.cn; miaozhiqiang@hnu.edu.cn;
zhonghang@hnu.edu.cn).
Rafael Fierro is with MARHES Lab, Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM
87131 USA (e-mail: rﬁerro@unm.edu).
This
article
has
supplementary
material
provided
by
the
au-
thors
and
color
versions
of
one
or
more
ﬁgures
available
at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3129486.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TII.2021.3129486
a growing interest in VTOL unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs).
Particularly, quadrotors, with the features of low cost and
small size, serve as the ideal aerial platforms that have been
widely employed in military and civilian applications, such as
border surveillance, disaster monitoring, and search and rescue
missions [1], [2]. The landing of the quadrotor is a fundamental
maneuver, but it remains a delicate process during the ﬂight [3],
since the landing control design suffers from both the limited
sensing of the quadrotors and the unknown model of the moving
targets. As a result, the landing control of the low-cost quadrotor
on the unknown moving target is an extremely challenging and
valuable problem.
Sensing the environment to locate itself is a prerequisite for
the quadrotor autonomous landing. In general, the global pose
can be provided by a global positioning system (GPS), how-
ever, the GPS signals degrade severely indoors or in clustering
environments such as cities and forests. Alternatively, the on-
board sensors provide robust relative pose information and allow
moregeneralautonomousnavigation.Thus,somesolutionshave
been explored based on onboard sensors in the GPS-denied
environments, including sonar, laser range ﬁnder, LIDAR (light
detection and ranging), and visual cameras. Among them, the
visual cameras are of low cost and lightweight that can provide
richer information [4], making them a very popular option for
landing control of quadrotors.
Various vision-based landing control approaches have been
developed for the quadrotor UAVs, and they can be divided
into two basic types: image-based visual servo (IBVS) [5]–[7],
and position-based visual servo (PBVS) [8]–[12]. In IBVS, the
image features are directly used in the formulation of the control
laws. Nevertheless, it may produce partly undesired motion
trajectories in the Cartesian space, especially when it needs a
large rotation around the optical axis of the camera. The PBVS
approach requires the explicit calculation of the pose estimation
based on the image features, but at the same time, it separates the
controller design problem from the vision-based pose estimation
problem and leads to a straightforward control design problem
in the Cartesian space. Owing to the underactuated dynamics of
the quadrotor UAVs, we are interested in the PBVS schemes that
avoid the image Jacobian formulation. In this direction, several
classical linear control methods have been proposed in [8]–[10].
Since almost all actual dynamic systems have the character-
istics of uncertainty and nonlinearity, other relevant nonlinear
1551-3203 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on May 30,2022 at 16:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LIN et al.: LOW-COMPLEXITY CONTROL FOR VISION-BASED LANDING
5349
controllers that employed nested saturations, backstepping, and
sliding modes control techniques were presented in [11]. Also, a
hybrid automaton was designed to change control modes for the
landing maneuver in [12] to counteract the uncertainty model
of the slope. However, all the aforementioned PBVS schemes
were developed for a static landing platform.
Although the PBVS landing schemes on a static platform
have achieved many results, for more general applications, the
challenge of stabilizing the motion of the quadrotors relative
to the moving platforms is greatly increased. Some interesting
works about landing on a moving platform have been investi-
gated. In [13], the velocity of the moving target was assumed
to be known, but the fact that the motion of the platform is
not usually available in a real environment. In [14], the PID
controller has good performance for landing on a high-speed
vehicle under the premise that the position and the velocity of the
landing vehicle can be measured. In [15]–[20], several schemes
based on the model of the landing platform have been developed.
Usually, a vertical movement of the platform was modeled as a
superpositionofseveralsinefunctionswithdifferentamplitudes,
frequencies, and phases [15]–[17], and a horizontal movement
of the platform was modeled as a car-like model [18]–[20].
Along the same line, the Kalman ﬁlters [15]–[19] and velocity
observer [20] were used for motion estimation of a moving plat-
form. However, the estimation of the model parameters or veloc-
ity is rather tedious, and the controller design is conservative and
only available in the presence of the moving platform models.
For another, some robust control schemes were proposed in [21]
and [22]. In [21], the invariant ellipsoid technique was proposed
to reasonably compensate for the ship heave motion up to within
a certain error bound. The neural network control method was
usedin[22]toimproverobustnessagainsttheuncertaintiesofthe
moving platform, but it was difﬁcult to implement on real-time
control systems due to the complicated control algorithm.
The motivation of this article is to propose a low-complexity
dynamic PBVS scheme for landing on an unknown moving
platform. Aiming at the underactuated nature of the quadrotor,
our control scheme is decomposed into an outer-loop position
control and an inner-loop attitude control module. Motivated by
the prescribed performance control schemes [23]–[25], the error
transformation based on the performance function is designed to
guarantee the landing behaviors and handle the uncertain non-
linear landing systems. Using the Lyapunov stability analysis,
stability and thus prescribed performance of the autonomous
landing system can be guaranteed. Compared with the existing
PBVS landing control schemes, the main contributions of this
article can be summarized as follows.
1) A novel low-complexity PBVS controller of the low-cost
quadrotor is proposed for the landing on the unknown
moving target. Particularly, the error transformation ap-
proach is designed to deal with the intermediate signal of
the backstepping control technique. It completely avoids
the explosion of the complexity issue raised by tradi-
tional backstepping-like approaches, without utilizing
additional ﬁlters. Therefore, this method simpliﬁes the
control design and performs well in real-time uncertain
dynamic systems. In contrast, some methods sacriﬁced
Fig. 1.
Vision-based landing system and involved coordinate frames.
computational resources to improve robustness against
theuncertainrelativedynamicsystems. Themethodofthe
optimal control was used in [21], and the neural network
controller was adopted in [22].
2) The landing controller does not incorporate any prior
knowledge of the moving platforms, so it exhibits strong
robustness against the uncertain relative dynamic system.
Different from methods of cooperative landing [14] and
known relative dynamic models [15]–[20], the proposed
method is a noncooperative autonomous landing and it
is isolated from prior model selections and velocity mea-
surements of the moving platforms.
3) By using prescribed performance functions, the landing
error is regulated to a predeﬁned arbitrarily small residual
set along with the absolute decaying time function, and
the maximum overshoot is less than a prescribed value.
Compared with landing solutions in [13]–[20], the pro-
posed method can explicitly guarantee the transient and
steady-state landing behaviors.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
introduces system modeling and problem statements. Section III
presents the control design and stability analysis. Simulation and
experimental results to verify the effectiveness of the proposed
control method are shown in Section IV. Finally, Section V
concludes this article.
II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
A. System Description and Modelling
Consider the landing system that includes a quadrotor UAV
equipped with a vision suite and a ﬁducial landmark attached
to a moving platform, as shown in Fig. 1. The inertial frame W
is rigidly attached to a position on the earth in East-North-Up
coordinates. The body-ﬁxed frame B is deﬁned to describe the
motion equation of the quadrotor. Let C be the camera frame,
and M be the landmark frame. Let p ∈R3 and v ∈R3 denote
the position and linear velocity of quadrotor expressed in W,
R ∈SO(3) is the rotation matrix from B to W, and Ω ∈R3
is the angular velocity expressed in B. Using the Newton–Euler
formulation, the dynamics of the quadrotor is given by
˙p = v
(1)
m ˙v = −mgi3 + fRi3
(2)
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on May 30,2022 at 16:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5350
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022
˙R = RΩ∧
(3)
J ˙Ω = −Ω × JΩ + τ
(4)
where m represents the mass; J = [Jx, Jy, Jz]T is the inertia
matrix of the quadrotor; g is the acceleration of gravity, and i3 =
[0, 0, 1]T is a unit vector. The thrust force f and the torque vector
τ = [τx, τy, τz]T are expressed in the frame B. The hat map
(·)∧: R3 →SO(3) denotes the skew-symmetric matrix such
that Ω∧x = Ω × x for any x.
Let pt ∈R3 expressed in W be the origin of the landmark
frame M attached to the moving platform. Since the landing
platform is moving, we denote the velocity of the platform as
˙pt ∈R3. Instead of measuring and estimating the velocity of the
platform, we only assume that:
Assumption 1: The velocity of the moving platform ˙pt is
unknown, but there exist an unknown real positive constant ¯νt
such that ∥˙pt∥< ¯νt.
B. Vision-Based Position Estimation
A perspective camera is attached to the quadrotor to estimate
its position relative to the landmark during landing. According to
the pin-hole model, the mapping from a point P c = [X, Y, Z]T
in the camera frame to an image coordinate s = [u, v]T is
deﬁned as
s =

u
v

= fc
Z

X
Y

(5)
where fc > 0 is the focal length of the camera. We consider a
squared ﬁducial marker AprilTag [26] as a landmark to estimate
the relative position. The 3-D position of the square corner of
the AprilTag is denoted as P m in M, and the corresponding
position P c expressed in C is given by
P c = RC
MP m + tC
M
(6)
where RC
M ∈SO(3) and tC
M ∈R3 represent the rotation and
translation of M relative to C, respectively. They can be esti-
mated by using the four square corners of the AprilTag, and the
side length of the AprilTag is the only scale information for the
entire process. As a result, the position of the quadrotor relative
to the center of the landmark expressed in W can be obtained as
rpt = p −pt = −RRB
CtC
M
(7)
where RB
C is a known ﬁxed rotational transformation of the
camera frame relative to the quadrotor body frame.
C. Problem Statement
The objective of this article is to design the PBVS controller
for a quadrotor landing on a moving platform with model
uncertainty. The relative position between the quadrotor and
the landmark is estimated by a monocular camera, and the
linear/angular velocity, as well as attitude angles of a quadrotor,
are provided by an auxiliary inertial measurement unit (IMU).
The linear velocity ˙pt and angular velocity ωt of the landmark
attached to the moving platform cannot be measured or esti-
mated due to the uncertain model of the moving platform. The
quadrotor maneuvers itself toward the safe landing point above
the moving platform, and it performs vertical landing on the
moving platform by turning OFF motors when the quadrotor is
sufﬁciently close to the landing point. Speciﬁcally, given the
desired relative position r∗
pt, the goal is to design a controller for
the quadrotor so that rpt converges to a predeﬁned and arbitrarily
small neighborhood of r∗
pt.
III. CONTROL DESIGN
A. Error Transformation
In this section, the error transformation for the position con-
trol is derived. In particular, it quantitatively characterizes the
landing performance. For completeness and compactness of pre-
sentation,thepreliminaryknowledgeonprescribedperformance
is ﬁrst summarized. The prescribed performance means that the
minimum speed of the convergence, the maximum steady-state
error, and the maximum allowable overshoot are set a priori.
Typically, the mathematical expression of the prescribed perfor-
mance is given by the following inequalities:
−ρi(t) < ei(t) < ρi(t), ∀t > 0
(8)
where ρi(t) is a continuously differentiable, bounded, strictly
positive, and decreasing function of time, called performance
function, which can be deﬁned as
ρi(t) = (ρi(0) −ρ∞
i )e−lit + ρ∞
i
(9)
where ρi(0) > 0 is a positive parameter indicating the maximum
allowable size of the tracking error, thus the initial error can
be guaranteed as 0 ≤∥ei(0)∥< ρi(0). The decreasing rate of
ρi(t) depends on the constant l > 0, and ρ∞
i > 0 represents the
steady-state performance speciﬁcation, which can be set small
enough to meet performance requirements.
To achieve landing control with the prescribed performance,
an error transformation is designed as follows:
ei = T(εi)ρi(t)
(10)
where the error transformation function T(εi) is a smooth
strictly increasing function with respect to a new error εi, and the
inverse function of T(εi) for εi exists. Besides, T(εi) satisﬁes
the following properties:
1) −1 < T(εi) < 1, ∀εi ∈R
2) limεi→+∞T(εi) = 1
3) limεi→−∞T(εi) = −1.
Based on the above requirements, a hyperbolic-tangent-type
function can be chosen as the candidate function T(εk) as
T(εi) = eεi −e−εi
eεi + e−εi .
(11)
If we denote ξi = ei/ρi, then the transformed error εi can be
expressed via the inverse transformation of (11) as
εi = 1
2 ln
1 + ξi
1 −ξi

(12)
where ln(·) denotes the natural logarithm. At this point, it can
be seen that if ei →0, then εi →0. Furthermore, the prescribed
performance (8) will be achieved if the transformed error im-
plemented in the controller design is bounded.
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on May 30,2022 at 16:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LIN et al.: LOW-COMPLEXITY CONTROL FOR VISION-BASED LANDING
5351
Remark 1: The key idea of the error transformation is to trans-
form the original nonlinear system with the constrained landing
error behavior appearing in (8), into an equivalent unconstrained
one. To this end, several common transformation functions, in-
cluding the arctangent-type or the hyperbolic-tangent-type [23]–
[25], are used. Owing to the property of these two kinds of
functions, both of them are feasible to guarantee the domain of
the inverse of the transformation function is a bounded open
interval. As a result, we can achieve the prescribed performance
constraint |ξi| < 1. Since the hyperbolic-tangent-type method is
more popular, it is used in the proposed method. Therefore, the
landing error strictly remains within the prescribed error bound
as long as the stability of the transformed error system is ensured.
In the end, the designed controller based on the transformed error
can explicitly meet the requirements of transient and steady-state
performance for landing in many applications of interest.
B. Low Complexity Position Control
To stabilize the translation dynamic subsystem (1) and (2) and
guarantee the landing with prescribed performance, the position
control scheme is proposed based on the aforementioned error
transformation. Deﬁne the position error ep as
ep = rpt −r∗
pt.
(13)
Using (12), the position error can be transformed to a new error
εp = [εp1, εp2, εp3]T , and its derivative is given by
˙εp = Qp(v −˙pt + ϱp)
(14)
where Qp = diag(qp1, qp2, qp3); ϱp = [ϱp1ϱp2, ϱp3]T; qpj and
ϱpj for j ∈1, 2, 3 are deﬁned as
qpj = ∂εpj
∂epj
=
1
(1 + ξpj)(1 −ξpj)
ϱpj = ∂ξpj
∂t
= −˙ρpjξpj.
Following the backstepping control method, the intermediate
virtual velocity variable ˆv = [ˆv1, ˆv2, ˆv3]T is introduced to guar-
antee the stability of εp, and it is designed as
ˆv = −k1QT
pεp
(15)
where k1 > 0 is a positive gain.
Deﬁne a linear velocity error signal as
ev = v −ˆv
(16)
where ev = [ev1, ev2, ev3]T . Similarly, the linear velocity error
can also be transformed to εv = [εv1, εv2, εv3]T . By recalling
(2), the time derivative of transformed error εv is
˙εv = Qv(−gi3 + fRi3
m
−˙ˆv + ϱv)
(17)
where Qv = diag(qv1, qv2, qv3); ϱv = [ϱv1, ϱv2, ϱv3]T; qvj and
ϱvj are given by
qvj = ∂εvj
∂evj
=
1
(1 + ξvj)(1 −ξvj)
ϱvj = ∂ξvj
∂t
= −˙ρvjξvj.
Now we are ready to design the position control law for the
translation dynamic subsystem. Utilizing the transformed ve-
locity error, the thrust magnitude is designed as
f = ∥F ∥= ∥−k2QT
vεv + mgi3∥
(18)
where F = −k2QT
vεv + mgi3, and k2 > 0 is a positive gain.
Remark 2: An important assumption in a classic SE(3) con-
troller [27] is the availability of the target’s velocity information
for feedback. Unfortunately, this requirement is not always sat-
isﬁed in reality because of the inaccurate velocity measurement
of the target. What’s more, the quadrotors might not be equipped
with related sensors to reduce the weight and cost. Therefore, the
unavailability of the target’s velocity makes the landing control
of quadrotors more challenging. To address the autonomous
landing problem that target velocity cannot be measured, es-
timated, or communicated in GPS-denied environments, a low-
complexity position controller is proposed without the velocity
and acceleration of the target. Note the thrust force given by (18)
does not incorporate any prior model knowledge of the moving
platform. Furthermore, no estimations have been employed to
acquire the velocity ˙pt of the moving platform. Moreover, it
avoids the differentiation of the virtual variable ˆv without using
additional ﬁlters. Different from the tracking control, the landing
control required a sufﬁciently low desired height to ensure the
safe landing so that it emphasizes the transient performance of
the PBVS controller. The proposed method is of signiﬁcance
in landing control due to it predetermining the convergence
residual set, convergence rate, and overshoot of the landing
errors. In short, the proposed low-complexity position controller
bounds the state response of an uncertain relative dynamic
system subjected to an unknown platform model, such that it
is robust to an uncertain relative dynamic landing system within
the bounded velocity of the moving platform.
Remark 3: The proposed PBVS method provides a low-
complexity solution for nonlinear systems. The error trans-
formation that incorporates the prescribed performance spec-
iﬁcations is originally used in the PBVS landing control and
explicitly guarantees the landing behavior, e.g., transient and
steady-state performance. More signiﬁcantly, with the help of
the characteristics of the performance function, the designed
controller avoids the explosion of complexity issues raised by
traditional backstepping-like approaches. As a result, the control
design is of considerably low computational complexity without
utilizing additional ﬁlters.
Remark 4: A quadrotor is an aircraft that is lifted and pro-
pelled by four independent actuators. Its dynamics can be seen
as the interconnection of the under-actuated position and the
fully actuated attitude subsystems. Due to the highly nonlinear
dynamics of the quadrotor, the landing control is addressed
by the design of a low-complexity outer-loop controller and a
geometric inner-loop attitude controller. In detail, the outer loop
with slow dynamics generates the thrust and the desired attitude
for the inner loop. Moreover, the inner loop with fast dynamics
aims to track an attitude command and generate the required
torques. Before starting to describe the attitude controller, we
will give the desired attitude Rd, which can be extracted from
the intermediary control input F .
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on May 30,2022 at 16:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5352
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022
C. Geometric Attitude Control
A geometric controller for the attitude subsystem (3) and (4)
is developed to follow a desired yaw angle ψ∗because the angle
information of the target is unavailable. But it is sufﬁcient to
perform the landing mission due to the symmetry of the physical
structure of the quadrotor. The desired attitude Rd is designed on
SO(3) has the advantage of the large-angle maneuvers. Hence,
the error function on SO(3) is conﬁgured to stabilize the attitude
represented by an identity matrix I as
Υ(R, Rd) = 1
2tr[I −RT
d R].
(19)
The error function Υ is locally positive-deﬁnite about R = Rd.
For a given Rd, this set can be represented by the sublevel set
L = {R ∈SO(3)∥Υ(R, Rd) < 2}. The desired rotation ma-
trix Rd = [rd1, rd2, rd3] is extracted from F as follows:
⎧
⎨
⎩
rd1 = rd2 × rd3
rd2 =
rd3×a
∥rd3×a∥
rd3 =
F
∥F ∥
(20)
where a = [cos(ψ∗), sin(ψ∗), 0]T . Given Rd and Ωd, the atti-
tude error and angular velocity error are given by
eR = 1
2(RT
dR −RTRd)∨
(21)
eΩ = Ω −RTRdΩd.
(22)
Motivated by the standard geometric attitude controller in [27],
the moment input τ is designed as
τ = −kReR−kΩeΩ+Ω×JΩ−J(Ω∨RT
dRΩd−RTRd ˙Ωd)
(23)
where the operator (·)∨is the inverse of the (·)∧operator
such that: SO(3) →R3. The positive constant gains kR, kΩ are
selected to guarantee stable performance.
D. Stability Analysis
Theorem1: Considerthesystem(1)–(4)withthelandingcon-
trol law for the quadrotor by thrust force (18) and torque inputs
(23), then the landing error signals (13), (16), and (21), (22) are
uniformly ultimately bounded, and the prescribed performance
(8) is guaranteed.
Proof: We ﬁrst consider the stability of the attitude error
dynamics. Substituting (23) into (4), then the attitude error
dynamics is given by
˙Υ(R, Rd) = eT
ReΩ
(24)
J ˙eΩ = −kReR −kΩeΩ.
(25)
Consider the following Lyapunov candidate function as
V = 1
2eT
ΩJeΩ + kRΥ(R, Rd).
(26)
Then, the time derivative of V is
˙V = eT
ΩJ ˙eΩ + kReT
ReΩ = −kΩ∥eΩ∥2 ≤0.
(27)
Since ˙V is semi-negative deﬁnite, we have eΩ →0 when t →
∞based on the Lyapunov stability theory. Moreover, it can be
seen that ˙eΩ is uniformly continuous. Applying the Barbalat’s
Lemma to (25), we get ˙eΩ →0 as t →∞. therefore eR →0
when t →∞.
Next, the stability of the translational error dynamics is pre-
sented. Substituting (15) into (14), then the time derivative of εp
is given by
˙εp = −k1QpQT
pεp + Qp(ϱp + ev −˙pt)
(28)
since Rdi3 = rd3 = F /∥F ∥, the time derivative of velocity
error dynamics εv can be obtained as
˙εv = Qv(−gi3 + F
m + ϱv −˙ˆv + χ)
(29)
where χ = f
m(Ri3 −Rdi3) .
To prove the stability of the position controller, we should
show the boundedness of the transformed error εi. Owing to
the properties of the T-function appearing in (10), it leads to
proving that ξi = ei/ρi evolves strictly within the open set
(−1, 1). Therefore, we can further demonstrate all errors achieve
the predetermined performance speciﬁed by (8) as −ρi(t) <
ei(t) < ρi(t). In the following, we proceed in three steps to
prove the stability of the position control law. In step 1, the
existence and uniqueness of a maximal system solution ξj :
[0, τmax) →Aξ for some τmax > 0, is guaranteed. In step 2,
the boundedness of all closed-loop signals is proven, and their
boundaries belong to a compact subset of Aξ. Consequently, in
step 3, the points raised in the second step are proven to remain
when τmax →∞.
Step 1: Prove the existence and uniqueness of a maximal
solution over a time interval [0, τmax). We ﬁrst deﬁned the open
set as follows:
Aξ = (−1, 1) × (−1, 1).
(30)
The set Aξ is nonempty and open. Using (8) and (9), since
the constructed performance function satisﬁes ∥ρpj(0)∥>
∥epj(0)∥and ∥ρvj(0)∥> ∥evj(0)∥, therefore, the ∥ξpj(0)∥=
∥epj(0)/ρpj(0)∥< 1 and ∥ξvj(0)∥= ∥evj(0)/ρvj(0)∥< 1.
If we deﬁne ξj = [ξpj, ξvj]T , where j = 1, 2, 3. As a result, the
ξj ∈Aξ. The time derivative of ξj is given by
˙ξj =
	
1
ρpj ( ˙epj
ρpj −ξpj ˙ρpj)
1
ρvj ( ˙evj
ρvj −ξvj ˙ρvj)

.
(31)
Since the fact that the performance functions ρpj and ρvj are
bounded, the ˙ρpj, ξpj, ˙ρvj, andξvj areboundedandcontinuously
differentiable functions of time. Utilizing (15) and (18), the
intermediate control signal ˆv and control law f are smooth over
Aξ, then ˙epj and ˙evj are continuously differentiable functions.
Therefore, ˙ξj is bounded and continuously differentiable as well
as locally Lipschitz ξj over the set Aξ. Thus, a uniqueness of a
maximal solution ξj : [0, τmax) →Aξ of ˙ξj over the set Aξ for
a time interval [0, τmax) is guaranteed, which implies
ξpj ∈(−1, 1), ˜ξvj ∈(−1, 1), ∀t ∈[0, τmax).
(32)
Step 2: The boundedness of all closed-loop signals is proven,
and their boundaries belongs to a compact subset of Aξ for all
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on May 30,2022 at 16:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LIN et al.: LOW-COMPLEXITY CONTROL FOR VISION-BASED LANDING
5353
t ∈[0, τmax). We deﬁne the second Lyapunov function as
V 1 = 1
2εT
p εp.
(33)
The time derivative of V 2 is given by
˙V 1 = −k1εT
p QpQT
pεp + εT
p Qpϖ1
(34)
where ϖ1 = ϱp + ev −˙pt. Since the fact that selected per-
formance function ρpj, ˙ρpj, ρvj, and ˙ρvj are bound, using
(32), we deduce that the boundedness of ϱpj = −˙ρpjξpj and
evj = ρvjξvj for all t ∈[0, τmax). Due to ∥˙pt∥< ¯νt is bounded,
so there exists a constant Δ1 > 0 such that
∥ϖ1∥≤∥ϱp∥+ ∥ev∥+ ∥˙pt∥≤Δ1
(35)
using Young’s inequality, one has
εT
p Qpϖ1 ≤σ1∥QT
p εp∥2 +
1
4σ1
∥ϖ1∥2
(36)
where σ1 is a positive constant. Then, (34) can be rewritten as
˙V 1 ≤−c1V 1 + b1
(37)
where c1 = (k1 −σ1)λ2
min(Qp), and b1 = Δ2
1/4σ1. Since the
normalized state error ξpj ∈(−1, 1), then qpj = 1/(1 −ξ2
vj) ≥
1 is bounded, so λmin(Qp) ≥1, ∀t ∈[0, τmax). we assume that
k1 and σ1 are chosen such that k1 ≥σ1, then c1 > 0. Using
the Lyapunov stability theory, it can be concluded that the
boundedness of εp such that ∥εpj∥< ¯εpj, where j = 1, 2, 3.
Furthermore, taking the inverse logarithmic function for (12),
we get
−1 < e−2¯εpj −1
e−2¯εpj + 1 ≤ξpj ≤e2¯εpj −1
e2¯εpj + 1 < 1
(38)
for all t ∈[0, τmax). The time derivative of ˆv is
˙ˆv = −k1 ˙Q
T
pεp −k1QT
p ˙εp
(39)
utilizing (38), it guarantees the boundedness of Qp and ˙Qp, ˙εp
for all t ∈[0, τmax). Hence, we obtain the boundedness of ˙ˆv,
∀t ∈[0, τmax).
We take the third Lyapunov function as
V 2 = 1
2εT
v εv.
(40)
The time derivative of V 2 is given by
˙V 2 = −k2
mεT
v QvQT
vεv + εT
v Qvϖ2 + εT
v Qvχ
(41)
where ϖ2 = ϱv −˙ˆv. Since the selected performance function
ρvj, ˙ρvj are bound, using (32), we deduce that the boundedness
of ϱvj = −˙ρvjξvj for all t ∈[0, τmax). Since the ˙ˆv is bounded,
there exists a constant Δ2 > 0 such that
∥ϖ2∥≤∥ϱv∥+ ∥˙ˆv∥≤Δ2.
(42)
Moreover, according to Rodrigues’ formula, we obtain ∥eR∥=
sin∥x∥, when RT
d R = exp ˆx for x ∈R3. This represents the
sine of the eigen-axis rotation angle between R and Rd such
that
∥(Ri3 −Rdi3)∥≤∥eR∥= β < 1.
(43)
The last term of the right-hand side of (41) is bounded as
∥εT
v Qvχ∥≤

k2∥QT
vεv∥2 + ∥QT
v εv∥∥mgi3∥
 β
m.
(44)
Using inequalities (42), (44), and applying Young’s inequality,
then (41) yields
˙V 2 ≤−k2(1 −β)
m
εT
v QvQT
vεv + (Δ2 + g)∥QT
v εv∥
≤−(k2(1 −β)
m
−σ2)∥QT
v εv∥2 + (Δ2 + g)2
4σ2
(45)
where σ2 is a positive constant. Inequality (45) implies that
˙V 2 ≤−c2V 2 + b2
(46)
where c2 = (k2(1 −β)/m −σ2)λ2
min(Qv), and b2 = (Δ2+g)2
4σ2
.
Since the normalized state error ξvj ∈(−1, 1), qvj = 1/(1 −
ξ2
vj) ≥1, and, therefore, λmin(Qv) ≥1. We assume that k2
and σ2 are chosen such that k2(1 −β)/m > σ2 and hence
c2 > 0. Therefore εv is bounded such that ∥εvj∥< ¯εvj, where
j = 1, 2, 3. Taking the inverse logarithmic function for (12), for
all t ∈[0, τmax), we obtain
−1 < e−2¯εvj −1
e−2¯εvj + 1 ≤ξvj ≤e2¯εvj −1
e2¯εvj + 1 < 1.
(47)
The boundedness of all closed-loop signals of ξj evolves in a
compact subset of Aξ, so the errors are uniformly ultimately
bounded for all t ∈[0, τmax).
Step 3: The points raised in the second step are proven to
remain when τmax →∞. Using (38) and (47), It’s veriﬁed that
ξj(t) ∈A′
ξ forallt ∈[0, τmax),wherethesetA′
ξ = (ξpj, ¯ξpj) ×
(ξvj, ¯ξvj) ∈Aξ is nonempty and compact. However, [28] dic-
tates the existence of a time instant t′ ∈[0, τmax) such that
ξj(t′) /∈A′
ξ. Thus, τmax = ∞by contradiction. This completes
the proof.
E. Modiﬁed Attitude Control Based on a Command Filter
To avoid complex calculations in the torque input, a com-
mand ﬁlter is introduced to compute the ˙F without the dif-
ferentiation so that ˙Rd can be easily obtained. Based on (20),
˙Rd = [˙rd1, ˙rd2, ˙rd3] as the derivative of Rd is given by
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
˙rd1 = ˙rd2 × rd3 + rd2 × ˙rd3
˙rd2 = (I3×3 −rd2rT
d2) ( ˙rd3×a+rd3× ˙a)
∥rd3×a∥
˙rd3 = (I3×3 −rd3rT
d3)
˙F
∥F ∥
(48)
whereI3×3 is theidentitymatrix. Introducingthecommandﬁlter
technology [29], one can be expressed as follows:
 ˙xi,1 = ωnxi,2
˙xi,2 = −2ζωnxi,2 −ωn(xi,1 −Fi)
(49)
with i ∈1, 2, 3, and the outputs of command ﬁlter are xi,1 = Fi
and xi,2 = ˙Fi. Filter parameters are designed as ωn > 0 and
ζ ∈(0, 1]. We design the modiﬁed attitude controller as
τ = −KReR −KΩeΩ + Ω × JΩ.
(50)
Remark 5: Compared with the geometric controller in (23),
the modiﬁed geometric attitude controller (50) neglects the last
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on May 30,2022 at 16:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5354
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022
Fig. 2.
Simulation results for the ﬁrst comparative example. (a) Trajectories of the quadrotor and the moving platform. (b) and (c) Position errors
and linear velocity errors of the proposed method (blue) along with corresponding performance functions (red) and comparative method (purple).
Fig. 3.
Simulation results for the second comparative example. (a) Trajectories of a quadrotor and a moving platform. (b) and (c) Position errors
and linear velocity errors of the proposed method (blue) along with corresponding performance functions (red) and comparative method (purple).
Fig. 4.
Simulation results for a sinusoidally oscillating platform whose horizontal trajectory is a circle. (a) The trajectories of a quadrotor and a
moving platform. (b) The time response of position errors. (c) The time response of linear velocity errors.
two terms in the controller (23). With the help of the higher order
inertial cancelation terms, this controller in (23) is guaranteed to
be exponentially stable for almost any rotation. These high-order
terms are related to Rd and Ωd, and they are usually small
enough that we can consider them as bounded disturbances.
Based on the Lyapunov stability theory, the controller in (50)
can make errors converge to a small neighborhood of zero, and
so it is stable in the absence of high-order terms. Also, it has been
mentioned in [30] that the effects of these high-order terms are
insigniﬁcant. From a practical standpoint, a lot of experiments
have achieved satisfactory performance by neglecting the higher
order terms.
IV. SIMULATION AND EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed control scheme,
several
simulations
and
experiments
were
presented
in
Figs. 4–8. All results were based on the following conﬁguration.
The system parameters of quadrotor were listed as: m = 2.3
kg, g = 9.8 m/s2 and J = diag(0.0432, 0.0432, 0.0715) kg·
m2/rad2. It can be seen from the stability proof that the controller
gains are chosen such that kΩ > 0, k1 ≥σ1 and k2(1 −β)/m >
σ2. Since β < 1, m > 0, and σ1, σ2 are arbitrarily small positive
constants, the control gains are positive and obtained via a trial
and error approach when satisfactory performance is achieved.
The parameters of the controllers were set as k1 = 4.5, k2 = 2.0,
kR = 150 and kΩ = 0.4, and the gains of the ﬁlter were cho-
sen as ζ = 0.5, ωn = 0.02. The parameters of the performance
function were given by ρ∞
pj = 0.05 m, ρ∞
vj = 0.05 m/s and lpj =
lvj = 0.5, where j = 1, 2, 3. In addition, an Extend Kalman
Filter was adopted to integrate the visual information and IMU
to calculate a more reliable relative position. The desired relative
position was set as r∗
pt = (0, 0, 0.4) m. Before investigating
experimental results by using hardware, the simulation results
allow us to gain insights into the proposed method in different
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on May 30,2022 at 16:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LIN et al.: LOW-COMPLEXITY CONTROL FOR VISION-BASED LANDING
5355
Fig. 5.
Simulation results with a target having the “8” shaped trajectory, where the measurement noises and the wind disturbances are imposed
at the side of the quadrotor. (a) The trajectories of a quadrotor and a moving platform, where the purple dotted line is the response curve of
controller [31], the yellow dot-and-dash line is the response curve of controller [32], the blue solid line is the proposed controller, and the red dashed
line is the trajectory of the target. (b) The time response of position errors. (c) The time response of linear velocity errors.
Fig. 6.
Experimental setup for the vision-based autonomous landing system, and the internal view from the embedded camera.
scenarios of interest. Hence, these results may be of a larger
scale than they are possible in the hardware setup, e.g., due to
restrictions regarding laboratory size.
A. Simulation Results Considering Two Comparative
Studies
In this section, two comparative examples were conducted to
verify the effectiveness of the proposed controller. In the ﬁrst ex-
ample, we evaluated the performance of the proposed controller
by comparing it with a geometric controller [30] with the target’s
velocity feedback. The linear and angular velocities of the target
were set as 5 m/s and 0.2 rad/s, respectively. The results are de-
picted in Fig. 2. Fig. 2(a) shows the trajectories of the quadrotor
and the target. Though the geometric controller with the target’s
velocity feedback converges faster, both of their trajectories
are smooth and have good performance. The time response of
position and velocity errors are depicted in Fig. 2(b) and (c).
It can be observed that all errors of the proposed method are
always guaranteed within the predeﬁned performance bounds,
so that it has a smaller convergence residual set. It is important
for landing missions with strict accuracy requirements.
In the second example, under the same simulation conditions,
the comparative controller in [30] was implemented without the
target’s velocity. To ensure the comparative method performs as
well as possible in this scenario, the linear and angular velocities
of the landing platform were set as 0.5 m/s and 0.2 rad/s. The
results are shown in Fig. 3. Fig. 3(a) illustrates the trajectories
of the quadrotor and the target. It can be easily seen that the
trajectory of the proposed controller is smoother, while the
comparative controller oscillates greatly. In Fig. 3(b) and (c),
the time response of position and velocity errors were pre-
sented. From the perspective of transient control performance,
the proposed method has a faster convergence speed and smaller
overshoot. As far as the actual landing mission is concerned, the
quadrotor is not allowed to have too much overshoot to cause a
collision during the landing. Obviously, the comparison method
is not up to this requirement when the target’s velocity infor-
mation is missing. More signiﬁcantly, the proposed method is
adapted to the complex landing environment due to the fact that it
can freely select the performance boundary. Therefore, the com-
parative simulation studies verify the effectiveness of the pro-
posed method without the velocity measurements of the target.
B. Simulation Results for Targets Moving in 3-D Space
Based on the horizontal motions of the target, the vertical
motions have been added to demonstrate the effectiveness of
the landing controller for a target moving in a 3-D space. The
linear and angular velocities of the landing platform were set
as 2 m/s and 0.2 rd/s. The chosen vertical reference trajectory
can be described as zr = 0.2sin(0.5t). The simulation results
are shown in Fig. 4. Fig. 4(a) describes the X–Y–Z positions
of the quadrotor and the target. The time responses of position
and linear velocity errors are plotted in Fig. 4(b) and (c). It
can be seen that all errors are always guaranteed within the
predeﬁned performance bounds. Hence, the quadrotor can track
the reference trajectory effectively though the target has one
more degree of freedom in the vertical axis. Therefore, the
proposed control method can achieve fast and accurate landing
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on May 30,2022 at 16:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5356
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022
Fig. 7.
Experiment 1: Quadrotor lands on a platform moving along a
straight line: (a) Trajectories of a quadrotor and a moving platform for
the whole landing process. (b)–(g) The position and linear velocity errors
(blue) and the corresponding imposed performance bounds (red).
of the quadrotor on the target moving in 3-D space with the
designed transient and steady-state performance indicators.
C. Simulation Results for Strong Robustness Veriﬁcation
In this simulation, the performance of the proposed controller
was evaluated for the real application scenarios, such as the
uncertain target with complex motions, wind disturbances, and
measurement noises. To ﬁt the real situation, we considered that
the wind caused a time-varying accelerated speed disturbance as
0.2cos(0.1t)m/s2 tothex-axis,y-axis,andz-axisintheCartesian
space; the noise was imposed on the measurements with a
standard deviation of 0.015 m; the target was endowed with com-
plex motions involving acceleration and deceleration, and an “8′′
shapedreferencetrajectorywaschosenasxr = 5sin(0.1t), yr =
5sin(0.2t). In addition, the following comparison numerical
simulations have been conducted to further demonstrate the
strong robustness of the proposed controller. Under the same
simulation conditions, we compared the results with those of the
approaches based on an adaptive backstepping controller in [31]
Fig. 8.
Experiment 2: Quadrotor lands on a platform moving along a
circular trajectory: (a) Trajectories of a quadrotor and a moving platform
for the whole landing process. (b)–(g) The position and linear velocity
errors (blue) and the corresponding imposed performance bounds (red).
and based on a boundary layer sliding controller in [32]. The
control schemes in [31] and [32] are similarly deﬁned for the
systemmodeledby(1)–(4),buttheybothrequirethevelocityand
acceleration of the target. Besides, the controller in [32] assumed
that the total wind speed relative to the UAV is known to estimate
the acceleration caused by drag. The results are shown in Fig. 5.
Fig. 5(a) depicts 3-D trajectories of the quadrotor and the target.
The time responses of the position and linear velocity errors
are plotted in Fig. 5(b) and (c). From Fig. 5(a), the trajectory of
the controller in [31] is not satisfactory since it cannot perfectly
compensate for the inﬂuence of the external wind disturbance.
The trajectory quality of the controller in [32] has been modiﬁed
with the help of the observer. In contrast, the proposed controller
can guarantee the best trajectory according to the prescribed
transient and steady-state performance although in the absence
of the target’s velocity and the disturbance observers. It can be
seen that the frequent variations of target velocities arose certain
tracking errors and the wind caused a time-varying accelerated
speed disturbance. However, all errors of the proposed controller
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on May 30,2022 at 16:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LIN et al.: LOW-COMPLEXITY CONTROL FOR VISION-BASED LANDING
5357
not only converged quickly but also strictly retained within
the prescribed performance bounds. These studies show the
superior robustness of the proposed approach over existing
controllers in handling model uncertainties and disturbances.
D. Experimental Results
Two real-hardware experiments were presented to further
demonstrate the performance of a proposed control scheme on a
physical quadrotor P600. As shown in Fig. 6, the experimental
setup of quadrotor included a downward-looking wide-angle
camera Realsense T265 with a 163◦ﬁeld of view (FOV) only
used to get RGB images, a custom-made electronics ﬂight
controller board Pixhawk 4 (build-in IMUs) provided angle and
velocity information of quadrotor, and a jetson nano onboard
computer ran the closed-loop control system at 20 Hz. The
proposed algorithm was implemented in the robot operating
system kinetic. A motion capture system was only utilized to
illustrate the landing trajectories. Two cases of experiments were
considered as follows:
Case 1: Quadrotor landed on a platform moving along a
straight line.
Case 2: Quadrotor landed on a platform moving along a
circular trajectory.
In the ﬁrst case, the linear velocity of the platform was set
as 0.5 m/s. The results are shown in Fig. 7, Fig. 7(a) depicts
the 3-D trajectories of the quadrotor and the moving platform
for the whole landing process. In Fig. 7(b)–(d), it can be seen
that the position errors converge with a satisfactory accuracy
range of about 0.035 m. The linear velocity errors remain within
the predeﬁned region and ensure that they will never violate the
prescribedtransientboundsinFig.7(e)–(g).Theresultsshowthe
good stability and performance of the proposed control scheme
for landing on a moving platform.
In the second case, the performance of the landing controller
with nonlinear reference velocity was evaluated. The linear and
angular velocities of the Husky moving platform were given by
0.5 m/s and 0.2 rd/s. Experimental results were illustrated in
Fig. 8. Fig. 8(a) illustrates the 3-D trajectories of the quadrotor
and the moving platform. One can see that position and linear
velocity errors are regulated to a predeﬁned arbitrarily small
residual set along with the absolute decaying time function in
Fig. 8(b)–(g). The results show that the transient and steady-
state landing behaviors of the proposed controller are explicitly
guaranteed and verify the robustness of the proposed controller
against the uncertain relative dynamic system subjected to un-
known moving platform models.
V. CONCLUSION
ThisarticleaddressedthePBVSlandingcontrolproblemofan
underactuated quadrotor on an unknown model of moving plat-
form. The proposed controller is of considerably low computa-
tionalcomplexity,soitissuitableforthistypeofvehiclewithlow
cost, real-time operation, and limited computation ability. Under
the hierarchical control framework involving a position con-
troller and an attitude controller, the quadrotor underactuation
was well treated. More signiﬁcantly, the PBVS controller using
the error transformation technology and the geometric attitude
controller based on the ﬁlter were designed to overcome the lack
of the target’s velocity. Therefore, the landing controller exhib-
ited strong robustness against the uncertain relative dynamic sys-
tem subjected to an unknown model of moving platform. With
this method, the transient and steady-state landing behaviors
were explicitly guaranteed. Hence, the proposed controller could
meet the landing requirements for many applications of interest.
Numerical simulations and experiments were conducted to show
the validity and robustness of the proposed approach. Future
work is to improve the performance of our landing algorithm
for considering the FOV constraints of cameras.
REFERENCES
[1] V. Kumar and N. Michael, “Opportunities and challenges with autonomous
micro aerial vehicles,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 1279–1291,
2012.
[2] H. Liu, X. Wang, and Y. Zhong, “Quaternion-based robust attitude control
for uncertain robotic quadrotors,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 11,
no. 2, pp. 406–415, Apr. 2015.
[3] A. Gautam, P. Sujit, and S. Saripalli, “A survey of autonomous landing
techniques for UAVs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Unmanned Aircr. Syst., 2014,
pp. 1210–1218.
[4] X. Zhang, B. Xian, B. Zhao, and Y. Zhang, “Autonomous ﬂight control
of a nano quadrotor helicopter in a GPS-denied environment using on-
board vision,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 6392–6403,
Oct. 2015.
[5] P. Serra, R. Cunha, T. Hamel, D. Cabecinhas, and C. Silvestre, “Landing
of a quadrotor on a moving target using dynamic image-based visual servo
control,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1524–1535, Dec. 2016.
[6] H. Shi, G. Sun, Y. Wang, and K. S. Hwang, “Adaptive image-based
visual servoing with temporary loss of the visual signal,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 1956–1965, Apr. 2019.
[7] X. Zhang, Y. Fang, X. Zhang, J. Jiang, and X. Chen, “Dynamic image-
based output feedback control for visual servoing of multirotors,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 7624–7636, Dec. 2020.
[8] O. Shakernia, Y. Ma, T. J. Koo, and S. S. Sastry, “Landing an unmanned
air vehicle: Vision-based motion estimation and nonlinear control,” Asian
J. Control, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 128–145, 1999.
[9] O. Shakernia, R. Vidal, C. Sharp, Y. Ma, and S. Sastry, “Multiple view
motion estimation and control for landing an aerial vehicle,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Robot. Autom., 2002, pp. 2793–2798.
[10] K. E. Wenzel, A. Masselli, and A. Zell, “Automatic take off, tracking and
landing of a miniature UAV on a moving carrier vehicle,” J. Intell. Robot.
Syst., Theory Appl., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 221–238, 2011.
[11] L. R. Garcia Carrillo, A. Dzul, and R. Lozano, “Hovering quad-rotor
control: A comparison of nonlinear controllers using visual feedback,”
IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 3159–3170,
Oct. 2012.
[12] D. Cabecinhas, R. Naldi, C. Silvestre, R. Cunha, and L. Marconi, “Robust
landing and sliding maneuver hybrid controller for a quadrotor vehi-
cle,” IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 400–412,
Mar. 2016.
[13] J. Thomas, J. Welde, G. Loianno, K. Daniilidis, and V. Kumar, “Au-
tonomous ﬂight for detection, localization, and tracking of moving tar-
gets with a small quadrotor,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 2, no. 3,
pp. 1762–1769, Jul. 2017.
[14] A. Borowczyk, D. T. Nguyen, A. P. V. Nguyen, D. Q. Nguyen, D.
Saussie, and J. L. Ny, “Autonomous landing of a multirotor micro air
vehicle on a high velocity ground vehicle,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 50,
pp. 10488–10494, 2017.
[15] L. Marconi, A. Isidori, and A. Serrani, “Autonomous vertical landing on
an oscillating platform: An internal-model based approach,” Automatica,
vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 21–32, 2002.
[16] B. Hu, L. Lu, and S. Mishra, “Fast, safe and precise landing of a quadrotor
on an oscillating platform,” in Proc. Amer. Control Conf., 2015, pp. 3836–
3841.
[17] J. L. Sanchez-Lopez, J. Pestana, S. Saripalli, and P. Campoy, “An approach
toward visual autonomous ship board landing of a VTOL UAV,” J. Intell.
Robot. Syst., vol. 74, no. 1/2, pp. 113–127, 2014.
[18] T. Baca et al., “Autonomous landing on a moving vehicle with an un-
manned aerial vehicle,” J. Field Robot., vol. 36, pp. 874–891, 2019.
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on May 30,2022 at 16:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5358
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022
[19] O. Araar, N. Aouf, and I. Vitanov, “Vision based autonomous landing of
multirotor UAV on moving platform,” J. Intell. Robot. Syst., vol. 85, no. 2,
pp. 369–384, 2017.
[20] J. Ghommam and M. Saad, “Autonomous landing of a quadrotor on a
moving platform,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 53, no. 3,
pp. 1504–1519, Jun. 2017.
[21] C. K. Tan, J. Wang, Y. C. Paw, and F. Liao, “Autonomous ship deck
landing of a quadrotor using invariant ellipsoid method,” IEEE Trans.
Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 891–903, Apr. 2016.
[22] A. Rodriguez-Ramos, C. Sampedro, H. Bavle, P. de la Puente, and P.
Campoy, “A deep reinforcement learning strategy for UAV autonomous
landing on a moving platform,” J. Intell. Robot. Syst., vol. 93, no. 1/2,
pp. 351–366, 2019.
[23] J. Zhang and G. Yang, “Prescribed performance fault-tolerant control
of uncertain nonlinear systems with unknown control directions,” IEEE
Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 6529–6535, Dec. 2017.
[24] P. Marantos, C. P. Bechlioulis, and K. J. Kyriakopoulos, “Robust trajectory
tracking control for small-scale unmanned helicopters with model uncer-
tainties,”IEEETrans.ControlSyst.Technol.,vol.25,no.6,pp. 2010–2021,
Nov. 2017.
[25] J. Na, Q. Chen, X. Ren, and Y. Guo, “Adaptive prescribed performance
motion control of servo mechanisms with friction compensation,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 486–494, Jan. 2014.
[26] J. Wang and E. Olson, “AprilTag 2: Efﬁcient and robust ﬁducial detection,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., 2016, pp. 4193–4198.
[27] T. Lee, M. Leok, and N. McClamroch, “Geometric tracking control of
a quadrotor UAV on SE(3),” in Proc. Conf. Decision Control, 2010,
pp. 5420–5425.
[28] E. D. Sontag, Mathematical Control Theory: Deterministic Finite Dimen-
sional Systems. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 1990.
[29] J. A. Farrell, M. Polycarpou, M. Sharma, and W. Dong, “Command ﬁltered
backstepping,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1391–1395,
Jun. 2009.
[30] R. Mahony, V. Kumar, and P. Corke, “Multirotor aerial vehicles: Modeling,
estimation, and control of quadrotor,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag., vol. 19,
no. 3, pp. 20–32, Sep. 2012.
[31] J. Liu, W. Gai, J. Zhang, and Y. Li, “Nonlinear adaptive backstepping
with ESO for the quadrotor trajectory tracking control in the multiple
disturbances,” Int. J. Control Autom. Syst., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 2754–2768,
2019.
[32] A. Paris, B. T. Lopez, and J. P. How, “Dynamic landing of an autonomous
quadrotor on a moving platform in turbulent wind conditions,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2020, pp. 9577–9583.
Jie Lin received the B.S. degree in automation
from the College of Electrical Engineering and
Automation, Fuzhou University, Fujian, China, in
2019. He is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree in control science and engineering with
Hunan University, Changsha, China.
His current research interests include multi-
robot systems, visual servoing, and nonlinear
control.
Yaonan Wang received the B.S. degree in
computer engineering from East China Science
and Technology University (ECSTU), Fuzhou,
China, in 1981, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in electrical engineering from Hunan University,
Changsha, China, in 1990 and 1994, respec-
tively.
From 1994 to 1995, he was a Postdoctoral
Research Fellow with the National University of
Defence Technology, Changsha. From 1981 to
1994, he was with ECSTU. From 1998 to 2000,
he was a Senior Humboldt Fellow in Germany. From 2001 to 2004,
he was a Visiting Professor with the University of Bremen, Bremen,
Germany. He has been a Professor with Hunan University since 1995.
His current research interests include robotics, intelligent perception and
control, and computer vision for industrial applications.
Prof.
Wang
is
an
Academician
of
the
Chinese
Academy
of
Engineering.
Zhiqiang Miao (Member, IEEE) received the
B.S.
and
Ph.D.
degrees
in
electrical
and
information engineering from Hunan Univer-
sity, Changsha, China, in 2010 and 2016,
respectively.
From 2014 to 2015, he was a Visiting Scholar
with the University of New Mexico, Albuquerque,
NM, USA. From 2016 to 2018, he was a Postdoc
Fellow with the Department of Mechanical and
Automation Engineering, The Chinese Univer-
sity of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. He is currently
an Associate Professor with the College of Electrical and Information En-
gineering, Hunan University. His research interests include multi-robot
systems, visual navigation and nonlinear control.
Prof. Miao was the recipient of the Outstanding Doctoral Dissertation
Award of Hunan Province in 2018, the Outstanding Doctoral Dissertation
Nomination Award of Chinese Association of Automation in 2018, the
Best Paper Honorable Mention Award of IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters in 2020, the Best Paper Finalists of the International Conference
on Advanced Robotics in 2017 and the IEEE International Conference
on Real-time Computing and Robotics in 2021. He served as the As-
sociate Editor of the 2022 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), the Workshop Associate Editor of the 2020
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), and the Technical Committee Member of several international
conferences.
Hang Zhong (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.,
M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in automation sci-
ence from the College of Electrical and Informa-
tion Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha,
China, in 2013, 2016, and 2020 respectively.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow with Hu-
nan University. His current research interests
include robotics modeling and control, visual
servo control, and path planning of the aerial
robots.
Rafael Fierro (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the M.Sc. degree in control engineering from the
University of Bradford, Bradford, U.K., in 1990,
and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering
from the University of Texas at Arlington, Arling-
ton, TX, USA, in 1997.
He held a postdoctoral appointment with the
GRASP Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA, and a Faculty Position
with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Oklahoma State University, Still-
water, OK, USA. He has been a Professor with the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of New Mexico, Al-
buquerque, NM, USA, since 2007, where he directs the Multiagent,
Robotics, Hybrid and Embedded Systems Laboratory. His current re-
search interests include hybrid and embedded systems, heterogeneous
multivehicle coordination, cooperative and distributed control of multia-
gent systems, mobile sensor networks, and robotics.
Dr. Fierro was a recipient of the Fulbright Scholarship, the 2004 Na-
tional Science Foundation CAREER Award, and the 2007 International
Society of Automation Transactions Best Paper Award. He is serving as
an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE
AND ENGINEERING.
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on May 30,2022 at 16:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

