Signal, Image and Video Processing (2023) 17:21–30
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11760-022-02199-y
ORIGINAL PAPER
Visual soft landing of an autonomous quadrotor on a moving pad
using a combined fuzzy velocity control with model predictive control
Oussama Bouaiss1
· Raihane Mechgoug1 · Abdelmalik Taleb-Ahmed2
Received: 7 October 2021 / Revised: 4 March 2022 / Accepted: 5 March 2022 / Published online: 23 April 2022
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag London Ltd., part of Springer Nature 2022
Abstract
Autonomous landing is a vital option for Unmanned Aerial vehicles (UAV), as it can be a fail-safe in many critical cases. This
paper demonstrates a complete solution for the soft landing application of a fully autonomous quadrotor on a moving pad
considering external disturbance, model uncertainties, and actuators noise. The challenge starts with detecting the specially
designed landing pad by an onboard vision system, a robust Algorithm estimates its coordinates precisely using a camera
pose estimation. An enhanced Kalman ﬁlter by Madgwick data fusion of asynchronous sensors was developed for the best
relative pose and heading reference. Different sizes and designs of the ArUco markers were attentively chosen to ensure the
best detection at different altitudes and angles of approach. The landing trajectory is dynamically generated based on Jerk
optimization, integrating a bio-inspired velocity proﬁle by Fuzzy Logic Controller (FLC) to smoothen the landing. Model
Predictive Control (MPC) was opted for quadrotor control to track the generated trajectory in time reference with the rejection
of disturbance. The solution presents a soft mechanism for ﬂat surface landing similar to human decision concept and control.
The proposed method ensures absorption of the shock of impact, and the optimal tracking of the moving landing pad at less
than 4 cm of error in Cartesian coordinates. Experimental results from pad relative pose estimation developed in Python,
Data fusion experimentation of Attitude and Heading Reference system (AHRS), and Matlab simulations with a performance
comparison between MPC and Proportional Integral Derivative (PID) control validate the effectiveness and reliability of the
proposed landing task solution.
Keywords Unmanned aerial vehicles · Quadrotor · Video processing · landing · Fuzzy logic · Model predictive Control ·
Pose estimation
1 Introduction
The quadrotor is one of the most interesting types of UAVs, it
received a large volume of papers and research because of its
ﬂexibility, maneuverability, and its hovering mode ability. Its
use was effective in detection, civil and military surveillance,
shipping of commercial, in medical services, and even in
B Oussama Bouaiss
oussama.bouaiss@univ-biskra.dz
B Raihane Mechgoug
raihane.mechgoug@univ-biskra.dz
Abdelmalik Taleb-Ahmed
Abdelmalik.Taleb-Ahmed@uphf.fr
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, LESIA Laboratory,
University of Mohamed Khider, Biskra, Algeria
2
Institute of Electronics, Microelectronics and Nanotechnology
(IEMN), UMR 8520, Polytechnic University Hauts de France,
University of Lille, CNRS, 59313 Valenciennes, France
industrial application [1,2]. Quadrotors have become able to
perform complicated maneuvers and autonomous tasks even
in harsh conditions or hazardous environments, thus comes
the option of autonomous landing as a vital task for many
missions and as a fail-safe in case of some technical issue
during the ﬂight such as GPS denial or low power.
Diverse papers tackled the quadrotor landing, Zhe et al. in
[3] developed a vision-based autonomous landing on a mov-
ing surface vessel with PID tracking and control, the relative
pose was based on the visual detection and estimation of the
landing area, relative localization for UAV-based image was
addressed [4]. In [5] Danjun et al. considered the ground
effect based on Cheeseman’s model for more precision of
the quadrotor Vertical Taking Off and Landing (VTOL) with
a robust PID control. An efﬁcient 3-D time-optimal trajec-
tory tracking by a quadrotor model on a moving pad was
addressed in [6]. Yuhua et al. proposed a complete solution
for autonomous landing of a low-cost quadrotor on a moving
123

22
Signal, Image and Video Processing (2023) 17:21–30
new designed landing pad with Lyapunov stability demon-
stration [7]. However, those previous papers opted for PID
control which unfortunately doesn’t consider either distur-
bance or model uncertainty, In addition, it affects slightly the
tracking performance. Other papers studied the landing con-
trol of the UAV on an oscillating pad with sea characteristics
[8] considering an introduction of nonlinear Kalman Filter
(KF) [9]. In [10] Carlos et al. proposed an uncertain quadrotor
smooth landing on a moving pad without a relative state vec-
tor availability using a Linear Quadratic Regulator(LQR) to
track the trajectory in the presence of unknown uncertainties.
To comply with the autonomous landing of the quadro-
tor, computer vision processing is crucial to determine the
relative pose to dynamically generate the trajectory for the
landing. Many algorithms of vision subject to detection and
estimation for autonomous landing have been developed.
ArUco markers were widely used because of the easiness
of detection and the efﬁciency of the identiﬁcation [2,3,7,9].
Whereas the pose estimation varies from direct methods that
use PnP algorithm [7,11,12], or sophisticated and intelligent
methods based on neural networking [13]. The visual pro-
cessing is so sensitive in the matter of data extraction (size,
pattern, and pose) to camera type and its calibration, to the
shuttereffect,tothevelocityofdrone’slanding,andtheexter-
nal light and mirror effect [11].
It is critical to consider the noise and disturbance model
in the control and estimation during the robust landing pro-
cess, especially in outdoor applications, thus the estimation
of quadrotor state vector was enhanced by Madgwick data
fusion of asynchronous sensors ﬁlter [14] combined by an
Extended KF, another ﬁlter was set for the best estimation of
markers visual localization [15].
Based on the literature, some researchers used pursuit
guidance while simultaneously descending with the UAV in
altitude [16], wherein [17], a fusion of monocular Simulta-
neously Localization And Mapping (SLAM) and INS was
utilized in the landing of the quadrotor in bio-inspired guid-
ance method which is based on Tau theory. In [18], complex
maneuvers were illustrated by a robust tracking control that
can be constrained for landing. In this paper, to enhance the
bio-inspired soft landing, a novel Fuzzy decision-maker pro-
cess is used to estimate the landing time via the average
possible speed, the Fuzzy sets use the observed state vectors
of both the quadrotor and moving pad to decide the velocity
of the landing. This method controls the velocity limits to
design the optimal trajectory to track for the landing as an
expert guidance control. MPC is chosen for the tracking per-
formance instead of classic PID, MPC is adaptive and can
handle the considered disturbance and Gaussian noise.
The proposed soft landing approach separates the process
into two interconnected parts: First, the detection of mark-
ers, identiﬁcation of at least one visible marker depending on
Fig. 1 Autonomous Landing control processing
the height, and then determining the relative pose of the pad
center with consideration to the motion of both the quadro-
tor and the landing pad. Then, the generation of minimal
Jerk trajectory to ensure smoothness during landing, where
MPC is responsible for tracking iteratively the desired trajec-
tory to land. The smooth velocity proﬁle is controlled by the
FLC decision-maker. The opted philosophy is demonstrated
in Fig. 1.
The project aimed to develop a complete application for
the smooth autonomous landing of a quadrotor on a moving
pad based on a vision algorithm using a monocular camera
with robust position control. The iterative and adaptive Gen-
eration of trajectory was based on the optimal jerk. This paper
has valued the following contributions:
• Design a robust application of the pose estimation based
on a special landing pad by multiple ArUco markers with
different patterns at different sizes to ease the detection.
• MPC control is opted for position tracking for better
attenuation of external disturbance with a performance
comparison to PID control.
• Planning a mimic of natural decision making as expert
human processing for landing by adding FLC for velocity
control.
• Combine EKF with Madgwick data fusion of asyn-
chronous sensors for state observation.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sect.
2 presents the landing pad design, the vision processing
approach for detection and identiﬁcation of the patterns, and
the pose estimation. In Sect. 3, the dynamics of the quadrotor
are modeled. In Sect. 4, The enhanced Madgwick/Extended
Kalman Filter (EKF) with data fusion is presented with the
Attitude and Heading Reference system (AHRS). Section 5
develops the generation of the optimum Jerk trajectory, with
the fuzzy velocity control. MPC for tracking the desired tra-
jectory for the landing is detailed in Sect. 6. Results of the
estimation of the relative pose by vision and control simula-
tion with comparison are presented in Sect. 7. Finally, Sect.
8 concludes the paper.
123

Signal, Image and Video Processing (2023) 17:21–30
23
2 The detection of the relative pose
estimation
Before engaging the landing control, the detection and the
estimation of the relative pose of the moving landing pad
are ﬁrstly processed. This section investigates this challenge,
aiming to maximize the detection probability and to avoid
miss-estimation samples and the limitation of the Field Of
View(FOV).
2.1 Concept of detection of the landing pad
Many techniques for pad detection were investigated, such
as color-based, or shape-based, other research were based
on employing a complementary modular approach that uses
data-driven methods for auto-docking such in [19]. In this
paper, we opted for the ArUco markers. The use of binary
square ﬁducial markers provides enough data for the detec-
tion by the four corners, the identiﬁcation from the binary
codiﬁcation, and the relative pose from projection process-
ing. All those features are easy to be acquired by different
types of cameras and from relatively higher altitudes. In addi-
tion, choosing different markers designs at different sizes
will ease the task of close detection at the same time as far
ones, which ensures a robust detection all along the trajec-
tory of landing. As the quadrotor got close to the landing
pad, some markers leave slowly the Field Of View(FOV), at
this level, the detection will be based only on the relatively
smaller markers, contrary to larger markers that will be used
at higher altitudes. Yuhua Qi et al. proposed a similar aspect
of detection for a low-cost camera in [7]. The redundancy of
markers will enhance the total probability of detection and
recall, precision augments by the use of small patterns at low
altitudes.
2.2 Robustness of the pose estimation
The ArUco library was used as a base of markers design
[20]. At every iteration image, the pose estimation process
is initially based on the markers detection algorithm that
recognizes the detected markers and identiﬁes them by a
binary codiﬁcation. Recognition is performed by analyzing
the inner codiﬁcation and attributing the marker in a canoni-
cal form by differentiating between black and white surfaces
using a simple Otsu thresholding technique, and excluding
the wrong detection, besides identifying markers from the
predeﬁned list. Then, the algorithm ran an estimation process
for the relative pose of the landing pad based on the OpenCV
library. A specially designed ﬁlter decides which markers to
be considered based on the average of actual relative distance
estimations between the quadrotor and the landing pad, the
ﬁlter extracts out the bad estimation based on the normalized
variance to the mean. The marker estimate is considered if
and only if:
|
⎛
⎜⎝
ˆ
Est(i)
2 −
⎛
⎝
N

j=1
ˆ
Est( j)/N
⎞
⎠
2⎞
⎟⎠/V(Est)| > 0.2
(1)
ˆ
Est(i) represents the Cartesian distance estimate from the
Marker i, V(Est) is the variance of all detected distances
estimates. Inner codiﬁcation choice of ArUco markers was
based on simple detection and reading from a far distance
and denser for smaller ones to improve close estimation. For
better pose estimation performance, it is judicious to calibrate
the camera, A special calibration code that uses OpenCV
for camera calibration tools and Charuco image was used to
extract the camera matrix and the distortion vector needed
for the pose estimator.
3 Dynamics modeling
3.1 Dynamics
The Quadrotor dynamics have been discussed in many
papers. The validated model is derived based on the con-
sideration of two frames as shown in [21]. Two frame
references were used, a Body-frame B(Ob, Xb, Yb, Zb). and
an Earth-related reference: E(Oe, Xe, Ye, Ze)., The E frame
will coincide with the landing pad in motion, detailed mod-
eling with illustrated forced has been studied in [21].
Considering all applied forces and torques contributions
on the quadrotor body with assumptions as detailed in [21]
(Table 1), the dynamics may be simpliﬁed in the follow-
ing equations, where double dots symbol means the second
derivative:
Table 1 Symbols deﬁnition
Symbols
Deﬁnitions
Symbols
Deﬁnitions
φ
Roll angle
θ
Pitch angle
ψ
Yaw angle

Rotor speed
JT P
Total rotors inertia
l
Lever
b
Thrust coefﬁcient
g
Gravity
d
Drag coefﬁcient

Rotor speed
m
Quadrotor mass
I
Inertia matrix
Ixx, Iyy, Izz
Inertia matrix diag
123

24
Signal, Image and Video Processing (2023) 17:21–30
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
¨X = (sψsφ + cψsθcφ) U1/m
¨Y = (−cψsφ + sψsθcφ) U1/m
¨Z = −g + cθcφ U1/m
¨φ = 1/Ixx ((Iyy −Izz) ˙φ ˙ψ + JT P ˙φ + U2)
¨θ = 1/Iyy ((Izz −Ixx) ˙θ ˙ψ + JT P ˙θ + U3)
¨ψ = 1/Izz ((Ixx −Iyy) ˙θ ˙φ + U4)
(2)
3.2 State space representation
Considering the state vector X = (x1 x2 ... x12)T in R12,
dynamics can be written in state-space as follows:
˙X = F(X,U)
(3)
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
x1 = x
x2 = ˙x1
x3 = y
x4 = ˙x3
x5 = z
x6 = ˙x5
x7 = φ
x8 = ˙x7
x9 = θ
x10 = ˙x9
x11 = ψ
x12 = ˙x11
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
; F(X, U) =
⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝
x2
(cos x7 sin x9 cos x11 + sin x7 sin x11) U1/m
x4
(cos x7 sin x9 sin x11 −sin x7 cos x11) U1/m
x6
−g + (cos x7 cos x9) U1/m
x8
1/Ixx ((Iyy −Izz) x12x10 + JT P x10 + U2)
x10
1/Iyy ((Izz −Ixx)x12x8 + JT P x8 + U3)
x12
1/Izz ((Ixx −Iyy)x10x8 + U4)
⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠
(4)
From the system dynamics in (4), the Cartesian position
vector depends on the attitude states. However, the attitude
of the quadrotor is independent of linear positions. Nested
loops control is based on this relative dependency [21].
4 Madgwick / EKF and data fusion
To land autonomously on the moving pad, the quadrotor
should localize itself ﬁrst during the ﬂight using multiple
asynchronous sensors, then estimate the relative pose to the
landing pad and move upon a minimal jerk trajectory.
Initially, an Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) is exploited
to track all rotations and translations with relative errors and
noise of measurements [22]. A magnetometer is used to build
the Attitude and Heading Reference system (AHRS) ﬁlter.
An EKF based on the Jacobian of the Linear Time Variant
(LTV) model will be combined with the Madgwick ﬁlter
of quaternion orientation and the GPS data to provide the
optimal orientation and position estimate.
4.1 AHRS filter and data fusion for Orientation
AHRS is a continuous discrete method for the estimation
of the orientation and heading of the quadrotor UAV via
asynchronous sensors data fusion including GPS when avail-
able. A combination of accelerometer and magnetometer is
susceptible to cancel gyro integrative bias drift [23]. The
developed AHRS is enhanced by the EKF that considers the
white Gaussian noises of internal disturbances of the plant
and sensors noises[24].
Quaternion orientation is chosen to avoid the gimbal lock
that may occur while using the Euler rotation angles. The
normalized quaternion orientation that uses the angular rate
ws is established by the Gyroscopic ﬁlter. The normalized
angular quaternion estimate is calculated as follows:
qw−est,i,N =

1/2 qest,i−1 ⊗ws
∥qw−est,i∥
(5)
qw−est,i is the quaternion angular estimate, and the
qest,i−1 is the best quaternion estimate from the EKF at
instant ”i −1”. ⊗represents the quaternion product. The
problem with this method is that it is prone to drift because
of the sensor bias. The dead reckoning of angles based only
on gyroscopic reading is too sensitive to noise and bias drift.
Thus the accelerometer and the calibrated magnetometer
from distortions can be fused with the Gyro ﬁlter for optimal
estimation of the quaternion orientations.
The accelerometer/magnetometer combination can sim-
ply provide the orientation of the quadrotor by the following
equations:
⎧
⎨
⎩
θ = arcsin(Accx/g)
φ = arctan(−Accy/accz)
ψ = arctan(magz/magx) + D
(6)
Acci mag j are accelerometer and magnetometer readings,
respectively, and D is the declination between the magnetic
north and true north. Madgwick formulated an optimization
function to get the quaternion orientation from the combi-
nation of accelerometer and magnetometer [14]. However,
his method doesn’t consider the dynamics of the model and
keeps blind to system noise.
For the synchronous quaternion estimations of the quadro-
tor [22], a complementary ﬁlter is processed as follows:
qest,i = γi qa−est,i + (1 −γi) qw−est,i,N ,
0 < γ < 1 (7)
qw−est,i,N is the normalized angular rate sensor quater-
nion
and
qa−est,i
is
the
normalized
accelerometer/
magnetometer quaternion orientation estimate. γi is an opti-
mal variable based on bad estimation method penalty, and it
is calculated by:
γi erra,m = (1 −γi)errw
(8)
with errw is the magnitude of quaternion derivative cor-
responding to the gyroscope measurement error and erra,m
123

Signal, Image and Video Processing (2023) 17:21–30
25
is the magnitude of quaternion error of the accelerome-
ter/magnetometer method.
γ = errw/(errw + erra,m).
(9)
The GPS data at 5 Hz NEO-6M is added to the EKF, the
general position is used in proactive way-points application
[25].
4.2 Design of the Kalman Filter gains
for the quadrotor
An EKF observes the state vector, including the orientations,
and the sensors bias. The observer derives from The six DOF
linear model [26]. A Jacobin linearized Linear Time Variant
(LTV) dynamic model of the quadrotor combined with the
sensorsﬁlterwasfoundbetterthantheMadgwickﬁlterforthe
quaternion orientation as it does incorporate the prediction
data [22]. The EKF uses orientation ﬁlter data to observe the
augmented state vector including the errors state vector.
Quaternion orientation and linear positions are updated by
EKF, the design is explicit in Fig. 2.
Iterative equations of the EKF to observe the state vector
estimate denoted by ˆx can be demonstrated to be as follows:
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
Ai = ∂F/∂x|xi,ui
Bi = ∂F/∂u|xi,ui
ˆx0−= ˆx−(0)
P−
0 = E[ ˜x0−˜x0−]
Ki = P−
i CT
i [Ci P−
i CT
i + Ri]−1
ˆxi + = ˆxi −+ Ki[yi −Ci ˆxi]
P+
i
= (I −KiCi)P−
i (I −KiCi)T + Ki Ri K T
i
ˆ
xi+1−= Ai ˆxi + + Biui
ˆ
P−
i+1 = Ai P+
i AT
i + Gi QiGT
i
(10)
Fig. 2 Madgwick / EKF Design with pre-ﬁltering and data fusion
Ai, Bi, Ci represent the time-variant linearized model matri-
ces, Ki is the optimal gain matrix, Pi, Gi Riccati matrices,
and R, Q are noise covariance matrices that depend on sen-
sors and model. superscript −and + represent the predicted
and updated values, respectively.
The combination between Madgwick AHRS ﬁlter and
EKF gives an optimal estimate of quadrotor orientation as
they are both derived from mathematical optimization.
5 Trajectory generation
Several methods for trajectory generation have been exam-
ined in the literature. Trajectory generation from optimiza-
tion of time or effort is not within the scope of this paper.
The geometric treatment of the problem simpliﬁes both the
modeling and control law for the system [27], min Jerk was
considered in this work, although, Vijay et al proved that a
min snap is equivalent to a min effort for quadrotor trajectory
generation [28].
5.1 Minimum Jerk trajectory
Neville Hogan developed the notion of jerk optimization
by minimizing the position third-time derivative denoted by
three dotted X, aiming for the smoothness of the 3D position
X(t), the optimization of jerk can be written as:
J =
 t f
t0
...
X(t)2dt.
(11)
The 3D solution of such an optimization is: X(6)(t) = 0.
Hence
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
x(t) = cx5t5 + cx4t4 + cx3t3 + cx2t2 + cx1t + cx0
y(t) = cy5t5 + cy4t4 + cy3t3 + cy2t2 + cy1t + cy0
z(t) = cz5t5 + cz4t4 + cz3t3 + cz2t2 + cz1t + cz0
(12)
where ci j are found by satisfying the boundary conditions
of initial and ﬁnal states. During landing, a control loop of
the vision and estimation updates the target position, thus,
the ﬁnal state changes such as the optimization as well. For
every iteration of the estimation, the optimization process
calculates the parameters online using the initial dynamic
state and the ﬁnal pose estimate.
To ﬁnd ci j, it is necessary to solve the three systems of
six algebraic equations each, between the initial and ﬁnal
states for every dimension. The problem of the solution is
that dynamic resolution, requires a good estimate of quadro-
tor position, velocity, and acceleration. Where the need for
the KF with sensors data fusion which is detailed in Sect.
4. Additionally, the ﬁnal time of each iteration should be
123

26
Signal, Image and Video Processing (2023) 17:21–30
calculated based on the required speed for that position. This
latter is decided by a fuzzy logic controller.
The minimum jerk 3D trajectory mentioned by Eq. (12)
describes system smoothness between initial and ﬁnal times.
For the aimed case, the ﬁnal time is unknown, so the prob-
lem is referred to be a feedforward control. Based on this
approach, the optimization will be divided into segments at
which we apply to ﬁnd a new smooth trajectory depending
on the quadrotor estimated states and the relative pose to the
landing pad in motion.
A simple reformulation of this problem lays on normaliz-
ing the time between [t0, t f ]:
τ = (t −t0)/T
(13)
T = t f −t0.
(14)
The 3D minimum jerk Trajectory will be generated by:
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
x(t) = cx5τ 5 + cx4τ 4 + cx3τ 3 + cx2τ 2 + cx1τ + cx0
y(t) = cy5τ 5 + cy4τ 4 + cy3τ 3 + cy2τ 2 + cy1τ + cy0
z(t) = cz5τ 5 + cz4τ 4 + cz3τ 3 + cz2τ 2 + cz1τ + cz0
(15)
where,
dτ/dt = 1/T .
(16)
The last system of Equations is used to form the algebraic
equations between an initial state given by the enhanced EKF
estimation at the initial instant of the current iteration and
the ﬁnal time state deﬁned by the desired landing on pose
estimate of the pad. Resolution of the system should be in
function of T .
5.2 Feedback controlled trajectory
Thedescribedtrajectoryby P(t) :

x(t), y(t), z(t)

isknown
and it is T dependent. so at every instant labeled by t0, we
deﬁne:
Px(t) = [x(t) ˙x(t) ¨x(t)]T
(17)
Px0 = [x0 vx0 ax0]T
(18)
Deriving the jerk equations in Eqs.15, we ﬁnd:
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
...x (t0) = 6cx3/T 3 = 60/T 3(x f −x0) −36/T 2vx0 −9/Tax0
...y(t0) = 6cy3/T 3 = 60/T 3(y f −y0) −36/T 2vy0 −9/Tay0
...z (t0) = 6cz3/T 3 = 60/T 3(z f −z0) −36/T 2vz0 −9/Taz0
(19)
Eq. (19) presents three kinematics for x(t), y(t) & z(t)
between initial time of each iteration t0, and the estimated
landing time t f .
⎡
⎣
˙x
¨x...x
⎤
⎦=
⎡
⎣
0
1
0
0
0
1
−60/T 3 −36/T 2 −9/T
⎤
⎦
⎡
⎣
x
˙x
¨x
⎤
⎦+
⎡
⎣
0
0
60/T 3
⎤
⎦x f
(20)
Dynamics described in Eq. (20) will provide a smooth tra-
jectory that minimizes the jerk. The unknown T value will
be deﬁned by an expert FLC, that considers many inputs
to validate the right velocity to target and the estimated
time for the landing. By analogy, we ﬁnd dynamics for y(t)
and z(t).
5.3 Fuzzy velocity control
In [16], Alvika et al processed the velocity by a log polyno-
mial to smooth the trajectory. However, to bio-inspired the
human piloting, a FLC was designed as a velocity controller,
other FLC approaches for adaptive intelligent control were
discussed in [29].
System of Eq. (20) represents the time position of the
quadrotor in the normalized time that depends on T , the total
descent time. Using expert piloting data, we aimed to gen-
erate the T via fuzzy logic processing to emulate the human
pilotinggrasp.Forthat,theFLCwasconceptualizedtogener-
ate the total time T based on instantaneous speed and distance
to the target. The classical approach to determine the fuzzy
rules base was processed, the antecedent and consequent
partitions will be designed by human expert knowledge for
quadrotor landing. Due to the complexity of time estimation,
the average speed is based on the processing of quadrotor
dynamics, the initial state, and relative pose and velocity.
FLC is opted for velocity control, as it is more linguistic
and to inspires the expert human pilot approach to land with
enough robustness and softness. FLC inputs are described by
the instantaneous relative position, velocity, and acceleration
states of the quadrotor, output is the average speed to target.
Landing time T is then calculated. This method presents a
soft landing because of the use of expert rules. The block
diagram of the fuzzy logic velocity controller is illustrated in
Fig. 3.
Total Time of landing T is based on the average velocity
and distance to the landing pad and can be calculated as
follows:
T =

	x2p,q + 	y2p,q + 	z2p,q/V + Tmin
(21)
123

Signal, Image and Video Processing (2023) 17:21–30
27
Fig. 3 velocity control and time to land estimation by Fuzzy logic
control scheme
	(x, y, z)p,q, represent the Cartesian distances between the
quadrotor and pad, V is the average velocity estimated by
the FLC, Tmin is a safety margin.
6 Control and tracking of designed
trajectory
MPC is an optimal control that satisﬁes a set of constraints.
MPC is chosen based on the quadrotor nature, the multiple
manipulative variables with constraints to meet, and the dis-
turbance which has been considered as model uncertainties,
and as white Gaussian noise during the simulation. Jaco-
bian of quadrotor dynamics is used to linearize the model,
the Adaptive design will be based on linearization at every
operating points [30,31].
6.1 Tracking control strategy
The MPC is a ﬁnite-horizon optimization based on the
dynamics model. Fig. 4 shows the control strategy with MPC
to track the generated min Jerk trajectory with the fuzzy
velocity control. System can be written as follows:
˙xi+1 = Ai xi + Biui + wi
(22)
yi = Ci xi + vi
(23)
vi,wi are discrete-time Gaussian white noises with the
respective covariance matrices Q and R. To ensure optimal
tracking [32], a quadratic cost function ”J” is deﬁned as:
J = 1/2 (CN xN −Z N)T SN (CN xN −Z N)+
+1/2 N−1
i=1

(Ci xi −Zi)T Qi(Ci xi −Zi) + uT
i Riui

(24)
Zi represents the Minimal Jerk trajectory along the hori-
zon N. The optimal Control can be demonstrated to be [32]:
Fig. 4 Complete Scheme of MPC control with Fuzzy min Jerk
trajectory
ui = −

(Ri + BT
i Pi+1Bi)−1BT
i Pi+1 Ai

xi
+

(Ri + BT
i Pi+1Bi)−1BT
i

gi+1
(25)
Pi and Gi are recursively calculated as follows:
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
Pi = Vi + AT
i Pi+1

I + Bi R−1
i
BT
i Pi+1
−1
Ai
gi = Wi Zi + AT
i

I −Pi+1(I + Bi R−1
i
BT
i Pi+1)−1Bi R−1
i
BT
i

gi+1
(26)
With Vi = CT
i QiCi and Wi = CT
i Qi,

PN = CT
N SNCN
gN = CT
N SN Z N
(27)
The control solution is calculated on the Horizon of N points
to the landing on the pad, at every iteration the control is
calculated repeatedly and applied just for current iteration.
The complete FLC/MPC control-based architecture is shown
in Fig. 4.
Stability of the control is ensured by the separation prin-
ciple, essentially, Adaptive LQG is a combination of the KF
and LQR. Thus, the design of optimal control can be derived
independently of the observer.
7 Results
In this section, we conducted all the simulations and experi-
ments necessary for the autonomous landing project.
7.1 Vision processing results
Tables 2, 3, and 4 are made considering the hovering mode of
the quadrotor to optimize the pad design emulating the real
aspect of vibration, ﬂight disturbance, and high-frequency
noise. For that many real-time images were taken and ana-
lyzed. Based on using one vs multiple markers and varying
their sizes, experimental tests of detection probability and
precision are explicit in Tables 2, 3 and 4.
123

28
Signal, Image and Video Processing (2023) 17:21–30
Table 2 Multiple markers vs single marker detectability and precision
of the pose estimation
Markers
Detectability (recall)
Estimate precision
Single Marker
97.1
4.89 cm
Multiple markers
99.3
2.55 cm
Table 3 Detection rate for different sizes of markers from different
heights
0.3 m
0.6 m
1 m
3 m
7 m
5 cm
100 %
99.2 %
91.1 %
8.1 %
0 %
10 cm
95.2%
99.2 %
97.4 %
88.9 %
31 %
18 cm
0 %
87.7 %
97.9 %
99.8 %
88.6 %
Table 4 Precision of pose estimation at different sizes of markers from
different heights. ((NA): Non-Applicable values: are cases of no detec-
tion)
0.3 m
0.6 m
1 m
3 m
7 m
5 cm
3.3 cm
5.1 cm
9.4 cm
(NA)
(NA)
10 cm
2.7 cm
3.4 cm
6.9 cm
19.6 cm
(NA)
18 cm
(NA)
(NA)
4.9 cm
12.9 cm
28.9 cm
Besides the detection recall, the precision of the pose sig-
niﬁcantly increases by enabling multi measurement which
attenuates the noise of calculation to a tolerated error margin
of the general position determination.
Multiple markers increase the detection probability of the
pad, and the estimation precision of the relative pose got
better. In addition, the different sizes of markers play an
important role in pose estimation and detection from differ-
ent heights, low altitudes uses small marker when larger ones
are out of the FOV. Contrary to the high altitude detection,
where we rely completely on larger markers as the smaller
ones are less detectable with insufﬁcient precision.
The designed landing pad was detected easily from differ-
ent heights, and different angles of heading orientation, Fig. 5
shows the detection and estimation from different positions.
Figure 5 shows different scenarios, Sub-Figure (A) shows
the designed landing pad that contains multiple designs at
different sizes, Sub-Figure (B) demonstrates the detection
process and the pose estimation from a far pose, Cartesian
coordinates are calculated and printed in red, the ﬁlter uses
only larger markers even with the possible detection of closer
ones, in Sub-Figure (C), The ﬁlter considers only medium
size markers, estimation of the Cartesian pose coordinates is
printed. In Sub-Figure (D), the pose estimation is based only
on smaller markers as larger ones are out of FOV. The F, M,
and C denotation show the ﬁlter choice of markers based on
the relative distance.
Fig. 5 Detection and estimation of the relative pose from differ-
ent positions (Sub-ﬁg.A: shows the designed landing pad, Sub-ﬁg.B:
demonstrates a detection from 2.8 m away, Sub-ﬁg.C demonstrates the
pose estimation from 0.9 m, Sub-ﬁg.D: shows a close pose estimation
at the ﬁnal stage of landing at 0.5 m)
7.2 Results of sensor fusion and EKF
of the quadrotor
The Data fusion ﬁlter combined with the EKF exploit the
MPU 9250 and the GPS with a calibrated magnetometer.
AHRS algorithm calculates the quaternion orientation. Fig. 6
presents the AHRS ﬁlter’s real-time performance by interfac-
ing Matlab with the sensor via Arduino. AHRS ﬁlter showed
a responsive tracking of real motion orientation. Mean track-
ing errors are detailed in Table 5.
A Matlab simulation of the EKF observer of linear posi-
tion is shown in Fig. 7, the Observer can reject noise and
uncertainty of dynamics. The EKF is crucial to ensure loop
Fig. 6 AHRS observer for the general position of the quadrotor, Real-
time reading by interfacing Matlab and MPU-9250
Table 5 Mean orientation tracking errors
Angles of orientation
Roll φ
Pitch θ
Yaw ψ
Error (deg)
0.23
0.34
0.65
123

Signal, Image and Video Processing (2023) 17:21–30
29
Fig. 7 EKF observer for the general position of the quadrotor with
Gaussian noise attenuation
stability during tracking, in presence of white noise applied
as sensor noise and wind gust. The wind gust was simulated
as a Gaussian noise at low feeding rate, whereas a high feed-
ing rate white noise was simulated and applied on actuators
and sensor reading.
7.3 Control simulation results
MPC tracking of the Min Jerk trajectory to land was simu-
lated in a Matlab environment by following a landing pad in
motion considering only the EKF as an observer. The mov-
ing pad position was simulated to be a forward sinusoidal
motion, as shown in the green path in Fig. 8, During the sim-
ulation, the Optimal trajectory is calculated dynamically and
updated in every iteration, based on optimization dynamics
in Eq. 20, furthermore, the T value is estimated by the FLC.
The MPC tracker calculates iteratively the optimal command
to apply by the set of equations Eqs. 25–27. The blue path
shows the optimal calculated trajectory. The Red trajectory
is the MPC simulated position of the quadrotor compared to
the PID one in magenta. The simulation of MPC shows an
excellent stabilization and very good tracking of the desired
trajectory even in presence of simulated wind gust and model
Fig. 8 3D Minimum Jerk trajectory tracking of a quadrotor perfor-
mance controlled by PID vs MPC (Landing pad trajectory in Green,
The optimal Min-Jerk trajectory in blue, Quadrotor position by con-
trolled by MPC in red, and the magenta path is the quadrotor position
by PID control)
uncertainties with Gaussian noise as demonstrated in Fig. 8,
PID control shows more deviation and less robustness to the
sudden noise and wind perturbation. A comparison with PID
control illustrates that the MPC is more performant and more
robust to the added disturbance.
8 Conclusion
This paper comes up with a robust application of the quadro-
tor’s autonomous landing on a moving platform that is
detected and localized by an onboard camera. An optimal
minimal Jerk trajectory tracking by MPC controller success-
fully opted subject to parametric uncertainties and external
disturbance.Therelativeposetothelandingpadwasbasedon
the detection of the specially designed pad by the combined
ArUco markers for the best detection at different altitudes
and angles. Identiﬁcation of each marker and estimation
of the pose was performed via Open-CV/python algorithm
enhanced by stabilization ﬁlters. The Madgwick / EKF
observer of the quadrotor was enhanced by an asynchronous
sensors fusion (MPU9250 and NEO-6M) to observe the
quadrotor states vector and sensors bias for orientation pre-
cision of less than 1 deg. Relative pose estimation was
satisfactory within 4 cm of accuracy. Trajectory generation
was adaptive based on both observers’ results with fuzzy
velocity control to estimate the landing time to bio-inspired
an experienced human pilot. Subsequently, the trajectory is
fed to the MPC for tracking, which considers the uncertainty
of model and disturbance. Comparison with PID proved the
robustness and performance of the MPC tracking.
Funding No Funds have been received.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest All authors of this paper declare no conﬂict of
interest.
Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human
participants performed by any of the authors.
References
1. Qianfei Zhou, Y.F., Ding, Shuqing: Corrosion inspection and eval-
uation of crane metal structure based on UAV vision. Signal Image
Video Process. 16(1), 5 (2022)
2. Miranda, V.R., Rezende, A., Rocha, T.L., Azpúrua, H., Pimenta,
L.C., Freitas, G.M.: Autonomous navigation system for a delivery
drone, arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08878
3. Xu, Z.-C., Hu, B.-B., Liu, B., Wang, X., Zhang, H.-T.: Vision-based
autonomous landing of unmanned aerial vehicle on a motional
unmanned surface vessel. In: 39th Chinese Control Conference
(CCC). pp. 6845–6850, IEEE (2020)
123

30
Signal, Image and Video Processing (2023) 17:21–30
4. Xing, L., Dai, W.: A local feature extraction method for uav-based
image registration based on virtual line descriptors. SIViP 15(4),
705–713 (2021)
5. Danjun, L., Yan, Z., Zongying, S., Geng, L.: Autonomous landing
of quadrotor based on ground effect modelling. In: 34th Chinese
Control Conference (CCC). pp. 5647–5652. IEEE (2015)
6. Hu, B., Mishra, S.: A time-optimal trajectory generation algorithm
for quadrotor landing onto a moving platform, In: American Con-
trol Conference (ACC). pp. 4183–4188. IEEE (2017)
7. Qi, Y., Jiang, J., Wu, J., Wang, J., Wang, C., Shan, J.: Autonomous
landing solution of low-cost quadrotor on a moving platform.
Robot. Auton. Syst. 119, 64–76 (2019)
8. Hervas, J.R., Reyhanoglu, M., Tang, H.: Automatic landing control
of unmanned aerial vehicles on moving platforms, In: IEEE 23rd
International Symposium on Industrial Electronics (ISIE), pp. 69–
74. IEEE (2014)
9. Hu,B.,Lu,L.,Mishra,S.:Fast,safeandpreciselandingofaquadro-
tor on an oscillating platform. In: American Control Conference
(ACC). pp. 3836–3841. IEEE (2015)
10. Aguilar-Ibanez, C., Suarez-Castanon, M.S., Gutierrez-Frias, O.,
Rubio, J.d.J.J., Meda-Campana, A.: A robust control strategy for
landing an unmanned aerial vehicle on a vertically moving plat-
form, Complexity (2020)
11. Schweighofer, G., Pinz, A.: Robust pose estimation from a planar
target. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 28(12), 2024–2030
(2006)
12. Bacik, J., Durovsky, F., Fedor, P., Perdukova, D.: Autonomous ﬂy-
ing with quadrocopter using fuzzy control and ArUco markers.
Intel. Serv. Robot. 10(3), 185–194 (2017)
13. Li, B., Wu, J., Tan, X., Wang, B.: Aruco marker detection
under occlusion using convolutional neural network. In:2020 5th
International Conference on Automation, Control and Robotics
Engineering (CACRE), pp. 706–711. IEEE (2020)
14. Wilson,S.,Eberle,H.,Hayashi,Y.,Madgwick,S.O.,McGregor,A.,
Jing, X., Vaidyanathan, R.: Formulation of a new gradient descent
MARG orientation algorithm: case study on robot teleoperation.
Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 130, 183–200 (2019)
15. Faria, S., Lima, J., Costa, P.: Sensor fusion for mobile robot local-
ization using extended kalman ﬁlter, uwb tof and aruco markers. In:
International Conference on Optimization, Learning Algorithms
and Applications, pp. 235–250. Springer (2021)
16. Gautam, A., Sujit, P., Saripalli, S.: Autonomous quadrotor land-
ing using vision and pursuit guidance. IFAC-PapersOnLine 50(1),
10501–10506 (2017)
17. Das, H., Sridhar, K., Padhi, R.: Bio-inspired landing of quadrotor
using improved state estimation. IFAC-PapersOnLine 51(1), 462–
467 (2018)
18. Lee, T., Leok, M., McClamroch, N.H.: Nonlinear robust tracking
control of a quadrotor UAV on SE (3). Asian J. Control 15(2),
391–408 (2013)
19. Volden,Ø., Stahl, A., Fossen T.I.: Vision-based positioning sys-
tem for auto-docking of unmanned surface vehicles (USVs). Int. J.
Intell. Robot. Appl. 1–18 (2021)
20. Garrido-Jurado, S., Muñoz-Salinas, R., Madrid-Cuevas, F.J.,
Marín-Jiménez,M.J.:Automaticgenerationanddetectionofhighly
reliable ﬁducial markers under occlusion. Pattern Recogn. 47(6),
2280–2292 (2014)
21. Bouaiss, O., Mechgoug, R., Ajgou, R.: Modeling, control and
simulation of quadrotor uav. In: 020 1st International Confer-
ence on Communications, Control Systems and Signal Processing
(CCSSP), pp. 340–345. IEEE, (2020)
22. Madgwick, S.: An efﬁcient orientation ﬁlter for inertial and iner-
tial/magnetic sensor arrays. Report x-io Univ. Bristol (UK) 25,
113–118 (2010)
23. Wang, L., Zhang, Z., Sun, P.: Quaternion-based Kalman ﬁlter for
AHRS using an adaptive-step gradient descent algorithm. Int. J.
Adv. Rob. Syst. 12(9), 131 (2015)
24. Xiong, J.-J., Zheng, E.-H.: Optimal kalman ﬁlter for state estima-
tion of a quadrotor uav. Optik 126(21), 2862–2868 (2015)
25. AG, U.: Neo-6: U-blox 6 gps modules data sheet (2018)
26. Morelli, E.A.: Estimating noise characteristics from ﬂight test data
using optimal fourier smoothing. J. Aircr. 32(4), 689–695 (1995)
27. Nayak, A., Banavar, R.N., Maithripala, D.H.S.: Stabilizing a spher-
ical pendulum on a quadrotor. Asian J. Control. https://doi.org/10.
1002/asjc.2577
28. Mellinger, D., Kumar, V.: Minimum snap trajectory generation
and control for quadrotors, In: IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, pp. 2520–2525. IEEE (2011)
29. Mo, H., Farid, G.: Nonlinear and adaptive intelligent control
techniques for quadrotor uav-a survey. Asian J. Control 21(2), 989–
1008 (2019)
30. Georgiou,T.T.,Lindquist,A.:Theseparationprincipleinstochastic
control, redux. IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 58(10), 2481–2494
(2013)
31. Van Willigenburg, L., De Koning, W.L.: Numerical algorithms and
issues concerning the discrete-time optimal projection equations.
Eur. J. Control. 6(1), 93–110 (2000)
32. Bohner, M., Wintz, N.: The linear quadratic tracker on time scales.
Int. J. Dyn. Syst. Differ. Equ. 3(4), 423–447 (2011)
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
123

