PROCEEDINGS OF SPIE
SPIEDigitalLibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie
Autonomous landing and ingress of
micro-air-vehicles in urban
environments based on monocular
vision
Roland Brockers, Patrick Bouffard, Jeremy Ma, Larry
Matthies, Claire Tomlin
Roland Brockers, Patrick Bouffard, Jeremy Ma, Larry Matthies, Claire Tomlin,
"Autonomous landing and ingress of micro-air-vehicles in urban environments
based on monocular vision," Proc. SPIE 8031, Micro- and Nanotechnology
Sensors, Systems, and Applications III, 803111 (13 May 2011); doi:
10.1117/12.884449
Event: SPIE Defense, Security, and Sensing, 2011, Orlando, Florida, United
States
Downloaded From: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie on 31 Jan 2024  Terms of Use: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/terms-of-use

Autonomous landing and ingress of micro-air-vehicles in urban
environments based on monocular vision.
Roland Brockers a, Patrick Bouffard b, Jeremy Ma a, Larry Matthies a, Claire Tomlin b
a Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA
b Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA
ABSTRACT
Unmanned micro air vehicles (MAVs) will play an important role in future reconnaissance and search and rescue appli-
cations. In order to conduct persistent surveillance and to conserve energy, MAVs need the ability to land, and they need
the ability to enter (ingress) buildings and other structures to conduct reconnaissance. To be safe and practical under a
wide range of environmental conditions, landing and ingress maneuvers must be autonomous, using real-time, onboard
sensor feedback. To address these key behaviors, we present a novel method for vision-based autonomous MAV landing
and ingress using a single camera for two urban scenarios: landing on an elevated surface, representative of a rooftop,
and ingress through a rectangular opening, representative of a door or window. Real-world scenarios will not include spe-
cial navigation markers, so we rely on tracking arbitrary scene features; however, we do currently exploit planarity of the
scene. Our vision system uses a planar homography decomposition to detect navigation targets and to produce approach
waypoints as inputs to the vehicle control algorithm. Scene perception, planning, and control run onboard in real-time;
at present we obtain aircraft position knowledge from an external motion capture system, but we expect to replace this in
the near future with a fully self-contained, onboard, vision-aided state estimation algorithm. We demonstrate autonomous
vision-based landing and ingress target detection with two different quadrotor MAV platforms. To our knowledge, this is
the ﬁrst demonstration of onboard, vision-based autonomous landing and ingress algorithms that do not use special purpose
scene markers to identify the destination.
1. INTRODUCTION
New applications in surveillance, rescue and aerial observation demand more and more autonomous behavior to support
human operators and guarantee safe operation. Accordingly, research in autonomous navigation for unmanned aerial ve-
hicles (UAVs) has been an intense ﬁeld of study in the past few years. Research activity has also been boosted by the
ready availability of small, relatively inexpensive small quadrotor platforms, some of which are easily adaptable for use
as research vehicles or even expressly designed as such. Nevertheless, payload capacity limitations are inescapable, and
in turn drive constraints on available energy and computational resources. Power- and CPU-intensive sensor suites are,
consequently, difﬁcult to deploy on such systems. For this reason, small passive vision sensors (i.e. cameras) have seen
increasing use for navigation, as a single passive sensor can be employed simultaneously for detection and 3D reconstruc-
tion. Using only a vision sensor creates new challenges, as a structure from motion approach with a single moving camera
can reconstruct 3D information only up to an unknown scale factor, additional information is necessary to remove the extra
degree of freedom. Systems that are deployed outdoors can overcome this issue by using GPS data for pose recovery, but
this is not an option for systems operating in deep space or indoors.
To cope with this issue, we are developing a system on a small UAV platform using a minimal sensor suite that
can operate using only on-board resources to autonomously achieve basic navigation tasks. Here we present, as a ﬁrst
step towards this goal, a navigation approach that visually detects and reconstructs the position of navigation targets, but
depends on an external motion capture system∗to regain scale and for closed loop control. In a future approach we plan on
replacing the motion capture system with an on-board state estimation that fuses IMU and visual information to estimate
pose and scale.
To demonstrate the capability of our approach, we chose two important example scenarios for a small UAV platform:
autonomous landing on an elevated landing platform (representative of a rooftop), and autonomous building ingress through
Author contact information: {brockers,jeremy.c.ma,lhm}@jpl.nasa.gov, {bouffard,tomlin}@eecs.berkeley.edu
∗VICON, http://www.vicon.com
Invited Paper
Micro- and Nanotechnology Sensors, Systems, and Applications III, edited by 
Thomas George, M. Saif Islam, Achyut K. Dutta, Proc. of SPIE Vol. 8031, 803111
© 2011 SPIE · CCC code: 0277-786X/11/$18 · doi: 10.1117/12.884449
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 8031  803111-1
Downloaded From: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie on 31 Jan 2024
Terms of Use: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/terms-of-use

(a)
(b)
Figure 1. We evaluated our approach on two different quadrotor platforms: STARMAC (a) and AscTec Pelican (b).
a rectangular opening (representative of windows and doors). Both scenarios are important for applications such as rescue
or surveillance missions, and allow us to deploy a multiple homography based approach that uses planar surfaces like walls
and roof-tops to reconstruct structure from motion.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses related work and how our approach differs. In section 3 we
introduce our approach in detail, highlighting the planar homography estimation framework for waypoint generation, our
control algorithm for autonomous navigation, and the vision and navigation system interaction. Experimental results are
given in Section 4. Section 5 concludes this paper and discusses future work.
2. RELATED WORK
Vision-based methods for aerial vehicles to detect navigation targets have been used in the past to identify e.g. landing sites
with ﬁxed markers,1–3 or terrain features such as ﬂat surface areas.4–6 To reconstruct the target position with a single mov-
ing camera, different structure from motion approaches are deployed. While most methods use external pose information
like GPS to calculate accurate target positions,1,4,7 other applications use the imagery itself to regain the camera motion
up to scale before a structure from motion approach is applied.5 These approaches usually need a separate mechanism
to retrieve the unknown scale factor in order to accurately scale the reconstructed 3D structure of the environment with
information from an additional sensor (e.g. an IMU or altimeter). A different approach is the use of optical ﬂow to perform
closed loop navigation. This is interesting, as the ﬂow ﬁeld, calculated from the camera images, can be used for egomotion
stabilization without additional pose sensors and, at the same time, for basic navigation tasks like obstacle avoidance or
landing without an explicit 3D reconstruction.8,9
In the work that is described in this paper, we use a multiple homography decomposition for motion estimation and
target detection. Homography based approaches have been used for landing site detection in various helicopter and aircraft
applications.7,10 These methods usually perform a RANSAC based homography calculation to identify a planar surface in
the image. We extend this approach to a multiple homography estimation method to detect planar elevated landing surfaces
above ﬂat ground, and to signiﬁcantly improve the accuracy of motion estimates from homography decompositions by
aligning the detected homographies.
In the following, we give a brief introduction of different vision-aided navigation approaches that are closely related to
our work. An example of an approach which visually detects a ﬁxed landing target is the method of Saripalli et al.1 Their
approach to autonomous landing of a UAV uses GPS and vision to navigate to a known landing site marked with a pre-
determined ’H’ pattern. Various control strategies for landing are considered, but the approach depends on the detection
of the known pattern by thresholding and segmentation. Inspired by the way ﬂies navigate, Rufﬁer et al. proposed an
optical-ﬂow based method for autonomous landing and navigation,8 controlling the aircraft by adjusting thrust and pitch
to maintain a reference optical ﬂow value. The experimental results are limited to a highly controlled environment with
tethered rotorcraft and arbitrarily textured terrain. Landing is considered from the control perspective but no identiﬁcation
of landing sites is performed. Goncalves et al. presented a method for vision-aided navigation for aircraft approach and
landing on a planar runway10 which is comparable to the method presented in this paper. The authors similarly utilize a
homography estimation schema to determine aircraft pose relative to the runway. However, in their approach, assumptions
are made (e.g. the slowly varying depth to feature) which are valid only for large aircraft at high altitude, preventing
extension to micro UAVs.
In terms of autonomous control, Templeton et al.4 demonstrated a model-predictive ﬂight control system using a
monocular camera on an autonomous helicopter. They tracked features in geo-referenced images to estimate 3D structure
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 8031  803111-2
Downloaded From: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie on 31 Jan 2024
Terms of Use: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/terms-of-use

H
frame 1
frame 2
X
c’
c
x1
x2
n
ovicon
tV
t12
pV1
pV2
obody
obody
’
R21
Figure 2. Coordinate frames and homography induced by a planar surface. t12 and R21 are the camera motion parameters reconstructed
from the homography H.
and generate modular elevation and appearance maps, but their approach assumes the availability of GPS information.
Herisse et al.9 addressed the control problem associated with hovering ﬂight and vertical landing control, using an optical
ﬂow technique, but assume only a single ﬂat plane and do not consider landing site selection. Recent work by Blosch et
al.11 demonstrates the use of a monocular vision-based SLAM algorithm for accurate determination of the pose of a UAV
in GPS denied environments. Using a technique ﬁrst introduced by Klein and Murray12 for augmented reality applications,
Blosch et al. are able to demonstrate the use of a SLAM algorithm for UAV applications in real-time with sustained
tracking made possible via image keyframes. The authors point to future work with an onboard IMU to determine scale,
which is an issue not yet resolved in their work. This work, while not exploring landing techniques per se, is a signiﬁcant
step towards the capability of operating UAV systems in all types of environments.
3. APPROACH
Our approach employs a single camera as a vision sensor to detect a navigation target and generate 3D waypoints to the
target for autonomous navigation of a quadrotor platform (ﬁgure 1). Autonomous ﬂight maneuvers are triggered based
on vision system inputs following a three step approach. In a ﬁrst phase, the vehicle ﬂies a search pattern to detect
the navigation target and to estimate an initial waypoint to the target position. Once detected, additional waypoints are
gathered by ﬂying the system in a random pattern in the vicinity of the target. These new waypoints are used by the
control algorithm to improve the accuracy of the target estimate. After the target estimate converges, the vehicle executes
a ﬁxed ﬂy-to-waypoint maneuver to the target. The following sections introduce the vision algorithm to generate target
waypoints from point correspondences for our two different application scenarios: autonomous landing on an elevated
landing platform, and approaching a rectangular opening for automated ingress, followed by a description of the vehicle
control algorithm that uses the vision inputs for navigation.
3.1 Vision based target detection and waypoint generation
Structure from motion with a single camera can be solved, in theory, by estimating the essential or fundamental matrix13,14
to recover camera motion up to scale, followed by triangulation for 3D reconstruction. However, because of the well-known
stability issues of estimating the transfer matrices from unconstrained point correspondences, we limit our approach by
assuming a planar surface in view – a ground plane or wall surface. In this case, a homography decomposition can be used
for ego motion estimation (ﬁgure 2), which is in general more stable than using essential or fundamental matrix estimates.
In our approach the homography is derived similar to15 from matched feature points.
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 8031  803111-3
Downloaded From: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie on 31 Jan 2024
Terms of Use: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/terms-of-use

H1,2
frame 1
frame 2
Groundplane
Table
H1
H2
n
tracked
feature
points
H
frame 1
frame 2
Wall
H
n
in-plane features
off-plane features
detected line segments
(a)
(b)
Figure 3. Homography based target detection: (a) Multiple homography detection for landing. (b) Opening detection for ingress scenario.
3.1.1 Feature detection and matching
To establish point correspondences between frames, we implemented a sub-pixel precise version of the STAR feature de-
tector, a center-surround type detector, for detecting blob-like features.16,17 Feature points are matched among frames
using an upright version of SURF18 for efﬁciency. To maximize the accuracy of motion estimation and the 3D reconstruc-
tion, the most current frame is matched against a reference frame, which is selected by tracking features in subsequent
frames and picking the frame in the past for which a minimum number of features can be tracked continuously.
3.1.2 Homography Estimation
A homography H is deﬁned by constraining the general rigid body motion equation by a 3D plane equation. Using
homogeneous coordinates, the relationship between points that are located on a planar surface can be expressed as:
x2 = R21(x1 −t12) , ˜nT
1x1 = 1 , ˜n1 = 1
d n1
(1)
⇒x2 = Hx1 with H = R21(1−t12˜nT
1)
(2)
Starting from unconstraint point correspondences, we use a RANSAC approach19 to calculate a homography for the max-
imum set of matched in-plane feature points for a given reprojection error threshold following the method of Longuet-
Higgins15 to parameterize the dominant plane in view. If multiple surfaces are visible (landing scenario) a reﬁnement step
further increases the accuracy of the estimated homography by detecting additional homographies and applying a multiple
homography alignment algorithm (see section 3.2). The ﬁnal homography is then decomposed to reconstruct the inverse
surface normal ˜n1 and vehicle motion R21,t12 up to scale (eq. 2) using the second part of Longuet-Higgins’ algorithm.15
Note, that the distance to the plane surface is coded in the inverse plane normal ˜n1 (eq. 1). In addition, the vision algorithm
also uses the distinction between in-plane and off-plane features for detection. We will discuss further details on how this
is done in sections 3.2 and 3.3.
3.1.3 Waypoint Generation
Once a navigation target is detected in the image, the reconstructed vehicle motion parameters and the plane normal of the
detected surface are used to calculate a 3D waypoint which is located on the target plane. To recover scale, VICON pose
information is used to scale the estimated camera translation t12 with the vehicle translation tV measured by the VICON
system:
s = |c−c′|
|t12|
= |tV −RV1tc +RV2tc|
1
(3)
Since the vehicle body frame obody (ﬁgure 2) is not centered on the camera projection center c, the vehicle orientation
RV1,RV2 in ovicon and the vehicle-camera calibration vector tc in obody are needed to account for rotational motion.
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 8031  803111-4
Downloaded From: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie on 31 Jan 2024
Terms of Use: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/terms-of-use

To calculate the 3D position of a waypoint Xc located on the detected planar surface, the ray deﬁned by the camera
center and a speciﬁc normalized image coordinate is intersected with the detected surface (as seen from the new camera
position) to obtain a 3D point in camera coordinates:
⃗r = (x2,y2,1)T, ˜n2 = R21
1
1−tT
12 · ˜n1
˜n1
(4)
Xc = β⃗r, s−1˜nT
2Xc = 1 ⇒β = s(˜nT
2⃗r)−1 ⇒Xc =
s·⃗r
n2xx2 +n2yy2 +n2z
(5)
This point is ﬁnally transferred into VICON coordinates that are used to control the vehicle, by a transformation with the
vehicle-camera calibration parameters Rc and tc and the vehicle position and orientation within the VICON frame PV1 and
RV1:
XV = PV1 +RV1tc +RV1RcXc
(6)
In the following, we apply the homography based reconstruction to two different application scenarios.
3.2 Landing
In the autonomous landing scenario (ﬁgure 4a), the quadrotor is equipped with a downward looking camera (cp. ﬁgure 3a)
to detect an elevated, planar landing site. In the detection phase, the vehicle initially ﬂies a predeﬁned search pattern, until
the landing area comes into view and is detected by the vision system. For each frame in which the vision algorithm detects
the landing surface, a waypoint is generated for the center of the landing spot. These individual waypoints are collected by
the vehicle control algorithm, which initiates an automated landing once the mean of the waypoint coordinates stabilizes.
In order to detect a landing platform it is assumed that the landing surface is surrounded by a dominant plane – the ﬂoor. A
ﬁrst homography estimation is used to reconstruct the plane parameters and to extract in-plane features that are located on
the ground. For all off-plane features, a second homography estimation is applied to ﬁnd the elevated landing surface. If
enough features on a second surface are found, the landing platform is detected (ﬁgure 5). Theoretically both homographies
could be used to calculate camera motion up to scale. However, in our approach we ﬁrst align the two homographies using
the epipolar constraint as described in20 before applying a homography decomposition algorithm to increase the accuracy
of the reconstruction results for ego motion and plane normals. Finally, an aiming point in the image is calculated which
is deﬁned by the center of all detected feature points on the landing target, and a 3D waypoint is calculated as described in
section 3.1.3.
3.3 Ingress
The homography estimation approach can also be applied to the problem of ingress (ﬁgure 4b) to detect wall openings. In
this application, the vehicle is equipped with a forward looking camera (ﬁgure 3b) to perform autonomous building ingress.
Similar to the landing scenario, we assume a dominant plane in view – the wall surface – and track outliers to detect an
Takeoff
Platform
Waypoint
Approach
Land
Detect Platform
Refine Estimate
Ingress
waypoint
Approach
Refinement
Detect Opening
Takeoff
(a)
(b)
Figure 4. After takeoff, the autonomous landing (a) and automated ingress (b) algorithm proceed in three phases: Detection, Reﬁnement,
and Approach.
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 8031  803111-5
Downloaded From: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie on 31 Jan 2024
Terms of Use: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/terms-of-use

Figure 5. Landing surface detection: The platform is detected if sufﬁcient matched features points are observed on the elevated platform
(squares). White dots are features located on the ground plane, black dots are outliers.
opening. Once detected, waypoints for the ingress target are generated as explained before, now using the wall surface to
position the waypoint in the center of the opening.
While off-plane features can serve as a good indicator of a wall opening, the detection of the opening target is in
particular more challenging due to (1) false positives for outliers that are not always isolated to opening areas and may
appear on the planar wall surface (ﬁgure 6a), and (2) clusters of outliers that do not clearly deﬁne the true size of the wall
opening (ﬁgure 6b). To remedy these issues, we adopt an approach to ingress that detects square or rectangular openings
since these types of openings are typical for urban/indoor environments. To detect a rectangular opening area, we search
for the bounding box that contains the most number of outliers without including any inliers. This is done in a three
step process. First, line segments are extracted from the image by a Hough transform, ﬁltering on predominantly vertical
and horizontal line segments (ﬁgure 7a and b). Second, a 2D histogram of in- and outliers is generated and partitioned
according to vertical and horizontal segments detected in the previous step (ﬁgure 7c). And third, the partition which
contains the largest number of outliers above a given threshold and without including any inliers is selected as an opening
(ﬁgure 7d).
Following the identiﬁcation of the largest bounding box of outliers (with a prior cue seeded by line segments from
the Hough Transform), the ingress point is identiﬁed as the center point of the box opening on the wall surface and a 3D
waypoint is generated and passed to the vehicle controller.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6. (a) Detected in-plane (white) and off-plane features (black). Note that some false positives are located on the planar surface,
rather than being completely isolated in the opening. (b) Outliers are only detected on out-of-plane regions that are descriptive in features.
Featureless off-plane areas of the image may not always be detected as such due to the lack of features. This limits the detectable size of
the actual opening (dashed box) to something much smaller (solid box).
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 8031  803111-6
Downloaded From: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie on 31 Jan 2024
Terms of Use: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/terms-of-use

1331
U
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7. (a) Raw output image from Hough Transform. (b) Filtered output with vertical and horizontal edges. (c) 2D histogram image of
inliers (outlined boxes) and outliers (solid boxes), partitioned using the detected vertical and horizontal line segments. (d) The detected
opening (white rectangle, centroid marked by white square), and features (inliers white, outliers black), superimposed on the captured
image.
3.4 Navigation and Control
Our control scheme is designed to operate in a hierarchical framework. There are three distinct levels to the hierarchy
which are termed the autonomy loop, the outer loop and the inner loop. The autonomy loop is responsible for the highest-
level behaviors and is the most abstract, whereas the outer and inner loop are responsible for low-level behaviors like direct
ﬂight to waypoints and vehicle stabilization. In the proposed scheme, the vision system becomes an input to the high-level
autonomy loop. Note, that this implies that this approach is adaptable to any vehicle for which the level abstractions hold
and not only to the speciﬁc vehicle type – a quadrotor UAV – considered in our experiments.
From the perspective of the autonomy loop, the vision subsystem is a sensory input, providing “measurements” of the
true position of a navigation target. The navigation system operates in three sequential phases with three distinct behaviors
at the autonomy level, in order to ﬁrst detect the target (detection phase), then determine an accurate estimate of the target
location (reﬁnement phase), and ﬁnally to perform an autonomous maneuver based on the ﬁnal target estimate (approach
phase) (cp. ﬁgure 4).
3.4.1 Autonomous Landing Control
Figure 8 illustrates the phases of the autonomous landing scenario. The objective is to detect and localize an unknown,
unmarked elevated landing platform, and subsequently land upon it.
Platform Detection
In the detection phase, the vehicle follows a predeﬁned path, while the vision subsystem gathers
imagery for an initial detection of the landing platform. Once the initial detection occurs and a ﬁrst landing spot waypoint
XV,1 is generated, the control system transitions to the reﬁnement phase.
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 8031  803111-7
Downloaded From: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie on 31 Jan 2024
Terms of Use: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/terms-of-use

00
oe
08
TO
15
2
10
02
00
02
10
00
02
I0
22
-JO
-02
00
02
I0
Detection
Takeoff
Refinement/Descent
Takeoff
Detection
Refinement
Descent
(a)
(b)
Figure 8. (a) Top-down view of an actual vehicle trajectory through the phases. (b) Side view of an actual vehicle trajectory through the
phases.
Reﬁnement of Estimate
The waypoint measurements are subject to noise and outliers, which makes it necessary to
gather additional measurements for a reﬁned estimate. This happens in the reﬁnement phase, where additional 3D way-
points are collected into a sequence of n waypoints

XV,i
n
i=1. To produce additional waypoints, the vehicle has to move
to collect imagery from different vantage points in the vicinity of the current estimate. This is accomplished by directing
the vehicle outer loop control to position the vehicle at points ˜XV,i in the neighborhood above the ﬁrst waypoint XV,1. To
address the uncertainty in the estimate of the platform location at any given time, these positions are drawn from a bivariate
normal distribution N (μ,Σ), where mean μ and covariance Σ are determined from the sample mean and covariance of the
waypoints collected up to that point. Positions that would take the vehicle more than some arbitrary cutoff distance away
from the estimate are discarded.
As each new measurement is obtained, sample statistics of the set of measurements are computed. In particular, the
waypoint estimate after the n-th measurement has been obtained is the sample mean of the estimates ˆXi = 1
n ∑n
i=1 XV,i,
When the stopping criteria for the reﬁnement phase,
n ≥nmin,
(7)
|

1
1
0

( ˆXn −ˆXn−1)| ≤εhorz,
(8)
|

0
0
1

( ˆXn −ˆXn−1)| ≤εvert,
(9)
have been met, the estimate is considered to be ’stable’, and ˆXn is taken as the ﬁnal target waypoint. The controller then
transitions to the approach phase.
Descent and Landing
In the approach phase, the vehicle is ﬁrst sent to the point at the current altitude immediately
above ˆXn. Then the vehicle descends at a ﬁxed rate vdes, as long as the radial offset er(t) between the current position
and ˆXn is within a tolerance. The altitude setpoint is then updated accordingly, x3(t +1) = x3(t)+vdesdt and the updated
setpoint is passed to the low-level altitude control loop. Thus, the vehicle only descends when it is within a prescribed
volume. Finally, once the vertical offset reaches a threshold altitude, the altitude setpoint is rapidly decreased before
cutting off power to the motors to complete the landing. During this ﬁnal phase the onboard accelerometer readings are
employed to detect touch down and cut off the motor power.
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 8031  803111-8
Downloaded From: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie on 31 Jan 2024
Terms of Use: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/terms-of-use

3.4.2 Autonomous Ingress Control
The autonomous landing scheme described above can be easily adapted for autonomous ingress – ingress basically follows
the same high-level control phases. Due to the forward looking camera, ﬂight maneuvers during detection and reﬁnement
are modiﬁed to reﬂect the change in viewing direction.
At the present time we have performed limited approaches to an opening for ingress, performing maneuvers for de-
tection and reﬁnement, but due to limitations in the available ﬂying space in the current laboratory setup, we are not able
to perform the actual ﬂy-through. We plan to remedy this in the near future, with a larger ﬂying area suitable for a full
ingress.
Several control options for maneuvering through the opening are feasible: A heuristic, similar to that used for landing
could prove adequate, depending on the control performance achievable under the aerodynamic disturbances present during
the ingress. However provably-safe schemes could be considered as well, wherein the controller design would be supported
by a reachability-based analysis.21
4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
4.1 Hardware Testbed
Our approach has been implemented on quadrotor platforms ﬂying indoors in laboratory environments, using a VICON
motion capture system as the primary means of state estimation. We have employed two different vehicle architectures (ﬁg-
ure 1), porting the approach from one (the STARMAC22 quadrotor) vehicle to the next (the AscTec Pelican UAV∗). While
the two vehicles differ in implementation details, they are similar in that they are both equipped with high-level computing
(in the case of STARMAC, a dual-core 2.16 GHz Pentium PC-104 board; for the Pelican, a 1.6 GHz Intel Atom board).
The high-level computer executes a multiprocess and multi threaded system, using Robot Operating System (ROS)23 for
system management, interprocess communication, and communication with the operator ground station. Modules were
written variously in Python and C++. Note, that our formulation does not require a minimum frame rate for good results –
the accuracy depends solely on the spatial separation of the camera location between image acquisition, not on the rate at
which images are captured.
Operator control of the vehicle is performed via a ’ground station’ laptop equipped with a joystick, which has bidirec-
tional communication with the onboard high level computer via a WiFi link. Live raw video from the onboard camera as
well as a diagnostic image output from the vision algorithm (as shown in ﬁgures 5 and 7) can be transmitted to the ground
station to allow for rapid debugging. Data may be logged to on-board mass storage for later transfer to a desktop PC where
the algorithms can be tested and reﬁned on the ’played back’ data.
As mentioned above, the autonomy layer implements the 3-phase behavior described above by commanding autose-
quence destinations to the outer loop of the control architecture. In the outer loop, a linear controller stably regulates the
vehicle’s lateral (horizontal) position of the vehicle towards a designated setpoint. Vehicle yaw angle is maintained con-
stant, and altitude is also regulated with a linear controller based on state measurements from the motion capture system.
The camera used is a Point Grey Research Fireﬂy MV USB monochrome camera equipped, with a 4 mm micro lens.
Capture was set in streaming mode at full (640×480) resolution. For the landing scenario, various platforms were tested.
Note that the vision algorithm is not dependent on special features or artiﬁcial texturing of the elevated platform. The
landing platform is relatively small in comparison to the ’footprint’ of the quadrotor’s landing gear (approx. 15×15cm),
which requires precise waypoint estimation. The ingress scenario employed a mockup wall built from Styrofoam elements
with one square opening of 60x60cm (cp. ﬁgure 6 and 7).
We tested our algorithm intensively running on-board the two different quadrotor platforms. Autonomous landing was
performed successfully on both, the STARMAC and the Asctec Pelican quadrotor. For the ingress experiment we used the
STARMAC platform to gather imagery for the waypoint calculation during the detection and reﬁnement phase.
∗Ascending Technologies GmbH, http://www.asctec.de/
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 8031  803111-9
Downloaded From: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie on 31 Jan 2024
Terms of Use: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/terms-of-use

//'
(a)
(b)
Figure 9. View of the STARMAC quadrotor (a) just prior to landing and (b) after landing in one of the experiments.
4.2 Landing
We tested the landing algorithm on the above described setup with the landing platform placed at an arbitrary location.
The sequence of events during an experimental run was as follows. The human operator ﬁrst commands the vehicle
to enter a position-holding mode, and commands a take-off maneuver, bringing the vehicle to a hover above the initial
location at some suitable altitude. Upon command of the operator’s ’go’ signal, a predetermined ﬂight path is executed
(platform detection phase). After detection and reﬁnement of the platform position, the vehicle lands autonomously on the
platform. After the automatic shut-down of the motors, the experimental run is considered complete. All operations after
the operators initiates the detection phase are performed completely autonomous.
In our experiments, we used three different sizes for the landing platform, assembled out of printer paper reams: a)
double wide, 2 reams high (43.2×27.9×10.9cm); b) double wide, 4 reams high (43.2×27.9×21.9cm); and c) single wide,
4 reams high (21.6×27.9×21.9cm). In all three scenarios, both quadrotor systems were able to successfully land (see
ﬁgure 9). The vision algorithm was very effective in detecting and localizing the landing platform. As expected, the
platform location was estimated most accurately in the lateral direction, while the vertical component of the estimate was
poorest. This behavior is acceptable, as a highly accurate lateral position is necessary to safely land the vehicle on the
platform, whereas a more uncertain height estimate is compensated within the ﬁnal descent step. Figure 10 shows the
measured raw lateral waypoint coordinates that are generated from the vision system, and the reﬁned waypoint estimate
during reﬁnement. Figure 11 compares the estimated height with the true height of the landing spot. The reﬁned estimate
and the estimated platform height converge over time, as new measurements arrive from the vision algorithm. Target
waypoints where generated at a maximum rate of approximately 5 fps on the STARMAC quadrotor and at approximately
2 fps on the Pelican system.
4.3 Ingress
The initial start up of the system is similar to the landing experiment. The vehicle is brought up to altitude and the detection
phase is initiated. To detect an opening, the vehicle ﬂies a trajectory along a wall surface, with the camera facing directly
to the wall. Once detected, the vehicle performs a predeﬁned horizontal ﬂight maneuver parallel to the wall surface in front
of the opening to execute the reﬁnement phase. For the reasons described above, we did not perform an approach phase.
To conﬁrm the quality of our reconstruction results, we added one measurement for the ingress experiment. In addition
to the calculation of a navigation waypoint in the center of the ingress target, we also calculate the lateral position of the left
and right border of the window opening to measure the opening width. Figure 12 shows the estimated opening width (mean
width) during reﬁnement phase for a typical test run. Note that larger deviations are outliers caused by false detections of
the window borders. The estimated opening width at convergence is very close to the true opening width of 60cm. This
conﬁrms the accuracy of the vision output for the ingress scenario.
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 8031  803111-10
Downloaded From: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie on 31 Jan 2024
Terms of Use: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/terms-of-use

0.29
0.28
0.27
0.26
0.25
0.24
0.23
0.22
0.66
0.68
x(m)
y(m)
0.70
0.72
0.74
0.76
Figure 10. Example of landing point es-
timate reﬁnement. Crosses are raw mea-
surements, Circles show the evolution of
the waypoint estimate as each new mea-
surement is incorporated.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
time(sec)
height(m)
estimated height
raw height
true height
Figure 11. Landing spot height estima-
tion.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
time(sec)
width(m)
estimated width
raw width
true width
Figure 12. Opening width estimation for
the ingress target.
5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper demonstrates a visual navigation approach for autonomous landing and ingress of a micro air vehicle, which
uses images from a monocular camera to detect navigation targets and generate 3D navigation waypoints based on a
multiple homography approach with scale recovery from a motion capture system. The system is able to generate highly
accurate target waypoints as shown in our experiments and illustrated by the very accurate reconstruction of the landing
platform height and the ingress opening width. Using a three stage control scheme, we are able to autonomously detect,
approach and land on an elevated landing surface that is only slightly larger than the footprint of our aerial vehicles, and
gather navigation target waypoints for building ingress. All algorithms run on-board the vehicles.
This is, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst vision-based, experimentally tested algorithm for small UAVs, using a single monoc-
ular camera and requiring no artiﬁcial labeling or external computation, enabling autonomous landing on an elevated
landing platform and ingress into a building.
The current approach uses pose estimates based on VICON motion capture data to regain scale for our structure from
motion approach, and to control the vehicle. We plan on substituting the VICON input with vision-based on-board state
estimation in a future extension. Ultimately, we aim to navigate a small aerial vehicle with on-board processing using only
a minimal sensor suite of a single camera with an additional sensor to regain scale (e.g. an on-board IMU), in a GPS denied
environment. A challenge for this type of vehicle when maneuvering close to structure or in wind gusts is the incorporation
of a dynamic controller to consider changes in vehicle dynamics caused by aerial disturbances. In particular, we want
to explore this aspect of the problem for performing autonomous ingress maneuvers through small openings. With the
complexity of the unsteady airﬂow in this ﬂight regime, effective models will likely require additional detail beyond the
simple double integrator type models which are quite effective when clear of such aerodynamic disturbances.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Army Research Laboratory under the Micro Autonomous Systems & Technology Collabo-
rative Technology Alliance program (MAST-CTA). JPL contributions were carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
California Institute of Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
REFERENCES
[1] Saripalli, S., Montgomery, J. F., and Sukhatme, G. S., “Vision-based autonomous landing of an unmanned aerial
vehicle,” in [Proc. Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation], 2799–2804 (2002).
[2] Lange, S., Suenderhauf, N., and Protzel, P., “A vision based onboard approach for landing and position control of an
autonomous multirotor uav in gps-denied environments,” in [Proc. of Int. Conf. on Adv. Robotics], (2009).
[3] Wenzel, K. E., Rosset, P., and Zell, A., “Low-cost visual tracking of a landing place and hovering ﬂight control with
a microcontroller,” Intelligent and Robotic Systems 57, 297–311 (2009).
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 8031  803111-11
Downloaded From: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie on 31 Jan 2024
Terms of Use: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/terms-of-use

[4] Templeton, T., Shim, D. H., Geyer, C., and Sastry, S. S., “Autonomous vision-based landing and terrain mapping using
an MPC-controlled unmanned rotorcraft,” in [Proc. Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation], 1349–1356 (2007).
[5] Johnson, A., Montgomery, J., and Matthies, L., “Vision guided landing of an autonomous helicopter in hazardous
terrain,” in [Proc. Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation], 3966 – 3971 (2005).
[6] Mejias, L., Usher, K., Roberts, J., and Corke, P., “Two seconds to touchdown – vision-based controlled forced
landing,” in [Proc. Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems], 3527–3532 (2006).
[7] Bosch, S., Lacroix, S., and Caballero, F., “Autonomous detection of safe landing areas for an uav from monocular
images,” in [Proc. Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems], 5522 –5527 (2006).
[8] Rufﬁer, F. and Franceschini, N., “Visually guided micro-aerial vehicle: automatic take off, terrain following, landing
and wind reaction,” in [Proc. Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation], 2339–2346 (2004).
[9] Herisse, B., Russotto, F.-X., Hamel, T., and Mahony, R., “Hovering ﬂight and vertical landing control of a vtol
unmanned aerial vehicle using optical ﬂow,” in [Proc. Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems], 801–806 (2008).
[10] Goncalves, T. F. and Azinheira, J. R., “Vision-based autonomous approach and landing for an aircraft using direct
visual tracking method,” in [Proc. Int. Conf. on Informatics in Control, Automation and Robotics], 94–101 (2009).
[11] Blosch, M., Weiss, S., Scaramuzza, D., and Siegwart, R., “Vision based mav navigation in unknown and unstructured
environments,” in [Proc. Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation], 21–28 (2010).
[12] Klein, G. and Murray, D., “Parallel tracking and mapping for small ar workspaces,” in [Proc. Int. Symposium on
Mixed and Augmented Reality], 225–234 (2007).
[13] Longuet-Higgins, H., “A computer algorithm for reconstructing a scenen from two projections,” Nature (293) , 133–
135 (1981).
[14] Luong, Q.-T. and Faugeras, O., “The fundamental matrix: Theory, algorithm, and stability analysis,” Comp. Vis. (17)
, 43–75 (1996).
[15] Longuet-Higgins, H., “The reconstruction of a plane surface from two perspective projections,” Proc. Roy. Soc.
London Series B 227 (1249) , 399–410 (1986).
[16] “Star detector wiki.” http://pr.willowgarage.com/wiki/Star Detector.
[17] Agrawal, M., Konolige, K., and Blas, M. R., “Censure: Center surround extremas for realtime feature detection and
matching.,” in [Proc. Europ. Conf. on Comp. Vis.], LNCS 5305, 102–115 (2008).
[18] Bay, H., Ess, A., Tuytelaars, T., and Van Gool, L., “Speeded-up robust features (surf),” Comp. Vis. Image Un-
derst. 110(3), 346–359 (2008).
[19] Fischler, M. A. and Bolles, R. C., “Random sample consensus: A paradigm for model ﬁtting with applications to
image analysis and automated cartography.,” Commun. ACM , 381–395 (1981).
[20] Cheng, Y., “Real-time surface slope estimation by homography alignment for spacecraft safe landing,” in [Proc. Int.
Conf. on Robotics and Automation], 2280–2286 (2010).
[21] Mitchell, I. M., Bayen, A. M., and Tomlin, C. J., “A time-dependent Hamilton-Jacobi formulation of reachable sets
for continuous dynamic games,” Trans. on Autom. Control 50(7), 947–957 (2005).
[22] Hoffmann, G. M., Huang, H., Waslander, S. L., and Tomlin, C. J., “Quadrotor helicopter ﬂight dynamics and control:
Theory and experiment,” in [Proc. of the AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference and Exhibit], (2007).
[23] “Ros (robot operating system) website.” http://www.ros.org.
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 8031  803111-12
Downloaded From: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie on 31 Jan 2024
Terms of Use: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/terms-of-use

