IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 20, NO. 4, AUGUST 2004
713
Image Moments: A General and Useful
Set of Features for Visual Servoing
François Chaumette, Member, IEEE
Abstract—In this paper, we determine the analytical form of the
interaction matrix related to any moment that can be computed
from segmented images. The derivation method we present is
based on Green’s theorem. We apply this general result to classical
geometrical primitives. We then consider using moments in
image-based visual servoing. For that, we select six combinations
of moments to control the six degrees of freedom of the system.
These features are particularly adequate, if we consider a planar
object and the configurations such that the object and camera
planes are parallel at the desired position. The experimental
results we present show that a correct behavior of the system is
obtained if we consider either a simple symmetrical object or a
planar object with complex and unknown shape.
Index Terms—Image moments, visual servoing.
I. INTRODUCTION
I
MAGE MOMENTS have been widely used in computer vi-
sion for a very long time, especially for pattern-recognition
applications [11], [15], [17]. It would be interesting to use them
in visual servoing since they provide a generic representation
of any object, with simple or complex shapes, that can be seg-
mented in an image. They also provide a more geometric and
intuitive meaning than the features that have been proposed in
[5] from the contour of an object. Attempts to use moments in
image-based visual servoing have already been presented in the
past. The problem was that the analytical form of the interac-
tion matrix related to image moments was not available. How-
ever, this matrix is essential to design a visual-servoing con-
trol scheme [8], [12]. That is why, in [1], if the idea of using
image moments was expressed rigorously, very coarse approxi-
mations were performed in practice to control only four degrees
of freedom (DOFs) of a robot using the area, the centroid, and
the main orientation of an object in the image. Similarly, in [24],
a neural network has been developed to numerically estimate
this interaction matrix. Finally, in [2], the interaction matrix re-
lated to the moments of order less than three has been deter-
mined, but the result was only valid for an ellipse in the image.
The first contribution of this paper is that it presents a method to
determine the analytical form of the interaction matrix related
to any image moment.
A second objective of using moments in image-based visual
servoing is to try to determine features that avoid the potential
Manuscript received December 10, 2002; revised July 25, 2003. This paper
was recommended by Associate Editor Y.-H. Liu and Editor S. Hutchinson upon
evaluation of the reviewers’ comments.
The author is with IRISA/INRIA Rennes, 35 042 Rennes Cedex, France
(e-mail: Francois.Chaumette@irisa.fr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TRO.2004.829463
problems that may appear when redundant image points coor-
dinates are used; local minimum and coupled features that lead
to inadequate robot trajectories, for example [3]. In fact, we
would like to find again the nice properties of 2 1/2D visual
servoing [14], but using visual features extracted only from the
current image (to avoid any partial pose estimation at each iter-
ation of the control scheme, which introduces some sensitivity
to image noise). A nice step in that direction has been recently
presented in [6]. More precisely, we search for six independent
visual features, such that the corresponding interaction matrix
has a maximal decoupled structure, without any singularity, and
such that its condition number is as low as possible (to improve
the robustness and the numerical stability of the system [9], [16],
[19]). The second contribution of this paper is concerned with
this objective.
In the next section, we present a method based on Green’s the-
orem to determine the analytical form of the interaction matrix
related to any moment. The most simple case of a planar object
is described in text, while the more general case is considered
in the Appendix. In Section II-B, we consider more particularly
the area and the coordinates of the center of gravity of the ob-
ject, which are the moments of lowest order zero and one. We
then determine the interaction matrix of the centered moments,
from which we deduce the one related to the main orientation
of the object. In Section III, all of these general results that are
valid for objects of any shape are applied to the most simple
and usual geometrical primitives: segments, straight lines, cir-
cles, spheres, and cylinders. Indeed, the method we propose al-
lows revisiting, in an easy way, the previous works dealing with
the modeling of the interaction matrix. After these modeling is-
sues, we propose in Section IV six visual features to control the
six DOFs of the system. We will see that the selected features
allows the system to have a nice decoupling behavior, if we con-
sider a planar object and the most usual case where the object
and camera planes are parallel at the desired position. The ex-
perimental results described in Section V validate the proposed
choice. Finally, concluding remarks are given in Section VI.
II. INTERACTION MATRIX OF IMAGE MOMENTS
A. Modeling
Let
be the observed object and
the image acquired by
the camera at time . We denote
the part of
where the
object projects, and
the contour of
. As explained at the
end of this section, we do not consider the intensity level of each
pixel, which means that either binary images are acquired or a
spatial segmentation algorithm, providing binary images, is first
1042-296X/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

714
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 20, NO. 4, AUGUST 2004
Fig. 1.
(a) Time variation of contour C(t). (b) A more detailed view.
performed on the acquired images. In that case, the moments
of
in the image are defined by
(1)
where
. We are interested in determining the
analytical form describing the time variation
of moment
in the function of the relative kinematic screw
between the camera and the object, where
and
represent the
translational and rotational velocity components, respectively.
As for classical geometrical features, we will obtain a linear link
that can be expressed in the form [8]
(2)
where
is the interaction matrix related to
.
In (1), the only part that is a function of time
is
. The
time variation of
can thus be obtained from the variation of
. More precisely, we have [10]
(3)
where
is the velocity of contour point
is the
unitary vector normal to
at point
, and
is an infinites-
imal element of contour
. From a geometrical point of view
(see Fig. 1), the variation of
is given by computing
on the infinitesimal area between
and
, which is
nothing but integrating along
the product of
(to compute
the moment) by the scalar product between
and
(so that
reaches
).
If the following conditions are satisfied (which is the case
in practice):
1)
is continuous by parts;
2) vector
is tangent to
and continuously dif-
ferentiable,
;
we can use the famous Green’s theorem [21] and write (3) in
the form
(4)
By developing (4), we finally obtain
(5)
This derivation, usual in physics and mechanics, has also al-
ready been used in computer vision. In [4], low-order moments
have been considered to estimate the time-to-collision and the
surface orientation of an object observed by a moving camera.
However, an affine-motion model was used in the derivation,
which was not able to handle the perspective projection model
of a camera exactly. The same application has been considered
in [7], but using a spherical projection model. Finally, in [18],
change in image moments under Lie group transformations has
been studied, with a special attention to affine motion. In the
following derivations, we consider a full and complete perspec-
tive projection model, as well as the six DOFs of the system.
Furthermore, moments of any order are addressed in a general
way.
In (5), the terms
, and
can be linearly
expressed to the kinematic screw
. Indeed, for any point with
coordinates
in the image whose corresponding three-
dimensional (3-D) point has depth
, we have the well-known
relation
(6)
where
(7)
At this step, we consider that the 3-D observed object belongs to
a continuous surface, which means that we assume that it does
not present any depth discontinuity. In that case, the depth
of
any 3-D object point can be expressed as a continuous function
of its image coordinates
and
, as follows:
(8)
For instance, if the object is planar or has a planar limb sur-
face (see [8] for more details), whose equation expressed in the
camera frame is given by
then we have
(9)
where
, and
.
We give in the Appendix the analytical form of the interac-
tion matrix for the general case (8). However, in the following,
we will only consider planar objects. Equation (9) will thus
be used, instead of (8), to simplify the mathematical develop-
ments. Furthermore, even if the general form is available, the
exact analytical form we obtain for planar objects can be seen
as an approximation for objects with more complex 3-D sur-
faces. Such approximation is generally sufficiently accurate in
practice, thanks to the robustness of the visual-servoing scheme
with respect to modeling errors.
Using (9) in (7), (6) can finally be written as
(10)
from which we deduce
(11)
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

CHAUMETTE: IMAGE MOMENTS: A GENERAL AND USEFUL SET OF FEATURES FOR VISUAL SERVOING
715
Substituting
(10)
and
(11)
into
(5),
and
remem-
bering that
, and
, we can express (5) under the expected
form (2). We obtain, after simple developments
(12)
where
The time variation of a moment of order
can thus be ex-
pressed from the moments of order up to
and, as far
as the translational terms are concerned, from the 3-D parame-
ters
, and
. This nice property will allow us to easily use
image moments in image-based visual servoing.
In fact, all the derivations presented above are valid for the
more general definition of image-based moments, that is
where
is the intensity level of image point with coor-
dinates
and
, and where the integration is performed on all
the image plane
. The assumption that the intensity level of a
point is not modified during any rigid motion has to be done (i.e.,
). This assumption is usual in computer vi-
sion in almost all works dealing with image-motion analysis.
It seems possible to use the previous theoretical results on any
image (and not only on binary or segmented ones). The problem
that occurs in practice lies in the parts of the image that appear
or disappear from one image to the next one, which makes the
moments non-differentiable on all of the image plane. A region
or its contour
(or a set of regions or contours) has to be ex-
tracted and tracked to provide a global matching, ensuring that
the moments are well defined and differentiable. We can note
that a local matching, linking any physical point of the contour
to its corresponding point in the next image, is not necessary
at all. This is a classical interest of using moments in computer
vision. Finally, it may be interesting, in practice, to take into
account a normalized intensity level of points in the tracked re-
gion for the computation of moments, in order to increase the
robustness and stability of the computed values with respect to
segmentation noise.
B. Zeroth- and First-Order Moments
From the general form given in (12), we can deduce the form
for any particular moment by just selecting the value of
and
. We first consider the most simple case
that will
give us the interaction matrix related to the area
of the
object. We obtain directly from (12)
(13)
where
. We can note that
depends
linearly on
(we have, of course,
, if
). Furthermore,
when the object is centered and parallel to the image plane
, we have
for all camera motions but
the expected translation
along the optical axis.
Similarly, by considering the first-order moments
and
, it is easy to determine the interaction matrix related to the
coordinates
and
of the center
of gravity of an object in the image. We obtain
(14)
where
where
, and
are the normalized centered moments
of order 2, defined as follows:
with
(15)
From this result, we can see that the interaction matrix re-
lated to the coordinates of the center of gravity of the object
is a generalization of the interaction matrix (7) related to the
coordinates of a point. Indeed, for a physical point, we have
, and we can set
in (14)
to exactly obtain the classical equation (7).
From another point of view, all previous works in visual ser-
voing that used the coordinates of the center of gravity of an
object as visual features (for instance, [6]), in fact used with
(7) an approximation of the real interaction matrix. However,
it was not a crucial problem, since closed-loop visual-servoing
schemes are well known to be robust with respect to such mod-
eling errors.
Finally, it is well known and clear from (14) that
and
are mainly related to translational motion
, along the
camera
axis and rotational motion
around the
axis (for
), and to
translational motion
and rotational motion
(for
).
C. Centered Moments
We now consider the centered moments
, defined by
(16)
Knowing the relation between
and the moments
of
order up to
, given as follows:
(17)
we can determine the interaction matrix related to
, using
(12). We can even obtain the analytical form of this matrix ex-
pressed with the centered moments by using the reciprocal re-
lation to (17) that links any
to the centered moments up to
order
(18)
After some (tedious) developments, we obtain the following
simple form:
(19)
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

716
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 20, NO. 4, AUGUST 2004
where
This result can also be obtained by applying Green’s theorem
directly to the definition of the centered moments (16). Indeed,
we thus obtain
(20)
from which, using (10) and (14), we find again (19).
From the analytical form of
and
, we can note that
all centered moments are invariant with respect to translational
motions parallel to the image plane only if the image plane is
parallel to the object (
when
).
If we consider the centered moments of order 2, that is,
, and
, we obtain from (19)
(21)
with
where centered moments of order 3 are given by [see (17)]
In visual servoing, we could hope that, using as visual
features
the six moments of order less than 3 (that is,
), the six DOF of the system could
be controlled. However, the interaction matrix
related to
is always of maximal rank 5 when an object appears with a
symmetrical shape in the image, such as ellipses, squares, or
rectangles. Furthermore, for nonsymmetrical objects, even if
is of full rank 6, its condition number is really too high to
provide satisfactory results (the control scheme is unstable).
As will be shown in Section IV, few moments of order at least
Fig. 2.
Orientation  of an object is defined as the orientation of the ellipse
obtained using the value of the object moments of order less than 3.
equal to 3 thus have to be involved in the selection of the visual
features.
Despite this, an interesting feature can be selected from the
moments of order 2. It is the well-known object orientation
defined by (see [15] and Fig. 2)
(22)
Since
, we have
where
. Using (21), we obtain
(23)
with
We can note that
is invariant with respect to any translational
motion when the object plane is parallel to the image plane
(
when
). Of course, we
can also note the direct link between the variation of
and the
rotational motions
around the optical axis.
From the previous results, we have exhibited four visual fea-
tures that have a direct and intuitive link with particular 3-D
motions. They are the area
, the coordinates
and
of the
center of gravity of the object, and the orientation
. We will
see in Section IV how to select two supplementary visual fea-
tures when we are interested in controlling the six DOFs of
the system. In the next section, we consider very particular and
simple cases.
III. FROM MOMENTS TO SIMPLE GEOMETRICAL PRIMITIVES
We have already seen in Section II-B that a point can be re-
trieved from the center of gravity of an object whose area is null.
In this section, we will see that the interaction matrix related
to simple geometrical primitives can be obtained easily from
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

CHAUMETTE: IMAGE MOMENTS: A GENERAL AND USEFUL SET OF FEATURES FOR VISUAL SERVOING
717
Fig. 3.
Usual representation of an ellipse.
the general previous results. We first consider ellipses, and then
segments and straight lines. These primitives have already been
studied in the past [2], [8]. We here revisit the obtained results
with a completely different and systematic approach.
A. Ellipses
The equation of an ellipse is given by (see Fig. 3)
where
and
are the coordinates of the center of gravity of
the ellipse,
and
are its major and minor axes, respectively,
and is directly linked to its orientation (more precisely, we have
). This representation is degenerated when the ellipse
becomes a circle (in that case,
is no longer defined). That is
why it is better to represent an ellipse with the coordinates of its
center of gravity and the normalized centered moments of order
2 defined in (15). These moments can easily be expressed from
the parameters
, and . Indeed, we have
(24)
from which we can determine the reciprocal relations
From this equation, the link between the area
of the el-
lipse and the normalized centered moments is easily obtained
as follows:
Furthermore, the equation of an ellipse can be expressed using
the minimal, complete, and nonambiguous representation
in the following form:
(25)
The interaction matrix related to the coordinates of the center
of gravity of the ellipse are given in (14). As for the normalized
centered moments, we obtain from their definition (15)
Using (21) and (13) and knowing that the centered moments
of order 3 are all equal to zero in the case of an ellipse (i.e.,
), we finally obtain
(26)
where
We find again the analytical form presented in [2]. We recall
that, if the ellipse in the image results from the projection of a
3-D circle, the 3-D parameters
, and
are directly obtained
from the parameters of the plane which the circle belongs to
[see (9)]. In that case, the interaction matrix
related to the
five parameters
is always of full rank 5, but in the case where
the 3-D circle is parallel to the image plane
and
centered. In that particular case, the ellipse becomes a centered
circle (such that
and
) and the
rank of
is only 3 (since
and
).
In the case where the ellipse in the image results from the
projection of a sphere, we have [2]
where
, and
are the coordinates of the center of the
sphere and
is its radius. In that case, the interaction matrix
related to
is always of rank 3, which means that only three
parameters are necessary and sufficient to represent the image of
a sphere. This result is intuitive, since a sphere is represented by
only four independent parameters. In order to obtain a minimal
and robust representation, we recommend simply using the area
and the coordinates of the center of gravity of the ellipse when a
sphere is considered. Indeed, in that case, the related interaction
matrix is always of full rank 3.
B. Segments
A segment of length
can be seen as an ellipse with major
axis
equal to /2 and minor axis
equal to 0 (see Fig. 3).
Of course, the middle of the segment corresponds exactly to the
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

718
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 20, NO. 4, AUGUST 2004
center of gravity of that particular ellipse, and similarly, the ori-
entation of the segment is nothing but the orientation of the el-
lipse. We deduce from (24) the value of the normalized centered
moments in the case of a segment, as follows:
(27)
from which we deduce
. We can thus deter-
mine the interaction matrix related to
from
and
.
More precisely, we have
(28)
Using (27) in (14), (23), and (28), we finally obtain a simple
form for the interaction matrix related to the four parameters of
a segment, as follows:
(29)
where
,
and
and
are the depth of the end points
and
of the segment, and
is the depth of the middle point
of the segment. Furthermore,
we have
As expected, we find again the analytical form given in [8] for
a segment, and we can note that the interaction matrix given by
(29) is always of full rank 4, and has a quite nice decoupling
form when the segment is parallel to the image plane (in which
case,
).
C. Straight Lines
A straight line in the image can be seen as a segment of infi-
nite length and whose center of gravity belongs to the straight
line (see Fig. 4). Using the
representation that defines the
configuration of the straight line by
we have
(30)
(31)
The coordinates
and
have the following form:
(32)
Fig. 4.
Representation of a straight line.
where
is unknown (see Fig. 4). Let us note that the derivations
described briefly below are simpler if we consider
, but
that is not necessary at all (and not perfectly justified from a
theoretical point of view), and we will see that all of the terms
in which
is induced disappear, as expected.
First, from (30), we deduce directly
. Using the
interaction matrix
related to the orientation of a segment,
given in (29), and using
and
(32), we directly obtain
(33)
where
, and
.
Furthermore, we obtain, by differentiating (31) to yield
Using (14), (33), and noting from (27) that
we obtain, after simple developments
(34)
where
. As expected, we thus find
again the analytical form of
and
given in [8].
If the considered 3-D object is a straight line, parameters
, and
are directly obtained from the equation of a plane
to which the 3-D straight line belongs. The only condition is
that the chosen plane does not contain the camera optical center.
If the considered 3-D object is a cylinder, its projection in the
image can be represented by two straight lines (in all nondegen-
erated cases) and parameters
, and
can have the same
value for both lines. More precisely, we have [2]
where
is the radius of the cylinder, and where
, and
are the coordinates of the point of the cylinder axis nearest
to the camera optical center.
We have shown in this section how the interaction matrix re-
lated to simple and classical geometrical primitives can be de-
termined by considering particular forms of moments. We now
come back to the general case by searching for adequate com-
binations of moments able to control the six DOFs of a robot by
image-based visual servoing.
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

CHAUMETTE: IMAGE MOMENTS: A GENERAL AND USEFUL SET OF FEATURES FOR VISUAL SERVOING
719
IV. SELECTION OF FEATURES FOR VISUAL SERVOING
From the results of Section II, four adequate visual features
are available from moments of order less than 3: coordinates
and
of the center of gravity; area
; and orientation
. They
are particularly interesting, since they are closely related to
and
and
, and
, respectively. In fact, these four
features have already been used in the partitioned system pre-
sented in [6] (with a more intuitive and approximative modeling
of the interaction matrix). The question is now to determine sup-
plementary visual features in order to decouple
from
and
from
. We have already seen in Section II-C that using
only moments of order less than 3 was not possible. This is why
we propose to select two combinations of moments of order up
to 3 and not combinations of moments of higher order. Indeed, it
seems preferable to use moments of order as low as possible to
reduce the sensitivity of the control scheme to image noise. For
that, the well-known skewness terms defined by
and
could be used [17], [24]. However, a better
decoupled behavior will be obtained if we are able to determine
invariants to translational motions and rotational motion around
the optical axis (since we already have visual features to control
these motions). Determining such invariants is a very difficult
problem [22]. Our choice is based on the famous Hu’s invari-
ants to image-based motion [11]. We recall three of them, given
as follows:
(35)
where
These invariants can be combined using products and ratios to
also obtain invariants to scale. In such a way, we propose using
(36)
Indeed, when the object is parallel to the image plane, the inter-
action matrix related to any of these two features, denoted
,
has the expected form
(37)
Unfortunately, the value of
and
(whose analytical form
is too complex to be given here) is equal to 0 for
and
when a centered symmetrical object is observed in the image. In
fact, this problem appears for all of Hu’s invariants. A different
set has to be selected for symmetrical objects in order to avoid
this isolated singularity. In that case, from the form of Hu’s in-
variants (which look like the basic trigonometric equation), we
propose using
(38)
where
, and
.
These features have been obtained by looking for the analytical
and numerical forms of the interaction matrix related to several
possible trigonometric combinations and several possible nor-
malizations. More precisely, we have chosen two invariants to
2D rotations and scale, valid for symmetrical objects (such that
), such that the first one is as inde-
pendent as possible from
, while the second is as independent
as possible from
. For the proposed features and for the con-
figurations where the object is parallel to the image plane, the
interaction matrix
has the same nice form as (37). For non-
symmetrical objects,
and
are not invariant to 2D rotations,
since they do not correspond to combinations of Hu’s invariants.
This implies that the coefficient of their interaction matrix cor-
responding to
is no more equal to 0. That is why we propose
using
and
only for symmetrical objects, and
and
in
all other cases.
Finally, we have to note that the translational terms of the
interaction matrix related to
and
(and to
and
for
a symmetrical object) are equal to 0 only when the object is
parallel to the image plane. The behavior far away from these
configurations may be unsatisfactory. However, as we will see
in the next section, where we have considered the case where
object and image planes are parallel at the desired position, the
results are satisfactory, even if the object is not parallel to the
image plane at the beginning of the positioning task.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In the presented experimental results, obtained with a 6-DOFs
eye-in-hand system, we have used the classical control law
(39)
where
is the camera kinematic screw sent to the low-level
robot controller,
is a positive gain, and
is the inverse
of the interaction matrix related to
computed for the desired
value
. We recall that
exists, since the six visual fea-
tures we have selected are such that
is of full rank 6.
Using this control scheme, only the local stability of the system
is demonstrated, since the sufficient positivity condition
is only ensured in a neighborhood of
(see [8] for more
details). Using
instead of
in control scheme (39)
would possibly give even better results, but we currently have
no way to estimate the 3-D parameters
, and
involved
in the interaction matrix when objects of unknown shape are
considered.
A. Case of a Simple Symmetrical Object
We first consider a simple rectangular object whose corners
can easily be tracked in the acquired images. The desired camera
position is such that the rectangle is parallel to the image plane,
at a range of 50 cm from the camera optical center
, and such that the rectangle is centered and hori-
zontal in the image [see Fig. 5(a)]. The displacement that the
camera has to realize is approximately composed of a rotation of
, and
around camera axis
, and , respec-
tively, and of a translation of
and
cm along these
axes. The image acquired at the initial camera position is dis-
played in Fig. 5(b).
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

720
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 20, NO. 4, AUGUST 2004
Fig. 5.
(a) Desired image. (b) Initial image.
Using the coordinates
and
of the four corners as visual
features, the numerical value of the interaction matrix for the
desired position is given by
As usual, this matrix does not present any interesting decou-
pling properties, and we can note that its condition number is
approximately equal to 180. The results obtained are depicted
in Fig. 7. Hopefully, the camera reaches its desired position, but
we can see that the corner trajectories in the image, as well as
the camera trajectory (that can be extrapolated from the com-
puted velocity), are not particularly satisfactory.
We now describe the results obtained for the same experi-
ment exactly, but using the six visual features based on image
moments selected in Section IV. In practice, we determine the
shape of the quadrilateral that corresponds to the image of the
rectangle from the position of the corners, and then compute
the moments of the quadrilateral [20]. We thus have as visual
features
whose desired value
is given by
We can note that the selected visual features allow one to
specify, easily and in an intuitive way, the desired position
or the desired image to be reached. For example, modifying
the depth between the camera and the object can be specified
by modifying only the desired value of the object area
in
the image. That is a supplementary advantage of determining
a minimal set of visual features directly related to the 3-D
translational and rotational motions.
At the desired value
, the interaction matrix presents excel-
lent decoupling properties, since it is upper triangular with only
two non-null values in the upper part. More precisely, we have
Fig. 6.
Results for the rectangle using image moments as visual features:
image moments error (m).
whose condition number is now equal to 17.1. The numerical
stability of the system is thus greatly improved using moments-
based features instead of points features (gain with scale equal to
more than 10). We also note that the numerical value of
is directly obtained from the analytical forms determined in this
paper. More precisely, it just needs the numerical value of the
moments of order up to 4 and
. Since computing moments
of a quadrilateral is very easy [20], the rate of the control loop
is the same using image moments or image-points coordinates
(that is, 50 Hz). The obtained results are depicted in Figs. 6 and
8. By comparing Figs. 7 and 8, we can immediately observe the
improvements obtained in the camera and image-corners trajec-
tories, even at the beginning of the camera displacement (where
the value and form of the current interaction matrix
is com-
pletely different from
).
B. Case of a Complex Object: The “Whale”
We finally present the results obtained for a nonsymmetrical
planar object whose shape is quite complex [see Fig. 9(a) and
(b)]. In practice, the moments are now computed by simple sum-
mations on the binarized images. This simple image processing
and all of the computations involved in an iteration of the con-
trol loop are again performed at the video rate. We now use as
visual features
The numerical value of the interaction matrix computed from
the desired image depicted in Fig. 9(a) is given by
We can note that
is no longer purely triangular (such
a form has not been reached yet) and presents more non-null
values in the upper part than previously (mainly because the
“whale” is not centered in the desired image). The condition
number of
is now equal to 42.1, which is still far better
than using points coordinates in
(it would be impossible to use
points coordinates in that case).
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

CHAUMETTE: IMAGE MOMENTS: A GENERAL AND USEFUL SET OF FEATURES FOR VISUAL SERVOING
721
Fig. 7.
Results for the rectangle using point coordinates as visual features. (a) Point coordinates error (pixels) versus iteration number. (b) Computed camera
velocity (cm/s and dg/s) versus iteration number. (c) Image points trajectory.
Fig. 8.
Results for the rectangle using image moments as visual features. (a) Point coordinates error (pixels). (b) Computed camera velocity (cm/s and dg/s).
(c) Image points trajectory.
Fig. 9.
Results for the “whale.” (a) Desired image. (b) Initial image. (c) Image moments error (m). (d) Computed camera velocity (cm/s and dg/s).
The results obtained for the same displacement to realize
as before are depicted in Fig. 9. Even if the decreasing be-
havior of the visual features is similar for the rectangle and
for the “whale” [compare Figs. 6 and 9(c)], the camera tra-
jectory is a little bit less satisfactory [compare Figs. 8(b) and
9(d)]. However, the convergence is obtained, even for the large
considered displacement, and all of the “whale” remains in the
camera field of view during the positioning task. We can fi-
nally note that the small white part outside the “whale” [see
Fig. 9(a) and (b)], which is taken into account in the compu-
tation of the moments, does not perturb the behavior of the
system at all.
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

722
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 20, NO. 4, AUGUST 2004
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper has presented a first step to using image moments
in visual servoing. The improvements with respect to classical
visual servoing seem to be significant, since we obtained
a generic representation able to handle simple geometrical
primitives, but also complex objects with unknown shapes. The
visual features we have selected by combinations of moments
present nice decoupling and stability properties. However, a
great deal of work remains to be done. First, we would like
to adapt our selection of visual features to the case where the
object and camera planes are not parallel at the desired position.
Indeed, in that case, since the interaction matrix related to the
selected visual features has no particular decoupling form, the
obtained behavior is satisfactory for small displacements to
realize, but may be unsatisfactory when large displacements
around
and
camera axes have to be realized (as for all
existing image-based visual-servoing schemes). Future work
will be also devoted to studying the robustness of our scheme
with respect to calibration errors and to partial occlusions.
We also would like to try to demonstrate the global stability
of the system. This will certainly be quite complex, but may
be possible, thanks to the selection of a minimal number of
decoupled features. We are also convinced that it is possible
to improve the selection of the visual features, for example,
following the recent developments presented in [13] (which
were concerned with only one DOF) and [23].
APPENDIX
We give here the analytical form of the interaction matrix
related to any image moment, in the general case, where the
object belongs to a continuous non-planar surface. As already
stated in Section II-A, the depth
of any object point can be
expressed as a continuous function of its image coordinates
and
Following exactly the same reasoning as before, changes in the
determination of the interaction matrix will only appear in (10)
and (11), from which we obtain
where only the first three terms that correspond to translational
motions are modified (since depth has no influence for rotational
motions). More precisely, we have
We can note that this general form obviously contains the par-
ticular form given in (12) for a planar object (where we had set
and all other terms
equal
to 0).
From the previous result, we easily deduce the terms that cor-
respond to the translational part of the interaction matrices re-
lated to the area
, and the coordinates
and
of the object
center of gravity
To compute the terms that correspond to the centered moments
, a more simple form can be derived if the polynomial that
links the depth
of a point to the corresponding image point is
decomposed around the object center of gravity
We have the following relations:
which, for a planar object, yields
Using this form, we obtain
where
(and we recall that
is the centered
moment normalized by the area
). Similarly, we
obtain
After some simple (but tedious) developments using (20) and
the previous equations, we finally obtain the terms related to
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

CHAUMETTE: IMAGE MOMENTS: A GENERAL AND USEFUL SET OF FEATURES FOR VISUAL SERVOING
723
the translational part of the interaction matrix related to any cen-
tered moment
as follows:
where
, and
. From these
last equations, we can deduce, if needed, the analytical form of
the interaction matrix related to any combination of moments,
such as, for example, the object orientation
. In all cases, the
results are a generalization of those obtained by considering
a planar object (i.e., the planar case can be retrieved from the
general case by canceling all the terms
and
, such that
).
To conclude, we can see from all the previous equations that,
if the object is not planar, or if its limb surface is not a plane,
the translational terms of the interaction matrix related to any
moments combination requires the value of moments of order
higher than
. Furthermore, an approximation of all
the terms
or
is also necessary in the visual-servoing
scheme. Even if not validated through experimental results,
approximating the object surface by a plane seems to be a
good compromise, in practice, between modeling errors and
complexity, especially thanks to the well-known robustness
properties of closed-loop visual-servoing schemes with respect
to modeling errors. Regardless, the results presented in this
Appendix may be useful for an accurate theoretical stability
analysis of the system.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Bien, W. Jang, and J. Park, “Characterization and use of Feature–Ja-
cobian matrix for visual servoing,” in Visual Servoing, K. Hashimoto,
Ed, Singapore: World Scientific, 1993, pp. 317–363.
[2] F. Chaumette, P. Rives, and B. Espiau, “Classification and realization of
the different vision-based tasks,” in Visual Servoing, K. Hashimoto, Ed,
Singapore: World Scientific, 1993, pp. 199–228.
[3] F. Chaumette, “Potential problems of stability and convergence in
image-based and position-based visual servoing,” in The Conflu-
ence of Vision and Control, ser. LNCIS Series.
Berlin, Germany:
Springer-Verlag, 1998, 237, pp. 66–78.
[4] R. Cipolla, Active Visual Inference of Surface Shape.
Berlin, Germany:
Springer-Verlag, 1995, vol. 1016, Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
[5] C. Collewet and F. Chaumette, “A contour approach for image-based
control of objects with complex shape,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intelligent Robots and Systems, vol. 1, Takamatsu, Japan, Nov. 2000,
pp. 751–756.
[6] P. Corke and S. Hutchinson, “A new partitioned approach to image-
based visual servo control,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Automat., vol. 17, pp.
507–515, Aug. 2001.
[7] Z. Duric, A. Rosenfeld, and J. Duncan, “The applicability of Green’s
theorem to computation of rate of approach,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol.
31, no. 1, pp. 83–98, Feb. 1999.
[8] B. Espiau, F. Chaumette, and P. Rives, “A new approach to visual ser-
voing in robotics,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Automat., vol. 8, pp. 313–326,
June 1992.
[9] J. Feddema, C. Lee, and O. Mitchell, “Automatic selection of image
features for visual servoing of a robot manipulator,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics and Automation, vol. 2, Scottsdale, AZ, May 1989, pp.
832–837.
[10] W. H. Hayt, Engineering Electromagnetics, 5th ed.
New York: Mc-
Graw-Hill, 1989.
[11] M. K. Hu, “Visual pattern recognition by moment invariants,” IRE Trans.
Inform. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 179–187, 1962.
[12] S. Hutchinson, G. Hager, and P. Corke, “A tutorial on visual servo con-
trol,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Automat., vol. 12, pp. 651–670, Oct. 1996.
[13] R. Mahony, P. Corke, and F. Chaumette, “Choice of image features
for depth-axis control in image-based visual servo control,” in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intelligent Robots and Systems, vol. 1, Lausanne,
Switzerland, Oct. 2002, pp. 390–395.
[14] E. Malis, F. Chaumette, and S. Boudet, “2 1/2D visual servoing,” IEEE
Trans. Robot. Automat., vol. 15, pp. 238–250, Apr. 1999.
[15] R. Mukundan and K. R. Ramakrishman, Moment Functions in Image
Analysis: Theory and Application, Singapore: World Scientific, 1998.
[16] B. Nelson and P. Khosla, “The resolvability ellipsoid for visual ser-
voing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, Seattle, WA, June 1994, pp. 829–832.
[17] R. J. Prokop and A. P. Reeves, “A survey of moment-based techniques
for unoccluded object representation and recognition,” in Proc. Com-
puter Vision, Graphics, Image Processing Conf., vol. 54, Sept. 1992, pp.
438–460.
[18] J. Sato and R. Cipolla, “Extracting group transformations from images
moments,” Comput. Vis. Image Understanding, vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 29–42,
1999.
[19] R. Sharma and S. Hutchinson, “Optimizing hand/eye configuration for
visual servo systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automa-
tion, vol. 1, Nagoya, Japan, May 1995, pp. 172–177.
[20] C. Steger, “On the calculation of arbitrary moments of polygons,”
Munchen Univ., Munchen, Germany, Tech. Rep. FGBV-96-05, Oct.
1996.
[21] J. Stewart, Calculus, 2nd ed.
Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole, 1991.
[22] L. Van Gool, T. Moons, E. Pauwels, and A. Oosterlink, “Vision and Lie’s
approach to invariance,” Image Vis. Comput., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 259–277,
May 1995.
[23] O. Tahri and F. Chaumette, “Application of moment invariants to visual
servoing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation, vol. 3,
Taipei, Taiwan, Sept. 2003, pp. 4276–4281.
[24] G. Wells, C. Venaille, and C. Torras, “Vision-based robot positioning
using neural networks,” Image Vis. Comput., vol. 14, no. 10, pp.
715–732, Dec. 1996.
François Chaumette (M’98) was born in Nantes,
France, in 1963, and graduated from École Nationale
Supérieure de Mécanique, Nantes, in 1987. He
received the Ph.D degree and “Habilitation à Diriger
des Recherches” in computer science from the
University of Rennes, Rennes, France, in 1990 and
1998, respectively.
Since 1990, he has been with IRISA/INRIA,
Rennes, where he is now “Directeur de Recherches.”
His research interests include robotics, computer
vision, and especially the coupling of these two
research domains (visual servoing and active perception).
Dr. Chaumette received the AFCET/CNRS Prize for the best French thesis
in automatic control in 1991. He was also the corecipient, with Ezio Malis, of
the 2002 King-Sun Fu Memorial Best IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS AND
AUTOMATION Paper Award. He is currently an Associate Editor of the IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS.
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

