ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Procedia Computer Science 171 (2020) 1449–1458
1877-0509 © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the Third International Conference on Computing and Network
Communications (CoCoNet’19).
10.1016/j.procs.2020.04.155
© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the Third International Conference on Computing and Network
Communications (CoCoNet’19).
Keywords: Fixed-wing Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs); Bio-inspired optimization algorithms; Bats Optimization Algorithm; Moth Flame 
Optimization Algorithm; Artificial Bee Colony Algorithm 
Third International Conference on Computing and Network Communications (CoCoNet’19) 
A Performance Study of Bio-Inspired Algorithms in Autonomous 
Landing of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle   
Harun Surej Ilangoa , Ramanathan R.a 
aDepartment of Electronics and Communication Engineering,  
Amrita School of Engineering, Coimbatore, 
Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham– 641112, India 
harunsurej.edu@gmail.com, r_ramanathan@cb.amrita.edu  
Abstract 
The complete operational automation of fixed wing Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) involves the autonomous operations across 
take-off, cruising and landing. Among all these stages the landing stage is the most crucial one. During landing, it is important for 
the UAV to maintain a constant speed and glide slope to ensure the stability and a successful touchdown on the runway. Also, it 
is important for a UAV to estimate the accurate point of landing in a minimal amount of time. Embedding Bio-inspiring 
algorithms in UAV control systems helps in accurate estimation of the landing point in a minimal amount of time. In this 
research work, the Bio-inspired optimization algorithms Bats Optimization Algorithm, Moth Flame Optimization Algorithm and 
Artificial Bee Colony Algorithm are used in determining the coordinates (points) of the computed path and to determine the 
optimal point of landing which ensures the above said parameters are within the operational limits of the UAV. The objective of 
this research work is to determine the path from the computed points and to find the optimal landing point in a minimal amount 
of time. The difference between the original points of the actual path and the derived computed points of the estimated path is 
measured as the error rate. The performance of the algorithms is analyzed in terms of two trade-off parameters, the time taken to 
compute the landing point and the accuracy in predicting the landing point. The empirical results show that the Moth Flame 
Optimization Algorithm takes less time to compute the optimal point with minimal error among the three optimization algorithms 
taken up for the study.   

1450	
Harun Surej Ilango  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 171 (2020) 1449–1458
1. Introduction 
The Unmanned Aerial Vehicles also called ‘drones’ are widely used in a number of applications like surveillance, 
search and rescue operations and for real-time monitoring.  These are currently growing in popularity and recently, 
Amazon, the world tech giant announced that it will be delivering customer packages to their homes directly through 
UAVs. Its latest iteration was unveiled in Las Vegas touting the machine’s ability to spot obstacles such as people, 
dogs, and clotheslines [1]. This conveys that this autonomous technology is still in its rudimentary stage. Fixed-wing 
UAVs are used for unmanned surveillance which involves a lot of automation. This technology requires multiple 
control systems to commensurate to build a complete product. Among these control systems, the landing system 
plays a crucial role as it requires the right direction, glide slope, speed, angle of attack and high precision during the 
final touchdown. In this research work, the UAV is considered to be a fixed-wing one. In a fixed wing UAV, the 
machine needs to be moving in order to prevent it from stalling. Its position relative to any point in space keeps 
changing. An exhaustive search of 3D-space needs to be searched to derive the optimum path to the runway and to 
determine the optimal point of landing. To determine the optimum path, optimization techniques can be employed. 
Inspired by nature, three optimization techniques are used in this study, namely, Bats Optimization Algorithm (BA), 
Moth Flame Optimization Algorithm (MFO) and Artificial Bee Colony Algorithm (ABC). The similarity among 
these three optimization algorithms is that all the three are avionic. Also, these algorithms avoid converging to a 
local optimum solution and there is a higher probability of obtaining a global optimum solution. 
The objective of this work is to design and simulate the landing of a fixed-wing UAV using Bio-inspired 
optimization algorithms. The embedded Bio-inspired algorithms in the control systems compute points that form the 
optimal path to the point of landing. The current position of the UAV is taken into account in computing the 
coordinates of the optimal path and the optimal landing point. The difference between the actual path and the 
computed path is estimated as the error rate.  So, the algorithm that generates an optimal path close to the actual path 
is considered as the best one. Also, the time taken by the algorithm to compute the landing point is very crucial. The 
algorithm that can determine the optimal points in minimum time and accuracy is considered as the best-suited 
algorithm. The performance of these three optimization algorithms is compared based on the metrics, mean time 
taken and mean error rate. There is always a trade-off between compute time and the accuracy of the estimated 
points. The empirical results show that the Moth Flame Optimization algorithm could compute the optimal points 
with minimal error rate in less time. 
Nomenclature 
ABC 
Artificial Bee Colony 
BA 
Bats Algorithm 
 
MFO 
Moth Flame Optimization Algorithm 
UAV 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
RMSE Root Mean Squared Error 
2. Background and related work 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles are autonomous vehicles which can fly without the help of humans. Most of the UAV 
autopilots have limited autonomous landing techniques due to high risks and accuracy factors. Landing must be done 
in a limited amount of time and space. Hence precise sensing techniques and accurate control are required during 
this process. The difficulties and challenges in the landing of autonomous vehicles are discussed by Gautam et.al [2]. 
These vehicles need a path planner to determine the optimal path for landing. Many research works have been 
carried out for determining the 3D path planning of UAVs [3,4,5,6].  Yang et al in their survey have classified the 
UAV path finding algorithms available in literature as Sampling-Based Algorithms, Node Based Optimal 
Algorithms, Mathematic Model-Based Algorithms, Bio-inspired Algorithms and Multi-fusion-based Algorithms [7].  
Bio-inspired algorithms use the biological characteristics of the animals to derive a solution. The biological 
characteristics of the birds and animals are used by the Bio-inspired algorithms to derive a solution.  The natural 
ecosystem mechanisms are simulated in these algorithms to derive solutions for the complicated combinatorial 

	
Harun Surej Ilango  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 171 (2020) 1449–1458
1451
optimization problems [8]. A few Bio-inspired algorithms that are applied for the planning of landing unmanned 
aerial vehicles were clearly discussed in [9].Bio-Inspired techniques like Particle Swarm Optimization(PSO) are 
used in various other application like MIMO [10]. With the increase in the number of iterations, the convergence 
rate of the algorithm increases in PSO. One point of concern compared to conventional vehicles is that, autonomous 
vehicle has to communicate with other vehicles and infrastructure which is external networks and may become a 
channel for attack and an opportunity for hackers during autonomous operation.[11] 
3. Problem statement 
Finding the optimum point of final approach plays a crucial role in maintaining the glide slope, glide speed and 
angle of attack for a proper landing of UAV. This is further complicated by the practical difficulty that the UAV is 
moving in 3-dimensional space with external factors such as wind acting on the UAV as it searches for an optimum 
position. The Bio-inspired optimization techniques namely, Bats Optimization Algorithm, Moth Flame Optimization 
Algorithm and Artificial Bee Colony Algorithm are employed to compute the point of final approach. Literature 
shows that these three optimization algorithms are usually employed for small search space simulation problems 
[12].  
In this work, the upper and lower bounds of the search space is considered as [-2000,2000], space the UAV is 
simulated and optimal points are determined. The performance of these optimization algorithms needs to be 
compared for this large space, based on computing time and accuracy. Using a few numbers of generations and 
iterations lowers the computing cost as it reduces the time taken for the algorithm to run. But the accuracy of the 
output takes a huge hit. But increasing the number of generations and iterations increases the compute time but leads 
to good accuracy. So, it is necessary to have the optimal number of generations and iterations thereby optimizing 
computing cost and accuracy, the two inversely proportional parameters. The performance of the algorithms needs to 
be compared based on computing time and accuracy. 
4. Methodology 
4.1. Experimental setup 
 
The experiments and simulations were carried out using MATLAB R2019a. The simulation of fixed-wing UAV 
is done using the Robotics System Toolbox in Simulink. The ‘Tuning Waypoint Follower for Fixed-Wing UAV’ is 
used as a mainstay for this simulation. The Simulink project is divided into three major blocks. Namely, ‘Waypoint 
Following Controller’, ‘Low Fidelity Fixed Wing Kinematic Model’ and ‘Visualization and Logging’ block.Fig. 1. 
Fig1. Low fidelity simulation model of Fixed-wing UAV in Simulink. 

1452	
Harun Surej Ilango  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 171 (2020) 1449–1458
The UAV waypoint follower block instructs the UAV to follow a set of waypoints given as an input to the 
‘Waypoints’ by the user. The ‘Heading Control’ block is used to determine the required roll angle in order to steer 
the UAV into the desired heading as instructed by the ‘UAV Waypoint Follower’ block. Parameters like speed, look 
ahead distance, simulated wind speed are automatically managed by the toolbox. 
The ‘UAV Guidance Model’ block takes in the ‘Environment’ parameters and the ‘Control’ parameters provided 
by the ‘Heading control’ and ‘Waypoint follower’ block and updates its current position in a 3-dimensional space 
and outputs the present state of it to the ‘UAV Animation’ block for visualization and logging. The ‘UAV 
Animation’ block displays the progress of the UAV in the 3-dimensional space in real-time. The Bio-Inspired 
optimization algorithms are added onto this simulation to find and simulate the optimum pathway to the runway. 
The optimization techniques take in the current coordinates of the UAV in 3-dimensional space and runway 
coordinates and compute the point of final approach. The point of final approach is then given to the ‘Waypoint 
generator’ MATLAB function. This function then computes the set of waypoints that the UAV has to follow and the 
output of the function is given to the ‘Waypoints’ input of the ‘UAV Waypoint Follower’ block.  
The optimization techniques are placed in an edge-triggered subsystem which is activated only at t=0s. To 
determine the optimal number of generations and the iterations, each optimization technique is made to run across a 
range of possibilities for the number of iterations from 1 to 10000 and the number of generations from 1 to 250. 
Fig.2. Bio-Inspired Optimization Techniques embedded on Low fidelity simulation model of Fixed-wing UAV in Simulink. 
The computed optimal coordinates are then fed to another waypoint MATLAB function which then computes the 
set of waypoints that the UAV has to follow based on parameters like the descent rate, speed and altitude. These 
waypoints are then fed to the ‘UAV Waypoint Follower’ block after which the simulation runs depicting the path 
followed by the UAV. 
4.2. Iterative analysis of the optimization techniques 
To determine the optimum number of generations for the considered Bio-inspired optimization algorithms, for 
each value of generation, a graph representing error versus the number of iterations is plotted and a line of best fit is 
derived. Using the line of best fit, the value of Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) is obtained for each value of 
generation. The RMSE plot for all the Bio-inspired optimization algorithms is plotted and the minimum RMSE 
value for each optimization algorithm is considered as the optimum number of generations. To determine the 
optimum number of iterations for the determined optimum number of generations, the lowest error from the line of 
best fit is calculated. These two parameters are then used to compute the meantime and mean accuracy of that Bio-
inspired optimization algorithm. 
Using the determined optimum values of generations and iterations, the compute time of that algorithm is 
determined. In order to reduce random errors, the optimization algorithm is called for 100 times and the meantime 

	
Harun Surej Ilango  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 171 (2020) 1449–1458
1453
and accuracy are calculated. For each iteration, the UAV coordinates are randomized. The randomized coordinates 
follow uniform distribution given by the Equation (1),[13] 
1
( )
f x
b
a
=
−
 
 
 
 (1) 
These parameters are then computed to determine the best Bio-inspired optimization algorithm. The probability 
density functions for accuracy and time are also plotted for comparative analysis of the performance parameters. 
The benchmark function that is used to evaluate the performance of the three Bio-inspired optimization 
techniques is a Sphere function [14] defined by the mathematical definition given in the Equation (2) 
( )
2
1
d
i
i
f x
x
=
=
 
 
 
 (2) 
where d is the number of dimensions in the search space. Sphere function is chosen as it has the search domain as 
-  xi   that is a large unrestricted search space. 
a 
 
 
 
 
 
           b 
Fig.3. Sphere function (a) at global minima; (b) shifted to an arbitrary point. 
The benchmark sphere function used in this optimization algorithms is restricted to d=3 as we are dealing with a 
UAV in a 3-dimensional space. So, the resulting fitness function is given in equation (3) and the result is shown in 
Fig.3.(a). 
( )
2
2
2
1
2
3
f x
x
x
x
=
+
+
 
 
 
 (3) 
The benchmark function is then further modified to shift the sphere to the required 3-dimensional coordinates 
 as given in equation (4) as shown in Fig.3.(b) 
( )
2
2
2
1
2
3
(
)
(
)
(
)
f x
x
a
x
b
x
c
=
−
+
−
+
−
 
 
 
 (4) 
 
 
 

1454	
Harun Surej Ilango  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 171 (2020) 1449–1458
 
Fig 4. shows the overall process diagram carried out in this work. 
 
Fig. 4. Process flow diagram  
5. Results and discussion 
The RMSE curve for all the three Bio-inspired optimization algorithms is shown in Fig.5. Using the RMSE plots 
for all the three algorithms, the optimum number of generations is derived. 
 
 
Fig.5. The plot of the number of generations vs RMSE. 
 
 
 

	
Harun Surej Ilango  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 171 (2020) 1449–1458
1455
Using these optimum number of generation values, the plots for error versus number of iterations for that 
particular generation is shown in Fig6.(a),(b),(c). 
a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b 
c 
Fig.6. Plot of number of generation’s vs RMSE (a) ABC; (b) BA; (c)MFO. 
The following points are inferred from the above plots: 
• The error almost instantly converges to zero in less iteration in ABC and MFO algorithms and in BA the 
convergence occurs after a considerable number of iterations.  
• The line of best fit passes through a significant number of points in ABC and MFO algorithms whereas in Bat 
algorithm it is not so.  
• The optimum number of iterations is determined from the plot of error vs the number of iterations for that 
particular generation. The point closest to the line of best fit, i.e. the point having the least error with respect to 
the line of best fit, is considered as the value of optimal iteration. 
The obtained values of the optimum number of generations and the optimum number of iterations are shown in 
Table 1. 
Table 1. The computed optimum number of generations and the optimum number of iterations. 
Optimization Algorithm 
The optimum 
number of 
generations 
The optimum 
number of 
iterations 
Bats Optimization Algorithm 
250 
8141 
Artificial Bee Colony Algorithm 
245 
668 
Moth Flame Algorithm 
249 
668 

1456	
Harun Surej Ilango  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 171 (2020) 1449–1458
The table shows that all the three Bio-inspired optimization algorithms chosen almost have the same number of 
generations while the optimal number of iterations varies significantly. Bats Optimization Algorithm uses 
significantly a greater number of iterations to provide the same level of accuracy as the other two.  
Iterative analysis of the chosen optimum parameters is done and the mean time taken and the mean error are 
calculated. These values are shown in Table 2. 
Table 2. Mean time taken and mean error of the iterative analysis. 
Optimization Algorithm 
Mean time taken (s) 
Mean error 
Bats Optimization Algorithm 
11.42714 
1.37782E-05 
Artificial Bee Colony Algorithm 
10.33553 
3.08649E-09 
Moth Flame Algorithm 
0.41068 
0.628269 
Also from the data of iterative analysis, the probability distribution of the error and the time elapsed can be 
computed with which we can say, with what probability that the algorithm will be able to satisfy a given condition 
say,  P(error) > 0.5 or P(time elapsed) > 2s. Figure 7 shows the normal distribution of the error and the time taken 
for each algorithm.  
a 
 
 
 
 
 
b 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
c                                                                                            d 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
e 
 
 
 
 
 
f 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7. Probability density function (a) Artificial Bee Colony (ABC)–error; (b) Artificial Bee Colony (ABC)–time elapsed;(c) Bats Algorithm 
(BA)–error; (d) Bats Algorithm (BA)–time elapsed;(e) Moth Flame Optimization Algorithm (MFO)–error; (f) Moth Flame Optimization 
Algorithm (MFO) – time elapsed. 

	
Harun Surej Ilango  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 171 (2020) 1449–1458
1457
The time taken parameter is considered as a significant parameter over the error parameter as the search space is 
significantly huge and an error less than 1 still holds good. A mean of error less than 1 does not significantly affect 
UAV’s landing performance and accuracy close to zero is hence not required. Another practical issue that reinforces 
that we prioritise mean time taken for computation is that the UAV is a fixed-wing type that has to be moving with 
considerable speed in order to prevent it from stalling. If the time taken is considerable, the UAV would have moved 
from the position from which it has started computing the optimised values and would end up in a wrong point of 
final approach which impacts the landing hugely. The experimental results show that the Moth Flame Algorithm 
takes the least time and also provides a tolerable accuracy. 
Fig. 8. Simulated UAV trajectory 
Fig. 8shows the final result of the simulation after the computed optimal value of generations and iterations are 
plugged into the respective optimization algorithms. The black line shows the path that the UAV followed to the 
runway. 
6. Conclusion 
This research work focuses on the application of Bio-inspired optimization algorithms to find the optimal path for 
landing. Three Bio-inspired optimization algorithms which have similar biological behaviour viz., Bat Optimization 
Algorithm, Moth Flame Algorithm, and Artificial Bee Colony Algorithm are considered for the study. The 
performance of the algorithms is analysed in terms of two trade-off parameters the time taken to compute the 
landing point and the accuracy in predicting the landing point. The experimental results show that among the three 
algorithms the Moth Flame Algorithm takes less time to compute the optimum point with a tolerable accuracy when 
used in a large search space. 
 
 
References 
[1]. 
"Amazon to deliver by drone 'within months'", BBC News, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-
48536319. [Accessed: 21- Oct- 2019]. 
[2]. 
A. Gautam, P. B. Sujit, and S. Saripalli. (2014) “A survey of autonomous landing techniques for UAVs.” IEEE International 
Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), Orlando, USA, pp. 1210-1218, 2014.doi:10.1109/icuas.2014.6842377. 
[3]. 
Choset, Howie M., et.al.(2005)“Principles of robot motion: theory, algorithms, and implementations.”Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press. 
Online ISBN:9780262255912. 

1458	
Harun Surej Ilango  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 171 (2020) 1449–1458
[4]. 
Schøler, F. (2012) “3D Path Planning for Autonomous Aerial Vehicles in Constrained Spaces.” Section of Automation & Control, 
Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg University. 
[5]. 
LaValle S M. (2006) “Planning algorithms.”Cambridge university press, New York NY, USA.ISBN:0521862051 
[6]. 
Karaman S, Frazzoli E.(2011)“Sampling-based algorithms for optimal motion planning.”The International Journal of Robotics 
Research30(7): 846-894 
[7]. 
Yang, Liang et al. (2014). “A literature review of UAV 3D path planning.” Proceeding of the 11th World Congress on Intelligent 
Control and Automation: 2376-2381. Doi:10.1109/wcica.2014.7053093. 
[8]. 
Bonabeau, E., et al. (2000) “Inspiration for Optimization from Social Insect Behaviour.” Nature, 406(6791):39–
42.Doi:10.1038/35017500. 
[9]. 
Mirjalili 
S, 
Song 
Dong 
J, 
Lewis 
A. 
(2019). 
“Nature-Inspired 
Optimizers”. 
Springer 
International 
Publishing 
AG.ISBN:9783030121266. Doi:10.1007/978-3-030-12127-3. 
[10]. Saravanamuthu, K and Ramanathan, R. (2018). “A Particle Swarm Approach to Target Detection in MIMO Radar.”Proceedings of the 
International Conference on 
Advances 
in 
Computing, 
Communications 
and 
Informatics 
(ICACCI-2018):1601-1607. 
Doi:10.1109/ICACCI.2018.8554569. 
[11]. Kumar, A.D., Chebrolu, K.N., Vinayakumar, R., &Soman, K.P. (2018). “A Brief Survey on Autonomous Vehicle Possible Attacks, 
Exploits and Vulnerabilities.”ArXiv, abs/1810.04144.  
[12]. Maitra, A., Prasath, S. R., &Padhi, R. (2016). “A Brief Survey on Bio-inspired Algorithms for Autonomous Landing.”In: 4thIFAC 
Conference on Advances in Control and Optimization of Dynamical Systems (ACODS 2016): 407. Doi: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2016.03.088. 
[13]. "Uniform Distribution -- from Wolfram MathWorld", Mathworld.wolfram.com, 2019. [Online]. Available: 
http://mathworld.wolfram.com/UniformDistribution.html. [Accessed: 21- Oct- 2019]. 
[14]. "Sphere Function", Sfu.ca, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://www.sfu.ca/~ssurjano/spheref.html. [Accessed: 21- Oct- 2019]. 
 

