 123
     Springer 
Handbookoƒ
Robotics
Siciliano
Khatib
Editors
Kröger
Multimedia Editor
2nd Edition

Springer Handbook
of Robotics

Springer Handbooks provide
a concise compilation of approved
key information on methods of
research, general principles, and
functional relationships in physical
and applied sciences. The world’s
leading experts in the ﬁelds of
physics and engineering will be as-
signed by one or several renowned
editors to write the chapters com-
prising each volume. The content
is selected by these experts from
Springer sources (books, journals,
online content) and other systematic
and approved recent publications of
scientiﬁc and technical information.
The volumes are designed to be
useful as readable desk reference
book to give a fast and comprehen-
sive overview and easy retrieval of
essential reliable key information,
including tables, graphs, and bibli-
ographies. References to extensive
sources are provided.

H
Handbook
Springer
of Robotics
Bruno Siciliano, Oussama Khatib (Eds.)
2nd Edition
With 1375 Figures and 109 Tables
K

Editors
Bruno Siciliano
University of Naples Federico II
Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology
Naples, Italy
siciliano@unina.it
Oussama Khatib
Stanford University
Department of Computer Science
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
Stanford, USA
khatib@cs.stanford.edu
ISBN: 978-3-319-32550-7
e-ISBN: 978-3-319-32552-1
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32552-1
Library of Congress Control Number:
2016937424
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher,
whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally
the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlm or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation,
computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or
hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks,
service marks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the absence
of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice
and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date
of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a
warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herin
or for any errors or omissions that may have been made.
Production and typesetting: le-tex publishing services GmbH, Leipzig
Handbook Coordination: Dr. J. Hinterberg, Dr. W. Skolaut, Heidelberg
Typography and layout: schreiberVIS, Seeheim
Illustrations: Hippmann GbR, Schwarzenbruck
Cover design: eStudio Calamar Steinen, Barcelona
Cover production: WMXDesign GmbH, Heidelberg
Printing and binding: PHOENIX PRINT, Würzburg
Printed on acid free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer-Verlag GmbH Berlin Heidelberg

V
Foreword
My ﬁrst introduction to robotics came via a phone call
in 1964. The caller was Fred Terman, the author of
the world-famous Radio Engineer’s Handbook, who
was at the time Provost of Stanford University. Dr.
Terman informed me that a computer science profes-
sor, John McCarthy, had just been awarded a large
research grant, part of which required the develop-
ment of computer-controlled manipulators. Someone
had suggested to Terman that it would be prudent if
the mathematically oriented McCarthy had some con-
tact with mechanical designers. Since I was the only
one on the Stanford faculty whose specialty was mecha-
nism design, Terman decided to phone me, even though
we had never met and I was a young assistant profes-
sor fresh out of graduate school with only 2 years at
Stanford.
Dr. Terman’s phone call led me to a close associa-
tion with John McCarthy and the Stanford Artiﬁcial In-
telligence Laboratory (SAIL) that he founded. Robotics
became one of the pillars of my entire academic career,
and I have maintained my interest in teaching and re-
searching the subject through to the present day.
The modern history of robotic manipulation dates
from the late 1940s when servoed arms were developed
in connection with master–slave manipulator systems
used to protect technicians handling nuclear materials.
Developments in this area have continued to the present
day. However, in the early 1960s there was very little
academic or commercial activity in robotics. The ﬁrst
academic activity was the thesis of H. A. Ernst, in 1961,
at MIT. He used a slave arm equipped with touch sen-
sors, and ran it under computer control. The idea in his
study was to use the information from the touch sensors
to guide the arm.
This was followed by the SAIL project and a simi-
lar project started by Professor Marvin Minsky at MIT,
which were the only sizeable academic ventures into
robotics at that time. There were a few attempts at com-
mercial manipulators, primarily in connection with part
production in the automotive industry. In the USA there
were two different manipulator designs that were being
experimented with in the auto industry; one came from
American Machine and Foundry (AMF) and the other
from Unimation, Inc.
There were also a few mechanical devices devel-
oped as hand, leg, and arm prosthetics, and, a bit later,
some exoskeletal devices to enhance human perfor-
mance. In those days there were no microprocessors.
So, these devices were either without computer control,
Bernard Roth
Professor of
Mechanical Engineering
Stanford University
or tethered to a remote so-called
minicomputer, or even a mainframe
computer.
Initially, some in the computer
science community felt that comput-
ers were powerful enough to con-
trol any mechanical device and make
it perform satisfactorily. We quickly
learned that this was not to be
the case. We started on a twofold
track. One was to develop particu-
lar devices for SAIL, so that hard-
ware demonstrations and proof-of-
concept systems were available for
the ﬂedgling robotics community to
experiment with. The other track,
which was more or less moonlighted from the work at
SAIL, was the development of a basic mechanical sci-
ence of robotics. I had a strong feeling that a meaningful
science could be developed, and that it would be best to
think in terms of general concepts rather than concen-
trate exclusively on particular devices.
Fortuitously, it turned out that the two tracks sup-
ported each other very naturally and, most importantly,
the right students were interested in doing their re-
search in this area. Hardware developments proved to
be speciﬁc examples of more general concepts, and the
students were able to develop both the hardware and the
theory.
Originally, we purchased an arm in order to get
started quickly. A group at Rancho Los Amigos Hos-
pital, in Los Angeles, was selling a tongue-switch-
controlled motor-driven exoskeleton arm to assist pa-
tients without muscular control of their arms. We pur-
chased one of these, and connected it to a time-shared
PDP-6 computer. The device was named Butterﬁn-
gers; it was our ﬁrst experimental robot. Several ﬁlms
demonstrating visual feedback control, block stacking
tasks, and obstacle avoidance were made with Butterﬁn-
gers as the star performer.
The ﬁrst manipulator that we designed on our own
was known simply as the Hydraulic Arm. As its name
implies, it was powered by hydraulics. The idea was
to build a very fast arm. We designed special rotary
actuators, and the arm worked well. It became the ex-
perimental platform for testing the ﬁrst ever dynamic
analysis and time-optimal control of a robotic arm.
However, its use was limited since the design speeds
were much faster than required due to the limitations

VI
Foreword
of the computational, planning, and sensing capabilities
that were common at that time.
We made an attempt to develop a truly digital
arm. This led to a snake-like structure named the Orm
(the Norwegian word for snake.) The Orm had several
stages, each with an array of inﬂatable pneumatic actu-
ators that were either fully extended or fully contracted.
The basic idea was that, even though only a ﬁnite num-
ber of positions in the workspace could be reached,
these would be sufﬁcient if there were a large number
of positions. A small prototype proof-of-concept Orm
was developed. It led to the realization that this type of
arm would not really serve the SAIL community.
The ﬁrst truly functional arm from our group was
designed by Victor Scheinman, who was a graduate stu-
dent at the time. It was the very successful Stanford
Arm, of which over ten copies were made as research
tools to be used in various university, government, and
industrial laboratories. The arm had six independently
driven joints; all driven by computer-controlled ser-
voed, DC electric motors. One joint was telescoping
(prismatic) and the other ﬁve were rotary (revolute).
Whereas the geometry of Butterﬁngers required an
iterative solution of the inverse kinematics, the geo-
metric conﬁguration of the Stanford Arm was chosen
so that the inverse kinematics could be programmed
in any easy-to-use time-efﬁcient closed form. Further-
more, the mechanical design was speciﬁcally made to
be compatible with the limitations inherent in time-
share computer control. Various end-effectors could be
attached to act as hands. On our version, the hand
was in the form of a vise-grip jaw, with two slid-
ing ﬁngers driven by a servoed actuator (hence, a true
seventh degree of freedom). It also had a specially
designed six-axis wrist force sensor. Victor Schein-
man went on to develop other important robots: the
ﬁrst was a small humanoid arm with six revolute
joints. The original design was paid for by Marvin
Minsky at the MIT AI Lab. Scheinman founded Vi-
carm, a small company, and produced copies of this
arm and the Stanford Arm for other labs. Vicarm later
became the West Coast Division of Unimation, Inc.,
where Scheinman designed the PUMA manipulator
under General Motors sponsorship through Unima-
tion. Later, for a company called Automatix, Schein-
man developed the novel Robot World multirobot sys-
tem. After Scheinman left Unimation, his colleagues
Brian Carlisle and Bruce Shimano reorganized Unima-
tion’s West Coast Division into Adept, Inc., which to
this day is the largest US manufacturer of assembly
robots.
Quickly, the modern trend of carefully detailed me-
chanical and electronic design, optimized software, and
complete system integration became the norm; to this
day, this combination represents the hallmark of most
highly regarded robotic devices. This is the basic con-
cept behind mechatronic, a word conied in Japan as
a concatenation of the words mechanics and electronics.
Mechatronics that relies on computation is the essence
of the technology inherent in robotics as we know it
today.
As robotics developed around the world, a large
number of people started working on various aspects,
and speciﬁc subspecialties developed. The ﬁrst big di-
vision was between people working on manipulators
and those working on vision systems. Early on, vi-
sion systems seemed to hold more promise than any
other method for giving robots information about their
environment.
The idea was to have a television camera capture
pictures of objects in the environment, and then use
algorithms that allowed the computer images of the pic-
tures to be analyzed, so as to infer required information
about location, orientation, and other properties of ob-
jects. The initial successes with image systems were
in problems dealing with positioning blocks, solving
object manipulation problems, and reading assembly
drawings. It was felt that vision held potential for use
in robotic systems in connection with factory automa-
tion and space exploration. This led to research into
software that would allow vision systems to recognize
machine parts (particularly partially occluded parts, as
occurred in the so-called bin-picking problems) and
ragged-shaped rocks.
After the ability to see and move objects became
established, the next logical need had to do with plan-
ning a sequence of events to accomplish a complex task.
This led to the development of planning as an impor-
tant branch in robotics. Making ﬁxed plans for a known
ﬁxed environment is relatively straightforward. How-
ever, in robotics, one of the challenges is to let the
robot discover its environment, and to modify its ac-
tions when the environment changes unexpectedly due
to errors or unplanned events. Some early landmark
studies in this area were carried out using a vehicle
named Shakey, which, starting in 1966, was developed
by Charlie Rosen’s group at the Stanford Research In-
stitute (now called SRI). Shakey had a TV camera,
a triangulating range ﬁnder, bump sensors, and was
connected to DEC PDP-10 and PDP-15 computers via
radio and video links.
Shakey was the ﬁrst mobile robot to reason about
its actions. It used programs that gave it the ability
for independent perception, world modeling, and action
generation. Low-level action routines took care of sim-
ple moving, turning, and route planning. Intermediate-

Foreword
VII
level actions combined the low-level ones in ways that
accomplished more complex tasks. The highest level
programs could make and execute plans to achieve
high-level goals supplied by a user.
Vision is very useful for navigation, locating ob-
jects, and determining their relative positions and ori-
entation. However, it is usually not sufﬁcient for as-
sembling parts or working with robots where there are
environmental constraining forces. This led to the need
to measure the forces and torques generated by the en-
vironment, on a robot, and to use these measurements
to control the robot’s actions. For many years, force-
controlled manipulation became one of the main topics
of study at SAIL, and several other labs around the
world. The use of force control in industrial practice has
always lagged the research developments in this area.
This seems to be due to the fact that, while a high level
of force control is very useful for general manipulation
issues, speciﬁc problems in very restricted industrial en-
vironments can often be handled with limited, or no,
force control.
In the 1970s, specialized areas of study such as
walking machines, hands, automated vehicles, sensor
integration, and design for hostile environments be-
gan to develop rapidly. Today there are a large number
of different specialties studied under the heading of
robotics. Some of these specialties are classical engi-
neering subject areas within which results have been
developed that have been particularized to the types
of machines called robots. Examples here are kine-
matics, dynamics, controls, machine design, topology,
and trajectory planning. Each of these subjects has
a long history predating the study of robotics; yet
each has been an area of in-depth robotics research
in order to develop its special character in regard to
robotic-type systems and applications. In doing this
specialized development, researchers have enriched the
classical subjects by increasing both their content and
scope.
At the same time that the theory was being devel-
oped, there was a parallel, although somewhat separate,
growth of industrial robotics. Strong commercial de-
velopment occurred in Japan and Europe, and there
was also continued growth in the USA. Industrial as-
sociations were formed (the Japan Robot Association
was formed in March 1971, and the Robotic Industries
Association (RIA) was founded in 1974 in the USA)
and trade shows, together with application-oriented
technical sessions, were introduced and held on a reg-
ular basis. The most important were the International
Symposium on Industrial Robots, the Conference on In-
dustrial Robot Technology (now called the International
Conference on Industrial Robot Technology), and the
RIA annual trade show, which is now called the Inter-
national Robots and Vision Show and Conference.
The ﬁrst regular series of conferences emphasizing
research, rather than the industrial, aspects of robotics,
was inaugurated in 1973. It was sponsored jointly
by the International Center for Mechanical Sciences
(CISM), based in Udine, Italy, and the International
Federation for the Theory of Mechanisms and Ma-
chines (IFToMM). (Although IFToMM is still used, its
meaning has been changed to the International Feder-
ation for the Promotion of Mechanism and Machine
Science.) It was named the Symposium on Theory and
Practice of Robots and Manipulators (RoManSy). Its
trademark was an emphasis on the mechanical sciences
and the active participation of researchers from East-
ern and Western Europe as well as North America and
Japan. It is still held biannually. On a personal note, it
is at RoManSy where I ﬁrst met each of the editors of
this Handbook: Dr. Khatib in 1978 and Dr. Siciliano
in 1984. They were both students: Bruno Siciliano had
been working on his PhD for about one year, and Ous-
sama Khatib had just completed his PhD research. In
both cases, it was love at ﬁrst sight!
RoManSy was quickly joined by a host of other
new conferences and workshops; today there are a large
number of research oriented robotics meetings that take
place through the year in many countries. Currently,
the largest conference is the International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), which regularly
draws well over 1000 participants.
In the beginning of the 1980s, the ﬁrst real text-
book on robotic manipulation in the USA was written
by Richard Lou Paul (Richard P. Paul, Robot Manipu-
lators: Mathematics, Programming, and Control, The
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1981). It used the idea
of taking classical subjects in mechanics and applying
them to robotics. In addition there were several topics
developed directly from his thesis research at SAIL. (In
the book, many examples are based on Scheinman’s
Stanford Arm.) Paul’s book was a landmark event in
the USA; it created a pattern for several inﬂuential
future textbooks and also encouraged the creation of
specialized robotics courses at a host of colleges and
universities.
At about this same time, new journals were created
to deal primarily with research papers in the areas re-
lated to robotics. The International Journal of Robotics
Research was founded in the spring of 1982, and three
years later the IEEE Journal of Robotics and Automa-
tion (now the IEEE Transactions on Robotics) was
founded.
As microprocessors became ubiquitous, the ques-
tion of what is or is not a robot came more into

VIII
Foreword
play. This issue has, in my mind, never been success-
fully resolved. I do not think a deﬁnition will ever be
universally agreed upon. There are of course the sci-
ence ﬁction creatures-from-outer-space varieties, and
the robots of the theater, literature, and the movies.
There are examples of imaginary robot-like beings that
predate the industrial revolution, but how about more
down-to-Earth robots? In my view the deﬁnition is es-
sentially a moving target that changes its character with
technological progress. For example, when it was ﬁrst
developed, a ship’s gyro auto-compass was considered
a robot. Today, it is not generally included when we list
the robots in our world. It has been demoted and is now
considered an automatic control device.
For many, the idea of a robot includes the concept
of multifunctionality, meaning the device is designed
and built with the ability to be easily adapted or re-
programmed to do different tasks. In theory this idea
is valid, but in practice it turns out that most robotic de-
vices are multifunctional in only a very limited arena.
In industry it was quickly discovered that a specialized
machine, in general, performs much better than a gen-
eral purpose machine. Furthermore, when the volume
of production is high enough, a specialized machine can
cost less to manufacture than a generalized one. So, spe-
cialized robots were developed for painting, riveting,
quasiplanar parts assembly, press loading, circuit board
stufﬁng, etc. In some cases robots are used in such spe-
cialized ways that it becomes difﬁcult to draw the line
between a so-called robot and an adjustable piece of
ﬁxed automation. Much of this practical unfolding is
contrary to the dream of the pioneers in robotics, who
had hoped for the development of general purpose ma-
chines that would do everything, and hence sell in great
enough volume to be relatively inexpensive.
My view is that the notion of a robot has to do with
which activities are, at a given time, associated with
people and which are associated with machines. If a ma-
chine suddenly becomes able to do what we normally
associate with people, the machine can be upgraded in
classiﬁcation and classiﬁed as a robot. After a while,
people get used to the activity being done by machines,
and the devices get downgraded from robot to machine.
Machines that do not have ﬁxed bases, and those that
have arm- or leg-like appendages have the advantage of
being more likely called robots, but it is hard to think of
a consistent set of criteria that ﬁts all the current naming
conventions.
In actuality any machines, including familiar house-
hold appliances, which have microprocessors directing
their actions can be considered as robots. In addition to
vacuum cleaners, there are washing machines, refrig-
erators, and dishwashers that could be easily marketed
as robotic devices. There are of course a wide range
of possibilities, including those machines that have
sensory environmental feedback and decision-making
capabilities. In actual practice, in devices considered to
be robotic, the amount of sensory and decision making
capability may vary from a great deal to none.
In recent decades the study of robotics has expanded
from a discipline centered on the study of mechatronic
devices to a much broader interdisciplinary subject.
An example of this is the area called human-centered
robotics. Here one deals with the interactions between
humans and intelligent machines. This is a growing area
where the study of the interactions between robots and
humans has enlisted expertise from outside the clas-
sical robotics domain. Concepts such as emotions in
both robots and people are being studied, and older ar-
eas such as human physiology and biology are being
incorporated into the mainstream of robotics research.
These activities enrich the ﬁeld of robotics, as they in-
troduce new engineering and science dimensions into
the research discourse.
Originally, the nascent robotics community was fo-
cused on getting things to work. Many early devices
were remarkable in that they worked at all, and little
notice was taken of their limited performance. Today,
we have sophisticated, reliable devices as part of the
modern array of robotic systems. This progress is the
result of the work of thousands of people throughout
the world. A lot of this work took place in universi-
ties, government research laboratories, and companies.
It is a tribute to the worldwide engineering and scien-
tiﬁc community that it has been able to create the vast
amount of information that is contained in the 64 chap-
ters of this Handbook. Clearly these results did not arise
by any central planning or by an overall orderly scheme.
So the editors of this handbook were faced with the dif-
ﬁcult task of organizing the material into a logical and
coherent whole.
The editors have accomplished this by organiz-
ing the contributions into a three-layer structure. The
ﬁrst layer deals with the foundations of the subject.
This layer consists of a single part of nine chapters
in which the authors lay out the root subjects: kine-
matics, dynamics, control, mechanisms, architecture,
programming, reasoning, and sensing. These are the ba-
sic technological building blocks for robotics study and
development.
The second layer has four parts. The ﬁrst of these
deals with robot structures; these are the arms, legs,
hands, and other parts that most robots are made up of.
At ﬁrst blush, the hardware of legs, arms, and hands
may look quite different from each other, yet they share
a common set of attributes that allows them to all be
treated with the same, or closely related, aspects of the
fundamentals described in the ﬁrst layer.

Foreword
IX
The second part of this layer deals with sensing
and perception, which are basic abilities any truly au-
tonomous robotic system must have. As was pointed
out earlier, in practice, many so-called robotic devices
have little of these abilities, but clearly the more ad-
vanced robots cannot exist without them, and the trend
is very much toward incorporating such capabilities into
robotic devices. The third part of this layer treats the
subject areas associated with the technology of manip-
ulation and the interfacing of devices. The fourth part of
this layer is made up of eight chapters that treat mobile
robots and various forms of distributed robotics.
The third layer consists of two separate parts (a to-
tal of 22 chapters) that deal with advanced applications
at the forefront of today’s research and development.
There are two parts to this layer; one deals with ﬁeld
and service robots, and the other deals with human-
centered and lifelike robots. To the uninitiated observer,
these chapters are what advanced robotics is all about.
However, it is important to realize that many of these
extraordinary accomplishments would probably not ex-
ist without the previous developments introduced in the
ﬁrst two layers of this Handbook.
It is this intimate connection between theory and
practice that has nurtured the growth of robotics and
become a hallmark of modern robotics. These two com-
plementary aspects have been a source of great personal
satisfaction to those of us who have had the opportu-
nity to both research and develop robotic devices. The
contents of this Handbook admirably reﬂect this com-
plementary aspect of the subject, and present a very
useful bringing together of the vast accomplishments
which have taken place in the last 50 years. Certainly,
the contents of this Handbook will serve as a valuable
tool and guide to those who will produce the even more
capable and diverse next generations of robotic devices.
The editors and authors have my congratulations and
admiration.
Stanford, August 2007
Bernard Roth

XI
Foreword
To open this Handbook and unfold the richness of its
64 chapters, we here attempt a brief personal overview
to sketch the evolution of robotics in its many aspects,
concepts, trends, and central issues.
The modern story of Robotics began about half
a century ago with developments in two different di-
rections.
First, let us acknowledge the domain of me-
chanical arms, ranging from teleoperated tasks on
radiation-contaminated products to industrial arms,
with the landmark machine UNIMATE – standing for
uni(versal)mate. The industrial development of prod-
ucts, mostly around the six-degree-of-freedom serial
links paradigm and active research and development,
associating mechanical engineering to the control spe-
cialism, was the main driving force here. Of particular
note nowadays is the successfully pursued effort to
design novel application-optimized structures, using
powerful sophisticated mathematical tools. In a simi-
lar way, an important issue concerns the design and
the actual building of arms and hands in the context of
human-friendly robots for tomorrow’s cognitive robot.
Second, and less well recognized, we should ac-
knowledge the stream of work concerned with themes
in artiﬁcial intelligence. A landmark project in this area
was the mobile robot Shakey developed at Stanford In-
ternational. This work, which aimed to bring together
computer science, artiﬁcial intelligence, and applied
mathematics to develop intelligent machines, remained
a secondary area for quite some time. During the 1980s,
building strength from many study cases encompassing
a spectacular spectrum ranging from rovers for extreme
environments (planet exploration, Antarctica, etc.), to
service robots (hospitals, museum guides, etc.), a broad
research domain arose in which machines could claim
the status of intelligent robots.
Hence robotics researches could bring together
these two different branches, with intelligent robots cat-
egorized in a solely computational way as bounded
rationality machines, expanding on the 1980s third-
generation robot deﬁnition:
(robot) . . . operating in the three-dimensional world
as a machine endowed with the capacity to interpret
and to reason about a task and about its execution,
by intelligently relating perception to action.
The ﬁeld of autonomous robots, a widely rec-
ognized test-bed, has recently beneﬁted from salient
contributions in robot planning using the results of
Georges Giralt
Emeritus Research
Director
LAAS-CNRS Toulouse
(deceased)
algorithmic geometry as well as of
a stochastic framework approach ap-
plied both to environmental mod-
eling and robot localization prob-
lems (SLAM, simultaneous localiza-
tion and modeling), and further from
the development of decisional pro-
cedures via Bayesian estimation and
decision approaches.
For the last decade of the millen-
nium, robotics largely dealt with the
intelligent robot paradigm, blend-
ing together robots and machine-
intelligence generic research within
themes covering advanced sensing
and perception, task reasoning and
planning, operational and decisional
autonomy, functional integration architectures, intelli-
gent human–machine interfaces, safety, and depend-
ability.
The second branch, for years referred to as non-
manufacturing robotics, concerns a wide spectrum of
research-driven real-world cases pertaining to ﬁeld,
service, assistive, and, later, personal robotics. Here,
machine intelligence is, in its various themes, the cen-
tral research direction, enabling the robot to act:
1. As a human surrogate, in particular for intervention
tasks in remote and/or hostile environments
2. In close interaction with humans and operating
in human environments in all applications encom-
passed by human-friendly robotics, also referred to
as human-centered robotics
3. In tight synergy with the user, expanding from
mechanical exoskeleton assistance, surgery, health
care, and rehabilitation into human augmentation.
Consequently, at the turn of the millennium,
robotics appears as a broad spectrum of research
themes both supporting market products for well-en-
gineered industrial workplaces, and a large number
of domain-oriented application cases operating in haz-
ardous and/or harsh environments (underwater robotics,
rough-terrain rovers, health/rehabilitation care robotics,
etc.) where robots exhibit meaningful levels of shared
autonomy.
The evolution levels for robotics stress the role of
theoretical aspects, moving from application domains
to the technical and scientiﬁc area. The organization of
this Handbook illustrates very well these different lev-

XII
Foreword
els. Furthermore, it rightly considers, besides a body of
software systems, front-line matters on physical appear-
ance and novel appendages, including legs, arms, and
hands design in the context of human-friendly robots
for tomorrow’s cognitive robot.
Forefront robotics in the ﬁrst decade of the cur-
rent millennium is making outstanding progress, com-
pounding the strength of two general directions:

Short/mid-term application-oriented study cases

Mid/long-term generic situated research.
For completeness, we should mention the large
number of peripheral, robotics-inspired subjects, quite
often concerning entertainment, advertising, and so-
phisticated toys.
The salient ﬁeld of human-friendly robotics encom-
passes several front-line application domains where the
robots operate in a human environment and in close
interaction with humans (entertainment and education,
public-oriented services, assistive and personal robots,
etc.), which introduces the critical issue of human–
robot interaction.
Right at the core of the ﬁeld, emerges the forefront
topic of personal robots for which three general charac-
teristics should be emphasized:
1. They may be operated by a nonprofessional user;
2. They may be designed to share high-level decision
making with the human user;
3. They may include a link to environment devices and
machine appendages, remote systems, and opera-
tors; the shared decisional autonomy concept (co-
autonomy) implied here unfolds into a large set of
cutting-edge research issues and ethical problems.
The concept of the personal robot, expanding to
robot assistant and universal companion, is a truly great
challenge for robotics as a scientiﬁc and technical ﬁeld,
offering the mid/long-term perspective of achieving
a paramount societal and economical impact. This in-
troduces, and questions, front-line topics encompassing
cognitive aspects: user-tunable human–machine intel-
ligent interfaces, perception (scene analysis, category
identiﬁcation), open-ended learning (understanding the
universe of action), skills acquisition, extensive robot-
world data processing, decisional autonomy, and de-
pendability (safety, reliability, communication, and op-
erating robustness).
There is an obvious synergistic effort between the
two aforementioned approaches, in spite of the neces-
sary framework time differences. The scientiﬁc link not
only brings together the problems and obtained results
but also creates a synergistic exchange between the two
sides and the beneﬁts of technological progress.
Indeed, the corresponding research trends and ap-
plication developments are supported by an explosive
evolution of enabling technologies: computer process-
ing power, telecommunications, networking, sensing
devices, knowledge retrieval, new materials, micro- and
nanotechnologies.
Today, looking to the mid- and long-term future, we
are faced with very positive issues and perspectives but
also having to respond to critical comments and loom-
ing dangers for machines that are in physical contact
with the user and may also be capable of unwanted,
unsafe behavior. Therefore, there is a clear need to in-
clude at the research level safety issues and the topic of
multifaced dependability and the corresponding system
constraints.
The Handbook of Robotics is an ambitious and
timely endeavor. It summarizes a large number of prob-
lems, questions, and facets considered by 164 authors
in 64 chapters. As such it not only provides an efﬁ-
cient display of basic topics and results obtained by
researches around the world, but furthermore gives ac-
cess to this variety of viewpoints and approaches to
everyone. This is indeed an important tool for progress
but, much more, is the central factor that will establish
the two ﬁrst decades of this millennium as the dawn of
robotics, lifted to a scientiﬁc discipline at the core of
machine intelligence.
Toulouse, December 2007
Georges Giralt

XIII
Foreword
The ﬁeld of robotics was born in the middle of the
last century when emerging computers were altering
every ﬁeld of science and engineering. Having gone
through fast yet steady growth via a procession of stages
from infancy, childhood, and adolescence to adulthood,
robotics is now mature and is expected to enhance the
quality of people’s lives in society in the future.
In its infancy, the core of robotics consisted of pat-
tern recognition, automatic control, and artiﬁcial intel-
ligence. Taking on these new challenge, scientists and
engineers in these ﬁelds gathered to investigate novel
robotic sensors and actuators, planning and program-
ming algorithms, and architectures to connect these
components intelligently. In so doing, they created arti-
facts that could interact with humans in the real world.
An integration of these early robotics studies yielded
hand–eye systems, the test-bed of artiﬁcial intelligence
research.
The playground for childhood robotics was the
factory ﬂoor. Industrial robots were invented and in-
troduced into the factory for automating spraying, spot
welding, grinding, materials handling, and parts assem-
bly. Machines with sensors and memories made the
factory ﬂoor smarter, and its operations more ﬂexible,
reliable, and precise. Such robotic automation freed hu-
mans from heavy and tedious labor. The automobile,
electric appliance, and semiconductor industries rapidly
retooled their manufacturing lines into robot-integrated
systems. In the late 1970s, the word mechatronics, orig-
inally coined by the Japanese, deﬁned a new concept
of machinery, one in which electronics was fused with
mechanical systems, making a wide range of indus-
trial products simpler, more functional, programmable,
and intelligent. Robotics and mechatronics exerted an
evolutionary impact on the design and operation of
manufacturing processes as well as on manufactured
products.
As robotics entered its adolescence, researchers
were ambitious to explore new horizons. Kinematics,
dynamics, and control system theory were reﬁned and
applied to real complex robot mechanisms. To plan and
carry out real tasks, robots had to be made cognizant
of their surroundings. Vision, the primary channel for
external sensing, was exploited as the most general, ef-
fective, and efﬁcient means for robots to understand
their external situation. Advanced algorithms and pow-
erful devices were developed to improve the speed
and robustness of robot vision systems. Tactile and
force sensing systems also needed to be developed for
Hirochika Inoue
Professor Emeritus
The University of Tokyo
robots to manipulate objects. Stud-
ies on modeling, planning, knowl-
edge, reasoning, and memorization
expanded their intelligent proper-
ties. Robotics became deﬁned as
the study of intelligent connection
of sensing to actuation. This deﬁni-
tion covered all aspects of robotics:
three scientiﬁc cores and one syn-
thetic approach to integrate them.
Indeed, system integration became
a key aspect of robotic engineering
as it allows the creation of lifelike
machines. The fun of creating such
robots attracted many students to the
robotics ﬁeld.
In advancing robotics further, scientiﬁc interest
was directed at understanding humans. Comparative
studies of humans and robots led to new approaches
in scientiﬁc modeling of human functions. Cognitive
robotics, lifelike behavior, biologically inspired robots,
and a psychophysiological approach to robotic ma-
chines culminated in expanding the horizons of robotic
potential. Generally speaking, an immature ﬁeld is
sparse in scientiﬁc understanding. Robotics in the 1980s
and 1990s was in such a youthful stage, attracting
a great many inquisitive researchers to this new frontier.
Their continuous explorations into new realms form the
rich scientiﬁc contents of this comprehensive volume.
Further challenges, along with expertise acquired
on the cutting edge of robotics, opened the way to
real-world applications for mature robotics. The early-
stage playground gave way to a workshop for industrial
robotics. Medical robotics, robot surgery, and in vivo
imaging save patients from pain while providing doc-
tors with powerful tools for conducting operations. New
robots in such areas as rehabilitation, health care, and
welfare are expected to improve quality of life in an ag-
ing society. It is the destiny of robots to go everywhere,
in the air, under water, and into space. They are ex-
pected to work hand in hand with humans in such areas
as agriculture, forestry, mining, construction, and haz-
ardous environments and rescue operations, and to ﬁnd
utility both in domestic work and in providing services
in shops, stores, restaurants, and hospitals. In a myr-
iad of ways, robotic devices are expected to support
our daily lives. At this point, however, robot appli-
cations are largely limited to structured environments,
where they are separated from humans for safety sake.

XIV
Foreword
In the next stage, their environment will be expanded
to an unstructured world, one in which humans, as ser-
vice takers, will always live and work beside robots.
Improved sensing, more intelligence, enhanced safety,
and better human understanding will be needed to pre-
pare robots to function in such an environment. Not
only technical but also social matters must be con-
sidered in ﬁnding solutions to issues impeding this
progress.
Since my initial research to make a robot turn
a crank, four decades have passed. I feel both lucky and
happy to have witnessed the growth of robotics from its
early beginnings. To give birth to robotics, fundamental
technologies were imported from other disciplines. Nei-
ther textbooks nor handbooks were available. To reach
the present stage, a great many scientists and engineers
have challenged new frontiers; advancing robotics, they
have enriched this body of knowledge from a variety
of perspectives. The fruits of their endeavors are com-
piled in this Handbook of Robotics. More than 100 of
the world’s leading experts have collaborated in produc-
ing this publication. Now, people who wish to commit
themselves to robotics research can ﬁnd a ﬁrm founda-
tion to build upon. This Handbook is sure to be used to
further advance robotics science, reinforce engineering
education, and systematically compile knowledge that
will innovate both society and industry.
The roles of humans and robots in an aging soci-
ety pose an important issue for scientists and engineers
to consider. Can robotics contribute to securing peace,
prosperity, and a greater quality of life? This is still an
open question. However, recent advances in personal
robots, robotic home appliances, and humanoids sug-
gest a paradigm shift from the industrial to the service
sector. To realize this, robotics must be addressed from
such viewpoints as the working infrastructure within
society, psychophysiology, law, economy, insurance,
ethics, art, design, drama, and sports science. Future
robotics should be studied as a subject that envelops
both humanity and technology. This Handbook offers
a selected technical foundation upon which to advance
such newly emerging ﬁelds of robotics. I look forward
to continuing progress adding page after page of robot-
based prosperity to future society.
Tokyo, September 2007
Hirochika Inoue

XV
Foreword
Robots have fascinated people for thousands of years.
Those automatons that were built before the 20th cen-
tury did not connect sensing to action but rather oper-
ated through human agency or as repetitive machines.
However, by the 1920s electronics had gotten to the
stage that the ﬁrst true robots that sensed the world
and acted in it appropriately could be built. By 1950
we started to see descriptions of real robots appearing
in popular magazines. By the 1960s industrial robots
came onto the scene. Commercial pressures made them
less and less responsive to their environments but faster
and faster in what they did in their carefully engi-
neered world. Then in the mid 1970s in France, Japan,
and the USA we started to see robots rising again in
a handful of research laboratories, and now we have
arrived at a world-wide frenzy in research and the be-
ginnings of large-scale deployment of intelligent robots
throughout our world. This Handbook brings together
the current state of robotics research in one place. It
ranges from the mechanism of robots through sens-
ing and perceptual processing, intelligence, action, and
many application areas.
I have been more than fortunate to have lived
with this revolution in robotics research over the last
30 years. As a teenager in Australia I built robots
inspired by the tortoises of Walter described in the Sci-
entiﬁc American in 1949 and 1950. When I arrived in
Silicon Valley in 1977, just as the revolution in the
personalization of computation was really coming into
being, I instead turned to the much more obscure world
of robots. In 1979 I was able to assist Hans Moravec
at the Stanford Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab (SAIL) as he
coaxed his robot The Cart to navigate 20 m in 6 hours.
Just 26 years later, in 2005, at the same laboratory,
SAIL, Sebastian Thrun and his team coaxed their robot
to autonomously drive 200 000 m in 6 hours: four or-
ders of magnitude improvement in a mere 26 years,
which is slightly better than a doubling every 2 years.
However, robots have not just improved in speed, they
have also increased in number. When I arrived at SAIL
in 1977 we knew of three mobile robots operating in
the world. Recently a company that I founded manu-
factured its 3 000 000th mobile robot, and the pace is
increasing. Other aspects of robots have had similarly
spectacular advances, although it is harder to provide
such crisp numeric characterizations. In recent years we
have gone from robots being too unaware of their sur-
roundings that it was unsafe for people to share their
workspace to robots that people can work with in close
Rodney Brooks
Panasonic Professor
of Robotics
Massachusetts Institute
of Technology
contact, and from robots that were
totally unaware of people to robots
that pick up on natural social cues
from facial expressions to prosody
in people’s voices. Recently robotics
has crossed the divide between ﬂesh
and machines so that now we are
seeing neurorobotics ranging from
prosthetic robotic extensions to reha-
bilitative robots for the disabled. And
very recently robotics has become
a respected contributor to research in
cognitive science and neuroscience.
The research results chronicled
in this volume give the key ideas that
have enabled these spectacular ad-
vances. The editors, the part editors,
and all the contributors have done a stellar job in bring
this knowledge together in one place. Their efforts have
produced a work that will provide a basis for much
further research and development. Thank you, and con-
gratulations to all who have labored on this pivotal
book.
Some of the future robotics research will be in-
cremental in nature, taking the state of the art and
improving upon it. Other parts of future research will be
more revolutionary, based on ideas that are antithetical
to some of the ideas and current state of the art pre-
sented in this book.
As you study this volume and look for places to con-
tribute to research through your own talents and hard
work I want to alert you to capabilities or aspirations
that I believe will make robots even more useful, more
productive, and more accepted. I describe these capabil-
ities in terms of the age at which a child has equivalent
capabilities:

The object-recognition capabilities of a 2-year-old
child

The language capabilities of a 4-year-old child

The manual dexterity of a 6-year-old child

The social understanding of an 8-year-old child.
Each of these is a very difﬁcult goal. However even
small amounts of progress towards any one of these
goals will have immediate applications to robots out in
the world. Good reading and best wishes as you con-
tribute further to robotkind.
Cambridge, October 2007
Rodney Brooks

XVII
Preface to the Second Edition
The Springer Handbook of Robotics was a challeng-
ing six-year endeavour from 2002 to 2008. It mobilized
a large number of active scientists and researchers to
produce this unique comprehensive reference source
combining basic and advanced developments. The
handbook has been very successful and extremely
well received in our community. New researchers have
been attracted to robotics which in turn have con-
tributed to further progress in this trans-disciplinary
ﬁeld.
The handbook soon established itself as a land-
mark in robotics publishing and beyond. It has been
the bestseller of all Springer engineering books during
the last seven years, the number one in chapter down-
loads (nearly forty thousand a year), and the fourth
most downloaded over all Springer books in 2011.
In February 2009, the handbook was recognized as
the Winner of the American Association of Publish-
ers (AAP) PROSE Award for Excellence in Physical
Sciences & Mathematics as well as the Award for En-
gineering & Technology.
The rapid growth of our ﬁeld as well as the birth
of new research areas motivated us in 2011 to start
pursuing a second edition with the intent to provide
not only an update but also an expansion of the hand-
book’s contents. Our editorial board (with David Orin,
Frank Park, Henrik Christensen, Makoto Kaneko, Raja
Chatila, Alex Zelinsky, and Daniela Rus) has been
enthusiastically engaged during the last four years
to coordinate the contributions of the authors to the
seven parts of the handbook in its three-layer struc-
ture. The contents have been restructured to achieve
four main objectives: the enlargement of foundational
topics for robotics, the enlightenment of design of var-
ious types of robotic systems, the extension of the
treatment on robots moving in the environment, and
the enrichment of advanced robotics applications. Most
previous chapters have been revised, ﬁfteen new chap-
ters have been introduced on emerging topics, and
a new generation of authors have joined the hand-
book’s team. The contents were ﬁnalized by the spring
of 2015 after extensive review and feedback, and the
project was completed by the fall of 2015 – gen-
erating, by that time, a record of over 12 000 ad-
ditional emails in our folders to the 10 000 of the
ﬁrst edition. The result is an impressive collection of
80 chapters over the 7 parts, contributed by 229 authors,
with more than 2300 pages, 1375 illustrations and 9411
references.
One of the major additions of the second edition
of the handbook is the inclusion of multimedia ma-
terial. An editorial team has been established under
the leadership of Torsten Kröger and the contribu-
tions of Gianluca Antonelli, Dongjun Lee, Dezhen
Song and Stefano Stramigioli. With the commitment
of such a group of energetic young scholars, the mul-
timedia project has been pursued in parallel to the
handbook project. The multimedia editorial team has
selected for each chapter video contributions, from
those suggested by the authors, based on their qual-
ity and relevance to the chapter’s contents. In addition,
the handbook editors have produced tutorial videos that
can be accessed directly from each part of the hand-
book. An openly accessible multimedia website, http://
handbookofrobotics.org, has been established to host
these videos with the sponsorship of IEEE Robotics and
Automation Society and Google. The website has been
conceived as a live dissemination project bringing the
latest robotics contributions to the world community.
We are deeply grateful for the continuous commit-
ment of our handbook extended team, particularly the
newcomers to the project. We would like to express
our gratitude and appreciation to Judith Hinterberg,
Werner Skolaut and Thomas Ditzinger from Springer
for their strong support, as well as to Anne Strohbach
and the le-tex staff for their highly professional typeset-
ting work in the production.
Eight years after the ﬁrst appearance of the hand-
book, the second edition comes to light. Beyond its
tutorial value for our community, it is our conviction
that the handbook will continue to serve as a useful
source to attract new researchers to robotics and inspire
decades of vibrant progress in this fascinating ﬁeld. The
cooperative spirit inspiring our team since the inception
of the ﬁrst edition is amusingly illustrated in the video
The Handbook – A Short History (
VIDEO 844 ). The
completion of the second edition has been inspired by
that same spirit and the gradient has been kept :-) Our
fellows in the robotics community are reminded now to
. . . keep the Hessian ;-)
January 2016
Bruno Siciliano
Naples
Oussama Khatib
Stanford

XIX
Preface to the Multimedia Extension
Scientiﬁc and technical advancements in the domain of robotics have accelerated
signiﬁcantly over the past decade. Since the inception of the Second Edition of the
Springer Handbook of Robotics in 2011, the Editors Bruno Siciliano and Oussama
Khatib decided to add multimedia content and appointed an editorial team: Gianluca
Antonelli, Dongjun Lee, Dezhen Song, Stefano Stramigioli, and myself as the Multi-
media Editor.
Over the ﬁve years of the project, everyone on the team worked with all of the
229 authors, the Part Editors, and the Editors. Besides communicating with all 80
Authors’ teams and reviewing, selecting, and improving all video contributions, we
also scanned all the videos published at robotics conferences organized by the IEEE
Robotics and Automation Society since 1991. A total of more than 5500 e-mails were
sent back and forth to coordinate the project and to ensure the quality of the content.
We implemented a video management system that allows authors to upload videos,
editors to review videos, and readers to access videos. Videos were selected with the
goal of helping convey content to all readers of the Second Edition. They may be
relevant from a technical, scientiﬁc, educational, or historical perspective. All chapter
and part videos are publicly accessible and can be found at
http://handbookofrobotics.org
In addition to the videos referenced in the chapters, each of the seven parts is
accompanied by a part video giving an overview of each part. The storyboards of these
videos were created by the Part Editors and then professionally produced.
The video content provided in the Multimedia Extension makes understanding the
written content easier and was designed to be a comprehensive addition to the Hand-
book. Concepts, methods, experiments, and applications described in the book were
animated, visually illustrated, or paired with sound and narration – giving readers a fur-
ther dimension to comprehend the written content of the book.
Coordinating the work with more than 200 contributors cannot just be done by
a small team, and we are deeply grateful for the support of many people and organiza-
tions. Judith Hinterberg and Thomas Ditzinger from the Springer Team in Heidelberg
helped us tremendously with professional support during the entire production phase.
The app for smartphones and tablets was implemented by Rob Baldwin from Studio
Orb and allows readers easy access to multimedia content. The IEEE Robotics and
Automation Society granted permissions to use all videos that have been published in
the proceedings of conferences sponsored by the society. Google and X supported us
by donating funds for the implementation of the website backend.
Following the Editors’ inspiration, let us keep working and communicating as one
community – and let us keep the Hessian all together . . . !
March 2016
Torsten Kröger
Mountain View

XX
Preface to the Multimedia Extension
Accessing Multimedia Contents
Multimedia contents are an integral part of the Second Edition of the Springer Hand-
book of Robotics. 69 chapters contain video icons like this one:
VIDEO 843
Each icon indicates a video ID that can be used to access individual videos in
various simple and intuitive ways.
Using the Multimedia App
We recommend using the multimedia app for smartphone and tablet PCs. You can
install the app on iOS and Android devices using the QR code below. The app allows
you to simply scan the pages of the book and automatically play all videos on your
device while reading the book.
Multimedia Contents
Using the Website: http://handbookofrobotics.org
All chapter videos and part videos can be accessed directly from the website of the
multimedia extension. Just enter a video ID in the search ﬁeld in the top right corner of
the website. You may also use the website to browse through chapter and part videos.
Using PDF Files
If you read an electronic copy of the Handbook, each video icon contains a hyper link.
Just click on the link to watch the corresponding video.
Using QR Codes
Each chapter starts with a QR code that contains a link to all videos of the chapter. Part
videos can be accessed through the QR code at the beginning of each part.

XXI
About the Editors
Bruno Siciliano received his Doctorate degree in Electronic Engineering from the
University of Naples, Italy, in 1987. He is Professor of Control and Robotics at Univer-
sity of Naples Federico II. His research focuses on methodologies and technologies in
industrial and service robotics including force and visual control, cooperative robots,
human-robot interaction, and aerial manipulation. He has co-authored 6 books and
over 300 journal papers, conference papers and book chapters. He has delivered over
20 keynote presentations and over 100 colloquia and seminars at institutions around
the world. He is a Fellow of IEEE, ASME and IFAC. He is Co-Editor of the Springer
Tracts in Advanced Robotics (STAR) series and the Springer Handbook of Robotics,
which received the PROSE Award for Excellence in Physical Sciences & Mathematics
and was also the winner in the category Engineering & Technology. He has served
on the Editorial Boards of prestigious journals, as well as Chair or Co-Chair for nu-
merous international conferences. Professor Siciliano is the Past-President of the IEEE
Robotics and Automation Society (RAS). He has been the recipient of several awards,
including the IEEE RAS George Saridis Leadership Award in Robotics and Automa-
tion and the IEEE RAS Distinguished Service Award.
Oussama Khatib received his Doctorate degree in Electrical Engineering from
Sup’Aero, Toulouse, France, in 1980. He is Professor of Computer Science at Stanford
University. His research focuses on methodologies and technologies in human-
centered robotics including humanoid control architectures, human motion synthesis,
interactive dynamic simulation, haptics, and human-friendly robot design. He has
co-authored over 300 journal papers, conference papers and book chapters. He has
delivered over 100 keynote presentations and several hundreds of colloquia and sem-
inars at institutions around the world. He is a Fellow of IEEE. He is Co-Editor of the
Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics (STAR) series and the Springer Handbook of
Robotics, which received the PROSE Award for Excellence in Physical Sciences &
Mathematics and was also the winner in the category Engineering & Technology. He
has served on the Editorial Boards of prestigious journals, as well as Chair or Co-Chair
for numerous international conferences. Professor Khatib is the President of the Inter-
national Foundation of Robotics Research. He has been the recipient of several awards,
including the IEEE RAS Pioneer Award in Robotics and Automation, the IEEE RAS
George Saridis Leadership Award in Robotics and Automation, the IEEE RAS Distin-
guished Service Award, and the Japan Robot Association (JARA) Award in Research
and Development.

XXIII
About the Part Editors
David E. Orin
Part A
The Ohio State University
Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
Columbus, USA
orin.1@osu.edu
David E. Orin received his PhD degree in Electrical Engineering from The Ohio State
University in 1976. From 1976–1980, he taught at Case Western Reserve University.
Since 1981, he has been at The Ohio State University, where he is currently a Professor
Emeritus of Electrical and Computer Engineering. He was a sabbatical faculty at
Sandia National Laboratories in 1996. His research interests center on humanoid and
quadruped running and dynamic walking, dynamic maneuvers in legged locomotion,
and robot dynamics. He has over 150 publications. His commitment to education has
resulted in his receiving the Eta Kappa Nu Professor of the Year Award in the EE
Department at OSU (1998–1999), and the MacQuigg Award for Outstanding Teaching
in the College of Engineering (2003). He is a Fellow of the IEEE (1993) and was the
President of the IEEE Robotics and Automation Society 2012–2013.
Frank C. Park
Part B
Seoul National University
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Seoul, Korea
fcp@snu.ac.kr
Frank Chongwoo Park received his BS in Electrical Engineering from MIT in 1985,
and PhD in Applied Mathematics from Harvard University in 1991. From 1991 to
1995 he was Assistant Professor of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at the
University of California, Irvine. Since 1995 he has been Professor of Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering at Seoul National University, Korea. His research interests are
in robot mechanics, planning and control, vision and image processing. In 2007–2008
he was an IEEE Robotics and Automation Society (RAS) Distinguished Lecturer. He
has served on the editorial boards of the Springer Handbook of Robotics and
Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics (STAR), Robotica, and the ASME Journal
of Mechanisms and Robotics. He is a fellow of the IEEE, and EiC of the IEEE
Transactions on Robotics.
Henrik I. Christensen
Part C
Georgia Institute of Technology
Robotics and Intelligent Machines
Atlanta, USA
hic@cc.gatech.edu
Henrik I. Christensen is the KUKA Chair of Robotics and Director of
Robotics at Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA. He received MS
and PhD degrees from Aalborg University in 1987 and 1990, respectively.
He has held positions in Denmark, Sweden, and USA. He has published
more than 300 contributions across vision, robotics, and AI. Results have
been commercialized through major companies and 6 spin-off companies.
He served as the founding coordinator of the European Robotics Research
Network (EURON) and the US Robotics Virtual Organization. He was
the editor of the US National Robotics Roadmap. He is a Fellow of
the International Foundation of Robotics Research (IFRR), American
Association of Advancement of Science (AAAS), and Institution of
Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE). He is an Editorial Board
member of the Springer STAR series, and serves on the editorial board of
several leading robotics journals.
Makoto Kaneko
Part D
Osaka University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Suita, Japan
mk@mech.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp
Makoto Kaneko received the MS and PhD degrees in Mechanical
Engineering from Tokyo University in 1978 and 1981, respectively.
From 1981 to 1990 he was Researcher at the Mechanical Engineering
Laboratory, from 1990 to 1993 an Associate Professor at Kyushu
Institute of Technology, from 1993 to 2006 Professor at Hiroshima
University, and in 2006 became a Professor at Osaka University. His
research interests include tactile-based active sensing, grasping strategy,
hyper human technology and its application to medical diagnosis, and
his work has received 17 awards. He is an Editorial Board member of the
STAR series and has served as chair or co-chair for several international
conferences. He is an IEEE Fellow. He has served the IEEE Robotics
and Automation Society as a Vice-President for Member Activities
and as a Technical Editor of the IEEE Transactions on Robotics and
Automation.

XXIV
About the Part Editors
Raja Chatila
Part E
University Pierre et Marie Curie
Institute of Intelligent Systems and
Robotics
Paris, France
raja.chatila@laas.fr
Raja Chatila, IEEE Fellow, is Director of Research at the French National Center
of Scientiﬁc Research (CNRS), and Director of the Institute of Intelligent Systems
and Robotics at Pierre and Marie Curie University in Paris. He is also Director
of the Laboratory of Excellence SMART on human–machine interaction. He was
Director of LAAS-CNRS, Toulouse France 2007–2010. His research covers aspects of
robotics in navigation and SLAM, motion planning and control, cognitive and control
architectures, human–robot interaction, and robot learning. He is author of over 140
publications. Current projects are Roboergosum on robot self-awareness and Spencer
on human–robot interaction in populated environments. He is President of the IEEE
Robotics and Automation Society for the term 2014–2015 and is member of the Ethics
Committee on Research in Information Science and Technology of the Allistene. He
received the IEEE Pioneer Award in Robotics and Automation and a Honorary Doctor
of Örebro University (Sweden).
Alex Zelinsky
Part F
Department of Defence
DST Group Headquarters
Canberra, Australia
alexzelinsky@yahoo.com
Dr. Alex Zelinsky is a research leader in mobile robotics, computer vision and
human–machine interaction. Dr. Zelinsky is Australia’s Chief Defence Scientist
and Chief Executive of the Defence Science and Technology Organisation (DSTO).
Before joining DSTO in March 2012, Dr. Zelinsky was Group Executive, Information
and Communication Sciences and Technology at CSIRO. Prior to joining CSIRO in
July 2004, Dr. Zelinsky was CEO of Seeing Machines, a company dedicated to the
commercialization of computer vision systems. The technology commercialized by
Seeing Machines was developed at the Australian National University, where Dr.
Zelinsky was Professor from 1996 to 2000. In 1997 he founded the Field and Services
Robotics conference series. Dr. Zelinsky’s contributions have been recognized by
the Australian Engineering Excellence Awards (1999, 2002), Technology Pioneer at
the World Economic Forum (2002-2004) and IEEE Robotics & Automation Society
Inaba Technical Award for Innovation Leading to Production (2010), Pearcey Medal
(2013). Dr. Zelinsky is an elected Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological
Sciences and Engineering (2002) and an elected Fellow of the IEEE (2008) and an
Honorary Fellow of Institution of Engineers Australia (2013).
Daniela Rus
Part G
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
CSAIL Center for Robotics
Cambridge, USA
rus@csail.mit.edu
Daniela Rus is the Andrew and Erna Viterbi Professor of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science and Director of the Computer Science
and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL) at MIT. Rus’ research
interests are in robotics, mobile computing, and data science. Rus is
a Class of 2002 MacArthur Fellow, a fellow of ACM, AAAI and IEEE,
and a member of the NAE. She earned her PhD in Computer Science
from Cornell University. Prior to joining MIT, Rus was a Professor in the
Computer Science Department at Dartmouth College.

XXV
About the Multimedia Editors
Torsten Kröger
Google Inc.
Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
t@kroe.org
Torsten Kroeger is a roboticist at Google and a visiting researcher
at Stanford University. He received his Master’s degree in Electrical
Engineering from TU Braunschweig, Germany, in 2002. From 2003
to 2009, he was a research assistant at Robotics Research Institute at
TU Braunschweig, from which he received his Doctorate degree in
Computer Science in 2009 (summa cum laude). In 2010, he joined
the Stanford AI Laboratory, where he worked on instantaneous trajec-
tory generation, autonomous hybrid switched-control of robots, and
distributed real-time hard- and software systems. He is the founder
of Reﬂexxes GmbH, a spin-off of TU Braunschweig working on the
development of deterministic real-time motion generation algorithms. In
2014, Reﬂexxes has joined Google. Torsten is an editor or an associate
editor of multiple IEEE conference proceedings, books, and book series.
He received the IEEE RAS Early Career Award, the Heinrich Büssing
Award, the GFFT Award, two fellowships of the German Research
Association, and he was a ﬁnalist of the IEEE/IFR IERA Award and the
euRobotics TechTransfer Award.
Gianluca Antonelli
University of Cassino and Southern Lazio
Department of Electrical and Information
Engineering
Cassino, Italy
antonelli@unicas.it
Gianluca Antonelli is an Associate Professor at the University of Cassino and
Southern Lazio. His research interests include marine and industrial robotics as well
as multiagent systems identiﬁcation. He has published 32 international journal papers
and more than 90 conference papers and is author of the book Underwater Robots. He
is chair of the IEEE RAS Chapter of the IEEE-Italy section.
Dongjun Lee
Seoul National University
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering
Seoul, Korea
djlee@snu.ac.kr
Dr. Dongjun Lee currently directs the Interactive and Networked Robotics Lab
(INRoL) at Seoul National University (SNU). He received the PhD degree from the
University of Minnesota, and MS and BS degrees from KAIST. His main research
interests are mechanics and control of robotic and mechatronic systems with emphasis
on teleoperation, haptics, aerial robotics, and multi-robot systems.
Dezhen Song
Texas A&M University
Department of Computer Science
College Station, USA
dzsong@cs.tamu.edu
Dezhen Song received the PhD degree in Engineering from the Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley, in 2004. Currently, he is an Associate
Professor with Texas A&M University, College Station. His research
area is networked robotics, computer vision, optimization, and stochastic
modeling. Dr. Song received the Kayamori Best Paper Award of the 2005
IEEE ICRA (with J. Yi and S. Ding) and the NSF Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) Award in 2007.

XXVI
About the Multimedia Editors
Stefano Stramigioli
University of Twente
Control Laboratory, Faculty of Electrical
Engineering, Mathematics & Computer
Science
7500 AE, Enschede, The Netherlands
s.stramigioli@utwente.nl
Stefano Stramigioli received the MSc in 1992 and the PhD in 1998.
Between the two degrees he worked as a researcher at the University
of Twente. Since 1998 he has been faculty member and he is currently
full Professor of Advanced Robotics and chair holder of the Robotics
and Mechatronics group at the University of Twente. He is an ofﬁcer
and Senior Member of IEEE. He has about 200 publications including
4 books, book chapters, journal and conference contributions. He is
currently the Vice President for Member Activities of the IEEE Robotics
and Automation Society. He has been an AdCom member for IEEE
RAS. Stefano is a member of the ESA Topical Team on Dynamics
of Prehension in Micro-gravity and its application to Robotics and
Prosthetics.

XXVII
List of Authors
Markus W. Achtelik
ETH Zurich
Autonomous Systems Laboratory
Leonhardstrasse 21
8092 Zurich, Switzerland
markus@achtelik.net
Alin Albu-Schäffer
DLR Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics
Münchner Strasse 20
82230 Wessling, Germany
alin.albu-schaeffer@dlr.de
Kostas Alexis
ETH Zurich
Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Systems
Tannenstrasse 3
8092 Zurich, Switzerland
konstantinos.alexis@mavt.ethz.ch
Jorge Angeles
McGill University
Department of Mechanical Engineering and
Centre for Intelligent Machines
817 Sherbrooke Street West
Montreal, H3A 2K6, Canada
angeles@cim.mcgill.ca
Gianluca Antonelli
University of Cassino and Southern Lazio
Department of Electrical and Information
Engineering
Via G. Di Biasio 43
03043 Cassino, Italy
antonelli@unicas.it
Fumihito Arai
Nagoya University
Department of Micro-Nano Systems Engineering
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku
464-8603 Nagoya, Japan
arai@mech.nagoya-u.ac.jp
Michael A. Arbib
University of Southern California
Computer Science, Neuroscience and ABLE Project
Los Angeles, CA 90089-2520, USA
arbib@usc.edu
J. Andrew Bagnell
Carnegie Mellon University
Robotics Institute
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
dbagnell@ri.cmu.edu
Randal W. Beard
Brigham Young University
Electrical and Computer Engineering
459 Clyde Building
Provo, UT 84602, USA
beard@byu.edu
Michael Beetz
University Bremen
Institute for Artificial Intelligence
Am Fallturm 1
28359 Bremen, Germany
ai-office@cs.uni-bremen.de
George Bekey
University of Southern California
Department of Computer Science
612 South Vis Belmonte Court
Arroyo Grande, CA 93420, USA
bekey@usc.edu
Maren Bennewitz
University of Bonn
Institute for Computer Science VI
Friedrich-Ebert-Allee 144
53113 Bonn, Germany
maren@cs.uni-bonn.de
Massimo Bergamasco
Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies
Perceptual Robotics Laboratory
Via Alamanni 13
56010 Pisa, Italy
m.bergamasco@sssup.it
Marcel Bergerman
Carnegie Mellon University
Robotics Institute
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
marcel@cmu.edu

XXVIII
List of Authors
Antonio Bicchi
University of Pisa
Interdepartmental Research Center “E. Piaggio”
Largo Lucio Lazzarino 1
56122 Pisa, Italy
bicchi@ing.unipi.it
Aude G. Billard
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL)
School of Engineering
EPFL-STI-I2S-LASA, Station 9
1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
aude.billard@epfl.ch
John Billingsley
University of Southern Queensland
Faculty of Engineering and Surveying
West Street
Toowoomba, QLD 4350, Australia
john.billingsley@usq.edu.au
Rainer Bischoff
KUKA Roboter GmbH
Technology Development
Zugspitzstrasse 140
86165 Augsburg, Germany
rainer.bischoff@kuka.com
Thomas Bock
Technical University Munich
Department of Architecture
Arcisstrasse 21
80333 Munich, Germany
thomas.bock@br2.ar.tum.de
Adrian Bonchis
CSIRO
Department of Autonomous Systems
1 Technology Court
Pullenvale, QLD 4069, Australia
adrian.bonchis@csiro.au
Josh Bongard
University of Vermont
Department of Computer Science
205 Farrell Hall
Burlington, VT 05405, USA
josh.bongard@uvm.edu
Wayne J. Book
Georgia Institute of Technology
G. W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering
771 Ferst Drive
Atlanta, GA 30332-0405, USA
wayne.book@me.gatech.edu
Cynthia Breazeal
MIT Media Lab
Personal Robots Group
20 Ames Street
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
cynthiab@media.mit.edu
Oliver Brock
Technical University Berlin
Robotics and Biology Laboratory
Marchstrasse 23
10587 Berlin, Germany
oliver.brock@tu-berlin.de
Alberto Broggi
University of Parma
Department of Information Technology
Viale delle Scienze 181A
43100 Parma, Italy
broggi@ce.unipr.it
Davide Brugali
University of Bergamo
Department of Computer Science and
Mathematics
Viale Marconi 5
24044 Dalmine, Italy
brugali@unibg.it
Heinrich Bülthoff
Max-Planck-Institute for Biological Cybernetics
Human Perception, Cognition and Action
Spemannstrasse 38
72076 Tübingen, Germany
heinrich.buelthoff@tuebingen.mpg.de
Joel W. Burdick
California Institute of Technology
Department of Mechanical Engineering
1200 East California Boulevard
Pasadena, CA 9112, USA
jwb@robotics.caltech.edu
Wolfram Burgard
University of Freiburg
Institute of Computer Science
Georges-Koehler-Allee 79
79110 Freiburg, Germany
burgard@informatik.uni-freiburg.de
Fabrizio Caccavale
University of Basilicata
School of Engineering
Via dell’Ateneo Lucano 10
85100 Potenza, Italy
fabrizio.caccavale@unibas.it

List of Authors
XXIX
Sylvain Calinon
Idiap Research Institute
Rue Marconi 19
1920 Martigny, Switzerland
sylvain.calinon@idiap.ch
Raja Chatila
University Pierre et Marie Curie
Institute of Intelligent Systems and Robotics
4 Place Jussieu
75005 Paris, France
raja.chatila@isir.upmc.fr
François Chaumette
Inria/Irisa
Lagadic Group
35042 Rennes, France
francois.chaumette@inria.fr
I-Ming Chen
Nanyang Technological University
School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
50 Nanyang Avenue
639798 Singapore, Singapore
michen@ntu.edu.sg
Stefano Chiaverini
University of Cassino and Southern Lazio
Department of Electrical and Information
Engineering
Via G. Di Biasio 43
03043 Cassino, Italy
chiaverini@unicas.it
Gregory S. Chirikjian
John Hopkins University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
3400 North Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218-2682, USA
gchirik1@jhu.edu
Kyu-Jin Cho
Seoul National University
Biorobotics Laboratory
1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu
Seoul, 151-744, Korea
kjcho@sun.ac.kr
Hyun-Taek Choi
Korea Research Institute of Ships & Ocean
Engineering (KRISO)
Ocean System Engineering Research Division
32 Yuseong-daero 1312 Beon-gil, Yuseong-gu
Daejeon, 305-343, Korea
htchoiphd@gmail.com
Nak-Young Chong
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology
Center for Intelligent Robotics
1-1 Asahidai, Nomi
923-1292 Ishikawa, Japan
nakyoung@jaist.ac.jp
Howie Choset
Carnegie Mellon University
Robotics Institute
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
choset@cs.cmu.edu
Henrik I. Christensen
Georgia Institute of Technology
Robotics and Intelligent Machines
801 Atlantic Drive NW
Atlanta, GA 30332-0280, USA
hic@cc.gatech.edu
Wendell H. Chun
University of Denver
Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
2135 East Wesley Avenue
Denver, CO 80208, USA
wendell.chun@du.edu
Wan Kyun Chung
POSTECH
Robotics Laboratory
KIRO 410, San 31, Hyojadong
Pohang, 790-784, Korea
wkchung@postech.ac.kr
Woojin Chung
Korea University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Anam-dong, Sungbuk-ku
Seoul, 136-701, Korea
smartrobot@korea.ac.kr
Peter Corke
Queensland University of Technology
Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science
2 George Street
Brisbane, QLD 4001, Australia
peter.corke@qut.edu.au

XXX
List of Authors
Elizabeth Croft
University of British Columbia
Department of Mechanical Engineering
6250 Applied Science Lanve
Vancouver, BC V6P 1K4, Canada
elizabeth.croft@ubc.ca
Mark R. Cutkosky
Stanford University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
450 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
cutkosky@stanford.edu
Kostas Daniilidis
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Computer and Information Science
3330 Walnut Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
kostas@upenn.edu
Paolo Dario
Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies
The BioRobotics Institute
Piazza Martiri della Libertà 34
56127 Pisa, Italy
paolo.dario@sssup.it
Kerstin Dautenhahn
University of Hertfordshire
School of Computer Science
College Lane
Hatfield, AL10 9AB, UK
k.dautenhahn@herts.ac.uk
Alessandro De Luca
Sapienza University of Rome
Department of Computer, Control, and
Management Engineering
Via Ariosto 25
00185 Rome, Italy
deluca@diag.uniroma1.it
Joris De Schutter
University of Leuven (KU Leuven)
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Celestijnenlaan 300
B-3001, Leuven-Heverlee, Belgium
joris.deschutter@kuleuven.be
Rüdiger Dillmann
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Institute for Technical Informatics
Haid-und-Neu-Strasse 7
76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
dillmann@ira.uka.de
Lixin Dong
Michigan State University
Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
428 South Shaw Lane
East Lansing, MI 48824-1226, USA
ldong@egr.msu.edu
Gregory Dudek
McGill University
Department of Computer Science
3480 University Street
Montreal, QC H3Y 3H4, Canada
dudek@cim.mcgill.ca
Hugh Durrant-Whyte
University of Sydney
Australian Centre for Field Robotics (ACFR)
Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
hugh@acfr.usyd.edu.au
Roy Featherstone
The Australian National University
Department of Information Engineering
RSISE Building 115
Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia
roy.featherstone@anu.edu.au
Gabor Fichtinger
Queen’s University
School of Computing
25 Union Street
Kingston, ON, K7L 2N8, Canada
gabor@cs.queensu.ca
Paolo Fiorini
University of Verona
Department of Computer Science
Strada le Grazie 15
37134 Verona, Italy
paolo.fiorini@univr.it
Paul Fitzpatrick
Italian Institute of Technology
Robotics, Brain, and Cognitive Sciences
Department
Via Morengo 30
16163 Genoa, Italy
paul.fitzpatrick@iit.it
Luke Fletcher
Boeing Research & Technology Australia
Brisbane, QLD 4001, Australia
luke.s.fletcher@gmail.com

List of Authors
XXXI
Dario Floreano
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL)
Laboratory of Intelligent Systems
LIS-IMT-STI, Station 9
1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
dario.floreano@epfl.ch
Thor I. Fossen
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Department of Engineering Cyberentics
O.S. Bragstads plass 2D
7491 Trondheim, Norway
fossen@ieee.org
Li-Chen Fu
National Taiwan University
Department of Electrical Engineering
No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Road
106 Taipei, Taiwan
lichen@ntu.edu.tw
Maxime Gautier
University of Nantes
IRCCyN, ECN
1 Rue de la Noë
44321 Nantes, France
maxime.gautier@irccyn.ec-nantes.fr
Christos Georgoulas
Technical University Munich
Department of Architecture
Arcisstrasse 21
80333 Munich, Germany
christos.georgoulas@br2.ar.tum.de
Martin A. Giese
University Clinic Tübingen
Department for Cognitive Neurology
Otfried-Müller-Strasse 25
72076 Tübingen, Germany
martin.giese@uni-tuebingen.de
Ken Goldberg
University of California at Berkeley
Department of Industrial Engineering and
Operations Research
425 Sutardja Dai Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-1758, USA
goldberg@ieor.berkeley.edu
Clément Gosselin
Laval University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
1065 Avenue de la Médecine
Quebec, QC G1K 7P4, Canada
gosselin@gmc.ulaval.ca
Eugenio Guglielmelli
University Campus Bio-Medico of Rome
Faculty Department of Engineering
Via Alvaro del Portillo 21
00128 Rome, Italy
e.guglielmelli@unicampus.it
Sami Haddadin
Leibniz University Hannover
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Appelstrasse 11
30167 Hannover, Germany
sami.haddadin@irt.uni-hannover.de
Martin Hägele
Fraunhofer IPA
Robot Systems
Nobelstrasse 12
70569 Stuttgart, Germany
mmh@ipa.fhg.de
Gregory D. Hager
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Computer Science
3400 North Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
hager@cs.jhu.edu
William R. Hamel
University of Tennessee
Mechanical, Aerospace, and Biomedical
Engineering
414 Dougherty Engineering Building
Knoxville, TN 37996-2210, USA
whamel@utk.edu
Blake Hannaford
University of Washington
Department of Electrical Engineering
Seattle, WA 98195-2500, USA
blake@ee.washington.edu
Kensuke Harada
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
and Technology
Intelligent Systems Research Institute
Tsukuba Central 2, Umezono, 1-1-1
305-8568 Tsukuba, Japan
kensuke.harada@aist.go.jp
Martial Hebert
Carnegie Mellon University
The Robotics Institute
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
hebert@ri.cmu.edu

XXXII
List of Authors
Thomas C. Henderson
University of Utah
School of Computing
50 South Central Campus Drive
Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA
tch@cs.utah.edu
Eldert van Henten
Wageningen University
Wageningen UR Greenhouse Horticulture
Droevendaalsesteeg 4
6708 PB, Wageningen, The Netherlands
eldert.vanhenten@wur.nl
Hugh Herr
MIT Media Lab
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA
hherr@media.mit.edu
Joachim Hertzberg
Osnabrück University
Institute for Computer Science
Albrechtstrasse 28
54076 Osnabrück, Germany
joachim.hertzberg@uos.de
Gerd Hirzinger
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics
Münchner Strasse 20
82230 Wessling, Germany
gerd.hirzinger@dlr.de
John Hollerbach
University of Utah
School of Computing
50 South Central Campus Drive
Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA
jmh@cs.utah.ledu
Kaijen Hsiao
Robert Bosch LLC
Research and Technology Center, Palo Alto
4005 Miranda Avenue
Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA
kaijenhsiao@gmail.com
Tian Huang
Tianjin University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
92 Weijin Road, Naukai
300072 Tianjin, China
tianhuang@tju.edu.cn
Christoph Hürzeler
Alstom Power Thermal Services
Automation and Robotics R&D
Brown Boveri Strasse 7
5401 Baden, Switzerland
christoph.huerzeler@power.alstom.com
Phil Husbands
University of Sussex
Department of Informatics
Brighton, BN1 9QH, UK
philh@sussex.ac.uk
Seth Hutchinson
University of Illinois
Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
1308 West Main Street
Urbana-Champaign, IL 61801, USA
seth@illinois.edu
Karl Iagnemma
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Laboratory for Manufacturing and Productivity
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
kdi@mit.edu
Fumiya Iida
University of Cambridge
Department of Engineering
Trumpington Street
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ, UK
fumiya.iida@eng.cam.ac.uk
Auke Jan Ijspeert
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL)
School of Engineering
MED 1, 1226, Station 9
1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
auke.ijspeert@epfl.ch
Genya Ishigami
Keio University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
3-14-1 Hiyoshi
223-8522 Yokohama, Japan
ishigami@mech.keio.ac.jp
Michael Jenkin
York University
Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science
4700 Keele Street
Toronto, ON M3J 1P3, Canada
jenkin@cse.yorku.ca

List of Authors
XXXIII
Shuuji Kajita
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
and Technology (AIST)
Intelligent Systems Research Institute
1-1-1 Umezono
305-8586 Tsukuba, Japan
s.kajita@aist.go.jp
Takayuki Kanda
Advanced Telecommunications Research (ATR)
Institute International
Intelligent Robotics and Communication
Laboratories
2-2-2 Hikaridai, Seikacho, Sorakugun
619-0288 Kyoto, Japan
kanda@atr.jp
Makoto Kaneko
Osaka University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
2-1 Yamadaoka
565-0871 Suita, Japan
mk@mech.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp
Sung-Chul Kang
Korea Institute of Science and Technology
Center for Bionics
39-1 Hawolgok-dong, Wolsong-gil 5
Seoul, Seongbuk-gu, Korea
kasch@kist.re.kr
Imin Kao
Stony Brook University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
167 Light Engineering
Stony Brook, NY 11794-2300, USA
imin.kao@stonybrook.edu
Lydia E. Kavraki
Rice University
Department of Computer Science
6100 Main Street
Houston, TX 77005, USA
kavraki@rice.edu
Charles C. Kemp
Georgia Institute of Technology and Emory
University
313 Ferst Drive
Atlanta, GA 30332-0535, USA
charlie.kemp@bme.gatech.edu
Wisama Khalil
University of Nantes
IRCCyN, ECN
1 Rue de la Noë
44321 Nantes, France
wisama.khalil@irccyn.ec-nantes.fr
Oussama Khatib
Stanford University
Department of Computer Sciences,
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
450 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
khatib@cs.stanford.edu
Lindsay Kleeman
Monash University
Department of Electrical and Computer Systems
Engineering
Melbourne, VIC 3800, Australia
kleeman@eng.monash.edu.au
Alexander Kleiner
Linköping University
Department of Computer Science
58183 Linköping, Sweden
alexander.kleiner@liu.se
Jens Kober
Delft University of Technology
Delft Center for Systems and Control
Mekelweg 2
2628 CD, Delft, The Netherlands
j.kober@tudelft.nl
Kurt Konolige
Google, Inc.
1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
konolige@gmail.com
David Kortenkamp
TRACLabs Inc
1012 Hercules Drive
Houston, TX 77058, USA
korten@traclabs.com
Kazuhiro Kosuge
Tohoku University
System Robotics Laboratory
Aoba 6-6-01, Aramaki
980-8579 Sendai, Japan
kosuge@irs.mech.tohoku.ac.jp

XXXIV
List of Authors
Danica Kragic
Royal Institute of Technology (KTH)
Centre for Autonomous Systems
CSC-CAS/CVAP
10044 Stockholm, Sweden
dani@kth.se
Torsten Kröger
Google Inc.
1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
t@kroe.org
Roman Kuc
Yale University
Department of Electrical Engineering
10 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520-8267, USA
kuc@yale.edu
James Kuffner
Carnegie Mellon University
The Robotics Institute
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3891, USA
kuffner@cs.cmu.edu
Scott Kuindersma
Harvard University
Maxwell-Dworkin 151, 33 Oxford Street
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
scottk@seas.harvard.edu
Vijay Kumar
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Mechanical Engineering and
Applied Mechanics
220 South 33rd Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6315, USA
kumar@seas.upenn.edu
Steven M. LaValle
University of Illinois
Department of Computer Science
201 North Goodwin Avenue, 3318 Siebel Center
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
lavalle@cs.uiuc.edu
Florant Lamiraux
LAAS-CNRS
7 Avenue du Colonel Roche
31077 Toulouse, France
florent@laas.fr
Roberto Lampariello
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics
Münchner Strasse 20
82234 Wessling, Germany
roberto.lampariello@dlr.de
Christian Laugier
INRIA Grenoble Rhône-Alpes
655 Avenue de l’Europe
38334 Saint Ismier, France
christian.laugier@inria.fr
Jean-Paul Laumond
LAAS-CNRS
7 Avenue du Colonel Roche
31077 Toulouse, France
jpl@laas.fr
Daniel D. Lee
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Electrical Systems Engineering
460 Levine, 200 South 33rd Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
ddlee@seas.upenn.edu
Dongjun Lee
Seoul National University
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering
301 Engineering Building, Gwanak-ro 599,
Gwanak-gu
Seoul, 51-742, Korea
djlee@snu.ac.kr
Roland Lenain
IRSTEA
Department of Ecotechnology
9 Avenue Blaise Pascal - CS20085
63178 Aubiere, France
roland.lenain@irstea.fr
David Lentink
Stanford University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
416 Escondido Mall
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
dlentink@stanford.edu
John J. Leonard
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Department of Mechanical Engineering
5-214 77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
jleonard@mit.edu

List of Authors
XXXV
Aleš Leonardis
University of Birmingham
Department of Computer Science
Edgbaston
Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK
a.leonardis@cs.bham.ac.uk
Stefan Leutenegger
Imperial College London
South Kensington Campus, Department of
Computing
London, SW7 2AZ, UK
s.leutenegger@imperial.ac.uk
Kevin M. Lynch
Northwestern University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
2145 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208, USA
kmlynch@northwestern.edu
Anthony A. Maciejewski
Colorado State University
Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
Fort Collins, CO 80523-1373, USA
aam@colostate.edu
Robert Mahony
Australian National University (ANU)
Research School of Engineering
115 North Road
Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia
robert.mahony@anu.edu.au
Joshua A. Marshall
Queen’s University
The Robert M. Buchan Department of Mining
25 Union Street
Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada
joshua.marshall@queensu.ca
Maja J. Matarić
University of Southern California
Computer Science Department
3650 McClintock Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA
mataric@usc.edu
Yoshio Matsumoto
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
and Technology (AIST)
Robot Innovation Research Center
1-1-1 Umezono
305-8568 Tsukuba, Japan
yoshio.matsumoto@aist.go.jp
J. Michael McCarthy
University of California at Irvine
Department of Mechanical Engineering
5200 Engineering Hall
Irvine, CA 92697-3975, USA
jmmccart@uci.edu
Claudio Melchiorri
University of Bologna
Laboratory of Automation and Robotics
Via Risorgimento 2
40136 Bologna, Italy
claudio.melchiorri@unibo.it
Arianna Menciassi
Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies
The BioRobotics Institute
Piazza Martiri della Libertà 34
56127 Pisa, Italy
a.menciassi@sssup.it
Jean-Pierre Merlet
INRIA Sophia-Antipolis
2004 Route des Lucioles
06560 Sophia-Antipolis, France
jean-pierre.merlet@sophia.inria.fr
Giorgio Metta
Italian Institute of Technology
iCub Facility
Via Morego 30
16163 Genoa, Italy
giorgio.metta@iit.it
François Michaud
University of Sherbrooke
Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Engineering
2500 Boul. Université
Sherbrooke, J1N4E5, Canada
francois.michaud@usherbrooke.ca
David P. Miller
University of Oklahoma
School of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering
865 Asp Avenue
Norman, OK 73019, USA
dpmiller@ou.edu
Javier Minguez
University of Zaragoza
Department of Computer Science and Systems
Engineering
C/María de Luna 1
50018 Zaragoza, Spain
jminguez@unizar.es

XXXVI
List of Authors
Pascal Morin
University Pierre and Marie Curie
Institute for Intelligent Systems and Robotics
4 Place Jussieu
75005 Paris, France
morin@isir.upmc.fr
Mario E. Munich
iRobot Corp.
1055 East Colorado Boulevard, Suite 340
Pasadena, CA 91106, USA
mariomu@ieee.org
Robin R. Murphy
Texas A&M University
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
333 H.R. Bright Building
College Station, TX 77843-3112, USA
murphy@cse.tamu.edu
Bilge Mutlu
University of Wisconsin–Madison
Department of Computer Sciences
1210 West Dayton Street
Madison, WI 53706, USA
bilge@cs.wisc.edu
Keiji Nagatani
Tohoku University
Department of Aerospace Engineering,
Graduate School of Engineering
6-6-01, Aramaki aza Aoba
980-8579 Sendai, Japan
keiji@ieee.org
Daniele Nardi
Sapienza University of Rome
Department of Computer, Control, and
Management Engineering
Via Ariosto 25
00185 Rome, Italy
nardi@dis.uniroma1.it
Eduardo Nebot
University of Sydney
Department of Aerospace, Mechanical and
Mechatronic Engineering
Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
eduardo.nebot@sydney.edu.au
Bradley J. Nelson
ETH Zurich
Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Systems
Tannenstrasse 3
8092 Zurich, Switzerland
bnelson@ethz.ch
Duy Nguyen-Tuong
Robert Bosch GmbH
Corporate Research
Wernerstrasse 51
70469 Stuttgart, Germany
duy@robot-learning.de
Monica Nicolescu
University of Nevada
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
1664 North Virginia Street, MS 171
Reno, NV 8955, USA
monica@unr.edu
Günter Niemeyer
Disney Research
1401 Flower Street
Glendale, CA 91201-5020, USA
gunter.niemeyer@email.disney.com
Klas Nilsson
Lund Institute of Technology
Department of Computer Science
22100 Lund, Sweden
klas.nilsson@cs.lth.se
Stefano Nolfi
National Research Council (CNR)
Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies
Via S. Martino della Battaglia 44
00185 Rome, Italy
stefano.nolfi@istc.cnr.it
Illah Nourbakhsh
Carnegie Mellon University
Robotics Institute
500 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890, USA
illah@andrew.cmu.edu
Andreas Nüchter
University of Würzburg
Informatics VII – Robotics and Telematics
Am Hubland
97074 Würzburg, Germany
andreas@nuechti.de
Paul Y. Oh
University of Nevada
Department of Mechanical Engineering
3141 Chestnut Street
Las Vegas, PA 19104, USA
paul@coe.drexel.edu

List of Authors
XXXVII
Yoshito Okada
Tohoku University
Department of Aerospace Engineering,
Graduate School of Engineering
6-6-01, Aramaki aza Aoba
980-8579 Sendai, Japan
okada@rm.is.tohoku.ac.jp
Allison M. Okamura
Stanford University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
416 Escondido Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-2203, USA
aokamura@stanford.edu
Fiorella Operto
Scuola di Robotica
Piazza Monastero 4
16149 Genoa, Italy
operto@scuoladirobotica.it
David E. Orin
The Ohio State University
Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
2015 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1272, USA
orin.1@osu.edu
Giuseppe Oriolo
University of Rome “La Sapienza”
Department of Computer, Control, and
Management Engineering
Via Ariosto 25
00185 Rome, Italy
oriolo@diag.uniroma1.it
Christian Ott
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics
Münchner Strasse 20
82234 Wessling, Germany
christian.ott@dlr.de
Ümit Özgüner
Ohio State University
Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
2015 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
umit@ee.eng.ohio-state.edu
Nikolaos Papanikolopoulos
University of Minnesota
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
200 Union Street SE
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
npapas@cs.umn.edu
Frank C. Park
Seoul National University
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Kwanak-ku, Shinlim-dong, San 56-1
Seoul, 151-742, Korea
fcp@snu.ac.kr
Jaeheung Park
Seoul National University
Department of Transdisciplinary Studies
Gwanggyo-ro 145, Yeongtong-gu
Suwon, Korea
park73@snu.ac.kr
Lynne E. Parker
University of Tennessee
Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science
1520 Middle Drive
Knoxville, TN 37996, USA
leparker@utk.edu
Federico Pecora
University of Örebro
School of Science and Technology
Fakultetsgatan 1
70182 Örebro, Sweden
federico.pecora@oru.se
Jan Peters
Technical University Darmstadt
Autonomous Systems Lab
Hochschulstrasse 10
64289 Darmstadt, Germany
mail@jan-peters.net
Anna Petrovskaya
Stanford University
Department of Computer Science
353 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
anya@cs.stanford.edu
J. Norberto Pires
University of Coimbra
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Palácio dos Grilos, Rua da Ilha
3000-214 Coimbra, Portugal
norberto@uc.pt

XXXVIII
List of Authors
Paolo Pirjanian
iRobot Corp.
8 Crosby Drive
Bedford, MA 01730, USA
paolo.pirjanian@gmail.com
Erwin Prassler
Bonn-Rhein-Sieg Univ. of Applied Sciences
Department of Computer Sciences
Grantham-Allee 20
53754 Sankt Augustin, Germany
erwin.prassler@h-brs.de
Domenico Prattichizzo
University of Siena
Department of Information Engineering
Via Roma 56
53100 Siena, Italy
prattichizzo@ing.unisi.it
Carsten Preusche
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics
Münchner Strasse 20
82234 Wessling, Germany
carsten.preusche@dlr.de
William Provancher
University of Utah
Department of Mechanical Engineering
50 South Central Campus Drive
Salt Lake City, UT 84112-9208, USA
wil@mech.utah.edu
John Reid
John Deere Co.
Moline Technology Innovation Center
One John Deere Place
Moline, IL 61265, USA
reidjohnf@johndeere.com
David J. Reinkensmeyer
University of California at Irvine
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering and
Anatomy and Neurobiology
4200 Engineering Gateway
Irvine, CA 92697-3875, USA
dreinken@uci.edu
Jonathan Roberts
Queensland University of Technology
Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science
2 George Street
Brisbane, QLD 4001, Australia
jonathan.roberts@qut.edu.au
Nicholas Roy
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
77 Massachusetts Avenue 33-315
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
nickroy@csail.mit.edu
Daniela Rus
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
CSAIL Center for Robotics
32 Vassar Street
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
rus@csail.mit.edu
Selma Šabanović
Indiana University Bloomington
School of Informatics and Computing
919 East 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47408, USA
selmas@indiana.edu
Kamel S. Saidi
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Building and Fire Research Laboratory
100 Bureau Drive
Gaitherbsurg, MD 20899-1070, USA
kamel.saidi@nist.gov
Claude Samson
INRIA Sophia-Antipolis
2004 Route des Lucioles
06560 Sophia-Antipolis, France
claude.samson@inria.fr
Brian Scassellati
Yale University
Computer Science, Cognitive Science, and
Mechanical Engineering
51 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8285, USA
scaz@cs.yale.edu
Stefan Schaal
University of Southern California
Depts. of Computer Science, Neuroscience, and
Biomedical Engineering
3710 South McClintock Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90089-2905, USA
sschaal@tuebingen.mpg.de
Steven Scheding
University of Sydney
Rio Tinto Centre for Mine Automation
Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
steven.scheding@sydney.edu.au

List of Authors
XXXIX
Victor Scheinman
Stanford University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
440 Escondido Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-3030, USA
vds@stanford.edu
Bernt Schiele
Saarland University
Department of Computer Science
Campus E1 4
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
schiele@mpi-inf.mpg.de
James Schmiedeler
University of Notre Dame
Department of Aerospace and Mechanical
Engineering
Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
schmiedeler.4@nd.edu
Bruno Siciliano
University of Naples Federico II
Department of Electrical Engineering and
Information Technology
Via Claudio 21
80125 Naples, Italy
bruno.siciliano@unina.it
Roland Siegwart
ETH Zurich
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Leonhardstrasse 21
8092 Zurich, Switzerland
rsiegwart@ethz.ch
Reid Simmons
Carnegie Mellon University
The Robotics Institute
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
reids@cs.cmu.edu
Patrick van der Smagt
Technical University Munich
Department of Computer Science, BRML Labs
Arcisstrasse 21
80333 Munich, Germany
smagt@brml.org
Dezhen Song
Texas A&M University
Department of Computer Science
311B H.R. Bright Building
College Station, TX 77843-3112, USA
dzsong@cs.tamu.edu
Jae-Bok Song
Korea University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Anam-ro 145, Seongbuk-gu
Seoul, 136-713, Korea
jbsong@korea.ac.kr
Cyrill Stachniss
University of Bonn
Institute for Geodesy and Geoinformation
Nussallee 15
53115 Bonn, Germany
cyrill.stachniss@igg.uni-bonn.de
Michael Stark
Max Planck Institute of Informatics
Department of Computer Vision and Multimodal
Computing
Campus E1 4
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
stark@mpi-inf.mpg.de
Amanda K. Stowers
Stanford University
Department Mechanical Engineering
416 Escondido Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-3030, USA
astowers@stanford.edu
Stefano Stramigioli
University of Twente
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mathematics &
Computer Science, Control Laboratory
7500 AE, Enschede, The Netherlands
s.stramigioli@utwente.nl
Gaurav S. Sukhatme
University of Southern California
Department of Computer Science
3710 South McClintock Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90089-2905, USA
gaurav@usc.edu
Satoshi Tadokoro
Tohoku University
Graduate School of Information Sciences
6-6-01 Aramaki Aza Aoba, Aoba-ku
980-8579 Sendai, Japan
tadokoro@rm.is.tohoku.ac.jp
Wataru Takano
University of Tokyo
Department of Mechano-Informatics
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku
113-8656 Tokyo, Japan
takano@ynl.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

XL
List of Authors
Russell H. Taylor
The Johns Hopkins University
Department of Computer Science
3400 North Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
rht@jhu.edu
Russ Tedrake
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory (CSAIL)
The Stata Center, Vassar Street
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
russt@csail.mit.edu
Sebastian Thrun
Udacity Inc.
2465 Latham Street, 3rd Floor
Mountain View, CA 94040, USA
info@udacity.com
Marc Toussaint
University of Stuttgart
Machine Learning and Robotics Lab
Universitätsstrasse 38
70569 Stuttgart, Germany
marc.toussaint@ipvs.uni-stuttgart.de
James Trevelyan
The University of Western Australia
School of Mechanical and Chemical Engineering
35 Stirling Highway
Crawley, WA 6009, Australia
james.trevelyan@uwa.edu.au
Jeffrey C. Trinkle
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Department of Computer Science
110 8th Street
Troy, NY 12180-3590, USA
trink@cs.rpi.edu
Masaru Uchiyama
Tohoku University
Graduate School of Engineering
6-6-01 Aobayama
980-8579 Sendai, Japan
uchiyama@space.mech.tohoku.ac.jp
H.F. Machiel Van der Loos
University of British Columbia
Department of Mechanical Engineering
2054-6250 Applied Science Lane
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada
vdl@mech.ubc.ca
Manuela Veloso
Carnegie Mellon University
Computer Science Department
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
mmv@cs.cmu.edu
Gianmarco Veruggio
National Research Council (CNR)
Institute of Electronics, Computer and
Telecommunication Engineering
Via De Marini 6
16149 Genoa, Italy
gianmarco@veruggio.it
Luigi Villani
University of Naples Federico II
Department of Electrical Engineering and
Information Technology
Via Claudio 21
80125 Naples, Italy
luigi.villani@unina.it
Kenneth J. Waldron
University of Technology Sydney
Centre of Mechatronics and Intelligent Systems
City Campus, 15 Broadway
Ultimo, NSW 2001, Australia
kenneth.waldron@uts.edu.au
Ian D. Walker
Clemson University
Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
105 Riggs Hall
Clemson, SC 29634, USA
ianw@ces.clemson.edu
Christian Wallraven
Korea University
Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering,
Cognitive Systems Lab
Anam-Dong 5ga, Seongbuk-gu
Seoul, 136-713, Korea
wallraven@korea.ac.kr
Pierre-Brice Wieber
INRIA Grenoble Rhône-Alpes
655 Avenue de l’Europe
38334 Grenoble, France
pierre-brice.wieber@inria.fr

List of Authors
XLI
Brian Wilcox
California Institute of Technology
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
4800 Oak Ridge Grove Drive
Pasadena, CA 91109, USA
brian.h.wilcox@jpl.nasa.gov
Robert Wood
Harvard University
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
149 Maxwell-Dworkin
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
rjwood@seas.harvard.edu
Jing Xiao
University of North Carolina
Department of Computer Science
Woodward Hall
Charlotte, NC 28223, USA
xiao@uncc.edu
Katsu Yamane
Disney Research
4720 Forbes Avenue, Suite 110
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
kyamane@disneyresearch.com
Mark Yim
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Mechanical Engineering and
Applied Mechanics
220 South 33rd Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
yim@seas.upenn.edu
Dana R. Yoerger
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
Applied Ocean Physics & Engineering
266 Woods Hole Road
Woods Hole, MA 02543-1050, USA
dyoerger@whoi.edu
Kazuhito Yokoi
AIST Tsukuba Central 2
Intelligent Systems Research Institute
1-1-1 Umezono
305-8568 Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
kazuhito.yokoi@aist.go.jp
Eiichi Yoshida
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
and Technology (AIST)
CNRS-AIST Joint Robotics Laboratory, UMI3218/CRT
1-1-1 Umezono
305-8568 Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
e.yoshida@aist.go.jp
Kazuya Yoshida
Tohoku University
Department of Aerospace Engineering
Aoba 01
980-8579 Sendai, Japan
yoshida@astro.mech.tohoku.ac.jp
Junku Yuh
Korea Institute of Science and Technology
National Agenda Research Division
Hwarangno 14-gil 5, Seongbuk-gu
Seoul, 136-791, Korea
yuh.junku@gmail.com
Alex Zelinsky
Department of Defence
DST Group Headquarters
72-2-03, 24 Scherger Drive
Canberra, ACT 2609, Australia
alexzelinsky@yahoo.com

XLIII
Contents
List of Abbreviations .............................................................
LXIII
1
Robotics and the Handbook
Bruno Siciliano, Oussama Khatib ..............................................
1
1.1
A Brief History of Robotics ..............................................
1
1.2
The Robotics Community................................................
3
1.3
This Handbook...........................................................
4
Video-References ...............................................................
5
Part A
Robotics Foundations
2
Kinematics
Kenneth J. Waldron, James Schmiedeler ......................................
11
2.1
Overview .................................................................
12
2.2
Position and Orientation Representation .............................
12
2.3
Joint Kinematics .........................................................
21
2.4
Geometric Representation ..............................................
25
2.5
Workspace ...............................................................
27
2.6
Forward Kinematics .....................................................
28
2.7
Inverse Kinematics ......................................................
29
2.8
Forward Instantaneous Kinematics ....................................
31
2.9
Inverse Instantaneous Kinematics .....................................
32
2.10
Static Wrench Transmission.............................................
33
2.11
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
33
References .......................................................................
33
3
Dynamics
Roy Featherstone, David E. Orin ................................................
37
3.1
Overview .................................................................
38
3.2
Spatial Vector Notation .................................................
39
3.3
Canonical Equations ....................................................
45
3.4
Dynamic Models of Rigid-Body Systems...............................
47
3.5
Kinematic Trees..........................................................
51
3.6
Kinematic Loops .........................................................
58
3.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
61
References .......................................................................
63
4
Mechanism and Actuation
Victor Scheinman, J. Michael McCarthy, Jae-Bok Song.......................
67
4.1
Overview .................................................................
68
4.2
System Features .........................................................
68
4.3
Kinematics and Kinetics ................................................
69
4.4
Serial Robots.............................................................
72
4.5
Parallel Robots...........................................................
73
4.6
Mechanical Structure....................................................
75
4.7
Joint Mechanisms .......................................................
76

XLIV
Contents
4.8
Actuators .................................................................
78
4.9
Robot Performance......................................................
85
4.10
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
87
Video-References ...............................................................
87
References .......................................................................
87
5
Sensing and Estimation
Henrik I. Christensen, Gregory D. Hager .......................................
91
5.1
Introduction .............................................................
91
5.2
The Perception Process..................................................
92
5.3
Sensors ...................................................................
94
5.4
Estimation Processes ....................................................
98
5.5
Representations .........................................................
109
5.6
Conclusions and Further Readings .....................................
111
References .......................................................................
111
6
Model Identification
John Hollerbach, Wisama Khalil, Maxime Gautier ...........................
113
6.1
Overview .................................................................
113
6.2
Kinematic Calibration ...................................................
115
6.3
Inertial Parameter Estimation ..........................................
122
6.4
Identifiability and Numerical Conditioning ...........................
127
6.5
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
135
Video-References ...............................................................
136
References .......................................................................
137
7
Motion Planning
Lydia E. Kavraki, Steven M. LaValle ............................................
139
7.1
Robotics Motion Planning ..............................................
139
7.2
Motion Planning Concepts..............................................
140
7.3
Sampling-Based Planning..............................................
141
7.4
Alternative Approaches .................................................
144
7.5
Differential Constraints .................................................
148
7.6
Extensions and Variations ..............................................
151
7.7
Advanced Issues .........................................................
154
7.8
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
157
Video-References ...............................................................
158
References .......................................................................
158
8
Motion Control
Wan Kyun Chung, Li-Chen Fu, Torsten Kröger.................................
163
8.1
Introduction to Motion Control.........................................
164
8.2
Joint Space Versus Operational Space Control .........................
166
8.3
Independent-Joint Control .............................................
167
8.4
PID Control ...............................................................
169
8.5
Tracking Control..........................................................
172
8.6
Computed-Torque Control ..............................................
174
8.7
Adaptive Control.........................................................
177
8.8
Optimal and Robust Control ............................................
181
8.9
Trajectory Generation and Planning ...................................
183
8.10
Digital Implementation .................................................
187

Contents
XLV
8.11
Learning Control .........................................................
190
Video-References ...............................................................
191
References .......................................................................
191
9
Force Control
Luigi Villani, Joris De Schutter ..................................................
195
9.1
Background ..............................................................
195
9.2
Indirect Force Control ...................................................
198
9.3
Interaction Tasks.........................................................
205
9.4
Hybrid Force/Motion Control............................................
211
9.5
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
216
Video-References ...............................................................
217
References .......................................................................
218
10 Redundant Robots
Stefano Chiaverini, Giuseppe Oriolo, Anthony A. Maciejewski ...............
221
10.1
Overview .................................................................
221
10.2
Task-Oriented Kinematics ..............................................
224
10.3
Inverse Differential Kinematics.........................................
227
10.4
Redundancy Resolution via Optimization .............................
232
10.5
Redundancy Resolution via Task Augmentation ......................
233
10.6
Second-Order Redundancy Resolution ................................
236
10.7
Cyclicity...................................................................
237
10.8
Fault Tolerance ..........................................................
237
10.9
Conclusion and Further Reading .......................................
239
Video-References ...............................................................
239
References .......................................................................
240
11 Robots with Flexible Elements
Alessandro De Luca, Wayne J. Book ............................................
243
11.1
Robots with Flexible Joints .............................................
244
11.2
Robots with Flexible Links..............................................
263
Video-References ...............................................................
279
References .......................................................................
279
12 Robotic Systems Architectures and Programming
David Kortenkamp, Reid Simmons, Davide Brugali ..........................
283
12.1
Overview .................................................................
283
12.2
History....................................................................
285
12.3
Architectural Components ..............................................
289
12.4
Case Study – GRACE......................................................
296
12.5
The Art of Robot Architectures..........................................
298
12.6
Implementing Robotic Systems Architectures .........................
299
12.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
302
Video-References ...............................................................
302
References .......................................................................
302
13 Behavior-Based Systems
François Michaud, Monica Nicolescu ..........................................
307
13.1
Robot Control Approaches ..............................................
308
13.2
Basic Principles of Behavior-Based Systems ..........................
310

XLVI
Contents
13.3
Basis Behaviors ..........................................................
313
13.4
Representation in Behavior-Based Systems...........................
313
13.5
Learning in Behavior-Based Systems ..................................
314
13.6
Applications and Continuing Work.....................................
318
13.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
322
Video-References ...............................................................
322
References .......................................................................
323
14 AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics
Michael Beetz, Raja Chatila, Joachim Hertzberg, Federico Pecora...........
329
14.1
Why Should a Robot Use AI-Type Reasoning? .........................
330
14.2
Knowledge Representation and Processing ...........................
330
14.3
Reasoning and Decision Making .......................................
338
14.4
Plan-Based Robot Control ..............................................
346
14.5
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
351
Video-References ...............................................................
351
References .......................................................................
352
15 Robot Learning
Jan Peters, Daniel D. Lee, Jens Kober, Duy Nguyen-Tuong,
J. Andrew Bagnell, Stefan Schaal ..............................................
357
15.1
What Is Robot Learning .................................................
358
15.2
Model Learning ..........................................................
360
15.3
Reinforcement Learning ................................................
372
15.4
Conclusions ..............................................................
385
Video-References ...............................................................
386
References .......................................................................
386
Part B
Design
16 Design and Performance Evaluation
Jorge Angeles, Frank C. Park....................................................
399
16.1
The Robot Design Process ...............................................
400
16.2
Workspace Criteria.......................................................
401
16.3
Dexterity Indices.........................................................
405
16.4
Other Performance Indices .............................................
408
16.5
Other Robot Types .......................................................
411
16.6
Summary .................................................................
416
References .......................................................................
416
17 Limbed Systems
Shuuji Kajita, Christian Ott .....................................................
419
17.1
Design of Limbed Systems ..............................................
420
17.2
Conceptual Design.......................................................
420
17.3
Whole Design Process Example.........................................
423
17.4
Model Induced Design ..................................................
427
17.5
Various Limbed Systems ................................................
434
17.6
Performance Indices ....................................................
437
Video-References ...............................................................
439
References .......................................................................
440

Contents
XLVII
18 Parallel Mechanisms
Jean-Pierre Merlet, Clément Gosselin, Tian Huang ...........................
443
18.1
Definitions ...............................................................
443
18.2
Type Synthesis of Parallel Mechanisms ................................
445
18.3
Kinematics ...............................................................
446
18.4
Velocity and Accuracy Analysis .........................................
447
18.5
Singularity Analysis .....................................................
448
18.6
Workspace Analysis......................................................
450
18.7
Static Analysis ...........................................................
451
18.8
Dynamic Analysis ........................................................
452
18.9
Design ....................................................................
452
18.10 Wire-Driven Parallel Robots ............................................
453
18.11 Application Examples ...................................................
455
18.12 Conclusion and Further Reading .......................................
455
Video-References ...............................................................
456
References .......................................................................
456
19 Robot Hands
Claudio Melchiorri, Makoto Kaneko............................................
463
19.1
Basic Concepts ...........................................................
464
19.2
Design of Robot Hands..................................................
465
19.3
Technologies for Actuation and Sensing ..............................
470
19.4
Modeling and Control of a Robot Hand ...............................
473
19.5
Applications and Trends ................................................
477
19.6
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
478
Video-References ...............................................................
478
References .......................................................................
479
20 Snake-Like and Continuum Robots
Ian D. Walker, Howie Choset, Gregory S. Chirikjian ...........................
481
20.1
Snake Robots – Short History ..........................................
481
20.2
Continuum Robots – Short History.....................................
485
20.3
Snake-Like and Continuum Robot Modeling..........................
487
20.4
Modeling of Locomotion for Snake-Like
and Continuum Mechanisms ...........................................
491
20.5
Conclusion and Extensions to Related Areas ..........................
492
Video-References ...............................................................
492
References .......................................................................
493
21 Actuators for Soft Robotics
Alin Albu-Schäffer, Antonio Bicchi .............................................
499
21.1
Background ..............................................................
500
21.2
Soft Robot Design........................................................
502
21.3
Modeling Actuators for Soft Robotics ..................................
508
21.4
Modeling Soft Robots ...................................................
511
21.5
Stiffness Estimation .....................................................
513
21.6
Cartesian Stiffness Control ..............................................
515
21.7
Periodic Motion Control.................................................
518
21.8
Optimal Control of Soft Robots .........................................
521
21.9
Conclusions and Open Problems .......................................
524

XLVIII
Contents
Video-References ...............................................................
525
References .......................................................................
526
22 Modular Robots
I-Ming Chen, Mark Yim .........................................................
531
22.1
Concepts and Definitions ...............................................
531
22.2
Reconfigurable Modular Manipulators ................................
533
22.3
Self-Reconfigurable Modular Robots ..................................
535
22.4
Conclusion and Further Reading .......................................
539
Video-References ...............................................................
540
References .......................................................................
540
23 Biomimetic Robots
Kyu-Jin Cho, Robert Wood ......................................................
543
23.1
Overview .................................................................
544
23.2
Components of Biomimetic Robot Design .............................
544
23.3
Mechanisms..............................................................
545
23.4
Material and Fabrication ...............................................
561
23.5
Conclusion ...............................................................
567
Video-References ...............................................................
568
References .......................................................................
570
24 Wheeled Robots
Woojin Chung, Karl Iagnemma ................................................
575
24.1
Overview .................................................................
575
24.2
Mobility of Wheeled Robots ............................................
576
24.3
Wheeled Robot Structures ..............................................
582
24.4
Wheel–Terrain Interaction Models .....................................
586
24.5
Wheeled Robot Suspensions ...........................................
589
24.6
Conclusions ..............................................................
592
Video-References ...............................................................
592
References .......................................................................
593
25 Underwater Robots
Hyun-Taek Choi, Junku Yuh ....................................................
595
25.1
Background ..............................................................
595
25.2
Mechanical Systems .....................................................
596
25.3
Power Systems...........................................................
599
25.4
Underwater Actuators and Sensors ....................................
601
25.5
Computers, Communications, and Architecture.......................
606
25.6
Underwater Manipulators ..............................................
614
25.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
617
Video-References ...............................................................
617
References .......................................................................
618
26 Flying Robots
Stefan Leutenegger, Christoph Hürzeler, Amanda K. Stowers, Kostas Alexis,
Markus W. Achtelik, David Lentink, Paul Y. Oh, Roland Siegwart ...........
623
26.1
Background and History ................................................
624
26.2
Characteristics of Aerial Robotics.......................................
625
26.3
Basics of Aerodynamics and Flight Mechanics ........................
629
26.4
Airplane Modeling and Design .........................................
641

Contents
XLIX
26.5
Rotorcraft Modeling and Design........................................
647
26.6
Flapping Wing Modeling and Design ..................................
653
26.7
System Integration and Realization....................................
659
26.8
Applications of Aerial Robots...........................................
662
26.9
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
666
Video-References ...............................................................
666
References .......................................................................
667
27 Micro-/Nanorobots
Bradley J. Nelson, Lixin Dong, Fumihito Arai .................................
671
27.1
Overview of Micro- and Nanorobotics .................................
671
27.2
Scaling....................................................................
674
27.3
Actuation at the Micro- and Nanoscales ..............................
675
27.4
Imaging at the Micro- and Nanoscales................................
676
27.5
Fabrication...............................................................
678
27.6
Microassembly ...........................................................
681
27.7
Microrobotics ............................................................
687
27.8
Nanorobotics.............................................................
692
27.9
Conclusions ..............................................................
704
Video-References ...............................................................
704
References .......................................................................
705
Part C
Sensing and Perception
28 Force and Tactile Sensing
Mark R. Cutkosky, William Provancher.........................................
717
28.1
Overview .................................................................
717
28.2
Sensor Types .............................................................
718
28.3
Tactile Information Processing .........................................
725
28.4
Integration Challenges ..................................................
730
28.5
Conclusions and Future Developments ................................
731
Video-References ...............................................................
731
References .......................................................................
731
29 Inertial Sensing, GPS and Odometry
Gregory Dudek, Michael Jenkin ................................................
737
29.1
Odometry ................................................................
737
29.2
Gyroscopic Systems ......................................................
739
29.3
Accelerometers ..........................................................
742
29.4
IMU Packages ............................................................
743
29.5
Satellite-Based Positioning (GPS and GNSS) ..........................
744
29.6
GPS-IMU Integration ....................................................
749
29.7
Further Reading .........................................................
750
29.8
Currently Available Hardware ..........................................
750
References .......................................................................
751
30 Sonar Sensing
Lindsay Kleeman, Roman Kuc ..................................................
753
30.1
Sonar Principles .........................................................
754
30.2
Sonar Beam Pattern .....................................................
756
30.3
Speed of Sound..........................................................
758

L
Contents
30.4
Waveforms ...............................................................
758
30.5
Transducer Technologies ................................................
759
30.6
Reflecting Object Models................................................
760
30.7
Artifacts ..................................................................
761
30.8
TOF Ranging..............................................................
762
30.9
Echo Waveform Coding..................................................
765
30.10 Echo Waveform Processing..............................................
767
30.11 CTFM Sonar ...............................................................
769
30.12 Multipulse Sonar ........................................................
772
30.13 Sonar Rings and Arrays .................................................
773
30.14 Motion Effects ...........................................................
775
30.15 Biomimetic Sonars ......................................................
778
30.16 Conclusions ..............................................................
779
Video-References ...............................................................
780
References .......................................................................
780
31 Range Sensing
Kurt Konolige, Andreas Nüchter ................................................
783
31.1
Range Sensing Basics ...................................................
783
31.2
Sensor Technologies.....................................................
785
31.3
Registration ..............................................................
794
31.4
Navigation and Terrain Classification and Mapping ..................
804
31.5
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
807
References .......................................................................
807
32 3-D Vision for Navigation and Grasping
Danica Kragic, Kostas Daniilidis ...............................................
811
32.1
Geometric Vision ........................................................
812
32.2
3-D Vision for Grasping.................................................
820
32.3
Conclusion and Further Reading .......................................
822
Video-References ...............................................................
822
References .......................................................................
822
33 Visual Object Class Recognition
Michael Stark, Bernt Schiele, Aleš Leonardis ..................................
825
33.1
Object Classes ............................................................
825
33.2
Review of the State of the Art ..........................................
826
33.3
Discussion and Conclusions ............................................
837
References .......................................................................
838
34 Visual Servoing
François Chaumette, Seth Hutchinson, Peter Corke ...........................
841
34.1
The Basic Components of Visual Servoing .............................
842
34.2
Image-Based Visual Servo ..............................................
843
34.3
Pose-Based Visual Servo................................................
851
34.4
Advanced Approaches...................................................
854
34.5
Performance Optimization and Planning .............................
856
34.6
Estimation of 3-D Parameters..........................................
858
34.7
Determining s and Matching Issues ..................................
859
34.8
Target Tracking...........................................................
859

Contents
LI
34.9
Eye-in-Hand and Eye-to-Hand Systems Controlled
in the Joint Space .......................................................
860
34.10 Under Actuated Robots .................................................
861
34.11 Applications..............................................................
863
34.12 Conclusions ..............................................................
863
Video-References ...............................................................
863
References .......................................................................
863
35 Multisensor Data Fusion
Hugh Durrant-Whyte, Thomas C. Henderson..................................
867
35.1
Multisensor Data Fusion Methods......................................
867
35.2
Multisensor Fusion Architectures.......................................
880
35.3
Applications..............................................................
885
35.4
Conclusions ..............................................................
889
Video-References ...............................................................
889
References .......................................................................
890
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
36 Motion for Manipulation Tasks
James Kuffner, Jing Xiao ........................................................
897
36.1
Overview .................................................................
898
36.2
Task-Level Control .......................................................
900
36.3
Manipulation Planning .................................................
904
36.4
Assembly Motion ........................................................
911
36.5
Unifying Feedback Control and Planning..............................
918
36.6
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
920
Video-References ...............................................................
923
References .......................................................................
923
37 Contact Modeling and Manipulation
Imin Kao, Kevin M. Lynch, Joel W. Burdick ....................................
931
37.1
Overview .................................................................
931
37.2
Kinematics of Rigid-Body Contact .....................................
932
37.3
Forces and Friction ......................................................
936
37.4
Rigid-Body Mechanics with Friction...................................
939
37.5
Pushing Manipulation ..................................................
942
37.6
Contact Interfaces and Modeling.......................................
943
37.7
Friction Limit Surface....................................................
946
37.8
Contacts in Grasping and Fixture Designs .............................
949
37.9
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
950
Video-References ...............................................................
951
References .......................................................................
951
38 Grasping
Domenico Prattichizzo, Jeffrey C. Trinkle.......................................
955
38.1
Models and Definitions .................................................
956
38.2
Controllable Twists and Wrenches .....................................
961
38.3
Compliant Grasps........................................................
965
38.4
Restraint Analysis .......................................................
967

LII
Contents
38.5
Examples.................................................................
975
38.6
Conclusion and Further Reading .......................................
985
Video-References ...............................................................
986
References .......................................................................
986
39 Cooperative Manipulation
Fabrizio Caccavale, Masaru Uchiyama .........................................
989
39.1
Historical Overview ......................................................
990
39.2
Kinematics and Statics ..................................................
991
39.3
Cooperative Task Space..................................................
995
39.4
Dynamics and Load Distribution .......................................
996
39.5
Task-Space Analysis .....................................................
998
39.6
Control....................................................................
999
39.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
1003
Video-References ...............................................................
1004
References .......................................................................
1004
40 Mobility and Manipulation
Oliver Brock, Jaeheung Park, Marc Toussaint .................................
1007
40.1
Grasping and Manipulation ............................................
1009
40.2
Control....................................................................
1013
40.3
Motion Generation ......................................................
1017
40.4
Learning..................................................................
1021
40.5
Perception ...............................................................
1025
40.6
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
1029
Video-References ...............................................................
1029
References .......................................................................
1030
41 Active Manipulation for Perception
Anna Petrovskaya, Kaijen Hsiao................................................
1037
41.1
Perception via Manipulation ...........................................
1037
41.2
Object Localization ......................................................
1038
41.3
Learning About an Object...............................................
1049
41.4
Recognition ..............................................................
1054
41.5
Conclusions ..............................................................
1057
Video-References ...............................................................
1058
References .......................................................................
1058
42 Haptics
Blake Hannaford, Allison M. Okamura ........................................
1063
42.1
Overview .................................................................
1064
42.2
Haptic Device Design ....................................................
1068
42.3
Haptic Rendering........................................................
1071
42.4
Control and Stability of Force Feedback Interfaces ...................
1073
42.5
Other Types of Haptic Interfaces........................................
1075
42.6
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
1079
References .......................................................................
1079
43 Telerobotics
Günter Niemeyer, Carsten Preusche, Stefano Stramigioli, Dongjun Lee .....
1085
43.1
Overview and Terminology .............................................
1085

Contents
LIII
43.2
Telerobotic Systems and Applications .................................
1087
43.3
Control Architectures ....................................................
1090
43.4
Bilateral Control and Force Feedback ..................................
1095
43.5
Emerging Applications of Telerobotics .................................
1101
43.6
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
1104
Video-References ...............................................................
1104
References .......................................................................
1105
44 Networked Robots
Dezhen Song, Ken Goldberg, Nak-Young Chong..............................
1109
44.1
Overview and Background..............................................
1109
44.2
A Brief History ...........................................................
1110
44.3
Communications and Networking .....................................
1112
44.4
Properties of Networked Robots .......................................
1115
44.5
Cloud Robotics ...........................................................
1121
44.6
Conclusion and Future Directions ......................................
1125
Video-References ...............................................................
1126
References .......................................................................
1126
Part E
Moving in the Environment
45 World Modeling
Wolfram Burgard, Martial Hebert, Maren Bennewitz.........................
1135
45.1
Historical Overview ......................................................
1136
45.2
Models for Indoors and Structured Environments ....................
1137
45.3
World and Terrain Models for Natural Environments .................
1141
45.4
Dynamic Environments .................................................
1149
45.5
Summary and Further Reading.........................................
1149
Video-References ...............................................................
1150
References .......................................................................
1150
46 Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
Cyrill Stachniss, John J. Leonard, Sebastian Thrun ...........................
1153
46.1
SLAM: Problem Definition...............................................
1154
46.2
The Three Main SLAM Paradigms .......................................
1157
46.3
Visual and RGB-D SLAM .................................................
1166
46.4
Conclusion and Future Challenges .....................................
1169
Video-References ...............................................................
1170
References .......................................................................
1171
47 Motion Planning and Obstacle Avoidance
Javier Minguez, Florant Lamiraux, Jean-Paul Laumond .....................
1177
47.1
Nonholonomic Mobile Robots: Where Motion Planning
Meets Control Theory....................................................
1178
47.2
Kinematic Constraints and Controllability .............................
1179
47.3
Motion Planning and Small-Time Controllability .....................
1180
47.4
Local Steering Methods and Small-Time Controllability..............
1181
47.5
Robots and Trailers ......................................................
1184
47.6
Approximate Methods ..................................................
1186
47.7
From Motion Planning to Obstacle Avoidance ........................
1187

LIV
Contents
47.8
Definition of Obstacle Avoidance ......................................
1187
47.9
Obstacle Avoidance Techniques ........................................
1188
47.10 Robot Shape, Kinematics, and Dynamics in Obstacle Avoidance....
1194
47.11 Integration Planning – Reaction .......................................
1196
47.12 Conclusions, Future Directions, and Further Reading ................
1198
Video-References ...............................................................
1199
References .......................................................................
1199
48 Modeling and Control of Legged Robots
Pierre-Brice Wieber, Russ Tedrake, Scott Kuindersma ........................
1203
48.1
A Brief History of Legged Robots .......................................
1204
48.2
The Dynamics of Legged Locomotion ..................................
1204
48.3
Stability Analysis – Not Falling Down..................................
1209
48.4
Generation of Dynamic Walking and Running Motions ..............
1214
48.5
Motion and Force Control...............................................
1222
48.6
Towards More Efficient Walking ........................................
1225
48.7
Different Contact Behaviors.............................................
1227
48.8
Conclusion ...............................................................
1228
References .......................................................................
1228
49 Modeling and Control of Wheeled Mobile Robots
Claude Samson, Pascal Morin, Roland Lenain ................................
1235
49.1
Background ..............................................................
1236
49.2
Control Models...........................................................
1238
49.3
Adaptation of Control Methods for Holonomic Systems ..............
1240
49.4
Methods Specific to Nonholonomic Systems ..........................
1241
49.5
Path Following in the Case of Nonideal Wheel-Ground Contact ....
1255
49.6
Complementary Issues and Bibliographical Guide ...................
1261
Video-References ...............................................................
1263
References .......................................................................
1263
50 Modeling and Control of Robots on Rough Terrain
Keiji Nagatani, Genya Ishigami, Yoshito Okada ..............................
1267
50.1
Overview .................................................................
1268
50.2
Modeling of Wheeled Robot in Rough Terrain ........................
1270
50.3
Control of Wheeled Robot in Rough Terrain ...........................
1274
50.4
Modeling of Tracked Vehicle on Rough Terrain........................
1276
50.5
Stability Analysis of Tracked Vehicles ..................................
1278
50.6
Control of Tracked Vehicle on Rough Terrain ..........................
1279
50.7
Summary .................................................................
1281
Video-References ...............................................................
1281
References .......................................................................
1282
51 Modeling and Control of Underwater Robots
Gianluca Antonelli, Thor I. Fossen, Dana R. Yoerger .........................
1285
51.1
The Expanding Role of Marine Robotics in Oceanic Engineering ....
1285
51.2
Underwater Robotics....................................................
1287
51.3
Applications..............................................................
1302
51.4
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
1303
Video-References ...............................................................
1304
References .......................................................................
1304

Contents
LV
52 Modeling and Control of Aerial Robots
Robert Mahony, Randal W. Beard, Vijay Kumar ..............................
1307
52.1
Overview .................................................................
1307
52.2
Modeling Aerial Robotic Vehicles ......................................
1309
52.3
Control....................................................................
1316
52.4
Trajectory Planning......................................................
1324
52.5
Estimating the Vehicle State............................................
1328
52.6
Conclusion ...............................................................
1330
Video-References ...............................................................
1331
References .......................................................................
1331
53 Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
Lynne E. Parker, Daniela Rus, Gaurav S. Sukhatme ...........................
1335
53.1
History....................................................................
1336
53.2
Architectures for Multirobot Systems...................................
1337
53.3
Communication..........................................................
1339
53.4
Networked Mobile Robots ..............................................
1340
53.5
Swarm Robots ...........................................................
1351
53.6
Modular Robotics........................................................
1354
53.7
Heterogeneity............................................................
1357
53.8
Task Allocation...........................................................
1359
53.9
Learning..................................................................
1361
53.10 Applications..............................................................
1362
53.11 Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
1366
Video-References ...............................................................
1366
References .......................................................................
1367
Part F
Robots at Work
54 Industrial Robotics
Martin Hägele, Klas Nilsson, J. Norberto Pires, Rainer Bischoff .............
1385
54.1
Industrial Robotics: The Main Driver for Robotics Research
and Application .........................................................
1386
54.2
A Short History of Industrial Robots ...................................
1386
54.3
Industrial Robot Kinematics ............................................
1392
54.4
Typical Industrial Robot Applications ..................................
1393
54.5
Safe Human–Robot Collaboration .....................................
1405
54.6
Task Descriptions – Teaching and Programming......................
1409
54.7
System Integration ......................................................
1414
54.8
Outlook and Long-Term Challenges....................................
1416
Video-References ...............................................................
1418
References .......................................................................
1418
55 Space Robotics
Kazuya Yoshida, Brian Wilcox, Gerd Hirzinger, Roberto Lampariello .......
1423
55.1
Historical Developments and Advances of Orbital Robotic Systems .
1424
55.2
Historical Developments and Advances of Surface Robotic Systems.
1430
55.3
Mathematical Modeling.................................................
1437
55.4
Future Directions of Orbital and Surface Robotic Systems............
1452
55.5
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
1457

LVI
Contents
Video-References ...............................................................
1457
References .......................................................................
1458
56 Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
Marcel Bergerman, John Billingsley, John Reid, Eldert van Henten .........
1463
56.1
Section Scope ............................................................
1464
56.2
Challenges and Opportunities..........................................
1465
56.3
Case Studies..............................................................
1467
56.4
Conclusion ...............................................................
1487
Video-References ...............................................................
1488
References .......................................................................
1489
57 Robotics in Construction
Kamel S. Saidi, Thomas Bock, Christos Georgoulas ...........................
1493
57.1
Overview .................................................................
1494
57.2
Offsite Applications of Robotics in Construction ......................
1499
57.3
Onsite Applications of Single Task Construction Robots ..............
1504
57.4
Integrated Robotized Construction Sites...............................
1511
57.5
Currently Unsolved Technical Problems................................
1514
57.6
Future Directions ........................................................
1516
57.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
1516
Video-References ...............................................................
1517
References .......................................................................
1517
58 Robotics in Hazardous Applications
James Trevelyan, William R. Hamel, Sung-Chul Kang........................
1521
58.1
Operation in Hazardous Environments:
The Need for a Robotics Solution ......................................
1521
58.2
Applications..............................................................
1523
58.3
Enabling Technologies ..................................................
1537
58.4
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
1544
Video-References ...............................................................
1545
References .......................................................................
1546
59 Robotics in Mining
Joshua A. Marshall, Adrian Bonchis, Eduardo Nebot, Steven Scheding ....
1549
59.1
Modern Mining Practice.................................................
1550
59.2
Surface Mining...........................................................
1552
59.3
Underground Mining....................................................
1562
59.4
Challenges and Industry Acceptance ..................................
1568
59.5
Challenges, Outlook, and Conclusion ..................................
1569
Video-References ...............................................................
1571
References .......................................................................
1572
60 Disaster Robotics
Robin R. Murphy, Satoshi Tadokoro, Alexander Kleiner ......................
1577
60.1
Overview .................................................................
1578
60.2
Disaster Characteristics and Impact on Robots........................
1581
60.3
Robots Actually Used at Disasters ......................................
1582
60.4
Robots at the Fukushima-Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant Accident ...
1588
60.5
Lessons Learned, Challenges, and Novel Approaches ................
1591

Contents
LVII
60.6
Evaluation ...............................................................
1598
60.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
1600
Video-References ...............................................................
1601
References .......................................................................
1601
61 Robot Surveillance and Security
Wendell H. Chun, Nikolaos Papanikolopoulos ................................
1605
61.1
Overview .................................................................
1605
61.2
Application Domains ....................................................
1607
61.3
Enabling Technologies ..................................................
1608
61.4
Active Research ..........................................................
1617
61.5
Conclusion ...............................................................
1622
Video-References ...............................................................
1623
References .......................................................................
1623
62 Intelligent Vehicles
Alberto Broggi, Alex Zelinsky, Ümit Özgüner, Christian Laugier .............
1627
62.1
The Motivation and Approaches to Intelligent Vehicles ..............
1628
62.2
Enabling Technologies ..................................................
1632
62.3
Road Scene Understanding.............................................
1635
62.4
Advanced Driver Assistance.............................................
1639
62.5
Driver Monitoring........................................................
1645
62.6
Towards Fully Autonomous Vehicles ..................................
1647
62.7
Future Trends and Prospects ...........................................
1650
62.8
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
1651
Video-References ...............................................................
1651
References .......................................................................
1652
63 Medical Robotics and Computer-Integrated Surgery
Russell H. Taylor, Arianna Menciassi, Gabor Fichtinger, Paolo Fiorini,
Paolo Dario ......................................................................
1657
63.1
Core Concepts ............................................................
1658
63.2
Technology ...............................................................
1662
63.3
Systems, Research Areas, and Applications ...........................
1667
63.4
Conclusion and Future Directions ......................................
1675
Video-References ...............................................................
1676
References .......................................................................
1676
64 Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
H.F. Machiel Van der Loos, David J. Reinkensmeyer, Eugenio Guglielmelli .
1685
64.1
Overview .................................................................
1686
64.2
Rehabilitation Therapy and Training Robots ..........................
1692
64.3
Aids for People with Disabilities .......................................
1703
64.4
Smart Prostheses and Orthoses ........................................
1711
64.5
Augmentation for Diagnosis and Monitoring .........................
1713
64.6
Safety, Ethics, Access and Economics ..................................
1715
64.7
Conclusions and Further Readings .....................................
1716
Video-References ...............................................................
1717
References .......................................................................
1718

LVIII
Contents
65 Domestic Robotics
Erwin Prassler, Mario E. Munich, Paolo Pirjanian, Kazuhiro Kosuge........
1729
65.1
Mobile Domestic Robotics ..............................................
1730
65.2
Enabling Technologies ..................................................
1747
65.3
Smart Homes ............................................................
1754
Video-References ...............................................................
1757
References .......................................................................
1757
66 Robotics Competitions and Challenges
Daniele Nardi, Jonathan Roberts, Manuela Veloso, Luke Fletcher...........
1759
66.1
Introduction .............................................................
1760
66.2
Overview .................................................................
1760
66.3
Competitions Inspired by Human Competitions ......................
1762
66.4
Task-Oriented Competitions ............................................
1769
66.5
Conclusion and Further Reading .......................................
1780
Video-References ...............................................................
1781
References .......................................................................
1781
Part G
Robots and Humans
67 Humanoids
Paul Fitzpatrick, Kensuke Harada, Charles C. Kemp, Yoshio Matsumoto,
Kazuhito Yokoi, Eiichi Yoshida .................................................
1789
67.1
Why Humanoids?........................................................
1789
67.2
History....................................................................
1792
67.3
What to Immitate? ......................................................
1794
67.4
Locomotion ..............................................................
1795
67.5
Whole-Body Activities ..................................................
1801
67.6
Morphological Communication.........................................
1809
67.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
1813
Video-References ...............................................................
1813
References .......................................................................
1813
68 Human Motion Reconstruction
Katsu Yamane, Wataru Takano.................................................
1819
68.1
Overview .................................................................
1819
68.2
Models and Computations..............................................
1820
68.3
Reconstruction for Understanding .....................................
1825
68.4
Reconstruction for Robots ..............................................
1829
Video-References ...............................................................
1830
References .......................................................................
1831
69 Physical Human–Robot Interaction
Sami Haddadin, Elizabeth Croft................................................
1835
69.1
Classification.............................................................
1836
69.2
Human Safety............................................................
1839
69.3
Human-Friendly Robot Design .........................................
1847
69.4
Control for Physical Interaction ........................................
1853
69.5
Motion Planning for Human Environments ...........................
1859
69.6
Interaction Planning ....................................................
1862

Contents
LIX
69.7
Conclusions and Challenges ............................................
1867
Video-References ...............................................................
1868
References .......................................................................
1869
70 Human–Robot Augmentation
Massimo Bergamasco, Hugh Herr..............................................
1875
70.1
Concept and Definitions ................................................
1876
70.2
Upper Limb Wearable Systems .........................................
1877
70.3
Lower Limb Wearable Systems..........................................
1882
70.4
Whole Body Wearable Systems .........................................
1889
70.5
Control of Human–Robot Augmentation Systems ....................
1892
70.6
Conclusions and Further Developments ...............................
1902
Video-References ...............................................................
1902
References .......................................................................
1902
71 Cognitive Human–Robot Interaction
Bilge Mutlu, Nicholas Roy, Selma Šabanović..................................
1907
71.1
Human Models of Interaction ..........................................
1908
71.2
Robot Models of Interaction............................................
1914
71.3
Models of Human–Robot Interaction..................................
1916
71.4
Conclusion and Further Reading .......................................
1927
Video-References ...............................................................
1927
References .......................................................................
1928
72 Social Robotics
Cynthia Breazeal, Kerstin Dautenhahn, Takayuki Kanda.....................
1935
72.1
Overview .................................................................
1936
72.2
Social Robot Embodiment ..............................................
1936
72.3
Social Robots and Social-Emotional Intelligence.....................
1938
72.4
Socio-Cognitive Skills ...................................................
1941
72.5
Human Social Responses to Social Robots.............................
1944
72.6
Social Robots and Communication Skills ..............................
1946
72.7
Long-Term Interaction with Robot Companions ......................
1950
72.8
Tactile Interaction with Social Robots .................................
1954
72.9
Social Robots and Teamwork ...........................................
1958
72.10 Conclusion ...............................................................
1959
72.11 Further Reading .........................................................
1960
Video-References ...............................................................
1960
References .......................................................................
1961
73 Socially Assistive Robotics
Maja J. Matarić, Brian Scassellati ..............................................
1973
73.1
Overview .................................................................
1973
73.2
The Need for Socially Assistive Robotics ...............................
1974
73.3
Advantages of Embodied Robots over Virtual Agents ................
1975
73.4
Motivation, Autonomy, and Companionship..........................
1977
73.5
Influence and the Dynamics of Assistive Interaction.................
1978
73.6
Personalization and Adaptation to Specific Needs and Abilities ....
1978
73.7
Creating Long-Term Engagement and Behaviour Change ............
1979
73.8
SAR for Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) Therapy .....................
1980
73.9
SAR Supporting Rehabilitation .........................................
1982

LX
Contents
73.10 SAR and Eldercare .......................................................
1985
73.11 SAR for Alzheimer’s Dementia and Cognitive Rehabilitation ........
1986
73.12 Ethical and Safety Considerations......................................
1987
References .......................................................................
1988
74 Learning from Humans
Aude G. Billard, Sylvain Calinon, Rüdiger Dillmann..........................
1995
74.1
Learning of Robots ......................................................
1995
74.2
Key Issues When Learning from Human Demonstrations ............
1998
74.3
Interfaces for Demonstration ...........................................
2000
74.4
Algorithms to Learn from Humans .....................................
2002
74.5
Conclusions and Open Issues in Robot LfD ............................
2008
Video-References ...............................................................
2009
References .......................................................................
2009
75 Biologically Inspired Robotics
Fumiya Iida, Auke Jan Ijspeert .................................................
2015
75.1
General Background.....................................................
2016
75.2
Methodology.............................................................
2017
75.3
Case Studies..............................................................
2021
75.4
Landscape of Bio-Inspired Robotics Research and Challenges ......
2026
75.5
Conclusion ...............................................................
2028
Video-References ...............................................................
2028
References .......................................................................
2029
76 Evolutionary Robotics
Stefano Nolfi, Josh Bongard, Phil Husbands, Dario Floreano................
2035
76.1
Method...................................................................
2036
76.2
First Steps ................................................................
2036
76.3
Simulation and Reality..................................................
2040
76.4
Behavior as a Complex Adaptive System ..............................
2041
76.5
Evolving Bodies..........................................................
2044
76.6
Seeing the Light .........................................................
2046
76.7
Computational Neuroethology .........................................
2049
76.8
Evolution and Learning .................................................
2054
76.9
Evolution of Social Behavior............................................
2057
76.10 Evolutionary Hardware .................................................
2060
76.11 Closing Remarks .........................................................
2061
Video-References ...............................................................
2061
References .......................................................................
2062
77 Neurorobotics: From Vision to Action
Patrick van der Smagt, Michael A. Arbib, Giorgio Metta .....................
2069
77.1
Definitions and History .................................................
2070
77.2
The Case for Vision ......................................................
2071
77.3
Vertebrate Motor Control................................................
2075
77.4
The Role of Mirror Systems..............................................
2082
77.5
Conclusion and Further Reading .......................................
2089
References .......................................................................
2090

Contents
LXI
78 Perceptual Robotics
Heinrich Bülthoff, Christian Wallraven, Martin A. Giese......................
2095
78.1
Perceptual Mechanisms of Object Representations...................
2097
78.2
Perceptual Mechanisms of Action Representation....................
2103
78.3
Perceptual Validation of Robotics......................................
2107
78.4
Conclusion and Further Reading .......................................
2108
Video-References ...............................................................
2109
References .......................................................................
2109
79 Robotics for Education
David P. Miller, Illah Nourbakhsh ..............................................
2115
79.1
The Role of Robots in Education .......................................
2116
79.2
Educational Robot Tournaments .......................................
2117
79.3
Education Robot Platforms .............................................
2120
79.4
Education Robot Controllers and Programming Environments ......
2123
79.5
Robotic Technologies for Student Learning............................
2127
79.6
Educational Evaluation of Robot Programs............................
2129
79.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
2131
Video-References ...............................................................
2131
References .......................................................................
2131
80 Roboethics: Social and Ethical Implications
Gianmarco Veruggio, Fiorella Operto, George Bekey .........................
2135
80.1
A Methodological Note..................................................
2137
80.2
Specificity of Robotics...................................................
2138
80.3
Cultural Differences in the Acceptance of Robots .....................
2138
80.4
Roboethics Foreshadowed in the Literature ..........................
2139
80.5
And Expressed in Real Robotics ........................................
2139
80.6
Ethics in Science and Technology ......................................
2140
80.7
Ethical Issues in an ICT Society .........................................
2143
80.8
Human Principles and Rights ..........................................
2144
80.9
Legal Issues in Robotics.................................................
2146
80.10 Roboethics Taxonomy ...................................................
2147
80.11 Roboethics Enforced: From Ideals to Rules............................
2156
80.12 Conclusions and Further Reading ......................................
2157
Video-References ...............................................................
2158
References .......................................................................
2159
Acknowledgements ..............................................................
2161
About the Authors................................................................
2163
Index ................................................................................
2197

LXIII
List of Abbreviations
Symbols
k-NN
k-nearest neighbor
0-D
zero-dimensional
1-D
one-dimensional
2-D
two-dimensional
2.5-D
two-and-a-half-dimensional
3-D
three-dimensional
3-D-NDT
three-dimensional!normal distributions
transform
4-D
four-dimensional
6-D
six-dimensional
6R
six-revolute
7R
seven-revolute
A
A&F
agriculture and forestry
AA
agonist–antagonist
AAAI
American Association for Artiﬁcial
Intelligence
AAAI
Association for the Advancement of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
AAL
ambient assisted living
ABA
articulated-body algorithm
ABF
artiﬁcial bacterial ﬂagella
ABRT
automated!bus rapid transit
ABS
acrylonitrile–butadiene–styrene
AC
aerodynamic center
AC
alternating current
ACARP
Australian Coal Association Research
Program
ACBS
automatic!constructions building system
ACC
adaptive cruise control
ACFV
autonomous!combat ﬂying vehicle
ACM
active chord mechanism
ACM
active cord mechanism
ACT
anatomically correct testbed
ADAS
advanced driving assistance system
ADC
analog digital conveter
ADCP
acoustic Doppler current proﬁler
ADL
activities for daily living
ADSL
asymmetric digital subscriber line
AFC
alkaline fuel cell
AFC
armoured (or articulated) face conveyor
AFM
atomic force microscope
AFV
autonomous!ﬂying vehicle
AGV
autonomous guided vehicle
AGV
automated!guided vehicle
AHRS
attitude and heading reference system
AHS
advanced highway system
AI
artiﬁcial intelligence
AIAA
American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics
AIM
assembly incidence matrix
AIP
air-independent power
AIP
anterior intraparietal sulcus
AIP
anterior interparietal area
AIS
artiﬁcial intelligence system
AIST
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
and Technology
AIST
Japan National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology
AIST
National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology
(Japan)
AIT
anterior inferotemporal cortex
ALEX
active leg exoskeleton
AM
actuator for manipulation
AMASC
actuator with mechanically adjustable
series compliance
AMC
Association for Computing Machinery
AMD
autonomous!mental development
AMM
audio-motor map
ANN
artiﬁcial neural network
AO
Arbeitsgemeinschaft für
Ostheosynthesefragen
AOA
angle of attack
AP
antipersonnel
APF
annealed particle ﬁlter
APG
adjustable pattern generator
API
application programming interface
APOC
allowing dynamic selection and changes
AR
autoregressive
aRDnet
agile robot development network
ARM
Acorn RISC machine architecture
ARM
assistive!robot service manipulator
ARX
auto regressive estimator
ASAP
adaptive sampling and prediction
ASCII
American standard code for information
interchange
ASD
autism spectrum disorder
ASIC
application-speciﬁc integrated circuit
ASIC
application-speciﬁc feature transform
ASIMO
advanced step in innovative mobility
ASK
amplitude shift keying
ASL
autonomous systems laboratory
ASM
advanced servomanipulator

LXIV
List of Abbreviations
ASN
active sensor network
ASR
automatic!spoken-language recognition
ASR
automatic!speech recognition
ASTRO
autonomous!space transport robotic
operations
ASV
adaptive suspension vehicle
ASyMTRe
automated!synthesis of multirobot task
solutions through software
reconﬁguration
AT
anti-tank mine
ATHLETE
all-terrain hex-legged extra-terrestrial
explorer
ATLANTIS
a three layer architecture for navigating
through intricate situations
ATLSS
advanced technology for large structural
systems
ATR
automatic!target recognition
AuRA
autonomous robot architecture
AUV
autonomous underwater vehicle
AUV
autonomous aquatic vehicle
AUVAC
Autonomous Undersea Vehicles
Application Center
AUVSI
Association for Unmanned Vehicle
Systems International
AV
anti-vehicle
B
B/S
browser/server
B2B
business to business
BCI
brain-computer interface
BE
body extender
BEMT
blade element momentum theory
BEST
boosting!engineering science and
technology
BET
blade element theory
BFA
bending ﬂuidic actuator
BFP
best-ﬁrst-planner
BI
brain imaging
BIP
behavior-interaction-priority
BLE
broadcast of local eligibility
BLEEX
Berkely exoskeleton
BLUE
best linear unbiased estimator
BML
behavior!mark-up language
BMS
battery management system
BN
Bayesian network
BOM
bill of material
BOw
bag-of-word
BP
behavior primitive
BP
base plate
BRICS
best practice in robotics
BRT
bus rapid transit
BWSTT
body-weight supported treadmill
training
C
C
cylindrical joint
C/A
coarse-acquisition
C/S
client/server
CA
collision avoidance
CACC
cooperative adaptive cruise control
CAD
computer-aided drafting
CAD
computer-aided design
CAE
computer-aided engineering
CALM
communication access for land mobiles
CAM
computer-aided manufacturing
CAN
controller area network
CARD
computer-aided remote driving
CARE
coordination action for robotics in
Europe
CASA
Civil Aviation Safety Authority
CASALA
Centre for Affective Solutions for
Ambient Living Awareness
CASPER
continuous activity scheduling,
planning, execution and replanning
CAT
collision avoidance technology
CAT
computer-aided tomography
CB
computional brain
CB
cluster bomb
CBRNE
chemical, biological, nuclear,
radiological, or explosive
CC
compression criterion
CCD
charge-coupled device
CCD
charge-coupled detector
CCI
control command interpreter
CCP
coverage conﬁguration protocol
CCT
conservative congruence transformation
CCW
counterclockwise
CC&D
camouﬂage, concealment, and deception
CD
collision detection
CD
committee draft
CD
compact disc
CDC
cardinal direction calculus
CDOM
colored dissolved organic matter
CE
computer ethic
CEA
Commissariat à l’Énergie Atomique
CEA
Atomic Energy Commission
CEBOT
cellular robotic system
CEC
Congress on Evolutionary Computation
CEPE
Computer Ethics Philosophical Enquiry
CES
Consumer Electronics Show
CF
carbon ﬁber
CF
contact formation
CF
climbing ﬁber
CFD
computational ﬂuid dynamics
CFRP
carbon ﬁber reinforced prepreg
CFRP
carbon ﬁber reinforced plastic
CG
center of gravity

List of Abbreviations
LXV
CG
computer graphics
CGI
common gateway interface
CHMM
coupled!hidden Markov model
CHMM
continuous hidden Markov model
CIC
computer integrated construction
CIE
International Commission on
Illumination
CIP
Children’s Innovation Project
CIRCA
cooperative intelligent real-time control
architecture
CIS
computer-integrated surgery
CLARAty
coupled layered architecture for robot
autonomy
CLEaR
closed-loop execution and recovery
CLIK
closed-loop inverse kinematics
CMAC
cerebellar model articulation controller
CMCs
ceramic matrix composite
CML
concurrent!mapping and localization
CMM
coordinate measurement machine
CMOMMT
cooperative multirobot observation of
multiple moving target
CMOS
complementary
metal-oxide-semiconductor
CMP
centroid moment pivot
CMTE
Cooperative Research Centre for Mining
Technology and Equipment
CMU
Carnegie Mellon University
CNC
computer numerical control
CNN
convolutional neural network
CNP
contract net protocol
CNRS
Centre National de la Recherche
Scientiﬁque
CNT
carbon nanotube
COCO
common objects in context
COG
center of gravity
COM
center of mass
COMAN
compliant humanoid platform
COMEST
Commission mondiale d’éthique des
connaissances scientiﬁques et des
technologies
COMINT
communication intelligence
CONE
Collaborative Observatory for Nature
Environments
COP
center of pressure
CoP
center of pressure
COR
center of rotation
CORBA
common object request broker
architecture
CORS
continuous operating reference station
COT
cost!of transport
COTS
commercial off-the-shelf
COV
characteristic output vector
CP
complementarity problem
CP
capture point
CP
continuous path
CP
cerebral palsy
CPG
central pattern generation
CPG
central pattern generator
CPS
cyber physical system
CPSR
Computer Professional for Social
Responsibility
CPU
central processing unit
CRASAR
Center for Robot-Assisted Search and
Rescue
CRBA
composite-rigid-body algorithm
CRF
conditional random ﬁeld
CRLB
Cramér–Rao lower bound
CSAIL
Computer Science and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Laboratory
CSIRO
Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and Industrial
Research Organisation
CSMA
carrier-sense multiple-access
CSP
constraint satisfaction problem
CSSF
Canadian Scientiﬁc Submersile Facility
CT
computed tomography
CTFM
continuous-transmission frequency
modulation
CU
control unit
cv-SLAM
ceiling vision SLAM
CVD
chemical vapor deposition
CVIS
cooperative vehicle infrastructure
system
CVT
continuous variable transmission
CW
clockwise
CWS
contact!wrench sum
D
D
distal
D/A
digital-to-analog
DAC
digital analog converter
DARPA
Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency
DARS
distributed!autonomous robotic systems
DBN
dynamic Bayesian network
DBN
deep belief network
DC
disconnected
DC
direct current
DC
dynamic!constrained
DCS
dynamic covariance scaling
DCT
discrete!cosine transform
DD
differentially driven
DDD
dangerous, dirty, and dreary
DDF
decentralized data fusion
DDP
differential dynamic programming
DDS
data distribution service
DEA
differential elastic actuator
DEM
discrete!element method

LXVI
List of Abbreviations
DFA
design!for assembly
DFRA
distributed ﬁeld robot architecture
DFT
discrete Fourier transform
DGPS
differential global positioning system
DH
Denavit–Hartenberg
DHMM
discrete!hidden Markov model
DHS
US Department of Homeland Security
DIRA
distributed!robot architecture
DIST
Dipartmento di Informatica Sistemica e
Telematica
DL
description logic
DLR
Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und
Raumfahrt
DLR
German Aerospace Center
DMFC
direct methanol fuel cell
DMP
dynamic movement primitive
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
DNF
dynamic!neural ﬁeld
DOD
Department of Defense
DOF
degree of freedom
DOG
difference of Gaussian
DOP
dilution of precision
DPLL
Davis–Putnam algorithm
DPM
deformable part model
DPN
dip-pen nanolithography
DPSK
differential phase shift keying
DRIE
deep reactive ion etching
DSM
dynamic!state machine
DSO
Defense Sciences Ofﬁce
DSP
digital signal processor
DSRC
dedicated short-range communications
DU
dynamic!unconstrained
DVL
Doppler velocity log
DWA
dynamic window approach
DWDM
dense wave division multiplex
D&D
deactivation and decommissioning
E
e-beam
electron-beam
EAP
electroactive polymer
EBA
energy bounding algorithm
EBA
extrastriate body part area
EBID
electron-beam induced deposition
EC
externally connected
EC
exteroception
ECAI
European Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence
ECD
eddy current damper
ECEF
earth-centred, earth-ﬁxed
ECER
European Conference on Educational
Robotics
ECG
electrocardiogram
ECU
electronics controller unit
EDM
electrical discharge machining
EE
end-effector
EEG
electroencephalography
EGNOS
European Geostationary Navigation
Overlay Service
EHC
enhanced horizon control
EHPA
exoskeleton!for human performance
augmentation
EKF
extended Kalman ﬁlter
ELS
ethical, legal and societal
EM
expectation maximization
emf
electromotive force
EMG
electromyography
EMIB
emotion, motivation and intentional
behavior
EMS
electrical!master–slave manipulator
EO
electrooptical
EO
elementary operator
EOA
end of arm
EOD
explosive!ordnance disposal
EP
exploratory procedure
EP
energy packet
EPFL
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de
Lausanne
EPP
extended!physiological proprioception
EPS
expandable polystyrene
ER
electrorheological
ER
evolutionary!robotics
ERA
European robotic arm
ERP
enterprise resource planning
ERSP
evolution robotics software platform
ES
electrical!stimulation
ESA
European Space Agency
ESC
electronic speed controller
ESL
execution support language
ESM
energy!stability margin
ESM
electric support measure
ETL
Electro-Technical Laboratory
ETS-VII
Engineering Test Satellite VII
EU
European Union
EURON
European Robotics Research Network
EVA
extravehicular activity
EVRYON
evolving morphologies for human–robot
symbiotic interaction
F
F5
frontal area 5
FAA
Federal Aviation Administration
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization
FARS
Fagg–Arbib–Rizzolatti–Sakata
FARSA
framework for autonomous robotics
simulation and analysis

List of Abbreviations
LXVII
fastSLAM
fast simultaneous localization and
mapping
FB-EHPA
full-body EHPA
FCU
ﬂight control-unit
FD
friction damper
FDA
US Food and Drug Association
FDM
fused deposition modeling
FE
ﬁnite element
FEA
ﬁnite element analysis
FEM
ﬁnite element method
FESEM
ﬁeld-emission SEM
FF
fast forward
FFI
Norwegian defense research
establishment
FFT
fast Fourier transform
FIFO
ﬁrst-in ﬁrst-out
FIRA
Federation of International Robot-soccer
Association
FIRRE
family of integrated rapid response
equipment
FIRST
For Inspiration and Recognition of
Science and Technology
Fl-UAS
ﬂapping wing unmanned aerial system
FLIR
forward!looking infrared
FMBT
feasible minimum buffering time
FMCW
frequency modulation continuous wave
fMRI
functional!magnetic resonance imaging
FMS
ﬂexible!manufacturing system
FNS
functional!neural stimulation
FOA
focus of attention
FOG
ﬁber-optic gyro
FOPEN
foliage penetration
FOPL
ﬁrst-order predicate logic
FOV
ﬁeld of view
FP
fusion primitive
FPGA
ﬁeld-programmable gate array
FR
false range
FRI
foot rotation indicator
FRP
ﬁber-reinforced plastics
FRP
ﬁber-reinforced prepreg
fs
force!sensor
FSA
ﬁnite-state acceptor
FSK
frequency shift keying
FSR
force sensing resistor
FSW
friction!stir welding
FTTH
ﬁber to the home
FW
ﬁxed-wing
G
GA
genetic algorithm
GAPP
goal as parallel programs
GARNICS
gardening with a cognitive system
GAS
global asymptotic stability
GBAS
ground based augmentation system
GCDC
Grand Cooperative Driving Challenge
GCER
Global Conference on Educational
Robotics
GCR
goal-contact relaxation
GCS
ground!control station
GDP
gross!domestic product
GenoM
generator of modules
GEO
geostationary Earth orbit
GF
grapple ﬁxture
GFRP
glass-ﬁber reinforced plastic
GI
gastrointestinal
GIB
GPS intelligent buoys
GICHD
Geneva International Centre for
Humanitarian Demining
GID
geometric!intersection data
GIE
generalized-inertia ellipsoid
GIS
geographic information system
GJM
generalized!Jacobian matrix
GLONASS
globalnaya navigatsionnaya
sputnikovaya sistema
GLS
global navigation satellite system
GMAW
gas-shielded metal arc welding
GMM
Gaussian mixture model
GMSK
Gaussian minimum shift keying
GMTI
ground!moving target indicator
GNC
guidance, navigation, and control
GO
golgi!tendon organ
GP
Gaussian process
GPCA
generalized principal component
analysis
GPRS
general!packet radio service
GPS
global positioning system
GPU
graphics processing unit
GRAB
guaranteed recursive adaptive bounding
GRACE
graduate robot attending conference
GraWoLF
gradient-based win or learn fast
GSD
geon structural description
GSN
gait sensitivity norm
GSP
Gough–Stewart platform
GUI
graphical user interface
GV
ground vehicle
GVA
gross!value added
GZMP
generalized!ZMP
H
H
helical joint
HAL
hybrid!assistive limb
HAMMER
hierarchical!attentive multiple models
for execution and recognition
HASY
hand!arm system
HBBA
hybrid behavior-based architecture
HCI
human–computer interaction

LXVIII
List of Abbreviations
HD
high deﬁnition
HD
haptic device
HD-SDI
high-deﬁnition serial digital interface
HDSL
high data rate digital subscriber line
HE
hand!exoskeleton
HF
hard ﬁnger
HF
histogram ﬁlter
HFAC
high frequency alternating current
HHMM
hierarchical!hidden Markov model
HIC
head injury criterion
HIII
Hybrid III dummy
HIP
haptic interaction point
HJB
Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman
HJI
Hamilton–Jacobi–Isaac
HMCS
human–machine!cooperative system
HMD
head-mounted display
HMDS
hexamethyldisilazane
HMI
human–machine!interaction
HMI
human–machine!interface
HMM
hidden Markov model
HO
human operator
HOG
histogram of oriented gradient
HOG
histogram of oriented features
HPC
high-performance computing
HRI
human–robot interaction
HRI/OS
HRI operating system
HRP
humanoid robotics project
HRR
high resolution radar
HRTEM
high-resolution transmission electron
microscope
HSGR
high safety goal
HST
Hubble space telescope
HSTAMIDS
handheld standoff mine detection system
HSWR
high safety wide region
HTAS
high tech automotive system
HTML
hypertext markup language
HTN
hierarchical task network
HTTP
hypertext transmission protocol
HW/SW
hardware/software
I
I/O
input/output
I3CON
industrialized, integrated, intelligent,
construction
IA
interval algebra
IA
instantaneous!allocation
IAA
interaction!agent
IAB
International Association of Bioethics
IACAP
International Association for Computing
and Philosophy
IAD
interaural amplitude difference
IAD
intelligent!assisting device
IARC
International Aerial Robotics
Competition
IAS
intelligent!autonomous system
IBVS
image-based visual servo control
IC
integrated chip
IC
integrated circuit
ICA
independent!component analysis
ICAPS
International Conference on Automated
Planning and Scheduling
ICAR
International Conference on Advanced
Robotics
ICBL
International Campaign to Ban
Landmines
ICC
instantaneous center of curvature
ICE
internet communications engine
ICP
iterative closest point
ICR
instantaneous center of rotation
ICRA
International Conference on Robotics
and Automation
ICT
information!and communication
technology
ID
inside diameter
ID
identiﬁer
IDE
integrated!development environment
IDL
interface deﬁnition language
IE
information!ethics
IED
improvised explosive device
IEEE
Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers
IEKF
iterated extended Kalman ﬁlter
IETF
internet!engineering task force
IFA
Internationale Funk Ausstellung
IFOG
interferometric ﬁber-optic gyro
IFR
International Federation of Robotics
IFREMER
Institut français de recherche pour
l’exploitation de la mer
IFRR
International Foundation of Robotics
Research
IFSAR
interferometric SAR
IHIP
intermediate haptic interaction point
IIR
inﬁnite impulse response
IIS
Internet Information Services
IIT
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
IJCAI
International Joint Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
IK
inverse kinematics
ILLS
instrumented logical sensor system
ILO
International Labor Organization
ILQR
iterative linear quadratic regulator
IM
injury measure
IMAV
International Micro Air Vehicles
IMTS
intelligent!multimode transit system
IMU
inertial measurement unit
INS
inertia navigation system

List of Abbreviations
LXIX
INS
inertial navigation system
IO
input output
IO
inferior olive
IOSS
input-output-to-state stability
IP
internet protocol
IP
interphalangeal
IPA
Institute for Manufacturing Engineering
and Automation
IPC
interprocess communication
IPC
international AI planning competition
IPMC
ionic polymer-metal composite
IPR
intellectual property right
IR
infrared
IRB
Institutional Review Board
IREDES
International Rock Excavation Data
Exchange Standard
IRL
in real life
IRL
inverse!reinforcement learning
IRLS
iteratively reweighted least square
IRNSS
Indian regional navigational satellite
system
IROS
Intelligent Robots and Systems
IS
importance sampling
ISA
industrial standard architecture
ISA
international standard atmosphere
ISAR
inverse SAR
ISDN
integrated services digital network
ISE
international submarine engineering
ISER
International Symposium on
Experimental Robotics
ISM
implicit shape model
ISO
International Organization for
Standardization
ISP
Internet service provider
ISR
intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance
ISRR
International Symposium of Robotics
Research
ISS
international space station
ISS
input-to-state stability
IST
Instituto Superior Técnico
IST
Information Society Technologies
IT
intrinsic tactile
IT
information!technology
IT
inferotemporal cortex
ITD
interaural time difference
IU
interaction!unit
IV
instrumental variable
IvP
interval programming
IWS
intelligent!wheelchair system
IxTeT
indexed time table
J
JAEA
Japan Atomic Energy Agency
JAMSTEC
Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science
and Technology
JAMSTEC
Japan Marine Science and Technology
Center
JAUS
joint architecture for unmanned systems
JAXA
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency
JDL
joint directors of laboratories
JEM
Japan Experiment Module
JEMRMS
Japanese experiment module remote
manipulator system
JHU
Johns Hopkins University
JND
just noticeable difference
JPL
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
JPS
jigsaw positioning system
JSC
Johnson Space Center
JSIM
joint-space inertia matrix
JSP
Java server pages
K
KAIST
Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology
KERS
kinetic energy recovery system
KIPR
KISS Institute for Practical Robotics
KLD
Kullback–Leibler divergence
KNN
k-nearest neighbor
KR
knowledge representation
KRISO
Korea Research Institute of Ships and
Ocean Engineering
L
L/D
lift-to-drag
LAAS
Laboratory for Analysis and
Architecture of Systems
LADAR
laser radar
LAGR
learning!applied to ground robots
LARC
Lie algebra rank condition
LARS
Laparoscopic Assistant Robotic System
LASC
Longwall Automation Steering
Committee
LBL
long-baseline system
LCAUV
long-range cruising AUV
LCC
life-cycle-costing
LCD
liquid-crystal display
LCM
light-weight communications and
marshalling
LCP
linear complementarity problem
LCSP
linear constraint satisfaction program
LDA
latent Dirichlet allocation
LED
light-emitting diode
LENAR
lower!extremity nonanthropomorphic
robot

LXX
List of Abbreviations
LEO
low!Earth orbit
LEV
leading edge vortex
LfD
learning!from demonstration
LGN
lateral!geniculate nucleus
LHD
load!haul-dump
LIDAR
light detection and ranging
LIGA
Lithographie, Galvanoumformung,
Abformung
LIP
linear inverted pendulum
LIP
lateral!intraparietal sulcus
LiPo
lithium polymer
LLC
locality constrained linear coding
LMedS
least median of squares
LMS
laser measurement system
LOG
Laplacian of Gaussian
LOPES
lower!extremity powered exoskeleton
LOS
line-of-sight
LP
linear program
LQG
linear quadratic Gaussian
LQR
linear quadratic regulator
LSS
logical sensor system
LSVM
latent support vector machine
LtA
lighter-than-air
LtA-UAS
lighter-than-air system
LTL
linear temporal logic
LVDT
linear variable differential transformer
LWR
light-weight robot
M
MACA
Afghanistan Mine Action Center
MACCEPA
mechanically adjustable compliance and
controllable equilibrium position
actuator
MAP
maximum a posteriori
MARS
multiappendage robotic system
MARUM
Zentrum für Marine
Umweltwissenschaften
MASE
Marine Autonomous Systems
Engineering
MASINT
measurement!and signatures intelligence
MAV
micro aerial vehicles
MAZE
Micro robot maze contest
MBA
motivated behavioral architecture
MBARI
Monterey Bay Aquarium Research
Institute
MBE
molecular-beam epitaxy
MBS
mobile!base system
MC
Monte Carlo
MCFC
molten carbonate fuel cell
MCP
magazining, cleaning, plotting
MCP
metacarpophalangeal
MCS
mission!control system
MDARS
mobile!detection assessment and
response system
MDL
minimum description length
MDP
Markov decision process
ME
mechanical!engeneering
MEG
magnetoencephalography
MEL
Mechanical Engineering Laboratory
MEMS
microelectromechanical system
MEP
motor!evoked potential
MESSIE
multi expert system for scene
interpretation and evaluation
MESUR
Mars environmental survey
MF
mossy ﬁber
MFI
micromechanical ﬂying insect
MFSK
multiple FSK
MHS
International Symposium on Micro
Mechatronics and Human Science
MHT
multihypothesis tracking
MIA
mechanical impedance adjuster
MIME
mirror!image movement enhancer
MIMICS
multimodal immersive motion
rehabilitation with interactive cognitive
system
MIMO
multiple-input–multiple-output
MIP
medial intraparietal sulcus
MIPS
microprocessor without interlocked
pipeline stages
MIR
mode identiﬁcation and recovery
MIRO
middleware for robot
MIS
minimally invasive surgery
MIT
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MITI
Ministry of International Trade and
Industry
MKL
multiple kernel learning
ML
machine!learning
MLE
maximum likelihood estimate
MLR
mesencephalic locomotor region
MLS
multilevel surface map
MMC
metal matrix composite
MMMS
multiple master multiple-slave
MMSAE
multiple model switching adaptive
estimator
MMSE
minimum mean-square error
MMSS
multiple master single-slave
MNS
mirror!neuron system
MOCVD
metallo-organic chemical vapor
deposition
MOMR
multiple operator multiple robot
MOOS
mission oriented operating suite
MOOS
motion-oriented operating system
MORO
mobile robot
MOSR
multiple operator single robot
MP
moving plate
MPC
model predictive control

List of Abbreviations
LXXI
MPF
manifold particle ﬁlter
MPFIM
multiple!paired forward-inverse model
MPHE
multiphalanx hand exoskeleton
MPSK
Mary phase shift keying
MQAM
Mary quadrature amplitude modulation
MR
magnetorheological
MR
multiple reﬂection
MR
multirobot!task
MRAC
model reference adaptive control
MRDS
Microsoft robotics developers studio
MRF
Markov random ﬁeld
MRHA
multiple!resource host architecture
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
MRSR
Mars rover sample return
MRTA
multirobot!task allocation
MSAS
multifunctional satellite augmentation
system
MSER
maximally stable extremal region
MSHA
US Mine Safety and Health
Administration
MSK
minimum shift keying
MSL
middle-size league
MSM
master–slave!manipulator
MST
microsystem technology
MT
momentum theory
MT
multitask
MT
medial temporal area
MTBF
mean time between failures
MTI
moving target indicator
MVERT
move value estimation for robot teams
MWNT
multiwalled carbon nanotube
N
N&G
nursery and greenhouse
NAP
nonaccidental property
NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Agency
NASDA
National Space Development Agency of
Japan
NASREM
NASA/NBS standard reference model
NBS
National Bureau of Standards
NC
numerical control
ND
nearness diagram navigation
NDDS
network data distribution service
NDGPS
nationwide different GPS system
NDI
nonlinear dynamic inversion
NDT
normal distributions transform
NEMO
network!mobility
NEMS
nanoelectromechanical system
NEO
neodymium
NERVE
New England Robotics Validation and
Experimentation
NESM
normalized ESM
NIDRR
National Institute on Disability and
Rehabilitation Research
NiMH
nickel metal hydride battery
NIMS
networked!infomechanical systems
NIOSH
United States National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health
NIRS
near infrared spectroscopy
NIST
National Institute of Standards and
Technology
NLIS
national livestock identiﬁcation scheme
NLP
nonlinear!programming problem
NMEA
National Marine Electronics Association
NMF
nonnegative matrix factorization
NMMI
natural machine motion initiative
NMR
nuclear!magnetic resonance
NN
neural network
NOAA
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
NOAH
navigation!and obstacle avoidance help
NOC
National Oceanography Centre
NOTES
natural!oriﬁce transluminal surgery
NPO
nonproﬁt organization
NPS
Naval Postgraduate School
NQE
national qualifying event
NRI
national robotics initiative
NRM
nanorobotic manipulator
NRTK
network real-time kinematic
NTPP
nontangential proper part
NTSC
National Television System Committee
NURBS
nonuniform rational B-spline
NUWC
Naval Undersea Warfare Center
Division Newport
NZDF
New Zealand Defence Force
O
OAA
open!agent architecture
OASIS
onboard autonomous science
investigation system
OAT
optimal arbitrary time-delay
OBU
on board unit
OC
optimal control
OCPP
optimal!coverage path planning
OCR
OC robotics
OCT
optical!coherence tomography
OCU
operator control unit
OD
outer diameter
ODE
ordinary differential equation
ODE
open dynamics engine
ODI
ordinary differential inclusion
OECD
Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development
OKR
optokinetic response
OLP
ofﬂine programming

LXXII
List of Abbreviations
OM
optical microscope
OM
occupancy map
ONR
US Ofﬁce of Naval Research
OOF
out of ﬁeld
OOTL
human!out of the loop control
OPRoS
open platform for robotic service
ORCA
open robot control architecture
ORCCAD
open robot controller computer aided
design
ORI
open!roboethics initiative
ORM
obstacle restriction method
OROCOS
open robot control software
ORU
orbital replacement unit
OS
operating system
OSC
operational-space control
OSIM
operational-space inertia matrix
OSU
Ohio State University
OTH
over-the-horizon
OUR-K
ontology based uniﬁed robot knowledge
OWL
web ontology language
OxIM
Oxford intelligent machine
P
P
prismatic joint
P&O
prosthetics!and orthotic
PA
point algebra
PACT
perception!for action control theory
PAD
pleasure arousal dominance
PAFC
phosphoric acid fuel cell
PAM
pneumatic artiﬁcial muscle
PaMini
pattern-based mixed-initiative
PANi
polyaniline
PANTOMEC
pantograph mechanism driven
PAPA
privacy, accuracy, intellectual property,
and access
PAS
pseudo-amplitude scan
PAT
proximity!awareness technology
PB
parametric!bias
PbD
programming!by demonstration
PBVS
pose-based visual servo control
PC
polycarbonate
PC
personal computer
PC
principal contact
PC
passivity controller
PC
proprioception
PC
Purkinje cell
PCA
principal component analysis
PCI
peripheral component interconnect
PCIe
peripheral component interconnect
express
PCL
point cloud library
PCM
programmable!construction machine
PD
proportional–derivative
PDE
partial differential equation
PDGF
power!data grapple ﬁxture
PDMS
polydimethylsiloxane
PDOP
positional dilution of precision
PDT
proximity!detection technology
PEAS
probing environment and adaptive
sleeping protocol
PEFC
polymer electrolyte fuel cell
PEMFC
proton exchange membrane fuel cell
PerceptOR
perception!for off-road robotics
PET
positron emission tomography
PF
particle ﬁlter
PF
parallel!ﬁber
PFC
prefrontal cortex
PFH
point feature histogram
PFM
potential ﬁeld method
PGM
probabilistic graphical model
PGRL
policy gradient!reinforcement learning
pHRI
physical!human–robot interaction
PI
policy iteration
PI
possible!injury
PI
propositional integral
PI
proportional–integral
PIC
programmable!intelligent computer
PID
proportional–integral–derivative
PIT
posterior!inferotemporal cortex
PKM
parallel kinematics machine
PKM
parallel kinematic machine
PL
power loading
PLC
programmable!logic controller
PLD
programmable!logic device
PLEXIL
plan execution interchange language
PLSA
probabilistic latent semantic analysis
PLZT
lead lanthanum zirconate titanate
PM
permanent magnet
PMC
polymer matrix composite
PMMA
polymethyl methacrylate
PneuNet
pneumatic network
PnP
prespective-n-point
PNT
Petri net transducer
PO
partially overlapping
PO
passivity observer
POE
local product-of-exponential
POI
point!of interest
POM
polyoxymethylene
POMDP
partially observable Markov decision
process
POP
partial-order planning
PPS
precise positioning system
PPy
polypyrrole
PR
positive photoresist
PRM
probabilistic roadmap
PRM
probabilistic roadmap method
PRN
pseudo-random noise

List of Abbreviations
LXXIII
PRoP
personal roving presence
ProVAR
professional vocational assistive robot
PRS
procedural reasoning system
PS
power source
PSD
position sensing device
PSD
position-sensitive-device
PSK
phase shift keying
PSPM
passive set-position modulation
PTAM
parallel tracking and mapping
PTU
pan–tilt unit
PUMA
programmable!universal machine for
assembly
PVA
position, velocity, and attitude
PVC
polyvinyl chloride
PVD
physical vapor deposition
PVDF
polyvinylidene ﬂuoride
PWM
pulse-width modulation
PwoF
point-contact-without-friction
PZT
lead zirconate titanate
Q
QAM
quadrature amplitude modulation
QD
quantum dot
QID
qualiﬁer, inspection and demonstration
QOLT
quality!of life technology
QOS
quality of service
QP
quadratic programming
QPSK
quadrature phase shift keying
QRIO
quest for curiosity
QSC
quasistatic!constrained
QT
quasistatic telerobotics
QZSS
quasi-zenith satellite system
R
R
revolute joint
R.U.R.
Rossum’s Universal Robots
RA
rectangle algebra
RAC
Robotics and Automation Council
RAIM
receiver autonomous integrity monitor
RALF
robotic arm large and ﬂexible
RALPH
rapidly adapting lane position handler
RAM
random!access memory
RAMS
robot-assisted microsurgery
RAMS
random!access memory system
RANSAC
random sample consensus
RAP
reactive action package
RAS
Robotics and Automation Society
RBC
recognition!by-component
RBF
radial!basis function network
RBF
radial!basis function
RBT
robot!experiment
RC
radio control
RC
robot!controller
RCC
region connection calculus
RCC
remote center of compliance
RCM
remote!center of motion
RCP
rover chassis prototype
RCR
responsible conduct of research
RCS
real-time control system
RCS
rig control system
RDT
rapidly exploring dense tree
RECS
robotic!explosive charging system
REINFORCE
reward increment = nonnegative factor
 offset reinforcement  characteristic
eligibility
RERC
Rehabilitation Engineering Research
Center
RF
radio frequency
RFID
radio frequency identiﬁcation
RG
rate gyro
RGB-D
color camera with depth
RGB-D
red green blue distance
RGB-D
red–green–blue–depth
RHIB
rigid!hull inﬂatable boat
RIE
reactive-ion etching
RIG
rate-integrating gyro
RISC
reduced instruction set computer
RL
reinforcement learning
RLG
ring laser gyroscope
RLG
random loop generator
RMC
resolved momentum control
RMDP
relational Markov decision processes
RMMS
reconﬁgurable modular manipulator
system
RMS
root mean square
RNDF
route network deﬁnition ﬁle
RNEA
recursive Newton–Euler algorithm
RNN
recurrent neural network
RNNPB
recurrent neural network with
parametric bias
RNS
reaction!null-space
ROC
receiver operating curve
ROC
remote!operations centre
ROCCO
robot!construction system for computer
integrated construction
ROD
robot!oriented design
ROKVISS
robotics component veriﬁcation on ISS
ROKVISS
robotics!components veriﬁcation on the
ISS
ROM
run-of-mine
ROM
read-only memory
ROMAN
Robot and Human Interactive
Communication
ROS
robot operating system
ROV
remotely operated vehicle
ROV
remotely!operated underwater vehicle

LXXIV
List of Abbreviations
RP
rapid prototyping
RP-VITA
remote presence virtual C independent
telemedicine assistant
RPC
remote procedure call
RPI
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
RPS
room positioning system
RRSD
Robotics and Remote Systems Division
RRT
rapidly exploring random tree
RS
Reeds and Shepp
RSJ
Robotics Society of Japan
RSS
Robotics Science and Systems
RSTA
reconnaissance, surveillance, and target
acquisition
RSU
road!side unit
RT
real-time
RT
room temperature
RT
reaction!time
RTCMS
C104 Radio Technical Commission for
Maritime Services Special Committee
104
RTD
resistance temperature devices
RTI
real-time innovation
RTK
real-time kinematics
rTMS
repetitive!TMS
RTS
real-time system
RTT
real-time toolkit
RV
rotary vector
RVD
rendezvous/docking
RW
rotary-wing
RWI
real-world interface
RWS
robotic workstation
R&D
research and development
R&D
research and development
S
SA
simulated annealing
SA
selective availability
SAFMC
Singapore Amazing Flying Machine
Competition
SAI
simulation!and active interfaces
SAM
smoothing and mapping
SAN
semiautonomous navigation
SAR
synthetic aperture radar
SAR
socially assistive robotics
SARSA
state action-reward-state-action
SAS
synthetic aperture sonar
SAS
stability augmentation system
SAT
International Conference on Theory and
Applications of Satisﬁability Testing
SBAS
satellite-based augmentation system
SBL
short baseline
SBSS
space based space surveillance
SC
sparse coding
SCARA
selective compliance assembly robot
arm
SCI
spinal cord!injury
sci-ﬁ
science ﬁction
SCM
smart composite microstructures
SCM
soil!contact model
SD
standard deviation
SDK
standard development kit
SDK
software development kit
SDM
shape deposition manufacturing
SDR
software!for distributed robotics
SDV
spatial dynamic voting
SEA
series elastic actuator
SEE
standard!end effector
SELF
sensorized environment for life
SEM
scanning electron microscope
SET
single electron transistor
SF
soft ﬁnger
SFM
structure from motion
SFX
sensor fusion effect
SGAS
semiglobal asymptotic stability
SGD
stochastic gradient descent
SGM
semiglobal!matching
SGUUB
semiglobal uniform ultimate
boundedness
SIFT
scale-invariant feature transform
SIGINT
signal!intelligence
SIR
sampling importance resampling
SISO
single input single-output
SKM
serial!kinematic machines
SLA
stereolithography
SLAM
simultaneous localization and mapping
SLICE
speciﬁcation language for ICE
SLIP
spring loaded inverted pendulum
SLRV
surveyor lunar rover vehicle
SLS
selective laser sintering
SM
static margin
SMA
shape memory alloy
SMAS
solid material assembly system
SMC
sequential Monte Carlo
SME
small!and medium enterprises
SMMS
single-master multiple-slave
SMP
shape memory polymer
SMS
short message service
SMSS
single-master single-slave
SMT
satisﬁabiliy modulo theory
SMU
safe!motion unit
SNAME
society of naval architects and marine
engineer
SNOM
scanning near-ﬁeld optical microscopy
SNR
signal-to-noise ratio
SNS
spallation neutron source
SOFC
solid oxide fuel cell
SOI
silicon-on-insulator

List of Abbreviations
LXXV
SOMA
stream-oriented messaging architecture
SOMR
single operator multiple robot
SOS
save our souls
SOSR
single operator single robot
SPA
sense-plan-act
SPaT
signal!phase and timing
SPAWAR
Space and Naval Warfare Systems
Center
SPC
self-posture changeability
SPDM
special purpose dexterous manipulator
SPHE
single-phalanx hand exoskeleton
SPL
single!port laparoscopy
SPL
standard!platform
SPM
scanning probe microscope
SPM
spatial pyramid matching
SPMS
shearer position measurement system
SPS
standard position system
SPU
spherical, prismatic, universal
SQP
sequential!quadratic programming
SR
single-robot task
SRA
spatial!reasoning agent
SRCC
spatial remote center compliance
SRI
Stanford Research Institute
SRMS
shuttle remote manipulator system
SSA
sparse surface adjustment
SSC
smart soft composite
SSL
small-size league
SSRMS
space!station remote manipulator system
ST
single-task
STEM
science, technology, engineering and
mathematics
STM
scanning tunneling microscope
STP
simple temporal problem
STriDER
self-excited tripodal dynamic
experimental robot
STS
superior!temporal sulcus
SUGV
small!unmanned ground vehicle
SUN
scene understanding
SURF
robust feature
SVD
singular value decomposition
SVM
support vector machine
SVR
support vector regression
SWNT
single-walled carbon nanotube
SWRI
Southwest Research Institute
T
T-REX
teleo-reactive executive
TA
time-extended assignment
TAL
temporal action logic
TAM
taxon!affordance model
TAP
test action pair
TBG
time-base generator
TC
technical committee
TCFFHRC
Trinity College’s Fireﬁghting Robot
Contest
TCP
transfer control protocol
TCP
tool center point
TCP
transmission control protocol
TCSP
temporal constraint satisfaction problem
tDCS
transcranial!direct current stimulation
TDL
task description language
TDT
tension-differential type
TECS
total energy control system
TEM
transmission electron microscope
tEODor
telerob explosive ordnance disposal and
observation robot
TFP
total!factor productivity
TL
temporal logic
TMM
transfer matrix method
TMS
tether management system
TMS
transcranial!magnetic stimulation
TNT
trinitrotoluene
TOA
time of arrival
TOF
time-of-ﬂight
ToF
time-of-ﬂight
TORO
torque!controlled humanoid robot
TPaD
tactile pattern display
TPBVP
two-point boundary value problem
TPP
tangential proper part
TRC
Transportation Research Center
TRIC
task space retrieval using inverse
optimal control
TS
technical!speciﬁcation
TSEE
teleoperated!small emplacement
excavator
TSP
telesensor programming
TTC
time-to-collision
TUM
Technical University of Munich
TV
television
U
U
universal joint
UAS
unmanned aircraft system
UAS
unmanned!aerial system
UAV
unmanned aerial vehicle
UAV
fusing air vehicle
UAV
ﬁelded unmanned aerial vehicle
UB
University of Bologna
UBC
University of British Columbia
UBM
Universität der Bundeswehr Munich
UCLA
University of California, Los Angeles
UCO
uniformly completely observable
UDP
user datagram protocol
UDP
user data protocol
UGV
unmanned!ground vehicle
UHD
ultrahigh deﬁnition

LXXVI
List of Abbreviations
UHF
ultrahigh frequency
UHV
ultrahigh-vacuum
UKF
unscented Kalman ﬁlter
ULE
upper!limb exoskeleton
UML
uniﬁed modeling language
UMV
unmanned marine vehicle
UNESCO
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc
and Cultural Organization
UPnP
universal plug and play
URC
Ubiquitous Robotic Companion
URL
uniform resource locator
USAR
urban!search and rescue
USB
universal!serial bus
USBL
ultrashort baseline
USBL
ultrashort-baseline
USC
University of Southern California
USV
unmanned!surface vehicle
UTC
universal coordinated time
UUB
uniform ultimate boundedness
UUV
unmanned underwater vehicle
UV
ultraviolet
UVMS
underwater vehicle!manipulator system
UWB
ultrawide band
UXO
unexploded ordnance
V
V2V
vehicle-to-vehicle
VAS
visual!analog scale
VCR
video!cassette recorder
vdW
van der Waals
VE
virtual environment
VFH
vector ﬁeld histogram
VHF
very high frequency
VI
value iteration
VIA
variable impedance actuator
VIP
ventral intraparietal
VM
virtual!manipulator
VME
Versa Module Europa
VO
virtual object
VO
velocity obstacle
VOC
visual object class
VOR
vestibular-ocular reﬂex
VR
variable reluctance
VRML
virtual reality modeling language
VS
visual servo
VS-Joint
variable stiffness joint
VSA
variable stiffness actuator
VTOL
vertical take-off and landing
W
W3C
WWW consortium
WAAS
wide-area augmentation system
WABIAN
Waseda bipedal humanoid
WABOT
Waseda robot
WAM
whole-arm manipulator
WAN
wide-area network
WASP
wireless!ad-hoc system for positioning
WAVE
wireless!access in vehicular
environments
WCF
worst-case factor
WCR
worst-case range
WDVI
weighted!difference vegetation index
WG
world!graph
WGS
World Geodetic System
WHOI
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
WML
wireless markup language
WMR
wheeled mobile robot
WSN
wireless!sensor network
WTA
winner-take-all
WTC
World Trade Center
WWW
world wide web
X
XCOM
extrapolated center of mass
XHTML
extensible hyper text markup language
XML
extensible markup language
xUCE
urban!challenge event
Y
YARP
yet another robot platform
Z
ZMP
zero moment point
ZOH
zero order hold
ZP
zona pellucida

Multimedia Contents Robotics and
1
Introduction
1. Robotics and the Handbook
Bruno Siciliano, Oussama Khatib
Robots! Robots on Mars and in oceans, in hospitals
and homes, in factories and schools; robots fight-
ing fires, making goods and products, saving time
and lives. Robots today are making a consider-
able impact on many aspects of modern life, from
industrial manufacturing to healthcare, trans-
portation, and exploration of the deep space and
sea. Tomorrow, robots will be as pervasive and per-
sonal as today’s personal computers. This chapter
retraces the evolution of this fascinating field from
the ancient to the modern times through a number
of milestones: from the first automated mechani-
cal artifact (1400 BC) through the establishment of
the robot concept in the 1920s, the realization of
the first industrial robots in the 1960s, the defini-
tion of robotics science and the birth of an active
research community in the 1980s, and the expan-
1.1
A Brief History of Robotics .......................
1
1.2
The Robotics Community .........................
3
1.3
This Handbook........................................
4
Video-References...........................................
5
sion towards the challenges of the human world of
the twenty-first century. Robotics in its long jour-
ney has inspired this handbook which is organized
in three layers: the foundations of robotics science;
the consolidated methodologies and technologies
of robot design, sensing and perception, manip-
ulation and interfaces, mobile and distributed
robotics; the advanced applications of field and
service robotics, as well as of human-centered
and life-like robotics.
1.1 A Brief History of Robotics
The dream to create machines that are skilled and
intelligent has been part of humanity from the begin-
ning of time. This dream is now becoming part of
our world’s striking reality. Since the early civiliza-
tions, one of man’s greatest ambitions has been to
create artifacts in their image. The legend of the Ti-
tan Prometheus, who molded humankind from clay,
or that of the giant Talus, the bronze slave forged
by Hephaestus (3500 BC), testify to this quest in
Greek mythology. The Egyptians’ oracle statues hid-
ing priests inside (2500 BC) were perhaps the pre-
cursor of our modern thinking machines. The clepsy-
dra water clock introduced by the Babylonians (1400
BC) was one of the ﬁrst automated mechanical ar-
tifacts. In the following centuries, human creativity
has given rise to a host of devices such as the au-
tomaton theatre of Hero of Alexandria (100 AD), the
hydro-powered water-raising and humanoid machines
of Al-Jazari (1200), and Leonardo da Vinci’s numer-
ous ingenious designs (1500). The development of
automata continued to ﬂourish in the eighteen century
both in Europe and Asia, with creations such as Jacquet-
Droz’s family of androids (drawer, musician and writer)
and the karakuri-ningyo mechanical dolls (tea server
and archer).
The robot concept was clearly established by those
many creative historical realizations. Nonetheless, the
emergence of the physical robot had to await the ad-
vent of its underlying technologies during the course
of the twentieth century. In 1920, the term robot – de-
rived from robota which means subordinate labour in
Slav languages – was ﬁrst introduced by the Czech
playwright Karel ˇCapek in his play Rossum’s Universal
Robots (R.U.R.). In 1940, the ethics of the interaction

Introduction
2
Introduction
between robots and humans was envisioned to be gov-
erned by the well-known three fundamental laws of
Isaac Asimov, the Russian science-ﬁction writer in his
novel Runaround.
The middle of the twentieth century brought the ﬁrst
explorations of the connection between human intelli-
gence and machines, marking the beginning of an era
of fertile research in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI). Around that time, the ﬁrst robots were realized.
They beneﬁted from advances in the different technolo-
gies of mechanics, controls, computers and electronics.
As always, new designs motivate new research and dis-
coveries, which, in turn, lead to enhanced solutions
and thus to novel concepts. This virtuous circle over
time produced that knowledge and understanding which
gave birth to the ﬁeld of robotics, properly referred to
as: the science and technology of robots.
The early robots built in the 1960s stemmed from
the conﬂuence of two technologies: numerical control
machines for precise manufacturing, and teleoperators
for remote radioactive material handling. These master-
slave arms were designed to duplicate one-to-one the
mechanics of the human arm, and had rudimental con-
trol and little perception about the environment. Then,
during the mid-to-late twentieth century, the devel-
opment of integrated circuits, digital computers and
miniaturized components enabled computer-controlled
robots to be designed and programmed. These robots,
termed industrial robots, became essential components
in the automation of ﬂexible manufacturing systems
in the late 1970s. Further to their wide application in
the automotive industry, industrial robots were success-
fully employed in general industry, such as the metal
products, the chemical, the electronics and the food
industries. More recently, robots have found new appli-
cations outside the factories, in areas such as cleaning,
search and rescue, underwater, space, and medical ap-
plications.
In the 1980s robotics was deﬁned as the science
which studies the intelligent connection between per-
ception and action. With reference to this deﬁnition,
the action of a robotic system is entrusted to a loco-
motion apparatus to move in the environment (wheels,
crawlers, legs, propellers) and/or to a manipulation ap-
paratus to operate on objects present in the environment
(arms, end effectors, artiﬁcial hands), where suitable
actuators animate the mechanical components of the
robot. The perception is extracted from the sensors pro-
viding information on the state of the robot (position
and speed) and its surrounding environment (force and
tactile, range and vision). The intelligent connection is
entrusted to a programming, planning and control ar-
chitecture which relies on the perception and available
models of the robot and environment and exploits learn-
ing and skill acquisition.
In the 1990s research was boosted by the need to
resort to robots to address human safety in hazardous
environments (ﬁeld robotics), or to enhance the human
operator ability and reduce his/her fatigue (human aug-
mentation), or else by the desire to develop products
with wide potential markets aimed at improving the
quality of life (service robotics). A common denomina-
tor of such application scenarios was the need to operate
in a scarcely structured environment which ultimately
requires increased abilities and a higher degree of au-
tonomy.
The ﬁrst video attached to this chapter Robots –
A 50 Year Journey by Oussama Khatib (2000) shows the
development of robotics through the ﬁrst ﬁve decades
(
VIDEO 805 ).
By the dawn of the new millennium, robotics has
undergone a major transformation in scope and di-
mensions. This expansion has been brought about by
the maturity of the ﬁeld and the advances in its re-
lated technologies. From a largely dominant industrial
focus, robotics has been rapidly expanding into the
challenges of the human world (human-centered and
life-like robotics). The new generation of robots is ex-
pected to safely and dependably co-habitat with humans
in homes, workplaces, and communities, providing sup-
port in services, entertainment, education, healthcare,
manufacturing, and assistance.
Beyond its impact on physical robots, the body of
knowledge robotics has produced is revealing a much
wider range of applications reaching across diverse
research areas and scientiﬁc disciplines, such as: biome-
chanics, haptics, neurosciences, virtual simulation, ani-
mation, surgery, and sensor networks among others. In
return, the challenges of the new emerging areas are
proving an abundant source of stimulation and insights
for the ﬁeld of robotics. It is indeed at the intersection of
disciplines that the most striking advances are expected
to happen.
The second video attached to this chapter Robots –
The Journey Continues by Bruno Siciliano, Oussama
Khatib and Torsten Kröger (2015) shows the intensive
and vibrating evolution of robotics through the last ﬁf-
teen years (
VIDEO 812 ).

Robotics and the Handbook
1.2 The Robotics Community
3
Introduction
1.2 The Robotics Community
The dissemination of research results and ﬁndings in
archival publications and conference presentations has
played an important role in the advancement of robotics
in the past three decades. The extent of scientiﬁc ac-
tivities in robotics has led to the establishment of
professional societies and research networks devoted to
the ﬁeld, which have ultimately contributed to the build-
ing of an international robotics community.
In the early 1980s, robotics was entering a new
era in its development following the earlier successes
in industrial applications. With much energy and ex-
citement, the pioneers of robotics launched a number
of initiatives, which came to shape what became our
ﬁeld. The ﬁrst robotics textbook by Richard Paul Robot
Manipulators: Mathematics, Programming, and Con-
trol appeared in 1981 (MIT Press). A year later, Mike
Brady, Richard Paul, and their colleagues established
the ﬁrst journal entirely devoted to robotics, the Inter-
national Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR), which
was followed by the organization in 1983 of the ﬁrst In-
ternational Symposium of Robotics Research (ISRR).
The intent was to foster the notion of robotics as
a distinct scientiﬁc ﬁeld and to create a broad com-
munity of robotics. It was in the pursuit of these
aims that the International Foundation of Robotics Re-
search (IFRR) was later formally founded in 1986
with the aim of promoting the development of robotics
as a science, establishing the theoretical foundations
and technology basis for its ever-expanding applica-
tions, with emphasis on its potential role to beneﬁt
humans.
The year 1984 brought a host of other major de-
velopments in robotics with the establishment of the
IEEE Robotics and Automation Council (RAC), led by
George Saridis, the organization of the ﬁrst IEEE Con-
ference on Robotics (John Jarvis and Richard Paul) –
which became the IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA) the year after, the
launching of the IEEE Journal of Robotics and Au-
tomation (George Bekey), and RAC Newsletter (Wesley
Snyder). The transformation of the council into the
IEEE Robotics and Automation Society (RAS) was for-
mally accomplished in 1989. With the birth of RAS,
the IEEE Journal of Robotics and Automation became
the IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation –
which split into the IEEE Transactions on Robotics
and the IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and
Engineering later in 2004; then, the RAS Newsletter be-
came the IEEE Robotics and Automation Magazine in
1994.
Over the following years, a number of other activi-
ties were launched. New conferences such as IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-
tems (IROS 1983), International Conference on Ad-
vanced Robotics (ICAR 1983), International Sympo-
sium on Experimental Robotics (ISER 1989), Robotics:
Science and Systems (RSS 2005), as well as new
journals such as Robotica (1983), Journal of Robotic
Systems (1984, subsequently Journal of Field Robotics
2006), Robotics and Autonomous Systems (1985), Ad-
vanced Robotics (1986), Journal of Intelligent and
Robotic Systems (1988), Autonomous Robots (1994),
contributed to a further substantial growth of the
robotics community.
The year 1991 marked an important novelty into
the ICRA ﬂagship conference series with the creation
of video proceedings, introduced earlier by Oussama
Khatib and Vincent Hayward in ISER 1989. Since then
video proceedings attained an important role for dis-
semination of research work in our robotics community.
This media has become an integral part of most archival
publications in recent years.
On the other hand, the introduction of graduate pro-
grams in robotics in many academic institutions around
the world in the last two decades is a clear illustration of
the level of maturity reached by robotics as a scientiﬁc
ﬁeld. Further to Paul’s seminal book, other textbooks
were published between the middle 1980s and middle
1990s, such as Introduction to Robotics: Mechanics and
Control by John Craig (1985), Robot Analysis and Con-
trol by Harry Asada and Jean-Jacques Slotine (1986),
Robotics: Control, Sensing, Vision, and Intelligence by
King Sun Fu, Rafael González and George Lee (1987),
Robot Dynamics and Control by Mark Spong and M.
Vidyasagar (1989), Foundation of Robotics by Tsu-
neo Yoshikawa (1990), A Mathematical Introduction to
Robotic Manipulation by Richard Murray, Zexiang Li
and Shankar Sastry (1994), and Modelling and Control
of Robot Manipulators by Lorenzo Sciavicco and Bruno
Siciliano (1995).
Engagement with students is essential for the future
of the robotics ﬁeld. Through a joint initiative between
IEEE RAS and IFRR, the School of Robotics Science
was founded in 2004. Summer schools have rapidly ex-
panded in scope and frequency, covering a wide range
of robotics research areas. Such programs are providing
students and young researchers with an educational op-
portunity of the highest scientiﬁc level, enabling them
to feed and grow their potential to become the top
robotics scientists in our community.
Both IEEE RAS and IFRR have constantly pro-
moted research, education, dissemination, and in-
dustrial realizations through their own forums and
through collaborations with many other organizations

Introduction
4
Introduction
in the robotics community world-wide, including Eu-
ropean Robotics Research Network (EURON) – which
has recently merged into the European Association
of Robotics (euRobotics), International Federation of
Robotics (IFR), and Robotics Society of Japan (RSJ).
As our ﬁeld continues to expand and embrace the
challenges of operation in the human world, robotics
is revealing a much wider range of applications and
involving diverse scientiﬁc disciplines such as biome-
chanics, neuroscience, haptics, animation, surgery, and
sensor networks among others. Today, new communi-
ties of researchers and developers are forming, with
growing connections to the core of robotics research.
A strategic goal for our community is one of outreach
and scientiﬁc cooperation across all regions and organi-
zations. Our common endeavor as roboticists to reach
this goal certainly holds the promise of exciting ad-
vances toward new frontiers.
1.3 This Handbook
The intensive stream of robotics research documented
in the literature culminates into this unique reference,
which aims at collecting in one self-contained vol-
ume the most signiﬁcant achievements of our inter-
national robotics community. The Springer Handbook
of Robotics presents a full coverage of the ﬁeld from
its foundations, through the research areas, up to the
new emerging applications of robotics. Accordingly,
the material is organized in three logical layers reﬂect-
ing the historical development of the ﬁeld, as illustrated
in Fig. 1.1.
The foundations of robotics science, laid down in
the ﬁrst layer (Part A with its 14 chapters), address the
theory of robot mechanics, sensing, planning, and con-
trol. The consolidated methodologies and technologies
of robot design (Part B with its 12 chapters), sensing
and perception (Part C with its 8 chapters), manipu-
lation and interfaces (Part D with its 9 chapters) and
mobile and distributed robotics (Part E with its 9 chap-
ters) are presented in the second layer. The third layer
Design
(F.Park)
B
12
Sensing and
Perception
(H.Christensen)
C
8
Robotics
Foundations
(D. Orin)
A
14
Manipulation and
Interfaces
(M. Kaneko)
D
9
Robots at Work
(A. Zelinsky)
F
13
Robots and Humans
(D. Rus)
G
14
Moving in the
Environment
(R. Chatila)
E
9
Fig. 1.1 Organization of the handbook
is devoted to advanced applications, such as in ﬁeld
and service robotics (Part F with its 13 chapters) and
human-centered and life-like robotics (Part G with its
14 chapters).
Part A presents the fundamental principles and
methods that are used to model, design, and control
a robotic system. All of the foundational topics are
included in this part: kinematics, dynamics, mecha-
nisms and actuation, sensing and estimation, model
identiﬁcation, motion planning, motion control, force
control, redundant robots, robots with ﬂexible ele-
ments, robotic systems architectures and programming,
behaviour-based systems, AI reasoning methods for
robotics, robot learning. A chapter is devoted to each of
these topics. The topics are expanded and applied to spe-
ciﬁc robotic structures and systems in subsequent parts.
Part B is concerned with the design of various
robotic systems. Some of the obvious mechanical struc-
tures that come to mind are arms, legs, wheels and
hands; to this list can be added robots in the air

Robotics and the Handbook
1.3 This Handbook
5
Introduction
and subsea, as well as robot structures at the micro
and nano scales. With a separate chapter devoted to
design and evaluation performance, the chapters in
this part successively examine limbed systems, paral-
lel mechanisms, robot hands, snake-like and contin-
uum robots, novel actuators for soft robotics, modular
robots, biomimetic robots, wheeled robots, underwater
robots, ﬂying robots, and micro/nano robots.
Part C covers different sensory modalities and in-
tegration of sensor data across space and time to gen-
erate models of robots and the external environment.
Robotics is the intelligent coupling of perception and
action and as such Part C complements Part B to build
systems. This part of the handbook covers sensing
across contact, proprioception and exteroception. The
main sensing modalities such as force and tactile sens-
ing, inertial sensing, global positioning system (GPS)
and odometry, sonar sensing, range sensing, three-
dimensional (3-D) vision for navigation and grasping
visual object class recognition, and visual servoing
are presented. Both basic sensor models, sensor data
processing and associated representations are covered.
Finally, a chapter on multisensor data fusion introduces
the mathematical tools needed for integration of sensor
information across space and time.
Part D is concerned with interaction between robots
and objects, or between humans and robots. Manipu-
lation is supposed to handle an object through direct
contact by arms or ﬁngers or just a pusher, while in-
terfaces are supposed to make either direct or indirect
interaction between humans and robots. For enhancing
dexterity in robot manipulation, motion for manipula-
tion tasks, contact modelling and manipulation, grasp-
ing, cooperative manipulation, mobility and manipula-
tion, active manipulation for perception are addressed
in the ﬁrst half of this part. For achieving a skilful
manipulation or power increase in a human–robot sys-
tem, haptics, telerobotics, and networked robots are
discussed in the second half of Part D.
Part E covers a wide span of topics concerning the
motion of robots in the environment. At ﬁrst this part
addresses world modelling, simultaneous localization
and mapping, motion planning and obstacle avoidance.
Then the modelling and control issues of legged robots,
wheeled mobile robots, robots on rough terrain, under-
water robots, and aerial robots are dealt with. This part
completes Part A on foundations in the context of mo-
bile robotics, and given the role of perception, is closely
related to Part C on sensing. In addition, multiple mo-
bile robot systems are discussed.
Part F covers topics related to creating ﬁeld and ser-
vice application-based robots that operate in all types of
environments. This includes applications ranging from
industrial robots to robotics competitions and chal-
lenges, through a diverse array of robotics applications:
space, agriculture and forestry, construction, hazardous
applications, mining, disaster scenarios, intelligent ve-
hicles, medical and computer-integrated surgery, reha-
bilitation and health-care, domestic environments. This
part of the handbook, which draws on Parts A, B, C, D
and E, describes how robots can be put to work.
Part G covers topics related to creating robots
that operate in human-centered environments. These
include humanoids, human motion reconstruction,
physical human–robot interaction, human robot aug-
mentation, cognitive human–robot interaction, social
robotics, socially assistive robotics, learning from
humans, biologically-inspired robotics, evolutionary
robotics, neurobotics, and perceptual robotics. The part
concludes with the use of robotics for education, and
the socio-ethical implications of robots.
Each part is accompanied by a video which illus-
trates the main concepts and the underlying challenges
in common to the chapters in the part, while topical
videos related to the speciﬁc contents of each chapter
can be accessed through the web site of the multi-
media contents associated with the handbook http://
handbookofrobotics.org/.
The handbook has been conceived to provide a valu-
able resource not only for robotics experts, but also
for newcomers to this expanding ﬁeld, e.g., engineers,
medical doctors, computer scientists, and designers. In
particular, it is important to underline the tutorial value
of Part A to graduate students and post-docs, the re-
search value of Parts B to E for a wider coverage of
research in robotics, and the added value of Parts F and
G to engineers and scientists interested in new applica-
tions.
The contents of the various chapters have been in-
spired by a classic cut, i. e., avoiding the inclusion of
on-going or not well-established methods. An objec-
tive perspective has been taken, while covering multiple
approaches, with the goal of ensuring a high archival
value to the handbook. Each chapter is preceded by
a short summary, and an introductory section provid-
ing the state of the art in the area. The core sections
are developed at a tutorial level. Lengthy mathemati-
cal derivations have been avoided whenever possible,
while the equations, tables, and algorithms are illus-
trated in ready-to-use form. The ﬁnal section of the
chapter provides conclusions and topics for further
reading. From the foundations to the social and ethi-
cal implications of robotics, the eighty chapters of the
handbook provide a comprehensive collection of ﬁve
decades of progress in robotics. This sum is a testi-
mony to the level of accomplishments in our ﬁeld, and
a premise of further advances towards new frontiers of
robotics.

Introduction
6
Introduction
Video-References
VIDEO 805
Robots – A 50 year journey
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/01/videodetails/805
VIDEO 812
Robots – The journey continues
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/01/videodetails/812

7
Multimedia Contents Robotic
Part A
Part A Robotics Foundations
Ed. by David E. Orin
2
Kinematics
Kenneth J. Waldron, Ultimo, Australia
James Schmiedeler, Notre Dame, USA
3
Dynamics
Roy Featherstone, Canberra, Australia
David E. Orin, Columbus, USA
4
Mechanism and Actuation
Victor Scheinman, Stanford, USA
J. Michael McCarthy, Irvine, USA
Jae-Bok Song, Seoul, Korea
5
Sensing and Estimation
Henrik I. Christensen, Atlanta, USA
Gregory D. Hager, Baltimore, USA
6
Model Identification
John Hollerbach, Salt Lake City, USA
Wisama Khalil, Nantes, France
Maxime Gautier, Nantes, France
7
Motion Planning
Lydia E. Kavraki, Houston, USA
Steven M. LaValle, Urbana, USA
8
Motion Control
Wan Kyun Chung, Pohang, Korea
Li-Chen Fu, Taipei, Taiwan
Torsten Kröger, Mountain View, USA
9
Force Control
Luigi Villani, Naples, Italy
Joris De Schutter, Leuven-Heverlee,
Belgium
10 Redundant Robots
Stefano Chiaverini, Cassino, Italy
Giuseppe Oriolo, Rome, Italy
Anthony A. Maciejewski, Fort Collins, USA
11 Robots with Flexible Elements
Alessandro De Luca, Rome, Italy
Wayne J. Book, Atlanta, USA
12 Robotic Systems Architectures
and Programming
David Kortenkamp, Houston, USA
Reid Simmons, Pittsburgh, USA
Davide Brugali, Dalmine, Italy
13 Behavior-Based Systems
François Michaud, Sherbrooke, Canada
Monica Nicolescu, Reno, USA
14 AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics
Michael Beetz, Bremen, Germany
Raja Chatila, Paris, France
Joachim Hertzberg, Osnabrück, Germany
Federico Pecora, Örebro, Sweden
15 Robot Learning
Jan Peters, Darmstadt, Germany
Daniel D. Lee, Philadelphia, USA
Jens Kober, Delft, The Netherlands
Duy Nguyen-Tuong, Stuttgart, Germany
J. Andrew Bagnell, Pittsburgh, USA
Stefan Schaal, Los Angeles, USA

8
The chapters contained in Part A, Robotics Founda-
tions, present the fundamental principles and methods
that are used to develop a robotic system. In order to
perform the tasks that are envisioned for robots, many
challenging problems have been uncovered in kine-
matics, dynamics, design, actuation, sensing, model-
ing, motion planning, control, programming, decision-
making, task planning, and learning. Robots with re-
dundant kinematic degrees of freedom or with ﬂexible
elements add to the complexity of these systems. The
chapters in this part address the basic issues in each of
these areas.
Some of the basic problems in robotics are outlined
as follows. Robots often consist of a large number of
degrees of freedom so that they can provide the rich
set of three-dimensional (3-D) motions that may be re-
quired for a range of tasks. The kinematic and dynamic
relationships between the joint actuators’ motion and
torques, and the desired motion and force for a task can
be very complex. The design of the link and joint struc-
tures, as well as the actuation, to achieve the desired
performance is also challenging.
The robot is a nonlinear, coupled system which is
difﬁcult to model and control because of its complex
dynamics. Kinematic redundancy and ﬂexible elements
in the robots increase this complexity. The problem is
exacerbated when the environment is unstructured, and
often sophisticated sensing and estimation techniques
are required.
In addition to control of the motion, control of the
interaction forces between the robot and environment
is needed when manipulating objects or interacting
with humans. A fundamental robotics task is to plan
collision-free motion for complex bodies from a start
to a goal position among a collection of obstacles, and
this can become an intractable computational problem.
In order to achieve some of the intelligence ascribed
to humans, robots will need to be equipped with sophis-
ticated action planners that employ symbolic reasoning
to move in dynamic, partially known environments. In
other scenarios, robots need to execute behaviors that
take advantage of dynamic interactions with the envi-
ronment rather than rely solely on explicit reasoning
and planning. Robot software architectures also have
special needs because of all of these requirements.
Robot learning will be necessary to generate actions
and control for ever-changing task requirements and en-
vironments, in order to achieve the level of autonomy
envisioned.
While the basic issues outlined in the previous para-
graphs are addressed in this part, more depth can be
found in other parts of the handbook. The kinematics,
dynamics, mechanical design, and control principles
and methods introduced in this part can be applied to
robotic structures made up of arms, hands, and legs
(Part B) as well as manipulators (Part D), wheeled
and other mobile robots (Part E), and ﬁeld and service
robots (Part F). Force control is especially important for
manipulators and their interfaces (Part D). The basic
sensing and estimation techniques presented here are
expanded and applied to speciﬁc sensing modalities in
Part C. Motion planning is an important aspect of ma-
nipulation (Part D) and mobile robots moving in the
environment (Part E). Robotic systems architectures,
behavior-based systems, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) rea-
soning methods, and robot learning are particularly
important in mobile robots moving in the environment
(Part E) and robots interacting with humans (Part G).
With this overview of Part A, we now provide
a brief synopsis of each chapter:
Chapter 2, Kinematics, provides a number of rep-
resentations and conventions to describe the motion
of the bodies in a robotic mechanism. These include
rotation matrices, Euler angles, quaternions, homoge-
neous transformations, screw transformations, matrix
exponential parameterization, and Plücker coordinates.
Representations of the kinematics of all common joint
types are provided, along with a modiﬁed form of
the Denavit–Hartenberg convention. These representa-
tional tools are applied to compute the workspace, the
forward and inverse kinematics, the forward and in-
verse instantaneous kinematics, Jacobian, and the static
wrench transmission.
Chapter 3, Dynamics, presents the dynamic equa-
tions of motion which provide the relationships be-
tween actuation and contact forces acting on robot
mechanisms, and the acceleration and motion trajec-
tories that result. Efﬁcient algorithms are provided
for important dynamics computations which include
inverse dynamics, forward dynamics, the joint-space in-
ertia matrix, and the operational-space inertia matrix.
The algorithms may be applied to ﬁxed-base robots,
mobile robots, and parallel robot mechanisms. Com-
pact formulation of the algorithms results from using
six-dimensional (6-D) spatial notation to describe rigid-
body velocity, acceleration, inertia, etc.
Chapter 4, Mechanisms and Actuation, focuses on
the principles that guide the design and construction of
robotic systems. The kinematic equations and Jacobian
are used to characterize the work envelope and mechan-
ical advantage, and guide the selection of the robot’s
size and joint arrangement. The design of both serial
and parallel robots is addressed. Practical consideration

9
is given to the design of the link and joint structures
along with selection of the actuators and transmission
drives to power the movement. Robot performance in
terms of speed, acceleration, repeatability, and other
measures is also addressed.
Chapter 5, Sensing and Estimation, provides a brief
overview of common sensing methods and estima-
tion techniques that have found broad applicability in
robotics. These provide information about the state of
the environment and robot system. The presentation is
structured according to a perception process model that
includes sensing, feature extraction, data association,
parameter estimation and model integration. Several
common sensing modalities are introduced and charac-
terized. Methods for estimation in linear and nonlinear
systems are discussed, including statistical estimation,
the Kalman ﬁlter, and sample-based methods. The sev-
eral common representations for estimation are also
introduced.
Chapter 6, Model Identiﬁcation, discusses methods
for determining the kinematic and inertial parame-
ters of robot manipulators. For kinematic calibration,
the primary aim is to identify the geometric Denavit–
Hartenberg parameters or equivalent, typically by sens-
ing a combination of joint and endpoint positions.
Inertial parameters in turn are estimated through the ex-
ecution of a trajectory while additionally sensing one or
more components of joint forces or torques. The chap-
ter is organized such that both kinematic and inertial
parameter identiﬁcation are cast into a common frame-
work of least-squares parameter estimation: common
features relating to the identiﬁability of the parame-
ters, adequacy of the measurement sets, and numerical
robustness are identiﬁed and emphasized for both the
kinematic and inertial parameters.
Chapter 7, Motion Planning, addresses the funda-
mental robotics task to plan collision-free motion for
complex bodies from a start to a goal position among
a collection of obstacles. The basic geometric path
planning problem (Piano Mover’s problem) is intro-
duced, but the focus of the chapter is on sampling-based
planning methods because of their generally wider
applicability. Planning with differential constraints is
considered and is important for wheeled mobile robots.
Extensions and variations to the basic motion planning
problem, as well as advanced issues, are discussed at
the end of the chapter.
Chapter 8, Motion Control, focuses on the con-
trol of the motion of a rigid manipulator. The main
challenges addressed are the complexity of the non-
linear, coupled dynamics and the model structural
uncertainties. The chapter discusses topics ranging
from independent-joint control and PID (proportional–
integral–derivative) control to computed-torque control
to manage the complex dynamics. Operational space (or
task space) control is presented, and this is needed for
control of tasks such as those associated with the end-
effector. Adaptive and robust control are discussed to
address the problems related to the uncertainties in the
system. Other topics presented include trajectory gen-
eration, digital implementation, and learning control.
Chapter 9, Force Control, focuses on the control of
the interaction forces between a robotic system and its
environment. The chapter groups interaction control in
two categories: indirect and direct force control, which
achieve the control without (indirect) or with (direct)
explicit closure of a force feedback loop. Impedance
control and hybrid force/motion control are examples of
each, respectively. The fundamental problem of interac-
tion tasks modeling is presented to provide the basis for
the force control schemes.
Chapter 10, Redundant Robots, addresses the mo-
tion generation and control of manipulators with re-
dundant kinematic degrees of freedom. Kinematic re-
dundancy affords a robot with an increased level of
dexterity that may be used to, e.g., avoid singulari-
ties, joint limits and workspace obstacles, and also to
minimize joint torques, energy, or other suitable perfor-
mance criteria. The chapter discusses inverse kinematic
redundancy resolution schemes which are arranged in
two main categories, namely those based on the op-
timization of suitable performance criteria and those
relying on the augmentation of the task space. The
use of kinematic redundancy for fault tolerance is also
analyzed.
Chapter 11, Robots with Flexible Elements, ad-
dresses the dynamic modeling and control of robots
with ﬂexibility in the joints and links. Because the con-
trol methods developed to compensate for joint versus
link ﬂexibility are structurally different, the chapter is
organized such that these two types of ﬂexibility are ex-
amined independently. The methods, however, can be
extended to the case when both joint and link ﬂexibil-
ities are present, possibly even dynamically interacting
at the same time. The chapter also examines the typical
sources of ﬂexibility in industrial robots.
Chapter 12, Robotic Systems Architectures and
Programming, presents the software architectures and
supporting programming tools and environments that
have been developed for robotic systems. Robot archi-
tectures have special needs because of the requirements
of the robot to interact asynchronously, in real time,
with an uncertain, often dynamic, environment. The
chapter discusses the major types of architectural com-

10
ponents for a layered robot control architecture – be-
havioral control, executives, and task planners – along
with the commonly used techniques for interconnecting
these components.
Chapter 13, Behavior-Based Systems, describes
a control methodology aimed at situated robots oper-
ating in unconstrained, challenging, and dynamic con-
ditions in the real world. Distributed behaviors are used
as the underlying building blocks, allowing behavior-
based systems to take advantage of dynamic interac-
tions with the environment rather than rely solely on
explicit reasoning and planning. The focus of the chap-
ter is to provide the basic principles of behavior-based
systems and their use in autonomous control problems
and applications. The chapter presents several different
classes of learning methods, but in all cases behaviors
are used as the underlying building blocks for the learn-
ing process.
Chapter 14, AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics,
sketches the main robotics-relevant topics of symbol-
based AI reasoning. Reasoning on a mobile robot is
especially challenging because of its dynamic, par-
tially known environment. This chapter describes basic
methods of knowledge representation and inference,
covering both logic- and probability-based approaches.
Results for several types of practical, robotics-related
reasoning tasks are given, with an emphasis on tem-
poral and spatial reasoning. Plan-based robot control is
described in some detail, as it is a particularly obvious
form of employing reasoning to the end of improving
robot action.
Chapter 15, Robot Learning, surveys work in ma-
chine learning for techniques that are used for learning
control and behavior generation in robots. In the future,
robots will no longer be used to only execute the same
task thousands of times, but rather they will be faced
with thousands of different tasks that rarely repeat in
an ever-changing environment. Robot learning will be
necessary to achieve the high degree of autonomy envi-
sioned. This chapter focuses on the core robot learning
approaches capable of learning action generation and
control, and in particular, techniques for model learn-
ing and reinforcement learning.
Part A presents the fundamental principles and
methods that are used to model, design, and con-
trol a robotic system. All of the foundational top-
ics are included in this part: kinematics, dynamics,
mechanisms and actuation, sensing and estimation,
model identiﬁcation, motion planning, motion control,
force control, redundant robots, robots with ﬂexible
elements, robotic systems architectures and program-
ming, behavior-based systems, AI reasoning methods
for robotics, and robot learning. A chapter is devoted
to each of these topics. The topics are expanded and
applied to speciﬁc robotic structures and systems in
subsequent parts.

Multimedia Contents Kinematics
11
Part A | 2
2. Kinematics
Kenneth J. Waldron, James Schmiedeler
Kinematics pertains to the motion of bodies
in a robotic mechanism without regard to the
forces/torques that cause the motion. Since robotic
mechanisms are by their very essence designed
for motion, kinematics is the most fundamen-
tal aspect of robot design, analysis, control, and
simulation. The robotics community has focused
on efficiently applying different representations of
position and orientation and their derivatives with
respect to time to solve foundational kinematics
problems.
This chapter will present the most useful rep-
resentations of the position and orientation of
a body in space, the kinematics of the joints
most commonly found in robotic mechanisms,
and a convenient convention for representing
the geometry of robotic mechanisms. These rep-
resentational tools will be applied to compute
the workspace, the forward and inverse kine-
matics, the forward and inverse instantaneous
kinematics, and the static wrench transmission
of a robotic mechanism. For brevity, the focus
will be on algorithms applicable to open-chain
mechanisms.
The goal of this chapter is to provide the reader
with general tools in tabulated form and a broader
overview of algorithms that can be applied to-
gether to solve kinematics problems pertaining to
a particular robotic mechanism.
2.1
Overview...............................................
12
2.2
Position and Orientation Representation
12
2.2.1
Position and Displacement...........
12
2.2.2
Orientation and Rotation .............
13
2.2.3
Homogeneous Transformations.....
16
2.2.4
Screw Transformations .................
17
2.2.5
Matrix Exponential
Parameterization.........................
19
2.2.6
Plücker Coordinates .....................
20
2.3
Joint Kinematics ....................................
21
2.3.1
Lower Pair Joints .........................
21
2.3.2
Higher Pair Joints ........................
24
2.3.3
Compound Joints ........................
24
2.3.4
6-DOF Joint ................................
24
2.3.5
Physical Realization.....................
25
2.3.6
Holonomic
and Nonholonomic Constraints.....
25
2.3.7
Generalized Coordinates ..............
25
2.4
Geometric Representation......................
25
2.5
Workspace.............................................
27
2.6
Forward Kinematics ...............................
28
2.7
Inverse Kinematics.................................
29
2.7.1
Closed-Form Solutions.................
29
2.7.2
Numerical Methods .....................
30
2.8
Forward Instantaneous Kinematics.........
31
2.8.1
Jacobian.....................................
31
2.9
Inverse Instantaneous Kinematics ..........
32
2.9.1
Inverse Jacobian .........................
32
2.10
Static Wrench Transmission ....................
33
2.11
Conclusions and Further Reading ...........
33
References.....................................................
33

Part A | 2.2
12
Part A
Robotics Foundations
2.1 Overview
Unless explicitly stated otherwise, robotic mechanisms
are systems of rigid bodies connected by joints. The
position and orientation of a rigid body in space are
collectively termed the pose. Therefore, robot kine-
matics describes the pose, velocity, acceleration, and
all higher-order derivatives of the pose of the bod-
ies that comprise a mechanism. Since kinematics does
not address the forces/torques that induce motion, this
chapter focuses on describing pose and velocity. These
descriptions are foundational elements of dynamics
(Chap. 3), motion planning (Chap. 7), and motion con-
trol (Chap. 8) algorithms.
Among the many possible topologies in which
systems of bodies can be connected, two of particu-
lar importance in robotics are serial chains and fully
parallel mechanisms. A serial chain is a system of
rigid bodies in which each member is connected to
two others, except for the ﬁrst and last members
that are each connected to only one other member.
A fully parallel mechanism is one in which there are
two members that are connected together by multi-
ple chains of other members and joints. In practice,
each of these chains is often itself a serial chain.
This chapter focuses almost exclusively on algorithms
applicable to serial chains. Parallel mechanisms are
dealt with in more detail in Chap. 18. Another im-
portant topology is the tree structure, which is sim-
ilar to a serial chain in that it has no closed loops,
but differs from a serial chain in that each mem-
ber might have multiple members connected to it,
forming multiple branches. A serial chain is actu-
ally just a special case of a tree structure with no
branches. Tree structures are addressed in greater depth
in Chap. 3.
2.2 Position and Orientation Representation
Spatial, rigid-body kinematics can be viewed as a com-
parative study of different ways of representing the pose
of a body. Translations and rotations, referred to in
combination as rigid-body displacements, are also ex-
pressed with these representations. No one approach is
optimal for all purposes, but the advantages of each can
be leveraged appropriately to facilitate the solution of
different problems.
The minimum number of coordinates required to
locate a body in Euclidean space is six. Many rep-
resentations of spatial pose employ sets with super-
abundant coordinates in which auxiliary relationships
exist among the coordinates. The number of indepen-
dent auxiliary relationships is the difference between
the number of coordinates in the set and six.
This chapter and those that follow it make frequent
use of coordinate frames or simply frames. A coor-
dinate frame i consists of an origin, denoted Oi, and
a triad of mutually orthogonal basis vectors, denoted
(Oxi Oyi Ozi), that are all ﬁxed within a particular body.
The pose of a body will always be expressed rela-
tive to some other body, so it can be expressed as the
pose of one coordinate frame relative to another. Sim-
ilarly, rigid-body displacements can be expressed as
displacements between two coordinate frames, one of
which may be referred to as moving, while the other
may be referred to as ﬁxed. This indicates that the ob-
server is located in a stationary position within the
ﬁxed frame, not that there exists any absolutely ﬁxed
frame.
2.2.1 Position and Displacement
The position of the origin of coordinate frame i relative
to coordinate frame j can be denoted by the 31 vector
jpi D
0
@
jp x
i
jp y
i
jp z
i
1
A :
The components of this vector are the Cartesian co-
ordinates of Oi in the j frame, which are the projections
of the vector jpi onto the corresponding axes. The vec-
tor components could also be expressed as the spherical
or cylindrical coordinates of Oi in the j frame. Such
representations have advantages for analysis of robotic
mechanisms including spherical and cylindrical joints.
A translation is a displacement in which no point
in the rigid body remains in its initial position and all
straight lines in the rigid body remain parallel to their
initial orientations. (The points and lines are not neces-
sarily contained within the boundaries of the ﬁnite rigid
body, but rather, any point or line in space can be taken
to be rigidly ﬁxed in a body.) The translation of a body
in space can be represented by the combination of its
positions prior to and following the translation. Con-
versely, the position of a body can be represented as
a translation that takes the body from a starting position
(in which the coordinate frame ﬁxed to the body co-
incides with the ﬁxed coordinate frame) to the current
position (in which the two frames are not coincident).

Kinematics
2.2 Position and Orientation Representation
13
Part A | 2.2
Thus, any representation of position can be used to cre-
ate a representation of displacement, and vice versa.
2.2.2 Orientation and Rotation
There is signiﬁcantly greater breadth in the representa-
tion of orientation than in that of position. This section
does not include an exhaustive summary, but focuses on
the representations most commonly applied to robotic
mechanisms.
A rotation is a displacement in which at least one
point in the rigid body remains in its initial position
and not all lines in the body remain parallel to their ini-
tial orientations. For example, a body in a circular orbit
rotates about an axis through the center of its circular
path, and every point on the axis of rotation is a point
in the body that remains in its initial position. As in the
case of position and translation, any representation of
orientation can be used to create a representation of ro-
tation, and vice versa.
Rotation Matrices
The orientation of coordinate frame i relative to coor-
dinate frame j can be denoted by expressing the basis
vectors .Oxi Oyi Ozi/ in terms of the basis vectors .Oxj Oyj Ozj/.
This yields .jOxi jOyi jOzi/, which when written together as
a 33 matrix is known as the rotation matrix. The com-
ponents of jRi are the dot products of the basis vectors
of the two coordinate frames.
jRi D
0
@
Oxi  Oxj
Oyi  Oxj
Ozi  Oxj
Oxi  Oyj
Oyi  Oyj
Ozi  Oyj
Oxi  Ozj
Oyi  Ozj
Ozi  Ozj
1
A :
(2.1)
Because the basis vectors are unit vectors and the dot
product of any two unit vectors is the cosine of the angle
between them, the components are commonly referred
to as direction cosines.
An elementary rotation of frame i about the Ozj axis
through an angle  is
RZ./ D
0
@
cos 
 sin 
0
sin 
cos 
0
0
0
1
1
A ;
(2.2)
while the same rotation about the Oyj axis is
RY./ D
0
@
cos 
0
sin 
0
1
0
 sin 
0
cos 
1
A ;
(2.3)
and about the Oxj axis is
RX./ D
0
@
1
0
0
0
cos 
 sin 
0
sin 
cos 
1
A :
(2.4)
Rotation matrices are combined through simple matrix
multiplication such that the orientation of frame i rela-
tive to frame k can be expressed as
kRi D kRj
jRi :
The rotation matrix jRi contains nine elements,
while only three parameters are required to deﬁne the
orientation of a body in space. Therefore, six aux-
iliary relationships exist among the elements of the
matrix. Because the basis vectors of coordinate frame i
are mutually orthonormal, as are the basis vectors of
coordinate frame j, the columns of jRi formed from
the dot products of these vectors are also mutually
orthonormal. A matrix composed of mutually orthonor-
mal vectors is known as an orthogonal matrix and has
the property that its inverse is simply its transpose. This
property provides the six auxiliary relationships. Three
require the column vectors to have unit length, and three
require the column vectors to be mutually orthogonal.
Alternatively, the orthogonality of the rotation matrix
can be seen by considering the frames in reverse order.
The orientation of coordinate frame j relative to coordi-
nate frame i is the rotation matrix iRj whose rows are
clearly the columns of the matrix jRi.
In summary, jRi is the rotation matrix that trans-
forms a vector expressed in coordinate frame i to
a vector expressed in coordinate frame j. It provides
a representation of the orientation of frame i relative
to j and thus, can be a representation of rotation from
frame i to frame j. Table 2.1 lists the equivalent rota-
tion matrices for the other representations of orientation
listed in this section. Table 2.2 contains the conversions
from a known rotation matrix to these other representa-
tions.
Euler Angles
For a minimal representation, the orientation of coor-
dinate frame i relative to coordinate frame j can be
denoted as a vector of three angles .˛; ˇ; /T. These
angles are known as Euler angles when each represents
a rotation about an axis of a moving coordinate frame.
In this way, the location of the axis of each succes-
sive rotation depends upon the preceding rotation(s), so
the order of the rotations must accompany the three an-
gles to deﬁne the orientation. For example, the symbols
.˛; ˇ; /T are used throughout this handbook to indicate
Z-Y-X Euler angles. Taking the moving frame i and the
ﬁxed frame j to be initially coincident, ˛ is the rotation
about the Oz axis of frame i, ˇ is the rotation about the
rotated Oy axis of frame i, and ﬁnally,  is the rotation
about the twice rotated Ox axis of frame i. The equiv-
alent rotation matrix jRi is given in Table 2.1. Z-Y-Z
and Z-X-Z Euler angles are other commonly used con-

Part A | 2.2
14
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Table 2.1 Equivalent rotation matrices for various representations of orientation, with abbreviations c WD cos , s WD
sin , and v WD 1  cos 
Z-Y-X Euler angles .˛; ˇ; /T
jRi D
0
@
c˛cˇ
c˛sˇs  s˛c
c˛sˇc C s˛s
s˛cˇ
s˛sˇs C c˛c
s˛sˇc  c˛s
sˇ
cˇs
cˇc
1
A
X-Y-Z ﬁxed angles . ; ; /T
jRi D
0
@
cc
css  sc 
csc C ss 
sc
sss C cc 
ssc  cs 
s
cs 
cc 
1
A
Angle-axis  Ow
jRi D
0
B@
w2
x v C c
wxwyv  wzs
wxwzv C wys
wxwyv C wzs
w2
y v C c
wywzv  wxs
wxwzv  wys
wywzv C wxs
w2
z v C c
1
CA
Unit quaternions .0 1 2 3/T
jRi D
0
B@
12

2
2 C 2
3

2 .12  03/
2 .13 C 02/
2 .12 C 03/
12

2
1 C 2
3

2 .23  01/
2 .13  02/
2 .23 C 01/
12

2
1 C 2
2

1
CA
ventions from among the 12 different possible orders of
rotations.
Regardless of the order of rotations, an Euler angle
representation of orientation always exhibits a singular-
ity when the ﬁrst and last rotations both occur about the
Table 2.2 Conversions from a rotation matrix to various
representations of orientation
Rotation matrix:
jRi D
0
@
r11
r12
r13
r21
r22
r23
r31
r32
r33
1
A
Z-Y-X Euler angles .˛; ˇ; /T:
ˇ D Atan2

r31;
q
r2
11 C r2
21

˛ D Atan2

r21
cos ˇ ;
r11
cos ˇ

 D Atan2

r32
cos ˇ ;
r33
cos ˇ

X-Y-Z ﬁxed angles . ; ; /T:
 D Atan2

r31;
q
r2
11 C r2
21

 D Atan2
 r21
cos  ;
r11
cos 

 D Atan2
 r32
cos  ;
r33
cos 

Angle axis  Ow:
 D cos1 
r11Cr22Cr331
2

Ow D
1
2 sin 
0
@
r32  r23
r13  r31
r21  r12
1
A
Unit quaternions .0 1 2 3/T:
0 D 1
2
p1 C r11 C r22 C r33
1 D r32r23
40
2 D r13r31
40
3 D r21r12
40
same axis. This can be readily seen in the second block
of Table 2.2 wherein the angles ˛ and  are undeﬁned
when ˇ D ˙90ı. (For Z-Y-Z and Z-X-Z Euler angles,
the singularity occurs when the second rotation is 0ı
or 180ı.) This creates a problem in relating the angu-
lar velocity vector of a body to the time derivatives of
Euler angles, which somewhat limits their usefulness in
modeling robotic systems. This velocity relationship for
Z-Y-X Euler angles is
0
@
P˛
Pˇ
P
1
A D
1
cos ˇ
0
@
0
sin 
cos 
0
cos  cos ˇ
 sin  cos ˇ
cos ˇ
sin  sin ˇ
cos  sin ˇ
1
A
0
@
!x
!y
!z
1
A ;
(2.5)
where .!x; !y; !z/T D i!i is given in moving frame i.
In some circumstances, the inverse of this relationship
may be required.
0
@
!x
!y
!z
1
A D
0
@
 sin ˇ
0
1
cos ˇ sin 
cos 
0
cos ˇ cos 
 sin 
0
1
A
0
@
P˛
Pˇ
P
1
A :
(2.6)
Fixed Angles
A vector of three angles can also denote the orienta-
tion of coordinate frame i relative to coordinate frame j
when each angle represents a rotation about an axis of
a ﬁxed frame. Appropriately, such angles are referred to
as ﬁxed angles, and the order of the rotations must again
accompany the angles to deﬁne the orientation. X-Y-Z
ﬁxed angles, denoted here as . ;; /T, are a common
convention from among the, again, 12 different possi-
ble orders of rotations. Taking the moving frame i and

Kinematics
2.2 Position and Orientation Representation
15
Part A | 2.2
the ﬁxed frame j to be initially coincident,  is the yaw
rotation about the ﬁxed Oxj axis,  is the pitch rotation
about the ﬁxed Oyj axis, and  is the roll rotation about
the ﬁxed Ozj axis. As can be seen by comparing the re-
spective equivalent rotation matrices in Table 2.1 and
the respective conversions in Table 2.2, a set of X-Y-Z
ﬁxed angles is exactly equivalent to the same set of Z-Y-
X Euler angles (˛ D , ˇ D , and  D  ). This result
holds in general such that three rotations about the three
axes of a ﬁxed frame deﬁne the same orientation as
the same three rotations taken in the opposite order
about the three axes of a moving frame. Likewise, all
ﬁxed-angle representations of orientations suffer from
the singularity discussed for Euler angles. Also, the re-
lationship between the time derivatives of ﬁxed angles
and the angular velocity vector is similar to the relation-
ship for Euler angles.
Angle-Axis
A single angle  in combination with a unit vector Ow
can also denote the orientation of coordinate frame i
relative to coordinate frame j. In this case, frame i is
rotated through the angle  about an axis deﬁned by
the vector Ow D .wx wy wz/T relative to frame j. The
vector Ow is sometimes referred to as the equivalent
axis of a ﬁnite rotation. The angle-axis representation,
typically written as either  Ow or .wx wy wz/T, is
superabundant by one because it contains four param-
eters. The auxiliary relationship that resolves this is
the unit magnitude of vector Ow. Even with this aux-
iliary relationship, the angle-axis representation is not
unique because rotation through an angle of  about
 Ow is equivalent to a rotation through  about Ow. Ta-
ble 2.3 contains the conversions from the angle-axis
representation to unit quaternions and vice versa. The
conversions from these two representations to Euler
angles or ﬁxed angles can be easily found by using
Table 2.3 Conversions from angle-axis to unit quaternion
representations of orientation and vice versa
Angle-axis  Ow to unit quaternion .0 1 2 3/T:
0 D cos 
2
1 D wx sin 
2
2 D wy sin 
2
3 D wz sin 
2
Unit quaternion .0 1 2 3/T to angle-axis  Ow:
 D 2 cos1 0
wx D
1
sin 
2
wy D
2
sin 
2
wz D
3
sin 
2
the conversions in Table 2.2 in conjunction with the
equivalent rotation matrices in Table 2.1. Velocity re-
lationships are more easily dealt with using the closely
related quaternion representation.
Quaternions
The quaternion representation of orientation due to
Hamilton [2.1], while largely superseded by the sim-
pler vector representations of Gibbs [2.2] and Graß-
mann [2.3], is extremely useful for problems in robotics
that result in representational singularities in the vec-
tor/matrix notation [2.4]. Quaternions do not suffer
from singularities as Euler and ﬁxed angles do.
A quaternion  is deﬁned to have the form
 D 0 C 1i C 2j C 3k ;
where the components 0, 1, 2, and 3 are scalars,
sometimes referred to as Euler parameters, and i, j,
and k are operators. The operators are deﬁned to satisfy
the following combinatory rules
ii D jj D kk D 1 ;
ij D k ; jk D i ; ki D j ;
ji D k ; kj D i ; ik D j :
Two quaternions are added by adding the respective
components separately, so the operators act as sepa-
rators. The null element for addition is the quaternion
0 D 0 C 0i C 0j C 0k, and quaternion sums are associa-
tive, commutative, and distributive. The null element
for multiplication is I D 1C0iC0jC0k, as can be seen
using I D  for any quaternion . Quaternion products
are associative and distributive, but not commutative,
and following the conventions of the operators and ad-
dition, have the form
ab D a0b0  a1b1  a2b2  a3b3
C .a0b1 C a1b0 C a2b3  a3b2/i
C .a0b2 C a2b0 C a3b1  a1b3/j
C .a0b3 C a3b0 C a1b2  a2b1/k :
(2.7)
It is convenient to deﬁne the conjugate of a quaternion
Q D 0  1i  2j  3k ;
so that
Q D Q D 2
0 C 2
1 C 2
2 C 2
3 :
A unit quaternion can then be deﬁned such that Q D 1.
Often, 0 is referred to as the scalar part of the quater-
nion, and .1 2 3/T is referred to as the vector part.

Part A | 2.2
16
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Unit quaternions are used to describe orientation,
and the unit magnitude provides the auxiliary relation-
ship to resolve the use of superabundant (four) coor-
dinates. A vector is deﬁned in quaternion notation as
a quaternion with 0 D 0. Thus, a vector p D .px py pz/T
can be expressed as a quaternion p D pxi C pyj C pzk.
For any unit quaternion , the operation pQ performs
a rotation of the vector p about the direction .1 2 3/T.
This is clearly seen by expanding the operation pQ and
comparing the results with the equivalent rotation ma-
trix listed in Table 2.1. Also, as shown in Table 2.3, unit
quaternions are closely related to the angle-axis repre-
sentation. 0 corresponds (but is not equal) to the angle
of rotation, while 1, 2, and 3 deﬁne the axis of rota-
tion.
For velocity analysis, the time derivative of the
quaternion can be related to the angular velocity vec-
tor as
0
BB@
P0
P1
P2
P3
1
CCA D 1
2
0
BB@
1
2
3
0
3
2
3
0
1
2
1
0
1
CCA
0
@
!x
!y
!z
1
A ;
(2.8)
where .!x; !y; !z/T D j!i is given in ﬁxed frame j.
Deﬁning 1W3 D .1; 2; 3/T, it is straightforward to ver-
ify that
P0 D 1
2
j!T
i 1W3
P1W3 D 1
2

0
j!i  1W3  j!i

:
In the case that the angular velocity is given in the
moving coordinates, these rate equations take a similar
form.
P0 D 1
2
i!T
i 1W3
P1W3 D 1
2

0
i!i C 1W3  i!i

The corresponding rate matrix for this case is the same
as (2.8) with the exception that the off-diagonal ele-
ments in the bottom 33 submatrix have opposite sign.
While a unit quaternion represents only the orienta-
tion of a body, quaternions may be dualized [2.5–7] to
create an algebra that provides a description of the posi-
tion and orientation of a body in space. Other combined
representations are discussed in the following sections.
2.2.3 Homogeneous Transformations
The preceding sections have addressed representations
of position and orientation separately. With homoge-
neous transformations, position vectors and rotation
matrices are combined together in a compact notation.
Any vector ir expressed relative to the i coordinate
frame can be expressed relative to the j coordinate
frame if the position and orientation of the i frame
are known relative to the j frame. Using the notation
of Sect. 2.2.1, the position of the origin of coordinate
frame i relative to coordinate frame j can be denoted
by the vector jpi D .jpx
i
jpy
i
jpz
i/T. Using the notation of
Sect. 2.2.2, the orientation of frame i relative to frame j
can be denoted by the rotation matrix jRi. Thus,
jr D jRi
ir C jpi :
(2.9)
This equation can be written
jr
1

D
jRi
jpi
0T
1
 ir
1

;
(2.10)
where
jTi D
jRi
jpi
0T
1

(2.11)
is the 4  4 homogeneous transformation matrix and
.jr 1/T and .ir 1/T are the homogeneous representations
of the position vectors jr and ir. The matrix jTi trans-
forms vectors from coordinate frame i to coordinate
frame j. Its inverse jT1
i
transforms vectors from co-
ordinate frame j to coordinate frame i.
jT1
i
D iTj D
jRT
i
jRT
i
jpi
0T
1

:
(2.12)
Composition of 44 homogeneous transformation ma-
trices is accomplished through simple matrix multipli-
cation, just as in the case of 3  3 rotation matrices.
Therefore, kTi D kTjjTi. Since matrix multiplications
do not commute, the order or sequence is important.
The homogeneous transformation of a simple rota-
tion about an axis is sometimes denoted Rot such that
a rotation of  about an axis Oz is
Rot.Oz; / D
0
BB@
cos 
 sin 
0
0
sin 
cos 
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
CCA :
(2.13)
Similarly, the homogeneous transformation of a simple
translation along an axis is sometimes denoted Trans
such that a translation of d along an axis Ox is
Trans.Ox; d/ D
0
BB@
1
0
0
d
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
CCA :
(2.14)

Kinematics
2.2 Position and Orientation Representation
17
Part A | 2.2
Homogeneous transformations are particularly at-
tractive when compact notation is desired and/or when
ease of programming is the most important considera-
tion. This is not, however, a computationally efﬁcient
representation since it introduces a large number of ad-
ditional multiplications by ones and zeros. Although
homogeneous transformation matrices technically con-
tain 16 elements, four are deﬁned to be zero or one,
and the remaining elements are composed of a rotation
matrix and a position vector. Therefore, the only truly
superabundant coordinates come from the rotation ma-
trix component, so the relevant auxiliary relationships
are those associated with the rotation matrix.
2.2.4 Screw Transformations
The transformation in (2.9) can be viewed as composed
of a rotation between coordinate frames i and j and
a separate displacement between those frames. To get
from frame i to frame j, one could perform the rotation
ﬁrst, followed by the displacement, or vice versa. Alter-
natively, the spatial displacement between the frames
can be expressed, except in the case of a pure transla-
tion, as a rotation about a unique line combined with
a translation parallel to that line.
Chasles’ Theorem
Chasles’ theorem, in the form stated by Chirikjian and
Kyatkin [2.8], has two parts. The ﬁrst states that:
Any displacement of a body in space can be accom-
plished by means of a translation of a designated
point from its initial to its ﬁnal position, followed
by a rotation of the whole body about that point to
bring it into its ﬁnal orientation.
The second part states that:
Any displacement of a body in space can be accom-
plished by means of a rotation of the body about
a unique line in space accompanied by a transla-
tion of the body parallel to that line.
Such a line is called a screw axis, and it is this second
result that is usually thought of as Chasles’ theorem.
The ﬁrst part of the theorem is almost axiomatic.
A designated point in a body anywhere in Euclidean
space can be displaced from a given initial position
to a given ﬁnal position. By further requiring that all
points in the body traverse the same displacement, the
body translates so that the designated point moves from
its initial position to its ﬁnal position. The body can then
be rotated about that point into any given ﬁnal orienta-
tion.
The second part of the theorem depends on this
representation of a spatial displacement and requires
a more complex argument. A preliminary theorem due
to Euler allows greater speciﬁcity about the rotation of
the body: Any displacement of a body in which one
point remains ﬁxed is equivalent to a rotation of that
body about a unique axis passing through that point.
Geometrically, embedding three points in the moving
body and letting one be the ﬁxed point about which
rotation occurs, each of the other two will have ini-
tial and ﬁnal positions. The right bisector planes of the
lines joining the initial and ﬁnal positions in each case
necessarily contain the ﬁxed point. Any line in the bi-
sector plane can be the axis of a rotation that carries
the corresponding point from its initial to its ﬁnal po-
sition. Therefore, the unique line common to the two
bisector planes is such that rotation about it will carry
any point in the body from its initial to its ﬁnal posi-
tion. The rigidity condition requires that all planes in
the body that contain that line rotate through the same
angle.
For any rotation of a rigid body described by a ro-
tation matrix jRi, Euler’s theorem states that there is
a unique eigenvector Ow such that
jRi Ow D Ow ;
(2.15)
where Ow is a unit vector parallel to the axis of rotation.
This expression requires a unit eigenvalue of jRi cor-
responding to the eigenvector Ow. The remaining two
eigenvalues are cos  ˙ i sin , where i is the complex
operator and  is the angle of rotation of the body about
the axis.
Combining the ﬁrst part of Chasles’ theorem with
Euler’s theorem, a general spatial displacement can be
expressed as a translation taking a point from its ini-
tial to its ﬁnal position, followed by a unique rotation
about a unique axis through that point that carries the
body from its initial to its ﬁnal orientation. Resolv-
ing the translation into components in the direction of
and orthogonal to the rotation axis, every point in the
body has the same displacement component in the di-
rection of the axis because rotation about it does not
affect that component. Projected onto a plane normal
to the rotation axis, the kinematic geometry of the dis-
placement is identical to that of planar motion. Just as
there is a unique point in the plane about which a body
could be rotated between two given positions, there is
a unique point in the projection plane. If the rotation
axis is moved to pass through that point, the spatial dis-
placement can be accomplished by a rotation about that
axis combined with a translation along it, as stated by
the theorem.
The line about which rotation takes place is called
the screw axis of the displacement. The ratio of the lin-
ear displacement d to the rotation  is referred to as the

Part A | 2.2
18
Part A
Robotics Foundations
pitch h of the screw axis [2.4]. Thus,
d D h :
(2.16)
The screw axis of a pure translation is not unique. Any
line parallel to the translation can be regarded as the
screw axis, and since the rotation  is zero, the axis of
a translation is said to have inﬁnite pitch.
A screw axis is most conveniently represented in
any coordinate frame by means of a unit vector Ow par-
allel to it and the position vector  of any point lying on
it. Additional speciﬁcation of the pitch h and the angle
of rotation  completely deﬁnes the location of a second
coordinate frame relative to the ﬁrst frame. Thus, a to-
tal of eight coordinates deﬁne a screw transformation,
which is superabundant by two. The unit magnitude
of vector Ow provides one auxiliary relationship, but in
general, there is no second auxiliary relationship be-
cause the same screw axis is deﬁned by all points lying
on it, which is to say that the vector  contains one free
coordinate.
Algebraically, a screw displacement is represented
by
jr D jRi.ir  / C d Ow C  :
(2.17)
Comparing this expression to (2.9) yields
jpi D d Ow C

133  jRi

 :
(2.18)
133 denotes the 3  3 identity matrix. An expression
for d is easily obtained by taking the inner product of
both sides of the equation with Ow.
d D Ow Tjpi :
(2.19)
The matrix 133  jRi is singular, so (2.18) cannot be
solved to give a unique value of , but since  can rep-
resent any point on the screw axis, this would not be
appropriate. One component of  can be arbitrarily cho-
sen, and any two of the component equations can then
be solved to ﬁnd the two other components of . All
other points on the screw axis are then given by Ck Ow,
where k can take any value.
Table 2.4 contains the conversions between screw
transformations and homogeneous transformations.
Note that the equivalent rotation matrix for a screw
transformation has the same form as the equivalent ro-
tation matrix for an angle-axis representation of orien-
tation in Table 2.1. Also, the auxiliary relationship that
the vector  be orthogonal to the screw axis ( Ow T D 0)
is used in Table 2.4 to provide a unique conversion to
the screw transformation. The inverse result, that of
ﬁnding the rotation matrix jRi and the translation jpi
corresponding to a given screw displacement, is found
from Rodrigues’ equation.
Rodrigues’ Equation
Given a screw axis, the angular displacement of a body
about it, and the translation of the body along it, the
displacement of an arbitrary point in that body can
be found. Viewing a matrix transformation as describ-
ing the displacement of the body, this is equivalent to
ﬁnding the matrix transformation equivalent to a given
screw displacement.
Referring to Fig. 2.1, the position vectors of a point
before and after a screw displacement can be geometri-
cally related as
jr D ir C d Ow C sin  Ow  .ir  /
 .1  cos /.ir  /  .ir  /  Ow Ow ;
(2.20)
where ir and jr denote the initial and ﬁnal positions of
the point, Ow and  specify the screw axis, and  and d
give the displacement about it. This result is usually re-
ferred to as Rodrigues’ equation [2.9], which can be
written as a matrix transformation [2.10],
jr D jRi
ir C jpi ;
(2.21)
since, when expanded, it gives three linear equations for
the components of jr in terms of those of ir.
jRi D
0
@
w2
x v C c
wxwyv  wzs wxwzv C wys
wxwyv C wzs
w2
y v C c
wywzv  wxs
wxwzv  wys wywzv C wxs
w2
z v C c
1
A
jpi D

133  jRi

 C h Ow ;
i coincident
with j frame
Xj 
Yj 
Zj 
Xi 
Yi 
Zi 
jr
ir
ir
dwˆ
wˆ
i final
i initial
Fig. 2.1 Initial and ﬁnal positions of an arbitrary point in
a body undergoing a screw displacement; ir is the position
of the point relative to the moving frame, which is coinci-
dent with the ﬁxed frame j in its initial position; jr is the
position of the point relative to the ﬁxed frame after the
screw displacement of the moving body

Kinematics
2.2 Position and Orientation Representation
19
Part A | 2.2
Table 2.4 Conversions from a screw transformation to a homogeneous transformation and vice versa, with abbreviations
c WD cos , s WD sin , and v WD 1  cos 
Screw transformation to homogeneous transformation
jRi D
0
B@
w2
x v C c
wxwyv  wzs
wxwzv C wys
wxwyv C wzs
w2
y v C c
wywzv  wxs
wxwzv  wys
wywzv C wxs
w2
z v C c
1
CA
jpi D .133  jRi/ C h Ow
Homogeneous transformation to screw transformation
l D
0
@
r32  r23
r13  r31
r21  r12
1
A
T
 D sign

lTjpi
 ˇˇˇˇcos1
r11 C r22 C r33  1
2
ˇˇˇˇ
h D
lTjpi
2 sin 
 D .133jRT
i /jpi
2.1cos /
Ow D
l
2 sin 
where the abbreviations are c WD cos , s WD sin ,
and v D 1  cos . The rotation matrix jRi expressed
in this form is also called the screw matrix, and these
equations give the elements of jRi and jpi in terms of
the screw parameters.
An exception arises in the case of a pure translation,
for which  D 0 and Rodrigues’ equation becomes
jr D ir C d Ow :
(2.22)
Substituting for this case, jRi D 133 and jpi D d Ow.
Additional information on screw theory can be
found in [2.11–15].
2.2.5 Matrix Exponential Parameterization
The position and orientation of a body can also be
expressed in a uniﬁed fashion with an exponential
mapping. This approach is introduced ﬁrst with its ap-
plication to pure rotation and expanded to rigid-body
motion. More details on the approach can be found
in [2.16] and [2.17].
Exponential Coordinates for Rotation
The set of all orthogonal matrices with determinant 1,
which is the set of all rotation matrices R, is a group
under the operation of matrix multiplication denoted
as SO.3/  R33 [2.18]. This stands for special or-
thogonal wherein special alludes to the det R beingC1
instead of ˙1. The set of rotation matrices satisﬁes the
four axioms of a group:

Closure: R1R2 2 SO.3/
8R1; R2 2 SO.3/

Identity: 133R D R133 D R
8R 2 SO.3/

Inverse: RT 2 SO.3/ is the unique inverse of R
8R 2 SO.3/

Associativity: .R1R2/R3 D R1.R2R3/
8R1; R2;
R3 2 SO.3/.
In
the
angle-axis
representation
presented
in
Sect. 2.2.2, orientation is expressed as an angle  of
rotation about an axis deﬁned by the unit vector Ow. The
equivalent rotation matrix found in Table 2.1 can be ex-
pressed as the exponential map
R D eS. Ow/
D 133 C S. Ow/ C 2
2Š S. Ow/2
C 3
3Š S. Ow/3 C : : : ;
(2.23)
where S. Ow/ is the unit skew-symmetric matrix
S. Ow/ D
0
@
0
wz
wy
wz
0
wx
wy
wx
0
1
A :
(2.24)
Thus, the exponential map transforms a skew-sym-
metric matrix S. Ow/ that corresponds to an axis of
rotation Ow into an orthogonal matrix R that corre-
sponds to a rotation about the axis Ow through an angle
of . It can be shown that the closed-form expression
for eS. Ow/, which can be efﬁciently computed, is
eS. Ow/ D 133 C S. Ow/ sin  C S. Ow/2.1  cos / :
(2.25)
The components of .wx wy wz/T, which are related
to the elements of the rotation matrix R in Table 2.2, are
referred to as the exponential coordinates for R.

Part A | 2.2
20
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Exponential Coordinates
for Rigid-Body Motion
As indicated in Sect. 2.2.3, the position and orientation
of a body can be expressed by the combination of a po-
sition vector p 2 R3 and a rotation matrix R 2 SO.3/.
The product space of R3 with SO.3/ is the group known
as SE.3/, which stands for special Euclidean.
SE.3/ D f.p; R/ W p 2 R3; R 2 SO.3/g
D R3  SO.3/ :
The set of homogeneous transformations satisﬁes the
four axioms of a group:

Closure: T1T2 2 SE.3/
8T1; T2 2 SE.3/

Identity: 144T D T144 D T
8T 2 SE.3/

Inverse: the unique inverse of T
8T 2 SE.3/ is
given in (2.12)

Associativity: .T1T2/T3 D T1.T2T3/
8T1; T2;
T3 2 SE.3/.
In the screw transformation representation in
Sect. 2.2.4, position and orientation are expressed by
the angle  of rotation about a screw axis deﬁned by the
unit vector Ow, the point  on the axis such that Ow T D
0, and the pitch h of the screw axis. The equivalent ho-
mogeneous transformation found in Table 2.4 can be
expressed as the exponential map
T D e
OŸ D 144 C OŸ C .OŸ/2
2Š
C .OŸ/3
3Š
C : : : ;
(2.26)
where
OŸ D
S. Ow/
v
0T
0

(2.27)
is the generalization of the unit skew-symmetric ma-
trix S. Ow/ known as a twist. The twist coordinates of OŸ
are given by  WD . Ow Tv T/T. It can be shown that the
closed-form expression for eOŸ is
e
OŸ D

eS. Ow/
.133  eS. Ow//. Ow  v/ C Ow Tv Ow
0T
1

:
(2.28)
Comparison of this result with the conversion between
homogeneous and screw transformations in Table 2.4
yields
v D   Ow
(2.29)
and
h D Ow Tv :
(2.30)
Thus, the exponential map for a twist transforms the ini-
tial pose of a body into its ﬁnal pose. It gives the relative
rigid-body motion. The vector  contains the exponen-
tial coordinates for the rigid-body transformation.
As for screw transformations, the case of pure trans-
lation is unique. In this case, Ow D 0, so
e
OŸ D
133
v
0T
1

:
(2.31)
2.2.6 Plücker Coordinates
A minimum of four coordinates are needed to de-
ﬁne a line in space. The Plücker coordinates of a line
form a six-dimensional (6-D) vector, so they are su-
perabundant by two. They can be viewed as a pair of
three-dimensional (3-D) vectors; one is parallel to the
line, and the other is the moment of that vector about
the origin. Thus, if u is any vector parallel to the line
and  is the position of any point on the line relative to
the origin, the Plücker coordinates (L, M, N, P, Q, and
R) are given by
.L; M; N/ D uTI .P; Q; R/ D .  u/T :
(2.32)
For simply deﬁning a line, the magnitude of u is not
unique, nor is the component of  parallel to u. Two
auxiliary relationships are imposed to reduce the set to
just four independent coordinates. One is that the scalar
product of the two three-dimensional vectors is identi-
cally zero.
LP C MQ C NR  0 :
(2.33)
The other is the invariance of the line designated when
the coordinates are all multiplied by the same scaling
factor.
.L; M; N; P; Q; R/  .kL; kM; kN; kP; kQ; kR/ :
(2.34)
This relationship may take the form of constraining u
to have unit magnitude so that L, M, and N are the di-
rection cosines.
In this handbook, it is often useful to express
velocities in Plücker coordinates, wherein unlike the
deﬁnition of lines, the magnitudes of the two three-
dimensional vectors are not arbitrary. This leads to
the motor notation of von Mises [2.9, 19] and Ev-
erett [2.20]. For instantaneously coincident coordinate
frames, one ﬁxed and the other embedded in the mov-
ing body, ! is the angular velocity of the body and v O
is the velocity of the origin O of the body-ﬁxed frame
when both are expressed relative to the ﬁxed frame.
This provides a Plücker coordinate system for the spa-
tial velocity v of the body. The Plücker coordinates of v

Kinematics
2.3 Joint Kinematics
21
Part A | 2.3
are simply the Cartesian coordinates of ! and v O,
v D
 !
v O

:
(2.35)
The transformation from Plücker coordinate sys-
tem i to Plücker coordinate system j for spatial veloc-
ities is achieved with the spatial transform jXi. If vi
and vj denote the spatial velocities of a body relative
to the i and j frames, respectively, and jpi and jRi de-
note the position and orientation of frame i relative to
frame j,
vj D jXivi ;
(2.36)
where
jXi D

jRi
033
S.jpi/jRi
jRi

;
(2.37)
such that
jXi
1 D iXj D

iRj
033
iRjS.jpi/
iRj

;
(2.38)
and
kXi D kXjjXi ;
(2.39)
and S.jpi/ is the skew-symmetric matrix
0
@
0
jpz
i
jpy
i
jpz
i
0
jpx
i
jpy
i
jpx
i
0
1
A :
(2.40)
Spatial vector notation, which includes the spatial
velocities and transforms brieﬂy mentioned here, is
treated in greater depth in Sect. 3.2. Speciﬁcally, Ta-
ble 3.1 gives a computationally efﬁcient algorithm for
applying a spatial transform.
2.3 Joint Kinematics
Unless explicitly stated otherwise, the kinematic de-
scription of robotic mechanisms typically employs
a number of idealizations. The links that compose the
robotic mechanism are assumed to be perfectly rigid
bodies having surfaces that are geometrically perfect in
both position and shape. Accordingly, these rigid bod-
ies are connected together at joints where their idealized
surfaces are in ideal contact without any clearance be-
tween them. The respective geometries of these surfaces
in contact determine the freedom of motion between the
two links, or the joint kinematics.
A kinematic joint is a connection between two bod-
ies that constrains their relative motion. Two bodies that
are in contact with one another create a simple kine-
matic joint. The surfaces of the two bodies that are
in contact are able to move over one another, thereby
permitting relative motion of the two bodies. Simple
kinematic joints are classiﬁed as lower pair joints if con-
tact occurs over surfaces [2.21] and as higher pair joints
if contact occurs only at points or along lines.
A joint model describes the motion of a frame ﬁxed
in one body of a joint relative to a frame ﬁxed in the
other body. The motion is expressed as a function of the
joint’s motion variables, and other elements of a joint
model include the rotation matrix, position vector, free
modes, and constrained modes. The free modes of
a joint deﬁne the directions in which motion is allowed.
They are represented by the 6  ni matrix ˆi whose
columns are the Plücker coordinates of the allowable
motion. This matrix relates the spatial velocity vector
across the joint v rel,i to the joint velocity vector Pqi,
v rel,i D ˆiPqi :
(2.41)
In contrast, the constrained modes of a joint deﬁne
the directions in which motion is not allowed. They
are represented by the 6  .6  ni/ matrix ˆc
i that
is complementary to ˆi. Tables 2.5 and 2.6 contain
the formulas of the joint models for all of the joints
described in this section. They are used extensively for
the dynamic analysis presented in Chap. 3. Additional
information on joints can be found in Chap. 4.
2.3.1 Lower Pair Joints
Lower pair joints are mechanically attractive since wear
is spread over the whole surface and lubricant is trapped
in the small clearance space (in nonidealized systems)
between the surfaces, resulting in relatively good lubri-
cation. As can be proved [2.23] from the requirement
for surface contact, there are only six possible forms of
lower pair joints: revolute, prismatic, helical, cylindri-
cal, spherical, and planar joints.
Revolute
The most general form of a revolute joint, often abbre-
viated as R and sometimes referred to colloquially as
a hinge or pin joint, is a lower pair composed of two

Part A | 2.3
22
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Table 2.5 Joint model formulas for one-degree-of-freedom lower pair joints, with abbreviations ci WD cos i and si WD sin i
(adapted in part from Table 4.1 in [2.22])
Joint type
Joint rotation matrix jRi
Position vector jpi
Free modes ˆi
Constrained modes ˆc
i
Pose state vars.
Pqi
Revolute R
0
@
ci
si
0
si
ci
0
0
0
1
1
A
0
@
0
0
0
1
A
0
BBBBBBB@
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCCA
0
BBBBBBB@
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
CCCCCCCA
i
Pi
Prismatic P
133
0
@
0
0
di
1
A
0
BBBBBBB@
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
CCCCCCCA
0
BBBBBBB@
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCCA
di
Pdi
Helical H
(pitch h)
0
@
ci
si
0
si
ci
0
0
0
1
1
A
0
@
0
0
hi
1
A
0
BBBBBBB@
0
0
1
0
0
h
1
CCCCCCCA
0
BBBBBBB@
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
h
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
CCCCCCCA
i
Pi
congruent surfaces of revolution. The surfaces are the
same except one of them is an external surface, convex
in any plane normal to the axis of revolution, and one
is an internal surface, concave in any plane normal to
the axis. The surfaces may not be solely in the form of
right circular cylinders, since surfaces of that form do
not provide any constraint on axial sliding. A revolute
joint permits only rotation of one of the bodies joined
relative to the other. The position of one body relative
to the other may be expressed as the angle between two
lines normal to the joint axis, one ﬁxed in each body.
Thus, the joint has one degree of freedom (DOF). When
the Oz axis of coordinate frame i is aligned with a revolute
joint axis, the formulas in Table 2.5 deﬁne the revolute
joint model.
Prismatic
The most general form of a prismatic joint, often ab-
breviated as P and sometimes referred to colloquially
as a sliding joint, is a lower pair formed from two con-
gruent general cylindrical surfaces. These may not be
right circular cylindrical surfaces. A general cylindrical
surface is obtained by extruding any curve in a constant
direction. Again, one surface is internal and the other is
an external surface. A prismatic joint permits only slid-
ing of one of the members joined relative to the other
along the direction of extrusion. The position of one
body relative to the other is determined by the distance
between two points on a line parallel to the direction
of sliding, with one point ﬁxed in each body. Thus, this
joint also has one degree of freedom. When the Oz axis
of coordinate frame i is aligned with a prismatic joint
axis, the formulas in Table 2.5 deﬁne the prismatic joint
model.
Helical
The most general form of a helical joint, often abbre-
viated as H and sometimes referred to colloquially as
a screw joint, is a lower pair formed from two helicoidal
surfaces formed by extruding any curve along a helical
path. The simple example is a bolt and nut wherein the
basic generating curve is a pair of straight lines. The
angle  of rotation about the axis of the helical joint is
directly related to the distance d of displacement of one
body relative to the other along that axis by the expres-
sion d D h, where the constant h is called the pitch of
the helical joint. When the Oz axis of coordinate frame i
is aligned with a helical joint axis, the formulas in Ta-
ble 2.5 deﬁne the helical joint model.
Cylindrical
A cylindrical joint, often abbreviated as C, is a lower
pair formed by contact of two congruent right circu-
lar cylinders, one an internal surface and the other
an external surface. It permits both rotation about the
cylinder axis and sliding parallel to it. Therefore, it is
a joint with two degrees of freedom. Lower pair joints
with more than one degree of freedom are easily re-
placed by kinematically equivalent compound joints
(Sect. 2.3.3) that are serial chains of one-degree-of-
freedom lower pairs. In the present case, the cylindrical
joint can be replaced by a revolute in series with a pris-

Kinematics
2.3 Joint Kinematics
23
Part A | 2.3
Table 2.6 Joint model formulas for higher-degree-of-freedom lower pair joints, universal joint, rolling contact joint, and 6-DOF
joint, with abbreviations ci WD cos i and si WD sin i (adapted in part from Table 4.1 in [2.22]) The Euler angles ˛i, ˇi, and i
could be used in place of the unit quaternion i to represent orientation
Joint type
Joint rotation matrix jRi
Position vector jpi
Free modes ˆi
Constrained modes ˆc
i
Pose
Variables
Velocity
Variables
Pqi
Cylindrical
C
0
@
ci
si
0
si
ci
0
0
0
1
1
A
0
@
0
0
di
1
A
0
BBBBBBB@
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
CCCCCCCA
0
BBBBBBB@
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCCA
i
di
 
Pi
Pdi
!
Spherical
S
 
Table 2.1
!
0
@
0
0
0
1
A
0
BBBBBBB@
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCCA
0
BBBBBBB@
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
CCCCCCCA
i
!i rel
Planar
0
@
ci
si
0
si
ci
0
0
0
1
1
A
0
@
cidxi  sidyi
sidxi C cidyi
0
1
A
0
BBBBBBB@
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCCA
0
BBBBBBB@
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
CCCCCCCA
i
dxi
dyi
0
B@
Pi
Pdxi
Pdyi
1
CA
Flat planar
rolling
contact
(ﬁxed
radius r)
0
@
ci
si
0
si
ci
0
0
0
1
1
A
0
@
rici  rsi
risi  rci
0
1
A
0
BBBBBBB@
0
0
1
r
0
0
1
CCCCCCCA
0
BBBBBBB@
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
r
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
CCCCCCCA
i
Pi
Univer-
sal U
0
@
c˛icˇi
s˛i
c˛isˇi
s˛icˇi
c˛i
s˛isˇi
sˇi
0
cˇi
1
A
0
@
0
0
0
1
A
0
BBBBBBB@
sˇi
0
0
1
cˇi
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCCA
0
BBBBBBB@
cˇi
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
sˇi
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
CCCCCCCA
˛i
ˇi
 
P˛i
Pˇi
!
6-DOF
 
see
Table 2.1
!
0pi
166
"i
0pi
 
!i
v i
!
matic joint whose direction of sliding is parallel to the
revolute axis. While simpler to implement using the
geometric representation discussed in Sect. 2.4, this
approach has disadvantages for dynamic simulation.
Modeling a single cylindrical joint as a combination
of a prismatic and a revolute joint requires the ad-
dition of a virtual link between the two with zero
mass and zero length. The massless link can create
computational problems. When the Oz axis of coordi-
nate frame i is aligned with a cylindrical joint axis,
the formulas in Table 2.6 deﬁne the cylindrical joint
model.
Spherical
A spherical joint, often abbreviated as S, is a lower pair
formed by contact of two congruent spherical surfaces.
Once again, one is an internal surface, and the other is
an external surface. A spherical joint permits rotation
about any line through the center of the sphere. Thus, it
permits independent rotation about axes in up to three
different directions and has three degrees of freedom.
A spherical joint is easily replaced by a kinematically
equivalent compound joint consisting of three revolutes
that have axes that all intersect in a single point – the
center of the spherical joint. The revolute joint axes

Part A | 2.3
24
Part A
Robotics Foundations
do not need to be successively orthogonal, but often
they are implemented that way. The arrangement is, in
general, kinematically equivalent to a spherical joint,
but it does exhibit a singularity when the revolute joint
axes become coplanar. This is as compared to the na-
tive spherical joint that never has such a singularity.
Likewise, if a spherical joint is modeled in simulation
as three revolutes, computational difﬁculties again can
arise from the necessary inclusion of massless virtual
links having zero length. The joint model formulas of
a spherical joint are given in Table 2.6.
Planar
A planar joint is formed by planar contacting surfaces.
Like the spherical joint, it is a lower pair joint with
three degrees of freedom. A kinematically equivalent
compound joint consisting of a serial chain of three
revolutes with parallel axes can replace a planar joint.
As was the case with the spherical joint, the compound
joint exhibits a singularity when the revolute axes be-
come coplanar. When the Oz axis of coordinate frame i
is aligned with the normal to the plane of contact, the
formulas in Table 2.6 deﬁne the planar joint model.
2.3.2 Higher Pair Joints
Some higher pair joints also have attractive proper-
ties, particularly rolling pairs in which one body rolls
without slipping over the surface of the other. This
is mechanically attractive since the absence of sliding
means the absence of abrasive wear. However, since
ideal contact occurs at a point, or along a line, appli-
cation of a load across the joint may lead to very high
local stresses resulting in other forms of material fail-
ure and, hence, wear. Higher pair joints can be used to
create kinematic joints with special geometric proper-
ties, as in the case of a gear pair or a cam and follower
pair.
Rolling Contact
Rolling contact actually encompasses several different
geometries. Rolling contact in planar motion permits
one degree of freedom of relative motion as in the case
of a roller bearing, for example. Planar rolling contact
can take place along a line, thereby spreading the load
and wear somewhat. Three-dimensional rolling con-
tact allows rotation about any axis through the point
of contact that is, in principle, unique. Hence, a three-
dimensional rolling contact pair permits relative motion
with three degrees of freedom. When the Oz axis of co-
ordinate frame i is aligned with the axis of rotation and
passes through the center of the roller of ﬁxed radius r,
the formulas in Table 2.6 deﬁne the planar rolling con-
tact joint model for a roller on a ﬂat surface.
Regardless of whether the joint is planar or three-
dimensional, the no-slip condition associated with
a rolling contact joint requires that the instantaneous
relative velocity between the points on the two bodies
in contact be zero. If P is the point of rolling contact
between bodies i and j,
v Pi=Pj D 0 :
(2.42)
Likewise, relative acceleration is in the direction of the
common normal to the two surfaces at the point of con-
tact. Because the constraint associated with the joint is
expressed in terms of velocity and cannot be expressed
in terms of position alone, it is nonholonomic, as dis-
cussed in Sect. 2.3.6. A more detailed discussion of
the kinematic constraints for rolling contact is found
in Chap. 24.
2.3.3 Compound Joints
Compound kinematic joints are connections between
two bodies formed by chains of other members and sim-
ple kinematic joints. A compound joint may constrain
the relative motion of the two bodies joined in the same
way as a simple joint. In such a case, the two joints are
said to be kinematically equivalent.
Universal
A universal joint, often abbreviated as U and referred
to as a Cardan or Hooke joint, is a compound joint
with two degrees of freedom. It consists of a serial
chain of two revolutes whose axes intersect orthogo-
nally. The joint model for a universal joint, in which,
from Euler angle notation, ˛i is the ﬁrst rotation about
the Z-axis and then ˇi is the rotation about the Y-axis,
is given in Table 2.6. This is a joint for which the matri-
ces ˆi and ˆc
i are not constant, so in general, Pˆi ¤ 0
and Pˆ
c
i ¤ 0. As seen in Table 2.6, the orientation of
the ﬁrst joint axis (expressed in the outboard coordinate
frame) varies with ˇi.
2.3.4 6-DOF Joint
The motion of two bodies not jointed together can
be modeled as a six-degree-of-freedom joint that in-
troduces no constraints. This is particularly useful
for mobile robots, such as aircraft, that make at
most intermittent contact with the ground, and thus,
a body in free motion relative to the ﬁxed frame
is termed a ﬂoating base. Such a free motion joint
model enables the position and orientation of a ﬂoat-
ing base in space to be expressed with six joint
variables. The 6-DOF joint model is included in Ta-
ble 2.6.

Kinematics
2.4 Geometric Representation
25
Part A | 2.4
2.3.5 Physical Realization
In an actual robotic mechanism, the joints may have
physical limits beyond which motion is prohibited.
The workspace (Sect. 2.5) of a robotic manipulator
is determined by considering the combined limits and
freedom of motion of all the joints within the mech-
anism. Revolute joints are easily actuated by rotating
motors and are, therefore, extremely common in robotic
systems. They may also be present as passive, un-
actuated joints. Also common, although less so than
revolutes, prismatic joints are relatively easily actu-
ated by means of linear actuators such as hydraulic or
pneumatic cylinders, ball screws, or screw jacks. They
always have motion limits since unidirectional slid-
ing can, in principle, produce inﬁnite displacements.
Helical joints are most often found in robotic mecha-
nisms as constituents of linear actuators such as screw
jacks and ball screws and are seldom used as primary
kinematic joints. Joints with more than one degree of
freedom are generally used passively in robotic mecha-
nisms because each degree of freedom of an active joint
must be separately actuated. Passive spherical joints
are quite often found in robotic mechanisms, while
passive planar joints are only occasionally found. The
effect of an actuated spherical joint is achieved by em-
ploying the kinematically equivalent combination of
three revolutes and actuating each. Universal joints are
used in robotic mechanisms in both active and passive
forms.
Serial chains are commonly denoted by the abbre-
viations for the joints they contain in the order in which
they appear in the chain. For example, an RPR chain
contains three links, the ﬁrst jointed to the base with
a revolute and to the second with a prismatic, while
the second and third are jointed together with another
revolute. If all of the joints are identical, the notation
consists of the number of joints preceding the joint
abbreviation, such as 6R for a six-axis serial-chain ma-
nipulator containing only revolute joints.
Joints are realized with hardware that is more com-
plex than the idealizations presented in Sects. 2.3.1
and 2.3.2. For example, a revolute joint may be
achieved with a ball bearing composed of a set of
bearing balls trapped between two journals. The balls
ideally roll without slipping on the journals, thereby
taking advantage of the special properties of rolling
contact joints. A prismatic joint may be realized by
means of a roller-rail assembly.
2.3.6 Holonomic
and Nonholonomic Constraints
With the exception of rolling contact, all of the con-
straints associated with the joints discussed in the
preceding sections can be expressed mathematically by
equations containing only the joint position variables.
These are called holonomic constraints. The number of
equations, and hence the number of constraints, is 6n,
where n is the number of degrees of freedom of the
joint. The constraints are intrinsically part of the axial
joint model.
A nonholonomic constraint is one that cannot be
expressed in terms of the position variables alone, but
includes the time derivative of one or more of those
variables. These constraint equations cannot be inte-
grated to obtain relationships solely between the joint
variables. The most common example in robotic sys-
tems arises from the use of a wheel or roller that
rolls without slipping on another member. Nonholo-
nomic constraints, particularly as they apply to wheeled
robots, are discussed in more detail in Chap. 24.
2.3.7 Generalized Coordinates
In a robotic mechanism consisting of N bodies, 6N
coordinates are required to specify the position and ori-
entation of all the bodies relative to a coordinate frame.
Since some of those bodies are jointed together, a num-
ber of constraint equations will establish relationships
among some of these coordinates. In this case, the 6N
coordinates can be expressed as functions of a smaller
set of coordinates q that are all independent. The coor-
dinates in this set are known as generalized coordinates,
and motions associated with these coordinates are con-
sistent with all of the constraints. The joint variables q
of a robotic mechanism form a set of generalized coor-
dinates [2.24, 25].
2.4 Geometric Representation
The geometry of a robotic mechanism is conveniently
deﬁned by attaching coordinate frames to each link.
While these frames could be located arbitrarily, it is ad-
vantageous both for consistency and computational efﬁ-
ciency to adhere to a convention for locating the frames
on the links. Denavit and Hartenberg [2.26] introduced
the foundational convention that has been adapted in
a number of different ways, one of which is the con-
vention introduced by Khalil and Dombre [2.27] used
throughout this handbook. In all of its forms, the con-
vention requires only four rather than six parameters
to locate one coordinate frame relative to another. The

Part A | 2.4
26
Part A
Robotics Foundations
four parameters consist of two link parameters, the link
length ai and the link twist ˛i, and two joint parameters,
the joint offset di and the joint angle i. This parsimony
is achieved through judicious placement of the coordi-
nate frame origins and axes such that the Ox axis of one
frame both intersects and is perpendicular to the Oz axis of
the following coordinate frame. The conventionis appli-
cable to robotic mechanisms consisting of revolute and
prismatic joints, so when multiple-degree-of-freedom
joints are present, they are modeled as combinations of
revolute and prismatic joints, as discussed in Sect. 2.3.
There are essentially four different forms of the
convention for locating coordinate frames in a robotic
mechanism. Each exhibits its own advantages by man-
aging trade-offs of intuitive presentation. In the original
Denavit and Hartenberg [2.26] convention, joint i is lo-
cated between links i and i C 1, so it is on the outboard
side of link i. Also, the joint offset di and joint angle i
are measured along and about the i  1 joint axis, so
the subscripts of the joint parameters do not match that
of the joint axis. Waldron [2.28] and Paul [2.29] modi-
ﬁed the labeling of axes in the original convention such
that joint i is located between links i  1 and i in order
to make it consistent with the base member of a se-
rial chain being member 0. This places joint i at the
inboard side of link i and is the convention used in all
of the other modiﬁed versions. Furthermore, Waldron
and Paul addressed the mismatch between subscripts
of the joint parameters and joint axes by placing the Ozi
αi
ai
zˆi
xˆ i–1
xˆ i
zˆ i–1
xˆ i–2
Joint i 
di 
θi–1 
θi 
di–1 
Body i 
Joint
i–1 
Body
i–2 
Body
i–1 
Fig. 2.2 Schematic of the numbering of bodies and joints
in a robotic mechanism, the convention for attaching coor-
dinate frames to the bodies, and the deﬁnitions of the four
parameters, ai, ˛i, di, and i, that locate one frame relative
to another
axis along the i C1 joint axis. This, of course, relocates
the subscript mismatch to the correspondence between
the joint axis and the Oz axis of the coordinate frame.
Craig [2.30] eliminated all of the subscript mismatches
by placing the Ozi axis along joint i, but at the ex-
pense of the homogeneous transformation i1Ti being
formed with a mixture of joint parameters with sub-
script i and link parameters with subscript i  1. Khalil
and Dombre [2.27] introduced another variation similar
to Craig’s except that it deﬁnes the link parameters ai
and ˛i along and about the Oxi1 axis. In this case, the
homogeneous transformation i1Ti is formed only by
parameters with subscript i, and the subscript mismatch
is such that ai and ˛i indicate the length and twist of link
i1 rather than link i. Thus, in summary, the advantages
of the convention used throughout this handbook com-
pared to the alternative conventions are that the Oz axes
of the coordinate frames share the common subscript of
the joint axes and the four parameters that deﬁne the
spatial transform from coordinate frame i to coordinate
frame i  1 all share the common subscript i.
In this handbook, the convention for serial chain
mechanisms is shown in Fig. 2.2 and summarized as
follows. The numbering of bodies and joints follows the
convention:

The N moving bodies of the robotic mechanism are
numbered from 1 to N. The number of the base is 0.

The N joints of the robotic mechanism are num-
bered from 1 to N, with joint i located between
members i  1 and i.
zˆ 5
zˆ 4
zˆ 6
zˆ 1
zˆ 3
zˆ 2
Fig. 2.3 Example six-degree-of-freedom serial chain ma-
nipulator composed of an articulated arm with no joint
offsets and a spherical wrist

Kinematics
2.5 Workspace
27
Part A | 2.5
Table 2.7 Geometric parameters of the example serial
chain manipulator in Fig. 2.3
i
˛i
ai
di
i
1
0
0
0
1
2
 
2
0
0
2
3
0
a3
0
3
4
 
2
0
d4
4
5

2
0
0
5
6
 
2
0
0
6
With this numbering scheme, the attachment of co-
ordinate frames follows the convention:

The Ozi axis is located along the axis of joint i,

The Oxi1 axis is located along the common normal
between the Ozi1 and Ozi axes.
Using the attached frames, the four parameters that
locate one frame relative to another are deﬁned as:

ai is the distance from Ozi1 to Ozi along Oxi1,

˛i is the angle from Ozi1 to Ozi about Oxi1,

di is the distance from Oxi1 to Oxi along Ozi,

i is the angle from Oxi1 to Oxi about Ozi.
The geometric parameters for the example manip-
ulator shown in Fig. 2.3 are listed in Table 2.7. All of
the joints of this manipulator are revolutes, and joint 1
has a vertical orientation. Joint 2 is perpendicular to
joint 1 and intersects it. Joint 3 is parallel to joint 2,
and the length of link 2 is a3. Joint 4 is perpendicular to
joint 3 and intersects it. Joint 5 likewise intersects joint
4 perpendicularly at an offset of d4 from joint 3. Finally,
joint 6 intersects joint 5 perpendicularly.
With this convention, coordinate frame i can be
located relative to coordinate frame i  1 by execut-
ing a rotation through an angle ˛i about the Oxi1
axis, a translation of distance ai along Oxi1, a rotation
through an angle i about the Ozi axis, and a translation
of distance di along Ozi. Through concatenation of these
individual transformations,
Rot.Oxi1; ˛i/Trans.Oxi1; ai/Rot.Ozi; i/
Trans.Ozi; di/ ;
(2.43)
the equivalent homogeneous transformation is,
i1Ti D
0
BB@
cos i
 sin i
0
ai
sin i cos ˛i
cos i cos ˛i
 sin ˛i
 sin ˛idi
sin i sin ˛i
cos i sin ˛i
cos ˛i
cos ˛idi
0
0
0
1
1
CCA :
(2.44)
The identiﬁcation of geometric parameters is addressed
in Chap. 8.
2.5 Workspace
Most generally, the workspace of a robotic manipula-
tor is the total volume swept out by the end-effector
as the manipulator executes all possible motions. The
workspace is determined by the geometry of the ma-
nipulator and the limits of the joint motions. It is
more speciﬁc to deﬁne the reachable workspace as
the total locus of points at which the end-effector
can be placed and the dextrous workspace [2.31] as
the subset of those points at which the end-effector
can be placed while having an arbitrary orientation.
Dexterous workspaces exist only for certain ideal-
ized geometries, so real industrial manipulators with
joint motion limits almost never possess dexterous
workspaces.
Many serial-chain robotic manipulators are de-
signed such that their joints can be partitioned into
a regional structure and an orientation structure. The
joints in the regional structure accomplish the posi-
tioning of the end-effector in space, and the joints in
the orientation structure accomplish the orientation of
the end-effector. Typically, the inboard joints of a se-
rial chain manipulator comprise the regional structure,
while the outboard joints comprise the orientation struc-
ture. Also, since prismatic joints provide no capability
for rotation, they are generally not employed within the
orientation structure.
The regional workspace volume can be calculated
from the known geometry of the serial-chain manipula-
tor and motion limits of the joints. With three inboard
joints comprising the regional structure, the area of
workspace for the outer two (joints 2 and 3) is computed
ﬁrst, and then the volume is calculated by integrating
over the joint variable of the remaining inboard joint
(joint 1). In the case of a prismatic joint, this simply in-
volves multiplying the area by the total length of travel
of the prismatic joint. In the more common case of
a revolute joint, it involves rotating the area about the
joint axis through the full range of motion of the rev-
olute [2.32]. By the theorem of Pappus, the associated
volume V is
V D ANr ;
(2.45)

Part A | 2.6
28
Part A
Robotics Foundations
where A is the area, Nr is the distance from the area’s
centroid to the axis, and  is the angle through which
the area is rotated. The boundaries of the area are de-
termined by tracing the motion of a reference point in
the end-effector, typically the center of rotation of the
wrist that serves as the orientation structure. Starting
with each of the two joints at motion limits and with
joint 2 locked, joint 3 is moved until its second mo-
tion limit is reached. Joint 3 is then locked, and joint 2
is freed to move to its second motion limit. Joint 2 is
again locked, while joint 3 is freed to move back to
its original motion limit. Finally, joint 3 is locked, and
joint 2 freed to move likewise to its original motion
limit. In this way, the trace of the reference point is
a closed curve whose area and centroid can be calcu-
lated mathematically.
More details on manipulator workspace can be
found in Chaps. 4 and 16.
2.6 Forward Kinematics
The forward kinematics problem for a serial-chain ma-
nipulator is to ﬁnd the position and orientation of the
end-effector relative to the base given the positions of
all of the joints and the values of all of the geometric
link parameters. Often, a frame ﬁxed in the end-effector
is referred to as the tool frame, and while ﬁxed in the ﬁ-
nal link N, it in general has a constant offset in both
position and orientation from frame N. Likewise, a sta-
tion frame is often located in the base to establish the
location of the task to be performed. This frame gener-
ally has a constant offset in its pose relative to frame 0,
which is also ﬁxed in the base.
A more general expression of the forward kine-
matics problem is to ﬁnd the relative position and
orientation of any two designated members given the
geometric structure of the robotic mechanism and
the values of a number of joint positions equal to
the number of degrees of freedom of the mecha-
nism. The forward kinematics problem is critical for
developing manipulator coordination algorithms be-
cause joint positions are typically measured by sensors
mounted on the joints and it is necessary to calcu-
late the positions of the joint axes relative to the ﬁxed
frame.
In practice, the forward kinematics problem is
solved by calculating the transformation between a co-
ordinate frame ﬁxed in the end-effector and another
coordinate frame ﬁxed in the base, i. e., between the tool
and station frames. This is straightforward for a serial
chain since the transformation describing the position
of the end-effector relative to the base is obtained by
simply concatenating transformations between frames
ﬁxed in adjacent links of the chain. The convention
for the geometric representation of a manipulator pre-
sented in Sect. 2.4 reduces this to ﬁnding an equivalent
4  4 homogeneous transformation matrix that relates
the spatial displacement of the end-effector coordinate
frame to the base frame.
For the example serial-chain manipulator shown in
Fig. 2.3 and neglecting the addition of tool and station
Table 2.8 Forward kinematics of the example serial chain
manipulator in Fig. 2.3, with abbreviations ci WD cos i
and si WD sin i
0T6 D
0
BBB@
r11
r12
r13
0px
6
r21
r22
r23
0py
6
r31
r32
r33
0pz
6
0
0
0
1
1
CCCA,
r11 D c1.s2s3  c2c3/.s4s6  c4c5c6/
 c1s5c6.c2s3 C s2c3/
C s1.s4c5c6 C c4s6/ ;
r21 D s1.s2s3  c2c3/.s4s6  c4c5c6/
 s1s5c6.c2s3 C s2c3/
 c1.s4c5c6 C c4s6/ ,
r31 D .c2s3 C s2c3/.s4s6  c4c5c6/
C s5c6.s2s3  c2c3/ ,
r12 D c1.s2s3  c2c3/.c4c5s6 C s4c6/
C c1s5s6.c2s3 C s2c3/
C s1.c4c6  s4c5s6/ ,
r22 D s1.s2s3  c2c3/.c4c5s6 C s4c6/
C s1s5s6.c2s3 C s2c3/
 c1.c4c6  s4c5s6/ ,
r32 D .c2s3 C s2c3/.c4c5s6 C s4c6/
 s5s6.s2s3  c2c3/ ,
r13 D c1c4s5.s2s3  c2c3/
 c1c5.c2s3 C s2c3/
 s1s4s5 ,
r23 D s1c4s5.s2s3  c2c3/
 s1c5.c2s3 C s2c3/ C c1s4s5 ,
r33 D c4s5.c2s3 C s2c3/
C c5.s2s3  c2c3/ ,
0px
6 D a3c1c2  d4c1.c2s3 C s2c3/ ,
0py
6 D a3s1c2  d4s1.c2s3 C s2c3/ ,
0pz
6 D a3s2 C d4.s2s3  c2c3/ .

Kinematics
2.7 Inverse Kinematics
29
Part A | 2.7
frames, the transformation is
0T6 D 0T1
1T2
2T3
3T4
4T5
5T6 :
(2.46)
Table 2.8 contains the elements of 0T6 that are calcu-
lated using Table 2.7 and (2.44).
Once again, homogeneous transformations provide
a compact notation, but are computationally inefﬁcient
for solving the forward kinematics problem. A reduc-
tion in computation can be achieved by separating the
position and orientation portions of the transformation
to eliminate all multiplications by the 0 and 1 elements
of the matrices. In Chap. 3, calculations are made us-
ing the spatial vector notation brieﬂy introduced here
in Sect. 2.2.6 and explained in detail in Sect. 3.2. This
approach does not employ homogeneous transforma-
tions, but rather separates out the rotation matrices and
positions to achieve computation efﬁciency. Table 3.1
provides the detailed formulas, with the product of
spatial transforms particularly relevant to the forward
kinematics problem.
Kinematic trees are the general structure of robotic
mechanisms that do not contain closed loops, and the
forward kinematics of tree structures are addressed
in Chap. 3. The forward kinematics problem for closed
chains is much more complicated because of the addi-
tional constraints present. Solution methods for closed
chains are included in Chap. 18.
2.7 Inverse Kinematics
The inverse kinematics problem for a serial-chain ma-
nipulator is to ﬁnd the values of the joint positions given
the position and orientation of the end-effector relative
to the base and the values of all of the geometric link
parameters. Once again, this is a simpliﬁed statement
applying only to serial chains. A more general state-
ment is: given the relative positions and orientations of
two members of a mechanism, ﬁnd the values of all of
the joint positions. This amounts to ﬁnding all of the
joint positions given the homogeneous transformation
between the two members of interest.
In the common case of a six-degree-of-freedom se-
rial chain manipulator, the known transformation is 0T6.
Reviewing the formulation of this transformation in
Sect. 2.6, it is clear that the inverse kinematics problem
for serial-chain manipulators requires the solution of
sets of nonlinear equations. In the case of a six-degree-
of-freedom manipulator, three of these equations relate
to the position vector within the homogeneous transfor-
mation, and the other three relate to the rotation matrix.
In the latter case, these three equations cannot come
from the same row or column because of the depen-
dency within the rotation matrix. With these nonlinear
equations, it is possible that no solutions exist or mul-
tiple solutions exist [2.33]. For a solution to exist, the
desired position and orientation of the end-effector must
lie in the workspace of the manipulator. In cases where
solutions do exist, they often cannot be presented in
closed form, so numerical methods are required.
2.7.1 Closed-Form Solutions
Closed-form solutions are desirable because they are
faster than numerical solutions and readily identify all
possible solutions. The disadvantage of closed-form so-
lutions is that they are not general, but robot dependent.
The most effective methods for ﬁnding closed-form so-
lutions are ad hoc techniques that take advantage of
particular geometric features of speciﬁc mechanisms.
In general, closed-form solutions can only be obtained
for six-degree-of-freedom systems with special kine-
matic structure characterized by a large number of
the geometric parameters deﬁned in Sect. 2.4 being
zero-valued. Most industrial manipulators have such
structure because it permits more efﬁcient coordina-
tion software. Sufﬁcient conditions for a six-degree-
of-freedom manipulator to have closed-form inverse
kinematics solutions are [2.34–36]:
1. Three consecutive revolute joint axes intersect at
a common point, as in a spherical wrist.
2. Three consecutive revolute joint axes are parallel.
Closed-form solution approaches are generally di-
vided into algebraic and geometric methods.
Algebraic Methods
Algebraic methods involve identifying the signiﬁcant
equations containing the joint variables and manipulat-
ing them into a soluble form. A common strategy is
reduction to a transcendental equation in a single vari-
able such as,
C1 cos i C C2 sin i C C3 D 0 ;
(2.47)
where C1, C2, and C3 are constants. The solution to such
an equation is
i D 2 tan1
0
B@
C2 ˙
q
C2
2  C2
3 C C2
1
C1  C3
1
CA :
(2.48)

Part A | 2.7
30
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Special cases in which one or more of the constants are
zero are also common.
Reduction to a pair of equations having the form,
C1 cos i C C2 sin i C C3 D 0 ;
(2.49)
C1 sin i  C2 cos i C C4 D 0 ;
(2.50)
is another particularly useful strategy because only one
solution results,
i D Atan2.C1C4  C2C3; C2C4  C1C3/ :
(2.51)
Geometric Methods
Geometric methods involve identifying points on the
manipulator relative to which position and/or orienta-
tion can be expressed as a function of a reduced set of
the joint variables. This often amounts to decompos-
ing the spatial problem into separate planar problems.
The resulting equations are solved using algebraic ma-
nipulation. The two sufﬁcient conditions for existence
of a closed-form solution for a six-degree-of-freedom
manipulator that are listed above enable the decomposi-
tion of the problem into inverse position kinematics and
inverse orientation kinematics. This is the decomposi-
tion into regional and orientation structures discussed in
Sect. 2.5, and the solution is found by rewriting (2.46),
0T6
6T5
5T4
4T3 D 0T1
1T2
2T3 :
(2.52)
The example manipulator in Fig. 2.3 has this structure,
and its regional structure is commonly known as an
articulated or anthropomorphic arm or an elbow manip-
ulator. The solution to the inverse position kinematics
problem for such a structure is summarized in Table 2.9.
Because there are two solutions for 1 and likewise two
solutions for both 2 and 3 corresponding to each 1
solution, there are a total of four solutions to the inverse
position kinematics problem of the articulated arm ma-
nipulator. The orientation structure is simply a spherical
wrist, and the corresponding solution to the inverse
orientation kinematics problem is summarized in Ta-
ble 2.10. Two solutions for 5 are given in Table 2.10,
but only one solution for both 4 and 6 corresponds
to each. Thus, the inverse orientation kinematics prob-
lem of a spherical wrist has two solutions. Combining
the regional and orientation structures, the total number
of inverse kinematics solutions for the manipulator in
Fig. 2.3 is eight.
2.7.2 Numerical Methods
Unlike the algebraic and geometric methods used to
ﬁnd closed-form solutions, numerical methods are not
robot dependent, so they can be applied to any kine-
matic structure. The disadvantages of numerical meth-
ods are that they can be slower and in some cases, they
do not allow computation of all possible solutions. For
a six-degree-of-freedom serial-chain manipulator with
only revolute and prismatic joints, the translation and
rotation equations can always be reduced to a poly-
nomial in a single variable of degree not greater than
16 [2.37]. Thus, such a manipulator can have as many
as 16 real solutions to the inverse kinematics prob-
lem [2.38]. Since closed-form solution of a polynomial
equation is only possible if the polynomial is of degree
four or less, it follows that many manipulator geome-
tries are not soluble in closed form. In general, a greater
number of nonzero geometric parameters corresponds
to a polynomial of higher degree in the reduction. For
such manipulator structures, the most common numeri-
cal methods can be divided into categories of symbolic
elimination methods, continuation methods, and itera-
tive methods.
Symbolic Elimination Methods
Symbolic elimination methods involve analytical ma-
nipulations to eliminate variables from the system of
nonlinear equations to reduce it to a smaller set of
equations. Raghavan and Roth [2.39] used dialytic
elimination to reduce the inverse kinematics problem
of a general 6R serial-chain manipulator to a polyno-
Table 2.9 Inverse position kinematics of the articulated
arm within the example serial chain manipulator in Fig. 2.3
1 D Atan2
0py
6; 0px
6

or Atan2

0py
6; 0px
6

3 D Atan2

D; ˙
p
1  D2

;
where D WD
.0px
6/2C.0py
6/2C.0pz
6/2a2
3d2
4
2a3d4
;
2 D Atan2

0pz
6;
q
.0px
6/2 C .0py
6/2

Atan2 .d4 cos 3; a3  d4 sin 3/
Table 2.10 Inverse orientation kinematics of the spheri-
cal wrist within the example serial chain manipulator in
Fig. 2.3, with abbreviations ci WD cos i and si WD sin i
5 D Atan2
 
˙
q
1 

r13s1  r23c1
2 ; r13s1  r23c1
!
4 D Atan2



r13c1 C r23s1

s.2C3/  r33c.2C3/ ;
˙ .r13c1 C r23s1/c.2C3/  r23s.2C3/

6 D Atan2

˙

r12s1 C r22c1

; ˙.r11s1  r21c1/

,
where the ˙ choice for 5 dictates all of the subsequent ˙
and  for 4 and 6 .

Kinematics
2.8 Forward Instantaneous Kinematics
31
Part A | 2.8
mial of degree 16 and to ﬁnd all possible solutions. The
roots provide solutions for one of the joint variables,
while the other variables are computed by solving lin-
ear systems. Manocha and Canny [2.40] improved the
numerical properties of this technique by reformulating
the problem as a generalized eigenvalue problem. An
alternative approach to elimination makes use of Gröb-
ner bases [2.41, 42].
Continuation Methods
Continuation methods involve tracking a solution path
from a start system with known solutions to a tar-
get system whose solutions are sought as the start
system is transformed into the target system. These
techniques have been applied to inverse kinematics
problems [2.43], and special properties of polynomial
systems can be exploited to ﬁnd all possible solu-
tions [2.44].
Iterative Methods
A number of different iterative methods can be em-
ployed to solve the inverse kinematics problem. Most
of them converge to a single solution based on an ini-
tial guess, so the quality of that guess greatly impacts
the solution time. Newton–Raphson methods provide
a fundamental approach that uses a ﬁrst-order approx-
imation of the original equations. Pieper [2.34] was
among the ﬁrst to apply the method to inverse kinemat-
ics, and others have followed [2.45, 46]. Optimization
approaches formulate the problem as a nonlinear op-
timization problem and employ search techniques to
move from an initial guess to a solution [2.47, 48].
Resolved motion rate control converts the problem to
a differential equation [2.49], and a modiﬁed predictor–
corrector algorithm can be used to perform the joint
velocity integration [2.50]. Control-theory-based meth-
ods cast the differential equation into a control prob-
lem [2.51]. Interval analysis [2.52] is perhaps one of
the most promising iterative methods because it of-
fers rapid convergence to a solution and can be used
to ﬁnd all possible solutions. For complex mecha-
nisms, the damped least-squares approach [2.53] is
particularly attractive, and more detail is provided
in Chap. 10.
2.8 Forward Instantaneous Kinematics
The forward instantaneous kinematics problem for
a serial-chain manipulator is: given the positions of
all members of the chain and the rates of motion
about all the joints, ﬁnd the total velocity of the end-
effector. Here the rate of motion about the joint is
the angular velocity of rotation about a revolute joint
or the translational velocity of sliding along a pris-
matic joint. The total velocity of a member is the
velocity of the origin of the coordinate frame ﬁxed
to it combined with its angular velocity. That is, the
total velocity has six independent components and
therefore, completely represents the velocity ﬁeld of
the member. It is important to note that this prob-
lem deﬁnition includes an assumption that the pose
of the mechanism is completely known. In most sit-
uations, this means that either the forward or in-
verse position kinematics problem must be solved
before the forward instantaneous kinematics problem
can be addressed. The same is true of the inverse
instantaneous kinematics problem discussed in the fol-
lowing section. The forward instantaneous kinematics
problem is important when doing acceleration anal-
ysis for the purpose of studying dynamics. The to-
tal velocities of the members are needed for the
computation of Coriolis and centripetal acceleration
components.
2.8.1 Jacobian
Differentiation with respect to time of the forward po-
sition kinematics equations yields a set of equations of
the form
kv N D J.q/Pq;
(2.53)
where kv N is the spatial velocity of the end-effector
expressed in any frame k, Pq is an n-dimensional vec-
tor composed of the joint rates, and J.q/ is a 6 
n matrix whose elements are, in general, nonlinear
functions of q. J.q/ is called the Jacobian matrix
of this algebraic system and is expressed relative
to the same coordinate frame as the spatial veloc-
ity kv N [2.54]. Alternately, (2.53) can be expressed
as
kv N D ŒJ1 J2    JN Pq ;
(2.54)
where N is the number of joints (each with possibly
more than 1 degree-of-freedom) and Ji provides the col-
umn(s) of J.q/ which correspond(s) to Pqi. If the joint
positions are known, (2.53) yields six linear algebraic
equations in the joint rates. If the joint rates are given,

Part A | 2.9
32
Part A
Robotics Foundations
a solution of (2.53) is a solution of the forward in-
stantaneous kinematics problem. Note that J.q/ can be
regarded as a known matrix for this purpose provided
all the joint positions are known.
Algorithm 2.1 Jacobian Computation Algorithm for
a Serial-Chain Mechanism
inputs: kXN; NXN1; :::; iXi1; :::; 2X1
output: J
X D kXN
for i D N to 1 do
Ji D X ˆi
if i > 1 then
X D X iXi1
end if
end for
Using the spatial vector notation brieﬂy introduced
in Sect. 2.2.6 and explained in detail in Sect. 3.2, the Ja-
cobian can be easily computed from the free modes ˆi
of the joints and the associated spatial transforms jXi.
Ji D kXi ˆi :
(2.55)
To understand why this holds, note that ˆi describes
the spatial velocities created by joint i in local coordi-
nates and kXi transforms spatial velocities expressed in
frame i to frame k. The quantities Ji can be efﬁciently
computed from kXN and the link-to-link transforms
iXi1. Algorithm 2.1 contains an algorithm for com-
puting the columns of the Jacobian in this manner.
Table 3.1 provides efﬁcient methods to carry out the
multiplications required in this algorithm which ex-
ploit the structure of spatial transformation matrices.
Note that the quantity kXN can be computed with
forward kinematics and each iXi1 can be computed
with simple joint kinematics. Thus, use of the algo-
rithm in Alg. 2.1 simpliﬁes the problem of forward
instantaneous kinematics to one of forward standard
kinematics. Additional information about the Jacobian
can be found in Chap. 10.
2.9 Inverse Instantaneous Kinematics
The important problem from the point of view of
robotic coordination is the inverse instantaneous kine-
matics problem. More information on robot coordi-
nation can be found in Chaps. 7 and 8. The inverse
instantaneous kinematics problem for a serial chain
manipulator is: given the positions of all members of
the chain and the total velocity of the end-effector,
ﬁnd the rates of motion of all joints. When controlling
a movement of an industrial robot that operates in the
point-to-point mode, it is not only necessary to compute
the ﬁnal joint positions needed to assume the desired
ﬁnal hand position. It is also necessary to generate
a smooth trajectory for motion between the initial and
ﬁnal positions. There are, of course, an inﬁnite number
of possible trajectories for this purpose. However, the
most straightforward and successful approach employs
algorithms based on the solution of the inverse instan-
taneous kinematics problem. This technique originated
in the work of Whitney [2.55] and of Pieper [2.34].
2.9.1 Inverse Jacobian
In order to solve the linear system of equations in the
joint rates obtained by decomposing (2.53) into its com-
ponent equations when vN is known, it is necessary to
invert the Jacobian matrix. The equation becomes
Pq D J1.q/vN :
(2.56)
Since J is a 6  6 matrix, numerical inversion is
not very attractive. It is quite possible for J to be-
come singular (jJj D 0), in which case the inverse
does not exist. More information on singularities can
be found in Chaps. 4 and 18. Even when the Jaco-
bian matrix does not become singular, it may become
ill-conditioned, leading to degraded performance in
signiﬁcant portions of the manipulator’s workspace.
Most industrial robot geometries are simple enough
that the Jacobian matrix can be inverted analyti-
cally, leading to a set of explicit equations for the
joint rates [2.56–58]. This greatly reduces the num-
ber of operations needed as compared to numerical
inversion. For more complex manipulator geometries,
though, numerical inversion is the only solution op-
tion. The Jacobian of a redundant manipulator is not
square, so it cannot be inverted. Chapter 10 dis-
cusses how various pseudoinverses can be used in such
cases.

Kinematics
References
33
Part A | 2
2.10 Static Wrench Transmission
A general force system can be shown to be equiva-
lent to a single force together with a moment acting
about its line of action. This is called a wrench. There
is a deep isometry between the geometries of systems
of wrench axes and that of systems of instantaneous
screw axes [2.59]. Static wrench analysis of a manip-
ulator establishes the relationship between wrenches
applied to the end-effector and forces/torques applied
to the joints. This is essential for controlling a ma-
nipulator’s interactions with its environment. Examples
include tasks involving ﬁxed or quasi-ﬁxed workpieces
such as inserting a component in place with a speci-
ﬁed force and tightening a nut to a prescribed torque.
More information can be found in Chaps. 9 and 37.
Through the principle of virtual work, the relation-
ship between wrenches applied to the end-effector
and forces/torques applied to the joints can be shown
to be
 D JTf ;
(2.57)
where  is the n-dimensional vector of applied joint
forces/torques for an n-degree-of-freedom manipulator
and f is the spatial force vector
f D
n
f

;
(2.58)
in which n and f are the vectors of torques and forces,
respectively, applied to the end-effector, both expressed
in the coordinate frame relative to which the Jacobian
is also expressed. Thus, in the same way the Jacobian
maps the joint rates to the spatial velocity of the end-
effector, its transpose maps the wrenches applied to the
end-effector to the equivalent joint forces/torques. As in
the velocity case, when the Jacobian is not square, the
inverse relationship is not uniquely deﬁned.
2.11 Conclusions and Further Reading
This chapter presents an overview of how the funda-
mentals of kinematics can be applied to robotic mech-
anisms. The topics include various representations of
the position and orientation of a rigid body in space,
the freedom of motion and accompanying mathemat-
ical models of joints, a geometric representation that
describes the bodies and joints of a robotic mechanism,
the workspace of a manipulator, the problems of for-
ward and inverse kinematics, the problems of forward
and inverse instantaneous kinematics including the def-
inition of the Jacobian, and ﬁnally the transmission of
static wrenches. This chapter is certainly not a com-
prehensive account of robot kinematics. Fortunately,
a number of excellent texts provide a broad introduction
to robotics with signiﬁcant focus on kinematics [2.17,
27, 29, 30, 51, 60–64].
From a historical perspective, robotics fundamen-
tally changed the nature of the ﬁeld of mecha-
nism kinematics. Before the ﬁrst work on the gen-
eration of coordination equations for robots [2.34,
55], the focus of the ﬁeld was almost entirely on
single-degree-of-freedom mechanisms. This is why
robotics, following on from the advent of digi-
tal computing, led to a renaissance of work in
mechanism kinematics. More details can be found
in Chap. 4. The evolution of the ﬁeld has contin-
ued as it has broadened from the study of sim-
ple serial chains for industrial robots, the focus of
the analysis in this chapter, to parallel machines
(Chap. 18), human-like grippers (Chap. 19), robotic
vehicles (Chaps. 17 and 24–26), and even small-scale
robots (Chap. 27).
References
2.1
W. R. Hamilton: On quaternions, or on a new system
of imaginaries in algebra, Philos. Mag. 18 (2000)
2.2
E.B. Wilson: Vector Analysis (Dover, New York 1960),
based upon the lectures of J.W. Gibbs (reprint of
the 2nd edn. published by Charles Scribner’s Sons,
1909)
2.3
H. Graßmann: Die Wissenschaft der extensiven Größe
oder die Ausdehnungslehre (Wigand, Leipzig 1844)
2.4
J.M. McCarthy: Introduction to Theoretical Kinematics
(MIT Press, Cambridge 1990)
2.5
W.K. Clifford: Preliminary sketch of bi-quarternions,
Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. 4, 381–395 (1873)
2.6
A.P. Kotelnikov: Screw calculus and some applica-
tions to geometry and mechanics (Annal. Imp. Univ.,
Kazan 1895)
2.7
E. Study: Geometrie der Dynamen (Teubner, Leipzig
1903)
2.8
G.S. Chirikjian, A.B. Kyatkin: Engineering Applica-
tions of Noncommutative Harmonic Analysis (CRC,
Boca Raton 2001)

Part A | 2
34
Part A
Robotics Foundations
2.9
R. von Mises: Anwendungen der Motorrechnung,
Z. Angew. Math. Mech. 4(3), 193–213 (1924)
2.10
J.E. Baker, I.A. Parkin: Fundamentals of Screw Mo-
tion: Seminal Papers by Michel Chasles and Olinde
Rodrigues, School of Information Technologies (Uni-
versity of Sydney, Sydney 2003), translated from
O. Rodrigues: Des lois géométriques qui régissent les
déplacements d’un système dans l’espace, J. Math.
Pures Applicqu. Liouville 5, 380–440 (1840)
2.11
R.S. Ball: A Treatise on the Theory of Screws (Cam-
bridge Univ. Press, Cambridge 1998)
2.12
J.K. Davidson, K.H. Hunt: Robots and Screw Theory:
Applications of Kinematics and Statics to Robotics
(Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford 2004)
2.13
K.H. Hunt: Kinematic Geometry of Mechanisms
(Clarendon, Oxford 1978)
2.14
J.R. Phillips: Freedom in Machinery. Vol 1. Introduc-
ing Screw Theory (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge
1984)
2.15
J.R. Phillips: Freedom in Machinery. Vol 2. Screw The-
ory Exemplified (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge
1990)
2.16
G.S. Chirikjian: Rigid-body kinematics. In: Robotics
and Automation Handbook, ed. by T. Kurfess (CRC,
Boca Raton 2005), Chap. 2
2.17
R.M. Murray, Z. Li, S.S. Sastry: A Mathematical In-
troduction to Robotic Manipulation (CRC, Boca Raton
1994)
2.18
A. Karger, J. Novak: Space Kinematics and Lie Groups
(Routledge, New York 1985)
2.19
R. von Mises: Motorrechnung, ein neues Hilfsmittel
in der Mechanik, Z. Angew. Math. Mech. 2(2), 155–181
(1924)
2.20
J.D. Everett: On a new method in statics and kine-
matics, Mess. Math. 45, 36–37 (1875)
2.21
F. Reuleaux: Kinematics of Machinery (Dover, New
York 1963), reprint of Theoretische Kinematik, 1875,
in German
2.22
R. Featherstone: Rigid Body Dynamics Algorithms
(Kluwer, Boston 2007)
2.23
K.J. Waldron: A method of studying joint geometry,
Mechan. Mach. Theory 7, 347–353 (1972)
2.24
T.R. Kane, D.A. Levinson: Dynamics, Theory and Ap-
plications (McGraw-Hill, New York 1985)
2.25
J.L. Lagrange: Oeuvres de Lagrange (Gauthier-Villars,
Paris 1867)
2.26
J. Denavit, R.S. Hartenberg: A kinematic notation for
lower-pair mechanisms based on matrices, J. Appl.
Mech. 22, 215–221 (1955)
2.27
W. Khalil, E. Dombre: Modeling, Identification and
Control of Robots (Taylor Francis, New York 2002)
2.28
K.J. Waldron: A study of overconstrained linkage
geometry by solution of closure equations, Part I:
A method of study, Mech. Mach. Theory 8(1), 95–104
(1973)
2.29
R. Paul: Robot Manipulators: Mathematics, Pro-
gramming and Control (MIT Press, Cambridge 1982)
2.30
J.J. Craig: Introduction to Robotics: Mechanics and
Control (Addison-Wesley, Reading 1986)
2.31
K.J. Waldron, A. Kumar: The dextrous workspace,
ASME Mech. Conf., Los Angeles (1980), ASME paper No.
80-DETC-108
2.32
R. Vijaykumar, K.J. Waldron, M.J. Tsai: Geometric
optimization of manipulator structures for working
volume and dexterity, Int. J. Robotics Res. 5(2), 91–
103 (1986)
2.33
J. Duffy: Analysis of Mechanisms and Robot Manip-
ulators (Wiley, New York 1980)
2.34
D. Pieper: The Kinematics of Manipulators Under
Computer Control, Ph.D. Thesis (Stanford University,
Stanford 1968)
2.35
C.S.G. Lee: Robot arm kinematics, dynamics, and
control, Computer 15(12), 62–80 (1982)
2.36
M.T. Mason: Mechanics of Robotic Manipulation (MIT
Press, Cambridge 2001)
2.37
H.Y. Lee, C.G. Liang: A new vector theory for the
analysis of spatial mechanisms, Mech. Mach. Theory
23(3), 209–217 (1988)
2.38
R. Manseur, K.L. Doty: A robot manipulator with 16
real inverse kinematic solutions, Int. J. Robotics Res.
8(5), 75–79 (1989)
2.39
M. Raghavan, B. Roth: Kinematic analysis of the
6R manipulator of general geometry, 5th Int. Symp.
Robotics Res. (1990)
2.40
D. Manocha, J. Canny: Real Time Inverse Kinematics
for General 6R Manipulators, Tech. Rep. (University
of California, Berkeley 1992)
2.41
B. Buchberger: Applications of Gröbner bases in
non-linear computational geometry, Lect. Notes
Comput. Sci. 296, 52–80 (1989)
2.42
P. Kovacs: Minimum degree solutions for the inverse
kinematics problem by application of the Buchberger
algorithm. In: Advances in Robot Kinematics, ed.
by S. Stifter, J. Lenarcic (Springer, New York 1991)
pp. 326–334
2.43
L.W. Tsai, A.P. Morgan: Solving the kinematics of the
most general six- and five-degree-of-freedom ma-
nipulators by continuation methods, ASME J. Mech.
Transm. Autom. Des. 107, 189–195 (1985)
2.44
C.W. Wampler, A.P. Morgan, A.J. Sommese: Numerical
continuation methods for solving polynomial sys-
tems arising in kinematics, ASME J. Mech. Des. 112,
59–68 (1990)
2.45
R. Manseur, K.L. Doty: Fast inverse kinematics of
5-revolute-axis robot manipulators, Mechan. Mach.
Theory 27(5), 587–597 (1992)
2.46
S.C.A. Thomopoulos, R.Y.J. Tam: An iterative solution
to the inverse kinematics of robotic manipulators,
Mechan. Mach. Theory 26(4), 359–373 (1991)
2.47
J.J. Uicker Jr., J. Denavit, R.S. Hartenberg: An interac-
tive method for the displacement analysis of spatial
mechanisms, J. Appl. Mech. 31, 309–314 (1964)
2.48
J. Zhao, N. Badler: Inverse kinematics position-
ing using nonlinear programming for highly artic-
ulated figures, Trans. Comput. Graph. 13(4), 313–336
(1994)
2.49
D.E. Whitney: Resolved motion rate control of ma-
nipulators and human prostheses, IEEE Trans. Man
Mach. Syst. 10, 47–63 (1969)
2.50
H. Cheng, K. Gupta: A study of robot inverse kine-
matics based upon the solution of differential equa-
tions, J. Robotic Syst. 8(2), 115–175 (1991)
2.51
L. Sciavicco, B. Siciliano: Modeling and Control of
Robot Manipulators (Springer, London 2000)

Kinematics
References
35
Part A | 2
2.52
R.S. Rao, A. Asaithambi, S.K. Agrawal: Inverse kine-
matic solution of robot manipulators using interval
analysis, ASME J. Mech. Des. 120(1), 147–150 (1998)
2.53
C.W. Wampler: Manipulator inverse kinematic so-
lutions based on vector formulations and damped
least squares methods, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern.
16, 93–101 (1986)
2.54
D.E. Orin, W.W. Schrader: Efficient computation of
the jacobian for robot manipulators, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 3(4), 66–75 (1984)
2.55
D.E. Whitney: The mathematics of coordinated con-
trol of prosthetic arms and manipulators, J. Dynamic
Sys. Meas. Control 122, 303–309 (1972)
2.56
R.P. Paul, B.E. Shimano, G. Mayer: Kinematic control
equations for simple manipulators, IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybern. 11(6), 339–455 (1981)
2.57
R.P. Paul, C.N. Stephenson: Kinematics of robot
wrists, Int. J. Robotics Res. 20(1), 31–38 (1983)
2.58
R.P. Paul, H. Zhang: Computationally efficient kine-
matics for manipulators with spherical wrists based
on the homogeneous transformation representa-
tion, Int. J. Robotics Res. 5(2), 32–44 (1986)
2.59
K.J. Waldron, K.H. Hunt: Series-parallel dualities in
actively coordinated mechanisms, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 10, 473–480 (1991)
2.60
H. Asada, J.J.E. Slotine: Robot Analysis and Control
(Wiley, New York 1986)
2.61
F.L. Lewis, C.T. Abdallah, D.M. Dawson: Control of
Robot Manipulators (Macmillan, New York 1993)
2.62
R.J. Schilling: Fundamentals of Robotics: Analy-
sis and Control (Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs
1990)
2.63
M.W. Spong, M. Vidyasagar: Robot Dynamics and
Control (Wiley, New York 1989)
2.64
T. Yoshikawa: Foundations of Robotics (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1990)

Multimedia Contents Dynamics
37
Part A | 3
3. Dynamics
Roy Featherstone, David E. Orin
The dynamic equations of motion provide the re-
lationships between actuation and contact forces
acting on robot mechanisms, and the accelera-
tion and motion trajectories that result. Dynamics
is important for mechanical design, control, and
simulation. A number of algorithms are important
in these applications, and include computation
of the following: inverse dynamics, forward dy-
namics, the joint-space inertia matrix, and the
operational-space inertia matrix. This chapter
provides efficient algorithms to perform each of
these calculations on a rigid-body model of a robot
mechanism. The algorithms are presented in their
most general form and are applicable to robot
mechanisms with general connectivity, geometry,
and joint types. Such mechanisms include fixed-
base robots, mobile robots, and parallel robot
mechanisms.
In addition to the need for computational ef-
ficiency, algorithms should be formulated with
a compact set of equations for ease of development
and implementation. The use of spatial notation
has been very effective in this regard, and is used in
presenting the dynamics algorithms. Spatial vector
algebra is a concise vector notation for describing
rigid-body velocity, acceleration, inertia, etc., us-
ing six-dimensional (6-D) vectors and tensors.
The goal of this chapter is to introduce the
reader to the subject of robot dynamics and to
provide the reader with a rich set of algorithms,
in a compact form, that they may apply to their
particular robot mechanism. These algorithms are
presented in tables for ready access.
3.1
Overview ................................................
38
3.1.1
Spatial Vector Notation..................
38
3.1.2
Canonical Equations .....................
38
3.1.3
Dynamic Models
of Rigid-Body Systems ..................
38
3.1.4
Kinematic Trees ............................
39
3.1.5
Kinematic Loops ...........................
39
3.2
Spatial Vector Notation............................
39
3.2.1
Motion and Force .........................
40
3.2.2
Basis Vectors ................................
40
3.2.3
Spatial Velocity and Force..............
40
3.2.4
Addition and Scalar Multiplication .
41
3.2.5
Scalar Product ..............................
41
3.2.6
Coordinate Transforms...................
41
3.2.7
Vector Products ............................
41
3.2.8
Differentiation..............................
42
3.2.9
Acceleration .................................
42
3.2.10
Spatial Momentum .......................
42
3.2.11
Spatial Inertia ..............................
42
3.2.12
Equation of Motion.......................
43
3.2.13
Computer Implementation ............
44
3.2.14
Summary .....................................
45
3.3
Canonical Equations................................
45
3.3.1
Joint-Space Formulation ...............
45
3.3.2
Lagrange Formulation ...................
46
3.3.3
Operational-Space Formulation .....
46
3.3.4
Impact Model...............................
47
3.4 Dynamic Models of Rigid-Body Systems....
47
3.4.1
Connectivity .................................
47
3.4.2
Link Geometry..............................
49
3.4.3
Link Inertias.................................
49
3.4.4
Joint Models.................................
49
3.4.5
Example System ...........................
50
3.5 Kinematic Trees ......................................
51
3.5.1
The Recursive Newton–Euler
Algorithm ....................................
51
3.5.2
The Articulated-Body Algorithm.....
54
3.5.3
The Composite-Rigid-Body
Algorithm ....................................
56
3.5.4
Operational-Space Inertia Matrix ...
57
3.6 Kinematic Loops .....................................
58
3.6.1
Formulation
of Closed-Loop Algorithm..............
58
3.6.2
Closed-Loop Algorithm..................
60

Part A | 3.1
38
Part A
Robotics Foundations
3.7
Conclusions and Further Reading.............
61
3.7.1
Multibody Dynamics .....................
62
3.7.2
Alternative Representations...........
62
3.7.3
Alternative Formulations ...............
62
3.7.4
Efficiency .....................................
62
3.7.5
Accuracy ......................................
62
3.7.6
Software Packages ........................
63
3.7.7
Symbolic Simplification .................
63
3.7.8
Algorithms for Parallel Computers ..
63
3.7.9
Topologically-Varying Systems .......
63
References.....................................................
63
3.1 Overview
Robot dynamics provides the relationships between ac-
tuation and contact forces, and the acceleration and
motion trajectories that result. The dynamic equations
of motion provide the basis for a number of computa-
tional algorithms that are useful in mechanical design,
control, and simulation. A growing area of their use is
in computer animation of mobile systems, especially
using human and humanoid models. In this Chapter,
the fundamental dynamic relationships for robot mech-
anisms are presented, along with efﬁcient algorithms
for the most common computations. Spatial vector no-
tation, a concise representation which makes use of 6-D
vectors and tensors, is used in the algorithms.
This chapter presents efﬁcient low-order algorithms
for four major computations:
1. Inverse dynamics, in which the required joint actua-
tor torques/forces are computed from a speciﬁcation
of the robot’s trajectory (position, velocity, and ac-
celeration),
2. Forward dynamics in which the applied joint ac-
tuator torques/forces are speciﬁed and the joint
accelerations are to be determined,
3. The joint-space inertia matrix, which maps the joint
accelerations to the joint torques/forces, and
4. The operational-space inertia matrix, which maps
task accelerations to task forces in operational or
Cartesian space.
Inverse dynamics is used in feedforward control and
trajectory planning. Forward dynamics is required for
simulation. The joint-space inertia (mass) matrix is used
in analysis, in feedback control to linearize the dynam-
ics, and is an integral part of many forward dynamics
formulations. The operational-space inertia matrix is
used in control at the task or end-effector level.
3.1.1 Spatial Vector Notation
Section 3.2 presents the spatial vector notation, which
is used to express the algorithms in this chapter in
a clear and concise manner. It was originally developed
by Featherstone [3.1] to provide a concise vector no-
tation for describing rigid-body velocity, acceleration,
inertia, etc., using 6-D vectors and tensors. Section 3.2
explains the meanings of spatial vectors and operators,
and provides a detailed tabulation of the correspon-
dence between spatial and standard three-dimensional
(3-D) quantities and operators, so that the algorithms in
the later sections can be understood. Formulae for efﬁ-
cient computer implementation of spatial arithmetic are
also provided. Effort is taken in the discussion of spatial
vectors to distinguish between the coordinate vectors
and the quantities they represent. This illuminates some
of the important characteristics of spatial vectors.
3.1.2 Canonical Equations
The dynamic equations of motion are provided in
Sect. 3.3 in two fundamental forms: the joint-space for-
mulation and the operational-space formulation. The
terms in the joint-space formulation have traditionally
been derived using a Lagrangian approach in which
they are developed independently of any reference co-
ordinate frame. The Lagrange formulation provides
a description of the relationship between the joint ac-
tuator forces and the motion of the mechanism, and
fundamentally operates on the kinetic and potential
energy in the system. The resulting joint-space formula-
tion has a number of notable properties that have proven
useful for developing control algorithms. The equations
to relate the terms in the joint-space and operational-
space formulations, along with an impact model, are
also provided in this section.
3.1.3 Dynamic Models
of Rigid-Body Systems
The algorithms in this chapter are model-based and re-
quire a data structure describing a robot mechanism
as one of their input arguments. Section 3.4 gives
a description of the components of this model: a con-
nectivity graph, link geometry parameters, link inertia
parameters, and a set of joint models. The description
of the connectivity is general so that it covers both kine-
matic trees and closed-loop mechanisms. Kinematic
trees and the spanning tree for a closed-loop mecha-
nism share a common notation. In order to describe

Dynamics
3.2 Spatial Vector Notation
39
Part A | 3.2
the link and joint geometry, two coordinate frames are
associated with each joint, one each attached to the pre-
decessor and successor links. These frames are deﬁned
to be compatible with the modiﬁed Denavit–Hartenberg
convention of Craig [3.2] for serial mechanisms con-
taining single-degree-of-freedom (DOF) joints, but are
nevertheless applicable to general rigid-body systems
containing general multi-DOF joints. The relationship
between connected links is described using the general
joint model of Roberson and Schwertassek [3.3]. A hu-
manoid robot is given as an example to illustrate the link
and joint numbering scheme, as well as the assignment
of coordinate frames to describe the links and joints.
The example includes a ﬂoating base, and revolute, uni-
versal, and spherical joints.
3.1.4 Kinematic Trees
The algorithms presented in Sect. 3.5 calculate the in-
verse dynamics, forward dynamics, joint-space inertia
matrix, and operational-space inertia matrix for any
robot mechanism that is a kinematic tree. An O.n/ al-
gorithm for inverse dynamics is provided, where n is
the number of degrees of freedom in the mechanism. It
uses a Newton–Euler formulation of the problem, and is
based on the very efﬁcient recursive Newton–Euler al-
gorithm (RNEA) of Luh et al. [3.4]. Two algorithms are
provided for forward dynamics. The ﬁrst is the O.n/
articulated-body algorithm (ABA) which was devel-
oped by Featherstone [3.1]. The second is the O.n2/
composite-rigid-body algorithm (CRBA), developed by
Walker and Orin [3.5], to compute the joint-space iner-
tia matrix (JSIM). This matrix, together with a vector
computed using the RNEA, provide the coefﬁcients of
the equation of motion, which can then be solved di-
rectly for the accelerations [3.5]. The operational-space
inertia matrix (OSIM) is a kind of articulated-body in-
ertia, and two algorithms are given to calculate it. The
ﬁrst uses the basic deﬁnition of the OSIM, and the sec-
ond is a straightforward O.n/ algorithm which is based
on efﬁcient solution of the forward dynamics prob-
lem. The inputs, outputs, model data, and pseudocode
for each algorithm are summarized in tables for ready
access.
3.1.5 Kinematic Loops
The above algorithms apply only to mechanisms hav-
ing the connectivity of kinematic trees, including un-
branched kinematic chains. A ﬁnal algorithm is pro-
vided in Sect. 3.6 for the forward dynamics of closed-
loop systems, including parallel robot mechanisms. The
algorithm makes use of the dynamic equations of mo-
tion for a spanning tree of the closed-loop system, and
supplements these with loop-closure constraint equa-
tions. Three different methods are outlined to solve
the resulting linear system of equations. Method 2 is
particularly useful if n  nc, where nc is the num-
ber of constraints due to the loop-closing joints. This
method offers the opportunity to use O.n/ algorithms
on the spanning tree [3.6]. The section ends with an
efﬁcient algorithm to compute the loop-closure con-
straints by transforming them to a single coordinate
system. Since the loop-closure constraint equations are
applied at the acceleration level, standard Baumgarte
stabilization [3.7] is used to prevent the accumulation
of position and velocity errors in the loop-closure con-
straints.
The ﬁnal section in this chapter provides a conclu-
sion and suggestions for further reading. The area of
robot dynamics has been, and continues to be, a very
rich area of investigation. This section outlines the ma-
jor contributions that have been made in the area and
the work most often cited. Unfortunately, space does
not permit us to provide a comprehensive review of the
extensive literature in the area.
3.2 Spatial Vector Notation
There is no single standard notation for robot dy-
namics. The notations currently in use include 3-D
vectors, 4  4 matrices, and several types of 6-D vec-
tor: screws, motors, Lie algebra elements, and spatial
vectors. Six-dimensional vector notations are gener-
ally the best, being more compact than 3-D vectors,
and more powerful than 4  4 matrices. We therefore
use 6-D vectors throughout this chapter. In particu-
lar, we shall use the spatial vector algebra described
in [3.8]. This section provides a brief summary of
spatial vectors. Descriptions of 4  4 matrix nota-
tions can be found in [3.2, 9], and descriptions of
other 6-D vector notations can be found in [3.10–
12].
In this handbook, vectors are usually denoted by
bold italic letters (e.g., f, v). However, to avoid a few
name clashes, we shall use upright bold letters to denote
spatial vectors (e.g., f, v). Note that this applies only to
vectors, not tensors. Also, in this section only, we will
underline coordinate vectors to distinguish them from
the vectors that they represent (e.g., v and v, represent-
ing v and v).

Part A | 3.2
40
Part A
Robotics Foundations
dz
dy
O
dx
dOz
dOy
dOx
ez
ey
O
ex
eOz
eOy
eOx
a)
b)
Fig.3.1a,b Plücker basis vectors for motions (a) and forces
(b)
3.2.1 Motion and Force
For mathematical reasons, it is useful to distinguish
between those vectors that describe the motions of
rigid bodies, and those that describe the forces act-
ing upon them. We therefore place motion vectors in
a vector space called M6, and force vectors in a space
called F6. (The superscripts indicate the dimension.)
Motion vectors describe quantities like velocity, accel-
eration, inﬁnitesimal displacement, and directions of
motion freedom; force vectors describe force, momen-
tum, contact normals, and so on.
3.2.2 Basis Vectors
Suppose that v
is a 3-D vector, and that v D
.vx; vy; vz/T is the Cartesian coordinate vector that rep-
resents v in the orthonormal basis fOx; Oy; Ozg. The rela-
tionship between v and v is then given by the formula
v D Oxvx C Oyvy C Ozvz :
This same idea applies also to spatial vectors, except
that we use Plücker coordinates instead of Cartesian co-
ordinates, and a Plücker basis instead of an orthonormal
basis.
Plücker coordinates were introduced in Sect. 2.2.6,
but the basis vectors are shown in Fig. 3.1. There are
12 basis vectors in total: six for motion vectors and six
for forces. Given a Cartesian coordinate frame, Oxyz, the
Plücker basis vectors are deﬁned as follows: three unit
rotations about the directed lines Ox, Oy, and Oz, de-
noted by dOx, dOy, and dOz, three unit translations in the
directions x, y, and z, denoted by dx, dy, and dz, three
unit couples about the x, y, and z directions, denoted
by ex, ey, and ez, and three unit forces along the lines
Ox, Oy, and Oz, denoted by eOx, eOy, and eOz.
3.2.3 Spatial Velocity and Force
Given any point O, the velocity of a rigid body can be
described by a pair of 3-D vectors, ! and v O, which
specify the body’s angular velocity and the linear veloc-
ity of the body-ﬁxed point currently at O. Note that v O
is not the velocity of O itself, but the velocity of the
body-ﬁxed point that happens to coincide with O at the
current instant.
The velocity of this same rigid body can also be de-
scribed by a single spatial motion vector, v 2 M6. To
obtain v from ! and v O, we ﬁrst introduce a Carte-
sian frame, Oxyz, with its origin at O. This frame deﬁnes
a Cartesian coordinate system for ! and v O, and also
a Plücker coordinate system for v. Given these coordi-
nate systems, it can be shown that
v D dOx!x C dOy!y C dOz!z C dxvOx
C dyvOy C dzvOz ;
(3.1)
where !x; : : : ; vOz are the Cartesian coordinates of !
and v O in Oxyz. Thus, the Plücker coordinates of v are
the Cartesian coordinates of ! and v O. The coordinate
vector representing v in Oxyz can be written
vO D
0
B@
!x
:::
vOz
1
CA D
 !
v O

:
(3.2)
The notation on the far right of this equation is simply
a convenient abbreviation of the list of Plücker coordi-
nates.
The deﬁnition of spatial force is very similar. Given
any point O, any system of forces acting on a single
rigid body is equivalent to a single force f acting on
a line passing through O, together with a pure couple,
nO, which is the moment of the force system about
O. Thus, the two vectors f and nO describe the force
acting on a rigid body in much the same way that !
and v O describe its velocity. This same force can also
be described by a single spatial force vector, f 2 F6. In-
troducing the frame Oxyz, as before, it can be shown that
f D exnOx C eynOy C eznOz C eOxfx
C eOyfy C eOzfz ;
(3.3)
where nOx; : : : ; fz are the Cartesian coordinates of nO
and f in Oxyz. The coordinate vector representing f in
Oxyz can then be written
fO D
0
B@
nOx
:::
fz
1
CA D
nO
f

:
(3.4)
Again, these are the Plücker coordinates of f in Oxyz,
and the notation on the far right is simply a convenient
abbreviation of the list of Plücker coordinates.

Dynamics
3.2 Spatial Vector Notation
41
Part A | 3.2
3.2.4 Addition and Scalar Multiplication
Spatial vectors behave in the obvious way under addi-
tion and scalar multiplication. For example, if f1 and f2
both act on the same rigid body, then their resultant
is f1 C f2; if two different bodies have velocities of v1
and v2, then the velocity of the second body relative to
the ﬁrst is v2 v1; and if f denotes a force of 1 N acting
along a particular line in space, then ˛ f denotes a force
of ˛ N acting along the same line.
3.2.5 Scalar Product
A scalar product is deﬁned between any two spatial vec-
tors, provided that one of them is a motion and the other
a force. Given any m 2 M6 and f 2 F6, the scalar prod-
uct can be written either f m or m  f, and expresses the
work done by a force f acting on a body with motion m.
Expressions like ff and mm are not deﬁned. If m and f
are coordinate vectors representing m and f in the same
coordinate system, then
m  f D mTf :
(3.5)
3.2.6 Coordinate Transforms
Motion and force vectors obey different transformation
rules. Let A and B be two coordinate frames, each deﬁn-
ing a coordinate system of the same name; and let mA,
mB, fA, and fB be coordinate vectors representing the
spatial vectors m 2 M6 and f 2 F6 in A and B coordi-
nates, respectively. The transformation rules are then
mB D BXAmA
(3.6)
and
fB D BXF
A fA ;
(3.7)
where BXA and BXF
A are the coordinate transformation
matrices from A to B for motion and force vectors, re-
spectively. These matrices are related by the identity
BXF
A  .BXA/T  .AXB/T :
(3.8)
Suppose that the position and orientation of frame A
relative to frame B is described by a position vector BpA
and a 33 rotation matrix BRA, as described in Sect. 2.2.
The formula for BXA is then
BXA D

1
0
S.BpA/
1
 BRA
0
0
BRA

D

BRA
0
S.BpA/BRA
BRA

;
(3.9)
and its inverse is
AXB D
ARB
0
0
ARB
 
1
0
S.BpA/
1

:
(3.10)
The quantity S.p/ is the skew-symmetric matrix that
satisﬁes S.p/v D p  v for any 3-D vector v. It is de-
ﬁned by the equation
S.p/ D
0
@
0
pz
py
pz
0
px
py
px
0
1
A :
(3.11)
3.2.7 Vector Products
There are two vector (cross) products deﬁned on spatial
vectors. The ﬁrst takes two motion-vector arguments,
and produces a motion-vector result. It is deﬁned by the
formula
m1  m2 D
 m1
m1O


 m2
m2O

D

m1  m2
m1  m2O C m1O  m2

:
(3.12)
The second takes a motion vector as left-hand argument
and a force vector as right-hand argument, and produces
a force-vector result. It is deﬁned by the formula
m  f D
 m
mO


 
f O
f
!
D
 
m  f O C mO  f
m  f
!
:
(3.13)
These products arise in differentiation formulae.
It is possible to deﬁne a spatial cross-product oper-
ator, in analogy with (3.11), as follows
S.m/ D
 S.m/
0
S.mO/
S.m/

;
(3.14)
in which case
m1  m2 D S.m1/ m2 ;
(3.15)
but
m  f D S.m/Tf :
(3.16)
Observe that S.m/ maps motion vectors to motion vec-
tors, but S.m/T maps force vectors to force vectors.

Part A | 3.2
42
Part A
Robotics Foundations
3.2.8 Differentiation
The derivative of a spatial vector is deﬁned by
d
dxs.x/ D lim
ıx!0
s.x C ıx/  s.x/
ıx
;
(3.17)
where s here stands for any spatial vector. The deriva-
tive is a spatial vector of the same kind (motion or force)
as that being differentiated.
The formula for differentiating a spatial coordinate
vector in a moving coordinate system is
 d
dt s

A
D d
dtsA C vA  sA ;
(3.18)
where s is any spatial vector, ds=dt is the time deriva-
tive of s, A is the moving coordinate system, .ds=dt/A
is the coordinate vector that represents ds=dt in A coor-
dinates, sA is the coordinate vector that represents s in A
coordinates, dsA=dt is the time derivative of sA (which
is the componentwise derivative, since sA is a coordi-
nate vector), and vA is the velocity of the A coordinate
frame, expressed in A coordinates.
The time derivative of a spatial vector that changes
only because it is moving is given by
d
dts D v  s ;
(3.19)
where v is the velocity of s. This formula is useful for
differentiating quantities that do not change in their own
right, but are attached to moving rigid bodies (e.g., joint
axis vectors).
3.2.9 Acceleration
Spatial acceleration is deﬁned as the rate of change of
spatial velocity. Unfortunately, this means that spatial
acceleration differs from the classical textbook deﬁ-
nition of rigid-body acceleration, which we shall call
classical acceleration. Essentially, the difference can be
summarized as follows
a D
 P!
Pv O

and
a0 D
 P!
Pv 0
O

;
(3.20)
where a is the spatial acceleration, a0 is the classical
acceleration, Pv O is the derivative of v O taking O to be
ﬁxed in space, and Pv 0
O is the derivative of v O taking O
to be ﬁxed in the body. The two accelerations are related
by
a0 D a C

0
!  v O

:
(3.21)
If r is a position vector giving the position of the body-
ﬁxed point at O relative to any ﬁxed point, then
v O D Pr ;
Pv 0
O D Rr ;
Pv O D Rr  !  v O :
(3.22)
The practical difference is that spatial accelerations are
easier to use. For example, if the bodies B1 and B2 have
velocities of v1 and v2, respectively, and vrel is the rela-
tive velocity of B2 with respect to B1, then
v2 D v1 C vrel :
The relationship between their spatial accelerations is
obtained simply by differentiating the velocity formula
d
dt.v2 D v1 C vrel/
)
a2 D a1 C arel :
Observe that spatial accelerations are composed by ad-
dition, exactly like velocities. There are no Coriolis or
centrifugal terms to worry about. This is a signiﬁcant
improvement on the formulae for composing classical
accelerations, such as those in [3.2, 13, 14].
3.2.10 Spatial Momentum
Suppose that a rigid body has a mass of m, a center
of mass at C, and a rotational inertia of NI
cm about C
(Fig. 3.2). If this body is moving with a spatial veloc-
ity of vC D .!Tv T
C/T, then its linear momentum is h D
mv C, and its intrinsic angular momentum is hC D
NI
cm!. Its moment of momentum about a general point,
O, is hO D hC Cch, where c D !
OC. We can assemble
these vectors into a spatial momentum vector as follows
hC D
hC
h

D
NI
cm!
mv C

(3.23)
and
hO D
hO
h

D
1
S.c/
0
1

hC :
(3.24)
Spatial momentum is a force vector, and transforms ac-
cordingly.
3.2.11 Spatial Inertia
The spatial momentum of a rigid body is the product of
its spatial inertia and velocity
h D Iv ;
(3.25)

Dynamics
3.2 Spatial Vector Notation
43
Part A | 3.2
where I is the spatial inertia. Expressed in Plücker co-
ordinates at C, we have
hC D ICvC ;
(3.26)
which implies
IC D
NI
cm
0
0
m1

:
(3.27)
This is the general formula for the spatial inertia of
a rigid body expressed at its center of mass. To ex-
press it at another point, O, we proceed as follows.
From (3.24), (3.26), and (3.27)
hO D
1
S.c/
0
1
 NI
cm
0
0
m1

vC
D
1
S.c/
0
1
 NI
cm
0
0
m1
 
1
0
S.c/T
1

vO
D
NI
cm C mS.c/S.c/T
mS.c/
mS.c/T
m1

vO I
but we also have that hO D IOvO, so
IO D
NI
cm C mS.c/S.c/T
mS.c/
mS.c/T
m1

:
(3.28)
This equation can also be written
IO D

NIO
mS.c/
mS.c/T
m1

;
(3.29)
where
NIO D NI
cm C mS.c/S.c/T
(3.30)
is the rotational inertia of the rigid body about O.
Spatial inertia matrices are symmetric and positive-
deﬁnite. In the general case, 21 numbers are required
O
C
c
Momentum:
Mass:  m
Rotational
inertia:  I
–cm
Linear
h = mυC
υC
Angular
Spatial




hC = I
– cm ω
ω
hC
h
Fig. 3.2 Spatial momentum
to specify a spatial inertia (e.g., for an articulated-body
or operational-space inertia); but a rigid-body inertia
needs only 10 parameters: the mass, the coordinates of
the center of mass, and the six independent elements of
either NI
cm or NIO.
The transformation rule for spatial inertias is
IB D BXF
A IAAXB ;
(3.31)
where A and B are any two coordinate systems. In prac-
tice, we often need to calculate IA from IB, given only
BXA. The formula for this transformation is
IA D .BXA/TIB
BXA :
(3.32)
If two bodies, having inertias I1 and I2, are rigidly con-
nected to form a single composite body, then the inertia
of the composite, Itot, is the sum of the inertias of its
parts
Itot D I1 C I2 :
(3.33)
This single equation takes the place of three equations
in the traditional 3-D vector approach: one to com-
pute the composite mass, one to compute the composite
center of mass, and one to compute the composite ro-
tational inertia. If a rigid body with inertia I is moving
with a velocity of v, then its kinetic energy is
T D 1
2v  Iv :
(3.34)
If a rigid body, B, is part of a larger system, then
it is possible to deﬁne an apparent-inertia matrix for B,
which describes the relationship between a force acting
on B and its resulting acceleration, taking into account
the effects of the other bodies in the system. Such quan-
tities are called articulated-body inertias. If B happens
to be the end-effector of a robot, then its apparent inertia
is called an operational-space inertia.
3.2.12 Equation of Motion
The spatial equation of motion states that the net force
acting on a rigid body equals its rate of change of mo-
mentum
f D d
dt.Iv/ D Ia C PIv :
It can be shown that the expression PIv evaluates to .v 
Iv/ [3.8, 15], so the equation of motion can be written
f D Ia C v  Iv :
(3.35)
This single equation incorporates both Newton’s
and Euler’s equations of motion for a rigid body. To

Part A | 3.2
44
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Table 3.1 Summary of spatial vector notation
Spatial quantities:
v
Velocity of a rigid body
a
Spatial acceleration of a rigid body (a D Pv)
a0
Classical description of rigid-body acceleration
expressed as a 6-D vector
f
Force acting on a rigid body
I
Inertia of a rigid body
X
Plücker coordinate transform for motion vectors
XF
Plücker coordinate transform for force vectors
(XF D XT)
BXA
Plücker transform from A coordinates to B coordinates
m
A generic motion vector (any element of M6)
3-D quantities:
O
Coordinate system origin
r
Position of the body-ﬁxed point at O relative to any
ﬁxed point in space
!
Angular velocity of a rigid body
v O
Linear velocity of the body-ﬁxed point at O (v O D Pr)
P!
Angular acceleration of a rigid body
Pv O
The derivative of v O taking O to be ﬁxed in space
Pv 0
O
The derivative of v O taking O to be ﬁxed in the body;
the classical acceleration of the body-ﬁxed point at
O .Pv 0
O D Rr/
f
Linear force acting on a rigid body, or the resultant of
a system of linear forces
nO
Moment about O of a linear force or system of linear
forces
m
Mass of a rigid body
c
Position of a rigid body’s center of mass, measured
relative to O
h
First moment of mass of a rigid body, h D m c; can also
denote linear momentum
NI
cm
Moment of inertia about a body’s centre of mass
NI
Moment of inertia about O
BRA
Orthonormal rotation matrix transforming
from A coordinates to B coordinates
ApB
Location of the origin of B coordinates relative to the
origin of A coordinates, expressed in A coordinates
verify this, we can recover them as follows. Express-
ing (3.35) at the body’s center of mass, and using (3.16),
(3.14), and (3.22), we have
nC
f

D
NI
cm
0
0
m1
 P!
Pv C


S.!/T S.v C/T
0
S.!/T
NI
cm!
mv C

D
NI
cm
0
0
m1

P!
Rc  !  v C

C

!  NI
cm!
m! v C

D
NI
cm P! C !  NI
cm!
mRc

:
(3.36)
Table 3.1 (continued)
Equations
v D
 
!
vO
!
a D
 
P!
PvO
!
D
 
P!
Rr  !  Pr
!
f D
 
nO
f
!
a0 D
 
P!
Pv 0
O
!
D
 
P!
Rr
!
D a C
 
0
!  v O
!
I D
 
NI
S.h/
S.h/T
m 1
!
D
 
NI
cm C mS.c/S.c/T
mS.c/
mS.c/T
m 1
!
BXA D
 
BRA
0
BRAS.ApB/T
BRA
!
D
 
BRA
0
S.BpA/ BRA
BRA
!
v  f D f  v D vT f D !  nO C vO  f
v  m D
 
!  m
vO  m C !  mO
!
D
 
S.!/
0
S.v O/
S.!/
!  
m
mO
!
v  f D
 
!  nO C v O  f
!  f
!
D
 
S.!/
S.vO/
0
S.!/
!  
nO
f
!
Compact computer representations
Mathematical
object
Size
Computer
representation
Size
 
!
v O
!
61
.! I v O/
3 C 3
 
nO
f
!
61
.nO I f/
3 C 3
 
NI
S.h/
S.h/T
m 1
!
66
.m I h I NI/
1 C 3 C 9
 
R
0
R S.p/T
R
!
66
.R I p/
9 C 3
Efﬁcient spatial arithmetic formulae
Expression
Computed value
X v
.R ! I R.v O  p  !//
XF f
.R.nO  p  f/ I Rf/
X1
.RT I R p/
X1 v
.RT! I RTvO C p  RT!/
.XF/1 f
.RTnO C p  RTf I RTf/
X1X2
.R1R2 I p2 C RT
2p1/
I1 C I2
.m1 C m2 I h1 C h2 I NI1 C NI2/
I v
.NI ! C h  v O I m v O  h  !/
XTIX
.m I RTh C m p I RTNIR
S.p/S.RTh/  S.RTh C m p/S.p//
For meaning of XTIX see (3.32)
3.2.13 Computer Implementation
The easiest way to implement spatial vector arithmetic
on a computer is to start with an existing matrix arith-
metic tool, like MATLAB and write (or download from
the Web) routines to do the following:

Dynamics
3.3 Canonical Equations
45
Part A | 3.3
1. Calculate S.m/ from m according to (3.14).
2. Compose X from R and p according to (3.9).
3. Compose I from m, c, and NI
cm according to (3.28).
All other spatial arithmetic operations can be per-
formed using standard matrix arithmetic routines. How-
ever, some additional routines could usefully be added
to this list, such as:

Routines to calculate R from various other represen-
tations of rotation.

Routines to convert between spatial and 44 matrix
quantities.
This is the recommended approach whenever hu-
man productivity is more important than computational
efﬁciency. A software package along these lines can be
found at [3.16].
If greater efﬁciency is required, then a more elabo-
rate spatial arithmetic library must be used, in which
1. A dedicated data structure is deﬁned for each kind
of spatial quantity, and
2. A suite of calculation routines are provided, each
implementing a spatial arithmetic operation by
means of an efﬁcient formula.
Some examples of suitable data structures and ef-
ﬁcient formulae are shown in Table 3.1. Observe that
the suggested data structures for rigid-body inertias
and Plücker transforms contain only a third as many
numbers as the 6  6 matrices they represent. The ef-
ﬁcient arithmetic formulae listed in this table offer cost
savings ranging from a factor of 1.5 to a factor of 6
relative to the use of general 6  6 and 6  1 matrix
arithmetic. Even more efﬁcient formulae can be found
in [3.17].
3.2.14 Summary
Spatial vectors are 6-D vectors that combine the linear
and angular aspects of rigid-body motion, resulting in
a compact notation that is very suitable for describing
dynamics algorithms. To avoid a few name clashes with
3-D vectors, we have used bold upright letters to denote
spatial vectors, while tensors are still denoted by ital-
ics. In the sections that follow, upright letters will be
used to denote both spatial vectors and vectors that are
concatenations of other vectors, like Pq.
Table 3.1 presents a summary of the spatial quanti-
ties and operators introduced in this section, together
with the formulae that deﬁne them in terms of 3-D
quantities and operators. It also presents data structures
and formulae for efﬁcient computer implementation of
spatial arithmetic. This table should be read in con-
junction with Tables 2.5 and 2.6, which show how to
compute the orientation, position, and spatial velocities
for a variety of joint types. Note that jRi and jpi in these
tables correspond to BRT
A and ApB, respectively, when
read in conjunction with Table 3.1.
3.3 Canonical Equations
The equations of motion of a robot mechanism are
usually presented in one of two canonical forms: the
joint-space formulation,
H.q/Rq C C.q; Pq/Pq C g.q/ D  ;
(3.37)
or the operational-space formulation,
.x/Pv C .x; v/ C .x/ D f :
(3.38)
These equations show the functional dependencies ex-
plicitly: H is a function of q,  is a function of x, and
so on. Once these dependencies are understood, they are
usually omitted. In (3.38), x is a vector of operational-
space coordinates, while v and f are spatial vectors
denoting the velocity of the end-effector and the exter-
nal force acting on it. If the robot is redundant, then the
coefﬁcients of this equation must be deﬁned as func-
tions of q and Pq rather than x and v.
These two equations are further explained below,
along with a description of the Lagrange formulation
of (3.37), and the impulsive equations of motion for im-
pact.
3.3.1 Joint-Space Formulation
The symbols q, Pq, Rq, and  denote n-dimensional vec-
tors of joint position, velocity, acceleration and force
variables, respectively, where n is the number of de-
grees of motion freedom of the robot mechanism. H
is an n  n symmetric, positive-deﬁnite matrix, and is
called the generalized, or joint-space, inertia matrix
(JSIM). C is an n  n matrix such that C Pq is the vector
of Coriolis and centrifugal terms (collectively known as
velocity product terms); and g is the vector of grav-
ity terms. More terms can be added to this equation, as
required, to account for other dynamical effects (e.g.,
viscous friction). The effects of a force f exerted on the
mechanism at the end-effector can be accounted for by
adding the term JTf to the right side of (3.37), where J
is the Jacobian of the end-effector (Sect. 2.8.1).

Part A | 3.3
46
Part A
Robotics Foundations
q speciﬁes the coordinates of a point in the mechan-
ism’s conﬁguration space. If the mechanism is a kine-
matic tree (Sect. 3.4), then q contains every joint vari-
able in the mechanism, otherwise it contains only an
independent subset. The elements of q are generalized
coordinates. Likewise, the elements of Pq, Rq, and  are
generalized velocities, accelerations, and forces.
3.3.2 Lagrange Formulation
Various methods exist for deriving the terms in (3.37).
The two that are most commonly used in robotics are
the Newton–Euler formulation and the Lagrange for-
mulation. The former works directly with Newton’s and
Euler’s equations for a rigid body, which are contained
within the spatial equation of motion, (3.35). This for-
mulation is especially amenable to the development of
efﬁcient recursive algorithms for dynamics computa-
tions, such as those described in Sects. 3.5 and 3.6.
The Lagrange formulation proceeds via the La-
grangian of the robot mechanism,
L D T  U ;
(3.39)
where T and U are the total kinetic and potential energy,
respectively, of the mechanism. The kinetic energy is
given by
T D 1
2 PqTHPq :
(3.40)
The dynamic equations of motion can then be devel-
oped using Lagrange’s equation for each generalized
coordinate
d
dt
@L
@Pqi
 @L
@qi
D i :
(3.41)
The resulting equation can be written in scalar form
n
X
jD1
HijRqj C
n
X
jD1
n
X
kD1
CijkPqjPqk C gi D i ;
(3.42)
which shows the structure of the velocity-product
terms. Cijk are known as Christoffel symbols of the ﬁrst
type, and are given by
Cijk D 1
2
@Hij
@qk
C @Hik
@qj
 @Hjk
@qi

:
(3.43)
They are functions of only the position variables, qi.
The elements of C in (3.37) can be deﬁned as
Cij D
n
X
kD1
CijkPqk :
(3.44)
However, C is not unique, and other deﬁnitions are pos-
sible.
With the choice of C given in (3.44), it is possible
to show that the matrix N, given by
N.q; Pq/ D PH.q/  2C.q; Pq/ ;
(3.45)
is skew-symmetric [3.18]. Thus, for any n  1 vector ˛,
˛TN.q; Pq/ ˛ D 0 :
(3.46)
This property is quite useful in control, especially when
considering ˛ D Pq, which gives
PqTN.q; Pq/ Pq D 0 :
(3.47)
By applying the principle of conservation of energy, it
can be shown that (3.47) holds for any choice of the
matrix C [3.18, 19].
3.3.3 Operational-Space Formulation
In (3.38), x is a 6-D vector of operational-space coordi-
nates giving the position and orientation of the robot’s
end-effector; v is the velocity of the end-effector; and f
is the force exerted on the end-effector. x is typically
a list of Cartesian coordinates, and Euler angles or
quaternion components, and is related to v via a dif-
ferential equation of the form
Px D E.x/v :
(3.48)
 is the operational-space inertia matrix, which is the
apparent inertia of the end-effector taking into account
the effect of the rest of the robot’s mechanism (i. e., it
is an articulated-body inertia).  and  are vectors of
velocity-product and gravity terms, respectively.
Operational space (also known as task space) is
the space in which high-level motion and force com-
mands are issued and executed. The operational-space
formulation is therefore particularly useful in the con-
text of motion and force control systems (Sects. 8.2 and
9.2). Equation (3.38) can be generalized to operational
spaces with dimensions other than six, and to opera-
tional spaces that incorporate the motions of more than
one end-effector [3.20].
The terms in (3.37) and (3.38) are related by the
following formulae
v D JPq ;
(3.49)
Pv D JRq C PJPq ;
(3.50)
 D JTf ;
(3.51)
 D .JH1JT/1 ;
(3.52)
 D .JH1CPq  PJPq/ ;
(3.53)
and
 D JH1g :
(3.54)

Dynamics
3.4 Dynamic Models of Rigid-Body Systems
47
Part A | 3.4
These equations assume that m 	 n (m is the dimension
of operational-space coordinates), and that the Jaco-
bian J has full rank. More details can be found in [3.21].
3.3.4 Impact Model
If a robot strikes a rigid body in its environment, then
an impulsive force arises at the moment of impact and
causes a step change in the robot’s velocity. Let us as-
sume that the impact occurs between the end effector
and a rigid body in the environment, and that a spatial
impulse of f0 is exerted on the end-effector. This im-
pulse causes a step change of v in the end-effector’s
velocity; and the two are related by the operational-
space equation of impulsive motion [3.22],
v D f0 :
(3.55)
In joint space, the equation of impulsive motion for
a robot mechanism is
HPq D 0 ;
(3.56)
where 0 and Pq denote the joint-space impulse and
velocity change, respectively. In the case of a collision
involving the robot’s end-effector, we have
0 D JTf0
(3.57)
and
v D JPq ;
(3.58)
which follow from (3.51) and (3.49). Equations (3.55)–
(3.57) imply that
Pq D NJv ;
(3.59)
where NJ is the inertia-weighted pseudoinverse of J and
is given by
NJ D H1JT :
(3.60)
NJ is also known as the dynamically consistent general-
ized inverse of the Jacobian matrix [3.21]. Note that the
expression JH1, which appears in (3.53) and (3.54),
is equal to NJT since H and  are both symmetric. Al-
though we have introduced NJ in the context of impulsive
dynamics, it is more typically used in normal (i. e., non-
impulsive) dynamics equations.
3.4 Dynamic Models of Rigid-Body Systems
A basic rigid-body model of a robot mechanism has
four components: a connectivity graph, link and joint
geometry parameters, link inertia parameters, and a set
of joint models. To this model, one can add various
force-producing elements, such as springs, dampers,
joint friction, actuators, and drives. The actuators and
drives, in particular, may have quite elaborate dynamic
models of their own. It is also possible to add extra mo-
tion freedoms to model elasticity in the joint bearings or
links (Chap. 11). This section describes a basic model.
More on this topic can be found in books such as [3.3,
8, 23].
3.4.1 Connectivity
A connectivity graph is an undirected graph in which
each node represents a rigid body and each arc repre-
sents a joint. The graph must be connected; and exactly
one node represents a ﬁxed base or reference frame. If
the graph represents a mobile robot (i. e., a robot that
is not connected to a ﬁxed base), then it is necessary
to introduce a ﬁctitious 6-DOF joint between the ﬁxed
base and any one body in the mobile robot. The chosen
body is then known as a ﬂoating base. If a single graph
is to represent a collection of mobile robots, then each
robot has its own ﬂoating base, and each ﬂoating base
has its own 6-DOF joint. Note that a 6-DOF joint im-
poses no constraints on the two bodies it connects, so
the introduction of a 6-DOF joint alters the connectiv-
ity of the graph without altering the physical properties
of the system it represents.
In graph-theory terminology, a loop is an arc that
connects a node to itself, and a cycle is a closed path
that does not traverse any arc more than once. In the
connectivity graph of a robot mechanism, loops are
not allowed, and cycles are called kinematic loops.
A mechanism that contains kinematic loops is called
a closed-loop mechanism; and a mechanism that does
not is called an open-loop mechanism or a kinematic
tree. Every closed-loop mechanism has a spanning tree,
which deﬁnes an open-loop mechanism, and every joint
that is not in the spanning tree is called a loop-closing
joint. The joints in the tree are called tree joints.
The ﬁxed base serves as the root node of a kine-
matic tree, and the root node of any spanning tree on
a closed-loop mechanism. A kinematic tree is said to be
branched if at least one node has at least two children,
and unbranched otherwise. An unbranched kinematic

Part A | 3.4
48
Part A
Robotics Foundations
tree is also called a kinematic chain, and a branched
tree can be called a branched kinematic chain. A typical
industrial robot arm, without a gripper, is a kinematic
chain, while a typical humanoid robot is a kinematic
tree with a ﬂoating base.
In a system containing NB moving bodies and NJ
joints, where NJ includes the 6-DOF joints mentioned
above, the bodies and joints are numbered as follows.
First, the ﬁxed base is numbered body 0. The other bod-
ies are then numbered from 1 to NB in any order such
that each body has a higher number than its parent.
If the system contains kinematic loops then one must
ﬁrst choose a spanning tree, and commit to that choice,
since the identity of a body’s parent is determined by the
spanning tree. This style of numbering is called a regu-
lar numbering scheme.
Having numbered the bodies, we number the tree
joints from 1 to NB such that joint i connects body i to
its parent. The loop-closing joints, if any, are then num-
bered from NB C1 to NJ in any order. Each loop-closing
joint k closes one independent kinematic loop, and we
number the loops from 1 to NL (where NL D NJ  NB is
the number of independent loops) such that loop l is the
one closed by joint k D NB C l. Kinematic loop l is the
unique cycle in the graph that traverses joint k, but does
not traverse any other loop-closing joint.
For an unbranched kinematic tree, these rules pro-
duce a unique numbering in which the bodies are
numbered consecutively from base to tip, and the joints
are numbered such that joint i connects bodies i and
i  1. In all other cases, regular numberings are not
unique.
Although the connectivity graph is undirected, it
is necessary to assign a direction to each joint for the
purpose of deﬁning joint velocity and force. This is
necessary for both tree joints and loop-closing joints.
Speciﬁcally, a joint is said to connect from one body to
another. We may call them the predecessor p.i/ and suc-
cessor s.i/ for joint i, respectively. Joint velocity is then
deﬁned as the velocity of the successor relative to the
predecessor; and joint force is deﬁned as a force acting
on the successor. It is standard practice (but not a ne-
cessity) for all tree joints to connect from the parent to
the child.
The connectivity of a kinematic tree, or the span-
ning tree on a closed-loop mechanism, is described by
an NB-element array of parent body numbers, where the
i-th element p.i/ is the parent of body i. Note that the
parent p.i/ for body i is also the predecessor p.i/ for
joint i, and thus the common notation. Many algorithms
rely on the property p.i/ < i to perform their calcula-
tions in the correct order. The set of all body numbers
for the children of body i, c.i/, is also useful in many
recursive algorithms.
The connectivity data for kinematic loops may be
described in a variety of ways. A representation that
facilitates use in recursive algorithms includes the fol-
lowing conventions. Loop-closing joint k joins bodies
p.k/ (the predecessor) and s.k/ (the successor). The set
LR.i/ for body i gives the numbers of the loops for
which body i is the root. Using the property p.i/ < i for
bodies in the spanning tree, the root of a loop is chosen
as the body with the lowest number. In addition, the set
LB.i/ for body i gives the numbers of the loops to which
body i belongs but is not the root.
An example of a closed-loop system is given in
Fig. 3.3. The system consists of a humanoid mechanism
with topologically varying contacts, with the environ-
ment and within the mechanism, which form closed
loops. The system has NB D 16 moving bodies and
NJ D 19 joints with NL D NJ NB D 3 loops. The main
body (1) is considered to be a ﬂoating base for this
mobile robot system. It is connected to the ﬁxed base
(0) through a ﬁctitious 6-DOF joint (1). To complete
the example, the loop-closing joint and the body num-
bers p.k/ and s.k/ as well as the root body for each loop
are given in Table 3.2. The body-based sets c.i/ and
10
3
13
7
17
5
12
9
14
15
2
6
16
11
4
8
1
B9
B13
B16
B14
B15
19
B11
B12
B1
B2
B3
B6
B4
B10
B8
B7
B0
18
B5
Fig. 3.3 Humanoid robot example. Note: to distinguish
between body numbers and joint numbers in this ﬁgure,
body numbers are preceded by a B for clarity

Dynamics
3.4 Dynamic Models of Rigid-Body Systems
49
Part A | 3.4
LB.i/ are given in Table 3.3. Note that LR.0/ D f1; 3g
and LR.1/ D f2g and all other LR sets are null for this
example.
3.4.2 Link Geometry
When two bodies are connected by a joint, a complete
description of the connection consists of a description
of the joint itself, and the locations of two coordinate
frames, one in each body, which specify where in each
body the joint is located. If there are NJ joints in the
system, then there are a total of 2NJ joint-attachment
frames. One half of these frames are identiﬁed with the
numbers 1 to NJ, and the remainder with the labels J1
to JNJ. Each joint i connects from frame Ji to frame i.
For joints 1 to NB (i. e., the tree joints), frame i
is rigidly attached to body i. For joints NB C 1 to NJ,
frame k for loop-closing joint k will be rigidly attached
to body s.k/. The second coordinate frame Ji is attached
to the predecessor p.i/ for each joint i, whether it is
a tree joint or a loop-closing joint. Coordinate frame Ji
provides a base frame for joint i in that the joint rotation
and/or translation is deﬁned relative to this frame.
Figure 3.4 shows the coordinate frames and trans-
forms associated with each joint in the system. The
overall transform from frame p.i/ coordinates to frame i
coordinates for a tree joint is given by
iXp.i/ D iXJi JiXp.i/ D XJ.i/XL.i/ :
(3.61)
The transform XL.i/ is a ﬁxed link transform which
sets the base frame Ji of joint i relative to p.i/. It may
be used to transform spatial motion vectors from p.i/
to Ji coordinates. The transform XJ.i/ is a variable joint
Table 3.2 Loop-closing joints and roots of loops for the
humanoid example
Loop l
Loop-closing
p.k/
s.k/
Root
joint k
1
17
0
5
0
2
18
16
1
1
3
19
0
13
0
Table 3.3 Body-based sets for the humanoid example
Body i
c.i/
LB.i/
Body i
c.i/
LB.i/
0
1
9
10, 11, 14
2, 3
1
2, 9
1, 3
10
2
3, 6
1
11
12
3
3
4
1
12
13
3
4
5
1
13
3
5
1
14
15
2
6
7
15
16
2
7
8
16
2
8
XJ(i)
XL(i)
Link i
Link p(i)
Joint i
i
Ji
p(i)
XJ(k)
XL1(k)
XL2(k)
Link s(k)
Link p(k)
Joint k
k
s(k)
Jk
p(k)
a)
b)
Fig.3.4a,b Coordinate frames and transforms associated with
(a) a tree joint and (b) a loop-closing joint
transform which completes the transformation across
joint i from Ji to i coordinates.
Similarly, the overall transform from frame p.k/ co-
ordinates to frame k coordinates for a loop-closing joint
is given by
kXp.k/ D kXJk
JkXp.k/ D XJ.k/ XL1.k/ :
(3.62)
An additional transform XL2.k/ is deﬁned from
frame s.k/ coordinates to frame k coordinates and is
given by
XL2.k/ D kXs.k/ :
(3.63)
Link and joint geometry data can be speciﬁed in
a variety of different ways. The most common method
is to use Denavit–Hartenberg parameters [3.24]. How-
ever, standard Denavit–Hartenberg parameters are not
completely general, and are insufﬁcient for describ-
ing the geometry for a branched kinematic tree, or for
a mechanism containing certain kinds of multi-DOF
joints. A modiﬁed form of Denavit–Hartenberg param-
eters [3.2] is used for single-DOF joints in this Hand-
book (Sect. 2.4). The parameters have been extended
for branched kinematic trees [3.23] and closed-loop
mechanisms.
3.4.3 Link Inertias
The link inertia data consists of the masses, positions
of centers of mass, and rotational inertias of each link
in the mechanism. The inertia parameters for link i are
expressed in coordinate frame i, and are therefore con-
stants.
3.4.4 Joint Models
The relationship between connected links is described
using the general joint model of Roberson and Schwer-
tassek [3.3]. For a kinematic tree or spanning tree on

Part A | 3.4
50
Part A
Robotics Foundations
a closed-loop mechanism, an ni1 vector, Pqi, relates the
velocity of link i to the velocity of its parent, link p.i/,
where ni is the number of degrees of freedom at the
joint connecting the two links. For a loop-closing joint
in a closed-loop mechanism, the relationship is between
the velocity of link s.i/ (the successor) and the velocity
of link p.i/ (the predecessor). In either case, the rela-
tionship is between the velocity of coordinate frames i
and Ji.
Let vrel and arel denote the velocity and acceleration
across joint i, that is, the velocity and acceleration of
link s.i/ relative to p.i/. The free modes of the joint are
represented by the 6ni matrix ˚i, such that vrel and arel
are given as follows
vrel D ˚iPqi
(3.64)
and
arel D ˚iRqi C P˚iPqi ;
(3.65)
where ˚i and P˚i depend on the type of joint [3.3]. The
matrix ˚i has full column rank, so we can deﬁne a com-
plementary matrix, ˚c
i , such that the 66 matrix

˚i˚c
i

is invertible. We can regard the columns of this matrix
as forming a basis on M6 such that the ﬁrst ni basis vec-
tors deﬁne the directions in which motion is allowed,
and the remaining 6  ni D nc
i vectors deﬁne directions
in which motion is not allowed. Thus, ˚c
i represents the
constrained modes of joint i.
The force transmitted across joint i from its prede-
cessor to its successor, fi, is given as follows
fi D

ic
i
 i
	i

;
(3.66)
where i is the ni  1 vector of applied forces along the
free modes, 	i is the .6  ni/  1 vector of constraint
forces, and i and c
i are computed as follows

ic
i

D

˚i˚c
i
T :
(3.67)
For most common joint types, it is possible to choose ˚i
and ˚c
i such that the matrix .˚i˚c
i / is numerically
orthonormal, so that .ic
i / is numerically equal
to .˚i˚c
i /. Note that (3.67) implies the following
relationships: .i/T˚i D 1nini, .i/T˚c
i D 0ni.6ni/,
.c
i /T˚i D 0.6ni/ni, and .c
i /T˚c
i D 1.6ni/.6ni/.
When applied to (3.66), the following useful relation-
ship results
i D ˚T
i fi :
(3.68)
The value of P˚i in (3.65) depends on the type of
joint. The general formula is
P˚i D V˚i C vi  ˚i ;
(3.69)
where vi is the velocity of link i, and V˚i is the apparent
derivative of ˚i, as seen by an observer moving with
link i, and is given by
V˚i D @˚i
@qi
Pqi :
(3.70)
For most common joint types, V˚i D 0.
Single-DOF joints (ni D 1) are especially straight-
forward to work with when using the Denavit–
Hartenberg convention. Motion is chosen along (pris-
matic) or about (revolute) the Ozi coordinate axis. In this
case, ˚i D . 0 0 0 0 0 1 /T for a prismatic joint and ˚i D
. 0 0 1 0 0 0 /T for a revolute joint. Also, V˚i D 0.
The ﬁctitious 6-DOF joint for a ﬂoating base for
a mobile robot is also handled relatively easily. For this
case, ˚i D 1 (6  6 identity matrix) and V˚i D 0.
The revolute joint and ﬂoating-base joint, as well as
the universal joint (ni D 2) and spherical joint (ni D 3)
are illustrated in the example in the next section. For
additional details on joint kinematics, see Sect. 2.3.
3.4.5 Example System
In order to illustrate the conventions used for the link
and joint models, coordinate frames are attached to the
ﬁrst ﬁve links (bodies) and ﬁxed base of the humanoid
robot as shown in Fig. 3.5. Note that frame Ji is attached
to link p.i/ D i  1 for each of the ﬁve joints. For this
example, the origin of frame J1 is set coincident with
the origin of frame 0, and the origins of frames J2, J3,
J4, and J5 are coincident with the origins of frames 2,
3, 4, and 5, respectively.
Note that J1 could be set at any position/orientation
on the ﬁxed base (B0) to permit the most convenient
Table 3.4 Number of degrees of freedom (ni), ﬁxed rota-
tion
JiRp.i/

and position
p.i/pJi

from frame p.i/ to base
frame Ji for joint i of the example system. Note that 2li is
the nominal length of link i along its long axis
Joint
ni
JiRp.i/
p.i/pJi
1
6
133
031
2
1
133
0
@
0
0
l1
1
A
3
3
0
@
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
A
0
@
0
l2
0
1
A
4
1
133
0
@
0
2l3
0
1
A
5
2
0
@
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
A
0
@
0
2l4
0
1
A

Dynamics
3.5 Kinematic Trees
51
Part A | 3.5
J3
J5
5
4
2
J4
3
J1
1
J2
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B0
xˆ
xˆ
xˆ
xˆ
xˆ
xˆ
xˆ
xˆ
xˆ
xˆ
xˆ
zˆ
zˆ
zˆ
zˆ
zˆ
zˆ
zˆ
zˆ
zˆ
zˆ
zˆ
yˆ
yˆ
yˆ
yˆ
yˆ
yˆ
yˆ
yˆ
yˆ
yˆ
yˆ
Fig. 3.5 Coordinate frames for the ﬁrst ﬁve links and
joints of the humanoid robot example
representation for the motion of the ﬂoating base (B1)
relative to the ﬁxed base. Also, the origin of J2 could
be set anywhere along Oz2.
The number of degrees of freedom, and ﬁxed rota-
tion and position of the base frames Ji for each joint
of the example system, are given in Table 3.4. The
rotation JiRp.i/ transforms 3-D vectors in p.i/ coor-
dinates to Ji coordinates. The position p.i/pJi is the
vector giving the position of the origin OJi relative to
Op.i/, expressed in p.i/ coordinates. The spatial trans-
form XL.i/ D JiXp.i/ may be composed from these 3-D
quantities through the equation for BXA in Table 3.1.
The humanoid has a ﬂoating base, the torso, a revolute
joint between the torso and pelvis (about Oz2), a spher-
ical joint at the hip, a revolute joint at the knee, and
a universal joint at the ankle. As shown in Fig. 3.5, the
leg is slightly bent and the foot is turned out to the side
(
 90ı rotation about Oy3 at the hip).
The free modes, velocity variables, and position
variables for all of the joint types in the humanoid
are given in Tables 2.5 and 2.6. The expressions for
jRi and jpi in these tables give iRT
Ji and Jipi, respec-
tively, through which the joint transform XJ.i/ D iXJi
may be composed. Revolute joints follow the Denavit–
Hartenberg convention with rotation about the Ozi axis.
The ankle has a pitch rotation of ˛5 about the OzJ5 axis
followed by a roll rotation of ˇ5 about the Oy5 axis (see
the Z–Y–X Euler angle deﬁnitions in Table 2.1). The
hip is modeled as a ball-and-socket, spherical joint.
To avoid the singularities that are associated with Eu-
ler angles, the quaternion i may be used to represent
the orientation at the hip. The relationship between the
quaternion rate Pi and the relative rotation rate !i rel is
given in (2.8) of the Handbook.
The ﬂoating base uses the position of the torso 0p1
and quaternion 1 for its position and orientation state
variables, respectively. The position of the torso may
be computed by integrating the velocity for the link,
as expressed in ﬁxed base coordinates: 0v 1 D 0R1v 1,
where v 1 is the velocity of the torso in moving coordi-
nates.
Note that V˚i D 0 for all joints except the universal
joint. Since the components of OzJ5 in link 5 coordinates
vary with ˇ5, VOzJ5 ¤ 0. See Sect. 2.3 of the Handbook for
further details of the joint kinematics.
3.5 Kinematic Trees
The dynamics of a kinematic tree is simpler, and eas-
ier to calculate, than the dynamics of a closed-loop
mechanism. Indeed, many algorithms for closed-loop
mechanisms work by ﬁrst calculating the dynamics of
a spanning tree, and then subjecting it to the loop-
closure constraints.
This section describes the following dynamics al-
gorithms for kinematic trees: the recursive Newton–
Euler algorithm (RNEA) for inverse dynamics, the
articulated-body algorithm (ABA) for forward dynam-
ics, the composite-rigid-body algorithm (CRBA) for
calculating the joint-space inertia matrix (JSIM), and
two algorithms to calculate the operational-space iner-
tia matrix (OSIM). Implementations of the ﬁrst three
can be found in [3.16].
3.5.1 The Recursive Newton–Euler
Algorithm
This is an O.n/ algorithm for calculating the inverse dy-
namics of a ﬁxed-base kinematic tree, and is based on
the very efﬁcient RNEA of Luh et al. [3.4]. A ﬂoating-

Part A | 3.5
52
Part A
Robotics Foundations
base version can be found in [3.8, 15]. Given the joint
position and velocity variables, this algorithm calcu-
lates the applied joint torque/force variables required to
produce a given set of joint accelerations.
The link velocities and accelerations are ﬁrst com-
puted through an outward recursion from the ﬁxed base
to the leaf links of the tree. The required forces on
each link are computed using the Newton–Euler equa-
tions (3.35) during this recursion. A second, inward
recursion uses the force balance equations at each link
to compute the spatial force across each joint and the
value of each joint torque/force variable. The key step
for computational efﬁciency is to refer most quantities
to local link coordinates. Also, the effects of gravity on
each link are efﬁciently included in the equations by ac-
celerating the base of the mechanism upward.
The calculation proceeds in four steps, as follows,
with two steps in each of the two recursions.
Step 1
Calculate the velocity and acceleration of each link in
turn, starting with the known velocity and acceleration
of the ﬁxed base, and working towards the tips (i. e., the
leaf nodes in the connectivity graph).
The velocity of each link in a kinematic tree is given
by the recursive formula
vi D vp.i/ C ˚iPqi ;
.v0 D 0/ ;
(3.71)
where vi is the velocity of link i, ˚i is the motion matrix
of joint i, and Pqi is the vector of joint velocity variables
for joint i.
The equivalent formula for accelerations is obtained
by differentiating (3.71), giving
ai D ap.i/ C ˚iRqi C P˚iPqi ;
.a0 D 0/ ;
(3.72)
where ai is the acceleration of link i, and Rqi is the vector
of joint acceleration variables.
The effect of a uniform gravitational ﬁeld on the
mechanism can be simulated by initializing a0 to ag
instead of zero, where ag is the gravitational accelera-
tion vector. In this case, ai is not the true acceleration of
link i, but the sum of its true acceleration and ag.
Step 2
Calculate the equation of motion for each link. This step
computes the forces required to cause the accelerations
calculated in step 1. The equation of motion for link i is
fa
i D Iiai C vi  Iivi ;
(3.73)
where Ii is the spatial inertia of link i, and fa
i is the net
force acting on link i.
Joint i
c (i) = {c1, c2, ...., cm}
p(i)
c1
c2
cm
f e
i
fi
fc1
fc2
fcm
.
.
.
Link i
Fig. 3.6 Forces acting on link i
Step 3
Calculate the spatial force across each joint. Referring
to Fig. 3.6, the net force acting on link i is
fa
i D fe
i C fi 
X
j2c.i/
fj ;
where fi is the force transmitted across joint i, fe
i is the
sum of all relevant external forces acting on link i, and
c.i/ is the set of children of link i. Rearranging this
equation gives the following recursive formula for cal-
culating the joint forces
fi D fa
i  fe
i C
X
j2c.i/
fj ;
(3.74)
where i iterates from NB to 1.
fe
i may include contributions from springs, dampers,
force ﬁelds, contact with the environment, and so on,
but its value is assumed to be known, or at least to be
calculable from known quantities.
If gravity has not been simulated by a ﬁctitious base
acceleration, then the gravitational force acting on link i
must be included in fe
i .
Step 4
Calculate the joint force variables, i. By deﬁnition,
they are given by the equation
i D ˚T
i fi :
(3.75)
Coordinate-Free Algorithm
Equations (3.71)–(3.75) imply the algorithm shown in
Algorithm 3.1, which is the coordinate-free version of
the RNEA. This is the simplest form of the algorithm,
and it is suitable for mathematical analysis and re-
lated purposes. However, it is not suitable for numerical

Dynamics
3.5 Kinematic Trees
53
Part A | 3.5
computation because a numerical version must use co-
ordinate vectors.
Algorithm 3.1 Coordinate-free recursive Newton–
Euler algorithm (RNEA) for inverse dynamics
v0 D 0
a0 D ag
for i D 1 to NB do
vi D vp.i/ C ˚i Pqi
ai D ap.i/ C ˚i Rqi C P˚i Pqi
fi D Ii ai C vi  Ii vi  f e
i
end for
for i D NB to 1 do
i D ˚T
i fi
if p.i/ ¤ 0 then
fp.i/ D fp.i/ C fi
end if
end for
Link-Coordinates Algorithm
In general, we say that an algorithm is implemented
in link coordinates if a coordinate system is deﬁned
for each link, and the calculations pertaining to link i
are performed in the coordinate system associated with
link i. The alternative is to implement the algorithm
in absolute coordinates, in which case all calculations
are performed in a single coordinate system, typically
that of the base link. In practice, the RNEA is more
computationally efﬁcient when implemented in link co-
ordinates, and the same is true of most other dynamics
algorithms.
To convert the RNEA to link coordinates, we
ﬁrst examine the equations to see which ones involve
quantities from more than one link. Equations (3.73)
and (3.75) each involve quantities pertaining to link i
only, and therefore need no modiﬁcation. Such equa-
tions are said to be local to link i. The remaining
equations involve quantities from more than one link,
and therefore require the insertion of coordinate trans-
formation matrices. The modiﬁed versions of (3.71),
(3.72), and (3.74) are
vi D iXp.i/ vp.i/ C ˚iPqi ;
(3.76)
ai D iXp.i/ ap.i/ C ˚iRqi C P˚iPqi ;
(3.77)
and
fi D fa
i  iXF
0
0fe
i C
X
j2c.i/
iXF
j fj :
(3.78)
Equation (3.78) assumes that external forces are ex-
pressed in absolute (i. e., link 0) coordinates.
Algorithm 3.2 Recursive Newton–Euler algorithm
using spatial vectors
inputs: q, Pq, Rq, model , 0fe
i
output: 
model data : NB, jtype.i/, p.i/, XL.i/, Ii
v0 D 0
a0 D ag
for i D 1 to NB do
XJ.i/ D xjcalc.jtype.i/;qi/
iXp.i/ D XJ.i/ XL.i/
if p.i/ ¤ 0 then
iX0 D iXp.i/ p.i/X0
end if
˚i D pcalc.jtype.i/;qi/
V˚i D pdcalc.jtype.i/; qi; Pqi/
vi D iXp.i/ vp.i/ C ˚iPqi

i D V˚iPqi C vi  ˚iPqi
ai D iXp.i/ ap.i/ C ˚iRqi C 
i
fi D Iiai C vi  Iivi  iXT
0
0fe
i
end for
for i D NB to 1 do
i D ˚T
i fi
if p.i/ ¤ 0 then
fp.i/ D fp.i/ C iXT
p.i/ fi
end if
end for
The complete algorithm is shown in Algorithm 3.2.
The function jtype returns the type code for joint i;
the function xjcalc calculates the joint transforma-
tion matrix for the speciﬁed type of joint; and the
functions pcalc and pdcalc calculate ˚i and V˚i. The
formulae used by these functions for a variety of joint
types can be found in Tables 2.5 and 2.6, bearing in
mind that the rotation matrices that must be used are the
transposes of those listed in these tables. In the general
case, both pcalc and pdcalc are needed. However,
for most common joint types, ˚i is a known constant
in link coordinates, and V˚i is therefore zero. If it is
known in advance that all joints will have this property,
then the algorithm can be simpliﬁed accordingly. The
quantities Ii and XL.i/ are known constants in link co-
ordinates, and are part of the data structure describing
the robot mechanism.
The last assignment in the ﬁrst loop initializes
each fi to the expression fa
i  iXF
0
0fe
i (using the iden-
tity iXF
0 D iXT
0
). The summation on the right-hand side
of (3.78) is then performed in the second loop. This al-
gorithm includes code to calculate iX0, which is used
to transform the external forces to link coordinates. If
there are no external forces, then this code can be omit-
ted. If there is only a single external force (e.g., a force

Part A | 3.5
54
Part A
Robotics Foundations
at the end-effector of a robot arm) then this code can
be replaced with code that transforms the external force
vector successively from one link coordinate system to
the next, using iXp.i/.
Note: although the phrase link coordinates suggests
that we are using moving coordinate frames, the algo-
rithm is in fact implemented in stationary coordinates
that happen to coincide with the moving coordinates at
the current instant.
3-D Vector RNEA
The original version of the RNEA was developed
and expressed using 3-D vectors (e.g. [3.2, 4]). Algo-
rithm 3.3 shows a special case of this algorithm, in
which the joints are assumed to be revolute, and the
joint axes are assumed to coincide with the z axes of the
link coordinate systems. (Without these assumptions,
the equations would be a lot longer.) It also assumes
that the external forces are zero.
Algorithm 3.3 Recursive Newton–Euler algorithm
in 3-D vectors, for revolute joints only
inputs: q, Pq, Rq, model
output: 
model data : NB, p.i/, RL.i/, p.i/pi, mi, ci, NI
cm
i
!0 D 0
P!0 D 0
Pv 0
0 D  Pv 0
g
for i D 1 to NB do
iRp.i/ D rotz.qi/ RL.i/
!i D iRp.i/ !p.i/ C OziPqi
P!i D iRp.i/ P!p.i/ C
iRp.i/ !p.i/

 OziPqi C OziRqi
Pv 0
i D iRp.i/

Pv 0
p.i/ C P!p.i/  p.i/pi
C!p.i/  !p.i/  p.i/pi

f i D mi. Pv 0
i C P!i  ci C !i  !i  ci/
ni D NI
cm
i
P!i C !i  NI
cm
i !i C ci  f i
end for
for i D NB to 1 do
i D OzT
i ni
if p.i/ ¤ 0 then
fp.i/ D fp.i/ C iRT
p.i/ f i
np.i/ D np.i/ C iRT
p.i/ ni C p.i/pi  iRT
p.i/ f i
end if
end for
In this algorithm, Pv 0
g is the linear acceleration due
to gravity, expressed in base (link 0) coordinates; rotz
computes the transpose of the matrix shown in (2.2);
RL.i/ is the rotational component of XL.i/; iRp.i/ is the
rotational component of iXp.i/; pcalc and pdcalc
are not used because ˚i is the known constant .OzT 0T/T;
Pv 0
i is the linear acceleration of the origin of link i coor-
dinates (Oi), and is the linear component of the classical
acceleration of link i; p.i/pi is the position of Oi relative
to Op.i/ expressed in p.i/ coordinates; and mi, ci, and NI
cm
i
are the inertia parameters of link i. (See Table 3.1 for
the equations relating these 3-D quantities to the corre-
sponding spatial quantities.)
At ﬁrst sight, the 3-D vector algorithm looks sig-
niﬁcantly different from the spatial vector algorithm.
Nevertheless, it can be obtained directly from the spa-
tial vector algorithm simply by expanding the spatial
vectors to their 3-D components, restricting the joint
type to revolute, converting spatial accelerations to clas-
sical accelerations (i. e., replacing each instance of Pv i
with Pv 0
i  !i  v i as per (3.22)), and applying some
3-D vector identities to bring the equations into the
form shown in the table. The conversion from spatial
to classical acceleration has one interesting side-effect:
v i cancels out of the equation of motion, and therefore
does not need to be calculated. As a result, the 3-D ver-
sion of the algorithm has a slight speed advantage over
the spatial version.
3.5.2 The Articulated-Body Algorithm
The ABA is an O.NB/ algorithm for calculating the
forward dynamics of a kinematic tree. However, un-
der normal circumstances, O.NB/ D O.n/, so we shall
refer to it as an O.n/ algorithm. The ABA was de-
veloped by Featherstone [3.1] and is an example of
a constraint-propagation algorithm. Given the joint po-
sition, velocity, and applied torque/force variables, this
algorithm calculates the joint accelerations. With the
joint accelerations determined, numerical integration
may be used to provide a simulation of the mechanism.
The key concept in the ABA is illustrated in
Fig. 3.7. The subtree rooted at link i interacts with the
rest of the kinematic tree only through a force fi that is
transmitted across joint i. Suppose we break the tree at
this point, and consider only the motion of the subtree
subject to an unknown force, fi, acting on link i. It is
possible to show that the acceleration of link i is related
to the applied force according to the equation
fi D IA
i ai C pA
i ;
(3.79)
where IA
i is called the articulated-body inertia of link i in
the subtree (which we can now call an articulated body),
and pA
i is the associated bias force, which is the force
required to produce zero acceleration in link i. Note
that pA
i depends on the velocities of the individual bod-
ies in the articulated body. Equation (3.79) takes into
account the complete dynamics of the subtree. Thus, if
we happened to know the correct value of fi, then (3.79)

Dynamics
3.5 Kinematic Trees
55
Part A | 3.5
would immediately give us the correct acceleration of
link i.
The reason we are interested in the quantities IA
i
and pA
i is that they allow us to calculate Rqi from ap.i/,
which in turn allows us to calculate ai, which then al-
lows us to calculate more joint accelerations, and so on.
Combining (3.79) with (3.75) and (3.72) gives
i D ˚T
i fi D ˚T
i

IA
i .ap.i/ C ˚iRqi C P˚iPqi/ C pA
i

;
which can be solved for Rqi to give
Rqi D Di

ui  UT
i ap.i/

;
(3.80)
where
Ui D IA
i ˚i ;
Di D

˚T
i Ui
1 D

˚T
i IA
i ˚i
1 ;
ui D i  UT
i 
i  ˚T
i pA
i
and

i D P˚iPqi D V˚iPqi C vi  ˚iPqi :
ai can then be calculated via (3.72).
It turns out that the articulated-body inertias and
bias forces can be calculated efﬁciently via the recur-
sive formulae
IA
i D Ii C
X
j2c.i/
IA
j  UjDjUT
j

(3.81)
and
pA
i D pi C
X
j2c.i/

pA
j C IA
j 
j C UjDjuj

;
(3.82)
where
pi D vi  Iivi  fe
i :
These formulae are obtained by examining the relation-
ship between fi and ai in Fig. 3.7 and assuming that IA
j
and pA
j are already known for every j 2 c.i/. For more
details see [3.1, 8, 15, 25].
The complete algorithm is shown in Algorithm 3.4.
Algorithm 3.4 Articulated-body algorithm for for-
ward dynamics
inputs: q, Pq, , model, 0fe
i
output: Rq
model data: NB, jtype.i/, p.i/, XL.i/, Ii
v0 D 0
a0 D ag
for i D 1 to NB do
XJ.i/ D xjcalc. jtype.i/; qi/
iXp.i/ D XJ.i/ XL.i/
if p.i/ ¤ 0 then
iX0 D iXp.i/ p.i/X0
end if
˚i D pcalc. jtype.i/;qi/
V˚i D pdcalc. jtype.i/; qi; Pqi/
vi D iXp.i/ vp.i/ C ˚i Pqi

i D V˚i Pqi C vi  ˚i Pqi
IA
i D Ii
pA
i D vi  Ii vi  iXT
0
0fe
i
end for
for i D NB to 1 do
Ui D IA
i ˚i
Di D

˚T
i Ui
1
ui D i  UT
i 
i  ˚T
i pA
i
if p.i/ ¤ 0 then
IA
p.i/ D IA
p.i/ C iXT
p.i/

IA
i  Ui Di UT
i
 iXp.i/
pA
p.i/ D pA
p.i/ C iXT
p.i/

pA
i C IA
i 
i C Ui Di ui

end if
end for
for i D 1 to NB do
ai D iXp.i/ ap.i/
Rqi D Di
ui  UT
i ai

ai D ai C ˚i Rqi C 
i
end for
It is expressed in link coordinates, as per the RNEA
in Algorithm 3.2. It makes a total of three passes
through the kinematic tree. The ﬁrst pass iterates from
the base out to the tips; it calculates the link veloci-
ties using (3.76), the velocity-product term 
i D P˚iPqi,
and it initializes the variables IA
i and pA
i to the values Ii
and pi.D vi  Iivi  iXF
0
0fe
i /, respectively. The second
pass iterates from the tips back to the base; it calculates
the articulated-body inertia and bias force for each link
using (3.81) and (3.82). The third pass iterates from the
base to the tips; it calculates the link and joint accelera-
tions using (3.80) and (3.77).
Link p(i)
Rest of
kinematic tree
Break
at joint i
Subtree rooted at link i
= articulated body i
fi
ai
Link i
Fig. 3.7 Deﬁnition of articulated body i

Part A | 3.5
56
Part A
Robotics Foundations
3.5.3 The Composite-Rigid-Body Algorithm
The CRBA is an algorithm for calculating the joint-
space inertia matrix (JSIM) of a kinematic tree. The
most common use for the CRBA is as part of a for-
ward dynamics algorithm. It ﬁrst appeared as method 3
in [3.5].
Forward dynamics, in joint space, is the task of
calculating Rq from q, Pq, and . Starting from (3.37),
the most obvious way to proceed is to calculate H
and CPq C g, and then solve the linear equation
HRq D   .CPq C g/
(3.83)
for Rq. If the mechanism is a kinematic tree, then H
and CPq C g can be computed in O.n2/ and O.n/
operations, respectively, and (3.83) can be solved in
O.n3/ operations. Algorithms that take this approach
are therefore known collectively as O.n3/ algorithms.
However, this ﬁgure of O.n3/ should be regarded as the
worst-case complexity, since the actual complexity de-
pends on the amount of branching in the tree [3.26].
Furthermore, even in the worst case, the n3 term has
a small coefﬁcient, and does not dominate until approx-
imately n D 60.
CPq C g can be calculated using an inverse dynam-
ics algorithm. If ID.q; Pq; Rq/ is the result of an inverse
dynamics calculation with arguments q, Pq and Rq, then
ID.q; Pq; Rq/ D  D HRq C CPq C g ;
so
CPq C g D ID.q; Pq; 0/ :
(3.84)
Thus, the value of CPq C g for a kinematic tree can be
calculated efﬁciently using the RNEA with Rq D 0.
The key concept in the CRBA is to note that the
JSIM only depends on the joint positions, and not their
rates. The CRBA makes the simplifying assumption
that the rate at each joint is zero. By also assuming
that gravity is zero, CPq C g is eliminated from (3.83).
Furthermore, for a revolute joint, a unit of joint acceler-
ation applied at the j-th joint produces the j-th column
of the JSIM. This partitions the mechanism into two
composite rigid bodies connected by the j-th joint, and
simpliﬁes the dynamics considerably. This concept has
been generalized so that the CRBA may be applied to
any joint type within a kinematic tree structure.
It can be shown that the general form of the JSIM
for a kinematic tree is
Hij D
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
˚T
i IC
i ˚j
if i 2 c.j/
˚T
i IC
j ˚j
if j 2 c.i/
0
otherwise;
(3.85)
where c.i/ is the set of links in the subtree rooted at
link i, including link i itself, and
IC
i D
X
j2c.i/
Ij :
(3.86)
See [3.8, 15]. In fact, IC
i is the inertia of the composite
rigid body formed by the rigid assembly of all the links
in c.i/, and this is where the algorithm gets its name.
Equations (3.85) and (3.86) are the basis of the al-
gorithm shown in Algorithm 3.5, which is the CRBA in
link coordinates.
Algorithm 3.5 Composite-rigid-body algorithm
for calculating the JSIM
inputs: model , RNEA partial results
output: H
model data : NB, p.i/, Ii
RNEA data : ˚i, iXp.i/
H D 0
for i D 1 to NB do
IC
i D Ii
end for
for i D NB to 1 do
F D IC
i ˚i
Hii D ˚T
i F
if p.i/ ¤ 0 then
IC
p.i/ D IC
p.i/ C iXT
p.i/ IC
i
iXp.i/
end if
j D i
while p.j/ ¤ 0 do
F D jXT
p.j/ F
j D p.j/
Hij D FT ˚j
Hji D HT
ij
end while
end for
This algorithm assumes that the matrices iXp.i/
and ˚i have already been calculated, e.g., during the
calculation of CPq C g. If this is not the case, then the
relevant lines from Algorithm 3.2 can be inserted into
the ﬁrst loop. The matrix F is a local variable. The ﬁrst
step, H D 0, can be omitted if there are no branches in
the tree.
Having calculated CPq C g and H, the ﬁnal step is
to solve (3.83) for Rq. This can be done using a standard
Cholesky or LDLT factorization. Note that H can be
highly ill-conditioned [3.27], reﬂecting an underlying
ill-conditioning of the kinematic tree itself, so it is rec-
ommended to use double-precision arithmetic for every
step in the forward dynamics calculation. (This advice
applies also to the ABA.)

Dynamics
3.5 Kinematic Trees
57
Part A | 3.5
Exploiting Sparsity
Equation (3.85) implies that some elements of H will
automatically be zero if there are branches in the kine-
matic tree. An example of this effect is shown in
Fig. 3.8. Observe that nearly half of the elements are
zero. It is possible to exploit this sparsity using the
factorization algorithms described in [3.26]. Depend-
ing on the amount of branching in the tree, the sparse
algorithms can run many times faster than the standard
algorithms.
3.5.4 Operational-Space Inertia Matrix
Two different algorithms are presented to calculate the
OSIM. The ﬁrst is an O.n3/ algorithm that uses the
basic deﬁnition of the OSIM along with efﬁcient fac-
torization of the JSIM. The second is an O.n/ algorithm
that is based on efﬁcient solution of the forward dynam-
ics problem.
Algorithm Using Basic Definition
If a robot has a relatively small number of freedoms
(e.g., six), then the most efﬁcient method for calculating
the OSIM is via (3.52). The procedure is as follows:
1. Calculate H via the CRBA.
2. Factorize H into H D LLT (Cholesky factorization).
3. Use back-substitution to calculate Y D L1 JT.
4. 1 D YT Y.
5. Factorize 1 (optional).
The ﬁnal step is only possible if the end-effector
has a full six DOFs, and is only necessary if the appli-
cation requires  rather than 1. In the second step,
an LDLT factorization can be used instead of Cholesky,
or one can use one of the efﬁcient factorizations de-
scribed in [3.26] for branched kinematic trees.
The other terms in (3.38) can be calculated via
(3.53) and (3.54). In particular, (3.38) can be rewritten
in the form
Pv C 1.x/Œ.x; v/ C .x/ D 1.x/ f ;
(3.87)
1
3
2
7
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
0
.
.
0
0
.
0
.
0
0
.
.
.
.
0
.
0
0
0
.
.
0
0
.
0
0
.
0
.
0
0
.
0
.
0
.
0
0
0
.
6
5
4
0
JSIM
Fig. 3.8 Branch-induced sparsity: branches in the kine-
matic tree cause certain elements in the JSIM to be zero
and the quantity 1.C/ can be calculated from the
formula
1. C / D JH1.CPq C g/  PJPq :
(3.88)
The term PJPq is the velocity-product acceleration of the
end-effector (3.50). It is calculated as a by-product of
calculating CPq C g via the RNEA (3.84). Speciﬁcally,
PJPq D aee  a0, where aee is the calculated acceleration
of the end-effector (expressed in the same coordinates
as Pv) and a0 is the acceleration of the base (ag).
O.n/ Algorithm
For a sufﬁciently large value of n, it becomes more
efﬁcient to use an O.n/ algorithm. Several such algo-
rithms can be found in [3.28–30]. In this section, a more
straightforward algorithm is given, which is based on
an O.n/ calculation of the joint-space forward dynam-
ics problem, e.g., via the ABA. It is a variation of the
unit force method [3.29] and computes the inverse of
the OSIM.
Starting with (3.87), observe that 1 is a func-
tion of position only, and certain terms in the dynamic
equations can be neglected without affecting its value.
Speciﬁcally, if the joint rates, Pq, joint forces, , and
gravitational forces are all set to zero, the value of 
will remain unchanged. Under these conditions,
Pv D 1f :
(3.89)
Let us deﬁne Oei to be a 6-D coordinate vector with
a 1 in the i-th coordinate and zeros elsewhere. If we set
f D Oei in (3.89), then Pv will equal column i of 1. Let
us also deﬁne the function FD.i; j; q; Pq; a0; ; f/, which
performs a forward-dynamics calculation and returns
the true acceleration of link i (i. e., ai  a0), expressed
in the same coordinates as f (typically the base coor-
dinates). The arguments q, Pq and  set the values of
the joint position, velocity, and force variables, while j
and f specify that an external force of f is to be applied
to link j. The argument a0 speciﬁes a ﬁctitious base ac-
celeration to include gravitational effects, and is set to
either 0 or ag.
With these deﬁnitions, we have
.1/i D FD.ee; ee; q; 0; 0; 0; Oei/
(3.90)
and
1.C/ D FD.ee; ee; q; Pq; ag; ; 0/ ; (3.91)
where .1/i is column i of 1, and ee is the body
number of the end-effector. It therefore follows that the
coefﬁcients of (3.87) can be calculated using the algo-
rithm shown in Algorithm 3.6. This algorithm is O.n/.

Part A | 3.6
58
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Algorithm 3.6 Algorithm to compute the inverse
of the operational-space inertia matrix and other
terms
for j D 1 to 6 do
Pvj D FD.ee; ee; q; 0;0; 0; Oej/
end for
1 D
Pv1 Pv2    Pv6	
1 . C / D FD.ee; ee; q; Pq; ag; ; 0/
The efﬁciency of the algorithm may be increased
signiﬁcantly when computing 1 by noting that:
(1) vi, 
i, and i in the ABA calculation (Algorithm 3.4)
may be set to zero, and (2) IA
i and the quantities that
depend upon it (Ui and Di) need only be computed
once, since they do not vary with the applied force.
Also, note that the algorithm may be applied to multi-
ple end-effectors by modifying FD to accept a list of
end-effector body numbers in its ﬁrst argument, and
return a composite vector containing the accelerations
of all the speciﬁed bodies. Algorithm 3.6 is then en-
closed in a for loop that controls the second argument
to FD, and iterates over all of the end-effector body
numbers [3.20].
However, for the case of branched mechanisms with
multiple end-effectors, several published algorithms
achieve even better efﬁciency, and should be used in-
stead [3.20, 29, 31–33]. The best achievable complexity
is O.n C md C m2/, where m is the number of end-
effectors and d is the depth of the system’s connec-
tivity tree [3.33]; but the fastest algorithm for a typi-
cal humanoid exploits branch-induced sparsity [3.32,
33].
3.6 Kinematic Loops
All of the algorithms in the last section were for kine-
matic trees. In this section, a ﬁnal algorithm is provided
for the forward dynamics of closed-loop systems. The
algorithm supplements the dynamic equations of mo-
tion for a spanning tree of the closed-loop system with
the loop-closure constraint equations. Three different
methods are given to solve the resulting linear system
of equations. An efﬁcient algorithm is given to compute
the loop-closure constraints.
Systems with
closed
kinematic
loops exhibit
more complicated dynamics than kinematic trees. For
example:
1. The degree of motion freedom of a kinematic tree is
ﬁxed, but that of a closed-loop system can vary.
2. The degree of instantaneous motion freedom is
always the same as the degree of ﬁnite motion free-
dom in a kinematic tree, but they can be different in
a closed-loop system.
3. Every force in a kinematic tree can be determined,
but some forces in a closed-loop system can be in-
determinate. This occurs whenever a closed-loop
system is overconstrained.
Two examples of these phenomena are shown in
Fig. 3.9. The mechanism in Fig. 3.9a has no ﬁnite mo-
tion freedom, but it has two degrees of inﬁnitesimal
motion freedom. The mechanism in Fig. 3.9b has one
degree of freedom when  ¤ 0, but if  D 0 then the
two arms, A and B, are able to move independently, and
the mechanism has two degrees of freedom. Moreover,
at the boundary between these two motion regimes, the
mechanism has three degrees of inﬁnitesimal motion
freedom. Both these mechanisms are planar, and are
therefore overconstrained. As a result, the out-of-plane
components of the joint constraint forces are indetermi-
nate. This kind of indeterminacy has no effect on the
motions of these mechanisms, but it does complicate
the calculation of their dynamics.
3.6.1 Formulation of Closed-Loop Algorithm
A closed-loop system can be modeled as a spanning tree
subject to a set of loop-closure constraint forces. If
HRq C CPq C g D 
is the equation of motion of the spanning tree on its
own, then the equation of motion for the closed-loop
system is
HRq C CPq C g D  C a C c ;
(3.92)
θ
A
B
a)
b)
Fig.3.9a,b Pathological closed-loop systems. (a) Example
of varying motion freedom,(b) Example with differing ﬁ-
nite and inﬁnitesimal motion freedoms

Dynamics
3.6 Kinematic Loops
59
Part A | 3.6
where a and c are vectors of loop-closure active and
constraint forces, respectively, expressed in the gen-
eralized force coordinates of the spanning tree. a is
a known quantity, and c is unknown. a comes from
the force elements acting at the loop-closing joints
(springs, dampers and actuators). If there are no such
force elements, then a D 0.
The loop-closure constraints restrict the motion of
the spanning tree. At the acceleration level, these con-
straints can be expressed in the form of a linear equa-
tion,
LRq D l ;
(3.93)
where L is an nc  n matrix. nc is the number of con-
straints due to the loop-closing joints, and is given by
the formula
nc D
NJ
X
kDNBC1
nc
k ;
(3.94)
where nc
k is the number of constraints imposed by
joint k. If rank.L/ < nc then the loop-closure constraints
are linearly dependent, and the closed-loop mechanism
is overconstrained. The mobility of a closed-loop sys-
tem (i. e., its degree of motion freedom) is given by the
formula
mobility D n  rank.L/ :
(3.95)
Given a constraint equation in the form of (3.93),
it follows that the constraint forces can be expressed in
the form
c D LT	 ;
(3.96)
where 	 D

	T
NBC1    	T
NJ
T
is an nc  1 vector of
unknown constraint-force variables (or Lagrange mul-
tipliers). If the mechanism is overconstrained, then LT
will have a null space, and the component of 	 lying in
this null space will be indeterminate.
It is often possible to identify redundant constraints
in advance. For example, if a kinematic loop is known
to be planar, then the out-of-plane loop-closure con-
straints are redundant. In these circumstances, it is
advantageous to remove the corresponding rows of L
and elements of l and 	. The removed elements of 	
can be assigned a value of zero.
Combining (3.92), (3.93), and (3.96) produces the
following equation of motion for a closed-loop system
H
LT
L
0
  Rq
	

D
 C a  .CPq C g/
l

:
(3.97)
The system matrix is symmetric, but indeﬁnite. If L has
full rank, then the system matrix will be nonsingular,
otherwise it will be singular, and one or more elements
of 	 will be indeterminate.
Equation (3.97) can be solved in any of the follow-
ing ways:
1. Solve it directly for Rq and 	.
2. Solve for 	 ﬁrst, and then use the result to solve
for Rq.
3. Solve (3.93) for Rq, substitute the result into (3.92),
eliminate the unknown constraint forces, and solve
for the remaining unknowns.
Method 1 is the simplest, but generally also the least
efﬁcient. This method is appropriate when the system
matrix is nonsingular. As the size of the system matrix
is .n C nc/  .n C nc/, this method is O..n C nc/3/.
Method 2 is particularly useful if n  nc, and offers
the opportunity to use O.n/ algorithms on the spanning
tree [3.6]. From (3.97),
LH1LT	 D l  LH1  C a  .CPq C g/	 :
(3.98)
This equation can be formulated in O.n .nc/2/ oper-
ations via O.n/ algorithms, and solved in O..nc/3/.
Once 	 is known, c can be calculated via (3.96) in
O.n nc/ operations, and (3.92) solved by an O.n/ al-
gorithm; so the total complexity is O.n .nc/2 C .nc/3/.
If L is rank deﬁcient, then LH1LT will be singu-
lar; but it is still a positive-semideﬁnite matrix, and
presents a slightly easier factorization problem than
a singular instance of the indeﬁnite system matrix
in (3.97).
Method 3 is useful if n  nc is small, or if L is ex-
pected to be rank deﬁcient. Equation (3.93) is solved
using a special version of Gaussian elimination (or sim-
ilar procedure), which is equipped with a numerical
rank test, and which is designed to solve underdeter-
mined systems. The solution is an equation of the form
Rq D Ky C Rq0 ;
where Rq0 is any particular solution to (3.93), K is an
n.nrank.L// matrix with the property LK D 0, and y
is a vector of n  rank.L/ unknowns. (Typically, y is
a linearly independent subset of the elements of Rq.)
Substituting this expression for Rq into (3.92), and pre-
multiplying both sides by KT to eliminate c, produces
KTH K y D KT 
 C a  .CPq C g/  HRq0

:
(3.99)
This method also has cubic complexity, but it can be the
most efﬁcient if n  nc is small. It is also reported to be
more stable than method 1 [3.34].

Part A | 3.6
60
Part A
Robotics Foundations
3.6.2 Closed-Loop Algorithm
Algorithms for calculating H and CPq C g can be
found in Sect. 3.5.3 and 3.5.1, respectively, which just
leaves L, l and a. To keep things simple, we will as-
sume that all loop-closing joints are zero-DOF joints.
There is no loss of generality with this assumption:
one simply breaks open the loops by cutting links in-
stead of joints (Fig. 3.10). However, there may be some
loss of efﬁciency. With this assumption, we only need
to calculate L and l, since a D 0.
Loop Constraints
In the general case, the velocity constraint equation for
loop k is
c
k
T .vs.k/  vp.k// D 0 ;
(3.100)
and the acceleration constraint is

c
k
T .as.k/  ap.k// C

P
c
k
T
.vs.k/  vp.k// D 0 :
(3.101)
However, if every loop-closing joint has zero DOF, then
these equations simplify to
vs.k/  vp.k/ D 0
(3.102)
and
as.k/  ap.k/ D 0 :
(3.103)
Let us deﬁne a loop Jacobian, Jk, with the property
that
vs.k/  vp.k/ D Jk Pq :
(3.104)
Jk is a 6  n matrix deﬁned by the formula
Jk D .e1k˚1    eNBk˚NB/ ;
(3.105)
Zero
DOF
joint
I2
I
I1
For dynamic equivalence, I1 + I2 = I
Fig. 3.10 Inserting a zero-DOF joint in preparation for cut-
ting the loop open at that joint
where
eik D
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
C1
if s.k/ 2 c.i/ and p.k/ … c.i/ ;
1
if p.k/ 2 c.i/ and s.k/ … c.i/ ;
0
otherwise.
In other words, eik D C1 if joint i lies on the path to s.k/
but not the path to p.k/; eik D 1 if joint i lies on the
path to p.k/ but not the path to s.k/; and eik D 0 if joint i
lies on both paths or on neither.
The loop acceleration constraint can now be written
0 D as.k/  ap.k/
D Jk Rq C PJk Pq
D Jk Rq C avp
s.k/  avp
p.k/ ;
(3.106)
where avp
i
is the velocity-product acceleration of link i,
which is the acceleration it would have if Rq were
zero. The velocity-product acceleration of every link
is calculated during the calculation of the vector CPq C
g (3.84). If the RNEA is used to calculate CPq C g,
then avp
i will be the value of ai calculated by the RNEA
with its acceleration argument set to zero.
The matrices L and l can now be expressed as fol-
lows
L D
0
B@
LNBC1
:::
LNJ
1
CA
and
l D
0
B@
lNBC1
:::
lNJ
1
CA ;
(3.107)
where
Lk D Jk
(3.108)
and
lk D avp
p.k/  avp
s.k/ :
(3.109)
Constraint Stabilization
In practice, it is necessary to stabilize loop-closure con-
straints, or they will simply ﬂy apart during simulation
because of numerical integration errors. The standard
technique is due to Baumgarte [3.3, 7, 35], and consists
of replacing each constraint equation of the form
ae D 0 ;
with one of the form
ae C Kvve C Kppe D 0 ;
where ae, ve, and pe are the acceleration, velocity, and
position errors, respectively, and Kv and Kp are posi-
tive constants. Typically, one chooses a time constant,

Dynamics
3.7 Conclusions and Further Reading
61
Part A | 3.7
tc, according to how quickly one wants the position and
velocity errors to decay. Kp and Kv are then given by the
formulae Kv D 2=tc and Kp D 1=t2
c. However, there is
no good rule for choosing tc. If tc is too long, then loop-
constraint errors accumulate faster than they decay; if
tc is too short, then the equations of motion become ex-
cessively stiff, causing a loss of numerical integration
accuracy. A reasonable value for a large, slow indus-
trial robot is tc D 0:1, while a smaller, faster robot might
need tc D 0:01.
To incorporate stabilization terms into the loop con-
straint equation, we replace (3.109) with
lk D avp
p.k/avp
s.k/Kv.vs.k/vp.k//Kppek ; (3.110)
where pek is a vector representing the position error in
loop k. In absolute coordinates (i. e., link 0 coordinates),
pek is given by
pek D x to vec.0Xp.k/ X1
L1 .k/ XL2.k/ s.k/X0/ ;
(3.111)
where the XL1.k/ and XL2.k/ transforms are deﬁned
in (3.62) and (3.63), and shown in Fig. 3.4 for joint k,
and x to vec
BXA

computes a vector approximating
the displacement from frame A to frame B, assuming
this displacement to be inﬁnitesimal. x to vec can be de-
ﬁned as
x to vec.X/ D 1
2
0
BBBBBB@
X23  X32
X31  X13
X12  X21
X53  X62
X61  X43
X42  X51
1
CCCCCCA
:
(3.112)
Algorithm
Algorithm 3.7 shows an algorithm for calculating L
and l for the special case when all the loop-closing
joints have 0-DOF. It combines simplicity with good
performance by transforming every quantity that is
needed to formulate the loop-closure constraints into
a single coordinate system, in this case absolute (link 0)
coordinates, so that no further transforms are needed.
The ﬁrst loop calculates the transforms from abso-
lute to link coordinates, and uses them to transform ˚i
to absolute coordinates. Only the ˚i that are needed in
the loop-closure constraints are transformed.
The second loop calculates the nonzero elements
of L (which can be sparse), according to (3.105). The
inner while loop terminates on the root of the loop,
which is the highest-numbered common ancestor of
links p.k/ and s.k/. It could be the ﬁxed base if they
have no other common ancestor. The second loop ends
with the calculation of l, in absolute coordinates, ac-
cording to (3.110).
Algorithm 3.7 Algorithm to calculate loop-closure
constraints
inputs: model , RNEA partial results
outputs: L, l
model data : NB, p.i/, NJ, p.k/, s.k/, LB.i/, XL1.k/,
XL2.k/, Kp, Kv
RNEA data : ˚i, iXp.i/, vp.k/, vs.k/, avp
p.k/, avp
s.k/
for i D 1 to NB do
if p.i/ ¤ 0 then
iX0 D iXp.i/ p.i/X0
end if
if LB.i/ ¤ null then
0˚i D iX1
0
˚i
end if
end for
L D 0
for k D NB C 1 to NJ do
i D p.k/
j D s.k/
while i ¤ j do
if i > j then
Lk;i D 0˚i
i D p.i/
else
Lk;j D 0˚j
j D p.j/
end if
end while
ae D s.k/X1
0
avp
s.k/  p.k/X1
0
avp
p.k/
ve D s.k/X1
0
vs.k/  p.k/X1
0
vp.k/
pe D x to vec
p.k/X1
0
X1
L1 .k/ XL2.k/ s.k/X0

lk D ae  Kv ve  Kp pe
end for
3.7 Conclusions and Further Reading
This chapter has presented the fundamentals of rigid-
body dynamics as they apply to robot mechanisms. It
has covered the following topics: the spatial vector al-
gebra, which provides a concise notation for describing
and implementing dynamics equations and algorithms;
the canonical equations of motion that are most fre-

Part A | 3.7
62
Part A
Robotics Foundations
quently used in robotics; how to construct a dynamic
model of a robot; and several efﬁcient model-based
algorithms for calculating inverse dynamics, forward
dynamics, and the joint-space and operational-space in-
ertia matrices.
There are many topics in dynamics that have not
been mentioned in this chapter, but can be found in later
chapters of this handbook. The dynamics of robots with
elastic links and joints is covered in Chap. 11; the prob-
lem of identifying the parameters of a dynamic model
is covered in Chap. 6; the dynamics of physical contact
between a robot and the objects in its environment is
described in Chap. 37; and the dynamics of robots with
ﬂoating bases is described in Chap. 55.
We conclude this chapter by noting that a brief his-
tory of robot dynamics can be found in [3.36], and that
a more extensive treatment of robot dynamics can be
found in books such as [3.8, 10, 15, 29, 37–40]. Finally,
some suggestions for further reading are listed below.
3.7.1 Multibody Dynamics
Robot dynamics can be regarded as a subset (or a spe-
ciﬁc application) of the broader discipline of multibody
dynamics. Books on multibody dynamics include [3.3,
14, 35, 41–46]. Of course, multibody dynamics is, in
turn, a subset of classical mechanics; and the mathe-
matical foundations of the subject can be found in any
good book on classical mechanics, such as [3.13].
3.7.2 Alternative Representations
This chapter has used spatial vectors to express the
equations of motion. There are various alternatives to
the use of spatial vectors: other kinds of 6-D vector,
3-D vectors, 4  4 matrices, and the spatial operator al-
gebra. All 6-D vector formalisms are similar, but are
not exactly the same. The main alternatives to spatial
vectors are: screws [3.10–12], motors [3.47], Lie al-
gebras [3.12, 48], and ad hoc notations. (An ad hoc
notation is one in which 3-D vectors are grouped into
pairs for the purpose of reducing the volume of alge-
bra.) Three-dimensional vectors are the formalism used
in most classical mechanics and multibody texts, and
are also a precursor to 6-D vector and 4  4 matrix for-
malisms. 4  4 matrices are popular in robotics because
they are very useful for kinematics. However, they are
not so useful for dynamics. 4  4 matrix formulations
of dynamics can be found in [3.37, 49, 50]. The spatial
operator algebra was developed at the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory (JPL) by Rodriguez, Jain, and others. It uses
6N-dimensional vectors and 6N6N matrices, the latter
regarded as linear operators. Examples of this notation
can be found in [3.38, 51–53].
3.7.3 Alternative Formulations
This chapter used a vectorial formulation of the equa-
tions of motion that is usually called the Newtonian or
Newton–Euler formulation. The main alternative is the
Lagrangian formulation, in which the equations of mo-
tion are obtained via Lagrange’s equation. Examples
of the Lagrangian formulation can be found in [3.9,
10, 18, 54, 55]. Kane’s method has also been applied in
robotics [3.56, 57].
3.7.4 Efficiency
Because of the need for real-time implementation, es-
pecially in control, the robotics community has focused
on the problem of computational efﬁciency. For inverse
dynamics, the O.n/ recursive Newton–Euler algorithm
(RNEA) of Luh et al. [3.4] remains the most impor-
tant algorithm. Further improvements to the algorithm
are given in [3.58, 59]. For forward dynamics, the two
algorithms presented in this chapter remain the most
important for computational considerations: the O.n/
articulated-body algorithm (ABA) developed by Feath-
erstone [3.1] and the O.n3/ algorithm based on the
composite-rigid-body algorithm (CRBA) of Walker and
Orin [3.5]. Improvements were made in the ABA over
the years [3.15, 17, 25] so that it was more efﬁcient than
the CRBA-based algorithm for decreasingly smaller
values of n. However, more recent application of the
CRBA to branched kinematic trees [3.26] and robotic
systems with motion-controlled appendages [3.60] con-
tinue to show the viability of the CRBA approach.
For the joint-space inertia matrix, the CRBA [3.5]
is the most important algorithm. A number of improve-
ments and modiﬁcations have been made over the years
to increase its computational efﬁciency [3.15, 61–63].
For the operational-space inertia matrix, efﬁcient O.n/
algorithms have been developed [3.28–30] and applied
to increasingly complex systems [3.20, 31, 33]. The ex-
ploitation of branch-induced sparsity also results in an
efﬁcient algorithm [3.32].
3.7.5 Accuracy
Concerns can arise over the numerical accuracy of a dy-
namics algorithm, the accuracy of a simulation (i. e.,
numerical integration accuracy), or the accuracy of
a dynamic model. The numerical accuracy of dynamics
algorithms has received relatively little attention com-
pared with efﬁciency. The RNEA, CRBA, and ABA
have all been tested for accuracy on a large variety
of rigid-body systems, but the same cannot be said
of most other algorithms. Rigid-body systems are of-
ten ill-conditioned, in the sense that a small change

Dynamics
References
63
Part A | 3
in the applied force (or a model parameter) can pro-
duce a large change in the resulting acceleration. This
phenomenon was studied by Featherstone [3.27], who
discovered that the ill-conditioning gets worse with in-
creasing body count, and that it can grow in proportion
to O.n4/ in the worst case. Other publications on this
topic include [3.8, 34, 64, 65].
3.7.6 Software Packages
A number of software packages have been devel-
oped to provide dynamic simulation capabilities for
multibody systems, and in particular, robotic systems.
Several have been written in MATLAB for ease of
integration with other analysis, control, and simula-
tion programs. Many packages are open source, and
some are offered at a relatively low cost to the user.
They differ in their capabilities in a variety of ways
including: speed, topologies and joint models sup-
ported, accuracy, underlying dynamic formulation and
associated order of complexity, user interface, graph-
ics support, numerical integration routines, integra-
tion with other code, application support, and cost.
Among those commonly cited are: Adams [3.66],
Autolev [3.67], Bullet [3.68], DART [3.69], Dy-
naMechs [3.70], Gazebo [3.71], Open Dynamics En-
gine [3.72], Robotics Studio [3.73], Robotics Tool-
box [3.74], Robotran [3.75, 76], SD/FAST [3.77], Sim-
body [3.78], SimMechanics [3.79], SYMORO [3.80,
81] and Webots [3.82].
3.7.7 Symbolic Simplification
The technique of symbolic simpliﬁcation takes a gen-
eral-purpose dynamics algorithm, and applies it sym-
bolically to a speciﬁc dynamic model. The result is a list
of assignment statements detailing what the algorithm
would have done if it had been executed for real. This
list is then inspected and pruned of all unnecessary cal-
culations, and the remainder is output to a text ﬁle in
the form of computer source code. This code can run
as much as ten times faster than the original general-
purpose algorithm, but it is speciﬁc to one dynamic
model. Both Autolev [3.67] and SD/FAST [3.77] use
this technique. Other publications on symbolic simpli-
ﬁcation for dynamics include [3.76, 80, 81, 83–88].
3.7.8 Algorithms for Parallel Computers
In order to speed up the common dynamics compu-
tations, a number of algorithms have been developed
for parallel and pipelined computers. For inverse dy-
namics, early work focused on speeding up the O.n/
RNEA on up to n processors [3.89, 90] while sub-
sequent work resulted in O.log2 n/ algorithms [3.91,
92]. For the O.n2/ CRBA to compute the joint-space
inertia matrix, early work resulted in O.log2 n/ al-
gorithms for n processors to compute the composite-
rigid-body inertias and diagonal elements of the ma-
trix [3.93, 94]. Subsequent work resulted in O.log2 n/
algorithms for O.n2/ processors to compute the entire
matrix [3.95, 96]. For forward dynamics, speedup was
obtained for a multiple manipulator system on a paral-
lel/pipelined supercomputer [3.97]. The ﬁrst O.log2 n/
algorithm for n processors was developed for an un-
branched serial chain [3.98]. More recent work has
focused on O.log2 n/ algorithms for more complex
structures [3.65, 99, 100].
3.7.9 Topologically-Varying Systems
There are many robot mechanisms whose topology
varies over time because of a change of contact con-
ditions, especially with the environment. In legged
vehicles, use of a compliant ground-contact model
to compute the contact forces reduced the closed-
loop structure to a tree structure [3.101]. However,
for cases in which the contacts are very stiff, numer-
ical integration problems may result. In more recent
work [3.40, 102] in which hard contact constraints
are assumed, an efﬁcient method was used to reduce
the large number of coordinate variables from that
which may be necessary in general-purpose motion
analysis systems [3.43]. Also, they were able to auto-
matically identify the variables as the structure varied
and developed a method for computing the velocity
boundary conditions after conﬁguration changes [3.40,
102].
References
3.1
R. Featherstone: The calculation of robot dynam-
ics using articulated-body inertias, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 2(1), 13–30 (1983)
3.2
J.J. Craig: Introduction to Robotics: Mechanics and
Control, 3rd edn. (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River
2005)
3.3
R.E. Roberson, R. Schwertassek: Dynamics of Multi-
body Systems (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1988)
3.4
J.Y.S. Luh, M.W. Walker, R.P.C. Paul: On-line com-
putational scheme for mechanical manipulators,
Trans. ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 102(2), 69–76
(1980)

Part A | 3
64
Part A
Robotics Foundations
3.5
M.W. Walker, D.E. Orin: Efficient dynamic com-
puter simulation of robotic mechanisms, Trans.
ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 104, 205–211 (1982)
3.6
D. Baraff: Linear-time dynamics using lagrange
multipliers, Proc. 23rd Annu. Conf. Comp. Graph.
Interact. Tech., New Orleans (1996) pp. 137–146
3.7
J. Baumgarte: Stabilization of constraints and in-
tegrals of motion in dynamical systems, Comput.
Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 1, 1–16 (1972)
3.8
R. Featherstone: Rigid Body Dynamics Algorithms
(Springer, New York 2008)
3.9
R.M. Murray, Z. Li, S.S. Sastry: A Mathematical Intro-
duction to Robotic Manipulation (CRC, Boca Raton
1994)
3.10
J. Angeles: Fundamentals of Robotic Mechanical
Systems, 2nd edn. (Springer, New York 2003)
3.11
R.S. Ball: A Treatise on the Theory of Screws (Cam-
bridge Univ. Press, London 1900), Republished
(1998)
3.12
J.M.
Selig:
Geometrical
Methods
in
Robotics
(Springer, New York 1996)
3.13
D.T. Greenwood: Principles of Dynamics (Prentice-
Hall, Englewood Cliffs 1988)
3.14
F.C. Moon: Applied Dynamics (Wiley, New York 1998)
3.15
R.
Featherstone:
Robot
Dynamics
Algorithms
(Kluwer, Boston 1987)
3.16
R. Featherstone: Spatial v2, http://royfeatherstone.
org/spatial/v2 (2012)
3.17
S. McMillan, D.E. Orin: Efficient computation of
articulated-body inertias using successive axial
screws, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 11, 606–611
(1995)
3.18
L. Sciavicco, B. Siciliano: Modeling and Control of
Robot Manipulators, 2nd edn. (Springer, London
2000)
3.19
J. Slotine, W. Li: On the adaptive control of robot
manipulators, Int. J. Robotics Res. 6(3), 49–59
(1987)
3.20
K.S. Chang, O. Khatib: Operational space dynam-
ics: Efficient algorithms for modeling and control
of branching mechanisms, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom., San Francisco (2000) pp. 850–856
3.21
O. Khatib: A unified approach to motion and force
control of robot manipulators: The operational
space formulation, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 3(1), 43–
53 (1987)
3.22
Y.F. Zheng, H. Hemami: Mathematical modeling of
a robot collision with its environment, J. Robotics
Syst. 2(3), 289–307 (1985)
3.23
W. Khalil, E. Dombre: Modeling, Identification and
Control of Robots (Kogan Page Sci., London 2002)
3.24
J. Denavit, R.S. Hartenberg: A kinematic nota-
tion for lower-pair mechanisms based on matrices,
J. Appl. Mech. 22, 215–221 (1955)
3.25
H. Brandl, R. Johanni, M. Otter: A very efficient
algorithm for the simulation of robots and sim-
ilar multibody systems without inversion of the
mass matrix, Proc. IFAC/IFIP/IMACS Int. Symp. Theory
Robots, Vienna (1986)
3.26
R. Featherstone: Efficient factorization of the joint
space inertia matrix for branched kinematic trees,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 24(6), 487–500 (2005)
3.27
R. Featherstone: An empirical study of the joint
space inertia matrix, Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(9),
859–871 (2004)
3.28
K. Kreutz-Delgado, A. Jain, G. Rodriguez: Recur-
sive formulation of operational space control, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom., Sacramento (1991)
pp. 1750–1753
3.29
K.W. Lilly: Efficient Dynamic Simulation of Robotic
Mechanisms (Kluwer, Boston 1993)
3.30
K.W. Lilly, D.E. Orin: Efficient O(N) recursive compu-
tation of the operational space inertia matrix, IEEE
Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 23(5), 1384–1391 (1993)
3.31
G. Rodriguez, A. Jain, K. Kreutz-Delgado: Spatial
operator algebra for multibody system dynamics,
J. Astronaut. Sci. 40(1), 27–50 (1992)
3.32
R. Featherstone: Exploiting sparsity in operational-
space dynamics, Int. J. Robotics Res. 29(10), 1353–
1368 (2010)
3.33
P. Wensing, R. Featherstone, D.E. Orin: A reduced-
order recursive algorithm for the computation of
the operational-space inertia matrix, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom., St. Paul (2012) pp. 4911–4917
3.34
R.E. Ellis, S.L. Ricker: Two numerical issues in simu-
lating constrained robot dynamics, IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybern. 24(1), 19–27 (1994)
3.35
J. Wittenburg: Dynamics of Systems of Rigid Bodies
(Teubner, Stuttgart 1977)
3.36
R. Featherstone, D.E. Orin: Robot dynamics: Equa-
tions and algorithms, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom., San Francisco (2000) pp. 826–834
3.37
C.A. Balafoutis, R.V. Patel: Dynamic Analysis of
Robot Manipulators: A Cartesian Tensor Approach
(Kluwer, Boston 1991)
3.38
A. Jain: Robot and Multibody Dynamics: Analysis
and Algorithms (Springer, New York 2011)
3.39
L.W. Tsai: Robot Analysis and Design: The Mechan-
ics of Serial and Parallel Manipulators (Wiley, New
York 1999)
3.40
K. Yamane: Simulating and Generating Motions of
Human Figures (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2004)
3.41
F.M.L. Amirouche: Fundamentals of Multibody
Dynamics: Theory and Applications (Birkhäuser,
Boston 2006)
3.42
M.G. Coutinho: Dynamic Simulations of Multibody
Systems (Springer, New York 2001)
3.43
E.J. Haug: Computer Aided Kinematics and Dynam-
ics of Mechanical Systems (Allyn and Bacon, Boston
1989)
3.44
R.L. Huston: Multibody Dynamics (Butterworths,
Boston 1990)
3.45
A.A. Shabana: Computational Dynamics, 2nd edn.
(Wiley, New York 2001)
3.46
V. Stejskal, M. Valášek: Kinematics and Dynamics of
Machinery (Marcel Dekker, New York 1996)
3.47
L. Brand: Vector and Tensor Analysis, 4th edn. (Wi-
ley/Chapman Hall, New York/London 1953)
3.48
F.C. Park, J.E. Bobrow, S.R. Ploen: A lie group for-
mulation of robot dynamics, Int. J. Robotics Res.
14(6), 609–618 (1995)
3.49
M.E. Kahn, B. Roth: The near minimum-time con-
trol of open-loop articulated kinematic chains,
J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 93, 164–172 (1971)

Dynamics
References
65
Part A | 3
3.50
J.J. Uicker: Dynamic force analysis of spatial link-
ages, Trans. ASME J. Appl. Mech. 34, 418–424 (1967)
3.51
A. Jain: Unified formulation of dynamics for serial
rigid multibody systems, J. Guid. Control Dyn. 14(3),
531–542 (1991)
3.52
G. Rodriguez: Kalman filtering, smoothing, and re-
cursive robot arm forward and inverse dynamics,
IEEE J. Robotics Autom. RA-3(6), 624–639 (1987)
3.53
G. Rodriguez, A. Jain, K. Kreutz-Delgado: A spatial
operator algebra for manipulator modelling and
control, Int. J. Robotics Res. 10(4), 371–381 (1991)
3.54
J.M. Hollerbach: A recursive lagrangian formulation
of manipulator dynamics and a comparative study
of dynamics formulation complexity, IEEE Trans.
Syst. Man Cybern. SMC-10(11), 730–736 (1980)
3.55
M.W. Spong, S. Hutchinson, M. Vidyasagar: Robot
Modeling and Control (Wiley, Hoboken 2006)
3.56
K.W. Buffinton: Kane’s Method in Robotics. In:
Robotics
and
Automation
Handbook,
ed.
by
T.R. Kurfess (CRC, Boca Raton 2005), 6-1–6-31
3.57
T.R. Kane, D.A. Levinson: The use of kane’s dynam-
ical equations in robotics, Int. J. Robotics Res. 2(3),
3–21 (1983)
3.58
C.A. Balafoutis, R.V. Patel, P. Misra: Efficient mod-
eling and computation of manipulator dynamics
using orthogonal cartesian tensors, IEEE J. Robotics
Autom. 4, 665–676 (1988)
3.59
X. He, A.A. Goldenberg: An algorithm for efficient
computation of dynamics of robotic manipulators,
Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Adv. Robotics, Columbus (1989)
pp. 175–188
3.60
W. Hu, D.W. Marhefka, D.E. Orin: Hybrid kinematic
and dynamic simulation of running machines, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 21(3), 490–497 (2005)
3.61
C.A. Balafoutis, R.V. Patel: Efficient computation of
manipulator inertia matrices and the direct dy-
namics problem, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 19,
1313–1321 (1989)
3.62
K.W. Lilly, D.E. Orin: Alternate formulations for the
manipulator inertia matrix, Int. J. Robotics Res. 10,
64–74 (1991)
3.63
S. McMillan, D.E. Orin: Forward dynamics of mul-
tilegged vehicles using the composite rigid body
method, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (1998)
pp. 464–470
3.64
U.M. Ascher, D.K. Pai, B.P. Cloutier: Forward dy-
namics: Elimination methods, and formulation
stiffness in robot simulation, Int. J. Robotics Res.
16(6), 749–758 (1997)
3.65
R. Featherstone: A divide-and-conquer articula-
ted-body algorithm for parallel O(log(n)) calcula-
tion of rigid-body dynamics. Part 2: Trees, loops
and accuracy, Int. J. Robotics Res. 18(9), 876–892
(1999)
3.66
MSC Software Corporation: Adams, http://www.
mscsoftware.com/
3.67
T. Kane, D. Levinson: Autolev user’s manual (OnLine
Dynamics Inc., Sunnyvale 2005)
3.68
Real-Time
Physics
Simulation:
Bullet,
http://
bulletphysics.org/wordpress (2015)
3.69
Georgia Tech Graphics Lab and Humanoid Robotics
Lab: DART, http://dartsim.github.io (2011)
3.70
S. McMillan, D.E. Orin, R.B. McGhee: DynaMechs:
An object oriented software package for efficient
dynamic simulation of underwater robotic vehi-
cles. In: Underwater Robotic Vehicles: Design and
Control, ed. by J. Yuh (TSI Press, Albuquerque 1995)
pp. 73–98
3.71
Open Source Robotics Foundation: Gazebo, http://
gazebosim.org (2002)
3.72
R. Smith: Open Dynamics Engine User Guide, http://
opende.sourceforge.net (2006)
3.73
Microsoft Corporation: Robotics Developer Studio,
http://www.microsoft.com/robotics (2010)
3.74
P.I. Corke: A robotics toolbox for MATLAB, IEEE
Robotics Autom. Mag. 3(1), 24–32 (1996)
3.75
Robotran: http://www.robotran.be (Center for Re-
search in Mechatronics, Université catholique de
Louvain 2015)
3.76
J.C. Samin, P. Fisette: Symbolic Modeling of Multi-
body Systems (Kluwer, Dordrecht 2003)
3.77
M.G.
Hollars,
D.E.
Rosenthal,
M.A.
Sherman:
SD/FAST User’s Manual (Symbolic Dynamics Inc.,
Mountain View 1994)
3.78
M. Sherman, P. Eastman: Simbody, https://simtk.
org/home/simbody (2015)
3.79
G.D. Wood, D.C. Kennedy: Simulating Mechanical
Systems in Simulink with SimMechanics (Math-
Works Inc., Natick 2003)
3.80
W. Khalil, D. Creusot: SYMORO+: A system for the
symbolic modeling of robots, Robotica 15, 153–161
(1997)
3.81
W. Khalil, A. Vijayalingam, B. Khomutenko, I. Mu-
khanov, P. Lemoine, G. Ecorchard: OpenSYMORO: An
open-source software package for symbolic mod-
elling of robots, Proc. IEEE/ASME Int. Conf. Adv.
Intell. Mechatron. (2014) pp. 126–1211
3.82
Cyberbotics Ltd.: Webots User Guide, http://www.
cyberbotics.com (2015)
3.83
I.C. Brown, P.J. Larcombe: A survey of customised
computer algebra programs for multibody dynamic
modelling. In: Symbolic Methods in Control System
Analysis and Design, ed. by N. Munro (Inst. Electr.
Eng., London 1999) pp. 53–77
3.84
J.J. Murray, C.P. Neuman: ARM: An algebraic robot
dynamic modeling program, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom., Atlanta (1984) pp. 103–114
3.85
J.J. Murray, C.P. Neuman: Organizing customized
robot dynamic algorithms for efficient numerical
evaluation, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 18(1), 115–
125 (1988)
3.86
F.C. Park, J. Choi, S.R. Ploen: Symbolic formulation
of closed chain dynamics in independent coordi-
nates, Mech. Mach. Theory 34, 731–751 (1999)
3.87
M. Vukobratovic, N. Kircanski: Real-Time Dynamics
of Manipulation Robots (Springer, New York 1985)
3.88
J. Wittenburg, U. Wolz: Mesa Verde: A symbolic
program for nonlinear articulated-rigid-body dy-
namics, ASME Des. Eng. Div. Conf., Cincinnati (1985)
pp. 1–8, ASME Paper No. 85-DET-151
3.89
J.Y.S. Luh, C.S. Lin: Scheduling of parallel computa-
tion for a computer-controlled mechanical manip-
ulator, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 12(2), 214–234
(1982)

Part A | 3
66
Part A
Robotics Foundations
3.90
D.E. Orin: Pipelined approach to inverse plant plus
jacobian control of robot manipulators, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom., Atlanta (1984) pp. 169–
175
3.91
R.H. Lathrop: Parallelism in manipulator dynamics,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 4(2), 80–102 (1985)
3.92
C.S.G. Lee, P.R. Chang: Efficient parallel algorithm
for robot inverse dynamics computation, IEEE Trans.
Syst. Man Cybern. 16(4), 532–542 (1986)
3.93
M. Amin-Javaheri, D.E. Orin: Systolic architectures
for the manipulator inertia matrix, IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybern. 18(6), 939–951 (1988)
3.94
C.S.G. Lee, P.R. Chang: Efficient parallel algo-
rithms for robot forward dynamics computation,
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 18(2), 238–251 (1988)
3.95
M. Amin-Javaheri, D.E. Orin: Parallel algorithms
for computation of the manipulator inertia matrix,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 10(2), 162–170 (1991)
3.96
A. Fijany, A.K. Bejczy: A class of parallel algorithms
for computation of the manipulator inertia matrix,
IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 5(5), 600–615 (1989)
3.97
S. McMillan, P. Sadayappan, D.E. Orin: Parallel dy-
namic simulation of multiple manipulator systems:
Temporal versus spatial methods, IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybern. 24(7), 982–990 (1994)
3.98
A. Fijany, I. Sharf, G.M.T. D’Eleuterio: Parallel
O(logN) algorithms for computation of manipula-
tor forward dynamics, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
11(3), 389–400 (1995)
3.99
R. Featherstone: A divide-and-conquer articula-
ted-body algorithm for parallel O(log(n)) cal-
culation of rigid-body dynamics. Part 1: Basic
algorithm, Int. J. Robotics Res. 18(9), 867–875
(1999)
3.100
R. Featherstone, A. Fijany: A technique for analyz-
ing constrained rigid-body systems and its appli-
cation to the constraint force algorithm, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 15(6), 1140–1144 (1999)
3.101
P.S. Freeman, D.E. Orin: Efficient dynamic simu-
lation of a quadruped using a decoupled tree-
structured approach, Int. J. Robotics Res. 10, 619–
627 (1991)
3.102
Y. Nakamura, K. Yamane: Dynamics computation
of structure-varying kinematic chains and its ap-
plication to human figures, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 16(2), 124–134 (2000)

Multimedia Contents Mechanism a
67
Part A | 4
4. Mechanism and Actuation
Victor Scheinman, J. Michael McCarthy, Jae-Bok Song
This chapter focuses on the principles that guide
the design and construction of robotic systems. The
kinematics equations and Jacobian of the robot
characterize its range of motion and mechanical
advantage, and guide the selection of its size and
joint arrangement. The tasks a robot is to per-
form and the associated precision of its movement
determine detailed features such as mechanical
structure, transmission, and actuator selection.
Here we discuss in detail both the mathematical
tools and practical considerations that guide the
design of mechanisms and actuation for a robot
system.
The following sections (Sect. 4.1) discuss char-
acteristics of the mechanisms and actuation that
affect the performance of a robot. Sections 4.2–4.6
discuss the basic features of a robot manipula-
tor and their relationship to the mathematical
model that is used to characterize its performance.
Sections 4.7 and 4.8 focus on the details of the
structure and actuation of the robot and how they
combine to yield various types of robots. The final
Sect. 4.9 relates these design features to various
performance metrics.
4.1
Overview...............................................
68
4.2
System Features.....................................
68
4.2.1
Work Envelope ............................
68
4.2.2
Load Capacity..............................
68
4.2.3
Kinematic Skeleton......................
69
4.3
Kinematics and Kinetics.........................
69
4.3.1
Robot Topology ...........................
69
4.3.2
Kinematics Equations ..................
71
4.3.3
Configuration Space.....................
71
4.3.4
Speed Ratios...............................
71
4.3.5
Mechanical Advantage .................
72
4.4
Serial Robots .........................................
72
4.4.1
Design Optimization ....................
73
4.4.2
Speed Ratios...............................
73
4.5
Parallel Robots ......................................
73
4.5.1
Workspace ..................................
74
4.5.2
Mechanical Advantage .................
74
4.5.3
Specialized Parallel Robots ...........
75
4.6
Mechanical Structure .............................
75
4.6.1
Links ..........................................
75
4.6.2
Joints .........................................
76
4.7
Joint Mechanisms ..................................
76
4.7.1
Joint Axis Structures.....................
76
4.8
Actuators ..............................................
78
4.8.1
Electromagnetic Actuators ............
78
4.8.2
Hydraulic Actuators .....................
80
4.8.3
Pneumatic Actuators....................
81
4.8.4
Other Actuators ...........................
82
4.8.5
Transmissions .............................
82
4.9
Robot Performance................................
85
4.9.1
Robot Speed ...............................
85
4.9.2
Robot Acceleration ......................
85
4.9.3
Repeatability ..............................
85
4.9.4
Resolution ..................................
86
4.9.5
Accuracy .....................................
86
4.9.6
Component Life
and Duty Cycle ............................
86
4.9.7
Collisions....................................
86
4.10 Conclusions and Further Reading ...........
87
Video-References...........................................
87
References.....................................................
87

Part A | 4.2
68
Part A
Robotics Foundations
4.1 Overview
The physical structure such as the beams, links, cast-
ings, shafts, slides, and bearings of a robot that create
its movable skeleton is termed the mechanical struc-
ture or mechanism of the robot. The electric, hydraulic
and pneumatic motors and other elements that cause the
links of the mechanism to move are called actuators. In
this chapter we consider the variety of designs for the
mechanisms and actuators that result in a machine sys-
tem that transforms computer commands into versatile
physical movement.
Early robots were designed with general motion ca-
pability under the assumption that they would ﬁnd the
largest market if they could perform the widest variety
of tasks; this emphasis on ﬂexibility proved to be ex-
pensive in both cost and performance. Robots are now
often designed for speciﬁc applications and to perform
limited sets of tasks.
Robot design focuses on the number of joints,
physical size, payload capacity, and the movement re-
quirements of the end-effector. The conﬁguration of the
movable skeleton and the overall size of the robot are
determined by task requirements for reach, workspace,
and reorientation ability. These features affect the preci-
sion of end-effector path control needed for applications
such as for arc-welding and for the smooth movement
of paint spraying. They also deﬁne the absolute posi-
tioning capability necessary for small part assembly, the
repeatability needed for material and package handling,
and the ﬁne resolution that allows precise, real-time
sensor-based motions.
A critical concern in robotic system design is the
range of tasks the robot is expected to perform. The
robot should be designed to have the ﬂexibility it needs
to perform the range of tasks for which it is intended.
This determines the topology of the robot mechanism
and the actuator system. The choices of geometry, mate-
rial, sensors, and cable routing follow from these basic
decisions.
4.2 System Features
The primary features that characterize a robot are its
work envelope and load capacity.
4.2.1 Work Envelope
The space in which a robot can operate is its work
envelope, which encloses its workspace. While the
workspace of the robot deﬁnes positions and orienta-
tions that it can achieve to accomplish a task, the work
envelope also includes the volume of space the robot it-
self occupies as it moves. This envelope is deﬁned by
the types of joints, their range of movement and the
lengths of the links that connect them. The physical size
of this envelope and the loads on the robot within this
envelope are of primary consideration in the design of
the mechanical structure of a robot.
Robot work envelope layouts must include consid-
erations of regions of limited accessibility where the
mechanical structure may experience movement limi-
tations. These constraints arise from limited joint travel
range, link lengths, the angles between axes, or a com-
bination of these. Revolute joint manipulators generally
work better in the middle of their work envelopes than
at extremes (Fig. 4.1). Manipulator link lengths and
joint travel should be chosen to leave margins for vari-
able sensor-guided controlled path motions and for tool
or end-effector changes, as offsets and length differ-
ences will often alter the work envelope.
4.2.2 Load Capacity
Load capacity, a primary robot speciﬁcation, is closely
coupled with acceleration and speed. For assembly
robots, mechanism acceleration and stiffness (structure
and drive stiffness) are often more important design pa-
rameters than peak velocity or maximum load capacity,
as minimizing pick-and-place motion cycle time, while
maintaining placement precision, is generally a top pri-
ority in small part assembly. In the case of arc-welding,
where slow controlled-path motion is required, velocity
Fig. 4.1 The PUMA 560 robot

Mechanism and Actuation
4.3 Kinematics and Kinetics
69
Part A | 4.3
jitter and weld path-following accuracy are important.
Load capacity should be seen as a variable. It is wise
to design and specify a manipulator in terms of useful
payload as a function of performance rather than just in
terms of maximum capacity.
Load capacity speciﬁcations must take into account
gravity and inertial loading seen at the end-effector.
These factors strongly affect wrist, end-effector design
and drive selection. In general, load capacity is more
a function of manipulator acceleration and wrist torque
than any other factor. The load rating also affects ma-
nipulator static structural deﬂection, steady-state motor
torque, system natural frequency, damping, and the
choice of control system parameters for best perfor-
mance and stability.
4.2.3 Kinematic Skeleton
Manipulator shape and size is determined by require-
ments on its workspace shape and layout, the precision
of its movement, its acceleration and speed, and its
construction. Cartesian manipulators have the simplest
transform and control equation solutions. Their pris-
matic (straight-line motion) and orthogonal (perpendic-
ular) axes make motion planning and computation rela-
tively straightforward. Because their major motion axes
do not couple dynamically (to a ﬁrst order), their con-
trol equations are also simpliﬁed. Manipulators with all
revolute (rotary) joints are generally harder to control,
but they feature a more compact and efﬁcient structure
for a given working volume. It is generally easier to de-
sign and build a good revolute joint than a long motion
prismatic joint. The workspaces of revolute joint manip-
ulators can easily overlap for coordinated multi-robot
installations, in contrast to the more exclusive useful
workspace of gantry style robots.
Final selection of the robot conﬁguration should
capitalize on speciﬁc kinematic, structural or perfor-
mance requirements. For example, a requirement for
a very precise vertical straight-line motion may dictate
the choice of a simple prismatic vertical axis rather than
two or three revolute joints requiring coordinated con-
trol.
Six degrees of freedom (DOFs) are the minimum
required to place the end-effector or tool of a robotic
manipulator at any arbitrary location (position and ori-
entation) within its accessible workspace. Most simple
or preplanned tasks can be performed with fewer than
six DOFs by careful task setup to eliminate certain axis
motions, or because the tool or task does not require full
speciﬁcation of location. An example of this is vertical
assembly using a powered screwdriver, where all oper-
ations can be achieved with three degrees of freedom.
Some applications require the use of manipulators
with more than six DOFs, in particular when mobil-
ity or obstacle avoidance are necessary. For example,
a pipe-crawling maintenance robot requires control of
the robot shape as well as precise positioning of its
end-effector. Generally, adding degrees of freedom in-
creases cycle time and reduces load capacity and ac-
curacy for a given manipulator conﬁguration and drive
system.
4.3 Kinematics and Kinetics
The dynamics of a robot can be separated into the
properties of the movement that depend upon the ge-
ometry of its mechanical structure, termed kinematics,
and those that depend on forces that act on the system,
known as kinetics. It is a law of dynamics that the differ-
ence between the change in energy of the moving robot
and the work performed by the forces acting on it does
not change over small variations of its trajectory. This is
called the principle of virtual work and states that vari-
ations in work and energy must cancel for all virtual
displacements [4.1, 2].
Because machines such as robots are designed to
minimize energy losses, often due to joint friction and
material strain losses, we can assume that the variation
in energy is small. This means that the work input of
the actuators is nearly equal to the work of the output
forces.
If we consider this relationship over a small dura-
tion of time, we have that the time rate of input work,
or input power is nearly equal to the associated output
power. Because power is force times velocity, we ob-
tain the fundamental relationship that the ratio of input
to output forces is the reciprocal of the ratio of input to
output speeds. Another way of saying this is that, in the
ideal machine, the mechanical advantage of a machine
is the inverse of its speed ratio.
4.3.1 Robot Topology
The kinematic skeleton of a robot is modeled as a se-
ries of links connected by either hinged or sliding
joints forming a serial chain. This skeleton has two ba-
sic forms, that of a single serial chain called a serial
robot (Fig. 4.1) and as a set of serial chains sup-
porting a single end-effector, called a parallel robot,
such as the platform shown in Fig. 4.2. Robots can be
conﬁgured to work in parallel such as the individual
legs of walking machines (Figs. 4.3 and 4.4) [4.3], as

Part A | 4.3
70
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Platform
Base
Fig. 4.2 A parallel robot can have as many as six se-
rial chains that connect a platform to the base frame
(
VIDEO 640 )
Fig. 4.3 A photograph of the adaptive suspension vehicle
(ASV)walking machine
Fig. 4.4 The adaptive suspension vehicle walking ma-
chine
well as the ﬁngers of mechanical hands (Figs. 4.5–4.7
and
VIDEO 642 ) [4.4].
The robot end-effector is the preferred tool for inter-
action with the environment, and the ability to position
and orient this end-effector is deﬁned by the skeleton of
y
x
z
Fig. 4.5 The Salisbury three-ﬁngered robot hand with its
cable drive system
y
x
z
Fig. 4.6 The Salisbury hand as the end-effector
of
a PUMA robot (the drive system is not shown)
Fig. 4.7 A photograph of the Salisbury three-ﬁngered
hand grasping a block
the robot. In a general serial robot, a chain of six joints
provides full control over the end-effector. In a general
parallel robot, there are more than six joints and the six
actuators may be applied to these joints in a variety of
ways to control the movement of the end-effector.

Mechanism and Actuation
4.3 Kinematics and Kinetics
71
Part A | 4.3
S3
S2
S1
A12
A23
B1
B2
d1
d2
z
z
x
x
α23
α23
α12
θ1
θ2
α12
Fig. 4.8 The kinematic skeleton deﬁned by the join axes
and their common normals
4.3.2 Kinematics Equations
A robot is designed so that specifying the values of lo-
cal joint parameters, such as the angle of rotary joints
and the travel of sliding joints, speciﬁes the position
of every component of a machine using its kinematics
equations. To do this the robot is described by a se-
quence of lines representing the axes Ozj of equivalent
revolute or prismatic joints and the common normal
lines Oxj which form the kinematic skeleton of the chain
(Fig. 4.8). This construction allows the speciﬁcation of
the location of each link of the robot relative to the base
by the matrix equation
T D Z.1; d1/X.˛1; a1/Z.2; d2/ : : :
 X.˛m1; am1/Z.m; dm/ ;
(4.1)
known as the kinematics equations of the chain [4.5, 6]
(Chap. 2; (2.46)). The set of all positions T that the end-
effector can reach for all values of the joint parameters
is called the workspace of the robot.
The matrices Z.j; dj/ and X.˛j; aj/ are 4  4 matri-
ces that deﬁne screw displacements around and along
the joint axes Ozj and Oxj, respectively [4.7]. The parame-
ters ˛j and aj deﬁne the dimensions of the links in the
chain. The parameter j is the joint variable for revo-
lute joints and dj is the variable for prismatic joints. The
trajectory Fp.t/ of a point Mp in the end-effector is ob-
tained from the joint trajectory,
q.t/ D .q1.t/; : : : ; qm.t//T ;
where qi is either i or di depending on the joint, given
by
Fp.t/ D T.q.t//Mp :
(4.2)
If the end-effector is connected to the base frame by
more than one serial chain (Fig. 4.2) then we have a set
of kinematics equations for each chain,
T D BjT.qj/Ej;
j D 1;: : : ; n ;
(4.3)
where Bj locates the base of the j-th chain and Ej deﬁnes
the position of its attachment to the part, or end-effector.
The set of positions T that simultaneously satisfy all
of these equations is the workspace of the part. This
imposes constraints on the joint variables that must be
determined to deﬁne its workspace completely [4.8,
9].
4.3.3 Configuration Space
The kinematics equations of the robot relate the range
of values available for the joint parameters, called the
conﬁguration space of the robot, to the workspace of
the end-effector. This conﬁguration space is a funda-
mental tool in robot path planning for obstacle avoid-
ance [4.10]. Though any link in the chain forming
a robot may hit an obstacle, it is the end-effector that is
intended to approach and move around obstacles such
as the table supporting the robot and the ﬁxtures for
parts it is to pick up. Obstacles deﬁne forbidden posi-
tions and orientations in the workspace which map back
to forbidden joint angles in the conﬁguration space of
the robot. Robot path planners seek trajectories to a goal
position through the free space around these joint space
obstacles [4.11].
4.3.4 Speed Ratios
The speed ratios of a robot relate the velocity F Pp of
a point Fp in the end-effector to the joint rates
Pq D .Pq1; : : : ; Pqm/T ;
that is
F Pp D v C ! 
Fp  d

;
(4.4)
where d and v are the position and velocity of a refer-
ence point, respectively, and ! is the angular velocity
of the end-effector.
The vectors v and ! depend on the joint rates Pqj
through the formula
v
!

D
0
@
@v
@Pq1
@v
@Pq2
  
@v
@Pqm
@!
@Pq1
@!
@Pq2
  
@!
@Pqm
1
A
0
B@
Pq1
:::
Pqm
1
CA ;
(4.5)

Part A | 4.4
72
Part A
Robotics Foundations
or
v D JPq :
(4.6)
The coefﬁcient matrix J in this equation is called the
Jacobian and is a matrix of speed ratios relating the ve-
locity of the tool to the input joint rotation rates [4.6,
9].
4.3.5 Mechanical Advantage
If the end-effector of the robot exerts a force f at the
point Fp, then the power output is
Pout D f  F Pp D
m
X
jD1
f 

@v
@Pqj
C @!
@Pqj

Fp  d

Pqj :
(4.7)
Each term in this sum is the portion of the output power
that can be associated with an actuator at joint Sj, if one
exists.
The power input at joint Sj is the product jPqj of the
torque j and joint angular velocity Pqj. Using the princi-
ple of virtual work for each joint we can compute
j D f  @v
@Pqj
C
Fp  d

 f  @!
@Pqj
;
j D 1; : : : ; m :
(4.8)
We have arranged this equation to introduce the force-
torque vector
f D .f; .Fp  d/  f/T
at the reference point d.
The equations (4.8) can be assembled into the ma-
trix equation
 D JTf ;
(4.9)
where J is the Jacobian deﬁned above in (4.5). For
a chain with six joints this equation can be solved for
the output force-torque vector f,
f D JT1  :
(4.10)
Thus, the matrix that deﬁnes the mechanical advantage
for this system is the inverse of the matrix of speed
ratios.
4.4 Serial Robots
A serial chain robot is a sequence of links and joints
that begins at a base and ends with an end-effector
(Fig. 4.9). The links and joints of a robot are of-
ten conﬁgured to provide separate translation and
orientation structures. Usually, the ﬁrst three joints
are used to position a reference point in space and
the last three form the wrist which orients the end-
effector around this point [4.12, 13]. This reference
point is called the wrist center. The volume of space
in which the wrist center can be placed is called the
reachable workspace of the robot. The rotations avail-
Fig. 4.9 A single ﬁnger of the Salisbury hand is a serial
chain robot
able at each of these points is called the dexterous
workspace.
The design of a robot is often based on the symme-
try of its reachable workspace. From this point of view
there are three basic shapes: rectangular, cylindrical, and
spherical [4.6].A rectangular workspace is provided by
three mutually perpendicular prismatic (P) joints which
form a PPPS chain called a Cartesian robot – S de-
notes a spherical wrist which allows all rotations about
its center point. A rotary base joint combined with two
prismatic joints forms a CPS chain with a cylindrical
workspace – C denotes a rotary (R) and sliding (P) joint
with the same axis. The P-joint can be replaced by a rev-
olute (R) joint that acts as an elbow in order to provide
the same radial movement. Finally, two rotary joints at
right angles form a T-joint at the base of the robot that
supports rotations about a vertical and horizontal axes.
Radial movement is provided either by a P-joint, or by
an R-joint conﬁgured as an elbow. The result is a TPS
or TRS chain with a spherical workspace.
It is rare that the workspace is completely symmet-
rical because joint axes are often offset to avoid link
collisions and there are limits to joint travel which com-
bine to distort the shape of the workspace.

Mechanism and Actuation
4.5 Parallel Robots
73
Part A | 4.5
4.4.1 Design Optimization
Another approach to robot design uses a direct speci-
ﬁcation of the workspace as a set of positions for the
end-effector of a robotic system [4.14–17] which we
call the task space. A general serial robot arm has two
design parameters, link offset and twist, for each of ﬁve
links combined with four parameters each that locate
the base of the robot and the workpiece in its end-
effector, making a total of 18 design variables. The
link parameters are often speciﬁed so the chain has
a spherical wrist and speciﬁc workspace shape. The de-
sign goal is usually to determine the workspace volume
and locate the base and workpiece frames so that the
workspace encloses the speciﬁed task space.
The task space is deﬁned by a set of 4  4 trans-
formations Di; i D 1; : : : ; k. The problem is solved iter-
atively by selecting a design and using the associated
kinematics equations T.q/ to evaluate relative displace-
ments in the objective function
f .r/ D
k
X
iD1
DiT1.qi/
 :
(4.11)
Optimization techniques yield the design parameter
vector r that minimizes this objective function.
This optimization depends on the deﬁnition of the
distance measure between the positions reached by the
end-effector and the desired workspace. Park [4.18],
Martinez and Duffy [4.19], Zefran et al. [4.20], Lin and
Burdick [4.21], and others have shown that there is no
distance metric that is coordinate frame invariant. This
means that, unless this objective function can be forced
to zero so the workspace completely contains the task
space, the resulting design will not be geometric in the
sense that the design is not independent of the choice of
coordinates.
4.4.2 Speed Ratios
A six-axis robot has a 6  6 Jacobian J obtained
from (4.5) that is an array of speed ratios relating the
components of the velocity v of the wrist center and
the angular velocity ! of the end-effector to each of the
joint velocities. Equation (4.9) shows that this Jacobian
deﬁnes the force-torque vector f exerted at the wrist
center in terms of the torque applied by each of the ac-
tuators. The link parameters of the robot can be selected
to provide a Jacobian J with speciﬁc properties.
The sum of the squares of the actuator torques of
a robot is often used as a measure of effort [4.22, 23].
From (4.9) we have
T D f TJJTf :
(4.12)
The matrix JJT is square and positive deﬁnite. There-
fore, it can be viewed as deﬁning a hyperellipsoid in
six-dimensional space [4.24]. The lengths of the semi-
diameters of this ellipsoid are the inverse of the absolute
value of the eigenvalues of the Jacobian J. These eigen-
values may be viewed as modal speed ratios that deﬁne
the ampliﬁcation associated with each joint velocity.
Their reciprocals are the associated modal mechanical
advantages, so the shape of this ellipsoid illustrates the
force ampliﬁcation properties of the robot.
The ratio of the largest of these eigenvalues to the
smallest, called the condition number, gives a measure
of the anisotropy or out-of-roundness of the ellipsoid.
A sphere has a condition number of one and is termed
isotropic. When the end-effector of a robot is in a posi-
tion with an isotropic Jacobian there is no ampliﬁcation
of the speed ratios or mechanical advantage. This is
considered to provide high-ﬁdelity coupling between
the input and output because errors are not ampli-
ﬁed [4.25, 26]. Thus, the condition number is used as
a criterion in a robot design [4.27].
In this case, it is assumed that the basic design
of the robot provides a workspace that includes the
task space. Parameter optimization ﬁnds the internal
link parameters that yield the desired properties for
the Jacobian. As in minimizing the distance to a de-
sired workspace, optimization based on the Jacobian
depends on a careful formulation to avoid coordinate
dependency.
4.5 Parallel Robots
A robotic system in which two or more serial chain
robots support an end-effector is called a parallel robot.
For example, the adaptive suspension vehicle (ASV)
leg (Fig. 4.10), is a pantograph mechanism driven by
parallel actuation. Each supporting chain of a paral-
lel robot may have as manyas six degrees of freedom,
however, in general only a total of six joints in the en-
tire system are actuated. A good example is the Stewart
platform formed from six TPS robots in which usually
only the prismatic joint (P-joint) in each chain is actu-
ated (Fig. 4.2) [4.9, 28, 29].
The kinematics equations of the TPS legs are
T D BjT.j/Ej;
j D 1; : : : ; 6 ;
(4.13)

Part A | 4.5
74
Part A
Robotics Foundations
where Bj locates the base of the leg and Ej deﬁnes the
position of its attachment to the end-effector. The set
of positions T that simultaneously satisfy all of these
equations is the workspace of the parallel robot.
Often the workspace of an individual chain of a par-
allel robot can be deﬁned by geometric constraints, for
example, a position T is in the workspace of the j-th
supporting TPS chain if it satisﬁes the constraint equa-
tion
.Txj  pj/  .Txj  pj/ D 	2
j :
(4.14)
This equation deﬁnes the distance between the base
joint pj and the point of attachment Fxj D Txj to the
platform as the length 	j is controlled by the actuated
prismatic joint. In this case the workspace is the set of
positions T that satisfy all six equations, one for each
leg.
4.5.1 Workspace
The workspace of a parallel robot is the intersection
of the workspaces of the individual supporting chains.
However, it is not the intersection of the reachable and
dexterous workspaces separately. These workspaces are
intimately combined in parallel robots. The dexterous
workspace is usually largest near the center of the
reachable workspace and shrinks as the reference point
moves toward the edge. A focus on the symmetry of
Fig. 4.10 One leg of the ASV walking machine is a paral-
lel robot
movement allowed by supporting leg designs has been
an important design tool resulting in many novel paral-
lel designs [4.30, 31]. Simulation of the system is used
to evaluate its workspace in terms of design parameters.
Another approach is to specify directly the posi-
tions and orientations that are to lie in the workspace
and solve the algebraic equations that deﬁne the leg
constraints to determine the design parameters [4.32,
33]. This is known as kinematic synthesis and yields
parallel robots that are asymmetric but have speciﬁed
reachable and dexterous workspaces, see McCarthy and
Soh [4.34].
4.5.2 Mechanical Advantage
The force ampliﬁcation properties of a parallel robot are
obtained by considering the Jacobians of the individual
supporting chains. Let the linear and angular velocity of
the platform be deﬁned by the six-vector v D .v; !/T,
then from the kinematics equations of each of the sup-
port legs we have
v D J1 P1 D J2 P2 D    D J6 P6 :
(4.15)
Here we assume that the platform is supported by six
chains, but it can be fewer, such as when the ﬁngers of
a mechanical hand grasp an object [4.4].
The force on the platform applied by each chain is
obtained from the principle of virtual work as
fj D

JT
j
1 j;
j D 1; : : : ; 6 :
(4.16)
There are only six actuated joints in the system so we
assemble the associated joint torques into the vector
 D .1; : : : ; 6/T. If f i is the force-torque vector ob-
tained from (4.16) for i D 1 and the remaining torques
to zero, then the resultant force-torque w applied to the
platform is
w D .f 1; f 2;    ; f 6/ ;
(4.17)
or
w D  :
(4.18)
The elements of the coefﬁcient matrix  deﬁne the
mechanical advantage for each of the actuated joints. In
the case of a Stewart platform the columns of this ma-
trix are the Plücker coordinates of the lines along each
leg [4.29].
The principle of virtual work yields the velocity of
the platform in terms of the joints rates P as
Tv D P :
(4.19)

Mechanism and Actuation
4.6 Mechanical Structure
75
Part A | 4.6
Thus, the inverse of  deﬁnes the speed ratios between
the actuated joints and the end-effector. The same equa-
tion can be obtained by computing the derivative of the
geometric constraint equations (4.14), and  is the Ja-
cobian of the parallel robot system [4.35].
The Jacobian  is used in parameter optimiza-
tion algorithms to design parallel robots [4.36] with
isotropic mechanical advantage. The square root of
the determinant
ˇˇTˇˇ measures the six-dimensional
volume spanned by the column vectors fj. The dis-
tribution of the percentage of this volume compared
to its maximum within the workspace is also used as
a measure of the overall performance [4.37, 38]. A sim-
ilar performance measure normalizes this Jacobian by
the maximum joint torques available and the maximum
component of force and torque desired, and then seeks
an isotropic design [4.39].
4.5.3 Specialized Parallel Robots
Another approach to the design of parallel robots has
been to separate their functionality into orientation and
translational platforms. Tsai and Joshi [4.40] and Jin
and Yang [4.41] survey designs for a class of par-
allel chains that generate pure translation. Kong and
Gosselin [4.42] and Hess-Coelho [4.43] do the same
for parallel chains that provide rotational movement in
space.
4.6 Mechanical Structure
For the purposes of dynamic modeling, the links of
a robot are generally considered to be rigid. However,
a robot is not a rigid structure. Like all structures it de-
ﬂects under applied loads, such as its own weight and
the weight of the payload, termed gravity loading; see
Figs. 4.11 and 4.12. The issue is a matter of degree.
The more force that is needed to cause a deﬂection in
the links, the more the robot moves like a connected set
of rigid bodies. Rigid robots have links designed to be
stiff so the deﬂections under load are less than the pos-
itioning accuracy required for their range of tasks. This
allows the dynamic model and control algorithms to ig-
nore link deﬂection. Most commercially available robot
arms are of this type (Rivin [4.44]).
It is possible to improve the positioning accuracy
of a rigid robot by augmenting a control algorithm that
includes a model of link deﬂection resulting from grav-
ity loading. It is also possible to use strain sensors to
measure loads and deﬂections. These semirigid robots
assume small structural deﬂections that are linearly re-
lated to known applied loads.
Flexible robots require that the dynamic model in-
clude the deﬂection of its various links under gravity
loading as well as under the forces associated with link
acceleration, called inertia loading. The robot control
algorithms must control the vibration of the system as
well its gross motion. Management of vibration may
be required even in rigid robots to reduce cycle time
when subjected to high dynamic loading at high speeds
or when manipulating large payloads.
4.6.1 Links
For industrial robots a critical concern is the link stiff-
ness in bending and in torsion. To provide this stiffness,
robot links are designed either as beams or shell (mono-
coque) structures. Monocoque structures have lower
weight or higher strength-to-weight ratios, but are more
costly and generally more difﬁcult to manufacture.
Cast, extruded, or machined beam-based links are of-
ten more cost effective; Juvinall and Marshek [4.45],
and Shigley and Mischke [4.46, 47]
Another important consideration is whether the link
structure includes bolted, welded, or adhesive bonded
assemblies of cast, machined, and fabricated elements.
Screw and bolted connections may seem straightfor-
ward, inexpensive, and easily maintained, but the in-
evitable deﬂection of a link even in the manufacturing
process introduces creep in these multiple element as-
semblies that changes the dimensions and performance
of the robot. Welded and cast structures are much less
susceptible to creep and the associated hysteresis defor-
mation, though in many cases they require secondary
manufacturing operations such as thermal stress reliev-
ing and ﬁnish machining.
The minimum practical wall or web thickness for
castings may be thicker than necessary for stiffness.
Thin walls can be achieved with structural skin (mono-
Fig. 4.11 The hydraulic Skywash aircraft cleaning robot

Part A | 4.7
76
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Fig. 4.12 DeLaval Cow Milking System features hy-
draulic robot with machine vision guided positioning
(
VIDEO 643 )
coque) structures but this is offset by the potential for
denting, permanent deformation, and damage in the
event of slight collisions. Therefore, both the perfor-
mance and application requirements must be considered
when selecting the construction and fabrication details
of the robot.
Performance- and application-speciﬁc materials and
geometry are used to reduce the weight of the links
and therefore the associated gravity and inertial loading.
For structures that move in a straight line, aluminum
or magnesium alloy extrusions of constant cross sec-
tion are convenient. Carbon and glass-ﬁber composites
provide lower mass for robots that require high ac-
celeration (painting robots). Thermoplastic materials
provide low-cost link structures though at reduced load
capacity. Stainless steel is often used in robots for med-
ical and food service applications. The longer links on
serial chain robots often are designed to taper in cross
section or wall thickness to reduce the associated iner-
tial loading.
4.6.2 Joints
Joints for most robots allow either rotary or linear
movement, termed revolute and prismatic joints. Other
joints that are available are the ball-in-socket, or spher-
ical joint, and the Hooke-type universal joint.
Integration of the mechanical structure of the robot
with its joint mechanism, which includes the actuator
and joint motion sensor, is a source of structural ﬂexibil-
ity. Precision is reduced when deformation in the joint
at its bearings can reduce gear and shaft preloads, al-
lowing undesirable backlash and free play. Structural
ﬂexibility can also introduce changes in gear center
spacing, introducing forces and torques and associated
deﬂection, binding, jamming, and wear.
4.7 Joint Mechanisms
A robot joint mechanism consists of at least four ma-
jor components: the joint axis structure, an actuator,
transmission, and state sensor (usually for position and
velocity feedback, but force sensors are also com-
mon).
For low-performance manipulators that accelerate
the payload at less than a peak of 0:5 g, system inertia
is not as important as gravity forces and torques. This
means the actuators can be placed near the joints, and
their suspended weight compensated by using counter-
balancing masses, springs, or gas pressure.
In high-performance robots where peak payload ac-
celerations reach 310 g or more, minimizing system
inertia is important. The actuators are placed near the
ﬁrst joint axis of a serial link manipulator to minimize
its inertial contribution, and drive linkages, belts, cables
or spaced gear stages are used to drive the joints.
While a longer transmission distance can reduce
mass and gravity moments and inertia, it introduces
ﬂexibility and thus reduces the system stiffness. The
design of the actuator placement and transmission for
each joint is a trade-off between weight, inertia, stiff-
ness, and complexity. This choice dictates the major
physical characteristics of a manipulator design. To il-
lustrate this point, consider the Adept 1 assembly robot
with four degrees of freedom, each a different structure.
The ﬁrst axis has a direct motor drive. The second axis
is driven by a steel band drive, and the third by a syn-
chronous belt drive. Finally, the fourth axis uses a linear
ball–screw drive. For a variety of useful joint mecha-
nisms Sclater and Chironis [4.48].
4.7.1 Joint Axis Structures
Revolute Joints
Revolute or rotary motion joints are designed to per-
form pure rotation while minimizing other displace-
ments and motions. The most important measure of the

Mechanism and Actuation
4.7 Joint Mechanisms
77
Part A | 4.7
quality of a revolute joint is its stiffness or resistance
to all undesired motion. Key factors to be considered in
design for stiffness are shaft diameter, mounting con-
ﬁguration and preloading of the bearings and proper
clearances and tolerances. Shaft diameter and bearing
size are not always based on load-carrying capacity;
rather, they often will be selected to be compatible with
a rigid mounting conﬁguration and also have a bore
large enough to pass cables, hoses, and even drive
elements for other joints. Because joint shafts will fre-
quently be torque-transmitting members, they and their
supporting structure must be designed both for bending
and torsional stiffness. The ﬁrst axis of the PUMA robot
is an example of such a joint with its large-diameter
tubular conﬁguration.
An important factor in maintaining stiffness in a rev-
olute joint is the choice of bearing-mounting conﬁgura-
tion. The mounting arrangement and mount must be de-
signed to accommodate manufacturing tolerances, ther-
mal expansion and bearing preload. Axial preloading of
ball or tapered roller bearings improves system accu-
racy and stiffness by minimizing both axial and radial
play. Preloads can be achieved through selective assem-
bly or elastic (spring) elements, shim spacers, threaded
collars, four-point contact bearings, duplex bearing ar-
rangements, and tight manufacturing tolerances.
Prismatic Joints
There are two basic types of prismatic or linear mo-
tion joints: single-stage and telescoping joints. Often
a prismatic joint and its associated link and actuator are
combined as a linear actuator. Single-stage joints are
made up of a moving surface that slides linearly along
a ﬁxed surface. Telescoping joints are essentially sets
of nested or stacked single-stage joints. Single-stage
joints feature simplicity and high stiffness, whereas
the primary advantage of telescoping joints is their
retracted-state compactness and large extension ratio.
Telescoping joints have a lower effective joint inertia
for some conﬁgurations and motions because part of
the joint may remain stationary or move with reduced
acceleration.
The primary functions of bearings in prismatic
joints are to facilitate motion in a single direction and to
prevent motion in all other directions. Preventing these
unwanted motions poses the more challenging design
problem. Deformations in the structure can distort the
bearing. In severe cases, ball or roller deﬂection under
load may cause binding, which precludes motion. For
high-precision prismatic joints, ways must be straight
and precise along their entire length which may be sev-
eral meters. The required precision grinding on multiple
surfaces can be costly. Bulky covers may be required to
shield and seal a prismatic bearing and way assembly.
The primary criterion for evaluating higher num-
ber (in or near the wrist or end-effector) linear motion
joints or axes is the stiffness-to-weight ratio. Achiev-
ing a good stiffness-to-weight ratio requires the use of
a hollow or thin-walled structure rather than solid mem-
bers for the moving elements.
Bearing spacing is extremely important in design
for stiffness. If this spacing is too short, system stiff-
ness will be inadequate no matter how great the bearing
stiffness. A major cause for failure in prismatic joints
is surface fatigue wear (brinelling) of the ways caused
by excessive ball loading due to high preload, moment
loads and shock loads.
The large exposed precision surfaces in most pris-
matic joints make them much more sensitive than rev-
olute joints to contamination, improper handling and
environmental effects. They are also signiﬁcantly more
difﬁcult to manufacture, properly assemble, and align.
Common types of sliding elements for prismatic
motion are bronze or thermoplastic impregnated bush-
ings. These bushings have the advantage of being low
in cost, of having relatively high load capacity, and
of working with unhardened or superﬁcially hardened
(i. e., plated or anodized) surfaces. Because the local or
contact stress on the moving element is distributed and
is low this element may be made of thin tube or an ex-
truded shape. Another type of bushing in common use
is the ball bushing. Ball bushings have the advantages of
lower friction and greater precision than plain bushings.
However, they require that the contacting surface of the
joint be heat treated or hardened (generally to Rc 55
or greater) and of sufﬁcient case and wall thickness to
support the ball point contact loads and resulting high
stresses.
Ball and roller slide assemblies are commonly used
in robot prismatic joints. There are two basic categories
of these slides; recirculating and non-recirculating.
Non-recirculating ball and roller slides are used pri-
marily for short-travel applications. They feature high
precision and very low friction at the expense of being
more sensitive to shock and relatively poor at accom-
modating moment loading. Recirculating ball slides are
somewhat less precise but can carry higher loads than
non-recirculating ball slides. They can also be set up to
handle relatively large moment loads. Travel range can
be up to several meters. Commercial recirculating ball
slides and ways have greatly simpliﬁed the design and
construction of linear axes, particularly in gantry and
track mounted manipulators.
Another common type of prismatic robot joint is
made up of cam followers, rollers, or wheels rolling on
extruded, drawn, machined, or ground surfaces. In high-
load applications the surfaces must be hardened before
they are ﬁnish ground. Cam followers can be purchased

Part A | 4.8
78
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Fig. 4.13 RobotWorld is an integrated workcell with mul-
tiple robot modules that move on air bearings
with eccentric mounting shafts to facilitate setup and
adjustment. Elastomer rollers provide quiet, smooth op-
eration.
Two less common types of linear or prismatic joints
feature ﬂexures and air bearings. Flexure-based joints,
whose motion results from elastic bending deforma-
tions of beam support elements, are used primarily for
small, high-resolution, quasilinear motions. Air bear-
ings require smooth surfaces and close control of tol-
erances as well as a constant supply of ﬁltered, oil-free
compressed air. Two- and three-degree-of-freedom air
bearings (x; y; ) can enable multiaxis motion with few
moving parts (Fig. 4.13).
Joint Travel
For revolute joint conﬁgurations, the shoulder and el-
bow joints and links determine the gross volume of the
work envelope (reachable workspace) of a robot ma-
nipulator arm. The wrist joints generally determine the
orientation range (dexterous workspace) about a point
within this work envelope. Larger joint travel may
increase the number of possible manipulator conﬁgura-
tions that will reach a particular location (increased task
space). Wrist joint travel in excess of 360ı and up to
Fig. 4.14 Wrist
for surgery has
no singularities
within range of
motion. Fea-
tures tungsten
cable actuation
(after [4.49])
720ı can be useful for situations requiring controlled-
path (e.g., straight-line) motion, synchronized motion
such as small part assembly on a moving conveyor
belt, or sensor-modiﬁed motions as in using machine
vision to select and guide picking jumbled items from
a bin. Continuous last-joint rotation is desirable in cer-
tain cases like loading or unloading a rotating machine
or mating threaded parts.
Additional joints and links, sometimes in the
robot but more often in the end-effector, and spe-
cialized tooling also serve to increase the task space
of a robot. Continuous and controlled-path robot mo-
tion requires planning to avoid singularities (regions
where two or more joints may become aligned or
nearly aligned) and the resulting unstable end-effector
motion in these regions. Manipulator design coordi-
nated with a well-planned workcell layout can im-
prove the useful task space by placing critical mo-
tions well away from singularity regions. For exam-
ple, a standard three-axis robot wrist has singularities
180ı apart, which can be increased to 360ı by im-
plementing a somewhat more complex reduced singu-
larity wrist. Such a wrist is used in a sheep-shearing
robot to achieve multiple, long, continuous, smooth,
constant-velocity, sensor-guided passes over the con-
toured body of a sheep to shear its wool [4.50, 51].
Figure 4.14 shows a wrist used for minimally-invasive
surgery that has no singularities within its range of mo-
tion [4.49].
4.8 Actuators
Actuators supply the motive power for robots. Most
robot actuators are commercially available components,
which are adapted or modiﬁed, as necessary, for a spe-
ciﬁc robot application. Three commonly used actuator
types are electromagnetic, hydraulic and pneumatic.
4.8.1 Electromagnetic Actuators
The most common types of actuators in robots today are
electromagnetic actuators.
Electric Servomotors
Most robot manipulators use servomotors as a power
source. Servomotors are designed to accurately follow
the desired position, velocity and torque which change
frequently and sometimes abruptly. They have struc-
tures similar to ordinary electric motors, but with low
inertia and large torque capably for high accelerations.
Typical servomotors used for robotic applications are
permanent magnet (PM) DC motors and brushless DC
(BLDC) motors.

Mechanism and Actuation
4.8 Actuators
79
Part A | 4.8
PM DC motors are widely used as a servomotor be-
cause of high torque, speed controllability over a wide
range, well-behaved torque-speed characteristics, and
adaptability to various types of control methods. The
DC motor converts electrical energy into rotational or
linear mechanical energy. It comes in many different
types and conﬁgurations. The lowest-cost PM motors
use ceramic (ferrite) magnets and robot toys and hobby
robots often use this type of motor. A PM motor with
a rare-earth (neodymium-iron-boron), NEO magnet sta-
tor produces the most torque and power for its size.
Brushless motors, also called AC servomotors or
brushless DC motors, are widely used in industrial
robots (Figs. 4.15 and 4.16). They substitute magnetic
or optical sensors and electronic switching circuitry
for the graphite brushes and copper bar commutator
used in brush-type DC motors, thus eliminating the
friction, spark-ing, and wear of commutating parts.
Brushless motors generally have good performance at
low cost because of the decreased complexity of the
motor. However, the controllers for these motors are
more complex and expensive than brush-type motor
controllers. A passive multi-pole neodymium magnet
rotor and a wire-wound iron stator of a brushless motor
provide good heat dissipation and excellent reliability.
Linear brushless motors function like unrolled rotary
motors. They typically have a long, heavy, multiple
Fig. 4.15 The Baldor AC servomotor
Fig. 4.16 The Anorad brushless linear motor
magnet passive stator and a short, lightweight, electron-
ically commutated wire-wound forcer (slider).
Modeling of DC Motors and BLDC Motors. Both DC
and BLDC motors can be described by almost identi-
cal equations although they have different structures, de
Silva [4.52]. Fig. 4.17. The motor torque m generated
at the motor is given by,
m D Ktia ;
(4.20)
where Kt is the torque constant [N m=A] and ia is the
armature current [A].
When the rotor is rotating, the back electromotive
force (emf) 
b is induced as follows,

b D Kb!m ;
(4.21)
where Kb is the back emf constant [V=(rad=s)] and !m
is the angular speed of the motor [rad=s].
The circuit equation is given by

a D Ra ia C La
dia
dt C 
b ;
(4.22)
where 
a is the armature voltage (supply voltage to the
armature) [V], Ra and La are the resistance [˝] and in-
ductance [H] of the armature winding, respectively.
Lastly, the mechanical equation is described by
J d!m
dt C B!m D m  l
r ;
(4.23)
where J is the equivalent moment of inertia re-
ferred to the motor shaft [kg m2], B is the equivalent
viscous-friction coefﬁcient referred to the motor shaft
[N m=rad=s], l is the load torque [N m], and r is the
gear ratio. The quantities J and B are given by
J D Jm C Jl
r2 ;
B D Bm C Bl
r2 ;
(4.24)
where Jm and Bm are related to the motor including the
gear connected to the motor shaft and Jl and Bl are re-
ferred to the load including the gear connected to the
load shaft.
Ra
+
+
–
–
La
Bm
qm
Jm
ia
va
Gear train
Load
Motor
qm = rql
eb
τm
ωm
ql
tl
Jl
tm
Fig. 4.17 Servomotor models

Part A | 4.8
80
Part A
Robotics Foundations
The four equations above can be represented as the
block diagram in Fig. 4.18.
In the servomotors, the electrical time constant e D
La=Ra and mechanical time constant m D J=B have ef-
fects on their performance. The electrical time constant
is much smaller than mechanical time constant because
of the armature inductance is usually negligible. Con-
sidering this factor, the angular speed of the motor is
described in terms of the armature voltage 
a and load
torque l as follows
!m.s/ D
1
JRa s C .Ra B C KtKb/

Kt
a.s/  Ra
l.s/
r

:
(4.25)
The above equation is frequently used in simula-
tions of both DC motor and BLDC motors.
Stepper Motors. Small, simple robots, such as bench-
top adhesive dispensing robots, frequently use stepper
or pulse motors of the permanent magnet (PM) hybrid
type or sometimes the variable reluctance (VR) type
(Fig. 4.19). These robots use open-loop position and
velocity control. They are relatively low in cost and
interface easily to electronic drive circuits. Microstep
control can produce 10 000 or more discrete robot joint
positions. In open-loop step mode the motors and robot
motions have a signiﬁcant settling time, which can be
Kt
Kb
1
+–
+–
La s + Ra
1
J s + B
ia
va
vb
tm
tl/r
wm
Fig. 4.18 Block diagram for servomotors
Fig. 4.19 The Sony robot uses open-loop permanent-
magnet stepper motors
damped either mechanically or through the application
of control algorithms. Power-to-weight ratios are lower
for stepper motors than for other types of electric mo-
tors. Stepper motors operated with closed-loop control
function similarly to direct-current (DC) or alternating-
current (AC) servomotors (Fig. 4.20).
Permanent-Magnet
DC
Motor. The
permanent-
magnet, direct-current, brush-commutated motor is
widely available and comes in many different types
and conﬁgurations. The lowest-cost permanent-magnet
motors use ceramic (ferrite) magnets. Robot toys and
hobby robots often use this type of motor. Neodymium
(NEO) magnet motors have the highest energy-product
magnets, and in general produce the most torque and
power for their size.
Ironless rotor motors, often used in small robots,
typically have copper wire conductors molded into
epoxy or composite cup or disk rotor structures. The ad-
vantages of these motors include low inductance, low
friction, and no cogging torque. Disk armature mo-
tors have several advantages. They have short overall
lengths, and because their rotors have many commu-
tation segments, they produce a smooth output with
low torque ripple. A disadvantage of ironless armature
motors is that they have a low thermal capacity due
to low mass and limited thermal paths to their case.
As a result, when driven at high power levels they
have rigid duty-cycle limitations or require forced-air
cooling.
4.8.2 Hydraulic Actuators
Hydraulic actuators, chosen as power sources for the
earliest industrial robots, offer very large force capa-
bility and high power-to-weight ratios. They convert
hydraulic power into useful mechanical energy. The
mechanical motion produced may be linear for hy-
Fig. 4.20 The Adept robot uses closed-loop control and
variable-reluctance motors (
VIDEO 644 )

Mechanism and Actuation
4.8 Actuators
81
Part A | 4.8
Hydraulic
zylinder
Flow control
valve
Directional
control valve
M
Pressure gauge
Relief valve
Check valve
Motor
Filter
Tank
Pump
Fig. 4.21 General hydraulic circuit
draulic cylinders or rotary for hydraulic motors and
vane actuators.
Figure 4.21 shows the basic hydraulic circuit com-
posed of oil tank, hydraulic pump, check valve, relief
valve, directional control valve and hydraulic actuator.
Hydraulic ﬂuid pressurized by the hydraulic pump is
conveyed to the hydraulic machine to perform the spec-
iﬁed task. To this end, the pressure, ﬂow, and direction
of hydraulic ﬂuid is changed by the hydraulic control
valves such as a pressure control valve, ﬂow control
valve, and directional control valve, respectively. The
directional control valve changes the ﬂow direction of
the hydraulic ﬂuid which is pressurized in the hydraulic
pump and thus the direction of actuator motion. The
ﬂow control valve changes the ﬂow rate of hydraulic
ﬂuid ﬂow and thus the speed of the hydraulic actuator.
For safety, the highest pressure is limited by the pres-
sure control valve such as a relief valve.
Hydraulic actuators have several advantages and
disadvantages due to the use of high pressure ﬂuid.
They can offer very large force or torque and high
power-to-weight ratios. Both linear and rotary motions
are readily available with small inertia of the moving
part. However, the hydraulic power supply is bulky and
the cost of the proportional, fast-response servovalves
are high. Leaks and maintenance issues have limited the
use and applica-tion of hydraulically powered robots.
a)
b)
c)
Fig.4.22a–c Applications of
hydraulic actuators to robot:
(a) BigDog (Boston dynamics)
(
VIDEO 645 ), (b) Sarcos exoscele-
ton (
VIDEO 646 ) (Raytheon) (c)
Magnum 7 (International Submarine
Engineering)
There have been many applications of hydraulic
actuators to robotics. For high forces or torques and
speeds, hydraulic servo actuators out-perform current
electromagnetic actuators. With proper design, leakage
can be virtually eliminated, Hollerbach et al. [4.53].
Figure 4.22 shows some typical applications of hy-
draulic actuators, [4.54–56].
4.8.3 Pneumatic Actuators
Pneumatic actuators are similar to hydraulic actuators.
Pneumatic actuators convert energy (in the form of
compressed air) into mechanical motion, which may
be linear or rotary. Pneumatic actuators are primarily
found in simple manipulators. Typically they provide
uncontrolled motion between mechanical limit stops.
These actuators provide good performance in point-
to-point motion. They are simple to control and are
low in cost. Pneumatic motors have several advantages
over electric motors. They are relatively safe in the
explosive environment. They are also less affected by
ambient temperature and humidity than electric mo-
tors. Although a few small actuators may be run with
typical factory air supplies, extensive use of pneumatic-
actuated robots requires the purchase and installation
of a costly dedicated compressed-air source. Pneumatic
actuators have low energy efﬁciency.
Pneumatic systems consist of pneumatic genera-
tor, pneumatic valves, pneumatic actuator and pipes.
A pneumatic generator produces compressed air using
an air compressor. Pneumatic valves are used to control
the pressure, ﬂow rate and direction. The mechanical
motion produced may be linear for pneumatic cylinders
or rotary for pneumatic motors.
Pneumatic actuators are not used for applications
requiring large forces or torques since they produce
less power than hydraulic actuators or electric actua-
tors. However, they are used in robot hands or artiﬁcial
muscles, which require high power-to-weight ratios.
Pneumatic artiﬁcial muscles are contractile or exten-
sional devices operated by pressurized air ﬁlling a pneu-
matic bladder. They are usually grouped in the agonist

Part A | 4.8
82
Part A
Robotics Foundations
a)
b)
Fig.4.23a,b Applications of pneu-
matic actuator: (a) robot hand and
arm with artiﬁcial muscle (Shadow
robot) and (b) pneumatic step motor
and MrBot (Urobotics, Johns Hop-
kins)
and antagonist pairs. Furthermore, they can be used
for medical robots since they are not affected by mag-
netic ﬁeld, and for robots in explosive environments
because there is no electrical arcing that exists in elec-
tromagnetic actuators. Figure 4.23 shows some robotic
applications of pneumatic actuators [4.57, 58].
4.8.4 Other Actuators
A wide variety of other types of actuators have been
applied to robots. A sampling of these include, ther-
mal, shape-memory alloy (SMA), bimetallic, chemical,
piezoelectric, magnetostrictive, electroactive polymer
(EAP), bladder, and micro-electromechanical system
(MEMS) actuators (see Figs. 4.24 and 4.25). Most of
these actuators have been applied to research and spe-
cial application robots rather than volume production
industrial robots. An example of a piezoelectric actuator
powered robot is the six-axis PI (Physik Instrumente)
piezo hexapod with sub-nanometer resolution shown
in Fig. 4.26.
Fig. 4.24 The artiﬁcial muscle EAP motor
Fig. 4.25 The Elliptec piezoelectric motor
4.8.5 Transmissions
The purpose of a transmission or drive mechanism is
to transfer mechanical power from a source to a load.
The design and selection of a robot drive mechanism re-
quires consideration of motion, load, and power require-
ments and the placement of the actuator with respect
to the joint. The primary considerations in transmission
design are stiffness, efﬁciency, and cost. Backlash and
windup impact drive stiffness especially in robot appli-
cations where motion is constantly reversing and load-
ing is highly variable. High transmission stiffness and
low or no backlash result in increased friction losses.
Most robot transmission elements have good efﬁcien-
cies when they are operating at or near their rated power
levels but not necessarily when lightly loaded. Larger
than necessary drives add weight, inertia and friction
loss to the system. Underdesigned drives have lower
stiffness, can wear rapidly in continuous or in high duty
cycle operation or fail due to accidental overloads.
Joint actuation in robots is generally performed by
drive mechanisms which interface the actuator (mech-
anical work source) to the robot links through the joints
in an energy-efﬁcient manner. A variety of drive mech-
anisms are incorporated in practical robots. The trans-
mission ratio of the drive mechanism sets the torque,
speed, and inertia relationship of the actuator to the link.
Proper placement, sizing, and design of the drive mech-
anisms set the stiffness, mass, and overall operational
performance of the robot. Most modern robots incorpo-
rate efﬁcient, overload damage resistant, back-driveable
drives.
Fig. 4.26 A six-axis Physik Instrumente (PI) piezo hexa-
pod with sub-nanometer resolution (
VIDEO 648 )

Mechanism and Actuation
4.8 Actuators
83
Part A | 4.8
Direct Drives
The direct drive is kinematically the simplest drive
mechanism. In the case of pneumatic or hydraulic
actuated robots, the actuator is directly connected be-
tween the links. Electric direct-drive robots employ
high-torque, low-speed rotary or linear motors directly
interfaced to the links. The complete elimination of free
play and smooth torque transmission are features of
a direct drive. However, there is often a poor dynamic
(inertia ratio) match of the actuator to the link requiring
a larger, less energy efﬁcient, actuator.
Band Drives
A variant of direct drive is band drive. A thin alloy steel
or titanium band is ﬁxed between the actuator shaft
and the driven link to produce limited rotary or linear
motion. Drive ratios in the order of up to 10 W 1 (10 ac-
tuator revolutions for 1 revolution of the joint) can be
obtained. Actuator mass is also moved away from the
joint – usually toward the base, to reduce robot iner-
tia and gravity loading. It is a smoother and generally
stiffer drive than a cable or belt drive.
Belt Drives
Synchronous (toothed) belts are often employed in
drive mechanisms of smaller robots and some axes of
larger robots. These function much the same as band
drives, but have the ability to drive continuously. Mul-
tiple stages (two or three) are occasionally used to
produce large drive ratios (up to 100 W 1). Belt tension
is controlled with idlers or center adjustment. The elas-
ticity and mass of long belts can cause drive instability
and thus increased robot settling time.
Gear Drives
Spur or helical gear drives provide reliable, sealed,
low-maintenance power transmission in robots. They
are used in robot wrists where multiple axes inter-
sect and compact drive arrangements are required.
Large-diameter gears are used in the base joints of
larger robots to handle high torques with high stiff-
ness. Gears are often used in stages and often with
long drive shafts, enabling large physical separation
between actuator and driven joint. For example, the
actuator and one stage of reduction may be located
near the elbow driving another stage of gearing or dif-
ferential in a wrist through a long hollow drive shaft
(Fig. 4.1).
Planetary gear drives are often integrated into com-
pact gearmotors (Fig. 4.27). Minimizing backlash (free
play) in a joint gear drive requires careful design,
high-precision and rigid support to produce a drive
mechanism which does not sacriﬁce stiffness, efﬁciency
and accuracy for low backlash. Backlash in robots is
controlled by a number of methods including selective
assembly, gear center adjustment, and proprietary anti-
backlash designs.
Worm Gear Drives
Worm gear drives are occasionally used in low-speed
robot manipulator applications. They feature right-
angle and offset drive capability, high ratios, simplicity,
good stiffness and load capacity. They have poor efﬁ-
ciency, which makes them non-back-driveable at high
ratios. This causes the joints to hold their position when
unpowered but also makes them prone to damage by
attempts to manually reposition the robot.
Proprietary Drives
Proprietary drives are widely used in standard industrial
manipulators. The harmonic drive and the rotary vector
(RV) drive are two examples of compact, low-backlash,
high-torque-capability drives using special gears, cams,
and bearings (Figs. 4.28 and 4.29).
Harmonic drives are frequently used in very small to
medium-sized robots. These drives have low backlash,
but its ﬂexspline allows elastic windup and low stiff-
ness during small reversing movements. RV drives are
Fig. 4.27 The Space Shuttle robot arm has planetary gear
joint drives
Fig. 4.28 The harmonic drive (
VIDEO 649 )

Part A | 4.8
84
Part A
Robotics Foundations
usually used in larger robots, especially those subject to
overloads and shock loading.
Linear Drives
Direct-drive linear actuators incorporate a linear motor
with a linkage to a linear axis. This linkage is often
merely a rigid or ﬂexure connection between the actua-
tor forcer and the robot link. Alternatively, a packaged
linear motor with its own guideways is mechanically
connected directly to a linear axis. Direct linear elec-
tromagnetic drives feature zero backlash, high stiffness,
high speeds, and excellent performance but are heavy,
have poor energy efﬁciency, and cost more than other
types of linear drives.
Ball Screws
Ball–screw-based linear drives efﬁciently and smoothly
convert rotary actuator motion into linear motion. Typ-
ically, a recirculating ball nut mates with a ground and
hardened alloy steel screw to convert rotary motion into
linear motion. Ball screws can be easily integrated into
linear axes. Compact actuator/drive packages are avail-
able, as well as components for custom integration.
Stiffness is good for short and medium travel, however
it is lower for long motions because the screw can only
be supported at its ends. Low or zero backlash can be
obtained with precision-ground screws. Speeds are lim-
Fig. 4.29 The Nabtesco RV drive
X
Z
"X" axis beam
Cross tie
Cross slide
"Z" slide
3 roll wrist
Leg
Carriage
Y
Fig. 4.30 The NASA gantry robot
ited by screw dynamic stability so rotating nuts enable
higher speeds. Low-cost robots may employ plain screw
drives featuring thermoplastic nuts on smooth rolled
thread screws.
Rack-and-Pinion Drives
These traditional components are useful for long mo-
tions where the guideways are straight or even curved.
Stiffness is determined by the gear/rack interface and
independent of length of travel. Backlash can be difﬁ-
Fig. 4.31 Two-arm collaborative robot with Series Elastic
Actuators (after [4.59])
Fig. 4.32 Series Elastic Actuator assembly in knee-ankle-
foot gait rehabilitation robot (after [4.60])

Mechanism and Actuation
4.9 Robot Performance
85
Part A | 4.9
cult to control as rack-to-pinion center tolerances must
be held over the entire length of travel. Dual pinion
drives are sometimes employed to deal with backlash
by providing active preload. Forces are generally lower
than with screws due to lower ratios. Small-diameter
(low teeth count) pinions have poor contact ratios,
resulting in vibration. Sliding involute tooth contact
requires lubrication to minimize wear. These catalog
stock drive components are often used on large gantry
robots and track-mounted manipulators (Fig. 4.30).
Compliant Actuators. Compliance in the form of
elasticity in a drive can be an asset or a defect in
a robot. High overall robot stiffness traditionally pro-
duces fast response, high positioning accuracy and
simpliﬁed control. However the contact and interaction
forces developed due to unexpected errors in dealing
with the workpieces, tools, workplace and the environ-
ment can cause damage to the robot, the surroundings,
and injury to persons. By adding controlled and mea-
sureable compliance to actuators, the elasticity of the
robot can be usefully increased.
One class of reduced stiffness actuator is the Series
Elastic Actuator (SEA). It features an elastic output el-
ement (spring) with a displacement sensor (measures
spring stretch) in series with a stiff actuator and trans-
mission component. With an appropriate controller, the
stiff classical position control actuator acts as a force
actuator (F D kx), effectively isolating the drive iner-
tia from the load inertia. This limits the forces resulting
from collisions or forced compliance often encoun-
tered when working in unstructured environments and
around persons. SEAs and similar compliant actuators
and compliant actuator conﬁgurations are discussed in
Chap. 69. Collaborative robots are designed to safely
work next to or in contact with persons, Fig. 4.31 [4.59],
and are an example of robots featuring compliant actu-
ators. Figure 4.32 shows compliant actuators used in an
exoskeleton for gait rehabilitation [4.60].
Other Drive Components
Splined shafts, kinematic linkages (four-bar, slider-
crank mechanisms, etc.) chains, cables, ﬂex couplings,
clutches, brakes, and limit stops are some examples of
other mechanical components used in robot drive mech-
anisms (Fig. 4.8). The Yaskawa RobotWorld assembly
and process automation robot system features a mag-
netically suspended direct electromagnetic drive planar
(2 axis) motor with no internal moving parts ﬂoating on
a virtually frictionless planar air bearing. (Fig. 4.12).
4.9 Robot Performance
Industrial robot performance is often speciﬁed in terms
of functional operations and cycle time. For assembly
robots the speciﬁcation is often the number of typical
pick-and-place cycles per minute. Arc-welding robots
are speciﬁed with a slow weld pattern and weave speed
as well as by a fast repositioning speed. For painting
robots, the deposition or coverage rate and spray pattern
speed are important. Peak robot velocity and accelera-
tion catalog data are generally just calculated numbers
and will vary due to dynamic (inertia) and static (grav-
ity) coupling between robot joints due to conﬁguration
changes as a robot moves.
4.9.1 Robot Speed
Maximum joint velocity (angular or linear) is not an
independent value. For longer motions it is often lim-
ited by servomotor bus voltage or maximum allowable
motor speed. For manipulators with high accelera-
tions, even short point-to-point motions may be velocity
limited. For low-acceleration robots, only gross mo-
tions will be velocity limited. Typical peak end-effector
speeds can range up to 20 m=s for large or fast manipu-
lators.
4.9.2 Robot Acceleration
In most modern manipulators, because the payload
mass is small when compared with the manipulator
mass, more power is spent accelerating the manipulator
than the load. Acceleration affects gross motion time
as well as cycle time (gross motion time plus settling
time). Manipulators capable of greater acceleration tend
to be stiffer manipulators. In high-performance robot
manipulators, acceleration and settling time are more
important design parameters than velocity or load ca-
pacity. Maximum acceleration for some assembly and
material handling robots is in excess of 10 g with light
payloads.
4.9.3 Repeatability
This speciﬁcation represents the ability of the ma-
nipulator to return repeatedly to the same location.
Depending on the method of teaching or programming
the manipulator, most manufacturers intend this ﬁg-
ure to indicate the radius of a sphere enclosing the
set of locations to which the arm returns when sent
from the same origin by the same program with the

Part A | 4.9
86
Part A
Robotics Foundations
same load and setup conditions. This sphere may not
include the target point because calculation round-off
errors, simpliﬁed calibration, precision limitations, and
differences during the teaching and execution modes
can cause signiﬁcantly larger errors than those just due
to friction, unresolved joint and drive backlash, servo
system gain, and structural and mechanical assembly
clearances and play. The designer must seriously con-
sider the real meaning of the required repeatability
speciﬁcation. Repeatability is important when perform-
ing repetitive tasks such as blind assembly or machine
loading. Typical repeatability speciﬁcations range from
12 mm for large spot-welding robots to 0:005 mm
(5 m) for precise micropositioning manipulators.
4.9.4 Resolution
This speciﬁcation represents the smallest incremental
motion that can be produced by the manipulator. Res-
olution is important in sensor-controlled robot motion
and in ﬁne positioning. Although most manufacturers
calculate system resolution from the resolution of the
joint position encoders, or from servomotor and drive
step size, this calculation is misleading because system
friction, windup, backlash, and kinematic conﬁgura-
tion affect the system resolution. Typical encoder or
resolver resolution is 10141025 counts for full-axis or
joint travel, but actual physical resolution may be in the
range 0:0010:5 mm. The useful resolution of a multi-
joint serial-link manipulator is worse than that of its
individual joints.
4.9.5 Accuracy
This speciﬁcation covers the ability of a robot to po-
sition its end-effector at a preprogrammed location
in space. Robot accuracy is important in the perfor-
mance of nonrepetitive types of tasks programmed
from a database, or for taught tasks that have been
remapped or offset owing to measured changes in the
installation.
Accuracy is a function of the precision of the
arm kinematic model (joint type, link lengths, angles
between joints, any accounting for link or joint de-
ﬂections under load, etc.), the precision of the world,
tool, and ﬁxture models, and the completeness and
accuracy of the arm solution routine. Although most
higher-level robot programming languages support arm
solutions, these solutions usually model only simpliﬁed
rigid-body kinematic conﬁgurations. Thus, manipulator
accuracy becomes a matter of matching the robot geom-
etry to the robot solution in use by precisely measuring
and calibrating link lengths, joint angles, and mounting
positions.
Typical accuracies for industrial manipulators range
from ˙10 mm for uncalibrated manipulators that have
poor computer models to ˙0:01 mm for machine-tool-
like manipulators that have controllers with accurate
kinematic models and solutions and precisely manufac-
tured and measured kinematic elements.
4.9.6 Component Life and Duty Cycle
The three subassemblies in an electrically powered
robot with the greatest failure problems are the actua-
tors (servomotors), transmissions, and power and sig-
nal cables. Mean time between failures (MTBF) should
be a minimum of 5000h on line, and ideally at least
10 000 operating hours should pass between major com-
ponent preventive maintenance replacement schedules.
Worst-case motion cycles must be assumed as most
current robot installations are used in generally repet-
itive tasks. Small-motion design-cycle life (less than
5% of joint travel range) for assembly robots should be
20100 million full bidirectional cycles. Large-motion
cycle life (greater than 50% of full joint range) should
typically be 540 million cycles.
Short-term peak performance is frequently lim-
ited by maximum drive loading, whereas long-term,
continuous, performance is limited by motor heating.
Rather than design for equal levels of short- and long-
term performance, cost savings and performance im-
provements can result from designing for an anticipated
duty cycle. This allows the use of smaller, lower-inertia,
lighter motors. Industrial robots usually become ob-
solete and are replaced before they reach their design
cycle life.
4.9.7 Collisions
In the course of operation, unforeseen or unexpected
situations may occasionally result in a collision involv-
ing the manipulator, its tools, the workpiece, or other
objects in the workplace. These accidents may result in
no, little, or extensive damage, depending in large part
on the design of the manipulator. Crash-resistant design
options should be considered early in the design process
if the time lost or cost of such accidents could be signiﬁ-
cant. Typical damage due to accidents include fracture
or shear failures of gear teeth or shafts, dented or bent
link structures, slipping of gears or pulleys on shafts,
cut or severely abraded or deformed wires, cables or
hoses, and broken connectors, ﬁttings, limit stops or
switches. Compliant elements such as overload (slip)
clutches, elastic members, and padded surfaces can be
incorporated to reduce shock loads and help decouple or
isolate the actuators and drive components in the event
of such collisions.

Mechanism and Actuation
References
87
Part A | 4
4.10 Conclusions and Further Reading
The mechanical design of a robot is an iterative pro-
cess involving engineering, technical, and application-
speciﬁc considerations evaluations, and choices. The
ﬁnal design should reﬂect consideration of detailed task
requirements rather than simply broad speciﬁcations.
Proper identiﬁcation and understanding of these re-
quirements is a key to achieving the design goals.
Design and choice of speciﬁc components involves
tradeoffs. A purely static, rigid-body approach to ma-
nipulator design is often used, but is not always sufﬁ-
cient. Mechanical system stiffness, natural frequencies,
control system compatibility, and intended robot appli-
cations and installation requirements must be consid-
ered.
There are many opportunities for further reading on
the design of the mechanisms and actuation that form
the core of a robotic system. A well-known and useful
reference for robot design is Rivin [4.44].
Craig [4.6] and Tsai [4.9] provide the mathematical
relations between the mechanical structure of a robot
and its workspace and mechanical advantage. Sclater
and Chironis [4.48] is a reprint of a valuable com-
pendium of devices useful for a variety of applications,
such as joint drives and transmissions. See McCarthy
and Soh [4.34] for geometric techniques to design spe-
cialized mechanisms.
Juvinall and Marshek [4.45] and Shigley and Mis-
chke [4.46, 47] are important references for the design
of the components such as the link structure, bearings,
and transmissions that are central to the effective me-
chanical performance of robotic systems.
Although many design decisions can be made
through the application of straightforward algorithms
and equations, a multitude of other important consider-
ations transform the challenge of robot design into one
requiring good engineering judgment.
Video-References
VIDEO 640
A parallel robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/04/videodetails/640
VIDEO 642
Three-fingered robot hand
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/04/videodetails/642
VIDEO 643
Robotics milking system
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/04/videodetails/643
VIDEO 644
SCARA robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/04/videodetails/644
VIDEO 645
Big Dog –Applications of hydraulic actuators
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/04/videodetails/645
VIDEO 646
Raytheon Sarcos exoskeleton
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/04/videodetails/646
VIDEO 648
PI piezo hexapod
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/04/videodetails/648
VIDEO 649
Harmonic drive
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/04/videodetails/649
References
4.1
D.T. Greenwood: Classical Dynamics (Prentice Hall,
Upper Saddle River 1977)
4.2
F.C. Moon: Applied Dynamics (Wiley, New York 1998)
4.3
S.-M. Song, K.J. Waldron: Machines that Walk: The
Adaptive Suspension Vehicle (MIT Press, Cambridge
1988)
4.4
M.T. Mason, J.K. Salisbury: Robot Hands and the Me-
chanics of Manipulation (MIT Press, Cambridge 1985)
4.5
R.P. Paul: Robot Manipulators: Mathematics, Pro-
gramming,
and
Control
(MIT
Press, Cambridge
1981)
4.6
J.J. Craig: Introduction to Robotics: Mechanics and
Control (Addison-Wesley, Reading 1989)
4.7
O. Bottema, B. Roth: Theoretical Kinematics (North-
Holland, Amsterdam 1979)
4.8
J.M. McCarthy: An Introduction to Theoretical Kine-
matics (MIT Press, Cambridge 2013)
4.9
L.W. Tsai: Robot Analysis. The Mechanics of Serial and
Parallel Manipulators (Wiley, New York 1999)
4.10
T. Lozano-Perez: Spatial Planning: A configuration
space approach, IEEE Trans. Comput. 32(2), 108–120
(1983)
4.11
J.C.
Latombe:
Robot
Motion
Planning
(Kluwer,
Boston 1991)
4.12
R. Vijaykumar, K. Waldron, M.J. Tsai: Geometric opti-
mization of manipulator structures for working vol-

Part A | 4
88
Part A
Robotics Foundations
ume and dexterity. In: Kinematics of Robot Manip-
ulators, ed. by J.M. McCarthy (MIT Press, Cambridge
1987) pp. 99–111
4.13
K. Gupta: On the nature of robot workspace. In:
Kinematics of Robot Manipulators, ed. by J.M. Mc-
Carthy (MIT Press, Cambridge 1987) pp. 120–129
4.14
I. Chen, J. Burdick: Determining task optimal modu-
lar robot assembly configurations, Proc. IEEE Robotics
Autom. Conf. (1995) pp. 132–137
4.15
P. Chedmail, E. Ramstei: Robot mechanisms syn-
thesis and genetic algorithms, Proc. IEEE Robotics
Autom. Conf. (1996) pp. 3466–3471
4.16
P. Chedmail: Optimization of multi-DOF mecha-
nisms. In: Computational Methods in Mechanical
Systems, ed. by J. Angeles, E. Zakhariev (Springer,
Berlin, Heidlberg 1998) pp. 97–129
4.17
C. Leger, J. Bares: Automated Synthesis and Opti-
mization of Robot Configurations, Proc. ASME Design
Tech. Conf., Atlanta (1998), paper no. DETC98/Mech-
5945 CD-ROM
4.18
F.C. Park: Distance metrics on the rigid body mo-
tions with applications to mechanism design, ASME
J. Mech. Des. 117(1), 48–54 (1995)
4.19
J.M.R. Martinez, J. Duffy: On the metrics of rigid body
displacements for infinite and finite bodies, ASME
J. Mech. Des. 117(1), 41–47 (1995)
4.20
M. Zefran, V. Kumar, C. Croke: Choice of Riemannian
metrics for rigid body kinematics, Proc. ASME Design
Tech. Conf., Irvine (1996), paper no. DETC96/Mech-
1148
4.21
Q. Lin, J.W. Burdick: On well-defined kinematic met-
ric functions, Proc. Int. Conf. Robotics Autom., San
Francisco (2000) pp. 170–177
4.22
C. Gosseli: On the design of efficient parallel mech-
anisms. In: Computational Methods in Mechanical
Systems, ed. by J. Angeles, E. Zakhariev (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 1998) pp. 68–96
4.23
J.V. Albro, G.A. Sohl, J.E. Bobrow, F. Park: On the
computation of optimal high-dives, Proc. Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom., San Francisco (2000) pp. 3959–
3964
4.24
G.E. Shilov: An Introduction to the Theory of Linear
Spaces (Dover, New York 1974)
4.25
J.K. Salisbury, J.J. Craig: Articulated hands: Force
control and kinematic issues, Int. J. Robotics Res.
1(1), 4–17 (1982)
4.26
J. Angeles, C.S. Lopez-Cajun: Kinematic isotropy and
the conditioning index of serial manipulators, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 11(6), 560–571 (1992)
4.27
J. Angeles, D. Chabla: On isotropic sets of points in
the plane. Application to the design of robot ar-
chitectures. In: Advances in Robot Kinematics, ed.
by J. Lenarčič, M.M. Stanišić (Kluwer, Boston 2000)
pp. 73–82
4.28
E.F. Fichter: A Stewart platform-based manipulator:
General theory and practical construction. In: Kine-
matics of Robot Manipulators, ed. by J.M. McCarthy
(MIT Press, Cambridge 1987) pp. 165–190
4.29
J.P. Merlet: Parallel Robots (Kluwer, Boston 1999)
4.30
J.M. Hervé: Analyse structurelle des méchanismes
par groupe des déplacements, Mech. Mach. Theory
13(4), 437–450 (1978)
4.31
J.M. Hervé: The Lie group of rigid body displace-
ments, a fundamental tool for mechanism design,
Mech. Mach. Theory 34, 719–730 (1999)
4.32
A.P. Murray, F. Pierrot, P. Dauchez, J.M. McCarthy:
A planar quaternion approach to the kinematic syn-
thesis of a parallel manipulator, Robotica 15(4), 361–
365 (1997)
4.33
A. Murray, M. Hanchak: Kinematic synthesis of pla-
nar platforms with RPR, PRR, and RRR chains. In:
Advances in Robot Kinematics, ed. by J. Lenarčič,
M.M. Stanišić (Kluwer, Boston 2000) pp. 119–126
4.34
J.M. McCarthy, G.S. Soh: Geometric Design of Link-
ages, 2nd edn. (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2010)
4.35
V. Kumar: Instantaneous kinematics of parallel-
chain robotic mechanisms, J. Mech. Des. 114(3), 349–
358 (1992)
4.36
C. Gosselin, J. Angeles: The optimum kinematic de-
sign of a planar three-degree-of-freedom parallel
manipulator, ASME J. Mech. Transmiss. Autom. Des.
110(3), 35–41 (1988)
4.37
J. Lee, J. Duffy, M. Keler: The optimum quality in-
dex for the stability of in-parallel planar platform
devices, Proc. ASME Design Eng. Tech. Conf., Irvine
(1996), paper no. 96-DETC/MECH-1135
4.38
J. Lee, J. Duffy, K. Hunt: A practical quality index
based on the octahedral manipulator, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 17(10), 1081–1090 (1998)
4.39
S.E. Salcudean, L. Stocco: Isotropy and actuator op-
timization in haptic interface design, Proc. Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom., San Francisco (2000) pp. 763–769
4.40
L.-W. Tsai, S. Joshi: Kinematics and optimization of
a spatial 3-UPU parallel manipulator, J. Mech. Des.
122, 439–446 (2000)
4.41
Q. Jin, T.-L. Yang: Theory for topology synthe-
sis of parallel manipulators and its application to
three-dimension-translation parallel manipulators,
J. Mech. Des. 126(3), 625–639 (2004)
4.42
X. Kong, C.M. Gosselin: Type synthesis of three-
degree-of-freedom spherical parallel manipulators,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 23, 237–245 (2004)
4.43
T.A. Hess-Coelho: Topological synthesis of a paral-
lel wrist mechanism, J. Mech. Des. 128(1), 230–235
(2006)
4.44
E.I. Rivin: Mechanical Design of Robots (McGraw-
Hill, New York 1988) p. 368
4.45
R.C. Juvinall, K.M. Marshek: Fundamentals of Ma-
chine Component Design, 4th edn. (Wiley, New York
2005) p. 832
4.46
J.E. Shigley, C.R. Mischke: Mechanical Engineer-
ing Design, 7th edn. (McGraw-Hill, New York 2004)
p. 1056
4.47
J.E. Shigley, C.R. Mischke: Standard Handbook of
Machine Design, 2nd edn. (McGraw-Hill, New York
1996) p. 1700
4.48
N. Sclater, N. Chironis: Mechanisms and Mechanical
Devices Sourcebook, 4th edn. (McGraw Hill, New York
2007) p. 512
4.49
Intuitive Surgical EndoWrist Insturments, http://
www.intuitivesurgical.com/products/instruments/
4.50
J.P. Trevelyan: Sensing and control for shearing
robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 5(6), 716–727
(1989)

Mechanism and Actuation
References
89
Part A | 4
4.51
J.P. Trevelyan, P.D. Kovesi, M. Ong, D. Elford: ET:
A wrist mechanism without singular positions, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 4(4), 71–85 (1986)
4.52
C. de Silva: Sensors and Actuators: Control Systems
Instrumentation (CRC, Boca Raton 2007)
4.53
J. Hollerbach, I. Hunter, J. Ballantyne: A Compara-
tive analysis of actuator technologies for robotics,
Robotics Rev. 2, 299–342 (1992)
4.54
Boston Dynamics, Waltham, MA, USA: Big Dog Robot,
http://www.bostondynamics.com/robot_bigdog.
html
4.55
Raytheon, Waltham MA, USA: Sarcos Exoskeleton,
http://www.popsci.com/category/tags/raytheon-
sarcos-xos
4.56
International Submarine Engineering, Port Coquit-
lam, BC, Canada: Magnum 7, http://www.ise.bc.ca/
manips.html
4.57
Shadow Robot Company, London, UK: Air muscles
and pneumatic hands, http://www.shadowrobot.
com/tag/muscle-hand
4.58
Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, USA: Pneumatic Stepper
Motor and MrBot, http://urobotics.urology.jhu.edu/
projects/PneuStep
4.59
The Baxter Robot Rethink Robotics, http://www.
rethinkrobotics.com/products/baxter/
4.60
Singapore
Institute
for
Neurotechnology,
Neu-
roRehabilitation
Laboratory:
http://www.
sinapseinstitute.org/projects/neurorehabilitation

Multimedia Contents Sensing and
91
Part A | 5.1
5. Sensing and Estimation
Henrik I. Christensen, Gregory D. Hager
Sensing and estimation are essential aspects of the
design of any robotic system. At a very basic level,
the state of the robot itself must be estimated for
feedback control. At a higher level, perception,
which is defined here to be task-oriented inter-
pretation of sensor data, allows the integration
of sensor information across space and time to
facilitate planning.
This chapter provides a brief overview of
common sensing methods and estimation tech-
niques that have found broad applicability in
robotics. The presentation is structured accord-
ing to a process model that includes sensing,
feature extraction, data association, parameter es-
timation, and model integration. Several common
sensing modalities are introduced and character-
ized. Common methods for estimation in linear
and nonlinear systems are discussed, includ-
ing statistical estimation, the Kalman filter, and
sample-based methods. Strategies for robust esti-
mation are also briefly described. Finally, several
5.1
Introduction ...........................................
91
5.2 The Perception Process ............................
92
5.3 Sensors...................................................
94
5.4 Estimation Processes ...............................
98
5.4.1
Point Estimation ............................
98
5.4.2
Other Approaches to Estimation ....
101
5.4.3 Robust Estimation Methods ..........
103
5.4.4 Data Association Techniques .........
105
5.4.5 Modeling Sensors.........................
108
5.4.6 Other Uncertainty Management
Methods......................................
108
5.5 Representations....................................
109
5.5.1
Raw Sensor Representations .........
109
5.5.2
Grid-Based Representations .........
109
5.5.3 Feature Representations ...............
110
5.5.4 Symbolic/Graph-Based Models ......
110
5.6 Conclusions and Further Readings .........
111
References...................................................
111
common representations for estimation are
introduced.
5.1 Introduction
Controlling a robotic system would be relatively simple
if a complete model of the environment was available,
and if the robot actuators could execute motion com-
mands perfectly relative to this model. Unfortunately,
in most cases of interest, a complete world model is not
available, and perfect control of mechanical structures
is never a realistic assumption. Sensing and estimation
are a means of compensating for this lack of complete
information. Their role is to provide information about
the state of the environment and the state of the robot
system as a basis for control, decision making, and in-
teraction with other agents in the environment, such as
humans.
For the purposes of discussion, we will differenti-
ate between sensing and estimation to recover the state
of the robot itself, referred to as proprioception, versus
sensing and estimation to recover the state of the ex-
ternal world, referred to as exteroception. In practice,
most robot systems are designed to have the propri-
oception necessary to estimate and control their own
physical state. On the other hand, recovering the state
of the world from sensor data is usually a much larger
and more complex problem.
Early
work
on
computational
perception
for
robotics assumed that one could recover a complete
general-purpose model of the environment, use such

Part A | 5.2
92
Part A
Robotics Foundations
a model to make decisions, and subsequently act on
them, as for example presented by [5.1]. More re-
cently it has become apparent that such an approach
is not realistic. Indeed, considering that sensor-based
robots now appear in diverse applications such as mo-
bile surveillance, high-performance manipulation, and
medical interventions, it is clear that appropriate sens-
ing and estimation for a given system must be highly
task dependent. Consequently, the discussion here is
organized along the lines of task-oriented sensing and
estimation of the external world.
Sensing and estimation together can be viewed as
the process of transforming a physical quantity into
a computer representation that can be used for further
processing. Sensing is thus closely tied to transducers
that transform some physical entity into a signal that
can be processed by a computer. Sensing is also inti-
mately tied to perception, the process of representing
the sensory information in an task-oriented model of the
world. However, sensor data is usually corrupted in var-
ious ways that complicate this process. Statistical noise
arises from the transducer, discretization is introduced
in the digitization process, and ambiguity is introduced
by poor sensor selectivity to name a few examples.
Estimation methods are thus introduced to support ap-
propriate integration of information into models of the
environment and for improvement of the signal-to-noise
ratio.
In this chapter the general characteristics of sensing
and estimation are introduced, while more in-depth pre-
sentations of select topics are provided in Part C of the
handbook. In Sect. 5.2 the overall sensing/perception
process is introduced. In Sect. 5.3 different kinds of
sensors are introduced and some key characteristics
are presented. Estimation of world representations can
utilize a number of different methods involving both
parametric and nonparametric techniques as discussed
in Sect. 5.4. For model-based integration a variety of
different representations can be used, as described in
Sect. 5.5.
5.2 The Perception Process
The input to the perception process is typically twofold:
(1) digital data from a number of sensors/transducers,
and (2) a partial model of the environment (a world
model) that includes information about the state of the
robot and other relevant entities in the external world.
The sensor data itself can take on a number of dif-
ferent forms such as a scalar or vector value x.˛;ˇ/
acquired over a time series x.t/, a scan xt.i/, a vec-
tor ﬁeld x or a three-dimensional volume x.	; ; /: In
many cases, a system must integrate data from several
disparate sensors, for example, an estimate of the po-
sition of a mobile robot may integrate data from axis
encoders, vision, global positioning system (GPS) data,
and inertial sensors.
To further structure the discussion in this chapter,
we adopt a general model of the perception process
Feature
extraction
Matching
(association)
Updating
Prediction
Model
integration
Model
Fig. 5.1 Example of a perception process as discussed in this chapter
as shown in Fig. 5.1. In this model, we have included
the most common operations applied to integrate sen-
sor data with a world model. Depending on the task in
question, some of the included modules may be miss-
ing, and others may themselves take on a complicated
structure. However, the supplied model sufﬁces to illus-
trate many of the issues in sensing and estimation. In the
remainder of this section, we discuss an example from
mobile localization to illustrate this model.
The initial problem in sensory processing is data
preprocessing and feature extraction. The role of pre-
processing is to reduce noise from the transducer, to
remove any systematic errors, and to enhance relevant
aspects of the data. In some cases, sensory information
might also have to be temporally or spatially aligned
for subsequent integration. There are innumerable ways

Sensing and Estimation
5.2 The Perception Process
93
Part A | 5.2
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
y (m)
x (m)
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
y (m)
x (m)
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
Fig. 5.2 An example of feature extraction from a laser
scan (after [5.2])
that data can be preprocessed to enhance or extract
features that are used in the integration. One common
approach is model ﬁtting, as illustrated for a laser scan-
ner in Fig. 5.2. Once sensor information is available,
it is often necessary to match the data with an exist-
ing model (Fig. 5.3). This model may be based on
a priori known structure (e.g., a computer-aided de-
sign (CAD) model of the environment), or may have
been built up from previously acquired data. Data as-
y
{W}
wyr
wxr
x
lwθr
Fig. 5.3 An example environmental model for mobile
robot localization (after [5.2])
Fig. 5.4 Estimation of position and orientation for the ex-
ample mobile robot (after [5.2])
sociation methods are commonly employed to estimate
the relationship between sensor data and the model of
the environment. In our mobile robot localization ex-
ample, the extracted line features are matched against
a polygonal world model. This matching process can
be performed in several different ways, but in general
it is an optimization that maximizes the alignment of
features to the model.
Once sensory data has been matched against the
world model it is possible to update the model with
new information contained in the sensor data. In the ex-
ample, the orientation and position of the robot relative
to the world model can be updated (Fig. 5.4) from the
matched line segments.
Finally, it may be possible to develop a dynamical
system model of the underlying state being estimated.
Using such a system model, it is possible to predict
how the world changes over time until new sensory
data is acquired. This can be used within a feed-forward
prediction process, which in turn simpliﬁes data associ-
ation for new sensory readings, as shown in Fig. 5.1.
With this as a prologue, we now turn to discuss each
step of the perception process in greater detail.

Part A | 5.3
94
Part A
Robotics Foundations
5.3 Sensors
There are a variety of ways to classify sensors depend-
ing on what they measure, and how they measure it.
As noted previously, proprioceptive sensors are used
to measure the internal state of a robot, which might
include position of different degrees of freedom, tem-
perature, voltage on key components, motor current,
force applied to an effector, and so forth. Exterocep-
tive sensors, on the other hand, generate information
about the external environment in terms of distance
to an object, interaction forces, tissue density, and so
forth.
Sensors may also be differentiated based on whether
they are passive or active. In general, an active sen-
sor is one that emits energy into the environment, and
measures properties of the environment based on the re-
sponse. A passive sensor is one that is not active. Active
sensors are generally more robust than passive sensors
since they exert some control over the measured sig-
nal. For example, a passive stereo camera system must
rely on the appearance of viewed surfaces when per-
forming feature matching for triangulation (Chap. 31),
whereas structured light systems project a pattern onto
the scene and are thus less sensitive to scene character-
istics. Even so, absorbtion, scattering or interference of
the emitted signal can affect the performance of active
sensors.
Proprioceptive sensors are typically passive and
usually measure physical properties of the robot such
as joint position, velocity, or acceleration, motor torque,
and so forth. Exteroceptive sensors, on the other hand,
can be further divided into contact and noncontact
sensing. The contact sensors are typically the same
modalities as used for proprioception, while noncontact
sensor sensors involve most of the modalities that can
be used for estimation of physical properties at a dis-
tance including intensity, range, direction, size, and so
forth.
A classiﬁcation of typical sensors according to
method and typical application is shown in Table 5.1.
More detail on methods of sensing, characterization of
sensors, and general applications can for example be
State
Ch A Ch B
S1
High
Low
S2
High High
S3
Low
High
S4
Low
Low
I
A
B
1
3
2
4
Fig. 5.5 Sketch of the quadrature encoder disc, and output from
photodetectors placed over each of the two pattern. The correspond-
ing state changes are shown on the right
found in the Handbook of Modern Sensors [5.3] and in
Part C of this handbook.
Estimation of rotational motion is fundamental to
control of robot manipulators and also for estimation
of ego-motion for mobile systems. The most common
sensor for measurement of rotation is the quadrature
encoder. It is composed of a transparent disc, with
two periodic patterns that are out of phase, as shown
in Fig. 5.5. Through the use of counters it is possible
Table 5.1 Classiﬁcation of sensors frequently used in
robotics according to sensing objective (proprioception
(PC)/exteroception (EC)) and method (active/passive)
Classiﬁcation
Sensor type
Sens
A/P
Tactile sensors
Switches/bumpers
EC
P
Optical barriers
EC
A
Proximity
EC
P/A
Haptic sensors
Contact arrays
EC
P
Force/torque
PC/EC
P
Resistive
EC
P
Motor/axis sensors
Brush encoders
PC
P
Potentiometers
PC
P
Resolvers
PC
A
Optical encoders
PC
A
Magnetic encoders
PC
A
Inductive encoders
PC
A
Capacity encoders
EC
A
Heading sensors
Compass
EC
P
Gyroscopes
PC
P
Inclinometers
EC
A/P
Beacon based
GPS
EC
A
(postion wrt
Active optical
EC
A
an inertial
Radio frequency
(RF) beacons
EC
A
frame)
Ultrasound beacon
EC
A
Reﬂective beacons
EC
A
Ranging
Capacitive sensor
EC
P
Magnetic sensors
EC
P/A
Camera
EC
P/A
Sonar
EC
A
Laser range
EC
A
Structured light
EC
A
Speed/motion
Doppler radar
EC
A
Doppler sound
EC
A
Camera
EC
P
Accelerometer
EC
P
Identiﬁcation
Camera
EC
P
Radio frequency
identiﬁcation RFID
EC
A
Laser ranging
EC
A
Radar
EC
A
Ultrasound
EC
A
Sound
EC
P

Sensing and Estimation
5.3 Sensors
95
Part A | 5.3
to directly compute the motion and its direction (the
phasing between sensors A and B in Fig. 5.5). In addi-
tion the disc is frequently ﬁtted with a single dot on the
outer rim for indexing (speciﬁcation of a zero index).
The density of the pattern determines the resolution of
the measurements. When ﬁtting the sensor to a motor
before a reduction gear it is easy to achieve accuracies
beyond 1=1000ı.
For the estimation of force and torque at an end-
effector it is possible to use piezoelectric elements.
These elements generate a voltage that is proportional
to the introduced deformation. Through careful place-
ment it is possible to measure both force and torque.
The sensors are used in robotic manipulation as part
of assembly systems, deburring, etc. and also in medi-
cal applications for the estimation of stress and contact.
Force/torque sensors are widely available in a range of
sizes and dynamic ranges, including new ﬂexible ar-
rays that can be mounted on a variety of end-effectors
(Fig. 5.6). These arrays are more commonly referred
to as tactile sensors as they begin to simulate the hu-
man tactile sense. See Chap. 19 and [5.4, 5] for recent
reviews of the state of the art in tactile sensing. Poten-
tial problems with force sensors are a dead band on
initial contact, and noisy data from the basic sensing
elements, which calls for signal processing to clean up
the data.
Ego-motion estimation is an important part of al-
most all robotic systems. To this end it is possible to use
inertial measurement units (IMU). An IMU typically in-
cludes both accelerometers and gyros. Accelerometers
are sensitive to all types of acceleration, which implies
that both translation motion and rotation (centripetal
forces) are measured in combination. Joint IMU units
allow the estimation of rotation and translation, and al-
low for double integration to estimation the velocity,
orientation, and position of a system, as for example re-
ported in [5.6]. One of the problems associated with the
use of an IMU is the need for double integration. Small
biases and noise can result in signiﬁcant divergence in
the ﬁnal estimate, which calls for use of detailed mod-
els and careful calibration and identiﬁcation of sensor
characteristics. An example of data from a cross-bow
DMU-6x unit for a car driving on an unpaved road is
shown in Fig. 5.7.
Much early work on mobile robotics, underwater
robots, and some medical robotics relies on ultrasonic
ranging. The general class of sensors are often termed
sound navigation and ranging (sonars). The general
principle is that the system emits a sound pulse and
awaits the return of echoes that have bounced off ob-
jects in the environment. Knowing the transmission
speed in the medium and the time of ﬂight it is possible
to compute the distance. The method was widely used
a)
b)
Fig. 5.6 (a) TactArray, a ﬂexible capacitive array tactile
sensor from Pressure Proﬁle Systems, Inc., is appropri-
ate for sensing contact locations and areas under sliding
conditions. (b) Conformable TactArray sensors can ﬁt on
a human or robotic hand (courtesy Pressure Proﬁle Sys-
tems, Inc.)
0
2 000
4 000
6 000
8 000
10 000
12 000
Acceleration
Sample m/s2
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
–0.05
–0.1
–0.15
Fig. 5.7 Example data from an IMU unit for driving on an
unpaved road
in early robotics due to the availability of low-cost sen-
sors with adequate performance. In underwater robotics
this is still a primary sensor. Sonar is discussed in detail
in Chap. 30.

Part A | 5.3
96
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Fig. 5.8 Example laser ranging sensor (SICK LMS291)
that is widely used in mobile robotics
Recent progress on environmental modeling and
navigation has, in many respects, been due to the emer-
gence of low-cost high-ﬁdelity laser scanning systems.
The SICK series of laser scanners are time-of-ﬂight
scanners. The scanner sends out a pulse of light and
measures the time to return. The standard scanner en-
ables estimation of distances up to 80 m at centimeter or
millimeter accuracy. The scanner measures distances in
a plane with an angular resolution of 0:51ı. The ﬁeld
of view is 180ı resulting in 181361 range measure-
ments. The sensor data are contaminated by uniformly
distributed noise, which must be considered in the de-
tection of features or integration of data into a raw
sensor map (Fig. 5.8).
Imaging sensors are a rich source of information
for sensing and estimation. Imaging sensors come in
a wide variety of conﬁgurations, varying according to
imaging geometry, image resolution, sensor technology
and the range of sensed spectral bands. Most readers
are no doubt familiar with the traditional three-CCD,
perspective color camera. In this case, there are three
charge-coupled detector (CCD) arrays, each receiving
a portion of the visible spectrum corresponding roughly
to the human perception of red, green, and blue colors.
A common and less expensive alternative is a so-called
single-chip CCD camera. In this case, a special spatial
array of color ﬁlters, usually referred to as a Bayer ﬁlter
after its inventor Bryce Bayer, is employed. The result-
ing spatial array is subsequently processed (a process
referred to as demosaicing) to provide color informa-
tion for each pixel.
In the United States, image sensors traditionally
contained 480 rows of 640 pixels according to the
National Television System Committee (NTSC) stan-
dard created for analog transmission of television
signals. The corresponding European standard, PAL,
has 576 lines of 768 pixels. More recently, the ad-
vent of digital interfaces such as IEEE 1394 and
Y
X
P
Z
Image plane
O
υ
u
Fig. 5.9 The pinhole camera model
Fig. 5.10 Catadioptric image and the same image mapped
to a cylindrical surface
USB 2.0 have allowed camera systems to be de-
veloped with signiﬁcantly improved resolution rang-
ing into the millions of pixels. At the same time,
cost-effective infrared (IR) and ultraviolet (UV) cam-
eras have become available, allowing the develop-
ment of advanced multispectral image interpretation
systems.
A traditional imaging sensor contains an optical
system that focuses light on a planar imaging array. In
most cases, this system can be modeled using the clas-
sical pinhole camera model (shown in Fig. 5.9). Given

Sensing and Estimation
5.3 Sensors
97
Part A | 5.3
a point .x; y; z/T in Euclidean space, the corresponding
camera pixel coordinates .u;v/T are given by
.u  uc/ D f
sx
x
z ;
.v  vc/ D f
sy
y
z ;
(5.1)
where f is the focal length of the lens system, uc and vc
are the pixel coordinates of the center of projection,
and sx and sy are the size of a single pixel on the imag-
ing array. In practice, these models are also augmented
with low-order models of image distortion. The val-
ues of these parameters for a given camera system can
be determined experimentally using a variety of meth-
ods [5.7].
By combining a traditional perspective camera with
a mirror, creating a so-called catadioptric system, it is
possible to create imaging geometries that map ﬁelds of
view as large as a hemisphere into a single image. Such
systems are useful, for example, for surveillance, and
their geometric properties provide for stable position
referencing for mobile navigation [5.8]. An example
image is shown in Fig. 5.10 together with the corre-
sponding image when mapped to a cylindrical surface.
Active ranging cameras, which combine images
from an optical camera with a dense range map, are now
also widely available and quite cost effective. These
systems perform triangulation between a light projec-
tor that throws a pattern with known structure into the
scene, and a camera that views the scene and detects
the pattern. By matching or correlating the pattern ele-
ments between the projector and the camera, and using
the known relationship between them, it is possible
to recover depth using standard methods. The cam-
era/projector pair for depth recovery typically operate
in the infrared to avoid the pattern being visible to
the human eye. Thus, these systems typically include
a third visible light camera to acquire a corresponding
color image. Hence the name RGB-D (red–green–blue–
depth) cameras. Fig. 5.11 shows two recent low-cost
RGB-D products. In Fig. 5.12 is show the fused output
for a tabletop scene.
The discussion above has touched on the most
commonly employed robotic sensing devices. Many
special-purpose sensors are employed for speciﬁc ap-
plications. In medicine (Chap. 63), ultrasound, X-ray,
Fig. 5.11 Picture of proxim and kinect RGB-D sensors
Fig. 5.12 Example of fused range images from RGB-D
camera and the same scene as an intensity textured mesh
computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imag-
ing are commonly employed. Underground mapping
makes use of ground-penetrating radar [5.9]. Underwa-
ter robotics makes use of many variations on acoustical
sensors. Further discussions of these more task-speciﬁc
sensing modalities can be found in the application chap-
ters in Part C of this handbook.

Part A | 5.4
98
Part A
Robotics Foundations
5.4 Estimation Processes
As discussed in the introduction, there are many differ-
ent techniques for combining information from sensors.
The appropriate set of techniques depends, to a great de-
gree, on what is known a priori about the environment,
what information is necessary for the task at hand,
and what models for the sensing system are appro-
priate. Common methodologies include simple voting-
based methods, parametric and nonparametric statisti-
cal estimation techniques, fuzzy logic-based systems,
and Dempster–Shafer theory.
To illustrate this point, consider the robot localiza-
tion problem introduced in Sect. 5.2. At the outset, if
nothing is known about the environment, the robot may
acquire a laser scan and try to produce an initial model
of the environment using line segments. Since nothing
is known a priori, the system must estimate:
1. The number of line segments
2. The data association between line segments and ob-
served data values
3. The parameters of the line segments themselves.
This is a challenging problem that can be at-
tacked by simple voting techniques such as the
Hough transform [5.10] or random sample consensus
(RANSAC) [5.11] or more sophisticated unsupervised
clustering methods such as k-means [5.12], expecta-
tion maximization (EM) [5.13], or generalized principal
component analysis (GPCA) [5.14]. In many cases, this
is a computationally intensive, iterative process.
Conversely, if a prior CAD model for the environ-
ment is known, then the problem is to produce a small
set of parameters (translation and rotation) of the
model to match the data. This problem can be solved,
using feature matching by aligning observed points
to the model with iterative closest-point algorithms
(ICP) [5.15] or other efﬁcient combinatorial matching
algorithms such as Monte Carlo methods [5.16]. The
best method to apply again depends to a great degree
on the structure of the environment and what is known
a priori.
Once an initial registration is known, new data can
take advantage of the fact that strong prior knowl-
edge is available. In particular, as the robot moves,
the sensor data should change in a predictable fash-
ion. Thus is it possible to make use of predictor–
corrector methods such as the Kalman ﬁlter [5.17,
18] or sequential importance sampling [5.19], provided
appropriate statistical characterizations of the sensing
system are available. The data association problem, if
present, can be addressed using a variety of general
techniques such as EM [5.12] or more specialized mod-
iﬁcations to the previously cited predictor–corrector
methods [5.20].
It is often the case that sensor data is corrupted by
occasional nonsensical values. For example, the laser
range ﬁnder in our example may occasionally return
a spurious range value due to a reﬂection. Many com-
monly used estimation techniques are not robust to such
so-called data outliers. Techniques from robust statis-
tics [5.21] can be used to improve the performance of
sensing and estimation systems in such cases.
Finally, we may want to consider what information
is actually important for the task at hand. Most of the
techniques above presume that the goal is to produce
an accurate estimate of a set of continuous parame-
ters closely related to the underlying data. However, in
some tasks, the parameter values themselves may not
be what is of interest. For example, suppose that the
goal of our robot is to drive through a doorway. Al-
though this clearly depends on an ability to estimate the
width of the door (a continuous parameter), the decision
is ultimately binary. This problem can be codiﬁed as
a decision problem. Decision problems can be modeled
using concepts from decision theory [5.22] including
zero–one loss functions, likelihood ratios, or probabil-
ity ratios. For example, in the case of ﬁtting through
a door, for a low-priority task there may be a low
cost associated with not attempting to move through
this particular door (necessitating replanning to ﬁnd
an alternative route) relative to attempting to navigate
through an opening that is too small (risking damage to
the robot or the door, or both). Conversely, if the task is
urgent, more risky behavior may be warranted.
For any given task (or decision), the amount of in-
formation necessary to reach the decision may vary, for
example, if the doorway is quite wide, it may require
relatively little information to safely navigate through
it. Conversely, a tight ﬁt may require close inspec-
tion before a decision can be reached. The problem of
determining the type and/or amount of information nec-
essary to reach a decision is referred to variously as the
sequential sampling problem [5.22], the sensor control
problem, or the sensor planning problem [5.23–25].
5.4.1 Point Estimation
In our robot localization example we saw several cases
where the key problem was to estimate an unknown
quantity that can be represented as a point in a vector
space. Examples include the location of a two-dimen-
sional (2-D) or three-dimensional (3-D) point or the
location of a robot. We also saw examples where the
problem was to locate the pose (position and orien-

Sensing and Estimation
5.4 Estimation Processes
99
Part A | 5.4
tation) of the robot, or parameters of a line segment.
The latter differ in that the underlying parameter space
is not a vector space. This introduces some additional
unique problems. We refer the reader to [5.26, 27] for
further discussion, and in the remainder of this chapter
restrict our attention to point estimation problems on
vector spaces. In our discussion, we assume the reader
is familiar with multivariate Gaussian distributions as
described in [5.28] and basic linear algebra [5.29].
In the remainder of this section, we consider the fol-
lowing general problem.
Given: an observation model
y D f .x; / :
(5.2)
Estimate: x 2 Re.n/ from observations y 2 Re.m/
where  is an unknown disturbance taking values
in Re.k/ and f is a known mapping from Re.k C n/
to Re.m/.
We divide our discussion into two topical areas:

Methods for performing estimation on batch and se-
quential data when f is linear,

Methods for performing estimation on sequential
data when f is nonlinear.
Estimation Techniques for Batch
and Sequential Data with Linear Models
In this section, we discuss linear and linearized es-
timation techniques for sequential data, including the
Kalman ﬁlter and extensions thereof. Our goal is to pro-
vide an overview of techniques available. The reader
may also wish to consult more in-depth references such
as [5.18, 30, 31] and (Chap. 35) for additional informa-
tion.
We ﬁrst consider the case when f in (5.2) is linear
in its arguments. In this case, we can write
y D Fx C B ;
(5.3)
where F 2 Re.m  n/ deﬁnes the (linear) relationship
between the unknown x and the observation y and B 2
Re.mm/. For the moment, we will drop B and assume
that  represents the complete disturbance model of the
system.
The least-squares method of estimating x from y
proceeds by solving the optimization problem
min
x kFx  yk2 :
(5.4)
This optimization has a unique solution Ox if and only
if the matrix F has full column rank. In this case, the so-
lution can be computed by solving the following linear
system
FTFOx D FTy :
(5.5)
In some cases, there may be reason to believe that some
observed elements are more reliable than others, and
hence should contribute more to the ﬁnal estimate. This
information can be incorporated by modifying (5.4) to
include a diagonal positive-deﬁnite weighting matrix W
as
min
x
.Fx  y/TW.Fx  y/ :
(5.6)
The solution is then given by solving
.FTWF/Ox D FTWy :
(5.7)
Although (5.3) included a disturbance component
(in the form of ), the parameter estimates computed
in (5.5) or (5.7) made no explicit use of this quantity.
However, we can often model the noise characteristics
of the underlying sensor using a statistical model and
recast our original estimation problem to incorporate
this information. One common method is to com-
pute the maximum-likelihood estimate (MLE), which is
a value Ox such that
p.yjOx/ D max
x
p.yjx/ :
(5.8)
For the linear additive model of (5.3), the likelihood
function can be expressed in a particularly simple form.
Suppose that  is described by a ﬁxed, known probabil-
ity density function D. The likelihood function is then
given by
p.yjx/ D D.y  Fx/ :
(5.9)
The MLE can be related to the previous least-
squares method as follows. Suppose that   N.0;ƒ/,
where N denotes a multivariate Gaussian density func-
tion with (mean) 0 and covariance ƒ. Upon observing
that the maximizing the value of the likelihood function
is equivalent to minimizing the negative log of the like-
lihood function, a short series of calculations shows that
the optimal maximum-likelihood estimate is computed
by weighted least squares with W D ƒ1.
Finally, there is often a reason to include the idea
that some parameters are more likely a priori to occur
as others. For example, when observing a car driving
on an expressway, a velocity of 60 mph is much more
likely than either 20 or 300 mph. This information can
be captured in prior statistics on the unknown value x.

Part A | 5.4
100
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Given a prior probably density on x; p.x/, Bayes the-
orem states that
p.xjy/ D p.yjx/p.x/
p.y/
D
p.yjx/p.x/
R
p.yjx/p.x/dx :
(5.10)
The maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) estimate
is the value Ox such that
p.Oxjy/ D max
x
p.xjy/ :
(5.11)
In general, the solution to this optimization problem can
be quite complex. Rather than pursue this course fur-
ther, we consider another alternative. Namely, provided
the second moments of p.xjy/ exist, it is possible to pro-
duce a least-squares estimate, in a statistical sense, by
solving the following optimization problem over an un-
known function ı
min
ı E kı.y/  xk2 :
(5.12)
That is, the best function ı is one that produces an es-
timate of x from y with minimum mean-square error
(MMSE). Thus, the estimator ı is often referred to as
an MMSE estimator.
It can be shown that, in the general case, the optimal
decision rule ı is the conditional mean [5.22]
ı.y/ D E Œx j y :
(5.13)
Unfortunately, this expression, as with the MAP esti-
mate deﬁned above, can be extremely difﬁcult to com-
pute for the general case. Later we consider methods
for computing approximations to (5.13). For now, we
again consider our previous linear observation model
(5.3) (without B). Additionally, we suppose that x and 
are independent random variables with ﬁnite second
moments, and both are zero-mean random variables.
Note that the latter is not really a restriction since it
can be accomplished by simply deﬁning a new variable
x0 D xEŒx. Finally, we will consider only linear func-
tions ı, that is, we can write Ox D ı.y/ D Ky.
With this, (5.12) can be expanded as
E kı.y/  xk2 D E kKy  xk2
D E kK.Fx C /  xk2
D E k.KF  I/xk2 C E kKk2
D tr

.KF I/ƒ.KF I/T C K†KT	
:
(5.14)
Here, the independence of x and  and the fact that they
are both zero mean has eliminated several terms. The
ﬁnal step makes use of the fact that kxk2 D tr.xxT/.
Taking derivatives with respect to K and setting
them equal to zero yields the solution
K D ƒFT.FƒFT C †/1 :
(5.15)
Thus, in this case the optimal estimate is given by a lin-
ear function of the observation, where the linear term
depends only on the variance of the underlying random
variables and the linear term deﬁning the observation
system.
If x is not zero-mean, but has mean , it is not hard
to show that the optimal estimate is
Ox D Ky C .I  KF/ ;
(5.16)
and that the variance of the estimate C is
ƒC D .I  KF/ ƒ :
(5.17)
The interested reader may wish to work this out for
a few simple cases, for example, if ƒ D † and F D I,
K D 1=2I and thus Ox D yC – a simple average – with
variance ƒC D 1=2ƒ:
When both the observation noise and prior statistics
are Gaussian distributions, then it can be shown that the
solution we have derived is also the MAP estimate for
the unknown x [5.22].
The Kalman Filter
With this as background, we are now in a position
to deﬁne the discrete-time Kalman–Bucy ﬁlter [5.32]
for linear systems. Consider the following time-series
model
xtC1 D Gxt C wt ;
(5.18)
yt D Fxt C t ;
(5.19)
where G is an n  n matrix describing the system time
evolution and x0 is distributed according to a Gaussian
distribution with mean Ox0 and variance ƒ0. In addi-
tion wt and t are zero-mean Gaussian independent
random variables for all t, wt is independent of wt0
for all t ¤ t0, and likewise t is independent of t0 for
all t ¤ t0. Finally, t has variance †t and wt has vari-
ance t.
Given an observation y1 it is possible, using the
derivation of the previous section, to compute an up-
dated estimate Ox1 with variance ƒ1. Note, that the
solution is a linear combination of two Gaussian ran-
dom variables: the observation value y1 and the prior
estimate Ox0. As any linear combination of Gaussian ran-
dom variables is also a Gaussian random variable, it
follows that the updated estimate is also Gaussian.

Sensing and Estimation
5.4 Estimation Processes
101
Part A | 5.4
G
F
K
+ +
+
z –1
z –1
x+
t
Λ–
t+1F (FΛ–
t+1F+)–1
(I – Kt+1F)Λ–
t+1
x+
t+1
Kt+1
x –
t+1
y –
t+1
y~
t+1
yt+1
GΛG T
Λ–
t+1
Λ+
t+1
Λ+
t
Ωt
Fig. 5.13 A summary of the Kalman ﬁlter
Now, we add one additional step: projection through
the dynamics model. To describe this, superscripts mi-
nus and plus will denote before and after the estimation
step, respectively. Thus, given an estimate OxC
t with vari-
ance ƒC
t , the projection ahead one time step produces
Ox
tC1 D GxC
t ;
(5.20)
ƒ
tC1 D GƒC
t GT C ˝t :
(5.21)
At this point, a new observation ytC1 is acquired and
the cycle repeats. The summarization of the complete
Kalman ﬁltering algorithm for linear systems is shown
in Fig. 5.13.
It is possible to show that the Kalman ﬁlter is the op-
timal ﬁlter, under the stated assumptions, in the mean-
square sense. It is also the optimal linear ﬁlter when
either or both Gaussian assumptions do not hold.
Nonlinear Estimation Techniques
for Sequential Data
The results of the previous subsection presume a linear
form for the relationship between the observation and
system state, additive noise, and a linear relationship
describing the state evolution. Furthermore, the stated
results are globally optimal for systems with Gaussian
observation and driving noise, but are only the best lin-
ear estimator if the noise sources are non-Gaussian.
As noted at the outset, the more general nonlinear
(discrete-time) system description is
xtC1 D gt.xt/ C wt ;
yt D ft.xt/ C t ;
(5.22)
where, for the moment, the noise model continues to be
additive.
Although this model contains nonlinear elements, it
is still possible to apply a variant of the Kalman ﬁlter,
the extended Kalman ﬁlter (EKF) by making use of the
Taylor-series expansion of the nonlinear elements about
the current estimates. Let Jf (resp. Jg) denote the Jaco-
bian matrix of the function f (resp. g). Supposing that
an estimate at time step t  1 exists, the ﬁrst-order ex-
pansion of (5.22) about this point yields
xtC1 D gt.Oxt1/ C Jg.Oxt1/.xt  OxtC1/ C wt ; (5.23)
yt D ft.Ox1/ C Jf.Oxt1/.xt  Oxt1/ C t :
(5.24)
Rearranging yields a linear form appropriate for the
previously deﬁned Kalman ﬁlter
QxtC1 D xtC1  gt.Oxt1/ C Jgt Oxt1 D Jgtxt C wt ;
(5.25)
Qyt D yt  ft.Oxt1/ C Jft Oxt1 D Jftxt C t :
(5.26)
In this form, Qx and Qy are new synthetic state and observa-
tion variables, Jg.Oxt1/ plays the role of G, and Jf.Oxt1/
plays the role of F.
It is worth noting that the EKF iterations are es-
sentially a form of weighted Newton iterations (i. e., an
iterative nonlinear estimation method). As a result, it is
often useful to iterate more than once on the same ob-
servation while holding the variance terms ﬁxed. This
allows the estimator to converge to a solution in the
presence of large disturbances or signiﬁcant nonlinear-
ities. Only after convergence are the variance terms
updated. This version of the Kalman ﬁlter is referred
to as the iterated extended Kalman ﬁlter (IEKF).
5.4.2 Other Approaches to Estimation
In the previous section, we reviewed a common and
widely used estimation method. However, there are sev-
eral alternative methodologies for solving parameter
estimation problems. Here we brieﬂy introduce two: se-
quential importance sampling and graphical models.
Sequential Importance Sampling
Much of the discussion heretofore has centered around
the notion of approximating everything known about
the system state using an estimated mean and covari-
ance. An alternative presents itself by simply going
back to Bayes theorem which states, in general, that
p.xnjy1; y2 : : : yn/ D p.y1; y2 : : : ynjxn/p.xn/
p.y1; y2 : : : yn/
: (5.27)
Assuming that yn is independent of all prior observa-
tions and states given xn, and that xn is independent
of xnk for k > 1 given xn1, this expression simpliﬁes

Part A | 5.4
102
Part A
Robotics Foundations
to
p.xnjxn1; yn/ D p.ynjxn/p.xn j xn1/
p.yn j xn1/
:
(5.28)
Recall that the optimal mean-square estimate is
given by the conditional mean which, in this case, is
ı.yn/ D E Œxn j yn :
(5.29)
In fact, we essentially showed that the Kalman ﬁlter is
a special case of this result for linear systems corrupted
by Gaussian noise.
The difﬁculty in implementing this procedure in the
general case ultimately comes down to the problem
of representing and computing with the distributions
that arise in the nonlinear, non-Gaussian case. However,
suppose that the heretofore continuous variable xn only
took on a discrete set of values. In this case, computing
Bayes theorem and other associated statistical quanti-
ties reduces to a straightforward set of computations on
this discrete set of variables. This can be simply done
for any distribution and any set of transformations.
Sequential important sampling (also known as parti-
cle ﬁltering, condensation, and a variety of other names)
is a way of applying this approach to continuous vari-
ables in a statistically sound manner. In order to perform
sequential importance sampling, it is assumed that:
1. It is possible to sample from the likelihood function
P.yn j xn/, and
2. It is possible to sample from the dynamical model
P.xn j xn1/.
Note the emphasis on sampling – there is no need to
explicitly exhibit an analytical form of the likelihood
function or of the dynamical model.
Given this, sequential important sampling, in its
simplest form, can be written as follows:
1. Let n1 D fhxk
n1; w k
n1i; k D 1; 2; : : : Ng repre-
sent a set of sample points xk
n1 together with a set
of weights w k
n1 with P w k
n1 D 1.
2. Compute
a
new
set
of
N
samples

n1 D
fhxk
n; 1=Ni; k D 1;2; : : : Ng as:
a) Choose a sample point xk1
n1 with probability
proportional to its weight w k1;
b) Sample
from
P.xn j xk
n1/
given
xk
n
with
weight 1=N;
3. Compute n D fhxk
n; P.yn j xk
n/i; k D 1; 2; : : : Ng.
It is easy to see that this set of steps is now in the form of
a recursive ﬁlter. Furthermore, at any time any statistic
of the associated distribution can be approximated from
the set of samples and associated weights.
Sampling-based ﬁlters of this form have found wide
applicability in a variety of challenging areas where
linear estimation techniques do not sufﬁce. These tech-
niques have been particularly successful, for problems
with low state dimension (typically n 	 3) and well-
constrained dynamics. For higher-dimensional prob-
lems or systems exhibiting high dynamic variability,
the number of particles necessary to obtain good ap-
proximations can become prohibitively large. How-
ever, even in these cases, sampling-based systems can
sometimes be engineered to produce acceptably good
results.
Graphical Models
Graphical models are a class of models that repre-
sent dependence and independence relationships among
a set of variables. Common examples of graphical mod-
els include Bayes nets, inﬂuence diagrams, and neural
nets. Graphical models are quite general – indeed much
of this chapter could have been written by ﬁrst deﬁn-
ing graphical models, and exploring specializations that
lead to the Kalman Filter, for example. Here, for reasons
of space, we focus on Bayes nets as a speciﬁc example
of graphical models.
A Bayesian network is a directed acyclic graph con-
sisting of nodes representing random variables, and
directed arcs representing probabilistic relationships
between pairs of random variables. Let parents.X/ de-
note the set of nodes which have arcs terminating at X,
and let X1; X2; : : : ; XN be the N random variables in the
graph. Then we can write
P.X1; X2; : : : ; XN/ D
N
Y
iD1
P.Xi j parents.Xi// :
(5.30)
For example, a Bayesian network representing a mo-
bile robot performing localization is shown in Fig. 5.14.
This graphical model encodes the sequential form of the
problem and is thus an example of a so-called recurrent
υt –1
Xt
ut
υt –1
Xt –1
ut –1
υt –1
Xt +1
ut –1
Fig. 5.14 An example of robot localization expressed as
a graphical model

Sensing and Estimation
5.4 Estimation Processes
103
Part A | 5.4
network. More discussion of such models can be found
in [5.33].
The structure of a Bayesian network encodes var-
ious independence relationships among variables. By
exploiting these independence relationships, it is pos-
sible to design efﬁcient inference algorithms. In partic-
ular, graphs which are acyclic even in their undirected
form (referred to as polytrees) admit linear time infer-
ence algorithms. More general graphs can be solved
using various types of iterative methods. In particular,
if the distributions in the network are of a continu-
ous type, variations on sequential importance sampling
can be used to solve problems in an approximate
sense [5.34].
Conditional Random Fields
In many cases of interest, including many of the ex-
amples in this chapter, the end goal is to infer or
predict a value or label from observed data. We might
then frame the problem by exploring the joint distri-
bution P.X; Y/ where X represents some data that is
observed and Y is what we would like to infer. Recall
that
P.X; Y/ D P.YjX/P.X/ :
If we take X D x for some observed values x,
then we see that P.X/ becomes constant, and infer-
ring a value for Y depends only on P.YjX/. If we
were to apply a Bayes Net to this problem, the model
would represent the complete joint probability distribu-
tion on X and Y, what is referred to as a generative
model. But, if we know X is always observed, then
much of this structure is irrelevant to our problem – we
don’t care about the probabilistic structure of X. This
observation has given rise to a specialization of graph-
ical models referred to as Conditional Random Fields,
or CRFs for short.
The immediate value of CRFs is their economy and
expressivity compared to graphical models. This has
immediate positive implications for the complexity of
both learning and inference. Traditionally CRF models
are learned using maximum likelihood-based methods
using gradient descent or other unconstrained optimiza-
tion techniques. However, recent methods like Cutting
Planes [5.35] and Block Coordinate Frank Wolfe [5.36]
pose it as a constrained optimization problem in the
form of a Structural Support Vector Machine. These
techniques tend to be more computationally efﬁcient
and are often more accurate.
CRFs have proven to be very general, and are
now extremely widely used for image processing, nat-
ural language processing, video processing – nearly
any problem where there is a series of data elements
1
X
Yt
X
Yt–d
10
20
30
40
50 100
b) Micro accuracy (%)
Skip-length (frames)
80
75
70
65
a)
Fig. 5.15 (a) A skip chain CRF for inferring symbolic labels (Y)
from robot kinematic and video data (X) acquired while a user
performed a surgical training task. (b) The change in classiﬁcation
accuracy as a function of the skip length (images courtesy of Colin
Lea)
from which some prediction is to be performed. For
example, Fig. 5.15 shows the graphical structure of
a skip-chain CRF designed to compute gesture labels
from kinematic and video data acquired from a surgi-
cal robot [5.37]. This can be viewed as a discriminative
generalization of a Hidden Markov Model (a genera-
tive model) that is designed to capture dependencies
over a speciﬁed period of time (the skip). The right side
shows the change in labeling performance as a function
of the skip length which is now a tunable parameter of
the model.
An in-depth discussion of CRFs goes well beyond
this chapter. The interested reader is referred to [5.38,
39] to learn more about the underlying theory and appli-
cation of CRFs. Because of their high interest, there are
a number of open-source packages for developing and
applying CRFs including PyStruct [5.40] for Python
and CRF++ for C++.
5.4.3 Robust Estimation Methods
In our previous discussions, we generally assumed that
all of the data was good, meaning that it was perhaps
corrupted by noise but ultimately carried information
about the problem at hand. However, in many cases,
the data may contain so-called outliers – data points
that are either much more highly corrupted than typical
data, or which are completely spurious. For example,
in our mapping application we might occasionally ob-
tain range data through multiple reﬂections. Thus, while
scanning a straight wall, most of the points would lie on
a straight line, but occasionally we would have a data
point that has a completely inconsistent range value.
Many common estimation methods are quite sen-
sitive to data outliers. Consider a very simple case:
estimating a single scalar value x by averaging a series
of observations X1; X2; : : : XN. Then we can write our

Part A | 5.4
104
Part A
Robotics Foundations
estimate Ox as
Ox D
N
X
iD1
Xi=N :
(5.31)
Now, without loss of generality, suppose that XN is an
outlier. We can rewrite the above as
Ox D
N1
X
iD1
Xi=n C XN=n :
(5.32)
It is now easy to see that we can produce any value of Ox
by manipulating Xn. In short, a single outlier can create
an arbitrarily poor estimate. More generally, the solu-
tion to any least-squares problem, e.g., estimating a line
from laser range data, takes the general form Ox D My.
By the same argument as above, it is easy to show
that any least-squares solution is likewise susceptible
to outliers.
The ﬁeld of robust statistics studies the problem of
estimation or decision making when the underlying data
are contaminated by outliers. In robust statistics, there
are two important concepts: the breakdown point and
inﬂuence function. The breakdown point is the propor-
tion of outliers (i. e., data with arbitrarily large errors)
that an estimator can tolerate before producing arbitrar-
ily large errors in an estimate. We argued above that
least-squares methods have a breakdown point of 0%
since the estimate can be perturbed arbitrarily far by
a single observation. By comparison, we might com-
pute an estimate by taking the median of the data, which
has a breakdown point of 50% – up to half of the data
can be outliers and meaningful results may still be pro-
duced.
Whereas the breakdown point quantiﬁes how many
outliers can be tolerated, the inﬂuence function quan-
tiﬁes how much an outlier affects an estimate. In the
case of least squares, the inﬂuence function is linear.
One way of creating new estimators with better robust-
ness is the method of M-estimators [5.21]. To produce
an M-estimate, we consider the following minimization
problem
min
Ox
N
X
iD1
	.Ox; yi/ :
(5.33)
Note that deﬁning 	.a;b/ D .a  b/2 leads to a least-
squares solution. However, we can now choose other
functions with better resistance to outliers. Fig. 5.16
shows three common examples.
Note that, in general, the optimization of (5.33)
is nonlinear and the result will often not exist in
closed form. Interestingly, it is often possible to
–1.5
–1
–0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
a)
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
–1.5
–1
–0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
b)
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
Fig. 5.16 (a) Three common robust M-estimation func-
tions: the square function, the absolute value, and the
Tukey biweight function. (b) The corresponding inﬂuence
functions
solve this problem using the method of iteratively
reweighted least squares (IRLS) [5.30, 41]. The idea
behind IRLS is quite simple. Recall that in (5.7) we in-
troduced a weighting matrix W. Suppose that, through
some means, we knew which data points were out-
liers. In this case, we could simply set the weights
for those points to zero, and the result would be
the least-squares estimate on the remaining (good)
data.
In IRLS, we alternate between hypothesizing out-
liers (through reweighting) and solving to produce a so-
lution (through least squares). Typically, the weight for
a point depends on the residual error of the estimate.
That is, suppose we compute
r D y  FOx :
(5.34)
Let  .y/ D d	=dx jOx; then we can set Wi;i D  .y/=ri.
It can be shown that in many cases this form of
weighting will lead to convergence. An example of
using IRLS techniques for video tracking is shown
in Fig. 5.17.
Voting-Based Methods
Another common method for dealing with outliers is to
choose a set of data and let it vote for a result. We dis-

Sensing and Estimation
5.4 Estimation Processes
105
Part A | 5.4
a)
b)
c)
Fig.5.17a–c An example of using an M-estimate imple-
mented via IRLS for visual tracking (after [5.42]). (a) Re-
sults of a face tracker in a single frame of video. The black
frame corresponds to a tracking algorithm without outlier
rejection and the white frame corresponds to the algorithm
with outlier rejection. (b) Magniﬁed view of the region in
the white frame; (c) the corresponding weighting matrix in
which darker areas mark outliers
cuss two common methods: RANSAC [5.11] and least
median of squares (LMedS) [5.43].
In both cases, we start with the idea that, amidst
all of the data (including outliers), there is an estimate
that is consistent with the good data. The problem is to
choose that estimate. Consider, however, our problem
of estimating a line from laser data, and suppose we
have 100 laser points. All we really need is to choose
two points correctly, ﬁt a line, and then count how many
other points are consistent with this line. If we (conser-
vatively) estimate that 3=4 of the data is good, then the
odds of choosing two good points is 9=16, or equiv-
alently, the odds of one or both points being outliers
is 7=16. If we now repeat this process a few (e.g., ten)
times, then the odds that all of our choices are bad
is .7=16/10 D 0:025%. To put it in other terms, there
is a 99:975% chance we have chosen a good pair of
points.
How do we decide to accept a sample? In RANSAC,
we vote by counting the number of samples that are
consistent with an estimate to within a given distance
threshold. For example, we would choose points that
are within a ﬁxed distance to the line we estimated. We
choose the candidate estimate with the largest number
of votes. In LMedS, we instead compute the median dis-
tance of all of the samples to the line. We then choose
the estimate with the least median value.
It is not hard to see that LMedS has a breakdown
point of 50% of the data. RANSAC, on the other hand,
can have a breakdown point that is potentially larger,
but it requires the choice of a threshold. RANSAC also
has the advantage that, once the inliers are identiﬁed,
it is possible to compute a least-squares estimate from
them, thus reducing the noise in the estimate.
Both RANSAC and LMedS can also provide good
starting solutions for a robust iterative method such as
IRLS.
5.4.4 Data Association Techniques
The previous section considered the case where there is
a known relationship between observations and a quan-
tity to be estimated. However, as was illustrated in our
initial mobile robot mapping problem, it may be the
case that we also have to compute this correspondence
in conjunction with estimation. In this case, an essen-
tial step in estimation is the data association problem:
producing a correspondence between the observed data
and quantities to be estimated.
The literature on this problem is enormous; here we
will focus on a few speciﬁc methods that have found
wide use. We will also separate our discussion into
causal (or sequential) association methods commonly
used when ﬁltering time-series data and noncausal (or
batch) methods that can be used when the complete data
set is available for processing. The latter is typically
treated with methods for data clustering.
In both cases, we can extend our previous models
and notation to include uncertainty as to the underlying
source of the data. To this end, we will use a superscript
on quantities to denote the observation model. Thus, our
observation model becomes
xk
tC1 D gk.xk
t/ C w k
t ;
(5.35)
yk
t D f k
t .xk
t/ C k
t ;
(5.36)
where k D 1 : : : M.
Clustering on Batch Data
Following the same course as our previous discussion
on point estimation, let us ﬁrst consider the case where
we do not make any statistical assumptions about the
data, and we have no system dynamics. Thus, we are
simply given the observations y1; y2; : : : ; yM. We have
unknown underlying parameters x1; x2; : : : ; xN (for the
moment, we take N as known). Our goal it to compute
an association mapping  such that .j/ D k if and only
if yj arose from the model parameters xk.
k-Means Clustering
The k-means algorithm for clustering and data asso-
ciation is simple, well established, and forms a good
starting point for our discussion. Here, we assume that
f .x/ D x – that is, we are provided with noisy obser-
vations of the underlying state vectors. The k-means
algorithm then proceeds as follows:
1. Pick N cluster centers fOxig.
2. For each observation yj, associate it with the closest
cluster center, that is, set .j/ D i, where
d.Oxi; yj/ D min
k
d.Oxk; yj/
(5.37)

Part A | 5.4
106
Part A
Robotics Foundations
for some distance function d (typically the Eu-
clidean distance).
3. Estimate the mean of the observation associated
with each cluster center as
Oxi D
X
j;.j/Di
yj :
(5.38)
4. Repeat steps 2 and 3.
In many cases and with good initialization, k-means
works quite well. However, it can also fail to produce
good clusters, and there is no guarantee that it will even
converge to a solution. It is common to repeat the algo-
rithm several times from different initial conditions and
take the result that has the best outcome. Note also that
the extension to linear observation models is straight-
forward by including F in (5.3) by deﬁning
d.Oxi; yj/ D kFOxi  yjk
(5.39)
and replacing (5.38) with the corresponding least-
squares estimator. Going a step further, if we have a sta-
tistical model for observed data, then we could make
use of the likelihood function introduced earlier and
deﬁne d.Oxi; yj/ D p.yjjOxi/ and make use of the MLE in
(5.38).
One disadvantage of the k-means algorithm is that,
even when we have known statistical models, it is not
guaranteed to converge. However, a variation, known as
expectation maximization, can be shown to converge.
Expectation Maximization for Data Association
and Modeling
The expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm [5.44] is
a general statistical technique for dealing with missing
data. In previous discussion, we made use of maxi-
mum-likelihood estimation to maximize the conditional
probability of observed data given a set of unknown
parameters. However, our use of MLE presumed that
we had complete knowledge of the data. In particular,
we knew the association between the data elements and
models.
Let use now assume that some of our data is miss-
ing. To this end, deﬁne YO and YU as the observed and
unobserved data, respectively. We then note that we can
write
p.YO; YUjx/ D p.YUjYO; x/p.YOjx/ :
(5.40)
Suppose now that we make a guess for Ox, and we
have a distribution over the unknown data YU (where
this comes from we will discuss in a minute). It follows
that we could compute the expected value of the log-
likelihood function (recall that maximizing the log like-
lihood is equivalent to maximizing the likelihood) as
Q.x; Ox/ D EYU Œlog p.YO; YUjx/jYO; Ox :
(5.41)
Note that we differentiate between the ﬁxed value Ox that
is usually needed to deﬁne the distribution over the un-
known data and the unknown x of the log-likelihood
function.
Ideally, we would then like to choose values for x
that make Q large. Thus, we can choose a new value
according to the iterative rule
Oxi D arg max
x
Q.x; Oxi1/ :
(5.42)
What can be shown is that this iteration will converge
to some local maximum of the objective function Q. It
is important to note that there is no guarantee that this
is, however, the global maximum.
How do we connect this with clustering? We con-
sider the observed data to be just that, the data we
have observed. Let the unobserved data be the associa-
tion values .j/; j D 1; 2; : : : M that determine which
model the observed data items originate from. Note
that this is a discrete random variable. Let us fur-
ther assume that N underlying clusters are distributed
according to a Gaussian distribution with mean xi
and covariance i. Let the unconditional probabil-
ity that a particular data item yj comes from clus-
ter i be ˛i. The unknown parameters are then  D
fx1; x2; : : : ; xN; 1; 2; : : : ; N; ˛1; ˛2; : : : ; ˛Ng: We
now use  and C to denote prior and updated parameter
estimates, respectively. For conciseness, we also deﬁne
wi;j D p.j D ijyj; / and we use a superscript C to de-
note updated parameter estimates. Then, after a series
of calculations [5.44], the EM algorithm for data clus-
tering becomes
E-Step:
wi;j D
p.yjj.j/ D i; /˛i
P
i p.yjj.j/ D i; /˛i
:
(5.43)
M-Step:
OxC
i
D
P
j yjwi;j
P
j wi;j
;
(5.44)
C
i
D
P
j yj.yj/twi;j
P
j wi;j
;
(5.45)
˛C
i
D
P
j wi;j
P
i
P
j wi;j
:
(5.46)
From this, we can see that EM produces a type of
soft clustering, as opposed to k-means which produces

Sensing and Estimation
5.4 Estimation Processes
107
Part A | 5.4
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
a) 10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
b) 10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
c) 10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
d) 10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
Fig.5.18a–d An example of clustering using expectation maximization. The ﬁgures are the results at iterations (a) 1,
(b) 2, (c) 5, and (d) 10
speciﬁc decisions (in terms of wi;j) as to which cluster
an observation belongs. In fact, the result of estimation
is the maximum-likelihood estimate of a Gaussian mix-
ture model which has the form
p.yj/ D
X
j
˛jN.yjOxj; ƒj/ ;
(5.47)
where N./ denotes a Gaussian density function.
Fig. 5.18 shows the results of executing the EM algo-
rithm on data sampled from a Gaussian mixture model.
Recursive Filtering
In the batch methods described above, we do not have
a priori information on state parameters. In the case
of recursive ﬁltering, we have the advantage that prior
state estimates, Oxk
t and k
t, are available for process-
ing at time t C 1. As before, for data yi
t; i D 1 : : : N,
the problem is to determine a mapping  W f1 : : : Ng !
f1 : : : Mg which associates data element i to model
k D .i/. In some cases, it is also useful to include
an outlier process to handle data that comes from no
known model. For this purpose, we can include 0 in the
range of the function, and use the mapping to zero as an
outlier.
Nearest-Neighbor Association
Analogous to k-mean clustering, a simple way of pro-
ducing a data association is to compute the data associ-
ation value as
.i/ D arg min
j
d.FjOxj; Oyi/ :
(5.48)
However, nearest-neighbor methods do not take into
account what we know about either the sensor data or
the estimate. That is, we may have a very very good
estimate of some model i and a very very bad esti-
mate for some other model j. If a sensor observation
is equidistance between them, does it make sense to
ﬂip a coin? Odds are that it is more likely to come
from j (with a larger variance) than i (with a smaller
variance).
A commonly used measure that can take this into
account is the Mahalanobis distance [5.45]. The idea is
to weight each value by its variance as
m.y1; y2/ D .y1y2/.ƒ1Cƒ2/1.y1y2/T : (5.49)
Thus, distances are scaled inversely with uncertainty. In
the case above, the observation with a higher variance
would produce the smaller distance, as desired.

Part A | 5.4
108
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Even using this as a weighting method, it is still
possible that we will make an error in data asso-
ciation. From an estimation point of view, this will
introduce an outlier in the estimation process with, as
discussed above, potentially disastrous results. Another
approach, analogous to IRLS, is instead to weight the
data based on the distance to a model. This leads natu-
rally to the notion of a data association ﬁlter. We refer
the reader to [5.20] for extensive discussions of these
techniques.
5.4.5 Modeling Sensors
To this point, we have introduced several sensing
modalities, and we have discussed several methods
for estimation. However, the latter often rely on hav-
ing statistical models for the former. Thus, no chapter
on sensing and estimation would be complete without
a short discussion of modeling sensors.
Developing a sensor model potentially involves four
major elements:
1. Creating a physical model
2. Determining a sensor calibration
3. Determining an error model
4. Identifying failure conditions.
The physical model is the relationship f between
the underlying quantities of interest (x) and the avail-
able data (y). In many cases, this relationship is obvious,
e.g., the distance from a laser sensor to a surface in the
world. In others, it may be less so, e.g., what is the right
model relating intensities in multiple camera images to
the distance to an observed point? In some cases, it
may be necessary to include computational processes,
e.g., feature detection and correspondence, in the sen-
sor model.
Once a physical model is determined, there is often
a process of sensor calibration. Such procedures are
typically speciﬁc to the sensor in question, for ex-
ample, the imaging geometry of a perspective camera
system requires identiﬁcation of two scale parame-
ters (governing image scale) and the location of the
optical center (two additional parameters). There are
also often lens distortion parameters. These parameters
can only be determined by a careful calibration proce-
dure [5.7].
Once a calibrated physical sensor model is avail-
able, determining an error model typically involves
performing an identiﬁcation of the statistical parame-
ters. Ideally, the ﬁrst step is to determine an empirical
distribution on errors. However, this can often be difﬁ-
cult, as it requires knowing accurate ground truth for the
underlying unknown parameters. This often requires
the development of a laboratory setup that can simulate
the expected sensing situation.
Given such an empirical distribution, there are sev-
eral important questions, including:
1. Are observations statistically independent?
2. Is the error distribution unimodal?
3. Can the essential aspects of the empirical error be
captured using common statistical quantities such
as the data variance?
We refer the reader to books on statistics and data
modeling [5.46] for further information on this topic.
Finally, it is important to understand when sen-
sors can and cannot provide reliable data, for example,
a laser sensor may be less accurate on dark surfaces than
on light ones, cameras do not produce meaningful data
if the lighting is too bright or too dark, and so forth.
In some cases, there are simple clues to these condi-
tions (e.g., simply looking at the intensity histogram of
a camera image can quickly determine if conditions are
suitable for processing). In some cases it is only pos-
sible to detect conditions in context (e.g., two range
sensors disagree on the distance to a surface). In some
cases failure is only detectable in retrospect, e.g., after
a 3-D surface model is built it is apparent that a hy-
pothesized surface would be occluded by another and
must therefore be a multiple reﬂection. In a truly robust
sensing system, all available possibilities for verifying
sensor operation should be exploited.
5.4.6 Other Uncertainty Management
Methods
Due to the limitations of space, we have necessarily
limited our discussion to cover the most commonly
used sensing and estimation methods. It is important
to note that many other alternative uncertainty manage-
ment methods have been proposed and employed with
success.
For example, if it is known that sensing error is
bounded, constraint-based methods can be quite ef-
fective at performing point estimation [5.47, 48]. Al-
ternatively, if only partial probability models can be
identiﬁed, Dempster–Shafer methods can be employed
to make judgments [5.49].
Fuzzy logic allows graded membership of a set.
With fuzzy set theory it is possible to have partial mem-
bership. As an example in classiﬁcation of data it might
be difﬁcult to select between two categories such as av-
erage and tall and gradual shifts may make sense. Such
methods have for example been used for situation as-
sessment and navigation as reported by [5.50] for the
DAMN architecture.

Sensing and Estimation
5.5 Representations
109
Part A | 5.5
5.5 Representations
Sensor data can be used directly for control but it is
also used for estimation of the state of the robot and/or
the world. The deﬁnition of state and the appropriate
methods for estimation are closely related to the repre-
sentation adopted for the application.
There are a rich variety of possible world represen-
tations including most typical geometric elements such
as points, curves, surfaces, and volumes. A fundamental
aspect in robotics is the concept of rigid-body pose. The
pose of a robot or an entity in the world is characterized
by position and orientation with respect to a reference
frame.
In general, pose is represented by the pair .R; H/.
Here R is the orientation of the object represented by
a rotation matrix with respect to a reference frame. Sim-
ilarly, H represents the translation of the object with
respect the reference frame. There is a rich set of po-
tential representations for the transformation between
reference frames as detailed in the chapter on Kinemat-
ics (Chap. 2) and in [5.51].
Sensory data is acquired in a local sensor reference
frame, for example, a sonar transducer, a laser scan-
ner, and a stereo imaging system would all measure
distances to surfaces in the world relative to their own
frame. However, if the goal is to combine this infor-
mation into a common world model, the data must be
transformed into a robot-centered reference frame, or
possibly into a ﬁxed world (inertial) reference frame.
In particular, the world-centered reference frame enable
simple transfer across robot motions and communica-
tion to other robots and/or users.
For the purposes of discussion, most representations
for the integration of sensor data can be categorized into
four general classes of models:

Raw sensor data models

Grid-based models

Feature-based models

Symbolic or graphical models.
Naturally, it is also possible to combine elements of
these four categories to achieve hybrid models of the
environment.
5.5.1 Raw Sensor Representations
For simple feedback control [5.52] it is common to inte-
grate raw sensory data directly into the control system,
as in many cases it is unnecessary to have a world model
for the control. For example, proprioceptive sensing
is often used in this manner: basic trajectory control
makes direct use of encoder information from joints,
and force control operates directly from force or torque
information from force sensors.
Raw sensor models are less common with extero-
ceptive sensing, but there are cases where it can be use-
ful. One example is mobile robot mapping from dense
point data. This approach has in particular been made
popular for laser range sensors, where scan alignment
is used for the generation of point-based world models.
The work by [5.53, 54] demonstrates how a number of
laser range scans can be combined into a joint model of
the environment. More formally a scan of the environ-
ment at time t is represented as a point set
Pt D fpi D .	i; i/ji 2 1 : : : Ng :
(5.50)
Two different scans Pt and PtC1 are then aligned
through a standard rigid body transformation. The es-
timation of the transformation is typically achieved
through use of the ICP algorithm [5.15]: assume
that HŒ0 is an initial estimate of the transformation be-
tween the two point sets and that jjpt  ptC1jj is the
Euclidean distance between a point from Pt and a point
from PtC1. If furthermore CP is a function to locate the
closest point from one set in the other set, then let C be
the set of point correspondences between the two sets.
Through iterations of the following algorithm,
1. Compute Ck D [N
iD1fpi; CPŒHŒk1.pi; PtC1/g,
2. Estimate the HŒk that minimizes the LSQ error be-
tween the points in Ck until the error has converged
an estimate of the scan alignment can be found and
a joint model of the environment can be constructed.
The model is simple to construct and well suited
for integration of sensor data from a single modal-
ity. Typically the model does not include information
about uncertainty and, as the model grows the complex-
ity, O.P
t jPtj/ becomes an issue.
5.5.2 Grid-Based Representations
In a grid-based representation the world is tessellated
into a number cells. The cells can contain informa-
tion about environmental features such as temperature,
obstacles, force distribution, etc. The dimensionality
of the grid is typically two or three, depending on
the application. The tessellation can either be uni-
form or tree based using quad-tree or oct-trees [5.55].
The tree-based methods are in particular well suited
for handling of inhomogeneous and large-scale data
sets. In a grid model each cell contains a probability
over the parameter set. As an example, when using

Part A | 5.5
110
Part A
Robotics Foundations
the grid model for representation of a physical envi-
ronment, the cell speciﬁes occupied (O) or free (F)
and the cell encodes the probability P.occupied/. Ini-
tially where there is no information the grid is initial-
ized to P.O/ D 0:5 to indicate unknown. It is further
assumed that sensor models are available that spec-
ify P.RjSij/, i. e., the probability of detection objects
for a given sensor and location. Using Bayes theo-
rem (5.10) it is now possible to update the grid model
according to
pij.t C 1/ D
P.RjSij D O/pij.t/
P.RjSij D O/pij.t/ C P.RjSij D F/.1  pij.t// ;
where pij is computed across the grid model whenever
new data are acquired.
The grid-based model has been widely used in mo-
bile robotics [5.56, 57] and in medical imaging where
image volumes are quite common [5.58]. Volume mod-
els can be relative large. As an example a millimeter-
resolution grid model of the human head requires 4 GB
of storage, and thus demands signiﬁcant computational
resources for maintenance.
5.5.3 Feature Representations
Both the raw sensor representation and the grid-based
models contain a minimum of abstraction for the sen-
sory data. In many cases there is an interest in extracting
features from the sensor data to reduce the storage
requirement and only preserve data that are invariant
across motion of the platform or external objects. Fea-
tures span most standard geometric entities such as
points (p), lines (l), planes (N; p), curves (p.s/), and
more general surfaces. For estimation of properties of
the external world there is a need for a hybrid model in
which collections of features are integrated into a uni-
ﬁed model of state.
In general a point is represented in R.3/. Sensors
have associated noise and, consequently, in most cases
points have an associated uncertainty, typically mod-
eled as Gaussian with mean  and standard deviation .
The estimation of the statistics is achieved using ﬁrst-
and second-order moments.
Line features are more difﬁcult to represent. The
mathematical line can be represented by the vector pair
(p; t), i. e., a point on the line and the tangent vector.
In many practical applications the line has a ﬁnite ex-
tent, and there is a need to encode the length of the line,
which can be achieved using end points, start point,
tangent, and length. In some cases it is advantageous
u1
u5
u2
u4
u6
u7
u8
u9
u3
c12
c45
c46
c67
c78
c89
c23
c34
Fig. 5.19 A topological map of a spatial environment
to have a redundant representation of the line model
to simplify updating and matching. The relation be-
tween end-point uncertainties and other line parameters
can be derived analytically, as described in [5.59]. The
estimation of line parameters is often based on the pre-
viously describe RANSAC method through the use of
the Hough transform [5.10], which is another voting-
based method.
For more complex feature models such as curves
or surfaces there is a corresponding need to utilize de-
tection methods that facilitate robust segmentation of
features, and estimation of the associated uncertainty.
A comprehensive description of such methods is avail-
able from [5.44].
5.5.4 Symbolic/Graph-Based Models
All of the representations presented in Sects. 5.5.1–
5.5.3 are parametric in nature with limited associated
semantics. Methods for the recognition of structures,
spaces, locations, and objects have seen major recent
progress in particular due to advances in statistical
learning theory [5.12, 60]. Consequently, today there
exist a variety of methods for the recognition of com-
plex structures in sensor data, such as landmarks, road
surfaces, body structures, etc. Given the availability
of recognized structures it is possible to represent the
environment using the previously discussed graphical
models. In general a graph is composed of a set of
nodes N and a set of edges E that connect nodes.
Both nodes and edges can have attributes associated
such as labels and distances. One example of a graph
structure is a topological map of the environment as
shown in Fig. 5.19. The graph representation could also
be a semantic model of the environment (objects and
places) or a representation of the composition of an ob-
ject to assembled.
In terms of model updating semantic/graph-based
representations can take advantage of recent advances
in Bayesian reasoning as presented by Pearl [5.61], and
exempliﬁed in [5.62].

Sensing and Estimation
References
111
Part A | 5
5.6 Conclusions and Further Readings
Sensing and estimation continues to be a challenging
and very active area of robotics research. Several areas
of sensing such as computer vision and medical imag-
ing are themselves large and diverse research areas. At
the same time, new fundamental and applied techniques
in estimation continue to be developed. Indeed, it is fair
to say that perception continues to be one of the most
challenging areas of robotics research.
Given this wealth of activity, no single chapter can
hope to cover all of the material that can be useful
in the development of sensor-based robotics. However,
the methods that have been presented here are rep-
resentative of the most commonly used techniques in
robotics. In particular, linear techniques such as the
Kalman ﬁlter continue to form the backbone of percep-
tive robotics. Part C of the handbook provides more in-
depth coverage of several of the key topics in sensing
and estimation.
For the reader wishing to learn more, general dis-
cussion on the design, physics, and use of a rich
variety of sensors can be found in the Handbook of
Modern Sensors [5.3]. A discussion of sensors for mo-
bile robots can be found in [5.63], though signiﬁcant
advances have been achieved since the book was pub-
lished more than a decade ago. Sensing and estimation
using computer vision is described in detail in [5.64]
and [5.65].
The basic estimation theory is covered in a num-
ber of excellent text books. Much of the detec-
tion and linear estimation theory is covered in depth
in [5.20] and [5.66]. General statistical estimation is
covered in [5.12] and [5.13] and the more recently
updated version [5.44]. Robust methods are described
in detail in [5.21, 43]. In-depth coverage of estima-
tion methods for mobile systems is also covered
in [5.33].
References
5.1
D.C. Marr: Vision (Freeman, Bedford 1982)
5.2
R. Siegwart, I.R. Nourbakhsh, D. Scaramuzza: Intro-
duction to Autonomous Mobile Robots, Intelligent
Robotics and Autonomous Systems (MIT Press, Cam-
bridge 2011)
5.3
J. Fraden: Handbook of Modern Sensors: Physic, De-
sign and Applications, 2nd edn. (Springer, New York
1996)
5.4
H.
Yousef,
M.
Boukallel,
K.
Althoefer:
Tactile
sensing for dexterous in-hand manipulation in
robotics — A review, Sensors Actuators A: Physical
167(2), 171–187 (2011)
5.5
M.I. Tiwana, S.J. Redmond, N.H. Lovell: A review
of tactile sensing technologies with applications in
biomedical engineering, Sensors Actuators A: Physi-
cal 179, 17–31 (2012)
5.6
G. Dissanayaka, S. Sukkarieh, E. Nebot, H. Durrant-
Whyte: The aiding of a low-cost strapdown inertial
measurement unit using vehicle model constraints
for land vehicle applications, IEEE Trans. Robot. Au-
tom. 17(5), 731–748 (2001)
5.7
Z. Zhang: A flexible new technique for camera cali-
bration, IEEE Trans. Pattern. Anal. Mach. Intell. 22(11),
1330–1334 (2000)
5.8
D. Burschka, J. Geiman, G.D. Hager: Optimal land-
mark configuration for vision-based control of mo-
bile robots, Proc. Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. ICRA (2003)
pp. 3917–3922
5.9
J. Baker, N. Anderson, P. Pilles: Ground-penetrat-
ing radar surveying in support of archeological site
investigations, Comput. Geosci. 23(10), 1093–1099
(1997)
5.10
P.V.C. Hough: A method and means for recognizing
complex patterns, U.S. Patent 306 9654 (1962)
5.11
M.A. Fischler, R.C. Bolles: Random Sample concen-
sus: A paradigm for model fitting with applications
to image analysis and automated cartography, Com-
mun. ACM 24, 381–395 (1981)
5.12
T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, J. Friedman: The Elements
of Statistical Learning, Springer Series in Statistics
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2002)
5.13
R.O. Duda, P.E. Hart: Pattern Classification and Scene
Analysis (Wiley-Interscience, New York 1973)
5.14
R. Vidal, Y. Ma, J. Piazzi: A new GPCA algorithm for
clustering subspaces by fitting, differentiating and
dividing polynomials, Proc. Int. Conf. Cumput. Vis.
Pattern Recog. 1, 510–517 (2004)
5.15
P. Besl, N.D. McKay: A method for registration of 3-D
shapes, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 14(2),
239–256 (1992)
5.16
F. Dellaert, S. Seitz, C. Thorpe, S. Thrun: Special issue
on Markov chain Monte Carlo methods, Mach. Learn.
50, 45–71 (2003)
5.17
A. Gelb (Ed.): Applied Optimal Estimation (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1974)
5.18
D. Simon: Optimal State Estimation: Kalman, H In-
finity, and Nonlinear Approaches (Wiley, New York
2006)
5.19
A. Doucet, N. de Freitas, N. Gordon: Sequential Monte
Carlo Methods in Practice (Springer, Berlin, Heidel-
berg 2001)
5.20
Y. Bar-Shalom, T. Fortmann: Tracking and Data As-
sociation (Academic, New York 1988)
5.21
P.J. Huber: Robust Statistics (Wiley, New York 1981)
5.22
J.O. Berger: Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian
Analysis, 2nd edn. (Springer, New York 1985)
5.23
G.D. Hager: Task-Directed Sensor Fusion and Plan-
ning (Kluwer, Boston 1990)

Part A | 5
112
Part A
Robotics Foundations
5.24
S. Abrams, P.K. Allen, K. Tarabanis: Computing cam-
era viewpoints in a robot work-cell, Int. J. Robot.
Res. 18(3), 267–285 (1999)
5.25
M. Suppa, P. Wang, K. Gupta, G. Hirzinger: C-
space exploration using noisy sensor models, Proc
(IEEE, Int. Conf. Robot. Autom 2004) pp. 1927–
1932
5.26
G.S. Chirikjian, A.B. Kyatkin: Engineering Applica-
tions of Noncommutative Harmonic Analysis (CRC,
Boca Raton 2000)
5.27
J.C. Kinsey, L.L. Whitcomb: Adaptive identification on
the group of rigid body rotations and its application
to precision underwater robot navigation, IEEE Trans.
Robot. 23, 124–136 (2007)
5.28
P.J. Bickel, K.A. Doksum: Mathematical Statistics, 2nd
edn. (Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River 2006)
5.29
G. Strang: Linear Algebra and its Applications, 4th
edn. (Brooks Cole, New York 2005)
5.30
P. McCullagh, J.A. Nelder: Generalized Linear Models,
2nd edn. (Chapman Hall, New York 1989)
5.31
E.L. Lehmann, G. Casella: Theory of Point Estimation
(Springer, New York 1998)
5.32
R.E. Kalman: A new approach to linear filtering and
prediction problems, Transactions of the ASME, J. Ba-
sic Eng. 82, 35–45 (1960)
5.33
S. Thrun, D. Fox, W. Burgard: Probabilistic Robotics,
Autonomous Robotics and Intelligent Agents (MIT
Press, Cambridge 2005)
5.34
C. Bishop: Pattern Recognition and Machine Learn-
ing (Springer, New York 2006)
5.35
T. Joachims, T. Finley, C.-N.J. Yu: Cutting-plane
training of structural SVMs, Mach. Learn. 77(1), 27–59
(2009)
5.36
S. Lacoste-Julien, M. Jaggi, M. Schmidt, P. Pletscher:
Block-coordinate
Frank-Wolfe
optimization
for
structural SVMs, Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (2013)
pp. 53–61
5.37
L. Tao, L. Zappella, G.D. Hager, R. Vidal: Surgical
gesture segmentation and recognition, Med. Image
Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervent., MICCAI 2013
(2013) pp. 339–346
5.38
C. Sutton, A. McCallum: An introduction to con-
ditional random fields for relational learning. In:
Introduction to Statistical Relational Learning, ed.
by L. Getoor, B. Taskar (MIT Press, Cambridge 2006)
pp. 93–128
5.39
C. Sutton, A. McCallum: An introduction to condi-
tional random fields, Found. Trends Mach. Learn. 1,
2055–2060 (2010)
5.40
C.A. Müller, S. Behnke: PyStruct-learning structured
prediction in python, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 1, 2055–
2060 (2013)
5.41
J.W. Hardin, J.M. Hilbe: Generalized Linear Mod-
els and Extensions, 2nd edn. (Stata, College Station
2007)
5.42
G.D. Hager, P.N. Belhumeur: Efficient region tracking
of with parametric models of illumination and ge-
ometry, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 20(10),
1025–1039 (1998)
5.43
P.J. Rousseauw, A. Leroy: Robust Regression and Out-
lier Detection (Wiley, New York 1987)
5.44
R.O. Duda, P.E. Hart, D.G. Stork: Pattern Classifica-
tion, 2nd edn. (Wiley, New York 2001)
5.45
P.C. Mahalanobis: On the generalised distance in
statistics, Proc. Nat. Inst. Sci. India 12, 49–55 (1936)
5.46
J. Hamilton: Time Series Analysis (Princeton Univ.
Press, Princeton 1994)
5.47
S. Atiya, G.D. Hager: Real-time vision-based robot
localization, IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 9(6), 785–800
(1993)
5.48
G.D. Hager: Task-directed computation of qualita-
tive decisions from sensor data, IEEE Trans. Robot.
Autom. 10(4), 415–429 (1994)
5.49
G. Shafer: A Mathematical Theory of Evidence
(Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton 1976)
5.50
J. Rosenblatt: DAMN: A distributed architecture for
mobile navigation, AAAI 1995 (Spring, Symposium on
Lessons Learned for Implementing Software Archi-
tectures for Physical Agents 1995) pp. 167–178
5.51
R.M. Murrey, Z. Li, S. Sastry: A Mathematical Intro-
duction to Robotic Manipulation (CRC, Boca Raton
1993)
5.52
K.J. Åström, B. Wittenmark: Adaptive Control, 2nd
edn. (Addison-Wesley, Reading 1995)
5.53
S. Gutmann, C. Schlegel: AMOS: Comparison of scan-
matching approaches for self-localization in in-
door environments, 1st Euromicro Conf. Adv. Mobile
Robotics (1996) pp. 61–67
5.54
S. Gutmann: Robust Navigation for Autonomous Mo-
bile Systems, Ph.D. Thesis (Alfred Ludwig University,
Freiburg 2000)
5.55
H. Samet: The quadtree and related hierarchical data
structures, ACM Comput. Surv. 16(2), 187–260 (1984)
5.56
A. Elfes: Sonar-based real-world mapping and navi-
gation, IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 3(3), 249–265 (1987)
5.57
A. Elfes: A Probabilistic Framework for Robot Percep-
tion and Navigation, Ph.D. Thesis (Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh 1989)
5.58
M.R. Stytz, G. Frieder, O. Frieder: Three-dimensional
medical imaging: Algorithms and computer systems,
ACM Comput. Surv. 23(4), 421–499 (1991)
5.59
R. Deriche, R. Vaillant, O. Faugeras: From Noisy Edges
Points to 3D Reconstruction of a Scene: A robust
approach and its uncertainty analysis. In: Theory
and Applications of Image Analysis, (World Scien-
tific, Singapore 1992) pp. 71–79
5.60
V.N. Vapnik: Statistical Learning Theory (Wiley, New
York 1998)
5.61
J. Pearl: Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Sys-
tems (Morgan Kaufmann, New York 1988)
5.62
M. Paskin: Thin Junction Tree Filters for Simultaneous
Localisation and Mapping, Ph.D. Thesis (University
of California, Berkley 2002)
5.63
H.R. Everett: Sensors for Mobile Robots: Theory and
Application (Peters, London 1995)
5.64
D. Forsyth, J. Ponce: Computer Vision - A Modern Ap-
proach (Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River 2003)
5.65
R. Hartley, A. Zisserman: Multiple View Geometry in
Computer Vision (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge
2000)
5.66
S. Blackman, R. Popoli: Design and Analysis of Mod-
ern Tracking Systems (Artech House, London 1999)

Multimedia Contents Model Ident
113
Part A | 6.1
6. Model Identification
John Hollerbach, Wisama Khalil, Maxime Gautier
This chapter discusses how to determine the kine-
matic parameters and the inertial parameters
of robot manipulators. Both instances of model
identification are cast into a common framework
of least-squares parameter estimation, and are
shown to have common numerical issues relating
to the identifiability of parameters, adequacy of
the measurement sets, and numerical robustness.
These discussions are generic to any parameter
estimation problem, and can be applied in other
contexts.
For kinematic calibration, the main aim is to
identify the geometric Denavit–Hartenberg (DH)
parameters, although joint-based parameters
relating to the sensing and transmission ele-
ments can also be identified. Endpoint sensing
or endpoint constraints can provide equivalent
calibration equations. By casting all calibration
methods as closed-loop calibration, the calibra-
tion index categorizes methods in terms of how
many equations per pose are generated.
Inertial parameters may be estimated through
the execution of a trajectory while sensing one
or more components of force/torque at a joint.
Load estimation of a handheld object is simplest
because of full mobility and full wrist force-torque
sensing. For link inertial parameter estimation,
restricted mobility of links nearer the base as well
as sensing only the joint torque means that not
6.1
Overview ..............................................
113
6.2 Kinematic Calibration............................
115
6.2.1
Serial-Link Robot Manipulators.....
116
6.2.2 Parallel Manipulator Calibration ....
120
6.3 Inertial Parameter Estimation................
122
6.3.1
Link Inertial Parameter Estimation.
122
6.3.2 Load Inertial Parameter Estimation
124
6.3.3 Identification
of Total Joint Drive Gains ..............
126
6.3.4 Link Parameter Estimation
for More Complex Structures..........
126
6.4 Identifiability
and Numerical Conditioning..................
127
6.4.1
Identifiability ..............................
128
6.4.2 Observability ...............................
131
6.4.3 Scaling........................................
132
6.4.4 Recursive Least Squares
and the Kalman Filter ..................
134
6.5 Conclusions and Further Reading...........
135
6.5.1
Relation to Other Chapters ............
135
6.5.2 Further Reading...........................
136
Video-References.........................................
136
References...................................................
137
all inertial parameters can be identified. Those
that can be identified are those that affect joint
torque, although they may appear in complicated
linear combinations.
6.1 Overview
There are many different kinds of models in robotics,
whose accurate identiﬁcation is required for precise
control. Examples from the previous chapters include
sensor models, actuator models, kinematic models, dy-
namic models, and ﬂexibility models. System identiﬁ-
cation is the general ﬁeld concerned with the process
of identifying models from measurements. Generally
speaking, there are two types of models: parametric
and nonparametric models. Parametric models are de-
scribed by a few parameters, which are adequate to

Part A | 6.1
114
Part A
Robotics Foundations
characterize the accuracy of a model throughout the
working range. Examples include sensor gain and off-
set, the DH parameters for links, and rigid-body inertial
parameters. Parametric models are particularly appro-
priate for robotics, whose components are manmade
and whose properties are controlled and understood.
Nonparametric models include the impulse re-
sponse and the Bode plot for linear systems, and Wiener
and Volterra kernels for nonlinear systems [6.1]. A non-
parametric model can be used as a stepping stone
towards identifying a parametric model; for example,
a Bode plot (graph of amplitude and phase versus input
frequency) is often used to decide on model order, such
as whether an actuator should be modeled as a second-
or third-order system. Otherwise, nonparametric mod-
els are required when the system’s properties are so
complicated that a few lumped parameters do not suf-
ﬁce. This is particularly true for biological systems.
This chapter will describe the parametric calibration
of the following kinds of models:
1. Kinematic parameters. Kinematic calibration is the
process of locating coordinate systems of objects
relative to each other. These objects may be isolated
from each other, or they may be linked by joints.
Examples include:

Locating a robot relative to a global reference
frame.

Locating a stereo vision system relative to
a robot.

Locating a grasped object relative to the manip-
ulator’s gripper frame.

Locating neighboring coordinate systems of
links of a robot manipulator.
2. Rigid-body inertial parameters. These parameters
are required to predict the driving forces and torques
to move objects and manipulators.
Suppose there are Npar parameters combined into
an Npar  1 parameter vector  D f1; : : : ; Nparg. The
parameters may appear linearly or nonlinearly in the
model.
Linear model:
yl D Al ;
(6.1)
Nonlinear model:
yl D f.xl; / ;
(6.2)
where yl D fyl
1; : : : ; yl
Mg is the M  1 vector of output
variables and xl D fxl
1; : : : ; xl
ng is the vector of input
variables. For the linear model, Al is an M Npar matrix
whose entries Al
ij are functions of the input variables xl.
Any entry Al
ij may be a complicated nonlinear function
of xl, but it evaluates to just a number. For the non-
linear model, an explicit equation is shown in which
the input variables appear in a nonlinear function f D
ff1; : : : ; fMg. Implicit nonlinear models f.yl; xl; / D 0
may also appear in calibration [6.2]; they are han-
dled similarly to explicit nonlinear models (Sect. 6.2.2).
There may be P different measurements; a particu-
lar measurement is indicated by the superscript l D
1; : : : ; P.
For linear models, information from different mea-
surements is combined by stacking the P (6.1)
y D A ;
(6.3)
where y D fy1; : : : ; ylg is an MP 1 vector of all output
measurements and A D fA1; : : : ; Alg is MP  Npar. The
parameters are estimated by ordinary least squares
 D .ATA/1ATy :
(6.4)
In statistics, the matrix A is called the regressor matrix
and the least-squares solution is called regression [6.3].
An example of a linear model is the rigid-body model
for inertial parameters.
The Gauss–Newton method [6.3] is typically em-
ployed to estimate the nonlinear model (6.2). First,
absorb the input variables xl (which can be considered
as a number of constants) into the nonlinear func-
tion f l, now given a superscript. The model is linearized
through a Taylor series expansion at a current esti-
mate k of the parameters at iteration k
yl
c D f l.k C /
D f l.k/ C @f l./
@
ˇˇˇˇ
Dk 
C higher order terms

 f l.k/ C Al ;
(6.5)
where yl
c are the computed values of the output variables
and Al D @f l=@ is a Jacobian matrix evaluated at k.
Higher-order terms in the Taylor series are ignored,
yielding the linearized form (6.5). The bold assumption
is now made that a correction  to the parameter esti-
mate k causes the computed output variables to equal
the measurements: yl
c D yl. Deﬁning yl D yl  f l.k/
as the error between the output measurement and the
predicted output with the current model k, the lin-
earized (6.5) becomes
yl D Al :
(6.6)
The linearized equation is then stacked for P measure-
ments for the estimation form
y D A :
(6.7)

Model Identification
6.2 Kinematic Calibration
115
Part A | 6.2
A correction  to the parameter estimates is now
found by ordinary least squares
 D .ATA/1ATy :
(6.8)
This
process
is
iterated
with
a
new
estimate
kC1 D k C 
until
the
error

becomes
sufﬁciently small. The Gauss–Newton method has
quadratic convergence, which is very fast, provided
that there is a good initial estimate 0 of the parameters
and the nonlinearity is not too severe. An example of
a nonlinear model is the kinematic model containing
the DH parameters. The nonlinearity is mild because
it is due to sines and cosines, so the Gauss–Newton
method usually has good convergence properties.
Both for linear and nonlinear estimation, however,
rank deﬁciencies and numerical ill-conditioning may
cause problems in inverting ATA. Rank deﬁciencies
may result from two problems:
1. Inadequate data. The quality of the data for es-
timating the parameters can be quantiﬁed by an
observability index, such as the condition num-
ber [6.4] of the regressor matrix A. A different
choice of data to maximize the observability index
might result in more robust estimates. Examples are
choosing different poses for kinematic calibration,
or different trajectories for inertial parameter esti-
mation.
2. Unidentiﬁable parameters. Perhaps no set of data
from an experiment can identify some of the param-
eters. A procedure has to be found to eliminate or
circumvent the unidentiﬁable parameters. Parame-
ter elimination is usually done by using the singular
value decomposition of A, while circumvention can
be achieved by using a priori values and ridge re-
gression. This does not mean that the parameters are
intrinsically identiﬁable, only that the experimen-
tal setup precludes their determination; for example,
only one of the 10 inertial parameters of the ﬁrst link
of a robot manipulator can be identiﬁed if the base
of the manipulator is stationary. A different experi-
mental setup involving accelerating the base of the
manipulator and measuring the reaction forces and
torques at the base would allow other parameters to
be identiﬁed [6.5].
Ill-conditioning may result from poor scaling of
measurements or parameters:
1. The least-squares estimation minimizes the error
between the predicted and measured output vector.
Components yl
j of the output vector yl may have
different units and magnitudes, such as radians ver-
sus meters, in pose measurements for kinematic
calibration. Moreover, not all components may be
measured to the same level of accuracy. Normaliz-
ing the output vectors with an appropriately chosen
weighting matrix may result in a better conditioned
estimate.
2. The parameters may also have different units and
different magnitudes. This can cause problems both
in terms of convergence criteria and in terms of
deciding which parameters to eliminate. Again,
a weighting matrix for the parameters may be in-
troduced to improve the conditioning.
These numerical issues are generic to any parame-
ter estimation problem, and are discussed at the end of
this chapter. The next sections discuss individual robot
models and issues in putting them into parameter esti-
mation form.
6.2 Kinematic Calibration
In general, the relative location between coordinate sys-
tems requires six geometric parameters to be calibrated
(position plus orientation). If there are mechanical con-
straints between the relative movement of the coor-
dinate systems, such as connection by a joint, fewer
parameters are required. For a rotary joint connecting
two links, whose axis is a line-bound vector, four ge-
ometric parameters are required. For a prismatic joint,
whose axis is a free vector, only two geometric param-
eters describing orientation are required.
In addition, nongeometric parameters are required
to model sensors and mechanical deﬂection:

Joint angle sensors may require a gain and offset
determination.

Camera calibration using an undistorted pinhole
camera model may require the determination of the
focal length and an image sensor offset.

Joint ﬂexibility from gears leads to angle change
due to gravity loading and the manipulator’s own
weight.

Base ﬂexibility results from nonrigid attachment of
the robot to the environment. Depending on how the
manipulator is outstretched, there will be a varying
effect on endpoint location.

Part A | 6.2
116
Part A
Robotics Foundations

Thermal effects and vibration may need to be mod-
eled for very ﬁne positioning control.
This section focuses on determining the geometric
parameters and the sensor-based nongeometric param-
eters.
6.2.1 Serial-Link Robot Manipulators
The modiﬁed Denavit–Hartenberg (DH) parameters
(Fig. 6.1) serve as the main geometric parameters
(Sect. 2.4); the link transformation matrix is
i1Ti
D Rot.x; ˛i/Trans.x; ai/Trans.z; di/Rot.z; i/ :
(6.9)

For an n-joint manipulator with rotary joint i D
1; : : : ; n, whose axis zi is a line in space, all four
parameters ai, di, ˛i, and i have to be calibrated.

For a prismatic joint i, whose axis zi is a free vector,
only two parameters describing its orientation (˛i
and i) are required. In principle, the axis zi can be
positioned anywhere in space. This means two DH
parameters are arbitrary. One possibility is to inter-
sect zi with OiC1 [6.6, 7], which sets diC1 D 0 and
aiC1 D 0. While kinematically correct, this place-
ment is nonintuitive in that it doesn’t correspond to
the physical location of the prismatic mechanism. It
is possible to set aiC1 with ai or i to values that
position zi in the middle of the prismatic joint’s me-
chanical structure.
In the case of nearly parallel neighboring axes, the
common normal is poorly deﬁned and the calibration
is ill-conditioned. For this case, Hayati and Mirmi-
rani [6.7] introduced an extra rotational parameter ˇi
about the yi1 axis (Fig. 6.2).
Let x0
i1 lie along a line from Oi to axis zi1, such
that x0
i1 is perpendicular to zi; the intersection point
zi
zi
xi–1
zi–1
zi+1
xi
ai+1
Oi–1
ai
di
αi+1
θi
Oi
Joint i
Link i
zi
xi–1
αi
Link i–1
Joint i–1
Fig. 6.1 The modiﬁed DH parameters
deﬁnes the origin Oi1. Two rotations are required to re-
late zi1 to zi D z0
i1: a rotation ˛i about x0
i1 maps z00
i1
to zi, and a rotation ˇi about yi1 D y00
i1 maps zi1
to z00
i1. The angle i is now from x0
i1 to xi about zi.
The link transformation is
i1Ti
D Rot.y; ˇi/Rot.x; ˛i/Trans.x; ai/Rot.z; i/ :
(6.10)

For a rotary joint, the parameter ˇi is calibrated in-
stead of di.

For a prismatic joint, the joint variable di has to be
retained. As before, position zi at some convenient
location on link i, by specifying two parameters rel-
ative to the coordinate system i C 1. Then proceed
with the construction of the Hayati parameters for
di D 0. As di changes, axis xi is displaced along zi
relative to x0
i1 (not shown). The link transforma-
tion is
i1Ti D Rot.y; ˇi/Rot.x; ˛i/Trans.x; ai/
Trans.z; di/Rot.z; i/ :
(6.11)
Although there are ﬁve parameters in this transfor-
mation, the process of setting the Hayati parameters
for di D 0 is tantamount to setting the value of di1
to locate Oi1, so there is no net increase in the
number of parameters.
The procedures above set the coordinate systems in
the intermediate links of a serial manipulator. Coordi-
nate systems also have to be set in the base and end
links, but the procedure for doing so depends on the
external metrology system and on any physical con-
straints on the end link pose. The last frame may be n
or n C 1, while the ﬁrst frame may be 0 or 1 (to keep
consecutive numbers); examples appear below. Collect
the unknown kinematic parameters into the vectors a,
d, ˛, , and ˇ, and thence into the parameter vec-
tor  D fa; d; ˛; ; ˇg. The parameters  predict the
zi
zi
zi+1
xi
ai+1
αi+1
θi
Oi
Joint i
Link i
zi–1
y"i–1=yi–1
z'i–1=zi
z"i–1
x'i–1=x"i–1
Oi–1
ai
αi
	i
Link i–1
Joint i–1
Fig. 6.2 The additional parameter ˇi about yi1 is em-
ployed for nearly parallel axes

Model Identification
6.2 Kinematic Calibration
117
Part A | 6.2
position and orientation of the last coordinate system
relative to the ﬁrst, such as 0Tn;c.
Not all six components of pose are necessarily
used for calibration; the number can vary from one
to six. Calibration proceeds by observing the error in
the prediction of a certain number of pose components,
then employing the nonlinear calibration method (6.7).
There are two general methods for observing er-
ror:

Open-loop calibration utilizes an external metrol-
ogy system to measure the pose components. Be-
cause the manipulator is not in contact with the
environment during this process, the method is
termed open loop.

Closed-loop
calibration utilizes
physical con-
straints on the end link pose to substitute for mea-
surements. Deviations from the physical constraint
represent the prediction error. Because of the con-
tact with the physical constraint, the manipulator
forms a closed loop with the ground.
Open-Loop Kinematic Calibration
The calibration literature contains a variety of metrol-
ogy systems, which can be categorized based on the
number of pose components measured [6.8]:

1 component: The distance to a single point on the
end link can be measured in a variety of ways, such
as an instrumented ball bar [6.9], wire potentiome-
ter [6.10], or laser displacement meter [6.11].

2 components: A single theodolite has been
employed to provide two orientation measure-
ments [6.12]. A reference length had to be sighted
for scaling.

3 components: Laser tracking systems provide ac-
curate three-dimensional (3-D) measurements by
reﬂecting a beam off a retroreﬂector mounted on the
end effector. The beam provides length information,
while the gimbal drive for laser steering provides
two orientation measurements [6.13]. Since the
least precise part of this setup is the angle sensing,
another approach is to employ three laser tracking
systems and use only the length information. Com-
mercial 3-D stereo-camera motion tracking systems
also provide high-accuracy measurements of posi-
tion.

5 components: Lau et al. [6.14] presented a steer-
able laser interferometer with steerable reﬂector.
With pitch and yaw measurements, the steerable
interferometer yields all three components of posi-
tion, while the steerable reﬂector yields two compo-
nents of orientation.

6 components: Full pose can be inferred from the
3-D position of multiple points on the last link mea-
sured with a stereo-camera system. A coordinate
system ﬁt to the cloud of points yields position plus
orientation [6.15].
Vincze et al. [6.16] measured full pose with a single-
beam laser tracking system, by ﬁtting the robot with
a retroreﬂector mounted on a universal joint. Posi-
tion is measured using interferometry, as usual. The
novel aspect is orientation measurement, by imag-
ing of the diffraction pattern of the edges of the
retroreﬂector.
Examples are given for calibrating with three pose
components and with all six pose components mea-
sured.
Point Measurement. The 3-D position of a particu-
lar point on the end link can be conveniently located by
some form of stereo camera system. The camera sys-
tem deﬁnes a global coordinate system relative to which
frame 1 of the robot is located. To provide enough pa-
rameters, an intermediate coordinate system has to be
introduced; this intermediate coordinate system has in-
dex 0, while the camera system is given index 1 to
keep consecutive numbers. Two of the eight param-
eters are arbitrary. Figure 6.3 shows one possibility:
z0 is made parallel (˛0 D 0) and coincident (a0 D 0)
with z1. The calibrated parameters are d0, 0, a1, d1,
˛1, and 1. In the case that z1 is nearly parallel to z0,
the measurement coordinate system can be simply re-
deﬁned to avoid using Hayati parameters; for example,
y1 can be redeﬁned as z1.
In the end link, the origin On and axis xn are un-
speciﬁed, as are the associated parameters dn and n.
Locating the measured point requires only three pa-
rameters, so the addition of a single coordinate system
n C 1 is required to provide an additional parameter.
z1
z2
x1
a2
a1
θ1
θ0
O1
d1
d0
Joint 1
Link 1
z0
z1
x0
x0
x0
x–1
z–1
O0
O–1
α1
Camera system
Fig. 6.3 A camera system (index1) is located relative to
the manipulator coordinate system 1 via an intermediate
coordinate system 0

Part A | 6.2
118
Part A
Robotics Foundations
The measured point is deﬁned as the origin OnC1 of
the new coordinate system, and the normal from zn that
intersects OnC1 deﬁnes the xn axis (Fig. 6.4). Three pa-
rameters are arbitrary; a simple choice is to make znC1
parallel to zn (˛nC1 D 0) and xnC1 collinear with xn
(nC1 D 0 and dnC1 D 0). The calibrated parameters
are anC1, dn, and n.
From the transformation
1TnC1 D 1T0 : : : nTnC1 ;
the position 1pnC1 of the measured point relative to
the camera frame is extracted. Collect the unknown
kinematic parameters into vectors a, d, ˛, , and ˇ, and
thence into the parameter vector  D fa; d; ˛; ; ˇg.
The nonlinear kinematic model analogous to (6.2) is
1pl
nC1 D f.ql; / ;
l D 1; : : : ; P ;
(6.12)
where ql is the vector of joint variables for pose l. To
linearize this equation into estimation form (6.6), the
associated Jacobians for each parameter type are calcu-
zn
zn+1
xn–1
zn–1
xn+1
xn
an+1
On–1
dn
θn
On
On+1
Joint n
Link n
xn–1
Link n–1
Joint n–1
Fig. 6.4 A measured point OnC1 is located on the end link
by adding a coordinate system n C 1
zn
zn+1
zn+1
xn–1
zn–1
xn+1
xn
xn
an+1
αn+1
On–1
dn
θn
θn+1
On
On+1
dn+1
Joint n
Link n
xn–1
Link n–1
Joint n–1
Fig. 6.5 Full pose measurement of coordinate system n C
1 in the end link
lated
1pl
nC1 D 1pl
nC1  1pl
nC1;c D Jl
D
Jl
a
Jl
d
Jl
˛
Jl

Jl
ˇ

0
BBBB@
a
d
˛

ˇ
1
CCCCA
;
(6.13)
where a typical column i for each individual parameter
Jacobian is derived from the screw parameters as if each
parameter represented an active joint (Sect. 2.8.1)
Jl
ai D
(1xl
i1
DH
1x0l
i1
Hayati
;
(6.14)
Jl
di D 1zl
i ;
(6.15)
Jl
˛i D
(1xl
i1  1dl
i1;nC1
DH
1x0l
i1  1dl
i1;nC1
Hayati
;
(6.16)
Jl
i D 1zl
i  1dl
i;nC1 ;
(6.17)
Jl
ˇi D 1yl
i1  1dl
i1;nC1 ;
(6.18)
where 1di;nC1 D 1RiipnC1 refers the interorigin vec-
tor to coordinate system 1. Equation (6.13) is stacked
for all the poses for the ﬁnal estimation form
1pnC1 D J ;
(6.19)
which corresponds to (6.7) and which is solved for 
by least squares and for  by iteration.
Full Pose Measurement. Suppose that coordinate
system n C 1 in link n is measured (Fig. 6.5). Coordi-
nate system n is completed in the usual way, and the six
calibrated parameters to locate coordinate system n C1
are dn, ˛n, n, anC1, dnC1, and nC1. If znC1 is nearly
parallel to zn, this axis may simply be permuted with
other axes, such as ynC1, to avoid using the Hayati pa-
rameters.
In addition to the position (6.12), orientation equa-
tions of coordinate system n C 1
1Rl
nC1 D F.ql; / ;
l D 1; : : : ; P
(6.20)
are extracted from 1TnC1, where F is a matrix func-
tion. Linearization of this equation yields
1Rl
nC1 D 1Rl
nC1  1Rl
nC1;c
D 1l
nC1  1Rl
nC1;c
S.1l
nC1/ D
1Rl
nC1  1Rl
nC1;c
 1Rl
nC1;c
T ;
(6.21)

Model Identification
6.2 Kinematic Calibration
119
Part A | 6.2
where 1l
nC1 are differential orthogonal rotations
which are the ﬁnite-difference counterpart to the an-
gular velocity vector. Continuing with this analogy,
a Jacobian J similar to that for spatial velocities
(Sect. 2.8.1) is employed to represent the combined ef-
fect of parameter variations  on changes in position
1pl
nC1 and orientation 1l
nC1
1pl
nC1
1l
nC1

D Jl :
(6.22)
Compared to (6.13), the Jacobian Jl now has six rows,
as do the individual parameter Jacobians
Jl
ai D
8
ˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆ:
 
1xl
i1
0
!
DH
 
1x0l
i1
0
!
Hayati
;
(6.23)
Jl
di D
1zl
i
0

;
(6.24)
Jl
˛i D
8
ˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆ:
 
1xl
i1  1dl
i1;nC1
1xl
i1
!
DH
 
1x0l
i1  1dl
i1;nC1
1x0l
i1
!
Hayati
;
(6.25)
Jl
i D
1zl
i  1dl
i;nC1
1zl
i

;
(6.26)
Jl
ˇi D
1yl
i1  1dl
i1;nC1
1yl
i1

:
(6.27)
As before,  is found by least squares and  by itera-
tion.
Closed-Loop Calibration
Physical constraints on end-effector position or orien-
tation can substitute for measurements. The location of
a physical constraint deﬁnes the reference coordinate
system; the measurement of endpoint position or orien-
tation is therefore deﬁned as zero. The deviation from
the physical constraint due to an incorrect kinematic
model is cast as a displacement from the reference co-
ordinates. Analogous to point measurement and full
pose measurement, there are closed-loop methods us-
ing point constraints and full pose constraints.
Point Constraint. Suppose that the end-effector holds
a stylus that makes contact with a ﬁxed point in the en-
vironment. The orientation of the stylus can be changed
by varying the joint angles, as long as the point of con-
tact is not changed. Before, the measurement system
for point measurement deﬁned the reference coordinate
system 1 (Fig. 6.3), and there was an end effector co-
ordinate system nC1 whose origin OnC1 was measured
(Fig. 6.4). Now the reference coordinate origin O0 has
index 0 and is collocated with OnC1 (Fig. 6.6). An extra
coordinate system 1 is not required because a point is
located relative to coordinate system 1 with only three
parameters: a1, d1, and 1. The arbitrary choice ˛1 D 0
is made, i. e., z0 is made parallel to z1.
Different poses while maintaining the point contact
can be generated manually, or they can be generated
automatically if there is a force control capability. In
comparison to (6.13), the measured position 0pl
nC1 D 0
by deﬁnition and the linearized calibration equation is
simply
1p
l
nC1 D 1pl
nC1;c D Jl :
(6.28)
The set of poses that may be generated is limited rela-
tive to open-loop calibration, which may affect identiﬁ-
ability.
Full Pose Constraint. Analogous to full pose mea-
surement (Fig. 6.5), the end link may be fully con-
strained by rigidly gripping the environment. If the
manipulator is redundant (Chap. 10), then poses can be
generated through self motion. Generating such poses
would require endpoint force/torque sensing or joint
torque sensing to be accomplished.
The end link can be considered part of the ground
due to rigid attachment, and therefore one fewer coor-
dinate system is required than for the ﬁxed point case.
Fig. 6.7 shows one way of setting up coordinate systems
0 and n for calibration. Axis z0 is set equal and coin-
cident with axis zn. The common normal between z0
and z1 sets the origin O0 and the axis x0. Coordinate sys-
tem n is completed by deﬁning On D O0 and xn D x0.
Six parameters result for calibration, as they must to re-
zn
zn+1
xn+1
x0
z0
a1
O1
xn
an+1
d1
θ0
On
O0=On+1
Joint n
Link n
x1
z1
Link 1
Joint 1
...
Fig. 6.6 Fixed point contact, setting O0 D OnC1

Part A | 6.2
120
Part A
Robotics Foundations
late coordinate system n to coordinate system 0: n, dn,
˛1, a1, d1, and 1.
Similar to (6.28) after index adjustment, the mea-
sured position 0pl
n D 0 by deﬁnition and the linearized
position calibration equation is
0p
l
n D 0pl
n;c :
(6.29)
With regard to the error in orientation (6.21), the mea-
sured orientation 0Rl
n D I, the identity matrix, after
index adjustment.
S

0l
n

D

I 0 Rl
n;c
 0Rl
n;c
T D
0Rl
n;c
T  I :
(6.30)
The error (6.22) is then applied as for full pose mea-
surement, after index adjustment. The set of poses that
may be generated is limited relative to open-loop cali-
bration, which may affect identiﬁability.
6.2.2 Parallel Manipulator Calibration
Parallel manipulators are comprised of multiple closed
loops. The methods of the previous section could
readily be extended to calibrate parallel manipula-
tors. Rather than treat parallel and serial manipulators
differently, and continue to elaborate the calibration
equations on a case-by-case basis that includes differ-
ent loop arrangements and different sensing arrange-
ments, Hollerbach and Wampler [6.8] presented a uni-
fying methodology termed the calibration index, which
views all calibration problems as closed-loop calibra-
tion problems.
Open-loop calibration is converted to closed-loop
calibration by considering the end effector measure-
ment to form a joint. All measurements, whether from
joints or metrology systems, are put on an equal foot-
ing, as are all unsensed joints, whether from unsensed
zn=z0
xn=x0
zn–1
xn–1
a1
α1
O1
On–1
d1
dn
θn
θ1
On=O0
x1
z1
Fig. 6.7 Fully constrained end link, setting O0 D On
components of pose, passive environmental constraints,
or joints in the chain without sensors. In the case of par-
allel linkages, sufﬁcient numbers of loop-closure equa-
tions are formulated to characterize the kinematics and
are combined at each pose. Because the loop-closure
equations are implicit functions of all measurements,
Wampler et al. [6.2] called this calibration method the
implicit loop method.
Fig. 6.8 illustrates this idea for a calibrated stereo
camera metrology system that measures the 3-D coor-
dinates of a distinguished point on the end-effector of
an uncalibrated robot. On the right this camera system
has been replaced by a prismatic leg, which stylistically
represents a six-degree-of-freedom (6-DOF) joint that
provides equivalent 3-D coordinate measurements. The
result is a closed-loop mechanism.
The kinematic loop closure equations f for the i-th
pose (i D 1; : : : ; P) are formed as
f i./  f.xi; / D 0 ;
(6.31)
where  is a vector of robot parameters to be calibrated,
xi is a vector of joint sensor readings and possibly exter-
nal sensor readings, and f i absorbs the sensor readings
xi and so is given an index. Combining (6.31) for the P
poses into a single matrix equation
f./ D

f 1T
: : :
f PTT
D 0 :
(6.32)
Linearize (6.32) around the nominal values of the pa-
rameters
f D @f
@ D A ;
(6.33)
where f is the deviation of the computed loop closure
equations from zero, J is the identiﬁcation Jacobian,
and  is the correction to be applied to the current
parameter estimate. The calibration problem is then
solved by minimizing f via iterative least squares.
Fig. 6.8 External metrology system modeled as a 6-DOF
joint

Model Identification
6.2 Kinematic Calibration
121
Part A | 6.2
The Calibration Index
The basis for kinematic calibration is to compute the
error in positioning a manipulator using the current
kinematic model. The error may be relative to mea-
surements by an external metrology system (open-loop
methods), or relative to a physical constraint such as
contact with a plane (closed-loop methods). An exter-
nal metrology system may measure all six components
of pose or fewer components such as a point on the
end link (three components). Likewise, a physical con-
straint can limit between one and six components of
pose. Constraints and measurements may be mixed.
The number of measurements and constraints determine
how many scalar equations per pose are available for
calibration.
The calibration index C quantiﬁes the number
of equations per pose. While this analysis is rather
straightforward for serial linkages, for parallel linkages
it can be difﬁcult to infer the number of independent
equations per pose
C D S  M ;
(6.34)
where S is the sensor index and M is the mobility index.
The mobility index [6.17] characterizes the degrees of
freedom in the calibration setup.
M D 6n 
NJ
X
iD1
nc
i ;
(6.35)
where n is the number of links, NJ is the number of
joints, and nc
i is the number of constraints at joint i. n in-
cludes any extra links attached to the robot to constrain
or measure its motion. NJ includes joints of any addi-
tional linkages added for calibration. For a rotational or
prismatic joint nc
i D 5, while for a ball or spherical joint
nc
i D 3. For an external measurement system for a freely
moving end-effector nc
NJ D 0, while for rigid attachment
of the endpoint nc
NJ D 6. While generally correct, there
are exceptions to (6.35) due to special or degenerate
mechanisms that have to be analyzed on a case-by-case
basis.
The sensor index S is the total number of sensors in
the joints
S D
NJ
X
iD1
Si ;
(6.36)
where Si is the number of sensed degrees in joint i. Usu-
ally Si D 1 for the lower-order pairs typical of actuated
joints, while SNJ D 6 for full pose measurement of the
end-effector joint NJ. For an unsensed joint, such as in
passive environment kinematics, Si D 0.
If P is the number of poses, then CP is the total num-
ber of equations for the calibration procedure. Clearly
a larger C means that fewer poses are required, other
things being equal. For the single-loop case consisting
of a series of sensed lower-order robot joints (Si D 1,
nc
i D 5, i D 1, : : :, NJ  1) with a ﬁnal joint (SNJ; nc
NJ)
connecting the end-effector to ground, one has from
(6.34–6.35)
C D SNJ C nc
NJ :
(6.37)
According to the calibration index, using full end-
point constraints is an equivalent kinematic calibration
method to using full pose measurements. There is po-
tentially a problem with the smaller range of poses
available with the endpoint constrained, but otherwise
the mathematics are the same.
Categorization of Serial Link Calibration
Methods
A great variety of calibration methods have been pro-
posed, varying in the manner of pose measurement or
endpoint constraints. These are categorized below ac-
cording to the calibration index C and the values of nc
NJ
and SNJ:

C D 6: nc
NJ D 0 and SNJ D 6 corresponds to full
pose measurement. nc
NJ D 6 and SNJ D 0 corre-
sponds to rigid endpoint attachment.

C D 5: nc
NJ D 0 and SNJ D 5 corresponds to 5-DOF
pose measurement [6.14]. nc
NJ D 5 and SNJ D 0
corresponds to 5-DOF endpoint constraints, such
as manipulation of an unsensed passive hinge
joint [6.18].

C D 4: No published method exists for C D 4.

C D 3: nc
NJ D 0 and SNJ D 3 corresponds to 3-DOF
pose measurement. nc
NJ D 3 and SNJ D 0 corre-
sponds to 3-DOF endpoint constraints.

C D 2: nc
NJ D 0 and SNJ D 2 corresponds to 2-DOF
pose measurements, such as is provided by a single
theodolite [6.12]. nc
NJ D 2 and SNJ D 0 corresponds
to 2-DOF endpoint constraints. Motion along a line
provides two constraints [6.19].

C D 1: nc
NJ D 0 and SNJ D 1 corresponds to mea-
surement of just 1-DOF pose, provided by a lin-
ear transducer such as an linear variable differ-
ential transformer (LVDT) [6.9] or wire poten-
tiometer [6.10]. nc
NJ D 1 and SNJ D 0 corresponds to
a plane constraint [6.20].
Categorization of Parallel-Link Calibration
Methods
To calibrate parallel robots, a loop-closure equation is
written for each loop j
0 D fj./ :
(6.38)

Part A | 6.3
122
Part A
Robotics Foundations
The equations for all the loops are combined. One prob-
lem is to eliminate unsensed degrees of freedom. The
calibration index is now applied based on the number
of loops:

2 loops: A two-loop mechanism has three arms or
legs, attached to a common platform. An example
is the RSI Research Ltd. Hand Controller [6.21],
which employs three 6-DOF arms with three sensed
joints each. The mobility of this mechanism is M D
6. As S D 9, therefore C D 3 and closed-loop cali-
bration is possible.

4 loops: Nahvi et al. [6.22] calibrated a spherical
shoulder joint, driven redundantly by four prismatic
legs (Fig. 6.9). In addition, the platform is con-
strained to rotate about a spherical joint; with the
four legs, four kinematic loops are formed. For this
system, M D 3 and S D 4, so that C D 1. Hence
self-calibration is possible. Without the extra leg
and the sensing it provides, one would have C D 0
and calibration would not be possible.

5 loops: Wampler et al. [6.2] calibrated the six-
legged Stewart platform (M D 6) via a closed-loop
Fig. 6.9 Redundant parallel drive shoulder joint
procedure. In addition to leg length measurements,
all angles on one of the legs were measured (S D
11). The reason for the extra sensors is to yield
a unique forward kinematics solution, but a side
beneﬁt is that, with C D 5, closed-loop calibra-
tion is possible. For a regular Stewart platform
without the instrumented leg, S D 6 and hence
C D 0. External pose measurement is required;
for example, with full pose measurement S D 12
and C D 6; full pose measurement was utilized
in [6.23].
6.3 Inertial Parameter Estimation
A rigid body i has 10 inertial parameters: mass mi,
center of mass r0i relative to an origin O0, and sym-
metric inertia matrix NIi referred here to the origin Oi
(Fig. 6.10). The rigid body may be a load held by the
end effector, or it can be one of the manipulator’s own
links. By generating a trajectory and measuring forces
or torques in combination with velocity and acceler-
ation, some or all of the inertial parameters can be
estimated.
6.3.1 Link Inertial Parameter Estimation
The procedure involves:
1. Formulating the Newton–Euler equations of the
load dynamics to reveal a linear dependence on the
inertial parameters.
2. Estimating the parameters using ordinary least
squares.
Begin with the Newton-Euler equations of the last
link, and assume that suitable ﬁlters have been designed
to estimate the velocity Pi and acceleration Ri at each
joint i.
The center of mass of link n is deﬁned as Cn, lo-
cated relative to the base origin O0 by rn D Cn O0 and
relative to link n’s origin On by cn D Cn  On. All vec-
tors and matrices are expressed in coordinate system n,
in which the center of mass location cn and the inertia
matrix NIn about origin On are constant.
From (3.35) in Chap. 3, the Newton-Euler equations
referred to On are
f n D Inan C v n  Inv n :
(6.39)
Substituting for the spatial inertia In, the spatial accel-
eration an, and the spatial velocity v n, the ﬁrst term on
d0n
Link n
Cn (cog)
g (gravity)
O0
On=On+1
rn
cn
fn
Fig. 6.10 Location of the center of gravity for an interme-
diate link i, and the constraint forces and torques

Model Identification
6.3 Inertial Parameter Estimation
123
Part A | 6.3
the right evaluates to
Inan D

NIn
mnS.cn/
mnS.cn/T
mn1
  P!n
Pv n

D
 NIn P!n C mnS.cn/
Rd0n  !n  v n

mnS.cn/T P!n C mn
Rd0n  !n  v n


;
where Pv n D Rd0n  !n v n has been substituted. The
second term on the right evaluates to
v n  Inv n D
S.!n/
S.v n/
0
S.!n/



NIn
mnS.cn/
mnS.cn/T
mn1
 !n
v n

D
 S.!n/NIn!n C mnS.cn/S.!n/v n
S.!n/mnS.cn/T!n C S.!n/mnv n

:
Combining and simplifying,
f n D

NIn P!n C S.!n/NIn!n  S
Rd0n

mncn
mnRd0n C S. P!n/mncn C S.!n/S.!n/mncn

;
(6.40)
where the mass moment mncn appears as a quantity
to be estimated in combination. However, since the
mass mn is separately estimated from the mnRd0n term,
the center of mass cn can be extracted. To account
explicitly for gravity g, we substitute Rd0ng for Rd0n sub-
sequently.
To formulate an estimation algorithm, the force and
torque measured by the wrist sensor must be expressed
in terms of the product of known geometric parameters
and the unknown inertial parameters. Elements of the
inertia matrix are vectorized as l.NIn/ according to the
following notation
NIn!n D
0
@
!1
!2
!3
0
0
0
0
!1
0
!2
!3
0
0
0
!1
0
!2
!3
1
A
0
BBBBBB@
I11
I12
I13
I22
I23
I33
1
CCCCCCA
 L.!n/ l
NIn

;
where L.!n/ is a 3  6 matrix of angular velocity ele-
ments and
NIn D
0
@
I11
I12
I13
I12
I22
I23
I13
I23
I33
1
A :
Using these expressions, (6.40) can be written as
f n
D
 0
S
Rd0n

L. P!n/ C S.!n/L.!n/
Rd0n S. P!n/ C S.!n/S.!n/
0


0
@
mn
mncn
l
NIn

1
A
or more compactly,
f n D Ann ;
(6.41)
where An is a 6  10 matrix, and n is the vector of the
10 unknown inertial parameters which appear linearly.
The previous formulation can be extended to all
the links of a manipulator with n joints (Fig. 6.10).
(Only manipulators with revolute joints will be con-
sidered, since handling prismatic joints requires only
trivial modiﬁcations to the algorithm.) Deﬁne f ij as the
spatial force at joint i due to movement of link j alone.
Then f ii is the spatial force at joint i due to movement of
its own link, and is the same as (6.41) with i substituted
for n in the An matrix
if ii D iAii ;
(6.42)
where i is the vector of unknown link i inertial pa-
rameters. Superscript i has been added to indicate that
vectors are expressed in terms of link i coordinates, so
that the center of mass ici and the inertia matrix iNIi are
constant.
The total spatial force if i at joint i is the sum of the
spatial forces if ij for all links j distal to joint i
if i D
n
X
jDi
if ij :
(6.43)
Each spatial force if ij at joint i is determined by trans-
mitting the distal spatial force jf jj across intermediate
joints. Using the spatial force transform matrix iXF
j ,
if i;iC1 D iX
F
iC1
iC1f iC1;iC1 D iX
F
iC1
iC1AiC1iC1 :
(6.44)
For convenience, we note that iXF
i D 166. To ob-
tain the forces and torques at the i-th joint due to the
movements of the j-th link, these matrices can be cas-
caded
if ij D iXF
iC1
iC1XF
iC2
  
j1XF
j
jf jj
D iXF
j
jAjj :
(6.45)

Part A | 6.3
124
Part A
Robotics Foundations
An upper-diagonal matrix expression for a serial
kinematic chain can be derived from (6.43) and (6.45)
0
BBB@
1f 1
2f 2
:::
nf n
1
CCCA
D
0
BBB@
1XF
1
1A1
1XF
2
2A2
  
1XF
n
nAn
0
2XF
2
2A2
  
2XF
n
nAn
:::
:::
:::
:::
0
0
  
nXF
n
nAn
1
CCCA
0
BBB@
1
2
:::
n
1
CCCA :
(6.46)
This equation is linear in the unknown parameters, but
the left-hand side is composed of a full force-torque
vector at each joint. Since only the torque i about the
joint rotation axis zi can usually be measured, each spa-
tial force if i must be projected onto the joint rotation
axis, reducing (6.46) to
 D K ;
(6.47)
where
i D
zi
0

 f i ;
Kij D
zi
0

 iXF
j
jAj ;
 D
0
BB@
1


n
1
CCA
and Kij D 0110 if i > j. For an n-link manipulator,  is
an n1 vector,  is a 10n1 vector, and K is an n10n
matrix.
For geared electric drives, joint torque may either
be measured by joint torque sensors (Chap. 28) or esti-
mated from the motor current by using an electric motor
model (Chap. 8). Most robots do not have joint torque
sensors, in which case joint friction needs to be taken
into account. Joint friction typically consumes a large
fraction of the torque that the motor produces. Coulomb
and viscous friction are the most important compo-
nents of a friction model, although Stribeck friction
may need to be modeled for low joint velocities [6.24,
25]. A friction model is estimated through a process of
moving one joint at a time, and relating motor torque to
velocity. Ripple torque, due either to uncompensated in-
homogeneities of the magnetic ﬁeld in the motor [6.26,
27], or to positional dependencies of gear tooth interac-
tion [6.24], may need to be modeled.
Equation 6.47 represents the dynamics of the ma-
nipulator for one sample point. It can be rewritten
using P data points as with geometric calibration
 D K :
K D
0
B@
K1
:::
KP
1
CA ;
 D
0
B@
1
:::
P
1
CA ;
(6.48)
where  is now an nP  1 vector and K is now
nP  10n.
Unfortunately, one cannot apply simple least-
squares estimation because KTK is not invertible due
to the loss of rank from restricted degrees of freedom at
the proximal links and the lack of full force-torque sens-
ing. Some inertial parameters are completely unidenti-
ﬁable, while some others can only be identiﬁed in linear
combinations. The general topic of identiﬁability of pa-
rameters, and how to handle unidentiﬁable parameters,
is discussed next.
An issue with geared electric drives is the rotor in-
ertia. If not known, the rotor inertia can be added to
the list of 10 inertial parameters to be identiﬁed for
a link [6.28]. For large gear ratios, the rotor inertia can
dominate the other components of link inertia.
6.3.2 Load Inertial Parameter Estimation
The load is considered as a rigid body held by the end
effector. It has 10 inertial parameters: mass mL, ﬁrst
moments mLcL relative to On and symmetric inertia
matrix NIL referred here to origin On (Fig. 6.11). The
estimation of these parameters can be used to tune the
control law parameters in order to improve the dynamic
accuracy of the robot, or to compensate for its dynam-
ics by the control. They can also be exploited to verify
the load transported by the robot. Two procedures are
presented to estimate the load inertia parameters: the
ﬁrst one assumes that there is a wrist-mounted 6-axis
force/torque sensor, whereas the second one makes use
of the joint torques.
d0i
Link i
Ci (cog)
g
O0
Oi
fn+1
Oi+1 
d0,i+1
ri
cn
fi
Fig. 6.11 Dynamics of the last link

Model Identification
6.3 Inertial Parameter Estimation
125
Part A | 6.3
Using 6-Axis Forces/Torque Sensor
Kinematically, the force-torque sensor is part of the last
link n, mounted near the joint axis zn and origin On.
The sensor provides readings relative to its own coordi-
nate system, called n C 1 (Fig. 6.11). The remainder of
the last link is attached to the shaft of the force-torque
sensor, and so the force-torque sensor is measuring the
loads on the last link excluding itself. The acceleration
of the force-torque sensor reference frame would have
to be calculated based on the amount of offset from On,
but we will ignore that complication here and assume
that the sensor origin OnC1 is coincident with On.
The estimation of load inertial parameters can be
carried out using (6.41).
The quantities inside the An matrix are computed
by direct kinematics computation from the measured
joint angles, and from the estimated joint velocities
and accelerations. The estimation is typically done by
bandpass ﬁltering of the joint angle data [6.29]. The el-
ements of the f n vector are measured directly by the
wrist force sensor. For robust estimates in the presence
of noise, a larger number of P data points are obtained
by moving the manipulator through a suitable trajec-
tory. Augment f n and An as
A D
0
B@
A1
n
:::
AP
n
1
CA ;
f D
0
B@
f 1
n
:::
f P
n
1
CA ;
(6.49)
where P is the number of data points. The least-squares
estimate for L is given by
OL D .ATA/1ATf :
(6.50)
For object recognition, it may be desired to derive
the inertia about the center of mass, which can be done
with the parallel axis theorem. An eigenvalue analysis
can diagonalize the inertia matrix to reveal the principal
axes and inertia.
Using Joint Torques
When the robot is holding a payload, the dynamic iden-
tiﬁcation (6.48) can be rewritten as follows
 D K C KLL ;
(6.51)
where  contains the measured joint torques when the
robot is holding a load for P points. Using (6.51) in the
identiﬁcation will result in grouping L with n and
with other link parameters. The load parameters can be
deduced by examining how the load parameters have
modiﬁed the values of the grouped inertial parameters
using the expressions of grouping relations [6.30]. In
the following we present three methods to identify L
parameters without using the grouping expressions.
Using a Priori Link Parameters Estimates. In this
case we suppose that the robot parameters without
load have been estimated as given in Sec. 6.3.1. By
substituting the robot parameters into (6.51) the 10
inertial parameters of the load are identiﬁable and
can be estimated using the least squares solution
of [6.31]
.  K/ D KLL :
(6.52)
In this method we suppose that the friction parame-
ters are invariant with respect to the payload. If this
hypothesis is not true the friction parameters must be
re-estimated at the same step with L.
Using Joint Torques on the Same Trajectory Twice
with and Without the Load. Since the vector K
of (6.52) is equal to the joint torques without load,
consequently, the payload inertial parameters could be
identiﬁed by (6.52) after replacing K by 0 repre-
senting the joint torques on the same trajectory without
load
.  0/ D KLL :
(6.53)
This method assumes that the difference between
the joint variables with and without payload is negligi-
ble and that the friction parameters are the same with
and without load. If the friction parameters vary with
respect to the load we can estimate this variation at the
same time as the load inertial parameter.
Estimating the Robot Parameters and the Load
Parameters in One Step. In this method the identi-
ﬁcation model is constructed by grouping two sets of
equations: the ﬁrst using a trajectory without load, and
the second using a trajectory when the robot is holding
the load. In this case the two sets of trajectories could
be different. The link parameters and the payload in-
ertial parameters are estimated using the least squares
solution of
a
b

D
Ka
0
Kb
KL
  
L

;
(6.54)
where the indices a and b indicate the trajectories with-
out and with load, respectively.
This method has the advantage of using a global
identiﬁcation procedure that can avoid the accumula-
tion of errors of previous methods.
These three methods have been validated experi-
mentally on the 6-DOF robot RX-90 of Staubli. They
give similar results [6.30].

Part A | 6.3
126
Part A
Robotics Foundations
6.3.3 Identification
of Total Joint Drive Gains
For gear electric drive of joint j, the joint torque j is
estimated as j D vrjgj, where vrj is the control signal
computed by the numerical controller of the robot (the
input references of the motor current loop) and gj is the
total joint j drive gain, given by the gear ratio, the cur-
rent ampliﬁer gain, and the motor torque constant.
Because of large values of the gear ratio for indus-
trial robots, (> 50), joint drive gain is very sensitive to
errors and must be accurately measured from special,
time consuming, heavy tests, on the drive chain [6.32,
33].
The methods used to identify the load inertial pa-
rameters using joint torques can be inversed to identify
the drive gains. In this case some load inertial param-
eters kL must be known while the other unknown
parameters uL are identiﬁed with the gain g.
The vector  of sampled joint torques in (6.52) or
(6.54) is rewritten as
 D Vrg ;
(6.55)
where: g is the (n1) vector of the joint drive gains, Vr
regroups the samples of vrj.
Using the Same Set of Trajectory Twice,
with and Without the Load
Introducing (6.55) and the known load inertial parame-
ters in (6.53) with the expression
KLL D KkLkL C KuLuL
(6.56)
gives
.Vr  VruL/g D KkLkL C KuLuL :
(6.57)
This equation can be used to identify uL and g as the
LS solution of the system
ŒKkLkL D

.Vr  VruL/
KuL
 
gT
T
uL
T :
(6.58)
Using Two Sets of Trajectories
(Same or Different), the First Set Without Load
and the Second Set with the Load
Introducing (6.55) and the known load inertial parame-
ters (6.56) in (6.54) gives
Vra
Vrb

g D
Ka
0
0
Kb
KuL
KkL
 
T
T
uL
T
kL
T :
(6.59)
Equation (6.59) can be used to identify all the pa-
rameters, g,  and uL, as the single global LS solution
of the system

0
KkLkL

D
Vra
Ka
0
Vrb
Kb
KuL
 
gT
T
T
uL
T :
(6.60)
But owing to the fact that KkL and KuL are corre-
lated by the same noisy data .q; Pq; Rq/, the total least
squares (TLS) solution is used to avoid biais errors of
the ordinary LS solution [6.34]. Rewritting (6.60) as
Ktottot D 0 ;
(6.61)
where
Ktot D
Vra
Ka
0
0
Vrb
Kb
KuL
KkLkL

;
(6.62)
tot D

gT
T
T
uL
1
T :
(6.63)
The singular value decomposition (SVD) of Ktot is
given by
Ktot D USVT ;
(6.64)
where U and V are orthonormal matrices, and S D
diag.si/ is a diagonal matrix with singular values si
of Ktot sorted in decreasing order. There are inﬁn-
ity of vectors Otot D Vc which are the TLS solutions
of (6.61), depending on a scale factor  and on the
normalized TLS solution given by the last column Vc
of V, jjVcjj D 1, corresponding to the smallest singular
value sc [6.34]. The unique solution O

tot assumes that its
last coefﬁcient O

tot.end/ must be equal to 1 according
to (6.63) such as
O

tot D
Vc
Vc(end)
(6.65)
The methods has been successfully experimen-
tally validated on the 6-DOF Staubli TX-40 industrial
robot [6.35].
This approach is very simple to perform and the ex-
perimental results have shown its effectiveness: for the
global identiﬁcation of the total joint drive gains and the
dynamic parameters, it is only necessary to accurately
weigh a payload mass and to carry standard trajectories
of industrial robot.
6.3.4 Link Parameter Estimation
for More Complex Structures
In this section we present the dynamic identiﬁcation
model for kinematic tree (spanning tree) robots and

Model Identification
6.4 Identifiability and Numerical Conditioning
127
Part A | 6.4
kinematic closed-loop robots including parallel robots.
These models are linear in the inertial parameters and
can be represented by a model similar to (6.47), thus
these parameters can be identiﬁed using the same tech-
niques.
Tree-Structured Robots
For an n-link manipulator with a kinematic tree struc-
ture, the dynamic identiﬁcation model (6.46) must be
modiﬁed to take into account that the inertial parame-
ters of link j have no effect on the dynamics of links
which do not belong to the chain from the base to that
link. For such structures, the link on which link j is ar-
ticulated is denoted by p.j/ (parent of j – see Sect. 3.4).
It could be a link with any number i, such that i < j.
Thus the nonzero elements of the column of the matrix
representing the coefﬁcients of the inertial parameters
of link j in (6.46) would be
jXF
j
jAj; p.j/XF
j
jAj; p.p.j//XF
j
jAj; : : : ; bXF
j
jAj ;
(6.66)
where b is the ﬁrst link of the chain connecting link 0 to
link j, thus p.b/ D 0.
Consequently, in (6.47) of a tree robot we obtain:
Kij D 0110 if i > j or if link i does not belong to the
branch connecting link 0 to link j. This means that some
elements of the upper-right submatrix of K will be zero.
We note that a serial structure is a particular case
of a tree structure where p.j/ D j  1. Thus any link m
such that m < j will belong to the chain from the base
to link j.
Closed-Loop Robots
The dynamic model of a closed-loop structure can be
obtained by considering ﬁrst an equivalent spanning
tree by opening one joint at each closed loop, and then
using the principle of virtual work such that
 D GTKtr ;
G D
@qtr
@qa

;
(6.67)
with qa an N  1 vector of N active joint angles (N dif-
fers from n, the total number of joints), and qtr an n  1
vector of the joints of the spanning tree structure.
Parallel Robots
A parallel robot is a particular case of closed-loop
robots (Chap. 18). It is composed of a moving platform,
representing the terminal link, that is connected to the
base by m parallel legs. The dynamic model of parallel
robots can be given by [6.36]
 D JT App C
m
X
iD1
 @qi
@qa
T
Kii ;
(6.68)
where Kii represents the dynamic model of leg i
with Ki a function of .qi; Pqi; Rqi/, qi is the vector of joint
angles of leg i, App is the Newton–Euler spatial force
of the platform calculated in terms of the Cartesian vari-
ables of the mobile platform using (6.41), and J is the
Jacobian matrix of the parallel manipulator. We can ob-
tain (6.68) from (6.67) by supposing that the spanning
tree structure is obtained by separating the mobile plat-
form from the legs.
Equation 6.68 can be rewritten as
 D

JTAp
.@q1=@qa/T K1   
.@qm=@qa/T Km
	
par
 D Kpar

!p; Pvp; P!p; qi; Pqi; Rqi

par ;
(6.69)
where par is the vector of the inertial parameters of the
robot (the legs and the platform).
par D
0
BBB@
p
1
:::
m
1
CCCA :
In the common case where the legs are identical and
their inertial parameters are denoted by leg, the identi-
ﬁcation model can be rewritten by the following equa-
tion, which considerably reduces the number of inertial
parameters to be identiﬁed
 D

JTAp
Pm
iD1 .@qi=@qa/T Ki
	  p
leg

:
(6.70)
The identiﬁcation of the orthoglide parallel robot is
given in [6.37].
6.4 Identifiability and Numerical Conditioning
That some inertial parameters in (6.47) are unidentiﬁ-
able does not mean that they are intrinsically identiﬁ-
able, only that the experimental setup does not allow
them to be identiﬁed. Limited motion near the base
could be ﬁxed by placing the whole manipulator on
a six-axis moving platform such as a Stewart–Gough
platform. In fact, for mobile manipulators mounted
on high-mobility vehicles such as satellites, it may
be necessary to know the full inertial model of the
manipulator. Additional sensors could be added, for ex-

Part A | 6.4
128
Part A
Robotics Foundations
ample a six-axis force-torque sensor to the base of the
robot [6.5], to identify some additional (but not all) in-
ertial parameters.
A similar situation may arise in kinematic cal-
ibration, where for example joint models might be
augmented to include gear eccentricities, transmission
and coupling coefﬁcients of gears, joint elasticity, link
elasticity, and base deﬂection [6.38]. By instrumenting
the robot with additional sensors, for example, by plac-
ing joint angle sensors before and after the gears to
measure joint deﬂection, it may be possible to identify
additional parameters of interest. Additional sensing
with a theodolite was done to measure base deﬂection
in [6.12].
Given that the experimental setup is what it is, there
may be no recourse but to deal with unidentiﬁable pa-
rameters, treated in the next section. Another problem
is that parameters might in principle be identiﬁable, but
numerical conditioning prevents their accurate determi-
nation. Issues such as adequacy of the collected data,
and the effect of different units and magnitudes of pa-
rameters, are treated subsequently.
6.4.1 Identifiability
There are two main approaches towards handling
unidentiﬁable parameters, depending on whether the
goal is a structural model or a prediction model. For
a structural model, the goal is to ﬁnd the minimum
parameter set that provides a meaningful physical de-
scription of the system by eliminating parameters until
all are identiﬁable. This is done by careful evaluation of
the effect of each parameter of the original model.
For a prediction model, the goal is to match the out-
puts to the inputs as closely as possible, and is more of
a curve-ﬁtting approach. The resulting parameter values
are not necessarily physically meaningful or accurate.
Structural Model
It may be possible in the initial model formation to
avoid including redundant or unidentiﬁable parameters.
At other times, it is not possible to determine a priori
what the minimal parameter set is, because of system
complexity or because of numerical difﬁculties such as
measurement error or limitations in the collected data.
A Priori Parameter Elimination. In the initial model
formation, the choice of representation can immediately
dictate whether the model is redundant or minimal.
For kinematic calibration, the minimal parameter set
includes four parameters for a rotary joint and two pa-
rameters for a prismatic joint. The detailed presentation
in Sect. 6.2.1 of how to set up the DH/Hayati param-
eters for different kinematic and sensing arrangements
has the advantage that the parameter set is minimal (ex-
cepting joint models). Once done, the application to any
manipulator is somewhat formulaic.
Five- and six-parameter joint models have also been
proposed, either for the convenience of locating link
coordinate systems or for the ease of model forma-
tion [6.13, 28, 39]. With such redundant parameter sets,
extra steps must be taken to handle the numerical difﬁ-
culties caused by the redundancy, such as by reducing
the number of parameters in a postprocessing step.
When there are complicated joint models that include
gearing effects as mentioned above, the resultant large
numbers of parameters make the parameter elimination
problem more difﬁcult. Determining the minimal set of
inertial parameters offers a different sort of complexity,
because large numbers of parameters are not identi-
ﬁable or are identiﬁable only in linear combinations.
Again, model reduction is one approach to handle this
problem.
Two approaches towards determining a minimal or
base parameter set are:
1. Numerical identiﬁcation of the unidentiﬁable pa-
rameters or linear combinations of parameters.
2. Symbolic determination.
Numerical identiﬁcation involves rank reduction
through matrix manipulation of the regressor, either
through QR decomposition or singular value decom-
position [6.40]. If the kinematic or dynamic model is
known exactly, then a simulation using exactly gen-
erated data will yield a noise-free regressor matrix A
in (6.3). For QR decomposition, the regressor matrix is
factored as
A D Q

R
0MPNpar;Npar

;
(6.71)
where Q is an M  MP orthogonal matrix, R is an
Npar  Npar upper-triangular matrix, and 0MPNpar;Npar is
the zero matrix with dimensions MPNpar Npar. The-
oretically, the unidentiﬁable parameters i are those
whose corresponding diagonal elements Rii of matrix R
are zero. In practice, jRiij is considered to be zero if it is
less than the numerical zero  [6.41]
 D MP max
i
jRiij ;
(6.72)
where  is the computer precision [6.41]. Other param-
eters may appear in linear combinations depending on
how many nonzero elements there are in row j of R.
Resolving these linear combinations is arbitrary. One
approach is to zero all elements in the linear combina-
tion save one. The result is a prediction model rather
than a structural model.

Model Identification
6.4 Identifiability and Numerical Conditioning
129
Part A | 6.4
Symbolic determination of the base inertial param-
eters has been proposed in [6.40, 42]. Using an energy
formulation, the total energy of link j is expressed
as hjj, where hj is a row vector termed the total energy
function whose elements are kinematic expressions of
the angular and linear velocity of link j plus gravity.
A recursive relation between neighboring links is de-
veloped as
hj D hj1j1	j C Pqjj ;
(6.73)
where the elements of the 1010 matrix j1	j are func-
tions of the DH parameters deﬁning frame j, and the
elements of the 1  10 row vector j depend on the
linear and angular velocities. The details of these ex-
pressions can be found in [6.40, 42]. Grouping rules are
then developed to ﬁnd the precise linear combinations
of parameters.
The minimum inertial parameters for a tree struc-
ture can be obtained using a closed-form solution simi-
lar to the serial structure case [6.42].
The term Ktr in (6.67) shows that the minimum
parameters of the spanning tree structure can be used
to calculate the dynamics of the closed structure, giving
by this a ﬁrst reduction and grouping of the inertial pa-
rameters. However extra parameters can be eliminated
or grouped when considering the matrix G. The case of
parallelogram loops can be treated symbolically using
closed-form relations [6.42]. For general closed loops,
the minimum parameters must be determined using nu-
merical methods such as QR decomposition [6.40].
In the case of parallel robots, we deduce from (6.68)
that the minimum parameters of the legs can be used
to calculate Kii, giving a ﬁrst reduction of the iner-
tial parameters. However, some other parameters can be
grouped with the parameters of the platform. The mini-
mum parameters of the Gough–Stewart robot are given
in [6.43].
Data-Driven Parameter Elimination. The singular
value decomposition of the regressor matrix can show
which parameters are unidentiﬁable, weakly identiﬁ-
able, or identiﬁable only in linear combination. For Npar
parameters, P data points, and M-dimensional output
measurements at each data point, the regressor ma-
trix A (6.3) or (6.7) can be decomposed as
A D U†VT ;
(6.74)
where U is an MP  MP orthogonal matrix, V is an
Npar  Npar orthogonal matrix, and † is the MP  Npar
matrix of singular values
† D

S
0MPNpar;Npar

;
(6.75)
where S D diag.1; : : : ; r; 0; : : : ; 0/ is the Npar  Npar
matrix of ordered singular values, with 1 the largest
and r the smallest nonzero singular value. There may
be Nparr zero singular values rC1 D    D Npar D 0.
Especially when complex joint models are assumed
that include ﬂexibility, backlash, and gear eccentric-
ity, it is not clear that all parameters can be identiﬁed.
Retaining poorly identiﬁable parameters will degrade
the robustness of the calibration; such parameters are
indicated by zero or very small singular values. The ex-
pansion of (6.7) in terms of (6.74) is
y D
r
X
jD1
j.v T
j /uj ;
(6.76)
where uj and vj are the j-th columns of U and V. For
zero or small singular values j, the projection v T
j 
of the parameters onto the column vector vj in general
represents a linear combination of parameters. It is also
possible that only a single parameter results from the
projection.
To proceed, it is ﬁrst necessary to scale the pa-
rameters and the output measurements so that the sin-
gular values are comparable. Scaling is discussed in
Sect. 6.4.3. Small singular values signal that there are
parameters that are poorly identiﬁable and that should
be eliminated. By small singular values, Schröer [6.38]
suggests the heuristic that the condition number of
a well-conditioned regressor matrix should be less
than 100
.A/ D 1
r
< 100 :
(6.77)
This heuristic derives from experience of their statisti-
cal community. If the condition number is above 100,
the singular values are examined, beginning with the
smallest one, which may be a zero singular value.
If the condition number is above 100, the lin-
ear sums (6.76) corresponding to the smallest singular
value r are examined. The elements of column v r are
in one-to-one correspondence with the elements of .
If there is an element j of v r that is much larger than
the others, then the parameter j corresponding to that
column element is a candidate for elimination. This
procedure will tend to pinpoint parameters that are to-
tally unidentiﬁable. Isolating the largest element of v r
is once again only meaningful if the parameters have
been previously scaled.
Once the parameter is eliminated, the condition
number of the reduced regressor is computed again. The
procedure iterates until the condition number of the re-
gressor is below 100.
The previous procedure can be carried out using QR
decomposition as in (6.71), by replacing  representing

Part A | 6.4
130
Part A
Robotics Foundations
the computer precision in (6.72) by a greater value func-
tion of the noise level.
Prediction Model
If there are several largest elements of v r that are
roughly comparable in magnitude, then these param-
eters may only be identiﬁable in linear combination.
There will be the same number of singular values which
are too small. By examining several columns vj cor-
responding to the small singular values, these linear
combinations can become apparent. The linear combi-
nations can be resolved arbitrarily, i. e., all parameter
elements in the linear combination save one can be set
to zero. The result of zeroing some parameters is that
the model is no longer a structural model, but rather
a prediction model.
One may also proceed without ﬁrst removing pa-
rameters. It can be shown by substituting the singular
value decomposition that
.ATA/1AT D V

S1 0Npar;MPNpar

UT :
(6.78)
Consequently the solution to (6.8) can be expressed
as [6.44]
 D
Npar
X
jD1
uT
j y
j
vj :
(6.79)
One can see that poorly identiﬁable parameters corre-
sponding to small singular values j greatly perturb the
estimates, because the weighting is 1=j. The strategy is
to remove their inﬂuence. If j is zero or very small rel-
ative to the largest singular value 1, then set 1=j D 0.
Parameters that cannot be identiﬁed well are simply
ignored in this procedure, which automatically con-
verges to an identiﬁable parameter set. The resulting
parameters can then be used for the model. A disadvan-
tage is that the resulting parameters may not correspond
to real model parameters. A procedure to project these
parameters on the real ones is given in [6.40].
Incorporating A Priori Parameter Estimates
Least squares treats parameter values as completely un-
known, i. e., they could be anywhere in the range from
1 to C1. Yet often a fairly good initial estimate of
the parameters is available, for example, from a manu-
facturer’s speciﬁcations or in the case of a recalibration.
It makes sense to incorporate such an a priori preference
into the least-squares optimization [6.45].
Suppose there is a preference for a solution
near  D 0. Express the preference as I D 0,
where I is the identity matrix, and append it as addi-
tional rows to (6.3) that reﬂect this preference
A
I

 D
 y
0

:
(6.80)
To proceed with the solution, we can treat 0 as a con-
stant. Redeﬁne the parameter vector as Q D   0,
which we expect to be close to zero. Then
A
I

Q D
Qy
0

;
(6.81)
where Qy D y  A0. We may not know 0 perfectly
well, so we add a weighting parameter  to express the
conﬁdence in this value
A
I

Q D
Qy
0

:
(6.82)
The larger is , the more conﬁdence we have in our
a priori estimate. The least-squares solution is therefore
Q D

AT
I
 A
I
1 
AT
I
T
Qy
0

D .ATA C 2I/1ATQy :
(6.83)
This solution is called damped least squares, where 
is the damping factor. Expanding this solution in terms
of the singular value decomposition,
Q D
Npar
X
jD1
.uT
j Qy/
j
2
j C 2 vj :
(6.84)
Hence a very small j is counteracted by the larger 
value; then the a priori information about parameter val-
ues dominates the information from the data, i. e., the
data are ignored. Thus for damped least squares, no ex-
plicit action on the singular values is required, because
the damping factor modiﬁes the singular values. The so-
lution will be perturbed over the normal least-squares
solution by the magnitude of the  choice.
Confidence Measure of Parameter Estimates
After calibration, an estimate OM of the covariance of the
parameter estimates can be derived from the data [6.3].
Assume that the task variables y have previously been
scaled for equal uncertainty, that there is no bias, and
that the errors are uncorrelated. Then
OM D 2.ATA/1 :
(6.85)
An estimate of the standard deviation  after running
the calibration procedure is obtained from the 2 statis-
tic [6.44, 46]
2 D .y  A O/T.y  A O/ :
(6.86)

Model Identification
6.4 Identifiability and Numerical Conditioning
131
Part A | 6.4
An unbiased estimator for 2 is O2 D 2=
, where 
 D
MP  Npar is called the statistical degrees of freedom; 
subtracts from the total number of measurements MP
the number Npar of parameters estimated, since some of
the measurements went into determining .
The estimate OM can be used as a basis for elimi-
nating parameters, by choosing those with the largest
variances.
6.4.2 Observability
The measurements that are taken will inﬂuence the
accuracy of parameter estimation. In kinematic cali-
bration, the quality of the pose set has been measured
by an observability index. In inertial parameter esti-
mation, the quality of the identiﬁcation trajectory has
been termed persistent excitation [6.47]. Regardless
of whether data is collected statically as in kinematic
calibration or dynamically as in inertial parameter es-
timation, the result is just a bunch of numbers that go
into the regressor matrix, and so common terminology
is appropriate.
In statistics, optimal experimental design theory has
given rise to several data measures termed alphabet op-
timalities [6.48]. Some of the most prominent are the
following:

A-optimality minimizes the trace of .ATA/1 to ob-
tain regression designs.

D-optimality
maximizes
the
determinant
of
.ATA/1.

E-optimality maximizes the minimum singular
value of .ATA/1.

G-optimality minimizes the maximum prediction
variance, and does not have a simple expression in
terms of singular values.
Although ties to the experimental design liter-
ature have not typically been made [6.49], sev-
eral of the proposed observability indexes for robot
calibration have an alphabet-optimality counterpart.
A-optimality does not have a counterpart in the
robot calibration literature, and conversely a few pro-
posed observability indexes do not have an alphabet-
optimality counterpart. In [6.49], it is proved that
E-optimality and G-optimality are equivalent for exact
design.
Borm et al. [6.50, 51] proposed an observability
index (here termed O1 and numbered consecutively be-
low) that maximizes the product of all of the singular
values
O1 D
rp1    r
p
P
:
(6.87)
This is similar to D-optimality. The rationale is that O1
represents the volume of a hyperellipsoid in y, de-
ﬁned by (6.7) when  deﬁnes a hypersphere, and the
singular values represent the lengths of axes. Therefore
maximizing O1 gives the largest hyperellipsoid volume,
and hence a good aggregate increase of the singular
values. One can also derive O1 from the well-known
relation
p
det.ATA/ D 1    r.
Minimizing the condition number of A as a measure
of observability has been proposed in [6.40, 52, 53]
O2 D 1
r
:
(6.88)
O2 measures the eccentricity of the hyperellipsoid
rather than its size. The intermediate singular values are
not considered to be that pertinent, because minimizing
the condition number automatically makes all singular
values become more similar in magnitude and makes
the hyperellipsoid closer to a hypersphere.
Nahvi et al. [6.22] argue for maximizing the mini-
mum singular value r as an observability measure
O3 D r :
(6.89)
This is similar to E-optimality. The rationale is to make
the shortest axis as long as possible, regardless of the
other axes, that is to say, to improve the worst case.
Consider the following standard result [6.4]
r 	 kyk
kk 	 1 ;
(6.90)
or more particularly
rkk 	 kyk :
(6.91)
Then maximizing r ensures that a given size of pa-
rameter errors kk has the largest possible inﬂuence
on the pose errors kyk.
Nahvi and Hollerbach [6.54] proposed the noise
ampliﬁcation index O4, which can be viewed as com-
bining the condition number O2 with the minimum
singular value O3
O4 D 2
r
1
:
(6.92)
The rationale is to measure both the eccentricity of the
ellipse through O2 as well as the size of the ellipse
through O3. The noise ampliﬁcation index was argued
to be the most sensitive to measurement error and mod-
eling error.
Hollerbach and Lokhorst [6.21] found experimen-
tally that the condition number and the minimum sin-
gular value gave about the same good result: their

Part A | 6.4
132
Part A
Robotics Foundations
relative magnitudes were almost proportional to the
root-mean-square (RMS) errors of the ﬁnal parameter
errors. The observability index O1 was not as sensitive
and not directly related to parameter errors. Sun and
Hollerbach [6.49] derived general relations among the
observability indexes and alphabet optimalities
O1  A-optimality  O3 :
(6.93)
They further showed that if 1  1, then O3  O2, and
if r 	 1, then O2  O4. They also argued that O3
(D-optimality) is in general the best index, because it
minimizes the variance of the parameters and also min-
imizes the uncertainty of the end-effector pose.
Optimal Experimental Design
An observability index is typically used to decide how
many data points to collect. As one begins to add
data points, the observability increases, then plateaus.
Adding additional data does not then improve the qual-
ity of the estimates. For kinematic calibration, data may
be added through random selection, or optimal design
methods can be employed that can drastically reduce
the amount of data required [6.55, 56]. Optimal experi-
mental designs work by measuring the effect of adding
or exchanging data points [6.57].
Exciting Trajectories
For inertial parameter estimation, data points are not in-
dependent because they result from a trajectory rather
than isolated poses. Therefore the issue is what type
of trajectory to generate. Industrial robots usually
have joint position point-to-point trajectory generators.
A continuous and smooth trajectory is calculated by in-
terpolating between these points, assuming zero initial
and ﬁnal velocity and acceleration at each point, and us-
ing polynomial interpolators. Excitation trajectories are
obtained by minimizing an observability index, using
nonlinear optimization techniques to calculate the poly-
nomial coefﬁcients, under the constraints of the joint
positions, velocities, and accelerations limits [6.52].
It is possible to facilitate the optimization by pro-
ceeding to a sequential excitation procedure. Speciﬁc
trajectories, which structurally excite a small number of
parameters, are easier to optimize. For example, mov-
ing one joint at a time with constant velocities excites
friction and gravity parameters. In this approach, se-
quential identiﬁcation is avoided. However, it is better
to collect all the data and to proceed to a globally
weighted least-squares estimation [6.29]. This proce-
dure avoids the accumulation of estimation errors and
allows the calculation of the conﬁdence intervals (6.85).
Speciﬁc trajectories have been proposed like si-
nusoidal interpolators [6.58], or periodic trajecto-
ries obtained from a spectral analysis of the con-
tribution function of the parameters [6.59]. This is
a general planning trajectory strategy, which is very
important to get accurate experimental identiﬁca-
tion [6.60].
6.4.3 Scaling
The numerical conditioning of parameter estimation
can be improved by scaling both the output measure-
ments (task variable scaling) and the parameters.
Task Variable Scaling
When performing a least-squares analysis on the end-
point pose error, position errors and orientation errors
have to be combined (6.22)
jjyijj2 D jj1pl
nC1jj2 C jj1l
nC1jj2 :
(6.94)
However, position error and orientation error have dif-
ferent units, and so are not comparable. Furthermore,
not all position or orientation components may be mea-
sured with equal accuracy.
Ordinary least squares (6.8) weighs all task vari-
ables equally. To weigh these variables differently, the
general solution is left multiplication of (6.7) by a scal-
ing matrix G [6.45],
Gy D GA ;
Qy  QA ;
(6.95)
where Qy D Gy is the scaled output vector and QA D
GA is the scaled regressor matrix. The weighted least-
squares solution is
 D . QAT QA/1 QATQy D .ATWA/1ATWy ;
(6.96)
where W D GTG. Often W is a diagonal matrix.
One approach to scaling position error versus ori-
entation error is to equalize the effect of a parameter
error i on either position error or orientation er-
ror. Curiously, for human-sized robot arms the effect
is equal without scaling due to an accident of metric
units. If  is the joint angle resolution, then s D r is
the resulting endpoint position resolution. For human-
sized arms, r D 1 m and hence s D . Thus meters and
radians are directly comparable after all. Thus using
no scaling factors for the pose parameters makes some
sense, and may explain why the general disregard for
scaling in the robotics community has not had more
consequences. If linkages are much smaller (like ﬁn-
gers) or much larger (like excavators) then the situation
is different.

Model Identification
6.4 Identifiability and Numerical Conditioning
133
Part A | 6.4
A more general way of choosing the weighting ma-
trix W is to use a priori information about acceptable
relative errors. Such information might arise from spec-
iﬁcations of the measurement apparatus. Suppose that
the output variables are subject to independent Gaus-
sian noise, such that y
j is the standard deviation in task
variable measurement component yi
j, for j D 1; : : : ; m
pose components. Then the individual diagonal weights
are wjj D 1=y
j , and deﬁne
Ri D diag
h
y
1
2 ; : : : ;

y
m
2i
;
R D diag.R1; : : : ; RP/ ;
where the weighting matrix W D R1, and R is called
the covariance matrix.
The weighted least-squares estimate is
 D .ATR1A/1ATR1y :
(6.97)
The resulting scaled output variable Qyl
j D yl
j=y
j is
dimensionless. The larger the uncertainty y
j , the less
this variable inﬂuences the least-squares solution rel-
ative to other variables. The standard deviations y
j
are not necessarily the same as endpoint measurement
accuracy, because model errors and input noise also
contribute to output errors.
The weighted least-squares solution using standard
deviations is variously called the Gauss–Markov esti-
mate, the generalized least-squares estimate, or the best
linear unbiased estimator (BLUE) [6.3]. It is the mini-
mum covariance estimate (on the parameter error) of all
unbiased estimators. A signiﬁcant point is that the stan-
dard deviations of the scaled components of Qy are all
about the same size, or the covariance QR D cov.Qy/ D
I, the identity matrix. Hence the Euclidean norm of the
error vector Qy is a reasonable measure of its size.
Often we do not know the covariance matrix R that
well. An estimate of the standard deviations after run-
ning the calibration procedure is obtained from the 2
statistic [6.44, 46]
2 D .y  A/TR1.y  A/ :
(6.98)
This equation is the same as the residual error (6.95),
with substitution for W D R1. 2 is nothing more than
the weighted residuals after calibration. The expected
value of 2 is
E.2/  
 D PK  R ;
(6.99)
where E is the expectation operator. That is to say,
the unweighted residuals .y  A/2 should, with
enough measurements, approximate the true covari-
ance. We may now uniformly scale an initial estimate
of R after a preliminary calibration, based on the value
of 2,
OR D 2

 R ;
(6.100)
where OR is the revised estimate of the covariance ma-
trix.
Parameter Scaling
Scaling of parameters is important for proper con-
vergence in nonlinear optimization and for singular
value decomposition. If parameters have vastly differ-
ent magnitudes, then the singular values are not directly
comparable. Also, parameter scaling can improve the
conditioning of the regressor A and help to avoid in-
vertibility problems.
Whereas left multiplication of A in (6.95) results
in task variable scaling, right multiplication of A by
a weighting matrix H results in parameter scaling [6.45]
y D .AH/.H1/  NA Q ;
(6.101)
where the scaled Jacobian and parameters are NA D AH
and  Q D H1. The least-squares solution is not
changed by parameter scaling, whereas it is by task
variable scaling.
The most common approach towards parameter
weighting is column scaling, which does not require
a priori statistical information. Deﬁne a diagonal ma-
trix H D diag.h1; : : : ; hNpar/ with elements
hj D
(
kcjk1
if kcjk ¤ 0
1
if kcjk D 0
(6.102)
where aj is the j-th column of A. Then (6.101) becomes
y D
Npar
X
jD1
aj
kajkjkajk :
(6.103)
Suppose that y has been previously normalized; then
its length is meaningful. Each aj=kajk is a unit vector,
and hence each scaled parameter jkajk is about the
same size and has the same effect on y.
Schröer [6.38] identiﬁed a problem with column
scaling, namely that poor identiﬁability of parameters
can result in very small Euclidean norms, which re-
sult in very large scaling factors. This results in strong
ampliﬁcation of uncertainties of A. Instead, Schröer
proposed scaling based on the effect on the anticipated
error of the robot (as previously discussed under task
variable scaling).

Part A | 6.4
134
Part A
Robotics Foundations
In an ideal case, one would have a priori knowl-
edge of the expected value 0 of the parameter vector
and the standard deviation 
j
of each of the parameter
vector components. More generally, the parameter dis-
tribution would be described by a covariance matrix M,
but usually this information is not available. Instead, the
estimate OM of the covariance from (6.85) can be used.
If the output measurement covariance R1 and pa-
rameter error covariance M are both available, one may
deﬁne a new least-squares optimization criterion that
combines output errors with parameter errors to yield
a new 2 statistic
2 D .y A/TR1.y  A/
C TM1 :
(6.104)
Its solution is the minimum-variance estimate, which
unlike (6.97) is biased
 D .ATR1A C M1/1ATR1y :
(6.105)
The Kalman ﬁlter recursively solves the same prob-
lem [6.61, 62]; when the state is nonvarying, there is
a constant process, and there is no process noise [6.13,
63]. The Gauss–Markov estimate is the limiting case
when M1 is zero, i. e., there is no a priori informa-
tion about the parameters. Again, there is an issue of
determining the covariances. As for the Gauss–Markov
estimate, the expected value of 2 can be used to uni-
formly scale R and M post facto [6.64].
6.4.4 Recursive Least Squares
and the Kalman Filter
In a control setting, it may be necessary to update the
estimate O at time step k based upon all the readings up
to time step k  1. It is possible to recast least squares
recursively to perform this updating [6.3], which is
strongly analogous to the Kalman Filter. At time step k,
there is a new reading
yk D Ak  C ek ;
(6.106)
where yk is of dimension M 1, Ak is of dimension M 
N, and  is of dimension N1. Let Rk be the covariance
of ek. This equation is stacked for all readings up to k,
and the Gauss–Markov estimate is derived
yk D Ak C ek
Ok D .AT
k R1
k Ak/1AT
k R1
k yk ;
(6.107)
where yk is of dimension MK  1, and Ak is of di-
mension MK  N. Rk is the covariance of ek, and is
a block-diagonal matrix with elements Rk.
To make an analogy to the Kalman ﬁlter, deﬁne the
covariance of O as Pk D .AT
k R1
k Ak/1 of dimension
N  N. Inverting this relation eventually yields a recur-
sive reltionship in terms of the covariance up to the
previous time, step, plus a new contribution
P1
k
D P1
k1 C .Ak/T.Rk/1Ak :
(6.108)
Similarly,
AT
k R1
k yk D AT
k1R1
k1yk1 C .Ak/T.Rk/1yk :
(6.109)
Substituting the deﬁnition of Pk and (6.109) into (6.107)
eventually yields
Ok D Ok1 C Pk.Ak/T.Rk/1.yk  Ak Ok1/ :
(6.110)
In the covariance updating matrix (6.108), the in-
verse P1
k1 has to be taken. The updating relationship
can be reworked into a computationally friendlier form
using the binomial inverse theorem (see Wikipedia en-
try)
.A C UBV/1 D
A1  A1U.B1 C VA1U/1VA1
(6.111)
Making the identiﬁcation A D P1
k1, U D .Ak/T, B D
.Rk/1, and V D Ak, after inversion (6.108) becomes
Pk D
Pk1  Pk1.Ak/T.Rk C AkPk1.Ak/T/1Ak Pk1
(6.112)
The resulting matrix in parentheses is of size M  M,
and is typically of much lower dimension than the
N  N dimension of Pk. That is to say, there are usually
many more parameters than measurement components.
Hence the inversion is easier.
Equations (6.110) and (6.112) comprise a large part
of the Kalman ﬁlter. Thus the Kalman ﬁlter is funda-
mentally recursive least squares [6.3, 61, 62]. There are
many variants to the Kalman ﬁlter, including one based
on the mmse estimate.
Gautier and Poignet [6.65] applied an extended
Kalman ﬁlter to estimate a robot’s inertial parame-
ters, in which the ﬁlter was reworked to include ve-
locity and acceleration estimation. They found that
there was no advantage to using a Kalman ﬁlter over
least squares, and in fact there was a disadvantage in
terms of sensitivity to initial conditions and slower

Model Identification
6.5 Conclusions and Further Reading
135
Part A | 6.5
convergence. One issue in on-line versus off-line es-
timation is the accuracy of velocity and acceleration
estimates. In off-line estimation, two sided (or acausal)
ﬁlters can be used, and they typically estimate time
derivatives more accurately than one-side (or causal)
ﬁlters.
6.5 Conclusions and Further Reading
This chapter has presented methods for calibrating
the kinematic parameters and the inertial parameters
of robot manipulators. Both methods are instances of
parameter estimation using least squares. Inertial pa-
rameters appear linearly in the equations of motion, and
ordinary least squares can be used. Kinematic parame-
ters appear nonlinearly because of sines and cosines,
and so nonlinear estimation via the Gauss–Newton
method can be applied.
There are domain-speciﬁc issues for setting up the
calibration equations. For kinematic calibration, Hayati
parameters have to be mixed with Denavit–Hartenberg
parameters to handle the case of nearly parallel joint
axes. The calibration equations have to take into ac-
count how the endpoint is measured or constrained.
By examining in a detailed fashion the possible joint
sequences, including parallel or prismatic joints, a min-
imal parameterization is achieved that obviates prob-
lems of identiﬁability.
The calibration index has been presented as cate-
gorizing all kinematic calibration methods. This index
counts the number of equations generated per pose, by
calculating the excess of sensing over mobility. A key
is that all calibration methods can be viewed as closed-
loop methods, where any endpoint sensing system is
considered as a joint. Parallel robots are handled by in-
corporating multiple closed loops.
For inertial parameter estimation,the recursive
Newton–Euler equations lead to a formulation of the
regressor matrix as an upper-diagonal matrix. A min-
imal parameterization is straightforward for serial and
spanning robots. The load inertial parameters estima-
tion has been treated by using either the joint torques
or the terminal link force-torque sensor measurements.
The proposed models are exploited to identify the joint
torques gains supposing known load parameters.
Numerical methods were presented to handle
unidentiﬁable parameters if a minimal parameterization
has not been achieved. These methods hinge on the
singular value or QR decomposition of the regressor
matrix. The singular values can be examined to de-
cide which parameters are not identiﬁable and should
be eliminated. Alternatively, a small singular value can
simply be zeroed to eliminate the effects of poorly iden-
tiﬁable parameters without explicitly eliminating them.
The former yields a structural model, while the latter
yields a prediction model. A priori estimates of param-
eters can be taken into account by using damped least
squares.
The adequacy of the measurement set for parame-
ter estimation is captured by different proposals for an
observability index. This index can be related to the lit-
erature on alphabet optimalities in experimental design.
Finally, the scaling of measurements or of param-
eters is important for a well-conditioned numerical
estimation, and is essential in order to compare singu-
lar values. When uncertainties in measurements and in
parameters are included as weights, the optimal mini-
mum variance estimate can be found, which is related
to the Kalman ﬁlter. If not known beforehand, these un-
certainties can be estimated from the data.
6.5.1 Relation to Other Chapters
Estimation involving least squares and Kalman ﬁlter-
ing is discussed in Chap. 5 in a similar context. The
problem of estimating properties of the world through
sensors is very similar to model identiﬁcation. Recur-
sive estimation techniques are particularly appropriate
when a robot needs to update its world model incremen-
tally. For model identiﬁcation, employing a recursive
formulation is not particularly helpful, as the machin-
ery of recursive updating can obscure numerical issues
with the total data.
The singular value decomposition appears in other
contexts. Chapter 10 and 16 analyze equal motion ca-
pability in different directions by measures similar to
the observability indexes: O1 has a counterpart in the
manipulability measure, and O2 the condition number
and O3 the minimum singular value appear again. By
contrast, the concern in calibration is good data in all
directions as captured by the singular values. Chap. 10
employs the singular value decomposition to analyze
redundant mechanisms. Whereas parameter estimation
generally is an overconstrained least-squares problem
(many more measurements than parameters), redundant
mechanisms are underconstrained (more joint angles
than task variables). Instead of signalling identiﬁability
problems, zero singular values indicate the null space of
the Jacobian. Damped least squares is used in Chap. 10
to avoid singularities. Just as the true parameters are
perturbed by damped least squares in calibration, the

Part A | 6.5
136
Part A
Robotics Foundations
trajectory is perturbed in order to get around a numeri-
cal conditioning issue.
Sensors involved in positioning a robot can have as-
pects of their sensor models calibrated as well, such
as the gain of a potentiometer. Camera calibration is
discussed in Chap. 32. Camera models can be deter-
mined at the same time as the kinematic models of robot
manipulators [6.39, 66], including intrinsic camera pa-
rameters such as the pinhole model discussed in Chap. 5
as well as the extrinsic parameters of where the camera
is located.
6.5.2 Further Reading
Screw Axis Measurement
An alternative to nonlinear least squares to estimate
kinematic parameters is a class of methods which mea-
sure the joint axes as lines in space, termed screw axis
measurement in [6.8]. One approach is circle point
analysis, which involves moving one joint at a time to
generate a circle at a distal measurement point [6.13].
Other approaches measure the Jacobian matrix, which
contains as columns the joint screws [6.67]. With
knowledge of the joint axes, the kinematic parame-
ters are straightforwardly extracted without nonlinear
search. The accuracy of this class of methods may not
be as good as the nonlinear least-squares methods.
Total Least Squares
Ordinary least squares assumes that there is only noise
in the output measurements, but often there is noise
in the inputs as well. Input noise is known to lead
to bias errors [6.3]. A framework for handling both
input and output noise is total least squares [6.34],
also known as orthogonal distance regression [6.68]
or errors-in-variables regression [6.69]. Nonlinear to-
tal least squares has been applied to robot calibration
in [6.2, 70, 71]. In the implicit loop method of [6.2], by
treating endpoint measurements equally with joint mea-
surements, no distinction is made between input and
output noise.
Methods with Direct
and Inverse Dynamic Models
The identiﬁcation of dynamic parameters presented in
this chapter is based on the Inverse Dynamic Identi-
ﬁcation Model and linear LS techniques. A common
procedure to validate the identiﬁcation result is to sim-
ulate the direct dynamic model with the identiﬁed
parameters and compare the output with the real sys-
tem.
Recently two methods which use both the direct and
the inverse dynamic models have been developed to im-
prove the noise immunity of estimates with respect to
low rate or corrupted data in the observation matrix
resulting from noisy measurements and/or bad tuning
of joint positions band-pass ﬁltering. The ﬁrst method
needs only the joint torques, while the velocity and ac-
celeration are obtained from the direct dynamic model.
It carries out in a combined procedure the identiﬁca-
tion and the validation. Current work aims to use this
technique to identify robots with ﬂexible joints where
the ﬂexible position variables are not measurable. The
second method uses an instrumental variable (IV) ap-
proach. Both methods have been validated on a 6-DOF
industrial robot [6.72, 73].
Video-References
VIDEO 422
Calibration of ABB’s IRB 120 industrial robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/06/videodetails/422
VIDEO 425
Robot calibration using a touch probe
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/06/videodetails/425
VIDEO 430
Calibration and accuracy validation of a FANUC LR Mate 200iC industrial robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/06/videodetails/430
VIDEO 480
Dynamic identification of Staubli TX40: Trajectory without load
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/06/videodetails/480
VIDEO 481
Dynamic identification of Staubli TX40: Trajectory with load
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/06/videodetails/481
VIDEO 482
Dynamic identification of Kuka LWR: Trajectory without load
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/06/videodetails/482
VIDEO 483
Dynamic identification of Kuka LWR: Trajectory with load
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/06/videodetails/483
VIDEO 485
Dynamic identification of a parallel robot: Trajectory with load
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/06/videodetails/485
VIDEO 486
Dynamic identification of Kuka KR270: Trajectory without load
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/06/videodetails/486

Model Identification
References
137
Part A | 6
VIDEO 487
Dynamic identification of Kuka KR270: trajectory with load
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/06/videodetails/487
VIDEO 488
Dynamic identification of a parallel robot: Trajectory without load
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/06/videodetails/488
References
6.1
P.Z. Marmarelis, V.Z. Marmarelis: Analysis of Physio-
logical Systems (Plenum, London 1978)
6.2
C.W. Wampler, J.M. Hollerbach, T. Arai: An implicit
loop method for kinematic calibration and its ap-
plication to closed-chain mechanisms, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 11, 710–724 (1995)
6.3
J.P. Norton: An Introduction to Identification (Aca-
demic, London 1986)
6.4
G.H. Golub, C.F. Van Loan: Matrix Computations
(Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore 1989)
6.5
H. West, E. Papadopoulos, S. Dubowsky, H. Cheah:
A method for estimating the mass properties of
a manipulator by measuring the reaction moments
at its base, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1989) pp. 1510–1516
6.6
R.P. Paul: Robot Manipulators: Mathematics, Pro-
gramming, and Control (MIT Press, Cambridge 1981)
6.7
S.A. Hayati, M. Mirmirani: Improving the abso-
lute positioning accuracy of robot manipulators,
J. Robotics Syst. 2, 397–413 (1985)
6.8
J.M. Hollerbach, C.W. Wampler: The calibration index
and taxonomy of kinematic calibration methods, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 15, 573–591 (1996)
6.9
A. Goswami, A. Quaid, M. Peshkin: Identifying robot
parameters using partial pose information, IEEE Con-
trol Syst. 13, 6–14 (1993)
6.10
M.R. Driels, W.E. Swayze: Automated partial pose
measurement system for manipulator calibration
experiments, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 10, 430–
440 (1994)
6.11
G.-R. Tang, L.-S. Liu: Robot calibration using a single
laser displacement meter, Mechatronics 3, 503–516
(1993)
6.12
D.E. Whitney, C.A. Lozinski, J.M. Rourke: Industrial
robot forward calibration method and results, ASME
J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 108, 1–8 (1986)
6.13
B.W. Mooring, Z.S. Roth, M.R. Driels: Fundamentals
of Manipulator Calibration (Wiley, New York 1991)
6.14
K. Lau, R. Hocken, L. Haynes: Robot performance
measurements using automatic laser tracking tech-
niques, Robotics Comput. Manuf. 2, 227–236 (1985)
6.15
C.H. An, C.H. Atkeson, J.M. Hollerbach: Model-Based
Control of a Robot Manipulator (MIT Press, Cambridge
1988)
6.16
M. Vincze, J.P. Prenninger, H. Gander: A laser tracking
system to measure position and orientation of robot
end effectors under motion, Int. J. Robotics Res. 13,
305–314 (1994)
6.17
J.M. McCarthy: Introduction to Theoretical Kinematics
(MIT Press, Cambridge 1990)
6.18
D.J. Bennet, J.M. Hollerbach: Autonomous calibra-
tion of single-loop closed kinematic chains formed
by manipulators with passive endpoint constraints,
IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 7, 597–606 (1991)
6.19
W.S. Newman, D.W. Osborn: A new method for kine-
matic parameter calibration via laser line tracking,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1993)
pp. 160–165
6.20
X.-L. Zhong, J.M. Lewis: A new method for au-
tonomous robot calibration, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1995) pp. 1790–1795
6.21
J.M. Hollerbach, D.M. Lokhorst: Closed-loop kine-
matic calibration of the RSI 6-DOF hand controller,
IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 11, 352–359 (1995)
6.22
A. Nahvi, J.M. Hollerbach, V. Hayward: Closed-loop
kinematic calibration of a parallel-drive shoulder
joint, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1994) pp. 407–412
6.23
O. Masory, J. Wang, H. Zhuang: On the accuracy of
a Stewart platform – Part II Kinematic calibration
and compensation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom., Piscataway (1994) pp. 725–731
6.24
B. Armstrong-Helouvry: Control of Machines with
Friction (Kluwer, Boston 1991)
6.25
B. Armstrong-Helouvry, P. Dupont, C. de Canudas
Wit: A survey of models, analysis tools and com-
pensation methods for the control of machines with
friction, Automatica 30, 1083–1138 (1994)
6.26
F. Aghili, J.M. Hollerbach, M. Buehler: A modular
and high-precision motion control system with an
integrated motor, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 12,
317–329 (2007)
6.27
W.S. Newman, J.J. Patel: Experiments in torque con-
trol of the Adept One robot, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom., Piscataway (1991) pp. 1867–1872
6.28
W. Khalil, E. Dombre: Modeling, Identification and
Control of Robots (Taylor Francis, New York 2002)
6.29
M. Gautier: Dynamic identification of robots with
power model, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1997) pp. 1922–1927
6.30
W. Khalil, M. Gautier, P. Lemoine: Identification of
the payload inertial parameters of industrial manip-
ulators, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2007) pp. 4943–4948
6.31
J. Swevers, W. Verdonck, B. Naumer, S. Pieters,
E. Biber: An Experimental Robot Load Identification
Method for Industrial Application, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 21(8), 701–712 (2002)
6.32
P.P. Restrepo, M. Gautier: Calibration of drive chain
of robot joints, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1995) pp. 526–531
6.33
P. Corke: In situ measurement of robot motor elec-
trical constants, Robotica 23(14), 433–436 (1996)
6.34
S. Van Huffel, J. Vandewalle: The Total Least Squares
Problem: Computational Aspects and Analysis (SIAM,
Philadelphia 1991)
6.35
M. Gautier, S. Briot: Global identification of drive
gains parameters of robots using a known pay-

Part A | 6
138
Part A
Robotics Foundations
load, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 136(5), 051026
(2014)
6.36
W. Khalil, O. Ibrahim: General solution for the dy-
namic modeling of parallel robots, J. Intell. Robotics
Syst. 49, 19–37 (2007)
6.37
S. Guegan, W. Khalil, P. Lemoine: Identification of
the dynamic parameters of the Orthoglide, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2003) pp. 3272–3277
6.38
K. Schröer: Theory of kinematic modelling and nu-
merical procedures for robot calibration. In: Robot
Calibration, ed. by R. Bernhardt, S.L. Albright (Chap-
man Hall, London 1993) pp. 157–196
6.39
H. Zhuang, Z.S. Roth: Camera-Aided Robot Calibra-
tion (CRC, Boca Raton 1996)
6.40
M. Gautier: Numerical calculation of the base inertial
parameters, J. Robotics Syst. 8, 485–506 (1991)
6.41
J.J. Dongarra, C.B. Mohler, J.R. Bunch, G.W. Stewart:
LINPACK User’s Guide (SIAM, Philadelphia 1979)
6.42
W. Khalil, F. Bennis: Symbolic calculation of the
base inertial parameters of closed-loop robots, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 14, 112–128 (1995)
6.43
W. Khalil, S. Guegan: Inverse and direct dynamic
modeling of Gough–Stewart robots, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 20, 754–762 (2004)
6.44
W.H. Press, S.A. Teukolsky, W.T. Vetterling, B.P. Flan-
nery: Numerical Recipes in C (Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge 1992)
6.45
C.L. Lawson, R.J. Hanson: Solving Least Squares
Problems (Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs 1974)
6.46
P.R. Bevington, D.K. Robinson: Data Reduction and
Error Analysis for the Physical Sciences (McGraw-Hill,
New York 1992)
6.47
B. Armstrong: On finding exciting trajectories for
identification experiments involving systems with
nonlinear dynamics, Int. J. Robotics Res. 8, 28–48
(1989)
6.48
J. Fiefer, J. Wolfowitz: Optimum designs in regression
problems, Ann. Math. Stat. 30, 271–294 (1959)
6.49
Y. Sun, J.M. Hollerbach: Observability index selection
for robot calibration, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA), Piscataway (2008) pp. 831–836
6.50
J.H. Borm, C.H. Menq: Determination of optimal
measurement configurations for robot calibration
based on observability measure, Int. J. Robotics Res.
10, 51–63 (1991)
6.51
C.H. Menq, J.H. Borm, J.Z. Lai: Identification and ob-
servability measure of a basis set of error parameters
in robot calibration, ASME J. Mech. Autom. Des. 111(4),
513–518 (1989)
6.52
M. Gautier, W. Khalil: Exciting trajectories for iner-
tial parameter identification, Int. J. Robotics Res. 11,
362–375 (1992)
6.53
M.R. Driels, U.S. Pathre: Significance of observation
strategy on the design of robot, J. Robotics Syst. 7,
197–223 (1990)
6.54
A. Nahvi, J.M. Hollerbach: The noise amplification
index for optimal pose selection in robot calibration,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1996)
pp. 647–654
6.55
D. Daney, B. Madeline, Y. Papegay: Choosing mea-
surement poses for robot calibration with local con-
vergence method and Tabu search, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 24(6), 501–518 (2005)
6.56
Y. Sun, J.M. Hollerbach: Active robot calibration al-
gorithm, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Piscataway (2008) pp. 1276–1281
6.57
T.J. Mitchell: An algorithm for the construction of D-
Optimal experimental designs, Technometrics 16(2),
203–210 (1974)
6.58
J. Swevers, C. Ganseman, D.B. Tukel, J. De Schutter,
H. Van Brussel: Optimal robot excitation and iden-
tification, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 13, 730–740
(1997)
6.59
P.O. Vandanjon, M. Gautier, P. Desbats: Identification
of robots inertial parameters by means of spectrum
analysis, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1995) pp. 3033–3038
6.60
E. Walter, L. Pronzato: Identification of Parametric
Models from Experimental Data (Springer, London
1997)
6.61
D.G. Luenberger: Optimization by Vector Space Meth-
ods (Wiley, New York 1969)
6.62
H.W.
Sorenson:
Least-squares
estimation:
from
Gauss to Kalman, IEEE Spectr. 7, 63–68 (1970)
6.63
Z. Roth, B.W. Mooring, B. Ravani: An overview of
robot calibration, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 3, 377–386
(1987)
6.64
A.E. Bryson Jr., Y.-C. Ho: Applied Optimal Control
(Hemisphere, Washington 1975)
6.65
M. Gautier, P. Poignet: Extended Kalman fiter-
ing and weighted least squares dynamic identi-
fication of robot, Control Eng. Pract. 9, 1361–1372
(2001)
6.66
D.J. Bennet, J.M. Hollerbach, D. Geiger: Autonomous
robot calibration for hand-eye coordination, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 10, 550–559 (1991)
6.67
D.J. Bennet, J.M. Hollerbach, P.D. Henri: Kinematic
calibration by direct estimation of the Jacobian ma-
trix, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1992)
pp. 351–357
6.68
P.T. Boggs, R.H. Byrd, R.B. Schnabel: A stable and ef-
ficient algorithm for nonlinear orthogonal distance
regression, SIAM J. Sci. Stat. Comput. 8, 1052–1078
(1987)
6.69
W.A. Fuller: Measurement Error Models (Wiley, New
York 1987)
6.70
J.-M. Renders, E. Rossignol, M. Becquet, R. Hanus:
Kinematic calibration and geometrical parameter
identification for robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
7, 721–732 (1991)
6.71
G. Zak, B. Benhabib, R.G. Fenton, I. Saban: Ap-
plication of the weighted least squares parameter
estimation method for robot calibration, J. Mech.
Des. 116, 890–893 (1994)
6.72
M. Gautier, A. Janot, P.O. Vandanjon: A New Closed-
Loop Output Error Method for Parameter Identifi-
cation of Robot Dynamics, IEEE Trans. Control Syst.
Techn. 21, 428–444 (2013)
6.73
A. Janot, P.O. Vandanjon, M. Gautier: A Generic In-
strumental Variable Approach for Industrial Robots
Identification, IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Techn. 22,
132–145 (2014)

Multimedia Contents Motion Plan
139
Part A | 7.1
7. Motion Planning
Lydia E. Kavraki, Steven M. LaValle
This chapter first provides a formulation of the
geometric path planning problem in Sect. 7.2
and then introduces sampling-based planning
in Sect. 7.3. Sampling-based planners are general
techniques applicable to a wide set of problems
and have been successful in dealing with hard
planning instances. For specific, often simpler,
planning instances, alternative approaches exist
and are presented in Sect. 7.4. These approaches
provide theoretical guarantees and for simple
planning instances they outperform sampling-
based planners. Section 7.5 considers problems
that involve differential constraints, while Sect. 7.6
overviews several other extensions of the basic
problem formulation and proposed solutions. Fi-
nally, Sect. 7.8 addresses some important and more
advanced topics related to motion planning.
7.1
Robotics Motion Planning .....................
139
7.2
Motion Planning Concepts.....................
140
7.2.1
Configuration Space .....................
140
7.2.2
Geometric Path Planning Problem .
141
7.2.3
Complexity of Motion Planning .....
141
7.3
Sampling-Based Planning.....................
141
7.3.1
Multi-Query Planners:
Mapping the Connectivity of Cfree...
142
7.3.2
Single-Query Planners:
Incremental Search ......................
143
7.4
Alternative Approaches..........................
144
7.4.1
Combinatorial Roadmaps..............
145
7.4.2
Roadmaps in Higher Dimensions...
146
7.4.3
Potential Fields............................
146
7.5
Differential Constraints..........................
148
7.5.1
Concepts and Terminology ............
148
7.5.2
Discretization of Constraints..........
149
7.5.3
Decoupled Approach ....................
149
7.5.4
Kinodynamic Planning .................
150
7.6
Extensions and Variations .....................
151
7.6.1
Closed Kinematic Chains ...............
151
7.6.2
Manipulation Planning.................
151
7.6.3
Time-Varying Problems ................
151
7.6.4
Multiple Robots ...........................
152
7.6.5
Uncertainty in Predictability .........
153
7.6.6
Sensing Uncertainty .....................
153
7.6.7
Optimal Planning.........................
154
7.7
Advanced Issues....................................
154
7.7.1
Topology of Configuration Spaces ..
154
7.7.2
Sampling Theory ..........................
155
7.7.3
Computational Algebraic
Geometry Techniques ...................
156
7.8
Conclusions and Further Reading...........
157
Video-References.........................................
158
References...................................................
158
7.1 Robotics Motion Planning
A fundamental robotics task is to plan collision-free
motions for complex bodies from a start to a goal
position among a collection of static obstacles. Al-
though relatively simple, this geometric path planning
problem is computationally hard [7.1]. Extensions of
this formulation take into account additional problems
that are inherited from mechanical and sensor limi-
tations of real robots such as uncertainties, feedback,
and differential constraints, which further complicate
the development of automated planners. Modern al-
gorithms have been fairly successful in addressing
hard instances of the basic geometric problem and

Part A | 7.2
140
Part A
Robotics Foundations
a lot of effort has been devoted to extend their ca-
pabilities to more challenging instances. These algo-
rithms have had widespread success in applications
beyond robotics, such as computer animation, vir-
tual prototyping, and computational biology. There
are many available surveys [7.2–4] and books [7.5–
7] that cover modern motion planning techniques and
applications.
7.2 Motion Planning Concepts
This section provides a description of the fundamental
motion planning problem or the geometric path plan-
ning problem. Extensions of this basic formulation to
more complicated instances will be discussed later in
the chapter and will be revisited throughout this book.
7.2.1 Configuration Space
In path planning, a complete description of the geom-
etry of a robot A and of a workspace W is provided.
The workspace W D RN, in which N D 2 or N D 3, is
a static environment populated with obstacles. The goal
is to ﬁnd a collision-free path for A to move from an
initial position and orientation to a goal position and
orientation.
To achieve this, a complete speciﬁcation of the
location of every point on the robot geometry, or
a conﬁguration q, must be provided. The conﬁgura-
tion space, or C-space (q 2 C), is the space of all
possible conﬁgurations. The C-space represents the set
of all transformations that can be applied to a robot
given its kinematics as described in Chap. 2 (Kine-
matics). It was recognized early on in motion planning
research [7.8, 9] that the C-space is a useful way to
abstract planning problems in a uniﬁed way. The ad-
vantage of this abstraction is that a robot with a com-
plex geometric shape is mapped to a single point in
the C-space. The number of degrees of freedom of
a robot system is the dimension of the C-space, or
the minimum number of parameters needed to specify
a conﬁguration.
Let the closed set O  W represent the (workspace)
obstacle region, which is usually expressed as a collec-
tion of polyhedra, three-dimensional (3-D) triangles, or
piecewise-algebraic surfaces. Let the closed set A.q/ 
W denote the set of points occupied by the robot when
at conﬁguration q 2 C; this set is usually modeled using
the same primitives as used for O. The C-space obstacle
region, Cobs, is deﬁned as
Cobs D fq 2 C j A.q/ \ O 6D ;g:
(7.1)
Since O and A.q/ are closed sets in W, the obstacle
region is a closed set in C. The set of conﬁgurations
that avoid collision is Cfree D C n Cobs, and is called the
free space.
Simple Examples of C-spaces
Translating Planar Rigid Bodies. The robot’s con-
ﬁguration can be speciﬁed by a reference point .x; y/ on
the planar rigid body relative to some ﬁxed coordinate
frame. Therefore the C-space is equivalent to R2. Fig-
ure 7.1 gives an example of a C-space for a triangular
robot and a single polygonal obstacle. The obstacle re-
gion in the C-space can be traced by sliding the robot
around the workspace obstacle to ﬁnd the constraints on
all q 2 C. Motion planning for the robot is now equiva-
lent to motion planning for a point in the C-space.
Planar Arms. Figure 7.2 gives an example of a two-
joint planar arm. The bases of both links are pinned, so
that they can only rotate around the joints, and there are
no joint limits. For this arm, specifying the rotational
parameters 1 and 2 provides the conﬁguration. Each
joint angle i corresponds to a point on the unit circle
S1 and the C-space is S1S1 D T2, the two-dimensional
(2-D) torus shown in Fig. 7.2. For a higher number of
Obstacle
Configuration space obstacle
Robot
(x, y)
(x, y)
a)
b)
Fig.7.1a,b A robot translating in the plane: (a) a triangu-
lar robot moves in a workspace with a single rectangular
obstacle. (b) The C-space obstacle
θ2
θ2
θ1
θ1
a)
b)
Fig. 7.2 (a) A two-joint planar arm in which the links are
pinned and there are no joint limits. (b) The C-space

Motion Planning
7.3 Sampling-Based Planning
141
Part A | 7.3
links without joint limits, the C-space can be similarly
deﬁned as
C D S1 S1     S1 :
(7.2)
If a joint has limits, then each corresponding S1 is often
replaced with R, even though it is a ﬁnite interval. If
the base of the planar arm is mobile and not pinned,
then the additional translation parameters must also be
considered in the arm’s conﬁguration
C D R2 S1 S1     S1 :
(7.3)
Additional examples of C-spaces are provided in
Sect. 7.7.1, where topological properties of conﬁgura-
tion spaces are discussed.
7.2.2 Geometric Path Planning Problem
The basic motion planning problem, also known as the
piano mover’s problem [7.1], is deﬁned as follows.
Given:
1. A
workspace
W,
where
either
W D R2
or
W D R3.
2. An obstacle region O  W.
3. A robot deﬁned in W. Either a rigid body A or
a collection of m links: A1; A2; : : : ; Am.
4. The conﬁguration space C (Cobs and Cfree are then
deﬁned).
5. An initial conﬁguration qI 2 Cfree.
6. A goal conﬁguration qG 2 Cfree. The initial and goal
conﬁguration are often called a query (qI; qG).
Compute a (continuous) path,  W Œ0; 1 ! Cfree,
such that .0/ D qI and .1/ D qG.
7.2.3 Complexity of Motion Planning
The main complications in motion planning are that it
is not easy to directly compute Cobs and Cfree, and the
dimensionality of the C-space is often quite high. In
terms of computational complexity, the piano mover’s
problem was studied early on and it was shown to be
PSPACE-hard by Reif [7.1]. A series of polynomial-
time algorithms for problems with ﬁxed dimension
suggested an exponential dependence on the problem
dimensionality [7.10, 11]. A single exponential-time al-
gorithm in the C-space dimensionality was proposed by
Canny and showed that the problem is PSPACE-com-
plete [7.12]. Although impractical, the algorithm serves
as an upper bound on the general version of the basic
motion planning problem. It applies computational al-
gebraic geometry techniques for modeling the C-space
in order to construct a roadmap, a one-dimensional
(1-D) subspace that captures the connectivity of Cfree.
Additional details about such techniques can be found
in Sect. 7.7.3.
The complexity of the problem motivated work in
path planning research. One direction was to study sub-
classes of the general problem for which polynomial
time algorithms exist [7.13]. Even some simpler, spe-
cial cases of motion planning, however, are at least
as challenging, for example, the case of a ﬁnite num-
ber of translating, axis-aligned rectangles in R2 is
PSPACE-hard as well [7.14]. Some extensions of mo-
tion planning are even harder. For example, a certain
form of planning under uncertainty in 3-D polyhedral
environment is NEXPTIME-hard [7.15]. The hardest
problems in NEXPTIME are believed to require dou-
bly exponential time to solve.
A different direction was the development of al-
ternative planning paradigms that were practical under
realistic assumptions. Many combinatorial approaches
can efﬁciently construct 1-D roadmaps for speciﬁc 2-D
or 3-D problems. Potential ﬁeld-based approaches de-
ﬁne vector ﬁelds which can be followed by a robot
towards the goal. Both approaches, however, do not
scale well in the general case. They will be described
in Sect. 7.4. An alternative paradigm, sampling-based
planning, is a general approach that has been shown to
be successful in practice for many challenging prob-
lems. It avoids the exact geometric modeling of the C-
space but it cannot provide the guarantees of a complete
algorithm. Complete and exact algorithms are able to
detect that no path can be found. Instead sampling-based
planning offers a lower level of completeness guarantee.
This paradigm is described in the following section.
7.3 Sampling-Based Planning
Sampling-based planners are described ﬁrst because
they are the method of choice for a very general class
of problems. The following section will describe other
planners, some of which were developed before the
sampling-based framework. The key idea in sampling-
based planning is to exploit advances in collision
detection algorithms that compute whether a single con-
ﬁguration is collision free. Given this simple primitive,
a planner samples different conﬁgurations to construct
a data structure that stores 1-D C-space curves, which
represent collision-free paths. In this way, sampling-
based planners do not access the C-space obstacles
directly but only through the collision detector and the
constructed data structure. Using this level of abstrac-

Part A | 7.3
142
Part A
Robotics Foundations
tion, the planners are applicable to a wide range of
problems by tailoring the collision detector to speciﬁc
robots and applications.
A standard for sampling-based planners is to pro-
vide a weaker, but still interesting, form of com-
pleteness: if a solution path exists, the planner will
eventually ﬁnd it. Giving up on the stronger form of
completeness, which also requires failure to be reported
in ﬁnite time, these techniques are able to solve in prac-
tice problems with more than three degrees of freedom
that complete approaches cannot address. More details
on this weaker form of completeness are provided in
Sect. 7.7.2.
Different planners follow different approaches on
how to sample conﬁgurations and what kind of
data structures they construct. Section 7.7.2 provides
a deeper insight on sampling issues. A typical classi-
ﬁcation of sampling-based planners is between multi-
query and single-query approaches:

In the ﬁrst category, the planners construct a road-
map, an undirected graph G that is precomputed
once so as to map the connectivity properties
of Cfree. After this step, multiple queries in the same
environment can be answered using only the con-
structed roadmap. Such planners are described in
Sect. 7.3.1.

Planners in the second category build tree data
structures on the ﬂy given a planning query. They at-
tempt to focus on exploring the part of the C-space
that will lead to solving a speciﬁc query as fast as
possible. They are described in Sect. 7.3.2.
Both
approaches, however, make
similar use
of a collision checking primitive. The objective of
a collision detector is to report all geometric contacts
between objects given their geometries and transforma-
tions [7.16–18]. The availability of packages that were
able to answer collision queries in a fraction of a sec-
ond was critical to the development of sampling-based
planners. Modern planners use collision detectors as
a black box. Initially the planner provides the geome-
tries of all the involved objects and speciﬁes which
of them are mobile. Then, in order to validate a robot
conﬁguration, a planner provides the corresponding
robot transformation and a collision detector responds
on whether the objects collide or not. Many packages
represent the geometric models hierarchically, avoid
computing
all-pairwise
interactions,
and
conduct
a binary search to evaluate collisions. Except from
conﬁgurations, a planner must also validate entire
paths. Some collision detectors return distance-from-
collision information, which can be used to infer that
entire neighborhoods in C are valid. It is often more
expensive, however, to extract this information; instead
paths are usually validated point by point using a small
stepping size either incrementally or by employing
binary search. Some collision detectors are incremental
by design, which means that they can be faster by
reusing information from a previous query [7.16].
Examples of problems solved by sampling-based
planners are shown in
VIDEO 24
and
VIDEO 17 .
7.3.1 Multi-Query Planners:
Mapping the Connectivity of Cfree
Planners that aim to answer multiple queries for a cer-
tain static environment use a preprocessing phase dur-
ing which they attempt to map the connectivity proper-
ties of Cfree onto a roadmap. This roadmap has the form
of a graph G, with vertices as conﬁgurations and edges
as paths. A union of 1-D curves is a roadmap G if it
satisﬁes the following properties:
1. Accessibility: From any q 2 Cfree, it is simple and
efﬁcient to compute a path  W Œ0; 1 ! Cfree such
that .0/ D q and .1/ D s, in which s may be any
point in S.G/. S.G/ is the swath of G, the union of
all conﬁgurations reached by all edges and vertices.
This means that it is always possible to connect
a planning query pair qI and qG to some sI and sG,
respectively, in S.G/.
2. Connectivity preserving: The second condition re-
quires that, if there exists a path  W Œ0; 1 ! Cfree
such that .0/ D qI and .1/ D qG, then there also
exists a path 0 W Œ0; 1 ! S.G/, such that 0.0/ D sI
and 0.1/ D sG. Thus, solutions are not missed be-
cause G fails to capture the connectivity of Cfree.
The probabilistic roadmap method (PRM) ap-
proach [7.19] attempts to approximate such a road-
map G in a computationally efﬁcient way. The pre-
processing phase of PRM, which can be extended
to sampling-based roadmaps in general, follows these
steps:
1. Initialization: Let G.V; E/ represent an undirected
graph, which is initially empty. Vertices of G
will correspond to collision-free conﬁgurations, and
edges to collision-free paths that connect vertices.
2. Conﬁguration sampling: A conﬁguration ˛.i/ is
sampled from Cfree and added to the vertex set V.
˛./ is an inﬁnite, dense sample sequence and ˛.i/
is the i-th point in that sequence.
3. Neighborhood computation: Usually, a metric is
deﬁned in the C-space, 	 W C  C ! R. Vertices q
already in V are then selected as part of ˛.i/’s neigh-
borhood if they have small distance according to 	.
4. Edge consideration: For those vertices q that do not
belong in the same connected component of G with

Motion Planning
7.3 Sampling-Based Planning
143
Part A | 7.3
˛.i/ the algorithm attempts to connect them with an
edge.
5. Local planning method: Given ˛.i/ and q 2 Cfree
a module is used that attempts to construct
a path s W Œ0; 1 ! Cfree such that .0/ D ˛.i/ and
.1/ D q. Using collision detection, s must be
checked to ensure that it does not cause a collision.
6. Edge insertion: Insert s into E, as an edge from ˛.i/
to q.
7. Termination: The algorithm is typically terminated
when a predeﬁned number of collision-free vertices
N has been added in the roadmap.
The algorithm is incremental in nature. Computa-
tion can be repeated by starting from an already existing
graph. A general sampling-based roadmap is summa-
rized in Algorithm 7.1.
Algorithm 7.1 Sampling-Based Roadmap
N: number of nodes to include in the roadmap
1: G.init(); i  0;
2: while i < N do
3:
if ˛.i/ 2 Cfree then
4:
G.add_ vertex.˛.i//; i  i C 1;
5:
for q 2 NEIGHBORHOOD.˛.i/,G/ do
6:
if CONNECT .˛.i/; q/ then
7:
G.add_ edge .˛.i/; q/;
8:
end if
9:
end for
10:
end if
11: end while
An illustration of the algorithm’s behavior is de-
picted in Fig. 7.3. To solve a query, qI and qG
are connected to the roadmap, and graph search is
performed.
For the original PRM [7.19], the conﬁguration ˛.i/
was produced using random sampling. For the connec-
Cobs
α(i)
Cobs
Fig. 7.3 The sampling-based roadmap is constructed in-
crementally by attempting to connect each new sam-
ple, ˛.i/, to nearby vertices in the roadmap
tion step between q and ˛.i/, the algorithm used straight
line paths in the C-space. In some cases a connection
was attempted if q and ˛.i/ were in the same connected
component in order to improve path quality. There have
been many subsequent works that try to improve the
roadmap quality while using fewer samples. Methods
for concentrating samples at or near the boundary of
Cfree are presented in [7.20, 21]. Methods that move
samples as far from the boundary as possible appear
in [7.22, 23]. Deterministic sampling techniques, in-
cluding grids, appear in [7.24]. A method of pruning
vertices based on mutual visibility that leads to a dra-
matic reduction in the number of roadmap vertices
appears in [7.25]. Theoretical analysis of sampling-
based roadmaps appears in [7.24, 26, 27] and is brieﬂy
discussed in Sect. 7.7.2. An experimental comparison
of sampling-based roadmap variants appears in [7.28].
One difﬁculty in these roadmap approaches is identify-
ing narrow passages. One proposal is to use the bridge
test for identifying these [7.29]. For other PRM-based
works, see [7.30–34]. Extended discussion of the topic
can be found in [7.5, 7].
7.3.2 Single-Query Planners:
Incremental Search
Single-query planning methods focus on a single
initial–goal conﬁguration pair. They probe and search
the continuous C-space by extending tree data struc-
tures initialized at these known conﬁgurations and
eventually connecting them. Most single-query meth-
ods conform to the following template:
1. Initialization: Let G.V; E/ represent an undirected
search graph, for which the vertex set V contains
a vertex for one (usually qI) or more conﬁgura-
tions in Cfree, and the edge set E is empty. Vertices
of G are collision-free conﬁgurations, and edges are
collision-free paths that connect vertices.
2. Vertex selection method: Choose a vertex qcur 2 V
for expansion.
3. Local planning method: For some qnew 2 Cfree,
which may correspond to an existing vertex in V
but on a different tree or a sampled conﬁguration,
attempt to construct a path s W Œ0; 1 ! Cfree such
that .0/ D qcur and .1/ D qnew. Using collision
detection, s must be checked to ensure that it does
not cause a collision. If this step fails to produce
a collision-free path segment, then go to Step 2.
4. Insert an edge in the graph: Insert s into E, as an
edge from qcur to qnew. If qnew is not already in V,
then it is inserted.
5. Check for a solution: Determine whether G encodes
a solution path.

Part A | 7.4
144
Part A
Robotics Foundations
6. Return to Step 2: Iterate unless a solution has been
found or some termination condition is satisﬁed, in
which case the algorithm reports failure.
During execution, G may be organized into one or
more trees. This leads to:
1. Unidirectional methods, which involve a single tree,
usually rooted at qI [7.35],
2. Bidirectional methods, which involve two trees,
typically rooted at qI and qG [7.35], and
3. Multidirectional methods, which may have more
than two trees [7.36, 37].
The motivation for using more than one tree is that
a single tree may become trapped trying to ﬁnd an exit
through a narrow opening. Traveling in the opposite
direction, however, may be easier. As more trees are
considered it becomes more complicated to determine
which connections should be made between trees.
Rapidly Exploring Dense Trees
The important idea with this family of techniques is that
the algorithm must incrementally explore the properties
of the C-space. An algorithm that achieves this objec-
tive is the rapidly exploring random tree (RRT) [7.35],
which can be generalized to the rapidly exploring dense
tree (RDT) for any dense sampling, deterministic or
random [7.7]. The basic idea is to induce a Voronoi bias
in the exploration process by selecting for expansion the
point in the tree that is closest to ˛.i/ in each iteration.
Using random samples, the probability that a vertex is
chosen is proportional to the volume of its Voronoi re-
gion. The tree construction is outlined as:
Algorithm 7.2 Rapidly Exploring Dense Trees
k: the exploration steps of the algorithm
1: G.init.qI/;
2: for i D 1 to k do
3:
G.add_ vertex.˛.i//;
4:
qn  NEAREST.S.G/;˛.i//;
5:
G.add_ edge.qn; ˛.i//;
6: end for
The tree starts at qI, and in each iteration, an edge and
vertex are added (Fig. 7.4).
α(i)
Cobs
q0
qn
qs
Fig. 7.4 If there is an obstacle, the edge travels up to the
obstacle boundary, as far as allowed by the collision detec-
tion algorithm
So far, the problem of reaching qG has not been
explained. There are several ways to use RDTs in
a planning algorithm. One approach is to bias ˛.i/ so
that qG is frequently chosen (perhaps once every 50
iterations). A more efﬁcient approach is to develop
a bidirectional search by growing two trees, one from
each of qI and qG. Roughly half of the time is spent
expanding each tree in the usual way, while the other
half is spend attempting to connect the trees. The sim-
plest way to connect trees is to let the newest vertex of
one tree be a substitute for ˛.i/ in extending the other.
This tricks one RDT into attempting to connect to the
other while using the basic expansion algorithm [7.38].
Several works have extended, adapted, or applied RDTs
in various applications [7.37, 39–42]. Detailed descrip-
tions can be found in [7.5, 7].
Other Tree Algorithms
Planners based on the idea of expansive spaces are pre-
sented in [7.43–45]. In this case, the algorithm forces
exploration by choosing vertices for expansion that
have fewer points in a neighborhood around them.
In [7.46], additional performance is obtained by self-
tuning random walks, which focus virtually all of their
effort on exploration. Other successful tree-based al-
gorithms include the path-directed subdivision tree al-
gorithm [7.47] and some of its variants [7.48]. In the
literature, it is sometimes hard to locate tree-based plan-
ners for ordinary path planning problems as many of
them (including RRT) were designed and/or applied
to more complex problems (Sect. 7.5.4). Their perfor-
mance is nevertheless excellent for a variety of path
planing problems.
7.4 Alternative Approaches
Alternative approaches to the sampling-based paradigm
include potential-ﬁeld-based techniques and combina-
torial methods that also produce roadmaps, such as cell
decompositions. These algorithms are able to elegantly
and efﬁciently solve a narrow class of problems, and
are much preferred over the algorithms of Sect. 7.3 in

Motion Planning
7.4 Alternative Approaches
145
Part A | 7.4
these cases. Most of the combinatorial algorithms are
of theoretical interest, whereas sampling-based algo-
rithms are motivated primarily by performance issues
in challenging applications. Nevertheless, given some
abstractions, the combinatorial algorithms can be used
to solve practical problems such as autonomous naviga-
tion of mobile planar robots.
7.4.1 Combinatorial Roadmaps
Several algorithms exist for the case in which C D R2
and Cobs is polygonal. Most of these cannot be di-
rectly extended to higher dimensions; however, some
of the general principles remain the same. The maxi-
mum clearance roadmap (or retraction method [7.49])
constructs a roadmap that keeps paths as far from
the obstacles as possible. Paths are contributed to the
roadmap from the three cases shown in Fig. 7.5, which
correspond to all ways to pair together polygon fea-
tures. The roadmap can be made naively in time O.n4/
by generating all curves shown in Fig. 7.5 for all pos-
sible pairs, computing their intersections, and tracing
out the roadmap. Several algorithms exist that provide
better asymptotic running time [7.50], but they are con-
siderably more difﬁcult to implement. The best-known
algorithm runs in O.n lg n/ time in which n is the num-
ber of roadmap curves [7.51].
An alternative is to compute a shortest-path
roadmap [7.52], as shown in Fig. 7.6. This is differ-
ent than the roadmap presented in the previous section
because paths may actually touch the obstacles, which
must be allowed for paths to be optimal. The roadmap
vertices are the reﬂex vertices of Cobs, which are ver-
tices for which the interior angle is greater than . An
edge exists in the roadmap if and only if a pair of ver-
tices is mutually visible and the line through them pokes
into Cfree when extended outward from each vertex
(such lines are called bitangents). An O.n2 lg n/-time
construction algorithm can be formed by using a radial
sweep algorithm from each reﬂex vertex. It can theoret-
ically be computed in time O.n2 Cm/, in which m is the
total number of edges in the roadmap [7.53].
Vertex–vertex
Edge–edge
Vertex–edge
Fig. 7.5 Voronoi roadmap pieces are generated in one of
three possible cases. The third case leads to a quadratic
curve
Figure 7.7 illustrates the vertical cell decomposition
approach. The idea is to decompose Cfree into cells that
are trapezoids or triangles. Planning in each cell is triv-
ial because it is convex. A roadmap is made by placing
a point in the center of each cell and each boundary be-
tween cells. Any graph search algorithm can be used
to ﬁnd a collision-free path quickly. The cell decom-
position can be constructed in O.n lg n/ time using the
plane-sweep principle [7.54, 55]. Imagine that a vertical
line sweeps from x D 1 to x D 1, stopping at places
where a polygon vertex is encountered. In these cases,
a cell boundary may be necessary above and/or below
the vertex. The order in which segments stab the ver-
tical line is maintained in a balanced search tree. This
enables the determination of the vertical cell boundary
limits in time O.lg n/. The whole algorithm runs in time
O.n lg n/ because there are O.n/ vertices at which the
sweep line can stop (also, the vertices need to be sorted
at the outset, which requires time O.n lg n/).
Fig. 7.6 The shortest-path roadmap includes edges be-
tween consecutive reﬂex vertices on Cobs and also bitan-
gent edges
Fig. 7.7 The roadmap derived from the vertical cell de-
composition

Part A | 7.4
146
Part A
Robotics Foundations
7.4.2 Roadmaps in Higher Dimensions
It would be convenient if the methods of Sect. 7.4.1
directly extend into higher dimensions. Although this
unfortunately does not occur, some of the general ideas
extend. To consider a cell decomposition in higher di-
mensions, there are two main requirements: (1) each
cell should be simple enough that motion planning
within a cell is trivial; (2) the cells should ﬁt together
nicely. A sufﬁcient condition for the ﬁrst requirement
is that cells are convex; more general shapes may be
allowed; however, the cells should not contain holes
under any circumstances. For the second requirement,
a sufﬁcient condition is that the cells can be organized
into a singular complex. This means that for any two
d-dimensional cells for d 	 n, if the boundaries of the
cells intersect, then the common boundary must itself
be a complete cell (of lower dimension).
In two-dimensional polygonal C-spaces, triangula-
tion methods deﬁne nice cell decompositions that are
appropriate for motion planning. Finding good trian-
gulations, which for example means trying to avoid
thin triangles, is given considerable attention in com-
putational geometry [7.55]. Determining the decom-
position of a polygonal obstacle region with holes
that uses the smallest number of convex cells is NP-
hard [7.56]. Therefore, we are willing to tolerate nonop-
timal decompositions.
In three-dimensional C-spaces, if Cobs is polyhedral,
then the vertical decomposition method directly extends
by applying the plane sweep recursively, for example,
the critical events may occur at each z coordinate, at
which point changes a 2-D vertical decomposition over
the x and y coordinates are maintained. The polyhe-
dral case is obtained for a translating polyhedral robot
among polyhedral obstacles in R3; however, for most
interesting problems, Cobs becomes nonlinear. Suppose
C D R2  S1, which corresponds to a robot that can
translate and rotate in the plane. Suppose the robot and
obstacles are polygonal. For the case of a line-segment
robot, an O.n5/ algorithm that is not too difﬁcult to im-
plement is given in [7.57]. The approaches for more
general models and C-spaces are extremely difﬁcult to
use in practice; they are mainly of theoretical interest
and are summarized in Sect. 7.7.3.
7.4.3 Potential Fields
A different approach for motion planning is inspired
from obstacle avoidance techniques [7.58]. It does
not explicitly construct a roadmap, but instead con-
structs a differentiable real-valued function U W Rm !
R, called a potential function, that guides the mo-
tion of the moving object. The potential is typically
constructed so that it consists of an attractive compo-
nent Ua.q/, which pulls the robot towards the goal,
and a repulsive component Ur.q/, which pushes the
robot away from the obstacles, as shown in Fig. 7.8.
The gradient of the potential function is the vec-
tor rU.q/ D DU.q/T D
 @U
@q1 .q/; : : : ; @U
@qm .q/
	T, which
0
10
20
30
40
a)
b)
c)
50
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
Fig.7.8a–c An attractive and a repulsive component deﬁne
a potential function. (a) An attractive potential, (b) a re-
pulsive potential, (c) an attractive and repulsive component
deﬁne a potential function

Motion Planning
7.4 Alternative Approaches
147
Part A | 7.4
points in the direction that locally maximally in-
creases U. After the deﬁnition of U, a path can be
computed by starting from qI and applying gradient de-
scent:
1. q.0/ D qI; i D 0;
2. while rU.q.i// ¤ 0 do
3.
q.i C 1/ D q.i/ C rU.q.i//
4.
i D i C 1
However, this gradient-descent approach does not
guarantee a solution to the problem. Gradient de-
scent can only reach a local minimum of U.q/, which
may not correspond to the goal state qG, as shown
in Fig. 7.9.
A planner that makes uses of potential functions
and attempts to avoid the issue of local minima is
the randomized potential planner [7.59]. The idea is
to combine potential functions with random walks by
employing multiple planning modes. In one mode,
gradient descent is applied until a local minimum is
reached. Another mode uses random walks to try to es-
cape local minima. A third mode performs backtracking
whenever several attempts to escape a local minimum
have failed. In many ways, this approach can be consid-
ered as a sampling-based planner. It also provides the
weaker completeness guarantee but it requires param-
eter tuning. Recent sampling-based methods achieve
better performance by spending more time exploring
the space, rather than focusing heavily on a potential
function.
The gradient of the potential function can be also
used to deﬁne a vector ﬁeld, which assigns a motion
qgoal
fatt
frep1
frep2
qgoal
q*
Local minimum
Robot path
a)
b)
Fig.7.9a,b Two examples of the local minimum problem
with potential functions
for the robot at any arbitrary conﬁguration q 2 C. This
is an important advantage of the approach, beyond its
computational efﬁciency, since it does not only com-
pute a single path, but also a feedback control strategy.
This makes the approach more robust against control
and sensing errors. Most of the techniques in feedback
motion planning are based on the idea of navigation
functions [7.60], which are potential functions properly
constructed so as to have a single minimum. A function
 W Cfree ! Œ0; 1 is called a navigation function if it:

Is smooth (or at least Ck for k  2),

Has a unique minimum at qG in the connected com-
ponent of the free space that contains qG,

Is uniformly maximal on the free-space boundaries,

and is Morse, which means that all its critical
points, such as saddle points, are isolated and can
be avoided with small random perturbations.
Navigation functions can be constructed for sphere
boundary spaces centered at qI that contain only spher-
ical obstacles, as illustrated in Fig. 7.10. Then they
can be extended to a large family of C-spaces that are
diffeomorphic to sphere spaces, such as star-shaped
spaces, as shown in Fig. 7.10. A more elaborate descrip-
tion of strategies for feedback motion planning will be
presented in Chap. 47.
qI
qG
a)
b)
qI
qG
Fig.7.10a,b Examples of (a) sphere and (b) star spaces

Part A | 7.5
148
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Putting the issue of local minima aside, another
major challenge for such potential function based ap-
proaches is constructing and representing the C-space
in the ﬁrst place. This issue makes the applications of
these techniques too complicated for high-dimensional
problems.
7.5 Differential Constraints
Robot motions must usually conform to both global
and local constraints. Global constraints on C have
been considered in the form of obstacles and possi-
bly joint limits. Local constraints are modeled with
differential equations, and are therefore called differen-
tial constraints. These limit the velocities, and possibly
accelerations, at every point due to kinematic consid-
erations, such as wheels in contact, and dynamical
considerations, such as the conservation of angular
momentum.
7.5.1 Concepts and Terminology
Let Pq denote a velocity vector. Differential constraints
on C can be expressed either implicitly in the form
gi.q; Pq/ D 0 or parametrically in the form Px D f .q; u/.
The implicit form is more general but often more dif-
ﬁcult to understand and utilize. In the parametric form,
a vector-valued equation indicates the velocity that is
obtained for a given q and u, in which u is an input,
chosen from some input space, U. Let T denote an in-
terval of time, starting at t D 0.
To model dynamics, the concepts are extended into
a phase space X of the C-space. Usually each point
x 2 X represents both a conﬁguration and velocity,
x D .q; Pq/. Both implicit and parametric representa-
tions are possible, yielding gi.x; Px/ D 0 and Px D f .x; u/,
respectively. The latter is a common control system
deﬁnition. Note that Px D .Pq; Rq/, which implies that ac-
celeration constraints and full system dynamics can be
expressed.
Planning in the state space X could lead to
a straightforward deﬁnition of Xobs by declaring x 2
Xobs if and only if q 2 Cobs for x D .q; Pq/. However, an-
other interesting possibility exists which provides some
intuition about the difﬁculty of planning with dynam-
ics. This possibility is based on the notion of a region of
inevitable collision, which is deﬁned as
Xric D fx.0/ 2 X j for any Qu 2 U1; 9t > 0
such that x.t/ 2 Xobsg ;
(7.4)
in which x.t/ is the state at time t obtained by integrat-
ing the control function Qu W T ! U from x.0/. The set
U1 is a predeﬁned set of all possible control func-
tions. Xric denotes the set of states in which the robot
is either in collision or, because of momentum, it can-
not do anything to avoid collision. It can be considered
as an invisible obstacle region that grows with speed
(Fig. 7.11).
Under the general heading of planning under differ-
ential constraints, there are many important categories
of problems that have received considerable attention
in research literature. The term nonholonomic plan-
ning was introduced for wheeled mobile robots [7.61].
A simple example is that a car cannot move sideways,
thereby making parallel parking more difﬁcult. In gen-
eral, a nonholonomicconstraint is a differential equality
constraint that cannot be integrated into a constraint
that involves no derivatives. Typically, nonholonomic
constraints that appear in robotics are kinematic, and
arise from wheels in contact [7.62]. Nonholonomic con-
straints may also arise from dynamics.
If a planning problem involves constraints on at
least velocity and acceleration, the problem is often re-
ferred to as kinodynamic planning [7.63]. Usually, the
model expresses a fully actuated system, which means
that it can be expressed as Rq D h.q; Pq; u/, in which U
contains an open set that includes the origin of Rn
(here, n is the dimension of both U and C). It is pos-
sible for a problem to be nonholonomic, kinodynamic,
both, or neither; however, in recent times, the terms are
not used with much precision.
q· = 0
q
Xric
Xric
Xric
Xric
Xobs
q· > 0
q· < 0
q·
Fig. 7.11 The region of inevitable collision grows quadrat-
ically with the speed

Motion Planning
7.5 Differential Constraints
149
Part A | 7.5
Trajectory planning is another important term,
which has referred mainly to the problem of deter-
mining both a path and velocity function for a robot
arm (e.g., PUMA 560). In the treatment below, all of
these will be referred to as planning under differential
constraints.
7.5.2 Discretization of Constraints
The only known methods for complete and optimal
planning under differential constraints in the presence
of obstacles are for the double integrator system with
X D R [7.64] and X D R2 [7.65]. To develop planning
algorithms in this context, several discretizations are
often needed. For ordinary motion planning, only C
needed to be discretized; with differential constraints,
T and possibly also U require discretization, in addition
to C (or X).
Discretization of the differential constraints is one
of the most important issues. To solve challenging plan-
ning problems efﬁciently, it is often necessary to de-
ﬁne motion primitives for the particular dynamical sys-
tem [7.40, 66, 67]. One of the simplest ways to discretize
the differential constraints is to construct a discrete-time
model, which is characterized by three aspects:
1. The time interval T is partitioned into intervals of
length t. This enables stages to be assigned, in
which stage k indicates that .k  1/t time has
elapsed.
2. A ﬁnite subset Ud of the action space U is cho-
sen. If U is already ﬁnite, then this selection may
be Ud D U.
3. The action u.t/ must remain constant over each time
interval.
From an initial state, x, a reachability tree can be
formed by applying all sequences of discretized actions.
Figure 7.12 shows the path of this tree for the Dubins
car, which is a kinematic model of a car that drives in
the plane at unit speed and cannot move in reverse. The
edges of the tree are circular arcs and line segments.
For general systems, each trajectory segment in the tree
is determined by numerical integration of Px D f .x; u/
for a given u. In general, this can be viewed as an in-
cremental simulator that takes an input and produces
a trajectory segment according to Px D f .x; u/.
7.5.3 Decoupled Approach
A popular paradigm for trajectory planning and other
problems that involve dynamics is to decouple the
problem into ﬁrst planning a path and then computing
a timing function along the path by performing a search
in the space spanned by .s; Ps/, in which s is the path
Two stages
a)
b)
Four stages
Fig. 7.12 (a) A reachability tree for the Dubins car with three ac-
tions. (b) A 2-stage tree is shown. The k-th stage produces 3k new
vertices
0
1
s·
s
Sobs
Fig. 7.13 An illustration of the bang–bang approach to
computing a time-optimal trajectory. The solution trajec-
tory is obtained by connecting the dots
parameter and Ps is its ﬁrst derivative. This leads to a di-
agram such as the one shown in Fig. 7.13, in which
the upper region Sobs must be avoided because the cor-
responding motion of the mechanical system violates
the differential constraints. Most methods are based on
early work in [7.68, 69], and determine a bang–bang
-control, which means that they switch between ac-
celerating and decelerating at full speed. This applies
to determining time-optimal trajectories (optimal once
constrained to the path). Dynamic programming can be
used for more general problems [7.70].
For some problems and nonholonomic systems,
steering methods have been developed to solve the
two-point boundary value problem efﬁciently [7.62,
71]. This means that, for any pair of states, a trajectory
that ignores obstacles but satisﬁes the differential con-
straints can be obtained. Moreover, for some systems,

Part A | 7.5
150
Part A
Robotics Foundations
q
q·
Fig. 7.14 Reachability graph from the origin, shown after three
stages (the true edges are actually parabolic arcs when accelera-
tion or deceleration occurs). Note that a lattice is obtained, but the
distance traveled in one stage increases as jPqj increases
the complete set of optimal trajectories has been charac-
terized [7.72, 73]. These control-based approaches en-
able straightforward adaptation of the sampling-based
roadmap approach [7.74, 75]. One decoupled approach
is to ﬁrst plan a path that ignores differential constraints,
and then incrementally transform it into one that obeys
the constraints [7.62, 76].
7.5.4 Kinodynamic Planning
Due to the great difﬁculty of planning under differential
constraints, many successful planning algorithms that
address kinodynamic problems directly in the phase
space X are sampling based.
Sampling-based planning algorithms proceed by
exploring one or more reachability trees. Many paral-
lels can be drawn with searching on a grid; however,
reachability trees are more complicated because they do
not necessarily involve a regular lattice structure. The
vertex set of reachability trees is dense in most cases.
a)
b)
Fig. 7.15 (a) The ﬁrst four stages of
a dense reachability graph for the
Dubins car. (b) One possible search
graph, obtained by allowing at most
one vertex per cell. Many branches
are pruned away. In this simple exam-
ple there are no cell divisions along
the -axis
It is therefore not clear how to search a bounded re-
gion exhaustively at a ﬁxed resolution. It is also difﬁcult
to design approaches that behave like a multiresolution
grid, in which reﬁnements can be made arbitrarily to
ensure resolution completeness.
Many algorithms attempt to convert the reachabil-
ity tree into a lattice. This is the basis of the origi-
nal kinodynamic planning work [7.63], in which the
discrete-time approximation to the double integrator,
Rq D u, is forced onto a lattice as shown in Fig. 7.14.
This enables an approximation algorithm to be devel-
oped that solves the kinodynamic planning problem in
time polynomial in the approximation quality 1= and
the number of primitives that deﬁne the obstacles. Gen-
eralizations of the methods to fully actuated systems are
described in [7.7]. Surprisingly, it is even possible to
obtain a lattice for some underactuated, nonholonomic
systems [7.77].
If the reachability tree does not form a lattice, then
one approach is to force it to behave as a lattice by
imposing a regular cell decomposition over X (or C),
and allowing no more than one vertex per cell to be ex-
panded in the reachability graph (Fig. 7.15). This idea
was introduced in [7.78]. In their version of this ap-
proach, the reachability graph is expanded by dynamic
programming. Each cell is initially marked as being in
collision or being collision free, but not yet visited. As
cells are visited during the search, they become marked
as such. If a potential new vertex lands in a visited cell,
it is not saved. This has the effect of pruning the reach-
ability tree.
Other related approaches do not try to force the
reachability tree onto a lattice. RRTs were designed
to expand the tree in a way that is biased toward
covering as much new territory as possible in each it-
eration [7.79]. Planners that are based on the concept
of expansive trees attempt to control the density of ver-

Motion Planning
7.6 Extensions and Variations
151
Part A | 7.6
tices in the tree by analyzing neighborhoods [7.44]. The
path-directed subdivision tree planner expands a tree,
while building an adaptive subdivision of the state
space, so as to avoid resampling the same regions of the
space [7.47, 80]. Such approaches can be biased to ac-
celerate the expansion of the tree towards a goal, while
still providing the weaker probabilistic completeness
guarantee [7.48].
VIDEO 24
provides an example of
the use of a tree-based planner together with a physics-
engine which accounts for the constraints.
7.6 Extensions and Variations
A brief overview of other important extensions to the
basic motion planning problem are presented in this
section.
7.6.1 Closed Kinematic Chains
In many cases, the robot may be consist of links that
form closed loops. This arises in many important appli-
cations, for example, if two arms grasp an object then
a loop is formed and a humanoid robot forms a loop if
both legs touch the ground. For parallel robots, loops
are intentionally designed into the robot [7.81]; a clas-
sic example is the Stewart–Gough platform. To model
closed-chain problems, the loops are broken so that
a kinematic tree of links is obtained. The main compli-
cation is that constraints on C of the form h.q/ D 0 are
introduced, which require that the loops are maintained.
This causes great trouble for most planning algorithms
because without loops a parameterization of C was
available. The closure constraints restrict the planning
to a lower-dimensional subset of C for which no param-
eterization is given. Computing a parameterization is
generally difﬁcult or impossible [7.82], although there
has been recent progress for some special cases [7.83].
Sampling-based approaches can generally be adap-
ted to handle closed chains. The main difﬁculty is that
the samples ˛.i/ over C are unlikely to be conﬁgu-
rations that satisfy closure. In [7.84], both RRTs and
PRMs were adapted to closed chains. RRTs performed
much better because a costly optimization was required
in the PRM to move samples onto the closure sub-
space; RRTs on the other hand do not require samples
to lie in this subspace. By decomposing chains into ac-
tive and passive links, followed by inverse kinematics
computations, performance was dramatically improved
for PRMs in [7.85]. This idea was further improved by
the introduction of the random loop generator (RLG).
Based on this, some of the most challenging closed-
chain planning problems ever solved appear in [7.86].
7.6.2 Manipulation Planning
In most forms of motion planning, the robot is not
allowed to touch obstacles. Suppose instead that it is ex-
pected to interact with its environment by manipulating
objects. The goal may be to bring an object from one
place to another, or to rearrange a collection of objects.
This leads to a kind of hybrid motion planning prob-
lem, which mixes discrete and continuous spaces. There
are discrete modes that correspond to whether the robot
is carrying a part [7.87]. In the transit mode, the robot
moves toward a part. In the transfer mode, it carries the
part. Transitions between modes require meeting spe-
ciﬁc grasping and stability requirement. One important
variant of manipulation planning is assembly planning,
in which the goal is to ﬁt a collection of pieces together
to make an assembled product [7.88]. Most motion
planning work makes limiting assumptions on the kinds
of interaction that can occur between the robot and the
objects. For richer models of manipulation, see [7.89].
7.6.3 Time-Varying Problems
Suppose that the workspace contains moving obsta-
cles whose trajectories are speciﬁed as a function of
time. Let T  R denote the time interval, which may
be bounded or unbounded. A state X is deﬁned as
X D C T, in which C is the usual C-space of the robot.
The obstacle region in X is characterized as
Xobs D f.q; t/ 2 X j A.q/ \ O.t/ 6D ;g ;
(7.5)
in which O.t/ is a time-varying obstacle. Many plan-
ning algorithms can be adapted to X, which has only
one more dimension than C. The main complication is
that time must always increase along a path through X.
For the easiest version of the problem, there is no
bound on the robot speed. In this case, virtually any
sampling-based algorithm can be adapted. Incremental
searching and sampling methods apply with little mod-
iﬁcation, except that paths are directed so that forward
time progress is made. Using bidirectional approaches
is more difﬁcult for time-varying problems because the
goal is usually not a single point due to the time de-
pendency. Sampling-based roadmaps can be adapted;
however, a directed roadmap is needed, in which every
edge must be directed to yield a time-monotonic path.

Part A | 7.6
152
Part A
Robotics Foundations
If the motion model is algebraic (i. e., expressed
with polynomials) then Xobs is semi-algebraic. This en-
ables cylindrical algebraic decomposition to apply. If
Xobs is polyhedral, as depicted in Fig. 7.16, then verti-
cal decomposition can be used. It is best to ﬁrst sweep
the plane along the T-axis, stopping at the critical times
when the linear motion changes.
There has been no consideration so far of the speed
at which the robot must move to avoid obstacles. It is
obviously impractical in many applications if the solu-
tion requires the robot to move arbitrarily fast. One step
towards making a realistic model is to enforce a bound
on the speed of the robot. Unfortunately, the problem
is considerably more difﬁcult. Even for piecewise-lin-
ear motions of obstacles in the plane, the problem has
been established to be PSPACE-hard [7.90]. A com-
plete algorithm based on the shortest-path roadmap is
presented in [7.91].
An alternative to deﬁning the problem in C  T is
to decouple it into a path planning part and a motion
timing part. A collision-free path in the absence of ob-
stacles is ﬁrst computed. A search in a 2-D space is then
performed to determine the timing function (or time
scaling) for the path.
7.6.4 Multiple Robots
A simple extension to the basic motion planning prob-
lem can be made to handle multibody robots by includ-
ing robot self-intersections; however, it is important to
specify the pairs of bodies for which collision is unac-
ceptable, for example, consecutive links in a robot arm
are allowed to touch.
yt
xt
qG
t
Cfree (t1)
Cfree (t2)
Cfree (t3)
t1
t2
t3
Fig. 7.16 A time-varying example with linear obstacle motion
Substantial attention has been devoted to the prob-
lem of planning for multiple robots (
VIDEO 21
and
VIDEO 22 ). Suppose there are m robots. A state
space is deﬁned that considers the conﬁgurations of all
robots simultaneously,
X D C1  C2      Cm:
(7.6)
A state x 2 X speciﬁes all robot conﬁgurations, and may
be expressed as x D .q1; q2; : : : ; qm/. The dimension
of X is N, which is N D Pm
iD1 dim.Ci/.
There are two sources of obstacle regions in
the state space: (1) robot–obstacle collisions, and
(2) robot–robot collisions. For each i such that 1 	 i 	
m, the subset of X that corresponds to robot Ai in col-
lision with the obstacle region O is
Xi
obs D fx 2 X j Ai.qi/ \ O 6D ;g:
(7.7)
This models the robot–obstacle collisions.
For each pair, Ai and Aj, of robots, the subset of X
that corresponds to Ai in collision with Aj is
Xij
obs D fx 2 X j Ai.qi/ \ Aj.qj/ 6D ;g:
(7.8)
Both (7.7) and (7.8) will be combined in (7.9) to
yield Xobs. The obstacle region in X is
Xobs D
 m
[
iD1
Xi
obs
! [
0
@ [
ij; i6Dj
Xij
obs
1
A :
(7.9)
Once these deﬁnitions have been made, any general-
purpose planning algorithm can be applied because X
and Xobs appear no different from C and Cobs, except
that the dimension N may be very high. Approaches
that plan directly in X are called centralized. The high
dimensionality of X motivates the development of de-
coupled approaches that handle some aspects of the
planning independently for each robot. Decoupled ap-
proaches are usually more efﬁcient, but this usually
comes at the expense of sacriﬁcing completeness. An
early decoupled approach is prioritized planning [7.92,
93], in which a path and timing function is computed
for the i-th robot while treating the ﬁrst i  1 robots as
moving obstacles as they follow their paths. Another
decoupled approach is ﬁxed-path coordination [7.94],
in which the paths are planned independently for each
robot, and then their timing functions are determined
by computing a collision-free path through an m-
dimensional coordination space. Each axis in this space
corresponds to the domain of the path of one robot.
Fig. 7.17 shows an example. The idea has been gen-
eralized to coordination on roadmaps [7.95, 96].

Motion Planning
7.6 Extensions and Variations
153
Part A | 7.6
7.6.5 Uncertainty in Predictability
If the execution of the plan is not predictable, then feed-
back is needed. The uncertainty may be modeled either
implicitly, which means that the plan is able to respond
to unexpected future conﬁgurations, or explicitly, which
means that the uncertainty is precisely characterized
and analyzed in the development of a plan. Potential-
function-based approaches are one way of achieving
feedback motion planning.
A plan can be represented as a vector ﬁeld
over Cfree, in which each vector indicates the required
velocity. The integral curves of the ﬁeld should ﬂow
into the goal without leaving Cobs. If dynamics are
a concern, then the vector ﬁeld can be tracked by an ac-
celeration-based control model
u D K.f .q/  Pq/ C rPqf .q/ ;
(7.10)
in which K is a scalar gain constant. Alternatively,
a vector ﬁeld may be designed directly on the phase
space, X; however, there are not methods to compute
such ﬁelds efﬁciently under general conditions. This
can also be considered as a feedback control problem
with implicit, nonlinear constraints on X.
If the uncertainty is modeled explicitly, then a game
against nature is obtained, in which the uncertainty
is caused by a special decision maker called nature.
The decisions of nature can either be modeled non-
deterministically, which means that a set of possible
actions is speciﬁed, or probabilistically, which means
that a probability distribution or density is speciﬁed
over the nature actions. Under nondeterministic un-
certainty, worst-case analysis is usually performed to
select a plan; under probabilistic uncertainty, expected-
case analysis is usually performed. Numerous ap-
proaches exist for such problems, including value itera-
tion, Dijkstra-like algorithms, and reinforcement learn-
ing algorithms [7.7].
7.6.6 Sensing Uncertainty
Consider solving tasks such as localization, map build-
ing, manipulation, target tracking, and pursuit-evasion
(hide-and-seek) with limited sensing. If the current con-
ﬁguration or state is not known during execution, then
the problem may appear quite different. Information is
obtained from sensors, and the planning problem nat-
urally lives in an information space or I-space [7.7,
Chap. 11]. The state may include the conﬁguration,
velocities, or even the map of the environment (e.g.,
obstacles). The most basic I-space is the set of all
histories that can be obtained during execution, based
on all sensing observations, actions previously applied,
s3 
s2 
s1 
s1 
s2 
s2 
s3 
s1 
s3 
Fig. 7.17 The obstacles that arise from coordinating m robots are
always cylindrical. The set of all 1
2m.m  1/ axis-aligned 2-D pro-
jections completely characterizes Xobs
and the initial conditions. The goal in developing ef-
ﬁcient algorithms in this context is to determine in-
formation mappings that reduce the I-space size or
complexity so that plans that can be computed that
use information feedback. The traditional way to use
the information state is for estimating the state. This
is sufﬁcient for solving many tasks, but it is often not
necessary. It may be possible to design and execute suc-
cessful plans without ever knowing the current state.
This can lead to more robust robot systems which may
also be cheaper to manufacture due to weaker sensing
requirements.
Two important families of I-spaces are nondeter-
ministic and probabilistic. A nondeterministic informa-
tion state (I-state) is a set of states that are possible
given the available history of sensor observations and
actions applied during execution. The nondeterministic
I-space is the set of all possibilities. Similarly, a proba-
bilistic I-state is a probability density function over the
state space, conditioned on the available history. The
probabilistic I-space is often called the belief space,
which represents the set of all probability density func-
tions. Both ﬁltering and planning over these spaces
remains a topic of active research. One of most use-
ful and classical results is the Kalman ﬁlter [7.97],
for which the belief space reduces to Gaussians, al-
lowing it to be completely parametrized by mean and
covariance of state. Many approaches to reasoning
in these I-spaces attempt to reduce its complexity,
through combinatorial reasoning in the case of nonde-
terministic I-spaces [7.98] and through approximations,

Part A | 7.7
154
Part A
Robotics Foundations
sampling, and dimensionality reduction techniques in
belief spaces [7.99–103]. For example, a sampling-
based roadmap can be constructed directly in the belief
space [7.104].
7.6.7 Optimal Planning
In most formulations of planning, computing an opti-
mal solution is given little or no importance. Several
factors have contributed to this trend. One of the most
fundamental is that a natural criterion of optimality
often does not exist. Unlike control theory, where op-
timality is a central goal, the main task in planning is
to avoid obstacles. Imagine walking quickly through
a furniture store. Moving along the shortest possible
path would cause you to touch the corners of obsta-
cles, which might not be desirable. You could try to
maximize clearance, but this causes longer paths, which
again might not be desirable. Another factor is that so-
lutions produced by path planning algorithms tend to
not be excessively long, especially after some quick
post-processing in the case of sampling-based planners.
Finally, the computational complexity of the optimal
planning problem is typically worse than its feasible
(not necessarily optimal) counterpart. One of the most
notable exceptions is planning in ﬁeld robotics (outdoor
vehicles in unstructured terrain), for which cost func-
tion determines navigability at each point, leading to the
well-known family of D* algorithms [7.105, 106].
In spite of these issues, several useful approaches
and interesting ideas have emerged. As mentioned in
Sect. 7.4.1, the shortest-path roadmap is an effective
multiple-query approach in the case of a 2-D, polyg-
onal C-space. Alternatively, the continuous Dijkstra
method provides an effective single-query approach
by propagating wavefronts that correspond to level
sets of the optimal cost from the initial conﬁguration
[7.107, 108]. The wavefronts are propagated combina-
torially, stopping only at critical events, leading to an
exact, optimal solution. In the case of 3-D polyhedral
C-spaces, the shortest path problem already becomes
PSPACE-hard [7.15]. However, algorithms that produce
approximately optimal solutions exist [7.109–111], and
are useful in C-spaces of several dimensions. Dijkstra-
like approaches can be adapted to include various forms
of uncertainty and differential constraints, and are all
derived in some way from value iteration methods
introduced by Bellman in the 1950s. See Chaps. 7,
10, and 14 of [7.7] for more discussion. Pushing into
even higher dimensions, recent sampling-based plan-
ning methods have produced asymptotically optimal
versions RRTs [7.112] and PRMs [7.112, 113], which
have been shown to produce paths that improve in qual-
ity as time progresses.
7.7 Advanced Issues
We cover here a series of more advanced issues, such
as topics from topology and sampling theory, and how
they inﬂuence the performance of motion planners. The
last section is devoted to computational algebraic geom-
etry techniques that achieve completeness in the general
case. Rather than being a practical alternative, these
techniques serve as an upper bound on the best asymp-
totic running time that could be obtained.
7.7.1 Topology of Configuration Spaces
Manifolds
One reason that the topology of a C-space is important
is because it affects its representation. Another reason is
that, if a path-planning algorithm can solve problems in
a topological space, then that algorithm may carry over
to topologically equivalent spaces.
The following deﬁnitions are important in order to
describe the topology of C-space. A map  W S ! T is
called a homeomorphism if  is a bijection and both 
and 1 are continuous. When such a map exists, S
and T are said to be homeomorphic. A set S is an
n-dimensional manifold if it is locally homeomorphic
to Rn, meaning that each point in S possesses a neigh-
borhood that is homeomorphic to Rn. For more details,
see [7.114, 115].
In the vast majority of motion planning problems,
the conﬁguration space is a manifold. An example
of a C-space that is not a manifold is the closed
unit square: Œ0; 1  Œ0; 1  R2, which is a manifold
with boundary obtained by pasting the one-dimensional
boundary on the two-dimensional open set .0; 1/ 
.0; 1/. When a C-space is a manifold, then we can
represent it with just n parameters, in which n is the
dimension of the conﬁguration space. Although an n-
dimensional manifold can be represented using as few
as n parameters, due to constraints it might be eas-
ier to use a representation that has higher number of
parameters, e.g., the unit circle S1 can be represented
as S1 D f.x; y/jx2 C y2 D 1g by embedding S1 in R2.
Similarly, the torus T2 can be embedded in R3.
Representation
Embeddings into higher-dimensional spaces can facili-
tate many C-space operations. For example, the orien-
tation of a rigid body in space can be represented by

Motion Planning
7.7 Advanced Issues
155
Part A | 7.7
a n  n matrix of real numbers. The n2 matrix entries
must satisfy a number of smooth equality constraints,
making the manifold of such matrices a submanifold
of Rm2. One advantage is that these matrices can be
multiplied to get another matrix in the manifold. For ex-
ample, the orientation of a rigid-body in n-dimensional
space (n D 2 or 3) is described by the set SO.n/, the set
of all n  n rotation matrices. The position and orienta-
tion of a rigid body is represented by the set SE.n/, the
set of all n  n homogeneous transformation matrices.
These matrix groups can be used to (1) represent rigid-
body conﬁgurations, (2) change the reference frame for
the representation of a conﬁguration, and (3) displace
a conﬁguration.
There are numerous parameterizations of SO.3/
[7.116] but unit quaternions correctly preserve the C-
space topology as S1 represents 2-D rotations. Quater-
nions were introduced in Chap. 2. There is, however,
a two-to-one correspondence between unit quaternions
and 3-D rotation matrices. This causes a topological is-
sue that is similar to the equivalence of 0 and 2 for
2-D rotations. One way to account for this is to declare
antipodal (opposite) points on S3 to be equivalent. In
planning, only the upper hemisphere of S3 is needed,
and paths that cross the equator instantly reappear on
the opposite side of S3, heading back into the northern
hemisphere. In topology, this is called a real projective
space: RP 3. Hence, the C-space of a 3-D body capable
only of rotation is RP 3. If both translation and rotation
are allowed, then SE.3/, the set of all 44 homogeneous
transformation matrices, yields
C D R3  RP 3 ;
(7.11)
which is six dimensional. A conﬁguration q 2 C can
be expressed using quaternions with seven coordinates,
.x; y; z; a;b; c; d/, in which a2 Cb2 Cc2 Cd2 D 1. More
examples can be found in Table 7.1.
7.7.2 Sampling Theory
Since the most successful paradigm for motion plan-
ning today is the sampling-based framework, presented
Table 7.1 Some common robots and their C-spaces
Type of robot
C-space
representation
Mobile robot translating in the plane
R2
Mobile robot translating and rotating
in the plane
SE.2/ or R2  S1
Rigid body translating in the three-space
R3
A spacecraft
SE.3/ or R3  SO.3/
An n-joint revolute arm
Tn
A planar mobile robot with an attached
n-joint arm
SE.2/  Tn
in Sect. 7.3, sampling theory becomes relevant to the
motion planning problem.
Metrics in Configuration/State Spaces
Virtually all sampling-based methods require some no-
tion of distance on C. For example, the sampling-based
roadmap method selects candidate vertices to connect
a new conﬁguration given a distance-deﬁned neigh-
borhood. Similarly, the rapidly exploring dense trees
expands the tree from the nearest node of the tree
to a newly sampled conﬁguration. Usually, a metric,
	 W C  C ! R, is deﬁned, which satisﬁes the standard
axioms: nonnegativity, reﬂexivity, symmetry, and the
triangle inequality.
Two difﬁcult issues that arise in constructing a met-
ric are: (1) the topology of C must be respected, and
(2) several different quantities, such as linear and angu-
lar displacements, must be compared in some way. To
illustrate the second issue, consider deﬁning a metric 	z
for a space constructed as Z D X  Y as
	z.z; z0/ D 	z.x; y; x0; y0/
D c1	x.x; x0/ C c2	y.y; y0/ :
(7.12)
Above, c1 and c2 are arbitrary positive constants that
indicate the relative weights of the two components.
For a 2-D rotation, i, expressed as ai D cos i and
bi D sin i, a useful metric is
	.a1; b1; a2; b2/ D cos1.a1a2 C b1b2/ :
(7.13)
The 3-D equivalent is obtained by deﬁning
	0.h1; h2/ D cos1.a1a2 C b1b2 C c1c2 C d1d2/ ;
(7.14)
in which each hi D .ai; bi; ci; di/ is a unit quaternion.
The metric is deﬁned as 	.h1; h2/ D min.	0.h1; h2/,
	0.h1; h2//, by respecting the required identiﬁcation
of antipodal points. This computes the shortest distance
in R4, for a path constrained to the unit sphere.
In some algorithms, deﬁning volume on C may
also be important. In general, this leads to a measure
space, for which the volume function (called the mea-
sure) must satisfy axioms that resemble the probability
axioms, but without normalization. For transformation
groups, one must be careful to deﬁne volumes in a way
that is invariant with respect to transformations. Such
volumes are called Haar measures. Deﬁning volumes
via balls using the metric deﬁnitions (7.13) and (7.14)
actually satisfy this concern.
Probabilistic Versus Deterministic Sampling
The C-space may be sampled probabilistically or de-
terministically. Either way, the requirement is usu-
ally that a dense sequence ˛ of samples is obtained.

Part A | 7.7
156
Part A
Robotics Foundations
This means that, in the limit as the number of sam-
ples tends to inﬁnity, the samples become arbitrarily
close to every point in C. For probabilistic sampling,
this denseness (with probability one) ensures prob-
abilistic completeness of a planning algorithm. For
deterministic sampling, it ensures resolution complete-
ness, which means that, if a solution exists, the algo-
rithm is guaranteed to ﬁnd it; otherwise, it may run
forever.
For probabilistic sampling, samples are selected
randomly over C, using a uniform probability den-
sity function. To obtain uniformity in a meaning-
ful way, the Haar measure should be used. This
is straightforward in many cases; SO.3/ however is
tricky. A uniform (with respect to Haar measure)
random quaternion is selected as follows. Choose
three points u1; u2; u3 2 Œ0; 1 uniformly at random, and
let [7.117]
h D
p
1  u1 sin 2u2;
p
1  u1 cos 2u2 ;
pu1 sin 2u3; pu1 cos 2u3

:
(7.15)
Even though random samples are uniform in some
sense, they are also required to have some irregularity
to satisfy statistical tests. This has motivated the de-
velopment of deterministic sampling schemes that offer
better performance [7.118]. Instead of being concerned
with randomness, deterministic sampling techniques
are designed to optimize criteria, such as discrepancy
and dispersion. Discrepancy penalizes regularity in the
sample, which frequently causes trouble in numerical
integration. Dispersion gives the radius of the largest
empty (not containing samples) ball. Thus, driving dis-
persion down quickly means that the whole space is
explored quickly. Deterministic samples may be ir-
regular neighborhood structure (appearing much like
random samples), or regular neighborhood structure,
which means that points are arranged along a grid or
lattice. For more details in the context of motion plan-
ning, see [7.7].
7.7.3 Computational Algebraic
Geometry Techniques
Sampling-based algorithms provide good practical per-
formance at the expense of achieving only a weaker
form of completeness. On the other hand, complete al-
gorithms, which are the focus of this section, are able to
deduce that there is no solution to a planning problem.
Complete algorithms are able to solve virtually any
motion planning problem as long as Cobs is represented
by patches of algebraic surfaces. Formally, the model
must be semi-algebraic, which means that it is formed
from unions and intersections of roots of multivariate
polynomials in q, and for computability, the polyno-
mials must have rational coefﬁcients (otherwise roots
may not have ﬁnite representations). The set of all roots
to polynomials with rational coefﬁcients is called real
algebraic numbers and has many nice computational
properties. See [7.12, 119–121] for more information
on the exact representation and calculation with real al-
gebraic numbers. For a gentle introduction to algebraic
geometry, see [7.82].
To use techniques based on algebraic geometry, the
ﬁrst step is to convert the models into the required
polynomials. Suppose that the models, the robot, A,
and the obstacles O are semi-algebraic (this includes
polyhedral models). For any number of attached 2-D
or 3-D bodies, the kinematic transformations can be
expressed using polynomials. Since polynomial trans-
formations of polynomials yield polynomials, the trans-
formed robot model is polynomial. The algebraic sur-
faces that comprise Cobs are computed by carefully
considering all contact types, which characterize all
ways to pair a robot feature (faces, edges, vertices)
with an obstacle feature [7.6, 7, 9, 122]. This step al-
ready produces too many model primitives to be useful
in most applications.
Once the semi-algebraic representation has been ob-
tained, powerful techniques from algebraic geometry
can be exploited. One of the most widely known al-
gorithms, cylindrical algebraic decomposition [7.119,
123, 124], provides the information needed to solve the
motion planning problem. It was originally designed
to determine whether Tarski sentences, which involve
quantiﬁers and polynomials, are satisﬁable, and to ﬁnd
an equivalent expression that does not involve quanti-
ﬁers. The decomposition produces a ﬁnite set of cells
over which the signs of the polynomials remain ﬁxed.
This enables a systematic approach to satisﬁability and
quantiﬁer elimination. It was recognized by Schwartz
and Sharir [7.121] that it also solves motion planning.
The method is conceptually simple, but there are
many difﬁcult technical details. The decomposition is
called cylindrical because the cells are organized into
vertical columns of cells, see Fig. 7.18 for a 2-D ex-
ample. There are two kinds of critical events, shown
in Fig. 7.19. At critical points, rays are extended indef-
initely in both vertical directions. The decomposition
differs from the vertical decomposition in Fig. 7.7
because there the rays were only extended until the
next obstacle was hit. Here, columns of cells are
obtained.
In n dimensions, each column represents a chain of
cells. The ﬁrst and last cells are n-dimensional and un-
bounded. The remaining cells are bounded and alternate
between being .n  1/-dimensional and n-dimensional.

Motion Planning
7.8 Conclusions and Further Reading
157
Part A | 7.8
The bounded n-dimensional cells are bounded above
and below by the roots of single multivariate polynomi-
als. This makes it simple to describe the cells and their
connectivity. To compute this cell decomposition, the
algorithm constructs a cascading chain of projections.
In the ﬁrst step, Cobs is projected from Rn to Rn1.
This is followed by a projection into Rn2. This re-
peats until R is obtained with a univariate polynomial
that encodes the places at which all critical boundaries
need to be placed. In a second phase of the algorithm,
a series of liftings is performed. Each lifting takes the
polynomials and cell decomposition over Ri and lifts
them via columns of cells to RiC1. A single lifting is
illustrated in Fig. 7.18b. The running time of the full
algorithm depends on the particular methods used to
perform the algebraic computations. The total running
time required to use cylindrical algebraic decomposi-
tion for motion planning is bounded by .md/O.1/n, in
which m is the number of polynomials to describe Cobs
(a huge number), and d is the maximum algebraic de-
gree. (It may seem odd for O./ to appear in the middle
of an expression. In this context, it means that there
exists some c 2 Œ0; 1/ such that the running time is
bounded by .md/cn. Note that another O is not neces-
sary in the front of the whole formula.) The main point
to remember is that the algorithm is doubly exponen-
tial in the dimension of C (even the number of cells is
doubly exponential).
Although performing the cylindrical decomposition
is sufﬁcient for solving motion planning, it computes
more information than is necessary. This motivates
Canny’s roadmap algorithm [7.12], which produces
a roadmap directly from the semi-algebraic set, rather
than constructing a cell decomposition along the way.
Since there are doubly exponentially many cells in the
cylindrical algebraic decomposition, avoiding this con-
struction pays off. The resulting roadmap method of
Canny solves the motion planning problem in time that
is again polynomial in the number of polynomials and
polynomial in the algebraic degree, but is only singly
exponential in dimension [7.12].
The basic idea is to ﬁnd silhouette curves in R2
of Cobs in Rn. The method ﬁnds zero-dimensional crit-
ical points and one-dimensional critical curves. The
critical curves become roadmap edges, and the criti-
a)
b)
35
36
34
25
24
23
22
26
27
28 33
32
31
30
29
13
12
11
10
19
18
17
20
21
14
15
16
3
8
9
7
6
5
2
1
4
37
Fig. 7.18 (a) A face modeled with four algebraic primitives, and
(b) a cylindrical algebraic decomposition of the face
Intersection
Folding over
Fig. 7.19 Critical points occur either when the surface
folds over in the vertical direction or when surfaces
intersect
cal points are places at which the algorithm recursively
ﬁnds silhouettes of .n  1/-dimensional slices of Cobs.
These contribute more critical points and curves. The
curves are added to the roadmap, and the algorithm
recurses again on the critical points. The recursive it-
erations terminate at n D 2. Canny showed that the
resulting union of critical curves preserves the connec-
tivity of Cobs (and hence, Cfree). Some of the technical
issues are: the algorithm works with a stratiﬁcation
of Cobs into manifolds; there are strong general position
assumptions that are hard to meet; paths are actually
considered along the boundary of Cfree; and the method
does not produce a parameterized solution path. For
improvements to Canny’s algorithm and many other im-
portant details, see [7.119].
7.8 Conclusions and Further Reading
The brief survey given here hardly does justice to mo-
tion planning, which is a rich and active research ﬁeld.
For more details, we recommend consulting two recent
textbooks [7.5, 7]. In addition, see the classic textbook
of Latombe [7.6], the classic papers in [7.4], and the re-
cent surveys in [7.2, 3]. Furthermore, consult the related
handbook chapters that were indicated throughout this
chapter.

Part A | 7
158
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Video-References
VIDEO 17
Powder transfer task using demonstration-guided motion planning
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/07/videodetails/17
VIDEO 21
Simulation of a large crowd
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/07/videodetails/21
VIDEO 22
Motion planning in multi-robot scenario
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/07/videodetails/22
VIDEO 23
Alpha puzzle
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/07/videodetails/23
VIDEO 24
Kinodynamic motion planning for a car-like robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/07/videodetails/24
References
7.1
J.H. Reif: Complexity of the mover’s problem and
generalizations, IEEE Symp. Found. Comput. Sci.
(1979) pp. 421–427
7.2
H.H. Gonzalez-Banos, D. Hsu, J.C. Latombe: Mo-
tion planning: Recent developments. In: Automous
Mobile Robots: Sensing, Control, Decision-Making
and Applications, ed. by S.S. Ge, F.L. Lewis (CRC,
Boca Raton 2006)
7.3
S.R. Lindemann, S.M. LaValle: Current issues in
sampling-based motion planning, 11th Int. Symp.
Robotics Res. (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2005)
pp. 36–54
7.4
J.T. Schwartz, M. Sharir: A survey of motion plan-
ning and related geometric algorithms, Artif. Intell.
J. 37, 157–169 (1988)
7.5
H. Choset, K.M. Lynch, S. Hutchinson, G. Kantor,
W. Burgard, L.E. Kavraki, S. Thrun: Principles of
Robot Motion: Theory, Algorithms, and Implemen-
tations (MIT, Cambridge 2005)
7.6
J.C. Latombe: Robot Motion Planning (Kluwer,
Boston 1991)
7.7
S.M. LaValle: Planning Algorithms (Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge 2006)
7.8
S. Udupa: Collision detection and avoidance in
computer controlled manipulators, Ph.D. Thesis
(Dept. of Electical Engineering, California Institute
of Technology, Pasadena 1977)
7.9
T. Lozano-Pérez: Spatial planning: A configuration
space approach, IEEE Trans. Comput. C 32(2), 108–
120 (1983)
7.10
J.T. Schwartz, M. Sharir: On the piano movers’
problem: III. Coordinating the motion of several in-
dependent bodies, Int. J. Robotics Res. 2(3), 97–140
(1983)
7.11
J.T. Schwartz, M. Sharir: On the piano movers’
problem: V. The case of a rod moving in three-
dimensional space amidst polyhedral obstacles,
Commun. Pure Appl. Math. 37, 815–848 (1984)
7.12
J.F. Canny: The Complexity of Robot Motion Plan-
ning (MIT, Cambridge 1988)
7.13
D. Halperin, M. Sharir: A near-quadratic algorithm
for planning the motion of a polygon in a polygonal
environment, Discret. Comput. Geom. 16, 121–134
(1996)
7.14
J.E. Hopcroft, J.T. Schwartz, M. Sharir: On the com-
plexity of motion planning for multiple indepen-
dent objects: PSPACE-hardness of the warehouse-
man’s problem, Int. J. Robotics Res. 3(4), 76–88
(1984)
7.15
J. Canny, J. Reif: New lower bound techniques
for robot motion planning problems, IEEE Symp.
Found. Comput. Sci. (1987) pp. 49–60
7.16
M.C. Lin, J.F. Canny: Efficient algorithms for in-
cremental distance computation, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (1991) pp. 1008–1014
7.17
P. Jiménez, F. Thomas, C. Torras: Collision detection
algorithms for motion planning. In: Robot Mo-
tion Planning and Control, ed. by J.P. Laumond
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1998) pp. 1–53
7.18
M.C. Lin, D. Manocha: Collision and proximity
queries. In: Handbook of Discrete and Computa-
tional Geometry, 2nd edn., ed. by J.E. Goodman,
J. O’Rourke (Chapman Hall/CRC, Boca Raton 2004)
pp. 787–807
7.19
L.E. Kavraki, P. Svestka, J.C. Latombe, M.H. Over-
mars: Probabilistic roadmaps for path planning in
high-dimensional configuration spaces, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 12(4), 566–580 (1996)
7.20
N.M. Amato, O.B. Bayazit, L.K. Dale, C. Jones,
D. Vallejo: OBPRM: An obstacle-based PRM for
3-D workspaces, Workshop Algorith. Found. Ro-
botics (1998) pp. 155–168
7.21
V. Boor, M.H. Overmars, A.F. van der Stappen:
The Gaussian sampling strategy for probabilistic
roadmap planners, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(1999) pp. 1018–1023
7.22
C. Holleman, L.E. Kavraki: A framework for using
the workspace medial axis in PRM planners, IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2000) pp. 1408–1413
7.23
J.M. Lien, S.L. Thomas, N.M. Amato: A general
framework for sampling on the medial axis of
the free space, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(2003)
7.24
S.M. LaValle, M.S. Branicky, S.R. Lindemann: On
the relationship between classical grid search and
probabilistic roadmaps, Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(7/8),
673–692 (2004)
7.25
T. Siméon, J.-P. Laumond, C. Nissoux: Visibility
based probabilistic roadmaps for motion planning,
Adv. Robotics 14(6), 477–493 (2000)
7.26
J. Barraquand, L. Kavraki, J.-C. Latombe, T.-Y. Li,
R. Motwani, P. Raghavan: A random sampling

Motion Planning
References
159
Part A | 7
scheme for robot path planning, Proc. Int. Symp.
Robotics Res. (1996) pp. 249–264
7.27
A. Ladd, L.E. Kavraki: Measure theoretic analysis
of probabilistic path planning, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 20(2), 229–242 (2004)
7.28
R. Geraerts, M. Overmars: Sampling techniques for
probabilistic roadmap planners, Int. Conf. Intell.
Auton. Syst. (2004) pp. 600–609
7.29
D. Hsu, T. Jiang, J. Reif, Z. Sun: The bridge test
for sampling narrow passages with probabilistic
roadmap planners, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(2003) pp. 4420–4426
7.30
R. Bohlin, L. Kavraki: Path planning using lazy PRM,
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2000) pp. 521–528
7.31
B. Burns, O. Brock: Sampling-based motion plan-
ning using predictive models, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (2005) pp. 3120–3125
7.32
P. Isto: Constructing probabilistic roadmaps with
powerful
local
planning
and
path
optimiza-
tion, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (2002)
pp. 2323–2328
7.33
P. Leven, S.A. Hutchinson: Using manipulability to
bias sampling during the construction of prob-
abilistic roadmaps, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
19(6), 1020–1026 (2003)
7.34
D. Nieuwenhuisen, M.H. Overmars: Useful cycles
in probabilistic roadmap graphs, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (2004) pp. 446–452
7.35
S.M.
LaValle,
J.J.
Kuffner:
Rapidly-exploring
random trees: progress and prospects. In: Al-
gorithmic
and
Computational
Robotics:
New
Direction,
ed.
by
B.R.
Donald,
K.M.
Lynch,
D. Rus (A.K. Peters, Wellesley 2001) pp. 293–
308
7.36
K.E. Bekris, B.Y. Chen, A. Ladd, E. Plaku, L.E. Kavraki:
Multiple query probabilistic roadmap planning us-
ing single query primitives, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (2003) pp. 656–661
7.37
M. Strandberg: Augmenting RRT-planners with lo-
cal trees, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2004)
pp. 3258–3262
7.38
J.J. Kuffner, S.M. LaValle: An Efficient Approach to
Path Planning Using Balanced Bidirectional RRT
Search, Techn. Rep. CMU-RI-TR-05-34 Robotics In-
stitute (Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh 2005)
7.39
J. Bruce, M. Veloso: Real-time randomized path
planning for robot navigation, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (2002) pp. 2383–2388
7.40
E. Frazzoli, M.A. Dahleh, E. Feron: Real-time mo-
tion planning for agile autonomous vehicles, AIAA
J. Guid. Contr. 25(1), 116–129 (2002)
7.41
M. Kallmann, M. Mataric: Motion planning using
dynamic roadmaps, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(2004) pp. 4399–4404
7.42
A. Yershova, L. Jaillet, T. Simeon, S.M. LaValle:
Dynamic-domain RRTs: Efficient exploration by
controlling the sampling domain, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (2005) pp. 3867–3872
7.43
D. Hsu, J.C. Latombe, R. Motwani: Path planning
in expansive configuration spaces, Int. J. Comput.
Geom. Appl. 4, 495–512 (1999)
7.44
D. Hsu, R. Kindel, J.C. Latombe, S. Rock: Ran-
domized kinodynamic motion planning with mov-
ing obstacles. In: Algorithmic and Computational
Robotics: New Directions, ed. by B.R. Donald,
K.M. Lynch, D. Rus (A.K. Peters, Wellesley 2001)
pp. 247–264
7.45
G. Sánchez, J.-C. Latombe: A single-query bi-
directional probabilistic roadmap planner with
lazy collision checking, ISRR Int. Symp. Robotics
Res. (2007) pp. 403–413
7.46
S. Carpin, G. Pillonetto: Robot motion planning us-
ing adaptive random walks, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (2003) pp. 3809–3814
7.47
A. Ladd, L.E. Kavraki: Fast exploration for robots
with
dynamics,
Workshop
Algorithm.
Found.
Robotics, Amsterdam (2004)
7.48
K.E. Bekris, L.E. Kavraki: Greedy but safe replan-
ning under differential constraints, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (2007) pp. 704–710
7.49
C. O’Dunlaing, C.K. Yap: A retraction method for
planning the motion of a disc, J. Algorithms 6, 104–
111 (1982)
7.50
D. Leven, M. Sharir: Planning a purely translational
motion for a convex object in two-dimensional
space using generalized Voronoi diagrams, Discret.
Comput. Geom. 2, 9–31 (1987)
7.51
M. Sharir: Algorithmic motion planning. In: Hand-
book of Discrete and Computational Geometry, 2nd
edn., ed. by J.E. Goodman, J. O’Rourke (Chapman
Hall/CRC, Boca Raton 2004) pp. 1037–1064
7.52
N.J. Nilsson: A mobile automaton: An application
of artificial intelligence techniques, 1st Int. Conf.
Artif. Intell. (1969) pp. 509–520
7.53
J. O’Rourke: Visibility. In: Handbook of Discrete
and Computational Geometry, 2nd edn., ed. by
J.E. Goodman, J. O’Rourke (Chapman Hall/CRC, Boca
Raton 2004) pp. 643–663
7.54
B. Chazelle: Approximation and decomposition of
shapes. In: Algorithmic and Geometric Aspects of
Robotics, ed. by J.T. Schwartz, C.K. Yap (Lawrence
Erlbaum, Hillsdale 1987) pp. 145–185
7.55
M.
de
Berg,
M.
van
Kreveld,
M.
Overmars,
O. Schwarzkopf: Computational Geometry: Algo-
rithms and Applications, 2nd edn. (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 2000)
7.56
J.M. Keil: Polygon decomposition. In: Handbook on
Computational Geometry, ed. by J.R. Sack, J. Urrutia
(Elsevier, New York 2000)
7.57
J.T. Schwartz, M. Sharir: On the piano movers’
problem: I. The case of a two-dimensional rigid
polygonal body moving amidst polygonal barriers,
Commun. Pure Appl. Math. 36, 345–398 (1983)
7.58
O. Khatib: Real-time obstacle avoidance for ma-
nipulators and mobile robots, Int. J. Robotics Res.
5(1), 90–98 (1986)
7.59
J. Barraquand, J.-C. Latombe: Robot motion plan-
ning: A distributed representation approach, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 10(6), 628–649 (1991)
7.60
E. Rimon, D.E. Koditschek: Exact robot navigation
using artificial potential fields, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 8(5), 501–518 (1992)

Part A | 7
160
Part A
Robotics Foundations
7.61
J.P. Laumond: Trajectories for mobile robots with
kinematic and environment constraints, Int. Conf.
Intell. Auton. Syst. (1986) pp. 346–354
7.62
J.P. Laumond, S. Sekhavat, F. Lamiraux: Guide-
lines in nonholonomic motion planning for mobile
robots. In: Robot Motion Planning and Control, ed.
by J.P. Laumond (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1998)
pp. 1–53
7.63
B.R. Donald, P.G. Xavier, J. Canny, J. Reif: Kinody-
namic planning, Journal ACM 40, 1048–1066 (1993)
7.64
C. O’Dunlaing: Motion planning with inertial con-
straints, Algorithmica 2(4), 431–475 (1987)
7.65
J. Canny, A. Rege, J. Reif: An exact algorithm for
kinodynamic planning in the plane, Discret. Com-
put. Geom. 6, 461–484 (1991)
7.66
J. Go, T. Vu, J.J. Kuffner: Autonomous behav-
iors for interactive vehicle animations, SIGGRAPH/
Eurographics Symp. Comput. Animat., Aire-la-Ville
(2004) pp. 9–18
7.67
M. Pivtoraiko, A. Kelly: Generating near minimal
spanning control sets for constrained motion plan-
ning in discrete state spaces, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (2005) pp. 3231–3237
7.68
J. Hollerbach: Dynamic scaling of manipulator tra-
jectories, Tech. Rep. 700 (MIT, Cambridge 1983)
7.69
K.G. Shin, N.D. McKay: Minimum-time control
of robot manipulators with geometric path con-
straints, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 30(6), 531–541
(1985)
7.70
K.G. Shin, N.D. McKay: A dynamic programming
approach to trajectory planning of robotic manip-
ulators, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 31(6), 491–500
(1986)
7.71
S. Sastry: Nonlinear Systems: Analysis, Stability,
and Control (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1999)
7.72
D.J. Balkcom, M.T. Mason: Time optimal trajectories
for bounded velocity differential drive vehicles, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 21(3), 199–217 (2002)
7.73
P. Souères, J.-D. Boissonnat: Optimal trajectories
for nonholonomic mobile robots. In: Robot Mo-
tion Planning and Control, ed. by J.P. Laumond
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1998) pp. 93–169
7.74
P. Svestka, M.H. Overmars: Coordinated motion
planning for multiple car-like robots using prob-
abilistic roadmaps, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(1995) pp. 1631–1636
7.75
S. Sekhavat, P. Svestka, J.-P. Laumond, M.H. Over-
mars: Multilevel path planning
for nonholo-
nomic robots using semiholonomic subsystems,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 17, 840–857 (1998)
7.76
P. Ferbach: A method of progressive constraints
for nonholonomic motion planning, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (1996) pp. 2949–2955
7.77
S. Pancanti, L. Pallottino, D. Salvadorini, A. Bic-
chi: Motion planning through symbols and lattices,
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2004) pp. 3914–
3919
7.78
J.
Barraquand,
J.-C.
Latombe:
Nonholonomic
multibody mobile robots: Controllability and mo-
tion planning in the presence of obstacles, Algo-
rithmica 10, 121–155 (1993)
7.79
S.M. LaValle, J.J. Kuffner: Randomized kinodynamic
planning, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (1999)
pp. 473–479
7.80
A.M. Ladd, L.E. Kavraki: Motion planning in the
presence of drift underactuation and discrete sys-
tem changes, Robotics Sci. Syst. I, Cambridge (2005)
pp. 233–241
7.81
J.-P. Merlet: Parallel Robots (Kluwer, Boston 2000)
7.82
D. Cox, J. Little, D. O’Shea: Ideals, Varieties, and Al-
gorithms (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1992)
7.83
R.J. Milgram, J.C. Trinkle: The geometry of con-
figuration spaces for closed chains in two and
three dimensions, Homol. Homot. Appl. 6(1), 237–
267 (2004)
7.84
J. Yakey, S.M. LaValle, L.E. Kavraki: Randomized
path planning for linkages with closed kinematic
chains, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 17(6), 951–958
(2001)
7.85
L. Han, N.M. Amato: A kinematics-based prob-
abilistic roadmap method for closed chain sys-
tems. In: Algorithmic and Computational Robotics:
New Directions, ed. by B.R. Donald, K.M. Lynch,
D. Rus (A.K. Peters, Wellesley 2001) pp. 233–
246
7.86
J. Cortés: Motion Planning Algorithms for Gen-
eral Closed-Chain Mechanisms, Ph.D. Thesis (Insti-
tut National Polytechnique do Toulouse, Toulouse
2003)
7.87
R. Alami, J.-P. Laumond, T. Siméon: Two ma-
nipulation planning algorithms. In: Algorithms
for Robotic Motion and Manipulation, ed. by
J.P. Laumond, M. Overmars (A.K. Peters, Wellesley
1997)
7.88
L.E. Kavraki, M. Kolountzakis: Partitioning a pla-
nar assembly into two connected parts is NP-
complete, Inform. Process. Lett. 55(3), 159–165
(1995)
7.89
M.T. Mason: Mechanics of Robotic Manipulation
(MIT, Cambridge 2001)
7.90
K. Sutner, W. Maass: Motion planning among
time dependent obstacles, Acta Inform. 26, 93–122
(1988)
7.91
J.H. Reif, M. Sharir: Motion planning in the pres-
ence of moving obstacles, Journal ACM 41, 764–790
(1994)
7.92
M.A. Erdmann, T. Lozano-Pérez: On multiple mov-
ing objects, Algorithmica 2, 477–521 (1987)
7.93
J. van den Berg, M. Overmars: Prioritized motion
planning for multiple robots, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (2005) pp. 2217–2222
7.94
T. Siméon, S. Leroy, J.-P. Laumond: Path coordi-
nation for multiple mobile robots: A resolution
complete algorithm, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
18(1), 42–49 (2002)
7.95
R. Ghrist, J.M. O’Kane, S.M. LaValle: Pareto optimal
coordination on roadmaps, Workshop Algorithm.
Found. Robotics (2004) pp. 185–200
7.96
S.M. LaValle, S.A. Hutchinson: Optimal motion
planning for multiple robots having independent
goals, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 14(6), 912–925
(1998)

Motion Planning
References
161
Part A | 7
7.97
P.R. Kumar, P. Varaiya: Stochastic Systems (Prentice
Hall, Englewood Cliffs 1986)
7.98
S.M. LaValle: Sensing and Filtering: A Fresh Per-
spective Based on Preimages and Information
Spaces, Foundations and Trends in Robotics (Now
Publ., Delft 2012)
7.99
R. Alterovitz, N. Simeon, K. Goldberg: The stochastic
motion roadmap: A sampling framework for plan-
ning with Markov motion uncertainty, Robotics Sci.
Syst. 3, 233–241 (2007)
7.100
H. Kurniawati, D. Hsu, W.S. Lee: SARSOP: Efficient
point-based POMDP planning by approximating
optimally reachable belief spaces, Robotics Sci.
Syst. (2008)
7.101
J. Pineau, G. Gordon, S. Thrun: Point-based
value iteration, Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (2003)
pp. 1025–1032
7.102
R. Platt, R. Tedrake, T. Lozano-Perez, L.P. Kaelbling:
Belief space planning assuming maximum likeli-
hood observations, Robotics Sci. Syst. (2010)
7.103
N. Roy, G. Gordon: Exponential family PCA for belief
compression in POMDPs, Adv. Neural Inform. Pro-
cess. Syst. (2003)
7.104
R. He, S. Prentice, N. Roy: Planning in informa-
tion space for a quadrotor helicopter in a GPS-
denied environment, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (2008)
7.105
S. Koenig, M. Likhachev: D lite, AAAI Nat. Conf. Ar-
tif. Intell. (2002) pp. 476–483
7.106
A. Stentz: Optimal and efficient path planning
for partially-known environments, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (1994) pp. 3310–3317
7.107
J. Hershberger, S. Suri: Efficient Computation of Eu-
clidean shortest paths in the plane, IEEE Symp.
Found. Comp. Sci. (1995) pp. 508–517
7.108
J.S.B. Mitchell: Shortest paths among obstacles in
the plane, Int. J. Comput. Geom. Applic. 6(3), 309
(1996)
7.109
J. Choi, J. Sellen, C.K. Yap: Precision-sensitive Eu-
clidean shortest path in 3-space, ACM Symp. Com-
put. Geo. (1995) pp. 350–359
7.110
C.H. Papadimitriou: An algorithm for shortest-path
planning in three dimensions, Inform. Process.
Lett. 20(5), 259 (1985)
7.111
D. Yershov, S.M. LaValle: Simplicial Dijkstra and A*
algorithms for optimal feedback planning, IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (2011)
7.112
S. Karaman, E. Frazzoli: Sampling-based algo-
rithms for optimal motion planning, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 30(7), 846 (2011)
7.113
J.D. Marble, K.E. Bekris: Towards small asymp-
totically near-optimal roadmaps, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (2012)
7.114
W.M. Boothby: An Introduction to Differentiable
Manifolds and Riemannian Geometry, 2nd edn.
(Academic, New York 2003)
7.115
A. Hatcher: Algebraic Topology (Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge 2002)
7.116
G.S. Chirikjian, A.B. Kyatkin: Engineering Applica-
tions of Noncommutative Harmonic Analysis (CRC,
Boca Raton 2001)
7.117
J. Arvo: Fast random rotation matrices. In: Graphics
Gems III, ed. by D. Kirk (Academic, New York 1992)
pp. 117–120
7.118
H. Niederreiter: Random Number Generation and
Quasi-Monte-Carlo Methods (Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia 1992)
7.119
S. Basu, R. Pollack, M.-F. Roy: Algorithms in Real
Algebraic Geometry (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2003)
7.120
B. Mishra: Computational real algebraic geometry.
In: Handbook of Discrete and Computational Ge-
ometry, ed. by J.E. Goodman, J. O’Rourke (CRC, Boca
Raton 1997) pp. 537–556
7.121
J.T. Schwartz, M. Sharir: On the piano movers’
problem: II.
General
techniques
for comput-
ing topological properties of algebraic manifolds,
Commun. Pure Appl. Math. 36, 345–398 (1983)
7.122
B.R. Donald: A search algorithm for motion plan-
ning with six degrees of freedom, Artif. Intell. J. 31,
295–353 (1987)
7.123
D.S. Arnon: Geometric reasoning with logic and al-
gebra, Artif. Intell. J. 37(1-3), 37–60 (1988)
7.124
G.E. Collins: Quantifier elimination by cylindrical
algebraic decomposition–twenty years of progress.
In: Quantifier Elimination and Cylindrical Algebraic
Decomposition, ed. by B.F. Caviness, J.R. Johnson
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1998) pp. 8–23

Multimedia Contents Motion Cont
163
Part A | 8
8. Motion Control
Wan Kyun Chung, Li-Chen Fu, Torsten Kröger
This chapter will focus on the motion control of
robotic rigid manipulators. In other words, this
chapter does not treat the motion control of mobile
robots, flexible manipulators, and manipulators
with elastic joints. The main challenge in the mo-
tion control problem of rigid manipulators is the
complexity of their dynamics and uncertainties.
The former results from nonlinearity and coupling
in the robot manipulators. The latter is twofold:
structured and unstructured. Structured uncer-
tainty means imprecise knowledge of the dynamic
parameters and will be touched upon in this chap-
ter, whereas unstructured uncertainty results from
joint and link flexibility, actuator dynamics, fric-
tion, sensor noise, and unknown environment
dynamics, and will be treated in other chapters.
In this chapter, we begin with an introduc-
tion to motion control of robot manipulators from
a fundamental viewpoint, followed by a survey
and brief review of the relevant advanced mate-
rials. Specifically, the dynamic model and useful
properties of robot manipulators are recalled in
Sect. 8.1. The joint and operational space control
approaches, two different viewpoints on control of
robot manipulators, are compared in Sect. 8.2.
Independent joint control and proportional–
integral–derivative (PID) control, widely adopted
in the field of industrial robots, are presented
in Sects. 8.3 and 8.4, respectively. Tracking con-
trol, based on feedback linearization, is introduced
in Sect. 8.5. The computed-torque control and its
variants are described in Sect. 8.6. Adaptive con-
trol is introduced in Sect. 8.7 to solve the problem
of structural uncertainty, whereas the optimality
and robustness issues are covered in Sect. 8.8. To
compute suitable set point signals as input values
for these motion controllers, Sect. 8.9 introduces
reference trajectory planning concepts. Since most
controllers of robot manipulators are implemented
by using microprocessors, the issues of digital im-
plementation are discussed in Sect. 8.10. Finally,
learning control, one popular approach to intelli-
gent control, is illustrated in Sect. 8.11.
8.1
Introduction to Motion Control.............
164
8.1.1
Dynamical Model.......................
164
8.1.2
Control Tasks.............................
165
8.1.3
Summary..................................
165
8.2
Joint Space Versus
Operational Space Control ....................
166
8.2.1
Joint Space Control ....................
166
8.2.2
Operational Space Control ..........
166
8.3
Independent-Joint Control...................
167
8.3.1
Controller Design Based
on the Single-Joint Model..........
167
8.3.2
Controller Design Based
on the Multijoint Model.............
169
8.3.3
Summary..................................
169
8.4
PID Control ..........................................
169
8.4.1
PD Control for Regulation ...........
169
8.4.2
PID Control for Regulation ..........
170
8.4.3
PID Gain Tuning ........................
170
8.4.4
Automatic Tuning ......................
171
8.5
Tracking Control...................................
172
8.5.1
Inverse Dynamics Control ...........
172
8.5.2
Feedback Linearization ..............
172
8.5.3
Passivity-Based Control..............
173
8.5.4
Summary..................................
174
8.6
Computed-Torque Control ....................
174
8.6.1
Computed-Torque Control ..........
174
8.6.2
Computed-Torque-Like Control...
175
8.6.3
Summary..................................
177
8.7
Adaptive Control ..................................
177
8.7.1
Adaptive Computed-Torque
Control .....................................
177
8.7.2
Adaptive Inertia-Related Control
178
8.7.3
Adaptive Control Based
on Passivity ..............................
179

Part A | 8.1
164
Part A
Robotics Foundations
8.7.4
Adaptive Control
with Desired Compensation........
180
8.7.5
Summary..................................
180
8.8
Optimal and Robust Control .................
181
8.8.1
Quadratic Optimal Control ..........
181
8.8.2
Nonlinear H1 Control...............
181
8.8.3
Passivity-Based Design
of Nonlinear H1 Control...........
182
8.8.4
A Solution to Inverse
Nonlinear H1 Control...............
183
8.9
Trajectory Generation and Planning .....
183
8.9.1
Geometric Paths and Trajectories
183
8.9.2
Joint Space and Operational
Space Trajectories ......................
184
8.9.3
Trajectory Representations .........
184
8.9.4
Trajectory Planning Algorithms ...
186
8.10 Digital Implementation........................
187
8.10.1
Z-Transform for Motion Control
Implementation........................
188
8.10.2
Digital Control for Coding ...........
189
8.11
Learning Control..................................
190
8.11.1
Pure P-Type Learning Control......
190
8.11.2
P-Type Learning Control
with a Forgetting Factor.............
190
8.11.3
Summary..................................
191
Video-References.........................................
191
References...................................................
191
8.1 Introduction to Motion Control
The dynamical model of robot manipulators will be re-
called in this section. Furthermore, important properties
of this dynamical model, which is useful in controller
design, will then be addressed. Finally, different control
tasks of the robot manipulators will be deﬁned.
8.1.1 Dynamical Model
For motion control, the dynamical model of rigid robot
manipulators is conveniently described by Lagrange
dynamics. Let the robot manipulator have n links
and let the .n  1/-vector q of joint variables be q D
Œq1; : : : ; qnT. The dynamic model of the robot manipu-
lator is then described by Lagrange’s equation [8.1–6]
H.q/Rq C C.q; Pq/Pq C g.q/ D  ;
(8.1)
where H.q/ is the .n  n/ inertia matrix, C.q; Pq/Pq is the
.n  1/-vector of Coriolis and centrifugal forces, g.q/
is the .n1/-vector of gravity force, and  is the .n1/-
vector of joint control inputs to be designed. Friction
and disturbance input have been neglected here.
Remark 8.1
Other contributions to the dynamic description of the
robot manipulators may include the dynamics of the
actuators, joint and link ﬂexibility, friction, noise, and
disturbances. Without loss of generality, the case of the
rigid robot manipulators is stressed here.
The control schemes that we will introduce in this
chapter are based on some important properties of the
dynamical model of robot manipulators. Before giving
a detailed introduction to these different schemes, let us
ﬁrst give a list of those properties.
Property 8.1
The inertia matrix is a symmetric positive-deﬁnite ma-
trix, which can be expressed
hIn 	 H.q/ 	 HIn ;
(8.2)
where h and H denote positive constants.
Property 8.2
The
matrix
N.q; Pq/ D PH.q/  2C.q; Pq/
is
skew-
symmetric for a particular choice of C.q; Pq/ (which is
always possible), i. e.,
zTN.q; Pq/z D 0
(8.3)
for any .n  1/-vector z.
Property 8.3
The .n  n/-matrix C.q; Pq/ satisﬁes
k C.q; Pq/ k	 co k Pq k
(8.4)
for some bounded constant co.
Property 8.4
The gravity force/torque vector satisﬁes
k g.q/ k	 go
(8.5)
for some bounded constant go.
Property 8.5
The equation of motion is linear in the inertia pa-
rameters. In other words, there is a .r  1/ constant

Motion Control
8.1 Introduction to Motion Control
165
Part A | 8.1
vector a and an .n  r/ regressor matrix Y.q; Pq; Rq/ such
that
H.q/Rq C C.q; Pq/Pq C g.q/ D Y.q; Pq; Rq/a :
(8.6)
The vector a is comprised of link masses, moments of
inertia, and the link, in various combinations.
Property 8.6
The mapping  ! Pq is passive; i. e., there exists ˛  0
such that
t
Z
0
PqT.ˇ/.ˇ/dˇ  ˛ ;
8t < 1 :
(8.7)
Remarks 8.1

Properties 8.3 and 8.4 are very useful since they al-
low us to establish upper bounds on the nonlinear
terms in the dynamical model. As we will see fur-
ther, several control schemes require knowledge of
such upper bounds.

In Property 8.5, the parameter vector a is comprised
of several variables in various combinations. The di-
mensionality of the parameter space is not unique,
and the search over the parameter space is an im-
portant problem.

In this section, we assume that the robot manipu-
lator is fully actuated and this indicates that there
is an independent control input for each degree of
freedom (DOF). In contrast, the robot manipulators
with joint or link ﬂexibility are no longer fully actu-
ated and the control problems are more difﬁcult in
general.
8.1.2 Control Tasks
It is instructive for comparative purposes to classify
control objectives into the following two classes:

Trajectory tracking is aimed at following a time-
varying joint reference trajectory speciﬁed within
the manipulator workspace. In general, this desired
trajectory is assumed to comply with the actua-
tors’ capacity. In other words, the joint velocity and
acceleration associated with the desired trajectory
should not violate, respectively, the velocity and ac-
celeration limit of the manipulator. In practice, the
capacity of actuators is set by torque limits, which
result in bounds on the acceleration that are com-
plex and state dependent.

Regulation sometimes is also called point-to-point
control. A ﬁxed conﬁguration in the joint space
is speciﬁed; the objective is to bring to and keep
the joint variable at the desired position in spite of
torque disturbances and independently of the initial
conditions. The behavior of transients and over-
shooting, are in general, not guaranteed.
The selection of the controller may depend on the
type of task to be performed. For example, tasks only
requiring the manipulator to move from one position to
another without requiring signiﬁcant precision during
the motion between these two points can be solved by
regulators, whereas such as welding, painting, and so
on, require tracking controllers.
Remarks 8.2

The regulation problem may be seen as a special
case of the tracking problem (for which the desired
joint velocity and acceleration are zero).

The task speciﬁcation above is given in the joint
space and results in joint space control, which is
the main content of this chapter. Sometimes, the
task speciﬁcation of the robot manipulators in terms
of the desired trajectory of the end-effector (e.g.,
control with eye-in-hand) is carried out in the task
space and gives rise to the operational space control,
which will be introduced in Sect. 8.2.
8.1.3 Summary
In this section, we introduced the dynamical model of
the robot manipulators and important properties of this
dynamical model. Finally, we deﬁned different control
tasks of the robot manipulators.

Part A | 8.2
166
Part A
Robotics Foundations
8.2 Joint Space Versus Operational Space Control
In a motion control problem, the manipulator moves to
a position to pick up an object, transports that object
to another location, and deposits it. Such a task is an
integral part of any higher-level manipulation tasks such
as painting or spot-welding.
Tasks are usually speciﬁed in the task space in terms
of a desired trajectory of the end-effector, while con-
trol actions are performed in the joint space to achieve
the desired goals. This fact naturally leads to two kinds
of general control methods, namely joint space con-
trol and operational space control (task space control)
schemes.
8.2.1 Joint Space Control
The main goal of the joint space control is to design
a feedback controller such that the joint coordinates
q.t/ 2 Rn track the desired motion qd.t/ as closely as
possible. To this end, consider the equations of mo-
tion (8.1) of an n-DOF manipulator expressed in the
joint space [8.2, 4]. In this case, the control of robot
manipulators is naturally achieved in the joint space,
since the control inputs are the joint torques. Neverthe-
less, the user speciﬁes a motion in terms of end-effector
coordinates, and thus it is necessary to understand the
following strategy.
Figure 8.1 shows the basic outline of the joint space
control methods. Firstly, the desired motion, which is
described in terms of end-effector coordinates, is con-
verted to a corresponding joint trajectory using the
inverse kinematics of the manipulator. Then the feed-
back controller determines the joint torque necessary to
move the manipulator along the desired trajectory spec-
iﬁed in joint coordinates starting from measurements of
the current joint states [8.1, 4, 7, 8].
Since it is always assumed that the desired task is
given in terms of the time sequence of the joint mo-
tion, joint space control schemes are quite adequate in
situations where manipulator tasks can be accurately
preplanned and little or no online trajectory adjustments
are necessary [8.1, 4, 7, 9]. Typically, inverse kinemat-
ics is performed for some intermediate task points, and
the joint trajectory is interpolated using the intermediate
joint solutions. Although the command trajectory con-
sists of straight-line motions in end-effector coordinates
Inverse
kinematics
Manipulator
Controller
xd
qd
τ
+
–
q
Fig. 8.1 Generic concept of joint space control
between interpolation points, the resulting joint motion
consists of curvilinear segments that match the desired
end-effector trajectory at the interpolation points.
In fact, the joint space control includes simple
proportional–derivative (PD) control, PID control, in-
verse dynamic control, Lyapunov-based control, and
passivity-based control, as explained in the following
sections.
8.2.2 Operational Space Control
In more complicated and less certain environments,
end-effector motion may be subject to online modiﬁ-
cations in order to accommodate unexpected events or
to respond to sensor inputs. There are a variety of tasks
in manufacturing where these type of control problem
arise. In particular, it is essential when controlling the
interaction between the manipulator and environment
is of concern.
Since the desired task is often speciﬁed in the
operational space and requires precise control of the
end-effector motion, joint space control schemes are
not suitable in these situations. This motivated a dif-
ferent approach, which can develop control schemes
directly based on the dynamics expressed in the oper-
ational space [8.10, 11].
Let us suppose that the Jacobian matrix, denoted
by J.q/ 2 Rnn, transforms the joint velocity (Pq 2 Rn)
to the task velocity (Px 2 Rn) according to
Px D J.q/Pq :
(8.8)
Furthermore, assume that it is invertible. Then, the op-
erational space dynamics is expressed as follows
f c D ƒ.q/Rx C .q; Pq/Px C .q/ ;
(8.9)
where f c 2 Rn denotes the command forces in the op-
erational space; the pseudo-inertia matrix is deﬁned by
ƒ.q/ D JT.q/H.q/J1.q/ ;
(8.10)
and .q; Pq/ and .q/ are given by
.q; Pq/ D JT.q/C.q; Pq/J1.q/
 ƒ.q/PJ.q/J1.q/ ;
.q/ D JT.q/g.q/ :
The task space variables are usually reconstructed
from the joint space variables, via the kinematic map-
pings. In fact, it is quite rare to have sensors to directly
measure end-effector positions and velocities. Also, it

Motion Control
8.3 Independent-Joint Control
167
Part A | 8.3
is worth remarking that an analytical Jacobian is uti-
lized since the control schemes operate directly on task
space quantities, i. e., the end-effector position and ori-
entation.
The main goal of the operational space control is
to design a feedback controller that allows execution
of an end-effector motion x.t/ 2 Rn that tracks the de-
sired end-effector motion xd.t/ as closely as possible.
To this end, consider the equations of motion (8.9) of
the manipulator expressed in the operational space. For
this case, Fig. 8.2 shows a schematic diagram of the
operational space control methods. There are several
advantages to such an approach because operational
Manipulator
Controller
xd
fc
+
–
x
Fig. 8.2 Basic concept of operational space control
space controllers employ a feedback loop that directly
minimizes task errors. Inverse kinematics need not be
calculated explicitly, since the control algorithm em-
beds the velocity-level forward kinematics (8.8), as
shown in the ﬁgure. Now, motion between points can
be a straight-line segment in the task space.
8.3 Independent-Joint Control
By independent-joint control (i. e., decentralized con-
trol), we mean that the control inputs of each joint only
depends on the measurement of the corresponding joint
displacement and velocity. Due to its simple structure,
this kind of control schemes offers many advantages.
For example, by using independent-joint control, com-
munication among different joints is saved. Moreover,
since the computational load of controllers may be re-
duced, only low-cost hardware is required in actual
implementations. Finally, independent-joint control has
the feature of scalability, since the controllers on all
the joints have the same formulation. In this section,
two kinds of design of independent-joint control will
be introduced: one focused on the dynamical model
of each joint (i. e., based on the single-joint model)
and the other based on the analysis of the overall dy-
namical model (i. e., the multijoint model) of robot
manipulators.
8.3.1 Controller Design Based
on the Single-Joint Model
The simplest independent-joint control strategy is to
control each joint axis as a single-input single-output
(SISO) system. Coupling effects among joints due to
varying conﬁguration during motion are treated as dis-
turbance inputs. Without loss of generality, the actuator
is taken as a rotary electric direct-current (DC) mo-
tor. Hence, the block diagram of the control scheme of
joint i can be represented in the domain of the complex
variables as shown in Fig. 8.3. In this scheme,  is the
angular variable of the motor, J is the effective inertia
viewed from the motor side, Ra is the armature resis-
tance (auto-inductance being neglected), and kt and kv
are, respectively, the torque and motor constants. Fur-
thermore, Gv denotes the voltage gain of the power
ampliﬁer so that the reference input is the input volt-
age Vc of the ampliﬁer instead of the armature voltage
Va. It has also been assumed that Fm  kvkt=Ra, i. e.,
the mechanical (viscous) friction coefﬁcient has been
neglected with respect to the electrical coefﬁcient. Now
the input–output transfer function of the motor can be
written as
M.s/ D
km
s.1 C sTm/ ;
(8.11)
where km D Gv=kv and Tm D RaJ=kvkt are, respectively,
the voltage-to-velocity gain and the time constant of the
motor.
To guide selection of the control structure, start by
noticing that an effective rejection of the disturbance d
on the output  is ensured by
1. A large value of the ampliﬁer before the point of
intervention of the disturbance
2. The presence of an integral action in the con-
troller so as to cancel the effect of the gravitational
component on the output at the steady state (i. e.,
constant ).
In this case, as shown in Fig. 8.4, the types of
control action with position and velocity feedback are
Σ
Σ
θ·
θ··
θ
Gv
kv
kt
Ra
d
1
s
1
J
1
s
Vc
Va
+
+
–
–
Fig. 8.3 Block scheme of a joint-driven system (after [8.4])

Part A | 8.3
168
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Σ
Σ
Σ
θ·
θ··
θ
kv
kTV
kTP
Gv (s)
Gp (s)
Σ
d
1
s
1
J
kt
Ra
1
s
θ  r
Va
+
+
–
+
–
–
+
–
Fig. 8.4 Block scheme of position and velocity feedback (after [8.4])
characterized by [8.4]
Gp.s/ D KP ;
Gv.s/ D KV
1 C sTV
s
;
(8.12)
where Gp.s/ and Gv.s/ correspond to the position and
velocity control actions, respectively. It is worth not-
ing that the inner control action Gv.s/ is in a form of
propositional–integral (PI) control to yield zero error in
the steady state under a constant disturbance d. Further-
more, kTP and kTV are both transducer constants, and
the ampliﬁer gain KV has been embedded in the gain of
the inner controller. From the scheme of Fig. 8.4, the
transfer function of the forward path is
P.s/ D kmKPKV.1 C sTV/
s.1 C sTm/
;
(8.13)
while that of the return path is
H.s/ D kTP

1 C s kTV
KPkTP

:
(8.14)
The zero of the controller at s D 1=TV can be chosen
so as to cancel the effects of the real pole of the motor at
s D 1=Tm. Then, by setting TV D Tm, the poles of the
closed-loop system move on the root locus as a function
of the loop gain, kmKVkTV. By increasing the position
feedback gain KP, it is possible to conﬁne the closed-
loop poles to a region of the complex plane with large
absolute real part. Then, the actual location can be es-
tablished by a suitable choice of KV.
The closed-loop input–output transfer function is
.s/
r.s/ D
1
kTP
1 C skTP
KPkTP
C
s2
kmKPkTPKV
;
(8.15)
which can be compared with the typical transfer func-
tion of a second-order system
W.s/ D
1
kTP
1 C 2s
!n
C s2
!2
n
:
(8.16)
It can be recognized that, with a suitable choice of the
gains, it is possible to obtain any value of natural fre-
quency !n and damping ratio . Hence, if !n and  are
given as design speciﬁcations, the following relations
can be found
KVkTV D 2!n
km
and
KPkTPKV D !2
n
km
:
(8.17)
For given transducer constants kTP and kTV, KV and
KP will be chosen to satisfy the two equations above,
respectively. On the other hand, the closed-loop distur-
bance/output function is
.s/
D.s/ D
sRa
ktKPKTPKV.1 C sTm/
1 C skTV
KPkTP
C
s2
kmKPkTPKV
;
(8.18)
which shows that the disturbance rejection factor is
XR.s/ D KPkTPKV and is ﬁxed, provided that KV and KP
have been chosen via the approach above. Concerning
the disturbance dynamics, the zero at the origin intro-
duced by the PI, a real pole at s D 1=Tm, and the pair
of complex poles with real part !n should be kept in
mind. In this case, an estimate TR of the output recov-
ery time needed by the control system to recover from
the effect of a disturbance on the joint position can be
evaluated by analyzing models of the transfer function
above. Such an estimate can reasonably be expressed as
TR D maxfTm; 1=!g.

Motion Control
8.4 PID Control
169
Part A | 8.4
8.3.2 Controller Design Based
on the Multijoint Model
In recent years, independent-joint control schemes
based on the complete dynamic model of the robot
manipulators (i. e., a multijoint model) have been pro-
posed. For example, following the approach of com-
puted-torque-like control, [8.12] dealt with the regula-
tion task for horizontal motions, and [8.13] and [8.14]
handled the tracking task for arbitrary smooth trajec-
tories. Since the overall dynamic model is considered,
the effects of coupling among joints are handled. These
schemes will be introduced in detail in Sect. 8.6.
8.3.3 Summary
In this section, we have presented two independent-
joint control schemes: one is based on the single-joint
model and the other is based on the multijoint model.
The former focuses on the dynamics of a single joint
and regards the interaction among joints as a distur-
bance. This control scheme is simple but may not be
suitable for high-speed tracking. Hence, we introduce
the latter, which considers the overall dynamical model
of robot manipulators such that the interaction among
joints can be handled.
Further Reading
There are different types of feedback applied in the
independent-joint control based on the single-joint
model (such as pure position feedback or position,
velocity, and acceleration feedback). A complete dis-
cussion is given in [8.4]. When the joint control servos
are required to track reference trajectories with high
speeds and accelerations, the tracking capabilities of the
above schemes are inevitably degraded. A possible rem-
edy is to adopt decentralized feedforward compensation
to reduce tracking errors [8.4, 5].
8.4 PID Control
Traditionally, control design in robot manipulators can
be understood as the simple fact of tuning of a PD or
PID compensator at the level of each motor driving
the manipulator joints [8.1]. Fundamentally, a PD con-
troller is a position and velocity feedback that has good
closed-loop properties when applied to a double inte-
grator system.
The PID control has a long history since Ziegler
and Nichols’ PID tuning rules were published in
1942 [8.15]. Actually, the strong point of PID control
lies in its simplicity and clear physical meaning. Sim-
ple control is preferable to complex control, at least in
industry, if the performance enhancement obtained by
using complex control is not signiﬁcant enough. The
physical meanings of PID control [8.16] are as follows:

P-control means the present effort making a present
state into desired state

I-control means the accumulated effort using the ex-
perience information of previous states

D-control means the predictive effort reﬂecting the
information about trends in future states.
8.4.1 PD Control for Regulation
A simple design method for manipulator control is to
utilize a linear control scheme based on the lineariza-
tion of the system about an operating point. An example
of this method is a PD control with a gravity compen-
sation scheme [8.17, 18]. Gravity compensation acts as
a bias correction, compensating only for the amount of
forces that create overshooting and an asymmetric tran-
sient behavior. Formally, it has the following form
 D KP.qd  q/  KVPq C g.q/ ;
(8.19)
where KP and KV 2 Rnn are positive-deﬁnite gain ma-
trices. This controller is very useful for set-point regula-
tion, i. e., qd D constant [8.7, 18]. When this controller
is applied to (8.1), the closed-loop equation becomes
H.q/Rq C C.q; Pq/Pq C KVPq  KPeq D 0 ;
(8.20)
where eq D qd  q, and the equilibrium point is y D
ŒeT
q; PqTT D 0. Now, the stability achieved by PD control
with gravity compensation can be analyzed accord-
ing to the closed-loop dynamic (8.20). Consider the
positive-deﬁnite function
V D 1
2 PqTH.q/Pq C 1
2eT
qKVeq :
Then, the derivative of function becomes negative
semideﬁnite for any value of Pq by using Property 8.2
in Sect. 8.1, i. e.,
PV D PqTKVPq 	 min.KV/kPqk2 ;
(8.21)
where min.KV/ means the smallest eigenvalue of
KV. By invoking the Lyapunov stability theory and
LaSalle’s theorem [8.1], it can be shown that the regu-
lation error will converge asymptotically to zero, while

Part A | 8.4
170
Part A
Robotics Foundations
their high-order derivatives remain bounded. This con-
troller requires knowledge of the gravity components
(structure and parameters), though it is simple.
Now, consider simple PD control without gravity
compensation
 D KP.qd  q/  KVPq ;
(8.22)
then the closed-loop dynamic equation becomes
H.q/Rq C C.q; Pq/Pq C g.q/ C KVPq  KPeq D 0 :
(8.23)
Consider the positive deﬁnite function
V D 1
2 PqTH.q/Pq C 1
2eT
qKVeq C U.q/ C U0 ;
where U.q/ denotes the potential energy with the rela-
tion of @U.q/=@q D g.q/ and U0 is a suitable constant.
Taking time derivative of V along the closed-loop dy-
namics (8.23) gives the same result (8.21) with previous
one using gravity compensation. In this case, the control
system must be stable in the sense of Lyapunov, but it
can not conclude that the regulation error will converge
to zero by LaSalle’s theorem [8.1]. Actually, the system
precision (the size of the regulation error vector) will
depend on the size of the gain matrix KP in the follow-
ing form
keqk 	 kK1
P kg0 ;
(8.24)
where g0 is that in Property 8.4 in Sect. 8.1. Hence, the
regulation error can be arbitrarily reduced by increasing
KP; nevertheless, measurement noise and other unmod-
eled dynamics, such as actuator friction, will limit the
use of high gains in practice.
8.4.2 PID Control for Regulation
An integral action may be added to the previous PD
control in order to deal with gravity forces, which to
some extent can be considered as a constant disturbance
(from the local point of view). The PID regulation con-
troller can be written in the following general form
 D KP.qd  q/ C KI
Z
f .qd  q/dt  KVPq ;
where KI 2 Rnn is a positive-deﬁnite gain matrix, and:

If f .qd  q/ D qd  q, we have PID control.

If KI
R
.Pq/dt is added, we have PI2D control.

If f ./ D tanh./, we have PD C nonlinear integral
control.
Global asymptotic stability (GAS) by PID control
was proved in [8.12] for robotic motion control sys-
tem including external disturbances, such as Coulomb
friction. Also, Tomei proved the GAS of PD control
in [8.19] by using an adaptation for gravity term. On
the other hand, Ortega et al. showed in [8.20] that
PI2D control could yield semiglobal asymptotic sta-
bility (SGAS) in the presence of gravity and bounded
external disturbances. Also, Angeli proved in [8.21] that
PD control could achieve the input-output-to-state sta-
bility (IOSS) for robotic systems. Also, Ramirez et al.
proved the SGAS (with some conditions) for PID gains
in [8.22]. Also, Kelly proved in [8.23] that PD plus
nonlinear integral control could achieve GAS under
gravity.
Actually, a large integral action in PID control can
cause instability of the motion control system. In order
to avoid this, the integral gain should be bounded by an
upper limit of the following form [8.1]
kPkV
2
H
> kI ;
where H is that in Property 8.1 in Sect. 8.1, KP D kPI,
KI D kII, and KV D kVI. This relation gives the guide-
lines for gain selection implicitly. Also, PID control has
generated a great variety of PID control plus something,
e.g., PID plus friction compensator, PID plus gravity
compensator, PID plus disturbance observer.
8.4.3 PID Gain Tuning
The PID control can be utilized for trajectory tracking
as well as set-point regulation. True tracking control
will be treated after Sect. 8.5. In this section, the simple
but useful PID gain tuning method will be introduced
for practical use. The general PID controller can be
written in the following general form
 D KVPeq C KPeq C KI
Z
eqdt ;
or, in another form,
 D

K C 1
2 I
 
Peq C KPeq C KI
Z
eqdt

:
(8.25)
In a fundamental stability analysis of tracking con-
trol systems, Qu and Dorsey proved in [8.24] that
PD control could satisfy uniform ultimate boundedness
(UUB). Also, Berghuis and Nijmeijer proposed output
feedback PD control, which satisﬁes semiglobal uni-
form ultimate boundedness (SGUUB) in [8.25] under
gravity and a bounded disturbance. Recently, Choi et al.
suggested inverse optimal PID control [8.26], assuring
extended disturbance input-to-state stability (ISS).

Motion Control
8.4 PID Control
171
Part A | 8.4
Actually, if a PID controller (8.25) is repeatedly ap-
plied to the same set point or desired trajectory, then the
maximum error will be proportional to the gains in the
following form
max
0ttf keq.t/k /
2
p
2k2 C 1
;
(8.26)
where tf denotes the ﬁnal execution time of a given
task and K D kI. This relation can be utilized to tune
the gain of a PID controller and is referred to as the
compound tuning rule [8.16]. The compound tuning
rule implicitly includes simple tuning rules as follows
( tuning method):

Square tuning: max keqk / 2, for a small k

Linear tuning: max keqk / , for a large k.
For example, suppose we select positive constant
diagonal matrices KP D kPI; KI D kII, while satisfying
k2
P > 2kI. For small k, the maximum error will be re-
duced by 1
4 according to the square tuning rule, if we
reduce the value  by 1
2. For large k, the maximum
error will be proportionally reduced as  according to
the linear tuning rule. This means that we can tune the
PID controller using only one parameter  when the
other gain parameters are ﬁxed [8.16] (
VIDEO 25 ).
Although these rules are very useful in tuning the con-
trol performance, they can be utilized only for repetitive
experiments for the same set point or desired trajec-
tory because the tuning rules consist of proportional
relations.
8.4.4 Automatic Tuning
For simplicity, deﬁne the composite error to be
s.t/ D Peq C KPeq C KI
Z
eqdt :
Now simple auto-tuning PID control is suggested by
choosing one tuning parameter K as shown in the fol-
lowing control form
 D

bK.t/ C 1
2 I

s.t/ ;
and its automatic tuning rule as follow
dbKi
dt D is2
i .t/;
for i D 1;    ; n ;
(8.27)
where i implies an update gain parameter for i-th con-
trol joint.
For practical use of the PID control, a target perfor-
mance denoted by ˝ is speciﬁed in advance
sup
0ttf
js.t/j D ˝ ;
in order to maintain the composite error within the re-
gion ˝. Moreover, since the auto-tuning rule has the
decentralized type (8.27), we suggest the decentralized
criterion for auto-tuning as follows
jsij >
˝
p
2n
;
(8.28)
where n is the number of the joint coordinates. As
soon as the composite error arrives at the tuning region
(8.28), the auto-tuning rule is implemented to assist the
achievement of target performance. On the contrary, if
the composite error stays in non-tuning region, namely,
jsij 	 ˝=
p
2n, then the auto-tuning process stops. For
this case, we expect that the gain bK updated by an auto-
tuning rule (8.27) would be larger than the matrix K˝
able to achieve the target performance ˝. As a matter
of fact, the auto-tuning rule plays a nonlinear damping
role in the auto-tuning region.
Matlab Example (Multimedia)
Simple automatic tuning example for one-link manipu-
lator control system is shown in the multimedia source
to help readers’ understanding.
Further Reading
The PID-type controllers were designed to solve the
regulation control problem. They have the advantage
of requiring knowledge of neither the model structure
nor the model parameters. Also, the stability achieved
by PID-type controllers was presented in this section.
A range of books and papers [8.1, 15, 16, 22, 27, 28] are
available to the robotics audience, detailing the indi-
vidual tuning methods used in PID control and their
concrete proofs.

Part A | 8.5
172
Part A
Robotics Foundations
8.5 Tracking Control
While independent PID controls are adequate in most
set-point regulation problems, there are many tasks that
require effective trajectory tracking capabilities such as
plasma-welding, laser-cutting or high-speed operations
in the presence of obstacles. In this case, employing lo-
cal schemes requires moving slowly through a number
of intermediate set points, thus considerably delay-
ing the completion of the task. Therefore, to improve
the trajectory tracking performance, controllers should
take account of the manipulator dynamic model via
a computed-torque-like technique.
The tracking control problem in the joint or task
space consists of following a given time-varying trajec-
tory qd.t/ or xd.t/ and its successive derivatives Pqd.t/ or
Pxd.t/ and Rqd.t/ or Rxd.t/, which describe the desired ve-
locity and acceleration, respectively. To obtain success-
ful performance, signiﬁcant effort has been devoted to
the development of model-based control strategies [8.1,
2, 7]. Among the control approaches reported in the lit-
erature, typical methods include the inverse dynamics
control, the feedback linearization technique, and the
passivity-based control method.
8.5.1 Inverse Dynamics Control
Though the inverse dynamics control has a theoretical
background, such as the theory of feedback lineariza-
tion discussed later, its starting point is mechanical en-
gineering intuition based on cancelling nonlinear terms
and decoupling the dynamics of each link. Inverse dy-
namics control in joint space has the form
 D H.q/v C C.q; Pq/Pq C g.q/ ;
(8.29)
which, applied to (8.1), yields a set of n decoupled lin-
ear systems, e.g., Rq D v, where v is an auxiliary control
input to be designed. Typical choices for v are
v D Rqd C KV.Pqd  Pq/ C KP.qd  q/ ;
(8.30)
or with an integral component
v D Rqd C KV.Pqd  Pq/ C KP.qd  q/
C KI
Z
.qd  q/dt ;
(8.31)
leading to the error dynamics equation
Req C KVPeq C KPeq D 0
for an auxiliary control input (8.30), and
e.3/
q
C KVReq C KPPeq C KIeq D 0 ;
if an auxiliary control input (8.31) is used. Both error
dynamics are exponentially stable by a suitable choice
of the gain matrices KV and KP (and KI).
Alternatively, inverse dynamics control can be de-
scribed in the operational space. Consider the opera-
tional space dynamics (8.9). If the following inverse
dynamics control is used in the operational space,
f c D ƒ.q/.Rxd C KVPex C KPex/ C .q; Pq/Px C .q/ ;
where ex D xd  x, the resulting error dynamics is
Rex C KVPex C KPex D 0 ;
(8.32)
and it is also exponentially stable. One apparent advan-
tage of using this controller is that KP and KV can be
selected with a clear physical meaning in operational
space. However, as can be seen in (8.10), ƒ.q/ becomes
very large when the robot approaches singular conﬁg-
urations [8.8]. This means that large forces in some
direction are needed to move the arm.
8.5.2 Feedback Linearization
This approach generalizes the concept of inverse dy-
namics of rigid manipulators. The basic idea of feed-
back linearization is to construct a transformation as
a so-called inner-loop control, which exactly linearizes
the nonlinear system after a suitable state space change
of coordinates. One can then design a second stage or
outer-loop control in the new coordinates to satisfy the
traditional control design speciﬁcations such as track-
ing, disturbance rejection, etc. [8.5, 29]. The full power
of the feedback linearization scheme for manipulator
control becomes apparent if one includes in the dy-
namic description of the manipulator the transmission
dynamics, such as the elasticity resulting from shaft
windup, gear elasticity, etc. [8.5].
In recent years, an impressive volume of litera-
ture has emerged in the area of differential-geometric
methods for nonlinear systems. Most of the results
in this area are intended to give abstract coordinate-
free descriptions of various geometric properties of
nonlinear systems and as such are difﬁcult for the non-
mathematician to follow. It is our intention here to give
only the basic idea of the feedback linearization scheme
and to introduce a simple version of this technique
that ﬁnds an immediate application to the manipula-
tor control problem. The reader is referred to [8.30] for
a comprehensive treatment of the feedback linearization
technique using differential-geometric methods.
Let us now develop a simple approach to the de-
termination of linear state-space representations of the

Motion Control
8.5 Tracking Control
173
Part A | 8.5
manipulator dynamics (8.1) by considering a general
sort of output  2 Rp
 D h.q/ C r.t/ ;
(8.33)
where h.q/ is a general predetermined function of the
joint coordinate q 2 Rn and r.t/ is a general predeter-
mined time function. The control objective will be to
select the joint torque inputs  in order to make the out-
put .t/ go to zero.
The choice of h.q/ and r.t/ is based on the control
purpose. For example, if h.q/ D q and r.t/ D qd.t/,
the desired joint space trajectory we would like the
manipulator to follow, then .t/ D qd.t/  q.t/  eq.t/
is the joint space tracking error. Forcing .t/ to zero
in this case would cause the joint variables q.t/ to
track their desired values qd.t/, resulting in a manipula-
tor trajectory-following problem. As another example,
.t/ could represent the operational space tracking er-
ror .t/ D xd.t/  x.t/  ex.t/. Then, controlling .t/
to zero would result in trajectory following directly in
operational space where the desired motion is usually
speciﬁed.
To determine a linear state-variable model for ma-
nipulator controller design, let us simply differentiate
the output .t/ twice to obtain
P D @h
@q Pq C Pr D TPq C Pr ;
(8.34)
R D TRq C PTPq C Rr ;
(8.35)
where we deﬁned a .pn/ transformation matrix of the
form
T.q/ D @h.q/
@q
D
 @h
@q1
@h
@q2
  
@h
@qn

:
(8.36)
Given the output h.q/, it is straightforward to com-
pute the transformation T.q/ associated with h.q/. In
the special case where P represents the operational
space velocity error, then T.q/ denotes the Jacobian ma-
trix J.q/.
According to (8.1),
Rq D H1.q/Œ  n.q; Pq/ ;
(8.37)
with the nonlinear terms represented by
n.q; Pq/ D C.q; Pq/Pq C g.q/ :
(8.38)
Then (8.35) yields
R D Rr C PTPq C T.q/H1.q/Œ  n.q; Pq/ :
(8.39)
Deﬁne the control input function
u D Rr C PTPq C T.q/H1.q/Œ  n.q; Pq/ :
(8.40)
Now we may deﬁne a state y.t/ 2 R2p by y D . P/ and
write the manipulator dynamics as
Py D
0
Ip
0
0

y C
0
Ip

u :
(8.41)
This is a linear state-space system of the form
Py D Ay C Bu ;
(8.42)
driven by the control input u. Due to the special form of
A and B, this system is called the Brunovsky canonical
form and it is always controllable from u.t/.
Since (8.40) is said to be a linearizing transforma-
tion for the manipulator dynamic equation, one may
invert this transformation to obtain the joint torque
 D H.q/TC.q/.u  Rr  PTPq/ C n.q; Pq/ ;
(8.43)
where TC denotes the Moore–Penrose inverse of the
transformation matrix T.q/.
In the special case  D eq.t/, and if we select u.t/ so
that (8.41) is stable by the PD feedback u D KP 
KV P, then T D In and the control input torque .t/
deﬁned by (8.43) makes the manipulator move in such
a way that y.t/ goes to zero. In this case, the feedback
linearizing control and the inverse dynamics control be-
come the same.
8.5.3 Passivity-Based Control
This method explicitly uses the passivity properties
of the Lagrangian system [8.31, 32]. In comparison
with the inverse dynamics method, passivity-based con-
trollers are expected to have better robust properties
because they do not rely on the exact cancellation of the
manipulator nonlinearities. The passivity-based control
input is given by
Pqr D Pqd C ˛eq ;
˛ > 0 ;
 D H.q/Rqr C C.q; Pq/Pqr C g.q/ C KVPeq C KPeq :
(8.44)
With (8.44), we obtain the following closed-loop sys-
tem
H.q/Psq C C.q; Pq/sq C KVPeq C KPeq D 0 ;
(8.45)
where sq D Peq C ˛eq. Let us choose a Lyapunov func-
tion V.y; t/ as follows
V D 1
2yT
˛KV C KP C ˛2H
˛H
˛H
H

y D 1
2yTPy :
(8.46)

Part A | 8.6
174
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Since the above equation is positive deﬁnite, it has
a unique equilibrium at the origin, i. e., y D .eT
q; PeT
q/T
D 0. Moreover, V can be bounded by
mkyk2 	 yTPy 	 Mkyk2 ;
M  m > 0 : (8.47)
The time derivative of V gives
PV D PeT
qKVPeq  ˛eqKPeq D yTQy < 0 ;
(8.48)
where Q D diagŒ˛KP; KV. Since Q is positive deﬁnite
and quadratic in y, it can be also bounded by
mkyk2 	 yTQy 	 Mkyk2 ;
M  m > 0 : (8.49)
Then, from the bound of the Lyapunov function V, we
get
PV 	 mkyk2 D 2V ;
 D m
M
;
(8.50)
which ﬁnally yields
V.t/ 	 V.0/e2t :
(8.51)
It has been shown that the value of ˛ affects the track-
ing result dramatically [8.33]. The manipulator tends to
vibrate for small values of ˛. Larger values of ˛ allow
better tracking performance and protect sq from being
spoiled by the velocity measurement noise when the po-
sition error is small. In [8.34], it was suggested that
KP D ˛KV
(8.52)
be used for quadratic optimization.
8.5.4 Summary
In this section, we have reviewed some of the model-
based motion control methods proposed to date. Under
some control approaches, the closed-loop system has
either asymptotic stability or globally exponential sta-
bility. However, such ideal performance cannot be ob-
tained in practical implementation because factors such
as sampling rate, measurement noise, disturbances, and
unmodeled dynamics will limit the achievable gain and
the performance of the control algorithms [8.33, 35,
36].
8.6 Computed-Torque Control
Through the years many kinds of robot control schemes
have been proposed. Most of these can be considered
as special cases of the class of computed-torque control
(Fig. 8.5) which is the technique of applying feedback
linearization to nonlinear systems in general [8.37, 38].
In the section, computed-torque control will be ﬁrst
introduced, and its variant, so-called computed-torque-
like control, will be introduced later.
8.6.1 Computed-Torque Control
Consider the control input (8.29)
 D H.q/v C C.q; Pq/Pq C g.q/ ;
which is also known as computed-torque control; it con-
sists of an inner nonlinear compensation loop and an
H  (q)
C  (q,q·)q· + τˆs(q)
Manipulators
υ
τ
Σ
+
+
q
q·
Fig. 8.5 Computed-torque control
outer loop with an exogenous control signal v. Substi-
tuting this control law into the dynamical model of the
robot manipulator, it follows that
Rq D v :
(8.53)
It is important to note that this control input converts
a complicated nonlinear controller design problem into
a simple design problem for a linear system consist-
ing of n decoupled subsystems. One approach to the
outer-loop control v is propositional–derivative (PD)
feedback, as in (8.30)
v D Rqd C KVPeq C KPeq ;
in which case the overall control input becomes
 D H.q/.Rqd CKVPeq CKPeq/ CC.q; Pq/Pq Cg.q/ ;
and the resulting linear error dynamics are
Req C KVPeq C KPeq D 0 :
(8.54)
According to linear system theory, convergence of the
tracking error to zero is guaranteed [8.29, 39].
Remark 8.2
One usually lets KV and KP be .n  n/ diagonal
positive-deﬁnite gain matrices (i. e., KV D diag.kV;1;

Motion Control
8.6 Computed-Torque Control
175
Part A | 8.6
   ; kV;n/ > 0, KP D diag.kP;1;    ; kP;n/ > 0) to guar-
antee the stability of the error system. However, the for-
mat of the foregoing control never leads to independent
joint control because the outer-loop multiplier H.q/ and
the full nonlinear compensation term C.q; Pq/Pq C g.q/
in the inner loop scramble all joint signals among dif-
ferent control channels.
8.6.2 Computed-Torque-Like Control
It is worth noting that the implementation of computed-
torque control requires that parameters of the dynamical
model are accurately known and the control input is
computed in real time. In order to avoid those problems,
several variations of this control scheme have been pro-
posed, for example, computed-torque-like control. An
entire class of computed-torque-like controllers can be
obtained by modifying the computed-torque control as
 D OH.q/v C OC.q; Pq/Pq C O.q/ ;
(8.55)
where O represents the computed or nominal value
and indicates that the theoretically exact feedback lin-
earization cannot be achieved in practice due to the
uncertainty in the systems. The overall control scheme
is depicted in Fig. 8.6.
Computed-Torque-Like Control
with Variable-Structure Compensation
Since there is parametric uncertainty, compensation is
required in the outer-loop design to achieve trajectory
tracking. The following shows a computed-torque-like
control with variable-structure compensation
v D Rqd C KVPeq C KPeq C v ;
(8.56)
where the variable-structure compensation v is de-
vised as
v D
8
<
:
	.x; t/
BTPx
k BTPx k
if
k BTPx k¤ 0 ;
0
if
k BTPx kD 0 ;
(8.57)
Hˆ (q)
Cˆ (q,q·)q· + τˆs(q)
Manipulators
υ
τ
Σ
+
+
q
q·
Fig. 8.6 Computed-torque-like control
where x D .eT
q; PeT
q/T, B D .0; In/T, P is a .2n2n/ sym-
metric positive-deﬁnite matrix satisfying
PA C ATP D Q ;
(8.58)
with A being deﬁned as
A D
 0
In
KP
KV

;
(8.59)
Q being any appropriate .2n  2n/ symmetric positive-
deﬁnite matrix,
	.x; t/ D
1
1  ˛ Œ˛ˇC k K kk x k C NH.x; t/ ;
(8.60)
where ˛ and ˇ are positive constants such that
kH1.q/ OH.q/  Ink 	 ˛ < 1
for
all
q 2 Rn
and
supt2Œ0;1/ k Rqd.t/ k< ˇ, respectively, K is the .n  2n/
matrix deﬁned as K D ŒKPKV, NH being a positive
constant such that k H1.q/ k	 NH for all q 2 Rn, and
the function  being deﬁned as
kŒ OC.q; Pq/  C.q; Pq/Pq C ŒOg.q/  g.q/k
	 .x; t/ :
(8.61)
Convergence of the tracking error to zero can be shown
using the Lyapunov function
V D xTPx ;
(8.62)
following the stability analysis in [8.5, 40].
Remarks 8.3

By Property 8.1 in Sect. 8.1, there exist positive
constants NH and Nh such that Nh 	k H1.q/ k	 NH
for all q 2 Rn. If we choose
OH D 1
c In ;
where
c D
NH C Nh
2
;
(8.63)
it can be shown that
k H1.q/ OH.q/  In k	
NH  Nh
H C Nh
 ˛ < 1 ;
(8.64)
which indicates that there is always at least one
choice of OH for some ˛ < 1.

Due to the discontinuity in v, chattering phe-
nomenon may occur when the control scheme is
applied. It is worth noting that chattering is often
undesirable since the high-frequency component in

Part A | 8.6
176
Part A
Robotics Foundations
the control can excite unmodeled dynamic effect
(such as joint ﬂexibility) [8.6, 29, 38]. In order to
avoid chattering, the variable-structure compensa-
tion can be modiﬁed to become smooth, i. e.,
v D
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
	.x; t/
BTPx
k BTPx k
if k BTPx k> " ;
	.x; t/
"
BTPx
if k BTPx k	 " ;
(8.65)
where " is a positive constant and is used as the
boundary layer. Following this modiﬁcation, con-
vergence of tracking errors to a residual set can be
ensured, and the size of this residual set can be made
smaller by use of a smaller value of ".
Computed-Torque-Like Control
with Independent-Joint Compensation
Obviously, the previous compensation scheme is cen-
tralized, which implies that the online computation load
is heavy and high-cost hardware is required for prac-
tical implementation. In order to solve this problem,
a scheme with independent-joint compensation is in-
troduced below. In this scheme, a computed-torque-like
control is designed with estimates as
OH.q/ D I ;
OC.q; Pq/ D 0 ;
O.q/ D 0 :
(8.66)
Then, we use the outer-loop v as
v D KVPeq C KPeq C v ;
(8.67)
where the positive constants KP and KV are selected
to be sufﬁciently large, and the i-th component v i of
v D .v 1; : : : ; v n/T is
v i D
8
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ:


ˇTw.qd; Pqd/
	2 si"i
if
j si j	
"i
ˇTw.qd; Pqd/ ;
ˇTw.qd; Pqd/ si
jsij
if
j si j>
"i
ˇTw.qd; Pqd/ :
(8.68)
In this compensation, si D Peq;i C ieq;i, i 2 f1; : : : ; ng,
and i; i 2 f1; : : : ; ng are positive constants. Further-
more, following the properties of robot manipulators,
we have
k H.q/Rqd C C.q; Pq/Pqd C g.q/ k
	 ˇ1 C ˇ2 k q k C k Pq kD ˇTw.q; Pq/
for some suitable positive constants ˇ1, ˇ2, and ˇ3,
where ˇ D .ˇ1; ˇ2; ˇ3/T and
w.q; Pq/ D Œ1; k q k; k Pq kT :
(8.69)
Finally, "i, i 2 f1; : : : ; ng, is the variable length of the
boundary layer, satisfying
P"i D gi "i ;
".0/ > 0 ;
gi > 0 :
(8.70)
It is worth pointing out that the term w in this control
scheme is devised as the desired compensation rather
than feedback. Furthermore, this scheme is in a form of
independent-joint control and hence has the advantages
introduced before. The convergence of the tracking er-
ror to zero can be shown using the Lyapunov function
V D 1
2
eT
q PeT
q
 KP
H
H
H
 eq
Peq

C
n
X
iD1
g1
i
"i ;
(8.71)
whose time derivative along the trajectory of the closed-
loop systems follows
PV D ˛
ˇˇˇˇ
eq
Peq
ˇˇˇˇ
2
;
(8.72)
with ˛ being some positive constant, if sufﬁciently large
KP and  are used. The detailed analysis of stability,
which requires Properties 8.3 and 8.4, can be found
in [8.13].
Remark 8.3
Similar to computed-torque-like control with variable-
structure compensation, we can consider the nonzero
boundary layer as
P"i D gi"i ;
".0/ > 0 ;
gi ; ˛i > 0 :
(8.73)
Following this modiﬁcation, tracking errors converge to
a residual set. The size of this residual set can be made
smaller by the use of a smaller value of " (i. e., smaller
˛i).
For the task of point-to-point control, one PD con-
troller with gravity compensation is designed with the
estimates
OH.q/ D I ;
OC.q; Pq/ D 0 ;
Og.q/ D g.q/ ;
(8.74)
with g.q/ being the gravity term of the dynamical
model of the robot manipulators. Then, we use the
outer-loop v as
v D KVPeq C KPeq ;
(8.75)
such that the control input becomes
 D KVPeq C KPeq C g.q/ :
(8.76)

Motion Control
8.7 Adaptive Control
177
Part A | 8.7
This scheme is much simpler to implement than the
exact computed-torque controller. The convergence of
the tracking error to zero can be shown using the Lya-
punov function
V D 1
2 PeT
qH.q/Peq C 1
2eT
qKPeq ;
(8.77)
whose time derivative along the solution trajectories of
the closed-loop system is
PV D PeT
qKVPeq :
(8.78)
The detailed analysis of stability is given in [8.12]. It
is necessary to note that this result is for the case of
regulation, rather than for the case of tracking, since
the former theoretical base, which relies on LaSalle’s
lemma, requires the system be autonomous (time invari-
ant) [8.38, 41, 42].
Remark 8.4
If we neglect gravity in the dynamical model of the
robot manipulators, then the gravity estimation can be
omitted here, i. e., Og.q/ D 0, so that the control law be-
comes
 D v D KVPeq C KPeq ;
(8.79)
which leads to pure PD control. The gain matrices, KP
and KV, can be selected to be diagonal so that this PD
control is in a form of independent-joint control devel-
oped based on the multijoint dynamic model.
8.6.3 Summary
In this section, we have presented two control schemes:
the computed-torque and computed-torque-like con-
trol. The former transforms a multi-input multi-output
(MIMO) nonlinear robotic system into a very simple
decoupled linear closed-loop system whose control de-
sign is a well-established problem. Since the practical
implementation of the former control requires pre-
knowledge of all the manipulator parameters and its
payload, which may not be realistic, the latter was in-
troduced to relax the foregoing requirement and still
to achieve the objective of tracking subject to system’s
uncertainty.
Further Reading
The PD control with different feedforward compensa-
tion for tracking control is investigated in [8.43]. An
adaptive control scheme based on PD control is pre-
sented in [8.19].
8.7 Adaptive Control
An adaptive controller differs from an ordinary con-
troller in that the controller parameters are time varying,
and there is a mechanism for adjusting these param-
eters online based on some signals in the closed-loop
systems. By the use of such control scheme, the con-
trol goal can be achieved even if there is parametric
uncertainty in the plant. In this section, we will in-
troduce several adaptive control schemes to deal with
the case of imperfect knowledge of dynamical parame-
ters of the robot manipulators. The control performance
of those adaptive control schemes, including adap-
tive computed-torque control, adaptive inertia-related
control, adaptive control based on passivity, and adap-
tive control with desired compensation, are basically
derived from Property 8.5. Finally, the condition of
persistent excitation, which is important in parameter
convergence, will be addressed.
8.7.1 Adaptive Computed-Torque Control
The computed-torque control scheme is appealing,
since it allows the designer to transform a MIMO highly
coupled nonlinear system into a very simple decou-
pled linear system, whose control design is a well-
established problem. However, this method of feedback
linearization relies on perfect knowledge of the system
parameters, and failure to have this will cause erroneous
parametric estimates, resulting in a mismatch term in
the closed-loop model of the error system. That term
can be interpreted as a nonlinear perturbation acting at
the input of the closed-loop system. In order to solve
the problem due to parametric uncertainty, we instead
consider the inverse dynamics method with parameter
estimates of
 D OH.q/.Rqd CKVPeq CKPeq/ C OC.q; Pq/Pq C Og.q/ ;
(8.80)
where OH, OC, Og have the same functional form as H, C,
g. From Property 8.5 of the dynamics model, we have
OH.q/Rq C OC.q; Pq/Pq C Og.q/ D Y.q; Pq; Rq/Oa ;
(8.81)
where Y.q; Pq; Rq/, called the regressor, is a known .nr/
function matrix and a is the .r  1/ vector that sum-
marizes all the estimated parameters. Substituting this

Part A | 8.7
178
Part A
Robotics Foundations
control input  into the manipulator dynamics gives the
following closed-loop error model
OH.q/.Req C KVPeq C KPeq/ D Y.q; Pq; Rq/Qa ;
(8.82)
where Qa D Oa  a. In order to acquire an appropriate
adaptive law, we ﬁrst assume that the acceleration term
Rq is measurable, and that the estimated inertia matrix
OH.q/ is never singular. Now, for convenience, the error
equation is rewritten as
Px D Ax C B OH1.q/Y.q; Pq; Rq/Qa ;
(8.83)
with x D
eT
q; PeT
q
T,
A D
 0n
In
KP
KV

;
B D
0n
In

:
(8.84)
The adaptive law is considered as
POa D  1YT.q; Pq; Rq/ OH1.q/BTPx ;
(8.85)
where  is an .r  r/ positive-deﬁnite constant matrix,
and P is a .2n2n/ symmetric positive-deﬁnite constant
matrix satisfying
PA C ATP D Q ;
(8.86)
with Q being a symmetric positive-deﬁnite constant
matrix with coherent dimension. In this adaptive law,
we made two assumptions:

The joint acceleration Rq is measurable, and

The bounded range of the unknown parameter is
available.
The ﬁrst assumption is to ensure that the regres-
sor Y.q; Pq; Rq/ is known a priori, whereas the second
assumption is to allow one to keep the estimate OH.q/
nonsingular by restricting the estimated parameter Oa to
lie within a range about the true parameter value.
Convergence of the tracking error and maintaining
boundedness of all internal signals can actually be guar-
anteed by Lyapunov stability theory with the Lyapunov
function
PV D xTQx :
(8.87)
Detailed stability analysis is given in [8.2].
Remark 8.5
For practical and theoretical reasons, the ﬁrst assump-
tion above is hardly acceptable. In most cases, it is not
easy to obtain an accurate measure of acceleration; the
robustness of the above adaptive control scheme with
respect to such a disturbance has to be established.
Moreover, from a pure theoretical viewpoint, measur-
ing q; Pq; Rq means that not only do we need the whole
system state vector, but we also need its derivative.
8.7.2 Adaptive Inertia-Related Control
Another adaptive control scheme is now introduced.
This proposed scheme does not require the measure-
ment of the manipulator’s acceleration nor does it
require inversion of the estimated inertia matrix. Hence,
the drawbacks of the adaptive computed-torque control
scheme are avoided. Let us consider the control input
 D OH.q/ Pv C OC.q; Pq/v C Og.q/ C KDs ;
(8.88)
where the auxiliary signals v and s are deﬁned as v D
Pqd C ƒeq and s D v  Pq D Peq C ƒeq, with ƒ being an
.n  n/ positive-deﬁnite matrix. Following Property 8.5
of the dynamic model, we have
H.q/ Pv C C.q; Pq/v C g.q/ D NY.q; Pq; v; Pv/a ;
(8.89)
where NY.; ; ; / is an .n  r/ matrix of known time
functions. The formulation above is the same type of
the parameter separation that was used in the formula-
tion of the adaptive computed-torque control. Note that
NY.q; Pq; v; Pv/ is independent of the joint acceleration.
Similar to the formulation above, we also have
OH.q/ Pv C OC.q; Pq/v C Og.q/ D NY.q; Pq; v; Pv/Oa :
(8.90)
Substituting the control input into the equation of mo-
tion, it follows that
H.q/Rq C C.q; Pq/Pq C g.p/
D OH.q/ Pv C OC.q; Pq/v C Og.q/ C KDs :
Since Rq D Pv  Ps; Pq D v  s, the previous result can be
rewritten as
H.q/Ps C C.q; Pq/s C KDs D NY.q; Pq; v; Pv/Qa ;
(8.91)
where Qa D a  Oa. The adaptive law is considered as
POa D  NYT.q; Pq; v; Pv/s :
(8.92)
The convergence of the tracking error to zero with
boundedness on all internal signals can be shown

Motion Control
8.7 Adaptive Control
179
Part A | 8.7
through Lyapunov stability theory using the following
Lyapunov-like function
V D 1
2sTH.q/s C 1
2 QaT1Qa ;
(8.93)
whose time derivative along the trajectories of the
closed-loop systems can be found to be
PV D sTKDs :
(8.94)
The detailed stability analysis is given in [8.32].
Remark 8.6

The restrictions for adaptive computed-torque con-
trol formerly seen have been removed here.

The term KDs introduces a PD-type linear stabiliz-
ing control action to the error system model.

The estimated parameters converge to the true pa-
rameters provided the reference trajectory satisﬁes
the condition of persistency of excitation,
˛1Ir 	
t0Ct
Z
t0
YT.qd; Pqd; v; Pv/Y.qd; Pqd; v; Pv/ dt
	 ˛2Ir ;
for all t0, where ˛1, ˛2, and t are all positive con-
stants.
8.7.3 Adaptive Control Based on Passivity
Taking a physics viewpoint of control, we see that the
concept of passivity has become popular for the devel-
opment of adaptive control schemes. Here, we illustrate
how the concept of passivity can be used to design
a class of adaptive control laws for robot manipulators.
First, we deﬁne an auxiliary ﬁltered tracking error sig-
nal r as
r D F1.s/eq ;
(8.95)
where
F1.s/ D

sIn C 1
s K.s/

;
(8.96)
and s is the Laplace transform variable. The .nn/ ma-
trix K.s/ is chosen such that F.s/ is a strictly proper,
stable transfer function matrix. As in the preceding
schemes, the adaptive control strategies has close ties
to the ability to separate the known functions from the
unknown constant parameters. We use the expression
given above to deﬁne
Z' D H.q/ŒRqd C K.s/eq
C V.q; Pq/

Pqn C 1
s K.s/eq

C g.q/ ;
where Z is a known .n  r/ regression matrix and ' is
a vector of unknown system parameters in the adap-
tive context. It is important to note that the above can
be arranged such that Z and r do not depend on the
measurement of the joint acceleration Rq. The adaptive
control scheme given here is called the passivity ap-
proach because the mapping of r ! Z Q' is constructed
to be a passive mapping. That is, we develop an adap-
tive law such that
t
Z
0
rT./Z./ Q'./d  ˇ
(8.97)
is satisﬁed for all time and for some positive scalar con-
stant ˇ. For this class of adaptive controllers, the control
input is given by
 D Z O' C KDr ;
(8.98)
Detailed analysis of stability is given in [8.44].
Remarks 8.4

If K.s/ is selected such that H.s/ has a relative de-
gree of one, Z and r will not depend on Rq.

Many types of control schemes can be generated
from the adaptive passive control approach by se-
lected different transfer function matrices K.s/ in
the deﬁnition of r.

Note that, by deﬁning K.s/ D sƒ such that F.s/ D
.sIn C ƒ/1, we have the control input
 D Z O'  KDr ;
with
Z O' D OH.q/.Rqd C ƒPeq/ C OC.q; Pq/.Pqd C ƒeq/
C Og.q/ :
The adaptive law may be chosen as
PO' D ZT.Peq C ƒeq/
to satisfy the condition of passive mapping. This in-
dicates that adaptive inertia-related control can be
viewed as a special case of adaptive passive control.

Part A | 8.7
180
Part A
Robotics Foundations
8.7.4 Adaptive Control
with Desired Compensation
In order to implement the adaptive control scheme,
one needs to calculate the elements of Y.q; Pq; Rq/ in
real time. However, this procedure may be excessively
time consuming since it involves computations with
highly nonlinear functions of joint position and veloc-
ity. Consequently, the real-time implementation of such
a scheme is rather difﬁcult. To overcome this difﬁ-
culty, the adaptive control with desired compensation
was proposed and is discussed here. In other words,
the variables q, Pq, and Rq are replaced with the desired
ones, namely, qd, Pqd, and Rqd. Since the desired quan-
tities are known in advance, all their corresponding
calculations can be performed ofﬂine, which renders
real-time implementation more plausible. Let us con-
sider the control input
 D Y.qd; Pqd; Rqd/Oa C kas C kpeq C knkeqk2s ; (8.99)
where the positive constants ka, kp, and kn are sufﬁ-
ciently large, and the auxiliary signal s is deﬁned as
s D Peq C eq. The adaptive law is considered as
POa D YT.qd; Pqd; Rqd/s :
(8.100)
It is worth noting that the desired compensation is
adopted in both the control and adaptive laws such that
the computational load can be drastically reduced. For
the sake of this analysis, we note that
kY.q; Pq; Rq/a  Y.qd; Pqd; Rqd/Oak
	 1keqk C 2keqk2 C 3ksk C 4kskkeqk ;
where 1, 2, 3, and 4 are positive constants. In order
to achieve trajectory tracking, it is required that
ka > 2 C 4 ;
kp > 1
2 C 2
4 ;
kv > 1
2 C 3 C 2
4 ;
(i. e., the gains ka, kp, and kv must be sufﬁciently
large). The convergence of the tracking error to zero
with boundedness on all internal signals can be proved
through application of Lyapunov stability theory with
the following Lyapunov-like function
V D 1
2sTH.q/s C 1
2kpeT
qeq C 1
2 QaT 1Qa ;
(8.101)
whose time derivative along the trajectories of the
closed-loop system can be derived as
PV 	 xTQx ;
(8.102)
where
x D
keqk
ksk

;
Q D
0
B@
kp  2
4
1
2
1
2
kv  3  4
4
1
CA :
Detailed stability analysis can be found in [8.45].
8.7.5 Summary
Since the computed-torque control suffers from para-
metric uncertainty, a variety of adaptive control
schemes have been proposed. Firstly, we have pre-
sented an adaptive control scheme based on computed-
torque control. Then, in order to overcome the men-
tioned drawbacks such as the measurability of the joint
acceleration and the invertibility of the estimated iner-
tia matrix, we presented an alternative adaptive control
scheme that is free of these drawbacks. Recently, to
incorporate a physics viewpoint into control, adaptive
passivity-based control has become popular, and hence
is introduced and discussed here. Finally, to reduce the
computational load of the adaptive schemes, we pre-
sented an adaptive control with desired compensation.
Further Reading
A computationally very fast scheme dealing with
adaptive control of rigid manipulators was presented
in [8.46]. The stability analysis was completed by as-
suming that the joint dynamics are decoupled, i. e.,
that each joint is considered as an independent second-
order linear system. A decentralized high-order adap-
tive variable-structure control is discussed in [8.47],
the proposed scheme makes both position and velocity
tracking errors of robot manipulators globally converge
to zero asymptotically while allowing all signals in
closed-loop systems to be bounded without the infor-
mation of manipulator parameters. Other pioneering
works in the ﬁeld can be found, for example, in [8.48,
49]; although none of the fundamental dynamic model
properties are used, the complete dynamics are taken
into account, but the control input is discontinuous and
may lead to chattering. Positive deﬁniteness of the in-
ertia matrix is explicitly used in [8.50], although it was
assumed that some time-varying quantities remain con-
stant during the adaptation. It is interesting to note that
all of these schemes were based on the concept of
model reference adaptive control (MRAC) developed
in [8.51] for linear systems. Therefore, they are concep-
tually very different from the truly nonlinear schemes
presented in this section.

Motion Control
8.8 Optimal and Robust Control
181
Part A | 8.8
A passive-based modiﬁed version of the least-
squares estimation scheme has been proposed in [8.52]
and [8.53], which guaranteed closed-loop stability of
the scheme. Other schemes can be found in [8.54],
where no use is made of the skew-symmetry property,
and in [8.55], where the recursive Newton–Euler for-
mulations is used instead of the Lagrange formulation
to derive the manipulator dynamics, and thus computa-
tion is simpliﬁed to facilitate practical implementation.
Even though adaptive control provides a solution to
the problem of parametric uncertainty, the robustness
of adaptive controllers remains a topic of great interest
in the ﬁeld. Indeed, measurement noise or unmodeled
dynamics (e.g., ﬂexibility) may result in unbounded
closed-loop signals. In particular, the estimated param-
eters may diverge; this is a well-known phenomenon
in adaptive control and is called parameter drift. So-
lutions inspired from the adaptive control of linear
systems have been studied [8.56, 57], where a modi-
ﬁed estimation ensures boundedness of the estimates.
In [8.58], the controller in [8.32] is modiﬁed to enhance
robustness.
8.8 Optimal and Robust Control
Given a nonlinear system, such as robotic manipula-
tors, one can develop many stabilizing controls [8.29,
41]. In other words, the stability of the control system
cannot determine a unique controller. It is natural that
one seeks an optimal controller among the many sta-
ble ones. However, the design of an optimal controller
is possible provided that a rather exact information on
the target system is available, such as an exact sys-
tem model [8.34, 59]. In the presence of discrepancy
between the real system and its mathematical model,
a designed optimal controller is no longer optimal,
and may even end up being instable in the actual sys-
tem. Generally speaking, the optimal control design
framework is not the best one to deal with system un-
certainty. To handle system uncertainty from the control
design stage, a robust control design framework is nec-
essary [8.60]. One of main objectives of robust control
is to keep the controlled system stable even in presence
of uncertainties in the mathematical model, unmodeled
dynamics, and the like.
Let us consider an afﬁne nonlinear system described
by nonlinear time-varying differential equation in the
state x D .x1; x2;    ; xn/T 2 Rn
Px.t/ D f.x; t/ C G.x; t/u C P.x; t/w ;
(8.103)
where u 2 Rm is the control input, and w 2 Rw is the
disturbance. Without disturbances or unmodeled dy-
namics, the system simpliﬁes to
Px.t/ D f.x; t/ C G.x; t/u :
(8.104)
Actually, there are many kinds of methods describing
the nonlinear system according to the objective of con-
trol [8.1, 16, 21, 23, 34, 54].
8.8.1 Quadratic Optimal Control
Every optimal controller is based on its own cost func-
tion [8.61, 62]. One can deﬁne a cost function as [8.63,
64]
z D H.x; t/x C K.x; t/u ;
such that HT.x; t/K.x; t/ D 0, KT.x; t/K.x; t/ D R.x; t/
> 0, and HT.x; t/H.x; t/ D Q.x; t/ > 0. Then, we have
1
2zTz D 1
2xTQ.x; t/x C 1
2uTR.x; t/u :
The quadratic optimal control for the system (8.104)
is found by solving, for a ﬁrst order differentiable
positive-deﬁnite function V.x; t/, the Hamilton–Jacobi–
Bellman (HJB) equation [8.34, 59]
0 D HJB.x; tI V/ D Vt.x; t/ C Vx.x; t/f.x; t/
 1
2Vx.x; t/G.x; t/R1.x; t/GT.x; t/VT
x .x; t/
C 1
2Q.x; t/ ;
where Vt D @V
@t and Vx D @V
@xT . Then the quadratic opti-
mal control is deﬁned by
u D R1.x; t/GT.x; t/VT
x .x; t/ :
(8.105)
Note that the HJB equation is a nonlinear second-order
partial differential equation in V.x; t/.
Unlike the aforementioned optimal control prob-
lem, the so-called inverse quadratic optimal control
problem is to ﬁnd a set of Q.x; t/ and R.x; t/ for which
the HJB equation has a solution V.x; t/. Then the in-
verse quadratic optimal control is deﬁned by (8.105).
8.8.2 Nonlinear H1 Control
When disturbances are not negligible, one can deal with
their effect such that
t
Z
0
zT.x; /z.x; /d 	 2
t
Z
0
w Tw d ;
(8.106)

Part A | 8.8
182
Part A
Robotics Foundations
where  > 0 speciﬁes the L2-gain of the closed-loop
system from the disturbance input w to the cost vari-
able z. This is called the L2-gain attenuation require-
ment [8.63–65]. One systematic way to design an opti-
mal and robust control is given by the nonlinear H1
optimal control. Let  > 0 be given, by solving the fol-
lowing equation
HJI.x; tI V/
D Vt.x; t/ C Vx.x; t/f.x; t/
 1
2Vx.x; t/fG.x; t/R1.x; t/GT.x; t/
 2P.x; t/PT.x; t/gVT
x .x; t/
C 1
2Q.x; t/ 	 0 ;
(8.107)
then the control is deﬁned by
u D R1.x; t/GT.x; t/VT
x .x; t/ :
(8.108)
The partial differential inequality (8.107) is called
the Hamilton–Jacobi–Isaac (HJI) inequality. Then one
can deﬁne the inverse nonlinear H1 optimal control
problem that ﬁnds a set of Q.x; t/ and R.x; t/ such that
the L2-gain requirement is achieved for a prescribed L2-
gain  [8.66].
Two things deserve further comment. The ﬁrst is
that the L2-gain requirement is only valid for distur-
bance signals w whose L2-norm is bounded. The sec-
ond is that H1 optimal control is not uniquely deﬁned.
Hence, one can choose a quadratic optimal among
many H1 optimal controllers. Precisely speaking, the
control (8.108) should be called H1 suboptimal con-
trol, since the desired L2-gain is prescribed a priori.
A true H1 optimal control is to ﬁnd a minimal value
of , such that the L2-gain requirement is achieved.
8.8.3 Passivity-Based Design
of Nonlinear H1 Control
There are many methodologies for the design of optimal
and/or robust controls. Among these, passivity-based
controls can take full advantage of the properties de-
scribed above [8.31]. They consist of two parts: one
coming from the reference motion compensation while
preserving the passivity of the system, and the other to
achieve stability, robustness, and/or optimality [8.66,
67].
Let us suppose that the dynamic parameters are
identiﬁed as bH.q/, bC.q; Pq/, and bg.q/, whose counter-
parts are H.q/, C.q; Pq/, and g.q/, respectively. Then,
passivity-based control generates the following tracking
control laws
 D bH.q/Rqref CbC.q; Pq/Pqref Cbg.q/  u ;
(8.109)
α (e·ref)
+
+
+
+
q·
H   (q) e··ref + C   (q, q·) e·ref
w
u
H~  (q) q··ref + C~ (q, q·) q·ref
e·ref
q·ref
Fig. 8.7 The closed-loop system according to (8.111)
where Rqref is the reference acceleration deﬁned by
Rqref D Rqd C KVPeq C KPeq ;
(8.110)
where KV D diagfkV;ig > 0 and KP D diagfkP;ig > 0.
Two parameters are involved in generating the refer-
ence acceleration. Sometimes the following alternative
method can be adopted
Rqref D Rqd C KVPeq :
This reduces the order of the closed-loop system be-
cause the state x D .eT
q; PeT
q/T is sufﬁcient for the system
description, while the deﬁnition of (8.110) requires the
state x D .
R
eT
q; eT
q; PeT
q/T.
In Fig. 8.7, the closed-loop dynamics under the con-
trol is given by
H.q/Reref C C.q; Pq/Peref D u C w ;
(8.111)
where
Reref D Req C KVPeq C KPeq ;
Peref D Peq C KVeq C KP
Z
eq :
If d.t/ D 0 and bH D H, bC D C, bg D g, then w D 0.
Otherwise, the disturbance is deﬁned as
w D eH.q/Rqref CeC.q; Pq/Pqref Ceg.q/Cd.t/ ; (8.112)
where eH D HbH, eC D CbC, andeg D bgg. It is of
particular interest that the system (8.111) deﬁnes a pas-
sive mapping between u C w and Peref.
According to the manner in which the auxiliary
control input u is speciﬁed, passivity-based control
can achieve stability, robustness, and/or optimality
(Fig. 8.7).

Motion Control
8.9 Trajectory Generation and Planning
183
Part A | 8.9
8.8.4 A Solution to Inverse
Nonlinear H1 Control
Let us deﬁne the auxiliary control input by the
reference-error feedback
u D ˛R1.x; t/Peref ;
(8.113)
where ˛ > 1 is arbitrary. Then, the control provides the
inverse nonlinear H1 optimality.
Theorem 8.1 Inverse Nonlinear H1 Optimal-
ity [8.66]
Let the reference acceleration generation gain matrices
KV and KP satisfy
K2
V > 2KP :
(8.114)
Then for a given  > 0, the reference error feedback
u D KPeref D K

Peq C KVeq C KP
Z
eq

(8.115)
satisﬁes the L2-gain attenuation requirement for
Q D
0
@
K2
PK
0
0
0
.K2
V  2KP/K
0
0
0
K
1
A ;
(8.116)
R D K1 ;
(8.117)
provided that
K D K  1
2 I > 0 :
(8.118)
Given , one can set K D ˛ 1
2 I for ˛ > 1. This
yields K D .˛  1/ 1
2 I.
When the inertia matrix is identiﬁed as a diagonal
constant matrix such as bH D diagfbmig, one should set
bC D 0. In addition, one can setbg D 0. Then this results
in a decoupled PID control of the form
i D bmi

Rqd;i C kV;iPeq;i C kP;ieq;i

C ˛ 1
2

Peq;i C kV;ieq;i C kP;i
Z
eq;i

for ˛ > 1, which can be rewritten as
i D bmiRqd;i C

bmikV;i C ˛ 1
2

Peq;i
C

bmikP;i C ˛ kV;i
2

eq;i C ˛ kP;i
2
Z
eq;i :
(8.119)
This leads to a PID control with the desired acceleration
feedforward [8.68] given by
i D bmiRqd;i C k
V;iPeq;i C k
P;ieq;i C k
I;i
Z
eq;i ;
(8.120a)
where
k
V;i D bmikV;i C ˛ 1
2 ;
(8.120b)
k
P;i D bmikP;i C ˛ kV;i
2 ;
(8.120c)
k
I;i D ˛ kP;i
2 :
(8.120d)
8.9 Trajectory Generation and Planning
This section deals with the problem of reference tra-
jectory generation, that is, the computation of desired
position, velocity, acceleration and/or force/torque sig-
nals that are used as input values for the robot motion
controllers introduced in Sects 8.3–8.8.
8.9.1 Geometric Paths and Trajectories
Path Planning
A path is a geometric representation of a plan to move
from a start to a target pose. The task of planning
is to ﬁnd a collision-free path among a collection of
static and dynamic obstacles. Path planning can also
include the consideration of dynamic constraints such
as workspace boundaries, maximum velocities, maxi-
mum accelerations, and maximum jerks. We distinguish
between online and ofﬂine path planning algorithms.
Ofﬂine planned paths are static and calculated prior
to execution. Online methods require algorithms that
meet real-time constraints (i. e., algorithms that do not
exceed a determinable worst-case computation time)
to enable path (re-)calculations and/or adaptations dur-
ing the robot motions in order to react to and interact
with dynamic environments. This means that a robot

Part A | 8.9
184
Part A
Robotics Foundations
moves along a path that has not necessarily been com-
puted completely, and which may change during the
movement. Details about path planning concepts are de-
scribed in Chap. 7, in Parts D and E, and speciﬁcally in
Chap. 47.
Trajectory Planning
A trajectory is more than a path: It also includes
velocities, accelerations, and/or jerks along a path
(
VIDEO 760 ). A common method is computing tra-
jectories for a priori speciﬁed paths, which fulﬁll
a certain criterion (e.g., minimum execution time). We
distinguish between online and ofﬂine trajectory plan-
ning methods. An ofﬂine calculated trajectory cannot
be inﬂuenced during its execution, while online trajec-
tory planning methods can (re-)calculate and/or adapt
robot motions behavior during the movement. The rea-
sons for this (re-)calculation and/or adaptation can
vary: improvement of accuracy, better utilization of cur-
rently available dynamics, reaction to and interaction
with a dynamic environment, or reaction to (sensor)
events. Besides the distinction between online and of-
ﬂine methods, we can further distinguish between (1)
one-dimensional (1-D) and multi-dimensional trajecto-
ries and (2) single-point and multi-point trajectories.
Multi-point trajectories typically relate to a path.
8.9.2 Joint Space and Operational
Space Trajectories
Depending on the control state space, trajectory gener-
ators provide set points for tracking controllers in joint
space or in operational space. In either space, a trajec-
tory can be represented in several different ways: cubic
splines, quintic splines, higher-order splines, harmonics
(sinusoidal functions), exponential functions, Fourier
series, and more.
Joint Space Trajectories
Consider the torque control input (8.29)
 D H.q/v C C.q; Pq/Pq C g.q/ ;
and the PD controller (8.30)
v D Rqd C KV.Pqd  Pq/ C KP.qd  q/ ;
(8.121)
or PID controller (8.31), respectively, the task of a tra-
jectory generator in joint space coordinates is com-
puting the signals qd.t/, Pqd.t/, and Rqd.t/. These three
signals contain the reference trajectory and are used as
input values for the tracking controller.
During nominal operation the joint torques re-
quired to execute a trajectory should not exceed joint
force/torque limits min.t/ and max.t/,
min.t/ 	 .t/ 	 max.t/ 8 t 2 R:
(8.122)
Operational Space Trajectories
Similarly to (8.29), we can also consider trajectories
represented by xd, Pxd, and Rxd for an operational space
controller (8.9)
f c D ƒ.q/ C .q; Pq/Px C .q/ ;
with a PD control law of
 D Rxd C KV.Pxd  Px/ C KP.xd  x/ :
(8.123)
With the transformation into joint space using the in-
verse of (8.8), the operational space trajectory generator
must assure that the limits given in (8.122) are not
violated. It is the responsibility of the path planner
(Chap. 7) that all points along the trajectory are in the
robot workspace and that start and goal poses can be
reached in the same joint conﬁguration. It is the respon-
sibility of the trajectory planner that joint torque and
velocity constraints are not violated even in the pres-
ence of kinematic singularities.
8.9.3 Trajectory Representations
Mathematical Representations
Functions for Rqd.t/ (8.121) and Rxd (8.123) can be repre-
sented in several ways that are described here.
Polynomial Trajectories. One of the simplest ways to
represent a robot trajectory is a polynomial function of
degree m for each joint i 2 f1; : : : ; ng
qi.t/ D ai;0 C ai;1t C ai;2t2 C : : : C ai;mtm ; (8.124)
so that q.t/ can be composed (or x.t/ in operational
space, respectively). In the simplest case, cubic poly-
nomials are used, which, however, leads to non-steady
acceleration signals with inﬁnite jerks. Quintic and
higher-order polynomials allow for steady acceleration
signals as well as arbitrary position, velocity, and accel-
eration vectors and the beginning and at the end of the
trajectory. To determine the coefﬁcients ai;j 8 .i; j/ 2
f1; : : : ; ng  f0; : : : ; mg of (8.124), the execution time
ttrgt, at which the target state will be reached needs to
be known. The left part of Fig. 8.8a shows a quintic
trajectory for three DOFs starting at t0 D 0 s with an
execution time of ttrgt D 2:5 s. To connect a trajectory
segment to preceding and succeeding segments, the fol-

Motion Control
8.9 Trajectory Generation and Planning
185
Part A | 8.9
DOF 1
DOF 2
DOF 3
0
0.5
1
1.5
Target state reached after 2.5 s
2
2.5
t (s)
150
100
50
0
–50
q· (t) (mm/s)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
150
100
50
0
–50
–100
q··(t) (mm/s2)
q· (t) (mm/s)
q··(t) (mm/s2)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
200
100
0
–100
–200
0
0.5
1
1.5
Target state reached after 2.125 s
2
2.5
t (s)
150
100
50
0
–50
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
150
100
50
0
–50
–100
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
200
100
0
–100
–200
a) q(t) (mm)
b) q(t) (mm)
Fig.8.8a,b Two sample trajectories for a three-DOF robot (n D 3). The trajectory in (a) is represented by quintic splines,
and the trajectory in (b) by piecewise polynomials
lowing six constraints need to be satisﬁed for all n joints
qi.t0/ D qi;start D ai;0
qi.ttrgt/ D qi;trgt D ai;0 C ai;1ttrgt C ai;2t2
trgt
C ai;3t3
trgt C ai;4t4
trgt C ai;5t5
trgt
Pqi.t0/ D Pqi;0 D ai;1
Pqi.ttrgt/ D Pqi;trgt D ai;1 C 2ai;2ttrgt C 3ai;3t2
trgt
C 4ai;4t3
trgt C 5ai;5t4
trgt
Rqi.t0/ D Rqi;0 D 2ai;2
Rqi.ttrgt/ D Rqi;trgt D 2ai;2 C 6ai;3ttrgt C 12ai;4t2
trgt
C 20ai;5t3
trgt :
A unique closed-form solution can be computed,
so that all polynomial coefﬁcients ai;j 8 .i; j/
2
f1; : : : ; ng  f0; : : : ; 5g can be determined for one tra-
jectory segment.
Piecewise Polynomials. Polynomials of different de-
grees can be concatenated to represent a trajectory
between an initial state .q0; Pq0; Rq0/ and a target state
.qtrgt; Pqtrgt; Rqtrgt/. For instance, the classical double-
S velocity proﬁle [8.69] with trapezoidal acceleration
and deceleration proﬁles and a cruise-velocity segment
in the middle consists of seven polynomials of de-
grees 3-2-3-1-3-2-3 (m in (8.124)). The right part of
Fig. 8.8 shows a trajectory represented by piecewise
polynomials. To compute time-optimal trajectories un-
der purely kinematic constraints (e.g., Pqmax, Rqmax, «qmax,
etc.), piecewise polynomials are used, because they
allow always using one signal at its kinematic limit
(Fig. 8.8b and [8.70]).

Part A | 8.9
186
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Trigonometric
Trajectories. Similarly
to
(8.124),
trigonometric functions can be used to represent har-
monic, cycloidal, and elliptic trajectories [8.71, 72].
A simple example for a harmonic trajectory for one
joint i is
qi.t/ D qi;trgt  qi;0
2

1  cos  .t  t0/
ttrgt  t0

C qi;0 :
(8.125)
While any order of derivatives of trigonometric func-
tions is continuous, they might be discontinuous at t0
and ttrgt.
Other Representations. Exponential Trajectories and
Fourier Series Expansions [8.72] are particularly suited
to minimize natural vibrations on robot mechanisms in-
troduced by reference trajectories.
Trajectories and Paths
To draw the connection to Chap. 7 and Parts D and E,
trajectories and paths are often tightly coupled.
Trajectories Along Predefined Paths. A path in joint
space can be described by a function q.s.t// with s 2
Œt0; ttrgt, where the start conﬁguration of the path is q.t0/
and the target conﬁguration is q.ttrgt/. To move a robot
along the path, an appropriate function s.t/ needs to be
computed that does not violate any of the kinematic
and dynamic constraints [8.73–75]. If a path is given
in operational space, x.s.t// can be mapped to q.t/
(Sect. 8.2).
Multi-Dimensional Trajectories. Instead of using
a one-dimensional function s.t/ to parameterize a path
segment, trajectories can also be described by individ-
ual functions for each DOF i to represent q.s.t// or
x.s.t//, respectively. To connect two arbitrary states, the
signals for each individual degree of freedom need to be
time-synchronized [8.70], so that all DOFs reach their
target state of motion at the very same instant. Those
trajectories may also be phase-synchronized [8.76], so
that the trajectories of all DOFs are derived from a one
master DOF and only scaled by a factor to achieve
homothety [8.77]. The two trajectories in Fig. 8.8 are
time-synchronized but not phase-synchronized.
Multi-Point Trajectories. If instead of an entirely de-
ﬁned geometric path or a motion to a single way point,
an entire series of geometric way points is given, the
trajectory that connects all way points in a given state
space needs to be computed. Trajectory segments be-
tween two way points can be represented with any of
the above mentioned representations as long as the po-
sition signal and its derivatives up an appropriate order
are continuous (at least C1 continuous). Splines, B-
splines, or Bezier splines are used to generate either
a reference trajectory or a geometric path, which then
can be parameterized with a function s.t/.
8.9.4 Trajectory Planning Algorithms
The following part provides an overview of online and
ofﬂine trajectory planning concepts.
Constraints
Constraints for trajectory planners can manifold:

Kinematic:
maximum
velocities,
accelerations,
jerks, etc. and workspace space limits

Dynamic: maximum joint or actuator forces and/or
torques

Geometric: no collisions with static and dynamic
objects in the workspace

Temporal: reaching a state within a given time in-
terval or at a given time.
These and other constraints may have to be taken
into account at the same time. Depending on the robot
and the task, additional optimization criteria may be
considered (e.g., time-optimality, minimum-jerk, max-
imum distance to workspace boundaries, minimum
energy).
Offline Trajectory Planning
Kahn and Roth [8.78] showed results using optimal,
linear control theory to achieve a near-time-optimal
solution for linearized manipulators. The resulting tra-
jectories are jerk-limited and lead to smaller trajectory-
following errors and to less excitation of structural
natural frequencies in the system.
The work of Brady [8.79] introduced several
techniques of trajectory planning in joint space and
Paul [8.80] and Taylor [8.81] published works about the
planning of trajectories in Cartesian space in parallel to
Brady. Lin et al. [8.82] published another purely kine-
matic approach as did Castain and Paul [8.69].
Hollerbach [8.83] ﬁrst introduced the consideration
of the nonlinear inverse robot dynamics for the genera-
tion of manipulator trajectories.
During the middle of the 1980s, three groups de-
veloped techniques for time-optimal trajectory planning
for arbitrarily speciﬁed paths: Bobrow [8.73], Shin and
McKay [8.74], and Pfeiffer and Johanni [8.75]. Tra-
jectories are composed of three curves: the maximum
acceleration curve, the maximum velocity curve, and

Motion Control
8.10 Digital Implementation
187
Part A | 8.10
the maximum deceleration curve. The proposed algo-
rithms ﬁnd the intersection points of these three curves.
These algorithms have become the fundament for
many follow-up works: Kyriakopoulos and Sridis [8.84]
added minimum-jerk criteria; Slotine and Yang aban-
doned the computationally expensive calculation of
the maximum velocity curve [8.85]; Shiller and
Lu added methods for handling dynamic singulari-
ties [8.86]; Fiorini and Shiller extended the algorithm
for known dynamic environments with moving obsta-
cles [8.87].
Online Trajectory Planning
An online modiﬁcation of a planned trajectory may
have several reasons: (i) The trajectory becomes
adapted in order to improve the accuracy with a path
speciﬁed beforehand; (ii) The robotic system reacts on
sensor signals and/or events that cannot be predicted be-
forehand, because the robot acts in a (partly) unknown
and dynamic environment.
Improving Path Accuracy. All previously described
off-line trajectory planning methods assume a dynamic
model that describes the behavior of the real robot ex-
actly. In practice, this is often not the case, and some
robot parameters are only estimated, some dynamic ef-
fects remain unmodeled, and system parameters may
change during operation. If this is the case, the result-
ing robot motion is not time-optimal anymore and/or
the maximum actuator forces and/or torques are ex-
ceeded, which leads to an undesired difference between
the speciﬁed and the executed path.
Dahl and Nielsen [8.88] extended [8.73–75] by
adapting the acceleration along the path, so that
the underlying trajectory-following controller becomes
adapted depending on the current state of motion. The
approaches of Cao et al. [8.89, 90] use cubic splines
to generate smooth paths in joint space with time-
optimal trajectories. Constantinescu and Croft [8.91]
suggest a further improvement to the approach of [8.86]
with objective to limit the derivative of actuator
forces/torques. Macfarlane and Croft extended this ap-
proach further by adding jerk limitations to quintic
splines (Fig. 8.8) [8.92].
Sensor-Based Trajectory Adaptation
The last paragraph presented an overview of online
trajectory generation methods for improving the path
accuracy, while this one focuses on the online consid-
eration of sensor signals, for instance, for the purpose
of collision avoidance (
VIDEO 757 ,
VIDEO 758 )
or switching between controllers or control gains
(
VIDEO 759 ,
VIDEO 761 ).
In 1988, Andersson presented an online trajectory
planning for a Ping-Pong-playing PUMA 260 manip-
ulator that computes parameterized quintic polynomi-
als [8.93, 94]. Based on [8.73–75], Lloyd and Hayward
proposed a technique to transition between two differ-
ent trajectory segments [8.95] using a transition win-
dow [8.81]. Ahn et al. introduced a method to connect
two arbitrary motion states online, which does not take
into account kinematic or dynamic constraints [8.96].
Broquère et al., Haschke et al., and Kröger extended
this approach for multi-dimensional trajectories, so that
kinematic constraints are taken into account [8.70, 97,
98].
Further Reading
Overviews of the domain of robot reference trajectory
generation can found in the textbooks of Biagiotti and
Melchiorri [8.72], Craig [8.99], Fu et al. [8.100], and
Spong et al. [8.101].
8.10 Digital Implementation
Most controllers introduced in the previous sections are
digitally implemented on microprocessors. In this sec-
tion basic but essential practical issues related to their
computer implementation are discussed. When the con-
troller is implemented on a computer control system,
the analog inputs are read and the outputs are set with
a certain sampling period. This is a drawback compared
to analog implementations, since sampling introduces
time delays into the control loop. Figure 8.9 shows the
overall block diagram of control system with a boxed
digital implementation part. When a digital computer is
used to implement a control law, it is convenient to di-
vide coding sequence in the interrupt routine into four
process routines, as shown in Fig. 8.10. Reading the
input signal from sensors and writing the control sig-
nal to digital-to-analog (D/A) converters synchronized
at the correct frequency is very important. Therefore,
these processes are located in the ﬁrst routine. After
saving counter values and extracting D/A values, which
are already calculated one step before, the next routine
produces reference values. Control routines with ﬁlters
follow and produce scalar or vector control outputs. Fi-
nally, the user interface for checking parameter values
is made and will be used for tuning and debugging.

Part A | 8.10
188
Part A
Robotics Foundations
R(t)
R k
Uk
Yk
Y(t)
Digital implementation
A/D
D/A
hold
Sensor
Actuator
+
–
Controller
C (z)
Plant
P (s)
A/D
Clock
Fig. 8.9 Digital implementation of system control
Encoder access
D/A, A/D access
Reference
generation
Controller
Digital filter
Interrupt END
Control_interrupt()
{
Read_Write();
Reference_Generate();
Output_process();
Output_Debug();
}
Interrupt start
Fig. 8.10 The sequence in the interrupt routine for digital
control
8.10.1 Z-Transform for Motion Control
Implementation
Continuous-time systems are transformed into discrete-
time systems by using the Z-transform. A discrete-
time system is used to obtain a mathematical model
that gives the behavior of a physical process at the
sampling points, although the physical process is still
a continuous-time system. A Laplace transform is used
for the analysis of control system in the s-domain. In
most cases, the design of controllers and ﬁlters are done
using tools in the s-domain. In order to realize those re-
sults in program code, understanding the Z-transform
is essential. All controllers and ﬁlters designed in the
s-domain can be easily translated to a program code
through a Z-transform because it has the form of dig-
itized difference sequences.
A PID controller is used as an example. In transfer
function form, this controller has the basic structure
Y.s/
E.s/ D KP C KI
s C sKV :
(8.126)
There are several methods for transformation from the
frequency domain to the discrete domain. For stability
conservation, backward Euler and Tustin algorithms are
often used. Though the Tustin algorithm is known as
the more exact one, the backward Euler algorithm is
utilized in the following procedure.
After substituting the backward Euler equation
into (8.126),
s Š 1  z1
T
;
the following discrete form is produced
Y.z/
E.z/ D ˛ C ˇz1 C z2
T.1  z1/
;
(8.127)
where
˛ D KIT2 C KPT C KV ;
ˇ D KPT  2KV ;
 D KV :
Sometimes a differentiator s in the PID controller
makes the implementation infeasible when the mea-

Motion Control
8.10 Digital Implementation
189
Part A | 8.10
surement noise is severe. One can remedy the con-
troller (8.126) by attaching a lowpass ﬁlter with ﬁlter
time constant 
Y.s/
E.s/ D KP C KI
s C
s
s C 1KV :
(8.128)
Again, substituting the backward
Euler
equation
into (8.128) produces
Y.z/
E.z/ D ˛ C ˇz1 C z2
1  ız1   z2 ;
(8.129)
where
˛ D KP C KIT C
KV
 C T ;
ˇ D .2 C T/KP C TKI C 2KV
 C T
;
 D KP C KV
 C T
;
ı D 2 C T
 C T ;
 D 

 C T ;
in which the ﬁlter time constant  is determined from
a cutoff frequency fc[Hz] for removing noises such as
 D
1
2fc .
8.10.2 Digital Control for Coding
Inverse Z-transform produces a difference equation for
digital control. Furthermore the difference equation can
be directly converted into the control program code.
Since the inverse Z-transform of Y.z/ is yk and z1
implies the previous sample time, z1Y.z/ D yk1 and
z2Y.z/ D yk2.
Now, the PID controller expressed by (8.127) is re-
arranged using the difference equation
T.yk  yk1/ D ˛ek C ˇek1 C ek2 ;
yk  yk1 D 1
T .˛ek C ˇek1 C ek2/ :
(8.130)
For pratical use, the PID controller can be directly
coded in the program as follows
yk D KP;cek C KV;cev
k C KI;cei
k ;
where
ek D pk;desired  pk ;
ev
k D vk;desired  vk
D .pk;desired  pk1;desired/  .pk  pk1/
D ek  ek1 ;
ei
k D ei
k1 C ek D
k
X
jD0
ek ;
in which pk is the present position, vk is the present ve-
locity, desired means reference to be followed, and c
means coded form for digitial control. Now let us ob-
tain the difference between the present control output
and the previous one
yk  yk1
D ŒKP;cek  KP;cek1
C ŒKV;c.ek  ek1/  KV;c.ek1  ek2/
C ŒKI;cei
k  KI;cei
k1
D .KP;c C KV;c C KI;c/ek
 .KP;c C 2KV;c/ek1 C KV;cek2 :
(8.131)
Comparing the parameters in (8.130) and (8.131),
one obtains
˛
T D KP C KV
T C KIT D .KP;c C KV;c C KI;c/ ;
ˇ
T D KP  2KV
T
D .KP;c C 2KV;c/ ;

T D KV
T D KV;c ;
which shows that there is a relation between the de-
signed and coded forms of the gains
KP;c D KP ;
KV;c D KV
T ;
KI;c D KIT :
(8.132)
As the sampling frequency is increased in the same sys-
tem, the coded KV gain should be increased and the
coded KI gain should be decreased. Using this method,
the designed controller can be coded in a digital signal
processor (DSP) or microprocessor. However, sufﬁcient
analysis and simulation for control algorithms should
be performed beforehand to obtain successful control
system performance.
In addition, the PID controller with lowpass ﬁl-
ter (8.129) can be implemented as
yk  ıyk1   yk2 D ˛ek C ˇek1 C ek2 ;
yk D ıyk1 C  yk2 C ˛ek C ˇek1 C ek2 :
(8.133)
Using the same procedures, one can arrive at the similar
control program code for digital control.

Part A | 8.11
190
Part A
Robotics Foundations
PID Control Experiment (Multimedia)
According as the gains change, the performance vari-
ations of PID controller implemented in the digital
control system are shown in the multimedia source to
help readers’ understanding
VIDEO 25 .
8.11 Learning Control
Since many robotic applications, such as pick-and-
place operations, paintings, and circuit-board assembly,
involve repetitive motions, it is natural to consider
the use of data gathered in previous cycles to try to
improve the performance of the manipulator in subse-
quent cycles. This is the basic idea of repetitive control
or learning control. Consider the robot model given
in Sect. 8.1 and suppose that one is given a desired
joint trajectory qd.t/ on a ﬁnite time interval 0 	 t 	 T.
The reference trajectory qd is used in repeated trails of
the manipulator, assuming either that the trajectory is
periodic, qd.T/ D qd.0/, (repetitive control) or that the
robot is reinitialized to lie on the desired trajectory at
the beginning of each trail (learning control). Hereafter,
we use the term learning control to mean either repeti-
tive or learning control.
8.11.1 Pure P-Type Learning Control
Let k be the input torque during the k-th cycle, which
produces an output qk.t/; 0 	 t 	 Tbnd. Now, let us con-
sider the following set of assumptions:

Assumption 1: Every trial ends at a ﬁxed time of
duration Tbnd > 0.

Assumption 2: Repetition of the initial setting is sat-
isﬁed.

Assumption 3: Invariance of the system dynamics is
ensured throughout these repeated trails.

Assumption 4: Every output qk can be measured and
thus the error signal qk D qk  qd can be utilized
in the construction of the next input kC1.

Assumption 5: The dynamics of the robot manipu-
lators is invertible.
The learning control problem is to determine a re-
cursive learning law L
kC1 D LŒk.t/; qk.t/ ;
0 	 t 	 Tbnd ;
(8.134)
where qk.t/ D qk.t/  qd.t/, such that kqkk ! 0 as
k ! 1 in some suitably deﬁned function norm, k  k.
The initial control input can be any control input that
produces a stable output, such as PD control. Such
learning control schemes are attractive because accurate
models of the dynamics need not be known a priori.
Several approaches have been used to generate
a suitable learning law L and to prove convergence of
the output error. A pure P-type learning law is one of
the form
kC1.t/ D k.t/  ˆqk.t/ ;
(8.135)
and is given this name because the correction term for
the input torque at each iteration is proportional to the
error qk. Now let d be deﬁned by the computed-
torque control, i. e.,
d.t/ D HŒqd.t/Rqd.t/ C CŒqd.t/; Pqd.t/Pqd.t/
C gŒqd.t/ :
(8.136)
One should recall that the function k actually does not
need to be computed; it is sufﬁcient to know that it ex-
ists. Considering the P-type learning control law, we
have
kC1.t/ D k.t/  ˆqk.t/ ;
(8.137)
where k.t/ D k.t/  d.t/, so that
kkC1.t/k2 	 kk.t/k2 ˇkˆqk.t/k2 (8.138)
provided there exist positive constant  and ˇ such that
Tbnd
Z
0
e	tqk
Tk.t/dt  1 C ˇ
2
kˆqk.t/k2
(8.139)
for all k. It then follows from the inequality above that
qk ! 0 in the norm sense as k ! 1. Detailed stabil-
ity analysis of this control scheme is given in [8.102,
103].
8.11.2 P-Type Learning Control
with a Forgetting Factor
Although pure P-type learning control achieves the de-
sired goal, several strict assumptions may be not valid
in actual implementations, for example, there may be an
initial setting error. Furthermore, there may be small but

Motion Control
References
191
Part A | 8
nonrepeatable ﬂuctuations of dynamics. Finally, there
may exit a (bounded) measurement noise k such that
qk.t/ C k.t/ D Œqk.t/ C k.t/  qd.t/ :
(8.140)
Thus the learning control scheme may fail. In order to
enhance the robustness of P-type learning control, a for-
getting factor is introduced in the form
kC1.t/ D .1  ˛/k.t/ C ˛0.t/
 ˆŒqk.t/ C k.t/ :
(8.141)
The original idea of using a forgetting factor in learning
control originated with [8.104].
It has been rigorously proven that P-type learning
control with a forgetting factor guarantees convergence
to a neighborhood of the desired one of size O.˛/.
Moreover, if the content of a long-term memory is re-
freshed after every k trials, where k is of O.1=˛/, then
the trajectories converge to an "-neighborhood of the
desired control goal. The size of " is dependent on the
magnitude of the initial setting error, the nonrepeat-
able ﬂuctuations of the dynamics, and the measurement
noise. For a detailed stability investigation, please refer
to [8.105, 106].
8.11.3 Summary
By applying learning control, the performance of repeti-
tive tasks (such as painting or pick-and-place operation)
is improved by utilizing data gathered in the previous
cycles. In this section, two learning control schemes
were introduced. First, pure P-type learning control and
its robustness problem were described. Then P-type
learning control with a forgetting factor was presented,
enhancing the robustness of learning control.
Further Reading
Rigorous and reﬁned exploration of learning control is
ﬁrst discussed independently in [8.2, 12].
Video-References
VIDEO 25
Gain change of the PID controller
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/08/videodetails/25
VIDEO 757
Safe human-robot cooperation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/08/videodetails/757
VIDEO 758
Virtual whiskers – Highly responsive robot collision avoidance
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/08/videodetails/758
VIDEO 759
JediBot – Experiments in human-robot sword-fighting
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/08/videodetails/759
VIDEO 760
Different jerk limits of robot arm trajectories
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/08/videodetails/760
VIDEO 761
Sensor-based online trajectory generation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/08/videodetails/761
References
8.1
C. Canudas de Wit, B. Siciliano, G. Bastin: Theory of
Robot Control (Springer, London 1996)
8.2
J.J. Craig: Adaptive Control of Mechanical Manip-
ulators, Ph.D. Thesis (UMI Dissertation Information
Service, Ann Arbor 1986)
8.3
R.J. Schilling: Fundametals of Robotics: Analysis
and Control (Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs 1989)
8.4
L. Sciavicco, B. Siciliano: Modeling and Control of
Robot Manipulator (McGraw-Hill, New York 1996)
8.5
M.W. Spong, M. Vidyasagar: Robot Dynamics and
Control (Wiley, New York 1989)
8.6
M.W. Spong, F.L. Lewis, C.T. Abdallah (Eds.): Robot
Control (IEEE, New York 1989)
8.7
C.H. An, C.G. Atkeson, J.M. Hollerbach: Model–
Based Control of a Robot Manipulator (MIT Press,
Cambridge, 1988)
8.8
R.M. Murray, Z. Xi, S.S. Sastry: A Mathematical
Introduction to Robotic Manipulation (CRC, Boca
Raton 1994)
8.9
T. Yoshikawa: Foundations of Robotics (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1990)
8.10
O. Khatib: A unified approach for motion and
force control of robot manipulators: The opera-
tional space formulation, IEEE J. Robotics Autom.
3(1), 43–53 (1987)
8.11
J.Y.S. Luh, M.W. Walker, R.P.C. Paul: Resolved–
acceleration control of mechanical
manipula-
tor, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 25(3), 468–474
(1980)
8.12
S. Arimoto, F. Miyazaki: Stability and robustness
of PID feedback control for robot manipulators
of sensory capability. In: Robotics Research, ed.

Part A | 8
192
Part A
Robotics Foundations
by M. Brady, R. Paul (MIT Press, Cambridge 1984)
pp. 783–799
8.13
L.C. Fu: Robust adaptive decentralized control of
robot manipulators, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control
37(1), 106–110 (1992)
8.14
H. Seraji: Decentralized adaptive control of manip-
ulators: Theory, simulation, and experimentation,
IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 5(2), 183–201 (1989)
8.15
J.G. Ziegler, N.B. Nichols: Optimum settings for au-
tomatic controllers, Trans. ASME 64, 759–768 (1942)
8.16
Y. Choi, W.K. Chung: PID Trajectory Tracking Control
for Mechanical Systems, Lecture Notes in Control
and Information Sciences, Vol. 289 (Springer, New
York 2004)
8.17
R. Kelly: PD control with desired gravity com-
pensation of robot manipulators: A review, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 16(5), 660–672 (1997)
8.18
M. Takegaki, S. Arimoto: A new feedback method
for dynamic control of manipulators, Trans. ASME J.
Dyn. Syst. Meas, Control 103, 119–125 (1981)
8.19
P. Tomei: Adaptive PD controller for robot manip-
ulators, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 7(4), 565–570
(1991)
8.20
R. Ortega, A. Loria, R. Kelly: A semi-globally stable
output feedback PI2 D regulator for robot manipu-
lators, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 40(8), 1432–1436
(1995)
8.21
D. Angeli: Input-to-State stability of PD-controlled
robotic systems, Automatica 35, 1285–1290 (1999)
8.22
J.A. Ramirez, I. Cervantes, R. Kelly: PID regulation
of robot manipulators: Stability and performance,
Syst. Control Lett. 41, 73–83 (2000)
8.23
R. Kelly: Global positioning of robot manipulators
via PD control plus a class of nonlinear integral
actions, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 43(7), 934–937
(1998)
8.24
Z. Qu, J. Dorsey: Robust tracking control of robots
by a linear feedback law, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control
36(9), 1081–1084 (1991)
8.25
H. Berghuis, H. Nijmeijer: Robust control of robots
via linear estimated state feedback, IEEE Trans. Au-
tom. Control 39(10), 2159–2162 (1994)
8.26
Y. Choi, W.K. Chung, I.H. Suh: Performance and
H1 optimality of PID trajectory tracking controller
for Lagrangian systems, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
17(6), 857–869 (2001)
8.27
K. Aström, T. Hagglund: PID Controllers: Theory, De-
sign, and Tuning (Instrument Society of America,
Research Triangle Park 1995)
8.28
C.C. Yu: Autotuning of PID Controllers: Relay Feed-
back Approach (Springer, London 1999)
8.29
F.L. Lewis, C.T. Abdallah, D.M. Dawson: Control of
Robot Manipulators (Macmillan, New York 1993)
8.30
A. Isidori: Nonlinear Control Systems: An Intro-
duction, Lecture Notes in Control and Information
Sciences, Vol. 72 (Springer, New York 1985)
8.31
H. Berghuis, H. Nijmeijer: A passivity approach to
controller–observer design for robots, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 9, 740–754 (1993)
8.32
J.J. Slotine, W. Li: On the adaptive control of robot
manipulators, Int. J. Robotics Res. 6(3), 49–59
(1987)
8.33
G. Liu, A.A. Goldenberg: Comparative study of ro-
bust saturation–based control of robot manipula-
tors: analysis and experiments, Int. J. Robotics Res.
15(5), 473–491 (1996)
8.34
D.M. Dawson, M. Grabbe, F.L. Lewis: Optimal con-
trol of a modified computed–torque controller for
a robot manipulator, Int. J. Robotics Autom. 6(3),
161–165 (1991)
8.35
D.M. Dawson, Z. Qu, J. Duffie: Robust tracking con-
trol for robot manipulators: Theory, simulation and
implementation, Robotica 11, 201–208 (1993)
8.36
A. Jaritz, M.W. Spong: An experimental compari-
son of robust control algorithms on a direct drive
manipulator, IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol. 4(6),
627–640 (1996)
8.37
A. Isidori: Nonlinear Control Systems, 3rd edn.
(Springer, New York 1995)
8.38
J.J. Slotine, W. Li: Applied Nonlinear Control (Pren-
tice Hall, Englewood Cliffs 1991)
8.39
W.J. Rugh: Linear System Theory, 2nd edn. (Prentice
Hall, Upper Saddle River 1996)
8.40
M.W. Spong, M. Vidyasagar: Robust microprocessor
control of robot manipulators, Automatica 23(3),
373–379 (1987)
8.41
H.K. Khalil: Nonlinear Systems, 3rd edn. (Prentice
Hall, Upper Saddle River 2002)
8.42
M. Vidysagar: Nonlinear Systems Analysis, 2nd edn.
(Prentice Hall, Englewood Ciffs 1993)
8.43
J.T. Wen: A unified perspective on robot con-
trol: The energy Lyapunov function approach, Int.
J. Adapt. Control Signal Process. 4, 487–500 (1990)
8.44
R. Ortega, M.W. Spong: Adaptive motion control of
rigid robots: A tutorial, Automatica 25(6), 877–888
(1989)
8.45
N. Sadegh, R. Horowitz: Stability and robustness
analysis of a class of adaptive contollers for robotic
manipulators, Int. J. Robotics Res. 9(3), 74–92
(1990)
8.46
S. Dubowsky, D.T. DesForges: The application of
model-reference adaptive control to robotic ma-
nipulators, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 37(1),
106–110 (1992)
8.47
S.H. Hsu, L.C. Fu: A fully adaptive decentralized
control of robot manipulators, Automatica 42, 1761–
1767 (2008)
8.48
A. Balestrino, G. de Maria, L. Sciavicco: An adaptive
model following control for robotic manipulators,
ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 105, 143–151 (1983)
8.49
S. Nicosia, P. Tomei: Model reference adaptive con-
trol algorithms for industrial robots, Automatica 20,
635–644 (1984)
8.50
R.
Horowitz,
M.
Tomizuka:
An
adaptive
control
scheme for mechanical
manipulators-
Compensation of nonlinearity and
decoupling
control, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 108,
127–135 (1986)
8.51
I.D. Laudau: Adaptive Control: The Model Reference
Approach (Dekker, New York 1979)
8.52
R. Lozano, C. Canudas de Wit: Passivity based adap-
tive control for mechanical manipulators using LS
type estimation, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 35(12),
1363–1365 (1990)

Motion Control
References
193
Part A | 8
8.53
B. Brogliato, I.D. Laudau, R. Lozano: Passive least
squares type estimation algorithm for direct adap-
tive control, Int. J. Adapt. Control Signal Process. 6,
35–44 (1992)
8.54
R. Johansson: Adaptive control of robot manip-
ulator motion, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 6(4),
483–490 (1990)
8.55
M.W. Walker: Adaptive control of manipulators
containing closed kinematic loops, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 6(1), 10–19 (1990)
8.56
J.S. Reed, P.A. Ioannou: Instability analysis and ro-
bust adaptive control of robotic manipulators, IEEE
Trans. Autom. Control 5(3), 74–92 (1989)
8.57
G. Tao: On robust adaptive control of robot manip-
ulators, Automatica 28(4), 803–807 (1992)
8.58
H. Berghuis, R. Ogata, H. Nijmeijer: A robust adap-
tive controller for robot manipulators, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1992) pp. 1876–
1881
8.59
R. Johansson: Quadratic optimization of motion
coordination and control, IEEE Trans. Autom. Con-
trol 35(11), 1197–1208 (1990)
8.60
Z. Qu, D.M. Dawson: Robust Tracking Control of
Robot Manipulators (IEEE, Piscataway 1996)
8.61
P. Dorato, C. Abdallah, V. Cerone: Linear-Quadratic
Control (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River 1995)
8.62
A. Locatelli: Optimal Control: An Introduction
(Birkhäuser, Basel 2001)
8.63
A. Isidori: Feedback control of nonlinear systems,
Int. J. Robust Nonlin. Control 2, 291–311 (1992)
8.64
A.J. der van Schaft: Nonlinear state space H1 con-
trol theory. In: Essays on Control: Perspective in
Theory and its Applications, ed. by H.L. Trentel-
man, J.C. Willems (Birkhäuser, Basel 1993) pp. 153–
190
8.65
A.J. der van Schaft: L2-gain analysis of nonlin-
ear systems and nonlinear state feedback H1
control, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 37(6), 770–784
(1992)
8.66
J. Park, W.K. Chung, Y. Youm: Analytic nonlinear
H1 inverse-optimal control for Euler–Lagrange
system, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 16(6), 847–854
(2000)
8.67
B.S. Chen, T.S. Lee, J.H. Feng: A nonlinear H1 con-
trol design in robotics systems under parametric
perturbation and external disturbance, Int. J. Con-
trol 59(12), 439–461 (1994)
8.68
J. Park, W.K. Chung: Design of a robust H1 PID
control for industrial manipulators, ASME J. Dyn.
Syst. Meas. Control 122(4), 803–812 (2000)
8.69
R.H. Castain, R.P. Paul: An on-line dynamic tra-
jectory generator, Int. J. Robotics Res. 3(1), 68–72
(1984)
8.70
T. Kröger: On-Line Trajectory Generation in Robotic
Systems, Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics,
Vol. 58 (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2010)
8.71
D. Simon, C. Isik: A trigonometric trajectory gener-
ator for robotic arms, Int. J. Control 57(3), 505–517
(1993)
8.72
L. Biagiotti, C. Melchiorri: Trajectory Planning for
Automatic Machines and Robots (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 2008)
8.73
J.E. Bobrow: Optimal robot path planning using the
minimum-time criterion, IEEE J. Robotics Autom.
4(4), 443–450 (1988)
8.74
K.G. Shin, N.D. McKay: Minimum-time control of
robotic manipulators with geometric path con-
straints, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 30(5), 531–541
(1985)
8.75
F. Pfeiffer, R. Johanni: A concept for manipulator
trajectory planning, Proc. Int. IEEE Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (1986) pp. 1399–1405
8.76
W. Khalil, E. Dombre: Trajectory generation. In:
Modeling, Identification and Control of Robots, ed.
by W. Khalil, E. Dombre (Butterworth-Heinemann,
Oxford 2004)
8.77
A.I. Kostrikin, Y.I. Manin: Linear Algebra and Ge-
ometry (Gordon and Breach Sci. Publ., Amsterdam
1997)
8.78
M.E. Kahn, B. Roth: The near-minimum-time con-
trol of open-loop articulated kinematic chains,
ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 93, 164–172 (1971)
8.79
M. Brady: Trajectory planning. In: Robot Motion:
Planning and Control, ed. by M. Brady, J.M. Holler-
bach, T.L. Johnson, T. Lozano-Pérez, M.T. Mason
(MIT Press, Cambridge 1982)
8.80
R.P.C. Paul: Manipulator cartesian path control.
In: Robot Motion: Planning and Control, ed. by
M. Brady, J.M. Hollerbach, T.L. Johnson, T. Lozano-
Pérez, M.T. Mason (MIT Press, Cambridge 1982)
8.81
R.H. Taylor: Planning and execution of straight-
line manipulator trajectories. In: Robot Motion:
Planning and Control, ed. by M. Brady, J.M. Holler-
bach, T.L. Johnson, T. Lozano-Pérez, M.T. Mason
(MIT Press, Cambridge 1982)
8.82
C.-S. Lin, P.-R. Chang, J.Y.S. Luh: Formulation and
optimization of cubic polynomial joint trajecto-
ries for industrial robots, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control
28(12), 1066–1074 (1983)
8.83
J.M. Hollerbach: Dynamic scaling of manipulator
trajectories, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 106(1),
102–106 (1984)
8.84
K.J. Kyriakopoulos, G.N. Sridis: Minimum jerk path
generation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1988) pp. 364–369
8.85
J.-J.E. Slotine, H.S. Yang: Improving the efficiency
of time-optimal path-following algorithms, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 5(1), 118–124 (1989)
8.86
Z. Shiller, H.-H. Lu: Computation of path con-
strained time optimal motions with dynamic sin-
gularities, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 114(1),
34–40 (1992)
8.87
P. Fiorini, Z. Shiller: Time optimal trajectory plan-
ning in dynamic environments, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1996) pp. 1553–1558
8.88
O. Dahl, L. Nielsen: Torque limited path following
by on-line trajectory time scaling, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1989) pp. 1122–1128
8.89
B. Cao, G.I. Dodds, G.W. Irwin: Time-optimal and
smooth constrained path planning for robot ma-
nipulators, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1994) pp. 1853–1858
8.90
B. Cao, G.I. Dodds, G.W. Irwin: A practical approach
to near time-optimal inspection-task-sequence

Part A | 8
194
Part A
Robotics Foundations
planning for two cooperative industrial robot arms,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 17(8), 858–867 (1998)
8.91
D. Constantinescu, E.A. Croft: Smooth and time-
optimal trajectory planning for industrial manipu-
lators along specified paths, J. Robotics Syst. 17(5),
233–249 (2000)
8.92
S. Macfarlane, E.A. Croft: Jerk-bounded manip-
ulator trajectory planning: Design for real-time
applications, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 19(1), 42–
52 (2003)
8.93
R.L. Andersson: A Robot Ping-Pong Player: Exper-
iment in Real-Time Intelligent Control (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1988)
8.94
R.L. Andersson: Aggressive trajectory generator for
a robot ping-pong player, IEEE Control Syst. Mag.
9(2), 15–21 (1989)
8.95
J. Lloyd, V. Hayward: Trajectory generation for
sensor-driven
and
time-varying
tasks,
Int.
J. Robotics Res. 12(4), 380–393 (1993)
8.96
K. Ahn, W.K. Chung, Y. Yourn: Arbitrary states
polynomial-like
trajectory
(ASPOT)
generation,
Proc. IEEE 30th Annu. Conf. Ind. Electron. Soc.
(2004) pp. 123–128
8.97
X. Broquère, D. Sidobre, I. Herrera-Aguilar: Soft
motion trajectory planner for service manipulator
robot, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2008) pp. 2808–2813
8.98
R. Haschke, E. Weitnauer, H. Ritter: On-line plan-
ning of time-optimal, jerk-limited trajectories,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2008) pp. 3248–3253
8.99
J.J. Craig: Introduction to Robotics: Mechanics and
Control (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River 2003)
8.100
K.S. Fu, R.C. Gonzalez, C.S.G. Lee: Robotics: Control,
Sensing, Vision and Intelligence (McGraw-Hill, New
York 1988)
8.101
M.W. Spong, S.A. Hutchinson, M. Vidyasagar: Robot
Modeling and Control (Wiley, New York 2006)
8.102
S. Arimoto: Mathematical theory or learning with
application to robot control. In: Adaptive and
Learning Control, ed. by K.S. Narendra (Plenum,
New York 1986) pp. 379–388
8.103
S. Kawamura, F. Miyazaki, S. Arimoto: Realization
of robot motion based on a learning method, IEEE
Trans. Syst. Man. Cybern. 18(1), 126–134 (1988)
8.104
G. Heinzinger, D. Frewick, B. Paden, F. Miyazaki:
Robust learning control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Decis.
Control (1989)
8.105
S. Arimoto: Robustness of learning control for robot
manipulators, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Decis. Control
(1990) pp. 1523–1528
8.106
S. Arimoto, T. Naiwa, H. Suzuki: Selective learning
with a forgetting factor for robotic motion control,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Decis. Control (1991) pp. 728–733

Multimedia Contents Force Contro
195
Part A | 9.1
9. Force Control
Luigi Villani, Joris De Schutter
A fundamental requirement for the success of
a manipulation task is the capability to handle
the physical contact between a robot and the en-
vironment. Pure motion control turns out to be
inadequate because the unavoidable modeling
errors and uncertainties may cause a rise of the
contact force, ultimately leading to an unstable
behavior during the interaction, especially in the
presence of rigid environments. Force feedback
and force control becomes mandatory to achieve
a robust and versatile behavior of a robotic sys-
tem in poorly structured environments as well as
safe and dependable operation in the presence of
humans. This chapter starts from the analysis of
indirect force control strategies, conceived to keep
the contact forces limited by ensuring a suitable
compliant behavior to the end effector, without
requiring an accurate model of the environment.
Then the problem of interaction tasks modeling
is analyzed, considering both the case of a rigid
environment and the case of a compliant environ-
ment. For the specification of an interaction task,
natural constraints set by the task geometry and
artificial constraints set by the control strategy are
established, with respect to suitable task frames.
This formulation is the essential premise to the
synthesis of hybrid force/motion control schemes.
9.1
Background ..........................................
195
9.1.1
From Motion Control
to Interaction Control ...................
196
9.1.2
From Indirect Force Control
to Hybrid Force/Motion Control......
197
9.2 Indirect Force Control ............................
198
9.2.1
Stiffness Control...........................
198
9.2.2
Impedance Control.......................
201
9.3 Interaction Tasks...................................
205
9.3.1
Rigid Environment .......................
205
9.3.2
Compliant Environment................
208
9.3.3 Task Specification.........................
209
9.3.4 Sensor-Based
Contact Model Estimation .............
211
9.4 Hybrid Force/Motion Control ..................
211
9.4.1
Acceleration-Resolved Approach ...
211
9.4.2 Passivity-Based Approach.............
214
9.4.3 Velocity-Resolved Approach..........
215
9.5 Conclusions
and Further Reading.............................
216
9.5.1
Indirect Force Control ...................
216
9.5.2 Task Specification.........................
217
9.5.3 Hybrid Force/Motion Control..........
217
Video-References.........................................
217
References...................................................
218
9.1 Background
Research on robot force control has ﬂourished in the
past three decades. Such a wide interest is motivated
by the general desire of providing robotic systems
with enhanced sensory capabilities. Robots using force,
touch, distance, and visual feedback are expected to au-
tonomously operate in unstructured environments other
than the typical industrial shop ﬂoor.
Since the early work on telemanipulation, the use
of force feedback was conceived to assist the human
operator in the remote handling of objects with a slave
manipulator. More recently, cooperative robot systems
have been developed where two or more manipula-
tors (viz. the ﬁngers of a dexterous robot hand) are
to be controlled so as to limit the exchanged forces

Part A | 9.1
196
Part A
Robotics Foundations
and avoid squeezing of a commonly held object. Force
control plays a fundamental role also in the achieve-
ment of robust and versatile behavior of robotic systems
in open-ended environments, providing intelligent re-
sponse in unforeseen situations and enhancing human–
robot interaction.
9.1.1 From Motion Control
to Interaction Control
Control of the physical interaction between a robot
manipulator and the environment is crucial for the suc-
cessful execution of a number of practical tasks where
the robot end-effector has to manipulate an object or
perform some operation on a surface. Typical exam-
ples in industrial settings include polishing, deburring,
machining or assembly. A complete classiﬁcation of
possible robot tasks, considering also nonindustrial ap-
plications, is practically infeasible in view of the large
variety of cases that may occur, nor would such a clas-
siﬁcation be really useful to ﬁnd a general strategy to
control the interaction with the environment.
During contact, the environment may set constraints
on the geometric paths that can be followed by the end-
effector, denoted as kinematic constraints. This situa-
tion, corresponding to the contact with a stiff surface,
is generally referred to as constrained motion. In other
cases, the contact task is characterized by a dynamic
interaction between the robot and the environment that
can be inertial (as in pushing a block), dissipative (as
in sliding on a surface with friction) or elastic (as in
pushing against an elastically compliant wall). In all
these cases, the use of a pure motion control strategy for
controlling interaction is prone to failure, as explained
below.
Successful execution of an interaction task with the
environment by using motion control could be obtained
only if the task were accurately planned. This would in
turn require an accurate model of both the robot manip-
ulator (kinematics and dynamics) and the environment
(geometry and mechanical features). A manipulator
model may be known with sufﬁcient precision, but
a detailed description of the environment is difﬁcult to
obtain.
To understand the importance of task planning accu-
racy, it is sufﬁcient to observe that in order to perform
a mechanical part mating with a positional approach the
relative positioning of the parts should be guaranteed
with an accuracy of an order of magnitude greater than
part mechanical tolerance. Once the absolute position
of one part is exactly known, the manipulator should
guide the motion of the other with the same accuracy.
In practice, the planning errors may give rise to
a contact force and moment, causing a deviation of the
end-effector from the desired trajectory. On the other
hand, the control system reacts to reduce such devia-
tions. This ultimately leads to a build-up of the contact
force until saturation of the joint actuators is reached or
breakage of the parts in contact occurs.
The higher the environment stiffness and position
control accuracy are, the more easily a situation like
the one just described can occur. This drawback can be
overcome if a compliant behavior is ensured during the
interaction. This compliant behavior can be achieved ei-
ther in a passive or in an active fashion.
Passive Interaction Control
In passive interaction control the trajectory of the robot
end-effector is modiﬁed by the interaction forces due to
the inherent compliance of the robot. The compliance
may be due to the structural compliance of the links,
joints, and end-effector, or to the compliance of the po-
sition servo. Soft robot arms with elastic joints or links
are purposely designed for intrinsically safe interaction
with humans. In industrial applications, a mechanical
device with passive compliance, known as the remote
center of compliance (RCC) device [9.1], is widely
adopted. An RCC is a compliant end-effector mounted
on a rigid robot, designed and optimized for peg-into-
hole assembly operations.
The passive approach to interaction control is
very simple and cheap, because it does not require
force/torque sensors; also, the preprogrammed trajec-
tory of the end-effector must not be changed at ex-
ecution time; moreover, the response of a passive
compliance mechanism is much faster than active repo-
sitioning by a computer control algorithm. However,
the use of passive compliance in industrial applications
lacks ﬂexibility, since for every robotic task a special-
purpose compliant end-effector has to be designed and
mounted. Also, it can only deal with small position and
orientation deviations of the programmed trajectory. Fi-
nally, since no forces are measured, it can not guarantee
that high contact forces will never occur.
Active Interaction Control
In active interaction control, the compliance of the
robotic system is mainly ensured by a purposely de-
signed control system. This approach usually requires
the measurement of the contact force and moment,
which are fed back to the controller and used to mod-
ify or even generate online the desired trajectory of the
robot end-effector.
Active interaction control may overcome the afore-
mentioned disadvantages of passive interaction control,
but it is usually slower, more expensive, and more so-
phisticated. To obtain a reasonable task execution speed
and disturbance rejection capability, active interaction

Force Control
9.1 Background
197
Part A | 9.1
control has to be used in combination with some degree
of passive compliance [9.2]: feedback, by deﬁnition,
always comes after a motion and force error has oc-
curred, hence some passive compliance is needed in
order to keep the reaction forces below an acceptable
threshold.
Force Measurements
For a general force-controlled task, six force compo-
nents are required to provide complete contact force
information: three translational force components and
three torques. Often, a force/torque sensor is mounted
at the robot wrist [9.3], but other possibilities exist, for
example, force sensors can be placed on the ﬁngertips
of robotic hands [9.4]; also, external forces and mo-
ments can be estimated via shaft torque measurements
of joint torque sensors [9.5, 6]. However, the majority
of the applications of force control (including indus-
trial applications) is concerned with wrist force/torque
sensors. In this case, the weight and inertia of the tool
mounted between the sensor and the environment (i. e.,
the robot end-effector) is assumed to be negligible or
suitably compensated from the force/torque measure-
ments. The force signals may be obtained using strain
measurements, which results in a stiff sensor, or de-
formation measurements (e.g., optically), resulting in
a compliant sensor. The latter approach has an advan-
tage if additional passive compliance is desired.
9.1.2 From Indirect Force Control
to Hybrid Force/Motion Control
Active interaction control strategies can be grouped into
two categories: those performing indirect force control
and those performing direct force control. The main dif-
ference between the two categories is that the former
achieve force control via motion control, without ex-
plicit closure of a force feedback loop; the latter instead
offer the possibility of controlling the contact force and
moment to a desired value, thanks to the closure of
a force feedback loop.
To the ﬁrst category belongs impedance control (or
admittance control) [9.7, 8], where the deviation of the
end-effector motion from the desired motion due to the
interaction with the environment is related to the con-
tact force through a mechanical impedance/admittance
with adjustable parameters. A robot manipulator under
impedance (or admittance) control is described by an
equivalent mass–spring–damper system with adjustable
parameters. This relationship is an impedance if the
robot control reacts to the motion deviation by gener-
ating forces, while it corresponds to an admittance if
the robot control reacts to interaction forces by impos-
ing a deviation from the desired motion. Special cases
of impedance and admittance control are stiffness con-
trol and compliance control [9.9], respectively, where
only the static relationship between the end-effector po-
sition and orientation deviation from the desired motion
and the contact force and moment is considered. Notice
that, in the robot control literature, the terms impedance
control and admittance control are often used to refer to
the same control scheme; the same happens for stiffness
and compliance control. Moreover, if only the relation-
ship between the contact force and moment and the end-
effector linear and angular velocity is of interest, the
corresponding control scheme is referred to as damping
control [9.10].
Indirect force control schemes do not require, in
principle, measurements of contact forces and mo-
ments; the resulting impedance or admittance is typi-
cally nonlinear and coupled. However, if a force/torque
sensor is available, then force measurements can be
used in the control scheme to achieve a linear and de-
coupled behavior.
Differently from indirect force control, direct force
control requires an explicit model of the interaction
task. In fact, the user has to specify the desired motion
and the desired contact force and moment in a con-
sistent way with respect to the constraints imposed
by the environment. A widely adopted strategy be-
longing to this category is hybrid force/motion control,
which aims at controlling the motion along the uncon-
strained task directions and force (and moment) along
the constrained task directions. The starting point is the
observation that, for many robotic tasks, it is possible to
introduce an orthogonal reference frame, known as the
compliance frame [9.11] (or task frame [9.12]) which
allows one to specify the task in terms of natural and
artiﬁcial constrains acting along and about the three
orthogonal axes of this frame. Based on this decompo-
sition, hybrid force/motion control allows simultaneous
control of both the contact force and the end-effector
motion in two mutually independent subspaces. Simple
selection matrices acting on both the desired and feed-
back quantities serve this purpose for planar contact
surfaces [9.13], whereas suitable projection matrices
must be used for general contact tasks, which can also
be derived from the explicit constraint equations [9.14–
16]. Several implementation of hybrid motion control
schemes are available, e.g., based on inverse dynam-
ics control in the operational space [9.17], passivity-
based control [9.18], or outer force control loops closed
around inner motion loops, typically available in indus-
trial robots [9.2].
If an accurate model of the environment is not
available, the force control action and the motion con-
trol action can be superimposed, resulting in a parallel
force/position control scheme. In this approach, the

Part A | 9.2
198
Part A
Robotics Foundations
force controller is designed so as to dominate the
motion controller; hence, a position error would be tol-
erated along the constrained task directions in order to
ensure force regulation [9.19].
9.2 Indirect Force Control
To gain insight into the problems arising at the inter-
action between the end-effector of a robot manipulator
and the environment, it is worth analyzing the effects of
a motion control strategy in the presence of a contact
force and moment. To this aim, assume that a ref-
erence frame ˙e is attached to the end-effector, and
let pe denote the position vector of the origin and Re
the rotation matrix with respect to a ﬁxed base frame.
The end-effector velocity is denoted by the 6  1 twist
vector v e D .PpT
e !T
e /T where Ppe is the translational ve-
locity and !e the angular velocity, and can be computed
from the n  1 joint velocity vector Pq using the linear
mapping
v e D J. q/Pq :
(9.1)
The matrix J is the 6  n end-effector geometric Ja-
cobian. For simplicity, the case of nonredundant non-
singular manipulators is considered; therefore, n D 6
and the Jacobian is a square nonsingular matrix. The
force f e and moment me applied by the end-effector
to the environment are the components of the wrench
he D . f T
e mT
e /T.
It is useful to consider the operational space formu-
lation of the dynamic model of a rigid robot manipula-
tor in contact with the environment
ƒ. q/ Pv e C . q; Pq/v e C . q/ D hc  he ;
(9.2)
where
ƒ. q/ D .JH. q/1JT/1
is the 6  6 operational space inertia matrix,
. q; Pq/ D JTC. q; Pq/J1  ƒ. q/PJJ1
is the wrench including centrifugal and Coriolis effects,
and . q/ D JTg. q/ is the wrench of the gravitational
effects; H. q/, C. q; Pq/ and g. q/ are the corresponding
quantities deﬁned in the joint space. The vector hc D
JT is the equivalent end-effector wrench correspond-
ing to the input joint torques .
9.2.1 Stiffness Control
In the classical operational space formulation, the end-
effector position and orientation is described by a
6  1 vector xe D . pT
e 'T
e /T, where 'e is a set of Eu-
ler angles extracted from Re. Hence, a desired end-
effector position and orientation can be assigned in
terms of a vector xd, corresponding to the position of
the origin pd and the rotation matrix Rd of a desired
frame ˙d. The end-effector error can be denoted as
xde D xd  xe, and the corresponding velocity error,
assuming a constant xd, can be expressed as Pxde D
Pxe D A1. 'e/v e, with
A. 'e/ D
I
0
0
T. 'e/

;
where I is the 3  3 identity matrix, 0 is a 3  3 null
matrix, and T is the 3  3 matrix of the mapping
!e D T. 'e/ P'e, depending on the particular choice of
the Euler angles.
Consider the motion control law
hc D AT. 'e/KPxde  KDv e C . q/ ;
(9.3)
corresponding to a simple proportional–derivative
(PD) + gravity compensation control in the operational
space, where KP and KD are symmetric and positive-
deﬁnite 6  6 matrices.
In the absence of interaction with the environment
(i. e., when he D 0), the equilibrium v e D 0, xde D 0
for the closed-loop system, corresponding to the de-
sired position and orientation for the end-effector, is
asymptotically stable. The stability proof is based on
the positive-deﬁnite Lyapunov function
V D 1
2v T
e ƒ. q/ve C 1
2xdeKPxde ;
whose time derivative along the trajectories of the
closed-loop system is the negative semideﬁnite function
PV D v T
e KDv e :
(9.4)
In the presence of a constant wrench he, using a similar
Lyapunov argument, a different asymptotically stable
equilibrium can be found, with a nonnull xde. The new
equilibrium is the solution of the equation
AT. 'e/KPxde  he D 0 ;

Force Control
9.2 Indirect Force Control
199
Part A | 9.2
which can be written in the form
xde D K1
P AT. 'e/he ;
(9.5)
or, equivalently, as
he D AT. 'e/KPxde :
(9.6)
Equation (9.6) shows that in the steady state the end-
effector, under a proportional control action on the
position and orientation error, behaves as a six-degree-
of-freedom (DOF) spring in respect of the external
force and moment he. Thus, the matrix KP plays the
role of an active stiffness, meaning that it is possible
to act on the elements of KP so as to ensure a suit-
able elastic behavior of the end-effector during the
interaction. Analogously, (9.5) represents a compliance
relationship, where the matrix K1
P
plays the role of
an active compliance. This approach, consisting of as-
signing a desired position and orientation and a suitable
static relationship between the deviation of the end-ef-
fector position and orientation from the desired motion
and the force exerted on the environment, is known as
stiffness control.
The selection of the stiffness/compliance parame-
ters is not easy, and strongly depends on the task to be
executed. A higher value of the active stiffness means
a higher accuracy of the position control at the expense
of higher interaction forces. Hence, if it is expected to
meet some physical constraint in a particular direction,
the end-effector stiffness in that direction should be
made low to ensure low interaction forces. Conversely,
along the directions where physical constraints are not
expected, the end-effector stiffness should be made high
so as to follow closely the desired position. This allows
discrepancies between the desired and achievable posi-
tions due to the constraints imposed by the environment
to be resolved without excessive contact forces and mo-
ments.
It must be pointed out, however, that a selective
stiffness behavior along different directions cannot be
effectively assigned in practice on the basis of (9.6).
This can easily be understood by using the classi-
cal deﬁnition of a mechanical stiffness for two bodies
connected by a 6-DOF spring, in terms of the linear
mapping between the inﬁnitesimal twist displacement
of the two bodies at an unloaded equilibrium and the
elastic wrench.
In the case of the active stiffness, the two bod-
ies are, respectively, the end-effector, with the attached
frame ˙e, and a virtual body, attached to the desired
frame ˙d. Hence, from (9.6), the following mapping
can be derived
he D AT. 'e/KPA1. 'e/•xde ;
(9.7)
in the case of an inﬁnitesimal twist displacement •xde
deﬁned as
•xde D
•pde
•de

D
Ppde
!de

dt D 
 Ppe
!e

dt ;
where Ppde D Ppd  Ppe is the time derivative of the posi-
tion error pde D pd  pe and !de D !d  !e is the
angular velocity error. Equation (9.7) shows that the
actual stiffness matrix is AT. 'e/KPA1. 'e/, which
depends on the end-effector orientation through the vec-
tor 'e, so that, in practice, the selection of the stiffness
parameters is quite difﬁcult.
This problem can be overcome by deﬁning a ge-
ometrically consistent active stiffness, with the same
structure and properties as ideal mechanical springs.
Mechanical Springs
Consider two elastically coupled rigid bodies A and B
and two reference frames ˙a and ˙b, attached to A
and B, respectively. Assuming that at equilibrium
frames ˙a and ˙b coincide, the compliant behavior
near the equilibrium can be described by the linear map-
ping
hb
b D K•xb
ab D
Kt
Kc
KT
c
Ko

•xb
ab ;
(9.8)
where hb
b is the elastic wrench applied to body B, ex-
pressed in frame B, in the presence of an inﬁnitesimal
twist displacement •xb
ab of frame ˙a with respect to
frame ˙b, expressed in frame B. The elastic wrench
and the inﬁnitesimal twist displacement in (9.8) can
also be expressed equivalently in frame ˙a, since ˙a
and ˙b coincide at equilibrium. Therefore, hb
b D ha
b
and •xb
ab D •xa
ab; moreover, for the elastic wrench ap-
plied to body A, ha
a D Kt•xa
ba D hb
b being •xa
ba D
•xb
ab. This property of the mapping (9.8) is known as
port symmetry.
In (9.8), K is the 6  6 symmetric positive-semidef-
inite stiffness matrix. The 3  3 matrices Kt and Ko,
called respectively the translational stiffness and ro-
tational stiffness, are also symmetric. It can be shown
that, if the 3  3 matrix Kc, called the coupling stiffness
is symmetric, there is maximum decoupling between
rotation and translation. In this case, the point corre-
sponding to the coinciding origins of the frames ˙a
and ˙b is called the center of stiffness. Similar deﬁni-
tions and results can be formulated for the case of the
compliance matrix C D K1. In particular, it is possi-
ble to deﬁne a center of compliance in the case that the
off-diagonal blocks of the compliance matrix are sym-
metric. The center of stiffness and compliance do not
necessarily coincide.

Part A | 9.2
200
Part A
Robotics Foundations
There are special cases in which no coupling ex-
ists between translation and rotation, i. e., a relative
translation of the bodies results in a wrench correspond-
ing to a pure force along an axis through the center
of stiffness; also, a relative rotation of the bodies re-
sults in a wrench that is equivalent to a pure torque
about an axis through the centers of stiffness. In these
cases, the center of stiffness and compliance coincide.
Mechanical systems with completely decoupled behav-
ior are, e.g., the remote center of compliance (RCC)
devices.
Since Kt is symmetric, there exists a rotation ma-
trix Rt with respect to the frame ˙a D ˙b at equilib-
rium, such that Kt D Rt t RT
t , and t is a diagonal
matrix whose diagonal elements are the principal trans-
lational stiffnessess in the directions corresponding to
the columns of the rotation matrix Rt, known as the
principal axes of translational stiffness. Analogously,
Ko can be expressed as Ko D Roo RT
o, where the
diagonal elements of o are the principal rotational
stiffnesses about the axes corresponding to the columns
of rotation matrix Ro, known as the principal axes of
rotational stiffness. Moreover, assuming that the ori-
gins of ˙a and ˙b at equilibrium coincide with the
center of stiffness, the expression Kc D Rc c RT
c can
be found, where the diagonal elements of c are the
principal coupling stiffnesses along the directions cor-
responding to the columns of the rotation matrix Rc,
known as the principal axes of coupling stiffness. In
sum, a 6  6 stiffness matrix can be speciﬁed, with re-
spect to a frame with origin in the center of stiffness, in
terms of the principal stiffness parameters and principal
axes.
Notice that the mechanical stiffness deﬁned by (9.8)
describes the behavior of an ideal 6-DOF spring which
stores potential energy. The potential energy function
of an ideal stiffness depends only on the relative posi-
tion and orientation of the two attached bodies and is
port symmetric. A physical 6-DOF spring has a pre-
dominant behavior similar to the ideal one, but never-
theless it always has parasitic effects causing energy
dissipation.
Geometrically Consistent Active Stiffness
To achieve a geometrically consistent 6-DOF active
stiffness, a suitable deﬁnition of the proportional con-
trol action in control law (9.3) is required. This control
action can be interpreted as the elastic wrench applied
to the end-effector, in the presence of a ﬁnite displace-
ment of the desired frame ˙d with respect to the end-
effector frame ˙e. Hence, the properties of the ideal
mechanical stiffness for small displacements should be
extended to the case of ﬁnite displacements. Moreover,
to guarantee asymptotic stability in the sense of Lya-
punov, a suitable potential elastic energy function must
be deﬁned.
For simplicity, it is assumed that the coupling stiff-
ness matrix is zero. Hence, the potential elastic energy
can be computed as the sum of a translational potential
energy and a rotational potential energy.
The translational potential energy can be deﬁned as
Vt D 1
2pT
deK0
Ptpde ;
(9.9)
with
K0
Pt D 1
2RdKPtRT
d C 1
2ReKPtRT
e ;
where KPt is a 33 symmetric positive-deﬁnite matrix.
The use of K0
Pt in lieu of KPt in (9.9) guarantees that
the potential energy is port symmetric also in the case
of ﬁnite displacements. Matrices K0
Pt and KPt coincide
at equilibrium (i. e., when Rd D Re) and in the case of
isotropic translational stiffness (i. e., when KPt D kPtI).
The computation of the power PVt yields
PVt D PpeT
def e

t C !eT
deme

t ;
where Ppe
de
is the time derivative of the posi-
tion displacement pe
de D RT
e . pd  pe/, while !e
de D
RT
e . !d  !e/. The vectors f e

t and e

t are, respec-
tively, the elastic force and moment applied to the end-
effector in the presence of the ﬁnite position displace-
ment pe
de. These vectors have the following expres-
sions when computed in the base frame
f 
t D K0
Ptpde
m
t D K00
Ptpde ;
(9.10)
with
K00
Pt D 1
2S.pde/RdKPtRT
d ;
where S./ is the skew-symmetric operator performing
the vector product. The vector h
t D . f T

t mT

t/T is
the elastic wrench applied to the end-effector in the
presence of a ﬁnite position displacement pde and
a null orientation displacement. The moment m
t is
null in the case of isotropic translational stiffness.
To deﬁne the rotational potential energy, a suitable
deﬁnition of the orientation displacement between the
frames ˙d and ˙e has to be adopted. A possible choice
is the vector part of the unit quaternion fde; e
deg that
can be extracted from matrix Re
d D RT
e Rd. Hence, the
orientation potential energy has the form
Vo D 2eT
deKPoe
de ;
(9.11)

Force Control
9.2 Indirect Force Control
201
Part A | 9.2
where KPo is a 33 symmetric positive-deﬁnite matrix.
The function Vo is port symmetric because e
de D d
ed.
The computation of the power PVo yields
PVo D !eT
deme

o ;
where
m
o D K0
Pode ;
(9.12)
with
K0
Po D 2ET.de; de/ReKPoRT
e ;
and E.de; de/ D deI  S. de/. The above equations
show that a ﬁnite orientation displacement de D RT
e e
de
produces an elastic wrench h
o D .0T mT

o/T which is
equivalent to a pure moment.
Hence, the total elastic wrench in the presence
of a ﬁnite position and orientation displacement of
the desired frame ˙d with respect to the end-effector
frame ˙e can be deﬁned in the base frame as
h
 D h
t C h
o :
(9.13)
where h
t and h
o are computed according to (9.10)
and (9.12), respectively.
Using (9.13) for the computation of the elastic
wrench in the case of an inﬁnitesimal twist displace-
ment •xe
de near the equilibrium, and discarding the high-
order inﬁnitesimal terms, yields the linear mapping
he
e D KP•xe
de D
KPt
0
0
KPo

•xe
de :
(9.14)
Therefore, KP represents the stiffness matrix of an ideal
spring with respect to a frame ˙e (coinciding with ˙d
at equilibrium) with the origin at the center of stiff-
ness. Moreover, it can be shown, using deﬁnition (9.13),
that the physical/geometrical meaning of the principal
stiffnesses and of the principal axes for the matri-
ces KPt and KPo are preserved also in the case of large
displacements.
The above results imply that the active stiffness ma-
trix KP can be set in a geometrically consistent way
with respect to the task at hand.
Notice that geometrical consistency can also be en-
sured with different deﬁnitions of the orientation error
in the potential orientation energy (9.11), for example,
any error based on the angle/axis representation of Rd
e
can be adopted (the unit quaternion belongs to this cat-
egory), or, more generally, homogeneous matrices or
exponential coordinates (for the case of both position
and orientation errors). Also, the XYZ Euler angles ex-
tracted from the matrix Rd
e could be used; however, in
this case, it can be shown that the principal axes of
rotational stiffness cannot be set arbitrarily but must co-
incide with those of the end-effector frame.
Stiffness control with a geometrically consistent ac-
tive stiffness can be deﬁned using the control law
hc D h
  KDv e C . q/ ;
(9.15)
with h
 in (9.13). The asymptotic stability about the
equilibrium in the case he D 0 can be proven using the
Lyapunov function
V D 1
2v T
e ƒ. q/v e C Vt C Vo ;
with Vt and Vo given in (9.9) and (9.11), respectively,
whose time derivative along the trajectories of the
closed-loop system, in case the frame ˙d is motion-
less, has the same expression as in (9.4). When he ¤
0, a different asymptotically stable equilibrium can
be found, corresponding to a nonnull displacement of
the desired frame ˙d with respect to the end-effector
frame ˙e. The new equilibrium is the solution of the
equation h
 D he.
Stiffness control allows to keep the interaction force
and moment limited at the expense of the end-effector
position and orientation error, with a proper choice of
the stiffness matrix, without the need of a force/torque
sensor. However, in the presence of disturbances (e.g.,
joint friction) which can be modeled as an equiva-
lent end-effector wrench, the adoption of low values
for the active stiffness may produce large deviations
with respect to the desired end-effector position and
orientation, also in the absence of interaction with the
environment.
9.2.2 Impedance Control
Stiffness control is designed to achieve a desired static
behavior of the interaction. In fact, the dynamics of
the controlled system depends on that of the robot
manipulator, which is nonlinear and coupled. A more
demanding objective may be that of achieving a de-
sired dynamic behavior for the end-effector, e.g., that of
a second-order mechanical system with six degrees of
freedom, characterized by a given mass, damping, and
stiffness, known as mechanical impedance.
The starting point to pursue this goal may be the ac-
celeration-resolved approach used for motion control,
which is aimed at decoupling and linearizing the non-
linear robot dynamics at the acceleration level via an
inverse dynamics control law. In the presence of inter-
action with the environment, the control law
hc D ƒ. q/˛ C . q; Pq/Pq C . q/ C he
(9.16)

Part A | 9.2
202
Part A
Robotics Foundations
cast into the dynamic model (9.2) results in
Pv e D ˛ ;
(9.17)
where ˛ is a properly designed control input with the
meaning of an acceleration referred to the base frame.
Considering the identity Pv e D NRT
e Pv e
e C PNRT
e v e
e, with
NRe D
Re
0
0
Re

;
the choice
˛ D NRT
e ˛e C PNRT
e v e
e
(9.18)
gives
Pv e
e D ˛e ;
(9.19)
where the control input ˛e has the meaning of an ac-
celeration referred to the end-effector frame ˙e. Hence,
setting
˛e D Pv e
d C K1
M .KDv e
de C he

  he
e/ ;
(9.20)
the following expression can be found for the closed-
loop system
KM Pv e
de C KDv e
de C he

 D he
e ;
(9.21)
where KM and KD are 6  6 symmetric and positive-
deﬁnite matrices,  Pv e
de D Pv e
d  Pv e
e, v e
de D v e
d v e
e, Pv e
d
and v e
d are, respectively, the acceleration and the ve-
locity of a desired frame ˙d and he

 is the elastic
wrench (9.13); all the quantities are referred to the end-
effector frame ˙e.
The above equation describing the dynamic behav-
ior of the controlled end-effector can be interpreted as
a generalized mechanical impedance. The asymptotic
Direct
kinematics
Inverse
dynamics
Impedance
control
Manipulator
and
environment
α
τ
he
q
q·
pd, Rd
υd
pe, Re
υe
υ·
d
Fig. 9.1 Impedance control
stability of the equilibrium in the case he D 0 can be
proven by considering the Lyapunov function
V D 1
2v eT
deKMv e
de C Vt C Vo ;
(9.22)
where Vt and Vo are deﬁned in (9.9) and (9.11), respec-
tively, and whose time derivative along the trajectories
of system (9.21) is the negative semideﬁnite function
PV D v eT
deKDv e
de :
When he ¤ 0, a different asymptotically stable equilib-
rium can be found, corresponding to a nonnull displace-
ment of the desired frame ˙d with respect to the end-
effector frame ˙e. The new equilibrium is the solution
of the equation h
 D he.
In case ˙d is constant, (9.21) has the meaning of
a true 6-DOF mechanical impedance if KM is chosen as
KM D
mI
0
0
M

;
where m is a mass and M is a 33 inertia tensor, and KD
is chosen as a block-diagonal matrix with 3  3 blocks.
The physically equivalent system is a body of mass m
with inertia tensor M with respect to a frame ˙e at-
tached to the body, subject to an external wrench he
e.
This body is connected to a virtual body attached to
frame ˙d through a 6-DOF ideal spring with stiffness
matrix KP and is subject to viscous forces and moments
with damping KD. The function V in (9.22) represents
the total energy of the body: the sum of the kinetic and
potential elastic energy.
A block diagram of the resulting impedance control
is sketched in Fig. 9.1. The impedance control com-
putes the acceleration input as in (9.18) and (9.20) on
the basis of the position and orientation feedback as
well as the force and moment measurements. Then, the
inverse dynamics control law computes the torques for
the joint actuators  D JThc with hc in (9.16). This con-
trol scheme, in the absence of interaction, guarantees
that the end-effector frame ˙e asymptotically follows
the desired frame ˙d. In the presence of contact with the
environment, a compliant dynamic behavior is imposed
on the end-effector, according to the impedance (9.21),
and the contact wrench is bounded at the expense
of a ﬁnite position and orientation displacement be-
tween ˙d and ˙e. Differently from stiffness control,
a force/torque sensor is required for the measurement
of the contact force and moment.
In the case that the force/torque sensor is not avail-
able, the measure of the external wrench he cannot
be used in the controller and thus the conﬁguration-

Force Control
9.2 Indirect Force Control
203
Part A | 9.2
independent impedance behaviour (9.21) cannot be
obtained anymore. However, a desired impedance be-
haviour can be still achieved with the control law
hc D ƒ. q/ Pv dC. q; Pq/vdCKDv deCh
C. q/
(9.23)
in place of (9.16), where KD is a 6  6 positive-deﬁnite
matrix and h
 is the elastic wrench (9.13). The result-
ing closed-loop equation is
ƒ. q/ Pvde C .. q; Pq/ C KD/vde C h
 D he;
representing an impedance behaviour which preserves
the actual operational space inertia matrix ƒ. q/ of the
robot. In the above equation, the centrifugal and Cori-
olis wrench . q; Pq/vde is required to preserve the
mechanical properties of a conﬁguration-dependent in-
ertia and to prove the stability similarly to (9.21). In
case ˙d is constant, control law (9.23) reduces to the
stiffness control law (9.15).
Pioneering experiments on stiffness control and
impedance control and without without force sensing
are presented in
VIDEO 684 .
VIDEO 686
reports
experiments on impedance control based on a geomet-
rically consistent active stiffness.
Implementation Issues
The selection of good impedance parameters ensuring
a satisfactory behavior is not an easy task. In fact, the
dynamics of the closed-loop system is different in free
space and during interaction. The control objectives are
different as well, since motion tracking and disturbance
rejection must be ensured in free space, while, during
the interaction, the main goal is achieving a suitable
compliant dynamic behavior for the end-effector. No-
tice also that the dynamics of the controlled system
during the interaction depends on the dynamics of the
environment.
To gain insight into these problems, assume that
the interaction of the end-effector with the environment
can be approximated by that derived from an ideal 6-
DOF spring connecting end-effector frame ˙e to the
environment frame ˙o. Therefore, according to (9.8),
the elastic wrench exerted by the end-effector on the
environment, in the presence of an inﬁnitesimal twist
displacement of ˙e with respect to ˙o, can be com-
puted as
he
e D K•xe
eo ;
(9.24)
where ˙e and ˙o coincide at equilibrium and K is
a stiffness matrix. The above model holds only in the
presence of interaction, while the contact wrench is null
when the end-effector moves in free space.
The disturbances acting on the robot manipulator
and the unmodeled dynamics (joint friction, modeling
errors, etc.) may be taken into account by introducing
an additive term on the right-hand side of the dynamic
model of the robot manipulator (9.2), corresponding to
an equivalent disturbance wrench acting on the end-
effector. This term produces an additive acceleration
disturbance  e on the right-hand side of (9.19). There-
fore, using the control law (9.20), the following closed-
loop impedance equation can be found
KM Pv e
de C KDv e
de C he

 D he
e C KM e :
(9.25)
The tuning procedure for the impedance parameters
can be set up starting from the linearized model that
can be computed from (9.25) in the case of inﬁnitesimal
displacements, i. e.,
KM•Rxe
de C KD•Pxe
de C .KP C K/•xe
de
D K•xe
do C KM e ;
(9.26)
where (9.24) and the equality •xe
eo D •xe
de C•xe
do have
been used. The above equation is valid both for con-
strained (K ¤ 0) and for free motion (K D 0).
It is evident that suitable dynamics of the position
and orientation errors can be set by suitably choosing
the matrix gains KM, KD, and KP. This task is easier
under the hypothesis that all the matrices are diagonal,
resulting in a decoupled behavior for the six compo-
nents of the inﬁnitesimal twist displacement. In this
case, the transient behavior of each component can be
set, e.g., by assigning the natural frequency and damp-
ing ratio with the relations
!n D
s
< kP C k
kM
;
 D 1
2
kD
p
kM.kP C k/
:
Hence, if the gains are chosen so that a given natural
frequency and damping ratio are ensured during the in-
teraction (i. e., for k ¤ 0), a smaller natural frequency
with a higher damping ratio will be obtained when the
end-effector moves in free space (i. e., for k D 0). As for
the steady-state performance, the end-effector error for
the generic component is
•xde D
k
.kP C k/•xdo C
kM
kP C k 
and the corresponding interaction force is
h D
kPk
kP C k•xdo  kMk
kP C k :

Part A | 9.2
204
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Direct
kinematics
Inverse
dynamics
Pos and
orient
control
Impedance
control
Manipulator
and
environment
α
τ
he
q
q·
pd, Rd
υd
pe, Re
υe
υ·
d
pc, Rc
υc
υ·
c
Fig. 9.2 Impedance control
with inner motion control
loop (admittance control)
The above relations show that, during interaction, the
contact force can be made small at the expense of
a large position error in steady state, as long as the ac-
tive stiffness kP is set low with respect to the stiffness
of the environment k, and vice versa. However, both the
contact force and the position error also depend on the
external disturbance ; in particular, the lower kP, the
higher the inﬂuence of  on both •xde and h. Moreover,
a low active stiffness kP may result in a large position er-
ror also in the absence of interaction (i. e., when k D 0).
Admittance Control
A solution to this drawback can be devised by separat-
ing motion control from impedance control as follows.
The motion control action is purposefully made stiff so
as to enhance disturbance rejection but, rather than en-
suring tracking of the desired end-effector position and
orientation, it ensures tracking of a reference position
and orientation resulting from the impedance control
action. In other words, the desired position and orien-
tation, together with the measured contact wrench, are
input to the impedance equation which, via a suitable
integration, generates the position and orientation to be
used as a reference for the motion control.
To implement this solution, it is worth introducing
a reference frame other than the desired frame ˙d. This
frame is referred to as the compliant frame ˙c, and is
speciﬁed by the quantities pc, Rc, v c, and Pv c that are
computed from pd, Rd, v d, and Pv d and the measured
wrench hc, by integrating the equation
KM Pv c
dc C KDv c
dc C hc

 D hc ;
(9.27)
where hc

 is the elastic wrench in the presence of a ﬁ-
nite displacement between the desired frame ˙d and the
compliant frame ˙c. Then, a motion control strategy,
based on inverse dynamics, is designed so that the end-
effector frame ˙e is taken to coincide with the compli-
ant frame ˙c. To guarantee the stability of the overall
system, the bandwidth of the motion controller should
be higher than the bandwidth of the impedance con-
troller.
A block diagram of the resulting scheme is sketched
in Fig. 9.2. It is evident that, in the absence of in-
teraction, the compliant frame ˙c coincides with the
desired frame ˙d and the dynamics of the position and
orientation error, as well as the disturbance rejection ca-
pabilities, depend only on the gains of the inner motion
control loop. On the other hand, the dynamic behav-
ior in the presence of interaction is imposed by the
impedance gains (9.27).
The control scheme of Fig. 9.2 is also known as ad-
mittance control because, in (9.27), the measured force
(the input) is used to compute the motion of the compli-
ant frame (the output), given the motion of the desired
frame; a mapping with a force as input and a position
or velocity as output corresponds to a mechanical ad-
mittance. Vice versa, (9.21), mapping the end-effector
displacement (the input) from the desired motion tra-
jectory into the contact wrench (the output), has the
meaning of a mechanical impedance. Experiments on
admittance control are reported in
VIDEO 685 .
Simplified Schemes
The inverse dynamics control is model based and
requires modiﬁcation of current industrial robot con-
trollers, which are usually equipped with indepen-
dent proportional–integral (PI) joint velocity controllers
with very high bandwidth. These controllers are able
to decouple the robot dynamics to a large extent, espe-
cially in the case of slow motion, and to mitigate the
effects of external forces on the manipulator motion if
the environment is sufﬁciently compliant. Hence, the
closed-loop dynamics of the controlled robot can be ap-
proximated by
Pq D Pqr
in joint space, or equivalently
Pv e D v r
(9.28)
in the operational space, where Pqr and v r are the control
signals for the inner velocity motion loop generated by

Force Control
9.3 Interaction Tasks
205
Part A | 9.3
a suitably designed outer control loop. These control
signals are related by
Pqr D J1. q/vr :
The velocity v r, corresponding to a velocity-resolved
control, can be computed as
v e
r D v e
d C K1
D

he

  he
e

;
where the control input has been referred to the end-
effector frame, KD is a 6  6 positive-deﬁnite matrix
and h
 is the elastic wrench (9.13) with stiffness ma-
trix KP. The resulting closed-loop equation is
KDv e
de C he

 D he
e ;
corresponding to a compliant behavior of the end-effec-
tor characterized by a damping KD and a stiffness KP.
In the case KP D 0, the resulting scheme is known as
damping control.
Alternatively, an admittance-type control scheme
can be adopted, where the motion of a compliant
frame ˙c can be computed as the solution of the dif-
ferential equation
KDv c
dc C hc

 D hc
e
in terms of the position pc, orientation Rc, and velocity
twist v c, where the inputs are the motion variables of
the desired frame ˙d and the contact wrench hc
e. The
motion variables of ˙c are then input to an inner po-
sition and velocity controller. In the case KD D 0, the
resulting scheme is known as compliance control.
9.3 Interaction Tasks
Indirect force control does not require explicit knowl-
edge of the environment, although to achieve a satisfac-
tory dynamic behavior the control parameters have to be
tuned for a particular task. On the other hand, a model
of the interaction task is required for the synthesis of
direct force control algorithms.
An interaction task is characterized by complex
contact situations between the manipulator and the en-
vironment. To guarantee proper task execution, it is
necessary to have an analytical description of the in-
teraction force and moment, which is very demanding
from a modeling viewpoint.
A real contact situation is a naturally distributed
phenomenon in which the local characteristics of the
contact surfaces as well as the global dynamics of
the manipulator and environment are involved. In
detail:

The environment imposes kinematic constraints on
the end-effector motion, due to one or more con-
tacts of different type, and a reaction wrench arises
when the end-effector tends to violate the con-
straints (e.g., the case of a robot sliding a rigid tool
on a frictionless rigid surface).

The end-effector, while being subject to kinematic
constraints, may also exert a dynamic wrench on
the environment, in the presence of environment dy-
namics (e.g., the case of a robot turning a crank,
when the crank dynamics is relevant, or a robot
pushing against a compliant surface).

The contact wrench may depend on the structural
compliance of the robot, due to the ﬁnite stiffness
of the joints and links of the manipulator, as well as
of the wrist force/torque sensor or of the tool (e.g.,
an end-effector mounted on an RCC device).

Local deformation of the contact surfaces may oc-
cur during the interaction, producing distributed
contact areas (e.g., the case of a soft contact surface
of the tool or of the environment).

Static and dynamic friction may occur in the case of
non ideally smooth contact surfaces.
The design of the interaction control and the perfor-
mance analysis are usually carried out under simplify-
ing assumptions. The following two cases are consid-
ered:
1. The robot and the environment are perfectly rigid
and purely kinematics constraints are imposed by
the environment,
2. The robot is perfectly rigid, all the compliance in
the system is localized in the environment, and the
contact wrench is approximated by a linear elastic
model.
In both cases, frictionless contact is assumed. It is ob-
vious that these situations are only ideal. However, the
robustness of the control should be able to cope with
situations where some of the ieal assumptions are re-
laxed. In that case the control laws may be adapted to
deal with nonideal characteristics.
9.3.1 Rigid Environment
The kinematic constraints imposed by the environ-
ment can be represented by a set of equations that the

Part A | 9.3
206
Part A
Robotics Foundations
variables describing the end-effector position and ori-
entation must satisfy; since these variables depend on
the joint variables through the direct kinematic equa-
tions, the constraint equations can also be expressed in
the joint space as
. q/ D 0 :
(9.29)
The vector  is an m1 function, with m < n, where n is
the number of joints of the manipulator, assumed to be
nonredundant; without loss of generality, the case n D 6
is considered. Constraints of the form (9.29), involv-
ing only the generalized coordinates of the system, are
known as holonomic constraints. The case of time-vary-
ing constraints of the form . q; t/ D 0 is not considered
here but can be analyzed in a similar way. Moreover,
only bilateral constraints expressed by equalities of the
form (9.29) are of concern; this means that the end-
effector always keeps contact with the environment.
The analysis presented here is known as kinetostatic
analysis.
It is assumed that the vector (9.29) is twice differ-
entiable and that its m components are linearly indepen-
dent at least locally in a neighborhood of the operating
point. Hence, differentiation of (9.29) yields
J. q/Pq D 0 ;
(9.30)
where J. q/ D @=@q is the m  6 Jacobian of . q/,
known as the constraint Jacobian. By virtue of the
above assumption, J. q/ is of rank m at least locally
in a neighborhood of the operating point.
In the absence of friction, the generalized inter-
action forces are represented by a reaction wrench
that tends to violate the constraints. This end-effector
wrench produces reaction torques at the joints that can
be computed using the principle of virtual work as
e D JT
. q/	 ;
where 	 is an m1 vector of Lagrange multipliers. The
end-effector wrench corresponding to e can be com-
puted as
he D JT. q/e D Sf. q/	 ;
(9.31)
where
Sf D JT. q/JT
. q/ :
(9.32)
From (9.31) it follows that he belongs to the m-
dimensional vector space spanned by the columns of
the 6  m matrix Sf. The inverse of the linear transfor-
mation (9.31) is computed as
	 D S
f . q/he ;
(9.33)
where S
f denotes a weighted pseudoinverse of the ma-
trix Sf, i. e.,
S
f D

ST
f WSf
1 ST
f W ;
(9.34)
where W is a suitable weighting matrix.
Notice that, while the range space of the matrix Sf
in (9.32) is uniquely deﬁned by the geometry of the
contact, the matrix Sf itself is not unique; also, the con-
straint equations (9.29), the corresponding Jacobian J
as well as the pseudoinverse S
f and the vector 	 are not
uniquely deﬁned.
In general, the physical units of measure of the ele-
ments of 	 are not homogeneous and the columns of the
matrix Sf, as well as of the matrix S
f , do not necessar-
ily represent homogeneous entities. This may produce
invariance problems in the transformation (9.33) if he
represents a measured wrench that is subject to distur-
bances and, as a result, may have components outside
the range space of Sf. If a physical unit or a reference
frame is changed, the matrix Sf undergoes a transforma-
tion; however, the result of (9.33) with the transformed
pseudoinverse in general depends on the adopted phys-
ical units or on the reference frame. The reason is that
the pseudoinverse is the weighted least-squares solution
of a minimization problem based on the norm of the
vector he  Sf. q/	, and the invariance can be guaran-
teed only if a physically consistent norm of this vector
is used. In the ideal case that he is in the range space
of Sf, there is a unique solution for 	 in (9.33), regard-
less of the weighting matrix, and hence the invariance
problem does not appear.
A possible solution consists of choosing Sf so that
its columns represent linearly independent wrenches.
This implies that (9.31) gives he as a linear combi-
nation of wrenches and 	 is a dimensionless vector.
A physically consistent norm on the wrench space can
be deﬁned based on the quadratic form hT
e K1he, which
has the meaning of an elastic energy if K is a positive-
deﬁnite matrix corresponding to a stiffness. Hence, the
choice W D K1 can be made for the weighting matrix
of the pseudoinverse.
Notice that, for a given Sf, the constraint Jaco-
bian can be computed from (9.32) as J. q/ D ST
f J. q/;
moreover, the constraint equations can be derived by in-
tegrating (9.30).
Using (9.1) and (9.32), the equality (9.30) can be
rewritten in the form
J. q/J1. q/J. q/Pq D ST
f v e D 0 ;
(9.35)
which, by virtue of (9.31), is equivalent to
hT
e v e D 0 :
(9.36)

Force Control
9.3 Interaction Tasks
207
Part A | 9.3
Equation (9.36) represents the kinetostatic relation-
ship, known as reciprocity, between the ideal reaction
wrench he (belonging to the so-called force-controlled
subspace) and the end-effector twist that obeys the con-
straints (belonging to the so-called velocity-controlled
subspace). The concept of reciprocity, expressing the
physical fact that, in the hypothesis of rigid and fric-
tionless contact, the wrench does not cause any work
against the twist, is often confused with the concept of
orthogonality, which makes no sense in this case be-
cause twists and wrenches belong to different spaces.
Equations ((9.35)) and (9.36) imply that the veloc-
ity-controlled subspace is the reciprocal complement of
the m-dimensional force-controlled subspace, identiﬁed
by the range of matrix Sf. Hence, the dimension of the
velocity-controlled subspace is 6  m and a 6  .6  m/
matrix Sv can be deﬁned, whose columns span the ve-
locity-controlled subspace, i. e.,
v e D Sv. q/ ;
(9.37)
where  is a suitable .6  m/  1 vector. From (9.35)
and (9.37) the following equality holds
ST
f . q/Sv. q/ D 0 I
(9.38)
moreover, the inverse of the linear transformation (9.37)
can be computed as
 D S
v . q/v e ;
(9.39)
where S
v denotes a suitable weighted pseudoinverse of
the matrix Sv, computed as in (9.34).
Notice that, as for the case of Sf, although the range
space of the matrix Sv is uniquely deﬁned, the choice
of the matrix Sv itself is not unique. Moreover, the
columns of Sv are not necessarily twists and the scalar 
may have nonhomogeneous physical dimensions. How-
ever, in order to avoid invariance problems analogous
to that considered for the case of Sf, it is convenient
to select the columns of Sv as twists so that the vec-
tor  is dimensionless; moreover, the weighting matrix
used to compute the pseudoinverse in (9.39) can be set
as W D M, being M a 6  6 inertia matrix; this corre-
sponds to deﬁning a norm in the space of twists based
on the kinetic energy. It is worth observing that the
transformation matrices of twists and wrenches, corre-
sponding to a change of reference frame, are different;
however, if twists are deﬁned with angular velocity
on top and translational velocity on bottom, then their
transformation matrix is the same as for wrenches.
The matrix Sv may also have an interpretation in
terms of Jacobians, as for Sf in (9.32). Due to the pres-
ence of m independent holonomic constraints (9.29),
the conﬁguration of the robot in contact with the en-
vironment can be described in terms of a .6  m/  1
vector r of independent variables. From the implicit
function theorem, this vector can be deﬁned as
r D  . q/ ;
(9.40)
where  . q/ is any .6m/1 twice-differentiable vec-
tor function such that the m components of . q/ and
the nm components of  . q/ are linearly independent
at least locally in a neighborhood of the operating point.
This means that the mapping (9.40), together with the
constraint (9.29), is locally invertible, with inverse de-
ﬁned as
q D . r/ ;
(9.41)
where . r/ is a 6  1 twice-differentiable vector func-
tion. Equation (9.41) explicitly provides all the joint
vectors which satisfy the constraint (9.29). Moreover,
the joint velocity vectors that satisfy (9.30) can be com-
puted as
Pq D J. r/Pr ;
where J. r/ D @=@r is a 6.6m/ full-rank Jacobian
matrix. Therefore, the following equality holds
J. q/J. r/ D 0 ;
which can be interpreted as a reciprocity condition be-
tween the subspace of the reaction torques spanned by
the columns of the matrix JT
 and the subspace of the
constrained joint velocities spanned by the columns of
the matrix J.
Rewriting the above equation as
J. q/J. q/1J. q/J. r/ D 0 ;
and taking into account (9.32) and (9.38), the matrix Sv
can be expressed as
Sv D J. q/J. r/ ;
(9.42)
which, by virtue of (9.40) and (9.41), it can be equiva-
lently expressed as a function of either q or r.
The matrices Sf and Sv, and their pseudoinverse S
f
and S
v are known as selection matrices. They play
a fundamental role for the task speciﬁcation, i. e., the
speciﬁcation of the desired end-effector motion and in-
teraction forces and moments, as well as for the control
synthesis.

Part A | 9.3
208
Part A
Robotics Foundations
9.3.2 Compliant Environment
In many applications, the interaction wrench between
the end-effector and a compliant environment can
be approximated by an ideal elastic model of the
form (9.24). However, since the stiffness matrix K
is positive deﬁnite, this model describes a fully con-
strained case, when the environment deformation co-
incides with the inﬁnitesimal twist displacement of the
end-effector. In general, however, the end-effector mo-
tion is only partially constrained by the environment
and this situation can be modeled by introducing a suit-
able positive-semideﬁnite stiffness matrix.
The stiffness matrix describing the partially con-
strained interaction between the end-effector and the
environment can be computed by modeling the en-
vironment as a couple of rigid bodies, S and O,
connected through an ideal 6-DOF spring of compli-
ance C D K1. Body S is attached to a frame ˙s and
is in contact with the end-effector; body O is attached
to a frame ˙o which, at equilibrium, coincides with
frame ˙s. The environment deformation about the equi-
librium, in the presence of a wrench hs, is represented
by the inﬁnitesimal twist displacement •xso between
frames ˙s and ˙o, which can be computed as
•xso D C hs :
(9.43)
All the quantities hereafter are referred to frame ˙s but
the superscript s is omitted for brevity.
For the considered contact situation, the end-
effector twist does not completely belong to the ideal
velocity subspace, corresponding to a rigid environ-
ment, because the environment can deform. Therefore,
the inﬁnitesimal twist displacement of the end-effector
frame ˙e with respect to ˙o can be decomposed as
•xeo D •xv C •xf ;
(9.44)
where •xv is the end-effector inﬁnitesimal twist dis-
placement in the velocity-controlled subspace, deﬁned
as the 6  m reciprocal complement of the force-con-
trolled subspace, while •xf is the end-effector inﬁnites-
imal twist displacement corresponding to the environ-
ment deformation. Hence,
•xv D Pv•xeo ;
(9.45)
•xf D .I  Pv/•xeo D .I  Pv/•xso ;
(9.46)
where Pv D Sv S
v and Sv and S
v are deﬁned as in the
rigid environment case. Being PvPv D Pv, the matrix Pv
is a projection matrix that ﬁlters out all the end-effector
twists (and inﬁnitesimal twist displacements) that are
not in the range space of Sv. Moreover, I  Pv is a pro-
jection matrix that ﬁlters out all the end-effector twists
(and inﬁnitesimal twist displacements) that are in the
range space of Sv. The twists Pvv are denoted as twists
of freedom while the twists .I  Pv/v are denoted as
twists of constraint.
In the hypothesis of frictionless contact, the interac-
tion wrench between the end-effector and the environ-
ment is restricted to a force-controlled subspace deﬁned
by the m-dimensional range space of a matrix Sf, as for
the rigid environment case, i. e.,
he D Sf	 D hs ;
(9.47)
where 	 is an m  1 dimensionless vector. Premulti-
plying both sides of (9.44) by ST
f and using (9.43),
(9.45), (9.46), and (9.47) yields
ST
f •xeo D ST
f C Sf	 ;
where the identity ST
f Pv D 0 has been exploited. There-
fore, the following elastic model can be found
he D Sf	 D K0•xeo ;
(9.48)
where K0 D Sf.ST
f CSf/1ST
f is the positive-semideﬁ-
nite stiffness matrix corresponding to the partially con-
strained interaction.
If the compliance matrix C is adopted as a weight-
ing matrix for the computation of S
f , then K0 can be
expressed as
K0 D PfK ;
(9.49)
where Pf D SfS
f . Being PfPf D Pf, matrix Pf is a pro-
jection matrix that ﬁlters out all the end-effector
wrenches that are not in the range space of Sf.
The compliance matrix for the partially constrained
interaction cannot be computed as the inverse of K0,
since this matrix is of rank m < 6. However, us-
ing (9.46), (9.43), and (9.47), the following equality can
be found
•xf D C0he ;
where the matrix
C0 D .I  Pv/C ;
(9.50)
of rank 6  m, is positive semideﬁnite. If the stiffness
matrix K is adopted as a weighting matrix for the com-
putation of S
v , then the matrix C0 has the noticeable
expression C0 D CSv.ST
vK Sv/1ST
v, showing that C0
is symmetric.

Force Control
9.3 Interaction Tasks
209
Part A | 9.3
9.3.3 Task Specification
An interaction task can be assigned in terms of a desired
end-effector wrench hd and twist v d. In order to be con-
sistent with the constraints, these vectors must lie in the
force- and velocity-controlled subspaces, respectively.
This can be guaranteed by specifying vectors 	d and d
and computing hd and v d as
hd D Sf	d;
v d D Svd ;
where Sf and Sv have to be suitably deﬁned on the basis
of the geometry of the task, and so that invariance with
respect to the choice of the reference frame and change
of physical units is guaranteed.
Many robotic tasks have a set of orthogonal ref-
erence frames in which the task speciﬁcation is very
easy and intuitive. Such frames are called task frames
or compliance frames. An interaction task can be spec-
iﬁed by assigning a desired force/torque or a desired
linear/angular velocity along/about each of the frame
axes. The desired quantities are known as artiﬁcial con-
straints because they are imposed by the controller;
these constraints, in the case of rigid contact, are
complementary to those imposed by the environment,
known as natural constraints.
Some examples of task frame deﬁnition and task
speciﬁcation are given below.
Peg-in-Hole
The goal of this task is to push the peg into the hole
while avoiding wedging and jamming. The peg has two
degrees of motion freedom, hence the dimension of the
velocity-controlled subspace is 6m D 2, while the di-
mension of the force-controlled subspace is m D 4. The
task frame can be chosen as shown in Fig. 9.3 and the
task can be achieved by assigning the following desired
forces and torques:

Zero forces along the xt and yt axes

Zero torques about the xt and yt axes,
xt
yt
zt
Fig. 9.3 Insertion of a cylindrical peg into a hole
and the desired velocities:

A nonzero linear velocity along the zt-axis

An arbitrary angular velocity about the zt-axis.
The task continues until a large reaction force in the
zt direction is measured, indicating that the peg has hit
the bottom of the hole, not represented in the ﬁgure.
Hence, the matrices Sf and Sv can be chosen as
Sf D
0
BBBBBB@
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCA
;
Sv D
0
BBBBBB@
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
CCCCCCA
;
where the columns of Sf have the dimensions of
wrenches and those of Sv have the dimensions of twists,
deﬁned in the task frame, and they transform accord-
ingly when changing the reference frame. The task
frame can be chosen either attached to the end-effector
or to the environment.
Turning a Crank
The goal of this task is turning a crank with an idle han-
dle. The handle has two degrees of motion freedom,
corresponding to the rotation about the zt-axis and to
the rotation about the rotation axis of the crank. Hence
the dimension of the velocity-controlled subspace is
6  m D 2, while the dimension of the force-controlled
subspace is m D 4. The task frame can be assumed as
in the Fig. 9.4, attached to the crank. The task can be
achieved by assigning the following desired forces and
torques:

Zero forces along the xt and zt axes

Zero torques about the xt and yt axes.
and the following desired velocities:
xt
yt
zt
Fig. 9.4 Turning a crank with an idle handle

Part A | 9.3
210
Part A
Robotics Foundations

A nonzero linear velocity along the yt-axis

An arbitrary angular velocity about the zt-axis.
Hence, the matrices Sf and Sv can be chosen as
Sf D
0
BBBBBB@
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCA
;
Sv D
0
BBBBBB@
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
CCCCCCA
;
referred to the task frame. In this case, the task
frame is ﬁxed with respect to the crank, but in mo-
tion with respect both the end-effector frame (ﬁxed
to the handle) and to the base frame of the robot.
Hence, the matrices Sf and Sv are time variant when
referred either to the end-effector frame or to the base
frame.
Sliding a Block on a Planar Elastic Surface
The goal of this task is to slide a prismatic block over
a planar surface along the xt-axis, while pushing with
a given force against the elastic planar surface. The ob-
ject has three degrees of motion freedom, hence the
dimension of the velocity-controlled subspace is 6 
m D 3 while the dimension of the force-controlled
subspace is m D 3. The task frame can be chosen at-
tached to the environment, as shown in Fig. 9.5, and
the task can be achieved by assigning the desired
velocities:

A nonzero velocity along the xt-axis

A zero velocity along the yt-axis

A zero angular velocity about the zt-axis,
and the desired forces and torques:

A nonzero force along the zt-axis

Zero torques about the xt and yt axes.
xt
yt
zt
Fig. 9.5 Sliding of a prismatic object on a planar elastic
surface
Hence, the matrices Sf and Sv can be chosen as
Sf D
0
BBBBBB@
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCA
;
Sv D
0
BBBBBB@
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
CCCCCCA
:
The elements of the 6  6 stiffness matrix K0, corre-
sponding to the partially constrained interaction of the
end-effector with the environment, are all zero except
those of the 3  3 principal minor K0
m formed by rows
3; 4; 5 and columns 3; 4; 5 of K0, which can be com-
puted as
K0
m D
0
@
c3;3
c3;4
c3;5
c4;3
c4;4
c4;5
c5;3
c5;4
c5;5
1
A
1
;
where ci;j D cj;i are the elements of the compliance ma-
trix C.
General Contact Model
The task frame concept has proven to be very useful
for the speciﬁcation of a variety of practical robotic
tasks. However, it only applies to task geometries with
limited complexity, for which separate control modes
can be assigned independently to three pure transla-
tional and three pure rotational directions along the axes
of a single frame. For more complex situations, as in
the case of multiple-point contact, a task frame may
not exist and more complex contact models have to be
adopted. A possible solution is represented by the vir-
tual contact manipulator model, where each individual
contact is modeled by a virtual kinematic chain between
the manipulated object and the environment, giving the
manipulated object (instantaneously) the same motion
freedom as the contact. The velocities and force kine-
matics of the parallel manipulator, formed by the virtual
manipulators of all individual contacts, can be derived
using the standard kinematics procedures of real manip-
ulators and allow the construction of bases for the twist
and wrench spaces of the total motion constraint.
A more general approach, known as constraint-
based task speciﬁcation opens up new applications in-
volving complex geometries and/or the use of multiple
sensors (force/torque, distance, visual sensors) for con-
trolling different directions in space simultaneously.
The concept of task frame is extended to that of mul-
tiple feature frames. Each of the feature frames makes
it possible to model part of the task geometry using
translational and rotational directions along the axes of
a frame; also, part of the constraints is speciﬁed in each

Force Control
9.4 Hybrid Force/Motion Control
211
Part A | 9.4
υyt
υxt
υ
yr
a)
yt
xr
xt
fyt
fyt
fxt
yr
θ
θ
b)
yt
xr
xt
Fig.9.6a,b Estimation of orientation error: (a) velocity-
based approach, (b) force-based approach
of the feature frames. The total model and the total set
of constraints are achieved by collecting the partial task
and constraints descriptions, each expressed in the indi-
vidual feature frames.
9.3.4 Sensor-Based
Contact Model Estimation
The task speciﬁcation relies on the deﬁnition of the ve-
locity-controlled subspace and of the force-controlled
subspace assuming that an accurate model of the con-
tact is available all the time. On the other hand, in
most practical implementations, the selection matri-
ces Sf and Sv are not exactly known, however many
interaction control strategies turn out to be rather robust
against modeling errors. In fact, to cope reliably with
these situations is exactly why force control is used. The
robustness of the force controller increases if the matri-
ces Sf and Sv can be continuously updated, using mo-
tion and/or force measurements, during task execution.
In detail, a nominal model is assumed to be avail-
able; when the contact situation evolves differently
from what the model predicts, the measured and pre-
dicted motion and force will begin to deviate. These
small incompatibilities can be measured and can then
be used to adapt the model online, using algorithms de-
rived from classical state-space prediction–correction
estimators such as the Kalman ﬁlter.
Figure 9.6 reports an example of error between
nominal and measured motion and force variables, typ-
ical of a two-dimensional contour-following task. The
orientation of the contact normal changes if the envi-
ronment is notplanar. Hence an angular error  appears
between the nominal contact normal, aligned to the yt-
axis of the task frame (the frame with axes xt and yt),
and the real contact normal, aligned to the yr-axis of the
real task frame (the frame with axes xr and yr). This
angle can be estimated with either velocity or force
measurements only:

Velocity-based approach: the executed linear veloc-
ity v, which is tangent to the real contour (aligned
to the xr-axis), does not completely lie along the
xt-axis, but has a small component vyt along the
yt-axis. The orientation error  can then be approx-
imated by  D tan1.vyt=vxt/.

Force-based approach: the measured (ideal) contact
force f does not completely lie along the nomi-
nal normal direction, aligned to the yt-axis, but has
a small component fxt along the xt-axis. The ori-
entation error  can then be approximated by  D
tan1.fxt=fyt/.
The velocity-based approach is disturbed by me-
chanical compliance in the system; the force-based
approach is disturbed by contact friction.
9.4 Hybrid Force/Motion Control
The aim of hybrid force/motion control is to split up
simultaneous control of both end-effector motion and
contact forces into two separate decoupled subprob-
lems. In the following, the main control approaches in
the hybrid framework are presented for the cases of both
rigid and compliant environments.
9.4.1 Acceleration-Resolved Approach
As for the case of motion control, the acceleration-
resolved approach is aimed at decoupling and lineariz-
ing the nonlinear robot dynamics at the acceleration
level, via an inverse dynamics control law. In the pres-
ence of interaction with the environment, a complete
decoupling between the force- and velocity-controlled
subspaces is sought. The basic idea is that of designing
a model-based inner control loop to compensate for the
nonlinear dynamics of the robot manipulator and de-
couple the force and velocity subspaces; hence an outer
control loop is designed to ensure disturbance rejec-
tion and tracking of the desired end-effector force and
motion.

Part A | 9.4
212
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Rigid Environment
In the case of a rigid environment, the external wrench
can be written in the form he D Sf	. The force multi-
plier 	 can be computed from (9.2) by multiplying both
sides of (9.2) by the weighted pseudo-inverse S
f with
weight ƒ1. q/ and using the time derivative of the last
equality (9.35). This yields
	 D S
f . q/ Œhc  . q; Pq/ C ƒf. q/PST
f v e ;
(9.51)
where ƒf. q/ D .ST
f ƒ1Sf/1 and . q; Pq/ D  Pq C .
Replacing again (9.51) into (9.2) gives
ƒ. q/ Pv e C Sfƒf. q/PST
f v e D Nf. q/Œhc  . q; Pq/ ;
(9.52)
with Nf D I  SfS
f . Notice that NfNf D Nf and NfSf D
0, hence the 6  6 matrix Nf is a projection matrix that
ﬁlters out all the end-effector wrenches lying in the
range of Sf. These correspond to wrenches that tend
to violate the constraints. Equation (9.52) represents
a set of six second-order differential equations whose
solution, if initialized on the constraints, automatically
satisfy (9.29) at all times.
The reduced-order dynamics of the constrained sys-
tem is described by 6  m second-order equations that
are obtained by premultiplying both sides of (9.52) by
the matrix ST
v and substituting the acceleration Pv e with
Pv e D Sv P C PSv :
The resulting equations are
ƒv. q/P D ST
v
h
hc  . q; Pq/  ƒ. q/PSv
i
;
(9.53)
where
ƒv D ST
vƒSv
and the identities (9.38) and
ST
vNf D ST
v
have been used. Moreover, expression (9.51) can be
rewritten as
	 D S
f . q/
h
hc  . q; Pq/  ƒ. q/PSv
i
;
(9.54)
where the identity PST
f Sv D ST
f PSv has been exploited.
Equation (9.54) reveals that the force multiplier vec-
tor 	 instantaneously depends also on the applied input
wrench hc. Hence, by suitably choosing hc, it is possi-
ble to directly control the m independent components
of the end-effector wrench that tend to violate the con-
straints; these components can be computed from the m
force multipliers through (9.31). On the other hand, the
6  m independent components of the end-effector ve-
locity twist can be controlled through hc via (9.53).
An inverse-dynamics inner control loop can be de-
signed by choosing the control wrench hc as
hc D ƒ. q/Sv˛v C Sf f 	 C . q; Pq/ C ƒ. q/PSv ;
(9.55)
where ˛v and f 	 are properly designed control inputs.
Substituting (9.55) into (9.53) and (9.51) yields
P D ˛ ;
	 D f 	 ;
showing that control law (9.55) allows complete de-
coupling between the force- and velocity-controlled
subspaces.
It is worth noticing that, for the implementation
of the control law (9.55), the constraint (9.29) as well
as (9.40) deﬁning the vector of the conﬁguration vari-
ables for the constrained system are not required, pro-
vided that the matrices Sf and Sv are known or estimated
online. In these cases, the task can easily be assigned by
specifying a desired force, in terms of the vector 	d.t/,
and a desired velocity, in terms of the vector d.t/;
moreover, a force/velocity control is implemented.
The desired force 	d.t/ can be achieved by setting
f 	 D 	d.t/ ;
(9.56)
but this choice is very sensitive to disturbance forces,
since it contains no force feedback. Alternative choices
are
f 	 D 	d.t/ C KP	 Œ	d.t/  	.t/ ;
(9.57)
or
f 	 D 	d.t/ C KI	
t
Z
0
Œ	d. /  	. / d ;
(9.58)
where KP	 and KI	 are suitable positive-deﬁnite matrix
gains. The proportional feedback is able to reduce the
force error due to disturbance forces, while the integral
action is able to compensate for constant bias distur-
bances.
The implementation of force feedback requires the
computation of the force multiplier  from the mea-
surement of the end-effector wrench he, which can be
achieved by using (9.33).
Velocity control is achieved by setting
˛ D Pd.t/ C KP Œd.t/  .t/
C KI
t
Z
0
Œd. /  . / d ;
(9.59)

Force Control
9.4 Hybrid Force/Motion Control
213
Part A | 9.4
where KP and KI are suitable matrix gains. It
is straightforward to show that asymptotic tracking
of d.t/ and Pd.t/ is ensured with exponential conver-
gence for any choice of positive-deﬁnite matrices KP
and KI.
The computation of the vector  from the available
measurements can be achieved using (9.39), where the
end-effector twist is computed from joint position and
velocity measurements through (9.1).
Equations (9.57) or (9.58) and (9.59) represent the
outer control loop ensuring force/velocity control and
disturbance rejection.
When (9.29) and (9.40) are known, the matrices Sf
and Sv can be computed according to (9.32) and (9.42)
and a force/position control can be designed by speci-
fying a desired force 	d.t/ and a desired position rd.t/.
Force control can be designed as above, while posi-
tion control can be achieved by setting
˛ D Rrd.t/ C KDr ŒPrd.t/  .t/ C KPr Œrd.t/  r.t/ :
Asymptotic tracking of rd.t/, Prd.t/ and Rrd.t/ is en-
sured with exponential convergence for any choice of
positive-deﬁnite matrices KDr and KPr. The vector r
required for position feedback can be computed from
joint position measurements via (9.40).
Compliant Environment
In the case of a compliant environment, according to the
decomposition (9.44) of the end-effector displacement,
the end-effector twist can be decomposed as
v e D Sv C C0Sf P	 ;
(9.60)
where the ﬁrst term is a twist of freedom, the second
term is a twist of constraint, the vector  is deﬁned as
in (9.42), and C0 is deﬁned in (9.50). Assuming a con-
stant contact geometry and compliance, i. e., PSv D 0,
PC0 D 0, and PSf D 0, a similar decomposition holds in
terms of acceleration
Pv e D Sv P C C0Sf R	 :
(9.61)
An inverse-dynamics control law (9.16) can be
adopted, resulting in the closed loop (9.17), where ˛
is a properly designed control input.
In view of the acceleration decomposition (9.61),
the choice
˛ D Sv˛ C C0Sf f 
(9.62)
allows decoupling of the force control from veloc-
ity control. In fact, substituting (9.61) and (9.62)
into (9.17) and premultiplying both sides of the result-
ing equation once by S
v and once by ST
f , the following
decoupled equations can be derived
P D ˛ ;
(9.63)
R	 D f 	 :
(9.64)
Hence, by choosing ˛ according to (9.59) as for the
rigid environment case, asymptotic tracking of a desired
velocity d.t/ and acceleration Pd.t/ is ensured, with
exponential convergence. The control input f 	 can be
chosen as
f 	 D R	d.t/ C KD	
 P	d.t/  P	.t/
	
C KP	 Œ	d.t/  	.t/ ;
(9.65)
ensuring asymptotic tracking of a desired force tra-
jectory (	d.t/; P	d.t/; R	d.t/) with exponential conver-
gence for any choice of positive-deﬁnite matrices KD	
and KP	.
Differently from the rigid environment case, feed-
back of P	 is required for the implementation of the
force control law (9.65). This quantity could be com-
puted from end-effector wrench measurements he as
P	 D S
f Phe :
However, since the wrench measurement signal is often
noisy, the feedback of P	 is often replaced by
P	 D S
f K0J. q/Pq ;
(9.66)
where joint velocities are measured using tachometers
or computed from joint positions via numerical differ-
entiation and K0 is the positive-semideﬁnite stiffness
matrix (9.49) describing the partially constrained inter-
action. For the computation of (9.66), only knowledge
(or an estimate) of K0 is required, and not that of the
full stiffness matrix K. Also, the implementation of the
control law (9.62) requires knowledge (or an estimate)
of the compliance matrix C0 of the partially constrained
interaction and not that of the full compliance matrix C.
If the contact geometry is known, but only an es-
timate of the stiffness/compliance of the environment
is available, the control law (9.62), with (9.65), may
still guarantee the convergence of the force error, if
a constant desired force 	d is assigned. In this case, the
control law (9.62) has the form
˛ D Sv˛ CbC0Sf f 	 ;
where bC
0 D .I Pv/bC and bC is an estimate of the com-
pliance matrix. Hence, (9.63) still holds, while, in lieu
of (9.64), the following equality can be found
R	 D Lff 	 ;

Part A | 9.4
214
Part A
Robotics Foundations
where Lf D .ST
f C Sf/1ST
f bC Sf is a nonsingular matrix.
Thus, the force- and velocity-controlled subspaces re-
main decoupled and the velocity control law (9.59)
does not need to be modiﬁed. On the other hand, if
the feedback of the time derivative of 	 is computed
using (9.66), only an estimate PO	 can be obtained. Us-
ing (9.66), (9.60) and (9.48), the following equality can
be found
PO	 D L1
f
P	 :
Therefore, computing the force control law f 	 as
in (9.65) with a constant 	d, PO	 in lieu of P	 and KD	 D
KD	I, the dynamics of the closed-loop system is
R	 C KD	 P	 C LfKP		 D LfKP		d ;
showing that exponential asymptotic stability of the
equilibrium 	 D 	d can be ensured, also in the pres-
ence of the uncertain matrix Lf, with a suitable choice
of the gains KD	 and KP	.
9.4.2 Passivity-Based Approach
The passivity-based approach exploits the passivity
properties of the dynamic model of the manipula-
tor, which hold also for the constrained dynamic
model (9.2). It can be easily shown that the choice of
the matrix C. q; Pq/ that guarantees the skew symme-
try of the matrix PH. q/  2C. q; Pq/ in the joint space,
also makes the matrix Pƒ. q/  2. q; Pq/ skew symmet-
ric. This fundamental property of Lagrangian systems
is at the base of passivity-based control algorithms.
Rigid Environment
The control wrench hc can be chosen as
hc D ƒ. q/Sv Pr C 0. q; Pq/r C .S
v /TK.r  /
C . q/ C Sf f 	 ;
(9.67)
where 0. q; Pq/ D  Sv C ƒPSv, K is a suitable sym-
metric and positive-deﬁnite matrix, and r and f 	 are
properly designed control inputs.
Substituting (9.67) into (9.2) yields
ƒ. q/SvPs C 0. q; Pq/s C .S
v /TKs
C Sf. f 	  	/ D 0 ;
(9.68)
with Ps D Pr  P and s D r  , showing that the
closed-loop system remains nonlinear and coupled.
Premultiplying both sides of (9.68) by the ma-
trix Sv, the following expression for the reduced-order
dynamics is achieved
ƒv. q/Ps C v. q; Pq/s C Ks D 0 ;
(9.69)
with v D ST
v. q; Pq/Sv C ST
vƒ. q/PSv; it can easily be
shown that the skew symmetry of the matrix Pƒ. q/ 
2. q; Pq/ implies that the matrix Pƒv. q/  2v. q; Pq/ is
skew symmetric as well.
On the other hand, premultiplying both sides
of (9.68) by the matrix ST
f ƒ1. q/, the following ex-
pression for the force dynamics can be found
f 	  	 D S
f . q/
h
 0. q; Pq/  .S
v /TK
i
s ;
(9.70)
being S
f
the weighted pseudo-inverse of Sf with
weight ƒ1. q/. The above equation shows that the
force multiplier 	 instantaneously depends on the con-
trol input f 	 but also on the error s in the velocity-
controlled subspace.
The asymptotic stability of the reduced-order sys-
tem (9.69) can be ensured with the choices
Pr D Pd C ˛ ;
(9.71)
r D d C ˛x ;
(9.72)
where ˛ is a positive gain, Pd and d are the desired ac-
celeration and velocity, respectively,  D d  , and
x D
t
Z
0
. /d :
The stability proof is based on the positive-deﬁnite Lya-
punov function
V D 1
2sT
ƒv. q/s C ˛xT
Kx ;
whose time derivative along the trajectories of (9.69),
PV D TK  ˛2xT
Kx ;
is a deﬁnite semi-negative function. Hence,  D 0,
x D 0, and s D 0 asymptotically. Therefore, track-
ing of the desired velocity d.t/ is ensured. Moreover,
the right-hand side of (9.70) remains bounded and
vanishes asymptotically. Hence, tracking of the de-
sired force 	d.t/ can be ensured by setting f 	 as for
the acceleration-resolved approach, according to the
choices (9.56)–(9.58).
Notice that position control can be achieved if a de-
sired position rd.t/ is assigned for the vector r in (9.40),
provided that the matrices Sf and Sv are computed ac-
cording to (9.32) and (9.42), and the vectors Pd D Rrd,
d D Prd, and x D rd r are used in (9.71) and (9.72).

Force Control
9.4 Hybrid Force/Motion Control
215
Part A | 9.4
Compliant Environment
The control wrench hc can be chosen as
hc D ƒ. q/ Pv r C . q; Pq/v r
C Ks. v r  v e/ C he C . q/ ;
(9.73)
where Ks is a suitable symmetric positive-deﬁnite ma-
trix while v r and its time derivative Pv r are chosen as
v r D v d C ˛x ;
Pv r D Pv d C ˛v ;
where ˛ is the positive gain, v d and its time deriva-
tive Pv d are properly designed control inputs, v D
v d  v e, and
x D
t
Z
0
v d :
Substituting (9.73) into (9.2) yields
ƒ. q/Ps C . q; Pq/s C Kss D 0 ;
(9.74)
with Ps D Pv r  Pv e and s D v r  v e.
The asymptotic stability of system (9.74) can be en-
sured by setting
v d D Svd C C0Sf P	d ;
where d.t/ is a desired velocity trajectory and 	d.t/ is
the desired force trajectory. The stability proof is based
on the positive-deﬁnite Lyapunov function
V D 1
2sTƒ. q/s C ˛xTKsx ;
whose time derivative along the trajectories of (9.74),
PV D v TKsv  ˛2xTKsx ;
is
a
negative-deﬁnite
function.
Hence,
v D 0
and x D 0, asymptotically. In the case of constant
contact geometry and stiffness, the following equalities
hold
v D Sv.d  / C C0Sf. P	d  P	/ ;
x D Sv
t
Z
0
.d  /d C C0Sf.	d  	/ ;
showing that both the velocity and force tracking errors,
belonging to reciprocal subspaces, converge asymptoti-
cally to zero.
9.4.3 Velocity-Resolved Approach
The acceleration-resolved approach, as well as the
passivity-based approach, require modiﬁcation of the
current industrial robot controllers. As for the case of
impedance control, if the contact is sufﬁciently com-
pliant, the closed-loop dynamics of a motion-controlled
robot can be approximated by (9.28), corresponding to
a velocity-resolved control.
To achieve force and velocity control, according to
the end-effector twist decomposition (9.60), the control
input v r can be chosen as
v r D Svv  C C0Sf f 	 ;
(9.75)
with
v  D d.t/ C KI
t
Z
0
Œd. /  . /d ;
(9.76)
and
f 	 D P	d.t/ C KP	Œ	d.t/  	.t/ ;
(9.77)
where KI and KP	 are suitable symmetric and
positive-deﬁnite matrix gains. Decoupling between
velocity- and force-controlled subspaces and exponen-
tial asymptotic stability of the closed-loop system can
be proven as for the acceleration-resolved approach.
Also, since the force error has second-order dynamics,
an integral action can be added to (9.77) to improve the
disturbance rejection capabilities, i. e.,
f 	 D P	d.t/ C KP	 Œ	d.t/  	.t/
CKI	
t
Z
0
Œ	d. /  	. / d ;
(9.78)
and the exponential asymptotic stability is guaranteed
if the matrices KP	 and KI	 are symmetric and positive
deﬁnite.
If an estimate bC of the stiffness matrix of the en-
vironment is used in (9.75), as for the acceleration-
resolved approach, the exponential convergence of 	
to a constant 	d can still be ensured for both (9.77)
and (9.78).
In some applications, besides the stiffness ma-
trix, also the geometry of the environment is uncer-
tain. In these cases, a force/motion control law sim-
ilar to (9.75) can be implemented, without using the
selection matrices Sv and Sf to separate the force-
controlled subspace from the velocity-controlled sub-
space. The motion control law can be set as in (9.76),

Part A | 9.5
216
Part A
Robotics Foundations
but using full velocity feedback. Also, the force con-
trol law can be set as in (9.78), but using full force
and moment feedback. That is, both motion control
and force control are applied in all directions of the
six-dimensional (6-D) space. The resulting control,
known as force control with feedforward motion or
parallel force/position control guarantees force reg-
ulation at the expense of position errors along the
constrained task directions, thanks to the dominance
of the force controller over the position controller en-
sured by the presence of the integral action on the
force error. This approach is tested in the experiments
reported in
VIDEO 687
and
VIDEO 691
where the
concept of task frame is also exploited. A framework
for robotic assembly, where a standard position-based
robot controller is integrated with an external con-
troller performing force-controlled skills is presented
in
VIDEO 692 .
9.5 Conclusions and Further Reading
This chapter has summarized the main approaches to
force control in a unifying perspective. However, there
are many aspects that have not been considered and
that must be carefully taken into account when dealing
with interaction robotic tasks. The two major paradigms
of force control (impedance and hybrid force/motion
control) are based on several simplifying assumptions
that are only partially satisﬁed in practical implemen-
tations. In fact, the performance of a force-controlled
robotic system depends on the interaction with a chang-
ing environment which is very difﬁcult to model and
identify correctly. A general contact situation is far
from being completely predictable, not only quantita-
tively, but also qualitatively: the contact conﬁguration
can change abruptly, or be of a different type than ex-
pected. Hence, the standard performance indices used
to evaluate a control system, i. e., stability, bandwidth,
accuracy, and robustness, cannot be deﬁned by consid-
ering the robotic system alone, as for the case of robot
motion control, but must be always referred to the par-
ticular contact situation at hand. Also, a classiﬁcation
of all these different situations is not easy, especially in
the case of dynamics environments and when the task
involves multiple contacts acting in parallel.
Due to the inherent complexity of the force control
problem, a large number of research papers on this topic
have been published in the past three decades. A de-
scription of the state of the art of the ﬁrst decade is
provided in [9.20], whereas the progress of the second
decade is surveyed in [9.21] and [9.22]. More recently,
two monographs on force control [9.23, 24] have ap-
peared. In the following, a list of references is provided,
where more details on the arguments presented in the
chapter, as well as topics not covered here, can be
found.
9.5.1 Indirect Force Control
The concept of generalized spring and damping for
force control in joint coordinates was originally pro-
posed in [9.3] and the implementation discussed
in [9.10]. Stiffness control in Cartesian coordinates was
proposed in [9.9]. Devices based on the remote center
of compliance were discussed in [9.25] for successful
mating of rigid parts. The original idea of a mechanical
impedance model used for controlling the interaction
between the manipulator and the environment is pre-
sented in [9.7], and a similar formulation is given
in [9.8]. Stability of impedance control was analyzed
in [9.26] and the problems of interaction with a stiff en-
vironment were considered in [9.27].
Adaptive impedance control algorithms [9.28, 29]
have been proposed to overcome uncertainties in the
dynamic parameters of the robot manipulator, while ro-
bust control schemes can be found in [9.30]. Impedance
control has also been used in the hybrid force/motion
control framework [9.31].
A reference work on modeling 6-DOF (spatial)
stiffness is [9.32], while the properties of spatial
compliance have been analyzed in detail in [9.33–
35]; a 6-DOF variable compliant wrist was proposed
in [9.36], while several studies concerning the con-
struction of programmed compliances, optimized for
speciﬁc tasks, have been proposed [9.37, 38]. The en-
ergy-based approach to derive a spatial impedance was
introduced in [9.39], using rotation matrices; various
6-DOF impedance control schemes based on different
representations of end-effector orientation, including
the unit quaternion, can be found in [9.40]. The quater-
nion-based formulation is extended to the case of non-
block-diagonal stiffness matrix in [9.41]. A rigorous
treatment of spatial impedance control in a passivity
framework can be found in [9.42].
More recently, impedance control was proposed as
an effective approach to enhance safety in applications
where humans and robots share the same workspace
and may have physical interaction. To this end, the
passive compliance of lightweight robots is combined
with the active compliance ensured by impedance con-
trol [9.43, 44].

Force Control
9.5 Conclusionsand Further Reading
217
Part A | 9
9.5.2 Task Specification
The concepts of natural and artiﬁcial constraints and
of compliance frame were introduced in [9.11]. These
ideas have been systematically developed in [9.12, 45]
within the task frame formalism. Theoretical issues on
the reciprocity of generalized force and velocity direc-
tions are discussed in [9.46, 47], while invariance in
computing the generalized inverse in robotics is ad-
dressed in [9.48]. The issue of partially constrained
tasks is considered in [9.49], where the models of
positive-semideﬁnite stiffness and compliance matrices
are developed. The problem of estimating geomet-
ric uncertainties is considered in [9.50, 51], as well
as the issue of linking constraint-based task speciﬁ-
cation with real-time task execution control. This ap-
proach is generalized in [9.52], where a systematic
constraint-based methodology to specify complex tasks
is presented.
9.5.3 Hybrid Force/Motion Control
Early works on force control can be found in [9.10].
The original hybrid force/positon control concept was
introduced in [9.13], based on the natural and arti-
ﬁcial constraint task formulation [9.11]. The explicit
inclusion of the manipulator dynamic model was pre-
sented in [9.17], and a systematic approach to modeling
the interaction with a dynamic environment was de-
veloped in [9.53]. The constrained formulation with
inverse dynamic controllers is treated in [9.14, 54] in
the Cartesian space as well as in [9.15] joint space.
The constrained approach was also used in [9.16] with
a controller based on linearized equations. The invari-
ance problems pointed out in [9.47] were correctly
addressed, among other papers, in [9.46, 55]. Trans-
position of model-based schemes from unconstrained
motion control to constrained cases was accomplished
for adaptive control in [9.18, 56, 57] and for robust con-
trol in [9.58].
Approaches designed to cope with uncertainties in
the environment geometry are the force control with
feedforward motion scheme proposed in [9.2] and the
parallel force/position control [9.19], based on the con-
cept of dominance of force control on motion control,
thanks to the use of an integral action on the force er-
ror. A parallel force/position regulator was developed
in [9.59]. The integral action for removing steady-state
force errors has traditionally been used; its stability was
proven in [9.60], while robustness with respect to force
measurement delays was investigated in [9.61, 62].
In the absence of force/torque sensors, suitable al-
gorithms can be adopted to estimate the contact force,
based, e.g., on disturbance observers [9.63], or on the
error of a position control [9.64].
It has generally been recognized that force con-
trol may cause unstable behavior during contact with
environment. Dynamic models for explaining this phe-
nomenon were introduced in [9.65] and experimen-
tal investigations can be found in [9.66] and [9.67].
Moreover, control schemes are usually derived on the
assumption that the manipulator end-effector is in con-
tact with the environment and that this contact is not
lost. Impact phenomena may occur and deserve careful
consideration, and there is a need for global analy-
sis of control schemes including the transition from
noncontact to contact situations and vice versa, see
e.g., [9.68–70].
Video-References
VIDEO 684
Recent research in impedance control
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/09/videodetails/684
VIDEO 685
Integration of force strategies and natural admittance control
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/09/videodetails/685
VIDEO 686
Experiments of spatial impedance control
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/09/videodetails/686
VIDEO 687
Compliant robot motion; Control and task specification
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/09/videodetails/687
VIDEO 691
COMRADE: Compliant motion research and development environment
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/09/videodetails/691
VIDEO 692
Robotic assembly of emergency stop buttons
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/09/videodetails/692

Part A | 9
218
Part A
Robotics Foundations
References
9.1
T.L. De Fazio, D.S. Seltzer, D.E. Whitney: The instru-
mented remote center of compliance, Ind. Robot
11(4), 238–242 (1984)
9.2
J. De Schutter, H. Van Brussel: Compliant robot mo-
tion II. A control approach based on external control
loops, Int. J. Robotics Res. 7(4), 18–33 (1988)
9.3
I. Nevins, D.E. Whitney: The force vector assembler
concept, Proc. 1 CISM-IFToMM Symp. Theory Pract.
Robotics Manip., Udine (1973)
9.4
M.T. Mason, J.K. Salisbury: Robot Hands and Me-
chanics of Manipulation (MIT Press, Cambridge 1985)
9.5
J.Y.S. Luh, W.D. Fisher, R.P.C. Paul: Joint torque con-
trol by direct feedback for industrial robots, IEEE
Trans. Autom. Control 28, 153–161 (1983)
9.6
G. Hirzinger, N. Sporer, A. Albu-Schäffer, M. Hähnle,
R. Krenn, A. Pascucci, R. Schedl: DLR’s torque-
controlled light weight robot III – Are we reach-
ing the technological limits now?, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom., Washington (2002) pp. 1710–
1716
9.7
N. Hogan: Impedance control: An approach to ma-
nipulation: Parts I–III, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Con-
trol 107, 1–24 (1985)
9.8
H. Kazerooni, T.B. Sheridan, P.K. Houpt: Robust
compliant motion for manipulators. Part I: The
fundamental concepts of compliant motion, IEEE
J. Robotics Autom. 2, 83–92 (1986)
9.9
J.K. Salisbury: Active stiffness control of a manipu-
lator in Cartesian coordinates, 19th IEEE Conf. Decis.
Control, Albuquerque (1980) pp. 95–100
9.10
D.E. Whitney: Force feedback control of manipulator
fine motions, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 99,
91–97 (1977)
9.11
M.T. Mason: Compliance and force control for com-
puter controlled manipulators, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man
Cybern. 11, 418–432 (1981)
9.12
J. De Schutter, H. Van Brussel: Compliant robot mo-
tion I. A formalism for specifying compliant motion
tasks, Int. J. Robotics Res. 7(4), 3–17 (1988)
9.13
M.H. Raibert, J.J. Craig: Hybrid position/force control
of manipulators, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 103,
126–133 (1981)
9.14
T. Yoshikawa: Dynamic hybrid position/force control
of robot manipulators – Description of hand con-
straints and calculation of joint driving force, IEEE
J. Robotics Autom. 3, 386–392 (1987)
9.15
N.H. McClamroch, D. Wang: Feedback stabilization
and tracking of constrained robots, IEEE Trans. Au-
tom. Control 33, 419–426 (1988)
9.16
J.K. Mills, A.A. Goldenberg: Force and position con-
trol of manipulators during constrained motion
tasks, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 5, 30–46 (1989)
9.17
O. Khatib: A unified approach for motion and
force control of robot manipulators: The operational
space formulation, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 3, 43–53
(1987)
9.18
L. Villani, C. Canudas de Wit, B. Brogliato: An ex-
ponentially stable adaptive control for force and
position tracking of robot manipulators, IEEE Trans.
Autom. Control 44, 798–802 (1983)
9.19
S. Chiaverini, L. Sciavicco: The parallel approach to
force/position control of robotic manipulators, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 9, 361–373 (1993)
9.20
D.E. Whitney: Historical perspective and state of the
art in robot force control, Int. J. Robotics Res. 6(1),
3–14 (1987)
9.21
M. Vukobratović, Y. Nakamura: Force and contact
control in robotic systems, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom., Atlanta (1993)
9.22
J. De Schutter, H. Bruyninckx, W.H. Zhu, M.W. Spong:
Force control: A bird’s eye view. In: Control Prob-
lems in Robotics and Automation, ed. by K.P. Vala-
vanis, B. Siciliano (Springer, London 1998) pp. 1–
17
9.23
D.M. Gorinevski, A.M. Formalsky, A.Y. Schneider:
Force Control of Robotics Systems (CRC, Boca Raton
1997)
9.24
B. Siciliano, L. Villani: Robot Force Control (Kluwer,
Boston 1999)
9.25
D.E. Whitney: Quasi-static assembly of compliantly
supported rigid parts, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Con-
trol 104, 65–77 (1982)
9.26
N. Hogan: On the stability of manipulators perform-
ing contact tasks, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 4, 677–686
(1988)
9.27
H. Kazerooni: Contact instability of the direct drive
robot when constrained by a rigid environment, IEEE
Trans. Autom. Control 35, 710–714 (1990)
9.28
R. Kelly, R. Carelli, M. Amestegui, R. Ortega: Adaptive
impedance control of robot manipulators, IASTED Int.
J. Robotics Autom. 4(3), 134–141 (1989)
9.29
R. Colbaugh, H. Seraji, K. Glass: Direct adaptive
impedance control of robot manipulators, J. Robotics
Syst. 10, 217–248 (1993)
9.30
Z. Van Lu, A.A. Goldenberg: Robust impedance con-
trol and force regulation: Theory and experiments,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 14, 225–254 (1995)
9.31
R.J. Anderson, M.W. Spong: Hybrid impedance con-
trol of robotic manipulators, IEEE J. Robotics Autom.
4, 549–556 (1986)
9.32
J. Lončarić: Normal forms of stiffness and compliance
matrices, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 3, 567–572 (1987)
9.33
T. Patterson, H. Lipkin: Structure of robot compli-
ance, ASME J. Mech. Design 115, 576–580 (1993)
9.34
E.D. Fasse, P.C. Breedveld: Modelling of elastically
coupled bodies: Part I – General theory and geo-
metric potential function method, ASME J. Dyn. Syst.
Meas. Control 120, 496–500 (1998)
9.35
E.D. Fasse, P.C. Breedveld: Modelling of elastically
coupled bodies: Part II – Exponential and gener-
alized coordinate method, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas.
Control 120, 501–506 (1998)
9.36
R.L. Hollis, S.E. Salcudean, A.P. Allan: A six-degree-
of-freedom magnetically levitated variable com-
pliance fine-motion wrist: Design, modeling and
control, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 7, 320–333
(1991)
9.37
M.A. Peshkin: Programmed compliance for error cor-
rective assembly, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 6, 473–
482 (1990)

Force Control
References
219
Part A | 9
9.38
J.M. Shimmels, M.A. Peshkin: Admittance matrix de-
sign for force-guided assembly, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 8, 213–227 (1992)
9.39
E.D. Fasse, J.F. Broenink: A spatial impedance con-
troller for robotic manipulation, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 13, 546–556 (1997)
9.40
F. Caccavale, C. Natale, B. Siciliano, L. Villani: Six-DOF
impedance control based on angle/axis representa-
tions, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 15, 289–300 (1999)
9.41
F. Caccavale, C. Natale, B. Siciliano, L. Villani: Robot
impedance control with nondiagonal stiffness, IEEE
Trans. Autom. Control 44, 1943–1946 (1999)
9.42
S. Stramigioli: Modeling and IPC Control of Interactive
Mechanical Systems – A Coordinate Free Approach
(Springer, London 2001)
9.43
C. Ott: Cartesian Impedance Control of Redundant
and Flexible-Joint Robots, Springer Tracts in Ad-
vanced Robotics (STAR) (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2008)
9.44
C. Ott, A. Albu-Schäffer, A. Kugi, G. Hirzinger: On the
passivity based impedance control of flexible joint
robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics 24, 416–429 (2008)
9.45
H. Bruyninckx, J. De Schutter: Specification of Force-
controlled actions in the task frame formalism –
A synthesis, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 12, 581–589
(1996)
9.46
H. Lipkin, J. Duffy: Hybrid twist and wrench control
for a robotic manipulator, ASME J. Mech. Design 110,
138–144 (1988)
9.47
J. Duffy: The fallacy of modern hybrid control theory
that is based on orthogonal complements of twist
and wrench spaces, J. Robotics Syst. 7, 139–144 (1990)
9.48
K.L. Doty, C. Melchiorri, C. Bonivento: A theory
of generalized inverses applied to robotics, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 12, 1–19 (1993)
9.49
T. Patterson, H. Lipkin: Duality of constrained elas-
tic manipulation, Proc. IEEE Conf. Robotics Autom.,
Sacramento (1991) pp. 2820–2825
9.50
J. De Schutter, H. Bruyninckx, S. Dutré, J. De Geeter,
J. Katupitiya, S. Demey, T. Lefebvre: Estimation first-
order geometric parameters and monitoring contact
transitions during force-controlled compliant mo-
tions, Int. J. Robotics Res. 18(12), 1161–1184 (1999)
9.51
T. Lefebvre, H. Bruyninckx, J. De Schutter: Polyedral
contact formation identification for auntonomous
compliant motion, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 19,
26–41 (2007)
9.52
J. De Schutter, T. De Laet, J. Rutgeerts, W. De-
cré, R. Smits, E. Aerbeliën, K. Claes, H. Bruyninckx:
Constraint-based task specification and estimation
for sensor-based robot systems in the presence of
geometric uncertainty, Int. J. Robotics Res. 26(5),
433–455 (2007)
9.53
A. De Luca, C. Manes: Modeling robots in contact with
a dynamic environment, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
10, 542–548 (1994)
9.54
T. Yoshikawa, T. Sugie, N. Tanaka: Dynamic hybrid
position/force control of robot manipulators – Con-
troller design and experiment, IEEE J. Robotics Au-
tom. 4, 699–705 (1988)
9.55
J. De Schutter, D. Torfs, H. Bruyninckx, S. Dutré: In-
variant hybrid force/position control of a velocity
controlled robot with compliant end effector using
modal decoupling, Int. J. Robotics Res. 16(3), 340–
356 (1997)
9.56
R. Lozano, B. Brogliato: Adaptive hybrid force-
position control for redundant manipulators, IEEE
Trans. Autom. Control 37, 1501–1505 (1992)
9.57
L.L. Whitcomb, S. Arimoto, T. Naniwa, F. Ozaki: Adap-
tive model-based hybrid control if geometrically
constrained robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 13,
105–116 (1997)
9.58
B. Yao, S.P. Chan, D. Wang: Unified formulation of
variable structure control schemes for robot manip-
ulators, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 39, 371–376 (1992)
9.59
S. Chiaverini, B. Siciliano, L. Villani: Force/position
regulation of compliant robot manipulators, IEEE
Trans. Autom. Control 39, 647–652 (1994)
9.60
J.T.-Y. Wen, S. Murphy: Stability analysis of position
and force control for robot arms, IEEE Trans. Autom.
Control 36, 365–371 (1991)
9.61
R. Volpe, P. Khosla: A theoretical and experimental
investigation of explicit force control strategies for
manipulators, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 38, 1634–
1650 (1993)
9.62
L.S. Wilfinger, J.T. Wen, S.H. Murphy: Integral force
control with robustness enhancement, IEEE Control
Syst. Mag. 14(1), 31–40 (1994)
9.63
S. Katsura, Y. Matsumoto, K. Ohnishi: Modeling of
force sensing and validation of disturbance observer
for force control, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 54, 530–
538 (2007)
9.64
A. Stolt, M. Linderoth, A. Robertsson, R. Johansson:
Force controlled robotic assembly without a force
sensor, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2012) pp. 1538–1543
9.65
S.D. Eppinger, W.P. Seering: Introduction to dynamic
models for robot force control, IEEE Control Syst. Mag.
7(2), 48–52 (1987)
9.66
C.H. An, J.M. Hollerbach: The role of dynamic mod-
els in Cartesian force control of manipulators, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 8(4), 51–72 (1989)
9.67
R. Volpe, P. Khosla: A theoretical and experimental
investigation of impact control for manipulators, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 12, 351–365 (1993)
9.68
J.K. Mills, D.M. Lokhorst: Control of robotic manipu-
lators during general task execution: A discontinuous
control approach, Int. J. Robotics Res. 12, 146–163
(1993)
9.69
T.-J. Tarn, Y. Wu, N. Xi, A. Isidori: Force regulation
and contact transition control, IEEE Control Syst. Mag.
16(1), 32–40 (1996)
9.70
B. Brogliato, S. Niculescu, P. Orhant: On the con-
trol of finite dimensional mechanical systems with
unilateral constraints, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 42,
200–215 (1997)

Multimedia Contents Redundant R
221
Part A | 10.1
10. Redundant Robots
Stefano Chiaverini, Giuseppe Oriolo, Anthony A. Maciejewski
This chapter focuses on redundancy resolution
schemes, i.e., the techniques for exploiting the
redundant degrees of freedom in the solution of
the inverse kinematics problem. This is obviously
an issue of major relevance for motion planning
and control purposes.
In particular, task-oriented kinematics and
the basic methods for its inversion at the veloc-
ity (first-order differential) level are first recalled,
with a discussion of the main techniques for han-
dling kinematic singularities. Next, different first-
order methods to solve kinematic redundancy are
arranged in two main categories, namely those
based on the optimization of suitable performance
criteria and those relying on the augmentation of
the task space. Redundancy resolution methods at
the acceleration (second-order differential) level
are then considered in order to take into account
dynamics issues, e.g., torque minimization. Con-
ditions under which a cyclic task motion results
in a cyclic joint motion are also discussed; this is
a major issue when a redundant manipulator is
used to execute a repetitive task, e.g., in industrial
applications. The use of kinematic redundancy for
fault tolerance is analyzed in detail. Suggestions
for further reading are given in a final section.
10.1
Overview.............................................
221
10.2
Task-Oriented Kinematics.....................
224
10.2.1
Task-Space Formulation.............
224
10.2.2
Singularities .............................
225
10.3
Inverse Differential Kinematics .............
227
10.3.1
The General Solution .................
227
10.3.2
Singularity Robustness...............
227
10.3.3
Joint Trajectory Reconstruction ...
231
10.4 Redundancy Resolution
via Optimization..................................
232
10.4.1
Performance Criteria ..................
232
10.4.2
Local Optimization.....................
232
10.4.3
Global Optimization...................
233
10.5 Redundancy Resolution
via Task Augmentation.........................
233
10.5.1
Extended Jacobian ....................
233
10.5.2
Augmented Jacobian .................
234
10.5.3
Algorithmic Singularities ............
234
10.5.4 Task Priority ..............................
235
10.6 Second-Order Redundancy Resolution..
236
10.7
Cyclicity ...............................................
237
10.8 Fault Tolerance ....................................
237
10.9 Conclusion and Further Reading...........
239
Video-References.........................................
239
References...................................................
240
10.1 Overview
Kinematic redundancy occurs when a robotic manipu-
lator has more degrees of freedom than those strictly
required to execute a given task. This means that,
in principle, no manipulator is inherently redundant;
rather, there are certain tasks with respect to which it
may become redundant. Because it is widely recognized
that a fully general spatial task consists of following an
end-effector motion trajectory requiring six degrees of
freedom, a robot arm with seven or more joints is fre-
quently considered as a typical example of an inherently
redundant manipulator. However, even robot arms with
fewer degrees of freedom, like conventional six-joint
industrial manipulators, may become kinematically re-
dundant for speciﬁc tasks, such as simple end-effector
positioning without constraints on the orientation.
The motivation for introducing kinematic redun-
dancy in the mechanical structure of a manipulator goes
beyond that for using redundancy in traditional engi-
neering design, namely, increasing robustness to faults
so as to improve reliability (e.g., redundant processors

Part A | 10.1
222
Part A
Robotics Foundations
or sensors). In fact, endowing robotic manipulators with
kinematic redundancy is mainly aimed at increasing
dexterity, as is the case with a human arm.
The minimal-complexity approach that character-
ized early manipulator designs had the objective of
minimizing cost and maintenance. For example, this led
to the development of selective compliance assembly
robot arm (SCARA) robots for pick-and-place opera-
tions where products had been designed for assembly,
i. e., using a single axis of insertion. However, giving
a manipulator the minimum number of joints required
to execute its task results in a serious limitation in real-
world applications where, in addition to the singular-
ity problem, joint limits or workspace obstacles are
present. All of these give rise to forbidden regions in the
joint space that must be avoided during operation, thus
requiring a carefully structured (and static) workspace
where the motion of the manipulator can be planned in
advance; this is the typical situation for workcells in tra-
ditional industrial applications.
On the other hand, the presence of additional de-
grees of freedom besides those strictly required to
execute the task allows motions of the manipulator that
Fig. 10.1 The 7-DOF DLR Lightweight Robot
Fig. 10.2 The 7-DOF Mitsubishi PA-10 manipulator
do not displace the end effector (the so-called self-mo-
tions or internal motions); this implies that the same
task at the end-effector level can be executed in sev-
eral ways at the joint level, giving the possibility of
avoiding the forbidden regions and ultimately resulting
in a more versatile mechanism. Such a feature is key to
allowing operation in unstructured or dynamically vary-
Fig. 10.3 The 8-DOF DEXTER by Scienzia Machinale
Fig. 10.4 A 5-ﬁnger hand by Schunk

Redundant Robots
10.1 Overview
223
Part A | 10.1
ing environments that characterize advanced industrial
applications and service robotics scenarios.
In practice, if properly managed, the increased
dexterity characterizing kinematically redundant robots
may allow them to not only avoid singularities, joint
limits, and workspace obstacles, but also to minimize
torque/energy over a given task, ultimately meaning
that the robotic manipulator can achieve a higher de-
gree of autonomy.
The biological archetype of a kinematically re-
dundant manipulator is the human arm, which, not
surprisingly, also inspires the terminology used to char-
acterize the structure of serial-chain manipulators. In
fact, the human arm has three degrees of freedom at
the shoulder, one degree of freedom at the elbow and
three degrees of freedom at the wrist. The available re-
dundancy can be easily veriﬁed by locking one’s wrist,
e.g., on a table and moving the elbow while keeping
the shoulder still. The kinematic arrangement of the hu-
man arm has been replicated in a number of robots often
termed as human-arm-like manipulators. This family
Fig. 10.5 The Baxter working robot by Rethink Robotics
Fig. 10.6 The NASA (National Aeronautics and Space
Administration) Robonaut
of 7-DOF (degree of freedom) manipulators includes
the DLR (Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raum-
fahrt) Lightweight Robot (Fig. 10.1) and the Mitsubishi
PA-10 robot (Fig. 10.2). An example of an 8-DOF robot
is the DEXTER by Scienzia Machinale (Fig. 10.3). Ma-
nipulators with a larger number of joints are often called
hyperredundant robots, and include many snake-like
robots described in the literature.
The use of two or more robotic structures to execute
a task (as in the case of multiﬁngered hands, humanoid
mockups or cooperating manipulators, Figs. 10.4–10.7,
respectively) also gives rise to kinematic redundancy.
Redundant mechanisms also include vehicle-manipu-
lator systems (Fig. 10.8); in this case, however, the
possible presence of nonholonomic constraints on the
Fig. 10.7 A cooperating dual-arm concept robot by Asea
Brown Boveri (ABB)
Fig. 10.8 A huge vehicle-manipulator system by KUKA
Aktiengesellschaft

Part A | 10.2
224
Part A
Robotics Foundations
motion of the base must be properly taken into account
in order to determine the actual degree of redundancy.
Although the realization of a kinematically redun-
dant structure raises a number of issues from the point
of view of mechanical design, this chapter focuses
on redundancy resolution schemes, i. e., techniques for
exploiting the redundant degrees of freedom in the so-
lution of the inverse kinematics problem. This is an
issue of major relevance for motion planning and con-
trol purposes.
10.2 Task-Oriented Kinematics
The relationship between the variables representing the
conﬁguration of an articulated manipulator and those
describing an assigned task in the appropriate space can
be established at the position, velocity or acceleration
level. In particular, consideration of the ﬁrst-order task
kinematics inevitably results in discussion of the task
Jacobian matrix, which is central to many redundancy
resolution techniques.
10.2.1 Task-Space Formulation
A manipulator consists of a chain of rigid bodies articu-
lated by joints. If qi denotes the variable characterizing
the relative displacement of body i with respect to
body i  1, the vector q D .q1 : : : qN/T uniquely de-
scribes the conﬁguration of an N-joint serial-chain
manipulator. Joint i may be either prismatic or revolute,
in which case qi measures the relative translation or ro-
tation of the attached links, respectively.
While the manipulator is naturally described and ac-
tuated in the joint space, its operation is conveniently
speciﬁed in terms of the vector t D .t1 : : : tM/T, which
typically deﬁnes the location of the manipulator end-
effector in a suitably deﬁned task space. In the general
case, it is of dimension M D 6 and t is chosen so that
its ﬁrst three components represent the position of the
end effector, while its last three components represent
a minimal description of the end-effector orientation
(such as Euler angles or the roll–pitch–yaw represen-
tation), i. e.,
t D

px
py
pz
˛
ˇ

	T :
Typically, one has N  M, so that the joints can provide
at least the number of degrees of freedom required for
the end-effector task. If N > M strictly, the manipulator
is kinematically redundant.
The relationship between the joint-space coordinate
vector q and the task-space coordinate vector t is ex-
pressed by the direct kinematics equation
t D kt.q/ ;
(10.1)
where kt is a nonlinear vector function.
Task Jacobian and Geometric Jacobian
It is useful to consider the ﬁrst-order differential kine-
matics [10.1]
Pt D Jt.q/ Pq ;
(10.2)
that can be obtained by differentiating (10.1) with re-
spect to time. In (10.2), Pt is the task-space velocity
vector, Pq is the joint-space velocity vector, and Jt.q/ D
@kt=@q is the M  N task Jacobian matrix (also called
the analytic Jacobian).
Remarkably, the components of Pt relative to the end-
effector orientation express the rate of change of the
parameters characterizing the adopted minimal repre-
sentation; they are not the components of the angular
velocity vector of the end-effector. Indeed, denoting
by vN the 3  1 translational velocity vector and by !N
the 31 angular velocity vector of the end-effector, and
deﬁning the end-effector spatial velocity v N as
v N D
vN
!N

;
(10.3)
the following relationship holds
Pt D T.t/ v N ;
(10.4)
where T is an M6 transformation matrix that is a func-
tion of t only. In the case of M D 6, the transformation
matrix T takes the form
T D
I
0
0
R

;
(10.5)
where I and 0 are, respectively, the identity and null
matrix of proper dimensions, and R is a 3  3 matrix
that speciﬁcally depends on the minimal representation
used to describe the end-effector orientation.
For a given manipulator, the mapping
v N D J.q/ Pq
(10.6)
relates a joint-space velocity to the corresponding end-
effector velocity through the 6  N geometric Jacobian

Redundant Robots
10.2 Task-Oriented Kinematics
225
Part A | 10.2
matrix J. The geometric Jacobian matrix is of major
concern in the kinematic analysis of a manipulator be-
cause it allows description of the motion capabilities of
the end-effector (in terms of its free rigid-body spatial
velocity) as a result of the velocity commands at the
joints in the current conﬁguration. As a matter of fact,
if JP iPqi denotes the contribution of Pqi to vN, zi1 is the
unit vector of the axis of joint i and ri1; e is the vector
expressing the position of the end effector frame with
respect to the joint i frame, it is
JP i D
(
zi1
if joint i is prismatic
zi1  ri1; e
if joint i is revolute ;
whereas if JO iPqi denotes the contribution of Pqi to !N, it
is
JO i D
(
0
if joint i is prismatic
zi1
if joint i is revolute :
By comparing (10.2), (10.4), and (10.6), the relation
between the geometric Jacobian and the task Jacobian
can be found as
Jt.q/ D T.t/ J.q/ :
(10.7)
Second-Order Differential Kinematics
While the ﬁrst-order differential kinematics (10.2) re-
lates task-space to joint-space velocities, further differ-
entiation with respect to time provides an analogous
relationship between accelerations
Rt D Jt.q/Rq C PJt.q; Pq/Pq :
(10.8)
This equation is also known as the second-order differ-
ential kinematics.
10.2.2 Singularities
In this section the occurrence of singular conﬁgurations
is considered to properly analyze their effect on inverse
kinematics solutions.
Representation and Kinematic Singularities
A robot conﬁguration q is singular if the task Jacobian
matrix Jt is rank-deﬁcient there. Considering the role
of Jt in (10.2) and (10.8), it is easy to realize that at
a singular conﬁguration it is impossible to generate end-
effector task velocities or accelerations in certain direc-
tions. Further insight can be gained by looking at (10.7),
which indicates that a singularity may be due to a loss
of rank of the transformation matrix T and/or of the ge-
ometric Jacobian matrix J.
Rank deﬁciencies of T are only related to the math-
ematical relationship established by R between the
angular velocity vector of the end-effector and the com-
ponents of Pt relative to the end-effector orientation;
because the expression of R depends on the adopted
minimal representation of the orientation, a conﬁgu-
ration at which T is singular is then referred to as
a representation singularity. Remarkably, any minimal
description of the end-effector orientation experiences
the occurrence of representation singularities. Further-
more, a given conﬁguration may or may not yield
a representation singularity depending on which de-
scription of orientation is used.
A representation singularity is not directly related
to the true motion capabilities of the manipulator struc-
ture, which can instead be inferred by the analysis of
the geometric Jacobian matrix. Rank deﬁciencies of J
are in fact related to loss of mobility of the manipulator
end-effector; indeed, end-effector velocities exist in this
case that are unfeasible for any velocity commanded at
the joints. A conﬁguration at which J is singular is re-
ferred to as a kinematic singularity.
Because this chapter focuses on the inversion of
the task differential kinematics (10.2) and (10.8), in
the following the task Jacobian matrix and its singu-
larities (which include representation and kinematic
singularities) are studied in detail. The case N  M is
considered, which encompasses conventional as well as
redundant manipulators.
Singular Value Decomposition of the Jacobian
To analyze the linear mapping (10.2), the singular
value decomposition (SVD) of the Jacobian matrix is
adopted; remarkably, this powerful numerical tool is the
sole reliable method to compute the rank of a matrix
and to study near-singular linear mappings. The classic
Golub–Reinsch algorithm [10.2], which is the most ef-
ﬁcient and numerically stable algorithm to compute the
SVD of an arbitrary matrix, may however be compu-
tationally demanding in view of real-time applications.
A faster algorithm that takes advantage of the nature of
robotic matrix calculations has been proposed [10.3];
this makes it possible to improve real-time kinematic
control techniques.
The SVD of the task Jacobian matrix can be written
in the form
Jt D U˙VT D
M
X
iD1
iuiv T
i ;
(10.9)
where U is the M M orthonormal matrix of the output
singular vectors ui, V is the N  N orthonormal ma-
trix of the input singular vectors v i, and ˙ D .S 0/ is
the M  N matrix whose M  M diagonal submatrix S

Part A | 10.2
226
Part A
Robotics Foundations
contains the singular values i of the matrix Jt. It is
worth noting that the SVD is a well-behaved function
of its matrix argument; therefore, the singular values
and associated subspaces do not change radically in
the neighborhood of the current conﬁguration. Let-
ting rank .Jt/ D R, the following hold
1  2  : : :  R > RC1 D    D 0 ;
R.Jt/ D spanfu1; : : : ; uRg ;
N .Jt/ D spanfv RC1; : : : ; v Ng :
If the task Jacobian is full-rank (R D M), all the sin-
gular values are nonzero, the range space of Jt is the
entire RM, and the null space of Jt has dimension NM.
In a singular conﬁguration, R < M; thus, the last M  R
singular values are zero, the range space of Jt is an R-
dimensional subspace of RM, and the dimension of the
null space of Jt increases to N  R. An interpretation
of this from a kinematic viewpoint is presented in the
following.
Feasible Velocities. At each conﬁguration, the range
space of Jt is the set of task-space velocities that can
be obtained as a result of all possible joint-space veloc-
ities Pq; therefore, it constitutes the so-called subspace
of feasible velocities for the end-effector task. A basis
for R.Jt/ is given by the ﬁrst R output singular vectors;
accordingly, the effect of a singularity is to decrease the
dimension of the range space of Jt that corresponds to
a reduction of the space of feasible velocities.
Null-Space Velocities. At each conﬁguration, the null
space of Jt is the set of joint-space velocities that yield
zero task velocity; these are thus shortly called null-
space velocities. A basis for N .Jt/ is given by the NR
last input singular vectors, which represent independent
linear combinations of the velocities at each joint. From
this viewpoint, the effect of a singularity is to increase
the dimension of the null space of Jt by introducing
a further independent linear combination of joint veloc-
ities that produces a zero task velocity.
According to (10.2) and (10.9), a joint velocity
along the i-th input singular vector results in a task ve-
locity that lies along the i-th output singular vector
8 2 R
Pq D  v i
)
t D i ui :
Thus, the i-th singular value of Jt can be viewed as
a gain factor relating motion along the v i direction of
the joint velocity space to the resulting motion along
the ui direction of the task velocity space. When a sin-
gularity is approached, the R-th singular value R tends
to zero and the task velocity produced by a ﬁxed joint
velocity along v R is decreased proportionally. At a sin-
gular conﬁguration, the joint-space velocity along v R
belongs to the null-space velocities and task velocities
along uR become unfeasible for the manipulator.
In the generic case, the joint-space velocity Pq is an
arbitrary linear combination of individual joint veloci-
ties with nonzero components along all the v i. Its effect
can be analyzed by combining the single effects of the
above components. Remarkably, the components of Pq in
the null space of Jt produce a change in the conﬁgura-
tion of the manipulator without affecting its task veloc-
ity. This can be exploited to achieve additional goals –
such as obstacle or singularity avoidance – in addition
to the realization of a desired task motion, and consti-
tutes the core of redundancy resolution approaches.
Distance from Singularities
Clearly, the effect of a singularity is experienced not
only at the singular conﬁguration itself but also in its
neighborhood (Sect. 10.3.2). For this reason, it is im-
portant to be able to characterize the distance from
singularities through suitable measures; these can then
be exploited to counteract undesirable effects.
Because each singularity is associated with a re-
duction in the rank of Jt, one conceptually simple
possibility in the case of a square Jacobian matrix (M D
N) is to compute its determinant. A generalization of
this idea that works also for nonsquare Jacobians is the
manipulability measure [10.4], deﬁned as
 D
q
jJt JT
t j :
It can be recognized that the manipulability measure is
equal to the product of the singular values of Jt, i. e.,
 D
M
Y
iD1
i ;
and thus its zeros coincide with the singularities.
Another possible measure of distance from a sin-
gular conﬁguration is the condition number of the
Jacobian matrix [10.5], deﬁned as
 D 1
M
:
The condition number has values ranging from 1, at
conﬁgurations where all the singular values are equal,
to 1, at singular conﬁgurations. Note that when  D 1
the end effector has the same motion capability in all
task space directions because all the singular values are
equal – i. e., the arm is at an isotropic conﬁguration –
whereas at a singularity it loses mobility in some task-
space direction.

Redundant Robots
10.3 Inverse Differential Kinematics
227
Part A | 10.3
An even more direct measure of the distance from
singular conﬁgurations is the smallest singular value of
the Jacobian matrix [10.5], i. e.,
min D M :
A computationally light estimate of the smallest sin-
gular value can be obtained either via numerical meth-
ods [10.3, 6, 7] or based on a kinematic analysis of the
robot structure [10.8].
It must be noted that the manipulability measure
may remain constant even in the presence of variations
of either the condition number or the smallest singu-
lar value of Jt. On the other hand, because the smallest
singular value changes more radically near singularities
than the other singular values, it dominates the behav-
ior of the determinant and the condition number of the
Jacobian matrix; therefore, the most effective measure
of distance from singular conﬁgurations is the smallest
singular value of Jt [10.5].
10.3 Inverse Differential Kinematics
In order to accomplish a task, a proper joint motion
must be commanded to the manipulator; therefore, it
is necessary to derive mathematical relations that allow
one to compute joint-space variables corresponding to
the assigned task-space variables. This is the objective
of the inverse kinematics problem.
The inverse kinematics problem can be solved by
inverting the direct kinematics equation (10.1), the ﬁrst-
order differential kinematics (10.2) or the second-order
differential kinematics (10.8). If the task is time-vary-
ing (i. e., if a desired trajectory t.t/ is assigned), it is
convenient to solve the differential kinematic relation-
ships because these represent linear equations using the
task Jacobian matrix [10.9].
10.3.1 The General Solution
Under the assumption that the manipulator is kinemat-
ically redundant (i. e., M < N), one solution of (10.2)
or (10.8) can be expressed by resorting to the pseudoin-
verse J
t of the task Jacobian matrix [10.1, 10]; this is
the unique matrix satisfying the Moore–Penrose condi-
tions [10.11–13]
Jt J
t Jt D Jt ;
J
t Jt J
t D J
t ;
.Jt J
t /T D Jt J
t ;
.J
t Jt/T D J
t Jt :
(10.10)
If Jt is low-rectangular and full-rank, its pseudoinverse
can be expressed as
J
t D JT
t .Jt JT
t /1 :
(10.11)
If Jt is square, expression (10.11) reduces to the stan-
dard inverse matrix.
The general solution of (10.2) can be written as
Pq D J
t Pt C .I  J
t Jt/ Pq0 :
(10.12)
Here, I  J
t Jt represents the orthogonal projection ma-
trix into the null space of Jt, and Pq0 is an arbitrary joint-
space velocity; the second part of the solution is there-
fore a null-space velocity. Equation (10.12) provides
all least-squares solution to the end-effector task con-
straint (10.2), i. e., it minimizes kPt  JPqk. In particular,
if Jt is low-rectangular and full-rank, all joint veloci-
ties in the form (10.12) exactly realize the assigned task
velocity. By acting on Pq0, one can still obtain differ-
ent joint velocities that give the same end-effector task
velocity; therefore, as will be discussed later in detail,
solutions in the form of (10.12) are typically used to
represent redundancy resolution techniques.
The particular solution obtained by setting Pq0 D 0
in (10.12),
Pq D J
t Pt ;
(10.13)
provides the least-squares solution of (10.2) with mini-
mum norm, and is known as the pseudoinverse solution.
In terms of the inverse differential kinematics problem,
the least-squares property quantiﬁes the accuracy of the
end-effector task realization, while the minimum norm
property may be relevant for the feasibility of the joint-
space velocities.
As for the second-order kinematics (10.8), its least-
squares solutions can be expressed in the general form
Rq D J
t .Rt  PJtPq/ C .I  J
t Jt/ Rq0 ;
(10.14)
where Rq0 is an arbitrary joint-space acceleration. As
above, choosing Rq0 D 0 in (10.14) gives the minimum-
norm acceleration solution
Rq D J
t .Rt  PJt Pq/ :
(10.15)
10.3.2 Singularity Robustness
We now investigate the kinematics aspects involved in
the ﬁrst-order inverse mappings (10.12) and (10.13)

Part A | 10.3
228
Part A
Robotics Foundations
with respect to the handling of singularities. With ref-
erence to the SVD of Jt in (10.9), let us consider the
following decomposition of the matrix J
t
J
t D V˙ UT D
R
X
iD1
1
i
v iuT
i ;
(10.16)
where, as above, R denotes the rank of the task Jacobian
matrix. Analogously to (10.9), the following hold
1  2  : : :  R > RC1 D    D 0 ;
R.J
t / D N ?.Jt/ D spanfv 1; : : : ; v Rg ;
N .J
t / D R?.Jt/ D spanfuRC1; : : : ; uMg :
Notice that, if the Jacobian matrix is full-rank,
the range space of J
t is an M-dimensional subspace
of RN and the null space of J
t is trivial. In a singular
conﬁguration (R < M), the range space of J
t is an R-
dimensional subspace of RN, and an MR-dimensional
null space of J
t exists.
The range space of J
t is the set of joint-space ve-
locities Pq that can be obtained via the inverse kinematic
mapping (10.13) as a result of all possible task ve-
locities Pt. Because these Pq belong to the orthogonal
complement of the null space of Jt, the pseudoinverse
solution (10.13) satisﬁes the least-squares condition, as
expected.
The null space of J
t is the set of the task veloci-
ties Pt that yield null joint-space velocity in the current
conﬁguration; these Pt belong to the orthogonal comple-
ment of the space of feasible task velocities. Therefore,
one effect of the pseudoinverse solution (10.13) is to
ﬁlter out the unfeasible components of the commanded
task velocity while allowing exact tracking of the fea-
sible components; this is related to the minimum-norm
property.
If the assigned task velocity is aligned with ui,
the corresponding joint-space velocity – computed
via (10.13) – is obtained along v i modulated by the
factor 1=i. When a singularity is approached, the R-th
singular value tends to zero and a ﬁxed task veloc-
ity command along uR requires joint-space velocities
along v R that grow unboundedly in proportion to the
factor 1=R. At the singular conﬁguration, the uR direc-
tion becomes unfeasible for the task variables and v R
adds to the null-space velocities of the arm.
According to the above, two main problems are
inherently related to the basic inverse differential kine-
matics solution (10.13), namely:

At near-singular conﬁgurations, excessive joint-
space velocities may result, due to the component
of Pt along the direction which becomes unfeasible
at the singularity.

At the singular conﬁguration, discontinuity of the
joint-space solution is experienced if Pt has a non-
null unfeasible component.
The same is obviously true for the complete inverse
solution (10.12).
Both the above problems are of major concern
for kinematic control of manipulators, where the com-
puted joint-space velocities must actually be executed
by the robot arm. This has motivated the develop-
ment of modiﬁed inverse differential mappings, so as
to ensure proper behavior of the manipulator through-
out its workspace independent of the conﬁguration of
the robot. A reasonable approach is to preserve the
mapping (10.13) far from singularities and to set up lo-
cal modiﬁcations of it only inside a region enclosing
the singular conﬁguration; the deﬁnition of the region
depends on a suitable measure of distance from the
singularity, while the modiﬁed mapping must ensure
feasible and continuous joint velocities.
Modification of the Planned Trajectory
One way to tackle the problem of singularities is to
act at the planning level by either designing trajectories
that do not incur in unavoidable singularities or assign-
ing task-space motion commands that are feasible for
the robot arm. However, these solutions rely on perfect
task planning and cannot be used in real-time sensory
control applications, in which motion commands are
generated online.
Because singularities are a function of conﬁgu-
ration and not workspace location, in general, it is
not possible to avoid singularities by restricting the
workspace trajectory of the manipulator. There do exist
cases where avoidance of singular conﬁgurations at the
motion planning level is relatively simple, e.g., when
dealing with those associated with workspace bound-
ary such as the elbow singularity of an anthropomorphic
arm. However, this approach may be difﬁcult for those
singularities, like the wrist one, that may occur every-
where in the workspace.
Another possibility is to perform a joint-space inter-
polation when the planned trajectory is close to a singu-
larity [10.14]; however, this may cause large errors in
tracking the originally assigned task-space motion.
Acting in the task space, a method based on time-
scale transformation is presented in [10.15], which
slows down the manipulator’s motion when a singular-
ity is approached; this technique, however, fails at the
singularity.
Because a task-space robot control system must
be able to guide the motion of the manipulator safely
through singularities, considerable research effort has
been devoted to the derivation of well-deﬁned and

Redundant Robots
10.3 Inverse Differential Kinematics
229
Part A | 10.3
continuous inverse kinematic mappings instead of the
above ad hoc approaches.
Removal of Dependent Rows or Columns
of the Jacobian Matrix
The ﬁrst requirement of solution (10.13) is the availabil-
ity of a general algorithm to compute the pseudoinverse
of Jt also when the Jacobian is singular. Several tech-
niques presented in the literature can be arranged in this
framework; they consist either in removing the unfeasi-
ble end-effector reference components [10.16] or in us-
ing nonsingular blocks of the Jacobian matrix [10.10].
The main problem with this type of solution is the spec-
iﬁcation of the directions of unfeasible velocities in
a systematic way and the need to have smooth transi-
tions between the usual inverse kinematic algorithm and
the algorithms used close to the singularities.
A systematic procedure to compute the pseudoin-
verse of the Jacobian matrix can be devised by taking
advantage of a kinematic analysis of the manipulator
structure because for many manipulators it is possible to
identify and describe classes of singular conﬁgurations
in suitably deﬁned link-ﬁxed frames. This approach has
been demonstrated for a six-degree-of-freedom elbow
geometry in [10.17, 18].
As for the continuity of the solution across a sin-
gularity, it must be observed that, while the singular
vectors change very little in the neighborhood of the
singularity, the term
1
M
vMuT
M Pt
suddenly disappears from (10.16) when R becomes less
than M at the singular conﬁguration.
One possibility to avoid this problem is to make
uT
M Pt 
 0
in the neighborhood of the singularity, which means
avoiding commanding task velocities along the direc-
tion that becomes unfeasible at the singular conﬁgu-
ration. This would require some method for efﬁciently
computing the singular subspace associated with near-
zero singular value(s) as described in the upcoming sec-
tion on numerical ﬁltering.
Independently from the assigned Pt, continuity of
the pseudoinverse solution can be ensured by treat-
ing the manipulator as singular in a suitably deﬁned
region around each singularity through a modiﬁed Ja-
cobian NJt, so that M  R extra degrees of freedom are
available [10.17–19]; these can be used without signif-
icantly affecting the end-effector velocity, because the
modiﬁed Jacobian NJt approximates Jt inside the region.
The described approach is difﬁcult to generalize for
multiple singularities. For the typical anthropomorphic
geometry of industrial manipulators, however, only the
wrist singularity is of primary concern because it may
occur everywhere in the workspace, while the elbow
and shoulder singularities are naturally characterized in
the task space and thus can be avoided during planning.
Regularization/Damped Least-Squares
Technique
The use of the damped least-squares technique in the in-
verse differential kinematics problem has been indepen-
dently proposed in [10.9, 20]. The method corresponds
to solving the optimization problem
min
Pq

kPt  JtPqk2 C 2kPqk2
;
(10.17)
which results in a solution Pq that minimizes the end-
effector tracking error from the set of all joint veloci-
ties that do not exceed kPqk. Here,  2 R is the damping
factor that represents the trade-off between the least-
squares and the mimimum-norm properties. When 
is zero, the solution to (10.17) and (10.13) become
identical.
The solution to (10.17) can be written in two equiv-
alent forms
Pq D JT
t .JtJT
t C 2I/1Pt ;
(10.18)
Pq D .JT
t Jt C 2I/1JT
t Pt :
(10.19)
The computational load of (10.18) is lower than that
of (10.19), because usually N  M. In the remainder,
we will refer to the damped least-squares solution as
Pq D J
t .q/Pt ;
(10.20)
whenever explicit speciﬁcation of the computation used
is not essential.
Condition (10.17) implies consideration of accu-
racy and feasibility at the same time when choosing
the joint-space velocity required to match the given
Pt. In this regard it is essential to suitably select the
value to be assigned to the damping factor: small val-
ues of  give accurate solutions but low robustness to
the occurrence of singular and near-singular conﬁgura-
tions; high values of  result in low tracking accuracy
even when a feasible and accurate solution would be
possible.
In the framework of singular value decomposition,
the solution (10.20) can be written as
Pq D
R
X
iD1
i
2
i C 2 v iuT
i Pt :
(10.21)

Part A | 10.3
230
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Remarkably, we have
R.J
t / D R.J
t / D N ?.Jt/
D spanfv 1; : : : ; v Rg ;
N .J
t / D N .J
t / D R?.Jt/
D spanfuRC1; : : : ; uMg :
As with J
t , if the Jacobian matrix is full-rank, the
range space of J
t is an M-dimensional subspace of RN
and the null space of J
t is trivial; in a singular con-
ﬁguration, the range space of J
t is an R-dimensional
subspace of RN, and an M  R-dimensional null space
of J
t exists.
It is clear that, with respect to the pure least-
squares solution (10.13), in (10.21) the components for
which i   are little inﬂuenced by the damping fac-
tor, because in this case
i
2
i C 2 
 1
i
:
On the other hand, when a singularity is approached,
the smallest singular value tends to zero while the as-
sociated component of the solution is driven to zero
by the factor i=2; this progressively reduces the
joint velocity required to achieve near-degenerate com-
ponents of the commanded Pt. At the singularity, the
solutions (10.20) and (10.13) behave identically as
long as the remaining singular values are signiﬁcantly
larger than the damping factor. One can show that the
maximum gain factor of 1=.2/ relating the task veloc-
ity component along ui to the resulting joint velocity
along v i occurs when i D .
Selection of the Damping Factor. According to
above,  determines the degree of approximation in-
troduced with respect to the pure least-squares solution
given by the pseudoinverse. An optimal choice for 
requires consideration of the smallest non-null singu-
lar value experienced along the given trajectory and of
the minimum damping needed to ensure feasible joint
velocities.
To achieve good performance in the entire manipu-
lator’s workspace the use of a conﬁguration-varying
damping factor has been proposed [10.9]. The natural
choice is to adjust  as a function of some measure of
distance from the singularity at the current conﬁgura-
tion of the robot arm. Far from singular conﬁgurations
feasible joint velocities are obtained; thus the accuracy
requirement prevails and low damping must be used.
Close to a singularity, task velocity commands along the
unfeasible directions give large joint velocities and the
accuracy requirement must be relaxed; in these cases,
high damping is needed.
A ﬁrst proposal was to adjust the damping fac-
tor as a function of the manipulability measure [10.9].
Because a more effective measure of distance from sin-
gular conﬁgurations is the smallest singular value of the
Jacobian matrix [10.5], its use has been considered later
for building a variable damping factor.
If an estimate QM of the smallest singular value is
available, the following choice for the damping factor
can be adopted [10.21]
2 D
8
<
:
0
when QM  "

1 

QM
"
2
2
max
otherwise,
(10.22)
which ensures continuity and good shaping of the solu-
tion. In (10.22), " deﬁnes the size of the singular region,
in which damping is used, and max sets the maximum
value of the damping factor, which occurs just at the
singularity.
Numerical
Filtering. As
can
be
recognized
from (10.21), the damping factor affects the accu-
racy of the solution along each end-effector velocity
component; however, the sole unfeasible direction is
responsible for the (possible) loss of tracking abil-
ity. To overcome this problem, selective ﬁltering of
the end-effector velocity components was proposed
in [10.6]. The method can be generalized as follows; if
estimates Qui of the output singular vectors associated
with the M  K smallest singular values – which give
the components to become unfeasible – are available,
the solution can be written in the form
Pq D JT
t
 
Jt JT
t C2ICˇ2
M
X
iDKC1
Qui QuT
i
!1
Pt ; (10.23)
where ˇ provides the largest contribution to damping
only along the unfeasible components. This solution is
an approximation to applying a greater selective ﬁlter-
ing to the near singular components, i. e.,
Pq 
K
X
iD1
i
2
i C 2 v i uT
i Pt
C
R
X
iDKC1
i
2
i C 2 C ˇ2 v i uT
i Pt ;
(10.24)
where the quality of the approximation is based on
the accuracy of the estimates of Qu in (10.23). No-
tice that K 	 R; nevertheless, a nonzero value of  is
kept to guarantee satisfactory conditioning of the map-
ping (10.23) even for incorrect estimates of the output
singular vectors.
Similarly, additional damping can be provided to
the joint-space velocity components given by the in-

Redundant Robots
10.3 Inverse Differential Kinematics
231
Part A | 10.3
put singular vectors associated to the smallest singular
values, since they are close to becoming the null-space
velocities [10.22]. The solution can be generalized in
the form
Pq D
 
JT
t Jt C2ICˇ2
N
X
iDKC1
Qv i Qv T
i
!1
JT
t Pt ; (10.25)
where ˇ provides the largest contribution to damp-
ing only along the N  K estimated null-space velocity
components Qv i. Once again, this solution is an approx-
imation to applying a greater selective ﬁltering to the
near singular components, i. e.,
Pq 
K
X
iD1
i
2
i C 2 v iuT
i Pt
C
R
X
iDKC1
i
2
i C 2 C ˇ2 v iuT
i Pt ;
(10.26)
where the quality of the approximation is based on the
accuracy of the estimates Qv i in (10.25). Also in this case
a nonzero value of  is kept to guarantee satisfactory
conditioning of the mapping (10.25) even for incorrect
estimates of the input singular vectors.
Comparison of (10.26) with (10.24) shows that, in
the case of accurate estimate of the singular vectors, the
solutions (10.23) and (10.25) behave identically.
10.3.3 Joint Trajectory Reconstruction
When solving the inverse kinematics problem at the
ﬁrst-order differential level, one obtains the joint ve-
locity proﬁle Pq.t/ that corresponds to an assigned end-
effector task velocity proﬁle Pt.t/; however, the robot
motion controller needs reference position trajectories
in addition to the velocity references for the joints.
The reconstruction of the joint-position proﬁle from the
joint-velocity proﬁle obtained from an end-effector task
velocity proﬁle Pt.t/ realizes a kinematic inversion that
can be seen as an inverse kinematics algorithm.
If the joint-velocity proﬁle were completely speci-
ﬁed (e.g., by its analytical expression) the correspond-
ing joint-position proﬁle could be obtained from time
integration
q.t/ D q.t0/ C
t
Z
t0
Pq./ d :
(10.27)
However, digital implementation of the robot control
system makes it more likely that a discrete-time se-
quence of samples Pqk of the computed joint velocities
at the time instants tk will be available, i. e.,
Pqk D Pq.tk/ :
For this reason, a discrete-time numerical approxima-
tion of the continuous-time integral (10.27) must be
suitably devised.
Accurate discrete-time approximations of a conti-
nuous-time integral usually require a trade-off between
the complexity of the interpolating algorithm and the
length of the time step. In real-time applications, such
as robot motion control, high-order interpolation results
in large ﬁnite-time delays that degrade the dynamic per-
formance of the control loop. This time delay can be
reduced by suitably shortening the time step; in fact, if
the time step is sufﬁciently short even a low-order inter-
polation may give acceptable accuracy of the numerical
integration. It is typical to use ﬁrst-order interpolation,
i. e., an Euler forward rectangular rule that transforms
the integral (10.27) into
qk D q0 C
k1
X
hD0
Pqh t ;
(10.28)
where t is the time step. Equation (10.28) is usually
written in the more effective recursive form
qk D qk1 C Pqk1 t :
Closed-Loop Inverse Kinematics (CLIK)
No matter what kind of interpolation is used, the
small though unavoidable error suffered at each nu-
merical integration step accumulates, leading to long-
term drifting of the reconstructed proﬁle from the
exact joint-position proﬁle. Another source of error
affecting any integral reconstruction method is the
possible uncertainty in the initial value of the joint
position.
Algorithmic solutions that overcome these prob-
lems are based on the use of a feedback correction term;
these are termed closed-loop inverse kinematics (CLIK)
algorithms [10.23]. Considering, e.g., the case of ﬁrst-
order kinematics, the joint velocity at the k-th time in-
stant is computed as (compare with (10.12))
Pqk D J
t .qk/
˚Ptk C K Œtk  kt.qk/

C
h
I  J
t .qk/Jt.qk/
i
Pq0k ;
(10.29)
where K is a constant positive-deﬁnite gain matrix.
Second-order CLIK algorithms are also available
that solve for joint positions, velocities, and acceler-
ations [10.24, 25]. The CLIK approach was originally
proposed in [10.26] and [10.27] based on the Jacobian
transpose in lieu of the pseudoinverse, which provides
remarkable computational savings and provides inher-
ent singularity handling capabilities [10.28].

Part A | 10.4
232
Part A
Robotics Foundations
10.4 Redundancy Resolution via Optimization
For a kinematically redundant manipulator, the inverse
kinematics problem admits an inﬁnite number of so-
lutions, so that a criterion to select one of them is
needed. In this section we consider the problem of re-
dundancy resolution via optimization at the ﬁrst-order
differential kinematics level. Before discussing algo-
rithmic schemes for computing joint velocities, we
provide a short review of possible performance criteria.
10.4.1 Performance Criteria
The availability of degrees of freedom in excess of those
strictly needed to execute a given task can be used to
improve the value of performance criteria during the
motion. These criteria may depend on the robot joint
conﬁguration only, or also involve velocities and/or ac-
celerations.
Among the additional objectives that can be pursued
by deﬁning a suitable criterion, arguably the most pop-
ular is singularity avoidance. In fact, one of the original
motivations for introducing kinematic redundancy was
to increase the size of the workspace the manipulator
could reach without being in a singular conﬁguration
(unavoidable singularities) for achieving general mo-
tion trajectory tracking tasks. A discussion of avoidable
and unavoidable singularities in redundant manipula-
tors can be found in [10.29]. If the assigned end-effector
task does not pass through unavoidable singularities, it
is in principle always possible to compute a joint trajec-
tory along which the task Jacobian Jt is continuously
full-rank. To this end, possible performance criteria
are the conﬁguration-dependent functions introduced
in Sect. 10.2.2 that characterize the distance from singu-
larities, i. e., the manipulability measure, the condition
number, and the smallest singular value of Jt. Maxi-
mizing (or keeping as large as possible) these functions
during the motion is a reasonable plan in order to avoid
singular conﬁgurations during the motion.
Because kinematic inversion can produce arbitrarily
large joint velocities in the vicinity of singular con-
ﬁgurations, a conceptually different possibility is to
minimize the norm of the joint velocity generated by the
redundancy resolution scheme. However, this approach
guarantees singularity avoidance only if such a norm is
minimized in an integral sense along the motion of the
manipulator. Local minimization of the norm [10.10]
does not lead to singularity avoidance in any practical
sense [10.29].
Redundancy can be also used to keep the manipu-
lator linkage away from undesired regions of the joint
space, for example, mechanical joint limits that are typ-
ically present in robot manipulators may be avoided by
minimizing the cost function [10.30]
H.q/ D 1
2
N
X
iD1

qi  qi;mid
qi;max  qi;min
2
;
where Œqi;min; qi;max is the available range for joint i and
qi;mid is its midpoint. Another interesting application is
obstacle avoidance, which can be enforced by minimiz-
ing suitable artiﬁcial potential functions deﬁned on the
basis of the image of the obstacle region in the conﬁgu-
ration space [10.31, 32].
Many other performance criteria have been pro-
posed in the literature; some of them are mentioned in
Sects. 10.5 and 10.8.
10.4.2 Local Optimization
The simplest form of local optimization is represented
by the pseudoinverse solution (10.13), which provides
the joint velocity with the minimum norm among those
that realize the task constraint. Clearly, the joint move-
ment generated by this locally optimal solution does not
provide global velocity minimization along the entire
manipulator motion. This means that, despite the local
minimization of joint velocities, singularity avoidance
is not guaranteed [10.29].
Another possibility is to use the general solu-
tion (10.12), choosing the arbitrary joint velocity Pq0
in the direction of the antigradient of a scalar conﬁg-
uration-dependent performance criteria H.q/ that one
would like to minimize
Pq0 D kH rH.q/ ;
(10.30)
where kH is a scalar step size and rH.q/ denotes
the gradient of H at the current joint conﬁguration.
This leads to the following redundancy resolution
scheme [10.30]
Pq D J
t Pt  kH.I  J
t Jt/ rH.q/ :
(10.31)
Because its second term is the projection of the anti-
gradient of H in the null space of the task Jacobian,
the above expression is reminiscent of the projected
gradient method for constrained minimization [10.33].
In particular, it can be shown [10.34] that the inverse
kinematic solution (10.31) minimizes the complete
quadratic function
L.q; Pq/ D 1
2 PqTPq C kHPqTrH.q/
at the current conﬁguration q. Thus, (10.31) represents
a natural trade-off between the unconstrained local

Redundant Robots
10.5 Redundancy Resolution via Task Augmentation
233
Part A | 10.5
minimization of the performance criteria H (which
would lead to choose Pq D kHrH.q/) and the satis-
faction of constraint (10.2) by a minimum-norm joint
velocity.
The choice of the step size kH is critical for the per-
formance of the redundancy resolution scheme (10.31).
In particular, a small value of the step size may slow
down the minimization of the performance criteria, but
on the other hand a large value may even lead to an
increase of H (recall that the antigradient is the local
direction of maximum decrease). In practice, one may
use a simpliﬁed line search technique such as Armijo’s
rule [10.33] to identify at each conﬁguration an appro-
priate value of kH in a reasonable time.
10.4.3 Global Optimization
The main advantage of the redundancy resolution
scheme (10.31) is its simplicity: if the computation
of rH.q/ and kH is efﬁcient, such a scheme is a realistic
option for real-time kinematic inversion. Its disadvan-
tage is to be found in the local nature of the optimization
process, which can lead to unsatisfactory performance
over long tasks, for example, use of (10.31) with H D
 (the manipulability measure) will perform better
than the simple pseudoinverse solution, but still cannot
guarantee singularity avoidance.
It is therefore natural to consider the possibility of
selecting Pq0 in (10.12) so as to minimize integral criteria
of the form
tf
Z
ti
H.q/ dt :
deﬁned over the duration Œti; tf of the entire task (e.g.,
the integral of manipulability along the motion). Un-
fortunately, the solution of this problem (naturally for-
mulated within the framework of calculus of variations)
may not exist, and, in general, admits no closed form.
One way to make the problem solvable is to include
a quadratic form in the joint velocities or accelerations
inside the integral. However, this is more easily done at
the second-order kinematic level (Sect. 10.5).
10.5 Redundancy Resolution via Task Augmentation
Another approach to redundancy resolution consists of
augmenting the task vector so as to tackle additional
objectives expressed as constraints. In this section, we
review the basic task augmentation techniques for solv-
ing the ﬁrst-order differential kinematics (10.2).
10.5.1 Extended Jacobian
The extended Jacobian technique, proposed by Bail-
lieul [10.35] and later revisited by Chang [10.36], en-
forces an appropriate number of functional constraints
to be fulﬁlled along with the original end-effector task
so as to identify a single solution among the inﬁnite
ones that are compatible with the end-effector task.
Let us consider an objective function g.q/ to be op-
timized and let also NJt.q/ be a matrix spanning the null
space of Jt at a nonsingular conﬁguration q, e.g.,
NJt D I  J
t Jt :
It can be recognized that, for a given t0, if q0 is a con-
ﬁguration at which the function g.q/ is at an extreme
under the constraint t0 D kt.q0/, one has
@g.q/
@q
ˇˇˇˇ
qDq0
NJt.q0/ D 0T :
(10.32)
If the Jacobian Jt has full rank M, then NJt has rank
N  M; therefore, (10.32) yields a set of N  M inde-
pendent constraints that can be written in vector form
as
h.q/ D 0 I
for example, these can be obtained by taking the scalar
product of the gradient @g.q/=@q by each of the N 
M vectors constituting a base of the null space of Jt ,
i. e.,
h.q/ D
@g.q/
@q
.vMC1.q/ : : : v N.q//
T
:
At this point, the condition (10.32) implies that the
equation
 
kt.q0/
h.q0/
!
D
 
t0
0
!
is satisﬁed.
For motion starting from t0 with q0 that tracks a tra-
jectory t.t/ by keeping g.q/ extremized at each time one
has
kt .q.t//
h .q.t//

D
t.t/
0

:

Part A | 10.5
234
Part A
Robotics Foundations
By differentiating both sides with respect to time
one obtains
0
@
Jt.q/
@h.q/
@q
1
A Pq D
 
Pt
0
!
;
(10.33)
where the matrix premultiplying the vector Pq is square
and is called the extended Jacobian Jext.
Therefore, if the initial conﬁguration q0 extrem-
izes g.q/ and provided that Jext does not become sin-
gular, the time integral of the inverse mapping
Pq D J1
ext .q/
 
Pt
0
!
(10.34)
tracks the assigned end-effector trajectory Pt.t/ propagat-
ing joint conﬁgurations that extremize g.q/.
The extended Jacobian method has a major advan-
tage over pseudoinverse techniques of the form (10.13)
in that it is cyclic (Sect. 10.6). Moreover, solu-
tion (10.34) can be made equivalent to (10.12) via
suitable choice of the vector Pq0 [10.35, 37]. One relative
disadvantage is its performance near algorithmic singu-
larities (Sect. 10.5.3).
10.5.2 Augmented Jacobian
Another approach, the so-called task-space augmenta-
tion, introduces a constraint task to be fulﬁlled along
with the end-effector task; then, an augmented Jacobian
matrix is set-up whose inverse gives the sought joint
velocity solution. The concept of task-space augmen-
tation has been independently introduced by Sciavicco
and Siciliano [10.28, 38, 39] and Egeland [10.40] and
later revisited by Seraji in the framework of the conﬁg-
uration control method [10.41].
In
detail,
let
us
consider
the
vector
tc D
.tc;1 : : : tc;P/T that describes the tasks to be ful-
ﬁlled in addition to the M-dimensional end-effector
task t. In the general case P 	 N  M, although full
redundancy exploitation suggests the consideration
of exactly as many additional tasks as the number of
redundant degrees of freedom, i. e., P D N  M.
The relation between the joint-space coordinate
vector q and the constraint-task vector tc can be con-
sidered as a direct kinematics equation
tc D kc.q/ ;
(10.35)
where kc is a continuous nonlinear vector function. Ac-
cordingly, it is useful to consider the mapping
Ptc D Jc.q/ Pq ;
(10.36)
which can be obtained by differentiating Eq. (10.35).
In (10.36), Ptc is the constraint-task velocity vector,
and Jc.q/ D @kc=@q is the P  N constraint-task Jaco-
bian matrix.
At this point, an augmented-task vector can be de-
ﬁned by stacking the end-effector task vector with the
constraint-task vector as
ta D
 t
tc

D
kt.q/
kc.q/

:
According to this deﬁnition, ﬁnding a joint conﬁgura-
tion q that results in some desired value for ta means
satisfying both the end-effector and the constraint task
at the same time.
A solution to this problem can be found at the dif-
ferential level by inverting the mapping
Pta D Ja.q/ Pq ;
(10.37)
where the matrix
Ja D
Jt
Jc

is referred to as the augmented Jacobian.
A particular choice for the constraint-task vector
is tc D h.q/, with h deﬁned as explained in 10.4.1,
which allows the augmented Jacobian method to embed
the extended Jacobian one.
10.5.3 Algorithmic Singularities
The speciﬁcation of additional goals besides tracking
the end-effector velocity raises the possibility that con-
ﬁgurations exist at which the augmented kinematics
problem is singular while the sole end-effector task
kinematics is not; these conﬁgurations are referred to
as algorithmic singularities [10.35]. In terms of the ve-
locity mappings (10.33) and (10.37), an algorithmically
singular conﬁguration is one at which the extended
and the augmented Jacobians, respectively, are singular
while Jt is full-rank.
When he introduced task-augmentation redundancy
resolution methods, Baillieul pointed out that algo-
rithmic singularities are not a speciﬁc problem of the
extended Jacobian technique but that they arise from the
way in which the constraint task conﬂicts with the end-
effector task [10.35, 37]. This is easily understandable
in the simple problem of trajectory tracking with obsta-
cle avoidance: if the assigned trajectory passes through
an obstacle either the trajectory is tracked or the ob-
stacle is avoided so that both tasks cannot be achieved.
If the origin of the conﬂict between the two tasks has

Redundant Robots
10.5 Redundancy Resolution via Task Augmentation
235
Part A | 10.5
a clear meaning the algorithmic singularity may then be
avoided by keenly specifying the constraint task case by
case [10.23]. In more general situations analytical tools
may be useful in ﬁnding algorithmic singularities and
guiding the choice of the constraint function [10.42] or
in ﬁnding conﬁgurations that better harmonize the two
tasks [10.43].
In terms of the tasks deﬁnitions given by (10.2)
and (10.36), one can see that the two tasks are in conﬂict
when
R

JT
c

\ R

JT
t

¤ f0g ;
(10.38)
which is the condition for the occurrence of an algorith-
mic singularity. On the other hand, when
R

JT
c

\ R

JT
t

D f0g ;
the two tasks are compatible becuse the two inverse
mappings are linearly independent; a special case of
task compatibility is when
R JT
c
  R? JT
t
 ;
(10.39)
and the two mappings are orthogonal.
At the algorithmic singularities the augmented Ja-
cobian cannot be inverted but singularity-robust tech-
niques can be adopted. Because the exact solution does
not exist there are reconstruction errors and these affect
both the task vectors. To counteract this problem the
use of weighted damped least-squares has been consid-
ered to invert the augmented Jacobian matrix [10.44,
45]. A different approach is the so-called task priority
inverse kinematics.
10.5.4 Task Priority
Conﬂicts between the end-effector task and the con-
straint task are handled in the framework of the task-
priority strategy by suitably assigning an order of pri-
ority to the given tasks and then satisfying the lower-
priority task only in the null space of the higher-priority
task [10.46, 47]. In the typical case, an end-effector task
is considered as the primary task, although examples
can occur when it becomes the secondary task [10.23].
The idea is that, when an exact solution does not exist,
the reconstruction error should only affect the lower-
priority task.
With reference to solution (10.12), the task-prior-
ity method consists of computing Pq0 to suitably achieve
the P-dimensional constraint-task velocity Ptc. The pro-
jection of Pq0 onto the null space of Jt ensures that the
lower priority of the constraint task will not affect the
higher priority end-effector task [10.48].
When the secondary task Ptc is orthogonal to the pri-
mary task Pt (in the sense of (10.39)) the joint velocity
Pq0 D J
c .q/Ptc
(10.40)
would easily solve the problem, because it would al-
ready be a null-space velocity for the primary-task
velocity mapping (10.2), i. e., projection through NJt
would not be needed. However, in the general case the
two tasks may be compatible but not orthogonal or may
conﬂict and there may not exist a joint velocity solu-
tion that ensures the achievement of both Pt and Ptc. To be
consistent with the deﬁned order of priority between the
two tasks, a reasonable choice is then to guarantee exact
tracking of the primary-task velocity while minimizing
the constraint-task velocity reconstruction error PtcJcPq;
this gives [10.49]
Pq0 D
h
Jc.I  J
t Jt/
i
.Ptc  Jc J
t Pt/ :
(10.41)
Finally, by observing that the null-space projection
operator is both hermitian and idempotent, the solu-
tion given by (10.12) and (10.41) can be simpliﬁed
to [10.46]
Pq D J
t Pt C
h
Jc.I  J
t Jt/
i
.Ptc  Jc J
t Pt/ :
(10.42)
It can be recognized that the problem of algorith-
mic singularities still remains; in fact, when condi-
tion (10.38) is satisﬁed the matrix Jc .I  J
t Jt/ loses
rank with full-rank Jt and Jc. However, in contrast to
the task-space augmentation approach, correct primary-
task solutions are expected as long as the sole primary-
task Jacobian matrix is full-rank. Away from the algo-
rithmic singularities the task-priority strategy gives the
same solution as the task-space augmentation approach;
this implies that close to an algorithmic singularity the
solution becomes ill-conditioned and large joint veloc-
ities may result. This problem can be solved by using
a continuous version of the truncated SVD as described
in [10.3].
Another approach is to relax minimization of the
secondary-task velocity reconstruction constraint and
simply pursue tracking of the components of (10.40)
that do not conﬂict with the primary task [10.50, 51],
namely
Pq D J
t Pt C .I  J
t Jt/J
c Ptc :
(10.43)

Part A | 10.6
236
Part A
Robotics Foundations
An intuitive justiﬁcation of this solution can be given
as follows: The pseudoinverses J
t
and J
c are used
to solve separately for the joint velocities associated
with the respective task velocities; the joint veloc-
ity associated with the (secondary) constraint task is
then projected onto the null space of Jt to remove
the components that would interfere with the (primary)
end-effector task and ﬁnally added to the joint veloc-
ity associated with the end-effector task. As a result,
a nice property of solution (10.43) is that algorith-
mic singularities are decoupled from the singularities
of Jc.
By construction, the solution (10.43) leads to
larger constraint-task reconstruction errors than solu-
tion (10.42); this is the price to be paid for smoother
trajectories for the joint velocity when tracking con-
ﬂicting tasks. In any case, a CLIK implementation will
allow one to recover from the secondary-task tracking
error due to the algorithmic singularities. In this case,
the CLIK formulation becomes
Pq D J
t w t C .I  J
t Jt/J
c w c ;
with
w t D Pt C Kt .t  kt.q// ;
w c D Ptc C Kc .tc  kc.q// :
10.6 Second-Order Redundancy Resolution
Redundancy resolution at the acceleration level allows
the consideration of dynamic performance along the
manipulator motion. Moreover, the obtained accelera-
tion proﬁles can be directly used as reference signals
(together with the corresponding positions and veloci-
ties) of a task-space dynamic controller. On the other
hand, a second-order redundancy resolution scheme is
invariably more demanding in terms of computational
load.
The simplest scheme operating at the acceleration
level is represented by (10.15), i. e., the solution with
the minimum norm among those that realize the task
constraint (10.8). Similar to the velocity-level pseu-
doinverse solution, the joint movement generated by
this locally optimal solution does not result in global
acceleration minimization along the entire manipulator
motion. Remarkably, however, the use of (10.15) does
lead to the minimization of the integral index
tf
Z
ti
PqTPqdt ;
over Œti; tf provided that the appropriate boundary con-
ditions are satisﬁed [10.52]. For example, in the case
of free endpoints (neither joint positions nor velocities
speciﬁed at ti and tf) the boundary conditions to be sat-
isﬁed are split and expressed as
Pq.Nt / D J
t Pt.Nt / ;
Nt D ti; tf :
Thus, in spite of the apparent simplicity and elegance of
the solution (10.15), actual minimization of the above
integral requires the solution of a two-point boundary
value problem (TPBVP), which is a computationally
intensive numerical procedure impractical for real-time
kinematic control. However, this may be perfectly ac-
ceptable for ofﬂine redundancy resolution in an indus-
trial setting.
More ﬂexibility in the choice of (both local and
global) performance criteria is obviously obtained by
considering the full second-order solution (10.14). Let
the manipulator dynamic model be expressed as
 D H.q/Rq C c.q; Pq/ C g.q/ ;
(10.44)
where  is the vector of actuator torques, H is the
manipulator inertia matrix, c is the vector of centrifu-
gal/Coriolis terms, and g is the gravitational torque
vector. Choosing the null-space acceleration in (10.14)
as
Rq0 D 
h
H.I  J
t Jt/
i
Q ;
(10.45)
with
Q D H J
t .Rt  PJtPq/ C c C g
leads to the local minimization of the actuator torque
norm T [10.53]. This particular redundancy resolu-
tion scheme performs reasonably over short tasks, but
may lead to instability (more precisely, very high joint
torques) in the long run, essentially due to the build-up
of null-space joint velocities. Note also that the matrix
product H.IJ
t Jt/ in (10.45) is not full-rank; however,
its pseudoinverse can be efﬁciently calculated using the
procedure given in [10.54]. Minimization of the integral
joint torque is also possible [10.55]; this solution obvi-
ously avoids the instability problem, but once again the
solution of a TPBVP is required.

Redundant Robots
10.8 Fault Tolerance
237
Part A | 10.8
Another interesting inverse solution is the following
Rq D J
t;H.Rt  PJt Pq/ C .I  J
t;HJt/ H1c ;
(10.46)
which is slightly modiﬁed with respect to the general
formula (10.14) in view of the use of a weighted pseu-
doinverse. In particular, J
t;H is the inertia-weighted task
Jacobian pseudoinverse, given in the full-rank case by
the following expression
J
t;H D H1JT
t .Jt H1JT
t /1 :
The solution (10.46) minimizes
tf
Z
ti
1
2 PqTH.q/Pq dt ;
i. e., the integral over Œti; tf of the manipulator kinetic
energy [10.52]. Once again, the correct boundary con-
ditions must be used; for example, the case of free
endpoints leads to
Pq.Nt / D J
t;HPt.Nt / ;
Nt D ti; tf :
10.7 Cyclicity
A
common
drawback
of
redundancy
resolution
schemes based on differential kinematics is the lack of
cyclicity (also called repeatability): in general, the joint-
space trajectory corresponding to a cyclic task space
trajectory is not cyclic itself (i. e., the ﬁnal position of
the joints does not coincide with the initial position).
This phenomenon is clearly undesirable, because it ba-
sically means that the behavior of the manipulator along
periodic tasks to be repeated over and over is unpre-
dictable.
A mathematical condition for cyclicity exists for
a particular class of redundancy resolution meth-
ods [10.56]. In particular, consider any scheme of the
form
Pq D Gt.q/Pt ;
(10.47)
where Gt is any generalized inverse of the task Jaco-
bian Jt, i. e., an N  M matrix such that JtGtJt D Jt
(the pseudoinverse matrix J
t in (10.13) is a particular
generalized inverse). Assume that the assigned task t.t/
describes a cyclic trajectory in a simply connected re-
gion of the task space, and denote by gti.q/ the i-th
column of Gt. A necessary and sufﬁcient condition
for (10.47) to generate cyclic joint trajectories is that
the distribution
Gt.q/ D spanfgt1.q/; : : : ; gtM.q/g
is involutive (i. e., it is closed under the Lie bracket op-
eration).
It should be emphasized that the involutivity of Gt
is a strong condition, because it must be satisﬁed at
any conﬁguration. This suggests that most generalized
inverses are not cyclic. Note also that the above con-
dition for cyclicity depends on the chosen generalized
inverse (i. e., pseudoinverse, weighted pseudoinverse,
and so on) as well as on the form of Jt, which in turn
is related to the mechanical structure of the manip-
ulator. This means that cyclicity must be established
on a case-by-case basis. However, it is possible to
design a repeatable inverse that can approximate any
desired generalized inverse over a speciﬁed subset of
the workspace [10.57].
As for redundancy resolution schemes which do not
fall in the class (10.47) – namely, those entailed by the
general inverse solution (10.12) – they are in general
not cyclic. In particular, this is true for when local op-
timization is used to solve redundancy, as in (10.31).
A notable exception is the extended Jacobian method,
which is always cyclic.
10.8 Fault Tolerance
One natural use for kinematic redundancy is that of fault
tolerance, i. e., if there are more degrees of freedom
than the minimum required to complete a task then one
should, theoretically, be able to tolerate a joint failure
and still complete the desired task. While component
failures for robots employed in structured and benign
environments where regular maintenance can be per-
formed are relatively rare, there are many important
applications, although less common, where this is not
true, e.g., in space or underwater exploration and in nu-
clear environments. The failure rates for components
in such harsh environments are relatively high [10.58]
and maintenance is not possible. Many of these com-
ponent failures will result in a robot’s joint becoming
immobilized, i. e., a locked joint failure mode [10.59].
Component failures that result in other common fail-

Part A | 10.8
238
Part A
Robotics Foundations
ure modes, e.g., free-swinging joint failures [10.60], are
also frequently transformed into the locked joint failure
mode by failure recovery mechanisms that employ fail
safe brakes [10.61].
A large body of work on fault-tolerant manipulators
has focused on the kinematic properties of redundant
robots, both of serial and parallel structure [10.62].
These analyses have been performed both on the lo-
cal properties associated with the manipulator Jaco-
bian [10.63, 64] as well as the global characteristics
such as the resulting workspace following a particu-
lar failure [10.65–67]. Clearly both local and global
kinematic properties are related, e.g., if a robot is at
a workspace boundary then the Jacobian is singular.
The effect of locked joint failures on the motion
capabilities of a robotic manipulator are most easily
characterized when the manipulator Jacobian is repre-
sented as a collection of columns
JMN D

J1
J2
: : :
JN

;
where Ji represents the end-effector velocity due to the
velocity of joint i. For an arbitrary single joint failure at
joint f , assuming that the failed joint can be locked, the
resulting .M.N1// Jacobian will be missing the f -th
column, where f can range from 1 to N. This Jacobian
will be denoted by a preceding superscript so that in
general
f JM.N1/ D

J1 J2 : : : Jf1 JfC1 : : : JN

:
As noted above, the local velocity properties of
a manipulator Jacobian are frequently quantiﬁed in
terms of the singular values. Most local dexterity mea-
sures can be deﬁned in terms of simple combinations
of these singular values such as their product (deter-
minant), sum (trace), or ratio (condition number). The
most signiﬁcant of the singular values is M, the mini-
mum singular value, because it is by deﬁnition the mea-
sure of proximity to a singularity and tends to dominate
the behavior of both the manipulability (determinant)
and the condition number. The minimum singular value
is also a measure of the worst-case dexterity over all
possible end-effector motions. One deﬁnition of failure
tolerance is based on the worst-case dexterity following
an arbitrary locked joint failure. Because f M denotes
the minimum singular value of f J, it is a measure of
the worst-case dexterity if joint f fails. If all joints are
equally likely to fail, then a measure of the worst-case
failure tolerance is given by
K D
N
min
fD1
f M :
Physically, this amounts to minimizing the worst-case
increase in joint velocity when a joint is locked and
the others must accelerate to maintain the desired end
effector trajectory. In addition, maximizing K is equiv-
alent to locally maximizing the distance to a post-failure
workspace boundary [10.68]. To insure that manipula-
tor performance is optimal prior to a failure, one may
want to further deﬁne an optimally failure tolerant Ja-
cobian as having all equal singular values due to the
desirable properties of isotropic manipulator conﬁgu-
rations. Under these conditions, to guarantee that the
minimum f M is as large as possible they should all be
equal. It is easy to show that the worst-case dexterity of
an isotropic manipulator that experiences a single joint
failure is governed by the inequality
K D
N
min
fD1
fM 	 
r
.N  M/
N
;
where  denotes the norm of the original Jacobian. The
best case of equality occurs if the manipulator is in
an optimally failure tolerant conﬁguration. The above
inequality makes sense from a physical point of view
because it represents the ratio of the degree of redun-
dancy to the original number of degrees of freedom.
Using the above deﬁnition of an optimally failure tol-
erant conﬁguration one can identify the structure of the
Jacobian required to obtain this property [10.63]. In par-
ticular, one can show that the optimally failure tolerant
criteria requires that each joint contributes equally to
the null space of the Jacobian transformation. Physi-
cally, this means that the redundancy of the robot is
uniformly distributed among all the joints so that a fail-
x
x
y
z
3
2
1
4
y
z
–3
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3 –3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
Fig. 10.9 A four degree-of-freedom spatial positioning
manipulator in a conﬁguration that is optimally fault
tolerant

Redundant Robots
10.9 Conclusion and Further Reading
239
Part A | 10.9
ure at any one joint can be compensated for by the
remaining joints.
A simple example of an optimally failure tolerant
conﬁguration that is easy to visualize is that of a spatial
positioning manipulator with four joints whose Jaco-
bian is given by
Jv D
0
B@

p
3=4
p
1=12
p
1=12
p
1=12
0

p
2=3
p
1=6
p
1=6
0
0

p
1=2
p
1=2
1
CA ;
where Jv represents the linear velocity portion of a ma-
nipulator Jacobian. The null space at this conﬁgura-
tion is given by .1=2/Œ11 1 1T, which illustrates that
each joint contributes equally to the null space mo-
tion, thus distributing the redundancy proportionally
to all degrees of freedom. If the four possible sin-
gle locked joint failures are considered, one can show
that
f 3 D Kmax D 1
2 ;
f D 1; : : : ; 4 ;
which satisﬁes the optimally failure tolerant criterion.
It is then possible to design physical robot manipula-
tors that possess this Jacobian along with its associated
optimal kinematic properties. An example of one such
robot is shown in Fig. 10.9 [10.69].
10.9 Conclusion and Further Reading
Research on kinematically redundant robots has been
ﬂourishing for over two decades now, and is still very
active. The number of papers dealing with this subject
is therefore enormous. The few works cited below are
simply a small addition to the fundamental contribu-
tions already referenced so far, and constitute by no
means an exhaustive list.
The mechanical design of kinematically redundant
manipulators has been studied in many papers [10.70–
74]. In particular, the superiority of human-arm-like
manipulators over conventional 6-DOF robots was ﬁrst
advocated in [10.75]. Reconﬁguration of this arm so as
to ensure full mobility in the whole workspace is stud-
ied in [10.76, 77].
A general analysis of the inverse kinematic prob-
lem for redundant manipulators is presented in [10.78].
In particular, the geometric structure of self-motions is
analyzed in [10.79].
Weighting the damped least-squares solution for
guaranteed singularity avoidance in anisotropic end-ef-
fector tasks was proposed in [10.9, 21, 80].
In addition to singularity avoidance, redundancy
has also been exploited to achieve obstacle avoid-
ance [10.37, 46, 81, 82], minimization of the effects of
joint elasticity [10.83], fault tolerance [10.60], reduc-
tion of impact force [10.84, 85], and maximization of
various dexterity measures [10.4, 5, 43, 86]. A com-
pletely different approach for obstacle avoidance with
redundant robots is presented in [10.87].
A review of redundancy resolution via local opti-
mization is given in [10.88]. A numerically efﬁcient
alternative for redundancy resolution via local opti-
mization is proposed in [10.89]. A redundancy resolu-
tion approach with somehow intermediate characteris-
tics between local and global optimization is presented
in [10.90]. Other methods for second-order redundancy
resolution are discussed, e.g., in [10.91]. Also worth
citing is the dynamically consistent generalized inverse
of [10.92].
The cyclicity issue was ﬁrst pointed out in [10.93],
and further investigated, e.g., in [10.94, 95]. General
formalisms for redundancy resolution of vehicle-ma-
nipulator systems subject to nonholonomic constraints
are described in [10.96, 97].
Video-References
VIDEO 813
KUKA LBR iiwa – Kinematic redundancy
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/10/videodetails/813
VIDEO 814
Free floating autonomous valve turning (task priority redundancy control + task concurrence)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/10/videodetails/814
VIDEO 815
Human inspired tele-impedance and minimum effort controller for improved manipulation performance
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/10/videodetails/815
VIDEO 816
Human motion mapping to a robot arm with redundancy resolution
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/10/videodetails/816

Part A | 10
240
Part A
Robotics Foundations
VIDEO 817
Configuration space control of KUKA lightweight robot LWR with EXARM exoskeleton
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/10/videodetails/817
VIDEO 818
FlexIRob – Teaching nullspace constraints in physical human-robot interaction
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/10/videodetails/818
VIDEO 819
Visual servoing control of baxter robot arms with obstacle avoidance using kinematic redundancy
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/10/videodetails/819
References
10.1
D.E. Whitney: Resolved motion rate control of ma-
nipulators and human prostheses,IEEE Trans. Man-
Mach. Syst. 10(2), 47–53 (1969)
10.2
G.H. Golub, C. Reinsch: Singular value decomposi-
tion and least-squares solutions, Numer. Math. 14,
403–420 (1970)
10.3
A.A. Maciejewski, C.A. Klein: The singular value
decomposition: computation and applications to
robotics, Int. J. Robotics Res. 8(6), 63–79 (1989)
10.4
T. Yoshikawa: Manipulability of robotic mecha-
nisms, Int. J. Robotics Res. 4(2), 3–9 (1985)
10.5
C.A. Klein, B.E. Blaho: Dexterity measures for the
design and control of kinematically redundant
manipulators, Int. J. Robotics Res. 6(2), 72–83
(1987)
10.6
A.A. Maciejewski, C.A. Klein: Numerical filtering
for the operation of robotic manipulators through
kinematically singular configurations, J. Robotics
Syst. 5, 527–552 (1988)
10.7
S. Chiaverini: Estimate of the two smallest sin-
gular values of the Jacobian matrix: applica-
tion to damped least-squares inverse kinematics,
J. Robotics Syst. 10, 991–1008 (1993)
10.8
O. Egeland, M. Ebdrup, S. Chiaverini: Sensory con-
trol in singular configurations – Application to
visual servoing, IEEE Int. Workshop Intell. Motion
Control, Istanbul (1990) pp. 401–405
10.9
Y. Nakamura, H. Hanafusa: Inverse kinematic so-
lutions with singularity robustness for robot ma-
nipulator control, Trans. ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas.,
Control 108, 163–171 (1986)
10.10
D.E. Whitney: The mathematics of coordinated
control of prosthetic arms and manipulators, Trans.
ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas., Control 94, 303–309 (1972)
10.11
T.L. Boullion, P.L. Odell: Generalized Inverse Matri-
ces (Wiley, New York 1971)
10.12
C.R. Rao, S.K. Mitra: Generalized Inverse of Matrices
and its Applications (Wiley, New York 1971)
10.13
A. Ben-Israel, T.N.E. Greville: Generalized Inverses:
Theory and Applications (Wiley, New York 1974)
10.14
R.H. Taylor: Planning and execution of straight-line
manipulator trajectories, IBM J. Res. Dev. 23, 424–
436 (1979)
10.15
M. Sampei, K. Furuta: Robot control in the neigh-
borhood of singular points, IEEE J. Robotics Autom.
4, 303–309 (1988)
10.16
E.W. Aboaf, R.P. Paul: Living with the singularity of
robot wrists, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Raleigh (1987) pp. 1713–1717
10.17
S. Chiaverini, O. Egeland: A solution to the sin-
gularity problem for six-joint manipulators, IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Cincinnati (1990)
pp. 644–649
10.18
S. Chiaverini, O. Egeland: An efficient pseudo-
inverse solution to the inverse kinematic problem
for six-joint manipulators, Model. Identif. Control
11(4), 201–222 (1990)
10.19
O. Khatib: A unified approach for motion and
force control of robot manipulators: The opera-
tional space formulation, IEEE J. Robotics Autom.
3, 43–53 (1987)
10.20
C.W. Wampler: Manipulator inverse kinematic so-
lutions based on vector formulations and damped
least-squares methods, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cy-
bern. 16, 93–101 (1986)
10.21
S. Chiaverini, O. Egeland, R.K. Kanestrøm: Achiev-
ing user-defined accuracy with damped least-
squares inverse kinematics, 5th Int. Conf. Adv.
Robotics, Pisa (1991) pp. 672–677
10.22
J.R. Sagli: Coordination of Motion in Manipulators
with Redundant Degrees of Freedom, Ph.D. Thesis
(Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
Trondheim 1991)
10.23
P. Chiacchio, S. Chiaverini, L. Sciavicco, B. Si-
ciliano: Closed-loop inverse kinematics schemes
for constrained redundant manipulators with task
space augmentation and task priority strategy, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 10(4), 410–425 (1991)
10.24
B. Siciliano:
A
closed-loop inverse kinematic
scheme for on-line joint-based robot control,
Robotica 8, 231–243 (1990)
10.25
Z.R. Novaković, B. Siciliano: A new second-order
inverse kinematics solution for redundant ma-
nipulators. In: Advances in Robot Kinematics, ed.
by S. Stifter, J. Lenarčič (Springer, New York 1991)
pp. 408–415
10.26
A. Balestrino, G. De Maria, L. Sciavicco: Robust con-
trol of robotic manipulators, 9th IFAC World Cong.,
Budapest (1984) pp. 80–85
10.27
W.A. Wolovich, H. Elliott: A computational tech-
nique for inverse kinematics, 23rd IEEE Conf. Decis.
Control, Las Vegas (1984) pp. 1359–1363
10.28
L. Sciavicco, B. Siciliano: A solution algorithm to
the inverse kinematic problem for redundant ma-
nipulators, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 4, 403–410
(1988)
10.29
J. Baillieul, J. Hollerbach, R.W. Brockett: Program-
ming and control of kinematically redundant ma-
nipulators, 23rd IEEE Conf. Decis. Control, Las Vegas
(1984) pp. 768–774
10.30
A. Liégeois: Automatic supervisory control of the
configuration and behavior of multibody mech-

Redundant Robots
References
241
Part A | 10
anisms, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 7, 868–871
(1977)
10.31
O. Khatib: Real-time obstacle avoidance for ma-
nipulators and mobile robots, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), St. Louis (1985) pp. 500–
505
10.32
J.C. Latombe: Robot Motion Planning (Kluwer,
Boston 1991)
10.33
D.G. Luenberger: Linear and Nonlinear Program-
ming (Addison-Wesley, Reading 1984)
10.34
A. De Luca, G. Oriolo: Issues in acceleration reso-
lution of robot redundancy, 3rd IFAC Symp. Robot
Control, Vienna (1991) pp. 665–670
10.35
J. Baillieul: Kinematic programming alternatives for
redundant manipulators, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA), St. Louis (1985) pp. 722–728
10.36
P.H.
Chang:
A
closed-form
solution
for
in-
verse kinematics of robot manipulators with re-
dundancy, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 3, 393–403
(1987)
10.37
J. Baillieul: Avoiding obstacles and resolving kine-
matic redundancy, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), San Francisco (1986) pp. 1698–1704
10.38
L. Sciavicco, B. Siciliano:
Solving the inverse
kinematic problem for robotic manipulators, 6th
CISM-IFToMM Symp. Theory Pract. Robotics Manip.,
Kraków (1986) pp. 107–114
10.39
L. Sciavicco, B. Siciliano: A dynamic solution to
the inverse kinematic problem for redundant ma-
nipulators, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Raleigh (1987) pp. 1081–1087
10.40
O. Egeland: Task-space tracking with redundant
manipulators, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 3, 471–475
(1987)
10.41
H.
Seraji:
Configuration
control
of
redundant
manipulators: theory and implementation, IEEE
J. Robotics Autom. 5, 472–490 (1989)
10.42
J. Baillieul: A constraint oriented approach to in-
verse problems for kinematically redundant ma-
nipulators, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Raleigh (1987) pp. 1827–1833
10.43
S.L. Chiu: Control of redundant manipulators for
task compatibility, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Raleigh (1987) pp. 1718–1724
10.44
H. Seraji, R. Colbaugh: Improved configuration
control for redundant robots, J. Robotics Syst. 7,
897–928 (1990)
10.45
O. Egeland, J.R. Sagli, I. Spangelo, S. Chiaverini:
A damped least-squares solution to redundancy
resolution, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Sacramento (1991) pp. 945–950
10.46
A.A. Maciejewski, C.A. Klein: Obstacle avoidance for
kinematically redundant manipulators in dynam-
ically varying environments, Int. J. Robotics Res.
4(3), 109–117 (1985)
10.47
Y. Nakamura, H. Hanafusa, T. Yoshikawa: Task-
priority based redundancy control of robot manip-
ulators, Int. J. Robotics Res. 6(2), 3–15 (1987)
10.48
H. Hanafusa, T. Yoshikawa, Y. Nakamura: Analysis
and control of articulated robot arms with redun-
dancy, IFAC 8th Trienn. World Congr., Kyoto (1981)
pp. 78–83
10.49
Y. Nakamura, H. Hanafusa: Task priority based
redundancy control of robot manipulators. In:
Robotics Research – The Second International Sym-
posium, ed. by H. Hanafusa, H. Hinoue (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1985) pp. 155–162
10.50
S. Chiaverini: Task-priority redundancy resolution
with robustness to algorithmic singularities, 4th
IFAC Symp. Robot Control, Capri (1994) pp. 393–399
10.51
S. Chiaverini: Singularity-robust task-priority re-
dundancy resolution for real-time kinematic con-
trol of robot manipulators, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 13, 398–410 (1997)
10.52
K. Kazerounian, Z. Wang: Global versus local opti-
mization in redundancy resolution of robotic ma-
nipulators, Int. J. Robotics Res. 7(5), 312 (1988)
10.53
J.M. Hollerbach, K.C. Suh: Redundancy resolution
of manipulators through torque optimization, IEEE
J. Robotics Autom. 3, 308–316 (1987)
10.54
A.A. Maciejewski: Kinetic limitations on the use
of redundancy in robotic manipulators, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 7(2), 205–210 (1991)
10.55
J.M. Hollerbach, K.C. Suh: Local versus global
torque optimization of redundant manipulators,
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Raleigh (1987)
pp. 619–624
10.56
T. Shamir, Y. Yomdin: Repeatability of redundant
manipulators: Mathematical solution of the prob-
lem, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 33, 1004–1009
(1988)
10.57
R.G. Roberts, A.A. Maciejewski: Repeatable gener-
alized inverse control strategies for kinematically
redundant manipulators, IEEE Trans. Autom. Con-
trol 38(5), 689–699 (1993)
10.58
B.S. Dhillon, A.R.M. Fashandi, K.L. Liu: Robot sys-
tems reliability and safety: A review, J. Qual. Maint.
Eng. 8(3), 170–212 (2002)
10.59
M.L. Visinsky, J.R. Cavallaro, I.D. Walker: A dynamic
fault tolerance framework for remote robots, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 11(4), 477–490 (1995)
10.60
J.D. English, A.A. Maciejewski: Fault tolerance
for kinematically redundant manipulators: Antic-
ipating free-swinging joint failures, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 14, 566–575 (1998)
10.61
P. Nieminen, S. Esque, A. Muhammad, J. Mattila,
J. Väyrynen, M. Siuko, M. Vilenius: Water hydraulic
manipulator for fail safe and fault tolerant remote
handling operations at ITER, Fusion Eng. Des. 84(7),
1420–1424 (2009)
10.62
Y. Yi, J.E. McInroy, Y. Chen: Fault tolerance of par-
allel manipulators using task space and kinematic
redundancy, IEEE Trans. Robotics 22(5), 1017–1021
(2006)
10.63
A.A. Maciejewski, R.G. Roberts: On the existence of
an optimally failure tolerant 7R manipulator Jaco-
bian, Appl. Math. Comp. Sci. 5(2), 343–357 (1995)
10.64
R.G. Roberts, A.A. Maciejewski: A local measure of
fault tolerance for kinematically redundant ma-
nipulators, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 12(4), 543–
552 (1996)
10.65
C.J.J. Paredis, P.K. Khosla: Fault tolerant task exe-
cution through global trajectory planning, Rel. Eng.
Syst. Saf. 53, 225–235 (1996)

Part A | 10
242
Part A
Robotics Foundations
10.66
C.L. Lewis, A.A. Maciejewski: Fault tolerant opera-
tion of kinematically redundant manipulators for
locked joint failures, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
13(4), 622–629 (1997)
10.67
R.S. Jamisola Jr., A.A. Maciejewski, R.G. Roberts:
Failure
tolerant
path
planning
for
kinemati-
cally redundant manipulators anticipating locked-
joint failures, IEEE Trans. Robotics 22(4), 603–612
(2006)
10.68
K.N. Groom, A.A. Maciejewski, V. Balakrishnan:
Real-time failure-tolerant control of kinematically
redundant manipulators, IEEE Trans. Robotics Au-
tom. 15(6), 1109–1116 (1999)
10.69
K.M. Ben-Gharbia, A.A. Maciejewski, R.G. Roberts:
Kinematic design of redundant robotic manipula-
tors for spatial positioning that are optimally fault
tolerant, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 29(5), 1300–
1307 (2013)
10.70
J. Salisbury, J. Abramowitz: Design and control of
a redundant mechanism for small motion, IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), St. Louis (1985)
pp. 323–328
10.71
J. Baillieul: Design of kinematically redundant
mechanisms, 24th IEEE Conf. Decis. Control, Ft.
Lauderdale (1985) pp. 18–21
10.72
G.S. Chirikjian, J.W. Burdick: Design and experi-
ments with a 30 DoF robot, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA), Atlanta (1993) pp. 113–119
10.73
J. Angeles: The design of isotropic manipulator ar-
chitectures in the presence of redundancies, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 11(3), 196–201 (1992)
10.74
A. Bowling, O. Khatib: Design of macro/mini ma-
nipulators for optimal dynamic performance, IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Albuquerqe (1997)
pp. 449–454
10.75
J.M. Hollerbach: Optimum kinematic design for
a seven degree of freedom manipulator. In:
Robotics Research – The Second International Sym-
posium, ed. by H. Hanafusa, H. Hinoue (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1985) pp. 216–222
10.76
O. Egeland, J.R. Sagli, S. Hendseth, F. Wilhelm-
sen: Dynamic coordination in a manipulator with
seven joints, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Scottsdale (1989) pp. 125–130
10.77
S. Chiaverini, B. Siciliano, O. Egeland: Kinematic
analysis and singularity avoidance for a seven-
joint manipulator, Am. Control Conf., San Diego
(1990) pp. 2300–2305
10.78
D.R. Baker, C.W. Wampler: On the inverse kinemat-
ics of redundant manipulators, Int. J. Robotics Res.
7(2), 3–21 (1988)
10.79
J.W. Burdick: On the inverse kinematics of redun-
dant manipulators: Characterization of the self-
motion manifolds, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Scottsdale (1989) pp. 264–270
10.80
S. Chiaverini, O. Egeland, R.K. Kanestrøm: Weighted
damped least-squares in kinematic control of
robotic manipulators, Adv. Robotics 7, 201–218
(1993)
10.81
M. Kirćanski, M. Vukobratović: Trajectory planning
for redundant manipulators in presence of obsta-
cles, 5th CISM-IFToMM Symp. Theor. Pract. Robots
Manip., Udine (1984) pp. 43–58
10.82
C.A. Klein: Use of redundancy in the design of
robotic systems. In: Robotics Research – The Sec-
ond International Symposium, ed. by H. Hanafusa,
H. Hinoue (MIT Press, Cambridge 1985) pp. 207–214
10.83
J. Baillieul: Kinematic redundancy and the control
of robots with flexible components, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Nice (1992) pp. 715–721
10.84
I.D. Walker: The use of kinematic redundancy in re-
ducing impact and contact effects in manipulation,
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Cincinnati
(1990) pp. 434–439
10.85
M.W. Gertz, J.O. Kim, P.K. Khosla: Exploiting redun-
dancy to reduce impact force, IEEE/RSJ Int. Work-
shop Intell. Robots Syst., Osaka (1991) pp. 179–184
10.86
T. Yoshikawa: Dynamic manipulability of robot ma-
nipulators, J. Robotics Syst. 2(1), 113–124 (1985)
10.87
G. Oriolo, M. Ottavi, M. Vendittelli: Probabilistic
motion planning for redundant robots along given
end-effector paths, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst., Lausanne (2002) pp. 1657–1662
10.88
D.N. Nenchev: Redundancy resolution through lo-
cal optimization: A review, J. Robotics Syst. 6, 6
(1989)
10.89
A. De Luca, G. Oriolo: The reduced gradient method
for solving redundancy in robot arms, Robotersys-
teme 7(2), 117–122 (1991)
10.90
S. Seereeram, J.T. Wen: A global approach to path
planning for redundant manipulators, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 11(1), 152–160 (1995)
10.91
A. De Luca, G. Oriolo, B. Siciliano: Robot redun-
dancy resolution at the acceleration level, Lab.
Robotics Autom. 4(2), 97–106 (1992)
10.92
O. Khatib: Inertial properties in robotics manipu-
lation: An object-level framework, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 14(1), 19–36 (1995)
10.93
C.A. Klein, C.H. Huang: Review of pseudoinverse
control for use with kinematically redundant ma-
nipulators, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 13, 245–
250 (1983)
10.94
R. Mukherjee: Design of holonomic loops for
repeatability
in
redundant
manipulators, IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Nagoya (1985)
pp. 2785–2790
10.95
A. De Luca, G. Oriolo: Nonholonomic behavior in
redundant robots under kinematic control, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 13(5), 776–782 (1997)
10.96
B. Bayle, J.Y. Fourquet, M. Renaud: Manipulabil-
ity of wheeled-mobile manipulators: Application
to motion generation, Int. J. Robotics Res. 22(7/8),
565–581 (2003)
10.97
A. De Luca, G. Oriolo, P.R. Giordano: Kinematic
modeling and redundancy resolution for non-
holonomic mobile manipulators, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Orlando (2006) pp. 1867–
1873

Multimedia Contents Robots with
243
Part A | 11
11. Robots with Flexible Elements
Alessandro De Luca, Wayne J. Book
Design issues, dynamic modeling, trajectory plan-
ning, and feedback control problems are presented
for robot manipulators having components with
mechanical flexibility, either concentrated at the
joints or distributed along the links. The chapter
is divided accordingly into two main parts. Sim-
ilarities or differences between the two types of
flexibility are pointed out wherever appropriate.
For robots with flexible joints, the dy-
namic model is derived in detail by following
a Lagrangian approach and possible simplified
versions are discussed. The problem of computing
the nominal torques that produce a desired robot
motion is then solved. Regulation and trajectory
tracking tasks are addressed by means of linear
and nonlinear feedback control designs.
For robots with flexible links, relevant factors
that lead to the consideration of distributed flexi-
bility are analyzed. Dynamic models are presented,
based on the treatment of flexibility through
lumped elements, transfer matrices, or assumed
modes. Several specific issues are then highlighted,
including the selection of sensors, the model order
11.1
Robots with Flexible Joints ..................
244
11.1.1
Dynamic Modeling.....................
245
11.1.2
Inverse Dynamics ......................
249
11.1.3
Regulation Control.....................
252
11.1.4
Trajectory Tracking .....................
257
11.1.5
Further Reading ........................
261
11.2
Robots with Flexible Links....................
263
11.2.1
Design Issues ............................
263
11.2.2
Modeling
of Flexible Link Arms .................
265
11.2.3
Control .....................................
269
11.2.4
Further Reading ........................
278
Video-References.........................................
279
References...................................................
279
used for control design, and the generation of
effective commands that reduce or eliminate
residual vibrations in rest-to-rest maneuvers.
Feedback control alternatives are finally discussed.
In each of the two parts of this chapter, a sec-
tion is devoted to the illustration of the original
references and to further readings on the subject.
The standard assumption underlying robot kinematics,
dynamics, and control design is that manipulators con-
sist only of rigid bodies (links and motion transmission
components). This is, however, an ideal situation that
may be considered valid only for slow motion and small
interacting forces. In practice, mechanical ﬂexibility in
robot manipulators is present for two main reasons: the
use of compliant transmission elements and the reduc-
tion of the mass of the moving links through the use
of lightweight material and slender design. These two
kinds of ﬂexibility introduce static and dynamic deﬂec-
tions between the position of the driving actuators and
the position of the manipulator end-effector. If ﬂexibil-
ity is not taken into account when considering robot
design and control, a degradation of the overall ex-
pected performance of the robot typically occurs.
From a modeling point of view, ﬂexibility can be as-
sumed as concentrated at the robot joints or distributed
(in different ways) along the robot links. The dynamic
modeling steps are similar, with the need to introduce
additional generalized coordinates besides those used
to describe the rigid motion of the robot arm. How-
ever, the properties of the resulting models are quite
different from a control point of view. Therefore, the
case of robots with ﬂexible joints and of robots with
ﬂexible links are presented in this chapter mostly as

Part A | 11.1
244
Part A
Robotics Foundations
separate items, pointing out similarities or structural
differences wherever appropriate. For both classes of
ﬂexible robots, the relevant design issues, dynamic
modeling, inverse dynamics algorithms, and control
laws for set-point regulation and trajectory tracking will
be discussed. Indeed, joint and link ﬂexibilities may
be present (and dynamically interact) at the same time.
Many of the presented results can be extended to this
case as well.
In the following, it is assumed that the reader is
already familiar with basic issues on kinematics, dy-
namics, and control of rigid robots (Chaps. 2, 3, 8).
11.1 Robots with Flexible Joints
The presence of joint ﬂexibility is common in current
industrial robots, when motion transmission/reduction
elements such as belts – (as in the selective compliant
assembly robot arm (SCARA) family), long shafts (as
in the forearm of the Unimation Puma arm), cables, har-
monic drives, or cycloidal gears are used. The purpose
of these components is to allow relocation of the actu-
ators next to the robot base, thus improving dynamic
efﬁciency, or to guarantee high reduction ratios with
power-efﬁcient compact inline devices.
However, when subject to the forces/torques arising
in normal robot operation, these components are intrin-
sically ﬂexible (e.g., the ﬂexspline in harmonic drives;
Fig. 11.1) and introduce a time-varying displacement
between the position of the actuators and that of the
driven links. Without a speciﬁc control action, an os-
cillatory behavior, typically of small magnitude but at
a relatively high frequency, is observed at the robot end-
effector level during free motion. Moreover, some form
of instability (e.g., chattering) may occur in tasks in-
volving contact with the environment.
Recently, ﬂexible actuation/transmission elements
have been deliberately selected in soft robots (such
as those driven by serial elastic actuation (SEA) or
variable stiffness actuation (VSA), Chap. 21) intended
for physical human–robot interaction and for achiev-
ing more natural motion characteristics. In fact, this
form of mechanical compliance guarantees an iner-
Wave generator
Flexspline
Circular spline
Fig. 11.1 The components of a harmonic drive
tial decoupling between the actuator and the (possi-
bly, lightweight) link, thus reducing the kinetic energy
involved in undesired collisions with humans. Such
a safety-oriented mechanical design should be traded-
off with a more complex control design aimed at
preserving the same performance of rigid robots in
terms of speed and accuracy of the end-effector motion
(Chap. 69).
Figures 11.2 and 11.3 show two examples of robot
manipulators with ﬂexible joints, the 8R robot Dex-
Fig. 11.2 The cable-driven robot Dexter by Scienzia
Machinale

Robots with Flexible Elements
11.1 Robots with Flexible Joints
245
Part A | 11.1
ter and the 7R lightweight manipulator DLR LWR-III.
The ﬁrst robot has motors 38 located inside the sec-
ond link, with motion transmitted to the distal links
through steel cables and pulleys; the second robot has
a modular structure, with each motor integrated in the
associated joint and using an harmonic drive as reduc-
tion element. The joint stiffnesses of the Dexter robot
vary between 120 and 6300 N m=rad depending on the
joint, while for the DLR LWR-III manipulator, the range
is 600015 000 N m=rad. These numerical values refer
to deﬂections and associated torques evaluated after the
reduction gears.
Deﬂection of the ﬂexible transmission elements can
be modeled as being concentrated at the joints of the
robot, thus limiting the complexity of the associated
equations of motion. When compared to the rigid case,
the dynamic model of robots with ﬂexible joints (and
rigid links) requires twice the number of generalized co-
ordinates to completely characterize the conﬁguration
of all rigid bodies (motors and links) constituting the
arm.
As a result, the case of ﬂexible joint robots is one ex-
ample in which the number of control inputs is strictly
less than the number of mechanical degrees of freedom.
This suggests that the design of control schemes re-
Fig. 11.3 The lightweight manipulator DLR LWR-III by
the German Aerospace Center
alizing standard motion tasks is expected to be more
difﬁcult than for rigid robots. Moreover, the implemen-
tation of a full state feedback law will require twice
the number of sensors, measuring quantities that are
before and after (or across) the joint deformation. On
the other hand, the motor torques used to command
the robot as well as the disturbance torques due to
joint ﬂexibility perform work on the same joint axes
(they are physically collocated). It should be noted
that this is one relevant difference with respect to the
case of ﬂexibility distributed along the links. This char-
acteristic is very helpful for rejecting vibrations and
controlling the overall robot motion. Roughly speak-
ing, we will be able to use input commands acting
before the source of ﬂexibility to ensure that output
variables deﬁned beyond the ﬂexibility behave in a de-
sired way.
11.1.1 Dynamic Modeling
Dynamic models that explicitly include joint ﬂexibil-
ity are used to evaluate quantitatively vibratory ef-
fects superposed on the rigid motion, verify whether
the control laws obtained under the assumption of
joint rigidity can still work in practice (or to what
extent they should be modiﬁed), and enable the de-
sign of new model-based feedforward and feedback
controllers.
We consider a robot with ﬂexible joints as an open
kinematic chain having N C1 rigid bodies, the base and
the N links, interconnected by N (rotary or prismatic)
joints undergoing deﬂection, and actuated by N elec-
trical drives. From a mechanical point of view, each
motor (with its stator and rotor) is an additional rigid
body with its inertial properties. All joints are consid-
ered to be ﬂexible, though mixed situations may be
encountered due to the use of different transmission de-
vices. When reduction gearings are present, they are
modeled as being placed before the joint deﬂection
occurs.
The following standard assumptions are made:
A1 Joint deﬂections are small, so that ﬂexibility effects
are limited to the domain of linear elasticity.
A2 The actuators’ rotors are modeled as uniform bodies
having their center of mass on the rotation axis.
A3 Each motor is located on the robot arm in a position
preceding the driven link. (This can be generalized
to the case of multiple motors simultaneously driv-
ing multiple distal links.)
The ﬁrst assumption supports the terminology of
robots with elastic joints often used in the literature.
The elasticity at joint i is modeled by a spring of stiff-

Part A | 11.1
246
Part A
Robotics Foundations
ness Ki > 0, which is torsional for rotational joints and
linear for translational ones. Figure 11.4 shows a sin-
gle link driven by a motor through a rotational elastic
joint. Nonlinear stiffness characteristics for the ﬂexible
joint can also be considered, provided that the map from
deﬂection to force is smooth and invertible. Assump-
tion A2 is a basic requirement for the long life of an
electrical drive, and thus very reasonable. As we will
see, it implies that the inertia matrix and the gravity
term in the robot dynamic model will be independent of
the angular position of the motors. A typical arrange-
ment of motors satisfying assumption A3 is shown in
Fig. 11.5. The simplest situation is when the i-th motor
moves link i and is mounted on link i  1 with its rota-
tion axis aligned with the i-th joint. This is, for instance,
the case for the LWR-III manipulator. The dislocation
of the actuating motors along the structure has a great
inﬂuence on the structure of the dynamic equations of
motion.
For kinematic and dynamic analysis, 2N frames are
attached to the 2N moving rigid bodies (links and mo-
tors) in the robot chain: the link frames Li and the
motor frames Ri, for i D 1; : : : ; N (Fig. 11.5). For the
deﬁnition of the link frames Li, the standard Denavit–
Hartenberg convention can be used. The frames Ri are
attached to the motor stators, aligned with the axes of
q
θ
τJ
Fig. 11.4 Schematic representation of an elastic joint
World
frame
Link 0
base
Link 2
Link 1
Joint 1
Joint 2
Motor 2
Motor 1
Motor N
Link N
Joint N
Joint N – 1
L2
L1
R1
R2
LN–1
LN
RN
Fig. 11.5 Arrangement of motors and links in an open kinematic
chain
symmetry of the motors and with the z-axis along the
spinning direction of the rotor.
Accordingly, 2N generalized coordinates will be
needed. A possible set of coordinates is given by
‚ D
 
q

!
2 R2N ;
where q is the N-vector of link positions and  is the
N-vector of motor (i. e., rotor) positions, as reﬂected
through the transmission/reduction gears. This choice
of variables is quite convenient because:
1. The model will be formally independent of the re-
duction ratios.
2. These position variables will have a similar dy-
namic range.
3. The kinematics of the robot will be a function of
the link variables q only (these variables are already
beyond the joint ﬂexibility) so that all issues related
to direct/inverse kinematics will be identical to the
case of fully rigid robots.
For some considerations, it is also useful to deﬁne
the variable m, namely the N-vector of motor positions
before reduction, which are the quantities directly mea-
sured by encoders mounted on the motors. In the case
of a motor directly placed on the i-th joint axis, one has
Pm;i D ni Pi, where ni  1 is the reduction ratio at the i-th
joint. In addition, for i D 1;: : : ; N, the difference
ıi D qi  i
is the deﬂection at the i-th joint, while
J;i D Ki.i  qi/
is the torque transmitted to the i-th link through the
associated elastic spring (Fig. 11.4) – the quantity mea-
sured by a joint torque sensor, whenever present. Note
that for robots with ﬂexible links, the set .; ı/ is typ-
ically used in the dynamic modeling, where ı is the
vector of link deﬂection coordinates.
Following a Lagrangian approach, the single energy
contributions to the Lagrangian
L D T .‚; P‚/  U.‚/
will be derived next.
The potential energy of the robot is due to gravity
and joint elasticity. The gravity part is related to the po-
sition of the barycenter of the links (each of mass mi)
and of the motors (of mass mri). Because of assump-
tion A2, the latter will be independent of . Thus,
Ugrav D Ugrav,link.q/ C Ugrav,motor.q/ :

Robots with Flexible Elements
11.1 Robots with Flexible Joints
247
Part A | 11.1
For the elastic part of the potential, because of assump-
tion A1, we have
Uelas D 1
2 .q  /TK.q  / ;
K D diag.K1; : : : ; KN/ :
As a result,
U.‚/ D Ugrav.q/ C Uelas.q  / :
The kinetic energy of the robot is the sum of the
link and rotor contributions. For the links, there is no
difference with respect to the standard rigid robot case
and it will be sufﬁcient to write in general
Tlink D 1
2 PqTML.q/Pq ;
(11.1)
with the positive-deﬁnite symmetric link inertia ma-
trix ML.q/. For the rotors, some more details are needed
Trotor D
N
X
iD1
Trotori
D
N
X
iD1
1
2 mriv T
riv ri C 1
2
Ri!T
ri
RiIri
Ri!ri

;
(11.2)
where v ri is the linear velocity of the center of mass of
the i-th rotor and !ri is the angular velocity of the i-th
rotor body. All quantities in the angular contributions
in (11.2) are conveniently expressed in the local frame
Ri. According to assumption A2, the rotor inertia matrix
is then diagonal
RiIri D diag.Irixx; Iriyy; Irizz/ ;
with Irixx D Iriyy, while v ri can be expressed as a func-
tion of q and Pq only. Moreover, due to assumption A3,
the angular velocity of the i-th rotor has the general ex-
pression
Ri!ri D
i1
X
jD1
Jri;j.q/Pqj C
0
@
0
0
Pm;i
1
A ;
(11.3)
where Jri;j.q/ is the j-th column of the Jacobian relat-
ing the link velocities Pq to the angular velocity of the
i-th rotor in the robot chain. By substituting (11.3) into
(11.2) and expressing Pm in terms of P, it can be shown
that
Trotor D 1
2 PqT 
MR.q/ C S.q/B1ST.q/
	
Pq
C PqTS.q/ P C 1
2
P
TB P ;
(11.4)
where B is the constant diagonal inertia matrix col-
lecting the rotors inertial components Irizz around their
spinning axes, as reﬂected through the reduction ratios,
MR.q/ contains the rotor masses (and, possibly, the ro-
tor inertial components along the other principal axes),
and the square matrix S.q/ expresses the inertial cou-
plings between the rotors and the previous links in the
robot chain.
A simple example illustrates the derivation and the
actual expressions of the terms in (11.4). We also in-
clude the reduction elements to show how the rotor
inertial component around the spinning axis will appear
in the kinetic energy, weighted by different powers of
the reduction ratios. Consider a planar robot with two
rotational elastic joints, a ﬁrst link of length `1, and
motors mounted directly on the joint axes. The kinetic
energies of the two rotors are
Trotor1 D 1
2 Ir1zz P2
m;1 D 1
2 Ir1zzn2
1 P2
1
Trotor2 D 1
2 mr2`2
1Pq2
1 C 1
2 Ir2zz.Pq1 C Pm;2/2
D 1
2 mr2`2
1Pq2
1 C 1
2 Ir2zz.Pq2
1 C 2n2Pq1 P2 C n2
2 P2
2 / ;
leading to
B D
Ir1zzn2
1
0
0
Ir2zzn2
2

;
S D
0
Ir2zzn2
0
0

;
MR D
mr2`2
1
0
0
0

;
SB1ST D
Ir2zz
0
0
0

:
In this speciﬁc case, the matrix S (as well as MR) is
constant. Note that for large reduction ratios ni, the
dominant inertial effect due to the rotors is given by
the matrix B. Also, if the second motor was mounted
remotely on the ﬁrst joint (as it is often the case in the
class of SCARA arms), or still close to the second joint
but with the spinning axis orthogonal to the axis of this
joint, then the matrix S would be zero.
In general, as a consequence of assumption A3,
the matrix S.q/ has always a strictly upper triangular
structure with a cascaded dependence of its nonzero
elements
S.q/ D
0
BBBBBBBBB@
0 S12 S13.q2/ S14.q2; q3/ : : :
: : :
S1N.q2; ::: ; qN1/
0
0
S23
S24.q3/
: : :
: : :
S2N.q3; ::: ; qN1/
0
0
0
S34
: : :
: : :
S3N.q4; ::: ; qN1/
:::
:::
:::
:::
:::
:::
:::
0
0
0
: : :
0
SN2;N1
SN2;N.qN1/
0
0
0
: : :
0
0
SN1;N
0
0
0
: : :
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCCCCA
:
(11.5)

Part A | 11.1
248
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Summing up, the total kinetic energy of the robot is
T D 1
2
P‚
TM.‚/ P‚
D 1
2

PqT
P
T M.q/
S.q/
ST.q/
B
  Pq
P

;
with
M.q/ D ML.q/ C MR.q/ C S.q/B1ST.q/ :
(11.6)
As anticipated, the total inertia matrix M of the robot
depends only on q.
Using the Lagrange equations, ﬁnally yields the
complete dynamic model
M.q/
S.q/
ST.q/
B
 Rq
R

C

c.q; Pq/ C c1.q; Pq; P/
c2.q; Pq/

C
g.q/ C K.q  /
K.  q/

D
0


;
(11.7)
where the inertial terms (related to the total inertia ma-
trix M.q/), the Coriolis and centrifugal terms (collec-
tively denoted by ctot.‚; P‚/), and the potential terms
.@U.‚/=@‚/T have been written separately. In par-
ticular, g.q/ D .@Ugrav.q/=@q/T while J D K. q/ is
the elastic torque transmitted through the joints.
The ﬁrst N and the last N equations of the dynamic
model (11.7) are referred to as the link and the motor
equations, respectively.
On the right-hand side of (11.7), all nonconserva-
tive generalized forces should appear. When dissipative
effects are not considered, only the motor torque 
producing work on the  variable is present (i. e., the
torques on the motor output shafts, ampliﬁed by the
reduction ratios) in the motor equations. If the robot
end-effector is in contact with the environment, the
zero on the right-hand side of the link equations should
be replaced by ext D JT.q/F, where J.q/ is the robot
Jacobian and F the forces/torques acting from the envi-
ronment on the robot.
In the presence of energy-dissipating effects, addi-
tional terms appear on the right-hand side of (11.7). For
instance, viscous friction at both sides of the transmis-
sions and spring damping of the (visco)elastic joints
give rise to the vector term
 
FqPq  D.Pq  P/
F P  D. P  Pq/
!
;
(11.8)
where the diagonal, positive-deﬁnite matrices Fq, F,
and D contain, respectively, the viscous coefﬁcients on
the link side and on the motor side, and the damping
of the elastic springs at the joints. More general forms
of nonlinear friction F can be considered. Note that,
in principle, friction acting on the motor side can be
fully compensated by a suitable choice of the control
torque , while this is not true for friction acting on the
link side, due to the noncollocation.
Model Properties
All elements in the 2N-vector ctot.‚; P‚/ of velocity-
dependent terms in (11.7) are independent of the motor
position . The speciﬁc dependence of the N-vectors c,
c1, and c2 follows from the general expression of the
components of ctot based on Christoffel symbols
ctot;i.‚; P‚/ D 1
2
P‚
T
"
@Mi
@‚ C
@Mi
@‚
T
 @M
@‚i
#
P‚ ;
for i D 1; : : : ; 2N, where Mi is the i-th column of the
total inertia matrix M.‚/. In particular, the veloc-
ity vectors c1 and c2 arise only in the presence of
a conﬁguration-dependent S.q/ matrix. Performing cal-
culations, it can be shown that:
1. The vector c1 does not contain quadratic velocity
terms in Pq or P, but only mixed quadratic terms PiPqj.
2. When the matrix S is constant (in particular, zero),
both c1 and c2 vanish.
The dynamic model (11.7) also shares some prop-
erties of the rigid case, such as:

The model equations admit a linear parametrization
in terms of a suitable set of dynamic coefﬁcients, in-
cluding joint stiffnesses and motor inertias, which is
useful for model identiﬁcation and adaptive control.

The Coriolis and centrifugal terms can always
be factorized as ctot.‚; P‚/ D C.‚; P‚/ P‚, in such
a way that matrix
P
M  2C is skew-symmetric –
a property used in control analysis.

For robots having only rotational joints, the gradi-
ent of the gravity vector g.q/ is globally bounded in
norm by a constant.
Finally, when the joint stiffness is extremely large
(K ! 1), then  ! q while J ! . It is easy to check
that the dynamic model (11.7) collapses in the limit into
the standard model of fully rigid robots (including links
and motors).
Reduced Model
In general, the link and motor equations in (11.7) are
dynamically coupled through the elastic torque J at
the joints, but also (at the acceleration level) via the in-
ertial components of matrix S.q/ – usually a path of
low energy transfer. The presence and actual relevance

Robots with Flexible Elements
11.1 Robots with Flexible Joints
249
Part A | 11.1
of these inertial couplings depend on the kinematic ar-
rangement of the manipulator and, in particular, on the
speciﬁc placement of the motors and transmission de-
vices. There are cases in which the matrix S is constant
(e.g., the planar case, as in the previous example, with
any number of links) or zero (e.g., for a single link with
elastic joint or for a robot with N D 2 links having the
two joint axes orthogonal and the motors mounted at the
joints). As a result, the dynamic equations will simplify
considerably.
For a generic robot with elastic joints, one can take
advantage of the presence of large reduction ratios (with
the ni’s of the order of 100150) and simply neglect en-
ergy contributions due to the inertial couplings between
the motors and the links (see again the 2R planar ex-
ample). This is equivalent to considering the following
simplifying assumption:
A4 The angular velocity of the rotors is due only to
their own spinning, i. e.,
Ri!ri D

0
0
Pm;i
T ;
i D 1; : : : ; N ;
instead of the complete expression (11.3).
As a result, the total angular kinetic energy of the
rotors is just
1
2 P
TB P (or S  0), and the dynamic
model (11.7) reduces to
M.q/Rq C c.q; Pq/ C g.q/ C K.q / D 0
B R C K.  q/ D  ;
(11.9)
with M.q/ D ML.q/ CMR.q/. The main feature of this
model is that the link and motor equations are dynam-
ically coupled only through the elastic torque J. In
addition, the motor equations are now fully linear.
We note that the complete model (11.7) and the
reduced model (11.9) display different characteristics
with respect to certain control problems. In fact, the re-
duced model is always feedback linearizable by static
state feedback, whereas this is never the case for the
complete model as soon as a coupling S ¤ 0 is present.
Singular Perturbation Model
It is interesting to show the two-time-scale dynamic be-
havior that it is induced in robots with elastic joints
when the joint stiffness K is relatively large, but still
ﬁnite. This behavior can be made explicit by a simple
linear change of coordinates, namely replacing  with
the joint torque J. For the sake of simplicity, this is
illustrated on the reduced model only (without dissipa-
tion).
Since the diagonal joint stiffness matrix is assumed
to have large but similar elements, a common scalar fac-
tor 1=2  1 can be extracted as
K D 1
2 OK D 1
2 diag

OK1; : : : ; OKN

:
The slow subsystem is then given by the link equations,
once they are rewritten as
M.q/Rq C c.q; Pq/ C g.q/ D J :
(11.10)
To obtain the dynamics of the fast subsystem, the joint
torque is differentiated twice, the motor and link ac-
celerations are replaced from (11.9), and the above
deﬁnition of OK is used. This leads to
2 RJ D OK
˚
B1 

B1 C M1.q/
	
J
CM1.q/Œc.q; Pq/ C g.q/

:
(11.11)
For small , (11.10) and (11.11) represent a singularly
perturbed system. The two separate time scales govern-
ing the slow and fast dynamics are t and  D t=, since
2 RJ D 2 d2J
dt2 D d2J
d2 :
This model serves as a basis for composite control
schemes, where the control torque has the general form
 D s.q; Pq; t/ C f .q; Pq; J; PJ/ :
(11.12)
This includes a slow action s, designed when ne-
glecting joint elasticity, and an additional action f for
locally stabilizing the fast ﬂexible dynamics around
a suitable manifold in the state space. It can be veriﬁed
that, when setting  D 0 in (11.10)–(11.12), the equiva-
lent rigid robot model is recovered as
ŒM.q/ C B Rq C c.q; Pq/ C g.q/ D s :
A similar singular perturbation model (and control de-
sign) can also be derived for robot manipulators with
ﬂexible links.
11.1.2 Inverse Dynamics
Given a desired motion of a robot, we wish to compute
the nominal torque needed to reproduce this motion in
ideal conditions (the inverse dynamics problem). Such
nominal torque can be used as the feedforward term in
a trajectory-tracking control law.
For rigid robots, the inverse dynamics is a straight-
forward algebraic computation obtained by replacing
the desired motion of the generalized coordinates in the
dynamic model. The minimum requirement for exact

Part A | 11.1
250
Part A
Robotics Foundations
reproduction is that the planned motion has a contin-
uously differentiable desired velocity. For robots with
elastic joints, a motion task can be conveniently ex-
pressed in terms of a desired link trajectory q D qd.t/
(possibly obtained from the kinematic inversion of
a desired motion in Cartesian space). The additional
complexity lies in the fact that not all robot coordi-
nates are directly assigned in this way, so that additional
derivations should be performed. This will require some
higher degree of smoothness of the desired trajectory
qd.t/ 2 Œ0; T, where the ﬁnal time T may or may not be
ﬁnite.
Reduced Model
Consider ﬁrst the case of the reduced model (11.7) and
set n.q; Pq/ D c.q; Pq/ C g.q/ for compactness. By evalu-
ating the link equations on the desired link motion
M.qd/Rqd C n .qd; Pqd/ C Kqd D Kd ;
(11.13)
the nominal position d of the motors associated with
the desired link motion is readily obtained. The nom-
inal elastic torque at the joints is J;d D K.d  qd/;
note that, from (11.13), this quantity can be expressed
as a function of qd, Pqd, and Rqd, which is independent
of K. Differentiating (11.13) leads to the expression for
the nominal motor velocity Pd,
M.qd/qŒ3
d C PM.qd/Rqd C Pn .qd; Pqd/ C KPqd D K Pd ;
(11.14)
where the notation yŒi D diy=dti is used. Differentiating
once more, we obtain
M.qd/qŒ4
d C 2 PM.qd/qŒ3
d C Rn .qd; Pqd/
C
h
RM.qd/ C K
i
Rqd D K Rd ;
(11.15)
to be used in the motor equations evaluated along
the desired motion. After simpliﬁcations, the nominal
torque is obtained as
d D ŒM.qd/ C B Rqd C n .qd; Pqd/
C BK1 h
M.qd/qŒ4
d C 2 PM.qd/qŒ3
d
C RM.qd/Rqd C Rn .qd; Pqd/
i
;
(11.16)
where the extra contributions to the nominal torque of
the rigid case due to joint elasticity can be clearly rec-
ognized. The evaluation of d involves the computation
of ﬁrst- and second-order partial derivatives of the dy-
namic model terms. For instance, one needs to compute
PMŒqd.t/ D
N
X
iD1
@Mi.q/
@q
ˇˇˇˇˇ
qDqd.t/
Pqd.t/eT
i ;
where ei is the i-th unit vector and Mi is the i-th col-
umn of matrix M.q/. This and other similar expressions
can be obtained by symbolic manipulation software.
From (11.16), it follows that the minimum require-
ment for the exact reproducibility of the desired motion
is that qd.t/ admits a continuously differentiable jerk
(i. e., that qŒ4
d .t/ exists in the time interval Œ0; T). Such
a smoother requirement should not come unexpected,
in view of the ﬂexible nature of the system.
Similarly to the rigid case, a recursive numerical
Newton–Euler algorithm can be deﬁned, which com-
putes efﬁciently the inverse dynamics torque (11.16) in
O.N/ asymptotic complexity. For the reduced model of
robots with elastic joints, the algorithm involves for-
ward recursion of motion variables up to the fourth
differential order and backward recursion of second
time derivatives of forces and torques.
Complete Model
Some more analysis is needed for the model (11.9). For
ease of exposition, and without loss of generality, the
case of a constant matrix S is considered. When evalu-
ating the link equations on the desired link motion
M.qd/Rqd CS Rd Cn .qd; Pqd/CKqd D Kd ; (11.17)
the additional presence of the motor acceleration on
the left-hand side does not allow solving directly for
the motor position d as a function of .qd; Pqd; Rqd/ only.
However, the strictly upper triangular structure (11.5)
of S allows one to deﬁne d componentwise, using the
scalar equations in (11.17) recursively. The N-th equa-
tion is in fact independent of Rd,
MT
N.qd/RqdC0T RdCnN .qd; Pqd/CKNqd;N D KNd;N ;
so that this equation can be used to deﬁne
d;N D fN .qd; Pqd; Rqd/
and, after double differentiation, its second time deriva-
tive
Rd;N D f 00
N

qd; Pqd; : : : ; qŒ4
d

:
In the .N  1/-th equation,
MT
N1.qd/Rqd C SN1;N Rd;N
C nN1 .qd; Pqd/ C KN1qd;N1 D KN1d;N1 ;
the acceleration Rd;N has already been determined in the
previous step. Therefore, this equation can be used sim-
ilarly to deﬁne
d;N1 D fN1

qd; Pqd; : : : ; qŒ4
d


Robots with Flexible Elements
11.1 Robots with Flexible Joints
251
Part A | 11.1
and, after two time differentiations, also
Rd;N1 D f 00
N1

qd; Pqd; : : : ; qŒ6
d

:
Note that whenever SN1;N D 0, there will be no in-
crease in the degree of the highest order derivatives
of qd within the functional dependence of d;N1. This
argument also applies recursively to the following steps.
Proceeding backward through the link equations, the
scalar computations end up with the deﬁnition of
d;1 D f1

qd; Pqd; : : : ; qŒ2N
d

and
Rd;1 D f 00
1

qd; Pqd; : : : ; qŒ2.NC1/
d

;
where the dependence on the highest possible differ-
ential degree of qd is shown. With Rd D f 00./ made
available in this way, the nominal torque is ﬁnally
computed from the motor equations, again evaluated
along the desired motion. Using (11.17) to substitute
for K.d  qd/ yields
d D

M.qd/ C ST	
Rqd C n .qd; Pqd/
C .B C S/ Rd

qd; Pqd; : : : ; qŒ2.NC1/
d

:
(11.18)
As a result, the presence of inertial motor–link cou-
plings considerably increases the complexity of the
solution to the inverse dynamics problem. The exact re-
production of a desired link trajectory by the nominal
torque in (11.18) requires that qd.t/ has a continu-
ously differentiable .2N C 1/-th time derivative (i. e.,
that qŒ2.NC1/
d
.t/ exists in the time interval Œ0; T). For
rest-to-rest motions, this implies a trajectory plan that
imposes a very slow start and ending phases.
We ﬁnally remark that the possibility of express-
ing the evolution of the state and input of a system
algebraically in terms of the evolution of an output
variable (in our case q) and a ﬁnite number of its deriva-
tives is sometimes referred to as the ﬂatness property.
The above inverse dynamics analysis shows that q is
a ﬂat output for robots with elastic joints modeled ei-
ther by (11.7) or (11.9).
Note also that, when a constant qd is considered,
these computations all provide the same condition for
the associated motor position
d D qd C K1g.qd/
(11.19)
and nominal static torque
d D g.qd/ :
(11.20)
Presence of Dissipative Terms
Inclusion of dissipative terms in the inverse dynamics
deserves some additional comments. Any model of fric-
tional effects acting on the motor side of the transmis-
sions can be included in the computation without extra
requirements. Friction at the link side should instead be
described by a smooth model, because of the need to
differentiate the link equations. Thus, some functional
approximations may be needed (e.g., replacing discon-
tinuous sign functions with hyperbolic tangents) before
including this term in (11.13) or (11.17).
On the other hand, the presence of a nonnegligi-
ble spring damping D in (11.8) changes the structure
of the computations. While this reduces the order of
the derivatives of qd involved, the problem itself will
become nonalgebraic; in fact, the inverse system will
require the use of the solution of a dynamical system,
albeit a simple one.
Consider for instance the model (11.9), including
now all the dissipative terms given in (11.8). When eval-
uating the link equations,
M.qd/Rqd C n .qd; Pqd/ C

D C Fq

Pqd C Kqd
D D Pd C Kd ;
(11.21)
the motor velocity Pd additionally appears on the right-
hand side. Differentiating (11.21) leads to
DRd C K Pd D w d ;
(11.22)
with
w d D M.qd/qŒ3
d C
h
PM.qd/ C D C Fq
i
Rqd
C Pn .qd; Pqd/ C KPqd :
Equation (11.22) represents a ﬁrst-order linear asymp-
totically stable dynamical system (internal dynam-
ics), with state
Pd and forcing signal w d.t/. For
a given Pd.0/, its solution Pd.t/ and the associated solu-
tion derivative Rd.t/ are needed to evaluate the nominal
torque in the motor equations. This yields
d D M.qd/Rqd C n .qd; Pqd/ C FqPqd C B Rd C F Pd ;
where (11.21) has been used to replace the term D. Pd 
Pqd/ C K.d  qd/. In this case, the desired link trajec-
tory qd.t/ should have a continuously differentiable
acceleration (qŒ3
d should exist, since it is used in the def-
inition of w d). Note that any initialization Pd.0/ of the
internal dynamics (11.22) is feasible (i. e., it produces
a speciﬁc torque proﬁle d.t/ yielding the same link

Part A | 11.1
252
Part A
Robotics Foundations
motion qd.t/), with the associated motor position d.0/
initialized from (11.21). Indeed, we should match the
actual initial state of the robot. For instance, starting
from an equilibrium state implies the unique choice
Pd.0/ D 0.
A similar procedure can also be applied to the com-
plete model (11.7) in the presence of spring damping.
Again a dynamical inverse system will be needed, while
the smoothness requirement on qd.t/ would be even
more dramatically reduced in that case.
We ﬁnally remark that, for robots with ﬂexible
links, the inverse dynamics problem gives also rise to
an internal dynamics, independently of the presence of
modal damping. Moreover, when specifying a desired
motion for the tip of the ﬂexible arm, the associated in-
ternal dynamics will be unstable and this critical issue
has to be tackled to determine a feasible solution.
11.1.3 Regulation Control
We now consider the problem of controlling the motion
of a robot with joint elasticity to a constant conﬁgura-
tion. In this problem, no trajectory planning is involved
and a feedback law should be found that achieves
asymptotic stabilization of a desired closed-loop equi-
librium. Global solutions (i. e., those valid when start-
ing from any initial state) are indeed preferred.
From the analysis in the previous section, it should
be clear that one needs to deﬁne only a constant ref-
erence qd (with Pqd.t/  0) for the link coordinates.
101
102
Motor velocity output
Phase (deg)
Frequency (rad/s)
100
50
0
–50
–100
101
102
Magnitude (dB)
Frequency (rad/s)
80
60
40
20
Fig. 11.6 Bode diagrams of the torque to motor velocity transfer
function
From (11.19), a unique reference d for the motor vari-
ables is in fact associated with the desired qd (which,
in turn, may result from a desired pose of the robot
end-effector). Furthermore, (11.20) provides the needed
static torque to be applied at steady state by any feasible
controller.
A major aspect of the presence of joint elasticity
is that the feedback part of the control law can de-
pend in general on four variables for each joint: the
motor and link position, and the motor and link veloc-
ity. However, in most robots where joint elasticity is
not explicitly considered in the system design, at most
two sensors are available for measurement at the joints:
a position sensor (e.g., an encoder) and, in some cases,
a tachometer as a velocity sensor. When no velocity
sensors are present, velocity is typically reconstructed
by suitable numerical differentiation of high-resolution
position measurements. Due to the presence of joint
elasticity, the position/velocity quantities that are ac-
tually measured depend on where these sensors are
mounted in the motor/transmission assembly.
A single link driven through an elastic joint is intro-
duced as a paradigmatic case study to show what can
be achieved using different sets of partial state mea-
surements. This simple situation provides indications
on how to handle the general multilink case.
In the absence of gravity, it will be shown that
a proportional–derivative (PD) controller based only
on motor measurements is sufﬁcient to achieve the de-
sired regulation task. In the presence of gravity, various
gravity compensation schemes can be added to the PD
feedback controller. These control results mimic the sit-
uation of robots with rigid joints, once the convenient
quantities for use in the feedback have been identiﬁed.
Single Elastic Joint Example
Consider a single link rotating on a horizontal plane
(thus, without gravity) and actuated with a motor
through an elastic joint coupling (Fig. 11.4). When vis-
cous friction on motor and link side as well as damping
across the spring are included, the dynamic model is
MRq C D.Pq  P/ C K.q  / C FqPq D 0 ;
B R C D. P  Pq/ C K.  q/ C F P D  ;
where the same, now scalar, notation of Sect. 11.1.1
has been used. Since this system is described by lin-
ear equations, Laplace transforms are used to derive the
transfer functions of interest, namely from input torque
to motor position
.s/
.s/ D Ms2 C .D C Fq/s C K
den.s/
;

Robots with Flexible Elements
11.1 Robots with Flexible Joints
253
Part A | 11.1
and from input torque to link position
q.s/
.s/ D Ds C K
den.s/ ;
with the common denominator den.s/ given by
den.s/ D
n
MB s3 C M.D C F/ C B.D C Fq/	 s2
C .M C B/K C .Fq C F/D C FqF
	 s
C .Fq C F/K
o
s :
In the case of link position output, the transfer function
has a larger relative degree (or pole-zero excess). Fig-
ures 11.6 and 11.7 show typical frequency responses in
the two cases. For clarity, the outputs have been cho-
sen at the velocity level. In the Bode diagram of the
magnitude for the motor velocity output, note the pres-
ence of an antiresonance/resonance behavior. Similarly,
there is a pure resonance (more pronounced for weak
or zero spring damping D) for the link velocity output.
The phase proﬁle in Fig. 11.7, with a high-frequency lag
of 270ı, indicates the greater control difﬁculty encoun-
tered when closing the feedback loop on link quantities.
In experimental tests on a robot joint, such plots are
quite characteristic of the presence of concentrated joint
elasticity and can be used to assess the relevance of this
phenomenon and for identifying model parameters.
For the analysis of the stabilizing properties of dif-
ferent feedback arrangements, all dissipative effects
will be neglected in the following (D D Fq D F D 0
is anyway the worst case). Consider ﬁrst the transfer
function relative to the motor position output
.s/
.s/
ˇˇˇˇ
no diss
D
Ms2 C K
ŒMB s2 C .M C B/K s2 :
(11.23)
Apart from a double pole at the origin, this transfer
function has a pair of imaginary zeros and poles, with
the zero pair occurring at the so-called locked frequency
!1 D
r
K
M ;
which characterizes the oscillations occurring when the
motor is locked (  0), e.g., by a high-gain positional
feedback. This frequency is used to assess the per-
formance limit of a simple PD control for the motor
variables. In order to achieve enough damping in the
closed-loop system, the bandwidth should be limited,
as a rule of thumb, to one-third of !1. Faster transients
can be achieved only by taking into account the fourth-
order dynamics of the elastic joint assembly. Note also
101
102
Link velocity output
Phase (deg)
Frequency (rad/s)
0
–100
–200
–300
101
102
Magnitude (dB)
Frequency (rad/s)
80
60
40
20
Fig. 11.7 Bode diagrams of the torque to link velocity transfer func-
tion
that the frequency of the zero pair is always lower than
that of the pole pair in (11.23). This is related to the
passivity of the mapping from torque to motor veloc-
ity, a property useful for stability and robust or adaptive
control design.
Since the control objective is to regulate the link po-
sition output, we are also interested in the open-loop
transfer function
q.s/
.s/
ˇˇˇˇ
no diss
D
K
ŒMB s2 C .M C B/K s2 :
(11.24)
This transfer function has no zeros (in fact, for this to
happen it is sufﬁcient that D D 0) so that the relative
degree is now four, the maximum possible. We shall see
that the nonlinear counterpart of the absence of zeros
in (11.24) will play a relevant role also for trajectory
control in the multilink case of robots with elastic joints.
It is worth mentioning that this situation is com-
pletely different from the case in which the elastic
spring would be moved out of the joint and placed any-
where along the link – a simple one-mode approximate
model of link ﬂexibility. In that case, the analogous
transfer function will possess a negative and a positive
real zero, symmetrically placed w.r.t. the origin (a non-
minimum-phase system). This indicates the criticality
of a direct inversion of the system input–output map for
the execution of a desired link trajectory.
With the desired position given in terms of the link
variable qd, the most natural choice for the design of

Part A | 11.1
254
Part A
Robotics Foundations
a linear stabilizing feedback using one position and one
velocity variable, is to close a PD loop from the link
variables,
 D uq 

KP;qq C KD;qPq

;
(11.25)
with position and velocity gains KP;q and KD;q, and with
uq D KP;qqd being the external input used for deﬁning
the set point. It is easy to verify that the closed-loop
poles will be unstable no matter how the gains are cho-
sen, so that error feedback from link variables alone
should be avoided. In a similar way, also the combi-
nation of motor position and link velocity feedback is
always unstable.
Another mixed feedback strategy is to use link po-
sition and motor velocity
 D uq 

KP;qq C KD;m P

:
(11.26)
This combination corresponds, e.g., to the case of
a tachometer integrated in a direct-current (DC) motor
and of an optical encoder placed on the load shaft for
sensing its position (without any knowledge about the
relevance of joint elasticity). Use of (11.26) leads to the
closed-loop characteristic equation
BMs4 C MKD;ms3 C .B C M/Ks2
C KKD;ms C KKP;q D 0 :
Using Routh’s criterion, asymptotic stability occurs
if and only if the motor velocity gain KD;m > 0 and
the link position gain satisﬁes 0 < KP;q < K, i. e., the
proportional feedback should not override the spring
stiffness. The existence of such an upper bound limits
the usefulness of this scheme.
Finally, consider performing feedback from the mo-
tor variables
 D u 

KP;m C KD;m P

;
(11.27)
with u D KP;md D KP;mqd (due to the absence of
gravity). The closed-loop system will be asymptotically
stable provided that both KP;m and KD;m are strictly pos-
itive (and otherwise arbitrarily large). This favorable
situation lends itself to a convenient generalization in
the multilink case.
Note that other partial state feedback combinations
would be possible, depending on the available sensing
devices. For instance, mounting a strain gauge on the
transmission shaft provides a direct measure of the elas-
tic torque J D K.  q/ for control use. Strain gauges
are also useful sensors for ﬂexible links. Indeed, full-
state feedback may be designed so as to guarantee
asymptotic stability and improve the transient behav-
ior considerably; however, this would be obtained at the
cost of additional sensors and requires proper tuning of
the four gains.
PD Control Using only Motor Variables
For the general multilink case in the absence of gravity,
consider the PD control law based on motor position
and velocity feedback
 D KP.d  /  KD P ;
(11.28)
with symmetric (typically, diagonal) positive-deﬁnite
gain matrices KP and KD. Since g.q/  0, it follows
from (11.19) that the reference value for the motor posi-
tion is d D qd (neither a joint deﬂection is present nor
an input torque is needed at steady state).
The control law (11.28) globally asymptotically sta-
bilizes the desired equilibrium state q D  D qd, Pq D
P D 0. This can be shown through a Lyapunov ar-
gument, completed by the application of La Salle’s
theorem. In fact, a candidate Lyapunov function is given
by the sum of the total energy of the system (kinetic
plus elastic potential) and of the control energy due to
the proportional term (a virtual elastic potential energy)
V D 1
2
P‚
TM.‚/ P‚ C 1
2.q  /TK.q  /
C 1
2.d  /TKP.d  /  0 :
(11.29)
Computing the time derivative of V along the tra-
jectories of the closed-loop system given by (11.7)
(or (11.9)) and (11.28), and taking into account the
skew-symmetry of P
M  2C, leads to
PV D  P
TKD P 	 0 :
The inclusion of dissipative terms (viscous friction and
spring damping) would render PV even more negative-
semideﬁnite. The analysis is completed by verifying
that the maximum invariant set contained in the set of
states such that PV D 0 (i. e., those with P D 0) collapses
into the desired unique equilibrium state.
We point out that an identical control law is able
to globally regulate, in the absence of gravity, robots
with ﬂexible links to a desired joint conﬁguration. In
that case,  in (11.28) would be the rigid coordinates at
the base of the ﬂexible links of the robot.
PD with Constant Gravity Compensation
The presence of gravity requires the addition of some
form of gravity compensation to the PD action (11.28).

Robots with Flexible Elements
11.1 Robots with Flexible Joints
255
Part A | 11.1
Moreover, this will typically need an additional struc-
tural assumption and may demand some caution in the
selection of the control gains.
Before proceeding, we recall a basic property of the
gravity vector g.q/ (under assumption A2, the gravity
vector in (11.7) is the same appearing in the dynamics
of the equivalent rigid robot). For robots with rotational
joints, elastic or not, a positive constant ˛ exists such
that

@g.q/
@q
 	 ˛ ;
8q 2 RN :
(11.30)
The norm of a matrix A.q/ is that induced by the Eu-
clidean norm for vectors, i. e.,
kAk D
p
max .ATA/ :
Inequality (11.30) implies that
kg.q1/  g.q2/k 	 ˛kq1  q2k ;
8q1; q2 2 RN :
(11.31)
In common practice, robot joints are never unre-
alistically soft. More precisely, they are stiff enough
to have, under the load of the robot’s own weight,
a unique equilibrium link position qe associated with
any assigned motor position e – the reverse of the re-
lationship expressed by (11.19). This situation is by no
means restrictive, but will be stated for clarity as a fur-
ther modeling assumption:
A5 The lowest joint stiffness is larger than the upper
bound on the gradient of gravity forces acting on
the robot, or
miniD1;:::;N Ki > ˛ :
The simplest modiﬁcation for handling the presence
of gravity is to consider the addition of a constant term
that compensates exactly the gravity load at the desired
steady state. According to (11.19) and (11.20), the con-
trol law (11.28) is then modiﬁed to
 D KP.d  /  KD P C g.qd/ ;
(11.32)
with symmetric, typically diagonal, KP > 0 (as a mini-
mum) and KD > 0, and with the motor reference given
by d D qd C K1g.qd/.
A sufﬁcient condition guaranteeing that q D qd,
 D d, Pq D P D 0 will be the unique globally asymp-
totically stable equilibrium for the system (11.7) under
the control law (11.32) is that
min

 K
K
K
K C KP

> ˛ ;
(11.33)
with ˛ deﬁned in (11.30). Taking into account the
diagonal structure of K and KP, and thanks to assump-
tion A5, it is always possible to fulﬁll this condition
by increasing the smallest proportional gain in the con-
troller (or, the smallest eigenvalue of KP if this matrix
has not been chosen diagonal).
In the following, we sketch the motivation for this
condition and the associated proof of asymptotic stabil-
ity. The equilibrium conﬁgurations of the closed-loop
system are the solutions of
K.q / C g.q/ D 0 ;
K.  q/  KP.d  /  g.qd/ D 0 :
Indeed, the pair .qd; d/ satisﬁes these equations. How-
ever, in order to obtain a global result one should
guarantee that this pair is the unique solution. There-
fore, recalling (11.19), the null term K.d qd/g.qd/
can be added/subtracted to both equations to obtain
K.q  qd/  K.  d/ D g.qd/  g.q/
K.q  qd/ C .K C KP/.  d/ D 0 ;
where the matrix in condition (11.33) can be clearly rec-
ognized. Taking the norms of terms on both sides and
bounding gravity terms using (11.31), the introduced
condition (11.33) implies that the pair .qd; d/ is in fact
the unique equilibrium. To show asymptotic stability,
a candidate Lyapunov function is built based on the one
introduced in (11.29) in the absence of gravity
Vg1 D V C Ugrav.q/  Ugrav.qd/  .q  qd/Tg.qd/
 1
2 gT.qd/K1g.qd/  0 :
(11.34)
The positive-deﬁniteness of Vg1 and the fact that its
unique minimum is at the desired state are again im-
plied by condition (11.33). (The last constant term
in (11.34) is used to set to zero the minimum value of
Vg1 at the equilibrium.). By the usual computations, it
follows that PVg1 D  P
TKD P 	 0 and the result is ob-
tained applying La Salle’s theorem.
The control law (11.32) is based only on the know-
ledge of the gravity term g.qd/ and of the joint stiff-
ness K. The latter appears in fact in the deﬁnition of the
motor position reference d. Uncertainties in the grav-
itational term g.qd/ and in the joint stiffness K affect
the performance of the controller. Still, the existence of
a unique closed-loop equilibrium and its asymptotic sta-
bility are preserved when the gravity bound by ˛ is still
correct and condition (11.33) holds for the true stiffness

Part A | 11.1
256
Part A
Robotics Foundations
values. Indeed, the robot will converge to an equilib-
rium that is different from the desired one – the better
the estimates OK and Og.qd/ used, the closer the actual
equilibrium will be to the desired one.
PD with Online Gravity Compensation
Similarly to the rigid robot case, a better transient be-
havior is expected if gravity compensation (or, more
precisely, its perfect cancellation) is performed at all
conﬁgurations during motion. However, the gravity
vector in (11.7) depends on the link variables q, which
are assumed not to be measurable at this stage. It is easy
to see that using g./, with the measured motor posi-
tions in place of the link positions, leads in general to
an incorrect closed-loop equilibrium. Moreover, even
if q were available, adding g.q/ to a motor PD error
feedback has no guarantee of success because this com-
pensation, which appears in the motor equation, does
not instantaneously cancel the gravity load acting on the
links.
With this in mind, a PD control with online gravity
compensation can be introduced as follows. Deﬁne the
variable
Q D   K1g.qd/ ;
(11.35)
which is a gravity-biased modiﬁcation of the measured
motor position , and let
 D KP .d  /  KD P C g. Q/ ;
(11.36)
where KP > 0 and KD > 0 are both symmetric (and typ-
ically diagonal) matrices. The control law (11.36) can
still be implemented using only motor variables. The
term g. Q/ provides only an approximate cancellation
(though, of a large part) of gravity during motion, but
leads to the correct gravity compensation at steady state.
In fact, by using (11.19) and (11.35), it follows that
Qd WD d  K1g.qd/ D qd ;
so that g. Qd/ D g.qd/.
Global asymptotic stability of the desired equi-
librium can be guaranteed under the same condi-
tion (11.33) used for the constant gravity compensation
case. A slightly different Lyapunov candidate is de-
ﬁned, starting again from the one in (11.29), as
Vg2 D V C Ugrav.q/  Ugrav. Q/
 1
2 gT.qd/K1g.qd/  0 ;
to be compared with (11.34).
The use of an online gravity compensation scheme
typically provides a smoother time course and a notice-
able reduction of the positional transient errors, with
no additional control effort in terms of peak and av-
erage torques. We note that choices of low position
gains, even when largely violating the sufﬁcient con-
dition (11.33) for stability, may still work, contrary to
the case of constant gravity compensation. However
even for increasing values of joint stiffness, in the limit
for K ! 1, the range of feasible values of KP that
guarantee exact regulation does not extend down to
zero.
A possibility to reﬁne the previous online gravity
compensation scheme, again based only on motor posi-
tion measurement, is offered by the use of a fast iterative
algorithm that elaborates the measure  in order to
generate a quasistatic estimate Nq./ of the current (un-
measured) q. In fact, in any steady-state conﬁguration
.qs; s/, a direct mapping is deﬁned from qs to s
s D hg.qs/ WD qs C K1g.qs/ :
Assumption A5 is sufﬁcient to guarantee the exis-
tence and uniqueness also of the inverse mapping qs D
h1
g .s/. For a measured , the function
q D T.q/ WD   K1g.q/
is then a contraction mapping and the iteration
qiC1 D T.qi/ ;
i D 0;1; 2; : : :
will converge to the unique ﬁxed point of this mapping,
which is exactly the value Nq./ D h1
g ./. A suitable
initialization for q0 is either the measured  or the
value Nq computed at the previous sampling instant. In
this way, just two or three iterations are needed to ob-
tain sufﬁcient accuracy and this is fast enough to be
implemented within a sensing/control sampling interval
of a digital robot controller. With this iterative scheme
running in the background, the regulation control law
becomes
 D KP .d  /  KD P C g .Nq.// ;
(11.37)
with symmetric (diagonal) KP > 0 and KD > 0. A proof
of the global asymptotic stability of this control scheme
can be given by further modifying the previous Lya-
punov candidates. The advantage of (11.37) is that any
positive value of the feedback gain KP is allowed, thus
recovering in full the operative working conditions of
the rigid case with exact gravity cancellation.
With reference to the reduced model (11.9), a fur-
ther improvement can be obtained via a nonlinear PD-
like controller that removes completely the gravity from

Robots with Flexible Elements
11.1 Robots with Flexible Joints
257
Part A | 11.1
the actual motion of the robot links. For this, consider
the control law
 D KPŒqd   C K1g.q/  KD
 P  K1Pg.q/

C g.q/ C BK1Rg.q/
(11.38)
with symmetric (diagonal) KP > 0 and KD > 0. The
last two terms are those needed to cancel both static
and dynamic effects due to gravity. Even when as-
sumption A5 does not hold, the control law (11.38)
guarantees global asymptotic stability of the desired
equilibrium state. This result is a byproduct of feedback
linearization design (Sect.11.1.4), though much simpler
than the complete one, and can be proven using again
a Lyapunov analysis. Since a lower bound on the joint
stiffness is not required (the joints may be arbitrarily
soft), the same approach can be used also for robots us-
ing variable stiffness actuation (VSA). The price to pay
is that an estimate of the link acceleration Rq is needed
when computing the term Rg in (11.38).
The two online gravity compensation schemes
(11.36) and (11.37) realize a compliance control in the
joint space with only motor measurements. The same
idea can also be extended to the case of Cartesian
compliance control by evaluating the direct kinematics
and the Jacobian (transpose) of the robot arm with Q
or, respectively, Nq./ in place of q. The role of a
damping action within a compliance/impedance con-
trol scheme can be clearly understood when looking at
VIDEO 133 and
VIDEO 134 .
Full-State Feedback
When the feedback law is based on a full set of meas-
urements of the robot state, the transient performance
of regulation control laws can be improved. Taking
advantage of the availability of a joint torque sen-
sor, we present a convenient design for the reduced
model (11.9) of robots with elastic joints, including
spring damping as a dissipation effect. Full-state feed-
back can be obtained in two phases, by combining
a preliminary torque feedback with the motor feedback
law in (11.28).
Using J D K.  q/, the motor equation can be
rewritten as
B R C J C DK1 PJ D  :
The joint torque feedback
 D BB1
 u C

I  BB1

 
J C DK1 PJ

;
(11.39)
where u is an auxiliary input to be designed, transforms
the motor equations into
B R C J C DK1 PJ D u :
In this way, the apparent motor inertia can be reduced to
a desired, arbitrary small value B, with clear beneﬁts
in terms of vibration damping. For instance in the linear
and scalar case, a very small B shifts the pair of complex
poles in (11.23) to a very high frequency, with the joint
behaving almost as a rigid one.
Setting now
u D KP;.d  /  KD; P C g.qd/
in (11.39) leads to the state feedback controller
 D KP.d  /  KD P C KTŒg.qd/  J
 KS PJ C g.qd/ ;
(11.40)
with gains
KP D BB1
 KP; ;
KD D BB1
 KD; ;
KT D BB1
  I
KS D

BB1
  I

DK1 :
Indeed, the law (11.40) can also be rewritten in terms of
.; q; P; Pq/, if the torque sensor is not available. How-
ever, keeping this structure of the gains preserves the
interesting physical interpretation of what the full-state
feedback controller is able to achieve.
11.1.4 Trajectory Tracking
As for rigid robots, the problem of tracking desired
time-varying trajectories for robots with elastic joints
is harder than that of achieving constant regulation. In
general, solving this problem requires the use of full-
state feedback and knowledge of all the terms in the
dynamic model.
Under these conditions, we shall focus on the feed-
back linearization approach, namely a nonlinear state
feedback law that leads to a closed-loop system with de-
coupled and exactly linear behavior for all the N joints
of the robot (in fact, the link variables q). The track-
ing errors along the reference trajectory are forced to
be globally exponentially stable, with a decaying rate
that can be directly speciﬁed through the choice of
the scalar feedback gains in the controller. This funda-
mental result is the direct extension of the well-known
computed torque method for rigid robots. Because of its
relevant properties, the feedback linearization approach

Part A | 11.1
258
Part A
Robotics Foundations
can be used as a reference to assess the performance
of any other trajectory tracking control law, which may
possibly be designed using less/approximate model in-
formation and/or only partial-state feedback.
However, in the presence of joint elasticity, the
design of a feedback linearization law is not straight-
forward. Furthermore, as soon as S ¤ 0, the dynamic
model (11.7) will not satisfy the necessary conditions
for exact linearization (nor those for input–output de-
coupling) when only a static (or, instantaneous) feed-
back law from the full state is allowed. Therefore, we
will restrict our attention to the more tractable case
of the reduced dynamic model (11.9) and sketch only
brieﬂy the more general picture.
As a second much simpler approach to trajectory
tracking problems, we also present a linear control
design that makes use of a model-based feedforward
command and a precomputed state reference trajectory,
as obtained from the inverse dynamics in Sect. 11.1.2,
with the addition of a linear feedback from the full
state. In this case, convergence to the desired trajec-
tory is only locally guaranteed, i. e., the tracking errors
should be small enough, but the control implementation
is straightforward and the real-time computational bur-
den is considerably reduced.
Feedback Linearization
Consider the reduced model (11.9) and let the de-
sired motion be speciﬁed by a smooth reference tra-
jectory qd.t/ for the robot links. The control design
will proceed by system inversion, in a similar way
to the inverse dynamics computations of Sect. 11.1.2
but using now the current measures of the state vari-
ables .q; ; Pq; P/ instead of the reference state evolution
.qd; d; Pqd; Pd/. Notably, there is no need to transform
the robot equations into their state-space description,
which is the standard form used in control design for
general nonlinear systems; we will use the robot model
directly in its second-order differential form (typical of
mechanical systems).
The outcome of the inversion procedure will be the
deﬁnition of a torque , in the form of a static state
feedback control law, which cancels the original robot
dynamics and replaces it with a desired linear and de-
coupled one of suitable differential order. In this sense,
the control law stiffens the dynamics of the robot with
elastic joints, irrespective of the fact that K is already
relatively large (stiff joint) or small (soft joint). The
feasibility of inverting the system from the chosen out-
put q without causing instability problems (related to
the presence of unobservable dynamics in the closed-
loop system, after cancellation) is a relevant property
of robots with elastic joints. In fact, this is the direct
generalization to the nonlinear multiple-input multiple-
output (MIMO) case of the possibility of inverting
a scalar transfer function in the absence of zeros (see
also the considerations made on (11.24)).
Rewrite the link equation in the compact form
M.q/Rq C n.q; Pq/ C K.q  / D 0 :
(11.41)
None of the above quantities depends instantaneously
on the input torque . Therefore, we can differentiate
once w.r.t. time and obtain
M.q/qŒ3 C PM.q/Rq C Pn.q; Pq/ C K.Pq  P/ D 0 :
(11.42)
Proceeding one step further leads to
M.q/qŒ4 C 2 PM.q/qŒ3 C RM.q/Rq
CRn.q; Pq/ C K.Rq  R/ D 0 ;
(11.43)
where R now appears. The motor acceleration is at the
same differential level of  in the motor equation
B R C K.  q/ D  ;
(11.44)
and thus, replacing R from (11.44), we get
M.q/qŒ4 C 2 PM.q/qŒ3 C RM.q/Rq C Rn.q; Pq/ C KRq
D KB1 Œ  K.  q/ :
(11.45)
We note that, using (11.41), the last term K.  q/
in (11.45) may also be replaced by M.q/Rq C n.q; Pq/.
Since the matrix A.q/ D M1.q/KB1 is always
nonsingular, an arbitrary value v can be assigned to
the fourth derivative of q by a suitable choice of the
input torque . The matrix A.q/ is the so-called de-
coupling matrix of the system and its nonsingularity is
a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for imposing a de-
coupled input–output behavior by nonlinear static state
feedback. Moreover, (11.45) indicates that each com-
ponent qi of q needs to be differentiated ri D 4 times in
order to be algebraically related to the input torque 
(ri is the relative degree of qi, when this is chosen as
a system output). Since there are N link variables, the
total sum of the relative degrees is 4N, equal to the di-
mension of the state of a robot with elastic joints. All
these facts taken together lead to the conclusion that,
when inverting (11.45) to determine the input  that im-
poses qŒ4 D v, there will be no dynamics left other than
the one appearing in the closed-loop input–output map.
Therefore, choose
 D BK1 h
M.q/v C ˛

q; Pq; Rq; qŒ3i
C ŒM.q/ C B Rq C n.q; Pq/ ;
(11.46)

Robots with Flexible Elements
11.1 Robots with Flexible Joints
259
Part A | 11.1
with
˛.q; Pq; Rq; qŒ3/ D RM.q/Rq C 2 PM.q/qŒ3 C Rn.q; Pq/ ;
where the terms in ˛ have been ordered according to
the dependence on increasing orders of derivatives of q.
It is easy to verify that the control law (11.46) leads to
a closed-loop system fully described by
qŒ4 D v ;
(11.47)
i. e., chains of four input–output integrators from each
auxiliary input vi to each link position output qi, for
i D 1; : : : ; N. Thus, the robot system has been exactly
linearized and decoupled by the nonlinear feedback
law (11.46). The improvement in performance can
be appreciated in a comparative way by looking at
VIDEO 135 and
VIDEO 770 .
The complete control law (11.46) is expressed
as a function of the so-called linearizing coordinates
.q; Pq; Rq; qŒ3/ only. This has led to some misunderstand-
ings in the past, as it seemed that the feedback lineariza-
tion approach for robots with elastic joints would need
direct measures of the link acceleration Rq and jerk qŒ3,
which are impossible to obtain with currently available
sensors (or would require multiple numerical differen-
tiations of position measures in real time, with critical
noise problems).
When considering the latest technology in the ﬁeld,
it is now feasible to have a set of sensors for elas-
tic joints measuring in a reliable and accurate way the
motor position  (and, possibly, also its velocity P),
the joint torque J D K.  q/, as well as the link
position q. For instance, this is the arrangement of sen-
sors available at each joint of the LWR-III lightweight
manipulator, where expressly designed high-resolution
incremental encoders of the magneto-resistive type are
used for the motor position, joint torque sensing is
based on a full bridge of strain gauges, and a high-
end capacitive potentiometer is used for the absolute
link position (Fig. 11.8). Therefore, only one numeri-
cal differentiation is needed in order to obtain a good
estimate of Pq and/or PJ as well. Note that, depending
on the speciﬁc sensor resolution, it may also be con-
venient to evaluate q using the measures of  and J
as   K1J.
With this in mind, it is easy to see that the following
three sets of 4N variables
.q; Pq; Rq; qŒ3/ ;
.q; ; Pq; P/ ;
.q; J; Pq; PJ/
are all equivalent state variables for a robot with elas-
tic joints, related by globally invertible transforma-
tions. Therefore, under the assumption that the dynamic
Link
position 
sensor 
Torque
sensor with
digital
interface
Harmonic
drive 
gear unit
DLR robodrive 
with safety brake
and position
sensor
Carbon fiber
robot link
Cross-roller
bearing
Power converter
unit
Joint- and motorcon-
troller board
Power supply
Fig. 11.8 Exploded view of a joint of the DLR LWR-III lightweight
manipulator and its sensor suite
model is available, we can completely rewrite the feed-
back linearizing control law (11.46) in terms of the
more conventional state .q; ; Pq; P/ or, taking advan-
tage of a joint torque sensor, in terms of .q; J; Pq; PJ/.
In particular, as a byproduct of (11.41) and (11.42), we
have
Rq D M1.q/ ŒK.  q/  n.q; Pq/
D M1.q/ ŒJ  n.q; Pq/ ;
(11.48)
and
qŒ3 D M1.q/
h
K. P  Pq/  PM.q/Rq  Pn.q; Pq/
i
D M1.q/
h
PJ  PM.q/Rq  Pn.q; Pq/
i
;
(11.49)
where the acceleration Rq appearing in (11.49) has al-
ready been computed through (11.48). Therefore, the
exact linearizing and decoupling control law can be
rewritten in terms of a static state feedback law of the
form  D .q; ; Pq; P; v/ or  D .q; J; Pq; PJ; v/. In-
deed, the evaluation of the various derivatives of the
dynamic model terms that are present in these expres-
sions should be properly organized or customized in
order to optimize computations.
Based on the resulting (11.47), the trajectory-
tracking problem is solved by setting
v D qŒ4
d C K3

qŒ3
d  qŒ3
C K2 .Rqd  Rq/
C K1.Pqd  Pq/ C K0.qd  q/ ;
(11.50)

Part A | 11.1
260
Part A
Robotics Foundations
where it is assumed that the reference trajectory qd.t/ is
(at least) three times continuously differentiable (i. e.,
the fourth derivative qŒ4
d
exists), and the diagonal ma-
trices K0; : : : ; K3 have scalar elements K;i such that
s4 CK3;is3 CK2;is2 CK1;isCK0;i ;
i D 1; : : : ; N ;
are Hurwitz polynomials. In view of the obtained de-
coupling, the trajectory error
ei.t/ D qd;i.t/  qi.t/
for the i-th link satisﬁes then
eŒ4
i
C K3;ieŒ3
i
C K2;iRei C K1;iPei C K0;iei D 0I ;
yielding ei.t/ ! 0 in a global exponential way, for any
initial state. A series of remarks are in order:

When the initial state .q.0/;.0/; Pq.0/; P.0// is
matched with the reference trajectory and its ﬁrst
three derivatives at time t D 0 (for this check,
(11.48) and (11.49) are to be used), exact repro-
duction of the reference trajectory is achieved at all
times.

In the case of a discontinuity of the reference posi-
tion trajectory, or of any of its ﬁrst three derivatives,
at a time t 2 Œ0; T, a trajectory error occurs at
t D t that will again decay to zero, independently
for each link and with the prescribed exponential
rate.

The choice of the gains K3;i; : : : ; K0;i can be made
by a pole placement technique (equivalent in this
case to an eigenvalue assignment). Let 1; : : : ; 4
be four poles with negative real parts, possibly
given in complex pairs and/or coincident, speci-
fying the desired transient of the trajectory error.
These closed-loop poles will be assigned by the
unique choice of real and positive gains
K3;i D .1 C 2 C 3 C 4/ ;
K2;i D 1.2 C 3 C 4/ C 2.3 C 4/ C 34 ;
K1;i D  Œ12.3 C 4/ C 34.1 C 2/ ;
K0;i D 1234 :
When the values of link and motor inertias are very
different from each other, or when the joint stiffness
is very large, the above ﬁxed choice of gains has the
drawback of generating too large control efforts. In
those cases, a more tailored set of eigenvalues can
be assigned scheduling their placement as a func-
tion of the physical data of robot inertias and joint
stiffnesses.

When compared to the computed torque method
for rigid robots, the feedback linearization control
for trajectory tracking given by (11.46)–(11.50) re-
quires the inversion of the inertia matrix M.q/ and
the additional evaluation of derivatives of the inertia
matrix and of other terms in the dynamic model.

The feedback linearization approach can also be
applied without any changes in the presence of
viscous (or otherwise smooth) friction at the mo-
tor and link side. The inclusion of spring damping
leads instead to a third-order decoupled differen-
tial relation between the auxiliary input v and q,
leaving thus a N-dimensional unobservable dynam-
ics in the closed-loop system, which is, however,
still asymptotically stable. In this case, only input–
output (and not full-state) linearization and decou-
pling is achieved.
We conclude with some considerations on exact
linearization/decoupling by feedback for the general
model (11.7) of robots with elastic joints. Unfortu-
nately, due to the presence of the inertial coupling
matrix S.q/ between links and rotors, the above con-
trol design can no longer be applied. Consider as an
illustration the case of a constant S in (11.7), with the
associated model simpliﬁcations. Solving for R from
the motor equations, R D B1 
  J  STRq

, and sub-
stituting into the link equations leads to
ŒM.q/  SB1STRq C n.q; Pq/  I C SB1 J
D SB1 :
In this case, the input torque  appears already in the
expression for the link acceleration Rq. Using (11.6), the
expression of the decoupling matrix is then
A.q/ D  ŒML.q/ C MR.q/1 SB1 ;
which is never full rank in view of the structure (11.5)
of S. As a consequence, the necessary condition for
obtaining (at least) input–output linearization and de-
coupling by static state feedback fails to hold.
However, by resorting to the use of a larger class
of control laws, it is still possible to obtain an exact
linearization and decoupling result. For this purpose,
consider a dynamic state feedback controller of the form
 D ˛.q; Pq; ; P; / C ˇ.q; Pq; ; P; /v ;
P D .q; Pq; ; P; / C ı.q; Pq; ; P; /v ;
(11.51)
where  2 R is the state of the dynamic compensator,
˛, ˇ, , and ı are suitable nonlinear vector functions,
and v 2 RN is (as before) an external input used for
trajectory-tracking purposes. It is possible to show in
general that a dynamic compensator (11.51) of order

Robots with Flexible Elements
11.1 Robots with Flexible Joints
261
Part A | 11.1
at most 
 D 2N.N  1/ can be designed so as to yield
a closed-loop system that is globally described by
qŒ2.NC1/ D v ;
(11.52)
in place of (11.47). Note the coincidence of this differ-
ential order with the one found for exact reproducibility
of a desired trajectory qd.t/ in Sect. 11.1.2. The track-
ing problem is then solved by working on (11.52), with
a direct generalization of the linear stabilization design
in (11.50).
It is interesting to give a physical interpretation for
this control result. The structural obstruction to input–
output decoupling of the model (11.7) is related to the
fact that the motion of a link attached to an elastic joint
is affected too soon (at the second differential level) by
torques originating at other elastic joints. This is due to
the inertial couplings present between motors and links.
The addition of dynamics (i. e., of integrators) in the
controller slows down these low-energy paths and al-
lows for the high-energy effects of the elastic torque
at the local joint (a fourth-order differential path) to
come into play. This dynamic balancing allows both
input–output decoupling and exact linearization of the
extended system (having the robot and the controller
states).
Linear Control Design
The feedback linearization approach to trajectory track-
ing gives rise to a rather complex nonlinear control
law. Its main advantage of globally enforcing a linear
and decoupled behavior to the trajectory error dynamics
should be traded-off with a control design that achieves
only local stability around the reference trajectory, but
is much simpler to implement (and may run at higher
sampling rates).
For this, the inverse dynamics results of Sect. 11.1.2
can be used, assuming either the reduced or the com-
plete robot model, with and without dissipative terms.
Given a sufﬁciently smooth desired link trajectory qd.t/,
we have seen that it is always possible to associate:
1. The nominal torque d.t/ needed for its exact repro-
duction.
2. The reference evolution of all other state variables
(e.g., d.t/, as given by (11.13), or J;d.t/).
These signals deﬁne a sort of steady-state (though,
time-varying) operation for the system.
A simpler tracking controller combines a model-
based feedforward term with a linear feedback term
using the trajectory error. The linear feedback locally
stabilizes the system around the reference state trajec-
tory, whereas the feedforward torque is responsible for
maintaining the robot along the desired motion as soon
as the error has vanished (see some examples on the
tracking of square paths in
VIDEO 136 ).
Using full-state feedback, two possible controllers
of this kind are
 D d C KP;.d  / C KD;. Pd  P/
C KP;q.qd  q/ C KD;q .Pqd  Pq/
(11.53)
and
 D d C KP;.d  / C KD;. Pd  P/
C KP;J.J,d  J/ C KD;J .PJ,d  PJ/ :
(11.54)
These trajectory tracking schemes are the most com-
mon in the control practice for robots with elastic joints.
In the absence of full-state measurements, they can be
combined with an observer of the unmeasurable quan-
tities. An even simpler realization is
 D d C KP.d  / C KD. Pd  P/ ;
(11.55)
which uses only motor measurements and relies on the
results obtained for the regulation case.
The different gain matrices used in (11.53)–(11.55)
have to be tuned using a linear approximation of the
robot system. This approximation may be obtained at
a ﬁxed equilibrium point or around the actual reference
trajectory, leading respectively to a linear time-invariant
or to a linear time-varying system. While the existence
of (possibly time-varying) stabilizing feedback matri-
ces is guaranteed by the controllability of these linear
approximations, the validity of the approach is only lo-
cal in nature and the region of convergence will depend
both on the given trajectory and on the robustness of the
designed linear feedback.
It should be mentioned that such a control approach
to trajectory tracking problems can be used also for
robots with ﬂexible links. Once the inverse dynamics
problem has been solved (for the case of link ﬂexi-
bility, this typically results in a noncausal solution),
a controller of the form (11.55) (or (11.53), with link
deﬂection ı and deﬂection rate Pı replacing, respec-
tively, q and Pq), can be directly applied.
11.1.5 Further Reading
This section contains the main references for the part of
this chapter on robots with joint ﬂexibility. In addition,
we point out to a larger bibliography for topics that have
not been included here.
Early interest in problems arising from the pres-
ence of ﬂexible transmissions in industrial robots dates
back to [11.1, 2], with ﬁrst experimental ﬁndings on the

Part A | 11.1
262
Part A
Robotics Foundations
GE P-50 arm. Relevant mechanical considerations in-
volved in the design of robot arms and in the evaluation
of their compliant elements can be found in [11.3].
One of the ﬁrst studies on the inclusion of joint elas-
ticity in the dynamic modeling of robot arms is due
to [11.4]. The detailed analysis of the model structure
presented in Sect. 11.1.1 comes from [11.5], with some
updates from [11.6]. The simplifying assumption lead-
ing to the reduced model was introduced in [11.7]. The
special case of motors mounted on the driven links is
considered in [11.8]. The observation that joints with
limited elasticity lead to a singularly perturbed dynamic
model was ﬁrst recognized in [11.9]. Symbolic ma-
nipulation programs for the automatic generation of
dynamic models of robots with elastic joints were also
developed very early [11.10].
The inverse dynamics computations in Sect. 11.1.2
can be traced back to [11.11, 12]. The use of programs
such as Modelica for the numerical evaluation of in-
verse dynamics is highlighted in [11.6]. An efﬁcient
Newton–Euler inverse dynamics algorithm for robots
with elastic joints has been proposed in [11.12].
The ﬁrst speciﬁc control designs were based
on decentralized linear controllers, see, e.g., [11.13]
and [11.14], where a fourth-order dynamics local to
each elastic joint was used. However, schemes with
proved global convergence characteristics appeared
only later.
In Sect. 11.1.3, the PD controller with constant grav-
ity compensation is a contribution of [11.15]. This was
also extended to the case of robots with ﬂexible links
in [11.16]. The ﬁrst two versions of regulation control
with online gravity compensation are due, respectively,
to [11.17] and [11.18]. Both these control laws were
extended to Cartesian compliance schemes in [11.19–
21]. The PD-like controller (11.38), with perfect can-
cellation of gravity effects on link motion, is a result
of [11.22]. A general regulation framework based on
energy shaping has been proposed in [11.23]. In the
absence of any information on gravity, a proportional–
integral–derivative (PID) regulator with semiglobal sta-
bility properties has been presented in [11.24], while
a global learning scheme was proposed in [11.25].
The presentation of a full-state feedback design
for regulation (and tracking) follows the idea used
in [11.26]. Special interest has been devoted over the
years to joint torque feedback, from the placement of
torque sensors on transmission shafts [11.27] or within
harmonic drives [11.28] to their use for achieving ro-
bust control performance [11.29].
The fact that the reduced model of robots with elas-
tic joints can always be feedback linearized via static
state feedback was shown for the ﬁrst time in [11.7].
A previous similar result for a speciﬁc robot kinematics
can be found in [11.30]. The discrete-time implemen-
tation of the feedback linearization approach has been
studied in [11.31], while its robustness properties were
analyzed in [11.32]. Feedback linearization and input–
output decoupling were also considered for the case
of viscoelastic joints in [11.33], and for robots with
joints of mixed type, some rigid and some elastic,
in [11.34]. The same idea of inversion control, lead-
ing to input–output decoupling and linearization, has
also been successfully applied to the tracking prob-
lem of joint-level trajectories in robots with ﬂexible
links [11.35].
For the general model of robots with elastic joints,
the use of dynamic state feedback was ﬁrst proposed
in [11.36]. A comparative study of the errors induced
by neglecting the motor–link inertia couplings (thus, for
robots that are not linearizable by static state feedback)
was carried out in [11.37]. The general algorithm for
constructing the dynamic linearizing feedback is pre-
sented in [11.38, 39].
The beneﬁt of combining a stabilizing feedback
with a feedforward command in robots with ﬂexi-
ble joints was experimentally shown for the ﬁrst time
in [11.39] (see also the
VIDEO 770 ) and then formal-
ized in [11.11].
Other
control
design
methodologies
available
for trajectory tracking, which were not discussed
in Sect. 11.1.4, are based on singular perturbation,
backstepping, or passivity. Nonlinear controllers based
on the two-time scale separation property were pro-
posed by [11.40] and [11.41]. These corrective con-
trollers are an outcome of the singular perturbation
model form and should be preferred in the case of very
stiff joints, as they do not generate high-gain laws in
the limit. Backstepping is based on the idea of con-
sidering the joint elastic torque [11.42] or the motor
position [11.43] as an intermediate ﬁctitious input to be
used to control the link equations, and then to design
the actual torque input in the motor equations so as to
follow the reference behavior for the previous interme-
diate input. The main advantage is that this design may
be easier to be transformed into an adaptive version.
Adaptive control results for robots with elastic joints
include the high-gain (approximate) schemes [11.44]
and [11.45], as well as the global (but very complex)
solution obtained in [11.46], both analyzed using only
the reduced dynamic model. Moreover, robust control
schemes have been proposed in [11.47], based on slid-
ing mode techniques, and in [11.48–52], using iterative
learning on repetitive tasks.
As for optimal control results, the intrinsic fourth-
order dynamics associated to ﬂexible joints has barred
so far the derivation of analytical or numerically efﬁ-
cient results. Finding the time-optimal velocity proﬁle

Robots with Flexible Elements
11.2 Robots with Flexible Links
263
Part A | 11.2
on a constrained geometric path is a solved problem
in the rigid case, but only an approximate solution is
available for robots with elastic joints [11.49]. A use-
ful generalization from the rigid to the elastic case is
the dynamic trajectory scaling algorithm of [11.50],
which provides a closed-form expression to the uniform
time scaling that recovers feasibility of commanded
torques w.r.t. their bounds. Selected optimal control
problems for single viscoelastic joints, involving either
the maximization of stored potential energy or the min-
imization of rest-to-rest motion time, have been tackled
and solved in [11.51] and [11.52], respectively.
Different state observers have been presented, start-
ing from an approximate one [11.53] up to the exact
ones in [11.5, 54], in which a tracking controller based
on the estimated state was also tested. In all cases, link
position or link position and velocity measurements are
assumed. On the other hand, the use of motor position
and link acceleration has been shown to be a feasible
alternative for robust state reconstruction [11.55].
Finally, the force control problem in constrained
tasks for robots with elastic joints has been tackled fol-
lowing a singular perturbation technique [11.56, 57], an
inverse dynamics approach [11.58], or an adaptive strat-
egy [11.59].
A uniﬁed passivity-based approach has been pre-
sented in [11.60], where an inner torque feedback loop
is incorporated for shaping (viz., reducing) the motor
inertia. This enables approximate gravity compensa-
tion (as done in Sect. 11.1.3), as well as to assign
a desired Cartesian stiffness relation for the link po-
sitions, mimicking the impedance control of the rigid
case for handling interactions and contacts with the
environment.
11.2 Robots with Flexible Links
Arm ﬂexibility is a dynamic behavior in which kinetic
energy interacts with elastic potential energy. Kinetic
energy is stored in moving inertia, and potential energy
is stored in compliant members. Flexible links provide
both the inertia and compliance distributed throughout
the member. Flexibility manifests itself as mechanical
oscillations and static deﬂections, greatly complicating
the motion control of a mechanical arm. If the time to
settle the oscillations is signiﬁcant relative to the cycle
time of the overall task, ﬂexibility will be a major con-
sideration in the arm design.
11.2.1 Design Issues
We will deal with these issues in a modular way, sepa-
rating link ﬂexibility and joint ﬂexibility. The ﬁrst topic
of link ﬂexibility deals with the inherent spatial dis-
tribution of compliance and inertia, perhaps with both
effects existing in the same element of material. The
links of a manipulator arm can usually be stiffened by
adding structural mass or by improving the material
properties or distribution over the links. At some points,
the links may be treated as rigid. The designer must
realize that an arm with heavy rigid links and ﬂexible
joints may be more ﬂexible dynamically than a lighter
arm with more link ﬂexibility and less inertia. The con-
sequences are predicted by the natural frequency of the
ﬁrst ﬂexible mode of motion, with the joint actuators
locked, which can be approximated by
!1 D
s
keff
Ieff
;
(11.56)
where keff is the effective spring constant and Ieff is the
effective inertia. For the elastic joint case, keff and Ieff are
directly available from the elastic joint parameters and
mass properties of the arm. The effective values appli-
cable to a simple beam in bending, for example, would
result from boundary conditions that are clamped at one
end and free at the other and would be selected to yield
a good approximation to the natural frequency. This nat-
ural frequency is readily available from handbooks on
vibration in this case as !1 D 3:52
p
EI=ml4. (The vari-
ables are used in (11.57) and (11.58) and deﬁned below.)
More complex geometries can be evaluated by various
means, including the transfer matrix method discussed
in Sect. 11.2.2 on modeling. The arm should be con-
sidered ﬂexible when this frequency is low enough to
interfere with the design of controllers based on rigid
assumptions. The common PD control of a single joint
on a ﬂexible link can only achieve adequate damping of
a closed-loop design when the magnitude of the closed
loop poles is less than about 1=3 of !1 [11.61].
A distillation of the key aspects of the mechanics of
materials is now in order. In some cases static compli-
ance effects represent a member sufﬁciently, whereas
in other cases the true distributed nature of compliance
and mass and its dynamics must be modeled. A long
structural member with forces f and moments M per-
pendicular to its long axis is subject to bending. Static
bending relates the moment at the axial location x to the
displacement w
M.x/ D EI.x/@2w
@x2 ;
(11.57)

Part A | 11.2
264
Part A
Robotics Foundations
where E is the elastic modulus of the material, and I.x/
is the area moment of inertia about the neutral axis of
the cross section. The deﬂection at any point is obtained
by integrating this equation from a reference point to
a desired point, such as the end of the link.
This is a description of compliance that can be
used when mass is isolated from elasticity. If mass
is distributed throughout the beam with material mass
density per unit volume 	, the time t must be incorpo-
rated so that
m.x/@2w.x; t/
@t2
C @2
@x2

EI.x/@2w.x; t/
@x2

D 0 :
(11.58)
Here m.x/ is the mass density per unit length, incor-
porating the material properties and the cross-sectional
area at x. Assumptions implicit in this equation, which
is called the Bernoulli–Euler equation, include the min-
imal impact of shear distortion and rotational inertia of
the cross section of the beam, which is valid for long
beams. The Timoshenko beam model relaxes these as-
sumptions but is not included here.
Torsional deﬂection of an angle  results if a twist-
ing moment T about the long beam axis occurs, such
that, in the static case
 D Tl
JG D ˛TT ;
(11.59)
where G is the shear modulus of the material, and J is
the polar area moment of inertia about the neutral axis
of the beam. Again, the addition of a distributed mass
and considering the dynamics produces a partial differ-
ential equation with independent variables in space and
time
.x/@2
@t2 D GJ @2
@x2 ;
(11.60)
where .x/ is the rotary mass moment of inertia per
unit length of the shaft. While (11.60) is potentially ap-
propriate for links, the smaller rotational mass moment
of inertia of a long slender shaft relative to the links it
drives results in the static compliance effects of torsion
given by (11.59) being of most importance.
Tension and compression effects should also be
acknowledged, although they tend to be the least sig-
niﬁcant. Here deﬂection ı in the x-direction (the long
axis of the member) results from axial force Fa and is
calculated as ı D FaL
AE
ı D FaL
AE D ˛XFFa ;
(11.61)
where L is the element length and A is its cross sec-
tional area. In the dynamic case, with mass density 	
and displacement , the axial motion is described by
	@2
@t2 D E@2
@x2 :
(11.62)
Note that these effects are special cases of the more
general elastic behavior of a member subject to accel-
eration and external loading, specialized to the member
with one long axis. The same general phenomena ap-
ply to joint structures (e.g., bearings and couplings)
and drive-train components (e.g., gears and cables). The
functional constraints on the structural design of these
members may be more severe and limit the designer’s
ability to make them more rigid by adding more mate-
rial. Under this constraint, the combined compliance of
the ﬂexible joint design and the rigidized link design re-
sults in inferior performance of the combination. A less
rigid link with less inertia will raise the lowest natural
frequency. Thus the design of the link and the joint must
be coordinated.
Flexibility is only one of several link design con-
straints. Static compliance is obviously another based
on the above discussion. Buckling and strength are
two more considerations that constrain some of the
same design parameters. While it has been shown that
ﬂexibility is a dominant constraint for typical arm de-
sign regimes [11.62], a simple optimization of bending
stiffness of a beam with a tubular geometry illustrates
the fallacy of ignoring buckling. If the radius of the
tube is varied to maximize bending stiffness with con-
strained total mass, the radius increases without bound,
producing a thin shell of inﬁnitesimal thickness and in-
ﬁnite radius that lacks robustness. The true constraint
becomes local buckling of the tube under slight pertur-
bations of the applied load. A thin metal can illustrates
this behavior as it crushes. Strength is another applica-
ble constraint. Various materials differ in their strength,
typically represented by their elastic limit or endurance
limit on the stress at a point in the member. A sufﬁ-
ciently stiff member may fail due to stress, particularly
at points of stress concentration.
In this presentation of options to overcome ﬂexibil-
ity, and link ﬂexibility in particular, radically different
operational and design strategies should be recognized
even though they are not the core of the treatment. The
elastic modulus relates stress to strain, but physically
the strain rate is sometimes a relevant term, providing
structural damping to augment the joint or control-
based damping. Composite materials have substantially
more damping inherent in their behavior. Damping
can be enhanced with passive damping treatments,
with constrained layer damping having particularly pro-
nounced effects [11.63]. Smart materials can also be

Robots with Flexible Elements
11.2 Robots with Flexible Links
265
Part A | 11.2
conﬁgured to enhance damping [11.64]. An operational
strategy known as bracing can be combined with re-
dundant actuation to achieve a large workspace for
a ﬂexible arm that provides gross motion and a smaller
precision workspace after docking the large arm with
a stationary structure, as described in [11.65].
The implication above is that ﬂexibility was always
due to the moving parts of the arm. However, the arm
base itself may be a source of signiﬁcant ﬂexibility.
If the base is stationary, the analysis may be almost
identical to that of the ﬂexible links of an arm. How-
ever, if the arm is mounted on a vehicle, tires or tracks
may be the source of ﬂexibility and empirical evalua-
tion of these new elements might be the best solution.
The vehicle could be a boat, aircraft, or space vehicle.
Here there is no elastic connection to an inertial refer-
ence frame and some fundamental changes in approach
will be needed. These changes are not unexplored and
in some cases are simple extensions of the following
approaches.
11.2.2 Modeling of Flexible Link Arms
Mathematical models of link ﬂexibility trade accuracy
for ease of use. It is therefore key to determine the
effects that are important to represent accurately. The
techniques presented here will assume linear elastic-
ity with light damping. Rotational motions must be of
modest angular rate so that centrifugal stiffening can be
ignored. Small deﬂections will generally be assumed.
These are reasonable assumptions for most robotic de-
vices, but can be violated in more exotic applications,
requiring reevaluation of the assumptions and more tor-
tuous modeling approaches.
Four model types will be examined:
1. Lumped-element models having compliance or in-
ertia but not both in a given member.
2. Finite-element models, which will be only brieﬂy
addressed.
3. Assumed mode models which readily include non-
linear dynamic behavior.
4. Transfer matrix models that incorporate the true
distributed intermingling of compliance and inertia
and consequently the inﬁnite-dimensional nature of
ﬂexible link arms.
With the limited space available here, the discussion
will be preliminary but should enable the reader to pur-
sue one or more alternatives knowledgably.
For lumped elements, one may build on the rigid
kinematics presented in the section on fundamentals of
kinematics (Chap. 2) that establishes rigid transforma-
tion matrices Ai. The 44 homogenous transformations
that describe position can be used to describe deﬂection
as well. Assuming small motions and static behavior (or
negligible member mass), the transformation produced
by elastic bending, torsion, and compression is
Ei D
0
BB@
1
˛FiFi
Yi  ˛MiMi
Zi
˛FiFi
Yi C ˛MiMi
Zi
1
˛FiFi
Zi  ˛MiMi
Yi
˛TiMi
Xi
0
0
˛FiFi
Zi C ˛MiMi
Yi
˛CiFi
Xi
˛TiMXi
˛XFiFi
Yi C ˛XMiMi
Zi
1
˛XFiFi
Zi C ˛XMiMi
Yi
0
1
1
CCA ;
(11.63)
where
˛Ci D coefﬁcient in compression,
displacement/force ;
˛Ti D coefﬁcient in torsion, angle/moment ;
˛Fi D coefﬁcient in bending, angle/force ;
˛Mi D coefﬁcient in bending, angle/moment ;
˛XFi D coefﬁcient in bending, displacement/force ;
˛XMi D coefﬁcient in bending,
displacement/moment ;
Fj
Xi D the force at the end of link i in the
X direction of coordinate frame j ;
Fj
Yi D the force at the end of link i in the
Y direction of coordinate frame j ;
Fj
Zi D the force at the end of link i in the
Z direction of coordinate frame j ;
Mj
Xi D the moment at the end of link i in the
X direction of coordinate frame j ;
Mj
Yi D the moment at the end of link i in the
Y direction of coordinate frame j ;
Mj
Zi D the moment at the end of link i in the
Z direction of coordinate frame j :
The listed coefﬁcients depend on the construction of the
element and are readily found for a slender beam from
simple strength of materials. In other cases, a ﬁnite-
element model or empirical measurements may be more
readily used.
Alternating transformations for the undeformed and
deformed aspects of N members (links or joints) pro-
duces the position vector of the end of arm (EOA)
p0 D .A1E1A2E2 : : : AiEiAiC1EiC1 : : : ANEN/
0
BB@
0
0
0
1
1
CCA :
(11.64)

Part A | 11.2
266
Part A
Robotics Foundations
If the massless elements connect rigid lumped masses,
a linear spatial model is readily obtained, as described
in [11.66]. Servo-controlled joints can also be inserted
into this model. This analysis proceeds by examining
the deﬂection of the elastic members produced by joint
motion and the resulting forces and moments on the
rigid inertias at the ends of the chain of links. The ref-
erence concentrates on the special case of only two
inertias at each end of the chain but the technique is
easily extended to inertias in the middle of the chain as
well. The results are six linear second-order equations
for each inertia and one ﬁrst-order equation for each
joint.
If the compliance and inertia properties are both to
be treated as distributed throughout the same element,
the partial differential equations (PDEs) introduced in
the previous section for bending, torsion, and com-
pression must be employed. Still insisting on a linear
treatment, the general solution of these equations can
be found in terms of each element with adjoining el-
ements, i. e., the boundary conditions on the PDE.
The convenient approach of Laplace transformation of
these linear equations into the frequency domain, fol-
lowed by factoring out the boundary conditions into
a matrix–vector product, results in a technique known
as the transfer matrix method (TMM) [11.67]. This
method has been applied productively to general elas-
tomechanics problems as well as speciﬁcally to ﬂexible
arms [11.68].
The transfer matrix relates variables at two stations
along the arm with the number of variables depending
on the model complexity. For the planar bending, de-
ﬂection of the beam is shown in Fig. 11.9
z1 D
0
BB@
W

M
V
1
CCA
1
D
0
BB@
displacement
angle
moment
shear force
1
CCA
at station 1
;
z0 D Tz1 ;
(11.65)
where T is the appropriate element transfer matrix.
If the element is a simple rotary spring with con-
stant k and a damper with constant b, then the angle
of rotation  is related to the moment by a differential
Station 0
y
x
M
W
V
Ψ
z
Station 1
Fig. 11.9 State vector for the bending transfer matrix
equation with the following Laplace-domain represen-
tation
M D L.k C b P/ ) k.s/ C bs.s/ D M0 D M1 ;
W0 D W1 ;
V0 D V1 ;
0 D 1  .s/ D 1 
1
k C bsM1 :
Note that the only variable changed across the element
is the angle related to the moment. The transfer matrix
representation conventionally uses zero initial condi-
tions and converts to the Fourier representation with
s D ı!. This leads to the transfer function
T D C.ı!/ D
0
BBBB@
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
kCb.ı!/
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
CCCCA
;
which has the same form of the joint controller as
shown in (11.69).
The beam model is much more complex, and the
Euler–Bernoulli model gives
B D
0
BBBBBBBBB@
c0
lc1
ac2
alc3
ˇ4c3
l
c0
ac1
l
ac2
ˇ4c2
a
ˇ4lc3
a
c0
lc1
ˇ4c1
al
ˇ4c2
a
ˇ4c3
l
c0
1
CCCCCCCCCA
;
(11.66)
where
ˇ4 D !2l4=.EI/ I
a D l2=.EI/ ;
c0 D .cosh ˇ C cos ˇ/=2 ;
c1 D .sinhˇ C sin ˇ/=.2ˇ/ ;
c2 D .cosh ˇ  cos ˇ/=.2ˇ2/ ;
c3 D .sinhˇ  sin ˇ/=.2ˇ3/ ;
 D density/unit length ;
! D circular frequency of vibration ;
E D elastic modulus ;
I D cross-sectional area moment of inertia :
The spatial variable has been transformed to the spatial
Laplace variable but no longer appears explicitly. The
Laplace time variable remains and is designated by s
or by the frequency variable ! D ıs, where ı D
p
1.

Robots with Flexible Elements
11.2 Robots with Flexible Links
267
Part A | 11.2
The other transfer matrices needed for a simple planar
model are as follows.
For a rotation in the plane of angle '
A D
0
BBB@
1
cos '
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
ms!2 sin ' tan '
0
0
cos '
1
CCCA ;
(11.67)
where ms is the sum of all outboard masses from the
angle to the end of the arm. This is an approximation
resulting from ignoring compression elasticity. These
elements appear as an additional mass to the extent they
are translated with beam compression.
For a rigid mass, simply applying Newton’s laws
and collecting term yields
R D
0
BBBBBBB@
1
l
0
0
0
1
0
0
m!2l
2
Im!2  m!2l2
2
1
l
m!2
m!2l
2
0
1
1
CCCCCCCA
;
(11.68)
where m is the mass of the body, Im is the mass moment
of inertia about an axis through the center of mass and
perpendicular to the plane of the arm, l is the length of
the mass (the distance between the points of attachment
at stations i and i C 1), and l=2 is the distance to the
center of mass from station i.
For a controlled joint with the controller transfer
function (joint torque/joint angle) D k.ı!/
C D
0
BBB@
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
k.ı!/
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
CCCA :
(11.69)
When combined to represent the planar arm with two
joints as shown in Fig. 11.10, this analysis yields a com-
posite transfer matrix that relates the four state variables
at the two ends of the arm. Further analysis results from
imposing the known boundary conditions at these ends.
The transfer matrix representation of an arm pre-
sented in [11.69] and pictured in Fig. 11.10 is shown in
(11.70).
0
BB@
W

M
V
1
CCA
0
D R1B2R3A4C5B6R7
0
BB@
W

M
V
1
CCA
7
:
(11.70)
In the example, the left end is pinned and the right end
is free, yielding
z0 D
0
BB@
W

M
V
1
CCA
0
D
0
BBB@
u11 u12 u13 u14
u21 u22 u23 u24
u31 u32 u33 u34
u41 u42 u43 u44
1
CCCA
0
BB@
W

M
V
1
CCA
7
;
u11 u12
u31 u32
 W


7
D
0
0

:
(11.71)
The determinant of the 2  2 matrix must be zero
when ! is a natural frequency, or a system eigenvalue if
it is complex. This can be found by a numerical search.
Evaluating variables (position, angle, shear, and mo-
ment) along the length of the arm with the eigenvalues
used for the values of ! yields the eigenfunctions. If
boundary conditions are not zero but known for given
frequencies, the frequency response of the system can
be obtained. Hence Bode plots are readily obtained
for boundary condition forcing. Interior forcing can be
handled using an extended state vector as described
in [11.67], which was applied to arms in [11.61] and
most recently updated with modern programming tech-
niques in [11.68]. Inverse fast Fourier transform (FFT)
will produce a time-domain response from the fre-
quency response.
The creation of a state-space model in the time do-
main is attractive because it enables the use of powerful
state-space design techniques and is compatible with
the nonlinear behavior of arms undergoing large mo-
tion and experiencing centrifugal and Coriolis forces.
The assumed modes method allows such a model to be
constructed efﬁciently. The presentation here follows
the early introduction of a recursive manner to calcu-
late these equations introduced in [11.70]. The ﬂexible
kinematics of the links must be expressed as a sum of
basis functions also known as assumed modes (shapes)
'i.x/ with time-variable amplitudes ıi.t/
w.x; t/ D
1
X
iD1
ıi.t/'i.x/ :
(11.72)
Station 7
Station 0
R1
R3
A4,C5
R7
B2
B6
Fig. 11.10 Transfer matrix representation of an arm

Part A | 11.2
268
Part A
Robotics Foundations
The amplitudes and their derivatives become the states
of the model. Compatible joint angle variables and their
derivatives are also included as the rigid state variables.
Joint angles tangent to the ends of the ﬂexible links
are compatible with mode shapes based on the clamped
boundary conditions at one end and free boundary con-
ditions at the other. This choice is generally chosen for
simulation and the rigid coordinates are directly mea-
sured by standard joint angle transducers. If rigid coor-
dinates are angles measured between lines connecting
successive joint axes, the end of arm is known in terms
of rigid coordinates alone and pinned–pinned boundary
conditions are consistent. This produces advantages for
inverse dynamics calculations as seen shortly.
The ﬂexible and rigid kinematics combined de-
scribes the position and velocity of every point on the
arm and can be used to express the kinetic energy T
and the potential energy V. These expressions are used
in the conservative form of Lagrange’s equation
d
dt
@T
@Pqi
 @T
@qi
C @V
@qi
D Fi ;
(11.73)
where Fi is the force that does work as qi is varied.
The kinematics of the deﬂection are again described
by 4  4 transformation matrices, but this time the as-
sumed mode shapes j are summed to give the position
of link i
hi
i./ D
0
BB@

0
0
1
1
CCA C
mi
X
jDi
ıij
0
BB@
xij./
yij./
zij./
0
1
CCA ;
(11.74)
where xij, yij, and zij are the xi, yi, and zi displacement
components of mode j of link i’s deﬂection, respec-
tively, ıij is the time-varying amplitude of mode j of
link i, and mi is the number of modes used to describe
the deﬂection of link i
Ei D
0
@Hi C
mi
X
jDi
ıijMij
1
A ;
(11.75)
where
Hi D
0
BB@
1
0
0
li
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
CCA
(11.76)
and
Mij D
0
BB@
0
zij
yij
xij
zij
0
xij
yij
yij
xij
0
zij
0
0
0
0
1
CCA :
(11.77)
This description is used in the formation of the po-
tential and kinetic energy contributions of each element
of mass. The integral over the link accumulates the to-
tal energy for that link and the sum over all links gives
the energy of the arm system. Interchanging the order
of integration and summation allows key invariant par-
ameters to be identiﬁed, such as the modal mass that
multiplies the second derivative of modal amplitude and
the modal stiffness that multiplies the amplitude itself.
The intermediate steps are aimed at the evaluation of
Lagrange’s equations, which separate into derivatives
related to the rigid variables and the ﬂexible variables. If
the rigid variables  are the joint variables, two groups
of equations result
1.
d
dt
 
@T
@ Pj
!
 @T
@j
C @Ve
@j
C @Vg
@j
D Fj
(11.78)
2.
d
dt
 
@T
@Pıjf
!
 @T
@ıjf
C @Ve
@ıjf
C @Vg
@ıjf
D 0 ; (11.79)
where the subscript e indicates elasticity, subscript g in-
dicates gravity, and ı indicates the amplitude of a mode
shape.
The simulation form of the equations is achieved by
grouping all second derivatives of the rigid and ﬂexible
coordinates, which yields
Mrr.q/
Mrf.q/
Mfr.q/
Mff
  R
Rı

D 
0
0
0
Ks
 
ı

C N.q; Pq/ C G.q/ C R.q; Pq; Q/ ;
(11.80)
where  is a vector of rigid coordinates, usually the
joint variables, ı is the vector of ﬂexible coordinates,
q D ŒT ıTT, Mij is the mass matrix for rigid and ﬂex-
ible coordinates corresponding to the rigid (i; j D r)
or ﬂexible (i; j D f ) coordinates and equations, N.q; Pq/
contains the nonlinear Coriolis and centrifugal terms,
G.q/ captures gravity effects, Q represents the ex-
ternally applied forces, and R captures the effect of
external forces and all other nonconservative forces in-
cluding friction.
On the other hand, the inverse dynamics form of the
equations is (assuming negligible friction)
Q D
Mrr.q/
Mrf.q/
Mfr.q/
Mff
  R
Rı

C
0
0
0
Ks
 
ı

 N.q; Pq/  G.q/ :
(11.81)

Robots with Flexible Elements
11.2 Robots with Flexible Links
269
Part A | 11.2
In general, Q is dependent on the vector T of motor
torques or forces at the joints, and the distribution of
these effects is such that
Q D
Br
Bf

T ;
(11.82)
where T has the same dimensionality as qr. By rear-
ranging the inverse dynamics equation, we obtain
Br
Mrf
Bf
Mff
 T
Rı

D
Mrr
Mrf

R C N.q; Pq/ C G.q/ ;
(11.83)
which is arranged with a vector of unknowns on the
left-hand side of the equation and the prespeciﬁed rigid
and solvable ﬂexible coordinates on the right. This is at
least approximately true, with the caveat that the non-
linear and gravity terms have a weak inﬂuence on the
immediate ﬂexible coordinates, which are not simulta-
neously known but which can be estimated for the next
time step.
One consequence of the distributed ﬂexibility is
non-minimum-phase behavior. This can occur for other
cases where the excitation is separated from the output
point by mass and ﬂexibility, a condition known as non-
collocation. These systems are characterized by a step
response in which the initial movement is opposite in
sign from the ﬁnal movement. This is simply charac-
terized for linear systems as a transfer function zero in
the right half-plane. As will be shown in the section on
Command Generation, it may be possible to overcome
this problem by redeﬁning the output.
11.2.3 Control
Appropriate reaction to ﬂexible dynamics requires ap-
propriate sensors. While a Kalman ﬁlter can theoreti-
cally observe ﬂexible link states from joint measure-
ments, it is based on back driving the joint from the
various modes of ﬂexible dynamics. More reliable indi-
cations of ﬂexibility include strain gauges, accelerome-
ters, and optical sensors.
Sensors for Flexibility Control
The strain of a beam element is a direct indication
of curvature, which is the second spatial derivative
of beam deﬂection, as indicated in (11.57). Modern
semiconductor strain gauges have high gauge factors
producing a good signal-to-noise ratio. The second spa-
tial derivative relationship means that a slight change
in location can result in a large change in the reading,
but once afﬁxed to the arm this is not a problem. More
of a problem is the relatively short lifetime of a strain
gauge subject to wear and tear if not carefully protected.
By suitably placing strain gauges, good measurements
of multiple assumed modes are possible.
Optical measurement of deﬂection can be very ver-
satile but is subject to interference between a target
measurement point and the sensor, particularly if the
sensor is stationary. If the sensor is mounted on the link,
this difﬁculty is reduced but optical measurements are
then usually a complex combination of the rotation of
the optical axis of the sensor and the deﬂection of the
target. Machine vision senses a wide ﬁeld of view but
typically with less precision. Multiple points can be de-
tected, which is attractive in measuring multiple modes.
Machine vision requires considerable processing and,
even for enhanced targets or retroreﬂective ﬁducials,
sample rates can be slow relative to some modes of con-
trol interest.
Accelerometers are attractive transducers in that
they do not require explicit grounding to a ﬁxed frame.
Microelectromechanical systems (MEMSs) accelerom-
eters provide the required low-frequency sensitivity and
are very inexpensive. However, they are subject to ori-
entation in a gravity ﬁeld, which must be compensated
for by knowing the orientation of the sensor. If one is
interested in position, accelerometers require two inte-
grations and are consequently subject to drift in position
measurement. Consequently, the combined use of sen-
sors is appealing. For example, vision sensors, which
are relatively slow but give direct position information
for the end of a ﬂexible member, can be combined with
accelerometers, which give information about the same
point at high sample rates but with noise and drift prob-
lems. The two sensor readings can be combined with
a Kalman ﬁlter or other fusion scheme.
Issues Related to Model Order
Realizing that the theoretical order of a ﬂexible arm
is inﬁnite, one should be prepared to deal with cer-
tain issues related to model order. The ﬁrst of these is
possible aliasing problems arising from ﬁnite sampling
rates. Antialiasing ﬁlters should be employed, and even
more effective is the use of analog damping by materi-
als, damping treatments, or the back electromotive force
(emf) of actuators to provide an inherent damping of the
system under digital control. A more subtle problem is
that of measurement and control spill over.
Control of Special Configurations:
Macro/Micro Redundancy
Several special conﬁgurations have been proposed to
enable improved controlled performance of ﬂexible link
arms. The problem with noncollocation noted above is
a case in point. In some cases, a large range of motion
and high accuracy cannot be achieved with a single set
of actuators. Redundant degrees of freedom can then

Part A | 11.2
270
Part A
Robotics Foundations
be employed with the macro degrees of freedom that
provide large range of motion but with inherent lack
of precision or accuracy. Vibrations are particularly dif-
ﬁcult to eliminate with a long arm, and construction
accuracy and even thermal drift can exceed the toler-
ance limits. If the gross motion is completed quickly,
residual vibrations may remain and be very lightly
damped. Actuators constructed for gross motions of
large axes do not have the bandwidth capabilities to
damp these vibrations actively, but small motion axes
typically do. This has been illustrated in several in-
stances for long-reach manipulators when exploring
nuclear waste cleanup solutions [11.71–74]. Using the
inertial forces generated at the end of the arm also
has the advantage of creating forces collocated with
the measurements being used for control, assuming the
base of the micro arm is at the end of the macro arm
and the location of sensors. Book and Loper [11.73]
and George and Book [11.75] have shown that this con-
trol is possible based on accelerometers in multiple
degrees of freedom. It is also possible to excite unde-
sired modes which have not been accounted for. If the
full six degrees of freedom are used it is possible to
argue stability based on a simple passive analogy. Gen-
erating prescribed forces at the base of an articulated
micromanipulator is a challenging task, requiring the
solution of a new type of inverse dynamics problem,
which solves for motions or joint torques to produce
the prescribed base forces and moments.
Command Generation for Flexible Link Arms
via Command Shaping
The trajectory undertaken by a ﬂexible arm can dra-
matically affect the consequences of ﬂexibility. Purely
0
Single impulse
Single impulse
shaped with
a three-term
command shaper
Δ
2Δ
Time
0
Time
1st impulse response
2nd impulse response
3rd impulse response
Resultant response
Fig. 11.11 Impulse response of a shaper and the effect on a vibra-
tory system. Time is normalized by the intersample time Ts and Td,
chosen such that  D Td=Ts is an integer
open-loop anticipation of the ﬂexible dynamics has
been used to create motion proﬁles wherein the motion
cancels the incipient oscillation that had been created by
earlier motions. This strategy is referred to as command
shaping. A more complicated strategy to implement is
a true inverse-dynamics-based trajectory wherein the
rigid and ﬂexible states are all orchestrated to arrive
at the desired point in state space, typically at a static
equilibrium. The high order of the ﬂexible model is
further complicated by the non-minimum-phase nature
of the noncollocated system and noncausal inverse is
necessary to produce a physically realizable trajectory
(
VIDEO 778 ).
Time delay command shaping is a variation of the
deadbeat control introduced by [11.76, 77]. It can be
couched in terms of a ﬁnite impulse response ﬁlter with
a simple impulse response as depicted in Fig. 11.11
with a single input impulse producing a small number
(typically two to four) of output impulses with ap-
propriate time spacing and amplitudes. Extensions by
Singer and Seering [11.78] and Singhose et al. [11.79]
have produced more robust varieties under the trade-
mark Input Shaping. The robustness is enhanced by
using more output impulses and appropriate selection
of the impulse spacing. The optimal arbitrary time-
delay (OAT) ﬁlter [11.80, 81] reduces this selection
to a simple formula for linear vibrations that depends
on the natural frequency and damping ratio of those
modes to be eliminated from the response. The simplic-
ity of implementation is illustrated in Fig. 11.12, where
the relationships between the ﬁlter parameters and the
mode parameters are
coefﬁcient 1 D 1
M
coefﬁcient 2 D .2 cos .!dTd/ e!nTd/
M
coefﬁcient 3 D e2!nTd
M
M D 1  2 cos .!dTd/ e!nTd
C e2!nTd
!d D !n
p
1  2 D damped natural frequency
!n D undamped natural frequency
 D damping ratio
Td D time delay selected, an integer
number of samples :
(11.84)
Note that the formulation here is oriented toward
digital systems with ﬁxed sampling intervals such that
the time delay of the ﬁlter is adjusted to an integer

Robots with Flexible Elements
11.2 Robots with Flexible Links
271
Part A | 11.2
number of sampling intervals. Command shaping has
been applied to a wide range of ﬂexible systems includ-
ing disk drives, cranes, and large robot arms, such as
the example by CAMotion (
VIDEO 777 ) as shown in
Fig. 11.13. Note that this example contains a ﬂexible
drive belt, effectively a ﬂexible joint, as well as ﬂexi-
ble links that contribute to the compliance of the lowest
mode that is quenched with an OAT ﬁlter.
Adaptive versions of command shaping have also
been demonstrated. A version oriented toward repetitive
motion applications is presented in [11.82].
Command Generation for Flexible Link Arms
via Inverse Dynamics
In contrast to the scant system knowledge required for
command shaping, the inverse dynamics of a ﬂexi-
ble arm requires a great deal of knowledge about the
system. The creation of an appropriate model was dis-
cussed above. An assumed modes model, for example,
is well adapted to inverse dynamics if the rigid coordi-
nates are not the joint angles, but the angles between
lines connecting the joint axes (where it is assumed that
joints are rotational). In this case, the desired end-of-
arm motion can be expressed solely in terms of rigid
variables, that is, the same variables qd used in the ﬂex-
ible joint case, and the desired ﬂexible variables are
found from the second-order equations driven by the
known rigid positions and velocities. The remaining
difﬁculty is the unstable zero dynamics of the system.
For the purposes of introduction, only the linear sit-
uation will be treated here in the fashion of [11.83].
First, the rigid coordinates and their derivatives are
found from the desired end-of-arm motion proﬁle. The
ﬂexible equations are separated into causal stable zeros
and anticausal unstable zeros, and the stable inverse is
solved forward in time. Physically the motion response
responds after the torque inputs. The computational
input however is the response and the torque is cal-
culated as an output, so no physical laws are violated
in solving the anticausal portion beginning at the ﬁ-
nal time when ﬂexible coordinates are speciﬁed to be
zero and proceeding to the initial time and beyond.
In fact, the exact solution extends from negative inﬁn-
ity (where the anticausal solution decays) to positive
inﬁnity (where the causal solution decays). For realis-
tic dynamics, the necessary time for the input is only
slightly more than the motion time for the end of the
arm because the zeros are often quite far from the ori-
gin in both directions. If the end-of-arm motion begins
at time zero, shortly before that, the joint torques be-
gin to pre-shape the ﬂexible links without moving the
end of arm. Similarly, when the end of the arm reaches
its ﬁnal position, the joint torques must release the
arm deﬂection in a manner that is not seen from the
Coefficient 1
Input series
Shaped
output
series
Coefficient 2
Coefficient 3
Delay Δ
Delay 2Δ
Fig. 11.12 Block diagram representation of the command shaping
algorithm
Fig. 11.13 A large ﬂexible linking arm with command shaping
Joint angle
End point position
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
Joint angle (rad)
Displacement (in)
Time (s)
Generated joint trajectory
1.06
0.85
0.64
0.43
0.21
0
–0.21
50
40
30
20
10
0
–10
Fig. 11.14 Inverse dynamics driven motion of a single-link ﬂexible
arm
end of arm (or any other chosen output location). Fig-
ure 11.14 shows the example from Kwon [11.84] for
a single-link arm and the
VIDEO 778
shows the be-
havior improvement.
Since inversion of the ﬂexible plant as described
earlier containing nonminimum phase or unstable ze-
ros can result in an anticausal input torque to achieve
an arbitrary trajectory, it is appropriate to look for other
trajectories with special characteristics that avoid these

Part A | 11.2
272
Part A
Robotics Foundations
problems. The location of zeros are dependent on where
on the ﬂexible link the trajectory is speciﬁed. De Luca
et al. studied the one ﬂexible link rotational arm and the
migration of zeros as the point of interest is shifted from
tip to joint. They utilize a point where zeros are nonex-
istent as the output point, a point that enables inversion
to proceed without the causality problem [11.85–87].
When this point reaches the desired angle with zero
deﬂection, the end point will also be at the desired an-
gle. Joint velocity and deﬂection velocities must also
be brought to zero resulting in a rest-to-rest motion
completed in speciﬁed time and with no residual os-
cillations. The cited references show the equivalence of
this development in the time or frequency domain for
linear systems. For a two link arm (only the forearm is
ﬂexible), the nonlinear behavior demanded a time do-
main approach [11.86].
De Luca and Di Giovanni [11.85] address rest-to-
rest motion of a single ﬂexible link and carries through
an example for a single ﬂexible mode. The later ref-
erence [11.87] also provides experimental results for
which a brief video (
VIDEO 779 ) is available. The
strength of this approach is its relative simplicity in
achieving the desired ﬁnal position described by a sin-
gle polynomial. The degree of the single polynomial
required to meet all the boundary conditions is 4ne C 3
where ne is the number of ﬂexible modes. One difﬁ-
culty is the inability to efﬁciently constrain the peak
torque required. Torque proﬁles developed in this sim-
plest of strategies have high peaks but for most of the
trajectory (at start and end) are relatively low. Hence
the peak torque capabilities of the actuator may not be
efﬁciently used. It is not necessary for a single polyno-
mial to describe the entire trajectory, of course, but the
complexity of developing the response without zeros
becomes more challenging for piece wise polynomials,
and arises from meeting all the boundary conditions on
polynomial segments. The nonlinear case arising from
a two link arm with the forearm ﬂexible [11.86] pro-
vides further exploration of the inversion approach for
ﬂexible arms.
The model employed by De Luca varies slightly
since deﬂection is measured from an axis passing
through the dynamic center of mass of the ﬂexible arm
as shown in Fig. 11.15, not the tangent to the neutral
axis of the beam at the rotary actuator. This modiﬁes the
boundary conditions on the shape equation and hence
the mode shapes. For an introduction, a single ﬂexible
link is considered here. Variables are deﬁned as follows:

J0, Jp: rotary inertia of the rotary actuator, tip pay-
load, respectively

mp: mass of the tip payload

; c; t: angles through center of mass, tangent to
actuated end, and through tip, respectively

x: axis through the center of mass (COM)

y: deﬂection perpendicular to x.
Consider the case with no damping on the modes.
While modal damping is readily incorporated, its typ-
ically low values justify an abbreviated treatment here
for the sake of space and simplicity. The output y spec-
iﬁed is the sum of the angle (to the center of mass), the
angular velocity, deﬂections and deﬂection rate, each
times appropriate gains. These gains are found by spec-
ifying the transfer function from joint torque to y to be
of maximum relative degree, i. e., it has no zeros. Equiv-
alently, the successive derivatives of y do not explicitly
involve the torque until the .2neC1/-th derivative. Note
that these characteristics ascribed to differentially ﬂat
systems may yield a more complete understanding of
this approach [11.88, 89],
y.s/
.s/ D
K
s2 Qne
iD1

s2 C !2
i
 ;
K D 1
J
ne
Y
iD1
!2
i :
When transformed to the time domain, the resulting
form of the torque based on derivatives of the desired
output will be
d.t/ D
J
Qne
iD1 !2
i
"
y2.neC1/
d
.t/ C
2ne1
X
iD0
˛iy.iC2/
d
.t/
#
:
The ˛i values are readily found from the convolution
of the polynomial or expansion of the denominator of.
y.s/=.s/. But what must be used for yd? With the given
deﬁnition of y, the desired value of yd for the rest-to-rest
trajectory will be achieved by creating an interpolating
trajectory with the desired initial and ﬁnal values of yd
Y
X
y
x
J0
mp
CoM
Jp
θt
θc
θ
Fig. 11.15 A deﬁnition of variables for the causal inversion
of De Luca

Robots with Flexible Elements
11.2 Robots with Flexible Links
273
Part A | 11.2
and derivatives of yd at the initial and ﬁnal times that are
zero. The number of derivatives to set equal to zero are
at least 2ne C1, but it may be preferred to set additional
derivatives equal to zero to obtain a smoother torque at
the ends of the trajectory. As explained in [11.85] this is
a transformation of states that results also in the desired
rest-to-rest behavior of the joint angle, the deﬂection
and their derivatives. For more robustness, the feedfor-
ward command should be supplemented with feedback
control, for example a simple PD or PID control of the
joint angle to follow yd.
Shown in Fig. 11.16 are the torque and resulting
bending deﬂection for a 2:2 s move using this combi-
nation on a single link ﬂexible arm [11.87].
To best comprehend these results, some details of
the ﬂexible arm in the experiment are needed. The
desired trajectory was deﬁned by a polynomial of de-
gree 19. The arm length was 0:655 m, of sheet steel
2 mm thick and 51 mm wide, directly driven by a DC
motor with inertia of 1:888 103 kg m2 and no tip
mass. The resulting natural frequencies were 14.4, 13.2
and 69:3 Hz with damping ratios of 0.0001, 0.001, and
0.008, respectively. Frequency errors of the model were
less than 1%. Friction compensation was applied based
on static and viscous models of the friction under con-
tinuous rotation.
Feedback Control of Flexible Links
Flexibility in the links is in some cases controlled in the
same way as concentrated ﬂexibility in joints. Herein
the focus is on approaches that apply speciﬁcally to
link ﬂexibility; consequently the use of Kalman ﬁltering
to estimate tip position and other broadly used tech-
niques are not reexamined. A long history of research
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2
2.4
a) Torque (N m)
Time (s)
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2
2.4
b) (deg)
Time (s)
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
–1.5
Fig. 11.16 (a) Applied torque for rest to rest motion with PD control. (b) Bending deformation at the tip
on this topic exists. Cannon and Schmitz [11.90], Truck-
enbrot [11.91], and others showed that these techniques
work for ﬂexible link arms and that the noncollocated
nature of the system aggravates the sensitivity to mod-
eling errors.
Strain measurements provide a valuable indication
of the state of a ﬂexible link, and strain rate, ob-
tained from ﬁltered differentiation of the typically noisy
strain signal, was shown by Hastings and Book [11.92]
to be an appropriate way of overcoming the limita-
tions imposed by purely joint feedback control. Yuan
et al. [11.93] produced an adaptive version of strain-rate
feedback.
Strain measurements readily lend themselves to cal-
culation of the modal amplitudes, and the number of
appropriately placed strain gage measurements N can
be equal to the number of mode amplitudes to be evalu-
ated. In this case, no estimation algorithm is necessary,
although ﬁltering is usually needed. If the mode shape
'i of a beam is known, strain is proportional to the sec-
ond derivative of 'i
˛ij D @2'i
@x2
ˇˇˇˇ
xj
:
(11.85)
By inverting the coefﬁcient matrix thus formed, it is
simple to obtain the amplitude of N modes as
0
BBB@
ı1
ı2
:::
ıN
1
CCCA D
0
BBB@
˛11
˛12
: : :
˛1N
˛21
˛22
: : :
˛2N
:::
:::
:::
:::
˛N1
˛N2
: : :
˛NN
1
CCCA
1 0
BBB@
"1
"2
:::
"N
1
CCCA :
(11.86)

Part A | 11.2
274
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Additional attention is necessary if beam torsion is
a signiﬁcant part of the mode deﬂection, but the prin-
ciple still applies. Active control of high-frequency
modes may not be warranted, and feedback of the one or
two lowest-frequency modes can be managed by clas-
sical or state-space design techniques to increase the
damping of that mode.
The use of the measurement of the end-of-arm po-
sition has perpetual appeal and is very effective for
rigid arms for the elimination of variability due to arm
distortion and the change over time of arm calibra-
tion. Machine vision can eliminate uncertainty in the
target position as well as the arm position. These ap-
proaches are plagued by the noncollocated and hence
non-minimum-phase dynamics of link ﬂexibility, how-
ever, and may require particular caution. Wang and
Vidyasagar [11.94] proposed an alternative formula-
tion of EOA measurements in the control formulation
that he called the reﬂected tip position. For a rotating
link of angle  and length l, the deﬂected position is
l Cı while the reﬂected tip position l ı is minimum
phase. This combination of joint and tip measure-
Fig. 11.17 Robotic arm large and ﬂexible (RALF) used in
EOA feedback experiments
ments produced the desired undeﬂected position but
would not serve for EOA tracking control. Obergfell
and Book [11.95] synthesized an output based on strain
feedback combined with EOA position that allowed
tracking control as well. They ﬁrst produced a passive
system with deﬂection feedback obtained from optical
measurements of the link deﬂection, and then devised
a traditional feedback control of the tip position mea-
sured by machine vision of the large two link arm
shown in Fig. 11.17 for the experimental robot RALF
(robot arm long and ﬂexible). Figures 11.18 and 11.19
compare the path for a large square traced in a plane
with only the deﬂection feedback and with both deﬂec-
tion and EOA position feedback.
Robust Estimation
for Flexible Link Systems
The state feedback algorithms readily designed for lin-
ear ﬂexible link systems are dependent on information
about states that cannot be directly measured and are
theoretically inﬁnite in number. Truncation of the states
to represent the most dominant low frequency modes
is a ready solution to the second problem and state
estimators or observers present a viable approach to
the ﬁrst problem. (Estimator and observer are com-
monly used interchangeably, but the term observer is
more common will be used in this section.) For lin-
ear systems a Luenberger observer or the stochastically
based Kalman ﬁlter are commonly used. Unfortunately,
observers require an accurate system model or the esti-
mates may be poor and the observer, a dynamic system
–1.84
–1.82
–1.8
–1.78
–1.76
Tip y-position (m)
Tip x-position (m)
5.24
5.22
5.2
5.18
5.16
5.14
Fig. 11.18 Path followed without EOA position feedback.
(Commanded trajectory is a square partially shown in light
brown. Actual trajectory shown in dark brown)

Robots with Flexible Elements
11.2 Robots with Flexible Links
275
Part A | 11.2
of order as high as the order of the system itself, may
even be unstable. Hence the robustness of the state ob-
server is a critical subject for the control of ﬂexible
link systems. The quality of the control is ultimately
the best measure of the quality of the estimator. Robust
observer design has been the subject of considerable re-
search and, in large part, mirrors the development of
robust controllers. This is natural since an observer is
a dynamic system which, like the plant itself, can be
controlled to achieve a desired outcome. Control ef-
fort of the observer is utilized to drive convergence of
the estimated outputs of the observer to the measured
outputs of the real system. Hence research on estima-
tors based on H-inﬁnity, fuzzy logic, neural network,
sliding mode, adaptive, and other design techniques
abound. In this chapter, two types of observers will be
discussed: sliding mode observers and multiple model
observers.
For all observers the placement of sensors is cru-
cial and for estimation of multiple modes it is desirable,
although not theoretically essential, to use multiple sen-
sors. Joint sensors (position and velocity) are typically
available for general pose (joint) control, but for de-
ﬂection sensing strain gages and accelerometers are
currently most appropriate. The MEMS accelerome-
ters now readily available and inexpensive will be the
principle choice here. Strain gages are more fragile
and generally provide more complex readings of the
mode behavior. Accelerometers are complicated by the
fact that acceleration is not dependent on just states z
which include the mode amplitudes and their deriva-
tives, but also on the input u creating the link motion.
Acceleration measurement of a point p on the link
is affected by both the states z and the input u as
follows,
Rxp D
n
ˇ.p/Œ˚Œ!2  ˇ.p/Œ˚Œ OC
o
z
C
˚
ˇ.p/Œ˚Œ˚TQ

u ;
where Rxp is the acceleration in the direction perpendic-
ular to the beam axis, ˚ is the matrix of eigenvectors, z
is the state vector, composed of joint motion as well as
beam deﬂections, p is the location of the sensor along
the beam axis, !2 is the diagonal matrix of natural
frequencies squared, OC is the modal damping matrix,
ˇ.p/ expresses the sensor motion in terms of the modal
states variables, and Q relates the input to the system
states.
As Post [11.96] has explained, the ability of a given
sensor to detect a mode depends on the amplitude of the
mode at the sensor location. Overall the singular val-
ues of the observability grammian, also used for testing
the system observability, is a reasonable but not perfect
–1.84
–1.82
–1.8
–1.78
–1.76
Tip y-position (m)
Tip x-position (m)
5.24
5.22
5.2
5.18
5.16
5.14
Fig. 11.19 Path followed with EOA feedback from camera.
(Commanded trajectory is a square partially shown in light
brown. Actual trajectory shown in dark brown)
metric. A robust measurement requires the placement
of sensors so as to avoid nodes (zero crossings) of the
modes to be sensed even when parameters of the sys-
tem change or are inaccurate. A single sensor (strain
gage or accelerometer) is much more likely to have this
problem than multiple sensors. The next sections de-
pend on suitably placed sensors. For those modes not
being controlled, one should minimize their inﬂuence
by placing sensors near the node of those modes. This
helps to avoid spillover of these modes that interferes
with the system as approximated.
Parametric Errors in System Model
Parametric errors are inaccuracies in the parameters of
a model with an accurate representation of the sys-
tem structure. For ﬂexible link systems this might arise
from inaccurate payload mass, stiffness values, stiff-
ness distribution, boundary conditions, etc., all of which
lead to inaccurate mode shapes, natural frequencies
and input coefﬁcients. Errors are inevitable to some
degree. As a consequence of parametric errors, one
of the most powerful results of linear feedback con-
trol of estimated states, the separation principle which
says the design of the observer does not change the
eigenvalues of the controlled system and vice versa, is
compromised. The rapid convergence of observer error
to zero will in general not occur with parametric er-
ror. The net effect is a major blow to the effectiveness
of the classical Luenberger observer. The Kalman ﬁl-
ter, which optimizes observer gains under conditions of
Gaussian process and measurement noise, is likewise

Part A | 11.2
276
Part A
Robotics Foundations
compromised. Without good state estimates the effec-
tiveness of the powerful state feedback approaches are
in jeopardy.
One currently popular tack to improve the robust-
ness of observers is the sliding mode observer. There
are several variations of this approach, and the tech-
nique by Wallcot and Zak [11.97, 98] was followed by
Post [11.96] in exploring the consequences of paramet-
ric error. As typical, a sliding surface is deﬁned which is
intended to guide the estimate error to zero. The reach-
ing phase moves from the initial error state to the sliding
surface and when that surface is crossed the sign on the
control changes. This rapid switching may be modiﬁed
by establishing a boundary layer near the switching sur-
face that substitutes a linear behavior.
In this section, we will use z as the state vector, Oz
as its estimate, L as the feedback of the observer, y as
the measurement and KS as the sliding mode gain. The
hat on a variable will generally denote its estimate and
an over dot its time derivative. The symbol  preceed-
ing a symbol indicates the variation of the true system
parameter from its model. The linear plant model is
thus
Pz D Az C Bu I
y D Cz C Du :
The equation approaching the switching surface is
POz D AOz C Bu C L.y  Oy/ C Kssgn.y  Oy/ :
When the boundary layer is included, the control
is changed in a region near the switching sur-
face where the design is essentially a conventional
linear observer. For present purposes we will not
employ a boundary layer but examine the pure
sliding mode case, for which the error equation
is
Pe D A0e  Kssgn .Ce/ C Az C Bu ;
which clearly has a steady state error solution that is
not zero except in the case that Az D Bu which
tends to occur when the overall system comes to rest.
Thus the convergence of the sliding mode observer has
similar issues found with the conventional linear ob-
servers. They can be stable but can converge to the
wrong steady state value leading to error, particularly
after the observer’s state estimates should have con-
verged to the slower changing system state. However,
when the overall plant reaches steady state and z D 0,
u D 0, the observer error will also converge to zero. In
contrast, the usual intent is to design the observer to
quickly converge to the true state estimate in order to
appropriately control the plant.
Successful Estimation
with Model Parameter Uncertainty
Models are seldom, if ever, exact in their representation
of a physical system. In addition to error in parame-
ter identiﬁcation, parameters can change with time and
operating conditions. For example, robots acquire and
release payloads and move to different poses which
may change parameters. As reported before, conver-
gence of state observers is adversely affected by these
changes which can lead to poor performance and even
instability. In a recent work, Post [11.96] described
a multiple model estimation scheme that successfully
overcomes these limitations for a ﬂexible link robot in
both simulation and experiment. Other authors, e.g.,
Chalhoub and Kfoury [11.99] have used fuzzy logic
techniques to address the needs for improving sliding
mode observers.
Since the true state of the system is not known, the
steady state estimation error cannot be calculated, but
if it is known to exist, Post has shown it to be propor-
tional to parameter error. Hence multiple models based
on a different set of sensors can be used to establish
which is most accurate. The difference in estimated
states based on two sensor selections ız.t/ D Ozs1  Ozs2
is then a metric for choosing between alternative ob-
servers in an array of observers with different assumed
parameters.
The observers themselves (conventional Luen-
berger observers or Kalman ﬁlters) have the form
POzs1.t/ D AOzs1.t/ C Bu.t/ C Ls1

ys1.t/  Oys1.t/
	
;
where Ozs1is the estimate of the state vector z using the
sensor array 1, A is the plant matrix, B is the input ma-
trix, Ls1 is the gain matrix to be designed, ys1 is the
sensor measurement of sensor array 1, and Oys1 estimate
of sensor measurement of sensor array 1, and similarly
for sensor s2. The difference between states and their
estimates converges rapidly (relative to the states them-
selves) to steady state and hence POzs1  POzs2 converges to
zero and hence
ız.t/ D 1ŒAz.t/ C Bu
C 2ŒCs1z.t/ C Ds1u.t/
C 3ŒCs2z.t/ C Ds2u.t/
is found to be the steady state slowly changing (rel-
ative to the observer dynamics) difference in the two
observers based on sensors s1 and s2. Here, the i are
constant matrices based on the model parameters and
not the true values of the system.  indicates the de-
viation of the true matrices from the model’s matrices
following that symbol. Note that subscripts s1 and s2
indicate different sensors involved in the measurement

Robots with Flexible Elements
11.2 Robots with Flexible Links
277
Part A | 11.2
and feed through matrices C and D, respectively. Also
note that this equation is somewhat complicated by the
feedthrough matrices occurring due to the use of ac-
celerometers to sense the motion.
Incorporating the speciﬁc representation of a linear
ﬂexible manipulator, the equations are
Pz D
 0.nn/
I.nn/
!2
.nn/
 OC.nn/

z C
0.nm/
OQ.nm/

u ;
where OC denotes modal damping and OQ denotes the
modal forcing coefﬁcient. The sensor’s output is
ySi D
n
 Œ1;  1.psi/; : : : ;  n.psi/ ˚.nn/!2
.nn/
 Œ1;  1.psi/; : : : ;  n.psi/ ˚.nn/ OC.nn/
o
z
C Œ1;  1.psi/; : : : ;  n.psi/ ˚.nn/ OQ.nn/u :
Let ˇSi D Œ1;  1.psi/; : : : ;  n.psi/ and one can attribute
to the sub-matrices the parametric change matrices
.Az.t/ C Bu/ D
0.nn/
I.nn/
 h
!2   OC

z.t/ C  OQu.t/
i
;
.CSiz.t/ C DSiu/ D
ˇSi˚
h
!2   OC

z.t/ C  OQu.t/
i
;
ız.t/ D

1
0.nn/
I.nn/

C 2ˇs1˚ C 3ˇs2˚


h
!2   OC

z.t/ C  OQu
i
;
which will be coalesced to give
ız.t/ D .2nn/.t/ ;
where it can be seen that  consists of known model
parameters and  is an unknown metric of parameter
errors that can’t be solved from this equation. However,
using the pseudo inverse we can produce a least squares
metric m.t/ which evaluates the relative accuracy of
two observers based on different models
.T/1Tı
z .t/ D m.t/ :
The smaller the norm of m.t/, the more accurate the
observer based on a given model is expected to be.
While various methods of using m.t/ can be con-
trived, Post [11.96] utilized a switching approach he
referred to as the multiple model switching adaptive
estimator (MMSAE), visualized in Fig. 11.20. The
weighting value wi is based on mi.t/ for the observer
State
estimate
selection
Payload
array
E1
mµ  0.20kg
E5
mµ  0.30kg
max
zˆ E1(t)
w1(t)
E2
mµ  0.225kg
zˆ E2(t)
w2(t)
E3
mµ  0.25kg
zˆ E3(t)
w3(t)
E4
mµ  0.275kg
zˆ E4(t)
w4(t)
zˆ E5(t)
w5(t)
Index
Payload
estimate
Best state
estimate
zˆ 
u(t)
y(t)
Fig. 11.20 Flow chart for the multiple model switching adaptive es-
timator (MMSAE)
based on a given model, then the estimate Ozi from that
observer was used. Figure 11.21 shows schematically
the ﬂow inside the estimator blocks E1 through E5. The
parameter varied in Post’s experiments was arm pay-
load. Multiple parameters could be varied but would
lead to a higher dimensional formulation and poten-
Weight
scaling
ET
+
–
zˆ i
zˆ 2
zˆ 3
wi
yS1
E2
yS2
E3
yS3
Fig. 11.21 Estimation module with weight scaling
MEMS
accelerometer
Vision
system
Control
interface
Flexible arm
Flexible belts
Belt drives
Fig. 11.22 Gantry robot used in MMSAE experiments (after
Post [11.96])

Part A | 11.2
278
Part A
Robotics Foundations
tially many estimators numbering NT D N1N2    Np for
the variation of p parameters, each with Ni values rep-
resented.
Post [11.96] conducted experiments with a linear
model of the gantry robot as illustrated in Fig. 11.22
and schematically modeled in Fig. 11.23, with the pa-
rameters given in Table 11.1 and sensor placements at
0.015, 0.25, and 0:42 m from the actuated end of the
beam. He compared:

Conventional PID (
VIDEO 780 ).

Fixed gain linear-quadratic regulator (LQR) plus
Luenberger state space designs (
VIDEO 781 ).

MMSAE design observers and LQR controls. Five
potential payloads were chosen with spacing in even
increments between 0.2 and 0:3 kg, i. e., an end-
point mass between 0.35 and 0.55.
The penalty matrices were kept the same for the
LQR controls but the resulting gains changed based on
the model employed by the MMSAE selection. While
various measures of performance could be demon-
strated involving somewhat arbitrary selection of con-
xb
xc
Kb
mp
Cb
S1
S2
S3
Fig. 11.23 Schematic of gantry robot model
PID
MMSAE SS 0.20 SS 0.25 SS 0.30 SS 0.35 SS 0.40
Cycle time (s)
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
With payload
Without payload
Fig. 11.24 Cycle times with implemented control methods
troller types, controller gains and metrics, the following
characteristics are considered most critical:

Stability with various payloads.

Cycle completion time, with requirements for set-
tling of vibration amplitude at prescribed stops.

Variation of cycle times with changing payloads.
Since reasonable work cycles often pick up and
drop off payloads, the test included these operations.
Cycle times are graphed in Fig. 11.24. The light bars
show the cycle times for the complete cycle with seg-
ments of the task carrying the payload and others with
the gripper empty. The dark bars show operation with
no payload carried and only the gripper mass present for
the entire cycle. In addition to the pair of bars labeled
PID and MMSAE (with obvious meanings) are pairs la-
beled SS 0.25 through SS 0.40. These latter labels refer
to the designed-for tip mass (payload plus gripper). The
most obvious message from this ﬁgure is that the state
space control is a vast improvement over PID, reducing
cycle time by about 90%. What is not obvious from this
ﬁgure is that some means of gain change is needed to
accommodate the payload variations. With a designed-
for tip mass of 0:45 kg and above, the operation without
payload was unstable. This is still below the actual tip
mass of 0:5 kg. Hence MMSAE was essential for a suc-
cessful completion of the task with these design criteria
(i. e., LQR penalty matrices and resulting gains). The
exact tip mass does not need to be known, only the
range of masses. The near identical cycle times with
and without the additional payload seen on the chart for
MMSAE is also a practical advantage.
11.2.4 Further Reading
The topic of ﬂexible link robot control is widely cov-
ered with papers on modeling and control. The reader
wishing to probe further may want to begin with a paper
giving some perspective on the nature of the problem.
This was the goal of Book in [11.100]. Progress to date
in this ﬁeld from the theoretical perspective is signiﬁ-
Table 11.1 Parameters of the gantry robot model
Parameter
Value
Unit
Payload (mt)
0.281
kg
Cart mass (mc)
10
kg
Arm length (L)
0.42
m
Elastic modulus (E)
7 1010
N=m
Density (	)
2700
kg=m3
Area moment (I)
1:0114 1010
m4
Belt stiffness (Kb)
2:1814 105
N=m
Cart damper (Cd)
100
N s=m
Structural damping coefﬁcient ()
0.0005
N s=m

Robots with Flexible Elements
References
279
Part A | 11
cant and has been collected by Canudas de Witt et al.
in [11.101]; this reference includes a wide range of
research approaches, but the examples of the practi-
cal application of this theory are more limited. The
German Aerospace Center has produced lightweight
space arms [11.102] and deployed them in space.
The startup CAMotion, Inc. [11.103] has produced
large lightweight industrial robots using the command-
shaping approach to improve cycle time. High-speed
arms such as the FlexPicker [11.104] achieve a light
weight and avoid ﬂexibility because of their parallel
structure, but suffer the usual disadvantages of parallel
actuation: restricted workspace considering the space
occupied by the robot structure.
Trautt and
Bayo’s early
exploration of non-
minimum-phase inverses is described in [11.105]. This
is a particularly interesting variation of the work by
Kwon [11.83, 84] in that it uses the frequency domain
and deals with nonzero initial conditions. The con-
cept of using two time scales, a fast time scale for the
ﬂexible dynamics and a slow time scale for the rigid
dynamics, can be found in Siciliano and Book [11.106].
The singular perturbation approach was used earlier by
Spong for elastic joint arms. Ghorbel and Spong also
consider ﬂexible links and contact with a rigid environ-
ment in [11.107]. Achieving robustness is a problem,
particularly with end-point sensors. Sliding mode con-
trol [11.108] and passivity-based control [11.109] ad-
dress this problem in effective but widely varying ways.
While these seem to be the more promising methods
of control, one will ﬁnd many more approaches to this
challenging control problem. H1, adaptive, fuzzy, and
other controllers have all been applied with varying de-
grees of success.
Video-References
VIDEO 133
Cartesian impedance control with damping off
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/11/videodetails/133
VIDEO 134
Cartesian impedance control with damping on
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/11/videodetails/134
VIDEO 135
Control laws for a single-link arm with an elastic joint
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/11/videodetails/135
VIDEO 136
Feedforward/feedback law for path tracking with a KUKA KR15/2 robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/11/videodetails/136
VIDEO 770
Trajectory generation and control for a KUKA IR 161/60 robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/11/videodetails/770
VIDEO 777
Input shaping on a lightweight gantry robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/11/videodetails/777
VIDEO 778
Inverse dynamics control for a flexible link
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/11/videodetails/778
VIDEO 779
Rest-to-rest motion for a flexible link
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/11/videodetails/779
VIDEO 780
PID response to impulse in presence of link flexibility
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/11/videodetails/780
VIDEO 781
State feedback response to impulse in presence of link flexibility
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/11/videodetails/781
References
11.1
L.M. Sweet, M.C. Good: Redefinition of the robot
motion control problem, IEEE Control Syst. Mag.
5(3), 18–24 (1985)
11.2
M.C. Good, L.M. Sweet, K.L. Strobel: Dynamic
models for control system design of integrated
robot and drive systems, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas.
Control 107, 53–59 (1985)
11.3
E. Rivin: Mechanical Design of Robots (McGraw-
Hill, New York 1988)
11.4
S. Nicosia, F. Nicolò, D. Lentini: Dynamical con-
trol of industrial robots with elastic and dissi-
pative joints, 8th IFAC World Congr., Kyoto (1981)
pp. 1933–1939
11.5
P. Tomei: An observer for flexible joint robots, IEEE
Trans. Autom. Control 35(6), 739–743 (1990)
11.6
R. Höpler, M. Thümmel: Symbolic computation of
the inverse dynamics of elastic joint robots, IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), New Orleans
(2004) pp. 4314–4319
11.7
M.W. Spong: Modeling and control of elastic joint
robots, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 109, 310–
319 (1987)
11.8
S.H. Murphy, J.T. Wen, G.N. Saridis: Simulation
and analysis of flexibly jointed manipulators,
29th IEEE Conf. Decis. Control, Honolulu (1990)
pp. 545–550

Part A | 11
280
Part A
Robotics Foundations
11.9
R. Marino, S. Nicosia: On the Feedback Control of
Industrial Robots with Elastic Joints: A Singular
Perturbation Approach (Dipartimento di Ingeg-
neria Elettronica, Univ. Rome Tor Vergata, Rome
1984), Rep. R-84.01
11.10
G. Cesareo, F. Nicolò, S. Nicosia: DYMIR: A code
for generating dynamic model of robots, IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Atlanta (1984)
pp. 115–120
11.11
A. De Luca: Feedforward/feedback laws for the
control of flexible robots, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA), San Francisco (2000) pp. 233–
240
11.12
G. Buondonno, A. De Luca: A recursive Newton–
Euler algorithm for robots with elastic joints and
its application to control, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst., Hamburg (2015) pp. 5526–5532
11.13
H.B. Kuntze, A.H.K. Jacubasch: Control algorithms
for stiffening an elastic industrial robot, IEEE
J. Robotics Autom. 1(2), 71–78 (1985)
11.14
S.H. Lin, S. Tosunoglu, D. Tesar: Control of a
six-degree-of-freedom flexible industrial ma-
nipulator, IEEE Control Syst. Mag. 11(2), 24–30
(1991)
11.15
P. Tomei: A simple PD controller for robots with
elastic joints, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 36(10),
1208–1213 (1991)
11.16
A. De Luca, B. Siciliano: Regulation of flexible
arms under gravity, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
9(4), 463–467 (1993)
11.17
A. De Luca, B. Siciliano, L. Zollo: PD control with
on-line gravity compensation for robots with
elastic joints: Theory and experiments, Automat-
ica 41(10), 1809–1819 (2005)
11.18
C. Ott, A. Albu-Schäffer, A. Kugi, S. Stramigi-
oli, G. Hirzinger: A passivity based Cartesian
impedance controller for flexible joint robots –
Part I: Torque feedback and gravity compensa-
tion, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), New
Orleans (2004) pp. 2659–2665
11.19
L. Zollo, B. Siciliano, A. De Luca, E. Guglielmelli,
P. Dario: Compliance control for an anthropomor-
phic robot with elastic joints: Theory and exper-
iments, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 127(3),
321–328 (2005)
11.20
A. Albu-Schäffer, C. Ott, G. Hirzinger: A passivity
based Cartesian impedance controller for flexi-
ble joint robots – Part II: Full state feedback,
impedance design and experiments, IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), New Orleans (2004)
pp. 2666–2672
11.21
C. Ott, A. Albu-Schäffer, A. Kugi, G. Hirzinger: On
the passivity-based impedance control of flexible
joint robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics 24(2), 416–429
(2008)
11.22
A. De Luca, F. Flacco: A PD-type regulator with
exact gravity cancellation for robots with flexi-
ble joints, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Shanghai (2011) pp. 317–323
11.23
R. Kelly, V. Santibanez: Global regulation of elastic
joint robots based on energy shaping, IEEE Trans.
Autom. Control 43(10), 1451–1456 (1998)
11.24
J. Alvarez-Ramirez, I. Cervantes: PID regulation
of robot manipulators with elastic joints, Asian
J. Control 5(1), 32–38 (2003)
11.25
A. De Luca, S. Panzieri: Learning gravity compen-
sation in robots: Rigid arms, elastic joints, flexible
links, Int. J. Adapt. Control Signal Process. 7(5),
417–433 (1993)
11.26
A. Albu-Schäffer, G. Hirzinger: A globally stable
state feedback controller for flexible joint robots,
Adv. Robotics 15(8), 799–814 (2001)
11.27
L.E. Pfeffer, O. Khatib, J. Hake: Joint torque sen-
sory feedback in the control of a PUMA manip-
ulator, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 5(4), 418–425
(1989)
11.28
M. Hashimoto, Y. Kiyosawa, R.P. Paul: A torque
sensing technique for robots with harmonic
drives, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 9(1), 108–116
(1993)
11.29
T. Lin, A.A. Goldenberg: Robust adaptive control of
flexible joint robots with joint torque feedback,
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Nagoya
(1995) pp. 1229–1234
11.30
M.G. Forrest-Barlach, S.M. Babcock: Inverse dy-
namics position control of a compliant manipu-
lator, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 3(1), 75–83 (1987)
11.31
K.P. Jankowski, H. Van Brussel: An approach to
discrete inverse dynamics control of flexible-joint
robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 8(5), 651–658
(1992)
11.32
W.M. Grimm: Robustness analysis of nonlinear
decoupling for elastic-joint robots, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 6(3), 373–377 (1990)
11.33
A. De Luca, R. Farina, P. Lucibello: On the con-
trol of robots with visco-elastic joints, IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Barcelona (2005)
pp. 4297–4302
11.34
A. De Luca: Decoupling and feedback lineariza-
tion of robots with mixed rigid/elastic joints, Int.
J. Robust Nonlin. Control 8(11), 965–977 (1998)
11.35
A. De Luca, B. Siciliano: Inversion-based nonlin-
ear control of robot arms with flexible links, AIAA
J. Guid. Control Dyn. 16(6), 1169–1176 (1993)
11.36
A. De Luca: Dynamic control of robots with joint
elasticity, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Philadelphia (1988) pp. 152–158
11.37
S. Nicosia, P. Tomei: On the feedback linearization
of robots with elastic joints, 27th IEEE Conf. Decis.
Control, Austin (1988) pp. 180–185
11.38
A. De Luca, P. Lucibello: A general algorithm for
dynamic feedback linearization of robots with
elastic joints, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Leuven (1998) pp. 504–510
11.39
J. Swevers, D. Torfs, M. Adams, J. De Schutter,
H. Van Brussel: Comparison of control algorithms
for flexible joint robots implemented on a KUKA
IR 161/60 industrial robot, 5th Int. Conf. Adv.
Robotics, Pisa (1991) pp. 120–125
11.40
K. Khorasani, P.V. Kokotovic: Feedback lineariza-
tion of a flexible manipulator near its rigid body
manifold, Syst. Control Lett. 6, 187–192 (1985)
11.41
M.W. Spong, K. Khorasani, P.V. Kokotovic: An inte-
gral manifold approach to the feedback control of

Robots with Flexible Elements
References
281
Part A | 11
flexible joint robots, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 3(4),
291–300 (1987)
11.42
S. Nicosia, P. Tomei: Design of global tracking con-
trollers for flexible-joint robots, J. Robotic Syst.
10(6), 835–846 (1993)
11.43
B. Brogliato, R. Ortega, R. Lozano: Global track-
ing controllers for flexible-joint manipulators:
A comparative study, Automatica 31(7), 941–956
(1995)
11.44
M.W. Spong: Adaptive control of flexible joint ma-
nipulators, Syst. Control Lett. 13(1), 15–21 (1989)
11.45
F. Ghorbel, J.Y. Hung, M.W. Spong: Adaptive con-
trol of flexible-joint manipulators, IEEE Control
Syst. Mag. 9(7), 9–13 (1989)
11.46
R. Lozano, B. Brogliato: Adaptive control of robot
manipulators with flexible joints, IEEE Trans. Au-
tom. Control 37(2), 174–181 (1992)
11.47
H. Sira-Ramirez, M.W. Spong: Variable struc-
ture control of flexible joint manipulators, Int.
Robotics Autom. 3(2), 57–64 (1988)
11.48
A. De Luca, G. Ulivi: Iterative learning control of
robots with elastic joints, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA), Nice (1992) pp. 1920–1926
11.49
O. Dahl: Path constrained motion optimization
for rigid and flexible joint robots, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Atlanta (1993) pp. 223–229
11.50
A. De Luca, L. Farina: Dynamic scaling of tra-
jectories for robots with elastic joints, IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Washington (2002)
pp. 2436–2442
11.51
S. Haddadin, M. Özparpucu, A. Albu-Schäffer: Op-
timal control for maximizing potential energy in
a variable stiffness joint, IEEE 51st Conf. Decis.
Control, Maui (2012) pp. 1199–1206
11.52
M. Özparpucu, S. Haddadin: Optimal control of
elastic joints with variable damping, 13th Euro-
pean Control Conf., Strasbourg (2014) pp. 2526–
2533
11.53
S. Nicosia, P. Tomei, A. Tornambè: A nonlinear ob-
server for elastic robots, IEEE J. Robotics Autom.
4(1), 45–52 (1988)
11.54
S. Nicosia, P. Tomei: A method for the state esti-
mation of elastic joint robots by global position
measurements, Int. J. Adapt. Control Signal Pro-
cess. 4(6), 475–486 (1990)
11.55
A.
De
Luca,
D.
Schröder,
M.
Thümmel:
An
acceleration-based state observer for robot ma-
nipulators with elastic joints, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Rome (2007) pp. 3817–3823
11.56
M.W. Spong: On the force control problem for
flexible joint manipulators, IEEE Trans. Autom.
Control 34(1), 107–111 (1989)
11.57
J.K. Mills: Stability and control of elastic-joint
robotic manipulators during constrained-motion
tasks, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 8(1), 119–126
(1992)
11.58
K.P. Jankowski, H.A. El Maraghy: Dynamic decou-
pling for hybrid control of rigid-/flexible-joint
robots interacting with the environment, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 8(5), 519–534 (1992)
11.59
T. Lin, A.A. Goldenberg: A unified approach to
motion and force control of flexible joint robots,
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Minneapo-
lis (1996) pp. 1115–1120
11.60
A. Albu-Schäffer, C. Ott, G. Hirzinger: A unified
passivity-based control framework for position,
torque and impedance control of flexible joint
robots, Int. J. Robotics Res. 26(1), 23–39 (2007)
11.61
W. Book, O. Maizza-Neto, D.E. Whitney: Feed-
back control of two beam, two joint systems with
distributed flexibility, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas.
Control 97(4), 424–431 (1975)
11.62
W. Book: Characterization of strength and stiff-
ness constraints on manipulator control. In: The-
ory and Practice of Robots and Manipulators, ed.
by W. Book (Elsevier, Amsterdam 1977) pp. 37–45
11.63
T.E. Alberts, W. Book, S. Dickerson: Experiments
in augmenting active control of a flexible struc-
ture with passive damping, AIAA 24th Aerosp. Sci.
Meet., Reno (1986)
11.64
T. Bailey, J.E. Hubbard Jr.: Distributed piezoelec-
tric-polymer active vibration control of a can-
tilever beam, J. Guid. Control Dyn. 8(5), 605–611
(1985)
11.65
W. Book, V. Sangveraphunsiri, S. Le: The Brac-
ing Strategy for Robot Operation, Jt. IFToMM-CISM
Symp. Theory Robots Manip. (RoManSy), Udine
(1984)
11.66
W. Book: Analysis of massless elastic chains with
servo controlled joints, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas.
Control 101(3), 187–192 (1979)
11.67
E.C. Pestel, F.A. Leckie: Matrix Methods in Elas-
tomechanics (McGraw-Hill, New York 1963)
11.68
R. Krauss: Transfer Matrix Modeling, Ph.D. Thesis
(School of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Insti-
tute of Technology, Atlanta 2006)
11.69
W.J. Book: Modeling, Design and Control of Flex-
ible Manipulator Arms, Ph.D. Thesis (Department
of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology, Cambridge 1974)
11.70
W. Book: Recursive lagrangian dynamics of flexi-
ble manipulators, Int. J. Robotics Res. 3(3), 87–106
(1984)
11.71
W.J. Book, S.H. Lee: Vibration control of a large
flexible manipulator by a small robotic arm, Proc.
Am. Control Conf., Pittsburgh (1989) pp. 1377–1380
11.72
J. Lew, S.-M. Moon: A simple active damping con-
trol for compliant base manipulators, IEEE/ASME
Trans. Mechatron. 2, 707–714 (1995)
11.73
W.J. Book, J.C. Loper: Inverse dynamics for com-
manding micromanipulator inertial
forces to
damp macromanipulator vibration, IEEE, Robot
Soc. Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Kyongju (1999)
11.74
I. Sharf: Active damping of a large flexible manip-
ulator with a short-reach robot, Proc. Am. Control
Conf., Seattle (1995) pp. 3329–3333
11.75
L. George, W.J. Book: Inertial vibration damping
control of a flexible base manipulator, IEEE/ASME
Trans. Mechatron. 8(2), 268–271 (2003)
11.76
J.F. Calvert, D.J. Gimpel: Method and apparatus
for control of system output in response to system
input, U.S. Patent 280 1351 (1957)
11.77
O.J.M. Smith: Feedback Control Systems (McGraw-
Hill, New York 1958)

Part A | 11
282
Part A
Robotics Foundations
11.78
N. Singer, W.P. Seering: Preshaping command in-
puts to reduce system vibration, ASME J. Dyn. Syst.
Meas. Control 112(1), 76–82 (1990)
11.79
W. Singhose, W. Seering, N. Singer: Residual vi-
bration reduction using vector diagrams to gen-
erate shaped inputs, J. Mech. Des. 2, 654–659
(1994)
11.80
D.P. Magee, W.J. Book: The Application of In-
put Shaping to a System with Varying Parameters,
Proc. 1992 Japan-USA Symp. Flex. Autom., San
Francisco (1992) pp. 519–526
11.81
D.P. Magee, W.J. Book: Optimal arbitrary time-
delay (OAT) filter and method to minimize un-
wanted system dynamics, U.S. Patent 607 8844
(2000)
11.82
S. Rhim, W.J. Book: Noise effect on time-domain
adaptive command shaping methods for flexi-
ble manipulator control, IEEE Trans. Control Syst.
Technol. 9(1), 84–92 (2001)
11.83
D.-S. Kwon, W.J. Book: A time-domain inverse
dynamic tracking control of a single-link flexi-
ble manipulator, J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 116,
193–200 (1994)
11.84
D.S. Kwon: An Inverse Dynamic Tracking Control
for a Bracing Flexible Manipulator, Ph.D. Thesis
(School of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Insti-
tute of Technology, Atlanta 1991)
11.85
A. De Luca, G. Di Giovanni: Rest-to-rest motion of
a one-link flexible arm, Proc. IEEE/ASME Int. Conf.
Adv. Intell. Mechatron., Como (2001) pp. 923–928
11.86
A. De Luca, G. Di Giovanni: Rest-to-rest motion
of a two-link robot with a flexible forearm, Proc.
IEEE/ASME Int. Conf. Adv. Intell. Mechatron., Como
(2001) pp. 929–935
11.87
A. De Luca, V. Caiano, D. Del Vescovo: Experi-
ments on rest-to-rest motion of a flexible arm.
In: Experimental Robotics VIII, Springer Tracts
in Advanced Robotics, Vol. 5, ed. by B. Sicil-
iano, P. Dario (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2003)
pp. 338–349
11.88
R.M. Murray, M. Rathinam, W. Sluis: Differential
flatness of mechanical control systems: A catalog
of prototype systems, Proc. ASME Int. Mech. Engr.
Congr., San Francisco (1995)
11.89
M. Fliess, P. Martin, P. Rouchon: Flatness and
defect of nonlinear systems: Introductory the-
ory and examples, Int. J. Control 61(6), 1327–1361
(1995)
11.90
R.H. Cannon, E. Schmitz: Initial experiments on
the end-point control of a flexible one-link
robot, Int. J. Robotics Res. 3(3), 62–75 (1984)
11.91
A. Truckenbrot: Modeling and control of flexible
manipulator structures, Proc. 4th CISM-IFToMM
Symp. Theory Robots Manip. (RoManSy), Zaborow
(1981) pp. 90–101
11.92
G.G. Hastings, W.J. Book: Reconstruction and ro-
bust reduced-order observation of flexible vari-
ables, ASME Winter Ann. Meet., Anaheim (1986)
11.93
B.S. Yuan, J.D. Huggins, W.J. Book: Small motion
experiments with a large flexible arm with strain
feedback, Proceedings of the 1989 Am. Control
Conf., Pittsburgh (1989) pp. 2091–2095
11.94
D. Wang, M. Vidyasagar: Passive control of a stiff
flexible link, Int. J. Robotics Res. 11, 572–578
(1992)
11.95
K. Obergfell, W.J. Book: Control of flexible manip-
ulators using vision and modal feedback, Proc.
Int. Conf. Risk Assess. Manag. (ICRAM), Istanbul
(1995)
11.96
B. Post: Robust State Estimation for the Con-
trol of Flexible Robotic Manipulators, Ph.D. Thesis
(School of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Insti-
tute of Technology, Atlanta 2013)
11.97
B. Walcott, S. Zak: State observation of nonlinear
uncertain dynamical system, IEEE Trans. Autom.
Control 32, 166–170 (1987)
11.98
B. Walcott, S. Zak: Observation of dynamical sys-
tems in the presence of bounded nonlineari-
ties/uncertainties, Proc. IEEE Conf. Dec. Control 25,
961–966 (1986)
11.99
N.G. Chalhoub, G.A. Kfoury: Development of a
robust nonlinear observer for a single-link, flex-
ible manipulator, Nonlin. Dyn. 39(3), 217–233
(2005)
11.100
W.J. Book: Controlled motion in an elastic world,
ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 2B, 252–261 (1993)
11.101
C. Canudas-de-Wit, B. Siciliano, G. Bastin (Eds.):
Theory of Robot Control (Springer, Berlin, Heidel-
berg 1996)
11.102
G. Hirzinger, N. Sporer, J. Butterfass, M. Greben-
stein: Torque-controlled lightweight arms and
articulated hands: Do we reach technological
limits now?, Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(4/5), 331–340
(2004)
11.103
Camotion Inc.: http://www.camotion.com (Ca-
motion Inc., Atlanta 2007)
11.104
B. Rooks: High speed delivery and low cost from
new ABB packaging robot, Ind. Robotics Int. J.
26(4), 267–275 (1999)
11.105
T. Trautt, E. Bayo: Inverse dynamics of non-
minimum phase systems with non-zero initial
conditions, Dyn. Control 7(1), 49–71 (1997)
11.106
B. Siciliano, W. Book: A singular perturbation
approach to control of lightweight flexible ma-
nipulators, Int. J. Robotics Res. 7(4), 79–90
(1988)
11.107
F. Ghorbel, M.W. Spong: Singular perturbation
model of robots with elastic joints and elastic
links constrained by a rigid environment, J. In-
tell. Robotics Syst. 22(2), 143–152 (1998)
11.108
J. Guldner, J. Shi, V. Utkin: Sliding Mode Control in
Electromechanical Systems (Taylor, London 1999)
11.109
J.-H. Ryu, D.-S. Kwon, B. Hannaford: Control
of a flexible manipulator with noncollocated
feedback: Time-domain passivity approach, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 20(4), 776–780 (2004)

Multimedia Contents Robotic Syste
283
Part A | 12.1
12. Robotic Systems Architectures
and Programming
David Kortenkamp, Reid Simmons, Davide Brugali
Robot software systems tend to be complex. This
complexity is due, in large part, to the need to con-
trol diverse sensors and actuators in real time, in
the face of significant uncertainty and noise. Robot
systems must work to achieve tasks while moni-
toring for, and reacting to, unexpected situations.
Doing all this concurrently and asynchronously
adds immensely to system complexity.
The use of a well-conceived architecture,
together with programming tools that support
the architecture, can often help to manage that
complexity. Currently, there is no single architec-
ture that is best for all applications – different
architectures have different advantages and dis-
advantages. It is important to understand those
strengths and weaknesses when choosing an ar-
chitectural approach for a given application.
This chapter presents various approaches to
architecting robotic systems. It starts by defining
terms and setting the context, including a re-
counting of the historical developments in the
area of robot architectures. The chapter then
discusses in more depth the major types of ar-
chitectural components in use today – behavioral
control (Chap. 13), executives, and task planners
(Chap. 14) – along with commonly used techniques
for interconnecting connecting those components.
Throughout, emphasis will be placed on pro-
gramming tools and environments that support
these architectures. A case study is then pre-
sented, followed by a brief discussion of further
reading.
12.1
Overview.............................................
283
12.1.1
Special Needs
of Robot Architectures................
284
12.1.2
Modularity and Hierarchy...........
284
12.1.3
Software Development Tools.......
285
12.2
History ................................................
285
12.2.1
Subsumption ............................
285
12.2.2
Layered Robot Control
Architectures.............................
286
12.3
Architectural Components ....................
289
12.3.1
Connecting Components ............
289
12.3.2
Behavioral Control .....................
291
12.3.3
Executive..................................
292
12.3.4
Planning ..................................
294
12.4
Case Study – GRACE ..............................
296
12.5
The Art of Robot Architectures ..............
298
12.6
Implementing
Robotic Systems Architectures...............
299
12.6.1
Agile Robot Development
Network (aRDnet) ......................
300
12.6.2
Yet Another Robot Platform
(YARP).......................................
300
12.6.3
Open Robot Control Software
(OROCOS) ...................................
300
12.6.4
Smartsoft..................................
300
12.6.5
Robot Operating System (ROS) .....
301
12.6.6 GenoM/BIP................................
301
12.6.7
Best Practice in Robotics (BRICS)..
301
12.7
Conclusions and Further Reading .........
302
Video-References.........................................
302
References...................................................
302
12.1 Overview
The term robot architecture is often used to refer to
two related, but distinct, concepts. Architectural struc-
ture refers to how a system is divided into subsystems
and how those subsystems interact. The structure of

Part A | 12.1
284
Part A
Robotics Foundations
a robot system is often represented informally using tra-
ditional boxes and arrows diagrams or more formally
using techniques such as uniﬁed modeling language
(UML) [12.1]. In contrast, architectural style refers
to the computational concepts that underlie a given
system. For instance, one robot system might use
a publish–subscribe message passing style of commu-
nication, while another may use a more synchronous
client–server approach.
All robotic systems use some architectural struc-
ture and style. However, in many existing robot
systems it is difﬁcult to pin down precisely the
architecture being used. In
fact, a single robot
system will often use several styles together. In
part, this is because the system implementation
may not have clean subsystem boundaries, blurring
the architectural structure. Similarly, the architec-
ture and the domain-speciﬁc implementation are of-
ten intimately tied together, blurring the architectural
style(s).
This is unfortunate, as a well-conceived, clean
architecture can have signiﬁcant advantages in the
speciﬁcation, execution, and validation of robot sys-
tems. In general, robot architectures facilitate develop-
ment by providing beneﬁcial constraints on the design
and implementation of robotic systems, without being
overly restrictive. For instance, separating behaviors
into modular units helps to increase understandabil-
ity and reusability, and can facilitate unit testing and
validation.
12.1.1 Special Needs of Robot Architectures
In some sense, one may consider robot architectures
as software engineering. However, robot architectures
are distinguished from other software architectures be-
cause of the special needs of robot systems. The most
important of these, from the architectural perspective,
are that robot systems need to interact asynchronously,
in real time, with an uncertain, often dynamic, en-
vironment. In addition, many robot systems need to
respond at varying temporal scopes – from millisec-
ond feedback control to minutes, or hours, for complex
tasks.
To handle these requirements, many robot architec-
tures include capabilities for acting in real time, con-
trolling actuators and sensors, supporting concurrency,
detecting and reacting to exceptional situations, dealing
with uncertainty, and integrating high-level (symbolic)
planning with low-level (numerical) control.
While the same capability can often be imple-
mented using different architectural styles, there may
be advantages of using one particular style over another.
As an example, consider how a robot system’s style
of communications can impact on its reliability. Many
robot systems are designed as asynchronous processes
that communicate using message passing. One popular
communication style is client–server, in which a mes-
sage request from the client is paired with a response
from the server. An alternate communication paradigm
is publish–subscribe, in which messages are broadcast
asynchronously and all modules that have previously
indicated an interest in such messages receive a copy.
With client–server-style message passing, modules typ-
ically send a request and then block, waiting for the
response. If the response never comes (e.g., the server
module crashes) then deadlock can occur. Even if the
module does not block, the control ﬂow still typically
expects a response, which may lead to unexpected re-
sults if the response never arrives or if a response to
some other request happens to arrive ﬁrst. In contrast,
systems that use publish–subscribe tend to be more
reliable: because messages are assumed to arrive asyn-
chronously, the control ﬂow typically does not assume
any particular order in which messages are processed,
and so missing or out-of-order messages tend to have
less impact.
12.1.2 Modularity and Hierarchy
One common feature of robot architectures is mod-
ular decomposition of systems into simpler, largely
independent pieces. As mentioned above, robot sys-
tems are often designed as communicating processes,
where the communications interface is typically small
and relatively low bandwidth. This design enables the
processes/modules to handle interactions with the envi-
ronment asynchronously, while minimizing interactions
with one another. Typically, this decreases overall sys-
tem complexity and increases overall reliability.
Often, system decomposition is hierarchical – mod-
ular components are themselves built on top of other
modular components. Architectures that explicitly sup-
port this type of layered decomposition reduce system
complexity through abstraction. However, while hierar-
chical decomposition of robotic systems is generally re-
garded as a desirable quality, debate continues over the
dimensions along which to decompose. Some architec-
tures [12.2] decompose along a temporal dimension –
each layer in the hierarchy operates at a characteris-
tic frequency an order of magnitude slower than the
layer below. In other architectures [12.3–6], the hier-
archy is based on task abstraction – tasks at one layer
are achieved by invoking a set of tasks at lower lev-
els. In some situations, decomposition based on spatial
abstraction may be more useful, such as when dealing
with both local and global navigation [12.7]. The main
point is that different applications need to decompose

Robotic Systems Architectures and Programming
12.2 History
285
Part A | 12.2
problems in different ways, and architectural styles can
often be found to accommodate those different needs.
12.1.3 Software Development Tools
While signiﬁcant beneﬁt accrues from designing sys-
tems using well-deﬁned architectural styles, many ar-
chitectural styles also have associated software tools
that facilitate adhering to that style during implemen-
tation. These tools can take the form of libraries of
functions calls, specialized programming languages, or
graphical editors. The tools make the constraints of the
architectural style explicit, while hiding the complexity
of the underlying concepts.
For instance, inter-process communication libraries,
such as common object request broker architecture
(CORBA) [12.8] and inter-process communication
(IPC) package [12.9], make it easy to implement
message passing styles, such as client–server and
publish–subscribe, respectively. Languages, such as
Subsumption [12.10] and Skills [12.11] facilitate the
development of data-driven, real-time behaviors, while
languages such as the execution support language
(ESL) [12.12] and the the plan execution interchange
language (PLEXIL) [12.13] provide support for reli-
ably achieving higher-level tasks. Graphical editors,
such as found in ControlShell [12.14], Labview [12.15]
and open robot controller computer aided design (OR-
CCAD) [12.6], provide constrained ways to assemble
systems, and then automatically generate code that ad-
heres to the architectural style.
In each case, the tools facilitate the development
of software in the given style and, more importantly,
make it impossible (or, at least, very difﬁcult) to vi-
olate the constraints of that architectural style. The
result is that systems implemented using such tools are
typically easier to implement, understand, debug, ver-
ify, and maintain. They also tend to be more reliable,
since the tools provide well-engineered capabilities for
commonly needed control constructs, such as message
passing, interfacing with actuators and sensors, and
handling concurrent tasks.
12.2 History
Robot architectures and programming began in the
late 1960s with the Shakey robot at Stanford Univer-
sity [12.16] (Fig. 12.1). Shakey had a camera, a range
ﬁnder, and bump sensors, and was connected to DEC
PDP-10 and PDP-15 computers via radio and video
links. Shakey’s architecture was decomposed into three
functional elements: sensing, planning, and execut-
ing [12.17]. The sensing system translated the camera
image into an internal world model. The planner took
the internal world model and a goal and generated
a plan (i. e., a series of actions) that would achieve
the goal. The executor took the plan and sent the ac-
tions to the robot. This approach has been called the
sense–plan–act (SPA) paradigm (Fig. 12.2). Its main ar-
chitectural features are that sensing ﬂowed into a world
model, which was then used by the planner, and that
plan was executed without directly using the sensors
that created the model. For many years, robotic control
architectures and programming focused almost exclu-
sively on the SPA paradigm.
12.2.1 Subsumption
In the early 1980s, it became apparent that the SPA
paradigm had problems. First, planning in any real-
world domain took a long time, and the robot would
be blocked, waiting for planning to complete. Second,
and more importantly, execution of a plan without in-
volving sensing was dangerous in a dynamic world.
Several new robot control architecture paradigms be-
Fig. 12.1 Shakey (after [12.18])
Sensors
Perception
Modeling
Planning
Task execution
Motor control
Actuators
Fig. 12.2 The
sense–plan–act
(SPA)
paradigm
(af-
ter [12.3], with permission)

Part A | 12.2
286
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Heading
Heading
Heading
Halt
Encoders
Heading
Wander
Feelforce
Force
Runaway
Turn
Forward
Map
Collide
Avoid
Sonar
Robot
Robot
Robot
Fig. 12.3 Example of the Subsumption architecture (after [12.3])
gan to emerge, including reactive planning, in which
plans were generated quickly and relied more directly
on sensed information instead of internal models [12.4,
19]. The most inﬂuential work, however, was the sub-
sumption architecture of Brooks [12.3]. A subsumption
architecture is built from layers of interacting ﬁnite-
state machines – each connecting sensors to actua-
tors directly (Fig. 12.3). These ﬁnite-state machines
were called behaviors (leading some to call Subsump-
tion behavior-based or behavioral robotics [12.20]; see
also Chap. 38). Since multiple behaviors could be ac-
tive at any one time, Subsumption had an arbitration
mechanism that enabled higher-level behaviors to over-
ride signals from lower-level behaviors. For example,
the robot might have a behavior that simply drives
the robot in random directions. This behavior is al-
ways active and the robot is always driving somewhere.
A second, higher-level behavior could take sensor in-
put, detect obstacles, and steer the robot away from
them. It is also always active. In an environment with
no obstacles, the higher-level behavior never generates
a signal. However, if it detects an obstacle it overrides
the lower-level behavior and steers the robot away. As
soon as the obstacle is gone (and the higher-level be-
havior stops sending signals), the lower-level behavior
gets control again. Multiple, interacting layers of behav-
iors could be built to produce more and more complex
robots.
Many robots were built using the subsumption ap-
proach – most at MIT [12.21–23]. They were quite
successful. Whereas SPA robots were slow and pon-
derous, Subsumption robots were fast and reactive.
A dynamic world did not bother them because they
constantly sensed the world and reacted to it. These
robots scampered around like insects or small rodents.
Several behavioral architectures arose in addition to
Subsumption, often with different arbitration schemes
for combining the outputs of behaviors [12.24, 25].
A popular example of behavior-based architectures
is Arkin’s motor-control schemas [12.26]. In this bi-
ologically inspired approach, motor and perceptual
schemas [12.27] are dynamically connected to one
another. The motor schemas generate response vec-
tors based on the outputs of the perceptual schemas,
which are then combined in a manner similar to po-
tential ﬁelds [12.28]. To achieve more complex tasks,
the autonomous robot architecture (AuRA) architec-
ture [12.29, 30] added a navigation planner and a plan
sequencer, based on ﬁnite-state acceptors (FSAs), to the
reactive schemas.
However, behavior-based robots soon reached lim-
its in their capabilities. It proved very difﬁcult to
compose behaviors to achieve long-range goals and
it proved almost impossible to optimize robot behav-
ior. For example, a behavior-based robot that delivered
mail in an ofﬁce building could easily be built by sim-
ply wandering around the ofﬁce building and having
behaviors looking for rooms and then overriding the
wandering and entering the ofﬁce. It was much more
difﬁcult to use the behavioral style of architecture to
design a system that reasoned about the day’s mail to
visit the ofﬁces in an optimal order to minimize delivery
time. In essence, robots needed the planning capabili-
ties of the early architectures wedded to the reactivity
of the behavior-based architectures. This realization led
to the development of layered, or tiered, robot control
architectures.
12.2.2 Layered Robot Control Architectures
One of the ﬁrst steps towards the integration of reac-
tivity and deliberation was the reactive action packages

Robotic Systems Architectures and Programming
12.2 History
287
Part A | 12.2
(RAPs) system created by Firby. In his thesis [12.31],
we see the ﬁrst outline of an integrated, three-layer ar-
chitecture. The middle layer of that architecture, and
the subject of the thesis, was the RAPs system. Firby
also speculated on the form and function of the other
two tiers, speciﬁcally with the idea of integrating classic
deliberative methods with the ideas of the emerging sit-
uated reasoning community, but those layers were never
implemented. Later, Firby would integrate RAPs with
a continuous low-level control layer [12.32].
Independently
and
concurrently,
Bonasso
at
MITRE [12.33] devised an architecture that began at
the bottom layer with robot behaviors programmed
in the Rex language as synchronous circuits [12.34].
These Rex machines guaranteed consistent semantics
between the agent’s internal states and those of the
world. The middle layer was a conditional sequencer
implemented in the goal as parallel programs (GAPPs)
language [12.35], which would continuously activate
and deactivate the Rex skills until the robot’s task was
complete. This sequencer based on GAPPs was ap-
pealing because it could be synthesized through more
traditional planning techniques [12.36]. This work
culminated in the three tiers (3T) architecture (named
after its three tiers of interacting control processes –
planning, sequencing, and real-time control), which
has been used on many generations of robots [12.37].
Architectures similar to 3T (Fig. 12.4) have been
developed subsequently. One example is a three layer
architecture for navigating through intricate situations
(ATLANTIS) [12.38], which leaves much more control
at the sequencing tier. In ATLANTIS, the delibera-
tive tier must be speciﬁcally called by the sequencing
tier. A third example is Saridis’ intelligent control ar-
chitecture [12.39]. The architecture begins with the
servo systems available on a given robot and aug-
ments them to integrate the execution algorithms of the
next level, using VxWorks and the VME (Versa Mod-
ule Europa) bus. The next level consists of a set of
coordinating routines for each lower subsystem, e.g.,
vision, arm motion, and navigation. These are im-
plemented in Petri net transducers (PNTs), a type of
scheduling mechanism, and activated by a dispatcher
connected to the organizational level. The organiza-
tional level is a planner implemented as a Boltzmann
neural network. Essentially the neural network ﬁnds
a sequence of actions that will match the required com-
mand received as text input, and then the dispatcher
executes each of these steps via the network of PNT
coordinators.
The LAAS architecture for autonomous systems
(LAAS) is a three-layered architecture that includes
software tools to support development/programming at
each layer [12.40]. The lowest layer (functional) con-
Planning
Executive
Behavioral
control
Persistent state
and choices
Memory of
immediate actions
Limited state
World
Memory
Task 1
  Subtask
  Subtask
Task 2
Task 3
Interpreter
Fig. 12.4 Prototype three-tiered architecture
sists of a network of modules, which are dynamically
parameterized control and perceptual algorithms. Mod-
ules are written in the generator of modules (GenoM)
language, which produces standardized templates that
facilitate the integration of modules with one another.
Unlike most other three-layered architectures, the ex-
ecutive layer is fairly simple – it is purely reactive
and does no task decomposition. It serves mainly as
a bridge – receiving task sequences from the highest
layer and selecting and parameterizing tasks to send
to the functional layer. The executive is written in the
Kheops language, which automatically generates deci-
sion networks that can be formally veriﬁed. At the top,
the decision layer consists of a planner, implemented
using the indexed time table (IxTeT) temporal plan-
ner [12.41, 42], and a supervisor, implemented using
procedural reasoning system (PRS) [12.43, 44]. The su-
pervisor is similar to the executive layer of other three-
layered architectures – it decomposes tasks, chooses
alternative methods for achieving tasks, and monitors
execution. By combining the planner and supervisor
in one layer, LAAS achieves a tighter connection be-
tween the two, enabling more ﬂexibility in when, and
how, replanning occurs. The LAAS architecture actu-
ally allows for multiple decisional layers at increasingly
higher levels of abstraction, such as a high-level mission
layer and a lower-level task layer.
Remote agent is an architecture for the autonomous
control of spacecraft [12.45]. It actually consists of
four layers – a control (behavioral) layer, an execu-
tive, a planner/scheduler, and mode identiﬁcation and
recovery (MIR) that combines fault detection and re-
covery. The control layer is the traditional spacecraft
real-time control system. The executive is the core of

Part A | 12.2
288
Part A
Robotics Foundations
the architecture – it decomposes, selects, and moni-
tors task execution, performs fault recovery, and does
resource management, turning devices on and off at ap-
propriate times to conserve limited spacecraft power.
The planner/scheduler is a batch process that takes
goals, an initial (projected) state, and currently sched-
uled activities, and produces plans that include ﬂexible
ranges on start and end times of tasks. The plan also in-
cludes a task to reinvoke the planner to produce the next
plan segment. An important part of the remote agent
is conﬁguration management – conﬁguring hardware
to support tasks and monitoring that the hardware re-
mains in known, stable states. The role of conﬁguration
management is split between the executive, which uses
reactive procedures, and MIR, which uses declarative
models of the spacecraft and deliberative algorithms to
determine how to reconﬁgure the hardware in response
to detected faults [12.46].
The Syndicate architecture [12.47] extends the 3T
model to multirobot coordination (Chap. 51). In this
architecture, each layer interfaces not only with the lay-
ers above and below, as usual, but also with the layers
of the other robots at the same level (Fig. 12.5). In
this way, distributed control loops can be designed at
multiple levels of abstraction. The version of Syndicate
in [12.48] used a distributed market-based approach for
task allocation at the planning layer.
Other noteworthy multitiered architectures have ap-
peared in the literature. The National Bureau of Stan-
dards (NBS) developed for the Aeronautics and Space
Agency (NASA) the NASA/NBS standard reference
model (NASREM) [12.2, 49], later named real-time
control system (RCS), was an early reference model
for telerobotic control (Fig. 12.6). It is a many-tiered
model in which each layer has the same general struc-
ture, but operates at increasingly lower frequency as
it moves from the servo level to the reasoning lev-
els. With the exception of maintaining a global world
Behavioral
control
Executive
Planning
Behavioral
control
Executive
Planning
Behavioral
control
Executive
Planning
Fig. 12.5 The Syndicate multirobot architecture
model, NASREM, in its original inception, provided
for all the data and control paths that are present in
architectures such as 3T, but NASREM was a refer-
ence model, not an implementation. The subsequent
implementations of NASREM followed primarily the
traditional sense–plan–act approach and were mainly
applied to telerobotic applications, as opposed to au-
tonomous robots. A notable exception was the early
work of Blidberg/Chappell [12.50].
While three-layered robot architectures are very
popular, various two-layered architectures have been
investigated by researchers. The coupled layered archi-
tecture for robot autonomy (CLARAty) was designed
to provide reusable software for NASA’s space robots,
especially planetary rovers [12.52, 53]. CLARAty con-
sists of a functional and a decision layer. The functional
layer is a hierarchy of object-oriented algorithms that
provide more and more abstract interfaces to the robot,
such as motor control, vehicle control, sensor-based
navigation, and mobile manipulation. Each object pro-
vides a generic interface that is hardware independent,
so that the same algorithms can run on different hard-
ware. The decision layer combines planning and ex-
ecutive capabilities. Similar to the LAAS architecture,
SP4
VJ4
WM4
WM3
WM2
WM1
Environment
BG4
SP3
VJ3
BG3
SP2
VJ2
BG2
SP1
VJ1
BG1
Sensors
Actuators
Value judgement
world modeling
Sensory
processing
Behavior
generating
Fig. 12.6 The real-time control system (RCS) reference ar-
chitecture (after [12.51])

Robotic Systems Architectures and Programming
12.3 Architectural Components
289
Part A | 12.3
this is done to provide for tighter coordination between
planning and execution, enabling continual replanning
in response to dynamic contingencies.
Closed-loop execution
and
recovery
(CLEaR)
[12.54] is one instantiation of the CLARAty de-
cision layer. CLEaR combines the continuous ac-
tivity scheduling, planning, execution and replan-
ning (CASPER) repair-based planner [12.55] and
the task description language (TDL) executive lan-
guage [12.56]. CLEaR provides a tightly coupled ap-
proach to goal- and event-driven behavior. At its heart
is the capability to do fast, continuous replanning, based
on frequent state and resource updates from execution
monitoring. This enables the planner to react to many
exceptional situations, which can be important in cases
where there are many tasks, few resources, and sig-
niﬁcant uncertainty. In CLEaR, both the planning and
executive components are able to handle resource con-
ﬂicts and exceptional situations – heuristics are used to
decide which component should be involved in a given
situation. The onboard autonomous science investiga-
tion system (OASIS) system [12.57] extends CLEaR to
include science data analysis so that the architecture
can be driven by opportunistic science-related goals
(such as ﬁnding unusual rocks or formations). OASIS
is planner-centric, releasing tasks to the executive com-
ponent just a few seconds before their scheduled start
times.
The cooperative intelligent real-time control archi-
tecture (CIRCA) is a two-layered architecture con-
cerned with guaranteeing reliable behavior [12.58, 59].
It embodies the notion of bounded reactivity – an ac-
knowledgement that the resources of the robot are not
always sufﬁcient to guarantee that all tasks can be
achieved. CIRCA consists of a real-time system (RTS)
and an artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) system (AIS) that are
largely independent. The RTS executes a cyclic sched-
ule of test action pairs (TAPs) that have guaranteed
worst-case behavior in terms of sensing the environ-
ment and conditionally acting in response. It is the
responsibility of the AIS to create a schedule that is
guaranteed to prevent catastrophic failures from occur-
ring, while running in hard real time. The AIS does this
by planning over a state-transition graph that includes
transitions for actions, exogenous events, and the pas-
sage of time (e.g., if the robot waits too long, bad things
can happen). The AIS tests each plan (set of TAPs) to
see if it can actually be scheduled. If not, it alters the
planning model, either by eliminating tasks (based on
goal prioritization) or by changing parameters of be-
haviors (e.g., reducing the robot’s velocity). The AIS
continues this until it ﬁnds a plan that can be success-
fully scheduled, in which case it downloads the new
plan to the RTS in an atomic operation.
Like CIRCA, ORCCAD is a two-layered architec-
ture that is concerned with guaranteed reliability [12.6,
60]. In the case of ORCCAD, this guarantee is achieved
through formal veriﬁcation techniques. Robot tasks
(lower-level behaviors) and robot procedures (higher-
level actions) are deﬁned in higher-level languages that
are then translated into the Esterel programming lan-
guage [12.61], for logical veriﬁcation, or the Timed-
Argus language [12.62], for temporal veriﬁcation. The
veriﬁcation is geared toward liveness and safety prop-
erties, as well as verifying lack of contention for
resources.
12.3 Architectural Components
We will take the three-tiered architecture as the pro-
totype for the components discussed in this chapter.
Figure 12.4 shows a typical three-tiered architecture.
The lowest tier (or layer) is behavioral control and is
the layer tied most closely to sensors and actuators.
The second tier is the executive layer and is respon-
sible for choosing the current behaviors of the robot
to achieve a task. The highest tier is the task-planning
layer and it is responsible for achieving long-term goals
of the robot within resource constraints. Using the ex-
ample of an ofﬁce delivery robot, the behavioral layer
is responsible for moving the robot around rooms and
hallways, for avoiding obstacles, for opening doors, etc.
The executive layer coordinates the behavioral layer to
achieve tasks such as leaving a room, going to an ofﬁce,
etc. The task-planning layer is responsible for decid-
ing the order of deliveries to minimize time, taking into
account delivery priorities, scheduling, recharging, etc.
The task-planning layer sends tasks (e.g., exit the room,
go to ofﬁce 110) to the executive. All these tiers need to
work together and exchange information. The next sec-
tion deals with the problem of connecting components
to each other. We then discuss each component of the
three-tiered prototype architecture in detail.
12.3.1 Connecting Components
All of the architecture components that have been dis-
cussed in this chapter need to communicate with each
other. They need to both exchange data and send com-
mands. The choice of how components communicate
(often called the middleware) is one of the most im-

Part A | 12.3
290
Part A
Robotics Foundations
portant and most constraining of the many decisions
a robot architecture designer will make. From previous
experience, a great deal of the problems and a majority
of the debugging time in developing robot architectures
have to do with communication between components.
In addition, once a communication mechanism is cho-
sen it becomes extremely difﬁcult to change, so early
decisions persist for many years. Many developers roll
their own communication protocols, usually built on top
of Unix sockets. While this allows for customization
of messages, it fails to take advantage of the reliabil-
ity, efﬁciency, and ease of use that externally available
communication packages provide. There are two ba-
sic approaches to communication: client–server and
publish–subscribe.
Client–Server
In a client–server (also called a point-to-point) commu-
nication protocol, components talk directly with other
components. A good example of this is remote pro-
cedure call (RPC) protocols in which one component
(the client) can call functions and procedures of an-
other component (the server). A modern, and popular,
variation on this is the common object request broker
architecture (CORBA). CORBA allows for one com-
ponent to call object methods that are implemented by
another component. All method calls are deﬁned in an
interface deﬁnition language (IDL) ﬁle that is language
independent. Every component uses the same IDL to
generate code that compiles with component to handle
communication. The advantage of this is that, when an
IDL ﬁle is changed, all components that use that IDL
can be recompiled automatically (by using make or sim-
ilar code conﬁguration tools). CORBA object request
brokers (ORBs) are available for most major object-
oriented languages. Although free ORBs are available,
many commercial ORBs offer additional features and
support. One disadvantage of CORBA is that it intro-
duces quite a bit of additional code into applications.
Some competitors have tried to address this issue, such
as the internet communications engine (ICE), which
has its own version of an IDL ﬁle called the speciﬁca-
tion language for ICE (SLICE). The biggest advantage
of a client–server protocol is that the interfaces are
very clearly deﬁned in advance and everyone knows
when the interface has changed. Another advantage is
that it allows for a distributed approach to communica-
tion with no central module that must distribute data.
A disadvantage of client–server protocols is that they
introduce signiﬁcant overhead, especially if many com-
ponents need the same information. It should be noted
that CORBA and ICE also have a broadcast mechanism
(called an event channel, or the notiﬁcation service, in
CORBA).
Publish–Subscribe
In a publish–subscribe (also called a broadcast) proto-
col, a component publishes data and any other com-
ponent can subscribe to that data. Typically, a cen-
tralized process routes data between publishers and
subscribers. In a typical architecture, most components
both publish information and subscribe to information
published by other components. There are several exist-
ing publish–subscribe middleware solutions. A popular
one for robotics is the real-time innovations’ (RTI)
data distribution service (DDS), formerly the network
data distribution service (NDDS) [12.63]. Another pop-
ular publish–subscribe paradigm is IPC developed at
Carnegie Mellon University [12.9]. Many publish-sub-
scribe protocols are converging on using extensible
markup language (XML) descriptions to deﬁne the data
being published, with the added convenience of trans-
mitting XML over HTTP, which allows for signiﬁcant
interoperability with Web-based applications. Publish–
subscribe protocols have a large advantage in being
simple to use and having low overhead. They are es-
pecially useful when it is unknown how many different
components might need a piece of data (e.g., multiple
user interfaces). Also, components do not get bogged
down with repeated requests for information from many
different sources. Publish–subscribe protocols are of-
ten more difﬁcult to debug because the syntax of the
message is often hidden in a simple string type. Thus
problems are not revealed until runtime when a com-
ponent tries, and fails, to parse an incoming message.
Publish–subscribe protocols are also not as readable
when it comes to sending commands from one mod-
ule to another. Instead of calling an explicit method or
function with parameters, a command is issued by pub-
lishing a message with the command and parameters
in it and then having that message be parsed by a sub-
scriber. Finally, publish–subscribe protocols often use
a single central server to dispatch messages to all sub-
scribers, providing a single point of failure and potential
bottleneck.
JAUS
Recently, a standard has emerged in the defense
robotics community not only for a communication pro-
tocol but also for deﬁnitions of messages that are sent
via that communication protocol. The joint architecture
for unmanned systems (JAUS) deﬁnes a set of reusable
messages and interfaces that can be used to command
autonomous systems [12.64–66]. These reusable com-
ponents reduce the cost of integrating new hardware
components into autonomous systems. Reuse also al-
lows for components developed for one autonomous
system to be used by another autonomous system. JAUS
has two components: a domain model and a reference

Robotic Systems Architectures and Programming
12.3 Architectural Components
291
Part A | 12.3
architecture. The domain model is a representation of
the unmanned systems’ functions and information. It
contains a description of the system’s functional and in-
formational capabilities. The former includes models of
the system’s maneuvering, navigational, sensing, pay-
load, and manipulation capabilities. The latter includes
models of the system’s internal data, such as maps
and system status. The reference architecture provides
a well-deﬁned set of messages. Messages cause actions
to commence, information to be exchanged, and events
to occur. Everything that occurs in a JAUS system is
precipitated by messages. This strategy makes JAUS
a component-based, message-passing architecture.
The JAUS reference architecture deﬁnes a system
hierarchy, as shown in Fig. 12.7. The topology deﬁnes
the system as the collection of vehicles, operator control
units (OCUs), and infrastructure necessary to provide
the full robotic capability. Subsystems are individual
units (e.g., vehicles or OCUs) in the system. Nodes
deﬁne a distinct processing capability within the archi-
tecture and route JAUS messages to components. Com-
ponents provide the different execution capabilities and
respond directly to command messages. Components
might be sensors (e.g., a SICK laser or a vision sensor),
actuators (a manipulator or a mobile base) or payloads
(weapons or task sensors). The topology (the layout of
particular system, subsystems, nodes, and components)
is deﬁned by the system implementers based on task
requirements.
At the core of JAUS is a set of well-deﬁned mes-
sages. JAUS supports the following message types.

Command: Initiate mode changes or actions

Query: Used to solicit information from a compo-
nent

Inform: Response to a query

Event set up: Passes parameters to set up an event

Event notiﬁcation: Sent when the event happens
JAUS has about 30 predeﬁned messages that can
be used to control robots. There are messages for con-
Comp2, Inst1
Comp2, Inst2
CompN, Inst1
Comp1, Inst1
System
Node
Node
Node
Node
Subsystem
Subsystem
Subsystem
Fig. 12.7 The JAUS reference ar-
chitecture topology (after JAUS
Reference Architecture docu-
ment [12.64])
trol of a robotic vehicle. For example, the global vector
driver message performs closed-loop control of the de-
sired global heading, altitude, and speed of a mobile
vehicle. There are also sensor messages such as global
pose sensor, which distributes the global position and
orientation of the vehicle. There are also manipulation
messages in JAUS. For example, the set joint positions
message sets the desired joint position values. The set
tool point message speciﬁes the coordinates of the end-
effector tool point in terms of the coordinate system at-
tached to the end-effector.
JAUS also has user-deﬁnable messages. Messages
have headers that follow a speciﬁc format and include
message type, destination address (e.g., system, subsys-
tem, node, and component), priority, etc. While JAUS
is primarily point to point, JAUS messages can also be
marked as broadcast and distributed to all components.
JAUS also deﬁnes coordinate systems for navigation
and manipulation to ensure all components understand
any coordinates sent to them.
12.3.2 Behavioral Control
Behavioral control represents the lowest level of con-
trol in a robot architecture. It directly connects sensors
and actuators. While these are typically hand-crafted
functions written in C or CCC, there have been spe-
cialized languages developed for behavioral control,
including ALFA [12.67], Behavioral Language [12.68],
and Rex [12.69]. It is at this level that traditional con-
trol theory (e.g., proportional–integral–derivative (PID)
functions, Kalman ﬁlters, etc.) resides. In architectures
such as 3T, the behavioral layer functions as a Brook-
sian machine – that is, the layer is composed of a small
number of behaviors (also called skills) that perceive
the environment and carry out the actions of the robot.
Example
Consider an ofﬁce delivery robot that operates in a typ-
ical ofﬁce building. The behavioral control layer con-

Part A | 12.3
292
Part A
Robotics Foundations
tains the control functions necessary to move around in
the building and carry out delivery tasks. Assuming the
robot has an a priori map of the building, some possible
behaviors for this robot include:
1. Move to location while avoiding obstacles
2. Move down hallway while avoiding obstacles
3. Find a door
4. Find a door knob
5. Grasp a door knob
6. Turn a door knob
7. Go through door
8. Determine location
9. Find ofﬁce number
10. Announce delivery.
Each of these behaviors ties sensors (vision, range
sensing, etc.) to actuators (wheel motors, manipulator
motors, etc.) in a tight loop. In architectures such as
Subsumption, all behaviors are running concurrently
with a hierarchical control scheme inhibiting the out-
puts of certain behaviors. In AuRA [12.30], behaviors
are combined using potential functions. Other architec-
tures [12.25, 69] use explicit arbitration mechanisms to
choose amongst potentially conﬂicting behaviors.
In architectures such as 3T [12.37], not all of the be-
haviors are active at the same time. Typically, only a few
behaviors that do not conﬂict would be active at a time
(e.g., behaviors 2 and 9 in the example above). The ex-
ecutive layer (Sect. 12.3.3) is responsible for activating
and deactivating behaviors to achieve higher-level tasks
and to avoid conﬂicts between two behaviors competing
for the same resource (e.g., an actuator).
Situated Behaviors
An important aspect of these behaviors is that they be
situated. This means that the behavior works only in
very speciﬁc situations. For example, behavior 2 above
moves down a hallway, but this is appropriate only
when the robot is situated in a hallway. Similarly, be-
havior 5, which grasps a door knob, is appropriate only
when the robot is within grasping distance of a door
knob. The behavior is not responsible for putting the
robot in the particular situation. However, it should rec-
ognize that the situation is not appropriate and signal as
such.
Cognizant Failure
A key requirement for behaviors is that they know when
they are not working. This is called cognizant fail-
ure [12.70]. For example, behavior 5 in our example
(grasping the door knob) should not continually grasp at
air if it is failing. More succinctly, the behavior should
not continue to bang its head against the wall. A com-
mon problem with early Subsumption robots is that the
behaviors did not know they were failing and contin-
ued to take actions that were not resulting in progress.
It is not the job of the behavioral control layer to decide
what to do in a failure situation; it is only necessary to
announce that the behavior has failed and halt activity.
Implementation Constraints
The behavioral control layer is designed to bring the
speed and reactivity of Subsumption to robot control.
For this reason, the behaviors in the behavioral control
layer need to follow the philosophies of Subsumption.
In particular, the algorithms used for behaviors should
be constant in state and time complexity. There should
be little or no search at the behavioral control level,
and little iteration. Behaviors should simply be trans-
fer functions that take in signals (from sensors or other
behaviors) and send out signals (to actuators or other
behaviors), and repeat these several times a second.
This will allow for reactivity to changing environments.
More controversial is how much state should be al-
lowed at the behavioral level. Brooks famously said
several years ago to use the world as its own best
model [12.68] – that is, instead of maintaining inter-
nal models of the world and querying those models,
the robot should instead directly sense the world to get
its data. State such as maps, models, etc. belong at the
higher levels of the three-tiered prototype architecture,
not at the behavioral control layer. Certain exceptions,
such as maintaining state for data ﬁltering calculations,
could be made on a case-by-case basis. Gat [12.71] ar-
gues that any state kept at the behavioral layer should
be ephemeral and limited.
12.3.3 Executive
The executive layer is the interface between the nu-
merical behavioral control and the symbolic planning
layers. The executive is responsible for translating high-
level plans into low-level behaviors, invoking behav-
iors at the appropriate times, monitoring execution, and
handling exceptions. Some executives also allocate and
monitor resource usage, although that functionality is
more commonly performed by the planning layer.
Example
Continuing the example of an ofﬁce delivery robot, the
main high-level task would be to deliver mail to a given
ofﬁce. The executive would decompose this task into
a set of subtasks. It may use a geometric path planner
to determine the sequence of corridors to move down
and intersections at which to turn. If there are door-
ways along the route, a task would be inserted to open
and pass through the door. At the last corridor, the ex-
ecutive would add a concurrent task that looks for the

Robotic Systems Architectures and Programming
12.3 Architectural Components
293
Part A | 12.3
ofﬁce number. The ﬁnal subtasks would be to announce
that the person has mail and to concurrently monitor
whether the mail has been picked up. If it is not picked
up after some period of time, an exception would be
triggered that invokes some recovery action (perhaps
announcing again, perhaps checking to make sure the
robot is at the correct ofﬁce, perhaps notifying the plan-
ning layer to reschedule the delivery for a later time).
Capabilities
The example above illustrates many of the capabilities
of the executive layer. First, the executive decomposes
high-level tasks (goals) into low-level tasks (behav-
iors). This is typically done in a procedural fashion: the
knowledge encoded in the executive describes how to
achieve tasks, rather than describing what needs to be
done and having the executive ﬁgure out the how by
itself. Sometimes, though, the executive may also use
specialized planning techniques, such as the route plan-
ner used in the example above. The decomposition is
typically a hierarchical task tree (Fig. 12.8), with the
leaves of the task tree being invocations and parameter-
izations of behaviors.
Besides decomposing tasks into subtasks, execu-
tives add and maintain temporal constraints between
tasks (usually between sibling tasks only, but some ex-
ecutive languages permit temporal constraints between
any pair of tasks). The most common constraints are se-
rial and concurrent, but most executives support more
expressive constraint languages, such as having one
task begin 10 s after another one starts or having one
task end when another ends.
DeliverMail
Speak
Center
OnDoor
LookFor
Door
Move
Center
OnDoor
Navigate
to
Monitor
Pickup
Fig. 12.8 Hierarchical task tree for mail-delivery task
(lozenge nodes are interior; rectangular nodes are leaves;
hexagonal node is an execution monitor; solid arrows are
parent–child relationships; dashed arrows are sequential
constraints)
The executive is responsible for dispatching tasks
when their temporal constraints are satisﬁed. In some
executives, tasks may also specify resources (e.g., the
robot’s motors or camera) that must be available before
the task can be dispatched. As with behaviors, arbitrat-
ing between conﬂicting tasks can be a problem. In the
case of executives, however, this arbitration is typically
either programmed in explicitly (e.g., a rule that says
what to do in cases where the robot’s attempt to avoid
obstacles takes it off the preferred route) or handled us-
ing priorities (e.g., recharging is more important than
mail delivery).
The ﬁnal two important executive capabilities are
execution monitoring and error recovery. One may
wonder why these capabilities are needed if the un-
derlying behaviors are reliable. There are two reasons.
First, as described in Sect. 12.3.2, the behaviors are sit-
uated, and the situation may change unexpectedly. For
instance, a behavior may be implemented assuming that
a person is available to pick up the mail, but that may
not always be the case. Second, in trying to achieve
some goal, the behavior may move the robot into a state
that is unexpected by the executive. For instance, people
may take advantage of the robot’s obstacle avoidance
behavior to herd it into a closet. While the behavior
layer may, in fact, keep the robot safe in such situations,
the executive needs to detect the situation in order to get
the robot back on track.
Typically, execution monitoring is implemented as
a concurrent task that either analyzes sensor data di-
rectly or activates a behavior that sends a signal to the
executive when the monitored situation arises. These
correspond to polling and interrupt-driven monitors, re-
spectively.
Executives support various responses to monitors
being triggered. A monitor may spawn subtasks that
handle the situation, it may terminate already spawned
subtasks, it may cause the parent task to fail, or it may
raise an exception. The latter two responses involve the
error recovery (also called exception handling) capa-
bility. Many executives have tasks return status values
(success or failure) and allow parent tasks to execute
conditionally based on the return values. Other ex-
ecutives use a hierarchical exception mechanism that
throws named exceptions to ancestor nodes in the task
tree. The closest task that has registered a handler for
that exception tries to handle it; if it cannot, it rethrows
the exception up the tree. This mechanism, which is in-
spired by the exception handling mechanisms of CCC,
Java, and Lisp, is strictly more expressive than the re-
turn-value mechanism, but it is also much more difﬁcult
to design systems using that approach, due to the non-
local nature of the control ﬂow.

Part A | 12.3
294
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Implementation Constraints
The underlying formalism for most executives is a hi-
erarchical ﬁnite-state controller. Petri nets [12.72] are
a popular choice for representing executive functions.
In addition, various languages have been developed
speciﬁcally to assist programmers in implementing
executive-level capabilities. We brieﬂy discuss as-
pects of several of these languages: reactive action
packages (RAPs) [12.4, 31], the procedural reasoning
system (PRS) [12.43, 44], the execution support lan-
guage (ESL) [12.12], the task description language
(TDL) [12.56], and the plan execution interchange lan-
guage (PLEXIL) [12.13].
These languages all share features and exhibit dif-
ferences. One distinction is whether the language is
stand-alone (RAPs, PRS, PLEXIL) or an extension of
an existing language (ESL is an extension of Common
Lisp; TDL is an extension of CCC). Stand-alone lan-
guages are typically easier to analyze and verify, but
extensions are more ﬂexible, especially with respect to
integration with legacy software. While stand-alone ex-
ecutive languages all support interfaces to user-deﬁned
functions. These interfaces are usually limited in ca-
pability (such as what types of data structures can be
passed around).
All of these executive languages provide support
for hierarchical decomposition of tasks into subtasks.
All except PLEXIL allow for recursive invocation of
tasks. RAPs, TDL, and PLEXIL have syntax that dis-
tinguishes leaf nodes of the task tree/graph from interior
nodes.
All these languages provide capabilities for express-
ing conditionals and iteration, although with RAPs and
PLEXIL these are not core-language constructs, but
must be expressed as combinations of other constructs.
Except for TDL, the languages all provide explicit sup-
port for encoding pre- and post-conditions of the tasks
and for specifying success criteria. With TDL, these
concepts must be programmed in, using more primi-
tive constructs. The stand-alone languages all enable
local variables to be deﬁned within a task description,
but provide for only limited computation with those
variables. Obviously, with extension languages the full
capability of the base language is available for deﬁning
tasks.
All the languages support the simple serial (se-
quential) and concurrent (parallel) temporal constraints
between tasks, as well as timeouts that can be speciﬁed
to trigger after waiting a speciﬁed amount of time. In
addition, TDL directly supports a wide range of tem-
poral constraints – one can specify constraints between
the start and end times of tasks (e.g., task B starts after
task A starts or task C ends after task D starts) as well
as metric constraints (e.g., task B starts 10 seconds after
task A ends or task C starts at 1pm). ESL and PLEXIL
support the signaling of events (e.g., when tasks tran-
sition to new states) that can be used to implement
similarly expressive types of constraints. In addition,
ESL and TDL support task termination based on the
occurrence of events (e.g., task B terminates when task
A starts).
The languages presented differ considerably in how
they deal with execution monitoring and exception han-
dling. ESL and TDL both provide explicit execution
monitoring constructs and support exceptions that are
thrown and then caught by registered handlers in a hi-
erarchical fashion. This type of exception handling is
similar to that used in CCC, Java, and Lisp. ESL and
TDL also support clean-up procedures that can be in-
voked when tasks are terminated. RAPs and PLEXIL
use return values to signal failure, and do not have hi-
erarchical exception handling. PLEXIL, though, does
support clean up procedures that are run when tasks
fail. PRS has support for execution monitoring, but not
exception handling. ESL and PRS support the notion
of resources that can be shared. Both provide support
for automatically preventing contention amongst tasks
for the resources. In the other executive languages, this
must be implemented separately (although there are
plans to extend PLEXIL in this area).
Finally, RAPs, PRS and ESL all include a symbolic
database (world model) that connects either directly
to sensors or to the behavior layer to maintain syn-
chrony with the real world. Queries to the database are
used to determine the truth of preconditions, to deter-
mine which methods are applicable, etc. PLEXIL has
the concept of a lookup that performs a similar func-
tion, although it is transparent to the task how this is
implemented (e.g., by a database lookup or by invok-
ing a behavior-level function). TDL leaves it up to the
programmer to specify how the tasks connect to the
world.
12.3.4 Planning
The planning component of our prototype layered ar-
chitecture is responsible for determining the long-range
activities of the robot based on high-level goals. Where
the behavioral control component is concerned with the
here-and-now and the executive is concerned with what
has just happened and what should happen next, the
planning component looks towards the future. In our
running example of an ofﬁce delivery robot, the plan-
ning component would look at the day’s deliveries, the
resources of the robot, and a map, and determine the op-
timal delivery routes and schedule, including when the
robot should recharge. The planning component is also
responsible for replanning when the situation changes.

Robotic Systems Architectures and Programming
12.3 Architectural Components
295
Part A | 12.3
For example, if an ofﬁce is locked, the planning compo-
nent would determine a new delivery schedule that puts
that ofﬁce’s delivery later in the day.
Types of Planning
Chapter 9 describes approaches to robot planning in de-
tail. Here, we summarize issues with respect to different
types of planners as they relate to layered architectures.
The two most common approaches used are hierar-
chical task net (HTN) planners and planner/schedulers.
HTN planners [12.73, 74] decompose tasks into sub-
tasks, in a manner similar to what many executives do.
The main differences are that HTN planners typically
operate at higher levels of abstraction, take resource uti-
lization into account, and have methods for dealing with
conﬂicts between tasks (e.g., tasks needing the same re-
sources, or one task negating a precondition needed by
another task). The knowledge needed by HTN planners
is typically fairly easy to specify, since one indicates
directly how tasks are to be achieved.
Planner/schedulers [12.75, 76] are useful in do-
mains where time and resources are limited. They
create high-level plans that schedule when tasks should
occur, but typically leave it to the executive to determine
exactly how to achieve the tasks. Planner/schedulers
typically work by laying out tasks on time lines, with
separate time lines for the various resources that are
available on the robot (motors, power, communication,
etc.). The knowledge needed by planner/schedulers
includes the goals that tasks achieve, the resources
they need, their duration, and any constraints between
tasks.
Many architectures provide for specialized planning
experts that are capable of solving particular prob-
lems efﬁciently. In particular, these include motion
planners, such as path planners and trajectory plan-
ners. Sometimes, the planning layer of the architecture
invokes these specialized planners directly; in other ar-
chitectural styles, the motion planners are part of the
lower levels of the architecture (the executive, or even
the behavioral layer). Where to put these specialized
planners is often a question of style and performance
(Sect. 12.5).
Additionally, some architectures provide for mul-
tiple planning layers [12.40, 45, 77]. Often, there is
a mission planning layer at the very top that plans
at a very abstract level, over relatively long periods
of time. This layer is responsible mainly for select-
ing which high-level goals are to be achieved over the
next period of time (and, in some cases, determining
in which order to achieve them) in order to maximize
some objective function (e.g., net reward). The lower
task planning layer is then responsible for determining
exactly how and when to achieve each goal. This break-
down is usually done for efﬁciency reasons, since it is
difﬁcult to plan simultaneously at both a detailed level
and over a long time horizon.
Integrating Planning and Execution
There are two main approaches to the integration of
the planning and execution components in robotic ar-
chitectures. The ﬁrst approach is that the planning
component is invoked as needed by the executive
and returns a plan. The planning component is then
dormant until called again. Architectures such as AT-
LANTIS [12.71] and Remote Agent [12.45] use this
approach, which requires that the executive either leave
enough time for planning to complete or that it safes
the system until planning is complete. In the Remote
Agent, for instance, a special planning task is explicitly
scheduled.
The second approach is that the planning compo-
nent sends high-level tasks down to the executive as
required and monitors the progress of those tasks. If
tasks fail, replanning is done immediately. In this ap-
proach, the planning component is always running and
always planning and replanning. Signals must pass in
real time between the planner and the executive to keep
them synchronized. Architectures such as 3T [12.37]
use this second approach. The ﬁrst approach is useful
when the system is relatively static, so that planning
can occur infrequently, at relatively predictable times.
The second approach is more suited to dynamic envi-
ronments, where replanning is more frequent and less
predictable.
Other decisions that need to be made when inte-
grating planning and execution are when to stop task
decomposition, where to monitor plan execution, and
how to handle exceptions. By planning all the way
down to primitive actions/behaviors, the planner has
a very good notion of what will happen during ex-
ecution, but at a price of much more computation.
Also, some task decompositions are easier to describe
procedurally (using an executive language) rather than
declaratively (using a planning language). Similarly,
monitoring at the executive level tends to be more ef-
ﬁcient, since the monitoring happens closer to the robot
sensors, but the planner may be able to use its more
global knowledge to detect exceptions earlier and/or
more accurately. With respect to handling exceptions,
executives can handle many on their own, at the price
of breaking the expectations used by the planner in
scheduling tasks. On the other hand, having exceptions
handled by the planner typically involves replanning,
which can be computationally expensive.
For all these integration issues, however, a middle
ground usually exists. For instance, one can choose to
decompose some tasks more deeply than others, or han-

Part A | 12.4
296
Part A
Robotics Foundations
dle certain exceptions in the executive and others in the
planner. In general, the right approach usually involves
a compromise and is determined by analyzing the do-
main in detail (Sect. 12.5).
12.4 Case Study – GRACE
In this section, we present the architecture of a fairly
complex autonomous mobile robot. Graduate robot at-
tending conference (GRACE) resulted from the efforts
of ﬁve research institutions (Carnegie Mellon, Naval
Research Laboratory, Northwestern University, Met-
rica, and Swarthmore College) to tackle the American
Association for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI) Robot
Challenge. The Challenge was for a robot to attend the
AAAI National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence as
a participant – the robot must ﬁnd the registration desk
(without knowing the layout of the convention center
beforehand), register for the conference, and then, af-
ter being provided with a map, ﬁnd its way to a given
location in time to give a technical talk about itself.
The architectural design of the robot was particu-
larly important given the complexity of the task and the
need to integrate techniques that had been previously
developed by the ﬁve institutions. These techniques
included localization in a dynamic environment, safe
navigation in the presence of moving people, path
planning, dynamic replanning, visual tracking of peo-
ple, signs and landmarks, gesture and face recognition,
speech recognition and natural language understanding,
speech generation, knowledge representation, and so-
cial interaction with people.
GRACE is built on top of an real world inter-
face (RWI) B21 base and has an expressive computer-
animated face projected on a ﬂat-panel liquid-crystal
display (LCD) screen (Fig. 12.9). Sensors that come
with the B21 include touch, infrared, and sonar sensors.
Fig. 12.9 The robot GRACE
Near the base is a SICK scanning laser range ﬁnder
that provides a 180° ﬁeld of view. In addition, GRACE
has several cameras, including a stereo camera head on
a pan–tilt unit (PTU) built by Metrica TRACLabs and
a single-color camera with pan–tilt–zoom capability,
built by Canon. GRACE can speak using a high-qual-
ity speech-generation software (Festival), and receive
speech responses using a wireless microphone head-
set (a Shure TC computer wireless transmitter/receiver
pair).
The behavioral layer of the architecture consisted of
individual processes that controlled particular pieces of
hardware. These programs provided abstract interfaces
to either control the hardware or return information
from sensors. To accommodate the different coding
styles of the various groups involved, both synchronous,
blocking and asynchronous, nonblocking calls were
supported by most of the interfaces (for the nonblock-
ing calls, the interfaces allowed programmers to specify
a callback function to be invoked when data was re-
turned). Interfaces at the behavioral level included robot
motion and localization (this interface also provided
laser information), speech recognition, speech genera-
tion, facial animation, color vision, and stereo vision
(Fig. 12.10).
The architecture used individual processes for each
of the behavioral capabilities, mainly because the un-
derlying code had been developed by different orga-
nizations. While having a large number of processes
run concurrently is somewhat inefﬁcient, trying to inte-
grate everything into a monolithic process was thought
to be too difﬁcult. In addition, the use of separate pro-
cesses facilitated development and debugging, since
one needed to run only those aspects of the system that
were being tested.
The executive layer consisted of separate programs
for achieving each subtask of the challenge – ﬁnding the
registration desk, riding the elevator, standing in line,
interacting with the person at the desk, navigating to the
talk, and giving the talk (Fig. 12.10). As is common in
many implemented robotic systems, the GRACE archi-
tecture did not have a planning layer – since the high-
level plan was ﬁxed and relatively straightforward, it
was coded explicitly. Several of the executive-layer pro-
grams were written using TDL (Sect. 12.3.3), which
facilitated concurrent control and monitoring of the var-
ious tasks.

Robotic Systems Architectures and Programming
12.4 Case Study – GRACE
297
Part A | 12.4
Navigate to
talk area
Stand
in line
Speech
understanding
Ride
elevator
Register
Give
talk
Motion and
localization
Stereo 
head
Canon
PTU/
Zoom
camera
Festival
(speech
generation)
LCD
display
Microphone
Stereo and 
gestures
Color
vision
Speech
recognition
Find
registration
area
Face
animation
B21 Base
and SICK
Executive
layer
Behavioral
layer
Fig. 12.10 GRACE’s architectural structure
One particularly involved task was ﬁnding the regis-
tration desk (recall that GRACE had no idea where the
booth was, or even what the convention center looked
like). TDL was used to create a ﬁnite-state machine that
allowed GRACE to maintain multiple goals, such as us-
ing an elevator to get to a particular ﬂoor and following
directions to ﬁnd the elevator (Fig. 12.11). The top-level
goal was to ﬁnd the registration desk. Intermediate sub-
goals were created as GRACE interacted with people
to determine the directions to the desk. If there were
no directions to follow, GRACE performed a random
walk until a person was detected using its laser scanner.
GRACE then engaged in conversation with the person
to obtain directions. GRACE could handle simple com-
mands, such as turn left and go forward ﬁve meters, as
well as higher-level instructions, such as take the ele-
vator and turn left at the next intersection. In addition,
GRACE could ask questions, such as am I at the regis-
tration desk? and is this the elevator? The TDL-based
ﬁnite-state machine was used to determine which inter-
actions were appropriate at various times and to prevent
the robot from getting confused.
Communication between processes used the in-
terprocess communication (IPC) messaging pack-
age [12.9, 78]. IPC supports both publish–subscribe
and client–server messaging, and enables complex data
structures to be passed transparently between processes.
One side beneﬁt of using IPC to communicate between
processes was the ability to log all message trafﬁc (both
message name and data content). This proved invalu-
able, at times, in determining why the system failed
Find
Stop
Destination
monitor
Got
directions?
Follow
directions
Ask for
directions
Find
human
There?
More?
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Found
Destination
Fig. 12.11 Finite-state machine for GRACE’s task for following di-
rections to the registration booth
to act as expected – did a process send out a message
with invalid data? Did it fail to send out a message in
a timely fashion? Was the receiving process blocked,
for some reason? Was there a timing issue? While wad-
ing through the message trafﬁc was often tedious, in

Part A | 12.5
298
Part A
Robotics Foundations
some cases it was the only way to catch intermittent
bugs.
In July 2002, GRACE successfully completed the
challenge at the Shaw Convention Centre in Edmonton,
Canada. The processes at the behavioral level gener-
ally worked as anticipated – this was largely attributed
to the fact that those modules were ported from previ-
ously developed (and hence well-tested) systems. While
generally functional, the executive-level processes had
more problems with off-nominal situations. This is
largely attributed to problems in sensor interpretation,
as well as mistaken assumptions about what the con-
vention center was going to look like (for instance,
it turned out that some of the barriers were made of
glass, which is largely invisible to the laser). Overall,
however, the architecture itself worked as expected, en-
abling a large body of complex software to be integrated
rather quickly and operate together effectively.
12.5 The Art of Robot Architectures
Designing a robot architecture is much more of an art
than a science. The goal of an architecture is to make
programming a robot easier, safer, and more ﬂexible.
Thus, the decisions made by a developer of a robot ar-
chitecture are inﬂuenced by their own prior experiences
(e.g., what programming languages they are familiar
with), their robot and its environment, and the tasks that
need to be performed. The choice of a robot architecture
should not be taken lightly, as it is the authors’ experi-
ences that early architectural decisions often persist for
years. Changing robot architectures is a difﬁcult propo-
sition and can set back progress while a great deal of
code is reimplemented.
The art of designing a robotic architecture starts
with a set of questions that the designer needs to ask.
These questions include:

What are the tasks the robot will be performing?
Are they long-term tasks? Short-term? User-initi-
ated? Robot-initiated? Are the tasks repetitive or
different across time?

What actions are necessary to perform the tasks?
How are those actions represented? How are those
actions coordinated? How fast do actions need to be
selected/changed? At what speed do each of the ac-
tions need to run in order to keep the robot safe?

What data is necessary to do the tasks? How will
the robot obtain that data from the environment or
from the users? What sensors will produce the data?
What representations will be used for the data?
What processes will abstract the sensory data into
representations internal to the architecture? How of-
ten does the data need to be updated? How often can
it be updated?

What computational capabilities will the robot
have? What data will these computational capa-
bilities produce? What data will they consume?
How will the computational capabilities of a robot
be divided, structured, and interconnected? What
is the best decomposition/granularity of computa-
tional capabilities? How much does each compu-
tational capability have to know about the other
capabilities? Are there legacy computational ca-
pabilities (from other robots, other robot projects,
etc.) that will be used? Where will the different
computational capabilities reside (e.g., onboard or
offboard)?

Who are the robot’s users? What will they com-
mand the robot to do? What information will they
want to see from the robot? What understanding do
they need of the robot’s computational capabilities?
How will the user know what the robot is doing? Is
the user interaction peer to peer, supervisory, or as
a bystander?

How will the robot be evaluated? What are the suc-
cess criteria? What are the failure modes? What is
the mitigation for those failure modes?

Will the robot architecture be used for more than
one set of tasks? For more than one kind of robot?
By more than one team of developers?
Once designers have answers to all (or most) of
these questions, they can then begin building some use
cases for the types of operations they want the robot
to perform and how they want users to interact with
it. These use cases should specify the outward behav-
ior of the robot with respect to its environment and
its users. From the use cases, an initial partitioning of
robot functionality can be developed. This partition-
ing should be accompanied by a sequence diagram that
shows the transfer of information and control over time
amongst the various components of the robot architec-
ture [12.79]. After this, a more formal speciﬁcation of
the interfaces between architectural components can be
developed. This may be done using a language such as
the interface deﬁnition language (IDL) of CORBA or
by deﬁning the messages to be distributed in a publish–
subscribe protocol. This is an important step, as once
implementation begins it is very costly to change inter-
faces. If an interface does change, all stakeholders need

Robotic Systems Architectures and Programming
12.6 Implementing Robotic Systems Architectures
299
Part A | 12.6
to be notiﬁed and need to agree to the change. The most
common integration problems in robot architectures are
mismatches between what components expect and what
they are receiving in the way of data.
An advantage of tiered architectures with clear in-
terface deﬁnitions is that the different layers can be
developed in parallel. The behavioral control layer can
be implemented and tested on the robot using a hu-
man as an executive. The executive can be implemented
and tested using state machine stubs for the expected
behaviors on the robot. The planning layer can be im-
plemented and tested using stubs for the tasks in the
executive. The stubs merely acknowledge that they
were called and report back appropriately. Then, the
tiers can be integrated to test timing and other runtime
issues. This parallel approach speeds up the develop-
ment of a robot architecture, but is possible only if the
roles and interfaces between components are clearly
deﬁned and respected. There is still considerable real-
time debugging necessary during integration. In our
experiences, most of the development time in robot ar-
chitectures is still spent on the behavioral control layer –
that is, sensing and acting are still the hard parts of robot
control, as compared to execution and planning. Having
a good, robust behavioral control layer goes a long way
towards having a competent robot architecture.
12.6 Implementing Robotic Systems Architectures
Robot System Architectures offer a coarse-gain view
of the structure of a robot system, which is modelled
according to the functional decomposition (or compo-
sition) of parts. Unfortunately, there are concerns that
cannot be effectively described and modularised using
the concept of composition of high cohesion functional
modules. Such concerns relate to the software systems
as a whole hence crosscutting their modular structure.
Non-functional requirements such as real-time perfor-
mance, fault tolerance, and safety, are typical examples
of properties that emerge from multiple parts of a sys-
tem and cannot be conﬁned into individual modules. In
order to meet these requirements, software development
efforts are mainly focused on delivering highly efﬁcient
implementations of control applications that exploit at
best the capabilities of speciﬁc hardware platforms to
perform a speciﬁc set of tasks in speciﬁc operational
environments.
The race towards performance and the pressure
to develop proof-of-concept code to test a new the-
ory [12.80] push robotic engineers to neglect other
quality attributes of a software system, such as main-
tainability, interoperability, and reusability. As a result,
a huge corpus of software applications, which imple-
ment the entire spectrum of robot functionality, algo-
rithms, and control paradigms, is potentially available
in robotic research laboratories as open source libraries.
Unfortunately, they are often not reusable even in
slightly different application scenarios, because the as-
sumptions and constraints about the computational and
robotics hardware, and the software and operational en-
vironments are hidden and hard coded in the software
implementation.
A large variety of today’s robotic systems is de-
signed according to the relatively small number of
robot control architecture paradigms discussed in the
previous sections. Nevertheless, the software that im-
plements their control applications differs signiﬁcantly
from system to system. These differences relate, for
example, to the data structures deﬁned to store rele-
vant information (e.g., the map of the environment, the
robot kinematic model), the application programming
interfaces (APIs) to drive sensors and actuators [12.81],
the information model used to represent key concepts
(e.g., geometric relations and coordinate representa-
tions). These differences indicate that the most common
robot functionalities have been re-implemented from
scratch innumerable times.
During the last few years, many ideas from software
engineering (such as component-based development
and model-driven engineering) have been progressively
introduced in the construction of robotic software sys-
tems to simplify their development and improve their
quality (see [12.82] for a survey).
Modern robot control systems are typically de-
signed as (logically) distributed component-based sys-
tems [12.83, 84]. Here, components are units of im-
plementation and represent a code-based way of con-
sidering the system. As an analogy, in the electronics
domain re-usable off-the-shelf electronic components
have been available for many years in the form of inte-
grated chips (ICs) which can be bought and deployed in
other parts of the world. This is possible because each
IC packages a clear set of functionality and provides
a well-deﬁned external interface.
In Robot System Architectures the interactions be-
tween software components are usually more complex
compared to more traditional business applications. In
Robotics, the software developer faces the complexity
of event-based, reactive, and distributed interactions be-
tween sensors and motors and between several process-
ing algorithms. Managing concurrent access to shared

Part A | 12.6
300
Part A
Robotics Foundations
resources by multiple (distributed) activities is one of
the main issues, as thoroughly discussed in [12.85]. For
this reason, robotic-speciﬁc component-based frame-
works and toolkits have been developed, which offer
mechanisms for real-time execution, synchronous and
asynchronous communication, data ﬂow and control
ﬂow management, and system conﬁguration.
The following section reviews some of the most re-
cent approaches and frameworks that have been specif-
ically deﬁned for robotics.
12.6.1 Agile Robot Development Network
(aRDnet)
aRDnet [12.86] is a software suite developed at the
German Aerospace Center (DLR) Institute of Robotics
and Mechatronics that supports the development of dis-
tributed component-based systems for complex mecha-
tronic systems with hard real-time requirements. The
aRDnet suite has been used to implement computa-
tionally demanding control loops in the kHz range
running over all the 41 degrees of freedom (DOF) of
the upper humanoid body Justin, such as impedance
control and collision avoidance. The robot control sys-
tem is structured as a network of functional blocks
and communication links distributed over a network of
computers connected by a fast digital bus like the Giga-
bit-Ethernet.
An aRDnet functional block is a software mod-
ule with multiple input and output ports that hide the
actual transportation protocol, i. e., user datagram pro-
tocol (UDP) sockets or EtherCAT to exchange data with
interconnected blocks. Blocks can be executed by indi-
vidual processes or can be grouped in synchronization
groups (e.g., for blocks interfacing the robot hardware)
executed iteratively by a single process according to the
synchronous data ﬂow model of computation. Differ-
ent synchronization groups can interact asynchronously
through non blocking read and write operations.
12.6.2 Yet Another Robot Platform (YARP)
YARP [12.87] is an open-source project developed at
the LIRA-Lab of the University of Genova in col-
laboration with MIT Computer Science and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL). It has been conceived
with the same objectives as aRDnet, i. e., the devel-
opment of distributed control systems for high DOF
robots, such as the humanoid bodies. It consists in
a lightweight software library for concurrent and dis-
tributed programming that has been used and tested on
several operating systems.
Similarly to aRDnet, distributed software mod-
ules exchange data through input/output asynchronous
communication ports. Differently from aRDnet, YARP
ports can manage multiple connections for a given
module at different data rates according to different
protocols (e.g., transfer control protocol (TCP), UDP,
multicast) allowing for the conﬁguration of the quality
of service (QOS) of the inter-module communication:
an output port can send data to many destinations,
while an input port can receive data from multiple
connections.
12.6.3 Open Robot Control Software
(OROCOS)
Orocos is one of the oldest open source framework
in robotics, under development since 2001, and with
professional industrial applications and products us-
ing it since about 2005 [12.88]. The focus of Orocos
has always been to provide a hard real-time capa-
ble component framework, the so-called Real-Time
Toolkit (RTT) implemented in CCC and as indepen-
dent as possible from any communication middleware
and operating system. Similarly to aRDnet and YARP,
components interact with each other by exchanging
data and events asynchronously through lock-free in-
put/output ports according to the Data Flow communi-
cation paradigm.
The distinguish feature of OROCOS is the deﬁni-
tion of a component model that speciﬁes a standard
behaviour for concurrent activities. Components with
real-time, deterministic and cyclic behaviour get ﬁxed
and cyclic time budgets for computation and within
a computation cycle they must reach stable interme-
diate states. OROCOS components are implemented
as extension (inheritance) of the base class TaskCon-
text, have their own thread of execution, and can be
deployed as objects that share the same address space
or as executables that communicate using the CORBA
middleware.
12.6.4 Smartsoft
Smartsoft [12.89] is an open source framework that
speciﬁcally addresses issues related to communica-
tion among software components of a robotic con-
trol system. Similarly to OROCOS, it deﬁnes a port-
based component model, whose distinguished feature
is a rich set of standard component interfaces (called
communication patterns) with strictly deﬁned interac-
tion semantics:

Send:
Deﬁnes
one-way
communication
with
a client/server relationship

Query: Two-way
request communication with
a client/server relationship

Robotic Systems Architectures and Programming
12.6 Implementing Robotic Systems Architectures
301
Part A | 12.6

Push newest/push timed: 1-to-n distribution (broad-
cast) with a publisher/subscriber relationship

Event: Asynchronous conditioned notiﬁcation with
a client/server relationship

Dynamic wiring: Dynamic component wiring with
a master/slave relationship.
Smartsoft is one of the ﬁrst open source frame-
works that has developed an open source toolchain
for robotic software development based on the Eclipse
Modeling Project. The toolchain implements a work-
ﬂow that guides the software developer from high level
design of the robot system architecture down to the
components implementation and deployment through
automatic model-to-model transformations.
12.6.5 Robot Operating System (ROS)
ROS [12.90] is a message-based peer-to-peer communi-
cation infrastructure supporting the easy integration of
independently developed software components, called
ROS nodes. A ROS system is thus a computation
graph consisting of a set of nodes communicating with
one another. Nodes are blocks of functional code and
are implemented as classes that wrap robotic soft-
ware libraries and provide access to the communication
mechanisms of the underlying infrastructure (the ROS
core). Nodes are organized into packages (ﬁle sys-
tem folders containing libraries, nodes, and message
deﬁnitions), which are grouped into thematic stacks
(i. e., the navigation stack). Messages are typed data
structures that can be nested into compound messages
and are exchanged between nodes according to the
publish/subscribe communication paradigm in an asyn-
chronous manner without the need for the interacting
nodes to know each other and to participate to the in-
teraction at the same time. Messages are organized by
topics, which correspond to information subjects that
allow subscribers to recognize the events they are inter-
ested in. When a node receives a message belonging to
a subscribed topic, a message handler is invoked asyn-
chronously, which performs some computation on the
message payload data and possibly generates a new
message of a given topic to publish the computation
results.
The distinguish characteristics of ROS is the lack
of enforced architecture in ROS libraries, i. e., ROS
nodes are designed as individually reusable compo-
nents. An application is built by conﬁguring individual
nodes in such a way that they can exchange mes-
sages belonging to common topics. This characteristic
favours the decentralized development of many small
packages by experts in the various robotics sub-do-
mains.
12.6.6 GenoM/BIP
GenoM [12.91] is a component-oriented software pack-
age developed by the LAAS CNRS robotics group that
is used for specifying and implementing the functional
level of robot system architectures. GenoM components
are collections of control services, which execute a ﬁ-
nite state automaton and are implemented by a set of C
functions called codels, which get appropriately called
during speciﬁc state transitions (i. e., start, exec, error,
etc.). GenoM components exchange data and events
through posters that are regions of shared memory.
The distinguish feature of the GenoM component
model is the integration with the Behavior-Interaction-
Priorities (BIPs) framework. BIP is a software frame-
work and toolset for formally modeling and verifying
complex, real-time component-based systems to guar-
antee correctness-by-construction of robotic control
systems. BIP is used to produce a formal interaction
model, which can be used for system level coordi-
nation to run (using the BIP engine) the functional
layer composed of all the GenoM modules. BIP al-
lows the hierarchical construction of compound compo-
nents by using connectors, which interconnect the ports
of GenoM components and models two basic modes
of communication, namely, caller/provider and broad-
caster/listener.
12.6.7 Best Practice in Robotics (BRICS)
Complementary
to
the
projects
described
above
BRICS [12.92], a joint research project funded by the
European Commission, has formalized the robot devel-
opment process according to the principles of Model
Driven Engineering [12.93] and has provided tools,
models, and functional libraries, which allow reducing
the development time of robot software systems.
In particular, the concepts of Component Frame-
work and Software Product Line have been introduced
in the robot development process [12.94, 95] as illus-
trated in
VIDEO 273 . This approach promotes the
routine use of existing software or software knowl-
edge to construct new software, so that similarities in
requirements, architectures and design between appli-
cations can be exploited to achieve substantial ben-
eﬁts in software quality, productivity, and business
performance.

Part A | 12
302
Part A
Robotics Foundations
12.7 Conclusions and Further Reading
Robot architectures are designed to facilitate the con-
current execution of task-achieving behaviors. They en-
able systems to control actuators, interpret sensors, plan,
monitor execution, and deal with unexpected contin-
gencies and opportunities. They provide the conceptual
framework within which domain-dependent software
development can take place, and they often provide pro-
gramming tools that facilitate that development.
While no single architecture has proven to be best
for all applications, researchers have developed a va-
riety of approaches that can be applied in different
situations. While there is not yet a speciﬁc formula
for determining which architecture will be best suited
for a given application, this chapter provides some
guidelines to help developers in selecting the right
architecture for the job. That being said, layered archi-
tectures have proven to be increasingly popular, due to
their ﬂexibility and ability to operate at multiple levels
of abstraction simultaneously.
The book Kortenkamp et al. [12.96] provide sev-
eral chapters on architectures that have inﬂuenced this
chapter. Most text books in robotics [12.20, 97, 98] have
sections on robot architectures. For many years in the
mid 1990s, the AAAI Spring Symposia on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence had sessions devoted to robot architec-
tures, although proceedings from those symposia are
not widely available. More information on GRACE can
be found in [12.99–101].
Video-References
VIDEO 273
Software product line engineering for robotics
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/12/videodetails/273
References
12.1
I. Jacobson, G. Booch, J. Rumbaugh: The Unified
Software Development Process (Addison-Wesley,
Reading 1998)
12.2
J.S. Albus: RCS: A reference model architecture
for intelligent systems, Working Notes: AAAI 1995
Spring Symp. Lessons Learn. Implement. Software
Archit. Phys. Agents (1995)
12.3
R.A. Brooks: A robust layered control system for
a mobile robot, IEEE J. Robot. Autom. 2(1), 14–23
(1986)
12.4
R.J. Firby: An investigation into reactive planning
in complex domains, Proc. 5th Natl. Conf. Artif.
Intel. (1987)
12.5
R. Simmons: Structured control for autonomous
robots, IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 10(1), 34–43
(1994)
12.6
J.J. Borrelly, E. Coste-Maniere, B. Espiau, K. Kape-
los, R. Pissard-Gibollet, D. Simon, N. Turro: The
ORCCAD architecture, Int. J. Robot. Res. 17(4), 338–
359 (1998)
12.7
B. Kuipers: The spatial semantic hierarchy, Artif.
Intell. 119, 191–233 (2000)
12.8
R. Orfali, D. Harkey: Client/Server Programming
with JAVA and CORBA (Wiley, New York 1997)
12.9
R. Simmons, G. Whelan: Visualization tools for
validating software of autonomous spacecraft,
Proc. Int. Symp. Artif. Intel., Robot. Autom. in
Space, Tokyo (1997)
12.10
R. A. Brooks: The Behavior Language: User’s
Guide, Tech. Rep. AIM-1227 (MIT, Artif. Intel. Lab,
Cambridge 1990)
12.11
R.J. Firby, M.G. Slack: Task execution: Interfac-
ing to reactive skill networks, Working Notes: AAAI
Spring Symp. Lessons Learn. Implement. Archit.
Phys. Agents, Stanford (1995)
12.12
E. Gat: ESL: A language for supporting robust plan
execution in embedded autonomous agents,
Proc. IEEE Aerosp. Conf. (1997)
12.13
V. Verma, T. Estlin, A. Jónsson, C. Pasareanu,
R. Simmons, K. Tso: Plan execution interchange
language (PLEXIL) for executable plans and com-
mand sequences, Proc. 8th Int. Symp. Artif. Intel.
Robot. Autom. Space, Munich (2005)
12.14
S.A. Schneider, V.W. Chen, G. Pardo-Castellote,
H.H. Wang: ControlShell: A software architec-
ture for complex electromechanical systems, Int.
J. Robot. Res. 17(4), 360–380 (1998)
12.15
National Instruments: LabVIEW (National Instru-
ments, Austin 2007) http://www.ni.com/labview/
12.16
N.J. Nilsson: A mobile automaton: an application
of AI techniques, Proc. 1st Int. Joint Conf. Ar-
tif. Intel. (Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco 1969)
pp. 509–520
12.17
N.J. Nilsson: Principles of Artificial Intelligence
(Tioga, Palo Alto 1980)
12.18
SRI International: Shakey the Robot, http://www.
sri.com
12.19
P.E. Agre, D. Chapman: Pengi: An implementation
of a theory of activity, Proc. 5th Natl. Conf. Artif.
Intel. (1987)
12.20
R.C. Arkin: Behavior-Based Robotics (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1998)

Robotic Systems Architectures and Programming
References
303
Part A | 12
12.21
J.H. Connell: SSS: A hybrid architecture applied to
robot navigation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Au-
tom. (1992) pp. 2719–2724
12.22
M. Mataric: Integration of representation into
goal-driven behavior-based robots, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (1992)
12.23
I. Horswill: Polly: A vision-based artificial agent,
Proc. Natl. Conf. Artif. Intel. (AAAI) (1993)
12.24
D.W. Payton: An architecture for reflexive au-
tonomous vehicle control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom. (1986)
12.25
J.K. Rosenblatt: DAMN: A Distributed Architec-
ture for Mobile Robot Navigation, Ph.D. Thesis
(Carnegie Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh 1997)
12.26
R.C. Arkin: Motor schema-based mobile robot
navigation, Int. J. Robot. Res. 8(4), 92–112 (1989)
12.27
M. Arbib: Schema Theory. In: Encyclopedia of Ar-
tificial Intelligence, ed. by S. Shapiro (Wiley, New
York 1992) pp. 1427–1443
12.28
O. Khatib: Real-time obstacle avoidance for ma-
nipulators and mobile robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom. (1985) pp. 500–505
12.29
R.C. Arkin: Integrating behavioral, perceptual,
and world knowledge in reactive navigation,
Robot. Autonom. Syst. 6, 105–122 (1990)
12.30
R.C. Arkin, T. Balch: AuRA: Principles and practice
in review, J. Exp. Theor. Artif. Intell. 9(2/3), 175–
188 (1997)
12.31
R.J. Firby: Adaptive Execution in Complex Dynamic
Worlds, Ph.D. Thesis (Yale Univ., New Haven 1989)
12.32
R.J. Firby: Task networks for controlling continu-
ous processes, Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. AI Plan. Syst.
(1994)
12.33
R.P. Bonasso: Integrating reaction plans and lay-
ered competences through synchronous control,
Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intel. (1991)
12.34
S.J. Rosenschein, L.P. Kaelbling: The synthesis of
digital machines with provable epistemic prop-
erties, Proc. Conf. Theor. Asp. Reas. Knowl. (1998)
12.35
L.P. Kaelbling: Goals as parallel program specifi-
cations, Proc. 6th Natl. Conf. Artif. Intel. (1988)
12.36
L. P. Kaelbling: Compiling operator descriptions
into reactive strategies using goal regression,
Tech. Rep., TR90-10, (Teleos Res., Palo Alto 1990)
12.37
R.P. Bonasso, R.J. Firby, E. Gat, D. Kortenkamp,
D.P. Miller, M.G. Slack: Experiences with an ar-
chitecture for intelligent, reactive agents, J. Exp.
Theor. Artif. Intell. 9(2/3), 237–256 (1997)
12.38
E. Gat: Integrating Planning and reacting in a het-
erogeneous asynchronous architecture for con-
trolling real-world mobile robots, Proc. Natl.
Conf. Artif. Intel. (AAAI) (1992)
12.39
G.N. Saridis: Architectures for intelligent controls.
In: Intelligent Control Systems: Theory and Appli-
cations, ed. by S. Gupta (IEEE Press, Piscataway
1995)
12.40
R. Alami, R. Chatila, S. Fleury, M. Ghallab,
F. Ingrand: An architecture for autonomy, Int.
J. Robot. Res. 17(4), 315–337 (1998)
12.41
M. Ghallab, H. Laruelle: Representation and con-
trol in IxTeT, a temporal planner, Proc. AIPS-94
(1994)
12.42
P. Laborie, M. Ghallab: Planning with sharable
resource constraints, Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
Intel. (1995)
12.43
M.P. Georgeff, F.F. Ingrand: Decision-making in
an embedded reasoning system, Proc. Int. Joint
Conf. Artif. Intel. (1989) pp. 972–978
12.44
F. Ingrand, R. Chatila, R. Alami, F. Robert: PRS:
A high level supervision and control language for
autonomous mobile robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom. (1996)
12.45
N.P. Muscettola, P. Nayak, B. Pell, B.C. Williams:
Remote agent: To boldly go where no AI sys-
tem has gone before, Artif. Intell. 103(1), 5–47
(1998)
12.46
B.C. Williams, P.P. Nayak: A model-based ap-
proach to reactive self-configuring systems, Proc.
AAAI (1996)
12.47
B. Sellner, F.W. Heger, L.M. Hiatt, R. Simmons,
S. Singh: Coordinated multi-agent teams and
sliding autonomy for large-scale assembly, Proc.
IEEE 94(7), 1425–1444 (2006), special issue on
multi-agent systems
12.48
D. Goldberg, V. Cicirello, M.B. Dias, R. Sim-
mons, S. Smith, A. Stentz: Market-based multi-
robot planning in a distributed layered architec-
ture, Proc. Int. Workshop Multi-Robot Syst (2003)
pp. 27–38
12.49
J.S. Albus, R. Lumia, H.G. McCain: NASA/NBS Stan-
dard Reference model for Telerobot Control System
Architecture (NASREM), Technol. #1235, (Nat. Inst.
Stand, Gaithersburg 1986)
12.50
D.R. Blidberg, S.G. Chappell: Guidance and con-
trol architecture for the EAVE vehicle, IEEE J. Ocean
Eng. 11(4), 449–461 (1986)
12.51
J.S. Albus: Outline for a theory of intelligence, IEEE
Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 21(3), 473–509 (1991)
12.52
R. Volpe, I. Nesnas, T. Estlin, D. Mutz, R. Petras,
H. Das: The CLARAty architecture for robotic au-
tonomy, Proc. IEEE Aerosp. Conf., Big Sky (2001)
12.53
I.A. Nesnas, R. Simmons, D. Gaines, C. Kunz,
A.
Diaz-Calderon,
T.
Estlin,
R.
Madison,
J.
Guineau,
M. McHenry, I. Shu,
D. Apfel-
baum: CLARAty: Challenges and steps toward
reusable robotic software, Int. J. Adv. Robot. Syst.
3(1), 023–030 (2006)
12.54
T. Estlin, D. Gaines, C. Chouinard, F. Fisher,
R. Castaño, M. Judd, R. Anderson, I. Nes-
nas: Enabling autonomous rover science through
dynamic planning and scheduling, Proc. IEEE
Aerosp. Conf., Big Sky (2005)
12.55
R. Knight, G. Rabideau, S. Chien, B. Engelhardt,
R. Sherwood: CASPER: Space exploration through
continuous planning, IEEE Intell. Syst. 16(5), 70–
75 (2001)
12.56
R. Simmons, D. Apfelbaum: A task description
language for robot control, Proc. Conf. Intel.
Robot Syst., Vancouver (1998)
12.57
T.A. Estlin, D. Gaines, C. Chouinard, R. Castaño,
B. Bornstein, M. Judd, I.A.D. Nesnas, R. Anderson:
Increased mars rover autonomy using AI plan-
ning, scheduling and execution, Proc. Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom. (2007) pp. 4911–4918

Part A | 12
304
Part A
Robotics Foundations
12.58
D. Musliner, E. Durfee, K. Shin: World modeling for
dynamic construction of real-time control plans,
Artif. Intell. 74(1), 83–127 (1995)
12.59
D.J. Musliner, R.P. Goldman, M.J. Pelican: Us-
ing
model checking
to guarantee
safety in
automatically-synthesized real-time controllers,
Proc. Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (2000)
12.60
B. Espiau, K. Kapellos, M. Jourdan: Formal verifi-
cation in robotics: Why and how?, Proc. Int. Symp.
Robot. Res., Herrsching (1995)
12.61
G. Berry, G. Gonthier: The Esterel synchronous
programming language: Design, semantics, im-
plementation, Sci. Comput. Progr. 19(2), 87–152
(1992)
12.62
M. Jourdan, F. Maraninchi, A. Olivero: Verifying
quantitative real-time properties of synchronous
programs, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 697, 347–358
(1993)
12.63
G. Pardo-Castellote, S.A. Schneider: The network
data delivery service: Real-time data connectiv-
ity for distributed control applications, Proc. Int.
Conf. Robot. Autom. (1994) pp. 2870–2876
12.64
JAUS Reference Architecture Specification, Vol-
ume II, Part 1 Version 3.2: http://www.jauswg.org/
baseline/refarch.html
12.65
JAUS Tutorial Powerpoint slides: http://www.
jauswg.org/
12.66
JAUS Domain Model Volume I, Version 3.2: http://
www.jauswg.org/baseline/current_baseline.
shtml
12.67
E. Gat: ALFA: A language for programming reac-
tive robotic control systems, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom. (1991) pp. 116–1121
12.68
R.A. Brooks: Elephants don’t play chess, J. Robot.
Autonom. Syst. 6, 3–15 (1990)
12.69
L.P. Kaelbling: Rex – A symbolic language for
the design and parallel implementation of em-
bedded systems, Proc. 6th AIAA Comput. Aerosp.
Conf., Wakefield (1987)
12.70
E. Gat: Non-linear sequencing and cognizant
failure, Proc. AIP Conf. (1999)
12.71
E. Gat: On the role of stored internal state in the
control of autonomous mobile robots, AI Mag.
14(1), 64–73 (1993)
12.72
J.L. Peterson: Petri Net Theory and the Modeling
of Systems (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River 1981)
12.73
K. Currie, A. Tate: O-Plan: The open planning ar-
chitecture, Artif. Intell. 52(1), 49–86 (1991)
12.74
D.S. Nau, Y. Cao, A. Lotem, H. Muñoz-Avila: SHOP:
Simple hierarchical ordered planner, Proc. Int.
Joint Conf. Artif. Intel. (1999) pp. 968–973
12.75
S. Chien, R. Knight, A. Stechert, R. Sherwood,
G. Rabideau: Using iterative repair to improve the
responsiveness of planning and scheduling, Proc.
Int. Conf. AI Plan. Sched. (2000) pp. 300–307
12.76
N. Muscettola: HSTS: Integrating planning and
scheduling. In: Intelligent Scheduling, ed. by
M. Fox, M. Zweben (Morgan Kaufmann, San Fran-
cisco 1994)
12.77
R. Simmons, J. Fernandez, R. Goodwin, S. Koenig,
J. O’Sullivan: Lessons learned from Xavier, IEEE
Robot. Autom. Mag. 7(2), 33–39 (2000)
12.78
R.
Simmons:
Inter
Process
Communication
(Carnegie Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh 2007), http://
www.cs.cmu.edu/IPC
12.79
S.W. Ambler: UML 2 Sequence Diagramms (Am-
bisoft, Toronto 2007) http://www.agilemodeling.
com/artifacts/sequenceDiagram.htm
12.80
W.D. Smart: Writing code in the field: Implications
for robot software development, Springer Tract.
Adv. Robot. 30, 93–105 (2007)
12.81
I.A.D. Nesnas: The CLARAty Project: Coping with
hardware and software heterogeneity, Springer
Tract. Adv. Robot. 30, 31–70 (2007)
12.82
D. Brugali, E. Prassler: Software engineering for
robotics, IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. 16(1), 9–15
(2009)
12.83
D.
Brugali,
P.
Scandurra:
Component-based
robotic engineering (Part I), IEEE Robot. Autom.
Mag. 16(4), 84–96 (2009)
12.84
D. Brugali, A. Shakhimardanov: Component-
based robotic engineering (Part II), IEEE Robot.
Autom. Mag. 17(1), 100–112 (2010)
12.85
D. Calisi, A. Censi, L. Iocchi, D. Nardi: Design
choices for modular and flexible robotic software
development: The OpenRDK viewpoint, J. Soft-
ware Eng. Robot. 3(1), 13–27 (2012)
12.86
B. Baeuml, G. Hirzinger: When hard realtime mat-
ters: Software for complex mechatronic systems,
Robot. Auton. Syst. 56, 5–13 (2008)
12.87
G. Metta, P. Fitzpatrick, L. Natale: YARP: Yet an-
other robot platform, Int. J. Adv. Robot. Syst 3(1),
43–48 (2006)
12.88
H. Bruyninckx: Open robot control software: the
OROCOS project, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.
(2001) pp. 2523–2528
12.89
C. Schlegel, A. Steck, D. Brugali, A. Knoll: Design
abstraction and processes in robotics: From code-
driven to model-driven engineering, Lect. Notes
Comput. Sci. 6472, 324–335 (2010)
12.90
S. Cousins: Welcome to ROS Topics, IEEE Robot. Au-
tom. Mag. 17(1), 13–14 (2010)
12.91
S. Bensalem, L. de Silva, F. Ingrand, R. Yan: A ver-
ifiable and correct-by-construction controller for
robot functional levels, J. Software Eng. Robot.
2(1), 1–19 (2011)
12.92
R. Bischoff, T. Guhl, E. Prassler, W. Nowak,
G. Kraetzschmar, H. Bruyninckx,
P.
Soetens,
M. Haegele, A. Pott, P. Breedveld, J. Broenink,
D. Brugali, N. Tomatis: BRICS: Best practice in
robotics, Proc. 41st Int. Symp. Robot., Munich
(2010) pp. 7–9
12.93
M. Klotzbuecher, N. Hochgeschwender, L. Gher-
ardi, H. Bruyninckx, G. Kraetzschmar, D. Brugali:
The BRICS component model: A model-based de-
velopment paradigm for complex robotics soft-
ware systems, 28th ACM Symp. Appl. Comput.,
Coimbra (2013) pp. 18–22
12.94
D. Brugali, L. Gherardi, A. Luzzana, A. Za-
kharov: A reuse-oriented development process
for component-basedrobotic systems, Lect. Notes
Comput. Sci. 7628, 361–374 (2012)
12.95
L. Gherardi, D. Brugali: Modeling and reusing
robotic software architectures: The
hyperflex

Robotic Systems Architectures and Programming
References
305
Part A | 12
toolchain, Proc. IEEE Robot. Autom. Conf. ICRA ’14,
Hong Kong (2014)
12.96
D. Kortenkamp, R.P. Bonasso, R. Murphy: Artificial
Intelligence and Mobile Robots (MIT Press, Cam-
bridge 1998)
12.97
R. Murphy: Introduction to AI Robotics (MIT Press,
Cambridge 2000)
12.98
R. Siegwart, I.R. Nourbakhsh: Introduction to Au-
tonomous Mobile Robots (MIT Press, Cambridge
2004)
12.99
R. Simmons, D. Goldberg, A. Goode, M. Monte-
merlo, N. Roy, B. Sellner, C. Urmson, A. Schultz,
M. Abramson, W. Adams, A. Atrash, M. Buga-
jska, M. Coblenz, M. MacMahon, D. Perzanowski,
I. Horswill, R. Zubek, D. Kortenkamp, B. Wolfe,
T. Milam, B. Maxwell: GRACE: An autonomous
robot for the AAAI Robot Challenge, AAAI Mag.
24(2), 51–72 (2003)
12.100
R. Gockley, R. Simmons, J. Wang, D. Bus-
quets,
C.
DiSalvo,
K.
Caffrey,
S.
Rosenthal,
J. Mink, S. Thomas, W. Adams, T. Lauducci,
M. Bugajska, D. Perzanowski, A. Schultz: Grace
and George: Social Robots at AAAI, Proc. AAAI
Mob. Robot Comp. Workshop (2004), pp. 15–
20
12.101
M.P.
Michalowski,
S.
Sabanovic,
C.
DiSalvo,
D. Busquets, L.M. Hiatt, N.A. Melchior, R. Sim-
mons: Socially Distributed
Perception: GRACE
plays social tag at AAAI 2005, Auton. Robot. 22(4),
385–397 (2007)

Multimedia Contents Behavior-Ba
307
Part A | 13
13. Behavior-Based Systems
François Michaud, Monica Nicolescu
Nature is filled with examples of autonomous
creatures capable of dealing with the diversity,
unpredictability, and rapidly changing conditions
of the real world. Such creatures must make de-
cisions and take actions based on incomplete
perception, time constraints, limited knowledge
about the world, cognition, reasoning and phys-
ical capabilities, in uncontrolled conditions and
with very limited cues about the intent of others.
Consequently, one way of evaluating intelligence
is based on the creature’s ability to make the most
of what it has available to handle the complexi-
ties of the real world. The main objective of this
chapter is to explain behavior-based systems and
their use in autonomous control problems and
applications. The chapter is organized as follows.
Section 13.1 overviews robot control, introduc-
ing behavior-based systems in relation to other
established approaches to robot control. Sec-
tion 13.2 follows by outlining the basic principles of
behavior-based systems that make them distinct
from other types of robot control architectures. The
concept of basis behaviors, the means of modu-
larizing behavior-based systems, is presented in
Sect. 13.3. Section 13.4 describes how behaviors are
used as building blocks for creating representations
for use by behavior-based systems, enabling the
robot to reason about the world and about itself in
that world. Section 13.5 presents several different
classes of learning methods for behavior-based
systems, validated on single-robot and multi-
robot systems. Section 13.6 provides an overview
of various robotics problems and application do-
mains that have successfully been addressed or
13.1
Robot Control Approaches ....................
308
13.1.1
Deliberative – Think, Then Act....
308
13.1.2
Reactive – Don’t Think, (Re)Act...
308
13.1.3
Hybrid –
Think and Act Concurrently.........
309
13.1.4
Behavior-Based Control –
Think the Way You Act ...............
309
13.1.5
When to Use What.....................
309
13.2
Basic Principles
of Behavior-Based Systems ..................
310
13.2.1
Misconceptions .........................
312
13.3
Basis Behaviors ...................................
313
13.4
Representation
in Behavior-Based Systems ..................
313
13.5
Learning in Behavior-Based Systems ....
314
13.5.1
Reinforcement Learning
in Behavior-Based Systems ........
315
13.5.2
Learning Behavior Networks.......
315
13.5.3
Learning from Demonstration
in Behavior-Based Systems ........
316
13.5.4
Learning from History
of Behavior Use.........................
317
13.6
Applications and Continuing Work........
318
13.6.1
Adaptive Behavior Selection –
A Case Study .............................
319
13.7
Conclusions and Further Reading .........
322
Video-References.........................................
322
References...................................................
323
are currently being studied with behavior-based
control. Finally, Sect. 13.7 concludes the chapter.

Part A | 13.1
308
Part A
Robotics Foundations
13.1 Robot Control Approaches
Situated robotics deals with embodied machines in
complex, challenging, often dynamically changing en-
vironments. Situatedness thus refers to existing in
a complex, challenging environment, and having one’s
behavior strongly affected by it. In contrast, robots that
exist in static, unchanging environments are usually not
thought to be situated. These include assembly robots
operating in complex but highly structured, ﬁxed, and
strongly predictable environments, speciﬁcally engi-
neered and controlled to enable the robot to accomplish
very speciﬁc tasks. The predictability and stability of
the environment have a direct impact on the complexity
of the robot that must operate in it; situated robots there-
fore present a signiﬁcant challenge for the designer.
Robot control, also referred to as robot decision-
making or robot computational architecture, is the
process of taking information about the environment
through the robot’s sensors, processing it as necessary
in order to make decisions about how to act, and execut-
ing actions in the environment. The complexity of the
environment, i. e., the level of situatedness, has a direct
impact on the complexity of control, which is, in turn,
directly related to the robot’s task. Control architectures
are covered in Chap. 12 of the Handbook.
While there are inﬁnitely many possible ways to
program a robot, there are fundamentally four classes
of robot control methods, described below.
13.1.1 Deliberative – Think, Then Act
In deliberative control, the robot uses all of the avail-
able sensory information, and all of the internally stored
knowledge, to reason about what actions to take next.
The control system is usually organized using a func-
tional decomposition of the decision-making processes,
consisting of a sensory processing module, a modeling
module, a planning module, a value judgment mod-
ule, and an execution module [13.1]. Such functional
decomposition allows complex operations to be per-
formed, but implies strong sequential interdependencies
between the decision-making modules.
Reasoning in deliberative systems is typically in
the form of planning, requiring a search of possible
state–action sequences and their outcomes. Planning,
a major component of artiﬁcial intelligence, is known
to be a computationally complex process. The process
requires the robot to perform a sequence of sense–plan–
act steps (e.g., combine the sensory data into a map
of the world, then use the planner to ﬁnd a path in
the map, then send steps of the plan to the robot’s
wheels) [13.2–4]. The robot must construct and then po-
tentially evaluate all possible plans until it ﬁnds one that
enables it to reach its goal, solve the task, or decide on
a trajectory to execute. Shakey, an early mobile robot
that used STRIPS, a general planner, is an example of
such a system applied to the problem of avoiding obsta-
cles and navigating based on vision data [13.5].
Planning requires the existence of an internal, sym-
bolic representation of the world, which allows the
robot to look ahead into the future and predict the out-
comes of possible actions in various states, so as to
generate plans. The internal model, thus, must be kept
accurate and up to date. When there is sufﬁcient time
to generate a plan and the world model is accurate, this
approach allows the robot to act strategically, selecting
the best course of action for a given situation. However,
being situated in a noisy, dynamic world usually makes
this impossible [13.6, 7]. Today, no situated robots are
purely deliberative. The advent of alternative architec-
tures was driven by the need for faster yet appropriate
action in response to the demands of complex and dy-
namically changing real-world environments.
13.1.2 Reactive – Don’t Think, (Re)Act
Reactive control is a technique for tightly coupling sen-
sory inputs and effector outputs, typically involving
no intervening reasoning [13.8] to allow the robot to
respond very quickly to changing and unstructured en-
vironments [13.9]. Reactive control is inspired by the
biological notion of stimulus–response; it does not re-
quire the acquisition or maintenance of world models,
as it does not rely on the types of complex reasoning
processes utilized in deliberative control. Rather, rule-
based methods involving a minimal amount of compu-
tation, and no internal representations or knowledge of
the world are typically used. Reactive systems achieve
rapid real-time responses by embedding the robot’s
controller in a collection of preprogrammed, concur-
rent condition–action rules with minimal internal state
(e.g., if bumped, stop; if stopped, back up) [13.8, 10].
This makes reactive control especially well suited to dy-
namic and unstructured worlds where having access to
a world model is not a realistic option. Furthermore, the
minimal amount of computation involved means that
reactive systems are able to respond in a timely man-
ner to rapidly changing environments.
Reactive control is a powerful and effective con-
trol method that abounds in nature; insects, which
vastly outnumber vertebrates, are largely reactive. How-
ever, limitations to pure reactivity include the inability
to store (much if any) information or have memory
or internal representations of the world [13.11], and
therefore the inability to learn and improve over time.

Behavior-Based Systems
13.1 Robot Control Approaches
309
Part A | 13.1
Reactive control trades off complexity of reasoning for
fast reaction time. Formal analysis has shown that, for
environments and tasks that can be characterized a pri-
ori, reactive controllers can be very powerful, and if
properly structured, capable of optimal performance in
particular classes of problems [13.12, 13]. In other types
of environments and tasks where internal models, mem-
ory, and learning are required, reactive control is not
sufﬁcient.
13.1.3 Hybrid – Think and Act Concurrently
Hybrid control aims to combine the best aspects of re-
active and deliberative control: the real-time response
of reactivity and the rationality and optimality of de-
liberation. As a result, hybrid control systems con-
tain two different components, the reactive/concurrent
condition–action rules and the deliberative ones, which
must interact in order to produce a coherent output. This
is challenging because the reactive component deals
with the robot’s immediate needs, such as moving while
avoiding obstacles, and thus operates on a very fast
time scale and uses direct external sensory data and
signals. In contrast, the deliberative component uses
highly abstracted, symbolic, internal representations of
the world, and operates on them on a longer time scale,
for example to perform global path planning or plan for
high-level decision-making. As long as the outputs of
the two components are not in conﬂict, the system re-
quires no further coordination. However, the two parts
of the system must interact if they are to beneﬁt from
each other. Consequently, the reactive system must
override the deliberative one if the world presents some
unexpected and immediate challenge. Analogously, the
deliberative component must inform the reactive one
in order to guide the robot toward more efﬁcient and
optimal trajectories and goals. The interaction of the
two parts of the system requires an intermediate com-
ponent, which reconciles the different representations
used by the other two and any conﬂicts between their
outputs. The construction of this intermediate compo-
nent is typically the greatest challenge of hybrid system
design.
Hybrid systems are referred to as layered, or tiered,
robot control architecture (Chap. 12). Many are re-
ferred to as three-layer architectures because of their
structure, which consists of the reactive (execution)
layer, intermediate (coordination) layer, and delibera-
tive (organization/planning) layer. The layers are orga-
nized according to the principle of increasing precision
of control in the lower layers with decreasing intel-
ligence [13.14]. A great deal of research has been
invested into the design these components and their in-
teractions [13.2, 15–21].
Three-layer architectures aim to harness the best
of reactive control in the form of dynamic, concurrent
and time-responsive control, and the best of delibera-
tive control, in the form of globally efﬁcient actions
over a long time scale. However, there are complex
issues involved in interfacing these fundamentally dif-
fering components, and the manner in which their
functionality should be partitioned is not yet well un-
derstood [13.22].
13.1.4 Behavior-Based Control –
Think the Way You Act
Behavior-based control employs a set of distributed, in-
teracting modules, called behaviors, that collectively
achieve the desired system-level behavior. To an ex-
ternal observer, behaviors are patterns of the robot’s
activity emerging from interactions between the robot
and its environment. To a programmer, behaviors are
control modules that cluster sets of constraints in order
to achieve and maintain a goal [13.22, 23]. Each behav-
ior receives inputs from sensors and/or other behaviors
in the system, and provides outputs to the robot’s ac-
tuators or to other behaviors. Thus, a behavior-based
controller is a structured network of interacting behav-
iors, with no centralized world representation or focus
of control. Instead, individual behaviors and networks
of behaviors maintain any state information and mod-
els.
Well-designed behavior-based systems take advan-
tage of the dynamics of interaction among the behaviors
themselves, and between the behaviors and the environ-
ment. The functionality of behavior-based systems can
be said to emerge from those interactions and is thus
neither a property of the robot or the environment in
isolation, but rather a result of the interplay between
them [13.22]. Unlike reactive control, which utilizes
collections of reactive rules with little if any state and
no representation, behavior-based control utilizes col-
lections of behaviors, which have no such constraints:
behaviors do have state and can be used to construct
representations, thereby enabling reasoning, planning,
and learning.
13.1.5 When to Use What
Characterizing a given robot computational architec-
ture based on these four classes of control is often
a matter of degree, as architectures attempt to com-
bine the advantages of these paradigms, especially
the responsiveness, robustness, and ﬂexibility of the
behavior-based approach with the use of abstract rep-
resentational knowledge for reasoning and planning
about the world [13.22] or for managing multiple

Part A | 13.2
310
Part A
Robotics Foundations
conﬂicting goals. For example, AuRA (autonomous
robot architecture) uses a planner to select behav-
iors [13.22] and 3T uses behaviors in the execution
layer of a three-level hierarchical architecture [13.24];
both of these architectures dynamically reconﬁgure be-
haviors according to reasoning based on available world
knowledge [13.22]. Goller et al. [13.25] use a set of 15
navigational behaviors with 17 activating behaviors,
combined with a task planner and a topological navi-
gation module.
Each of the above approaches to robot control has
its strengths and weaknesses, and all play important
and successful roles in certain robot control problems
and applications. Each offers interesting but different
insights, and no single approach should be seen as
ideal or otherwise in the absolute. Rather, the choice
of robot control methodology should be based on the
particular task, environment, and robot. Robot control
presents fundamental tradeoffs having to do with time
scale of response, system organization, and modular-
ity: thinking allows looking ahead to avoid mistakes,
but only as long as sufﬁcient, accurate, up-to-date in-
formation is available, otherwise reacting may be the
best way to handle the world. As a consequence of
these inherent tradeoffs, it is important to have different
methodologies at our disposal rather than having to ﬁt
all controller needs into a single methodology. Select-
ing an appropriate control methodology and designing
an architecture within it is best determined by the sit-
uatedness properties of the problem, the nature of the
task, the level of efﬁciency or optimality needed, and
the capabilities of the robot, both in terms of hardware,
world modeling, and computation.
For example, reactive control is the best choice
for environments demanding immediate response, but
such speed of reaction comes at the price of being
myopic, not looking into the past or the future. Re-
active systems are also a popular choice in highly
stochastic environments, and environments that can be
properly characterized so as to be encoded in a reac-
tive input–output mapping. Deliberative systems, on the
other hand, are the only choice for domains that re-
quire a great deal of strategy and optimization, and
in turn search and planning. Such domains, how-
ever, are not typical of situated robotics, but more so
of scheduling, game playing, and system conﬁgura-
tion, among others. Hybrid systems are well suited
for environments and tasks where internal models and
planning are needed, and the real-time demands are
few, or sufﬁciently independent of the higher-level
reasoning.
Behavior-based systems, in contrast, are best suited
for environments with signiﬁcant dynamic changes,
where fast response and adaptivity are crucial, but the
ability to do some looking ahead and avoid past mis-
takes is required. Those capabilities are spread over
the active behaviors, using representations if neces-
sary [13.23], as discussed in the following.
13.2 Basic Principles of Behavior-Based Systems
Behavior-based
robotics was
developed
for
situ-
ated robots, allowing them to adapt to the dy-
namics of real-world environments without operat-
ing upon abstract representations of reality [13.11],
but also giving them more computational capabil-
ity and expressivity than are available to reactive
robots. Behavior-based systems maintain a tight cou-
pling of sensing and action through behaviors, and
use the behavior structure for representation and learn-
ing. Therefore, it is uncommon for a behavior to
perform extensive computation or reasoning relying
on a traditional world model, unless such computa-
tion can be done in a timely manner in response
to dynamic and fast-changing environment and task
demands.
Figure 13.1 summarizes the general components of
low-level behavior-based systems. Note that there is
a distinction between activation conditions, which al-
low the behavior to generate actions, and stimuli, from
which actions are generated.
The basic principles of behavior-based control can
be summarized brieﬂy as follows:

Behaviors are implemented as control laws (some-
times similar to those used in control theory), either
in software or hardware, as a processing element or
as a procedure.

Each behavior can take inputs from the robot’s
sensors (e.g., proximity sensors, range detectors,
contact sensors, camera) and/or from other modules
in the system, and can send outputs to the robot’s ef-
fectors (e.g., wheels, grippers, arm, speech) and/or
to other modules.

Many different behaviors may independently re-
ceive input from the same sensors and output action
commands to the same actuators.

Behaviors are encoded to be relatively simple, and
are added to the system incrementally.

Behaviors (or subsets thereof) are executed con-
currently, not sequentially, in order to exploit par-

Behavior-Based Systems
13.2 Basic Principles of Behavior-Based Systems
311
Part A | 13.2
Activation conditions
Stimuli
Process
Action
Behavior n
Activation conditions
Stimuli
Process
Action
Behavior 2
...
Activation conditions
Stimuli
Process
Action
Behavior 1
Action
selection
Sensing/
perception
Commands
Fig. 13.1 A general schematic of one type of behavior-based systems
allelism and speed of computation, as well as the
interaction dynamics among behaviors and between
behaviors and the environment.
Behaviors are designed at a variety of abstraction
levels, facilitating bottom-up construction of behavior-
based systems. New behaviors are introduced into the
system incrementally, from the simple to the more
complex, until their interaction results in the desired
overall capabilities of the robot. In general, behaviors
encode time-extended processes, not atomic actions
that are typical of feedback control (e.g., go-forward-
by-a-small-increment or turn-by-a-small-angle). The
interaction and integration of temporal and spatial ef-
fects are of key importance in behavior-based systems.
Merely having one process controlling an actuator for
predetermined intervals of time, or using as many pro-
cesses as there are effectors to control them, does not
sufﬁce as the basis for behavior-based control. It is
the combined effect of concurrent processes over time
and driven by perception and internal states that cre-
ates the relevant behavior-based dynamics in a control
system.
As a ﬁrst step, survival behaviors, such as collision-
avoidance, are implemented. These behaviors are often
reactive in nature, since reactive rules can and of-
ten do form components of simple behaviors. Next,
behaviors are added that provide more complex capa-
bilities, such as wall-following, target-chasing, homing,
ﬁnd-object, get-recharged, avoid-the-light, aggregate-
with-group, pick-up-object, ﬁnd-landmark. Depend-
ing on the system being designed, behaviors imple-
menting distributed representations may be added,
as may be behaviors capable of learning about the
world and/or the robot itself, and operating on those
representations and learned information. Representa-
tion and learning are addressed in more detail in
Sect. 13.4.
Behavior-based systems are typically designed so
the effects of the behaviors interact largely in the en-
vironment rather than internally through the system,
taking advantage of the richness of the interaction dy-
namics by exploiting the properties of situatedness.
These dynamics are sometimes called emergent behav-
iors because they emerge from the interactions and are
not internally speciﬁed by the robot’s program. There-
fore, the internal behavior structure of a behavior-based
system need not necessarily mirror its externally man-
ifested behavior. For example, a robot that ﬂocks with
other robots may not have a speciﬁc ﬂocking behavior;
instead, its interaction with the environment and other
robots may result in ﬂocking, although its only behav-
iors may be avoid-collisions, stay-close-to-the-group,
and keep-going.
For such an approach to work, a behavior-based
system must resolve the issue of choosing a particu-
lar action or behavior from multiple options, a process
known as action selection [13.26] (or also behavior
coordination [13.27], behavior selection [13.28], or be-
havior fusion [13.29]) problem. This is one of the
central design challenges of behavior-based systems.
One approach to action selection is the use of a pre-
deﬁned behavior hierarchy, in which commands from
the highest-ranking active behavior are sent to the actu-
ator and all others are ignored. Numerous approaches
based on other principles as well as ad hoc methods
for addressing the action selection problem have been
developed and demonstrated on robotic systems. These
methods aim to provide increased ﬂexibility but, in
some cases, may do so at the cost of reducing the ef-

Part A | 13.2
312
Part A
Robotics Foundations
ﬁciency or the analyzability of the resulting control
systems. Developed methods include varieties of motor
schemas [13.16], command fusion [13.30], spreading
of activation through a behavior network [13.31, 32],
behavior auctions [13.33, 34], and fuzzy logic [13.35,
36], among many others. Pirjanian [13.27] presents
a survey of action selection mechanisms. Some frame-
works also support the use of several action selection
mechanisms, such as APOC [13.28] (allowing dynamic
selection and changes) and iB2C [13.29] (along with
development guidelines, analysis tools and visualiza-
tion techniques).
13.2.1 Misconceptions
Because behavior-based systems are not always simple
to describe or implement, they are also often misun-
derstood. The most common misconception equates
reactive and behavior-based systems. Historically, the
advent of behavior-based systems was inspired by re-
active systems; both maintain real-time couplings be-
tween sensing and action [13.18, 37], and are struc-
tured and developed bottom-up, consisting of dis-
tributed modules. However, behavior-based systems
are fundamentally more powerful than reactive sys-
tems, because they can store representations [13.38],
while reactive systems cannot. Reactive systems are
limited by their lack of internal state; they are in-
capable of using internal representations and learn-
ing. Behavior-based systems overcome this limitation
because their underlying unit of representation, the
behavior, can store state internally, in a distributed
fashion.
The means by which state and representation are
distributed in behavior-based systems is one of the
sources of the ﬂexibility of the control methodol-
ogy. Representations in behavior-based systems are
distributed, so as to best match and utilize the un-
derlying behavior structure that causes the robot to
act. This is how thinking can be organized in much
the same way as acting. Thus if a robot needs to
plan ahead, it does so in a network of communicat-
ing behaviors, rather than a single centralized plan-
ner. If a robot needs to store a large map, the map
might be distributed over multiple behavior modules
representing its components, such as a network of
landmarks, as in [13.39], or a network of param-
eterized navigation behaviors, as in [13.40, 41], so
that reasoning about the map/environment/task can
be done in an active fashion, through using message
passing within the behavior network. The planning
and reasoning components of the behavior-based sys-
tem use the same mechanisms as the sensing- and
action-oriented behaviors, and as a result do not op-
erate on a fundamentally different time scale and
representation relative to one another. Various forms
of distributed representations are used, ranging from
static table structures and networks, to active pro-
cedural processes implemented within the behavior
networks.
Another area of common misconception relates to
the comparison between behavior-based systems and
hybrid systems. Because the two use such different
modularization strategies, it is often assumed that one
approach (usually hybrid) has improved expressive ca-
pabilities. In fact, behavior-based and hybrid systems
have the same expressive and computational capabili-
ties: both can exploit representations and look ahead,
but they do so in very different ways. This has re-
sulted in different application domains being best suited
to behavior-based versus hybrid systems. Speciﬁcally,
hybrid systems dominate the domain of single-robot
control, unless the task is so time-demanding that a re-
active system must be used. Behavior-based systems
dominate the domain of multi-robot control because
the notion of collections of behaviors within the sys-
tem scales well to collections of such robots, resulting
in robust, adaptive group behavior [13.42, 43]. See
Chap. 53 on multiple mobile robot systems for more
details.
Like hybrid systems, behavior-based systems may
be organized in layers, but unlike hybrid systems,
the layers do not differ from each other drastically
in terms of organization, time scale or representation
used. Behavior-based systems typically do not employ
the hierarchical/sequential division favored by hybrid
approaches. Behavior-based systems do provide both
low-level control and high-level deliberation; the latter
can be performed by one or more distributed repre-
sentations that compute(s) over the other behaviors or
modules, often directly utilizing low-level behaviors
and their outputs. The resulting systems, built from the
bottom-up, do not divide into differently represented
and independent components, and consist of elements
directly tied in some ways to behaviors. The power, el-
egance, and complexity of behavior-based systems all
stem from the ways in which their constituent behav-
iors are designed, coordinated, and used. For instance,
monitoring how behaviors for low-level control con-
tribute to the commands issued over time can be used
to evaluate how appropriate the robot operates in its
environment based on its set of activated behaviors. Dif-
ferent methods can be used to implement such a mecha-
nism, such as temporal analyses [13.36, 44–47], pattern
recognition techniques [13.48] and graph-based repre-
sentations [13.49–51].
Therefore, the principles to keep in mind when ex-
tending behavior-based to higher decisional levels are:

Behavior-Based Systems
13.4 Representation in Behavior-Based Systems
313
Part A | 13.4
1. Use behaviors as the building block of both
decision-making and action execution processes;
2. Use distributed parallel evaluation and concurrent
control over lower-level behaviors, which take real-
time inputs from sensory data and send real-time
commands to effectors;
3. Have no centralized components, each module car-
rying out its own responsibilities.
The following sections describe and illustrate in
more detail how behavior-based principles can be used
to control robots.
13.3 Basis Behaviors
The process of designing a set of behaviors for a robot
is referred to as behavior synthesis, and is typically per-
formed by hand, although some methods for automated
synthesis behaviors have been developed and success-
fully demonstrated [13.52, 53]. In all cases, behaviors
perform a particular activity, attain a goal, or maintain
some state. The notion of deﬁning an optimal behavior
set for a given robot or task has been considered, but
it is generally accepted that such a notion is not realis-
tic as it is dependent on too many speciﬁcs of a given
system and environment that cannot currently be effec-
tively formalized.
Matari´c et al. [13.43, 54] describe basis behav-
iors, also referred to as primitive behaviors, as a tool
for structuring and thus simplifying behavior syn-
thesis. Basis behaviors are a set of behaviors such
that each is necessary, in the sense that each either
achieves, or helps to achieve, a relevant goal that
cannot be achieved without it by other members of
that set. Furthermore, the basis behavior set is sufﬁ-
cient for achieving the goals mandated for the con-
troller. The term basis was chosen to be indicative
of the similar notion within linear algebra. The prop-
erty of necessity or parsimony is analogous to the
idea of linear independence; the idea of sufﬁciency is
similar to the linear algebraic concept of span. Ba-
sis behaviors should be simple, stable, robust, and
scalable.
Another organizational principle of basis behaviors
is orthogonality. Two behaviors are orthogonal if they
do not interfere with one another, each inducing no
side-effects in the other. This is often achieved by hav-
ing behaviors take mutually exclusive sensory inputs.
Another method is to have different behaviors control
separate effectors. This form of factorization is only
feasible when the robot’s dynamics do not inhibit their
separability. In contrast, autonomous helicopter control
is an example of a highly coupled system; Saripalli
et al. [13.55] demonstrated how behavior-based control
can be effectively applied to robust autonomous heli-
copter ﬂight.
Basis behavior design principles have been applied
to single-robot as well as multi-robot behavior-based
systems in a variety of applications, ranging from nav-
igation to foraging, coordinated group movement, box
pushing, and others.
13.4 Representation in Behavior-Based Systems
Embedding representation into behavior-based systems
involves the challenge of conserving the basic principles
of the approach at all levels of system decision-making.
Combining abstract reasoning processes with behaviors
must be done in a way that exploits interaction dynam-
ics and desirable emergent system properties.
Matari´c et al. [13.38, 56] describe work with a robot
named Toto and as shown by
VIDEO 35 , which
introduced the use of distributed representation into
behavior-based systems. Toto’s capabilities included
safe navigation, landmark detection, map learning, and
path planning in the learned map representation, all
within the behavior-based framework. To exploit the
principles underlying behavior-based control, Toto’s
representation was not a centralized map. Instead, any
newly discovered landmark in the environment was as-
signed to a new map representation behavior, which
stored the landmark descriptor (type, estimated Carte-
sian location, and compass orientation). Whenever sen-
sory inputs matched the landmark descriptor, the robot
localized to that particular landmark and the behavior
became active. The following is pseudo-code for each
landmark behavior:
Algorithm 13.1
my-behavior-type: C
my-compass-direction: 0
my-approximate-location: (x,y)
my-approximate-length: 6.5
whenever received (input)

Part A | 13.5
314
Part A
Robotics Foundations
if input(behavior-type) = my-behavior-type
and
input(compass-direction) =
my-compass-direction then
active ¡- true
end if
As new landmarks are discovered, they are added
to the map representation behavior network. In this
way, the topology of the resulting map network is iso-
morphic to the topology of the network graph in the
physical environment Toto has explored. The edges
in the network graph are also communication links
in the behavior network, allowing landmark behaviors
to communicate through local message passing. Con-
sequently, a currently active map behavior can send
a message to its topological neighbor(s), thereby in-
dicating expectation of it being the next recognized
landmark and facilitating Toto’s localization. Planning
in the network takes place through the use of the
same message-passing mechanism. The goal landmark
(which could be selected by the user as part of the
task, such as go to this particular corridor or go to
the nearest north-facing wall), sends messages (i. e.,
spreads activation) from itself to its neighbors, which
pass it on throughout the network. As messages are
passed, the length of each landmark in the graph is
accrued, thereby estimating the length of each path.
The shortest path arriving at the currently active net-
work behavior indicates the best direction to pursue
toward the goal. This is equivalent to a distributed Di-
jkstra search. Importantly, because this search is an
active ongoing process within a behavior map rather
than a static process (as it would be in a centralized map
representation), if the robot is picked up and moved
to another location, as soon as it localizes, it contin-
ues on the optimal path to the goal: each landmark
makes a local decision as to where to go next toward
the goal, and no unique global path is stored in any cen-
tral location/representation. Thus, the path is constantly
refreshed and updated; if any route is blocked, the link
in the graph is disconnected and the shortest path is up-
dated dynamically.
Toto exempliﬁes how, in a behavior-based system,
a representation can be stored in a distributed fashion,
so as to best match the underlying behavior structure
that produces the robot’s external goal-driven activity.
If Toto needs to make high-level decisions (such as
planning ahead to a distant goal), it does so in a net-
work of communicating behaviors, rather than a single
centralized component. This results in scalable and ef-
ﬁcient computation for the system as a whole, since
the typically slower decision-making processes such
as planning are distributed and modularized in a way
that makes them more consistent with the time scale
and representation of the rest of the system. Note the
fundamental difference between this general attempt
of behavior-based systems to homogenize their rep-
resentation through the use of behaviors as universal
modules, compared to hybrid systems which rely on
inherently different representations and time scales at
different levels of the system.
13.5 Learning in Behavior-Based Systems
The ability to improve performance over time and to
reason about the world, in the context of a chang-
ing and dynamic environment, are important areas of
research in situated robotics. Unlike in classical ma-
chine learning where the goal is typically to optimize
performance over a long period of time, in situated
learning the aim is to adapt relatively quickly toward
attaining efﬁciency in the light of uncertainty. Models
from biology are often considered, given its proper-
ties of learning directly from environmental feedback.
Variations and adaptations of machine learning, and in
particular reinforcement learning, have been effectively
applied to behavior-based robots, which have demon-
strated learning to walk [13.57], communicate [13.58],
navigate and create topological maps [13.38, 59], di-
vide tasks [13.23, 60], behave socially [13.61], and
even identify opponents and score goals in robot soc-
cer [13.62]. Methods from artiﬁcial life, evolutionary
computation/genetic algorithms, fuzzy logic, vision and
learning, multi-agent systems, and many other research
areas continue to be actively explored and applied to
behavior-based robots as their role in animal modeling
and practical applications continue to develop.
When operating in unpredictable and partially ob-
servable environments, an autonomous robot must ex-
amine the evolution of its general states, and try to
capture what emerges from the interaction dynamics
with its environment. Temporal integration of differ-
ent types of observations is an important aspect of
that capability [13.63, 64]. Work on motivational sys-
tems [13.47, 65–68] has shown that a balance between
planning and reactivity for goal management can be
achieved using internal variables activated or inhibited
by different factors [13.42, 46, 69, 70]. Motivations can
be cyclic (e.g., circadian rhythms) or change in vari-
ous temporally dependent ways [13.68]. In general, the

Behavior-Based Systems
13.5 Learning in Behavior-Based Systems
315
Part A | 13.5
notion of motivations is used to efﬁciently balance the
need to adapt to the contingencies of the world and to
accomplish the robot’s goals.
In the following subsections, we discuss four suc-
cessfully validated classes of learning approaches in
behavior-based systems. The approaches differ in what
is learned and where learning algorithms are applied,
but in all cases behaviors are used as the underlying
building blocks for the learning process.
13.5.1 Reinforcement Learning
in Behavior-Based Systems
Behaviors are recognized as excellent substrates for
speeding up reinforcement learning (RL), which is
known to suffer from the curse of dimensionality.
The earliest examples of RL in behavior-based sys-
tems demonstrated hexapod walking [13.57] and box-
pushing [13.71]. Both decomposed the control system
into a small set of behaviors, and used generalized in-
put states, thereby effectively reducing the size of the
state space. In the box-pushing example, the learning
problem was broken up into modularized policies for
learning separate mutually exclusive behaviors: for get-
ting out when stuck, for ﬁnding the box when lost and
not stuck, and for pushing the box when in contact with
one and not stuck. The modularization into behaviors
resulted in greatly accelerated as well as more robust
learning. More recently, Kober et al. [13.72] demon-
strated the use of reinforcement learning to learn a set of
meta-parameters that enable the adaptation of learned
motor plans, such as a table tennis pass or a dart throw-
ing task, to new situations.
Scaling up reinforcement learning to multi-robot
behavior-based systems has also been explored [13.23,
73]. In multi-robot systems, the environment presents
further challenges of nonstationarity and credit assign-
ment, due to the presence of other agents and concurrent
learners. The problem was studied in the context of
a foraging task with four robots, each initially equipped
with a small set of basis behaviors (searching, homing,
picking-up, dropping, following, avoiding) and learn-
ing individual behavior selection policies, i. e., which
behavior to execute under which conditions. Due to
interference among concurrent learners, this problem
could not be solved directly by standard RL. Shaping,
a concept from psychology [13.74], was introduced; it
was subsequently adopted in robot RL [13.75]. Shaping
pushes the reward closer to the subgoals of the behav-
ior, and thus encourages the learner to incrementally
improve its behaviors by searching the behavior space
more effectively. Matari´c [13.73] introduced shaping
through progress estimators, measures of progress to-
ward the goal of a given behavior during its execution.
This form of reward shaping addresses two issues as-
sociated with delayed reward: behavior termination and
fortuitous reward. Behavior termination is event-driven;
the duration of any given behavior is determined by
the interaction dynamics with the environment, and can
vary greatly. Progress estimators provide a principled
means for deciding when a behavior may be terminated
even if its goal is not reached and an externally gen-
erated event has not occurred. Fortuitous reward refers
to reward ascribed to a particular situation–behavior (or
state–action) pair which is actually a result of previous
behaviors/actions. It manifests as follows: previous be-
haviors lead the system near the goal, but some event
induced a behavior switch, and subsequent achievement
of the goal is ascribed most strongly to the ﬁnal be-
havior, rather than the previous ones. Shaped reward
in the form of progress estimators effectively elimi-
nates this effect. Because it provides feedback during
behavior execution, it rewards the previous beneﬁ-
cial behaviors more strongly than the ﬁnal one, thus
more appropriately assigning credit. This case there-
fore illustrates how reinforcement learning has been
successfully applied to behavior-based robotics, in par-
ticular at the level of behavior selection. The learning
process is accelerated by the behavior structure, which
provides a higher-level representation of actions and
time-extended dynamics.
13.5.2 Learning Behavior Networks
The modularization of behavior-based systems as net-
works of behaviors allows for learning to be ap-
plied at the network level as well. Nicolescu and
Matari´c [13.40, 41] developed the notion of abstract
behaviors, which separate the activation conditions of
a behavior from its output actions (so-called primitive
behaviors, which share the same principles as basis be-
haviors described Sect. 13.3); this allows for a more
general set of activation conditions to be associated
with the primitive behaviors. While this is not neces-
sary for any single task, it is what provides generality
to the representation. An abstract behavior is a pairing
of a given behavior’s activation conditions (i. e., precon-
ditions) and its effects (i. e., postconditions); the result
is an abstract and general operator much like those used
in classical deliberative systems (Fig. 13.2). Primitive
behaviors, which typically consist of a small basis set,
may involve one or an entire collection of sequential or
concurrently executing behaviors.
Networks of such behaviors are then used to spec-
ify strategies or general plans in a way that merges
the advantages of both abstract representations and
behavior-based systems. The nodes in the networks are
abstract behaviors, and the links between them repre-

Part A | 13.5
316
Part A
Robotics Foundations
sent precondition and postcondition dependencies. The
task plan or strategy is represented as a network of such
behaviors. As in any behavior-based system, when the
conditions of a behavior are met, the behavior is acti-
vated. Analogously, when the conditions of an abstract
behavior are met, the behavior activates one or more
primitive behaviors which achieve the effects speci-
ﬁed in its postconditions. The network topology at the
abstract behavior level encodes any task-speciﬁc behav-
ior sequences, freeing up the primitive behaviors to be
reused for a variety of tasks. Thus, since abstract behav-
ior networks are computationally lightweight, solutions
for multiple tasks can be encoded within a single system
and dynamically switched.
Nicolescu
and
Matari´c
[13.40, 41]
introduced
a means for automatically generating such networks of-
ﬂine as well as at runtime. The latter enables a learning
robot to acquire task descriptions dynamically, while
observing its environment, which can include other
robots and/or a teacher. The methodology was validated
on a mobile robot following a human and acquiring
a representation of the human-demonstrated task by
observing the activation of its own abstract behavior
pre- and postconditions, thus resulting in a new ab-
stract behavior network representing the demonstrated
task [13.76]. The robot was able to acquire novel be-
havior sequences and combinations (i. e., concurrently
executing behaviors), resulting in successful learning of
tasks involving visiting various targets in particular or-
der as shown in
VIDEO 27
and
VIDEO 28 , pick-
ing up, transporting, and delivering objects as shown
in
VIDEO 32
and
VIDEO 33 , dealing with barri-
ers, and maneuvering obstacle courses in speciﬁc ways
as shown in
VIDEO 30
and
VIDEO 31 .
This approach has been extended to learning of
more general task representations, in which every goal
A – Active output/input
P – Precondition input
I – Inhibit input
E – Effects output
Permanent precondition
Enabling precondition
Ordering precondition
Inhibitory link
Abstract behaviors
Primitive behaviors
I
1 A
E
P
2
A
E
I
3
A
P
A
A
A
A
A
E
4
A
E
P
Fig. 13.2 Behavior network
is achieved through a linear superposition (or fusion)
of robot primitives, and sequencing across goals is
achieved through arbitration [13.77]. In this work, con-
trollers are built from two components: behavior prim-
itives (BPs) and fusion primitives (FPs), which can be
sequenced to form behavior networks. The behavior
primitives perform a set of actions under given environ-
mental conditions and are represented using a schema-
based approach [13.78]. A fusion primitive encapsulates
a set of multiple concurrently running primitive be-
haviors through linear combination of the motor com-
mands, expressed as a vector in the robot’s coordinate
system. The FPs combine these vectors by weighting
them and fusing them through vector addition. The
method allows for learning of both the goals involved in
the task (represented as the sequence of goal-achieving
fusion primitives) and also of the particular ways in
which the same goals can be achieved (captured in
the behavior weights). Using this learning approach,
a robot is capable of learning multiple navigation styles
(such as staying on the center/left/right side of a corri-
dor, preferences for turning left or right at T-junctions
and particular styles of navigating around obstacles).
13.5.3 Learning from Demonstration
in Behavior-Based Systems
Learning by demonstration has also been combined
with behavior-based systems to produce one-shot learn-
ing and teaching mechanisms for robot control [13.40,
79]. Furthermore, this type of behavior-based archi-
tecture has been used to learn ship navigation strate-
gies [13.80]; during a learning phase, an instructor
selects behaviors for a ship to execute in order to reach
a speciﬁc goal, and a subsequent ofﬂine stage then gen-
erates dependency links between the behaviors that it
witnessed during the learning phase.
Another form of learning by demonstration has used
probabilistic methods to select and combine multiple
behaviors [13.81]. There, the problem of learning what
behaviors to execute during autonomous navigation is
treated as a state estimation problem. During a learning
phase, the robot observes commands used by a teacher.
A particle ﬁlter then fuses the control commands that
were demonstrated by the teacher to estimate behavior
activation. The method produces a robust controller that
is well suited for dynamic environments.
Learning by demonstration has also been used in
a case-base reasoning framework [13.82], to teach a 4-
legged Aibo robot different low-level navigation behav-
iors, such as following a ball and reaching a target. The
learned behaviors encapsulate the kinematics and dy-
namics of the robot’s control through the instruction
process, which would be more difﬁcult to achieve if de-

Behavior-Based Systems
13.5 Learning in Behavior-Based Systems
317
Part A | 13.5
signed by hand, and can successfully be combined into
a newer, higher-level behavior, thus enabling hierarchi-
cal representations of robot tasks.
A method based on decision trees and Support Vec-
tor Machines has been used in [13.83] to ﬁnd mappings
between sensory data and patterns produced by behav-
iors in a learned feature space. The mapping allows
a robot to identify behaviors shown by a human demon-
strator and to further learn a sequential representation of
the demonstrated task.
13.5.4 Learning from History
of Behavior Use
Most deliberative approaches derive knowledge for rea-
soning about the world from sensor inputs and actions
taken by the robot. This results in complex state-space
representations of the world and does not take into con-
sideration the context in which these sensations/actions
are taken. As already discussed, behaviors, which are
readily used as low-level control blocks driven by what
is experienced from the interactions with the environ-
ment, can also serve as an abstract representation to
model those interactions. One approach is to use history
information [13.84], i. e., to explicitly take into consid-
eration the time sequence of observations in order to
make a decision. Applying this idea to behavior-based
systems, by knowing the purpose of each of the behav-
iors and by observing their history of use, the robot
can reason and ground its intentions in what it is ex-
periencing in its operating environment. The concept of
abstract behavior is exploited here as well, to activate
behaviors and as a representation on which to learn.
Learning from history has been validated in
behavior-based systems capable of making the robot
change its behavior selection strategy for foraging col-
ored objects (blocks) to a homing region in nonsta-
tionary, dynamically changing environments involving
multiple concurrently learning robots [13.49–51]. In
that foraging task, the robot is given two subtasks:
search for a block (searching task), and bring it to the
home region (homing task). The robot is given behav-
iors to accomplish these tasks: one behavior for the
searching task, called searching-block, and two for the
homing task, homing and drop-block. A velocity con-
trol behavior is also used in both of these tasks to make
the robot move. All these behaviors are referred to as
task behaviors. Conditions for activating task behaviors
are preprogrammed based on the presence or absence
of a block in front of the robot and the proximity of the
home region.
The robot also needs to navigate safely in the en-
vironment. In this approach, an avoidance behavior is
activated unless the robot is near home and carrying
a block; otherwise it is disabled to allow the robot to
approach the home region. This type of behavior, used
for handling harmful situations and interference while
accomplishing a task, is referred to as a maintenance
behavior. The designer determines the conditions in
which maintenance behaviors should be used, but can-
not indicate when they will occur during the task, as
that is tied to the dynamics of the interaction between
the robot and its environment.
The robot learns to use alternative behaviors
(follow-side, rest, and turn-randomly), which introduce
variety into its action repertoire by changing the way
it accomplishes its tasks. In contrast to other types of
behaviors, these have no a priori activation conditions;
the objective is to allow the robot to learn when to acti-
vate these behaviors according to past experiences, for
some preset periods of time, when it is experiencing
interference in accomplishing its task. Figure 13.3 il-
lustrates how the behaviors are prioritized using a ﬁxed
suppression mechanism, similar to the subsumption
architecture [13.9] but with the difference that the ac-
tivated behaviors, i. e., those allowed to issue outputs,
change dynamically.
Following behavior-based principles, an activated
behavior may or may not be used to control the robot,
Behavior sequence
...FFFAAAAAASSSSYYYYYHHH...SSSSAAAA
Activation of an alternative-behavior
Interaction model level
Behavior level
Rest
R
Avoidance
A
Drop-block
D
Follow-side
F
Searching-block
S
Homing
H
Turn-randonly
T
Velocity-control
V
Tree representation of history of behavior use
A,3
S,3
E,3
S,3
A,5
S,5
60 %
T,1
S,1
E,1
A,2
F,2
70 %
S,1
E,1 80 %
S
e
a
r
c
h
i
n
g
H
o
m
i
n
g
(Wires)
Commands
(velocity, rotation)
Fig. 13.3 Organization of the behavior level and the interaction
model level. Behavior on colored background represent an example
of activated behaviors for the searching task, with Turn-randomly as
a chosen alternative behavior. For clarity, sensory inputs to behav-
iors are not shown

Part A | 13.6
318
Part A
Robotics Foundations
depending on the sensory conditions it monitors and
the arbitration mechanism. An activated behavior is
used only when it provides commands that actually
control the robot. Whenever a behavior is used, its cor-
responding symbol is sent to the interaction model,
generating the sequence of behaviors used over time.
Separate learning trees are used for each task; determin-
ing which one to use is done based on the activated task
behavior.
The algorithm uses a tree structure to store the his-
tory of behavior use. The upper part of Fig. 13.3 shows
a typical tree with nodes storing the behavior (H for
use by homing and drop-block) used for controlling the
robot while accomplishing its task, and n, the number
of times a transition between the node itself and its suc-
cessor has been made (as observed from behavior use).
Initially, the tree for a particular task is empty and is
incrementally constructed as the robot goes about its
task. Leaf nodes are labeled with E (for end-node) and
store the total performance of the particular tree path.
Whenever a path is completely reused, when the same
sequence of behaviors is used, the E node is updated
with the average of the stored and current performances
for recent trials.
Learning is done through reinforcement. Depending
on the domains and the tasks, a variety of factors can
be used to evaluate performance, and different metrics
can be used with this learning algorithm. To see how
far the idea of self-evaluation and learning by observ-
ing behavior use can be taken, the evaluation function
used here is not based on characteristics about the envi-
ronment or the task. Instead, it is based on the amount
of time behaviors are used. Comparison between the
time spent using behaviors associated with the tasks
and the time spent exploiting maintenance behaviors is
used to derive the evaluation criterion. Consequently,
behavioral selection strategy is derived from what can
be learned from the experiences of the robot in its en-
vironment, without having to characterize a priori what
can be considered to be optimal operating conditions in
the environment.
Using the tree and the evaluation function, the algo-
rithm has two options for using a maintenance behavior:
1. Not to make any changes in its active behavior set
(the observe option);
2. To activate an alternative behavior.
The sequence of nodes in a tree path characterizes the
interactions experienced by the robot in the world. Dif-
ferent selection criteria can be used by comparing the
performance at the current position in the tree with
the expected performance, following an exploration (to
learn the effects of alternative behaviors) then exploita-
tion (to exploit what was learned in previous trials)
strategy. The expected performance of a given node
is the sum of the stored end-node performances in its
subpaths, multiplied by the frequency of use of the sub-
paths relative to the current position in the tree. Finally,
since this algorithm is used in noisy and nonstationary
conditions, deleting paths is necessary to keep the inter-
action model up to date. This is done by keeping only
a ﬁxed number of the most recent paths in the tree.
Results obtained with this approach show that the
robot is able to learn unanticipated strategies (like rest-
ing in front of a static obstacle to increase the turning
angle when it starts to move again, making it locate
a target) and original ones (like yielding when close to
other robots or following walls when the center of the
pen is crowded). Developing such capabilities is impor-
tant in general, because it makes it possible for robots
to learn in nonstationary environments, which are com-
mon in natural settings.
13.6 Applications and Continuing Work
Behavior-based robots have demonstrated various stan-
dard capabilities, including obstacle avoidance, nav-
igation, terrain mapping, following, chasing/pursuit,
object manipulation, task division and cooperation, and
learning maps [13.85], navigation and walking. They
have also demonstrated some novel applications like
large-scale group behaviors including ﬂocking, for-
aging, and soccer playing, human–robot interaction,
and modeling insect [13.86] and even human behav-
ior [13.87–89]. Behavior-based methods span mobile
robots, shopping carts [13.25], underwater vehicles,
planetary rovers for space exploration, assistive [13.90],
interactive and social robots [13.91, 92], as well as
snake-like modular robots [13.93], robots capable of
grasping, manipulation, walking, running, and many
others. Consumer market products, such as the iRobot
Roomba Robotic Floorvac [13.94], also use behavior-
based control, demonstrating its broad applicability.
The use of behavior-based architectures for robot
control has evolved from single-system implementa-
tions to approaches that combine forms of learning,
state estimation, and distributed computation. Behav-
iors have been combined with fuzzy inference systems
for indoor navigation using mobile robots [13.35, 36,
95–97], where a command fusion module acts as an
arbiter that combines multiple fuzzy behavior outputs

Behavior-Based Systems
13.6 Applications and Continuing Work
319
Part A | 13.6
into a single control signal. This strategy ensures the
robot is capable of making inferences in the face of
uncertainty.
Behavior-based methods have been employed in
multi-robot systems from the outset [13.43], as il-
lustrated by
VIDEO 34 , and are still used [13.98,
99]. Multi-robot researchers also consider tasks re-
quiring tightly coupled cooperation; [13.100] for an
overview and discussion. Such tasks typically require
low-level sensor-sharing and/or for higher-level explicit
coordination. Behavior-based controllers have been de-
veloped and extended in order to address these chal-
lenges. For example, Parker et al. [13.101] considered
reusable behavior units that can be automatically redis-
tributed for low-level information processing. Werger
and Matari´c [13.102] described broadcast of local el-
igibility (BLE) to enable higher-level group behav-
iors by allowing communications to inﬂuence each
robot’s local action selection mechanism. Gerkey and
Matari´c [13.103, 104] demonstrated scalable and efﬁ-
cient market-based coordination algorithms for multi-
robot coordination in a variety of tasks, including
tightly coupled ones (e.g., box-pushing [13.105]).
A similar strategy was applied to a robot sensor net-
work, which achieves concurrent, sequential and asyn-
chronous multi-robot task allocation [13.106]. The
market-based auction algorithm developed in this sys-
tem uses a ﬁtness function that enhances fault tolerance
and the fairness of the task allocation process. Sedat
and Aydan [13.107] use a fractal conductivity-based ap-
proach to generate movements of a coordinated team of
mobile sensors. The team explores an environment to
reach a target that is a source of a potential ﬁeld chemi-
cal substance contaminated into sea or lake water.
Several researchers have shown that behavior-based
controllers allow for sophisticated coordination through
a utility-centered model of the collective task. Behav-
iors use this representation to produce actions that
consider each robot’s impact on the performance of the
group as a whole. Iocchi et al. [13.108] have shown
this in heterogeneous multi-robot system, while Batalin
and Sukhatme [13.109] demonstrated that complex,
interrelated and dynamic tasks can be performed in
coordinated ways in robots with behavior-based con-
trollers interacting with a sensor network. Stroupe and
Balch [13.110] considered a mapping task and devel-
oped move value estimation for robot teams (MVERT),
essentially a behavior-based method for maximizing
group knowledge.
Because behavior-based methods lend itself natu-
rally to multi-robot control problems, they have had
a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on that ﬁeld of research. Sim-
mons et al. [13.111] described a hybrid architecture
designed for group-level coordination which employs
behaviors as a method for organizing low-level safety-
critical controller code. Behaviors have also been used
to structure controllers and networked communication
in minimalist systems [13.112]. Some multi-robot re-
search with a control-theoretic ﬂavor has used separate
executable processes that can be switched on and off
dynamically depending on task constraints, in a manner
very similar to behavior-based control [13.113].
Behavior-based controllers have also been built us-
ing genetic algorithms [13.114], in which the controller
learned through coevolution ﬁve behavioral compo-
nents (waypoint prediction, force ﬁeld trajectory, speed
regulation, reversing and heading alignment), enabling
it to outperform all its opponents in a real time car
racing game held during the 2007 IEEE Congress on
Evolutionary Computation (CEC).
Behavior-based architectures have also been used in
complex vision systems for identiﬁcation rather than
control. In those contexts, each behavior represents
a small unit of visual computation, such as frame differ-
encing, motion detection, and edge detection, resulting
in biologically inspired vision and attention behav-
ior [13.115, 116].
Behavior-based architectures have also been devel-
oped for the control and learning in humanoid robots.
In the past, the Cog project demonstrated behavior-
based control for articulated manual and eye–hand co-
ordination [13.117, 118]. Edsinger [13.119] developed
a lightweight behavior architecture for organizing per-
ception and control of Domo. The architecture allows
for speciﬁcation of time-contingent behaviors and dis-
tributed computation, resulting in a real-time controller
that allows Domo to operate in an environment with
humans. Kismet [13.120] involved several behavior-
based systems that controlled perception, motivation,
attention, behavior, and movement in a human–robot
interaction (HRI) context. Each behavior represented
Kismet’s individual drives and motivations. Situated
modules and episode rules were introduced as part of an
HRI architecture by Ishiguro et al. [13.121] and Kanda
et al. [13.122]; they employed an ordered set of general-
use situated modules and behaviors that are contingent
on a condition, used in sequences deﬁned by a set of
task-speciﬁc episode rules.
13.6.1 Adaptive Behavior Selection –
A Case Study
Designing robots capable of safely and effectively in-
teracting with humans in real-world settings is one of
the ultimate challenges in robotics. Representation and
abstract reasoning are necessary to keep up with and
adapt to the inherently complex properties of such en-
vironments and tasks.

Part A | 13.6
320
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Beliefs, emotional signaling
Intentions, emotional signaling
Motivational
percepts
Behavioral
percepts
Intention
workspace
(attentional,
emotional)
Action
selection
Perception
Modulation
Sensory 
inputs
Commands
Exploitation
Configuration
and
activation
Motivations
Behaviors
Actions
Desires
Organization
layer
Coordination
layer
Behavioral
layer
Fig. 13.4 Hybrid Behavior-
Based Architecture (HBBA)
Adaptation in behavior-based systems [13.28] gen-
erally consists of modifying internal parameters of
the behaviors, or modifying the set of activated be-
haviors. Many possible avenues to implement such
mechanisms exist. One possibility consists of adding
to a behavior-based architecture the idea of intention-
ally activating, monitoring, and conﬁguring behaviors.
An architectural framework based on this idea has
evolved over the years, having been implemented on di-
verse robotic platforms and tested in various operational
conditions:

EMIB – Emotion, Motivation and Intentional Be-
haviors – has been applied to robots with different
capabilities, such as a robot that uses activation vari-
ables, topological localization and mapping, and
fuzzy behaviors to explore and characterize an envi-
ronment [13.45, 46], and on an autonomous rolling
robot that only uses simple sensors and a micro-
controller to generate purposeful movements for
conducting studies regarding on toddler–robot inter-
action [13.123, 124].

MBA – Motivated Behavioral Architecture [13.125,
126]). In the American Association for Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AAAI) mobile robot competition and
as shown in
VIDEO 417 , MBA was used with
the Spartacus robot to demonstrate how a behavior-
based system could integrate planning and sequenc-
ing tasks under temporal constraints, interleaving
planning and execution [13.127] (as in [13.128]
and [13.129]), and with spatial localization capa-
bilities using a previously generated metric map.
The system also used behavioral message read-
ing [13.130], sound processing capabilities with an
eight-microphone system for source localization,
tracking, real-time sound separation [13.131, 132],
and a touch screen interface to allow the robot to
acquire information about where it is in the world,
what it should do, and how it should do it [13.125].
HBBA
–
Hybrid
Behavior-Based
Architec-
ture [13.133] – illustrated by Fig. 13.4, is the current
instantiation of the architectural framework. The
Behavioral Layer consists of behaviors that are acti-
vated and conﬁgured according to what are referred
to as the Intentions of the system (derived by the
Motivation Layer). Intentions are associated with the
activation and conﬁguration of behaviors and with
the modulation of perceptual modules. The highest
layer uses Motivations acting as distributed processes
(just like Behaviors) and manifesting Desires for the
satisfaction or inhibition of Intentions. The Intention
Workspace processes these Desires to issue Intentions.
The Intention Workspace can also provide Emotional
Signaling
(detecting
situations
based
on
models
of how Behaviors are exploited over time [13.44,
134–136]), and generates Beliefs (i. e., knowledge
about the interaction dynamics of the robot and the
environment) which can be used to identify conﬂicts
between Desires and their satisfaction. The objective

Behavior-Based Systems
13.6 Applications and Continuing Work
321
Part A | 13.6
Expressive
face
Speaker
DEAs
Gripper
Powered
wheels
Laser
range finder
Kinect sensor
Pan-tilt unit
Microphones
Omnidirectional
platform
Fig. 13.5 Photographs of
the front and back of the
robot, IRL-1 (30 DOF and
55 sensors). DEAs stand for
Differential Elastic Actuators
(after [13.133])
is to have Intentions emerge from the interaction of
independent motivations. Desires are communicated
to the Intention Workspace, which plays a role similar
to a coordination layer in a hybrid architecture, or to
action selection with motivations acting as behaviors
and Intentions emerging from the interaction of inde-
pendent motivations. Our design requirements for the
Intention Workspace module is to implement generic
mechanisms (i. e., mechanisms that are independent of
the robot’s physical capabilities and intended usage) to
generate Beliefs (i. e., data structures that represent de-
sires, knowledge about the interaction dynamics of the
robot and the environment), and identify conﬂicts be-
tween Desires and their satisfaction. The Exploitation
link is used to derive information about the effective
use of Behaviors as inﬂuenced by the events occurring
in the world and the Action Selection mechanism.
We believe that observing the exploitation of behav-
iors over time is an important source of information
about the emerging functionality that comes from the
Behaviors and the Motivations, because it combines
both a representation of the environment (from the
behavioral percepts associated with Behaviors) and of
the control policy (from the internal decision-making
processes).
HBBA is currently being used with IRL-1 [13.137,
138], an interactive omnidirectional platform shown in
Fig. 13.5,
VIDEO 418 and
VIDEO 419 .
IRL-1 has behaviors for safe navigation, recharge
and social interaction (with gestures, voice and vision).
Action selection is priority-based. Motivations are im-
plemented to provide the intrinsic modes of operation
of the robot (safe navigation while exploring the world,
interact with people and ensuring energetic autonomy),
to localize and plan paths to desired locations, and even-
tually to plan and schedule tasks [13.139]. Just like
action selection at the behavior-based level, the Inten-
tion Workspace plays a key role. More speciﬁcally, in
HBBA, it involves:

A tree representation of desires. Each desire can be
associated with a particular conﬁguration and acti-
vation of one or more behaviors. The tree represen-
tation of desires provides a general representation
of Desires’ interdependencies issued by the inde-
pendent motivations, from high-level/abstract de-
sires (e.g., Deliver message) to primitive/behavior-
related desires (e.g., Avoid obstacles), allowing for
behavior conﬁgurations to arise in a distributed
fashion based on the capabilities available to the
robot. This allows motivations to exchange informa-
tion asynchronously on how to activate, conﬁgure,
and monitor behaviors. For instance, one motiva-
tion may monitor the robot’s energy level to issue
a recharging desire, which would be associated with
a Recharge behavior that would make the robot
opportunistically detect and dock to a charging sta-
tion. Meanwhile, if the robot knows where it is and
can determine a path to a nearby charging station,
a path planning motivation could add a sub-desire
of navigating to this position, using a Goto behav-
ior. If a person is detected, a social motivation may
provide an alternative desire by engaging into a con-
versation to ask for guidance toward the nearest
charging station. The robot would then have three
alternative solutions to fulﬁll its desire to recharge.

A representation of the history of behavior exploita-
tions (similar to one described in Sect. 13.5.4), in-
dexed by intentions. For instance, for the recharging
desire example, if being guided by people reveals
not to be as reliable as using the internal map, a pref-
erence could be given to the second option.

Part A | 13.7
322
Part A
Robotics Foundations

An attention selection mechanism to module com-
putational load, by percepts selection or out-
put complexity reduction. For instance, artiﬁcial
audition [13.131, 132] can be modulated to de-
tect sounds, localize sound sources or separate
sound sources depending on the presence of peo-
ple surrounding the robot and its intentions to
interact. A Simultaneous Localization and Map-
ping (SLAM) algorithm can change resolution de-
pending on available processing load of onboard
computers.

An emotion-based mechanism to regulate conﬂicts
between desires and intentions. Robot’s adaptabil-
ity in dynamic, continuous and unpredictable en-
vironments ultimately depends on the detection
of the situations for which their regular decision-
making process is not appropriate. Psychologists
have identiﬁed that one of the functions of hu-
man emotion is to highlight these kinds of situ-
ations, allowing other cognitive processes to ad-
dress them. Therefore, an emotional process that
detect such situations from the use of temporal
models of intentions could be beneﬁcial [13.44].
This process does not rely on a priori knowl-
edge of speciﬁc environmental conditions nor of
the robot’s mission objectives, but only on tempo-
ral analysis of how behaviors satisfy the robot’s
intentions.
13.7 Conclusions and Further Reading
This chapter has described behavior-based control,
a methodology for single- and multi-robot control
aimed at situated robots operating in unconstrained,
challenging, and dynamic conditions in the real
world. While inspired by the philosophy of reac-
tive control, behavior-based systems are fundamen-
tally more expressive and powerful, enabling rep-
resentation, planning, and learning capabilities. Dis-
tributed behaviors are used as the underlying building
blocks for these capabilities, allowing behavior-based
systems to take advantage of dynamic interactions
with the environment rather than rely solely on ex-
plicit reasoning and planning. As the complexity of
robots continues to increase, behavior-based princi-
ples and their applications in robot architectures and
deployed systems will evolve as well, demonstrating
increasingly higher levels of situated intelligence and
autonomy.
Interested readers can ﬁnd more information regard-
ing behavior-based systems in other chapters of this
Handbook, as well as in Brooks [13.140], Arkin [13.22],
in artiﬁcial intelligence and robotics textbooks [13.141,
142], and in introductory textbooks on mobile robot
control [13.143–145].
Video-References
VIDEO 27
Experience-based learning of high-level task representations: Demonstration
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/13/videodetails/27
VIDEO 28
Experience-based learning of high-level task representations: Reproduction
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/13/videodetails/28
VIDEO 30
Experience-based learning of high-level task representations: Demonstration (2)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/13/videodetails/30
VIDEO 31
Experience-based learning of high-level task representations: Reproduction (2)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/13/videodetails/31
VIDEO 32
Experience-based learning of high-level task representations: Demonstration (3)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/13/videodetails/32
VIDEO 33
Experience-based learning of high-level task representations: Reproduction (3)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/13/videodetails/33
VIDEO 34
The Nerd Herd
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/13/videodetails/34
VIDEO 35
Toto
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/13/videodetails/35
VIDEO 417
SpartacUS
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/13/videodetails/417
VIDEO 418
Natural interaction design of a humanoid robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/13/videodetails/418
VIDEO 419
Using ROS4iOS
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/13/videodetails/419

Behavior-Based Systems
References
323
Part A | 13
References
13.1
J.S. Albus: Outline for a theory of intelligence, IEEE
Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 21(3), 473–509 (1991)
13.2
G. Girald, R. Chatila, M. Vaisset: An integrated
navigation and motion control system for au-
tonomous multisensory mobile robots, Proc. 1st
Int. Symp. Robotics Res. (1983)
13.3
H. Moravec, A. Elfes: High resolution maps from
wide angle sonar, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (1995)
13.4
J. Laird, P. Rosenbloom: An investigation into re-
active planning in complex domains, Proc. 9th
Natl. Conf. Am. Assoc. Artif. Intell. (1990) pp. 1022–
1029
13.5
N.J. Nilsson: Shakey the Robot, Tech. Rep. No. 325
(SRI International, Menlo Park 1984)
13.6
S.J. Rosenschein, L.P. Kaelbling: A situated view of
representation and control, Artif. Intell. 73, 149–
173 (1995)
13.7
R.A. Brooks: Elephants don’t play chess. In: De-
signing Autonomous Agents: Theory and Practice
form Biology to Engineering and Back, ed. by
P. Maes (MIT Press, Cambridge 1990) pp. 3–15
13.8
R. Brooks, J. Connell: Asynchrounous distributed
control system for a mobile robot, Proc. SPIE In-
tell. Control Adapt. Syst. (1986) pp. 77–84
13.9
R.A. Brooks: A robust layered control system for
a mobile robot, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. RA-2(1),
14–23 (1986)
13.10
P.E. Agre, D. Chapman: Pengi: An implementation
of a theory of activity, Proc. 6th Natl. Conf. Am.
Assoc. Artif. Intell. (1987) pp. 268–272
13.11
R.A. Brooks: Intelligence without representation,
Artif. Intell. 47, 139–159 (1991)
13.12
M. Schoppers: Universal plans for reactive robots
in unpredictable domains, Proc. Int. Jt. Conf. Artif.
Intell. (1987) pp. 1039–1046
13.13
P.E. Agre, D. Chapman: What are plans for? In:
Designing Autonomous Agents: Theory and Prac-
tice form Biology to Engineering and Back, ed. by
P. Maes (MIT Press, Cambridge 1990) pp. 17–34
13.14
G.N. Saridis: Intelligent robotic control, IEEE Trans.
Autom. Control AC-28(5), 547–557 (1983)
13.15
R.J. Firby: An investigation into reactive plan-
ning in complex domains, Proc. AAAI Conf. (1987)
pp. 202–206
13.16
R. Arkin: Towards the unification of navigational
planning and reactive control, Proc. Am. Assoc.
Artif. Intell., Spring Symp. Robotics Navig. (1989)
pp. 1–5
13.17
C. Malcolm, T. Smithers: Symbol grounding via
a hybrid architecture in an autonomous assembly
system. In: Designing Autonomous Agents: The-
ory and Practice from Biology to Engineering and
Back, ed. by P. Maes (MIT Press, Cambridge 1990)
pp. 123–144
13.18
J.H. Connell: SSS: A hybrid architecture applied
to robot navigation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (1992) pp. 2719–2724
13.19
E. Gat: Integrating planning and reacting in
a heterogeneous asynchronous architecture for
controlling real-world mobile robots, Proc. Natl.
Conf. Artif. Intell. (1992) pp. 809–815
13.20
M. Georgeoff, A. Lansky: Reactive reasoning and
planning, Proc. 6th Natl.Conf. Am. Assoc. Artif. In-
tell. (1987) pp. 677–682
13.21
B. Pell, D. Bernard, S. Chien, E. Gat, N. Muscettola,
P. Nayak, M. Wagner, B. Williams: An autonomous
spacecraft agent prototype, Auton. Robots 1-2(5),
1–27 (1998)
13.22
R.C. Arkin: Behavior-Based Robotics (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1998)
13.23
M.J. Matarić: Reinforcement learning in the
multi-robot domain, Auton. Robots 4(1), 73–83
(1997)
13.24
P. Bonasso, R.J. Firby, E. Gat, D. Kortenkamp,
D.P. Miller, M.G. Slack: Experiences with an archi-
tecture for intelligent reactive agents, Proc. Int. Jt.
Conf. Artif. Intell. (1995)
13.25
M. Goller, T. Kerscher, J.M. Zollner, R. Dillmann,
M. Devy, T. Germa, F. Lerasle: Setup and control
architecture for an interactive shopping cart in
human all day environments, Proc. Int. Conf. Adv.
Robotics (2009) pp. 1–6
13.26
P. Pirjanian: Multiple objective behavior-based
control, Robotics Auton. Syst. 31(1-2), 53–60
(2000)
13.27
P.
Pirjanian:
Behavior
Coordination
Mecha-
nisms – State-of-the-Art, Tech. Rep. IRIS-99-
375 (Univ. of Southern California, Institute of
Robotics and Intelligent Systems, Los Angeles
1999) pp. 99–375
13.28
M. Scheutz, V. Andronache: Architectural mecha-
nisms for dynamic changes of behavior selection
strategies in behavior-based systems, IEEE Trans.
Syst. Man Cybern. B 34(6), 2377–2395 (2004)
13.29
M. Proetzsch, T. Luksch, K. Berns: Development
of complex robotic systems using the behavior-
based control architecture iB2C, Robotics Auton.
Syst. 58(1), 46–67 (2010)
13.30
D. Payton, D. Keirsey, D. Kimble, J. Krozel,
J. Rosenblatt: Do whatever works: A robust ap-
proach to fault-tolerant autonomous control,
Appl. Intell. 2(3), 225–250 (1992)
13.31
P. Maes: Situated agents can have goals. In: De-
signing Autonomous Agents: Theory and Prac-
tice form Biology to Engineering and Back, ed.
by P. Maes (MIT Press, Cambridge 1990) pp. 49–
70
13.32
P. Maes: The dynamics of action selection, Proc.
Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell. (1989) pp. 991–997
13.33
B.A. Towle, M. Nicolescu: Real-world implemen-
tation of an Auction Behavior-Based Robotic Ar-
chitecture (ABBRA), Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Technol.
Pract. Robot Appl. (2012) pp. 79–85
13.34
B.A. Towle, M. Nicolescu: Fusing multiple sensors
through behaviors with the distributed architec-
ture, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multisens. Fusion Integr.
Intell. Syst. (2010) pp. 115–120
13.35
A. Saffiotti: The uses of fuzzy logic in autonomous
robot navigation, Soft Comput. 1, 180–197 (1997)

Part A | 13
324
Part A
Robotics Foundations
13.36
F. Michaud: Selecting behaviors using fuzzy logic,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Fuzzy Syst. (1997)
13.37
E. Gat: On three-layer architectures. In: Artificial
Intelligence and Mobile Robotics, ed. by D. Ko-
rtenkamp, R. Bonasso, R. Murphy (MIT/AAAI Press,
Cambridge 1998)
13.38
M.J. Matarić: Integration of representation into
goal-driven behavior-based robots, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 8(3), 304–312 (1992)
13.39
M.J.
Matarić:
Navigating
with
a
rat
brain:
A neurobiologically-inspired model for robot
spatial representation, From animals to animats.
Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Simul. Adapt. Behav. (1990)
pp. 169–175
13.40
M. Nicolescu, M.J. Matarić: Experience-based
representation construction: Learning from hu-
man and robot teachers, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robot Syst. (2001) pp. 740–745
13.41
M. Nicolescu, M.J. Matarić: A hierarchical archi-
tecture for behavior-based robots, Proc. Int. Jt.
Conf. Auton. Agents Multiagent Syst. (2002)
13.42
L.E. Parker: ALLIANCE: An architecture for fault tol-
erant multirobot cooperation, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 14(2), 220–240 (1998)
13.43
M.J. Matarić: Designing and understanding adap-
tive group behavior, Adapt. Behav. 4(1), 50–81
(1995)
13.44
C. Raïevsky, F. Michaud:
Improving situated
agents adaptability using interruption theory of
emotions, From animals to animats. Proc. Int.
Conf. Simul. Adapt. Behav. (2008) pp. 301–310
13.45
F. Michaud, G. Lachiver, C.T. Le Dinh: Architectural
methodology based on intentional configuration
of behaviors, Comput. Intell. 17(1), 132–156 (2001)
13.46
F. Michaud:
EMIB–Computational
architecture
based on emotion and motivation for inten-
tional selection and configuration of behaviour-
producing modules, Cogn. Sci. Q. 3-4, 340–361
(2002)
13.47
F. Michaud, M.T. Vu: Managing robot autonomy
and interactivity using motives and visual com-
munication, Proc. Int. Conf. Auton. Agents (1999)
pp. 160–167
13.48
O. Petterson, L. Karlsson, A. Saffiotti: Model-
free execution monitoring in behavior-based
robotics, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 37(4), 890–
901 (2007)
13.49
F. Michaud, M.J. Matarić: Learning from his-
tory for behavior-based mobile robots in non-
stationary environments, Auton. Robots 5(3/4),
335–354 (1998)
13.50
F. Michaud, M.J. Matarić: Learning from history for
behavior-based mobile robots in non-stationary
environments II, Auton. Robots 31(3-4), 335–354
(1998)
13.51
F. Michaud, M.J. Matarić: Representation of be-
havioral history for learning in nonstationary
conditions, Robotics Auton. Syst. 29(2), 1–14 (1999)
13.52
O.C. Jenkins, M.J. Matarić: Deriving action and
behavior primitives from human motion data,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot Syst. (2002)
pp. 2551–2556
13.53
O.C. Jenkins, M.J. Matarić: Automated derivation
of behavior vocabularies for autonomous hu-
manoid motion, Proc. 2nd Int. Jt. Conf. Auton.
Agents Multiagent Syst. (2003)
13.54
M.J. Matarić: Designing emergent behaviors: From
local interactions to collective intelligence, From
animals to animats 2. Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Simul.
Adapt. Behav. (1992) pp. 432–441
13.55
S. Saripalli, D.J. Naffin, G.S. Sukhatme: Au-
tonomous flying vehicle research at the University
of Southern California, Proc. 1st Int. Work. Multi-
Robot Syst. (2002) pp. 73–82
13.56
M.J. Matarić: Behavior-based control: Examples
from navigation, learning, and group behavior,
J. Exp. Theor. Artif. Intell. 9(2-3), 323–336 (1997)
13.57
P. Maes, R.A. Brooks: Learning to coordinate be-
haviors, Proc. 8th Natl. Conf. Artif. Intell. AAAI
(1990) pp. 796–802
13.58
H. Yanco, L.A. Stein: An adaptive communica-
tion protocol for cooperating mobile robots, From
animals to animats 3. Proc 3rd Int. Conf. Simul.
Adapt. Behav. (1993) pp. 478–485
13.59
J.R. del Millàn: Learning efficient reactive behav-
ioral sequences from basic reflexes in a goal-
directed autonomous robot, From animals to an-
imats 3. Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Simul. Adapt. Behav.
(1994) pp. 266–274
13.60
L. Parker: Learning in cooperative robot teams,
Proc. Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell. (1993) pp. 12–23
13.61
M.J. Matarić: Learning to behave socially, From
animals to animats 3. Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Simul.
Adapt. Behav. (1994) pp. 453–462
13.62
M. Asada, E. Uchibe, S. Noda, S. Tawaratsumida,
K. Hosoda: Coordination of multiple behaviors
acquired by a vision-based reinforcement learn-
ing, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot Syst.
(1994)
13.63
J. McCarthy: Making robots conscious of their
mental states, AAAI Spring Symp. (1995)
13.64
T. Smithers: On why better robots make it harder,
From animals to animats. Proc. 3rd Int. Conf.
Simul. Adapt. Behav. (1994) pp. 64–72
13.65
D. McFarland, T. Bösser: Intelligent Behavior in
Animals and Robots (MIT Press, Cambridge 1993)
13.66
P. Maes: A bottom-up mechanism for behavior
selection in an artificial creature, From animals to
animats. Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Simul. Adapt. Behav.
(1991) pp. 238–246
13.67
B.M. Blumberg, P.M. Todd, P. Maes: No bad dogs:
Ethological lessons for learning in Hamsterdam,
From animals to animats. Proc. Int. Conf. Simul.
Adapt. Behav., ed. by P. Maes, M.J. Matarić, J.-
A. Meyer, J. Pollack, S.W. Wilson (1996) pp. 295–
304
13.68
C. Breazeal, B. Scassellati: Infant-like social inter-
actions between a robot and a human caregiver,
Adapt. Behav. 8(1), 49–74 (2000)
13.69
F. Michaud, P. Pirjanian, J. Audet, D. Létourneau:
Artificial emotion and social robotics. In: Dis-
tributed Autonomous Robotic Systems, ed. by
L.E. Parker, G. Bekey, J. Barhen (Springer, Tokyo
2000) pp. 121–130

Behavior-Based Systems
References
325
Part A | 13
13.70
A. Stoytchev, R. Arkin: Incorporating motivation in
a hybrid robot architecture, J. Adv. Comput. Intell.
Intell. Inf. 8(3), 269–274 (2004)
13.71
S. Mahadevan, J. Connell: Automatic program-
ming of behavior-based robots using reinforce-
ment learning, Artif. Intell. 55, 311–365 (1992)
13.72
J. Kober, A. Wilhelm, E. Oztop, J. Peters: Rein-
forcement learning to adjust parametrized motor
primitives to new situations, Auton. Robots 33,
361–379 (2012)
13.73
M.J. Matarić: Reward functions for accelerated
learning, Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., New
Brunswick, ed. by W.W. Cohen, H. Hirsh (Morgan
Kauffman, Boston 1994) pp. 181–189
13.74
H. Gleitman: Psychology (Norton, New York 1981)
13.75
M. Dorigo, M. Colombetti: Robot Shaping: An
Experiment in Behavior Engineering (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1997)
13.76
M. Nicolescu, M.J. Matarić: Learning and inter-
acting in human-robot domains, IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybern. 31(5), 419–430 (2001)
13.77
M.
Nicolescu,
O.C.
Jenkins,
A.
Olenderski,
E. Fritzinger: Learning
behavior fusion from
demonstration,
Interact.
Stud.
9(2),
319–352
(2008)
13.78
R.C. Arkin: Motor schema based navigation for
a mobile robot: An approach to programming by
behavior, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(1987) pp. 264–271
13.79
S.B. Reed, T.R.C. Reed, M. Nicolescu, S.M. Dascalu:
Recursive, hyperspherical behavioral learning for
robotic control, Proc. IEEE World Autom. Congr.
(2010) pp. 1–8
13.80
A. Olenderski, M. Nicolescu, S. Louis: A behavior-
based architecture for realistic autonomous ship
control, Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Intell. Games
(2006)
13.81
M. Nicolescu, O.C. Jenkins, A. Olenderski: Learning
behavior fusion estimation from demonstration,
Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Robot Hum. Interact. Com-
mun. (2006) pp. 340–345
13.82
J.M. Peula, C. Urdiales, I. Herrero, I. Sánchez-
Tato, F. Sandoval: Pure reactive behavior learning
using case based reasoning for a vision based 4-
legged robot, Robotics Auton. Syst. 57(67), 688–
699 (2009)
13.83
S. Huang, E. Aertbelien, H. Van Brussel, H. Bruyn-
inckx: A behavior-based approach for task learn-
ing on mobile manipulators, Proc. 41st Int. Symp.
Robotics 6th Ger. Conf. Robotics (2010) pp. 1–
6
13.84
A.K. McCallum: Hidden state and reinforcement
learning with instance-based state identifica-
tion, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. B 26(3), 464–
473 (1996)
13.85
E. Jauregi, I. Irigoien, B. Sierra, E. Lazkano, C. Are-
nas: Loop-closing: A typicality approach, Robotics
Auton. Syst. 59(3-4), 218–227 (2011)
13.86
D.J. Harvey, T.-F. Lu, M.A. Keller: Comparing
insect-inspired chemical plume tracking algo-
rithms using a mobile robot, IEEE Trans. Robotics
24(2), 307–317 (2008)
13.87
A. Agha, G. Bekey: Phylogenetic and ontogenetic
learning in a colony of interacting robots, Auton.
Robots 4(1), 85–100 (1997)
13.88
R.A. Brooks, L. Stein: Building brains for bodies,
Auton. Robots 1(1), 7–25 (1994)
13.89
B. Webb: Robotic experiments in cricket phono-
taxis, From animals to animats 3. Proc. 3rd Int.
Conf. Simul. Adapt. Behav. (1994) pp. 45–54
13.90
C. Liu, K. Conn, N. Sakar, W. Stone: Online af-
fect detection and robot behavior adaptation for
intervention of children with autism, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 24(4), 883–896 (2008)
13.91
N. Mitsunaga, C. Smith, T. Kanda, H. Ishiguro,
N. Hagita: Adapting robot behavior for human–
robot interaction, IEEE Trans. Robotics 24(4), 911–
916 (2008)
13.92
J.-W. Yoon, S.-B. Cho: An intelligent synthetic
character for smartphone with Bayesian networks
and behavior selection networks, Expert Syst.
Appl. 39(12), 11284–11292 (2012)
13.93
A. Brunete, M. Hernando, E. Gambao, J.E. Tor-
res:
A
behaviour-based
control
architecture
for heterogeneous modular, multi-configurable,
chained
micro-robots,
Robotics
Auton.
Syst.
60(12), 1607–1624 (2012)
13.94
J.L. Jones: Robots at the tipping point, IEEE
Robotics Autom. Mag. 13(1), 76–78 (2006)
13.95
M.F. Selekwa, D.D. Dunlap, D. Shi, E.G. Collins Jr.:
Robot navigation in very cluttered environments
by preference-based fuzzy behaviors, Robotics
Auton. Syst. 56(3), 231–246 (2008)
13.96
P. Rusu, E.M. Petriu, T.E. Whalen, A. Coro-
nell, H.J.W. Spoelder: Behavior-based neuro-
fuzzy controller for mobile robot navigation, IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas. 52(4), 1335–1340 (2003)
13.97
R. Huq, G.K.I. Mann, R.G. Gosine: Behaviour
modulation technique in mobile robotics using
fuzzy discrete event system, IEEE Trans. Robotics
22, 903–916 (2006)
13.98
J.S. Cepeda, L. Chaimowicz, R. Soto, J.L. Gordillo,
E.A. Alanís-Reyes, L.C. Carrillo-Arce: A behavior-
based strategy for single and multi-robot au-
tonomous exploration, Sensors 12(9), 12772–12797
(2012)
13.99
A. Marino, L. Parker, G. Antonelli, F. Caccavale:
A decentralized architecture for multi-robot sys-
tems based on the null-space-behavioral control
with application to multi-robot border patrolling,
J. Intell. Robotic Syst. 71(3-4), 423–444 (2013)
13.100
L.E. Parker: Current research in multirobot sys-
tems, Artif. Life Robotics 7(1–2), 1–5 (2003)
13.101
L.E. Parker, M. Chandra, F. Tang: Enabling au-
tonomous sensor-sharing for tightly-coupled co-
operative tasks, Proc. 1st Int. Work. Multi-Robot
Syst. (2005) pp. 119–230
13.102
B.B. Werger, M.J. Matarić: Broadcast of Local Eligi-
bility for Multi-Target Observation, Proc. 5th Int.
Conf. Distrib. Auton. Robotics Syst. (2000) pp. 347–
356
13.103
B.P. Gerkey, M.J. Matarić: Principled communi-
cation for dynamic multi-robot task allocation,
Lect. Notes Control Inform. Sci. 271, 353–362 (2001)

Part A | 13
326
Part A
Robotics Foundations
13.104
B.P. Gerkey, M.J. Matarić: Sold!: Auction methods
for multi-robot coordination, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 18(5), 758–768 (2002)
13.105
B.P. Gerkey, M.J. Matarić: Pusher-watcher: An
approach to fault-tolerant tightly-coupled robot
coordination, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(2002) pp. 464–469
13.106
B. Akin, A.M. Aydan, I. Erkmen: A behav-
ior based layered, hybrid, control architecture
for robot/sensor networks, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (2006) pp. 206–211
13.107
N. Sedat, E. Aydan: A fractal conductivity-based
approach to mobile sensor networks in a po-
tential field, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 37(7),
732–746 (2008)
13.108
L. Iocchi, D. Nardi, M. Piaggio, A. Sgorbissa: Dis-
tributed coordination in heterogeneous multi-
robot systems, Auton. Robots 15(2), 155–168
(2004)
13.109
M. Batalin, G. Sukhatme: Coverage, exploration
and deployment by a mobile robot and com-
munication network, Telecommun. Syst. 26(2–4),
181–196 (2004)
13.110
A.W. Stroupe, T. Balch: Value-based action se-
lection for observation with robot teams using
probabilistic techniques, Robotics Auton. Syst.
50(2–3), 85–97 (2005)
13.111
R. Simmons, T. Smith, M.B. Dias, D. Goldberg,
D. Hershberger, A. Stentz, R. Zlot: A Layered Ar-
chitecture for coordination of mobile robots, Proc.
NRL Work. Multi-Robot Syst. (2002)
13.112
J. Nembrini, A. Winfield, C. Melhuish: Minimalist
coherent swarming of wireless networked au-
tonomous mobile robots, Proc. 7th Int. Conf.
Simul. Adapt. Behav. (2002) pp. 373–382
13.113
M. Egerstedt, X. Hu: Formation constrained multi-
agent control, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 17(6),
947–951 (2001)
13.114
C.H. Tan, K.C. Tan, A. Tay: Computationally effi-
cient behaviour based controller for real time car
racing simulation, Expert Syst. Appl. 37(7), 4850–
4859 (2010)
13.115
K. Gold, B. Scassellati: Learning about the self and
others through contingency, AAAI Spring Symp.
Dev. Robotics (2005)
13.116
M. Baker, H.A. Yanco: Automated street cross-
ing for assistive robots, Proc. Int. Conf. Rehabil.
Robotics (2005) pp. 187–192
13.117
M. Williamson: Postural primitives: Interactive
behavior for a humanoid robot arm, Proc. Int.
Conf. Simul. Adapt. Behav. (1996)
13.118
M. Marjanovic, B. Scassellati, M. Williamson,
R. Brooks: The Cog Project: Building a humanoid
robot, Lect. Notes Artif. Intell. 1562, 52–87 (1998)
13.119
A. Edsinger: Robot Manipulation in Human En-
vironments, Ph.D. Thesis (Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge 2007)
13.120
C. Breazeal: Infant-like social interactions be-
tween a robot and a human caretaker, Adapt.
Behav. 8(1), 49–74 (2000)
13.121
H. Ishiguro, T. Kanda, K. Kimoto, T. Ishida:
A robot architecture based on situated modules,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot Syst. (1999)
pp. 1617–1623
13.122
T. Kanda, T. Hirano, D. Eaton, H. Ishiguro: Person
identification and interaction of social robots by
using wireless tags, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robotics Syst. (2003) pp. 1657–1664
13.123
F. Michaud, J.F. Laplante, H. Larouche, A. Du-
quette, S. Caron, D. Létourneau, P. Masson: Au-
tonomous spherical mobile robotic to study child
development, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man. Cybern. 35(4),
1–10 (2005)
13.124
F. Michaud, S. Caron: Roball, the rolling robot, Au-
ton. Robots 12(2), 211–222 (2002)
13.125
F. Michaud, C. Côté, D. Létourneau, Y. Brosseau,
J.-M. Valin, É. Beaudry, C. Raïevsky, A. Pon-
chon, P. Moisan, P. Lepage, Y. Morin, F. Gagnon,
P. Giguère, M.-A. Roux, S. Caron, P. Frenette,
F. Kabanza: Spartacus attending the 2005 AAAI
Conference, Auton. Robots 12(2), 211–222 (2007)
13.126
F. Michaud, Y. Brosseau, C. Côté, D. Létourneau,
P. Moisan, A. Ponchon, C. Raïevsky, J.-M. Valin,
E. Beaudry, F. Kabanza: Modularity and integra-
tion in the design of a socially interactive robot,
Proc. IEEE Int. Work. Robot Hum. Interact. Com-
mun. (2005) pp. 172–177
13.127
E. Beaudry, Y. Brosseau, C. Côté, C. Raïevsky, D. Lé-
tourneau, F. Kabanza, F. Michaud: Reactive plan-
ning in a motivated behavioral architecture, Proc.
Am. Assoc. Artif. Intell. Conf. (2005) pp. 1242–1247
13.128
K. Haigh, M. Veloso: Planning, execution and
learning in a robotic agent, Proc. 4th Int. Conf.
Artif. Intell. Plan. Syst. (1998) pp. 120–127
13.129
S. Lemai, F. Ingrand: Interleaving temporeal plan-
ning and execution in robotics domains, Proc.
Natl. Conf. Artif. Intell. (2004) pp. 617–622
13.130
D. Létourneau, F. Michaud, J.-M. Valin: Au-
tonomous robot that can read, EURASIP J. Appl,
Signal Process. 17, 1–14 (2004)
13.131
J.-M. Valin, F. Michaud, J. Rouat: Robust localiza-
tion and tracking of simultaneous moving sound
sources using beamforming and particle filtering,
Robotics Auton. Syst. 55(3), 216–228 (2007)
13.132
J.-M. Valin, S. Yamaoto, J. Rouat, F. Michaud,
K. Nakadai, H.G. Okuno: Robust recognition of si-
multaneous speech by a mobile robot, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 23(4), 742–752 (2007)
13.133
F. Michaud, F. Ferland, D. Létourneau, M.-
A. Legault, M. Lauria: Toward autonomous, com-
pliant, omnidirectional humanoid robots for nat-
ural interaction in real-life settings, Paladyn.
J. Behav. Robotics 1, 57–65 (2010)
13.134
D.O. Hebb: The Organization of Behavior: A Neu-
ropsychological Theory (Wiley, New York 1949)
13.135
G. Mandler: Mind and Body: Psychology of Emo-
tion and Stress (Norton, New York 1984)
13.136
J.E. Stets: Emotions and sentiments. In: Hand-
book of Social Psychology, ed. by J.E. DeLamater
(Wiley, New York 2003)
13.137
F.
Ferland,
F.
Ferland,
D.
Létourneau,
M.-
A. Legault, M. Lauria, F. Michaud: Natural interac-
tion design of a humanoid robot, J. Hum.-Robot
Interact. 1(2), 118–134 (2012)

Behavior-Based Systems
References
327
Part A | 13
13.138
F. Ferland, R. Chauvin, D. Létourneau, F. Michaud:
Hello Robot, can you come here? Using ROS4iOS to
provide remote perceptual capabilities for visual
location, speech and speaker recognition, Proc.
ACM/IEEE Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (1983) p. 101
13.139
E. Beaudry, D. Létourneau, F. Kabanza, F. Michaud:
Reactive planning as a motivational source in
a behavior-based architecture, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robot Syst. (2008) pp. 1848–1853
13.140
R.A. Brooks: Cambrian Intelligence – The Early
History of the New AI (MIT Press, Cambridge 1999)
13.141
R. Pfeifer, C. Scheier: Understanding Intelligence
(MIT Press, Cambridge 2001)
13.142
R.R. Murphy: An Introduction to AI Robotics (MIT
Press, Cambridge 2000)
13.143
M.J. Matarić: The Robotics Primer (MIT Press, Cam-
bridge 2007)
13.144
F. Martin: Robotic Explorations: A Hands-On In-
troduction to Engineering (Prentice Hall, Upper
Saddle River 2001)
13.145
J.L. Jones, A.M. Flynn: Mobile Robots – Inspiration
to Implementation (Peters, Wellesley 1993)

Multimedia Contents AI Reasoning
329
Part A | 14
14. AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics
Michael Beetz, Raja Chatila, Joachim Hertzberg, Federico Pecora
Artificial intelligence (AI) reasoning technology in-
volving, e.g., inference, planning, and learning,
has a track record with a healthy number of suc-
cessful applications. So can it be used as a toolbox
of methods for autonomous mobile robots? Not
necessarily, as reasoning on a mobile robot about
its dynamic, partially known environment may
differ substantially from that in knowledge-based
pure software systems, where most of the named
successes have been registered. Moreover, recent
knowledge about the robot’s environment can-
not be given a priori, but needs to be updated
from sensor data, involving challenging problems
of symbol grounding and knowledge base change.
This chapter sketches the main robotics-
relevant topics of symbol-based AI reasoning. Basic
methods of knowledge representation and infer-
ence are described in general, covering both logic-
and probability-based approaches. The chap-
ter first gives a motivation by example, to what
extent symbolic reasoning has the potential of
helping robots perform in the first place. Then
(Sect. 14.2), we sketch the landscape of represen-
tation languages available for the endeavor. After
that (Sect. 14.3), we present approaches and re-
sults for several types of practical, robotics-related
reasoning tasks, with an emphasis on temporal
and spatial reasoning. Plan-based robot control
14.1
Why Should a Robot Use AI-Type
Reasoning?..........................................
330
14.2
Knowledge Representation
and Processing ....................................
330
14.2.1
Logic-Based Reasoning ..............
331
14.2.2
Probabilistic Reasoning..............
334
14.3
Reasoning and Decision Making ...........
338
14.3.1
Using Multiple Knowledge
Representation Formalisms ........
339
14.3.2
Reasoning About Time ...............
339
14.3.3
Reasoning About Space..............
342
14.3.4
Reasoning About Multiple KR
Formalisms ...............................
344
14.3.5
Knowledge Representation
Systems for Robots ....................
345
14.4 Plan-Based Robot Control ....................
346
14.4.1
Models of Plan-Based Control ....
346
14.4.2
Representation of Plans .............
348
14.4.3
Generating Robot Action Plans ...
349
14.4.4
Revising and Improving Plans ....
350
14.4.5 Other Reasoning Methods ..........
350
14.5 Conclusions and Further Reading .........
351
14.5.1
Further Reading ........................
351
Video-References.........................................
351
References...................................................
352
is described in some more detail in Sect. 14.4.
Section 14.5 concludes.
Historical debates about the necessity and wisdom of
employing symbolic reasoning in autonomous mobile
robots notwithstanding (Chap. 13), there seems to be
agreement now that some part or layer in the control
system of such robots should or could include rea-
soning. Hybrid control architectures (Chap. 12) would
be typical software structures for solving the difﬁcult
problem of amalgamating their contributions with those
of other parts of the controller, yet guaranteeing sufﬁ-
ciently short control cycle times that the robot can act
safely in a dynamic environment.
Symbolic reasoning is understood here in the classi-
cal sense of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), i. e., delibera-
tion based on symbols as in ﬁrst-order predicate logic
(FOPL) or Bayesian probability theory, but typically
with restrictions and/or extensions thereof, which have
to be traded off against each other to achieve a suitable
combination of expressivity and inference speed.

Part A | 14.2
330
Part A
Robotics Foundations
14.1 Why Should a Robot Use AI-Type Reasoning?
If robots are to accomplish tasks that are too compli-
cated for specifying the appropriate behavior for all
possible situations beforehand, they should be able to
reason themselves about what is the appropriate way to
perform the task – even if the task is speciﬁed vaguely.
In this setting, reasoning means inferring the needed
knowledge from what is spelled out explicitly in the
available knowledge. It further means automated rea-
soning using methods from AI including knowledge
representation (KR) and inference, heuristic search, and
machine learning.
To perform their course of action appropriately,
robots need to reason about the actions they intend
to perform, their intended effects, the unwanted side
effects, whether they are executable in the respective
situations, the goals the actions are to accomplish, and
so on. Consider, for example, the seemingly simple task
of picking up an object from a table. To do so, the
robot has to decide where to go in order to pick up the
object, which hand(s) to use, how to reach for the ob-
ject, which type of grasp to apply, where to place the
gripper, how much grasp force to apply, how much lift
force, how to lift the object, where to hold it, and so
on.
If programmers have to specify the decisions for
every conceivable combination of object and task, the
control program for picking up an object becomes
very complex. But even this program would in most
cases not sufﬁce to generate competent robot behavior,
because how the pickup action should be performed de-
pends on the context, too – the state of the object, the
task to be performed, the scene that the object is located
in. If the object is a glass ﬁlled with juice, it has to be
held upright and if it is a bottle the robot intends to ﬁll
a glass with, it should not grasp the top of the bottle.
If the bottle is to be picked up in the middle of a clut-
tered scene, then grasping the top of the bottle might
be the best choice. If the scene is cluttered and the pur-
pose is ﬁlling a glass, then the robot might even have to
re-grasp after picking up the object.
The situation gets even more complicated if the task
is not a single action, but a compound activity such as
cleaning the table. In this case, AI reasoning methods
can be employed to enable programmers to specify the
course of activity very compactly: for every object on
the table put it where it belongs. For such a vague plan
to be a sufﬁcient activity prescription, the robot has to
infer the information needed to decide on the appropri-
ate parameterizations of the pickup actions and it has to
infer where objects belong depending on whether they
are to be used again, are dirty, perishable, etc. Compe-
tently cleaning the table might also require the robot to
think about the order in which it wants to put away the
objects. It might decide to group the carry actions ac-
cording to the place where the items have to be placed,
or clean up perishable items ﬁrst. It might reason about
whether to stack items, get a tray and use that, and
whether to leave doors of cupboards open.
Thus, an important task of AI reasoning techniques
is: given a vague instruction, infer what is the appropri-
ate action, what is the appropriate object to be acted on,
what is the appropriate order of action executions, and
what is the appropriate way of performing every action.
To deal with these issues, autonomous robots can
represent and reason about aspects including the robots’
capabilities, their environments, the objects they are to
act on, their actions and the effects they cause, and other
agents in the environment.
Important kinds of reasoning that robots should be
capable of, therefore include the following:

Prediction (often called temporal projection): infer-
ring what will (probably) happen if the intended
course of action is executed

Envisioning: inferring (all) possible events and ef-
fects that will happen if a plan gets executed in
a hypothetical situation

Diagnosis: inferring what caused a particular event
or effect in plan execution

Query answering: given some knowledge precon-
ditions for plan execution (e.g., a robot has to
know the combination of a safe in order to open
it), inferring pieces of knowledge that satisfy these
knowledge preconditions.
14.2 Knowledge Representation and Processing
Reasoning requires that the reasoner – in our case,
a robot – has an explicit representation of parts or as-
pects of its environment to reason about. Two questions
come up immediately: what are suitable formats for
such an explicit representation, and where does the rep-
resented knowledge come from?
The second question refers to the problem of gener-
ating and maintaining in real time a symbolic descrip-
tion of the robot’s environment, or at least of some
part of it, based on, possibly, a previous symbolic de-
scription and on recent environment information as by
sensors and by communication with other agents. In full

AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics
14.2 Knowledge Representation and Processing
331
Part A | 14.2
generality, this problem is currently unsolved, involving
AI fundamentals such as symbol grounding [14.1] and
object anchoring [14.2]. So practical symbolic reason-
ing in a robot is restricted to that part of its knowledge
that can be kept sufﬁciently recent. This includes, obvi-
ously, static knowledge about the environment, such as
the topological elements and their relations in a build-
ing; transient knowledge available in symbolic forms,
such as in facility management data bases; and, most
challenging, symbolic data that has to be distilled from
sensor data. Object recognition (Chap. 33) is a crucial
ingredient to solve this; these issues will not be treated
here.
This section deals with answers to the ﬁrst question,
i. e., formalisms suitable for representing knowledge.
Suitability has two aspects here that are to be treated
as two sides of one coin. One is epistemological ade-
quacy: Does the formalism allow the targeted aspects
of the environment to be expressed compactly and pre-
cisely? The other is computational adequacy: Does the
formalism allow typical inferences to be drawn effec-
tively and efﬁciently? There is a tradeoff between the
two adequacies, given that very rich, expressive, and
hence epistemologically appealing formalisms are typi-
cally accompanied by intractable or even undecidable
inference problems, and vice versa. KR, then [14.3,
p. xiii]:
is the ﬁeld of AI that focuses on the design of
formalisms that are both epistemologically and
computationallyadequate for expressing knowledge
about a particular domain.
The plural in formalisms does not come by chance:
there is no such thing as the KR language. The reason
is twofold.
First, the archetype of KR languages, FOPL, is un-
decidable, i. e., any reasoner dealing with a language
at least as expressive as FOPL is not guaranteed to
terminate on a single query, let alone terminate fast.
However, full FOPL expressivity is not always needed;
for example, to represent a ﬁnite domain or to make re-
stricted use of quantiﬁcation may lead to decidable, and
even tractable representation languages. Second, some
Table 14.1 Abstract categorization of main relational languages as used in Robotics (see text for explanations)
Assertions
Queries
Subject
Example
General relational
languages
Sentences, theories
(Logical) consequence
Situations, contexts, rela-
tions
FOPL, prolog, situation
calculus
Description logics
A-Box and T-Box contents
Subsumption, consistency
Ontologies, encyclopedias
OWL-DL
Probabilistic
languages
Prior and conditional prob-
abilities
Conditional
probabilities
Evidence
Bayesian
networks
Languages
for temporal
and spatial reasoning
Temporally and/or
spatially qualiﬁed
sentences
Logical consequence,
satisﬁability, minimal
representation
Desired or observed spa-
tial/temporal state
of affairs
LTL, IA, TCSP, RCC,
ARAC
applications of KR and reasoning, like quite a num-
ber of applications in Robotics, require evidence rather
than truth to be represented, and FOPL, in particular,
does not come handy for doing that. So, there are good
reasons, both for pragmatics and for epistemological
adequacy, for having several representation languages –
and that has happened in AI.
Table 14.1 lists in its rows four broad types of KR
languages, which have been in use in Robotics. De-
scription logics (DLs) are in fact a speciﬁc family of
relational languages, of which there are decidable and
tractable members. The table gives in its columns the
Assertions of the language types, i. e., the language el-
ements used to represent some domain; the Queries,
i. e., the type of problems that a reasoner in a particular
language is supposed to solve; the Subject that a par-
ticular language of the respective type is normally used
for representing; and Examples of such languages. The
remainder of this section sketches generic KR in logic
and in a probabilistic language, including the respective
types of inferences. Speciﬁc robotics-related instances
of reasoning on the symbol level are described in the
following section, in particular, reasoning about tempo-
ral and spatial objects and relations, which are pervasive
in a robot’s reasoning.
14.2.1 Logic-Based Reasoning
As stated above, FOPL does not qualify for a KR for-
malism in the above-mentioned sense of being both
epistemologically and computationally adequate for
typical application domains – in many cases, it is
neither of the two. Yet, it is the background for un-
derstanding conceptually and mathematically general
relational languages.
In this short text, we can only introduce KR in logic
by way of example, assuming familiarity with the basic
notions of FOPL. For more comprehensive and formal
treatments, we refer to the broad body of literature: ev-
ery typical AI textbook introduces FOPL, and [14.4,
5] are no exceptions; [14.6] is a principled introduction
to logics; [14.7] a practical one, and [14.8] a concise
mathematical one.

Part A | 14.2
332
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Representing knowledge in some variant of logic fa-
cilitates to draw inferences from that knowledge using
provably sound and/or complete calculi. Automated de-
duction is a subﬁeld of logic and AI that offers a healthy
number of very powerful implemented deduction sys-
tems that can readily be used. Reference [14.4, Chap. 9]
gives an introduction; [14.9] is a traditional handbook
covering all the classical topics of logical reasoning.
Relying on logical inference, a robot could deduce
a large number of facts that might otherwise be hard or
impossible to get at. For example, assume a robot per-
ceives by acquiring and interpreting sensor data, that
the door D509 in an ofﬁce building is currently closed:
Closed.D509/ expressed in some ad hoc FOPL lan-
guage, assuming intuitive interpretations of symbols.
Let us further assume that the robot’s base of static
knowledge about the building contains the sentences
Connects.D509; C5; R509/ ;
Connects.D508; C5; R508/ ;
Connects.D508a; R508; R509/ ;
8d; l1; l2:ŒConnects.d;l1; l2/ $
Connects.d;l2; l1/ ;
8d:ŒClosed.d/ $ :Open.d/ ;
8l:ŒAt.l/ ! Acessible.l/ ;
8l1; l2:ŒAccessible.l1/ !
.9d:ŒConnects.d;l1; l2/ ^ Open.d/ !
Accessible.l2// :
(14.1)
Constants Di and variable d denote doors; Ri denote
rooms; Ci corridors; variables l; li denote locations, i. e.,
rooms and corridors. Assume that the robot’s localiza-
tion tells it its current room or corridor location as At./.
Then, assuming the robot knows it is At.C5/, ob-
serving Closed.D509/ entails :Open.D509/, and, more
interestingly, that Accessible.R509/ is true only if
Open.D508/ ^ Open.D508a/ is true. So, performing, for
example, a delivery task to room R509, the robot may
replan its route through R508, unless at least one of
D508; D508a is known to be closed. If the status of one or
both of them is unknown (neither Open./ nor Closed./
is entailed by the current knowledge base), then acces-
sibility of R509 can be neither proven nor disproven.
That would leave open the option of planning the route
through D508 and D508a, gathering their required sta-
tuses on site.
So, as this little example may show, FOPL is a pow-
erful representation and reasoning tool. Moreover, its
theory is very well understood. In particular, it is well-
known that consequence in FOPL is in general unde-
cidable, that means, a sound and complete deduction
algorithm cannot even guarantee termination for some
particular inference attempt, let alone speedy results.
However, that does not mean logic as a representa-
tion and inference tool needs to be completely disposed
of. Many applications do not require the full expres-
sivity of FOPL. Moreover, there are many interesting
language subsets of FOPL that are decidable and can be
handled by algorithms that are efﬁcient in most practi-
cal cases. So considerable effort by the KR community
has gone into identifying FOPL subsets and ﬁtting
inference procedures that qualify for being both episte-
mologically and computationally adequate for a broad
number of applications. We will consider two of them in
more detail: propositional logic and description logics;
we will then go brieﬂy into using logics for high-level
robot control.
Propositional Theories
In quite a number of practical cases, FOPL theories
(sets of formulas) represent in fact ﬁnite domains. Log-
ically speaking, they have ﬁnite Herbrand universes or
can at least be recast in a form such that they have. In
this case, it may still be handy to express the domain
theory in FOPL syntax, but all that goes beyond a purely
propositional theory is just for notational convenience.
For example, an axiom stating that a robot can only be
in one location (room or corridor) at a time
8l1; l2:ŒAt.l1/ ! .:At.l2/ _ l1 D l2/
(14.2)
can be ﬂattened for a ﬁnite building into the, clumsy
but equivalent, form handling all locations explicitly,
for example in a six-storey building
At.R001/ ! Œ:At.R002/ ^    ^ :At.R514/^
:At.C0/ ^    ^ :At.C5/ ;
At.R002/ ! Œ:At.R001/ ^    ^ :At.R514/^
:At.C0/ ^    ^ :At.C5/ ;
  
(14.3)
where every ground (variable-free) instance of a pred-
icate, such as the At instances above, are to be con-
sidered as propositional variables, regarding textual
identity.
The good news here is that the corresponding ﬂat
theory to a FOPL theory over a ﬁnite Herbrand universe
is propositional, hence, it is decidable. Moreover, under
some practical conditions – e.g., if the variables in the
FOPL theory are sorted (that is, the information is avail-
able that the variables l1; l2, e.g., range over rooms and
corridors) – it can even be generated mechanically from
a more compact FOPL syntax.
The potentially bad news is that the now proposi-
tional theory may of course consist of a huge amount

AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics
14.2 Knowledge Representation and Processing
333
Part A | 14.2
of propositional sentences: in general, as all com-
binations of variable substitutions in all FOPL sen-
tences need to be generated, the growth is multiex-
ponential in terms of the domain sizes of the FOPL
variables.
However, the technology for propositional satisﬁ-
ability checking or model checking is making consid-
erable progress, allowing propositional theories with
thousands or even tens of thousands of variables to be
handled in the order of seconds of computation time
on regular hardware. The respective methods are par-
ticularly efﬁcient if many models exist for a satisﬁable
propositional formula or if the truth or falsity of many
ground facts is known a priori (such as At.C5/ for
a robot by independent localization). Both is often the
case in practical KR.
References [14.4, Chap. 7.6] and [14.9, Chap. 24]
give introductions to model checking. One modern fam-
ily of methods is based on the classical Davis–Putnam
(DPLL) algorithm [14.10]. It attempts to construct sys-
tematically a propositional model of a given theory, ef-
ﬁciently propagating interpretation constraints for vari-
ables. Another family of algorithms applies local search
techniques, attempting to generate interpretations using
random (Monte Carlo) variable assignments. Refer-
ence [14.11] is a Web page maintained for the annual
satisﬁability checking competitions held together with
the annual SAT (Theory and Applications of Satisﬁ-
ability Testing) conferences; it gives a continuously
updated overview over current top-performing satisﬁ-
ability checking systems.
Description Logics
DL have emerged as rigorous formalizations of some-
what intuitive KR forms of the AI of the 1970s, namely,
semantic networks and frame systems. Logically speak-
ing, DLs, of which there is a considerable variety, form
a certain family of subsets of FOPL, some of which are
decidable or even tractable.
There are two parts of representing knowledge
about a particular domain using a DL language. First,
the upper ontology of the domain is formulated. It intro-
duces the general domain concepts as well as relations
between these concepts. A particularly interesting type
of relations occurring in all ontologies is the superclass-
subclass relation. Given that most DLs – as part of
the means for enforcing decidability – strictly disal-
low cyclic relations between concepts to be speciﬁed,
the superclass relation imposes a hierarchical taxonomy
on concepts, which serves for deﬁning property inheri-
tance, much like in object-oriented programming. This
ﬁrst part of a DL-based domain representation is, for
historical reasons, often called the T-Box (or termino-
logical knowledge).
A concept in the DL language corresponds to
a unary predicate. To give an example, an ontology
of robot navigation domains might include concepts
like Door, Location, and so on. The concept hierarchy
is built by deﬁning concept equality D or a subcon-
cept property, e.g., Room v Location, and Corridor v
Location. Concepts can be combined using concept
conjunction, disjunction, and negation (u; t; :, re-
spectively), allowing, e.g., concept deﬁnitions like
Location D Room t Corridor, Door D Closed t Open,
and Open D :Closed.
Roles in a DL language correspond to binary pred-
icates, such as leadsTo for a door and a location.
Inversity, intersection, and union of roles are deﬁned as
expected, where leadsTo D leadsFrom1 is an example
for deﬁning inverse roles. Roles can be composed, such
as in deﬁning adjacent D leadsFromıleadsTo (location
l is adjacent to m if and only if some door connects
them). Finally, concepts and roles can be combined for
deﬁning new concepts and roles. In particular, it is pos-
sible to quantify over role-ﬁllers, i. e., the individual
objects (see next) that can be consistently substituted
for role arguments. For example, one could deﬁne
BlockedLoc D Location u :9leadsFrom:Open (assum-
ing the intuitive binding rules of the operators). Differ-
ent variants of DLs differ in what operators they make
available; the set of available operators and additional
constraints on deﬁnitions shape both the expressivity
and the computability of the respective DL variant –
the spectrum ranges from undecidable to tractable.
See [14.3] for details.
As the second part of domain representation using
DLs, individual objects have to be introduced into the
language of concepts and roles. This part of the domain
representation is called A-Box (or assertional knowl-
edge). For example, Room.R509/, leadsTo.D509; R509/,
and Closed.D509/ could be asserted.
DLs have a number of reasoning services to offer,
which are based on logical inference in a given T-Box
and A-Box. They include consistency of the concept
deﬁnition, subsumption and disjointness of concepts,
consistency of the A-Box wrt. the T-Box, concept and
role instances, all of which are decidable in many DLs.
Given the T-Box and A-Box rudiments above, it would,
e.g., be concluded that everything is consistent and that
BlockedLoc.R509/ (note that only door D509 is known
here to lead to R509!). These DL inferences are theoreti-
cally intractable, but run efﬁciently in most of practical
cases.
Reference
[14.3]
provides
a
comprehensive
overview of DL. In 2004, the WWW consortium
(W3C) has deﬁned the Web Ontology Language
OWL [14.12] as a technical basis for the Semantic
Web, which was followed by OWL 2 in 2009 [14.13].

Part A | 14.2
334
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Part of the language is OWL-DL, a classical DL in
the sense just described. OWL-DL ontologies are
publicly available over the Web. Reference [14.14]
gives a tutorial introduction.
Logics for High-Level Robot Control
Robot domains are dynamic by nature, including at least
one physical agent, namely, the robot. Capturing that in
logic-based formalisms is possible and has been under-
taken, as introduced in [14.4, Chap. 12.3]. However, it
poses some conceptual and technical problems, which
we will describe at the end of this section on Logics.
Very brieﬂy, one of them comes from the require-
ment of expressing concisely and reasoning efﬁciently
with logical models of events in general, and actions
in particular. Logically speaking, an individual action
changes the truth value of a limited number of facts,
leaving everything else as it was. For example, mod-
eling on some abstract level the action of going from
one location to another as atomic, it changes the robot’s
current location before and after; depending on the
modeling, it may also change the battery state and the
mileage count; but it does not change the layout of the
building or the name of the president. The problem of
formalizing actions concisely in a logical language so
that they allow facts to be inferred efﬁciently that may
or may not have changed after applying a sequence of
actions, has been termed the frame problem. It has re-
ceived much attention in the literature; there are now
a number of practical solutions to it.
Another problem concerns knowledge-base update
made necessary by independently changing facts. Con-
sider, for example, a robot sitting – as it is told by its
self-localization – in front of some door D, which is
believed to be open, but the robot perceives a closed
door. Logically, this is a contradiction. Now there are
in theory several ways to make the knowledge and the
perception consistent. One is to assume that D has been
closed since learning that it was open – probably the
most intuitive explanation. Logically just as good would
be, e.g., that the perception is faulty, or that the robot
has been teleported in front of a known closed door.
Among these explanations, some are more intuitively
plausible than others; logically, some would require less
formulas of the knowledge base to be withdrawn and
should therefore be preferred. Ideally, after replacing
an old piece of information with a new one, one would
have to make sure that the consequences of a retracted
formula are no longer believed.
Theoretically, these problems are arbitrarily difﬁ-
cult. Practically, they can be sufﬁciently restricted to
allow solutions within a neat logical framework. Typ-
ical solutions would introduce some notion of state
or holding period for formulas, following the clas-
sical example of the situation calculus [14.15]. That
allows change to be tracked. Typical solutions would
also give up completeness of inference, resorting to
a Prolog-like inference engine. Three examples for
such solutions with reported applications in robot con-
trol are GOLOG [14.16], event calculus [14.17] and
FLUX [14.18]. Another family of solutions would
model the course of time in a more ﬁne-grained way
than switching between states. Temporal logics are ap-
propriate here, and the temporal action logic (TAL) is
an example, which has even been integrated in a perfor-
mant planner [14.19]. It leads to a more sophisticated
form of temporal reasoning that will be treated in
Sect. 14.3.
14.2.2 Probabilistic Reasoning
KR formalisms based on logics are worth considering
whenever factual knowledge is to be represented, from
which consequences are to be queried. However, part of
the knowledge that a robot might use about its environ-
ment does not really have this character.
Uncertainty is one of these traits, or rather, a whole
family of them, as uncertainty is in itself an overloaded
concept. Lack of knowledge is one of its aspects. Log-
ics can handle this insofar as truth or falsity of some
facts may remain undetermined. If too much is unde-
termined in a knowledge base, logics will no longer be
able to make interesting deductions though, as every-
thing is possible logically. Yet, the different possibilities
may differ considerably in likelihood, according to in-
tuition. The point here is to represent and reason about
evidence.
The ﬁeld of KR has adopted Bayesian probability
as a means for representing and reasoning with evi-
dence, using correlations between facts rather than strict
implications. Note that this approach amalgamates dif-
ferent sources of lack of precision and completeness of
knowledge. Some piece of knowledge may be unknown
because it is in principle unknowable, or because it was
judged too costly to build a precise theory or determine
all information relevant for making a sound deduction.
In either case, working with probabilities rather than bi-
nary truth values can serve as an approximation. Note
that the notion of truth is still the same here as in clas-
sical logics: objectively, a fact is supposed to be either
true or false; probability just models the subjective evi-
dence that the fact is true.
We next describe two popular and powerful rep-
resentation and processing formats for probabilistic
knowledge: Bayesian networks (BNs) and Markov de-
cision processes (MDPs). In analogy to Sect. 14.2.1,
we here assume familiarity with the basic notions of
probability theory. Reference [14.4, Chap. 13] gives an

AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics
14.2 Knowledge Representation and Processing
335
Part A | 14.2
excellent basic introduction; for a more comprehensive
treatment, there is a large variety of introductory text-
books around, [14.20] being an example.
Bayesian Networks
Inference in Bayesian probability theory basically
means to infer the probability of some event of interest,
given prior and dependent other relevant probabilities.
Practically, an important type of probabilistic infer-
ence is diagnostic reasoning from observed effects back
to hidden causes, given rules that specify conditional
probabilities from causes to effects. So the problem is,
for a potential cause C and an observed effect E: Given
prior probabilities P.C/ and P.E/ and the conditional
probability P.EjC/, determine the posterior P.CjE/.
The solution is of course given by the Bayes rule as
P.CjE/ D P.EjC/P.C/
P.E/
:
(14.4)
However, like in logical reasoning, the theoretically
appealing principle turns out to be impractical if ap-
plied naively. Consider that not just one effect E may
be observed, but E1; : : : ; En; moreover, not all of them
are conditionally independent. A generalized form of
the Bayes rule to calculate the correct posterior is
straightforward, but who can specify all the conditional
probabilities involved – in the worst case O.2n/ of them,
where n may easily range in the hundreds in practical
cases?
Until the late 1980s, this problem was more or less
circumvented. One way to do so was to treat the Ei in
bad faith as independent: simply take the n individual
conditional probabilities P.EijC/ and use them for ap-
proximating straightforward the full joint probability
distributions. Reference [14.4, Chap. 14] reviews this
and other alternative approaches.
The solution used ever since it has appeared [14.21]
is Bayesian networks (BN), more recently subsumed
under the more general concept of graphical models.
The idea is to represent the random variables as nodes
in a directed acyclic graph, where a node is directly
preceded by a set of parent nodes if and only if it
is directly conditionally dependent on the correspond-
ing parent variables. So the huge full joint probabil-
ity distribution is broken down into many, typically
very small, local joint probability distributions without
loss of information, the trick being to use the typi-
cally many known conditional independences among
variables to reduce the representational and inferential
effort drastically.
Figure 14.1 shows a simple BN expressing that D
is dependent on B and C, with probabilities given by
a conditional probability table which speciﬁes locally
the joint probability distribution. In addition, the struc-
P(A) P(¬A)
P(¬B|A )
P(B|A )
P(¬B| ¬A)
P(B| ¬A)
P(¬C|A )
P(C|A )
P(¬C| ¬A)
P(C| ¬A)
A
B
C
D
Fig. 14.1 Structure of a simple Bayesian network. It is associated
with conditional probability tables. (The one for D, dependent on B
and on C, is omitted)
ut
xt – 1
xt
zt
ut
xt –1
xt
zt
ut + 1
xt + 1
zt + 1
Fig. 14.2 Unfolding of a simple DBN over two time slices repre-
senting two successive states. Variables x denote states, u denote
actions, and z denote measurements. The structure of each individ-
ual slice (signaled by identical variable subscripts) is invariant over
time
ture says that D is independent from A, given B and C
(a node is independent from its ancestors, given its par-
ents), and that B is independent from C, given A, i. e.,
P.CjA; B/ D P.CjA/ and P.BjA; C/ D P.BjA/.
Network inference can be interpreted in both direc-
tions. Bottom up, a BN enables to explain an observed
phenomenon using the known conditional probabilities
(diagnosis). For example, if D is observed, the likeli-
hoods of its known causes (B or C) can be inferred. Top
down, a BN enables to propagate evidence to compute
the probability of a phenomenon, e.g., to compute the
probability of D given A (causation).
For systems evolving over time, for which the
Markov property holds, i. e., a state of a system variable
in some state depends on no variables earlier than the
previous state, a BN representation takes on a particu-
lar form, a dynamic Bayesian network, DBN. Assuming
that the dependences among variables within a state
remain constant over time, and assuming further that
a variable x at different states is represented as a family
of variables x1; : : : ; xt; : : :, a DBN unfolded into a BN
has a particular structure, as sketched by example in
Fig. 14.2. The variables representing a new state corre-
spond to a new BN slice, which reproduces the structure
of the previous state representation and whose nodes
depend only on each other and on nodes represent-

Part A | 14.2
336
Part A
Robotics Foundations
ing the previous state. This locality allows inference in
DBNs to be efﬁcient.
Markov Decision Processes
In the context of robot control, uncertainty is induced by
perception, action, and incompleteness of prior knowl-
edge about the environment, all of which are related.
Perception uncertainty results from sensor noise, from
occlusion, from interpretation ambiguities, and other
effects. Action uncertainty results from approximate ac-
tion models (e.g., wheel slippage), unsuccessful action
(e.g., grasping failure), or other practically unavoidable
effects.
Figure 14.3 depicts this uncertainty laden interac-
tion between the robot and its environment.
Probabilistic representations are used to cope with
these uncertainties. Planning being a sequential deci-
sion problem, MDP and, in the case of partial observ-
ability of the environment, partially observable Markov
decision processes (POMDPs) [14.22] are widely used
to address them. The Markov assumption, which is the
hallmark of this approach, is that a state sn of the system
depends only on the previous state sn1 and the action
that lead to sn, and not on any earlier states.
Under this assumption, an MDP is formally deﬁned
by four components hS; A; T; Ri where S is a ﬁnite set of
states, A is a ﬁnite set of actions, T W SA ! S the tran-
sition function deﬁning the probability of state change
Environment
State transition: s → s'
with probability T (s, a, s')
State
estimation
Decision
ϖ : b → a
Action a
Action a
Observation o
Belief b
Observation o
Action a
Belief b
Robot
Fig. 14.3 The
robot acts on
its environment
producing a new
state with a given
probability.
Knowledge of the
robot about state
results from its
observation and
is also uncertain.
Its decisions are
taken based on its
beliefs
upon application of a given action at time t
T.s;a; s0/ D P.stC1 D s0 j st D s; at D a/ :
(14.5)
T is known and provided as a table of transition proba-
bilities. Finally, R.s; a/, R W SA ! R, is deﬁned as the
reward received by the system after achieving action a
leading to state s. Often, the reward is associated with
the state only (R.s/). In the sequential process, the re-
wards are supposed to be additive. Solving an MDP is
an optimization problem in which the sum of the ex-
pected rewards, called the utility, is maximized. MDPs
suppose that the rewards are already known. When this
is not the case, the robot can acquire them through
experience. One technique to do so is reinforcement
learning, as described in Chap. 15. Figure 14.4 shows
an example of a simple MDP.
There are two main methods to solve an MDP. In
the value iteration (VI) method, the ﬁrst step is to com-
pute the utilities U.s/ for all states, and the second step
is to compute the optimal policy .s/ which provides,
for each state, the optimal action. Computing the utili-
ties iteratively is based on the Bellman equation [14.23]
UiC1.s/ D R.s/ C maxa
X
s0
T.s; a; s0/Ui.s0/ ;
(14.6)

AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics
14.2 Knowledge Representation and Processing
337
Part A | 14.2
A
rw= –1
B
rw=–10
C
rw= –50
D
rw= –100
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.7
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.9
0.9
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
u
s
d
u
s
d
u, s, d
u
s
d
0.1
0.1
0.1
Fig. 14.4 A representation of an
MDP. In this example, states A, B, C,
D have associated rewards (1, 10,
50, 100). There are three possible
actions in each state, u, s, d, each
have a given probability (shown on the
arrows) to lead to another state
where 0 <  < 1 is a discount factor. After computing
the utilities, the optimal policy is the one that pro-
vides the best action (i. e., the one maximizing the
utility) for each state. This is computed by .s/ D
arg maxa
P
s0 T.s; a; s0/U.s0/. So the result of the MDP
is the best local decision. A policy is an a priori compu-
tation of the best sequence of actions, which is guided
by the maximization of a global reward instead of just
reaching a goal with minimal cost, as in classical plan-
ning. So a policy is not a plan of actions that has to be
strictly executed. Since it already takes uncertainties in
action execution into account, the policy can be pursued
whatever the outcome of action execution.
The second method is called policy iteration (PI).
Here one starts with an initial (e.g., random) policy 
and, through an iterative algorithm, tries to improve it
gradually by looking for the actions that augment utility.
In conclusion, in a deterministic setting, the solu-
tion to a planning problem is a sequence of actions. In
an observable stochastic setting, the solution is a policy
deﬁned by the best local decision.
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes
In the (realistic) case where the robot has no full ac-
cess to the environment, decision making must be made
under partial observability. To that end, the MDP for-
malism is enriched with an observation function that
provides uncertain knowledge. A POMDP is deﬁned
by six components hS; A; T; R; ˝; Oi. The ﬁrst four de-
scribe an MDP. ˝ is a ﬁnite set of observations o.
O W S  A ! ˝ is the observation model O.s0; a; o/ (de-
rived for the robot sensor models) that provides the
probability to obtain observation o after action a which
has lead to state s0. The robot belief state is the probabil-

Part A | 14.3
338
Part A
Robotics Foundations
ity distribution over all states, i. e., all the probabilities
of being in all the states. The belief to be in a given state
is usually noted by b.s/. The belief is updated after an
action and observation by
b0.s0/ D ˛O.s0; a; o/
X
s
T.s; a; s0/b.s/ ;
(14.7)
where ˛ is a normalization constant.
Although partial observability is a typical case for
robots acting in mundane environments, and hence
POMDPs are the more adequate formalism for mod-
eling action and observation, POMDP-based models
are often avoided. The reason is that calculating opti-
mal POMDP policies is impracticably complex. Mostly,
solving a POMDP is based on approximate or derived
methods, such as working with the corresponding be-
lief MDP of a POMDP, which results from considering
the (fully observable) belief function induced by the
POMDP.
A good example of using Markov processes for
modelling and solving robotics decision-making prob-
lems, combining task planning, and motion planning is
provided in [14.24].
14.3 Reasoning and Decision Making
The main motivation for developing reasoning capac-
ities in robotics is to enable robots to make decisions
about their future actions. This is why planning was
one of the main early research topics in AI, within
the SHAKEY project (
VIDEO 704 ), resulting in the
seminal STRIPS planner [14.25]. Designing a planning
system requires to address three main questions:

How to represent the world?

How to represent actions?

How to guide the plan search process?
According to the formalism used to answer these
questions, the planning system will cope differently
with the constraints of the real world, and this is an
essential issue in robotics. As mentioned above, early
planning techniques were based on ﬁrst-order predicate
logic (FOPL) for representing knowledge, and the limi-
tation of FOPL when facing the uncertainties of the real
world has lead to adopt probabilistic representations
and probabilistic reasoning to cope with real situations.
World Representations. Classically, when reasoning
at the symbolic level, knowledge about the world is
represented as states which are sets of logical propo-
sitions such as Ontable(Cup). Under the closed world
assumption, the facts that have the value FALSE are not
represented in the states of the world. In order to deal
with uncertainties, instead of having TRUE/FALSE val-
ues, the propositions have a probability distribution of
being true.
Representation of Actions. In classical planning, as
introduced by STRIPS, actions modify the state of the
world and are deﬁned by three sets of predicate lists.
The predicates that should be true for the action to
be feasible are the preconditions. The set of predicates
that become TRUE after the action is executed is the
ADD list. The set of predicates that becomes FALSE
after action execution is the DELETE list. The plan-
ner includes a uniﬁcation procedure to determine which
predicates correspond to the propositions describing the
world states. Taking into account uncertainties in action
execution leads to including a probabilistic characteri-
zation of their outcome.
Search. Finding the most adequate action is based
on a search algorithm in the state space. The state space
is an implicit graph given by the initial state and a suc-
cessor function that provides the states immediately
adjacent to a given state. Each action, which represents
the transition from one state to its successor, has a given
cost. The well known A* algorithm [14.26] was pro-
posed in 1968, again within the SHAKEY project, to
address the search problem. The planning algorithm,
based on this search, recursively selects the action that
would produce the current goal state (or a subgoal
thereof), and under certain conditions the optimal (i. e.,
least cost) solution is found.
This classical planning scheme is not able to cope
with uncertainties because it is based on FOPL repre-
sentations. The only way it can do that is through plan
mending or replanning (Sect. 14.4). When probabilis-
tic representations are used, the plan search will adopt
a very different scheme as explained in Sect. 14.2.2.
However, reasoning in AI and robotics involves
much more than sequential planning. Robots act in the
real world in which action duration determines suc-
cess or failure. They have to consider events occurring
at given instants and situations that unfold over time.
Temporal relations and an appropriate temporal logic
are necessary to represent and reason about time. Sec-
tion 14.3.2 discusses temporal reasoning.
Another central issue is reasoning about space.
What does it mean exactly when we represent a piece
of knowledge by the predicate Ontable(Cup), or
Near(Robot,Table)? How to express spatial relation-
ships symbolically from sensor data? This involves

AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics
14.3 Reasoning and Decision Making
339
Part A | 14.3
speciﬁc formalisms as well which are developed in
Sect. 14.3.3.
14.3.1 Using Multiple Knowledge
Representation Formalisms
Automated planning carries an immediate appeal for
robotic applications: the actions a robot should perform
to achieve a goal are obtained as a result of reason-
ing in a model which can be changed to suit different
environments, physical capabilities, and tasks. Yet rea-
soning about action per se is not a silver bullet for
robot programming. As noted earlier, obtaining com-
petent robot behavior by reasoning in a model crucially
depends on the epistemological adequacy of the model-
ing language. As a case in point, let us elaborate on our
initial example: imagine a waiter robot with two arms
that has to serve meals to guests in a restaurant. The
robot would have to reason about time in order to in-
fer that cold beverages should be delivered before they
get warm. Food needs to be served in front of guests,
hence the robot should be capable of some form of spa-
tial reasoning. It should be capable of reasoning about
resources, e.g., infer that it cannot hold more than two
parts of the meal simultaneously with its two arms, or
that its tray can only accommodate a limited number
of dishes. A DL ontology might inform the robot that
all mugs in the cupboard are clean – hence, committing
to a particular mug at planning time is not necessary –
or that a cup or a mug both work well for serving cof-
fee. Most of this knowledge is difﬁcult or impossible
to model in classical planning models [14.27], which
are limited to describing the causal relations that exist
between actions and predicates in FOPL.
The types of knowledge a robot should possess
ultimately depend on the application. It should be how-
ever evident that – short of encoding this knowledge in
FOPL, which is computationally inadequate – several
models expressed in different formalisms are necessary
in most meaningful domains. Note also that any plan
containing actions that are to be executed by a robot
should also be translated to actionable metric terms that
are understandable by the robot. For instance, speciﬁc
positions in which objects are to be placed, locations to
navigate to, and action dispatch times should be indi-
cated in the plan. Finally, the knowledge represented in
different models a robot should use for reasoning (the
causal model being only one of these) often presents
nontrivial interdependences: the capacity of the robot’s
tray (resource model) determines the number of trips
a robot has to perform to and from the table it is
clearing (causal reasoning), the type of meal (ontolog-
ical model) may affect the spatial layout of the cutlery
(spatial reasoning), and the time it takes for a bever-
age to get cold (temporal model) will affect the order
of goal achievement (causal reasoning). The develop-
ment of problem solving algorithms that account for
these interdependences is an active topic of research.
An overview of recent results in this direction is pro-
vided in Sect. 14.3.4.
Of particular interest to this discussion are tem-
poral and spatial KR formalisms. Several temporal
and spatial logics possess properties that make them
both epistemological and computationally adequate for
a variety of robotic problems. Below, we outline the
principal temporal and spatial KR formalisms that are
relevant to robotics.
14.3.2 Reasoning About Time
Linear temporal logic (LTL) [14.28] is a decidable
propositional logic which provides a means to describe
how execution paths will evolve in the future. The tem-
poral operators  (next),  (always), ˙ (eventually),
U (until) and R (release) are used to represent condi-
tions on the state of a system. For instance, the robot
will eventually place the cup on the table (reachabil-
ity), the robot will never serve a cold coffee (safety),
and the robot will always reach its charging station
before its battery is discharged (liveness). A fragment
of LTL (speciﬁcally, syntactically co-safe LTL formu-
lae [14.29]) has become relevant in robotics because of
its ability to predicate upon discrete temporal proper-
ties of motions. For example, an exploration robot may
be required to visit locations A, B and C in a prede-
termined sequential order; or conditions like avoid C
unless A or B have been visited, and always avoid D.
Given such temporal goal speciﬁcations, it is possible
to compute motions that satisfy these goals with proba-
bilistic roadmaps (PRMs) [14.30, 31].
LTL formulae express qualitative temporal speci-
ﬁcations, thus offering the domain expert a means to
specify conditions on execution at a high level of ab-
straction. LTL does not however consider that robot
actions have a temporal extent, and that the temporal
extents of different actions may be required to have
speciﬁc relations. The qualitative temporal logics point
algebra (PA) [14.32] and interval algebra (IA) [14.33]
can be used to capture (and enforce) such relations.
Speciﬁcally, they allow to represent qualitative tem-
poral relations among temporal variables. Variables in
PA represent time points, which can be used to repre-
sent events, such as the robot has reached the table,
or start/end times of actions, such as the robot starts
to place a mug on the table. In IA, variables represent
time intervals, e.g., the robot navigates to the table, or
the robot places the mug on the table. The basic PA re-
lations are the three temporal relations f<; >; Dg. All

Part A | 14.3
340
Part A
Robotics Foundations
unions of these relations (	, , ¤, the universal re-
lation >, and the empty relation ;) are also valid PA
constraints. In IA, constraints represent temporal rela-
tions among temporal intervals. The basic IA relations
BIA are the 13 possible temporal relations between in-
tervals, namely precedes (p), meets (m), overlaps (o),
during (d), starts (s), ﬁnishes (f), their inverses (e.g.,
p1), and equals () (Fig. 14.5). A constraint in IA
is a disjunction of basic relations fr1; : : : ; rng 2 BIA 
: : :  BIA. Going back to our example, a relevant piece
of temporal knowledge for our waiter robot is that the
action of picking the mug temporally overlaps the fact
that it is holding the mug, i. e., the IA relation
Pick.Mug/ fog Holding.Mug/ :
(14.8)
This knowledge in fact represents the qualitative state
of affairs in the presence of a successful pick-up action,
whereas the contingency in which the mug slips from
the robot’s gripper (an all too common occurrence with
today’s robots!) can be expressed by the temporal rela-
tion
Pick.Mug/ fd1g Holding.Mug/ :
(14.9)
A set of variables and constraints in PA or IA con-
stitutes a constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) [14.34].
A fundamental reasoning problem in temporal CSPs is
to test the satisﬁability of the CSP – assessing whether
a substitution of temporal values to variables exists that
satisﬁes all constraints. A related problem is that of
computing the minimal representation of a given CSP,
that is, the equivalent CSP formed by the strongest im-
plied constraints. Both problems are tractable for PA
and for several fragments of IA [14.35]. A particularly
useful example of tractable subalgebra of IA is the set
of convex IA relations [14.36]. For example, fb; m; og is
a convex IA relation, whereas fb; og is not. These good
A+
A−
[l, u]
B−
B+
[l, u]
[l, u]
[l, u]
A−
A+
B+
B−
[l, u]
B−
B+
[l, u]
A+
A−
[l, u]
A−
A+
[l, u]
B−
B+
B−
B+
A−
A+
[l, u]
B−
B+
A−
A+
A−
A+
B−
B+
A+
A−
[l, u]
B−
B+
B+
B−
[l, u]
A−
A+
B+
B−
[l, u]
A−
A+
B−
B+
A−
A+
A−
A+
B−
B+
[l, u]
[l, u]
[l, u]
[l, u]
A+
A−
B+
B−
A{f−1}B
A{d−1}B
A{o−1}B
A{d}B
A{p−1}B
A{m}B
A{m−1}B
A{s−1}B
A{f}B
A{s}B
A{≡}B
A{p}B
A{o}B
Fig. 14.5 The 13 basic qualitative relations in interval algebra. Œl; u indicate metric bounds that can be attached to the
basic relations to reﬁne the metric semantics of the relations
computational properties can be leveraged by robots
during plan execution. Ensuring robust execution in the
case of our waiter robot picking a mug need not be hard-
coded as an ad-hoc status checking procedure into the
implementation of the pick up action. Conversely, it can
be modeled as a simple relation as above, and its veri-
ﬁcation can be cast as a CSP containing the relations
Pick.Mug/ fog Holding.Mug/ ;
Pick.Mug/ fd1g Holding.Mug/ :
(14.10)
The ﬁrst constraint represents the requirement we ex-
pect to hold in nominal execution, whereas the second
constraint results from perception and proprioception
(more on this later). The above CSP is not satisﬁable:
the observed and executed situations are not consistent
with the modeled temporal relation representing suc-
cessful plan execution. This determination can be made
in polynomial time (with respect to the number of vari-
ables in the CSP) with a particular form of inference,
called path consistency [14.37].
Although convenient for specifying high-level re-
quirements on robot plans, PA and IA cannot capture
metric information. For this, we need metric tempo-
ral constraints, which allow to predicate on durations
and relative temporal distances between variables. An
important metric temporal problem is the temporal con-
straint satisfaction problem (TCSP). As in PA, variables
represent time points. Constraints represent disjunc-
tions of bounds on the temporal distance between the
pairs of time points: given two time points a and b, the
constraint
a
Œl1;u1_Œl2;u2_:::Œln;un
! b
states that li 	 b  a 	 ui, for one or more i 2 f1 : : : ng:
A TCSP is satisﬁable iff at least one disjunct (pair of

AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics
14.3 Reasoning and Decision Making
341
Part A | 14.3
inequalities) per constraint holds. Unlike PA and IA,
variables in a TCSP are associated with an explicit
set of possible assignments of time values, called do-
main. Computing the minimal representation consists
of restricting the domains of time points to the smallest
intervals of time containing values that satisfy all con-
straints. A particular restriction of the TCSP, called the
simple temporal problem (STP), has the property that
domains are contiguous intervals of time. The condi-
tion for remaining in the STP fragment of TCSP is that
constraints have only one disjunct, i. e., are of the form
a
Œl;u
! b :
Whereas computational problems for the the general
TCSP are NP-hard, the satisﬁability and minimal repre-
sentation problems for the STP are tractable. Both prob-
lems are solved by path consistency inference [14.38],
and highly optimized algorithms have been developed
for the satisﬁability and minimal representation prob-
lems [14.39, 40].
The semantics of basic PA and IA can be understood
through the use of metric temporal constraints. For in-
stance, the constraint
Pick.Mug/ fog Holding.Mug/
(14.11)
is equivalent to the metric constraints
Pick.Mug/ Œ1;1/
! Holding.Mug/ ;
Holding.Mug/ Œ1;1/
! Pick.Mug/C ;
(14.12)
where ./ and ./C represent, respectively, the start
and end times of the corresponding intervals. More-
over, metric bounds can be used to deﬁne a metric
extension of IA in which we can express high-level re-
lations between intervals with additional metric bounds
(Fig. 14.5). For instance, AfpŒ5; 13gB states that in-
terval A should end at least 5 and at most 13 time
units before interval B starts. In addition to binary con-
straints, it is also common practice to deﬁne the two
unary constraints ReleaseŒl; uA and DeadlineŒl; uA,
stating, respectively, that A starts between l and u time
units after the origin of time, and that A ends between l
and u time units after the origin of time.
Overall, constraint-based temporal calculi can rep-
resent both qualitative and metric time. Provided that
appropriate fragments of IA are used in modeling, the
reasoning tasks can be conveniently reduced to path
consistency inference in an STP. This is an attractive
feature for robot reasoning: it provides a means to an-
chor observations and proprioception in time. In the
example above, the robot must infer from sensing that
the relation
Pick.Mug/ fd1g Holding.Mug/
(14.13)
holds. An implementation of this capability can be
achieved by representing as time points both observed
and planned behavior, and constraining these time
points so as to reﬂect the precise times in which they
were observed. Assuming the current time is 20, that
the robot started to pick the mug at time 5, and that
the gripper reports that it is holding an object between
times 10 and 18, the following STP models the robot’s
situation
Pick.Mug/ foŒ1; 1/Œ1; 1/Œ11/g Holding.Mug/ ;
ReleaseŒ5; 5 Pick.Mug/ ;
DeadlineŒ20; 20 Pick.Mug/ ;
ReleaseŒ10; 10 Holding.Mug/ ;
DeadlineŒ18; 18 Holding.Mug/ :
(14.14)
The above STP is not satisﬁable, reﬂecting the fact that
execution has not gone according to plan. Again, this
state of affairs can be ascertained in low-order poly-
nomial time, hence providing a simple mechanism for
online fault detection.
The use of temporal constraint reasoning in plan-
ning and plan execution goes beyond diagnosing fail-
ures. The fact that intervals are grounded on a metric
temporal CSP (an STP) provides a means to maintain
knowledge about when actions should be dispatched,
and whether they should be delayed to accommodate
unexpected contingencies. For instance, we can express
that the robot should start moving back to the counter
once the mug has been held for at least 3 s with the con-
straint
Holding.Mug/ foŒ3; 1/Œ1; 1/Œ1;1/g
Move.Table; Counter/ :
(14.15)
A delay in the start time of the Holding.Mug/
predicate will propagate to the start time of the
Move.Table; Counter/ action, progressively pushing its
start time into the future until the robot starts holding
the mug. Correct propagation of exogenous events is
ensured by maintaining in the STP the requirements
of the plan together with constraints representing when
events are observed, when actions are dispatched, and
when they terminate. A simple procedure for maintain-
ing these constraints is the following:

When an action is dispatched at time t, a Re-
leaseŒt; t constraint is imposed on the correspond-
ing interval, constraining its start time to the current
time.

Part A | 14.3
342
Part A
Robotics Foundations

The fact that the action is still executing at time
t C m is modeled with the constraint DeadlineŒt C
mC1; 1/, modeling the fact that the action will end
some time in the future.

When the lower level executive signals at time
t C m C n that an action has ﬁnished, the constraint
DeadlineŒt C m C n; t C m C n is added to the STP,
thus constraining the action’s end time.
Every time a constraint is added, the minimal STP
is recomputed – that is, the domains of the time points
(start and end times of actions and predicates) are up-
dated. In so doing, we ensure that the lower bound of
time points representing the start times of actions will
always correspond to the earliest admissible time at
which actions should be dispatched to the robot’s exec-
utive layer. This guarantees that execution will uphold
all temporal constraints modeled in the temporal CSP.
These may include additional requirements on the plan,
such as speciﬁcations regarding necessary orderings of
actions, actions that must occur concurrently, and syn-
chronizations with exogenous events.
The computational adequacy of temporal CSPs en-
tails that reasoning about temporal models can be
performed online during execution. Thus, reasoning
about time is a way to enable fault diagnosis, guarantee
timely action dispatching, and enforce temporal speciﬁ-
cations on robot plans. Mechanisms based on temporal
constraint reasoning have been used as a tool for this
purpose in many settings involving execution of plans
on real physical systems [14.41, 42]. Similar techniques
have been used to account for uncontrollable events
in plan execution [14.43], inferring context from sen-
sor traces [14.44], and integrated context inference and
planning [14.45]. A good overview of the fundamental
principles of temporal constraint reasoning underlying
these results is given in Dechter’s book on constraint
processing [14.46].
14.3.3 Reasoning About Space
Spatial KR formalisms serve the purpose of specify-
ing desired spatial relations in a scene. As for temporal
models, they can be used to make sense of sensor traces,
to enforce conditions during plan execution, as well as
to drive the planning process itself. Most work has fo-
cused on the use of qualitative spatial relations for scene
understanding (e.g., in the context of perceptual anchor-
ing [14.47]). Structural pattern recognition, important
applications of which can be found in medical domains,
employ cognitive vision techniques to match qualitative
spatial knowledge (representing a speciﬁed structure)
to perceived context [14.48, 49]. In many applications,
qualitative relations do not belong to a well-deﬁned cal-
culus, rather are tailored to capture speciﬁc features
(e.g., distance, orientation, and shape) which are use-
ful for pattern speciﬁcation and recognition in particular
applications. As is the case for temporal knowledge,
a well-deﬁned spatial calculus is useful because of its
provable formal properties – e.g., tractability of speciﬁc
reasoning problems, expressiveness of the language,
and so on. Well-founded spatial calculi permit logical
reasoning, and, not surprisingly, they are grounded on
similar principles as PA and IA. We illustrate here these
principles and show simple examples of their use in
robotic applications.
The main entities of interest in qualitative spatial
calculi are objects, or, rather, the regions (or points) of
physical space that they occupy. Spatial calculi provide
a means to represent the relations among these regions.
There exist several well-known and well-studied quali-
tative calculi. Each of these calculi focuses on one cat-
egory of spatial concepts – e.g., topology, direction and
distance. Region connection calculus (RCC) [14.50]
is used for representing and reasoning with topologi-
cal relations. Cardinal direction calculus (CDC) [14.51]
is an approach based on directional relations. As for
temporal calculi, these calculi use the language of con-
straints to represent spatial properties, and classical
constraint-based reasoning techniques like path consis-
tency [14.52] to ascertain consistency.
Ofparticularinterest hereis RCC, which is grounded
on eight spatial relations describing the connectedness
of regions: disconnected (DC), externally connected
(EC), tangential
proper
part (TPP), nontangential
proper part (NTPP), partially overlapping (PO), equal
(), and the inverses TPP1 and NTPP1 (Fig. 14.6).
The full algebra deriving from the eight basic RCC
relations is called RCC-8. An important restriction of
RCC-8 is RCC-5, obtained by subsuming the relations
DC and EC into one relation, and NTPP and TPP into
another. The satisﬁability and minimal CSP problems
are NP-hard for both RCC-8 and RCC-5 – however,
these problems are tractable if we restrict the language
to the basic relations (as for IA), and a large num-
ber of tractable fragments of RCC-8 and RCC-5 are
known [14.53]. A good example of where these proper-
ties are useful is in the problem of anchoring modeled
relations to observed spatial layouts. This is exempliﬁed
in the work by Cohn et al. [14.54] on video sequence
analysis, where the problem is to construct qualitative
representations of the evolution of spatial relations in
video sequences. The qualitative descriptions are ob-
tained online, due to the computational adequacy of the
qualitative spatial calculus used (a derivative of RCC
called CORE-9).
Qualitative spatial reasoning can be used, much like
qualitative temporal reasoning, to robustify plan execu-

AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics
14.3 Reasoning and Decision Making
343
Part A | 14.3
B
A
B
B
A
A
A
A
B
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A{EC}B
A{DC}B
A{NTPP−1}B
A{TPP−1}B
A{NTPP}B
A{TPP}B
A{PO}B
A{≡}B
Fig. 14.6 The eight basic
qualitative relations in RCC
tion. We may, for instance, require that mugs should be
placed on top of saucers (Mug NTPP Saucer). As we
have shown for temporal reasoning, the task of verify-
ing the correct state of affairs can be cast to a CSP which
is guaranteed to be feasible iff the desired spatial layout
is observed.
However, note that all we can express with RCC
constraints are topological relations between objects.
RCC cannot express notions like left-of, above, and so
on, as the only assumption made on variables is that
they are convex regions of space. Conversely, rectangle
algebra (RA) [14.55] expresses more than topological
relations – at the cost of assuming that objects have
a particular shape. Speciﬁcally, RA is an extension
of IA to two dimensions. Its variables thus represent
axis-parallel rectangles, and relations are pairs of IA re-
lations, one for each axis.
RA can be augmented, like IA, with metric bounds.
The resulting calculus, called ARAC [14.56], sub-
sumes both topology and cardinal relations. For in-
y
B
A
Ay
−
x
[0, ∞)
∈[5,13]
∈
〈p[5,13],p〉
N
W
NW
NE
E
SE
S
SW
DC
By
+
By
−
Ay
+
Ax
−
Ax
+
Bx
+
Bx
−
Fig. 14.7 The ARAC relation BhpŒ5; 13; piA, which sub-
sumes RCC relation AfDCgB and CDC relation A North-
east of B
stance (Fig. 14.7), the relation
B hpŒ5; 13; pi A
(14.16)
states that B precedes A in both the x and y axes, and that
the distance along the x axis between A and B should
be at least 5 and at most 13. The ARAC relation sub-
sumes the qualitative relation A is Northeast of B, as
well as the RCC relation AfDCgB. Note that rectangular
regions are compatible with the representation of seg-
mented objects in most off-the-shelf perception mod-
ules. This property facilitates the process of going from
sensor data to symbols. Toward this aim, ARAC pro-
vides the unary constraints AtŒl1; u1Œl2; u2Œl3; u3Œl4; u4
and SizeŒl1; u1Œl2; u2Œl3; u3Œl4; u4. The ﬁrst constraint
bounds the length of the sides of a rectangle, while
the second bounds the placement of a rectangle in 2-D
space. Note that the At constraint performs a similar
function to the Release and Deadline constraints used
in the metric extension of IA, which denote speciﬁed or
perceived absolute placements in time of intervals. It is
thus intuitive to see how the At constraint can be im-
plemented with Release and Deadline constraints in the
augmented IA CSPs used to represent the projections of
rectangles on the two axes.
We can employ ARAC constraints to represent de-
sired placements of objects, both in qualitative and
metric terms. For instance, the speciﬁcation of a well-
set table for our waiter robot could be
Fork hdŒ5; C1/Œ5; C1/;
dŒ5; C1/Œ5; C1/i Table ;
Knife hdŒ5; C1/Œ5; C1/;
dŒ5; C1/Œ5; C1/i Table ;
Fork hp; di Mug ;
Mug hp; di Knife ;
Mug SizeŒ8; 8Œ8; 8 ;
Fork SizeŒ2; 2Œ15; 15 ;
Knife SizeŒ2; 2Œ15; 15 ;
(14.17)

Part A | 14.3
344
Part A
Robotics Foundations
that is, forks and knives should be at least 5 cm from
the edge of the table, forks should be located on the
left of mugs and knives on the right, the size of forks
and knives is 2  15 cm2, and the size of mugs is 8 
8 cm2.
The above relations can be maintained, much like
we have illustrated for temporal reasoning, in a lower-
level metric constraint-based representation – in this
case, consisting of two STPs, one for each axis of
the reference frame. It has been shown [14.56] that
these two STPs are satisﬁable iff the ARAC CSP is
satisﬁable, and that the minimal STPs contain all the
admissible placements of objects. The minimal STPs
can thus be used to extract an admissible placement of
the objects in the scene. Technically, this is done by
hallucinating the objects that are to be placed in the
scene, that is, representing both observed objects and
those that are intended to be placed into the scene in the
spatial CSP. In the example above, supposing the robot
must place the mug on a table which already has a fork
and a knife on it, the hallucinated object is the mug,
while the fork and knife would be constrained by At
constraints representing their observed locations. The
bounds of all variables in the minimal STPs represent
all the admissible placements of the objects. Those of
the fork and knife will not have been reﬁned in the min-
imal representation, as they were already ﬁxed by the
At constraints resulting from observation; conversely,
the bounds of the Mug rectangle are reﬁned in the min-
imal representation to contain only those points that
are admissible wrt. the other constraints in the spatial
CSP.
So far, we have shown how employing constraint-
based temporal and spatial KR formalisms allows to
cast the problem of fault detection to a tractable prob-
lem that can be solved online. Another important aspect
of plan execution that is facilitated by these represen-
tations is fault identiﬁcation and repair [14.57]. It is
easy to see why an explicit representation formulated
in terms of constraints facilitates these tasks: suppose
that the fork and knife are placed on the table cor-
rectly from the qualitative point of view – i. e., the
fork is left of the knife – but that they are only 5 cm
apart. The resulting spatial CSP would not be satisﬁ-
able, as it would be impossible to ﬁt the mug (whose
bounding box is 8  8 cm2) between the two pieces of
cutlery, as prescribed by constraints .Forkhp; diMug/
and .Mughp; diKnife/. The spatial CSP can be used at
this point as a tool to perform culprit analysis: the same
CSP without the At constraint modeling the observed
placement of the fork represents the situation in which
we assume that the fork can be moved; if this CSP is sat-
isﬁable, then we know that replacing the fork is a way
to achieve a well-set table.
Spatial reasoning has not received as much attention
as temporal reasoning in the context of robotic applica-
tions. The AI and Robotics research communities are,
however, quickly clustering around this important topic.
Spatial calculi are a well studied topic in AI, albeit with
less applications in robotics than temporal reasoning.
As robots become more competent in manipulation and
navigation tasks, the issue of representing and enforc-
ing high-level requirements on space begins to come
to the fore. As always, it is the combination of epis-
temological and computational adequacy of signiﬁcant
fragments of spatial KR formalisms that makes them
useful in robot applications. Indeed, the potential of
qualitative and metric spatial reasoning goes beyond
planning and plan execution, with active research direc-
tions in human–robot interaction [14.58–60] and object
search [14.61]
14.3.4 Reasoning About Multiple KR
Formalisms
Despite their simplicity, the examples we have used to
illustrate the basic concepts of temporal and spatial rea-
soning point to the fact that reasoning about action,
time, space, and any other knowledge possessed by the
robot must occur jointly. For instance, the decision to
place the mug on the table may depend on the spatial
layout of other objects on the table, or on whether there
is a more urgent task to be carried out before doing so.
It is easy to see that even this simple task cannot ig-
nore kinematics and geometric constraints, which may
call for approaching the table from a different side, or
to move another object before placing the mug. Re-
cent work in integrated task and motion planning is
a response to the need for integrating these forms of
reasoning into planning. Today, this is very much seen
as the next big challenge, and consistent research results
in this speciﬁc area of hybrid reasoning are closing the
gap between classical planning and real robotic appli-
cations [14.62–67].
We argue, however, that kinematics and geomet-
ric constraints are only two of the important types of
knowledge necessary for achieving competent robot be-
havior. Comparatively less work exists in integrating
other types of knowledge. DL reasoing has been em-
ployed to generate high-level plans [14.68], to reﬁne
planning domains [14.69], and Galindo et al. [14.70]
show how to enhance the task planning process with
spatial and ontological models. The largest volume of
work in integrating diverse forms of reasoning into
planning focuses on integrating planning, temporal,
and resource reasoning – e.g., planning with metric
temporal reasoning [14.71], qualitative temporal mod-
els [14.44], combined qualitative and metric temporal

AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics
14.3 Reasoning and Decision Making
345
Part A | 14.3
reasoning [14.72], and resource scheduling [14.73–
75].
Although these advancements contribute to widen-
ing the expressive power of models for robot reasoning,
they do not suggest general methods for jointly rea-
soning about heterogeneous KR formalisms. As noted
earlier, the types of knowledge a robot should pos-
sess ultimately depend on the application, which makes
this an important basic research question. A few ex-
amples pointing in the direction of general solutions
do exist, although work in the area is sparse. These
include planning modulo theories [14.76], an exten-
sion of satisﬁabiliy modulo theories (SMTs) [14.77],
which enrich classical planning models with seman-
tics belonging to arbitrary ﬁrst order theories. SMTs
themselves are an example of general hybridization
scheme, and have been employed in a robotic con-
text by Nedunuri et al. [14.78] to enforce metric re-
quirements on motion and manipulation tasks. The
approach known in the literature as meta-constraint
reasoning is similar in structure to SMTs, but is
grounded on the more general notion of CSP. Meta-
constraint reasoning has been used to develop solvers
for highly expressive planning domains that include
qualitative and metric time, resources, and logical
constraints [14.79]. In the context of robotic appli-
cations, the approach has been used for online plan-
ning with qualitative and metric time, spatial rela-
tions in ARAC and resources [14.57], as well as
for online conﬁguration planning for multirobot sys-
tems [14.80].
14.3.5 Knowledge Representation Systems
for Robots
In autonomous robot control systems, the kinds of
information that we have discussed in the previous
subsections are not only represented and reasoned
about but also used subsymbolically for generating
perception-guided activity. For example, some informa-
tion such as the appearance and poses of the objects on
the table might be generated by the perception system
of the robot through the interpretation of sensor data.
Other information such as the position of the robot in
the environment might be estimated using state estima-
tion algorithms and stored in dedicated data structures.
Also, symbolic action descriptions have to be translated
into low-level parameterizations of control routines in
order to generate behavior and cause effects.
These aspects of embodying abstract and symbolic
reasoning in robots are at least partly addressed by
system-level research on KR and reasoning for robots.
The resulting systems serve as integrated question-
answering components in a robot’s control program that
gather information from different sources and employ
a range of inference methods for controlling and pa-
rameterizing control routines.
Examples of recent systems include the pntology-
based
uniﬁed
robot knowledge (OUR-K)
frame-
work [14.81], mostly used for navigation actions, the
ORO system [14.82] that focuses on knowledge for
human–robot interaction and dialog grounding, and
the KnowRob system [14.83] providing deep knowl-
edge for robotic manipulation tasks. The semantic
layer [14.84] of the PEIS Ecology [14.85] serves both
autonomous robots and ambient intelligent environ-
ments. In the Ke Jia project [14.86], Answer Set Pro-
gramming is used as representation for integrating KR,
natural language processing, task planning and motion
planning on a mobile platform. Also classical cogni-
tive architectures such as Soar [14.87] and ACT-R also
integrate modules for storing knowledge [14.88] with
inference capabilities, but have only rarely been used
on robots [14.89].
One ﬁeld that has seen much progress in the past
years is the creation and representation of environ-
ment models, often termed semantic maps. Advances
in object recognition allowed to detect and percep-
tually interpret single objects in environments, which
enables robots to store higher level semantic informa-
tion about them in their respective maps. The term
semantic is used for a range of different interpretation
capabilities – from a mere segmentation and catego-
rization of the environment into different region types
to the segmentation of objects, their categorization,
and the interpretation of their properties [14.90], or
from the co-occurrence of objects in scenes [14.91]
up to environment representations in description log-
ics [14.92], from statistical relational environment mod-
els [14.93] to an embedding of spatial information
into an encyclopedic and common-sense knowledge
base [14.94]. Many of the reasoning tasks that we have
discussed in Sect. 14.3.3 have implicitly assumed ex-
pressive semantic maps that can make symbolic place
descriptions such as on the table or in the cupboard
effective.
Knowledge representation aspects also become in-
creasingly important for the instruction of robots with
natural language as well as for human–robot interac-
tion. For understanding directives involving objects in
the environment [14.95] and for following spoken di-
rections [14.96–99], a robot might have to ground the
words it hears or reads into its percepts and actions.
The natural-language text may be the result of direct
interaction with a human, but can also be obtained from
resources on the Web, for example, for mining object
locality knowledge [14.100] or extracting task instruc-
tions from websites [14.101] (
VIDEO 705 ).

Part A | 14.4
346
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Web-enabled robotics is another branch of robotics
that has recently become increasingly important. Mod-
ern robot control systems use the worldwide web as
an information resource [14.102], for sharing knowl-
edge and skills [14.103], for telepresence applica-
tions [14.104], to employ web services [14.105], and
to use computational resources provided through the
web [14.106] (
VIDEO 706 ).
14.4 Plan-Based Robot Control
Plan-based control is an information processing ap-
proach for controlling autonomous robots that aims at
making robot control systems more general – in at least
three respects. First, it enables robots to successfully
carry out multiple, diverse, and possibly interfering
tasks. Second, it can improve the course of action by
adapting the control software for the respective exe-
cution context. Third, plan-based control can enable
robots to perform novel tasks without requiring the col-
lection of extensive experience.
In the plan-based approach, robots generate actions
and behavior by synthesizing, maintaining, and exe-
cuting plans, where plans are robot control programs
that a robot cannot only execute but also reason about
and manipulate [14.107]. Thus plan-based controllers
can manage and adapt plans in order to better achieve
complex and changing tasks [14.108]. The use of plans
enables robots to ﬂexibly interleave complex and in-
teracting tasks, exploit opportunities, quickly plan their
courses of action, and, if necessary, revise their intended
activities.
Plans in plan-based control have two roles. They are
(1) executable prescriptions that can be interpreted by
the robot to generate behavior in order to accomplish its
jobs and (2) representations that can be synthesized and
revised by the robot to meet the robot’s criterion of util-
ity. Besides having means for representing and generat-
ing plans, plan-based controllers are also equipped with
tools that enable computational processes to (1) predict
what might happen when a robot controller gets exe-
cuted and return the result as an execution scenario,
(2) infer what might be wrong with a robot controller
given an execution scenario, and (3) perform complex
revisions on robot controllers.
In most general terms robot planning can be con-
sidered to be the automatic generation, reﬁnement,
revision, and optimization of robot plans [14.107]. As
a computational problem it can be formulated as fol-
lows: given an abstract plan P and a description of the
current situation, ﬁnd an executable realization Q that
maximizes some objective function V. In this problem
formulation, an abstract plan might be to go shopping
and to clean up the apartment, to win a robot soc-
cer game, to monitor the trafﬁc in a particular area
using an autonomous helicopter, or, for a museum tour-
guide robot, to inform and entertain the visitors of the
museum.
Robot planning algorithms aim at ﬁnding appropri-
ate plans by hypothesizing possible courses of action
and predicting what could happen when the plans get
executed. Based on these predictions, the robot decides
whether the plan will meet its objectives.
In the remainder of this subsection we will ﬁrst
discuss conceptual models underlying robot planning
and the representation of robot plans. We will then talk
about the automated synthesis of robot plans and ﬁnally
discuss mechanisms for revising plans and optimizing
plans based on experience.
14.4.1 Models of Plan-Based Control
The generation of plans and the prediction of what will
happen is based on models of the robot, its actions, and
the world. The most commonly used models are state-
transition systems (also called discrete-event systems or
problem spaces) [14.27].
Using state-transition systems, the behavior and the
effects of robot activity can be represented as a triple
˙ D hS; A; i, where:

S D fs1; s2; : : :g is a set of states

A D fa1; a2; : : :g is a set of actions

W S  A ! S is a state-transition function.
Thus, the action repertoire of a robot can be stated
as a graph where the nodes represent the states of the
environment and links of the form
si
A! sj
represent the fact that the state si can be transformed
into the state sj by the robot executing action A.
Imagine a robot has to stack three different objects,
e.g., a cup, a saucer, and a set. In the initial state, all ob-
jects are placed on a table surface. The robot can pick
an object (provided that there is no other object on top
of it) and can place it either on the surface or on top of
another object (provided, again, that there is nothing al-
ready on top of it). If we further assume that each object
can be placed on all other objects, and that only a single

AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics
14.4 Plan-Based Robot Control
347
Part A | 14.4
object can be moved at a time (and not a stack of two of
them), then we get the state space depicted in Fig. 14.8.
The state-transition model abstracts away aspects of
robot activity such as the structure of actions and the
events, behavior, and effects that are caused during ac-
tion execution. Actions are considered to cause atomic
state transitions.
Even with these abstractions, a number of variations
of planning problems are investigated. These variations
result from different trade-offs one can make with re-
spect to the computational complexity of the planning
problem, the strength of assumptions one makes about
the capabilities of the robot, and the realism with which
one wants to represent the behavior of the robot and the
effects of its actions.
An important subclass of state-transition models are
the ones that characterize action by specifying their pre-
conditions and effects [14.25, 109, 110]. Preconditions
state the conditions under which the respective action
is executable and has the speciﬁed effects. The effects
represent how the world changes when the action is ex-
ecuted.
If these models are stated as axioms in a logical rep-
resentation language (Sect. 14.2) planning methods can
Move (set,cup)
Move (cup,set)
Move
(set,saucer)
Move
(saucer,set)
Move (saucer,set)
Move (set,saucer)
Move (cup,set)
Move (set,cup)
Move
(cup,saucer)
Move (saucer,cup)
Move (cup,saucer)

Move (set,saucer)
Move (cup,set)
Start
Move (saucer,cup)
Move (saucer,set)
Fig. 14.8 Example: problem space for stacking three objects
be particularly powerful: they can compute sequences
or partially ordered sets of actions that are provably
working plans from the logical point of view. This
means that planning algorithms can ﬁnd plans that are
guaranteed to transform any state satisfying a given
state description into a state that satisﬁes a given goal,
if such a plan exists. Unfortunately, in many robot ap-
plications action models that are axiomatized this way
are too unrealistic.
Many extensions of the state-transition model deal
with providing the expressive power needed to state ac-
tion models more realistically. The ﬁrst one extends the
state-transition model by allowing state transitions to
be caused by a combination of an action and an event
(W S  A  E ! S) rather than the action alone. This
modiﬁcation allows us to represent action failures by
stating that a failure event occurs while the action is ex-
ecuted. It also allows us to approximate environments
that are dynamically changing. The second extension
is to change the state transition function such that it
maps into a subset of states rather than a single state
(W S  A ! 2S). This modiﬁcation allows the robot to
reason through the nondeterminism that can often not
be avoided when autonomous robots perform realis-

Part A | 14.4
348
Part A
Robotics Foundations
tic activities. Other researchers extend models used for
plan-based control by including aspects that allow the
robot to reason about its resources, geometric aspects
of manipulation actions [14.24, 111], sensing actions,
and so on.
Besides the state-transition model researchers also
use hybrid system models to reason about robot ac-
tivities [14.112–114]. In the hybrid system model the
action repertoires of robots are speciﬁed as continuous
variable dynamical systems with a phased operation.
Within each phase, called control mode, the system
evolves continuously according to the dynamical law
of that mode, called continuous ﬂow. Thus, the state
of the hybrid system can be thought of as a pair –
the control mode and the continuous state. The con-
trol mode identiﬁes a ﬂow, and the continuous ﬂow
identiﬁes a position in it. Also associated with each
control mode are so-called jump conditions, specifying
the conditions that the discrete state and the continu-
ous state together must satisfy to enable a transition to
another control mode. The transitions can cause abrupt
changes of the discrete as well as the continuous state.
The jump relation speciﬁes the valid settings of the sys-
tem variables that might occur during a jump. Then,
until the next transition, the continuous state evolves
according to the ﬂow identiﬁed by the new control
mode.
The advantage of a hybrid-system-based conceptu-
alization over state-based ones is that hybrid systems
can adequately model concurrent processes with inter-
fering continuous effects. They also allow for discrete
changes in process parameterization, which we need to
model the activation, deactivation, and reparameteriza-
tion of control processes through concurrent reactive
plans (Sect. 14.4.2). In addition, hybrid system based
conceptualizations can model the procedural meaning
of waiting for and reacting to asynchronous events.
While the increased expressive power allows us to
model the behavior that today’s autonomous manipula-
tion robots generate much more faithfully, the models
are also in most cases too complex to completely syn-
thesize action plans from primitive actions. Many of
the modelling issues to be addressed in the intersec-
tion between action planning and control are discussed
in [14.115, 116].
14.4.2 Representation of Plans
When the robot is performing its activity, it is under the
control of a plan. The most common forms of action
plans in autonomous robot control are:

State-transition plans, totally or partially ordered
sets of atomic actions.

Policies, mappings from (perceived) environment
states to actions.

Reactive plans that specify how the robot is to re-
spond to sensory events and execution failures in
order to accomplish its jobs.
State-Transition Plans
Robot action plans that are generated according to
the state-transition model are ordered sets of actions,
often called plan steps. The assumptions of the state-
transition model, in particular that plan steps are atomic
and their execution can be abstracted away, are not sat-
isﬁed in many robot applications. To execute plan steps
successfully, actions have to include subactions such as
detecting the object to be fetched in a scene or detect-
ing that the object has been successfully grasped before
lifting the arm. As autonomous robot activity is far from
perfect, the robot might not be able to generate the nec-
essary execution events or it can generate the events but
fails to achieve the desired effects. For example, an ob-
ject might slip out of the robot’s hand after grasping
it.
As a consequence, state-transition plans can of-
ten only serve as guidelines for generating robust and
ﬂexible robot behavior [14.117]. To close the gap to
low-level robot control, researchers have proposed mul-
tilayer software architectures for autonomous robot ac-
tivity, in particular 3T (3-tiered) architectures [14.118]
(Chap. 12). 3T architectures run planning and exe-
cution at different software layers and different time
scales where a sequencing layer synchronizes between
both layers. Each layer uses a different form of plan
or behavior speciﬁcation language. The planning layer
typically uses a problem space plan, whereas the execu-
tion layer employs feedback control routines that can be
activated and deactivated. The intermediate layer typi-
cally uses a simple form of a reactive plan language (see
below). Even though 3T architectures have been shown
to produce competent activity in some application do-
mains, there remain important issues to be addressed for
more complex applications. One of them is that the be-
havior generated by the sequencing layer might deviate
substantially from the action model used for planning,
which might cause plans not to work as expected by the
action models used by the planning component. As the
planning layer abstracts away from control structures, it
also lacks the expressiveness to specify robust and ﬂex-
ible behavior.
MDP Policies
A second category of plans are policies, which are map-
pings from discretized robot states into robot actions.
Such policies are computed as solutions of Markov de-
cision problems (Sect. 14.2.2). The policies computed

AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics
14.4 Plan-Based Robot Control
349
Part A | 14.4
by MDPs aim at robustness and optimizing the aver-
age performance. They are less appropriate when the
consequences of decisions are not in the near future.
The decision of how to grasp an object might con-
siderably affect the ease with which the object can
be placed later in the activity episode. Extensions of
MDP policies such as the combination of programming
and reinforcement learning [14.119, 120] and the struc-
turing of policies with so-called options [14.121, 122]
partly address these issues.
Concurrent Reactive Plan Languages
Concurrent reactive plan languages are the result of
applying programming language design methods to
the speciﬁcation of robot behavior. Concurrent reactive
plans specify how the robot is to respond to events,
including perception and failure events, in order to
achieve its goals [14.123]. Such plan languages offer
rich sets of control structures that support the struc-
turing and transparent synchronization and monitoring
of concurrent control processes, the detection and re-
covery from execution failures, the context-dependent
execution of subplans, the prompt reaction to asyn-
chronous events, and data structures for the descriptions
of objects to be manipulated [14.124, 125]. Some re-
active plan languages also incorporate explicit repre-
sentations of the beliefs, goals, and intentions of the
robot [14.126–128] and even provide powerful rea-
soning mechanisms to adapt the plan execution to the
respective situation context [14.129].
While concurrent reactive plan languages enable
robots to accomplish their tasks competently, they are
too expressive for automatically generating robust, ﬂex-
ible high-performance plans from ﬁrst principles. They
typically require the use of plan libraries and transfor-
mational planning techniques to deal with the compu-
tational complexity caused by the expressiveness of the
plan languages (Sect. 14.4.4).
14.4.3 Generating Robot Action Plans
The most common form of reasoning performed on
plans is the synthesis of plans for given problems. In
general, planning is concerned with reasoning about in-
tended courses of action before executing them in order
to avoid failures in achieving given goals, to prevent un-
desired side effects, or to improve the performance of
the robot in accomplishing its goals.
There are many different variants of planning
problems, categories of plans that can be gener-
ated, and methods that can be applied to planning
problems. Comprehensive overviews can be found in
textbooks [14.4, 27] and overview articles [14.130,
131]. A wide range of the planning problems is ad-
dressed within an international AI planning competition
(IPC) [14.132] using standardized problem speciﬁca-
tion languages [14.109, 110]. Several implementations
of planning algorithms participating in this competition
are available as open-source software.
In planning for state-transition, the task of the plan-
ning system is to ﬁnd an ordered set of actions that
transform any state satisfying the initial state descrip-
tion into a state satisfying the given goals.
The ﬁrst class of planning systems are systems that
enumerate the states that can be reached by preﬁxes (or
sufﬁxes) of hypothetical action sequences until a goal
state is reached. Planning systems that fall into this cat-
egory include the STRIPS planning algorithm [14.25]
and newer and more efﬁcient algorithms such as the FF
(fast forward) planning algorithm [14.133] as well as
various variants of these algorithms.
Another class of algorithms enumerates abstract
plans that represent sets of plans. The idea underly-
ing this approach is that by reasoning about an abstract
plan, the planning algorithm can compactly reason
about different plan instances at the same time by
reasoning about their common causal structure. For ex-
ample, a partial order plan represents all possible com-
pletions of the plan. The POP (partial-order planning)
algorithms is a family of algorithms that is primar-
ily used for teaching action planning [14.130] while
GraphPlan [14.134] is an algorithm that is designed for
planning process efﬁciency [14.131].
The algorithms above are domain independent:
they compute plans by analyzing whether precondi-
tions of plan steps are achieved through the effects
of prior actions using general algorithms. In contrast,
domain-dependent planners use domain knowledge to
constrain and prune the search space to be explored
in a planning process. An example of such domain
knowledge is that stacks of objects are built bot-
tom up. Domain-dependent planners are often much
more efﬁcient than their domain-independent coun-
terparts. Examples of domain-dependent planners are
the TL- (temporal logic) [14.135] and the TAL plan-
ners [14.19].
Another category of planners that are designed to
deal with more complex planning problems are HTN
(hierarchical task network) planners. HTN planners are
equipped with libraries of plan schemata that specify
how abstract plan steps can be decomposed into more
complex subplans. Examples of such planners are the
SHOP planners [14.136] and extensions thereof that are
combined with description logics and applied to au-
tonomous robot control [14.69].
The planning approaches above generate plans that
have similar expressiveness in terms of the behavior
they can specify. The planners mainly differ with re-

Part A | 14.5
350
Part A
Robotics Foundations
spect to the size of the planning problems they can
handle and their efﬁciency in solving planning prob-
lems.
14.4.4 Revising and Improving Plans
Another dimension that robot action planning meth-
ods can be scaled along is the expressiveness of the
plans they generate in terms of specifying competent
robot behavior. A subclass of planning methods that
is suitable for generating concurrent reactive plans is
transformational planning.
The underlying idea of transformational planning is
to paste together plans from libraries of plan schemata
and revise them for the speciﬁed task [14.137] rather
than creating completely new plans from scratch. Trans-
formational planning has also been referred to as plan
repair or plan debugging [14.138, 139] and is often
performed within a generate-test-debug control strat-
egy [14.140]. Plan transformation is a promising ap-
proach in applications where default plans that have
a substantial chance of being successful can be con-
structed easily, tested by projecting them, analyzed with
respect to their expected execution failures, and where
failures can be used to index the appropriate plan revi-
sions.
Transformational planning subsumes classical plan-
ning methods such as partial-order planning in the
sense that the operations of the POP algorithms can
be simply expressed as transformations. In addition to
the transformations that correspond to classical plan-
ning, transformational planning typically employs col-
lections of transformations including domain-speciﬁc
ones, heuristic transformations, and transformations for
plan optimization [14.141]. In cases where the planners
employ transformations that cannot be guaranteed to
work, they rely on powerful plan projection methods
for testing the generated plan hypotheses [14.142].
Transformational planning is a promising approach
for autonomous robots performing complex manipula-
tion tasks because it makes it easy for programmers to
specify how plans should be modiﬁed to avoid certain
expected behavior ﬂaws. For example, a transformation
could tell the robot to stack items in order to transport
them more efﬁciently subject to additional constraints
such as that it should not stack too many items because
it might drop them. Or, it might stack one kind of object
on another one but not vice versa – typically it is safe to
stack cups on plates but not plates on cups.
Transformational planning can also effectively fa-
cilitate the learning not only of plans [14.139] but also
of planning capabilities by learning for a particular
robot and environment what the robot can stack and
carry and what not.
14.4.5 Other Reasoning Methods
There are a number of other reasoning methods that
plan-based robot control needs to employ in order
to produce competent object manipulation capabili-
ties [14.143]. One of the main reasons is that the tasks
and subtasks that a robot is to perform are typically
underspeciﬁed: the robot might be asked to fetch the
screwdriver from the table but when it gets there are
several different screwdrivers. Or, the robot might be
asked to crack an egg and has to decide where to crack
it, where to put the yolk and egg white, what to do with
the shell, etc. When fetching objects, it has to reason
about abstract states such as visibility and reachabil-
ity of objects. We can only give a couple of examples
here.
The ﬁrst reasoning problem is that of object iden-
tity resolution, the inference task of deciding whether
two internal representations refer to the same object
in the real world. When receiving the command to
pick up the red cup from the table, the robot must
make at some point the decision that a data structure
returned by the robot’s perception system and the lan-
guage description refer to the same object. Only by
making this inference, the robot is able to infer that
it can achieve the given task by picking up a partic-
ular object that it sees. In logic-based representations
this problem is even harder because symbols used in
the planning problem speciﬁcation denote objects in the
outside world. In this setting the problem of object iden-
tity resolution problem becomes the symbol grounding
problem [14.1], i. e., the problem to determine the right
or, at least, the most likely object in a given environ-
ment for each constant and each deﬁnite description in
the logical representation. The most powerful inference
methods to reason about object identity resolution are
ﬁrst-order probabilistic reasoning mechanisms as de-
scribed in [14.144].
Other important inference methods are needed to
model some predicates used in the activity models
more realistically. Predicates that deserve such spe-
cial treatment include visibility and reachability. For
example, the Asymov planner [14.111] reasons about
action preconditions that include reachability condi-
tions and tests reachability through the existence of
motion plans. Other planning systems reason about the
next best views that a robot should take in order to
perform complex perception tasks. Sophisticated ac-
tion planners that include action and motion planning
employing more general geometric reasoning capabil-
ities can be found in [14.66]. Cognition-enabled plans
employ such reasoning methods in order to parameter-
ize actions with respect to the effects that should be
achieved and avoided [14.62].

AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics
14.5 Conclusions and Further Reading
351
Part A | 14
14.5 Conclusions and Further Reading
The aim of this chapter was, ﬁrst, to motivate the
purpose and beneﬁt of employing general reasoning
methods in robot control; second, to sketch some of
the generic reasoning methods from AI that are well-
understood, available, and most likely of use on a robot;
and third, to go into plan-based robot control in some
more detail, as it is a particularly obvious form of
employing reasoning to the end of improving robot
action.
Yet, the chapter has only sketched the tip of an ice-
berg. Employing symbolic reasoning in an autonomous
mobile robot requires to have and update on the robot
a symbolic model of the world, or at least of that part
of the world which is relevant for the current task –
but who knows beforehand exactly what is and what
isn’t relevant for some task? It therefore requires to be
able to interpret the current sensor data stream on a se-
mantic level to transform it into a symbolic description
in terms of categories that are meaningful in the KR.
Assuming that it is not practical to equip a robot with
all knowledge that may likely be relevant for each and
every situation it may ﬁnd itself in, it requires some
form of learning, generalization, and/or the ability to
look up unknown knowledge from available sources.
These and some more requirements that are needed
for practically using AI reasoning methods on a robot
cannot be fulﬁlled completely based on current state-of-
the-art AI methods and technology; as a consequence,
currently existing robot prototypes employing AI rea-
soning methods in their control systems are limited in
terms of generality and adaptability.
It is no recent insight that employing AI reasoning
methods on robots is both a chance and a challenge.
In fact some of the early inﬂuential work in AI was
driven by the idea of designing integrated reasoning
robots, such as SHAKEY [14.145] (
VIDEO 704 ); as
a consequence, early AI textbooks like [14.146] would
naturally include robotics as a target ﬁeld for using AI
reasoning methods. The ﬁeld of AI has since focused
on applications other than Robotics. Recent efforts in
integrating reasoning systems with autonomous robots
have done much to bring the original robot-inspired
vision back into focus, as witnessed by series of work-
shops on AI-Based Robotics (e.g., IROS 2013) or AI
and Robotics (AAAI 2014). It is exactly the family of
challenges and chances that this chapter is about that is
discussed at these events.
14.5.1 Further Reading
For a more complete coverage of the generic meth-
ods described here, as well as the rest of AI, we
refer to AI textbooks, of which the one by Russell
and Norvig [14.4] is comprehensive and currently most
widely used. Among the sources for ﬁrst-hand mate-
rial, let us mention the two journals Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence and Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research
(JAIR) [14.147], which both cover well the topics ad-
dressed here. The main international conference in the
ﬁeld is IJCAI (International Joint Conference on Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence); ECAI (European Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence [14.148]) and AAAI (Association
for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence [14.149]) are other
major international symposia on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
in general. Regarding planning in particular, ICAPS
(International Conference on Automated Planning and
Scheduling [14.150]) is the main international confer-
ence.
Reference [14.151] reviews about the same topic as
this chapter, but structures it differently along the notion
of deliberation functions.
Video-References
VIDEO 704
SHAKEY: Experimentation in robot learning and planning (1969)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/14/videodetails/704
VIDEO 705
From knowledge grounding to dialogue processing
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/14/videodetails/705
VIDEO 706
RoboEarth final demonstrator
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/14/videodetails/706

Part A | 14
352
Part A
Robotics Foundations
References
14.1
S. Harnad: The symbol grounding problem, Phys-
ica D 42, 335–346 (1990)
14.2
S. Coradeschi, A. Saffiotti: An introduction to the
anchoring problem, Robotics Auton. Syst. 43(2/3),
85–96 (2003)
14.3
F. Baader, D. Calvanese, D. McGuinness, D. Nardi,
P. Patel-Schneider (Eds.): The Description Logic
Handbook (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge
2003)
14.4
S.J. Russell, P. Norvig: Artificial Intelligence:
A Modern Approach, 3rd edn. (Pearson Education,
Upper Saddle River 2010)
14.5
R.J. Brachman, H.J. Levesque: Knowledge Repre-
sentation and Reasoning (Morgan Kaufmann, San
Francisco 2004)
14.6
W.O. van Quine: Methods of Logic, 4th edn. (Har-
vard Univ. Press, Cambridge 1982)
14.7
Z. Manna, R. Waldinger: The Deductive Founda-
tions of Computer Programming: A One-Volume
Version of “The Logical Basis for Computer Pro-
gramming” (Addison-Wesley, Reading 1993)
14.8
W. Hodges: Elementary predicate logic. In: Hand-
book of Philosophical Logic, Vol. 1, ed. by D. Gab-
bay, F. Guenthner (D. Reidel, Dordrecht 1983)
14.9
A. Robinson, A. Voronkov (Eds.): Handbook of Au-
tomated Reasoning (Elsevier, Amsterdam 2001)
14.10
M. Davis, G. Logemann, D. Loveland: A machine
program for theorem proving, Communications
ACM 5(7), 394–397 (1962)
14.11
The international SAT Competitions web page:
http://www.satcompetition.org/
14.12
The Web Ontology Language OWL: http://www.w3.
org/TR/owl-features/
14.13
OWL
2
Web
Ontology
Language
Document
Overview (Second Edition): http://www.w3.org/
TR/owl2-overview/
14.14
P. Hitzler, M. Krötzsch, S. Rudolph: Foundations
of Semantic Web Technologies (Chapman Hall/CRC,
Boca Raton 2009)
14.15
J. McCarthy, P. Hayes: Some philosophical prob-
lems from the standpoint of artificial intelligence,
Mach. Intell. 4, 463–507 (1969)
14.16
H. Levesque, R. Reiter, Y. Lespérance, F. Lin,
R. Scherl: Golog: A logic programming language
for dynamic domains, J. Log. Program. 31, 59–83
(1997)
14.17
M. Shanahan, M. Witkowski: High-level robot
control through logic, ATAL ’00: Proc. 7th Int.
Workshop Intell. Agents VII. Agent Theor. Archit.
Lang. (2001) pp. 104–121
14.18
M. Thielscher: Reasoning Robots. The Art and Sci-
ence of Programming Robotic Agents (Springer,
Berlin 2005)
14.19
P. Doherty, J. Kvarnström: TALplanner: A tempo-
ral logic based planner, AI Magazine 22(3), 95–102
(2001)
14.20
K.L. Chung, F. AitSahila: Elementary Probabil-
ity Theory, 4th edn. (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2003)
14.21
J. Pearl: Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent
Systems (Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo 1988)
14.22
A.R. Cassandra, L.P. Kaelbling, M.L. Littman: Act-
ing Optimally in Partially Observable Stochastic
Domains, Tech. Rep. AAAI-94 (Department of
Computer Science, Brown University, Providence
1994) pp. 1023–1028
14.23
R.E. Bellman: Dynamic Programming (Princeton
Univ. Press, Princeton 1957)
14.24
L.P. Kaelbling, T. Lozano-Pérez: Integrated task
and
motion
planning
in
belief
space,
Int.
J. Robotics Res. 32(9/10), 1194–1227 (2013)
14.25
R.E. Fikes, N.J. Nilsson: Strips: A new approach to
theorem proving in problem solving, J. Artif. In-
tell. 2, 189–208 (1971)
14.26
P.E. Hart, N.J. Nilsson, B. Raphael: A formal basis
for the heuristic determination of minimum cost
paths, IEEE Trans. Syst. Sci. Cybern. 4(2), 100–107
(1968)
14.27
M. Ghallab, D.S. Nau, P. Traverso: Automated
Planning – Theory and Practice (Elsevier, Amster-
dam 2004)
14.28
A. Pnueli: The temporal logic of programs, Proc.
18th Annu. Symp. Found. Comput. Sci., Provi-
dence (1977) pp. 46–57
14.29
O. Kupferman, M.Y. Vardi: Model checking of
safety properties, Form. Methods Syst. Des. 19(3),
291–314 (2001)
14.30
E. Plaku, L.E. Kavraki, M.Y. Vardi: Hybrid sys-
tems: From verification to falsification by com-
bining motion planning and discrete search,
Form. Methods Syst. Des. 34, 157–182 (2009)
14.31
A. Bhatia, M.R. Maly, L.E. Kavraki, M.Y. Vardi: Mo-
tion planning with complex goals, IEEE Robotics
Autom. Mag. 18(3), 55–64 (2011)
14.32
M. Vilain, H. Kautz, P. van Beek: Constraint prop-
agation algorithms for temporal reasoning: A re-
vised report. In: Readings in Qualitative Reason-
ing About Physical Systems, ed. by D.S. Weld,
J. de Kleer (Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco
1990) pp. 373–381
14.33
J. Allen: Towards a general theory of action and
time, Artif. Intell. 23(2), 123–154 (1984)
14.34
E.P.K. Tsang: Foundations of Constraint Satisfac-
tion (Academic Press, London, San Diego 1993)
14.35
P. Jonsson, A. Krokhin: Complexity classification
in qualitative temporal constraint reasoning, Ar-
tif. Intell. 160(1/2), 35–51 (2004)
14.36
G. Ligozat: A new proof of tractability for ORD-
horn relations, AAAI Workshop Spat. Temp. Rea-
son., Portland (1996)
14.37
U. Montanari: Networks of constraints: Funda-
mental properties and applications to picture
processing, Inf. Sci. 7, 95–132 (1974)
14.38
R.W. Floyd: Algorithm 97: Shortest path, Commu-
nications ACM 5(6), 345 (1962)
14.39
L. Xu, B.Y. Choueiry: A new efficient algorithm for
solving the simple temporal problem, Proc. 4th
Int. Conf. Temp. Log., Cairns (2003)

AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics
References
353
Part A | 14
14.40
L.R. Planken, M.M. De Weerdt, R.P.J. van der
Krogt: P3C: A new algorithm for the simple tem-
poral problem, Proc. Int. Conf. Autom. Plan.
Sched. (ICAPS), Sydney (2008) pp. 256–263
14.41
C. McGann, F. Py, K. Rajan, J. Ryan, R. Henthorn:
Adaptive control for autonomous underwater ve-
hicles, Proc. 23rd Natl. Conf. Artif. Intell., Chicago
(2008) pp. 1319–1324
14.42
B.C. Williams, M.D. Ingham, S.H. Chung, P.H. El-
liott: Model-based programming of intelligent
embedded systems and robotic space explorers,
Proceedings IEEE 91(1), 212–237 (2003)
14.43
T. Vidal, H. Fargier: Handling contingency in tem-
poral constraint networks: From consistency to
controllabilities, J. Exp. Theor. Artif. Intell. 11, 23–
45 (1999)
14.44
P. Doherty, J. Kvarnström, F. Heintz: A temporal
logic-based planning and execution monitor-
ing framework for unmanned aircraft systems,
J. Auton. Agents Multi-Agent Syst. 2(2), 332–377
(2009)
14.45
F. Pecora, M. Cirillo, F. Dell’Osa, J. Ullberg, A. Saf-
fiotti: A constraint-based approach for proactive,
context-aware human support, J. Ambient Intell.
Smart Environ. 4(4), 347–367 (2012)
14.46
R. Dechter: Constraint Processing, The Morgan
Kaufmann Series in Artificial Intelligence (Morgan
Kaufmann, San Francisco 2003) pp. 155–165
14.47
A. Loutfi, S. Coradeschi, M. Daoutis, J. Melchert:
Using knowledge representation for perceptual
anchoring in a robotic system, Int. J. Artif. Intell.
Tools 17(5), 925–944 (2008)
14.48
O. Colliot, O. Camara, I. Bloch: Integration of fuzzy
spatial relations in deformable models – Applica-
tion to brain MRI segmentation, Pattern Recogn.
39(8), 1401–1414 (2006)
14.49
X. Wang, J.M. Keller, P. Gader: Using spatial rela-
tionships as features in object recognition, Annu.
Meet. North Am. Fuzzy Inf. Proces. Soc., Syracuse
(1997)
14.50
D.A. Randell, Z. Cui, A.G. Cohn: A Spatial Logic
based on Regions and Connection, Proc. Int.
Conf. Princ. Knowl. Represent. Reason., Cam-
bridge (1992)
14.51
S. Skiadopoulos, M. Koubarakis: Composing car-
dinal direction relations, Artif. Intell. 152(2), 143–
171 (2004)
14.52
J. Renz, B. Nebel: Qualitative spatial reasoning
using constraint calculi. In: Handbook of Spa-
tial Logics, ed. by M. Aiello, I. Pratt-Hartmann,
J.F.A.K. van Benthem (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2007) pp. 161–215
14.53
T. Drakengren, P. Jonsson: A complete classifi-
cation of tractability in Allen’s algebra relative
to subsets of basic relations, Artif. Intell. 106(2),
205–219 (1998)
14.54
A.G. Cohn, J. Renz, M. Sridhar: Thinking inside the
box: A comprehensive spatial representation for
video analysis, Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Princ. Knowl.
Represent. Reason., Rome (2012) pp. 588–592
14.55
P. Balbiani, J.-F. Condotta, L. Farinas Del Cerro:
A new tractable subclass of the rectangle algebra,
Proc. 16th Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell., Stockholm
(1999) pp. 442–447
14.56
M. Mansouri, F. Pecora: A representation for spa-
tial reasoning in robotic planning, Proc. IROS
Workshop AI-Based Robotics, Tokyo (2013)
14.57
M. Mansouri, F. Pecora: More knowledge on the
table: Planning with space, time and resources
for robots, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Hong Kong (2014) pp. 647–654
14.58
M. Skubic, D. Perzanowski, S. Blisard, A. Schultz,
W. Adams, M. Bugajska, D. Brock: Spatial lan-
guage for human-robot dialogs, IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybern. C 34(2), 154–167 (2004)
14.59
R. Moratz, T. Tenbrink: Spatial reference in lin-
guistic human-robot interaction: Iterative, em-
pirically supported development of a model of
projective relations, Spat. Cogn. Comput. 6(1), 63–
107 (2006)
14.60
S. Guadarrama, L. Riano, D. Golland, D. Gouhring,
Y. Jia, D. Klein, P. Abbeel, T. Darrell: Ground-
ing spatial relations for human-robot interaction,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Tokyo
(2013) pp. 1640–1647
14.61
L. Kunze, K.K. Doreswamy, N. Hawes: Using qual-
itative spatial relations for indirect object search,
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Hong Kong
(2014) pp. 163–168
14.62
L. Mosenlechner, M. Beetz: Parameterizing ac-
tions to have the appropriate effects, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., San Fran-
cisco (2011) pp. 4141–4147
14.63
A. Gaschler, R.P.A. Petrick, M. Giuliani, M. Rickert,
A. Knoll: KVP: A knowledge of volumes approach
to robot task planning, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst., Tokyo (2013) pp. 202–208
14.64
G. Havur, K. Haspalamutgil, C. Palaz, E. Erdem,
V. Patoglu: A case study on the Tower of Hanoi
challenge: Representation, reasoning and execu-
tion, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Tokyo
(2013) pp. 4552–4559
14.65
L. de Silva, A.K. Pandey, R. Alami: An inter-
face for interleaved symbolic-geometric planning
and backtracking, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS), Tokyo (2013) pp. 232–239
14.66
L.P. Kaelbling, T. Lozano-Pérez: Hierarchical task
and motion planning in the now, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 1470–1477
14.67
F. Lagriffoul, D. Dimitrov, A. Saffiotti, L. Karls-
son: Constraint propagation on interval bounds
for dealing with geometric backtracking, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Vilamoura
(2012) pp. 957–964
14.68
G. de Giacomo, L. Iocchi, D. Nardi, R. Rosati: Mov-
ing a robot: the KR&R approach at work, Proc.
5th Int. Conf. Princ. Knowl. Represent. Reason.
(KR’96), Cambridge (1996) pp. 198–209
14.69
R. Hartanto, J. Hertzberg: Fusing DL reasoning
with HTN planning, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 5243,
62–69 (2008)
14.70
C. Galindo, J.A. Fernandez-Madrigal, J. Gonzalez,
A. Saffiotti: Using semantic information for im-
proving efficiency of robot task planning, Proc.

Part A | 14
354
Part A
Robotics Foundations
ICRA-07 Workshop Semant. Inf. Robotics, Rome
(2007) pp. 27–32
14.71
W. Cushing, S. Kambhampati, Mausam, D.S. Weld:
When is temporal planning really temporal?, Proc.
20th Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell., Hyderabad (2007)
14.72
J.L. Bresina, A.K. Jónsson, P.H. Morris, K. Rajan:
Activity planning for the Mars exploration rovers,
Proc. 15th Int. Conf. Autom. Plan. Sched. (ICAPS),
Monterey (2005) pp. 1852–1859
14.73
M. Cirillo, F. Pecora, H. Andreasson, T. Uras,
S. Koenig: Integrated motion planning and co-
ordination for industrial vehicles, Proc. 24th Int.
Conf. Autom. Plan. Sched. (ICAPS), Portsmouth
(2014)
14.74
S. Fratini, F. Pecora, A. Cesta: Unifying planning
and scheduling as timelines in a component-
based perspective, Arch. Control Sci. 18(2), 231–271
(2008)
14.75
M. Ghallab, H. Laruelle: Representation and con-
trol in IxTeT, a temporal planner, Proc. 2nd Int.
Conf. Artif. Intell. Plan. Syst. (AIPS-94), Chicago
(1994) pp. 61–67
14.76
P. Gregory, D. Long, M. Fox, J.C. Beck: Plan-
ning modulo theories: Extending the planning
paradigm, Proc. 15th Int. Conf. Autom. Plan.
Sched. (ICAPS), São Paulo (2012)
14.77
R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras, C. Tinelli: Solv-
ing SAT and SAT modulo theories: From an ab-
stract Davis–Putnam–Logemann–Loveland pro-
cedure to DPLL(T), Journal ACM 53, 937–977 (2006)
14.78
S. Nedunuri, S. Prabhu, M. Moll, S. Chaudhuri,
L.E. Kavraki: SMT-based synthesis of integrated
task and motion plans for mobile manipulation,
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Hong Kong
(2014)
14.79
U. Köckemann, L. Karlsson, F. Pecora: Grandpa
hates robots – Interaction constraints for plan-
ning in inhabited environments, Proc. 28th Conf.
Artif. Intell., Quebéc City (2014)
14.80
M. Di Rocco, F. Pecora, A. Saffiotti: When robots
are late: Configuration planning for multiple
robots with dynamic goals, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Tokyo (2013)
14.81
G.H. Lim, I.H. Suh, H. Suh: Ontology-based uni-
fied robot knowledge for service robots in indoor
environments, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. A
41(3), 492–509 (2011)
14.82
S. Lemaignan, R. Ros, L. Mösenlechner, R. Alami,
M. Beetz: ORO, a knowledge management module
for cognitive architectures in robotics, Proc. 2010
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Taipei (2010)
pp. 3548–3553
14.83
M. Tenorth, M. Beetz: KnowRob – A knowledge
processing infrastructure for cognition-enabled
robots, Int. J. Robotics Res. 32(5), 566–590 (2013)
14.84
M. Daoutis, S. Coradeschi, A. Loutfi: Grounding
commonsense knowledge in intelligent systems,
J. Ambient Intell. Smart Environ. 1(4), 311–321
(2009)
14.85
A. Saffiotti, M. Broxvall, M. Gritti, K. LeBlanc,
R. Lundh, J. Rashid, B.S. Seo, Y.J. Cho: The
PEIS-Ecology project: Vision and results, IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Nice (2008)
pp. 2329–2335
14.86
X. Chen, J. Ji, J. Jiang, G. Jin, F. Wang, J. Xie: Devel-
oping high-level cognitive functions for service
robots, Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Auton. Agents Multia-
gent Syst., Toronto (2010) pp. 989–996
14.87
J.F. Lehman, J.E. Laird, P. Rosenbloom: A gentle
introduction to Soar, an architecture for human
cognition, Invit. Cogn. Sci. 4, 212–249 (1996)
14.88
N. Derbinsky, J.E. Laird: Extending soar with
dissociated symbolic memories, Symp. Human
Mem. Artif. Agents, AISB (2010) pp. 31–37, http://
ai.eecs.umich.edu/soar/sitemaker/docs/pubs/
aisb2010_rwwa_soar9.pdf
14.89
W.G. Kennedy, M. Rouleau, J.K. Bassett: Multi-
ple levels of cognitive modeling within agent-
based modeling, Proc. 18th Conf. Behav. Repre-
sent. Model. Simul., Sundance (2009) pp. 143–
144
14.90
R.B. Rusu, Z.C. Marton, N. Blodow, M. Dolha,
M. Beetz: Towards 3D point cloud based ob-
ject maps for household environments, Robotics
Auton. Syst. J. Semant. Knowl. Robotics 56(11),
927–941 (2008)
14.91
S. Vasudevan, R. Siegwart: Bayesian space con-
ceptualization and place classification for se-
mantic maps in mobile robotics, Robotics Auton.
Syst. 56(6), 522–537 (2008)
14.92
H.
Zender,
O.
Martinez
Mozos,
P.
Jensfelt,
G.J.M. Kruijff, W. Burgard: Conceptual spatial rep-
resentations for indoor mobile robots, Robotics
Auton. Syst. 56(6), 493–502 (2008)
14.93
B. Limketkai, L. Liao, D. Fox: Relational object
maps for mobile robots, Proc. Int. Jt. Conf. Artif.
Intell. (IJCAI) (2005) pp. 1471–1476
14.94
M. Tenorth, L. Kunze, D. Jain, M. Beetz: KNOWROB-
MAP – Knowledge-linked semantic object maps,
10th
IEEE-RAS
Int.
Conf.
Humanoid
Robots,
Nashville (2010) pp. 430–435
14.95
N. Mavridis, D. Roy: Grounded situation models
for robots: Where words and percepts meet, Proc.
2006 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Beijing
(2006) pp. 4690–4697
14.96
D.K. Misra, J. Sung, K. Lee, A. Saxena: Tell
me Dave: Context-sensitive grounding of natural
language to mobile manipulation instructions,
Proc. Robotics Sci. Syst. (RSS) (2014)
14.97
T. Kollar, S. Tellex, D. Roy, N. Roy: Toward under-
standing natural language directions, Proc. 5th
AMC/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI),
Osaka (2010) pp. 259–266
14.98
C. Matuszek, E. Herbst, L. Zettlemoyer, D. Fox:
Learning to parse natural language commands to
a robot control system, Proc. 13th Int. Symp. Exp.
Robotics (ISER) Québec City (2012) pp. 403–415
14.99
F. Duvallet, T. Kollar, A. Stentz: Imitation learn-
ing for natural language direction following
through unknown environments, 2013 IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2013) pp. 1047–1053
14.100
K. Zhou, M. Zillich, H. Zender, M. Vincze: Web
mining driven object locality knowledge acqui-
sition for efficient robot behavior, IEEE/RSJ Int.

AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics
References
355
Part A | 14
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Vilamoura (2012)
pp. 3962–3969
14.101
M. Tenorth, D. Nyga, M. Beetz: Understanding
and executing instructions for everyday manipu-
lation tasks from the World Wide Web, IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Anchorage (2010)
pp. 1486–1491
14.102
M. Tenorth, U. Klank, D. Pangercic, M. Beetz: Web-
enabled robots – Robots that use the web as an
information resource, Robotics Autom. Mag. 18(2),
58–68 (2011)
14.103
M. Waibel, M. Beetz, R. D’Andrea, R. Janssen,
M. Tenorth, J. Civera, J. Elfring, D. Gálvez-López,
K. Häussermann, J.M.M. Montiel, A. Perzylo,
B. Schießle, O. Zweigle, R. van de Molengraft:
RoboEarth – A world wide web for robots,
Robotics Autom. Mag. 18(2), 69–82 (2011)
14.104
S. Osentoski, B. Pitzer, C. Crick, G. Jay, S. Dong,
D.H. Grollman, H.B. Suay, O.C. Jenkins: Remote
robotic laboratories for learning from demon-
stration – Enabling user interaction and shared
experimentation, Int. J. Soc. Robotics 4(4), 449–
461 (2012)
14.105
M.B. Blake, S.L. Remy, Y. Wei, A.M. Howard:
Robots on the web, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 18,
33–43 (2011)
14.106
D.
Hunziker,
M.
Gajamohan,
M.
Waibel,
R.
D’Andrea:
Rapyuta:
The
RoboEarth
cloud
engine, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2013) pp. 438–444
14.107
D. McDermott: Robot planning, AI Magazine 13(2),
55–79 (1992)
14.108
M.E. Pollack, J.F. Horty: There’s more to life than
making plans: Plan management in dynamic,
multiagent environments, AI Magazine 20(4), 71–
83 (1999)
14.109
D. McDermott, M. Ghallab, A. Howe, C. Knoblock,
A. Ram, M. Veloso, D. Weld, D. Wilkins: PDDL –
The Planning Domain Definition Language, Tech.
Rep. CVC TR-98-003/DCS TR-1165 (Yale Center for
Computational Vision and Control, New Haven
1998)
14.110
M. Fox, D. Long: PDDL2.1: An extension of PDDL for
expressing temporal planning domains, J. Artif.
Intell. Res. 20, 61–124 (2003)
14.111
F. Gravot, S. Cambon, R. Alami: aSyMov: A planner
that deals with intricate symbolic and geometric
problems, Springer Tracts Adv. Robotics 15, 100–
110 (2005)
14.112
R. Alur, T. Henzinger, H. Wong-Toi: Symbolic anal-
ysis of hybrid systems, Proc. 37th IEEE Conf. Decis.
Control, Tampa (1997) pp. 702–707
14.113
R. Alur, T. Henzinger, P. Ho: Automatic symbolic
verification of embedded systems, IEEE Trans.
Softw. Eng. 22, 181–201 (1996)
14.114
M. Beetz, H. Grosskreutz: Probabilistic hybrid ac-
tion models for predicting concurrent percept-
driven robot behavior, J. Artif. Intell. Res. 24, 799–
849 (2005)
14.115
K. Passino, P. Antsaklis: A system and control-
theoretic perspective on artificial intelligence
planning systems, Appl. Artif. Intell. 3, 1–32 (1989)
14.116
T. Dean, M. Wellmann: Planning and Control
(Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Mateo 1991)
14.117
R. Alami, R. Chatila, S. Fleury, M. Ghallab,
F. Ingrand: An architecture for autonomy, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 17(4), 315–337 (1998)
14.118
R.P. Bonasso, R.J. Firby, E. Gat, D. Kortenkamp,
D.P. Miller, M.G. Slack: Experiences with an ar-
chitecture for intelligent, reactive agents, J. Exp.
Theor. Artif. Intell. 9(2/3), 237–256 (1997)
14.119
D. Andre, S. Russell: Programmable reinforcement
learning agents, Proc. 13th Conf. Neural Inf. Pro-
cess. Syst. (2001) pp. 1019–1025
14.120
D. Andre, S.J. Russell: State abstraction for pro-
grammable reinforcement learning agents, 18th
Natl. Conf. Artif. Intell., Edmonton (2002) pp. 119–
125
14.121
R.S. Sutton, D. Precup, S.P. Singh: Between MDPs
and Semi-MDPs: A framework for temporal ab-
straction in reinforcement learning, Artif. Intell.
112(1/2), 181–211 (1999)
14.122
D. Precup: Temporal Abstraction in Reinforce-
ment Learning, Ph.D. Thesis (University of Mas-
sachusetts, Amherst 2000)
14.123
M. Beetz: Structured reactive controllers, J. Auton.
Agents Multi-Agent Syst. 4(1/2), 25–55 (2001)
14.124
D. McDermott: A Reactive Plan Language (Yale
University, New Haven 1991)
14.125
M. Ingham, R. Ragno, B. Williams: A reactive
model-based programming language for robotic
space explorers, Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Artif. Intell.
Robotics Autom. Space (ISAIRAS) (2001)
14.126
M. Bratman: Intention, Plans, and Practical Rea-
son (Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge 1987)
14.127
M. Bratman, D. Israel, M. Pollack: Plan and re-
source-bounded practical reasoning, Comput. In-
tell. 4, 349–355 (1988)
14.128
M. Georgeff, F. Ingrand: Decision making in an
embedded reasing system, Proc. 11th Int. Jt. Conf.
Artif. Intell. (1989) pp. 972–978
14.129
M. Beetz, D. Jain, L. Mosenlechner, M. Tenorth,
L. Kunze, N. Blodow, D. Pangercic: Cognition-en-
abled autonomous robot control for the realiza-
tion of home chore task intelligence, Proceedings
IEEE 100(8), 2454–2471 (2012)
14.130
D.S. Weld: An introduction to least commitment
planning, AI Magazine 15(4), 27–61 (1994)
14.131
D.S. Weld: Recent advances in AI planning, AI
Magazine 20(2), 93–123 (1999)
14.132
D.V. McDermott: The 1998 AI planning systems
competition, AI Magazine 21(2), 35–55 (2000)
14.133
J. Hoffmann, B. Nebel: The FF planning system:
Fast plan generation through heuristic search,
J. Artif. Intell. Res. 14, 253–302 (2001)
14.134
A.L. Blum, M.L. Furst: Fast planning through
plan graph analysis, J. Artif. Intell. 90, 281–300
(1997)
14.135
F. Bacchus, F. Kabanza: Planning for temporally
extended goals, Ann. Math. Artif. Intell. 22(1/2),
5–27 (1998)
14.136
D. Nau, O. Ilghami, U. Kuter, J.W. Murdock, D. Wu,
F. Yaman: SHOP2: An HTN planning system, J. Artif.
Intell. Res. 20, 379–404 (2003)

Part A | 14
356
Part A
Robotics Foundations
14.137
D. McDermott: Transformational planning of re-
active behavior, Tech. Rep. (Yale University, New
Haven 1992)
14.138
P. H. Winston: Learning Structural Descriptions
from Examples, AI Tech. Rep. 231 (MIT, Cambridge
1970)
14.139
K.J. Hammond: Case-Based Planning: Viewing
Planning as a Memory Task (Academic Press,
Waltham 1989)
14.140
R.G. Simmons: A theory of debugging plans and
interpretations, Proc. 7th Natl. Conf. Artif. Intell.
(1988) pp. 94–99
14.141
M. Beetz: Concurrent Reactive Plans: Anticipating
and Forestalling Execution Failures, Lecture Notes
in Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 1772 (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2000)
14.142
H. Grosskreutz: Probabilistic projection and belief
update in the pGOLOG framework. In: Informatik
2000, Informatik Aktuell, ed. by K. Mehlhorn,
G. Snelting (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2000)
pp. 233–249
14.143
L. Morgenstern: Mid-sized axiomatizations of
commonsense problems: A case study in egg
cracking, Studia Log. 67(3), 333–384 (2001)
14.144
N. Blodow, D. Jain, Z.-C. Marton, M. Beetz: Per-
ception and probabilistic anchoring for dynamic
world state logging, Proc. 10th IEEE-RAS Int. Conf.
Humanoid Robots (Humanoids) (2010) pp. 160–
166
14.145
N.J. Nilsson: Shakey the Robot, Tech. Note , Vol. TN
323 (SRI International, Stanford 1984) http://www.
ai.sri.com/shakey/
14.146
B.
Raphael:
The
Thinking
Computer:
Mind
Inside
Matter
(W.H. Freeman, San
Francisco
1976)
14.147
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research: http://
www.jair.org/
14.148
European Conference on Artificial Intelligence:
http://www.eccai.org/ecai.shtml
14.149
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence: http://
www.aaai.org/Conferences/AAAI/aaai.php
14.150
International Conference on Automated Planning
and Scheduling: http://www.icaps-conference.
org/
14.151
F. Ingrand, M. Ghallab: Robotics and artifi-
cial intelligence: A perspective on delibera-
tion functions, AI Communications 27(1), 63–80
(2014)

Multimedia Contents Robot Learni
357
Part A | 15
15. Robot Learning
Jan Peters, Daniel D. Lee, Jens Kober, Duy Nguyen-Tuong, J. Andrew Bagnell, Stefan Schaal
Machine learning offers to robotics a framework
and set of tools for the design of sophisticated
and hard-to-engineer behaviors; conversely, the
challenges of robotic problems provide both inspi-
ration, impact, and validation for developments in
robot learning. The relationship between disci-
plines has sufficient promise to be likened to that
between physics and mathematics. In this chapter,
we attempt to strengthen the links between the
two research communities by providing a survey
of work in robot learning for learning control and
behavior generation in robots. We highlight both
key challenges in robot learning as well as notable
successes. We discuss how contributions tamed the
complexity of the domain and study the role of al-
gorithms, representations, and prior knowledge
in achieving these successes. As a result, a partic-
ular focus of our chapter lies on model learning
for control and robot reinforcement learning. We
demonstrate how machine learning approaches
may be profitably applied, and we note through-
out open questions and the tremendous potential
for future research.
15.1
What Is Robot Learning........................
358
15.1.1
Robot Learning Approaches ........
358
15.1.2
Robot Learning Settings .............
359
15.1.3
Notation...................................
360
15.2
Model Learning ...................................
360
15.2.1
Model Types..............................
361
15.2.2
Model Learning Architectures......
363
15.2.3
Model Learning Challenges
and Constraints.........................
365
15.2.4
Model Learning Methods............
366
15.2.5
Applications of Model Learning...
369
15.2.6
Future Directions.......................
371
15.3
Reinforcement Learning.......................
372
15.3.1
Relation to Classical Control........
372
15.3.2
Reinforcement Learning Methods
373
15.3.3
Optimal Control with Learnt
Models .....................................
375
15.3.4
Model-Free
Value Function Approaches ........
376
15.3.5
Policy Search.............................
377
15.3.6
Challenges in Robot
Reinforcement Learning .............
380
15.3.7
Tractability Through
Representation .........................
382
15.3.8
Tractability Through Prior
Knowledge ...............................
383
15.3.9
Tractability Through Models........
384
15.4
Conclusions .........................................
385
Video-References.........................................
386
References...................................................
386
In the future, robots will be part of daily life in hu-
man society, providing assistance in many areas ranging
from clinical applications, education and care giving,
to normal household environments, disaster scenarios,
and space exploration [15.1]. Robots will no longer
be used to only execute the same task thousands of
times, but rather they will be faced with thousands of
different tasks that rarely repeat in an ever changing en-
vironment [15.2]. It will be difﬁcult to preprogram all
possible tasks and scenarios in such robots, and robots
will need to be able to learn by themselves or with the
help of humans. They will need to automatically adjust
to stochastic and dynamic environments, as well as to
changes due to wear and tear. Machine learning will be
necessary to achieve this high degree of autonomy and
enabling future robots to perceive and act in the world.

Part A | 15.1
358
Part A
Robotics Foundations
15.1 What Is Robot Learning
Robot learning consists of a multitude of machine
learning approaches in the context of robotics. The type
of the learning problem is usually characterized by the
type of feedback, the process of data generation, and
the type of data. At the same time, the type of data
will determine the robot learning approach which actu-
ally can be employed. While the ﬁeld of robot learning
includes a huge number of topics ranging from learn-
ing in perception, state abstraction, decision making,
and probabilistic techniques in robotics [15.3–5], this
chapter focuses on issues of learning action generation
and control. As indicated in Fig. 15.1, we explain robot
learning using the two key ingredients: (i) the setting
in terms of data and feedback, and (ii) the learning
approach.
15.1.1 Robot Learning Approaches
In this chapter, we will focus on the core robot learn-
ing approaches capable of learning action generation
 = {(si, ai, si+1)}
si+1 ≈ fforward (si, ai)
r ≈ R~ (si, ai)
r E (ai|si)
Behavioral
cloning
V E (si)
πE (ai|si)
Inverse reinforcement learning
 = {(si, ai, si+1)}
 = {(si, ai, si+1, ri)}
s ~ T (si+1, si, ai)
r ≈ R~ (si, ai)
V *= (s)
π*(ai|si)
Value function
methods
π*(ai|si)
Policy
search
π*(ai|si)
Optimal control with learnt models
Interaction data from experience
Observed expert data
V *= (si)
Model
learning
Fig. 15.1 The main branches of robot learning for action generation and control can be characterized both in terms of
the available data D and the employed approach that learns from the data. A key distinction for data sets is whether
they were generated from observed expert’s demonstration or the robot’s embodied experience. Data sets generically
include samples i that consist at least of states si, actions ai, and next states siC1. However, in many cases, a qual-
ity assessment in form of a reward ri is available as feedback. The branches in the tree illustrate the core robot
learning problems considered here. Model learning generate a model T.siC1; si; ai/ from data. Reinforcement learn-
ing approaches require a reward in order to obtain an optimal policy . Model-based methods usually learn a model
from which they subsequently construct an optimal value function and policy. Model-free methods either learn value
functions from data without model knowledge to construct a policy while policy search methods optimize the pol-
icy directly based on the interaction data. Expert data allows for reproducing observed behavior E. Two branches
have had a particular importance in robot learning: imitation learning by behavioral cloning can treated by supervised
learning and is discussed in detail in Chap. 74. Imitation learning by inverse RL reconstructs the reward function of
the expert and uses reinforcement learning approaches to re-construct the expert’s policy (This ﬁgure was inspired
by [15.6])
and control. Particularly, we will be focusing on tech-
niques of model learning and reinforcement learn-
ing (RL). (Note that we omit imitation learning by
behavioral cloning as Chap. 75 deals with it exten-
sively.) These methods have enabled real-time learning
in complex robot systems such as helicopters, legged
robots, anthropomorphic arms, and humanoid robots.
We ﬁrst discuss some broader issues of learning con-
trol before reviewing technical details and the related
literature.
Learning Models for Control
Models are among the most essential tools in robotics,
and it is widely believed that intelligent mammals
also rely on internal models in order to generate their
actions. A model describes essential predictive infor-
mation about the behavior of the environment and the
inﬂuence of an agent on this environment. While classi-
cal robotics relies on manually generated models based
on human insights into physics, future autonomous

Robot Learning
15.1 What Is Robot Learning
359
Part A | 15.1
robots need to be able to automatically generate mod-
els from information which is extracted from the data
streams accessible to the robot. Machine learning ap-
proaches in generating these models will also need to
be adapted to the control architectures for which they
are intended. Such model learning for control will be
discussed in Sect. 15.2.
Planning with Reinforcement Learning
Planning motor behaviors and optimizing them with
respect to some criteria is part of every motor skill.
Reinforcement learning offers one of the most gen-
eral frameworks to address these issues. In essence,
it assumes that the goal or intent of a movement is
represented in terms of an optimization or reward cri-
terion, such that learning algorithms can ﬁll in the
often nontrivial details of the plan. While RL has
wide area of application in many domains ranging
from computer games to elevator scheduling [15.7],
its application to high-dimensional physical systems
with continuous state–action spaces requires often dedi-
cated approaches, algorithms, representations, and prior
knowledge. An important issue will also be the choice
between model-based and model-free algorithms, as
well as between value function-based and policy search
methods. Reinforcement learning’s different branches
are indicated in Fig. 15.1 and will be discussed in
Sect. 15.3.
Learning from Demonstration
with Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Learning a skill starting from scratch with a complex
robot system is often infeasible or extremely time con-
suming. Taking inspiration from child teaching tech-
niques, learning from demonstration has become a very
popular tool to endow a robot with some initial rea-
sonable performance, from which further learning can
progress more rapidly. As another chapter in this hand-
book will address learning from demonstration in more
detail, we also discuss a particular subclass of learn-
ing from demonstration, i. e., using inverse RL (the two
most relevant classes of imitation learning are indi-
cated in Fig. 15.1). Inverse RL addresses how to extract
a suitable cost function from observed behavior, an idea
going back to Kalman [15.8]. Algorithms for inverse
RL are tightly coupled to RL which we can only brieﬂy
discuss in Sect. 15.3.6, Curse of Goal Speciﬁcation, but
they are also discussed in Sect. 75.4.3.
As learning has found many applications in
robotics, this chapter can only scratch the surface and
extensions of several sections can be found in [15.9,
10]. By focusing on the key approaches for teaching
a robot new abilities, we nevertheless hope to give
a concise overview.
15.1.2 Robot Learning Settings
The setting of robot learning methods is determined by
the data. Data can either be obtained from an expert
or generated by interaction with the system. Often data
needs to be reproduced accurately (as e.g., for model
learning or imitation learning by behavioral cloning)
while in other cases a feedback signal can determine
what data is actually relevant for the system (directly in
RL and somewhat more indirectly in imitation learning
by inverse RL). Also, the type of data generation will
determine what robot learning methods are applicable
as indicated in Fig. 15.1. For example, while expert data
is crucial for imitation, it may simply be the wrong data
to learn from in model learning.
Data for Robot Learning
In comparison to many other machine learning do-
mains, robot learning suffers from a variety of complex
real-world data problems. Real-world training time is
limited – hence, only relatively few complete execu-
tions of a task can ever be generated. These episodes
are frequently perceived noisily, have a fair amount of
variability in the outcome, do not cover all possible sce-
narios and most often do not include all reactions to
external stimuli. While episodes are scarce, the sam-
ples executed during a trial are not (but are often
not helpful as they contain less information for some
types of learning). Instead, high-dimensional data is
obtained at a fast rate (e.g., proprioceptive informa-
tion at 500 Hz to 5 kHz, vision at 30200 Hz, tac-
tile at 50 Hz to 5 kHz depending on the measurement
mode). The data the robot can learn from is usu-
ally generated by the imperfect controller that needs
to be improved. Thus, generating interesting data that
has sufﬁciently useful information is a recurring prob-
lem in robot learning, discussed under various names,
like exploration/exploitation tradeoff, persistent exci-
tation, etc. Last not least, for high-dimensional robot
systems (like humanoids), there is no representative
training data set to learn from. A small change in
posture of a robot can radically change in which part
of the workspace the robot operates. Rapidly learning
on the ﬂy is frequently more important than squeez-
ing the most of information from a few data points.
Sharing data across different robots would be desir-
able, envisioning a cloud robotics approach. However,
so far, even various instantiations of the same robot
model can create quite different data depending on their
wear and tear, calibration, and maintenance. Sharing
data across different robot models has not seen a lot
of success, as kinematic and dynamic differences can
lead to rather different control and planning realiza-
tions. Thus, machine learning techniques for robotics

Part A | 15.2
360
Part A
Robotics Foundations
become quickly rather specialized and domain/robotic
speciﬁc.
What Feedback Is Available for Learning?
A straightforward way to categorize robot learning ap-
proaches is given by the type of feedback [15.11].
A scalar performance score such as a reward or cost
will often result in a RL approach. A presented de-
sired action or predicted behavior allow supervised
learning approaches such as model learning or direct
imitation learning. Feedback in terms of an explana-
tion has become most prominent in inverse RL. These
methods will be explained in more detail below. Note
that unsupervised learning problems where no feed-
back is required also can be found in robotics [15.5,
12].
15.1.3 Notation
In the next section and in Fig. 15.1, we will use the fol-
lowing notation. In general, we follow the tradition in
RL [15.13]. When it comes to speciﬁc control prob-
lems, we use q for a vector of states in conﬁguration
space (often called joint-space), u for motor commands
in conﬁguration space, and x for a state in task- or
effector-space.
15.2 Model Learning
In recent years, methods to learn models from data
have become increasingly interesting tools for robotics.
There are a variety of reasons for this development.
First, robot control – as needed in less structured dy-
namic and more stochastic environments – requires
model-based control to realize high compliance, since
stiff control without good models exposes the robot and
its environment to more risk of damage. Second, due
to the complexity of modern robot systems, standard
models like rigid body dynamics are only rough ap-
proximations which do not accurately model unknown
sources of nonlinearities from actuation (hydraulics
and motor saturation), passive elements like wires, hy-
draulic hoses, cable stretch, and/or sources of friction
and stiction. Finally, interaction with an unstructured,
uncertain, and human-inhabited environment may re-
quire to learn models on the ﬂy [15.14, 15]. In addition,
wear and tear of a robot in continual use will create
drifting models. All these issues can be addressed by
a) Forward model
sk
ak
sk+1
b) Inverse model
sk
ak
ak:k+1
sk+1
ak–1
c) Mixed model
Example of an operator model
sk
ak
zk
sk–1
sk+1
d)
sk
sk+1
sk+2
sk+t
Fig.15.2a–d Graphical models for different types of models. The white nodes denote the observed quantities, while the
brown nodes represent the quantities to be inferred. (a) The forward model allows inferring the next state given current
state and action. (b) The inverse model determines the action required to move the system from the current state to the
next state. (c) The mixed model approach combines forward and inverse models in problems where a unique inverse does
not exist. Here, the forward and inverse models are linked by a latent variable zk. (d) The operator model is needed when
dealing with ﬁnite sequences of future states
learning models directly from measured data, ideally in
a continual and incremental on-line fashion, using ap-
propriate nonlinear function approximation techniques.
We discuss different types of models (forward mod-
els, inverse models, mixed models, and operator mod-
els) in Sect. 15.2.1, along with difference architectures
for model learning in Sect. 15.2.2. Some of the chal-
lenges that arise in these models in the domain of
robotics are discussed in Sect. 15.2.3. How models
can be learned using machine learning techniques are
described in Sect. 15.2.4, and examples where model
learning has proven to be helpful for the action gen-
eration in complex robot systems [15.14, 16–21] are
highlighted in Sect. 15.2.5.
While this chapter attempts to give a fairly exhaus-
tive overview on model learning in robotics, it is of
course not complete due to the space constraints of
a book chapter. An extended version of this section can
be found in [15.9].

Robot Learning
15.2 Model Learning
361
Part A | 15.2
15.2.1 Model Types
Models represent the functional relationship between
input and output variables. If we can observe the cur-
rent state sk of a system and the action ak currently
applied to the system, we can attempt to predict the next
state skC1, which is called a forward model with map-
ping .sk; ak/ ! skC1. We can also use the inverse model
to infer the current action, i. e., the relation .sk; skC1/ !
ak, if we know the current state and the desired or
expected future state. There are also approaches com-
bining forward and inverse models for prediction which
we will refer to as mixed model approaches. However,
for many applications the system behavior has to be pre-
dicted for the next t-steps rather than for the next single
step; models that predict a series of states will be called
operator models. Graphical depictions of these different
models are shown in Fig. 15.2.
Forward Models
Forward models predict the next state of a dynamic
system given the current action and current state. The
forward model directly corresponds to the state transfer
skC1 D fforward.sk; ak/ :
(15.1)
This function expresses the causal physical proper-
ties of the system, and the learning of such causal
mappings is a well-deﬁned problem using standard re-
gression techniques. While forward models are unique
mappings in classical physics, there are several cases
where forward models alone do not provide sufﬁcient
information to uniquely determine the next system’s
state [15.22]. For instance, when a pendulum is lo-
cated at its unstable equilibrium point, it will tend to go
either to the left or right rather than remain in the cen-
ter. Nevertheless, the prediction of the forward model
would be for the pendulum to remain centered. In this
case, the state transfer function is not sufﬁcient to cap-
ture the interesting dynamics of the system [15.22, 23].
For such cases, a probabilistic model T.skC1; ak; sk/ D
P.skC1jsk; ak/ may be more appropriate as it captures
both likely modes with a conditional density instead of
just the mean behavior.
An early application of forward models in classical
control is the Smith predictor, where the forward model
is employed to cancel out delays imposed by the feed-
back loop [15.24]. Subsequently, forward models have
been applied in the context of model reference adaptive
control (MRAC) [15.25]. MRAC is a control system in
which the performance of an action is predicted using
a forward reference model. The controller adjusts the
action based on the resulting error between the desired
and current state. Hence, the policy  for MRAC can
be written as
.s/ D argmin
a
.fforward.s; a/  sdes/ ;
(15.2)
where sdes denotes a desired trajectory and s represents
the observed state. MRAC was originally developed for
continuous-time system and extended later for discrete
and stochastic systems [15.25]. Applications of MRAC
can be widely found for robot control, such as adaptive
manipulator control [15.26].
Further applications of forward models can be
found in the wide class of model predictive control
(MPC) [15.27]. MPC computes optimal actions by min-
imizing a given cost function over a certain prediction
horizon N. The MPC control policy can be described by
.s/ D argmin
atWtCN
tCN
X
kDt
Fcost .fforward.sk; ak/; sk;des; ak/ ;
(15.3)
where Fcost.s; sdes/ denotes the cost of an action ak re-
sulting in a state s away from the desired state sdes.
MPC was ﬁrst developed for linear system models
and, subsequently, extended to more complex nonlin-
ear models with constraints [15.27]. Forward models
have also been essential in model-based RL approaches,
which relate to the problem of optimal control [15.28–
30]. Here, the forward models describe the transition
dynamics determining the probability of reaching the
next state given current state and action. In contrast to
previous applications, the forward models incorporate
a probabilistic description of the system dynamics in
this case [15.31, 32]. Example applications of forward
models for optimal control are given in the case studies
in Sect. 15.2.5, Simulation-Based Optimization.
Inverse Models
Inverse models predict the action required to move the
system from the current state to a desired future state.
In contrast to forward models, inverse models represent
an anticausal system. Thus, inverse models may not ex-
ist or be well deﬁned. However, for several cases, such
as for inverse dynamics of nonoveractuated robots, the
inverse relationship is well-deﬁned. Ill-posed inverse
modeling problems can be solved by introducing ad-
ditional constraints, as discussed in Sect. 15.2.1, Mixed
Models.
For control, applications of inverse models can be
traditionally found in computed torque robot control,
where the inverse dynamics model predicts the required
torques, i. e., the action, to move the robot along a de-
sired joint space trajectory. Thus, the computed torque

Part A | 15.2
362
Part A
Robotics Foundations
control policy can be described by
.s/ D finverse.s; sdes/ C k.s  sdes/ ;
(15.4)
where the function k.s  sdes/ is an error correction
term (e.g., a proportional–derivative (PD)-controller
since both positions and velocities are normally part
of the state in a second order dynamical system)
needed for stabilization of the robot. If an accu-
rate inverse dynamics model is given, the predicted
torques are sufﬁcient to obtain a precise tracking
performance. The inverse dynamics control approach
is closely related to the computed torque control
method.
Here, the feedback term acts through the inverse
model of the system giving a control policy,
.s/ D finverse Œs; sdes C k.s  sdes/ :
(15.5)
If the inverse model perfectly describes the inverse
dynamics, inverse dynamics control will perfectly com-
pensate for all nonlinearities occurring in the system.
Control approaches based on inverse models are well-
known in the robotics community, and have gained
increasing popularity since the late 1980s, as the in-
crease in computational power and the existence of
torque-controlled robots have allowed computing more
complex models for real-time control. The concept of
feedback linearization is another, more general way to
derive inverse dynamics control laws, offering possibly
more applications for learned models [15.33, 34].
Mixed Models
In addition to forward and inverse models, there are
also methods combining both types of models. Since
modeling the forward relationship is well deﬁned while
modeling the inverse relation may be an ill-posed prob-
lem, the basic idea behind the combined mixed model
is that the information encoded in the forward model
can help to resolve the nonuniqueness of the inverse
model. A typical ill-posed inverse modeling problem
is the inverse kinematics of redundant robots. Given
a joint conﬁguration q, the task space position x D f .q/
can be determined exactly (i. e., the forward model is
well deﬁned), while there may be many possible joint
conﬁgurations q for a given task space position x, i. e.,
the inverse model could have inﬁnitely many solutions
and deriving an average suitable solution is not straight-
forward. The problem is that the set of inverse solutions
may not form a convex set. Thus, when learning such
inverse mappings, the learning algorithm will poten-
tially average over the nonconvex set, giving rise to an
invalid solution.
The ill-posedness of the inverse model can be re-
solved if it is combined with the prediction of a forward
model, which checks whether the proposed inverse so-
lution results in the desired state [15.35]. If not, the
remaining error can be used to adjust the learned in-
verse model such that it chooses a valid solution.
The mixed model approach, i. e., the composite
of forward and inverse models, was ﬁrst proposed
in conjunction with the distal teacher learning ap-
proach [15.35], and discussed in Sect. 15.2.2, Distal
Teacher Learning. The proposed mixed models ap-
proach has subsequently evoked signiﬁcant interest and
has been extensively studied in the ﬁeld of motor
control [15.36, 37]. Furthermore, the mixed model ap-
proach is supported by some evidence that the human
cerebellum can be modeled using forward–inverse com-
posite models, such as MOSAIC [15.38, 39]. While
mixed models have become well known in the neuro-
science community, the application of such models in
robot control is not yet widespread. Pioneering work
on mixed models in the control community can be
found in [15.40, 41], where mixed models are used
for model reference control of an unknown Markov
jump system. Despite that mixed model approaches are
not widely used in control, with the appearance of in-
creasingly more humanoid robots, biologically inspired
robot controllers are gaining more popularity and the
ones based on mixed models may present a promising
approach [15.17, 42, 43].
Operator Models
The models from the preceding sections are mainly
used to predict a single future state or action. How-
ever, in many problems, such as open-loop control, one
would like to have information of the system for the
next t-steps in the future. This problem is the multi-step
ahead prediction problem, where the task is to pre-
dict a sequence of future values without the availability
of output measurements in the horizon of interest. We
will term the models which are employed to solve this
problem as operator models. It turns out that such oper-
ator models are difﬁcult to develop because of the lack
of measurements in the prediction horizon. A straight-
forward idea would be to apply single-step prediction
models t times in sequence, in order to obtain a series
of future predictions. However, this approach is suscep-
tible to error accumulation, i. e., errors made in the past
are propagated into future predictions. An alternative is
to apply autoregressive models which are extensively
investigated in time series prediction [15.44], in order
to employ past predicted values to predict future out-
comes.
Combining operator models with control was ﬁrst
motivated by the need of extension of forward models
for multi-step predictions [15.45]. In more recent work,
variations of traditional ARX and ARMAX models for

Robot Learning
15.2 Model Learning
363
Part A | 15.2
Table 15.1 Overview on model types associated with applicable learning architectures and example applications
Model type
Learning architecture
Example applications
Forward model
Direct modeling
Prediction, ﬁltering, learning simulations, optimization
Inverse model
Direct modeling (if invertible),
indirect modeling
Inverse dynamics control, computed torque control, feedback linearization
control
Mixed model
Direct modeling (if invertible),
indirect modeling, distal-teacher
Inverse kinematics, operational space control, multiple model control
Operator model
Direct modeling
Planning, optimization, model predictive control, delay compensation
nonlinear cases have been proposed for control [15.46,
47]. However, operator models based on some paramet-
ric structures, such as ARX or ARMAX, have shown to
have difﬁculties in more complex systems. The situa-
tion is even worse in the presence of noise or complex
nonlinear dynamics. These difﬁculties give reasons to
employ nonparametric operator models for multi-step
predictions [15.48, 49].
15.2.2 Model Learning Architectures
In the previous section, we have presented different
prediction problems that require different types of mod-
els. A central question is how to learn and adapt these
different models while they are being used. We will
distinguish between direct modeling, indirect model-
ing, and the distal teacher approach. Table 15.1 shows
an overview of model types associated with applicable
learning architectures. These architectures can be ob-
served in Fig. 15.3.
Direct Modeling
Direct learning is probably the most straightforward
and most frequently applied way to obtain a model
despite that it is not always applicable. In this learn-
ing paradigm, the model is directly learned by ob-
serving the inputs and outputs, creating a supervised
learning problem. Direct model learning can be imple-
mented using most regression techniques, such as linear
regression, local linear regression, recursive regres-
sion [15.50, 51], neural networks [15.52, 53], or other
statistical approximation techniques, currently mostly
based on kernel methods [15.54, 55].
An early example for direct learning control was
the self-tuning regulator that generates a forward model
and adapts it online [15.56]. Assuming the estimated
forward model is correct (also called the certainty
equivalence principle), the self-tuning regulator will es-
timate an appropriate control law online. However, the
forward model in the traditional self-tuning regulator
has a ﬁxed parametric structure and, hence, it cannot
deal automatically with unknown nonlinearities [15.47,
57]. The main reason why parametric models need to be
used in direct modeling techniques is that such model
parameterization is necessary for a convenient formu-
a) Direct modeling
b) Indirect modeling
Model
Σ
Feedback
controller
sD
a
s
Robot
+
+
Model
Σ
Feedback
controller
sD
a
s
Robot
+
+
c) Distal teacher learning
Inverse
model
Σ
Feedback
controller
Forward
model
sD
a
s
Robot
+
+
Fig.15.3a–c Learning architectures in model learning ap-
plied to control. (a) In the direct modeling approach, the
model is learned directly from the observations – the given
example shows learning and inverse model. (b) Indirect
modeling approximates the model using the output of the
feedback controller as error signal. (c) In the distal teacher
learning approach, the inverse model’s error is determined
using the forward model. The resulting models will con-
verge to an identity transformation
lation of the control law and, more importantly, for
the rigorous stability analysis. As the parametric model
structure is often too limited for complex robot sys-
tems, learning methods with more degrees of freedom

Part A | 15.2
364
Part A
Robotics Foundations
are needed, such as neural networks or other machine
learning techniques [15.58, 59]. However, including so-
phisticated learning algorithms in control makes the
analysis more complex if not impossible. Some exam-
ples of nonparameteric learning for control have been
applied to unmanned airplane control [15.60], where
the learning system models can prevent the airplane
from crashing in case of changes in the airplane dynam-
ics, e.g., due to failure of the mechanics.
Inverse models can also be learned in a direct
manner if the inverse mapping is well deﬁned. A well-
known example is the inverse dynamics model re-
quired by computed torque and inverse dynamics con-
trol [15.61, 62]. If direct modeling is applicable, learn-
ing becomes straightforward and can be achieved using
standard regression techniques [15.14, 63, 64]. Early
work in learning inverse models for control attempted
to adapt a parametric form of the rigid body dynam-
ics model which is linear in its parameters and, hence,
can be estimated from data straightforwardly using lin-
ear regression [15.65–67]. In practice, the estimation of
dynamics parameters is not always straightforward. It
is hard to create sufﬁciently rich data sets so that phys-
ically plausible parameters can be identiﬁed [15.15],
and when identiﬁed online, additional persistent excita-
tion issues occur [15.68]. Models with ﬁxed parametric
structures are not capable of capturing certain nonlin-
earities; hence, more sophisticated models have been
introduced for learning inverse dynamics, such as neu-
ral networks [15.64, 69] or statistical nonparametric
models [15.14, 63, 70]. There have also been attempts
to combine parametric rigid body dynamics model with
nonparametric model learning for approximating the
inverse dynamics [15.71]. Similar as in inverse dynam-
ics models, feedback linearization can also be used
in conjunction with direct model learning. Again, the
nonlinear dynamics can now be approximated using
neural networks or other nonparametric learning meth-
ods [15.60, 72]. Stability analysis of feedback lineariza-
tion control with learned models is possible extending
the cases where the nonlinear dynamics could not be
canceled perfectly [15.60]. It should be noted that
learning an inverse dynamics model .s; sdes/ ! a can
have very slow learning performance when the initially
learned model is rather far from reality. In this case, the
predicted action a will create outcomes that are very far
away from sdes, such that the learning system, when try-
ing out the bad action a, can hardly extract any useful
information from this experience how to actually real-
ize sdes.
While direct learning is mostly associated with
learning a single type of model, it can also be applied
to mixed models and operator models. The mixed model
approach (e.g., combining inverse and forward models)
ﬁnds its application in learning control for multiple-
module systems. The basic idea is to decompose a com-
plex system into many simpler subsystems which can
be controlled individually [15.41]. The problem is how
to choose an appropriate architecture for the multiple
controllers, and how to switch between the multiple
modules. Following the multiple-module idea, each con-
troller module consists of a pair of inverse and forward
models in the mixed model approach. The controller can
be considered as an inverse model, while the forward
model is essentially used to switch between the differ-
ent modules [15.36]. Such multiple pairs of forward and
inverse models can be learned directly using gradient-
descend methods or expectation-maximization [15.42].
Direct learning of operator models has been done with
neural networks [15.73]. In more recent work, proba-
bilistic methods are employed to learn such operator
models [15.48, 49].
Indirect Modeling
Direct learning works well when the functional rela-
tionship is well deﬁned. However, there can be situa-
tions where the inverse relationship is not well deﬁned,
such as in the differential inverse kinematics prob-
lem. In such cases, inverse models can often still be
learned, but in an indirect way. One such indirect
modeling technique is feedback error model learn-
ing [15.74]. Feedback error learning relies on the output
of a feedback controller that is used to generate the error
signals employed to learn the feedforward controller.
In problems, such as feedforward inverse dynamics
control [15.61], this approach can be understood par-
ticularly well: if the inverse dynamics model is perfect,
the feedback controller is not needed and its output
will be zero. If it is nonzero, it corresponds to the er-
ror of the feedforward model [15.61]. The intuition
behind feedback error learning is that by minimizing
the feedback errors for learning the inverse model, the
feedback control term will be decreasing as the model
converges.
Compared to the direct model learning, feedback er-
ror learning is a goal-directed model learning approach
resulting from the minimization of feedback error – in
this error can only be zero if the goal was achieved.
Another important difference between feedback error
learning and direct learning is that feedback error learn-
ing has to perform online, while direct model learning
can be done both online and ofﬂine. Additionally, feed-
back error learning does not create supervised learning
data in the classical sense: the feedback error is not
computed from an output target, but just from an error
that represents the gradient toward better performance.
This issue, and additionally a complex interaction be-
tween PD gains and learning stability [15.75] can make

Robot Learning
15.2 Model Learning
365
Part A | 15.2
it more complex to set up a successful feedback error
learning system.
Feedback error learning is biologically motivated
due to its inspiration from cerebellar motor con-
trol [15.37]. It has been further developed for control
with robotics applications, originally employing neu-
ral networks [15.76, 77]. Feedback error learning can
also be used with various nonparametric learning meth-
ods [15.75]. Conditions for the stability of feedback
error learning control in combination with nonparamet-
ric approaches have also been investigated [15.75].
Indirect model learning can also be used in the
mixed model approach [15.78]. Here, the attempt has
been made to combine the feedback error learning
with the mixture of experts’ architecture to learn mul-
tiple inverse models for different manipulated objects,
where the inverse models are learned indirectly using
the feedback error learning approach [15.78]. The for-
ward model is used for training a gating network, as it
is well deﬁned. The gating network subsequently gen-
erates a weighted prediction of the multiple inverse
models, where the predictors determine the locally re-
sponsible models.
Distal Teacher Learning
The distal teacher learning approach was motivated by
the necessity to learn general inverse models which suf-
fer from the ill-posedness problem [15.35]. Here, the
nonuniqueness of the inverse model is resolved by the
distal teacher which determines the error of the inverse
model using a forward model. Unlike the feedback error
learning approach, this insight allows directly aiming
at a globally consistent inverse model instead of local
on-policy optimization. The distal teacher employs two
interacting learning process: one process where the for-
ward model is learned, and the other process where the
learned forward model is used for determining the er-
ror of the inverse model. In the original distal learning
approach, the inverse model’s output is validated by the
forward model, as the composite of these models yields
an identity mapping if perfectly learned [15.35]. The
intuition behind this approach is that the inverse model
will learn a correct solution by minimizing the error be-
tween the output of the forward model and the input to
Table 15.2 Some challenges for model learning in robotics
Data challenges
Algorithmic constraints
Real-world challenges
High-dimensionality
Incremental updates
Safety
Smoothness
Real-time
Robustness
Richness of data
Online learning
Generalization
Noise
Efﬁciency
Interaction
Outliers
Large data sets
Stability
Redundant data
Prior knowledge
Uncertainty
Missing data
Sparse data
In the environment
the inverse model. Thus, the inverse model will result
in solutions that are consistent with the forward model.
The distal teacher approach has successfully learned
particular solutions for multi-valued mappings, such as
inverse kinematics of redundant robots [15.35]. Similar
to feedback error model learning [15.74], distal teacher
learning is also a goal-directed learning method appli-
cable for various robot control scenarios.
The distal learning approach is particularly suitable
for control when combining with the mixed models, as
it naturally incorporates the mixed model principle. The
distal teacher learning approach with mixed models has
motivated a number of follow-up projects with several
robot control applications [15.17, 43, 79].
15.2.3 Model Learning Challenges
and Constraints
Given different types of models and their associated
learning architectures, it may not be straightforward to
apply machine learning methods [15.54, 55, 80] to these
models in robotics. Several important problems arise
that need to be addressed before learning methods can be
successfully applied, and are summarized in Table 15.2.
Data Challenge
In order to learn a good model for applications in
robotics, the sampled data has to cover a preferably
large region of the model state space, and ideally cover
it densely. Of course, in high-dimensional systems, one
can never cover the complete state space – indeed, in
complex robots like humanoids with state spaces of
over 30 dimensions, only a very tiny fraction of the
possible space can be explored in a lifetime. Thus, one
can only hope to sample data in a task speciﬁc way,
which is usually just in a very small part of the entire
data space. For the purpose of generalization and accu-
racy, the data has to be sufﬁciently rich, i. e., it should
contain as much information about the system as possi-
ble. Thus, generating large and rich data sets for model
learning is an essential step. This step often requires
additional excitation of the robot system during data
generation, analogous to persistent excitation in clas-
sical system identiﬁcation [15.68].

Part A | 15.2
366
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Many machine learning methods for regression as-
sume that the model to be learned is sufﬁciently smooth.
However, there are many applications in robotics where
the approximated functions are known to be nons-
mooth – one example is a stiction-friction model. Such
nonsmooth functions are sometimes approximated us-
ing kernel methods, where special kernels need to be
deﬁned in order to take the expected nonsmoothness in
account [15.54, 55]. Discontinuities in a function can
also be approximated by learning how to switch dis-
continuously between local models [15.81].
Difﬁculties arising from the large number of de-
grees of freedom in robotics can also be mitigated
using dimensionality reduction methods [15.82, 83].
Dimensionality reduction is based on the insight that
the useful information in the data may be represented
by a low-dimensional manifold of the original input
space. Dimensionality reduction methods have proven
to be a powerful method for model learning in high-
dimensional robot systems [15.63, 84].
As the data is sampled over a possibly long period
of time in many robotics applications [15.85], problems
of redundant and irrelevant data can occur. Redundant
and irrelevant data can bias the model which severely
degenerates the generalization performance. To over-
come these issues, data needs to be ﬁltered that is
informative for the learning process [15.70, 86]. Deal-
ing with noise and outliers is always a challenging
problem for robot learning. Recent work in the ma-
chine learning community has addressed this problem
by developing regularization frameworks based on sta-
tistical learning theory. The basic idea is to constrain
the model to be learned in order to alleviate the con-
tributions made by the noisy components in the data.
Examples of regularized model learning methods in-
clude support vector regression and Gaussian process
regression [15.87, 88]. Methods that explicitly account
for noise in the data can signiﬁcantly improve their gen-
eralization performance.
Algorithmic Constraints
In many scenarios, robot learning algorithms have
to deal with massive amounts of data coming from
their sensors. Thus, algorithms need to be efﬁcient in
terms of computation without sacriﬁcing learning accu-
racy [15.89]. Fast and real-time computation presents
a challenging problem. Standard model learning ap-
proaches, such as Gaussian process regression, for
example, scale cubically in the number of training data
points, preventing a straightforward usage in robotics.
Sparse and reduced set methods smartly reduce the size
of training data and, thus, decrease the computational
effort for the learning and the prediction step [15.90].
Efﬁcient implementations using parallel computation
may also be used to speed up machine learning algo-
rithms [15.91].
Online learning is also needed for continuous adap-
tation to a changing world which is essential to make
robots more autonomous [15.85]. Most machine learn-
ing methods are developed for learning in batch mode,
while online learning requires incremental approxima-
tion of the model [15.14, 92]. An advantage of online
model learning is the ability to uncover interesting
state-space regions during task execution.
For some robots, it may be difﬁcult or expensive
to obtain a lot of data for learning. In these cases,
we need algorithms which allow us to incorporate
additional prior knowledge to improve the learning per-
formance in the presence of sparse data [15.93, 94].
In kernel methods, prior knowledge can be speciﬁed
by feature vectors which can be used to deﬁne appro-
priate kernels [15.93]. In contrast, probabilistic frame-
works allow specifying a priori information [15.54].
Furthermore, prior knowledge, if given as a paramet-
ric model, can be inserted into nonparametric models
yielding semiparametric learning approaches [15.71,
95]. Semiparametric models have shown to be capable
in learning competitive models, when little data is avail-
able [15.71].
Real-World Constraints
Ensuring safe interaction of robots with human beings
in everyday life, machine learning algorithms devel-
oped for robotics applications have to minimize the risk
of injury and damage. For critical applications, such as
medical or service robotics, robustness and reliability
are among the most important criteria which have to be
fulﬁlled by model learning. Learning becomes more ro-
bust by employing feature selection as a preprocessing
step, and has been used in several robotics application
in vision and control [15.70, 96].
Robustness also requires the ability of the learn-
ing algorithm to deal with missing data. Missing data
due to measurement errors poses a difﬁcult problem
for model learning in robotics. Recently, probabilistic
learning methods have been used to infer the missing
components in the training data [15.97]. An advantage
of probabilistic methods comes from the ability to as-
sign uncertainty to the predicted values, making it easier
to deal with missing and imprecise data.
15.2.4 Model Learning Methods
We consider model learning in the context of supervised
learning, where the inputs x and outputs y are given. The
true output data is corrupted by noise , i. e.,
y D f .x/ C  :
(15.6)

Robot Learning
15.2 Model Learning
367
Part A | 15.2
Table 15.3 A large variety of machine learning methods have been applied in model learning for robotics. We distinguish
between global and local methods, as well as semilocal methods which combine both approaches. The methods differ
in the training mode and their online capabilities. For computational complexity, n denotes the total number of training
points, m is the number of data points in a local model, and M is the number to local models
Method
Type
Mode
Online
Complexity
Learning applications
Locally weighted projection regres-
sion [15.80]
Local
Incremental
Yes
O.n/
Inverse dynamics [15.63],
Foothold quality model [15.21]
Local Gaussian process regression [15.14]
Local
Incremental
Yes
O.m2/
Inverse dynamics [15.14]
Gaussian mixture model [15.98]
Semilocal
Batch
No
O.Mn/
Human motion model [15.99]
Bayesian committee machine [15.100]
Semilocal
Batch
No
O.m2n/
Inverse dynamics [15.54]
Sparse Gaussian process regression [15.101]
Global
Incremental
Yes
O.n2/
Transition dynamics [15.32],
Task model [15.102]
Gaussian process regression [15.103]
Global
Batch
No
O.n3/
Terrain model [15.104],
State estimation
model [15.105]
Support vector regression [15.55]
Global
Batch
No
O.n2/
ZMP control model [15.106],
Grasp stability model [15.107]
Incremental support vector machine [15.108]
Global
Incremental
Yes
O.n2/
Inverse dynamics [15.109]
Note that the noise is additive to f .x/; models that
address noise in the inputs can be developed as
well [15.110]. The performance of a model is given by
its generalization ability, i. e., the learned model should
be able to provide precise predictions of the output
on new input data. Different learning techniques make
different assumptions on how to model the function f
given the data. From a function approximation point
of view, we will distinguish between global and lo-
cal techniques. Beyond the local and global types of
model learning, there are also approaches that com-
bine both ideas. An example of such a hybrid approach
is the mixtures of experts [15.98, 111]. Here, the data
is partitioned into smaller local models by a learned
gating network, and prediction is accomplished by fus-
ing local model predictions. Mixture of experts have
been further embedded into a Bayesian learning frame-
work, giving rise to a number of Bayesian hybrid
approaches such as committee machines [15.100], mix-
tures of Gaussian models [15.112], or inﬁnite mixtures
of experts [15.113].
Global Regression
Global regression techniques model the underlying
function f using all observed data [15.114], i. e., ev-
ery data point is potentially adjusting every parameter
of the learning system. A straightforward way to model
the function f is to assume a parametric structure, such
as linear or polynomial models or multilayer perceptron
neural networks, and to ﬁt the model parameters us-
ing training data [15.52, 114, 115]. However, ﬁxing the
model with a parametric structure beforehand may not
sufﬁce to explain the sampled data with sufﬁcient ac-
curacy, which motivates nonparametric model learning
frameworks [15.54, 55, 115]. Nonparametric learning
does not mean that there are no parameters, just that the
correct number of relevant parameters is unknown, and
that it is unlikely that a ﬁnite set of parameters would
sufﬁce to model the entire regression problem.
In the last two decades, parametric and nonparamet-
ric regression methods have been focussing on func-
tions f modeled as
f .x/ D T.x/ ;
(15.7)
where  is a weight vector and  is a vector of nonlin-
ear functions, also called features or basis-functions. 
projects x into some high-dimensional space, in which
the learning problem is assumed to become linear in
the parameters. The basic idea behind nonparametric
regression is that the optimal model structure should
be obtained from the training data. Hence, the size
of the weight vector  is not ﬁxed but can increase
with the number of training data points. In contrast
to nonparametric statistical approaches, other popular
function approximation methods, such as neural net-
works, ﬁx the model structure beforehand [15.52], like
the number of nodes and their connections. However,
there is a connection between artiﬁcial neural networks
and probabilistic approaches [15.116, 117] using the
formalization in (15.7).
Learning systems as formalized in (15.7) are mostly
discussed as kernel methods [15.55]. Learning a model
is equivalent to ﬁnding a tradeoff between the model’s
complexity and the best ﬁt of the model to the ob-
served data. Thus, it is desirable to have a model which
is simple but at the same time can explain the data
well. The number of features (i. e., the length of feature
vector ) has a direct correlation with the complexity
of the regression model, as the more features one al-
lows, usually the more powerful the learning system

Part A | 15.2
368
Part A
Robotics Foundations
becomes, but it also takes more data to constrain the
open parameters of the model. One of the key insights
of kernel methods [15.54, 55] was that one can actually
work with inﬁnitely many features using the so-called
kernel trick, where the formulation of the regression
problem only involves inner products of the feature
vectors .xi/T.xj/ of any two inputs xi and xj, and
that this inner product can often be computed in closed
form by a kernel function k.xi; xj/. This approach intro-
duces a dual form of the regression learning problem
where the number of open parameters is identical to
the number of n training data, and not the number of
features. In support vector regression (SVR) [15.55],
a sparsiﬁcation process will choose the minimal num-
ber of parameters needed to represent the training data.
In Gaussian process regression [15.54], a probabilistic
approach is taken that places a prior distribution over .
The posterior parameters can subsequently be obtained
by optimizing the corresponding marginal likelihood.
Kernel and probabilistic methods have proven to
be successful tools for model learning over the last
decade, resulting in a number of widely applied regres-
sion methods [15.87, 88, 118]. These methods can be
applied to high-dimensional data. They can also deal
well with noisy data, as the noise is taken in account
indirectly by regularizing the model complexity. Fur-
thermore, they are relatively easy to use, as several
black-box implementations are available. However, the
major drawback of these methods are the computa-
tional complexity. For instance, for Gaussian process
regression the complexity scales cubically in terms of
the number of training data points. Thus, one active
research line in machine learning is to reduce the com-
putational cost of those approaches. Due to customized
techniques for robotics, kernel and probabilistic regres-
sion techniques found their ways into several robotics
applications, such as robot control [15.70], sensor mod-
eling [15.119], or state estimation [15.105].
Local Learning Methods
The basic idea of local regression techniques is to
estimate the underlying function f within a local neigh-
borhood around a query input point xq. The data points
in this neighborhood can then be used to predict the out-
come for the query point. Generally, local regression
models can be obtained by minimizing the following
cost function J using n training data points
J D
n
X
kD1
w

.xk  xq/TD.xk  xq/
	
kyk  Of.xk/k2 :
(15.8)
As indicated by (15.8), the essential ingredients for a lo-
cal regression model are the neighborhood function w
and the local model Of. The neighborhood function w,
which is controlled by a distance metric D, often sim-
pliﬁed as a scalar width parameter D D 1=hI, measures
the distance between a query point xq to the points in the
training data. The local model Of describes the function
structure used to approximate f within the neighbor-
hood around xq [15.120, 121]. Depending on the com-
plexity of the data, different function structures can be
assumed for the local model Of, such as a linear or a poly-
nomial model. The open-parameters of Of can be esti-
mated straightforwardly by minimizing J with respect
to these parameters.
The choice of the neighborhood function and its
distance metric parameter is more involved. Several
techniques have been suggested for estimating D for
a given w, including the minimization of the leave-
one-out cross-validation error and adaptive bandwidth
selection [15.122, 123].
Due to their simplicity and computational ef-
ﬁciency, local regression techniques have become
widespread in model learning for robotics [15.124–
126]. In the last decade, novel local regression ap-
proaches were further developed in order to cope with
the demands in real-time robotics applications, such
as locally weighted projection regression [15.92, 127].
Inspired by local regression techniques, these meth-
ods ﬁrst employ a partitioning of the input space into
smaller local regions, for which locally linear models
are approximated. A useful metaphor is to imagine that
the input space is partitioned into disjoint boxes, and
for the data points falling into each of these boxes, an
independent local model is ﬁt, usually of very simple
complexity, like locally linear models.
In addition to the computational efﬁciency, local
methods can deal with less smooth functions and do not
require the same smoothness and regularity conditions
as global regression methods. However, it has been
shown in practice that local methods suffer from prob-
lems induced by high-dimensional data, as notions of
locality break down for sparse, high-dimensional data.
Furthermore, the learning performance of local meth-
ods may be sensitive to noise and heavily depends on
the way how the input space is partitioned, i. e., the
conﬁguration of the neighborhood function w. These
problems still present an active research topic [15.17,
128].
Several attempts have been made to scale local re-
gression models to higher dimensional problems as
required for many modern robotics systems. For ex-
ample, locally weighted projection regression com-
bines local regression with dimensionality reduction
by projecting the input data into a lower dimen-
sional space, where local regression is employed after-
ward [15.92]. Other methods combine nonparametric

Robot Learning
15.2 Model Learning
369
Part A | 15.2
probabilistic regression, such as Gaussian process re-
gression, with the local approaches while exploiting the
strength of probabilistic methods for model learning
in high-dimension [15.14, 17]. Local learning meth-
ods are very well suited to parallelization on modern
computer hardware, as each local model can be ﬁt
independently.
15.2.5 Applications of Model Learning
Several representative examples of model learning are
illustrated in the following sections.
Simulation-Based Optimization
As forward models directly describe the causal dynamic
behavior of a system, learning such models has received
much attention in model-based control, particularly for
optimal control problems. In optimal control, a for-
ward model is needed to predict the behavior of the
control system over an extended time horizon in order
to optimize the control policy. If an analytical model
is inaccurate, learning the model offers an interesting
alternative.
Atkeson and Morimoto [15.29] have been among
the ﬁrst to explore this approach using differential dy-
namic programming [15.129] for optimizing open-loop
control policies. The basic idea was to use receptive
ﬁeld-weighted regression (a type of locally weighted
regression) to learn the models of the cost function
and the state transition. Differential dynamic program-
ming locally linearizes the state transition model and
generates a local quadratic approximation of the cost.
These approximations are used to improve an open-loop
policy where the linearizations are also updated after
every policy update [15.29]. Atkeson and Morimoto
used the method to learn the underactuated pendu-
lum swing up task, where a pole is attached to with
a passive joint to the endeffector of a robot arm. The
goal of the robot is to bring the pole from a hang-
ing to an upright position. Hence, the system needs to
pump energy into the pendulum in order to swing it up
(Fig. 15.4a). Subsequently, the pole needs to be sta-
bilized at the upright position [15.130]. Starting from
an unconstrained human demonstration, the robot was
able to successfully learn the swing up and balance task
after three trials [15.130]. The local trajectory optimiza-
tion technique has been further extended to biped robot
walking [15.131]. More recently, a related approach
with parametric function approximation has been ap-
plied by Abbeel et al. [15.132] to learn autonomous
helicopter ﬂight (
VIDEO 353 ).
While Atkeson and Morimoto [15.29] and Abbeel
et al. [15.132] used the forward model as an implicit
simulator, Ng et al. [15.30] used it as an explicit sim-
ulator (as originally suggested by Sutton [15.28] in
form of the DYNA model). Here, with the help of
the forward model, complete trajectories (or roll-outs)
were simulated. The predictions of the forward model
were perturbed by Gaussian noise with a repeating,
ﬁxed noise history. This injection of noise requires the
learned controller to be robust to noise and modeling
errors, while the re-use of the noise history reduces
the variance of policy updates and results in much
faster learning [15.133, 134]. In this way, roll-outs from
a similar set of start-states are generated. The result-
ing performance of different control policy can be
compared, which allows policy updates both by pair-
wise comparison or by gradient-based optimization.
The approach has been able to successfully stabilize
an helicopter in an inverted ﬂight (Fig. 15.4b and
VIDEO 352 ). A few similar examples in model pre-
dictive control (Sect. 15.2.1) exist, which employ a va-
riety of different learning approaches such as statistical
learning methods [15.48], neural networks [15.135],
both for robot navigation [15.136] and helicopter con-
trol [15.137].
a)
b)
Fig. 15.4 (a) Sketch of learning a pendulum swing up task,
and (b) inverse helicopter ﬂight (courtesy of Andrew Y.
Ng). In both the cases, the forward model is used to learn
the dynamics of the system for policy optimization

Part A | 15.2
370
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Approximation-Based
Inverse Dynamics Control
Inverse models, such as inverse dynamics models,
are frequently used in robotics for feedforward con-
trol [15.62]. Inverse dynamics models characterize the
required joint torques  D f .q; Pq; Rq/ to achieve a desired
robot acceleration Rq for the state q; Pq, i. e., the vectors of
joint positions and velocities. In classical robot control,
analytical dynamics models are derived in the frame-
work of rigid body dynamics
 .q; Pq; Rq/ D M .q/ Rq C F .q; Pq/ ;
(15.9)
where M.q/ is the generalized inertia matrix of the
robot, F.q; Pq/ is a vector deﬁned by forces/torques
from Coriolis effects, centripetal effects, and gravity.
This model relies on many assumptions, such as rigid-
ity of the robot’s links, negligible nonlinearities from
other sources (e.g., actuators), second-order dynamics,
etc. [15.62]. However, modern robotics systems with
highly nonlinear components, such as hydraulic tubes
or elastic cable drives, can no longer be accurately mod-
eled with rigid body dynamics. An inaccurate dynamics
model can lead to severe losses in control performance
and, in the worst case, instability. Instead of model-
ing the inverse dynamics manually based on physics
and human insight, an inverse dynamics model can
be learned from sampled data. Such a data-driven ap-
Fig. 15.5 The 7 degree of freedom anthropomorphic SAR-
COS arm used in learning inverse dynamics, inverse kine-
matics, and operational space control
proach has the advantage that all nonlinearities encoded
in the data will be approximated by the model [15.14].
In most robots, the inverse dynamics model is
a unique mapping from joint space into torque space,
and learning inverse dynamics models is a standard re-
gression problem. In order to generalize the learned
models for a larger state space and to adapt the
models for time-dependent changes in the dynamics,
real-time online learning becomes necessary. However,
online learning poses difﬁcult challenges for any re-
gression method. These problems have been addressed
by real-time learning methods such as locally weighted
projection regression [15.80]. Nguyen-Tuong and Pe-
ters [15.14, 70] combined the basic ideas behind the
locally weighted projection regression method with
Gaussian process regression [15.54], attempting to get
as close as possible to the speed of local learning while
having a comparable accuracy to Gaussian process
regression. The resulting method has shown to be ca-
pable of real-time online learning of the robot’s inverse
dynamics. Instead of using local models, data sparsi-
ﬁcation methods can be employed to speed up kernel
regression approaches for real-time scenarios [15.70].
It is worth noting that inverse dynamics model
learning approaches can also be motivated from a bi-
ological point of view. Kawato [15.37] suggested that
the cerebellum may act as an inverse dynamics model.
Motivated by this insight, Shibata and Schaal [15.76]
proposed a biologically inspired vestibulo-oculomotor
control approach based on feedback-error learning of
the inverse dynamics model. The problem is to stabilize
the gaze of an oculomotor system that is mounted on
a moving body, which creates permanent perturbations
to eye (or camera) system. The cerebellum is known
to predict the forces required to keep the image sta-
bilized on the retina, based on efferent motor signals
and inputs from the vestibular system. Vijayakumar and
Schaal employ the locally weighted projection regres-
sion approach to learn the inverse model of the eye
dynamics online [15.80]. The same locally weighted
projection regression technique has also been used to
learn a complete inverse dynamics model for a hu-
manoid robot [15.63] (Fig. 15.5).
Learning Operational Space Control
Operational space control (OSC) allows a robot to ac-
complish a task space controller, e.g., for following
a desired trajectory in task space or for impedance
control [15.15, 138]. The relationship between the task
space and joint space of the robot is well deﬁned by the
classical forward kinematics models x D f .q/, where q
denotes a joint space conﬁguration and x represents the
corresponding task space position. The task space ve-
locity and acceleration are given by Px D J.q/Pq and Rx D

Robot Learning
15.2 Model Learning
371
Part A | 15.2
PJ.q/Pq C J.q/Rq, respectively, where J.q/ D @f =@q is the
Jacobian. To obtain the joint torques required for task
space control, the dynamics model (as given in (15.9))
is needed. The direct combination of dynamics and
kinematics model yields one possible operational space
control law
a D MJC
W.Rx  PJPq/ C F ;
(15.10)
where
JC
W
denotes
the
weighted
pseudoinverse
of J [15.139] and a represents the desired joint torques.
Equation (15.10) can be employed to generate the
joint torques necessary for tracking a task space
trajectory determined by a reference task-space accel-
eration [15.15]. Note that in practical applications, such
control laws often require further terms, such as a null-
space control law for joint-space stabilization [15.15].
As discussed before, dynamics models can be hard
to obtain and, thus, learning can be a promising alterna-
tive. Learning an operational space control law corre-
sponds to learning an inverse model such as .q; Pq; Rx/ !
a [15.43]. However, learning such OSC models is an
ill-posed problem, as there are inﬁnitely many possible
inverse models, due to the redundancy of joint space to
task space mappings. For example, inﬁnitely many so-
lutions for a redundant robot can be derived analytically
by varying the metric W of the weighted pseudoinverse
in (15.10). As the space of possible solutions is not
convex (Sect. 15.2.1, Mixed Models), such OSC mod-
els cannot be straightforwardly learned using regression
models (unless the system has no redundant degrees of
freedom). Similar problems appear in the limited case
of differential inverse kinematics.
Both
D’Souza
et al.
[15.79]
and
Peters
and
Schaal [15.43] noticed that local linearizations of the
mapping in (15.10) will always form a locally convex
space. Hence, data sets generated by such systems will
also be locally convex. They furthermore realized that
the predictive abilities of forward models allows deter-
mining local regions, where a locally consistent inverse
model can be learned. However, depending on how the
learning data was collected, i. e., the local data distri-
bution, learning may result in rather different solutions
to the local inverse model. Thus, two neighboring local
inverse models may have quite different policies how to
resolve redundancy, resulting in a discontinuous jump
when transitioning from one local model to the next
during control. As a result, a globally consistent so-
lution to OSC can no longer be ensured. This insight
leads to two signiﬁcantly different approaches. D’Souza
et al. [15.79] created a differential inverse kinematics
learning system (i. e., a limited special case of an opera-
tional space control law) and chose to bias the learning
system by selectively generating data. However, such
an approach will generically be limited by the tradeoff
between this intentional bias and the inverse model’s
accuracy. Peters and Schaal [15.43] treated learning
of complete operational space control laws. They real-
ized that a re-weighting of the data using an additional
reward function allows regularizing these inverse mod-
els toward a globally consistent solution. Inspired by
a result in analytical OSC [15.139], they suggest ap-
propriate reward functions both for learning full OSC
and differential inverse kinematics. The resulting map-
ping was shown to work on several robot systems. Ting
et al. [15.17] presented an implementation of Peters
and Schaal [15.43] approach with modern Bayesian
machine learning, which sped up the performance sig-
niﬁcantly.
Instead of learning a direct OSC control law as done
by Peters and Schaal [15.43], Salaun et al. [15.140]
attempted to learn the well-deﬁned differential for-
ward kinematics as a ﬁrst step (i. e., learning the Ja-
cobian) using locally weighted projection regression.
The corresponding weighted pseudoinverse of the Ja-
cobian is subsequently computed using singular value
decomposition (SVD). The obtained differential in-
verse kinematics model is combined with an inverse
dynamics model to generate the joint space control
torques [15.140]. Approximating inverse kinematics
models has also been investigated in neural network
learning and reservoir computing architectures [15.35,
141].
15.2.6 Future Directions
A key question in robotics is how to deal with un-
certainty in the environment. As probabilistic machine
learning techniques (e.g., Bayesian inference) have
reached a high level of maturity [15.54], it has become
clear how beneﬁcial Bayesian machine learning can
be for robot learning, especially, for model learning in
the presence of uncertainty. However, machine learning
techniques based on Bayesian inference are known to
suffer from high computational complexity. Thus, spe-
cial approximations will be needed as illustrated by the
problems discussed in Sect. 15.2.3. Recently developed
approximate inference methods such as in [15.90, 142]
may become interesting new tools for robotics.
In order for robots to enter everyday life, they need
to continuously learn and adapt to new tasks. Recent
research on learning robot control has predominantly
focused on learning single tasks that were studied in
isolation. However, there is an opportunity to transfer
knowledge between tasks, which is known as transfer
learning in the ﬁeld of machine learning [15.143]. To
achieve this goal, robots need to learn the invariants
of the individual tasks and environments and, sub-

Part A | 15.3
372
Part A
Robotics Foundations
sequently, exploit them when learning new tasks. In
this context, similarities between tasks also need to be
investigated and how they can be exploited for general-
ization [15.144].
In most of the model learning approaches, super-
vised learning methods are used. However, for many
robot applications, target outputs are not always avail-
able. In these scenarios, semisupervised learning tech-
niques can be useful to learn such models [15.145].
Semisupervised learning employs labeled as well as
unlabeled data for model learning and can help to over-
come the sparse labeling problem. It would also be
beneﬁcial to develop online versions of semisupervised
approaches for real-time adaptation and learning.
Approximation-based control often still suffers
from a lack of proper analysis of stability and con-
vergence properties. Modern statistical learning the-
ory might offer new tools to derive appropriate error
bounds [15.55]. For example, generalization bounds
can be used to estimate the learning performance of the
controller and, from this insight, further statements and
conditions about stability could be made.
Learning nonunique and ill-posed mappings is a key
problem for several robot applications. This problem
can be considered as a nonunique labeling problem, and
statistical machine learning techniques, such as condi-
tional random ﬁelds [15.146], may help to solve the
problem. A conditional model speciﬁes the probabili-
ties of possible target outputs given an input observation
sequence. As the target outputs are conditioned on
the current input observations, nonuniqueness in the
mappings can be resolved. It would be beneﬁcial to in-
vestigate how such models could be incorporated into
learning control and hierarchical control frameworks.
15.3 Reinforcement Learning
Probably the most general frameworks for learning
control is RL which enables a robot to autonomously
discover optimal behaviors through trial and error in-
teractions with its environment. No explicit teaching
signal is provided, as in supervised learning, but rather
learning is based on a scalar objective function that
measures the overall performance of the robot.
Consider the example of training a robot to re-
turn a table tennis ball ([15.147],
VIDEO 354 ). In this
case, the robot makes observations of dynamic vari-
ables specifying ball position and velocity as well as its
internal dynamics including joint positions and veloc-
ities. These measurements capture the relevant state s
of the system. The actions a available to the robot are
the torque commands sent to the motors. A function 
that computes the motor commands (i. e., the actions)
based on the current state is the policy. The RL prob-
lem is to ﬁnd a policy that optimizes the long term sum
of rewards R.s; a/, as already indicated in Sect. 15.1.3.
The reward function in this example could be based
on the number of successful hits, or on secondary cri-
teria like energy consumption; RL algorithms aim to
ﬁnd (near-)optimal policies that maximize the reward
function over a chosen time horizon. An extended dis-
cussion of robot RL techniques, on which this chapter
is based, can be found in [15.10].
15.3.1 Relation to Classical Control
RL is closely related to the theory of classical optimal
control, as well as dynamic programming, stochas-
tic programming, simulation optimization, stochastic
search, and optimal stopping [15.152]. Both RL and
optimal control address the problem of ﬁnding an op-
timal policy (often also called the controller or control
policy) that optimizes an objective function over a time
horizon, and both rely on the notion of a system be-
ing described by an underlying set of states, controls
and a plant or model that describes transitions be-
tween states. However, optimal control assumes perfect
knowledge of the system’s description in the form of
a model (e.g., a model as in Sect. 15.2 that describes
what the next state of the robot will be given the cur-
rent state and action). For such models, optimal control
ensures strong guarantees which, nevertheless, often
break down due to model and computational approxi-
mations.
In contrast, RL operates directly on measured data
and rewards from interaction with the environment. Re-
inforcement learning research has placed great focus on
addressing cases which are analytically intractable by
using approximations and data-driven techniques. An
important class of approaches to RL within robotics
centers on the use of classical optimal control tech-
niques (e.g., linear-quadratic regulation and differential
dynamic programming) to system models learned via
repeated interaction with the environment [15.150, 153,
154]. A concise discussion of viewing RL as adaptive
optimal control is presented in [15.155]. This path is
indicated in Fig. 15.1 as optimal control with learnt
models.
Reinforcement
learning
applied
to
robotics
(Fig.15.6) differs considerably from most well-studied
RL benchmark problems. Problems in robotics are

Robot Learning
15.3 Reinforcement Learning
373
Part A | 15.3
a) Obelix robot
b) Zebra Zero robot
c) Autonomous helicopter
d) Sarcos humanoid DB
Fig.15.6a–d A small sample of robots with behaviors that were reinforcement learned. These cover the whole range of
aerial vehicles, robotic arms, autonomous vehicles, and humanoid robots. (a) The OBELIX robot is a wheeled mobile
robot that learned to push boxes (after [15.148]) with a value function-based approach (courtesy of Sridhar Mahadevan).
(b) A Zebra Zero robot arm learned a peg-in-hole insertion task (after [15.149]) with a model-free policy gradient
approach (courtesy of Rod Grupen). (c) Carnegie Mellon’s autonomous helicopter leveraged a model-based policy search
approach to learn a robust ﬂight controller (after [15.150]). (d) The Sarcos humanoid DB learned a pole-balancing task
(after [15.151]) using forward models
often
involve high-dimensional, continuous states
and actions (note that the 1030-dimensional con-
tinuous actions common in robot RL are considered
large [15.152]). In robotics, it is often unrealistic to
assume that the true state is completely observable
and noise free. The learning system will not be able
to know precisely in which state it is and even vastly
different states might look very similar. Thus, RL in
robotics is often modeled as partially observed, a point
we take up in detail in our formal model description
below. The learning system must hence use ﬁlters to
estimate the true state. It is often essential to maintain
the information state of the environment that not only
contains the raw observations but also a notion of
uncertainty on its estimates (e.g., both the mean and
the variance of a Kalman ﬁlter tracking the ball in the
robot table tennis example).
Experience on a real physical system is tedious to
obtain, expensive, and often hard to reproduce. Even
getting to the same initial state is impossible for the
robot table tennis system. Every single trial run, often
called a roll-out or episode, is costly and, as a result,
such applications force us to focus on difﬁculties that
do not arise as frequently as in classical RL bench-
mark examples that are mostly simulation studies. In
order to learn within a reasonable time frame, suit-
able approximations of state, policy, value function,
and/or system dynamics need to be introduced. How-
ever, while real-world experience is costly, it usually
cannot be replaced by learning in simulations alone.
In analytical or learned models of the system, even
small modeling errors can accumulate to a substantially
different behavior. Hence, algorithms need to be ro-
bust with respect to models that do not capture all the
details of the real system, also referred to as under-
modeling, and to model uncertainty. Another challenge
commonly faced in robot RL is the generation of appro-
priate reward functions. Rewards that guide the learning
system quickly to success are needed to cope with the
cost of real-world experience. This problem is called
reward shaping [15.156] and represents a substantial
manual contribution. Specifying good reward functions
in robotics requires a fair amount of domain knowledge
and may often be hard in practice.
Not every RL method is equally suitable for
the robotics domain. In fact, many of the meth-
ods thus far demonstrated on difﬁcult problems have
been model-based [15.50, 132, 157] and robot learn-
ing systems often employ policy search methods rather
than value function-based approaches [15.149, 150,
158–164]. Such design choices stand in contrast to pos-
sibly the bulk of the early research in the machine
learning community [15.13, 165].
15.3.2 Reinforcement Learning Methods
In RL, an agent tries to optimize the accumulated re-
ward over a time horizon, e.g., a manipulation task or
even its entire lifetime. In an episodic setting, where the
task is restarted at the end of each episode, the objective
is to maximize the total reward per episode. If the task
is on-going, a discounted accumulated reward which
weighs earlier rewards with less inﬂuence is typically
optimized. The agent is modeled as being in an envi-
ronment with state s 2 S and can perform actions a 2 A.
The states and actions can be either discrete or con-
tinuous and are normally multi-dimensional. A state s
contains all relevant information about the agent and
environment needed to model future states or observ-
ables. An action a is used to control the time evolution
of the system. For example, in a navigation task, the
state could be the position and orientation of the robot,
whereas the action corresponds to the torques applied
to the wheels.
At every time step, the agent gets a reward R,
a scalar value which typically depends on its state and

Part A | 15.3
374
Part A
Robotics Foundations
action. For instance, in a navigation task, rewards could
be given for reaching the target, and penalties (neg-
ative reward) would arise for expending energy. The
goal of RL is to ﬁnd a policy  that chooses ac-
tion a in s such as to maximize the cumulative reward
over time. The policy  can be either deterministic,
which always chooses the same action for each state
a D .s/, or probabilistic which draws a sample action
from a distribution: a  .s; a/ D P .ajs/. Reinforce-
ment learning algorithms need to discover the relations
between states, actions, and rewards. Hence exploration
is required to sufﬁciently sample these functional rela-
tionships, which can be directly embedded in the policy
or performed separately as part of the learning process.
Classical RL approaches are based upon the as-
sumption of a Markov decision process or MDP which
models the dynamics of the environment through
transition probabilities T. Given the current state s
and action a, the conditional transition probability
T.s0; a; s/ D P.s0js; a/ describes the distribution over
the next state s0 and generalize the notion of de-
terministic dynamics. The Markov property requires
that the next state s0 and reward depend only on the
previous state s and action a, and not on any other
information [15.13]. In robotics, we are able to ﬁnd
an approximate notion of a state in a MDP for many
situations.
Goals of Reinforcement Learning
The goal of RL is to discover an optimal policy  that
maps states (or observations) to actions so as to max-
imize the expected return J, which corresponds to the
cumulative expected reward. There are different models
of optimal behavior [15.165] which result in differ-
ent deﬁnitions of the expected return. A ﬁnite-horizon
model only attempts to maximize the expected reward
for the horizon H, i. e., the next H (time-)steps h
J D E
( H
X
hD0
Rh
)
:
This setting can also be applied to model problems
where it is known how many steps are remaining.
Alternatively, future rewards can be discounted by
a discount factor  (with 0 	  < 1) yielding a metric
J D .1  /E
( 1
X
hD0
hRh
)
:
This setting is most frequently discussed in classical
RL texts. The parameter  affects how much the future
is taken into account and needs to be tuned manually.
As illustrated in [15.165], this parameter often qualita-
tively changes the form of the optimal solution. Policies
designed by optimizing with small  are myopic and
greedy, and may lead to poor performance if we actually
care about longer term rewards. It is straightforward to
show that the optimal control law can be unstable if the
discount factor is too low (e.g., it is not difﬁcult to show
this destabilization even for discounted linear quadratic
regulation problems). Hence, discounted formulations
are occasionally inadmissible in robot control despite
that they are somewhat more common in the machine
learning community.
In the limit when the discount factor  approaches
1, the metric approaches what is known as the average-
reward criterion [15.7]
J D lim
H!1 E
(
1
H
H
X
hD0
Rh
)
:
This setting has the problem that it cannot distinguish
between policies that initially gain a transient of large
rewards and those that do not. This transient phase, also
called preﬁx, is dominated by the rewards obtained in
the long run. If a policy accomplishes both an optimal
preﬁx as well as an optimal long-term behavior, it is
called bias optimal [15.166]. An example in robotics
would be the transient phase during the start of a rhyth-
mic movement, where many policies will accomplish
the same long-term reward but differ substantially in the
transient (e.g., there are many ways of starting the same
gait in dynamic legged locomotion) allowing for room
for improvement in practical application.
In real-world domains, the shortcomings of the dis-
counted formulation are often more critical than those
of the average reward setting as stable behavior is of-
ten more important than a good transient [15.167]. We
also often encounter an episodic control task, where
the task runs only for H time-steps and then reset (po-
tentially by human intervention) and started over. This
horizon H may be arbitrarily large, as long as the ex-
pected reward over the episode can be guaranteed to
converge. As such episodic tasks are probably the most
frequent ones, ﬁnite-horizon models are often the most
relevant.
Two natural goals arise for the learner. In the ﬁrst,
we attempt to ﬁnd an optimal strategy at the end of
a phase of training or interaction. In the second, the goal
is to maximize the reward over the whole time the robot
is interacting with the world.
In contrast to supervised learning, the learner must
ﬁrst discover its environment and is not told the opti-
mal action it needs to take. To gain information about
the rewards and the behavior of the system, the agent
needs to explore by considering previously unused ac-
tions or actions it is uncertain about. It needs to decide
whether to play it safe and stick to well-known actions

Robot Learning
15.3 Reinforcement Learning
375
Part A | 15.3
with (moderately) high rewards or to dare trying new
things in order to discover new strategies with an even
higher reward. This problem is commonly known as
the exploration–exploitation tradeoff. However, as state
spaces in robotics problems are often tremendously
large due to continuous and high-dimensional state–
action spaces, exploring the entire state–action space is
mostly infeasible. This problem is often referred to as
the curse of dimensionality [15.168].
Off-policy methods learn independently of the
employed policy, i. e., an explorative strategy that is
different from the desired ﬁnal policy can be employed
during the learning process. On-policy methods collect
sample information about the environment using the
current policy. As a result, exploration must be built
into the policy and determines the speed of the policy
improvements. Such exploration and the performance
of the policy can result in an exploration–exploitation
tradeoff between long- and short-term improvement
of the policy. Modeling exploration models with prob-
ability distributions has surprising implications, e.g.,
stochastic policies have been shown to be the optimal
stationary policies for selected problems [15.169,
170] and can even break the curse of dimensional-
ity [15.171]. Furthermore, stochastic policies often
allow the derivation of new policy update steps with
surprising ease.
The agent needs to determine a correlation between
actions and reward signals. An action taken does not
have to have an immediate effect on the reward but can
also inﬂuence a reward in the distant future. The difﬁ-
culty in assigning credit for rewards is directly related
to the horizon or mixing time of the problem. It also in-
creases with the dimensionality of the actions as not all
parts of the action may contribute equally.
15.3.3 Optimal Control with Learnt Models
The classical RL setup is a MDP where, additionally, to
the states s, actions s, and rewards R we also have tran-
sition probabilities T.s0; a; s/. Here, the reward is mod-
eled as a reward function R.s; a/. If both the transition
probabilities and reward function are known, this can be
seen as an optimal control problem [15.152]. If these
functions are acquired from measured data through
model learning methods as described in Sect. 15.2, we
are in the scenario of optimal control with learnt models
indicated in Fig. 15.1.
The value function V.s/ provides an assessment of
much reward will be accumulated starting from state s
and following a given policy . If a policy is optimal,
denoted as , the corresponding optimal value func-
tion will be denoted a V, often abbreviated as V.
For each state there can be one or several optimal
actions a, resulting in the same value V.s/. The con-
sistency condition for optimality is
V.s/ D max
a
"
R.s; a/ C 
X
s0
V.s0/T.s; a; s0/
#
(15.11)
in the discounted case. This statement is equivalent to
the Bellman principle of optimality [15.168] that states:
An optimal policy has the property that whatever
the initial state and initial decision are, the remain-
ing decisions must constitute an optimal policy with
regard to the state resulting from the ﬁrst decision.
Thus, we have to perform an optimal action a, and,
subsequently, follow the optimal policy  in order to
achieve a global optimum. This principle of optimality
has also been crucial in enabling the ﬁeld of optimal
control [15.172]. Note that for constructing the opti-
mal policy, the max operator in (15.11) needs to be
evaluated, which requires knowledge of the state transi-
tion model T.s; a; s0/, i. e., this approach is generically
a model-based requiring either a predeﬁned model or
a learnt one using insights from Sect. 15.2.
Dynamic programming-based methods are the clas-
sical approach for solving optimal control problems in
RL. These require, as mentioned before, a model of
the transition probabilities T.s0; a; s/ and the reward
function R.s; a/ to calculate the value function. These
functions do not necessarily need to be predetermined
but can also be learned from data, potentially incre-
mentally. Such methods are called model-based RL
methods or optimal control with learnt models. Typical
methods include policy iteration and value iteration.
Policy iteration alternates between the two phases
of policy evaluation and policy improvement. The ap-
proach is initialized with an arbitrary policy. Policy
evaluation determines the value function for the cur-
rent policy. Each state is visited and its value is updated
based on the current value estimates of its successor
states, the associated transition probabilities, as well as
the policy. This procedure is repeated until the value
function converges to a ﬁxed point, which approximates
the true value function. Policy improvement greedily
selects the best action in every state according to the
value function, thus creating a policy update. The two
steps of policy evaluation and policy improvement are
iterated until the policy does not change any longer.
Policy iteration only updates the policy once the
policy evaluation step has converged. In contrast, value
iteration combines the steps of policy evaluation and
policy improvement by directly updating the value
function based on (15.11) every time a state is updated.

Part A | 15.3
376
Part A
Robotics Foundations
15.3.4 Model-Free
Value Function Approaches
Many traditional RL approaches are based on identi-
fying (possibly approximate) solutions to this equation,
and are known as value function methods. Instead of de-
riving the value functions from a transition model and
a reward function, they ﬁrst approximate the value func-
tion, and use it to construct the optimal policy.
Instead of the value function V.s/, these algo-
rithms usually rely on the state–action value function
Q.s; a/, which has advantages of determining the op-
timal policy, as shown below, but also enables the use of
model-free methods. This state–action value function is
deﬁned as
Q.s; a/ D R.s; a/ C 
X
s0
V.s0/T.s; a; s0/ :
In contrast to the value function V.s/, the state–action
value function Q.s; a/ explicitly contains the informa-
tion about the effects of a particular action. The optimal
state–action value function is
Q.s; a/ D R.s; a/
C 
X
s0

max
a0 Q.s0; a0/

T.s; a; s0/ :
If Q is known, ﬁnding the optimal action just requires
ﬁnding the maximal value of Q at a given state s –
this does not require a model, but is just a standard (al-
though not necessarily trivial) root-ﬁnding problem of
functions. Importantly, using state–action value func-
tion allows a model-free learning approach, at the cost
of learning a value function over the joint space of s
and a.
If the optimal value function V.s0/ and the transi-
tion probabilities T.s; a; s0/ for the following states are
known, determining the optimal policy is straightfor-
ward in a setting with discrete actions, as an exhaustive
search is possible. For continuous spaces, determining
the optimal action a is an optimization problem in it-
self. If both states and actions are discrete, the value
function and the policy may, in principle, be represented
by tables and picking the appropriate action is reduced
to a look-up. For large or continuous spaces, represent-
ing the value function as a table becomes intractable.
Function approximation is employed to ﬁnd a lower
dimensional representation that matches the real value
function as closely as possible, as discussed later.
A wide variety of methods of model-free value
function based RL algorithms that attempt to estimate
V.s/ or Q.s; a/ have been developed and can be split
mainly into two classes: (i) rollout-based Monte Carlo
methods and (ii) temporal difference methods such as
TD./, Q-learning, and SARSA (state-action-reward-
state-action).
Monte Carlo methods use sampling in order to
estimate the value function. This procedure can be
used to replace the policy evaluation step of the
dynamic programming-based methods above. Monte
Carlo methods are model-free, i. e., they do not need
an explicit transition function. They perform roll-outs
by executing the current policy on the system, hence
operating on-policy. The frequencies of transitions and
rewards are kept track of and are used to form estimates
of the value function. For example, in an episodic set-
ting the state–action value of a given state–action pair
can be estimated by averaging all the returns that were
received when starting from them.
Temporal difference methods, unlike Monte Carlo
methods, do not have to wait until an estimate of the
return is available (i. e., at the end of an episode) to up-
date the value function. Rather, they use temporal errors
and update at every time step. The temporal error is the
difference between the old estimate and a new estimate
of the value function, taking into account the reward re-
ceived in the current sample. These updates are done
iterativley and, in contrast to dynamic programming
methods, only take into account the sampled succes-
sor states rather than the complete distributions over
successor states. Like the Monte Carlo methods, these
methods are model-free, as they do not use a model of
the transition function to determine the value function.
For example, the value function could be updated itera-
tively by
V0.s/ D V.s/ C ˛

R.s; a/ C V.s0/  V.s/
	
;
where V.s/ is the old estimate of the value function,
V0.s/ the updated one, and ˛ is a learning rate. This
update step is called the TD(0)-algorithm in the dis-
counted reward case. However, in order to select the
optimal action, a model of the transition function would
still be required, i. e., this method can only be used for
policy evaluation in a policy iteration scenario.
The equivalent temporal difference learning algo-
rithm for state–action value functions is SARSA with
Q0.s; a/ D Q.s; a/
C ˛

R.s; a/ C Q.s0; a0/  Q.s; a/
	
;
where Q.s; a/ is the old estimate of the state–action
value function and Q0.s; a/ the updated one. This al-
gorithm is on-policy as both the current action a as
well as the subsequent action a0 are chosen according
to the current policy . The average-reward variant is
called R-learning [15.173], which is closely related to

Robot Learning
15.3 Reinforcement Learning
377
Part A | 15.3
Q-learning, with the updates
Q0.s; a/ D Q.s; a/
C ˛

R.s; a/ C  max
a0 Q.s0; a0/  Q.s; a/

:
These methods do not require a model of the transition
function for determining the deterministic optimal pol-
icy .s/.
15.3.5 Policy Search
Value function approaches infer the optimal policy in-
directly by ﬁrst ﬁnding a value function, and then com-
puting the corresponding optimal actions. Instead, the
policy can be learned directly, without a detour through
a value function. For robotics, this approach has sev-
eral advantages. It allows for a natural integration of
expert knowledge, e.g., through both structure and ini-
tializations of the policy. It allows domain-appropriate
prestructuring of the policy in an approximate form
without changing the original problem. Optimal poli-
cies often have many fewer parameters than optimal
value functions. For example, in linear quadratic con-
trol, the value function has quadratically many pa-
rameters in the dimensionality of the state-variables,
while the policy requires only linearly many param-
eters. Local search in policy space can directly lead
to good results as exhibited by early hill-climbing ap-
proaches [15.172], as well as more recent successes,
[15.149, 150, 157, 159–163, 174–182]. Additional con-
straints can be incorporated naturally, e.g., regularizing
the change in the path distribution. As a result, policy
search often appears more natural to robotics.
Policy search has been considered the harder prob-
lem for a long time as the optimal solution most often
cannot directly be determined from equations as in
Bellman principle of optimality [15.168] and dynamic
programming. Nevertheless, in robotics, policy search
has recently become an important alternative to value
function based methods due to better scalability as
well as the convergence problems of approximate value
function methods. Most policy search methods opti-
mize locally around existing policies , parameterized
by a set of policy parameters i, by computing changes
in the policy parameters i that will increase the ex-
pected return and results in iterative updates of the form
iC1 D i C i :
The computation of the policy update is the key
step
here
and
a
variety
of
updates have
been
proposed, including pairwise comparisons [15.183,
184], gradient estimation using ﬁnite policy differ-
ences [15.159, 160, 180, 185–187], general stochastic
optimization methods (such as Nelder-Mead [15.150],
cross entropy [15.188] and population-based meth-
ods [15.189]), and approaches coming from opti-
mal control such as differential dynamic program-
ming or DDP [15.153] and multiple shooting ap-
proaches [15.190].
Let us brieﬂy take a closer look at gradient-based
approaches ﬁrst. The updates of the policy parameters
are based on a hill-climbing approach, which is follow-
ing the gradient of the expected return J for a deﬁned
step-size ˛
iC1 D i C ˛rJ :
Different methods exist for estimating the gradient rJ
and many algorithms require tuning of the step-size ˛.
Finite difference gradient estimators evaluate P pol-
icy parameter perturbations to obtain an estimate of the
policy gradient. Here, we have OJp 
 J.iCp/Jref,
where p D Œ1; : : : ; P are the individual perturbations,
OJp the estimate of their inﬂuence on the return, and
Jref is a reference return, e.g., the return of the unper-
turbed parameters. The gradient can now be estimated
by linear regression
rJ 
 ‚T‚1 ‚TOJ ;
where the matrix ‚ contains all the stacked samples
of the perturbations p and OJ contains the corre-
sponding OJp. In order to estimate the gradient the
number of perturbations needs to be at least as large
as the number of parameters. The approach is very
straightforward and even applicable to policies that are
not strictly differentiable. However, it is usually con-
sidered to be very noisy and inefﬁcient. For the ﬁnite
difference approach tuning the step-size ˛ for the up-
date, the number of perturbations P, and the type and
magnitude of perturbations are all critical tuning fac-
tors.
Likelihood ratio methods rely on the insight that
in an episodic setting where the episodes  are gener-
ated according to the distribution P./ D P .j/ with
the return of an episode J D PH
hD1 Rh and number of
steps H in each episode, the expected return for a set of
policy parameter  can be expressed as
J D
X

P./J :
(15.12)
The gradient of the episode distribution can be written
as
rP./ D P./r log P./ ;
(15.13)

Part A | 15.3
378
Part A
Robotics Foundations
which is commonly known as the likelihood ratio or
REINFORCE (reward increment = nonnegative fac-
tor  offset reinforcement  characteristic eligibil-
ity) [15.191] trick. From multivariate calculus, we have
r log P./ D rP./=P./. Combining (15.12)
and (15.13) we get the gradient of the expected return
in the form
rJ D
X

rP./J
D
X

P./r log P./J
D E
n
r log P./Jo
:
If we have a stochastic policy .ajs/ that gener-
ates the episodes , we do not need to keep track of
the probabilities of the episodes but can directly express
the gradient in terms of the policy as r log P./ D
PH
hD1 r log .ahjsh/. Finally the gradient of the ex-
pected return with respect to the policy parameters can
be estimated as
rJ D E
( H
X
hD1
r log .ahjsh/
!
J
)
:
If we now take into account that rewards at the begin-
ning of an episode cannot be caused by actions taken at
the end of an episode, we can replace the return of the
episode J by the state–action value function Q.s; a/
and get [15.161]
rJ D .1  /
 E
( H
X
hD1
hr log .ahjsh/Q.sh; ah/
)
;
which is equivalent to the policy gradient theo-
rem [15.169]. In practice, it is often advisable to sub-
tract a reference Jref, also called baseline, from the re-
turn of the episode J or the state–action value function
Q.s; a/, respectively, to get better estimates, similar to
the ﬁnite difference approach. In these settings, the ex-
ploration is automatically taken care of by the stochastic
policy.
Initial gradient-based approaches such as ﬁnite dif-
ferences gradients or REINFORCE [15.191] have been
rather slow. The weight perturbation algorithm is re-
lated to REINFORCE but can deal with non-Gaussian
distributions which signiﬁcantly improves the signal-
to-noise ratio of the gradient [15.180]. Recent natural
policy gradient approaches [15.161, 162] have allowed
for faster convergence which may be advantageous for
robotics as it reduces the learning time and required
real-world interactions.
Alternatives to gradient methods are currently a hot
research topic. For example, a different class of safe
and fast policy search methods, inspired by expectation-
maximization from machine learning, can be derived
when the reward is treated as an improper probability
distribution [15.192]. Some of these approaches have
proven successful in robotics, e.g., reward-weighted
regression [15.161], policy learning by weighting ex-
ploration with the returns [15.163], Monte Carlo ex-
pectation maximization [15.193], and cost-regularized
kernel regression [15.194]. Algorithms with closely
related update rules can also be derived from differ-
ent perspectives including policy improvements with
path integrals [15.195] and relative entropy policy
search [15.175].
Finally, the policy search by dynamic program-
ming [15.196] method is a general strategy that com-
bines policy search with the principle of optimality.
The approach learns a nonstationary policy backward
in time like dynamic programming methods, but does
not attempt to enforce the Bellman equation and the
resulting approximation instabilities. The resulting ap-
proach provides some of the strongest guarantees that
are currently known under function approximation and
limited observability. It has been demonstrated in learn-
ing walking controllers and in ﬁnding near-optimal
trajectories for map exploration [15.197].
One of the key open issues in the ﬁeld is deter-
mining when it is appropriate to use each of these
methods. Some approaches leverage signiﬁcant struc-
ture speciﬁc to the RL problem [15.195], including
reward structure, Markovanity, causality of reward sig-
nals [15.191], and value-function estimates when avail-
able [15.161]. Others embed policy search as a generic,
black-box, problem of stochastic optimization [15.150,
198–201]. Signiﬁcant open questions remain regarding
which methods are best in which circumstances and
further, at an even more basic level, how effective lever-
aging the kinds of problem structures mentioned above
are in practice. Examples of resulting success can be
observed in
VIDEO 354 and
VIDEO 355 .
Value Function Approaches
Versus Policy Search
The discussion whether value function approaches or
policy search methods are more suitable for RL has
been going on for a long time, and, so far, the answer
is really problem speciﬁc. If a complete optimal value
function is known, a globally optimal solution follows
by greedily choosing actions that receive the highest
value. However, value-function-based approaches have
up to now been difﬁcult to scale to high-dimensional

Robot Learning
15.3 Reinforcement Learning
379
Part A | 15.3
robotics as they require function approximation for
the value function – in low dimensions, discretizations
and lookup tables work best and have no theoretical
issues. Unfortunately, theoretical guarantees from dis-
crete state–action representations no longer hold when
employing function approximation. Even ﬁnding the
optimal action can be a hard problem due to the sen-
sitivity of selecting the optimal action in face of even
tiny inaccuracies in the approximated value function,
and the cost of solving an optimization problem in
a continuous unknown function for action selection. For
example, the computational cost of updating a policy
in policy search can easily be cheaper than ﬁnding just
one optimal action for one state by searching the state–
action value function.
In principle, a value function requires total cover-
age over the state space and the largest local error
determines the quality of the resulting policy. A par-
ticularly signiﬁcant problem is the error propagation
in value functions. A small change in the policy may
cause a large change in the value function, which again
causes a large change in the policy. While this may
lead more quickly to good, possibly globally optimal
solutions, such learning processes often prove unstable
under function approximation [15.196, 202, 203] and
are considerably more dangerous when applied to real
robotic systems where overly large policy deviations
may lead to dangerous motor commands.
In contrast, policy search methods usually only con-
sider the current policy and its neighborhood in order to
gradually improve performance. The result is that usu-
ally only local optima, and not the global one, can be
found. However, these methods work well in conjunc-
tion with continuous states and actions, and they scale
to high-dimensional robots, e.g., humanoid robots.
Policy search methods are sometimes called actor-
only methods; value function methods are sometimes
called critic-only methods. The idea of a critic is to ﬁrst
observe and estimate the performance of choosing con-
trols on the system (i. e., the value function), then derive
a policy based on the gained knowledge. In contrast, the
actor directly tries to deduce the optimal policy. A set
of algorithms called actor-critic methods attempt to in-
corporate the advantages of each: a policy is explicitly
maintained, as is a value function for the current pol-
icy. The value function (i. e., the critic) is not employed
for action selection. Instead, it observes the perfor-
mance of the actor and decides when the policy needs
to be updated and which action should be preferred.
The resulting update step features the local convergence
properties of policy gradient algorithms while reducing
update variance [15.204]. There is a tradeoff between
the beneﬁt of reducing the variance of the updates and
having to learn a value function as the samples required
to estimate the value function could also be employed
to obtain better gradient estimates for the update step.
Rosenstein and Barto [15.205] propose an actor-critic
method that additionally features a supervisor in the
form of a stable policy.
Function Approximation
The topic of function approximation occurs repeatedly
in RL and deserves some attention. For discrete state–
action problems with not too many states and actions,
look-up tables are a reasonable representation for value
functions, rewards functions, and state-transitions (i. e.,
models). But look-up tables have no generalization to
neighboring states, which makes them computation-
ally inefﬁcient. Moreover, for continuous state–action
problems with many dimensions, discretization would
create an exponential growth of the number of dis-
crete states and actions, and is thus infeasible (curse of
dimensionality). Thus, replacing discretized representa-
tions by continuous function approximators is the only
possibility.
Function approximation can be employed to repre-
sent policies, value functions, and state-transition mod-
els. Thus, the techniques discussed in Sect. 15.2.4 also
apply to these function approximation problems. How-
ever, a fundamental problem in using supervised learn-
ing methods developed in the literature for function
approximation is that most such methods are designed
for independently and identically distributed sample
data. However, the data generated by the RL process is
usually neither independent nor identically distributed.
Usually, the function approximator itself plays some
role in the data collection process (e.g., by serving to
deﬁne a policy that we execute on a robot.)
Linear basis function approximators form one of
the most widely used approximate value function tech-
niques in continuous (and discrete) state spaces. This
popularity is largely due to the simplicity of their repre-
sentation as well as a convergence theory, albeit limited,
for the approximation of value functions based on sam-
ples [15.206]. Let us brieﬂy take a closer look at a radial
basis function network to illustrate this approach. The
value function maps states to a scalar value. The state
space can be covered by a grid of points, each of which
correspond to the center of a Gaussian-shaped basis
function. The value of the approximated function is
the weighted sum of the values of all basis functions
at the query point. As the inﬂuence of the Gaussian
basis functions drops rapidly with the distance of its
center, the value of the query points will be predom-
inantly inﬂuenced by the neighboring basis functions.
The weights are set in a way to minimize the error
between the observed samples and the reconstruction.
For the mean squared error, these weights can be de-

Part A | 15.3
380
Part A
Robotics Foundations
termined by linear regression. Kolter and Ng [15.207]
discuss the beneﬁts of regularization of such linear
function approximators to avoid over-ﬁtting.
Other possible function approximators for value
functions include wire
ﬁtting, which
Baird
and
Klopf [15.208] suggested as an approach that makes
continuous action selection feasible. Using Fourier ba-
sis has been suggested by Konidaris et al. [15.209].
Even discretizing the state space can be seen as a form
of function approximation where coarse values serve
as estimates for a smooth continuous function. One
example is tile coding [15.13], where the space is sub-
divided into (potentially irregularly shaped) regions,
called tiling. The number of different tilings determines
the resolution of the ﬁnal approximation. Policy search
also beneﬁts from compact representations of the pol-
icy.
Models of the system dynamics can be represented
using a wide variety of techniques. In this case, it is
often important to model the uncertainty in the model
(e.g., by a stochastic model or Bayesian estimates of
model parameters) to ensure that the learning algorithm
does not exploit model inaccuracies. See Sect. 15.3.9
for a more detailed discussion.
15.3.6 Challenges in Robot Reinforcement
Learning
Reinforcement learning is generally a difﬁcult problem
and many of its challenges are particularly apparent in
the robotics setting. As the states and actions of most
robots are inherently continuous, we are forced to con-
sider the resolution at which they are represented. We
must decide how ﬁne grained the control is that we
require over the robot, whether we employ discretiza-
tion or function approximation, and what time step we
establish. Additionally, as the dimensionality of both
states and actions can be high, we face the Curse of
Dimensionality [15.168] as discussed in Sect. 15.3.6,
Curse of Dimensionality. As robotics deals with com-
plex physical systems, samples can be expensive due
to the long execution time of complete tasks, required
manual interventions, and the need for maintenance
and repair. In these real-world measurements, we must
cope with the uncertainty inherent in complex physi-
cal systems. A robot requires that the algorithm runs
in real-time. The algorithm must be capable of dealing
with delays in sensing and execution that are inherent in
physical systems (Sect. 15.3.6). A simulation might al-
leviate many problems but these approaches need to be
robust with respect to model errors as discussed later.
An often underestimated problem is the goal speciﬁ-
cation, which is achieved by designing a good reward
function. As noted in Sect. 15.3.6, this choice can make
the difference between feasibility and an unreasonable
amount of exploration.
Curse of Dimensionality
When Bellmann [15.168] explored optimal control in
discrete high-dimensional spaces, he faced an exponen-
tial explosion of states and actions for which he coined
the term Curse of Dimensionality. As the number of di-
mensions grows, exponentially more data and computa-
tion is needed to cover the complete state–action space.
Evaluating every state quickly becomes infeasible with
growing dimensionality, even for discrete states.
Robotic systems often have to deal with these high-
dimensional states and actions due to the many degrees
of freedom of modern anthropomorphic robots. For ex-
ample, in a ball-paddling task (
VIDEO 355 ) the proper
representation of a robot’s state would consist of its
joint angles and velocities for each of its seven degrees
of freedom as well as the Cartesian position and veloc-
ity of the ball (Fig. 15.7). The robot’s actions would be
the generated motor commands, which often are torques
or accelerations. In this example, we have 2.7C3/ D
20 state dimensions and seven-dimensional continuous
actions.
In robotics, such tasks are often rendered tractable
to the robot engineer by a hierarchical task decom-
position that shifts some complexity to a lower layer
of functionality. Classical RL approaches often con-
sider a grid-based representation with discrete states
and actions, often referred to as a grid-world. A navi-
gational task for mobile robots could be projected into
Racket position
Ball velocity
Ball position
Joint velocities
Racket
velocity
Joint positions
Fig. 15.7 State–space used in the modeling of a robot RL
task of paddling a ball. This example can also be observed
in
VIDEO 355

Robot Learning
15.3 Reinforcement Learning
381
Part A | 15.3
this representation by employing a number of actions
like move to the cell to the left that use a lower level
controller that takes care of accelerating, moving, and
stopping while ensuring precision. In the ball-paddling
example, we may simplify by controlling the robot in
racket space (which is lower dimensional as the racket
is orientation-invariant around the string’s mounting
point) with an operational space control law [15.15].
Many commercial robot systems also encapsulate some
of the state and action components in an embedded con-
trol system (e.g., trajectory fragments are frequently
used as actions for industrial robots). However, this
form of a state dimensionality reduction severely lim-
its the dynamic capabilities of the robot according to
our experience [15.63, 210].
The RL community has a long history of dealing
with dimensionality using computational abstractions.
It offers a larger set of applicable tools ranging from
adaptive discretizations [15.211] and function approx-
imation approaches [15.13] to macro-actions or op-
tions [15.212, 213]. Options allow a task to be decom-
posed into elementary components and quite naturally
translate to robotics. Such options can autonomously
achieve a subtask, such as opening a door, which re-
duces the planning horizon [15.212]. The automatic
generation of such sets of options is a key issue in order
to enable such approaches. We will discuss approaches
that have been successful in robot RL in Sect. 15.3.7.
Curse of Real-World Samples
Robots inherently interact with the physical world and,
thus, create their own learning data from physical sen-
sors. Real physical systems create a variety of problems
that are worthwhile to keep in mind:

Robot hardware is usually expensive, suffers from
wear and tear, and requires careful maintenance.
Repairing a robot system is a nonnegligible ef-
fort associated with cost, physical labor, and long
waiting periods. To apply RL in robotics, safe ex-
ploration becomes a key issue of the learning pro-
cess [15.157, 214–216].

The robot and its environment may continually
change slowly, e.g., due to wear and tear, or light
conditions. Thus, the learning process should be
able to track these changing conditions, i. e., learn
continually.

Experimentation with real robots is time consum-
ing, e.g., putting the pole back on the robot’s end-
effector during pole balancing after a failure, and
running many trials for learning. Algorithms that
are data efﬁcient are often more important than
memory and computations needed to process the
data.

Real-time constraints on an actual robot impose
constraints for how much computation can be per-
formed for action generation and learning updates.
These constraints are less severe in an episodic set-
ting where the time intensive part of the learning can
be postponed to the period between episodes. Hes-
ter et al. [15.217] have proposed a real-time archi-
tecture for model-based value function RL methods
taking into account these challenges.

Time-discretization, inevitable in computer imple-
mentations, can generate undesirable artifacts, e.g.,
the distortion of distance between states, or smooth-
ing effect by temporal aliasing.

Delays in information processing with physical sen-
sors and actuators can negatively affect learning.
This effect can be addressed by putting some num-
ber of recent actions into the state, at the cost of
signiﬁcantly increasing the dimensionality of the
problem.
Curse of Under-Modeling
and Model Uncertainty
One way to offset the cost of real-world interaction is
to use accurate models as simulators as suggested in
Sect. 15.2.5. In an ideal setting, this approach would
render it possible to learn the behavior in simulation and
subsequently transfer it to the real robot. Unfortunately,
creating a sufﬁciently accurate model of the robot and
its environment is often impossible. As small modeling
errors accumulate over time, the simulated robot can
quickly diverge from the real-world system, such that
the policy will not transfer without signiﬁcant modi-
ﬁcations as experienced by [15.218]. For tasks where
the system is self-stabilizing (i. e., where the robot does
not require active control to remain in a safe state or
return to it), transferring policies often works much bet-
ter [15.219]. Learning in simulation, however, becomes
quickly useless when contact dynamics and friction are
too hard to model. For example, in the ball-paddling
task the elastic string that attaches the ball to the racket,
and the contact dynamics of the bouncing ball have such
modeling problems.
Curse of Goal Specification
In RL, the desired behavior is implicitly speciﬁed by the
reward function. While often dramatically simpler than
specifying the behavior itself, in practice, it can be sur-
prisingly difﬁcult to deﬁne a good reward function, such
that manual design and tuning become very important.
In many domains, it seems natural to provide rewards
only upon task achievement – for example, when a table
tennis robot wins a match. This view results in an ap-
parently simple, binary reward speciﬁcation. However,
a robot may receive such a reward so rarely that it is un-

Part A | 15.3
382
Part A
Robotics Foundations
likely to ever succeed in its lifetime. Instead of relying
on simpler binary rewards, we frequently need to in-
clude intermediate rewards in the scalar reward function
to guide the learning process to a reasonable solution,
a process known as reward shaping [15.156]. Addition-
ally, physical constraints of the robot in terms of range
of motion and torque saturation need to be taken into ac-
count. Often, a change in coordinates, i. e., the question
in which space (e.g., task space, joint space) the cost
function should be speciﬁed, can determine success or
failure. In general, RL algorithms are also notorious for
exploiting the reward function in ways that are not an-
ticipated by the designer.
Inverse RL, also known as inverse optimal con-
trol [15.220], is a promising alternative to specifying
the reward function manually. It assumes that a re-
ward function can be reconstructed from a set of expert
demonstrations as indicated in Fig. 15.1. This reward
function does not necessarily correspond to the true
reward function, but provides guarantees on the re-
sulting performance of learned behaviors [15.221, 222].
Inverse RL was initially studied in the control com-
munity [15.8] and in the ﬁeld of economics [15.223].
The initial results were only applicable to limited
domains (linear quadratic regulator problems) and re-
quired closed form access to plant and controller, hence
samples from human demonstrations could not be used.
Russel [15.220] brought the ﬁeld to the attention of the
machine learning community. Abbeel and Ng [15.221]
deﬁned an important constraint on the solution to the
inverse RL problem when reward functions are linear
in a set of features: a policy that is extracted by observ-
ing demonstrations has to earn the same reward as the
policy that is being demonstrated. Ratliff et al. [15.222]
demonstrated that inverse optimal control can be un-
derstood as a generalization of ideas in machine learn-
ing of structured prediction and introduced efﬁcient
subgradient-based algorithms with regret bounds that
enabled large scale application of the technique within
robotics. Ziebart et al. [15.2] extended the technique
developed by Abbeel and Ng [15.221] by rendering
the idea robust and probabilistic, enabling its effec-
tive use for both learning policies and predicting the
behavior of suboptimal agents. These techniques, and
many variants, have been recently successfully applied
to outdoor robot navigation [15.224–226], manipula-
tion [15.227], and quadruped locomotion [15.224, 227,
228]. An example of a resulting success can be ob-
served in
VIDEO 353 .
More recently, the notion that complex policies
can be built on top of simple, easily solved optimal
control problems by exploiting rich, parametrized re-
ward functions has been exploited within RL more
directly. In [15.229, 230], complex policies are derived
by adapting a reward function for simple optimal con-
trol problems using policy search techniques. Zucker
and Bagnell [15.230] demonstrate that this technique
can enable efﬁcient solutions to robotic marble-maze
problems that effectively transfer between mazes of
varying design and complexity. These works highlight
the natural tradeoff between the complexity of the re-
ward function and the complexity of the underlying RL
problem for achieving a desired behavior.
15.3.7 Tractability Through Representation
Much of the success of RL methods has been due
to the clever use of approximate representations. The
need of such approximations is particularly pronounced
in robotics, where table-based representations (as dis-
cussed in Sect. 15.3.4) are rarely scalable. Common
themes are to reduce the dimensionality of states and
actions, to choose representations that are robust in face
of the data generation process of RL, or to ﬁnd compact
parameterizations of policies and value functions. The
following outlines a list of items that are relevant:

A variety of authors have manually developed dis-
cretizations so that basic tasks can be learned on
real robots. For low-dimensional tasks, we can gen-
erate discretizations straightforwardly by splitting
each dimension into a number of regions. The
main challenge is to ﬁnd the right number of re-
gions for each dimension that allows the system
to achieve a good ﬁnal performance while still
learning quickly. Example applications include bal-
ancing a ball on a beam [15.231], one degree of
freedom ball-in-a-cup [15.232], two degree of free-
dom crawling motions [15.233], and gait patterns
for four-legged walking [15.234]. Complex tasks
need much more hand crafting, e.g., as in naviga-
tion [15.235], vision-based processing [15.236], or
RoboCup scenarios [15.237].

Adaptive representations can be very useful, e.g., as
in cooperative task achievement [15.238], or com-
puter vision [15.239].

Automatic construction of meta-actions (and the
closely related concept of options) has fascinated
RL researchers. The idea is to have more intelligent
actions that are composed of a sequence of com-
mands and that in themselves achieve a simple task.
A simple example would be to have a meta-action
move forward 5 m. For example, in [15.240], the
state and action sets are constructed in such a way
that repeated action primitives lead to a change in
the state to overcome problems associated with the
discretization. Huber and Grupen [15.241] use a set
of controllers with associated predicate states as

Robot Learning
15.3 Reinforcement Learning
383
Part A | 15.3
a basis for learning turning gates with a quadruped.
Fidelman and Stone [15.242] use a policy search
approach to learn a small set of parameters that
controls the transition between a walking and a cap-
turing meta-action in a RoboCup scenario. A task
of transporting a ball with a dog robot [15.243] can
be learned with semiautomatically discovered op-
tions. Using only the subgoals of primitive motions,
a humanoid robot can learn a pouring task [15.244].
Other examples include foraging [15.245] and
cooperative tasks [15.246] with multiple robots,
grasping with restricted search spaces [15.247],
and mobile robot navigation [15.248]. If the meta-
actions are not ﬁxed in advance, but rather learned
at the same time, these approaches are hierarchical
RL approaches. Konidaris et al. [15.249, 250] pro-
pose an approach that constructs a skill tree from
human demonstrations. Here, the skills correspond
to options and are chained to learn a mobile manip-
ulation skill.

In a relational representation, the states, actions, and
transitions are not represented individually. Enti-
ties of the same predeﬁned type are grouped and
their relationships are considered. This representa-
tion may be preferable for highly geometric tasks
(which frequently appear in robotics) and has been
employed to learn to navigate buildings with a real
robot in a supervised setting [15.251] and to manip-
ulate articulated objects in simulation [15.252].

Function approximation has always been the key
component that allowed value function methods to
scale into interesting domains. Unfortunately, the
max-operator used within the Bellman equation and
temporal-difference updates can theoretically make
most linear or nonlinear approximation schemes
unstable for either value iteration or policy itera-
tion. Quite frequently such an unstable behavior
is also exhibited in practice. Linear function ap-
proximators are stable for policy evaluation, while
nonlinear function approximation (e.g., neural net-
works) can even diverge if just used for policy
evaluation [15.206]. A large number of approaches
have been suggested to facilitate value function ap-
proximation. For instance, creating physics-inspired
features as nonlinear basis functions for linear ap-
proximator [15.151, 253] can be promising. Generic
neural networks can be successful [15.254, 255],
in particular the CMAC (cerebellar model articu-
lation controller) neural network [15.256]. Local
model function approximators often provide more
stable learning behavior [15.151, 257, 258]. Proba-
bilistic nonparametric function approximators like
Gaussian process regression has recently shown in-
teresting successes in robot RL [15.259–262].

Similar to choosing a good structure in value func-
tion approximation, choosing a good structure and
parameterization for the policy can make a big dif-
ferent for success or failure or RL. Finding sparse
parameterization essentially reduces the dimension-
ality of the learning problem, as only a few pa-
rameters need to be learned, and not an action for
every time step. Among the most popular have
been spline-based parameterizations [15.158, 180,
199], linear parameterizations based on physics-
inspired features [15.263], parameterized motor
primitives [15.161, 162, 264, 265], Gaussian Mix-
ture Models [15.157, 177, 266], generic neural net-
works [15.149, 176, 185], and nonparametric ap-
proaches [15.175, 194].
15.3.8 Tractability Through Prior Knowledge
Prior knowledge can dramatically help guide the learn-
ing process. It can be included in the form of initial
policies, demonstrations, initial models, a predeﬁned
task structure, or constraints on the policy such as
torque limits or ordering constraints of the policy pa-
rameters. These approaches signiﬁcantly reduce the
search space and, thus, speed up the learning pro-
cess. Providing a (partially) successful initial policy
allows a RL method to focus on promising regions
in the value function or in policy space. Prestructur-
ing a complex task such that it can be broken down
into several more tractable ones can signiﬁcantly re-
duce the complexity of the learning task. Constraints
may also limit the search space, but often pose new,
additional problems for the learning methods. For ex-
ample, policy search limits often do not handle hard
limits on the policy well. Relaxing such constraints
(a trick often applied in machine learning) is not fea-
sible if they were introduced to protect the robot in the
ﬁrst place.
As indicated in Fig. 15.1, observed expert data can
be used for constructing useful policies. Using demon-
strations to initialize RL has become rather popular and
provides multiple beneﬁts. Perhaps the most obvious
beneﬁt is that it provides supervised training data of
what actions to perform in states that are encountered.
Such data may be helpful when used to bias policy ac-
tion selection. The most dramatic beneﬁt, however, is
that demonstration – or a hand-crafted initial policy –
removes the need for global exploration of the pol-
icy or state-space of the RL problem. The student can
improve by locally optimizing a policy knowing what
states are important, making local optimization meth-
ods feasible. Of course, if the demonstration was not
close to the globally optimal behavior, only local op-
tima can be discovered.

Part A | 15.3
384
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Fig. 15.8 Boston Dynamics LittleDog
jumping (after [15.178], courtesy of
Zico Kolter)
Demonstrations by a teacher can be obtained in
two different scenarios. In the ﬁrst, the teacher demon-
strates the task using his or her own body; in the
second, the teacher controls the robot to do the task.
The ﬁrst scenario is limited by the embodiment issue,
as the movement of a human teacher usually cannot be
mapped directly to the robot due to different physical
constraints and capabilities. For example, joint angles
of a human demonstrator need to be adapted to account
for the kinematic differences between the teacher and
the robot. Often it is more advisable to only consider
task-relevant information, such as the Cartesian posi-
tions and velocities of the end-effector and the object.
Demonstrations obtained by motion capture have been
used to learn a pendulum swingup [15.174], ball-in-a-
cup [15.267], and grasping [15.260].
The second scenario obtains demonstrations by
a human teacher directly controlling the robot. Here
the human teacher ﬁrst has to learn how to achieve
a task with the particular robot’s hardware, adding valu-
able prior knowledge. If the robot is back-drivable,
kinesthetic teach-in (i. e., by taking it by the hand
and moving it) can be employed, which enables
the teacher to interact more closely with the robot.
This method has resulted in applications including
T-ball batting [15.161, 162], reaching tasks [15.177,
268], ball-in-a-cup [15.163] and
VIDEO 355 , ﬂipping
a light switch [15.269], playing pool and manipulating
a box [15.270], and opening a door and picking up ob-
jects [15.271]. A marble maze task can be learned using
demonstrations by a human player [15.272].
Often a task can be decomposed hierarchically into
basic components or into a sequence of increasingly dif-
ﬁcult tasks. In both cases the complexity of the learning
task is signiﬁcantly reduced. For example, hierarchical
Q-learning has been used to learn different behavioral
levels for a six-legged robot: moving single legs, lo-
cally moving the complete body, and globally moving
the robot toward a goal [15.273]. A stand-up behavior
considered as a hierarchical RL task has been learned
using Q-learning in the upper-level and a continuous ac-
tor-critic method in the lower level [15.274]. Navigation
in a maze can be learned using an actor-critic architec-
ture by tuning the inﬂuence of different control modules
and learning these modules [15.275]. Huber and Gru-
pen [15.241] combine discrete event system and RL
techniques to learn turning gates for a quadruped. Hart
and Grupen [15.213] learned to bi-manual manipula-
tion tasks by assembling policies hierarchically. Daniel
et al. [15.276] learn options in a tetherball scenario
and Muelling et al. [15.147] learn different strokes in
a table tennis scenario (
VIDEO 354 ). Whitman and
Atkeson [15.277] show that the optimal policy for some
global systems (like a walking controller) can be con-
structed by ﬁnding the optimal controllers for simpler
subsystems and coordinating these.
As discussed in Sect. 15.3.2, balancing exploration
and exploitation is an important consideration. Task
knowledge can be employed to guide to robots curiosity
to focus on regions that are novel and promising at the
same time. For example, a mobile robot learns to direct
attention by employing a modiﬁed Q-learning approach
using novelty [15.278]. Using corrected truncated re-
turns and taking into account the estimator variance,
a six-legged robot employed with stepping reﬂexes can
learn to walk [15.279]. Ofﬂine search can be used to
guide Q-learning during a grasping task [15.280]. Using
upper conﬁdence bounds [15.281] to direct exploration
into regions with potentially high rewards, grasping can
be learned efﬁciently [15.262].
15.3.9 Tractability Through Models
In Sect. 15.3.2, we discussed robot RL from a model-
free perspective where the system simply served as
a data generating process. Such model-free reinforce-

Robot Learning
15.4 Conclusions
385
Part A | 15.4
ment algorithms try to directly learn the value function
or the policy without any explicit modeling of the tran-
sition dynamics. In contrast, many robot RL problems
can be made tractable by learning forward models, i. e.,
approximations of the transition dynamics based on
data. Such model-based RL approaches jointly learn
a model of the system with the value function or the
policy and often allow for training with less interac-
tion with the the real environment. Reduced learning
on the real robot is highly desirable as simulations are
frequently faster than real-time while safer for both
the robot and its environment. The idea of combining
learning in simulation and in the real environment was
popularized by the Dyna-architecture [15.282], prior-
itized sweeping [15.283], and incremental multi-step
Q-learning [15.284] in RL. In robot RL, the learning
step on the simulated system is often called mental re-
hearsal.
A few remarks concerning model-based RL are im-
portant. It is essentially impossible to obtain a forward
model that is accurate enough to simulate a complex
real-world robot system without error. Reinforcement
learning approaches exploit such model inaccuracies
if they are beneﬁcial for the reward received in simu-
lation [15.174]. The resulting policies may work well
with the forward model (i. e., the simulator) but poorly
on the real system. This effect is known as simulation
bias.
Nevertheless, simulation biases can be addressed
by introducing stochastic models or distributions over
models even if the system is very close to deter-
ministic. Artiﬁcially adding a little noise will smooth
model errors and avoid policy over-ﬁtting [15.153,
285]. Model learning methods that maintain probabilis-
tic uncertainty about true system dynamics allow the
RL algorithm to generate distributions over the per-
formance of a policy. Such methods explicitly model
the uncertainty associated with the dynamics at each
state and action. For example, when using a Gaus-
sian process model of the transition dynamics, a policy
can be evaluated by propagating the state and associ-
ated uncertainty forward in time. Such evaluations in
the model can be used by a policy search approach
to identify where to collect more data to improve
a policy, and may be exploited to ensure that con-
trol is safe and robust to model uncertainty [15.150,
214]. When the new policy is evaluated on the real
system, the novel observations can subsequently be
incorporated into the forward model. Bagnell and
Schneider [15.150] showed that maintaining model un-
certainty and using it in the inner-loop of a policy
search method enabled effective ﬂight control using
only minutes of collected data, while performance was
compromised by considering a best-ﬁt model. This ap-
proach uses explicit Monte Carlo simulation in the
sample estimates. By treating model uncertainty as
if it were noise [15.214] as well as employing ana-
lytic approximations of forward simulation, a cart-pole
task can be solved with less than 20 s of interac-
tion with the physical system [15.157]; a visually
driven block-stacking task has also been learned data-
efﬁciently [15.164].
15.4 Conclusions
We focussed on the two key branches of robot learn-
ing, i. e., supervised learning of internal models with
regression methods, and trial-and-error with reinforce-
ment learning. While both topics are traditional topics
of machine learning, inserting these learning topics into
robot learning adds a variety of complexities and in-
tricacies, which are not immediately obvious – indeed
many issues have been revealed only through experi-
ments with physical robots. A large number of issues
are control theoretic, i. e., due to dealing with a closed-
loop physical system that needs to be stable. Other
issues are due to the inherent constraints that a phys-
ical system imposes, e.g., actuator saturation and the
limits of the work space. High-dimensional continuous
state–action space causes yet another set of problems,
and particularly affects feasibly and efﬁciency of robot
learning. Model-errors and senor noise can have ad-
verse outcome on the learning process. And the fact that
a robot needs to generate its own learning data, i. e.,
the exploration–exploitation tradeoff and ever chang-
ing sampling distributions, creates a large number of
problems.
We note that there is no clear receipe for robot
learning, but rather a large number of ingredients that,
when used appropriately, can achieve excellent learn-
ing results. As a caveat, even minor incorrect choices
can completely prevent any success of learning. That
robot learning has yet not reached maturity is obvi-
ous from the fact that learning algorithms are rarely
used on robots on a daily basis – most results are
feasibility studies and not robust enough for daily
use. Many results are also overtuned to a particu-
lar physical robot, and do not generalize to others
easily.

Part A | 15
386
Part A
Robotics Foundations
Some of the open questions for the future of robot
learning include:

How to choose appropriate representations automat-
ically for model learning, value function learning,
and policy learning? Perhaps, there is one partic-
ular choice that robustly works for many different
robots, or maybe one could ﬁnd a small set of pos-
sible approaches that can easily be compared.

How to create useful reward functions? This topic
connects to inverse RL, and on a higher level to how
to understand the intentions of observed behavior.

How much can prior knowledge help? How much is
needed? How should it be provided?

How to integrate more tightly with perception?
Robot learning is largely action-centric and as-
sumes that perception is provided. In reality, there
is a perception-action-learning loop where the dif-
ferent components interact signiﬁcantly, and need
to be jointly developed.

How to reduce parameter sensitivity? Manual tun-
ing of hyperparameters such as gradient rates, for-
getting rates, exploration rates, etc., are a common
curse for the robot learning practitioner, and often,
a small change in a parameter determines success or
failure.

How to robustly deal with modeling errors? Mod-
els are great when they work, but disastrous if they
are not accurate enough. Probabilistic and robust
control methods may help, but can also degrade per-
formance due to very conservative learning results.
This list is by no means exhaustive, but captures
some of the key issues. In the end, there is strong
need for researchers and scientists who are willing to
tackle a complex mixture of theoretical problems and
experimental problems. Often, just setting up an exper-
imental robot environment with accurate and efﬁcient
debugging and visualization tools is a formidable ef-
fort. Then, ﬁnding the right experiment and the right
data trace that allows for error diagnosis in robot learn-
ing is still a bit of an art and requires fairly deep insights
into physics, algorithms, software architectures, and
technology.
Video-References
VIDEO 352
Inverted helicopter hovering
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/15/videodetails/352
VIDEO 353
Inverse reinforcement
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/15/videodetails/353
VIDEO 354
Machine learning table tennis
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/15/videodetails/354
VIDEO 355
Learning motor primitives
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/15/videodetails/355
References
15.1
S. Schaal: The new robotics – Towards human-
centered machines, HFSP J. Front. Interdiscip. Res,
Life Sci. 1(2), 115–126 (2007)
15.2
B.D. Ziebart, A. Maas, J.A. Bagnell, A.K. Dey: Max-
imum entropy inverse reinforcement learning,
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (2008)
15.3
S.
Thrun,
W.
Burgard,
D.
Fox:
Probabilistic
Robotics (MIT, Cambridge 2005)
15.4
B. Apolloni, A. Ghosh, F. Alpaslan, L.C. Jain, S. Pat-
naik (Eds.): Machine Learning and Robot Percep-
tion, Stud. Comput. Intell., Vol. 7 (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 2005)
15.5
O. Jenkins, R. Bodenheimer, R. Peters: Manip-
ulation manifolds: Explorations into uncovering
manifolds in sensory-motor spaces, Int. Conf.
Dev. Learn. (2006)
15.6
M. Toussaint: Machine learning and robotics, Tu-
tor. Conf. Mach. Learn. (2011)
15.7
D.P. Bertsekas: Dynamic Programming and Opti-
mal Control (Athena Scientific, Nashua 1995)
15.8
R.E. Kalman: When is a linear control system op-
timal?, J. Basic Eng. 86(1), 51–60 (1964)
15.9
D. Nguyen-Tuong, J. Peters: Model learning in
robotics: A survey, Cogn. Process. 12(4), 319–340
(2011)
15.10
J. Kober, D. Bagnell, J. Peters: Reinforcement
learning in robotics: A survey, Int. J. Robotics Res.
32(11), 1238–1274 (2013)
15.11
J.H. Connell, S. Mahadevan: Robot Learning
(Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht 1993)
15.12
J. Ham, Y. Lin, D.D. Lee: Learning nonlinear ap-
pearance manifolds for robot localization, Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (2005)
15.13
R.S. Sutton, A.G. Barto: Reinforcement Learning
(MIT, Cambridge 1998)
15.14
D. Nguyen-Tuong, J. Peters: Model learning with
local Gaussian process regression, Adv. Robotics
23(15), 2015–2034 (2009)
15.15
J. Nakanishi, R. Cory, M. Mistry, J. Peters, S. Schaal:
Operational space control: A theoretical and em-

Robot Learning
References
387
Part A | 15
prical comparison, Int. J. Robotics Res. 27(6), 737–
757 (2008)
15.16
F.R. Reinhart, J.J. Steil: Attractor-based computa-
tion with reservoirs for online learning of inverse
kinematics, Proc. Eur. Symp. Artif. Neural Netw.
(2009)
15.17
J. Ting, M. Kalakrishnan, S. Vijayakumar, S. Schaal:
Bayesian kernel shaping for learning control,
Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., Vol. 21 (2008)
pp. 1673–1680
15.18
J. Steffen, S. Klanke, S. Vijayakumar, H.J. Ritter:
Realising dextrous manipulation with structured
manifolds using unsupervised kernel regression
with structural hints, ICRA 2009 Workshop: Ap-
proaches Sens. Learn. Humanoid Robots, Kobe
(2009)
15.19
S. Klanke, D. Lebedev, R. Haschke, J.J. Steil, H. Rit-
ter: Dynamic path planning for a 7-dof robot
arm, Proc. 2009 IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(2006)
15.20
A. Angelova, L. Matthies, D. Helmick, P. Perona:
Slip prediction using visual information, Proc.
Robotics Sci. Syst., Philadelphia (2006)
15.21
M. Kalakrishnan, J. Buchli, P. Pastor, S. Schaal:
Learning locomotion over rough terrain using ter-
rain templates, IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(2009)
15.22
N. Hawes, J.L. Wyatt, M. Sridharan, M. Kopicki,
S. Hongeng, I. Calvert, A. Sloman, G.-J. Kruijff,
H. Jacobsson, M. Brenner, D. Skočaj, A. Vrečko,
N. Majer, M. Zillich: The playmate system, Cognit.
Syst. 8, 367–393 (2010)
15.23
D. Skočaj, M. Kristan, A. Vrečko, A. Leonardis,
M. Fritz, M. Stark, B. Schiele, S. Hongeng, J.L. Wy-
att: Multi-modal learning, Cogn. Syst. 8, 265–309
(2010)
15.24
O.J. Smith: A controller to overcome dead-time,
Instrum. Soc. Am. J. 6, 28–33 (1959)
15.25
K.S. Narendra, A.M. Annaswamy: Stable Adaptive
Systems (Prentice Hall, New Jersey 1989)
15.26
S. Nicosia, P. Tomei: Model reference adaptive
control algorithms for industrial robots, Automat-
ica 20, 635–644 (1984)
15.27
J.M. Maciejowski: Predictive Control with Con-
straints (Prentice Hall, New Jersey 2002)
15.28
R.S. Sutton: Dyna, an integrated architecture for
learning, planning, and reacting, SIGART Bulletin
2(4), 160–163 (1991)
15.29
C.G. Atkeson, J. Morimoto: Nonparametric repre-
sentation of policies and value functions: A tra-
jectory-based approach, Adv. Neural Inform. Pro-
cess. Syst., Vol. 15 (2002)
15.30
A.Y. Ng, A. Coates, M. Diel, V. Ganapathi, J. Schulte,
B. Tse, E. Berger, E. Liang: Autonomous inverted
helicopter flight via reinforcement learning, Proc.
11th Int. Symp. Exp. Robotics (2004)
15.31
C.E. Rasmussen, M. Kuss: Gaussian processes in
reinforcement learning, Adv. Neural Inform. Pro-
cess. Syst., Vol. 16 (2003) pp. 751–758
15.32
A. Rottmann, W. Burgard: Adaptive autonomous
control using online value iteration with Gaussian
processes, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(2009)
15.33
J.-J.E. Slotine, W. Li: Applied Nonlinear Control
(Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River 1991)
15.34
A. De Luca, P. Lucibello: A general algorithm for
dynamic feedback linearization of robots with
elastic joints, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(1998)
15.35
I. Jordan, D. Rumelhart: Forward models: Super-
vised learning with a distal teacher, Cognit. Sci.
16, 307–354 (1992)
15.36
D.M. Wolpert, M. Kawato: Multiple paired forward
and inverse models for motor control, Neural
Netw. 11, 1317–1329 (1998)
15.37
M. Kawato: Internal models for motor control and
trajectory planning, Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 9(6),
718–727 (1999)
15.38
D.M. Wolpert, R.C. Miall, M. Kawato: Internal
models in the cerebellum, Trends Cogn. Sci. 2(9),
338–347 (1998)
15.39
N. Bhushan, R. Shadmehr: Evidence for a for-
ward dynamics model in human adaptive motor
control, Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., Vol. 11
(1999) pp. 3–9
15.40
K. Narendra, J. Balakrishnan, M. Ciliz: Adaptation
and learning using multiple models, switching
and tuning, IEEE Control Syst, Mag. 15(3), 37–51
(1995)
15.41
K. Narendra, J. Balakrishnan: Adaptive control us-
ing multiple models, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control
42(2), 171–187 (1997)
15.42
M. Haruno, D.M. Wolpert, M. Kawato: Mosaic
model for sensorimotor learning and control,
Neural Comput. 13(10), 2201–2220 (2001)
15.43
J. Peters, S. Schaal: Learning to control in oper-
ational space, Int. J. Robotics Res. 27(2), 197–212
(2008)
15.44
H. Akaike: Autoregressive model fitting for con-
trol, Ann. Inst. Stat. Math. 23, 163–180 (1970)
15.45
R.M.C. De Keyser, A.R.V. Cauwenberghe: A self-
tuning multistep predictor application, Automat-
ica 17, 167–174 (1980)
15.46
S.S. Billings, S. Chen, G. Korenberg: Identification
of mimo nonlinear systems using a forward-re-
gression orthogonal estimator, Int. J. Control 49,
2157–2189 (1989)
15.47
E. Mosca, G. Zappa, J.M. Lemos: Robustness of
multipredictor adaptive regulators: MUSMAR, Au-
tomatica 25, 521–529 (1989)
15.48
J. Kocijan, R. Murray-Smith, C. Rasmussen, A. Gi-
rard: Gaussian process model based predictive
control, Proc. Am. Control Conf. (2004)
15.49
A.
Girard,
C.E.
Rasmussen,
J.Q.
Candela,
R.M.
Smith:
Gaussian
process
priors
with
uncertain inputs application to multiple-step
ahead time series forecasting, Adv. Neural Inform.
Process. Syst., Vol. 15 (2002) pp. 545–552
15.50
C.G. Atkeson, A. Moore, S. Stefan: Locally weighted
learning for control, AI Review 11, 75–113 (1997)
15.51
L. Ljung: System Identification – Theory for the
User (Prentice-Hall, New Jersey 2004)

Part A | 15
388
Part A
Robotics Foundations
15.52
S. Haykin: Neural Networks: A Comprehensive
Foundation (Prentice Hall, New Jersey 1999)
15.53
J.J. Steil: Backpropagation-decorrelation: Online
recurrent learning with O(N) complexity, Proc. Int.
Jt. Conf. Neural Netw. (2004)
15.54
C.E. Rasmussen, C.K. Williams: Gaussian Processes
for Machine Learning (MIT, Cambridge 2006)
15.55
B. Schölkopf, A. Smola: Learning with Kernels:
Support Vector Machines, Regularization, Opti-
mization and Beyond (MIT, Cambridge 2002)
15.56
K.J. Aström, B. Wittenmark: Adaptive Control (Ad-
dison Wesley, Boston 1995)
15.57
F.J. Coito, J.M. Lemos: A long-range adaptive con-
troller for robot manipulators, Int. J. Robotics Res.
10, 684–707 (1991)
15.58
P. Vempaty, K. Cheok, R. Loh: Model reference
adaptive control for actuators of a biped robot
locomotion, Proc. World Congr. Eng. Comput. Sci.
(2009)
15.59
J.R. Layne, K.M. Passino: Fuzzy model reference
learning control, J. Intell. Fuzzy Syst. 4, 33–47
(1996)
15.60
J. Nakanishi, J.A. Farrell, S. Schaal: Composite
adaptive control with locally weighted statistical
learning, Neural Netw. 18(1), 71–90 (2005)
15.61
J.J. Craig: Introduction to Robotics: Mechanics
and Control (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River
2004)
15.62
M.W. Spong, S. Hutchinson, M. Vidyasagar: Robot
Dynamics and Control (Wiley, New York 2006)
15.63
S. Schaal, C.G. Atkeson, S. Vijayakumar: Scalable
techniques from nonparametric statistics for real-
time robot learning, Appl. Intell. 17(1), 49–60
(2002)
15.64
H. Cao, Y. Yin, D. Du, L. Lin, W. Gu, Z. Yang: Neural
network inverse dynamic online learning control
on physical exoskeleton, 13th Int. Conf. Neural In-
form. Process. (2006)
15.65
C.G. Atkeson, C.H. An, J.M. Hollerbach: Estimation
of inertial parameters of manipulator loads and
links, Int. J. Robotics Res. 5(3), 101–119 (1986)
15.66
E. Burdet, B. Sprenger, A. Codourey: Experiments
in nonlinear adaptive control, Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. 1, 537–542 (1997)
15.67
E. Burdet, A. Codourey: Evaluation of paramet-
ric and nonparametric nonlinear adaptive con-
trollers, Robotica 16(1), 59–73 (1998)
15.68
K.S. Narendra, A.M. Annaswamy: Persistent ex-
citation in adaptive systems, Int. J. Control 45,
127–160 (1987)
15.69
H.D. Patino, R. Carelli, B.R. Kuchen: Neural net-
works for advanced control of robot manipu-
lators, IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 13(2), 343–354
(2002)
15.70
D. Nguyen-Tuong, J. Peters: Incremental spar-
sification for real-time online model learning,
Neurocomputing 74(11), 1859–1867 (2011)
15.71
D. Nguyen-Tuong, J. Peters: Using model knowl-
edge for learning inverse dynamics, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (2010)
15.72
S.S. Ge, T.H. Lee, E.G. Tan: Adaptive neural net-
work control of flexible joint robots based on
feedback linearization, Int. J. Syst. Sci. 29(6), 623–
635 (1998)
15.73
C.M. Chow, A.G. Kuznetsov, D.W. Clarke: Suc-
cessive one-step-ahead predictions in multiple
model predictive control, Int. J. Control 29, 971–
979 (1998)
15.74
M. Kawato: Feedback error learning neural net-
work for supervised motor learning. In: Advanced
Neural Computers, ed. by R. Eckmiller (Elsevier,
North-Holland, Amsterdam 1990) pp. 365–372
15.75
J. Nakanishi, S. Schaal: Feedback error learn-
ing and nonlinear adaptive control, Neural Netw.
17(10), 1453–1465 (2004)
15.76
T. Shibata, C. Schaal: Biomimetic gaze stabi-
lization based on feedback-error learning with
nonparametric regression networks, Neural Netw.
14(2), 201–216 (2001)
15.77
H. Miyamoto, M. Kawato, T. Setoyama, R. Suzuki:
Feedback-error-learning neural network for tra-
jectory control of a robotic manipulator, Neural
Netw. 1(3), 251–265 (1988)
15.78
H. Gomi, M. Kawato: Recognition of manipulated
objects by motor learning with modular architec-
ture networks, Neural Netw. 6(4), 485–497 (1993)
15.79
A. D’Souza, S. Vijayakumar, S. Schaal: Learning
inverse kinematics, IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (2001)
15.80
S. Vijayakumar, S. Schaal: Locally weighted pro-
jection regression: An O(N) algorithm for incre-
mental real time learning in high dimensional
space, Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (2000)
15.81
M. Toussaint, S. Vijayakumar: Learning disconti-
nuities with products-of-sigmoids for switching
between local models, Proc. 22nd Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn. (2005)
15.82
J. Tenenbaum, V. de Silva, J. Langford: A global
geometric framework for nonlinear dimensional-
ity reduction, Science 290, 2319–2323 (2000)
15.83
S. Roweis, L. Saul: Nonlinear dimensionality re-
duction by locally linear embedding, Science 290,
2323 (2000)
15.84
H. Hoffman, S. Schaal, S. Vijayakumar: Local di-
mensionality reduction for non-parametric re-
gression, Neural Process. Lett. 29(2), 109–131
(2009)
15.85
S. Thrun, T. Mitchell: Lifelong robot learning,
Robotics Auton. Syst. 15, 25–46 (1995)
15.86
Y. Engel, S. Mannor, R. Meir: Sparse online greedy
support vector regression, Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn.
(2002)
15.87
A.J. Smola, B. Schölkopf: A tutorial on support
vector regression, Stat. Comput. 14(3), 199–222
(2004)
15.88
C.E. Rasmussen: Evaluation of Gaussian Processes
and Other Methods for Non-Linear Regression
(University of Toronto, Toronto 1996)
15.89
L. Bottou, O. Chapelle, D. DeCoste, J. Weston:
Large-Scale Kernel Machines (MIT, Cambridge
2007)
15.90
J.Q. Candela, C.E. Rasmussen: A unifying view of
sparse approximate Gaussian process regression,
J. Mach. Learn. Res. 6, 1939–1959 (2005)

Robot Learning
References
389
Part A | 15
15.91
R. Genov, S. Chakrabartty, G. Cauwenberghs: Sili-
con support vector machine with online learning,
Int. J. Pattern Recognit. Articial Intell. 17, 385–404
(2003)
15.92
S. Vijayakumar, A. D’Souza, S. Schaal: Incremental
online learning in high dimensions, Neural Com-
put. 12(11), 2602–2634 (2005)
15.93
B. Schölkopf, P. Simard, A. Smola, V. Vapnik: Prior
knowledge in support vector kernel, Adv. Neural
Inform. Process. Syst., Vol. 10 (1998) pp. 640–
646
15.94
E. Krupka, N. Tishby: Incorporating prior knowl-
edge on features into learning, Int. Conf. Artif.
Intell. Stat. (San Juan, Puerto Rico 2007)
15.95
A. Smola, T. Friess, B. Schoelkopf: Semiparamet-
ric support vector and linear programming ma-
chines, Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., Vol. 11
(1999) pp. 585–591
15.96
B.J. Kröse, N. Vlassis, R. Bunschoten, Y. Mo-
tomura: A probabilistic model for appearance-
based robot localization, Image Vis. Comput. 19,
381–391 (2001)
15.97
M.K. Titsias, N.D. Lawrence: Bayesian Gaussian
process latent variable model, Proc. 13th Int. Conf.
Artif. Intell. Stat. (2010)
15.98
R. Jacobs, M. Jordan, S. Nowlan, G.E. Hinton:
Adaptive mixtures of local experts, Neural Com-
put. 3, 79–87 (1991)
15.99
S. Calinon, F. D’halluin, E. Sauser, D. Caldwell,
A. Billard: A probabilistic approach based on dy-
namical systems to learn and reproduce gestures
by imitation, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 17, 44–54
(2010)
15.100
V. Treps: A bayesian committee machine, Neural
Comput. 12(11), 2719–2741 (2000)
15.101
L. Csato, M. Opper: Sparse online Gaussian pro-
cesses, Neural Comput. 14(3), 641–668 (2002)
15.102
D.H. Grollman, O.C. Jenkins: Sparse incremental
learning for interactive robot control policy esti-
mation, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom., Pasadena
(2008)
15.103
M. Seeger: Gaussian processes for machine learn-
ing, Int. J. Neural Syst. 14(2), 69–106 (2004)
15.104
C. Plagemann, S. Mischke, S. Prentice, K. Kersting,
N. Roy, W. Burgard: Learning predictive terrain
models for legged robot locomotion, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (2008)
15.105
J. Ko, D. Fox: GP-bayesfilters: Bayesian filtering
using Gaussian process prediction and observa-
tion models, Auton. Robots 27(1), 75–90 (2009)
15.106
J.P.
Ferreira,
M.
Crisostomo,
A.P.
Coimbra,
B. Ribeiro: Simulation control of a biped robot
with support vector regression, IEEE Int. Symp.
Intell. Signal Process. (2007)
15.107
R. Pelossof, A. Miller, P. Allen, T. Jebara: An SVM
learning approach to robotic grasping, IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (2004)
15.108
J. Ma, J. Theiler, S. Perkins: Accurate on-line sup-
port vector regression, Neural Comput. 15, 2683–
2703 (2005)
15.109
Y. Choi, S.Y. Cheong, N. Schweighofer: Local on-
line support vector regression for learning control,
Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Comput. Intell. Robotics Au-
tom. (2007)
15.110
J.-A. Ting, A. D’Souza, S. Schaal: Bayesian robot
system identification with input and output
noise, Neural Netw. 24(1), 99–108 (2011)
15.111
S. Nowlan, G.E. Hinton: Evaluation of adaptive
mixtures of competing experts, Adv. Neural In-
form. Process. Syst., Vol. 3 (1991) pp. 774–780
15.112
V. Treps: Mixtures of Gaussian processes, Adv.
Neural
Inform. Process. Syst., Vol. 13 (2001)
pp. 654–660
15.113
C.E. Rasmussen, Z. Ghahramani: Infinite mixtures
of Gaussian process experts, Adv. Neural Inform.
Process. Syst., Vol. 14 (2002) pp. 881–888
15.114
T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, J. Friedman: The Elements
of Statistical Learning (Springer, New York, 2001)
15.115
W.K. Haerdle, M. Mueller, S. Sperlich, A. Wer-
watz: Nonparametric and Semiparametric Models
(Springer, New York 2004)
15.116
D.J. MacKay: A practical Bayesian framework for
back-propagation networks, Computation 4(3),
448–472 (1992)
15.117
R.M. Neal: Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks,
Lecture Notes in Statistics, Vol. 118 (Springer, New
York 1996)
15.118
B. Schölkopf, A.J. Smola, R. Williamson, P.L. Bart-
lett: New support vector algorithms, Neural Com-
put. 12(5), 1207–1245 (2000)
15.119
C. Plagemann, K. Kersting, P. Pfaff, W. Bur-
gard: Heteroscedastic Gaussian process regression
for modeling range sensors in mobile robotics,
Snowbird Learn. Workshop (2007)
15.120
W.S. Cleveland, C.L. Loader: Smoothing by local
regression: Principles and methods. In: Statistical
Theory and Computational Aspects of Smoothing,
ed. by W. Härdle, M.G. Schimele (Physica, Heidel-
berg 1996)
15.121
J. Fan, I. Gijbels: Local Polynomial Modelling and
Its Applications (Chapman Hall, New York 1996)
15.122
J. Fan, I. Gijbels: Data driven bandwidth selection
in local polynomial fitting, J. R. Stat. Soc. 57(2),
371–394 (1995)
15.123
A. Moore, M.S. Lee: Efficient algorithms for mini-
mizing cross validation error, Proc. 11th Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn. (1994)
15.124
A. Moore: Fast, robust adaptive control by learn-
ing only forward models, Adv. Neural Inform.
Process. Syst., Vol. 4 (1992) pp. 571–578
15.125
C.G. Atkeson, A.W. Moore, S. Schaal: Locally
weighted learning for control, Artif. Intell. Rev. 11,
75–113 (1997)
15.126
G. Tevatia, S. Schaal: Efficient Inverse Kinemat-
ics Algorithms for High-Dimensional Movement
Systems (University of Southern California, Los An-
geles 2008)
15.127
C.G. Atkeson, A.W. Moore, S. Schaal: Locally
weighted learning, Artif. Intell. Rev. 11(1–5), 11–73
(1997)
15.128
N.U. Edakunni, S. Schaal, S. Vijayakumar: Kernel
carpentry for online regression using randomly
varying coefficient model, Proc. 20th Int. Jt. Conf.
Artif. Intell. (2007)

Part A | 15
390
Part A
Robotics Foundations
15.129
D.H. Jacobson, D.Q. Mayne: Differential Dynamic
Programming (American Elsevier, New York 1973)
15.130
C.G. Atkeson, S. Schaal: Robot learning from
demonstration, Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.
(1997)
15.131
J. Morimoto, G. Zeglin, C.G. Atkeson: Minimax dif-
ferential dynamic programming: Application to
a biped walking robot, Proc. 2009 IEEE Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (2003)
15.132
P. Abbeel, A. Coates, M. Quigley, A.Y. Ng: An appli-
cation of reinforcement learning to aerobatic he-
licopter flight, Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst.,
Vol. 19 (2007) pp. 1–8
15.133
P.W. Glynn: Likelihood ratio gradient estimation:
An overview, Proc. Winter Simul. Conf. (1987)
15.134
A.Y. Ng, M. Jordan: Pegasus: A policy search
method for large MDPs and POMDPs, Proc. 16th
Conf. Uncertain. Artif. Intell. (2000)
15.135
B.M. Akesson, H.T. Toivonen: A neural network
model predictive controller, J. Process Control
16(9), 937–946 (2006)
15.136
D. Gu, H. Hu: Predictive control for a car-like mo-
bile robot, Robotics Auton. Syst. 39, 73–86 (2002)
15.137
E.A. Wan, A.A. Bogdanov: Model predictive neu-
ral control with applications to a 6 DOF helicopter
model, Proc. Am. Control Conf. (2001)
15.138
O. Khatib: A unified approach for motion and
force control of robot manipulators: The opera-
tional space formulation, J. Robotics Autom. 3(1),
43–53 (1987)
15.139
J. Peters, M. Mistry, F.E. Udwadia, J. Nakanishi,
S. Schaal: A unifying methodology for robot con-
trol with redundant dofs, Auton. Robots 24(1),
1–12 (2008)
15.140
C. Salaun, V. Padois, O. Sigaud: Control of redun-
dant robots using learned models: An operational
space control approach, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (2009)
15.141
F.R. Reinhart, J.J. Steil: Recurrent neural associa-
tive learning of forward and inverse kinematics
for movement generation of the redundant PA-10
robot, Symp. Learn. Adapt. Behav. Robotics Syst.
(2008)
15.142
J.Q. Candela, C.E. Rasmussen, C.K. Williams: Large
Scale Kernel Machines (MIT, Cambridge 2007)
15.143
S. Ben-David, R. Schuller: Exploiting task related-
ness for multiple task learning, Proc. Conf. Learn.
Theory (2003)
15.144
I. Tsochantaridis, T. Joachims, T. Hofmann, Y. Al-
tun: Large margin methods for structured and
interdependent output variables, J. Mach. Learn.
Res. 6, 1453–1484 (2005)
15.145
O.
Chapelle,
B.
Schölkopf,
A.
Zien:
Semi-
Supervised Learning (MIT, Cambridge 2006)
15.146
J.D. Lafferty, A. McCallum, F.C.N. Pereira: Con-
ditional random fields: Probabilistic models for
segmenting and labeling sequence data, Proc.
18th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (2001)
15.147
K. Muelling, J. Kober, O. Kroemer, J. Peters: Learn-
ing to select and generalize striking movements
in robot table tennis, Int. J. Robotics Res. 32(3),
263–279 (2012)
15.148
S. Mahadevan, J. Connell: Automatic program-
ming of behavior-based robots using reinforce-
ment learning, Artif. Intell. 55(2/3), 311–365 (1992)
15.149
V. Gullapalli, J.A. Franklin, H. Benbrahim: Acquir-
ing robot skills via reinforcement learning, IEEE
Control Syst. Mag. 14(1), 13–24 (1994)
15.150
J.A. Bagnell, J.C. Schneider: Autonomous heli-
copter control using reinforcement learning policy
search methods, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(2001)
15.151
S. Schaal: Learning from demonstration, Adv.
Neural
Inform. Process. Syst., Vol. 9
(1996)
pp. 1040–1046
15.152
W. B. Powell: AI, OR and Control Theory: A Rosetta
Stone for Stochastic Optimization, Tech. Rep.
(Princeton University, Princeton 2012)
15.153
C.G. Atkeson: Nonparametric model-based rein-
forcement learning, Adv. Neural Inform. Process.
Syst., Vol. 10 (1998) pp. 1008–1014
15.154
A. Coates, P. Abbeel, A.Y. Ng: Apprenticeship
learning for helicopter control, Communication
ACM 52(7), 97–105 (2009)
15.155
R.S. Sutton, A.G. Barto, R.J. Williams: Reinforce-
ment learning is direct adaptive optimal control,
Am. Control Conf. (1991)
15.156
A.D. Laud: Theory and Application of Reward
Shaping in Reinforcement Learning (University of
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 2004)
15.157
M.P. Deisenrot, C.E. Rasmussen: PILCO: A model-
based and data-efficient approach to policy
search, 28th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (2011)
15.158
H. Miyamoto, S. Schaal, F. Gandolfo, H. Gomi,
Y. Koike, R. Osu, E. Nakano, Y. Wada, M. Kawato:
A Kendama learning robot based on bidirectional
theory, Neural Netw. 9(8), 1281–1302 (1996)
15.159
N. Kohl, P. Stone: Policy gradient reinforcement
learning for fast quadrupedal locomotion, IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2004)
15.160
R. Tedrake, T.W. Zhang, H.S. Seung: Learning to
walk in 20 minutes, Yale Workshop Adapt. Learn.
Syst. (2005)
15.161
J. Peters, S. Schaal: Reinforcement learning of
motor skills with policy gradients, Neural Netw.
21(4), 682–697 (2008)
15.162
J. Peters, S. Schaal: Natural actor-critic, Neuro-
computing 71(7–9), 1180–1190 (2008)
15.163
J. Kober, J. Peters: Policy search for motor prim-
itives in robotics, Adv. Neural Inform. Process.
Syst., Vol. 21 (2009) pp. 849–856
15.164
M.P. Deisenroth, C.E. Rasmussen, D. Fox: Learning
to control a low-cost manipulator using data-ef-
ficient reinforcement learning. In: Robotics: Sci-
ence and Systems VII, ed. by H. Durrand-Whyte,
N. Roy, P. Abbeel (MIT, Cambridge 2011)
15.165
L.P. Kaelbling, M.L. Littman, A.W. Moore: Rein-
forcement learning: A survey, J. Artif. Intell. Res.
4, 237–285 (1996)
15.166
M.E. Lewis, M.L. Puterman: The Handbook of
Markov Decision Processes: Methods and Appli-
cations (Kluwer, Dordrecht 2001) pp. 89–111
15.167
J.
Peters,
S.
Vijayakumar,
S.
Schaal:
Linear
Quadratic Regulation as Benchmark for Policy

Robot Learning
References
391
Part A | 15
Gradient Methods, Technical Report (University of
Southern California, Los Angeles 2004)
15.168
R.E. Bellman: Dynamic Programming (Princeton
Univ. Press, Princeton 1957)
15.169
R.S. Sutton, D. McAllester, S.P. Singh, Y. Mansour:
Policy gradient methods for reinforcement learn-
ing with function approximation, Adv. Neural In-
form. Process. Syst., Vol. 12 (1999) pp. 1057–1063
15.170
T. Jaakkola, M.I. Jordan, S.P. Singh: Convergence
of stochastic iterative dynamic programming al-
gorithms, Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., Vol.
6 (1993) pp. 703–710
15.171
J. Rust: Using randomization to break the curse
of dimensionality, Econometrica 65(3), 487–516
(1997)
15.172
D.E. Kirk: Optimal Control Theory (Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs 1970)
15.173
A. Schwartz: A reinforcement learning method
for maximizing undiscounted rewards, Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn. (1993)
15.174
C.G. Atkeson, S. Schaal: Robot learning from
demonstration, Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (1997)
15.175
J. Peters, K. Muelling, Y. Altun: Relative entropy
policy search, Natl. Conf. Artif. Intell. (2010)
15.176
G. Endo, J. Morimoto, T. Matsubara, J. Nakanishi,
G. Cheng: Learning CPG-based biped locomotion
with a policy gradient method: Application to
a humanoid robot, Int. J. Robotics Res. 27(2), 213–
228 (2008)
15.177
F. Guenter, M. Hersch, S. Calinon, A. Billard: Re-
inforcement learning for imitating constrained
reaching movements, Adv. Robotics 21(13), 1521–
1544 (2007)
15.178
J.Z. Kolter, A.Y. Ng: Policy search via the signed
derivative, Robotics Sci. Syst. V, Seattle (2009)
15.179
A.Y. Ng, H.J. Kim, M.I. Jordan, S. Sastry: Au-
tonomous helicopter flight via reinforcement
learning, Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., Vol.
16 (2004) pp. 799–806
15.180
J.W. Roberts, L. Moret, J. Zhang, R. Tedrake: From
motor to interaction learning in robots, Stud.
Comput. Intell. 264, 293–309 (2010)
15.181
R. Tedrake: Stochastic policy gradient reinforce-
ment learning on a simple 3D biped, IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (2004)
15.182
F. Stulp, E. Theodorou, M. Kalakrishnan, P. Pastor,
L. Righetti, S. Schaal: Learning motion primitive
goals for robust manipulation, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (2011)
15.183
M. Strens, A. Moore: Direct policy search using
paired statistical tests, Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.
(2001)
15.184
A.Y. Ng, A. Coates, M. Diel, V. Ganapathi, J. Schulte,
B. Tse, E. Berger, E. Liang: Autonomous inverted
helicopter flight via reinforcement learning, Int.
Symp. Exp. Robotics (2004)
15.185
T. Geng, B. Porr, F. Wörgötter: Fast biped walking
with a reflexive controller and real-time policy
searching, Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., Vol.
18 (2006) pp. 427–434
15.186
N. Mitsunaga, C. Smith, T. Kanda, H. Ishiguro,
N. Hagita: Robot behavior adaptation for hu-
man-robot interaction based on policy gradient
reinforcement learning, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (2005)
15.187
M. Sato, Y. Nakamura, S. Ishii: Reinforcement
learning for biped locomotion, Int. Conf. Artif.
Neural Netw. (2002)
15.188
R.Y. Rubinstein, D.P. Kroese: The Cross Entropy
Method: A Unified Approach to Combinatorial
Optimization, Monte-Carlo Simulation (Springer,
New York 2004)
15.189
D.E. Goldberg: Genetic Algorithms (Addision Wes-
ley, New York 1989)
15.190
J.T. Betts: Practical Methods for Optimal Control
Using Nonlinear Programming, Adv. Design Con-
trol, Vol. 3 (SIAM, Philadelphia 2001)
15.191
R.J. Williams: Simple statistical gradient-follow-
ing algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
learning, Mach. Learn. 8, 229–256 (1992)
15.192
P. Dayan, G.E. Hinton: Using expectation-maxi-
mization for reinforcement learning, Neural Com-
put. 9(2), 271–278 (1997)
15.193
N. Vlassis, M. Toussaint, G. Kontes, S. Piperidis:
Learning model-free robot control by a Monte
Carlo EM algorithm, Auton. Robots 27(2), 123–130
(2009)
15.194
J. Kober, E. Oztop, J. Peters: Reinforcement learn-
ing to adjust robot movements to new situations,
Proc. Robotics Sci. Syst. Conf. (2010)
15.195
E.A. Theodorou, J. Buchli, S. Schaal: Reinforce-
ment learning of motor skills in high dimensions:
A path integral approach, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (2010)
15.196
J.A. Bagnell, A.Y. Ng, S. Kakade, J. Schneider: Pol-
icy search by dynamic programming, Adv. Neural
Inform. Process. Syst., Vol. 16 (2003) pp. 831–
838
15.197
T. Kollar, N. Roy: Trajectory optimization using re-
inforcement learning for map exploration, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 27(2), 175–197 (2008)
15.198
D. Lizotte, T. Wang, M. Bowling, D. Schuurmans:
Automatic gait optimization with Gaussian pro-
cess regression, Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell. (2007)
15.199
S. Kuindersma, R. Grupen, A.G. Barto: Learning
dynamic arm motions for postural recovery, IEEE-
RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (2011)
15.200
M. Tesch, J.G. Schneider, H. Choset: Using re-
sponse surfaces and expected improvement to
optimize snake robot gait parameters, IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (2011)
15.201
S.-J. Yi, B.-T. Zhang, D. Hong, D.D. Lee: Learn-
ing full body push recovery control for small
humanoid robots, IEEE Proc. Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (2011)
15.202
J.A. Boyan, A.W. Moore: Generalization in re-
inforcement learning: Safely approximating the
value function, Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst.,
Vol. 7 (1995) pp. 369–376
15.203
S. Kakade, J. Langford: Approximately optimal
approximate reinforcement learning, Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn. (2002)
15.204
E. Greensmith, P.L. Bartlett, J. Baxter: Variance
reduction techniques for gradient estimates in

Part A | 15
392
Part A
Robotics Foundations
reinforcement learning, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 5,
1471–1530 (2004)
15.205
M.T. Rosenstein, A.G. Barto: Reinforcement learn-
ing with supervision by a stable controller, Am.
Control Conf. (2004)
15.206
J.N. Tsitsiklis, B. Van Roy: An analysis of temporal-
difference learning with function approximation,
IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 42(5), 674–690 (1997)
15.207
J.Z. Kolter, A.Y. Ng: Regularization and feature
selection in least-squares temporal difference
learning, Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (2009)
15.208
L.C. Baird, H. Klopf: Reinforcement Learning with
High-Dimensional Continuous Actions, Technical
Report WL-TR-93-1147 (Wright-Patterson Air Force
Base, Dayton 1993)
15.209
G.D. Konidaris, S. Osentoski, P. Thomas: Value
function approximation in reinforcement learn-
ing using the Fourier basis, AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.
(2011)
15.210
J. Peters, K. Muelling, J. Kober, D. Nguyen-Tuong,
O. Kroemer: Towards motor skill learning for
robotics, Int. Symp. Robotics Res. (2010)
15.211
L. Buşoniu, R. Babuška, B. de Schutter, D. Ernst:
Reinforcement Learning and Dynamic Program-
ming Using Function Approximators (CRC, Boca
Raton 2010)
15.212
A.G. Barto, S. Mahadevan: Recent advances in hi-
erarchical reinforcement learning, Discret. Event
Dyn. Syst. 13(4), 341–379 (2003)
15.213
S. Hart, R. Grupen: Learning generalizable con-
trol programs, IEEE Trans. Auton. Mental Dev. 3(3),
216–231 (2011)
15.214
J.G. Schneider: Exploiting
model uncertainty
estimates for safe dynamic control learning,
Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., Vol. 9 (1997)
pp. 1047–1053
15.215
J.A. Bagnell: Learning Decisions: Robustness,
Uncertainty,
and
Approximation.
Dissertation
(Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh 2004)
15.216
T.M. Moldovan, P. Abbeel: Safe exploration in
markov decision processes, 29th Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn. (2012)
15.217
T. Hester, M. Quinlan, P. Stone: RTMBA: A real-time
model-based reinforcement learning architecture
for robot control, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(2012)
15.218
C.G. Atkeson: Using local trajectory optimizers to
speed up global optimization in dynamic pro-
gramming, Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., Vol.
6 (1994) pp. 663–670
15.219
J. Kober, J. Peters: Policy search for motor prim-
itives in robotics, Mach. Learn. 84(1/2), 171–203
(2010)
15.220
S. Russell: Learning agents for uncertain environ-
ments (extended abstract), Conf. Comput. Learn.
Theory (1989)
15.221
P. Abbeel, A.Y. Ng: Apprenticeship learning via
inverse reinforcement learning, Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn. (2004)
15.222
N.D. Ratliff, J.A. Bagnell, M.A. Zinkevich: Maxi-
mum margin planning, Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.
(2006)
15.223
R.L. Keeney, H. Raiffa: Decisions with Multiple Ob-
jectives: Preferences and Value Tradeoffs (Wiley,
New York 1976)
15.224
N. Ratliff, D. Bradley, J.A. Bagnell, J. Chest-
nutt: Boosting structured prediction for imitation
learning, Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., Vol.
19 (2006) pp. 1153–1160
15.225
D. Silver, J.A. Bagnell, A. Stentz: High performance
outdoor navigation from overhead data using
imitation learning. In: Robotics: Science and Sys-
tems, Vol. IV, ed. by O. Brock, J. Trinkle, F. Ramos
(MIT, Cambridge 2008)
15.226
D. Silver, J.A. Bagnell, A. Stentz: Learning from
demonstration for autonomous navigation in
complex unstructured terrain, Int. J. Robotics Res.
29(12), 1565–1592 (2010)
15.227
N. Ratliff, J.A. Bagnell, S. Srinivasa: Imitation
learning for locomotion and manipulation, IEEE-
RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (2007)
15.228
J.Z. Kolter, P. Abbeel, A.Y. Ng: Hierarchical appren-
ticeship learning with application to quadruped
locomotion, Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst.,
Vol. 20 (2007) pp. 769–776
15.229
J. Sorg, S.P. Singh, R.L. Lewis: Reward design via
online gradient ascent, Adv. Neural Inform. Pro-
cess. Syst., Vol. 23 (2010) pp. 2190–2198
15.230
M. Zucker, J.A. Bagnell: Reinforcement planning:
RL for optimal planners, IEEE Proc. Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (2012)
15.231
H. Benbrahim, J.S. Doleac, J.A. Franklin, O.G. Sel-
fridge: Real-time learning: A ball on a beam, Int.
Jt. Conf. Neural Netw. (1992)
15.232
B. Nemec, M. Zorko, L. Zlajpah: Learning of a ball-
in-a-cup playing robot, Int. Workshop Robotics,
Alpe-Adria-Danube Region (2010)
15.233
M. Tokic, W. Ertel, J. Fessler: The crawler, a class
room demonstrator for reinforcement learning,
Int. Fla. Artif. Intell. Res. Soc. Conf. (2009)
15.234
H. Kimura, T. Yamashita, S. Kobayashi: Reinforce-
ment learning of walking behavior for a four-
legged robot, IEEE Conf. Decis. Control (2001)
15.235
R.A. Willgoss, J. Iqbal: Reinforcement learning of
behaviors in mobile robots using noisy infrared
sensing, Aust. Conf. Robotics Autom. (1999)
15.236
L. Paletta, G. Fritz, F. Kintzler, J. Irran, G. Dorffner:
Perception and developmental learning of affor-
dances in autonomous robots, Lect. Notes Com-
put. Sci. 4667, 235–250 (2007)
15.237
C. Kwok, D. Fox: Reinforcement learning for sens-
ing strategies, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (2004)
15.238
T. Yasuda, K. Ohkura: A reinforcement learning
technique with an adaptive action generator for
a multi-robot system, Int. Conf. Simul. Adapt. Be-
hav. (2008)
15.239
J.H. Piater, S. Jodogne, R. Detry, D. Kraft, N. Krüger,
O. Kroemer, J. Peters: Learning visual repre-
sentations for perception-action systems, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 30(3), 294–307 (2011)
15.240
M. Asada, S. Noda, S. Tawaratsumida, K. Hosoda:
Purposive behavior acquisition for a real robot
by vision-based reinforcement learning, Mach.
Learn. 23(2/3), 279–303 (1996)

Robot Learning
References
393
Part A | 15
15.241
M. Huber, R.A. Grupen: A feedback control struc-
ture for on-line learning tasks, Robotics Auton.
Syst. 22(3/4), 303–315 (1997)
15.242
P. Fidelman, P. Stone: Learning ball acquisition
on a physical robot, Int. Symp. Robotics Autom.
(2004)
15.243
V. Soni, S.P. Singh: Reinforcement learning of hi-
erarchical skills on the Sony AIBO robot, Int. Conf.
Dev. Learn. (2006)
15.244
B. Nemec, M. Tamošiunait˙e, F. Wörgötter, A. Ude:
Task adaptation through exploration and action
sequencing, IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots
(2009)
15.245
M.J. Matarić: Reinforcement learning in the mul-
ti-robot domain, Auton. Robots 4, 73–83 (1997)
15.246
M.J. Matarić: Reward functions for accelerated
learning, Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML) (1994)
15.247
R. Platt, R.A. Grupen, A.H. Fagg: Improving grasp
skills using schema structured learning, Int. Conf.
Dev. Learn. (2006)
15.248
M. Dorigo, M. Colombetti: Robot Shaping: Devel-
oping Situated Agents Through Learning, Techni-
cal Report (International Computer Science Insti-
tute, Berkeley 1993)
15.249
G.D.
Konidaris,
S.
Kuindersma,
R.
Grupen,
A.G. Barto: Autonomous skill acquisition on
a mobile manipulator, AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.
(2011)
15.250
G.D.
Konidaris,
S.
Kuindersma,
R.
Grupen,
A.G. Barto: Robot learning from demonstration
by constructing skill trees, Int. J. Robotics Res.
31(3), 360–375 (2012)
15.251
A. Cocora, K. Kersting, C. Plagemann, W. Bur-
gard, L. de Raedt: Learning relational navigation
policies, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(2006)
15.252
D. Katz, Y. Pyuro, O. Brock: Learning to manipulate
articulated objects in unstructured environments
using a grounded relational representation. In:
Robotics: Science and Systems, Vol. IV, ed. by
O. Brock, J. Trinkle, F. Ramos (MIT, Cambridge
2008)
15.253
C.H. An, C.G. Atkeson, J.M. Hollerbach: Model-
Based Control of a Robot Manipulator (MIT, Press,
Cambridge 1988)
15.254
C. Gaskett, L. Fletcher, A. Zelinsky: Reinforcement
learning for a vision based mobile robot, IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (2000)
15.255
Y. Duan, B. Cui, H. Yang: Robot navigation based
on fuzzy RL algorithm, Int. Symp. Neural Netw.
(2008)
15.256
H. Benbrahim, J.A. Franklin: Biped dynamic
walking using reinforcement learning, Robotics
Auton. Syst. 22(3/4), 283–302 (1997)
15.257
W.D. Smart, L. Pack Kaelbling: A framework for re-
inforcement learning on real robots, Natl. Conf.
Artif. Intell./Innov. Appl. Artif. Intell. (1989)
15.258
D.C. Bentivegna: Learning from Observation Us-
ing Primitives (Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta 2004)
15.259
A. Rottmann, C. Plagemann, P. Hilgers, W. Bur-
gard: Autonomous blimp control using model-
free reinforcement learning in a continuous state
and action space, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (2007)
15.260
K. Gräve, J. Stückler, S. Behnke: Learning motion
skills from expert demonstrations and own expe-
rience using Gaussian process regression, Jt. Int.
Symp. Robotics (ISR) Ger. Conf. Robotics (ROBOTIK)
(2010)
15.261
O. Kroemer, R. Detry, J. Piater, J. Peters: Active
learning using mean shift optimization for robot
grasping, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(2009)
15.262
O. Kroemer, R. Detry, J. Piater, J. Peters: Combin-
ing active learning and reactive control for robot
grasping, Robotics Auton. Syst. 58(9), 1105–1116
(2010)
15.263
T. Tamei, T. Shibata: Policy gradient learning of
cooperative interaction with a robot using user’s
biological signals, Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
(2009)
15.264
A.J. Ijspeert, J. Nakanishi, S. Schaal: Learning at-
tractor landscapes for learning motor primitives,
Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., Vol. 15 (2003)
pp. 1547–1554
15.265
S. Schaal, P. Mohajerian, A.J. Ijspeert: Dynamics
systems vs. optimal control – A unifying view,
Prog. Brain Res. 165(1), 425–445 (2007)
15.266
H.-I. Lin, C.-C. Lai: Learning collision-free reach-
ing skill from primitives, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (2012)
15.267
J. Kober, B. Mohler, J. Peters: Learning perceptual
coupling for motor primitives, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (2008)
15.268
S. Bitzer, M. Howard, S. Vijayakumar: Using di-
mensionality reduction to exploit constraints in
reinforcement learning, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (2010)
15.269
J. Buchli, F. Stulp, E. Theodorou, S. Schaal: Learn-
ing variable impedance control, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 30(7), 820–833 (2011)
15.270
P. Pastor, M. Kalakrishnan, S. Chitta, E. Theodorou,
S. Schaal: Skill learning and task outcome pre-
diction for manipulation, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (2011)
15.271
M. Kalakrishnan, L. Righetti, P. Pastor, S. Schaal:
Learning force control policies for compliant ma-
nipulation, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(2011)
15.272
D.C. Bentivegna, C.G. Atkeson, G. Cheng: Learning
from observation and practice using behavioral
primitives: Marble maze, 11th Int. Symp. Robotics
Res. (2004)
15.273
F. Kirchner: Q-learning of complex behaviours on
a six-legged walking machine, EUROMICRO Work-
shop Adv. Mobile Robots (1997)
15.274
J. Morimoto, K. Doya: Acquisition of stand-up
behavior by a real robot using hierarchical re-
inforcement learning, Robotics Auton. Syst. 36(1),
37–51 (2001)
15.275
J.-Y. Donnart, J.-A. Meyer: Learning reactive and
planning rules in a motivationally autonomous
animat, Syst. Man Cybern. B 26(3), 381–395 (1996)

Part A | 15
394
Part A
Robotics Foundations
15.276
C. Daniel, G. Neumann, J. Peters: Learning con-
current motor skills in versatile solution spaces,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (2012)
15.277
E.C. Whitman, C.G. Atkeson: Control of instanta-
neously coupled systems applied to humanoid
walking, IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots
(2010)
15.278
X. Huang, J. Weng: Novelty and reinforcement
learning in the value system of developmen-
tal robots, 2nd Int. Workshop Epigenetic Robotics
Model. Cognit. Dev. Robotic Syst. (2002)
15.279
M. Pendrith: Reinforcement learning in situated
agents: Some theoretical problems and practical
solutions, Eur. Workshop Learn. Robots (1999)
15.280
B. Wang, J.W. Li, H. Liu: A heuristic rein-
forcement learning for robot approaching ob-
jects, IEEE Conf. Robotics Autom. Mechatron.
(2006)
15.281
L.P. Kaelbling: Learning in Embedded Systems
(Stanford University, Stanford 1990)
15.282
R.S. Sutton: Integrated architectures for learning,
planning, and reacting based on approximating
dynamic programming, Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.
(1990)
15.283
A.W. Moore, C.G. Atkeson: Prioritized sweeping:
Reinforcement learning with less data and less
time, Mach. Learn. 13(1), 103–130 (1993)
15.284
J. Peng, R.J. Williams: Incremental multi-step Q-
learning, Mach. Learn. 22(1), 283–290 (1996)
15.285
N. Jakobi, P. Husbands, I. Harvey: Noise and the
reality gap: The use of simulation in evolutionary
robotics, 3rd Eur. Conf. Artif. Life (1995)

395
Multimedia Contents Design
Part B
Part B Design
Ed. by Frank C. Park
16 Design and Performance Evaluation
Jorge Angeles, Montreal, Canada
Frank C. Park, Seoul, Korea
17 Limbed Systems
Shuuji Kajita, Tsukuba, Japan
Christian Ott, Wessling, Germany
18 Parallel Mechanisms
Jean-Pierre Merlet, Sophia-Antipolis,
France
Clément Gosselin, Quebec, Canada
Tian Huang, Tianjin, China
19 Robot Hands
Claudio Melchiorri, Bologna, Italy
Makoto Kaneko, Suita, Japan
20 Snake-Like and Continuum Robots
Ian D. Walker, Clemson, USA
Howie Choset, Pittsburgh, USA
Gregory S. Chirikjian, Baltimore, USA
21 Actuators for Soft Robotics
Alin Albu-Schäffer, Wessling, Germany
Antonio Bicchi, Pisa, Italy
22 Modular Robots
I-Ming Chen, Singapore, Singapore
Mark Yim, Philadelphia, USA
23 Biomimetic Robots
Kyu-Jin Cho, Seoul, Korea
Robert Wood, Cambridge, USA
24 Wheeled Robots
Woojin Chung, Seoul, Korea
Karl Iagnemma, Cambridge, USA
25 Underwater Robots
Hyun-Taek Choi, Daejeon, Korea
Junku Yuh, Seoul, Korea
26 Flying Robots
Stefan Leutenegger, London, UK
Christoph Hürzeler, Baden, Switzerland
Amanda K. Stowers, Stanford, USA
Kostas Alexis, Zurich, Switzerland
Markus W. Achtelik, Zurich, Switzerland
David Lentink, Stanford, USA
Paul Y. Oh, Las Vegas, USA
Roland Siegwart, Zurich, Switzerland
27 Micro-/Nanorobots
Bradley J. Nelson, Zurich, Switzerland
Lixin Dong, East Lansing, USA
Fumihito Arai, Nagoya, Japan

396
The chapters contained in Part B, Design, are concerned
with the design and modeling of the actual physical
realizations of a robot. Some of the more obvious me-
chanical structures that come to mind are arms, legs,
and hands. To this list we can add wheeled vehicles
and platforms; snake-like and continuum robots; robots
capable of swimming and ﬂying; and robot structures
at the micro- and nanoscales. Even for that most ba-
sic robotic device, the arm, an incredibly diverse set
of structures is possible, depending on the number and
types of joints and actuators, and the presence of closed
loops in the kinematic structure, or ﬂexibility in the
joints and links. Constructing models, and planning and
control algorithms for these diverse structures repre-
sents an even greater set of challenges.
The topics addressed in these chapters are essential
to creating not only the physical robot itself, but also to
creating and controlling movements, and manipulating
objects in desired ways. As such the connections with
the chapters on Robot Foundations (Part A) – particu-
larly the chapters on Kinematics (Chap. 1), Dynamics
(Chap. 2), and Mechanisms and Actuation (Chap. 3) –
are self-evident. What ultimately distinguishes robotics
from other disciplines that study intelligence is that,
by deﬁnition, robots require a physical manifestation,
and by extension must physically interact with the en-
vironment. In this regard the topics addressed in these
chapters can be said to constitute the most basic layer
of this endeavor.
Just as it is difﬁcult to examine human intelligence
from a purely abstract perspective, remotely detached
from the physical body, so it is difﬁcult to separate the
contents of the remaining parts without including in the
discussion the actual medium of interaction with the
physical world, the (physical) robots themselves. For
example, the question of how to coordinate sensing and
perception with action (Part C), how to grasp and ma-
nipulate objects (Part D), and how to teach robots to
move in the world (Part E), must inevitably consider
the physical structure of the robot. Robots specialized to
various applications and environments (Part F), partic-
ularly those intended for direct interaction with humans
(Part G), naturally must also consider the robot’s phys-
ical structure.
With this overview of Part B, we now provide a brief
synopsis of each chapter.
Chapter 16, Performance Evaluation and Design
Criteria, provides a concise overview of the robot de-
sign process, and surveys some of the criteria and tools
used in the mechanical design and performance evalua-
tion of robots. Criteria such as workspace volume, local
and global dexterity, and elastostatic and elastodynamic
performance are not only applicable to determining the
topological structure and physical dimensions of the
robot, but can also be useful for, e.g., workpiece place-
ment and kinematic redundancy resolution.
Chapter 17, Limbed Systems, discusses the myriad
issues involved in the design, analysis, and control of
robots with limbs. Deﬁning a limbed system as a robot
consisting of a body and at least one limb such that it
is able to support and propel itself, the chapter begins
with an overview of the design process for limbed
systems,from conceptual to detailed, and the basic dy-
namics of passive and controlled walking. The chapter
also examines numerous case studies illustrating the
diversity of limbed robot designs, and schemes for their
actuation and locomotion. Multi-legged robots, such as
dynamic quadrupeds inspired by mammals and behav-
ior-based multilegged robots, are also discussed, as are
hybrid leg-wheel-arm robots, tethered walking robots,
and even legged robots capable of climbing walls.
Chapter 18, Parallel Mechanisms and Robots,
presents an introduction to the kinematics and dynam-
ics of parallel mechanisms such as the well-known
Stewart–Gough platform. Parallel mechanisms contain
closed loops in their kinematic structure, and as such
methods for their analysis differ considerably from
those for their serial counterparts. This chapter dis-
cusses topics ranging from type synthesis and forward
and inverse kinematic solutions of parallel mecha-
nisms, to an investigation of their singularity behavior,
workspace characterization, static and dynamic analy-
sis, and practical issues in their design.
Chapter 19, Robot Hands, investigates the princi-
pal issues behind the design, modeling, and control of
robot hands. Beginning with a discussion of levels of
anthropomorphism, and the characterization of robot
hand dexterity, the chapter investigates the relevant de-
sign issues for robot hands, actuation and transmission
architectures, and available sensing technologies. The
dynamic modeling and control of robot hands are made
challenging not only by the complex kinematic struc-
ture, but also by the ﬂexible transmission elements, and
the chapter devotes particular attention to these issues.
Chapter 20, Snake-Like and Continuum Robots,
begins with a history of snake robots, starting with the
pioneering work of Shigeo Hirosein in the early 1970s.
While snake-like and continuum robots have very simi-
lar exterior appearances, there is considerable diversity
in their mechanical design, and the ways in which they
are actuated.This chapter describes the mechanical de-
sign, actuation, modeling,motion planning, and control
of such robots. The chapter also provides case studies
of a wide range of existing snake-like and continuum

397
robots that illustrate the diversity of designs as well as
applications.
Chapter 21, Soft Robots, begins with the premise
that robots of the future will not resemble the bulky
rigid machines found in today’s factory ﬂoors, but will
be compliant and adaptable, and able to safely inter-
act with humans – in other words, soft. This chapter
discusses the design, modeling, and control of actua-
tors for this new generation of soft robots.The chapter
surveys the different principles and technologies that
can be used to design and implement actuators for soft
robotics. Many of the concepts are organized so as to
allow a direct analogy with natural muscles. Variable
impedance actuators are examined in some detail, from
their mathematical modeling to motion and force plan-
ning and control.
Chapter 22, Modular Robots, provides an overview
of the design of modular robots. The chapter begins
with a discussion of the concept of modularity, and
a deﬁnition and classiﬁcation of modular robots. The
chapter then examines reconﬁgurable modular manip-
ulators, from the earliest designs that were conceived
in an industrial automation setting, to more recent self-
reconﬁgurable modular robots. Issues related to the
design of modules and the interfaces between them, and
the determination of optimal conﬁgurations, are also
discussed in this chapter.
Chapter 23, Biomimetic Robots, broadly examines
the ways in which biological principles can be applied
to the design of robotic mechanisms. The challenges
of biomimetic design include developing a deep under-
standing of the relevant natural system, and translating
this understanding into a set of engineering design
rules; this often entails the development of novel fab-
rication and actuation to realize the biomimetic design.
This chapter discusses the basic design principles un-
derlying biomimetic robots and their contrast with
bio-inspired robots, and the fundamental components
for developing a biomimetic robot. The chapter also
provides detailed reviews of biomimetic designs that
have been developed for ﬂapping-wing ﬂight, jumping,
crawling, wall climbing, and swimming, as well as the
enabling material and fabrication technologies for these
biomimetic designs.
Chapter 24, Wheeled Robots, provides a gen-
eral and comprehensive description of wheeled mobile
robots. The chapter begins with a discussion of robot
mobility based on the types of wheels and the nature
of the kinematic constraints, followed by a classiﬁ-
cation of wheeled robot structures according to the
number and type of wheels and how they are arranged.
Omnimobile robots and articulated robot realizations
are described, and wheel–terrain interaction models
for computing contact forces are also presented. The
chapter concludes with a classiﬁcation of wheel–terrain
interaction cases depending on the relative stiffnesses of
the wheel and terrain, and the structure and dyamics of
suspension systems that enable movement of wheeled
robots over uneven surfaces.
Chapter 25, Underwater Robots, examines the de-
sign issues for underwater robots, with a focus on
remotely operated vehicles and autonomous underwa-
ter vehicles. The major components of an underwater
robot – from the mechanical elements and subsystems
including any attached manipulators, to power sources,
actuators and sensors, and architectures for comput-
ing and communications and control, are discussed in
this chapter. Aspects of the mathematical modeling and
control of underwater robots is covered in a separate
chapter later in this handbook.
Chapter 26, Flying Robots, provides an overview
of the core elements of ﬂying robots. The reader will
be guided through the design process of aerial robots,
beginning with a qualitative characterization of the dif-
ferent types of ﬂying robot. Design and modeling are
particularly closely intertwined in ﬂying robots, and the
chapter provides an overview of the underlying aerody-
namics and tools for their analysis. The chapter then
shows how these tools can be applied to the design
and analysis of various types of ﬂying robots, including
ﬁxed-wing, rotary-wing, and ﬂapping wing systems,
with case studies illustrating these design principles.
Chapter 27, Micro/Nanorobots, provides an over-
view of the state of the art in micro- and nanorobotics.
The former entails robotic manipulation of objects
with dimensions in the millimeter to micrometer range,
as well as the design and fabrication of autonomous
robotic agents within this size range (nanorobotics is
deﬁned in the same way, but for dimensions smaller
than a micrometer). The chapter outlines scaling
effects, actuation, and sensing and fabrication at
these scales, and also applications to microassembly,
biotechnology, and the construction and characteriza-
tion of micro- and nano-electromechanical systems.

Multimedia Contents Design and P
399
Part B | 16
16. Design and Performance Evaluation
Jorge Angeles, Frank C. Park
In this chapter we survey some of the tools and
criteria used in the mechanical design and perfor-
mance evaluation of robots. Our focus is on robots
that are (a) primarily intended for manipulation
tasks and (b) constructed with one or more serial
kinematic chains. The kinematics of parallel robots
is addressed in detail in Chap. 18; their elastostat-
ics is the subject of Sect. 16.5.1. Wheeled robots,
walking robots, multifingered hands, and robots
intended for outdoor applications, i.e., those en-
compassing what is known as field robotics, are
studied in their own chapters; here we provide
an overview of the main classes of these robots as
relating to design.
16.1
The Robot Design Process .....................
400
16.2 Workspace Criteria ...............................
401
16.2.1
Reaching a Set of Goal Frames....
403
16.2.2
Workspace Volume
and Topology ............................
404
16.3 Dexterity Indices..................................
405
16.3.1
Local Dexterity
for Open Chains.........................
405
16.3.2
Dynamics-Based Local
Performance Evaluation .............
407
16.3.3
Global Dexterity Measures ..........
407
16.3.4
Closed-Chain Dexterity Indices ...
407
16.3.5 Alternative Dexterity-Like
Measures ..................................
407
16.4 Other Performance Indices ...................
408
16.4.1
Acceleration Radius ...................
408
16.4.2
Elastostatic Performance ............
408
16.4.3 Elastodynamic Performance .......
410
16.5 Other Robot Types................................
411
16.5.1
Robots Mounted on a Fixed Base:
Parallel-Kinematics Machines.....
412
16.5.2
Mobile Robots...........................
414
16.5.3 Aquatic Robots..........................
415
16.5.4 Flying Robots ............................
416
16.6 Summary ............................................
416
References...................................................
416
The most obvious application of the criteria and tools
described in this chapter is in the mechanical design
of a robot. Robot design differs from the design of 1-
degree-of-freedom (DOF) machinery in that the latter is
intended for one speciﬁc task, e.g., picking up a work-
piece from a belt conveyor and placing it on a magazine.
Moreover, the conveyor is synchronized with the ma-
nipulating machine and the magazine is stationary, with
well-deﬁned locations where each workpiece is to be
placed. Manipulation robots, in contrast, are not in-
tended for one speciﬁc task, but rather for a family of
tasks falling within one class of workpiece motions,
e.g., planar, spherical, translational, or motions pro-
duced by systems of the selective compliance assembly
robot arm (SCARA) type, also known as Schönﬂies dis-
placements [16.1]. The challenge that robot designers
face is therefore one of uncertainty in the speciﬁc task
that the robot will be required to execute. Design cri-
teria have been devised to help the designer cope with
uncertainty, as discussed herein.

Part B | 16.1
400
Part B
Design
16.1 The Robot Design Process
Given a family of tasks that constitute the func-
tional requirements in the design process, besides
more-detailed design speciﬁcations, the role of the de-
signer consists in producing a robot that will meet
all the requirements and speciﬁcations. The various
stages in the robot design job at hand are intended
to:
1. Determine the topology of the kinematic chain un-
derlying the mechanical structure. Under this item
we consider ﬁrst the robot type: serial, parallel or
hybrid. Then, a decision is to be made on the lay-
out of the various subchains in terms of the type of
joints, most commonly, revolute and prismatic. Re-
cently, one additional type has been recognized to
be equally useful, the ˘-joint, coupling two links
under relative translation by means of two other
links undergoing identical angular displacements,
although about different parallel axes. The four
links form a parallelogram four-bar linkage [16.2].
2. Determine the geometric dimensions of the various
links deﬁning the robotic architecture, as required
to ﬁll a table of Denavit–Hartenberg (DH) parame-
ters [16.3] so as to satisfy workspace requirements.
Although these parameters are usually understood
to include the joint variables, these variables do not
affect the robot architecture; they determine instead
the robot posture.
3. Determine the structural dimensioning of the vari-
ous links and joints, as needed to meet static load
requirements, where load includes both forces and
moments – wrenches – under either the most de-
manding or the most likely operation conditions,
depending on the design philosophy adopted at the
outset.
4. Determine the structural dimensioning of the vari-
ous links and joints, as needed to meet dynamic load
requirements, where loads are inertia effects of links
and manipulated object.
5. Determine the elastodynamic dimensioning of the
overall mechanical structure, including the actuator
dynamics, to avoid a speciﬁc spectrum of excitation
frequencies under either the most demanding or the
most likely operation conditions.
6. Select the actuators and their mechanical transmis-
sions for the operation conditions adopted at the
outset to cope with task uncertainty.
The above stages can be performed sequentially,
in the order given above: (i) ﬁrst, the topology is de-
termined based on the family of tasks speciﬁed at the
outset and the shape of the workspace, as discussed in
Sect. 16.2.2; (ii) the link geometry is deﬁned based on
the workspace requirements, which include the maxi-
mum reach, and the topology deﬁned in stage 1; (iii)
with the link geometry thus deﬁned, the structural
dimensioning of links and joints (unless the robot un-
der design is parallel, which does not fall within the
scope of this chapter, all joints are actuated) is un-
dertaken, so as to support the static loads assumed at
the outset; (iv) with the links and joints dimensioned
for static-load conditions, the link centers of mass and
link inertia matrices are determined for a preliminary
evaluation of the motor torque requirements (this eval-
uation is preliminary in that it does not consider the
dynamic load brought about by the actuators; this load
can be signiﬁcant, even in the case of parallel robots,
which can have all their motors ﬁxed to the robot
base); (v) with the links assumed rigid, joint stiffness
is assumed, based on experience or using data from
a similar robot, which then leads to an elastodynamic
model whose natural modes and frequencies can be de-
termined at a selected set of robot postures (dynamic
behavior of the structure is dependent on robot pos-
ture) by means of scientiﬁc code such as Matlab or
computer-aided engineering (CAE) code such as CA-
TIA, Siemens PLM, Pro/Engineer or ANSYS; and (vi)
if the frequency spectrum of the robot structure is ac-
ceptable, the designer can continue to motor selection;
otherwise, a redimensioning is required, which means
returning to stage 3.
Even though a design cycle can be completed as
outlined above, the designer must now incorporate into
the elastodynamic model the structural and inertial data
provided by the motor manufacturer. This requires a re-
turn to stage 5 and a new elastodynamic analysis. It
is thus apparent that the robot design process has one
element in common with engineering design in gen-
eral: both are iterative and open-ended [16.4]. Remark-
ably, however, the various items driving each design
stage are, to a large extent, independent of each other,
e.g., topology and geometry can be determined inde-
pendently from motor selection. Obviously, all issues
interact in the overall design process, but, within certain
design speciﬁcations, the various items do not contra-
dict each other, as to warrant a multiobjective design
approach. That is, the optimum design of serial robots
can be accomplished fairly well by means of a sequence
of single-objective optimization jobs. Again, the results
of the last stage, motor selection, must be integrated
into an overall mathematical model to test the overall
performance. One reference addressing practical opti-
mization issues in the conceptual design of industrial
robots is [16.5].

Design and Performance Evaluation
16.2 Workspace Criteria
401
Part B | 16.2
Only when the physical limits of components
have been exhausted may a radical redesign requir-
ing a return to stage 1 be warranted. This is the
case with SCARA systems. Current industrial robots
of this class bear topologies that are largely of the
serial type, but some parallel SCARA systems have
now appeared in the market. Indeed, the quest for
shorter cycle time, as pertaining to an industry test
cycle – described in Sect. 16.2.1 – has prompted the
industry to look for alternatives to serial architec-
tures. This is how ABBRobotics developed a hybrid
parallel-serial robot, the FlexPicker, built upon Clavel’s
Delta robot [16.6], to which a fourth axis has been
added in series with the ﬁrst three. The latter are
laid out in a symmetric, parallel architecture that en-
ables Delta to produce pure translations of its moving
platform. Adept Technology’s Quattro s650H is re-
portedly capable of three cycles=s for the same test
cycle.
This chapter is organized according to the various
stages of the robot design process outlined earlier. Not-
ing that topology selection and geometric dimensioning
are tightly coupled in the kinematic design process, we
ﬁrst begin with an examination of workspace criteria:
we review methods for determining the topology of the
kinematic chain, followed by the geometric dimensions
so as to satisfy workspace requirements. We then review
in detail the various criteria developed for characteriz-
ing a robot’s manipulating capability, focusing on quan-
titative notions of dexterity based on both kinematic and
dynamic models. We then examine methods for struc-
tural dimensioning of the links and joints so as to meet
both static and dynamic load requirements. Finally, we
discuss elastodynamic dimensioning, and actuator and
gear sizing, taking into account properties such as the
natural frequency of the robot, and force and accelera-
tion capability requirements. We end the chapter with
an overview of mobile, aquatic, and ﬂying robots.
16.2 Workspace Criteria
The most obvious consideration in designing a robot is
that its workspace has a set of required characteristics.
This is a fundamental problem in classical mechanism
design, and raises the obvious question of how a user
can specify those characteristics.
Issues to consider here pertain, mostly, to what Vi-
jaykumar et al. [16.7] termed the regional structure of
a manipulator. This applies to manipulators with a de-
coupled architecture, whose last three revolutes have
concurrent axes, thereby forming a spherical wrist, the
point of concurrency being the wrist center. The ma-
nipulation task of architectures of this kind thus allows
for a decoupling of the positioning and the orientation
subtasks: the regional structure, consisting of the ﬁrst
three joints, is ﬁrst postured so as to locate the center
of its wrist at a speciﬁed point C.x; y; z/; then, the lo-
cal structure, i. e., the wrist, is postured so as to make
the end-effector (EE) attain a speciﬁed orientation with
respect to a frame ﬁxed to the base, given by a rotation
matrix.
Most algorithms reported in the literature to de-
termine the workspace of a given robot refer to the
workspace of the regional structure. Here, we should
distinguish between the workspace of the kinematic
chain, regardless of the physical implementation of the
chain, and that of the physical robot. In the former,
all revolute joints are capable of unlimited rotations
about their axes; in the latter, joint limits are needed,
for example, to avoid wire entanglement. In the early
stages of robot design, joint limits need not be con-
sidered, the workspace thus exhibiting symmetries that
are proper of the type of joints of the regional struc-
ture. If the ﬁrst joint is a revolute, the workspace has
an axis of symmetry, namely, the axis of this revo-
lute joint; if the ﬁrst joint is prismatic, the workspace
has an extrusion symmetry, with the direction of ex-
trusion given by the direction of motion of this joint.
As prismatic joints are inﬁnitely extensive, so is the
kinematic workspace of a robot with a prismatic joint.
The kinematic workspaces of robots with prismatic
joints are usually displayed for a ﬁnite portion of this
workspace.
In the case of parallel robots, to be studied in
full detail in Chap. 14, the regional structure is elu-
sive, in general. The usual practice when displaying
the workspace for these robots is to assume a constant
orientation of the moving plate, the counterpart of the
EE of serial robots [16.8]. A common architecture of
parallel robots, which arises quite naturally in the de-
sign process, entails identical legs symmetrically placed
both on the base platform and on the moving plat-
form. Each leg is, in turn, a serial kinematic chain with
one or two active joints, all others being passive. The
workspace of this kind of robots also exhibits certain
symmetries, but no axial symmetry. The symmetries are
dictated by the number of legs and the types of actuated
joints.
Coming back to serial robots, the workspace can
be deﬁned by an envelope that is essentially of one
of two types, either a manifold or a surface that is

Part B | 16.2
402
Part B
Design
smooth almost everywhere, i. e., smooth everywhere ex-
cept for a set of points of measure zero in the Lebesgue
sense [16.10]. Broadly speaking, a set of measure zero
on a surface is a curve, e.g., a meridian on a sphere,
or a set of isolated points on a line, e.g., the set of ra-
tional numbers on the real line. A paradigm for this
second kind of workspace is that of the Puma robot,
whose kinematic chain is displayed in Fig. 16.1. In
this ﬁgure, the regional and the local structures are
clearly distinguished, the former being fully extended.
The workspace of this robot is obtained upon lock-
ing all joints but the second, when the robot is in the
posture shown in Fig. 16.1. Then, the second joint is
fully rotated about its axis, the center C of the wrist
then describing a circle of radius R equal to the dis-
tance of C from the line L2, the plane of the circle
being normal to this line and lying a distance b3 from
the axis L1 of the ﬁrst joint. This distance is known as
the shoulder offset. Now, with all joints locked again,
but this time with the ﬁrst joint unlocked, the robot
O1
O3
O2
L 1
L 3
L 2
e2
e1
e3= e2
L
C
Fig. 16.1 A Puma robot in a fully stretched posture (af-
ter [16.9])
Z 1
Z 1
Z 2
Z 2
Z 2
X 2
X 2
b3
b3
R
r
R
b)
c)
a)
Fig. 16.2 The workspace of a Puma robot (after [16.9])
is turned as a rigid body about L1. The result is the
toroid of Fig. 16.4. Notice that the solid enclosed by
this surface is the result of the Boolean operation SC,
where S is the sphere of radius R centered at point O2
of Fig. 16.1, while C is the inﬁnite cylinder of ra-
dius b3 and axis L1, which appears as Z1 in Fig. 16.2.
It is noteworthy that, although this workspace can be
readily generated by a simple Boolean operation, it
cannot possibly be generated by an implicit function
of the form f .x; y; z/ D 0 because the surface is not
a manifold.
Robots with manifold workspaces are not common
in industry. We display in Fig. 16.3 an architecture for
the regional structure of a six-axis decoupled robot,
with its neighboring axes mutually orthogonal and
at the same distance a from each other. The com-
mon normals to the two pairs of axes, X2 and X3,
also lie at the same distance a, as do X4 from X3
and C from Z3. Point C is the center of the spherical
wrist, the latter not being included in the ﬁgure. The
workspace of this robot admits a representation of the
form f .x; y; z/ D 0 [16.9], which produces the mani-
fold workspace of Fig. 16.4. The shaded internal region
of the workspace includes all points admitting four real
inverse-kinematics solutions, all other points admitting
only two.
Given that any point of the workspace boundary
represents a positioning singularity – different from an
orientation singularity – manipulators with workspace
boundaries that are not manifolds exhibit double sin-
gularities at the edges of their workspace boundary,
which means that at edge points the rank of the robot
Jacobian becomes deﬁcient by two. At any other point
of the workspace boundary the rank deﬁciency is by
one.
C
X 4
X 1
X 3
Y 1
Z 1
a
a
a
a
a
X 2
Z 2
Z 4
Z 3
e3
e1
e2
Fig. 16.3 An
orthogonal
three-revolute
robot
(af-
ter [16.9])

Design and Performance Evaluation
16.2 Workspace Criteria
403
Part B | 16.2
Design rules based on the shape of the workspace
can now be drawn:
1. If the workspace required is axially symmetric and
ﬁnite, use a serial robot with a regional structure
composed of revolute joints only.
2. If the workspace required has a symmetry of ex-
trusion and is unbounded, use a serial robot with
regional structure having one ﬁrst joint of the pris-
matic type. Here, unbounded is used in a restricted
sense, meaning much larger in one direction than
the others. Moreover:

If one direction is required to be much larger
than the others, then practical implementations
of prismatic joints are available in the form
of rails either overhead, thereby giving rise to
gantry robots, or on the ﬂoor.

If two directions are required to be much larger
than the other, then use a wheeled mobile robot
carrying a manipulator on top. A famous re-
alization of this concept is the National Aero-
nautical and Space Agency’s (NASA) Sojourner
used in the Pathﬁnder mission to Mars in 1997.
3. If axial symmetry is not required, but rather
a workspace with various coplanar axes of sym-
metry, similar to those of regular polygons, use
a parallel robot.
16.2.1 Reaching a Set of Goal Frames
Closely related to the problem of workspace spec-
iﬁcation is that of task speciﬁcation. In mechanism
design it is customary to specify a set of coordinate
frames in space, and to design a mechanism with an
a priori speciﬁed topology that can visit these frames.
An order in which the frames must be reached may
be given. In the event that not all of the frames
are reachable, then one may seek a mechanism that
Regions
Number of solutions
Two solutions
Four solutions
Z1
Y1
X1
Fig. 16.4 The workspace of the orthogonal robot of
Fig. 16.3 (after [16.9])
comes closest, in some suitable sense, to the speciﬁed
frames. The literature on this classical mechanism de-
sign problem is vast [16.1, 11, 12] and the references
cited therein. Some further remarks in connection with
this goal-frame approach to robot dimensioning are
noteworthy:
1. Reaching exactly the desired frames may not al-
ways be desired or possible: in some cases it is
better to use an optimization approach that allows
for solutions that will visit the desired poses within
a minimum error (provided that an error norm can
be suitably engineered, of course, as suggested
in [16.13]).
2. It has been claimed [16.8] that interval analysis
allows not only a discrete set of desired poses
but also a full six-dimensional (6-D) workspace to
be met while taking into account manufacturing
errors.
3. The branching problem occurring in 1-DOF mech-
anisms may also occur in robot design: a design
solution based on via points may indeed visit the
prescribed poses, but not all of these may be reach-
able within the same assembly mode. This problem
is exacerbated in the design of serial robots, as a 6-
DOF, revolute-coupled robot may admit up to 16
distinct postures – branches – for one given EE
pose [16.14, 15].
4. While a robot designed to visit a set of prescribed
poses via its EE will be able to visit that set, we
should not forget that the purpose of using robots
is ﬁrst and foremost to be able to perform not one
single task, but rather a family of tasks. In this
light, the set of poses for which a robot is designed
might as well be a task that is representative of that
family.
In connection with remark 4 above, we can cite the
design or evaluation of SCARA systems. A SCARA
system is a 4-DOF serial robot capable of tasks that
lie within the Schönﬂies subgroup of the group of
rigid-body displacements [16.16, 17], namely the set of
three-dimensional (3-D) displacements augmented with
a rotation about an axis of ﬁxed direction. In these
systems, the task at hand is given by two vertical seg-
ments joined by one horizontal segment. Moreover, the
length of the vertical segments is 25:0 mm, that of the
horizontal segment being 300:0 mm. While the EE is
traversing the horizontal segment, moreover, it should
rotate about a vertical axis through an angle of 180ı.
This task speciﬁcation, which has been adopted by
SCARA manufacturers, does not indicate how to ne-
gotiate the corners, which is left to the imagination of
the robotics engineer.

Part B | 16.2
404
Part B
Design
16.2.2 Workspace Volume and Topology
Reachable and Dexterous Workspace
Beginning with the early work of Roth [16.18], there
have been many studies on the relationship between
manipulator kinematic geometry and its workspace.
Most studies have focused on a classiﬁcation of the
workspace into two components, the reachable and the
dexterous workspace [16.19]. Given a reference point P
attached to a manipulator EE, such as the center of
the spherical wrist, or a point on the EE, the reach-
able workspace is deﬁned to be the set of points in
physical space that can be reached by P. The dexterous
workspace, on the other hand, is the set of points that
can be reached by P with arbitrary EE orientations.
The early literature on workspace focuses on nu-
merical and algebraic methods to characterize these
workspaces. Reachable and dexterous workspaces have
been analyzed using numerical techniques by Kumar
and Waldron [16.19], Yang and Lee [16.20], and Tsai
and Soni [16.21], among others. The advantage of these
schemes over algebraic approaches is that kinematic
constraints can be readily included. More-general de-
sign principles or insights, however, are more difﬁcult
to come by using these techniques. Among the alge-
braic approaches to workspace characterization, a topo-
logical analysis of robot workspace is given by Gupta
and Roth [16.22] and Gupta [16.23]; here the concept
of workspace holes and voids is deﬁned, and condi-
tions for their existence are identiﬁed. The shape of the
reachable and dexterous workspaces is also analyzed as
a function of P.
Further studies of workspace analysis were re-
ported by Freudenstein and Primrose [16.24] and by
Lin and Freudenstein [16.25], where precise relation-
ships between kinematic and workspace parameters are
developed, and a class of three-joint manipulators is
optimized for workspace volume. A more general anal-
ysis of workspace optimization is given in Vijaykumar
et al. [16.7]. Performance criteria for manipulators are
deﬁned here in terms of the dexterous workspace; given
that a manipulator satisﬁes certain constraints on its
Denavit–Hartenberg parameters, it is shown that the op-
timal six-revolute (6R) design is the elbow manipulator.
A typical design of robot regional architecture is of
the orthogonal type, consisting of one revolute of the
vertical axis and two revolutes of the horizontal axes,
one of which intersects the vertical axis. Moreover,
the most common architecture includes intermediate
and distal links of identical lengths. The workspace
of this architecture is thus a sphere of radius equal
to twice that common link length. The volume of this
workspace is thus determined by the length in ques-
tion. As shown by Yoshikawa [16.26], the workspace of
the two-link planar manipulator deﬁned by the last two
links of the foregoing regional architecture is of maxi-
mum area for a prescribed reach and equal link lengths.
As a result, the volume of the same regional architec-
ture is similarly of maximum volume for a prescribed
reach.
Differential-Geometric Workspace
Characterization
Workspace can also be approached from a differential-
geometric perspective, by regarding the conﬁguration
space of a robotic EE frame as a subset of the special
Euclidean group SE(3). An important physical consid-
eration in deﬁning the workspace volume of spatial
mechanisms is that it should not depend on the choice
of ﬁxed reference frame. Less obvious but just as im-
portant is the requirement that the volume should not
depend on which point of the last link the EE frame is
ﬁxed to. This last condition has the following physical
signiﬁcance: if the EE were enlarged or shrunk, then
the robot would have the same workspace volume. The
workspace volume of a robot therefore depends only on
the joint axes.
The workspace volume of a robot is deﬁned by re-
garding SE(3) as a Riemannian manifold, so that the
workspace volume is simply the volume of the im-
age of the forward kinematic map f with respect to
the volume form on SE(3). It is known that SE(3) has
a bi-invariant volume form, that is, the notion of vol-
ume is invariant with respect to the choice of both
the ﬁxed (base) and moving (EE) frames – see, e.g.,
Loncaric [16.27]. Paden and Sastry [16.28] provide
the following visualization for this volume form: Sup-
pose an airplane is restricted to move within a cube
of airspace of length 1 km on a side. At each point
within this cube the airplane can point itself anywhere
in a 4 solid angle and roll 2 about the direction it is
pointing. The orientation volume at such an airplane is
4 2 D 82 rad3. Multiplying by the positional vol-
ume one obtains 82 rad3km3 for the volume of the free
conﬁguration space of the aircraft.
This depiction is the notion of workspace volume
used for robots; it has the advantage of being able
to trade off orientation freedom for positional free-
dom smoothly, unlike the popular notion of dexterous
workspace. Note that the actual numerical value one
obtains will depend on the choice of length scale for
physical space; this in itself does not pose a serious
problem for workspace volumes, as long as the same
length scale is maintained when comparing different
workspaces.
In [16.28] Paden and Sastry show that the op-
timal 6R manipulator that maximizes the workspace
volume subject to a kinematic length constraint is the

Design and Performance Evaluation
16.3 Dexterity Indices
405
Part B | 16.3
elbow manipulator. This result is consistent with the
earlier ﬁnding of Vijaykumar et al. [16.7], but the au-
thors employ the geometric framework outlined above.
Moreover, the results are obtained without some of the
a priori assumptions on the kinematic structure made by
Vijaykumar.
16.3 Dexterity Indices
16.3.1 Local Dexterity for Open Chains
Dexterity can be deﬁned as the ability to move and
apply forces and torques in arbitrary directions with
equal ease, the concept thus belonging to the realm
of kinetostatics, which is the study of the interplay
between feasible twists and constraint wrenches in
multibody mechanical systems under static conserva-
tive conditions. Here, twist is the 6-D array of velocity
variables of a rigid body, involving three components of
a landmark-point velocity and three of angular velocity;
wrench, in turn, is the 6-D array of static variables act-
ing on a rigid body, three accounting for the resultant
force applied at the same landmark point and three for
the concomitant moment acting on the same body.
Salisbury and Craig [16.29] introduced the concept
of dexterity when working on the design of articulated
hands. At issue is the way in which input joint velocity
errors propagate to the output velocities of each ﬁn-
gertip. To illustrate this concept, let J./ denote the
Jacobian of the forward kinematic map, i. e.,
t D J./ P ;
(16.1)
in which  and P denote the vectors of joint variables
and joint rates, respectively, while t is the EE twist, de-
ﬁned, in turn, as,
t D
!
Pp

;
(16.2)
with ! denoting the angular velocity of the EE and Pp the
velocity of the operation point P of the EE, at which the
task is speciﬁed.
Assuming the Jacobian J is mn, the singular value
decomposition of J can be expressed in the form
J D U†VT ;
(16.3)
where U and V are respectively mm and nn unitary
matrices, and † is a m  n matrix with zeros every-
where, except for its .i; i/ entries, for i D 1; : : : n if
m > n; otherwise, for i D 1;: : : m. The non-zero ele-
ments are the (non-negative) singular values of J. At
nonsingular postures, the Jacobian is invertible and we
can write
P D V†1UTt :
(16.4)
Furthermore, if we assume that all the components of
both t and P have the same physical units, which is the
case for purely positioning or purely orienting manip-
ulators with only revolute joints, then we can take the
Euclidean norm of both sides of (16.4), thereby obtain-
ing
kPk2 D tTU

††T1 UTt :
(16.5)
If we let v D UTt then the above expression for kPk2
becomes
v T 
††T1 v D kPk2 :
(16.6)
Now, if the i-th component of v is denoted by vi,
for i D 1; : : : ; n, and we look at the mapping of the unit
ball in J, kPk2 D 1, (16.6) leads to
v1
2
1
C v2
2
2
C    C vn
2
n
D 1 ;
(16.7)
which is the canonical equation of an ellipsoid of semi-
axes f i gn
1 in the G-space, i. e., the space of Cartesian
velocities, or twists of the EE. Notice that the ellipsoid
in question takes its canonical form when represented
in a coordinate frame of axes oriented in the directions
of the eigenvectors of U.
In summary the unit ball in joint space is mapped by
the Jacobian-inverse J1 into an ellipsoid whose semi-
axes are the singular values of J. That is, J distorts the
unit ball in the joint-rate space into an ellipsoid in the
EE-twist space. Hence, a measure of the quality of mo-
tion and force transmission of the robotic architecture
from the joints to the EE is given by the above distor-
tion; the smaller the distortion, the higher the quality of
the transmission.
A measure of the Jacobian-induced distortion can
thus be deﬁned as the ratio of the largest M to the
smallest m singular values of J, which is nothing
but the condition number 2 of J based on the matrix
2-norm [16.30], i. e.,
2 D M
m
:
(16.8)
Actually, (16.8) is only one possibility of comput-
ing the condition number of J, or of any m  n matrix

Part B | 16.3
406
Part B
Design
for that matter, and certainly not the most economical.
Notice that this deﬁnition requires knowledge of the
singular values of the Jacobian. However, computing
the singular values of a matrix is as computationally in-
tensive as computing eigenvalues, with the added cost
of a polar decomposition [16.31]; the combined oper-
ation is slightly less expensive than the singular-value
decomposition [16.32]. The most general deﬁnition of
condition number, for n  n matrices, is [16.30]
.A/ D kAkkA1k :
(16.9)
The expression (16.8) is obtained when the matrix 2-
norm is adopted in (16.9). The matrix 2-norm is deﬁned
as
kAk2  max
i f i g :
(16.10)
If, on the other hand, the weighted matrix Frobenius
norm is adopted, which is deﬁned as
kAkF 
r
1
ntr.AAT/ 
r
1
ntr.ATA/ ;
(16.11)
then, apparently, the computation of the singular val-
ues can be obviated. When the weight 1=n is omitted
in the above deﬁnition, the standard Frobenius norm
is obtained. Notice, however, that the weighted Frobe-
nius norm is more signiﬁcant in engineering, for it does
not depend on the number of rows and columns of the
matrix at hand. The weighted Frobenius norm, in fact,
yields the root-mean-square (rms) value of the set of
singular values.
The Frobenius condition number F of the Jaco-
bian J, based on the matrix Frobenius norm, is then
F.J/ D 1
n
p
tr.JJT/
p
trŒ.JJT/1
D 1
n
p
tr.JTJ/
p
trŒ.JTJ/1 :
(16.12)
One more important difference between the two forms
of computing the matrix condition number is worth
pointing out: 2.  / is not an analytic function of its
matrix argument, while F.  / is. Hence, the condition
number based on the Frobenius norm can be applied to
great advantage in robot architecture design, as F.  /
is differentiable and lends itself to gradient-dependent
optimization methods, which are much faster than di-
rect methods based only on function evaluations. In
robot control, which requires real-time computations,
F.  / also offers practical advantages, for its computa-
tion obviates the knowledge of the singular values, only
requiring a matrix inversion, which is a rather simple
task.
The signiﬁcance of the condition number in robot
design and control can be best understood if we re-
call that the concept stems from numerical analysis in
connection with the solution of the linear system of
equations (16.1) for P. Given that J is a function of
both the architecture parameters and the posture vari-
ables , J is known only to within the error with
which those quantities are known. Further, let the ar-
chitecture parameters, namely, the constant values in
the Denavit–Hartenberg parameter list, be stored in an
array p. Both p and  are known up to measurement
errors ıp and ı, respectively. Moreover, the twist t is
input into the control software of the robot with an un-
avoidable error ıt.
In solving (16.1) for P with ﬂoating-point arith-
metic, the computed value is contaminated with
a roundoff error ı P. The relative error in the com-
puted P is related to the relative errors in the archi-
tecture parameters and posture variables by the rela-
tion [16.30]
kı Pk
kPk
	 .J/
kıpk
kpk C kık
kk C kıtk
ktk

;
(16.13)
where p and  represent the (unknown) actual values of
these vectors and t the nominal value of the twist.
Nevertheless, the foregoing discussion applies to
tasks involving either positioning or orientation, but
not both. Most frequently, robotic tasks involve both
positioning and orientation, which leads to Jacobian
matrices with entries bearing disparate physical units,
the consequence being that the Jacobian singular values
have disparate units as well. Indeed, singular values as-
sociated with positioning bear units of length, whereas
those associated with orientation are dimensionless. As
a consequence, it is impossible to either order all singu-
lar values from smallest to largest or to add them all.
To cope with the issue of disparate units in the Ja-
cobian entries, and to allow for the computation of the
Jacobian condition number, the concept of characteris-
tic length has been proposed [16.9]. The characteristic
length L has been deﬁned as the length by which the
entries of the Jacobian with units of length are to be
divided to render the Jacobian condition number a min-
imum at an optimum posture. This deﬁnition, while
sound, lacks an immediate geometric interpretation,
which has made its adoption in the robotics community
difﬁcult. In order to provide for a geometric interpreta-
tion, the concept of homogeneous space was recently
introduced [16.33]. Using this concept, the robot ar-
chitecture is designed in a dimensionless space, with
points whose coordinates are dimensionless real num-
bers. In this way, the six Plücker coordinates [16.34]
of lines are all dimensionless, and hence the columns

Design and Performance Evaluation
16.3 Dexterity Indices
407
Part B | 16.3
of the robot Jacobian matrix, comprising the Plücker
coordinates of the revolute axes, are dimensionless as
well. As a consequence, the Jacobian singular values
are all dimensionless, and the Jacobian condition num-
ber can be deﬁned. Once the robotic architecture has
been designed for minimum condition number, under
geometric constraints on link-length ratios and angles
between neighboring revolute axes, for example, the
maximum reach of the robot can be calculated. The
maximum reach r will thus be a dimensionless quan-
tity. When this quantity is compared with the prescribed
maximum reach R, with units of length, the characteris-
tic length is computed as the ratio L D R=r.
16.3.2 Dynamics-Based Local Performance
Evaluation
Since motions are caused by forces and torques act-
ing on rigid bodies, it seems reasonable to formulate
performance indices that take into account the iner-
tial properties of the mechanism. Asada [16.35] deﬁnes
the generalized-inertia ellipsoid (GIE) as the ellipsoid
described by the product G D JTMJ1, where M
denotes the inertia matrix of the manipulator. This el-
lipsoid is that with semiaxes given by the singular
values of the foregoing product. Yoshikawa [16.36],
in turn, deﬁnes a corresponding dynamic manipulabil-
ity measure as detŒJM1.JM1/T. Physically these
concepts represent two distinct phenomena. Suppose
the robot is viewed as an input–output device, which,
given a joint torque, produces an acceleration at the
EE. Yoshikawa’s index measures the uniformity of this
torque–acceleration gain, whereas Asada’s GIE charac-
terizes the inverse of this gain. If a human operator were
holding the EE and attempting to move it about, the GIE
would measure the resistance of the robot to this EE
motion.
Other measures that attempt to capture robot per-
formance as a function of the dynamics can be cited:
Voglewede and Ebert-Uphoff [16.37] propose perfor-
mance indices based on joint stiffness and link inertia,
with the aim of establishing a distance to singularity for
any robot posture, while Bowling and Khatib [16.38]
propose a general framework for capturing the dynamic
capability of a general robot manipulator that includes
the velocity and acceleration characteristics of the EE,
taking into account factors such as torque and the ve-
locity limits of the actuators.
16.3.3 Global Dexterity Measures
The above measures are local in the sense that they
characterize the dexterity of a robot at a given pos-
ture. Local measures are useful for applications ranging
from redundancy resolution to workpiece positioning,
but for design applications a global measure may be
more desirable. One straightforward way of extending
local measures to global ones is to integrate them over
the allowable joint space. In [16.39] Gosselin and An-
geles integrate the Jacobian condition number over the
workspace to deﬁne a global measure, thereby produc-
ing a global conditioning index. For the simpler cases
of planar positioning and spherical manipulators, the
global conditioning index was found to coincide with
its local counterpart.
16.3.4 Closed-Chain Dexterity Indices
The formulation of dexterity for closed chains presents
a number of subtleties. The ﬁrst obvious difference
is that the joint conﬁguration space of a closed chain
will no longer be a ﬂat space; in the general case it
will be a curved multidimensional surface embedded
in a higher-dimensional (typically ﬂat) space. Also,
dual to the open chain case, the forward kinematics for
closed chains is generally more difﬁcult to solve than
the inverse kinematics, with the possibility of multi-
ple solutions. Another important difference is that only
a subset of the joints may be actuated, and that the num-
ber of actuated joints may even exceed the mechanism’s
kinematic degrees of freedom.
Several coordinate-based formulations for closed-
chain dexterity have been proposed for speciﬁc mecha-
nisms [16.40] and for cooperating robot systems whose
joints are all assumed to be actuated [16.41, 42], at
least some of which have led to apparently paradoxical
results [16.43, 44]. Because of the nonlinear charac-
teristics unique to closed-chain mechanisms discussed
above, particular care must be exercised in formulating
coordinate-based dexterity measures.
Another
recent
line
of
work
has
attempted
a coordinate-invariant differential-geometric formula-
tion of dexterity for closed chains. In this framework
the joint and EE conﬁguration spaces are regarded as
Riemannian manifolds with an appropriate choice of
Riemannian metric, with the choice of joint space met-
ric reﬂecting the characteristics of the joint actuators.
The previous notions of ellipsoid developed for se-
rial chains can be extended to general closed chains,
containing both passive and active joints, and possibly
redundantly actuated [16.45, 46].
16.3.5 Alternative Dexterity-Like Measures
The various deﬁnitions of dexterity discussed above all
refer to the same qualitative feature of the ability of
a robot to move and apply forces in arbitrary direc-
tions. A different viewpoint is taken in the work of

Part B | 16.4
408
Part B
Design
Liégeois [16.47] and Klein and Huang [16.48], where
dexterity is quantiﬁed in terms of joint-range availabil-
ity. The driving motivation here lies in that most robots
have joint limits; therefore, one should minimize the
possibility of a joint reaching a stop.
Hollerbach [16.49] takes an alternative approach to
designing a redundant seven revolute 7R manipulator,
by considering: (a) elimination of internal singularities,
(b) ability to avoid obstacles in the workspace, (c) the
solvability of the kinematic equations, and (d) mechan-
ical constructability. Based on these four criteria, he
derived a particular 7R design with the morphology of
the human arm, i. e., composed of two spherical joints
deﬁning the shoulder and the wrist plus an intermedi-
ate revolute playing the role of the elbow. Now, while
a redundant architecture should remain fully capable of
performing 6-DOF tasks upon locking one joint, the
architecture reported in this reference may end up by
losing this capability if the elbow joint is locked.
From a control perspective, Spong [16.50] shows
that, if the inertia matrix of a manipulator has a van-
ishing Riemannian curvature, there exists a set of co-
ordinates in which the equations of motion assume
a particularly simple form. The curvature of the iner-
tia matrix also reﬂects the sensitivity of the dynamics
to certain robot parameters. Minimizing the curva-
ture, therefore, is another possible criterion for robot
design.
16.4 Other Performance Indices
16.4.1 Acceleration Radius
Another measure that attempts to capture the dynamic
capabilities of a robotic manipulator is the acceleration
radius. Initially proposed by Graettinger and Krogh
in [16.51], the acceleration radius measures the min-
imum acceleration capability of the EE, in arbitrary
directions, for the given torque bounds on the actuators.
Speciﬁcally, given the dynamics equations for a serial
chain in the form
 D M./ R C C.; P/ P ;
(16.14)
in which M is the robot mass matrix – also known as the
inertia matrix – in joint space, and C.; P/ is the matrix
mapping the joint-rate vector to the vector of Coriolis
and centrifugal forces in the same space. Moreover, the
actuators are assumed to have joint torque limits of the
form
min 	  	 max ;
(16.15)
where the lower and upper limits min; max 2 Rn are
constant or functions of the manipulator posture . The
EE twist rate, denoted by Pt, can be expressed as
Pt D J./ R C PJ.; P/ P ;
(16.16)
where PJ.; P/ is the Jacobian time-derivative. The Ja-
cobian J was introduced in (16.1).
Under the assumption that J./ is nonsingular, one
can write
R D J./1Pt  J./1PJ.; t/ P :
(16.17)
Substituting the above expression into the dynamic
equations (16.14) leads to
.; t;Pt/ D M0./Pt C C0.; t/t ;
(16.18)
where
M0./ D M./J./1
C0.; t/ D ŒC.; t/  M./J./1PJ.; t/J1./ :
For a given state .; P/, the linear torque bounds
(16.15) now deﬁne a polytope in the twist-rate space.
Graettinger and Krogh [16.51] deﬁne the acceleration
radius to be the largest sphere centered at the origin that
is contained in this polytope; its radius reﬂects the min-
imal guaranteed EE acceleration in arbitrary directions.
This concept is applied to measure the EE accelera-
tion capability of a manipulator, as well as to determine
the actuator sizes for achieving a desired acceleration
radius. Bowling and Khatib [16.38] generalize this con-
cept to capture both force and acceleration capabilities
of the EE, with a view to quantifying the worst-case dy-
namic performance capability of a manipulator.
16.4.2 Elastostatic Performance
Elastostatic performance refers to the robotic system’s
response to the applied load – force and moment, i. e.,
wrench – under static equilibrium. This response may
be measured in terms of the stiffness of the manip-
ulator, which determines the translation and angular
deﬂections when the EE is subjected to an applied
wrench.
Robot deﬂections have two sources: link and joint
deﬂection. In the presence of long links, as in the space

Design and Performance Evaluation
16.4 Other Performance Indices
409
Part B | 16.4
robot Canadarm2, link compliance is a major source
of deﬂection. However, in the majority of today’s se-
rial robots, the main source of deﬂection occurs at the
joints.
In this chapter, we assume that the manipulator
links are rigid, and model the joints as linearly elastic
torsional springs. The more complex problem of link
ﬂexibility is studied in detail in Chap. 11. That is, for
the elastostatic model we base our analysis on the as-
sumption that, under a positioning task, the joints are
locked at a certain posture 0, while the EE is subject to
a perturbation wrench w that is balanced by an elas-
tic joint torque . Under these conditions,  and 
obey the well-known linear relation
K D  ;
(16.19)
in which K is the stiffness matrix in joint space at the
given posture. Moreover, the matrix K is diagonal, with
its entries equal to the torsional stiffnesses of the cor-
responding joints, K is therefore posture independent,
i. e., constant throughout the whole robot workspace.
Moreover, since all joints exhibit a ﬁnite, nonzero stiff-
ness, K is invertible, its inverse C being termed the
compliance matrix. We can thus express the inverse re-
lation of (16.19) as
 D C :
(16.20)
It should be apparent that  and  have an incre-
mental nature, for both are measured from the equilib-
rium posture, at which  and  vanish.
On the issue of stiffness matrix, Grifﬁs and
Duffy [16.52] proposed a mapping from an incre-
mental rigid-body displacement x into an incremen-
tal wrench w that turned out to be nonsymmetric.
The concept behind this mapping was formalized by
Howard, Zefran and Kumar [16.53] by means of Lie
algebra. However, in the foregoing papers, x and w
turn out to be incompatible in the sense that their re-
ciprocal product does not yield incremental work – the
point at which x is deﬁned is distinct from that at
which w is applied. For this reason, the array rep-
resentation of the same mapping cannot be, properly
speaking, termed a stiffness matrix.
For a constant magnitude of , the deﬂection
attains its maximum value in the direction of the eigen-
vector associated with the maximum eigenvalue of C
or, equivalently, with the minimum eigenvalue of K,
denoted by min. In terms of elastostatic performance,
we aim to (a) make the maximum deﬂection a mini-
mum, i. e., we want to maximize min, and (b) make the
magnitude of the deﬂection jjjj as insensitive as pos-
sible to changes in the direction of the applied load .
This can be done by rendering min as close as possi-
ble to max. The ﬁrst aim is associated with the stiffness
constants, i. e., the higher the constants the lower the
deﬂections. The later, however, is associated with the
concept of isotropy, the ideal case being when all the
eigenvalues of K are identical, which means that K is
isotropic. Due to the pyramidal effect of serial robots,
in which downstream motors carry their upstream coun-
terparts, the joint stiffness is bound to be largest for the
proximal joints. Hence an isotropic stiffness matrix is
impossible for serial robots.
Notice that (16.19) and (16.20) may also be formu-
lated in the task space, i. e.,
KCx D w ;
(16.21)
where x  tt, with t denoting a small time interval
producing a correspondingly small change x in the
pose of the EE. That is,
x D J Pt D J ;
(16.22)
which is a linear transformation of the joint-vector in-
crement into the pose-increment vector. We show next
that the stiffness matrix is not frame invariant. This
means that, under the linear transformation from joint to
Cartesian coordinates, the stiffness matrix does not obey
a similarity transformation. For quick reference, we re-
call below the deﬁnition of similarity transformation:
if y D Lx is a linear transformation of Rn into itself,
and we introduce a change of vector basis, x0 D Ax,
y0 D Ay, then L changes to L0, which is given by
L0 D ALA1 :
(16.23)
The above transformation of any vector of Rn into an-
other one of the same space, and of a matrix L into L0,
as given by (16.23), is termed a similarity transforma-
tion. Notice that A is guaranteed to be invertible, as it
represents a change of coordinate frame.
Now, under the change of coordinates given
by (16.22), (16.21) leads to
KCJ D JT ;
(16.24)
where we have used the kinetostatic relation [16.9]
JTw D  :
The exponent T denotes the transpose of the inverse
or, equivalently, the inverse of the transpose. Upon mul-
tiplication of both sides of (16.24) by JT from the left,
we end up with
JTKCJ D  :
(16.25)

Part B | 16.4
410
Part B
Design
If we now compare (16.19) with (16.25), we can
readily derive the relations between the stiffness ma-
trix K in joint space and the stiffness matrix KC in
Cartesian space
K D JTKCJ
and
KC D JTKJ1 ;
(16.26)
which apparently is not a similarity transformation be-
tween K and KC. What this means is that the two
matrices do not share the same set of eigenvalues
and their eigenvectors are not related by the linear
relation (16.22). As a matter of fact, if the robot is
revolute-coupled, the entries of its stiffness matrix K all
have units of Nm, i. e., of torsional stiffness, while the
entries of KC have disparate units. To show this, the Ja-
cobian matrix, the inverse Jacobian and the two stiffness
matrices are partitioned correspondingly into four 3  3
blocks, i. e., as
J D
J11
J12
J21
J22

;
J1 D
J0
11
J0
12
J0
21
J0
22

;
K D
K11
K12
KT
12
K22

;
KC D
KC11
KC12
KT
C12
KC22

:
Furthermore, in light of the deﬁnition of the
twist, (16.2), the two upper blocks of J are dimen-
sionless, while its two lower blocks have units of
length [16.9]. As a consequence, the two left blocks
of J1 are dimensionless, while its two right blocks
have units of inverse length. Now, the blocks of KC are
computed from the corresponding relation in (16.26),
thereby obtaining
KC11 D J0T
11.K11J0
11 C K12J0
21/
C J0T
21.KT
12J0
11 C K22J0
21/
KC12 D J0T
11.K11J0
12 C K12J0
22/
C J0T
21.KT
12J0
12 C K22J0
22/
KC21 D KT
C12
KC22 D J0T
12.K11J0
12 C K12J0
22/
C J0T
22.KT
12J0
12 C K22J0
22/ :
It is now apparent that: KC11 has entries with units
of Nm, i. e., of torsional stiffness; KC12 and KC21 have
entries with units of N; and KC22 has entries with units
of N=m, i. e., of translational stiffness.
The outcome of the foregoing discussion is that
a norm for K is possible, but not one for KC, unless of
course a characteristic length is introduced to render all
the entries of KC dimensionally homogeneous. A norm
of a matrix is useful as it indicates how large the entries
of the matrix are. We would like to characterize how
stiff a robot is in both joint and Cartesian spaces. In joint
space we could adopt any norm, but notice that the 2-
norm, introduced in (16.8), would be misleading, as this
norm would assign the value of the strongest joint to
the overall robot stiffness. A more suitable norm would
be the weighted Frobenius norm, introduced in (16.11),
which would assign the rms value of the joint stiffnesses
to the overall robot stiffness.
To design a robot optimally, we would therefore aim
to maximize the Frobenius norm of its stiffness matrix
in joint space, while observing constraints on the robot
weight, as stiffer joints lead to heavier joints if the same
material is used for all joints.
16.4.3 Elastodynamic Performance
For a general design problem, not only the kinetostatic
and elastostatic performances, but also the elastody-
namic performance have to be considered. In this re-
gard, we introduce the assumptions of Sect. 16.4.2, with
the added condition that inertia forces due to the link
masses and moments of inertia are now taken into con-
sideration.
The linearized model of a serial robot at the posture
given by 0, if we neglect damping, is
M R C K D  ;
(16.27)
in which M is the n  n positive-deﬁnite mass ma-
trix introduced in Sect. 16.4.1, while K was deﬁned
in Sect. 16.4.2 as the n  n positive-deﬁnite stiffness
matrix in joint space. Both K and M were deﬁned in
joint-space coordinates, , representing the vector of
joint-variable elastic displacements, as in Sect. 16.4.2.
These displacements are produced when, as the joints
are all locked at a value 0 and thereby become ideal
linear springs, the robot is subject to a perturbation ,
to nonzero initial conditions, or to a combination of
both.
Under free vibration, i. e., under a motion of the sys-
tem (16.27) caused by nonzero initial conditions and
a zero excitation , the foregoing equation can be
solved for  R
 R D D ;
D  M1K ;
(16.28)
in which the matrix D is known as the dynamic ma-
trix. This matrix determines the behavior of the system
under consideration, as its eigenvalues are the nat-
ural frequencies of the system and its eigenvectors
the modal vectors. Let f !i gn
1 and f f i gn
1 denote the
sets of eigenvalues and the corresponding eigenvectors
of D, respectively. Under the initial conditions Œ.0/,
 P.0/T, in which .0/ is proportional to the i-th

Design and Performance Evaluation
16.5 Other Robot Types
411
Part B | 16.5
eigenvector of D and  P.0/ D 0, the ensuing motion
is of the form .t/ D .0/cos !it [16.54].
Furthermore, under the change of variables given
by (16.22), the model (16.27) changes to
MJ1Rx C KJ1x D JTw :
If we now multiply both sides of the above equation
by JT, we obtain the elastodynamic model (16.27) in
Cartesian coordinates, namely
JTMJ1Rx C JTKJ1x D w ;
in which the ﬁrst matrix coefﬁcient is the mass ma-
trix MC in Cartesian coordinates, and the second is
identiﬁed as KC, which was introduced in (16.26), i. e.,
MC  JTMJ1 :
(16.29)
The elastodynamic model in Cartesian coordinates
thus takes the form
MCRx C KCx D w :
(16.30)
Again, by virtue of the transformation (16.29), it is
apparent that the mass matrix, like its stiffness coun-
terpart, is not invariant under a change of coordinates.
Moreover, in a revolute-coupled robot, all the entries
of M have units of kg m2; however, the entries of MC
have disparate units. An analysis similar to that con-
ducted in Sect. 16.4.2 for the stiffness matrix in Carte-
sian space reveals that, if MC is partitioned into four
3  3 blocks, then its upper-left block has units of mo-
ment of inertia, its lower-right block has units of mass,
while its off-diagonal blocks have units of kg m.
Correspondingly, the dynamic matrix in Cartesian
coordinates becomes
DC D M1
C KC :
(16.31)
It is now a simple matter to prove that the dynamic ma-
trix is invariant under a change of coordinates. Indeed,
if we substitute transformations (16.26) and (16.29)
into (16.31), we obtain
DC D JM1JTJTKJ1 D JM1KJ1 ;
in which the dynamic matrix D in joint coordinates can
be readily identiﬁed in the ﬁnal expression, and hence,
DC D JDJ1 ;
(16.32)
which shows that DC is indeed a similarity transfor-
mation of D. As a consequence, the dynamic matrix is
indeed invariant under a change of coordinates, the two
matrices thus sharing the same sets of eigenvalues, their
eigenvectors being related by the same similarity trans-
formation. That is, if the modal vectors in joint space –
the eigenvectors of D – are denoted by f f i gn
1 and the
modal vectors in Cartesian space are denoted by f gi gn
1,
then these two sets are related by
gi D Jf i ;
i D 1; : : : ; n :
(16.33)
Therefore, the natural frequencies of the elastody-
namic model are the same, regardless of the space in
which they are calculated, while their natural modes of
vibration change under a similarity transformation.
Under an excitation of the form  D 0 cos !t and
zero initial conditions, the system is known to respond
with a harmonic motion of frequency ! and magni-
tude that depends on both ! and the system frequency
spectrum f !i gn
1 [16.54]. When ! equals one of the nat-
ural frequencies of the system, the response magnitude
grows unbounded, a phenomenon known as resonance.
For this reason, when designing a robot, it is imperative
that its frequency spectrum does not involve any of the
expected operation frequencies, which can be achieved
by designing the robot with stiffness and mass matrices
that yield a frequency spectrum outside of the frequency
range of the operation conditions.
This design task is not straightforward. Indeed,
while the stiffness matrix in joint space is constant,
the mass matrix is posture dependent, i. e., M D M./.
Because of this feature, the elastodynamic design of
a robot is bound to be iterative: the design can be con-
ducted for a straw-man task, i. e., a typical task in the
target applications, thus deﬁning a set of postures that
lead in turn to a set of mass-matrix values. Then, the fre-
quency spectrum for all these postures can be designed
to lie above the frequency range of the straw-man task.
Since the robot will eventually be commanded to exe-
cute other tasks than the straw-man task, simulation of
alternative tasks is required to ensure that the design is
safe from a resonance viewpoint.
16.5 Other Robot Types
Serial robots were fully developed, to a great extent, in
the nineties, with SCARA systems capable of executing
the standard manipulation task deﬁned in Sect. 16.2.1 at
the rate of two cycles per second. Other, more sophis-
ticated robots started appearing in the 1980s. Parallel
robots were a natural extension of serial robots. They

Part B | 16.5
412
Part B
Design
presented new challenges to researchers, as their for-
ward kinematics turned out to be quite more complex
than the inverse kinematics of serial robots. Nowadays
a few parallel and hybrid, i. e., serial-parallel robots,
are found in applications in industry and other envi-
ronments. A remarkable type of robot that emerged in
the 1990s is humanoids, with their own design and con-
trol challenges. Flying and swimming robots are also
developing fast. An outline of the design challenges
brought about by these new types of robots is included
below.
16.5.1 Robots Mounted on a Fixed Base:
Parallel-Kinematics Machines
Under
the
umbrella
parallel-kinematics machines
(PKMs) are included robots comprising one base plate
(BP), one moving plate (MP) and a set of limbs that
couple the two. The earliest robot of this kind that at-
tracted the attention of researchers is what is known as
the Gough–Stewart platform (GSP), consisting of six
limbs, each of the SPU type, where S, P and U stand for
spherical, prismatic and universal joint, respectively. In
fact, the ﬁrst two belong to what is known as the six
lower kinematic pairs [16.3] – the other four are R, H,
C, and F, which are termed revolute, helical, cylindri-
cal and planar pairs. The U joint is a concatenation of
two R pairs with axes intersecting at right angles. Three
of these six pairs, R, P and H, allow for 1-DOF motion
between the two links that they couple; C allows for 2-
DOF, while S and F allow for three. Each limb of the
GSP thus allows for 6-DOF of the MP with respect to
the BP.
The ﬁrst and foremost task when designing a PKM
is the choice of both the type and the number of limbs.
As to the latter, it varies from two to six. Apparently, the
DOF of a limb should be at least that of the PKM under
design. The early PKMs studied, mainly in the 1980s,
were invariably 6-DOF systems. Clavel [16.6] patented
in 1990 what may be the ﬁrst PKM with reduced mo-
bility, i. e., with a DOF D 3, namely, a robot that allows
pure translations of its MP. Spherical robots, like Gos-
selin’s Agile Eye [16.55], are also of reduced mobility.
Different from Clavel’s Delta, all links of spherical link-
ages undergo spherical motion, rotating about the same
point – the center of the sphere. Delta is supplied with
links that undergo other motions than those of their MP,
purely translational.
Other PKMs with reduced mobility appeared later,
the best known being the H4, a 4-DOF system, patented
in 2001 [16.56], and designed to implement Schönﬂies
displacements (Sect. 16.2.1) of its MP. The forego-
ing patent came as a response to the need of ever
faster pick-and-place robots for the packaging and the
electronics industry sectors, when it was apparent that
the SCARA systems of the mid eighties had reached
their limits because of their serial architecture. The H4
is manufactured by Adept Technology, Inc. under the
name Adept Quattro s650HS parallel robot.
Motivated by the growing interest in fast robots
with reduced mobility, two approaches to the design
of PKMs with reduced mobility have been put forth:
screw theory [16.57] and group theory [16.58]. By far,
the most favored approach is the former, as screw the-
ory is well established within the community of robot
mechanicists. However, group theory offers features not
found in screw theory, which is local in that its scope is
limited to the velocity level. Group theory is applicable
at the displacement level. What is at stake in this con-
text is the topology of the robot, namely, the number of
joints, links, limbs and the type of joints, what Harten-
berg and Denavit [16.3] term the number synthesis
and the type synthesis. These two activities correspond
to the qualitative synthesis underlying the design pro-
cess, which appears at the conceptual stage, as opposed
to its quantitative counterpart; the latter appears at
the embodiment and the detail stages of the design
process [16.4]. Recently, a design paradigm based on
the concept of complexity has been proposed [16.59],
aimed at assessing the complexity of a linkage design
variant based on the types of its joints.
As an extension of the Delta robot, ABB Robotics
developed the Flexpicker IRB360, a hybrid system that
comprises a Delta robot in series with a revolute joint at
its MP that adds one fourth DOF to the purely transla-
tional motion of the Delta. The result is, thus, a hybrid
Schönﬂies motion generator. ABB’s robot is used in the
food-processing industry.
A major bottleneck in the development of fast
robots with reduced mobility is their structural stiffness.
With the packaging and electronics industry requiring
ever faster pick-and-place robots, capable of speeds
greater than 3 cycles/s, high excitation frequencies are
generated, which calls for structures much stiffer than
those found in other applications areas. The ideal fast
robot should have a parallel structure whose mass is
negligible when compared to that of its payload and,
at the same time, highly stiff. As the robots of interest
are intended for the production of Schönﬂies displace-
ments, any motion of their MP outside of this subgroup,
namely, any tilt of the MP, is considered parasitical and
should be of as small an amplitude as possible. This
calls for a structure that exhibits a high rotational stiff-
ness about any horizontal axis – under the assumption
that the only rotational motion of the MP is about a ver-
tical axis, which is usually the case. The challenge here
is how to characterize this stiffness. A simple elasto-
dynamic model of the structure is derived by assuming

Design and Performance Evaluation
16.5 Other Robot Types
413
Part B | 16.5
that the limbs provide a linearly elastic suspension for
the MP, which is assumed to be rigid. The structure can
be regarded as a generalized spring [16.60], namely,
a linearly elastic suspension that is ﬁxed to one station-
ary base at one end and carries a moving rigid body
at another end. Moreover, the suspension allows full 6-
DOF small-amplitude displacements of the body. What
is meant by the latter is rotations that entail a small an-
gle – as small as to allow for an approximation of the
type sin  
 , with  denoting the angle – and transla-
tions small with respect to the dimensions of the body.
The motion of the MP can then be represented using
a unit screw [16.57] multiplied by a small angle . Un-
der these conditions, the Cartesian stiffness matrix is of
6  6, given that the screw is of dimension 6.
In characterizing the rotational stiffness of PKMs,
one may think of resorting to the eigenvalues and eigen-
vectors of their stiffness matrix. There are some issues
with this approach, however, for, in light of the different
units of the four blocks of this matrix (Sect. 16.4.2) the
eigenvalue problem associated with the matrix is mean-
ingful only in a generalized sense [16.61], as explained
presently. Let us recall the 6  6 Cartesian stiffness ma-
trix KC, introduced in Sect. 16.4.2, and let us denote
with ki its i-th eigenvector, a unit screw, and with i its
corresponding eigenvalue. The generalized eigenvalue
problem associated with KC now can be stated as
KCki D iki; ki 
ei
i

; i D 1; : : : 6 ;
(16.34)
in which ei is the unit vector denoting the direction of
the axis of the i-th eigenscrew, i is the moment of the
axis with respect to the origin and  is a permutation
matrix that exchanges the top and the bottom blocks of
a screw array, these two items being deﬁned as
 D
O
1
1
O

; i D ei  pi C piei ;
(16.35)
for i D 1; : : : 6, O and 1 denoting the 3  3 zero and
identity matrices, respectively, while pi is the position
vector of a point on the axis of the eigenscrew ki, while
pi is the pitch of ki. The moment of a line L can be
interpreted as that of a unit force whose line of action
coincides with L. The generalized eigenvalue problem
of (16.34) now leads to
Aiki D 0; Ai D

Krr
Krt  i1
KT
rt  i1
Ktt

;
(16.36)
for i D 1; : : : 6. In light of its deﬁnition, (16.34), ki ¤
0, and hence, (16.36) must admit a non-trivial solution,
which means that Ai must be singular, thereby leading
to the characteristic equation of KC, namely,
det

Krr
Krt  1
KT
rt  1
Ktt

D 0 ;
(16.37)
where subscript i has been deleted from , for it is no
longer needed. In light of the linear homogeneous form
in  of the foregoing 6  6 matrix, its determinant is
a sextic polynomial in , the eigenvalue sought.
It is worth mentioning that the set of screws does
not form, properly speaking, a vector space, for screws
do not have a zero – they include a three-dimensional
unit vector, which hence cannot vanish. By the same
token, the set of screws does not admit a scalar prod-
uct. Indeed, if two screw arrays are dot-multiplied, their
product is meaningless, because it involves additions
of quantities with disparate units. The pertinent con-
cept is reciprocity: the reciprocal product of two unit
screws, s1 and s2 is deﬁned via matrix , introduced
in (16.35), namely, sT
1s2, which rightfully has units of
length. When the reciprocal product of two unit screws
vanishes, the screws are said to be reciprocal to each
other. The physical signiﬁcance of the concept lies in
that a unit screw multiplied by an amplitude F with
units of force produces a wrench; one multiplied by
an amplitude ˝ with units of frequency yields a twist.
If the wrench happens to be a pure force with line of
action intersecting the axis of the twist – the case of
a force applied at a door whose line of action intersects
the axis of the hinges – then wrench and twist are recip-
rocal to each other in that the power developed by the
wrench on the door undergoing a feasible twist is zero.
Now we have a result that parallels one applicable
to symmetric n  n matrices:
Theorem 16.1
The eigenvalues of K are real and the product ipi is
non-negative, while the eigenvectors f ki g6
1 are mutually
reciprocal.
its proof being found in [16.62] and [16.63].
Further, decoupling of the stiffness matrix means
ﬁnding a new coordinate frame in which its two off-
diagonal blocks vanish. Such a decoupling is not al-
ways possible, as shown below (See the corrigenda
in [16.63]). It is known that the entries of the Carte-
sian stiffness matrix change according with a similarity
transformation applicable to screws, which involves
both a shift of origin and a change of the orientation of
the original frame [16.64]. If the latter is labeled A and
the new frame B, then A is carried into B by means
of a shift of the origin given by vector d and a rota-
tion matrix Q. In the sequel, the cross-product matrix

Part B | 16.5
414
Part B
Design
of a vector v 2 R3 will be needed. This is known to be
a skew symmetric matrix V with the property
Vx  v  x;
8 x 2 R3;
V  CPM.v/ :
(16.38)
Now let D  CPM.d/, with d deﬁned above as the
displacement that takes the origin of A into that of B.
The components of a unit screw Os in B change to those
in A according to the similarity transformation
Œ Os A D SŒ Os B;
S D
 Q
O
DQ
Q

;
(16.39)
the inverse of the 6  6 matrix S being
S1 D
 QT
O
QTD
QT

:
(16.40)
Accordingly, the components of the stiffness ma-
trix change, under the same similarity transformation,
as [16.63]
Œ K A D SŒ K BS1 ;
(16.41)
which, were it not for matrix , looks like the similar-
ity transformation of a n  n matrix. The presence of 
is essential by virtue of the deﬁnition of the reciprocal
product. Let, now,
Œ K A D
 K0
rr
K0
rt
.K0
rt/T
K0
tt

; Œ K B D
Krr
Krt
KT
rt
Ktt

:
(16.42)
The distinct blocks of the two matrices are related
by
K0
rr D Q.Krr  KrtD/QT C DQ.KT
rt  KttD/QT
K0
rt D .QKrt C DQKtt/QT
K0
tt D QKttQT
;
the decoupling condition following upon setting K0
rt D
O, which leads to
QTDQKtt D Krt ;
(16.43)
Now, since D is a cross-product matrix, it is singu-
lar – its null space is spanned by vector d. Based on
Sylvester’s Theorem [16.31], which states that the rank
of the product of two matrices is at most the smaller of
the matrix ranks, the left-hand side of (16.43) is singu-
lar, and hence, the right-hand side must also be singular,
which is the decoupling condition sought. If block Krt
is singular, then decoupling can be achieved by means
of a shift of the origin, without changing the orientation
of the frame, i. e., upon choosing Q D 1 in (16.43). This
result is summarized below:
Theorem 16.2
The stiffness matrix can be decoupled if and only if its
off-diagonal block is singular. When this is the case,
decoupling is achieved by a similarity transformation
involving only a shift of origin.
The design criterion to apply here is, thus, to aim at
a singular coupling block of the Cartesian stiffness ma-
trix. This can be achieved by means of ﬁnite elements,
but these work for one single robot posture. However,
with the help of the concept of generalized spring, Tagh-
vaiepour et al. [16.65] showed that it is possible to
obtain the stiffness matrix of deformable links using
that obtained with ﬁnite element analysis (FEA) at one
particular posture, then transforming this matrix to ob-
tain its counterpart at an alternate posture. The details
on how to compute the displacement vector d that helps
decouple the stiffness matrix are given in [16.63].
Once the stiffness matrix is decoupled, the eigen-
values of the rotational and translational blocks can be
readily found, and assess the performance of the robot
from the stiffness viewpoint. As a matter of fact, in the
presence of a decoupled matrix, the characteristic equa-
tion (16.37) reduces to
det
 Krr
1
1
Ktt

D 0 ;
(16.44)
Upon expansion, using the expression for the deter-
minant of a block-matrix [16.66], the foregoing equa-
tion leads to
det.Krr/det.Ktt  2K1
rr / D 0 ;
the characteristic equation in  readily following
P./  det.Ktt  2K1
rr / D 0 ;
(16.45)
which is apparently a cubic equation in 2, the outcome
being that the eigenvalues of the decoupled 66 Carte-
sian stiffness matrix occur in symmetric pairs, i. e., the
six eigenscrews of the matrix occur in pairs of oppo-
site chirality, while the absolute values of each pair are
identical [16.62, 63].
16.5.2 Mobile Robots
Mobile robots bear an architecture similar to PKMs.
Different from the latter, their limbs are not attached
to a base plate, but free to move. In fact, their links
proximal to the ground end by either feet or wheels,
thereby leading to weheeled or, correspondingly, legged
mobile robots. Mobile robots termed hybrid have been
designed with a combination of wheeled and legged
limbs. These robots take on various morphologies, as
outlined below.

Design and Performance Evaluation
16.5 Other Robot Types
415
Part B | 16.5
Wheeled Robots
The earliest of these robots were termed autonomous
guided vehicles (AGV). They were provided with
a chassis and two motors, to implement the 2-DOF
proper of any terrestrial vehicle equipped with conven-
tional – as opposed to omnidirectional – wheels. These
systems were capable of following a trajectory printed
on the ﬂat ground of a manufacturing facility. They had
thus a rather limited mobility, but their load-carrying
capacity was virtually unlimited.
Robots with conventional wheels are generally
equipped with two pairs of pneumatic tires, that al-
low them to adapt themselves to irregular surfaces.
Moreover, these robots can either bear steerable wheels,
like MDA’s Rover Chassis Prototype (RCP), or change
course by means of maneuvers involving different an-
gular velocities of their tires mounted on axles ﬁxed to
the chassis, like the Khepera robot.
Extraterrestrial exploration has prompted the devel-
opment of rovers, namely, wheeled robots intended for
roaming on unstructured terrain, either soft, like the
Moon’s or Mars’s regolith, or hard, like rocks. Design
issues here pertain mainly to the wheels, as these must
adapt themselves to a rich variety of conditions and ter-
rain constitution. Rovers are currently designed to travel
at very low speeds, sometimes of a few meters per day,
the case of NASA’s Curiosity (This rover landed on
Mars on August 6, 2012.). The main issue here is for
the wheels to provide enough traction and prevent spin-
ning without advancing. The latter is guaranteed by the
use of individual motors on each wheel. Traction is en-
hanced by means of grousers on the wheel periphery.
Curiosity and RCP feature metal wheels with grousers.
Legged Robots
This kind of robots has evolved tremendously since the
earlier systems developed in the eighties: Ohio state
university (OSU) hexapod and the OSU adaptive sus-
pension vehicle (ASV), among others. Current legged
robots range from those with six legs, X-RHEX Lite,
with a planar symmetry and three identical legs on each
side of the body, or the multi-appendage robotic system
(MARS), with its legs distributed along the vertices of
a regular hexagon, to four-legged robots with an archi-
tecture similar to that of mammals, like Big Dog and
Cheetah. Special mention deserve bipeds, of which the
best known are humanoids, with the architecture of the
human body, namely, ASIMO (advanced step in inno-
vative mobility) and its competitor, QRIO (quest for
curiosity). Design issues vary, depending on the num-
ber of legs. Hexapods offer a combination of static
stability and maneuverability, which their four-legged
counterparts do not. By far, humanoids are the highest
demanding in terms of static and dynamic stability, but
offer the highest mobility.
Hybrid Robots
Hybrid robots stem from the combination of the two
foregoing types, wheeled with legged. These are sys-
tems that look like wheeled robots, but that feature
wheels instead of feet. They offer the advantages – and
the disadvantages – of the two foregoing types. A recent
example of this kind of robots is NASA’s ATHLETE
(all-terrain hex-legged extra-terrestrial explorer) robot,
that features six articulated legs stemming from the
edges of a regular hexagon deﬁning the robot body and
ending in wheels. Its design is intended for service to
the planned Lunar base. According to NASA, the 15-
ton lunar habitat would be [16.67]
mounted on top of the six-legged robot. The habi-
tat could walk right off of the lunar lander, and
then proceed to any desired location. Wheeled lo-
comotion would be used for level ground; more
challenging terrain could be negotiated with the full
use of the ﬂexible legs.
16.5.3 Aquatic Robots
Aquatic robots are currently being marketed for opera-
tion on water, whether on the surface or underneath. An
example of a surface robot is the Mantra, intended to
act as a lifeguard and help swimmers in distress. Some
aquatic robots have been designed with the morphol-
ogy of ﬁsh [16.68]. One swimming robot designed with
a hexapod morphology, featuring six ﬂippers in lieu of
legs is Aqua, developed at McGill University, and de-
picted in Fig. 16.5.
By far, the aquatic robot with the highest proﬁle is
the robotic submarine Blueﬁn, which became a celebrity
Fig. 16.5 Aqua, an amphibious robot

Part B | 16
416
Part B
Design
in the search for the debris of Flight MHS370 (Flight
went missing on March 7, 2014 at 16:41 GMT.).
16.5.4 Flying Robots
This ﬁeld is becoming quite active, with some robots
mimicking the morphology of insects, and falling
into the category of micro-robots [16.69]; other ﬂy-
ing robots are designed as unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAV) [16.70]. Intensive research is now being re-
ported in the design and control of two novel types
of UAVs, namely, drones and quadrotors. The con-
trol of drones undergoing fast maneuvers has been
made possible by the inception of gyro-free inertial
measurement systems fabricated with microelectrome-
chanical systems (MEMS) technology. Highly ma-
neuverable quadrotors, especially suitable for surveil-
lance and reconnaissance missions, are small-size,
light-weight ﬂying machines supplied with two pairs
of counter-rotating rotors and propellers, located
at the vertices of a square frame [16.71]. A re-
cent issue of IEEE’s Robotics & Automation Mag-
azine [16.72] includes a state-of-the-art account of
quadrotor technology.
16.6 Summary
This chapter is devoted to the design of robots,
with a focus on serial architectures. In this regard,
we started by proposing a stepwise design proce-
dure; then, we recalled the main issues in robot
design. These issues pertain to workspace geome-
try, and to the kinetostatic, the dynamic, the elasto-
static and the elastodynamic performances. In doing
this, the mathematics behind the concepts addressed
was brieﬂy outlined, so as to make the chapter self-
contained.
A major design issue in the design of PKM, namely,
stiffness, was given due attention. Design issues per-
taining to other kinds of robots, like wheeled, legged,
ﬂying and aquatic, were outlined.
References
16.1
O. Bottema, B. Roth: Theoretical Kinematics (North-
Holland, Amsterdam 1979), also available by Dover
Publishing, New York 1990
16.2
J. Angeles: The qualitative synthesis of parallel
manipulators, ASME J. Mech. Des. 126(4), 617–624
(2004)
16.3
R. Hartenberg, J. Denavit: Kinematic Synthesis of
Linkages (McGraw-Hill, New York 1964)
16.4
G. Pahl, W. Beitz: Engineering Design. A Systematic
Approach, 3rd edn. (Springer, London 2007), trans-
lated from the original Sixth Edition in German
16.5
M. Petterson, J. Andersson, P. Krus, X. Feng,
D. Wäppling: Industrial robot design optimization
in the conceptual design phase, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Mechatron. Robotics, Vol. 2, ed. by P. Drews (2004)
pp. 125–130
16.6
R. Clavel: Device for the movement and positioning
of an element in space, US Patent 497 6582 (1990)
16.7
R. Vijaykumar, K.J. Waldron, M.J. Tsai: Geometric
optimization of serial chain manipulator structures
for working volume and dexterity, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 5(2), 91–103 (1986)
16.8
J.P. Merlet: Parallel Robots (Kluwer, Boston 2006)
16.9
J. Angeles: Fundamentals of Robotic Mechanical
Systems, 3rd edn. (Springer, New York 2007)
16.10
K. Hoffman: Analysis in Euclidean Space (Prentice
Hall, Englewood Cliffs 1975)
16.11
L. Burmester: Lehrbuch der Kinematik (Arthur Felix,
Leipzig 1886)
16.12
J.M.
McCarthy:
Geometric
Design
of
Linkages
(Springer, New York 2000)
16.13
J. Angeles: Is there a characteristic length of a rigid-
body displacement?, Mech. Mach. Theory 41, 884–
896 (2006)
16.14
H. Li: Ein Verfahren zur vollständigen Lösung
der
Rückwärtstransformation
für
Industrier-
oboter mit allegemeiner Geometrie, Ph.D. Thesis
(Universität-Gesamthochschule Duisburg, Duisburg
1990)
16.15
M. Raghavan, B. Roth: Kinematic analysis of the
6R manipulator of general geometry, Proc. 5th Int.
Symp. Robotics Res., ed. by H. Miura, S. Arimoto
(MIT, Cambridge 1990)
16.16
J. Angeles: The degree of freedom of parallel robots:
A group-theoretic approach, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Barcelona (2005) pp. 1017–
1024
16.17
C.C. Lee, J.M. Hervé: Translational parallel manip-
ulators with doubly planar limbs, Mech. Mach.
Theory 41, 433–455 (2006)
16.18
B. Roth: Performance evaluation of manipulators
from a kinematic viewpoint, National Bureau of
Standards – NBS SP 495, 39–62 (1976)
16.19
A. Kumar, K.J. Waldron: The workspaces of a me-
chanical manipulator, ASME J. Mech. Des. 103, 665–
672 (1981)
16.20
D.C.H. Yang, T.W. Lee: On the workspace of me-
chanical manipulators, ASME J. Mech. Trans. Au-
tom. Des. 105, 62–69 (1983)
16.21
Y.C. Tsai, A.H. Soni: An algorithm for the workspace
of a general n-R robot, ASME J. Mech. Trans. Autom.
Des. 105, 52–57 (1985)

Design and Performance Evaluation
References
417
Part B | 16
16.22
K.C. Gupta, B. Roth: Design considerations for ma-
nipulator workspace, ASME J. Mech. Des. 104, 704–
711 (1982)
16.23
K.C. Gupta: On the nature of robot workspace, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 5(2), 112–121 (1986)
16.24
F. Freudenstein, E. Primrose: On the analysis and
synthesis of the workspace of a three-link, turn-
ing-pair connected robot arm, ASME J. Mech. Trans.
Autom. Des. 106, 365–370 (1984)
16.25
C.C. Lin, F. Freudenstein: Optimization of the
workspace of a three-link turning-pair connected
robot arm, Int. J. Robotics Res. 5(2), 91–103 (1986)
16.26
T. Yoshikawa: Manipulability of robotic mecha-
nisms, Int. J. Robotics Res. 4(2), 3–9 (1985)
16.27
J. Loncaric: Geometric Analysis of Compliant Mech-
anisms in Robotics, Ph.D. Thesis (Harvard Univer-
sity, Cambridge 1985)
16.28
B. Paden, S. Sastry: Optimal kinematic design of 6R
manipulators, Int. J. Robotics Res.7(2), 43–61 (1988)
16.29
J.K. Salisbury, J.J. Craig: Articulated hands: Force
control and kinematic issues, Int. J. Robotics Res.
1(1), 4–17 (1982)
16.30
G.H. Golub, C.F. Van Loan: Matrix Computations
(Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore 1989)
16.31
G. Strang: Linear Algebra and Its Applications,
3rd edn. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, San Diego
1988)
16.32
A. Dubrulle: An optimum iteration for the matrix
polar decomposition, Electron. Trans. Numer. Anal.
8, 21–25 (1999)
16.33
W.A. Khan, J. Angeles: The kinetostatic optimiza-
tion of robotic manipulators: The inverse and the
direct problems, ASME J. Mech. Des. 128, 168–178
(2006)
16.34
H. Pottmann, J. Wallner: Computational Line Ge-
ometry (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2001)
16.35
H. Asada: A geometrical representation of manip-
ulator dynamics and its application to arm design,
Trans. ASME J. Dyn. Sys. Meas. Contr. 105(3), 131–135
(1983)
16.36
T. Yoshikawa: Dynamic manipulability of robot ma-
nipulators, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1985) pp. 1033–1038
16.37
P.A. Voglewede, I. Ebert-Uphoff: Measuring close-
ness to singularities for parallel manipulators,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004)
pp. 4539–4544
16.38
A. Bowling, O. Khatib: The dynamic capability
equations: A new tool for analyzing robotic ma-
nipulator performance, IEEE Trans. Robotics 21(1),
115–123 (2005)
16.39
C.M. Gosselin, J. Angeles: A new performance index
for the kinematic optimization of robotic manipu-
lators, Proc. 20th ASME Mech. Conf. (1988) pp. 441–
447
16.40
C. Gosselin, J. Angeles: The optimum kinematic de-
sign of a planar three-degree-of-freedom parallel
manipulator, ASME J. Mech. Trans. Autom. Des. 110,
35–41 (1988)
16.41
A. Bicchi, C. Melchiorri, D. Balluchi: On the mo-
bility and manipulability of general multiple limb
robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 11(2), 232–235
(1995)
16.42
P. Chiacchio, S. Chiaverini, L. Sciavicco, B. Sicil-
iano: Global task space manipulability ellipsoids
for multiple-arm systems, IEEE Trans. Robotics Au-
tom. 7, 678–685 (1991)
16.43
C. Melchiorri: Comments on Global task space ma-
nipulability ellipsoids for multiple-arm systems
and further considerations, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 9, 232–235 (1993)
16.44
P. Chiacchio, S. Chiaverini, L. Sciavicco, B. Siciliano:
Reply to comments on Global task space manip-
ulability ellipsoids for multiple-arm systems’ and
further considerations, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
9, 235–236 (1993)
16.45
F.C. Park: Optimal robot design and differen-
tial geometry, ASME J. Mech. Des. 117, 87–92
(1995)
16.46
F.C. Park, J. Kim: Manipulability of closed kine-
matic chains, ASME J. Mech. Des. 120(4), 542–548
(1998)
16.47
A. Liégeois: Automatic supervisory control for the
configuration and behavior of multibody mecha-
nisms, IEEE Trans. Sys. Man. Cyber. 7(12), 842–868
(1977)
16.48
C.A. Klein, C.H. Huang: Review of pseudo-inverse
control for use with kinematically redundant ma-
nipulators, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 13(2), 245–
250 (1983)
16.49
J.M. Hollerbach: Optimum kinematic design of
a seven degree of freedom manipulator. In:
Robotics Research: The Second International Sym-
posium, ed. by H. Hanafusa, H. Inoue (MIT, Cam-
bridge 1985)
16.50
M.W. Spong: Remarks on robot dynamics: Canon-
ical transformations and riemannian geometry,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1992)
pp. 454–472
16.51
T.J. Graettinger, B.H. Krogh: The acceleration ra-
dius: A global performance measure for robotic
manipulators, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 4(11), 60–69
(1988)
16.52
M. Griffis, J. Duffy: Global stiffness modeling of
a class of simple compliant couplings, Mech. Mach.
Theory 28, 207–224 (1993)
16.53
S. Howard, M. Zefran, V. Kumar: On the 6 
6 cartesian stiffness matrix for three-dimen-
sional motions, Mech. Mach. Theory 33, 389–408
(1998)
16.54
L. Meirovitch: Fundamentals of vibrations (Mc-
Graw-Hill, Boston 2001)
16.55
C.M. Gosselin, J.-F. Hamel: The agile eye: A high-
performance three-degree-of-freedom camera-
orienting device, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (1994) pp. 781–786
16.56
O. Company, F. Pierrot, T. Shibukawa, K. Morita:
Four-Degree-of-Freedom Parallel Robot, EU Patent
No. EP 108 4802 (2001)
16.57
X. Kong, C. Gosselin: Type synthesis of parallel
mechanisms, Springer Tract. Adv. Robotics, Vol. 33
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2007)

Part B | 16
418
Part B
Design
16.58
J. Hervé: The Lie group of rigid body displacements,
a fundamental tool for mechanism design, Mech.
Mach. Theory 34, 719–730 (1999)
16.59
W.A. Khan, J. Angeles: A novel paradigm for the
qualitative synthesis of simple kinematic chains
based on complexity measures, ASME J. Mech.
Robotics 3(3), 0310161–03101611 (2011)
16.60
J. Lončarivc: Normal forms of stiffness and compli-
ance matrices, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 3(6), 567–572
(1987)
16.61
X. Ding, J.M. Selig: On the compliance of coiled
springs, Int. J. Mech. Sci. 46, 703–727 (2004)
16.62
J.M. Selig: The spatial stiffness matrix from simple
stretched springs, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2000) pp. 3314–3319
16.63
J. Angeles: On the nature of the Cartesian stiffness
matrix, Rev. Soc. Mex. Ing. Mec. 3(5), 163–170 (2010)
16.64
A.K. Pradeep, P.J. Yoder, R. Mukundan: On the use
of dual-matrix exponentials in robotic kinematics,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 8(5), 57–66 (1989)
16.65
A. Taghvaeipour, J. Angeles, L. Lessard: On the
elastostatic analysis of mechanical systems, Mech.
Mach. Theory 58, 202–216 (2013)
16.66
D. Zwillinger (Ed.): CRC Standard Mathematical Ta-
bles and Formulae, 31st edn. (CRC, Boca Raton 2002)
16.67
B. Christensen: Robotic lunar base with legs
changes everything, http://www.space.com/5216-
robotic-lunar-base-legs.html
16.68
L. Wen, T. Wang, G. Wu, J. Li: A novel method based
on a force-feedback technique for the hydrody-
namic investigation of kinematic effects on robotic
fish, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2011), Paper No. 0828
16.69
L.L. Hines, V. Arabagi, M. Sitti: Free-flight simu-
lation and pitch-and-roll control experiments of
a sub-gram flapping-flight micro aerial vehicle,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011),
Paper No. 0602
16.70
C.E. Thorne, M. Yim: Towards the dvelopment of
gyroscopically controled micro air vehicles, Proc.
2011 IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2011), Paper
No. 1800
16.71
T. Lee, M. Leok, N.H. McClamroch: Geometric track-
ing control of a quadrotor UAV on SE(3), Proc. 49th
IEEE Conf. Decis. Control (2010)
16.72
Robots take flight: Quadroto unmanned aerial
vehicles,
IEEE
Robotics
Autom.
Mag.
19(3)
(2012),
http://online.qmags.com/RAM0912?pg=3&
mode=2#pg1&mode2

Multimedia Contents Limbed Syste
419
Part B | 17
17. Limbed Systems
Shuuji Kajita, Christian Ott
A limbed system is a mobile robot with a body,
legs and arms. First, its general design process is
discussed in Sect. 17.1. Then we consider issues of
conceptual design and observe designs of vari-
ous existing robots in Sect. 17.2. As an example in
detail, the design of a humanoid robot HRP-4C
is shown in Sect. 17.3. To design a limbed system
of good performance, it is important to take into
account of actuation and control, like gravity com-
pensation, limit cycle dynamics, template models,
and backdrivable actuation. These are discussed
in Sect. 17.4.
In Sect. 17.5, we overview divergence of limbed
systems. We see odd legged walkers, leg–wheel
hybrid robots, leg–arm hybrid robots, tethered
walking robots, and wall-climbing robots. To com-
pare limbed systems of different configurations, we
can use performance indices such as the gait sen-
sitivity norm, the Froude number, and the specific
resistance, etc., which are introduced in Sect. 17.6.
17.1
Design of Limbed Systems ....................
420
17.2
Conceptual Design ...............................
420
17.2.1
Conceptual Design Issues ...........
421
17.2.2
Case Studies..............................
421
17.3
Whole Design Process Example .............
423
17.3.1
Conceptual Design
of HRP-4C .................................
423
17.3.2
Mechanical Design.....................
424
17.3.3
Electrical System Design .............
425
17.4
Model Induced Design..........................
427
17.4.1
Dynamic Walking.......................
427
17.4.2
Template Models .......................
430
17.4.3
Robots for Control Based
on Backdrivable Actuation .........
432
17.5
Various Limbed Systems .......................
434
17.5.1
Odd Legged Walkers...................
434
17.5.2
Leg-Wheel Hybrid Robots...........
435
17.5.3
Leg-Arm Hybrid Robots..............
436
17.5.4
Tethered Walking Robots............
436
17.5.5
Wall-Climbing Robots ................
436
17.6
Performance Indices ............................
437
17.6.1
Stability Margins .......................
437
17.6.2
Gait Sensitivity Norm .................
437
17.6.3
Duty Factor
and Froude Number ..................
438
17.6.4
Specific Resistance ....................
439
Video-References.........................................
439
References...................................................
440
In this chapter, we refer a limbed system as a mobile
robot which consists of a body, legs and arms. Its gen-
eral concept is illustrated in Fig. 17.1.
Let us deﬁne that a limbed system must have a body and
at least one leg (lower limb) to support and to propel
itself. A leg interacts with the environment by its end
effector (foot). It can also have an arbitrary number of
arms (upper limb) to manipulate target objects by their
end effectors (hands).
From a body-centered point of view, legs can be re-
garded as special arms designed for manipulating the
earth. This justiﬁes us to treat both of the legs and the
arms as limbs in a uniﬁed manner, thus we chose the
word limbed systems as the title of this chapter.

Part B | 17.2
420
Part B
Design
17.1 Design of Limbed Systems
General robot design process has already been dis-
cussed in the previous 16, therefore, we will concentrate
on the speciﬁc issues on limbed systems. A design
process of actual limbed system can be seen in liter-
atures [17.1–3]. A typical development process may
takes the following steps:

Step 1: Basic requirements. A designer must specify
the class of tasks performed by the limbed system
and its requirements, target velocity, payload, ex-
pected environment, etc.

Step 2: Conceptual design. The number of legs and
arms, their topology, and associated gait are de-
Environment
Target object
Body
End effectors
Upper limbs
(arms)
Lower limbs
(legs)
Fig. 17.1 General concept of a limbed system
Basic requirements
Retargetting the design goal
Design iterations
- class of tasks
- target speed
- payload
- terrain profile
etc.
Conceptual design
- number of legs
- gait
- number of arms
- topology
- geometric dimensions
Detailed design
- actuators
- reduction gears
- sensors
- computers
- power source
Evaluation
- total mass
- joint speed
- joint torque
- power consumption
Fig. 17.2 Typical develop-
ment process of a limbed
system
cided simultaneously. They must be designed at
the same time, because the leg structure and gait
are tightly coupled, thus they should not be con-
sidered separately. Geometric dimensions of links
are also determined based on the basic require-
ments.

Step 3: Detailed design. A designer selects actua-
tors, sensors, reduction gears, and other mechani-
cal/electrical components to realize the conceptual
design. Then the structural elements are designed to
integrate the devices.

Step 4: Evaluation. Evaluate the design by building
a prototype model or performing computer sim-
ulations. In our experience, the ﬁrst design can
never meet the basic requirement, and we are
forced to return to Step 3 to change the motor
type or the reduction ratio. Sometimes, the simu-
lation results suggest us reconsidering the concep-
tual design or even rethinking the basic require-
ments.
Figure 17.2 overviews the development process of
a limbed system. Note that a development of a limbed
system is an extremely dynamic process, rather than
a static top-down development. The detail of each step
will be discussed in the following subsections.
17.2 Conceptual Design
At the beginning, a designer must have a class of tasks
in his mind, for example:

Enter a damaged nuclear power plant, climb stairs,
and close speciﬁed valves

Explore a planet to seek a new lifeforms

Carry a person and climb stairs

Perform dances to entertain its audience, etc..
Note that it must be a class of tasks and should not
be a single task, because the latter can be realized by
a single degree-of-freedom machinery as expressed in
the former chapter.
A class of tasks should be compiled into more
speciﬁc goals. For example, target speed of traveling,
maximum step length, maximum payload, or expected
terrain proﬁles (ex. maximum height of obstacles).

Limbed Systems
17.2 Conceptual Design
421
Part B | 17.2
Those ﬁgures give a solid guide line for a design pro-
cess.
17.2.1 Conceptual Design Issues
The goal of conceptual design is to decide the basic
kinematic property of the robot, the number of legs and
arms, limb topology, and geometric dimensions of the
links. A robot designer should take into account the fol-
lowing issues:

Gait type: Leg motion pattern for walking or running
is called gait and it greatly affects limbed system de-
sign. For example, a robot for static gait should be
designed to have sprawled posture to maximize its
stability. Whereas, a robot for dynamic gait is de-
signed to have erect posture with high center of mass
to get a longer time constant of its falling. The gait
generation is discussed in 75.

Biomimesis: Some robots are designed to mimic the
mechanical structure of a living creature as accurate
as possible. This is beneﬁcial for deeper under-
standing of biological systems. For example, Quinn
and Ritzmann have built a hexapod robot with
kinematics that are remarkably similar to the cock-
roach Blaberus discoidalis [17.4] (
VIDEO 521 ).
Biomimesis is also meaningful in terms of enter-
tainment applications. Hirukawa et al. developed
biped walking dinosaur robots of Tyrannosaurus
Rex and Parasaurolophus for an exposition [17.5].
Those robots were built on 30 % scale of the
real dinosaurs due to safety issues; nevertheless,
they could attract many audience by their realis-
tic outlooks at the 2005 World Exposition, Aichi,
Japan.

Bioinspired dynamics: To reproduce the robust and
versatile locomotion of animals, some designers
pay their attention on essential dynamics of the
locomotion, rather than the mechanical similarity.
Koditschek et al. emphasized this standpoint on the
development of their hexapod robot RHex, which
equipped with only six actuators and yet can run on
various irregular terrain [17.6].

Mechanical simplicity: It is preferred to realize the
target tasks with a mechanism as simple as possi-
ble. Therefore, the design is always biased to use
fewer number of actuators.
VIDEO 520 shows an
example of robot design with minimum numbers of
actuators.

Limb workspace: A limb must have at least three
degrees of freedom (DOF) to freely locate the tip of
a limb in 3-D space. It must have also at least six
DOF for the arbitrary orientation of the end effector
in 3-D space.

Load bearing: Proper joint assignment can reduce
the joint torque to support the body weight. In
VIDEO 517 , we can see a unique hexapod leg de-
sign for efﬁcient load bearing.
17.2.2 Case Studies
Let us observe how abovementioned issues are reﬂected
in the conceptual design of actual limbed systems.
Underactuatedness Versus Redundancy
We compare two monopods which were designed un-
der different policies on actuation. Figure 17.3a is the
3-D one-legged hopping machine developed by Raib-
ert [17.1]. This robot is driven by one pneumatic
cylinder in its leg and two hydraulic actuators in its hip
joints. Therefore, it has only three actuated DOF while
3-D rigid body motion requires 6. Despite its underac-
tuatedness, it can freely travel in 3-D space keeping its
body upright thanks to its balance control.
Figure 17.3b shows the one-legged robot developed
by Tajima and Suga [17.7]. It has seven actuated DOFs
in total, three at the hip, one at the knee, two at the
ankle, and one at the toe. Therefore, this robot is a re-
dundant system having one extra DOF in addition to the
six required for 3-D motion. This redundancy can help
the robot to reduce the excessive joint speed required
at hopping. As a result, successful hopping motion con-
trol was realized by using servo motors with reduction
gears for all joints.
Serial Versus Parallel
Legs of a limbed system can be conﬁgured either as
a serial or parallel structures. In most cases, each leg
of a biped robot is designed as serial chain of six ac-
a)
b)
Fig.17.3a,b Monopod robot designs. (a) MIT 3-D One-Leg Hopper
(1983); (b) Toyota monopod (2006)

Part B | 17.2
422
Part B
Design
tuated DOF, where three are used in the hip, one in
the knee and two in the ankle. HRP-2 L developed by
Kaneko et al. [17.8], as shown in Fig. 17.4a, is one of
such examples. For such robots, the most difﬁcult part
a)
b)
Fig.17.4a,b Biped robot designs. (a) HRP-2L (2001);
(b) WL-16R (2003)
a)
b)
Fig.17.5a,b Quadruped designs. (a) TITAN III (1984);
(b) BigDog (2005)
is the hip joint design. A hip joint mechanism must con-
tain three axis of rotation (roll/pitch/yaw) bearing high
torque caused by the upper body weight. This is serious
especially for a robot to carry heavy loads.
Takanishi et al. solved this problem by introducing
legs of the Stewart platform for their WL-16R, a human
carrying biped locomotor (Fig. 17.4b). Each leg con-
sists of six linear actuators driven by DC-geared motors
and ball screws. In this design, their robot can carry
a human of 50 kg weight [17.9].
Static Gait Versus Dynamic Gait
Figure 17.5a is TITAN III developed by Hirose and
his colleagues [17.10]. This is one of the successful
quadruped robots in 1980s. Each leg is a 3-D panto-
graph mechanism driven (PANTOMEC) by three linear
actuators (ball screw with DC motor) equipped on its
body, thus it has 12 DOF. To perform statically bal-
anced walk, this robot was designed to have a low center
of mass and widely spread legs.
Figure 17.5b is BigDog, an energy autonomous hy-
draulic quadruped robot of 1 m tall, 1 m long, and 90 kg
developed by Buehler et al. [17.11]. Each leg has one
passive linear pneumatic compliance in the lower leg,
three active joints for knee, hip pitch, and roll. There-
a)
b)
Fig.17.6a,b Hexapod designs. (a) ASV (1986); (b) Gen-
ghis (1989)

Limbed Systems
17.3 Whole Design Process Example
423
Part B | 17.3
fore it has 12 actuated DOF and four passive DOF.
This robot can demonstrate remarkable walking per-
formance in an outdoor environment, as well as can
maintain its balance even when kicked by a human. This
ability of dynamic balancing is helped by its design of
high center of mass with the leg assignment with nar-
row lateral separation.
Big Versus Small
Design concept is deeply affected by the robot size. Fig-
ure 17.6a shows one of the most famous hexapods, the
adaptive suspension vehicle (ASV) developed by Wal-
dron et al. [17.2, 12]. The ASV is a hydraulically driven
hexapod robot which can carry a parson over rough
terrain. Its length and height are 5:2 m and 3:0 m, re-
spectively, and weighs 2700 kg. To walk around in 3-D
space, each leg requires 3 DOFs, thus the robot has 18
DOF in total.
Figure 17.6b shows a small hexapod robot Gen-
ghis (35 cm length and 1 kg weight) developed by
Brooks [17.13]. This robot could also demonstrate ro-
bust walking in 3-D space, but its weight is less than
a thousandth of the ASV. As a result, Genghis does not
need precise 3-D foot positioning for its walking con-
trol. Each leg has only two DOF and the robot has 12
DOF in total. Standing with three legs, the body posi-
tion and orientation can be fully controlled as long as
the feet is allowed to slip on the ground.
Degree of Biomimesis
We can increase the degree of biomimesis by adding
DOF; however, fewer DOF is preferable in terms of en-
a)
b)
Fig.17.7a,b Humanoid designs. (a) ASIMO (2000); (b) HRP-4C
(2009)
gineering. The ﬁrst version of ASIMO has 26 DOF in
total, 6 for each leg, 5 for each arm, one for each hand,
and two for the head (Fig. 17.7a) [17.14]. As a biped
walking humanoid robot, this is a reasonable conﬁgura-
tion.
Cybernetic human HRP-4C (Fig. 17.7b) was de-
signed to be as close as a human in consideration of
applications in entertainment industry [17.15, 16]. It has
44 DOF in total, 7 for each leg, 6 for each arm, 2 for
each hand and, three for its waist, 3 for its neck, and
8 for its face. Its design detail is discussed in the next
section.
17.3 Whole Design Process Example
In this section, we explain the design process of a hu-
manoid robot HRP-4C. We do this to give the read-
ers an example of the whole development process of
a limbed system. The readers are also recommended
to see the comprehensive development report for the
humanoid robot LOLA written by Lohmeier [17.3].
Also please watch another successful humanoid de-
signs in
VIDEO 522
and
VIDEO 526 . Note that
a general mechanical design and construction pro-
cess have already been discussed in this handbook
(Chap. 4).
17.3.1 Conceptual Design of HRP-4C
At the beginning of our project, we deﬁned Cybernetic
human as a humanoid robot with the following features:
1. Have the appearance and shape of a human being.
2. Can walk and move like a human being.
3. Can interact with humans using speech recognition
and so forth.
Such robots can be used in the entertainment indus-
try, for example, exhibitions and fashion shows. It can
also be used as a human simulator to evaluate devices
for humans.
As the successor of our previous humanoid robots
HRP-2 and HRP-3 [17.17, 18], we call our new hu-
manoid robot HRP-4C, C stands for cybernetic human.
To determine the target shape and dimensions of
HRP-4C, we used the anthropometric database for
Japanese population, which was measured and com-
piled by Kouchi et al. [17.19]. The database provides

Part B | 17.3
424
Part B
Design
the dimensions of different Japanese groups of ages and
sex. Considering the entertainment applications like
fashion show, we picked the average young female data
(age from 19 to 29). Figure 17.8 shows part of the di-
mensions provided by the database.
To reproduce women’s graceful motion, we asked
a professional walking model to perform walking, turn-
ing, sitting on chair, and other motions. The perfor-
mance was motion-captured and used to evaluate possi-
ble joint conﬁgurations proposed for HRP-4C structure.
From the captured data, the required joint workspace
was estimated. In addition, we estimated the motor
power during biped walking to design the appropriate
leg joint conﬁguration.
Figure 17.9 shows the joint conﬁguration we ﬁnally
decided for HRP-4C. To reproduce the human motion,
three DOFs (roll, pitch, yaw) were assigned for each of
the waist and the neck joints. In addition, we put active
toe joints to realize biped walking with wide stride.
17.3.2 Mechanical Design
Figure 17.10 shows the mechanism to drive the knees
of HRP-4C. The rotation of the servo motor is trans-
Thigh circumference: 543
Calf circumference: 351
Symphyseal height: 789
Trochanterion height: 801
Crystal height: 944
Lateral epicondyle
height: 429
Iliac spine height: 850
Waist height: 993
Suprasternal height: 1281
Stature: 1586
Upper arm circumference: 253
Forearm circumference: 228
Chest circum-
ference: 830
Waist circum-
ference: 659
Fig. 17.8 Anthropometric data of average young Japanese
female (after [17.19], all measures in mm)
mitted to the input of the harmonic drive gear by way
of the pulleys and the timing belt, and the output of the
harmonic gear is connected to the lower leg link. By this
way, we can obtain high torque output without backlash
which is required for dynamic biped walking. Note that
z
y
x
Yaw
Pitch
Toe joints
Waist joints
Neck joints
Roll
Fig. 17.9 Joint conﬁguration of HRP-4C body (joints for
the face and hands are omitted)
Pulley
Pulley
Timing belt
Harmonic drive gear
DC motor with ironless rotor
Fig. 17.10 Joint drive system (after [17.8])

Limbed Systems
17.3 Whole Design Process Example
425
Part B | 17.3
the pulleys and the timing belt offer us a ﬂexible choice
of the motor placement as well as the total reduction ra-
tio. The belt compliance becomes negligible thanks to
the high reduction ratio of the harmonic gear at the ﬁnal
stage.
The same mechanisms of Fig. 17.10 are used for
most of the joints of HRP-4C; however, there are some
exceptions. The ﬁrst example is the ankle joint. Fig-
ure 17.11 illustrates the mechanism of the left lower leg
link and the ankle. The ankle pitch and roll joints are
driven by two servomotors (Motor #1 and Motor #2)
embedded in the shin link. Motor #1 rotates the ball
screw to create the linear motion via timing belt and
pulleys. Then the ball screw’s nut pushes or pulls the
connecting rod that ﬁnally drives the ankle pitch joint.
Motor #2’s rotation is transmitted to the bevel gear
#1, timing belt #2, and the second bevel gear. The bevel
gear #2 rotates the harmonic drive gear and it ﬁnally
rotates the ankle roll joint. This elegant yet compli-
cated mechanism was necessary to realize the slim outer
shape of the HRP-4C ankle which must have close di-
mensions of human ankle.
Figure 17.12 is the toe joint mechanism of HRP-4C.
To avoid sole plate separation which may catch obsta-
cles between the plates, the toe joint axis should locate
as close as possible to the ﬂoor surface. For this pur-
pose, a four bar linkage is used to drive the toe sole
plate by the harmonic drive gear mounted on the heel
sole plate.
As already mentioned, harmonic drive gears are
mainly used because they are backlash free. On the
other hand, for the mechanical parts, which do not
require backlash-less motion, we can use alternative de-
vices. For this reason, servo motors with planetary gear
heads were used as the actuators for facial expressions
and hands.
Figure 17.13 is the ﬁnal mechanical design of
HRP-4C (Fig. 17.13a) and its exterior (Fig. 17.13b).
The covers for the arms, legs and body are made of ﬁber
reinforced plastics (FRP) and the facial skin and hand
skin are made of silicone rubber.
17.3.3 Electrical System Design
Figure 17.14 shows the electronics architecture of HRP-
4C. The entire system is controlled by a single board
computer of the PCI-104 form factor with Intel Pen-
tium M 1:6 GHz. Two peripheral boards, the 10 ch
controller area network CAN interface board and the
force sensor interface board are stacked on the CPU
board.
To realize a human-like slender outlook, we used
compact motor drivers which were developed in our
previous project [17.18]. This device is an intelligent
Timing belt #1
Timing belt #2
Motor #2 (for ankle roll)
Ball screw
Bevel gear #1
Bevel gear #2
Ankle roll axis
Ankle pitch axis
(Side view)
(Front view)
Harmonic drive gear
Connecting rod
Motor #1
(for ankle pitch & ankle roll)
Fig. 17.11 Ankle joint drive mechanism of HRP-4C
Heel sole plate
Servomotor
Four bar linkage mechanism
Toe pitch axis
Toe sole plate
Harmonic drive gear
Pulleys and timing belt
Fig. 17.12 Toe joint mechanism
driver for a single servo motor, which takes an in-
cremental encoder signal and provides motor current
by proportional–integral–derivative (PID) control. The
driver is small enough to be embedded in leg/arm links
nearby the target motor. Since it has a CAN interface
which allows cascade connection from the CAN inter-
face board, the wiring can be simpliﬁed and reduced.
In addition, we used another CAN-interfaced in-
telligent drivers for small motors for the face and
the hands. This driver can drive multiple motors by
handling each incremental encoder, PID feedback,
and the current control. We developed this type of

Part B | 17.3
426
Part B
Design
320
175
197
350
1600
340
93
136.9
136.9
39
153
285
a)
b)
Fig.17.13a,b Mechanism of (a) HRP-4C and its (b) exterior
Hub
(air LAN)
Ethernet
IEEE802.11a/g/b
×1
×1
×2
CPU board
(Pentium M® 1.6 GHz)
Force sensor IF board
Six-axis force sensor
10ch CAN IF board
CCD
camera
USB
CAN
CAN
PCI 104
Motor driver
(single drive type)
Motor driver
(multi drive type)
...
CAN
Inertial measurement unit
(IMU)
Motor driver
(single drive type)
44 motors
in total
Fig. 17.14 Electronics architecture of HRP-4C
Table 17.1 Principal speciﬁcations of HRP-4C
Height
1,600 mm
Weight
48 kg (with batteries)
Total DOF
44 DOF
Face
8 DOF
Neck
3 DOF
Arm
6 DOF  2
Hand
2 DOF  2
Waist
3 DOF
Leg
7 DOF  2
CPU
Intel Pentium M 1:6 GHz
Sensors
Head
CCD camera
Body
Inertial measurement unit (IMU)
Sole
6-axis force sensor  2
Batteries
NiMH 48 V
driver by modifying the device for our multiﬁngered
hand [17.20].
By using these motor drivers and the CAN interface
board, we can control 44 servo motors in total. Further-
more, a commercial inertial measurement unit (IMU) is
connected via CAN to measure and control of the body
posture during biped walk.
The feet of HRP-4C are equipped with six-axis
force sensors to measure the zero-moment point (ZMP)
for its balance control. These sensor signals are inter-
faced by the force sensor interface board.
Table 17.1 shows the principal dimensions and
speciﬁcation of the ﬁnal design of HRP-4C. It becomes

Limbed Systems
17.4 Model Induced Design
427
Part B | 17.4
a humanoid robot with 1:6 m height, 46 kg weight, and
44 actuated DOF. The on-board nickel metal hydride
battery (NiMH) provides power for 20 min operation
time without an external cable. HRP-4C’s human-like
walking demonstration and a quick slip-turn experi-
ment are shown in
VIDEO 522
and
VIDEO 525 ,
respectively.
17.4 Model Induced Design
The design of multilimbed robotic systems is a mecha-
tronic challenge involving expertise in diverse ﬁelds
such as mechanical design, electrical design, commu-
nication and control, as well as software engineering.
A task-oriented perspective on the overall system al-
lows in some cases to incorporate a desired function
directly into the system design rather than enforcing
this behavior by active control. This idea can be found
in many robotic designs. The most prominent exam-
ple might be the use of counterweights for passive
gravity compensation employed in robot manipulators.
A clever mechanical design thus leads to a smaller
power consumption of the actuators and consequently
leads to a simpliﬁed system design. Passive gravity
balancing has been realized via several approaches
involving counterweights, springs (Fig. 17.15), and par-
allel mechanisms [17.21]. Such a gravity compensation
based on springs is for example employed in the robot
PR2 from Willow Garage (Fig. 17.16) [17.22, 23]. In
this section, we will highlight several examples of
legged robots where a desired function or property of
the ﬁnal system is realized at least partly via clever me-
chanical design.
17.4.1 Dynamic Walking
Passive Dynamic Walking
The concept of passive dynamic walking was pio-
neered by McGeer (
VIDEO 527 ). In the seminal
paper [17.24], a class of purely passive mechanical
K
b
l
Mg
a
θ
Fig. 17.15 Passive gravity compensation by a spring: For
Kab D Mgl the torques around the hinge produced by grav-
ity and by the spring counter-balance each other
systems on an inclined surface were analyzed which ex-
hibit a periodic gait that is intrinsically, i. e., open loop,
stable. The resulting periodic motion is characterized
by the fact that the increase of energy due to the slope
is exactly balanced by the energy loss at the impact.
McGeer proposed to analyze these systems in terms of
orbital stability using Poincaré maps.
A detailed analysis of simple walking models with
point feet, which are based on this principle, can be
found for instance in [17.25] or [17.26]. Figure 17.17
shows a conceptual model of a passive walking ma-
chine which is able to walk down on an inclined slope.
For analyzing the dynamics of this system, the fol-
lowing two components are needed: 1) The open-loop
dynamics of the swing phase: Under the assumption
that the stance leg is standing ﬁrmly on the ground
(without lift-off or slipping) until the next touch-down,
the open loop dynamics can be derived from standard
Lagrangian multibody dynamics. 2) An impact model
Fig. 17.16 PR2 robot from Willow Garage using springs
for passive gravity compensation (after [17.22, 23])

Part B | 17.4
428
Part B
Design
at the time of touch-down of the swing leg, which de-
termines the state variables after the impact based on
the state variables before the impact. Often, a perfectly
inelastic impact is assumed.
In a fully passive mechanism with given dynam-
ics parameters, the motion is completely determined by
the initial condition of the system. The mapping from
the initial state to the state at the beginning of the next
step is called stride function or return map. A periodic
gait can be characterized by a ﬁxed point of the stride
function, and the search for a periodic gait can accord-
ingly be formulated as an optimization problem on the
stride function. In general, optimization may involve
the initial condition as well as the dynamics parameters
including the inclination of the slope.
In order to analyze the stability properties of a peri-
odic gait, McGeer proposed to interpret the stride func-
tion as a Poincaré map of the system. Local (orbital)
stability can then be decided based on the lineariza-
tion of the Poincaré map. Since computing the Poincaré
map (i. e., computing the stride function) involves solv-
ing the open loop dynamics of the system until the
next touch-down, this often can only be implemented
numerically.
Figure 17.18 shows technical realizations of pla-
nar passive dynamic walkers. The walker shown in
Fig. 17.18a from Technical University of Delft has the
simplest possible conﬁguration with straight legs and
point-feet. Premature impact of the swing leg with the
ground is avoided by a stepping pattern on the in-
clined slope. The mechanism in Fig. 17.18b was built
at Cornell University based on ideas from McGeer’s
seminal paper. The arc shape of the foot implements
a rolling motion during stance. The ground clearance of
the swing leg was realized by a passive knee joint.
l
–q1
q2
M
g
m
m
θ
Swing leg
Stance leg
Fig. 17.17 Conceptual model of a simple passive dynamic
walker
Figure 17.19 shows a fully passive walking machine
in 3-D [17.27] (
VIDEO 532 ). It employs soft heels for
improving the contact transition. The swinging motion
of the arms allows for reducing the angular momentum
around the vertical axis as well as side-to-side rocking.
Knee extension is limited to a straight conﬁguration by
a locking mechanism.
Semipassive Limit Cycle Walker
Purely passive dynamic walkers can produce a sta-
ble limit cycle when walking down a shallow slope.
Thereby, the energy loss at each impact is compensated
a)
b)
Fig.17.18a,b Examples of planar passive dynamic walkers
with (a) point feet, (b) arc feet, and knees

Limbed Systems
17.4 Model Induced Design
429
Part B | 17.4
by the energy gain from the decent along the slope, i. e.,
these systems are powered by gravity.
Several attempts have been made for increasing
the versatility and robustness of limit cycle walkers
by adding active power sources. Figure 17.20 shows
some successful designs reported in [17.28]. In these
systems, simple actuation is used for substituting grav-
itational power in order to allow for walking on level
ground. While these systems are not fully passive,
their energy consumption is much less than com-
pared to fully actuated walking robots. The Cornell
biped, as shown in Fig. 17.20a, utilizes actuation only
in the ankle. The actuation is used such that each
ankle joint extends when the opposite foot hits the
ground. The Delft biped, as shown in Fig. 17.20b,
instead is powered at the hip and utilizes passive
ankles.
The superior energy efﬁciency which can be
achieved by dynamic limit cycle walkers has been
demonstrated in the Cornell Ranger [17.29] that suc-
ceeded to walk over a distance of 65 km without
recharging or direct human intervention except for the
remotely controlled steering.
Fig. 17.19 A 3-D passive walker with upper body (af-
ter [17.27])
Actuated Limit Cycle Walkers
Passive and semipassive limit cycle walkers strongly
rely on the passive dynamics for realizing a speciﬁc
gait. In actuated limit cycle walkers the control of some
joints is used for imposing a limit cycle on the remain-
ing dynamics. The systems shown in Fig. 17.21 are
fully actuated, except for some unactuated degrees of
freedom, e.g., at the foot–ground contact, and/or under-
actuation due to elasticity.
In the framework of the hybrid zero dynam-
ics [17.32], a cyclic variable like the virtual leg angle
(angle from the hip to the stance foot) is introduced and
the active degrees of freedom are controlled via partial
feedback linearization to implement a virtual constraint
which describes how the active degrees of freedom are
coupled to the cyclic variable. The shape of the vir-
tual constraint is then optimized aiming at a stable limit
cycle for the remaining two-dimensional (2-D) zero dy-
namics. A comprehensive treatment of this approach
can be found in [17.33]. Such control approaches
were implemented on the robots RABBIT [17.34] and
MABLE [17.35]. While RABBIT employed position
control in the active degrees of freedom, MABLE was
implemented with series elastic actuators allowing for
torque-based control (
VIDEO 533 ).
The design of the 3-D walking machine Flame in
Fig. 17.21c was also motivated by the aim of combin-
ing limit cycle walking with active control [17.36]. The
actuation of this robot was also based on series elastic
a)
b)
Fig.17.20a,b Underactuated biped robots: (a) 3-D passive walker
(Cornell Biped, 2003) developed at Cornell Univ. (after [17.30]);
(b) Denise (2004) (after [17.31])

Part B | 17.4
430
Part B
Design
a)
b)
c) 
Fig.17.21a–c Actuated limit cycle
walkers (a) RABBIT (2002); (b) MA-
BEL (2008); (c) Flame (2007)
actuation and it was controlled by an event-based state
machine in combination with active foot placement for
gait stabilization.
17.4.2 Template Models
Conceptual models play an important role as tem-
plates for the design and control of legged walking
machines. Template models can also be used for gener-
ating hypotheses about the neuro-mechanical control in
biological systems [17.37]. In this context, they provide
a possible answer to Bernstein’s DOF problem, how the
redundancy lying in the human neuro-muscular system
is coordinated. We will discuss two conceptual models
which have proven useful for legged locomotion.
The linear inverted pendulum (LIP) model has been
proposed as a template model for bipedal walking
(
VIDEO 512 ). Figure 17.22a shows the main forces
acting on the center of mass (COM) of a legged robot.
If all the mass is concentrated in one single point, which
implies mass-less legs, the acceleration forces of the
m(g+z··)
mx··
z
a)
b)
p
τ = 0
F
x
m(g+z··)
mx··
c
p
τ
F
Fig. 17.22 (a) The linear inverted pendulum model (af-
ter [17.38]) (b) Deﬁnition of the centroidal moment pivot
(after [17.39, 40])
COM are counter balanced by the ground interaction
force F acting at the ZMP p. If the COM is kept at
a constant height, i. e., Rz D 0, one immediately obtains
the dynamical equations of the linear inverted pendu-
lum model
Rx D g
z .x  p/ :
(17.1)
This model has been the starting point for many
successful methods aiming at trajectory generation and
feedback control of bipedal humanoid robots [17.41–
43]. More details on the related control issues can be
found in 48. By using this model, the implicit assump-
tion is made that the change of angular momentum
around the COM, e.g., due to the swing leg dynamics,
a)
b)
Fig.17.23a,b Bipedal robots (a) LOLA (2009); (b) HUBO
(2005)

Limbed Systems
17.4 Model Induced Design
431
Part B | 17.4
can be neglected. This assumption plays an important
role also for the mechanical design. The bipedal robot
LOLA (Fig. 17.23a) developed at Technical Univer-
sity of Munich (TUM) is optimized for low inertia
in the legs by moving the knee and ankle actuators
into thigh [17.44]. In the robot HUBO from KAIST
(Fig. 17.23b) the design aimed at concentrating the
main inertia into the torso while keeping the mass of
the moving parts in the arms and legs small [17.45].
Aiming at a better representation of the change of
angular momentum the centroidal moment pivot (CMP)
(Fig. 17.22b) was proposed as an additional ground ref-
erence point [17.39, 40]. For the more general model in
Fig. 17.22b the force balance results in
Rx D g C Rz
z
.x  p/ C 
mz :
(17.2)
The CMP is deﬁned as the hypothetical location of the
ZMP for the case  D 0, such that the distance between
the ZMP and the CMP is proportional to the change of
angular momentum, i. e.,
c D p  
Fz
;
(17.3)
where Fz D m.g C Rz/. In undisturbed human walking it
was observed that the distance between ZMP and CMP
is kept small [17.40], while the change of angular mo-
mentum plays a stronger role for push recovery [17.46].
An alternative way of modeling the effect of the
limb motion (e.g., swing foot dynamics) on the over-
all dynamics is to consider a three-mass model, which
has been utilized in the control of LOLA [17.44] and
the Honda humanoid robot ASIMO [17.47].
While the LIP model has been introduced as a con-
ceptual model for walking, it cannot describe running
motions in which a ﬂight phase is present. In biome-
chanics, the spring-loaded inverted pendulum (SLIP)
model (Fig. 17.24) was introduced in which the leg is
modeled as a linear spring [17.48].
During the stance phase, the dynamics is given by
mRr D mg C k

l0
jr  rFj  1

.r  rF/ ;
(17.4)
k
r
rF
g
m
α
Fig. 17.24 The spring loaded inverted pendulum (SLIP)
model
where l0 and k are the rest length and stiffness of the
spring, respectively, and rF is the location of the stance
foot. During the ﬂight phase, one simply has Rr D g,
and it is assumed that the leg angle instantaneously ad-
justs to an angle ˛ for preparing the next touch-down.
The model contains no damping and impact phenomena
are eliminated by assuming mass-less legs. Therefore,
a)
b)
Fig.17.25a,b Hopping robots developed in the MIT LegLab (a) 3-D
Biped (1989); (b) Quadruped (1984) (after [17.1])
a)
c)
b)
Fig.17.26a–c Robotic arms for implementing torque control:
(a) WAM arm (Barrett Technologies) utilizing direct drive actua-
tion in combination with cable transmissions, (b) the DLR light-
weight-robot-III with integrated joint torque sensors, (c) the robot
arm A2 (Mekka Robotics) based on series elastic actuators

Part B | 17.4
432
Part B
Design
a)
b)
Fig.17.27a,b Fully torque controlled humanoid robots: (a) DLRs
robot TORO (2013); (b) Humanoid robot CB based on hydraulic
actuation (CB-i, 2008)
a)
b)
Fig.17.28a,b Humanoid upper body robots which allow whole
body control based on joint torque: (a) DLRs torque controlled
robot Justin and (b) Twendy-one from Waseda Univ. using
SEA
this model is conservative. It allows to generate peri-
odic hopping trajectories representing running motions.
Moreover, the contact force proﬁle resulting from these
motions shows similarity to data from human running
motions. An extension of the SLIP dynamics to bipedal
walking including double support phases was analyzed
in [17.49].
The SLIP model can be considered as the simplest
model of one-legged hopping and bipedal running. Its
compliant leg function can be of interest for the design
and control of future legged robots, which aim at highly
dynamic motions like fast running, hopping, and jump-
ing.
Gait generation and control of compliant hopping
robots have been studied in the 1980s by Raibert in
the MIT LegLab. A detailed treatment of these de-
velopments is summarized in [17.1]. The basic idea
of Raibert’s dynamic locomotion approach can be ex-
plained by considering a planar one-legged hopping
robot. It can be shown that this system can be con-
trolled in a surprisingly simple way by the combination
of three separate components:
1. Altitude control which is implemented by a ﬁxed
thrust during stance.
2. Control of the forward velocity by placing the foot
at a ﬁxed distance from the hip at touch-down.
3. Control of the body attitude during stance using ac-
tuation at the hip.
The same principle was applied to a one-legged
hopper in 3-D, as well as to bipedal and quadrupedal
hopping robots (Fig. 17.25). In the quadrupedal case,
the combined effect of alternating pairs of legs was
summarized by considering a single virtual leg.
17.4.3 Robots for Control Based
on Backdrivable Actuation
A large number of algorithms for model-based control
of robotic systems assume a rigid-body model of the
robot in which the joint torques act as the control in-
put. The capability of controlling the torque in practice
is heavily inﬂuenced by the properties of the actuator
transmission. While direct drive actuation allows a pre-
cise feed-forward control of the actuator torque via the
motor current, this leads to rather heavy drive units. The
WAM arm from Barrett Technologies (Fig. 17.26a) uti-
lizes direct drive actuation in combination with cable
transmissions in order to store the leading four drives
into the base of the robot. In this way, a large inertia
of the moving elements is avoided. The use of gears
with high transmission ratios allows to reduce the over-
all weight, but leads to slower drive units which are
hardly or not at all backdrivable. Joint torque sens-
ing and serial elastic actuation present two hardware-
oriented approaches for improving the torque controlla-
bility of highly geared actuators.
Joint torque sensing assumes a dedicated sen-
sor for measuring the link side torque  and was
applied in a series of lightweight robot arms de-

Limbed Systems
17.4 Model Induced Design
433
Part B | 17.4
a)
b) 
c)
Fig.17.29a–c Bipedal robots using
serial elastic actuators: (a) Spring
Flamingo (1996) (after [17.50]);
(b) M2V2 (2008) (after [17.51]);
(c) COMAN (2011) developed at IIT
utilizing SEA in selected joints (hip,
knee, ankle)
veloped at DLR, including the light-weight robot
in Fig. 17.26b [17.52] and the upper body robot
Justin as shown in Fig. 17.28a [17.53]. Recently, the
same drive technology has been integrated in the de-
sign of the torque-controlled humanoid robot TORO
(Fig. 17.27a) [17.54] (
VIDEO 531 ). Torque sensing
and control have also been employed in the hydraulic
humanoid CB developed by Sarcos (Fig. 17.27b).
In series elastic actuators (SEAs), the joint torque
sensing is implemented indirectly by measuring the de-
ﬂection of an elastic element which is introduced into
the drive train [17.55]. Early robots with compliant ac-
tuators were the two armed systems COG [17.56] from
MIT and Wendy [17.57] from Waseda university, which
even allowed the adaptation of the compliance. More
recently, series elastic actuators are used in the compli-
ant arm A2 from Mekka (Fig. 17.26c) and the humanoid
upper body robot Twendy-one from Waseda university
(Fig. 17.28). They have been also applied to bipedal
systems in the robots as shown in Fig. 17.29 (also watch
VIDEO 529 and
VIDEO 530 ).
While the mathematical models of torque controlled
robots and robots with SEA have the same structure
it should be mentioned that the source of elasticity is
Motor inertia
Link inertia
τ
τ
θ
q
Torque feedback
Link inertia
u
τ
θ
q
Fig. 17.30 Conceptual model of an elastic joint: A propor-
tional feedback of the joint torque reduces the effective
motor inertia and motor friction
different in these approaches. In SEA, the deﬂective el-
ement for the torque sensing represents the main source
of elasticity and its role is to decouple the motor and
link side dynamics for high frequency disturbances like
impacts. A well-designed torque sensor instead should
not introduce a big effect on the overall joint stiffness
(in this case usually the gear introduces the main source
of elasticity). Despite their conceptual similarity, the lit-
erature of SEA and elastic joint robots also differs in
the way that in the context of SEA usually the linear
dynamics of a single compliant actuator is considered
for the controller design, while in the context of elas-
tic joint robots the full nonlinear multibody dynamics
is considered.
From a modeling and control point of view, the use
of torque sensors in the joints leads to a robot model
with elastic joints. For actuators with a high transmis-
sion ratio, a common modeling assumption is that the
kinetic energy of each rotor depends only on its own
spinning motion and not on the rigid body motion of the
other joints [17.58]. Let the motor and link side joint an-
gles be denoted by  2 Rn and q 2 Rn, then the reduced
ﬂexible joint model (Chap 11 for a detailed derivation)
is given by
M.q/RqC C.q; Pq/Pq C g.q/ D  C f;q ;
(17.5)
B R C  D m C f; ;
(17.6)
where M.q/, C.q; Pq/Pq, and g.q/ represent the link side
inertia matrix, the centrifugal and Coriolis forces, and
the gravity term of the rigid body dynamics. The motor
inertia is given by the diagonal matrix B. The vector 
represents the joint torques. In the case of an elastic
joint with linear joint stiffness ki the torque is given
by i D ki.i  qi/. The terms f;q and f; represent
friction terms at the link side and the motor side, re-
spectively.

Part B | 17.5
434
Part B
Design
Link
position 
sensor 
Torque
sensor with
digital
interface
Harmonic
drive 
gear unit
DLR robodrive 
with safety brake
and position
sensor
Carbon fibre
robot link
Cross roller
bearing
Power converter
unit
Joint- and motorcon-
troller board
Power supply
Fig. 17.31 The torque sensing based joint technology of DLR’s light
weight robot arm
A purely proportional feedback of the joint torques
m D .K  I/ C Ku
(17.7)
has the effect that the motor dynamics equation (17.6)
shows a controlled behavior as
K1
 B R C  D u C K1
 f; :
(17.8)
Let us assume that K is chosen as a diagonal matrix.
Then we see that the matrix K1
 B corresponds to an ef-
fective (i. e., virtual) motor inertia matrix. By choosing
the gains in K larger than unity, we can thus reduce the
effective motor inertia (Fig. 17.30). Moreover also the
effects of motor friction are reduced such that a torque
controlled joint ultimately exhibits a backdrivable be-
havior even if the underlying gear mechanism is not or
only hardly backdrivable.
From this interpretation of torque feedback, we
can derive some general guidelines for the mechanical
design of torque-controlled robots. Since the effec-
tive motor side friction can be reduced by a simple
proportional torque feedback but link side friction is
not affected, we conclude that the mechanical design
should aim at low friction at the link side and the torque
sensing should be implemented at the power output
side of the gear. Since the assembly of gear and torque
sensor is assumed to behave like an ideal spring, any
masses of moving parts in the transmission should be
kept low in order to minimize unmodeled dynamics
which would affect the validity of (17.7). As an exam-
ple of a successful design, Fig. 17.31 shows a cross-
section of a joint of the torque-controlled DLR-light-
weight-robot-III [17.52] in which a harmonic drive
transmission is combined with a strain gauge-based
torque sensor.
Instead of the simple proportional control of (17.7),
a complete torque controller can be designed based on
the torque dynamics
BK1R C  D m C f; C BRq ;
(17.9)
resulting from (17.6) and  D K. q/. Torque tracking
is achieved via
m D d C BK1 Rd C f; C KqBRq C u.d  / ;
(17.10)
where u.d  / represents a proportional–derivative
(PD) or PID control law and the nonnegative fac-
tor Kq < 1 is chosen less than 1 in order to avoid
an overcompensation of the link side acceleration. In
the context of SEA such a controller was proposed
based on a linear system representation of a single joint
in [17.55]. Cascaded torque control of a single SEA-
based joint using an inner loop velocity controller has
been analyzed in [17.59, 60], also using a linear model.
In the context of torque-controlled elastic joint robots,
in [17.61] a combination with a Cartesian impedance
controller was proven to be stable for the full nonlinear
dynamics based on the stability theory of cascaded sys-
tems (using Kq D 1). Passivity-based control has been
analyzed in [17.62].
17.5 Various Limbed Systems
In this section, we explore the divergence of the limbed
system design.
17.5.1 Odd Legged Walkers
A robot can be designed by pure engineering. For
example, the tripodal walking robots STriDER (self-
excited tripodal dynamic experimental robot) 1 and
2 (Fig. 17.32) can demonstrate a unique locomotion
which have never developed by evolution [17.63] and
VIDEO 534 . It has three identical legs each of them
has four DOF, three at the hip and one at the knee.
Supporting the body with two legs, the robot takes a dy-
namic step by swinging the rest leg. Since the body ﬂips

Limbed Systems
17.5 Various Limbed Systems
435
Part B | 17.5
Fig. 17.32 STriDER 1 and 2
with 180 ı about the aligned pelvis joints connecting the
support legs, the robot can continue its dynamic walk.
Five legged walkers have been developed by some
groups. For example, Besari et al. developed a ﬁve-
legged robot inspired from starﬁsh, and applied rein-
forcement learning to obtain its optimal gait [17.64].
17.5.2 Leg-Wheel Hybrid Robots
Unlike animals or insects, a robot can be designed
to have wheels which can rotate inﬁnitely. By mixing
the efﬁciency of wheels and the ﬂexibility of legs, we
a)
(1)
(2)



(3)
(4)
c)
b)
d)
Fig.17.33a–d Leg-wheel hybrid
robots. (a) Biped leg–wheel robot
(1998); (b) Roller walker (1996);
(c) RHex (2001); (d) Whegs II (2003)
(after [17.65–68])
can expect a robot of maximum terrain adaptivity with
minimum power consumption. Figure 17.33 shows ex-
amples of such a design concept.
Figure 17.33a shows a stair climbing of a biped leg-
wheeled robot developed by Matsumoto et al. [17.65].
The robot is a planer biped with telescopic legs, but the
tip of each leg is equipped with a powered wheel. Dur-
ing a single leg support phase, the robot is controlled
as a wheeled inverted pendulum. In addition, a con-
troller was developed to realize the smooth transient
between single support and statically stable double sup-
port phase.
Figure 17.33b is RollerWalker developed by Hi-
rose et al. [17.66, 69]. RollerWalker is a 12 DOF
quadruped robot equipped with passive wheels on the
tip of legs. It uses roller-skating mode on a ﬂat ﬂoor,
while it can walk on an uneven terrain by retracting the
passive wheels (
VIDEO 535 ).
Figure 17.33c is RHex developed by Buehler,
Koditchek et al. [17.67]. Although it was originally in-
spired from the locomotion of cockroach, RHex has
only six active DOF, that is, one actuator for each hip.
Moreover, the legs can rotate full circle around the
pitch axis. By this unique design, RHex can walk and
run over rugged, broken, and obstacle-ridden ground
(
VIDEO 536 ). Recently, it also demonstrated biped
running with its rear legs [17.70].
Figure 17.33d is Whegs II, another cockroach-
inspired robot developed by Allen et al. [17.68]. This
robot has only 4 active DOFs, one for propulsion,
two for staring and one for body ﬂexion. Each leg is
equipped with three spring-loaded spoke and driven by

Part B | 17.5
436
Part B
Design
a)
b)
Fig. 17.35 Dante II (1994) (after [17.71])
a)
b)
Fig.17.34a,b Leg-arm hybrid robots (a) MELMANTIS-1
(1996); (b) Yanbo3 (2003) (after [17.72, 73]) J
the same actuator (
VIDEO 537 ). Whegs II can realize
comparable mobility to RHex, while it uses fewer actu-
ators.
17.5.3 Leg-Arm Hybrid Robots
Another design concept is a leg–arm hybrid robot. Since
legs have inherently many degree of freedom, it is pos-
sible to use them as manipulators. By this way, we
can minimize total DOF, complexity, weight and power
consumption of the walking robot. MELMANTIS-1
(Fig. 17.34a) developed by Koyachi et al. is a hexapod
walker of 22 DOF, which can transform its legs into ma-
nipulators [17.72]. The robot can manipulate an object
by two legs while standing with four other legs, after
traveling by six legs with the maximum stability.
Yanbo3 is a biped walker of 8 DOF developed by
the group of Ota et al. [17.73]. It is designed to have
minimum DOF necessary for a biped robot as well as
for a manipulator when it is in the single support. In
Fig. 17.34b, the robot is pressing the elevator button by
its foot.
17.5.4 Tethered Walking Robots
Figure 17.35 shows Dante II, an eight-legged tethered
walking robot developed by CMU Field Robotics Cen-
ter in 1994. It was used at an Alaskan volcano for
scientiﬁc exploration. To descend down steep crater
walls in a rappelling-like manner, the robot uses tether
cable anchored at the crater rim [17.71]. Hirose et al.
also developed tethered quadruped for construction
work [17.74].
17.5.5 Wall-Climbing Robots
Wall-climbing robots are characterized by their foot
mechanisms and leg conﬁgurations. The vital part is the
foot mechanism to generate pulling force and the use of
vacuum suction cups, electromagnets (for steel wall),
adhesive materials, or miniature spine array has been
proposed.
Figure 17.36a shows a wall-climbing quadruped
NINJA-1 developed by Hirose et al. [17.75] Each foot
of NINJA-1 is equipped with a specially designed
suction pad which can minimize its vacuum leakage.
Another reliable wall-climbing robot with suction cups
was developed by Yano et al. [17.76]
Fig.17.36a,b Wall-climbing robots. (a) NINJA-1 (1991);
(b) RiSE (2005) (after [17.75, 77]) J

Limbed Systems
17.6 Performance Indices
437
Part B | 17.6
Figure 17.36b shows a wall-climbing hexapod RiSE
developed by Kim et al. [17.77, 78]. Each foot of RiSE
is equipped with arrays of miniature spines observed in
some insects and spiders. The robot can reliably climb
on a wide variety of outdoor surfaces including concrete,
stucco, brick, and dressed sandstone.As a wall-climbing
robot more recently developed, watch Stickybot III in
VIDEO 540 and Waalbot in
VIDEO 541 .
17.6 Performance Indices
In this section, we introduce useful performance in-
dices, that can be used to evaluate legged robots of
different conﬁgurations.
17.6.1 Stability Margins
The stability margin was originally proposed for a de-
gree of stability of the statically walking multilegged
robots by McGhee and Frank [17.79]. By neglecting the
inertial effects caused by body and leg acceleration, we
can guarantee the robot keep balance if the projection of
center of mass (COM) exists inside the support polygon
as shown in Fig. 17.37. (Note: In multilegged robot re-
search, the word support pattern is frequently used for
support polygon [17.2, 79, 80].)
For a given conﬁguration of a walking robot, the
stability margin Sm is deﬁned as the minimum distance
of the vertical projection of COM to the boundaries of
the support pattern in the horizontal plane as illustrated
in Fig. 17.38a.
In addition, an alternative index was proposed to
obtain the optimal gait analytically. That is the lon-
gitudinal stability margin Sl which is deﬁned as the
minimum distance from the vertical projection of COM
to the support pattern boundaries along the line parallel
to the body motion.
For a dynamic walking robot, we can deﬁne a stabil-
ity margin as the minimum distance of the ZMP to the
boundaries of the support polygon, since ZMP is the
natural extension of a projected COM on the ground.
Support polygon
(support pattern)
CoM
Fig. 17.37 Support polygon (support pattern) of multi-
legged robot
This fact has already been mentioned in the original
work of ZMP [17.81], and has been implicitly used
by many researchers. Explicit deﬁnition of this ZMP
stability margin can be seen, for example, in Huang
et al. [17.82].
For a legged robot on a rough terrain, Messuri and
Klein deﬁned the energy stability margin as the mini-
mum potential energy required to tumble the robot as,
SE D min
i .Mghi/ ;
(17.11)
where hi is the COM height variation during the tumble
around the i-th segment of the support polygon and M
is the total mass of the robot [17.83]. This concept is
widely accepted, and there are some proposals for im-
provement [17.14, 84].
17.6.2 Gait Sensitivity Norm
Hobbelen and Wisse proposed a gait sensitivity norm
(GSN) as a disturbance rejection measure of limit cycle
walking machines [17.85]. GSN is deﬁned as
GSN D

@g
@e

2
;
(17.12)
where e is the set of disturbances and g is the gait in-
dicator which characterizes the failure mode, motion
ﬁnally end up a tumble. For a 2-D limit cycle walker,
they took ﬂoor irregularities (step height to walk over)
and step time as e and g, respectively.
For real robots, GSN can be experimentally ob-
tained from the response of gait indicators g to a single
a)
b)
Sm = min(d1, d2, d3)
Sl = min(d1, d2)
Body 
motion
d2
d1
d2
d3
d1
Fig.17.38a,b Deﬁnition of stability margins. (a) Stability margin;
(b) Longitudinal stability margin

Part B | 17.6
438
Part B
Design
disturbance e0 as

@g
@e

2
D
1
je0j
v
u
u
t
q
X
iD1
1
X
kD0
Œgk.i/  g.i/2 ;
(17.13)
where gk.i/ is the i-th gait indicator value at k steps after
the disturbance e0 has applied, q is the number of gait
indicators. GSN has a good correlation with the basin of
attraction, hence it can be used for a design of a robust
walking robot and its controller.
17.6.3 Duty Factor
and Froude Number
Throughout this chapter, we have observed various
walking robots which might ﬁt best for certain en-
vironment and purpose. In some cases, however, we
need to compare walking robots which have different
masses, sizes, and leg numbers by using a certain per-
formance index. Such an index should be dimensionless
like a Mach number or a Raynords number in ﬂuid
mechanics.
PV II [14]
Big muskie [15]
OSU hexapod [16]
Electric monopod
(Papantoniou [6]) 
Hydraulic quadruped
(Raibert [5]) 
GE quadruped [19]
1950 Cars [13]
1994 Cars [21]
Limiting line
(Gabrielli & von Karman [13])
Human running [23]
Off-road
vehicles [22]
Human
cycling [25]
Human
walking [23]
ASV [17]
Helios II [18]
ARL monopod [fig. 8]
Cornell biped 2005
Gravity walker
(McGeer [20])
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Specific resistance ε
Velocity (m/s)
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
0.001
Fig. 17.39 Gabrielli–von Karman diagram (after [17.86])
One of the useful indices for walking machines is
a duty factor ˇ deﬁned as
ˇ D (support period)
(cycle time)
:
Duty factors can be used to make the distinction
between walks and runs, since we have ˇ  0:5 for
walking and ˇ < 0:5 for running [17.87].
Froude number is used in ﬂuid mechanics to explain
the behavior of surface waves. Since both of surface
waves and legged locomotion are dynamic motion in
gravity, Alexander used it to characterize animal lo-
comotion [17.87, 88]. He calculated a Froude number
by
Fr2 D V2
gh ;
(17.14)
where V is the walking or running speed, g is the
gravity acceleration, and h is the height of hip joint
from the ground. He showed animals of different
sizes uses similar gaits when they travel with equal
Froude numbers. Especially, most animals changes

Limbed Systems
17.6 Performance Indices
439
Part B | 17.6
their gait from walking to running at the speed of
Fr2 D 1.
Froude number is also deﬁned as
Fr1 D
V
pgh ;
(17.15)
which is the square root of Fr2 and can be used non
dimensional speed of animals or legged robots.
17.6.4 Specific Resistance
The speciﬁc resistance is another important dimen-
sionless number, which is used to evaluate the energy
efﬁciency of a mobile robot.
Gabrielli and von Karman discussed the perfor-
mance of various vehicles using the power consumption
per unit distance. That is
 D
E
Mgd ;
(17.16)
where E is the total energy consumption for a travel of
distance d, M is the total mass of the vehicle and g is
gravity acceleration [17.89]. Note that when we push
a box of mass M for a distance d on a ﬂoor with a fric-
tion coefﬁcient , we consume the power Mgd and the
speciﬁc resistance becomes  D . Therefore, we can
say that the speciﬁc resistance indicates how smooth the
locomotion is.
In the original work, Gabrielli and von Karman
plotted the speciﬁc resistance as the function of speed
for various vehicles (Fig. 17.39). This is called the
Gabrielli–von Karman diagram and it was used to
compare various styles of locomotion by Umetani and
Hirose [17.90]. Gregorio et al. also showed the speciﬁc
resistance of recent walking robots including their ef-
ﬁcient hopping robot, ARL monopod [17.86]. Collins
et al. developed robots based on passive-dynamics with
small actuators and achieved energy efﬁciency close
to human walking [17.91]. In the paper, the speciﬁc
resistance is referred to as speciﬁc energetic cost of
transport.
Video-References
VIDEO 512
Linear inverted pendulum mode
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/512
VIDEO 517
Hexapod robot Ambler
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/517
VIDEO 520
Hexapod ParaWalker-II
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/520
VIDEO 521
Cockroach-like hexapod
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/521
VIDEO 522
Bipedal humanoid robot: WABIAN
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/522
VIDEO 522
Cybernetic human HRP-4C walking
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/524
VIDEO 525
Cybernetic human HRP-4C quick turn
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/525
VIDEO 526
Development of a humanoid robot DARwIn
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/526
VIDEO 527
Passive dynamic walking with knees
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/527
VIDEO 529
Intuitive control of a planar bipedal walking robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/529
VIDEO 530
IHMC/Yobotics biped
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/530
VIDEO 531
Torque controlled humanoid robot TORO
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/531
VIDEO 532
3-D passive dynamic walking robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/532
VIDEO 533
Biped running robot MABEL
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/533
VIDEO 534
STriDER: Self-excited tripedal dynamic experimental robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/534
VIDEO 535
Roller-Walker: Leg-wheel hybrid vehicle
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/535

Part B | 17
440
Part B
Design
VIDEO 536
RHex rough-terrain robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/536
VIDEO 537
Whegs II: A mobile robot using abstracted biological principles
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/537
VIDEO 540
StickybotIII climbing robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/540
VIDEO 541
Waalbot: agile climbing with synthetic fibrillar dry adhesives
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/17/videodetails/541
References
17.1
M.H. Raibert: Legged Robots That Balance (MIT
Press, Cambridge 1986)
17.2
S.-M. Song, K.J. Waldron: Machines That Walk: The
Adaptive Suspension Vehicle (MIT Press, Cambridge
1989)
17.3
S. Lohmeier: Design and Realization of a Humanoid
Robot for Fast and Autonomous Bipedal Locomo-
tion (Technische Universität München, München
2010)
17.4
R.D. Quinn, R.E. Ritzmann: Construction of a hexa-
pod robot with cockroach kinematics benefits both
robotics and biology, Connect. Sci. 10(3), 239–254
(1998)
17.5
H. Hirukawa, F. Kanehiro, K. Kaneko, S. Kajita,
M. Morisawa: Dinosaur robotics for entertainment
applications, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 14(3), 43–
51 (2007)
17.6
D.E. Koditschek, R.J. Full, M. Buehler: Mechanical
aspects of legged locomotion control, Arthropod
Struct. Dev. 33, 251–272 (2004)
17.7
R. Tajima, K. Suga: Motion having a flight phase:
Experiments involving a one-legged robot, Proc.
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Beijing (2006)
pp. 1727–1731
17.8
K. Kaneko, S. Kajita, F. Kanehiro, K. Yokoi, K. Fu-
jiwara, H. Hirukawa, T. Kawasaki, M. Hirata,
T. Isozumi: Design of advanced leg module for
humanoid robotics project of METI, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002) pp. 38–
45
17.9
Y. Suhagara, H. Lim, T. Hosobata, Y. Mikuriya,
H. Sunazuka, A. Takanishi: Realization of dynamic
human-carrying walking by a biped locomotor,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), New Or-
leans (2004) pp. 3055–3060
17.10
S.
Hirose,
T.
Masui,
H.
Kikuchi,
Y.
Fukuda,
Y. Umetani: TITAN III: A quadruped walking vehi-
cle – Its structure and basic characteristics, Proc.
Int. Symp. Robotics Res., Kyoto (1984) pp. 325–
331
17.11
M. Buehler, R. Playter, M. Raibert: Robots step out-
side, Proc. Int. Symp. Adapt. Motion Anim. Mach.
(AMAM), Ilmenau (2005)
17.12
K.J. Waldron, R.B. McGhee: The adaptive suspen-
sion vehicle, IEEE Control Syst. Mag. 6, 7–12 (1986)
17.13
R.A. Brooks: A robot that walks; Emergent behav-
ior from a carefully evolved network, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Scottsdale (1989)
pp. 292–296
17.14
M. Hirose, Y. Haikawa, T. Takenaka, K. Hirai: Devel-
opment of humanoid robot ASIMO, Proc. Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) – Workshop 2 (2001)
17.15
K. Kaneko, F. Kanehiro, M. Morisawa, K. Miura,
S. Nakaoka, S. Kajita: Cybernetic Human HRP-4C,
IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots, Paris (2009)
pp. 7–14
17.16
K. Kaneko, F. Kanehiro, M. Morisawa, T. Tsuji,
K. Mira, S. Nakaoka, S. Kajita, K. Yokoi: Hardware
improvement of cybernetic human HRP-4C towards
entertainent use, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS), San Fransisco (2011) pp. 4392–
4399
17.17
K. Kaneko, F. Kanehiro, S. Kajita, H. Hirukawa,
T. Kawasaki, M. Hirata, K. Akachi, T. Isozumi: Hu-
manoid Robot HRP-2, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 1083–1090
17.18
K. Kaneko, K. Harada, F. Kanehiro, G. Miyamori,
K. Akachi: Humanoid Robot HRP-3, Proc. Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2008) pp. 2471–2478
17.19
M. Kouchi, M. Mochimaru, H. Iwasawa, S. Mitani:
Anthropometric database for Japanese popula-
tion 1997-98, Japanese Industrial Standards Center,
AIST, MITI http://riodb.ibase.aist.go.jp/dhbodydb/
(Tokyo 2000)
17.20
K. Kaneko, K. Harada, F. Kanehiro: Development
of multi-fingered hand for life-size humanoid
robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2007) pp. 913–920
17.21
Q. Lu, C. Ortega, O. Ma: Passive gravity compensa-
tion mechanisms: Technologies and applications,
Recent Pat. Eng. 5(1), 32–44 (2011)
17.22
K.A. Wyrobek, E.H. Berger, H.F.M. Van der Loos,
J.K. Salisbury: Towards a personal robotics devel-
opment platform: Rationale and design of an in-
trinsically safe personal robot, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2008)
17.23
Willow
Garage
Inc.,
68
Willow
Road,
Menlo
Park, CA 94025, USA: http://www.willowgarage.
com/pages/pr2/
17.24
T. McGeer: Passive dynamic walking, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 9(2), 62–82 (1990)
17.25
M. Garcia, A. Chatterjee, A. Ruina, M. Coleman: The
simplest walking model: Stability, complexity, and
scaling, ASME J. Biomech. Eng. 120, 281–288 (1998)
17.26
A. Goswami, B. Thuilot, B. Espiau: A study of the
passive gait of a compass-like biped robot: Sym-
metry and chaos, Int. J. Robotics Res. 17, 1282–1301
(1998)

Limbed Systems
References
441
Part B | 17
17.27
S.H. Collins, M. Wisse, A. Ruina: A three-dimen-
sional passive-dynamic walking robot with two
legs and knees, Int. J. Robotics Res. 20(2), 607–615
(2001)
17.28
S.H. Collins, A. Ruina, R. Tedrake, M. Wisse: Efficient
bipedal robots based on passive dynamic walkers,
Sci. Mag. 307, 1082–1085 (2005)
17.29
P.A. Bhounsule, J. Cortell, A. Ruina: Design and
control of Ranger: an energy-efficient, dynamic
walking robot, 15th Int. Conf. Climb. Walk. Robots
(CLAWAR), Baltimore (2012) pp. 441–448
17.30
S.H. Collins, M. Wisse, A. Ruina: Three-dimensional
passive-dynamic walking robot with two legs and
knees, Int. J. Robotics Res. 20(2), 607–615 (2001)
17.31
M. Wisse, L. Schwab, F.L.T. Van der Helm: Passive
walking dynamic model with upper body, Robotica
22(6), 681–688 (2004)
17.32
E.R. Westervelt, J.W. Grizzle, D.E. Koditschek: Hy-
brid zero dynamics of planar biped walkers, IEEE
Trans. Autom. Control 48(1), 42–56 (2003)
17.33
E.R.
Westervelt, J.W.
Grizzle,
C.
Chevallereau,
J.H. Choi, B. Morris: Feedback Control of Dynamic
Bipedal Robot Locomotion (CRC, Boca Raton 2007)
17.34
C. Chevallereau, G. Abba, Y. Aoustin, F. Plestan,
E.R. Westervelt, C. Canudas-de-Wit, J.W. Grizzle:
RABBIT: A testbed for advanced control theory, IEEE
Control Syst. Mag. 23(5), 57–79 (2003)
17.35
J.W.
Grizzle,
J.
Hurst,
B.
Morris,
H.W.
Park,
K. Sreenath: MABEL, A new robotic bipedal walker
and runner, Proc. IEEE Am. Control Conf. (2009)
17.36
D. Hobbelen, T. de Boer, M. Wisse: System overview
of bipedal robots Flame and TUlip: Tailor-made for
Limit Cycle Walking, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS), Nice (2008) pp. 2486–2491
17.37
R.J. Full, D.E. Koditschek: Templates and anchors:
neuromechanical hypotheses of legged locomotion
on land, J. Exp. Biol. 202, 3325–3332 (1999)
17.38
S. Kajita, K. Tani: Study of dynamic biped locomo-
tion on rugged terrain – Derivation and application
of the linear inverted pendulum mode, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1991) pp. 1405–
1411
17.39
M.B. Popovic, A.
Goswami, H. Herr: Angular
momentum regulation during human walking:
Biomechanics and control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 2405–2411
17.40
M.B. Popovic, A. Goswami, H. Herr: Ground ref-
erence points in legged locomotion: Definitions,
biological trajectories and control implications, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 24(12), 1013–1032 (2005)
17.41
S. Kajita, F. Kanehiro, K. Kaneko, K. Fujiwara,
K. Harada, K. Yokoi, H. Hirukawa: Biped walk-
ing pattern generation by using preview control of
zero-moment point, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2003) pp. 1620–1626
17.42
Y. Choi, D. Kim, Y. Oh, B.J. You: Posture/walking
control
for
humanoid
robot based on
kine-
matic resolution of com Jacobian with embed-
ded motion, IEEE Trans. Robotics 23(6), 1285–1293
(2007)
17.43
J. Englsberger, C. Ott, M. Roa, A. Albu-Schaeffer,
G. Hirzinger: Bipedal walking control based on
capture point dynamics, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011) pp. 4420–4427
17.44
S. Lohmeier, T. Bushmann, H. Ulbrich: Humanoid
Robot LOLA, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Kobe (2009) pp. 775–780
17.45
I.W. Park, J.-Y. Kim, J. Lee, J.H. Oh: Mechanical
design of humanoid robot platform KHR-3 (KAIST
Humanoid Robot 3: HUBO), Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf.
Humanoid Robots (2005) pp. 321–326
17.46
B. Stephens: Humanoid push recovery, Proc. IEEE-
RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (2007)
17.47
T. Takenaka, T. Matsumoto, T. Yoshiike: Real time
motion generation and control for biped robot –
1st Report: Walking gait pattern generation, Proc.
IEEE /RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2009)
pp. 1084–1091
17.48
R. Blickhan: The spring mass model for running
and hopping, J. Biomech. 22(11-12), 1217–1227 (1989)
17.49
H. Geyer, A. Seyfarth, R. Blickhan: Compliant leg
behaviour explains basic dynamics of walking and
running, Proc. Biol. Sci. 273(1603), 2861–2867 (2006)
17.50
J. Pratt, G. Pratt: Exploiting natural dynamics in the
control of a planar bipedal walking robot, Proc.
36th Ann. Allerton Conf. Commun. (1998)
17.51
J. Pratt, B. Krupp: Design of a bipedal walking
robot, SPIE Def. Sec. Symp., Bellingham (2008)
17.52
G.
Hirzinger,
N.
Sporer,
A.
Albu-Schaeffer,
M. Haehnle, R. Krenn, A. Pascucci, M. Schedl:
DLR’s torque-controlled light weight robot III – are
we reaching the technological limits now?, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2002)
pp. 1710–1716
17.53
C. Ott, O. Eiberger, W. Friedl, B. Baeuml, U. Hil-
lenbrand, C. Borst, A. Albu-Schaeffer, B. Brunner,
H. Hirschmueller, S. Kielhoefer, R. Konietschke,
M. Suppa, T. Wimboeck, F. Zacharias, G. Hirzinger:
A humanoid two-arm system for dexterous manip-
ulation, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots,
Genova (2006) pp. 276–283
17.54
C. Ott, C. Baumgaertner, J. Mayr, M. Fuchs, R. Burger,
D. Lee, O. Eiberger, A. Albu-Schaeffer, M. Greben-
stein, G. Hirzinger: Development of a biped robot
with torque controlled joints, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int.
Conf. Humanoid Robots (2010) pp. 167–173
17.55
G.A. Pratt, M.M. Williamson: Series elastic actua-
tors, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(1995) pp. 399–406
17.56
R. Brooks, C. Breazeal, M. Marjanovic, B. Scassellati,
M. Williamson: The Cog project: Building a hu-
manoid robot, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 1562, 52–87
(1999)
17.57
H. Iwata, S. Sugano: Development of human sym-
biotic robot: WENDY, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (1999)
17.58
M.W. Spong: Modeling and control of elastic joint
robots, Trans. ASME: J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 109,
310–318 (1987)
17.59
G. Wyeth: Control issues for velocity sourced series
elastic actuators, Proc. Australasian Conf. Robotics
Autom. (2006)
17.60
H. Vallery, R. Ekkelenkamp, H. van der Kooij,
M. Buss: Passive and accurate torque control of se-

Part B | 17
442
Part B
Design
ries elastic actuators, IEEE/RSJ Proc. Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2007)
17.61
C. Ott, A. Albu-Schaeffer, G. Hirzinger: Decoupling
based cartesian impedance control of flexible joint
robots, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2003)
17.62
C. Ott, A. Albu-Schaeffer, A. Kugi, G. Hirzinger: On
the passivity based impedance control of flexi-
ble joint robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics 24(2), 416–429
(2008)
17.63
J. Heaston, D. Hong, I. Morazzani, P. Ren, G. Gold-
man: STriDER: Self-excited tripedal dynamic exper-
imental robot, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Roma (2007) pp. 2776–2777
17.64
A. Rachmat, A. Besari, R. Zamri, A. Satria Prabu-
wono, S. Kuswadi: The study on optimal gait for
five-legged robot with reinforcement learning, Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Appl. (2009) pp. 1170–1175
17.65
O. Matsumoto, S. Kajita, M. Saigo, K. Tani: Dynamic
trajectory control of passing over stairs by a biped
type leg-wheeled robot with nominal reference of
static gait, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (1998) pp. 406–412
17.66
S. Hirose, H. Takeuchi: Study on roller-walk (basic
characteristics and its control), Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1996) pp. 3265–3270
17.67
U. Saranli, M. Buehler, D.E. Koditschek: RHex:
A Simple and Highly Mobile Hexapod Robot, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 20(7), 616–631 (2001)
17.68
T.J. Allen, R.D. Quinn, R.J. Bachmann, R.E. Ritz-
mann: Abstracted biological principles applied
with reduced actuation improve mobility of legged
vehicles, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS), Las Vegas (2003) pp. 1370–1375
17.69
G. Endo, S. Hirose: Study on roller-walker: Sys-
tem integration and basic experiments, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Detroit (1999)
pp. 2032–2037
17.70
N. Neville, M. Buehler, I. Sharf: A bipedal running
robot with one actuator per leg, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Orlando (2006) pp. 848–
853
17.71
J.
Bares, D.
Wettergreen:
Dante
II:
Technical
description, results and
lessons learned, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 18(7), 621–649 (1999)
17.72
N. Koyachi, H. Adachi, M. Izumi, T. Hirose, N. Senjo,
R. Murata, T. Arai: Multimodal control of hexapod
mobile manipulator MELMANTIS-1, Proc. 5th Int.
Conf. Climb. Walk. Robots (2002) pp. 471–478
17.73
Y. Ota, T. Tamaki, K. Yoneda, S. Hirose: Development
of walking manipulator with versatile locomotion,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2003)
pp. 477–483
17.74
S. Hirose, K. Yoneda, H. Tsukagoshi: TITAN VII:
Quadruped walking and manipulating robot on
a steep slope, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Albuquerque (1997) pp. 494–500
17.75
S. Hirose, A. Nagakubo, R. Toyama: Machine that
can walk and climb on floors, walls and ceilings,
Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Adv. Robotics (ICAR), Pisa (1991)
pp. 753–758
17.76
T. Yano, S. Numao, Y. Kitamura: Development of
a self-contained wall climbing robot with scanning
type suction cups, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS), Vol. 1 (1998) pp. 249–254
17.77
S. Kim, A. Asbeck, W. Provancher, M.R. Cutkosky:
SpinybotII: Climbing hard walls with compliant
microspines, Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Robotics (ICAR),
Seattle (2005) pp. 18–20
17.78
A.T. Asbeck, S. Kim, A. McClung, A. Parness,
M.R. Cutkosky: Climbing walls with microspines
(Video), Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Orlando (2006)
17.79
R.B. McGhee, A.A. Frank: On the stability properties
of quadruped creeping gaits, Math. Biosci. 3, 331–
351 (1968)
17.80
R.B. McGhee: Vehicular legged locomotion. In:
Advances in Automation and Robotics, ed. by
G.N. Saridis (JAI, Greenwich 1985) pp. 259–284
17.81
M. Vukobratović, J. Stepanenko: On the stability of
anthropomorphic systems, Math. Biosci. 15, 1–37
(1972)
17.82
Q. Huang, K. Yokoi, S. Kajita, K. Kaneko, H. Arai,
N. Koyachi, K. Tanie: Planning walking patterns for
a biped robot, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 17(3),
280–289 (2001)
17.83
D.A. Messuri, C.A. Klein: Automatic body regulation
for maintaining stability of a legged vehicle during
rough-terrain locomotion, IEEE J. Robotics Autom.
RA-1(3), 132–141 (1985)
17.84
E. Garcia, P. de Gonzalez Santos: An improved en-
ergy stability margin for walking machines subject
to dynamic effects, Robotica 23(1), 13–20 (2005)
17.85
D.G.E. Hobbelen, M. Wisse: A disturbance rejection
measure for limit cycle walkers: The gait sensi-
tivity norm, IEEE Trans. Robotics 23(6), 1213–1224
(2007)
17.86
P. Gregorio, M. Ahmadi, M. Buehler: Design, con-
trol, and energetics of an electrically actuated
legged robot, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. B27(4),
626–634 (1997)
17.87
R. McNeill Alexander: The gait of bipedal and
quadrupedal animals, Int. J. Robotics Res. 3(2), 49–
59 (1984)
17.88
R. McNeill Alexander: Exploring Biomechanics –
Animals in Motion (Freeman, Boston 1992)
17.89
G. Gabrielli, T. von Karman: What price speed –
Specific power required for propulsion of vehicles,
Mechan. Eng. 72(10), 775–781 (1950)
17.90
Y. Umetani, S. Hirose: Biomechanical study on ser-
pentine locomotion – Mechanical analysis and
zoological experiment for the stationary straight-
forward movement, Trans. Soc. Instrum. Control
Eng. 6, 724–731 (1973), in Japanese
17.91
S. Collins, A. Ruina, R. Tedrake, M. Wisse: Efficient
Bipedal Robots Based on Passive-Dynamic Walkers,
Science 307, 1082–1085 (2005)

Multimedia Contents Parallel Mech
443
Part B | 18.1
18. Parallel Mechanisms
Jean-Pierre Merlet, Clément Gosselin, Tian Huang
This chapter presents an introduction to the kine-
matics and dynamics of parallel mechanisms, also
referred to as parallel robots. As opposed to classi-
cal serial manipulators, the kinematic architecture
of parallel robots includes closed-loop kinematic
chains. As a consequence, their analysis differs
considerably from that of their serial counterparts.
This chapter aims at presenting the fundamen-
tal formulations and techniques used in their
analysis.
18.1
Definitions.........................................
443
18.2
Type Synthesis
of Parallel Mechanisms .......................
445
18.3
Kinematics.........................................
446
18.3.1
Inverse Kinematics..................
446
18.3.2
Forward Kinematics ................
446
18.4
Velocity and Accuracy Analysis.............
447
18.5
Singularity Analysis ............................
448
18.5.1
Parallel Singularity Analysis .....
448
18.6
Workspace Analysis.............................
450
18.7
Static Analysis ....................................
451
18.8
Dynamic Analysis................................
452
18.9
Design ...............................................
452
18.10 Wire-Driven Parallel Robots ................
453
18.10.1
Cable-Suspended Parallel
Mechanisms ...........................
454
18.10.2
Fully Constrained Wire-Driven
Parallel Mechanisms ...............
454
18.10.3
Design and Prototyping...........
455
18.11
Application Examples .........................
455
18.12
Conclusion and Further Reading .........
455
Video-References.........................................
456
References...................................................
456
18.1 Definitions
A closed-loop kinematic chain is one in which the links
and joints are arranged such that at least one closed loop
exists. Furthermore, a complex closed-loop kinematic
chain is obtained when one of the links – other than
the base – has a degree of connectivity greater than or
equal to 3, i. e., one link other than the base is connected
through joints to at least three other links. A parallel
manipulator can be deﬁned as a closed-loop mechanism
composed of an end effector having n degrees of free-
dom (DOF) and a ﬁxed base, linked together by at least
two independent kinematic chains.
An example of such a structure was patented in
1928 by Gwinnett [18.1] to be used as a platform for
a movie theatre. In 1947, Gough [18.2] established the
basic principles of a mechanism with a closed-loop
kinematic structure (Fig. 18.1) that allows the position-
ing and the orientation of a moving platform so as to test
tire wear and tear. He built a prototype of this machine
in 1955.
For this mechanism, the moving effector is a hexag-
onal platform whose vertices are all connected to a link
by a ball-and-socket (spherical) joint. The other end of
the link is attached to the base by a universal joint.
A linear actuator allows the modiﬁcation of the to-
tal length of the link; this mechanism is, therefore,
a closed-loop kinematic structure, actuated by six lin-
ear actuators.
In 1965, Stewart [18.3] suggested the use of such
a structure for ﬂight simulators and the Gough mecha-
nism is sometimes referred to as the Stewart platform

Part B | 18.1
444
Part B
Design
Fig. 18.1 Gough platform
Fig. 18.2 The Delta robot
or the Gough–Stewart platform. The same architecture
was also concurrently proposed by Kappel as a motion
simulation mechanism [18.4]. Nowadays, the Gough
platform and its variants are the platform of choice
for many applications, for example, ﬂight simulators.
This application provides a convincing illustration of
the main advantage of parallel robots namely, their
load-carrying capacity. Indeed, while the ratio of the
mass of the payload over the mass of the robot is typ-
ically smaller than 0.15 for serial 6R industrial robots,
this ratio can be larger than 10 for parallel structures.
Another advantage of the Gough platform is its very
good positioning accuracy (although it has been ques-
tioned [18.5]). This high accuracy arises from the fact
that the legs work essentially in tension/compression
and are subjected to virtually no bending – thereby
A3
A2
A1
B3
yr
x r
C
B2
B1
O
x
y
Fig. 18.3 The 3  RPR planar parallel robot
leading to very small deformations – and from the
fact that the errors in the internal sensors of the
robot (measurement of the lengths of the legs for the
Gough platform) are mapped into very small errors
of the platform position. Parallel robots are also al-
most insensitive to scaling (the same structure can
be used for large or micro robots) and they can be
built using almost any type of joint, actuator, or trans-
mission, including exotic ones such as tape spring
and ﬂexure joints [18.6] or binary actuators [18.7].
The main drawbacks of parallel robots are their small
workspace and the singularities that can appear within
this workspace. However, large workspaces may be ob-
tained using wire transmissions (see, for example, the
Robocrane [18.8]): such robots will be speciﬁcally ad-
dressed in Sect. 18.10 as their analysis is somewhat
different. Apart from the Gough platform, the most suc-
cessful designs of parallel robots are the Delta robot
proposed by Clavel [18.9] (Fig. 18.2) and some planar
parallel robots. The most common planar parallel robots
have three identical legs each having an RPR or RRR
architecture, where the underlined joint is the actuated
one (such robots are often denoted as 3RPR (3RRR;
Fig. 18.3).
The geometric arrangement of the joints and links
of the Delta structure provides three translational de-
grees of freedom at the platform. Numerous other
types of parallel robots have been proposed in the re-
cent years. Although most existing architectures are
based on the intuition of their designer, the synthesis
of parallel mechanisms can be dealt with systemati-
cally. An overview of the main approaches to the type
synthesis of parallel mechanisms is given in the next
section.

Parallel Mechanisms
18.2 Type Synthesisof Parallel Mechanisms
445
Part B | 18.2
18.2 Type Synthesis of Parallel Mechanisms
Determining all potential mechanical architectures of
parallel robots that can produce a given motion pattern
at the moving platform is a challenging problem. Sev-
eral authors have addressed this problem, referred to as
type synthesis. The approaches proposed in the litera-
ture can be divided into four groups:

Approaches based on graph theory: The enumera-
tion of all possible structures having a given number
of DOFs can be performed by considering that there
is only a ﬁnite set of possible kinematic pairs, and
hence a very large, but ﬁnite, set of possible struc-
ture combinations (e.g., [18.10]). Classical mobility
formulae – for example, the Chebychev–Grübler–
Kutzbach formula – are then used to determine the
number of DOFs in the structure. Unfortunately,
these formulas do not take into account geometric
properties of the mechanism that can change the
number of DOFs of the platform. Although many
parallel robots have been successfully invented and
developed for industrial uses, based on graph the-
ory – the Neos Tricept [18.11] and the Sprint Z3
head of DS Technologie Gmbh, for example – the
synthesis approaches based strictly on graph theory
can produce only limited nonoverconstrained paral-
lel robots and have been largely superseded by the
other methods described below.

Approaches based on group theory: The motion of
a rigid body has the special structure of a group, the
displacement group. Subgroups of the group of dis-
placements, such as the spatial translations or all the
translational and rotational motions about all axes
that are parallel to the axis deﬁned by a given vec-
tor (Schönﬂies motion [18.12]), play an important
role as they can be combined through the intersec-
tion operation [18.13] when elements of subgroups
act on the same rigid body. Type synthesis con-
sists in determining all the possible subgroups to
which the different kinematic chains that will con-
stitute the legs of the robot may belong to so that
their intersection leads to the desired motion pattern
for the platform. The synthesis approaches based
on group theory led to the discovery of numer-
ous possible architectures [18.14]. Nevertheless, the
displacement group has special properties that are
not reﬂected by its group structure alone. Also,
the approach is limited to motion patterns that can
be described by a subgroup of the displacement
group.

Approach based on differential geometry: As
a full extension and completion of the Lie-group-
algebraic method, the differential geometry method
can be used to cover the motion patterns that cannot
be modeled by subgroups but regular submanifolds,
a plane-hinged parallelogram, for example [18.15].
The additional merit of the geometric method lies
in that it enables to link the ﬁnite motion with
the instantaneous motion of the platform thanks to
the integral/differential relationship between the Lie
group and Lie algebra.

Approaches based on screw theory: In this ap-
proach, the ﬁrst step is to determine the wrench
system S that is reciprocal to the theoretically acces-
sible instantaneous twist (or velocity twist) of the
moving platform. Then, the wrenches of each limb
whose union spans the system S (and that determine
all the possible structures of the kinematic chains
that will generate the corresponding wrenches) are
enumerated. Although this method is very effective
at providing simple and intuitive descriptions of the
instantaneous motions of the platform, it is neces-
sary to verify that the mobility of the platform is full
cycle and not only instantaneous as all considered
twists and wrenches are instantaneous. Thus, tech-
niques to ensure the consistency between the ﬁnite
and instantaneous motions have also been devel-
oped. A systematic implementation of this approach
is provided in [18.16].
The above synthesis methods have been used to
generate a large number of architectures that cannot
be presented in this book, but the website [18.17]
presents a comprehensive description of a large num-
ber of mechanical architectures. Among others, several
remarkable architectures were proposed in the recent
years to generate Schönﬂies motions using the innova-
tive concept of articulated plates, leading to a brand new
pick-and-place parallel robot known as Adept Quat-
tro [18.18]. Also, other similar architectures allowing
unlimited rotations of the end effector while avoiding
all singularities have recently been proposed (see for
instance [18.19]).
It should also be pointed out that although these
synthesis methods can be used to generate a large num-
ber of architectures [18.20], there is a lack of a metric
to evaluate which one is better than the other even if
they have completely identical motion patterns. Fur-
thermore, it is hard to link the models for type synthesis
with those for kinematic, static, and dynamic analyses
and design. Open issues, therefore, include:

To develop suitable performance metrics for each
motion type to identify suitable topological struc-
tures for speciﬁc applications.

Part B | 18.3
446
Part B
Design

To develop a complete theoretical package that
enables type synthesis and parametric design to
be integrated into a uniﬁed framework that takes
into account the unavoidable uncertainties in the
manufacturing process, an ultimate objective of
design.
18.3 Kinematics
18.3.1 Inverse Kinematics
The solution of the inverse kinematic problem is usually
straightforward for parallel robots. This can be illus-
trated with the Gough platform.
The solution of the inverse kinematic problem con-
sists in determining the vector of leg lengths q for
a given pose of the platform deﬁned by the position vec-
tor p of a given point on the platform in a ﬁxed reference
frame and a rotation matrix R representing the orien-
tation of the platform with respect to the ﬁxed frame.
Let ai denote the position vector of the anchor point
of the i-th leg on the base given in the ﬁxed reference
frame and bi denote the position vector of the anchor
point of the i-th leg on the platform, given in a moving
frame attached to the platform. The length of the i-th
leg is the norm of the vector connecting the two anchor
points. This vector, noted si, can be written as
si D p C Rbi  ai ;
i D 1;: : : ; 6 :
(18.1)
Given the pose of the platform (vector p and matrix R),
vector si is readily calculated using (18.1) and, hence,
the leg lengths can be obtained.
18.3.2 Forward Kinematics
The solution of the forward kinematic problem consists
in determining the pose of the platform for a given set
of actuated joint coordinates (a given vector q). This
solution is needed for control purposes, calibration, and
motion planning.
The forward kinematic problem of a parallel robot is
usually much more complex than the inverse kinematic
problem. Indeed, the loop closure equations (18.1) are
typically highly nonlinear expressions of the pose vari-
ables. They form a nonlinear set of equations that
generally admits multiple solutions (e.g., the Gough
platform can have up to 40 solutions [18.21–23], while
a table with the number of solutions for Gough plat-
forms with special geometries is provided in [18.24]).
The forward kinematic problem arises in two different
contexts. In the ﬁrst case, no estimate of the current
pose of the platform is available (e.g., when starting
the robot), while in the second case, a relatively precise
estimate of the pose is known (e.g., in real-time con-
trol when the forward kinematics has been solved at the
previous sampling time of the controller). In the ﬁrst
case, the only known approach is to determine all the
solutions of the inverse kinematic equations, although
there is no known algorithm to sort the set of solu-
tions. It is often possible to determine an upper bound
on the number of real solutions. Consider, for exam-
ple, the case of the planar 3  RPR robot (Fig. 18.3).
If the joint at point B3 is disassembled, two separate
mechanisms are obtained, namely, a 4-bar linkage and
a rotary lever. From the kinematics of 4-bar linkages,
it is known that point B3 moves on a sixth-order alge-
braic curve. Moreover, it is also known that point B3
of the lever moves on a circle, that is, a second-order
algebraic curve. For a given set of actuated joint coordi-
nates, solutions to the forward kinematic problem arise
when the two curves intersect, that is, when the mech-
anism can be assembled. Bezout’s theorem states that
algebraic curves of order m, n intersect in nm points,
counting their order of multiplicity. In the above case,
this means that the curves intersect in 12 points. How-
ever, these 12 points include the two circular imaginary
points that belong to the coupler curve of the 4-bar
linkage and to any circle, thereby to their intersection.
These points are counted three times in Bezout’s the-
orem and, hence, the forward kinematic problem will
have at most six real solutions, corresponding to the in-
tersection points.
Various methods have been proposed for the
solution of the forward kinematic problem: elim-
ination
[18.25],
continuation
[18.23],
Gröbner
bases [18.26], and interval analysis [18.27]. Elim-
ination is usually not very stable numerically (i. e.,
it can produce spurious roots and miss solutions)
unless special care is taken in the implementation of
the resulting univariate equation and the elimination
steps. For instance, the transformation of polynomial
solutions into eigenvalue problems can be used [18.28].
Polynomial continuation, on the other hand, is much
more stable numerically since mature algorithms can
be found in the literature [18.29]. The fastest methods –
although not appropriate for a real-time use – are
Gröbner bases and interval analysis. They also have the
advantage of being numerically certiﬁed (no roots can
be missed and the solution can be computed with an
arbitrarily prescribed accuracy).

Parallel Mechanisms
18.4 Velocity and Accuracy Analysis
447
Part B | 18.4
However, in the simplest cases, elimination can usu-
ally be used to produce stable implementations as, for
example, for the 3RPR robot [18.30, 31]. Finally, it is
pointed out that the forward kinematic problem solved
for one type of robot may often be used for another ar-
chitecture: for example, the one developed above for the
3RPR robot may be used for the 3RRR. This is typ-
ical for parallel robots.
When a priori information (an initial guess of the
solution) is available, the forward kinematics is usually
solved using the Newton–Raphson or the Newton–
Gauss iterative scheme. Consider the solution to the
inverse kinematic problem, written as
q D f.x/ :
(18.2)
Iteration k of the Newton–Raphson procedure is written
as
xkC1 D xk C A.q  f.xk// ;
(18.3)
where q is the vector of prescribed joint variables. Ma-
trix A is usually chosen as .@f=@q/1.xk/ (the inverse
matrix may not be computed at each iteration or even be
chosen as constant). The iterative scheme stops when
the magnitude of the difference vector .q  f.xk// is
smaller than a chosen threshold.
Provided that a good initial estimate of the solution
is available, the Newton–Raphson algorithm is usually
very fast. However, the procedure may not converge or,
even worse, it may converge to a solution that is not the
correct pose of the platform, that is, it may converge
to another assembly mode. Such a situation can occur
even if the initial guess is arbitrarily close to the correct
pose. If the result is used in a control loop, the conse-
quences can be catastrophic. Fortunately, mathematical
tools, such as the Kantorovitch theorem combined with
interval analysis can be used to determine if the solution
found by the Newton–Raphson scheme is the correct
pose of the robot, that is, to certify the result at the cost
of a longer computation time, yet still compatible with
real time [18.27].
Furthermore, the choice of the inverse kinematics
equations plays an important role in the convergence
of this method [18.27]. For example, for a Gough
platform, a minimal set of equations (six equations in-
volving six unknowns: three for the translation and
three orientation angles) can be used but other rep-
resentations are possible. For instance, the position
coordinates of three of the platform anchor points – in
the ﬁxed reference frame – can be used as unknowns
(the coordinates of the remaining three points are then
readily computed upon convergence). Using this rep-
resentation, nine equations are needed. Six equations
are obtained based on the known distances between
the anchor points on the base and platform and three
additional equations are obtained based on the known
distances between all combinations of the three selected
platform anchor points.
Another possible approach for the solution of
the forward kinematic problem is either to add sen-
sors on the passive joints (e.g., on the U joints
of a Gough platform) or to add passive legs with
sensed joints. The main issue is then to determine
the number and location of the additional sensors that
lead to a unique solution [18.32–34] and to deter-
mine the effect of the sensor errors on the position-
ing error of the platform. For example, Stoughton
mentions that for a Gough platform with sensors in
the U joints, it is still necessary to use the Newton–
Raphson scheme to improve the accuracy of the so-
lution because the solutions obtained with the ad-
ditional sensors are very sensitive to measurement
noise [18.35].
18.4 Velocity and Accuracy Analysis
Similarly to serial robots, the actuated joint velocity
vector of parallel robots Pq is related linearly to the
vector of translational and angular velocities of the
platform (for simplicity, the latter vector is denoted
here as Pp although the angular velocity is not the time
derivative of any set of angular parameters). The linear
mapping between the two vectors is provided by the Ja-
cobian matrix J
Pp D J.p/Pq :
(18.4)
However, for parallel robots, a closed-form expression
is usually available for the inverse Jacobian J1 but this
is much more difﬁcult for J (more precisely, the closed-
form for most 6-DOF robots will be so complex that
it cannot be used in practice). For example, a simple
static analysis can be used to show that the i-th row J1
i
of matrix J1 for a Gough platform can be written as
J1
i
D .ni
ci  ni/ ;
(18.5)
where ni represents the unit vector deﬁned along leg i
and ci is the vector connecting the origin of the mobile
frame attached to the platform to the i-th anchor point
on the platform.

Part B | 18.5
448
Part B
Design
The effect of the joint sensor errors q on the posi-
tioning error p follows the same relationship, namely
p D J.p/q :
(18.6)
Since matrix J is difﬁcult to be obtained in a closed
form, accuracy analysis (i. e., ﬁnding the maximal po-
sitioning errors over a given workspace for bounded
joint sensor errors) is much more difﬁcult than for serial
robots [18.36, 37]. Apart from the measurement errors,
there are other sources of inaccuracy in parallel robots,
namely, clearance in the passive joints, manufacturing
tolerances, thermal errors, gravity induced and dynamic
errors [18.38, 39]. The effect of joint clearances on tra-
jectories followed by serial and parallel robots was
studied in [18.40–42]. According to these works, it is
impossible to determine trends for the effect of the ge-
ometric errors: a case-by-case study must be performed
since the effect is highly dependent on the mechanical
architecture, dimensioning, and workspace of the robot.
Thermal effects are sometimes mentioned as possible
sources of inaccuracy, although few works substantiate
this claim [18.43] and cooling may slightly reduce their
effects [18.44, 45].
Calibration is another means of improving the ac-
curacy of parallel robots. This issue was addressed in
Chap. 3. The methods and procedures used for parallel
robots differ slightly from the ones used for serial robots
since only the inverse kinematic equations are available
and the positioning of the platform is much less sensi-
tive to the geometric errors than in serial robots [18.46,
47]. Hence, the measurement noise occurring during
calibration has a signiﬁcant impact and may lead to sur-
prising results. For example, the classical least-squares
method may lead to parameters that are such that some
constraint equations are not satisﬁed even when the
measurement noise is taken into account [18.48] or
even to parameter values that are unrealistic. It has also
been shown with experimental data that classical paral-
lel robot modeling leads to constraint equations that do
not have any solution irrespective of the measurement
noise [18.49]. Moreover, calibration is very sensitive to
the choice of the calibration poses [18.50]: it seems that
the optimal choice is to select poses on the workspace
boundary [18.51, 52]. We may also mention an origi-
nal calibration approach based not on the proprioceptive
sensors of the robot but on leg observation with a vision
system [18.53].
18.5 Singularity Analysis
The analysis of singularities of parallel mechanisms
was ﬁrst addressed in [18.54]. In this formulation, the
kinematic equations were reduced to the input–output
relationship between the actuated joint coordinate vec-
tor q and the platform Cartesian coordinate vector p,
namely,
f.q; p/ D 0 :
(18.7)
Differentiating (18.7) with respect to time leads to
BPq C APp D 0 :
(18.8)
Three types of singularities can then be deﬁned: i/
when matrix B is singular (termed serial singularity),
ii/ when matrix A is singular (termed parallel singular-
ity) and iii/ when the input–output equations degenerate
(termed architecture singularity) in which case both ma-
trices A and B can be singular. In a serial singular
conﬁguration, the joints can have a nonzero velocity,
while the platform is at rest. In a parallel singularity,
there exist nonzero platform velocities for which the
joint velocities are zero. In the neighborhood of such
a conﬁguration, the robot can undergo an inﬁnitesimal
motion, while the actuators are locked. Since the mobil-
ity of the end effector should be zero when the actuators
are locked, it is also said that in such a conﬁguration, the
robot gains some DOFs. As a consequence, certain de-
grees of freedom of the platform cannot be controlled,
and this is a major problem.
A more general study of singularities was pro-
posed by Zlatanov et al. [18.55]. The latter analysis
uses the velocity equations involving the full twist of
the end effector and all joint velocities (passive or
actuated). This approach led to a more detailed clas-
siﬁcation of singularities and was also used later to
reveal special singularities (referred to as constraint sin-
gularities) [18.56] that could not be found with the
analysis presented in [18.54]. Also, the singularity anal-
ysis of parallel mechanisms was revisited more recently
in [18.57], where hierarchical levels in which different
critical phenomena originate are recognized.
The singularity analyses discussed above are of the
ﬁrst order. Second-(and higher-)order singularity anal-
yses can also be performed, although these analyses are
much more complex [18.42, 58].
18.5.1 Parallel Singularity Analysis
This type of singularity is especially important for par-
allel robots because it corresponds to conﬁgurations in

Parallel Mechanisms
18.5 Singularity Analysis
449
Part B | 18.5
which the control of the robot is lost. Furthermore, very
large joint forces can occur in the vicinity of singular
poses that may lead to a breakdown of the robot. The
main issues to be addressed in this context are:
1. The characterization of the singularities.
2. The deﬁnition of performance indices representing
the closeness to a singularity.
3. The development of algorithms that are capable of
detecting the presence of singularities over a given
workspace or trajectory.
Parallel singularities arise when the 66 full inverse
Jacobian Jf (i. e., the matrix that maps the full twist
of the platform into active – and eventually passive –
joint velocities) is singular, that is, when its determi-
nant det.Jf/ is equal to 0. It is pointed out that passive
joint velocities sometimes have to be included because
restricting the analysis to the active joint velocities may
not allow the determination of all singular conﬁgura-
tions of the mechanism (see the example of the 3UPU
robot [18.59]). Usually, a proper velocity analysis al-
lows one to establish this matrix in a closed form. But
computing the determinant of this matrix may be dif-
ﬁcult even with symbolic computation tools (see the
example of the Gough platform [18.60, 61]) and it does
not provide an insight into the geometric conditions as-
sociated with the singularities.
An alternative approach is to use line geometry: in-
deed, for several parallel robots (although not all), a row
of Jf corresponds to the Plücker vector of some line de-
ﬁned on the links of the robot. For example, for a Gough
platform, the rows of Jf are the normalized Plücker vec-
tors of the lines associated with the legs of the robot.
A singularity of matrix Jf, therefore, implies a linear
dependency between these vectors (they then constitute
a linear complex), a situation that may occur only if the
lines associated with the vectors verify particular geo-
metric constraints [18.62]. These geometric constraints
have been identiﬁed by Grassmann for every set of 3,
4, 5, or 6 vectors. Singularity analysis is, thus, reduced
to determining conditions on the pose parameters for
which these constraints are satisﬁed, giving geometric
information on the singularity variety. A variant of this
approach is to use the Grassmann Cayley algebra that
in certain cases may lead directly to the geometric sin-
gularity conditions [18.63].
Measuring closeness between a pose and a sin-
gular conﬁguration is a difﬁcult problem: there exists
no mathematical metric deﬁning the distance between
a prescribed pose and a given singular pose. Hence,
a certain level of arbitrariness must be accepted in the
deﬁnition of the distance to a singularity and none of
the proposed indices is perfect. For example, a possi-
ble index is the determinant of Jf: unfortunately, when
the platform is subjected to both translational and rota-
tional motion, the Jacobian matrix is not dimensionally
homogeneous and, hence, the value of the determinant
changes according to the physical units used to describe
the geometry of the robot. Dexterity indices, as deﬁned
in Chap. 10 (although they are much less relevant for
parallel robots than for serial robots [18.37]), can also
be used, and special indices for parallel robots have also
been proposed [18.64–66]. For example, it may be in-
teresting for a Gough platform to deﬁne a workspace as
singularity-free if for any pose the absolute value of the
joint forces is lower than a given threshold [18.67] or
to use a physically meaningful index like the kinematic
sensitivity [18.68].
Most of the analyses based on the above indices
are local, that is, valid only for a given pose, while in
practice the problem is to determine if a singular conﬁg-
uration can occur over a given workspace or trajectory.
Fortunately, an algorithm exists that allows this veri-
ﬁcation, even if the geometric model of the robot is
uncertain [18.69]. However, it should be pointed out
that a singularity-free workspace may not always be
optimal for parallel robots. Indeed, other performance
requirements may impose the presence of singularities
in the workspace or the robot may have part of its
workspace singularity-free (for example its working re-
gion) while exhibiting singularities outside this region.
Therefore, a motion planner producing a trajectory that
avoids singularities while remaining close to a desired
path is advisable and various approaches have been pro-
posed to address this problem [18.70, 71]. A related
problem is to determine if two solutions of the forward
kinematics may be joined without crossing a singular-
ity: this has been proved for planar robots [18.72, 73]
but also for 6-DOF robots [18.74].
Finally, it is noted that being close to a singular
conﬁguration may be useful in some cases. For exam-
ple, large ampliﬁcation factors between the end-effector
motion and the actuated joint motion may be inter-
esting for ﬁne positioning devices with a very small
workspace or for improving the sensitivity along some
measurement directions for a parallel robot used as
a force sensor [18.75]. It should also be mentioned that
parallel robots that remain permanently in a singular
conﬁguration may be interesting since they are capable
of producing complex motions with only one actua-
tor [18.76–78].

Part B | 18.6
450
Part B
Design
18.6 Workspace Analysis
As mentioned earlier, one of the main drawbacks of par-
allel robots is their small workspace. Moreover, their
workspace analysis is usually more complex than for
serial robots, especially if the platform has more than
3-DOFs. Indeed, the platform motion capabilities are
usually coupled, thereby prohibiting simple graphical
representations of the workspace. Decoupled robots
have also been proposed [18.79–81] (
VIDEO 54
and
VIDEO 52 ), but they do not provide the load-
carrying capacity of conventional parallel robots. In
general, the workspace of parallel robots is restricted
by the following:

The limitations on the actuated joint variables: for
example, the lengths of the legs of a Gough platform
have a minimum and maximum value.

The limitations on the range of motion of the pas-
sive joints: for example, the U and S joints of
a Gough platform have restricted ranges of angular
motion.

The mechanical interferences between the bodies of
the mechanism (legs, base, and platform).
Different types of workspaces can be deﬁned such
as, for example, the dextrous workspace (the set of plat-
form locations in which all orientations are possible),
the maximal workspace (the set of platform locations
that may be reached with at least one orientation), or
the orientation workspace (the set of orientations that
can be reached for a given location of the platform).
A possible approach for representing the workspace
of parallel robots with n > 3 DOFs is to ﬁx the value
of n  3 pose parameters in order to be able to plot the
workspace over the remaining 3-DOFs. Such plots can
be obtained very efﬁciently using geometric methods
if the plotted variables involve only translational mo-
tions because a geometric approach usually allows one
to establish directly the nature of the boundary of the
workspace (e.g., [18.82, 83] for the calculation of the
workspace of a Gough platform when its orientation is
ﬁxed). Another advantage of this approach is that it al-
lows the computation of the surface and volume of the
workspace. Possible alternatives include:

Discretization methods in which all poses of an n-
dimensional grid are checked with respect to all
types of kinematic constraints. Such methods are
usually simple to implement but are computation-
ally intensive because the computation time in-
creases exponentially with the resolution of the
mesh. Also, they require a large storage space.

Numerical methods that allow the determination of
the workspace boundary [18.84, 85].

Numerical methods based on interval analysis that
allow the determination of an approximation of
the workspace volume up to an arbitrary accu-
racy [18.86, 87]. This representation is also appro-
priate for motion planning problems.
Singularities can also split the workspace calculated
from the above kinematic constraints into elementary
components, called the aspects by Wenger and Chab-
lat [18.88] and which are separated by a singularity
variety. Some very good results have been obtained for
planar robots [18.89] but determining the aspects for
spatial robots is still an open problem. A parallel robot
may not always be able to move from one aspect to an-
other (at least without considering the dynamics of the
robot [18.90, 91]) and hence the useful workspace can
be reduced.
A problem related to workspace analysis is the
motion planning problem, which is slightly different
from that encountered with serial robots. For parallel
robots, the problem is not to avoid obstacles within
the workspace but either to determine if a given tra-
jectory lies entirely inside the workspace of the robot
and is singularity-free (for which an algorithm is avail-
able [18.92]) or to determine such a trajectory between
two poses which is much more difﬁcult [18.93]. In-
deed, classical serial robot motion planners work in the
joint space and assume that there is a one-to-one re-
lationship between the joint space and the operational
space. With this assumption, it is possible to determine
a set of points in the joint space that is collision-free
and to use this knowledge to build a collision-free
path between two poses. However, this assumption is
not valid for parallel robots because the mapping be-
tween the joint space and the operational space is not
one to one: a point in the joint space may either cor-
respond to multiple points in the operational space
or have no correspondence because the closure equa-
tions of the mechanism are not satisﬁed. For parallel
robots, the most efﬁcient motion planner seems to be an
adaptation of a probabilistic motion planner that takes
into account – to a certain extent – the closure equa-
tions [18.94, 95].
Another motion planning problem is related to tasks
where a limited number of DOFs of the robot are used,
while the others may be used to increase the machine’s
workspace, to avoid singularities or to optimize some
performance index of the robot [18.96, 97]. Along the
same line, it is possible to deﬁne the part positioning
problem [18.98] as determining the pose of a rigid body
with respect to the workspace of the robot so that this
pose satisﬁes some constraints.

Parallel Mechanisms
18.7 Static Analysis
451
Part B | 18.7
18.7 Static Analysis
Similarly to serial robots, the static analysis of paral-
lel robots can be readily performed using the Jacobian
matrix. Indeed, the mapping between the vector of ac-
tuated joint forces/torques  and the external wrench f
exerted by the platform can be written as
 D JTf ;
(18.9)
where JT is the transpose of the Jacobian matrix of the
robot. Equation (18.9) can be used for various purposes,
namely:

During the design process in order to determine
the maximal actuator forces/torques over the robot
workspace (for actuator selection). This is a com-
plex issue since JT is not known in a closed
form.

In applications where the robot is used as a force
sensor: If  is measured and the pose of the plat-
form is known, then (18.9) can be used to calculate f
so that the robot can be used both as a motion and
sensing platform [18.99–101].
The stiffness matrix K of a parallel robot is deﬁned
similarly to that of serial robots as
K D JTKjJ1 ;
(18.10)
where Kj is the diagonal matrix of actuated joint stiff-
ness. Duffy [18.102] notes that this derivation is, in
general, incomplete. For example, for a Gough platform
this derivation assumes that there is no initial load on
the elastic element of the link. Assuming that the length
of the unloaded link is q0
i leads to
f D
iD6
X
iD1
kqini C ki.qi  q0
i /ni ;
m D
iD6
X
iD1
kqici  ni C ki.qi  q0
i /.ci  ni/ ;
where ki denotes the axial stiffness of the leg, ni rep-
resents the unit vector deﬁned along the i-th leg, ci is
the vector connecting the origin of the moving refer-
ence frame to the i-th anchor point of the platform,
and f; m are the external force and moment vectors that
are applied by the platform. Consequently, the stiffness
matrix as deﬁned in (18.10) is valid only if qi D q0
i , and
is coined the passive stiffness.
Moreover,
it
was
pointed
out in
the
litera-
ture [18.103] that the formulation of (18.10) is valid
only when the external wrench is zero. Indeed, the
above formulation does not account for the fact that the
Jacobian matrix is conﬁguration dependent and there-
fore changes with the applied loads. The formulation
proposed in [18.103] and termed conservative congru-
ence transformation (CCT) takes these changes into
account and leads to a stiffness matrix deﬁned as
Kc D JTKjJ1 C
@JT
@p

;
(18.11)
where p is the vector of Cartesian coordinates and 
is the vector of actuated joint forces/torques. When-
ever possible, the formulation of (18.11) should be used
instead of that of (18.10) because it is mechanically
consistent.
Another interesting static problem is the static bal-
ancing of parallel robots. The static balancing of mech-
anisms, in general, has been an important research topic
for several decades (e.g., [18.104] for an account of the
state of the art and many recent new results). Parallel
mechanisms are said to be statically balanced when the
weight of the links does not produce any torque (or
force) at the actuators under static conditions, for any
conﬁguration of the manipulator or mechanism. This
condition is also referred to as gravity compensation.
The gravity compensation of parallel mechanisms was
addressed in [18.105] where the use of counterweights
was suggested to balance a 2-DOF parallel robot used
for antenna aiming, and in [18.106] for planar robots.
This analysis leads to simple and elegant balancing
conditions.
In general, static balancing can be achieved us-
ing counterweights and/or springs
VIDEO 48 . When
springs are used, static balancing can be deﬁned as the
set of conditions for which the total potential energy in
the mechanism – including gravitational energy and the
elastic energy stored in the springs – is constant for any
conﬁguration of the mechanism. When no springs – or
other means of storing elastic energy – are used, then
static balancing conditions imply that the center of mass
of the mechanism does not move in the direction of the
gravity vector, for any motion of the mechanism.
Sufﬁcient conditions under which a given mech-
anism is statically balanced may be obtained. The
problem of statically balancing spatial parallel robots is
usually complex [18.107, 108]). Among other results,
it was pointed out that it is not possible to balance
a 6-UPS robot in all poses by using only counter-
weights [18.109] (U stands for a Hooke joint, P stands
for a prismatic joint and S stands for a spherical joint).
Alternative mechanisms (using parallelograms) that can

Part B | 18.9
452
Part B
Design
be balanced using only springs were suggested [18.107,
110, 111].
A natural extension of static balancing is dynamic
balancing. The dynamic balancing problem consists
in ﬁnding parallel mechanisms that do not produce
any reaction force or torque on their base for ar-
bitrary trajectories. This problem was addressed for
planar and spatial parallel mechanisms. In [18.112], it
was shown that dynamically balanced parallel mecha-
nisms with up to 6-DOFs can be synthesized, although
the resulting mechanical architectures may be complex
(
VIDEO 49 ).
18.8 Dynamic Analysis
The dynamic model of parallel robots has a form similar
to that of serial robots (Chap. 3), namely,
M.x/Rp C C.Pp; Pq; p; q/ C G.p; q/ D  ;
(18.12)
where M is the positive-deﬁnite generalized inertia ma-
trix, G is the gravitational term, and C is the centrifugal
and Coriolis term. However, this equation is more dif-
ﬁcult to obtain for parallel robots because the closure
equations have to be satisﬁed. A classical method for
calculating the dynamic models of closed-chain mech-
anisms is to consider ﬁrst an equivalent tree structure,
and then to enforce the kinematic constraints using La-
grange multipliers or d’Alembert’s principle [18.113,
114]. Other approaches include the use of the principle
of virtual work [18.115–118], the Lagrange formal-
ism [18.119–122], Hamilton’s principle [18.123], and
Newton–Euler equations [18.124–129].
The main drawback of dynamic models obtained for
parallel robots is that they are usually rather complex,
they require the determination of dynamic parameters
that are often not well known (dynamic identiﬁcation
of closed-loop mechanisms being not trivial [18.130]),
and they usually involve solving the forward kinemat-
ics. Therefore, their calculation is computer intensive
while they must be used in real time.
Using dynamic models for control purposes was
proposed [18.131, 132], usually in the context of an
adaptive control scheme, in which the tracking errors
are used on-line to correct the parameters used in the
dynamic equations [18.133, 134]. Control laws were
proposed mainly for planar robots and for the Delta
robot [18.135, 136], although some implementations
have been proposed for general 6-DOF robots [18.137,
138] or vibration platforms [18.139]. However for 6-
DOF robots, the beneﬁts of using dynamic models for
high-speed motions are difﬁcult to establish because the
computational burden of the dynamic model somewhat
reduces the potential gains. An original approach is to
work directly in the joint space, using information ob-
tained on the legs’ orientation through a vision system,
allowing to get rid of the forward kinematics [18.140].
Dynamic control is an important and open issue
since parallel robots can operate at velocities and ac-
celerations much larger than those of serial robots. For
example, some of the Delta robots have reached accel-
erations of the order of 500 m=s2 (with an objective of
reaching 100 G [18.141]) while wire-driven robots can
probably exceed this value.
Finally, the optimization of the dynamic properties
of parallel mechanisms can be addressed by minimizing
the variation of the inertia over the workspace [18.142].
18.9 Design
The design of a robot can be decomposed into two main
phases:

Structural synthesis: Finding the general mechani-
cal structure of the robot.

Geometric synthesis: Determining the value of the
geometric parameters involved in a given structure
(here geometric parameters has a loose sense: for
example, mass, inertia may also be involved).
The problem of structural synthesis (type synthesis)
was addressed in Sect. 18.2. However, performance re-
quirements other than the motion pattern of the robot
have to be taken into account in the design of a robot.
Serial robots have the advantage that the number of pos-
sible mechanical architectures is relatively small and
that some of these architectures have clear advantages
in terms of performance compared to others (for exam-
ple the workspace of a 3R structure is much larger than
the workspace of a Cartesian robot of similar size).
Unfortunately, no such rules exist for parallel
robots, for which there are furthermore a large number
of possible mechanical designs. Additionally, the per-
formances of parallel robots are very sensitive to their
geometric parameters. For example, the extremal stiff-
ness of a Gough platform over a given workspace can
change by 700% for a change of only 10% of the plat-
form radius. Consequently, structural synthesis cannot

Parallel Mechanisms
18.10 Wire-Driven Parallel Robots
453
Part B | 18.10
be dissociated from the geometric synthesis. In fact, it is
conjectured that a well-dimensioned robot of any struc-
tural type will, in general, perform better than a poorly
designed robot with a structure that may seem more ap-
propriate for the task at hand.
Usually, the design process is treated as an opti-
mization problem. To each speciﬁed performance re-
quirement is associated a performance index whose
value increases with the level of violation of the per-
formance requirement. These performance indices are
summed in a weighted real-value function, called the
cost function, which is a function of the geometric
design parameters, and then a numerical optimization
procedure is used to ﬁnd the parameters that minimize
the cost function (hence, this approach leads to what
is called an optimal design) [18.143–145]. There are,
however, numerous drawbacks to this approach: the
determination and effect of the weights in the cost func-
tion are difﬁcult to ascertain, imperative requirements
are difﬁcult to incorporate and complexify the opti-
mization process, and the deﬁnition of the performance
indices is not trivial, only to name a few. The main is-
sues can be stated as follows:

It is quite difﬁcult to ensure that the global minima
is reached in spite of using relatively new opti-
mization methods such as neural network or genetic
algorithm.

The robustness of the design solution obtained with
the cost function approach with respect to the uncer-
tainties in the ﬁnal design. Indeed, the real instanti-
ation of a theoretical solution always differs from
the theoretical solution itself because of the manu-
facturing tolerances and other uncertainties that are
inherent to a mechanical system.

Performance requirements may be antagonistic
(e.g., workspace and accuracy), and the approach
only provides a compromise between these require-
ments that is difﬁcult to master through the weights.
An alternative to optimal design is referred to as
appropriate design, in which no optimization is con-
sidered, but the objective is to ensure that desired
requirements are satisﬁed. This approach is based on
the deﬁnition of the parameter space in which each
dimension is associated with a design parameter. Per-
formance requirements are considered in turn and the
regions of the parameter space which correspond to
robots satisfying the requirements are calculated. The
design solution is then obtained as the intersection of
the regions obtained for each individual requirement.
In practice, only an approximation of the regions is
necessary since values close to the boundary cannot be
physically realized due to the manufacturing tolerances.
For that calculation, interval analysis was successfully
used in various applications [18.36, 146].
The appropriate design approach is clearly more
complex to implement than the cost function approach
but has the advantage of providing all design solutions,
with the consequence that manufacturing tolerances
may be taken into account to ensure that the real robot
also satisﬁes the desired requirements.
18.10 Wire-Driven Parallel Robots
Parallel mechanisms naturally lead themselves to an-
other paradigm that exploits the structural properties
of wires (cables). Cables are mechanical components
that can withstand large tensile loads relative to their
weight. When applied to parallel mechanisms, a plural-
ity of cables can be attached to a moving platform and
driven by actuated reels mounted on the base frame.
Because of the parallel architecture, it is possible to
ensure that cables can be maintained under tension
within a given workspace. Wire-driven parallel mech-
anisms have been studied by several researchers over
the last 20 years (e.g., [18.8, 147] for early work). The
advantages of these mechanisms are numerous. When
wound on a spool, cables allow motion ranges that are
much larger than that produced by conventional artic-
ulated systems. Also, because they can only resist to
tensile forces, cables are, as mentioned above, much
thinner and lighter than most conventional mechani-
cal components, for similar payloads. Thus, they have
very low inertia and are particularly suitable for systems
in which large ranges of motion are required. Indeed,
long-reach articulated robots are heavy and involve the
motion of signiﬁcant mass, whereas cable-driven robots
remain light even when the range of motion is very
large. This property is clearly exempliﬁed by aerial
video camera systems such as the SkyCam [18.148]
or in
VIDEO 44 , which shows an application in
the scanning of artifacts for the generation of digi-
tal three-dimensional (3-D) models.
VIDEO 45
and
VIDEO 50
show another application in material han-
dling.
Because wires can only resist tensile loads, wire-
driven parallel mechanisms are generally designed
based on either one of the two following approaches,
namely: (1) the weight (gravity) of the moving plat-
form is used to ensure that all cables are under tension
or (2) the number of cables is larger than the number
of degrees of freedom of the platform, thereby allowing

Part B | 18.10
454
Part B
Design
a pre-stressing of the cables that can be used to ensure
that all cables remain under tension. The wire-driven
parallel mechanisms that are designed based on the ﬁrst
approach are referred to as cable-suspended parallel
mechanisms, while the mechanisms that are based on
the second approach are referred to as fully constrained
wire-driven parallel mechanisms.
18.10.1 Cable-Suspended Parallel
Mechanisms
Most cable-suspended parallel mechanisms are not re-
dundantly actuated: they typically include as many
actuators as DOFs. These mechanisms have been pro-
posed in the literature as potential candidates for appli-
cations that require very large workspaces or mecha-
nisms that can provide effective payload to mass ratios.
One of the ﬁrst cable-suspended mechanisms that was
built is the Robocrane [18.8], developed by NIST al-
most two decades ago. This 6-DOF robot was intended
for crane-type operations in which the pose of the pay-
load can be fully controlled. Other cable-suspended
mechanisms have also been studied and prototypes
were built to validate their performance (e.g., [18.149]
and [18.150]). More recently, cable-suspended parallel
mechanisms including more actuators than DOFs were
proposed, and it was shown that their workspace-to-
footprint ratio can be much larger than that of nonredun-
dant cable-suspended parallel mechanisms [18.151].
This is convincingly illustrated in
VIDEO 45
and
VIDEO 50 , where a cable-suspended parallel mech-
anism with eight cables is demonstrated.
Most of the cable-suspended parallel mechanisms
proposed or built in the past were assumed to work
under static or quasi-static conditions. Under this as-
sumption, the workspace can be determined based on
the static equilibrium of the moving platform. The
workspace is deﬁned as the set of platform poses for
which static equilibrium can be obtained while main-
taining tension in all cables. Techniques to determine
the static workspace of cable-suspended robots were
proposed in the literature, for instance, in [18.152].
The dynamic trajectory planning and control of cable-
suspended parallel mechanisms were also investigated
in the recent literature (e.g., [18.153–156]), leading to
cable-suspended parallel mechanisms that can be op-
erated beyond their static workspace. The concept of
dynamic workspace then arises [18.157], which can be
deﬁned as the set of poses that the platform can reach
with at least one kinematic state (position, velocity, and
acceleration).
Finally, it should be mentioned that the determi-
nation of the static pose of an underactuated cable-
suspended parallel mechanism – that is, one with fewer
cables than DOFs – is a very complex problem that has
not yet been completely solved [18.158, 159]. In fact,
for a given platform and given cable lengths, it is pos-
sible that an equilibrium pose can be reached, although
some of the cables are not under tension. Therefore, the
determination of the static pose involves not only solv-
ing for the actual number of cables, n, but also for all
subrobots with n  1 cables.
18.10.2 Fully Constrained Wire-Driven
Parallel Mechanisms
Fully constrained wire-driven parallel mechanisms
have also attracted a great deal of attention. Fully con-
strained mechanisms include a number of cables larger
than the number of degrees of freedom of the mech-
anism. If a proper geometry is used, they generally
exhibit a wrench-closed workspace within which the
platform can resist arbitrary external wrenches, while
maintaining the cables in tension.
The statics of wire-driven robots can be described
by
W D f ;
(18.13)
where  is the vector of tensions in the wires, f is
the wrench at the platform, and W is the so-called
wrench matrix, which is conﬁguration dependent. Since
fully constrained wire-driven parallel mechanisms in-
clude more cables than DOFs, their wrench matrix W
contains more columns than rows. Based on the above
equation, the wrench-closed workspace can then be de-
ﬁned as the set of poses for which there exists at least
one vector in the nullspace of W that has all its compo-
nents of the same sign. When this condition is satisﬁed,
the mechanism is said to be tensionable [18.160] and
can theoretically resist arbitrary external wrenches sim-
ply by increasing the pre-stress in the cables.
The determination and the optimization of the
wrench-closure workspace is a challenging problem
that has attracted signiﬁcant attention. Although the
early work presented in [18.149, 161, 162] was mainly
applicable to planar wire-driven robots, it paved the
way to more general analyses by providing a mathe-
matical modelling of the problem. Determining whether
a given pose of the platform is located within the
wrench-closure workspace is a rather straightforward
problem. However, discretizing the workspace and ap-
plying such a criterion to a mesh of points does not
solve the problem satisfactorily because the wrench-
closed workspace is generally not convex and may
even be composed of disconnected components. There-
fore, more powerful techniques are needed in order
to obtain reliable and useful results. In [18.163], in-

Parallel Mechanisms
18.12 Conclusion and Further Reading
455
Part B | 18.12
terval analysis is used to determine the wrench-closed
workspace of fully constrained wire-driven parallel
robots while providing deﬁnite answers.
VIDEO 45
and
VIDEO 50
show an example of fully constrained
wire-driven parallel mechanisms.
18.10.3 Design and Prototyping
Synthesizing a wire-driven parallel mechanism for
a prescribed wrench-closed workspace is a very chal-
lenging issue [18.164]. Also, in addition to the
workspace, several other issues must be considered
in the design of wire-driven parallel robots, for ex-
ample, the determination of the potential interferences
between the wires. An elegant geometric solution to this
problem is proposed in [18.165] but handling transla-
tions and rotations simultaneously remains a challenge.
Other design problems include the handling of special
conﬁgurations and assembly mode changes as well as
the accuracy and the practical implementation of the
spools [18.166].
Several prototypes of wire-driven parallel robots
were built and reported in the literature. Early proto-
types include the NIST Robocrane [18.8], the Falcon
robot [18.147], and the skycam system [18.148]. Many
others were built, including those shown in the videos
accompanying this chapter and the potential applica-
tions are numerous.
18.11 Application Examples
Parallel robots have been successfully used in many ap-
plications, a few of which are now brieﬂy mentioned.
Almost all recent land-based telescopes use parallel
robots, either as a secondary mirror alignment sys-
tem (e.g., the University of Arizona MMT or the ESO
VISTA) or as a primary mirror pointing device [18.6].
A wire-driven parallel robot ﬂew in the space shuttle
mission STS-63 in February 1999 while an octopod
(a parallel robot with eight legs) was used to isolate
the space shuttle payload from vibration. All ﬂight
simulators use a parallel structure as a motion plat-
form. They are nowadays used for driving simulators
as well (e.g., the NADS-driving simulator [18.167]).
In industry, numerous machine tools based on paral-
lel structures have been designed. Some of them have
found a niche market (e.g., the Tricept) and it can be
expected that more will be used in the future. Ultra ac-
curate positioning devices based on parallel robots are
proposed by companies, such as Physik Instrumente,
Alio, Micos, and Symétrie. In the food industry, the
Delta robot proposed by ABB and Demaurex is widely
used for fast packaging. Other companies such as Adept
are also developing fast parallel robots with 3- and
4-DOFs. Medical applications are also growing, for
example, in rehabilitation (after the pioneering work
of the Rutgers ankle [18.168] and the platform Caren
of Motek), in surgery (for example for spine surgery
with the Renaissance robot of Mazor or for vitreoreti-
nal surgery [18.169]) or for training and monitoring
the motion of human joints [18.170], a topic in which
cable-driven robots play an important role, as they do
for aerial robots [18.171] or rescue operation (a version
of the SkyCam robot has been used to ﬁght oil ﬁres dur-
ing the Iraqi War).
18.12 Conclusion and Further Reading
The analysis of a parallel mechanism may be partly
based on methods that are presented in other chapters
of this handbook:

Kinematics: Kinematics background is covered in
Chap. 2.

Dynamics: General approaches are presented in
Chap. 3 while identiﬁcation of the dynamic param-
eters is addressed in Chap. 6.

Design: Design methodologies are covered in
Chap. 16.

Control: Control issues are presented in Chaps. 7, 8,
and 9 although the closed-loop structure of parallel
robots may require some adaptation of the control
schemes.
It must also be emphasized that efﬁcient numeri-
cal analysis is a key point for many algorithms related
to parallel robots. A system solving with Gröbner
basis, continuation method, and interval analysis is
essential for kinematics, workspace, and singularity
analysis. Further information and up-to-date exten-
sive references and papers related to parallel robots
can be found on the following two websites [18.38,
100]. Useful complementary readings on parallel robots
are [18.140, 147, 164]. Parallel robots are slowly ﬁnd-
ing their way into various applications, not only in
industry but also in ﬁeld and service robotics, as dis-
cussed in Part F of this handbook. Still, compared to
their serial counterpart, their analysis is far from being
complete.

Part B | 18
456
Part B
Design
Video-References
VIDEO 43
3-DOF high-speed 3-RPS parallel robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/18/videodetails/43
VIDEO 44
6-DOF cable-suspended robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/18/videodetails/44
VIDEO 45
CoGiRo
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/18/videodetails/45
VIDEO 46
Parallel 5R robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/18/videodetails/46
VIDEO 47
Diamond
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/18/videodetails/47
VIDEO 48
6-DOF statically balanced parallel robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/18/videodetails/48
VIDEO 49
3-DOF dynamically balanced parallel robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/18/videodetails/49
VIDEO 50
IPAnema
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/18/videodetails/50
VIDEO 51
Par2 robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/18/videodetails/51
VIDEO 52
Quadrupteron robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/18/videodetails/52
VIDEO 53
R4 robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/18/videodetails/53
VIDEO 54
Tripteron robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/18/videodetails/54
References
18.1
J.E. Gwinnett: Amusement device, US Patent
178 9680 (1931)
18.2
V.E. Gough: Contribution to discussion of papers
on research in automobile stability, control and
tyre performance, 1956–1957. Proc. Auto Div. Inst.
Mech. Eng. (1956)
18.3
D. Stewart: A platform with 6 degrees of freedom,
Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part 1 15 (1965) pp. 371–386
18.4
I.A. Bonev: The true origins of parallel robots,
http://www.parallemic.org/Reviews/Review007.
html (2003)
18.5
S. Briot, I.A. Bonev: Are parallel robots more accu-
rate than serial robots?, CSME Transactions 31(4),
445–456 (2007)
18.6
G. Aridon, D. Rémond, F. Morestin, L. Blanchard,
R. Dufour: Self-deployment of a tape-spring
hexapod: experimental and numerical investiga-
tion, ASME J. Mech. Des. 131(2), 0210031–0210037
(2009)
18.7
M. Hafez, M.D. Lichter, S. Dubowsky: Optimized
binary modular reconfigurable robotic devices,
IEEE Trans. Mechatron. 8(1), 152–162 (2003)
18.8
J. Albus, R. Bostelman, N. Dagalakis: The NIST
robocrane, J. Robotic Syst. 10(5), 709–724 (1993)
18.9
R. Clavel: DELTA, a fast robot with parallel geom-
etry, 18th Int. Symp. Ind. Robots (ISIR), Lausanne
(1988) pp. 91–100
18.10
K.H. Hunt: Structural kinematics of in parallel ac-
tuated robot arms, J. Mech. Transm. Autom. Des.
105(4), 705–712 (1983)
18.11
K.E. Neumann: Robot: Neos Product HB Norrtalje
Suède. US Patent 4732525, (1988)
18.12
Q. Li, J.M. Hervè: Parallel mechanisms with bifur-
cation of Schoenflies motion, IEEE Trans. Robotics
25(1), 158–164 (2009)
18.13
J.M. Hervé: Group mathematics and parallel link
mechanisms, 9th IFToMM World Congr. Theory
Mach. Mech., Milan (1995) pp. 2079–2082
18.14
C.-C. Lee, J.M. Hervè: Type synthesis of primitive
Schönflies-motion generators, Mech. Mach. The-
ory 44(10), 1980–1997 (2009)
18.15
J. Meng, G.F. Liu, Z. Li: A geometric theory for
analysis and synthesis of sub-6 DOF parallel ma-
nipulators, IEEE Trans. Robotics 23(4), 625–649
(2007)
18.16
X. Kong, C.M. Gosselin: Type Synthesis of Par-
allel Mechanisms, Springer Tracts in Advanced
Robotics, Vol. 33 (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2007)
18.17
J.P.
Merlet:
http://www.sop.inria.fr/members/
Jean-Pierre.Merlet//Archi/archi_robot.html
(IN-
RIA, France)
18.18
F.
Pierrot,
V.
Nabat,
O.
Company,
S.
Krut,
P. Poignet: Optimal design of a 4-DOF parallel ma-
nipulator: From academia to industry, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 25(2), 213–224 (2009)
18.19
C. Gosselin, T. Lalibertè, A. Veillette: Singularity-
free kinematically redundant
planar parallel
mechanisms with unlimited rotational capability,
IEEE Trans. Robotics 31(2), 457–467 (2015)

Parallel Mechanisms
References
457
Part B | 18
18.20
G. Gogu: Structural Synthesis of Parallel Robots
(Kluwer, Dordrecht 2007)
18.21
P. Dietmaier: The Stewart Gough platform of gen-
eral geometry can have 40 real postures. In: Ad-
vances in Robot Kinematics: Analysis Control, ed.
by J. Lenarčič, M.L. Husty (Kluwer, Dordrecht 1998)
pp. 7–16
18.22
M.L. Husty: An algorithm for solving the di-
rect kinematic of Stewart Gough-type platforms,
Mech. Mach. Theory 31(4), 365–380 (1996)
18.23
M. Raghavan: The Stewart platform of general ge-
ometry has 40 configurations, ASME J. Mech. Des.
115(2), 277–282 (1993)
18.24
J.C. Faugère, D. Lazard: The combinatorial classes
of parallel manipulators, Mech. Mach. Theory
30(6), 765–776 (1995)
18.25
T.-Y. Lee, J.-K. Shim: Improved dyalitic elimi-
nation algorithm for the forward kinematics of
the general Stewart Gough platform, Mech. Mach.
Theory 38(6), 563–577 (2003)
18.26
F. Rouillier: Real roots counting for some robotics
problems. In: Computational Kinematics, ed. by
J.-P. Merlet, B. Ravani (Kluwer, Dordrecht 1995)
pp. 73–82
18.27
J.-P. Merlet: Solving the forward kinematics of
a Gough-type parallel manipulator with inter-
val analysis, Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(3), 221–236
(2004)
18.28
D. Manocha: Algebraic and Numeric Techniques
for Modeling and Robotics, Ph.D. Thesis (Univer-
sity of California, Berkeley 1992)
18.29
A.J. Sommese, C.W. Wampler: The Numerical So-
lution of Systems of Polynomials: Arising in Engi-
neering And Science (World Scientific, Singapore
2005)
18.30
C. Gosselin, J. Sefrioui, M.J. Richard: Solution
polynomiale au problème de la cinématique di-
recte des manipulateurs parallèles plans à 3 de-
grés de liberté, Mech. Mach. Theory 27(2), 107–119
(1992)
18.31
P. Wenger, D. Chablat, M. Zein: Degeneracy study
of the forward kinematics of planar 3 RPR par-
allel manipulators, ASME J. Mech. Des. 129(12),
1265–1268 (2007)
18.32
L. Baron, J. Angeles: The direct kinematics of
parallel manipulators under joint-sensor redun-
dancy, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 16(1), 12–19
(2000)
18.33
J.-P. Merlet: Closed-form resolution of the di-
rect kinematics of parallel manipulators using
extra sensors data, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Atlanta (1993) pp. 200–204
18.34
R. Vertechy, V. Parenti-Castelli: Robust, fast and
accurate solution of the direct position analysis
of parallel manipulators by using extra-sensors.
In: Parallel Manipulators: Towards New Applica-
tions, ed. by H. Wu (InTech, Rijeka 2008) pp. 133–
154
18.35
R. Stoughton, T. Arai: Kinematic optimization of
a chopsticks-type micro-manipulator, Jpn. Symp.
Flex. Autom., San Fransisco (1993) pp. 151–157
18.36
J.-P. Merlet, D. Daney: Dimensional synthesis of
parallel robots with a guaranteed given accuracy
over a specific workspace, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA), Barcelona (2005)
18.37
J.-P. Merlet: Jacobian, manipulability, condition
number, and accuracy of parallel robots, ASME
J. Mech. Des. 128(1), 199–206 (2006)
18.38
F.-T. Niaritsiry, N. Fazenda, R. Clavel: Study
of the source of inaccuracy of a 3 DOF flex-
ure hinge-based parallel manipulator, IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), New Orleans (2004)
pp. 4091–4096
18.39
G. Pritschow, C. Eppler, T. Garber: Influence of
the dynamic stiffness on the accuracy of PKM,
3rd Chemnitzer Parallelkinematik Semin. Chem-
nitz (2002) pp. 313–333
18.40
V. Parenti-Castelli, S. Venanzi: On the joint clear-
ance effects in serial and parallel manipulators,
Workshop Fundam. Issues Future Res. Dir. Paral-
lel Mech. Manip. Québec (2002) pp. 215–223
18.41
A. Pott, M. Hiller: A new approach to error anal-
ysis in parallel kinematic structures, Adv. Robot
Kinemat., Sestri-Levante (2004)
18.42
K. Wohlhart: Degrees of shakiness, Mech. Mach.
Theory 34(7), 1103–1126 (1999)
18.43
K. Tönshoff, B. Denkena, G. Günther, H.C. Möh-
ring: Modelling of error effects on the new hybrid
kinematic DUMBO structure, 3rd Chemnitzer Par-
allelkinematik Semin. Chemnitz (2002) pp. 639–
653
18.44
U. Sellgren: Modeling of mechanical interfaces in
a systems context, Int. ANSYS Conf., Pittsburgh
(2002)
18.45
S. Eastwood, P. Webbb: Compensation of ther-
mal deformation of a hybrid parallel kinematic
machine, Robotics Comput. Manuf. 25(1), 81–90
(2009)
18.46
W. Khalil, S. Besnard: Identificable parameters for
the geometric calibration of parallel robots, Arch.
Control Sci. 11(3/4), 263–277 (2001)
18.47
C.W. Wampler, J.M. Hollerbach, T. Arai: An im-
plicit loop method for kinematic calibration
and its application to closed-chain mecha-
nisms, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 11(5), 710–724
(1995)
18.48
D. Daney, Y. Papegay, A. Neumaier: Interval meth-
ods for certification of the kinematic calibration
of parallel robots, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), New Orleans (2004) pp. 1913–1918
18.49
D. Daney, N. Andreff, G. Chabert, Y. Papegay: In-
terval method for calibration of parallel robots:
a vision-based experimentation, Mech. Mach.
Theory 41(8), 929–944 (2006)
18.50
A. Nahvi, J.M. Hollerbach: The noise amplifica-
tion index for optimal pose selection in robot
calibration, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Minneapolis (1996) pp. 647–654
18.51
G. Meng, L. Tiemin, Y. Wensheng: Calibration
method and experiment of Stewart platform us-
ing a laser tracker, Int. Conf Syst. Man Cybern.,
Hague (2003) pp. 2797–2802

Part B | 18
458
Part B
Design
18.52
D.
Daney:
Optimal
measurement
configura-
tions for Gough platform calibration, IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Washington (2002)
pp. 147–152
18.53
P. Renaud, N. Andreff, P. Martinet, G. Gogu:
Kinematic calibration of parallel mechanisms:
A novel approach using legs observation, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 21(4), 529–538 (2005)
18.54
C.
Gosselin,
J.
Angeles:
Singularity
analysis
of closed-loop kinematic chains, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 6(3), 281–290 (1990)
18.55
D. Zlatanov, R.G. Fenton, B. Benhabib: A unifying
framework for classification and interpretation
of mechanism singularities, ASME J. Mech. Des.
117(4), 566–572 (1995)
18.56
D. Zlatanov, I.A. Bonev, C.M. Gosselin: Constraint
singularities of parallel mechanisms, IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Washington (2002)
pp. 496–502
18.57
M. Conconi, M. Carricato: A new assessment of
singularities of parallel kinematic chains, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 25(4), 757–770 (2009)
18.58
G. Liu, Y. Lou, Z. Li: Singularities of parallel ma-
nipulators: A geometric treatment, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 19(4), 579–594 (2003)
18.59
I.A. Bonev, D. Zlatanov: The mystery of the singu-
lar SNUtranslational parallel robot, http://www.
parallemic.org/Reviews/Review004.html (2001)
18.60
H. Li, C.M. Gosselin, M.J. Richard, B. Mayer St-
Onge: Analytic form of the six-dimensional sin-
gularity locus of the general Gough-Stewart plat-
form, ASME J. Mech. Des. 128(1), 279–287 (2006)
18.61
B. Mayer St-Onge, C.M. Gosselin: Singularity anal-
ysis and representation of the general Gough-
Stewart platform, Int. J. Robotics Res. 19(3), 271–
288 (2000)
18.62
J.-P. Merlet: Singular configurations of paral-
lel manipulators and Grassmann geometry, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 8(5), 45–56 (1989)
18.63
R. Ben-Horin, M. Shoham: Application of Grass-
mann Cayley algebra to geometrical interpreta-
tion of parallel robot singularities, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 28(1), 127–141 (2009)
18.64
H. Pottmann, M. Peternell, B. Ravani: Approxima-
tion in line space. Applications in robot kinemat-
ics, Adv. Robot Kinemat., Strobl (1998) pp. 403–412
18.65
P.A. Voglewede, I. Ebert-Uphoff: Measuring close-
ness to singularities for parallel manipulators,
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), New Orleans
(2004) pp. 4539–4544
18.66
G. Nawratil: New performance indices for 6-DOF
UPS and 3-DOF RPR parallel manipulators, Mech.
Mach. Theory 44(1), 208–221 (2009)
18.67
J. Hubert, J.-P. Merlet: Static of parallel ma-
nipulators and closeness to singularity, J. Mech.
Robotics 1(1), 1–6 (2009)
18.68
P. Cardou, S. Bouchard, C. Gosselin: Kinematic-
sensitivity indices for dimensionally nonhomo-
geneous jacobian matrices, IEEE Trans. Robotics
26(1), 166–173 (2010)
18.69
J.-P. Merlet, D. Daney: A formal-numerical ap-
proach to determine the presence of singular-
ity within the workspace of a parallel robot.
In: Computational Kinematics, ed. by F.C. Park,
C.C. Iurascu (EJCK, Seoul 2001) pp. 167–176
18.70
S. Bhattacharya, H. Hatwal, A. Ghosh: Compar-
ison of an exact and an approximate method
of singularity avoidance in platform type parallel
manipulators, Mech. Mach. Theory 33(7), 965–974
(1998)
18.71
D.N.
Nenchev,
M.
Uchiyama:
Singularity-
consistent path planning and control of paral-
lel robot motion through instantaneous-self-
motion type, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Minneapolis (1996) pp. 1864–1870
18.72
C. Innocenti, V. Parenti-Castelli: Singularity-free
evolution from one configuration to another in
serial and fully-parallel manipulators, 22nd Bi-
enn. Mech. Conf., Scottsdale (1992) pp. 553–
560
18.73
M. Husty: Non-singular assembly mode change in
3-RPR parallel manipulators. In: Computational
Kinematics, ed. by A. Kecskeméthy, A. Müller
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2009) pp. 51–60
18.74
S. Caro, P. Wenger, D. Chablat: Non-singular as-
sembly mode changing trajectories of a 6-DOF
parallel robot, ASME Int. Des. Eng. Techn. Conf.
Comput. Inform. Eng. Conf., Chicago (2012)
18.75
R.
Ranganath,
P.S.
Nair,
T.S.
Mruthyunjaya,
A. Ghosal: A force-torque sensor based on
a Stewart platform in a near-singular con-
figuration, Mech. Mach. Theory 39(9), 971–998
(2004)
18.76
M.L. Husty, A. Karger: Architecture singular par-
allel manipulators and their self-motions. In:
Adv. Robot Kinematics: Analysis Control, ed. by
J. Lenarčič, M.L. Husty (Springer, Dordrecht 2000)
pp. 355–364
18.77
A. Karger: Architecture singular planar parallel
manipulators, Mech. Mach. Theory 38(11), 1149–
1164 (2003)
18.78
K. Wohlhart: Mobile 6-SPS parallel manipulators,
J. Robotic Syst. 20(8), 509–516 (2003)
18.79
C. Innocenti, V. Parenti-Castelli: Direct kinematics
of the 6-4 fully parallel manipulator with po-
sition and orientation uncoupled, Eur. Robotics
Intell. Syst. Conf., Corfou (1991)
18.80
G. Gogu: Mobility of mechanisms: A critical
review, Mech. Mach. Theory 40(10), 1068–1097
(2005)
18.81
I. Zabalza, J. Ros, J.J. Gil, J.M. Pintor, J.M. Jimenez:
Tri-Scott a new kinematic structure for a 6-DOF
decoupled parallel manipulator, Workshop Fun-
dam. Issues Future Res. Dir. Parallel Mech. Manip.,
Québec (2002) pp. 12–15
18.82
C. Gosselin: Determination of the workspace of
6-DOF parallel manipulators, ASME J. Mech. Des.
11(3), 331–336 (1990)
18.83
J.-P. Merlet: Geometrical determination of the
workspace of a constrained parallel manipulator,
Adv. Robot Kinemat., Ferrare (1992) pp. 326–329
18.84
F.A. Adkins, E.J. Haug: Operational envelope of
a spatial Stewart platform, ASME J. Mech. Des.
119(2), 330–332 (1997)

Parallel Mechanisms
References
459
Part B | 18
18.85
E.J. Haugh, F.A. Adkins, C.M. Luh: Operational en-
velopes for working bodies of mechanisms and
manipulators, ASME J. Mech. Des. 120(1), 84–91
(1998)
18.86
O. Bohigas, L. Ros, M. Manubens: A complete
method for workspace boundary determination,
Adv. Robot Kinemat., Piran (2010) pp. 329–338
18.87
J.-P. Merlet: Determination of 6D workspaces of
Gough-type parallel manipulator and compari-
son between different geometries, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 18(9), 902–916 (1999)
18.88
P. Wenger, D. Chablat: Workspace and assembly
modes in fully parallel manipulators: A descrip-
tive study. In: Advances in Robot Kinematics:
Analysis Control, ed. by J. Lenarčič, M.L. Husty
(Springer, Dordrecht 1998) pp. 117–126
18.89
G. Moroz, F. Rouiller, D. Chablat, P. Wenger: On the
determination of cusp points of 3-RPR parallel
manipulators, Mech. Mach. Theory 45(11), 1555–
1567 (2010)
18.90
S. Briot, V. Arakelian: Optimal force generation
in parallel manipulators for passing through the
singular positions, Int. J. Robotics Res. 27(2), 967–
983 (2008)
18.91
J. Hesselbach, C. Bier, C. Budde, P. Last, J. Maaß,
M. Bruhn: Parallel robot specific control fonction-
alities, 2nd Int. Colloquium, Collab. Res. Centre,
Braunschweig (2005) pp. 93–108
18.92
J.-P. Merlet: An efficient trajectory verifier for
motion planning of parallel machine, Parallel
Kinemat. Mach. Int. Conf., Ann Arbor (2000)
18.93
R. Ur-Rehman, S. Caro, D. Chablat, P. Wenger:
Multi-objective path placement of parallel kine-
matics machines based on energy consumption,
shaking forces and maximum actuator torques:
Application to the Orthoglide, Mech. Mach. The-
ory 45(8), 1125–1141 (2010)
18.94
J. Cortés, T. Siméon: Probabilistic motion planning
for parallel mechanisms, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA), Taipei (2003) pp. 4354–4359
18.95
J.H. Yakey, S.M. LaValle, L.E. Kavraki: Randomized
path planning for linkages with closed kinematic
chains, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 17(6), 951–958
(2001)
18.96
J.-P. Merlet, M.-W. Perng, D. Daney: Optimal tra-
jectory planning of a 5-axis machine tool based
on a 6-axis parallel manipulator. In: Advances in
Robot Kinematics, ed. by J. Lenarčič, M.L. Husty
(Kluwer, Dordrecht 2000) pp. 315–322
18.97
D. Shaw, Y.-S. Chen: Cutting path generation of
the Stewart platform-based milling machine us-
ing an end-mill, Int. J. Prod. Res. 39(7), 1367–1383
(2001)
18.98
Z. Wang, Z. Wang, W. Liu, Y. Lei: A study on
workspace, boundary workspace analysis and
workpiece positioning for parallel machine tools,
Mech. Mach. Theory 36(6), 605–622 (2001)
18.99
D.R. Kerr: Analysis, properties, and design of
a Stewart-platform transducer, J. Mech. Transm.
Autom. Des. 111(1), 25–28 (1989)
18.100
C.C. Nguyen, S.S. Antrazi, Z.L. Zhou, C.E. Camp-
bell: Analysis and experimentation of a Stew-
art
platform-based
force/torque
sensor,
Int.
J. Robotics Autom. 7(3), 133–141 (1992)
18.101
C. Reboulet, A. Robert: Hybrid control of a ma-
nipulator with an active compliant wrist, 3rd Int.
Symp. Robotics Res., Gouvieux (1985) pp. 76–80
18.102
J. Duffy: Statics and Kinematics with Applica-
tions to Robotics (Cambridge Univ. Press, New York
1996)
18.103
C. Huang, W.-H. Hung, I. Kao: New conserva-
tive stiffness mapping for the Stewart Gough
platform, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Washington (2002) pp. 823–828
18.104
J.L. Herder: Energy-free systems: Theory, Con-
ception and Design of Statically Balanced Spring
Mechanisms, Ph.D. Thesis (Delft University of
Technology, Delft 2001)
18.105
G.R. Dunlop, T.P. Jones: Gravity counter balanc-
ing of a parallel robot for antenna aiming, 6th
Int. Symp. Robotics Manuf., Montpellier (1996)
pp. 153–158
18.106
M. Jean, C. Gosselin: Static balancing of planar
parallel manipulators, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA), Minneapolis (1996) pp. 3732–3737
18.107
I. Ebert-Uphoff, C.M. Gosselin, T. Laliberté: Static
balancing of spatial parallel platform-revisited,
ASME J. Mech. Des. 122(1), 43–51 (2000)
18.108
C.M. Gosselin, J. Wang: Static balancing of spa-
tial six-degree-of-freedom parallel mechanisms
with revolute actuators, J. Robotic Syst. 17(3), 159–
170 (2000)
18.109
M. Leblond, C.M. Gosselin: Static balancing of
spatial and planar parallel manipulators with
prismatic actuators, ASME Des. Eng. Tech. Conf.,
Atlanta (1998) pp. 5187–5193
18.110
B. Monsarrat, C.M. Gosselin: Workspace analy-
sis and optimal design of a 3-leg 6-DOF parallel
platform mechanism, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
19(6), 954–966 (2003)
18.111
J. Wang, C.M. Gosselin: Static balancing of spatial
three-degree-of-freedom parallel mechanisms,
Mech. Mach. Theory 34(3), 437–452 (1999)
18.112
Y. Wu, C.M. Gosselin: Synthesis of reactionless
spatial 3-DOF and 6-DOF mechanisms without
separate counter-rotations, Int. J. Robotics Res.
23(6), 625–642 (2004)
18.113
M. Ait-Ahmed: Contribution à la Modélisation
Géométrique et Dynamique des Robots Paral-
lèles, Ph.D. Thesis (Univ. Paul Sabatier, Toulouse
1993)
18.114
G.F. Liu, X.Z. Wu, Z.X. Li: Inertial equivalence
principle and adaptive control of redundant par-
allel manipulators, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Washington (2002) pp. 835–840
18.115
R. Clavel: Conception d’un robot parallèle rapide
à 4 degrés de liberté, Ph.D. Thesis (EPFL, Lau-
sanne, 1991), No. 925.
18.116
J. Gallardo, J.M. Rico, A. Frisoli, D. Checcacci,
M. Bergamasco: Dynamics of parallel manipu-
lators by means of screw theory, Mech. Mach.
Theory 38(11), 1113–1131 (2003)
18.117
L.-W. Tsai: Solving the inverse dynamics of
a Stewart Gough manipulator by the principle

Part B | 18
460
Part B
Design
of virtual work, ASME J. Mech. Des. 122(1), 3–9
(2000)
18.118
J. Wang, C.M. Gosselin: A new approach for the
dynamic analysis of parallel manipulators, Multi-
body Syst. Dyn. 2(3), 317–334 (1998)
18.119
Z. Geng, L.S. Haynes: On the dynamic model and
kinematic analysis of a class of Stewart platforms,
Robotics Auton. Syst. 9(4), 237–254 (1992)
18.120
K. Liu, F. Lewis, G. Lebret, D. Taylor: The sin-
gularities and dynamics of a Stewart platform
manipulator, J. Intell. Robotic Syst. 8(3), 287–308
(1993)
18.121
K. Miller, R. Clavel: The Lagrange-based model
of Delta-4 robot dynamics, Robotersysteme 8(1),
49–54 (1992)
18.122
H. Abdellatif, B. Heimann: Computational effi-
cient inverse dynamics of 6-DOF fully parallel
manipulators by using the Lagrangian formalism,
Mech. Mach. Theory 44(1), 192–207 (2009)
18.123
K. Miller: Optimal design and modeling of spatial
parallel manipulators, Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(2),
127–140 (2004)
18.124
A. Codourey, E. Burdet: A body oriented method
for finding a linear form of the dynamic equations
of fully parallel robot, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA), Albuquerque (1997) pp. 1612–
1618
18.125
B. Dasgupta, P. Choudhury: A general strategy
based on the Newton Euler approach for the
dynamic formulation of parallel manipulators,
Mech. Mach. Theory 34(6), 801–824 (1999)
18.126
P. Guglielmetti: Model-Based Control of Fast Par-
allel Robots: a Global Approach in Operational
Space, Ph.D. Thesis (EPFL, Lausanne, 1994)
18.127
K. Harib, K. Srinivasan: Kinematic and dynamic
analysis of Stewart platform-based machine tool
structures, Robotica 21(5), 541–554 (2003)
18.128
W. Khalil, O. Ibrahim: General solution for the
dynamic modeling of parallel robots, IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), New Orleans (2004)
pp. 3665–3670
18.129
C. Reboulet, T. Berthomieu: Dynamic model of
a six degree of freedom parallel manipulator, Int.
Conf. Adv. Robotics, Pise (1991) pp. 1153–1157
18.130
H. Abdellatif, B. Heimann: Experimental iden-
tification of the dynamics model for 6-DOF
parallel manipulators, Robotica 28(3), 359–368
(2010)
18.131
H. Abdellatif, B. Heimann: Model based con-
trol for industrial robots: Uniform approaches
for serial and parallel structures. In: Industrial
Robotics: Theory, Modelling and Control, ed. by
S. Cubero (pro literatur Verlag, Augsburg 2007)
pp. 523–556
18.132
S. Tadokoro: Control of parallel mechanisms, Adv.
Robotics 8(6), 559–571 (1994)
18.133
M. Honegger, A. Codourey, E. Burdet: Adaptive
control of the Hexaglide, a 6 DOF parallel ma-
nipulator, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Albuquerque (1997) pp. 543–548
18.134
S. Bhattacharya, H. Hatwal, A. Ghosh: An on-
line estimation scheme for generalized Stewart
platform type parallel manipulators, Mech. Mach.
Theory 32(1), 79–89 (1997)
18.135
P. Guglielmetti, R. Longchamp: A closed-form in-
verse dynamics model of the Delta parallel robot,
4th IFAC Symp. Robot Control, Syroco, Capri (1994)
pp. 51–56
18.136
K. Miller: Modeling of dynamics and model-
based control of DELTA direct-drive parallel robot,
J. Robotics Mechatron. 17(4), 344–352 (1995)
18.137
E. Burdet, M. Honegger, A. Codourey: Controllers
with desired dynamic compensation and their
implementation on a 6 DOF parallel manipulator,
IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Taka-
matsu (2000)
18.138
K. Yamane, Y. Nakamura, M. Okada, N. Komine,
K.I. Yoshimoto: Parallel dynamics computation
and h1 acceleration control of parallel manip-
ulators for acceleration display, ASME J. Dyn. Syst.
Meas. Control 127(2), 185–191 (2005)
18.139
J.E. McInroy: Modeling and design of flexure
jointed Stewart platforms for control purposes,
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 7(1), 95–99 (2002)
18.140
F. Paccot, N. Andreff, P. Martinet: A review on
the dynamic control of parallel kinematic ma-
chines: theory and experiments, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 28(3), 395–416 (2009)
18.141
D. Corbel, M. Gouttefarde, O. Company, F. Pierrot:
Towards 100G with PKM is actuation redundancy
a good solution for pick-and-place?, IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Anchorage (2010)
pp. 4675–4682
18.142
F.
Xi:
Dynamic
balancing
of
hexapods
for
high-speed applications, Robotica 17(3), 335–342
(1999)
18.143
J. Angeles: The robust design of parallel manip-
ulators, 1st Int. Colloquium, Collab. Res. Centre,
Braunschweig (2002) pp. 9–30
18.144
S. Bhattacharya, H. Hatwal, A. Ghosh: On the op-
timum design of a Stewart platform type parallel
manipulators, Robotica 13(2), 133–140 (1995)
18.145
K.E. Zanganeh, J. Angeles: Kinematic isotropy and
the optimum design of parallel manipulators, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 16(2), 185–197 (1997)
18.146
H. Fang, J.-P. Merlet: Multi-criteria optimal de-
sign of parallel manipulators based on inter-
val analysis, Mech. Mach. Theory 40(2), 151–171
(2005)
18.147
S. Kamamura, W. Choe, S. Tanaka, S.R. Pandian:
Development of an Ultrahigh Speed Robot FALCON
using Wire Drive System, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (1995) pp. 215–220
18.148
L.L. Cone: Skycam: An Aerial Robotic Camera Sys-
tem, Byte 10(10), 122–132 (1985)
18.149
J. Pusey, A. Farrah, S.K. Agrawal, E. Messina:
Design and workspace analysis of a 6-6 cable-
suspended parallel robot, Mech. Mach. Theory 39,
761–778 (2004)
18.150
C. Gosselin, S. Bouchard: A gravity-powered
mechanism for extending
the workspace of
a cable-driven parallel mechanism: Application
to the appearance modelling of objects, Int.
J. Autom. Technol. 4(4), 372–379 (2010)

Parallel Mechanisms
References
461
Part B | 18
18.151
J. Lamaury, M. Gouttefarde: A tension distribution
method with improved computational efficiency.
In: Cable-Driven Parallel Robots, ed. by T. Bruck-
mann, A. Pott (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2012)
pp. 71–85
18.152
A.T.
Riechel,
I.
Ebert-Uphoff:
Force-feasible
workspace analysis for underconstrained,point-
mass cable robots, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2004) pp. 4956–4962
18.153
D.
Cunningham,
H.
Asada:
The
Winch-Bot:
A cable-suspended, under-actuated robot uti-
lizing parametric self-excitation, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2009) pp. 1844–1850
18.154
S. Lefrançois, C. Gosselin: Point-to-point motion
control of a pendulum-like 3-DOF underactuated
cable-driven robot, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2010) pp. 5187–5193
18.155
D. Zanotto, G. Rosati, S.K. Agrawal: Modeling and
control of a 3-DOF pendulum-like manipula-
tor, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011)
pp. 3964–3969
18.156
C. Gosselin, P. Ren, S. Foucault: Dynamic trajectory
planning of a two-DOF cable-suspended parallel
robot, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012)
pp. 1476–1481
18.157
G. Barrette, C. Gosselin: Determination of the dy-
namic workspace of cable-driven planar parallel
mechanisms, ASME J. Mech. Des. 127(2), 242–248
(2005)
18.158
M. Carricato, J.-P. Merlet: Direct geometrico-static
problem of under-constrained cable-driven par-
allel robots with three cables, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 3011–3017
18.159
J.-F. Collard, P. Cardou: Computing the low-
est equilibrium pose of a cable-suspended rigid
body, Optim. Eng. 14, 457–476 (2013)
18.160
S. Behzadipour, A. Khajepour: Trajectory planning
in cable-based high-speed parallel robots, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 22(3), 559–563 (2006)
18.161
M. Gouttefarde, C. Gosselin: Analysis of the
wrench-closure workspace of planar parallel
cable-driven mechanisms, IEEE Trans. Robotics
22(3), 434–445 (2006)
18.162
E. Stump, V. Kumar: Workspace delienation of
cable-actuated parallel manipulators, ASME Int.
Des. Eng. Tech. Conf. (2004)
18.163
M. Gouttefarde, D. Daney, J.-P. Merlet: In-
terval-analysis-based
determination
of
the
wrench-feasible workspace of parallel cable-
driven robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics 27(1), 1–13
(2011)
18.164
K. Azizian, P. Cardou: The dimensional synthe-
sis of planar parallel cable-driven mechanisms
through convex relaxations, ASME J. Mech. Des.
4(3), 0310111–03101113 (2012)
18.165
S. Perreault, P. Cardou, C. Gosselin, M.J.D. Otis:
Geometric determination of the interference-
free constant-orientation workspace of paral-
lel cable-driven mechanisms, ASME J. Mech.
Robotics 2(3), 031016 (2010)
18.166
J.-P. Merlet: MARIONET, a family of modular wire-
driven parallel robots, Adv. Robot Kinemat.: Mo-
tion Man Mach. (2010) pp. 53–61
18.167
The National Advanced Driving Simulator, The
University of Iowa: http://www.nads-sc.uiowa.
edu
18.168
M. Girone, G. Burdea, M. Bouzit, V. Popescu,
J.E. Deutsch: A Stewart platform-based system
for ankle telerehabilitation, Auton. Robots 10(2),
203–212 (2001)
18.169
T. Nakano, M. Sugita, T. Ueta, Y. Tamaki, M. Mitsu-
ishi: A parallel robot to assist vitreoretinal surgery,
Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 4(6), 517–526
(2009)
18.170
M. Wu, T.G. Hornby, J.M. Landry, H. Roth,
B.D. Schmit: A cable-driven locomotor training
system for restoration of gait in human SCI, Gait
Posture 33(2), 256–260 (2011)
18.171
J. Fink, N. Michael, S. Kim, V. Kumar: Planning
and control for cooperative manipulation and
transportation with aerial robots, Proc. Intl. Sym.
Robot. Res., Luzern (2009)

Multimedia Contents Robot Hands
463
Part B | 19
19. Robot Hands
Claudio Melchiorri, Makoto Kaneko
Multifingered robot hands have a potential ca-
pability for achieving dexterous manipulation of
objects by using rolling and sliding motions. This
chapter addresses design, actuation, sensing and
control of multifingered robot hands. From the
design viewpoint, they have a strong constraint in
actuator implementation due to the space limi-
tation in each joint. After briefly introducing the
overview of anthropomorphic end-effector and its
dexterity in Sect. 19.1, various approaches for ac-
tuation are provided with their advantages and
disadvantages in Sect. 19.2. The key classification
is (1) remote actuation or build-in actuation and
(2) the relationship between the number of joints
and the number of actuator. In Sect. 19.3, actu-
ators and sensors used for multifingered hands
are described. In Sect. 19.4, modeling and con-
trol are introduced by considering both dynamic
effects and friction. Applications and trends are
given in Sect. 19.5. Finally, this chapter is closed
with conclusions and further reading.
19.1
Basic Concepts.....................................
464
19.1.1
Anthropomorphic End-Effectors .
464
19.1.2
Dexterity of a Robotic Hand........
465
19.2
Design of Robot Hands.........................
465
19.2.1
Actuators Placement
and Motion Transmission ...........
465
19.2.2
Actuation Architectures ..............
467
19.3
Technologies for Actuation and Sensing
470
19.3.1
Actuation .................................
470
19.3.2
Sensors.....................................
470
19.4 Modeling and Control of a Robot Hand .
473
19.4.1
Dynamic Effects of Flexible
Transmission Systems.................
474
19.4.2
Transmission Model
of Tendon-Outer-Tube System ....
476
19.4.3
The Control Through
Single-Acting Actuators..............
476
19.4.4 Control of a Robot Hand.............
477
19.5 Applications and Trends.......................
477
19.6 Conclusions and Further Reading .........
478
Video-References.........................................
478
References...................................................
479
Human hands have great potentialities not only for
grasping objects of various shapes and dimensions, but
also for manipulating them in a dexterous manner. It
is common experience that, by training, one can per-
form acrobatic manipulation of stick-shaped objects,
manipulate a pencil by using rolling or sliding motions,
perform precise operations requiring ﬁne control of
small tools or objects. It is obvious that this kind of dex-
terity cannot be achieved by a simple gripper capable of
open/close motion only. A multiﬁngered robot hand can
therefore provide a great opportunity for achieving such
a dexterous manipulation in a robotic system. More-
over, we have also to consider that human beings do not
use hands only for grasping or manipulating objects.
Exploration, touch, perception of physical properties
(roughness, temperature, weight, just to mention a few)
are other fundamental tasks that we usually are able to
perform thanks to our hands. We expect this type of
capabilities also from robotic end-effectors and there-
fore, by adding quite advanced sensing equipments and
proper control strategies, we may improve the interac-
tion capabilities with the environment, achieving for
example active exploration, detection of sensing sur-
face properties (local friction, impedance, and so on),
tasks that are usually very hard or impossible for sim-
ple grippers. For these and other reasons the study of
multiﬁngered robot hands has strongly interested the re-
search community since the early days of Robotics.
It was in late 1970s that Okada developed a mul-
tiﬁngered robot hand with a tendon driving system

Part B | 19.1
464
Part B
Design
and demonstrated a nut opening motion [19.1]. In
early 1980s, two major projects on multiﬁngered robot
hands have been launched: the Stanford/Jet Propul-
sion Laboratory (JPL;
VIDEO 751 ) hand and the
Utah/Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
hand [19.2, 3]. These two robot hands still represent
a milestone and a term of comparison for the de-
sign of new devices. Since then, several multiﬁngered
hands have been designed and developed in a num-
ber research institutes all over the world. Among the
most known, one can mention the Deutsches Zentrum
für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR) hand(s) (
VIDEO 754 ,
VIDEO 768 , and
VIDEO 769 ), Mechanical Engi-
neering Laboratory (MEL) hand, Electro-Technical
Laboratory (ETL) hand, Darmstadt hand, Karlsruhe
hand, University of Bologna (UB) hand (
VIDEO 756 ,
VIDEO 767 ), Barrett hand (
VIDEO 752 ), Yasukawa
hand, Gifu hand, U-Tokyo hand, Hiroshima hand, Soft
Pisa/IIT hand (
VIDEO 749 ,
VIDEO 750 ), and many
others [19.4–10].
When designing a multiﬁngered hand, on the basis
of its utilization, one should ﬁrst deﬁne the following
key issues: number and kinematic conﬁguration of the
ﬁngers, anthropomorphic or nonanthropomorphic as-
pect, built-in or remote actuation, transmission system
(in case of remote actuation), sensor assignment, inte-
gration with a carrying device (robot arm), control. All
these aspects are considered in this chapter.
19.1 Basic Concepts
Before illustrating the main issues involved in the de-
sign and use of a robotic hand, it is necessary to discuss
some basic concepts and deﬁnitions often encoun-
tered when dealing with these devices. In particular,
terms like dexterity and anthropomorphism must be de-
ﬁned, and their implications on robotic hand design
speciﬁed.
19.1.1 Anthropomorphic End-Effectors
The term anthropomorphism denotes the capability of
a robotic end-effector to mimic the human hand, partly
or totally, as far as shape, size, consistency, and gen-
eral aspect (including color, temperature, and so on) are
considered. As the word itself suggests, anthropomor-
phism is related to the external perceivable properties,
and is not, itself, a measure of what the hand can do. On
the contrary, dexterity is related to actual functionality
and not to shape or aesthetic factors. In this sense an-
thropomorphism and dexterity are orthogonal concepts,
whose reciprocal dependance (at least in the robotic
ﬁeld) has been not proved yet.
As a matter of fact, we can ﬁnd in the literature
anthropomorphic end-effectors with very poor dexter-
ity level, even though they are called hands, as the
tasks they can perform are limited to very rough grasp-
ing procedures [19.11]. Similarly, we can ﬁnd smart
end-effectors, capable of sophisticated manipulation
procedures, without any level of anthropomorphism,
e.g., the DxGrip-II [19.12]. Anthropomorphism itself is
neither necessary nor sufﬁcient to achieve dexterity, al-
though it is quite evident that the human hand achieves
a very high level of dexterity and represents a preferen-
tial paradigm for dexterous robotic manipulation.
Anthropomorphism is a desirable goal in the design
of robotic end-effectors mainly for the following rea-
sons:

The end-effector can operate in a human-oriented
environment (e.g., servicing robots), where tasks
may be executed by robots or men as well.

The end-effector can be tele-operated by a human
operator, by means of special-purpose interfaces
(e.g., a data-glove), directly reproducing the oper-
ator’s hand behavior.

For purposes of entertainment, assistance, and so
on, a human-like aspect and behavior may be specif-
ically required, like for humanoid robots.

For prosthetic devices anthropomorphism is a quite
evident design goal. The development of end-
effectors for prosthetic purposes [19.13–15] has
recently produced so advanced devices that they can
be fully considered robotic systems.
While it is difﬁcult to quantify the effective degree
of dexterity of a robotic system, its anthropomorphism
can be deﬁned in a precise and objective way. In partic-
ular, the aspects that mainly contribute to determine the
anthropomorphism level of a robotic hand are:

Kinematics: concerning the presence of the main
morphological elements (principal upper ﬁngers,
secondary upper ﬁngers, opposable thumb, palm).

Contact surfaces: extension and smoothness of the
contact surfaces, aspect that reﬂects on the capa-
bility to locate contacts with objects all over the
surface of the available links and on the presence
of external compliant pads [19.16].

Robot Hands
19.2 Design of Robot Hands
465
Part B | 19.2

Size: i. e., the size of the robotic hand both referring
to the average size of a human hand and the correct
size ratio between the links.
19.1.2 Dexterity of a Robotic Hand
Besides the geometrical reproduction of the human
hand, the main research target remains the emulation
of those functionalities which make it such a versatile
end-effector.
Two are the main capabilities of a human hand:

Prehension, i. e., the hand’s ability to grasp and hold
objects of different size and shape

Apprehension, or the hand’s ability to understand
through active touch.
In this sense, the human hand is both an output
and input device [19.17]. As output device, it can ap-
ply forces in order to obtain stable grasps or perform
manipulation procedures. As input device, it is capable
to explore an unknown environment providing informa-
tion about the state of the interaction with it. The same
features are desirable in robot hands. As a matter of
fact, the application of robotic systems in unknown en-
vironments requires dexterous manipulation abilities to
execute complex operations in a ﬂexible way.
A widely accepted deﬁnition states that the dex-
terity of a robotic end-effector is a measure of its
capability of changing the conﬁguration of the manipu-
lated object from an initial conﬁguration to a ﬁnal one,
arbitrarily chosen within the device workspace. Gen-
erally speaking, with the term dexterity we intend the
capability of the end-effector, operated by a suitable
robotic system, to autonomously perform tasks with
a certain level of complexity. An exhaustive review
of scientiﬁc work developed so far about dexterity of
robotic hands, with a quite complete and updated list of
references, can be found in [19.18].
Even though the word dexterity itself has a very
positive meaning, it may be useful to consider different
levels of dexterity, associated with growing complexity
and criticality of performable tasks. The dexterity do-
main for robotic hands can be roughly divided in two
main areas, i. e., grasping and internal manipulation.
Grasping is intended as the capability of constrain-
ing objects with a constraint conﬁguration that is sub-
stantially invariant with time (the object is ﬁxed with
respect to the hand).
Internal manipulation is a controlled motion of the
grasped object in the hand workspace, with the con-
straint conﬁguration changing with time.
Further subdivisions of these two domains have
been widely discussed in the literature (different
grasp topologies [19.19], different internal manipula-
tion modes based on internal mobility and/or contact
sliding or rolling [19.18]).
Although the notion of dexterity is well settled, the
way to achieve it remains debated. Factors affecting
the actual capabilities of a robotic end-effector are so
many that often the analysis and above all the synthesis
of dexterous hands do not take into proper consider-
ation some of these elements, namely: morphological
features; sensory equipment; control algorithms; task
planning strategies; and so on.
19.2 Design of Robot Hands
The mechanical design of an articulated robotic hand
can be performed according to many possible design
concepts and options, even if a kinematical architecture
has already been deﬁned and size and shape speciﬁ-
cations imposed. One of the main issues is the design
of a proper actuation and transmission system. This as-
pect is crucial because space and dimensions are usually
limited, being in general an anthropomorphic aspect
and dimension a design goal to be pursued. Another
aspect that is relevant for the design is the adoption
of compliant structures (Fig. 19.1), in place of con-
ventional mechanical joints, e.g., rolling pairs [19.20,
21].
Note that, since many solutions and operating con-
cepts can be adopted, what is presented here aims only
at illustrating the most signiﬁcant solutions, and does
not pretend to be a complete discussion of all the possi-
ble choices.
19.2.1 Actuators Placement
and Motion Transmission
In order to actuate the joints of a robot hand, two basic
approaches for the placement of the actuators are possi-
ble, i. e.:

Placing the motors as close as possible to each joint,
directly in the ﬁngers and sometimes integrating
them within the joint itself.

Placing the motors into the palm or in the forearm;
in this case motion is transmitted to each joint by
means of (complex) kinematic chains.

Part B | 19.2
466
Part B
Design
a)
c)
b)
Fig.19.1a–c
Three robotic
ﬁngers based on
compliant joints.
(a) The ﬁnger is
obtained in a sin-
gle teﬂon piece;
(b) joint compli-
ance is achieved
with metallic
springs; (c) fast
prototyping al-
lows for different
compliant mech-
anisms as joints
In-site actuation can be deﬁned as the case in which
the actuator is hosted inside one of the two links con-
nected by the actuated joint or is placed directly inside
the joint:

Direct-drive actuation: the actuator is placed di-
rectly on the joint, without transmission elements.

Link-hosted actuation: the actuator is placed inside
one of the two links constituting the actuated kine-
matic chain.
In-site actuation simpliﬁes the mechanical conﬁg-
uration of the joint, reducing the transmission chain
complexity. In particular, it has the great advantage
that the motion of the joint is kinematically indepen-
dent with respect to other joints. Usually, the size of
the ﬁnger is imposed by the dimension of the actuators,
and for technological reasons it is quite difﬁcult to ob-
tain both an anthropomorphic size and the same grasp
strength of the human hand. Furthermore, the motors
occupy a large room inside the ﬁnger structure, and it is
a serious problem to host other elements, like sensors or
compliant skin layers. A further negative aspect is that,
since the mass of the actuators is concentrated inside
the ﬁnger, the dynamic behavior of the system and its
response bandwidth are reduced.
Nevertheless, the recent advancement of actuator
technology enables us to directly implement a quite
powerful actuator with reasonable size in each joint.

Robot Hands
19.2 Design of Robot Hands
467
Part B | 19.2
This built-in actuation has been adopted, e.g., for DLR
hand [19.4, 22], ETL hand, Karlsruhe hand, Yasukawa
hand, Barrett hand, Gifu hand, U-Tokyo hand, and Hi-
roshima hand. Since this actuation does not include
compliant element like tendons, we can keep a stiff
transmission system, which leads to a stable control
system even under a high gain (Sect. 19.4). An issue
is the routing of wires for both power and signal ca-
bles. This issue is more serious in distal joints than for
the base joint, since the cables in distal joints produce
a relatively large torque disturbance on the ﬁrst joint,
and therefore it is difﬁcult to achieve a precise torque
control for this joint.
Remote Actuation
Remote actuation is an alternative solution to in-site
actuation. In remote actuation, the joint is driven by ac-
tuators placed outside the links connected by the joint
itself. Remote actuation requires a motion transmis-
sion system, that must pass through the joints between
the motor and the actuated joint. In some way, re-
mote actuation must consider the problem of kinematic
coupling between the actuated joint and the previous
ones. Remote actuation is prevalent in biological struc-
tures (e.g., in human hand), where the ﬁnger joints are
moved by muscles placed on the palm or in the fore-
arm. This human-like approach has been adopted in
projects of robotic hands like the UB hand or the Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Agency (NASA) Robo-
naut hand [19.23, 24].
Remote actuation systems can be classiﬁed accord-
ing to the type of adopted transmission elements, i. e.,
ﬂexible- or rigid-link transmission.
Flexible Link Transmission. Flexible link transmis-
sion is based on deformable connections, either ﬂexible
or rotational, that can adapt to variations of conﬁgura-
tion by changing the transmission path. Linear ﬂexible
transmissions are based on ﬂexible elements with trans-
lating motion, subject to tension (more frequently)
or tension and compression. Two further subcate-
gories can be identiﬁed: pulley-routed ﬂexible elements
(tendons, chains, belts) or sheath-routed ﬂexible ele-
ments (mainly tendon-like elements). Rotational ﬂex-
ible transmissions are based on ﬂexible rotary shafts,
that can transmit rotational motion inside the ﬁnger
structure to the joint, where a ﬁnal transforming mech-
anism (a bevel gear or a worm gear) can be used to
actuate the joint.
Rigid Link Transmission. Rigid link transmission is
mainly based on articulated linkages or on rolling
conjugated proﬁles (mainly gear trains). A further sub-
division can be made between parallel and nonparallel
axes gear trains, like bevel gears, worm gears, and so
on.
19.2.2 Actuation Architectures
Both in-site and remote actuation can be applied ac-
cording to different types of organization, i. e., by using
one ore more actuators for each joint and by making
these actuators work in different ways.
In general, we can consider an overall number N
of joints for the robotic hand (the wrist joints are not
considered) and a number M of actuators that are used
to drive, directly or indirectly, the joints. According
to different concepts of actuation and transmission,
three main categories of actuation schemes can be
identiﬁed:

M < N: some joints are passive, coupled, or under-
actuated.

M D N: each joint has its own actuator and there are
no passive, coupled or underactuated joints.

M > N: more than one actuator is operating on
a single joint.
These architectures strongly depends on the type of mo-
tors. In particular, it is possible to recognize two main
actuation modalities:

Single-acting actuators – each motor can generate
a controlled motion in one direction only: return
motion in opposite direction must be obtained by an
external action, that can be a passive (e.g., a spring)
or an active system (e.g., an antagonistic actuator);
this is the case of tendon-based transmission sys-
tems.

Double-acting actuators – each motor can generate
a controlled motion in both directions and can be
used alone to drive the joint or to cooperate with
other actuators; in this case the functional redun-
dancy can allow sophisticated drive techniques, like
push-pull cooperation.
Each category can be further subdivided. In the
following, a brief description of the most frequently
adopted schemes is presented.
Single-Acting Actuators
with Passive Return Elements
Passive elements, like springs, can store energy dur-
ing the actuation phase, restituting it during the return
stroke (Fig. 19.2a). This mechanism leads to a simpliﬁ-
cation of actuation scheme, but requires mechanically
backdrivable actuators. Other possible drawbacks are
related to the loss of available power for the grasp and

Part B | 19.2
468
Part B
Design
the limited response bandwidth in case of low spring
stiffness.
Agonistic-Antagonistic
Single-Acting Actuators
Two actuators drives the same joint, acting in op-
position in different directions (agonistic-antagonistic
couple) (Fig. 19.2b). This solution leads to an N joints-
2N actuators scheme and is quite complex since a large
number of actuators must be placed in the hand. On the
other hand, it may allow sophisticated control proce-
dures, as both actuators can pull at the same time, with
different intensity, generating a driving torque on the
joint and a preloading of the joint itself (cocontraction,
typical of tendon-driven joints):

Pros: cocontraction strategies, possibility to change
the joint stiffness according to the grasping phase
and therefore to limit the inﬂuence of friction
during fast approaching motions; independent po-
sition/tension control on each actuator can allow
compensation of different path length in case of re-
mote transmission; it is the most ﬂexible solution
for driving a joint.

Cons: back-drivability of actuators is required; high
difﬁculty in hosting two actuators for each joint,
both in in-site and in remote location; higher con-
trol complexity; higher cost.
Single-Acting Actuators Organized According
to the Concept of Actuation Net
This is a very interesting case, mimicking biological
systems, but has not been implemented yet in robotic
hands, except for some preliminary studies. N joints are
driven by M actuators, being N < M < 2N. Each actua-
tor cooperates in moving more than one joint, thanks to
proper net-shaped transmissions:
a)
b)
Joint
F
F
Actuator
Actuator
Joint
F
Actuator
Fig.19.2a,b Single-acting actuator with an antagonist pas-
sive element (a) and in an agonist-antagonist conﬁgura-
tion (b)

Pros: cocontraction strategies, possibility to change
the joint stiffness according to the grasping phase
and therefore to limit the inﬂuence of friction dur-
ing fast approaching motions; reduced number of
actuators with respect to the 2N actuators scheme.

Cons: back-drivability of actuators is required; high
complexity of the kinematic scheme and therefore
high complexity in control.
The simplest case of actuation net is represented
by the so called N C 1 actuation (being N in this case
the number of joints of a ﬁnger), frequently adopted in
practice (Fig. 19.3). In this case, all actuators are cou-
pled, and therefore a damage of any of them will result
in a general failure.
Double Acting Actuators with M < N
In this case, the number of actuators is less than the
number of joints. With reference to a single motor and
several joints, two main subcases can be deﬁned:
1. The joints are kinematically coupled, in a ﬁxed or
variable way, so that the number of degrees of free-
dom of this subsystems is reduced to one.
2. The joints are selectively actuated by the motor, ac-
cording to an active or passive selection subsystem.
The former case can be further subdivided:

Joints kinematically coupled in a ﬁxed way: In this
kind of kinematical conﬁguration, each motor can
move more joints connected by rigid mechanisms
with ﬁxed transmission ratios. A typical application
is obtained with the use of a gear train: the ﬁrst
link is directly actuated by a motor, while a gear
transmission between a wheel ﬁxed to the frame
and a ﬁnal wheel connected to the joint generates
the relative motion of the second link (Fig. 19.4a).
Should the motion of two parallel ﬁngers be re-
quired, their connection could be easily obtained
mounting two gear wheels on the same shaft. An-
other very common way to obtain this kind of
kinematical linkage is to use tendon driven devices
a)
b)
c)
Fig.19.3a–c Remote actuation. (a) N-type, (b) 2N-type, (c)
N C 1-type

Robot Hands
19.2 Design of Robot Hands
469
Part B | 19.2
as shown in Fig. 19.4b. In artiﬁcial hand design, the
main advantage when using joints driven by ﬁxed-
ratio mechanisms is the possibility to know and
control the position of the second link. A disadvan-
tage is that this kind of mechanisms does not adapt
to the shapes of the grasped objects, and this may
cause grasp instability.

Joints coupled in a non-ﬁxed way: This is the case of
underactuated mechanisms and deformable passive-
driven joints. A mechanism is said to be under-
actuated when the number of actuators is smaller
than the number of degrees of freedom. When ap-
plied to mechanical ﬁngers, this concept may lead
to shape adaptation, i. e., underactuated ﬁngers can
envelope the objects to be grasped and adapt to their
shape even with a reduced number of actuators.
In order to obtain a statically determined system,
elastic elements and mechanical limits must be in-
troduced in underactuated systems (simple linear
spring are often used). In the case of a ﬁnger clos-
ing on an object, for instance, the conﬁguration of
the ﬁnger is determined by the external constraints
associated with the object. An example of an un-
deractuated two-degrees of freedom ﬁnger is shown
in Fig. 19.5 [19.25]. The ﬁnger is actuated through
the lower link, and a spring is used to maintain the
ﬁnger fully extended. A mechanical limit is used
to keep the phalanges aligned under the action of
this spring when no external forces are applied on
the phalanges. Since the joints cannot be controlled
independently, the behavior of the ﬁnger is deter-
mined by the design parameters (i. e., the geometric
and the stiffness properties). Hence, the choice of
these design parameters is a crucial issue.
Another approach consists in coupling the motion
of two adjacent joints by means of deformable link-
ages. This feature introduces in the kinematical
chain the needed compliance to ﬁt to the shapes of
the grasped objects. A very simple mechanism of
this category is reported in Fig. 19.6. Structurally it
is similar to the mechanisms based on a ﬁxed cou-
pling, the only important difference is the addition
of a spring to give extensibility to the tendon. This
spring allows to decouple the motion between the
ﬁrst and second link when an external force is ap-
plied to the distal one. This solution is widely used:
a well known example is the DLR hand. The bene-
ﬁts of this solution are mainly due to the possibility
to ﬁt to the shapes of objects. A design problem is
the choice of the stiffness of the deformable element
in order to achieve at the same time a strong grasp
and a good shape adaptability.

Joints selectively driven by only one motor: With
this solution, the motion generated by only one
(large) motor is transmitted and distributed to sev-
eral joints. Actuation and control of each joint is
obtained by means of insertion-disinsertion devices
like self-acting or commanded clutches.
Double-Acting Actuation, with M D N
This is a very common case: each joint is driven in both
directions by the same actuator. The achievable perfor-
mances are therefore similar (equal) in both directions,
but particular attention must be paid to backlash, and it
is usually necessary to preload the transmission system.
In particular, preload is mandatory in case of trans-
mission by means of ﬂexible elements like tendons
(Fig. 19.3a). Furthermore, the adoption of a closed-
Fixed end of tendon
First member
Second member
Frame
a)
b)
Fixed wheel
First member
Second member
Frame
Fig. 19.4 Double-acting actuator with N D M based on
gears (a) and tendons (b)
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.19.5a–d Grasping sequence performed by a ﬁnger based on
underactuated mechanism
Fixed end of tendon
First member
Second member
Frame
Fig. 19.6 Joints coupled in non ﬁxed way

Part B | 19.3
470
Part B
Design
loop tendon transmission requires that the overall length
of the tendon route must be kept constant, accord-
ing to the concept that winded and unwinded parts
of the tendon on the motor pulley have the same
length; this involves the need of length-compensating
mechanisms (e.g., pulley-trains, cams) every time that
changes in the geometry of the ﬁnger cause a dif-
ferential displacement of the tendons. In spite of this
required complexity, this actuation scheme has been
widely used, with simple pulley routing (UB hand,
Okada hand, . . . ), or sheath-routing (Salisbury hand,
Dipartmento di Informatica Sistemica e Telematica
(DIST) hand), that has a simpler mechanical structure
but must face the problem of sheath-tendon friction
(application of high preload is not convenient in this
case).
19.3 Technologies for Actuation and Sensing
In this Section, a brief description of the main issues
related to technological aspects of actuation and sensing
for robot hands is reported. A more general presentation
and detailed description of these aspects is given in Part
A (Chaps. 4 and 5) and Part C (Chap. 28).
19.3.1 Actuation
Electrical actuators are without doubt the most com-
mon choice for actuating robot hands. As a matter
of fact, electric motors have very good performance
in terms of position/velocity control, have a reason-
able mass/power ratio, and are a very common tech-
nology, that does not require external devices (as for
hydraulic or pneumatic actuators). However, there are
several other possibilities. For example: ultrasonic mo-
tors (Keio hand [19.26]), chemical actuators, pneu-
matic actuators (McKibben in the Shadow hand [19.27];
VIDEO 753 ), spring based actuators (as for the 100G
Capturing Robot [19.28]
VIDEO 755 ), twisted string
actuators (Fig. 19.7) [19.29] (Dexmart hand [19.30];
VIDEO 767 ), and others.
In particular, for pursuing quick responses, either
pneumatic or spring-based actuators may be good solu-
tions, although it should be noted that a braking system
Actuation length (mm)
50
Twist
angle
(rad)
48
43
33
0
4ϖ
8ϖ
12ϖ
Fig. 19.7 The twisted string concept:
by twisting the string, its twisted
string concept length is reduced
transforming a rotational motion into
a linear one
with quick response is essential for achieving good po-
sition controllability for this type of actuators.
19.3.2 Sensors
In robot hands, as in other robotic devices, sensors can
be classiﬁed in two main categories: proprioceptive and
exteroceptive sensors. The ﬁrst type of sensors mea-
sures physical information related to the state of the
device itself (e.g., position, velocity, and so on), while
the second one is devoted to the measurement of data re-
lated to the interaction with objects/environment (e.g.,
applied forces/torques, friction, shape, and so on).
Joint Position/Velocity Sensors
For control purposes, there is the obvious necessity
of measuring position/velocity of the actuated joints.
A major problem consists in the limitation of the avail-
able space, both for the sensors and for the wires.
Different technological solutions can be adopted, but
a rather common choice is based on Hall-effect sensors,
that are sufﬁciently small, precise and reliable for this
type of application. In case of remote actuation, there
is the possibility of having two position/velocity sen-
sors for each joint: one located in the actuator (e.g.,

Robot Hands
19.3 Technologies for Actuation and Sensing
471
Part B | 19.3
an encoder) and one placed in the joint itself, often
necessary because of the non linearities introduced by
the transmission system (elasticity, friction, and so on).
Quite often, this latter sensor is speciﬁcally designed
and implemented for the given hand, being commer-
cially available sensors too large and not suitable for
installation in the joints.
Tendon Tension Sensor
and Joint Torque Sensor
It is well known that humans can control ﬁnger tip
compliance as well as ﬁnger tip force by controlling
voluntary muscles. In remote actuation, it is essential
to measure the tendon tension for two main reasons: for
compensating the friction existing in the transmission
system, and for measuring the external contact force.
Figure 19.8 shows a way for measuring the tendon ten-
sion where the tendon is pressed by an elastic plate
with a strain gauge. When a tension is applied to the
tendon, the sensor measures a force composed of axial
and bending force components. The displacement of the
elastic plate due to the axial force component is negligi-
bly small compared with that due to the bending force
component. As a result, the bending force component
generates a bending deformation for the elastic plate.
This deformation is transformed in an electric signal
by means of proper transducers, such as strain gauges
attached on the surface of the plate or optoelectronic
components [19.31, 32]. Now, suppose N-type actua-
tion with two tension sensors, as shown in Fig. 19.9,
where joint torque  is given. Note that  D r.T1  T2/
T1
T1
M
Strain gauge
Fig. 19.8 Tendon tension sensing
T1
T2
r
τ
Strain gauge
Amplifier
+
–
e = kτ 
Fig. 19.9 Tension sensor based torque sensing
where r, T1, and T2 are the pulley radius and ten-
don tensions, respectively. Since we can measure e1
and e2 corresponding to T1 and T2,  can be obtained
by feeding both e1 and e2 into the differential circuit.
This approach, however, includes a couple of issues.
The main problem is the plastic deformation of the
sensor plate under an extreme large pretension. Once
such a plastic deformation has happened, the sensor
will never work appropriately anymore. Another mi-
nor issue is are that two sensors are always necessary
for measuring a joint torque. To cope with these is-
sues, the tension-differential-type torque sensor [19.28]
can be used as shown in Fig. 19.10. The sensor is de-
signed with just a single body and it partially includes
an elastic part where at least one strain gauge is at-
tached. The working principle of the sensor, shown in
Fig. 19.10a, supposes that a torque is applied to the
joint. This means that T1 and T2 have different val-
ues. This difference causes a bending force around the
strain gauge. The key is that the bending force is kept
to zero even under an extremely large tension as far
as no joint torque is given. Therefore, we are com-
pletely released from the plastic deformation of the
elastic plate due to pretension. Furthermore, the sen-
sor is constructed with just a single body. There are
couple of variations in this type of torque sensor. As
decreasing the pulley distance in Fig. 19.10a, the sen-
sor eventually results in the single-pulley-version with
zero distance, as shown in Fig. 19.10b. The single-
pulley-version has been implemented into Darmstadt
T1
T2
r
τ
a)
T1
T2
r
τ
b)
T1
T2
r
τ
c)
Fig.19.10a–c Tension-differential
type
(TDT)
sensor.
(a) Double pulley version, (b) single pulley version,
(c) pulley-less version (after [19.28])

Part B | 19.3
472
Part B
Design
hand [19.33] and MEL hand [19.34]. Furthermore, if
the sensor is built in the ﬁnger link connected by the
concerned tendon, there is no relative motion between
the sensor and the tendon. As a result, we can remove
the pulley, as shown in Fig. 19.10c. This is called as
the pulley-less version and has been implemented into
Hiroshima hand. The tension-differential-type torque
sensor will be a powerful tool for measuring a tendon
drive joint.
Finger Tip Tactile (or Force) Sensors
Most robot manipulation and assembly tasks would
beneﬁts of the utilization of tactile sensory information.
When lifting an object, tactile sensing could detect the
onset of slip in time for corrective action to be taken. In
addition to the contact point between the ﬁnger tip and
the object, several objects properties, such as friction
coefﬁcient of the object surfaces, surface texture, and
weight can be determined by utilizing a ﬁnger tip tac-
tile (or force) sensor. A six-axis force sensor allows us
to detect contact point as well as contact force between
ﬁnger and environment, if a single contact is assumed.
For the ﬁnger model as shown in Fig. 19.11, the follow-
ing relationship between the sensor output and contact
force may be deﬁned
Fs D f ;
(19.1)
Ms D xc  f ;
(19.2)
where f 2 R3, Fs 2 R3, Ms 2 R3, and xc 2 R3 are the
external force vector, the force vector measured by the
six-axis force sensor, the moment vector measured by
the six-axis force sensor, and the position vector in-
dicating the contact position, respectively. From the
ﬁrst equation, we can directly obtain the contact force.
Putting Fs into the second equation leads to Ms D xc 
Fs. xc is determined in such a way that Ms D xc  Fs
may be satisﬁed. For a ﬁnger with convex object, we
have always two mathematical solutions as shown in
Fig. 19.12a where the meaningful solution is the one
satisfying f tn < 0, n being the outward normal direc-
tion to the ﬁnger’s surface (a ﬁnger can only push the
Σs
Ms
Fs
f
z
x
y
xc
Object
Fig. 19.11 Sensor coordinate system P
S
object). However, for a ﬁnger with concave shape, we
have at least four mathematical solutions, as shown in
Fig. 19.12b where two of those are physically possible.
A ﬁnger with the six-axis force sensor located in the
ﬁngertip, Fig.19.12.c, can avoid multiple solutions. On
the other hand, only forces applied to the ﬁngertip can
be detected, and if more links are in contact with the ob-
ject it would be necessary to have a force/torque sensor
placed in each of them.
This type of solution, i. e., a multiaxis sensor for
measuring not only forces and torques but also the posi-
tion of the contact point, is known in the literature as the
intrinsic tactile (IT) principle [19.35]. In general, with
respect to the use of traditional tactile sensors, see later,
it leads to a simpliﬁcation in the design since it requires
less wires and connections for the sensor.
Tactile Sensors
Another important class of sensing devices consists of
tactile sensors, which are used for several purposes,
such as shape recognition, contact point determination,
pressure/force measurement. A number of tactile sen-
sors have been proposed in the literature, with several
different solutions concerning the implementation fea-
tures: optical, piezoresistive, piezoelectric, and so on.
References [19.36, 37] give an overview on technolo-
gies and applications.
f tn < 0
f tn > 0
f tn < 0
f tn < 0
f tn < 0
f tn < 0
Six-axis force sensor
a)
Six-axis force sensor
b)
Object
Object
Object
f tn < 0
f tn > 0
Six-axis force sensor
c)
Fig. 19.12 Interpretation of solutions. (a) Convex shape,
(b) ﬁnger with a concave shape, (c) sensor located in the
ﬁngertip

Robot Hands
19.4 Modeling and Control of a Robot Hand
473
Part B | 19.4
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
5
10
15
0
y
x
5
10
15
0
a)
b)
Fig.19.13a,b A Tactile sensor. (a) Scheme of a tactile sen-
sor, (b) example of data from a tactile sensor
Tactile sensors have been introduced in robotics
since the late 1970s. Nowadays, as the force sensors,
also tactile sensors are commercially available devices.
Probably, they represent the most commonly adopted
sensorial class for industrial grippers, even though they
are often used as advanced on/off devices to check
whether a grasp or contact condition occurs.
Usually, they consist in a matrix (array) of sensing
elements. Each sensing element is usually referred to
as a taxel (from tactile element), and the whole set of
information is called a tactile image, Fig. 19.13. Main
goal of this class of sensors is to measure the map of
pressures over the sensing area.
In general, the types of information that may be ob-
tained from a tactile sensor are:

Contact: This is the most simple information given
by the sensor, concerning the presence or absence
of a contact.

Force: Each sensing element provides an informa-
tion related to the amount of locally applied force,
which can be used in several manners for successive
elaborations.

Simple geometrical information, i. e., position of the
contact area, geometrical shape of the contact itself
(planar, circular, and so on).

Main geometrical features of the object: By proper
elaborations of the data of the taxels, it is possible
to deduce the type of object in contact with the sen-
sor, for example a sphere, a cylinder and so on (data
relative to the 3-D (three-dimensional) shape).

Mechanical properties, such as friction coefﬁcient,
roughness, and so on. Also thermal properties of the
object may be measured by a tactile sensor.

Slip condition, i. e., the relative movement between
the object and the sensor.
Several technologies have been adopted for the de-
sign of tactile sensors, ranging from piezoresistive to
magnetic, to optical effects, and so on. Among the most
common, one can mention:

Resistive and conductive effect

Electromagnetic effect

Capacitive effect

Piezoelectric effect

Optical effect

Mechanical methods.
Each of these technologies has positive and negative
aspects. Common drawbacks, however, are the size of
these sensors, usually quite large in comparison with
the available space, and the necessity of a high number
of electrical connections.
19.4 Modeling and Control of a Robot Hand
The dynamic model of a robot hand with in-site actua-
tion is very similar to the model of a traditional (indus-
trial) robot, and the hand can be considered as a collec-
tion of robot manipulators. On the other hand, remote
actuation introduces some peculiar features that have to
be carefully considered. In particular, the problems tied
to nonlinear phenomena (e.g., friction and backlash),
compliance of the transmission system, and noncolo-
cation of sensors and actuators are very critical for the
design of the control. Moreover, the use of single-acting
actuators, such as tendon based actuation systems, re-
quires the adoption of proper control techniques, which
allow the imposition of the desired torque at each joint
of the hand, despite the coupling among them.

Part B | 19.4
474
Part B
Design
Actuator
jm
rotor
kt
bt
kt
bt
kt
bt
mt
kt
bt
mt
kt
bt
kc
bc
mt
jl
joint and link
jl
joint and link
jm
rotor
kc
bc
Fa
Fa
Transmission
Finger
Environment
force sensor
re
g
ni
F
n
oissi
m
s
n
a
r
T
r
o
ta
u
tc
A
Environment
force sensor
a)
b)
Fig.19.14a,b Model of a robot joint (a) with transmission ﬂexibility, and (b) with tendon based transmission
19.4.1 Dynamic Effects of Flexible
Transmission Systems
The transmission system of robot hands with remote
actuation is usually characterized by an high level of
friction and non negligible dynamic effects which com-
plicate the control problem. A simple representation
considers a single axis motion with two inertial ele-
ments linked by an elastic transmission. This is the
typical representation of elastic joints in which the for-
mer element represents the motor inertia, while the
latter is related to the inertial properties of the ac-
tuated joint/link (Fig. 19.14a). More complex models
assume a dynamic model for the transmission system,
i. e., the classical representation of tendons based on the
serial repetition of masses linked by springs/dampers,
reported in Fig. 19.14b. These simple models are par-
jω
σ
0
–bc±√b2
c – 4(jm+ jl)kc
2 (jm+ jl)
Fig. 19.15 Root contour of the transfer function (19.3)
with variable kt
ticularly useful to understand some drawbacks and
limitations due to the fact that actuation system and ac-
tuated element are located in two different places and
the motion is transmitted by a nonideal (that is not
purely static) element. If we consider the capability of
the ﬁngers’ joint of applying a force on the environ-
ment, the effect of the transmission system on the open
loop response of the system modeled as in Fig. 19.14a,
are a noticeable reduction of the bandwidth, and an
important phase delay between the input Fa (the force
applied by the motor) and the output Fc (the force ex-
changed at the contact). As shown in Fig. 19.15, the
open-loop transfer function
Fa
Fc
D
.bcsCkc/.btsCkt/

jls2 C.bt Cbc/sCkt Ckc
	
.jms2 CbtsCkt/  .btsCkt/2
(19.3)
is characterized by four poles that, for growing values
of the transmission stiffness ks, move from their initial
locations (that depend on the values of physical param-
eters jl, jm, etc., although for ks D 0 at least one pole
is in the origin of the Gauss plane) towards the poles
of a system with an inﬁnitely rigid transmission (for kc
tending to 1, two poles go to inﬁnity) (and a total iner-
tia given by the contributions of both the motor and the
link) whose transfer function is
Fa
Fc
D
.bcs C kc/
.jl C jm/s2 C bcs C kc
(19.4)
As a consequence, the bandwidth of the system with
ﬂexible transmission, that for high values of ks approx-

Robot Hands
19.4 Modeling and Control of a Robot Hand
475
Part B | 19.4
Fig. 19.16 Bode plots of the open loop transfer function
(19.3) for low stiffness values (continuous line) high stiff-
ness value (dashed line) and with no transmission (dotted
line) I
imates those of (19.4), decreases when the compliance
of the transmission is not negligible, see the Bode plots
reported in Fig. 19.16. The bandwidth of the system
with ﬂexible transmission is strongly affected by the lo-
cation of the speed reducer: when the reducer is placed
at the joint the bandwidth is Kr times (Kr is the reduction
ratio) higher than the one achievable with the reduc-
tion applied directly on the motor [19.38] (Fig. 19.17).
Moreover, it is worth to notice that for low level of
the stiffness kt a sharp phase drop occurs at the fre-
quency of the ﬂexible mode. Therefore, there are some
frequencies (relatively low) at which the force applied
by the motor and the one measured with a sensor in
the ﬁnger’s joint are completely out of phase. These
effects, which may cause the instability of the overall
system under force control (or impedance control) are
referred to as noncolocation. In general, when actuators
and sensors are physically located at different points of
a ﬂexible structure (or a structure with ﬂexible transmis-
sion), there will be unstable modes in the closed-loop
system [19.39].
From the control viewpoint, the problem of me-
chanical transmission ﬂexibility is further exasperated
by the non linear frictional phenomena that inevitably
affect remote actuation and motion transmission. As
a matter of fact, the linear viscous friction, represented
in Fig. 19.14 by the damping coefﬁcient bt, is accompa-
nied by stiction and Coulomb friction, both of which are
discontinuous at zero velocity (Fig. 19.18). These non-
linearities may cause limit cycles and input-dependent
stability, and must be accurately taken into account
in the design of the robot hand structure as well as
of its control architecture [19.40]. For instance, in the
design of the Utah/MIT dexterous hand, depicted in
Fig. 19.19, in order to reduce static friction, the idea
of using tendon sheaths was abandoned in favor of pul-
leys [19.3]. In order to ﬁnd an optimal trade-off between
complexity and reliability of the mechanical arrange-
ment and achieved friction level, a number of solutions,
which combine sheaths and pulleys for routing the ten-
don from actuators to ﬁngers’ joints has been adopted
in the design of robot hands, e.g., the Stanford/JPL
hand (
VIDEO 751 ) and the UB hand 3 reported in
Fig. 19.20. This device is characterized by an extremely
simple structure, with the tendons completely routed
within sheaths, but on the other hand the friction can-
not be absolutely neglected and a precise modeling of
the interaction between the tendons and the tube is nec-
essary for control purposes [19.41].
100
101
102
103
104
Magnitude (dB)
20
0
–20
–40
–60
–80
–100
100
101
No transmission
Low stiffness transmission
High stiffness transmission
102
103
104
Frequency (rad/s)
0
–90
–180
–270
Phase (deg)
Belt
Reducer
Motor
Fig. 19.17 Reducer location on the medial joint of the DLR
hand II
x·
a)
b
l
Ffric
x·
b)
Ffric
Fs
Fc
Fig.19.18a,b Frictional phenomena: viscous friction (a) and stic-
tion and Coulomb friction (b)

Part B | 19.4
476
Part B
Design
19.4.2 Transmission Model
of Tendon-Outer-Tube System
This system can be modeled as shown in Fig. 19.21
where Tin, Tout, T0, in, out, Ri, x, and L are the tension
at the input side, the tension at the output side, the initial
pretension, the displacement at the input side, the dis-
placement at the output side, the local radius of routing,
the coordinate system along the wire, and the length of
the tendon, respectively. The relationship between the
tension at output and the input displacement is given
by [19.42],
Tout  T0 D Kt.inB/ ;
(19.5)
Fig. 19.19 The Utah/MIT robotic hand
a)
b)
Fig.19.20a,b Tendon based robot hands: Stanford/JPL hand (a) and
UB hand 3 (b)
where Kt and B are the total stiffness and the equiva-
lent backlash, respectively, and those are given by,
1
Kt
D 1
Ke
C 1
Ks
C 1
Kap
(19.6)
Kap D Kw

exp./  1
(19.7)
B D T0L
EA  exp./    1

(19.8)
 D
X
jˇij sgn in
(19.9)
where Ke, Ks, Kw, Kap, , E, A and ˇi are the stiffness of
environment, the stiffness of force sensor, the apparent
stiffness of the tendon, the friction coefﬁcient, Young’s
modulus, the cross sectional area, and the bending angle
of each segment of tendon, respectively. For example,
X
jˇij D 2
for the case given in Fig. 19.21. As can be seen from
this example, the friction related parameter  increases
dramatically when the tube is heavily bent. While we
have a big advantage of choosing a free route for the
power transmission, it brings a large nonlinearity for
the transmission system. We would note that while both
the apparent stiffness of the tendon and the equivalent
backlash vary depending upon  which is the function
of the curvature of the route as well as the friction coef-
ﬁcient, B and Kap result in B D 0 and Kap D Kw under
 D 0. From the view point of control, such hysteresis
is, of course, not desirable. To cope with these issues,
each tendon should be designed as short as possible, so
that we may keep high stiffness and small backlash in
the transmission system.
19.4.3 The Control Through Single-Acting
Actuators
The use of single-acting actuators (i. e., standard mo-
tors with tendinous transmission), which are commonly
X=0
Ri
Tout
ks
ke
in
X=L
out
Fig. 19.21 Model of tendon-outer-tube transmission

Robot Hands
19.5 Applications and Trends
477
Part B | 19.5
assumed in the design of robot hands with remote
actuation, requires the adoption of speciﬁc control tech-
niques in order to guarantee the desired torques at
the joints and to maintain at each time a positive ten-
sion on the tendons. To this purpose, the tendons are
treated like inelastic frictionless elements and the prob-
lem is coped in a way completely decoupled from
the issue of the device stability, discussed in previous
sections.
A tendon, routed in the ﬁnger structure through
sheaths or/and pulleys, can be modeled by means an
extension function li./ [19.43] relating the joints’ con-
ﬁguration with the tendon elongation. In the case of the
tendon network represented in Fig. 19.3, the extension
functions of the three tendons have the form
li./ D l0i ˙ R1 ˙ R2 ;
where R is the radius of the pulleys and
 D Œ12T
is the vector of the joint variables. Once the extension
function has been determined, it is straightforward to
derive the relationship between tendons forces and re-
sulting joints torques. As a matter of fact, the relation
between the joint speeds P and tendon speeds Pl can be
deduced by simply differentiating the expression of ex-
tension functions
Pl D @l
@ ./ P D P./ P :
(19.10)
Because of the conservation of the power, from (19.10),
one can achieve
 D PT./f ;
(19.11)
where  are the torques exerted on the joints, and f are
the force applied by tendons. From (19.11) it results that
the force transmitted by a tendon may affect (and, in
general, will affect) more than one joint.
In order to guarantee the possibility of exerting joint
torques in every direction under the constraint of pure
tensile forces, for any  2 Rn it must exist a set of
forces f i 2 Rm (n and m are respectively the number of
joints and the number of tendons) such that
 D PT./f
and
f i > 0; i D 1; : : : ; m :
(19.12)
In this case the tendon network is said force closure.
If the condition expressed by (19.12) is veriﬁed, given
a desired torque vector  it is possible to compute the
force that the actuators must provide to the tendons ac-
cording to
f D P./ C f N ;
(19.13)
where
P D P.PTP/1
is the pseudo-inverse of the coupling matrix PT and
f N 2 N .PT/
is a vector of internal forces that insures that all tendon
tensions are positive. In general, internal forces will be
chosen as small as possible, so that the tendons are al-
ways taut but are not subject to excessive strains.
19.4.4 Control of a Robot Hand
The modeling and control aspects described in the
previous Sections, although very important and fun-
damental, can be considered as a sort of low level
problems in the control of a robot hand, in the sense
that they are related to the speciﬁc physical properties
of the device.
There are also other problems that must be faced
and solved in order to operate in a proﬁtable manner
with a multiﬁngered hand. These problems are solved
by a proper design of a high level control for the hand,
that must take into account the interaction of the hand
with the objects and more in general with the envi-
ronment. In this context, general aspects that must be
considered are: the control of forces/torques applied
at the contact points, the necessity to model contact
compliance/friction effects, the type of mobility both
for the ﬁngers and at the contact (rolling, sliding, . . . ),
a suitable planning algorithm for grasping and/or ma-
nipulating the objects, and so on.
These problems are illustrated in detail in Part C,
Chaps. 37–39.
19.5 Applications and Trends
In the industrial environment, simplicity and cost are
the main guidelines for the design of end-effectors,
and therefore simple devices, as open-close grippers,
are very common and widely used. This situation has
led during the years to the development of a num-
ber of special-purpose devices, optimized for single

Part B | 19.6
478
Part B
Design
specialized operations but not suitable for other tasks.
At the moment, dexterous multiﬁngered hands have
not really been applied to any major application,
mainly because of problems of reliability, complexity,
cost.
On the other hand, more and more operations are
currently envisaged for robots working in environments
designed for, and utilized by, human operators. Enter-
tainment, maintenance, space/underwater applications,
help to disable persons are just a few examples of use of
robotic systems in which interaction with tools and ob-
jects designed for human beings (or directly with them)
is implied. In all these circumstances, the robot must
be able to grasp and manipulate objects (different in di-
mension, shape, weight, . . . ) similarly to humans, and
therefore a robot hand, with a proper number of ﬁngers
and joints and also with an anthropomorphic appear-
ance, seems to be the most adequate solution.
There are several projects aiming at developing an-
thropomorphic robots. Among others, one can mention
Fig. 19.22 The NASA/JPL Robonaut
the NASA/JPL Robonaut [19.24], Fig. 19.22, the de-
vices developed at the DLR, the several projects on
humanoid robots currently under development.
19.6 Conclusions and Further Reading
The design of multiﬁngered robot hands has attracted
the interest of the research community since the early
days of robotics, not only as a challenging technical
problem itself but, probably, also because of anthro-
pomorphic motivations and the intrinsic interest for
a better knowledge of the human beings. In the last
decades, has previously discussed, several important
projects have been launched, and important examples
of robot hands developed. Nevertheless, the current sit-
uation is that reliable, ﬂexible, dexterous hands are still
not available for real applications. For these motiva-
tions, it is easy to foresee also for the future a consistent
research activity in this fascinating ﬁeld, with develop-
ments at the technological (sensor, actuator, material,
. . . ) and methodological (control, planning, . . . ) level.
Important connections with other scientiﬁc ﬁelds are
also expected, as for example with cognitive science.
Being this research area so wide, it is not simple
to suggest to interest readers further readings, except
for quite classical books such as [19.43–45]. As a mat-
ter of fact, depending on the speciﬁc research area,
many publications are available, although often not or-
ganized as reference books, but mainly as technical
papers published in journals or presented at interna-
tional conferences. Moreover, since hundreds of new
papers are published every year covering the different
aspects of this robotic ﬁeld, it is really quite difﬁcult,
and also not fair, to give at the moment speciﬁc sug-
gestions for further readings. We can only refer to the
citations already provided in the references.
Video-References
VIDEO 749
The PISA-IIT SoftHand
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/19/videodetails/749
VIDEO 750
The PISA-IIT SoftHand
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/19/videodetails/750
VIDEO 751
The Salisbury Hand
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/19/videodetails/751
VIDEO 752
The Barrett Hand
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/19/videodetails/752
VIDEO 753
The Shadow Hand
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/19/videodetails/753

Robot Hands
References
479
Part B | 19
VIDEO 754
The DLR Hand
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/19/videodetails/754
VIDEO 755
A high-speed Hand
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/19/videodetails/755
VIDEO 756
The UBH2, University of Bologna Hand, ver. 2 (1992)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/19/videodetails/756
VIDEO 767
The Dexmart Hand
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/19/videodetails/767
VIDEO 768
DLR Hand
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/19/videodetails/768
VIDEO 769
The DLR Hand performing several task
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/19/videodetails/769
References
19.1
T. Okada: Object-handling system for manual in-
dustry, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 2, 79–86 (1979)
19.2
K.S. Salisbury, B. Roth: Kinematics and force anal-
ysis of articulated mechanical hands, J. Mech.
Transm. Actuation Des. 105, 35–41 (1983)
19.3
S.C. Jacobsen, E.K. lversen, D.F. Knutti, R.T. lohn-
san, K.B. Biggers: Design of the Utah/MIT dexterous
hand, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1986)
19.4
J. Butterfass, G. Hirzinger, S. Knoch, H. Liu: DLR’s
Multisensory articulated Hand Part I: Hard- and
software architecture, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (1999)
19.5
A. Albu-Schäffer, T. Bahls, M. Chalon, O. Eiberger,
W. Friedl, R. Gruber, S. Haddadin, U. Hagn,
R. Haslinger, H. Hoppner, S. Jorg, M. Nickl, A. Noth-
helfer, F. Petit, J. Reill, N. Seitz, T. Wimbock, S. Wolf,
T. Wusthoff, G. Hirzinger: The DLR hand arm sys-
tem, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2011)
19.6
C. Melchiorri, G. Vassura: Mechanical and control
features of the University of Bologna hand version
2, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Int. Robots Syst. (IROS),
Rayleigh (1992) pp. 187–193
19.7
W.T. Townsend: MCB – Industrial robot feature
article- Barrett Hand grasper, Ind. Robot 27(3), 181–
188 (2000)
19.8
H. Kawasaki, T. Komatsu, K. Uchiyama: Dexterous
anthropomophic robot hand with distributed tac-
tile sensor: Gifu hand II, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mecha-
tronics 7(3), 296–303 (2002)
19.9
T.J. Doll, H.J. Scneebeli: The Karlsruhe Hand, Prepr.
IFAC Symp. Robot Control (SYROCO) (1988), pp. 37.1–
37.6
19.10
M.G. Catalano, G. Grioli, E. Farnioli, A. Serio, C. Pi-
azza, A. Bicchi: Adaptive synergies for the design
and control of the Pisa/IIT SoftHand, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 33, 768–782 (2014)
19.11
N. Fukaya, S. Toyama, T. Asfour, R. Dillmann: Design
of the TUAT/Karlsruhe humanoid hand, Robot. Syst.
3, 1754–1759 (2000)
19.12
A. Bicchi, A. Marigo: Dexterous grippers: Putting
nonholonomy to work for fine manipulation, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 21(5/6), 427–442 (2002)
19.13
M.C. Carrozza, C. Suppo, F. Sebastiani, B. Massa,
F. Vecchi, R. Lazzarini, M.R. Cutkosky, P. Dario:
The SPRING hand: Development of a self-adaptive
prosthesis for restoring natural grasping, Auton.
Robots 16(2), 125–141 (2004)
19.14
J.L. Pons, E. Rocon, R. Ceres, D. Reynaerts, B. Saro,
S. Levin, W. Van Moorleghem: The MANUS-HAND
dextrous robotics upper limb prosthesis: Mechani-
cal and manipulation aspects, Auton. Robots 16(2),
143–163 (2004)
19.15
Bebionic Prosthetic Hand: RSLSteeper, Leeds, UK
(2015) http://www.bebionic.com/
19.16
G. Berselli, M. Piccinini, G. Palli, G. Vassura: En-
gineering design of fluid-filled soft covers for
robotic contact interfaces: Guidelines, nonlinear
modeling, and experimental validation, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 27(3), 436–449 (2011)
19.17
T. Iberall, C.L. MacKenzie: Opposition space and
human prehension. In: Dexterous Robot Hands,
(Springer, New York 1990)
19.18
A. Bicchi: Hands for dexterous manipulation and
robust grasping: A difficult road toward simplic-
ity, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 16(6), 652–662
(2000)
19.19
M.R. Cutkosky: On grasp choice, grasp models, and
the design of hands for manufacturing tasks, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 5(3), 269–279 (1989)
19.20
G. Berselli, M. Piccinini, G. Vassura: Comparative
evaluation of the selective compliance in elastic
joints for robotic structures, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 4626–4631
19.21
L.U. Odhner, A.M. Dollar: Dexterous manipulation
with underactuated elastic hands, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011)
19.22
J. Butterfass, M. Grebenstein, H. Liu, G. Hirzinger:
DLR-Hand II: Next generation of a dextrous robot
hand, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Seoul (2001)
19.23
C. Melchiorri, G. Vassura: Mechanical and control
features of the UB hand version II, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1992)
19.24
R.O. Ambrose, H. Aldridge, R.S. Askew, R.R. Bur-
ridge, W. Bluethmann, M. Diftler, C. Lovchik, D. Ma-
gruder, F. Rehnmark: Robonaut: NASA’s space hu-
manoid, IEEE Intell. Syst. (2000)
19.25
L. Birglen, C.M. Gosselin: Kinetostatic analysis of
underactuated fingers, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
20(2), 211–221 (2004)

Part B | 19
480
Part B
Design
19.26
I. Yamano, T. Maeno: Five-fingered robot hand us-
ing ultrasonic motors and elastic elements, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2005) pp. 2684–
2689
19.27
Shadow Dexterous Hand: Shadow Robot Co. LTD.,
London (2015), http://www.shadowrobot.com/
19.28
M. Kaneko, M. Higashimori, R. Takenaka, A. Namiki,
M. Ishikawa: The 100G capturing robot – too fast to
see, Proc. 8th Int. Symp. Artif. Life Robotics (2003)
pp. 291–296
19.29
G. Palli, C. Natale, C. May, C. Melchiorri, T. Würtz:
Modeling and control of the twisted string actu-
ation system, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics 18(2),
664–673 (2013)
19.30
G. Palli, C. Melchiorri, G. Vassura, G. Berselli,
S. Pirozzi, C. Natale, G. De Maria, C. May: Innova-
tive technologies for the next generation of robotic
hands, Springer Tracts Adv. Robotics 80, 173–218
(2012)
19.31
G. Palli, S. Pirozzi: Force sensor based on discrete
optoelectronic components and compliant frames,
Sensors Actuators A 165, 239–249 (2011)
19.32
G. Palli, S. Pirozzi: A miniaturized optical force sen-
sor for tendon-driven mechatronic systems: Design
and experimental evaluation, Mechatronics 22(8),
1097–1111 (2012)
19.33
W. Paetsch, M. Kaneko: A three fingered multi-
jointed gripper for experimental use, Proc. IEEE Int.
Workshop Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1990) pp. 853–
858
19.34
H. Maekawa, K. Yokoi, K. Tanie, M. Kaneko,
N. Kimura, N. Imamura: Development of a three-
fingerd robot hand with stiffness control capability,
Mechatronics 2(5), 483–494 (1992)
19.35
A. Bicchi: A criterion for optimal design of multiaxis
force sensors, J. Robotics Auton. Syst. 10(4), 269–
286 (1992)
19.36
A. Pugh: Robot Sensors: Tactile and Non-Vision,
Vol. 2 (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1986)
19.37
H.R. Nicholls, M.H. Lee: A survey of robot tactile
sensing technology, Int. J. Robotics Res. 3(3), 3–30
(1989)
19.38
W.T. Townsend, J.K. Salisbury: Mechanical band-
width as a guideline to high-performance manip-
ulator design, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1989)
19.39
S.D. Eppinger, W.P. Seering: Three dynamic prob-
lems in robot force control, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 8(6), 751–758 (1992)
19.40
W.T.
Townsend,
J.K.
Salisbury:
The
effect
of
Coulomb friction and stiction on force control, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1987)
19.41
G. Palli, G. Borghesan, C. Melchiorri: Modeling,
identification and control of tendon-based actu-
ation systems, IEEE Trans. Robotics 28(2), 277–290
(2012)
19.42
M. Kaneko, T. Yamashita, K. Tanie: Basic consid-
erations on transmission characteristics for tendon
driven robots, Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Adv. Robotics
(1991) pp. 827–883
19.43
R.M. Murray, Z. Li, S.S. Sastry: A Mathematical Intro-
duction to Robotic Manipulation (CRC, Boca Raton
1994)
19.44
J. Mason, J.K. Salisbury: Robot Hands and the
Mechanics of Manipulation (MIT Press, Cambridge
1985)
19.45
R.M. Cutkosky: Robotic Grasping and Fine Manip-
ulation (Springer, New York 1985)

Multimedia Contents Snake-Like a
481
Part B | 20.1
20. Snake-Like and Continuum Robots
Ian D. Walker, Howie Choset, Gregory S. Chirikjian
This chapter provides an overview of the state
of the art of snake-like (backbones comprised
of many small links) and continuum (continu-
ous backbone) robots. The history of each of these
classes of robot is reviewed, focusing on key hard-
ware developments. A review of the existing theory
and algorithms for kinematics for both types of
robot is presented, followed by a summary of mod-
eling of locomotion for snake-like and continuum
mechanisms.
20.1
Snake Robots – Short History ...............
481
20.2 Continuum Robots – Short History........
485
20.3 Snake-Like
and Continuum Robot Modeling...........
487
20.4 Modeling of Locomotion for Snake-Like
and Continuum Mechanisms ................
491
20.5 Conclusion and Extensions
to Related Areas ..................................
492
Video-References.........................................
492
References...................................................
493
20.1 Snake Robots – Short History
The study of snake robots began in earnest with the pio-
neering work of Shiego Hirose, a professor at the Tokyo
Institute of Technology. He called his snake robots these
active chord mechanisms, or ACMs for short. The ﬁrst
successful locomotive snake was ACM III (Fig. 20.1a),
which he developed between 1972 and 1975; the ACM
III robot had 20 segments and used passive wheels to
form a constraint between the mechanism and the en-
vironment. Each segment was able to yaw with respect
to each other and the combined motion of these degrees
of freedom propelled the entire robot forward [20.1].
This type of coordinated control resulting in locomo-
tion is called a gait; more formally, a gait is a cyclic
motion in the mechanisms internal degrees of freedom
that result in net motion for the snake robot. The next
step in the development of the Hirose family of snake
robots were the OBLIX (Fig. 20.1b) (1978–1979) and
MOGURA (1982–1984), two robots that could achieve
three-dimensional movements and lift their heads by
rotating their oblique joints. The beneﬁt of a single
actuator operating an oblique joint over a true three-
dimensional joint is simplicity, light weight, and ease
to control because each segment only needed to be ac-
tuated by one motor [20.2].
Hirose’s lab then began exploring possible appli-
cations of snake robots with Koryu I and II (1985–
present). Each one of Koryu’s load-bearing modules
uses actuated joints to lift itself, lower itself, and in
more recent incarnations, angle its wheel base to ﬁt
the ground. With such forms of actuations, these large
snake robots were able to traverse uneven terrain and
even climb stairs, all while carrying a load, distributed
along the entire robot [20.2]. Inspired by the ability of
real snakes to traverse uneven terrains, Hirose’s lab de-
veloped a smaller mechanism, called Souryu I and II
(1975–present) for the purposes of search and rescue
(Fig. 20.2). The Souryu robots were able to climb over
rubble because of their low center of mass and treads
all along their bodies [20.3, 4].
In 1999, Hirose returned to the ACM with Slim
Slime, a robot that was pneumatically actuated and
formed a smooth curve instead of the usual sectioned,
angular curve of other snake robots [20.5]. After Slim
Slime, the lab began working on ACM-RI, R2, R3, and
R4 (2001–present.) These robots are much closer to the
design of the ﬁrst ACM, with passive wheels and many-
sectioned bodies. These robots, unlike the ﬁrst ACM,
can lift their bodies and move in three dimensions. Each

Part B | 20.1
482
Part B
Design
a)
b)
Fig. 20.1 Hirose’s snake robots starting (a) with the active chord
(ACM III) and (b) Oblix/Mogura mechanisms (after [20.2])
a)
b)
Fig.20.2a,b The Koryu I, II robot drving outside (a) (after [20.2])
and (b) the Souryu I, II robot maneuvering over rubble (after [20.4])
section has wheels that are set 90ı from each other in
an alternating fashion. They were created for use in
search and rescue [20.1]. The most recent ACM is R5,
a fully amphibious robot that uses passive wheels to roll
along the ground and paddles to move through the wa-
ter [20.6] (Fig. 20.3).
Snake robot research began in the United States in
the late 1980s. Joel Burdick and his then-student Greg
Chirikjian at Caltech developed a continuum theory to
model the shape of snake robots in general. Burdick
and Chirikjian coined the term hyper-redundant ma-
nipulator, which means a mechanism that has many
more degrees of freedom that are necessary to position
and orient its end-effector. They built Snakey in 1992;
Snakey consisted of three degree of freedom bays or ac-
tuated trusses that could both manipulate and locomote.
Their focus was to create a strong, precise mechanism
that focused less on snake-like movement and more on
the difﬁculties of programming a mechanism with many
degrees of freedom. The Caltech team considered ap-
plications such as retrieval of satellites and search and
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.20.3a–d Slim Slime (a) and the new generation of ACM-R snake robots: (b) ACM-R3; (c) ACM-R4; (d) ACM-R5
(after [20.1])
rescue [20.7, 8]. Burdick and his group also designed
and built snake robots with the Jet Propulsion Labora-
tory and the NEC Corporation with Nobuaki Takanashi.
These were based on a three-dimensional joint proto-
type built by Takanashi. This smaller snake was able to
execute several movement gaits, and was intended to be
used in search and rescue.
Chirikjian moved on to Johns Hopkins University
where he created a comprehensive research program
on a broad class of hyper-redundant mechanisms, not
limited to snake robots. One such nonsnake robot was
the metamorphic shape-changing modular robot sys-
tem comprising hexagonal elements. His group also
developed snake robots based on binary actuators,
which have two states, say fully elongated and con-
tracted [20.9].
Snake and reconﬁgurable modular robot research
also co-developed at Xerox Parc, and then at the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania under the direction of Mark
Yim. Beginning with PolyPod [20.10] in 1994 as part
of Mark Yim’s dissertation while he was at Stanford,
snake conﬁgurations of modular robots were perform-
ing many of the conventional snake gaits as well as
some innovative slinky-like and rolling gaits [20.11].
This research continued after Yim’s move to Xerox’s
Palo Alto Research with PolyBot in 2000, a more
robust version of PolyPod with more abilities for sens-
ing [20.12]. When Yim began Modlab at the University
of Pennsylvania, PolyBot evolved into CKbot ([20.13],
2009). CKbot can now reconﬁgure from an exploded
position, run on four legs, walk on two, and perform
most basic snake gaits [20.14, 15]. They also developed
foamBot (2011), a robot that can create other robots,
including snake robots, out of CKbot modules and hard-
ening spray foam [20.16].
Hirose, Chirikjian, Burdick, and Yim had a strong
inﬂuence on Howie Choset’s work at Carnegie Mel-
lon University (CMU). Choset’s snake robot research
began in the CMU Biorobotics Lab as an undergrad-
uate research project which adapted Yim’s modular
design speciﬁcally for snake robot use (Fig. 20.7). It-
erating on this modular design, this lab has created
a series of snake robots over 15 years [20.17, 18]. In

Snake-Like and Continuum Robots
20.1 Snake Robots – Short History
483
Part B | 20.1
Fig. 20.4 Snakey, the
snake robot showing
also Joel Burdick, Greg
Chirikjian, Howie Choset,
Jimbo Ostrowski (af-
ter [20.8])
addition to the mechanism, one of the major innova-
tions of this work is gaits, the controllers that prescribe
motion for the snake robots. These gaits generalized
the gait motion, based on Hirose’s serpenoid curve and
Chirikjian’s modal functions, to perform a large variety
of behaviors including climbing up poles, swimming
in a pond, maneuvering through pipes, and breaching
through a fence [20.19]. Working with Robin Murphy’s
group at Texas A&M, the snake robots have been ﬁne
tuned for urban search and rescue use. This created
an ideal platform for infrastructure inspection such as
networks of pipes in power plants. In 2012, Choset
sent his robots to Egypt for archaeology in conﬁned
spaces [20.20].
In Norway, Øyvind Stavdahl in the Gemini Cen-
tre for Advanced Robotics created several snake robots,
many of which were in collaboration with the Norwe-
gian University of Science and Technology. The ﬁrst
of these major research projects in snake robotics was
the Anna Konda (2005-present), a ﬁreﬁghting snake
concept. Based on hydraulic actuation, this robot is
powered entirely by the pressure of a ﬁre hose, and is
designed to reach ﬂames in areas that are either too dan-
gerous or too small for ﬁreﬁghters to reach [20.21].
This team also created AIKO (2006–2010), a snake
robot created to experiment with snake locomotion that
could later be applied to Anna Konda [20.22]. Mostly
focused on object-aided locomotion, AIKO evolved
a)
b)
Fig. 20.5 (a) Yim’s original Polypod
robot (after [20.10]) and (b) current
CK Robot in a wheeled snake
conﬁguration (after [20.13])
into KULKO (2010–present), a robot with a force-
sensing body that uses its simple understanding of the
obstacles it is in contact with in order to locomote
more effectively. These two robots have produced sev-
eral innovative movement algorithms for object aided
locomotion that could be applied to Anna Konda as well
as other nonwheeled snake robots [20.23].
The snake robots described above rely on internal
motions to propel themselves forward. Johann Boren-
stein at the University of Michigan created the Omni-
Tread (2004) robot [20.24] that propels itself with
moving threads situated along side of the robot. Its
strong joints are actuated by pneumatic bellows. The
bellows can be proportionally controlled, allowing its
body to be fully compliant while crossing rubble to have
more of its body touching the ground, or strong enough
to lift half of its body weight, which is necessary for
ledges and gaps. The Omni-Tread excelled at moving
over rubble [20.24].
David Anhalt and James McKenna at SAIC took
the tread concept to the limit; they designed and built
a toroidal skin drive, a drive mechanism that has re-
ciprocating skin that consists of an elongated toroidal
skin that covers the entire length of the robot, and
a drive unit which propels it. The outer (tubular) layer
of the skin slides axially from the head to the tail of
the snake robot, and wraps inside itself over a cap-
tured ring at the tail. The skin then recirculates from the
tail to the head (through the center of the outer tubu-
lar layer), and changes direction again (over a second
captured ring at the head) to again become the outside
layer. In this conﬁguration, the skin forms a continu-
ous toroidal loop. The SAIC team collaborated with
Choset’s group to build a snake robot using this drive
mechanism [20.25].
Finally, we describe some snake robots that use
wheels to locomote. Hisashi Date, who heads a re-
search team at the Robotics Lab for National Defense
Academy of Japan, built a snake robot in 2007 to trace
lines using lateral undulations and a line-tracing sensor
arm. Date later developed in 2009 a mechanism that has
passive wheels; it is very similar to Shigeo Hirose’s ﬁrst
ACM robots, except it is powered by hydraulics. Date’s
robot also implements touch sensing much like being
planned for Anna Konda [20.26].

Part B | 20.1
484
Part B
Design
Fig. 20.6 Choset’s Modsnake consisting of 16 DOFs (de-
gree of freedom) each orthogonally placed with respect to
each other (after [20.17, 18])
Fig. 20.7 Anna Konda snake robot (after [20.21])
Another wheeled snake robot is HAUBOT (2009-
present), developed by Akio Ishiguro at Tohoku Uni-
versity. It is being used to study the autonomous de-
centralized control mechanisms underlying the adaptive
locomotion of animals. It uses real-time tunable rub-
ber springs to actuate each joint. Each joint generates
4 tracks
per segment
Drive shaft spine
through all
segments
Single drive motor
in center segment
Four pneumatic
bellows per 2-DOF joint
Segments
a)
b)
Fig.20.8a,b The Omni-Tread treaded
snake robot (a) and an (b) illustration
of its design (after [20.24])
Skeletal body and actuators
Silicone layer
Polyester layer
Fig. 20.9 The SAIC skin drive mech-
anism followed by the SAIC/CMU
snake robot powered by the skin drive
mechanism (after [20.25])
torque proportional to the difference between the joint
angle and the target angle which is given by the ante-
rior joint angle. By using just this method of simple
sensing, the robot can locomote in two dimensions,
without requiring a centralized control hub. More re-
cently, HAUBOT has been successfully paired with
head tracking software so that it can be driven intu-
itively [20.27].
At Kyoto University, Fumitoshi Matsuno has also
developed several snake robots. Matsuno has made
many innovations in the control of snakes with differ-
ent modes of propulsion. In 2002, Matsuno and his
lab built KOHGA, a treaded snake robot made for
search and rescue. Its joints can be passive or ac-
tive, allowing it to move through rough terrain and
also lift parts of its body [20.28]. Another robot they
have developed is a snake robot that propels itself
using screw-inspired modules. Built in 2010, it uses
many of the same control algorithms as KOHGA ex-
cept besides moving forward, backward, and turning, it
can also roll sideways perpendicular to its head direc-
tion [20.29].
These labs together have created an incredible va-
riety of snake-like robot locomotion. Snake robots can
now traverse nonﬂat ﬁelds, climb poles, swim under-
water, and even rebuild themselves. They can access
incredibly small spaces and transition between swim-
ming to slithering to climbing without having to be
reconﬁgured. Advancing far beyond slithering across
ﬂat ground, these robots are nearly ready to begin tack-
ling spaces in the ﬁeld that no other robot can reach.

Snake-Like and Continuum Robots
20.2 Continuum Robots – Short History
485
Part B | 20.2
Soon these robots may be found in the pipes of oil re-
ﬁneries, crawling through nuclear power plants, at the
front line of search and rescue operations, ﬁghting ﬁres
or exploring underwater environments.
20.2 Continuum Robots – Short History
The term continuum manipulator, ﬁrst coined by
Robinson and Davies in [20.30], which is equiva-
lent to the continuous morphology manipulator deﬁned
in [20.31], indicates the snake/hyper-redundant robot
concept taken to the extreme. In other words, concep-
tually this category of robots have backbone structures
taken to the limit, with their number of joints tending
to inﬁnity, but with their link lengths tending to zero,
which is also the approach taken in Chirikjian and Bur-
dick’s work on backbone curves. While this concept
initially appears idealistic, complicated and impossible
to implement, the limiting case (a smooth continuum
curve, with the ability to bend at any point along the
backbone) is quite easy to realize in hardware.
Numerous continuum designs have been proposed
since the early 1960s beginning with the Tensor
Arm [20.32] developed based on the original Orm con-
cept of Leifer and Scheinman [20.33]. With a ﬂexible
backbone bent by remotely driven tendons, the Ten-
sor Arm anticipated numerous later designs. However –
a key issue with later continuum robot designs until the
1990s – coordination of the inputs to take advantage of
the shapes achievable by the robot proved difﬁcult. This
lack of enabling underlying models for motion planning
(now much less of an issue, see the following section)
hindered the development of the ﬁeld for many years.
Nevertheless, some researchers, beginning with Shi-
geo Hirose [20.2], continued to explore the problem
of constructing continuum robots. Many of these ef-
forts were inspired by an evolving knowledge of the
morphology and functionality of biological continuum
structures [20.34–36] particularly the trunks of ele-
phants [20.37–39] and the arms of octopuses [20.40–
42]. The key robot design issues revolve around how to
actuate (bend and possibly extend/contract) the back-
bone. Two basic design strategies have emerged [20.43,
44]: (1) extrinsic actuation, where the actuators are sep-
arate from the backbone structure, e.g., [20.45–49]; and
(2) intrinsic actuation, where the actuators represent
a fundamental part of the backbone, e.g., [20.50–53].
Extrinsically actuated designs have the advan-
tage that by locating the actuators outside the robot
workspace, the backbone itself can be simpliﬁed and
streamlined. Tendons have proved a popular and gen-
erally successful choice for extrinsically actuated con-
tinuum designs [20.38, 54, 55]. Groups of tendons are
terminated at speciﬁc points down the backbone, and
combine to bend the backbone to produce a series
of (usually constant curvature) sections. The tendons
bend a backbone that is nominally straight (realized
either via an elastic rod [20.56], the incorporation of
springs [20.38], or pneumatic chambers [20.57, 58]).
A good example of the ability of this design strategy
to produce a long, thin backbone with extrinsic actua-
tion is given by NASA Johnson Space Center’s Tendril
([20.49], Fig. 20.10), intended to penetrate through
small oriﬁces and explore in tight spaces for Space
applications.
In recent years, a completely different form of ex-
trinsically actuated continuum robot, based on concen-
tric tubes, has appeared. These concentric tube [20.59,
60] (sometimes termed as active cannula [20.61])
robots have been primarily motivated by medical ap-
plications [20.62]. Research has focused on applica-
tion (e.g., as active endoscopes [20.63–66]) within the
human body [20.67, 68], on various types of mini-
mally invasive surgical procedures [20.69–71], and the
associated development of steerable needle technolo-
gies [20.72–74].
Concentric tube robots, as the name suggests, form
the robot backbone from several (typically two or three)
hollow tubes, with tubes of smaller radius inserted
through those of larger radius. Each smaller tube can
be pushed through the tube immediately outside it to ex-
tend the backbone length. The tubes can also be rotated,
to give 2n degrees of freedom for an n-tube backbone.
The tubes are preformed to have a constant curva-
ture, so can be extended and bent (albeit with amount
Fig. 20.10 NASA’s Tendril, an extrinsically actuated con-
tinuum manipulator (after [20.49])

Part B | 20.2
486
Part B
Design
Fig. 20.11 Extrinsically actuated concentric tube continuum manip-
ulators
Fig. 20.12 The OC Robotics Snake-Arm robot – an ex-
trinsically actuated continuum-like robot with segmented
backbone (after [20.75])
Fig. 20.13 The intrinsically actuated Octarm pneumatic continuum
manipulator and its development team (after [20.42])
of bending preset) in arbitrary directions (Fig. 20.11).
This design arrangement is well-suited to the medi-
cal applications which have motivated its development.
Numerous prototypes have been developed in the last
several years, and the results of initial trials are highly
promising. This work is being pioneered by the groups
of Pierre Dupont at Boston University [20.59, 73, 74,
Fig. 20.14 The intrinsically actuated
bionic handling assistant by Festo
(after [20.50])
76], Michael Zinn et al. at the University of Wiscon-
sin [20.62, 77], and Robert Webster, III et al., at Van-
derbilt University [20.44, 61, 67, 78].
Note that the backbone for extrinsically actuated
robots does not have to be continuous to produce the
continuum effect [20.47, 79, 80]. A commercially suc-
cessful group of extrinsically actuated continuum-like
snake-arm manipulators are currently manufactured
and retailed by OC Robotics (OCR) in the United
Kingdom [20.75]. Remotely tendon-driven (designed
by Rob Buckingham and Andy Graham of OCR), but
with a snake-like segmented backbone (the number and
form of segments can be changed) these snake-arms
give a continuous backbone effect. OCR’s manipula-
tors (Fig. 20.12) are currently the only general purpose
continuum-like robot commercially available, and have
been deployed in nuclear reactors and inside airframes,
among other applications for largely noncontact opera-
tions in tight, cluttered spaces. This ability to penetrate
and slither through complex environments (mirroring
NASA’s goals for Tendril) is one of the main motiva-
tions and anticipated practical advantages of continuum
robots.
Intrinsically actuated continuum robots have their
actuators within the continuum backbone. Indeed, the
backbones of most intrinsically actuated continuum
robots are largely formed by their actuators. Artiﬁ-
cial muscle technologies, notably pneumatic McKibben
muscles, have proved most effective in intrinsically ac-
tuated hardware realizations [20.50, 81]. A particular
advantage of intrinsic actuation is the ability to produce
extensible backbones [20.43, 44].
For example, Ian Walker’s group at Clemson led
the development of the octopus-arm inspired Octarm
instrinsically actuated extensible continuum manipula-
tors ([20.42], Fig. 20.13,
VIDEO 158 ). The backbone
of the Octarm is formed from its actuators: sets of
(3) McKibben muscles arranged in series to give three
or four sections. Several generations of Octarm were
tested in ﬁeld trials, mounted on a Foster-Miller Talon
mobile base [20.81] (
VIDEO 157 ). The robots were
shown to be able to grasp and manipulate objects over
a wide range (order of magnitude) of sizes and weights,
and of widely varying shapes and textures [20.82]. This

Snake-Like and Continuum Robots
20.3 Snake-Like and Continuum Robot Modeling
487
Part B | 20.3
ability to adapt shape to perform whole-arm manip-
ulation [20.83] with the backbone is another prime
motivation for continuum robots [20.84].
Another good example of an intrinsically actuated
continuum robot is the Bionic Handling Assistant re-
cently developed by Festo [20.50] (Fig. 20.14). This
continuum robot is unusual in that it is preshaped for
its sections to be nonconstant curvature. The curvature
is biologically inspired.
Currently, another biologically inspired (once again
by the octopus) large project, under EU funding, led by
Darwin Caldwell, and featuring researchers in Greece,
Israel, Italy, Switzerland, and the UK, is working to-
ward creation of a European Octopus robot [20.40,
85] (Fig. 20.15). This robot features multiple contin-
uum limbs [20.85]. The European group has considered
both intrinsic [20.86] and extrinsic actuation [20.40]
for their limbs.
Many snakelike/continuum robotic devices have
found applications in the medical area. This includes
very ﬂexible steerable needles [20.87–91], and the
Fig. 20.15 The
European
Octopus
continuum-limbed
robot (after [20.40]) (currently under development)
concentric-tube robots mentionedearlier [20.73, 74, 92–
97]. Other recent medical snake robots include novel
articulated designs [20.98, 99], and stiff-continuum-
ﬁlament cable-driven designs [20.100–103].
20.3 Snake-Like and Continuum Robot Modeling
While continuum manipulators are seen to be the ex-
treme case of snake-like or hyper-redundant structures,
it was quickly realized that they represent a funda-
mentally new class of manipulators [20.43, 44, 104].
A continuous ﬂexible backbone features, at least in
theory, an inﬁnite number of degrees of freedom. As
such, the traditional tools in robotics for modeling
(a ﬁnite number of) serial rigid links no longer ap-
ply. Additionally, it is obviously not possible to actuate
an inﬁnite number of degrees of freedom in practice.
Continuum manipulator hardware universally features
a ﬁnite number of actuators, applying forces/torques
to the backbone at a ﬁxed and preselected set of lo-
cations. This causes signiﬁcant complexity in their
analysis. However, signiﬁcant progress has been made,
and understanding resulting from analysis of continuum
kinematics has been applied, as discussed in the follow-
ing section.
Clearly, to correctly model continuum manipula-
tors, models based on continuous backbones are re-
quired. Interestingly, such models have also proved to
be key theoretical resources in the motion planning
of rigid-link hyper-redundant systems. While in the-
ory discrete-link hyper-redundant manipulators can be
modeled (and their planning based on) traditional ma-
nipulator modeling techniques, it was quickly found
that the computational complexity of such approaches
made them difﬁcult to implement, and the correspond-
ing models hard to visualize. An alternative strategy
(and a more successful one in practice) has been to
adopt an approach based on continuum manipulator
kinematics. In the following, we overview the recent
development of continuum manipulator kinematics. We
then discuss how the existence of both discrete-link and
continuum models have enhanced motion planning for
each category of hyper-redundant system.
The lack of distinct links in continuum systems
makes the standard robot manipulator modeling strat-
egy of a ﬁnite number of coordinate frames (each ﬁxed
in one link) inappropriate for their modeling. Instead,
the natural approach is to model continuum kinematics
via a frame which evolves along a continuous back-
bone, parameterized by arc length s. Local motion of
the backbone at point s is modeled in terms of the local
frame at s. This strategy allows computation of for-
ward kinematics, and construction of continuum Jaco-
bians, analogous to those for rigid-link systems [20.31,
105].
Numerous alternatives for selection of the back-
bone frames have been proposed [20.31, 106–109]. In
all such approaches, positions along the backbone curve
can be expressed relative to the unit tangent, u.s/, as
x.t/ D
t
Z
0
Œ1 C ".s/u.s/ds :

Part B | 20.3
488
Part B
Design
In this formulation, ".s/ is the local extensibility, or
stretch, of the curve. If this quantity is equal to zero,
then t becomes arc length. Otherwise, equal increments
of t can correspond to different lengths along the curve,
with a positive value of ".s/ corresponding to a stretch,
and negative values corresponding to a compression.
While most continuum robots have a backbone that is
essentially inextensible, the reason for introducing this
variability is that allowing certain sections to stretch or
compress affords greater freedom to hyper-redundant
manipulators with discrete stages, making it easier to ﬁt
the physical robot to the curve. This ﬁtting process takes
as an input not only the relative positions of the distal
and proximal ends of each stage, but also orientations.
If the tangent is taken as one of the axes of a reference
frame, a choice for the other two axes remains and can
be made in a number of different ways. Once this choice
is made, a reference frame
g.t/ D .R.t/; x.t//
is established at each value of t and relative rigid-body
displacements are computed for stages as
Œg.ti/1 ı g.tiC1/
D

ŒR.ti/TR.tiC1/; ŒR.ti/T.x.tiC1/  x.ti//

:
In the inextensible case where the curve parameter
becomes arclength s one natural choice for deﬁning
the orientation R.t/ is the well-known Serret–Frenet
frame [20.31, 108, 109] which evolves along the back-
bone according to the following
dt=ds D n
dn=ds D t C b
db=ds D n :
In the above, the frame origin is given by x, where
the unit tangent to the curve t D dx=ds (denoted as t
rather than u), and forms one of the frame axes. The
other axes are deﬁned as the normal (t  n D 0) and
the binormal b D t  n. The curvature  and torsion 
dictate the shape of the curve. The axes of the Frenet–
Serret frame provide an intuitive visualization of local
movement: two possible dimensions of bending, cor-
responding to rotations about the normal and binormal
axes, and one of extension/contraction (present and
controllable in several continuum robots), correspond-
ing to translation along the tangent axis.
The Frenet–Serret model has the advantage of be-
ing a well-established means for modeling continuous
spatial curves. The drawback of this formulation is that
it is not optimal in the sense that for a given curve
shape, the total amount of motion of the evolving refer-
ence frame required to traverse the curve is not minimal
subject to end constraints and the requirement that one
axis of the reference frame is the tangent. Variational
calculus can be used to obtain the optimal framing
of curves, as reviewed in [20.31] in the context of
coordinate-dependent optimization, and in [20.110] us-
ing a coordinate-free approach.
Moreover, there are multiple approaches to deﬁn-
ing the evolution of the tangent, and hence the shape of
the curve. Consider an inextensible curve whose shape
has not yet been speciﬁed, and let the unit tangent to
the curve be deﬁned relative to an a priori-unknown
arclength-dependent orientation as
u.s/ D R.s/e3 :
The goal is to ﬁnd R.s/ such that the positional con-
straint
x.L/ D
L
Z
0
u.s/ds ;
and the orientational constraints on R.L/ are satisﬁed
when R.0/ D I. Here, I is the identity matrix and the
manipulator has length L.
Treating s as time, then corresponding to R.s/ is
an angular velocity ! D .RT dR=ds/V, where the V op-
eration extracts the dual vector of a skew-symmetric
matrix. We can then ask what R.s/ is optimal in the
sense of minimizing a cost of the form
I D 1
2
L
Z
0
Œ!.s/  bTBŒ!.s/  bds :
When b D 0 and B is the moment of inertia of a cross
section of the manipulator, this is akin to kinetic energy
of rotation, and minimizing it provides an evolution of
reference frames that minimally rotate. Variational cal-
culus provides the conditions
B P! C !  .B!  b/ D
0
B@
TRe2
TRe1
0
1
CA ;
that can be integrated numerically and the rotation ma-
trix R.s/ is obtained from the angular velocities by
integrating
PR D R
" 3
X
iD1
!i.s/Ei
#
;

Snake-Like and Continuum Robots
20.3 Snake-Like and Continuum Robot Modeling
489
Part B | 20.3
where
E1 D
0
B@
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
CA ;
E2 D
0
B@
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
CA ;
E3 D
0
B@
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
CA :
The three-dimensional vector of Lagrange multipli-
ers  and the a priori unspeciﬁed initial value of
the three-dimensional vector ! at s D 0 together pro-
vide six degrees of freedom with which to match the
end constraints on position and orientation. In this
way, curves of ﬁxed length that vary in shape as lit-
tle as possible while meeting end constraints can be
generated.
Alternative frame representations in the contin-
uum robot literature also have selected the axes of
the frame to align with the controlled motion axes
of particular hardware realizations [20.47, 107]. In ei-
ther case, given a frame, the key problem is how
to use the resulting model to plan motions. The ba-
sic issue is that the continuum kinematics models
in their basic form feature inﬁnite degrees of free-
dom (as necessary to model arbitrary spatial curves).
However, hyper-redundant robots (discrete-joint or con-
tinuum) can be controlled in only a ﬁnite number
of ways, thus admitting a reduced set of physical
solutions. Therefore, research in continuum manip-
ulators has concentrated on how to constrain con-
tinuum kinematics models to best represent robot
hardware.
The initial major breakthrough in motion planning
for hyper-redundant arms was made in a landmark se-
ries of publications by Chirikjian and Burdick [20.31,
105, 111] introducing continuum kinematics and us-
ing them to approximate rigid-link hyper-redundant
systems [20.105]. Basically, the philosophy is to use
a (theoretical) curve to model the physical backbone
of a hyper-redundant robot. Motion planning is per-
formed for the curve, and the (discrete) robot back-
bone then ﬁt to the resulting (continuous) solution
curve. This approach has proved quite effective, and
the associated research introduced several key theo-
retical concepts to the area. In particular, the use of
a modal approach [20.105, 112] (restricting the classes
of allowable solutions to shapes generated via simple
linear combinations of modes), arose from this ap-
proach to redundancy resolution for hyper-redundant
manipulators. This concept can be viewed as a top-
down approach of building a general model, and
adapting it (via mode selection and curve-ﬁtting) to
hardware.
In the planar case, the angle of the rotation ma-
trix R.s/ is simply the integral of the curvature of the
curve. Expressing this curvature as a weighted sum of
two functions, or modes, then restricts the manipula-
tor to act as if it only has two degrees of freedom. As
an example of this modal approach, a closed form so-
lution can be obtained for inextensible manipulators of
unit length by restricting the curvature to be a linear
combination of cos 2s and sin 2s. If the coefﬁcients
in front of these functions are, respectively, 2a1 and
2a2, then
xee D sin.a2/J0
h
.a2
1 C a2
2/
1
2
i
;
yee D cos.a2/J0
h
.a2
1 C a2
2/
1
2
i
;
where J0 is the zeroth-order Bessel function.
And inverse kinematics can be achieved in closed
form by computing
a1 D Oa˙
1 .Nxee/
D ˙
n
J1
0
h
.x2
ee C y2
ee/
1
2
io2
 ŒAtan2.xee; yee/2
 1
2
a2 D Oa2.Nxee/ D Atan2.xee; yee/ :
In this planar example the convention that the tangent
to the curve at the base of the manipulator points along
the y axis has been used.
This closed-form solution has also been used to gen-
erate closed-form solutions for spatial manipulators, as
well as to deﬁne waves that travel along the manipula-
tor for the purpose of obstacle avoidance, locomotion
and manipulation. This is illustrated in Figs. 20.16–
20.18 [20.31] with a variable-geometry truss superim-
posed on the backbone curve. In the context of obstacle
avoidance, the modal solution given above is scaled in
order that the part of the manipulator outside of the
obstacle ﬁeld terminates at o position to allow entry,
and the section inside of the obstacle ﬁeld has curva-
ture that is piecewise constant to maneuver around the
obstacles.
In the context of locomotion, the modal approach
is used to ensure that the end conditions on a traveling
wave match those of terrain. In the context of grasping

Part B | 20.3
490
Part B
Design
and manipulation, the modal approach is used in two
ways. First, it deﬁnes the shape of a locomotion-like
traveling wave that traverses the grasped object. This
extends the reach of the manipulator around the object.
Then, the bottom part of the manipulator contracts to
form a shape deﬁned by the modes while the part of the
manipulator that is closest to the base yet in contact with
a)
c)
d)
b)
Fig.20.16a–d Using the modal approach to position part
of a manipulator at the entry of an obstacle ﬁeld (af-
ter [20.31])
Fig. 20.17 Net motion to the left by wave propagation (af-
ter [20.31])
the grasped object unwinds. The result is a combina-
tion of waves and unwinding that produce net rotation
of grasped objects without ever letting go, as described
in [20.31, 113].
More recent research has concentrated on the notion
dual to that of the previous section, using the physi-
cal constraints imposed on the backbones of speciﬁc
continuum robot hardware types to construct contin-
uum kinematics. This can be viewed as a bottom-up
approach, focused on particular hardware classes, with
the main aim of sufﬁciently modeling the hardware to
avoid the use of approximations in the motion plan-
ning. Examples of this approach are given in [20.44,
107] where the key constraint imposed on a general
continuum kinematics model arises from the observa-
tion that many continuum hardware implementations
resolve into a ﬁnite number of constant curvature sec-
tions. (This arises naturally from the imposition of
a ﬁnite number of input force/torques on a stiff con-
tinuum backbone). In [20.106], it is noted that the
resulting constant curvature models can be viewed
as a particular case of the general modal approach
of [20.105].
The approach shown [20.44, 107] involves several
transformations [20.114], to transition the map between
task and actuator space via a section space. As key
part of this transformation, a conventional (theoretical)
rigid-link model can be used to model the kinemat-
ics of each section. Thus, rigid-link kinematics have
proven key to resolving redundancy for continuum ma-
nipulators, as continuum kinematics play a key part
in redundancy resolution for rigid-link hyperredundant
arms.
Finally, a series of Jacobians are formed. The differ-
ence here is that the continuum Jacobian is a function of
locally meaningful variables (bending angle, curvature,
and extension) deﬁning section shape or the direct val-
ues of actuators which determine these variables. Given
the existence of continuum Jacobians, the redundancy
is usually resolved as
PI D J
EPtE C

I  J
EJE

PI0
in the same way as for conventional redundant ma-
nipulators (and with the same general corresponding
advantages and issues), as discussed in Chap. 10.
Recent efforts have extended the progress in con-
tinuum robot kinematics to develop dynamic mod-
els for continuum robots [20.84, 104]. New models
based on the Lagrangian [20.108, 115] and Newton–
Euler [20.116] formulations have been introduced.
Progress is impeded by the complexity of the dynam-
ics of continuous backbones with large deformations,
and many models remain too complex for practical

Snake-Like and Continuum Robots
20.4 Modeling of Locomotion for Snake-Like and Continuum Mechanisms
491
Part B | 20.4
Fig. 20.18 Net rotation of an object by wave initiation at
base and wave propagation (after [20.31]) I
implementation. Hence, recent work has focused on im-
plementable dynamic models based on simple, lumped-
parameter models [20.117].
The new kinematic and dynamic models are in
turn now enabling research in continuum robot motion
planning [20.118, 119] and control [20.120, 121]. New
models for force estimation [20.122], handling [20.76,
123], and sensing [20.124] using continuum robots have
been introduced. Both model-based [20.54] and non-
model based [20.125] controllers have been proposed.
Controllers have been proposed in both conﬁguration
and task [20.54, 126] space. However, at this time, im-
plementation of model-based controllers is rare.
20.4 Modeling of Locomotion for Snake-Like
and Continuum Mechanisms
Snake and continuum robots have the ability to use their
entire bodies to interact with the environment in order to
produce purposeful motion [20.127–136]. Locomotion
is a challenging motion planning and control problem
because a planner/controller must contend with many
degrees of freedom at once, even if they were somehow
reduced with approaches like the backbone method, dis-
cussed above. Many researchers achieve this by model-
ing the snake robot’s motion with a gait, a cyclic motion
in the internal degrees of freedom of a mechanism that
produces net motion. It makes sense to implement gaits
because all locomoting animals exhibit gaits: horses
gallop, trot, and walk; snakes sidewind, laterally undu-
late, and linearly progress.
The beneﬁt of the gait is that one can reduce a com-
plex system down to a few set of parameters that
describe the gait and then by cycling through the phase
of the gait, a planner can achieve locomotion. So, if
the gait were just a sinusoid, the user speciﬁes ampli-
tude, frequency, and phase and the mechanism is then
ﬁt to the sinusoid, which requires very little computa-
tion as was seen with the backbone method. To achieve
motion in three dimensions, we describe gaits for the
snake robot with two sinusoidal waves lying in two mu-
tually perpendicular planes, a horizontal plane parallel
to the ground and a vertical plane perpendicular to the
ground. Recall that some of the mechanisms, described
above, consists of single degree of freedom joints, each
placed orthogonally to its neighboring joints. For the
sake of notation, we ascribe the even joints to modules
that bend in the vertical plane and odd joints to modules
that bend in the horizontal plane. So, if a vertical wave
perpendicular to the ground is sent through the mech-
anism, only the even modules participate, while the
odd modules remain stationary. Likewise, only the odd
modules participate in sending lateral waves parallel to
the ground through the robot. Should the snake robot
fall onto its side, then even modules simply become
the lateral modules and the odd become the vertical
modules.
Given that the even modules are responsible for
propagating vertical waves and the odd for propagating
lateral waves, we use the terms offsetvertical, offsetlateral,
amplitudevertical, and amplitudeground to denote the pa-
rameters affecting the two orthogonal waves. Finally,
we assume that both offset parameters are set to zero,
unless otherwise noted. All of our differentiable gaits
can be described by an angle of the n-th module at time t
as
angle.n;t/
D
8
ˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆ:
offseteven C amplitudeeven  sin./ ;
n D even ;
offsetodd C amplitudeodd  sin. C ı/ ;
n D odd ;
;
 D
 d
dn  n C d
dt  t

:
(20.1)
The offset is generally used to aim the robot when
locomoting on the ground. For instance, when the snake
is straight or climbing a pipe, the offset is zero. The am-

Part B | 20.5
492
Part B
Design
plitude terms describe the amplitudes of the mutually
perpendicular waves. In most cases, the amplitude and
speed of the robot are directly correlated and as both in-
crease, the robot can better reach over large obstacles.
However, larger amplitude comes at the cost of reduced
stability. Intuitively, given a ﬁxed number of modules,
the fewer waves in the robot, the larger each wave can
be. Thus, smaller values of d=dn allow more modules
to participate in any one wave, which in turn allows for
larger waves.
The frequency of the sine wave is determined by ,
which increases with time and along the length of
the snake robot. The rate at which  changes is con-
trolled by the d=dn and d=dt terms. Note that the
sine wave moving through the robot has a spatial and
temporal component: 1) d=dn determines the spatial
component, meaning if we freeze time (ﬁx t), it tells
us what the robot as a whole looks like, and 2) d=dt
determines the frequency of the temporal component,
meaning that if we examine the sinusoidal trajectory
of one individual actuator (ﬁx n), we determine how
it moves. A zero value for d=dn causes identical an-
gles on all of the modules on one axis, generating an arc
along that axis, and a zero value for d=dt has the effect
of freezing time. Finally, ı is simply an offset to control
the timing between the motions of the two orthogonal
waves. These parameters can be modiﬁed to change the
type of and nature of the gait performed by the robot.
Current work includes combining the gait-equation-
based approach with backbone curves. We are devel-
oping techniques that take an animated sequence of
backbone curves and infer the gait parameters from
that sequence. The backbone curve approach is easy to
visualize and therefore geometrically manipulate. The
beneﬁt of the gait approach is that it contains an an-
alytic expression which permits evaluation, and hence
optimization. With this new current approach, we can
obtain the best of both worlds.
20.5 Conclusion and Extensions to Related Areas
The ﬁeld of snake-like and continuum robots has blos-
somed over the past 40 years. The work has taken many
different directions including novel designs for locomo-
tion, manipulation, and medical applications, as well as
different avenues for applying the resulting modeling
techniques including nonholonomic planning and the
conformational ﬂexibility and statistical mechanics of
biological macromolecules.
It is worth noting that other related works in
nonrobotic ﬁelds and application areas have devel-
oped either in parallel or as a consequence of the
efforts mentioned before. For example, continuum
devices were developed essentially outside the ﬁeld
of robotics in [20.137, 138] from the perspective of
mechanics. Continuum curve approaches applied to
variable-geometry trusses were developed in [20.139–
141], essentially in parallel with [20.9]. In recent
work, wormlike robots [20.142] have been designed
that execute peristaltic waves, motivated by biology
akin to those described in [20.113]. Finally, analy-
sis for understanding curves and workspace formula-
tions for snake and continuum robots have been used
to study deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) [20.110, 143–
148].
Video-References
VIDEO 157
Field experiments with the OctArm continuum manipulator
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/157
VIDEO 158
OctArms I-V
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/158
VIDEO 159
One dimensional binary manipulator
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/159
VIDEO 160
Two dimensional binary manipulator
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/160
VIDEO 161
Three dimensional binary manipulator
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/161
VIDEO 162
Binary manipulator grasping
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/162
VIDEO 163
Binary manipulator obstacle navigation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/163

Snake-Like and Continuum Robots
20.5 Conclusion and Extensions to Related Areas
493
Part B | 20
VIDEO 164
Binary manipulator object recovery
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/164
VIDEO 165
Modsnake fence navigation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/165
VIDEO 166
Modsnake autonomous pole-climbing
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/166
VIDEO 167
Modsnake pipe inspection
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/167
VIDEO 168
Modsnake climbing a tree
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/168
VIDEO 169
Modsnake swimming
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/169
VIDEO 171
Modsnake pole climb
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/171
VIDEO 174
Modsnake sidewinding
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/174
VIDEO 175
CMU medical snake robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/175
VIDEO 244
Active compliant insertion
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/244
VIDEO 245
Automatic insertion implant calibration
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/245
VIDEO 246
IREP tagging spikes
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/246
VIDEO 247
RDP experimental results
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/247
VIDEO 248
Stenting deployment system
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/248
VIDEO 249
Bimanual dissection
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/249
VIDEO 250
First concentric tube robot teleoperation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/250
VIDEO 251
Shoe decoration using concentric tube robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/251
VIDEO 252
Concentric tube robot at TEDMED 2010
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/252
VIDEO 253
Aiko obstacle-aided locomotion
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/253
VIDEO 254
Aiko sidewinding
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/254
VIDEO 255
Anna Konda – Motion
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/20/videodetails/255
References
20.1
B.Y.S. Hirose, H. Yamada: Snake-like robots, IEEE
Robot. Autom. Mag. 16(1), 88–98 (2009)
20.2
S. Hirose: Biologically Inspired Robots: Snake-
Like Locomotors and Manipulators (Oxford Univ.
Press, New York 1993)
20.3
Y. Tanaka, M. Arai, S. Hirose, T. Shingo: Develop-
ment of Souryu-V with mono-tread-crawlers and
elastic-rods joint, IEEE Int. Workshop Saf. Secur.
Rescue Robot. (2006)
20.4
Hirose Fukushima Lab: Souryu Robot
http://
www-robot.mes.titech.ac.jp/robot/snake/soryu/
soryu.html
20.5
H. Ohno, S. Hirose: Design of slim slime robot and
its gait of locomotion, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tel Robot. Syst. (2001) pp. 707–715
20.6
H.
Yamada,
M.
Mori,
K.
Takita,
S.
Ogami,
S. Hirose: Development of amphibious snake-
like
robot
ACM-R5,
36th
Int.
Symp.
Robot.
(2005)
20.7
G.S. Chirikjian, J.W. Burdick: Design and experi-
ments with a 30 DOF robot, Proc. IEEE ICRA (1992)
pp. 113–119
20.8
J.W. Burdick: Robots that crawl, walk, and slither,
Eng. Sci. 55(4), 2–13 (1992)
20.9
G.S. Chirikjian: Inverse kinematics of binary ma-
nipulators using a continuum model, J. Intel.
Robot. Syst. 19, 5–22 (1997)
20.10
J.
Bluck:
Squaring
off
with
a
robotic
ser-
pent. http://astrobiology.nasa.gov/articles/2001/
2/21/squaring-off-with-a-robotic-serpent/

Part B | 20
494
Part B
Design
20.11
University
of
Pennsylvania:
Modlab,
http://
modlabupenn.org/multimedia/
20.12
M. Yim: New locomotion gaits, Proc. IEEE ICRA
(1994) pp. 2508–2514
20.13
M. Yim, D. Duff: Modular robots, IEEE Spectr. 39(2),
30–34 (2002)
20.14
M. Park, M. Yim: Distributed control and commu-
nication fault tolerance for the CKBot, IEEE Int.
Conf. Reconfig. Mech. Robot. (2009) pp. 682–688
20.15
M. Yim, B. Shirmohammadi, J. Sastra, M. Park,
M. Dugan, C.J. Taylor: Towards robotic self-
reassembly after explosion, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intel. Robot. Syst. (2007) pp. 2767–2772
20.16
S. Revzen, M. Bhoite, A. Macasieb, M. Yim: Struc-
ture synthesis on-the-fly in a modular robot, Int.
Conf. Intel. Robot. Syst. (2011) pp. 4797–4802
20.17
C. Wright, A. Johnson, A. Peck, Z. McCord, A. Naak-
tgeboren, P. Gianfortoni, M. Gonzalez-Rivero,
R.L. Hatton, H. Choset: Design of a modular
snake robot, Int. Conf. Intel. Robot. Syst. (2007)
pp. 2609–2614
20.18
A. Johnson, C. Wright, M. Tesch, K. Lipkin,
H. Choset: A Novel Architecture for Modular Snake
Robots, Tech. Report CMU-RI-TR-11-29 (Carnegie
Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh 2011)
20.19
K. Lipkin, I. Brown, A. Peck, H. Choset, J. Rem-
bisz, P. Gianfortoni, A. Naaktgeboren: Differ-
entiable and piecewise differentiable gaits for
snake robots, Int. Conf. Intel. Robot. Syst. (2007)
pp. 1864–1869
20.20
Biorobotics Laboratory, Carnegie Mellon Univer-
sity http://biorobotics.org (for videos of Choset’s
robots)
20.21
P. Liljeback, O. Stavdahl, A. Beitnes: Snake-
Fighter – Development of a water hydraulic fire
fighting snake robot, 9th Int. Conf. Control Au-
tom. Robot. Vision (2006) pp. 1–6
20.22
P. Liljeback, K.Y. Pettersen, O. Stavdahl, J.T. Grav-
dahl: Experimental investigation of obstacle-
aided locomotion with a snake robot, IEEE Trans.
Robot. 99, 1–8 (2011)
20.23
P.
Liljeback,
S.
Fjerdingen,
K.Y.
Pettersen,
Ø. Stavdahl: A snake robot joint mechanism with
a contact force measurement system, Proc. IEEE
ICRA (2009) pp. 3815–3820
20.24
J. Borenstein, M. Hansen, A. Borrell: The Omni-
Tread OT-4 serpentine robot—design and perfor-
mance, J. Field Robot. 24(7), 601–621 (2007)
20.25
J.C.
McKenna,
D.J.
Anhalt,
F.M.
Bronson,
H.B. Brown, M. Schwerin, E. Shammas, H. Choset:
Toroidal skin drive for snake robot locomotion,
Proc. IEEE ICRA (2008) pp. 1150–1155
20.26
H. Date, Y. Takita: An electricity-free snake-like
propulsion mechanism driven and controlled by
fluids, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst.
(2009) pp. 3637–3642
20.27
T. Sato, T. Kano, A. Ishiguro: A decentralized con-
trol scheme for an effective coordination of phasic
and tonic control in a snake-like robot, Bioinspir.
Biomim. 7(1), 016005 (2012)
20.28
T. Kamegawa, T. Yarnasaki, H. Igarashi, F. Mat-
suno: Development of the snake-like rescue robot
kohga, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (2004)
pp. 5081–5086
20.29
M.
Hara,
S.
Satomura,
H.
Fukushima,
T. Kamegawa, H. Igarashi, F. Matsuno: Con-
trol of a snake-like robot using the screw drive
mechanism, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.
(2007) pp. 3883–3888
20.30
G. Robinson, J.B.C. Davies: Continuum robots –
A state of the art, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Au-
tom., Detroit (1999) pp. 2849–2854
20.31
G.S. Chirikjian: Theory and applications of hyper-
redundant robotic mechanisms (Department of
Applied Mechanics, California Institute of Tech-
nology, Pasadena 1992)
20.32
V.C. Anderson, R.C. Horn: Tensor arm manipulator
design, Mech. Eng. 89(8), 54–65 (1967)
20.33
B. Roth, J. Rastegar, V. Scheinman: On the design
of computer controlled manipulators, 1st CISM-
IFTMM Symp. Theory Pract. Robot. Manip. (1973)
pp. 93–113
20.34
W.M. Kier, K.K. Smith: Tongues, tentacles and
trunks:
The
biomechanics
of
movement
in
muscular-hydrostats, Zool. J. Linneaan Soc. 83,
307–324 (1985)
20.35
F. Martin, C. Niemitz: How do African ele-
phants
(Loxodonta
Africana)
optimize
goal-
directed trunk movements?, Jahresvers. Dt. Zool.
Ges. Dt. Ges. Parasitol. 96, 159 (2003)
20.36
Y. Yekutieli, R. Sagiv-Zohar, B. Hochner, T. Flash:
Dynamics model of the octopus arm. II. Control of
reaching movements, J. Neurophysiol. 94, 1459–
1468 (2005)
20.37
R. Cieslak, A. Morecki: Elephant trunk type elas-
tic manipulator – A tool for bulk and liquid type
materials transportation, Robotica 17, 11–16 (1999)
20.38
M.W. Hannan, I.D. Walker: Analysis and exper-
iments with an elephant’s trunk robot, Adv.
Robot. 15(8), 847–858 (2001)
20.39
H. Tsukagoshi, A. Kitagawa, M. Segawa: Active
hose: An artificial elephant’s nose with maneu-
verability for rescue operation, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Autom., Seoul (2001) pp. 2454–2459
20.40
E. Guglielmino, N. Tsagarakis, D.G. Caldwell: An
octopus-anatomy inspired robotics arm, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., Taipei (2010)
pp. 3091–3096
20.41
W. McMahan, B.A. Jones, I.D. Walker, V. Chi-
trakaran, A. Seshadri, D. Dawson: Robotic manip-
ulators inspired by cephalopod limbs, Proc. CDEN
Des. Conf., Montreal (2004) pp. 1–10
20.42
I.D. Walker, D. Dawson, T. Flash, F. Grasso, R. Han-
lon, B. Hochner, W.M. Kier, C. Pagano, C.D. Rahn,
Q. Zhang: Continuum robot arms inspired by
cephalopods, Proc. 7th SPIE Conf. Unmanned
Ground Veh. Technol., Orlando (2005) pp. 303–
314
20.43
D. Trivedi, C.D. Rahn, W.M. Kier, I.D. Walker: Soft
robotics: Biological inspiration, state of the art,
and future research, Appl. Bionics Biomech. 5(2),
99–117 (2008)
20.44
R.J. Webster III, B.A. Jones: Design and kine-
matic modeling of constant curvature continuum

Snake-Like and Continuum Robots
20.5 Conclusion and Extensions to Related Areas
495
Part B | 20
robots: A review, Int. J. Robot. Res. 29(13), 1661–
1683 (2010)
20.45
D.B. Camarillo, C.F. Milne, C.R. Carlson, M.R. Zinn,
J.K. Salisbury: Mechanics modeling of tendon-
driven
continuum
manipulators,
IEEE
Trans.
Robot. 24(6), 1262–1273 (2008)
20.46
L. Cowan: Analysis and experiments for tendril-
type robots, M.S. Thesis (Clemson University,
Clemson 2008)
20.47
M.W. Hannan, I.D. Walker: Kinematics and the
implementation of an elephant’s trunk manipu-
lator and other continuum style robots, J. Robot.
Syst. 20(2), 45–63 (2003)
20.48
G. Immega: Tentacle-like manipulators with ad-
justable tension lines, U.S. Patent 531 7952A (1992)
20.49
J.S. Mehling, M.A. Diftler, M. Chu, M. Valvo: A min-
imally invasive tendril robot for in-space inspec-
tion, Proc. Conf. BioRobotics (2006) pp. 690–695
20.50
A. Grzesiak, R. Becker, A. Verl: The bionic handling
assistant – A success story of additive manufac-
turing, Assem. Autom. 31(4), 329–333 (2011)
20.51
D.M. Lane, J.B.C. Davies, G. Robinson, D.J. O’Brien,
J. Sneddon, E. Seaton, A. Elfstrom: The AMADEUS
dextrous subsea hand: Design, modeling, and
sensor processing, IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 24(1), 96–
111 (1999)
20.52
M.B. Pritts, C.D. Rahn: Design of an artificial mus-
cle continuum robot, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., New Orleans (2004) pp. 4742–4746
20.53
K. Suzumori, S. Iikura, H. Tanaka: Development
of flexible microactuator and its applications to
robotic mechanisms, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., Sacramento (1991) pp. 1622–1627
20.54
D.B. Camarillo, C.R. Carlson, J.K. Salisbury: Task-
space control of continuum manipulators with
coupled tendon drive, 11th Int. Symp. Exp. Robot.
(2009) pp. 271–280
20.55
G. Immega, K. Antonelli: The KSI tentacle manip-
ulator, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Nagoya
(1995) pp. 3149–3154
20.56
I. Gravagne, C. Rahn, I.D. Walker: Large deflec-
tion dynamics and control for planar continuum
robots, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 8(2), 299–307
(2003)
20.57
B.A. Jones, W. McMahan, I.D. Walker: Design and
analysis of a novel pneumatic manipulator, Proc.
3rd IFAC Symp. Mechatron. Syst., Sydney (2004)
pp. 745–750
20.58
W. McMahan, B.A. Jones, I.D. Walker: Design and
implementation of a multi-section continuum
robot: Air-Octor, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robot. Syst., Edmonton (2005) pp. 3345–3352
20.59
J. Lock, G. Laing, M. Mahvash, P.E. Dupont: Qua-
sistatic modeling of concentric tube robots with
external loads, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robot. Syst., Taipei (2010) pp. 2325–2332
20.60
L.G. Torres, R. Alterovitz: Motion planning for
concentric tube robots using mechanics-based
models, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot.
Syst., San Francisco (2011) pp. 5153–5159
20.61
R.J. Webster III, J.M. Romano, N.J. Cowan: Kine-
matics and calibration of active cannulas, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Pasadena (2008)
pp. 3888–3895
20.62
R.S. Penning, J. Jung, J.A. Borgstadt, N.J. Fer-
rier, M.R. Zinn: Towards closed loop control of
a continuum robotic manipulator for medical ap-
plications, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
Shanghai (2011) pp. 4822–4827
20.63
B. Bardou, P. Zanne, F. Nageotte, M. de Mathelin:
Control of multiple sections flexible endoscopic
system, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot.
Syst., Taipei (2010) pp. 2345–2350
20.64
G. Chen, P.M. Tu, T.R. Herve, C. Prelle: Design
and modeling of a micro-robotic manipulator
for colonoscopy, 5th Int. Workshop Res. Educ.
Mechatron., Annecy (2005) pp. 109–114
20.65
K. Xu, J. Zhao, J. Geiger, A.J. Shih, M. Zheng: De-
sign of an endoscopic stitching device for surgical
obesity treatment using a N.O.T.E.S. approach,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., San
Francisco (2011) pp. 961–966
20.66
H.-S. Yoon, S.M. Oh, J.H. Jeong, S.H. Lee, K. Tae,
K.-C. Koh, B.J. Yi: Active bending robot endoscope
system for navigation through sinus area, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., San Fran-
cisco (2011) pp. 967–972
20.67
L.A. Lyons, R.J. Webster III, R. Alterovitz: Planning
active cannula configurations through tubular
anatomy, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., An-
chorage (2010) pp. 2082–2087
20.68
S. Wakimoto, K. Suzumori: Fabrication and basic
experiments of pneumatic multi-chamber rubber
tube actuator for assisting colonoscope insertion,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Anchorage
(2010) pp. 3260–3265
20.69
N. Simaan, R. Taylor, P. Flint: A dexterous system
for laryngeal surgery, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., New Orleans (2004) pp. 351–357
20.70
H. Watanabe, K. Kanou, Y. Kobayashi, M.G. Fu-
jie: Development of a ‘Steerable Drill’ for ACL
reconstruction to create the arbitrary trajectory
of a bone tunnel, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robot. Syst., San Francisco (2011) pp. 955–960
20.71
K.
Xu,
R.E.
Goldman,
J.
Ding,
P.K.
Allen,
D.L. Fowler, N. Simaan: System design of an in-
sertable robotic effector platform for single port
access (SPA) surgery, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robot. Syst., St. Louis (2009) pp. 5546–
5552
20.72
J. Ding, K. Xu, R. Goldman, P. Allen, D. Fowler,
N. Simaan: Design, simulation and evaluation of
kinematic alternatives for insertable robotic ef-
fectors platforms in single port access surgery,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Anchorage
(2010) pp. 1053–1058
20.73
P. Sears, P.E. Dupont: Inverse kinematics of con-
centric tube steerable needles, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Autom. (2007) pp. 1887–1892
20.74
P. Sears, P.E. Dupont: A steerable needle technol-
ogy using curved concentric tubes, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst. (2006) pp. 2850–2856
20.75
R. Buckingham: Snake arm robots, Ind. Robot An
Int. J. 29(3), 242–245 (2002)

Part B | 20
496
Part B
Design
20.76
M. Mahvash, P.E. Dupont: Stiffness control of
a continuum manipulator in contact with a soft
environment, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robot. Syst., Taipei (2010) pp. 863–870
20.77
J. Jung, R.S. Penning, N.J. Ferrier, M.R. Zinn:
A modeling approach for continuum robotic
manipulators: Effects of nonlinear internal de-
vice friction, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robot. Syst., San Francisco (2011) pp. 5139–
5146
20.78
D.C. Rucker, B.A. Jones, R.J. Webster III: A model
for concentric tube continuum robots under ap-
plied wrenches, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Au-
tom., Anchorage (2010) pp. 1047–1052
20.79
T. Aoki, A. Ochiai, S. Hirose: Study on slime
robot: Development of the mobile robot pro-
totype model using bridle bellows, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., New Orleans (2004)
pp. 2808–2813
20.80
H. Ohno, S. Hirose: Design of slim slime robot and
its gait of locomotion, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robot. Syst., Maui (2001) pp. 707–715
20.81
B.A. Jones, M. Csencsits, W. McMahan, V. Chi-
trakaran,
M. Grissom, M. Pritts,
C.D. Rahn,
I.D. Walker: Grasping, manipulation, and explo-
ration tasks with the OctArm continuum manip-
ulator, Proc. Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Orlando
(2006)
20.82
W. McMahan, M. Pritts, V. Chitrakaran, D. Dienno,
M. Grissom, B. Jones, M. Csencsits, C.D. Rahn,
D. Dawson, I.D. Walker: Field trials and testing
of OCTARM continuum robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom. (2006) pp. 2336–2341
20.83
J.K. Salisbury: Whole arm manipulation, 4th
Symp. Robot. Res. (1987)
20.84
I.D. Walker: Continuum robot appendages for
traversal of uneven terrain in in-situ exploration,
IEEE Aerosp. Conf. (2011) pp. 1–8
20.85
R. Kang, A. Kazakidi, E. Guglielmino, D.T. Branson,
D.P. Tsakiris, J.A. Ekaterinaris, D.G. Caldwell: Dy-
namic model of a hyper-redundant, octopus-like
manipulator for underwater applications, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., San Fran-
cisco (2011) pp. 4054–4059
20.86
I.S.
Godage,
D.T.
Branson,
E.
Guglielmino,
G.A.
Medrano-Cerda,
D.G.
Caldwell:
Shape
function-based kinematics and dynamics for
variable-length continuum robotic arms, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Shanghai (2011)
pp. 452–457
20.87
R. Alterovitz, A. Lim, K. Goldberg, G.S. Chirikjian,
A.M. Okamura: Steering flexible needles under
Markov motion uncertainty, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst. (2005) pp. 120–125
20.88
N.J.
Cowan,
K.
Goldberg,
G.S.
Chirikjian,
G. Fichtinger, R. Alterovitz, K.B. Reed, V. Kallem,
W. Park, S. Misra, A.M. Okamura: Robotic needle
steering: Design, modeling, planning, and im-
age guidance. In: Surgical Robotics – Systems,
Applications, and Visions, ed. by J, Rosen, B.
Hannaford, R. Satava (Springer New York pp,
557–582 (2011)
20.89
W. Park, Y. Wang, G.S. Chirikjian: The path-of-
probability algorithm for steering and feedback
control of flexible needles, Int. J. Robot. Res.
29(7), 813–830 (2010)
20.90
W. Park, J.S. Kim, Y. Zhou, N.J. Cowan, A.M. Oka-
mura, G.S. Chirikjian: Diffusion-based motion
planning for a nonholonomic flexible needle
model, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
Barcelona (2005)
20.91
R.J.
Webster
III,
J.-S.
Kim,
N.J.
Cowan,
G.S. Chirikjian, A.M. Okamura: Nonholonomic
modeling of needle steering, Int. J. Robot. Res.
25(5–6), 509–525 (2006)
20.92
C.
Rucker,
R.J.
Webster
III,
G.S.
Chirikjian,
N.J.
Cowan:
Equilibrium
conformations
of
concentric-tube continuum robots, Int. J. Robot.
Res. 29(10), 1263–1280 (2010)
20.93
P.E. Dupont, J. Lock, B. Itkowitz, E. Butler: Design
and control of concentric-tube robots, IEEE Trans.
Robot. 26(2), 209–225 (2010)
20.94
J. Lock, G. Laing, M. Mahvash, P.E. Dupont: Qua-
sistatic modeling of concentric tube robots with
external loads, 2010 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robot. Syst. (2010) pp. 2325–2332
20.95
P.E. Dupont, J. Lock, E. Butler: Torsional kinematic
model for concentric tube robots, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Autom. (2009) pp. 3851–3858
20.96
C. Bedell, J. Lock, A. Gosline, P.E. Dupont: Design
optimization of concentric tube robots based on
task and anatomical constraints, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Autom. (2011) pp. 398–403
20.97
M. Mahvash, P.E. Dupont: Stiffness control of sur-
gical continuum manipulators, IEEE Trans. Robot.
27(2), 334–345 (2011)
20.98
A. Degani, H. Choset, A. Wolf, M.A. Zenati: Highly
articulated robotic probe for minimally invasive
surgery, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (2006)
pp. 4167–4172
20.99
A. Degani, H. Choset, A. Wolf, T. Ota, M.A. Zenati:
Percutaneous intrapericardial interventions us-
ing a highly articulated robotic probe, In The
First IEEE/RAS-EMBS Int. Conf. Biomed. Robot.
Biomech. (2006) pp. 7–12
20.100
R.J.
Murphy,
M.S.
Moses,
M.D.
Kutzer,
G.S.
Chirikjian,
M.
Armand:
Constrained
workspace generation for snake-like manipu-
lators with applications to minimally invasive
surgery, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (2013)
pp. 5341–5347
20.101
M.S. Moses, M.D. Kutzer, H. Ma, M. Armand:
A continuum manipulator made of interlocking
fibers, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (2013)
pp. 4008–4015
20.102
S.M. Segreti, M.D.M. Kutzer, R.J. Murphy, M. Ar-
mand: Cable length estimation for a compliant
surgical manipulator, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom. (2012) pp. 701–708
20.103
R.J. Murphy, M.D. Kutzer, S.M. Segreti, B.C. Lucas,
M. Armand: Design and kinematic characteri-
zation of a surgical manipulator with a focus
on treating osteolysis, Robotica 32(6), 835–850
(2014)

Snake-Like and Continuum Robots
20.5 Conclusion and Extensions to Related Areas
497
Part B | 20
20.104
D. Trivedi, A. Lotfi, C.D. Rahn: Geometrically ex-
act dynamics for soft robotics manipulators, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., San Diego
(2007) pp. 1497–1502
20.105
G.S. Chirikjian, J.W. Burdick: A modal approach to
hyper-redundant manipulator kinematics, IEEE
Trans. Robot. Autom. 10(3), 343–354 (1994)
20.106
I.A. Gravagne, I.D. Walker: Manipulability, force,
and compliance analysis for planar continuum
manipulators, IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 18(3),
263–273 (2002)
20.107
B.A. Jones, I.D. Walker: Kinematics for multisec-
tion continuum robots, IEEE Trans. Robot. 22(1),
43–55 (2006)
20.108
H. Mochiyama, T. Suzuki: Dynamic modeling
of a hyper-flexible manipulator, Proc. 41st SICE
Annu. Conf., Osaka (2002) pp. 1505–1510
20.109
H. Mochiyama, T. Suzuki: Kinematics and dynam-
ics of a cable-like hyper-flexible manipulator,
Proc. IEEE Intl. Conf. Robot. Autom., Taipei (2003)
pp. 3672–3677
20.110
G.S. Chirikjian: Variational analysis of snakelike
robots. In: Redundancy in Robot Manipulators
and Multi-Robot Systems, Lecture Notes in Elec-
trical Engineering, Vol. 57, ed. by D. Milutinovic,
J. Rosen (Springer, New York 2013) pp. 77–91
20.111
G.S. Chirikjian: Hyper-redundant manipulator
dynamics: A continuum approximation, Adv.
Robot. 9(3), 217–243 (1995)
20.112
I.S.
Godage,
E.
Guglielmino,
D.T.
Branson,
G.A. Medrano-Cerda, D.G. Caldwell: Novel modal
approach for kinematics of multisection contin-
uum arms, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot.
Syst., San Francisco (2011) pp. 1093–1098
20.113
G.S.
Chirikjian,
J.W.
Burdick:
Kinematics
of
hyper-redundant locomotion with applications
to grasping, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.
(1991) pp. 720–725
20.114
M. Csencsits, B.A. Jones, W. McMahan: User in-
terfaces for continuum robot arms, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., Edmonton (2005)
pp. 3011–3018
20.115
E. Tatlicioglu, I.D. Walker, D.M. Dawson: Dynamic
modeling for planar extensible continuum robot
manipulators, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
Rome (2007) pp. 1357–1362
20.116
W. Khalil, G. Gallot, O. Ibrahim, F. Boyer: Dynamic
modeling of a 3-D serial eel-like robot, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Barcelona (2005)
pp. 1282–1287
20.117
N. Giri, I.D. Walker: Three module lumped ele-
ment model of a continuum arm section, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., San Fran-
cisco (2011) pp. 4060–4065
20.118
J. Li, J. Xiao: Determining ‘grasping’ configura-
tions for a spatial continuum manipulator, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., San Fran-
cisco (2011) pp. 4207–4214
20.119
J. Xiao, R. Vatcha: Real-time adaptive motion
planning for a continuum manipulator, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., Taipei (2010)
pp. 5919–5926
20.120
M. Ivanescu, N. Bizdoaca, D. Pana: Dynamic con-
trol for a tentacle manipulator with SMA actua-
tors, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Taipei
(2003) pp. 2079–2084
20.121
M. Ivanescu, V. Stoian: A variable structure con-
troller for a tentacle manipulator, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Autom., Nagoya (1995) pp. 3155–3160
20.122
A. Bajo, N. Simaan: Finding lost wrenches: Us-
ing continuum robots for contact detection and
estimation of contact location, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Autom., Anchorage (2010) pp. 3666–
3672
20.123
H.
Mochiyama:
Whole-arm
impedance
of
a serial-chain manipulator, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom., Seoul (2001) pp. 2223–2228
20.124
D.C. Rucker, R.J. Webster III: Deflection-based
force sensing for continuum robots: A proba-
bilistic approach, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robot. Syst., San Francisco (2011) pp. 3764–3769
20.125
D. Braganza, D.M. Dawson, I.D. Walker, N. Nath:
Neural network grasping controller for continuum
robots, Proc. 45th IEEE Conf. Decis. Control, San
Diego (2006)
20.126
A. Kapadia, I.D. Walker: Task space control of ex-
tensible continuum manipulators, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., San Francisco (2011)
pp. 1087–1092
20.127
S. Ma: Analysis of creeping locomotion of a snake-
like robot, Adv. Robot. 15(2), 205–224 (2001)
20.128
K.Y. Pettersen, O. Stavdahl, J.T. Gravdahl: Snake
Robots: Modelling, Mechatronics, and Control
(Springer, London 2012)
20.129
A.A. Transeth, K.Y. Pettersen, P. Liljeback: A survey
on snake robot modeling and locomotion, Robot.
27(7), 999–1015 (2009)
20.130
R. Vaidyanathan, H.J. Chiel, R.D. Quinn: A hy-
drostatic robot for marine applications, Robot.
Auton. Syst. 30(1), 103–113 (2000)
20.131
C. Wright, A. Johnson, A. Peck, Z. McCord, A. Naak-
tgeboren, P. Gianfortoni, M. Gonzalez-Rivero,
R. Hatton, H. Choset: Design of a modular snake
robot, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst.
(2007) pp. 2609–2614
20.132
M. Tesch, K. Lipkin, I. Brown, R. Hatton, A. Peck,
J. Rembisz, H. Choset: Parameterized and scripted
gaits for modular snake robots, Adv. Robot. 23(9),
1131–1158 (2009)
20.133
R.L. Hatton, H. Choset: Generating gaits for snake
robots: Annealed chain fitting and keyframe wave
extraction, Auton. Robot. 28(3), 271–281 (2010)
20.134
J.C.
McKenna,
D.J.
Anhalt,
F.M.
Bronson,
H.B. Brown, M. Schwerin, E. Shammas, H. Choset:
Toroidal skin drive for snake robot locomo-
tion, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (2008)
pp. 1150–1155
20.135
A. Wolf, H.B. Brown, R. Casciola, A. Costa,
M. Schwerin, E. Shamas, H. Choset: A mobile hy-
per redundant mechanism for search and rescue
tasks, Proc. 3rd IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot.
Syst. (2003) pp. 2889–2895
20.136
C. Wright, A. Buchan, B. Brown, J. Geist, M. Schw-
erin, D. Rollinson, H. Choset: Design and archi-

Part B | 20.5
498
Part B
Design
tecture of the unified modular snake robot, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (2012) pp. 4347–4354
20.137
J.M. Snyder, J.F. Wilson: Dynamics of the elas-
tica with end mass and follower loading, J. Appl.
Mech. 57, 203 (1990)
20.138
J.F. Wilson, D. Li, Z. Chen, R.T. George Jr.: Flexi-
ble robot manipulators and grippers: Relatives of
elephant trunks and squid tentacles. In: Robots
and Biological Systems: Towards a New Bion-
ics?, (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1993) pp. 475–
494
20.139
F. Naccarato, P.C. Hughes: Inverse kinematics of
variable-geometry truss manipulators, J. Robot.
Syst. 8(2), 249–266 (1991)
20.140
P.C.
Hughes,
W.G.
Sincarsin,
K.A.
Carroll:
Trussarm
–
A
variable-geometry-truss
ma-
nipulator, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct. 2(2),
148–160 (1991)
20.141
R.J. Salerno, C.F. Reinholtz, S.G. Dhande, R. Hall:
Kinematics of long-chain variable geometry truss
manipulators: An overview of solution tech-
niques, Proc. 2nd Int. Workshop Adv. Robot Kine-
mat. (1990)
20.142
A.S.
Boxerbaum,
K.M.
Shaw,
H.J.
Chiel,
R.D. Quinn: Continuous wave peristaltic mo-
tion in a robot, Int. J. Robot. Res. 31(3), 302–318
(2012)
20.143
G.S. Chirikjian: Framed curves and knotted DNA,
Biochem. Soc. Trans. 41, 635–638 (2013)
20.144
I. Ebert-Uphoff, G.S. Chirikjian: Discretely ac-
tuated manipulator workspace generation by
closed-form convolution, ASME J. Mech. Des.
120(2), 245–251 (1998)
20.145
I. Ebert-Uphoff, G.S. Chirikjian: Inverse kinemat-
ics of discretely actuated hyper-redundant ma-
nipulators using workspace densities, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (1996) pp. 139–145
20.146
I.
Ebert-Uphoff:
On
the
development
of
discretely-actuated
hybrid-serial-parallel
manipulators (Department of Mechanical En-
gineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore
1997)
20.147
Y. Wang, G.S. Chirikjian: Workspace generation
of hyper-redundant manipulators as a diffusion
process on SE(N), IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 20(3),
399–408 (2004)
20.148
Y. Zhou, G.S. Chirikjian: Conformational statis-
tics of semi-flexible macromolecular chains with
internal joints, Macromolecules 39(5), 1950–1960
(2006)

Multimedia Contents Actuators fo
499
Part B | 21
21. Actuators for Soft Robotics
Alin Albu-Schäffer, Antonio Bicchi
Although we do not know as yet how robots of
the future will look like exactly, most of us are
sure that they will not resemble the heavy, bulky,
rigid machines dangerously moving around in old-
fashioned industrial automation. There is a grow-
ing consensus, in the research community as well
as in expectations from the public, that robots of
the next generation will be physically compliant
and adaptable machines, closely interacting with
humans and moving safely, smoothly and effi-
ciently – in other terms, robots will be soft.
This chapter discusses the design, modeling
and control of actuators for the new generation
of soft robots, which can replace conventional ac-
tuators in applications where rigidity is not the
first and foremost concern in performance. The
chapter focuses on the technology, modeling, and
control of lumped parameters of soft robotics, that
is, systems of discrete, interconnected, and com-
pliant elements. Distributed parameters, snake-
like and continuum soft robotics, are presented
in Chap. 20, while Chap. 23 discusses in detail the
biomimetic motivations that are often behind soft
robotics.
21.1
Background.........................................
500
21.1.1
Motivations .............................
500
21.1.2
Safety .....................................
500
21.1.3
Resilience................................
501
21.1.4
Performance
and Energy Efficiency ...............
501
21.1.5
The Third Way
of Robotic Control and ...........
501
21.2
Soft Robot Design ................................
502
21.2.1
Natural Muscles .......................
502
21.2.2
Breaking Down Artificial Muscle
Systems...................................
502
21.2.3
Sources for Soft Actuators..........
503
21.2.4
Pneumatic and Hydraulic..........
503
21.2.5
Electromagnetic
and Electrostatic ......................
503
21.2.6
Piezoelectric ............................
504
21.2.7
Electro- and Magneto-Strictive .
504
21.2.8
Shape Memory Alloys
and Polymers ..........................
505
21.2.9
Polymeric Actuators..................
505
21.2.10
Carbon Nanotubes ...................
505
21.2.11
Energy Storage .........................
505
21.2.12
Energy Dissipation
and Dampers...........................
505
21.2.13
Artificial Muscles
Arrangements ..........................
506
21.2.14
Specifications
and Performance .....................
507
21.3
Modeling Actuators
for Soft Robotics ..................................
508
21.3.1
The Mass–Spring–Damper
Paradigm.................................
508
21.3.2
Nonlinear Mechanical Systems ..
508
21.4
Modeling Soft Robots...........................
511
21.5
Stiffness Estimation .............................
513
21.5.1
Observers
for Linear Impedance ...............
514
21.5.2
Variable Stiffness Observers.......
514
21.5.3
Parametric Estimation ..............
514
21.5.4
Nonparametric Estimation ........
515
21.6
Cartesian Stiffness Control ....................
515
21.6.1
Cartesian Impedance Control.....
515
21.6.2
Independent Position
and Stiffness Control ................
516
21.7
Periodic Motion Control........................
518
21.7.1
Periodic Motion Tracking
and Stiffness Adaptation ..........
518
21.7.2
Controlled Oscillatory Dynamics .
519
21.7.3
Exciting Intrinsic Oscillatory
Dynamics ................................
520
21.7.4
Model-Based Approach ............
520
21.7.5
Model-Free Approach...............
520

Part B | 21.1
500
Part B
Design
21.8
Optimal Control of Soft Robots..............
521
21.8.1
OC Theory ................................
521
21.8.2
SEA Optimization......................
521
21.8.3
Safe Brachistochrone OC
Problem ..................................
522
21.8.4
Max Speed OC Problem .............
522
21.8.5
VSA Optimization......................
523
21.9
Conclusions and Open Problems ...........
524
Video-References.........................................
525
References...................................................
526
The chapter starts by analyzing the main motivations
that are behind the development of actuators for soft
robotics: these are mainly safety of operation, espe-
cially in interaction with humans; resilience of the robot
itself in interaction with harsh, unpredictable environ-
ments, and performance enhancement in dynamic tasks.
We then brieﬂy survey the different principles and
technologies that can be used to implement actuators for
soft robotics. Using natural muscles as a term of com-
parison, we consider different elements constituting an
actuator, such as the prime movers, energy storage and
dissipation elements, and their different possible ar-
rangements.
We then move to consider a class of actuators for
soft robotics that includes many of the recent devel-
opments in this ﬁeld, that is, the class of variable
impedance actuators (VIA) and the subclass of variable
stiffness actuators (VSAs), and consider how a math-
ematical model of these systems can be provided in
general but precise terms. With the objective of help-
ing the reader navigate the space of the many existing,
and many more conceivable, designs we consider these
actuators from a general point of view, discussing how
their performance envelope and speciﬁcations could be
given in a uniﬁed, comprehensive way.
In the ﬁnal part of the chapter, we consider the new
problems and opportunities arising from the control of
soft robots, including the need to estimate the variable
physical compliance of the actuators, to plan its vari-
ations to adapt to tasks and environments, and to do
real-time control of soft robots exploiting their physi-
cal properties.
21.1 Background
21.1.1 Motivations
The intrinsic properties of the biological muscles and
their advantageous arrangement within the muscu-
loskeletal system are a key aspect to the motion perfor-
mance of many animal species. The ﬂexibility, force-
to-weight ratio, viscous damping, and fast reacting
properties provide animals with an actuator having
properties well suited for the tasks they are faced with
day to day. Taking the human as an example, our mus-
cles allow us to do very ﬁne manipulation, precisely
exerting forces and torques at the millinewton level,
but also lift objects at a 10 W 1 force-to-weight ratio.
Through the interplay of these physical properties with
the neural sensory-motor control, motion is accom-
plished in a very energy-efﬁcient, safe, and effective
way.
Despite the diverse range of actuation techniques
developed over the past years, the lack of an actuator
which can reach the functional performance of the bio-
logical muscle and its neuro-mechanical control system
still remains one of the most signiﬁcant barriers for the
development of machines, which can match the motion
capabilities of natural systems. This observation has
motivated many researchers in recent years to work to-
ward developing and exploiting actuation technologies
for a new generation of soft robots, which can co-exist
and co-operate with people and reach or even surpass
their performance.
21.1.2 Safety
One of the main motivations for revisiting traditional
robotic design is the concern about their safety: it
is to be expected that interacting with robot assis-
tants or collaborators should not constitute (or even
just be perceived as) a higher injury risk to humans
than the interaction with another cautious human. At-
tention toward safe operation of robots near to, and
even in contact with, humans is rather recent, although
some of the pioneering contributions date back to the
1990s [21.1]. Robot-speciﬁc risk assessment methods
have been studied in recent years [21.2, 3], and are dis-
cussed in Chap. 69.
The inherent danger to humans of conventional
arms can be mitigated by retro-ﬁtting their design by
increasing their sensorization (using, e.g., proximity-
sensitive skins), or by increasing the energy-absorbing
properties of protective layers (adding enough soft and
compliant coverings or placing airbags around the arm).

Actuators for Soft Robotics
21.1 Background
501
Part B | 21.1
Starting in the early 1990s, researchers have gradually
abandoned the retro-ﬁtting approach and started de-
signing robots with interaction safety in mind from the
beginning: notable examples are MIT’s WAM (whole
arm manipulator) [21.4] and DLR’s LWR (light-weight
robot) [21.5]. Arms in this class are primarily char-
acterized by low inertia of their moving parts (links
and motors) and backdrivability. Advanced sensing and
control can realize a soft behavior via software.
Another approach to increase the safety level of
robot arms interacting with humans is soft robotics,
that is, to intentionally introduce mechanical compli-
ance and damping in design. By this researchers tend
to replace the sensor-based computation of a behavior
and its error-prone realization using active actuator con-
trol, by its direct physical embodiment, as in the natural
example. Having compliance and damping in the robot
structure is by no means sufﬁcient to ensure its safety,
as it might indeed be even counterproductive for the
elastic energy potentially stored. Just like a human arm,
a soft robot arm will need intelligent control to make it
behave softly as when caressing a baby, or strongly as
when punching.
21.1.3 Resilience
Physical interaction of a robot with its environment can
also be dangerous to the robot itself. Indeed, while for-
tunately the number of accidents involving robots and
humans is very limited, the number of times a robot
is damaged because of impacts or force overexer-
tion is rather large, and clearly the more so the less
structured is the task and/or the environment. A typ-
ical cause of breakdown for traditional robots is the
failure of reduction gears (especially harmonic drives
are quite sensitive to shock loads) and motor bear-
ings, but large accelerations can easily damage sensors
and electronics. Although seldom considered in the
scientiﬁc literature, resilience to shocks is not only in-
strumental to achieve viable applications of robots in
everyday life, but would also be very useful in indus-
trial environments, substantially enlarging the scope of
applicability of robot technology. Soft robotics tech-
nologies can provide solutions that are extremely ef-
fective in absorbing shocks and reducing accelerations:
soft materials can be used as coverings or even as
structural elements in robot limbs, but the main tech-
nological challenge remains with soft actuators and
transmissions.
21.1.4 Performance and Energy Efficiency
A further reason to search for a new generation of actu-
ators with controllable compliance is for their dynamic
behavior, which can afford high-performance, natural-
looking motion while being more energy-efﬁcient than
rigid robots.
Indeed, adaptable compliance can be used to adjust
the natural dynamics of the robot in tune with those
of its environment, so that the intrinsic physical be-
havior of the resulting system is close to the desired
motion. In these circumstances, actuators would only
have to inject and extract energy into and out of the sys-
tem for small corrective actions, thus reducing energy
consumption.
The idea of embodying desirable dynamics in the
physical properties of soft robots is of particular im-
portance, for example, in walking/running robots and
prostheses: indeed, biomechanical studies reveal that
compliance adaptation is important for human walk-
ing and running. Although most humanoid robots (such
as HRP-4 [21.6, 7] and ASIMO [21.8, 9]) use rigid
robotics technologies, soft actuators are more and more
often adopted in humanoid robots: pneumatic muscles
are used, for example, in [21.10] and [21.11], while
several legged systems have appeared that use series-
elastic actuators [21.12]. What is probably the ﬁrst pro-
totype of fully physically compliant humanoid has been
recently presented in [21.13].
The fact that natural systems change the compli-
ance of their muscular system depending on the gait
and environmental conditions, and even during the dif-
ferent phases of the gait, seems to indicate the potential
usefulness of variable impedance actuators (VIA) for
locomotion – yet, because of the technical and theoret-
ical challenges posed, only early prototypes of bipedal
walking systems with variable stiffness actuation have
been reported so far [21.14, 15], and no humanoid robot
has been reported (to the best of our knowledge) mak-
ing full use of VIAs.
Besides their role in reducing energy consumption
in cyclic motions, soft robotics can provide deﬁnite per-
formance advantages in many other tasks. One notable
class are those tasks where performance is measured
in terms of peak velocity reached at the end of an ex-
plosive-type motion, such as for example, in throwing,
hitting, jumping, kicking, etc. Compliance in the robot
structure indeed allows to store elastic energy in a build-
up phase, and restitute it in the subsequent explosive
phase. Furthermore, it permits us to have joints that, at
least for a short time duration, move at a substantially
higher velocity than the motor shaft [21.16, 17].
21.1.5 The Third Way
of Robotic Control and 	
Novel actuators for soft robotics introduce one further
interesting innovation for what concerns their control

Part B | 21.2
502
Part B
Design
philosophy and architecture. Indeed, it can be roughly
but fairly said that most existing robotic systems are
controlled according to either one of two dominant ar-
chitectures: position-based controller and torque-based
controller. Position-based controllers, which prevail in
traditional industrial robotics, are rather closed con-
troller architectures built around an inner servomech-
anism loop, which basically provide the user with
the ability to set joint position references, with very
limited access to inner variables such as velocities,
gains, or torques. Torque-controlled robots, on the other
hand, provide a completely open control architecture,
whereby the user can specify the motor currents or
joint torques directly as a function of all accessible
states. While the position-based control is still by far the
most widely used architecture, because it requires less
costly sensors, actuators and processors, and is more
robust, serviceable, and fool-proof, researchers have
always had a preference for the versatility and open-
ness of the torque-based control. The introduction of
relatively large physical compliance in soft actuators
changes the picture considerably. This is particularly
true in VIA systems, where the user is provided with
the control of neither the joint positions nor torques di-
rectly. Rather, one can specify the neutral equilibrium
position of the joint, and the stiffness (and damping)
by which the joint is attracted toward it, when exter-
nal or inertial loads displace it from such equilibrium.
To illustrate the difference, consider building a joint
for a fully dynamic task, such as jumping on one leg:
while position- or torque-control architectures would
hardly be able to do the job (unless using very high-per-
formance components), two relatively slow, low-cost
servomotor units connected through springs in agonist–
antagonist arrangement can already provide a very
effective solution.
It should be noted here that such VIA control
model is very similar in philosophy to the  version
of the equilibrium-point hypothesis in human motor
control [21.18–20]. According to the equilibrium point
hypothesis, movements arise as a consequence of shifts
in the equilibrium of the motor system. This equi-
librium is dependent upon the interaction of control
signals, reﬂexes, muscle properties and loads, but it is
under the control of central arm movement [21.21]. In
this sense, soft robotics also provide a very interesting
arena for exchanging ideas and insights with the re-
search community in motor neuroscience.
21.2 Soft Robot Design
In this section, we provide a concise presentation of the
main elements and technologies that may contribute to
the development of novel actuators for soft robotics.
21.2.1 Natural Muscles
For comparison and inspiration, it is natural to consider
ﬁrst the characteristics of natural muscles. A typical
muscle consists of many thousands of muscle ﬁbers
working in parallel, organized in motor units, that is,
one or several ﬁbers with a motor neuron activating
them. A single muscle ﬁber contains several myoﬁbrils,
made of sarcomere separated by Z disks. In a sarcomere,
thin (actin) and thick (myosin) ﬁlaments are arranged in
a hexagonal lattice, such that one thick ﬁlament inter-
acts with six thin ﬁlaments. Cross-bridges linking actin
and myosin pull toward sacromere center from both
ends resulting in muscle shortening. Actin and myosin
ﬁlaments slide against each other byrepeated attach-
ment and detachment of cross-bridges, thus resulting in
muscle contraction.
As a consequence of their structure, natural muscles
have several mechanical properties which differ from
conventional actuators. Muscles (and tendons) have
spring-like properties, with stiffness and damping in-
creasing with activation, and are capable of storing and
releasing energy, but also of dissipating it. Muscles are
equipped with sensors which can provide stretch (e.g.,
spindles) and force (e.g., Golgi tendon organs) infor-
mation to the nervous system. Muscle tension increases
nonlinearly with activation, and – for ﬁxed activation –
depends on both length and velocity. Muscles are most
often arranged in antagonistic pairs (such as the bicep
and tricep in the elbow) or groups (such as in the shoul-
der): this fact, together with the nonlinearity of their
force–stretch relationship, is used to modulate the ef-
fective impedance at the joints.
21.2.2 Breaking Down Artificial Muscle
Systems
Even a nonexhaustive but reasonably broad analysis
of technologies potentially contributing to the develop-
ment of novel actuators for soft robotics could not ﬁt
this handbook chapter. However, we will attempt here
to provide a simple categorization of the subject mat-
ter, along whose lines a more complete survey could be
organized. To this purpose, we will break down a soft
robot system into a network of simpler elements, whose
behavior is simpler and more easily described.

Actuators for Soft Robotics
21.2 Soft Robot Design
503
Part B | 21.2
Like other systems, a soft actuator is comprised of
storage elements that keep energy inside the same en-
ergetic domain, and of transducers that allow a ﬂow of
energy from one domain to another. Transducers may
dissipate energy via heat production (energy sinks), or
can instead inject energy inside the system (energy
sources). Sources can, in turn, be divided into ﬂow
sources, effort sources, and hybrid, or real sources.
A ﬂow source determines the amount of ﬂow (linear
or angular velocity, heat ﬂow, volume or mass ﬂow, : : :)
going through it, without caring for the effort (force,
torque, temperature, pressure, : : :) needed to keep such
ﬂow. The converse holds for an effort source. A hybrid
source, instead, is a device that offers a generic con-
straint between the effort/ﬂow pair.
Storage and transducer elements can be connected
in different arrangements, which may result in com-
pletely different behaviors. VIA, an important class of
actuators for soft robotics, have the characteristic that
their overall behavior can be changed under active con-
trol between that of an effort and a ﬂow source.
21.2.3 Sources for Soft Actuators
Technologies used as sources for soft actuators vary
broadly in nature and scope. In this section, we limit
ourselves to provide a list with comments on the range
of applicability, while we refer the reader to spe-
ciﬁc literature for more detailed analysis: for instance,
the author of [21.22] compares several active mate-
rials in a volumetrically normalized fashion, includ-
ing stress (force-generating capability), strain (stroke
length), speed of actuation, and power and energy met-
rics.
21.2.4 Pneumatic and Hydraulic
Pneumatic and hydraulic actuators [21.23, 24] include
classical tie-rod or rod-less cylinders and rotary motors.
Pneumatic actuators are usually low-impedance effort
sources, while hydraulics tend to be high-impedance
sources, but compliant behaviors can be actively con-
trolled, or obtained through combination with other
elements in the actuator system arrangement.
Of speciﬁc interest for soft robotics are the so-
called pneumatic artiﬁcial muscles (PAMs), a name
used to describe contractile linear-motion engines op-
erated by gas pressure. The actuator’s core element is
a ﬂexible membrane or shell attached at both ends to
ﬁttings along which mechanical power is transferred
to a load. As the membrane is inﬂated, it bulges out-
ward and expands radially, and contracts axially thus
exerting a pulling force on its load. The force and
motion thus generated by this type of actuator is typ-
ically unidirectional in tension (different from bellows,
which work in compression). Pneumatic artiﬁcial mus-
cles (PAM) became popular in robotics through the
work of McKibben, who used braided sleeves around
an elastic bladder as an orthotic actuator in the late
1950s [21.25], and have been widely used since then
in robotics in various forms [21.26–32].
PAMs have an intrinsically nonlinear characteris-
tic (force decreases with contraction) and, due to gas
compressibility, they exhibit a natural low impedance.
As they act one way, two PAM are needed to generate
bidirectional motion in an antagonistic arrangement. By
a pressure differential on the two muscles, a net joint
torque is applied. On the other hand, due to nonlinear-
ity of the stretch/force characteristic, an increase in the
common-mode pressure varies the joint stiffness, while
leaving torque unaffected. The above characteristics
of PAMs are somehow similar to those natural mus-
cles, although many important differences exist. From
a practical viewpoint, the main drawbacks of pneumatic
muscles are the encumbrance, noise, and slow response
related to use of pressurized gas, and their relatively
limited energy density.
21.2.5 Electromagnetic and Electrostatic
Electromagnetic motors use Lorentz-type forces act-
ing on electric charges moving in a magnetic ﬁeld.
Examples are solenoids, that is, electromagnetically in-
ductive coils wound around a movable steel or iron
slug (the armature) [21.33], and rotating or linear in-
duction motors [21.34]. Electromagnetic sources are
typically effort sources, although often they have to
be matched to the system impedance through gears,
which may transform their behavior substantially. On
the other hand, stepper motors, that is, brushless syn-
chronous electric machines that divide a full rotation
into a large number of steps, can be considered ide-
ally as position sources. Stepper motors are mainly of
three main types, that is, permanent magnet, hybrid syn-
chronous, and variable reluctance steppers.
Electrostatic actuators are based on the attraction
and repulsion of electric charges [21.35]. They typ-
ically require high-driving voltages at low currents
(dual in a sense to electromagnetic motors). Linear
electrostatic motors can be realized using comb-drive
arrangements. While electrostatic drives at macroscopic
scales are impractical due to large voltages, they have
excellent potential at micro or nanoscale, where mi-
croelectromechanical systems (MEMSs) with moving,
charged plates are far easier to fabricate than coils and
iron cores.

Part B | 21.2
504
Part B
Design
21.2.6 Piezoelectric
The reverse piezoelectric effect, that is the production of
stress and/or strain in a piezoelectric material when an
electric ﬁeld is applied can also be used for actuating
robots. Most used inorganic materials for piezoelec-
tric transducres consist of ceramics with perovskite
or tungsten-bronze structures, such as barium titanate
(BaTiO3), lead titanate (PbTiO3) and lead zirconate ti-
tanate (PbŒZrxTi1xO3, 0 < x < 1), commonly known
as lead zirconate titanate (PZT) [21.36], while the direct
effect of piezoelectric polymers such as polyvinylidene
ﬂuoride (PVDF) is mostly used for sensors.
Elementary piezoelectric actuators are best suited
for microscale applications, where they can reach
very high accuracy. Piezoelectric motors are some-
times used in resonant mode with rectiﬁcation mecha-
nisms that transform oscillations in net displacements
(e.g., traveling-wave, inch-worm and stick-slip step-
ping motors). Multilayer (stacks) actuators, piling up
several layers (usually thinner than 100 m), are used
to increase the actuator stroke, while retaining contin-
uous and reversible operation. Stacked actuators are
sometimes used within a mechanical ampliﬁer struc-
tures, which can reach millimeter strokes (Fig. 21.1)
Ampliﬁed piezoelectric stack actuators are commer-
cially available from Dynamic Structures and Materials
(Franklin, TN, USA) and Cédrat (Meylan, France).
In essence, the compliant mechanism accomplishes
a force–displacement tradeoff from input to output at
the cost of storing energy within the compliant mech-
anism. This principle has been used in several mecha-
nisms, such as in [21.37].
Ueda et al. [21.38] envision ampliﬁed piezoelectric
stack actuators as modular units in a cellular actua-
tor, drawing a parallel with muscles in that the overall
actuation for a given joint is the sum of a number of dis-
crete actionable units connected by compliant material.
In the same way, muscles are composed of individual
ﬁbers grouped into motor units whose effects are cou-
pled by elastic tendons. In order to function as modular,
muscle-cell like units, the compliant mechanism in the
Fig. 21.1 Example of an ampliﬁed piezo actuator with mul-
tilayer stacks
ampliﬁed piezoelectric stacks need to have very ag-
gressive force–displacement tradeoffs while ﬁtting into
a compact volumetric envelope. This is accomplished
by using a hierarchical set of strain ampliﬁers, where
the output of each stage in the ampliﬁcation is the input
to the subsequent stage. Each stage ﬁts inside the subse-
quent stage; hence, this is referred to as a nested strain
ampliﬁcation mechanism. Schultz and Ueda [21.39,
40] present a framework to describe and specify the
geometry of a nested conﬁguration that results in a fa-
vorable tradeoff that meets design speciﬁcations. The
work of Schultz and Ueda [21.41] draws yet another
parallel with muscle, the idea that the central nervous
system has authority over each motor unit in the mus-
cle and activates each one in an on–off manner. This,
in essence makes the control of muscles or muscle-like
actuators a switching, rather than analog interface, and
circumvents the problem of hysteresis inherent in posi-
tioning piezoelectric material with an analog voltage.
This actuator type also incorporates this idea of re-
dundancy; a lost motor unit (dead piezoelectric stack)
does not result in total failure, but rather a loss of
performance.
21.2.7 Electro- and Magneto-Strictive
The electro- and magnetostrictive effects exhibited by
some materials, that is, the tendency to change their
shape under electric or magnetic ﬁelds, can also be
exploited to build microscale actuators. Electrostric-
tion differs from piezoelectricity because it is exhibited
by all dielectric materials, and is proportional to the
square of the polarization (instead of linearly). Re-
versal of the electric ﬁeld does not reverse the direc-
tion of the deformation. Certain engineered ceramics,
such as lead lanthanum zirconate titanate (PLZT) have
high-electrostrictive constants and can produce strains
of the order of 0:1% at ﬁeld strengths of the or-
der of 1 MV=m. Electrostrictive actuators are typically
structured and used like piezoelectric actuators. Sim-
ilarly, magnetostrictive materials deform under mag-
netic ﬁelds and in proportion to their magnetostrictive
coefﬁcient [21.42]. One of the strongest effects is ex-
hibited by Terfenol-D, with strain of the order of
0:1% in a ﬁeld of the order of 100kA=m at room
temperature.
The pronounced thermal expansion of some mate-
rials (e.g., doped single-crystal silicon or polysilicon)
can be used to transform heat in mechanical energy and
generate motion at micro scales. Temperature is typi-
cally controlled by Joules’s effect, or through local heat
injection, while mechanical ampliﬁcation is often intro-
duced with MEMS techniques (e.g., symmetric bent-
beam or asymmetric bimorph structures).

Actuators for Soft Robotics
21.2 Soft Robot Design
505
Part B | 21.2
21.2.8 Shape Memory Alloys and Polymers
Macro-scale thermal actuators can otherwise be built
using shape memory materials, which include al-
loys (shape memory alloys, SMA) and polymers
(shape memory polymers SMP). Alloys like copper–
zinc–aluminum–nickel, copper–aluminium–nickel, and
nickel–titanium (NiTi) alloys [21.43] exhibit shape
memory
when
transitioning
from
martensitic
to
austenitic phase (one-way effect) and, under particular
conditions, also on the opposite phase change (two-way
effect). SMA can exhibit up to 8% recoverable strain,
and can be formed in virtually any shape. Energy in-
efﬁciency, slow response times, and large hysteresis are
the main limitations. Torres-Jara et al. [21.44] have cre-
ated an SMA muscle-like module in a convenient form
factor by combining laser-cut SMA sheets with plas-
tic hubs so that the hubs move away from one another
when energized. These modules can be connected to-
gether in series or parallel to make an overall actuator
with the desired properties.
SMPs are relatively new shape memory materials,
which can be triggered by temperature but also by elec-
tric or magnetic ﬁeld, light or solution [21.45, 46]. The
shape change happens with transitions to glass phase,
crystallization, or melting. While mechanical proper-
ties of SMPs are not yet comparable to SMAs, SMPs
have an enormous potential for their versatility, as they
range from stable to biodegradable, from soft to hard,
and from elastic to rigid polymers.
21.2.9 Polymeric Actuators
Shape memory polymers represent only an example of
viscoelastic materials which can be used for actuation.
Very intense research has been pursued in recent years
on actuators based on several different phenomena ex-
hibited by polymeric materials [21.47]. Electroactive
polymers (EAPs) are divided into ionic EAPs (based
on diffusion of ions and solvents) and electronic EAPs
(based electronic charging of the material). Ionic EAPs
include polyelectrolyte gels [21.45, 46], ionic polymer
metal composites (IPMC, such as Naftion by DuPont),
conducting polymers (such as polypyrrole (PPy) and
polyaniline (PANi)). Electronic EAPs include piezo-
electric [21.48], electrostrictive, and dielectric poly-
mers and elastomers (such as acrylic polymers and
silicones [21.49]), and ﬂexoelectric polymers, such as
liquid crystal elastomers [21.50].
21.2.10 Carbon Nanotubes
Carbon
nanotubes
(CNTs)
have
a
nonpolymeric
macromolecular structure consisting of a graphite
monoatomic sheet rolled to form tubes whose length
can be about 1000 times their diameter. CNT actuators
can be realized by using sheets of single- or multiwalled
nanotubes as electrolyte-ﬁlled electrodes of a super ca-
pacitor [21.51], developing up to 0:75 MPa (cf. 0:3 MPa
of the human muscle tissue) at low voltages, though
still with limited stroke. A recent breakthrough in CNT
actuators has been the use of highly ordered aerogel
sheets, which allowed fabrication of actuators with gi-
ant strokes (ca. 180% actuation along the width) with
fast response (5 ms delay) [21.52], which is slightly bet-
ter than the human muscle. The artiﬁcial CNT muscle
is stronger than steel in one direction, and more ﬂexible
than rubber in the other two directions [21.53]. When
large strokes will be obtained at low voltages, the poten-
tial of CNT actuators for the design of artiﬁcial muscles
is clearly enormous.
21.2.11 Energy Storage
Although energy storage elements in artiﬁcial muscles
use a variety of materials and structures, due to the
need of having mechanical energy readily available in
dynamic phases, storage in the form of elastic energy
prevails. This can be done by either pressurized gas sys-
tems (mainly in connection with hydraulic or pneumatic
actuation systems), of by deformation of solid elements,
that is, springs. Materials for storing a large amount
of elastic energy in a small volume, and with lim-
ited losses, include special metal alloys (e.g., medium-
and high-carbon steel, beryllium copper, and phosphor
bronze). Composite materials, in the three main types
available (polymer matrix composites (PMCs), metal
matrix composites (MMCs) and ceramic matrix com-
posites (CMCs)) offer a wider versatility in obtaining
different stiffness, which depends not only on the con-
stituent materials but also on the ﬁber design. Advanced
needs of soft robotics applications motivate research in
using sophisticated materials for energy storage, such
as, for example, carbon nanotubes, elastomers, and su-
perelastic materials.
Mechanical energy can also be stored in kinetic
form through the use of inertial elements, similar to
the kinetic energy recovery system (KERS) used in
F1 racing cars. However, the mismatch with typical
slow speeds of robotic joints introduces the need for
gears. Conceptual design of CVT (continuous vari-
able transmission)-based VIAs have been proposed,
although research in this direction is still in its infancy.
21.2.12 Energy Dissipation and Dampers
Energy sinks, that is, dissipation systems and dampers,
are another important element in the construction of

Part B | 21.2
506
Part B
Design
a soft robot actuator. Indeed, underdamped behaviors
are both nonnatural looking and potentially dangerous.
Damping can be obtained through real-time control,
or directly in hardware via electrical shunting or with
mechanical devices. The latter have been extensively
applied to a diverse range of cases, from the control of
excessive structural response to transient environmental
disturbances in civil structures, to automotive suspen-
sion systems, and more recently in robotics.
Dampers are often classiﬁed as either passive, semi-
active or active systems, depending on the amount of
external power required to perform its functionality.
Dampers can be realized using different operating prin-
ciples, which we brieﬂy summarize here.
A friction damper (FD) is essentially composed of
an actuator that applies a normal force on the output
shaft, and generates friction as a consequence of rela-
tive motion ([21.54] for modeling). The control of the
compression force between the frictional surfaces con-
trols friction and can simulate damping: this has been
effectively used in robotics to implement variable phys-
ical damping [21.55]. Drawbacks include the possibility
for hysteresis and dead zone effects, due to static fric-
tion [21.56].
Electrorheological (ER) and magnetorheological
(MR) dampers are based on liquids whose physical
behavior depends on the application of electric or mag-
netic ﬁelds, respectively [21.56]. These ﬂuids follow the
Bingham models: after a yielding point, they behave as
viscous liquids. The property that can be changed is the
yield stress itself. The MR operating principle has been
used to realize VDAs in vehicles [21.57] and also in
robotics [21.58]. A more accurate model and a com-
parison between MR and FD can be found in [21.54],
where it is pointed out that MR dampers, like the FDs,
present high hysteresis.
Eddy current dampers (ECDs) are magnetic devices
composed of a conductive material moving through
a magnetic ﬁeld. Eddy currents are induced and cre-
ate a damping force that is proportional to the relative
velocity between the material and the magnetic ﬁeld.
These devices can be realized with both permanent
magnets and electromagnets. In both cases, there is
the possibility of designing a device whose damping
can be adjusted [21.59, 60]. In one case, the damping
coefﬁcient can be controlled by varying the intensity
of the magnetic ﬁeld, in the other case, by modifying
the geometry of the conductor, or the gap between the
conductor and the magnets (the effectiveness is shown
in [21.60]). Electromagnetic ECDs have the advantage
of not requiring mobile parts, but have the disadvantage
of consuming power for maintaining a ﬁxed damping
value. Being ﬂuid-free and contact-free, ECD dampers
are clean and wear-free. However, they typically ex-
ert low damping torque at high velocity, thus requiring
gearboxes for typical robotic applications.
Fluidic dampers are probably the most widely used
in robotics and general machinery and can be divided
into two main categories: turbulent ﬂow dampers (high
Reynolds number) which produce a damping force pro-
portional to the square of the relative speed; and lam-
inar ﬂow dampers (low Reynolds number), where the
damping force is proportional to relative speed. Simple
dampers are largely used in the automotive industry us-
ing an oriﬁce through which the viscous ﬂuid ﬂow is
turbulent. Such device generates, at a given frequency,
high damping for high amplitudes, but lower damping
for lower amplitudes, and thus, has the drawback of pre-
senting long lasting residual oscillations [21.56].
21.2.13 Artificial Muscles Arrangements
The basic technologies and elements reviewed above
can be arranged in many different ways to achieve ac-
tuators for soft robotics. While a detailed taxonomy of
arrangements is impossible here, the main distinction
is between actuators that have a constant mechanical
compliance characteristic, and those which can vary
stiffness. In the ﬁrst class are series elastic actuators
(SEA), which have been developed since the 1990s
for applications in humanoid locomotion and manip-
ulation [21.61]. An SEA may include a conventional,
rigid actuator connected to a compliant element, which
is in turn connected on the other end to the moving link.
The compliant element can exhibit a nonlinear compli-
ance (load-deformation) characteristic, which however,
is constant in time. SEA actuators, however, may use
torque and position sensing at both ends of the elastic
element and modify its natural mechanical impedance
by virtue of active control of the motor. The impedance
range to which an SEA can be effectively controlled is
centered around the natural (passive) impedance of the
elastic element and is limited in span by motor torque
limits and overall control bandwidth.
As opposed, VSA can vary their natural impedance
directly at the physical level, so that active control
can be superimposed and ultimately achieve larger
ranges of effective impedance than SEA. The idea of
varying the mechanical impedance of actuation comes
directly from natural musculoskeletal systems, which
often exhibit this feature. VSA systems can change in-
dependently the equilibrium point of the moving body
part, and the stiffness of the elastic force between the
equilibrium point and the displaced body position (thus
effectively implementing Feldman’s equilibrium point,
or -model for human movement control [21.62]).
Accordingly, VSAs always use two prime movers.
A rough distinction can be made between VSA ar-

Actuators for Soft Robotics
21.2 Soft Robot Design
507
Part B | 21.2
q1
qM
q2
qL
qL
Stiffness motor
Motor
Link
Motor
1
Motor
2
Link
qS
τS
τM
τ1
τ2
JS,bS
JL,bL
JL,bL
J1,b1
J2,b2
JM,bM
f(qL–qM,qS)
f1(qL–q1)
f2(qL–q2)
Fig. 21.2 Explicit stiffness
variation and agonist–
antagonist arrangements
a)
K1
K2
b)
K1
K3
K2
c)
K1
K2
K1'
K2'
Fig.21.3a–c Three basic antagonist
arrangements: (a) Simple, (b) cross-
coupled and (c) bidirectional
rangements where the motors are explicitly dedicated
to either equilibrium or stiffness control, and arrange-
ments where the roles are mixed (Fig. 21.2). Explicit
stiffness variation arrangements include, for example,
the MIA (mechanical impedance adjuster) [21.63]), the
AMASC (actuator with mechanically adjustable series
compliance) [21.64], the MACCEPA (mechanically ad-
justable compliance and controllable equilibrium posi-
tion actuator) [21.65]), and the variable stiffness joint
(VS-Joint) [21.66]. Other VSA designs use instead
agonist–antagonist (AA) arrangements, either in its
simplest version, directly inspired to biological models,
with two actuators pulling against each other [21.67,
68], or in other variants such as the cross-coupled
AA [21.69] and bidirectional AA [21.70] arrangements
(Fig. 21.3) It is a matter of simple calculations [21.71]
to appreciate that, in an AA arrangement, the elastic
elements must exhibit a nonlinear characteristic in or-
der for the joint stiffness to be variable. If each tendon
has a quadratic force–deformation relationship, then
the overall joint behaves as a linear spring with vari-
able spring constant K. A potential disadvantage of
AA arrangements using unilateral (e.g., tendon) cou-
plings between the prime movers and the driven link
is that, to be able to exert a maximum torque  at
the link, two motors each capable of  are needed. To
alleviate this problem, the cross-coupled and bidirec-
tional design introduce the possibility for an agonist
actuator to also work in favour of the antagonist when
required.
Recent work in soft robotics has introduced phys-
ically variable damping on the rotor dynamics in con-
junction with series elastic or VSAs [21.72]. Physically
variable damping based on the ECD effect has been
demonstrated in haptic interfaces [21.73]. Some au-
thors introduced physical dampers in robotic design,
both in the so-called series damping actuator conﬁgura-
tion [21.58], or as a variable friction damper connected
to an SEA [21.55], and as a variable diaphragm laminar
damper module connected to a variable stiffness actua-
tor [21.74].
21.2.14 Specifications and Performance
The increasing number of available actuators for soft
robotics and the widening scope of applications are
rapidly creating a need for a simple language for ap-
plication developers and actuator providers to talk to-
gether. Just like the perspective user of conventional
hydraulic pistons or DC motors looks at spec sheets
for a concise description of the performance guaran-
teed by the product, a soft robot designer will need to
ﬁnd salient facts about different artiﬁcial muscles pre-
sented in a clear and homogeneous way. The European
project VIACTORS has dedicated a substantial effort to
investigate what the crucial parameters of different de-
signs are and has described a data sheet template that
organizes these contents both from the designer and the
user’s points of view [21.75–77]. The interested reader
is referred to these publications for details: it is inter-
esting to note here that, besides the characteristics that
are shared with conventional actuators (stall and peak
motor torque, max velocity, power, electrical and me-
chanical interfaces, etc.), there are few data and curves

Part B | 21.3
508
Part B
Design
that are speciﬁc of soft actuators: for instance, the range
of stiffness variability, and the settling time needed to
reach from minimum to maximum stiffness, or vice
versa.
21.3 Modeling Actuators for Soft Robotics
To approach the analysis and control of novel ac-
tuators for soft robotics, it is necessary to describe
their characteristics in terms of a mathematical model
which accounts for their static and dynamic behaviors.
We begin here by reviewing the familiar concept of
mechanical impedance in linear time-invariant single
degree of freedom (DOF) systems. Hence, in view of
the fact that actuator softness control often introduces
nonlinearity and time variance of the model, we pro-
ceed to generalize the concept. Finally, we move from
consideration of a single actuator to modeling of multi-
DOF, articulated soft robots.
21.3.1 The Mass–Spring–Damper Paradigm
The simplest example of mechanical impedance is a lin-
ear spring, that is, a sample of material which exhibits
a proportional relation between applied force f and
displacement at equilibrium y, y D cf . The proportion-
ality constant c is the spring compliance. The inverse
relation, that is, f D ky introduces the spring stiffness
k D c1. A spring can store an elastic energy V, whose
ﬁrst derivative with respect to the displacement y is the
force
f D @V.y/
y
;
and the second derivative is the spring stiffness constant
k D @2V.y/
@y2
:
The concepts of compliance and stiffness are gener-
alized from static (equilibrium) to dynamic cases by
introducing the notion of admittance and impedance,
respectively.
Consider a damper made of viscous material that
opposes to displacements proportionally to how quick
they are, that is, f D bPy, where b is the damping coef-
ﬁcient, and the inertial effects of accelerating an equiv-
alent mass m of material under deformation, f D mRy.
In most materials, the three effects occur at the same
time, and we have that the force/displacement relation
is described by an ordinary differential equation. In the
simple case of a single-DOF mass–spring–damper sys-
tem, we have
f D mRy C bPy C ky ;
(21.1)
that is, a relation between two functions of time, f .t/
and y.t/. Such a differential equation describes a dy-
namical system. This can be regarded as a causal
system if displacement (appearing with the highest-or-
der derivative) is regarded as the effect (or output),
and force as the cause (or input). Indeed, the knowl-
edge of initial conditions on displacement, and the time
course of force, determine all subsequent evolution of
displacement.
Insofar as the dynamical system (21.1) is linear
and time-invariant, its input–output behavior is conve-
niently studied via Laplace transforms from functions
in the domain of time t to functions in the domain of the
complex variable s. By denoting F.s/, Y.s/, Vy.s/ the
transforms of f .t/, y.t/, and vy.t/ D Py.t/, respectively,
one has immediately
F.s/ D .ms2 C bs C k/Y.s/
D .ms2 C bs C k/s1Vy.s/ :
(21.2)
The operator Z.s/ WD .ms2 C bs C k/s1 is called (me-
chanical) impedance of the spring–damper–mass sys-
tem. The reciprocal operator of impedance is called
admittance A.s/. Notice that the admittance operator is
causal, while impedance is not.
21.3.2 Nonlinear Mechanical Systems
Real materials and systems deform under applied forces
in more complicated ways than (21.1): in general, the
dynamics between forces and deformations include
nonlinearities, and can be of an order higher than
two. How do we extend to these cases the concept of
impedance (21.2), and speciﬁcally the notions of mass,
stiffness and damping?
There is no easy clearcut solution to this problem.
A straightforward approach is to ﬁnd a linear, second-
order model of type (21.1), which approximates well
enough the real dynamics, and take its parameters to
deﬁne those of the system. In this section we brieﬂy
review some of the implications of this approach.
Consider the relation between a force f 2 F (F here
is the set of allowed forces) applied at some point in
a material sample, and the displacement y 2 Y mea-
sured at equilibrium at the same point and along the
same direction of the force (Y the set of allowed dis-
placements). By ideally collecting all pairs .f .t/;y.t//
corresponding in an inﬁnite set of experiments (indexed

Actuators for Soft Robotics
21.3 Modeling Actuatorsfor Soft Robotics
509
Part B | 21.3
by t for convenience), one can describe the relation by
its graph G  F  Y. Notice that this relation does not
need to be a function: for hysteretic materials, for ex-
ample, there are more admissible values of one variable
corresponding to the same value of the other (Fig. 21.4).
Considering an analytic description of the graph G
given by the locus G.f ;y/ D 0, at regular points of the
graph a force function f .y/ is deﬁned for values of y in
a neighborhood of y0. The stiffness associated with such
a nonlinear force function can then be deﬁned as
k.y/ D df .y/
dy
D 
@G.f ; y/
@f
1 @G.f ; y/
@y
:
This can be generalized to a second-order, non-
linear dynamic setting by considering the relation
between forces, displacements, and ﬁrst- and sec-
ond-order derivatives of displacements and its graph
G  F  Y  DY  D2Y, comprised of 4-tuples d.t/ WD
.f .t/;y.t/; Py.t/; Ry.t// corresponding to an idealized, inﬁ-
nite set of experiments. (If hysteretic nonlinearities are
considered, it is necessary to describe the relation in
an extended space where hysteresis state variables are
introduced [21.78].) If G.f ; y; Py; Ry/ D 0 is an analytical
description of the graph, and d0 is a regular point, then
a force function f .y; Py; Ry/ is deﬁned in a neighborhood
of d0. More generally, when the system includes time-
varying parameters u.t/ – such as, for example, a stiff-
ening action in VSAs – one has G.f ; y; Py; Ry; u.t// D 0
and f .y; Py; Ry; u/. Following the linearization approach
set out above, we can deﬁne admittance along a given
(nominal) trajectory as the linear operator mapping
small changes of the external force with respect to its
nominal course, to changes in the resulting motion.
To do this, consider the nonlinear ordinary differential
equations (ODE) obtained by solving G.f ;y; Py; Ry; t/ D 0
Loading
Unloading
Force
Extension
Fig. 21.4 Elastic hysteresis of a rubber-like material
θ
θ
τe
τb
τt
τb
λb
λt
τt
τe
Fig. 21.5 A link subject to an external load and actuated by
two antagonistic actuators. Nomenclature refers to actuator
models used in (21.3) and (21.5), respectively
at a regular point with respect to Ry as
Ry D g.y; Py; f ; u/ ;
and its state space form, with x 2 R2, x1 D y, x2 D Py,
that is,
d
dt
 
x1
x2
!
D
 
x2
g.x1; x2; f ; u/
!
:
For given initial conditions x.0/ D Nx0 and a given nom-
inal course in time of the force Nf .t/, let Nx.t/ be the
nominal solution obtained. The ﬁrst-order approxima-
tion of the dynamics of the perturbed motion Qx.t/ D
x.t/  Nx.t/ corresponding to a change in force Qf .t/ D
f .t/  Nf.t/ is the linear time-varying system
PQx D
 
0
1
.t/
ˇ.t/
!
Qx C
 
0
.t/
!
Qf :
For the given system and the given motion, hence, we
can deﬁne instantaneous mass, stiffness, and damping
coefﬁcients as
m.t/ D 1.t/ I
b.t/ D m.t/ˇ.t/ I
k.t/ D m.t/.t/ :
Example 21.1
Consider the link in Fig. 21.5, actuated by two antag-
onistic actuators (with a role vaguely similar to that
of the biceps and triceps muscles at the elbow), with
a quadratic damping and subject to gravity and to an
external torque load e. The system dynamics are
I R C ˇ Pj Pj  b C t  mgl sin   e D 0 :

Part B | 21.3
510
Part B
Design
0
5
10
5
10
15
a) K (N m/rad)
Time (t)
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
0
15
b) B (N m s/rad)
Time (t)
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
Fig.21.6a,b Generalized stiffness (a) (dashed is without gravity term) and generalized damping for the example with
actuators as in (21.3), subject to a unit step in external torque at t D 1 s, and (b) with time-varying activation ub.t/ D ut.t/
linearly increasing from 0 at t D 1 s to 1 at t D 15 s. Numerical values used in simulation: I D 0:05 Nm s2, mgl D 0:1 Nm,
ˇ D 1 Nm s2, ˛ D 1 Nm, max D 2 Nm
0
5
10
5
10
15
a) K (N m/rad)
Time (t)
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
15
b) B (N m s/rad)
Time (t)
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
Fig.21.7a,b Generalized stiffness (a) (dashed is without gravity term) and generalized damping for the example with
actuators as in (21.5), subject to a unit step in external torque at t D 1 s, and (b) with time-varying reference angle
ub.t/ D ut.t/ linearly decreasing from =3 at t D 1 s to 0 at t D 15 s. Numerical values used in simulation as in Fig. 21.6,
except for ˛ D 0:3 Nm
Assume ﬁrst that the two actuators generate torques ac-
cording to the model [21.67]
b D .max  ˛b/ ub ;
t D .max  ˛t/ ut ;
(21.3)
where b D .=2C/, t D .=2/, max is the max-
imum isometric torque, ub, ut are the normalized con-
traction parameters (0 	 u 	 1, u D ub, ut), and ˛ is
a constant assumed to be equal for the two actuators. We
easily obtain m D I for the generalized mass, b. P/ D
2ˇj Pj for the generalized damping, and
k.; u/ D ˛.ub C ut/  mgl cos./
(21.4)
for the generalized stiffness. In the latter expression, the

Actuators for Soft Robotics
21.4 Modeling Soft Robots
511
Part B | 21.4
role of a gravity-induced term and that of a co-activation
stiffness term are apparent.
If
a
different
actuator
model
is
adopted,
namely [21.79]
b D ˛.b  ub/2 ;
t D ˛.t  ut/2 ;
(21.5)
where ub, ut are now interpreted as the rest lengths of
the actuators, one has
k./ D 2˛.  b  t/  mgl cos./ :
The values of stiffness and damping for the two
examples above, corresponding to time-varying values
of the control parameters, are reported in Figs. 21.6
and 21.7, respectively.

So far, we have considered only impedance for
second-order dynamical systems – basically modeling
actuators with a single moving element that domi-
nates the system inertia. In practice, one may encounter
higher order systems because of either (i) more complex
actuator systems, or (ii) the connection of actuators and
links in an articulated robot structure. The latter case
will be discussed in Sect. 21.4.
Examples of actuators with higher order dynam-
ics are the arrangements in Fig. 21.3: if the agonist
and antagonist prime movers as well as the driven
link have nonnegligible inertia, the dynamics are at
least of sixth order. If the system is linear, admit-
tance can still be deﬁned as the sixth-order transfer
function from link torque to link displacement: how-
ever, there is no natural way of associating an equiv-
alent single mass, spring or damper coefﬁcient. To
recover these notions, an approach could be to ap-
ply some form of model reduction of the higher order
dynamics to second order [21.80]. However, model
reduction is all but an obvious procedure, as the ap-
proximate heavily depends on how the similarity of
response between dynamics is measured. With nonlin-
ear systems, the problem is clearly even more com-
plicated. Overall, the topic is deﬁnitely worth further
investigation, which should take into account what
are the ultimate practical goals of deﬁning impedance
parameters.
21.4 Modeling Soft Robots
In this section, a brief introduction of dynamic mod-
els for soft robots is given, starting with a quite general
lumped-parameter formulation and successively intro-
ducing several simplifying assumptions.
A soft robot with lumped elasticities can be imag-
ined as a set of directly actuated rigid bodies with
conﬁguration  2 Rm, connected to the indirectly ac-
tuated rigid bodies (with conﬁguration vector q 2 Rn)
through viscoelastic forces, as exemplary sketched in
Fig. 21.8. The entire conﬁguration space of the system
is denoted by x D .; q/, x 2 R.nCm/. A quite gen-
eral abstraction of a compliant robot, which can be
used for the generic design of controllers, is given
by
M.x/Rx C c.x; Px/ C
@V.x/
@x
T
C d.x; Px/ D
 
m
ext
!
;
(21.6)
with M.x/ being the inertia matrix, c.x; Px/ the Cori-
olis and centrifugal vector, V the potential energy of
the elastic element and of the gravity forces, m 2 Rm
the actuator generalized forces acting as control inputs,
and ext 2 Rn the external torques acting on the robot as
a disturbance. The most relevant property of this struc-
ture is its underactuation, meaning that the system has
less control inputs .m/ than its conﬁguration space di-
mension .n C m/. However, in contrast to other purely
inertially coupled underactuated systems (for example
multiple pendulums such as the Acrobot [21.81].), for
the considered robots V.x/ is [21.82] positive deﬁ-
nite, implying that a unique equilibrium point exists for
each external torque with actuators in a ﬁxed conﬁgu-
θ1
q1
...
...
qn
τm1
θ2
τm2
θn
τmm
Fig. 21.8 A soft robot can be imagined as a set of directly
actuated rigid bodies with conﬁguration , connected to
the indirectly actuated rigid bodies (with conﬁguration co-
ordinates q through elastic forces). Note that in general,
inertial couplings, not depicted in the ﬁgure, might exist as
well

Part B | 21.4
512
Part B
Design
–0.2
–0.25
–0.1
–0.15
–0.05 0
0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25
Stiffness (N m/rad)
θ–q (rad)
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Fig. 21.9 Typical shapes of elastic torque characteristics,
denoted by nonlinear deﬂection dependency and a family
of linear curves, parameterized by 
ration  D 0 and that the linearization of the system
around an equilibrium point fx D x0; Px D 0g is con-
trollable. Typically, V.x/ D VG.x/ C V£.x/, that is, the
potential function is the sum of a gravity potential
VG and an elastic potential V. The elastic poten-
tial function V.x/ is a convex function (Fig. 21.9),
increasing strongly enough to compensate for the desta-
bilizing effects of VG, such that V.x/ is convex as well.
Furthermore, the system contains in general a dissi-
pative friction force d.Px; x/ with PxTd.Px; x/ 	 0. Note
that between the directly and indirectly actuated states,
there can exist also inertial couplings, as depicted in
Fig. 21.10. Therefore, M.x/ is in general a fully cou-
pled matrix.
While at ﬁrst sight looking pretty general and sim-
ple, model (21.6) is actually quite complex due to the
full, parallel inertia and stiffness coupling. This can be
seen by rewriting it in the less compact form
 
M.q; /
Q.q; /
QT.q; /
B.q; /
!  
Rq
R
!
C c.q; ; Pq; P/ C g.q; /
C
0
BB@
@V.q; /T
@q
@V.q; /T
@
1
CCA C d.Pq; P/ D
 
ext
m
!
:
(21.7)
The above formulation emphasized the inertial cou-
pling terms Q.q; / as well as possible dependen-
cies of the inertial properties on both motor and link
conﬁguration.
Although (21.6) is the only formulation general
enough to describe most soft robot designs with lumped
elasticities encountered in the literature so far, it might
pose substantial difﬁculties in controller design, that
is, for the fact that it is not necessarily feedback-lin-
earizable. (See, for example, the full dynamic model
θ
q
τ
Fig. 21.10 In this example, the directly and the indirectly
actuated states are both inertially and elastically coupled.
This leads to a fully coupled inertia matrix in the dynamics
equations
of ﬂexible joint robots from [21.83, 84], which is not
static state-linearizable.) Therefore, several simplifying
assumptions are encountered in the literature, justiﬁed
by particular robot design choices:

A1: The system has no inertia coupling between
the directly and the indirectly actuated stated, but
only elastic couplings. This assumption includes
the usual neglecting of motor gyroscopic effects
for high-gear actuators [21.85] as well the neglec-
tion of small inertial couplings usually appearing in
the VIA mechanisms [21.86] and imposes some re-
strictions related to mechanical design (Fig. 21.10
for a counter-example). The assumption leads to
a block-diagonal structure of the mass matrix.

A2: The gravity potential energy as well as the vari-
ation of the mass matrix is only due to the link-side
variables q. This implies that also the Coriolis and
centrifugal torques are only depending on q and Pq.

A3: The dynamics of the stiffness adjusting mecha-
nism is negligible; the system dynamics is mainly
described by the states q and a directly actuated
state vector  2 Rn of the same dimension as q,
corresponding to one principal motor per joint. The
remaining m  n motor coordinates of the stiffness
adjusters are treated as parameters and are usually
denoted by . In this case, the elastic potential
reduces to V.q  ; /. This is already a quite re-
stricting assumption, applying mainly for SEA-type
actuators with a dedicated stiffness adjuster, as typ-
ically used in the design of large joints of arms and
legs. The model is practically valid only if stiff-
ness is changed off-line or at low rate. Classical
antagonistic actuators including two equally sized
motors, as used, for example, in some robotic hand
designs [21.87] do not fulﬁll this assumption.

A4: A further particular choice of V.q  ; / is
that of a quadratic function in q   such that the

Actuators for Soft Robotics
21.5 Stiffness Estimation
513
Part B | 21.5
joint torque is
 D @V.; /T
@
D K./ ;
(21.8)
with
 D q  .
This
implies
that
the
stiff-
ness of the actuator depends only on the stiff-
ness adjuster and not on the deﬂection of the
springs [21.82]. This assumption introduces ad-
ditional simpliﬁcations in controller design, ap-
plies however only to a restricted subclass of soft
actuators.
The model, under assumptions A1, A2 reduces to
 
M.q/
0
0
B
!  
Rq
R
!
C
 
c.q; Pq/
0
!
C
 
g.q/
0
!
C
0
BB@
@V.q; /T
@q
@V.q; /T
@
1
CCA C d.Px/ D
 
ext
m
!
:
(21.9)
Note that the model above does not make any fur-
ther speciﬁcation regarding the dimensions m and n,
thus covering a broad range of robots, including as par-
ticular cases:

The classical, fully antagonistic case with m D 2n.

The quite popular n C 1 tendon design for robot
ﬁngers which leads to m D n C 1. More generally,
2n > m > n tendon designs are encountered.

Synergy hands with m < n, where each synergistic
actuator acts over springs on several links.

Multi-articular muscles, as mostly existing in bio-
logical systems.
Under assumption A3 the size of  reduces to the
size of q.m D n/ and the model becomes
 
M.q/
0
0
B
!  
Rq
R
!
C
 
c.q; Pq/
0
!
C
 
g.q/
0
!
C
 


!
C d.Px/ D
 
ext
m
!
;
(21.10)
with T D @V.; /=@: It is then quite close to the
ﬂexible joint models treated in detail in Chap. 11. The
similarity becomes even stronger, when the torque is de-
scribed by (21.8) under assumption A4. Note that the
dimension of  in (21.10) is half of the dimension of
the same variable in (21.9) since the dynamics of the
stiffness adjuster is neglected.
21.5 Stiffness Estimation
Strictly speaking, impedance is a differential operator
relating physical quantities (forces and displacements).
Rather than a direct measurement, the process of char-
acterizing impedance of a system is therefore a process
of dynamical system identiﬁcation.
In typical procedures for impedance measurement
of material samples, such as, for example, organic
tissue samples, the measured system is put into me-
chanical contact with another mechanical system, the
instrument. The resulting compound dynamical system
is then subject to a dynamical excitation of different
nature, and data are collected. Experiments are typi-
cally conducted by touching the sample with a small,
hard, vibrating probe. On the basis of measurements
on the probe motion (displacement y, velocity Py or ac-
celeration Ry) and the applied force f , the mechanical
impedance of the sample is inferred. A vast literature
is available on the metrology of impedance of mate-
rials, and the reader is referred there for a detailed
survey [21.88].
The problem of measuring impedance in articulated
systems is obviously more complex than for material
samples, but is of great relevance to several ﬁelds –
including notably human movement science and neu-
roscience, who strive to understand how humans vary
and control impedance in their movements. When the
hand is slightly perturbed during arm movements, it
tends to return to the undisturbed trajectory [21.20,
89], as if the hand would be connected to a spring
along the planned trajectory. This spring-like property
stems mainly from muscle elasticity and the stretch re-
ﬂex, which produce – through the complex leverage
of muscles at different limb conﬁgurations – a restor-
ing force toward the undisturbed trajectory. Methods to
characterize the mechanical impedance of human limbs
have been the subject of extensive research [21.90–98].
Current protocols for identifying impedance in human
motion typically recur to experiments in which per-
turbations are purposefully injected in the system, and
their effects are measured. In artiﬁcial robotic systems,
impedance parameters can also be calculated on the
basis of a precise description of the model (wherever
this is available), or obtained through accurate calibra-
tion procedures. In both natural and artiﬁcial systems,
it would be of great utility to have a method which
could identify impedance in real time, without per-

Part B | 21.5
514
Part B
Design
turbing the normal execution of the task, and robustly
to inaccurate modeling and to time-varying parame-
ters altering calibration results. Of particular interest
in robotics is the application of such methods to VIAs
for soft robotics. As discussed, these can be imple-
mented in a variety of ways and arrangements, but all
designs share a fundamentally unavoidable nonlinear
behavior, which makes stiffness measurement a tough
problem.
According to the description of impedance as a dif-
ferential operator, its characterization can be cast as
an identiﬁcation problem of a dynamical system. To
date, the literature on this subject is not abundant, and
it can be subdivided in two main approaches, that is,
parametric and nonparametric identiﬁcation. Paramet-
ric approaches postulate that a model of the actuator
generating variable stiffness is known in its structure,
but that some of its parameters are unknown. Non-
parametric approaches do not use such an assumption,
and are thus more general; however, as we will see,
nonmodel-based observers have the disadvantage that
they cannot go to sleep after reaching convergence, and
require persistent excitation to stay tuned to variable
impedance.
21.5.1 Observers for Linear Impedance
To introduce the problem, let us ﬁrst consider the case
of constant linear impedance identiﬁcation in the ele-
mentary system (21.1)
f D mRy C bPy C ky ;
where we assume that m, b, k are unknown but con-
stant, while y and f are available from position and
force measurements at one of the ends of the compli-
ant elements.
Before embarking in building an algorithm to es-
timate impedance, it is important to establish that the
problem is well posed, that is, that a solution exists and
is unique. To this purpose, consider an extended state
vector
z D

y
Py
 k
m
 b
m
1
m

;
and rewrite the dynamics (21.1) as a nonlinear dynami-
cal system
Pz D
0
BBBBBB@
z2
z1z3 C z2z4
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCA
C
0
BBBBBB@
0
z5
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCA
f ;
y D h.z/ D z1 :
(21.11)
The identiﬁcation of the impedance parameters can thus
be cast as a nonlinear observability problem, that is,
from the knowledge of the input f and output y, es-
timate the initial state z.0/, and in particular its three
last components which completely determine the lin-
ear impedance. The observability codistribution for this
system is
˝.z/ D
span
0
BBBBBBBBB@
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
z3
z4
z1
z2
0
0
0
0
0
1
z3z4 z3 C z2
4 z2 C z1z4 z1z3 C 2z2z4 0
0
0
0
z5
z4
1
CCCCCCCCCA
:
It is easy to check that, for m, b, k > 0, the ob-
servability codistribution has codimension zero for
all states, except if z1 D z2 D 0. Hence, whenever
the system is not in stationary equilibrium, the
three linear constant impedance parameters can, in
principle, be reconstructed from position and force
measurements.
To actually estimate the impedance in this case, dif-
ferent methods can be adopted. These include standard
off-line identiﬁcation techniques (which exploit the lin-
ear nature of the regressor for the unknown parameters),
such as, for example, in [21.99], or on-line nonlinear
state observers (e.g., extended Kalman ﬁlters) applied
to system (21.11) [21.100].
21.5.2 Variable Stiffness Observers
Unfortunately, the generalization of the above straight-
forward approach to the case when impedance is non-
linear and/or time-varying is not trivial. To convince
oneself, it is sufﬁcient to consider the case that, instead
of the linear spring term ky, a nonlinear and time-vary-
ing spring function s.y;u.t// is introduced in (21.1),
that is
f D mRy C bPy C s.y; u/ :
(21.12)
In the s.y; u.t// term, u indicates an exogenous in-
put that commands changes in stiffness. For instance,
disregarding gravity in Example 21.1 earlier, u would
represent the co-activation term ub C ut in (21.4).
21.5.3 Parametric Estimation
A ﬁrst approach to identify stiffness can be based on the
assumption that the arrangement of the variable stiff-
ness actuator is known (Fig. 21.2), and that a parametric

Actuators for Soft Robotics
21.6 Cartesian Stiffness Control
515
Part B | 21.6
description of the spring function is available, for ex-
ample, in terms of a ﬁnite basis expansion. In this case,
parametric stiffness observers have been proposed that
work on the motor side, that is, considering the dynam-
ics of each motor as
 D J R C b P  f ./ ;
(21.13)
where  is the torque of the motor, J and b are the motor
inertia and damping, respectively, and  D   q is the
displacement angle with q being the link angle. These
parameters and signals being known or measured, the
problem is to estimate the stiffness ./ D @f
@ , as-
suming it can be approximated by the truncated Taylor
expansion
i.i/ 
N
X
jD0
˛i
j
.i/j
jŠ
:
In [21.101], a parametric stiffness observer is presented
to solve this problem. The idea is to ﬁrst obtain an esti-
mation of the spring force function f ./ by combining
a modiﬁed kinematic Kalman ﬁlter for the estimation
of the ﬁrst derivative of q and a ﬁrst-order ﬁlter. Then
f ./ is approximated by a power series whose co-
efﬁcients are estimated by a least-squares algorithm.
Finally,  is obtained by analytically differentiating
the Taylor expansion. The method has been demon-
strated to work well in simulation, and encouraging
experimental results have been reported. The method is
somewhat sensitive to the choice of several parameters,
which require careful tuning. Subsequently, [21.102,
103] proposed algorithms based on differential algebra
and modulating functions, respectively, that improved
convergence and robustness avoiding taking any deriva-
tives and are very easy to tune.
21.5.4 Nonparametric Estimation
When no information on the structure of f or on the
variable u.t/ is available, the only possible approach
is on the link side, that is trying to estimate the joint
stiffness looking only at the link dynamics, without as-
suming any structure for the spring stiffness function.
A nonparametric method was proposed in [21.104] to
measure stiffness in a system such as (21.12), which
can be easily derived from the idea of differentiating
(21.12) once with respect to time
Pf D m«y C bRy C Py C suPu ;
where
su WD @s.y; u/
u
:
The method is based on the continuous update of an
estimate O of stiffness. Based on a best effort prediction
for the link torque Pf as
POf D m«y C bRy C O Py ;
it was shown that, under mild assumptions, the update
law
PO D ˛.Pf  POf /sgn.y/ ;
(21.14)
with ˛ > 0 makes O.t/ converge to the true stiffness
value .t/ within a uniformly ultimately bounded error.
The error bound is affected by errors in obtaining ﬁl-
tered approximations of derivatives of the position y.t/
and of the applied force f .t/, and in estimating mass and
damping coefﬁcients m and b, respectively. Conversely,
the error can be reduced by increasing the gain factor ˛.
As opposed to parametric methods, no assumptions are
made on the function s.y; u/, except that it is smooth
and bounded in both arguments. The method has been
experimentally demonstrated to work well, practically
converging to the true stiffness value in all circum-
stances except when stiffness is varied without moving
the link. In this case (where it is indeed theoretically
impossible to observe stiffness from the link side), the
method of [21.104] simply stops updating the stiffness
estimate, to resume as soon as a sufﬁciently rich dy-
namic excitation is again applied to the link.
21.6 Cartesian Stiffness Control
21.6.1 Cartesian Impedance Control
The Cartesian impedance control paradigm is one of
the most widely used manipulation control approaches
in modern robotics to handle contact situations [21.90,
105, 106]. It combines the advantages of compliant ma-
nipulation with the ease and intuitiveness of a task
description in Cartesian coordinates. Indeed, this con-
trol technique has been one of the motivations for the
research of variable-impedance-actuated robots. There-
fore, it is a natural aim to analyze and transfer Cartesian
impedance control concepts to soft robots.
The goal addressed in this section is to realize a de-
sired Cartesian impedance behavior at the tool center
point (TCP) of a variable- impedance- actuated robot.
Following a central paradigm of VIA, the mechanical

Part B | 21.6
516
Part B
Design
robot parameters need to be tuned such that the desired
behavior is naturally achieved on a mechanism level to
the largest extent possible.
With the model from (21.10), the VIA joints shall
be adjusted to realize a Cartesian stiffness. The stiff-
ness behavior is described by a constant stiffness matrix
KC D @f=@x 2 Rmm as the relation between the Carte-
sian wrench f and the Cartesian displacement x. The n
passive and adjustable joint stiffness components pro-
vide the diagonal matrix KJ D @=@q 2 Rnn with the
joint torques  and the joint positions q. Decoupled joint
compliance is assumed. The mapping from the Carte-
sian stiffness space to the joint stiffness space is given
by T W KJ D T.KC/. This transformation can be written
as
KJ D @
@q D @.J.q/TKCx/
@q
D J.q/TKCJ.q/  @J.q/TKCx
@q
I
(21.15)
J.q/ D @f.q/
@q
is the manipulator Jacobian, where f.q/
is the forward kinematics mapping. x D xd  x is the
Cartesian position error between the desired and the
actual position. The ﬁrst part of (21.15) reﬂects the stiff-
ness around the equilibrium point. The second part of
(21.15) is due to the change of the Jacobian [21.107].
The Cartesian stiffness at the equilibrium position
.x D 0/, resulting from a speciﬁc joint stiffness, can
be obtained by solving the inverse problem of (21.15),
KC D T 1.KJ/. Note that at the equilibrium position
the second term in (21.15) vanishes. Using compliance
matrices C D K1
 , it results from
CC D J.q/CJJ.q/T
(21.16)
that
KC D .J.q/K1
J J.q/T/1 :
(21.17)
In [21.108], it was investigated that an arbitrary
Cartesian stiffness matrix with three translational and
three rotational stiffnesses .KC 2 R66/ can hardly be
reached by a 7-DOF robot, even exploiting the null
space. Bounds are imposed by the technical realization,
namely the diagonal joint stiffness matrix or mechanical
VSA stiffness limits. Furthermore, the transformation
of the joint stiffness into the Cartesian space is strongly
determined by the robot kinematics and pose.
To overcome these restrictions and improve the
stiffness tracking performance, one can use the pas-
sive stiffness in combination with an active impedance
controller [21.109], which widely extends the achiev-
able Cartesian stiffness range. Active control adapts
the stiffness in a wider range, and the elastic elements
are capable of absorbing impacts and increase the en-
ergy efﬁciency. By combining the two concepts, one
can beneﬁt from the individual advantages. The serial
interconnection of the active stiffness Kactive and the
passive one Kpassive results in an overall stiffness Kres
(Fig. 21.11)
K1
res D K1
active C K1
passive :
(21.18)
To compute the active and passive stiffness com-
ponents, a two-step optimization algorithm can be
used [21.109]. It achieves ﬁrst a passive stiffness as
close as possible to the desired one and secondly de-
signs the active stiffness to minimize the residual.
21.6.2 Independent Position
and Stiffness Control
Variable stiffness robots are well suited for manip-
ulation tasks involving the interaction with an envi-
ronment. Such tasks are often speciﬁed by a robot
pose trajectory and an associated stiffness trajectory.
As VSA robots allow us to vary joint position and
stiffness in a mechanical way, a direct approach is to
adjust the respective position or stiffness inputs. De-
pending upon the joint setup, these inputs are reﬂected
by distinct actuators [21.66] or can be achieved by
a simple coordinating transformation arising from the
coupling of actuators [21.69]. The underlying idea is to
embed and thereby achieve the desired robot behavior
on a mechanical level. Additional control goals, espe-
cially important in the presence of disturbances, are the
minimization of deﬂections and the suppression of vi-
brations.
The solutions to achieve independent control of link
motion and stiffness can be classiﬁed in two categories:

One class of controllers exploits the knowledge of
system models.
In [21.110] and [21.111], feedback linearization ap-
proaches are used to transform the robot dynamics
Fig. 21.11 Combination of active impedance controller
(brown springs) with passive compliance (black springs) to
achieve a desired Cartesian stiffness

Actuators for Soft Robotics
21.6 Cartesian Stiffness Control
517
Part B | 21.6
into an equivalent model of simpler form. A de-
coupled chain of integrators can be achieved, as
long as system inversion is possible. The simple
structure of the equivalent dynamics allows for si-
multaneous decoupling and accurate tracking of
motion and stiffness reference proﬁles. However,
the abstraction of the robot dynamics hinders the
implementation of performance criteria.
Another model-based approach aims to achieve
a reduced order model [21.112]. Therefore, separate
dynamics are identiﬁed in the robot system, namely
the arm, the positioning actuators, and the stiffness
actuators. The independence of these dynamics is
shown by a singular perturbation analysis. A cas-
caded control structure is based upon this analysis.
The abstraction that this class of controllers pro-
vides, allows for theoretical simplicity and design
ﬂexibility. On the other hand, robot performance
and robustness in the presence of model uncer-
tainty are not guaranteed. High-model accuracy and
high derivatives of states are often required. Fur-
thermore, to conform with the idea of embodiment
additional effort is necessary, as the controllers of-
ten introduce a different robot behavior.

The second class of controllers are energy-shaping-
based controllers.
One of the ﬁrst controllers in this category was
presented in [21.7]. The controller acts on motor po-
sition and uses a transformation to independently
control the joint position and stiffness. The con-
troller is validated on a one-DOF VSA joint.
An extension and a generalization have been pre-
sented in [21.113]. The control design formulation
is valid for a quite general form of underactu-
ated Euler–Lagrange systems including variable
impedance robots. Herein, the controller action can
be interpreted as shaping of the potential and kinetic
robot energy ensuring system passivity.
A general task is described as to control k indepen-
dent output variables given by q D h.x/ to desired
constant values qd 2 Rk. x 2 Rn is the vector of
generalized coordinates, where n D 2k is the usual
case for VSA robots. Given the structure of VSA
robots (21.10), a new variable Nq can be found. This
is a collocated (directly actuated) variable, which
is statically equivalent to the noncollocated (indi-
rectly actuated) q. Using this collocated variable
for a passive feedback ensures stability and can be
interpreted as shaping the potential energy of the
system.
The variable Nq is achieved by solving the static so-
lution of the link side equation
 C g.q/ D 0
(21.19)
for q. Except for very simple cases, this equation has
to be solved numerically. Due to the convex nature,
this is a fast and numerically robust task in practice.
Consequently, the controller
u D g.Nq/  JT
Nq./Kp.Nq  qd/  Kd P
(21.20)
stabilizes the desired position qd; g.Nq/ is a feed for-
ward term, compensating for the gravity. The use
of Nq enables arbitrarily low controller gains even
for large displacements from the equilibrium. JNq
is a Jacobian mapping the collocated variable on
the statical equivalent Nq. Global asymptotic stabil-
ity based on LaSalle’s invariance theorem can be
shown.
The approach can be extended in order to include
also the feedback of torque and torque deriva-
tive, with the effect of reducing the apparent ac-
tuator inertia and friction. This allows improving
the transient performance while remaining within
the passivity framework. A torque feedback of the
form
m D BB1
 u C .I  BB1
 / ;
(21.21)
with a new control input u leads to a new subsystem
with scaled motor inertia
B R C  D u :
(21.22)
The torque controller can therefore be interpreted as
a scaling of the kinetic energy of the rotors in order
to reduce the vibrations caused by the joint ﬂexi-
bility. The controlled system allows again a passive
representation.
The energy shaping approach provides excellent
performance in the static case and for well damped
systems. Some joints show low intrinsic damping to
enable joint torque estimation and energy efﬁciency.
In this case it is desirable to add additional damp-
ing via control or to include a physical variable
damping element. Several damping control struc-
tures can be considered. A simple gain scheduling
approach for a one-DOF system has been presented
in [21.114]. Local linear sub problems are identiﬁed
on which a linear quadratic regulator (LQR) state
feedback controller is designed. The nonlinearity of
the robot dynamics requires to adapt the controller
poles dependent on the system state, which is espe-
cially hard for the multi-joint robots.
A physically motivated state feedback control ap-
proach for multi-DOF VSA robots has been pre-
sented in [21.115] using an eigenvalue-based modal
decomposition.

Part B | 21.7
518
Part B
Design
21.7 Periodic Motion Control
Robotic tasks, such as walking, jumping, running, and
some pick-and-place motions, are essentially periodic
motions. During these tasks, the natural oscillatory dy-
namics of compliant actuators can be ideally exploited
to increase performance and energy efﬁciency. It is
well known that fast running animals store and recover
a substantial amount of energy during a running gait pe-
riod in their tendons and muscles. Also human running
strongly relies on elastic energy storage.
Exciting periodic motions in a highly nonlinear
multibody system by using nonlinear elastic actuators
is, however, a nontrivial task. While modal oscillations
and their control are very well understood for linear sys-
tems, the nonlinear generalization is a very active topic
of research. Since we consider that the ability to per-
form (quasi) periodic motions with high velocity and
force at low weight will be one of the major beneﬁts
of soft robots, we dedicate an extensive section to this
topic.
The topic of exploiting intrinsic elasticity for pe-
riodic motions was addressed in robotics by [21.116–
120] among others. Two basic approaches can be dis-
tinguished:

Tracking an arbitrary desired periodic trajectory, or
enforcing an arbitrary oscillatory closed-loop be-
havior, by control while simultaneously adjusting
the compliance of the actuator such that the control
effort is minimal.

Exciting and sustaining intrinsic oscillatory dynam-
ics of the compliantly actuated robotic system by
control. Completion of a given task implies that this
intrinsic oscillation modes correspond to the task by
the initial mechanical design and by online adjust-
ment of the robot conﬁguration and of its intrinsic
actuator stiffness.
Depending on the design of the compliantly actu-
ated robotic system, the above control approaches have
to cope with underactuation, model nonlinearities, and
multiple-DOF structures.
21.7.1 Periodic Motion Tracking
and Stiffness Adaptation
The idea of tracking a periodic trajectory in the link-
side variables q with minimal torque is inspired by
classical rigid-robot control. The approach [21.117]
considers, for example, robotic systems with elastic el-
ements in parallel to the main actuators
M.q/Rq C .C.q; Pq/ C D/Pq C g.q/ C K.q  / D  :
(21.23)
Since  is assumed to be constant here, the model re-
duces in this case to a fully actuated robot dynamics
with parallel elasticity, being thus simpler than (21.6).
The objectives of the controller are:
1. Tracking a periodic trajectory qd.t C T/ D qd.t/
with period T such that q.t/ ! qd.t/
2. Minimizing the actuator torque  by optimizing the
stiffness K.
Considering the actuator torque required to generate
the desired motion
d D M.qd/Rqd C ŒC.qd; Pqd/ C D Pqd
C g.qd/ C K.qd  / ;
a stiffness matrix Kopt is deﬁned to be optimal if it min-
imizes the cost function
J.K/ D
iTCT
Z
iT
d.K;t/Td.K;t/dt :
(21.24)
In the case of the single-DOF system
mRq C dPq C kq D  ;
(21.25)
with constant system parameters m, d, k > 0, the
desired, sinusoidal motion qd.t/ D a sin !t obviously
minimizes the cost function (21.24), when the stiffness
is kopt D m!2. With the optimal stiffness, the sinusoidal
motion with an arbitrary amplitude a > 0 corresponds
to a resonance motion, since the angular frequency ! D
p
kopt=m of the desired trajectory corresponds to the
resonance frequency of the system (21.25).
The method proposed in [21.117] extends this sim-
ple concept of resonance to the multi-DOF system
(21.23). Various online or ofﬂine optimization algo-
rithms can be deﬁned to minimize the cost function
(21.24). For example, [21.117] uses the parameter ad-
justment law
Pk D diag.q  /
h
PQq C KBs.Qq/
i
to adapt the stiffness K D diag.k/. The controller gain
matrix KB is positive deﬁnite and diagonal and the
adaptation gain  is a positive deﬁnite matrix. The
rationale behind this law is to increase the stiffness
whenever the elastic deﬂection .  q/ has the oppo-
site sign to the tracking error. In this case, a stiffness
increase reduces the tracking error. The stiffness is re-
duced whenever the elastic torque increases the tracking

Actuators for Soft Robotics
21.7 Periodic Motion Control
519
Part B | 21.7
error. In particular, the control error Qq D q  qd is satu-
rated by functions si.Qqi/ satisfying certain boundedness
constraints. These saturated functions are important for
the stability analysis in [21.117].
The paper [21.121] considers dynamic systems with
elastic elements either in parallel with the main actuator
as in (21.23), or in series as in
f.Rq; Pq; q; t/ D K.q  /
(21.26)
B R D K.q  / C  ;
(21.27)
where B represents the constant inertia matrix of
the main motor part of the model. The objectives
of [21.117] were extended to compute the optimal value
of a constant stiffness for minimizing energy consump-
tion in a periodic task for series conﬁguration, and both
the optimal stiffness and spring preload values for the
parallel case.
Assuming that K D diag.Kj/ and B D diag.Bj/ (the
second assumption is required in the serial case) it is
shown how to derive expressions of the optimal ac-
tuation parameters for minimizing energy-related cost
functions such as (21.24) and
J.K/ D
iTCT
Z
iT
w d.K; t/Tw d.K; t/dt :
(21.28)
where w d.K; t/ D d.K;t/  P d.K;t/, with  denot-
ing element-wise multiplication. Rather surprisingly,
it is shown in [21.121] that it is possible to save
lengthy iterations and simulations by computing ana-
lytical expressions for the optimal stiffness and preload
as integral functions of any given desired joint trajecto-
ries: for example, the series stiffness that minimizes the
cost (21.24) is given by the formula
K
j D

R iTCT
iT
B2
j Rfj.Rqd; Pqd; qd; t/dt
R iTCT
iT
BjRfj.Rqd; Pqd; qd; t/.BjRqd;j C fj.Rqd; Pqd; qd; t//dt
:
(21.29)
21.7.2 Controlled Oscillatory Dynamics
The basic idea to generate periodic motions is here
to control the output of the joint such that it be-
haves like a desired, oscillatory dynamic system rather
than imposing a predeﬁned, time-dependent trajec-
tory [21.118]. The resulting motion will be therefore
depending on initial conditions and possible perturba-
tions, but will eventually converge to the periodic orbit.
For simplicity, here we describe the concept for the
model of a single variable stiffness actuated joint, satis-
fying
mRq C @V.; q/
@q
D 0 :
(21.30)
The output position of the joint is denoted q 2 R and
the velocities P D u 2 R2 of the two actuators of the
VIA joint are assumed as control inputs. Note that this
model corresponds to the ﬁrst row in (21.9) with m D 2
and n D 1. Let us assume a generic family of desired
oscillatory dynamics
Rq C a.q/ D 0 ;
(21.31)
with a.q/ chosen such that a periodic orbit results. In
particular, a.q/ can be the derivative of a desired po-
tential function Vd.q/. The goal is to control the system
(21.30) such that
h.;q/ D a.q/ 1
m
@V£.; q/
@q
D 0
(21.32)
holds.
With
initial
conditions
.q.0/; Pq.0/;1.0/;
2.0// 2 h.0/1 the constraint (21.32) can be fulﬁlled,
if the control u satisﬁes the constraint on velocity level,
that is, Ph.; q/ D 0. Since P D u is the control input,
this implies
Ph.;q/ D A.; q/u C b.; q; Pq/ D 0 ;
(21.33)
with
A.;q/ WD 1
m
@2V£.; q/
@q@
;
(21.34)
b.;q; Pq/ WD
@a.q/
@q
 1
m
@2V£.; q/
@q2

Pq :
(21.35)
Using a generalized right inverse A of the matrix A,
the control
u D A.; q/b.;q; Pq/ ;
(21.36)
fulﬁlls the velocity constraint (21.33).
The solution of (21.33) with regard to u is not
unique, as the problem is under-constrained. By choos-
ing a particular generalized pseudoinverse of A of the
form A D B1AT.AB1AT/1, the solution (21.36)
minimizes the norm kuk2
B with respect to a certain met-
ric tensor B. If, for example, B is the matrix containing
the motor inertias then the kinetic energy of the actua-
tors is minimized. The under-constrained situation can
be interpreted such that the desired motion might be
achieved by both adjusting the stiffness and the motor
position of the actuators. Choosing a certain metric B
implicitly deﬁnes a weighting of the two components.

Part B | 21.7
520
Part B
Design
21.7.3 Exciting Intrinsic Oscillatory Dynamics
Exciting the intrinsic oscillatory behavior of mechani-
cal systems, that consist of kinetic and potential energy
storages, is inspired by the concept of resonance from
linear oscillation theory. The idea is to move the actu-
ators of the compliant system such that the trajectory
of link variables is periodic and thereby the energy in-
put due to the motor motion ideally counteracts only
the loss of dissipated energy. Instead of tracking an
arbitrary trajectory, here we are interested in exciting
intrinsic resonant motions of the system.
Consider the dynamical system of the form (21.10).
The objectives in this section are ﬁnding a control m
such that for a certain period T, the trajectories of link
variables fulﬁll q.t C T/ D q.t/, and the intrinsic oscil-
latory dynamics are exploited to the maximally possible
extent. Assuming that the motion q.t/ should take place
on one of several one-dimensional manifolds Zj  Rn
(referred to as oscillation modes), the problem can be
further reﬁned:

C1: Given the mapping z D z.q/. If zj represents the
coordinate of the desired oscillation mode, then the
control must ensure that oscillations excited in all
other modes decay, that is, for i ¤ j, Pzi ! 0.

C2: The motion of zj has to be controlled to sustain
a periodic motion with a desired oscillation ampli-
tude.
21.7.4 Model-Based Approach
To derive a coordinate transformation z D z.q/ and to
fulﬁll the above conditions, the free motion .ext D 0/
link-side dynamics of (21.10) can be modiﬁed by ﬁrst
considering  as control input, that is,
d D q? C K1
P .C.q; Pq/Pq C g.q/  KDPq C / ;
(21.37)
with  being a decoupling term to be speciﬁed later.
This leads to the closed-loop dynamics
M.q/Rq C KP.q  q?/ C KDPq D 0 :
(21.38)
In order to excite oscillations which are quite close
to the initial oscillation modes, consider coordinates zi
which correspond to the instantaneous modal coordi-
nates z D Q.q/1.q  q?/. Q.q/ is deﬁned on the ba-
sis of double diagonalization of M and K such that
Q.q/TQ.q/1 D M.q/ and Q.q/Tdiag..q//Q.q/1
D KP, where 	.q/ 2 Rn
>0 are generalized eigenvalues,
as proposed in [21.120]. By considering a damping
design
KD D 2Q.q/Tdiag
h
i
p
i.q/
i
Q.q/1 ;
and by choosing  as
 D ŒM.q/ RQ.q/ C KD PQ.q/z C 2M.q/ PQ.q/Pz ;
(21.39)
the resulting closed-loop dynamics
Rzi C 2i
p
i.q/Pzi C i.q/zi D 0
fulﬁlls the condition C1, if for i ¤ j, i > 0. Then, the
nonlinear damping term
j D 
Pj.q/
4j.q/
3
2
C 1
2
q
j.q/kHŒH.q; zj; Pzj/  Hd
produces a periodic motion zj.t C T/ D zj.t/. In partic-
ular, the resulting limit cycle corresponds to a level Hd
of the energy function H.q; zj; Pzj/ D 1
2.
1
	j.q/Pz2
j C z2
j / as
proposed in [21.122].
Note that applying the control (21.37) to the sys-
tem (21.10) requires a controller that ensures a track-
ing .t/ ! d.t/ of the desired motor position d.t/.
21.7.5 Model-Free Approach
Exciting oscillations in multi-DOF mechanical systems
without changing at all the original inertia and stiff-
ness properties of the plant requires either an ideally
separated excitation on a certain oscillation mode or
intrinsic physical damping properties that ensure the
decay of oscillations excited in the other modes cf.
condition C1. Note that in most cases fully decou-
pled modes do not even exist. On the basis of the
latter assumption, which is valid in biological systems
and some robotic examples [21.123], the control law
z D
(
sign.z/ Oz
if jzj > z
0
otherwise
(21.40)
excites a modal oscillation in a simple way. Thereby, the
linear transformation zj D w Tq approximates the non-
linear mapping 'W Rn ! Zj, such that the generalized
modal force can be transformed by the vector of weights
w 2 Rn, that is,
z D w T. .  q/   .?  q?// ;
(21.41)
where ? and q? satisfy the equilibrium conditions
g.q/C .q/ D 0. When the modal force z exceeds
a certain threshold z, the controller switches by an

Actuators for Soft Robotics
21.8 Optimal Control of Soft Robots
521
Part B | 21.8
amplitude Oz. This results in steps of desired motor
positions
d D ? C wz :
Since the motor positions  are not the control input
of the system (21.10), a motor PD controller should be
considered to ensure that .t/ ! d.t/.
Note that the oscillation controller requires neither
derivatives of measured signals nor model knowledge
of the plant. Therefore it is simple and robust, and
can be easily applied to different types of compli-
antly actuated systems. The control law is, at least
for the one-DOF case, the optimal solution for max-
imizing the oscillation amplitude in minimum time.
Furthermore, the control law deﬁned by (21.40) and
(21.41) is plausible to have a biological equivalent,
since it strongly resembles the computation function of
neurons.
21.8 Optimal Control of Soft Robots
Robot joints with intrinsic elasticity have some major
advantages over their rigid counterparts: they are more
robust, versatile, and can store energy. These properties
enable robots to realize motions which would not be
possible using stiff actuators of the same size. However,
the question remains open as to how elastic elements in
soft robots can be best controlled to exploit their po-
tential. Optimal control (OC) theory is being regarded
as one of the most promising tools to clarify such
questions: as far as an appropriate choice of the cost
functional is available, optimal control techniques can
provide design guidelines for both the physical design
and the control of soft robots.
There are at least two main reasons why OC is
fundamental to study soft actuators. On one side OC
provides an absolute performance reference that fac-
torizes the control design out of the equation, hence
it furnishes a principled basis to compare the perfor-
mance of different system designs. On the other side,
OC is a key element in understanding planning and
control methodologies for soft actuators. A careful anal-
ysis of OC results obtained through either analytic or
numerical techniques, allows to distillate laws summa-
rizing control policies that can be applied to classes of
tasks.
General analytic solutions could be developed so far
only for one-DOF joints. Physical bounds on states and
inputs, the strong nonlinear structure of the robots and
the high number of DOF allow only numerical solutions
for general robotic systems. Nevertheless, choosing an
advantageous parametrization for numerical solutions
of the OC problem strongly beneﬁts from insights given
by the low-dimensional analytical solutions. Therefore,
the analytical concepts are explained for some basic ex-
amples in this section.
21.8.1 OC Theory
We consider the dynamics of a system described
in standard form .Px D f .u;x; t//, with the cost func-
tional J consisting of a terminal cost # and an
integral cost L
J.u/ D #.x.tf/;tf/ C
tf
Z
t0
L.x; u; t/dt :
(21.42)
According
to
Pontryagin’s
minimum
princi-
ple
[21.124],
the optimal control u
is
known
to
minimize
the
Hamiltonian
function
H D
Tf .u;x; t/ C L, along the optimal trajectory, where 
are the costates. For an OC problem with constraints on
only the control u 2 U, differential equations of these
costates are given by P D @H=@x. Furthermore, if the
ﬁnal state is not explicitly stated, Minimum Principle
also provides boundary conditions for 	 at the ﬁnal
time
.tf/ D @#
@x
ˇˇˇˇ
tf
:
In order to make use of the Minimum Principle, one
has to ﬁrst solve these differential equations for x
and  and then ﬁnd the control u, which minimizes
the Hamiltonian: H.x; ; u/ 	 H.x; ; u/ for all
u 2 U, where x and  denote the optimal states and
costates.
21.8.2 SEA Optimization
Naturally, the performance achievable with a given soft
actuator under optimal control depends on the physics
of the actuator itself. It is therefore very interesting to
study the nested optimization problem of how to design
soft robotics actuators which can produce the best per-
formance under optimal control.
From the analysis of a one-DOF SEA joint, it can
be observed [21.17] that there exists an optimal value
of the linear stiffness that maximizes the (optimally
controllable) peak speed. The optimal stiffness value
depends on the motor (e.g., maximum acceleration and
speed) and on the task (e.g., terminal time). This result
is illustrated in Fig. 21.12.

Part B | 21.8
522
Part B
Design
21.8.3 Safe Brachistochrone OC Problem
One of the ﬁrst instances of use of OC for soft (vari-
able stiffness) robots is the study of the so-called safe
brachistochrone problem [21.125]. The goal was to
ﬁnd control laws for the equilibrium position and vari-
ables transmission stiffness such that a point-to-point
link motion is achieved in minimum time subject to
a limit on the worst-case impact force that the link could
exchange with the environment during the trajectory.
Limiting the impact force during motion can be use-
ful both for increasing the safety of a robot operating
in proximity of humans, and for reducing the risk of
damaging the robot itself in accidental collisions with
a stiff environment. The main results were to show that
VSAs can perform better (that is, faster within bounds
on a measure of impact risk) than both conventional
(rigid) actuators and SEAs, and that the optimal stiff-
q· (rad/s)
u1* (rad/s)
φ (rad)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Time t (s)
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
Fig. 21.12 Optimal motor velocity (! D 5 rad=s, ju1 minj D
u1 max D 1 rad=s)
Link position
Link speed
Control
Reference position
Reference speed (*)
(*) Legend is referred
to the three subplots
Case (P)+(S)+(A)
Case (P)
Case (A)
Case (S)
0
2
4
6
8
10
Link final speed (rad/s)
ω (rad/s)
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
Time (s)
10
5
0
–5
–10
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Time (s)
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Time (s)
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
Fig. 21.13 Diagram (after [21.17])
representing the maximum speed
reached by a one-DOF SEA after
a single swing at varying the spring
stiffness .! D
p
k=m/. Dashed
curves show terminal speed Pq.T/
under ideal motor position control
(case P), speed control (case S)
and acceleration control (case A).
The continuous red curve shows
terminal speed in the realistic
condition of motor acceleration
control .j R.t/j 	 10 rad s2/, with
bounds on position (j.t/j 	  rad)
and velocity .j P.t/j 	 5 rad s1/. The
small charts show optimal control and
state patterns in time
ness law is inversely related to the link velocity, in
a fashion roughly described by the easy-to-remember
rule fast and soft, stiff and slow.
21.8.4 Max Speed OC Problem
A complementary example of application of OC theory
concerns the problem of maximizing the velocity of an
elastic robot joint at some desired ﬁnal time or position.
This goal is relevant to impulsive tasks, such as jumping
on feet, hitting a ball or hammering a nail. Conversely
to the previous example, in such tasks it might be desir-
able that impact is maximized: indeed, it turns out that
elastic actuators are neither intrinsically more or less
safe than rigid joints, but can be both, under suitable
control laws.
The differential equations for the states and co-
states of this OC problem are summarized in Table 21.1.
Note that the functional J to be minimized consists
merely of a terminal cost J.u1/ D Pq.tf/. For this par-
ticular problem, studied in [21.126, 127], the condition
of minimizing the Hamiltonian H on the optimal trajec-
tory becomes u
1 
1 	 u1
1 , for all u1 2 Œu1 min; u1 max.
Consequently, u
1 will have its minimum or maximum
value depending on the sign of the ﬁrst costate 
1 . Us-
ing Table 21.1, this ﬁrst costate can be obtained as 
1 D
! sinŒ!.tft/, where ! denotes the natural frequency
of the system. The optimal control u
1 will thus be peri-
odic with the eigenfrequency of the system ! and take
its maximum (minimum) value, whenever sinŒ!.tf t/
is positive (negative). Note that the switching of the op-
timal control occurs with the eigenfrequency starting
from the ﬁnal time backward. For the particular case

Actuators for Soft Robotics
21.8 Optimal Control of Soft Robots
523
Part B | 21.8
Table 21.1 OC problem for the elastic joint .! D
q
k
m/
Excitation
States x
Cost J
Px D f.x; u1/
P D 
@H
@x
.tf/
u1 D P
 

Pq
!
x2.tf/
 
u1  x2
!2x1
!
 
!22
1
!
@#
@x jtf D
 
0
1
!
when the ﬁnal time is a multiple of the oscillation period
tf D nT D 2n=!, switching can be equivalently done
in feed-forward after every half period. For an elastic
joint starting from the rest position, this particular con-
trol law states then to switch the motor velocity when
the angular deﬂection  or similarly the acceleration of
the system changes its sign
P D sign.Rq/u1 max :
(21.43)
If an additional quadratic integral cost in the con-
trol, L D cu2
1 with a positive scalar c, is considered
in (21.42), a continuous control law will follow. For
tf D nT a classical resonance excitation with a sinu-
soidal input then follows, corresponding to intuition and
knowledge of linear systems. It is possible to extend
these analytical solutions for nonlinear stiffness charac-
teristics and damped systems [21.127]. For example, for
an underdamped robotic link a similar optimal control
is found, which is periodic with the damped eigenfre-
quency. Different motor models can also be investigated
analytically.
21.8.5 VSA Optimization
The very fact that for different tasks the optimal value
of stiffness is different implies that the adaptability of
the physical stiffness of actuators can be very useful in
improving performance over a set of tasks.
One further interesting question is raised by the
possibility offered by VSA technologies to vary the ac-
tuator stiffness in time. The problem becomes that of
ﬁnding the optimal time course of both the actuator
position .t/ and stiffness k.t/ so as to maximize per-
formance. This problem can be again investigated using
OC theory [21.17, 128]. Without going in the details of
OC computations, results show that under the simplify-
ing assumption that the actuator position and stiffness
are bounded but can be changed instantaneously, the op-
timal control for a single swing and free terminal time
(within this swing) is bang–bang: the optimal reference
position is
 D sign.Pq/max ;
while the optimal stiffness k.t/ takes its minimum
value kmin or maximum value kmax depending on the
switching function
k D
(
kmin
if PqRq < 0
kmax
if PqRq > 0
;
(21.44)
while for PqRq D 0 the stiffness value can be set arbi-
trarily. This indicates the rather intuitive notion be-
tween link velocity and accelerations summarized by
θ·
1
θ·
1, sim
q·
1
q·
1, sim
θ·
2
θ·
2, sim
q·
2
q·
2, sim
a)
0
0.5
θ·
2, max
θ·
1, max
1
1.5
c) Velocity (rad/s)
Time t (s)
4
2
0
–2
0
0.5
1
1.5
b) Velocity (rad/s)
Time t (s)
4
2
0
–2
Fig.21.14a–c Throwing experiment with the DLR hand-
arm system (after [21.87]). (a) Experimental setup, (b)
velocity of joint 1, (c) velocity of joint 2

Part B | 21.9
524
Part B
Design
the rule stiff speed-up, soft slow-down. More general
cases of VSA optimization are discussed in [21.17, 128]
and [21.126]. It is important to notice that even for one-
link robots analytical solutions are not always straight-
forward to ﬁnd, especially if state constraints exist or
system properties have nonlinearities.
Under some conditions, it may be possible to ap-
ply efﬁcient numerical solutions to such problems. For
instance, if the soft actuator dynamics system are lin-
ear (as e.g., in the SEA case) but there exist state
and control constraints (e.g., the torque-speed char-
acteristic of a dc motor), it is possible to translate
the optimal control problem into a convex optimiza-
tion problem [21.129], for which there exist fast and
reliable methods to obtain the global solution. For
robots with multiple-links, differential equations re-
sulting from OC theory are nonlinear and cannot in
general be solved analytically. Consequently, numeri-
cal methods such as pseudospectral methods [21.130]
or iterative linear quadratic regulator (ILQR) meth-
ods [21.131, 132] are employed for these systems. One
example of how to use these methods to outperform
rigid robots is described in [21.133], where a throw-
ing motion is optimized using the gauss pseudospectral
method [21.134]. The reported experiments verify the
system’s ability to use the elastic energy for explo-
sive motions. Figure 21.14a illustrates the experimental
setup, while the motor and link velocity are depicted on
Fig. 21.14b,c. Note that the link velocities Pq reach more
than double the maximum motor velocities Pmax during
the motion, which would be clearly not possible with
stiff actuators.
21.9 Conclusions and Open Problems
In this chapter, we have reviewed some of the technolo-
gies and methods for analysis and control underpinning
the use of novel actuators for soft robotics. The ﬁeld
has rapidly expanded in recent years, and it is very dif-
ﬁcult to provide an exhaustive up-to-date account of all
innovations being continuously brought forward: hope-
fully, this chapter provides at least a faithful picture of
some of the most important current research trends in
soft actuation.
When comparing current robots with biological
systems in terms of actuator energy density, energy ef-
ﬁciency of motion, resilience, and sensitivity during
interaction, the importance of intrinsic compliance be-
comes striking. We are still far from having found so far
the optimal technical realization of compliant, muscle-
like actuators regarding design simplicity, integration,
and energy density. Nevertheless, in this chapter foun-
dations have been described both by properly deﬁning
basic notions such as nonlinear impedance and ad-
dressing parametric identiﬁcation, and in analyzing and
standardizing the main physical properties to be used
for the description of elastic actuators. A widely agreed
set of characteristic parameters summarized in a stan-
dardized data sheet format [21.75–77] help comparing
the very heterogeneous design approaches and choosing
the best concept for a given application. We proposed
a quite general dynamic model for ﬂexible robots with
lumped elasticities, covering all designs proposed to our
knowledge so far. The model is obviously related to
the models of ﬂexible robots from Chap. 11 and can
be regarded as a generalization thereof. The control of
ﬂexible robots was focused on two main challenges.
First, the simultaneous control of the position and in-
trinsic impedance of the devices has to be solved. This
is a challenge for systems with highly nonlinear and
very compliant behavior. This aspect was addressed on
joint and the Cartesian level.
Second, control to push ﬂexible robots to their limit
and maximally exploit their potential beneﬁts. If robust-
ness comes mainly by the design process, that is not
true for energy efﬁciency and performances maximiza-
tion (even under safety constraints). The achievement of
these features requires optimization and optimal control
algorithms, such as those exposed in the present chap-
ter. Moreover, OC algorithms can be used as a tool for
comparison among different actuator designs extracting
their inherent (i. e., control-independent) performance
boundaries, and to derive easy-to-understand control
rules for peculiar DOFs (e.g., stiffness) of soft robots.
Important new directions are open in front of the
research community. On one side, new active materi-
als could provide a boost to the development in soft
robotics actuators, especially in the small scale; on
the other hand, it can be expected that some of the
promising advanced material research in the past will
eventually make their way in practically viable tech-
nologies. New functional architectures for actuators
that can adapt their physical behavior to the task are
also potentially very fruitful. An important future trend
is the extension from variable stiffness to VIAs, capa-
ble of more closely mimicking the functionalities of
muscular structures where not just the elasticity, but
also the damping (and perhaps the effective inertia) can
be physically tuned. Much work remains also to be
done in the understanding of the theoretical underpin-
nings and in practical methods for the identiﬁcation and

Actuators for Soft Robotics
21.9 Conclusions and Open Problems
525
Part B | 21.9
control of nonlinear, time varying, multidimensional
impedance.
The very fact that research in novel actuators for
soft robotics has produced a wealth of ideas and so-
lutions poses a challenge of different nature. Indeed,
a huge potential for innovation is already available
to researchers and practitioners, which has been only
superﬁcially tapped so far in applications. Soft actu-
ators could change the landscape not only in robust
and safe interaction or in locomotion: there are prob-
ably many, more speciﬁc application niches where the
new technologies could have an impact – possibly
also outside the scope of robotics narrowly deﬁned,
in the larger domain if automation. To foster tech-
nological awareness of soft robotics potential in the
community of those interested in machines that can
move and interact more naturally, several initiatives are
being undertaken, including an IEEE technical commit-
tee on soft robotics [21.135] and several workshops,
special issues and even specialized journals on the
topic. Recently, a natural machine motion initiative
(NMMI) [21.136] has been launched with the aim of
diffusing the ideas of soft actuation to achieve nat-
urally moving robots with human-like grace, power,
and dexterity. One of the objectives of the NMMI is
to make the technology of soft actuators widely avail-
able to the general public, by publishing as open-source
the design and all instructions needed to build and use
low-cost actuators, thus building a community of de-
velopers interested in sharing advances toward simple,
affordable, yet smooth, strong, and accurate muscles for
robots.
Video-References
VIDEO 456
Variable impedance actuators: Moving the robots of tomorrow
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/456
VIDEO 457
Petman tests camo
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/457
VIDEO 458
Introducing WildCat
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/458
VIDEO 460
VSA CubeBot – peg in hole
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/460
VIDEO 461
DLR Hand Arm System smashed with baseball bat
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/461
VIDEO 463
Safety evaluation of lightweight robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/463
VIDEO 464
Hammering task with the DLR Hand Arm System
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/464
VIDEO 465
Dynamic walking of whole-body compliant humanoid COMAN
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/465
VIDEO 466
Dynamic walking of whole-body compliant humanoid COMAN
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/466
VIDEO 467
Maccepa System
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/467
VIDEO 468
AMASC – changing stiffness
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/468
VIDEO 470
VSA-Cube: Arm with high and low stiffness preset
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/470
VIDEO 471
CompAct™robotics technology
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/471
VIDEO 472
VSA-Cube arm: Drawing on a wavy surface (high stiffness)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/472
VIDEO 473
Arm drawing on a wavy surface (low stiffness)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/473
VIDEO 474
Arm drawing on a wavy surface (selective stiffness)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/474
VIDEO 475
Intrinsically elastic robots: The key to human like performance (Best Video Award)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/475
VIDEO 546
DLR Hand Arm System: Punching holes
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/546
VIDEO 547
DLR Hand Arm System throwing a ball and Justin catching it
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/547

Part B | 21
526
Part B
Design
VIDEO 548
Active damping control on the DLR Hand Arm System
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/548
VIDEO 549
Throwing a ball with the DLR VS-Joint
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/549
VIDEO 550
DLR Hand Arm System: Two arm manipulation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/550
VIDEO 698
Full body compliant humanoid COMAN
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/698
VIDEO 699
AWAS-II
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/21/videodetails/699
References
21.1
K.T.
Ulrich,
T.T.
Tuttle,
J.P.
Donoghue,
W.T.
Townsend:
Intrinsically
Safer
Robots,
Tech. Rep. (Barrett Technology Inc., Cambridge
1995), Final Report for NASA Contract NAS10-12178
21.2
B. Lacevic, P. Rocco: Safety-oriented control of
robotic manipulators – A kinematic approach,
Proc. 18th World Congr. Int. Fed. Autom. Control
(IFAC) (2011)
21.3
S. Haddadin, S. Haddadin, A. Khoury, T. Rokahr,
S. Parusel, R. Burgkart, A. Bicchi, A. Albu-
Schaeffer: On making robots understand safety:
Embedding injury knowledge into control, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 31, 1578–1602 (2012)
21.4
K. Salisbury, W. Townsend, B. Eberman, D. DiP-
ietro:
Preliminary
design
of
a
whole-arm
manipulation system (WAMS), Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Philadelphia (1988)
pp. 254–260
21.5
G.
Hirzinger,
A.
Albu-Schäffer,
M.
Hähnle,
I. Schaefer, N. Sporer: On a new generation of
torque
controlled
light-weight
robots,
Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2001)
pp. 3356–3363
21.6
K. Yokoi, F. Kanehiro, K. Kaneko, S. Kajita, K. Fu-
jiwara, H. Hirukawa: Experimental study of hu-
manoid robot HRP-1S, Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(4/5),
351–362 (2004)
21.7
K. Kaneko, F. Kanehiro, M. Morisawa, K. Miura,
S. Nakaoka, S. Kajita: Cybernetic human HRP-4C,
Proc. IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (2009)
pp. 7–14
21.8
Y. Sakagami, R. Watanabe, C. Aoyama, S. Mat-
sunaga, N. Higaki, K. Fujimura: The intelligent
asimo: System overview and integration, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Vol. 3
(2002) pp. 2478–2483
21.9
M. Hirose, K. Ogawa: Honda humanoid robots
development, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. A 365(1850),
11–19 (2007)
21.10
B. Vanderborght, B. Verrelst, R. Van Ham, M. Van
Damme, D. Lefeber: A pneumatic biped: Exper-
imental walking results and compliance adap-
tation experiments, Proc. Int. Conf. Humanoid
Robots, Tsukuba (2006)
21.11
T. Takuma, K. Hosoda, M. Ogino, M. Asada:
Stabilization of quasi-passive pneumatic mus-
cle walker, Proc. IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid
Robots, Vol. 2 (2004) pp. 627–639
21.12
S.H. Collins, A. Ruina: A bipedal walking robot
with efficient and human-like gait, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005) pp. 1983–
1988
21.13
N.G. Tsagarakis, S. Morfey, G. Medrano-Cerda,
Z. Li, D.G. Caldwell: Compliant humanoid co-
man: Optimal joint stiffness tuning for modal
frequency control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (2013) pp. 665–670
21.14
J.W. Hurst, J.E. Chestnutt, A.A. Rizzi: An Actuator
with Mechanically Adjustable Series Compliance,
CMU-RI-TR-04-24 (Robotics Inst./Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh 2004)
21.15
L.C. Visser, S. Stramigioli, R. Carloni: Robust
bipedal walking with variable leg stiffness, Proc.
4th IEEE/RAS/EMBS Int. Conf. Biomed. Robotics
Biomechatron. (BioRob) (2012) pp. 1626–1631
21.16
S. Haddadin, M.C. Ozparpucu, A. Albu-Schäffer:
Optimal control for maximizing potential energy
in a variable stiffness joint, Proc. 51st IEEE Annu.
Conf. Decis. Control (CDC) (2012) pp. 1199–1206
21.17
M. Garabini, A. Passaglia, F.A.W. Belo, P. Salaris,
A. Bicchi: Optimality principles in variable stiff-
ness control: The VSA hammer, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), San Francisco
(2011) pp. 1843–1851
21.18
A.G. Feldman: Once more on the equilibrium-
point hypothesis ( model) for motor control,
J. Mot. Behav. 18, 17–54 (1986)
21.19
J.R. Flanagan, A.M. Wing: Modulation of grip force
with load force during point-to-point arm move-
ments, Exp. Brain Res. 95, 131–143 (1993)
21.20
J. Won, N. Hogan: Stability properties of human
reaching movements, Exp. Brain Res. 107(1), 125–
136 (1995)
21.21
P.L. Gribble, D.J. Ostry, V. Sanguineti, R. Labois-
sière: Are complex control signals required for
human arm movement?, J. Neurophysiol. 79,
1409–1424 (1998)
21.22
J.D.W. Madden, N.A. Vandesteeg, P.A. Anquetil,
P.G.A. Madden, A. Takshi, R.Z. Pytel, S.R. La-
fontaine, P.A. Wieringa, I.W. Hunter: Artificial
muscle technology: Physical principles and naval
prospects, IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 29(3), 706–728
(2004)
21.23
A. Parr: Hydraulics and Pneumatics: A Tech-
nician’s and Engineer’s Guide (Butterworth-
Heinemann, Oxford 1998)

Actuators for Soft Robotics
References
527
Part B | 21
21.24
I.L. Krivts, G.V. Krejnin: Pneumatic Actuating Sys-
tems for Automatic Equipment: Structure and De-
sign (CRC, Boca Raton 2006)
21.25
H.A. Baldwin: Realizable models of muscle func-
tion,
Proc. 1st
Rock
Biomech. Symp.
(1969)
pp. 139–148
21.26
K. Inoue: Rubbertuators and applications for
robots, Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Robotics Res. (1987)
pp. 57–63
21.27
B. Hannaford, J.M. Winters, C.-P. Chou, P.H. Mar-
bot: The anthroform biorobotic arm: A system for
the study of spinal circuits, Ann. Biomed. Eng. 23,
399–408 (1995)
21.28
D.G. Caldwell, G.A. Medrano-Cerda, M. Goodwin:
Control of pneumatic muscle actuators, IEEE Con-
trol Syst. Mag. 15(1), 40–48 (1995)
21.29
T. Hesselroth, K. Sarkar, P.P. van der Smagt,
K. Schulten: Neural network control of a pneu-
matic robot arm, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern.
24(1), 28–38 (1994)
21.30
A. Bicchi, S.L. Rizzini, G. Tonietti: Compliant
design for intrinsic safety: General issues and
preliminary design, Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Maui (2001) pp. 1864–
1869
21.31
F. Daerden, D. Lefeber: The concept and design of
pleated pneumatic artificial muscles, Int. J. Fluid
Power 2(3), 41–50 (2001)
21.32
B.
Verrelst,
R.
Van
Ham,
B.
Vanderborght,
D. Lefeber, F. Daerden, M. Van Damme: Second
generation pleated pneumatic artificial muscle
and its robotic applications, Adv. Robotics 20(7),
783–805 (2006)
21.33
I.M. Gottlieb: Practical Electric Motor Handbook
(Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford 1997)
21.34
J.F. Gieras, M. Wing: Permanent Magnet Motor
Technology: Design and Applications (CRC, Boca
Raton 2002)
21.35
M. Gad-el Hak: The MEMS Handbook: MEMS, De-
sign and Fabrication (CRC, Boca Raton 2006)
21.36
K. Uchino: Piezoelectric Actuators and Ultrasonic
Motors (Kluwer, Boston 1997)
21.37
S.-C. Huang, W.-L. Chen: Design of topologically
optimal microgripper, IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man Cy-
bern. (2008)
21.38
J. Ueda, T. Secord, H. Asada: Large effective-
strain piezoelectric actuators using nested cellu-
lar architecture with exponential strain amplifi-
cation mechanisms, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron.
15, 770–782 (2010)
21.39
J. Schultz, J. Ueda: Two-port network models
for compliant rhomboidal strain amplifiers, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 29(1), 42–54 (2013)
21.40
J. Schultz, J. Ueda: Nested piezoelectric cellular
actuators for a biologically inspired camera po-
sitioning mechanism, IEEE Trans. Robotics 29(5),
1–14 (2013)
21.41
J. Schultz, J. Ueda: Experimental verification
of
discrete
switching
vibration
suppression,
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 17(2), 298–308 (2012)
21.42
G. Engdahl: Handbook of Giant Magnetostrictive
Materials (Academic, San Diego 2000)
21.43
D.C. Lagoudas: Shape Memory Alloys: Modeling
and Engineering Applications (Springer, New York
2008)
21.44
E. Torres-Jara, K. Gilpin, J. Karges, R.J. Wood,
D. Rus: Composable flexible small actuators built
from thin shape memory alloy sheets, IEEE
Robotics Autom. Mag. 17(4), 78–87 (2010)
21.45
L. Jinsong: Shape-Memory Polymers and Multi-
functional Composites (CRC, Boca Raton 2009)
21.46
F. Carpi, E. Smela: Biomedical Applications of
Electroactive Polymer Actuators (Wiley, Chichester
2009)
21.47
P. Brochu, Q. Pei: Advances in dielectric elas-
tomers
for
actuators
and
artificial
muscles,
Macromol. Rapid Commun. 31(1), 10–36 (2010)
21.48
H.S. Nalwa: Ferroelectric Polymers: Chemistry,
Physics, and Applications (CRC, Boca Raton 1995)
21.49
F. Carpi, D. De Rossi, R. Kornbluh, R. Pelrine,
P. Sommer-Larsen: Dielectric Elastomers as Elec-
tromechanical Transducers: Fundamentals, Ma-
terials, Devices, Models and Applications of an
Emerging Electroactive Polymer Technology (Else-
vier, Amsterdan 2008)
21.50
G. Fernandez: Liquid-crystal polymers: Exotic ac-
tuators, Nat. Mater. 12(1), 12–14 (2013)
21.51
R.H. Baughman, C. Cui, A.A. Zakhidov, Z. Iqbal,
J.N. Barisci, G.M. Spinks, G.G. Wallace, A. Maz-
zoldi, D.D. Rossi, A.G. Rinzler, O. Jaschinski,
S. Roth, M. Kertesz: Carbon nanotube actuators,
Science 284(5418), 1340–1344 (1999)
21.52
A.E. Aliev, J. Oh, M.E. Kozlov, A.A. Kuznetsov,
S. Fang, A.F. Fonseca, R. Ovalle, M.D. Lima,
M.H. Haque, Y.N. Gartstein, M. Zhang, A.A. Za-
khidov, R.H. Baughman: Giant-stroke, supere-
lastic carbon nanotube aerogel muscles, Science
323(5921), 1575–1578 (2009)
21.53
J.D.W.
Madden:
Stiffer
than
steel,
Science
323(5921), 1571–1572 (2009)
21.54
E.
Guglielmino,
C.W.
Stammers,
K.A.
Edge,
T. Sireteanu, D. Stancioiu: Damp-by-wire: Mag-
netorheological vs friction dampers, Proc. 16th
IFAC World Cong. (2005) pp. 340–345
21.55
M. Laffranchi, N.G. Tsagarakis, D.G. Caldwell:
A variable physical damping actuator (VPDA) for
compliant robotic joints, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2010) pp. 1668–1674
21.56
J.C. Dixon: The Shock Absorber Handbook, Senior
Lect. Eng. Mech. (Wiley, Chichester 2007)
21.57
J. Li, D. Jin, X. Zhang, J. Zhang, W.A. Gruver:
An electrorheological fluid damper for robots,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1995)
pp. 2631–2636
21.58
C.-M. Chew, G.-S. Hong, W. Zhou: Series damper
actuator: A novel force control actuator, Proc.
4th IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (2004)
pp. 533–546
21.59
B. Ebrahimi, M.B. Khamesee, F. Golnaraghi:
A novel eddy current damper: Theory and exper-
iment, J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 42(7), 075001 (2009)
21.60
H.A. Sodano, J.-S. Bae, D. Inman, K. Belvin:
Improved concept and model of eddy current
damper, J. Vib. Acoust. 128(3), 294–302 (2006)

Part B | 21
528
Part B
Design
21.61
G.A. Pratt, M.M. Williamson: Series elastic actu-
ators, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
Hum. Robot Interact. Coop. Robots, Vol. 1 (1995)
pp. 399–406
21.62
M.L. Latash: Motor synergies and the equilib-
rium-point, Mot. Control 14(3), 294–322 (2010)
21.63
T. Morita, S. Sugano: Development and evalua-
tion of seven-d.o.f. mia arm, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1997) pp. 462–467
21.64
J.W. Hurst, J. Chestnutt, A. Rizzi: An actuator with
physically variable stiffness for highly dynamic
legged locomotion, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 4662–4667
21.65
R. Van Ham, B. Vanderborght, M. Van Damme,
B. Verrelst, D. Lefeber: MACCEPA, the mechanically
adjustable compliance and controllable equilib-
rium position actuator: Design and implementa-
tion in a biped robot, Robotics Auton. Syst. 55(10),
761–768 (2007)
21.66
S. Wolf, G. Hirzinger: A new variable stiffness de-
sign: Matching requirements of the next robot
generation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2008) pp. 1741–1746
21.67
N.
Hogan:
Adaptive
control
of
mechanical
impedance by coactivation of antagonist mus-
cles, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control AC-29(8), 681–690
(1984)
21.68
S.A. Migliore, E.A. Brown, S.P. DeWeerth: Biologi-
cally inspired joint stiffness control, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005) pp. 4519–4524
21.69
G. Tonietti, R. Schiavi, A. Bicchi: Design and con-
trol of a variable stiffness actuator for safe and
fast physical human/robot interaction, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005) pp. 528–
533
21.70
M.G. Catalano, G. Grioli, M. Garabini, F. Bonomo,
M. Mancinit, N. Tsagarakis, A. Bicchi: Vsa-cube-
bot: A modular variable stiffness platform for
multiple degrees of freedom robots, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 5090–
5095
21.71
A. Bicchi, G. Tonietti: Fast and soft-arm tactics,
IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 11(2), 22–33 (2004)
21.72
A. Albu-Schäffer, S. Wolf, O. Eiberger, S. Haddadin,
F. Petit, M. Chalon: Dynamic modelling and con-
trol of variable stiffness actuators, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2010) pp. 2155–2162
21.73
A.H.C. Gosline, V. Hayward: Eddy current brakes
for haptic interfaces: Design, identification, and
control, IEEE/ASME Trans, Mechatron. 13(6), 669–
677 (2008)
21.74
M. Catalano, G. Grioli, M. Garabini, F.W. Belo,
A. di Basco, N. Tsagarakis, A. Bicchi: A variable
damping module for variable impedance actua-
tion, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2012) pp. 2666–2672
21.75
VIACTORS (Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raum-
fahrt, Università di Pisa, Universiteit Twente,
Imperial College London, Instituto Italiano di
Tecnologia, Vrije Universiteit Brussel): Variable
Impedance Actuators data sheets, http://www.
viactors.org/VSA%20data%20sheets.htm (2011)
21.76
G. Grioli, S. Wolf, O. Eiberger, W. Friedl, M. Gre-
benstein, H. Höppner, E. Burdet, D. Caldwell,
R. Carloni, M. Catalano, D. Lefeber, S. Stramigio-
li, N. Tsagaratkis, M. Van Damme, R. Van Ham,
B. Vanderborght, L.C. Visser, A. Bicchi, A. Albu-
Schaeffer: Variable stiffness actuators: The user’s
point of view, Int. J. Robotics Res. 34(6), 727–743
(2015)
21.77
S. Wolf, G. Grioli, W. Friedl, M. Grebenstein,
H. Hoeppner, E. Burdet, D. Caldwell, A. Bicchi,
S. Stramigioli, B. Vanderborght: Variable stiffness
actuators: Review on design and components,
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. PP(99), 1 (2015)
21.78
M. Krasnosel’skii, A. Pokrovskii: Systems with Hys-
teresis (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1989)
21.79
A.G. Feldman: Functional tuning of the nervous
system with control of movement or maintenance
of a steady posture. II: Controllable parameters of
the musc1e, Biophysics 11, 565–578 (1966)
21.80
A.C. Antoulas: Approximation of Large-Scale Dy-
namical Systems (SIAM, Philadelphia 2005)
21.81
I. Fantoni, R. Lozano, M.W. Spong: Energy based
control of the pendubot, IEEE Trans. Autom. Con-
trol 45(4), 725–729 (2000)
21.82
A. Jafari, N. Tsagarakis, D. Caldwell: A novel in-
trinsically energy efficient development of a novel
actuator with adjustable stiffness (awas), IEEE
Trans. Mechatron. 18(1), 355–365 (2013)
21.83
A. De Luca: Decoupling and feedback linearization
of robots with mixed rigid/elastic joints, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1996) pp. 816–
821
21.84
A. De Luca, P. Lucibello: A general algorithm for
dynamic feedback linearization of robots with
elastic joints, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1998) pp. 504–510
21.85
M. Spong: Modeling and control of elastic joint
robots, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 109, 310–
319 (1987)
21.86
A. Albu-Schffäer, S. Wolf, O. Eiberger, S. Haddadin,
F. Petit, M. Chalon: Dynamic modeling and con-
trol of variable stiffness actuators, Proc. IEEE Conf.
Robotics Autom. ICRA (2010) pp. 2155–2162
21.87
M.
Grebenstein,
A.
Albu-Schäffer,
T.
Bahls,
M. Chalon, O. Eiberger, W. Friedl, R. Gruber,
S. Haddadin, U. Hagn, R. Haslinger, H. Hoppner,
S. Jörg, M. Nickl, A. Nothhelfer, F. Petit, J. Reill,
N. Seitz, T. Wimböck, S. Wolf, T. Wusthoff, G. Hir-
zinger: The DLR hand arm system, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Shanghai (2011)
pp. 3175–3182
21.88
H.P. Olesen, R.B. Randall: A Guide to Mechanical
Impedance and Structural Response Techniques,
Tech. Rep. (Bruel and Kjaer, Noerum 1977)
21.89
H. Gomi, M. Kawato: Human arm stiffness and
equilibrium-point trajectory during multi-joint
movement, Biol. Cybern. 76(3), 163–171 (1997)
21.90
N. Hogan: Impedance Control: An approach to
Manipulation – Parts I–III, J. Dyn. Syst. Meas.
Control 107, 1–24 (1985)
21.91
F.A. Mussa-Ivaldi, N. Hogan, E. Bizzi: Neural,
mechanical, and geometric factors subserving

Actuators for Soft Robotics
References
529
Part B | 21
arm posture in humans, J. Neurosci. 5(10), 2732
(1985)
21.92
H. Gomi, R. Osu: Task-dependent viscoelastic-
ity of human multijoint arm and its spatial
characteristics for interaction with environments,
J. Neurosci. 18(21), 8965 (1998)
21.93
E. Burdet, R. Osu, D.W. Franklin, T.E. Milner,
M. Kawato: Measuring stiffness during arm move-
ments in various dynamic environments, Proc.
1999 ASME Annu. Symp. Haptic Interfac. Virtual
Environ. Teleoper. Syst. (1999) pp. 421–428
21.94
E. Burdet, R. Osu, D.W. Franklin, T. Yoshioka,
T.E. Milner, M. Kawato: A method for measuring
endpoint stiffness during multi-joint arm move-
ments, J. Biomech. 33(12), 1705–1709 (2000)
21.95
D.W. Franklin, E. Burdet, R. Osu, M. Kawato,
T.E. Milner: Functional significance of stiffness in
adaptation of multijoint arm movements to sta-
ble and unstable dynamics, Exp. Brain Res. 151(2),
145–157 (2003)
21.96
K.P. Tee, E. Burdet, C.M. Chew, T.E. Milner: A model
of force and impedance in human arm move-
ments, Biol. Cybern. 90(5), 368–375 (2004)
21.97
E.J. Perreault, R.F. Kirsch, P.E. Crago: Multijoint
dynamics and postural stability of the human
arm, Exp. Brain Res. 157(4), 507–517 (2004)
21.98
R.D. Trumbower, M.A. Krutky, B.S. Yang, E.J. Per-
reault: Use of self-selected postures to regulate
multi-joint stiffness during unconstrained tasks,
PLoS ONE 4(5), e5411 (2009)
21.99
K. Hashimoto, T. Kureha, Y. Nishimura, K. Oku-
mura, S. Muraoka: Measurement of mechanical
impedance using quartz resonator force sensor
during the process of grasping, SICE Annu. Conf.,
Vol. 1 (2004) pp. 722–726
21.100
A. Serio, G. Grioli, I. Sardellitti, N.G. Tsagarakis,
A. Bicchi: A decoupled impedance observer for
a variable stiffness robot, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 5548–5553
21.101
F. Flacco, A. De Luca, I. Sardellitti, N. Tsagarakis:
On-line estimation of variable stiffness in flexible
robot joints, Int. J. Robotics Res. 31(13), 1556–1577
(2012)
21.102
T. Ménard, G. Grioli, A. Bicchi: A real time observer
for an agonist-antagonist variable stiffness actu-
ator, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2013)
21.103
T. Ménard, G. Grioli, A. Bicchi: A stiffness estima-
tor for agonistic-antagonistic variable-stiffness-
actuator devices, IEEE Trans. Robotics 30(5), 1269–
1278 (2014)
21.104
G. Grioli, A. Bicchi: A non-invasive real-time
method for measuring variable stiffness, Proc.
10th Int. Conf. Robotics Sci. Syst., Zaragoza (2010)
21.105
J.K. Salisbury: Active stiffness control of a ma-
nipulator in cartesian coordinates, Proc. 19th IEEE
Conf. Decis. Control (1980) pp. 83–88
21.106
C. Ott: Cartesian Impedance Control of Redundant
and Flexible-Joint Robots, Springer Tracts. Adv.
Robotics (Springer, Berlin, Heidelburg 2008)
21.107
N. Hogan: Mechanical impedance of single- and
multi-articular systems. In: Multiple Muscle Sys-
tems, ed. by J.M. Winters, S.L.-Y. Woo (Springer,
New York 1990) pp. 149–164
21.108
A.
Albu-Schäffer,
M.
Fischer,
G.
Schreiber,
F. Schoeppe, G. Hirzinger: Soft robotics: What
cartesian stiffness can we obtain with passively
compliant, uncoupled joints?, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2004)
21.109
F. Petit, A. Albu-Schäffer: Cartesian impedance
control for a variable stiffness robot arm, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (2011)
21.110
G. Palli, C. Melchiorri, A. De Luca: On the feedback
linearization of robots with variable joint stiff-
ness, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2008)
21.111
A. De Luca, F. Flacco, A. Bicchi, R. Schiavi: Non-
linear decoupled motion-stiffness control and
collision detection/reaction for the VSA-II variable
stiffness device, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2009)
21.112
G. Palli, C. Melchiorri: Output-based control
of robots with variable stiffness actuation, J.
Robotics (2011) doi:dx.doi.org/10.1155/2011/735407
21.113
A. Albu-Schäffer, C. Ott, F. Petit: Energy shap-
ing control for a class of underactuated Euler-
Lagrange systems, Proc. IFAC Symp. Robot Control
(2012)
21.114
I. Sardellitti, G. Medrano-Cerda, N.G. Tsagarakis,
A. Jafari, D.G. Caldwell: A position and stiff-
ness control strategy for variable stiffness actu-
ators, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2012)
21.115
F. Petit, A. Albu-Schäffer: State feedback damp-
ing control for a multi dof variable stiffness robot
arm, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2011)
21.116
B. Vanderborght: Dynamic Stabilisation of the
Biped Lucy Powered by Actuators with Control-
lable Stiffness, Ph.D. Thesis (Vrije Universiteit
Brussel, Brussel 2007)
21.117
M. Uemura, S. Kawamura: Resonance-based mo-
tion control method for mulit-joint robot through
combining stiffness adaptation
and iterative
learning control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2009)
21.118
L.C. Visser, S. Stramigioli, A. Bicchi: Embodying
desired behavior in variable stiffness actuators,
Proc. IFAC Congr. Int. Fed. Autom. Control (2011)
21.119
D. Lakatos, F. Petit, A. Albu-Schäffer: Nonlin-
ear oscillations for cyclic movements in variable
impedance actuated robotic arms, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2013) pp. 503–513
21.120
D. Lakatos, G. Garofalo, F. Petit, C. Ott, A. Albu-
Schäffer: Modal limit cycle control for variable
stiffness actuated robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2013)
21.121
A. Velasco, G.M. Gasparri, M. Garabini, L. Malagia,
P. Salaris, A. Bicchi: Soft-actuators in cyclic mo-
tion: Analytical optimization of stiffness and pre-
load, Proc. IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots,
Atlanta (2013)
21.122
G. Garofalo, C. Ott, A. Albu-Schäffer: Orbital stabi-
lization of mechanical systems through semidef-

Part B | 21
530
Part B
Design
inite Lyapunov functions, Proc. Am. Control Conf.
(ACC) (2013)
21.123
D. Lakatos, F. Petit, A. Albu-Schäffer: Nonlinear
oscillations for cyclic movements in human and
robotic arms, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2013) pp. 508–511
21.124
M. Papageorgiou: Optimierung: Statische, Dy-
namische, Stochastische Verfahren (Oldenbourg,
Munich 1996)
21.125
A. Bicchi, G. Tonietti: Fast and soft arm tactics:
Dealing with the safety-performance trade-off in
robot arms design and control, IEEE Robotics Au-
tom. Mag. 11(2), 22–33 (2004)
21.126
S. Haddadin, M.C. Özparpucu, A.A. Schäffer: Op-
timal control for maximizing potential energy in
variable stiffness joints, Proc. 51st IEEE Conf. Decis.
Control (CDC), Maui (2012)
21.127
S. Haddadin, M. C. Özparpucu, F. Huber, N. Mans-
feld, A. Albu-Schäffer: Exploiting the natural dy-
namics of elastic joints for peak velocity, Int. J.
Robotics Res. (2012)
21.128
M. Garabini, A. Passaglia, F. Belo, P. Salaris, A. Bic-
chi: Optimality principles in stiffness control: The
vsa kick, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2012) pp. 3341–3346
21.129
R. Incaini, L. Sestini, M. Garabini, M.G. Cata-
lano, G. Grioli, A. Bicchi: Optimal control and
design guidelines for soft jumping robots: Series
elastic actuation and parallel elastic actuation in
comparison, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2013) pp. 2477–2484
21.130
D. Garg, M.A. Patterson, W.W. Hager, A.V. Rao,
D.A. Benson, G.T. Huntington: A unified frame-
work for the numerical solution of optimal control
problems using pseudospectral methods, Auto-
matica 46(11), 1843–1851 (2010)
21.131
W. Li, E. Todorov: Iterative linearization methods
for approximately optimal control and estimation
of non-linear stochastic system, Int. J. Control
80(9), 1439–1453 (2007)
21.132
W. Li, E. Todorov: Iterative linear quadratic reg-
ulator design for nonlinear biological movement
systems, Proc. Int. Conf. Inform. Control, Autom.
Robotics (2004) pp. 222–229
21.133
S. Haddadin, F. Huber, A. Albu-Schaffer: Opti-
mal control for exploiting the natural dynamics
of variable stiffness robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012) pp. 3347–3354
21.134
D. Benson: A Gauss Pseudospectral Transcription
for Optimal Control, Ph.D. Thesis (MIT, Cambridge
2005)
21.135
IEEE Robotics and Automation Society Techni-
cal Committee on Soft Robotics: http://www.
ieee-ras.org/soft-robotics
21.136
Natural
Machine
Motion
Initiative:
http://
naturalmachinemotion.com

Multimedia Contents Modular Rob
531
Part B | 22.1
22. Modular Robots
I-Ming Chen, Mark Yim
This chapter presents a discussion of modular
robots from both an industrial and a research
point of view. The chapter is divided into four
sections, one focusing on existing reconfigurable
modular manipulators typically in an indus-
try setting (Sect. 22.2) and another focusing on
self-reconfigurable modular robots typically in
a research setting (Sect. 22.4). Both sections are
sandwiched between the introduction and con-
clusion sections.
This chapter is focused on design issues. Rather
than a survey of existing systems, it presents some
of the existing systems in the context of a dis-
cussion of the issues and elements in industrial
modular robotics and modular robotics research.
The reader is encouraged to look at the references
for further discussion on any of the presented
topics.
22.1
Concepts and Definitions .....................
531
22.1.1
Concept of Modularity................
532
22.1.2
Definition and Classification
of Modular Robots.....................
532
22.2
Reconfigurable
Modular Manipulators .........................
533
22.2.1
Background of Modular
Manipulator Systems .................
533
22.2.2
Module Design Issues ................
534
22.2.3
Interface Design Issues...............
534
22.2.4
Modeling of Modular
Manipulators ............................
534
22.2.5 Configuration Optimization ........
535
22.3 Self-Reconfigurable
Modular Robots ...................................
535
22.3.1
Types of Self-Reconfigurable
Modular Robots.........................
536
22.3.2
System and Module
Design Issues ............................
536
22.3.3
Interface Design Issues...............
537
22.4 Conclusion and Further Reading...........
539
Video-References.........................................
540
References...................................................
540
Modularity in design engineering refers to a compart-
mentalization of elements. Most often modularity in
complex systems occurs as a result of taking a com-
plex system and dividing it into pieces in order to
better understand the simpler elements and parallelize
the design efforts. Modularity also facilitates the re-
placing of elements either for repair or upgrading new
functionality. The alternative to a modular approach is
an integrated approach where systems are designed as
a whole. While integrated approaches tend not to be
as easy to repair, upgrade or reconﬁgure, they do have
fewer constraints on element design and therefore can
be made more optimal. Integrated approaches can fo-
cus on lowering cost or having higher performance.
In mechanical devices, the choice between modular
or integrated architectures can have a large impact on
the range of application as well as cost or perfor-
mance [22.1].
22.1 Concepts and Definitions
For example, a hand drill with modular attachments
can expand itsrange of functionality from drilling holes
to screwing bolts or bufﬁng surfaces. For robotics, the
same impact applies. However, robots have an inher-

Part B | 22.1
532
Part B
Design
ent complexity that lends itself to modularity,such as
actuator modules, sensor modules, and sometimes com-
putation modules. In the following sections, deﬁnitions
will be given for different kinds of modularity fre-
quently seen in robotics.
22.1.1 Concept of Modularity
The product design literature can be looked at as
encompassing robotics – which can be considered
as an industrial or research product. The architec-
ture of product modularity can be categorized into
three subtypes: slot, bus, and sectional modular-
ity [22.1]:

Slot architecture: Each of the interfaces between
components is of a different type from the others,
so that the various components in the product can-
not be interchanged.

Bus architecture: There is a common bus to which
the other physical components connect via the same
type of interface.

Sectional architecture: All interfaces are of the
same type and there is no single element to which
all the other components attach, i. e., there is no
base component. The assembly is built up by con-
necting the components to each other via identical
interfaces (Fig. 22.1).
Such classiﬁcations provide a good deﬁnition of
modular robots as follows:

If a complex robotic system adopts a slot- and
bus-modularity design approach for its internal
structure and architecture, not the external con-
ﬁguration, it can be called a modularly designed
robotic system beneﬁting from design paralleliza-
tion. Such a robot may have a uniﬁed and inte-
grated conﬁguration that cannot be changed from
outside.

If a robot adopts a bus- and sectional-modular-
ity design approach for both internal structure and
external conﬁguration, it can be called a modular
robot. The users can reconﬁgure the compartmen-
talization and interchange functional modules with
some level of effort.
a)
b)
c)
Fig.22.1a–c Modular ar-
chitecture types: (a) slot
architecture (b) bus architec-
ture (c) sectional architecture
22.1.2 Definition and Classification
of Modular Robots
Any system can be reconﬁgured by destructing and re-
constructing it, for example in the worst case, using
a blowtorch and milling machine. The key element we
must deﬁne is the level of effort required to reconﬁg-
ure. We propose here three levels from the lowest to the
highest level of effort of the user:
1. The system reconﬁgures itself. It is self-reconﬁg-
urable.
2. The system is reconﬁgured by a lay user with or
without special tools typically in matter of seconds
to minutes.
3. The system is reconﬁgured only by an expert with
specialized tools.
This chapter will focus on modular robots that give
rise to plug-and-play reconﬁguration of the system for
task and function changes, levels 1 and 2. Level 1
systems are self-reconﬁgurable systems with sectional
modularity. Level 2 systems in this chapter focuses on
reconﬁgurable modular manipulators with a ﬁnite set of
modules of different functions.
The modular manipulator type of robotic systems
are natural evolution of industrial robot manipulators
that consist of a number of speciﬁc functional modules,
such as actuator modules, link modules, and end-effec-
tor modules. Subsequently, robots with the serial and
branching topology, such as humanoid robots, legged
robots, mobile manipulators adopt a similar approach
for modularity as these functional modules form the ba-
sis of a robotic system.
The self-reconﬁgurable modular robots grew out of
the concept of self-evolution and self-conﬁguration of
biological cells with identical units. Such a robot nor-
mally consists of a large number of a small set of types
of mechatronic units that possess actuation, connection,
communication, and computing capability that can be
assembled together in arbitrary forms and also recon-
ﬁgure itself.
Although the two types of modular robots origi-
nated from different fundamental concepts, the goals to
provide a large number of possible robot conﬁgurations
for different tasks with the same set of basic robot mod-
ules are the same.

Modular Robots
22.2 ReconfigurableModular Manipulators
533
Part B | 22.2
22.2 Reconfigurable Modular Manipulators
Reconﬁgurable modular manipulators are robot arms
that have elements that can be rearranged.
22.2.1 Background of Modular
Manipulator Systems
The simplest form of modular manipulator comes in
the form of automatic tool changers also called quick-
change end-effectors. These are optional tools that
can be attached to the end of a robotic arm. Auto-
matic tool changers are standard equipment for many
CNC (computer numerically controlled) milling ma-
chines and lathes since the 1960s. They enable the
machines to drill holes of different sizes, or cut dif-
ferent shapes. Although CNC machines are not often
considered industrial robots, they share the same ele-
ments (actuators, sensors, and computation) and their
function is more limited. Most industrial robot arms can
be equipped with automatic changing end-effectors by
adding a wrist that has the compatible interface for a va-
riety of grippers and end-effectors. These devices are
available commercially from Schunk (Germany), ATI
industrial automation (USA), Destaco, Amatrol, RE2
(USA), RAD, and others.
In the modularization of industrial robots, the gran-
ularity of the components is usually based on their basic
functions, i. e., motion actuation and tooling. Thus, the
design of modules is highly differentiated into actuator
modules, passive joint modules, and tooling modules,
etc. Several prototype modular robotic systems have
been built and demonstrated, including the reconﬁg-
urable modular manipulator system (RMMS) [22.2],
several generations of the cellular robotic system (CE-
BOT) [22.3], and modular manipulator systems devel-
oped by University of Toronto [22.4], University of
Stuttgart [22.5], University of Texas at Austin [22.6],
and Toshiba Corp. [22.7].
Basically, these systems have serial-type (or open-
chain) geometry with large working envelopes. These
serial-type modular robots are well suited for assembly,
trajectory tracking, welding, and hazardous material
handling. Parallel modular robots have also been de-
veloped for light-machining tasks [22.8]. As indicated
in [22.8], modular design can reduce the development
cycle of the parallel robots signiﬁcantly. Furthermore,
it allows a trial-and-error approach for the construction
of parallel robots that is impossible with the integrated
design approach.
With globalization of world manufacturing, the con-
cept of modular manipulators has quickly gained in-
dustrial attention. A full-scale reconﬁgurable robotic
system workcell consisting of three modular robots
with a total 15 axes was successfully showcased in
1999 [22.9] (Fig. 22.2). The modular robot workcell has
a serial type 6-degrees-of-freedom (DOF) robot for the
pick-and-place action of the work piece, a 2-DOF robot
for work piece transfer, and a 6-DOF parallel robot for
milling operations on the work piece. All the robots are
built from the same set of modular components, includ-
ing actuator modules, link modules, and tool modules.
The
German
company Amtec, later
acquired
by Schunk, developed the ﬁrst commercially avail-
able modular manipulator system called PowerCube.
Schunk has subsequently developed its industrial ma-
nipulators and automation systems based on Power-
Cube with some success [22.10]. Today there are many
robotic systems with a wide spectrum of applications
that are built around modular robot components.
The modular robot concept also proliferated in the
hobby and educational robot sectors around the year
2000 by the introduction of well-packaged self-con-
tained servo motor modules into inexpensive robotic
devices, such as Robotis (Korea) and Kondo (Japan), as
well as Lego (Denmark) and other toy companies mak-
ing educational robots.
Mobile robots with legs, wheels, and tracks also
belong to this class of modularity where they are
conﬁgured for different task requirements such as
those needed for disaster relief, rescue, and surveil-
lance purposes. Two tracked modular mobile robots
designed with multiple track segments [22.11] and
reconﬁgurable tracks allowing serial and parallel con-
nections [22.12] have been demonstrated. The work
in [22.13] contains an in-depth review of the develop-
ment in modular mobile robots.
Fig. 22.2 15-axis Reconﬁgurable Robotic Workcell (after
[22.9])

Part B | 22.2
534
Part B
Design
22.2.2 Module Design Issues
A modular robot consists of the two main features
found in a modular product: 1) a one-to-one mapping
from functional elements to the physical components
of the product and 2) decoupled interfaces between the
components of different modules [22.1]. For modular
manipulators, the essential components are the base,
positioning, and orienting mechanisms composed by
actuator modules and link modules of different dimen-
sions and geometry, and the end-effector module. For
legged and wheeled mobile robotic systems, the motion
generation mechanism modules are essential.
The actuator modules normally use DC or AC
motors as a 1-DOF rotate or pivot joint module typ-
ically with compact high reduction ratio transmission
mechanisms [22.2, 4, 6, 7, 9]. Some modular systems
also adopt 1-DOF linear modules for larger workspace
envelope [22.4, 9] and 2-DOF joint modules for com-
pact dexterous motions [22.10]. The actuator module
shown in Fig. 22.3 has two independent linear and
rotary motion capabilities suitable for compact assem-
bly tasks [22.9]. The actuator modules are typically
designed with similar geometry but with different di-
mensions and power ratings for different application
requirements.
The link modules connecting units in between the
actuators function as reachable workspace extenders.
Some systems adopt a standard ﬁxed-dimension con-
nection module [22.3, 4, 6] and some use variable di-
mension modules that can be customized to satisfy arbi-
trary design constraints [22.9]. In some systems [22.2],
Fig. 22.3 A 2-DOF translate-turn module with ball-screw
and ball-spline mechanism
the link module becomes part of the actuator module so
that the module acts as an actuator as well as the con-
necting structure.
22.2.3 Interface Design Issues
The mechanical connecting interface between modules
in a modular manipulator needs to satisfy three basic
requirements:
1. Stiffness
2. Fast reconﬁguration
3. Interchangeability.
Thus, the design of mechanical connections or
docking mechanisms is a critical issue. In a fully or
semisupervised robotic system, like some modular ma-
nipulator systems [22.2–9], the connecting mechanism
is designed to be manually operated for reliability and
safety reasons. In a fully autonomous system, the con-
necting mechanism needs to be designed typically with
an extra actuator and locking mechanism for carrying
out the connection automatically. This is the case for
most of the self-reconﬁgurable modular robots.
In order to meet the requirement of interchangeabil-
ity, the electronic and communication interface for the
modular system normally adopts common communica-
tion network architecture with plug-and-play capability
similar to local area network (LAN). There are a num-
ber of existing industrial standard network protocols for
real-time robot control suitable for such applications,
like CAN-bus, RS485, and IEEE 1394. The progressive
development of industrial automation protocols will
facilitate the implementation of modular robot com-
munications. While many of the early systems use
wired multidrop bus architectures for communications,
multirobot systems have used fast local message for-
warding [22.14] and wireless networking.
22.2.4 Modeling of Modular Manipulators
Challenges to model the modular manipulator systems
come from the lack of uniform formalisms of the un-
ﬁxed robot conﬁguration and geometry and the errors
accumulated from assembly and dis-assembly of the
modules. Hence, the ﬁrst effort in modular robot mod-
eling was the introduction of a graph-based technique
with additional module assembly information for the
representation of a modular robot conﬁguration [22.15].
This work introduced a modular robot representation
scheme, termed assembly incidence matrix (AIM) for
distinct modular robot conﬁgurations. There are sev-
eral subsequent extensions and variations of AIM for
broader categories of modular robots including modu-
lar mobile manipulators [22.16–18].

Modular Robots
22.3 Self-ReconfigurableModular Robots
535
Part B | 22.3
Once the modular robot conﬁguration can be dis-
tinctly deﬁned with the type of modules, the connection
sequence, module orientation, kinematic, and dynamic
models of the robot can be obtained through an auto-
matic generation algorithm [22.19]. Kinematic model
generation can be achieved through the conventional
Denavit–Hartenberg (DH) parameterization [22.2–4,
17] or the coordinate-free local product-of-exponential
(POE) approach [22.8, 9, 19]. However, the DH method
does not provide a clear distinction between the ar-
ranging sequence of modules in a robot chain, and it
is an initial position-dependent representation. The lo-
cal POE formulation of the kinematics and dynamics
based on the theory of Lie groups and Lie algebras for
rigid motion in se.3/ and SO.3/ can avoid this prob-
lem. Furthermore, the POE representation can avoid the
singularity conditions that frequently occur in the kine-
matic calibration formulated by the DH method [22.20].
Thus, POE representations provide a uniform and well-
behaved method for handling the inverse kinematics of
both calibrated and un-calibrated robot systems. In local
POE modeling, the joint axes are described in the local
module (body) coordinate systems, it is progressive in
constructing the kinematic models, so it conveniently
resembles the assembling action of the physical modu-
lar robot components.
The machining tolerance, compliance, and wear of
the connecting mechanism due to frequent module re-
conﬁguration may introduce errors in positioning the
end effector. Hence, kinematic calibration is a must for
modular robots. In the POE calibration model, the robot
errors are assumed to be in the initial positions of the
consecutive modules because the local POE model is
a zero reference method. Based on linear superposi-
tion and differential transformation, a 6-parameter error
model can be established for serial-type robots [22.19].
This model can be obtained through the automatic
generation process. An iterative least-square algorithm
employed to ﬁnd the error parameters to be corrected.
The corrected kinematic model is then updated in the
robot controller for operation. The simulation and ex-
periment have shown that the proposed method can
improve the position accuracy up to two orders of mag-
nitude, or to the nominal repeatability of the robot after
calibration with measurement noise. A typical 6-DOF
articulate-type modular robot can reach a position accu-
racy of 0:1 mm compared to an accuracy of 1 mm before
the calibration [22.20]
A formulation of the dynamic model of modu-
lar manipulators starts from a recursive Newton–Euler
algorithm [22.21, 22]. The generalized velocity, accel-
eration, and forces can be expressed in terms of linear
operations on se.3/ [22.23]. Based on the relation-
ship between the recursive formulation and the closed-
form Lagrangian formulation for serial-robot dynam-
ics discussed in [22.24, 25], the AIM can assist in the
construction of the closed-form equation of motion of
a modular robot in any generic topology with redundant
and non-redundant conﬁgurations [22.19].
22.2.5 Configuration Optimization
Due to the modular design, the modular manipulator
can be optimal at the component level, but may not
obtain optimal performance at the system level. Task-
driven robot conﬁguration optimization becomes nec-
essary to establish locally optimal performance for the
overall robotic system. Typically, the problem of robot
conﬁguration optimization can be stated as ﬁnding an
assembly of robot modules that can achieve a certain
task requirement based on an inventory of modules.
The conﬁguration of a modular robot can be treated as
a compound entity with ﬁnite number of constituents.
Finding the most suitable task-oriented robot conﬁg-
uration then becomes a discrete design optimization
problem using a task performance related objective
function. Discrete optimization techniques, such as ge-
netic algorithms (GAs), the simulated annealing (SA)
method, and other artiﬁcial intelligence techniques have
been employed to ﬁnd solutions [22.26–28].
The criteria used in selecting the optimal conﬁgu-
ration depend largely on the task requirements, which
mostly describe the necessary robot trajectories or key
postures. Yang and Chen proposed a reduced DOF
approach to minimize the total number of actuator mod-
ules employed in a serial-type modular robot for a given
task [22.29]. With fewer modules, the robot can carry
more payloads instead of carrying distal modules. Fur-
thermore, the robot can be operated at higher speed with
better dynamic response.
22.3 Self-Reconfigurable Modular Robots
Self-conﬁgurable systems can rearrange their own
topology. An example is shown in
VIDEO 2
. There
are dozens of research groups who have constructed
many versions of self-reconﬁgurable robots [22.3,
30–46], with many approaches for programming
them [22.36, 47–61]. As of 2012, over 800 papers and
a book [22.31] have been written.
These systems are characterized by many identi-
cal modules that can be rearranged into a variety of
shapes and conﬁgurations and by being highly scal-

Part B | 22.3
536
Part B
Design
able with simulated systems having hundreds, thou-
sands, or millions of modules. These systems have three
promises:
1. Low cost from batch fabrication of repeated mod-
ules
2. High robustness from redundancy and the ability to
self-repair
3. High versatility from the ability to reconﬁgure and
adapt to changing situations [22.62].
Practically speaking, none of the promises have
been proven, though the promise of versatility is getting
close. These systems have exhibited a wide variety of lo-
comotion and manipulation including: legged walking
with between 2 and 14 legs; riding a tricycle [22.63];
rolling like a tread [22.14]; snake-like locomotion (lat-
eral and rectilinear undulation, concertina, sidewind-
ing) [22.64]; manipulation of large objects with mul-
tiple arms/ﬁngers [22.65]; manipulation of small ob-
jects; climbing stairs, fences, poles, in pipes; self-
reconﬁguration between dozens of shapes and many
others [22.31]. Figure 22.4 and
VIDEO 1
show a
self-reconﬁgurable modular robot SMORES [22.66].
Other self-reconﬁgurable robots like ATRON [22.40]
is shown in
VIDEO 5
and M-blocks is shown in
VIDEO 3
.
22.3.1 Types of Self-Reconfigurable Modular
Robots
Self-reconﬁguring systems can be classiﬁed into three
types based on the style of reconﬁguration: chain,
lattice, and mobile [22.62]. The chain systems recon-
ﬁgure by using chains of modules that form and break
loops [22.36, 62]. They tend to be well suited for work
on the environment, as they can form articulated limbs.
The lattice systems have modules which have nominal
positions sitting on a regular lattice and tend to be better
at self-reconﬁguration as moving to neighboring lattice
positions makes collision checking easy [22.33, 34, 39,
43]. The mobile systems have modules that individu-
ally maneuver on terrain and reconﬁgure by moving on
the environment to relocate themselves in a conglomer-
ate [22.38, 67].
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 22.4 (a) One SMORES module
with four main actuators and four
docking faces. (b) Three SMORES
modules attached together. (c) Two
modules moving on a lattice
Of the systems that have been implemented to date,
some that have been shown to be most capable (judg-
ing by number of demonstrations) are the hybrid chain-
lattice systems: Superbot [22.14], MTRAN III [22.68]
and CKbot [22.69]. Recent additions to this group are
Johns Hopkins University [22.70], iMobot [22.71], and
SMORES [22.66] which are hybrid in all three areas,
chain-lattice-mobile systems.
22.3.2 System and Module Design Issues
There is an interesting phenomenon called second sys-
tem syndrome [22.72], where designers include many
features in the second version of a system they de-
sign. They often include many more features than the
system may need. This is especially problematic in
modular reconﬁgurable systems with repeated modules;
any feature added to one module has the possibility
of its effect multiplied by n, the number of modules.
For example, an increase of d in computational pro-
cessing power (e.g., microprocessor without interlocked
pipeline stages, MIPS) in one module will result in
a system increase of dn.
Another similar phenomenon for designers is called
feature creep, where more and more features are added
as the system is being designed. Often this has a cu-
mulative linear effect on cost, but worse, there is an
exponential effect on reliability.
The simplest form of robustness analysis assumes
independent probabilities that a module may fail dur-
ing a speciﬁed function. If one module succeeds during
that function with probability p then the system with
nidentical module has a probability of success of pn, un-
der the assumption that all modules must be functioning
to succeed. Clearly this is problematic for large n.
As systems scale up in number, a key to make things
work is to be sure that the system does not depend on
every module working perfectly. Indeed, if only X num-
bers are needed, one would wonder why one would use
more than X, especially if the only impact is reduced re-
liability. Here, one strategy is to ensure that the solution
is devised in a way where the performance improves
with the number of modules. If modules fail, then the
system can gracefully degrade. In systems with tightly
coupled actions between modules, this can be difﬁcult

Modular Robots
22.3 Self-ReconfigurableModular Robots
537
Part B | 22.3
to implement. In tasks where only binary metrics exist,
(success or failure) using the optimal X modules, setting
aside the extras may be the best solution.
One of the aspects that researchers ﬁnd most in-
teresting about self-reconﬁgurable robots is examining
what happens when modules scale up in number (and
also typically, scaled down in size). As the numbers in-
crease, the number of shapes/conﬁgurations increases
and concomitantly, the types of activities that are possi-
ble increase as well.
Control and planning get very complicated quickly
though. Simply enumerating the number of isomor-
phic conﬁgurations has resulted in a PhD thesis without
completely solving the problem [22.15].
While researchers have simulated hundreds, thou-
sands, and even millions of modules, no physical
system has been demonstrated with more than a few
hundred to date. The largest single system so far is
Kilobot [22.73], which has very simple mobile mod-
ules that swarm together and actually do not connect
rigidly. The modules communicate wirelessly in a one-
to-many (broadcast) fashion. For rigidly connected sys-
tems the largest number of modules demonstrated in
one connected system was a 14-legged 48-module Poly-
bot system [22.74].
Main Actuation
Every module has some form of actuation that enables
the modules to move from one position to another or
to do some work on the environment. We call it the
main actuator. By far the most common main actua-
tor is a DC electric motor as it is the lowest cost and
easiest to implement.
In chain systems, the main actuator typically drives
a revolute joint so that a chain of modules forms an
articulated arm. In lattice systems, the main actuator
typically moves the module (or a neighboring module)
along a constrained 1-DOF path that can be translation
or rotation. In mobile reconﬁguration, the main actuator
enables locomotion, usually through wheels or treads.
The main actuator is typically the largest compo-
nent in a module and so has been the focus when trying
to make modules smaller. To date, the smallest mod-
ule with onboard actuators, that both attaches and de-
taches uses shape memory actuated module that was
2 cm [22.75]. An even smaller 1 mm modulewas created
at Carnegie Mellon University [22.76] using electrostat-
ics as an actuator, but it did not attach to other modules.
On the other extreme, the largest module is
GHC [22.77], an 8 m3 helium-ﬁlled cube with shape
memory actuators on the edges to rotate these ﬂoat-
ing balloons about edges, attaching electrostatically.
DARPA is also sponsoring a project to look at reconﬁg-
urable maritime craft constructed in a 200 ISO container
form factor. University of Pennsylvania has demon-
strated scale models at 1=12 scale, with main actuators
being thrusters to maneuver the parallelepipeds in wa-
ter [22.78].
22.3.3 Interface Design Issues
The main component of modular systems differentiat-
ing it from an integrated system is the interface between
modules. When talking about modular systems, the
amount of modularity can be measured by the num-
ber of these interfaces. For self-reconﬁgurable modular
robotic systems in this chapter the number of interfaces
in one connected component can be as small as six or
as large as millions.
In the most general case, every interface must do
two things: 1) attach and 2) detach. When they attach
they must do two things: 1) form a physical coupling
and 2) allow a ﬂow through the interface for supply
power and information (often done electrically).
The interfaces can be gendered [22.36], that is two
mating interfaces are not identical, one has male fea-
tures sticking out and the other female features to
receive the male features. They can be ungendered
with no protruding or receding mating features. Or they
can be hermaphroditic [22.39] where interfaces con-
tain both male and female features. Ungendered and
hermaphroditic interfaces can have identical interfaces
on both sides. This increases the number of possible
arrangements over gendered modules; however, un-
gendered and hermaphroditic components are typically
more complex than gendered interfaces.
Each module can have multiple interfaces. If we
consider the number of conﬁgurations possible with m
interfaces per module assuming identical modules and
ignoring any physical constraints such as self-collision,
we obtain mn possible conﬁgurations. The number of
non-isomorphic conﬁgurations is much less, but is very
difﬁcult to enumerate in general. However, one special
case to consider is two interfaces per module. In this
case, topologically, there are only two different conﬁgu-
rations, a single chain, and a loop. For this reason, most
systems have three or more interfaces.
In addition, each interface can have multiple sym-
metries that allow different kinematic relationships for
the same adjacency relationship. For example many
systems have either a 2-way connector (modules may
be optionally be rotated 180ı to each other) or a 4-way
connector (90ı rotations.) This p-way symmetry leads
to .pm/n total possible conﬁgurations.
Mechanical Interfaces
Mechanical interfaces rigidly attach two modules to-
gether with the ability to detach as well. Strategies to

Part B | 22.3
538
Part B
Design
enable this capability include using nuts and bolts, mag-
netic bonding [22.39], electrostatic bonding [22.77],
probe and drogue [22.79], and a variety of physical
hook-type mechanisms. Each mechanical interface has
three performance metrics: bond strength, acceptance
range, and interface precision/stiffness.
Bond strength can be characterized by the amount
of force required to separate two modules in its weakest
direction [22.80]. The acceptance range is the tol-
erance to position errors as two docks approach to
dock [22.81]. Interface precision/stiffness indicates the
amount of position error (deﬂection) that can occur con-
tributed by the interface under load. This can come from
elastic deﬂection, slop at a joint in a mate, or misalign-
ments in non-self-guiding docks.
For self-reconﬁguring systems, attaching and de-
taching is automatic and the area of acceptance is
required to be much larger than typical manually assem-
bled modular systems. This is in large part because the
cost of precision is high and bond precision/stiffness is
typically small. The ideal mechanical interface has high
bond strength, high acceptance range and high bond
stiffness, all of which comes with increased weight,
size, and cost. However, different styles of reconﬁgu-
ration emphasize different aspects.
Lattice reconﬁguration systems do not need high ac-
ceptance range as modules move in highly constrained
manner when reconﬁguring, usually with one degree of
freedom from one lattice position to neighboring one.
However, high bond stiffness is emphasized, as these
modules do not often have actuated degrees of freedom
to compensate for errors in position. For example, a se-
quence of modules in a lattice that are forming a loop
might not close properly because one section of mod-
ules may sag under gravity. This sag was noticeable in
the 3-D lattice module [22.82].
Chain reconﬁguration modules can deal with lower
bond stiffness since they usually have degrees of free-
dom that can compensate for errors in deﬂection. How-
ever, docking even with this compensation is not trivial
and most systems require as large an acceptance range
as possible.
Bond strength for systems that reconﬁgure tend to
be much lower than the one would ﬁnd in a manu-
ally assembled system. For example, magnetic bonding
methods are easy to implement, typically have good
precision and wide range of acceptance, but are weak.
Manual systems that are bolted together have high bond
strength, but are very complicated if they are made
automatic with a very small acceptance range. The vari-
ability in bond strength versus the stiffness in joints
can be used to vary the overall stiffness of a con-
glomerate system [22.80]. This variable stiffness can
be used to make a compliant material that can conform
to surfaces or a stiff material that will not bend under
load.
Depending on the task, bond strength may not
be required to be high. For example, in mobile re-
conﬁguration systems that primarily move on the
ground, e.g., forming trains such as millibot [22.67] or
swarms [22.38], the worst case situation is when the
conglomerate tries to cross a gap with modules can-
tilevered over the gap. Otherwise, the conglomerate is
nominally supported at all times and the bond only
sees dynamic friction and inertial forces. But in general,
higher bond strength does not hurt and keeps a system
from falling apart from static or dynamic loads.
Power and Communications Interface
Power and communications interfaces are typically
electrical, though in the case of the related work in
quick-change end effectors, pneumatics is often sup-
plied too. In any case, the primary parameters of con-
cern are the number of lines that must be transmitted
between the interface, and the type of lines (e.g., pneu-
matic, high voltage, high current, ﬁber optic, etc.). The
type of line will determine the size (which usually limits
the number of lines) as well as the precision alignment
required at the interface.
In self-reconﬁgurable systems, the typical interface
passes electric power and a separate electronics com-
munications bus on which all modules talk, though they
are sometimes combined [22.77]. A key consideration
for electronic lines is not only that the correct lines
have good contact when mated, but also that wrong
contacts do not touch during the docking process due
to position error. For most self-reconﬁguring systems
maximizing the tolerance to position errors is the most
important [22.56].
Communication between modules is essential for
any self-reconﬁgurable system, whether the control
is distributed or centralized. There are primarily two
forms of communication: a global communications bus
(any module talks to any other module) or a local
communications medium (modules only talk to their
neighbors through the modular interface.)
These two forms have different implications. Global
buses are typically much faster than local methods of
equivalent cost. There are no issues of varied latency
between modules as with local methods. One problem
with global buses is that there is no mechanism for
modules communicating with each other to know the
relative physical position of each module. Local meth-
ods get this for free. Local methods, can also emulate
global architectures by message passing and routing.
Local methods are also more robust to physical errors
(such as shorting a communications line to power) con-
taining failures to locally. However, they are just as

Modular Robots
22.4 Conclusion and Further Reading
539
Part B | 22.4
Table 22.1 Characteristics of used communication protocols
Method
Speed (kbs)
Range (m)
Power (mW)
Address space
Rel. cost
Notes
Ethernet/CAT
1k–1m
100’s
500
4 billion
$$$$
Complex stack (IPV4)
CANbus
101000
100
 200
 2000
$$$
Robust (base frame)
Bluetooth
1k–3k
10
 100
1 million
$$$
3 s wake-up
BLE (wibree)
1k
10
10
1 million
$$
Low power Bluetooth
Zigbee
20250
1075
 30
64 bit
$$
Wakeup 15 ms
RS485
10010 k
1200
5
256
$
Robust elec. protoc
SPI
112 k
 10
5
Out of band
$
Simple sync 5 wire
vulnerable to software errors such as ﬂooding a network
with garbage messages.
There are many choices for global communica-
tion protocols falling into two categories: wired and
wireless. Wired is the most common and has many
possible protocols, mostly requiring that the bus is
multidrop. Popular wired protocols include Ethernet,
EtherCAT, RS-485, SPI, and CANbus. Popular wire-
less protocols include Zigbee, Bluetooth, and 802.11.
Important characteristics of communication protocols
include the speed, real-time aspects, address space, and
cost. A comparison is shown in Table 22.1 with typical
values of common implementation.
The importance of the speed depends (or often dic-
tates) the architecture of distributed control. Communi-
cations to individual modules can range from 100 times
a second (for direct remote control) to several times
per minute for higher level behavior control (e.g., hor-
mone control [22.50]). Many protocols have automatic
recovery from bad packets, which has obvious im-
portance. Ethernet uses random backoff retransmission
after a collision, which makes the protocol non-deter-
ministic. This makes it difﬁcult to have guarantees of
real-time performance. The protocol is very fast so it
is possible to ignore this as messages will get through
with small latency with high probability. EtherCAT is
Ethernet for Control Automation Technology that is
better suited for real-time control. CANbus (Control
Area Network bus) is a well-established bus used in
the automotive technology that can be real-time, and
robust, though it is typically slower than Ethernet or
EtherCAT.
22.4 Conclusion and Further Reading
After more than a quarter century of research and de-
velopment in modular robotics, a number of modular
robotic systems have successfully entered the indus-
try automation, education and entertainment markets.
These successful modular robotic systems indicate that
modular design offers advantages in the areas of prod-
uct variety, application variety and creativity. However,
the cost of such systems, no matter at the module level
or at the system level, has room to be reduced to help
mass adoption.
The cost structure of a modular robot is closely
linked with the design of the individual modules and
the systemic architecture to be conceived as well as
the market demand and expectation. From the develop-
ment history of LEGO bricks to the Schunk Powercube
modules, it is clear that module design functions are be-
coming simpler (reducing cost) and increasing variabil-
ity (increasing the user base). Hence, for reconﬁgurable
modular manipulators, mobile systems, and self-recon-
ﬁgurable modular robots, focusing on system designs to
meet the expectation of the end user is the current trend.
Besides system design, standardization of mechani-
cal and communication interfaces is critical. Like other
electronic and industrial products, electronic and com-
munication interfaces for modular robots could adopt
existing industry standards depending on the form
factors, connecting performance, reliability, etc. The
mechanical interface design normally does not have
industry standard to follow due to variety in mechan-
ical speciﬁcations on the form factor, loading capacity,
rigidity of the joints. Hence, many novel mechani-
cal connection designs can be explored for modular
robots.
Future research continues to explore increasing the
number of modules. As they approach hundreds and
thousands, there are interesting questions that arise as
modules become more tightly coupled than current
efforts [22.73]. Issues include how to deal with the in-
creased likelihood that some modular elements are not
functioning completely correctly. Biologically inspired
mechanisms such as intentional cell-death and cell-re-
placement may become a required part of very large
systems.
As the modular approach has increasingly large
numbers of modules, there are many more conﬁgura-
tions and resulting capabilities from those conﬁgura-
tions. Future research will need to address the problem
of determining appropriate or optimal conﬁgurations

Part B | 22
540
Part B
Design
for arbitrary tasks. This may lead to a better understand-
ing of robotic tasks in general.
The most recent review article on modular mo-
bile robots can be found in [22.13]. In [22.30], the
technical challenges and future of self-reconﬁgurable
modular robots are reviewed. Interested readers may
ﬁnd further information on self-reconﬁgurable robots
in [22.31].
Video-References
VIDEO 1
SMORES
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/22/videodetails/1
VIDEO 2
4x4ht4a
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/22/videodetails/2
VIDEO 3
M-Blocks: Momentum-driven, magnetic modular robots self-reconfiguring
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/22/videodetails/3
VIDEO 5
ATRON robot showing robust and reversible execution of self-reconfiguration sequences
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/22/videodetails/5
References
22.1
K. Ulrich: The role of product architecture on the
manufacturing firm, Res. Policy 24, 419–440 (1995)
22.2
C. Paredis, H.B. Brown, P. Khosla: A rapidly de-
ployable manipulator system, Proc. IEEE ICRA (1996)
pp. 1434–1439
22.3
T. Fukuda, S. Nakagawa: Dynamically reconfig-
urable robot system, Proc. IEEE ICRA (1988) pp. 1581–
1586
22.4
R. Cohen, M. Lipton, M. Dai, B. Benhabib: Concep-
tual design of a modular robot, ASME J Mech. Des.
25, 114–117 (1992)
22.5
K.H. Wurst: The conception and construction of
a modular robot system, Proc. 16th Int. Symp. Ind.
Robots (ISIR) (1986) pp. 37–44
22.6
D. Tesar, M.S. Butler: A generalized modular archi-
tecture for robot structures, ASME J. Manuf. Rev.
2(2), 91–117 (1989)
22.7
T. Matsumaru: Design and control of the mod-
ular robot system: TOMMS, Proc. IEEE ICRA (1995)
pp. 2125–2131
22.8
G. Yang, I.-M. Chen, W.K. Lim, S.H. Yeo: Kine-
matic design of modular reconfigurable in-parallel
robots, Auton. Robot. 10(1), 83–89 (2001)
22.9
I.-M. Chen: Rapid response manufacturing through
a rapidly reconfigurable robotic workcell, Robotics
Comput. Integr. Manuf. 17(3), 199–213 (2001)
22.10
Schunk GmbH, Lauffen, Germany, http://www.
schunk.com/
22.11
W. Wang, W. Yu, H. Zhang: JL-2: A mobile multi-
robot system with docking and manipulating ca-
pabilities, Int. J. Adv. Robotic Syst. 7(1), 9–18 (2010)
22.12
B. Li, S. Ma, J. Liu, M. Wang, T. Liu, Y. Wang:
AMOEBA-I: A shape-shifting modular robot for ur-
ban search and rescue, Adv. Robotics 23(9), 1057–
1083 (2009)
22.13
P. Moubarak, P. Ben-Tzvi: Modular and reconfig-
urable mobile robotics, Robot. Auton. Syst. 60,
1648–1663 (2012)
22.14
H.C.H. Chiu, M. Rubenstein, W.M. Shen: Multifunc-
tional superbot with rolling track configuration,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ IROS (2007)
22.15
I.-M.
Chen,
J.W.
Burdick:
Enumerating
non-
isomorphic assembly configurations of a modular
robotic system, Int. J. Robotics Res. 17(7), 702–719
(1998)
22.16
J. Liu, Y. Wang, S. Ma, Y. Li: Enumeration of
the non-isomorphic configurations for a recon-
figurable modular robot with square-cubic-cell
modules, Int. J. Adv. Robotic Syst. 7(4), 58–68
(2010)
22.17
H. Liu, H. Wang, S. Li, L. He: Research on the
topology description and modeling method for re-
configurable modular robots, Proc. ASME/IFToMM
Int. Conf. Reconfig. Mech. Robot. (ReMAR) (2009)
pp. 129–135
22.18
E. Meister, A. Gutenkunst: Self-adaptive framework
for modular and self-reconfigurable robotic sys-
tems, Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Adapt. Self-Adapt. Syst.
Appl. (ADAPTIVE) (2012) pp. 30–37
22.19
I.-M. Chen, G. Yang, S.H. Yeo, G. Chen: Kernel for
modular robot applications – Automatic model-
ing techniques, Int. J. Robotics Res. 18(2), 225–242
(1999)
22.20
I.-M. Chen, C.T. Tan, G. Yang, S.H. Yeo: A local POE
model for robot kinematic calibration, Mech. Mach.
Theory 36(11), 1215–1239 (2001)
22.21
J.M. Hollerbach: A recursive lagrangian formulation
of manipulator dynamics and a comparative study
of dynamics formulation complexity, IEEE Trans.
Syst. Man Cybern. 10, 730–736 (1980)
22.22
G. Rodriguze, A. Jain, K. Kreutz-Delgado: A spa-
tial operator algebra for manipulator modeling and
control, Int. J. Robotics Res. 10(4), 371–381 (1991)
22.23
R. Murray, Z. Li, S. Sastry: A Mathematical Intro-
duction to Robotic Manipulation (CRC, Boca Raton
1994)

Modular Robots
References
541
Part B | 22
22.24
R.
Featherstone:
Robot
Dynamics
Algorithms
(Kluwer, Dordrecht 1987)
22.25
F.C. Park, J.E. Bobrow, S.R. Ploen: A lie group for-
mulation of robot dynamics, Int. J. Robotics Res.
14(6), 609–618 (1995)
22.26
I.-M. Chen, J.W. Burdick: Determining task optimal
modular robot assembly configurations, Proc. IEEE
ICRA (1995) pp. 132–137
22.27
J. Han, W.K. Chung, Y. Youm, S.H. Kim: Task based
design of modular robot manipulator using ef-
ficient genetic algorithm, Proc. IEEE ICRA (1997)
pp. 507–512
22.28
C. Paredis, P.K. Khosla: Agent based design of fault
tolerant manipulators for satellite docking, Proc.
IEEE ICRA (1997) pp. 3473–3480
22.29
G. Yang, I.-M. Chen: Task-based optimization of
modular robot configurations: Minimized degree-
of-freedom approach, Mech. Mach. Theory 35(4),
517–540 (2000)
22.30
M. Yim, W.M. Shen, B. Salemi, D. Rus, M. Moll,
H. Lipson, E. Klavins, G. Chirikjian: Modular self-
reconfigurable robot systems – Challenges and op-
portunities for the future, IEEE Robotics Autom.
Mag. 14(1), 43–52 (2007)
22.31
K.
Stoy,
D.
Brandt,
D.J.
Christensen:
Self-
Reconfigurable Robots – An Introduction (MIT,
Cambridge 2010)
22.32
D. Rus, M. Vona: Self-reconfiguration planning
with compressible unit modules, Proc. IEEE ICRA
(1999)
22.33
S. Murata, E. Yoshida, K. Tomita, H. Kurokawa,
A. Kamimura, S. Kokaji: Hardware design of mod-
ular robotic system, Proc. IEEE/RSJ IROS (2000)
22.34
K. Kotay, D. Rus: Self-reconfigurable robots for nav-
igation and manipulation, Proc. IEEE/RSJ IROS (1997)
22.35
C. Ünsal, H. Kiliççöte, P.K. Khosla: I(CES)-cubes:
A modular self-reconfigurable bipartite robotic
system, Proc. SPIE, Sens. Fusion Decent. Control
Robotic Syst., Bellingham (1999) pp. 258–269
22.36
A. Castano, W.M. Shen, P. Will: CONRO: Towards
deployable robots with inter-robots metamorphic
capabilities, Auton. Robots 8(3), 309–324 (2000)
22.37
W.H. Lee, A.C. Sanderson: Dynamic analysis and
distributed control of tetrobot modular reconfig-
urable robotic system, Auton. Robots 10(1), 67–82
(2001)
22.38
E. Tuci, R. Gross, V. Trianni, F. Mondada, M. Bonani,
M. Dorigo: Cooperation through self-assembly in
multi-robot systems, ACM Trans. Auton. Adapt. Syst.
(TAAS) 1(2), 115–150 (2006)
22.39
J.W. Suh, S.B. Homans, M. Yim: Telecubes: Me-
chanical design of a module for self-reconfigurable
robotics, Proc. IEEE ICRA (2002)
22.40
M.W. Jorgensen, E.H. Ostergaard, H.H. Lund: Mod-
ular Atron: Modules for a self-reconfigurable robot,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ IROS (2004) pp. 2068–2073
22.41
M. Hafez, M.D. Lichter, S. Dubowsky: Optimized
binary modular reconfigurable robotic devices,
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 8(1), 18–25 (2003)
22.42
P. White, V. Zykov, J. Bongard, H. Lipson: Three di-
mensional stochastic reconfiguration of modular
robots, Proc. Robotics Sci. Syst. 1, 161–168 (2005)
22.43
B. Kirby, J. Campbell, B. Aksak, P. Pillai, J. Hoburg,
T. Mowry, S.C. Goldstein: Catoms: Moving robots
without moving parts, Proc. Natl. Conf. Artif. Intell.
20, 1730–1731 (2005)
22.44
S.C. Goldstein, J.D. Campbell, T.C. Mowry: Pro-
grammable matter, Computer 38(6), 99–101 (2005)
22.45
A.A.
Goldenberg,
N.M.
Kircanski,
P.
Kuzan,
J.A. Wiercienski, R. Hui, C. Zhou: Modular, ex-
pandable and reconfigurable robot, US Patent
552 3662 (1996)
22.46
H. Lipson, J.B. Pollack: Towards continuously re-
configurable self-designing robotics, Proc. IEEE
ICRA (2000)
22.47
J.E. Walter, E.M. Tsai, N. Amato: Choosing good
paths for fast distributed reconfiguration of hexag-
onal metamorphic robots, Proc. IEEE ICRA (2002)
22.48
A. Castano, P. Will: Representing and discovering
the configuration of CONRO robots, Proc. IEEE ICRA
(2001) pp. 3503–3509
22.49
K. Støy, W.M. Shen, P. Will: Global locomotion
from local interaction in self-reconfigurablerobots,
Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Intell. Auton. Syst. (IAS-7), Ma-
rina del Rey (2002)
22.50
P. Will, B. Salemi, W.M. Shen: Hormone-controlled
metamorphic
robots,
Proc.
IEEE
ICRA
(2001)
pp. 4194–4199
22.51
A. Kamimura, S. Murata, E. Yoshida, H. Kurokawa,
K. Tomita, S. Kokaji: Self-reconfigurable modular
robot – Experiments on reconfiguration and loco-
motion, Proc. IEEE/RSJ IROS (2001) pp. 606–612
22.52
R. Fitch, D. Rus, M. Vona: Basis for self-repair robots
using self-reconfiguring crystal modules, Proc. IEEE
Int. Auton. Syst. (2000) pp. 903–910
22.53
G.S. Chirikjian, A. Pamecha, I. Ebert-Uphoff: Eval-
uating efficiency of self-reconfiguration in a class
of modular robots, J. Robotic Syst. 13(5), 317–338
(1996)
22.54
F.H. Bennett, E.G. Rieffel: Design of decentralized
controllers for self-reconfigurable modular robots
using genetic programming, Proc. 2nd NASA/DoD
Workshop Evol. Hardw. (2000)
22.55
Z. Butler, R. Fitch, D. Rus: Distributed control for
unit-compressible robots: Goal-recognition, loco-
motion, and splitting IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron.
7(4), 418–430 (2002)
22.56
M. Yim, Y. Zhang, K. Roufas, D. Duff, C. Elder-
shaw: Connecting and disconnecting for chain
self-reconfiguration with PolyBot, IEEE/ASME Trans.
Mechatron. 7(4), 442–451 (2002)
22.57
Y. Zhang, M.P.J. Fromherz, L.S. Crawford, Y. Shang:
A general constraint-based control framework with
examples in modular self-reconfigurable robots,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ IROS (2002) pp. 2163–2168
22.58
H. Bojinov, A. Casal, T. Hogg: Emergent structures in
modular self-reconfigurable robots, robotics and
automation, Proc. IEEE ICRA (2000)
22.59
P. Pirjanian, C. Leger, E. Mumm, B. Kennedy,
M. Garrett, H. Aghazarian, S. Farritor, P. Schenker:
Distributed control for a modular, reconfigurable
cliff robot, Proc. IEEE ICRA (2002)
22.60
K.C. Prevas, C. Unsal, M.O. Efe, P.K. Khosla: A hi-
erarchical motion planning strategy for a uniform

Part B | 22
542
Part B
Design
self-reconfigurable modular robotic system, Proc.
IEEE ICRA (2002)
22.61
W.W. Melek, A.A. Goldenberg: Neurofuzzy control
of modular and reconfigurable robots, IEEE/ASME
Trans. Mechatron. 8(3), 381–389 (2003)
22.62
M. Yim, D.G. Duff, K.D. Roufas: Polybot: A mod-
ular reconfigurable robot, Proc. IEEE ICRA (2000)
pp. 514–520
22.63
M. Yim, Y. Zhang, D. Duff: Modular Reconfigurable
Robots, Machines that shift their shape to suit the
task at hand, IEEE Spectrum 39(2), 30–34 (2002)
22.64
M. Yim, C. Eldershaw, Y. Zhang, D. Duff: Limbless
conforming gaits with modular robots. In: Springer
Tract. Adv. Robot., Vol. 21, 2006) pp. 459–468
22.65
M. Yim, J. Reich, A.A. Berlin: Two approaches to
distributed manipulation. In: Distributed Manip-
ulation, ed. by K. Bohringer, H.H. Choset (Kluwer,
Dordrecht 2000) pp. 237–261
22.66
J. Davey, N. Kwok, M.
Yim: Emulating
self-
reconfigurable Robots – Design of the SMORES sys-
tem, Proc. IEEE/RSJ IROS (2012)
22.67
H.B. Brown, J.M. Vande Weghe, C.A. Bererton,
P.K. Khosla: Millibot trains for enhanced mobility,
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 7(4), 452–461 (2002)
22.68
S. Murata, K. Kakomura, H. Kurokawa: Toward
a scalable modular robotic system, IEEE Robotics
Autom. Mag. 14(4), 56–63 (2007)
22.69
M. Yim, B. Shirmohammadi, J. Sastra, M. Park,
M.
Dugan,
C.J.
Taylor:
Towards
robotic
self-
reassembly after explosion, Proc. IEEE/RSJ IROS
(2007) pp. 2767–2772
22.70
M. Kutzer, M. Moses, C. Brown, M. Armand,
D. Scheidt, G. Chirikjian: Design of a new inde-
pendently-mobile reconfigurable modular robot,
Proc. IEEE ICRA (2010)
22.71
H. Cheng, G. Ryland: Design of iMobot, an in-
telligent reconfigurable mobile robot with novel
locomotion, Proc. IEEE ICRA (2010)
22.72
F.P. Brooks: The Mythical Man-Month (Addison-
Wesley, Reading 1975)
22.73
M. Rubenstein, R. Nagpal: Kilobot: A robotic mod-
ule for demonstrating behaviors in a large scale (210
units) collective, Proc. IEEE ICRA (2010) pp. 47–51
22.74
Y. Zhang, M. Yim, C. Eldershaw, D. Duff, K. Rou-
fas: Scalable and reconfigurable configurations and
locomotion gaits for chain-type modular recon-
figurable robots, Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Intell.
Robotics Autom. (CIRA) (2003)
22.75
E.
Yoshida,
S.
Murata,
S.
Kokaji,
K.
Tomita,
H. Kurokawa: Micro self-reconfigurable modu-
lar robot using shape memory alloy, J. Robotics
Mechatron. 13(2), 212–218 (2001)
22.76
M.E. Karagozler, S.C. Goldstein, J.R. Reid: Stress-
driven MEMS assemblyCelectrostatic forces D 1mm
diameter robot, Proc. IEEE/RSJ IROS (2009)
22.77
M.E. Karagozler, J.D. Campbell, G.K. Feddore,
S.C. Goldstein, H.P. Weller, B.W. Yoon: Electrostatic
latching for inter-module adhesion, power trans-
fer, and communication in modular robots, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ IROS (2007)
22.78
I. O’Hara, J. Paulos, J. Davey, N. Eckenstein,
N. Doshi, T. Tosun, J. Greco, Jungwon. Seo,
M. Turpin, V. Kumar, M. Yim: Self-assembly of
a swarm of autonomous boats into floating struc-
tures, Proc. IEEE ICRA (2014) pp. 1234–1240
22.79
L. Vasilescu, P. Varshavshaya, K. Kotay, D. Rus:
Autonomous modular optical underwater robot
(amour) design, prototype and feasibility study,
Proc. IEEE ICRA (2005)
22.80
P.J. White, S. Revzen, C.E. Thorne, M. Yim: A gen-
eral mechanical strength model for programmable
matter and modular robotic structures, Robotica
29(1), 103–121 (2011)
22.81
N. Eckenstein, M. Yim: The X-Face: An improved
planar passive mechanical connector for modular
self-reconfigurable robots, Proc. IEEE/RSJ IROS (2012)
pp. 3073–3078
22.82
S. Murata, H. Kurokawa, E. Yoshida, K. Tomita,
S. Kokaji: A 3-D self-reconfigurable structure, Proc.
IEEE ICRA (1998) pp. 432–439

Multimedia Contents Biomimetic
543
Part B | 23
23. Biomimetic Robots
Kyu-Jin Cho, Robert Wood
Biomimetic robot designs attempt to translate
biological principles into engineered systems, re-
placing more classical engineering solutions in
order to achieve a function observed in the natu-
ral system. This chapter will focus on mechanism
design for bio-inspired robots that replicate key
principles from nature with novel engineering
solutions. The challenges of biomimetic design
include developing a deep understanding of the
relevant natural system and translating this un-
derstanding into engineering design rules. This
often entails the development of novel fabri-
cation and actuation to realize the biomimetic
design.
This chapter consists of four sections. In
Sect. 23.1, we will define what biomimetic de-
sign entails, and contrast biomimetic robots with
bio-inspired robots. In Sect. 23.2, we will dis-
cuss the fundamental components for developing
a biomimetic robot. In Sect. 23.3, we will review
detailed biomimetic designs that have been de-
veloped for canonical robot locomotion behaviors
including flapping-wing flight, jumping, craw-
ling, wall climbing, and swimming. In Sect. 23.4,
we will discuss the enabling technologies for
23.1
Overview.............................................
544
23.2
Components
of Biomimetic Robot Design .................
544
23.3 Mechanisms ........................................
545
23.3.1
Legged Crawling ........................
545
23.3.2
Worm-Like Crawling ..................
547
23.3.3
Snake Robots ............................
548
23.3.4
Flapping-Wing Flight.................
550
23.3.5 Wall Climbing............................
551
23.3.6 Swimming ................................
553
23.3.7
Jumping ...................................
555
23.3.8 Gripping and Perching...............
558
23.4 Material and Fabrication......................
561
23.4.1
Shape Deposition Manufacturing
561
23.4.2
Smart Composite
Microstructures .........................
562
23.4.3 Pop-Up Book MEMS ...................
564
23.4.4 Other Fabrication Methods .........
565
23.5 Conclusion...........................................
567
Video-References.........................................
568
References...................................................
570
these biomimetic designs including material and
fabrication.
Biomimetics is a broad ﬁeld that covers all ranges of
robotics including robot structure and mechanics, actu-
ation, perception, and autonomy. This section will focus
on robots that mimic structure and movement principles
found in nature to perform desired tasks in unstructured
environments.
Nature frequently inspires engineers to adopt solu-
tions from biology for application to human challenges.
Robots are built to perform certain tasks, and many tasks
include moving from one place to another. The various
modes of locomotion in nature have inspired robots to
mimic these locomotion with a goal to overcome var-
ious obstacles in the environment, and move around
with the extreme agility similar to that found in nature.
Mankind has engineered various modes of transporta-
tion on ground, air, and water. On ground, wheeled ve-
hicles are the most popular choice. In air, ﬁxed wing
airplanes and helicopters with rotating blades dominate,
and in water, ships, and submarines propelled by similar
rotating elements are most common. In contrast, nature

Part B | 23.2
544
Part B
Design
has different solutions to locomotion involving mov-
ing legs, undulating ﬁns, and ﬂapping wings. Many of
these biological locomotionmechanisms have analogies
to engineered systems. Instead of using wheels, nature
uses legs of different sizes, numbers, and impedances;
humans and birds are bipedal, many mammals and rep-
tiles move on four legs, and insects have six legs, and
other arthropods have eight or more legs. These legs are
coordinated to move on different surfaces in a stable
manner. Snakes and worms move around without legs
by creating waves with their body. Instead of ﬁxed wings
with jets and rotary propellers, birds, bats, and ﬂying in-
sects ﬂap their wings. Fish create undulatory motions
with their bodies to swim with agility far beyond con-
ventional boats and submarines. Each of these biologi-
cal locomotion modes are based on the nature’s funda-
mental actuator: muscle. Muscles create linear motion
that is coupled to the structures that generate locomo-
tion. Therefore, these structures are closely related to the
morphology of the muscles that move the structures.
23.1 Overview
The main purpose of locomotion in manmade machines
is to deliver large payloads across long distances in
the shortest possible time or with the minimal energy
expenditure. There are roads, airports, shipyards, and
other foundations that support this transportation, en-
abling the structural design of cars, trains, planes, and
ships to focus on transportation tasks. On the other
hand, locomotion in nature is primarily for survival.
Animals and insects have evolved to survive in various
environments. Each species uses their mode of locomo-
tion to hunt for food, ﬁnd mates, and escape danger all
in unstructured natural environments. Therefore, the re-
quirements for biological locomotion are much more
complicated than human transportation systems.
Biomimetic robots try to mimic the structural char-
acteristics and the principles of movement to be able
to move around places where conventional machines or
robots are unable to perform as needed. Animals can
crawl on a rugged terrain at a high speed, can climb
walls without a tether, can ﬂy in cluttered environments
and hover and perch as needed.
Depending on the size of the species the optimal
mode of locomotion and the underlying structure is dif-
ferent. For example, jumping is found frequently in
small insects to escape danger, since their small size
makes it hard for them to escape quickly using other
forms of locomotion. Jumping by a large animal is dif-
ferent from jumping by small insects like a ﬂea. Larger
insects or animals tend to use their legs to run or crawl
to escape the danger. Large birds ﬂap their wings at
a much lower frequency, and use gliding mode whereas
bees and ﬂies beat their wings continuously at a high
frequency during ﬂight. The structure is very differ-
ent, where the wings of a bird have bones, muscle, and
feathers versus the muscle-less and lightweight wings
of insects. Therefore, when developing biomimetic
robots, the size of the target species should be taken
into account.
Since nature has evolved to survive in extreme
environments, there are many examples of extreme
locomotion that are typically not possible with con-
ventional engineering designs. For example, the wall
climbing robot Stickybot uses the directional adhesion
principle of a gecko to climb up smooth vertical walls.
However, directional adhesion alone is not enough. The
design has to enable even pressure distribution on the
pad to make sure the pads are well in contact with the
wall. These small details can be important to perfor-
mance of biomimetic robots and should be considered
carefully.
Since robots are commonly built to perform tasks
too tedious or dangerous for humans, it is natural to
adopt designs found in nature for functionality where
nature has already found a solution. In fact, many robot
designs in this handbook, such as legged robots and
robot hands and many examples of ﬂying robots, un-
derwater robots, and micro robots, are biomimetic. This
chapter will focus on areas of biomimetic robot designs
that have been recently expanding. Legged robots and
robot hands have already formed large communities and
are covered in separate chapters. There are various other
forms of locomotion, e.g., crawling, jumping, swim-
ming, and ﬂapping, that are being researched to mimic
the principle of movement and the biological structure.
The structure and the components of these robots will
be reviewed and discussed in this chapter.
23.2 Components of Biomimetic Robot Design
Biomimetic robot design begins with an understanding
of the underlying principles at work in a natural system.
For the design of a biomimetic robot, the components
used in building the robot are important; the structural

Biomimetic Robots
23.3 Mechanisms
545
Part B | 23.3
design is constrained or enabled by the actuator system,
the materials and the fabrication methods used to build
the robot.
Understanding of the principles of movement found
in nature initiates the design of biomimetic robots. This
can be studied by observing the kinematics and measur-
ing forces in moving animals, or by understanding and
modeling the dynamics. Substantial research on biolog-
ical locomotion analyzes the kinematics of the animal.
However, it is important to understand the dynamics
behind the kinematics to be able to implement the
dynamic principles into the robot design, which will en-
able the robot to perform like an animal, instead of just
looking like one. Full et al. proposed clock-driven, me-
chanically self-stabilizing, compliant sprawled-posture
mechanics to explain a cockroach racing seemingly ef-
fortlessly over a rough surface [23.1, 2]. Ellington built
a system that can measure the force generated by ﬂap-
ping wings to understand the thrust generated by insect
wings [23.3]. These studies in biology have inﬂuenced
robotics researchers, and inspired them to build hexa-
pod and ﬂapping-wing robots.
To implement biological principles in engineered
systems, components that can create performance sim-
ilar to that of nature is required. Nature’s biological
structures are composed of various materials, e.g., tis-
sues, bones, cuticles, ﬂesh, and feathers. These ma-
terials are replaced with engineered materials, e.g.,
metal, plastics, composites, and polymers. New en-
gineered materials are being developed that exhibit
similar properties to natural materials, which will en-
able life-like robots. However, the performance of the
biomimetic robot can be similar to nature without ac-
tually mimicking the exact structure. Therefore, it is
important to decide to what level biomimicry is re-
quired. Large robots tend to be built with conventional
mechanical components such as motors, joints, and
linkages made of metal. The challenge is in building
meso-scale robots, where the conventional mechani-
cal components become ineffective, due to friction and
other inefﬁciencies. As the robot becomes smaller, it
is beneﬁcial to mimic not just the kinematics seen in
nature, but also the structure at the component level.
Another challenge for small scales is actuation – the ac-
tuator must be as effective as the muscle even at small
scales.
A number of new manufacturing methods have be-
come available which also enable new designs that
were not previously possible by more classical machin-
ing methods and nuts-and-bolts assembly techniques.
Examples include shape deposition manufacturing and
smart composite microstructures. In many cases, these
new fabrication processes facilitate the construction of
novel biomimetic robots beyond what was possible by
conventional means.
Levels of mimicry can vary depending on the com-
ponents used in the design. The robot can simply look
like an animal, but not perform similarly to the mim-
icked animal. On the other hand, once the principle is
mimicked the robot does not have to look like the ani-
mal, but it can still perform a task in a similar manner
as the animal. The different ways of mimicking allows
each robot to have its own characteristic. For example,
a ﬂea uses what is called a torque reversal for jump-
ing, which is a unique method of storing and releasing
large amount of energy. In nature, this method is possi-
ble with muscles and a lightweight-legged structure. To
mimic the ﬂea’s locomotion, we need an actuator that
is comparable to muscles and a fabrication method that
allows us to build a small-scale rigid structure.
23.3 Mechanisms
Developing multilegged robot has been achieved by
using speciﬁc design which enables some function or
biomimetic model inspired by multilegged insects. Es-
pecially, the ability of a cockroach enabling to run on
a rough surface at a high speed has inspired to develop
a series of multilegged robots. They are capable of
maintaining stability during locomotion at a high speed
(relative to their body length).
23.3.1 Legged Crawling
Some types of cockroaches can achieve speed up to
50 body length per second and can crawl on un-
even terrain, overcoming obstacles far higher than their
height [23.2]. RHex (Fig 23.1a) [23.4] is one of the
ﬁrst robots to implement cockroach-like characteris-
tics. It is a hexapod crawling robot with C-shaped
legs, so it is suitable for walking on uneven terrain
or large obstacles, as shown in
VIDEO 400 . Mini-
Whegs (Fig 23.1b) [23.5] also have unusual wheel with
three spokes. Because of the wheel-spoke structure, the
gait passively adapts to the terrain similar to climb-
ing cockroaches, as shown in
VIDEO 401
[23.15].
Sprawlita (Fig 23.1c) [23.6] is a hexapod crawling robot
that uses pneumatic actuators on each leg and passive
rotary joints so that it can achieve dynamic stability.
It weighs 27 kg and its speed is over 3 body length=s
or 550 mm=s. iSprawl (Fig 23.1d) [23.7] is hexapod
crawling robot that uses extension of each legs during
crawling. This robot is driven by electric motors and

Part B | 23.3
546
Part B
Design
155 mm
1 cm
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.23.1a–d Crawling robots inspired by cockroach (a) RHex (after [23.4]), (b) Mini-Whegs (after [23.5]), (c) Sprawlita
(after [23.6]), (d) iSprawl (after [23.7])
35 mm
1 cm
a)
e)
f)
g)
b)
c)
d)
100 mm
10 cm
Fig.23.2a–g Crawling robots inspired by cockroach. (a) DASH (after [23.8]), (b) RoACH (after [23.9]), (c) DynaRoACH
(after [23.10]), (d) OctoRoACH (after [23.11]), (e) HAMR3 (after [23.12]), (f) centipede-like modular robot (af-
ter [23.13]), (g) crawling robot through the integration of microrobot technologies (after [23.14])
ﬂexible push–pull cables. Rotation of the motor causes
the legs to extend or contract. It weighs 300 g and is able
to crawl 15 bodylength=s or 2:3 m=s, as can be seen in
VIDEO 403 .
Cockroach-based designs would improve the per-
formance of millimeter or centimeter scale crawl-
ing robots which face inefﬁciency with conventional
mechanisms. DASH (Fig 23.2a) [23.8] is a hexapedal
crawling robot fabricated using SCM (Smart compos-
ite manufacturing) process. This robot has only one
electric motor coupled to a four-bar linkage pushing
the legs in an elliptical crawling motion, as shown
in
VIDEO 405 . DASH weighs 16:2 g and achieves
a)
b)
Fig.23.3a,b The latest version of crawling robots which shows im-
proved performance (a) HAMRV (after [23.16]), (b) VelociRoACH
(after [23.17])
speed up to 15 body length=s or 1:5 m=s. RoACH
(Fig 23.2b) [23.9] is a hexapod crawling robot that
imitate cockroach’s alternating tripod gait. A typical
cockroach gait involves the ipsilateral front leg, hind
leg, and contralateral middle leg moving simultane-
ously. Two sets of three legs tread on a surface in
turn – generating the alternating tripod gait. RoACH
uses two shape memory alloy (SMA) wire actuators
to contract the body in two orthogonal directions.
Contraction of the two actuators results in motion
of legs through a four-bar linkage. The legs repeat-
edly operate swing and stance motions according to
the sequential stimulation of the two actuators and it
can be seen in
VIDEO 286 . It weighs 2:4 g and is
able to crawl 1 body length=s or 3 cm=s. DynaRoACH
(Fig 23.2c) [23.10] has six legs driven by one DC
motor. It has passive dynamics similar to RoACH to
achieve better locomotion performance. Lift motion
is achieved by a slider crank mechanism and swing
motion by a four-bar mechanism. Like RHex, it uses C-
shape legs so that the robot has lower vertical stiffness,
lateral collapsibility for obstacle climbing, and more
distributed ground contact. It weigh 24 g and is 100 mm
long and is capable of speeds up to 14 bodylength=s
or 1:4 m=s. OctoRoACH (Fig 23.2d) [23.11] is quite
similar to DynaRoACH, but it has two motors driv-

Biomimetic Robots
23.3 Mechanisms
547
Part B | 23.3
ing the legs on each side. It has eight legs so that
it maximizes pitch stability using two motors. Oc-
toRoACH weigh 35 g and is 100 mm long. HAMR3
(Fig 23.2e) [23.12] uses nine piezoelectric actuators.
Each leg performs swing and lift motion through
two decoupled piezoelectric actuator through four-bar
slider-crank mechanisms and spherical ﬁve-bar mecha-
nisms (
VIDEO 406 ). This robot weighs 1:7 g and has
speeds up to 0:9 bodylength=s or 4:2 cm=s (4:7 cm long
robot). Especially, the HAMR is manufactured using
a method inspired by pop-up books that enables fast
and repeatable assembly. Multilegged robots inspired
by centipede using mechanism similar to alternative
tripod gaits is also developed (Fig 23.2f) [23.13]. Its
several gait patterns that differ in gait frequency and
phase are described in
VIDEO 407 . Using microrobot
technologies developed until 2006, integrated structure
was developed although the structure was not yet tested
(Fig 23.2g) [23.14].
With more experiments and research about mo-
tion of cockroaches, the cockroaches like robots
can extremely improve their performance by revi-
sion using biomimetic model. HAMRV, which is the
most recent version of HAMR [23.16], can move
10:1 body length=s (44:2 cm=s) which is remarkably
improved compared to preceded versions are capable of
running at 0:9 body length=s. It is even capable of ma-
neuverability and control at both low and high speeds.
VelociRoACH (Fig 23.3b) [23.17] which is the latest
version of RoACH can run 2:7 m=s extremely higher
speed relative to previous version (
VIDEO 408 ).
23.3.2 Worm-Like Crawling
Worm-like crawling motion can be separated into two
categories: peristaltic crawling and two-anchor crawl-
ing. Worms exhibiting peristaltic crawling locomotion –
such as earth worms – can move through small tunnels
with limited space. Therefore, mimicry of this locomo-
tion imposes similar characteristics to the robot and it
has the potential to be used in small and harsh environ-
ment such as collapsed disaster site or inside a pipe line.
which A schematic of peristaltic locomotion is shown in
Fig. 23.4. By sequentially changing the volume of the
body, the whole structure generates the moving motion.
a)
b)
c)
Hooks
1 cm
Circular muscle
fibers
Longitudinal
muscle fibers
Coelom
Micro NiTi coil actuators
Oligochaeta muscle structure
Fig. 23.5 (a) Robot with peristaltic
motion (after [23.18]). (b) Meshworm
robot (after [23.19]). (c) Biomimetic
miniature robotic crawler (af-
ter [23.20])
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
δ
Step 5
Seg.1
Seg.1 Seg.3 Seg.1
1
2
3
4
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
4
4
4
Longitudinal tendon
Ground contact
Contracting segment
Relaxed segment
Fig. 23.4 Peristaltic locomotion (after [23.19])
The key design issue in mimicking peristaltic motion
is how to create sequential volume change. Many re-
searchers have tried various creative methods to solve
this problem. Boxerbaum et al. built a robot with a mesh
structure, and using a single motor and wire, made
a partial volume change of the robot which realized
a crawling motion (Fig. 23.5a) [23.18]. Seok et al. used
a SMA coil spring actuator to change the segmented
volume, and also used a mesh tube as the body structure
(Fig. 23.5b) [23.19]. Menciassi et al. also used a SMA
coil spring actuator, but they used a micro hook to en-
hance the friction force (Fig. 23.5c) [23.20].
Two-anchor crawling is a locomotion method used
by inchworms. This locomotion mode is not fast, but
it can overcome nearly any complicated topology. With
an appropriate gripping method, it not only can climb
vertical walls, but also can cross gaps. There are two
key design issues for generating a two-anchor crawling
motion: the ﬁrst is how to change the shape of the waist
and the second is how to anchor and unanchor to the
surface. Kotay and Rus simply used an electric motor to
articulate the waist motion and used an electromagnetic
pad as the anchoring method (Fig. 23.6a) [23.21]. Us-
ing an electromagnetic pad, the robot can climb a steel
structure. Cheng et al. used a tendon-driven mechanism
with a compressible body and an anisotropic friction
pad to generate motion (Fig. 23.6b) [23.22]. Using sym-
metrical or asymmetrical winding of the wire attached
on the both side, the robot can make forward or steering
movements. Koh and Cho used SMA coil spring actu-
ators to control the waist motion (Fig. 23.6d) [23.23].

Part B | 23.3
548
Part B
Design
Upper SMA spring
Lower SMA spring
Anisotropic friction pad
Left SMA spring
Right SMA spring
a)
d)
e)
b)
c)
Fig.23.6a–e Two anchor crawl-
ing robot. (a) The inchworm robot
(after [23.21]). (b) The soft mo-
bile robot with thermally activated
joint (after [23.22]). (c) Treebot
(after [23.24]). (d) Omega shaped
inchworm inspired crawling robot (af-
ter [23.23]) (e) GoQBot (after [23.25])
The body of the robot is made by a single sheet design
with glass ﬁber composite, and a folding pattern de-
signed to enable steering motion even though the robot
was built by a single sheet. Lin et al. realized a robot
with two-anchoring motion, but he also added a rolling
locomotion to solve the speed limitation of previous
two-anchor motion demonstrations (Fig. 23.6e) [23.25].
Lam and Xu realized another method to generate the
waist motion. The robot used a backbone rod coupled
to an electrical motor. By controlling the length of the
backbone using the motor, the robot can control the po-
sition of the anchoring point (Fig. 23.6c) [23.24].
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.23.7a–d Three snake-like robots. (a) AMC-III, Shigeo Hi-
rose, Fukushima Robotics Lab, Tokyo Institute of Technology
(after [23.26]), (b) Slim Slime Robot II (SSR-2), Shigeo Hi-
rose, Fukushima Robotics Lab, Tokyo Institute of Technology
(after [23.27]), (c) Modular snake robot, Howie Choset, Biorobotics
Lab, Carnegie Mellon University (after [23.28]), (d) AMC-R5,
Shigeo Hirose, Fukushima Robotics Lab, Tokyo Institute of Tech-
nology (after [23.29])
23.3.3 Snake Robots
Studies on the locomotion of snakes began in middle
of the 20th century [23.30–32]. Snakes are limbless,
slender, and ﬂexible [23.33]. Their locomotion gives
them adaptability and mobility through land, uneven
ground, narrow channel, pipes, and even water, and
even ﬂying between trees [23.34, 35]. An advantage of
snake-like locomotion is the great versatility and free-
dom of movement with numerous degrees of freedom
[23.36]. Additionally, snake locomotion could be ef-
ﬁcient compared to legged animals, because there is
no lifting of the center of gravity or limb accelera-
tion [23.37]. In 1970s, Hirose developed a continuous
locomotion model and a snake-like robot called the
Active Cord Mechanism (ACM) [23.38]. After the Hi-
rose’s ACM robot, snake-like robots have been widely
studied. In 1972, ACM-III (Fig. 23.6) was developed
and it was the ﬁrst robot that mimics the serpentine mo-
tion of real snakes [23.38]. The recent versions of ACM
are in
VIDEO 397 .
Locomotion of snake-like robots can be categorized
into the following different types: serpentine motion, si-
nus lifting, pedal wave, side-winding, spiral swimming,
lateral rolling, lateral walking, mixture lean serpentine,
and lift rolling motions.
The ﬁrst generation of snake-like robots could
only achieve motion on planar surfaces. These designs
quickly evolved and current snake-like robots can go
upward within narrow pipes and can climb and hold on
to trees like
VIDEO 393 [23.39]. To facilitate travers-
ing large obstacles, some robots have added actuated
articulation between each joint [23.40]. In addition,
there are some snake-like robots that can swim in water.
With a ﬁrmly waterproofed body, these robots can swim
with spiral and sinusoidal locomotion patterns [23.38].
Today, mechanism design of snake-like robots can
be classiﬁed with following ﬁve different types: active

Biomimetic Robots
23.3 Mechanisms
549
Part B | 23.3
i
~
i
Vi
MLR
9
1
18
17
20
19
d
d
a)
b)
c)
A
Brainstem
PD controller
CPG model
(spinal cord)
B
C
10
8
7
1
2
3
4
5
10
6
9
2
11
3
12
4
13
5
14
6
15
7
16
8
Fig. 23.8 (a) Conﬁguration of the CPG model (after [23.41]). (b) Salamandra robotica I, Auke Jan Ijspeert, Biorobotics
Lab, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (after [23.41]). (c) Salamandra robotica II, Auke Jan Ijspeert,
Biorobotics Lab, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (after [23.42])
bending joint type, active bending and elongation joint
type, active bending joint and active wheel type, passive
bending joint and active wheel type, and active bend-
ing joint, and active crawler type [23.43]. Each of these
types of snake-like robots consist of a number of seri-
ally connected joints. Therefore, snake-like robots are
easy to modularize with their joints [23.43].
Most snake-like robots are equipped wheels that are
actively or passively driven. Recently, wheelless snake-
like robots have been studied [23.32]. These robots
move with undulatory motion, especially lateral un-
dulation that can be observed in real snakes. Some
snake-like robots are actuated with smart materials,
such as shape memory alloys and IPMCs, rather than
motors [23.44]. Snake-like robots roll to avoid obstacles
and interact with environment. They make waveforms
with their body for propulsion. Therefore, it is impor-
tant to deﬁne the conﬁguration of the body of the robots.
Measuring yaw (pitch) and roll angles are important for
controlling the snake robots. Tilt sensors, accelerome-
ters, gyroscope, and joint angle sensors are typically
leveraged to control the robot [23.37]. Tactile sensors
attached to the contact area or outside of the body of
the snake-like robots have been used to measure surface
contact forces at each joint, providing more information
to the controller. Additionally, measuring contact forces
could be useful for active and adaptive grasping of the
snake-like robot [23.45].
However, due to the high degrees of freedom of the
snake-like robots, designing controllers is not easy even
for ﬂat surface locomotion. Efforts without complex
sensors and controllers are in
VIDEO 392 . Because of
this, contrasting with the advantages of locomotion of
real snakes – which can move in uneven environments –
most existing snake-like robots are developed based on
ﬂat surface movement [23.46].
A major motivating application for snake-like
robots is the exploration of hazardous environment that
are inaccessible to humans. In particular, industrial
inspection of pipes and ventilation tubes, and chem-
ical channels are key operating environments. There
is also the potential for snake-like robots as medical
devices, such as minimal invasive surgery device and
laparoscopy and endoscopy [23.37]. For these appli-
cations, snake-like robots require their outer skin to
hermetically seal the internal components [23.40].
There are numerous challenges for snake-like
robots. For greater reliability, robustness and controlla-
bility, the mechanisms and conﬁguration of the snake-
like robots could be simpliﬁed. To use the snake-like
robots for exploration and inspection applications, rout-
ing of external wires for electronics and power to the
robot is an important consideration. Finally, with a large
number of degrees of freedom typical of snake-like
robots, designing efﬁcient control strategy is large is-
sue [23.37].
Similar to undulatory locomotion of snakes, body
of salamanders makes S-shape standing waves. They
are capable of rapidly switching between swimming
and walking locomotion. Their locomotion in aquatic
and terrestrial environments is generated by a central
pattern generation (CPG) and stimulation of a mesen-
cephalic locomotor region (MLR) located in the mid-
brain (Fig. 23.7 and
VIDEO 395 ) [23.41]. There were

Part B | 23.3
550
Part B
Design
some efforts to produce similar swimming and walking
gaits to real salamander with robotic salamanders. The
salamander robots with the mathematical CPG model,
DC motors, and oscillators could produce similar kine-
matics to real salamanders [23.42] (Fig. 23.8).
23.3.4 Flapping-Wing Flight
Flapping-wing ﬂight is a common inspiration for
biomimetic aerial robots. This is due to the agility of
natural ﬂyers such as birds, bats, and insects. Advances
in the understanding of the aerodynamics of ﬂapping-
wing based on hydrodynamic theories and experimental
results have provided insights into thrust production in
ﬂapping-wing animals [23.47]. From observation of the
ﬂapping motion exhibited by insect ﬂight, the transla-
tional, and rotational motions of the wing produce lift
forces at high angles of attack – beyond what is typ-
ical for ﬁxed wing aircraft. The formation of a large
vortex at the leading edge of the wing and the recaptur-
ing of shed vortices by properly timing of the swing
enhance the resultant lift force [23.48]. Figure 23.9
shows the representative motion of an insect wing dur-
ing ﬂight and the vector formation of hydrodynamic
forces. Such characteristics learned from nature inspires
the design of wing-driving systems in ﬂapping-wing
ﬂying robots.
Most ﬂapping mechanisms are constructed from
electromagnetic rotary motors driving crank-rocker
linkages to ﬂap the wings. Examples include the
DelFly II [23.49], Robot dragonﬂy [23.50] and Nano
Hummingbird [23.51] as shown in Fig. 23.10. As can
be seen in
VIDEO 402 , DelFly II employs four-wing
morphology where two wings on each side perform
Total
   aerodynamic
     force
Wing path
Downstroke
Upstroke
Drag
Lift
Fig. 23.9 Diagram of wing motion
indicating magnitude and orien-
tation of the aerodynamic force
(after [23.48])
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 23.10 (a) Delfy II (after [23.49]),
(b) Robot Dragonﬂy [23.50], (c) Nano
Hummingbird (after [23.51])
a clapping motion during each period. This contributes
to lower power consumption and the low rocking ampli-
tude of the fuselage. The DelFly II model used a crank
mechanism such that the gear axis is perpendicular to
the ﬂying direction, for overcoming phase differences
between the two sets of wings and this difference in-
duced rotational movement on the fuselage [23.49]. In
related work, the Robot Dragonﬂy [23.50] is inspired
from a dragonﬂy’s hovering capabilities and utilizes
a tandem wing model. Each transmission link is at-
tached to gear mechanisms that can make wing motions
similar to those of a dragonﬂy. The Nano Humming-
bird uses single pair of ﬂapping wings as with real
hummingbirds. The ﬂapping mechanism is a dual lever,
string-based ﬂapping mechanism. Wing rotation modu-
lation for control of the wing attack angle is achieved by
the two adjustable stops which limit how far each wing
can rotate [23.51]. Alternative mechanisms use oscillat-
ing actuators and ﬂexure-based transmissions systems
(these mechanisms are discussed in Sect. 23.4.2).
As the robot scale decreases, previous ﬂapping
mechanisms have been difﬁcult to adapt due to man-
ufacturing challenges and the physics of scaling. The
Harvard robotic ﬂy shows promising fabrication and
design processes to build the small scale ﬂapping air
vehicle as shown in Fig. 23.11 [23.52]. Previous ver-
sions of the Harvard robotic ﬂy had three degrees of
freedom, only one of which was actuated. The angle
of attach of two the wings are passively controlled by
a compliant ﬂexure joint connected to the transmis-
sion. The wing beat frequency is tuned at 110 Hz in
resonance. Through advances in meso-scale manufac-
turing methods, the capabilities of the robotic ﬂy have
been dramatically extended and unconstrained ﬂight

Biomimetic Robots
23.3 Mechanisms
551
Part B | 23.3
a)
b)
c)
Transmission
Airfoil
Scutum
Wing
Wing
Actuator
Transmission
Dorsoventral muscles
Airframe
Dorsolongitudinal
muscle
Exoskeleton
Actuator
Airframe
Fig. 23.11 (a) Harvard robotic ﬂy, (b) Illustrations of thorax mechanisms, (c) and transmission (after [23.52])
has been demonstrated like
VIDEO 399
in an 80 mg
robot as discussed in Sect. 23.4.2.
Flapping-wing locomotion can also be extended
to
multimodal
locomotion
in
combination
with
other mechanisms. In the DASHCWings shown in
Fig. 23.12 [23.53], the combination of wing ﬂapping
and crawling compliments each other for improving
agility and stability. This hybrid robot improves per-
formance of the maximum horizontal running speed
in a factor of two and the maximum climbing incline
angle by a factor of three.
23.3.5 Wall Climbing
Climbing and maneuvering on vertical surfaces present
a difﬁcult challenge. However, this locomotion mode
is needed in many areas such as shipping, construction,
and terrestrial locomotion in natural environment. Early
attempts involved the use of suction cups, magnets,
Fig. 23.12 DASHCWings (after [23.53])
or pressure-sensitive adhesives to implement climbing.
More recently, claw, spines and sticky pads inspired by
nature have been used. Climbing insects and animals
inspired many researchers. Insects and reptiles em-
ploy small spines that catch on ﬁne asperities. Geckos
and some spiders employ large numbers of very ﬁne
hairs that achieve adhesion based on van der Waals
interaction.
Early in the 1990s, nonbiomimetic wall climbing
robots, i. e., the Ninja-1, RAMR, and Alicia were de-
veloped using suction cup. Ninja-1 attaches to a wall
making use of a suction mechanism (Fig. 23.13a). The
main mechanism consists of a three-dimensional (3-D)
parallel link, a conduit-wire-driven parallelogram, and
valve-regulated multiple sucker that enabled the robot
to attach the surface with grooves [23.54]. RAMR used
underactuation to remove the redundant actuators to
drive the small two-legged robot [23.59]. The Alicia
robot was developed for a variety of applications such
as maintenance, building inspection, and safety in pro-
cess and construction industries. An aspirator is used to
depressurize a suction cup, so the whole robot can ad-
here to the wall like a standard suction cup. The Alicia3
robot use three of the Alicia II modules, allowing the
whole system to better deal with obstacles on the target
surface [23.60]. REST is an exceptional case that ap-
plies electromagnets instead of suction cup. It climbed
only ferromagnetic wall using electromagnetic four legs
with 12-DOF [23.61].
The effective wall climbing mechanisms of animals
and insects have inspired development of biomimetic
wall climbing robots. Typical robots utilizing bio-
inspired spines found in climbing insects and cock-
roach are Spinybot and RiSE. Spinybot in
VIDEO 388
climbs hard vertical surfaces including concrete, brick,
stucco, and masonry with compliant microspine arrays
(Fig. 23.13b). It can exploit small asperities (bumps
or pits) on the surface. The sequence of motions is

Part B | 23.3
552
Part B
Design
0
a)
d)
e)
b)
c)
Servos and
push-pull
cables
(3 per leg)
Controller
Camera
in tail
COM
Toe peeling
for detach-
ment
10 cm
30 cm
1
2
3
4
5
6
58 cm
Fig. 23.13 (a) Ninja-1 (after [23.54]),
(b) Spinybot II (after [23.55]),
(c) RiSE (after [23.56]), (d) Gecko
adhesive system (after [23.57]),
(e) Stickybot (after [23.58])
accomplished using an under-actuated mechanism con-
sisting of a single rotary RC servo motor and several
spines independently engaging asperities on the con-
crete surface [23.55]. RiSE is a hexapod robot capable
of locomotion on ground and vertical surfaces such as
brick, stucco, crushed stone, and wood, as shown in
VIDEO 390 (Fig. 23.13c) [23.56]. To climb a vertical
wall, it uses microspines inspired by cockroach’s tarsus
structure. In addition, it held its center of mass close to
surface to minimize the pitch-back moment. RiSE also
employed a static tail to reduce disparity from the pull-
in forces experienced by the different legs [23.56, 62].
Insects and geckos can provide inspiration for novel
adhesive technology and for the locomotion mecha-
nisms employed during climbing. Geckos are able to
climb rapidly up smooth vertical surfaces and biologists
reveal that a gecko’s foot has nearly ﬁve hundred thou-
sand keratinous hairs or setae. And measured adhesive
force values show that individual seta operate by van
der Waals forces. The gecko’s toe uncurling and peel-
ing suggests that two aspects of setal function increase
effectiveness [23.63]. The subsequent study shows that
the linear relation between adhesion and shear force is
consistent with a critical angle of release in live gecko
toes and isolated setal arrays (Fig. 23.13d). And the
frictional adhesion model provides an explanation for
the very low detachment forces observed in climbing
geckos that does not depend on toe peeling [23.57].
Stickybot, Mini-Whegs, Geckobot, and Waalbot are
prototypical robots that leverage biomimetic dry adhe-
sives. Stickybot climbs smooth vertical surfaces such
as glass, plastic, and ceramic tile at 4 cm=s, as shown
in
VIDEO 389 (Fig. 23.13e). The robot employs sev-
eral design principles adapted from the gecko including
a hierarchy of compliant structures, directional adhe-
sion. The undersides of Stickybot’s toes are covered
with arrays of small, angled polymer stalks. They read-
ily adhere when pulled tangentially from the tips of
the toes toward the ankles. When pulled in the oppo-
site direction, they release [23.58]. Mini-Whegs uses
wheel-legs with compliant, adhesive feet for climb-
ing. The foot motion mimics the foot kinematics of
insects, in order to test new bio-inspired adhesive tech-
nologies and novel, reusable insect-inspired polymer
(polyvinylsiloxane) [23.67]. Geckobot has kinematics
similar to a gecko’s climbing gait. It uses a novel peel-
ing mechanism of the elastomer adhesive pads, steering
mechanisms and an active tail for robust and agile
climbing [23.68, 69]. Waalbot used two actuated legs
with rotary motion and two passive revolute joints at
each foot. The robot has ability to climb on nonsmooth
surfaces as well as on inverted smooth surfaces using
gecko-like ﬁbrillar adhesives and passive peeling. It is
also capable of plane-to-plane transitions and steering
to avoid obstacles [23.70].
Different approaches for climbing include elec-
troadhesion. Electroadhesives use a novel clamping
technology called compliant electroadhesion – a form
of electrically controllable adhesion. This involves in-
ducing electrostatic charges on a wall substrate using
a power supply connected to compliant pads situated on
the moving robot. This generates high clamping forces
that are around 0:21:4 N supported for a one square
centimeter clamp area, depending on the substrate.
Regarding power considerations for electroadhesion,
assuming 50% conversion efﬁciency, in the worst-case
scenario, two AAA batteries weighing 7:6 g each can
hold up a robot in perch mode for almost one year.
Electroadhesion combined with a conventional wheeled
robot results in inchworm-style wall climbing [23.79].

Biomimetic Robots
23.3 Mechanisms
553
Part B | 23.3
a)
b)
c)
A
B
Pin joint contact
Linear spring k
parallel viscous damper γ
	
L(t) linear actuator
l2
g
t = 0
t = T/2
t = T
l1
Rigidly attached shoulder
10 cm
Fig. 23.14 (a) DynoClimber (after [23.64]). (b) A dynamic template for climbing (after [23.65]). (c) CLASH with gecko
pad (after [23.66])
Dynamic wall climbing is the next challenge for
wall climbing robots because previous robots were slow
and in most instances restricted to targeted surfaces.
For dynamical climbing originating in biology, pendu-
lous climbing model was proposed (Fig. 23.14b). This
model abstracts remarkable similarities in dynamic wall
scaling behaviour exhibited by radically different ani-
mal species such as cockroaches and geckos [23.65].
The ﬁndings suggest that animals employ large lateral
in-pulling forces and body rotations to achieve fast,
self-stabilizing gaits. DynoClimber displays the feasi-
bility of adapting the dynamics to robot that runs verti-
cally upward (Fig. 23.14a). A novel bi-pedal dynamic
climber can scale a vertical wall fast accompanying
while achieving dynamic stability. For dynamic climb-
ing, this robot consists of a DC motor, a crank slider
mechanism and passive-wrist springs so its climbing
at speeds 0:67 m=s (1:5 body lengths=s) [23.64]. The
climbing robot CLASH has modiﬁed DASH platform
but it actuates in horizontal direction to reduce height
(7 mm from robot bottom). One of the key points is
passive foot mechanism. When climbing upward, the
foot hangs its spines on the surface and then retracts
passively. This increases the shear and normal forces
and enables climbing on loose cloth at 15 cm=s speed,
as shown in
VIDEO 391
[23.80]. The next version
of CLASH has a foot that consists of an 18  15 mm
pad of microfabricated PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane)
ridges inspired by gecko feet (Fig. 23.14c). The ankle
is an isosceles-trapezoid four-bar that creates a remote
center-of-motion. This mechanism allows the foot to
make coplanar contact with the surface and reduces roll
peeling moments [23.66].
23.3.6 Swimming
Underwater vehicles have been made to achieve marine
explorations, surveillance, and environmental monitor-
ing. Most underwater vehicles employ propellers for
propulsion and these vehicles have shown great perfor-
mance with respect to the cost of transport. However,
efﬁciency and manoeuvrability in conﬁned areas is
problematic for most surface or underwater vehicles.
Moreover, propeller-driven vehicles risk tangling when
moving thourgh environments with debris and vegeta-
tion. To resolve these issues, researchers have tried to
replace the conventional rotary propellers with undula-
tory movement inspired by ﬁsh (Fig. 23.15).
The undulatory movement of ﬁsh provides two
main advantages – manoeuvrability in conﬁned areas
and high propulsive efﬁciency. The main difference be-
tween existing propeller and undulatory movement is
turning radius and speed. Fish can turn with a radius
1/10 of their body length, while propeller-driven ships
require a much larger radius. Accordingly, the turn-
ing speed of ﬁsh is much faster than ships. Beyond
manoeuvrability, the driving efﬁciency in biological
swimmers also show more improvement over man-
made systems [23.81].
To achieve ﬁsh-like swimming motion, various
mechanisms have been employed such as linkage mech-
anisms and compliant mechanisms. Barrett ﬁrst pro-
posed a RoboTuna by using six servo motors and
eight linkages [23.71]. Morikawa et al. built a robotic
ﬁsh mimicking the caudal musculo-skeletal structure of
a tuna with two rubber pneumatic artiﬁcial muscles and
a multijoint bending mechanism [23.82]. A robotic dol-
phin was designed with four links and six servo motors
to mimic the dorsoventral movement of a real dol-
phin [23.83]. Low developed a ﬁsh robot to generate ar-
bitrary undulating waveforms, by connecting ten servo
motors in series by linking them with sliders [23.74].
Liu and Hu developed a robotic ﬁsh mimicking the body
motion of carangiform ﬁsh by using three servo mo-
tors on each joint, as shown in
VIDEO 431
[23.72].
Yang et al. presented Ichthus V5.5 by using 3-DOF se-
rial link-mechanism with servo motors on each joint for
propulsion, as shown in
VIDEO 432 . Ichthus V5.5 has

Part B | 23.3
554
Part B
Design
Isotropic view
FR1
FR2
FR3
FR4
FR6
FR5
x
x
z
y
y
Fin rays
Crank
Crank
C
B
A
D
P
M
N
Q
H
I
G
ABS
PDMS
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
h)
g)
Testing tank tuna
D. Barrett 11-17-93
Space
frame
Tendons
Space frame
Mast
Nose cone
Lycra
Foam
Ribs
Elliptical
bulk head
Sensor
electronics
Silicone oil
Cast
fin
Flexible
skin
Lightweight
ribs
Skin
Main
bulk head
Space
frame
Spline
Tendons
Centre controller sensors
COG controller
Infrared sensors
Batteries
Fins
Tail with servo motors
Oscillating
tail foil
K
J
O
L
33.9
(cm)
14.6
5.1
F
15.9
Fig.23.15a–h Design of robotic ﬁn (a) Robo Tuna (after [23.71]), (b) G9 serise robotic ﬁsh (after [23.72]), (c) Ichthus
(after [23.73]), (d) Undulating robotic ﬁn rays (after [23.74]), (e) Soft robotic ﬁsh (after [23.75]), (f) Robotic mata ray
(after [23.76]), (g) Turtle-like swimming robot (after [23.77]), (h) Robotic ﬁn rays (after [23.78])
several sensors to navigate autonomously in the real en-
vironment such as rivers [23.73].
Beyond linkage mechanisms, several researchers
have employed compliant materials in their designs to
make the undulatory motion without complicated link-
age structures. Salumäe and Kruusmaa implemented
swimming kinematics of a trout by simply adjusting
the compliance of a ﬂexible ﬁn with a single ac-
tuator [23.84]. Alvarado and Youcef-Toumi designed
a robotic ﬁsh with a simple and robust mechanism,
using a compliant body that was approximated by
a continuous cantilever beam to generate a ﬁsh-like os-
cillating motions [23.85]. This simple design achieved
biomimetic locomotion using only one servomotor,
while most other robotic ﬁsh use several motors to
achieve biomimetic modes of swimming. Marchese
et al. employed a compliant body with embedded ac-
tuators and used a novel ﬂuidic actuation system that
drives body motion, as shown in
VIDEO 433 [23.75].
Park et al. presented a guideline for optimizing the ﬁn
to maximize the thrust generated by a compliant ﬁn.
The half-pi phase delay condition describes the con-
dition that the thrust is maximized regardless of the
shape of the ﬁn, driving frequency, and amplitude. They
also presented a variable-stiffness ﬂapping mechanism
to improve the performance of a compliant ﬁn while

Biomimetic Robots
23.3 Mechanisms
555
Part B | 23.3
a)
b)
Mm
Ms
Body
Ball bearing
Cam axis
Springs
Main leg
Leg axis
Leg lever arm
Cam
l
α
γ

+γ
FTs
FNs
FNe
FTc
50°
20°
Fig.23.16a,b Escapement cam mechanism (a) Grillo (Ver.1) (after [23.86]) and (b) 7 g jumping robot (after [23.87])
the operating conditions change [23.88]. Tendons were
used to vary the stiffness and the attachment point is
determined based on the anatomy of a dolphin’s ﬂuke.
Several ﬁsh robots that use smart actuators to create
undulating motion have also been investigated [23.89].
Wang et al. embedded shape memory alloy (SMA) wire
actuator to create ﬂexible bending and investigated the
musculature of a cuttleﬁsh ﬁn to aid the design of the
biomimetic ﬁn [23.90]. Chen et al. mimicked manta
ray by using ionic polymer-metal composite (IPMC)
as artiﬁcial muscles. They embedded an IPMC mus-
cle in each pectoral ﬁn and a passive PDMS membrane
to lead to an undulatory ﬂapping motion on the ﬁn,
as shown in
VIDEO 434
[23.76]. Kim et al. [23.77]
used a smart soft composite (SSC) structure to generate
bending and twisting motions in a simple, lightweight
structure. Lauder et al. designed a robotic ﬁsh caudal
ﬁn with six independently moving ﬁn rays based on the
anatomy of bluegill sunﬁsh and presented that the cup-
ping motion produced greater thrust than others such as
W-shaped, undulation, and rolling [23.78]. They used
ﬁve different sets of ﬁn rays and measured thrust by
varying the motion program. In addition, Lauder et al.
used a ﬂexible plastic foil to explore the effects of
changing swimming speed, foil length, and shape of the
foil-trailing edge on undulatory locomotion [23.91].
23.3.7 Jumping
In nature, many animals use jumping as a locomotion
strategy. Jumping has the advantages of overcoming
large obstacles and avoiding predators quickly and in-
creasing the chances of survival. Robots also experience
challenges in overcoming obstacles larger than the char-
acteristic dimension of the robot. To ﬁnd solutions for
this, many researchers have developed jumping robots
inspired by nature.
The jumping process requires large amounts of en-
ergy to be released instantaneously. However, muscle
has limited reaction speed – achieving a maximum
acceleration of 15 m s2. Therefore, many small crea-
tures, such as insects, have adapted special elastomers
for energy storage to generate large accelerations in-
stead of using muscles. On the other hand, most large
creatures, such as human that have relatively long legs,
primarily use large muscles that can generate sufﬁcient
large force to swing long legs quickly.
In small-scale jumping, to achieve large instanta-
neous acceleration, the jumping process has two steps:
1) slow energy storage and 2) rapid release of the stored
energy. Escapement cam mechanism is widely used to
achieve these two steps. It consists of a spring, a ra-
dius varying cam, a motor, and a gearbox for torque
ampliﬁcation. The motor rotates the cam slowly, but
powerfully, toward the direction of compressing or ex-
tending the spring. At the ﬁnal portion of the cycle, the
cam’s radius returns to the initial state instantly, releas-
ing the spring causing the robot to jump. Grillo (Ver.1)
(in
VIDEO 278 ) [23.86] and a similar 7 g jumping
robot (in
VIDEO 279 ) [23.87] use this escapement
cam mechanism (Fig. 23.16).
A toothless gear mechanism is similar to the es-
capement cam mechanism. The main differences are
that the toothless gear mechanism uses an incomplete
gear instead of a change in the cam shape. The mo-
tor actuates the incomplete gear, and the gear actuates
a transmission to compress or extend a spring. When the
a)
b)
Fig.23.17a,b Toothless gear mechanism (a) Grillo (Ver.2)
(after [23.92]), (b) Mini-Wheg (after [23.93])

Part B | 23.3
556
Part B
Design
Rotation
link
Cable
Pulley
Body
F
Foot
a)
b)
c)
Fig.23.18a–c
Other escapement
mechanism (a) MSU Jumper (af-
ter [23.94]), (b) MSU Jump-runner
(after [23.95]), (c) Jollbot (af-
ter [23.96])
20 mm
a)
b)
c)
d)
Ufe
Flexor
Coxa
Joint 1
Extensor
Stopper
Trigger
Lfe
Ti
Fig. 23.19 (a) Torque-reversal mech-
anism, (b) Flea-inspired catapult
mechanism (after [23.97]), (c) Simpli-
ﬁed ﬂea-inspired catapult mechanism
(after [23.98]), (d) Jumping robotic
insect (after [23.99])
transmission passes the toothless gear part, the trans-
mission returns to the initial position and the stored
energy is released instantly. Examples of robots using
toothless gear mechanisms include Mini-Whegs [23.93]
and Grillo (Ver.2) [23.92] (Fig. 23.17).
These two click mechanisms, the escapement
cam mechanism and the toothless gear mechanism,
are commonly used for jumping mechanisms, but
other methods have also been developed (Fig. 23.18
and
VIDEO 280 ). The catapult mechanism of MSU
Jumper [23.94] and MSU Jump-Runner [23.95] is sim-
ilar to the escapement cam mechanism, except for the
absence of a cam. Instead of using a cam, it uses a one-
way bearing. This mechanism can be separated in two
parts based on the critical point in the jump cycle.
Before passing the critical point, the one-way bearing
cannot rotate freely, so it rotates to the direction of en-
ergy storage. On the other hand, after passing that point,
it can rotate freely and release the stored energy for
jumping. The catapult mechanism in Jollbot [23.96] is
similar to the mechanism in the MSU Jumper. Its struc-
ture’s slit acts like a one-way bearing.
A ﬂea-inspired catapult mechanism [23.97] is
different from aforementioned catapult mechanisms
(Fig. 23.19 and
VIDEO 281 ). It consists of three SMA
coil springs: (1) Flexor, (2) Extensor, and (3) Trigger.
The SMA is activated by heat induced from applied cur-
rent. The ﬂea catapult mechanism begins by activating

Biomimetic Robots
23.3 Mechanisms
557
Part B | 23.3
Asymmetric catapult type
τ3
λ
τ0 = 0
Elastic strip
Elastic strip
Maximum torque shape
Initial shape
Final shape
Range
limitation
Range
limitation
Snap-through
buckling shape
Link type
active joint
Link
Snap-through
buckling
Snap-through
buckling
Passive rotational
joint with range
limitation
Drive
Drive
2nd mode
Motor
Active joint
Passive joint with rotational limitation
Elastic strip
Main frame
Range limitation
Elastic strip
3rd mode
Active
rotational
joint
Energy
storing
Energy
storing
L
p0
pc
Fig. 23.20 An asymmetric robotic catapult jumping robot (after [23.100])
the ﬂexor that folds the leg. Then, the extensor is ac-
tivated. Because the direction of the torque generated
by the extensor force is in the folding direction, the leg
does not move and energy is stored in the extensor SMA
coil spring. After energy is storage, activation of the
trigger attached to the extensor pulls the extensor until
it passes the joint. As a result, the direction of the torque
generated by the extensor is reversed and the robot
starts to jump. This mechanism uses muscle-like ac-
tuators to create the torque reversal mechanism, which
enables simple design. Variation of the torque reversal
mechanisms have been developed with lesser number of
actuators but maintaining the same biological principle:
the simpliﬁed ﬂea-inspired catapult mechanism [23.98]
and the jumping robotic insect [23.99].
An
asymmetric
robotic
catapult
jumping
robot [23.100] also has a unique catapult mecha-
nism (Fig. 23.20). It utilizes buckling in a compliant
beam to jump. It consists of a main frame, an elastic
strip and a motor. The elastic strip is connected to
the main frame with a free rotational joint that can
rotate from 0ı to 180ı and is connected to a motor
that can control the rotation angle. When one of the
elastic strip’s ends is ﬁxed to the main frame, adjusting
the angle of the other end can be in a snap-through
buckling shape. This can produce bidirectional jumps,
but the buckling modes are different on either side.
Jumping mechanisms for microrobots [23.101]
have been built using microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS) manufacturing methods to create a silicon
body, silicon leg, and a series of PDMS springs
(Fig. 23.21a). This mechanism consists of two rigid
bodies connected by PDMS springs and is activated
by an external force. The robot includes only the
mechanisms required to demonstrate a jump. The ac-
tuation combined elastomer mechanism is shown in
Fig. 23.21b [23.101]. It used chevron actuators. These
actuators are used to linearly pull and release the PDMS
spring embedded into an etched silicon structure for
jumping. The mechanism’s PDMS springs are designed
F
1
3
2
a)
b)
Body
Silicon
3 mm
1 mm
Elastomer
Leg
A actuators
B actuators
Frame
Springs
Anchors
Fig. 23.21 (a) Microrobot (after [23.101]), (b) a colored SEM im-
age of the actuated mechanism (after [23.101])

Part B | 23.3
558
Part B
Design
0.017 m
0.013 m
0.025 m
0.017 m 0.008 m
a)
b)
Bi-articular
muscle
Mono-articular
muscle
Passive
spring
Fig. 23.22
(a) Pneumatic artiﬁcial
muscles arranged like bi-articular
muscle, (b) Mowgli (after [23.102])
to be similar to resilin – the elastomer that appears in
insects [23.101].
In large-scale jumping, to overcome muscle’s lim-
ited speed, large animals use their long legs or spe-
cial arrangements of muscles and bones such as bi-
articular muscles. They are muscles that work on two
joints. In a mechanical linkage that is composed of
bi-articular muscle and bones, the two joints affect
each other. During the jumping process, these condi-
tions can be helpful for generating the optimum force.
The large jumping robot Mowgli uses long legs and
pneumatic artiﬁcial muscles that are arranged like bi-
articular muscle and it can be seen in Fig. 23.22 and in
VIDEO 285 [23.102].
Speciﬁcations of the jumping robots are summa-
rized in Table 23.1.
23.3.8 Gripping and Perching
In nature, insects and animals climb various kinds of
terrains – from ﬂat and smooth to wavy and rugged
surfaces. Some animals evolved in a way that pas-
sively adapts to unstructured environments to reduce
the energy consumption and control complexity. From
the view point of robotics, these properties have the
potential to increase energy efﬁciency and reduce sys-
tem complexity. Therefore, many researchers have
employed such mechanism to gripping and perching
devices.
Table 23.1 Speciﬁcations of the jumping robots
Robot
Actuator
Length
Weight
Jumping height
Initial velocity
7 g jumping robot [23.87]
Motor
5 cm
7 g
1:4 m
5:9 m=s
Grillo(Ver.1) [23.86]
Motor
5 cm
15 g
–
1:5 m=s
Grillo(Ver.2) [23.92]
Motor
3 cm
10 g
–
3:6 m=s
Mini-Wheg [23.93]
Motor
910 cm
90190 g
0:18 m
–
MSU Jumper [23.94]
Motor
6:5 cm
23:5 g
0:87 m
–
MSU Jump-runner [23.95]
Motor
9 cm
25 g
1:43 m
–
Jollbot [23.96]
Motor
30 cm
465 g
0:218 m
–
Flea-inspired catapult mechanism [23.97]
SMA
2 cm
1:1 g
0:64 m
4:4 m=s
Simpliﬁed ﬂea-inspired jumping mechanism [23.98]
SMA
3 cm
2:3 g
1:2 m
7 m=s
Jumping robotic insect [23.99]
SMA
2 cm
0:034 g
0:3 m
2:7 m=s
An asymmetric robotic catapult jumping robot [23.100]
Motor
17 cm
30 g
0:2 m
–
Microrobot [23.101]
None
0:4 cm
0:008 g
0:32 m
3 m=s
Mowgli [23.102]
Pneumatic
1 m
3 kg
0:4 m
–
Hawkes et al. developed a mechanism that allows
large patches of directional dry adhesives to conform
to the topology of the surfaces they are in contact
with [23.103]. The mechanism uses a rigid tile sup-
ported by a compliant material loaded by an inexten-
sible tendon – inspired by the tendon system and the
ﬂuid-ﬁlled sinus in gecko toes. This mechanism permits
the adhesive to make full contact with the surface and
have uniform loading despite signiﬁcant errors in align-
ment. Hawkes et al. also developed a gasper for landing
of microair vehicles and grappling objects in space us-
ing gecko-inspired directional adhesives, as shown in
VIDEO 413 [23.104] (Fig. 23.23).
There are several devices and robots that employ mi-
crospines for grasping rough surfaces easily seen in na-
ture. Kim et al. proposed arrays of miniature spines that
catch opportunistically on surface asperities [23.55].
Desbiens et al. proposed a small and unmanned air-
craft that can land, perch and take off from vertical sur-
faces, as shown in
VIDEO 412
[23.105] inspired by
squirrels that reduce their horizontal velocity up to 60%
prior to impact to distribute impact over all four limbs.
Spenko et al. developed a hexapedal climbing robot us-
ing rows of toes having microspine [23.56]. Parness
et al. also employed 16 carriages, each of which con-
tains 16 microspines that conform to mm-scale and be-
low, as shown in
VIDEO 414 [23.106] (Fig. 23.24).
Trimmer et al. employed a passive gripping method
found in caterpillars [23.107]. Caterpillars use their re-

Biomimetic Robots
23.3 Mechanisms
559
Part B | 23.3
Rebound spring
Compliant foam joint
Latch
MAV
Tile
Support
Foam
Sliding joint
Truss spring
Outrigger
Adhesive
tile
Truss tendon
Tile tendon
Lateral digital tendon
Lead screw
Ratcheting nut
Tile support
foam
Tendon
spring
Adhesive pads
Lateral digital tendon
Fluid-filled sac
Phalanges
Lamellae
Lamellae
a)
b)
Fig.23.23a,b Graspers based on Gecko-inspired adhesives. (a) Gecko-inspired toe used in RiSE robot (left) and cross
section of the gecko foot (right) (after [23.103]), (b) Collapsing truss grasper (left) and pivot linkage grasper (right)
(after [23.104])
Touchdown
possible
Elevator
up
Pitch up
maneuver
9 m/s
2 m/s
Wall
detection
Approach angles
Loading force
angles
yˆw
xˆw
a)
b)
c)
d)
10 cm
1
2
3
4
5
6
6
1
3
4
2
5
3 cm
Fig.23.24a–d Microspine-based robots. (a) Landing and perching UAV (after [23.105]), (b) RiSE robot (after [23.56]),
(c) sample acquisition tool (after [23.106]), (d) Spinybot (after [23.55])
tractor muscles to release the grip, which means that
they do not consume any energy during gripping. Like
the caterpillar, Trimmer et al. designed the grippers so
that gripping is released when the SMA spring actua-
tor is activated. Jung et al. proposed an underactuated
mechanism based on ﬂexural buckling [23.108]. The
ﬂexural buckling mechanism is inspired by the soft
cuticle of a caterpillar’s feet, which largely deforms de-
pending on the shape of the contacting surface. The
large deformation in the engineered device, ﬂexural

Part B | 23.3
560
Part B
Design
a)
c)
b)
Compression
spring
SMA
springs
B
C
4
2
1
1
3
3
Linear elastic
material
Flexure
A
Gripping angle (θ)
Contact force
4
2
1
3
Gripping angle (θ)
Contact force
2
4
1
3
2
θ
4
buckling with an adequately selected length, provides
wide gripping range with a narrow range of force varia-
tion. This provides a sufﬁcient number of contacts with
even contact forces, enabling adaptive gripping on var-
ious surfaces. In addition, design of the gripper can
140
High tensile modulus
low CTE
Low tensile modulus
high CTE
High tensile modulus
low CTE
Low tensile modulus
high CTE
Fiber direction
Fiber direction
240
50
a)
b)
Ø10
Ø20
Steel cable
Silicone cone
Dyneema cable
Ø12
CFRP
leaf
SMA
spring
Supporter
Fig. 23.26 (a) Octopus-inspired
manipulation (left) and tendon-driven
mechanism (right) (after [23.109]),
(b) Flytrap-inspired gripper (left) and
Orthogonally laminated CFRP (right)
(after [23.110])
Fig. 23.25 (a) Passive gripping system (after [23.107]),
(b) caterpillar-inspired underactuated gripper and (c) con-
stant force region by ﬂexural buckling (after [23.108]) J
easily be scaled up or down depending on required
scale.
VIDEO 409
shows the small and large scale
gripper that can achieve adaptive grasping (Fig. 23.25).
The octopus performs crawling movements with
the same limbs used for grasping and manipulation,
as shown in
VIDEO 411 . Calisti et al. proposed an
octopus-inspired solution for movement and manipula-
tion [23.109]. To implement octopus-like motion, they
employed a steel cable for elongating and shortening
and ﬁber cables for bending, which is inspired by the
longitudinal muscles found in an octopus shown in
Fig. 23.26.
Kim et al. developed ﬂytrap-inspired high-speed
gripper, as shown in
VIDEO 410
[23.110]. Flytraps
achieve fast capturing by using the bistable structural
characteristic of its leaf. To achieve similar bistability,
Kim et al. used asymmetrically laminated carbon ﬁber
reinforced prepregs (CFRP). They also utilized a de-
velopable surface having kinematic constraints, which
constrain the curvature of the artiﬁcial leaf. Therefore,
the curved leaf can be actuated by bending the straight
edge orthogonal to the curve, a process called bending
propagation.
Doyle et al. developed an avian-inspired passive
perching mechanism for quadrotors for perch-and-
stare, as shown in
VIDEO 415
[23.111]. Songbirds
had evolved to sleep while perching. When they perch
on a branch, the tendon connected from the ankle and

Biomimetic Robots
23.4 Material and Fabrication
561
Part B | 23.4
a)
b)
Knee
Ankle
Flexor
tendons
Ankle
Shin
Knee
Heele
Thigh
Fw
Kf
Fa
Δ
δ
Tendon anchored
to leg
Represents
compliance of foot
Fig. 23.27 (a) Avian-inspired perching mechanism with UAV (left) anatomy and mechanism design (right) (after [23.111]),
(b) perching mechanism and process (after [23.112])
the rear side of toe automatically cause the toe to grip
the branch. This allows the songbirds to tightly grip the
branch without any muscular effort. Inspired by this,
Doyle et al. used a four-bar mechanism and a tendon
connected from the knee to the ankle and foot to couple
landing motion with grasping. Kovaˇc et al. presented
a 4:6 g perching mechanism for microaerial vehicles
(MAVs) to make them perch on various walls such
as tree and concrete buildings [23.112], as shown in
VIDEO 416 . To achieve high impact force, the nee-
dles snap through as the trigger collides with the target
surface (Fig. 23.27).
23.4 Material and Fabrication
23.4.1 Shape Deposition Manufacturing
The fundamental concept of shape deposition manufac-
turing (SDM) is layered molding manufacturing with
CNC machining process. It not only create complex
3-D shapes rapidly, but also enables high precision
ﬁnishing and large design ﬂexibility. This concept is ini-
tially proposed by Weiss et al. [23.113]. Figure 23.28a
shows the steps of the SDM process and Fig. 23.28b
shows fabrication result [23.114]. After deposing sup-
port material, the support was fabricated by CNC ma-
chining to make high precision surface. Li et al. shows
Deposit (part)
Deposit (support)
Support
a)
b)
Part
Embedded component
Shape
Shape
Embed
Fig.23.28a,b Shape deposition manufacturing (a) Process, (b) result of SDM process for robot mechanism design (af-
ter [23.114])
that it is possible to embed a various functional ma-
terial such as sensors to the structure [23.115] and
Marra et al. show that this process can be used in
the fabrication of scaffolds for bone tissue engineer-
ing [23.116].
In 1999, the SDM process was ﬁrst used for robot
design by Bailey et al. [23.114]. Robot design meth-
ods based on the SDM process have advantages that it
does not need complex assembly or connecting meth-
ods, and it can embed sensors and actuators directly
into the body structure. In other words, the structure
is build and assembled at the same time, and this

Part B | 23.4
562
Part B
Design
2.5 cm
Actuators and
wiring embedded
inside structure
Legs with
compliant
flexures
Fig. 23.29 Hexapedal robot built by SDM process (af-
ter [23.117])
l = 0.07 m (2.75”)
l
1 = 25°
2 =
45°
Fig. 23.30 Robotic gripper built by SDM process (af-
ter [23.118])
characteristic leads to enhanced manufacturability in
small-scale applications. To build a desired mechanism,
the author used multiple cycles of material deposi-
tion and shaping as shown in Fig. 23.28a. Multiple
materials were used in fabrication to create variable
characteristic to each functional part. More ﬂexible
material was used for joints and rigid material was
used for links. The ﬂexible components are not only
used as articulated joints, but also as dampers and
springs to control the impedance of a mechanism. Bin-
nard et al. suggested a design framework for the SDM
Link
(rigid)
Link
(rigid)
Flexure
(compliant)
Composite
(1)
(2)
(3)
Polymer
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Fig. 23.31 Schematic illustration
of a single joint unit in SCM and
the layup of laminating process
(after [23.50])
process for mechanism design, making more multi-
farious applications possible [23.119]. Figure 23.29
shows Sprawlita, a hexapedal robot fabricated based
on the SDM process. Using the SDM process, actu-
ators and wires are embedded in the body structure,
resulting in robust performance and minimal manual as-
sembly operations [23.117]. Robotic grippers can also
be made by the SDM process (Fig. 23.30) [23.118].
All of joints, links, and sheath for the actuating wire
were fabricated and assembled simultaneously. Embed-
ded sensors are also possible. Force sensors embedded
in the ﬁngertips of a robotic SDM gripper have been
demonstrated [23.120]. Using a soft base material for
the robot, it is also possible to design a human-friendly
SDM robot [23.121].
23.4.2 Smart Composite Microstructures
In the late 1990s, researchers at the University of Cal-
ifornia, Berkeley began a project to create a robotic
insect capable of sustained autonomous ﬂight – the mi-
cromechanical ﬂying insect was born [23.122]. Among
the many challenges for this project, how to manufac-
ture and what materials should be used for structures,
mechanisms, and actuators were primary concerns.
Recognizing the lack of a viable meso-scale manu-
facturing method, the team lead by Fearing attempted
multiple techniques including folded triangular stain-
less steel beams [23.123] and eventually settled on
multilayer composites [23.124]. In this paradigm, later
called smart composite microstructures (SCM) [23.50],
layers of materials are machined, aligned, and lam-
inated to form a quasi-two-dimensional (quasi-2-D)
laminate. The choice of materials, 2-D layer geome-
tries, and order of the layup allows the user to create
an array of rigid components separated by compliant
ﬂexures. This composite laminate, later called a stan-
dard linkage layer can then be folded into 3-D shapes
and mechanisms.
The SCM process presents a new paradigm of de-
sign and fabrication for developing small-scale robots.
Planar ﬁber-reinforced prepreg (FRP) and ﬂexure
hinges replace conventional links and joints in the
robot mechanism. The composite laminating process is

Biomimetic Robots
23.4 Material and Fabrication
563
Part B | 23.4
0
5
4
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
3
2
1
10
15
20
a)
b)
c)
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
Alignment
features
Fig.23.32a–c Spherical ﬁve-bar linkage structure created by the SCM fabrication process (after [23.52]). (a) The pattern design of
a rigid face sheet, (b) laser-cut and cured microcomposite sheet before folding, (c) SCM spherical ﬁve-bar linkage for transmission
of MFI
Airframe
Wing
Fourbars
Differential
Slider
crank
Actuators
B
O
A
C
a)
b)
Fourbar 2
Fourbar 1
6 mm
c)
d)
Transmission
Airfoil
Actuator
1 cm
Airframe
Fig.23.33a–d Various generations
of MFI. (a) Wing transmission made
of steed face sheet (after [23.123]).
(b) Thorax mechanism with ﬁve-
bar spherical linkage SCM (after
[23.124]). (c) The Harvard robotic
ﬂy is capable of ﬂapping-wing liftoff
(after [23.50]). (d) The Harvard
robotic ﬂy is the ﬁrst robotic insect
capable of unconstrained controlled
ﬂight (after [23.125])
adopted instead of conventional machining and assem-
bly processes which are difﬁcult to apply to building
a small-scale robot mechanism. Figure 23.31 shows
a single unit of the links and the ﬂexure hinge joints
which are the key building blocks of the SCM pro-
cess [23.50]. The ﬂexure joint is a polymer ﬁlm that
can be bent easily and eliminating friction losses that
are the dominant cause of reduced efﬁciency in small-
scale robot mechanisms.
Rigid face sheets of ﬁber-reinforced composites
sandwich polymers and joints are created at the gap
between face sheets. The resulting quasi-2-D sheets
are then folded into 3-D structures. The face sheets
of rigid composite materials are carefully patterned to
create robot mechanisms. For example, Fig. 23.32a is
a 2-D pattern designed for creating a spherical ﬁve-
bar linkages as shown in Fig. 23.32c. This is the wing
transmission linkage in the early versions of microme-
chanical ﬂying insect (MFI) [23.52].
Figure 23.33 shows the various versions of the
MFI developed using the SCM fabrication process.
Figure 23.33a is the early version of a transmission
that uses a steel face sheet [23.123]. Figure 23.33b
is the next generation of the MFI fabricated using
a carbon ﬁber composite (CF) sheet and polyester
ﬁlm. It has 26 joints, 4-DOF, four actuators, and two
wings. CF composites materials improve the perfor-
mance of MFI thorax structure by reducing the iner-
tia by a factor of three and increasing the resonant
frequency by 20% [23.124]. A later version with a 3-
DOF transmission (two passive DOF) and a single
bimorph PZT actuator as shown in Fig. 23.33c was able
to produce sufﬁcient thrust to achieve liftoff [23.52].
Passive dynamics in the thorax structures simpli-

Part B | 23.4
564
Part B
Design
a)
b)
100 mm
10 cm
Fig. 23.34 DASH (after [23.8])
2 mm
a)
b)
Fig.23.35a,b
1:900 scale 1903 Wright Flyer model
14 mm in wing span (after [23.126]). After laminating
layup (a), model after folding (b)
ﬁes the design and reduces undesired coupling be-
tween the degrees of freedom. Controlled ﬂight is
accomplished by separated actuator design shown in
Fig. 23.33d. Tethered but unconstrained stable hov-
ering and basic controlled manoeuvres are demon-
strated [23.125].
a)
b)
LSL1 and LSL4
Cauton fiber
Adhesive
Polyamide film
Bass
Assembly features and
exoskeleton reinforcement
Input four-bars
Pop-up linkage
Lift four-bar
Assembly strut
Swing four-bar
Leg attachment
Fig. 23.36 (a) Mobee, monolithic design of MFI [23.127], (b) HAMR-VP, a 1:27 g quadrupedal microrobot manufac-
tured using the PC-MEMS and pop-up assembly techniques (after [23.16])
The SCM fabrication process can be extended to
larger scales by using various sheet materials. Fig-
ure 23.34 shows centimetre scale crawling robots that
are built using the SCM fabrication process with card-
board and adhesive ﬁlms in place of the composites
used in the MFI. This new paradigm is fast and inex-
pensive – both in the materials used and the required
infrastructure. Furthermore, novel bio-inspired robot
mechanism that produce high performance can be cre-
ated easily as shown in Fig. 23.34. Figure 23.34a
is a small, lightweight, power autonomous running
robot, DASH [23.8]. It is capable of running at speeds
up to 15 body lengths per second and surviving
falls from large heights, due to the unique compli-
ant nature of its structures. The design can be modi-
ﬁed easily and achieve high performance with regard
to stability, speed, and maneuverability as shown in
Fig. 23.34b [23.10].
23.4.3 Pop-Up Book MEMS
In order to streamline the development of high per-
formance and economical robots, many assembly tools
have been developed to assist with robot construc-
tion at various scales. However, in millimetre-scale
robots, many challenges arise in the fabrication pro-
cess and handling many individual parts for assembly.
Pop-up books and paper folding inspire the solution
for eliminating the onerous assembly process with
small individual parts in the fabrication process of
the millimetre-scale robotic structures. Monolithic fab-
rication using pop-up book-inspired designs enables
efﬁcient batch processing starting from multiple layered
composites similar to the basic elements used in SCM.
The carefully designed layers are interconnected and
allow folding mechanisms of high complexity. Once
folding ensues, the complex 3-D structures are cre-
ated by parallel mechanisms created in the thickness

Biomimetic Robots
23.4 Material and Fabrication
565
Part B | 23.4
102
1Kilo Pascal
1Mega Pascal
1Giga Pascal
Fat
103
Liver endothelial cells
104
Agarose gel
Sticky tape
105
Soft silicone elastomer
106
PDMS
107
Vulcanized rubber
108
Polyethylene
109
Polypropylene
1010
Aluminium
Cartilage
Epoxy (hard)
Bone
1011
Titanium
1012
Diamond
Rigid
Soft
Fig. 23.37 Young’s modulus for
various materials (after [23.128] which
was also adapted by Autumn et al.
in [23.63])
of the laminate. Figure 23.35 presents a pop-up struc-
ture of 1:900 scale 1903 Wright Flyer model, 14 mm
in wing span [23.126]. The model consists of six rigid
CF composite layers, seven adhesive layers, and two
polymer ﬂexure layers. Multiple rigid-ﬂex folding lay-
ers are stacked and selectively bonded. The idea is
previously applied to microelectric mechanical systems
(MEMS) process. Combining this idea and pop-up book
designs, the fabrication process is developed for build-
ing micro robotic systems including robot structures
and actuators.
Figure 23.36 shows two examples that are designed
and fabricated by the pop-up book MEMS process.
Figure 23.36a is the Mobee (Harvard robotic ﬂy us-
ing the monolithic popup book MEMS design meth-
ods) [23.127]. In
VIDEO 398 , it demonstrates how
the pop-up book MEMS process enables mass produc-
tion by parallel manufacturing on a single sheet and
reduces entire fabrication time by eliminating oner-
ous assembly tasks. Figure 23.36b is a small-scale
quadruped crawling robot designed by pop-up book
MEMS techniques. This device demonstrates how com-
plex millimeter-scale robot structures are capable of
pop-up assembly [23.16]. Twenty-three material layers
are cut by precision laser machining and laminated with
selective adhesion. After popup, the body frame is cre-
ated and other components such as a circuit board and
actuators are bonded on the frame.
23.4.4 Other Fabrication Methods
In nature, animals use soft parts of their body for
generating locomotion, morphing conﬁguration, and
adapting to the environment. In order to maximize the
utility of their compliance, some bio-inspired robots
are primarily composed of soft materials such as ﬂu-
ids, gels, granules, and soft polymers. With respect to
compliance, soft materials vary with a wide range of
elastic (Young’s) modulus [23.128] (Fig. 23.37). There-
fore, bio-inspired robots should be built by different
fabrication methods depending on their constituent ma-
terials.
Releasing
Directional polymeric stalks
Bottom mold
+
Middle mold
Filling liquid polymer
Assembly with
top mold
Normal
Lateral
Tangential
Fig. 23.38 Manufacturing process of directional adhesion
pad (after [23.58])
Soft Lithography
Soft lithography was originally proposed for micro- and
nanostructure manufacturing in 1998 [23.129]. Early
soft lithography used an elastomeric stamp with pat-
terned relief structures on its surface to generate desired
patterns and structures. In bio-inspired robotics, for ex-
ample, a directional adhesion pad inspired by a gecko
foot’s microscale adhesion spines was developed by
a similar fabrication method to soft lithography [23.58]
(Fig. 23.38).
Advances of convenient, effective and low-cost soft
lithography allowed it to be utilized not only in the
micro and nano scale in bio-chemical ﬁelds, but also
in macro-scale robotics. Moreover, development and
popularization of additive manufacturing process us-
ing 3-D printers which can design molds with various
shapes easily and rapidly have helped soft lithography
to be applied in robotics. Soft lithography has become
a representative manufacturing method for bio-inspired
soft robots since soft lithography was ﬁrst applied to
manufacturing bio-inspired soft robots [23.130–133]
(Fig. 23.39). In soft lithography for bio-inspired soft
robots, uncured elastomeric polymers, such as PDMS
or EcoFlex, are poured into a mold designed with

Part B | 23.4
566
Part B
Design
conﬁguration of the structure. After curing, the soft
materials form a structure containing multiple air cham-
bers and pneumatic channels. Such kind of structure is
so-called a pneumatic network (PneuNet) or bending
ﬂuidic actuator (BFA).
This structure allows the robots to generate so-
phisticated locomotion such as gripping, walking, and
crawling as shown in Fig. 23.40. In addition, extra
embedded channels can control the ﬂow of a dye-
ing solution so that a soft robot can camouﬂage by
changing body color to match the color of the surround-
ings [23.135]. The actuation or locomotion of robots
manufactured by soft lithography depends on the elas-
tic modulus of materials and the geometry and position
of air chambers [23.136].
Furthermore, soft lithography in robotics has ad-
vanced by mixing different kind of materials. By em-
bedding sheets or ﬁbers into elastomers, an actuator
has asymmetric compliance which allows the structure
to be ﬂexible but not extensible, so that the actuator
can generate a wide range of motions such as bending,
extension, contraction, twisting, and others [23.137]
(Fig. 23.41). By embedding magnets into elastomers,
a soft robot can attach, detach, and easily align modules
that have a unique function per each module depending
on the task [23.138].
Patm <
<
<
Es
Eb
P1
P2
Fig. 23.39 Soft lithography of pneumatic network (Pne-
uNet) or bending ﬂuidic actuator (BFA) (after [23.130,
133, 134])
2 cm
Fig. 23.40 Bio-inspired soft robots and actuators manu-
factured by soft lithography (after [23.130, 131, 135, 136])
To overcome a slow actuation, which is a typi-
cal issue for soft robots, the design of segmented air
chambers divided by slits was introduced as an alterna-
tive soft actuator [23.139]. As a result, a fast PneuNet
structure had high rate of actuation, improved 25 times
relative to the slow PneuNet actuators. Also, a reduced
change of volume minimizes fatiguing the materials,
and thus the durability improves to a level that the actu-
ator does not fail within a million cycles of full bending.
Actuator Embedded Molding
Bio-inspired soft robots potentially have inﬁnite de-
grees of freedom and the nonlinearity of soft materials
creates difﬁculty in generating desired postures and mo-
tion. Actuator-embedded molding is commonly used to
manufacture the soft structure for bio-inspired robots.
In actuator-embedded molding, the design considera-
tions are the type of the actuator and the actuator’s
location and direction in the soft structure. For an ex-
ample of a bio-inspired robot using actuator-embedded
molding, a turtle-like swimming robot was created us-
ing a smart soft composite (SSC) structure to create
bending and twisting deformation [23.77] (Fig. 23.42).
The SSC structure consists of an actuator-embedded
layer as an active component, a patterned layer as a pas-
sive component, and a soft matrix as the body as shown
in Fig. 23.42. The angle of the patterned layer deter-
mines the bending direction passively, and the actuator-
embedded layer generates deformation. The soft matrix
helps to deform the structure continuously. Widely used
5 cm
1 cm
5 cm
5 cm
a)
c)
d)
e)
b)
1 kg
1 kg
1 kg
Fig.23.41a–e Programmable
paper–elastomer
compos-
ites-based pneumatic actuators by using soft lithography
(after [23.137])

Biomimetic Robots
23.5 Conclusion
567
Part B | 23.5
Temp. (°C)
Curing time (h)
0
8h at 70 °C
Smart material
Smart material
SMA wires
Curing mold
Matrix
Active layer #2
(center aligned, 0°)
z
x
y
z
x
y
z
x
z
x
z
x
z
x
y
z
x
y
z
x
Passive layer #3
(700 µm gap, 90°)
Passive layer #2
(700 µm gap, 45°)
Passive layer #1
(700 µm gap, 0°)
Active layer #1
(center aligned, 0°)
Smart material
Scaffold
Filament
distance, d
Filament
orientation, θ
Filament width, w
  Filament height, h
Matrix
Fig. 23.42 Actuator-embedded molding for the SSC structure actuator (after [23.77])
actuators in the actuator embedded molding are wires
including common wires connected with servo motors
and shape memory alloys (SMA) [23.25, 77, 140].
Additive Manufacturing
Additive manufacturing or 3-D printing is a rapid pro-
totyping (RP) process of manufacturing a 3-D solid
structure of any conﬁguration through sequential lay-
ering from a digital CAD model. Since the 1980s,
various types of additive manufacturing have been de-
veloped: solid-based processes such as fused deposi-
tion modeling (FDM), photo curable liquid polymer-
based processes such as stereolithography (SLA), and
powder-based processes such as selective laser sinter-
ing (SLS).
Evolving the technology of 3-D printers, soft mate-
rial deposition and even hybrid deposition of different
materials with different stiffnesses are available. Thus,
soft structures can be built at once, and products using
hybrid deposition can have features of rigidity and soft-
ness at the same time. For example, a highly deformable
3-D printed soft robot was developed [23.141]. This
robot body was printed by using a multimaterial print-
able 3-D printer (Objet Connex 500TM 3-D printer)
with two materials: one is a soft rubber-like Objet Tan-
goBlackPlusTM and another is a hard polypropylene-
like Objet VeroWhitePlusTM. These two materials have
different friction coefﬁcients; thus, the robot can switch
friction with the ground on its edge by bending the
body.
23.5 Conclusion
Biomimetic robotics attempt to create devices that are
capable of various types of effective interaction with
natural environment, e.g., locomotion and manipula-
tion, by using the principles of nature. Nature is full of
surprising types of movements that enables insects and
animals to survive by escaping from danger or hunting
for food. In this chapter, we have presented robots that
attempt to recreate these feats by understanding the un-

Part B | 23.5
568
Part B
Design
derlying principles, deriving an engineering design, and
fabricating them with novel methods. In recent years,
engineers have succeeded in recreating insects and ani-
mals that show amazing capabilities such as climbing
walls like a gecko, hovering like a ﬂy and climbing
trees like a snake. These robots have been developed
to understand nature, and also to be used as tools for
surveillance, information gathering, and rescue opera-
tions. However, many of these robots are still in the
basic research phase and are not yet ready for everyday
use.
The key open research issues remain in the broad
areas of materials, fabrication, actuation, and power.
Composites and polymers, together with novel fabrica-
tion methods, have enabled various novel biomimetic
robots. Development of these new material and fabri-
cation has been one of the key enabling technologies,
and further development of these technologies will cer-
tainly contribute to more mature biomimetic robots.
Actuation and power still remain the bottleneck of
many biomimetic robots. DC motors are the actua-
tors of choice for many biomimetic robots, and with
novel transmission design, DC motors can create mo-
tions required by the robots. However, DC motors
are inefﬁcient for small-scale biomimetic robots. Al-
though artiﬁcial muscle actuators that are based on
shrinkage or expansion of material, e.g., shape mem-
ory alloys, IPMC, electro-active polymers and shape
memory polymers, promise to give robots capabilities
similar to creatures that use biological muscles even
at small scales. However, many issues related to ro-
bustness, efﬁciency, and power limit the capabilities of
robots that use these actuators. Limitations of these ac-
tuators should be carefully considered to match the de-
sired application. Development of new artiﬁcial muscle
actuator that can emulate biological muscles – with-
out the drawbacks of current actuators – is needed to
open up a new era for biomimetic robots. Batteries also
limit the capabilities of current biomimetic robots com-
pared to their biological counterparts in terms of size
and operation time. Development of energy-harvesting
technologies together with new battery chemistries and
manufacturing methods will enable longer operation
time, which will contribute to realizing wider applica-
tions for biomimetic robots. Overall, biomimetic robot
design is one of the most challenging areas of robot
design since it requires development of various tech-
nologies to mimic the structure and function of natural
systems. Therefore, development of biomimetic robots
can have broader impact in many areas of engineering
and science, and should be seen as a platform for vari-
ous convergent technologies.
Video-References
VIDEO 278
The long-jumping robot ’Grillo’
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/278
VIDEO 279
A miniature 7 g jumping robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/279
VIDEO 280
A single motor actuated miniature steerable jumping robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/280
VIDEO 281
The Flea: Flea-inpired light jumping robot using elastic catapult
with active storage and release mechanism
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/281
VIDEO 285
Jumping & landing robot ’MOWGLI’
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/285
VIDEO 286
RoACH: A 2:4 g, untethered crawling hexapod robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/286
VIDEO 287
A new form of peristaltic locomotion in a robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/287
VIDEO 288
Meshworm
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/288
VIDEO 289
Treebot: Autonomous tree climbing by tactile sensing
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/289
VIDEO 290
Omegabot : Inchworm inspired robot climbing
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/290
VIDEO 291
GoQBot: Insanely fast robot caterpillar
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/291
VIDEO 388
SpinybotII: Climbing hard walls with compliant microspines
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/388
VIDEO 389
Smooth vertical surface climbing with directional adhesion
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/389

Biomimetic Robots
23.5 Conclusion
569
Part B | 23
VIDEO 390
Biologically inspired climbing with a hexapedal robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/390
VIDEO 391
CLASH: Climbing vertical loose cloth
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/391
VIDEO 392
Torque control strategies for snake robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/392
VIDEO 393
Snake robot climbs a tree
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/393
VIDEO 394
Snake robot in the water
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/394
VIDEO 395
Salamandra Robotica II robot walking and swimming
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/395
VIDEO 397
ACM-R5H
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/397
VIDEO 398
Pop-up fabrication of the Harvard monolithic bee (Mobee)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/398
VIDEO 399
Controlled flight of a biologically-inspired, insect-scale robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/399
VIDEO 400
Rhex the parkour robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/400
VIDEO 401
Mini whegs
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/401
VIDEO 402
Robot dragonfly DelFly explorer flies autonomously
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/402
VIDEO 403
Standford Sprawl and iSprawl
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/403
VIDEO 405
DASH: Resilient high-speed 16 g hexapedal robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/405
VIDEO 406
HAMR3: An autonomous 1:7 g ambulatory robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/406
VIDEO 407
Undulatory gaits in a centipede millirobot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/407
VIDEO 408
VelociRoACH
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/408
VIDEO 409
Underactuated adaptive gripper using flexural buckling
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/409
VIDEO 410
Flytrap-inspired bi-stable gripper
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/410
VIDEO 411
An octopus-bioinspired solution to movement and manipulation for soft robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/411
VIDEO 412
Landing and perching UAV
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/412
VIDEO 413
Dynamic surface grasping with directional adhesion
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/413
VIDEO 414
Gravity-independent rock-climbing robot and a sample acquisition tool
with microspine grippers
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/414
VIDEO 415
Avian-inspired perching mechanism with UAV
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/415
VIDEO 416
A perching mechanism for micro aerial vehicles
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/416
VIDEO 431
G9 series robotic fish
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/431
VIDEO 432
Ichthus
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/432
VIDEO 433
Autonomous, self-contained soft robotic fish
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/433
VIDEO 434
Robotic Ray takes a swim
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/23/videodetails/434

Part B | 23
570
Part B
Design
References
23.1
R.J. Full, K. Autumn, J. Chung, A. Ahn: Rapid
negotiation of rough terrain by the death-head
cockroach, Am. Zool. 38(5), 81A (1998)
23.2
R.J. Full, M.S. Tu: Mechanics of a rapid running
insect: Two-, four- and six-legged locomotion,
J. Exp. Biol. 156, 215–231 (1991)
23.3
C.P. Ellington: The novel aerodynamics of insect
flight: Applications to micro-air vehicles, J. Exp.
Biol. 202, 3439–3448 (1999)
23.4
U. Saranli, M. Buehler, D.E. Koditschek: RHex:
A simple and highly mobile hexapod robot, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 20, 616–631 (2001)
23.5
J.M.
Morrey,
B.
Lambrecht,
A.D.
Horchler,
R.E.
Ritzmann,
R.D.
Quinn:
Highly
mobile
and robust small quadruped robots, Proc IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Vol. 1 (2003)
pp. 82–87
23.6
J.E. Clark, J.G. Cham, S.A. Bailey, E.M. Froehlich,
P.K. Nahata, R.J. Full, M.R. Cutkosky: Biomimetic
design and fabrication of a hexapedal running
robot, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Vol. 4 (2001) pp. 3643–3649
23.7
S. Kim, J.E. Clark, M.R. Cutkosky: iSprawl: design
and tuning for high-speed autonomous open-
loop running, Int. J. Robotics Res. 25, 903–912
(2006)
23.8
P. Birkmeyer, K. Peterson, R.S. Fearing: DASH: A
dynamic 16g hexapedal robot, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2009) pp. 2683–
2689
23.9
A.M. Hoover, E. Steltz, R.S. Fearing: RoACH: An
autonomous 2.4g crawling hexapod robot, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2008)
pp. 26–33
23.10
A.M. Hoover, S. Burden, X.-Y. Fu, S.S. Sastry,
R.S. Fearing: Bio-inspired design and dynamic
maneuverability of a minimally actuated six-
legged robot, Proc. IEEE/RAS Biomed. Robotics
Biomech. (BioRob) (2010) pp. 869–876
23.11
A.O. Pullin, N.J. Kohut, D. Zarrouk, R.S. Fear-
ing: Dynamic turning of 13 cm robot compar-
ing tail and differential drive, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012) pp. 5086–
5093
23.12
A.T. Baisch, C. Heimlich, M. Karpelson, R.J. Wood:
HAMR3: An autonomous 1.7g ambulatory robot,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2011) pp. 5073–5079
23.13
K.L. Hoffman, R.J. Wood: Turning gaits and op-
timal undulatory gaits for a modular centipede-
inspired
millirobot,
Proc.
IEEE/RAS
Biomed.
Robotics Biomech. (BioRob) (2012) pp. 1052–
1059
23.14
R. Sahai, S. Avadhanula, R. Groff, E. Steltz,
R. Wood, R.S. Fearing: Towards a 3g crawling robot
through the integration of microrobot technolo-
gies, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2006) pp. 296–302
23.15
J.T. Watson, R.E. Ritzmann, S.N. Zill, A.J. Pollack:
Control of obstacle climbing in the cockroach,
Blaberus discoidalis. I. Kinematics, J. Comp. Phys-
iol. A 188, 39–53 (2002)
23.16
A.T. Baisch, O. Ozcan, B. Goldberg, D. Ithier,
R.J.
Wood:
High
speed
locomotion
for
a
quadrupedal
microrobot,
Int.
J.
Robotics
Res. 33, 1063–1082 (2014)
23.17
D.W.
Haldane,
K.C.
Peterson,
F.L.
Garcia
Bermudez, R.S. Fearing: Animal-inspired design
and aerodynamic stabilization of a hexapedal
millirobot, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2013) pp. 3279–3286
23.18
A.S. Boxerbaum, H.J. Chiel, R.D. Quinn: A new
theory and methods for creating peristaltic mo-
tion in a robotic platform, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2010) pp. 1221–1227
23.19
S. Seok, C.D. Onal, K.-J. Cho, R.J. Wood, D. Rus,
S. Kim:
Meshworm: A
peristaltic
soft
robot
with antagonistic nickel titanium coil actuators,
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 18, 1–13 (2012)
23.20
A. Menciassi, D. Accoto, S. Gorini, P. Dario: De-
velopment of a biomimetic miniature robotic
crawler, Auton. Robotics 21, 155–163 (2006)
23.21
K. Kotay, D. Rus: The inchworm robot: A multi-
functional system, Auton. Robotics 8, 53–69
(2000)
23.22
N. Cheng, G. Ishigami, S. Hawthorne, H. Chen,
M. Hansen, M. Telleria, R. Playter, K. Iagnemma:
Design and analysis of a soft mobile robot
composed of multiple thermally activated joints
driven by a single actuator, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2010) pp. 5207–5212
23.23
J.-S. Koh, K.-J. Cho: Omega-shaped inchworm-
inspired crawling robot with large-index-and-
pitch (LIP) SMA spring actuators, IEEE/ASME Trans.
Mechatron. 18, 419–429 (2013)
23.24
T.L. Lam, Y. Xu: Climbing strategy for a flexible tree
climbing robot – Treebot, IEEE Trans. Robotics 27,
1107–1117 (2011)
23.25
H.-T.
Lin,
G.G.
Leisk,
B.
Trimmer:
GoQBot:
A caterpillar-inspired soft-bodied rolling robot,
Bioinsp. Biomimet. 6, 026007 (2011)
23.26
S. Hirose, Y. Umetani: The development of soft
gripper for the versatile robot hand, Mech. Mach.
Theory 13, 351–359 (1978)
23.27
H. Ohno, S. Hirose: Design of slim slime robot and
its gait of locomotion, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2001) pp. 707–715
23.28
C. Wright, A. Johnson, A. Peck, Z. McCord, A. Naak-
tgeboren, P. Gianfortoni, M. Gonzalez-Rivero,
R. Hatton, H. Choset: Design of a modular snake
robot, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2007) pp. 2609–2614
23.29
H. Yamada, S. Chigisaki, M. Mori, K. Takita,
K. Ogami, S. Hirose: Development of amphibious
snake-like robot ACM-R5, Proc. ISR (2005)
23.30
J. Gray: The mechanism of locomotion in snakes,
J. Exp. Biol. 23, 101–120 (1946)
23.31
G.S. Miller: The motion dynamics of snakes and
worms, ACM Siggraph Comput. Graph. 22, 169–173
(1988)

Biomimetic Robots
References
571
Part B | 23
23.32
Z. Bayraktaroglu: Snake-like locomotion: Exper-
imentations with a biologically inspired wheel-
less snake robot, Mech. Mach. Theory 44, 591–602
(2009)
23.33
D.L. Hu, J. Nirody, T. Scott, M.J. Shelley: The me-
chanics of slithering locomotion, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. 106, 10081–10085 (2009)
23.34
Z. Wang, S. Ma, B. Li, Y. Wang: Experimental study
of passive creeping for a snake-like robot, Proc.
IEEE/ICME Int. Conf. Complex Med. Eng. (CME) (2011)
pp. 382–387
23.35
J.J. Socha, T. O’Dempsey, M. LaBarbera: A 3-D
kinematic analysis of gliding in a flying snake,
Chrysopelea paradisi J. Exp. Biol. 208, 1817–1833
(2005)
23.36
R.L. Hatton, H. Choset: Generating gaits for snake
robots: Annealed chain fitting and keyframe wave
extraction, Auton. Robotics 28, 271–281 (2010)
23.37
K.J. Dowling: Limbless Locomotion: Learning to
Crawl with a Snake Robot (NASA, Pittsburgh 1996)
23.38
S. Hirose, M. Mori: Biologically inspired snake-like
robots, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Biomimet. (ROBIO)
(2004) pp. 1–7
23.39
C. Wright, A. Buchan, B. Brown, J. Geist, M. Schw-
erin, D. Rollinson, M. Tesch, H. Choset: Design and
architecture of the unified modular snake robot,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012)
pp. 4347–4354
23.40
K.-H. Low: Industrial Robotics: Programming,
Simulation and Applications (InTech, Rijeka 2007)
23.41
A.J. Ijspeert, A. Crespi, D. Ryczko, J.M. Cabelguen:
From swimming to walking with a salamander
robot driven by a spinal cord model, Science 315,
1416–1420 (2007)
23.42
R.
Crespi,
K.
Karakasiliotis,
A.
Guignard,
A.J.
Ijspeert:
1
Salamandra
robotica
II:
An
amphibious
robot
to
study
salamander-like
swimming and walking gaits, IEEE Trans. Robotics
29, 308–320 (2013)
23.43
S. Hirose, H. Yamada: Snake-like robots [Tutorial],
IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 16, 88–98 (2009)
23.44
N. Kamamichi, M. Yamakita, K. Asaka, Z.-W. Luo:
A snake-like swimming robot using IPMC actua-
tor/sensor, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2006) pp. 1812–1817
23.45
P. Liljebäck, K.Y. Pettersen, O. Stavdahl, J.T. Grav-
dahl: Snake robot locomotion in environments
with obstacles, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 17,
1158–1169 (2012)
23.46
P. Liljebäck, K.Y. Pettersen, Ø. Stavdahl, J.T. Grav-
dahl: A review on modelling, implementation,
and control of snake robots, Robotics Auton. Syst.
60, 29–40 (2012)
23.47
M.H. Dickinson: Wing rotation and the aerody-
namic basis of insect flight, Science 284, 1954–
1960 (1999)
23.48
M.H. Dickinson: How animals move: An integra-
tive view, Science 288, 100–106 (2000)
23.49
G.C.H.E. de Croon, K.M.E. de Clercq, R. Ruijsink,
B. Remes, C. de Wagter: Design, aerodynamics,
and vision-based control of the DelFly, Int. J. Mi-
cro Air Veh. 1(2), 71–97 (2009)
23.50
R.J. Wood, S. Avadhanula, R. Sahai, E. Steltz,
R.S. Fearing: Microrobot design using fiber re-
inforced composites, J. Mech. Des. 130, 052304
(2008)
23.51
M. Keennon, K. Klingebiel, H. Won, A. Andriukov:
Development of the nano hummingbird: A tailless
flapping wing micro air vehicle, AIAA Aerospace
Sci. Meet. (2012)
23.52
R.J. Wood: The first takeoff of a biologically in-
spired at-scale robotic insect, IEEE Trans. Robotics
24, 341–347 (2008)
23.53
K. Peterson, P. Birkmeyer, R. Dudley, R.S. Fearing:
A wing-assisted running robot and implications
for avian flight evolution, Bioinsp. Biomimet. 6,
046008 (2011)
23.54
S. Hirose, A. Nagakubo, R. Toyama: Machine that
can walk and climb on floors, walls and ceilings,
Adv. Robotics ICAR ’05. Proc. (1991) pp. 753–758
23.55
S. Kim, A.T. Asbeck, M.R. Cutkosky, W.R. Provan-
cher: SpinybotII: Climbing hard walls with com-
pliant microspines, Adv. Robotics ICAR ’05. Proc.
(2005) pp. 601–606
23.56
M. Spenko, G.C. Haynes, J. Saunders, M.R. Cutkos-
ky, A.A. Rizzi, R.J. Full, D.E. Ko-ditschek: Biolog-
ically inspired climbing with a hexapedal robot,
J. Field Robotics 25, 223–242 (2008)
23.57
K. Autumn, A. Dittmore, D. Santos, M. Spenko,
M. Cutkosky: Frictional adhesion: A new angle on
gecko attachment, J. Exp. Biol. 209, 3569–3579
(2006)
23.58
S. Kim, M. Spenko, S. Trujillo, B. Heyneman,
D. Santos, M.R. Cutkosky: Smooth vertical surface
climbing with directional adhesion, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 24, 65–74 (2008)
23.59
M. Minor, H. Dulimarta, G. Danghi, R. Mukherjee,
R.L. Tummala, D. Aslam: Design, implementation,
and evaluation of an under-actuated minia-
ture biped climbing robot, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2000) pp. 1999–
2005
23.60
D. Longo, G. Muscato: The Alicia 3 climbing robot:
A three-module robot for automatic wall in-
spection, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 13, 42–50
(2006)
23.61
M. Armada, M. Prieto, T. Akinfiev, R. Fernán-
dez, P. González, E. García, H. Montes, S. Nabulsi,
R. Ponticelli, J. Sarriá, J. Estremera, S. Ros,
J. Grieco, G. Fernández: On the design and de-
velopment of climbing and walking robots for the
maritime industries, J. Marit. Res. 2, 9–32 (2005)
23.62
G.C. Haynes, A. Khripin, G. Lynch, J. Amory,
A. Saunders, A.A. Rizzi, D.E. Koditschek: Rapid
pole climbing with a quadrupedal robot, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2009)
pp. 2767–2772
23.63
K. Autumn, Y.A. Liang, S.T. Hsieh, W. Zesch,
W.P. Chan, T.W. Kenny, R. Fearing, R.J. Full: Ad-
hesive force of a single gecko foot-hair, Nature
405, 681–685 (2000)
23.64
G.A. Lynch, J.E. Clark, P.-C. Lin, D.E. Koditschek:
A bioinspired dynamical vertical climbing robot,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 31, 974–996 (2012)

Part B | 23
572
Part B
Design
23.65
J. Clark, D. Goldman, P.-C. Lin, G. Lynch, T. Chen,
H. Komsuoglu, R.J. Full, D. Koditschek: Design of
a bio-inspired dynamical vertical climbing robot,
Robotics Sci. Syst. (2007)
23.66
P. Birkmeyer, A.G. Gillies, R.S. Fearing: Dynamic
climbing of near-vertical smooth surfaces, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2012)
pp. 286–292
23.67
K.A. Daltorio, T.E. Wei, S.N. Gorb, R.E. Ritzmann,
R.D. Quinn: Passive foot design and contact area
analysis for climbing mini-whegs, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2007) pp. 1274–
1279
23.68
O. Unver, A. Uneri, A. Aydemir, M. Sitti: Geckobot:
A gecko inspired climbing robot using elastomer
adhesives, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2006) pp. 2329–2335
23.69
S.A. Bailey, J.G. Cham, M.R. Cutkosky, R.J. Full: A
biomimetic climbing robot based on the gecko,
J. Bionic Eng. 3, 115–125 (2006)
23.70
M.P. Murphy, C. Kute, Y. Mengüç, M. Sitti: Waalbot
II: Adhesion recovery and improved performance
of a climbing robot using fibrillar adhesives, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 30, 118–133 (2011)
23.71
D.S. Barrett: Propulsive Efficiency of a Flexible Hull
Underwater Vehicle, Ph.D. Thesis (MIT, Cambridge
1996)
23.72
J. Liu, H. Hu: Biological inspiration: From carangi-
form fish to multi-joint robotic fish, J. Bionic Eng.
7, 35–48 (2010)
23.73
G.-H. Yang, K.-S. Kim, S.-H. Lee, C. Cho, Y. Ryuh:
Design and control of 3-DOF robotic fish ‘ICHTHUS
V5, Lect. Not. Comp. Sci. 8103, 310–319 (2013)
23.74
K. Low: Modelling and parametric study of mod-
ular undulating fin rays for fish robots, Mech.
Mach. Theory 44, 615–632 (2009)
23.75
A.D. Marchese, C.D. Onal, D. Rus: Autonomous soft
robotic fish capable of escape maneuvers using
fluidic elastomer actuators, Soft Robotics 1, 75–87
(2014)
23.76
Z. Chen, T.I. Um, H. Bart-Smith: Bio-inspired
robotic manta ray powered by ionic polymer–
metal composite artificial muscles, Int. J. Smart
Nano Mater. 3, 296–308 (2012)
23.77
H.-J. Kim, S.-H. Song, S.-H. Ahn: A turtle-like
swimming robot using a smart soft composite
(SSC) structure, Smart Mater. Struct. 22, 014007
(2013)
23.78
C.J.
Esposito,
J.L.
Tangorra,
B.E. Flammang,
G.V. Lauder: A robotic fish caudal fin: Effects of
stiffness and motor program on locomotor per-
formance, J. Exp. Biol. 215, 56–67 (2012)
23.79
H. Prahlad, R. Pelrine, S. Stanford, J. Marlow,
R. Kornbluh: Electroadhesive robots—wall climb-
ing robots enabled by a novel, robust, and elec-
trically controllable adhesion technology, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2008)
pp. 3028–3033
23.80
P. Birkmeyer, A.G. Gillies, R.S. Fearing: CLASH:
Climbing vertical loose cloth, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011) pp. 5087–
5093
23.81
K. Streitlien, G.S. Triantafyllou, M.S. Triantafyllou:
Efficient foil propulsion through vortex control,
AIAA J. 34, 2315–2319 (1996)
23.82
H. Morikawa, S. Nakao, S.-I. Kobayashi: Exper-
imental study on oscillating wing for propulsor
with bending mechanism modeled on caudal
muscle-skeletal structure of tuna, Jap. Soc. Mech.
Eng. C 44, 1117–1124 (2001)
23.83
R.
Fan,
J.
Yu,
L.
Wang,
G.
Xie,
Y.
Fang,
Y. Hu: Optimized design and implementation
of biomimetic robotic dolphin, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Biomimet. (ROBIO) (2005) pp. 484–489
23.84
T. Salumäe, M. Kruusmaa: A flexible fin with bio-
inspired stiffness profile and geometry, J. Bionic
Eng. 8, 418–428 (2011)
23.85
P.V. y Alvarado, K. Youcef-Toumi: Design of ma-
chines with compliant bodies for biomimetic lo-
comotion in liquid environments, J. Dyn. Syst.
Meas. Contr. 128, 3–13 (2006)
23.86
U. Scarfogliero, C. Stefanini, P. Dario: Design and
development of the long-jumping, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2007) pp. 467–472
23.87
M. Kovac, M. Fuchs, A. Guignard, J.-C. Zufferey,
D. Floreano: A miniature 7g jumping robot, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2008)
pp. 373–378
23.88
Y.-J. Park, T.M. Huh, D. Park, K.-J. Cho: Design of
a variable-stiffness flapping mechanism for max-
imizing the thrust of a bio-inspired underwater
robot, Bioinsp. Biomimet. 9, 036002 (2014)
23.89
W.-S. Chu, K.-T. Lee, S.-H. Song, M.-W. Han, J.-
Y. Lee, H.-S. Kim, M.S. Kim, Y.J. Park, K.J. Cho,
S.H. Anh: Review of biomimetic underwater
robots using smart actuators, Int. J. Prec. Eng.
Manuf. 13, 1281–1292 (2012)
23.90
Z. Wang, G. Hang, Y. Wang, J. Li, W. Du: Embedded
SMA wire actuated biomimetic fin: A module for
biomimetic underwater propulsion, Smart Mater.
Struc. 17, 025039 (2008)
23.91
G.V. Lauder, J. Lim, R. Shelton, C. Witt, E. Ander-
son, J.L. Tangorra: Robotic models for studying
undulatory locomotion in fishes, Mar. Technol.
Soc. J. 45, 41–55 (2011)
23.92
F. Li, G. Bonsignori, U. Scarfogliero, D. Chen,
C. Stefanini, W. Liu, P. Dario, F. Xin: Jumping
mini-robot with bio-inspired legs, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Biomimet. (ROBIO) (2009) pp. 933–938
23.93
B.G.A. Lambrecht, A.D. Horchler, R.D. Quinn: A
small, insect-inspired robot that runs and jumps,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
pp. 1240–1245
23.94
J. Zhao, J. Xu, B. Gao, N. Xi, F.J. Cintrón,
M.W. Mutka, X. Li: MSU Jumper: A single-motor-
actuated miniature steerable jumping robot, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 29, 602–614 (2013)
23.95
J. Zhao, W. Yan, N. Xi, M.W. Mutka, L. Xiao: A
miniature 25 grams running and jumping robot,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2014)
23.96
R. Armour, K. Paskins, A. Bowyer, J. Vincent,
W. Megill: Jumping robots: A biomimetic solu-
tion to locomotion across rough terrain, Bioinsp.
Biomimet. 2, S65–S82 (2007)

Biomimetic Robots
References
573
Part B | 23
23.97
M. Noh, S.-W. Kim, S. An, J.-S. Koh, K.-J. Cho:
Flea-inspired catapult mechanism for miniature
jumping robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics 28, 1007–1018
(2012)
23.98
J.-S. Koh, S.-P. Jung, M. Noh, S.-W. Kim, K.-
J. Cho: Flea inspired catapult mechanism with
active energy storage and release for small scale
jumping robot, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2013) pp. 26–31
23.99
J.-S. Koh, S.-P. Jung, R.J. Wood, K.-J. Cho:
A jumping robotic insect based on a torque re-
versal catapult mechanism, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2013) pp. 3796–
3801
23.100
A. Yamada, M. Watari, H. Mochiyama, H. Fuji-
moto: An asymmetric robotic catapult based on
the closed elastica for jumping robot, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2008) pp. 232–
237
23.101
A.P. Gerratt, S. Bergbreiter: Incorporating compli-
ant elastomers for jumping locomotion in micro-
robots, Smart Mater. Struct. 22, 014010 (2013)
23.102
R. Niiyama, A. Nagakubo, Y. Kuniyoshi: Mowgli:
A bipedal jumping and landing robot with an
artificial musculoskeletal system, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2007) pp. 2546–
2551
23.103
E.W.
Hawkes,
E.V.
Eason,
A.T.
Asbeck,
M.R. Cutkosky: The gecko’s toe: Scaling di-
rectional adhesives for climbing applications,
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 18, 518–526 (2013)
23.104
E.W.
Hawkes,
D.L.
Christensen,
E.V.
Eason,
M.A. Estrada, M. Heverly, E. Hilgemann, J. Hao,
M.T. Pope, A. Parness, M.R. Cutkosky: Dynamic
surface grasping with directional adhesion, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2013)
pp. 5487–5493
23.105
A.L. Desbiens, A.T. Asbeck, M.R. Cutkosky: Land-
ing, perching and taking off from vertical sur-
faces, Int. J. Robotics Res. 30, 355–370 (2011)
23.106
A.
Parness,
M.
Frost,
N.
Thatte,
J.P.
King,
K. Witkoe, M. Nevarez, M. Garrett, H. Aghazarian,
B. Kennedy: Gravity-independent rock-climbing
robot and a sample acquisition tool with mi-
crospine grippers, J. Field Robotics 30, 897–915
(2013)
23.107
B.A.
Trimmer,
A.E.
Takesian,
B.M.
Sweet,
C.B. Rogers, D.C. Hake, D.J. Rogers: Caterpil-
lar locomotion: A new model for soft-bodied
climbing and burrowing robots, 7th Int. Symp.
Technol. Mine Problem (2006) pp. 1–10
23.108
G.-P. Jung, J.-S. Koh, K.-J. Cho: Underactuated
adaptive gripper using flexural buckling, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 29(6), 1396 (2013)
23.109
M. Calisti, M. Giorelli, G. Levy, B. Mazzolai,
B. Hochner, C. Laschi, P. Dario: An octopus-bioin-
spired solution to movement and manipulation
for soft robots, Bioinsp. Biomimet. 6, 036002
(2011)
23.110
S.-W. Kim, J.-S. Koh, J.-G. Lee, J. Ryu, M. Cho,
K.-J. Cho: Flytrap-inspired robot using struc-
turally integrated actuation based on bistability
and a developable surface, Bioinsp. Biomimet. 9,
036004 (2014)
23.111
C.E. Doyle, J.J. Bird, T.A. Isom, J.C. Kallman,
D.F. Bareiss, D.J. Dunlop, R.J. King, J.J. Abbott,
M.A. Minor: An avian-inspired passive mecha-
nism for quadrotor perching, IEEE/ASME Trans.
Mechatron. 18, 506–517 (2013)
23.112
M. Kovač, J. Germann, C. Hürzeler, R.Y. Siegwart,
D. Floreano: A perching mechanism for micro
aerial vehicles, J. Micro-Nano Mechatron. 5, 77–91
(2009)
23.113
R. Merz, F. Prinz, K. Ramaswami, M. Terk, L. Weiss:
Shape deposition manufacturing, Proc. Solid
Freeform Fabric. Symp., University of Texas at
Austin (1994) pp. 1–8
23.114
S.A. Bailey, J.G. Cham, M.R. Cutkosky, R.J. Full:
Biomimetic robotic mechanisms via shape de-
position manufacturing, Robotics Res. Int. Symp.
(2000) pp. 403–410
23.115
X. Li, A. Golnas, F.B. Prinz: Shape deposition man-
ufacturing of smart metallic structures with em-
bedded sensors, SPIE Proc. 7th Annu. Int. Symp.
Smart Struct. Mater. (International Society for Op-
tics and Photonics, Bellingham 2000) pp. 160–171
23.116
K.G. Marra, J.W. Szem, P.N. Kumta, P.A. DiMilla,
L.E. Weiss: In vitro analysis of biodegradable
polymer
blend/hydroxyapatite
composites
for
bone tissue engineering, J. Biomed. Mater. Res.
47, 324–335 (1999)
23.117
J.G. Cham, S.A. Bailey, J.E. Clark, R.J. Full,
M.R.
Cutkosky:
Fast
and
robust:
Hexapedal
robots via shape deposition manufacturing, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 21, 869–882 (2002)
23.118
A.M. Dollar, R.D. Howe: A robust compliant
grasper via shape deposition manufacturing,
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 11, 154–161 (2006)
23.119
M. Binnard, M.R. Cutkosky: Design by composition
for layered manufacturing, J. Mech. Des. 122, 91–
101 (2000)
23.120
Y.-L. Park, K. Chau, R.J. Black, M.R. Cutkosky:
Force sensing robot fingers using embedded fiber
Bragg grating sensors and shape deposition man-
ufacturing, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2007) pp. 1510–1516
23.121
D. Shin, I. Sardellitti, Y.-L. Park, O. Khatib,
M. Cutkosky: Design and control of a bio-inspired
human-friendly robot, Int. J. Robotics Res. 29,
571–584 (2010)
23.122
R.S.
Fearing,
K.H.
Chiang,
M.H.
Dickinson,
D.L. Pick, M. Sitti, J. Yan: Wing transmission
for a micromechanical flying insect, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 2 (2000)
pp. 1509–1516
23.123
J. Yan, R.J. Wood, S. Avadhanula, M. Sitti,
R.S. Fearing: Towards flapping wing control for
a micromechanical flying insect, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2001) pp. 3901–3908
23.124
R.J. Wood, S. Avadhanula, M. Menon, R.S. Fear-
ing: Microrobotics using composite materials: The
micromechanical flying insect thorax, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 2 (2003)
pp. 1842–1849

Part B | 23
574
Part B
Design
23.125
K.Y. Ma, P. Chirarattananon, S.B. Fuller, R.J. Wood:
Controlled flight of a biologically inspired, insect-
scale robot, Science 340, 603–607 (2013)
23.126
J. Whitney, P. Sreetharan, K. Ma, R. Wood: Pop-
up book MEMS, J. Micromech. Microeng. 21, 115021
(2011)
23.127
P.S.
Sreetharan,
J.P.
Whitney,
M.D.
Strauss,
R.J. Wood: Monolithic fabrication of millime-
ter-scale machines, J. Micromech. Microeng. 22,
055027 (2012)
23.128
C. Majidi: Soft robotics: A perspective – Current
trends and prospects for the future, Soft Robotics
1, 5–11 (2013)
23.129
Y. Xia, G.M. Whitesides: Soft lithography, Annu.
Rev. Mater. Sci. 28, 153–184 (1998)
23.130
F. Ilievski, A.D. Mazzeo, R.F. Shepherd, X. Chen,
G.M. Whitesides:
Soft robotics
for chemists,
Angew. Chem. 123, 1930–1935 (2011)
23.131
R.F. Shepherd, F. Ilievski, W. Choi, S.A. Morin,
A.A. Stokes, A.D. Mazzeo, X. Chen, M. Wang,
G.M. Whitesides: Multigait soft robot, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 108, 20400–20403 (2011)
23.132
B.C.-M.
Chang,
J.
Berring,
M.
Venkataram,
C. Menon, M. Parameswaran: Bending fluidic
actuator for smart structures, Smart Mater. Struct.
20, 035012 (2011)
23.133
B. Chang, A. Chew, N. Naghshineh, C. Menon:
A spatial bending fluidic actuator: Fabrication
and quasi-static characteristics, Smart Mater.
Struct. 21, 045008 (2012)
23.134
B. Finio, R. Shepherd, H. Lipson: Air-Powered Soft
Robots for K-12 Classrooms, IEEE Proc. Integr. STEM
Edu. Conf. (ISEC) (2013) pp. 1–6
23.135
S.A. Morin, R.F. Shepherd, S.W. Kwok, A.A. Stokes,
A. Nemiroski, G.M. Whitesides: Camouflage and
display for soft machines, Science 337, 828–832
(2012)
23.136
R.V. Martinez, J.L. Branch, C.R. Fish, L. Jin,
R.F. Shepherd, R. Nunes, Z. Suo, G.M. Whitesides:
Robotic tentacles with three-dimensional mobil-
ity based on flexible elastomers, Adv. Mater. 25,
205–212 (2013)
23.137
R.V. Martinez, C.R. Fish, X. Chen, G.M. Whitesides:
Elastomeric origami: Programmable paper-elas-
tomer composites as pneumatic actuators, Adv.
Funct. Mater. 22, 1376–1384 (2012)
23.138
S.W. Kwok, S.A. Morin, B. Mosadegh, J.H. So,
R.F. Shepherd, R.V. Martinez, B. Smith, F.C. Sime-
one, A.A. Stokes, G.M. Whitesides: Magnetic as-
sembly of soft robots with hard components, Adv.
Funct. Mater. 24, 2180–2187 (2013)
23.139
B.
Mosadegh,
P.
Polygerinos,
C.
Keplinger,
S. Wennstedt, R.F. Shepherd, U. Gupta, J. Shim,
K. Bertoldi, C.J. Walsh, G.M. Whitesides: Pneu-
matic networks for soft robotics that actuate
rapidly,
Adv.
Funct.
Mater.
24,
2163–2170
(2013)
23.140
M. Cianchetti, A. Arienti, M. Follador, B. Mazzolai,
P. Dario, C. Laschi: Design concept and validation
of a robotic arm inspired by the octopus, Mater.
Sci. Eng. C 31, 1230–1239 (2011)
23.141
T. Umedachi, V. Vikas, B.A. Trimmer: Highly de-
formable 3-D printed soft robot generating inch-
ing and crawling locomotions with variable fric-
tion legs, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2013) pp. 4590–4595

Multimedia Contents Wheeled Rob
575
Part B | 24.1
24. Wheeled Robots
Woojin Chung, Karl Iagnemma
The purpose of this chapter is to introduce, ana-
lyze, and compare various wheeled mobile robots
(WMRs) and to present several realizations and
commonly encountered designs. The mobility of
WMR is discussed on the basis of the kinematic
constraints resulting from the pure rolling condi-
tions at the contact points between the wheels and
the ground. Practical robot structures are classified
according to the number of wheels, and features
are introduced focusing on commonly adopted de-
signs. Omnimobile robot and articulated robots re-
alizations are described. Wheel–terrain interaction
models are presented in order to compute forces at
the contact interface. Four possible wheel-terrain
interaction cases are shown on the basis of relative
stiffness of the wheel and terrain. A suspension
system is required to move on uneven surfaces.
Structures, dynamics, and important features of
commonly used suspensions are explained.
24.1
Overview.............................................
575
24.2 Mobility of Wheeled Robots .................
576
24.2.1
Types of Wheels.........................
576
24.2.2 Kinematic Constraints ................
578
24.2.3 Robot Configuration Variables.....
580
24.2.4 Restriction on Robot Mobility .....
580
24.2.5 Characterization
of Robot Mobility ......................
581
24.2.6 Five Classes
of Wheeled Mobile Robots .........
581
24.3 Wheeled Robot Structures ....................
582
24.3.1
Robots with One Wheel..............
582
24.3.2 Robots with Two Wheels ............
582
24.3.3 Robots with Three Wheels ..........
583
24.3.4 Robots with Four Wheels ...........
585
24.3.5 Special Applications
of Wheeled Robots ....................
585
24.4 Wheel–Terrain Interaction Models ........
586
24.4.1
Rigid Wheels on Rigid Terrain .....
586
24.4.2 Rigid Wheels
on Deformable Terrain ...............
586
24.4.3 Deformable Tires
on Deformable Terrain ...............
587
24.4.4 Deformable Tires on Rigid Terrain
589
24.5 Wheeled Robot Suspensions.................
589
24.5.1
Passive Suspension Dynamics .....
590
24.5.2 Semiactive Suspension Dynamics
591
24.6 Conclusions .........................................
592
Video-References.........................................
592
References...................................................
593
24.1 Overview
Wheeled robots have been widely used to achieve mo-
bility because there are many advantages including the
simple structure, energy efﬁciency, fast speed, low fab-
rication cost, and so forth. The purpose of this chapter
is to provide a general description of wheeled mobile
robots, to discuss their properties from the mobility
point of view, to describe the most commonly en-
countered realizations of such robots, and to explain
wheel–terrain interaction models and suspension sys-
tems.
The chapter is organized as follows: Sect. 24.2 is de-
voted to the characterization of the restriction of robot
motion induced by these pure rolling conditions. We
ﬁrst describe different types of wheels used in the con-
struction of mobile robots and derive the corresponding
kinematic constraints. This allows us to characterize the
mobility of a robot equipped with several wheels of
these different types, and we show that these robots can
be classiﬁed only into ﬁve categories, corresponding to
two mobility indices.

Part B | 24.2
576
Part B
Design
In Sect. 24.3, we present several realizations of
wheeled mobile robots by the use of various types of
wheels. Structures and features of widely used wheel
mechanisms are explained. Design issues of wheeled
robots include capability of omnidirectional move-
ment, fabrication cost, difﬁculty of control, and terrain
traversability.
Section 24.4 explains wheel–terrain interaction
models. It is shown that four possible wheel–terrain in-
teraction cases can be obtained according to the relative
stiffness of the wheel and terrain. The presented analyti-
cal models are broadly suitable for analysis, simulation,
design, and control purposes.
Section 24.5 presents suspensions for wheeled
robots. A suspension is a system of linkages, springs,
dampers, and actuators that governs the relative mo-
tion between a robot’s wheels and body. Suspen-
sion mechanisms are useful when driving over un-
even surfaces. Common methods for modeling passive
and semiactive suspensions are presented. The anal-
ysis of these models allows for principled selection
of springs, dampers, and active or semiactive actua-
tors that form the basis of nearly all wheeled robot
suspensions.
Finally, some concluding remarks are given in
Sect. 24.6.
24.2 Mobility of Wheeled Robots
In this section, we describe a variety of wheels and
wheel implementations in mobile robots. We discuss
the restriction of robot mobility implied by the use of
these wheels and deduce a classiﬁcation of robot mo-
b
b
d
A
l
Robot
chassis
	
α
d
p
X1
c)
a)
b)
X2
Fig.24.1a–c The general design of a standard wheel.
(a) Side view, (b) front view, and (c) top view
bility allowing one to characterize robot mobility fully,
whatever the number and type of the wheels.
24.2.1 Types of Wheels
In order to achieve robot locomotion, wheeled mobile
robots are widely used in many applications. In general,
wheeled robots consume less energy and move faster
than other locomotion mechanisms (e.g., legged robots
or tracked vehicles). From the viewpoint of control, less
control effort is required, owing to their simple mech-
anisms and reduced stability problems. Although it is
difﬁcult to overcome rough terrain or uneven ground
conditions, wheeled mobile robots are suitable for
a large class of target environments in practical appli-
cations. When we think of a single-wheel design, there
are two candidates: a standard wheel or a special wheel.
A standard wheel can be understood as a conventional
tire. Special wheels possess unique mechanical struc-
tures including rollers or spheres. Figure 24.1 shows the
general design of a standard wheel. Three conditions
should be deﬁned for a standard wheel design:
1. Determination of the two offsets d and b
2. Mechanical design that allows steering motion or
not (i. e., to ﬁx the wheel orientation or not)
3. Determination of steering and driving actuation
(i. e., active or passive drive).
Condition 1 is the kinematic parameter design prob-
lem for a single standard wheel. The parameter d can
be either 0 or some positive constant. Parameter b is
the lateral offset of the wheel and is usually set to
zero. In a special design, a nonzero b may be selected
to obtain pure rolling contact between the wheel and
ground without causing rotational slip at the contact
point. However, this is rarely used and we mainly con-
sider the case of zero lateral offset b.

Wheeled Robots
24.2 Mobility of Wheeled Robots
577
Part B | 24.2
Condition 2 is a design problem for whether the
wheel orientation can be changed or not. If the steering
axis is ﬁxed, the wheel provides a velocity constraint
on the driving direction. Condition 3 is the design prob-
lem of whether to actuate steering or driving motion by
actuators or to drive steering or motion passively.
If steering motion is allowed, the offset d plays
a signiﬁcant role in the kinematic modeling. For a con-
ventional caster wheel (i. e., an off-centered orientable
wheel), there is a nonzero offset d. Point A in Fig. 24.1
indicates the location of the joint connecting the wheel
module to the robot chassis. Two orthogonal linear ve-
locity components at point A are obtained by a caster
wheel, which results from the steering and driving mo-
tions of the wheel module. This implies that a passive
caster wheel does not provide an additional velocity
constraint on the robot’s motion. If a caster wheel is
equipped with two actuators that drive steering and
driving motions independently, holonomic omnidirec-
tional movement can be achieved because any desired
velocity at point A can be generated by solving the in-
verse kinematics problem.
If the offset d is set to zero, the allowable velocity
direction at point A is limited to the wheel orientation.
In such a case, the steering motion should not be pas-
sive because the wheel orientation cannot be changed
passively. However, the driving velocity can be de-
termined passively by the actuation of other wheels.
Wheel orientation should be actively steered to the
desired velocity direction due to the nonholonomic ve-
locity constraint. This implies that the wheel orientation
should be aligned before movement.
In summary, four types of standard wheels are com-
monly used. First is a passively driven wheel with
a ﬁxed steering axis. Second is a passive caster wheel
with offset d. Third is an active caster wheel with
offset d, where the steering and driving motions are
controlled by actuators. An example of caster wheels
is shown in
VIDEO 325 . The fourth is an active ori-
entable wheel with zero offset d, where steering and
driving motions are driven by actuators. The structures
of each wheel type are shown in Fig. 24.2. The kinemat-
ics and constraints of those wheels will be explained in
detail in Sect. 24.2.2.
Although standard wheels are advantageous be-
cause of their simple structure and good reliability,
the nonholonomic velocity constraint (i. e., no side-
slip condition) limits robot motion. On the other hand,
special wheels can be employed in order to obtain
omnidirectional motion of a mobile robot (omnimo-
bile robot), i. e., to ensure three degrees of freedom
for plane motion. We consider two typical designs
of special wheels: the Swedish wheel and the spher-
ical wheel. Figure 24.3a and
VIDEO 328
show the
p
p
p
Y R
X R
a)
A
l
α
Robot
chassis
X 1
X 2
b)
Y R
X R
c)
A
υ
υ
l
α
Robot
chassis
d
d
A
l
Robot
chassis
Caster
wheel
B
A
B
(t)
α
Fig.24.2a–c Structures of standard wheels. (a) Passive
ﬁxed wheel, (b) passive or active, off-centered orientable
wheel, and (c) active orientable wheel without offsets
Swedish wheel. Small passive free rollers are located
along the outer rim of the wheel. Free rollers are em-
ployed in order to eliminate the nonholonomic velocity
constraint. Passive rollers are free to rotate around the
axis of rotation, which results in lateral motion of
the wheel. As a result, a driving velocity should be
controlled, while the lateral velocity is passively deter-
mined by the actuation of the other wheels. A similar
design can be seen in
VIDEO 327 .
A spherical wheel is shown in Fig. 24.3c. The ro-
tation of the sphere is constrained by rollers that make
rolling contact with the sphere. The rollers can be di-
vided into driving and supporting rollers. The sphere is

Part B | 24.2
578
Part B
Design
p
X2
X1
Y
X
b)
c)
A
l
α
γ
Robot chassis
Drive roller
Motor
ω0
ω1
ω2
Encoders
θ= 0
	
a)
Fig. 24.3 (a) Swedish wheel, (b) attachment of a Swedish
wheel, and (c) spherical wheel (after [24.1])
driven by the actuation of the driving rollers, whereas
the rolling contacts provide nonholonomic constraints,
and the resultant motion of the sphere module becomes
holonomic. This implies that the robot can be moved
with any desired linear/angular velocities at any time.
By using the spherical wheel, a holonomic omnidirec-
tional mobile robot can be developed and the robot
achieves smooth and continuous contact between the
sphere and the ground. However, the design of the
sphere-supporting mechanism is difﬁcult and the pay-
load must be quite low due to the point contact. Another
drawback is that the surface of the sphere can be pol-
luted when traveling over dirty ground and it is difﬁcult
to overcome irregular ground conditions. These draw-
backs limit the practical application of the spherical
wheel. An example of the use of spherical wheels can
be found in [24.1] and [24.2]. The spherical structure
can also be applied to special robotic transmissions; ex-
amples include the nonholonomic manipulator in [24.3]
and the passive haptic system in [24.4].
24.2.2 Kinematic Constraints
We assume, as a ﬁrst step, that the mobile robot under
study is made up of a rigid cart equipped with nonde-
formable wheels, and that it is moving on a horizontal
plane. The position of the robot on the plane is de-
scribed, with respect to an arbitrary inertial frame, by
the posture vector  D .x y /T, where x and y are
the coordinates of a reference point P of the robot cart,
while  describes the orientation of a mobile frame at-
tached to the robot, with respect to the inertial frame
(Fig. 24.4).
We assume that, during motion, the plane of each
wheel remains vertical and the wheel rotates around
its horizontal axle, whose orientation with respect to
the cart can be ﬁxed or varying. We distinguish be-
tween the two basic classes of idealized wheels, namely
conventional and the Swedish wheels. In each case,
Robot chassis
x
y
l2
l1
X1
X2
P
θ
Fig. 24.4 The posture deﬁnition of a mobile robot on
a plane

Wheeled Robots
24.2 Mobility of Wheeled Robots
579
Part B | 24.2
it is assumed that the contact between the wheel and
the ground is reduced to a single point. The kinematic
constraints result from the fact that the velocity of the
material point of the wheel in contact with the ground
is equal to zero.
For a conventional wheel, the kinematic constraints
imply that the velocity of the center of the wheel is
parallel to the wheel plane (nonslip condition) and is
proportional to the wheel rotation velocity (pure rolling
condition). For each wheel, the kinematic constraints
therefore result in two independent conditions. For
a Swedish wheel, due to the relative rotation of the
rollers with respect to the wheel, only one of the veloc-
ity components of the wheel contact point is zero. The
direction of this zero component is ﬁxed with respect
to the wheel plane and depends on the wheel construc-
tion. For such wheels, the kinematic constraints result
in only one condition.
Conventional Wheels
We now derive the general form of the kinematic con-
straints for a conventional wheel.
As shown in Fig. 24.2, there are several variations
of the conventional wheel design. First, we focus on the
off-centered orientable wheel in Fig. 24.2b. The center
of the wheel, B, is connected to the cart by a rigid rod
from A (a ﬁxed point on the cart) to B, aligned with
the wheel plane. The rod, whose length is denoted by d,
can rotate around a ﬁxed vertical axle at point A. The
position of A is speciﬁed by two constant polar coor-
dinates, l and ˛, with respect to the reference point P.
The rotation of the rod with respect to the cart is rep-
resented by the angle ˇ. The radius of the wheel is
denoted by r, and its angle of rotation around its hor-
izontal axle is denoted by '. The description therefore
involves four constant parameters: ˛, l, r, and d, and
two variables: '.t/ and ˇ.t/.
With these notations the kinematic constraints are
derived as follows.
We make the derivation explicit for the general situ-
ation corresponding to a caster wheel (Fig. 24.2b). For
ﬁxed or steering wheels one just has to consider either
the case d D 0 and constant ˇ (ﬁxed wheels), or d D 0
and variable ˇ (steering wheels).
First, we evaluate the velocity of the center of
the wheel, which results from the following vector
expression d
dtOB D d
dtOPC d
dtPAC d
dtAB. The two com-
ponents of this vector in the robot frame are expressed
as
Px cos  C Py sin   l P sin ˛ C . P C Pˇ/d cos.˛ C ˇ/
and
Px sin  CPy cos  l P cos ˛C. P C Pˇ/d sin.˛Cˇ/ :
The projections of this vector onto the direction of
the wheel plane, i. e., onto the vector (cos.˛Cˇ=2/,
sin.˛ C ˇ  =2// and the vector of the wheel axle
(cos.˛Cˇ/, sin.˛Cˇ/), are r P' and 0, respectively, cor-
responding to the pure rolling and nonslip conditions.
After some manipulations, these conditions can be
rewritten in the following compact form.
Pure Rolling Condition.
. sin.˛Cˇ/ cos.˛Cˇ/ l cos ˇ/R./ PCr P' D 0 :
(24.1)
Nonslip Condition.
. cos.˛Cˇ/ sin.˛Cˇ/dCl sin ˇ/R./ PCd Pˇ D 0 :
(24.2)
In the earlier given expressions, R./ is the orthog-
onal rotation matrix expressing the orientation of the
robot with respect to the inertial frame, i. e.,
R./ D
0
B@
cos 
sin 
0
 sin 
cos 
0
0
0
1
1
CA :
(24.3)
As said before, these general expressions can be
simpliﬁed for different types of conventional wheels.
For ﬁxed wheels, the center of the wheel is ﬁxed
with respect to the cart and the wheel orientation is
constant. This corresponds to a constant value of ˇ and
d D 0 (Fig. 24.2a). The nonslip equation (24.2) then re-
duces to
.cos.˛ Cˇ/ sin.˛ Cˇ/ l sin ˇ/R./ P D 0 : (24.4)
For steering wheels, the center of the wheel is also
ﬁxed with respect to the cart (i. e., d D 0), with ˇ time-
varying, so the nonslip equation takes the form (24.2).
This structure was already introduced in Fig. 24.2c.
The situation described by (24.1) and (24.2), with
a nonzero-length rod AB and time-varying orientation
angle ˇ corresponds to caster wheels.
Swedish Wheels. The position of a Swedish wheel
with respect to the cart is described, as for ﬁxed wheels,
by three constant parameters: ˛, ˇ, and l. An additional
parameter is required to characterize the direction, with
respect to the wheel plane, of the zero component of
the velocity at the contact point of the wheel. This pa-
rameter is , which is the angle between the axle of the
rollers and the wheel plane (Fig. 24.3b).

Part B | 24.2
580
Part B
Design
The kinematic constraints now impose only one
condition
Œ sin.˛ C ˇ C /
cos.˛ C ˇ C /
l cos.ˇ C /
 R./ P C r cos  P' D 0
(24.5)
24.2.3 Robot Configuration Variables
We now consider a wheeled robot equipped with N
wheels of the earlier described types. We use the fol-
lowing subscripts to identify quantities related to these
four types: f for ﬁxed wheels, s for steering wheels, c for
caster wheels, and sw for Swedish wheels. The number
of wheels of each type are denoted by Nf, Ns, Nc, and
Nsw, with N D Nf C Ns C Nc C Nsw.
The conﬁguration of the robot is fully described by
the following generalized coordinate vector:

Posture coordinates: the posture vector .t/ D
.x.t/ y.t/ .t//T

Orientation coordinates: the NsCNc orientation an-
gles of the steering and caster wheels, i. e., ˇ.t/ D
.ˇs.t/ ˇc.t//T

Rotation coordinates: the N rotation angles of the
wheels, i. e., '.t/ D .'f.t/ 's.t/ 'c.t/ 'sw.t//T.
This whole set of coordinates is termed as the set of
conﬁguration coordinates. The total number of conﬁg-
uration coordinates is Nf C 2Ns C 2Nc C Nsw C 3.
24.2.4 Restriction on Robot Mobility
The pure rolling conditions for ﬁxed, steering, and
caster wheels, as well as the constraints relative to the
Swedish wheels, can be written in the following com-
pact form
J1.ˇs; ˇc/R./ P C J2 P' D 0 ;
(24.6)
with
J1.ˇs; ˇc/ D
0
BBB@
J1f
J1s.ˇs/
J1c.ˇc/
J1sw
1
CCCA :
In this expression, J1f, J1s.ˇs/, J1c.ˇc/, and J1sw are, re-
spectively, .Nf3/, .Ns3/, .Nc3/, and .Nsw3/ ma-
trices, whose forms derive directly from the kinematic
constraints, while J2 is a constant .N N/ diagonal ma-
trix whose entries are the radii of the wheels, except for
the radii of the Swedish wheels which are multiplied
by cos .
The value  D =2 would correspond to the di-
rection of the zero component of the velocity being
orthogonal to the plane of the Swedish wheel. Such
a wheel would be subject to a constraint identical to the
nonslip condition for a conventional wheel; hence, los-
ing the beneﬁt of implementing a Swedish wheel. This
implies that  ¤ 
2 and that J2 is a nonsingular matrix.
The nonslip conditions for caster wheels can be
summarize as
C1c.ˇc/R./ P C C2c Pˇc D 0 ;
(24.7)
where C1c.ˇc/ is a .Nc  3/ matrix, whose entries de-
rive from the nonslip constraints (24.2), while C2c is
a constant diagonal nonsingular matrix, whose entries
are equal to d.
The last constraints relate to the nonslip conditions
for ﬁxed and steering wheels. They can be summarized
as
C
1 .ˇs/R./ P D 0 ;
(24.8)
where
C
1 .ˇs/ D
 
C1f
C1s.ˇs/
!
;
where C1f and C1s.ˇs/ are, respectively, .Nf  3/ and
.Ns  3/ matrices.
It is important to point out that the restrictions on
robot mobility result only from the conditions (24.8) in-
volving the ﬁxed and the steering wheels. These condi-
tions imply that the vector R./ P belongs to NŒC
1 .ˇs/,
the null space of the matrix C
1 .ˇs/. For any R./ P
satisfying this condition, there exists a vector P' and
a vector Pˇc satisfying, respectively, conditions (24.6)
and (24.7), because J2 and C2c are nonsingularmatrices.
Obviously rankŒC
1 .ˇs/ 	 3. If it is equal to 3
then R./ P D 0, which means that any motion in the
plane is impossible. More generally, restrictions on
robot mobility are related to the rank of C
1 .ˇs/, as will
be discussed as follows in detail.
It is worth noticing that condition (24.8) has a di-
rect geometrical interpretation. At each time instant
the motion of the robot can be viewed as an instanta-
neous rotation about the instantaneous center of rotation
(ICR), whose position with respect to the cart can be
time varying. At each instant the velocity of any point
of the cart is orthogonal to the straight line joining this
point and the ICR. This is true, in particular, for the cen-
ters of the ﬁxed and steering wheels, which are ﬁxed
points of the cart. On the other hand, the nonslip con-
dition implies that the velocity of the wheel center is
aligned with the wheel plane. These two facts imply that

Wheeled Robots
24.2 Mobility of Wheeled Robots
581
Part B | 24.2
the horizontal rotation axles of the ﬁxed and steering
wheels intersect at the ICR (Fig. 24.5). This is equiva-
lent to the condition that rankŒC
1 .ˇs/ 	 3.
24.2.5 Characterization of Robot Mobility
As said earlier, the mobility of the robot is directly
related to the rank of C
1 .ˇs/, which depends on the
design of the robot. We deﬁne the degree of mobility ım
as
ım D 3  rankŒC
1 .ˇs/ :
(24.9)
Let us ﬁrst examine the case rank.C1f/ D 2, which im-
plies that the robot has at least two ﬁxed wheels. If there
are more than two ﬁxed wheels, their axles intersect at
the ICR, whose position with respect to the cart is then
ﬁxed in such a way that the only possible motion is a ro-
tation of the cart about this ﬁxed ICR. Obviously, from
the user’s point of view, such a design is not acceptable.
We therefore assume that rank.C1f/ 	 1.
Moreover, we assume that
rankŒC
1 .ˇs/ D rank.C1f/ C rankŒC1s.ˇs/ 	 2 :
These two assumptions are equivalent to the following
set of conditions:
1. If the robot has more than one ﬁxed wheel, they are
all on a single common axle.
2. The centers of the steering wheels do not belong to
this common axle of the ﬁxed wheels.
3. The number rankŒC1s.ˇs/ is equal to the number of
steering wheels that can be oriented independently
in order to steer the robot.
We call this number the degree of steerability
ıs D rankŒC1s.ˇs/ :
(24.10)
If a robot is equipped with more than ıs steering
wheels, the motion of the extra wheels must be coordi-
nated in order to guarantee the existence of the ICR at
each instant.
We conclude that, for wheeled mobile robot of prac-
tical interest, the two deﬁned indices, ım and ıs, satisfy
the following conditions:
1. The degree of mobility satisﬁes 1 	 ım 	 3. The up-
per bound is obvious, while the lower bound means
that we consider only cases where motion is possi-
ble.
2. The degree of steerability satisﬁes 0 	 ıs 	 2. The
upper bound can be reached only for robots without
ﬁxed wheels, while the lower bound corresponds to
robots without steering wheels.
3. The following is satisﬁed: 2 	 ım C ıs 	 3.
ICR
a)
b)
ICR
Fig.24.5a,b The instantaneous center of rotation. (a) A car-like
robot; (b) a three-steering-wheels robot
The case ım C ıs D 1 is not acceptable because it
corresponds to the rotation of the robot about a ﬁxed
ICR. The cases ım  2 and ıs D 2 are excluded because
according to the assumptions, ıs D 2 implies ım D 1.
These conditions imply that only ﬁve structures are of
practical interest, corresponding to the ﬁve pairs (ım, ıs)
satisfying the aforementioned inequalities, according to
the following array
ım
3
2
2
1
1
ıs
0
0
1
1
2
In the following, each type of structure will be des-
ignated by using a denomination of the form type (ım,
ıs) robot.
24.2.6 Five Classes
of Wheeled Mobile Robots
We now brieﬂy describe the ﬁve classes of wheeled
robot structures, pointing out the mobility restriction in-
herent to each class. Details and examples can be found
in Sect. 24.3 and in [24.5].
Type (3,0) Robots
These robots have no ﬁxed and no steering wheels
and are equipped only with Swedish or caster wheels.
Such robots are called omnimobile, because they
have full mobility in the plane, which means that
they are able to move in any direction without any
reorientation.
Type (2,0) Robots
These robots have no steering wheels, but either one
or several ﬁxed wheels with a common axle. Mo-
bility is restricted in the sense that, at a given pos-
ture .t/, the velocity P.t/ is constrained to belong to
a two-dimensional distribution spanned by the vector
ﬁelds RT./s1 and RT./s2, where s1 and s2 are two
constant vectors spanning N.C1f/. A typical example
of such a robot is the wheelchair.

Part B | 24.3
582
Part B
Design
Type (2,1) Robots
These robots have no ﬁxed wheels and at least one
steering wheel. If there is more than one steering
wheel, their orientations must be coordinated in such
a way that rankŒC1s.ˇs/ D ıs D 1. The velocity P.t/
is constrained to belong to a two-dimensional dis-
tribution spanned by the vector ﬁelds RT./s1.ˇs/
and RT./s2.ˇs/, where s1.ˇs/ and s2.ˇs/ are two vec-
tors spanning N.C1s.ˇs//.
Type (1,1) Robots
These robots have one or several ﬁxed wheels on a sin-
gle common axle, and also one or several steering
wheels, with the conditions that their centers are not lo-
cated on the common axle of the ﬁxed wheels, and that
their orientations are coordinated. The velocity P.t/ is
constrained to belong to a one-dimensional distribution
parameterized by the orientation angle of one arbitrarily
chosen steering wheel. Mobile robots built on the model
of a conventional car (often called car-like robots) be-
long to this class.
Type (1,2) Robots
These robots have no ﬁxed wheels, but at least two
steering wheels. If there are more than two steering
wheels, then their orientation must be coordinated in
order to satisfy the condition rankŒC1s.ˇs/ D ıs D 2.
The velocity P.t/ is constrained to belong to a one-
dimensional distribution parameterized by the orienta-
tion angles of two arbitrarily chosen steering wheels.
24.3 Wheeled Robot Structures
There are many design alternatives for wheeled mobile
robots. Design problems of a single-body mobile robot
include the selection of wheel types, the placement of
wheels, and the determination of the kinematic parame-
ters. Design objectives should be speciﬁed according to
the target environments and tasks, as well as the ini-
tial and operational costs of a robot. In this section,
robot structures are classiﬁed according to the number
of wheels, and then features will be introduced focusing
on commonly adopted designs.
24.3.1 Robots with One Wheel
A robot with a single wheel is basically unstable with-
out dynamic control in order to maintain its balance of
the body. A typical example is a unicycle. As a variation
of a unicycle, a robot with a rugby-ball-shaped wheel
can be used in order to improve stability in the lateral
direction, as studied in [24.6].
A spherical robot can also be considered as a single-
wheel robot. A balancing mechanism such as a spinning
wheel is employed to achieve dynamic stability. This
approach has advantages including high maneuverabil-
ity and low rolling resistance. However, single-wheel
robots are rarely used in practical applications, because
additional balancing mechanisms are required, control
is difﬁcult, and pose estimation by pure dead reckoning
is not available. An example of a spherical robot can be
found in [24.7].
24.3.2 Robots with Two Wheels
In general, there are two types of two-wheel robots,
as shown in Fig. 24.6. Figure 24.6a shows a bicycle-
type robot. It is common to steer a front wheel and
to drive a rear wheel. Since the dynamic stability of
a bicycle-type robot increases with its speed, a bal-
ancing mechanism is not necessarily required. The
advantage of this approach is that the robot width can be
reduced. However, a bicycle type is rarely used because
it cannot maintain its pose when the robot stands still.
Figure 24.6b shows an inverted-pendulum-type robot.
It is a two-wheel differential drive robot.
It is possible to achieve static stability by accurately
placing the center of gravity on the wheel axle. How-
ever, it is common to apply dynamic balancing control,
which is similar to the conventional control problem for
an inverted pendulum. The size of a robot can be re-
Active fixed wheel
Robot
chassis
Robot
chassis
Active fixed wheel
Active fixed wheel
Passive, actively
steerable wheel
a)
b)
Fig. 24.6 (a) Bicycle-type robot and (b) inverted-pendu-
lum-type robot

Wheeled Robots
24.3 Wheeled Robot Structures
583
Part B | 24.3
duced by using two-wheel robots, when compared with
robots with more than three wheels. A typical applica-
tion of a pendulum-type robot is to design a structure as
a four-wheel robot, consisting of two pendulum robots
connected. Then, the robot can climb stairs by lifting its
front wheels while the robot reaches the stair. A major
disadvantage is that control effort is always required for
dynamic balancing. Examples of inverted-pendulum-
type robots can be found in [24.8] and [24.9].
24.3.3 Robots with Three Wheels
Since a robot with three wheels is statically stable and
has a simple structure, it is one of the most widely used
structures for wheeled robots. There are a large number
of designs according to the choice of individual wheel
types. Every wheel introduced in Sect. 24.2.1 can be
used to construct three-wheel robots. In this section,
ﬁve popular design examples are described (Fig. 24.7):
1. Two-wheel differential drive
2. Synchronous drive
3. An omnimobile robot with Swedish wheels
Passive caster wheel
Steering pulley
Steering motor
Steering
wheels
L
L
L
P
P
P
X2
X1
Caster
wheel
Caster
wheel
Steering belt
Drive belt
Drive motor
Wheel
Drive pulley
v (t)
v (t)
(x,y)
v (t)
ω (t)
ω (t)
ω (t)
Y
X
Active fixed wheel
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
x2
x1
Y
X
X2
X1
X2
X1
Fig. 24.7 (a) Two-wheel differential drive, (b) synchronous drive, (c) omnimobile robot with Swedish wheels, (d) omn-
imobile robot with active caster wheels, and (e) omnidirectional robot with active steerable wheels
4. An omnimobile robot with active caster wheels
5. An omnidirectional robot with steerable wheels.
Two-Wheel Differential-Drive Robot
A two-wheel differential-drive robot is one of the most
popular designs and is composed of two active ﬁxed
wheels and one passive caster wheel. The robot can be
classiﬁed as a type (2,0) robot in the nomenclature of
Sect. 24.2.6. It is possible to extend the robot to a four-
wheel robot by adding passive caster wheels. The major
advantages of the robot can be summarized as follows:

A simple mechanical structure, a simple kinematic
model, and low fabrication cost.

A zero turning radius is available. For a cylin-
drical robot, the obstacle-free space can easily be
computed by expanding obstacle boundaries by the
robot radius r.

Systematic errors are easy to calibrate.
On the other hand, its drawbacks are:

Difﬁculty of moving irregular surfaces. When the
robot goes over uneven surfaces, its orientation

Part B | 24.3
584
Part B
Design
might change abruptly if one of the active wheels
loses contact with the ground.

Only bidirectional movement is available.
Synchronous-Drive Robot
A synchronous-drive robot can be built by using cen-
tered or off-centered orientable wheels. The steering
and driving motions of each wheel are mechanically
coupled by chains or belts, and the motions are actuated
synchronously, so the wheel orientations are always
identical. The kinematic model of a synchronous drive
robot is equivalent to that of the unicycle, a type (1,1)
robot. Therefore, omnidirectional motion, i. e., motion
in any direction can be achieved by steering the wheel
orientations to the desired velocity direction. How-
ever, the orientation of the robot chassis cannot be
changed. Sometimes a turret is employed to change the
body orientation. The most signiﬁcant advantage of the
synchronous-drive robot is that omnidirectional move-
ment can be achieved by using only two actuators. Since
the mechanical structure guarantees synchronous steer-
ing and driving motions, less control effort is required
for motion control. Other advantages include that
odometry information is relatively accurate and driving
forces are evenly distributed among all the wheels. The
drawbacks of this approach can be summarized as:

Complicated mechanical structure.

If backlash or loose coupling is present in the chain
transmission, velocity differences between wheels
may occur.

In order to achieve omnidirectional movement, the
wheel orientations should be aligned to the desired
velocity direction before movement, due to the non-
holonomic velocity constraints.
Omnimobile Robot with Swedish Wheels
The omnimobile robot with Swedish wheels corre-
sponds to type (3,0) in the nomenclature of Sect. 24.2.6.
At least three Swedish wheels are required to build
a holonomic omnidirectional robot. A major advantage
of using the Swedish wheel is that omnidirectional mo-
bile robots can be easily constructed. At least three
Swedish wheels are required to build a holonomic om-
nidirectional robot. Since omnidirectional robots can be
built without using active steering of wheel modules,
the mechanical structures of actuating parts can have
simple structures. However, the mechanical design of
a wheel becomes slightly complicated. One drawback
of the Swedish wheel is that there is a vertical vibra-
tion because of discontinuous contacts during motion.
In order to solve this problem, a variety of mechani-
cal designs have been proposed; examples can be found
in [24.10] and [24.11]. Another drawback is its rela-
tively low durability when compared to conventional
tires. An example of a robot using Swedish wheels can
be found in [24.12].
Omnimobile Robot
with Active Caster Wheels
A holonomic omnidirectional robot can be constructed
by using at least two active caster wheels, and the robot
also belongs to type (3,0). The robot can be controlled
to generate arbitrary linear and angular velocities re-
gardless of the wheel orientations. Since the robot
uses conventional tires, the disadvantages of Swedish
wheels, for example, vertical vibrations or durability
problems, can be solved. An example can be found
in [24.13]. The disadvantages of this robot can be sum-
marized as follows:

Since the location of the ground contact point (i. e.,
footprint) changes with respect to the robot chassis,
instability can take place when the distance between
the wheels is too short.

If the robot switches its movement to the reverse di-
rection, an abrupt change of wheel orientations may
take place. This is called the shopping-cart effect,
which may result in instantaneous high steering ve-
locities.

If a driving motor is directly attached to the wheel,
wires to the motor will be wound due to steering
motions. In order to avoid this, a gear train should
be employed to transmit the input angular veloc-
ity from the driving motor, which is attached to the
robot chassis. In this case, the mechanical structure
becomes quite complicated.

If a robot is equipped with more than two active
caster wheel modules, more than four actuators are
used. Since the minimum number of actuator to
achieve holonomic omnidirectional motion is three,
this is an overactuated system. Therefore, actuators
should be accurately controlled in a synchronous
way.
Omnidirectional Robot
with Active Steerable Wheels
Centered orientable wheels are also employed to build
omnidirectional robots; at least two modules are re-
quired. A signiﬁcant difference between the active
caster wheel and the centered orientable wheel is that
the wheel orientation should always be aligned with the
desired direction of velocity direction, as computed by
inverse kinematics. This fact implies that this robot is
nonholonomic and omnidirectional: it is a type (1,2)
robot. The control problem is addressed in [24.14]. The
mechanical drawbacks are similar to those of using
active caster wheels (i. e., many actuators and compli-

Wheeled Robots
24.3 Wheeled Robot Structures
585
Part B | 24.3
cated mechanical structures). Since the driving motor is
directly attached to the driving axis in many cases, al-
lowable steering angles are limited in order to prevent
wiring problems.
There are a lot of design candidates for three-wheel
robots, other than the ﬁve designs described earlier.
They can be classiﬁed and analyzed according to the
scheme presented in Sect. 24.1. The aforementioned
designs can be extended to four-wheel robots to im-
prove stability. Additional wheels can be passive wheels
without adding additional kinematic constraints. Active
wheels can also be added and should be controlled by
solving the inverse kinematics problem. Four-wheeled
robots require suspension to maintain contact with the
ground to prevent wheels from ﬂoating on irregular
surfaces.
24.3.4 Robots with Four Wheels
Among the various four-wheel robots, we focus on
the car-like structure. The car-like structure has been
called as the Ackermann steering geometry that was
shown in Fig. 24.3c. The front two wheels should be
synchronously steered to keep the same instantaneous
center of rotation. It is clear that the orientations of two
front wheels are slightly different because the curva-
tures of rotation are different. As a result, this solution
is kinematically equivalent to a single orientable wheel
and the robot can be classiﬁed as a type (1,1) robot.
A major advantage of a car-like robot is that it is
stable during high-speed motion. However, it requires
a slightly complicated steering mechanism. If the rear
wheels are actuated, a differential gear is required to
obtain pure rolling of the rear wheels during the turning
motion. If the steering angle of the front wheel cannot
reach 90ı, the turning radius becomes nonzero. There-
fore, parking motion control in a cluttered environment
becomes difﬁcult.
24.3.5 Special Applications
of Wheeled Robots
Articulated Robots
A robot can be extended to an articulated robot, which
is composed of a robot and trailers. A typical exam-
ple is the luggage-transporting trailer system at airports.
By exploiting trailers, a mobile robot obtains vari-
ous practical advantages. For example, modular and
reconﬁgurable robots can change their conﬁguration ac-
cording to service tasks. A common design is a car with
multiple passive trailers, which is the simplest design
of an articulated robot.
VIDEO 326 shows another ex-
ample of a trailer robot. From the viewpoint of control,
some signiﬁcant issues have been made clear, including
s
z
θ
Fig. 24.8 An active trailer system (after [24.16])
2
1
4
3
Fig. 24.9 A mobile robot for rough terrain (after [24.17])
a proof of controllability and the development of open-
and closed-loop controllers using canonical forms such
as the chained form. The design issues for trailer sys-
tems are the selection of wheel types and decisions
regarding the link parameters. In practical applications,
it is advantageous if trailers can move along the path of
the towing robot. Passive trailers can follow the path of
a towing robot within a small error by using a special
design of passive steering mechanism for trailers; see,
for example, [24.15].
On the other hand, active trailers can be used. There
are two types of active trailers. A ﬁrst approach is to
actuate wheels of trailers. The connecting joints are
passive, and two-wheel differential-drive robots can be
used as active trailers. By using this type of active trail-
ers, accurate path-following control can be achieved.
The second approach is to actuate connecting joints.
The wheels of the trailer are passively driven. By appro-
priate actuation of the connecting joints, the robot can
move without wheel actuation, by snake-like motions.
As an alternative design, we can use an active prismatic
joint to connect trailers, in order to lift the neighboring
trailer. By allowing vertical motion, a trailer system can
climb stairs and traverse rough terrain. Examples of ac-
tive trailers can be found in [24.16].

Part B | 24.4
586
Part B
Design
Hybrid Robots
A fundamental difﬁculty of using wheels is that they
can only be used on ﬂat surfaces. To overcome this
problem, wheels are often attached to a special link
mechanism. Each wheel is equipped with independent
actuators and a linkage mechanism enables the robot
to adapt its conﬁguration to irregular ground condi-
tions (
VIDEO 329 ). A typical design can be found
in [24.17] and can be understood as a hybrid robot
that is a combination of a legged robot and a wheeled
robot. Another hybrid example is a robot equipped with
both tracks and wheels. Wheels and tracks have com-
plementary advantages and disadvantages. Wheeled
robots are energy efﬁcient; however, tracked robots
can traverse rough terrain. Therefore, a hybrid robot
can selectively choose its driving mechanism according
to environmental conditions, although fabrication cost
increases.
24.4 Wheel–Terrain Interaction Models
A wheeled robot’s mobility properties are governed
by forces generated at the wheel–terrain contact in-
terface. The ability to accurately model wheel–terrain
interaction forces is therefore an important aspect of
robot design, simulation, and control. These forces
are strongly inﬂuenced by the relative stiffness of the
wheel and terrain. Generally, there are four possible
wheel–terrain interaction cases. The ﬁrst case is that of
a rigid wheel traveling on rigid terrain (Fig. 24.10a).
The second case is that of a rigid wheel traveling on
deformable terrain (Fig. 24.10b). The third case is that
of a deformable wheel traveling on deformable terrain
(Fig. 24.10c). The fourth case is that of a deformable
wheel traveling on rigid terrain (Fig. 24.10d). Models
for these four cases are presented as follows. It should
be noted that while many different types of models (i. e.,
ﬁnite element, discrete element, empirical) have been
developed for each of these four cases, the focus here is
on analytical models that are broadly suitable for anal-
ysis, simulation, design, and control purposes.
24.4.1 Rigid Wheels on Rigid Terrain
Many robots employ wheels made of metal, stiff rubber,
or other materials that deform very little when subject
to loading experienced during operation. When oper-
ated on stiff surfaces such as indoor ﬂooring, pavement,
or stone, wheel–terrain interaction can be reasonably
approximated as a point contact. An interaction model
based on classical Coulomb friction can then be em-
ployed to describe bounds on available tractive forces,
Fx, and lateral forces, Fy, as a function of the load on
the wheel, W, for a robot with n wheels traveling on
a surface with coefﬁcient of friction 
Fxi 	 xWi ;
i D 1 : : : n ;
(24.11)
Fyi 	 yWi ;
i D 1 : : : n :
(24.12)
Since the frictional force can be generated in any
direction, and its magnitude is limited, a bound on the
norm of the frictional and lateral forces can be ex-
pressed as
 Fxi
xWi
2
C
 Fyi
yWi
2
D 1 ;
i D 1 : : : n :
(24.13)
Equation (24.13) represents a concept known as the
friction ellipse (Fig. 24.11). When the effective friction
is equal in all directions the ellipse becomes a circle.
24.4.2 Rigid Wheels on Deformable Terrain
Robotic locomotion in outdoor, off-road terrain fre-
quently results in deformation of the terrain, especially
when the terrain is composed of a deformable mate-
rial such as sand, silt, loam, or clay. When the wheel
is constructed of a rigid material such as metal or stiff
rubber, or the tire inﬂation pressure is high enough such
that tire deformation is small, wheel–terrain interaction
occurs along an arc of the wheel, rather than at a sin-
gle point (Fig. 24.10b). In such scenarios, the Coulomb
friction model described in Sect. 24.4.1 does not accu-
rately represent the relationship between the wheel load
ω
ω
ω
ω
b)
a)
c)
d)
Fig.24.10a–d Four cases of wheel–terrain interaction me-
chanics: (a) rigid wheel traveling over rigid terrain,
(b) rigid wheel traveling over deformable terrain, (c) de-
formable wheel traveling over deformable terrain, and
(d) deformable wheel traveling over rigid terrain

Wheeled Robots
24.4 Wheel–Terrain Interaction Models
587
Part B | 24.4
x
Fx
F
Fy
Wμx
Wμy
y
Fig. 24.11 Illustration of friction ellipse concept to repre-
sent constraint on longitudinal and lateral friction
and tractive forces. This is because the mechanism for
force generation derives primarily from shearing along
failure planes in the terrain, rather than from frictional
contact at a point on the wheel–terrain interface.
Models of the interaction of rigid wheels on de-
formable surfaces were developed by Bekker in the
1950s and 1960s in the context of large military ve-
hicles [24.18]. Bekker’s research gave rise to the dis-
cipline of terramechanics, i. e., the study of vehicle-
terrain interaction phenomena. Bekker’s terramechanics
models have subsequently been applied to robotic sys-
tems at a range of sizes [24.19] and [24.20]. However,
Bekker performed his original analyses in the context
of large military vehicles, which were typically several
meters in length and with gross vehicle weights exceed-
ing 500 kg. The accuracy of such models when used to
analyze the performance of small robotic systems re-
mains an open research question [24.21] and [24.22].
A description of terramechanics models for the case
of rigid wheels on deformable surfaces is presented
in Chap. 55, in the context of Space Robotics. How-
ever, Chap. 55 assumes that the wheel is constructed
of a rigid material such as metal, which is typical for
planetary exploration rovers but rare for robots oper-
ating on Earth. As noted earlier, a pneumatic tire will
behave as a rigid wheel if the average tire ground pres-
sure, which is a function of the tire carcass stiffness and
inﬂation pressure, exceeds some critical ground pres-
sure. The average tire ground pressure can be obtained
experimentally by measuring the tire contact patch area
while the tire is subjected to a series of known vertical
loads and inﬂation pressures. The critical ground pres-
sure is deﬁned as
pgcr D
kc
b C k¥

1
.2nC1/ 
3W
.3  n/bti
p
D

2n
2nC1
;
(24.14)
where kc, k¥, n are the soil-dependent parameters, b is
the smallest dimension of the (typically rectangular)
wheel–terrain contact patch, bti is the tire width, W is
the vertical load on the tire, and D is the tire diameter.
If the average tire ground pressure exceeds the crit-
ical ground pressure, a pneumatic tire can be modeled
as a rigid wheel interacting with a deformable surface.
This scenario is governed by the equations presented
in Chap. 55. If the average tire ground pressure does
not exceed the critical ground pressure, a pneumatic tire
can be modeled either as a deformable wheel interact-
ing with deformable terrain, or as a deformable wheel
interacting with rigid terrain. Models of these scenarios
are presented in Sects. 24.4.3 and 24.4.4.
24.4.3 Deformable Tires
on Deformable Terrain
When the average tire ground pressure does not exceed
the critical ground pressure, both the tire and the terrain
surface may undergo deformation. Accurate modeling
of this interaction thus requires consideration of phe-
nomena related to both soil deformation (most notably,
soil compaction, and shear deformation) and tire defor-
mation. Several semiempirical models for this scenario,
based on Bekker theory, have been developed in recent
years.
A simple approach to modeling in this interaction
scenario was initially proposed by Bekker, and further
developed by Harnisch [24.23]. This approach relies
on the observation that tire deformation serves to in-
crease the size of the wheel–terrain contact patch, and
thus reduce the average ground pressure and minimize
sinkage. Bekker proposed the substitute circle concept,
which embodies the notion that the deformable tire can
be equivalently represented by a rigid tire of increased
diameter, to yield identical sinkage (Fig. 24.12). The di-
ameter of the larger rigid tire can be computed via the
following method:
1. Assuming zero slip, sinkage for the original tire di-
ameter D, assumed to be rigid, is calculated for the
vertical load W and soil parameters.
2. Knowing the tire load-deﬂection characteristics, for
the given inﬂation pressure the tire deﬂection ı can
be calculated.
3. The diameter of the larger substitute circle D0 will
correspond to the diameter of the circle that passes
through P1, P2, and P3.
Once the outer circle diameter is known, all other
quantities will be calculated following the standard
methodology presented in Chap. 55, substituting D0 for
the original wheel diameter D.

Part B | 24.4
588
Part B
Design
P1
δ
P2
D
D'
P3
Fig. 24.12 Illustration of substitute circle concept
An alternative approach, based on a more physi-
cally realistic model of the deformed tire geometry, was
proposed by Wong [24.24]. Here, the tire geometry is
represented as a circular arc with a perfectly ﬂat (i. e.,
horizontal) base (Fig. 24.13). The pressure distribution
under the ﬂat section BC is assumed to be uniform, and
equal to the average ground pressure of the tire pg. Dis-
regarding shear effects and soil elastic rebound (section
CD), it is possible to calculate the tire deﬂection ı by
balancing vertical forces
W D bpglt C WAB ;
(24.15)
where b is the tire width, lt is the length of the ﬂat sec-
tion BC, and WAB is the vertical reaction exerted by the
soil along the undeformed tire section AB
WAB D

b
k
l C k¥
 p
D.z0 C ı/n1

.3  n/.z0 C ı/
3
2  .3  n/ı
3
2  3z0
p
ı
3
;
(24.16)
A
B
C
D
lt
θC
θr
θf
θC
δ
Fig. 24.13 Diagram of deformable wheel traveling over
deformable terrain
where D is the undeformed tire diameter and z0 is the
static sinkage that can be calculated through standard
pressure–sinkage relations
z0 D
8
ˆˆ<
ˆˆ:

pg
.kc=lt/Ck
 1
n
.lt < b/

pg
.kc=b/Ck¥
 1
n
.lt  b/
;
(24.17)
where lt D 2
p
Dı  ı2 is the contact patch length. Al-
though not strictly correct, the tire ground pressure
pg can be approximated by the tire inﬂation pressure,
a known variable. Following this assumption, it is pos-
sible to solve (24.16) for the tire deﬂection ı.
Once the deformed tire shape has been calculated,
all other relevant quantities (i. e., sinkage, drawbar
force, and torque) can be calculated. Since the tire pro-
ﬁle is nonsmooth, the normal and tangential stresses are
described by piecewise expressions. The vertical load
balance can be written as
W D br
c
Z
r
 cos    sin /d C bDpg sin c
C br
f
Z
c
. cos  C  sin /d :
(24.18)
The aforementioned equation can be solved for the
entry angle f. The angle c can be derived from the tire
deﬂected shape. Once the tire-terrain geometry is de-
termined, the sinkage can be found. Note that this new
sinkage will differ from the static sinkage z0. It is then
possible to calculate drawbar pull Fx and driving torque
Fx D br
c
Z
r
. cos  C  sin /d C b
lt
Z
0
dx
C br
f
Z
c
. cos  C  sin /d ;
(24.19)
T D br2
c
Z
r
d C br cos c
lt
Z
0
dx C br2
f
Z
c
d :
(24.20)
Another ﬂexible tire model developed by Senatore
and Sandu is similar to the approach proposed by Wong,
however it calculates the tire deﬂection as a function
of inﬂation pressure, and also models multi-pass ef-
fects [24.25]. Generally speaking, all of the ﬂexible tire
models proposed to date have various advantages and
drawbacks, and none have gained universal approval in
the research community.

Wheeled Robots
24.5 Wheeled Robot Suspensions
589
Part B | 24.5
24.4.4 Deformable Tires on Rigid Terrain
In scenarios where the tire stiffness is signiﬁcantly
lower than the terrain stiffness, only the tire will expe-
rience signiﬁcant deformation. This scenario has been
studied extensively in the automotive community, since
it is the typical interaction scenario for passenger and
commercial vehicles operating on paved roads. Here,
two common models of steady-state tire–terrain inter-
action are brieﬂy described: the brush model and the
magic formula model [24.26].
The brush model models the tire contact patch as
a row of elastic bristles in contact with the ground. Car-
cass, belt, and tread element compliance is captured by
a lumped bristle compliance. For the case of pure lon-
gitudinal slip, the tractive force can be calculated as
Fx D 2cpxa2 Vsx
Vx
;
(24.21)
where cpx is the longitudinal tread element stiffness
per unit length and other quantities are illustrated in
Fig. 24.14.
In a similar manner, the lateral force can be calcu-
lated as follows
Fy D 2cpya2˛ ;
(24.22)
where ˛ is the slip angle. As previously discussed for
the case of rigid wheels on rigid terrain, combined slip
operation will limit the availability of longitudinal and
lateral thrust [24.26].
The magic formula model is an empirical model
that has found widespread application due to its
ﬂexibility and reduced computational burden. The
model is based on a combination of trigonometric
functions that generate a curve that (usually) passes
through the origin, reaches a peak value, and then tends
to a horizontal asymptote: this behavior is typical of
force/moment versus slip characteristics of modern
tires, regardless of tire size, construction, inﬂation
pressure, and other characteristics. The general form of
the magic formula model is
y D D sinfC arctanŒBx  E.Bx  arctan Bx/g ;
(24.23)
re
Vx
Vsx
a
S
Fig. 24.14 Brush tire model for analyzing interaction of
deformable tire and rigid terrain
SV
SH
D
X
x
Y
y
arctan (BCD)
Fig. 24.15 Diagram illustrating inﬂuence of parameters of
magic tire model
with Y.X/ D y.x/ C SV and x D X C SH. Here, Y repre-
sents the output variable, which may be Fx, Fy or Mz,
and X represents the input variable, which may be tan ˛
or k (i. e., the lateral or longitudinal slip). The relation
also contains several empirically determined values, as
follows: B represents a stiffness factor; C a shape fac-
tor; D a peak value; E a curvature factor; SH a horizontal
shift; and SV a vertical shift. These factors are illustrated
in Fig. 24.15.
24.5 Wheeled Robot Suspensions
A suspension is a system of linkages, springs, dampers,
and actuators that govern the relative motion between
a robot’s wheels and body. These mechanisms include
a degree of freedom allowing the wheel to spin, and op-
tional degrees of freedom for steering and vertical trans-
lation. Suspension mechanisms are useful when driving
over uneven surfaces for several reasons. First, a sus-
pension allows the wheels to maintain contact with the
ground despite disturbances from the uneven ground
surface, which allows generation of traction, braking,
and cornering forces. Additionally, suspensions provide
load-bearing and dissipative elements (i. e., springs,

Part B | 24.5
590
Part B
Design
dampers, and active or semiactive actuators) to mitigate
the effect of disturbances on robot body motion, and
thus allow for improved obstacle negotiation and sen-
sor or payload stabilization. Key issues in suspension
design include the design of suspension linkage kine-
matics and selection of load-bearing and dissipative el-
ements.
Suspension linkage kinematics are designed to al-
low vertical displacement of the wheels. Typical sus-
pension mechanisms include simple prismatic joints,
rotational joints with a wheel attached to a trailing arm,
and 4-bar linkages. For car-like wheeled robots, sub-
stantial inspiration can be drawn from the design of
passenger vehicle suspensions, which has received vast
research attention [24.27]. A comprehensive treatment
of the design of suspension linkage kinematics is be-
yond the scope of this chapter. Interested readers are
referred to [24.28].
The selection of load-bearing and dissipative ele-
ments is typically based on analysis of low-order mod-
els of the suspension subject to expected operational
conditions. Common methods for modeling passive and
semiactive suspensions are presented in the following.
Analysis of these models allows for principled selection
of springs, dampers, and active or semiactive actuators
that form the basis of nearly all wheeled robot suspen-
sions.
24.5.1 Passive Suspension Dynamics
Arguably the most common passive suspension design
consists of a parallel spring and damper mounted be-
tween the robot body and wheels. A simple model for
analyzing the vertical dynamics of this suspension is
commonly referred to as the quarter car model [24.29]
and is illustrated in Fig. 24.16. The fraction of body
mass supported by the suspension element, mb, is con-
nected to a wheel with mass mw by a spring element
with stiffness ks and a damping element with damping
mb
mw
ks
kw
zw
zu
zb
bs
mb
mw
ks
kw
zw
zu
zb
bb
bw
a)
b)
Fig.24.16a,b Quarter car model for passive suspension
modelling (a) and quarter car model with ideal sky-hook
semi-active suspension control (b)
coefﬁcient bs. The wheel stiffness is denoted by kw, and
transmits vertical excitation from the uneven terrain sur-
face. The heights of the body mass, wheel mass, and
terrain surface are given by zb, zw, and zu, respectively.
A state vector x for this model is composed of
the suspension displacement ds D zb zw, wheel spring
displacement dw D zw  zu, and velocities Pzb, Pzw, as
shown in (24.24), along with a linear state space
model (24.25)–(24.27). Note that the input to the model
is the vertical terrain velocity Pzu. This is a convenient
formulation for linear systems analysis since Pzu can be
modeled as white noise with intensity proportional to
the vehicle’s forward speed and a road roughness pa-
rameter [24.29].
x D
0
BB@
ds
dw
Pzb
Pzw
1
CCA
(24.24)
Px D Ax C Bu
(24.25)
A D
0
BB@
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
ks=mb
0
bs=mb
bs=mb
ks=mw
kw=mw
bs=mw
bs=mw
1
CCA
(24.26)
B D
0
BB@
0
1
0
0
1
CCA :
(24.27)
To investigate the properties of this model, transfer
functions G.s/ D Y.s/=U.s/ are computed for outputs
of interest y D Cx as
G.s/ D C.sI  A/1B :
(24.28)
With a white noise input, all frequencies are equally
represented. Thus, the magnitude of the transfer func-
tion jG.j!/j at a given frequency ! represents the
frequency response of each output. Two outputs are of
particular interest for suspension design purposes: the
wheel displacement d Pw and body acceleration Rzb. This
is because the wheel displacement corresponds to vari-
ations in the wheel contact force, and thus informs the
road holding and maneuvering capability of the robot.
The body acceleration represents the amount of vibra-
tion experienced by the sensors and payloads mounted
on the robot body.
The output matrix for the wheel displacement dw is
C D .0
1
0
0/ ;
(24.29)
and the output matrix for the body acceleration Rzb is
C D

 ks
mb
0
 bs
mb
bs
mb

:
(24.30)

Wheeled Robots
24.5 Wheeled Robot Suspensions
591
Part B | 24.5
10−1
100
101
102
10−3
10−2
10−1
Frequency (Hz)
Magnitude
Wheel displacement
ζ = 0.2
ζ = 0.7
ζ = 1.2
10−1
100
101
102
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
Frequency (Hz)
Magnitude
Wheel displacement
bw = bb
bw = 0.5 bb
bw = 0
a)
b)
Fig.24.17a,b Wheel displacement frequency response for passive suspension (a) and semiactive suspension. Wheel dis-
placement frequency corresponds to wheel contact force variation and road holding capability
10−1
100
101
102
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
Frequency (Hz)
Magnitude
Body acceleration
ζ = 0.2
ζ = 0.7
ζ = 1.2
10−1
100
101
102
10−4
10−2
100
102
Frequency (Hz)
Magnitude
Body acceleration
bw = bb
bw = 0.5 bb
bw = 0
a)
b)
Fig.24.18a,b Body acceleration frequency response for passive suspension (a) and semiactive suspension (b). Body
acceleration frequency corresponds to the vibration of sensors and payloads mounted on the robot body
The frequency response of wheel displacement and
body acceleration are shown in Figs 24.17 and 24.18,
respectively. These plots are shown with the follow-
ing representative parameter values for a passenger
vehicle: the ride frequency !b D
p
ks=mb D 2   rad=s,
the wheel hop frequency !w D
p
kw=mw D 20   rad=s,
the mass ratio 	 D mw=mb D 0:1, and the damping ra-
tio  D bs=.2pksmb/ D .0:2; 0:7; 1:2/. Various damp-
ing ratios are shown to illustrate the behavior of
underdamped, critically damped, and over-damped
suspensions.
For the underdamped case, where  D 0:2, reso-
nant peaks (which are generally undesirable) exist in
the frequency response near !b and !w for both the
wheel displacement and body acceleration. For the
over-damped case, where  D 1:2, the peak response
occurs between the resonant peaks. For the (approxi-
mately) critically damped case, where  D 0:7, the peak
responses are reduced, and for this reason many suspen-
sion are designed to exhibit critical damping.
24.5.2 Semiactive Suspension Dynamics
The introduction of controllable actuators to the sus-
pension allows for shaping of the system’s dynamic
response, and can improve road holding performance

Part B | 24.6
592
Part B
Design
and reduce body vibration. Suspension systems inte-
grated with controllable actuators are referred to as
active or semiactive suspensions. Active suspensions
refer to systems with powered rotational or linear actua-
tors capable of both supplying and absorbing signiﬁcant
amounts of energy, such that the actuator effectively
replaces the passive components in a traditional suspen-
sion. Such systems are rare due to their complexity and
cost. A simpler and more inexpensive (and therefore
more common) approach to controllable suspensions
is to employ semiactive elements. This refers to ele-
ments that can absorb energy in a controlled manner,
such as active (e.g., magnetorheological) ﬂuid dampers.
Semiactive suspensions can be modeled in a manner
similar to passive suspensions with a time-varying, pos-
itive damping coefﬁcient bs.t/  0.
Semiactive suspension control schemes attempt
to control the damping coefﬁcient bs.t/ to emulate
dampers with coefﬁcients b, b acting on the absolute ve-
locities of the body and wheels, in order to reduce the
effect of wheel vibration on the robot body. A common
technique known as a sky-hook controller is illustrated
in Fig. 24.16. The technique can be approximated by
applying the damper force F given in the following.
Note that a semiactive system can only approximate this
control, as F is constrained as F.Pz  Pz/ 	 0.
F D bPz C bPz
(24.31)
To illustrate the potential improvement achievable
by the use of a semiactive suspension with a sky-hook
controller, frequency responses of the semiactive sus-
pension quarter car model with F given earlier are
plotted in Figs 24.17 and 24.18. The model parame-
ters are identical to the values from the previous section
for critical damping  D 0:7, with damping coefﬁcients
b D b and b D .b; 0:5b;0/. Note that the case b D b is
identical to the passive, critically damped case.
With no wheel damping, b D 0, both frequency
responses are improved for !  !, and the body ac-
celeration response is improved for !  !. Near !,
however, there exist substantial resonant peaks for both
outputs. With moderate wheel damping b D 0:5b, the
amplitude of the resonant peaks near ! are reduced and
both peak responses are reduced, though performance
improvements of b D 0 are not matched for frequencies
far from !.
While the sky-hook and other suspension control
algorithms can improve the dynamic response of the ve-
hicle, it is important to note some inherent trade-offs in
semiactive and active suspension control. It has been
proven that road holding and attenuation of body vi-
bration can be concurrently improved through active
control for frequencies below the wheel hop frequency,
! [24.29]. At frequencies above !, however, any at-
tempts to improve one of these quantities necessarily
causes the other to degrade.
24.6 Conclusions
Wheels are the most commonly employed running
gear for mobile robots due to their relative simplic-
ity, robustness, and low cost. The number of possible
wheeled mobile robot realizations is almost inﬁnite,
depending on the number, type, implementation, geo-
metric characteristics, and motorization of the wheels.
This chapter has described several such realizations.
Notwithstanding this variety, it is possible to classify
WMRs into only ﬁve generic categories. This catego-
rization aids understanding of wheel structures through
simpliﬁcation. Practical robot structures have been clas-
siﬁed according to the number and type of wheels.
Wheel-terrain interaction models have been presented
to allow the analysis of tractive force generation ca-
pability, for design and simulation purposes. Finally,
a brief description of common suspension systems has
been presented, including a presentation of structures
and dynamic models.
Video-References
VIDEO 325
An omnidirectional mobile robot with active caster wheels
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/24/videodetails/325
VIDEO 326
Articulated robot – a robot pushing 3 passive trailers
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/24/videodetails/326
VIDEO 327
An omnidirectional robot with 4 Mecanum Wheels
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/24/videodetails/327
VIDEO 328
An omnidirectional robot with 4 Swedish wheels
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/24/videodetails/328
VIDEO 329
An innovative space rover with extended climbing abilities
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/24/videodetails/239

Wheeled Robots
References
593
Part B | 24
References
24.1
H. Asama, M. Sato, L. Bogoni: Development of
an omnidirectional mobile robot with 3 DOF de-
coupling drive mechanism, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1995) pp. 1925–1930
24.2
L. Ferriere, G. Campion, B. Raucent: ROLLMOBS,
a new drive system for omnimobile robots, Robot-
ica 19, 1–9 (2001)
24.3
W. Chung: Nonholonomic Manipulators, Springer
Tracts Adv. Robotics, Vol. 13 (Springer, Berlin, Hei-
delberg 2004)
24.4
J.E. Colgate, M. Peshkin, W. Wannasuphoprasit:
Nonholonomic haptic display, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1996) pp. 539–544
24.5
G. Campion, G. Bastin, B. dAndrea-Novel: Struc-
tural properties and classification of kinematic and
dynamic models of wheeled mobile robots, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 12, 47–62 (1996)
24.6
R. Nakajima, T. Tsubouchi, S. Yuta, E. Koyanagi:
A development of a new mechanism of an au-
tonomous unicycle, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (1997) pp. 906–912
24.7
G.C. Nandy, X. Yangsheng: Dynamic model of a gy-
roscopic wheel, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (1998) pp. 2683–2688
24.8
Y. Ha, S. Yuta: Trajectory tracking control for navi-
gation of self-contained mobile inverse pendulum,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(1994) pp. 1875–1882
24.9
Y. Takahashi, T. Takagaki, J. Kishi, Y. Ishii: Back
and forward moving scheme of front wheel raising
for inverse pendulum control wheel chair robot,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2001)
pp. 3189–3194
24.10
K.-S. Byun, S.-J. Kim, J.-B. Song: Design of contin-
uous alternate wheels for omnidirectional mobile
robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2001) pp. 767–772
24.11
M. West, H. Asada: Design and control of ball
wheel omnidirectional vehicles, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1995) pp. 1931–1938
24.12
B. Carlisle: An omnidirectional mobile robot. In:
Development in Robotics, ed. by B. Rooks (IFS, Bed-
ford 1983) pp. 79–87
24.13
M. Wada, S. Mori: Holonomic and omnidirectional
vehicle with conventional tires, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1996) pp. 3671–3676
24.14
D.B. Reister, M.A. Unseren: Position and constraint
force control of a vehicle with two or more steer-
able drive wheels, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 9(6),
723–731 (1993)
24.15
Y. Nakamura, H. Ezaki, Y. Tan, W. Chung: Design of
steering mechanism and control of nonholonomic
trailer systems, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 17(3),
367–374 (2001)
24.16
S. Hirose: Biologically Inspired Robots: Snake-Like
Locomotion and Manipulation (Oxford Univ. Press,
Oxford 1993)
24.17
R. Siegwart, P. Lamon, T. Estier, M. Lauria, R. Piguet:
Innovative design for wheeled locomotion in
rough terrain, J. Robotics Auton. Syst. 40, 151–162
(2003)
24.18
M.G. Bekker: Introduction to Terrain-Vehicle Sys-
tems (Univ. Michigan Press, Ann Arbor 1969)
24.19
H. Shibly, K. Iagnemma, S. Dubowsky: An equiv-
alent soil mechanics formulation for rigid wheels
in deformable terrain, with application to plan-
etary exploration rovers, J. Terramech. 42, 1–13
(2005)
24.20
G. Ishigami, A. Miwa, K. Nagatani, K. Yoshida:
Terramechanics-based for steering maneuver of
planetary exploration rovers on loose soil, J. Field
Robotics 24(3), 233–250 (2007)
24.21
G.
Meirion-Griffith,
M.
Spenko:
A
modified
pressure-sinkage model for small, rigid wheels on
deformable terrains, J. Terramech. 48(2), 149–155
(2011)
24.22
C. Senatore, M. Wulfmeier, P. Jayakumar, J. Maclen-
nan, K. Iagnemma: Investigation of stress and fail-
ure in granular soils for lightweight robotic vehicle
applications, Proc. Ground Vehicle Syst. Eng. Tech-
nol. Symp. (2012)
24.23
C. Harnisch, B. Lach, R. Jakobs, M. Troulis, O. Nehls:
A new tyre–soil interaction model for vehicle sim-
ulation on deformable ground, Vehicle Syst. Dyn.
43(1), 384–394 (2005)
24.24
J.Y. Wong: Theory of Ground Vehicles, 3rd edn. (Wi-
ley, Hoboken 2001)
24.25
C. Senatore, C. Sandu: Off-road tire modeling and
the multi-pass effect for vehicle dynamics simula-
tion, J. Terramech. 48(4), 265–276 (2011)
24.26
H.B. Pacejka: Tire and Vehicle Dynamics, 2nd edn.
(Elsevier, Oxford 2005)
24.27
P. Barak: Magic Numbers in Design of Suspensions
for Passenger Cars, SAE Tech. Pap. No. 911921 (SAE,
Warrendale 1991)
24.28
J.C. Dixon: Suspension Geometry and Computation
(Wiley, Chichester 2009)
24.29
J.K. Hedrick, T. Butsuen: Invariant properties of au-
tomotive suspensions, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part D
J. Automob, Eng. 204(1), 21–27 (1990)

Multimedia Contents Underwater
595
Part B | 25.1
25. Underwater Robots
Hyun-Taek Choi, Junku Yuh
Covering about two-thirds of the earth, the ocean
is an enormous system that dominates processes
on the Earth and has abundant living and non-
living resources, such as fish and subsea gas and
oil. Therefore, it has a great effect on our lives
on land, and the importance of the ocean for
the future existence of all human beings can-
not be overemphasized. However, we have not
been able to explore the full depths of the ocean
and do not fully understand the complex pro-
cesses of the ocean. Having said that, underwater
robots including remotely operated vehicles (ROVs)
and autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) have
received much attention since they can be an ef-
fective tool to explore the ocean and efficiently
utilize the ocean resources. This chapter focuses
on design issues of underwater robots including
major subsystems such as mechanical systems,
power sources, actuators and sensors, computers
and communications, software architecture, and
manipulators while Chap. 51 covers modeling and
control of underwater robots.
25.1
Background.........................................
595
25.2 Mechanical Systems .............................
596
25.2.1
Frames and Pressure Hulls..........
596
25.2.2
Materials and Buoyancy.............
597
25.3 Power Systems.....................................
599
25.3.1
On-Board Power Sources............
599
25.3.2
Surface Power Systems...............
601
25.4 Underwater Actuators and Sensors .......
601
25.4.1
Actuators..................................
602
25.4.2 Nonacoustic Sensors ..................
602
25.4.3 Acoustics Sensors.......................
604
25.4.4 Other Sensor Issues ...................
606
25.5 Computers, Communications,
and Architecture..................................
606
25.5.1
On-Board Computers .................
606
25.5.2 Communications .......................
608
25.5.3 Software Architecture.................
610
25.6 Underwater Manipulators ....................
614
25.6.1
Dynamics..................................
614
25.6.2 Teleoperation............................
615
25.6.3 Autonomous Manipulation.........
616
25.7
Conclusions and Further Reading .........
617
Video-References.........................................
617
References...................................................
618
25.1 Background
The ocean covers about two-thirds of the earth and
has a great effect on the future existence of all human
beings. Underwater robots or unmanned underwater ve-
hicles (UUVs) can help us better understand marine and
other environmental issues, protect the ocean resources
of the earth from pollution, and efﬁciently utilize them
for human welfare.
Most UUVs commercially available in the market
are tethered and remotely operated, referred to as re-
motely operated vehicles (ROVs). The operators on
the mother vessel control the ROV by sending control
signals and power to the vehicle and receiving video,
status, and other sensory data via an umbilical cable.
Most work-class ROVs are equipped with one or mul-
tiple video cameras and lights, sonars, a still camera,
one manipulator, one grabber, and a wide range of sam-
pling devices. The large deep-sea ROVs use a tether
management system (TMS) that allows the vehicle to
be deployed using a strong but heavy umbilical ca-
ble and then ﬂown out from the TMS using a lighter,
more ﬂexible cable. ROVs must have high bandwidth
for high-resolution video and data transmission.

Part B | 25.2
596
Part B
Design
The US Navy funded the early ROV technology
development in the 1960s. They were used to recover
underwater ordnance. ROVs have been used for various
applications including military operations, environmen-
tal systems, scientiﬁc missions, ocean mining, and gas
and oil industry [25.1]. Visiongains analysis indicates
that total spending on ROVs in the energy industry will
reach about $2:7 billion in 2022 as ROVs are required
for more inspection, maintenance, drill support, and de-
commissioning activities than ever before.
However, since most commercial ROV systems
currently have some operational issues such as very
high operational costs with mother vessels and opera-
tor fatigue, the demand for advanced underwater robot
technologies that would lead to next generation work-
class ROV systems or autonomous underwater vehicles
(AUVs) has been growing. A survey paper on AUVs
was published by Yuh [25.2] in 2000. The paper de-
scribes key areas, such as dynamics, control systems,
navigation, sensors, communications, power systems,
pressure hulls, fairing, and mechanical manipulators.
It also presents existing AUV systems and components
commercially available in the market then.
This chapter focuses on design issues with each ma-
jor subsystem of underwater robots, such as mechanical
systems, power sources, actuators and sensors, com-
puters and communications, software architecture, and
manipulators.
25.2 Mechanical Systems
Every 10 m adds approximately 1 atm of water pres-
sure on a robot body and the chemical environment of
the seawater is highly corrosive. Therefore, mechani-
cal systems that have excellent structural strength, and
excellent chemical and environmental resistance are
needed.
An underwater robot’s mechanical structure can be
divided into three functional subsystems: frame, pres-
sure vessel, and fairing. Frame is the primary skeleton
of the robot. It deﬁnes the robot’s shape, supports its
weight both in and out of the water, provides mechani-
cal support, resists hydrodynamic forces of motion and
additional force due to operation of tools, and pro-
tects against any damages [25.3]. Its design must be
based on structural analysis. A pressure vessel should
be a waterproof structure and it must be strong enough
to withstand water pressure at a target design depth.
Typically, a cylindrical or spherical shape is the most
effective way to maximize strength at the expense of
low space efﬁciency. A pressure vessel with a larger
diameter would result in increased cost of materials
and machining since it requires increasing the thickness
of the pressure vessel for the same strength. Conse-
quently, the pressure vessel would become heavier.
Therefore, selecting appropriate materials for a pres-
sure vessel is very important. Fairing is like a skin
of the robot. A fairing that covers all or parts of an
underwater robot offers some advantages, such as an
aesthetically pleasing exterior, a decreased drag force,
and protection.
25.2.1 Frames and Pressure Hulls
The frame must be designed considering the following
operational conditions:
1. On the ground without motion
2. Underwater in motion
3. Hanging from a crane for launch and recovery.
The major points of acting force for each condi-
tion are totally different. The static gravitational force is
enough to be considered for the ﬁrst case. For the second
case, we should consider buoyancy force, gravitational
force as well as all thruster forces in a dynamic state.
During the launch and recovery stages, the enormous
snap force, due to the mother ship’s vertical motion can
be concentrated on a lifting point of the robot.
The structural design and analysis must be con-
ducted to take advantages of shapes offering high
strength and stiffness for their weight. At the same time,
materials should be chosen to give the maximum struc-
tural performance with the minimum weight [25.4]. An
important point is that weights in both air and wa-
ter must be carefully calculated. One should note that
buoyancy materials will also increase the overall weight
of the robot in air. A factor of safety is one of crucial
parameters in designing mechanical systems. Incorpo-
rating a factor of safety may result in 50% overdesign
for a manned system and 10% overdesign for an un-
manned system [25.5]. Figure 25.1 shows a deep-sea
ROV, HEMIRE’s open frame that is made of aluminum.
HEMIRE was developed by Korea Research Institute of
Ships and Ocean Engineering (KRISO) (
VIDEO 796 ).
On the other hand, a closed frame or a fairing is desir-
able for AUVs, due to limited on-board power sources
for required hydrodynamic performance.
The ﬁrst and ultimate goal in designing a pressure
vessel is to provide a watertight environment, where
on-board computers, sensors, or normal batteries are in-
stalled. Therefore, two important design factors are wa-

Underwater Robots
25.2 Mechanical Systems
597
Part B | 25.2
terproof sealing design and water pressure-resistant de-
sign. When given speciﬁcations, such as an inside diam-
eter (ID) or an outer diameter (OD), length, thickness,
and materials, we must analyze buckling stress and
yield stress. They are the dominant factors for the deep-
sea (high pressure) environment [25.6]. A spherical-
or cylindrical-shaped pressure vessel would be good
to withstand the hydrostatic pressure; however, a pres-
sure vessel of cylindrical shape is considered a better
alternative as it provides a better placement for the com-
ponents. Hydrodynamic design would not be needed
for pressure vessels placed inside a frame with fair-
ing. However, if the body of an underwater robot is
designed as a pressure vessel, hydrodynamics in design-
ing a pressure vessel must be considered to reduce the
drag, cavitation, and acoustic noise [25.7].
Frames and pressure vessels must have the struc-
tural analysis using the ﬁnite element method (FEM)
software, and nondestructive tests and/or pressure test-
ing to avoid any mechanical defects. Pressure testing
is the best way to reveal hidden defects in materials
and in machining process even though it requires addi-
tional time, cost and nontrivial facilities. It is a critical
environmental test because a hydrostatic pressure test,
cyclic pressure test for fatigue test due to repeated de-
ployments, and failure mode test to compare a designed
crush depth with its real depth are all involved [25.5].
Pressure testing facilities provide not only a cham-
ber for external pressure testing but also various types
of measurement sensors and systems to record any
changes during the testing.
25.2.2 Materials and Buoyancy
Besides high strength and high stiffness, one should
consider good corrosion resistance and machinability
Fig. 25.1 Aluminum frame of an ROV, Hamire, developed
by KRISO, Korea
in choosing materials for frames and pressure ves-
sels [25.7].
A typical underwater robot for shallow water
tends to use aluminum, polycarbonate (PC), and poly-
oxymethylene (POM), while high strength steel, tita-
nium, and composites are considered for a deep-sea
underwater robot. The hybrid ROV, Nereus, is for
a depth of 11 000 m and employs two pressure vessels
composed of 96% alumina ceramic because its high
compressive strength-to-weight ratio allows for near
neutrally buoyant pressure vessels capable of going to
these extreme depths [25.8]. Basic properties of materi-
als are described later.
Steel is commonly used because of its high tensile
strength and low cost. For marine applications, surface
treatment of steel must be done because it is suscepti-
ble to corrosion or rusting. It tends to distort magnetic
ﬁelds. Type 316 stainless steel is usually regarded as
the standard marine grade and it is typically used for
hydraulic, pneumatic and fasteners, but it is difﬁcult to
machine and weld. The aluminum alloy is lightweight
and has high strength. It is of reasonable value and not
related to magnetic effects. Since it is vulnerable to
corrosion, surface treatment is also required. High heat
conductivity is another advantage for a pressure vessel
of aluminum alloy. The titanium alloy has a very high
strength-to-weight ratio, excellent corrosion resistance
without any surface treatment, low electric conductiv-
ity, and no magnetic ﬁeld distortion. Drawbacks include
low heat conductance, difﬁculties in machining and
welding, and high cost.
The most commonly used composite for marine
applications is glass-ﬁber reinforced plastic (GFRP),
which has a very high strength-to-weight ratio, excel-
lent corrosion resistance, and a competitive price tag.
Carbon ﬁber reinforced plastic (CFRP) performs bet-
ter, but it is more expensive. For deep-sea applications,
CFRP would bring lots of advantages. The pressure ves-
sel of the Seaglider for 6000m was made of CFRP
because of its ability to achieve weight to displacement
ratios of less than 0:5 [25.9]. However, it has not been
popular in the market mainly because of difﬁculties in
machining. Metal matrix composites (MMC) and ce-
ramic alloy have many advantages over other materials.
In particular, they have high elastic modulus and hard-
ness, high melting points, low thermal expansion, and
good chemical resistance.
Instead of metals and composite materials, acrylic
(plexiglas), POM
(polyoxymethylene, acetal,
del-
rin), PC (polycarbonate lexan), ABS (acrylonitrile–
butadiene–styrene), PVC (polyvinyl chloride), and
plastic are alternatives for underwater robots operat-
ing in shallow-water environments. The main advan-
tages of the abovementioned materials are excellent

Part B | 25.2
598
Part B
Design
Table 25.1 Properties of materials for an underwater robot
Speciﬁcation
Density (kg=dm3)
(typical)
Tensile strength (MPa),
Ultimate (typical)/Yield (typical)
Modulus of elasticity (GPa)
(typical)
Steel (HY80)
7:87
482689/276517
190210 (200)
Stainless steel (Type316)
7:758:1
620560/415290
193
Aluminum 6061-T6
2:7
310/276
68:9
Aluminum 7075-T6
2:81
572/503
71:7
Titanium Ti-6Al-4V
4:43
950/880
113:8
GFRP, E-glass
2:442:48
48004900/NA
8590
GFRP, S-glass
2:542:60
34003500/NA
6575
CFRP
1:751:95
25006000/NA
200800
Acrylic
0:71:25 (1:16)
19:385:0 (64:3)/25:085:0 (60:2)
0:9503:79 (2:69)
Polycarbonate
0:951:54 (1:2)
46:1124 (64:6)/37:0191 (64.3)
1:807:58 (2:37)
Unreinforced polyoxymethylene
1:142:23 (1:42)
5:00115 (55:6)/22:0120 (26:8)
0:58612:1 (2:73)
Acrylonitrile–butadiene–styrene
0:353:5 (1:06)
24:173:1 (38)/20:073:1 (43:3)
0:7786:10 (2:3)
Polyvinyl chloride
1:4
4:0059:0/17:052:0
0:001593:24
Ceramic (96% alumina)
3:73:97
20702620/260300
393
Metal matrix composite, Al/SiC
2:783:01
230317
125270
corrosion resistance and ease of machining and fabri-
cation with relatively low cost. Additionally, POM has
high stiffness, low friction, and excellent dimensional
stability. PC and acrylic have high-impact strength.
They are lightweight and ﬂexible. Even though glass
is brittle and, hence, subject to damage from impact,
glass spheres are also appropriate for pressure ves-
sels because of the immense strength-to-weight ratio,
corrosion resistance, nonmagnetic and electrically non-
conductive characteristics, and low cost [25.9]. Some
properties are summarized in Table 25.1.
The metal corrosion in seawater is the gradual de-
terioration of a material based on the electrochemical
reaction. There are galvanic corrosion and electrolytic
corrosion which are known for fundamentally the same
process and known for accelerating rates of the metal
corrosion in underwater robot [25.3]. To protect against
electrolytic corrosion, insulators, such as resin or rubber
are attached to metal contact surfaces [25.6]. How-
ever, surface treatment is an effective way to avoid
any direct contact of seawater. Anodizing is a surface
conversion process that changes the exterior physical
properties of a metal to form a hard coating on the
surface as results of a controlled electrochemical pro-
cess. One thing we should remember is that anodizing
works well only when the entire surface remains in-
tact. In other words, a small chip in the surface can
become the point of accelerated corrosion if there is
contact with a less active material [25.10]. A topcoat
will provide additional protection against corrosion.
Sacriﬁcial anodes, made of highly active metal like
zinc and magnesium, are alternative for corrosion pro-
tection. As sacriﬁcial anodes corrode and deteriorate,
they must be periodically inspected and replaced if
needed.
When designing an underwater robot, it is recom-
mended to have small positive buoyancy, except the
reserve buoyancy for payload. It will help an under-
water robot returning to the surface in the case of any
electronics and power failure. The amount of positive
buoyancy would depend on the size of robots, typi-
cally from a few hundred grams to several kilograms.
There are several factors for consideration in choosing
buoyancy materials, such as low density, high strength,
nontoxic harmless, and weather resistance. The most
important factors are low water absorption and low
compressibility, which are all dependent on the tar-
get operating depth [25.4]. For an underwater robot,
expandable polystyrene, polyisocyanurate foam, and
syntactic foam are the most common buoyancy mate-
rials. The expandable polystyrene (EPS) is a super light
and cheap material. However, it is only used for very
shallow water because it is compressed by water pres-
sure. Polyisocyanurate foams are generally low-density,
insulation-grade foams, which have excellent insulating
value and good compressive-strength properties. Since
it is usually made in large blocks via a continuous extru-
sion process, these blocks are reasonably inexpensive
and effective for shallow water [25.4]. The syntactic
foam consists of glass microballoons and epoxy resin.
The amount of trapped air within the resin structure will
determine the density as well as the durability of the
foam at deeper depths. It is also noted here that ballast-
ing is a procedure of adding, removing, or relocating
weights or ﬂoatation on an underwater robot to correct
its buoyancy, pitch, and roll. There are two types of bal-
last systems: ﬁxed (static) ballast and variable (active)
ballast. In a ﬁxed ballast system, an underwater robot
is preset to the desired ballast and operates without any
dynamic change of the ballast system. Fixed payload is

Underwater Robots
25.3 Power Systems
599
Part B | 25.3
usually in the form of several lead blocks, which can be
exchanged for equipment without adjusting the robots
buoyancy. Variable ballast is not common in most ROVs
but the hybrid ROV, Nereus, has one [25.8].
25.3 Power Systems
Underwater robots obtain power from any of three cat-
egories: on-board power, surface power by a tether, and
the combination of the two. For an onboard power sys-
tem, we can think of many types of power sources, such
as primary/secondary batteries, internal/external com-
bustion engines, and fuel cells. For surface powered
underwater robots, the mother ship has to deliver power
to the robot by a tether. Surface powered underwater
robots have advantages of high power capacity and al-
most unlimited power but also entail additional cost for
a winch, a drum, a TMS, and a mother ship. This sec-
tion reviews typical power sources including batteries,
fuel cells, and surface power systems.
25.3.1 On-Board Power Sources
The on-board power source of an underwater robot is
an air-independent power (AIP) system, and the most
common AIP system is batteries. Performance spec-
iﬁcations of untethered vehicles like AUVs, such as
working range, service time, and payloads are limited
by the battery capacity.
Battery technology has improved over the last
decade. One would like to have better battery sources
in terms of high energy density, high charge and dis-
charge rates, desirable current characteristics, wide
operating/storage temperature range, reliability, long
lifecycle, low cost for purchasing and maintenance,
and, most importantly, safety against ﬁre and explo-
sion. We should also consider details on safety such
as nongassing, spill-proof electrolyte, status monitoring
as well as special requirements depending on the shape
and volume of an AUV and particular working environ-
ment conditions such as depth, under sea ice near the
North Pole [25.6, 11, 13].
Primary batteries usually have better endurance
than secondary batteries. The lithium primary battery
has a very high energy density but its operating cost
is more expensive. The alkaline battery can be consid-
ered the most common primary battery as it is relatively
cheap, but it has safety issues because it outgases hydro-
gen and it is sensitive to temperature [25.7].
There are a number of different kinds of sec-
ondary batteries including lead-acid, silver zinc, nickel–
cadmium, nickel-metal hydride, lithium-ion, lithium-
polymer batteries. Lead-acid batteries are the oldest
type of battery having a low energy density. How-
ever, because of its relatively large power rate and low
cost, they are the popular choice for many applications.
Nickel–cadmium (Ni–Cd) batteries were widely used in
commercial products because of their robust character-
istics but had problems with the toxicity of the heavy
metal cadmium. Nickel metal hydride batteries have
been improved to eliminate drawbacks of Ni–Cd and
replaced Ni–Cd in the market. During the last couple
of decades, the silver–zinc battery was the most used
power source in professional AUVs because of its bet-
ter performance compared to that of old type secondary
batteries such as lead-acid and Ni–Cd, even though it is
very expensive. Today, lithium-ion and lithium-polymer
batteries are popular in our daily life. We can ﬁnd them
in many IT devices. Li-ion batteries using lithium ions
as an electrolyte have the advantages of higher energy
density, longer cycle life, relatively low self-discharge,
low maintenance, and light weight. However, the draw-
backs include protection circuits and aging effects. In
contrast, lithium-polymer batteries use a solid polymer
composite. This reduces the chance of overcharging and
electrolyte leakage and is more robust against physical
damage [25.12], even though they have a lower energy
density and a lower life cycle compared to Li-ion bat-
teries. Some properties are summarized in Table 25.2.
In the literature, as one of the alternatives, sea-
water batteries with very long endurance capabilities
are considered and have been studied to improve the
performance. However, due to low power capacity, its
applications are limited [25.14].
A fuel cell is an electrochemical device converting
the chemical energy of fuels with oxygen directly into
electricity to produce electric power, heat, and water.
Since there is continuously replenished fuel, a fuel cell
has a much larger capacity and longer endurance than
batteries at the cost of system complexity. There are
various types of fuel cells. The most common types are
solid oxide (SOFC), direct methanol (DMFC), proton
exchange membrane (PEMFC, or polymer electrolyte
(PEFC)), phosphoric acid (PAFC), molten carbonate
(MCFC), and alkaline (AFC), where each type operates
at different temperature conditions using different ma-
terials [25.15, 16].
A closed-cycle PEFC system is known to be the
most suitable for underwater and it consists of a fuel
cell generator, a high pressure oxygen tank, and a metal
hydride tank. Its operating temperature is around 60 ıC

Part B | 25.3
600
Part B
Design
Table 25.2 Summary of characteristics of commonly used batteries (after [25.7, 11, 12])
Type
Advantages
Disadvantages
Energy/weight
(W h=kg)
Energy/volume
(W h=l)
Rating
Life cycle
Alkaline
(primary)
Cheap
Leak gas at high tempera-
ture
140
–
–
–
Lithium
(primary)
High energy density,
expensive
375
–
–
–
Lead acid
(secondary)
Low cost, long life cycle
(1000)
Low energy density, leak
hydrogen
2030
6080
4050
700
Silver–zinc
(Ag–Zn)
(secondary)
High energy density
Limited life cycle (40100),
need careful maintenance,
high cost
100120
180200
4871
100
Nickel–cadmium
(Ni–Cd)
(secondary)
Long life cycle, ﬂat dis-
charge curve, good low
temperature performance
Memory effects, envi-
ronmentally unfriendly,
exothermic charging process
4060
50150
4060
2000
Nickel–metal
hydride (Ni–MH)
(secondary)
High energy density,
reduced memory effect
Self-discharging, limited
discharge current
60120
140300
Ambient
1000
Lithium ion
(secondary)
High-energy density, long
life cycle, no memory
effect
Aging effect
100265
250730
2045
4001200
Lithium polymer
(secondary)
Flexible form factor, light
weight, Improved safety
Lower energy density com-
pared to Li-ion
130200
170300
Ambient
3003000
and its reactive product is only pure water. Urashima,
the ﬁrst prototype of a fuel cell-driven underwater ve-
hicle developed by JAMSTEC, Japan, uses a solid
polymer electrolyte fuel cell (PEFC) which allows 60 h
endurance and 300 km cruising with max. 4 kW power,
and they achieved 60 h of nonstop electric power gen-
eration and ﬁnished a sea trial [25.17]. In 2007, JAM-
STEC started the research to develop a fuel cell for the
second generation long-range cruising AUV (LCAUV)
to cruise over 3000 km with over 600 h of continuous
running [25.12].
The energy density of a fuel cell generator itself is
high, but when we consider a whole fuel cell system
including subsystems, such as hydrogen, oxygen, and
reactant water tanks, auxiliary components, and control
electronics, its energy density becomes low. Down-
sizing of these subsystems is needed for underwater
applications. So, a hybrid fuel/battery system would be
an alternative to share full loads because it allows both
components to be of smaller dimensions and operates
with higher efﬁciency using direct hydrogen and pure
oxygen [25.18].
There are two types of loads: propulsion load for
propulsion and hotel load for on-board computers,
lights, navigation sensors, and payloads. If an AUV
is operated for professional long-term missions, we
need very accurate simulations for adjusting trade-offs
among various constraints. Conventional lead-acid and
Ni-based batteries would not be the best choice for
AUVs. Instead, lithium-based batteries are the attractive
solution that does not entail time-consuming estima-
tion techniques. Nonetheless, lead-acid batteries remain
a practical and low-cost option for education, experi-
mentation, and testing.
There are two options for battery installation in-
side an AUV. One is that they are housed in a pressure
vessel, the other one is using pressure-tolerant and wa-
terproof batteries without a pressure vessel. The latter
eliminates burdens related to leakage in assembling
the system, thus increases system reliability. Lithium-
polymer batteries using the solid electrolyte were made
without air in the packaging. Hence, they would be
a candidate in designing pressure-tolerant on-board
power source for AUVs [25.19].
A battery management system (BMS) is a very
important subsystem for performance and safety. It
monitors the internal status of voltages, current, tem-
peratures and state of charge. Based on the above
information, a BMS controls circuits for balancing
and protects batteries from over-current, over/under-
voltage, over/under-temperature, and any predescribed
conditions. As a part of health monitoring, an on-board
computer of an AUV should collect status from the
BMS to reﬂect a power budget and health to given mis-
sions.
Just like adding volume of auxiliary systems and
fuel storage units to calculate an energy density of
a fuel cell, we need a measure for fair comparison
of the energy density among different power sources.
Since a power source is installed inside of an AUV,
which should be neutrally buoyant to save the en-
ergy in operation, energy density per neutrally buoyant

Underwater Robots
25.4 Underwater Actuators and Sensors
601
Part B | 25.4
Table 25.3 Summary of pros and cons of DC and AC (alternating current) (data from [25.4, 20])
Form
Pro
Con
Remarks
DC
Two conductors with less shielding in
tether, low voltage drop
Current protection, difﬁculties in voltage
step-up and down
For observation class ROV
AC
Longer transmission distances, ﬂexibility in
voltage up and down
Inductance noise, reactive losses, need
subsystem for freq. converting
For deep-sea ROV
kilogram should be a reasonable unit. This means
that weight and volume for buoyancy materials and
pressure vessels must be added to the power source
itself, and this also means that the characteristics of
buoyancy materials and pressure vessels (aluminum,
titanium, composite material) under considering work-
ing (or maximum) depth should be designed before or
at the same time [25.21]. Between batteries and fuel
cells, a semi-fuel cell can be another alternative. It
is a generator, but its usability is like a battery be-
cause one reactant is stored externally and brought
to the reaction cell [25.11]. Aluminum/hydrogen per-
oxide energy semi-fuel cells can practically gener-
ate an energy density of about 400 Wh=kg (theo-
retically 3418 Wh=kg) which is three times that of
a lithium-ion system [25.12]. HUGIN 3000 powered
by a semi-fuel cell developed by FFI (Norwegian De-
fense Research Establishment) [25.7] operates at 4 km
down to a sea depth of 3000 m for up to 60 h. This
pressure-tolerant system is very attractive in deep-water
systems. But it requires trained personnel for opera-
tion and maintenance as well as special facilities and
tools [25.14].
25.3.2 Surface Power Systems
In the case of ROVs, the whole power is delivered
from a mother ship to the ROV through an umbili-
cal/tether cable, offering very high power and theo-
retically unlimited endurance. These electrical power
transmission techniques may look simple, but actually
involve a highly complicated procedure for optimiza-
tion. A power system determines work capability of
ROV as well as operating cost, subsystem size, and
safety considerations. Typically, it consists of a surface
system, a tether, and a subsea system. A surface system
includes a shipboard power source (or power outlet),
frequency converter, step-up transformers, and a ground
fault monitoring device. A frequency converter is used
only for high-frequency alternative current, but it is ad-
vantageous in handling the power of a subsea system.
In a subsea system, there are step-down transform-
ers, rectiﬁers, power busses, power switching devices
for distribution, and a ground fault monitoring device.
Also, system conﬁguration and setup reﬂects the power
requirement of the devices installed on a ROV including
thrusters, lights, sensors and any circuits. Once again,
these design parameters of a power system are not in-
dependent of each other [25.4, 20, 22, 23].
A detail conﬁguration depends on the form of cur-
rent and needed capacity. First of all, we have to make
a decision on the form of current. There are three types
of current for ROV systems:
1. 50/60 Hz
2. High frequency alternating current (HFAC) at
400 Hz
3. Direct current (DC).
The decision should be based on the design ob-
jectives of maximizing power transfer, efﬁciency and
lifetime, as well as minimizing the overall system
cost using steady-state analysis and transient analy-
sis [25.20]. Table 25.3 shows pros and cons of the form
of current.
Besides maximizing the power transfer to an ROV,
we have to minimize the diameter of a cable, system
cost, support systems on deck, and the weight of the
ROV without losing a high level of electrical power
quality. Therefore, most observation class ROVs use the
DC power system mainly due to portability and cost,
and work-class ROVs have a tendency to use a three
phase AC power system.
25.4 Underwater Actuators and Sensors
It is inevitable that the overall performance of an un-
derwater robot depends on the quality of its actuators
and sensors. While one can think of different types of
actuators for underwater robots, such as thrusters, wa-
ter jets, and biomimetic actuators (
VIDEO 793 ), most
underwater robots use thrusters that use propellers in-
volving hydrodynamics of water ﬂow when generating
force to move through water. It is noted that the map-
ping between thruster command and generated force is
not linear, especially in the transient state of motion.
The sensors for an underwater robot can be divided
into three groups: navigation sensors, system sensors,

Part B | 25.4
602
Part B
Design
and mission sensors. They can also be categorized fur-
ther by acoustic- or nonacoustic-based sensing. Sensing
in underwater environments is very challenging, es-
pecially position sensing. There is no electromagnetic
wave propagation under water except for very short
ranges and, therefore, the GPS (global positioning sys-
tem) is not available. Due to the limited performance of
a single sensor, the sensor fusion approach with multi-
ple sensors is used. For example, the inertial navigation
system (INS) includes an IMU (inertial measurement
unit) and a DVL (Doppler velocity logger) with highly
complicated algorithms. The performance of optical
sensing depends on the turbidity level, while acous-
tic sensing encounters signiﬁcant challenges due to the
dynamic properties and extreme nature of the ocean,
such as multipath problems, variation of signal atten-
uation, variation of acoustic channel, nonlinear effects,
and many more [25.24, 25]. This section describes un-
derwater actuators and sensors, and their design-related
issues.
25.4.1 Actuators
There are two major types of thrusters – electrical
thrusters and electro-hydraulic thrusters – along with
other types such as bio-inspired smart actuators and
jet propulsion. The efﬁciency of an electro-hydraulic
thruster is about 15%, while the efﬁciency of a fully
electrical thruster is about 43% [25.13], where the def-
inition of efﬁciency is the ratio of shaft mechanical
power output versus electrical power input. In spite of
the low energy efﬁciency, electro-hydraulic thrusters
are preferred for large size work-class ROVs because
of their extensive thrust and practicality in the rugged
conditions of the offshore work environment. Various
factors contributing to the power conversion efﬁciency
of the hydraulic propulsion system for ROVs are de-
scribed in [25.26].
Many small ROVs and AUVs have fully electrical
thrusters because of their compact size and high efﬁ-
ciency. Torpedo-type AUVs for cruising commonly use
the screw-type propellers, which generate much more
power, though only in the forward direction. Small
ROVs and AUVs requiring slow but ﬁne motion typ-
ically use the propellers generating the same power in
both forward/reverse directions. When two thrusters are
operating on the same plane and the same direction of
motion, an underwater robot must have counter-rotating
thrusters to eliminate the counter torque effect of the
thrusters rolling the robot opposite to the direction of
propeller rotation.
There are many propeller design parameters includ-
ing propeller diameter, the number of blades, blade
pitch, blade thickness, hub size, rake, etc. Propeller
diameter and blade pitch are critical design parame-
ters that impact a robot’s torque and power, and are
related to the size and cost of an underwater robot.
Therefore, we have to ﬁnd an optimum combination
of propeller diameter and blade pitch, along with care-
ful matching to a motor to have an efﬁcient electrical
propulsion system [25.27]. A typical underwater elec-
trical thruster includes an electric motor, a motor am-
pliﬁer and controller, a thruster housing typically made
of aluminum or titanium, and oil-ﬁlled, drive shafts
designed for watertight using magnetic coupling or dy-
namic seal, propellers, and ducts. The Kort nozzle has
a relatively simple geometry and it performs efﬁciently
at low speed. The Rice nozzle has a lower drag co-
efﬁcient and a better geometry to promote increased
thrust [25.24].
25.4.2 Nonacoustic Sensors
Various nonacoustic sensors can be considered for mea-
suring an underwater robot’s position and pose, and
detecting its linear and rotational motion. Magnetic sen-
sors are the most common to get the north direction,
but are susceptible to local magnetic disturbances gen-
erated by the active elements of a robot system or any
magnetized materials in the environment.
Inertial sensors are sensors based on inertia, where
linear acceleration is measured by accelerometers and
the rate of rotation is measured by gyroscopes with-
out an external reference. There are several types of
accelerometers, such as pendulous accelerometers, pen-
dulous integrating gyroscope accelerometers, force re-
balance accelerometers, piezoelectric accelerometers,
differential capacitor accelerometers, and vibrating
beam accelerometers. They have each advantages and
disadvantages. Some of them can be built using either
conventional mechanical type or microelectromechani-
cal system (MEMS) type. MEMS types like capacitive-
based MEMS accelerometers and MEMS vibrating
beam accelerometers, show generally higher sensitivity
and better resolution [25.28, 29]. A gyroscope (gyro) is
used to measure angular velocity of an object. There are
three main types of gyro: spinning mass, vibratory, and
optical. Spinning-mass type gyros operate on the prin-
ciple of conservation of angular momentum, and this
mechanical type gyro shows wide performance range
(0:0001 to > 100ı=h). However, it is very expensive.
Vibratory (vibrating structure) type gyros use Coriolis
forces that are small and of low cost because they use
MEMS technology, but they have a limited performance
range. Optical type gyros operate under the principle
of the Sagnac effect, and there are two main types of
optical gyros, RLG (ring-laser gyro) and interferomet-
ric ﬁber-optic gyro (IFOG). A RLG has high sensitivity

Underwater Robots
25.4 Underwater Actuators and Sensors
603
Part B | 25.4
and stability, a wide range of measurement (from 0:001
to 1000ı=h), excellent scale-factor stability and linear-
ity, insensitivity to accelerations and fast turn-on (<1 s).
The RLG technology is a mature technology, and is well
established in the medium- and high-performance mar-
kets. However, RLGs are still complex and expensive.
A ﬁber-optic gyro (FOG) can provide several important
advantages of a pure solid-state device, such as reli-
able and low maintenance due to no moving part, no
sealed cavity and no acoustic noise, and high perfor-
mance. The FOG technologies are expected to replace
many of the current RLG-based systems. However, one
particular area where the RLG is expected to retain its
superiority over the FOG is in applications requiring ex-
tremely high-scale-factor stability.
An attitude and heading reference system (AHRS)
is a sensor providing three-dimensional (3-D) orienta-
tion information. Typically, it consists of (MEMS) gy-
roscopes, accelerometers, and magnetometers on all
three axes, and an onboard microprocessor running
a nonlinear estimation algorithm, such as an extended
Kalman ﬁlter to compute the orientation. An integra-
tion drift is compensated by reference vectors, such as
gravity and the earth magnetic ﬁeld.
The fusion of several navigation sensors can min-
imize navigation errors. This sensor combination of
accelerometers, gyros, navigation computer, and some
electronics, called inertia navigation system (INS), pro-
vides estimations of velocity, position, and orientation
by integrations of the linear accelerations and angu-
lar rates with an appropriate transformation between
the body frame and the earth frame if given an ini-
tial position and orientation [25.12, 23]. Therefore, an
INS is one of the most important devices for an un-
derwater robot. Typically, the performance of an INS is
usually rated in terms of its position error growth rate.
USAF SNU84-1 categorizes INS units as shown in Ta-
ble 25.4.
To increase the accuracy of a navigation system, an
INS has been combined with DVL (Doppler velocity
log). As an example, an integrated Doppler-inertial sys-
tem, Marpos, calculates the relative position from a start
point by dead reckoning, which shows a positioning ac-
curacy of around 0:03% of the total distance traveled,
the equivalent of 1:7 m per hour at a vehicle speed of
three knots by AUV Maridan M600 [25.30].
Table 25.4 Performance classiﬁcation of INS (USAF
SNU84-1)
INS classiﬁcation
Position error
growth rate
Heading errors
Low
> 2 nm=h
> 0:2ı
Medium
0:52 nm=h
0:05 to 0:2ı
Precision
< 0:5 nm=h
< 0:05ı
For the vertical motion of an underwater robot,
its depth is easily measured by pressure sensors with-
out any cumulative error. Actually, a pressure sensor
measures the external pressure experienced by an un-
derwater robot, where the two most common pressure
sensor technologies are (i) strain gauges and (ii) quartz
crystals. Strain gauge pressure sensors can typically
attain overall accuracies of up to about 0:1% of full
scale and resolutions of up to about 0:01% of full
scale. Quartz crystal pressure sensors can typically at-
tain overall accuracies of about 0:01% of full scale and
overall resolution of up to about 0:0001% of full scale,
that is, a resolution of one part per million [25.31].
Common units for pressure are atmosphere (atm), bar,
kilopascals (kPa), pound of force per square inch (psi),
Torr (D mmHg), and one atmosphere (1 atm) of pres-
sure is 101:325 kPa and one bar (1 bar) of pressure is
100 kPa. In sea water, since pressure increases by 1 atm
for every 10:0 m of depth, depth is an approximate
reading of a pressure sensor multiplied by 10 m=atm.
In fresh water, this simple formula underestimates the
actual pressure by 2–3%, so you can get a more accu-
rate depth by using 10:3 instead of 10 m=atm [25.3].
Measured pressure by a sensor is relative pressure. For
absolute pressure, we have to add 1 atm to the sensor
measurement.
Another nonacoustic sensor is an underwater com-
puter vision system that can be considered as part of
navigation sensors for underwater robots in addition
to simply recording images of the underwater environ-
ment. When the underwater environment has high tur-
bidity and insufﬁcient and/or nonuniform light, it would
not be easy to obtain enough visual information for the
navigation through identifying objects, detecting obsta-
cles, measuring distance between objects, and so on.
However, when approaching its target very closely, for
example, at the ﬁnal stage of approaching for docking,
the robot could gather useful information using a vision
system.
On the other hand, underwater images are major
products of underwater missions, especially for the
inspection of submerged structures or observation of
marine organisms, seaﬂoor geology, etc. In this case,
associating time stamp and localization data with the
images increases the overall quality of the output. Be-
cause of the limited light range, it is very difﬁcult to
cover a wide area with one single shot. Thus, an im-
age mosaicking is a popular strategy to overcome this
in which several images are merged together in order
to create a larger image, just as is done on Google
Earth. Real-time image mosaicking is used for naviga-
tion stitches images with simple image manipulations,
and high-quality image mosaicking is done by post-
processing using various optimization techniques.

Part B | 25.4
604
Part B
Design
More recently, advanced, high-quality camera and
video management systems have been developed such
as HD (high deﬁnition) cameras, HD-SDI (serial dig-
ital interface) transmission through a ﬁber-optic cable,
high-quality digital video management systems, holo-
graphic cameras, laser scanning systems, 3-D camera
systems with 3-D monitors, a hybrid optical-acoustic
imaging systems incorporating stereographic optical
cameras, and high-resolution multibeam sonars [25.12,
32, 33]. Such developments would greatly help increas-
ing the effectiveness of the underwater robot operation.
25.4.3 Acoustics Sensors
There are many ways to calculate the speed of an un-
derwater robot. We can simply estimate the speed by
the integral of linear acceleration from an accelerom-
eter even though there are large accumulative errors.
We can also measure the speed directly using a pitot
tube velocity log, a rotor type velocity log, an electro-
magnetic velocity log, and an acoustic Doppler current
proﬁlers (ADCPs) [25.6], which are all water speed
sensors, and are measuring speed with respect to the
water, not the ground speed of a robot. ADCP provides
measurements of the water’s current direction and mag-
nitude by measuring the velocity of particles in water
using principles of Doppler shift. However, Doppler
velocity logs (DVLs) can be used to measure the ve-
locity of robots moving in the water with respect to
the ocean ﬂoor. Since ADCP and DVL use the same
principles, typically DVL is operated in ADCP mode
for a hydrographic instrument and bottom-lock mode
for a navigation instrument. Since a DVL measures the
Doppler shift of sonar signals reﬂected by the ground
to obtain the velocity, there is a maximum range from
seabed to the sensor, which is inversely proportional to
the frequency of a signal, typically from 300 kHz to
2 MHz. Table 25.5 shows the performances of DVLs
currently available in the market. Recently phased ar-
ray technology in DVL has been announced and has
Table 25.5 Summary of DVL speciﬁcations available in
market
Speciﬁcation
Model A
Model B
Model C
Frequency
300 kHz
600 kHz
1200 kHz
Max. range
200300 m
90110 m
2030 m
Velocity
range
˙10 m=s
Velocity reso-
lution
0:1 cm=s
Accuracy
0:4% ˙
2 mm=s
0:2% ˙
1 mm=s
0:2% ˙
1 mm=s
Average
power
310 W
26 W
23 W
brought signiﬁcant advantages over piston array type
DVL in terms of size and weight, which have extended
the areas of applications for DVLs [25.34].
There are several types of sonar systems such as
single-beam directional sonar, scanning sonar, side scan
sonar, multibeam sonar, interferometric sonar and syn-
thetic aperture sonar. Single-beam sonars send a pulse
of sound at a particular frequency that is reﬂected from
the seabed, and its echo is received by a transducer.
It can be implemented in the form of a single chan-
nel, for example, an altimeter measuring the distance
between a robot and seabed, or multiple channels, for
example, obstacle avoidance sonar measuring distances
between a robot and any objects around it. A scan-
ning sonar, that is, forward looking sonar, has a small
transducer rotating on its axis and emits pulses at the
particular direction, and then obtains a set of bins,
where a bin represents the echo intensity returning from
a speciﬁc place along the transducer axis. An image is
synthesized by placing the set of bins in a Cartesian
space with a set of colors assigning their intensities. On
the other hand, a side scan sonar has a ﬁxed transducer
emitting fan-shaped acoustic pulses in the cross-track
direction, and then the measured acoustic reﬂections are
compiled to create and accurate image of the sea bot-
tom. It is one of the most effective tools for quickly
searching for any objects such as wreckage debris or
mines on a large area of the seabed. However, it does not
provide reliable information on their position [25.35].
An imaging sonar uses a fan beam typically with
a 30ı 3 dB beam width while retaining about 1:7ı an-
gular resolution, whereas a proﬁling sonar emits a spot
or pencil beam with about a 1:7ı 3 dB beam width from
both horizontal and angular rotation, which means that
it provides higher resolution measurements. A multi-
beam sonar has an array of transducer emitting acoustic
pulses simultaneously to cover a large area. This beam
pattern is wide in the across-track ﬁeld and narrow
in the along-track ﬁeld, which is appropriate for col-
lecting highly accurate seaﬂoor information at the cost
of the high purchasing expense and high power con-
sumption. An interferometric sonar is one possible tool
providing wide-swath coverage and high-resolution
bathymetry in shallow water using the technique of su-
perimposing two (or more) waves, which signiﬁcantly
improves the efﬁciency and safety of hydrographic sur-
vey operations. A synthetic aperture sonar (SAS) is
a high-resolution acoustic imaging technique that sums
multiple returns from multiple pings to produce out-
put imagery with constant along track resolution which
is independent of both range and frequency. This is
a kind of artiﬁcial enlargement of a sonar array by ac-
curate navigation data. Dual frequency technology has
been announced for an imaging sonar and side scan

Underwater Robots
25.4 Underwater Actuators and Sensors
605
Part B | 25.4
sonar, which offers more ﬂexibility. A typical dual fre-
quency imaging sonar uses frequency between 0:9 and
2:5 MHz to obtain medium and ultra-high-quality res-
olution from mid- to close-range. A side scan sonar’s
typical range is from 100 to 500 kHz. Based on a high-
quality imaging sonar, researchers have been trying to
identify underwater objects. Figure 25.2 shows a re-
sult of real-time tracking for artiﬁcial landmarks using
DIDSON [25.36] (
VIDEO 794 ), where the multiple
landmarks are being tracked after being detected and
recognized by a probabilistic based algorithm devel-
oped by the Korea Research Institute of Ships and
Ocean Engineering (KRISO) [25.37].
Acoustic positioning systems are the popular ap-
proach to locate the underwater robot by solving a tri-
angulation problem based on distances between an
underwater robot and the preinstalled transponders. The
distances are calculated by the time of ﬂight of the
acoustic signal between them, that is, half the round-
trip time multiplied by the speed of sound in water. It is
theoretically simple with no cumulative error. However,
to obtain accurate position information, we have to have
an exact understanding of the system, consideration of
the inherent physical error sources, and lots of practi-
cal experience. The accuracy inherently depends on the
conﬁguration of the baseline, and the speed of sound
underwater is affected by water temperature, pressure,
and salinity. Additionally, in shallow water or in the
highly reverberant underwater environment, multiple
reﬂected copies of any transmitted signal reach the re-
ceiver at delayed intervals. It is known as the multipath
problem. Therefore, we have to know the characteristics
of the underwater acoustic environment at the work site.
Before explaining the conﬁguration of types of acoustic
ID 3
ID 2
R. 310°
Dis. 2.77 m
Azi. –5,2°
R. 130°
Dis. 2.22 m
Azi. 4,7°
Fig. 25.2 Result of real-time tracking for artiﬁcial land-
marks using DIDSON
positioning system, we need to review functions of its
basic component. When an interrogate sends a signal,
a transponder installed on the seabed or an underwater
robot receives the interrogation signal, and then sends
a reply signal to the interrogator. A responder is a trans-
mitter installed on the seabed or an underwater robot
just like a transponder, but it can be triggered by a hard-
wired external control signal to transmit a signal. If
a transmitter sends out a pulse on a particular frequency,
it is called a beacon or pinger [25.4].
There are three main types of acoustic positioning
systems: long baseline (LBL), short baseline (SBL),
and ultrashort baseline (USBL). An LBL system deter-
mines the position by measuring the slant ranges from
three or more transponders mounted widely spaced on
the seabed and typically at the corners of the opera-
tions site. This results in very high positioning accuracy
and robustness regardless of water depth over wide op-
erating area. However, this system requires multiple
transponders which inevitably need a long deploy-
ment/recovery time and a calibration time required at
each location. An update rate is relatively long because
of two-way ranging. In an SBL system, there are three
or more transducers connected by wires to a central
control unit; these transducers construct a baseline in-
stalled on from a large barge to a small boat. It is just
like an upside down version of an LBL system without
requiring any seaﬂoor premounted transponders. How-
ever, accuracy depends on the transducer spacing and
mounting method. When a wider spacing is available,
the performance can be similar to LBL systems. Other-
wise, the accuracy goes down. A USBL system consists
of a small integrated transducer array and a transpon-
der/responder installed on what we want to trace, where
the position of the transponder/responder is calculated
by the combination of a target distance by the time
of ﬂight of a received signal and a target direction by
the phase shift of the received signal on each of the
acoustic elements in the transceiver array, called phase-
differencing. Since a small error of the target direction
calculated by a USBL will become a larger position er-
ror over a great distance, it should be mounted on the
bottom end of a strong and rigid transducer pole, which
is installed either on the side or in some cases on the
bottom of a surface vessel. Additional sensors, includ-
ing high-quality IMU and GPS, have to compensate for
errors due to the any changing position and orientation
of the integrated transducer array.
USBL systems offer many advantages, such as low
complexity, ease of use and not requiring sea ﬂoor
transponders. But they have also some disadvantages.
An installation of a rigid pole for mounting of a trans-
ducer array is needed and a calibration process is
required to determine offsets for the precise alignment

Part B | 25.5
606
Part B
Design
of a USBL system. Most importantly, their positioning
accuracy and robustness are not as good as the LBL sys-
tems. In the case of range, all types are quite accurate
assuming that the line of sight is maintained. However,
the bearing accuracy of LBL systems is less than 1ı,
whereas SBL and USBL systems typically have 13ı
bearing accuracy [25.4].
The GPS intelligent buoys (GIB) system is available
as a promising acoustic positioning system [25.38]. The
conﬁguration of GIB is an inverted LBL, where several
ﬂoating buoys equipped with submerged hydrophones
and GPS receivers measure the time of arrivals (TOAs)
of the acoustic signals sent by the emitter of an underwa-
ter target and from the time measurements tracked po-
sition is calculated in real time. This system allows fast
and easy installation without a calibration process and
a dedicated mother ship and provides real-time multiob-
jects tracking with a fast update rate because of one-way
acoustic signals from the emitter of an underwater tar-
get to the ﬂoating buoys. The number of ﬂoating buoys
is determined by the size of the area and the accuracy re-
quirement of given operations.
25.4.4 Other Sensor Issues
Many sensors and communication devices of an un-
derwater robot, such as altimeter, DVL, imaging sonar,
ranging sonar, acoustic modem, and acoustic position-
ing system are sonar-based devices. The integration and
concurrent operation of multiple sonar sensors could
cause cross-sensor acoustic interference problems. The
contamination caused by such sensor crosstalk severely
degrades the performance and sometimes, more se-
riously, mangles the whole sensor system. Basically,
we have to mediate a sensor conﬁguration including
working frequencies of all sensors and their mounting
positions to avoid sensor crosstalk. For mission sen-
sors, we can selectively turn on the sensors as needed,
considering other sensors installed on the mother ship.
Additionally, potential problems of bio fouling and
corrosion of underwater sensors should be taken into
consideration and the quality of measurements should
be regularly maintained.
Health-monitoring sensors are also very important.
Even though they are small and relatively cheap com-
pared to navigation sensors, it could save a robot.
Health-monitoring sensors cover multipoint tempera-
ture and humidity values inside pressure vessels, status
of the power system, for example, status of a battery
using a battery management system (BMS) or status
of tether cable using a ground fault-monitoring system,
and status of the control system. At the same time, an
emergency plan should be prepared for cases in which
the system is headed toward complete failure. Examples
include a situational warning for high temperature or
clear thruster commands when communication is lost.
An emergency beacon and a ﬂash have to be operated
independently from any system of the robot.
25.5 Computers, Communications, and Architecture
Design of computer systems, software architecture, and
communication systems is a major task in designing
an underwater robot. Designing the overall hardware
and software structures and selecting appropriate com-
ponents are very challenging and crucial. Nowadays,
tethered robots or ROVs use a ﬁber-optic cable for real-
time data transfer between a simple on-board computer
system and a high-performance computing system on
a mother ship. Untethered robots or AUVs require high
computing power resources on-board with an underwa-
ter wireless communication system such as an acoustic
modem.
It is worthwhile to note the Woods Hole Oceano-
graphic Institute (WHOI)’s hybrid ROV, also known
as Nereus [25.8]. It operates in two different modes.
For broad area survey, the vehicle can operate unteth-
ered as an AUV capable of exploring and mapping
the sea ﬂoor with sonars and cameras. For close-up
imaging and sampling, Nereus can be converted at sea
to operate as an ROV, using a lightweight, microthin,
ﬁber-optic tether. Nereus uses its manipulator by tele-
operation via the ﬁber-optic tether while the vehicle can
be considered an AUV. In May 2009, Nereus explored
the Mariana Trench, being the ﬁrst vehicle to explore
the Mariana Trench since 1998.
25.5.1 On-Board Computers
ROVs rely on computing systems on a mother ship
and typical candidates are industrial PCs installed on
a rack or on a shelf inside a control van as a sur-
face control system. The overall system consisting of
several PCs with a high-speed network handles data
from the ROV and commands from its operator in
order to control the ROV. Each computer is desig-
nated for a certain mission such as control, naviga-
tion, etc. However, the recent trend is to simplify the
interface by an integration of multiple PCs and by
speciﬁc software with expectation of cost saving ben-
eﬁts [25.39].
Unlike ROVs, AUVs must have compact, robust, re-
liable, and high-performance on-board computer sys-

Underwater Robots
25.5 Computers, Communications, and Architecture
607
Part B | 25.5
Gigabit
camera 1
1000Mbps
Ethernet PHY1
Zynq-7020 EPP
Cortex-A9
(Vision)
DDR3 memory
DDR3 memory
Quad-SPI
flash memory
SDIO level
translator slot
HDMI codec
/HDMI con.
LEDs
Switches
Extension
port A/B
SDIO
memory
HDMI
monitor
Extension
module
Cortex-A9
(Motion)
PS block (processor side)
PL block (FPGA side)
ECAT IP
/ENET IP
HDMI IP
GPIO
IP
Ext. IP
ECAT IP
/ENET IP
1000Mbps
Ethernet PHY1
PJTAG
33.3333MHz
1000Mbps
Ethernet PHY1
1000Mbps
Ethernet PHY1
PJTAG
33.3333MHz
Gigabit
camera 2
ECAT
Master/slave 1
ECAT
Master/slave 2
AXI interconnect
Fig. 25.3 Hardware conﬁguration of Zynq-7020-based system, mController
tems. One popular choice is a VMEbus (Versa Module
Europa) system [25.40]. Many AUVs before the year
2000 such as ODIN, Oceans Voyager II, and Aqua Ex-
plorer 1000 used a VME system based on Motorola CPU
with a real-time operating system, such as VxWorks and
OS9 [25.2]. Some AUVs like Kambara and Oberon use
Compact peripheral component interconnect (PCI) sys-
tems [25.32, 41]. The controller area network (CAN)
bus was originally designed as a vehicle bus standard to
allow many subsystems such as actuators and sensors to
communicate with each other using only two wires by
a maximum 1 MHz data transmission rate [25.12]. The
CAN bus could bring great advantages in designing the
layout of wire harnesses for internal sensors of an AUV,
but unfortunately, it has not been popular because there
are few internal sensors that support it.
PC-104C is an embedded computer standard which
has no backplane but the boards are stacked on top of
each other via stackable ISA, PCI, and PCIe bus con-
nectors [25.33]. PC-104C based systems are widely
used in various types of embedded applications be-
cause of their advantages such as small size, stackable,
rugged, compact, interoperable, PC compatible high-
quality, low cost, and low power consumption [25.33,
40]. Basically, it consists of a CPU board with an op-
tional power supply module. Other required functions
can be added by stacking multiple peripheral modules
such as frame-grabber, analog digital conveter/digital
analog converter (ADC/DAC) converter, digital IO, re-
lay, serial communication, CAN network, and GPS
receiver from different manufacturers. Each module of-
fers high-performance speciﬁcations and environmental
speciﬁcations, such as extended operating temperature
from 40 to C85 ıC. As an example, a decade ago,
ODIN, originally developed with a VME-based on-
board computer system, was refurbished to a PC-104C
based AUV, ODIN III [25.42]. Today, many recently
developed AUVs employ PC-104C based systems. It
is also noted that as a possibility of a heterogeneous
bus system, there is a PC-104C bus-based system (CPU
module) along with standard VME-based I/O modules
using a protocol interface card [25.40].
PC-104C is a good choice for a single CPU sys-
tem. However, when we need more computing power
for implementing complicated algorithms, additional
PC-104s must be installed because multiple CPUs

Part B | 25.5
608
Part B
Design
Cameras
Monitors
Long fiber optic cable
(Ex. 16 km without repeater)
Computers
Video converter
RS232 converter
RS422/485 converter
LAN converter
Video converter
RS232 converter
RS422/485 converter
LAN converter
Underwater
Surface
Backplane (bus)
Backplane (bus)
F.O. modem
F.O. modem
Sensors
Fig. 25.4 Typical diagram of ﬁber-optic communication system for ROV
are not supported in a PC-104C stack. For example,
yShark [25.43] has three PC104Cs with a high-speed
local area network (LAN) for robot control, image pro-
cessing, and acoustic signal processing. This causes
many difﬁculties, such as a complicated system struc-
ture, wiring, space, and cooling in a pressure vessel.
Alternative design of a distributed on-board system for
an AUV is a combination of a PC-104C system and
an ARM-based system. Besides consumer mobile de-
vices, many mobile robots have used ARM processors
32-bit RISC (reduced instruction set computer) micro-
processors because of its high-performance, low power
consumption, and low cost. As an example, Fig. 25.3
shows a hardware conﬁguration of mController (an-
nounced by Redone technology, Korea) which is based
on the Xilinx Zynq-7020 platform [25.44]. Its size is
only 125 mm  125 mm, and it consists of Dual core
Cortex-A9 for typical motion control and vision pro-
cessing, and an FPGA part for data parsing of various
sensors. In this hardware hierarchy, PC-104 could be
designated to operate high-level tasks.
An
on-board-independent
microcomputer-based
emergency response system is very important to carry
out critical functions, such as power disconnection of
thrusters and weight drop when the on-board main sys-
tem is dead. The emergency response system consists
of a microprocessor that monitors the status of the on-
board main system, an actuator, and a backup battery.
Under normal conditions, the on-board main system
would regularly check the status of the emergency
response system.
25.5.2 Communications
For ROVs, an umbilical cable is used for communica-
tion between an ROV and its mother ship. An umbilical
cable commonly has a coaxial core or a ﬁber-optic core.
A ﬁber-optic cable is much better than a coaxial cable
in terms of performance and physical dimensions. Light
and thin ﬁber-optic cables offer high-speed, secured,
long-distance data transmission without electromag-
netic interference, and less drag force on an ROV, even
though it is an expensive solution mainly because of op-
tic ﬁber distribution devices, ﬁber-optic tools, and the
special knowledge required for a handling ﬁber core.
An umbilical cable of a typical ROV has been designed
to have 23 ﬁber-optic cores including a spare core.
A ﬁber-optic modem connected to each end of a ﬁber-
optic cable sends and receives data at the same time,
working together with several sub-boards that convert
data in various formats, for examples, NTSC Video,
RS232, and LAN as shown in Fig. 25.4.
Since the demand of high-quality video, such as
multiple HD video, 3-D HD video, and UHD (ultrahigh
deﬁnition) video is rapidly increasing, 100 Gbps opti-
cal communication systems are released to handle mass
data using a technology known as dense wave division
multiplex (DWDM) [25.12]. Cable designers are also
making an effort in developing new techniques to add
more ﬁber-optic cores inside an umbilical cable, where
each core could be designated to high-quality video de-
vices. The Nereus team used a light ﬁber tether system
to send a lightweight battery-powered vehicle to the full
depth of the ocean of about 11 km in the ROV mode.
The selected Sanmina/SCI buffered ﬁber is 0:25 mm
in diameter, weighs only 0:173 kg for 11 km cable in
water, has a working strength of 8 N, and a breaking
strength of 108 N [25.5].
For untethered vehicles like AUVs, wireless com-
munication is considered. Typical radio communication
would be ﬁne when an AUV is on the surface. In an un-
derwater environment, acoustic communication is the
practical solution at the moment even though a com-
mercial acoustic modem has a limited range and a very
limited data rate. Table 25.6 shows the speciﬁcations
of commercial acoustic modems. Acoustic communi-
cation is relatively slow compared to radio communi-
cation, and it is fundamentally limited by the speed
of sound in water, roughly 1500 m=s. Because acoustic
attenuation increases with sound frequency, lower fre-
quencies are desirable for long-range communications.
But, to generate signals at very low frequencies, larger
size transducers are needed. This results in lower data
rates that are undesirable [25.2, 13]. The speed and di-
rection of sound propagation vary depending on various
factors such as surface waves, currents, sea state, tides,

Underwater Robots
25.5 Computers, Communications, and Architecture
609
Part B | 25.5
Table 25.6 Speciﬁcations of commercial acoustic modems
Speciﬁcation
A modem
B modem
C modem
D modem
Size (length  dia)
585  183
200  165
235  126(87)
580  150
Material
Aluminum
Aluminum
Weight (air/water)
11=6
5=1:5
4:2=2:3
21/(n/a)
Voltage
1850 VDC
1020 VDC
1224 VDC
1828VDC
Power (transmit/receive/sleep)
< 50 W/1/0.03
20/0.6/0.005
2/0.75/0.008
40/0.9/0.009
Working depth
3000
1000
200
7000
Working temperature (ıC)
540
540
545
545
Beam width
˙25
Hemispherical
210 (Omni)/120 (wide)/70
(narrow)
210 (Omni)/70 (Directional)
Working range
7000 m
Up to 20 km
350 mm
7000 m (Omni)/10 000 m(D)
Frequency
1422 kHz
7:512 kHz
26:7744:62 kHz
7:512:5 kHz
Modulation
QPSK
MFSK and DPSK
Hybrid
Hybrid
Raw data rate
1:515 kbps
2 kbps
9:6 kbps
2:5 kbps
User data rate
0:610 kbps
0:3 kbps
7 kbps
2:0 kbps
Bit error rate
109
106
109
107
Environment
Near vertical, horizontal
Near vertical, horizontal
DPSK: differential phase shift keying
temperature, conductivity, depth, and sea-bottom type.
Hence, acoustic communication is inherently delayed,
due to propagation delay. Several techniques in signal
processing, data packaging, and coding schemes have
been developed to overcome these difﬁculties due to
signal absorption, geometric spreading losses, bound-
ary effects, and multipath through.
Acoustic modems consist of three main parts: an
underwater transducer, an analog transceiver including
a matching preamp and an ampliﬁer, and a hardware
platform for control and signal processing, such as mi-
croprocessor, digital signal processor (DSP), or ﬁeld
programmable gate array (FPGA) [25.45]. When acous-
tic communication technology was in its infancy, an
analog-based hardware platform was developed. Then
digital techniques brought important improvements for
increasing the reliability of transmissions using explicit
error-correction techniques and increasing some level
of compensation for the channel reverberation both
in time (multipath) and frequency (Doppler spread-
ing) [25.46]. There are several methods in digital mod-
ulation, where the most fundamental techniques are
PSK (phase shift keying), FSK (frequency shift keying),
ASK (amplitude shift keying), and quadrature ampli-
tude modulation (QAM), and their improved versions
are MFSK (multiple FSK), QPSK (quadrature phase
shift keying), MPSK (M-ary phase shift keying), MSK
(minimum shift keying), GMSK (Gaussian minimum
shift keying), MQAM (M-ary quadrature amplitude
modulation), and so on.
Just like a typical network, a data packet is packed
with a header and a tail for addressing, error detec-
tion and correction not to be corrupted by transmis-
sion errors. In particular, the data link layer protocol
implemented in some modems detects errors in a re-
ceived packet and then requests retransmissions, which
degrades the effective transfer rate. To reduce the re-
transmission rate, some modems have a function to
adjust the speed of transmission depending on the chan-
nel condition. Another important technique is about
minimizing the effects of multipath, which is most
prominent over long ranges and shallow water because
the original signal can be bounced between the sur-
face and bottom before arriving at the receiver. There
are a few algorithms for robust data transmission in
multipath environments, such as convolutional coding,
multipath guard period, and data redundancy. Also,
a time-reversal technique is an alternative to reducing
the effects of multipath [25.12]. From a practical point
of view, acoustic communication has some other lim-
itations, such as horizontal communication in shallow
water, the loss of line of sight between the modems,
the in-band noise (typically caused by another sonar
system), echo sounder from ships, a shallow zone, and
clouds of air bubbles near a receiver. These limitations
might degrade its performance or make it unreliable.
Electromagnetic waves are strongly absorbed by
sea water, but, for close-range communication, electro-
magnetic communication would be useful because it
would be less affected by multipass interferences. JAM-
STEC (Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and
Technology) has developed a new communication using
electromagnetic waves. This was experimentally evalu-
ated up to 50 m distance [25.12].
Another approach is an optical underwater commu-
nication that achieves much higher data transfer rates

Part B | 25.5
610
Part B
Design
than an acoustic communication system at signiﬁcantly
lower power consumption and smaller packaging.
However,
the
operation
requires
a
point-to-point
communication setting, requiring the alignment of the
receiver and the transmitter for the communication
to work effectively. Their range and scope are also
affected by the water clarity, water light absorption,
and power loss due to propagation spherical spread-
ing [25.47]. Recently, the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT) proposed a real-time video delivery
solution based on underwater optical communication,
AquaOptical II that consists of a high-bandwidth
wireless optical communication device and a two-layer
digital encoding scheme designed for error-resistant
communication of high-resolution images. Its maxi-
mum transmission bandwidth of 4 Mbps and various
video streaming tests showed similar performances
at close ranges of up to 25 m in a pool trial [25.48],
and up to 34 m on the Charles River near Boston. It
requires accurate motion stabilization because of the
narrow beams involved [25.49].
When an AUV is on the surface or an AUV exposes
an antenna above the surface, radio communication is
the best option. For a short range in which an AUV is
operating near shore or its support craft, 900 MHz wire-
less modems or 2:4 GHz 802.11 wireless networks are
common considering antenna sizes [25.49]. For longer
ranges, radio links make use of an earth orbiter satel-
lite like Argos satellites and Iridium satellites. In some
cases, we have to make our own pressure-tight antenna,
including a motion stabilizer to track the satellite re-
gardless of ﬂuctuation of motion. A tracking system for
the Urashima vehicle was developed using data on net-
work design and the oscillating characteristics of the
vehicle [25.12]. Oscillation of the vehicle was measured
with the high-accuracy inertial navigation system in-
stalled in Urashima in a sea trial. An oscillation angle
of 7ı and period of 0:15 Hz were estimated.
25.5.3 Software Architecture
includes various software components as shown in
Fig. 25.5. The lower part of the software architec-
ture is middleware as a class of software technologies
designed to help managing the complexity and hetero-
geneity inherent in distributed systems [25.50]. It is
deﬁned as a layer of software above an operating system
but below application programs that provide a common
programming abstraction across a distributed system.
In the literature, AUV architectures were classi-
ﬁed into four categories – the hierarchical architecture,
the hierarchical architecture, the subsumption architec-
ture, and the hybrid architecture [25.51] or into three
categories – the deliberative architecture, the reactive
architecture, and the hybrid architecture [25.52]. Since
most of the recently developed architectures are hybrid,
instead of describing each architecture, key features of
recently proposed software architectures for AUVs are
described below.
Teleo-Reactive EXecutive (T-REX) was developed
for a speciﬁc underwater robot by the Monterey Bay
Aquarium Research Institute [25.53–55]. It is a goal-
oriented hybrid executive with an embedded automated
planning adaptive execution using agents. In order to
make the embedded automated planning scalable, the
T-REX enables the scope of deliberation to be parti-
tioned functionally and temporally inside units called
Teleo-reactors. A Teleo-reactor agent is considered the
coordinator of a set of concurrent control loops, which
is characterized by functional scope, temporal scope,
and timing requirements.
Huxley was developed by Blueﬁn Robotics origi-
nally for its ﬂeet of AUVs. Since it is for their wide
range of commercial products, the most fundamental
requirement was the ﬂexibility in terms of robustness
and reliability, extensibility for new hardware, main-
tainability, and testability [25.56]. It consists of two
layers – a reactive layer and an executive layer – and it
allows expanding these core layers through a standard
interface. Another key element is the Huxley messaging
protocol, called the stream-oriented messaging archi-
tecture (SOMA), where SOMA is a publish-subscribe
messaging protocol. Huxley’s layered architecture with
SOMA and SOMA interfaces can be extended along
with new functionalities and/or modiﬁed conﬁgurations
of future AUVs while localizing changes and increasing
the reusability of components.
The lightweight communications and marshalling
(LCM) system was designed as an alternative for
implementing inter-process communication (IPC) for
real-time robotics in the marine environment. It was
Less common
functions
Common functions
Middleware
Real-time operating system
Hardware
Hardware
…
Domain specific
functions
Fig. 25.5 Typical conﬁguration of software for robot

Underwater Robots
25.5 Computers, Communications, and Architecture
611
Part B | 25.5
Distributed heterogeneous
hardware/software environment
Abstraction
Customizability
Portability
Real-time
capacity
Communication
Interoperability
Standard
Security
Resource
management
Flexibility
Expandability
Maintainability
Reusability
Fault
tolerance
Self-configuring
self-optimizing
Modular
based
development
Modularity
Fig. 25.6 Key characteristics of middleware
developed speciﬁcally for low-latency, high-throughput
communication accomplished by a set of software
tools for message passing between modules using
user datagram protocol (UDP) multicast, marshalling
(encoding and decoding) of LCM messages, language-
independent data structures for messages of any digital
data, allowing the transparent distribution of the
system. This architecture was veriﬁed by two marine
robotics applications [25.57].
MOOS-IvP consists of two distinct open source
software projects. The Mission Oriented Operating
Suite (MOOS) is, as a core middleware, a suite of
libraries and executables developed by the Mobile
Robotics Group at the University of Oxford. It provides
inter-process communication using a publish-subscribe
model, as a star topology where all messages go through
a central MOOS server. IvP (interval programming)
refers to a multiobjective optimization method used by
the IvP helm for arbitrating between competing behav-
iors in its behavior-based architecture. MOOS provides
modules for navigation, control and data logging, tools
for mission replay from log ﬁles and communication
debugging, and also provides driver modules for some
sensors widely used with AUVs [25.57–59]. MOOS-
IvP has been used for several AUVs including the
Blueﬁn 21 in. UUV, the Hydroid REMUS-100 and
REMUS-600 UUVs, the Ocean Server Iver2 UUV, the
Ocean Explorer 21 in. UUV, autonomous kayaks from
Robotic Marine Systems and SARA Inc., and two larger
USVs from the NATO Underwater Research Center in
La Spezia Italy [25.54, 58].
Let us look at middleware that should be easy to use,
robust against change, reliable for any faults, easy to
maintain, efﬁciently ﬂexible, and supportive for hetero-
geneous and distributed hardware components. Well-
structured proven middleware with some often-needed
and value-added functions would minimize time and
cost for development. In the literature [25.50–53, 56–
58, 60–64], there are many demanded characteristics to
realize above expectations, as shown in Fig. 25.6. Fun-
damental characteristics of middleware are abstraction
and modularity. Abstraction is expected to simplify and
to lessen burdens of application development process,
and modularity is a necessary condition of ﬂexibil-
ity and customizability. Abstraction allows developers
to concentrate on building advanced algorithms them-
selves by hiding details of low-level hardware resources
of heterogeneous and distributed hardware environ-
ments [25.51, 62]. This concept includes more speciﬁed
subissues: interoperability by using simpliﬁed inter-
faces with communication and standard; customizabil-
ity with real-time capacity; and ﬂexibility and resource
management. Additionally, resource management han-
dles faults in hardware. From these characteristics,

Part B | 25.5
612
Part B
Design
a middleware is free from the speciﬁc hardware envi-
ronments, and could obtain portability, self-conﬁguring
and self-optimizing. To achieve ﬂexibility, we have
to follow a modular-based development for increasing
reusability of existing components based on modularity
and interoperability. This development approach allows
us to focus on building modules without considering
speciﬁc relationships between existing modules. Based
on this, expandability and maintainability can be real-
ized, where expandability is the ability to incorporate
new resources, for example, newly developed sensors
without interfering with the existing parts, and main-
tainability is about how easy to embrace modiﬁcation
of components without affecting the rest. To imple-
ment a middleware, standards such as the common ob-
ject request broker architecture (CORBA), the Internet
communications engine (ICE), and the open dynamics
engine (ODE) are applied [25.64], which bring many
advantages. Basically, it requires less effort in imple-
menting and evaluating a core engine from scratch,
and some of these have additional functionalities such
as standardized interface and security. Security as-
pects such as authentication, authorization, and secure
communication become essential for collaborations of
multiple robots or classiﬁed applications [25.64]. So
far, many research groups have proposed their own mid-
dleware for their robots, such as MIRO (middleware
for robot), ORCA (open robot control architecture),
UPnP (universal plug and play), RT (robot-technology),
the player and stage, OPRoS (the open platform for
robotic services), ROS (robot operating system), ORO-
COS (open robot control software), ERSP, MRDS (Mi-
crosoft robotics developers studio), MOOS (the mission
oriented operating suite), and Webots [25.50].
A development of middleware itself is not a trivial
work. Understanding concepts is one thing and imple-
menting them is another. The reasons for possible errors
are mainly:
1. Many inherently distributed and heterogeneous
components which will vary to improve perfor-
mance.
2. The limited and restricted resources available on
a robot platform.
3. The high rate of system failures from incorporat-
ing complicated algorithms and interacting with the
environment, causing exceptional situations [25.50,
62].
Basically, an underwater robot’s middleware has
almost the same requirements as a robot, but the weight-
ing of requirements and the point of view of require-
ments are little different. For an underwater robot’s
middleware, the following points must be considered:
1. Limitation of resources: Underwater robots use
a low bandwidth of an underwater communication
and thus, has to manage a mission using internal
computing resources.
2. Unstable sensor information: Underwater sensors
based on sonar are not stable and accurate enough to
directly use data for robot control systems. There-
fore, assisting algorithms such as well-tuned ﬁl-
tering algorithms and sensor fusion algorithms are
needed.
3. Lack of accessibility: Underwater robots do not
allow any access of an electrical contact used
for debugging because of its water-proof pressure
vessel.
This is one of the most challenging aspects in build-
ing an underwater robot. Thus, for the underwater robot,
middleware should provide an independent channel for
a supporting a debugging process.
No middleware is perfect, but we believe that we
can achieve signiﬁcant improvements through trial and
error coupled with extensive feedback from the com-
munity [25.50]. When you develop system software
and its architecture on your own, the implementation
of abstraction and modularity can be understood with
the white-box framework and the black-box framework
concepts. The black-box framework supports extensi-
bility by deﬁning interfaces for components without
detail information inside the components. White-box,
as a base class in a class library can be designed for
expanding with subclasses, based on object-oriented
language features [25.63]. In the early stage of devel-
opment, software architecture is mainly conceived as
a white box framework. Hence, information inside the
boxes, that is, classes, should be understood. As the ar-
chitecture becomes more advanced and the components
become more concrete, the black-box framework is the
solution for most common expansions. At the moment,
MOOS-IvP would be the best choice to start developing
your vehicle software because it is open source soft-
ware, and there is a relative wealth of information and
case examples for AUVs online.
As an alternative to formal software architectures
discussed above, we propose a simple but effective so-
lution in testing a robot as shown in Fig. 25.7. This
architecture has one real-time thread with several non-
real-time threads for controlling actuators and devices
installed on the robot.
In the Fig. 25.7:
1. The packet conveys three types of commands from
an operator – commands for teleoperation, com-
mands for RT-thread (real-time thread) itself and

Underwater Robots
25.5 Computers, Communications, and Architecture
613
Part B | 25.5
5
4
1
3
6
2
Non RT thread
for controlling
devices
(Relay, IO, etc.)
Packet from outside 
For tele-
operation
commands
AHRS
Command for
controlling
device
Unlock at multiples
of sampling time
DVL
Alti-
meter
Camera
Sonar
Depth
sensors
For
sensors
For sensor
fusion
Read sensor
data
Filtering: senor
data
Control:
heading
Output DA for
thruster
Image
processing
Fusion: senor
data
Control: XY
motion
Control: depth
& pitch
Tele-operation
For control
input
Common
memory
Function pool
Command for
controlling RT thread &
functions in selected task
Real-time thread
Sleep:
(read sensor
data, output DA
= Zero)
Run:
Task A
with selected
functions
Task B
Task C
Fig. 25.7 Example diagram of simple software architecture
functions in the selected tasks, and commands for
devices of the robot.
2. Device control commands run in a non-RT thread
triggered by the RT-thread, typically every 1 s.
3. All sensor data including teleoperation commands
and results of any sensor fusion algorithms are inde-
pendently saved in common memory, and thruster
commands, that is, control input are also saved
here.
4. This architecture has a manual task coordinator and
each task can be easily synthesized using functions
from a function pool.
5. A robot is basically in one of two modes, sleep and
run, where the sleep mode is doing only health-
monitoring with basic sensors, the run mode runs
a selected task which consists of subtasks in func-
tion pool. Tasks are designed for speciﬁc purposes,
and one of them is selected by an operator before
running. Of course, the default task should be the
teleoperation task.
6. The RT-thread carries three main functions: doing
any critical device control commands ﬁrst, DA con-
verting for control input of previous sampling time
saved in the common memory, and processing al-
gorithms using a sensor input saved in the common
memory.
Since the function of this RT-thread is based on
a basic sampling time, we could easily implement
any multisampling time structures for various latency
times of sensors and load-distributing structures to en-
hance the usage of computing resources. This would
be done by calling functions at multiples of the basic
sampling time. This architecture has been applied to
several test-bed AUVs and smart ROVs [25.42, 43, 65]
(
VIDEO 797 ,
VIDEO 799 ).

Part B | 25.6
614
Part B
Design
25.6 Underwater Manipulators
Most commercial underwater robots with manipulators
are ROVs. A typical work-class ROV for intervention
missions has a 7 degrees-of-freedom (DOF) manipula-
tor and a 5 DOF grabber. The manipulator is used for
interactive manipulation by a human operator on the
mother ship, while the grabber is used to maintain a rel-
ative position of ROV to the target object by grabbing
a target structure in the presence of an underwater cur-
rent or wave. This section describes underwater manip-
ulator systems based on materials presented in [25.66].
Table 25.7 lists samples of heavy duty underwater ma-
nipulators currently available in the market. They are
quite expensive but utilize proven technologies in the
ﬁeld. However, most commercial underwater manip-
ulators are hydraulic-driven and developed for ROVs
and they are not suitable for AUVs that have limited
on-board power and whose on-board sensors could be
sensitive to noise. Therefore, electric-driven manipula-
tors would be preferred for AUVs like SAUVIM.
A typical work-class ROV for intervention missions
requires two individual operators, one steering the vehi-
cle and the other operating the manipulator. One of the
main tasks of the vehicle operator is to keep the ROV
as steady as possible (station-keeping) since the vehicle
motion can disturb the manipulator and greatly affects
the accuracy of its end-effector interacting with the en-
vironment. The accuracy of the end-effector would be
greatly improved if the manipulator controller could
compensate for any disturbance due to the motion of
the vehicle. However, most commercial ROV systems
do not use vehicle motion compensation control for the
manipulator. In the past, a very few AUV systems for
intervention missions have been reported and they were
used as a test-bed for developing autonomous manipu-
lation or as a working model for research.
25.6.1 Dynamics
The analysis of the dynamics of underwater vehicle ma-
nipulators is much more complex than that of regular
manipulators on the factory ﬂoor. For example, it is dif-
ﬁcult to accurately introduce the effects of the added
mass and the added moment of inertia in the model-
ing process for multiple links of the manipulator. The
frictional force and the drag force due to the veloc-
ity of the manipulator itself, waves, and currents are
also complex in modeling. The modeling and control
of underwater manipulators were studied by several re-
searchers, including [25.67–78]. In this section, it is not
our intention to derive details of the full dynamic equa-
tions of the underwater vehicle manipulators. Instead,
we would like to point out several speciﬁc elements that
differentiate underwater vehicle manipulators from reg-
ular manipulators. The hydrodynamic forces acting on
a rigid body moving in ﬂuid can be found in [25.79,
80]. Similar to the vehicle main body, each link of the
manipulator will be inﬂuenced by hydrodynamic forces
including added mass, buoyancy acting at the center of
buoyancy of the link, the ﬂuid acceleration force result-
ing from the acceleration of the ﬂuid itself, and the ﬂuid
drag forces exerted on the link.
As the proﬁle drag forces are dominant for slowly
moving objects, the drag force exerting on an inﬁnites-
imal element of the i-th link and the total drag force on
the link can be expressed as
dDfi D 1
2	CDbivrijvrijdx ;
(25.1)
Dfi D 1
2	
l
Z
0
CDbivrijvrijdx ;
(25.2)
where CD is the drag coefﬁcient, 	 is the ﬂuid density,
vri is the relative velocity of the element to the ﬂuid ﬂow
velocity, bi dx is a projected area of the element, and l is
the link length.
Considering the effects of the hydrodynamic vari-
ables above and assuming that the vehicle is stationary
during the manipulation, the dynamic model of an un-
derwater manipulator having a series of links and joints
can be represented by the following equations,
Mm.q/Rq C Cm.q; Pq/ C Dm.q; Pq/ C Fm.Pq/
C Gm.q/ C d D m ;
(25.3)
where q 2 Rn1 is a joint angle vector, m 2 Rn1
a joint torque vector, Mm.q/ 2 Rnn an inertia matrix
including added mass terms, Cm.q; Pq/ 2 Rn1 a nonlin-
ear vector arising from centrifugal and Coriolis effects
including added mass terms, Dm.q; Pq/ 2 Rn1 a nonlin-
ear vector due to hydrodynamic forces, such as drag
forces, Fm.Pq/ 2 Rn1 a nonlinear vector due to fric-
tion at the manipulator joints, Gm.q/ 2 Rn1 a nonlinear
vector due to gravity and buoyancy forces, d 2 Rn1
a vector of unknown signals due to unmodeled dynam-
ics or external disturbances such as current.
During the manipulation, the end-effector or tool
of the manipulator can be in contact with the envi-
ronment, and forces and moments would occur at the
end-effector. In this situation, (25.3) must be modiﬁed
by adding the reaction torque to the end-effector force
on the right-hand side of (25.3)
r D JT
m.q/f e ;
(25.4)

Underwater Robots
25.6 Underwater Manipulators
615
Part B | 25.6
Table 25.7 Samples of commercially available underwater manipulators
Speciﬁcation
Eca robotics
International
submarine
engineering (ISE)
Kraft telerobotics
FMC/Schilling
robotics
Western space and
marine
Model
Arm 7H
Magnum-7
Predator
Titan 4
The ARM
DOF
6 plus gripper
6 plus gripper
6 plus gripper
6 plus gripper
6 plus gripper
Power source
Hydraulic
Hydraulic: max
1000 psi/19 lpm
(5 gpm)
Hydraulic:
103 bar–207 bar
(1500 psi–3000 psi),
19 lpm (5 gpm)
Hydraulic:
103 bar–207 bar
(1500 psi–3000 psi),
19 lpm (5 gpm)
Hydraulic:
max 204 bar
(3000 psi), 7:6 lpm
(2 gpm)
Material
Titanium or alu-
minum
Aluminum with stain-
less steel ﬁttings
Anodized aluminum
and stainless steel
Titanium
Max grip force
490 N (110 lbf)
2009 N (450 lbf)
1334 N (300 lbf)
4092 N (920 lbf)
1467 N (330 lbf)
Wrist torque
108 Nm (80 ft  lbs)
108 Nm (80 ft  lbs)
135 Nm (100 ft  lbs)
170 Nm (125 ft  lbs)
Actuator
Hydraulic cylinder
Hydraulic cylinder
Hydraulic cylinder
Hydraulic cylinder
Hydraulic cylinder
Max reach
1700 mm (6600)
1524 mm (6000)
2019 mm (79:5000)
1920 mm (75:700)
1700 mm (6600)
from azimuth axis
to ﬁngers
Max lift capacity
454 kg (1000 lbs)
227 kg (500 lbs)
454 kg (1000 lbs)
45:4 Kg (100 lbs)
Max lift at full
extent
90 kg (198 lbs)
295 kg (650 lbs)
91 kg (200 lbs)
122 kg (270 lbs)
29:5 kg (65 lbs)
Working depth
(standard)
7500 msw
(24 600 fsw)
6000 msw
(19 700 fsw)
3000 msw
(9800 fsw)
4000 msw (13 100 fsw)
Unlimited
Working depth
(Extended)
Unlimited
11 000 msw
(36 000 fsw)
6500 msw
(21 000 fsw)
7000 msw (22 967 fsw)
Unlimited
Homepage
www.ecarobotics.com
www.ise.bc.ca
www.
krafttelerobotics.com/
www.
fmctechnologies.com/
Schillingrobotics.aspx
www.wsminc.com
where Jm 2 R6n is the manipulator Jacobian matrix,
and f e 2 R61 a vector of forces, and torques at the end-
effector.
The dynamics of the underwater vehicle manipula-
tor is quite complicated, highly nonlinear, and involves
coupled equations with unknown parameters and dis-
turbances as shown in (25.3). It is almost impossible to
accurately model the dynamic equations and to operate
the manipulator at a nominal speed using a conventional
controller. However, when the manipulator moves very
slowly in a friendly environment with no or minimal
current or wave, the dynamics of the manipulator can
be represented by the simpliﬁed linear version of (25.3)
since the effect of velocity-dependent terms become
negligible. In fact, during the actual operation in the
ﬁeld, most commercial underwater manipulators move
very slowly (much less than 1 rad=s) for safety and
other reasons, and they use conventional joint con-
trollers for the master-slave teleoperation.
25.6.2 Teleoperation
A typical setup for teleoperation involves the operator
sitting in the control room located on the mother ship
and holding a master arm that is a miniature of the
actual underwater vehicle manipulator (slave arm) at-
tached to the ROV. The operator controls the slave arm
by moving the master arm and its motion is followed by
the slave arm. During the operation, the operator relies
on visual information of the work site in the form of
a series of two-dimensional (2-D) video images that are
captured by cameras on the vehicle main body and the
slave arm. The images are then transmitted to the con-
trol room monitors by an underwater cable. The view of
the work site is not only limited, but the visual informa-
tion especially for the deep sea operation is also often
delayed. If the vehicle is not holding or sitting on an un-
derwater structure, the ROV operator must try to control
the vehicle for station-keeping during the manipulation.
However, even if there is no current or wave during
the station-keeping, the vehicle moves like free ﬂoat-
ing within the accuracy of the vehicle position sensors
in the order of a meter or so. Therefore, it is difﬁcult
to achieve the accuracy at the end-effector since under-
water vehicle manipulators are attached to the vehicles
that are constantly moving, unlike industrial manipu-
lators, whose bases are ﬁxed on the factory ﬂoor. As
mentioned in [25.81], many simple tasks on the ground
such as plugging become very difﬁcult to perform by
the underwater vehicle manipulator. Underwater plug-
ging tasks, done on a trial-error basis as the required
precision cannot be achieved by the ROV manipulator

Part B | 25.6
616
Part B
Design
system, take hours to complete. Therefore, operator fa-
tigue often becomes a critical issue in tele-operating the
underwater vehicle manipulator.
25.6.3 Autonomous Manipulation
Autonomous manipulation on a moving base, such as
terrestrial mobile robots, humanoids, and underwater
robotic vehicles is a very challenging task in the area of
robotics in general, especially in unstructured environ-
ments, such as underwater. It is deﬁned as the capability
of a robot system that performs intervention tasks
requiring physical contact with unstructured environ-
ments without continuous human supervision. Unlike
industrial manipulators which have ﬁxed bases on the
ﬂoor, autonomous manipulation requires a system ca-
pable of assessing a situation, including self-calibration
based on sensory information, and executing or revis-
ing a course of manipulating action without continuous
human intervention. Therefore, developing a system
capable of fully autonomous manipulation would be
a great achievement and make a substantial impact on
a variety of application areas with signiﬁcant economi-
cal, societal, and scientiﬁc importance [25.82].
Let us look at one scenario of cutting an underwater
cable. With given information about the cable’s location
and shape, the vehicle has to navigate to the location,
Fig. 25.8 The SAUVIM vehicle (Sand Island, Hawaii,
2008)
identify the cable, position itself, and cut the cable. It
may sound like a very simple task. However, it would
not be so simple if it has to be done in autonomous
mode. Even in teleoperation mode, it would not be an
easy task without the coordinated motion control if the
vehicle is ﬂoating in water. In fact, the low bandwidth
and signiﬁcant time delay inherent in acoustic subsea
communications represent a considerable obstacle to
remotely operate a manipulation system, making it im-
possible for remote controllers to react to problems in
a timely manner. Nevertheless, robots for autonomous
underwater intervention would pave the way for a dif-
ferent range of new operations, such as deep-ocean
and under-ice exploration, tasks in hazardous areas,
tasks in natural or man-made disastrous regions, au-
tomated searches, and surveillance missions, to name
a few.
In the past, many researchers have studied advanced
control of AUV itself as reported in [25.83–91], but
only a few AUVs with manipulators were introduced.
OTTER is an AUV equipped with a single degree-
of-freedom arm, which was designed to be used as
a test-bed for developing autonomous technologies at
Fig. 25.9 Girona 500 I-AUV

Underwater Robots
25.7 Conclusions and Further Reading
617
Part B | 25.7
the Stanford Aerospace Robotics Lab in 1996. It is
a hovering-capable underwater vehicle that operates
in a test tank at the Monterey Bay Aquarium Re-
search Institute (MBARI) [25.92]. Another intervention
AUV, namely ALIVE, was developed by Cybernetix in
2003. The aim of the EU-funded ALIVE project was
to develop an intervention-AUV capable of docking to
a subsea structure, which has not been speciﬁcally mod-
iﬁed for AUV use. A description of the ALIVE vehicle
was given in [25.93].
The key technology in underwater intervention per-
formed with autonomous vehicles is autonomous ma-
nipulation. In the literature, no such system fully func-
tional for autonomous manipulation was reported until
recent developments with a semi-autonomous underwa-
ter vehicle for intervention missions, SAUVIM [25.94–
97]. SAUVIM (Fig. 25.8) funded by the US Ofﬁce
of Naval Research was jointly developed by the Au-
tonomous Systems Laboratory (ASL) of the University
of Hawaii, Marine Autonomous Systems Engineering
(MASE), Inc. in Hawaii, and Naval Undersea Warfare
Center Division Newport (NUWC) in Rhode Island.
The ﬁrst fully autonomous manipulation in an un-
structured ocean environment was demonstrated with
SAUVIM at Snug Harbor, Honolulu, Hawaii on Jan-
uary 20, 2010. Following its success, more underwater
vehicles having the capability of autonomous manipula-
tion are expected to develop in the near future. Among
some exemplar, underwater intervention tasks are ob-
ject recovery/rescue, and maintenance/repairing of un-
derwater facilities. Therefore, one may consider a task
like black-box recovery, grasping an object of inter-
est and placing it at a desired location for benchmarks
in future development. One recent development after
SAUVIM is the TRIDENT project [25.98–101] in Eu-
rope, which developed Girona 500 I-AUV (Fig. 25.9).
They performed an autonomous underwater interven-
tion task, with a black-box recovery in Port de Sóllers
harbor (Mallorca) in October 2012 [25.14].
As subsea business in oil and gas industry is about
to boom in the very near future, AUVs for inter-
vention missions will receive more attention. While
autonomous underwater manipulation is still an active
research topic, recent development with SAUVIM and
Girona 500 I-AUV would accelerate advancement in
the ﬁeld.
25.7 Conclusions and Further Reading
In this chapter, we described major subsystems of un-
derwater robots – mechanical systems, power systems,
actuators, sensors, computing systems, software archi-
tecture, communications, and manipulator systems, and
also discussed critical design issues from the authors’
practical experiences.
There are currently more than 1000 work-class
ROVs. They are used for various applications, such
as scientiﬁc research, military operations, and under-
water constructions. About 57% of ROVs are used
for offshore oil and gas industry. Most commercial
ROVs have used old but proven technologies in the
past 20 years. However, the ROV operation is very
expensive as it requires a mother ship and, there-
fore, developing advanced ROVs or smart ROVs for
efﬁcient operations in terms of operating hours and
costs has received much attention. There are more
than 550 AUVs in use worldwide and some of them
are commercially available. While the use of AUVs
is still limited, advantages of AUVs have been rec-
ognized by the recent AUV operations in the ﬁeld:
post-incident monitoring of BP Macondo oil leakage
in 2010 and the successful recovery of black boxes
of Air France ﬂight 447 that crashed into the At-
lantic Ocean in 2009. Therefore, it is expected to see
more underwater robots for various applications in the
future.
Some web-based resources related to the top-
ics of this chapter include the following sites: the
Remotely Operated Vehicles Committee of the Ma-
rine Technology Society (http://www.rov.org/), the Au-
tonomous Undersea Vehicles Application Center (AU-
VAC, http://www.auvac.org) and the technical com-
mittee on Marine Robotics of the IEEE Society
of Robotics and Automation (http://webuser.unicas.it/
MarineRoboticsTC). A list of AUVs and developers can
be found at http://www.transitport.net/Lists/AUVs.Org.
html. AUVSI (Association for Unmanned Vehicle Sys-
tems International) and ONR (US Ofﬁce of Naval Re-
search) sponsor International Autonomous Underwater
Vehicle Competition as well as Autonomous Surface
Vehicle competition (http://www.auvsifoundation.org/
AUVSI/FOUNDATION/Competitions/).
It is worthwhile to note that several important ini-
tiatives [25.1, 101] in underwater robotics in Europe
have been made including AMADEUS for developing
dexterous arms for underwater manipulation; GREX –
coordination and control of cooperating heterogeneous
unmanned systems in uncertain environments; CO-
3AUVs – cognitive cooperative control for AUVs;
FREESUBNET – a Marie Curie research training net-
work on marine robotics; and TRIDENT that developed
Girona 500 I-AUV for autonomous underwater inter-
vention tasks.

Part B | 25
618
Part B
Design
Video-References
VIDEO 793
Six-legged waking underwater robot, Crabster
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/25/videodetails/793
VIDEO 794
Preliminary results of sonar-based SLAM using landmarks
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/25/videodetails/794
VIDEO 796
First record of deep-sea diving of Hamire, depth was 5882m
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/25/videodetails/796
VIDEO 797
Preliminary experimental result of an ROV, iTurtle
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/25/videodetails/797
VIDEO 799
Preliminary experimental result of an AUV, yShark2
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/25/videodetails/799
References
25.1
J. Yuh, G. Marani, D.R. Blidberg: Applications of
marine robotic vehicles, Intell. Serv. Robotics 4(4),
221–231 (2011)
25.2
J. Yuh: Design and control of autonomous under-
water robots: A survey, Auton. Robots 8(1), 7–24
(2000)
25.3
S.W. Moore, H. Bohm, V. Jensen: Underwater
Robotics: Science, Design and Fabrication (Ma-
rine Advanced Technology Education MATE Center,
Monterey 2010)
25.4
R.D. Christ, R.L. Wernli: The ROV Manual: A User
Guide for Observation Class Remotely Operated
Vehicles (Elsevier, Amsterdam 2007)
25.5
K. Hardy, S. Weston, J. Sanderson: Under pressure:
Testing before deployment is integral to success at
sea, Sea Technol. 50(2), 19–25 (2009)
25.6
T. Hyakudome: Design of autonomous underwa-
ter vehicle, Int. J. Adv. Robotic Syst. 8(1), 131–139
(2011)
25.7
W.H. Wang, R.C. Engelaar, X.Q. Chen, J.G. Chase:
The state-of-art of underwater vehicles – Theo-
ries and applications. In: Mobile Robots – State
of the Art in Land, Sea, Air, and Collaborative
Missions, ed. by X.Q. Chen, Y.Q. Chen, J.G. Chase
(InTech, Rijeka 2009)
25.8
A.D. Bowen, D.R. Yoerger, C. Taylor, R. Mc-
Cabe, J. Howland, D. Gomez-Ibanez, J.C. Kinsey,
M. Heintz, G. McDonald, D.B. Peter, S.B. Fletcher,
C. Young, J. Buescher, L.L. Whitcomb, S.C. Mar-
tin, S.E. Webster, M.V. Jakuba: The Nereus hybrid
underwater robotic vehicle for global ocean sci-
ence operations to 11,000 m depth, Proc. MTS/IEEE
Ocean (2007)
25.9
T.J. Osse, T.J. Lee: Composite pressure hulls for
autonomous underwater vehicles, Proc. MTS/IEEE
Ocean (2007)
25.10
K. Hardy: Anodizing aluminum for underwater
applications, Ocean News Technol. 15(3), 54–56
(2009)
25.11
S.M.A. Sharkh, G. Griffiths, A.T. Webb: Power
sources for unmanned underwater vehicles. In:
Technology and Applications of Autonomous Un-
derwater Vehicles, ed. by G. Griffiths (Taylor Fran-
cis, New York 2002) pp. 19–35
25.12
H. Yoshida: Fundamentals of underwater vehicle
hardware and their applications. In: Underwater
Vehicles, ed. by A.V. Inzartsev (InTech, Rijeka 2009)
pp. 557–582
25.13
L.L. Whitcomb: Underwater robotics: Out of the
research laboratory and into the field, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2000) pp. 709–
716
25.14
Ø. Hasvold, N.J. Størkersen, S. Forseth, T. Lian:
Power sources for autonomous underwater vehi-
cles, J. Power Sourc. 162(2), 935–942 (2006)
25.15
A. Mendez, T.J. Leo, M.A. Herreros: Fuel cell power
systems for autonomous underwater vehicles:
State of the art, Proc. Int. Conf. Energy (2014)
25.16
K.L. Davies, R.M. Moore: Unmanned underwater
vehicle fuel cell energy/power system technol-
ogy assessment, IEEE J. Ocean Eng. 32(2), 365–372
(2007)
25.17
H. Yoshida, T. Sawa, T. Hyakudome, S. Ishibashi,
T. Tani, M. Iwata, T. Moriga: The high efficiency
multi-less (HEML) fuel cell – A high energy source
for underwater vehicles, buoys, and stations,
Proc. MTS/IEEE Ocean (2011)
25.18
Q. Cai, D.J. Browning, D.J. Brett, N.P. Brandon:
Hybrid fuel cell/battery power systems for under-
water vehicles, Proc. 3rd SEAS DTC (2007)
25.19
K. E. Robinson: Li-poly pressure-tolerant batter-
ies dive deep, Batter. Power Prod. Technol. 11(2),
999999 (2007)
25.20
M.C. Wrinch, M.A. Tomim, J. Marti: An analysis of
sub sea electric power transmission techniques
from DC to AC 50/60 Hz and beyond, Proc. MTS/IEEE
Ocean. (2007)
25.21
N. Størkersen, Ø. Hasvold: Power sources for AUVs,
Proc. Sci. Def. Conf. (2004)
25.22
S. Cohan: Trends in ROV development, Mar. Tech-
nol. Soc. J. 42(1), 38–43 (2008)
25.23
E. Mellinger: Power system for new MBARI ROV,
Proc. IEEE Oceans (1993) pp. 152–157
25.24
M.R. Arshad: Recent advancement in sensor
technology for underwater applications, Indian
J. Mar. Sci. 38(3), 267–273 (2009)
25.25
L. Lionel: Underwater robots part I: Current sys-
tems and problem pose. In: Mobile Robotics,

Underwater Robots
References
619
Part B | 25
ed. by A. Lazinica (InTech, Rijeka 2006) pp. 335–
360
25.26
S.M.A. Sharkh: Propulsion systems for AUVs. In:
Technology and Applications of Autonomous Un-
derwater Vehicles, ed. by G. Griffiths (Taylor Fran-
cis, New York 2002) pp. 109–1255
25.27
T. Schilling, W. Klassen, C. Barrett, J. Stanley:
Power at depth: Efficient ROV power delivery and
thrust generation for improved construction, re-
pair, and maintenance support, Proc. Offshore
Technol. Conf. (2005)
25.28
P.D. Groves: Principles of GNSS, Inertial, and Mul-
tisensor Integrated Navigation Systems (Artech
House, Boston 2013)
25.29
F. Viksten: On the Use of an Accelerometer for
Identification of a Flexible Manipulator, Master
Thesis (Linköping Univ., Linköping 2001)
25.30
J. Romeo, G. Lester: Navigation is key to AUV mis-
sions, Sea Technol. 42(12), 24–30 (2001)
25.31
J.C. Kinsey, R.M. Eustice, L.L. Whitcomb: A˜survey
of
underwater
vehicle
navigation:
Recent
advances
and
new
challenges,
Proc.
Int.
Conf.
Manoeuvering
Control
Mar.
Craft,
Lis-
bon (2006)
25.32
C. Silpa-Anan, T. Brinsmead, S. Abdallah, A. Zelin-
sky: Preliminary experiments in visual servo con-
trol for autonomous underwater vehicle, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2003)
pp. 1824–1829
25.33
RTD Embedded Technologies, Inc., What is PC/104?
http://www.rtd.com/PC104/Default.htm (2014)
25.34
A. Kenny, G. Lopez: Advances in and extended ap-
plication areas for Doppler sonar, Proc. MTS/IEEE
Ocean. (2012)
25.35
E. Thurman, J. Riordan, D. Toal: Multi-sonar inte-
gration and the advent of senor intelligence. In:
Advances in Sonar Technology, ed. by S.R. Silva
(InTech, Rijeka 2009) pp. 151–164
25.36
Sound Metrics Corporation (Bellevue, WA): Didson
Sonar, L http://www.soundmetrics.com/products/
didson-sonars (2015)
25.37
Y. Lee, T.G. Kim, H.-T. Choi: Añew approach of
detection and recognition for artificial landmarks
from noisy acoustic images, Adv. Intell. Syst. Com-
put. 274, 851–858 (2014)
25.38
A. Alcocer, P. Oliveira, A. Pascoal: Underwater
acoustic positioning systems based on buoys with
GPS, Proc. 8th Europ. Conf. Underw. Acoust., Vol.
8 (2006) pp. 1–8
25.39
L. Brun: ROV/AUV trends market and technology,
Mar. Technol. Rep. 5(7), 48–51 (2012)
25.40
G.
Verma,
M.
Kalra,
S.K.
Jain,
D.A.
Roy,
B.B. Biswas: Embedded
PC
based controller
for use in VME bus based data acquisition system,
Proc. 9th Int. Workshop Pers. Comput. Part. Accel.
Controls (2012) pp. 65–76
25.41
S.B.
Williams,
P.
Newman,
G.
Dissanayake,
J. Rosenblatt, H. Durrant-Whyte: A˜decoupled,
distributed auv control architecture, Int. Symp.
Robotics 31, 246–251 (2000)
25.42
H.-T. Choi, A. Hanai, S.K. Choi, J. Yuh: Devel-
opment of an underwater robot, ODIN-III. Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst. (IROS) (2003)
pp. 836–841
25.43
D. Lee, G. Kim, D. Kim, H. Myung, H. Choi:
Vision-based object detection and tracking for
autonomous navigation of underwater robots,
Ocean Eng. 48, 59–68 (2012)
25.44
Xilinx, Inc.: Zynq-7000 all programmable SoC,
http://www.xilinx.com/products/silicon-devices/
soc/zynq-7000/index.htm (2014)
25.45
B. Benson, Y. Li, R. Kastner, B. Faunce, K. Domond,
D. Kimball, C. Schurgers: Design of a˜low-cost, un-
derwater acoustic modem for short-range sensor
networks, Proc. MTS/IEEE Ocean. (2010)
25.46
D.B. Kilfoyle, A.B. Baggeroer: The state of the art
in underwater acoustic telemetry, IEEE J. Ocean.
Eng. 25(1), 4–27 (2000)
25.47
Z. Jiang: Underwater acoustic networks–issues
and solutions, Int. J. Intell. Control Syst. 13(3),
152–161 (2008)
25.48
M.W. Doniec, A. Xu, D. Rus: Robust real-time
high definition underwater video streaming with
AquaOptical II, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA), Karlsruhe (2013)
25.49
J.W. Nicholson, A.J. Healey: The present state of
autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) applica-
tions and technologies, Mar. Technol. Soc. J. 42(1),
44–51 (2008)
25.50
W.D. Smart: Is a˜common middleware for robotics
possible?, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2007)
25.51
K.P. Valavanis, D. Gracanin, M. Matijasevic, R. Kol-
luru, G.A. Demetriou: Control architectures for au-
tonomous underwater vehicles, IEEE Control Syst.
17(6), 48–64 (1997)
25.52
P. Ridao, J. Yuh, J. Batlle, K. Sugihara: On AUV con-
trol architecture, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2000) pp. 855–860
25.53
C.
McGann,
F.
Py,
K.
Rajan,
H.
Thomas,
R.
Henthorn,
R.
McEwen:
T-rex:
A ˜model-
based architecture for AUV control, Proc. 3rd
Workshop Plan. Plan Exec. Real-World Syst.
(2007)
25.54
E.F. Perdomo, J.C. Gámez, A.C.D. Brito, D.H. Sosa:
Mission specification in underwater robotics,
J. Phys. Agents 4(1), 25–34 (2010)
25.55
M.L. Seto (Ed.): Marine Robot Autonomy (Springer,
New York 2013)
25.56
D. Goldberg: Huxley: A˜flexible robot control ar-
chitecture for autonomous underwater vehicles,
Proc. MTS/IEEE Ocean. (2011)
25.57
B.S. Bingham, J.M. Walls, R.M. Eustice: Develop-
ment of a˜flexible command and control software
architecture for marine robotic applications, Mar.
Technol. Soc. J. 45(3), 25–36 (2011)
25.58
MOOS-IvP:
http://oceanai.mit.edu/moos-ivp/
pmwiki/pmwiki.php
25.59
M.R.
Benjamin,
H.
Schmidt,
P.M.
Newman,
J.J. Leonard: Nested autonomy for unmanned
marine vehicles with MOOS-IvP, J. Field Robotics
27(6), 834–875 (2010)
25.60
C. Lin, X. Feng, Y. Li, K. Liu: Toward a˜generalized
architecture for unmanned underwater vehicles,

Part B | 25
620
Part B
Design
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011)
pp. 2368–2373
25.61
N. Mohamed, J. Al-Jaroodi, I. Jawhar: Middleware
for robotics: A˜survey, Proc. IEEE Conf. Robotics,
Autom. Mechatron. (2008) pp. 736–742
25.62
M. Namoshe, N.S. Tlale, C.M. Kumile, G. Bright:
Open middleware for robotics, Proc. 5th Int. Conf.
Mechatron. Mach. Vis. Pract. (2008) pp. 189–
194
25.63
D. Brugali, G.S. Broten, A. Cisternino, D. Colombo,
J. Fritsch, B. Gerkey, G. Kraetzschmar, R. Vaughan,
H. Utz: Trends in robotic software frameworks. In:
Software Engineering for Experimental Robotics,
ed. by D. Brugali (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2007) pp. 259–266
25.64
A.
Elkady,
T.
Sobh:
Robotics
middleware:
A˜comprehensive literature survey and attribute-
based bibliography, J. Robotics 2012, 959013
(2012)
25.65
S. Kim, H.-T. Choi, J.-W. Lee, Y.J. Lee: Design,
implementation, and experiment of an under-
water robot for effective inspection of underwater
structures, Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Robot Intell. Tech-
nol. Appl. (2013)
25.66
T.W. Kim, J. Yuh, G. Marani: Underwater vehi-
cle manipulators. In: Springer Handbook of Ocean
Engineering, ed. by M. Dhanak, N. Xiros (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2016), in press.
25.67
N. Kato, D.M. Lane: Coordinated control of mul-
tiple manipulators in underwater robots, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 3 (1996)
pp. 2505–2510
25.68
M.W. Dunnigan, D.M. Lane, A.C. Clegg, I. Edwards:
Hybrid position/force control of a˜hydraulic under-
water manipulator, Proc. IEEE Control Theory Appl.
143, 145–151 (1996)
25.69
B. Lévesque, M.J. Richard: Dynamic analysis
of a manipulator in a˜fluid environment, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 13(3), 221–231 (1994)
25.70
H. Mahesh, J. Yuh, R. Lakshmi: A˜coordinated con-
trol of an underwater vehicle and robotic manip-
ulator, J. Robotics Syst. 8(3), 339–370 (1991)
25.71
S. McMillan, D.E. Orin, R.B. McGhee: Efficient dy-
namic simulation of an underwater vehicle with
a robotic manipulator, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cy-
bern. 25(8), 1194–1206 (1995)
25.72
T.W. McLain, S.M. Rock, M.J. Lee: Experiments
in the coordinated control of an underwater
arm/vehicle system, Autom. Robotics 3, 213–232
(1996)
25.73
T.J. Tarn, G.A. Shoults, S.P. Yang: A˜dynamic model
of an underwater vehicle with a˜robotic manip-
ulator using kanes method, Autom. Robot. 3,
269–283 (1996)
25.74
K. Ioi, K. Itoh: Modelling and simulation of an un-
derwater manipulator, Adv. Robot. 4(4), 303–317
(1989)
25.75
I. Schjølberg, T.I. Fossen: Modelling and control of
underwater vehicle-manipulator systems, Proc.
3rd Conf. Mar. Craft Manoeuvering Control (1994)
25.76
K.N. Leabourne, S.M. Rock: Model development of
an underwater manipulator for coordinated arm-
vehicle control, Proc. MTS/IEEE Ocean., Vol. 2 (1998)
pp. 941–946
25.77
M. Lee, H.-S. Choi: A˜robust neural controller for
underwater robot manipulators, IEEE Trans. Neu-
ral Netw. 11(6), 1465–1470 (2000)
25.78
J.-H. Ryu, D.-S. Kwon, P.-M. Lee: Control of un-
derwater manipulators mounted on an ROV us-
ing base force information, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 4 (2001) pp. 3238–3243
25.79
M.H. Patel: Dynamics of Offshore Structures (But-
terworths, London 1989)
25.80
A.W. Troesch, S.K. Kim: Hydrodynamic forces act-
ing on cylinders oscillating at small amplitudes,
J. Fluids Struct. 5(1), 113–126 (1991)
25.81
M. Hildebrandt, L. Christensen, J. Kerdels, J. Al-
biez, F. Kirchner: Realtime motion compensation
for ROV-based teleoperated underwater manip-
ulators, Proc. MTS/IEEE Ocean. Eur. (2009) pp. 1–6
25.82
O. Brock, R. Grupen: Final Report of NSF/NASA
Workshop on Autonomous Mobile Manipula-
tion (AMM) (Univ. of Massachusetts, Amherst
2005)
25.83
G. Antonelli: Underwater Robots, Springer Tracts
in Advanced Robotics, Vol. 96, 3rd edn. (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 2014)
25.84
M. Carreras, J. Yuh, J. Batlle, P. Ridao: A˜behavior-
based scheme using reinforcement learning for
autonomous underwater vehicles, IEEE J. Ocean.
Eng. 30(2), 416–427 (2005)
25.85
M. Carreras, J. Yuh, J. Batlle, P. Ridao: Appli-
cation of SONQL for real-time learning of robot
behaviors, Robots Auton. Syst. 55(8), 628–642
(2007)
25.86
S. Zhao, J. Yuh: Experimental study on advanced
underwater robot control, IEEE Trans. Robotics
21(4), 695–703 (2005)
25.87
A. Hanai, H.-T. Choi, S.K. Choi, J. Yuh: Experimen-
tal study on fine motion control of underwater
robots, Adv. Robotics 18(10), 963–978 (2004)
25.88
T.W. Kim, J. Yuh: Application of on-line neuro-
fuzzy controller to AUVs, Inf. Sci. 145(1), 169–182
(2002)
25.89
C.S.G. Lee, J.-S. Wang, J. Yuh: Self-adaptive
neuro-fuzzy systems for autonomous underwa-
ter vehicle control, Adv. Robotics 15(5), 589–608
(2001)
25.90
J. Yuh, J. Nie: Application of non-regressor-based
adaptive control to underwater robots: Experi-
ment, Comput. Electr. Eng. 26(2), 169–179 (2000)
25.91
K.C. Yang, J. Yuh, S.K. Choi: Fault-tolerant sys-
tem design of an autonomous underwater vehicle
ODIN: An experimental study, Int. J. Syst. Sci.
30(9), 1011–1019 (1999)
25.92
H.H. Wang, S.M. Rock, M.J. Lees: Experiments in
automatic retrieval of underwater objects with an
AUV, Proc. MTS/IEEE Ocean., Vol. 1 (1995) pp. 366–
373
25.93
J. Evans, P. Redmond, C. Plakas, K. Hamilton,
D. Lane: Autonomous docking for intervention-
AUVs using sonar and video-based real-time 3D
pose estimation, Proc. MTS/IEEE Ocean., Vol. 4
(2003) pp. 2201–2210

Underwater Robots
References
621
Part B | 25
25.94
G. Marani, S.K. Choi, J. Yuh: Underwater au-
tonomous manipulation for intervention mis-
sions AUVs, Ocean Eng. 36(1), 15–23 (2009)
25.95
G. Marani, J. Yuh, S.K. Choi: Autonomous ma-
nipulation for an intervention AUV. In: Advances
in Unmanned Marine Vehicles, IEE Control En-
gineering Series, ed. by B. Sutton, G. Roberts
(Institution of Engineering and Technology, Lon-
don 2006) pp. 217–237
25.96
G. Marani, S.K. Choi, J. Yuh: Real-time center
of buoyancy identification for optimal hovering
in autonomous underwater intervention, Intell.
Serv. Robotics 3(3), 175–182 (2010)
25.97
D. Beciri: SAUVIM robot completed its first fully
autonomous mission, http://www.robaid.com/
search/SAUVIM (2010)
25.98
P. Sanz, R. Ridao, G. Oliver, P. Casalino, C. Insaur-
ralde, C. Silvestre, C. Melchiorri, A. Turetta: TRI-
DENT: Recent improvements about autonomous
underwater intervention missions, Proc. IFAC
Workshop Navig. Guid. Control Underw. Veh.
(NGCUV) (2012)
25.99
D. Ribas, N. Palomeras, P. Ridao, M. Carreras,
A. Mallios: Girona 500 AUV: From survey to inter-
vention, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 17(1), 46–53
(2012)
25.100
M. Prats, D. Ribas, N. Palomeras, J.C. Garcia,
V. Nannen, S. Wirth, J.J. Fernañdez, J.P. Beltrañ,
R. Campos, P. Ridao, P.J. Sanz, G. Oliver, M. Car-
reras, N. Gracias, R. Marín, A. Ortiz: Reconfigurable
AUV for intervention missions: A˜case study on un-
derwater object recovery, Intell. Serv. Robotics
5(1), 19–31 (2012)
25.101
Trident: Marine Robots and Dexterous Manipula-
tion for Enabling Autonomous Underwater Multi-
purpose Intervention Missions: Newsletter Octo-
ber 2012, http://www.irs.uji.es/trident/files/2nd-
TRIDENT-SCHOOL-Newsletter-Oct2012.pdf (2012)

Multimedia Contents Flying Robot
623
Part B | 26
26. Flying Robots
Stefan Leutenegger, Christoph Hürzeler, Amanda K. Stowers, Kostas Alexis, Markus W. Achtelik,
David Lentink, Paul Y. Oh, Roland Siegwart
Unmanned aircraft systems (UASs) have drawn
increasing attention recently, owing to ad-
vancements in related research, technology, and
applications. While having been deployed suc-
cessfully in military scenarios for decades, civil
use cases have lately been tackled by the robotics
research community.
This chapter overviews the core elements of
this highly interdisciplinary field; the reader is
guided through the design process of aerial robots
for various applications starting with a qualitative
characterization of different types of UAS. Design
and modeling are closely related, forming a typi-
cally iterative process of drafting and analyzing the
related properties. Therefore, we overview aerody-
namics and dynamics, as well as their application
to fixed-wing, rotary-wing, and flapping-wing
UAS, including related analytical tools and practical
guidelines. Respecting use-case-specific require-
ments and core autonomous robot demands, we
finally provide guidelines to related system inte-
gration challenges.
26.1
Background and History.......................
624
26.1.1
A Glimpse of History ..................
624
26.2 Characteristics of Aerial Robotics ..........
625
26.2.1
Aerial Robots Classification.........
625
26.2.2 The Effect of Scale .....................
626
26.3 Basics of Aerodynamics
and Flight Mechanics...........................
629
26.3.1
Properties of the Atmosphere .....
630
26.3.2 General Fluid Dynamics
and 2-D Flow around Airfoils .....
630
26.3.3 Wing Aerodynamics ...................
633
26.3.4 Performance of Rotors
and Propellers ..........................
635
26.3.5 Drag.........................................
637
26.3.6 Aircraft Dynamics
and Flight Performance Analysis .
638
26.4 Airplane Modeling and Design .............
641
26.4.1
Forces and Moments..................
641
26.4.2 Static Stability ...........................
642
26.4.3 Dynamic Model .........................
643
26.4.4 Design Guidelines .....................
644
26.4.5 A Simple Autopilot.....................
646
26.5 Rotorcraft Modeling and Design ...........
647
26.5.1
Mechanical Design of Rotors
and Propellers ..........................
648
26.5.2 Rotorcraft Dynamics...................
648
26.5.3 Simplified Aerodynamics............
649
26.5.4 Nonuniform Inflow....................
651
26.5.5 Flapping Dynamics ....................
651
26.5.6 Flight Dynamics Assessment .......
652
26.6 Flapping Wing Modeling and Design ....
653
26.6.1
Aerodynamic Mechanisms..........
653
26.6.2 Sizing New Flappers...................
655
26.7 System Integration and Realization ......
659
26.7.1
Challenges
for Autonomous UAS ..................
659
26.7.2
Levels of Autonomy ...................
659
26.7.3
UAS Components .......................
660
26.8 Applications of Aerial Robots................
662
26.8.1
Demonstrated Applications
of UAS ......................................
662
26.8.2 Current Applications
and Missions ............................
664
26.8.3 Aerial Robots:
Emerging Categories ..................
664
26.8.4 Open Issues ..............................
665
26.9 Conclusions and Further Reading .........
666
Video-References.........................................
666
References...................................................
667

Part B | 26.1
624
Part B
Design
26.1 Background and History
The ﬁeld of aerial robotics encompasses a very broad
class of ﬂying machines that nowadays often possess
the perception capabilities and decisional autonomy to
accomplish complex tasks without the need for any
direct human interventioning. Historically and within
the aerospace jargon, robotic ﬂying machines are com-
monly referred to as unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs),
while the entire infrastructures, systems and human–
machine interfaces required for autonomous operation
are often called unmanned aerial systems (UAS). Aerial
robotic technologies are currently on the cutting edge
of aerospace and robotic research. Breakthrough con-
tributions take place in various ﬁelds such as design,
estimation [26.1], perception [26.2], control [26.3], and
planning [26.4], paving the way for a historical change
on how ﬂying systems are operated and what applica-
tion challenges they fulﬁll.
As a class of systems, aerial robots have their roots
in the ﬁrst guided missiles; however, nowadays they re-
fer to a wide variety of advanced intelligent systems.
According to the American Institute of Aeronautics
and Astronautics (AIAA) [26.5], a UAV is deﬁned
as
an aircraft which is designed or modiﬁed, not to
carry a human pilot and is operated through elec-
tronic input initiated by the ﬂight controller or by
an onboard autonomous ﬂight management control
system that does not require ﬂight controller inter-
vention.
As is generally the case in robotics, aerial robots tend
to become more and more complex systems as a result
of the effort to achieve advanced decision making and
planning capabilities based on its on-board perception
of the environment and a set of relatively abstract mis-
sion goals.
Aerial robots posses the unique capability to gen-
tly ﬂy over terrain that other robots struggle to roll or
crawl over. The price to be paid is related with the
advanced challenges in terms of system design, propul-
sion, perception, control, and navigation. Autonomous
ﬂight requires handling of all six degrees of freedom
and advanced cognition capabilities within challenging
environments. In that sense, perception and naviga-
tion complexity drastically increase, while payload and
available power consumption for processing tends to
be limited, especially as scale decreases. Essentially,
the design of aerial robots requires increased attention
and thorough selection, or even combination, of one or
more existing or new ﬂying concepts, electronic com-
ponents and algorithms. The design engineer has to
assess speciﬁc optimization challenges and trade-offs
as important desired goals like decreased weight and
modularity typically contradict each other.
26.1.1 A Glimpse of History
Aerial robotics is a ﬁeld of active research and promis-
ing perspectives, yet it already accumulates more than
a century of developments. Figure 26.1 depicts some
historical as well as recent examples of UAVs in the
military and civilian sector. Starting as conceptual de-
signs in the context of the human efforts to develop
ﬂying machines, aerial robots soon proved their ex-
tensive potential and have already created their own
legacy. As was also the case for manned aviation, aerial
robotic technologies accelerated within the framework
of the 20th century world conﬂicts. Within World War I,
Hewitt–Sperry developed an automatic plane that acted
as a ﬂying torpedo, carrying onboard intelligence to au-
tonomously sustain ﬂight over long periods of time.
This page-turning success was achieved through the
integration of (Sperry’s self-made) gyroscopes which
were then mechanically connected to the control sur-
faces and therefore established the necessary feedback
control loop. During World War II, the German armed
forces deployed one of the ﬁrst successful cruise mis-
siles, the V–1. Despite the fact that V–1 had limited
success rate it did incorporate most of the elementary
components, estimation algorithms and control loops
that can allow autonomous navigation and reference
tracking. Military applications kept being, and still are,
the main driving force of aerial robotics research and
the newest developments in the area change and shape
the modern warfare. With the introduction of global
positioning systems (GPSs), aerial robots managed to
achieve the ﬁrst completely autonomous surveillance
missions. As information and intelligence gathering be-
came one of the most important aspects of the world’s
open or silent conﬂicts, military research around the
1970s led to systems equipped with cameras and other
sensory systems, giving birth to the UAV prototype the
way we know it today. However, civil applications are
currently emerging at a very fast pace and the majority
of market predictions converge to the conclusion that
this area will take dominant characteristics, and most
importantly, will become an equally important – if not
more – innovation drive.
Within this framework, the advancements in the
ﬁeld of microprocessors, miniaturized sensing, as well
as actuator efﬁciency and downscaling greatly acceler-
ated the ﬁeld of aerial robots and paved the way for
the great achievements we observe today. Aerial robots
have advanced to a state in which sophisticated sensor

Flying Robots
26.2 Characteristics of Aerial Robotics
625
Part B | 26.2
Atlantik solar
Firefly
Apid 60
Predator
Robocopter
nEuron
V-1
Hewit–Sperry
D-21
Fig. 26.1 A glimpse on the UAS history through some examples starting from the Hewitt–Sperry Automatic Airplane
(1917), the V-1 ﬂying bomb (1944), and the Lockheed D-21 (1962) until the recent examples of military (Predator,
Robocopter, nEuron) and civilian (AtlantikSolar, Fireﬂy, Apid 60) aerial robots
modules for onboard state estimation and environmen-
tal perception, powerful embedded processors running
sophisticated navigation algorithms, potentially several
communication interfaces, as well as high-end-mission-
oriented payloads that enable the execution of challeng-
ing tasks, can be tightly integrated.
26.2 Characteristics of Aerial Robotics
This section aims to provide an overview of the key
characteristic features and properties of different aerial
robotic conﬁgurations as well as a classiﬁcation based
on the key advantages and limitations of some of the
most common ﬂying concepts found in unmanned avi-
ation.
26.2.1 Aerial Robots Classification
Compared to the categorization of manned aviation,
aerial robots classiﬁcation is more complex, as the
term currently refers to a very wide variety of sys-
tems of different scale, mechanical conﬁguration, and
actuation principles. In their vast majority, aerial robots
correspond, in one way or another, to miniaturized ver-
sions of manned aircraft designs. Relatively classical
ﬁxed-wing unmanned aerial systems (FW-UAS) de-
signs and rotary-wing unmanned aerial systems (RW-
UAS) such as those shown in Fig. 26.2 are common
vehicle conﬁgurations one may encounter in most ap-
plications, including those of surveillance, monitoring,
inspection, mapping, or payload transportation. How-
ever, even within these relatively traditional concepts,
several design aspects differ from those chosen for
manned systems. This reﬂects the fact that for different
scales, the variation of the physical properties behavior,
along with the search for optimized designs, will natu-
rally lead to modiﬁed and novel design considerations.
This is further triggered by the fact that the absence
of a pilot on-board unlocks a wide set of engineering
choices, typically out of question or even forbidden in
manned aviation. As expected for a multitude of en-
gineering reasons, large UAS tend to follow design
concepts closer to – while at smaller scale to classi-

Part B | 26.2
626
Part B
Design
Endurance
Scale
Maneuverability
Endurance
RW-UAS
FW-UAS
Scale
Endurance
LtA-
UAS
FW-UAS
RW-UAS
Convertibles
Bio-
inspired
Blimps
Electric gliders
Delta-wings
Acrobatic flyers
Tilt-rotors
Multirotors
Conventional
helicopters
Flapping wing
systems
Coaxial
helicopters
Ducted fan
Tail-sitters
Fig. 26.2 Classiﬁcation of aerial robotics based on their endurance and maneuverability properties. Also note the signif-
icant effect of scale which highlights that comparisons should be done on similar scales
cal designs while as scale decreases innovation – at the
level of the ﬂying principle – becomes more and more
intense.
Apart from lighter-than-air systems (LtA-UAS),
FW-UAS tend to be the most power efﬁcient ﬂying
principle, while RW-UAS are tailored to increased ma-
neuverability as well as the ability of stationary vertical
ﬂight (hovering). This general classiﬁcation (also valid
for manned aviation) is then further complicated with
the relatively large class of convertible designs (such
as tilt-rotors or cruise-ﬂight-enabled ducted fans). This
ﬁrst attempt for aerial robots classiﬁcation has then to
be further augmented to account for the biologically in-
spired concepts, and especially the emerging ﬁeld of
ﬂapping-wing UAS (Fl-UAS). Figure 26.2 provides an
abstract – yet incomplete – overview of the vehicle
classes one may encounter in most of the application
ﬁelds. As shown, a large diversity is observed as a re-
sult of the engineering efforts to propose designs with
optimized endurance, agility, controllability, or even
simplicity in a very wide scale range. In the following
subsections, a brief overview on how the main aerody-
namic forces and effects depend on the design scale of
an aerial vehicle are provided.
26.2.2 The Effect of Scale
The understanding of how aerial vehicles manage to
remain airborne, provides a useful insight into the
effect of scale, and how different dimensioning has
a huge impact on the efﬁciency of every ﬂying machine.
Table 26.1 provides an overview of the formulas ex-
pressing the lift force, as well as the drag forces that
govern the ﬂight of the most common UAS conﬁgu-
rations. More detailed deﬁnitions on the aerodynamic
forces can be found on the subsequent sections.
Within these equations, 	 is the density of the air
while the remaining parameters are speciﬁc to the ve-
hicle conﬁguration. For FW-UAS, cL and cD represent
the wing lift and drag coefﬁcients, respectively, A is
the wing area, and Vt denotes the airspeed. For the
case of RW-UAS, cT and cQ denote the rotor thrust
and drag coefﬁcients, .R2/ is the rotor disk area, ˝
is the angular velocity of the rotor, and R is the rotor
disk radius. Finally, for LtA-UAS, VLtA is the volume
of the blimp, cLtA
D
is the drag coefﬁcient depending
on the blimp shape, Vt is the blimp’s airspeed, ALtA
is the blimp surface in the direction of motion and
	gas is the ﬁlling gas density. Figure 26.3 illustrates
Table 26.1 Formulas of the main aerodynamic forces and
moments for common UAS conﬁgurations. FW stands for
ﬁxed-wing UAS, RW for rotary-wing, and LtA for lighter-
than-air
UAS
Lift/Thrust
Drag force/Moment
FW
L D 1
2 cL	AV2
t
D D 1
2 cD	AV2
t
RW
T D cT	.R2/.R˝/2
Q D cQ	.R2/.R˝/2R
LtA
Ls D gVLtA.	gas  	/
D D 1
2 cLtA
D 	ALtAV2
t

Flying Robots
26.2 Characteristics of Aerial Robotics
627
Part B | 26.2
L
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
Ls
D
T
D
a)
b)
c)
Fig.26.3a–c Main aerodynamic forces applied on (a) ﬁxed-wing, (b) rotary-wing, and (c) lighter-than-air systems.
(a) AtlantikSolar is a solar-powered FW-UAS developed by the Autonomous Systems Lab at ETH Zurich, (b) Fire-
ﬂy is developed by Ascending Technologies GMBH, while (c) Skye is developed by students of ETH Zurich
these forces on the body of the relevant aerial vehicle
conﬁgurations.
Derivation of scaling laws starts with the obser-
vation of the lift and drag forces and how these are
functions of scale-dependent parameters such as the
area of the wing or the rotor radius. Proper dimen-
sioning is essentially a very complex procedure where
a multitude of factors has to be taken into account.
Among others, one has to account for the issues of
aerodynamics efﬁciency, availability of propulsion sys-
tems at a given scale, the technologies they employ
(e.g., electric motors, jet engines) as well as the sim-
plicity and robustness of the corresponding mechanical
conﬁguration. In the following, scaling laws and rel-
evant design guidelines for ﬁxed-wing, rotary-wing,
and lighter-than-air systems are provided. Only a brief
overview is provided for the case of ﬂapping-wing sys-
tems, as the effect of scale on such UAS conﬁgurations
is separately discussed within Sect. 26.6.
FW-UAS
Scaling laws express the dominant role of size and scale
for a given vehicle conﬁguration. In the case of ﬁxed-
wing systems, the wing loading, deﬁned as the ratio of
the weight (W) versus the wing area A, is the key param-
eter one has to focus to get some ﬁrst insight on the role
of scale. The Tennekes diagram shown in Fig. 26.4 pro-
vides a visual interpretation of this fact [26.6]. Working
around the point that the lift force exactly counteracts
the weight, the indicated trend line was derived using
the following formulas [26.7]
W
A D
3p
W47 ;
W
A D 1
2cL	V2
t ;
A D bwcw ;
(26.1)
where Vt is the airspeed, W is the weight, A is the wing
area, bw is the wing span, and cw is the wing chord.
These equations express the role of the lifting properties
of the airfoil and airspeed against the ratio of the weight
of the ﬂying body and its wing area. For this analysis,
a ﬁxed aspect ratio . D bw=cw/ is assumed for all sizes
of aircraft. Although such a simple analysis does not
account for the details of the ﬂuid dynamics environ-
ment between the different aircraft sizes, it is known
that smaller aircrafts are typically built with lower as-
pect ratios, and that the difference in aspect ratio over
existing aircraft within the size range of interest is sig-
niﬁcant.
RW-UAS
For the case of rotorcraft conﬁgurations, similar scaling
laws regarding the vehicle efﬁciency may be derived. It
is important to highlight however that especially for ro-
torcrafts, working with scaling laws demands that one
has to simultaneously focus on both efﬁciency and dy-
namic response in order to avoid undesired effects in the
vehicle ﬂight dynamics such as unstable oscillations.
Regarding the power efﬁciency, let power loading (PL)
be deﬁned as T=P, where P corresponds to the ideal
power. As the induced ideal power to hover is given by
P D T%h, the ideal power loading will be inversely pro-
portional to the induced velocity at the rotor disk %i
%h D %i )
s
T
2	.R2/ D P
T D .PL/1 :
(26.2)
Observing Fig. 26.5, it is shown that the ratio T=P
decreases quickly with increasing disk loading. There-
fore, conﬁgurations with proportionally smaller rotors
against their mass will tend to be less efﬁcient in hov-
ering ﬂight; that is, the rotor will require proportionally
more power to generate the required amount of thrust.
It is also to be noted, however, that calculation of the
actual power loading and rotor efﬁciency requires the
consideration of viscous losses.
From the above brief analysis, we concluded that in
general the tendency to increase the rotor dimension fa-
vors efﬁciency. However, this is not the only scaling law
one has to consider. Rotorcrafts are particularly com-

Part B | 26.2
628
Part B
Design
Midge
Gnat
House fly
Honey bee
Bumblebee
Dung beetle
Dung beetle
House wren
Spotted sandpiper
Puffin
Ruffed grouse
Pheasant
Canada goose
Beach baron
Learjet 31
F-16
Mig-23
F-15
Airbus A380
Being 777  
Boeing 737-900
Fokker F-28
Supermarine spitfire
Piper warrior
Solar pathfinder
Gossamer condor
Solar challenger
Skysurfer
Solar zephyr
Solar sunrise
White pelican
Brown pelican
Snowy owl
 
Goshawk
Common tem
Hermit thrush
Privet hawk
Eyed hawk
Ant lion
1
2
3
4
5
7
10
20
30
50 70 100
Cruising speed Vt (m/s)
200
106
105
104
103
102
101
100
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
10–5
102
100
101
103
104
Wing loading W/A (N/m2)
Weight  W (N)
Fig. 26.4 Tennekes size trend relating
wing loading and cruise speed to
weight for insects, birds, and manned
aircraft
plex dynamic systems and scaling considerations also
have to focus on dynamic aspects of their ﬂight. A more
concrete analysis may take place using Froude or Mach
scaling models. Let N denote the length scale between
two vehicles, Rm the rotor radius of the model vehicle,
and Rp the rotor radius of the prototype vehicle: thus,
a scale factor N denotes a helicopter 1=N times the size
of its prototype. Table 26.2 summarizes the Froude and
Mach scaling laws that account for the role of scale in
a set of signiﬁcant parameters namely the length of the
model and the prototype Lm, Lp, the dominant time con-
stants tm, tp of the inner-loop characteristic response,
the characteristic velocities Vm, Vp, the weight values
Wm, Wp, the expected moments of inertia Im, Ip, and the
response-dominant frequencies !m, !p.
These, slightly more advanced scaling laws, fur-
ther provide the opportunity to assess the aspects of
main rotor performance, and more speciﬁcally the ex-
pected thrust margin. Traditional manned helicopters
have small thrust margins in hover, typically 510%
while miniaturized vehicles often present very high val-
ues. Mach models predict in general faster rotor speeds
as compared to Froude scaled models, which conse-
quently leads to a lower expected thrust coefﬁcient. The

Flying Robots
26.3 Basics of Aerodynamics and Flight Mechanics
629
Part B | 26.3
Hovering efficiency (power loading) (lb hp–1)
Effective disk loading (lb ft2)
10
1
100
1000
VTOL
Conventional
helicopters
Tilt-rotors
Tilt-wings
10
8
6
4
2
0
Compound
helicopters
Fig. 26.5 Hovering efﬁciency versus
disk loading for a range of vertical lift
aircraft
Table 26.2 Scaling laws for conventional helicopters
Dimension
Froude
Mach
Length
Lm D Lp=N
Lm D Lp=N
Time constant
tm D tp=
p
N
tm D tp=N
Speed
Vm D Vp=
p
N
Vm D Vp
Weight
Wm D Wp=N3
Wm D Wp=N3
Inertia mat.
Im D Ip=N5
Im D Ip=N5
Frequency
!m D !p
p
N
!m D !pN
thrust coefﬁcient reﬂects the lift loading of the rotor. For
a given, single rotor conﬁguration, the maximum thrust
is provided by the following expression
Tmax D .cT=/max	.R2/.˝R/2 ;
(26.3)
where  represents the blade solidity (Sect. 26.3.4).
This relation gives a maximum thrust that scales as
Tmax / 1=N3 for a Froude model and as Tmax / 1=N2
for a Mach model. Once divided by the vehicle weight
which scales as W / 1=N3, it is deduced that Froude
models present a similar thrust-to-weight ratio. On the
contrary, for a Mach model, there is an increasing
expected maximum thrust-to-weight: .T=W/max / N.
Using these formulas, researchers in [26.8] calculated
the scaling parameters for several conventional heli-
copters that provide intuitive insight on how scaling
laws work.
LtA-UAS
For the case of lighter-than-air vehicles simple scaling
laws regarding the efﬁciency of the system hold. Con-
sidering the example of a spherical blimp, it is directly
deduced that the lift force scales with the cubic power
of the radius. On the other hand, its mass, which de-
pends on the surface, scales with the square power of
the radius and also does the drag force. This essentially
indicates that larger blimps will tend to have a higher
maximum lift to weight and lift-against-drag force ra-
tios.
Fl-UAS
Analysis of the scaling laws for ﬂapping wing systems
requires a different treatment, as the ﬂight modality
changes while the robot operates in hover mode or nav-
igates in forward ﬂight. Furthermore, the lift and drag
coefﬁcients are dependent on the airfoil characteristics
of the wing and also on the ﬂapping frequency, a fact
that further increases the complexity of the analysis on
the effect of scale. Section 26.6 provides insight on how
to deal with this challenging issue so that proper ﬂap-
ping wing systems design is achieved.
26.3 Basics of Aerodynamics and Flight Mechanics
Assembling an analytic representation of a UAS in-
volves the derivation of approximative expressions for
the aerodynamic forces, accounting for the actuator dy-
namics and appending the resulting effect to the vehicle
body equations of motion. The goal of this section is
to provide the necessary insight and understanding of

Part B | 26.3
630
Part B
Design
–60 –40 –20
0
20
a) Altitude h AMSL (km)
Temperature T (°C)
20
15
10
5
0
0
500
1000
b) Altitude h AMSL (km)
Pressure p (hPa)
20
15
10
5
0
0
0.5
1
1.5
c) Altitude h AMSL (km)
Density ρ (kg/m3)
20
15
10
5
0
Fig. 26.6 Variation of (a) air tempera-
ture, (b) pressure, and (c) density with
altitude in the lower part of the In-
ternational Standard Atmosphere.The
tropopause, above which the tem-
perature is not further decreasing,
corresponds to the red dashed line. It
constitutes the upper limit of common
weather phenomena
the underlying mechanisms and physical phenomena
along with the derivation of the formulae for the most
dominant effects one has to account for with any UAS
conﬁguration.
26.3.1 Properties of the Atmosphere
Assessing ﬂow properties forms the basis for any fur-
ther qualitative or quantitative aerodynamic analysis
relevant for aircraft design, modeling and control. The
international standard atmosphere (ISA) [26.9] pro-
vides a reference for the average main air characteristics
as a function of altitude. Figure 26.6 shows the evolu-
tion of air temperature Tair, pressure p, and density 	.
These parameters largely affect the Reynolds number
Re, which can be interpreted as the inﬂuence of iner-
tial forces as compared to viscous forces of a ﬂow, as
well as the Mach number Ma representing the ratio of
airspeed versus speed of sound.
It is noteworthy that the above parameters may be
brought into relationship by the ideal gas law
p D 	RTair ;
(26.4)
with R D 286:97 m2=s2=ıK denoting the ideal gas con-
stant of air.
1
2
3
4
9
8
7
6
5
10
Fig. 26.7 Characteristics of a 2-D ﬂow around an airfoil 1 – Free
stream velocity ﬁeld, 2 – Streamline, 3 – Stagnation point, 4 –
yLaminar boundary layer, 5 – Overpressure, 6 – ySuction, 7 – Tran-
sition point, 8 – Turbulent boundary layer, 9 – Separation point,
10 – Separated ﬂow
In contrast to aerodynamics, where forces, ﬁrst
and foremost lift, is generated by motion of an object
through the air, the aerostatic lift force is formed solely
by static properties of an object. It forms the basis of
operation for a balloon or blimp.
According to Archimedes’ principle, the aerostatic
lift Lstat pointing upward, amounts to
Lstat D 	Vg  mg ;
(26.5)
where g stands for the Earth gravitational acceleration,
V for the volume of the object, and m for its mass. To
state an example, consider a helium balloon of spher-
ical shape with a diameter amounting to 1 m in the
lower atmosphere. Neglecting its hull weight (thus with
m D 	heliumV), it will generate an aerostatic lift force of
5:4 N, representing an upper bound for any kind of total
design mass including payload. Increasing the diameter
of said sphere to 1:5 m has the huge effect of increasing
lift to 18:1 N.
26.3.2 General Fluid Dynamics
and 2-D Flow around Airfoils
A
general
airﬂow
around
an
aircraft
is
three-
dimensional, unsteady, and may be turbulent, even
interacting with a nonrigid structure. In this setting,
computations are almost intractable. We will thus rely
on certain simpliﬁcations in order to allow simpler cal-
culations and notably enhancing the understanding of
a ﬂow ﬁeld together with resulting forces and moments.
In both airplane and rotorcraft aerodynamics, the as-
sumption of a locally two-dimensional (2-D) ﬂow can
be very helpful to serve as a starting point for more ad-
vanced computation.
Before diving into a formal treatment, the example
in Fig. 26.7 depicts some characteristic elements of 2-D
ﬂow around an airfoil.
Notice that the pressure distribution on the airfoil
contour is induced by the ﬂow ﬁeld, making the most

Flying Robots
26.3 Basics of Aerodynamics and Flight Mechanics
631
Part B | 26.3
signiﬁcant contribution to the aerodynamic force and
moment. However, also viscous effects yield a typically
unwanted share in the overall force (and moment) in
the form of shear stress transmitted to the surface. The
elements overviewed in Fig. 26.7 will now be explained
in the following paragraphs.
Finite Control Volume Analysis:
Mass and Momentum Conservation
Consider a ﬁnite control volume B bounded by the
surface S with normal n, which may contain a body
or airfoil, depending on the context. For convenience,
parts of the boundaries are often chosen to be stream-
lines (in 2-D) or stream surfaces (in 3-D). For this
volume, the conservation of mass must be fulﬁlled
“
S
	v  ndS ;
(26.6)
where n denotes the ﬂuid velocity vector.
From classical Newtonian mechanics, we can fur-
thermore postulate the applicability of conservation of
linear and angular momentum
Ftot D
“
S
	v.v  n/dS C
“
S
pndS
C @
@t
•
B
	v dB ;
(26.7)
Mtot D
“
S
	.v  r/.v  n/dS
C @
@t
•
B
	.v  r/dB ;
(26.8)
where r denotes the position vector.
Differential Volume Analysis:
Euler and Bernoulli Equations
When applied to a differential volume and assuming
inviscid ﬂow, (26.7) can be used to derive Euler’s equa-
tion
	
 @
@t C v  r

v C rp D 0 :
(26.9)
This equation forms the basis of many ﬁnite-element-
based numerical tools neglecting viscous effects outside
the boundary layer. Such methods employ potential
ﬂow theory along with some boundary layer analy-
sis module; free example tools are JavaFoil [26.10]
and xfoil [26.11] for 2-D ﬂow computation as well as
XFLR [26.12] allowing also 3-D ﬂow extensions.
When applying (26.9) along a streamline and under
the assumption that the ﬂow is incompressible (a fair as-
sumption for low-speed aerodynamics up to Ma D 0:3),
Bernoulli’s equation relating speed (Vt) and pressure
can be formulated
	V2
t
2 C 	gh C p D const ;
(26.10)
where g denotes gravitational acceleration and h the el-
evation – the aerostatic pressure component 	gh can
often be neglected due to small elevation changes along
a streamline.
Viscous Effects and the Boundary Layer
While it is often a valid approximation to neglect vis-
cous effects far enough from the body surfaces, they
have to be considered within the boundary layer, where
the ﬂuid is slowed down to meet the speed of the sur-
face. The friction shear stress w transmitted to the
surface is characterized by the gradient of the ﬂow
speed perpendicular to the surface
w D  dU
dn ;
(26.11)
where  denotes the dynamic viscosity of the ﬂuid, U
stands for the airspeed parallel to the surface, and n for
the coordinate along the surface normal n. This tan-
gential ﬂuid velocity gradient in the boundary layer is
visualized qualitatively in Fig. 26.7.
The boundary layer will be laminar around the nose,
with the ﬂuid moving parallel to the surface. At some
point (at a critical local Reynolds number), however,
inﬂuenced by disturbances such as surface roughness,
a transition to a turbulent boundary layer will occur: it
is characterized by stochastic ﬂuctuations, signiﬁcantly
thicker and producing substantially more friction than
before the transition.
dL
dM
dD
c
α
Fig. 26.8 Decomposition of the aerodynamic force by
a 2-D ﬂow around an airfoil: the section lift dL denotes the
component perpendicular to the far-ﬁeld inﬂow, and drag
dD the one parallel to it

Part B | 26.3
632
Part B
Design
−10
0
10
1.5
1
0.5
0
−0.5
1.5
1
0.5
0
−0.5
1.5
1
0.5
0
−0.5
α (°)
0
0.05
0.1
cd
cm
−0.4
−0.2
0
 
Re=100000
Re= 200000
Re= 300000
Re= 400000
Re= 500000
Re= 600000
Re= 700000
Re= 800000
Re= 900000
Re=1000000
a)  cl 
b)  cl 
c)  cl 
Fig.26.9a–c SA7036 low-speed airfoil lift (a), drag (b), and moment (c) polars for various Reynolds numbers calculated
by Javafoil
Section Lift, Drag,
and Moment Representation
with Dimensionless Coefficients
Historically and for practical reasons, the aerodynamic
force is split into a component perpendicular to the in-
ﬂow direction called lift, and a second one parallel to the
inﬂow called drag. We write 2-D lift, drag, and moment
as inﬁnitesimal quantities dL, dD, and dM, respec-
tively, as opposed to L, D, and M designating physical
forces of a whole airplane. Figure 26.8 visualizes these
quantities. Furthermore, we deﬁne the angle of attack ˛
as the angle between inﬂow direction and the chord line
of length c connecting airfoil leading edge and trailing
edge. Note that force and moment are reduced to the
point at 0:25c, i. e., one quarter of the chord behind the
leading edge.
Dimension analysis suggests the formulation of
aerodynamic forces and moments in terms of section
lift, drag, and moment coefﬁcients cl, cd, and cm
dL D 1
2	V2
t clcdy ;
(26.12)
dD D 1
2	V2
t cdcdy ;
(26.13)
dM D 1
2	V2
t cmc2 dy ;
(26.14)
where Vt stands for the inﬂow speed and dy denotes an
inﬁnitesimal length element perpendicular to the 2-D
ﬂow (which can be interpreted as a length element into
span-wise direction of an inﬁnitely long wing).
These coefﬁcients largely depend on the angle of
attack ˛; but furthermore, the Reynolds and Mach num-
bers signiﬁcantly inﬂuence them as well. The angle of
attack dependences are typically given in the form of
section lift, drag and moment polars, an example of
which is provided in Fig. 26.9. Note that the drag com-
ponent is originating both from viscous skin friction
as well as form drag, caused by an asymmetric pres-
sure distribution due to boundary layer development
and separation. The lift curve shows its characteristic
linear increase with increasing ˛ for small angles of at-
tack. The maximum and minimum lift values beyond
which stall is entered are clearly visible in the lift po-
lar. Note that the aerodynamic performance cl=cd of
the airfoil generally decreases with smaller Reynolds
numbers as expected. The choice of reference point at
0:25c typically leads to a mostly constant moment coef-
ﬁcient when varying ˛, cl, respectively, as can be seen
in Fig. 26.9 as well.
Separation and Stall
At the upper side of the airfoil, the ﬂuid is moving
from the under-pressure region toward a higher pres-
sure at the trailing edge; the slower moving ﬂuid in the
boundary layer will at some point not be able to follow
this adverse pressure gradient, leading to ﬂow separa-
tion. As the angle of attack is increased, the separation
point suddenly moves far toward the leading edge: this
condition is referred to as stall, with the catastrophic
consequence of signiﬁcant loss of lift and increase of
drag. Figure 26.10 illustrates the changes in the ﬂow
and pressure distribution when varying the angle of at-
tack. Note that the maximum lift and stall conditions
are highly inﬂuenced by the choice of airfoil, Reynolds
number, and Mach number.

Flying Robots
26.3 Basics of Aerodynamics and Flight Mechanics
633
Part B | 26.3
26.3.3 Wing Aerodynamics
So far the 2-D ﬂow characteristics around airfoils were
treated. This will form the basis for the understanding
and computation of lift and thrust forces generated on
any type of aircraft; the following treatment of a ﬁnite
wing serves as an important example of how to include
three-dimensional (3-D) ﬂow effects.
Recording lift and drag polars for a ﬁnite wing
rather than just for its airfoil reveals less lift increase per
angle of attack increase, less maximum lift, and higher
drag at raised angles of attack. These observations are
related to the concept of induced ﬂow to be treated in
the following.
Vortex System of a Wing
As a direct consequence of lift, we observe a downward
ﬂow deﬂection across an airfoil. This is intuitively ex-
plained with conservation of linear momentum as stated
in (26.7). Assuming an inviscid and incompressible
ﬂuid, the ﬂow may be modeled with potential ﬁeld the-
ory [26.13], where the velocity vector ﬁeld is deﬁned as
the gradient of a scalar function. This concept allows for
the insertion of singularities into a free stream, such as
sources, sinks, and vortices. Figure 26.11 shows a ﬁrst
approximation using a single vortex – conceptually il-
lustrating the ﬂow characteristics around a simpliﬁed
wing. The vortex system consists of the bound vortex
and tip vortices; note that the vortex will in theory have
to be closed to a ring by a starting vortex. In prac-
tice, i. e., in the presence of friction, the vortices will
of course decay over time. Figure 26.12 illustrates the
existence of tip vortices trailing an airplane wing.
The vortices induce a downwash area behind the
wing; nevertheless, the trailing vortices will also induce
some downward ﬂow at the wing.
Induced Drag
With the simpliﬁed concept of the vortices around
a wing in mind, we conclude that the wing lift induces
downward ﬂow, thus reducing the effective angle of
attack when looking at the 2-D-ﬂow of a wing cross-
section. Figure 26.13 illustrates this reduction of the
angle of attack from ˛f (free stream) to ˛e (effective) by
the induced angle ˛i that is caused by the induced ﬂow
component wi. Note that this reduction of angle of at-
tack is typically resulting in a smaller lift. Furthermore,
when decomposing the lift into components parallel and
perpendicular to the free stream velocity, it becomes ap-
parent that a part dDi of the lift results parallel to the
effective inﬂow, thus will contribute to the overall drag
of the wing. The integral of these components is re-
ferred to as induced drag. The actual amount of induced
drag largely depends on the wing geometry; a variety of
α
α
α
α
a) Small angle of attack
b) Nominal level flight angle of attack
c) Maximum lift, cl, max
d) Stall
Fig.26.10a–d Changes in the ﬂow characteristics with increasing
angle of attack ˛. For a small ˛ (a) the example nonsymmetric air-
foil will generate some lift. (b) depicts nominal operation. At some
˛, the maximum lift cl;max is reached (c). Beyond that angle of at-
tack, stall occurs (d)
Bound vortex
Trailing vortex
Trailing vortex
Downwash
Fig. 26.11 Simpliﬁed representation of the wing vortex
system: as a consequence of lift, a bound vortex is formed
along with trailing wingtip vortices inducing downwash
approaches have been employed in order to minimize
induced drag, the most popular of which are winglets.

Part B | 26.3
634
Part B
Design
Fig. 26.12 Wake vortex study by NASA at Wallops Island:
the tip vortices are visualized using colored smoke rising
from the ground
Free
stream
Effective
inflow
dDi
dL
dD
αf
αi
ωi
αe
Fig. 26.13 Induced drag on a ﬁnite wing cross section: the induced
downwash wi causes a reduced effective angle of attack. As a con-
sequence, the lift dL contains a component dDi parallel to the free
stream velocity vector
For an approximately elliptical lift distribution, the in-
duced drag coefﬁcient can be roughly calculated as
cD;i D C2
L
e ;
(26.15)
with the aspect ratio  and the Oswald efﬁciency e (de-
viation from the truly elliptic distribution) amounting
from 0.7 to 0.85 for typical conﬁguration.
Lifting Line Method
In the following, we present one example of how
to numerically approximate the lift and drag distri-
bution of a wing including induced drag. The lifting
line method is a 2.5-D (two-and-a-half-dimensional)
approach in which the induced ﬂow is viewed as gen-
erated by several discrete horseshoe vortices rather
than just one as introduced qualitatively earlier. Fig-
ure 26.14 depicts the geometry and variables involved.
Note that the method only provides reliable results,
if the assumption holds that spanwise ﬂow is negli-
gible; in particular, spanwise variation of parameters
such as chord length and twist is supposed to be rather
small. The Kutta–Joukowsky theorem relates circula-
tion and lift; applied to a discrete wing segment, we
obtain
&k D 1
2ckcl;k.˛eff/Vt ;
(26.16)
with the segment (index k) circulation &k, the local
chord length ck, and the local airfoil lift coefﬁcient cl;k.
The lift coefﬁcient depends on the effective angle of
attack: ˛e D ˛f  ˛i. The induced downwash at posi-
tion mk is obtained by adding the induced speeds of all
the individual vortices according to Biot–Savart
wi;k D
nC1
X
jD1
&jeV
4k.pj  mk/  eVk


1 C .pj  mk/  eV
k.pj  mk/k

;
(26.17)
where eV stands for the (unit) direction of ﬂight. At mk,
the induced angle of attack is calculated as
˛i;k D arctan wi;k
Vt

 wi;k
Vt
:
(26.18)
Together with the respective 2-D polar data, the
above relations allow calculating the lift, drag, and
moment distribution (with respect to the free in-
ﬂow direction eV) from a known circulation distri-
bution, and can be summed and reduced to, e.g.,
the center of mass of a whole airplane. Note that
the section lift coefﬁcient is often approximated lin-
early as cl.˛/ 
 cl;0 C cl˛˛, which allows for a direct
solution when applying (26.16) and (26.17). More
accurate results, in particular in the domain near
maximum lift, however, are obtained by using the
nonlinear lift polar. In this case, a standard itera-
tive numeric solver may be used. Furthermore, air-
foil data with deﬂected control surfaces can be in-
cluded, allowing to calculate control moments (and
forces).
Note that the above method is just one example of
numerically solving for the wing characteristics know-
ing the 2-D airfoil properties (polars) – well-suited
for low-speed medium to high aspect ratio wings. For
an overview on alternatives, the reader is referred to,
e.g., [26.13].

Flying Robots
26.3 Basics of Aerodynamics and Flight Mechanics
635
Part B | 26.3
Δyk
pk
pk+1
mk
ck /4
ck
Γ1
ΔΓ1 = Γ1
ΔΓ2 = Γ2– Γ1
ΔΓk = Γk–Γk –1
ΔΓn = Γn+1–Γn
ΔΓk +1 = Γk +1–Γk
ΔΓn+1 = Γn
Γ2
Γk
Γn
Vt
Fig. 26.14 k horse shoe vortices
with circulation &k placed on the
wing to model the induced ﬂow. The
lifting line is imagined through the
quarter-chord (ck=4) locations. Vortex
threads with strength &k are leaving
the wing at the points pk along the
inﬂow and induce downwash at the
locations mk
26.3.4 Performance of Rotors
and Propellers
The propulsion mechanism found on many robotic
aerial vehicles is commonly a speciﬁc conﬁguration of
propellers or rotors. In the case of a robotic airplane,
forward facing propellers produce thrust forces com-
pensating drag in forward ﬂight. In case of a tail sitter
or multicopter UAV, the propellers may be facing up
(or down) and produce the main lift component com-
pensating the vehicle’s weight allowing it to hover in
the air. Similarly, the more classic helicopter-type con-
ﬁgurations (single rotor with tail rotor, coaxial rotor,
tandem rotor, etc.), use rotors to generate the required
thrust force to ﬂy.
In order to decide on a suitable rotor or propeller
geometry and to deﬁne requirements for the UAV mo-
tor drives, models must be available which allow for
an assessment of the thrust and torque characteristics
of a particular rotor or propeller. For this purpose, the
blade element momentum theory (BEMT) has found
widespread use, as it often provides a prediction accu-
racy which is acceptable for the UAV design process
(despite its simplicity).
Blade Element Momentum Theory
One of the basic difﬁculties in aerodynamic rotor and
propeller studies is the prediction of the induced inﬂow
velocities discussed in Sect. 26.3.3. BEMT addresses
this problem by combining two simple modeling ap-
proaches, namely momentum theory (MT) and blade
element theory (BET) which individually cannot di-
rectly resolve this issue in an accurate manner [26.14].
The basic idea of momentum theory is to con-
sider the revolving propeller or rotor as a propulsion
disk which produces a thrust force by accelerating the
surrounding (incompressible) air mass passing through
it. A boundary volume is deﬁned encapsulating the
propulsion disc. Subsequently, the laws of mass, mo-
mentum and power conservation are formulated across
the boundaries of the deﬁned control volume. The con-
cept of this propulsion disk as well as the corresponding
control volume are visualized in Fig. 26.15.
From this simplistic model, two main conclusions
may be drawn. First and foremost, it is possible to es-
tablish a relation between the induced velocity vi at the
propulsion disk and the produced thrust force T. In nor-
malized form, it can be expressed as
cT D 2i.i C 1/ :
(26.19)
To simplify notation, the external airﬂow velocity v1
as well as the induced velocity vi have been normalized
with the rotor or propeller tip speed ˝R
i D vi
˝R;
1 D v1
˝R ;
(26.20)
and the nondimensional thrust coefﬁcient cT is de-
ﬁned as
cT D
T
	.R2/.˝R/2 :
(26.21)
R
R0
dr
r
dr
T
υ∞
υ∞ + υi
υ∞ + 2υi
a)
b)
Fig. 26.15 (a) Side view on the slipstream control volume encom-
passing the MT propulsion disc. (b) Top view on MT propulsion
disk with incremental annular section and root cutout

Part B | 26.3
636
Part B
Design
The parameter 	 corresponds to the density of air, R
to the rotor or propeller radius, and ˝ to the rotor or
propeller angular speed.
In case of a robotic airplane, the velocity v1 at
the start of the control volume corresponds to the body
forward ﬂight velocity Vt and in case of a rotorcraft con-
ﬁguration to the body climb respectively descent rate w.
Similarly, an incremental expression for the thrust
coefﬁcient may be found from MT by evaluating the
mass, moment, and power conservation laws over an
annular ring of the deﬁned control volume only. The
corresponding expression can be found as
dCMT
T
D 4i.i C 1/rdr ;
(26.22)
where r D r
R and dr D dr
R are the normalized radial lo-
cation and the radial increment of the propulsion disk
annulus.
Another relevant conclusion that may be drawn
from MT is that ideally, the induced component vi of
the slipstream velocity at the propulsion disk will ac-
celerate to two times its initial value before leaving the
control volume. In consequence to this acceleration of
the ﬂow ﬁeld, the radial slipstream boundary will (in
the ideal case) contract to half the propulsion disk area
at the end of the control volume.
For the BET approach, the modeling process starts
by investigating the aerodynamic lift and drag forces dL
and dD on an individual rotor or propeller blade revolv-
ing around its shaft. These lift and drag forces produced
by each airfoil segment depicted in Fig. 26.16, con-
tribute to the total thrust and torque increments dT and
a)
b)
dL
dD
 dr 
r
R
R0
z
y
UT
U
UP
θ
α
Φ
Ω
U
Fig. 26.16 (a) Rotor blade revolving around its shaft.
(b) Blade element of a revolving rotor blade
dQ of the respective rotor or propeller annular section.
The corresponding relation can be established as
dT D Nb.dL  ˚ dD/ 
 Nb dL ;
(26.23)
dQ D Nbr.dDC ˚ dL/ :
(26.24)
In this context, Nb represents the number of rotor or
propeller blades and ˚ corresponds to the local inﬂow
angle which is assumed to remain small. Under this as-
sumption, the inﬂow angle ˚ can be directly derived as
the ratio between the local perpendicular inﬂow veloc-
ity UP 
 vi C v1 and the tangential velocity UT 
 ˝r
visualized in Fig. 26.16b. Additionally, the assumption
introduced in (26.23) is justiﬁed by the fact that at low
angles of attack ˛, the drag forces dD are at least one
order of magnitude smaller than the corresponding lift
forces dL.
Based on (26.23) and the deﬁnition of the lift incre-
ment (26.12), the local thrust coefﬁcient at each radial
blade station r may be derived as
dCBET
T
D 1
2clr2dr;
with
 D Nbc
R :
(26.25)
The parameter c corresponds to the local blade chord
and  is the so-called rotor or propeller solidity. The
solidity is a rough metric representing how much of
a propulsion disk is covered by rotor or propeller
blades. The aerodynamic parameter cl D cl.˛; Re; Ma/
corresponds to the airfoil lift coefﬁcient in function of
the local angle of attack ˛ and the local Reynolds and
Mach numbers Re and Ma.
Accordingly, as established in (26.25), the thrust
produced by a rotor or propeller strongly depends on
the angle of attack ˛, which itself is a function of the
local airfoil pitch angle  and the inﬂow angle ˚
˛ D   ˚ 
   UP
UT
:
(26.26)
In conclusion, MT as well as BET are capable of
establishing a meaningful relation between the induced
velocities vi and the resulting thrust force T. How-
ever, none of the two theories are capable of accurately
predicting rotor or propeller performance as either the
radial distribution of the induced velocity or the radial
distribution of the thrust coefﬁcient must be known to
compute the other.
The basic idea behind BEMT is to combine the
thrust expression (26.22) resulting from MT with the
thrust expression (26.25) from BET to compute the in-
duced inﬂow velocity independently of the thrust force.
Different BEMT implementations are possible depend-
ing on how willing one may be to introduce further
assumptions for the section lift coefﬁcient cl.

Flying Robots
26.3 Basics of Aerodynamics and Flight Mechanics
637
Part B | 26.3
Reference [26.14] presents a straightforward ap-
proach tailored toward helicopter rotors operating bel-
low stall by introducing a linear model for cl in function
of the angle of attack
cl D cl1˛ C cl0 :
(26.27)
The parameters cl0 and cl1 can be computed from the
lift polars of a particular airfoil geometry for a given
range of angles of attack, Reynolds, and Mach numbers.
This linear approximation may have limited validity
for very low Reynolds numbers and strongly cambered
airfoils but is in general acceptable for many typical
airfoil geometries found on UAV rotors and propellers.
Assembling (26.22) and (26.25) under the assumption
(26.27), an algebraic expression of the radial induced
inﬂow distribution can be derived as
i.r;1/ D
p
A2 C B  A ;
(26.28)
A D cl1
16  1
2
;
A D cl1
16 C 1
2
;
B D cl1
8 0r :
Note that the lift-curve offset cl0 has been absorbed in
the virtual pitch angle
0 D  C cl0
cl1
;
(26.29)
to simplify the notation.
Once the approximate radial distribution of inﬂow
velocities has been found, the local rotor or propeller
thrust increments (26.25) can be computed. Similarly,
the rotor or propeller torque increments derived from
BET as
dcBET
Q
D dcQi C dcQ0 ;
(26.30)
dcQi D 1
2cl.i C 1/r3 dr ;
(26.31)
dcQ0 D 1
2cdr3 dr ;
(26.32)
can be evaluated based on the inﬂow distribution given
in (26.28). For clarity, the total torque coefﬁcient in-
crement has been separated into its induced component
dcQi originating from the lift forces and its proﬁle com-
ponent dcQ0 due the drag forces. The aerodynamic drag
coefﬁcient cd D cd.˛; Re; Ma/ can be approximated us-
ing a quadratic function in dependency of the angle of
attack [26.14]
cd D cd2˛2 C cd1˛ C cd0 :
(26.33)
The parameters cd0, cd1, and cd2 can be computed from
the drag polars of the modeled airfoil.
Consequently, the thrust and torque increments may
be integrated along the radial direction of the rotor or
propeller disk to compute the total thrust and torque co-
efﬁcients
cT D
R
Z
0
dcBET
T
;
(26.34)
cQ D
R
Z
0
dcBET
Q
:
(26.35)
These thrust and torque integrals are usually evaluated
numerically, as the blade pitch  D .r/ as well as the
blade chord c D c.r/ may be nonlinear functions of the
radial direction r (blade twist and taper).
Finally, note that the presented theory may be ex-
tended to provide performance estimates under lateral
inﬂow velocities such as in case of a rotorcraft in for-
ward ﬂight and may also be used to asses other types
of rotor or propeller conﬁgurations such as, e.g., the
coaxial rotor. Also note that the prediction accuracy of
BEMT tools can be further improved by accounting for
tip-loss effects and the nonlift producing rotor or pro-
peller hub, e.g., using the Prandtl tip-loss function also
presented in [26.14] and incorporating a root cutout ra-
dius R0.
The resulting predictions are generally in good
agreement with experimental data – nevertheless, an ex-
perimental veriﬁcation is strongly recommended.
26.3.5 Drag
The sources of drag on aircraft are manifold: histori-
cally, the distinction between the lift-dependent induced
drag and parasite drag is made. The latter is further
subdivided into skin friction drag due to viscous shear
stress at the surface, and form drag, generated by pres-
sure loss along bodies (i. e., due to boundary layer
development or even ﬂow separation). Both these com-
ponents contribute to the airfoil proﬁle drag, i. e., the
section drag coefﬁcient cd introduced before.
On a whole aircraft, many more drag sources are
distinguished. For an exhaustive overview, the inter-
ested reader is referred to [26.13]. In the following, we
will present an overview of drag generated by different
typical shapes; note that when simply summing drag of
different shapes associated with aircraft parts, the result
may be a helpful initial estimate, but can be inaccurate,
because of neglecting the interaction of ﬂows resulting
in interference drag. Depending on the stage of the de-
sign process or the desired modeling accuracy, 2.5-D

Part B | 26.3
638
Part B
Design
computations or even full 3-D computational ﬂuid dy-
namics (CFD) simulations might be necessary to satisfy
the needs of aerodynamics calculations.
Skin Friction
The simple but important example of a ﬂat plate of
length l in parallel ﬂow is well studied. As introduced in
the airfoil theory Sect. 26.3.2, the boundary that devel-
ops will be laminar near the leading edge and transitions
into a turbulent one, generating more drag, at some
point downstream. The friction coefﬁcient is deﬁned as
cf D
2Df
	V2
t Sw
;
(26.36)
with the wetted surface Sw and the friction drag force
Df. According to [26.13], the coefﬁcients can be ap-
proximated by
Laminar W
cf D 1:328Re0:5
l
;
(26.37)
Turbulent W
cf D 0:455.log10 Rel/2:58 :
(26.38)
Note that the point of transition is depending on the lo-
cal Reynolds number Rex D 	Vtx=, where x denotes
the coordinate along the ﬂow from the leading edge
of the plate. Depending on the surface roughness and
ambient turbulence, the critical (transition) Reynolds
number varies; as an average guess for a ﬂat plate, it
will be in the order of Rex;crit D 3 105.
Drag Coefficients for Selected Bodies
In the following, drag coefﬁcients for a selection of
2-D and 3-D bodies of rotation are given, obtained
Table 26.3 Bodies the drag coefﬁcients of which are
largely Reynolds number independent
cD (2-D)
cD (3-D)
!
1:98
1:18
!
2:0
1:01:2
!
1:3
0:7
!
2:0
1:1
!
2:2
1:7
!
1:4
0:4
from [26.13]. Table 26.3 overviews a category of bod-
ies, the drag coefﬁcients of which are largely indifferent
to the Reynolds number, owing to their geometrically
deﬁned (sharp edge) ﬂow separation point.
Rounder bodies, most prominently the cylinder in
cross-ﬂow or the sphere, however, show a distinc-
tively different behavior quantiﬁed in Table 26.4: below
a critical Reynolds number Recrit 
 4105, the drag co-
efﬁcient is signiﬁcantly higher, where separation occurs
before boundary layer transition. In contrast, above the
critical Reynolds number, the turbulent, more energetic
boundary layer separates only further downstream, re-
ducing the wake and thus the amount of form drag.
A third important object category is formed by
streamlined and fuselage-like bodies: due to their com-
parably high skin friction part, the ﬁneness ratio largely
inﬂuences the drag coefﬁcient (along with the Reynolds
number). The ﬁneness is deﬁned as body length divided
by body diameter. We introduce a volumetric drag coef-
ﬁcient as cDm D 2D=.	V2
t V2=3
m / with the body volume
Vm. Interestingly, this is minimal and approximately
constant at ﬁneness ratios between 4 and 10, which pro-
vides a range for optimal sizing of such a body when
a certain volume needs to be ﬁtted. The values are given
in Table 26.5.
26.3.6 Aircraft Dynamics
and Flight Performance Analysis
Sections 26.3.1–26.3.5 shortly presented the basic the-
ory of wings, rotors, and propellers as well as a few
tools to assess their respective aerodynamic perfor-
mance. To develop fully functional UAV platforms,
merely evaluating the individual ﬂight mechanisms is
a good starting point but generally not sufﬁcient.
Designing high-performance aircraft systems re-
quires a fundamental understanding of how the respec-
tive design parameters affect the full ﬂight dynamic
response and application-speciﬁc capabilities. In order
to comprehend how design changes affect an aerial
Table 26.4 Sphere and cylinder drag coefﬁcients
cD (2-D)
cD (3-D)
!
Re < Recrit
1:1
0:4
Re > Recrit
0:27
0:15
Table 26.5 Volumetric drag coefﬁcients for ﬁneness 410
(largely turbulent boundary layer)
Fuselages and nacelles
cDm  0:027
Streamlined bodies
cDm  0:024

Flying Robots
26.3 Basics of Aerodynamics and Flight Mechanics
639
Part B | 26.3
CoG
τ
τ
x
x
B
B
W
f
f
y
y
y
z
x
z
z
r
r
Fig. 26.17 Coordinate frames with
external forces and moments of
rotorcraft and ﬁxed-wing UAVs
robotic system, representative models of its ﬂight dy-
namics are required. Such models must be capable of
capturing the dominant system dynamics within the
relevant part of the ﬂight envelope. Furthermore, espe-
cially in an interdisciplinary ﬁeld such as robotics, these
models must be accessible to the nonaerodynamic ex-
pert (the roboticist) and thus need to be simple enough
to provide the required insight for the aircraft design
process.
As many other types of robots, robotic ﬂight plat-
forms may be treated as a multibody system where
a set of interlinked bodies exchanges kinetic and poten-
tial energy under the inﬂuence of external forces and
moments. For aircraft systems it is common to treat
the entire aircraft as a single rigid body ﬁrst, with re-
lated body coordinate frame attached, as visualized in
Fig. 26.17. Additional dynamics such as for example
rotor ﬂapping (as in case of a helicopter system) may
be appended to these body dynamics in a subsequent
step.
The modeling process thus starts by treating the
aircraft system as a rigid body affected by external
forces F and external moments . Using the Newton–
Euler formalism to derive the aircraft body dynamics,
one can directly write down the linear and angular mo-
mentum balance for a single rigid body
m.B Pv C B!  Bv/ D BF ;
BIB P! C B!  .BIB!/ D B :
(26.39)
For simplicity’s sake, (26.39) is usually expressed with
respect to a body ﬁxed frame B located in the center
of gravity of the aircraft. The velocity vectors Bv D
.u;v; w/T and B! D .p; q; r/T thus represent the air-
craft linear and angular velocities with respect to B. The
inertial properties of the above body dynamics are de-
ﬁned by the aircraft’s total mass m and its second mass
moment of inertia BI also expressed with respect to B
and its origin.
The most relevant contribution to the forces BF
and the moments B originates from the aerodynamic
ﬂight components such as wings, propellers and ro-
tors. By integrating (26.39) over time one may compute
a prediction of the aircraft’s dynamic response to these
external forces and moments and thus the evolution of
its absolute pose. This pose is commonly represented
by the position of the vehicle’s center of gravity WrB D
.x; y; z/T as well as the vehicle’s orientation relative to
an earth ﬁxed world frame W which is considered in-
ertial. The aircraft orientation is commonly represented
using rotation matrices or quaternions. In the case of the
rotation matrix representation, the aircraft orientation
may be parameterized in three dimensional space by
three consecutive rotations with the roll, pitch, and yaw
angles ' 2 Œ; ,  2 Œ=2; =2 and  2 Œ; 
as
WRB D RZ. /RY./RX.'/ :
(26.40)
In this case, relations between the body frame veloc-
ities Bv and B! and the world frame pose can be
expressed as
WPr D WRBBv ;
W PRB D WRBŒB! ;
(26.41)
where ŒB! corresponds to the skew-symmetric matrix
of the vector B!.
In a minimal form, the orientation dynamics can be
expressed in terms of roll, pitch, and yaw angles
0
B@
P'
P
P 
1
CA D
0
BBBBBB@
1
sin ' tan 
cos ' tan 
0
cos '
 sin '
0
sin '= cos 
cos '= cos 
„
ƒ‚
…
Jr
1
CCCCCCA
B! :
(26.42)

Part B | 26.3
640
Part B
Design
Note that the Jacobian Jr becomes singular at the
boundaries of  D ˙=2.
As a singularity-free, but still compact represen-
tation of orientation, quaternions may be used. Using
the representation WqB D .qw; qx; qy; qz/T with real part
qw, the rotational kinematics become
W PqB D 1
2.B!/WqB ;
(26.43)
with the matrix  deﬁned as
.B!/ D
 
0
B!T
B!
ŒB!
!
:
(26.44)
In summary (using quaternions), we thus have the
equations of motion
WPr D WRB
Bv ;
W PqB D 1
2.B!/WqB ;
B Pv D 1
m
BF  B!  Bv ;
B P! D BI1ŒB  B!  .BIB!/ :
(26.45)
Note that the external forces and moments are re-
lated to the system’s actuator inputs u, the vehicle’s
orientation with respect to W and they typically are also
functions of the linear and angular body motion as well
as additional dynamics terms, represented here by the
vector "r
BF D BF.Wr; WqB; Bv; B!; "r; u/ ;
(26.46)
B D B.Wr; WqB; Bv; B!; "r; u/ :
(26.47)
The additional dynamics "r may account for structural
dynamics such as rotor ﬂapping in case of a robotic he-
licopter or relevant actuator dynamics.
The resulting nonlinear system dynamics can usu-
ally be cast into state-space form and represented as
Px D f.x; u/ ;
x D .xb; xr/T ;
u D .u1; : : : ; uN/T ;
(26.48)
where the nonlinear functions f deﬁne the rate of
change of the aircraft body states xb as well as the addi-
tional states xr affected by the set of N actuator inputs
u1 to uN.
In order to gain a deeper understanding of how
(26.48) is affected by changes of the ﬂight system’s
geometric, structural, inertial, and aerodynamic pa-
rameters, three main problems are commonly of rele-
vance [26.15]:

The trim problem deals with the computation of the
set of actuator inputs u D u0 under which the non-
linear dynamic system presented in (26.48) remains
in a desired trim point x D x0 and thus f.x0; u0/ D
0. The most simple example of such a trim point x0
is the hover condition for a rotorcraft system where
one may want to ﬁnd the required rotor speed ˝0
to hover or the steady forward ﬂight condition for
a ﬁxed-wing UAV at a forward velocity Vt.

The topic of stability deals with the question of
how easily the system (26.48) will deteriorate from
a speciﬁc trim condition .x0; u0/ under the inﬂuence
of small disturbances x and u. This investiga-
tion commonly involves the linearization of (26.48)
according to
A D
 @f
@x

xDx0;uDu0
;
B D
 @f
@u

xDx0;uDu0
;
Px D Ax C Bu ;
(26.49)
where the eigenvalues and vectors of A will pro-
vide deeper insight into the motion characteristics
and stability properties of an aircraft.

Analyzing the System Response
x.t/ D x.0/ C
t
Z
0
Pxdt
(26.50)
to characteristic inputs such as steps, pulses or
speciﬁc input frequencies will provide additional
information about the ﬂight characteristics of a spe-
ciﬁc aircraft conﬁguration.
These modeling and analysis concepts commonly
ﬁnd wide applicability for various types of robotic ﬂight
conﬁgurations and will be discussed in more detail for
the speciﬁc UAV types presented hereafter.
Actuator Dynamics
Deriving the aerodynamic forces is combined with the
dynamic equations of motion in order to assemble
a complete model of the ﬂying vehicle. However, as the
employed actuators are of naturally limited bandwidth,
accurate modeling furthermore requires the integration
of the relevant motor or servo dynamics.
Nowadays, motors utilized in small size unmanned
systems often belong to the category of brushless direct-
current (DC) electric motors (BLDC). BLDCs are syn-
chronous motors powered by a DC electric source via
an integrated switching power supply. The equations of
motion for a such a system are essentially nonlinear and

Flying Robots
26.4 Airplane Modeling and Design
641
Part B | 26.4
rather complex. However, working with small UAS, we
may solely focus on the input–output dynamics which
can be described with the following transfer function
!.s/
Qm.s/ D
Km.1 C ’s/
.1 C ms/.1 C ’s/ C KmK’.Kie0/2 ;
(26.51)
where !.s/, Qm.s/ correspond to the Laplace ex-
pressions of the linearized angular velocity and input
torque, Km is the mechanical gain, m represents the
mechanical time constant, K’ is the rotor gain, ’ is
the rotor time constant, K depends on electromagnetic
properties of the motor and ie0 denotes the stator current
linearization point [26.16]. Often, a satisfactory speed
controller and BLDC dynamics description is obtained
as the relation between a reference angular velocity
and the actual output taking the even simpler ﬁrst-order
form
!.s/
!r.s/ D
1
1 C mcs ;
(26.52)
with the time constant mc of the controlled motor.
Accounting for motor dynamics is essential for
high-bandwidth control of agile vehicles that highly de-
pend on such actuators (i. e., multirotors). However, in
several other UAS conﬁgurations such as ﬁxed-wing
vehicles or conventional helicopters may, if needed,
rather account for servo dynamics acting on control sur-
faces or a swashplate. Again, the relevant servo angle
dynamics can be captured by an identiﬁed ﬁrst-order
transfer function of the form 1=.1Css/, with the servo
time constant s.
26.4 Airplane Modeling and Design
Ever since the beginning of aviation, a broad spectrum
of airplanes has been built and operated successfully:
size, speed, and maneuverability vary widely and as
a function of application. Since design and modeling
are strongly related, we want to ﬁrst give an overview
of the physical principles common to all such conﬁg-
urations, and provide analysis tools for characterizing
static and dynamic properties of an airplane. The design
problem somewhat constitutes the inverse problem:
for speciﬁed target characteristics, the engineer needs
to ﬁnd a suitable conﬁguration; we therefore provide
a summary of design guidelines aimed at fast con-
vergence to a suitable design. Finally, a simple and
classical autopilot scheme is presented underlining the
need for models also at that stage.
26.4.1 Forces and Moments
Consider Fig. 26.18 for the introduction of airplane
geometry deﬁnitions and main forces. Forces and mo-
ments are reduced to the airplane center of gravity
(COG). Note that the angle of attack (AOA) ˛ is de-
ﬁned as the angle between the x-axis and the true
airspeed vector v t projected into the body x–z-plane, ˇ
denotes the sideslip angle, causing a typically unwanted
sideslip force Y, L, and D denote lift and drag, W stands
for the weight and T for thrust, which may act into
a direction different from x (at a thrust angle T). We
furthermore write the aerodynamic moment vector as
BA D ŒLA; MA; NAT. Also note the introduction of the
main control surfaces that are designed to mainly inﬂu-
ence the aerodynamic moment: with ailerons, elevator,
and rudder, the roll .LA/, pitch .MA/, and yaw .NA/ mo-
ments are controlled. The indicated ﬂaps, if available,
are used for increasing lift for take-off and landing, in
order to achieve a slower minimum speed.
Aerodynamic Forces and Moments
The aerodynamic forces and moments can be modeled
to various accuracy using full 3-D CFD or with 2.5-D
tools: Sect. 26.3.3 overviews such an approach which
can beused to model theaerodynamicsurfaces in incom-
pressible ﬂow. For enhanced accuracy, fuselages may be
Flaps
Flaps
Elevator
Elevator
Rudder
Right
aileron
Right
aileron
L
Y
W
eB,z
eB,x
eT
υt
eB,y
T
D
α
	
Fig. 26.18 Geometric deﬁnitions and main forces acting on the air-
plane (general case, not in equilibrium)

Part B | 26.4
642
Part B
Design
considered using again a combination of potential ﬂow
(placing singularities) and boundary layer theory. Re-
spective ready-to-use software such as AVL [26.17] and
XFLR [26.12] is available for free.
The forces and moments may again be written with
dimensionless coefﬁcients as
L D 1
2	V2
t cLA ;
(26.53)
D D 1
2	V2
t cDA ;
(26.54)
MA D 1
2	V2
t cMNcA ;
(26.55)
with the wing area A, the mean chord length Nc, and the
true airspeed Vt D kv tk. The moments LA and NA are
made dimension-less with the wingspan b rather than
the chord length.
Static Performance Considerations
Having characterized lift and drag of an airplane, three
operating points are of particular interest.
First, stall is occurring at cL;max. This condition can
be directly translated into constant-speed level-ﬂight
stall speed by applying the lift balance L D mg.
Second, the maximum cL=cD ratio, or the glide ra-
tio characterizes the maximum aerodynamic efﬁciency,
i. e., the operating point for maximum range (assuming
constant propulsive efﬁciency).
Finally, the maximum c3
L=c2
D ratio, or the climb fac-
tor describes the condition at which power consumption
is minimized, thus maximizing ﬂight time (again as-
suming constant propulsion unit efﬁciency).
The latter two conditions have direct interpretation
in gliding (or propulsion shut-off), in terms of maxi-
mum distance reached per altitude lost and minimum
sink rate, respectively. Again, corresponding velocities
can be found using the lift balance.
Thrust
For detailed insight into the variety of propulsion sys-
tems and respective models, the interested reader is
referred to [26.13, 18]. As an approximation for the
important case of a propeller, the BEMT method as
described in Sect. 26.3.4 is suggested. For many ap-
plications, choosing the propeller speed as the system
input and neglecting motor dynamics is sufﬁcient.
26.4.2 Static Stability
Various forms of stability constitute central character-
istics of an airplane related to whether or not it can
be ﬂown by a human pilot or ﬂight controller. Simple
stability criteria can be derived by requiring reaction
forces and moments to be opposing a disturbance. We
assume stationary conditions in the sense of constant
linear and angular speeds: the respective force and mo-
ment balance is typically straightforward to apply in
order to determine the starting point of the stability
analysis.
Longitudinal Static Stability
We will take a close look at the example of longitudinal
static stability playing a central role in airplane analy-
sis and design. Leaving aside possible inﬂuence of the
propulsion unit, the respective directional stability cri-
terion is stated as
@cM
@˛ < 0 ;
(26.56)
at the equilibrium condition cM D 0. Figure 26.19 il-
lustrates an exemplary moment coefﬁcient as a func-
tion of AOA. Note that elevator actuation will move
this curve up and down, and with it the equilibrium
point (2) toward higher or lower angles of attack (i. e.,
lower or higher trimmed speeds). Figure 26.20 illus-
trates the forces and moments in the stable equilibrium
Elevator up
Elevator down
cM
1
2
3
α
cM
α > 0
cM
α
< 0
Fig. 26.19 Moment coefﬁcient cM as a function of AOA ˛
the equilibrium point (2) is stable for @cM=@˛ < 0 (brown
curve)
–υt
–υt
–υt
eB,x
1
2
3
CoG
AC
Δϵ
Fig. 26.20 Forces and moments at the main wing and tail
for zero lift (1), the stable equilibrium AOA (2), and for
high lift (3). The forces and moments are drawn into the
individual surfaces’ aerodynamic centers. Note the tilted
inﬂow at the tail due to downwash. The green ﬁlled circle
denotes the overall airplane aerodynamic center (AC)

Flying Robots
26.4 Airplane Modeling and Design
643
Part B | 26.4
with a simpliﬁed airplane side-view as compared to the
points (1) and (3), i. e., zero-lift .˛ D 0/ and high-lift,
respectively. The stability criterion can be equivalently
stated as: the airplane COG needs to be in front of the
airplane aerodynamic center. Note the main parameters
that inﬂuence the stability are tail lever arm, tail area,
the longitudinal dihedral  (Fig. 26.20 for its geomet-
ric deﬁnition), and the COG location along the x-axis.
26.4.3 Dynamic Model
While some core characteristics such as static stability
and performance measures may already be established
using aerodynamics coefﬁcients only, we now turn to
analyze the dynamics, since they provides a much richer
insight into airplane characteristics.
For application of the 6-D (six-dimensional) rigid
body dynamics (26.45), the forces and moments from
the various sources need to be assembled and repre-
sented in the body frame
BF D
0
B@
L sin ˛  D cos ˛ C T cos T
Y
L cos ˛  D sin ˛ C T sin T
1
CA C BW ;
(26.57)
B D
0
B@
LA C LT
MA C MT
NA C NT
1
CA ;
(26.58)
with
the
weight
in
body
coordinates
BW D
BRWŒ0; 0; mgT, and where the T-subscript indi-
cates (possible) moment components from thrust. Note
that the system inputs u are hidden inside these forces
and moments. Also be aware of ˛ and ˇ containing
parts of the state vector
˛ D arctan2.wt; ut/ ;
(26.59)
ˇ D arcsin.vt=Vt/ ;
(26.60)
where the true airspeed components are used
Bv t WD
8
ˆˆ<
ˆˆ:
ut
vt
wt
D Bv  BRW
Ww ;
(26.61)
with the wind vector Ww.
Furthermore, due to the airplane symmetry plane,
the inertia matrix becomes
BI D
0
B@
Ixx
0
Ixz
0
Iyy
0
Ixz
0
Izz
1
CA :
(26.62)
Parametric Force and Moment Models
Let us consider the example of a simple airplane con-
ﬁguration with ailerons, a rudder and an elevator plus
a propeller, driven by an electric motor at rotation speed
!p.
We deﬁne the system input vector u D Œıa; ıe; ır; ıT
as normalized aileron, rudder, and elevator action,
ıa; ıe; ır 2 Œ1; 1 as well as (normalized) thrust ıT 2
Œ0; 1.
The fully parametric nonlinear model provided be-
low largely follows [26.19]. We approximate the lift,
drag as well as sideslip coefﬁcients with polynomials in
˛ and ˇ
cL 
 cL;0 C cL;˛˛ C cL;˛2˛2 C cL;˛3˛3 ;
cD 
 cD;0 C cD;˛˛ C cD;˛2˛2 C cD;ˇ2ˇ2 ;
cY 
 cY;ˇˇ :
(26.63)
For many applications except slow ﬂying airplanes, the
second-order and third-order term of cL can be omitted.
As far as the torques are concerned, we introduce
also dependencies on normalized angular rates
B!n D .pn; qn; rn/T D
 pb
2Vt
; qNc
2Vt
; rb
2Vt
T
:
(26.64)
A suitable approximation of the moment coefﬁcients is
now made as
cl 
 cl;0 C cl;ıaıa C cl;ˇˇ C cl;pnpn C cl;rnrn ;
cM 
 cM;0 C cM;ıeıe C cM;˛˛ C cM;qnqn ;
cN 
 cN;0 C cN;ırır C cN;ˇˇ C cN;rnrn :
(26.65)
Finally, the propeller thrust force needs to be mod-
eled. Using the advance ratio J D 2Vt
!pd , with propeller
diameter d, we can approximate the thrust coefﬁcient
cT 
 cT;0 C cT;JJ C cT;J2J2 :
(26.66)
The thrust is then obtained as
T D 	
 !p
2
2
d4cT :
(26.67)
Linearized Dynamics
As common throughout literature, the linearized air-
plane dynamics are written using Euler angles, which
is why we will follow the same approach. But concep-
tually, they could be written in a singularity-free form
using a minimal quaternion perturbation.

Part B | 26.4
644
Part B
Design
Typically, a separation into longitudinal and lateral
dynamics is made, in order to assess related character-
istics separately. Furthermore, the state is transformed
to contain ˛, ˇ, and Vt rather than Bv.
The linear dynamics around a reference state x0 and
input u0 vector takes the form
Pxlon D Alonxlon C Blonulon
and
Pxlat D Alatxlat C Blatulat :
The following formulation follows [26.19] to a large ex-
tent.
Figure 26.21 describes the separation in terms of in-
puts u and states x for the linearized system.
The longitudinal nonlinear equations are given as
Pq D 1
Iyy
ŒMA C MT  .Ixx  Izz/pr C Ixz.p2  r2/ ;
PVt D 1
mŒD cos ˇ C Y sin ˇ
C T cos.˛  T/ cos ˇ C mg1 ;
P˛ D
1
cos ˇ

 1
mVt
.L  T sin.˛  T/ C mg3/ C qA

;
P D q cos '  r sin ' ;
(26.68)
Longitudinal
dynamics
Δδe
Δq
ΔVt
Δα
Δθ
ΔδT
Longitudinal plant
a)
Lateral plant
b)
Lateral
dynamics
Lateral
dynamics
Longitudinal
dynamics
Δδa
Δp
Δr
Δ	
Δ
Δδr
Fig.26.21a,b Linearized (a) longitudinal, and (b) lateral
plants for inputs u (around u0) of the local states x
(around x0)
Short period
mode
ω = 5rad/s
Roll subsidence
mode
Dutch roll
mode
ω = 3rad/s
Spiral
mode
Phugoid
mode
ω = 0.6rad/s
Longitudinal poles
a)
Lateral poles
b)
Im
Im
Re
Re
2
–2
4
–4
Fig. 26.22 (a) Longitudinal, and (b) lateral poles of an example aer-
obatic RC airplane
and the lateral nonlinear equations amount to
Pp D Izz.LA C LT  Tp/
IxxIzz  I2xz
 Ixz.NA C NT  Tr/
IxxIzz  I2xz
;
Pr D Ixz.LA C LT  Tp/
IxxIzz  I2xz
C Izz.NA C NT  Tr/
IxxIzz  I2xz
;
Pˇ D rA C
1
mVt
ŒY cos ˇ C D sin ˇ
 T cos.˛  t/ sin ˇ C mg2 ;
P' D p C q sin ' tan  C r cos ' tan  ;
(26.69)
where the following terms were used
g1 D g.cos ˛ cos ˇ sin  C sin ˇ sin ' cos 
C sin ˛ cos ˇ cos ' cos / ;
g2 D g.cos ˛ sin ˇ sin  C cos ˇ sin ' cos 
 sin ˛ sin ˇ cos ' cos / ;
g3 D g.sin ˛ sin  C cos ˛ cos ' cos / ;
qA D q cos ˇ  p sin ˇ cos ˛  r sin ˛ sin ˇ ;
rA D r cos ˛  p sin ˛ ;
Tp D .Izz  Iyy/qr C Ixzpq ;
Tr D .Iyy  Ixx/qp  Ixzqr :
(26.70)
The linearizations of (26.68) and (26.69) are
straightforward to obtain and not provided here due to
space constraints. For a speciﬁc operating point, typ-
ically stationary ('0 D 0, 0 D ˛0, and B! D 0), the
standard tools of linear systems analysis can be em-
ployed. Most importantly, the pole locations in the
imaginary plane will tell the characteristic modes and
their dynamic stability. Figure 26.22 shows a pole loca-
tion plot for an example RC airplane and introduces the
related mode names.
In the case of a real pole i, it has the time constant
i D 1=Re.i/. In the case of a complex conjugate
pole pair, it is associated with a damping ratio i D
Re.i/=
p
Im.i/2 C Re.i/2 and with an eigenfre-
quency !i D
p
Im.i/2 C Re.i/2.
Figure 26.23 illustrates and characterizes the main
modes.
26.4.4 Design Guidelines
Airplane design typically consists of the three stages
conceptual design, preliminary design, and detail de-
sign. Here, we focus on the ﬁrst two phases; due to
space constraints, details of airplane structural design

Flying Robots
26.4 Airplane Modeling and Design
645
Part B | 26.4
and analysis are not covered here. The reader is re-
ferred to respective literature, e.g., [26.20], or [26.21],
the latter covering RC-type aircraft. In the following,
we provide a quick overview of practical guidelines for
the typically iterative design process related to achiev-
ing characteristics as described above. The guidelines
follow largely [26.22] and [26.18], with focus on slow-
ﬂying small-scale UAS.
Sizing and Geometry of Main Components
In the following, we provide some rules of thumb as
initial guess for the design process in terms of sizing
the wing, tail, control surfaces, and the propulsion unit.
As a ﬁrst and very general advice, the engineer is en-
couraged to minimize wetted area and cross section, as
well as any kind of nacelles for increased aerodynamic
efﬁciency.
Wing. First, an existing airfoil shall be chosen with
characteristics meeting the requirements in the target
ﬂow regime (Re and Ma). When it comes to deter-
mining the overall wing size, a ﬁrst estimate of design
weight including structure, avionics, payload, propul-
sion unit, and energy storage is of crucial importance
(26.2). With the target speed Vr and design lift coefﬁ-
cient cl, a rough guess can be made for the wing area
A D 2mg=.	V2
r cl/ :
Concerning wing shape, clearly highest efﬁciency
is reached with high aspect ratios (plus no multiple
Phugoid: exchange of potential and kinetic energy
a)
Short period: AoA oscillation
b)
Dutch roll: combined
yaw/roll oscillation
c)
Spiral: unstable
(divergent) example
d)
Fig.26.23a–d Characteristic trajectories of excited longi-
tudinal modes (a,b) and lateral modes (c,d)
lifting surfaces), and, at low Ma, no sweep-back – as
long as still implementable with a structural concept
and staying at reasonably high Re numbers. For high
efﬁciency, it is advisable to achieve an elliptic lift distri-
bution to some extent by geometry. For benign stalling
characteristics, it is furthermore highly advisable to
twist the wing leading edge downward with increased
spanwise distance (which also inﬂuences the lift distri-
bution).
Finally, some dihedral should be considered for roll
stability.
Tail. Various types of tails and even exotic conﬁgura-
tions like the canard have been suggested; here, we want
to simply point out the importance of the so-called tail
volume coefﬁcient, cVT and cHT concerning vertical and
horizontal tail, respectively,
cVT D lVTAVT=.bA/ ;
(26.71)
cHT D lHTAHT=.NcA/ ;
(26.72)
with the wing to vertical tail lever arm lVT and the
wing to horizontal tail lHT (these are referenced to the
individual mean 1=4-chord points). Typical values for
small-size slow airplanes are cVT=0.02–0.04 and cHT D
0:5–0.7. Furthermore, care should be taken that control
surfaces are not completely blanketed in the case of stall
(for stall/spin recovery).
Control Surfaces. Ailerons typically extend from
around 50% in span direction to 90%; in this setting,
2030% of wing chord is suggested as aileron depth.
Tail control surface depth is typically chosen around
40% of the respective chord.
Propulsion. Finally, some advice is given concern-
ing the propulsion unit. Some UAVs are required to
be handlaunched: note that this imposes limits on the
overall maximum take-off mass and minimum/stall air-
speed. Experience shows that reasonable limits are
<9 m=s minimum/stall speed and 7 kg airplane mass.
For such small UAVs, a static thrust to weight ratio of
at least 50% is highly recommended. In general, the
propulsion unit must be sized to meet the speciﬁcations
in terms of climb rates, maximum level ﬂight speed and
service ceiling. For the highest efﬁciency, the propul-
sion unit should be designed such as to provide highest
efﬁciency at the design operating point (subscript r)
Tr=W D cD;r=cL;r. For a hobbyist brushless DC outrun-
ner type motor, the maximum power per motor mass
ratio of 3:4 kW=kg can be used for estimation of the
propulsion unit weight [26.23] (gearbox and propeller
mass not included).

Part B | 26.4
646
Part B
Design
Handling Qualities
Manned aviation introduced the notion of handling
qualities, assessing how well an aircraft can be ﬂown
by a human pilot as a basis for certiﬁcation of both
civil and military airplanes. Since UAS typically rely
on autopilot systems enabling a certain degree of au-
tonomy, these concepts may not be directly applied,
but are still extremely relevant. Most importantly, the
handling qualities concerning static and dynamic sta-
bility, as well as controllability determine the success
of a UAS design.
While an autopilot can handle more and faster insta-
bilities than a pilot, it can certainly not compensate for
missing actuation authority. As detailed in Sect. 26.7,
it is advisable to implement de facto manual operation
mode as a testing, backup, or even standard operation
mode, in which the airplane is either steered manually
or through some stability augmentation system (SAS).
Therefore, it is highly advisable that the resulting sys-
tem complies with the following core requirements
(simpliﬁed from [26.18]):

Static longitudinal stability: most aft COG at least
5% of Nc in front of aerodynamic center (static mar-
gin, SM).

Phugoid damping ph > 0:2.

Short-period oscillation !sh > 2, s > 0:5.

Spiral mode may be unstable, if sp > 20 s.

Roll acceleration at maximum aileron deﬂection
jPp.ıa;max/j > 5 rad=s2, roll subsidence time constant
rs < 1 s.

Dutch roll damping dr > 0:1.

Spins shall not be entered abruptly and must always
be recoverable.
Attitude
control
P
L1
PI
Guidance
TECS
WP
list
pts
hd
d
pd
qd
rd
Tr
θ·
d
δT
δd
δe
δr
δT
θd
·d
Vd
Rate
control
Airplane
dynamics
P
ω
P
P
Altitude &
speed control
Fig. 26.24 Simple cascaded airplane guidance and control system
 1
d
R
R
Vt
η
2η
Fig. 26.25 Illustration of L1 lateral guidance
26.4.5 A Simple Autopilot
As shown earlier, airplane dynamics are nonlinear
multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO) systems with
a signiﬁcant amount of cross-coupling, thus they are
inherently challenging to control. While a plethora
of control strategies have been suggested as autopi-
lots, we will provide a simple yet functional approach
here that employs the popular concept of cascaded
control loops as well as simple linear single-input–
single-output (SISO) PID controllers acting on sub-
parts of the dynamics. This approach is still widely
deployed and well-understood, despite the fact that
more advanced controllers, such as model-based lin-
ear quadratic regulators (LQR) with gain scheduling or
nonlinear dynamic inversion (NDI) may achieve sig-
niﬁcantly better performance. Reference [26.24] con-
stitutes an eccelent reference for in-depth treatment of
small UAS guidance and control with cascaded control
loops.
Cascaded Control Architecture
Figure 26.24 introduces the overall controller archi-
tecture. It presents the (typical) separation of per-axis
rate controllers at the innermost loop, followed by an
attitude controller and a combined altitude and speed
controller TECS (total energy control system), as well
as by a lateral L1 guidance. In general, care must be
taken to separate successively closed loops by around
a decade in terms of bandwidth.
Assuming little cross-axis sensitivity, the rate con-
trollers may be implemented with simple individual
P-controllers, optionally with 1=V2
t gain scaling. Also
the attitude controllers can be as simple as P and PI-
controllers for roll and pitch, respectively. Note that
the desired roll and pitch angle derivatives need to be
transformed in the static block Tr into angular reference
rates: this can be achieved by applying the inverse Ja-
cobian Jr from (26.42) – where the missing yaw angle
time derivative can be computed from the coordinated
turn constraint ˇ D 0, Pˇ D 0 in (26.69)
P D 
g sin 
Vt cos ˛ cos  C
Pd sin 
cos  cos  :
(26.73)
The combined altitude and speed controller (TECS)
inspired from [26.25] uses the difference to the refer-
ence altitude h D hd  h to compute a desired climb
rate of the form Phd D Phtraj C KP;alth, with the given
trajectory rate of climb Phtraj and a P-gain KP;alt. Know-
ing the speed and corresponding angle of attack, Phd can
be simply converted into a desired pitch angle d –
to be saturated according to maximum thrust (climb)
and drag (sink). Since climb rate must be provided via

Flying Robots
26.5 Rotorcraft Modeling and Design
647
Part B | 26.5
additional thrust, the respective power component is
computed as Tclimb D mgPhd=Vt. Concerning the speed
control, the second thrust component is computed with
the P-gain KP;vel as Tacc D mKP;velVt.
As a last autopilot component, the L1 lateral
guidance [26.26] proceeds as follows (illustrated in
Fig. 26.25): a reference circular path of radius R is cal-
culated that intersects the reference path given by the
waypoint sequence at look-ahead distance L1. In or-
der to track this reference, a centripetal acceleration of
V2
t =R is needed, which can now be directly translated
into a desired roll angle ' D arctan.V2
t =.Rg// corre-
sponding to a coordinated (level) turn – saturated with
maximum bank angles.
Note that the suggested scheme should be enhanced
by stall prevention and recovery (AOA monitoring and
control), as well as by preventing sideslip for safer (and
more efﬁcient) operation.
26.5 Rotorcraft Modeling and Design
Various types of rotorcraft UAS conﬁgurations have
been developed in the past (some examples are shown in
Fig. 26.26), from helicopter-type UAVs such as [26.27,
28], over a vast selection of multicopter conﬁgura-
tions such as [26.29, 30] and tail-sitter vehicles such
as [26.31, 32] up to completely new types of ﬂight
mechanisms [26.33, 34]. The design, modeling, and
system analysis process for all these RW-UAS types
is essentially very similar and is largely based on
the methodologies originally developed within the
aerospace community for full-scale rotorcraft design
and evaluation [26.15, 35]. In this context, it is im-
portant to realize that the rotorcraft design process
goes beyond mere efﬁciency and payload considera-
tions focused on the propulsion components (e.g., using
BEMT). Designing an effective RW-UAS should in
principle also include ﬂight dynamics assessments of
the entire robotic ﬂight platform.
Flight performance assessment is commonly based
on one of two types of modeling approaches referred
to as quasi-steady and hybrid [26.36]. The quasi-steady
modeling method employs a single rigid body represen-
tation of the aircraft affected by the steady-state forces
and moments originating from the propulsion subsys-
tem. Hybrid models treat the rotorcraft as a multibody
system where the dynamics of the aircraft body are cou-
pled with additional dynamics of the rotor or propeller
blades (e.g., blade ﬂapping dynamics). For propeller-
based RW-UAS like multicopter and tail-sitter vehicles
using the quasi-steady approach to, e.g., model attitude
dynamics is most widespread. This may be related to
the fact that for these vehicle conﬁgurations, properly
accounting for motor dynamics may be more rele-
vant than accounting for high-order effects related to
structural deformations of the propeller blades. For
helicopter-type UAVs the hybrid approach is more com-
mon as some dynamic modes of the rotor system are
likely to couple with the attitude dynamics of the main
rotorcraft body. Note that a proper application of the hy-
brid approach is considerably more involved than using
quasi-steady models and should only be resorted to if
justiﬁed.
A detailed treatment of the speciﬁc modeling and
design procedures for every robotic rotorcraft conﬁg-
uration is beyond the scope of this chapter and thus
the presented considerations focus on helicopter-type
and multicopter UAVs. Based on the extensive theoreti-
cal aerospace-related background available in [26.14,
15, 35] amongst others, models for the most relevant
rotor respectively propeller forces and moments are
presented and subsequently appended to the rotorcraft
body dynamics discussed in Sect. 26.3.6. A simpliﬁed
a)
b)
Fig. 26.26 (a)
Conventional
helicopter
conﬁguration.
Swiss UAV Neo S-300. (b) Quadro-copter conﬁguration.
Microdrones MD4-1000

Part B | 26.5
648
Part B
Design
hybrid modeling approach is introduced and reductions
to quasi-steady models are discussed where applicable.
Finally, a few metrics meaningful for rotorcraft design
and control purposes are discussed and summarized
shortly.
26.5.1 Mechanical Design of Rotors
and Propellers
The main control mechanism for any RW-UAS is its
rotors or propellers. Accordingly, to understand the
working principles and the dynamics of the rotorcraft
type of aircraft, it is worth investigating a few of the
main design characteristics found in these ﬂying mech-
anisms.
The following discussion focuses on the operation
principles of helicopter rotors and will be expanded
to propellers subsequently. Figure 26.27 visualizes the
typical rotor degrees of freedom realized via the ﬂap,
lead-lag and feathering (also referred to as pitch)
hinges. The ﬂap hinge allows the rotor blade to ﬂap due
to aerodynamic and inertial loads affecting the blade
body during ﬂight. The lead-lag hinge responds to lat-
eral rotor blade moments due to Coriolis forces related
to ﬂapping. Where the ﬂap and the lead-lag hinges
are usually passive, possibly augmented with spring or
damper elements, the pitch hinge is active in order to
adjust the blade angle of attack and thus the generated
aerodynamic forces.
Three types of rotor hubs are typically found in
modern helicopters referred to as teetering, articulated,
and hingeless depending on the mechanical realization
of the ﬂap hinge (Fig. 26.28). In the case of teeter-
ing rotor, a single hub ﬂap hinge is located directly
on the rotorshaft axis, rigidly connecting a set of two
rotor blades. For the articulated rotor, the blades and
the rotor hub are connected via mechanical hinges at
a speciﬁc offset e from the rotor shaft axis, thus al-
lowing each blade to ﬂap individually. The hingeless
rotor ﬂaps through the deformation of elastic elements
Flap hinge
Pitch hinge

θ
	
Rotor hub
Lead-lag hinge
Fig. 26.27 Typical hinge conﬁguration of an articulated
rotor blade
connecting the hub with each individual rotor blade or
directly through structural deformation of the blades
themselves. In this case, a virtual hinge offset can be
deﬁned at the intersection of the rotor hub plane and the
tangent to the deﬂecting blade body at 75% of the rotor
radius [26.14]. The speciﬁc characteristics of the ﬂap
hinge (offset from rotor shaft, stiffness, and damping)
are fundamental for rotor blade ﬂapping and in con-
sequence for the rotorcraft pitch and roll dynamics as
discussed later.
In the case of most propeller-based rotary-wing
(RW) UAVs (e.g., multicopter systems) the feathering
and lead-lag degrees of freedom do not exist. Nev-
ertheless, propeller-based RW-UAVs may exert blade
ﬂapping by deformation of the propeller blades.
26.5.2 Rotorcraft Dynamics
As discussed in Sect. 26.3.6, the main rotorcraft body
dynamics can be directly described by the simpliﬁed
differential (26.45) which for most rotorcraft systems
maintain the presented mathematical structure. For
helicopter-type and multicopter UAV conﬁgurations the
dominant set of external forces and moments affecting
these dynamics can be summarized as
F D FG C
Nr
X
iD1
Fi
T C
Nr
X
iD1
Fi
H C FD ;
(26.74)
 D
Nr
X
iD1
i
Q C
Nr
X
iD1
i
T C
Nr
X
iD1
i
H C
Nr
X
iD1
i
“ :
(26.75)
The vector FG represents the weight force and Fi
T is
the thrust force of the i-th rotor or propeller out of the
total set of Nr rotors or propellers (Fig. 26.29). These
forces are related to the body heave dynamics but due
	
Teetering rotor
	
e
	
e
0.75R
Articulated rotor
Hingeless rotor
Fig. 26.28 Rotor hub design concepts of a teetering rotor,
an articulated rotor with hinge offset e and a hingeless rotor
with a virtual hinge offset e

Flying Robots
26.5 Rotorcraft Modeling and Design
649
Part B | 26.5
to the underactuation of most rotorcraft are also respon-
sible for the lateral rotorcraft acceleration.
The additional in-plane hub forces Fi
H represent
drag-related effects that may be neglected near hover
but become more dominant for higher lateral ﬂight ve-
locities [26.15]. The vector FD represents the drag force
associated with the rotorcraft main body. For simplic-
ity’s sake, it is assumed that the center of pressure of
the rotorcraft body is collocated with its center of grav-
ity which is not necessarily the case.
The relevant set of external moments is deﬁned by
the torques i
Q affecting the vehicle yaw dynamics, the
thrust-induced moments i
T, the moments introduced
by the hub forces i
H and the ﬂapping moments related
to the rotor hub stiffness i
“.
More explicit expressions for the respective force
and moment terms may be found in Tables 26.6
and 26.7, where Ti is the averaged thrust force mag-
nitude, Hi
x and Hi
y are the hub force components along
the rotorcraft body frame x- and y-axes, and Qi is the
torque generated by the i-th propeller or rotor. The aero-
dynamic drag of the main rotorcraft body, represented
by the components Dx, Dy, and Dz, has been discussed
in some detail in Sect. 26.3.5.
The vector Bri corresponds to the displacement of
the i-th rotor or propeller hub from the rotorcraft body
frame origin and Bni is the tip-path plane normal of the
i-th propeller or rotor disk as explained in [26.37].
The coefﬁcients ˇ1c and ˇ1s represent the longi-
tudinal and lateral ﬂapping coefﬁcients [26.15] de-
scribing the tilting of the rotor or propeller disk as
elaborated in more detail later in this section. Fi-
nally, the parameter ki
b corresponds to the ﬂapping
spring stiffness of the i-th rotor or propeller hub.
In the case of articulated or teetering hubs this tor-
sional spring stiffness represents potential ﬂap hinge
springs and in case of hingeless hubs approximates
Table 26.6 Typical rotorcraft forces
Type of force
Expression
Gravity
BFG D BRW
0
BB@
0
0
mg
1
CCA
Thrust
BFi
T D BniTi
Hub forces
BFi
H D
0
BB@
Hi
x
Hi
y
0
1
CCA
Rotorcraft body drag
BFD D
0
BB@
Dx
Dy
Dz
1
CCA
τ4
Q
τ3
Q
	
τ2
Q
τ1
Q
τ1
Q
τ1
	
F1
T
F 3
T
F 4
T
F 2
T
F 2
T
r2
r
W
CoG
x
z
y
r
r1
F 1
T
Fig. 26.29 A conventional helicopter and a quadro-copter plat-
form. Flapping angles have been exaggerated and only the rotor
and propeller forces relevant near hover have been visualized
the structural bending stiffness of a particular rotor or
propeller.
In the case of a helicopter tail rotor, ﬂapping is usu-
ally neglected and the thrust direction is modeled as,
e.g.,
Bni D
0
B@
0
1
0
1
CA :
(26.76)
To ﬁnalize the models of these external forces and
moments, the respective aerodynamic effects as well as
the role and characteristics of blade ﬂapping must be
discussed next.
26.5.3 Simplified Aerodynamics
In order to accurately predict the forces and moments
generated by a rotorcraft system, accounting for var-
ious ranges of operation conditions, detailed design
speciﬁcations, aerodynamic interactions between the
different rotors or propellers and possibly the rotorcraft
body itself, highly sophisticated aerodynamics simula-
Table 26.7 Typical rotorcraft moments
Type of moment
Expression
Torque
Bi
Q D
0
BB@
0
0
Qi
1
CCA
Thrust moment
BT D Bri  Bf i
T
Hub moment
Bi
H D Bri  Bfi
H
Flap moment
Bi
“ D ki
b
0
BB@
ˇi
1s
ˇi
1c
0
1
CCA

Part B | 26.5
650
Part B
Design
tion tools are required. Such tools are usually not easily
accessible to or operated by the roboticist and may hide
some of the fundamental ﬂight dynamics characteristics
of a particular platform due to the involved complexity.
For a repeated evaluation of the general ﬂight properties
of a rotorcraft it may thus be preferable to derive ap-
proximate, analytical models of the aerodynamic forces
and moments. This may provide profound insight into
the core working principles of rotorcraft operation.
The general approach to derive such models is
the employment of BET as partially presented in
Sect. 26.3.4. BET, as opposed to BEMT or MT, main-
tains the notion of individual rotor or propeller blades.
Hence, it may account for changes in the angle of attack
˛, the aerodynamic inﬂow velocities UT and UP and in
consequence of the local lift and drag increments dL
and dD, not only in function of the radial position r
of the observed airfoil segment but also in dependency
of the blade azimuth . To further the understanding of
this dependency in , one may examine Fig. 26.16 as
well as Fig. 26.30 where the hub coordinate frame H is
introduced.
The perpendicular and tangential inﬂow velocities
UP and UT (and thus also ˛) are strongly related to
the rotor angular speed ˝ and the induced inﬂow ve-
locity vi (as discussed for BEMT). In ﬂight operation
beyond hover, these inﬂow velocities are also affected
by the rotorcraft linear and angular velocities Bv and
B!, as well as the potential ﬂapping motion of the rotor
or propeller blades. From the perspective of a revolving
rotor or propeller blade, these additional inﬂow veloci-
ties vary periodically in function of .
Inspecting Fig. 26.30, one can establish the follow-
ing relations for the airfoil inﬂow velocities [26.35]
UT D ˝.eC r/  vy C ˇ!xr ;
(26.77)
UP D vi  w C !y.e C r/ C Pˇr  ˇvx :
(26.78)
a)
b)
u
xB
yB
r
ωy
ω
ωx
yH
υ
	
	·
xH
xH
zH
UT
UP
dr
e
Ω

Fig. 26.30 (a) Top view of revolving rotor/propeller blade and the
relevant velocities. (b) Side view of revolving rotor/propeller blade
and the relevant velocities
The linear and angular velocities vx, vy, !x, and !y cor-
respond to the projections of the vehicle body velocities
u, v, p, and q into the hub frame H
vx D u cos  C v sin  ;
(26.79)
vy D v cos   u sin  ;
(26.80)
!x D p cos  C q sin  ;
(26.81)
!y D q cos   p sin  :
(26.82)
For helicopter-type UAVs the azimuth dependency of
˛ may also be related to periodic changes in the blade
pitch angle . For helicopter conﬁgurations the feath-
ering angle  can usually be controlled collectively for
the entire rotor disk or cyclically in dependency of the
blade position  using a swashplate mechanism [26.38]
 D 0 C 1c cos  C 1s sin  :
(26.83)
The swashplate mechanism essentially provides the
means to adjust the collective pitch angle 0 as well as
the cyclic pitch angles 1c and 1s individually. Note
that for twisted propeller or rotor blades 0 merely
represents the pitch angle at the blade root and an ad-
ditional term accounting for the radial variation in pitch
must be introduced [26.14].
By altering 0, the swashplate provides some con-
trol over the average angle of attack of the entire rotor
disk and thus the generated average thrust and torque.
Similarly, varying the cyclic components creates a lift
imbalance between opposing sides of the rotor disc.
This lift imbalance induces a periodic ﬂapping motion
of the individual rotor blades (also depending on )
which affects the pitch and roll moments “ and T.
For helicopter-type UAVs this is the main control mech-
anism for the pitch and roll attitude dynamics.
For the majority of multicopter vehicles 0 is usu-
ally ﬁxed and the cyclic angles do not exist .1c D 1s D
0/. In this case, attitude control is realized through T
only by changing the propeller speed ˝i of the individ-
ual propellers.
To describe the aforementioned periodic changes in
blade ﬂapping the following representation of the ﬂap-
ping angle ˇ is customary when modeling rotorcraft
dynamics [26.39]
ˇ D ˇ0.t/ C ˇ1c.t/ cos .t/ C ˇ1s.t/ sin .t/ :
(26.84)
The coefﬁcient ˇ0.t/ corresponds to the coning angle
of the entire rotor or propeller disc, whereas ˇ1c.t/
and ˇ1s.t/ are the longitudinal and lateral disk tilting
angles.

Flying Robots
26.5 Rotorcraft Modeling and Design
651
Part B | 26.5
Unlike the blade pitch coefﬁcients in (26.83), the
ﬂap coefﬁcients in (26.84) are assumed to be functions
of time t which is later exploited when modeling ﬂap-
ping dynamics.
Although it is crucial to capture all these peri-
odic dependencies in , it can be obstructive for the
purpose of creating an efﬁcient rotorcraft simulation.
Directly simulating the body dynamics (26.45) un-
der the inﬂuence of the external forces and moments
(26.74) and (26.75) while accounting for all depen-
dencies in , would require the blade motion to be
simulated step by step while moving around the rotor
or propeller shaft. This can lead to comparatively stiff
differential equations which may be hard to simulate
efﬁciently.
An alternative approach is to derive simpliﬁed force
and torque models by integrating the lift and drag in-
crements along the rotor or propeller radius, summing
over the number of blades Nb and averaging around the
rotor azimuth as
T D Nb
2
2
Z
0
R
Z
0
dL ;
(26.85)
Q D Nb
2
2
Z
0
R
Z
0
r

dD C UP
UT
dL

;
(26.86)
Hx D Nb
2
2
Z
0
R
Z
0
sin 

dD C UP
UT
dL

;
(26.87)
Hy D Nb
2
2
Z
0
R
Z
0
cos 

dD C UP
UT
dL

:
(26.88)
Combining (26.77) to (26.88) with (26.12), (26.13),
(26.27), and (26.33) and assuming simple rotor or pro-
peller blade geometries (e.g., linear blade twist) the
above expressions can be evaluated algebraically, e.g.,
using a symbolic computation program. As opposed to
BEMT these averaged aerodynamic formulations are
capable of accounting for the effects of the periodic
changes of inﬂow velocities such as, e.g., the dissymme-
try of lift phenomenon [26.15] as well as for the varying
blade feathering and ﬂapping angles.
To gain some appreciation of how these averaged
models may be useful in providing insight into the core
characteristics of rotorcraft operation, a strongly simpli-
ﬁed thrust model directly resulting from (26.85) under
the assumption of hover and negligible ﬂapping angles
is given as an example
T D

kT10 C kT2
v0
˝ C kT3

˝2 :
(26.89)
The coefﬁcients kT1, kT2, and kT3 essentially de-
pend on aerodynamic and geometric rotor or propeller
properties. As one may deduce directly from (26.89),
thrust is a linear function of the collective pitch an-
gle 0 and the average induced rotor or propeller in-
ﬂow velocity v0 which is further deﬁned in the next
section.
26.5.4 Nonuniform Inflow
In order to account for the varying induced ﬂow ﬁeld
over the rotor or propeller disk in hover and forward
ﬂight, the following approximate induced inﬂow distri-
bution may be assumed as discussed in [26.14]
vi D v0 C r
R.v1c cos  C v1s sin / :
(26.90)
The velocity component v0 represents the average in-
duced inﬂow at the center of the modeled rotor respec-
tively propeller disc. It is directly related to the thrust
level the rotor or propeller is operating at and may be
computed, e.g., based on the iterative method discussed
in [26.15]. The inﬂow coefﬁcients v1c and v1s account
for changes in the induced ﬂow ﬁeld due to lateral rotor-
craft ﬂight velocities. Various steady-state models for
v1c and v1s have been proposed in the past with moder-
ate prediction quality only.
Reference [26.40] presents these models in de-
tail and discusses an alternative method which also
accounts for transient effects. Accounting for inﬂow
dynamics, the transient response of v0, v1c, and v1s
to, e.g., sudden blade pitch changes can be captured
and the aforementioned iterative computations may be
avoided.
26.5.5 Flapping Dynamics
The dynamics of rotor or propeller ﬂapping corresponds
to a second-order differential equation of the ﬂapping
angle ˇ which essentially represents an aerodynami-
cally damped oscillator [26.35]
Rˇ D Rˇ.;˝; u; v; w; p; q; Pp; Pq; ˇ; Pˇ; / :
(26.91)
Reference [26.41] and references therein elaborate the
modeling process required to derive the above differen-
tial equation from ﬁrst principles.
As for the simpliﬁed aerodynamic forces and mo-
ments, the dependency of (26.91) on rotor azimuth
is important but problematic for efﬁcient blade ﬂap
simulations. Here, the averaging operation discussed
in [26.39] has been employed. This essentially leads to
the following differential equation of the ﬂapping coef-

Part B | 26.5
652
Part B
Design
ﬁcients ˇ0, ˇ1c and ˇ1s
A Rˇ Rˇ C A Pˇ Pˇ C Aˇˇ D A C A!! C A ;
ˇ D
0
B@
ˇ0
ˇ1c
ˇ1s
1
CA ;
 D
0
B@
%0  w
%1c
%1s
1
CA ;
! D
0
BBB@
p
q
Pp
Pq
1
CCCA ;
 D
0
B@
0
1c
1s
1
CA :
(26.92)
The involved matrices from A Rˇ to A depend on an
abundance of aerodynamic, geometric, inertial, and
structural parameters of the modeled rotor or propeller
system as well as on the lateral ﬂight velocity of the ro-
torcraft. The structure of these matrices is thus strongly
related to the type of rotor or propeller hub that is be-
ing modeled. From the resulting mathematical relations
it is for example possible to conclude that for a teeter-
ing rotor without hinge springs, the maximal ﬂapping
response ˇ to a cyclic pitch input in  will follow with
a 90ı phase shift in rotor azimuth [26.15].
Considering the body time constants of most ro-
torcraft conﬁgurations in comparison with the time
constants of the above dynamics, one may in general
assume that the fast poles in (26.92) are negligible and
they mostly represent rotor or propeller vibrations. Ac-
cordingly, (26.92) is often reduced to a ﬁrst-order dif-
ferential equation by introducing the assumption Rˇ D 0.
For very rigid rotors or propellers one may even assume
Pˇ D 0 and compute the steady-state ﬂapping response
only (quasi-steady model). However, this is not the case
for all RW-UAS conﬁgurations. To what degree higher
order effects such as ﬂapping or inﬂow dynamics have
to be accounted for, depends on the level of frequency
separation between the body poles versus the poles of
the rotor dynamics.
26.5.6 Flight Dynamics Assessment
Assembling the dynamics of the rotorcraft body with
the forces and moments deﬁned in the previous sec-
tion, as well as possibly introducing higher order effects
such as blade ﬂapping and inﬂow dynamics, results
in a set of nonlinear differential equations represent-
ing the ﬂight characteristics of the modeled platform.
In order to inspect these ﬂight characteristics one may
implement a ﬂight simulator based on this set of non-
linear differential equations and analyze the simulated
ﬂight responses. The linearization process presented in
Sect. 26.3.6 may provide additional conclusions and
is often followed by a separation into subsystems an-
alyzed individually.
One of the most crucial rotorcraft subsystems corre-
sponds to the pitch and roll attitude dynamics as it is this
subsystem which ultimately deﬁnes how agile, stable,
or accurate a rotorcraft may be able to ﬂy in the horizon-
tal plane of motion. Assuming near hover operation and
neglecting higher order dynamics, the linearized open-
loop roll dynamics for example, can usually be reduced
to a ﬁrst-order transfer function
G.s/ D P.s/
U.s/ D
Kp
s  Dp
:
(26.93)
The frequency function P.s/ represents the Laplace
transform of the rotorcraft roll rate p and U.s/ the
Laplace transform of a control input affecting the roll
subsystem. For a helicopter, this control input com-
monly corresponds to a cyclic swashplate command and
for a quadro-copter to the differential speed between
two propellers on opposing sides of its airframe. The
abstracted system parameter Kp corresponds to the so-
called roll control derivative and Dp to the so-called
roll damping [26.37]. The control sensitivity Kp deﬁnes
how strong the initial rotorcraft roll acceleration Pp will
respond to a control input represented by U.s/. The
parameter Dp deﬁnes how well the system’s dynamic
response will be damped in the following. For hybrid
rotorcraft models the corresponding transfer functions
are generally of higher order but are equally useful
when analyzed with the well-known tools of linear sys-
tem theory [26.15, 35].
In general, these transfer functions and the result-
ing metrics such as, e.g., Kp and Dp can be derived in
dependency of a speciﬁc subset of physical rotorcraft
parameters. Using these simple metrics and including
the knowledge that may be gathered from the nonlin-
ear ﬂight simulator, ﬂight performance trends can be
assessed depending on the parameters of the UAV con-
ﬁguration under investigation. Such parameters may for
example include the body pitch and roll inertia, the lo-
cation of the body center of gravity or the location of
the rotors or propellers. The fundamental understand-
ing gained in this evaluation process is crucial for the
development of effective robotic ﬂight systems and the
required control laws.

Flying Robots
26.6 Flapping Wing Modeling and Design
653
Part B | 26.6
26.6 Flapping Wing Modeling and Design
A variety of animals, from insects to birds, are capa-
ble of ﬂight maneuvers which are presently impossible
in micro aerial vehicles, such as ﬂying in turbulence or
cluttered airspace. Additionally, animals are more ma-
neuverable and can ﬂy longer distances. People have
made many attempts at building ﬂapping robots or
ornithopters. While several are successful, many ei-
ther never take off or ﬂy only for a short duration
due to their higher complexity or poor design. Until
recently, ornithopters represented a niche of ﬂying ve-
hicles. The development of lithium polymer batteries
produced a light-weight high-power energy resource to
power ornithopters. Among the ﬁrst successful elec-
tric ornithopters were the Caltech and Aerovironment
microbats in 1998 [26.42, 43]. Many designs still fail
to ﬂy despite the rapidly increasing population build-
ing electric ornithopters. A major problem in most
designs is an inability to generate enough lift to take
off in the ﬁrst place. This precludes additional ﬂight
research, such as maneuverability, ﬂight distance or
time. Engineers have believed that ﬂapping wings are
essential to further development of micro aerial ve-
hicles since the ﬁrst electric ornithopters took off
and biologists started to understand the aerodynam-
ics of ﬂapping insect wings. The main reason behind
this focus is the idea that they are aerodynamically
more efﬁcient at the small Reynolds number of insects
(1010 000) when viscosity effects start to dominate
airﬂow.
26.6.1 Aerodynamic Mechanisms
Our understanding of insect aerodynamics provides us
with the most detailed model of the aerodynamic func-
tion of a ﬂapping wing [26.45]. There is some evidence
that wing ﬂexibility can improve aerodynamic perfor-
mance of a ﬂapping wing by roughly 10% [26.46] if
the angle of attack is not optimized for a stiff wing.
However, a parametric study using a robot model of an
insect wing suggests that wing ﬂexibility does not im-
prove performance if we can optimize angle of attack
independently of wing stiffness [26.47]. Ignoring aeroe-
lastic effects that change angle of attack distribution,
the key known aerodynamic mechanisms of a ﬂapping
wing are [26.45]:
1. A stable leading edge vortex (LEV) that enables
the wing to operate at high angles of attack with-
out stall during the quasi-steady mid-stroke phase
(Fig. 26.31). During stroke reversal the aerodynam-
ics is not quasi steady. In this phase, ﬁve additional
affects are thought to be important:
2. Added mass effects due to ﬂuid acceleration in re-
sponse to the reversal.
3. The Wagner effect explaining that changes in vor-
tex strength need time to build-up over a few chord
lengths of travel.
4. Rotational lift due to the timing of changes in an-
gle of attack during stroke reversal and its effect on
vortex lift through the Kramer effect.
5. Wake capture when the wing reverses direction
and interacts with the momentum jet of its shed
wake.
6. Clap and ﬂing when the wings become close enough
to (nearly) touch and air is forced out of the cavity
formed by the two wings and sucked back in, which
can increase lift [26.48].
a)
b)
(1) Stable leading
 
edge vortex
(1) Stable leading
 
edge vortex
Quasi-steady
Unsteady
Quasi-steady
(2) Added mass
(3) Wagner effect
(4) Rotational lift
(5) Wake capture
(6) Clap & fling
Fig.26.31a,b Flapping insect wing aerodynamics can be under-
stood through the interaction of a myriad of complex aerodynamic
mechanisms. (a) The key high-lift mechanism insects employ, is
a stable leading edge vortex (LEV) generated during the up and
downstroke. (b) A ﬂapping cycle consists of a quasi-steady part
during which the wing accelerates little. During this phase, the sta-
ble LEV is the key high-lift mechanism (1). During stroke reversal
there is evidence that up to ﬁve effects (2)–(6) could be important
(after [26.44])

Part B | 26.6
654
Part B
Design
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.5
1
Fruit fly
Propeller
Flapper
Re=14000
Re=1400
Re=110
Fruit
fly
Translating
Flapping
Spinning
90°
90°
Flapping
90°
0°
0°
0°
1.5
2
0
1
2
3
4
5
ni
g
°
Streak
Core
a)
b)
c) Lift coefficient
Drag coefficient
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
d) Power factor
Glide number
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
e) Lift coefficient
Drag coefficient
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Fig.26.32a–e The aerodynamics of a ﬂapping (insect) wing scale from insect to bird scale. (a) A stable LEV enables
ﬂapping wings to operate at high angles of attack without stall. (b) The key parameter explaining LEV stability is the
wing’s swing, its spinning motion, as demonstrated by this spinning model of a ﬂy wing which generates a stable LEV
and similarly elevated forces as in ﬂapping wings. (c) At insect scale ﬁxed (translating) wings underperform, whereas
ﬂapping and spinning wings generate similarly high lift. Spinning wings generate less drag which makes them more
efﬁcient. (d) The power factor of a spinning wing is higher than for a ﬂapping wing, higher indicating that less power
is needed to support body weight. (e) The dimensionless lift and drag averaged over a full ﬂapping cycle is independent
of scale to within good approximation (Reynolds number 110: fruit ﬂy: 1400; house ﬂy: 14 000; hummingbird). This
makes ﬂapping wing aerodynamics scalable enabling the use of dimensional analysis [26.49]
There exist, however no quantitative experimen-
tal studies or theories that fully dissect these effects
and quantify their relative importance for aerodynamic
lift and power. While ﬂapping wing aerodynamics is
complex and not fully understood, it is simple from
a robot design perspective, because it is scalable from
insect to bird size (Fig. 26.32). This enables prototyp-
ing at larger, more cost effective, scales and enables
scaling the design down as technology advances, and
smaller components and fabrication methods become
Delfly II
28
16
1.26
15 min.
14
Gearbox and 4-bar
102–100
1.4 W
380 mA
Nano-Hummingbird
16
19
1.37
11 min.
30
Gearbox and string
rollers
102–100
3.27 W
880 mA
RoboBee
3
0.06
N/A (tethered)
N/A (tethered)
110
Piezo-electric
Elastic 4-bar like
102–10–1
N/A (tethered)
N/A (tethered)
Wingspan (cm)
Mass (g)
m/m0
Flight time
Frequency (Hz)
Mechanism
Scale (mm)
Power
Current
a)
b)
c)
Fig.26.33a–c Examples of three
different types of successful ﬂap-
pers. (a) Jaap Oldenkamp, Delﬂy
II (after [26.49, 50]), (b) Nano
Hummingbird (after [26.51]), (c)
RoboBee (after [26.52])
available [26.49]. Flapping wings generate more lift
than translating wings because they generate a stable
LEV. To generate a stable vortex over the whole wing,
the aspect ratio with respect to the center of rotation
needs to be equal to or smaller than about 4 [26.53].
Flapping wings with an aspect ratio larger than 4 can
stall outboard [26.53]; whereas more stubby ﬂapping
wings cannot. This can explain why the majority of in-
sect, bird, and bat wings have an aspect ratio of around
24 with respect to the shoulder joint [26.53]. The

Flying Robots
26.6 Flapping Wing Modeling and Design
655
Part B | 26.6
main advantage of stubby wings is that they do not stall
at high angles of attack enabling animals to take-off
and land vertically by increasing angle of attack in-
stead of ﬂapping frequency [26.53] using LEVs [26.54].
Insects [26.55], bats, hummingbirds [26.56], and other
birds [26.57], but also auto rotating seeds generate sta-
ble LEVs. This shows that stable LEVs are a convergent
evolutionary solution for high lift at high angle of attack
in nature [26.53].
Comparison of ﬂapping versus spinning (propeller-
like) insect wings shows spinning insect wings generate
similar elevated lift forces by generating a LEV at lower
drag. Helicopters with stubby rotors are, therefore,
aerodynamically more efﬁcient than stubby ﬂapping
wings, because they need less power to ﬂy, as quali-
tatively presented in Fig. 26.32d [26.49]. This is con-
ﬁrmed experimentally for the most advanced hovering
ornithopter at present, the Nano Hummingbird [26.51].
Comparing its ﬂapping wing with a spinning wing
showed for various forward speeds that ﬂapping wings
require more power for the same lift, in part due to
aerodynamics [26.49, 53], and in part due to inertia
losses [26.49, 51]. The key advantage of ﬂapping wings
seems to be the potential for extreme maneuverability
and robustness. For instance, ﬂapping wings may fare
better in turbulence, close to the ground, near verti-
cal surfaces and through clutter, when helicopters can
become unstable due to stall and complex rotor-wake
interactions [26.58].
26.6.2 Sizing New Flappers
An improved understanding of the detailed aerodynam-
ics is scientiﬁcally invaluable, but perhaps not critical
for designing successful ornithopters at a time when
most struggle to take-off. Instead, sizing an ornithopter
in terms of gross design parameters such as wing span,
weight, and ﬂapping frequency is more critical for take-
off. The design methodology introduced here explains
how one can transform successful designs to meet other
mission perspectives. These designs can then enable
ﬂight studies that can advance our understanding of
ornithopters versus Ro-UAS and FW-UAS to better ap-
preciate their unique advantages.
Amongst successful ﬂappers, there are three main
archetypes as shown in Fig. 26.33. Historically, most
ﬂappers have relied on variants of a four-bar mecha-
nism to generate the ﬂapping motion which generates
lift. One example of this is the Delﬂy family of or-
nithopters, which are capable of both fast forward
ﬂying and hover using this approach (
VIDEO 493 ).
A recent design which demonstrates both prolonged
hovering ﬂight and maneuverability, although lacks
the ability to ﬂy fast forward, is the Aerovironment
Nano-Hummingbird [26.51]. The Nano-Hummingbird
uses a ﬂapping mechanism composed of rollers and
strings, while still using a geared down motor to pro-
vide power at the right frequency. Additionally, the
wings provide control, rather than traditional tail con-
trol surfaces. Another more modern development is
centimeter scale ornithopters which use piezoelectric
actuators to generate ﬂapping motion and control such
as the Harvard Robobee [26.52] and the Berkeley
Micromechanical Flying Insect. These are capable of
tethered ﬂight only, because no batteries exist that can
supply high enough power in an enough lightweight
package.
Despite the differences in design, these ﬂappers
share common trends in parameters, as shown in
Fig. 26.34. To design a functional ornithopter, we start
with a desired mission such as surveillance, search
and rescue, or military applications. The mission de-
termines an appropriate wingspan, and also determines
a minimum time for task completion. Figure 26.34
shows that empty weight (mass without battery) fol-
lows an exponential pattern with wingspan, especially
over the mid-range of wingspans. The main observation
is that the power deﬁning scale is not 3, but approx-
imately 1:5. This may be because signiﬁcant portions
of the mass of smaller ornithopters comes from elec-
tronics, gearboxes and actuators, whose masses are not
dependent on wingspan. Additionally, required ﬂapping
frequency decreases with wingspan, enabling an ap-
proximation of required ﬂapping frequency based on
wingspan that works well for all sizes of ornithopters,
as expected using scaling relations.
Using initial design parameters from a success-
ful ornithopter, we can design another ornithopter that
is also capable of ﬂapping ﬂight using scaling rela-
tionships of geometry, ﬂuid mechanics, and battery
physics [26.27]. We need to decide on design param-
eters for the new ﬂapper, including the wingspan b,
weight W, aspect ratio , and battery weight Wbatt.
Here, the aspect ratio is wingspan divided by chord
length, as these are both easily measured design pa-
rameters. Example of initial parameters for the Delﬂy II
are: b1 D 28 cm, m1 D 16 g (W D mg), 1 D 3:5, f1 D
14 Hz, P1 D 1:4 W, Wbatt;1 D 2:7 g, t1 D 15 min. Initial
design parameters are denoted with subscript 1; while
new design parameters are denoted with subscript 2.
Using the curve ﬁtted through successful ornithopters
as shown in Fig. 26.34, one can make an initial approx-
imation of empty weight. First, we can calculate the
wing area, Aﬂ, of the new ﬂapper and the old ﬂapper
using the same equation for each
A / b2
 :
(26.94)

Part B | 26.6
656
Part B
Design
0
20
40
DFI
DFII
KU1
UMD JB
KU2
KU4
AM
DEM
Nano
HMF
DFM
DFII
DFI
UMD BB
UMD JB
UMDSB
Nano
KU4 KU3
KU2
KU1
MFI
uB3 & KU3
60
80
101
101
102
Ornithopter
1.5th power fit
3rd power curve
Ornithopter
1st power fit
a) Empty mass (g)
Wingspan (cm)
80
60
40
20
0
b) Flapping frequency (Hz)
Wingspan (cm)
103
102
101
100
Fig.26.34a,b Current ornithopter trends of empty mass
and ﬂapping frequency with changes in wingspan. (a)
The empty mass of successful ornithopters does not
scale with wingspan cubed, but with wingspan to the
power 1:5 (R2 D 0:79). The power law predicts the ap-
proximate masses effectively in the 1050 cm wingspan
range, while it overestimates the mass for those with
wingspans below 10 cm. The curve to the third power
consistently underestimates the unloaded masses of cur-
rent ornithopters. (b) To support the weight of the or-
nithopter, ﬂapping frequency needs to increase inverse
to wingspan for smaller wingspans. Ornithopters in (a)
ﬂy freely and have a ﬂight time of at least one minute.
The Micromechanical Flying Insect and Harvard Robobee
follow the same trend line for ﬂapping frequency as
larger ornithopters; even though they ﬂy tethered (they
would need to ﬂap faster with batteries onboard). The
relationship here ﬁts a power curve with the exponent
equal to 1:01 with R2 D 0:96. Abbreviations are as fol-
lows: MFI – Berkeley Micromechanical Flying Insect;
HMF – Harvard Robobee; KU1,2,3,4 – Konkuk Univer-
sity ornithopters; DFI,II,M-Delﬂy I,II and Micro; Nano –
Aerovironment Nano-Hummingbird; UMD SB, JB, BB –
University of Maryland Small Bird, Big Bird, Jumbo Bird;
AM – Brian’s Ornithopter; uB3 – NiCad powered Caltech
Microbat
In hovering or steady forward ﬂight, it is reasonable to
assume that weight is proportional to lift
W / 1
2cL	V2
t Aﬂ:
(26.95)
We assume that cL (lift coefﬁcient), 	 (density,) and g
(gravitational acceleration) are constant [26.49], which
is reasonable for ﬂights on earth at low altitudes. Then,
rearranging produces the following relationship be-
tween forward velocities, Vt
Vt;2 D Vt;1
s
W2
W1
Aﬂ;1
Aﬂ;2
:
(26.96)
We can then assume that the advance ratio J is constant
for both vehicles, which is a reasonable approximation
for ornithopters with similar wing kinematics, shape,
and deformation. The advance ratio J is the ratio of
maximum forward speed to wingtip speed
J D
Vt
4f ˚R :
(26.97)
Since wingspan is twice the radius, and we can use the
assumption that J is constant to obtain the following
relationship for ﬂapping frequencies
f2 D Vt;2
Vt;1
b1
b2
˚1
˚2
f1 :
(26.98)
Then, assuming that ﬂapping amplitude, ˚ is constant
between the two designs (reasonable for designs that
follow the same parameters and keep the same gear-
boxes) we can simplify the relationship for ﬂapping
frequencies
f2 D Vt;2
Vt;1
b1
b2
f1 :
(26.99)
The required power to ﬂy is proportional to the weight
and ﬂight speed
P / mgVt D WVt :
(26.100)
Thus, we can calculate the power required of the new
ﬂapper relative to that of the old ﬂapper
P2 D P1
Vt;2
Vt;1
W2
W1
:
(26.101)
Using the power calculated above, the ﬂight time can be
estimated as
t D CLiPoULiPo
P
m ;
(26.102)

Flying Robots
26.6 Flapping Wing Modeling and Design
657
Part B | 26.6
in which ULiPo D 3:7 V for a LiPo battery, and where,
as in Fig. 26.35, the capacity can be approximated as
CLiPo D mbattkbatt :
(26.103)
From the scaling equations (particularly (26.101)
and (26.102)), we can produce a set of graphs as in
Fig. 26.36, allowing us to use the wingspan and ﬂight
time to design a scaled ornithopter. Beginning with
the approximate wingspan and ﬂight time desired, we
use Fig. 26.36a to choose the appropriate battery mass.
An increase in wingspan creates the option for heav-
ier batteries and an increase in ﬂight time as does an
increase in battery mass. The wingspan and battery
mass specify the required ﬂapping frequency. This al-
lows us to choose a motor and gear ratio. If this turns
out to be impractical with available components, we
can adjust parameters and iterate between the equations
shown in Fig. 26.36. In general, for an ornithopter with
equal mass, increasing the wingspan decreases the nec-
essary ﬂapping frequency. Alternatively, increasing the
battery mass to improve ﬂight time also requires in-
creasing ﬂapping frequency, electric power, and current
to carry the extra payload. This explains why increas-
ing battery mass beyond empty weight causes little
increase in ﬂight time, because the airframe needs to
become much stronger at the cost of weight. A penalty
in the ﬂight time scaling equation needs to be imple-
mented to correct for the increase in structural weight.
The required ﬂapping frequency and battery mass ratio
0
5
10
Batteries
Linear fit
50% increase
100% increase
Battery capacity (mAh)
Battery mass (g)
800
400
0
Fig. 26.35 Battery capacity as a function of mass for
many small lithium polymer (LiPo) batteries in the size
range (<10 g) which would be used for ornithopters with
1050 cm wingspan. The graph shows the technology
is linearly scalable. The approximate capacity density of
small LiPo cells (3:7 V) is 37 mAh=g
specify the required power. Power increases signiﬁ-
cantly with wingspan. Additionally, power increases
with added battery mass due to the increase in ﬂapping
frequency required to lift the larger mass. Finally, we
can determine the current the battery needs to supply,
which is proportional to the power assuming we use
the same kind of battery and efﬁciency of motor. Iter-
ating between these steps enables ﬁnding solutions that
best meet the mission speciﬁcations. We note that many
ornithopters could ﬂy signiﬁcantly longer by doubling
their current battery mass (Fig. 26.36a) at the expense
of control response (inertia) and airframe loading.
If ﬂight time needs to increase for a wingspan-
constrained ornithopter design, and battery mass and
chemistry is already optimized, we should reduce air-
0.5
1
1.5
2
m/mE
2.5
3
10.5
2
0.5
1
10.5
2
0.5
1
10.5
2
0.5
1
10.5
2
a) t/t0
b/b0
4
2
0
b) f/f0
b/b0
4
2
0
c) P/P0
b/b0
8
6
4
2
0
d) I/I0
b/b0
8
6
4
2
0
Fig.26.36a–d These four ﬁgures show the effects of
changing wingspan and adding battery mass to an or-
nithopter on the ﬂight time, power consumption, current re-
quirement, and ﬂapping frequency requirement. The value
of the empty mass, me, is determined using the ﬁtted curve
in Fig. 26.34a for each wingspan. The ﬁgures are then
scaled from the initial reference (Delﬂy II) whose position
is at .1; 1/ in each ﬁgure. (a) Increasing the battery mass
ratio increases the ﬂight time up until the ratio becomes
equal to 3. This ignores additional airframe mass needed
to carry these batteries. (b) However, increasing the bat-
tery mass also increases the required ﬂapping frequency.
(c,d) Increasing the frequency also increases the necessary
power (P) and current (I). Using these parameters, we can
iterate back and forth between the plots until a feasible de-
sign is found

Part B | 26.6
658
Part B
Design
0
2
4
0
2
4
0
2
4
a) f/f0
f/f0; P/P0; I/I0
Φ/Φ0
4
2
0
b) Design parameter
AR/AR0
4
2
0
c) t/t0
m/m0
4
2
0
t/t0
Fig.26.37a–c Changing additional parameters can modify performance of a scaled vehicle. (a) Adjusting the ﬂapping
amplitude allows the user to change the required ﬂapping frequency to use available motor/gearbox combinations. Gen-
erally, larger ﬂapping angles result in increased lift coefﬁcient and decreased drag (after [26.59]). Thus, increasing the
amplitude to match it with the motor and gear train can decrease the required power to ﬂy. (b) As the aspect ratio
increases at a constant wingspan, the wing area decreases, and therefore the ﬂight time decreases while the required ﬂap-
ping frequency (and hence the power and current) increases. (c) Flight time decreases with additional payload (weight)
frame mass (Fig. 26.37) and increase wing area [26.49].
Mass can be further decreased by airframe optimization
using underutilized aerospace optimization strategies,
and by critically reevaluating the payload. Wing area
can be increased by decreasing aspect ratio and select-
ing a biplane instead of a monoplane conﬁguration.
Whereas such wing design changes reduce aerody-
namic efﬁciency of the wing, they increase the overall
vehicle energy efﬁciency, and therefore increase ﬂight
time. Ornithopters that ﬂy long enough to complete
missions are often controlled by low-weight underpow-
ered actuators that sacriﬁce maneuverability.
To control the ornithopter’s ﬂight and to utilize its
maneuverability, we need to generate enough control
torques with lightweight actuators. Designs optimized
for ﬂight time, such as the Delﬂy, use control surfaces
added to the tail in the style of a traditional rudder
or elevator. More maneuverable designs use the ﬂap-
ping wings as control surfaces, by changing their angle
of attack (Nano-Hummingbird [26.51]) or left versus
right wing relative ﬂapping motions (Robobee [26.52]).
The two dominant off the shelf actuators are stan-
dard servos and magnetic actuators. Standard servos
have small electric motors and potentiometers and
move to speciﬁed positions; while magnetic actuators
have a small magnet inside a small coil of wire and
apply speciﬁed amounts of torque. Magnetic actua-
tors are available at lower masses than servos, which
proves critical in optimizing performance of smaller
ornithopters. This shows that selecting appropriate ac-
tuators involves a tradeoff between ﬂight duration and
maneuverability. Ornithopters that are more maneuver-
able require more powerful and precise servo actuators.
The required servo torque of a scaled ornithopter can
be estimated assuming isometric scaling: Torque should
be proportional to total weight times wingspan, because
aerodynamic force is proportional to weight, and arm
length to wingspan. Knowing the required torque, we
need to ﬁnd a servo that can provide it. To reduce trial
and error we have plotted current servo data to deter-
mine how torque correlates with mass to budget for its
weight. The data in Fig. 26.38 shows that torque is pro-
portional to mass squared for current servo technology,
0
1
2
Servos
3
Actuators
4
5
Servo torque (kg cm)
Servo
speed
(rad/s)
Servo mass (g)
1.5
1
0.5
0
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Fig. 26.38 Servo (dots) and actuator (crosses) torques in-
creases with mass. The intensity of dots represents the
servo speed, with darker dots representing faster servos
(the magnetic actuators do not have speeds shown, as they
apply a force rather than specify a position). The servo
speed does not correlate strongly with mass, as it is de-
pendent on the motors, gears, and other internal hardware
of the servo, as well as the supply voltage. There are mag-
netic actuators available in the range of 0:81:8 g, they are
not included here due to lack of data available from manu-
facturers

Flying Robots
26.7 System Integration and Realization
659
Part B | 26.7
while empty ornithopter mass scales with wingspan to
the power of 1:5 (Fig. 26.34), so as wingspan increases
the actuator mass can become proportionally smaller.
We have demonstrated current design strategies
based off scaling successful designs that ensure or-
nithopters ﬂy. These upgraded rules of thumb are pow-
erful because current aerospace design analysis and
optimization techniques for ornithopters lack predictive
power and are therefore less informative than estimates
based on scaled ﬂying designs. If current designers base
their ﬁrst iteration of new ornithopters on current state-
of-the-art ornithopters, the ﬁeld can progress at a faster
pace through successful ﬂight testing of new concepts
that meet novel mission criteria.
26.7 System Integration and Realization
Enabling autonomous ﬂights with UAS incorporates
solving many challenges. This requires an interdis-
ciplinary approach, bringing together expertise from
many different ﬁelds. As shown in Fig. 26.39, knowl-
edge in the ﬁeld of aircraft design, as detailed in this
chapter, is required, as well as in many ﬁelds of engi-
neering and robotics.
26.7.1 Challenges for Autonomous UAS
Given the agility of UAS and their strict limitations
on weight and power consumption, the choice of sen-
sors, processors, and algorithms impose great technical
and scientiﬁc challenges. Also, major differences exist
between ground vehicles and UAS – sensors and algo-
rithms that work well on ground vehicles cannot simply
be applied on UAS due to inherent challenges.
Limited Payload and Power Supply
Weight and size restrictions require that lightweight
sensors have to be used, usually at the cost of having
noisier and less accurate data. These limitations also re-
strict the choice of onboard computers being used to
Mechanical
design
Aircraft
design
• Aerodynamics
• Structures
• Propulsion
systems
• Certification
Mobile
robotics
• Perception
• Localization
•  Cognition
•  Motion
 control
Unmanned
arial systems
Electronics
Software
Fig. 26.39 UAS design and research is interdisciplinary as
challenges from both aircraft design and mobile robotics
are combined
process information from the sensors. Thus, algorithms
need to cope with such data to achieve robust estimates,
while having limited computational power. As a refer-
ence, the take-off weight of a commonly used small
multirotor UAS (e.g., shown in Fig. 26.40) is 1:5 kg,
including 0:5 kg of payload, while the ﬂight autonomy
is approximately 15 min. For this class of UAS, approx-
imately 100 mW are required per 1 g additional take-off
weight for hovering – a fact that has to be considered
even for mounting small additional payload. Detailed
studies of take-off weight, payload, and ﬂight time of
such systems can be found in [26.60].
Degrees of Freedom
Compared to typical ground vehicles, there are two ad-
ditional degrees of freedom (DOF) for the vehicle’s
attitude (pitch and roll angle) as well as one additional
degree of freedom for the altitude, that need to be es-
timated and controlled. This requires state estimation,
control, and planning to be performed in full 6-D space,
and without simplifying assumptions.
Under-Actuated Systems
The types of UAS studied here are usually under-
actuated, as there are less control inputs available than
DOF. As a result, the attitude has to be changed for
many maneuvers. This in return changes the ﬁeld of
view of onboard sensors interacting with the UAS’ en-
vironment like cameras, or distance sensors.
Constant Motion and Inherent Instability
UAS cannot simply stop to acquire sensor readings,
when state estimation is delayed or contains high uncer-
tainty. While waiting for measurements or re-evaluation
of uncertain state estimates, the vehicle continues mov-
ing and further falsiﬁes these estimates.
26.7.2 Levels of Autonomy
We classify levels of autonomy and interaction with the
pilot or operator into three categories: Manual ﬂight,
semiautonomous and autonomous. Industry and the re-

Part B | 26.7
660
Part B
Design
Flight control unit:
   Low-level tasks
   Sensor fusion
   Control
Onboard computer
    Sensor fusion
    Perception
    Planning
GPS
WiFi
Inertial measurement unit (IMU)
Cameras
Fig. 26.40 Multi-rotor UAS and its
main components (after [26.60])
search community have made great progress toward
semiautonomous ﬂights, while there are still many open
questions and research topics for truly autonomous op-
eration.
Manual Flight
We refer to this mode when operation of the UAS re-
quires pilot skills. A remote-pilot has to handle attitude
dynamics and throttle/thrust in a way such that the
UAS remains in a stable state. That is, the pilot cannot
leave the hands off the remote control. This also means
that line-of-sight has to be maintained up to a distance
where the pilot can observe the state of the UAS prop-
erly. Piloting may be aided by a stability augmentation
system (SAS), like rate stabilization commonly used on
ﬁxed wing aircraft, or attitude control commonly used
on multirotor UAS.
Semiautonomous (Automatic)
This ﬂight mode does not require piloting skills any-
more, which is why we refer to a pilot rather than
an operator. Onboard sensors and algorithms are in
charge of stabilizing the UAS, such that the opera-
tor can leave the hands off the remote control and the
UAS remains in a stable state, waiting for input such as
waypoints or desired velocities. However, it is still the
full responsibility of the operator to ﬁnd feasible paths,
safely navigate around obstacles and to interact with
other air trafﬁc. This requires line of sight to be main-
tained, however, ﬁrst-person view could be thought of,
Common states: position, velocity, attitude ...
Additional objectives: quality of localization, endurance ...
Planning
Control
Perception
State
estimation
Fig. 26.41 Components for an autonomous UAS
as long as legal requirements are fulﬁlled. Examples for
such modes are off-the-shelf multirotor UAS [26.61]
equipped with GPS sensors or small ﬁxed-wing air-
craft [26.62] used for surveying.
Autonomous
Full autonomous mode relaxes the constraints from
semiautonomous or automatic mode. Only mission
goals are set, or high-level task allocation is handled
by the operator, while the UAS navigates through the
environment safely by itself. This includes global path
planning, collision avoidance with both static and dy-
namic objects and replanning where necessary. The
main idea is that the UAS can be left alone while
performing the task at hand, and, in case, warns the op-
erator ahead of time if intervention becomes necessary.
26.7.3 UAS Components
Autonomous UAS require numerous components from
various ﬁelds, which need to be carefully designed in
order to address the challenges detailed above. We high-
light important design considerations of building blocks
ﬁrst, and show implementation aspects for real systems.
Figure 26.40 shows the components for a commonly
used multirotor UAS.
Components for Autonomous Flights
The levels of autonomy deﬁned in Sect. 26.7.2 require
several components to be designed and to work with
each other. These components are shown in Fig. 26.41
and are described in the following:
Perception and State Estimation. Perception for au-
tonomous UAS mainly involves both localization of
the UAS and sensing of its environment. For localiza-
tion, commonly used satellite-based localization sys-
tems such as GPS (GLONASS or GALILEO in the
future) may not be accurate enough, especially dur-
ing tasks that involve operation in close proximity to
(man-made) structure, and certainly not indoors. Di-

Flying Robots
26.7 System Integration and Realization
661
Part B | 26.7
rect view to satellites is obstructed in these cases,
compromising localization accuracy. Also, it may be
considered whether sole reliance on these services is
acceptable, as authorities may deteriorate the accuracy
on purpose (selected availability). Thus, additional sen-
sors such as cameras or laser-rangeﬁnders should be
used onboard UAS in combination with simultaneous
localization and mapping (SLAM), or visual or laser
odometry algorithms, yielding additional localization
information [26.63–67].
Another important requirement to enable au-
tonomous ﬂights on the levels deﬁned above, is sensing
or reconstruction of the environment in order to navi-
gate around obstacles, and for sense-and-avoid maneu-
vers with other air trafﬁc. Obstacle sensing is especially
important when navigating close to terrain at low al-
titude. Satellite-based navigation in combination with
terrain maps may not be accurate enough, outdated,
and cannot handle dynamic obstacles. Again, onboard
sensors such as cameras, laser-rangeﬁnders, or even
radar, in combination with appropriate algorithms need
to be used to overcome the limitations mentioned be-
fore [26.68, 69].
Having information from a multitude of sensors,
from IMU over cameras to satellite-based, intelligent
sensor fusion methods are required, taking all informa-
tion into account and yielding a best estimate of the
state of the UAS and its environment. As such, percep-
tion and state estimation are building blocks, providing
essential information to the components described in
the following.
Control. As UAS typically present highly dynamic un-
certain ﬂight behavior, appropriate and robust control
techniques are required across all levels of autonomy.
This ranges from SAS used for supporting the pilot
during manual operation, to higher level control such
as waypoint following, and more advanced techniques
such as trajectory tracking, and may include handling
of failure situations. Cascaded control structures are
commonly used for this task [26.70]: inner- or low-
level control loops stabilize attitude dynamics (these
may be cascaded already), while outer- or high-level
control loops stabilize translational dynamics (veloc-
ity or position). Employed control approaches range
from simple P(I)D structures to more advanced tech-
niques like model predictive control (MPC) [26.3].
During waypoint following, speciﬁed waypoints have
to be reached and via-points have to be passed, while
the velocity and attitude proﬁle is left to the con-
troller to optimize. For trajectory tracking in contrast,
a tracking controller [26.71] has to follow speciﬁc pro-
ﬁles for position and attitude dynamics. These proﬁles
are usually planned with approaches presented below,
and yield more smooth paths than simple waypoint
following.
Planning. Planning in the context of UAS depicts the
process of planning appropriate waypoints or dynamic
trajectories for a UAS depending on the mission at
hand. This involves the latter two levels of autonomy
described in the previous section. Requirements range
from (dynamic) obstacle avoidance, taking obstacles
and the dynamics of the UAS into account, to more
sophisticated complete mission plans [26.72]. While
taking into account vehicle dynamics is a straight-
forward choice, additional constraints such as quality
of state estimation along a path, or battery endurance
may have to be considered as well. Furthermore, there
may be additional objectives like area covered or, for in-
stance, energy optimizations for solar airplanes in order
to stay airborne 24 h or longer.
While analytic approaches [26.73] can be used for
simple planning tasks, random sampling-based plan-
ners [26.74–76] dominate the literature in the area of
path planning for UAS, due to their ability to cope with
nonlinear vehicle dynamics and high-dimensional state
spaces. Based on these planners, a number of success-
ful approaches exist for UAS, even taking into account
localization uncertainty [26.4, 77–79].
Communication. Communication can be thought of
the glue between the components mentioned above.
While components have to communicate onboard
across multiple computation devices, there is also the
need of communication with a ground station, or with
the operator remote control device, via radio-links.
Here, the requirements in terms of range, delay, and
transmission rate (commonly referred to as bandwidth)
can vary greatly and should be tailored to the appli-
cation: computationally heavy tasks, being ofﬂoaded
to a ground station require high-bandwidth connec-
tions, where either WiFi (IEEE 802.11n or IEEE draft
802.11ac) or ultra wide band (UWB) techniques can be
applied. However, a reasonable maximum range is in
the order of 100m. More autonomy means also less de-
pendence on radio-links and realtime constraints. Mis-
sions involving larger distances have to rely on longer
range radio-links, even up to satellite links, but at the
expense of bandwidth and delay or signiﬁcant weight
and power requirements. That radio-links should never
be used inside any (real-time) critical control loops,
goes without saying.
Integration Onboard UAS
The components identiﬁed above have different re-
quirements in terms of real-time constraints and com-
putational complexity. Instead of real time, it is more

Part B | 26.8
662
Part B
Design
MAV
Flight control unit (FCU)
Correction
State
Onboard computer
High level processor
Position controller @1 kHz
EKF prediction @1 kHz
5 DOF pose
EKF propagation
@100 Hz
EKF update (s)
Local pose estimation
with monocular vision
@30 Hz
Position, velocity, attitude
Attitude
commands
IMU data
Low level
processor
Fig. 26.42 Example implementation of ﬂight-relevant components
onboard a multirotor UAS. All time-critical tasks such as con-
trol and the prediction part of an extended Kalman ﬁlter (EKF)
are performed on real-time microcontroller hardware, while com-
putationally more demanding, but less time-critical, tasks (visual
localization, EKF update) are processed on the onboard computer
using a standard operating system
appropriate to consider that a task has to be completed
in time. As an example, vehicle control tasks have to be
computed within a few milliseconds, but these task are
computationally less complex. Path planning in con-
trast is fairly complex, but it is usually perfectly ﬁne
if a path is computed within seconds, since planning
horizons span much longer time. Perception and parts
of state estimation lie in-between and need computa-
tion times in the order of tens of milliseconds. This
deﬁnes how, and on which computation devices these
components should be implemented. An example for
a multirotor UAS is shown in Fig. 26.42. The microcon-
trollers on the ﬂight-control-unit (FCU) are closest to
inertial sensors and actuators, but least powerful. Con-
trol loops and the prediction parts of the state estimator
are implemented here, running at guaranteed rates on
a real-time operating system, or even without. This re-
laxes real-time constraints on the onboard computer,
which can compute demanding tasks such as visual lo-
calization and update steps for state estimation. Local
planning tasks are computed here as well, while less
critical parts can be ofﬂoaded to a ground station.
Application Related Payload
While there is a set of sensors required to enable
autonomous navigation, which are referred to as naviga-
tion sensors, additional sensors, or payload in general,
need to be considered in the design phase. Not only in
terms of payload, i. e., weight, but also such that the
UAS is kept balanced. Furthermore, it has to be guar-
anteed that the additional payload does not interfere
(electromagnetically) with components in the critical
stabilization loop. Applications and their required sen-
sors are detailed in the next section.
26.8 Applications of Aerial Robots
From an application perspective, one may distinguish
between UAS that mostly operate as remote controlled
or semiautonomous systems (typically referred to as
drones) and intelligent systems, robots that present
advanced levels of autonomy. Drones are essentially
tele-operated aircraft or systems capable of tracking
predeﬁned trajectories while they further integrate on-
board sensors to provide situational awareness. Most
often such situational awareness is visual (using optics)
but can also include meteorological and environmen-
tal tasks like hurricane-monitoring and chemical plume
detection. As such, most drones ﬂy high with a prede-
termined and structured ﬂight plan and mission proﬁle.
Drones will continue to be valuable assets and as fea-
tured in daily media headlines world-wide, positively
impact both civilian and military missions.
Nowadays, a constant trend is to develop aerial
robots of advanced intelligence. Machine cognition,
perception and vehicle control algorithms work in con-
cert to perform applications that go beyond just situ-
ational awareness. Reaching new levels of autonomy,
these robots are designed to handle unforeseen events,
interact with their environment, and adapt to a broad
range of scenarios. In essence, drones were in their
vast majority passive, providing eyes on scene whereas
modern aerial robots tend to become active, allow-
ing their users to engage the scene, act autonomously
and possibly interact with surroundings. Figure 26.43
presents indicative examples of current and emerging
applications.
26.8.1 Demonstrated Applications of UAS
The Handbook’s ﬁrst edition listed eight categories of
possible applications. Since then, all these applications
have been realized, albeit with various levels of ma-

Flying Robots
26.8 Applications of Aerial Robots
663
Part B | 26.8
Surveillance &
monitoring 
Law
enforcement 
Communications
Transportation
Precision
agriculture 
Aerial work
task execution
Search &
rescue
Innovative media
Payload delivery
Remote sensing
Mapping & inspection 
Inspection throug
contact
Aerial
manipulation
Assembly tasks
Fig. 26.43 Indicative demonstrated and emerging applications of aerial robotics
turity. UAS (both drones and aerial robots) have been
deployed in:
1. Remote sensing
2. Disaster response
3. Surveillance
4. Search and rescue
5. Image acquisition
6. Communications
7. Transportation
8. And payload delivery.
The ﬁrst ﬁve categories broadly fall into the area
of reconnaissance, surveillance, and target acquisition
(RSTA). Drones have continued to successfully per-
form RSTA-based tasks like volcanic sampling, damage
assessment, border patrol, and cinematography. In con-
trast, the latter three categories are being realized with
advanced aerial robots. Equipped with computational
intelligence aerial robots can ﬂock. Aerial robots can
also airlift, maneuver and interact in near-Earth envi-
ronments like in-and-around buildings, forests, caves
and tunnels. As such current trends in aerial robotics
push the application envelope beyond RSTA. The eight
categories are now revisited with context on the ex-
pected breakthroughs to come while the topic of visual
inspection for industrial purposes is separately dis-
cussed:

Remote sensing: Drones are already used for
pipeline spotting, power line monitoring, volcanic
sampling, mapping, meteorology, geology, agri-
culture and unexploded mine detection. Advanced
aerial robots will be able to conduct pipeline risk as-
sessment and repair, power line maintenance, real-
time mapping, crop care and mine defusing.

Disaster response: Drones are also used for chem-
ical sensing, ﬂood monitoring, and wildﬁre man-
agement. Advanced aerial robots will be able to
conduct infrastructure repair, ﬂood mitigation, and
wildﬁre ﬁghting.

Surveillance: Drones are employed for law en-
forcement, trafﬁc monitoring, coastal and maritime
patrol, and border patrols. Advanced aerial robots
will be able to accomplish tasks like crowd control,
trafﬁc redirection, and inspection of maritime and
trucking containers.

Search and rescue: The vision of using drones for
search and rescue operations within low-density or
hard-to-reach areas has already become a reality.

Part B | 26.8
664
Part B
Design
Advanced aerial robots will be able to go beyond
casualty extraction by assessing care and delivering
ﬁrst-aid support.

Visual inspection: For quite some time, drones are
utilized to provide direct visual feeds to ground
operators inspection industrial and civil structures.
Future aerial robots will be able to act as a new high
ﬁdelity autonomous inspection tools that could also
be capable of conducting maintenance work tasks.

Transportation: Drones are already used for small-
and large-cargo transport, and possibly passenger
transport. Advanced aerial robots will be able to
conduct in-ﬂight refueling of other aircraft, pick-up
and drop-off of cargo as well as loading and extrac-
tion of casualties.

Communications: The use of drones as permanent
or ad hoc communication relays for voice and data
transmission, as well as broadcast units for tele-
vision or radio is currently a reality. Advanced
aerial robots will be able to conduct perch-and-
stare to serve as bug on the wall listening devices,
perch-and-stare to harvest energy from power lines,
ﬂocking to establish networks especially in areas
with degraded communications.

Payload delivery: Drones are already employed for
ﬁreﬁghting or crop dusting. Advanced aerial robots
will be able to accomplish dexterous manipulation
of payloads like tools for repairing structures, deliv-
ering, and insertion of logistics as well as handling
crops.

Image acquisition: Cinematography or real-time
entertainment is another relatively established use-
case of drones. Advanced aerial robots will be able
to conduct acting as pixels and operate in formation
ﬂight to serve as physical displays in the air.
26.8.2 Current Applications and Missions
Since the Handbook’s ﬁrst edition, media headlines
continue to document UAS and their impact in all the
aforementioned application categories. No longer are
such applications notional but are rather considered as
routine. The following provides recent state-of-the-art
examples in each category to underscore this message.
Drone usage for RSTA-based military operations
is routine. Tracking targets and, in growing instances,
destroying them, is commonly performed. But also non-
military missions in remote sensing, disaster response,
and surveillance are becoming routine. Beyond image
acquisition, drones are routinely used to gather me-
teorological data. NASA and NOAA regularly deploy
drones for real-time monitoring of hurricanes. On-
board sulfur dioxide sensors gather airborne samples
from volcanic plumes. Drones are frequently deployed
after disasters: in Fukushima (2011) and Hurricane
Sandy (2012) aerial images were gathered to assess
building damage. Monitoring of maritime piracy and
cartel drug-trafﬁcking also underscore the usefulness of
drones to persistently survey using high-deﬁnition cam-
eras and night vision systems.
Currently, drones are deployed to open and/or re-
stricted areas where airborne collision risk is reduced.
The need for situational awareness will however con-
tinue to be fulﬁlled by UAS. The demand for more
data will push the development of newer drones. As
such, well-known and cutting-edge aerodynamic design
principles will be applied so that UAS ﬂy longer and
farther and incorporate different ﬂight modalities like
vertical take-off and landing (VTOL). Sensor suites will
also grow in sophistication to collect higher-resolution
and/or multispectral data. Propulsion technologies will
also be engineered to enable UAS to carry more sen-
sors. The net effect is that as missions become more
routine and frequent, the variations of drones and their
performance will grow to keep up with expanding
RSTA-based needs.
26.8.3 Aerial Robots: Emerging Categories
The road ahead is full of challenging emerging appli-
cations that will beneﬁt from the utilization of aerial
robotic technologies. This is especially the case when
one considers near-Earth environments like in-and-
around buildings, through forests and down tunnels and
caves. Beyond RSTA, such environments provide op-
portunities for aerial robots to dexterously interact with
objects. Today’s drones release retardants over wildﬁres
but tomorrow’s aerial robots would attach hoses and
breach walls for ﬁreﬁghting. Interaction demands ad-
vances in areas like aircraft design (ﬂight modalities,
payload capability), algorithms (perception, control,
motion planning, and grasping) and manipulators (arms
and end-effectors). The latter two areas overlap with
the greater domain of robotics research. As deeper un-
derstanding and realizations develop, the application
space, demand and impact of aerial robots will grow
even greater. In the following, a brief overview of excit-
ing emerging applications will be listed.
Assembly Work Task Execution
One notional concept employs aerial robots to assembly
physical structures. Such assembly pushes the bound-
aries of the categories of transportation and payload
delivery. Labs like those of University of Pennsylva-
nia [26.80], Switzerland (ETH Zurich [26.81]) have
used gripper-mounted quadrotors to illustrate proof-
of-concept. Demonstrations include the pickup and
drop-off of workpieces to deﬁned locations. These

Flying Robots
26.8 Applications of Aerial Robots
665
Part B | 26.8
workpieces self-connect using magnets or premachined
joints but illustrate capabilities to coordinate multi-
ple aircraft, mitigate disturbances like ground effect,
sense and map, and execute agile maneuvers. Groups
at Drexel, Twente, Seville, and Yale are equipping
rotorcraft robots with manipulators to illustrate more
dexterous tasks like inserting, screwing, and remov-
ing workpieces. Assembly and in general physical
work-task execution will ﬁnd applications in categories
like disaster response (repairing structures) and remote
sensing (inserting sensors).
Inspection Through Contact
Inspecting containers at docks, ships, and border cross-
ings is a daunting task. Sensor technology is advanc-
ing to look inside such containers. However, dexterous
aerial robots that can open hatches and trunks could also
yield many applications. Inspection as an emerging cate-
gory can employ aerial robots to physically interact with
structures. Aerial robots can physically probe bridges,
pipelines, and power lines to repair and replace parts.
Interactive inspection could emerge to applications like
crop handling and minedefusing. LabslikethoseofETH
Zurich [26.82] and the University of Bologna [26.83]
have presented relevant results in the topic.
Innovative Media
Both the number of vendors and affordability of rotor-
craft robots have increased since the Handbook’s ﬁrst
edition. In mid-2000, it was not surprising to see a com-
mercial quadrotor costing 40 000 USD. Today, there
are dozens of companies providing robotic rotorcraft
ranging in price (hundreds to under 10 000 USD), size
(from pucks to bike wheels) and conﬁgurations (mono,
co-axial, and multirotor). Such range will likely yield
innovative and entrepreneurial applications.
The Fireﬂy project at the MIT SENSEable Lab per-
haps best illustrates the notion of coordinating multiple
aerial robots to display images. Each aerial robot acts
as ﬂying pixel and maneuver into position to form 2
or 3-D images. Beyond visual and dynamic art, such
capabilities could yield airborne displays for tasks like
crowd control, trafﬁc redirection and SOS signals. Air-
borne displays could also expand creative expression to
enhance concerts, advertise at stadiums, and inform au-
diences.
Autonomous Structural Inspection and 3-D
Reconstruction
From the perspective of the role of aerial robotics
in accelerating growth, mapping of areas, structural
inspection of buildings and infrastructure as well as
recognition of objects or areas of interest is among the
most important application ﬁelds. Aerial robots have
achieved great milestones in such scenarios. Among
others, recently researchers managed to extract a high-
ﬁdelity 3-D model of the Swiss mountain top Mat-
terhorn utilizing a small FW-UAS and sophisticated
robotic vision techniques [26.84], other efforts led to
the inspection of a real power plant boiler using a mul-
tirotor vehicle and tightly integrated visual-inertial al-
gorithms [26.85], while in terms of industrial adoption
aerial robots have provenly minimized the inspection
times of power infrastructure [26.86] and are often
used in combination with geographic information sys-
tem (GIS) data [26.84]. It is worth noting that some
of the largest asset owners and service providers in the
ﬁeld of civil infrastructure and civil engineering works
have shown interest and participate in large consortia
that aim to make such aerial robotic technologies an
integral and game-changing factor of how things are
done (see e.g., Petrobot Project [26.87], ARCAS: Aerial
Robotics Cooperative Assembly System [26.88], Eu-
RoC: European Robotics Challenges [26.89], ARGOS
Challenge [26.90].).
Precision Agriculture
Precision agriculture is considered to be among the
ﬁelds where the use of aerial robots may become a key
factor boosting growth and improving the production
quality. The Japanese farming sector has historically
been in a position to lead the relevant research efforts
with successful designs like the Yamaha RMAX being
extensively used for monitoring as well as spraying op-
erations [26.5]. Already in December 2002, 1687 aerial
robots were used in Japan to conduct precision agri-
culture operations. However, current research contri-
butions and pioneering technology early adopters have
opened an even more promising channel for the widest
possible utilization of aerial robotic technologies for the
beneﬁt of agriculture production. Mainly through the
use of miniaturized aerial robotics at farms of smaller
scale and via the integration of advanced multispec-
tral perception sensors (i. e., NDVI) [26.91], accurate
mapping and analysis regarding the quality of the ﬁeld,
the level of plant growth and existence of diseases
becomes possible. Such technologies are expected to
become a critical tool to optimize and enhance agri-
cultural services. Furthermore, manipulators-equipped
aerial robots will be able to autonomously physically
act based on their perception of the ﬁeld and minimize
the time and effort required for several agriculture ser-
vices and tasks.
26.8.4 Open Issues
Emerging categories underscore both the distinction
between more traditional drones and emerging aerial

Part B | 26.9
666
Part B
Design
robotic technologies as well as how much further the
state-of-the-art has to be pushed. Clearly, today’s UAS
have limited payloads but adding manipulators goes be-
yond lift issues. When interacting with objects, aerial
robots must handle reaction forces and torques. Under-
standing such reactions remains an open issue. How-
ever, both space and underwater roboticists have looked
at dexterous manipulators for tasks like satellite repair
and turning valves on ocean-based oil rigs. As research
clariﬁes this issue and as lift capacities increase, dexter-
ous aerial robots will be realized.
Airspace access is an often cited issue that may limit
aerial robot development and vast utilization. A US
congressional bill was passed in 2012 that sets require-
ments for UAS to ﬂy in the national airspace by 2015.
This has also sparked competition among a dozen or
so states to establish UAS ﬂight testing sites. In Eu-
rope, similar events have happened and there are UAS
test sites in places like Finland (Kemijarvi), Sweden
(NEAT), and Wales (Parc Aberporth).
Lastly, somewhat ironic is that today’s unmanned
drones require a crew of highly skilled operators. In
the case of some Predator missions, crew sizes can be
up to a dozen people. Also ironic is that human er-
ror is the most cited cause for drone accidents. As the
number of UAS in the national airspace increases, the
need for even more operators will also grow. This has
the potential to raise the risk of UAS-related accidents.
The issues of effective UAV pilot training, certifying
operators, handling emergency landings, and sharing
airports with manned aircraft will also emerge as press-
ing ones.
26.9 Conclusions and Further Reading
Design of aerial robots requires background knowl-
edge in a multitude of subjects, from aerodynam-
ics to dynamics, control, and system integration:
we have overviewed the relevant basics along with
analytical tools and guidelines to go through the
stages of designing, modeling, and setting up oper-
ation of various types of unmanned aerial systems
(UAS). An emphasis was given on custom tailor-
ing a system to a speciﬁc application, in order to
optimally meet related requirements in terms of en-
durance, range, agility, size, complexity, as well as
from a system integration point of view. The com-
pilation at hand shall serve as a starting point, fur-
ther motivating the reader to study the various ﬁelds
with their related literature, ranging from aircraft and
system design to the classical autonomous robotics
challenges involving perception, cognition and motion
control.
Video-References
VIDEO 493
Delfly II in hover
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/26/videodetails/493
VIDEO 602
AtlantikSolar field-trials
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/26/videodetails/602
VIDEO 603
senseSoar UAV Avionics testing
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/26/videodetails/603
VIDEO 604
Structural inspection path planning via iterative viewpoint resampling
with application to aerial robotics
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/26/videodetails/604
VIDEO 688
sFly: Visual-inertial SLAM for a small helicopter in large outdoor environments
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/26/videodetails/688
VIDEO 689
UAV stabilization, mapping & obstacle avoidance using VI-sensor
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/26/videodetails/689
VIDEO 690
Project Skye – autonomous blimp
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/26/videodetails/690
VIDEO 693
Flight stability in aerial redundant manipulators
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/26/videodetails/693
VIDEO 694
The astounding athletic power of quadcopters
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/26/videodetails/694
VIDEO 695
Robots that fly ... and cooperate
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/26/videodetails/695
VIDEO 696
A robot that flies like a bird
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/26/videodetails/696

Flying Robots
References
667
Part B | 26
VIDEO 697
Robotic insects make first controlled flight
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/26/videodetails/697
VIDEO 719
Towards valve turning using a dual-arm aerial manipulator
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/26/videodetails/719
References
26.1
S. Leutenegger, M. Chli, R.Y. Siegwart: Brisk: Binary
robust invariant scalable keypoints, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV) (2011) pp. 2548–2555
26.2
D.
Scaramuzza,
M.C.
Achtelik,
L.
Doitsidis,
F.
Fraundorfer,
E.B.
Kosmatopoulos,
A.
Mar-
tinelli, M.W. Achtelik, M. Chli, S.A. Chatzichristofis,
L. Kneip, G.H. Lee, S. Lynen, L. Meier, M. Pollefeys,
A. Renzaglia, R. Siegwart, J.C. Stumpf, P. Tanska-
nen, C. Troiani, S. Weiss: Vision-controlled micro
flying robots: From system design to autonomous
navigation and mapping in GPS-denied environ-
ments, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 2014(9), 1–10
(2014)
26.3
K. Alexis, G. Nikolakopoulos, A. Tzes: Model pre-
dictive quadrotor control: Attitude, altitude and
position experimental studies, IET Control Theory
Appl. 6(12), 1812–1827 (2012)
26.4
M.W. Achtelik, S. Lynen, S. Weiss, M. Chli, R. Sieg-
wart: Motion and uncertainty aware path planning
for micro aerial vehicles, J. Field Robotics 31(4),
676–698 (2014)
26.5
K. Nonami: Autonomous Flying Robots: Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles and Micro Aerial Vehicles (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 2010)
26.6
H. Tennekes: The Simple Science of Flight: From In-
sects to Jumbo Jets (MIT, Cambridge 2009)
26.7
W.J. Pisano, D.A. Lawrence: Control limitations of
small unmanned aerial vehicles in turbulent en-
vironments, Proc. AIAA Guid. Navig. Control Conf.
(2009)
26.8
B. Mettler, C. Dever, E. Feron: Scaling effects and
dynamic characteristics of miniature rotorcraft,
J. Guid. Control Dyn. 27(3), 466–478 (2004)
26.9
ICAO: Manual of the ICAO Standard Atmosphere:
Extended to 80 Kilometres (262 500 feet) (Int.
Civil
Aviation
Organization
(ICAO),
Montréal
1993)
26.10
M. Hepparle: JavaFoil - Analysis of java airfoils,
http://www.mh-aerotools.de/airfoils/javafoil.htm
(2007)
26.11
M. Drela: XFOIL - Subsonic airfoil development
system,
http://www.web.mit.edu/drela/Public/
web/xfoil (2000)
26.12
Techwinder: xlfr5, http://www.xflr5.com (2000)
26.13
B.W. McCormick: Aerodynamics, Aeronautics, and
Flight Mechanics (Wiley, New York 1979)
26.14
G.J. Leishman: Principles of Helicopter Aerodynam-
ics (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge 2006)
26.15
G.D. Padfield: Helicopter Flight Dynamics (Black-
well, New York 2007)
26.16
L. Zaccarian: Dc Motors: Dynamic Model and Con-
trol Techniques (Lecture Notes Univ. Rome, Rome
2012)
26.17
M. Drela: AVL (Software for aerodynamic and
flight-dynamic
analysis),
http://web.mit.edu/
drela/Public/web/avl (2004)
26.18
B. Etkin: Dynamics of Atmospheric Flight (Wiley,
New York 1972)
26.19
G.J.J. Ducard: Fault-Tolerant Flight Control and
Guidance Systems: Practical Methods for Small Un-
manned Aerial Vehicles, Advanced in Industrial
Control (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2009)
26.20
M.C.Y. Niu: Airframe Structural Design (Conmilit,
Hong Kong 1988)
26.21
R. Randolph: R/C Airplane Building Techniques, R/C
Encyclopedia (Air Age, Wilton 1991)
26.22
D.P. Raymer: Aircraft Design: A Conceptual Ap-
proach (AIAA, Washington 1989)
26.23
A. Noth: Design of Solar Powered Airplanes for Con-
tinuous Flight, Ph.D. Thesis (Ecole Polytechnique
Fedenale de Lausanne, Lausanne 2008)
26.24
R.W. Beard, T.W. McLain: Small Unmanned Aircraft:
Theory and Practice (Princeton Univ. Press, Prince-
ton 2012)
26.25
A.A. Lambregts: Vertical flight path and speed con-
trol autopilot design using total energy principles,
AIAA Paper (AIAA, Washington 1983)
26.26
S. Park, J. Deyst, J.P. How: A new nonlinear guid-
ance logic for trajectory tracking, Proc. AIAA Guid.
Navig. Control Conf. (2004) pp. 16–19
26.27
S.
Bouabdallah,
C.
Bermes,
S.
Grzonka,
C.
Gimkiewicz,
A.
Brenzikofer,
R.
Hahn,
D. Schafroth, G. Grisett, W. Burgard, R. Sieg-
wart: Towards palm–size autonomous helicopters,
Proc. Int. Conf. Exhib. Unmanned Aer. Veh. (2010)
26.28
P.I.E. Pounds, D.R. Bersak, A.M. Dollar: Grasping
from the air: Hovering capture and load stability,
Proc. IEEE Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011)
26.29
D. Gurdan, J. Stumpf, M. Achtelik, K.-M. Doth,
G. Hirzinger, D. Rus: Energy-efficient autonomous
four-rotor flying robot controlled at 1 khz, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Auton. Syst. (2007)
26.30
G.M.
Hoffmann,
H.
Huang,
S.L.
Waslander,
C.J. Tomlin: Quadrotor helicopter flight dynamics
and control: Theory and experiment, Proc. AIAA
Guid. Navig. Control Conf. (2007)
26.31
A. Ko, O.J. Ohnaian, P. Gelhausen: Ducted fan uav
modeling and simulation in preliminary design,
Proc. AIAA Model. Simul. Technol. Conf. Exhibit.
(2007)
26.32
R. Naldi, F. Forte, L. Marconi: A class of modular
aerial robots, Proc. 50th IEEE Conf. Decis. Control
Eur. Control Conf. (2011)
26.33
E.R. Ulrich, J.S. Humbert, D.J. Pines: Pitch and
heave control of robotic samara micro air vehicles,
J. Aircr. 47, 1290–1299 (2010)

Part B | 26
668
Part B
Design
26.34
C.Y. Yun, I. Park, H.Y. Lee, J.S. Jung, I.S. Hwang,
S.J. Kim: A new vtol uav cyclocopter with cycloidal
blades system, Proc. 60th AHS Annu. Forum Amer.
Helicopter Soc. (2004)
26.35
R.W. Prouty: Helicopter Performance, Stability and
Control (Krieger, New York 2005)
26.36
M.B. Tischler, R.K. Remple: Aircraft and Rotorcraft
System Identification: Engineering Methods with
Flight-Test Examples (AIAA, Washington 2006)
26.37
B. Mettler: Identification, Modeling and Character-
istics of Miniature Rotorcraft (Kluwer, Boston 2002)
26.38
A.R.S. Bramwell, G. Done, D. Balmford: Bramwell’s
Helicopter
Dynamics
(Butterworth-Heinemann,
London 2001)
26.39
R.T.N. Chen: Effects of primary rotor parameters on
flapping dynamics, Tech. Rep. (National Aeronau-
tics and Space Administration, Washington 1980)
26.40
R.T.N. Chen: A survey of nonuniform inflow models
of rotorcraft flight dynamics and control applica-
tions, Tech. Rep. (National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, Washington 1989)
26.41
R.
Cunha:
Advanced
Motion
Control
for
Au-
tonomous Air Vehicles, Ph.D. Thesis (Instituto Su-
perior Tecnico, Universidade Tecnica de Lisbon, Lis-
bon 2007)
26.42
T.N. Pornsin-Sirirak, S.W. Lee, H. Nassef, J. Gras-
meyer, Y.C. Tai, C.M. Ho, M. Keennon: MEMs wing
technology for a battery powered ornithopter, Proc.
13th IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. MEMS (2000) pp. 799–804
26.43
T.N. Pornsin-Sirirak, Y.C. Tai, C.M. Ho, M. Keen-
non: Microbat: A palm-sized electrically powered
ornithopter, Proc. NASA/SPL Workshop Biomorphic
Robotics (2001) pp. 14–17
26.44
S.P. Sane: The aerodynamics of insect flight, J. Exp.
Biol. 206(23), 4191–4208 (2003)
26.45
M.H. Dickinson, F.O. Lehmann, S.P. Sane: Wing ro-
tation and the aerodynamic basis of insect flight,
Science 284(5422), 1954–1960 (1999)
26.46
J. Young, S.M. Walker, R.J. Bomphrey, G.K. Tay-
lor, A.L.R. Thomas: Details of insect wing design
and deformation enhance aerodynamic function
and flight efficiency, Science 325(5947), 1549–1552
(2009)
26.47
L. Zhao, Q. Huang, X. Deng, S.P. Sane: Aerodynamic
effects of flexibility in flapping wings, J. R. Soc. In-
terface 7(44), 485–497 (2010)
26.48
F.O. Lehmann, S.P. Sane, M. Dickinson: The aerody-
namic effects of wing-wing interaction in flapping
insect wings, J. Exp. Biol. 208(16), 3075–3092 (2005)
26.49
D. Lentink, S.R. Jongerius, N.L. Bradshaw: Flying
Insects and Robots (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2009)
26.50
G.C.H.E. de Croon, M.A. Groen, C. De Wagter,
B. Remes, R. Ruijsink, B.W. van Oudheusden: De-
sign, aerodynamics, and autonomy of the DelFly,
Bioinspiration Biomim. 7(2), 025003 (2012)
26.51
M. Keennon, K. Klingebiel, H. Won, A. Andriukov:
Tailless flapping wing propulsion and control de-
velopment for the nano hummingbird micro air
vehicle, Proc. Am. Helicopter Soc. Futur. Vert. Lift
Aircr. Des. Conf. (2012)
26.52
K.Y. Ma, P. Chirarattananon, S.B. Fuller, R.J. Wood:
Controlled flight of a biologically inspired, insect-
scale robot, Science 340(6132), 603–607 (2013)
26.53
D. Lentink, M.H. Dickinson: Rotational accelera-
tions stabilize leading edge vortices on revolving
fly wings, J. Exp. Biol. 212(16), 2705–2719 (2009)
26.54
W. Shyy, H. Aono, C.-K. Kang, H. Liu: An Introduc-
tion to Flapping Wing Aerodynamics (Cambridge
Univ. Press, Cambridge 2013)
26.55
C.P. Ellington, C. van den Berg, A.P. Willmott,
A.L.R. Thomas: Leading-edge vortices in insect
flight, Nature 384, 626–630 (1996)
26.56
D.R. Warrick, B.W. Tobalske, D. Powers: Lift produc-
tion in the hovering hummingbird, Proc. R. Soc.
Biol. Sci. (2009) pp. 3747–3752
26.57
F.T. Muijres, L.C. Johansson, A. Hedenstrom: Lead-
ing edge vortex in a slow-flying passerine, Biol.
Lett. 8(4), 554–557 (2012)
26.58
J. Koo, T. Oka: Experimental Study on the Ground
Effect of a Model Helicopter Rotor in Hovering, Tech.
Rep. (NASA, Washington 1966)
26.59
S.P. Sane, M.H. Dickinson: The control of flight
force by a applying wing: Lift and drag production,
J. Exp. Biol. 204(15), 2607–2626 (2001)
26.60
M.C. Achtelik, K.-M. Doth, D. Gurdan, J. Stumpf:
Design of a multi rotor MAV with regard to effi-
ciency, dynamics and redundancy, Proc. AIAA Guid.
Navig. Control Conf. (2012)
26.61
Ascending Technologies Ltd.: http://www.asctec.de
(2015)
26.62
Sensefly (Parrot Company): http://www.sensefly.
com (2000)
26.63
M.W. Achtelik: Advanced Closed Loop Visual Navi-
gation for Micro Aerial Vehicles, Ph.D. Thesis (ETH
Zurich, Zurich 2014)
26.64
A. Bachrach, S. Prentice, R. He, N. Roy: RANGE –
Robust autonomous navigation in GPS-denied en-
vironments, J. Field Robotics 28, 644–666 (2011)
26.65
S. Leutenegger, P. Furgale, V. Rabaud, M. Chli,
K. Konolige, R. Siegwart: Keyframe-based visual-
inertial slam using nonlinear optimization, Proc.
Robotics Sci. Syst. (RSS) (2013)
26.66
S. Weiss: Vision Based Navigation for Micro Heli-
copters, Ph.D. Thesis (ETH Zurich, Zurich 2012)
26.67
A.I. Mourikis, S.I. Roumeliotis, J.W. Burdick: SC-
KF mobile robot localization: A stochastic cloning
kalman filter for processing relative-state mea-
surements, IEEE Trans. Robotics 23(4), 717–730 (2007)
26.68
A. Bachrach, S. Prentice, R. He, P. Henry, A.S. Huang,
M. Krainin, D. Maturana, D. Fox, N. Roy: Estimation,
planning, and mapping for autonomous flight us-
ing an RGB-D camera in GPS-denied environments,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 31, 1320–1343 (2012)
26.69
T. Tomic, K. Schmid, P. Lutz, A. Domel, M. Kassecker,
E. Mair, I. Grixa, F. Ruess, M. Suppa, D. Burschka:
Toward a fully autonomous UAV: Research platform
for indoor and outdoor urban search and rescue,
IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 19(3), 46–56 (2012)
26.70
S. Bouabdallah: Design and Control of Quadrotors
with Application to Autonomous Flying, Ph.D. The-
sis (STI School of Engineering, EPFL, Lausann 2007)

Flying Robots
References
669
Part B | 26
26.71
T. Lee, M. Leoky, N.H. McClamroch: Geometric track-
ing control of a quadrotor UAV on SE(3), Proc. 49th
IEEE Conf. Dec. Control (CDC) (2010) pp. 5420–5425
26.72
P. Doherty, J. Kvarnström, F. Heintz: A temporal
logic-based planning and execution monitoring
framework for unmanned aircraft systems, Auton.
Agents Multi-Agent Syst. 19(3), 332–377 (2009)
26.73
P.E. Hart, N.J. Nilsson, B. Raphael: A formal basis
for the heuristic determination of minimum cost
paths, Trans. Syst. Sci. Cybern. 4(2), 100–107 (1968)
26.74
S. Karaman, E. Frazzoli: Incremental sampling-
based algorithms for optimal motion planning,
Proc. Robotics Sci. Syst. (RSS), Zaragoza (2010)
26.75
L.E. Kavraki, P. Švestka, J.-C. Latombe, M.H. Over-
mars: Probabilistic roadmaps for path planning in
high-dimensional configuration spaces, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 12(4), 566–580 (1996)
26.76
S.M. LaValle, J.J. Kuffner: Randomized kinodynamic
planning, Int. J. Robotics Res. 20(5), 378–400 (2001)
26.77
A. Bry, N. Roy: Rapidly-exploring random belief
trees for motion planning under uncertainty, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 723–
730
26.78
H. Cover, S. Choudhury, S. Scherer, S. Singh: Sparse
tangential network (SPARTAN): Motion planning for
micro aerial vehicles, IEEE Proc. Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2013)
26.79
R. He, S. Prentice, N. Roy: Planning in information
space for a quadrotor helicopter in a gps-denied
environments, IEEE Proc. Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2008) pp. 1814–1820
26.80
Q. Lindsey, D. Mellinger, V. Kumar: Construction
with quadrotor teams, Auton. Robots 33(3), 323–
336 (2012)
26.81
J.
Willmann,
F.
Augugliaro,
T.
Cadalbert,
R.
D’Andrea,
F.
Gramazio,
M.
Kohler:
Aerial
robotic construction towards a new field of ar-
chitectural research, Int. J. Archt. Comput. 10(3),
439–460 (2012)
26.82
G. Darivianakis, K. Alexis, M. Burri, R. Siegwart:
Hybrid predictive control for aerial robotic physi-
cal interaction towards inspection operations, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2014)
26.83
L. Marconi, R. Naldi, L. Gentili: Modelling and
control of a flying robot interacting with the
environment,
Automatica
47(12),
2571–2583
(2011)
26.84
Z. Lin: UAV for mapping – low altitude photogram-
metric survey, Proc. 21st ISPRS Congr. Techn. Com-
mis. I, Beijing (2008) pp. 1183–1186
26.85
J. Nikolic, M. Burri, J. Rehder, S. Leutenegger,
C. Huerzeler, R. Siegwart: A UAV system for inspec-
tion of industrial facilities, Proc. IEEE Aerosp. Conf.
(2013) pp. 1–8
26.86
Cyberhawk: Aerial Inspection and Suervying Spe-
cialists, http://www.thecyberhawk.com (2015)
26.87
Petrobot Project: http://www.petrobotproject.eu/
26.88
ARCAS: Aerial Robotics Cooperative Assembly Sys-
tem, http://www.arcas-project.eu/
26.89
EuRoC: European Robotics Challenges, http://www.
euroc-project.eu/
26.90
ARGOS
Challenge:
http://www.argos-challenge.
com/
26.91
E.R. Hunt Jr., W.D. Hively, S.J. Fujikawa, D.S. Linden,
C.S.T. Daughtry, G.W. McCarty: Acquisition of nir-
green-blue digital photographs from unmanned
aircraft for crop monitoring, Remote Sens. 2, 290–
305 (2010)

Multimedia Contents Micro-/Nano
671
Part B | 27.1
27. Micro-/Nanorobots
Bradley J. Nelson, Lixin Dong, Fumihito Arai
The field of microrobotics covers the robotic ma-
nipulation of objects with dimensions in the
millimeter to micron range as well as the design
and fabrication of autonomous robotic agents that
fall within this size range. Nanorobotics is defined
in the same way only for dimensions smaller than
a micron. With the ability to position and orient
objects with micron- and nanometer-scale di-
mensions, manipulation at each of these scales
is a promising way to enable the assembly of
micro- and nanosystems, including micro- and
nanorobots.
This chapter overviews the state of the art of
both micro- and nanorobotics, outlines scaling
effects, actuation, and sensing and fabrica-
tion at these scales, and focuses on micro- and
nanorobotic manipulation systems and their ap-
plication in microassembly, biotechnology, and
the construction and characterization of micro
and nanoelectromechanical systems (MEMS/NEMS).
Material science, biotechnology, and micro- and
nanoelectronics will also benefit from advances in
these areas of robotics.
27.1
Overview of Micro- and Nanorobotics ...
671
27.2
Scaling................................................
674
27.2.1
The Size of Things......................
674
27.2.2
Predominate Physics
at the Micro- and Nanoscales ....
674
27.3
Actuation at the Micro- and Nanoscales
675
27.3.1
Electrostatics.............................
675
27.3.2
Electromagnetics .......................
676
27.3.3
Piezoelectrics ............................
676
27.3.4
Other Techniques ......................
676
27.4
Imaging at the Micro-
and Nanoscales ...................................
676
27.4.1
Optical Microscopy.....................
677
27.4.2
Electron Microscopy ...................
677
27.4.3
Scanning Probe Microscopy ........
678
27.5
Fabrication..........................................
678
27.5.1
Microfabrication........................
679
27.5.2
Nanofabrication ........................
680
27.6
Microassembly.....................................
681
27.6.1
Automated Microassembly
Systems ....................................
681
27.6.2
Microassembly System
Design......................................
683
27.6.3
Basic Microassembly
Techniques ...............................
685
27.7
Microrobotics.......................................
687
27.7.1
Introduction .............................
687
27.7.2
Bio-Microrobotics......................
689
27.7.3
Bio-Mimetic/Untethered
Microrobots ..............................
690
27.8
Nanorobotics.......................................
692
27.8.1
Introduction .............................
692
27.8.2
Nanorobotic Manipulation
Systems ....................................
695
27.8.3
Nanorobotic Manipulation
and Assembly ...........................
696
27.8.4
Nanorobotic Systems .................
702
27.9
Conclusions .........................................
704
Video-References.........................................
704
References...................................................
705
27.1 Overview of Micro- and Nanorobotics
Progress in robotics over recent years has dramatically
extended our ability to explore, perceive, understand,
and manipulate the world on a variety of scales extend-
ing from the edges of the solar system, to the bottom

Part B | 27.1
672
Part B
Design
of the sea, down to individual atoms (Fig. 27.1). At
the lower end of this scale, technology has been mov-
ing toward greater control of the structure of matter,
suggesting the feasibility of achieving thorough control
of the molecular structure of matter atom by atom, as
Feynman ﬁrst proposed in 1959 in his prophetic article
on miniaturization [27.1]:
What I want to talk about is the problem of manip-
ulating and controlling things on a small scale. . . I
am not afraid to consider the ﬁnal question as to
whether, ultimately – in the great future – we can
arrange the atoms the way we want: the very atoms,
all the way down!
He asserted that
At the atomic level, we have new kinds of forces
and new kinds of possibilities, new kinds of effects.
The problems of manufacture and reproduction of
materials will be quite different. The principles of
physics, as far as I can see, do not speak against the
possibility of maneuvering things atom by atom.
This technology is now labeled nanotechnology.
The great future of Feynman began to be realized
in the 1980s. Some of the capabilities he dreamed
of have been demonstrated, while others are being
actively pursued. Feynman foresaw the possibility of
employing a microrobotic manipulator (a master–slave
system) for bottom-up manufacturing (manipulation,
assembly, etc.) of minute machines; one such device
he described as swallowing the surgeon, which he at-
tributed to his friend Albert R. Hibbs. He also imagined
we could build a billion tiny factories, models of each
other, which are manufacturing simultaneously, drilling
holes, stamping parts, and so on [27.1]. Micro- and
nanorobotics research has progressed from these seem-
ingly far-out concepts of the 1960s and 1970s to reality
when microelectromechanical systems (MEMSs) began
to emerge in the late 1980s. These building blocks took
the form of surface-micromachined micromotors and
microgrippers made of polysilicon fabricated on a sili-
con chip [27.2]. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, more
concrete suggestions on how one could realize MEMS-
based microrobotic devices using such micromotors as
well as potential applications were published [27.3, 4].
Today, a variety of microrobotic devices are enabling
new applications in various ﬁelds.
In industry, interesting areas for microrobotics in-
clude assembly [27.5, 6], characterization, inspection
and maintenance [27.7, 8], microoptics (positioning of
microoptical chips, microlenses and prisms) [27.9], and
microfactories [27.10]. Many of these applications re-
quire automated handling and assembly of small parts
with accuracy in the submicron range.
Other important ﬁelds include biology (manipula-
tion, capturing, sorting and combining cells [27.11])
and medical technology [27.12, 13]. In surgery, the
use of steerable catheters and endoscopes is very at-
tractive and the development of increasingly small
microrobotic devices is rapidly progressing. Wireless
untethered microrobots that will explore and repair
our bodies (swallowing the surgeon) appear to be
simply a matter of time. In fact, endoscopy using
wireless capsules (camera pills) are already on the
market and allow for endoscopic imaging of the en-
tire gastrointestinal tract [27.14], something currently
not possible using standard scopes. Magnetic steer-
ing or crawling-type motions serve as promising ways
for such devices to locomote in a controlled fash-
ion [27.15]. Doctors could steer pill-mounted cameras
and other actuators to areas of interest for visual in-
vestigation and biopsies beyond the range of current
endoscopes.
Nanorobotics represents the next stage in mini-
aturization
for
maneuvering
nanoscale
objects.
Nanorobotics is the study of robotics at the nanometer
scale, and includes robots that are nanoscale in size,
i. e., nanorobots, and large robots capable of manip-
ulating objects that have nanometer dimensions with
nanometer resolution, i. e., nanorobotic manipulators.
The ﬁeld of nanorobotics brings together several dis-
ciplines, including nanofabrication processes used for
producing nanoscale robots, nanoactuators, nanosen-
sors, and physical modeling at nanoscales. Nanorobotic
manipulation technologies, including the assembly of
nanometer-sized parts, the manipulation of biological
cells or molecules, and the types of robots used to
perform these types of tasks also form a component of
nanorobotics.
As the 21st century unfolds, the impact of nanotech-
nology on the health, wealth, and security of humankind
is expected to be at least as signiﬁcant as the combined
inﬂuences in the 20th century of antibiotics, the inte-
grated circuit, and human-made polymers. For example,
N. Lane stated in 1998, [27.16]
If I were asked for an area of science and engineer-
ing that will most likely produce the breakthroughs
of tomorrow, I would point to nanoscale science and
engineering.
The great scientiﬁc and technological opportunities
nanotechnology presents have stimulated extensive ex-
ploration of the nanoworld and initiated an exciting
worldwide competition, which has been accelerated
by the publication of the National Nanotechnology
Initiative by the US government in 2000 [27.17].
Nanorobotics will play a signiﬁcant role as an enabling
nanotechnology and could ultimately be a core part of

Micro-/Nanorobots
27.1 Overview of Micro- and Nanorobotics
673
Part B | 27.1
A
nm
μm
mm
x
y
z
Assembler
Fig. 27.1 Robotic exploration at micro- and nanometer scales
nanotechnology if Drexler’s machine-phase nanosys-
tems based on self-replicative molecular assemblers via
mechanosynthesis can be realized [27.18].
By the early 1980s, scanning tunneling microscopes
(STMs) [27.19] radically changed the way in which
we interacted with and even regarded single atoms and
molecules. The very nature of proximal probe methods
encourages the exploration of the nanoworld beyond
conventional microscopic imaging. Scanning probes
now allow us to perform engineering operations on
single molecules, atoms, and bonds, thereby providing
a tool that operates at the ultimate limits of fabrication.
They have also enabled exploration of molecular prop-
erties on an individual nonstatistical basis.
STMs and other nanomanipulators are nonmolec-
ular machines that use bottom-up strategies. Although
performing only one molecular reaction at a time is
obviously impractical for making large amounts of
a product, it is a promising way to provide the next gen-
eration of nanomanipulators. Most important, it is pos-
sible to realize the directed assembly of molecules or
supermolecules to build larger nanostructures through
nanomanipulation. The products produced by nanoma-
nipulation could be the ﬁrst step of a bottom-up strategy
in which these assembled products are used to self-
assemble into nanomachines.
One
of
the
most
important
applications
of
nanorobotic manipulation will be nanorobotic assem-
bly. However, it appears that, until assemblers capable
of replication can be built, the combination of chemical
synthesis and self-assembly are necessary when start-
ing from atoms; groups of molecules can self-assemble
quickly due to their thermal motion, enabling them to
explore their environments and ﬁnd (and bind to) com-
plementary molecules. Given their key role in natural
molecular machines, proteins are obvious candidates
for early work in self-assembling artiﬁcial molecular
systems. Degrado [27.20] demonstrated the feasibil-
ity of designing protein chains that predictably fold
into solid molecular objects. Progress is also being
made in artiﬁcial enzymes and other relatively small
molecules that perform functions like those of natu-
ral proteins. Several bottom-up strategies using self-
assembly appear feasible [27.21]. Chemical synthesis,
self-assembly, and supramolecular chemistry make it
possible to provide building blocks at relatively large
sizes beginning from the nanometer scale. Nanorobotic
manipulation serves as the base for a hybrid approach to

Part B | 27.2
674
Part B
Design
construct nanodevices by structuring these materials to
obtain building blocks and assembling them into more
complex systems.
Despite the claims of many futurists, the form
nanorobots of the future will take and what tasks
they will actually perform remain unclear. However,
it is clear that nanotechnology is progressing towards
the construction of intelligent sensors, actuators, and
systems that are smaller than 100 nm. These nanoelec-
tromechanical systems (NEMSs) will serve as both the
tools to be used for fabricating future nanorobots as
well as the components from which these nanorobots
may be developed. Shrinking device size to these di-
mensions presents many fascinating opportunities such
as manipulating nano-objects with nanotools, mea-
suring mass in femtogram ranges, sensing forces at
piconewton scales, and inducing gigahertz motion,
among other new possibilities waiting to be discov-
ered. These capabilities will, of course, drive the
tasks that future nanorobots constructed by and with
NEMS will perform. NEMS and the components of
nanorobots will be the products of nanorobotic manip-
ulation. Large nanorobotic manipulators will be able
to shrink in size due to this development, thus en-
abling nanosized robotic manipulators and other forms
of nanorobots. All of these form the scope of the area
of nanorobotics.
This chapter focuses on micro- and nanorobotics in-
cluding actuation, manipulation, and assembly at the
micro- and nanoscale. The main goal of these ﬁelds of
robotics is to provide an effective technology for the
experimental exploration of the micro- and nanoworld,
and to push the boundaries of this exploration from
a robotics research perspective.
27.2 Scaling
27.2.1 The Size of Things
Things we can potentially observable range from
1035 m (the Planck length) to 1026 m (the radius of the
observable universe). A nanometer, 109 m, is about
ten times the size of the smallest atoms, such as hy-
drogen and carbon, while a micron is barely larger than
the average wavelength of visible light, thus invisible to
the human eye. A millimeter, the size of a pinhead, is
roughly the smallest part typically fabricated using tra-
ditional machining techniques. The range of scales from
millimeters to nanometers is one million (Fig. 27.1),
which is also about the range of scales in present-day
mechanical technology from the largest skyscrapers to
the smallest conventional mechanical machine parts.
The vast opportunity to make new machines spanning
almost six orders of magnitude from 1 mm to 1 nm, is
one take on Feynman’s famous statement, there is plenty
of room at the bottom [27.1]. If L is taken as a typical
length, 0.1 nm for an atom, perhaps 2 m for a human,
this scale range in L would be 21010. If the same scale
range were to apply to an area, 0:1 nm  0:1 nm versus
2 m  2 m, the scale range for area L2 is 4  1020. Since
a volume L3 is enclosed by sides L, we can see that the
number of atoms of size 0:1 nm in a (2 m3) volume is
about 8  1030, recalling that Avogadro’s number NA D
6:022  1023 is the number of atoms in a gram-mole,
supposing that the atoms were 12C, molar responding
to a density 1:99  104 kg=m3. A primary working tool
of the nanotechnologist is facility in scaling the mag-
nitudes of various properties of interest, as the length
scale L shrinks, e.g., from 1 mm to 1 nm.
Clearly, the number of atoms in a device scales
as L3. If a transistor on the micron scale contains 1012
atoms, then on the nanometer scale, L0=L D 103 it will
contain 1000 atoms, likely too few to preserve its func-
tion.
Normally, we will think of scaling as an isotropic
scale reduction in three dimensions. However, scaling
can be thought of usefully when applied only to one
or two dimensions, scaling a cube to a two-dimensional
(2-D) sheet of thickness a or to a one-dimensional (1-D)
tube or nanowire of cross-sectional area a2. The term
zero-dimensional (0-D) is used to describe an object
small in all three dimensions, having volume a3. In elec-
tronics, a zero-dimensional object (a nanometer-sized
cube a3 of semiconductor) is called a quantum dot (QD)
or artiﬁcial atom because its electronic states are few
and sharply separated in energy, and thus resemble the
electronic states of an atom.
27.2.2 Predominate Physics
at the Micro- and Nanoscales
The predominate physics at the micro- and nanoscale
can be dramatically different from at the macroscale.
Surface and intermolecular forces, such as adhesion
forces originating from surface tension forces, van
der Waals forces, and electrostatic forces, become
more signiﬁcant than volumetric forces such as grav-
itational forces for objects with sizes well below
1000 m [27.22]. Although the laws of classical New-
tonian physics may well sufﬁce to describe changes in
behavior down to 10 nm (100 Å), the range of scaling

Micro-/Nanorobots
27.3 Actuation at the Micro- and Nanoscales
675
Part B | 27.3
is tremendous. Therefore, the changes in magnitudes of
many important physical properties, such as resonant
frequencies, are so great, that completely different ap-
plications may appear.
The more challenging question for the nanotechnol-
ogist is to understand and hopefully to exploit those
changes in physical behavior that occur at the end
of the classical scaling range. The end of the scal-
ing is the size scale of atoms and molecules, where
nanophysics [27.23] is the proven conceptual replace-
ment of the laws of classical physics. Modern physics,
which includes quantum mechanics as a description of
matter on a nanometer scale, is a very well-developed
and proven subject whose application to real situations
is limited only by modeling and computational compe-
tence.
In the modern era, simulations and approximate
solutions increasingly facilitate the application of
nanophysics to almost any problem of interest. Many
central problems are already (adequately, or more
than adequately) solved in the extensive literatures
of theoretical chemistry, biophysics, condensed matter
physics, and semiconductor device physics. The practi-
cal problem is to ﬁnd the relevant work, and, frequently,
to convert the notation and units systems to apply the
results to the problem at hand.
27.3 Actuation at the Micro- and Nanoscales
The positioning of nanorobots and nanorobotic ma-
nipulators depends largely on nanoactuators. While
nanosized actuators for nanorobots are still under
exploration and relatively far from implementation,
MEMS-based efforts are focused on shrinking their
sizes [27.24]. Nanometer resolution motion has been
extensively investigated and can be generated using
various actuation principles. Electrostatics, electromag-
netics, and piezoelectrics are the most common ways
to realize actuation at nanoscales. For nanorobotic ma-
nipulation, besides nanoresolution and compact sizes,
actuators generating large strokes and high forces are
best suited for such applications. The speed criteria are
of less importance as long as the actuation speed is in
the range of a couple of hertz and above. Table 27.1
provides a small selection of early works on actua-
tors [27.25–30] suitable for micro- and nanorobotic
applications (partially adapted from [27.24]).
Several extensive reviews on various actuation prin-
ciples have been published [27.4, 31–34]. During the
design of an actuator, the trade-offs among range of
motion, force, speed (actuation frequency), power con-
sumption, control accuracy, system reliability, robust-
ness, load capacity, etc. must be taken into considera-
Table 27.1 Actuation with MEMS
Actuation
principle
Type of
motion
Volume
(mm3/
Speed
(s1)
Force
(N)
Stroke
(m)
Resolution
(m)
Power density
(W/m3)
Reference
Electrostatic
Linear
400
5000
1  107
6  106
NA
200
[27.25]
Magnetic
Linear
0:4  0:4  0:5
1000
2:6  106
1  104
NA
3000
[27.26]
Piezoelectric
Linear
25:412:71:6
4000
350
1  103
7  108
NA
[27.27]
Actuation
principle
Type of
motion
Volume
(mm3)
Speed
(rad/s)
Torque
(Nm)
Stroke
(rad)
Resolution
(rad)
Power density
(W/m3)
Reference
Electrostatic
Rotational
=4  0:52  3
40
2  107
2
NA
900
[27.28]
Magnetic
Rotational
2  3:7  0:5
150
1  106
2
5=36
3000
[27.29]
Piezoelectric
Rotational
=4 1:52  0:5
30
2  1011
0.7
NA
NA
[27.30]
tion. This section reviews basic actuation technologies
and potential applications at nanometer scales.
27.3.1 Electrostatics
Electrostatic charge arises from a build up or deﬁcit of
free electrons in a material, which can exert an attractive
force on oppositely charged objects, or a repulsive force
on similarly charged objects. Since electrostatic ﬁelds
arise and disappear rapidly, such devices will likewise
demonstrate very fast operation speeds and be little af-
fected by ambient temperatures.
Previous investigations have produced many ex-
amples of miniature devices using electrostatic force
for actuation including silicon micromotors [27.35, 36],
microvalves [27.37], and microtweezers [27.38]. This
type of actuation is important for achieving nanoscale
actuation.
Electrostatic ﬁelds can exert great forces, but gener-
ally across very short distances. When the electric ﬁeld
must act over larger distances, a higher voltage will be
required to maintain a given force. The extremely low
current consumption associated with electrostatic de-
vices makes for highly efﬁcient actuation.

Part B | 27.4
676
Part B
Design
Table 27.2 Comparison of nano actuators
Method
Efﬁciency
Speed
Power
density
Electrostatic
Very high
Fast
Low
Electromagnetic
High
Fast
High
Piezoelectric
Very high
Fast
High
Thermomechanical
Very high
Medium
Medium
Phase change
Very high
Medium
High
Shape memory
Low
Medium
Very high
Magnetostrictive
Medium
Fast
Very high
Electrorheological
Medium
Medium
Medium
Electrohydrodynamic
Medium
Medium
Low
Diamagnetism
High
Fast
High
27.3.2 Electromagnetics
Electromagnetism arises from electric current moving
through a conducting material. Attractive or repulsive
forces are generated adjacent to the conductor and pro-
portional to the current ﬂow. Structures can be built
which gather and focus electromagnetic forces, and har-
ness these forces to create motion.
Electromagnetic ﬁelds arise and disappear rapidly,
thus permitting devices with very fast operation speeds.
Since electromagnetic ﬁelds can exist over a wide range
of temperatures, performance is primarily limited by the
properties of the materials used in constructing the ac-
tuator.
One example of a microfabricated electromagnetic
actuator is a microvalve which uses a small electro-
magnetic coil wrapped around a silicon micromachined
valve structure [27.39]. The downward scalability of
electromagnetic actuators into the micro- and nano-
realm may be limited by the difﬁculty of fabricating
small electromagnetic coils. Furthermore, most electro-
magnetic devices require perpendicularity between the
current conductor and the moving element, presenting
a difﬁculty for planar fabrication techniques commonly
used to make silicon devices.
An important advantage of electromagnetic devices
is their high efﬁciency in converting electrical energy
into mechanical work. This translates into less current
consumption from the power source.
27.3.3 Piezoelectrics
Piezoelectric motion arises from the dimensional
changes generated in certain crystalline materials when
subjected to an electric ﬁeld or to an electric charge.
Structures can be built which gather and focus the
force of the dimensional changes, and harness them to
create motion. Typical piezoelectric materials include
quartz (SiO2), lead zirconate titanate (PZT), lithium
niobate, and polymers such as polyvinylidene ﬂuoride
(PVDF).
Piezoelectric materials respond very quickly to
changes in voltages and with great repeatability. They
can be used to generate precise motions with repeatable
oscillations, as in quartz timing crystals used in many
electronic devices. Piezoelectric materials can also act
as sensors, converting tension or compression strains to
voltages.
On the microscale, piezoelectric materials have
been used in linear inchworm drive devices and mi-
cropumps [27.40]. STMs and most nanomanipulators
use piezoelectric actuators.
Piezoelectric materials operate with high force and
speed, and return to a neutral position when unpow-
ered. They exhibit very small strokes (under 1 %).
Alternating electric currents produce oscillations in the
piezoelectric material, and operation at the sample’s
fundamental resonant frequency produces the largest
elongation and highest power efﬁciency [27.41]. Piezo-
electric actuators working in the stick–slip mode can
provide millimeter to centimeter strokes. Most com-
mercially available nanomanipulators adopt this type
of actuators, such as Picomotors from New Focus and
Nanomotors from Klock.
27.3.4 Other Techniques
Other techniques include thermomechanical, phase
change, shape memory, magnetostrictive, electrorhe-
ological, electrohydrodynamic, diamagnetism, magne-
tohydrodynamic, shape changing, polymers, and bi-
ological methods (living tissues, muscle cells, etc.).
Table 27.2 compares these techniques.
27.4 Imaging at the Micro- and Nanoscales
A brief overview is given of common imaging tools
used in the research area of micro- and nanorobotics
including optical, electron, and scanning probe mi-
croscopy. The application and integration of these tools
for micro- and nanorobotics are discussed in separate
sections.
In selecting a proper tool for imaging/sensing at
these scales, the following factors should be ﬁrst con-
sidered:
1. Specimen: size, conductivity, and environment
compatibility are among the most important aspects

Micro-/Nanorobots
27.4 Imaging at the Micro-and Nanoscales
677
Part B | 27.4
Table 27.3 Comparison of optical microscopes (OM) and electron microscopes
Feature
OM
TEM
SEM
General use
Surface morphology
and sections (140 m)
Section (40150 nm) or small particles
on thin membranes
Surface morphology
Source of illumination
Visible light
High-speed electrons
High-speed electrons
Best resolution
ca. 200 nm
ca. 0:2 nm
ca. 36 nm
Magniﬁcation range
101000
500500:000
20150:000
Depth of ﬁeld
0:0020:05 nm (N.A. 1.5)
0:0040:006 mm (N.A. 103)
0:0031 mm
Lens type
Glass
Electromagnetic
Electromagnetic
Image ray-formation spot
On eye by lenses
On phosphorescent plate by lenses
On cathode tube
by scanning device
to consider. For example, in vivo bioapplications
generally require air or liquid, so lower-resolution,
light microscopy should be the ﬁrst choice. If higher
resolution is needed, atomic force microscopy or
scanning near-ﬁeld optical microscopy can be used.
2. Resolution: the ability to see ﬁne details of a speci-
men. Once you can resolve ﬁne details then you can
magnify them. Every microscope has a ﬁnite resolu-
tion;ifyoumagnifyobjectsbeyondtheresolutionthe
result will be empty magniﬁcation. Roughly speak-
ing, a light microscope cannot provide a resolution
better than 200 nm. The best commercially available
scanning electron microscopes (SEM) have approx-
imately 1 nm resolution, while transmission elec-
tron microscopes (TEM) can achieve approximately
0.2 nm, and a scanning tunneling microscope (STM)
working in ultrahigh vacuum under very low temper-
ature can resolve atomic-level structures. A compar-
ison of optical microscopy and electron microscopy
is given in Table 27.3.
3. Depth of ﬁeld: the range of depth that a specimen is
in acceptable focus. A microscope that has a small
depth of ﬁeld will have to be continuously focused
up and down to view a thick specimen.
4. Contrast: the ratio between dark and light. Typ-
ically, most microscopes use absorption contrast,
i. e., the specimen is subjected to stains in order
to be seen. This is called bright-ﬁeld microscopy.
There are other types of microscope that use more
exotic means to generate contrast, such as phase
contrast, dark ﬁeld, and differential interference
contrast.
5. Brightness: the amount of light. The higher a mi-
croscope magniﬁes the more light will be required.
The illumination source should also be at a wave-
length (color) that will facilitate interaction with
the specimen. All microscopes fall into either of
two categories based on how the specimen is illu-
minated. In the typical compound microscope the
light passes through the specimen and is collected
by the image forming optics. This is called dias-
copic illumination. Dissecting (stereo) microscopes
generally use episcopic illumination for use with
opaque specimen. The light is reﬂected onto the
specimen and then into the objective lens.
27.4.1 Optical Microscopy
Since their invention in the late 1500s, light micro-
scopes have enhanced our knowledge in basic biology,
biomedical research, medical diagnostics, and mate-
rials science. Light microscopes can magnify objects
up to 1000 times, revealing microscopic details. Light-
microscopy technology has evolved far beyond the
ﬁrst microscopes of Robert Hooke and Antoni van
Leeuwenhoek. Special techniques and optics have been
developed to reveal the structures and biochemistry of
living cells. Most optical microscopes in current use are
known as compound microscopes, where a magniﬁed
image of an object is produced by the objective lens,
and this image is magniﬁed by a second lens system
(the ocular or eyepiece) for viewing. Microscopes have
even entered the digital age, using charge-coupled de-
vices (CCDs) and digital cameras to capture images.
The development of modern microscopy has en-
abled a large family of optical microscopes. For spe-
cial purposes, other types of optical microscopes can
be selected. These include phase-contrast microscopy,
ﬂuorescence microscopy, confocal scanning optical mi-
croscopy, and deconvolution microscopy image recon-
struction.
27.4.2 Electron Microscopy
Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)
Since the commercial availability of the SEM in 1966,
it has been a valuable resource for viewing samples at
a much higher resolution and depth of ﬁeld than the
typical optical microscope. Conventional SEMs can re-
solve down to the nanometer scale (
 1 nm) whereas an
optical microscope can only resolve down to approx-
imately 200 nm [27.42]. Unlike conventional optical
microscopes, SEMs have a high depth of ﬁeld which
gives imaged samples a three-dimensional appearance.

Part B | 27.5
678
Part B
Design
Early SEMs were limited to viewing conductive sam-
ples. However, many of today’s SEMs can image non-
conductive samples in addition to conductive samples
using variable-pressure chambers.
Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM)
The TEM can resolve to an atomic scale down to about
1 d. h. (i. e., 0:1 nm). The TEM mode of operation is
similar to that of the SEM in that both microscopes con-
tain an electron gun source of illumination. However,
the TEM detects the electrons that pass through a given
sample. As a result, the electron gun of the TEM oper-
ates at higher energy levels between 501000kV, while
the SEM’s electron gun operates at around 130 kV.
In order for proper imaging to take place, the sam-
ple must be very thin so that electrons from the beam
can pass through the specimen. Electrons that do not
pass through the sample cannot be detected. Unlike the
SEM, the TEM produces images that are two dimen-
sional in appearance.
27.4.3 Scanning Probe Microscopy
Scanning Tunneling Microscope (STM)
Similar to the TEM, the STM [27.19] can also re-
solve specimens down to the atomic scale. The scanning
probe of the STM is comprised of a noble metal sharp-
ened to an atomic-sized tip, which is mounted on
a piezoelectrically driven (x, y, z) linear stage. The STM
makes use of the quantum-mechanical effect known as
tunneling. Electron tunneling occurs when electrons,
driven by a small potential difference, ﬂow across the
gap between the probe tip and sample. This event takes
place at Ångström-scale distances between the probe tip
and the sample [27.43]. The tunneling current, which
is typically on the order of a few nanoamperes, is di-
rectly related to the tip–sample separation distance.
Thus, the tunneling current can be measured and is kept
at a constant value by controlling the tip–sample gap
distance (z) with a feedback control system. The probe
tip is then scanned (x, y) along the entire surface of the
sample. Since the control system maintains a constant
tunneling current, and thus maintains a constant tip–
sample distance (z), the result of a scan yields a z.x; y)
terrain map of the sample with enough resolution to de-
tect atomic-scale features. The STM can achieve faster
imaging by operating in so-called constant-height mode
in which the probe tip is scanned in a plane parallel to
the average surface portion. The tip–sample distance (z)
can then be inferred directly from the measured tunnel-
ing current [27.43].
Atomic Force Microscope (AFM)
The AFM [27.44] is considered to be a spin-off of the
STM. One shortcoming of the STM is that it requires
conductive probe tips and samples to work properly.
The AFM was developed in order to view nonconduc-
tive samples, giving it a wider applicability than the
STM. In addition to imaging nonconductive samples,
the AFM can also image samples immersed in liquid,
which is useful for biological applications [27.45]. Al-
though the STM and AFM are similar in that they both
scan the surface of a sample with an atomically sharp
probe, they operate under slightly different principles.
The AFM is based on interatomic forces as opposed to
the electron tunneling used in the STM. The AFM probe
tip is mounted on the end of a microscale cantilever
beam. At very short separations, the forces between
atoms in the probe tip and atoms in the sample cause the
cantilever to deﬂect. This deﬂection is usually measured
by striking the back of the cantilever with a laser. The
reﬂection of the laser beam hits a photodetector, which
can be used to recover the deﬂection of the cantilever.
The force can then be calculated by using Hooke’s law,
which simply relates the applied force to the stiffness
and deﬂection of a material. The forces that are mea-
sured can be on the scale of piconewtons [27.43]. The
AFM has three main modes of operation known as con-
tact mode, noncontact mode, and tapping mode.
Unlike the SEM and TEM, both the STM and AFM
do not require a vacuum environment in order to func-
tion. However, a high vacuum is advantageous in order
to keep the samples from becoming contaminated from
the surrounding environment as well as controlling hu-
midity. In addition, atomic resolution in air is hardly
possible with an AFM due to humidity. As a result of
humidity, a water ﬁlm is formed and creates problems
because of capillary forces. This can be resolved by op-
erating in vacuum environment or completely in a liquid
solution [27.43].
27.5 Fabrication
The design of micro- and nanorobotic devices is in-
extricably linked to available fabrication techniques.
However, though the development of microfabrication
processes has become somewhat stable over the past
decade, nanofabrication processes are still being ac-
tively pursued, and the design constraints generated by
these processes are relatively unexplored. This section
will brieﬂy highlight the processes used in conventional

Micro-/Nanorobots
27.5 Fabrication
679
Part B | 27.5
microfabrication including lithography, thin-ﬁlm de-
position, chemical etching, and electrodeposition, and
describe some emerging techniques for nanofabrica-
tion.
Most micro- and nanofabrication techniques have
their roots in the standard fabrication methods de-
veloped for the semiconductor industry [27.46–48].
Therefore, a clear understanding of these techniques is
necessary for anyone embarking on a research and de-
velopment path in the micro/nano area.
27.5.1 Microfabrication
In this section, we will discuss the major microfabrica-
tion techniques used most frequently in the manufactur-
ing of microstructures.
Photolithography
Lithography
is
the
technique
used
to
transfer
a computer-generated pattern onto a substrate (sil-
icon, glass, GaAs, etc.). This pattern is subsequently
used to etch an underlying thin ﬁlm (oxide, nitride, etc.)
for various purposes (doping, etching, etc.). Although
photolithography, i. e., lithography using an ultraviolet
(UV) light source, is by far the most widely used
lithography technique in microelectronic fabrication,
electron-beam (e-beam) and X-ray lithography are two
alternatives that have attracted considerable attention
in the MEMS and nanofabrication areas. We will
discuss photolithography in this section and postpone
the discussion of e-beam and X-ray techniques to the
subsequent sections dealing with nanofabrication.
The starting point following the creation of the
computer layout for a speciﬁc fabrication sequence is
the generation of a photomask. This involves a se-
quence of photographic processes (using optical or
e-beam pattern generators) that results in a glass plate
having the desired pattern in the form of a thin (
100 nm) chromium layer. Following the generation of
photomask, the lithography and etching process can
proceed as shown in Fig. 27.2. After depositing the
desired material on the substrate, the photolithogra-
phy process starts with spin-coating the substrate with
a photoresist. This is a polymeric photosensitive ma-
terial that can be spun onto the wafer in liquid form;
usually an adhesion promoter such as hexamethyld-
isilazane (HMDS) is used prior to the application of
the resist. The spinning speed and photoresist viscos-
ity will determine the ﬁnal resist thickness, which is
typically 0.5–2.5m. Two different kinds of photore-
sist are available: positive and negative. With a positive
resist, the UV-exposed areas will be dissolved in the
subsequent development stage, whereas with a nega-
tive photoresist, the exposed areas will remain intact
after the development. After spinning the photoresist
on the wafer, the substrate is soft-baked (530 min at
60–100 ıC in order to remove the solvents from the re-
sist and improve the adhesion. Subsequently, the mask
is aligned to the wafer and the photoresist is exposed to
a UV source.
After exposure, the photoresist is developed in
a process similar to the development of photographic
ﬁlm. The resist is subsequently hard-baked (2030 min
at 120–180 ıC in order to further improve the adhesion.
The hard-bake step concludes the photolithography se-
quence by creating the desired pattern on the wafer.
Next, the underlying thin ﬁlm is etched, and the pho-
toresist is stripped in acetone or other organic solvent.
Figure 27.3 shows a schematic of the photolithography
steps with a positive photoresist.
Thin-Film Deposition and Doping
Thin-ﬁlm deposition and doping are used extensively
in micro- and nanofabrication technologies. Most of the
fabricated structures contain materials other than that of
the substrate, which are obtained by various deposition
techniques, or by modiﬁcation of the substrate. These
techniques include oxidation, doping, chemical vapor
deposition (CVD), physical vapor deposition (PVD),
and electroplating.
Etching and Substrate Removal
For micro- and nanofabrication, in addition to thin ﬁlm
etching, often the substrate (silicon, glass, GaAs, etc.)
needs to be removed in order to create various me-
chanical structures (beams, plates, etc.). Two important
ﬁgures of merit for any etching process are selectivity
and directionality.
Selectivity is the degree to which the etchant can
differentiate between the masking layer and the layer to
Silicon substrate
Deposit thin film (oxide, doping, CVD, PVD, electroplating, etc.)
Spin photoresist
Soft bake
Align the mask
Expose the wafer
Develop the resist
Hard bake
Etching (wet (anisotropic and isotropic) or dry (high-pressure plasma,
RIE, ion milling))
Device
Fig. 27.2 Typical microfabrication process ﬂow

Part B | 27.5
680
Part B
Design
be etched. Directionality has to do with the etch proﬁle
under the mask. In an isotropic etch, the etchant attacks
the material in all directions at the same rate, creating
a semicircular proﬁle under the mask (Fig. 27.4a). In an
anisotropic etch, the dissolution rate depends on spe-
ciﬁc directions, and one can obtain straight sidewalls
or other noncircular proﬁles (Fig. 27.4b). One can also
divide the various etching techniques into wet and dry
categories. Due to the lateral undercut, the minimum
feature size achievable with wet etchants is limited
to > 3 m. Photoresist and silicon nitride are the two
most common masking materials for the wet oxide etch.
Anisotropic and isotropic wet etching of crystalline (sil-
icon and gallium arsenide) and noncrystalline (glass)
substrates are important topics in micro- and nanofabri-
cation [27.49–53].
SiO2
Si
SiO2
Si
Photoresist
a)  Oxidize the substrate
b)  Spin the photoresist
 
and soft bake
SiO2
Si
SiO2
Si
Photomask
Light
c)  Expose the photoresist
SiO2
Si
SiO2
Si
e)  Etch the oxide
f)  Stripe the photoresist
d)  Develop the photoresist
 
and hard bake
Fig.27.3a–f Schematic drawing of the photolithographic
steps with a positive photoresist (PR) (a) Oxidize the sub-
strat (b) spin the photoresist and soft bake (c) expose the
photoresist (d) develop the photoresist and hard bake (e)
etch the oxide (f) stripe the photoresist
a)
b)
Substrate
Mask
Mask
Film
Film
Substrate
Mask
Mask
Film
Film
Fig.27.4a,b Proﬁle for isotropic (a) and anisotropic (b) etch
through a photoresist mask
The anisotropic behavior of these etchants with re-
spect to the (111) planes have been used extensively to
create beams, membranes, and other mechanical and
structural components. Figure 27.5 shows the typical
cross sections of (100) silicon wafers etched with an
anisotropic wet etchant. As can be seen, the (111) slow
planes are exposed and creating 54:7ı sloped sidewalls.
Depending on the dimensions of the mask opening,
a V-groove or a trapezoidal trench is formed in the (100)
wafer. A large enough opening will allow the silicon to
be etched all the way through the wafer, thus creating
a thin dielectric membrane of the other side. It should
be mentioned that exposed convex corners have a higher
etch rate than the concave ones, resulting in an under-
cut that can be used to create dielectric (e.g., nitride)
cantilever beams.
Dry etching techniques are largely plasma based.
They have several advantages compared with wet etch-
ing. These include smaller undercut (allowing smaller
lines to be patterned) and higher anisotropy (allowing
high-aspect-ratio vertical structures). However, the se-
lectivity of dry etching techniques is lower than the wet
etchants, and one must take into account the ﬁnite etch
rate of the masking materials. The three basic dry etch-
ing techniques, namely high-pressure plasma etching,
reactive-ion etching (RIE), and ion milling, utilize dif-
ferent mechanisms to obtain directionality.
27.5.2 Nanofabrication
The design and fabrication of NEMS is an emerg-
ing area being pursued by an increasing number of
researchers. Two approaches to nanofabrication, top-
down and bottom-up, have been identiﬁed by the
nanotechnology research community and are being in-
dependently investigated by various researchers. Top-
down approaches are based on microfabrication and
include technologies such as nanolithography, nanoim-
printing, and chemical etching. Presently, these are
2-D fabrication processes with relatively low resolu-
tion. Bottom-up strategies are assembly-based tech-
niques. Currently these strategies include techniques
such as self-assembly, dip-pen lithography, and directed
self-assembly. These techniques can generate regular
nanopatterns at large scales.
Si
54.7°
(111)
(100)
SiO2
Fig. 27.5 Anisotropic etch proﬁles for (100) silicon wafers

Micro-/Nanorobots
27.6 Microassembly
681
Part B | 27.6
In this section, we will discuss three major nanofab-
rication techniques. These include:
1. e-beam and nanoimprint fabrication
2. Epitaxy and strain engineering, and
3. Dip-pen nanolithography.
E-beam Lithography
and Nanoimprint Fabrication
In previous sections, we discussed several important
lithography techniques commonly used in MEMS and
microfabrication. These include various forms of UV
(regular, deep, and extreme) and X-ray lithography.
However, due to the lack of resolution (in the case
of the UV), or the difﬁculty in manufacturing mask
and radiation sources (X-ray), these techniques are
not suitable for nanometer-scale fabrication. E-beam
lithography is an attractive alternative technique for
fabricating nanostructures [27.53]. It uses an elec-
tron beam to expose an electron-sensitive resist such
as polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) dissolved in
trichlorobenzene (positive) or polychloromethylstyrene
(negative).
The e-beam gun is usually part of an SEM, although
a TEM can also be used. Although electron wavelengths
on the order of 1 Å can easily be achieved, electron scat-
tering in the resist limits the attainable resolutions to
> 10 nm. The beam control and pattern generation are
achieved through a computer interface.
E-beam lithography is serial and hence has a low
throughput. Although this is not a major concern in fab-
ricating devices used in studying fundamental micro-
physics, it severely limits large-scale nanofabrication.
E-beam lithography, in conjunction with such processes
as lift-off, etching, and electrodeposition, can be used to
fabricate various nanostructures.
An interesting new technique that circumvents the
serial and low-throughput limitations of the e-beam
lithography for fabricating nanostructures is nanoim-
print technology [27.54]. This technique uses an
e-beam-fabricated hard material master (or mold) to
stamp and deform a polymeric resist. This is usually
followed by a reactive-ion etching step to transfer the
stamped pattern to the substrate. This technique is eco-
nomically superior, since a single stamp can be used
repeatedly to fabricate a large number of nanostruc-
tures.
Epitaxy and Strain Engineering
Atomic-precision
deposition
techniques
such
as
molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE) and metallo-organic
chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) have proven to
be effective tools in fabricating a variety of quantum
conﬁnement structures and devices (quantum well
lasers,
photodetectors,
resonant
tunneling
diodes,
etc.) [27.55–57].
Dip-Pen Nanolithography
In dip-pen nanolithography (DPN), the tip of an AFM
operated in air is inked with a chemical of inter-
est and brought into contact with a surface. The ink
molecules ﬂow from the tip onto the surface as with
a fountain pen. Line widths down to 12 nm with spa-
tial resolution of 5 nm have been demonstrated with
this technique [27.58]. Species patterned with DPN
include conducting polymers, gold, dendrimers, de-
oxyribonucleic acid (DNA), organic dyes, antibodies,
and alkanethiols.
27.6 Microassembly
Assembly is often required in macroscale product man-
ufacturing in order to reduce the complexity and cost
of the manufacturing process. Assembly makes it pos-
sible to build complex products from relatively simple
parts and to integrate incompatible manufacturing pro-
cesses. It also makes maintenance and replacement
possible. The extension of assembly techniques into the
microscale is driven by the development of modern de-
sign and manufacturing technologies in the pursuit of
miniaturization and function integration, especially by
the development of integrated circuit (IC) [27.59] and
MEMS fabrication techniques. With the extension of
manufacturing technology into the microscale and even
nanoscale domain, the term microassembly has been
created to refer speciﬁcally to assembly operations per-
formed at the micro/mesoscale [27.60]. To give a formal
deﬁnition, microassembly is the assembly of objects
with microscale and/or mesoscale features under mi-
croscale tolerances [27.61].
27.6.1 Automated Microassembly Systems
Microassembly plays the role of an enabling tech-
nology in various processes of MEMS fabrication,
including device fabrication, packaging, and intercon-
nection. MEMS device fabrication is fundamentally
different from the highly modular IC fabrication in
that it often requires the machining of complex-shaped
three-dimensional (3-D) mechanical structures [27.51].
However, almost all current MEMS fabrication tech-

Part B | 27.6
682
Part B
Design
niques are subject to constraints in limited allowable
materials, limited capabilities in true 3-D fabrication,
and the requirement of fabrication process compatibil-
ity. Microassembly provides a possible solution to these
constraints. For example, incompatible fabrication pro-
cesses can be integrated through assembly. This makes
it possible to use nontraditional fabrication techniques
that are not necessarily based on semiconductor materi-
als, such as laser cutting, microwire electrical discharge
machining (EDM), and micromilling [27.62]. Complex
3-D structures can also be developed using parts with
relatively simple geometry [27.63, 64]. Microassembly
is also crucial to MEMS packaging and interconnec-
tion [27.65, 66].
From the perspective of robotic systems and au-
tomation, MEMS device fabrication and packaging
share many common assembly requirements. A fun-
damental commonality of both processes is the re-
quirement of the ability to manipulate micro/mesoscale
objects so that precise (i. e., microscale tolerance) spa-
tial relations can be established (e.g., die alignment,
part insertion) and certain physical/chemical processes
(e.g., die bonding, surface coating) can be performed.
Another common requirement is to control the interac-
tion force involved. MEMS devices often have fragile
structures such as thin beams or membranes. This re-
quires controlling the interactive force in manipulation
operations. Typically, the force magnitude resides in the
range from millinewtons to micronewtons.
MEMS devices are often three-dimensional. MEMS
packaging requires both electrical interconnection for
signal transmission and mechanical interconnection for
the interaction of the packaged device with its exter-
nal environment [27.51, 67]. Many such mechanical
interconnections require three-dimensional manipula-
tion and three-dimensional force control. The actual
operations are highly application speciﬁc, which pose
great challenges to the development of automated mi-
croassembly systems. Automated IC packaging sys-
tems can be used for the packaging of certain MEMS
devices such as accelerometers and gyros. However,
packaging of microﬂuidic devices, optical MEMS de-
vices, and hybrid microsystems often require the devel-
opment of new automated microassembly techniques
and systems.
The selection of assembly mode is among the
ﬁrst decisions to be made in developing automated
microassembly systems. Sequential microassembly re-
quires the use of micromanipulators and sensory feed-
back. At each moment, only one or a few parts are being
assembled. Depending on the physical effects used,
parallel microassembly can be either deterministic or
stochastic [27.68]. Die bonding is an example of deter-
ministic parallel microassembly. In stochastic parallel
microassembly, large numbers of parts are assembled
simultaneously using distributed physical effects such
as electrostatic force, capillary force, centrifugal force,
or vibration [27.60, 69–71]. In fact, the basic philoso-
phy of stochastic parallel microassembly is to minimize
the use of sensory feedback.
Each of these assembly modes has both advantages
and disadvantages. Each has its own suitable appli-
cations. Deterministic parallel assembly shares several
commonalities with sequential microassembly. For ex-
ample, sensory feedback is often used in deterministic
parallel microassembly. However, deterministic parallel
microassembly requires high relative positioning ac-
curacy between parts. In addition, only simple planar
structure features can be assembled in order to make
parallel operation possible.
Due to the requirement of MEMS packaging for
three-dimensional manipulation and microassembly, it
can be expected that automated sequential microassem-
bly will be the most widely adopted solution. In partic-
ular, those MEMS packaging applications that require
the control of multiple-degree-of-freedom (DOF) inter-
action force should use sequential microassembly. The
major possible disadvantage of sequential microassem-
bly is its low throughput. This constraint can often be
overcome by appropriate system design.
Here
we
introduce
a
three-dimensional
mi-
croassembly example that originates from an industrial
application [27.61]. It is signiﬁcantly different from
wire bonding and die bonding applications in that
high-precision 3-D part insertion is required. Together
with other examples, it will be used throughout this
section to illustrate the major concepts and techniques
and the logic connections between each functional unit
of an automated microassembly system.
The assembly task is to pick up micromachined
thin metal parts that are transferred to the assembly
workcell on a vacuum-release tray (Fig. 27.6a–c), and
insert them into vertically deep reactive ion etching
(DRIE) etched holes in a silicon wafer (Fig. 27.6d).
The wafers can have diameters up to 8 inches. The
holes on each wafer form regular arrays consisting
of approximately 50 holes each. However, these ar-
rays may not be regularly distributed on the wafer.
Typically, hundreds of parts are to be assembled on
each wafer. In general, each assembly operation is
a typical rectangular-peg-into-a-rectangular-hole prob-
lem. Each metal part is approximately half a millimeter
in width and less than 100m in thickness at its
rectangular tip. The total assembly tolerance is typi-
cally smaller than 10 m in the vertical direction, and
smaller than 20 m in the horizontal direction. This
task is a typical application of 3-D microassembly
techniques.

Micro-/Nanorobots
27.6 Microassembly
683
Part B | 27.6
27.6.2 Microassembly System Design
This section discusses the design of automated mi-
croassembly systems from the perspective of robotic
systems and automation. Performance objects to be
achieved include high reliability, high throughput, high
ﬂexibility, and low cost.
General Guidelines
Taking a System Perspective. An automated mi-
croassembly system consists of many functional units
and must integrate techniques from a diverse range of
areas such as robotics, computer vision, microscope op-
tics, physics, and chemistry. It is therefore important to
consider the interaction between these units.
Emphasizing the Coupling with Packaging Pro-
cesses. Although in this section microassembly tech-
niques are addressed primarily from the perspective
of robotics for the clarity of presentation, robotic sys-
tem designers must recognize the strong dependence
of architecture design of the robotic systems on the
packaging process being implemented. This connection
should be emphasized from the beginning of system de-
velopment.
Design for Reconfigurability. Automated packaging
machines must be designed so that they can be cus-
tomized for a wide variety of applications. Reconﬁgura-
bility is therefore a basic design requirement. Typically,
modular design based on function decomposition is de-
sirable. Support for tool replacement is essential.
The design of automated microassembly systems is
strongly dependent on the assembly tolerance required.
First of all, the repeatability of the motion control sys-
tem and the micromanipulator used is determined by
the required assembly tolerance. In addition, assem-
bly tolerance often determines the minimum resolu-
tion of the microscope optics. General microassembly
tasks may only require microscopic vision feedback
and manipulators with microscale repeatability, while
complex microassembly tasks may also require the in-
a)
Parts on release tray
b)
d)
e)
Parts versus a U.S. dime
DRIE holes
Assembly results
c)
Part shape
Fig.27.6a–e A 3-D microassembly example (a) Parts on release tray (b) parts versus a US dime (c) part shape (d) DRIE holes
(e) assembly results
tegration of microforce and vision feedback [27.72,
73].
Automated microassembly systems must be able to
support a wide variety of material-handling tools, which
include part transfer tools, bulk feeders, wafer-handling
tools, magazine loaders and unloaders, etc.
The role of the micromanipulator is to provide
multiple-DOF ﬁne motion control. The role of the mi-
crogripper is to grasp objects in pick-and-place and
other assembly operations. Their efﬁciency and robust-
ness will to a great extent decide the performance of
the entire system. Microgripper design is also closely
related to the design of ﬁxtures for microassembly op-
erations.
Major environment factors include clean-room re-
quirements, temperature, humidity, airﬂow, etc. Certain
assembly operations must be performed in a clean
room. This requires that the design of automated mi-
croassembly systems comply with relevant standards.
Some packaging processes such as eutectic bonding
must be performed under high temperature. Conse-
quently, the potential inﬂuence of high temperature
on motion control system and microscope optics must
be considered. For the manipulation of microscale
objects, environment conditions such as temperature
and humidity can have a major inﬂuence on adhesion
forces [27.74, 75]. Therefore, it is often important to
consider environment control in system design.
Assembly Process Flow: An Example
The micromachined metal parts (Fig. 27.6c) are hor-
izontally transferred to the workcell on the vacuum-
release tray (Fig. 27.6b). The wafer is placed on
a wafer mount perpendicular to the horizontal plane
(Fig. 27.6b). This conﬁguration does not require the
ﬂipping of the thin metal parts and is advantageous in
terms of reliability and efﬁciency. There are two major
operations in each assembly cycle: pickup and inser-
tion. Under the conﬁguration shown in Fig. 27.7a, all
the operations are performed by the same workcell.
Complex packaging operations must often be decom-
posed and performed by multiple workcells [27.76].

Part B | 27.6
684
Part B
Design
General System Architecture
An automated microassembly system typically consists
of the following functional units.
Large Workspace Positioning Unit. A large work-
space and long-range positioning motion are required in
most microassembly operations. The large workspace
is necessary to accommodate different functional units,
part feeders, and various tools.
In general, off-the-shelf motion control systems de-
veloped for automated IC packaging equipment can be
adopted directly. For the task described in Sect. 27.6.1,
the DRIE-etched holes are distributed on wafers up to
8 inches in diameter. This requires the assembly sys-
tem to have a commensurate working space and high
positioning speed. The coarse positioning unit has four
DOFs (Fig. 27.7a). Planar motion in the horizontal di-
rection is provided by an open-frame high-precision XY
table with a travel of 32 cm (12 inch) and a repeatability
of 1 m in both directions. Position feedback with a res-
olution of 0:1 m is provided by two linear encoders.
A dual-loop PID (proportional–integral–derivative)plus
feedforward control scheme is used for each axis. The
internal speed loop is closed on the rotary encoder on the
motor. The external position loop is closed on the lin-
ear encoder. Each wafer is placed on the vertical wafer
mount that provides both linear and rotational control
(Fig. 27.7b). Vertical motions of the wafer mount are
provided by a linear slide with a travel of 20 cm (8 inch)
and a repeatability of 5 m. It is also controlled using
a PID plus feedforward algorithm. Both the XY table and
the vertical linear slides are actuated using alternating-
current (AC) servo motors. The rotation of the wafer
mount is actuated by an Oriental PK545AUA microstep
motor with a maximum resolution of 0:0028ı step. All
low-level controllers are commanded and coordinated
by a host computer [27.61].
For applications requiring repeatability of one mi-
cron or greater, it is convenient to use conventional posi-
a)
System overview
b)
Assembly scene
c)
Micromanipulator unit
Fig.27.7a–c An experimental microassembly workcell (a) System overview (b) assembly scene (c) micromanipulator
unit
tioning tables to implement coarse range motions.These
tables typically use leadscrew or ballscrew drives and
ball or roller bearings. For applications requiring sub-
micron or nanometer repeatability, a few solutions are
also commercially available. For example, piezoactua-
tors are often used for nanometer repeatability motion.
The disadvantage of piezoactuators is that their travel
range is small, typically on the order of 100 microns.
As another example, a series of positioning stages with
submicron repeatability based on direct-drive linear ac-
tuators and air bearings is available from Aerotech. It is
also possible to use parallel structure mechanisms such
as a Stewart platform [27.77]. In general, the develop-
ment of IC manufacturing towards the deep submicron
level provides a major driving force behind the develop-
ment of these motion control techniques.
Micromanipulator Unit. Fine pose (position and ori-
entation) control is required in operations such as 3-D
precision alignment and assembly. For example, the six
DOFs required by the task introduced in Sect. 27.6.1 are
implemented on separate structures. The three Carte-
sian DOF are provided by an adapted Sutter MP285
micromanipulator, which also provides yaw motions
with its rotational DOF (Fig. 27.7c). Roll motions are
implemented on the wafer mount (Fig. 27.7b). The
pitch movement of the metal part after pickup is not mo-
torized and is implemented through manual adjustment
and calibration before assembly. More discussion of mi-
cromanipulator conﬁguration can be found in [27.61].
Two principles need to be considered in implement-
ing motion control for automated 3-D microassembly.
The ﬁrst is the partition of large-workspace coarse posi-
tioning unit and the ﬁne positioning micromanipulator
unit. The second is the decomposition and distributed
implementation of multiple DOFs. In practice, the ac-
tual implementations of these principles are highly
application speciﬁc. For certain applications, if a large-
range positioning unit is sufﬁcient to satisfy assembly

Micro-/Nanorobots
27.6 Microassembly
685
Part B | 27.6
tolerance requirements, the separate implementation of
a micromanipulator may even be unnecessary.
In general, the separation of a micromanipula-
tor unit will facilitate the implementation of high-
bandwidth motion control. However, this separation
normally brings redundancy to the entire motion control
system. The functioning of the high-precision micro-
manipulator must also rely on closed-loop feedback
control, especially microscopic vision feedback.
Automated Microgripper Unit. The function of a mi-
crogripper is to provide geometrical and physical con-
straints (grasping) in pick-and-place and assembly op-
erations. The reliability and efﬁciency of the microgrip-
per is critical to the performance of the entire automated
microassembly system. Several factors must be consid-
ered in micromanipulator design. First of all, as the
micromanipulator end-effector, the microgripper must
be constantly monitored under a microscope. There-
fore, it must be small in size and suitable in shape
to remain in the microscope’s ﬁeld of view and to
minimize occlusion. Secondly, it is important to con-
sider the different governing physics and to explore
the use of various gripping forces [27.77]. Thirdly, mi-
crogrippers are used in both part pick-and-place and
assembly. Since assembly operations typically require
more constraints, microgrippers designed for pick-and-
place operations may not necessarily be suitable for
assembly operations. In fact, the microassembly task
described in Sect. 27.6.2 is performed using a combined
microgripper [27.61]. Microgripper development is of-
ten closely related to the development of ﬁxtures that
can also have microscale sizes.
Microscope Optics and Imaging Unit. The function
of the microscope optics and imaging unit is to provide
noncontact measurement of the geometry, motion, and
spatial relations of assembly objects. Typical conﬁgura-
tions of commercial device bonding systems use one or
two vertical microscopes. An inverted microscope con-
ﬁguration is commonly used for backside alignment.
On the other hand, 3-D microassembly may require two
camera views in a stereo conﬁguration. In the system
shown in Fig. 27.7a, a total of four different views can
be provided to its human operator: a global view of the
entire assembly scene, a vertical microscopic view for
part pickup, and two lateral microscopic views for the
ﬁne position and orientation adjustments during the ﬁ-
nal microassembly operations. Each view uses a CCD
camera with a matching optical system. All images are
captured using a Matrox Corona peripheral component
interconnect (PCI) frame grabber.
Microscopic visual feedback is crucial for precise
3-D alignment. Provided that resolution requirements
of the assembly task can be satisﬁed, microscope optics
with larger working distances is desirable. For the as-
sembly task addressed in Sect. 27.6.1, an Edmund Sci-
entiﬁc VZM 450i zoom microscope with a 1 objective
is used to provide the right view. Its working distance
is approximately 90 mm, with a resolution of 7:5 m.
The vertical view is also provided by a VZM 450i
microscope with a 0:5 objective to guide pickup oper-
ations. Its ﬁeld of view can range from 2:8  2:8 mm to
17:6  17:6 mm. Its working distance is approximately
147 mm.
If visual servoing is required in automate assem-
bly operations, a stereo conﬁguration formed by adding
another lateral view may be necessary. Higher resolu-
tion may be necessary in some microassembly tasks.
In such cases, the same conﬁguration can be used
with higher-resolution microscope optics, for example,
two Navitar TenX zoom microscopes with Mitutoyo
ultralong-working-distance M Plan Apo 10 objectives
have been used in this conﬁguration by the authors. The
resolution of each microscope is 1 m, with a work-
ing distance of 33:5 mm. Consequently, the usable
workspace of the micromanipulator is reduced [27.61].
The global view is implemented using a miniature
Marshall V-1260 board camera to monitor the status of
the entire assembly scene. It plays an important role
in helping the operator to understand gross spatial re-
lations and preventing operation errors.
From the perspective of robotic systems, the de-
velopment of automation microassembly systems for
complex 3-D microassembly operation will rely on the
development of:
1. Compact, robust and high-speed micromanipulators
with 5–6 DOFs.
2. Highly reliable and efﬁcient microgrippers that are
suitable for working under microscopes. Such grip-
pers should have active force control or passive
compliance to avoid damage to MEMS devices.
3. Three-dimensional microscopic computer vision
techniques, three-dimensional microforce measure-
ment and control techniques, and their integration.
27.6.3 Basic Microassembly Techniques
This section introduces a few supporting techniques
important to automated microassembly systems, in-
cluding machine vision techniques, microforce control
techniques, and simulation veriﬁcation of assembly
strategy.
Machine Vision Techniques
Machine vision techniques are widely used in the semi-
conductor industry. The major difference between ma-

Part B | 27.6
686
Part B
Design
chine vision and general computer vision [27.78] is that,
unlike natural objects and scenes, industrial objects and
scenes can often be artiﬁcially designed and conﬁgured.
This advantage often makes it possible to signiﬁcantly
reduce the complexity and enhance the robustness of
vision techniques. The applications of machine vision
techniques can generally be categorized into the follow-
ing two classes based on the requirement of real-time
processing.
Non-Time-Critical Vision Applications. These ap-
plications do not require visual feedback for high-
bandwidth real-time control. Examples include object
recognition and packaging quality inspection [27.79].
Time-Critical Vision Applications. These applica-
tions require real-time visual feedback. Examples in-
clude vision-guided pick-and-place, alignment, inser-
tion, etc. [27.80]. An introduction to 3-D computer
vision techniques can be found in [27.81]. A standard
introduction to visual servoing techniques can be found
in [27.82].
Several commercial software packages are available
from suppliers such as Cognex, Coreco Imaging, and
National Instruments.
Microforce Control Techniques
The theory of force control has been studied by the
robotics community for more than 50 years [27.83, 84].
Several theoretical frameworks and many control algo-
rithms have been proposed and experimentally veriﬁed.
A variety of macroscale multiple-DOF force sensors
have been developed.
Force control is also crucial to microassembly. For
example, contact forces in device bonding must often
be programmed and precisely controlled. In general,
many of the macroscale force control techniques can
be applied at micro/mesoscales. Force control for de-
vice bonding is essentially 1-D and involves force on
the order of several newtons. On the other hand, in the
manipulation of micro/mesoscale parts, the magnitude
of interactive force typically ranges from millinew-
tons (103 N) to micronewtons (106 N). Forces of this
magnitude are often referred to as microforces. A major
technical challenge in implementing microforce control
is the lack of multiple-DOF microforce sensors. A ba-
sic requirement for multiple-DOF microforce sensors is
that they must be miniature in size. The manufacturing
of these sensors normally requires the use of micro-
machining, including MEMS techniques. There are two
major microforce sensing conﬁgurations.
Stand-Alone Force Sensor. The advantage of this
conﬁguration is that the sensor is general purpose
and can be used with different microgrippers. Most
macroscale multiple-DOF force sensors are of this type.
However, this also requires the sensor to have sufﬁcient
structural stiffness to support the static load of micro-
gripper, which is often signiﬁcantly larger than the force
resolution to be reached.
Embedded Force Sensor. Micro strain gages can be
attached to microgrippers [27.85]. Force-sensitive ma-
terials can also be deposited on microgrippers. This
conﬁguration avoids the issue of static load. However,
such force sensing capabilities are dependent on the
microgripper design, which often is not necessarily
optimal for the measurement of multiple-DOF micro-
force/torque.
Complex and high-precision microassembly tasks
also require the integration of microscopic machine
vision with microforce control. Simple integration tech-
niques use a gating/switching scheme [27.72, 86]. For
more integrated approaches, visual impedance can be
used [27.73].
Simulation Verification of Assembly Strategies
In many microassembly tasks, the distances between
adjacent features are often on the meso/microscale.
Therefore, selecting the correct assembly sequence is
important for collision avoidance. In addition, due
to the limited working distance of microscopes, mi-
croassembly operations must often be performed in
a limited space using micromanipulators. Collision
avoidance is critical to avoiding equipment or device
damage. Potential collisions can be found and avoided
by using ofﬂine simulation software. Many commer-
cially available ofﬂine robot programming tools can
provide this function.
Microassembly Tool
The end-effector of a micromanipulator in an auto-
mated microassembly system is often in the form of
a microgripper, whose reliability and efﬁciency greatly
inﬂuence the reliability and efﬁciency of the entire
system. The microgripper must often be as small as pos-
sible. Its design must also minimize potential damage to
fragile MEMS parts. This often requires passive com-
pliance in structural design.
Microgrippers with integrated MEMS actuators can
be fabricated monolithically and thus can be more com-
pact in size. Several physical effects are commonly
used in MEMS actuators, including electrostatic force
and piezoelectric force [27.87], shape memory alloy
(SMA) [27.88, 89], and thermal deformation [27.63,
90]. Currently, the major limitation is that it is difﬁ-
cult for MEMS actuators to generate sufﬁcient travel,
force, and power output. Alternatively, another solution

Micro-/Nanorobots
27.7 Microrobotics
687
Part B | 27.7
is to provide actuation externally [27.61, 91] The ad-
vantage is that sufﬁcient travel and force and power
output can be more easily obtained. The major dis-
advantage is that the microgripper is less compact
in size. This could become a major obstacle to its
applications.
27.7 Microrobotics
Today, more and more microrobotic devices are en-
abling new applications in various ﬁelds. Besides mi-
croassembly, microrobotics can play important roles
in other industry ﬁelds for manipulation, characteriza-
tion, inspection, and maintenance, and in biotechnology
for, e.g., manipulating cells, a ﬁeld referred to as bio-
microrobotics.
27.7.1 Introduction
Microrobotics is a ﬁeld that combines the established
theory and techniques of robotics with the exciting
new tools provided by MEMS technology in order
to create intelligent machines that operate at micron
scales. As stated by authors reviewing the micro-
robotics ﬁeld [27.31, 92], many micro terms such as
micromechatronics, micromechanism, micromachines,
and microrobots are used synonymously to indicate
a wide range of devices whose function is related to
a small scale; however, small scale is a relative term
so a clearer deﬁnition is needed.
The obvious difference between a macrorobot and
a microrobot is the size of the robot. Thus, one deﬁ-
nition of a microrobot is a device having dimensions
smaller than classical watch-making parts (i. e., m to
mm) and having the ability to move, apply forces and
manipulate objects in a workspace with dimensions in
the micrometer or submicrometer range [27.93]. How-
ever, in many cases it is important that the robot can
move over much larger distances. This task-speciﬁc
deﬁnition is quite wide and includes several types of
very small robots as well as stationary micromanipula-
tion systems, which are a few decimeters in size but can
carry out very precise manipulation (in the micron or
even nanometer range) [27.92].
Besides classiﬁcation by task or size, microrobots
can also be classiﬁed by their mobility and functional-
ity [27.31, 94]. Many robots usually consist of sensors
and actuators, a control unit, and an energy source.
Depending on the arrangement of these compo-
nents, one can classify microrobots according to the fol-
lowing criteria: locomotive and positioning possibility
(yes or no), manipulation possibility (yes or no), control
type (wireless or tethered), and autonomy. Figure 27.8
illustrates 15 different possible microrobot conﬁgura-
tions by combining the four criteria [27.31, 94].
As depicted in Fig. 27.8 (taken from [27.24]), the
classiﬁcation is dependent on the following microrobot
components: the control unit (CU), the power source
(PS), the actuators necessary for moving the robot
platform (i. e., the robot drive for locomotion and posi-
tioning; AP), and the actuators necessary for operation
(i. e., manipulation using robot arms and hands; AM).
Besides the different actuation functions, sensory func-
tions are also needed, for example, tactile sensors for
microgrippers or charge-coupled device (CCD) cam-
eras for endoscopic applications (compare Fig. 27.8d
and a).
The ultimate goal is to create a fully autonomous,
wireless mobile microrobot equipped with suitable mi-
crotools according to Fig. 27.8o. Because this is a very
difﬁcult task, a good start is to investigate the possibility
of making silicon microrobot platforms that are steered
and powered through wires, like the one in Fig. 27.8c,
and to study their locomotion capability.
The majority of MEMS-based microrobotic de-
vices developed so far could be categorized as move-
able links – microcatheters [27.95, 96], according
to Fig. 27.8a, or microgrippers [27.25], such as those
in Fig. 27.8d, or the microgrippers [27.97, 98] shown
in Fig. 27.8e. Among the research publications covering
locomotive microrobots, most publications have ad-
dressed microconveyance systems (Fig. 27.8b) [27.99–
102]. Robots using external sources for locomotion
could be used (compare Fig. 27.8b,f,j,n). According
to Fatikow and Rembold [27.92], several researchers
are working on methods to navigate micromechanisms
through human blood vessels; however, these micro-
robots are difﬁcult to control. Examples of partially
autonomous systems (compare Fig. 27.8j) are the con-
cept for so-called smart pills. Centimeter-sized pills for
sensing temperature and/or pH inside the body have
been presented [27.103, 104] as well as pills equipped
with video cameras [27.105]. The pill is swallowed and
transported to the part of the body where one wants
to measure or record a video sequence. The informa-
tion of the measured parameter or the signals from the
camera is then transmitted (telemetrically) out of the
body. More sophisticated approaches involving actua-
tors for drug delivery of various kinds have also been
proposed [27.92, 104]. The position of the pill inside
the body is located by an X-ray monitor or ultrasound.

Part B | 27.7
688
Part B
Design
a)
d)
e)
b)
f)
c)
g)
h)
i)
j)
k)
l)
m)
n)
o)
Microrobots physically
mounted to positioning system
fixed to external environment
Microrobots for manipulating
operations (wire controlled)
Wireless microrobots for
manipulating operations
Autonomous microrobots
 for manipulating operations
CU + PS
CU + PS
CU + PS
CU + PS
PS+AM
PS+AM
CU+PS+AM
CU+PS+AM
CU+PS
CU+PS+AP+AM
CU+
PS+
AP
PS+AP
+AM
(PS)+AP
CU + PS
CU + PS
AP+AM
Microrobots without manipulation
functions (wire controlled)
CU + PS
AP
AM
AM
AM
AM
AP
CU
(PS)
CU
(PS)
CU
(PS)
CU
(PS)
PS
AP
AP
AP
AP
AM
AP
AP
Fig.27.8a–o Classiﬁcation
of
microrobots
by
functionality
(modiﬁcation
of
earlier
presented
classiﬁcation
schemes [27.12, 31, 92, 93]). (CU indicates the control unit; PS, the power source or power supply; AP, the actuators
for positioning; AM, the actuators for manipulation): (a–c) Microrobots without manipulation functions (wire con-
trolled), (d–g) microrobots for manipulation operations (wire controlled), (h–k) wireless microrobots for manipulation
operations, (l–o) autonomous microrobots for manipulationg operations, (d,h,l) microrobots physically mounted to po-
sitioning system ﬁxed to external environment
As soon as the pill reaches an infected area, a drug en-
capsulated in the pill can be released by the actuators
onboard. External communication could be realized
through radio signals.
Several important results have been presented re-
garding walking microrobots (Fig. 27.8c,g,k) fabri-
cated by MEMS technologies and batch manufactur-
ing. Different approaches for surface-micromachined
robots [27.106, 107] and for a piezoelectric dry-
reactive-ion-etched microrobot should be mentioned.
A suitable low-power application-speciﬁc integrated
circuit (ASIC) for robot control has been successfully
tested and is planned to be integrated on a walk-
ing microrobot [27.108]. The large European Esprit
project MINIMAN (1997) has the goal of developing
moveable microrobotic platforms with integrated tools
with six degrees of freedom for applications such as
microassembly within an SEM and involves differ-
ent MEMS research groups from several universities
and companies across Europe. Further, miniature robot
systems with MEMS/MST (microsystem technology)
components have been developed [27.109].
Several research publications on gnat minirobots
and
actuator
technologies
for
MEMS
micro-
robots [27.3, 110] were reported by US researchers
in the early 1990s, and several groups in Japan are
also currently developing miniaturized robots based on
MEMS devices [27.8]. In Japan, an extensive ten-year
program
on
micromachine
technology,
supported
by the Ministry of International Trade and Industry
(MITI), started in 1991. One of the goals of this
project is to create microsized and miniature robots for
microfactory, medical technology, and maintenance
applications. Several microrobotic devices, including
locomotive robots and microconveyers, have been
produced within this program. Miniature robot devices
or vehicles [27.111] for locomotive tasks, containing
several MEMS components, have been presented.
Even though great efforts have been made on robot
miniaturization using MEMS technologies, no experi-
mental results on MEMS batch-fabricated microrobots
suitable for autonomous walking (i. e., robust enough
to be able to carry its own power source or to be
powered by telemetric means) have been presented yet.
The ﬁrst batch-fabricated MEMS-based microrobot
platform able to walk was presented in 1999 [27.112].
However, this robot was powered through wires and
was not equipped with manipulation actuators. Besides
walking microrobotic devices, several reports on ﬂy-
ing [27.113–115] and swimming [27.116] robots have
been published. Micromotors and gear boxes made
using LIGA technology (a high-precision, lithograph-

Micro-/Nanorobots
27.7 Microrobotics
689
Part B | 27.7
ically deﬁned plating technology) are used to build
small ﬂying microhelicopters, which are commercially
available from the Institute of Microtechnology in
Mainz, Germany, as rather expensive demonstration
objects [27.114]. Besides the pure mechanical micro-
robots, hybrid systems consisting of electromechanical
components and living organisms such as cockroaches
have also been reported [27.117].
27.7.2 Bio-Microrobotics
Biomanipulation entails such operations as position-
ing, grasping, and injecting material into various lo-
cations in cells. Research topics in bio-microrobotics
include the autonomous manipulation of single cells
or molecules, the characterization of biomembrane me-
chanical properties using microrobotic systems with
integrated vision and force sensing modules, and more.
The objective is to obtain a fundamental understanding
of single-cell biological systems and provide charac-
terized mechanical models of biomembranes for de-
formable cell tracking during biomanipulation and cell
injury studies.
Existing biomanipulation techniques can be clas-
siﬁed into noncontact manipulation including laser
trapping [27.118–121] and electrorotation [27.122–
124], and contact manipulation, referred to as me-
chanical micromanipulation [27.125]. When laser trap-
ping [27.118–121] is used for noncontact biomanipula-
tion, a laser beam is focused through a large-numerical-
aperture objective lens, converging to form an optical
trap in which the lateral trapping force moves a cell in
suspension toward the center of the beam. The longitu-
dinal trapping force moves the cell in the direction of
the focal point. The optical trap levitates the cell and
holds it in position. Laser traps can work in a well-
controlled manner. However, two features make laser
trapping techniques undesirable for automated cell in-
jection. The high dissipation of visible light in aqueous
solutions requires the use of high-energy light close
to the UV spectrum, raising the possibility of damage
to the cell. Even though some researchers claim that
such concerns could be overcome using wavelengths
in the near-infrared (IR) spectrum [27.120], the ques-
tion as to whether the incident laser beam might induce
abnormalities in the cells’ genetic material still exists.
One alternative to using laser beams is the electrorota-
tion technique. Electric-ﬁeld-induced rotation of cells
was demonstrated by Mischel et al. [27.126], Arnold
and Zimmermann [27.127], and Washizu et al. [27.124].
This noncontact cell manipulation technique is based
on controlling the phase shift and magnitude of elec-
tric ﬁelds. These ﬁelds, appropriately applied, produce
a torque on the cell. Different system conﬁgurations
have been established for cell manipulation based on
this principle [27.122, 123], which can achieve high ac-
curacy in cell positioning. However, it lacks a means to
hold the cell in place for further manipulation, such as
injection, since the magnitude of the electric ﬁelds has
to be kept low to ensure the viability of cells. The limits
of noncontact biomanipulation in the laser trapping and
electrorotation techniques make mechanical microma-
nipulation desirable. The damage caused by laser beams
in the laser trapping technique and the lack of a hold-
ing mechanism in the electrorotation technique can be
overcome by mechanical micromanipulation.
To improve the low success rate of manual oper-
ation, and to eliminate contamination, an autonomous
robotic system (shown in Fig. 27.9) has been developed
to deposit DNA into one of the two nuclei of a mouse
embryo without inducing cell lysis [27.11, 128]. The
laboratory’s experimental results show that the success
rate for the autonomous embryo pronuclei DNA injec-
tion is dramatically improved over conventional manual
Cell holding unit
35°
Inverted microscope
Readout circuit board with a wire bonded force sensor
3DOF microrobot
Fig. 27.9 Robotic biomanipulation system with vision and force
feedback
20μm
20μm
a)
b)
Fig. 27.10 Cell injection process. (a) Before and (b) during the in-
jection of a mouse oocyte zona pellucida (ZP)

Part B | 27.7
690
Part B
Design
injection methods. The autonomous robotic system fea-
tures a hybrid controller that combines visual servoing
and precision position control, pattern recognition for
detecting nuclei, and a precise autofocusing scheme.
Figure 27.10 illustrates the injection process.
To realize large-scale injection operations, a MEMS
cell holder was fabricated using anodic wafer-bonding
techniques. Arrays of holes are aligned on the cell
holder, which are used to contain and ﬁx individual
cells for injection. When well calibrated, the system
with the cell holder makes it possible to inject large
numbers of cells using position control. The cell injec-
tion operation can be conducted in a move–inject–move
manner.
A successful injection is determined greatly by in-
jection speed and trajectory, and the forces applied to
cells. To further improve the robotic system’s perfor-
mance, a multi-axial MEMS-based capacitive cellular
force sensor is being designed and fabricated to pro-
vide realtime force feedback to the robotic system.
The MEMS cellular force sensor also aids research in
biomembrane mechanical property characterization.
MEMS-Based Multi-Axis Capacitive Cellular
Force Sensor
The
MEMS-based
two-axis
cellular
force
sen-
sor [27.129] shown in Fig. 27.11 is capable of resolving
normal forces applied to a cell as well as tangential
forces generated by improperly aligned cell probes.
A high-yield microfabrication process was developed
to form the 3-D high-aspect-ratio structure using deep
reactive ion etching (DRIE) on silicon-on-insulator
(SOI) wafers. The constrained outer frame and the
inner movable structure are connected by four curved
springs. A load applied to the probe causes the inner
structure to move, changing the gap between each pair
of interdigitated comb capacitors. Consequently, the
total capacitance change resolves the applied force. The
interdigitated capacitors are orthogonally conﬁgured to
make the force sensor capable of resolving forces in
both the x- and y-directions. The cellular force sensors
used in the experiments are capable of resolving forces
up to 25  N with a resolution of 0.01  N.
Moveable structure
Curved spring
800μm 35X
x
y
5 μm
20μm 1000X
20μm 1000X
Fig. 27.11 A cellular force sensor with
orthogonal comb drives detailed
Tip geometry affects the quantitative force mea-
surement results. A standard injection pipette (Cook
K-MPIP-1000-5) tip section with a tip diameter of
5  m is attached to the probe of the cellular force sen-
sors.
The robotic system and high-sensitivity cellular
force sensor are also applied to biomembrane mechan-
ical property studies [27.130]. The goal is to obtain
a general parameterized model describing cell mem-
brane deformation behavior when an external load is
applied. This parameterized model serves two chief
purposes. First, in robotic biomanipulation, it allows
online parameter recognition so that cell membrane
deformation behavior can be predicted. Second, for
a thermodynamic model of membrane damage in cell
injury and recovery studies, it is important to appreciate
the mechanical behavior of the membranes. This allows
the interpretation of such reported phenomena as me-
chanical resistance to cellular volume reduction during
dehydration, and its relationship to injury. The estab-
lishment of such a biomembrane model will greatly
facilitate cell injury studies.
Experiments demonstrate that robotics and MEMS
technology can play important roles in biological stud-
ies such as automating biomanipulation tasks. Aided
by robotics, the integration of vision and force sensing
modules, and MEMS design and fabrication techniques,
investigations are being conducted in biomembrane me-
chanical property modeling, deformable cell tracking,
and single-cell and biomolecule manipulation.
27.7.3 Bio-Mimetic/Untethered Microrobots
Similar to the larger scale, bio-mimicking is a signiﬁ-
cant approach for the design of micro- and nanorobots.
However, at the micro-/nanoscale, the objectives we are
learning from are not animals, ﬁshes, birds, or insects
anymore, rather we learn from such categories as bac-
teria, molecular motors, DNA molecules, and so on.
For instance, it is well known that a variety of mi-
croorganisms swim in liquid using ﬂagella, a swimming
strategy that is particularly well suited to their low-
Reynolds-number regime [27.131]. Eukaryotic ﬂagella

Micro-/Nanorobots
27.7 Microrobotics
691
Part B | 27.7
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
0s
3s
6s
9s
12s
15s
18s
Camera
Three orthogonal
electromagnetic
coil pairs
Sample holder
3 DOF manipulator
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
18.0
16.0
14.0
12.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
25.0
20.0
30.0
35.0
40.0
Frequency / (Hz)
Velocity v (μm/s)
1.0 mT
3 μm
Helical tail
Soft magnetic head
2.0 mT
1.5 mT
21s
24s
27s
30s
33s
36s
39s
Fig.27.12a–e Artiﬁcial bacteria ﬂagella. (a) SEM micrograph of an as-fabricated ABF with a diameter of 2:7 m. (b)
Schematic drawing of driving an ABF swims forward and backward as a rotary-to-linear motion converter. For forward
and backward motion, the helical tail turns clockwise (CW) and counterclockwise (CCW), respectively (as seen by an
observer in front of the ABF). (c) A series of frames taken from a video camera showing an ABF swim forward in
water. The ABF has an 81 m long InGaAs/GaAs/Cr helical tail, and a 4:5 m  4:5 m square head. B, f, , ' represent
four parameters, i. e., magnetic ﬁeld, ﬁeld frequency, yaw and pitch, which can be controlled by the coil pairs. (d) The
dependence of ABF velocity to frequency of external magnetic ﬁeld generated by the coil pairs. (e) Experimental setup.
All examples are from the authors’ work
are active organelles that deform to create paddling
motions, such as propagating waves or circular translat-
ing movements. Previous work experimentally demon-
strated that this kind of motion can be approximated by
a microscopic artiﬁcial swimmer consisting of a chain
of DNA-bound magnetic beads connected to a red
blood cell [27.132]. In contrast, bacterial (prokaryotic)
ﬂagella work differently by using a molecular motor to
turn the base of a ﬂagellum or bundle of ﬂagella, which
deform passively into a helical structure [27.133].
One example inspired by this is artiﬁcial bacte-
rial ﬂagella (ABFs) [27.134], which are proposed as
microrobots capable of locomotion in liquid. An ar-
tiﬁcial bacterial ﬂagellum consists of a helical tail
resembling a natural ﬂagellum, fabricated by the self-
scrolling of helical nanobelts [27.135, 136], and a thin
soft-magnetic head, consisting of a Cr/Ni/Au multi-
layer. Experimental investigation shows that an ABF
can be propelled forward, backward and steered by
a controlled external rotating magnetic ﬁeld. ABFs have
comparable swimming speed to bacteria propelled by
ﬂagella but under precise control.
An artiﬁcial bacterial ﬂagellum (ABF) consists of
two parts: a helical tail and a soft-magnetic metal
head as shown in Fig. 27.12. Previous work has shown
that the geometrical shape of the helical tail, i. e., chi-
rality, helicity angle and diameter, can be precisely
controlled. To control the locomotion of the ABF re-
motely, three orthogonal electromagnetic coil pairs
were employed to generate a uniform rotating magnetic
ﬁeld [27.137].
In principle, for forward and backward motion, the
ABF acts as a corkscrew to convert rotary motion to
linear motion as shown in Fig. 27.12b. Figure 27.12c
shows a left-handed ABF swim controlled by coil pairs.
It can be seen in Fig. 27.12c that the ABF swim forward
until the 10th second by rotating the magnet ﬁeld clock-
wise (CW). In contrast to a left-handed ABF, when the
same ﬁeld is applied to a right-handed ABF, though
it rotates in the same direction as left-handed one, the
swimming direction will be opposite. The magnetic
torque for rotation is generated by the thin head at-
tempting to align with the applied ﬁeld, and torque for
steering is generated by the diagonal axis of the square
head attempting to align with the applied ﬁeld, since
the diagonal axis is the easy magnetization axis of thin
square plates in weak applied ﬁelds. Thus, to steer the
ABFs in water, two more parameters were applied, i. e.,

Part B | 27.8
692
Part B
Design
yaw () and pitch ('), for the turning and tilting of the
ABF.
The velocity of ABF is investigated as a function of
magnetic ﬁeld strength and rotation frequency in water
(Fig. 27.12d. A 45 m long ABF is used for the tests
with three different ﬁeld strengths: 1:0 mT, 1:5 mT and
2:0 mT. The ﬁeld’s rotational frequency is increased
from 5 Hz to 35 Hz. The results show that at low fre-
quency the swimmer’s rotation is synchronized with the
applied ﬁeld, and ABF velocity increases linearly with
frequency, as expected in the low-Reynolds-number
regime [27.131]. After reaching a maximum value, the
velocity reduces and becomes less deterministic with
increasing ﬁeld frequency, since the available magnetic
torque is no longer sufﬁcient to keep the swimmer
synchronized with the applied ﬁeld. The ﬂuctuations
in the curves are attributed to unmodeled boundary
conditions, such as wall effects and intermolecular in-
teractions of the ABF with the substrate. The maximum
velocity we have achieved is 18 m=s, which is com-
parable to bacteria, such as Escherichia coli [27.138],
which swim by rotating their ﬂagella with a frequency
of about 100 Hz at room temperature. The results also
indicate that by exerting a stronger magnetic torque on
the ABF, higher driving frequencies can be achieved
resulting in higher linear velocity. By extrapolating ex-
perimental results, if a frequency of 100 Hz can be
achieved, the resulting swimming speed of ABFs may
be beyond bacteria swimming speeds.
Self-propelled devices such as these are of inter-
est in fundamental research and biomedical applications
for mimicking and understanding natural organisms, for
signaling inter- or intra-cellular information, for manip-
ulating cellular or sub-cellular objects, and for targeted
drug delivery. In contrast to bacteria that are propelled
by nature ﬂagella and move somewhat randomly in
liquid, ABF motion can be precisely controlled by
magnetic ﬁelds. ABFs can be used as a test bed for
understanding the swimming behavior of bacteria and
other swimming microorganisms, and can potentially
be used for targeted drug delivery and as wireless ma-
nipulators for medical and biological applications.
27.8 Nanorobotics
Nanorobotics represents the next stage in miniaturiza-
tion for maneuvering nanoscale objects. Nanorobotics
is the study of robotics at the nanometer scale,
and includes robots that are nanoscale in size, i. e.,
nanorobots, and large robots capable of manipulating
objects that have dimensions in the nanoscale range
with nanometer resolution, i. e., nanorobotic manip-
ulators. Robotic manipulation at nanometer scales is
a promising technology for structuring, characteriz-
ing, and assembling nanoscale building blocks into
NEMS. Combined with recently developed nanofab-
rication processes, a hybrid approach is realized to
build NEMS and other nanorobotic devices from indi-
vidual carbon nanotubes and SiGe/Si nanocoils. Mate-
rial science, biotechnology, electronics, and mechanical
sensing and actuation will beneﬁt from advances in
nanorobotics.
27.8.1 Introduction
Nanomanipulation, or positional and/or force control
at the nanometer scale, is a key enabling technol-
ogy for nanotechnology by ﬁlling the gap between
top-down and bottom-up strategies, and may lead to
the appearance of replication-based molecular assem-
blers [27.18]. These types of assemblers have been
proposed as general-purpose manufacturing devices for
building a wide range of useful products as well as
copies of themselves (self-replication).
Presently, nanomanipulation can be applied to the
scientiﬁc exploration of mesoscopic physical phenom-
ena, biology, and the construction of prototype nan-
odevices. It is a fundamental technology for prop-
erty characterization of nanomaterials, nanostructures,
and nanomechanisms, for the preparation of nanoscale
building blocks, and for the assembly of nanodevices
such as NEMS.
Nanomanipulation was enabled by the inventions
of the STM [27.19], AFMs [27.44], and other types
of scanning probe microscopes (SPMs). Besides these,
optical tweezers (laser trapping) [27.139] and mag-
netic tweezers [27.140] are also potential nanomanip-
ulators. Nanorobotic manipulators (NRMs) [27.141,
142] are characterized by the capability of 3-D po-
sitioning, orientation control, independently actuated
multiple end-effectors, and independent real-time ob-
servation systems, and can be integrated with scanning
probe microscopes. NRMs largely extend the complex-
ity of nanomanipulation.
A concise comparison of STM, AFM, and NRM
technology is shown in Fig. 27.13. With its incom-
parable imaging resolution, an STM can be applied
to particles as small as atoms with atomic resolution.
However, limited by its 2-D positioning and available
strategies for manipulations, standard STMs are ill-
suited for complex manipulation and cannot be used
in 3-D space. An AFM is another important type
of nanomanipulator. Manipulation with an AFM can

Micro-/Nanorobots
27.8 Nanorobotics
693
Part B | 27.8
be done in either contact or dynamic mode. Gen-
erally, manipulation with an AFM involves moving
an object by touching it with a tip. A typical ma-
nipulation starts by imaging a particle in noncontact
mode, then removing the tip oscillation voltage and
sweeping the tip across the particle in contact with
the surface and with the feedback disabled. Mechan-
ical pushing can exert larger forces on objects and,
hence, can be applied for the manipulation of relatively
larger objects. 1- to 3-D objects can be manipulated
on a 2-D substrate. However, the manipulation of in-
dividual atoms with an AFM remains a challenge.
By separating the imaging and manipulation func-
tions, nanorobotic manipulators can have many more
degrees of freedom including rotation for orientation
control, and hence can be used for the manipulation
of 0-D (symmetric spheres) to 3-D objects in 3-D
free space. Limited by the lower resolution of elec-
tron microscopes, NRMs are difﬁcult to use for the
manipulation of atoms. However, their general robotic
capabilities, including 3-D positioning, orientation con-
trol, independently actuated multiple endeffectors, sep-
arate real-time observation system, and integration with
SPMs inside, make NRMs quite promising for complex
nanomanipulation.
The ﬁrst nanomanipulation experiment was per-
formed by Eigler and Schweizer in 1990 [27.143]. They
used an STM and materials at low temperatures (4 K)
to position individual xenon atoms on a single-crystal
nickel surface with atomic precision. The manipula-
tion enabled them to fabricate rudimentary structures
of their own design, atom by atom. The result is the fa-
mous set of images showing how 35 atoms were moved
to form the three-letter logo IBM, demonstrating that
matter could indeed be maneuvered atom by atom as
Feynman suggested [27.1].
A nanomanipulation system generally includes
nanomanipulators as the positioning device, micro-
scopes as eyes, various end-effectors including probes
and tweezers among others as its ﬁngers, and various
types of sensors (force, displacement, tactile, strain,
etc.) to facilitate the manipulation and/or to determine
the properties of the objects. Key technologies for
nanomanipulation include observation, actuation, mea-
surement, system design and fabrication, calibration
and control, communication, and the human–machine
interface.
Strategies for nanomanipulation are basically deter-
mined by the environment – air, liquid or vacuum –
which is further decided by the properties and size
of the objects and observation methods. Figure 27.14
depicts the microscopes, environments, and strategies
of nanomanipulation. In order to observe manipulated
objects, STMs can provide sub-Ångström imaging res-
NRM
AFM
100
10
1
0.1
Resolution of
manipulation 
        (nm)
Medium
Low
High
Complexity of
manipulation
Scale of objects (nm)
100
10
1
0.1
STM
Fig. 27.13 Comparison of nanomanipulators
0.1nm
2-D
manipulation
Non-contact
manipulation
3-D
manipulation
1nm
10nm
AFM ( 3-D observation)
STM ( 3-D observation)
SEM/TEM ( 2-D real-time observation)
SNOM ( 2-D ob.)
OM ( 2-D ob.)
100nm
1μm
100μm
Vacuum
Air
Liquid
Contact manipulation
Non-contact manipulation
Scale
Fig. 27.14 Microscopes, environments, and strategies of
nanomanipulation
olution, whereas AFMs can provide atomic resolutions.
Both can obtain 3-D surface topology. Because AFMs
can be used in an ambient environment, they provide
a powerful tool for biomanipulation that may require
a liquid environment. The resolution of SEM is limited
to about 1 nm, whereas ﬁeld-emission SEM (FESEM)
can achieve higher resolutions. SEM/FESEM can be
used for real-time 2-D observation for both the objects
and end-effectors of manipulators, and large ultrahigh-
vacuum (UHV) sample chambers provide enough space
to contain an NRM with many degrees of freedom

Part B | 27.8
694
Part B
Design
(DOFs) for 3-D nanomanipulation. However, the 2-D
nature of the observation makes positioning along the
electron-beam direction difﬁcult. High-resolution trans-
mission electron microscopes (HRTEM) can provide
atomic resolution. However, the narrow UHV specimen
chamber makes it difﬁcult to incorporate large manipu-
lators. In principle, optical microscopes (OMs) cannot
be used for nanoscale (smaller than the wavelength of
visible lights) observation because of diffraction limits.
Scanning near-ﬁeld OMs (SNOMs) break this limi-
tation and are promising as a real-time observation
device for nanomanipulation, especially for ambient en-
vironments. SNOMs can be combined with AFMs, and
potentially with NRMs for nanoscale biomanipulation.
Tip
Substrate
A
a)
A'
B
1
2
3
1'
Tip
Tip
Substrate
Substrate
Substrate
A'
B'
B'
B
C
D
C
Tip
Tip
Tip
Substrate
A
b)
A'
B
1
3
1'
Substrate
Substrate
Substrate
A'
B'
B'
2
Tip
Tip
B
C
D
C
Tip
Tip
Tip
Substrate
A
c)
A'
B'
B
B
B'
1
3, 3'
4, 4'
5
2,2'
Tip
Tip
Substrate
Substrate
Substrate
C'
D'
1'
E'
E'
C
D
E
F
E
Tip
Tip
Fig.27.15a–c Basic strategies of nanomanipulation. In the ﬁgure,
A, B, C,...represent the positions of end-effector (e.g., a tip); A0,
B0, C0,. ..the positions of objects; 1, 2, 3,. . . the motions of end-
effector; and 10, 20, 30,... the motions of objects. Tweezers can be
used in pick-and-place to facilitate the picking-up, but are gen-
erally not necessarily helpful for placing. (a) Lateral noncontact
nanomanipulation (sliding). (b) Lateral contact nanomanipulation
(pushing/pulling). (c) Vertical nanomanipulation (picking and plac-
ing)
Nanomanipulation processes can be broadly classi-
ﬁed into three types:
1. Lateral noncontact
2. Lateral contact
3. Vertical manipulation.
Generally, lateral noncontact nanomanipulation is
mainly applied for atoms and molecules in UHV with
an STM or bio-object in liquid using optical or mag-
netic tweezers. Contact nanomanipulation can be used
in almost any environment, generally with an AFM, but
is difﬁcult for atomic manipulation. Vertical manipula-
tion can be performed by NRMs. Figure 27.15 shows
the processes of the three basic strategies.
Motion of the lateral noncontact manipulation
processes is shown in Fig. 27.15a. Applicable ef-
fects [27.144] able to cause the motion include long-
range van der Waals (vdW) forces (attractive) generated
by the proximity of the tip to the sample [27.145],
electric-ﬁeld-induced ﬁelds by the voltage bias be-
tween the tip and the sample [27.146, 147], tunnel-
ing current local heating or inelastic tunneling vibra-
tion [27.148, 149]. With these methods, some nanode-
vices and molecules have been assembled [27.150,
151]. Laser trapping (optical tweezers) and magnetic
tweezers are possible for noncontact manipulation of
nanoscale biosamples, e.g., DNA [27.152, 153].
Noncontact manipulation combined with STMs has
revealed many possible strategies for manipulating
atoms and molecules. However, for the manipulation
of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) no examples have been
demonstrated.
Pushing or pulling nanometer objects on a sur-
face with an AFM is a typical manipulation using this
method as shown in Fig. 27.15b. Early work showed
the effectiveness of this method for the manipulation of
nanoparticles [27.154–158]. This method has also been
shown in nanoconstruction [27.159] and biomanipula-
tion [27.160]. A virtual-reality interface facilitates such
manipulation [27.161–163] and may create an opportu-
nity for other types of manipulation. This technique has
been used in the manipulation of nanotubes on a sur-
face, and some examples will be introduced later in this
chapter.
The pick-and-place task as shown in Fig. 27.15c is
especially signiﬁcant for 3-D nanomanipulation since
its main purpose is to assemble prefabricated building
blocks into devices. The main difﬁculty is in achiev-
ing sufﬁcient control of the interaction between the tool
and object and between the object and the substrate.
Two strategies have been presented for micromanip-
ulation [27.164] and have also proven to be effective
for nanomanipulation [27.142]. One strategy is to apply

Micro-/Nanorobots
27.8 Nanorobotics
695
Part B | 27.8
a dielectrophoretic force between a tool and an object
as a controllable additional external force by applying
a bias between the tool and the substrate on which the
object is placed. Another strategy is to modify the van
der Waals and other intermolecular and surface forces
between the object and the substrate. For the former,
an AFM cantilever is ideal as one electrode to generate
a nonuniform electrical ﬁeld between the cantilever and
the substrate.
27.8.2 Nanorobotic Manipulation Systems
Nanorobotic manipulators are the core components of
nanorobotic manipulation systems. The basic require-
ments for a nanorobotic manipulation system for 3-D
manipulation include nanoscale positioning resolution,
a relative large working space, enough DOFs includ-
Y X
Z
Y
Z
B
C
a)
b)
MM3A
c) Kinematic model
q2
q1
p3
X
Z
A
C
q2
q1
p3
Installation
Fig. 27.16 (a)
Nanomanipulator
MM3A
from
Klein-
diek (b) inside an SEM (c) kinematic model
Table 27.4 Speciﬁcations of MM3A
Item
Speciﬁcation
Operating range q1 and q2
240ı
Operating range Z
12 mm
Resolution A (horiz.)
107 rad (5 nm)
Resolution B (vert.)
107 rad (3:5 nm)
Resolution C (linear)
0:25 nm
Fine (scan) range A
20 m
Fine (scan) range B
15 m
Fine (scan) range C
1 m
Speed A, B
10 mm=s
Speed C
2 mm=s
ing rotational ones for 3-D positioning and orientation
control of the end-effectors, and usually multiple end
effectors for complex operations.
A
commercially
available
nanomanipulator
(MM3A from Kleindiek) installed inside an SEM (Carl
Zeiss DSM962) is shown in Fig. 27.16. The manip-
ulator has three degrees of freedom, and nanometer-
to subnanometer-scale resolution (Table 27.4). Calcu-
lations show that when moving/scanning in the A/B
direction at joint q1=q2, the additional linear motion
in C is very small. For example, when the arm length
is 50 mm, the additional motion in the C direction is
only 0:25 nm to 1 nm when moving 5–10 m; in the
A direction; these errors can be ignored or compensated
with an additional motion of the prismatic joint p3,
which has a 0:25 nm resolution.
Figure 27.17a shows a nanorobotic manipulation
system that has 16 DOFs in total and can be equipped
with three or four AFM cantilevers as end-effectors for
both manipulation and measurement. The positioning
resolution is sub-nanometer and strokes are on the order
Z
Y
X
a)
b)
1cm
Nano fabrication system
Nano instrumentation system
Nanorobotic manipulation system
Fig.27.17a,b Nanorobotic system. (a) Nanorobotic manip-
ulators. (b) System setup

Part B | 27.8
696
Part B
Design
of centimeters. The manipulation system is not only for
nanomanipulation, but also for nanoassembly, nanoin-
strumentation, and nanofabrication. Four-probe semi-
conductor measurements are perhaps the most complex
manipulation that this system can perform, because it is
necessary to actuate four probes independently by using
four manipulators. With the advancement of nanotech-
nology, one could shrink the size of nanomanipulators
and insert more DOFs inside the limited vacuum cham-
ber of a microscope, and perhaps the molecular version
of manipulators such as that dreamed of by Drexler
could be realized [27.18].
For the construction of multi-walled carbon nan-
otube (MWNT)-based nanostructures, manipulators
position and orient nanotubes for the fabrication
of nanotube probes and emitters, for performing
nanosoldering with electron-beam-induced deposition
(EBID) [27.165], for the property characterization of
single nanotubes for selection purposes and for char-
acterizing junctions to test connection strength.
A nanolaboratory is shown in Fig. 27.17b. The
nanolaboratory integrates a nanorobotic manipulation
system with a nanoanalytical system and a nanofab-
rication system, and can be applied for manipulating
nanomaterials, fabricating nanoscale building blocks,
assembling nanodevices, and for in situ analysis of
the properties of such materials, building blocks, and
devices. Nanorobotic manipulation within the nanolab-
oratory has opened a new path for constructing
nanosystems in 3-D space, and will create opportuni-
ties for new nanoinstrumentation and nanofabrication
processes.
27.8.3 Nanorobotic Manipulation
and Assembly
Nanomanipulation is a promising strategy for nano-
assembly. Key techniques for nanoassembly include the
structuring and characterization of nanoscale building
blocks, the positioning and orientation control of the
building blocks with nanoscale resolution, and effec-
tive connection techniques. Nanorobotic manipulation,
which is characterized by multiple DOFs with both po-
sition and orientation controls, independently actuated
multiprobes, and a real-time observation system, have
been shown effective for assembling nanotube-based
devices in 3-D space.
The well-deﬁned geometries, exceptional mechan-
ical properties, and extraordinary electric characteris-
tics, among other outstanding physical properties of
CNTs [27.166] qualify them for many potential appli-
cations, especially in nanoelectronics [27.167], NEMS,
and other nanodevices [27.168]. For NEMS, some
of the most important characteristics of nanotubes
include their nanometer diameter, large aspect ratio
(101000), TPa-scale Young’s modulus [27.169–171],
excellent elasticity [27.141], ultralow interlayer fric-
tion, excellent capability for ﬁeld emission, various
electric conductivities [27.172], high thermal conduc-
tivity [27.173], high current-carrying capability with
essentially no heating [27.174], sensitivity of conduc-
tance to various physical or chemical changes, and
charge-induced bond-length change.
Helical 3-D nanostructures, or nanocoils, have
been synthesized from various materials, including
helical carbon nanotubes [27.175] and zinc oxide
nanobelts [27.176]. A new method of creating struc-
tures with nanoscale dimensions has recently been pre-
sented [27.177] and can be fabricated in a controllable
way [27.178, 179]. The structures are created through
a top-down fabrication process in which a strained
nanometer-thick heteroepitaxial bilayer curls up to form
3-D structures with nanoscale features. Helical ge-
ometries and tubes with diameters between 10 nm and
10 m have been achieved. Because of their inter-
esting morphology, mechanical, electrical, and elec-
tromagnetic properties, potential applications of these
nanostructures in NEMS include nanosprings [27.180],
electromechanical sensors [27.181], magnetic ﬁeld de-
tectors, chemical or biological sensors, generators
of magnetic beams, inductors, actuators, and high-
performance electromagnetic wave absorbers.
NEMS based on individual carbon nanotubes
and nanocoils are of increasing interest, indicating
that capabilities for incorporating these individual
building blocks at speciﬁc locations on a device
must be developed. Random spreading [27.182], di-
rect growth [27.183], self-assembly [27.184], dielec-
trophoretic assembly [27.185, 186], and nanomanipula-
tion [27.187] have been demonstrated for positioning
as-grown nanotubes on electrodes for the construction
of these devices. However, for nanotube-based struc-
tures, nanorobotic assembly is still the only technique
capable of in situ structuring, characterization, and as-
sembly. Because the as-fabricated nanocoils are not
free-standing from their substrate, nanorobotic assem-
bly is virtually the only way to incorporate them into
devices at present.
Nanorobotic Assembly of Carbon Nanotubes
Nanotube manipulation in two dimensions on a sur-
face was ﬁrst performed with an AFM by contact
pushing on a substrate. Figure 27.18 shows the typi-
cal methods for 2-D pushing. Although similar to that
shown in Fig. 27.15b, the same manipulation caused
various results because nanotubes cannot be regarded
as a 0-D point. The ﬁrst demonstration was given by
Wong et al. for measuring the mechanical properties of

Micro-/Nanorobots
27.8 Nanorobotics
697
Part B | 27.8
a nanotube [27.188]. They adopt the method shown
in Fig. 27.18b, i. e., to bend a nanotube by pushing
one end of it and ﬁxing the other end. The same strat-
egy was used for the investigation of the behavior of
nanotubes under large strain [27.189]. Postma et al.
applied the strategies shown in Fig. 27.18c,d to ob-
tain a kinked junction and crossed nanotubes [27.190].
Hertel et al. combined this technique with an inverse
process, namely straightening by pushing along a bent
tube, and realized the translation of the tube to an-
other location [27.191] and between two electrodes
to measure the conductivity [27.192]. This technique
was also used to place a tube on another tube to
form a single-electron transistor (SET) with a cross-
junction of nanotubes [27.193]. Pushing-induced break-
ing (Fig. 27.18d) has also been demonstrated for a nan-
otube [27.191]. The simple assembly of two bent tubes
and a straight one formed a Greek letter . To investi-
gate the dynamics of rolling at the atomic level, rolling
and sliding of a nanotube (as shown in Fig. 27.18e,f) are
performed on graphite surfaces using an AFM [27.194].
Besides pushing and pulling, another important process
is indentation. By indenting a surface, mechanical prop-
erty characterization [27.195] and data storage [27.196]
can be realized.
Manipulation of CNTs in 3-D space is important
for assembling CNTs into structures and devices. Basic
techniques for the nanorobotic manipulation of car-
bon nanotubes are shown in Fig. 27.19 [27.197]. These
serve as the basis for handling, structuring, characteriz-
ing, and assembling NEMS.
The basic procedure is to pick up a single tube
from nanotube soot (Fig. 27.19a). This has been
shown ﬁrst by using dielectrophoresis [27.142] through
nanorobotic manipulation (Fig. 27.19b). By applying
a bias between a sharp tip and a plane substrate,
a nonuniform electric ﬁeld can be generated between
the tip and the substrate with the strongest ﬁeld near the
tip. This ﬁeld can cause a tube to orient along the ﬁeld
or further jump to the tip by electrophoresis or dielec-
trophoresis (determined by the conductivity of objective
tubes). Removing the bias, the tube can be placed at
other locations at will. This method can be used for
free-standing tubes on nanotube soot or on a rough
surface on which surface van der Waals forces are gen-
erally weak. A tube strongly rooted in CNT soot or
lying on a ﬂat surface cannot be picked up in this way.
The interaction between a tube and the atomic ﬂat sur-
face of AFM cantilever tip has been shown to be strong
enough for picking up a tube onto the tip [27.198]
(Fig. 27.19c). By using EBID, it is possible to pick up
and ﬁx a nanotube onto a probe [27.199] (Fig. 27.19d).
For handling a tube, weak connection between the tube
and the probe is desired.
a)
Substrate
Probe
b)
Substrate
Probe
c)
Substrate
Probe
d)
Substrate
Probe
e)
Substrate
Probe
f)
Substrate
Probe
Fig.27.18a–f Two-dimensional manipulation of CNTs. Starting
from the original state shown in (a), pushing the tube at different
site with different force may cause the tube to deform as in (b) and
(c), to break as in (d), or to move as in (e) and (f). (a) Original state.
(b) Bending. (c) Kinking. (d) Breaking. (e) Rolling. (f) Sliding
Bending and
buckling a
CNT
as
shown
in
Fig. 27.19e,f are important for in situ property char-
acterization of a nanotube [27.200], which is a simple
way to obtain the Young’s modulus of a nanotube
without damaging the tube (if performed within its
elastic range) and hence can be used for the selec-
tion of a tube with desired properties. By buckling an
MWNT over its elastic limit, a kinked structure can
be obtained [27.201]. To obtain any desired angle for
a kinked junction it is possible to ﬁx the shape of
a buckled nanotube within its elastic limit by using
EBID [27.202]. For a CNT, the maximum angular dis-
placement will appear at the ﬁxed left end under pure
bending or at the middle point under pure buckling.
A combination of these two kinds of loads will achieve
a controllable position of the kinked point and a desired
kink angle. If the deformation is within the elastic limit
of the nanotube, it will recover as the load is released.
To avoid this, EBID can be applied at the kinked point
to ﬁx the shape.
Stretching a nanotube between two probes or
a probe and a substrate has generated several interest-
ing results (Fig. 27.19g). The ﬁrst demonstration of 3-D
nanomanipulation of nanotubes took this as an exam-
ple to show the breaking mechanism and to measure
the tensile strength of CNTs [27.141]. By breaking an
MWNT in a controlled manner, interesting nanodevices
have been fabricated. This technique – destructive fab-
rication – has been presented to get sharpened and lay-

Part B | 27.8
698
Part B
Design
Substrate
Probe
Substrate
Probe
Probe
Probe
Substrate
Probe
Substrate
Substrate
Substrate
Probe
Probe
Probe
Substrate
Substrate
e) Bending
f) Buckling
g) Stretching/Breaking
h) Connecting/Bonding
a) Original state
b) Picking up by dielectron-
phoresis
c) Picking up by vdW forces
d) Picking up by EBID
CNTs
CNT
soot
100 nm
100 nm
100 nm
10 nm
1 μm
1 μm
1 μm
1 μm
Fig.27.19a–h Nanorobotic manipulation of CNTs. The basic technique is to pick up an individual tube from CNT soot
(as in (a)) or from an oriented array; (b) shows a free-standing nanotube picked up by dielectrophoresis generated by
a nonuniform electric ﬁeld between the probe and substrate, (c) (after [27.196]) and (d) show the same manipulation by
contacting a tube with the probe surface or ﬁxing (e.g., with EBID) a tube to the tip (inset shows the EBID deposit).
Vertical manipulation of nanotubes includes bending (e), buckling (f), stretching/breaking (g), and connecting/bonding
(h). All examples with the exception of (i) are from the authors’ work
ered structures of nanotubes, and to improve the length
control of a nanotube [27.201]. Typically, a layered and
a sharpened structure can be obtained from this process,
similar to that achieved from electric pulses [27.202].
Bearing motion has also been observed in an incom-
pletely broken MWNT [27.201]. The interlayer friction
has been shown to be very small [27.203, 204].
The reverse process, namely the connection of bro-
ken tubes (Fig. 27.19h), has been demonstrated re-
cently, and the mechanism is revealed as rebonding
of unclosed dangling bonds at the ends of broken
tubes [27.205]. Based on this interesting phenomenon,
mechanochemical nanorobotic assembly has been per-
formed [27.206].
Assembly of nanotubes is a fundamental technol-
ogy for enabling nanodevices. The most important
tasks include the connection of nanotubes and plac-
ing of nanotubes onto electrodes. Pure nanotube cir-
cuits [27.206] created by interconnecting nanotubes of
different diameters and chirality could lead to further
size reductions in devices. Nanotube intermolecular
and intramolecular junctions are basic elements for
such systems [27.207]. Room-temperature (RT) single-
electron transistors (SETs) [27.208] have been shown

Micro-/Nanorobots
27.8 Nanorobotics
699
Part B | 27.8
with a short (
 20 nm) nanotube section that is cre-
ated by inducing local barriers into the tube with an
AFM, and Coulomb charging has been observed. With
a cross-junction of two single-walled carbon nanotubes
(SWNTs) (semiconducting/metallic), three- and four-
terminal electronic devices have been made [27.209].
A suspended cross-junction can function as an elec-
tromechanical nonvolatile memory [27.210].
Although some kinds of junctions have been synthe-
sized with chemical methods, there is no evidence yet
showing that a self-assembly-based approach can pro-
vide more complex structures. SPMs were also used to
fabricate junctions, but they are limited to a 2-D plane.
We have presented 3-D nanorobotic manipulation-
based nanoassembly, which is a promising strategy both
for the fabrication of nanotube junctions and for the
construction of more complex nanodevices with such
junctions as well.
Nanotube junctions can be classiﬁed into differ-
ent types by the kinds of components (SWNTs or
MWNTs), geometric conﬁgurations (V kink, I, X cross,
T, Y branch, and 3-D junctions) conductivity (metallic
or semiconducting), and connection methods (inter-
molecular (connected with van der Waals force, EBID,
etc.) or intramolecular (connected with chemical bonds)
junctions). Here we show the fabrication of several
kinds of MWNT junctions by emphasizing the con-
nection methods. These methods will also be effective
for SWNT junctions. Figure 27.20 shows CNT junc-
tions constructed by connecting with van der Waals
forces (a), joining by electron-beam-induced deposi-
tion (b), and bonding through mechanochemistry (c).
Figure 27.20a shows a T-junction connected with
van der Waals forces, which is fabricated by positioning
the tip of an MWNT onto another MWNT until they
form a bond. The contact is checked by measuring the
shear connection force.
EBID provides a soldering method to obtain
stronger nanotube junctions than those connected
through van der Waals forces. Hence, if the strength
of nanostructures is emphasized, EBID can be applied.
Figure 27.20b shows an MWNT junction connected
through EBID, in which the upper MWNT is a sin-
gle one with 20 nm in diameter and the lower one is
a bundle of MWNTs with an extruded single CNT
with Ø 30 nm. The development of conventional EBID
has been limited by the expensive electron ﬁlament
used and low productivity. We have presented a paral-
lel EBID system by using CNTs as emitters because of
their excellent ﬁeld-emission properties [27.211]. The
feasibility of parallel EBID is presented. It is a promis-
ing strategy for large-scale fabrications of nanotube
junctions. As in its macroscale counterpart, welding,
EBID works by adding materials to obtain stronger
100 nm
R1=14 nm R2=21 nm
L3= 2343 nm
1 μm
MWMT (Ø20 nm)
MWMT (Ø30 nm)
100 nm
Bundle of
MWNTs
EBID
deposit
100 nm
X70 000
Push
X27 000
a)
b)
c)
Fig.27.20a–c MWNT junctions. (a) MWNTs connected with van
der Waals forces. (b) MWNTs joined with EBID. (c) MWNTs
bonded with a mechanochemical reaction
connections, but in some cases, the added material
might inﬂuence normal functions for nanosystems. So,
EBID is mainly applied to nanostructures rather than
nanomechanisms.
To construct stronger junctions without adding ad-
ditional materials, mechanochemical nanorobotic as-
sembly is an important strategy. Mechanochemical
nanorobotic assembly is based on solid-phase chemi-
cal reactions, or mechanosynthesis, which is deﬁned as
chemical synthesis controlled by mechanical systems
operating with atomic-scale precision, enabling direct
positional selection of reaction sites [27.18]. By picking
up atoms with dangling bonds rather than natural atoms
only, it is easier to form primary bonds, which provides
a simple but strong connection. Destructive fabrication
provides a way to form dangling bonds at the ends of
broken tubes. Some of the dangling bonds may close
with neighboring atoms, but generally a few bonds will
remain dangling. A nanotube with dangling bonds at its
end will bind more easily to another to form intramolec-
ular junctions. Figure 27.20c shows such a junction.
Three-dimensional nanorobotic manipulation has
opened a new route for the structuring and assembly
of nanotubes into nanodevices. However, at present
nanomanipulation is still performed in a serial manner
with master–slave control, which is not a large-scale
production-oriented technique. Nevertheless, with ad-
vances in the exploration of mesoscopic physics, better
control on the synthesis of nanotubes, more accurate ac-
tuators, and effective tools for manipulation, high-speed
and automatic nanoassembly will be possible. Another
approach might be parallel assembly by positioning
building blocks with an array of probes [27.212] and

Part B | 27.8
700
Part B
Design
joining them together simultaneously, e.g., with the par-
allel EBID [27.199] we presented. Further steps might
progress towards exponential assembly [27.213], and in
the far future to self-replicating assembly [27.18].
Nanorobotic Assembly of Nanocoils
The construction of nanocoil-based NEMS involves the
assembly of as-grown or as-fabricated nanocoils, which
is a signiﬁcant challenge from a fabrication stand-
point. Focusing on the unique aspects of manipulating
nanocoils due to their helical geometry, high elastic-
ity, single-end ﬁxation, and strong adhesion of the coils
to the substrate from wet etching, a series of new pro-
cesses has been presented using a manipulator (MM3A,
Kleindiek) installed in an SEM (Zeiss DSM962). As-
fabricated SiGe/Si bilayer nanocoils (thickness 20 nm
without Cr layer or 41 nm with Cr layer; diameter D D
3:4 m) are manipulated. Special tools have been fab-
ricated including a nanohook prepared by controlled
tip-crashing of a commercially available tungsten sharp
probe (Picoprobe T-4-10–1 mm and T-4-10) onto a sub-
strate, and a sticky probe prepared by tip dipping into
a double-sided SEM silver conductive tape (Ted Pella,
Inc.). As shown in Fig. 27.21, experiments demon-
F
e)
f)
g)
h)
F
F
F
F
a)
b)
c)
d)
F
F
Fig.27.21a–h Nanorobotic manipulation of nanocoils (a) original state, (b) compressing/releasing, (c) hooking, (d) lateral
pushing/breaking, (e) picking, (f) placing/inserting, (g) bending, and (h) pushing and pulling
strate that nanocoils can be released from a chip by
lateral pushing, picked up with a nanohook or a sticky
probe, and placed between the probe/hook and another
probe or an AFM cantilever (Nano-probe, NP-S). Ax-
ial pulling/pushing, radial compressing/releasing, and
bending/buckling have also been demonstrated. These
processes have shown the effectiveness of manipulation
for the characterization of coil-shaped nanostructures
and their assembly for NEMS, which have been oth-
erwise unavailable.
Conﬁgurations of nanodevices based on individ-
ual nanocoils are shown in Fig. 27.22. Cantilevered
nanocoils as shown in Fig. 27.22a can serve as
nanosprings. Nanoelectromagnets, chemical sensors,
and nanoinductors involve nanocoils bridged between
two electrodes as shown in Fig. 27.22b. Electromechan-
ical sensors can use a similar conﬁguration but with
one end connected to a moveable electrode as shown
in Fig. 27.22c. Mechanical stiffness and electric con-
ductivity are fundamental properties for these devices
that must be further investigated.
As shown in Fig. 27.21h, axial pulling is used to
measure the stiffness of a nanocoil. A series of SEM
images are analyzed to extract the AFM tip displace-

Micro-/Nanorobots
27.8 Nanorobotics
701
Part B | 27.8
ment and the nanospring deformation, i. e., the relative
displacement of the probe from the AFM tip. From this
displacement data and the known stiffness of the AFM
cantilever, the tensile force acting on the nanospring
versus the nanospring deformation was plotted. The de-
formation of the nanospring was measured relative to
the ﬁrst measurement point. This was necessary be-
cause the proper attachment of the nanospring to the
AFM cantilever must be veriﬁed. Afterwards, it was not
possible to return to the point of zero deformation. In-
stead, the experimental data as presented in Fig. 27.22d
has been shifted such that with the calculated linear
elastic spring stiffness the line begins at zero force and
zero deformation. From Fig. 27.22d, the stiffness of the
spring was estimated to be 0:0233 N=m. The linear elas-
tic region of the nanospring extends to a deformation
of 4:5 m. An exponential approximation was ﬁtted to
the nonlinear region. When the applied force reached
0:176 N, the attachment between the nanospring and
the AFM cantilever broke. Finite-element simulation
(ANSYS 9.0) was used to validate the experimental
data [27.181]. Since the exact region of attachment can-
not be identiﬁed from the SEM images, simulations
were conducted for 4, 4.5, and 5 turns to estimate the
possible range according to the apparent number of
turns of the nanospring. The nanosprings in the sim-
0
0
Deformation (μm)
Linear deformation
Nonlinear deformation
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
Force (μN)
6
1
2
3
4
5
F = 0.018 e0.3886d
Linear curve fit
Exponential curve fit
0
0
Voltage (V)
0.16
Current (mA)
10
d) Stiffness characterization of nanocoils
e) I–V curve of a 11turn nanocoil
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
2
4
6
8
a) Cantilevered
b) Bridged (fixed)
c)
Bridged (moveable)
Electrodes
Support
Electrodes
F = 0.0233 d
Fig.27.22a–e Nanocoil-based devices. Cantilevered nanocoils (a) can serve as nanosprings. Nanoelectromagnets, chem-
ical sensors, and nanoinductors involve nanocoils bridged between two electrodes (b). Electromechanical sensors can
use a similar conﬁguration but with one end connected to a moveable electrode (c). Mechanical stiffness (d) and electric
conductivity (e) are basic properties of interest for these devices
ulations were ﬁxed at one end and had an axial load
of 0.106N applied at the other end. The simulation
results for the spring with four turns yield a stiffness
of 0:0302N=m; for the nanospring with 5 turns it is
0:0191 N=m. The measured stiffness falls within this
range with 22.0% above the minimum value and 22.8%
below the maximum value, and very close to the stiff-
ness of a 4.5-turn nanospring, which has a stiffness of
0:0230 N=m according to the simulation.
Figure 27.22e shows the results from electrical char-
acterization experiments on a nanospring with 11 turns
using the conﬁguration shown in Fig. 27.21g. The I–
V curve is nonlinear, which may be caused by the
resistance change of the semiconductive bilayer due
to ohmic heating. Another possible reason is the de-
crease in contact resistance caused by thermal stress.
The maximum current was found to be 0:159 mA un-
der an 8:8 V bias. Higher voltage causes the nanospring
to blow off. From the fast scanning screen of the SEM,
an extension of the nanospring on probes was observed
around the peak current so that the current does not drop
abruptly. At 9:4 V, the extended nanospring is broken
down, causing an abrupt drop in the I–V curve.
From fabrication and characterization results, the
helical nanostructures appear to be suitable to function
as inductors. They would allow further miniaturization

Part B | 27.8
702
Part B
Design
compared to state-of-the-art microinductors. For this
purpose, higher doping of the bilayer and an additional
metal layer would result in the required conductance.
Conductance, inductance, and quality factor can be
further improved if, after curling up, additional metal
is electroplated onto the helical structures. Moreover,
a semiconductive helical structure, when functional-
ized with binding molecules, can be used for chemi-
cal sensing under the same principle as demonstrated
with other types of nanostructures. With bilayers in
the range of a few monolayers, the resulting struc-
tures would exhibit very high surface-to-volume ra-
tio with the whole surface exposed to an incoming
analyst.
27.8.4 Nanorobotic Systems
Nanorobotic devices involve tools, sensors, and actua-
tors at the nanometer scale. Shrinking device size makes
it possible to manipulate nanosized objects with nano-
sized tools, measure mass in femtogram ranges, sense
Support/Cathode
Electrodes
Support/Cathode
CNT
Support/Cathode
MWNT
a) Cantileverd
Bridged
c) Opened
d) Telescoping
e) Parallel
f) Crossed
g) Vertical array
h) Lateral array
Electrode
Electrode
CNT
CNT
CNTs
Electrode(s)
CNT
CNT
CNT
CNT
Electrode
Electrode
1 μm
1 μm
100 nm
100 nm
1 μm
20 μm
b)
CNTs
Electrode(s)
Electrode(s)
Fig.27.23a–h Conﬁgurations of individual nanotube-based NEMS. Scale bars: (a) 1 m (inset: 100 nm), (b) 200 nm, (c)
1 m, (d) 100 nm, (e) and (f) 1 m, (g) 20 m, and (h) 300 nm. All examples are from the authors’ work
force at piconewton scales, and induce GHz motion,
among other amazing advancements.
Top-down and bottom-up strategies for manufactur-
ing such nanodevices have been independently investi-
gated by a variety of researchers. Top-down strategies
are based on nanofabrication and include technologies
such as nanolithography, nanoimprinting, and chemical
etching. Presently, these are 2-D fabrication processes
with relatively low resolution. Bottom-up strategies are
assembly-based techniques. At present, these strate-
gies include such techniques as self-assembly, dip-pen
lithography, and directed self-assembly. These tech-
niques can generate regular nanopatterns at large scales.
With the ability to position and orient nanoscale objects,
nanorobotic manipulation is an enabling technology for
structuring, characterizing and assembling many types
of nanosystems [27.197]. By combining bottom-up and
top-down processes, a hybrid nanorobotic approach
based on nanorobotic manipulation provides a third way
to fabricate NEMS by structuring as-grown nanoma-
terials or nanostructures. This new nanomanufacturing

Micro-/Nanorobots
27.8 Nanorobotics
703
Part B | 27.8
Mesoscopic physics
Mesoscopic chemistry
Molecular biology
Scaling laws
Microscopy
Self-assembly
Nano fabrication
Manipulation
Instrumentation
Fabrication
Assembly
Nano biotechnology
Structures
Tools
Sensors
Actuators
Nano material synthesis
Nanoscience
Nano technology
Nano engineering
Nanorobotic systems
Nanorobotic
manipulation
Nanorobotic systems
3-D: Nanotubes, nanohelixes,
 
molecular machines ...
2-D: Nanofilms, nanobelts ...
1-D: Nanowires ...
0-D: Fullerenes, QDs ...
NEMS
Fig. 27.24 A roadmap for nanorobotic
systems
technique can be used to create complex 3-D nanode-
vices with such building blocks. Nanomaterial science,
bio-nanotechnology, and nanoelectronics will also ben-
eﬁt from advances in nanorobotic assembly.
The conﬁgurations of nanotools, sensors, and ac-
tuators based on individual nanotubes that have been
experimentally demonstrated are summarized as shown
in Fig. 27.23.
For detecting deep and narrow features on a surface,
cantilevered nanotubes (Fig. 27.23a, [27.199]) have
been demonstrated as probe tips for an AFM [27.206],
a STM, and other types of SPM. Nanotubes provide
ultrasmall diameters, ultralarge aspect ratios, and excel-
lent mechanical properties. Manual assembly [27.214],
and direct growth [27.215] have proven effective for
their construction. Cantilevered nanotubes have also
been demonstrated as probes for the measurement
of ultrasmall physical quantities, such as femtogram
masses [27.170], piconewton-order force sensors, and
mass ﬂow sensors [27.197] on the basis of their
static deﬂections or change of resonant frequencies
detected within an electron microscope. Deﬂections
cannot be measured from micrographs in real time,
which limits the application of this kind of sensor.
Interelectrode distance changes cause emission cur-
rent variation of a nanotube emitter and may serve as
a candidate to replace microscope images. Bridged in-
dividual nanotubes (Fig. 27.23b, [27.185]) have been
the basis for electric characterization. Opened nan-
otubes (Fig. 27.23c, [27.216]) can serve as atomic or
molecular containers, thermometers [27.217], or spot
welders [27.218]. The electrostatic deﬂection of a nan-
otube has been used to construct a relay [27.219].
A new family of nanotube actuators can be constructed
by taking advantage of the ultralow interlayer friction of
a multiwalled nanotubes. Linear bearings based on tele-
scoping nanotubes and a microactuator with a nanotube
as a rotation bearing have been demonstrated [27.203,
220], and batch fabrication has been realized based on
dielectrophoretically assembled arrays [27.221]. A pre-
liminary experiment on a promising nanotube linear
motor with ﬁeld-emission current serving as posi-
tion feedback has been shown with nanorobotic ma-
nipulation (Fig. 27.23d, [27.216]). Cantilevered dual
nanotubes have been demonstrated as nanotweez-
ers [27.222] and nanoscissors (Fig. 27.23e) [27.179] by
manual and nanorobotic assembly, respectively. Based
on electric resistance change under different tempera-
tures, nanotube thermal probes (Fig. 27.23f) have been
demonstrated for measuring the temperature at precise
locations. These thermal probes are more advantageous
than nanotube-based thermometers because the latter

Part B | 27
704
Part B
Design
require TEM imaging. The integration of the aforemen-
tioned devices can be realized using the conﬁgurations
shown in Fig. 27.23g,h [27.183]. The arrays of individ-
ual nanotubes can also be used to fabricate nanosensors,
such as position encoders [27.223].
Nanorobotic systems remains a rich research ﬁeld
with a large number of open problems. New materials
such as nanowires, nanobelts, graphene, and polymer
at the nanoscale will enable a new family of sensors
and actuators for the detection and actuation of ultra-
small quantities or objects with ultrahigh precision and
frequencies. Through random spreading, direct growth,
optical tweezers, and nanorobotic manipulation, proto-
types have been demonstrated. However, for integration
into nanosystems, self-assembly processes will become
increasingly important. Among them, we believe that
dielectrophoretic nanoassembly will play a signiﬁcant
role for large-scale production of regular 2-D structures.
A roadmap for nanorobotic systems [27.224]
is shown in Fig. 27.24. Knowledge from meso-
scopic physics, mesoscopic/supramolecular chemistry,
and molecular biology at the nanometer scale con-
verges to form the ﬁeld. Various disciplines con-
tribute to nanorobotics, including nanomaterial syn-
thesis, nanobiotechnology, and microscopy for imag-
ing and characterization. Such topics as self-assembly,
nanorobotic assembly, and hybrid nanomanufacturing
approaches for assembling nano building blocks into
structures, tools, sensors, and actuators are consid-
ered areas of nanorobotic study. A current focus of
nanorobotics is on the fabrication of NEMS and other
nanosystems, which may serve as components for fu-
ture nanorobots. The main goals of nanorobotics are to
provide effective tools for the experimental exploration
of the nanoworld, and to push the boundaries of this ex-
ploration from a robotics research perspective.
27.9 Conclusions
Despite the claims of many futurists, such as Issac
Asimov’s legendary submarine Proteus inside the hu-
man body [27.225] and Robert A. Freitas’s nanomed-
ical robots [27.226], the form that micro/nanorobots
of the future will take and the tasks they will ac-
tually perform remain unclear. However, it is clear
that technology is progressing towards the construc-
tion of intelligent sensors, actuators, and systems on
small scales. These will serve as both the tools to be
used for fabricating future micro/nanorobots as well
as the components from which these robots may be
developed. Shrinking device size to these dimensions
presents many fascinating opportunities such as manip-
ulating nano-objects with nanotools, measuring mass
in femtogram ranges, sensing forces at piconewton
scales, and inducing GHz motion, among other new
possibilities waiting to be discovered. These capabil-
ities will, of course, drive the tasks that future mi-
cro/nanorobots constructed by and with MEMS/NEMS
will perform.
Video-References
VIDEO 11
Artificial bacterial flagella
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/27/videodetails/11
VIDEO 12
The electromagnetic control of an untethered microrobot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/27/videodetails/12
VIDEO 13
A transversely magnetized rod-shaped microrobot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/27/videodetails/13
VIDEO 489
Attogram mass delivery from a carbon nanotube
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/27/videodetails/489
VIDEO 490
Multi-beam bilateral teleoperation of holographic optical tweezers
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/27/videodetails/490
VIDEO 491
High-speed magnetic microrobot actuation in a microfluidic chip by a fine V-groove surface
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/27/videodetails/491
VIDEO 492
Linear-to-rotary motion converters for three-dimensional microscopy
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/27/videodetails/492

Micro-/Nanorobots
References
705
Part B | 27
References
27.1
R.P. Feynman: There’s plenty of room at the bot-
tom, Caltech Eng. Sci. 23, 22–36 (1960)
27.2
R.S. Muller: Microdynamics, Sens. Actuators A
21(1), 1–8 (1990)
27.3
A.M. Flynn, R.A. Brooks, W.M. Wells, D.S. Barrett:
The world’s largest one cubic inch robot, IEEE Mi-
cro Electro Mech. Syst. (MEMS) (1989) pp. 98–101
27.4
W. Trimmer, R. Jebens: Actuators for micro robots,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1989)
pp. 1547–1552
27.5
S. Fatikow, U. Rembold: An automated micro-
robot-based desktop station for micro assembly
and handling of micro-objects, IEEE Conf. Emerg.
Technol. Fact. Autom. (EFTA’96) (1996) pp. 586–
592
27.6
B.J. Nelson, Y. Zhou, B. Vikramaditya: Sensor-
based microassembly of hybrid MEMS devices,
IEEE Control Syst. Mag. 18, 35–45 (1998)
27.7
K.
Suzumori,
T.
Miyagawa,
M.
Kimura,
Y. Hasegawa: Micro inspection robot for 1-in
pipes, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 4, 286–292
(1999)
27.8
M. Takeda: Applications of MEMS to industrial in-
spection, Proc. 14th IEEE Int. Conf. Micro Electro
Mech. Syst. (MEMS) (2001) pp. 182–191
27.9
T. Frank: Two-Axis electrodynamic microposition-
ing devices, J. Micromech. Microeng. 8, 114–118
(1989)
27.10
N. Kawahara, N. Kawahara, T. Suto, T. Hirano,
Y. Ishikawa, T. Kitahara, N. Ooyama, T. Ataka: Mi-
crofactories: New applications of micromachine
technology to the manufacture of small products,
Res. J. Microsyst. Technol. 3, 37–41 (1997)
27.11
Y. Sun, B.J. Nelson: Microrobotic cell injection,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2001)
pp. 620–625
27.12
P. Dario, M.C. Carrozza, L. Lencioni, B. Mag-
nani, S. Dapos Attanasio: A micro robotic system
for colonoscopy, Proc. Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1997) pp. 1567–1572
27.13
F. Tendick, S.S. Sastry, R.S. Fearing, M. Cohn:
Application of micromechatronics in minimally
invasive surgery, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 3,
34–42 (1998)
27.14
G. Iddan, G. Meron, A. Glukhovsky, P. Swain:
Wireless capsule endoscopy, Nature 405, 417
(2000)
27.15
K.B. Yesin, K. Vollmers, B.J. Nelson: Analysis and
design of wireless magnetically guided micro-
robots in body fluids, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 1333–1338
27.16
M.C. Roco, R.S. Williams, P. Alivisatos: Nanotech-
nology Research Directions. Vision for Nanotech-
nology in the Next Decade (Kluwer, Dordrecht
2000)
27.17
M.L. Downey, D.T. Moore, G.R. Bachula, D.M. Etter,
E.F. Carey, L.A. Perine: National Nanotechnology
Initiative: Leading to the Next Industrial Rev-
olution, A Report by the Interagency Working
Group on Nanoscience, Engineering and Technol-
ogy (Committee on Technology, National Science
and Technology Council, Washington 2000)
27.18
K. Drexler: Nanosystems: Molecular Machinery,
Manufacturing and Computation (Wiley, New York
1992)
27.19
G. Binnig, H. Rohrer, C. Gerber, E. Weibel: Surface
studies by scanning tunneling microscopy, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 49, 57–61 (1982)
27.20
W.F. Degrado: Design of peptides and proteins,
Adv. Protein Chem. 39, 51–124 (1998)
27.21
G.M. Whitesides, B. Grzybowski: Self-assembly at
all scales, Science 295, 2418–2421 (2002)
27.22
R. Fearing: Survey of sticking effects for micro-
parts, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Int. Robots Syst.
(1995) pp. 212–217
27.23
E.L.
Wolf:
Nanophysics
and
Nanotechnology
(Wiley-VCH, Weinheim 2004)
27.24
T. Ebefors, G. Stemme: Microrobotics. In: The
MEMS Handbook, ed. by M. Gad-el-Hak (CRC,
Boca Raton 2002)
27.25
C.-J. Kim, A.P. Pisano, R.S. Muller: Silicon-
processed overhanging microgripper, IEEE/ASME
J. Microelectromechanical Syst. 1, 31–36 (1992)
27.26
C. Liu, T. Tsao, Y.-C. Tai, C.-M. Ho: Surface mi-
cromachined magnetic actuators, Proc. 7th IEEE
Int. Conf. Micro Electro Mech. Syst. (MEMS) (1994)
pp. 57–62
27.27
J. Judy, D.L. Polla, W.P. Robbins: A linear piezo-
electric stepper motor with submicron displace-
ment and centimeter travel, IEEE Trans. Ultrason.
Ferroelectr. Freq. Control 37, 428–437 (1990)
27.28
K. Nakamura, H. Ogura, S. Maeda, U. Sangawa,
S. Aoki, T. Sato: Evaluation of the micro wobbler
motor fabricated by concentric build-up process,
Proc. 8th IEEE Int. Conf. Micro Electro Mech. Syst.
(MEMS) (1995) pp. 374–379
27.29
A. Teshigahara, M. Watanabe, N. Kawahara,
I. Ohtsuka, T. Hattori: Performance of a 7-mm
microfabricated car, IEEE/ASME J. Microelectrome-
chanical Syst. 4, 76–80 (1995)
27.30
K.R. Udayakumar, S.F. Bart, A.M. Flynn, J. Chen,
L.S. Tavrow, L.E. Cross, R.A. Brooks, D.J. Ehrlich:
Ferroelectric thin film ultrasonic micromotors,
Proc. 4th IEEE Int. Conf. Micro Electro Mech. Syst.
(MEMS) (1991) pp. 109–113
27.31
P. Dario, R. Valleggi, M.C. Carrozza, M.C. Montesi,
M. Cocco: Review – Microactuators for micro-
robots: A critical survey, J. Micromech. Microeng.
2, 141–157 (1992)
27.32
I. Shimoyama: Scaling in microrobots, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (1995)
pp. 208–211
27.33
R.S. Fearing: Powering 3-dimensional micro-
robots: power density limitations, tutorial on Mi-
cro Mechatronics and Micro Robotics, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1998)
27.34
R.G. Gilbertson, J.D. Busch: A survey of mi-
cro-actuator technologies for future spacecraft
missions, J. Br. Interplanet. Soc. 49, 129–138
(1996)

Part B | 27
706
Part B
Design
27.35
M.
Mehregany,
P.
Nagarkar,
S.D.
Senturia,
J.H. Lang: Operation of microfabricated harmonic
and ordinary side-drive motors, Proc. 3rd IEEE
Int. Conf. Micro Electro Mech. Syst. (MEMS) (1990)
pp. 1–8
27.36
Y.C. Tai, L.S. Fan, R.S. Mulle: IC-processed micro-
motors: design, technology, and testing, Proc.
2nd IEEE Int. Conf. Micro Electro Mech. Syst.
(MEMS) (1989) pp. 1–6
27.37
T. Ohnstein, T. Fukiura, J. Ridley, U. Bonne: Mi-
cromachined silicon microvalve, Proc. 3rd IEEE
Int. Conf. Micro Electro Mech. Syst. (MEMS) (1990)
pp. 95–99
27.38
L.Y. Chen, S.L. Zhang, J.J. Yao, D.C. Thomas,
N.C. MacDonald: Selective chemical vapor depo-
sition of tungsten for microdynamic structures,
Proc. 2nd IEEE Int. Conf. Micro Electro Mech. Syst.
(MEMS) (1989) pp. 82–87
27.39
K. Yanagisawa, H. Kuwano, A. Tago: An elec-
tromagnetically driven microvalve, Proc. 7th Int.
Conf. Solid-State Sens. Actuators (1993) pp. 102–
105
27.40
M. Esashi, S. Shoji, A. Nakano: Normally close mi-
crovalve and micropump fabricated on a silicon
wafer, Proc. 2nd IEEE Int. Conf. Micro Electro Mech.
Syst. (MEMS) (1989) pp. 29–34
27.41
R. Petrucci, K. Simmons: An introduction to
piezoelectric crystals, Sens. J. Appl.Sens. Technol.
11(5), 26–31 (1994)
27.42
J. Goldstein, D. Newbury, D. Joy, C. Lyman,
P. Echlin, E. Lifshin, L. Sawyer, J. Michael: Scan-
ning Electron Microscopy and X-ray Microanalysis
(Kluwer, New York 2003)
27.43
G. Binnig, H. Rohrer: In touch with atoms, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 71, S324–S330 (1999)
27.44
G. Binnig, C.F. Quate, C. Gerber: Atomic force mi-
croscope, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 93–96 (1986)
27.45
M.J. Doktycz, C.J. Sullivan, P.R. Hoyt, D.A. Pel-
letier, S. Wu, D.P. Allison: AFM imaging of bac-
teria in liquid media immobilized on gelatin
coated mica surfaces, Ultramicroscopy 97, 209–
216 (2003)
27.46
S.A. Campbell: The Science and Engineering of Mi-
croelectronic Fabrication (Oxford Univ. Press, New
York 2001)
27.47
C.J. Jaeger: Introduction to Microelectronic Fabri-
cation (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River 2002)
27.48
J.D. Plummer, M.D. Deal, P.B. Griffin: Silicon VLSI
Technology (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River
2000)
27.49
M. Gad-el-Hak (Ed.): The MEMS Handbook (CRC,
Boca Raton 2002)
27.50
T.-R. Hsu: MEMS and Microsystems Design and
Manufacture (McGraw-Hill, New York 2002)
27.51
G.T.A.
Kovacs:
Micromachined
Transducers
Sourcebook (McGraw-Hill, New York 1998)
27.52
G.T.A. Kovacs, N.I. Maluf, K.A. Petersen: Bulk
micromachining of silicon, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (1998) pp. 1536–1551
27.53
P.
Rai-Choudhury
(Ed.):
Handbook
of
Microlithography,
Micromachining
and
Mi-
crofabrication (SPIE, Bellingham 1997)
27.54
S.Y. Chou: Nano-imprint lithography and litho-
graphically induced self-assembly, MRS Bulletin
26, 512–517 (2001)
27.55
M.A. Herman: Molecular Beam Epitaxy: Funda-
mentals and Current Status (Springer, New York
1996)
27.56
J.S. Frood, G.J. Davis, W.T. Tsang: Chemical Beam
Epitaxy and Related Techniques (Wiley, New York
1997)
27.57
S. Mahajan, K.S.S. Harsha: Principles of Growth
and Processing of Semiconductors (McGraw-Hill,
New York 1999)
27.58
C.A. Mirkin: Dip-pen nanolithography: auto-
mated fabrication of custom multicomponent,
sub-100 nanometer surface architectures, MRS
Bulletin 26, 535–538 (2001)
27.59
C.A. Harper: Electronic Packaging and Intercon-
nection Handbook (McGraw-Hill, New York 2000)
27.60
K.F. Bohringer, R.S. Fearing, K.Y. Goldberg: Mi-
croassembly.In: Handbook of Industrial Robotics,
ed. by S. Nof (Wiley, New York 1999) pp. 1045–1066
27.61
G. Yang, J.A. Gaines, B.J. Nelson: A supervisory
wafer-level 3D microassembly system for hybrid
MEMS fabrication, J. Intell. Robotics Syst. 37, 43–
68 (2003)
27.62
P. Dario, M. Carrozza, N. Croce, M. Montesi,
M. Cocco: Non-traditional technologies for mi-
crofabrication, J. Micromech. Microeng. 5, 64–71
(1995)
27.63
W. Benecke: Silicon microactuators: activation
mechanisms and scaling problems, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Solid-State Sens. Actuators (1991) pp. 46–50
27.64
A. Menciassi, A. Eisinberg, M. Mazzoni, P. Dario:
A sensorized electro discharge machined su-
perelastic alloy microgripper for micromanip-
ulation: simulation and characterization, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2002)
pp. 1591–1595
27.65
T.R. Hsu: Packaging design of microsystems and
meso-scale devices, IEEE Trans. Adv. Packag. 23,
596–601 (2000)
27.66
L. Lin: MEMS post-packaging by localized heating
and bonding, IEEE Trans. Adv. Packag. 23, 608–616
(2000)
27.67
A. Tixier, Y. Mita, S. Oshima, J.P. Gouy, H. Fujita:
3-D microsystem packaging for interconnecting
electrical, optical and mechanical microdevices
to the external world, Proc. 13th IEEE Int. Conf.
Micro Electro Mech. Syst. (MEMS) (2000) pp. 698–
703
27.68
M.J. Madou: Fundamentals of Microfabrication
(CRC, Boca Raton 2002)
27.69
I. Shimoyama, O. Kano, H. Miura: 3D micro-
structures folded by Lorentz force, Proc. 11th IEEE
Int. Conf. Micro Electro Mech. Syst. (MEMS) (1998)
pp. 24–28
27.70
K.F. Bohringer, B.R. Donald, L. Kavraki, F.L. Lami-
raux: Part orientation with one or two stable
equilibria using programmable vector fields, IEEE
Trans. Robot. Autom. 16, 157–170 (2000)
27.71
V. Kaajakari, A. Lal: An electrostatic batch assem-
bly of surface MEMS using ultrasonic triboelectric-

Micro-/Nanorobots
References
707
Part B | 27
ity, Proc. 14th IEEE Int. Conf. Micro Electro Mech.
Syst. (MEMS) (2001) pp. 10–13
27.72
G. Yang, B.J. Nelson: Micromanipulation contact
transition control by selective focusing and mi-
croforce control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2003) pp. 3200–3206
27.73
G. Morel, E. Malis, S. Boudet: Impedance based
combination of visual and force control, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1998) pp. 1743–
1748
27.74
F. Arai, D. Andou, T. Fukuda: Adhesion forces re-
duction for micro manipulation based on micro
physics, Proc. 9th IEEE Int. Conf. Micro Electro
Mech. Syst. (MEMS) (1996) pp. 354–359
27.75
Y. Zhou, B.J. Nelson: The effect of material
properties and gripping force on micrograsping,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom (ICRA) (2000)
pp. 1115–1120
27.76
K. Kurata: Mass production techniques for optical
modules, Proc. 48th IEEE Electronic Components
and Technology Conf. (1998) pp. 572–580
27.77
V.T. Portman, B.-Z. Sandler, E. Zahavi: Rigid 6 6
parallel platform for precision 3-D micromanipu-
lation: theory and design application, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 16, 629–643 (2000)
27.78
R.M. Haralick, L.G. Shapiro: Computer and Robot
Vision (Addison-Wesley, Reading 1993)
27.79
A. Khotanzad, H. Banerjee, M.D. Srinath: A vi-
sion system for inspection of ball bonds and
2-D profile of bonding wires in integrated cir-
cuits, IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf. 7, 413–422
(1994)
27.80
J.T.
Feddema,
R.W.
Simon:
CAD-driven
mi-
croassembly and visual servoing, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom (ICRA) (1998), pp. 1212 -1219
27.81
E. Trucco, A. Verri: Introductory Techniques for 3-D
Computer Vision (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River
1998)
27.82
S. Hutchinson, G.D. Hager, P.I. Corke: A tutorial on
visual servo control, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
12, 651–670 (1996)
27.83
B. Siciliano, L. Villani: Robot Force Control (Kluwer,
Dordrecht 2000)
27.84
T. Yoshikawa: Force control of robot manipulators,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom (ICRA) (2000)
pp. 220–226
27.85
J.A. Thompson, R.S. Fearing: Automating mi-
croassembly with ortho-tweezers and force sens-
ing, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2001) pp. 1327–1334
27.86
B.J. Nelson, P.K. Khosla: Force and vision resolv-
ability for assimilating disparate sensory feed-
back, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 12, 714–731
(1996)
27.87
Y. Haddab, N. Chaillet, A. Bourjault: A micro-
gripper using smart piezoelectric actuators, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2000)
pp. 659–664
27.88
D. Popa, B.H. Kang, J. Sin, J. Zou: Reconfigurable
micro-assembly system for photonics applica-
tions, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom (ICRA)
(2002) pp. 1495–1500
27.89
A.P. Lee, D.R. Ciarlo, P.A. Krulevitch, S. Lehew,
J. Trevin, M.A. Northrup: A practical microgrip-
per by fine alignment, eutectic bonding and SMA
actuation, Proc. IEEE Int. conf. Solid-State Sens.
Actuators (1995) pp. 368–371
27.90
H. Seki: Modeling and impedance control of a
piezoelectric bimorph microgripper, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int.
Conf.
Intell.
Robots
Syst.
(IROS)
(1992)
pp. 958–965
27.91
W. Nogimori, K. Irisa, M. Ando, Y. Naruse: A laser-
powered micro-gripper, Proc. 10th IEEE Int. Conf.
Micro Electro Mech. Syst. (MEMS) (1997) pp. 267–271
27.92
S. Fatikow, U. Rembold: Microsystem Technology
and Microrobotics (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
1997)
27.93
T. Hayashi: Micro mechanism, J. Robotics Mechatr.
3, 2–7 (1991)
27.94
S. Johansson: Micromanipulation for micro- and
nanomanufacturing, INRIA/IEEE Symp. Emerging
Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA’95),
Paris (1995) pp. 3–8
27.95
K.-T. Park, M. Esashi: A multilink active catheter
with polyimide-based integrated CMOS interface
circuits, J. Microelectromechanical Syst. 8, 349–
357 (1999)
27.96
Y. Haga, Y. Tanahashi, M. Esashi: Small diam-
eter active catheter using shape memory alloy,
Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Workshop on Micro Electro
Mechanical Systems, Heidelberg (1998) pp. 419–
424
27.97
E.W.H. Jager, O. Inganas, I. Lundstrom: Micro-
robots for micrometer-size objects in aqueous
media: Potential tools for single cell manipula-
tion, Science 288, 2335–2338 (2000)
27.98
E.W.H. Jager, E. Smela, O. Inganas: Microfabricat-
ing conjugated polymer actuators, Science 290,
1540–1545 (2000)
27.99
J.W. Suh, S.F. Glander, R.B. Darling, C.W. Stor-
ment, G.T.A. Kovacs: Organic thermal and elec-
trostatic
ciliary
microactuator
array
for
ob-
ject manipulation, Sens. Actuators A 58, 51–60
(1997)
27.100
E. Smela, M. Kallenbach, J. Holdenried: Electro-
chemically driven polypyrrole bilayers for mov-
ing and positioning bulk micromachined silicon
plates, J. Microelectromechanical Syst. 8, 373–383
(1999)
27.101
S. Konishi, H. Fujita: A conveyance system using
air flow based on the concept of distributed micro
motion systems, IEEE J. Microelectromechanical
Syst. 3, 54–58 (1994)
27.102
M. Ataka, A. Omodaka, N. Takeshima, H. Fujita:
Fabrication and operation of polyimide bimorph
actuators for a ciliary motion system, J. Microelec-
tromechanical Syst. 2, 146–150 (1993)
27.103
G.-X. Zhou: Swallowable or implantable body
temperature telemeter-body temperature radio
pill, Proc. IEEE 15th Annual Northeast Bioengi-
neering Conf. (1989) pp. 165–166
27.104
A. Uchiyama: Endoradiosonde needs micro ma-
chine technology, Proc. IEEE 6th Int. Symp. Micro
Mach. Hum. Sci. (MHS) (1995) pp. 31–37

Part B | 27
708
Part B
Design
27.105
Y. Carts-Powell: Tiny Camera in a Pill Extends Lim-
its of Endoscopy, OE-Rep. Aug., Vol. 200 (SPIE,
Bellingham 2000)
27.106
R. Yeh, E.J.J. Kruglick, K.S.J. Pister: Surface-mi-
cromachined components for articulated micro-
robots, J. Microelectromechanical Syst. 5, 10–17
(1996)
27.107
P.E. Kladitis, V.M. Bright, K.F. Harsh, Y.C. Lee:
Prototype Microrobots for micro positioning in
a manufacturing process and micro unmanned
vehicles, Proc. IEEE 12th Int. Conf. Micro Electro
Mech. Syst. (MEMS), Orlando (1999) pp. 570–575
27.108
D. Ruffieux, N.F. Rooij: A 3-DoF bimorph ac-
tuator array capable of locomotion, Proc. 13th
Eur. Conf. Solid-State Transducers (Eurosensors),
Hague (1999) pp. 725–728
27.109
J.-M. Breguet, P. Renaud: A 4 degrees-of-free-
doms microrobot with nanometer resolution,
Robotics 14, 199–203 (1996)
27.110
A. Flynn, L.S. Tavrow, S.F. Bart, R.A. Brooks,
D.J. Ehrlich, K.R. Udayakumar, L.E. Cross: Piezo-
electric micromotors for microrobots, J. Micro-
electromechanical Syst. 1, 44–51 (1992)
27.111
A. Teshigahara, M. Watanabe, N. Kawahara,
Y. Ohtsuka, T. Hattori: Performance of a 7 mm mi-
crofabricated car, J. Microelectromechanical Syst.
4, 76–80 (1995)
27.112
T. Ebefors, J. Mattson, E. Kalvesten, G. Stemme: A
walking silicon micro-robot, 10th Int. Conf. Solid-
State Sens. Actuators (Transducers), Sendai (1999)
pp. 1202–1205
27.113
N. Miki, I. Shimoyama: Flight performance of mi-
cro-wings rotating in an alternating magnetic
field, Proc. IEEE 12th Int. Conf. Micro Electro Mech.
Syst. (MEMS), Orlando (1999) pp. 153–158
27.114
Mainz: Micro-motors: The World’s Tiniest Heli-
copter,
http://phys.org/news/2004-08-world-
lightest-micro-flying-robot-built.html
27.115
K.I. Arai, W. Sugawara, T. Honda: Magnetic small
flying machines, IEEE 8th Int. Conf. Solid-State
Sens. Actuattors (1995) pp. 316–319
27.116
T. Fukuda, A. Kawamoto, F. Arai, H. Matsuura:
Mechanism and swimming experiment of micro
mobile robot in water, Proc. IEEE 7th Int. Work-
shop Micro Electro Mech. Syst. (MEMS), Oiso (1994)
pp. 273–278
27.117
I. Shimoyama: Hybrid system of mechanical parts
and living organisms for microrobots, Proc. IEEE
6th Int. Symp. Micro Mach. Hum. Sci. (MHS) (1995)
p. 55
27.118
A. Ashkin: Acceleration and trapping of particles
by radiation pressure, Phys. Rev. Lett. 24, 156–159
(1970)
27.119
T.N. Bruican, M.J. Smyth, H.A. Crissman, G.C. Salz-
man, C.C. Stewart, J.C. Martin: Automated single-
cell manipulation and sorting by light trapping,
Appl. Opt. 26, 5311–5316 (1987)
27.120
J. Conia, B.S. Edwards, S. Voelkel: The micro-
robotic laboratory: Optical trapping and scissing
for the biologist, J. Clin. Lab. Anal. 11, 28–38
(1997)
27.121
W.H. Wright, G.J. Sonek, Y. Tadir, M.W. Berns: Laser
trapping in cell biology, IEEE J. Quant. Electron.
26, 2148–2157 (1990)
27.122
F. Arai, K. Morishima, T. Kasugai, T. Fukuda:
Bio-micromanipulation (new direction for opera-
tion improvement), Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robotics Syst. (IROS) (1997) pp. 1300–1305
27.123
M. Nishioka, S. Katsura, K. Hirano, A. Mizuno:
Evaluation of cell characteristics by step-wise ori-
entational rotation using optoelectrostatic micro-
manipulation, IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. 33, 1381–1388
(1997)
27.124
M. Washizu, Y. Kurahashi, H. Iochi, O. Kurosawa,
S. Aizawa, S. Kudo, Y. Magariyama, H. Hotani: Di-
electrophoretic measurement of bacterial motor
characteristics, IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. 29, 286–294
(1993)
27.125
Y.
Kimura,
R.
Yanagimachi:
Intracytoplasmic
sperm injection in the mouse, Biol. Reprod. 52,
709–720 (1995)
27.126
M. Mischel, A. Voss, H.A. Pohl: Cellular spin reso-
nance in rotating electric fields, J. Biol. Phys. 10,
223–226 (1982)
27.127
W.M. Arnold, U. Zimmermann: Electro-Rotation:
Development of a technique for dielectric mea-
surements on individual cells and particles,
J. Electrost. 21, 151–191 (1988)
27.128
Y. Sun, B.J. Nelson: Autonomous injection of bi-
ological cells using visual servoing, Int. Symp.
Experim. Robotics (ISER) (2000) pp. 175–184
27.129
Y. Sun, B.J. Nelson, D.P. Potasek, E. Enikov:
A
bulk
microfabricated
multi-axis
capacitive
cellular
force
sensor
using
transverse
comb
drives, J. Micromech. Microeng. 12, 832–840
(2002)
27.130
Y. Sun, K. Wan, K.P. Roberts, J.C. Bischof, B.J. Nel-
son: Mechanical
property characterization
of
mouse zona pellucida, IEEE Trans. Nanobiosci. 2,
279–286 (2003)
27.131
E.M. Purcell: Life at low Reynolds-number, Am.
J. Phy. 45, 3–11 (1977)
27.132
R. Dreyfus, J. Baudry, M.L. Roper, M. Fermigier,
H.A. Stone, J. Bibette: Microscopic artificial swim-
mers, Nature 437, 862–865 (2005)
27.133
H.C. Berg, R.A. Anderson: Bacteria swim by rotat-
ing their flagellar filaments, Nature 245, 380–382
(1973)
27.134
L. Zhang, J.J. Abbott, L.X. Dong, B.E. Kratochvil,
D.J. Bell, B.J. Nelson: Artificial bacterial flagella:
Fabrication and magnetic control, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 94, 064107 (2009)
27.135
L. Zhang, E. Deckhardt, A. Weber, C. Schonen-
berger, D. Grutzmacher: Controllable fabrication
of SiGe/Si and SiGe/Si/Cr helical nanobelts, Nan-
otechnology 16, 655–663 (2005)
27.136
V.Y.
Prinz,
V.A.
Seleznev,
A.K.
Gutakovsky,
A.V. Chehovskiy, V.V. Preobrazhenskii, M.A. Puty-
ato, T.A. Gavrilova: Free-standing and overgrown
InGaAs/GaAs nanotubes, nanohelices and their
arrays, Physica E Low-Dimen. Syst. Nanostruc-
tures 6, 828–831 (2000)

Micro-/Nanorobots
References
709
Part B | 27
27.137
F.B. Hagedorn, E.M. Gyorgy: Magnetic-Shape
Anisotropy in Polygonal Prisms, J. Appl. Phys. 39,
995–997 (1968)
27.138
H.C. Berg, D.A. Brown: Chemotaxis in escherichia-
coli analyzed by 3-dimensional tracking, Nature
239, 500–504 (1972)
27.139
A. Ashkin, J.M. Dziedzic: Optical trapping and ma-
nipulation of viruses and bacteria, Science 235,
1517–1520 (1987)
27.140
F.H.C. Crick, A.F.W. Hughes: The physical prop-
erties of cytoplasm: A study by means of the
magnetic particle method, Part I, Exp. Cell Res.
1, 37–80 (1950)
27.141
M.F. Yu, M.J. Dyer, G.D. Skidmore, H.W. Rohrs,
X.K. Lu, K.D. Ausman, J.R.V. Ehr, R.S. Ruoff: Three-
dimensional manipulation of carbon nanotubes
under a scanning electron microscope, Nan-
otechnology 10, 244–252 (1999)
27.142
L.X. Dong, F. Arai, T. Fukuda: 3D nanorobotic
manipulation of nano-order objects inside SEM,
Proc. Int. Symp. Micromechatron. Hum. Sci. (MHS)
(2000) pp. 151–156
27.143
D.M. Eigler, E.K. Schweizer: Positioning single
atoms with a scanning tunneling microscope, Na-
ture 344, 524–526 (1990)
27.144
P. Avouris: Manipulation of matter at the atomic
and molecular levels, Acc. Chem. Res. 28, 95–102
(1995)
27.145
M.F. Crommie, C.P. Lutz, D.M. Eigler: Confinement
of electrons to quantum corrals on a metal sur-
face, Science 262, 218–220 (1993)
27.146
L.J. Whitman, J.A. Stroscio, R.A. Dragoset, R.J. Cel-
lota: Manipulation of adsorbed atoms and cre-
ation of new structures on room-temperature
surfaces with a scanning tunneling microscope,
Science 251, 1206–1210 (1991)
27.147
I.-W. Lyo, P. Avouris: Field-induced nanome-
ter-scale to atomic-scale manipulation of sili-
con surfaces with the STM, Science 253, 173–176
(1991)
27.148
G. Dujardin, R.E. Walkup, P. Avouris: Dissociation
of individual molecules with electrons from the
tip of a scanning tunneling microscope, Science
255, 1232–1235 (1992)
27.149
T.-C. Shen, C. Wang, G.C. Abeln, J.R. Tucker,
J.W. Lyding, P. Avouris, R.E. Walkup: Atomic-scale
desorption through electronic and vibrational-
excitation mechanisms, Science 268, 1590–1592
(1995)
27.150
M.T. Cuberes, R.R. Schittler, J.K. Gimzewsk: Room-
temperature
repositioning
of
individual
C60
molecules at Cu steps: operation of a molecular
counting device, Appl. Phys. Lett. 69, 3016–3018
(1996)
27.151
H.J. Lee, W. Ho: Single-bond formation and char-
acterization with a scanning tunneling micro-
scope, Science 286, 1719–1722 (1999)
27.152
T. Yamamoto, O. Kurosawa, H. Kabata, N. Shi-
mamoto, M. Washizu: Molecular surgery of DNA
based on electrostatic micromanipulation, IEEE
Trans. Ind. Appl. 36, 1010–1017 (2000)
27.153
C. Haber, D. Wirtz: Magnetic tweezers for DNA mi-
cromanipulation, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 71, 4561–4570
(2000)
27.154
D.M. Schaefer, R. Reifenberger, A. Patil, R.P. An-
dres: Fabrication of two-dimensional arrays of
nanometer-size clusters with the atomic force
microscope,
Appl.
Phys.
Lett.
66,
1012–1014
(1995)
27.155
T. Junno, K. Deppert, L. Montelius, L. Samuelson:
Controlled manipulation of nanoparticles with an
atomic force microscope, Appl. Phys. Lett. 66,
3627–3629 (1995)
27.156
P.E. Sheehan, C.M. Lieber: Nanomachining, ma-
nipulation and fabrication by force microscopy,
Nanotechnology 7, 236–240 (1996)
27.157
C. Baur, B.C. Gazen, B. Koel, T.R. Ramachandran,
A.A.G. Requicha, L. Zini: Robotic nanomanipula-
tion with a scanning probe microscope in a net-
worked computing environment, J. Vac. Sci. Tech.
B 15, 1577–1580 (1997)
27.158
A.A.G.
Requicha:
Nanorobots,
NEMS,
and
nanoassembly, Proceedings IEEE 91, 1922–1933
(2003)
27.159
R. Resch, C. Baur, A. Bugacov, B.E. Koel, A. Mad-
hukar, A.A.G. Requicha, P. Will: Building and
manipulating 3-D and linked 2-D structures of
nanoparticles using scanning force microscopy,
Langmuir 14, 6613–6616 (1998)
27.160
J. Hu, Z.-H. Zhang, Z.-Q. Ouyang, S.-F. Chen,
M.-Q. Li, F.-J. Yang: Stretch and align virus in
nanometer scale on an atomically flat surface,
J. Vac. Sci. Tech. B 16, 2841–2843 (1998)
27.161
M. Sitti, S. Horiguchi, H. Hashimoto: Controlled
pushing of nanoparticles: modeling and exper-
iments, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 5, 199–211
(2000)
27.162
M. Guthold, M.R. Falvo, W.G. Matthews, S. Paul-
son,
S.
Washburn,
D.A.
Erie,
R.
Superfine,
J.F.P. Brooks, I.R.M. Taylor: Controlled manipu-
lation of molecular samples with the nanoMa-
nipulator, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 5, 189–198
(2000)
27.163
G.Y. Li, N. Xi, M.M. Yu, W.K. Fung: Develop-
ment of augmented reality system for AFM-based
nanomanipulation, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron.
9, 358–365 (2004)
27.164
F. Arai, D. Andou, T. Fukuda: Micro manipulation
based on micro physics–strategy based on at-
tractive force reduction and stress measurement,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robotics Syst. (1995)
pp. 236–241
27.165
H.W.P. Koops, J. Kretz, M. Rudolph, M. Weber,
G. Dahm, K.L. Lee: Characterization and appli-
cation of materials grown by electron-beam-
induced deposition, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 33, 7099–
7107 (1994)
27.166
S. Iijima: Helical microtubules of graphitic carbon,
Nature 354, 56–58 (1991)
27.167
S.J. Tans, A.R.M. Verchueren, C. Dekker: Room-
temperature transistor based on a single carbon
nanotube, Nature 393, 49–52 (1998)

Part B | 27
710
Part B
Design
27.168
R.H. Baughman, A.A. Zakhidov, W.A. de Heer: Car-
bon nanotubes-the route toward applications,
Science 297, 787–792 (2002)
27.169
M.J. Treacy, T.W. Ebbesen, J.M. Gibson: Excep-
tionally high Young’s modulus observed for in-
dividual carbon nanotubes, Nature 381, 678–680
(1996)
27.170
P. Poncharal, Z.L. Wang, D. Ugarte, W.A. de Heer:
Electrostatic deflections and electromechanical
resonances of carbon nanotubes, Science 283,
1513–1516 (1999)
27.171
M.F. Yu, O. Lourie, M.J. Dyer, K. Moloni, T.F. Kel-
ley, R.S. Ruoff: Strength and breaking mechanism
of multiwalled carbon nanotubes under tensile
load, Science 287, 637–640 (2000)
27.172
T.W. Ebbesen, H.J. Lezec, H. Hiura, J.W. Bennett,
H.F. Ghaemi, T. Thio: Electrical conductivity of in-
dividual carbon nanotubes, Nature 382, 54–56
(1996)
27.173
P. Kim, L. Shi, A. Majumdar, P.L. McEuen: Ther-
mal transport measurements of individual mul-
tiwalled nanotubes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 215502
(2001)
27.174
W.J. Liang, M. Bockrath, D. Bozovic, J.H. Hafner,
M. Tinkham, H. Park: Fabry-Perot interference in
a nanotube electron waveguide, Nature 411, 665–
669 (2001)
27.175
X.B.
Zhang,
D.
Bernaerts,
G.V.
Tendeloo,
S. Amelincks, J.V. Landuyt, V. Ivanov, J.B. Nagy,
P. Lambin, A.A. Lucas: The texture of catalyti-
cally grown coil-shaped carbon nanotubules,
Europhys. Lett. 27, 141–146 (1994)
27.176
X.Y. Kong, Z.L. Wang: Spontaneous polarization-
induced nanohelixes, nanosprings, and nanor-
ings of piezoelectric nanobelts, Nano Lett. 3,
1625–1631 (2003)
27.177
S.V.
Golod,
V.Y.
Prinz,
V.I.
Mashanov,
A.K.
Gutakovsky:
Fabrication
of
conducting
GeSi/Si micro- and nanotubes and helical mi-
crocoils, Semicond. Sci. Technol. 16, 181–185
(2001)
27.178
L. Zhang, E. Deckhardt, A. Weber, C. Schönen-
berger, D. Grützmacher: Controllable fabrication
of SiGe/Si and SiGe/Si/Cr helical nanobelts, Nan-
otechnology 16, 655–663 (2005)
27.179
L. Zhang, E. Ruh, D. Grützmacher, L.X. Dong,
D.J. Bell, B.J. Nelson, C. Schönenberger: Anoma-
lous coiling of SiGe/Si and SiGe/Si/Cr helical
nanobelts, Nano Lett. 6, 1311–1317 (2006)
27.180
D.J. Bell, L.X. Dong, B.J. Nelson, M. Golling,
L.
Zhang,
D.
Grützmacher:
Fabrication
and
characterization
of
three-dimensional
In-
GaAs/GaAs nanosprings, Nano Lett. 6, 725–729
(2006)
27.181
D.J. Bell, Y. Sun, L. Zhang, L.X. Dong, B.J. Nelson,
D. Grutzmacher: Three-dimensional nanosprings
for electromechanical sensors, Sens. Actuators A
Phys. 130, 54–61 (2006)
27.182
R. Martel, T. Schmidt, H.R. Shea, T. Herte,
P. Avouris: Single- and multi-wall carbon nan-
otube field-effect transistors, Appl. Phys. Lett. 73,
2447–2449 (1998)
27.183
N.R. Franklin, Y.M. Li, R.J. Chen, A. Javey, H.J. Dai:
Patterned growth of single-walled carbon nan-
otubes on full 4-inch wafers, Appl. Phys. Lett. 79,
4571–4573 (2001)
27.184
T. Rueckes, K. Kim, E. Joselevich, G.Y. Tseng, C.-
L. Cheung, C.M. Lieber: Carbon nanotube-based
non-volatile random access memory for molecu-
lar computing science, Science 289, 94–97 (2000)
27.185
A. Subramanian, B. Vikramaditya, L.X. Dong,
D.J. Bell, B.J. Nelson: Micro and nanorobotic as-
sembly using dielectrophoresis. In: Robotics Sci.
Syst, ed. by S. Thrun, G.S. Sukhatme, S. Schaal,
O. Brock (MIT Press, Cambridge 2005) pp. 327–334
27.186
C.K.M. Fung, V.T.S. Wong, R.H.M. Chan, W.J. Li:
Dielectrophoretic batch fabrication of bundled
carbon nanotube thermal sensors, IEEE Trans.
Nanotechnol. 3, 395–403 (2004)
27.187
T. Fukuda,
F. Arai,
L.X. Dong:
Assembly of
nanodevices with carbon nanotubes through
nanorobotic manipulations, Proceedings IEEE 91,
1803–1818 (2003)
27.188
E.W. Wong, P.E. Sheehan, C.M. Lieber: Nanobeam
mechanics: elasticity, strength, and toughness of
nanorods and nanotubes, Science 277, 1971–1975
(1997)
27.189
M.R.
Falvo,
G.J.
Clary,
R.M.
Taylor,
V.
Chi,
F.P. Brooks, S. Washburn, R. Superfine: Bending
and buckling of carbon nanotubes under large
strain, Nature 389, 582–584 (1997)
27.190
H.W.C. Postma, A. Sellmeijer, C. Dekker: Manip-
ulation and imaging of individual single-walled
carbon nanotubes with an atomic force micro-
scope, Adv. Mater. 12, 1299–1302 (2000)
27.191
T. Hertel, R. Martel, P. Avouris: Manipulation of
individual carbon nanotubes and their interac-
tion with surfaces, J. Phys. Chem. B 102, 910–915
(1998)
27.192
P. Avouris, T. Hertel, R. Martel, T. Schmidt,
H.R. Shea,
R.E. Walkup:
Carbon
nanotubes:
nanomechanics, manipulation, and electronic
devices, Appl. Surf. Sci. 141, 201–209 (1999)
27.193
M. Ahlskog, R. Tarkiainen, L. Roschier, P. Hakonen:
Single-electron transistor made of two cross-
ing multiwalled carbon nanotubes and its noise
properties, Appl. Phys. Lett. 77, 4037–4039 (2000)
27.194
M.R. Falvo, R.M.I. Taylor, A. Helser, V. Chi,
F.P.J.
Brooks,
S.
Washburn,
R.
Superfine:
Nanometre-scale rolling and sliding of car-
bon nanotubes, Nature 397, 236–238 (1999)
27.195
B. Bhushan, V.N. Koinkar: Nanoindentation hard-
ness
measurements
using
atomic-force
mi-
croscopy, Appl. Phys. Lett. 64, 1653–1655 (1994)
27.196
P. Vettiger, G. Cross, M. Despont, U. Drechsler,
U. Durig, B. Gotsmann, W. Haberle, M.A. Lantz,
H.E. Rothuizen, R. Stutz, G.K. Binnig: The mil-
lipede - Nanotechnology entering data storage,
IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol. 1, 39–55 (2002)
27.197
L.X. Dong: Nanorobotic manipulations of car-
bon nanotubes. Ph.D. Thesis Ser (Nagoya Univ.,
Nagoya 2003)
27.198
J.H. Hafner, C.-L. Cheung,
T.H. Oosterkamp,
C.M. Lieber: High-yield assembly of individual

Micro-/Nanorobots
References
711
Part B | 27
single-walled carbon nanotube tips for scanning
probe microscopies, J. Phys. Chem. B 105, 743–746
(2001)
27.199
L.X. Dong, F. Arai, T. Fukuda: Electron-beam-in-
duced deposition with carbon nanotube emitters,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 1919–1921 (2002)
27.200
L.X. Dong, F. Arai, T. Fukuda: 3D nanorobotic ma-
nipulations of multi-walled carbon nanotubes,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2001)
pp. 632–637
27.201
L.X. Dong, F. Arai, T. Fukuda: Destructive construc-
tions of nanostructures with carbon nanotubes
through nanorobotic manipulation, IEEE/ASME
Trans. Mechatron. 9, 350–357 (2004)
27.202
J. Cumings, P.G. Collins, A. Zettl: Peeling and
sharpening multiwall nanotubes, Nature 406, 58
(2000)
27.203
J. Cumings, A. Zettl: Low-friction nanoscale lin-
ear bearing realized from multiwall carbon nan-
otubes, Science 289, 602–604 (2000)
27.204
A. Kis, K. Jensen, S. Aloni, W. Mickelson, A. Zettl:
Interlayer forces and ultralow sliding friction in
multiwalled carbon nanotubes, Phys. Rev. Lett.
97, 025501 (2006)
27.205
L.X. Dong, F. Arai, T. Fukuda: Nanoassembly
of carbon nanotubes through mechanochemical
nanorobotic manipulations, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys.
42, 295–298 (2003)
27.206
L. Chico, V.H. Crespi, L.X. Benedict, S.G. Louie,
M.L. Cohen: Pure carbon nanoscale devices: Nan-
otube heterojunctions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 971–
974 (1996)
27.207
Z. Yao, H.W.C. Postma, L. Balents, C. Dekker: Car-
bon nanotube intramolecular junctions, Nature
402, 273–276 (1999)
27.208
H.W.C. Postma, T. Teepen, Z. Yao, M. Grifoni,
C. Dekker: Carbon nanotube single-electron tran-
sistors at room temperature, Science 293, 76–79
(2001)
27.209
M.S. Fuhrer, J. Nygård, L. Shih, M. Forero, Y.-
G. Yoon, M.S.C. Mazzoni, H.J. Choi, J. Ihm,
S.G. Louie, A. Zettl, P.L. McEuen: Crossed nanotube
junctions, Science 288, 494–497 (2000)
27.210
T. Rueckes, K. Kim, E. Joselevich, G.Y. Tseng, C.-
L. Cheung, C.M. Lieber: Carbon nanotube-based
nonvolatile random access memory for molecular
computing science, Science 289, 94–97 (2000)
27.211
A.G. Rinzler, J.H. Hafner, P. Nikolaev, L. Lou,
S.G. Kim, D. Tománek, P. Nordlander, D.T. Colbert,
R.E. Smalley: Unraveling nanotubes: field emis-
sion from an atomic wire, Science 269, 1550–1553
(1995)
27.212
S.C. Minne, G. Yaralioglu, S.R. Manalis, J.D. A-
dams, J. Zesch, A. Atalar, C.F. Quate: Automated
parallel high-speed atomic force microscopy,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 72, 2340–2342 (1998)
27.213
G.D. Skidmore, E. Parker, M. Ellis, N. Sarkar,
R. Merkle: Exponential assembly,Nanotechnology
11, 316–321 (2001)
27.214
H.J. Dai, J.H. Hafner, A.G. Rinzler, D.T. Colbert,
R.E. Smalley: Nanotubes as nanoprobes in scan-
ning probe microscopy, Nature 384, 147–150 (1996)
27.215
J.H. Hafner, C.L. Cheung, C.M. Lieber: Growth of
nanotubes for probe microscopy tips, Nature 398,
761–762 (1999)
27.216
L.X. Dong, B.J. Nelson, T. Fukuda, F. Arai: Towards
Nanotube Linear Servomotors, IEEE Trans. Autom.
Sci. Eng. 3, 228–235 (2006)
27.217
Y.H. Gao, Y. Bando: Carbon nanothermometer
containing gallium, Nature 415, 599 (2002)
27.218
L.X.
Dong,
X.Y.
Tao,
L. Zhang,
B.J. Nelson,
X.B. Zhang: Nanorobotic spot welding: Controlled
metal deposition with attogram precision from
Copper-filled carbon nanotubes, Nano Lett. 7,
58–63 (2007)
27.219
S.W. Lee, D.S. Lee, R.E. Morjan, S.H. Jhang,
M.
Sveningsson,
O.A.
Nerushev,
Y.W.
Park,
E.E.B. Campbell: A three-terminal carbon nano-
relay, Nano Lett. 4, 2027–2030 (2004)
27.220
A.M. Fennimore, T.D. Yuzvinsky, W.-Q. Han,
M.S. Fuhrer, J. Cumings, A. Zettl: Rotational ac-
tuators based on carbon nanotubes, Nature 424,
408–410 (2003)
27.221
A.
Subramanian,
L.X.
Dong,
J.
Tharian,
U. Sennhauser, B.J. Nelson: Batch fabrication of
carbon nanotube bearings, Nanotechnology 18,
075703 (2007)
27.222
P. Kim, C.M. Lieber: Nanotube nanotweezers, Sci-
ence 286, 2148–2150 (1999)
27.223
L.X. Dong, A. Subramanian, D. Hugentobler,
B.J. Nelson, Y. Sun: Nano Encoders based on Ver-
tical Arrays of Individual Carbon Nanotubes, Adv.
Robotics 20, 1281–1301 (2006)
27.224
L.X. Dong, B.J. Nelson: Robotics in the small, Part
II: Nanorobotics, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 14,
111–121 (2007)
27.225
I. Asimov: Fantastic Voyage (Bantam Books, New
York 1966)
27.226
R.A. Freitas: Nanomedicine, Volume I: Basic Ca-
pabilities (Landes Bioscience, Austin 1999)

713
Multimedia Contents Sensing
Part C
Part C Sensing and Perception
Ed. by Henrik I. Christensen
28 Force and Tactile Sensing
Mark R. Cutkosky, Stanford, USA
William Provancher, Salt Lake City, USA
29 Inertial Sensing, GPS and Odometry
Gregory Dudek, Montreal, Canada
Michael Jenkin, Toronto, Canada
30 Sonar Sensing
Lindsay Kleeman, Melbourne, Australia
Roman Kuc, New Haven, USA
31 Range Sensing
Kurt Konolige, Mountain View, USA
Andreas Nüchter, Würzburg, Germany
32 3-D Vision for Navigation and Grasping
Danica Kragic, Stockholm, Sweden
Kostas Daniilidis, Philadelphia, USA
33 Visual Object Class Recognition
Michael Stark, Saarbrücken, Germany
Bernt Schiele, Saarbrücken, Germany
Aleš Leonardis, Birmingham, UK
34 Visual Servoing
François Chaumette, Rennes, France
Seth Hutchinson, Urbana-Champaign,
USA
Peter Corke, Brisbane, Australia
35 Multisensor Data Fusion
Hugh Durrant-Whyte, Sydney, Australia
Thomas C. Henderson, Salt Lake City, USA

714
Part C covers material related to sensing and percep-
tion. The section covers all the aspects of sensing for
basic measurement of physical parameters in the world
to making sense of such data for the purpose of en-
abling a robot to perform its tasks. Right now robotics
is seeing a revolution in use of sensors. Traditionally
robots have been designed to have maximum stiffness
and applications have been designed to be predictable
in their operation. As robots emerge from the fences
areas and we deploy robots for a wider range of ap-
plications from collaborative robotics to autonomously
driving cars it is essential to have perception capabil-
ities that allow estimation of the state of the robot but
also the state the surrounding environment. Due to these
new requirements the importance of sensing and per-
ception has increased signiﬁcantly over the last decade
and will without doubt to continue to grow in the future.
The topics addressed in this section include all
aspects from detection and processing physical con-
tact with the world through force and tackle sensing
over augmented environments for detection of posi-
tion and motion in the world to image based methods
for mapping, detection and control in structured and
unstructured environments. In many settings a single
sensory modality/sensor is inadequate to give robust es-
timate of the state of the environment. Consequently
a chapter on multi-sensory fusion is also included in this
part. Part C considers primarily the sensing and percep-
tion aspects of robotics with a limited view to many of
the other aspects. Part A is providing the basic, Part B
provides the kinematic structures that we need to design
control methods for interaction, while Part D will cover
the grasping and manipulation of objects. The remain-
ing parts of the handbook covers application verticals
where sensors and perception plays a key role.
With this brief overview of Part C, we provide
a brief synopsis of each chapter.
Chapter 28 covers force and tactile sensing, which
is essential for physical interaction with the world.
Tactile sensing addresses the issue of detecting and han-
dling contact with objects and structures in the world.
Tactile sensing is essential both for safety and manipu-
lation applications as the control of a robot changes due
to contact which changes the kinematic conﬁgurations.
Force sensing addresses estimation of force and torque
as part of dynamic motion but also for interaction with
physical objects such as inserting an object or turning
a valve. The model chosen for force estimation also im-
pacts the control of the robot.
Chapter 29 covers use of odometry, inertial and
GPS for estimation of motion and position in the world.
Odometry is the ego-estimation of your position/motion
based on robot mounted sensors. With the introduction
of sensors for estimation of accelerator and rotational
velocity it is possible improve the estimation of position
and motion. With the introduction of inexpensive iner-
tial measurement units (IMU), driven by the game and
phone industry, the use of IMU has increased signiﬁ-
cantly. For outdoor operation it is frequently possible
to utilize Global Navigation Systems such as the global
positioning systems (GPS). The integration of odome-
try, IMU and GPS information allow design of systems
for precision agriculture, autonomous driving, etc. The
chapter provides a description of the core techniques to
make this possible.
One of the ﬁrst sensors to be used for large scale
estimation of distance to external objects was sonars.
Chapter 30 covers the basic methods for sound based
ranging and localization. Sonars are widely used for
underwater mapping and localization, but is also used
as an inexpensive modality for localization and ground
vehicles and landing of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles.
Typically a single sensor has limited precision but
through used of phased array techniques and multiple
sensors it is possible to achieve high-ﬁdelity ranging.
The chapter covers both the basic physics, sensing, and
estimation methods.
Over the last two decades we have seen tremen-
dous progress on laser based ranging as a complement
to stereo/multi-ocular methods for distance estimation.
Light detection and ranging (LIDAR) is today used
as an effective modality for mapping, localization and
tracking of external objects in the environment. In
Chapter 31 the basic techniques for range estimation
using light based ranging is described and fundamen-
tal methods for three-dimensional (3-D) modeling of
the environment are described. Recently there has been
a renaissance in range based sensing due to the intro-
duction of RGB-D sensors, that utilize structured light
and cameras to generate a dense range maps at very-
low prices.
Chapter 32 covers the general topics of 3-D vision
which covers estimation of distance from the paral-
lax between two or more cameras and/or the motion
of a camera over time. The parallax between two or
more images allows estimation of the distance to exter-
nal objects, which can be leveraged for localization and
navigation, but also for grasping and interacting with
objects in the environment. The chapter covers both the
basic aspects of 3-D estimation and some of the com-
mon applications of 3-D vision for robot control.
Chapter 33 covers the topic of object recognition.
Computer based object recognition has been studied
for more than 50 years. Over the last decade we have

715
seen tremendous progress on object recognition due
to improved cameras and availability of much better
computers and increased memory. We are seeing both
image based recognition techniques and methods for
recognition based on the 3-D structure of objects. More
recently we have seen a renewed interesting use of neu-
ral nets for detection of objects due to new Bayesian
methods and the problem of object categorization –
recognizing categories of objects such as car, motorcy-
cle, trafﬁc sign, people, etc. has become an important
problem. The chapter covers both view and 3-D based
methods for recognition and discusses also categoriza-
tion of objects.
Chapter 34 covers the problem of image servoing.
When trying to interact with an object we can use im-
age data to drive the end-effector to a goal location. Two
common conﬁgurations are eye-in-hand and hand-to-
eye. In addition the control can be performed directly
in image coordinates or through recovery of two-and-
a-half-dimensional (2.5-D) or 3-D pose for an object.
To enable all of this an impact aspect is to derived the
relation between changes in robot motion and changes
in the image/pose, which is derivation of the Jacobian
for the system. This chapter discusses both eye-in-hand
and hand-to-eye visual servoing and image/pose based
control of the process and provides examples of use of
visual servoing in real scenarios.
Finally, the part is concluded by Chapter 35 which
discusses multi-sensory data fusion. As mentioned ear-
lier most applications require use of multiple sensors to
generate robust/complete methods for control. Data fu-
sion involves a number of different aspects from time
synchronization to transformation into a common ref-
erence frame to integration of data over time/space to
generate more robust/accurate estimate of the world
state. Recently a number of new methods for Bayesian
data fusion have emerged. In this chapter the funda-
mental of data fusion are reviewed and a number of the
most common techniques for multi-sensory fusion are
introduced.

Multimedia Contents Force and Ta
717
Part C | 28.1
28. Force and Tactile Sensing
Mark R. Cutkosky, William Provancher
This chapter provides an overview of force and
tactile sensing, with the primary emphasis placed
on tactile sensing. We begin by presenting some
basic considerations in choosing a tactile sen-
sor and then review a wide variety of sensor
types, including proximity, kinematic, force, dy-
namic, contact, skin deflection, thermal, and
pressure sensors. We also review various transduc-
tion methods, appropriate for each general sensor
type. We consider the information that these var-
ious types of sensors provide in terms of whether
they are most useful for manipulation, surface
exploration or being responsive to contacts from
external agents.
Concerning the interpretation of tactile infor-
mation, we describe the general problems and
present two short illustrative examples. The first
involves intrinsic tactile sensing, i.e., estimating
contact locations and forces from force sensors.
The second involves contact pressure sensing, i.e.,
estimating surface normal and shear stress distri-
butions from an array of sensors in an elastic skin.
We conclude with a brief discussion of the chal-
lenges that remain to be solved in packaging and
manufacturing damage-tolerant tactile sensors.
28.1
Overview.............................................
717
28.2 Sensor Types........................................
718
28.2.1
Proprioceptive
and Proximity Sensing ...............
718
28.2.2 Other Contact Sensors ................
720
28.2.3 Kinematic Sensors .....................
721
28.2.4 Force and Load Sensing .............
721
28.2.5 Dynamic Tactile Sensors .............
722
28.2.6 Array Sensors ............................
722
28.3 Tactile Information Processing..............
725
28.3.1
Tactile Information Flow:
Means and Ends of Tactile Sensing
725
28.3.2 Solid Mechanics
and Deconvolution ....................
727
28.3.3 Curvature and Shape Information
729
28.3.4 Object and Surface Identification
729
28.3.5 Active Sensing Strategies ............
730
28.3.6 Dynamic Sensing
and Event Detection ..................
730
28.3.7
Integration of Thermal
and Other Sensors .....................
730
28.4 Integration Challenges.........................
730
28.5 Conclusions and Future Developments..
731
Video-References.........................................
731
References...................................................
731
28.1 Overview
Tactile sensing has been a component of robotics for
roughly as long as vision. However, in comparison to
vision, for which great strides have been made in terms
of hardware and software and which is now widely
used in industrial and mobile robot applications, tac-
tile sensing always seems to be a few years away from
widespread utility. So before reviewing the technolo-
gies and approaches available, it is worthwhile to ask
some basic questions:

How important is tactile sensing?

What is it useful for?

Why does it remain comparatively undeveloped?
In nature, tactile sensing is an essential survival tool.
Even the simplest creatures are endowed with large
numbers of mechanoreceptors for exploring and re-
sponding to various stimuli. In humans, tactile sensing
is indispensable for three distinct kinds of activity: ma-

Part C | 28.2
718
Part C
Sensing and Perception
nipulation, exploration and response. The importance
of tactile sensing for manipulation is most evident in
ﬁne motor tasks. When we are chilled, tasks like but-
toning a shirt can become an exercise in frustration.
The problem is primarily a lack of sensing; our mus-
cles, snug in our coat sleeves, are only slightly affected
but our cutaneous mechanoreceptors are anesthetized
and we become clumsy. For exploration, we continu-
ally assimilate information about materials and surface
properties (e.g., hardness, thermal conductivity, fric-
tion, roughness) to help us identify objects. We may
have difﬁculty distinguishing real leather from synthetic
leather by sight, but not by touch. Finally, the impor-
tance of tactile response, whether to a gentle touch or
an impact, is seen in the damage that patients with pe-
ripheral neuropathy (e.g., as a complication of diabetes)
accidentally do to themselves.
As Fig. 28.1 indicates, the same functional cat-
egories apply to robots. However, in comparison to
animals, with hundreds or thousands of mechanore-
ceptors per square centimeter of skin, even the most
sophisticated robots are impoverished. One reason for
the slow development of tactile sensing technology as
compared to vision is that there is no tactile analog
to the charge-coupled device (CCD) or complemen-
tary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) optical array.
Instead, tactile sensors elicit information through phys-
ical interaction. They must be incorporated into skin
surfaces with compliance, for conforming locally to
surfaces, and with adequate friction for handling ob-
jects securely. The sensors and skin must also be robust
enough to survive repeated impacts and abrasions. And
unlike the image plane in a camera, tactile sensors must
Manipulation: Grasp force
control; contact locations and
kinematics; stability assessment.
Exploration: Surface texture,
friction and hardness; thermal
properties; local features.
Response: Detection and reaction
to contacts from external agents.
Fig. 28.1 Uses of tactile sensing in robotics
be distributed over the robot appendages, with partic-
ularly high concentrations in areas like the ﬁngertips.
The wiring of tactile sensors is consequently another
formidable challenge.
Nonetheless, considerable progress in tactile sen-
sor design and deployment has been made over the
last couple of decades. In the following sections we
review the main functional classes of tactile sensors
and discuss their relative strengths and limitations.
Looking ahead, new fabrication techniques offer the
possibility of artiﬁcial skin materials with integrated
sensors and local processing for interpreting sensor sig-
nals and communicating over a common bus to reduce
wiring.
There is an extensive literature describing touch
sensing research. Recent general reviews include [28.1–
4] and these cite a number of useful older reviews
including [28.5–7].
28.2 Sensor Types
This section outlines ﬁve main types of sensors: propri-
oceptive, kinematic, force, dynamic tactile, and array
tactile sensors, as well as sensors that provide thermal
or material composition data. However, the emphasis
is on sensors that provide mechanoreception, as sum-
marized in Table 28.1. The most important quantities
measured with tactile sensors are shape and force. Each
of these may be measured as an average quantity for
some part of the robot or as a spatially resolved, dis-
tributed quantity across a contact area. In this chapter
we follow the convention of studies of the human sense
of touch and use the term touch sensing to refer to the
combination of these two modes. Devices that measure
an average or resultant quantity are sometimes referred
to as internal or intrinsic sensors. The basis for these
sensors is force sensing, which precedes the discussion
of tactile array sensors.
28.2.1 Proprioceptive
and Proximity Sensing
Proprioceptive sensing refers to sensors that provide
information about the net force or motion of an ap-
pendage, analogous to receptors that provide informa-
tion in humans about tendon tensions or joint move-
ments. Generally speaking, the primary source for
spatial proproceptive information on a robot is pro-
vided by joint angle and force–torque sensors. Since
joint angle sensors such as potentiometers, encoders,
and resolvers are well established technologies, they
do not warrant discussion here. Instead, a brief re-
view of proximity sensing via whiskers and antennae
as well as noncontact proximity sensing is provided.
Force–torque sensors are discussed in greater detail in
Sect. 28.2.4.

Force and Tactile Sensing
28.2 Sensor Types
719
Part C | 28.2
Table 28.1 Tactile sensor modalities and common transduction types
Sensor modality
Sensor type
Sensor attributes
Advantages
Disadvantages
Normal pressure
Piezoresistive array
[28.8–12]
Array of piezoresistive junctions
Embedded in a elastomeric skin
Cast or screen printed
Suitable for mass production
Simple design
Simple signal conditioning
Low force thresholds/high
sensitivity
Frail
Signal drift and hysteresis
Capacitive array [28.13–17]
Array of capacitive junctions
Row and column electrodes
separated by elastomeric dielec-
tric
Good sensitivity
Moderate hysteresis, depend-
ing
on construction
Complex circuitry
Piezoresistive microelec-
tromechanical system
(MEMS) array [28.18–20]
Silicon micromachined array
with doped silicon strain gauged
ﬂexures
Suitable for to mass produc-
tion
Frail
Optical [28.21, 22]
Combined tracking of opti-
cal markers with a constitutive
model
No interconnects to break
Requires personal computer
(PC) for computing applied
forces
Skin deformation
Optical [28.23, 24]
Fluid-ﬁlled elastomeric mem-
brane
Tracking of optical markers in-
scribed on membrane coupled
with energy minimization algo-
rithm
Compliant membrane
No electrical interconnects to
be damaged
Complex computations
Hard to customize sensor
Magnetic [28.25]
Array of hall effect sensors
Complex computations
Hard to customize sensor
Resistive tomography [28.26]
Array of conductive rubber
traces as electrodes
Robust construction
Piezoresistive (curvature)
[28.27, 28]
Employs an array of strain
gauges
Directly measure curvature
Frailty of electrical intercon-
nects
Hysteresis
Dynamic tactile
sensing
Piezoelectric (stress rate)
[28.19, 29, 30]
polyvinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF)
embedded in elastomeric skin
High bandwidth
Frailty of electrical junctions
Skin acceleration [28.31, 32]
Commercial accelerometer
aﬁxed to robot skin
Simple
No spatially distributed con-
tent
Sensed vibrations tend to be
dominated by structural reso-
nant frequency

Part C | 28.2
720
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Whisker and Antenna Sensors
For many animals whiskers or antennae provide an ex-
tremely accurate combination of contact sensing and
proprioceptive information. For example, cockroaches
can steer themselves along curved walls using only po-
sition and rate information from their antennae [28.33].
Other insects and arthropods use numerous small hair
sensors on the exoskeleton to localize contacts. Rats
perform highly accurate whisking to explore the shapes
and textures of objects in their vicinity, with sen-
sor processing performed by a specialized barrel cor-
tex [28.34].
In robotics, this potentially very useful hybrid of
proprioceptive and tactile sensing has received compar-
atively little attention, although examples date at least
to the early 1990s [28.35, 36]. In more recent work,
Clements and Rahn [28.37] demonstrated an active
whisker with a sweeping motion and Lee et al. [28.33]
used a passive, ﬂexible antenna to steer a running
cockroach-inspired robot. Prescott et al. [28.34, 38]
have conducted extensive work on active robotic whisk-
ing for object exploration and identiﬁcation, inspired by
mammalian models.
Proximity
While proximity sensing does not strictly fall under
the category of tactile sensing, a number of researchers
have employed proximity sensors for collision detec-
tion between a robot arm and the environment; hence,
we brieﬂy review these technologies here. Three pri-
mary sensor technologies which include capaciﬂec-
tive, infrared (IR) optical, and ultrasonic sensors have
been used in this application. Vranish et al. devel-
oped an early capaciﬂective sensor for collision avoid-
ance between the environment and a grounded robot
arm [28.39]. Early examples of IR emitter/detector
pairs in an artiﬁcial skin include [28.40, 41]. A more re-
cent design using optical ﬁbers is reported in [28.42],
and an adaptation for a prosthetic hand is reported
in [28.43]. Other researchers have developed robot skin
that includes ultrasonic and IR optical sensors for colli-
sion avoidance [28.44]. Wegerif and Rosinski provide
a comparison of the performance of all 3 of these
proximity sensing technologies [28.45]. For a further
review of some of these sensors, see Chap. 31 on range
sensing.
28.2.2 Other Contact Sensors
There are a variety of other contact-based sensors
that are capable of discerning object properties such
as electromagnetic characteristics, density (via ultra-
sound), or chemical composition (cf. animals’ senses
of taste and smell). While this is beyond the scope of
the current chapter, Chap. 75, on biologically inspired
robots, brieﬂy discusses biologically inspired chemical
sensors related to smell and taste. For completeness,
thermal sensors and material composition sensors are
also brieﬂy discussed below.
Thermal Sensors
Thermal sensing is an important element of human
tactile sensing, useful for determining the material com-
position of an object as well as to measure surface
temperatures. Since most objects in the environment are
at about the same (room) temperature, a temperature
sensor that contains a heat source can detect the rate at
which heat is absorbed by an object. This provides in-
formation about the heat capacity of the object and the
thermal conductivity of the material from which it is
made, making it easy, for example, to distinguish met-
als from plastics.
Buttazzo et al. [28.46] note that the piezoelectric
polymer used in their tactile sensing system is also
strongly pyroelectric, and use a superﬁcial layer as
a thermal sensor. Other sensors use thermistors as trans-
ducers [28.47–49]. Some systems purposely provide
an internal temperature reference and use the tem-
perature differential from the environment to detect
contacts [28.50, 51]; however, objects with a tempera-
ture the same as the reference will not be detected. Most
of these sensors have a relatively thick outer skin cover-
ing the heat sensitive elements, thus protecting delicate
components and providing a conformal surface at the
expense of slower response time.
As a more recent example of thermal sensing, En-
gel et al. [28.52] present a ﬂexible tactile sensor design
that includes integrated gold ﬁlm heaters and RTDs (re-
sistance temperature devices) on a polymer microma-
chined substrate. Lin et al. [28.24] include a thermistor
as part of the sensing suite in their artiﬁcial ﬁngertip.
While there is a high level of integration in these sen-
sors, tradeoffs concerning construction, performance,
and protection of sensing elements remain an ongoing
challenge.
Material Composition Sensors
There has been some work on sensors for material com-
position. In analogy with the human senses of taste
and smell, liquid and vapor phase chemical sensors
could potentially determine the chemical composition
of a surface [28.53, 54]. However, the large majority
of robotic chemical sensing has involved non-contact
sensing of airborne plumes [28.55, 56]. Another sens-
ing modality which provides information about material
properties is electromagnetic ﬁeld sensing, using de-
vices such as eddy current or Hall effect probes to
measure ferromagnetism or conductivity [28.57, 58].

Force and Tactile Sensing
28.2 Sensor Types
721
Part C | 28.2
28.2.3 Kinematic Sensors
Although they are not generally regarded as tactile sen-
sors, sensors that detect the position of a limb can
provide the robot with geometric information for ma-
nipulation and exploration, particularly when the limb
also includes sensors that register contact events. Ex-
amples of combining joint angle sensing and contact
sensing with compliant ﬁngers to learn about the con-
ﬁguration of a grasp include [28.59, 60].
28.2.4 Force and Load Sensing
Actuator Effort Sensors
For some actuators such as electric servo motors, a mea-
sure of the actuator effort can be obtained directly by
measuring the motor current (typically using a sens-
ing resistor in series with the motor). However, because
motors are typically connected to robot limbs via gear-
boxes with output/input efﬁciencies of 60% or less, it is
usually much more accurate to measure the torque at the
output of the gearbox. Solutions to this problem include
torque load cells and mechanical structures at the robot
joints whose deﬂections can be measured using electro-
magnetic or optical sensors. For cable or tendon-driven
arms and hands it is useful to measure the cable ten-
sion – both for purposes of compensating for friction in
the drive-train and as a way of measuring the loads upon
the appendage [28.61, 62]. When ﬁngers or arms make
contact with objects in the environment, cable tension
sensing becomes an alternative to endpoint load sens-
ing for measuring components of the contact forces. Of
course, only those components that produce signiﬁcant
torques can be measured with accuracy. Chapter 19 on
multiﬁngered hands contains more details concerning
tendon tension measurement.
Force Sensors
When actuator effort sensors are not sufﬁcient to mea-
sure the forces exerted by or on a robot appendage, dis-
crete force sensors are typically utilized. These sensors
are found most often at the base joint or wrist of a robot
but could be distributed throughout the links of a robot.
In principle, any type of multi-axis load cell could
be used for manipulator force–torque sensing. How-
ever, the need for small, lightweight units with good
static response eliminates many commercial sensors.
The design of force sensors for mounting above the
gripper at the wrist has received the most atten-
tion [28.63, 64], but ﬁngertip sensors for dextrous hands
have also been devised. Often these sensors are based
on strain gauges mounted on a metal ﬂexure [28.65–
67] which can be fairly stiff and robust. Sinden and
Boie [28.68] propose a planar six axis force–torque
sensor based on capacitive measurements with an elas-
tomer dielectric. Design considerations for force sen-
sors include stiffness, hysteresis, calibration, ampliﬁ-
cation, robustness, and mounting. Dario et al. present
an integrated ﬁngertip for robotic hands integrated
FSR (force sensing resistor) pressure array, piezoce-
ramic bimorph dynamic sensor, and force–torque sen-
sor [28.29]. More recently Edin et al. [28.69] have de-
veloped a miniature a multi-axis ﬁngertip force sensor
(Fig. 28.2). For applications where immunity to electro-
magnetic noise is desirable, Park et al. [28.70] present
a robot ﬁngertip with embedded ﬁber optic Bragg grat-
ings, used as optical strain gages. Bicchi [28.71] and
Uchiyama et al. [28.72] consider the optimal design of
multi-axis force sensors in general.
Information from the force sensors can also be com-
bined with knowledge of ﬁngertip geometry to estimate
contact location, as implied in Fig. 28.3. This method of
contact sensing is referred to as intrinsic tactile sensing
and was ﬁrst presented by Bicchi et al. [28.73]. A com-
parison between intrinsic and extrinsic contact sensing
y
x
z
Mx
Mz
Fz
Fx
Fy
My
Fig. 28.2 Miniature ﬁngertip force–torque sensor for
a prosthetic hand (after [28.69])
Dynamic
tactile
sensor
Tactile array
sensor
Point of
contact
Fingertip
force/torque
sensor
Joint
angle/torque
sensors
Fig. 28.3 Robot hand with ﬁngertip force and tactile sens-
ing. Information from the force sensors can be combined
with knowledge of ﬁngertip geometry to estimate contact
location, referred to as intrinsic tactile sensing

Part C | 28.2
722
Part C
Sensing and Perception
(i. e., using distributed contact sensors) is presented by
Son et al. [28.74]. This topic is discussed further in
Sect. 28.3.1.
28.2.5 Dynamic Tactile Sensors
Taking a cue from the role of fast-acting or dynamic tac-
tile sensors in human manipulation [28.75], researchers
have developed dynamic sensors for slip detection and
for sensing textures and ﬁne features.
Early slip sensors based on displacement detected
the motion of a moving element such as a roller or
needle in the gripper surface [28.76, 77]. Subsequent
work has typically used accelerometers or other sensors
that are inherently sensitive to small, transient forces or
motions. Early examples include [28.31, 78–80]. Many
subsequent contributions are reviewed in [28.81].
For the case of hard objects held in metal grippers,
acoustic emissions may reveal slip [28.82]. Because
these signals are at very high frequency (over 100 kHz)
they can be useful for distinguishing among different
kinds of contact events in noisy environments [28.83].
Another approach for improving the signal/noise ro-
bustness of dynamic sensing is to use an actively stim-
ulated sensor and measure the change in response as
contact conditions change [28.84, 85].
For grasp force control, it is especially useful to de-
tect incipient slips, which are accompanied by small,
localized vibrations, or micro-slips, at the periphery of
a ﬁnger/object contact region before gross sliding oc-
curs. The challenge is to distinguish these from other
events that produce vibrations [28.86–89].
For detecting features and ﬁne surface features
it can be effective to use small ﬁbers, a skin with
ﬁngerprint-like ridges, or a stylus that drags over the
surface like a ﬁngernail [28.46, 90, 91].
Because many dynamic tactile sensors only pro-
duce a transient response, they are often combined
with pressure sensing arrays or force sensors to provide
a combination of low frequency and high frequency
tactile sensing [28.24, 29, 32, 46, 89, 92, 93]. An alter-
native, which can be simpler from the standpoint of
sensor integration, is to use conventional pressure sens-
ing arrays for slip detection. In this case, the array
resolution and scanning rate must be sufﬁcient to de-
tect motion or incipient motion quickly, to prevent
grasp failures. Fortunately, this is becoming increas-
ingly feasible [28.19, 81, 94, 95].
VIDEO 14
shows
an example of dynamic tactile sensing.
28.2.6 Array Sensors
Hundreds of designs for tactile array sensors have ap-
peared in the literature in the last 25 years, and many
of them are designed for use with dextrous hands. In
terms of transducers, the fundamental requirement is
to unambiguously recover either the shape or pressure
distribution across the contact. Shape sensing requires
a compliant skin, which can also have advantages for
grasp stability (see Chaps. 37 and 38 on contact mod-
eling and grasping). Examples of shape-sensing tactile
arrays include [28.23, 24]. However, the far more com-
mon approach is to measure subsurface strains, which
can be correlated with surface pressure distributions, as
presented by Fearing and Hollerbach [28.96] and dis-
cussed further in Sect. 28.3.2.
Contact Location Sensors
The simplest and perhaps most robust tactile arrays pro-
vide measurements solely of contact location. Some
such sensors utilize a membrane switch design like
that found in keyboards [28.97]. As another example,
a robust two-dimensional (2-D) switch array can be
embedded in a prosthetic hand [28.69]. Some optical
tactile sensors have also been used primarily as contact
location sensors. Maekawa et al. [28.98] used a single
optical position sensing device (PSD) or a CCD cam-
era array to detect the position of scattered light off of
a hemispherical optical wave guide ﬁngertip with a sil-
icone rubber cover. Light is scattered at the locations
of contacts. With a textured skin, the magnitude of the
force can also be estimated, as the contact area grows
in proportion to the pressure. However, an issue with
ﬁngertips that use a compliant skin covering a hard sub-
strate is that adhesion between the two materials results
in hysteresis. In addition, when the ﬁngertip is dragged
over a surface, the friction can produce a shift in the
estimated contact position.
Pressure Sensing Arrays
Capacitive
Pressure
Sensing
Arrays. Capacitive
pressure sensing arrays are one of the oldest and most
common tactile sensor types. Some of the earliest anal-
ysis of such sensors is presented by Fearing [28.99]
for capacitive arrays embedded into a soft robot ﬁnger-
tip. The arrays consist of overlapping row and column
electrodes separated by an elastomeric dielectric, form-
ing an array of capacitors. A change in capacitance
results from compressing the dielectric between row-
column plates at a particular intersection. The equation
for capacitance, based on the physical parameters, is
expressed as C 
 A=d, where  is the permittivity
of the dielectric between the plates of the capacitor,
A is the area of the plates, and d is the spacing be-
tween them. Pressing on the skin reduces the plate
spacing d, thus providing a linear response with dis-
placement. Through appropriate switching circuitry,
a region of a sensor array can be isolated at a particular

Force and Tactile Sensing
28.2 Sensor Types
723
Part C | 28.2
row/column intersection. Examples of similar capaci-
tive tactile arrays can be found in [28.100, 101] and
commercially [28.14]. Large capacitive arrays have also
been developed to cover the arms of a robot [28.15–17].
A woven fabric with capacitive sensing junctions is re-
ported in [28.102].
With a suitable dielectric and plate design, capaci-
tive arrays can be robust, have a large dynamic range
(ratio between minimum and maximum detectable
pressure) and low hysteresis, which is desirable for fast
response. However, a common problem is the need to
shield the array from stray capacitance effects (e.g.,
from an approaching metallic surface) and to mini-
mize parasitic capacitance associated with wiring to
and from the active elements. For these reasons, the re-
cent trend is to use local microprocessors specialized
for capacitance measurement as part of an integrated
sensing system (Sect. 28.4). An example is shown in
Fig. 28.4.
VIDEO 15
actually shows results taken
with the sensor depicted in Fig. 28.4.
Piezoresistive Pressure Sensing Arrays. Many re-
searchers have produced tactile sensor arrays that are
piezoresistive. In most cases, these sensors utilize
a conductive rubber that is bulk molded or a piezoresis-
tive ink that is patterned via screen printing or stamping.
Each of these approaches employs a conductive ad-
ditive (typically carbon black or silver) to create its
conductive/piezoresistive behavior. As a more ﬂexible
and durable alternative, some researchers have devel-
oped fabric-based piezoresistive sensors, discussed sep-
arately below.
Russell [28.27] presented one of the ﬁrst molded
conductive rubber tactile sensor arrays composed of
Sensor pads
Joint sensor
ADC
Fig. 28.4 Capacitive touch and joint angle sensors on
a ﬂexible circuit for incorporation in a robotic hand, shar-
ing the same microprocessors for signal processing and
communication (after [28.103])
conductive rubber column and row electrodes with
piezoresistive junctions. However, this sensor exhib-
ited signiﬁcant drift and hysteresis, which fueled re-
search to minimize these effects through proper se-
lection of molding material [28.8]. These issues were
never completely solved due to the hysteretic nature
of elastomers, but this sensing approach remains at-
tractive due to its ease of manufacturing. Hence, it has
continued to ﬁnd applications, for example, in the ap-
pendages of humanoid robots where extreme accuracy
is not required [28.104]. Signiﬁcant improvements in
dynamic range and robustness are also possible using
a treated elastomer that exploits a quantum tunneling
effect [28.105], and commercial versions are now avail-
able [28.106].
A number of researchers and companies have devel-
oped tactile sensors that utilize conductive (piezoresis-
tive) ink, generally referred to as FSRs (force sensitive
resistors). This is by far the most common and economi-
cal means to incorporate tactile sensing via off-the-shelf
sensors. However, to make highly integrated, dense sen-
sor arrays, custom fabrication is necessary. Examples
of such sensors include [28.9, 29]. To take this basic
concept a step further, Someya [28.107] has produced
robotic skin that employs patterned organic semicon-
ductors for local ampliﬁcation of the piezoresistive
sensor array, printed on ﬂexible polyimide ﬁlm. Al-
though fabricated on a ﬂexible substrate, these sensor
arrays are somewhat susceptible to bending fatigue.
Piezoresistive fabrics have been developed to ad-
dress fatigue and fragility issues found in tactile arrays.
Examples of these sensors are presented in [28.10–12,
108] and are utilized in applications such as the arms or
legs of humanoid robots. Because this technology has
the potential to replace ordinary cloth, it is a promising
technology for applications in wearable computing or
even smart clothing. A different solution to the problem
of making a sensor that will work on joints and loca-
tions with extensive ﬂexing is to employ ﬁne channels
of liquid metal in a stretchy elastomer [28.109].
One ﬁnal design that does not fall under the
above fabrication categories is a sensor designed by
Kageyama et al. [28.110] that utilizes a piezoresistive
conductive gel pressure array along with a multi-level
contact switch array via variable contact resistance
within sensor layers that they developed for use in hu-
manoid robots.
MEMS arrays. MEMS technology is attractive for pro-
ducing dense sensor arrays with integrated packag-
ing, signal processing and communications electronics.
Early devices were produced in silicon through stan-
dard silicon micro-machining techniques, allowing high
spatial resolution and dedicated hardware for multi-

Part C | 28.2
724
Part C
Sensing and Perception
plexing, etc. [28.111, 112]. However, such silicon-only
devices can be brittle and difﬁcult to integrate into
a robust, compliant skin. More recent efforts have
addressed these problems by using combinations of
semiconductors and other materials, including organic
semiconductors [28.18, 19, 52, 113, 114].
Returning to the idea of using silicon load cells
for tactile sensing, Valdastri et al. [28.115] developed
a miniature MEMS silicon-based three-axis load cell
that resembles a joystick and is appropriate for embed-
ding within an elastomeric skin for detecting shear and
normal stresses (Fig. 28.5) [28.93]. Other recent efforts
include ﬂexible arrays with high spatial resolution using
capacitive or piezoresistive technology [28.20, 116].
Skin Deflection Sensing
Brocket [28.117] was one of the ﬁrst to propose the idea
of using deformable membranes as robot ﬁngertips. As
noted by Shimoga and Goldenberg [28.118], there are
several advantages to using deformable ﬁngertips over
more rigid robot ﬁngertips, which include: 1) improved
grasp stability, 2) reduced shock, and 3) reduced fa-
tigue for embedded sensor elements. Other early work
includes a deformable ﬁngertip with skin covering
polyurethane foam and instrumented with elastomeric
strain gages [28.27].
Nowlin [28.25] used Bayesian algorithms to im-
prove data interpretation of a deformable tactile sen-
sor that used magnetic ﬁeld sensing. A 4  4 array
of magnets were supported above paired hall-effect
a)
b)
A
Top layer
Bottom layer
Silicon
sensor
Flexible
circuit
t2
t1
B
D
C
Fig. 28.5 (a) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) micro-
graphs of a MEMS 3-axis tactile force sensor. (b) MEMS
force sensor wirebonded to a ﬂex-circuit and embedded
within a silicone rubber skin (after [28.115])
sensors off a rigid base by individual ﬂuid ﬁlled
balloons. Hall-effect sensors measure the strength of
the local magnetic ﬁeld, which should increase with
proximity to the magnets; however, this is compli-
cated by neighboring magnets in the array. Hence,
noisy data were combined using Bayesian algorithms
to predict membrane deformation for a deformable
ﬁngertip.
Later, Russell and Parkinson [28.26] developed an
impedance tomographic tactile sensor, capable of mea-
sure skin deformation over an 8  5 array. This sensor
was constructed with of neoprene rubber and ﬁlled with
distilled water, similar to the more recent BioTac sen-
sor [28.24]. Row and column electrodes were made
from copper and conductive rubber for the rigid sub-
strate and neoprene skin, respectively. Like the capaci-
tive tactile sensors described above, this sensor utilized
multiplexing electronics to reduce the number of elec-
trical interconnects. Square waveform driver electronics
are used to estimate the resistance of a column of wa-
ter formed between row and column elements providing
a signal that is proportional to the current skin height.
Ferrier and Brocket [28.23] implemented a tactile
sensor which used optical tracking in combination with
models of the skin to predict sensor ﬁngertip defor-
mations. The ﬁngertip sensor consists of a tiny CCD
camera focused on a 7  7 array of dots marked on the
inside of a gel-ﬁlled silicone membrane. An algorithm
is used to construct a 1313 grid over the array of dots.
This algorithm uses a combination of the position that is
sensed by the CCD camera, which provides the location
along a line radially outward from the focal point, in
combination with a mechanical model used to solve for
the radial distance from the camera focal point, based
on energy minimization.
A more recent example of a shape sensing array is
the commercial Syntouch BioTac that grew out of re-
search on a multimodal ﬁngertip tactile sensor [28.24].
In this design, measuring the changes in resistance
between terminals in a water-ﬁlled skin provides an es-
timate of the skin deformation.
Other Array Tactile Array Sensors
While less common than capacitive or piezoresistive
sensors, optical tactile sensors have consistently been
attractive for their immunity to electromagnetic inter-
ference. The basic approaches include designs that use
a small camera to measure skin deformations and ar-
rays of optical emitters and detectors. Optical ﬁbers can
also be used to separate the transducer from the contact
site [28.42, 119].
An interesting tactile sensor uses vision to track an
array of spherical markers embedded in a transparent
elastomer to infer the stress state of the skin material

Force and Tactile Sensing
28.3 Tactile Information Processing
725
Part C | 28.3
due to applied forces [28.21]. This sensor is currently
being commercialized under the tradename GelForce.
Miniaturization of optical components has also
made it possible to construct a tactile array of surface-
mounted optical devices. In a physically robust design
that can be adapted for shear and normal sensing, emit-
ters and detector pairs are covered by a thin translucent
layer of silicone rubber followed by an opaque outer
layer. As the silicone skin is depressed, there is a varia-
tion in the amount of light reﬂected from the emitter to
the detector [28.22, 120].
The concept of reﬂection off the underside of a com-
pliant skin has also been used with acoustic or ultra-
sonic sensors. Shinoda et al. [28.121] present a sensor
that looks at the change in reﬂected accoustic en-
ergy from a resonator chamber near the surface of the
skin, with application to friction measurement [28.122].
Ando et al. [28.123] present a more sophisticated ultra-
sound sensor that achieves 6-DOF (degree of freedom)
displacement sensing via paired plate elements that uti-
lize 4 ultrasound transducers per plate.
Multimodal Arrays
Human sensing is inherently multi-modal, with com-
binations of fast- and slow-acting mechanoreceptors
as well as specialized thermal and pain receptors. In
an analogous approach, a number of researchers have
developed multi-modal tactile sensing suites that com-
bine mechanical and thermal sensing [28.24, 49, 52,
124, 125]. As noted earlier, other work has combined
static and dynamic sensing [28.24, 29, 32, 46, 92, 93,
126].
28.3 Tactile Information Processing
In discussing the processing of tactile information, we
return ﬁrst to the three main uses depicted in Fig. 28.1.
For manipulation, we require, foremost, information
about contact locations and forces so that we can grasp
objects securely and impart desired forces and motions
to them. For exploration, we are concerned with ob-
taining and integrating information about the object,
including the local geometry, hardness, friction, texture,
thermal conductivity, etc. For response, we are con-
cerned especially with the detection of events, such as
contacts produced by an external agent, and in assessing
their types and magnitudes. The uses of information are
often coupled. For example, we manipulate objects in
order to explore them, and we use the information ob-
tained through object exploration to improve our ability
to control forces and motions in manipulation. Recog-
nizing contact events is also important for manipulation
and exploration, as it is for response.
28.3.1 Tactile Information Flow:
Means and Ends of Tactile Sensing
Figure 28.6 summarizes the general ﬂow of information
from each type of sensor reviewed in the previous sec-
tion through primary sensed quantities to information
provided for manipulation, exploration and response.
A useful thought exercise is to consider exactly what in-
formation we use to perform a task such as turning a pen
end-over-end between the ﬁngers. We can easily per-
form this task with our eyes closed. What information
are we using? We need to track the position and orienta-
tion of the pen and to monitor the forces that we impose
on it to maintain stable manipulation. In other words,
we need to know the conﬁguration of our grasp, the lo-
cations and movements of contacts over the surfaces of
our ﬁngers, the magnitudes of grasp forces and the con-
tact conditions with respect to friction limits, etc. The
same requirements apply for robots and are provided by
the information ﬂow in Fig. 28.6.
At the upper left corner of the ﬁgure, joint angles,
combined with the forward kinematic model of the ma-
nipulator and knowledge of external link geometries,
establish the positions and orientations of coordinate
frames embedded in the ﬁngertips. This information
is needed to integrate local information about object
shape, surface normal orientation, etc. so that the over-
all geometry and pose of the object can be determined.
Actuator effort sensors provide information about
the resultant forces, using the Jacobian transpose:
JTf D , where f is an n  1 vector of external forces
and moments taken with respect to a coordinate frame
embedded in the appendage. JT is the Jacobian trans-
pose, mapping external forces and moments to joint
torques, and  is an m  1 vector of joint torques for
a serial kinematic chain with m degrees of freedom. We
require that the k-th column of JT have elements that are
relatively large compared to the overall condition num-
ber of J to provide an accurate measurement of the k-th
element of f. Eberman and Salisbury [28.127] show
that it is possible to measure contact force and location
using only joint torque measurements if the manipula-
tor has clean dynamics.
Alternatively, we can use a multi-axis force–torque
sensor in the ﬁngers, as shown in Fig. 28.3, or robot
wrist to obtain contact forces. This approach has the
advantage of providing dynamic force signals with

Part C | 28.3
726
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Grasp
configuration
Contact forces
Contact geometry
Surface stresses
Contact impulse,
vibration
Surface properties
(e.g. thermal)
Joint angle
Sensor
Transformation
Level information
Interpretation
High level
information
Actuator
effort
Force/torque
Array
Dynamic
Thermal etc.
Contact type
Contact motion
Grasp forces
Orientation
Object shape
Object
identification
Manipulation
phase
Kinematics
Geometry
Solid
mechanics
Object pose
estimation
Feature
extraction
Event
recognition
Surface
fitting
Dynamic
filtering
Fig. 28.6 Force and tactile sensor information ﬂow and signal processing
a higher signal=noise ratio because they are not masked
by the inertias of the robot arm or ﬁngers and their
transmissions. If the geometry of the ﬁngertip is known,
one can use intrinsic tactile sensing [28.65, 128] to
compute the contact location as well as the contact force
by examining ratios of resultant forces and torques at
the sensor.
When the contacts are small compared to the ﬁnger-
tips (so that a point-contact approximation applies) and
the ﬁngertips are convex shapes, the contact location
is easily computed. Fig. 28.7 shows a contact force f,
contacting the ﬁngertip surface at a location r. A force–
torque sensor such as that in Fig. 28.2 measures the
moment,  D rf, with respect to the origin. If we con-
sider the lever arm h, perpendicular to the line of action
of f, then h=h D f=f  =, where h D =f is the mag-
nitude of h. We can then write that r D h ˛f, where ˛
is a constant obtained by solving for the intersection of
the line of action and the ﬁngertip surface. For a convex
ﬁngertip, there will be two such points, of which only
one corresponds to a positive (inward) contact force.
From the contact location one can deduce the lo-
cal contact normal and contact kinematic type from
a small number of force measurements. Bicchi presents
algorithms for extending these methods to soft ﬁn-
gers [28.128]. Brock and Chiu [28.66] describe the use
of force sensors for the perception of object shape using
this approach and for measuring the mass and center of
mass of a grasped object.
For precision tasks involving small objects or small
forces and motions, cutaneous sensors provide the most
sensitive measurements. In general, as task require-
y
x
z
Contact force
on fingertip
surface
r
h
f
Fig. 28.7 Intrinsic tactile sensing: a contact produces
a unique line of action and moment about the origin of
a coordinate system in the ﬁngertip. The contact location
can be obtained by solving for the intersection of the line
of action and the ﬁngertip surface

Force and Tactile Sensing
28.3 Tactile Information Processing
727
Part C | 28.3
ments get smaller, the sensor must be located closer
to the contact so that the compliance and inertia of
the intervening parts of the manipulator do not inter-
fere with the measurement. Dario [28.129] suggests
that ﬁnger tip force sensors are useful for forces of
0:110:0 N while array sensors can measure distributed
forces of 0:011:0 N. Son et al. [28.74] ﬁnd that intrin-
sic tactile sensing and array sensors can both provide
accurate (within 1 mm) estimates of contact location;
however, the intrinsic tactile sensing method is in-
herently sensitive to the accuracy of the force–torque
sensor calibration and can produce transient errors due
to unmodeled dynamic forces.
Proceeding down the left side of Fig. 28.6 we come
to the large category of cutaneous array sensors. The in-
terpretation of information from array sensors depends
initially on the transducer type. For arrays of binary
contact or proximity sensors, interpretation amounts
mainly to establishing the location and general shape of
the contact area. Techniques common to binary vision
can be used to obtain sub-pixel resolution and to iden-
tify contact features. This information, in combination
with measurements of the grasp forces from actuator
effort or force–torque sensors, is sufﬁcient for basic ma-
nipulation tasks [28.69].
28.3.2 Solid Mechanics and Deconvolution
A basic problem associated with tactile array sensors
is to reconstruct what is happening at the surface of the
skin from a ﬁnite set of measurements obtained beneath
the surface. Typically we are interested in determining
pressure and perhaps shear stress distributions associ-
ated with contacts on the skin. In other cases, as when
the ﬁngertips consist of a gel or soft foam covered by
a thin membrane so that the pressure is nearly constant,
the local geometry of the contact is of interest.
In the following example we consider the case of
an array of elements located at a depth d below the
surface of an elastomeric skin. A contact has resulted
in a pressure distribution over the region of interest.
We establish a coordinate system with z pointing in
the inward normal direction and, for simplicity, we ex-
amine a one-dimensional loading case, p.y/, in which
the pressure distribution is unchanging in the x direc-
tion. We further assume that the extent of the skin in
the x direction is large compared to the skin thickness
so that strains in the x direction are inhibited, leading
to a plane strain elasticity problem. We assume that
the skin is a homogenous, isotropic material and the
strains are small enough that linear elasticity theory
can be applied. Of course, none of these assumptions
is entirely valid in practical cases; however, the results
do agree qualitatively with the measurements obtained
with actual robot ﬁngers and tactile arrays. A thorough
discussion of the general approach and of the accuracy
of the linear elastic models can be found in [28.91, 96,
99, 130, 131].
Figure 28.8 illustrates the case of two line loads, or
knife edges, pressed against the surface of the skin (akin
to a planar version of the two-point discrimination test
for human tactile acuity). The solution for a single line
load, or impulse response, was derived by Boussinesq in
1885. For the case of plane strain the principal stresses
in the .y; z/ plane from a normal unit impulse can be
expressed in cartesian coordinates as [28.132]
z.y; z/ D
2
z

1
Œ1 C .y=z/22 ;
(28.1)
y.y; z/ D
2
z

.y=z/2
Œ1 C .y=z/22 ;
(28.2)
x.y; z/ D 
.y C z/ ;
(28.3)
where 
 is Poisson’s ratio for the material (typically 0.5
for elastomeric materials).
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
x
y
z
y position (λ)
σz (y,z)
δ2
3.33 λ
3.33 λ
δ1
d2
d1
z = d1
z = d2
 Sensors, d1 = 2λ
 Sensors, d2 = 3λ
 λ
Elastic layer
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
6.66 λ
Continuous stress
Fig. 28.8 Plane strain stress response for two (unit magni-
tude) line loads. Note the blurring that occurs with greater
depth

Part C | 28.3
728
Part C
Sensing and Perception
For two such line loads located at distances ı1
and ı2 from the origin, the solution can be obtained by
superposition
z.y; z/ D
2
z

8
ˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆ:
1

1 C

yı1
z
22
C
1

1 C

yı2
z
22
9
>>>=
>>>;
;
(28.4)
y.y; z/ D
2
z

8
ˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆ:

yı1
z
2

1 C
n
yı1
z
o22
C

yı2
z
2

1 C
n
yı2
z
o22
9
>>>=
>>>;
:
(28.5)
For more general pressure distributions the stresses
can be found by convolution of the pressure distribu-
tion, p.y/, and the impulse response Gi.y; z/
i D
Dy
Z
D1
Œp./dGi.y  ; z/ :
(28.6)
Also plotted in Fig. 28.8 are curves corresponding
to the vertical stress components, z, at two different
depths d1 D 2 and d2 D 3, where  is the sensor
spacing. As we go deeper beneath the skin, the stresses
become smoothed or blurred, and the ability to dis-
tinguish between closely spaced impulses diminishes.
However, the blurring of concentrated pressure distri-
butions can also provide an advantage when we have
a limited number of sensors because the stresses and
strains spread over a larger area and are more likely to
affect at least one sensor. The elastic skin also provides
a kind of automatic edge enhancement because stresses
are high at the transitions between loaded and unloaded
regions of the skin.
In most cases, for example in the case of capac-
itive or magnetic sensors, the sensing elements will
measure strains or local deformations of the skin ma-
terial in the vertical direction. In a few cases, such as
pieces of piezoelectric ﬁlm embedded in an elastomeric
skin [28.91], the sensors are sufﬁciently stiff compared
to the surrounding material that they can be considered
to measure stresses directly.
For the case of elastic plane strain, the strains are
related to the stresses by [28.133]
y D 1
E

y  
.x C z/
	
;
(28.7)
z D 1
E
z  
.x C y/	 ;
(28.8)
where E is the Young’s modulus and 
 is the Poisson’s
ratio, which we assume is 0.5 for an elastomeric skin.
Figure 28.9 shows the typical measurements that
may be obtained from a row of sensing elements from
the two line loads applied in Fig. 28.8. Each bar cor-
responds to the strain, zi measured by a corresponding
element and computed using (28.8), with stresses ob-
tained from (28.3)–(28.5).
The problem at this point is to produce a best es-
timate of the surface pressure distribution, p.y/, from
this ﬁnite set of subsurface strain measurements. The
problem is a classic example of estimating a signal
from a sparse set of remote measurements. One ap-
proach to this process is based on deconvolution tech-
niques [28.91, 96, 99]. The measured signal from the
sensors z is convolved with the inverse of the im-
pulse strain response H.y/ to ﬁnd an estimate of the
surface pressure that produced the signals. The inver-
sion tends to amplify high frequency noise, and the
inverse ﬁlter bandwidth must be limited according to
the spatial density of the sensors and their depth below
surface.
Another approach [28.21, 130] is to assume that the
surface pressure distribution can be approximated by
a ﬁnite set of impulses p D Œp1; p2 : : : pnt. The sen-
sor readings form a vector,  D Œ1; 2 : : : mt, where
m > n for the bandwidth limitations discussed above.
The strain response can then be written as a matrix
0
2
4
6
8
10
y position (λ)
Relative strain εz (y,z), z = 2 λ
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
–0.05
–0.1
Fig. 28.9 Measured strain with assumed 10% noise

Force and Tactile Sensing
28.3 Tactile Information Processing
729
Part C | 28.3
equation
 D Hp :
(28.9)
Each element of H is computed using (28.8) with z
and y computed using equations similar to (28.4) and
(28.5) and with x from (28.3). The estimated discrete
pressure distribution is then found by taking the pseu-
doinverse of H
Op D HC :
(28.10)
Using the strain measurements from Fig. 28.9, at
a depth d D 2, the estimated pressure distribution us-
ing the pseudoinverse method is seen in Fig. 28.10.
In this example, because the assumed set of seven im-
pulses matches fortuitously with the actual loading, the
reconstruction is fairly accurate despite the assumed
noise.
An alternative approach to constructing soft robot
ﬁnger tips is to enclose a compliant medium such as
foam rubber or ﬂuid in a thin elastic membrane [28.25,
27, 117, 134–137]. Some of the tactile array sensors de-
veloped for these ﬁngers are able to measure directly
the shape of the membrane, so that a physical model
is not needed for interpretation of the signal [28.25].
Another sensing scheme uses an array of magnetic sen-
sors at the center of the ﬁnger to measure the changes
in the magnetic ﬁeld generated by deformations of the
magnet-loaded membrane [28.137]. A statistical algo-
rithm has been developed that can robustly determine
the membrane shape from the sensor signals [28.25].
However, a mechanical model is still required to ﬁnd the
pressure distribution across the contact from the shape
information provided by all of these sensors.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
y position (λ)
Estimated p (y,z), z = 2 λ
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Fig. 28.10 Estimated surface pressure distribution using
pseudoinverse method for 11 sensors and 7 assumed im-
pulses
28.3.3 Curvature and Shape
Information
Another alternative to measuring subsurface strains or
deﬂections is to measure directly the local curvature
at each element of an array of sensors. The curvature
information can be applied directly toward identifying
contact type and centroid location or integrated to ob-
tain the local shape of the contact [28.28, 138].
Returning to Fig. 28.6, once the local contact
shape or geometry has been established, the next steps
typically include feature identiﬁcation (e.g., identify-
ing corners or ridges on an object) and determin-
ing the overall shape and pose of the object in the
hand.
Often the object shape is at least partially known
a priori in which case a variety of surface or data ﬁtting
methods can be used. For example, Fearing [28.139]
developed a method for calculation of the radius of
curvature and orientation of a generalized cylinders
from tactile array data and [28.140] developed a neu-
ral network that performs a similar calculation. Other
schemes use contact locations, surface normals and
contact forces to determine information about object
shape and orientation with respect to the hand [28.141–
144].
Allen [28.145] uses several different primitive rep-
resentations for object shape attributes based on the
particular exploratory procedure used to sense the ob-
ject. Object volume and approximate shape are per-
ceived with enclosure grasping, and the resulting shape
is modeled using superquadric surfaces. Similarly, mea-
surement of the lateral extent of object faces leads
to a face-edge-vertex model and contour following to
a generalized cylinder representation.
The question of what constitutes an appropri-
ate set of features is not well understood, although
it clearly depends on the intended application. El-
lis [28.146] considers appropriate feature sets and
methodologies for acquiring the needed data. Lederman
and Browse [28.147] suggest that surface roughness,
surface curvature, and oriented edges are used in human
haptic perception.
28.3.4 Object and Surface
Identification
The most common application of touch information has
been in object recognition and classiﬁcation. In object
recognition the goal is to identify one object from a set
of known objects using information derived from touch.
In classiﬁcation the goal is to categorize objects ac-
cording to preselected sensed properties. These systems
are usually based on geometric information derived

Part C | 28.4
730
Part C
Sensing and Perception
from tactile array or force sensors, although some ap-
proaches use additional information (e.g., compliance,
texture, thermal properties and the kinematic pose of
the hand) [28.148–154].
28.3.5 Active Sensing Strategies
Because touch provides only local information, move-
ment is an integral part of touch sensing for recognition
and exploration. A review of tactile sensing focusing on
exploration and manipulation is found in [28.2]. Several
researchers have developed strategies for scheduling
sensor movements so that each additional observation
decreases the number of objects which are consistent
with prior observations. This is sometimes described
as a hypothesize and test approach. Early examples in-
clude [28.141, 155–157].
Klatzky et al. [28.149] have suggested that robotics
systems can employ the same exploratory procedures
used by humans in haptic exploration. These proce-
dures prescribe the ﬁnger motions needed for tasks such
as tracing object contours, measuring compliance, and
determining the lateral extent of object surfaces. Early
work on exploratory tactile sensing includes [28.145,
158, 159]. More recent examples include [28.32, 160,
161].
Edge tracking and surface following strategies
have received particular attention. Early examples in-
clude [28.162–166]; a more recent example is found
in [28.167].
28.3.6 Dynamic Sensing
and Event Detection
For dynamic tactile sensors used to detect such events
as gentle contacts or slippage between the ﬁngertips
and an object, the main challenge is to reliably de-
tect the event in question without false positives. The
dynamic tactile sensors that produce large signals in re-
sponse to contact events are also prone to producing
large signals in response to vibrations from the robot
drive train and to rapid accelerations of the robot hand.
Solutions for more robustly detecting contact events
include comparing the signals from dynamic tactile sen-
sors at and away from the contact regions and statistical
pattern recognition methods to identify the signature
of true contact events. Early examples include [28.86,
127, 168]. More recent examples have taken advantage
of the much greater realtime processing capability that
is now available for signal processing and event classi-
ﬁcation [28.32, 161, 169, 170].
28.3.7 Integration of Thermal
and Other Sensors
Sensors such as thermal contact sensors are rarely used
in isolation; their signals are generally integrated with
those from tactile arrays and other sensors to produce
additional information for identifying objects. Exam-
ples of integrated thermal and mechanical sensors for
surface characterization include [28.24, 52, 171].
28.4 Integration Challenges
A critical problem that we have not yet addressed is
the difﬁculty of connecting to a large and diverse ar-
ray of tactile sensors. In 1987 Jacobsen et al. [28.172]
cited the routing of wires as perhaps the most difﬁcult
problem in dexterous hand design and, to a large extent,
this remains true today. However, some solutions to this
problem have been presented in recent years using wire-
less sensor arrays or digital busses for power and signal
connections.
In early work, Shinoda and Oasa [28.173] embed-
ded tiny wireless sensing elements in an elastic skin
that uses an inductive base coil to provide power and
signal transmission. Hakozaki and Shinoda [28.174]
embed tactile sensor chips between 2 layers of conduc-
tive rubber provide power and serial communication. In
other work, [28.18, 20] produce large scale printed ar-
rays with built-in multiplexing and communications.
In a different approach, Yamada et al. [28.168] use
wireless sensor chips and light transmitted through
a transparent elastomer both for power and to commu-
nicate to a power-receiver chip. Ascari et al. [28.175]
propose a communications scheme with all information
transmitted along optical ﬁbers.
In recent years, the proliferation of microprocessors
that can perform local signal conditioning, multiplex-
ing and digital communications has been particularly
helpful.These devices, adapted from touch-screens,
are small enough to be located at the ﬁngertips of
a hand. One solution is to modify the barometric pres-
sure sensing chips common in cell phones, converting
them into pressure sensing elements [28.95, 176]. An-
other is to use processors adapted for capacitive touch
screens [28.94, 103]. Still another involves arrays of op-
tical tactile devices [28.22].

Force and Tactile Sensing
References
731
Part C | 28
28.5 Conclusions and Future Developments
In comparison to computer vision, tactile sensing al-
ways seems to be a few years away from widespread
adoption. As explained in the introduction to this chap-
ter, the reasons include physical problems (placement
and robustness of sensors, wiring challenges) and the
diversity of sensor types for detecting forces, pressures,
local geometries, vibrations, etc. As we have seen, the
transduction and interpretation methods are typically
different for each of these tactile quantities. However,
there are some basic issues that apply to tactile sensing
in general. For example, sensors are generally located
within or beneath a compliant skin, which affects the
quantities that they sense in comparison to pressures,
stresses, thermal gradients or displacements applied to
the skin surface.
When choosing tactile sensors for a robot arm or
hand, it is effective to begin with a consideration of
which tactile quantities are most desired and for what
purpose. For example, if the main concern is to ob-
tain accurate measurements of loads or contact forces
at sufﬁcient data rates for force servoing, then intrinsic
tactile sensing may make the most sense. If manipu-
lating objects with soft contacts and with sliding or
rolling, curved array sensors for measuring pressure
distributions, or perhaps local skin deﬂections, may be
desirable. If exploring objects to learn about their tex-
ture and material composition, dynamic tactile sensors
and thermal sensors may be effective.
In an ideal world, one would incorporate all these
tactile sensors in a robotic end-effector without regard
to cost, signal processing or wiring complexity. For-
tunately, the cost and size of transducers suitable for
tactile sensing are steadily dropping and the ability to
perform localized processing is improving with surface-
mounted devices on ﬂexible circuits. In the near future
it will be increasingly possible to fabricate dense arrays
of transducers in-situ on contoured surfaces, using ma-
terial deposition and laser machining techniques. In this
way, robots may ﬁnally start to approach the tactile sen-
sitivity and responsiveness of animals.
Video-References
VIDEO 14
The effect of twice dropping, and then gently placing, a two gram weight on a small capacitive tactile
array
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/28/videodetails/14
VIDEO 15
Capacitive tactile sensing
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/28/videodetails/15
References
28.1
M.I. Tiwana, S.J. Redmond, N.H. Lovell: A re-
view of tactile sensing technologies with applica-
tions in biomedical engineering, Sens. Actuators
A Phys. 179, 17–31 (2012)
28.2
H. Yousef, M. Boukallel, K. Althoefer: Tactile
sensing for dexterous in-hand manipulation in
robotics – A review, Sens. Actuators A Phys. 167(2),
171–187 (2011)
28.3
R.S. Dahiya, G. Metta, M. Valle, G. Sandini: Tactile
sensing – From humans to humanoids, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 26(1), 1–20 (2010)
28.4
C. Lucarotti, C.M. Oddo, N. Vitiello, M.C. Carrozza:
Synthetic and bio-artificial tactile sensing: A re-
view, Sensors 13(2), 1435–1466 (2013)
28.5
M.H. Lee: Tactile sensing: new directions, new
challenges, Int. J. Robotic Res. 19(7), 636–643
(2000)
28.6
M.H.
Lee,
H.R. Nicholls:
Tactile
sensing
for
mechatronics-a state of the art survey, Mecha-
tronics 9(1), 1–31 (1999)
28.7
L.D. Harmon: Automated tactile sensing, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 1(2), 3–32 (1982)
28.8
J.-P. Uldry, R.A. Russell: Developing conduc-
tive elastomers for applications in robotic tactile
sensing, Adv. Robotics 6(2), 255–271 (1992)
28.9
T.V. Papakostas, J. Lima, M. Lowe: A large area
force sensor for smart skin applications, Proc. IEEE
Sens., Vol. 2 (2002) pp. 1620–1624
28.10
M. Shimojo, A. Namiki, M. Ishikawa, R. Makino,
K. Mabuchi: A tactile sensor sheet using pres-
sure conductive
rubber with
electrical-wires
stitched method, IEEE Sens. J. 4(5), 589–596
(2004)
28.11
D. De Rossi, A. Della Santa, A. Mazzoldi: Dress-
ware: wearable piezo- and thermoresistive fab-
rics for ergonomics and rehabilitation, Proc. 19th
Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Vol. 5
(1997) pp. 1880–1883
28.12
A. Tognetti, F. Lorussi, M. Tesconi, D. De Rossi:
Strain sensing fabric characterization, Proc. IEEE
Sens., Vol. 1 (2004) pp. 527–530
28.13
R.S. Fearing, T.O. Binford: Using a cylindrical tac-
tile sensor for determining curvature, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 7(6), 806–817 (1991)

Part C | 28
732
Part C
Sensing and Perception
28.14
Pressure
Profile
Systems:
http://www.
pressureprofile.com/
28.15
H.-K. Lee, S.-I. Chang, E. Yoon: A flexible polymer
tactile sensor: Fabrication and modular expand-
ability for large area deployment, J. Microelec-
tromechanical Syst. 15(6), 1681–1686 (2006)
28.16
T. Hoshi, H. Shinoda: A sensitive skin based
on touch-area-evaluating tactile elements, Proc.
14th Symp. Haptic Interfaces Virtual Env. Teleop-
erator Syst. (2006) pp. 89–94
28.17
P. Maiolino, M. Maggiali, G. Cannata, G. Metta,
L. Natale: A flexible and robust large scale capac-
itive tactile system for robots, IEEE Sens. J. 13(10),
3910–3917 (2013)
28.18
T. Sekitani, M. Takamiya, Y. Noguchi, S. Nakano,
Y. Kato, T. Sakurai, T. Someya: A large-area wire-
less power-transmission sheet using printed or-
ganic transistors and plastic MEMS switches, Nat.
Mater. 6(6), 413–417 (2007)
28.19
R.S. Dahiya, D. Cattin, A. Adami, C. Collini, L. Bar-
boni, M. Valle, L. Lorenzelli, R. Oboe, G. Metta,
F. Brunetti: Towards tactile sensing system on chip
for robotic applications, IEEE Sens. J. 11(12), 3216–
3226 (2011)
28.20
K. Takei, T. Takahashi, J.C. Ho, H. Ko, A.G. Gillies,
P.W. Leu, R.S. Fearing, A. Javey: Nanowire active-
matrix circuitry for low-voltage macroscale arti-
ficial skin, Nat. Mater. 9(10), 821–826 (2010)
28.21
K. Kamiyama, H. Kajimoto, N. Kawakami, S. Tachi:
Evaluation of a vision-based tactile sensor, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 2 (2004)
pp. 1542–1547
28.22
M. Quigley, C. Salisbury, A.Y. Ng, J.K. Salis-
bury: Mechatronic design of an integrated robotic
hand, Int. J. Robobotics Res. 33(5), 706–720 (2014)
28.23
N.J. Ferrier, R.W. Brockett: Reconstructing the
shape of a deformable membrane from image
data, Int. J. Robotics Res. 19(9), 795–816 (2000)
28.24
C.H. Lin, T.W. Erickson, J.A. Fishel, N. Wettels,
G.E. Loeb: Signal processing and fabrication of
a biomimetic tactile sensor array with ther-
mal, force and microvibration modalities, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Biomim. (ROBIO) (2009)
pp. 129–134
28.25
W.C. Nowlin: Experimental results on Bayesian al-
gorithms for interpreting compliant tactile sens-
ing data, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Vol. 1 (1991) pp. 378–383
28.26
R.A. Russell, S. Parkinson: Sensing surface shape
by touch, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Vol. 1 (1993) pp. 423–428
28.27
R.A. Russell: Compliant-skin tactile sensor, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1987)
pp. 1645–1648
28.28
W.R. Provancher, M.R. Cutkosky: Sensing local ge-
ometry for dexterous manipulation, Proc. Intl.
Symp. Exp. Robotics (2002) pp. 507–516
28.29
P. Dario, R. Lazzarini, R. Magni, S.R. Oh: An in-
tegrated miniature fingertip sensor, Proc. 7th Int.
Symp. Micro Mach. Hum. Sci. (1996) pp. 91–97
28.30
R.D. Howe, M.R. Cutkosky: Dynamic tactile sens-
ing: perception of fine surface features with stress
rate sensing, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 9(2),
140–151 (1993)
28.31
R.D. Howe, M.R. Cutkosky: Sensing skin accelera-
tion for texture and slip perception, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 1 (1989) pp. 145–
150
28.32
J.M. Romano, K. Hsiao, G. Niemeyer, S. Chitta,
K.J. Kuchenbecker: Human-inspired robotic grasp
control with tactile sensing, IEEE Trans. Robotics
27(6), 1067–1079 (2011)
28.33
J. Lee, S.N. Sponberg, O.Y. Loh, A.G. Lamper-
ski, R.J. Full, N.J. Cowan: Templates and anchors
for antenna-based wall following in cockroaches
and robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics 24(1), 130–143
(2008)
28.34
T.J. Prescott, M.J. Pearson, B. Mitchinson, J.C. Sul-
livan, A. Pipe: Whisking with robots: from rat vib-
rissae to biomimetic technology for active touch,
IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 16(3), 42–50 (2009)
28.35
R.A. Russell: Using tactile whiskers to measure
surface contours, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (1992) pp. 1295–1299
28.36
M. Kaneko, N. Kanayama, T. Tsuji: Active antenna
for contact sensing, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
14(2), 278–291 (1998)
28.37
T.N. Clements, C.D. Rahn: Three-dimensional
contact imaging with an actuated whisker, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 22(4), 844–848 (2006)
28.38
T.J. Prescott, M.J. Pearson, B. Mitchinson, J.C. Sul-
livan, A. Pipe: Tactile discrimination using ac-
tive whisker sensors, IEEE Sens. J. 12(2), 350–362
(2012)
28.39
J.M. Vranish, R.L. McConnell, S. Mahalingam: Ca-
paciflector collision avoidance sensors for robots,
Comput. Electr. Eng. 17(3), 173–179 (1991)
28.40
E. Cheung, V. Lumelsky: A sensitive skin system
for motion control of robot arm manipulators,
Robotics Auton. Syst. 10(1), 9–32 (1992)
28.41
D. Um, V. Lumelsky: Fault tolerance via com-
ponent redundancy for a modularized sensitive
skin, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1999) pp. 722–727
28.42
S. Walker, K. Loewke, M. Fischer, C. Liu, J.K. Salis-
bury: An optical fiber proximity sensor for haptic
exploration, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2007) pp. 473–478
28.43
P. Wei, L. Zhizeng: A design of miniature strong
anti-jamming proximity sensor, Proc. Int. Conf.
Comp. Sci. Electron. Eng. (ICCSEE) (2012) pp. 327–
331
28.44
E. Guglielmelli, V. Genovese, P. Dario, G. Morana:
Avoiding obstacles by using a proximity US/IR
sensitive skin, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (1993) pp. 2207–2214
28.45
D. Wegerif, D. Rosinski: Sensor based whole arm
obstacle avoidance for kinematically redundant
robots, Proc. SPIE – Int. Soc. Opt. Eng. 1828, 417–
426 (1992)
28.46
G. Buttazzo, P. Dario, R. Bajcsy: Finger based
explorations, Proc. SPIE 0726, Intell. Robots Com-
put. Vis. V, ed. by D.P. Casadent (1986) pp. 338–
345

Force and Tactile Sensing
References
733
Part C | 28
28.47
D. Siegel, I. Garabieta, J. Hollerbach: An inte-
grated tactile and thermal sensor, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1986) pp. 1286–1291
28.48
R.A. Russell: A thermal sensor array to provide
tactile feedback for robots, Int. J. Robotics Res.
5(3), 35–39 (1985)
28.49
F. Castelli: An integrated tactile-thermal robot
sensor with capacitive tactile array, IEEE Trans.
Ind. Appl. 38(1), 85–90 (2002)
28.50
D.G. Caldwell, C. Gosney: Enhanced tactile feed-
back (Tele-taction) using a multi-functional sen-
sory system, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) 1, 955–960 (1993)
28.51
G.J. Monkman, P.M. Taylor: Thermal tactile sens-
ing, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 9(3), 313–318
(1993)
28.52
J. Engel, J. Chen, X. Wang, Z. Fan, C. Liu, D. Jones:
Technology development of integrated multi-
modal and flexible tactile skin for robotics ap-
plications, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS), Vol. 3 (2003) pp. 2359–2364
28.53
P. Bergveld: Development and application of
chemical sensors in liquids. In: Sensors and Sen-
sory Systems for Advanced Robots, NATO ASI Series,
Vol. 43, ed. by P. Dario (Springer, Berlin, Heidel-
berg 1988) pp. 397–414
28.54
T. Nakamoto, A. Fukuda, T. Moriizumi: Perfume
and flavor identification by odor sensing sys-
tem using quartz-resonator sensor array and
neural-network pattern recognition, Proc. 6th
Int. Conf. Solid-State Sens. Actuators (TRANSDUC-
ERS ’91) (1991)
28.55
R.A. Russell: Survey of robotic applications for
odor-sensing technology, Int. J. Robotics Res.
20(2), 144–162 (2001)
28.56
A.J. Lilienthal, A. Loutfi, T. Duckett: Airborne
chemical sensing with mobile robots, Sensors
6(11), 1616–1678 (2006)
28.57
B.A. Auld, A.J. Bahr: A novel multifunction robot
sensor, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1986) pp. 1791–1797
28.58
H. Clergeot, D. Placko, J.M. Detriche: Electrical
proximity sensors. In: Sensors and Sensory Sys-
tems for Advanced Robots, NATO ASI Series, Vol. 43,
ed. by P. Dario (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1988)
pp. 295–308
28.59
M. Kaneko, K. Tanie: Contact point detection for
grasping of an unknown object using self-posture
changeability (SPC), IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.,
Vol. 10 (1994) pp. 355–367
28.60
A.M. Dollor, L.P. Jentoft, J.H. Cao, R.D. Howe: Con-
tact sensing and grasping performance of compli-
ant hands, Auton. Robots 28(1), 65–75 (2010)
28.61
J.K. Salisbury: Appendix to kinematic and force
analysis of articulated hands. In: Robot Hands
and the Mechanics of manipulation, ed. by
M.T. Mason, J.K. Salisbury (MIT Press, Cambridge
1985)
28.62
G. Palli, C. Melchiorri, G. Vassura, U. Scarcia,
L. Moriello, G. Berselli, A. Cavallo, G. De Maria,
C. Natale, S. Pirozzi, C. May, F. Ficuciello, B. Sicil-
iano: The DEXMART hand: Mechatronic design and
experimental evaluation of synergy-based con-
trol for human-like grasping, Int. J. Robotics Res.
33(5), 799–824 (2014)
28.63
A. Pugh (Ed.): Robot Sensors, Volume 2: Tac-
tile and Non-Vision (IFS Publ./Springer, New York
1986)
28.64
J.G. Webster: Tactile Sensors for Robotics and
Medicine (Wiley, New York 1988)
28.65
J.K. Salisbury: Interpretation of contact geome-
tries from force measurements. In: Robotics Res.
First Int. Symp, ed. by M. Brady, R.P. Paul (MIT
Press, Cambridge 1984)
28.66
D. Brock, S. Chiu: Environment perception of an
articulated robot hand using contact sensors,
ASME Winter Annu. Meet. Robotics Manuf. Au-
toma., Vol. 15 (1985) pp. 89–96
28.67
J. Butterfass, M. Grebenstein, H. Liu, G. Hirzinger:
DLR-Hand II: next generation of a dextrous robot
hand, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Vol. 1 (2001) pp. 109–114
28.68
F.W. Sinden, R.A. Boie: A planar capacitive force
sensor with six degrees of freedom, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1986) pp. 1806–1813
28.69
B.B. Edin,
L. Beccai, L. Ascari, S. Roccella,
J.J. Cabibihan, M.C. Carrozza: A bio-inspired ap-
proach for the design and characterization of
a tactile sensory system for a cybernetic prosthetic
hand, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2006) pp. 1354–1358
28.70
Y.-L. Park, S.C. Ryu, R.J. Black, K.K. Chau,
B. Moslehi, M.R. Cutkosky: Exoskeletal force-
sensing end-effectors with embedded optical
fiber-bragg-grating sensors, IEEE Trans. Robotics
25(6), 1319–1331 (2009)
28.71
A. Bicchi: A criterion for optimal design of mul-
tiaxis force sensors, Robotics Auton. Syst. 10(4),
269–286 (1992)
28.72
M. Uchiyama, E. Bayo, E. Palma-Villalon: A math-
ematical approach to the optimal structural
design
of a robot force sensor, Proc. USA-
Japan Symp. Flexible Automation (1998) pp. 539–
546
28.73
A. Bicchi, J.K. Salisbury, P. Dario: Augmentation
of grasp robustness using intrinsic tactile sensing,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 1
(1989) pp. 302–307
28.74
J.S. Son, M.R. Cutkosky, R.D. Howe: Comparison of
contact sensor localization abilities during ma-
nipulation, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS), Vol. 2 (1995) pp. 96–103
28.75
R.S. Johansson, J.R. Flanagan: Coding and use of
tactile signals from the fingertips in object ma-
nipulation tasks, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10(5), 345–
359 (2009)
28.76
M. Ueda: Tactile sensors for an industrial robot
to detect a slip, Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Ind. Robots
(1972) pp. 63–70
28.77
R. Matsuda: Slip sensor of industrial robot and
its application, Electric. Eng. Jap. 96(5), 129–136
(1976)
28.78
J. Rebman, J.-E. Kallhammer: A Search for Pre-
cursors of Slip in Robotic Grasp, Intelligent Robots

Part C | 28
734
Part C
Sensing and Perception
and Computer Vision: Fifth in a Series, Cambridge,
ed. by E. Casaent (1986) pp. 329–337
28.79
P. Dario, D. De Rossi: Tactile sensors and the grip-
ping challenge, IEEE Spectrum 22(8), 46–52 (1985)
28.80
R.W. Patterson, G.E. Nevill: The induced vibra-
tion touch sensor – A new dynamic touch sensing
concept, Robotica 4(01), 27–31 (1986)
28.81
M.R. Cutkosky, J. Ulmen: Dynamic Tactile Sensing.
In: The Human Hand as an Inspiration for Robot
Hand Development, Springer Tracts in Advanced
Robotics 95, ed. by R. Balasubramanian, V.J. San-
tos (Springer, Cham 2014) pp. 389–403
28.82
D. Dornfeld, C. Handy: Slip detection using acous-
tic emission signal analysis, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 3 (1987) pp. 1868–1875
28.83
X.A. Wu, N. Burkhard, B. Heyneman, R. Valen,
M.R. Cutkosky: Contact event detection for robotic
oil drilling, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2014) pp. 2255–2261
28.84
S. Omata: Real time robotic tactile sensor system
for the determination of the physical properties
of biomaterials, Sens. Actuators A Phys. 112(2/3),
278–285 (2004)
28.85
S.B.
Backus,
A.M.
Dollar:
Robust
resonant
frequency-based contact detection with applica-
tions in robotic reaching and grasping, IEEE/ASME
Trans. Mechatron. 19(5), 1552–1561 (2014)
28.86
M.R. Tremblay, M.R. Cutkosky: Estimating friction
using incipient slip sensing during a manipula-
tion task, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Vol. 1 (1993) pp. 429–434
28.87
E.G.M. Holweg, H. Hoeve, W. Jongkind, L. Mar-
coni, C. Melchiorri, C. Bonivento: Slip detection by
tactile sensors: Algorithms and experimental re-
sults, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Vol. 4 (1996) pp. 3234–3239
28.88
I. Fujimoto, Y. Yamada, T. Maeno, T. Morizono,
Y. Umetani: Identification of incipient slip phe-
nomena based on the circuit output signals of
PVDF film strips embedded in artificial finger
ridges, Trans. Soc. Instrum. Control Eng. 40(6),
648–655 (2004)
28.89
B. Choi, H.R. Choi, S. Kang: Development of tac-
tile sensor for detecting contact force and slip,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
pp. 2638–2643
28.90
P.A. Schmidt, E. Maël, R.P. Würtz: A sensor for
dynamic tactile information with applications in
human–robot interaction and object exploration,
Robotics Auton. Syst. 54(12), 1005–1014 (2006)
28.91
R.D. Howe: Tactile sensing and control of robotic
manipulation, Adv. Robotics 8(3), 245–261 (1993)
28.92
C. Melchiorri: Slip detection and control using
tactile and force sensors, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mecha-
tron. 5(3), 235–243 (2000)
28.93
C.M. Oddo, L. Beccai, G.G. Muscolo, M.C. Carrozza:
A biomimetic MEMS-based tactile sensor array
with fingerprints integrated in a robotic fingertip
for artificial roughness encoding, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Biomim. (2009) pp. 894–900
28.94
A. Schmitz, M. Maggiali, L. Natale, B. Bonino,
G. Metta: A tactile sensor for the fingertips of the
humanoid robot iCub, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (2010) pp. 2212–2217
28.95
L.P. Jentoft, Y. Tenzer,
D. Vogt, R.J. Wood,
R.D. Howe: Flexible, stretchable tactile arrays
from MEMS barometers, Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Adv.
Robotics (2013) pp. 1–6
28.96
R.S. Fearing, J.M. Hollerbach: Basic solid mechan-
ics for tactile sensing, Int. J. Robotics Res. 4(3),
40–54 (1985)
28.97
W. Griffin, W.M. Provancher, M.R. Cutkosky:
Feedback strategies for telemanipulation with
shared control of object handling forces, Pres-
ence Teleoperations Virtual Environ. 14(6), 720–731
(2005)
28.98
H. Maekawa, K. Tanie, K. Komoriya, M. Kaneko,
C.
Horiguchi,
T.
Sugawara:
Development
of
a finger-shaped tactile sensor and its evaluation
by active touch, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA), Vol. 2 (1992) pp. 1327–1334
28.99
R.S. Fearing: Tactile sensing mechanisms, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 9(3), 3–23 (1987)
28.100
G. Cannata, M. Maggiali, G. Metta, G. Sandini:
An embedded artificial skin for humanoid robots,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Muiltisens. Fusion Integr. In-
tell. Syst. (2008) pp. 434–438
28.101
M.-Y. Cheng, X.-H. Huang, C.-W. Ma, Y.-J. Yang:
A flexible capacitive tactile sensing array with
floating electrodes, J. Micromechanics Microengi-
neering 19(11), 115001 (2009)
28.102
Y. Hasegawa, M. Shikida, D. Ogura, Y. Suzuki,
K. Sato: Fabrication of a wearable fabric tac-
tile sensor produced by artificial hollow fiber,
J. Micromechanics Microengineering 18(8), 085014
(2008)
28.103
D. McConnell Aukes, M.R. Cutkosky, S. Kim, J. Ul-
men, P. Garcia, H. Stuart, A. Edsinger: Design and
testing of a selectively compliant underactuated
hand, Int. J. Robotics Res. 33(5), 721–735 (2014)
28.104
O. Kerpa, K. Weiss, H. Worn: Development of
a flexible tactile sensor system for a humanoid
robot, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2003) pp. 1–6
28.105
D. Bloor, A. Graham, E.J. Williams, P.J. Laughlin,
D. Lussey: Metal–polymer composite with nanos-
tructured filler particles and amplified physical
properties, Appl. Phys. Lett. 88(10), 102103 (2006)
28.106
Peratech:
Peratech
QTC,
http://www.peratech.
com/standard-products/ (2014)
28.107
T. Someya: Integration of organic field-effect
transistors and rubbery pressure sensors for ar-
tificial skin applications, Proc. IEEE Int. Electron.
Dev. Meet. (2003) pp. 8–14
28.108
H. Alirezaei, A. Nagakubo, Y. Kuniyoshi: A tactile
distribution sensor which enables stable mea-
surement under high and dynamic stretch, Proc.
IEEE Symp. 3D User Interfaces (2009) pp. 87–93
28.109
Y.-L. Park, B.-R. Chen, R.J. Wood: Design and
fabrication of soft artificial skin using embedded
microchannels and liquid conductors, IEEE Sens.
J. 12(8), 2711–2718 (2012)
28.110
R. Kageyama, S. Kagami, M. Inaba, H. Inoue: De-
velopment of soft and distributed tactile sensors

Force and Tactile Sensing
References
735
Part C | 28
and the application to a humanoid robot, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man Cybern., Vol. 2 (1999)
pp. 981–986
28.111
B.J. Kane, M.R. Cutkosky, G.T.A. Kovacs: A trac-
tion stress sensor array for use in high-resolution
robotic tactile imaging, J. Microelectromechanical
Syst. 9(4), 425–434 (2000)
28.112
H. Takao, K. Sawada, M. Ishida: Monolithic silicon
smart tactile image sensor with integrated strain
sensor array on pneumatically swollen single-
diaphragm structure, IEEE Trans. Electron. Dev.
53(5), 1250–1259 (2006)
28.113
K. Noda, I. Shimoyama: A Shear stress sensing for
robot hands -Orthogonal arrayed piezoresistive
cantilevers standing in elastic material-, Proc.
14th Symp. Haptic Interfaces Virtual Env. Teleop-
erator Syst. (2006) pp. 63–66
28.114
M.-Y. Cheng, C.-L. Lin, Y.-J. Yang: Tactile and
shear stress sensing array using capacitive mech-
anisms with floating electrodes, 2010 IEEE 23rd
Int. Conf. Micro Electro Mech. Syst. (2010) pp. 228–
231
28.115
P. Valdastri, S. Roccella, L. Beccai, E. Cattin,
A. Menciassi, M.C. Carrozza, P. Dario: Characteri-
zation of a novel hybrid silicon three-axial force
sensor, Sens. Actuators A 123/124, 249–257 (2005)
28.116
S.C.B. Mannsfeld, B.C.-K. Tee, R.M. Stoltenberg,
C.V.H.H.
Chen,
S.
Barman,
B.V.O.
Muir,
A.N. Sokolov, C. Reese, Z. Bao: Highly sensitive
flexible pressure sensors with microstructured
rubber
dielectric
layers,
Nat.
Mater.
9(10),
859–864 (2010)
28.117
R. Brockett: Robotic hands with rheological sur-
faces, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1985) pp. 942–946
28.118
K.B. Shimoga, A.A. Goldenberg: Soft robotic fin-
gertips. I. A comparison of construction materials,
Int. J. Rob, Res. 15(4), 320–350 (1996)
28.119
A. Mazid, R. Russell: A robotic opto-tactile sen-
sor for assessing object surface texture, IEEE Conf.
Robotics Autom. Mechatronics (2006) pp. 1–5
28.120
L.S. Lincoln, S.J.M. Bamberg, E. Parsons, C. Salis-
bury, J. Wheeler: An elastomeric insole for 3-axis
ground reaction force measurement, Proc. IEEE
RAS/EMBS Int. Conf. Biomedical Robotics Biomech.
(2012) pp. 1512–1517
28.121
H. Shinoda, K. Matsumoto, S. Ando: Acoustic res-
onant tensor cell for tactile sensing, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 4 (1997)
pp. 3087–3092
28.122
H. Shinoda, S. Sasaki, K. Nakamura: Instanta-
neous evaluation of friction based on ARTC tac-
tile sensor, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Vol. 3 (2000) pp. 2173–2178
28.123
S. Ando, H. Shinoda, A. Yonenaga, J. Terao: Ul-
trasonic six-axis deformation sensing, IEEE Trans.
Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control. 48(4), 1031–
1045 (2001)
28.124
P. Dario, D. De Rossi, C. Domenici, R. Francesconi:
Ferroelectric polymer tactile sensors with anthro-
pomorphic features, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (1984) pp. 332–340
28.125
D.M. Siegel: Contact sensors for dextrous robotic
hands, MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory Tech.
Rep., no. 900 (MIT Press, Cambridge 1986)
28.126
J.S. Son, E.A. Monteverde, R.D. Howe: A tactile
sensor for localizing transient events in manipu-
lation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Vol. 1 (1994) pp. 471–476
28.127
B.S.
Eberman,
J.K.
Salisbury:
Determination
of Manipulator Contact Information from Joint
Torque Measurements. In: Experimental Robotics
I, The First International Symposium, ed. by
V. Hayward, O. Khatib (Springer, Montreal 1990)
28.128
A. Bicchi: Intrinsic contact sensing for soft fingers,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1990)
pp. 968–973
28.129
P. Dario: Tactile sensing for robots: Present and
future. In: The Robotics Review 1, ed. by O. Khatib,
J. Craig, T. Lozano-Perez (MIT Press, Cambridge
1989) pp. 133–146
28.130
J.R. Phillips, K.O. Johnson: Tactile spatial resolu-
tion III: A continuum mechanics model of skin
predicting mechanoreceptor responses to bars,
edges and gratings, J. Neurophysiol. 46(6), 1204–
1225 (1981)
28.131
T. Speeter: A tactile sensing system for robotic
manipulation, Int. J. Robotics Res. 9(6), 25–36
(1990)
28.132
K.L. Johnson: Contact Mechanics (Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge 1985)
28.133
S. Timoshenko, J.N.N. Goodier: Theory of Elasticity
(McGraw-Hill, New York 1951)
28.134
G. Kenaly, M. Cutkosky: Electrorheological fluid-
based fingers with tactile sensing, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1989) pp. 132–136
28.135
R.D. Howe: Dynamic Tactile Sensing, Ph.D. Thesis
(Stanford University, Stanford 1990)
28.136
R.M. Voyles, B.L. Stavnheim, B. Yap: Practical
electrorheological fluid-based fingers for robotic
applications, IASTED Int. Symp. Robotics Manuf.
(1989)
28.137
J.J. Clark: A magnetic field based compliance
matching sensor for high resolution, high compli-
ance tactile sensing, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (1989) pp. 772–777
28.138
T.H. Speeter: Analysis and Control of Robotic Ma-
nipulation, Ph.D. Thesis (Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland 1987)
28.139
R. Fearing: Tactile sensing for shape inter-
pretation. In: Dextrous Robot Hands, ed. by
S.T. Venkataraman, T. Iberall (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 1990) pp. 209–238
28.140
A.J. Worth, R.R. Spencer: A neural network for tac-
tile sensing: The hertzian contact problem, Proc.
Int. Jt. Conf. Neural Netw. (1989) pp. 267–274
28.141
W.E.L. Grimson, T. Lozano-Perez: Model-based
recognition and localization from sparse range
or tactile data, Int. J. Robotics Res. 3(3), 3–35
(1984)
28.142
P.C. Gaston, T. Lozano-Perez: Tactile recognition
and localization using object models: The case of
polyhedra on a plane, Proc. IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell. (1984) pp. 257–266

Part C | 28
736
Part C
Sensing and Perception
28.143
J.L. Schneiter: An objective sensing strategy for
object recognition and localization, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1986) pp. 1262–1267
28.144
R. Cole, C. Yap: Shape from probing, J. Algorithm.
8(1), 19–38 (1987)
28.145
P.K. Allen: Mapping haptic exploratory procedures
to multiple shape representations, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1990) pp. 1679–1684
28.146
R.E. Ellis: Extraction of tactile features by passive
and active sensing, Proc. SPIE 0521 (1985) p. 289
28.147
S.J. Lederman, R. Browse: The physiology and
psychophysics of touch. In: Sensors and Sensory
Systems for Advanced Robotics, ed. by P. Dario
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1986) pp. 71–91
28.148
H. Ozaki, S. Waku, A. Mohri, M. Takata: Pattern
recognition of a grasped object by unit-vector
distribution, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 12(3),
315–324 (1982)
28.149
R.L. Klatzky, R. Bajcsy, S.J. Lederman: Object
exploration in one and two fingered robots,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1987)
pp. 1806–1809
28.150
D. Siegel: Finding the pose of an object in the
hand, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1991) pp. 406–411
28.151
D. Taddeucci, C. Laschi, R. Lazzarini, R. Magni,
P. Dario, A. Starita: An approach to integrated
tactile perception, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 4 (1997) pp. 3100–3105
28.152
A. Schneider, J. Sturm, C. Stachniss, M. Reis-
ert, H. Burkhardt, W. Burgard: Object identifica-
tion with tactile sensors using bag-of-features,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2009)
pp. 243–248
28.153
N. Gorges, S.E. Navarro, D. Göger, H. Wörn: Haptic
object recognition using passive joints and haptic
key features, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2010) pp. 2349–2355
28.154
Y. Bekiroglu, J. Laaksonen, J.A. Jorgensen, V. Kyrki,
D. Kragic: Assessing grasp stability based on
learning and haptic data, IEEE Trans. Robotics
27(3), 616–629 (2011)
28.155
V.S. Gurfinkel: Tactile sensitizing of manipulators,
Eng. Cybern. 12(6), 47–56 (1974)
28.156
R. Ellis: Acquiring tactile data for the recognition
of planar objects, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 4 (1987) pp. 1799–1805
28.157
A. Cameron: Optimal tactile sensor placement,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1989)
pp. 308–313
28.158
P. Dario: Sensing body structures by an advanced
robot system, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1988) pp. 1758–1763
28.159
S.A.A. Stansfield: Robotic grasping of unknown
objects:
A
knowledge-based
approach,
Int.
J. Robotics Res. 10(4), 314–326 (1991)
28.160
A. Petrovskaya, O. Khatib: Global localization of
objects via touch, IEEE Trans. Robotics 27(3), 569–
585 (2011)
28.161
N.F. Lepora, U. Martinez-Hernandez, H. Barron-
Gonzalez, M. Evans, G. Metta, T.J. Prescott: Em-
bodied hyperacuity from Bayesian perception:
Shape and position discrimination with an iCub
fingertip sensor, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2012) pp. 4638–4643
28.162
C. Muthukrishnan, D. Smith, D. Meyers, J. Reb-
man, A. Koivo: Edge detection in tactile images,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1987)
pp. 1500–1505
28.163
A.D. Berger, P.K. Khosla: Using tactile data for
real-time feedback, Int. J. Robotics Res. 10(2),
88–102 (1991)
28.164
K. Pribadi, J.S. Bay, H. Hemami: Exploration and
dynamic shape estimation by a robotic probe,
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 19(4), 840–846
(1989)
28.165
H. Zhang, N.N. Chen: Control of contact via tactile
sensing, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 16(5), 482–
495 (2000)
28.166
A.M. Okamura, M.R. Cutkosky: Feature detection
for haptic exploration with robotic fingers, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 20(12), 925–938 (2001)
28.167
K.
Suwanratchatamanee,
M.
Matsumoto,
S. Hashimoto: Robotic tactile
sensor system
and applications, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 57(3),
1074–1087 (2010)
28.168
K. Yamada, K. Goto, Y. Nakajima, N. Koshida,
H. Shinoda: A sensor skin using wire-free tactile
sensing elements based on optical connection,
Proc. 41st SICE Annu. Conf., Vol. 1 (2002) pp. 131–
134
28.169
M. Schoepfer, C. Schuermann, M. Pardowitz,
H. Ritter: Using a piezo-resistive tactile sensor for
detection of incipient slippage, Proc. ISR/ROBOTIK
41st Int. Symp. Robotics (2010) pp. 14–20
28.170
B. Heyneman, M.R. Cutkosky: Slip interface classi-
fication through tactile signal coherence, IEEE/RSJ
IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2013)
pp. 801–808
28.171
P. Dario, P. Ferrante, G. Giacalone, L. Livaldi, B. Al-
lotta, G. Buttazzo, A.M. Sabatini: Planning and
executing tactile exploratory procedures, IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Vol. 3 (1992)
pp. 1896–1903
28.172
S.C. Jacobsen, J.E. Wood, D.F. Knutti, K.B. Biggers:
The Utah/MIT dextrous hand: Work in progress.
In: First International Conference on Robotics Re-
search, ed. by M. Brady, R.P. Paul (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1984) pp. 601–653
28.173
H. Shinoda, H. Oasa: Passive wireless sensing el-
ement for sensitive skin, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS), Vol. 2 (2000) pp. 1516–1521
28.174
M. Hakozaki, H. Shinoda: Digital tactile sens-
ing elements communicating through conductive
skin layers, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA’02), Vol. 4 (2002) pp. 3813–3817
28.175
L. Ascari, P. Corradi, L. Beccai, C. Laschi: A minia-
turized and flexible optoelectronic sensing sys-
tem for a tactile skin, Int. J. Micromechanics
Microengineering 17, 2288–2298 (2007)
28.176
M. Zillich, W. Feiten: A versatile tactile sensor sys-
tem for covering large and curved surface areas,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2012)
pp. 20–24

Multimedia Contents Inertial Sens
737
Part C | 29.1
29. Inertial Sensing, GPS and Odometry
Gregory Dudek, Michael Jenkin
This chapter examines how certain properties of
the world can be exploited in order for a robot or
other device to develop a model of its own motion
or pose (position and orientation) relative to an ex-
ternal frame of reference. Although this is a critical
problem for many autonomous robotic systems,
the problem of establishing and maintaining an
orientation or position estimate of a mobile agent
has a long history in terrestrial navigation.
29.1
Odometry ............................................
737
29.2 Gyroscopic Systems ..............................
739
29.2.1
Mechanical Systems...................
739
29.2.2 Optical Systems .........................
740
29.2.3 MEMS .......................................
741
29.3 Accelerometers ....................................
742
29.3.1
Mechanical Accelerometer..........
742
29.3.2 Piezoelectric Accelerometer ........
743
29.4 IMU Packages.......................................
743
29.4.1
Performance .............................
744
29.5 Satellite-Based Positioning
(GPS and GNSS) ....................................
744
29.5.1
Overview ..................................
745
29.5.2 Performance Factors ..................
746
29.5.3 Enhanced GPS ...........................
748
29.5.4 Nationwide Differential
GPS System (NDGPS) ...................
748
29.5.5 GPS Receivers
and Communications.................
749
29.6 GPS-IMU Integration ............................
749
29.7
Further Reading ..................................
750
29.7.1
Odometry .................................
750
29.7.2
Gyroscopic Systems ....................
750
29.7.3
Accelerometers..........................
750
29.7.4
GPS ..........................................
750
29.8 Currently Available Hardware ...............
750
29.8.1
Gyroscopic Systems ....................
750
29.8.2 Accelerometers..........................
750
29.8.3 IMU Packages ............................
751
29.8.4 GPS Components .......................
751
References...................................................
751
29.1 Odometry
The word odometry is a contraction of the Greek words
hodos meaning travel or journey, and metron mean-
ing measure. Given its importance to a wide variety
of applications from civil engineering to military con-
quest, the basic concepts that underly odometry have
been studied for over 2000 years. Perhaps the earliest
reference to odometry appears in his Ten Books on Ar-
chitecture where Vitruvius describes [29.1]
a useful invention of the greatest ingenuity, trans-
mitted by our predecessors, which enables us, while
sitting in a carriage on the road or sailing by sea, to
know how many miles of a journey we have accom-
plished.
In the context of autonomous vehicles, odometry usu-
ally refers to the use of data from the actuators (wheels,
treads, etc.) to estimate the overall motion of the vehi-
cle. The basic concept [29.2] is to develop a mathemat-
ical model of how commanded motions of the vehicles
wheels/joints/etc. induce motion of the vehicle itself,
and then to integrate these commanded motions over
time in order to develop a model of the pose of the
vehicle as a function of time. The use of odometry infor-

Part C | 29.1
738
Part C
Sensing and Perception
d
V
υl
υr
ω
θ
x
y
ICC
Fig. 29.1 Differential drive kinematics
mation to estimate the pose of the vehicle as a function
of time is known as Dead Reckoning or Deductive
Reckoning and ﬁnds wide application in navigation at
sea [29.3].
The details of odometry estimation varies with ve-
hicle design. In the context of mobile robots perhaps the
simplest vehicle for odometry estimation is the differen-
tial drive vehicle (Fig. 29.1). A differential drive vehicle
has two driveable wheels which are independently con-
trollable and which are mounted along a common axis.
Assuming that the location of the wheels are ﬁxed
on the vehicle, then for the wheels to remain in con-
stant contact with the ground, the two wheels must
describe arcs on the plane such that the vehicle rotates
around a point (known as the ICC – instantaneous cen-
ter of curvature) that lies on the wheels’ common axis
(Fig. 29.1). If the ground contact speeds of the left and
right wheels are vl and vr respectively, and the wheels
are separated by a distance 2d, then
!.R C d/ D vr ;
!.R  d/ D vl :
We can rearrange these two equations to solve for ! the
rate of rotation about the ICC and R the distance from
the center of the robot to the ICC
! D .vr  vl/=2d
R D d.vr C vl/=.vr  vl/ :
The instantaneous velocity of the point midway be-
tween the robot’s wheels is given by V D !R.
Now as vl and vr are functions of time we can gen-
erate the equation of motion for the differential drive
robot. Using the point midway between the wheels as
the origin of the robot, and writing  as the orientation
of the robot with respect to the x-axis of a global Carte-
sian coordinate system obtains
x.t/ D
Z
V.t/ cos Œ.t/ dt ;
y.t/ D
Z
V.t/ sin Œ.t/ dt ;
.t/ D
Z
!.t/dt :
This is the solution for the odometry of a differen-
tial drive vehicle on the plane. Given control inputs (vl
and vr) and some initial state estimate, we can estimate
where an idealized robot using this motion model will
be at any time t.
Given such a model and complete knowledge of
the control inputs, we should, in principle, be able
to estimate a robot’s pose at any time. In a perfect
world this would be all that is necessary to estimate
accurately the robot’s pose at any time in the fu-
ture. Unfortunately errors in the modelling (incorrect
estimations of wheel size, vehicle size), uncertainty
about the control inputs, realities of the motor con-
troller (errors between commanded wheel rotation and
true rotation), errors in the physical modelling of the
robot (wheel compaction, ground compaction, wheel
slippage, non-zero tire width), etc., introduces an error
between the dead reckoning estimate of the vehicle mo-
tion and its true motion. The problem of correcting for
this error is the problem of pose maintenance for the
vehicle, and requires the integration of the dead reckon-
ing estimate with estimates obtained from other sensor
systems.
Other chapters in this handbook examine sensors
that rely on external events, visual and otherwise, that
can provide information as to the robot’s pose or
changes in it’s pose. Here we consider sensors that
transduce physical properties of matter under the inﬂu-
ence of external forces and properties of matter and the
use of global positioning systems (GPS).

Inertial Sensing, GPS and Odometry
29.2 Gyroscopic Systems
739
Part C | 29.2
29.2 Gyroscopic Systems
The goal of gyroscopic systems is to measure changes
in vehicle orientation by taking advantage of physi-
cal laws that produce predictable effects under rotation.
A rotating frame is not an inertial frame, and thus many
physical systems will appear to behave in an apparently
non-Newtonian manner if the frame is rotating. By mea-
suring these deviations from what would be expected in
a Newtonian frame the underlying self-rotation can be
determined.
29.2.1 Mechanical Systems
Mechanical gyroscopes and gyrocompasses have a long
history in navigation, Bohnenberger is generally cred-
ited with the ﬁrst recorded construction of a gyro-
scope [29.4]. The gyrocompass was patented in 1885
by Martinus Gerardus ven den Bos. In 1903 Herman
Anschütz-Kaempfe constructed a working gyrocom-
pass and obtained a patent on the design. In 1908 Elmer
Sperry patented a gyrocompass in the US and then at-
tempted to sell this device to the German Navy. A patent
battle followed and Albert Einstein testiﬁed in the case.
([29.5–8] for more details on the history of the gyro-
compass and its inventors.)
Gyroscopes and gyrocompasses rely on the princi-
ple of the conservation of angular momentum [29.9].
Angular momentum is the tendency of a rotating ob-
ject to keep rotating at the same angular speed about
the same axis of rotation in the absence of an external
torque. The angular momentum L of an object with mo-
ment of inertia I rotating at angular speed ! is given by
L D I  !:
Consider a rapidly spinning wheel mounted on
a shaft so that it is free to change its axis of rotation
(Fig. 29.2a). Assuming no friction on the bearings or
air resistance, the rotor axis will remain constant regard-
less of the motion of the external cage. This constancy
of orientation can be exploited to maintain a bearing in-
dependently of the motion of the vehicle, although it is
not usually desirable to utilize the principle of conserva-
tion of angular momentum via a gyroscope directly. To
see this, suppose that a gyroscope is set on the equator,
with its spinning axis aligned pointing along the equa-
tor (Fig. 29.2b). As the earth spins, the gyroscope will
maintain a constant axis of orientation and thus to an
earth-ﬁxed observer will appear to rotate returning to
its original orientation every 24 hours. Similarly, if the
gyroscope were to be positioned on the equator such
that its spinning axis was parallel to the axis of rotation
of the earth, the gyroscope’s axis of rotation would re-
main stationary and would appear to remain stationary
to an earth-ﬁxed observer as the planet rotates.
Although this global motion limits the mechanical
gyroscope’s ability to sense absolute orientation di-
rectly, gyroscopes can be used to measure local changes
in orientation, and thus are well suited to vehicular
robotic applications. Rate gyros (RGs) measure a ve-
hicle’s rotation rate (its angular rate of rotation). This
is the fundamental measurement that is the basis of all
gyroscopic systems. Rate-integrating gyros (RIGs) use
embedded processing to internally integrate the angu-
lar rotation rate to produce an estimate of the absolute
angular displacement of the vehicle.
In order to exploit a gyroscope for navigation with
respect to an earth-stable frame, it is desirable for the
rotational axis of the shaft to remain ﬁxed within the
earth frame, rather than remaining ﬁxed with respect to
an external frame. A gyrocompass obtains this by rely-
ing on precession. When a torque is applied to change
the axis of rotation of a spinning object, conservation
of angular momentum will cause a change in the spin
direction that is perpendicular to the angular momen-
tum and the direction in which the torque is applied.
This is the effect that causes gyroscopes suspended at
one end to spin around the end from which they have
been suspended. Consider the pendulus gyro sketched
in Fig. 29.3a. This is a standard gyroscope with a weight
suspended below the rotational axis. As before, imagine
this pendulus gyrocompass set spinning on the equator
with the axis of rotation aligned with the axis of rota-
tion of the planet, and with the weight hanging directly
down. As the planet spins, the gyroscope’s axis of ro-
tation remains stationary and would appear to remain
a)
L = Iω
Spin axis
S
b)
Fig.29.2a,b Mechanical gyroscope. (a) Traditionally gimballed
gyroscope. The gimball provides the gyroscope the freedom to
rotate about its axis as the base of the gyroscope is rotated (b) gyro-
scope as it is rotated around the planet. The wheel of the gyroscope
(grey) remains in the same orientation as it revolves with the planet.
To an observer on the planet the gyroscope will appear to rotate

Part C | 29.2
740
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Wheel
Weight
Horizontal axis
Earth's rotation – West to East
T - Torque
P - Precision
a
b
c
d
e
T
T
T
T
P
P
P
P
Spinning axis
Vertical axis
a)
b)
Fig.29.3a,b Simple gyrocompass: (a) Pendulus gyro; (b) Precessional motion
stationary as the planet rotates. Now suppose that in-
stead of being aligned with the spin axis of the planet,
the spin axis is aligned with the equator. As the planet
spins, the spin axis is drawn out of the plane as it re-
mains aligned with the original spin axis. As it becomes
drawn out of the plane, the mass hanging below the gy-
rocompass is raised up and generates a torque down due
to gravity. The direction perpendicular to the spin axis
and the torque rotates the spin axis away from the equa-
tor (aka towards the true pole). This process is sketched
in Fig. 29.3b.
Unfortunately the pendulus gyro is not an ideal de-
vice for navigation. Although its rotation axis will align
with the rotation axis of the planet, it does not converge
to this value directly but oscillates about it. The solu-
tion to this damping problem is to use oil reservoirs,
rather than a solid weight, as the counterbalance, and to
restrict the motion of the oil in the reservoir [29.10].
a)
b)
Start
End
Start End
α
Fig.29.4a,b Circular light path. (a) Stationary path; (b) Moving
path
The gyrocompass ﬁnds true north by controlling the
precession of a gyroscope. In practice, the performance
of a mechanical gyrocompass is impacted by external
forces acting on the compass which also contribute to
the precession of the gyroscope. This includes forces
generated by motion of the device containing the gyro-
compass, as well as any external forces acting on the
vehicle. Another issue for mechanical gyrocompasses
is that in latitudes away from the equator, the stable
position of the gyrocompass is not horizontal, and ac-
curate estimates of true north in such latitudes requires
corrections to be applied to raw gyrocompass values.
Finally, mechanical gyrocompasses require an external
force to be applied to maintain the spin of the gyro-
scope. This process introduces unwanted forces into the
system which can further corrupt the measurement pro-
cess.
Given the complexity, cost, size, the delicate nature
of gyrocompasses, and the availability of less expensive
and more reliable technologies, mechanical gyrocom-
passes have given way to optical- and MEMS-based
systems (MEMS or microelectromechanical systems
are also known as micromachines or micro systems
technology and refer to mechanisms at the scale of inte-
grated circuits).
29.2.2 Optical Systems
Optical gyroscopes rely on the Sagnac effect rather than
rotational inertia in order to measure (relative) head-
ing. The mechanism is based on the behaviour of an
optical standing wave in a rotating frame. Historically
this was ﬁrst produced using lasers and an arrangement
of mirrors, but it is now typically obtained using ﬁbre-

Inertial Sensing, GPS and Odometry
29.2 Gyroscopic Systems
741
Part C | 29.2
optic technology. The Sagnac Effect is named after its
discoverer Georges Sagnac [29.11, 12]. The underlying
concept can be traced back even earlier to the work of
Harress [29.13], and perhaps ﬁnds its most famous ap-
plication in terms of the measurement of the rotation of
the earth [29.14].
Ignore relativistic effects and consider the circu-
lar light path shown in Fig. 29.4a. If two light pulses
are sent in opposite directions around a stationary path
of perimeter D D 2R they will travel the same dis-
tance at the same speed. They will arrive at the starting
point simultaneously, taking time t D D=c where c is
the speed of light in the medium. Now let us sup-
pose that instead of being stationary, this circular light
path rotates clockwise about its center at rotational
speed ! (Fig. 29.4b). The light travelling clockwise
around the path must go farther to reach the starting
point, while light travelling counterclockwise around
the path goes a shorter distance. The clockwise path
has distance
Dc D 2R C !Rtc ;
where tc is the time taken in the clockwise direction,
while the counterclockwise path has distance
Da D 2R  !Rta ;
where ta is the time taken in the counterclockwise di-
rection. But Dc D ctc and Da D cta, so
tc D 2
R
c  !R
and
ta D 2R.cC !R/ :
The time difference t D tc  ta is given by
t D 2R

1
c  !R 
1
c C !R

:
By measuring t, the rotational speed can be com-
puted. Note that although the above derivation assumes
classical mechanics and ignores relativistic effects, the
derivation also applies when relativistic speeds are
taken into account [29.15]. See [29.16] for an in depth
review of the Sagnac effect and ring-lasers.
In optical gyroscopes lasers are typically used as the
light source. Optical gyroscopes either utilize straight
line light paths with mirror surfaces or prisms at the
edges to direct the light beam (a ring laser gyroscope –
RLG), or a polarization maintaining glass-ﬁber loop
(ﬁber optic gyro – FOG). The glass-ﬁber may actu-
ally loop multiple times, thus extending the effective
length of the light path. The time delay between the
clockwise and counter-clockwise is detected by exam-
ining the phase interference between the clockwise and
counter-clockwise light signals. Multiple optical gyro-
scopes with non-parallel axes can be ganged together in
order to measure 3-D rotations.
Various techniques can be used to measure the
time difference including examining the Doppler (fre-
quency) shift of the laser light due to the motion of
the gyro and an examination of the beat frequency
of the interference pattern between the clockwise and
counter-clockwise paths [29.17]. Ring interferometers
typically consist of many windings of ﬁber optic lines
that conduct light of a ﬁxed frequency in opposite direc-
tions around the loop and measure the phase difference.
A ring laser consists of a laser cavity in the shape of
a ring. Light circulates in both directions around this
cavity producing two standing waves with the same
number of nodes in both directions. Since the optical
path lengths are different in the two directions, the res-
onate frequencies differ. The difference between these
two frequencies is measured. An unfortunate side effect
of the ring laser approach is that the two signals will
lock to each other for small rotations and it is typically
necessary to physically rotate the device in a controlled
manner in order to ensure that this lock-in effect can be
avoided.
29.2.3 MEMS
Almost all MEMS gyroscopes are based on vibrating
mechanical elements to sense rotation. Vibratory gyro-
scopes rely on the transfer of energy between vibratory
modes based on Coriolis acceleration. Coriolis acceler-
ation is the apparent acceleration that arises in a rotating
frame of references. Suppose an object moves along
a straight line in a rotating frame of reference. To an
outside observer in an inertial frame the object’s path is
curved – thus there must be some force acting on the
object to maintain the straight line motion as viewed
by the rotating observer. An object moving in a straight
line with local velocity v in a frame rotating at rate ˝
relative to an inertial frame will experience a Coriolis
acceleration given by
a D 2v  ˝ :
Transducing
acceleration
in
a MEMS
gyroscope
amounts to inducing some local linear velocity and
measuring the resultant Coriolis forces.
Early MEMS gyroscopes utilized vibrating quartz
crystals to generate the necessary linear motion. More

Part C | 29.3
742
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Driven vibration
Sensed
vibration
Rotation
Fig. 29.5 MEMS gyroscope principle of operation
recent designs have replaced the vibrating quartz crys-
tals with silicon based vibrators. Various MEMS struc-
tures have been developed including
Tuning Fork Gyroscopes
Tuning fork gyroscopes use a tuning fork-like structure
(Fig. 29.5) as the underlying mechanism. As the tun-
ing forks vibrate within a rotating frame, Coriolis forces
cause the tines of the fork to vibrate out of the plane of
the fork which is measured. This is the effect used by
the InertiaCube sensor [29.18].
Vibrating Wheel Gyroscopes
Vibrating wheel gyroscopes use a wheel that oscillates
about its rotational axis. External rotation of the frame
causes the wheel to tilt which can be sensed.
Wine Glass Resonator Gyroscopes
Wine glass resonator gyroscopes use the effect of Cori-
olis forces on the position of nodal points on a resonat-
ing structure to estimate the external rotation. Sadly, no
actual wine glasses are involved.
As MEMS gyroscopes have no rotating parts,
have low power consumption requirements, and are
very small, MEMS gyros are quickly replacing me-
chanical and optical gyroscope sensors in robotic
applications.
With the exception of gyrocompasses, gyroscopes
measure relative rotational motion around a single axis.
They accomplish this measurement by exploiting phys-
ical properties of rotating frames of reference. Earlier
technologies based on mechanical gyroscopes have
given way to optical- and MEMS-based devices but the
underlying principle remains unchanged – that rotating
frames of reference show speciﬁc physical properties
can be measured to estimate the relative rotation.
A problem common to all gyroscopes is that of drift.
Each of the relative motion measurements is corrupted
by an error process, and these errors accumulate over
time. This, coupled with speciﬁc measurement errors
associated with the individual gyroscope technologies
means that unless the error is corrected through ref-
erence to some alternate (external) measurement, the
drift will eventually exceed the required accuracy of the
measurement.
As individual gyros only measure rotation about
a single axis, it is common to gang multiple gyros
together with orthogonal axes of sensitivity in or-
der to measure 3-D rotations. These collections of
gyros are often integrated with other sensors (com-
passes, accelerometers, etc.) in order to construct iner-
tial measurement units (or IMUs). This is considered in
Sect. 29.4.
29.3 Accelerometers
Just as gyroscopes can be used to measure changes in
orientation of a robot, other inertial sensors – known
as accelerometers – can be used to measure external
forces acting on the vehicle. One important factor con-
cerning accelerometers is that they are sensitive to all
external forces acting upon them – including gravity.
Accelerometers use one of a number of different mech-
anisms to transduce external forces into a computer
readable signal.
29.3.1 Mechanical Accelerometer
A mechanical accelerometer (Fig. 29.6a) is essentially
a spring-mass-damper system with some mechanism
for external monitoring. When some force is applied
(e.g., gravity), the force acts on the mass and dis-
places the spring. Assuming an ideal spring with a force
proportional to its displacement, the external forces bal-
ance the internal ones
Fapplied D Fintertial C Fdamping C Fspring ;
D mRx C cPx C kx ;
where c is the damping coefﬁcient. This equation can be
solved to show that depending on the size of the damp-
ing coefﬁcient relative to the expected external force
and the mass, the system can be made to reach a stable
ﬁnal value in a reasonably short period of time when-

Inertial Sensing, GPS and Odometry
29.4 IMU Packages
743
Part C | 29.4
a)
b)
Spring
Mass
Spring
Mass
Housing
Crystal
Damper
Fig. 29.6 Accelerometers. (a) Mechanical accelerometer;
(b) piezoelectric accelerometer J
ever a static force is presented. This need to pre-esti-
mate the expected force and the resulting (potentially
long) time for the system to converge on a ﬁnal mea-
surement coupled with non-ideal performance of the
spring limits the applicability of mechanical accelerom-
eters. Another issue with mechanical accelerometers is
that they are particularly sensitive to vibration.
29.3.2 Piezoelectric Accelerometer
Rather than relying on a direct mechanical measure-
ment of external forces, piezoelectric accelerometers
are based on a property exhibited by certain crystals
which generate a voltage across them when stressed.
A small mass can be positioned so that it is only sup-
ported by the crystal, and as forces cause the mass to
act upon the crystal this induces a voltage that can be
measured (Fig. 29.6b).
29.4 IMU Packages
An inertial measurement unit (IMU) is a device that
utilizes measurement systems such as gyroscopes and
accelerometers to estimate the relative position, ve-
locity and acceleration of a vehicle in motion. First
demonstrated in 1949 by C. S. Draper, IMU’s have
become a common navigational component of aircraft
and ships. Historically an IMU is self-contained and
provides this estimate without reference to external ref-
erences, however the deﬁnition has become less precise
in recent years and now it is common to have the term
IMU also refer to systems which do include such exter-
nal references.
IMU’s come in two basic ﬂavours, gimbaled sys-
tems and strap-down systems. As their name suggests,
gimbaled IMU’s are mounted within complex gimball
structures in order to provide a stable platform from
which measurements can be made. Gyroscopes are used
to ensure that the gimball remains aligned with the ini-
tial reference frame at power up. The orientation of the
gimbaled platform relative to the vehicle is used to map
measurements taken within the IMU to the reference
frame of the vehicle. Strap down IMU’s, on the other
hand, have the IMU rigidly connected to the vehicle
(strapped down), so no such transformation is required.
In either case estimating the motion relative to the initial
frame requires integrating information from the sen-
sors within the IMU (accelerometers, gyroscopes, etc.)
in real time. This was a signiﬁcant computational ef-
fort in the early days of IMU’s, and thus historically
(prior to the 1970s) the gimbaled IMU was more com-
mon. Given the low expense of such computation today,
and the costs associated with manufacturing and operat-
ing gimbaled IMU’s, strap down IMU’s are much more
common today [29.19].
The sensing technology of an IMU is typically inte-
grated with an on-board computational unit to produce
an attitude and heading reference unit (AHRS) which
is a single device that maintains a 6-DOF estimate of
the pose of the vehicle (position .x; y; z/ and orien-
tation (roll, pitch, yaw)). In practice, the distinction
between an AHRS and an IMU is often unclear since
the combinations of software and device outputs is quite
varied, and most MEMS devices contain a substantial
computational substrate and are able to directly offer
up a position, velocity, and attitude (PVA) solution. In
general, an AHRS includes gyroscopes, accelerometers
and a magnetometer. These are often combined with
a GPS as described in the next section. In addition to
maintaining a 6-DOF pose of the vehicle, commercial
IMU’s also typically maintain estimates of velocity and
acceleration and can usually provide a diverse set of
lower-level measurements as well.
The basic computational task of an IMU is shown in
Fig. 29.7. This IMU uses three orthogonal accelerome-
ters and three orthogonal gyroscopes. The Gyroscope
data ! is integrated to maintain an ongoing estimate

Part C | 29.5
744
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Rate gyros
Orientation
integration
Initial velocity
Initial position
Accelerometers
Transform to
local-level
navigation frame
Subtract g from
vertical
acceleration
Integrate to get
velocity
Integrate to get
position
Acceleration
Velocity
Position
Fig. 29.7 IMU block diagram
of vehicle orientation . At the same time, three ac-
celerometers are used to estimate the instantaneous
vehicle acceleration a. This data is then transformed via
the current estimate of the vehicle orientation relative to
gravity, so that the gravity vector can be estimated and
extracted from the measurement. The resulting acceler-
ation is then integrated to obtain vehicle velocity v and
then integrated again to obtain position r.
IMU’s are extremely sensitive to measurement er-
rors in the underlying gyroscopes and accelerometers.
Drift in the gyroscopes leads to mis-estimates of the
vehicle orientation relative to gravity, resulting in an
incorrect cancellation of the gravity vector. As the
accelerometer data is integrated twice, any residual
gravity vector will result in a quadratic error in po-
sition [29.18]. As it is never possible to completely
eliminate the gravity vector and this and any other er-
ror is integrated over time drift is a fundamental issue
for any IMU. Given a sufﬁciently long period of opera-
tion all IMU’s eventually drift and reference to some
external measurement is required to correct this. For
many ﬁeld robots GPS has become an effective source
for these external corrections.
29.4.1 Performance
Gyroscopes and Inertial measurements units today fre-
quently include the required computational support to
directly integrate the inertial signals and provide po-
sition, velocity, and attitude (PVA) estimates as direct
output. The quality of these estimates is critically de-
pendent not only on the sensing technology, but on
the algorithms (almost universally including an ex-
tended Kalman ﬁlter) used in the estimation process and
their calibration. While the extended Kalman ﬁler is,
of course, a well understood algorithm, the subtlety of
its implementation remains a signiﬁcant distinguishing
factor among different brands of IMU.
Intertial measurement units can be evaluated with
respect to various factors that determine performance.
Several of these are enumerated below:
1. Bias repeatability. This is maximum deviation of the
gyroscope under ﬁxed inertial operation conditions
with constant temperature, i. e., the drift of the read-
ing under ideal conditions. This is measured over
different time scales and leads to short term and
long term bias repeatability.
2. Angle random walk. This measures the noise in the
angular rate data coming from the gyro.
3. Scale factor ratio. This parameter is not speciﬁc to
IMU’s or gyros and is a general measurement of sig-
nal amplitude. It measures the ratio of the output
analogue voltage to the sensor parameter of inter-
est. For a gyroscope this is typically measured in
mV=.deg=s/ whereas for an accelerometer it is typ-
ically mV=.m=s2/.
4. Position accuracy. The accuracy in practice of po-
sition estimation depends on the sensors and the
integration algorithm, both of which are intrinsic to
the IMU, as well as the nature of the trajectory ex-
perienced by the IMU.
29.5 Satellite-Based Positioning (GPS and GLS)
The global navigation satellite system (GNSS) and
it’s most commonplace instance, the global position-
ing system (GPS), is the single most commonly used
mechanism for location estimation. It provides a three
dimensional position estimate in absolute coordinates
as well as current time and date and is available any-

Inertial Sensing, GPS and Odometry
29.5 Satellite-Based Positioning (GPS and GNSS)
745
Part C | 29.5
where on the earth’s surface. Standard GPS provides
a position estimate in the horizontal plane to within
about 20 meters. It was original developed for mil-
itary applications but has become widely adopted in
civilian applications including automobile navigation
systems, recreational orienteering, and inventory track-
ing for transportation companies. It is rapidly being
superseded (via augmentation) by systems that add re-
lated technologies to basic GPS reception.
29.5.1 Overview
GPS is based on received radio signals transmitted by
an ensemble of satellites orbiting the earth. By compar-
ing the time delays from the different satellite signals,
a position ﬁx can be computed. The most widely ac-
cepted GPS system is based on the NAVSTAR satellite
system deployed and maintained by the United States,
speciﬁcally by the Air Force Space Command. As a US
military service, the US government reserves the right
to terminate or modify it’s availability at their discre-
tion. A similar system named GLONASS (globalnaya
navigatsionnaya sputnikovaya sistema) is operated by
the Russian government. Many modern GPS receivers
and cell phones can access both the US GPS and Rus-
sian GLONASS systems. Another alternative system is
being deployed by the European Union, named Galileo,
with the explicit expectation that it not be under mili-
tary control. It is expected to offer two different classes
of service, an open service and an encrypted higher-
quality commercial service. Other GPS systems such
as the Chinese Beidou, the Japanese quasi-zenith satel-
lite system (QZSS), the Indian regional navigational
satellite system (IRNSS) system are intended to pro-
vide similar functionality. GPS receivers that are able
to receive position data from multiple different satellite
systems have become readily available and are referred
to as global navigation satellite system (GNSS) sys-
tems.
Technically, the term GPS always refers to the
NAVSTAR system although in common parlance it is
sometime used to refer to any system that provides
satellite-based positioning. Historically NAVSTAR pro-
vided two different services: the precise positioning
system (PPS), reserved primarily for military users, and
the standard position system (SPS) with lower accuracy.
The difference between these was referred to as selec-
tive availability (SA). This difference in accuracy was
artiﬁcially induced via pseudo-random noise in the SPS
signal for strategic reasons, and was eliminated on May
2, 2000. Although this accuracy distinction could, in
principle, be reinstated this seems unlikely, and recent
GPS satellites (GPS Block III series, not launched at
this time) are not equipped with the SA feature. US mil-
itary users have access to a precise positioning service
(PPS). This second frequency enables military users
to correct for radio signal degradation caused by the
Earth’s atmosphere.
The GPS satellite network is based on a base con-
stellation of 24 orbiting satellites along with up to six
supplementary additional satellites that are also oper-
ational. These satellites are in almost-circular medium
earth orbit. As opposed to being geostationary the or-
bits are semi-synchronous, meaning that their position
relative to a ground observer is constantly changing,
and that their orbital period is exactly half a sidereal
day. The orbits are selected so that from almost any
point of the earth’s surface there will always be four or
more satellites directly visible – a criterion for obtain-
ing a GPS position estimate. The satellites are organized
into six orbital planes with four satellites in each. The
system is designed such that averaged over the entire
earth’s surface and over a 24 hour internal, the satellites
should provide 99.9% coverage at the worst-covered lo-
cation in any 24 hour interval, and the signal should
be at least 83.92% available at the worst place on earth
on the worst day over a 30 day measurement interval.
Note that this criterion for availability takes into ac-
count transmitted operational factors above and beyond
simple coverage. Of course, this criterion ignores the
reality of topographic features like mountains, as well
as other objects such as buildings that can obstruct the
like-of-sight.
Each satellite repeatedly broadcasts a data packet
known as the coarse-acquisition (C/A) code, which is
received by the GPS receiver on the L1 channel at
1575:42MHz. The simple principle is that if the re-
ceiver knows the absolute positions of the observed
satellites, the receiver position can be directly deter-
mined. If the signal propagation time for the radio
signals were known, the receiver position could be
computed directly via trilateration (Fig. 29.8). This im-
plies that an absolute timing reference is present on
the receiver, which would be prohibitively costly. In-
stead, only the satellites have highly accurate atomic
clocks. The receiver computes the difference in sig-
nal propagation times between the different satellites,
and uses this to compute a range estimate referred to
as a pseudo-range (to explicitly indicate that it is cor-
rupted by several sources of measurement noise). The
speciﬁc geometric problem is referred to as multilat-
eration or hyperbolic positioning and the solution is
computed using a sophistical Kalman ﬁlter within the
GPS receiver. To avoid retaining an ephemeris (pose)
table for the satellites and a very accurate clock in the
receiver, each satellite broadcasts its own position and
an accurate time signal as part of the data packet that it
transmits.

Part C | 29.5
746
Part C
Sensing and Perception
GPS satellites broadcast at several different fre-
quencies known as L1 through L5 although until re-
cently only L1 (1575:42 MHz) and L2 (1227:6 MHz)
were being using for civilian GPS receivers. Dual fre-
quency L1/L5 GPS systems have become more broadly
largely due to the emergence other GNSS systems in
addition to the original NAVSTAR GPS.
The standard service offered by NAVSTAR and the
performance criteria for it are determined by the L1
signal, which contains two unencrypted components:
the acquisition message (coarse acquisition message
C/A) and a navigation data message. It is also possible
to use the encrypted L2 signal as well, even with-
out the secret decryption keys, to provide augmented
error correction (by observing the relative effects of
ionospheric distortion as a function of frequency). The
restricted access signal broadcast on both the L1 and
L2 channels is the P-code (as well as a fairly recent
M-code) which, is known as the Y-code or P(Y) or
Emitter B
Emitter A
Emitter C
dB
dA
dC
Fig. 29.8 GPS trilateration on the plane. Suppose that one
receives signals from three transmitters (A, B, and C)
with known locations. Knowledge of the signal delay from
one emitter (say A) localizes the receiver to lie on a cir-
cle of known diameter (dA) whose center is the emitter.
The constraints from two emitters intersect at two points
(maximum). A third emitter is required to disambiguate
these two solutions. In 3-D, the signal propagation con-
straint from a single emitter constrains the receiver to lie
on a sphere. The intersection of the constraints from two
emitters constrains the receiver to lie on a circle. The in-
tersection of the constraints from three emitters constrains
the receiver to one of two points
P/Y code once it is encrypted. Both the C/A and P(Y)
code include the navigation message stream that spec-
iﬁes clock bias data, orbital information, ionospherical
propagation corrections factors, ephemeris data, status
information on all the satellites, universal time code
and other information. The satellite performance is co-
ordinated by the master control station located at the
Schriever Air Force Base near Colorado Springs, (Col-
orado, USA) and is connected to a global network of
ﬁve additional monitoring stations (Cape Canaveral,
Ascension Island, Kwajalein Atoll (Marshall Islands),
Diego Garcia Atoll, Hawaii) which are used to pro-
duce the measurements that are uplinked to generate the
navigation message stream. Finally, it should be noted
an additional signal is now available on the L2 fre-
quency band. This L2C signal on satellites designated
block IIR-M promises to provide much improved re-
ceiver sensitivity so that position ﬁxes can be obtained
in environments, such as in forests, where they are cur-
rently not readily available.
29.5.2 Performance Factors
GPS performance depends on several factors: satel-
lite transmission accuracy, environmental conditions,
interactions with ground-based obstacles, and receiver
properties.
In the context of robotics, factors that effect the
performance of the satellites themselves and the atmo-
spheric conditions are essentially uncontrollable. Nev-
ertheless, it should be noted that these can be sources of
error and that the GPS signal itself may not always be
reliable. A service failure is deﬁned as a set of circum-
stances where the positioning service exhibits atypical
error behavior (i. e., incorrect signals). Such failures are
classiﬁed into minor and major failures. Minor failures
are those that have limited impact on a receiver and lead
to ranging error of under 150 m. Major failures are those
that lead either to larger errors or data processing over-
loads in the receiver. If a single satellite experiences an
error that leads to a major failure, then within a 6 hour
period, approximately 63% of the earth’s surface will
have the satellite in view a some point.
The controllable factors in using GPS for accu-
rate localization are (i) it requires an unobstructed
line of sight to the satellites, (ii) it depends on atmo-
spheric conditions, and (iii) it depends the ability to
receive (weak) radio-frequency communications. There
is a potential for wildly incorrect estimates. Generally
satellites that are directly overhead provide better sig-
nal than those near the horizon. In addition, since the
basis of GPS position is differential signal analysis, it
is best if the satellites used in the GPS computation are
widely spaced in the sky.

Inertial Sensing, GPS and Odometry
29.5 Satellite-Based Positioning (GPS and GNSS)
747
Part C | 29.5
GPS signals are in the microwave band and, as such,
they can pass through plastic and glass, but are ab-
sorbed by water (wood, heavy foliage) and are reﬂected
by many materials. As a consequence, GPS is unreli-
able in heavy forest, deep canyons, inside automobiles
and boats, heavy snowfall or between tall buildings.
In some cases, partial obstruction of the sky may not
prevent a position estimate from being computed. As-
suming the minimum number of satellites operating
at any time is 24, then on average across the earth’s
surface 8 satellites are in view so that even partial
occlusion of the sky can often be tolerated. On the
other hand, partial occlusion can lead to reduced accu-
racy since the selection of available satellites used for
computing position becomes limited and optimal accu-
racy is obtained by using as many satellites as possible
(weighting them appropriately in the internal Kalman
ﬁlter).
Secondary factors that differentiate different GPS
receivers are the rate at which the signals are collected,
the receiver sensitivity, the number of satellites used
in the ﬁnal computation, the number of factors taken
into account in the estimator and the exploitation of
supplementary positioning schemes such as WAAS (de-
scribed later). A major factor in determining the rate
at which estimates can be produced is the number of
independent receiver elements in the GPS system. Se-
quential single-channel receivers are simpler and thus
more economical (and potentially smaller), but they
must sequentially lock onto each satellite being used.
Parallel multi-channel receivers can lock onto to more
than one satellite at once, and are generally faster and
more costly; some degree of parallelism is the norm in
good-quality consumer devices.
GPS computations are based on an estimation of the
dilution of precision (DOP) and speciﬁcally for the di-
lution of precision of the positional parts of the system
(i. e., positional dilution of precision PDOP). These cor-
respond to partial derivatives of the error with respect to
position and allow the most accurate ensemble of visi-
ble satellites to be determined at any time. The standard
implementation for GPS systems speciﬁes that PDOP
values be recomputed every 5 minutes.
The minimum performance parameters for GPS
receivers are based upon transforming instantaneous
range residuals to a user position estimate using a lin-
earized position solution from a stationary, surveyed
location. Most GPS receivers use additional techniques
such as range residual smoothing, velocity aiding,
Kalman ﬁltering, or multiple satellite (all-in-view satel-
lite) solutions. That said, formal performance for the
system is measured with respect to the minimum. The
GPS position estimation algorithm is summarized as
follows:
1. Select the best four satellites based upon minimum
error measured in terms of PDOP.
2. Update every ﬁve minutes, or whenever a satellite
being used in the solution sets.
3. Measure the pseudo range to each satellite. Each
of the four measurements must have a reception
timetag within 0:5 s of the solution time. The re-
ception timetag is based upon measurement system
time, and the transmission timetag is based upon
satellite time.
4. Determine the ephemeris for each of the satel-
lites being used, and compute the Earth-centred,
Earth-ﬁxed (ECEF) coordinates for each. Correct
for the earth’s rotation and thus compute an estimate
pseudo-range measurement that should be obtained
for each satellite.
5. Compute the range residuals as the differences be-
tween the actual and observed measurements.
6. Estimate the matrix G that determines the overall
system solution, know as the position solution ge-
ometry matrix. The matrix can be described in terms
of a collection of row vectors one for each of the
satellites being used, each row being made up of
the x; y; z and time coordinate direction cosines for
the vector between the user and the satellite (the
is with respect to a ﬁxed reference frame for the
planet called the World Geodetic System, WGS84).
WGS84 represents position on the Earth in terms
of latitude, longitude, and height above the sur-
face, which is modeled as an ellipsoid. The WGS84
coorinate system represents longitude as a value
from 180 to 180 degrees, with 0 degrees at the
Earth’s prime meridian, and longitude as a value
from 90 degrees (at the North pole) to 90.
7. Compute the user position.
The standard implementation of GPS is based upon
a position ﬁx rate of once per second, although faster
and slower rates are possible. Under typical operating
conditions and without specialized enhancements GPS
accuracy is roughly 2025 m in the horizontal plane
and 43 m in the vertical direction. The restricted PPS
signal provides an accuracy of at least 22 m (typical
values are 710 m) in the horizontal plane and 27:7 m
in the vertical direction as well as UTC time accuracy
within 200 ns based on a reference signal from the US
Naval Observatory.
GPS signals can be affected by multipath issues,
where the radio signals reﬂect off surrounding terrain –
buildings, canyon walls, hard ground, etc. This delay
in reaching the receiver causes inaccuracy. A variety
of receiver techniques, most notably narrow correlator
spacing [29.20], have been developed to mitigate multi-
path errors. For long delay multipath, the receiver itself

Part C | 29.5
748
Part C
Sensing and Perception
can recognize the wayward signal and discard it. To
address shorter delay multipath due to the signal reﬂect-
ing off the ground, specialized antennas may be used.
This form of multipath is harder to ﬁlter out as it is
only slightly delayed as compared to the direct signal,
causing effects almost indistinguishable from routine
ﬂuctuations in atmospheric delay.
29.5.3 Enhanced GPS
A wide range of augmentation systems have been de-
veloped both by government agencies and private com-
panies to enhance the basic GPS signal.
Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS)
The wide area augmentation system (WAAS) is an aug-
mentation system operated by the US Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) to provide better GPS and timing
performance for aircraft operating over North America.
The WAAS system is based around a supplementary
signal that can be received by GPS receivers to im-
prove their accuracy. WAAS increases the accuracy of
horizontal position estimates from 1012 m with GPS
alone, to between 1 and 2 m. The WAAS signal contains
corrections for the GPS signal that reduce the effects
of errors due to timing errors, satellite position cor-
rections, and local perturbations due to variations in
the ionosphere. These correction terms are estimated
by ground-based stations at ﬁxed and accurately-known
positions and uplinked to satellites which broadcast
them to suitably enabled GPS receivers. The WAAS
signal is only computed and available for North Amer-
ica, but similar correction signals are becoming avail-
able elsewhere as part of the standardization of satellite-
based augmentation systems (SBASs). This includes
Europe (where is it called EGNOS, the European Geo-
stationary Navigation Overlay Service) and Japan and
parts of Asia (where it is called MSAS, the multi-
functional satellite augmentation system). Further en-
hancements to GPS and WAAS, in the form of global
navigation satellite system landing system (GLS), are
slated for completion in 2013.
Differential GPS
Differential GPS (DGPS) is a technique for correcting
GPS signals by using a nearby GPS receiver located at
a known accurately-surveyed position. In fact, several
variations on this basic idea exist and are also known
under the general rubric of ground based augmentation
systems (GBASs). DGPS uses the same principles as
WAAS but on a local scale without resorting to the use
of satellite uplinks. The receiver at the known position
computes the error in the GPS signal and transmits it to
the nearby receiver at the unknown location. Since the
error varies as a function of position on the earth, the
effectiveness of the correction degrades with distance,
typically with a maximum effective range of a couple
of hundred miles. The method was especially desir-
able before the suspension of selective availability and
the development of WAAS (which can be viewed as
a form of DGPS). In the USA and Canada, a network of
ground based DGPS transmitters are in place, send sig-
nals using radio frequencies between 285 and 325 kHz.
Commercial DGPS solutions also exist akin to WAAS.
29.5.4 Nationwide Differential
GPS System (NDGPS)
The (US) nationwide differential GPS system (NDGPS)
is an augmentation system that integrates costal and
ground transportation systems to provide 1015 cm ac-
curacy throughout most of the US. The system relies on
a network of radio signals broadcast from base stations.
Similar systems exist in a number of other countries in-
cluding Canada.
Receiver Autonomous Integrity Monitor (RAIM)
Receiver autonomous integrity monitor (RAIM) is
a technique by which multiple pseudo-range measure-
ments are obtained (i. e., pose estimates) using different
combinations of satellites. If inconsistent measure-
ments are obtained, it indicates that a failure of some
sort has taken place in the system. A position ﬁx using
at least satellites is needed to detect such an error which
at least six satellite are needed to exclude the data from
a single bad satellite and still obtain a reliable estimate.
Real-Time Kinematic Positioning (RTK)
One GPS enhancement technology with rapidly grow-
ing acceptance in robotics applications is real-time
kinematic positioning or RTK [29.21]. RTK-GPS in
a GNSS conﬁguration also exploits multiple satellite
constellations and is often regarded as the most high-
performance GPS solution that is readily available.
Because of it’s high accuracy, it is often referred to
as survey grade. In practice, commonplace RTK-GPS
units can achieve horizontal positioning accuracy on
the order of 1 cm. RTK-GPS augments standard dif-
ferential GPS technology by enhancing the effective
resolution of the pseudo-range distance estimates us-
ing corrections obtained by a base station. Speciﬁcally,
RTK estimates the number of carrier cycles in the com-
munication path between a GPS satellite and each of the
base station and the receiver, and thus is essentially de-
pendent on the phase of the signal. Such units typically
ignore the actual data payload of the signal and exploit
the phase of the GPS signal (typically the L1 band);
this is a fundamentally different mode of operation from

Inertial Sensing, GPS and Odometry
29.6 GPS-IMU Integration
749
Part C | 29.6
the commonplace code phase computation that low cost
receivers use. The base station that is used to provide
a reference position for the estimation process can be
part of a custom system being deployed, but various
networks reference base stations accessible to the pub-
lic now exist. When a network of base stations are used
to provide correction signals over a wide region, the
system is referred to as network real-time kinematic
(NRTK) GPS and a class of networks as continuously
operating reference station (CORS) networks. NRTK
networks are evolving rapidly and a range computing
protocols have been developed or employed including
the Radio Technical Commission for Maritime Services
Special Committee 104 (RTCMS C104) protocol for
transmitting GNSS data.
If properly estimated, RTK-GPS can obtain position
estimates that are several orders of magnitude more ac-
curate than the multiple meter accuracy associated with
conventional DGPS. Critical to RTK is estimating the
number of whole signal cycles that are present in the
path from the satellite to the station. GPS carrier waves
have a wavelength of about 19 cm, and this coupled with
an estimate of the phase of the carrier signal can result in
pseudo-range estimates with errors in the 1 mm range.
29.5.5 GPS Receivers and Communications
GPS receivers are classiﬁed according to their perfor-
mance and cost. The best receivers are referred to as
geodetic grade (or survey grade) with economical mod-
els referred to as resource grade or recreational. In
general the costs of these different models varies by sev-
eral orders of magnitude, but the gap in performance is
gradually narrowing.
Receivers come in two types: code phase and carrier
phase. Code phase receivers use the satellite naviga-
tion message part of the data stream to provide the
ephemeris data and produce real-time output. There is
a delay for them to lock into the satellites, but then they
produce output continuously without an initial posi-
tion estimate. The C/A signal is a 1023 pseudo-random
noise (PRN) bit string with a known key. The actual
pseudo-range data is determined by ﬁnding the offset
of this bit string, and computing the correct shift of this
bit string is the essential computation that determined
the delay before a lock is achieved.
Carrier phase receivers, on the other hand, use the
phase of the raw GPS signal rather than the embedded
(digital) C/A signal. The L1 and L2 signals have wave-
lengths of 19 and 24 cm respectively, and good quality
phase measurements allow horizontal positioning accu-
racies on the order of millimeters in principle. These
measurements, however, only provide relative position
information within a neighborhood of some tens of kilo-
meters.
Serial Protocols
Consumer GPS devices almost universally support
some variant of the National Marine Electronics Asso-
ciation (NMEA) protocol as well as various proprietary
protocols speciﬁc to each manufacturer. NMEA is a se-
rial protocol sometimes encapsulated within other pro-
tocols. Several variants of the protocol exist, but NMEA
0183 is the most commonly supported while NMEA
2000 supports higher data rates and uses a very different
communication protocol. While the protocol is propri-
etary and the ofﬁcial speciﬁcation can only be pur-
chased from the NMEA, there are several open-source
descriptions of the protocol that have been reversed en-
gineered and its basic message characteristics are very
widely used and distributed.
The NMEA 0183 protocol supports an ASCII mode
of communications based on a talker (the GPS re-
ceiver) and one or most listeners (computers) which
receiver simple protocol strings called sentences. Anec-
dotal evidence suggests that there are ambiguities in the
protocol that can lead to difﬁculties is assuring compat-
ibility between devices (this suggestion is necessarily
made without inspecting the proprietary documenta-
tion, which might preclude its description here).
29.6 GPS-IMU Integration
It has become commonplace for GPS and IMU tech-
nologies to be integrated into a single GPS-aided in-
ertial navigation system (GPS/INS) to leverage their
complementary advantages. Although GPS offers the
promise of high resolution positioning information on
or about the surface of the planet, it does not solve
all of the problems associated with robot pose esti-
mation. First, it does not directly obtain information
about vehicle orientation – to determine the orien-
tation of the vehicle (yaw, and for many vehicles
pitch and roll) must be estimated by either differ-
entiating the GPS signal or through integration with
other sensors including compasses, gyrocompasses, and
IMU’s. Second, GPS receivers are generally unable
to provide continuous independent estimates of po-
sition. Estimates are only available at distinct time
instances with (for inexpensive receivers at least) con-
siderable delays between measurements. A continuous

Part C | 29.8
750
Part C
Sensing and Perception
estimate of pose requires estimation of pose between
GPS readings. Finally, it is not always possible to
obtain a GPS ﬁx. Local geography (e.g., mountains,
buildings, trees) or an overhead cover that is opaque
to radio signals (e.g., indoors, underwater) can block
the signal entirely. Integration of a GPS receiver with
other sensor technology (often an IMU) can be used
to deal with these issues, at least for short periods of
time.
The process of integrating GPS and IMU data is typ-
ically expressed as an extended Kalman ﬁlter estimation
process (Sect. 35.2.3). Essentially the IMU data is used
to bridge between solid GPS measurements and is com-
bined in a least squares optimal sense with the GPS data
when both are available. Given the complementary na-
ture and true independence of the two sensors, a wide
range of commercial packages have been developed to
integrate GPS and IMU data [29.22].
When GPS measurements are integrated in a robotic
vehicle, and in particular when they are combined with
data from an IMU the orientation of the antenna be-
comes a consideration. The GPS position ﬁx is based
on the position of the GPS antenna and if it is located
far from the IMU or the center of the vehicle coordinate
system then this must be accounted for or instabilities
in the position or orientation can occur.
29.7 Further Reading
29.7.1 Odometry
Many
general
robotics
books
including
[29.2]
and [29.23] provide considerable information on
vehicle odometry and derive odometry equations for
standard vehicle designs.
29.7.2 Gyroscopic Systems
Everett’s book [29.24] provides a review of various
sensor technologies including gyroscopic systems and
accelerometers. Interesting historical documentation on
the gyrocompass and its inventor can be found in
Hughes’ book [29.5].
29.7.3 Accelerometers
Everett’s book [29.24] provides a review of various
sensor technologies including gyroscopic systems and
accelerometers.
29.7.4 GPS
Considerable details on the theory and implemen-
tation of GPS systems can be found in Leick’s
book [29.25]. See also [29.26]. Details of various
approaches to GPS/INS integration can be found
in [29.27] and [29.28]
29.8 Currently Available Hardware
Although the speciﬁc models listed below are likely to
have a short shelf life, the list of contacts is may be
a good starting point for the identiﬁcation of speciﬁc
inertial sensing devices.
29.8.1 Gyroscopic Systems

KVN DSP-3000 Tactical Grade
Fiber Optic Gyro (FOG),
KVH Industries Inc., 50 Enterprise Center,
Meddletown RI, 02842-5279,
USA, 1-401-847-3327

Fiber Optic Gyroscope HOFG-1(A),
Corporate Headquarters Hitachi Cable Ltd.
4-14-1 Sotokanda, Chiyoda-ku,
Tokyo 101-8971, Japan.

Rate Gyroscope CRS03,
Silicon Sensing Systems Japan, Ltd.
1-10 Fusocho (Sumitomo Precision Complex),
Amagaxaki, Hyogo 660-0891, Japan.
29.8.2 Accelerometers

Accelerometer GSA 101,
A-KAST Measurements and Control Ltd.,
1054-2 Centre St. Suite #299,
Thornhill, ON, L4J 8E5, Canada.

ENDEVCO MODEL 22,
Brüel and Kjaer,
DK-2850 Naerum, Denmark.

Inertial Sensing, GPS and Odometry
References
751
Part C | 29
29.8.3 IMU Packages

IMU,
MEMSense, 2693D Commerce Rd.,
Rapid City, SD 57702, USA.

IMU400 MEMS Inertial Measurement Unit,
Crossbow Technology Inc.,
4145 N. First St., San Jose, CA 95134, USA.

IntertiaCube3, (3DOF IMU),
Intersense,
36 Crosby Dr, #15,
Bedford, MA 01730, USA.
29.8.4 GPS Components

Garmin GPS 18,
Garmin International Inc.,
1200 East 151st St.,
Olathe, KS 66062-3426, USA.

Magellan Meridian Color,
Thales Navigation
471 El Camino Real,
Santa Clara, CA 95050-4300, USA.

TomTom Bluetooth GPS Receiver,
Rembrandtplein 35,
1017 CT Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.
References
29.1
Vitruvius: Ten Books on Architecture (Harvard Univ.
Press, London 1914) p. 301, English translation by M.
H. Morgan
29.2
G. Dudek, M. Jenkin: Computational Principles of
Mobile Robotics, 2nd edn. (Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge 2010)
29.3
E. Maloney: Dutton’s Navigation and Piloting (US
Naval Institute Press, Annapolis 1985)
29.4
J.G.F. Bohnenberger: Beschreibung einer Maschine
zur Erläuterung der Geseze der Umdrehung der Er-
de um ihre Axe, und der Veränderung der Lage der
lezteren, Tüb. Bl. Naturw. Arzneik. 3, 72–83 (1817)
29.5
T.P. Hughes: Elmer Sperry: Inventor and Engineer
(The Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore 1993)
29.6
H.W. Sorg: From Serson to Draper – Two centuries
of gyroscopic development, Navigation 23, 313–324
(1976)
29.7
W. Davenport: Gyro! The Life and Times of Lawrence
Sperry (Charles Scribner, New York 1978)
29.8
J.F. Wagner: From Bohnenberger’s machine to in-
tegrated navigation systems, 200 years of inertial
navigation, Photogramm. Week (2005)
29.9
R.P. Feynman, R.B. Leighton, M. Sands: The Feyn-
man Lectures on Physics (Addison-Wesley, Reading
1963)
29.10
T.F.T. Submarine: Navpers 16160 Standards and Cur-
riculum Division Training (Bureau of Naval Person-
nel United States Navy, Arlington 1946)
29.11
G. Sagnac: L’ether lumineux demontre par l’effect
du vent relatif d’ether dans un interferometre en
rotation uniforme, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 157, 708–
710 (1913)
29.12
G. Sagnac: Sur la preuve de la realitet de l’ether
lumineaux par l’experience de l’interferographe
tournant, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 157, 1410–1413 (1913)
29.13
F. Harress: Die Geschwindigkeit des Lichtes in be-
wegten Körpern, Ph.D. Thesis (Richters, Jena 1912)
29.14
A.A. Michelson, H.G. Gale: The effect of the Earth’s
rotation on the velocity of light, J. Astrophys. 61,
140–145 (1925)
29.15
S. Ekeziel, H.J. Arditty: Fiber-Optic Rotation Sen-
sors, Springer Ser. Opt. Sci. (Springer, Berlin, Hei-
delberg 1982)
29.16
G.E. Stedman: Ring-laser tests of fundamental
physics and geophysics, Rep. Prog. Phys. 60, 615–
688 (1997)
29.17
D. Mackenzie: From the luminiferous ether to the
Boeing 757: A history of the laser gyroscope, Tech-
nol. Cult. 34(3), 475–515 (1993)
29.18
E. Foxlin, M. Harringon, Y. Altshuler: Miniature 6-
DOF inertial system for tracking HMDs, SPIE Proc.
3362 (1998) pp. 214–228
29.19
M. Mostafa: History of inertial navigation systems
in survey applications, J. Am. Soc. Photogramm.
Remote Sens. 67, 1225–1227 (2001)
29.20
A.J. Van Dierendonck, P. Fenton, T. Ford: Theory and
performance of narrow correlator spacing in a GPS
receiver, Navigation 39, 265–283 (1992)
29.21
A. Rietdorf, C. Daub, P. Loef: Precise positioning in
real-time using navigation satellites and telecom-
munication, Proc. 3rd Workshop Posit. Navig. Com-
mun. (2006) pp. 123–128
29.22
J. Rios, E. White: Low cost solid state GPS/INS pack-
age, Proc. Inst. Navig. Conf. (2000)
29.23
R. Siegwart, I.R. Nourbakhsh: Introduction to Au-
tonomous Mobile Robots (MIT Press, Cambridge
2004)
29.24
H.R. Everett: Sensors for Mobile Robots: Theory and
Application (Peters, Wellesley 1995)
29.25
A. Leick: GPS Satellite Surveying (Wiley, Hoboken
2004)
29.26
P. Misra, P. Enge: Global Positioning System: Sig-
nals, Measurements, and Performance (Ganga-
Jamuna Press, Lincoln 2006)
29.27
J. Farrell, M. Barth: The Global Positioning System
and Inertial Navigation (McGraw-Hill, New York
1989)
29.28
M.S. Grewal, L.R. Weill, A.P. Andrews: Global Posi-
tioning Systems, Inertial Navigation, and Integra-
tion (Wiley, Hoboken 2007)

Multimedia Contents Sonar Sensin
753
Part C | 30
30. Sonar Sensing
Lindsay Kleeman, Roman Kuc
Sonar or ultrasonic sensing uses the propaga-
tion of acoustic energy at higher frequencies than
normal hearing to extract information from the
environment. This chapter presents the funda-
mentals and physics of sonar sensing for object
localization, landmark measurement and classifi-
cation in robotics applications. The source of sonar
artifacts is explained and how they can be dealt
with. Different ultrasonic transducer technologies
are outlined with their main characteristics high-
lighted.
Sonar systems are described that range in
sophistication from low-cost threshold-based
ranging modules to multitransducer multipulse
configurations with associated signal process-
ing requirements capable of accurate range and
bearing measurement, interference rejection,
motion compensation, and target classification.
Continuous-transmission frequency-modulated
(CTFM) systems are introduced and their ability
to improve target sensitivity in the presence of
noise is discussed. Various sonar ring designs that
provide rapid surrounding environmental cover-
age are described in conjunction with mapping
results. Finally the chapter ends with a discussion
of biomimetic sonar, which draws inspiration from
animals such as bats and dolphins.
30.1
Sonar Principles .................................
754
30.2
Sonar Beam Pattern............................
756
30.3
Speed of Sound ..................................
758
30.4
Waveforms.........................................
758
30.5
Transducer Technologies .....................
759
30.5.1
Electrostatic ...........................
759
30.5.2
Piezoelectric...........................
760
30.5.3
MEMS.....................................
760
30.6
Reflecting Object Models ....................
760
30.7
Artifacts.............................................
761
30.8
TOF Ranging.......................................
762
30.9
Echo Waveform Coding .......................
765
30.10 Echo Waveform Processing ..................
767
30.10.1
Ranging
and Wide-Bandwidth Pulses ...
767
30.10.2 Bearing Estimation .................
768
30.11
CTFM Sonar ........................................
769
30.11.1
CTFM Transmission Coding........
769
30.11.2
CTFM TOF Estimation................
769
30.11.3
CTFM Range Discrimination
and Resolution.......................
770
30.11.4
Comparison of CTFM
and Pulse-Echo Sonar.............
770
30.11.5
Applications of CTFM ...............
771
30.12
Multipulse Sonar ................................
772
30.12.1
Interference Rejection.............
772
30.12.2
On-the-Fly Target Classification
772
30.13
Sonar Rings and Arrays .......................
773
30.13.1
Simple Ranging Module Rings..
773
30.13.2
Advanced Rings ......................
773
30.13.3
Sonar Rings with FPGA
Hardware Processing...............
774
30.13.4
Double Refresh Rate Sonar Ring
775
30.13.5
Sparse 3-D Arrays....................
775
30.14 Motion Effects ....................................
775
30.14.1
Moving Observation of a Plane.
776
30.14.2
Moving Observation of a Corner
776
30.14.3 Moving Observation of a Edge..
777
30.14.4 The Effect of a Moving
Observation on the Angle
of Reception...........................
777
30.14.5 Plane, Corner, and Edge Moving
Observation Arrival Angles .......
777
30.15 Biomimetic Sonars .............................
778
30.16 Conclusions........................................
779
Video-References.........................................
780
References...................................................
780

Part C | 30.1
754
Part C
Sensing and Perception
30.1 Sonar Principles
Sonar is a popular sensor in robotics that employs
acoustic pulses and their echoes to measure the range
to an object. Since the sound speed is usually known,
the object range is proportional to the echo travel time.
θ
Δθ
a)
b)
T/R
Transmission
time
c)
d)
Sonar
location
Range
dot
E
P
Time
tO
rO
O
Fig.30.1a–d Sonar ranging principles: (a) sonar conﬁguration,
(b) echo waveform, (c) range dot placement, (d) sonar map
E
a)
b)
T/R
FR
Transmission
time 1
c)
Sonar
location
P
Time
tO
rO
O
Transmission
time 2
Fig.30.2a–c False range reading: (a) sonar conﬁguration, (b) prob-
ing pulse 2 transmitted before echo from pulse 1 arrives, (c) false
range (FR) is measured from transmission time 2
At ultrasonic frequencies the sonar energy is concen-
trated in a beam, providing directional information in
addition to range. Its popularity is due to its low cost,
light weight, low power consumption, and low com-
putational effort, compared to other ranging sensors.
In some applications, such as in underwater and low-
visibility environments, sonar is often the only viable
sensing modality.
Sonars in robotics have three different, but related,
purposes:
1. Obstacle avoidance: the ﬁrst detected echo is as-
sumed to measure the range to the closest object.
Robots use this information to plan paths around
obstacles and to prevent collisions.
2. Sonar mapping: a collection of echoes acquired by
performing a rotational scan or from a sonar array
is used to construct a map of the environment. Sim-
ilar to a radar display, a range dot is placed at the
detected range along the probing pulse direction.
3. Object recognition: a sequence of echoes or sonar
maps is processed to classify echo-producing struc-
tures composed of one or more physical objects.
When successful, this information is useful for
robot registration or landmark navigation.
Figure 30.1 shows a simpliﬁed sonar system, from
its conﬁguration to the resulting sonar map. A sonar
transducer, T/R, acts as both the transmitter (T) of
a probing acoustic pulse (P) and the receiver of echoes
(E). An object O lying within the sonar beam, indicated
by the shaded region, reﬂects the probing pulse. A part
of the reﬂected signal impinges on the transducer as is
detected as an echo. The echo travel time to, commonly
called the time-of-ﬂight (TOF) is measured from the
probing pulse transmission time. In this case the echo
waveform is a replica of the probing pulse, which usu-
ally consists of as many as 16 cycles at the resonant
frequency of the transducer. The object range ro is com-
puted from tO using
rO D ctO
2 ;
(30.1)
where c is the sound speed (343 m=s at standard tem-
perature and pressure). The factor of 2 converts the
round-trip (P C E) travel distance to a range measure-
ment. Beam-spreading losses and acoustic absorption
limit sonar range.
In forming a sonar map, a range dot is placed along
the direction corresponding to the transducer’s physi-
cal orientation. A sonar map is usually built by rotating
the sensor about the vertical axis, indicated by the ori-
entation angle , through a series of discrete angles

Sonar Sensing
30.1 Sonar Principles
755
Part C | 30.1
separated by  and placing sonar dots the correspond-
ing ranges. Since the range from the object O to the
center of T/R is almost constant as T/R rotates, the
range dots typically fall on a circle as long as O lies
within the beam. Hence, sonar maps are made up of
arcs.
The major limitations of sonar include:
1. The wide sonar beam causes poor directional res-
olution. Objects are located at the middle of iso-
lated arcs, but shorter-range objects shorten the
arcs of those at farther ranges, and the arcs pro-
duced by a collection of objects are often difﬁcult
to interpret. A consequence of this effect is that
wide beams occlude small openings, limiting robot
navigation.
2. The slow sound speed, relative to an optical sensor,
reduces the sonar sensing rate. A new probing pulse
should be transmitted after all detectable echoes
from the previous pulse have expired, otherwise the
false reading shown in Fig. 30.2 can occur. The echo
from probing pulse 1 occurs after probing pulse 2 is
emitted. Sonar measures the TOF from the most re-
cent probing pulse. Many sonars transmit probing
pulses every 50 ms, but encounter false readings in
reverberant environments.
3. Smooth surfaces at oblique incidence do not pro-
duce detectable echoes. Figure 30.3 shows a pla-
nar surface (a wall) that acts as a mirror to the
sonar beam. The important point is that the nearby
wall does not itself produce a detectable echo, and
a robot using sonar for obstacle avoidance may col-
lide with the wall.
4. Artifacts caused by beam side-lobes and multiple
reﬂections produce range readings in the environ-
ment where no objects exist. Figure 30.3 also shows
the redirected beam enclosing object O. The echo is
also redirected by the wall back to the transducer.
From the transducer’s reference, the object is at the
virtual object location VO, and it would generate the
same sonar map as shown in Fig. 30.1. Since there
is no physical object corresponding to the sonar dot
location, it is an artifact. Also, note that the acous-
tic energy indicated by the dot-dashed line reﬂected
back to the transducer is not detected because it
does not lie within the beam cone. Beam side-lobes
often detect these echoes and produce shorter-range
readings but placed along the sonar orientation.
5. Travel time and amplitude variations in the echoes
caused by inhomogeneities in the sound speed. Both
effects cause random ﬂuctuations in the detected
echo travel time, even in static environments. Fig-
E
T/R
P
O
VO
Fig. 30.3 The smooth surface redirects the beam, causing a sonar
artifact at virtual object (VO) location. The dot-dashed echo path
falls outside the sonar beam and does not produce a detectable echo
E
a)
b)
T/R
Transmission
time 
P
Time
O
Fig.30.4a,b Random echo jitter. (a) Sonar conﬁguration; thermal
inhomogeneities in the acoustic transmission medium cause refrac-
tion effects. (b) Examples of variations in echo travel times and
amplitudes in a static environment
ure 30.4 illustrates thermal ﬂuctuations that cause
speed up, retardation, and travel redirection by re-
fraction of echoes. These cause temporal and am-
plitude variations in the echoes and jitter in the
range readings. While these typically introduce mi-
nor changes in sonar maps, they often cause havoc
with approaches using ﬁner analysis.
This chapter describes the physical and mathemat-
ical details that extend this simpliﬁed sonar model to
practical sonar systems.

Part C | 30.2
756
Part C
Sensing and Perception
30.2 Sonar Beam Pattern
To derive a qualitative description of the sonar trans-
ducer, we apply elementary acoustics theory to a sim-
pliﬁed model to achieve a simple analytic form [30.1].
A sonar emitter is commonly modeled as a circular pis-
ton surface of radius a vibrating with frequency f in an
inﬁnite planar bafﬂe. The wavelength  is
 D c
f ;
(30.2)
where c the sound speed in air, 343 m=s at 25 ıC [30.2].
When a >  the emitted pressure ﬁeld forms a beam
consisting of a main lobe surrounded by side-lobes. In
the far ﬁeld, or range greater than a2=, the beam is
described by its directivity pattern, which is the two-
dimensional Fourier transform of the aperture function,
in this case the circular aperture produces a Bessel func-
tion. The emitted pressure amplitude at range r and
angle  relative to the piston axis can be written as
PE.r; / D ˛a2f
r
2J1.ka sin /
ka sin 

;
(30.3)
where ˛ is a proportionality constant that includes the
density of air and the source strength, k D 2=, and J1
is the Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind. The term in the
brackets evaluates to 1 along the sonar axis,  D 0. The
a2 term indicates that the emitted pressure increases
with the piston area. The frequency f appears in the
numerator because the faster-moving piston generates
higher pressures. The range r appears in the denomi-
nator because the conservation of energy requires the
pressure to decrease as the beam widens with range.
The main lobe is deﬁned by its ﬁrst off-axis null,
which occurs at an angle of
0 D arcsin
0:61
a

:
(30.4)
For example, the popular electrostatic instrument
grade transducer, formerly produced by Polaroid [30.3],
had a radius of a D 1:8 cm and is conventionally driven
at f D 49:4 kHz, making  D 0:7 cm and 0 D 14:7ı.
An object that is small compared to  and located
in the emitted pressure ﬁeld produces an echo with
a spherical wavefront whose amplitude decays with
the inverse of the distance propagated. In the common
pulse-echo single transducer (monostatic) ranging sen-
sor, only part of the echo wavefront impinges on the
receiving aperture. The sensitivity pattern of the circu-
lar aperture, now acting as the receiver, has the same
beam-like Bessel function form given in (30.3) by the
reciprocity theorem [30.1]. If the reﬂecting object is lo-
cated at (r; ) relative to the transducer, the detected
echo pressure amplitude, referenced to the receiver out-
put, is given by
PD.r; / D ˇfa4
r2
2J1.ka sin /
ka sin 
2
;
(30.5)
where ˇ is a proportionality constant that includes pa-
rameters that cannot by controlled in a design, such as
the density of air. The additional a2 in the numerator
occurs because larger apertures detect more of the echo
wavefront.
Figure 30.5 shows the echo amplitude from a small
(point-like) object located in the far ﬁeld as a function
–40
a) Normalized echo amplitude
Angle (deg)
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
–40
b) Amplitude (dB)
Angle (deg)
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
–25
–30
–35
–40
–45
–50
Fig.30.5a,b Normalized amplitude of echo from small ob-
ject predicted by the piston model as a function of angle.
(a) Linear scale. (b) Decibel scale

Sonar Sensing
30.2 Sonar Beam Pattern
757
Part C | 30.2
of angle detected by the electrostatic instrument grade
transducer. The curve has been normalized by the on-
axis echo amplitude.
This model is qualitative in that it provides the fol-
lowing practically useful insights:

For a small reﬂector size relative to the wavelength,
the echo amplitude decreases inversely with the
square of the range because there is a 1=r dispersion
loss from the transmitter to the object, followed by
an additional 1=r dispersion loss in the echo back
to the receiver. However, larger reﬂectors can be
treated using a Huygens principle approach [30.4]
by dividing them into smaller reﬂectors and coher-
ently adding their echo contributions. When this
is done in two dimensions over a normally inci-
dent extended plane reﬂector, the echo amplitude
decreases as 1=r rather than 1=r2. A cylindrical
reﬂector extends over one dimension and results
in an amplitude variation with range between 1=r
and 1=r2. A more-extreme situation can occur with
a concave reﬂector that acts as an acoustic magni-
ﬁer, resulting in an amplitude that decreases with
a negative power of range of less than one.

The transducer excited by an approximation to a si-
nusoid exhibits side-lobes due to null caused by
phase cancellation. For example, the 16-cycle exci-
tation employed in the conventional sonar exhibits
side-lobes. The peak of the ﬁrst side-lobe is 35 dB
relative to the echo amplitude when a small reﬂec-
tor lies on the transducer axis. The speciﬁcation
sheet for the 600 series instrument-grade transducer
shows the ﬁrst off-axis null at 15ı and a ﬁrst side-
lobe peak magnitude of 26 dB. We presume that
these measurements were made using a plane as
a reﬂector.

This model can be used to compute approximate
beam parameter values for other common transduc-
ers. For example, the SensComp 7000 Series [30.5]
with a D 1:25 cm yields  D 20ı, equal to the
speciﬁed value. However, the speciﬁed ﬁrst side-
lobe peak magnitude equals approximately 16 dB,
which is substantially different from the expected
35 dB.
The limitations of the qualitative model include:

Actual transducers only approximate pistons vibrat-
ing in an inﬁnite planar bafﬂe. The inﬁnite bafﬂe
directs all the radiated sound pressure into the half-
space in front of the transducer. Actual transducers
radiate in all directions, but most of the acoustic en-
ergy is concentrated within the main lobe.

All pulse-echo ranging sonars operate with ﬁnite-
duration pulses rather than inﬁnite-duration sinu-
soids. Several systems described below use pulses
that are quite different from a sinusoidal excita-
tion, either in duration or in form. These are com-
monly analyzed by computing the spectrum of the
pulse and decomposing it into several sinusoidal
frequencies, each having its own beam pattern.
For example, the echo amplitude predictions above
are reasonably accurate, including beam width and
side-lobes, for the 16-cycle pulses. However, when
impulse or swept-frequency excitations are used,
the net beam proﬁle becomes the superposition (of
linear amplitudes) of the beam patterns produced by
each frequency component in the excitation. Such
broadband excitations do not exhibit nulls because
the nulls formed by one frequency are ﬁlled in by
main and side-lobes of beams produced by other
frequencies.

Most sonar transducers are encased in protective
housings. The electrostatic instrument-grade trans-
ducer cover forms a mechanical ﬁlter that enhances
the acoustic output at 49:4 kHz. The cases of other
transducers may distort the transmitted ﬁeld, but
most form some type of directional beam.

The model does not include frequency-dependent
acoustic absorption of the transmission medium.
These reduce the echo amplitudes predicted by the
model.
The analytic model above is limited to simple con-
ﬁgurations. With current computational power, trans-
ducers can be extended to those with arbitrary, even
multiple, apertures and with various excitations. Wave-
forms of echoes from objects having arbitrary shapes
can be simulated by using Huygens principle [30.4].
The transmitter, receiver, and object surfaces are broken
up into two-dimensional (2-D) surface arrays of emit-
ting, reﬂecting, and detecting elements, using squares
of dimension < =5 (the smaller the better, but taking
longer). The impulse response of a given conﬁguration
is computed by assuming an impulsive emission and
superimposing the travel times along all possible paths
from all transmitter elements to all object elements and
then to all receiver elements. The temporal resolution
should be < .20fmax/1, where fmax is the maximum fre-
quency in the excitation. A 1 —s resolution is adequate
for a 16-cycle 49:4 kHz excitation. A much ﬁner resolu-
tion (< 0:1 —s) is required for an impulsive excitation.
The echo waveform is then computed as the convolu-
tion of this impulse response with the actual transmitted
pulse waveform [30.4].

Part C | 30.4
758
Part C
Sensing and Perception
30.3 Speed of Sound
The speed of sound c varies signiﬁcantly with atmo-
spheric temperature, pressure, and humidity and can be
critical in determining the accuracy of a sonar system.
This section outlines the relationship between c and
these variables and is based on [30.6, 7].
The speed of sound in dry air at sea-level air density
and one atmosphere pressure is given by
cT D 20:05
p
TC C 273:16 ms1 ;
(30.6)
where TC is the temperature in degrees Celsius. Under
most conditions (30.6) is accurate to within 1%. How-
ever, should the relative humidity be known, a better
estimate can be made as
cH D cT C hr

1:0059 103
C 1:7776 107.TC C 17:78/3	
ms1 :
(30.7)
Equation (30.7) is accurate to within 0:1% for tempera-
tures in the range 30 to 43 ıC for most pressures at sea
level. Should atmospheric pressure, ps be known then
the following expression can be used
cP D 20:05
v
u
u
t
TC C 273:16
1  3:79 103

hrpsat
ps
 ms1 ;
(30.8)
where the saturation pressure of air, psat is dependent on
temperature as follows
log10
psat
ps0

D 10:796

1 
T01
T

 5:0281log10
T01
T

C 1:5047104

1  108:2927
h
T
T01

1
i
C 0:42873103

1 C 104:7696
h
1
 T01
T
i
 2:2196 ;
(30.9)
ps0
is
the
reference
atmospheric
pressure
of
101:325 kPa and T01 is the triple-point isotherm
temperature with the exact value of 273:16 K.
30.4 Waveforms
Sonars employ a variety of waveforms, the most com-
mon types of which are shown in Fig. 30.6. Each
waveform can be considered the echo from a nor-
mally incident plane. Waveforms are classiﬁed as being
narrow- or wide-band depending on their spectral band-
width. Narrow-band pulses provide superior detection
performance in the presence of additive noise, while
wide-band pulses provide better range resolution and
do not have side-lobes.
Figure 30.6a shows the waveform produced by the
Murata 40 kHz piezoelectric transducer excited by an
eight-cycle 40 kHz square wave 40 Vrms. The Murata
sensor is small, lightweight, and efﬁcient, but has an
approximately 90ı beam width. These transducers are
used in monostatic, bistatic, and multiple transducer ar-
rays [30.8, 9].
The next three waveforms were produced by the Po-
laroid 600 electrostatic transducer. Similar waveforms
are generated by the smaller Polaroid 7000 transducer.
Figure 30.6b shows the waveform produced by the
6500 ranging module. This ranging module with its
10 m range, low cost, and simple digital interface is
a popular choice for implementing sonar arrays and
rings. While the electrostatic transducer is inherently
wide-band, with a usable frequency range from 10 to
120 kHz [30.10], narrow-band pulses are produced by
exciting the transducer with 16 cycles at 49:4 kHz.
Figure 30.6c illustrates a means to exploit the wide
bandwidth of the Polaroid electrostatic transducer by
exciting it with a decreasing-frequency square wave.
Such frequency-sweep pulses are processed by a band
of band-pass ﬁlters to extract the frequency dependence
of reﬂecting objects. A correlation detector, also know
as a matched ﬁlter, compresses swept-frequency pulses
to improve range resolution. Longer-duration (100 ms)
pulses are used in CTFM systems. Figure 30.6d shows
a wide-band pulse when the excitation is a 10 s-
duration 300 V pulse. The metal protective mesh, which
also acts as a mechanical ﬁlter resonant at 50 kHz, was
removed by machining to achieve a usable bandwidth
from 10 to 120kHz, with the peak occurring at 60 kHz.
Such wide-band pulses are useful for object classiﬁca-
tion [30.10, 11]. These pulses have small amplitudes,
limiting their range to 1 m or less.

Sonar Sensing
30.5 Transducer Technologies
759
Part C | 30.5
200 μs
a)
c)
Time
Time
320 μs
b)
Time
40 μs
d)
Time
Fig.30.6a–d Common sonar pulse waveforms. (a) Murata 40 kHz transducer (narrow band). (b) Polaroid 600 electro-
static transducer excited with 16-cycle sinusoid at 49:4 kHz (6500 ranging module – narrow band). (c) Polaroid 600
electrostatic transducer excited with decreasing-frequency excitation signal (wide band). (d) Polaroid 600 electrostatic
transducer excited with 10 s 300 V pulse (wide band)
30.5 Transducer Technologies
Electrostatic and piezoelectric transducers are the two
major types available that operate in air and can in prin-
ciple operate both as a transmitter and receiver – some
samples are shown in Fig. 30.7. In general electrostatic
devices have a higher sensitivity and bandwidth but typ-
ically require a bias voltage above 100 V. Piezoelectric
devices operate at lower voltages, making their elec-
tronic interfacing simpler, but have a high-Q resonant
ceramic crystal and this results in a narrow frequency
response compared to electrostatic transducers.
30.5.1 Electrostatic
An example of an electrostatic transducer is the Po-
laroid instrument-grade transducer (now available from
SensComp.com) constructed from a gold-coated plastic
foil membrane stretched across a round grooved alu-
minium back plate. The conductive foil is charged via
a bias voltage of 150 V with respect to the back plate.
Incoming sound waves vibrate the foil and change the
average distance between the foil and back plate and
thereby changing the capacitance of the foil. Assum-
ing that the charge q is constant, the voltage v.t/ is
generated proportional to this varying capacitance C.t/
as v.t/ D qC.t/. As a transmitter, the transducer mem-
brane is vibrated by applying 0300 V pulses across
this capacitor, typically using a pulse transformer. The
Fig. 30.7 Left to right: Series 9000, instrument-grade, and
Series 7000 transducers; front and back views are shown
(courtesy Acroname, Inc., Boulder)

Part C | 30.6
760
Part C
Sensing and Perception
charge induced by the 300 V on the capacitor causes
an electrostatic attraction force between the membrane
and the back plate. The grooves on the back plate allow
stretching of the membrane and by creating random-
ness in the back plate roughness a broad resonance can
be achieved in the frequency response. For example
the bandwidth of the 7000 series Polaroid transducer is
20 kHz. A front grille is mounted on the transducer and
removing this grille reduces losses and reverberation
between the grill and the membrane. Another electro-
static transducer was designed by Kay and details of its
design can be found in [30.12].
30.5.2 Piezoelectric
Piezoelectric ceramic transducers can be used as both
transmitters and receivers, however some manufactur-
ers sell transmitters and receivers separately in order to
optimize the transmitted power and receiver sensitivity,
respectively. A piezoelectric resonant crystal mechan-
ically vibrates when a voltage is applied across the
crystal, and in reverse generates a voltage when me-
chanically vibrated. Often a conical concave horn is
mounted on the crystal to acoustically match the crys-
tal acoustic impedance to that of air. An example is the
Murata MA40A5R/S receiver and sender transducers,
which operate at 40 kHz. This device has a diameter of
16 mm and a 60ı beam angle for transmitter combined
with receiver for 20 dB loss compared to the maxi-
mum sensitivity. The effective bandwidth of transmitter
and receiver is only a few kHz due to the resonant na-
ture of the crystals. This limits the envelope rise time
of pulses to around 0:5 ms. An advantage is the abil-
ity to drive piezoelectric devices with low voltages,
for example by connecting each terminal to comple-
mentary CMOS logic outputs. There is a wide range
of resonant frequencies for piezoelectric transducers
from 20 kHz to megahertz. Also available is piezoelec-
tric ﬁlm called polarized ﬂuoropolymer, polyvinylidene
ﬂuoride (PVDF) from [30.13]. This ﬂexible ﬁlm can
be cut to shape and custom ultrasonic transmitters and
receivers can be formed. The sensitivities of the trans-
mitters and receivers made from PVDF is generally
lower than that of ceramic crystal transducers and most
applications are short range where the broadband na-
ture of PVDF allows short pulses to be formed, allowing
pulse-echo ranging to as little as 30 mm.
30.5.3 MEMS
Microelectromechanical system (MEMS) ultrasonic
transducers can be fabricated on a silicon chip and
integrated with electronics. The sensors offer a low-
cost mass-produced alternative to standard transducers.
MEMS ultrasonic transducers operate as electrostatic
capacitive transducers where the membrane can be
made from thin nitride. Devices operate at frequencies
up to several megahertz and offer advantages in signal-
to-noise ratio over piezoelectric devices due to their
better matching to air acoustic impedance [30.14]. Two-
dimensional arrays of devices can be deployed on a chip
that are well matched and steerable.
30.6 Reflecting Object Models
Modeling the reﬂection processes helps in interpreting
echo information. In this section we consider three sim-
ple reﬂector models: planes, corners, and edges, shown
in Fig. 30.8. These models apply to both single trans-
ducers and arrays.
A plane is a smooth surface that acts as an acous-
tic mirror. Smooth walls and door surfaces act as planar
reﬂectors. The plane must be sufﬁciently wide to pro-
duce the two reﬂections whose path is shown in dotted
line. The plane reﬂector is then slightly larger than the
intersection area of the beam with a plane of inﬁnite ex-
tent. Smaller planes produce weaker echoes because of
a smaller reﬂecting surface and negative interference by
echoes diffracted from the edges of the plane. An acous-
tic mirror allows the analysis using a virtual transducer,
indicated by primes in the ﬁgure.
A corner is the concave right-angle intersection of
two surfaces. Corners formed by intersecting walls, the
sides of ﬁle cabinets, and door jambs are commonly
observed corner reﬂectors in indoor environments. The
novel feature of the corner, and its three-dimensional
(3-D) counterpart the corner cube, is that waves reﬂect
back in the same direction from which they originate.
This is caused by planar reﬂections at each of the two
surfaces deﬁning the corner. The virtual transducer is
then obtained by reﬂecting the transducer about one
plane of the corner and then the other plane. This gives
rise to a reﬂection through the intersection point of the
corner as shown in Fig. 30.8b. The virtual transducer
analysis indicates that, for a monostatic sonar, echoes
from a plane and corner are identical and that planes and
corners can generate identical sonar maps [30.4]. The
difference in the virtual transducer orientation between
planes and corners has been exploited using trans-
ducer arrays to differentiate these reﬂectors [30.11,
15].

Sonar Sensing
30.7 Artifacts
761
Part C | 30.7
1
1'
2
2'
a)
1
2'
2
1'
b)
1
2
c)
Fig.30.8a–c Reﬂector models: (a) plane, (b) corner, and
(c) edge
T/R
Fig. 30.9 Random reﬂector model. Echoes reﬂect back
from normally incident surface sections within the beam
The edge shown in Fig. 30.8c models physical
objects such as convex corners and high-curvature sur-
faces (posts), where the point of reﬂection is approx-
imately independent of transducer position. Edges are
encountered in hallways. While planes and corners gen-
erate strong echoes, edges generate weak echoes that
are detected only a short range [30.4], making them
difﬁcult objects to detect. Early robot sonar researchers
placed bubble wrap material on edge surfaces to make
them reliably detectable.
Many environmental objects can be conﬁgured as
a collection of planes, corners, and edges. Models for
echo production [30.16, 17] indicate that normally in-
cident surface patches and locations at which sharp
changes in the surface function and its derivatives
generate echoes. Objects with rough surfaces or a col-
lection of many objects generate echoes from a variety
of ranges and bearings, as illustrated in Fig. 30.9. If p.t/
represents a single echo waveform, often a replica of
the probing waveform, the total echo waveform pT.t/
is the sum of individual echoes pi.t/ from N normally
incident patches at range ri and bearing i, scaled by
amplitude ai, or
pT.t/ D
N
X
iD1
ai.i/pi

t  2ri
c

;
(30.10)
where ai.i/ is an amplitude factor related to the sur-
face patch size and its bearing in the beam. Wide-
bandwidth echoes are more complicated because their
waveform changes in a deterministic fashion due to
diffraction [30.11].
Sonars that analyze pT.t/ employ analog-to-digital
converters to obtain waveform samples [30.11, 18]. Re-
ﬂecting patches separated in range produce isolated
patches [30.11], but more often the incremental travel
time is less than the pulse duration, causing pulse
overlap. Rough surfaces and volume scatterers, such
as indoor foliage, have large N, allowing pT.t/ to be
treated as a random process [30.19, 20]. Conventional
TOF sonars output the ﬁrst time that pT.t/ exceeds
a threshold [30.11].
30.7 Artifacts
Sonars usually work well in simple environments, while
complex environments often produce mysterious read-
ings, artifacts, that foil attempts to build reliable sonar
maps. Artifacts have given sonar a bad reputation as
being a noisy, or low-quality, sensing modality. Sonar
stalwarts believe sonar would open up many new appli-
cations, if only we understood echoes at a level that ap-
proximates that employed by bats and dolphins [30.21].
Sonar stalwarts divide into two categories in terms of
how they treat artifacts. The ﬁrst attempts to build in-
telligent sensors that identify and suppresses artifacts
before transmitting data to a higher-level reasoning pro-

Part C | 30.8
762
Part C
Sensing and Perception
gram. Previous approaches [30.22, 23] required custom
electronics, which other researchers have been reluctant
to adopt because of expense or lack of experience. An
alternate approach is to control conventional sonar in
a novel fashion to produce a series of spikes and re-
quires only software changes [30.24]. Sonar arrays have
been used to ﬁnd consistent data [30.25–27]. Echoes
from specular reﬂectors, such as planes, corners, or
posts, exhibit detectable features, which can be ob-
scured by artifacts.
The second category of sonar users attempts to
eliminate artifacts produced by conventional sensors
by using higher-level postprocessing. These include
proponents of occupancy (or certainty) grids [30.28,
29], including those that apply simpliﬁed physical
models, such as sonar arcs [30.30, 31]. In simple en-
vironments postprocessing usually eliminates artifacts
that are inconsistent with a feature [30.32] or with
a physical map [30.31]. More-sophisticated methods
handle artifacts by treating them as noise and apply-
ing hidden Markov models (HMM) [30.33]. However,
multiple passes are needed to successfully teach the
system about relatively simple environments, mostly
because artifacts are not amenable to being treated as
independent additive noise. Eliminating troublesome
artifacts would replace HMM with simpler Markov
chains [30.34, 35], and sufﬁcient sonar data can be ob-
tained in a single pass. What frustrates this second
category, and mildly amuses the ﬁrst, is that this post-
processing works well in simple environments, but fails
in real-world environments. This second category even-
tually abandons sonar and joins the camera and laser
ranging crowd.
There are two important classes of artifacts: axial
multiple reﬂection (MR) artifacts and dynamic artifacts.
These artifacts are important in sonar mapping when
they indicate the presence of a static object at a lo-
cation where none exists. Troublesome MR artifacts
are caused by delayed echoes produced by a previ-
ous probing pulse exceeding the detection threshold
after the current probing pulse has been transmitted.
Such artifacts then appear as close-range objects and
obscure actual farther-range objects in conventional
sonars. Most sonars employ probing pulse emission pe-
riods longer than 50 ms to avoid MR artifacts, although
some reverberant environments can still produce arti-
facts [30.36].
Dynamic artifacts are produced by moving objects,
such as individuals passing through the sonar beam.
Even though these are actual objects and echoes indi-
cate their true range, their presence should not be part of
a sonar map that describes the static environment. Such
dynamic artifacts make quantitative matchings between
stored and generated sonar maps error-prone.
Another common artifact is a nonaxial MR arti-
fact [30.4] caused by an obliquely incident smooth
surface that redirects the sonar beam to some other
echo-producing object. The TOF produces a range read-
ing that is positioned along the sonar axis. While the
object is not at the location indicated on a sonar map,
its location in the sonar map is a stable element and can
be useful for navigation.
One may argue that, if the locations of all objects are
known, the echoes can be determined and should not be
treated as random processes. However, the presence of
speed ﬂuctuations in the medium due to thermal gra-
dients and ever-present electronic noise cause random
ﬂuctuations in the times that thresholds are exceeded.
Even a stationary sonar in a static environment exhibits
random ﬂuctuations [30.37], similar to the visual expe-
rience of fading when viewing objects beyond a heated
surface.
Sonar can identify artifacts by applying three phys-
ical criteria that are met by echoes from static environ-
mental objects. Artifact features include [30.36]:
1. Echo amplitude – echoes with amplitudes less than
a speciﬁed threshold
2. Coherence – echoes forming constant-range az-
imuthal intervals less than a speciﬁed threshold, and
3. Coincidence – echoes detected with a sonar array
at different times (lacking temporal coherence) or
corresponding to different locations (lacking spatial
coherence).
30.8 TOF Ranging
Most conventional sonars employ Polaroid 6500 rang-
ing modules [30.38] connected to the Polaroid 600
series electrostatic ultrasound transducer. The module is
controlled with digital signals on two input lines (INIT
for initialization and probing pulse transmission and
BLNk for clearing the indication and resetting the de-
tector) and the TOF reading occurs on its output line
(ECHO). A logic transition on INIT causes the trans-
ducer to emit a pulse lasting for 16 cycles at 49:4 kHz.
The same transducer detects echoes after a short delay
to allow transmission transients to decay. Another in-
terrogation pulse is typically emitted only after all the
echoes produced by the previous pulse have decayed
below a detection threshold.

Sonar Sensing
30.8 TOF Ranging
763
Part C | 30.8
The module processes echoes by performing recti-
ﬁcation and lossy integration. Figure 30.10 illustrates
a simulation of the processed waveform applied to the
threshold detector. While the echo arrives at time t0
after the emission, ECHO exhibits a transition at the
measured TOF time tm, the ﬁrst time the processed echo
signal exceeds a detection threshold . By convention,
the range r of the reﬂecting object is calculated by
r D ctm
2 ;
(30.11)
where c is the speed of sound in air, usually taken as
343 m=s.
Figure 30.10b shows details around the threshold
detection point including the residual high-frequency
ripple after full-wave rectiﬁcation and integration. Two
effects can be noticed. First, tm will always occur af-
ter t0, making threshold detection a biased estimate
of the true echo arrival time. Moreover, this bias is
related to the echo amplitude: stronger echoes will pro-
duce an integrator output having a greater slope, which
exceeds  sooner than tm. Second, as the echo ampli-
tude decreases, for example, when the object moves
away from the transducer axis, the threshold level oc-
curs later in the integrator output and tm will experience
small jumps in time approximately equal to half the pe-
riod [30.39].
The ﬁrst step in developing a model of the detection
process is to develop a model for the echo amplitude
as a function of bearing. The Polaroid transducer is
often modeled as a vibrating piston to yield the trans-
mitter/receiver beam pattern shown in Fig. 30.11. To
simplify the analysis, the peak of the beam proﬁle is
t0
τ
τ
tm
a)
b)
Time
t0 tm
Time
Fig.30.10a,b Simulation of Polaroid ranging module op-
eration. (a) Processed echo waveform. (b) Expanded time
and amplitude scale around threshold crossing point
approximated with a Gaussian function, a parabola in
logarithmic units in Fig. 30.11, to determine the echo
amplitude as a function of object bearing , or
A D A0 exp

 2
22

;
(30.12)
where A0 is the on-axis amplitude and  is a measure of
the beam width. The value  D 5:25ı provides a good
ﬁt around the peak of the beam pattern. The Gaussian
model is reasonable only over the central section of the
main lobe that produces detectable echoes.
We assume that the echo arrival time t0 does not
change signiﬁcantly with transducer orientation (object
bearing); this effect was investigated and found to be
minor [30.4]. In contrast, measured TOFs, denoted by
tm and t0
m in Fig. 30.12, are amplitude dependent and
a function of object bearing, which affects echo ampli-
tude as shown in Fig. 30.11.
The module processes the detected echo wave-
form by rectiﬁcation and lossy integration, as discussed
above. To derive a useful analytic model, assume that
the integration is lossless and the rectiﬁed echo is a unit
step function with amplitude A. This approximates the
processed waveform shown in Fig. 30.10b by a lin-
ear function around time tm, shown in Fig. 30.12. The
model ignores the residual ripple and the decreasing
slope of the waveform as the lossy rectiﬁcation ap-
proaches a constant value, shown in Fig. 30.10. The
linear function with a slope proportional to the echo am-
plitude is given by A.t  t0/, for t  t0. This function
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
Plane
Pole
Rod
5
10
15
20
25
Echo magnitude (dB)
Bearing (deg)
0
–10
–20
–30
–40
–50
–60
Fig. 30.11 Piston model transmitter/receiver pattern for the
Polaroid 600 series transducer. A Gaussian approxima-
tion with SD D 5:25ı is shown in dashed line. Equivalent
threshold levels for plane, pole, and rod objects at 1:5 m
range are shown as dot-dashed lines

Part C | 30.8
764
Part C
Sensing and Perception
t0
tm
t'm
Aθ (t–T0)
Amplitude
τ
Time
Fig. 30.12 TOF values tm and t0
m for idealized processed
echo waveforms having two amplitudes. The solid line in-
dicates a larger-amplitude echo
Fig.30.13a–c TOF data from an object at 1:5 m range;
mean of 100 measurements with bars indicating ˙1 SD.
The dashed lines are model predictions. (a) 1 m wide plane
.=A D 0:15 s/. (b) 8:9 cm diam pole .=A D 0:67 s/.
(c) 8 mm diam rod .=A D 2:68 s/ I
exceeds the threshold  at
tm D t0 C 
A
D t0 C 
A0
exp
 2
22

:
(30.13)
For ﬁxed , the incremental delay in tm is a func-
tion of the bearing  and inversely proportional to the
echo amplitude. When a constant echo amplitude A (in
volts) is applied to the integrator, the slope of the lin-
ear output is A V=s, with typical values on the order of
A D 105 V=s. If  D 0:10 V, =A D 106 s D 1s.
Experiments were conducted with a Polaroid 600
series transducer connected to a model 6500 ranging
module [30.39]. The Polaroid module was operated
conventionally to generate tm values as a rotational
scan was performed. Objects include a 1 m-wide plane,
a 8:9 cm-diameter pole, and an 8 mm-diameter rod, all
located at 1:5 m range. A rotational scan was performed
from 40ı to C40ı in 0:3ı steps. At each angle, 100 tm
values were recorded. The mean deviations from the tm
when the object is on the sonar axis ( D 0) were de-
termined and the standard deviation (SD) values were
computed. There were no other objects in proximity to
the object being scanned. Echoes from objects beyond
2 m were eliminated by a range gate.
Figure 30.13a shows the data for the plane,
Fig. 30.13b for the pole, and Fig. 30.13c for the rod.
The values are shown relative to the tm value ob-
served at 0ı bearing. Dashed lines indicate the values
predicted by the model. The tm values showed a varia-
tion with SD D 5s (0:9mm) at zero bearing, which is
about nine times greater than that predicted by sampling
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
a) Time (μs)
Bearing (deg)
150
100
50
0
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
b) Time (μs)
Bearing (deg)
150
100
50
0
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
c) Time (μs)
Bearing (deg)
150
100
50
0
jitter alone. This random time jitter is caused by dy-
namic thermal inhomogeneities in the air transmission
medium, which change the local sound speed and cause
refraction [30.37, 40]. The SD increases with deviation
from zero bearing because smaller echoes exceed the
threshold later in the processed waveform. The smaller

Sonar Sensing
30.9 Echo Waveform Coding
765
Part C | 30.9
slope of the latter part of the processed echo waveform
shown in Fig. 30.10 causes greater tm differences for
a given variation in echo amplitude, thus increasing the
SD.
One feature in the data not described by the model
is due to residual ripple in the integrator output, which
causes jumps in TOF readings equal to half peri-
ods (10s) added to the value predicted by (30.13).
These jumps are clearly evident in the mean values of
Fig. 30.13.
The angular extent over which echoes were detected
was 45ı for the plane, 22:8ı for the pole, and 18:6ı for
the rod. Side-lobes produced by the plane are visible
and have small echo amplitudes, which cause their tm
values to be retarded in time. These angular extents can
be related to the echo amplitudes that would have pro-
duced the respective arcs according to the piston model;
these are indicated in Fig. 30.11. For the plane, the
threshold level relative to the maximum echo amplitude
is 38 dB, for the pole 25 dB, and for the rod 13 dB.
Since the ranging module threshold at 1:5 m range is
the same for each object, the difference in levels indi-
cates the relative echo strength from each object, i. e.,
the plane echo is 13 dB (a factor of 4:5) greater than
the pole echo, and the pole echo is 12 dB (a factor of 4)
greater than the rod echo.
30.9 Echo Waveform Coding
Systems that display echo information beyond the ﬁrst
echo have been investigated [30.11, 18, 25, 41–43], but
typically employ custom electronics. One motivation
for examining the entire echo waveform is the suc-
cess of diagnostic medical ultrasound imaging systems,
which adopt this method [30.44, 45].
As a less expensive alternative to analog-to-digital
conversion, the Polaroid ranging module can detect
echoes beyond the initial echo by repeatedly resetting
the detection circuit. The 6500 module speciﬁcation
suggests a delay before resetting to prevent the current
echo from retriggering the detection circuit [30.3]. Let
us ignore this suggestion and control the Polaroid mod-
ule in nonstandard way to provide information about
the entire echo waveform. Since the echo amplitude
is estimated from the digital output produced by the
Polaroid module, this operation has been called pseudo-
amplitude scan (PAS) sonar [30.24].
The conventional ranging module processes de-
tected echoes by performing rectiﬁcation and forming
a lossy integration, as illustrated in Fig. 30.14a.
The BLNK input is typically kept at zero logic
level, which enables the ECHO output. ECHO exhibits
a transition at the time when the processed echo sig-
nal exceeds a threshold, as shown in Fig. 30.14b. By
convention, the time interval between the INIT and
ECHO transitions indicates the time of ﬂight (TOF),
from which the range r of the reﬂecting object is cal-
culated by
r D c  TOF
2
:
(30.14)
Echoes occurring after the initial echo can be de-
tected by resetting ECHO by pulsing the BLNK input.
The speciﬁcation suggests that the BLNK pulse should
be delayed after the ECHO indication by at least 440 s
to account for all 16 returning cycles in the echo and to
allow it to decay below the threshold for the largest ob-
servable echo. The largest echoes typically saturate the
detection circuit, providing a predetermined maximum
value. This duration corresponds to the time interval
over which the processed signal is above the threshold,
as shown in Fig. 30.14a.
When an ECHO event is observed, the PAS sys-
tem issues a short 3 s (corresponding to a software
query period) pulse on the BLNK input line, which
clears the ECHO signal as shown in Fig. 30.14c. Upon
being cleared, the Polaroid module exhibits a delay in-
versely related to the echo amplitude, lasting at least
140 s for large-amplitude echoes, and then produces
Threshold
a)
b)
c)
Time
Time
Time
440 μs
Fig.30.14a–c Polaroid ranging module operation modes.
(a) Processed echo waveform. (b) ECHO output produced
in conventional time-of-ﬂight mode. (c) ECHO output pro-
duced in PAS mode

Part C | 30.9
766
Part C
Sensing and Perception
another ECHO event if the processed echo signal still
exceeds the threshold. The PAS system repeatedly is-
sues a BLNK pulse whenever an ECHO event is ob-
served. Hence, a strong echo is represented by three
pulses on the ECHO line, the ﬁrst corresponding to the
conventional TOF, followed by two more pulses. Be-
cause lower amplitude echoes spend less time above the
threshold, a weaker echo produces two pulses spaced
farther apart, and a very weak echo may produce only
one pulse. Shorter INIT pulses discharge the integra-
tor by a lesser amount and thus increase the number
of pulses produced by the standard Polaroid emis-
sion [30.46, 47].
A PAS sonar map is generated by placing a range
dot along the transducer axis as a rotational scan is ex-
ecuted. With multiple readings per interrogation pulse,
a PAS sonar map contains multiple dots at each inter-
rogation angle. Rotational scans then form arcs, with
isolated arcs indicating weak echoes, arc pairs moder-
ate echoes, and arc triplets large echoes. To illustrate,
Fig. 30.15 shows arcs formed by a large plane (2:3 m
width by 0:6 m height) and ﬁve cylinders with different
diameters, all placed at 1 m range. Examining objects at
the same range eliminates effects caused by the range-
dependent gain of the module.
A conventional TOF sonar map by comparison
would display only the nearest arc in the PAS map for
each object. Qualitatively, the arc length increases and
the number of arcs increase with the echo amplitude,
which is bearing dependent. The strongest reﬂectors
produce concave arcs [30.4, 48]. This occurs because,
with echo amplitudes much greater than the thresh-
old, the threshold is exceeded near the beginning of
the echo, yielding a nearly constant range reading over
a signiﬁcant extent over bearing. In contrast, the weak-
est reﬂectors produce convex arcs, caused by echoes
whose amplitudes are comparable to the threshold. As
the echo amplitude decreases the threshold is exceeded
at later points along the processed waveform, produc-
ing greater range readings. This effect also appears at
the edges of the arcs produced by strong reﬂectors.
Object
Arc extent (deg)
Plane
8.9 cm dia post
2.85 cm dia post
8 mm dia pole
1.5 mm dia wire
0.6 mm dia wire
48.3
24.6
23.1
21.9
19.2
10.5
Fig. 30.15 PAS sonar maps of six objects located at 1 m
range. The sonar is located below the objects in the ﬁgure
Computing the beam pattern of the vibrating pis-
ton model [30.1], which is a reasonable approximation
to the Polaroid transducer, yields the curve shown in
Fig. 30.16.
This ﬁgure describes the detected echo magni-
tude normalized to have a maximum of 0 dB, which
occurs along the beam axis. The larger echoes are
much greater than the threshold, such as those pro-
duced by the plane, whose maximum amplitudes can
be 44 dB relative to the threshold. The 44 dB thresh-
old agrees with the PAS map for a plane: strong echoes
(three stripes) occur within 10ı of normal incidence,
range readings increase due to echo amplitude re-
duction at ˙15:6ı, approximating the predicted nulls
at ˙14:7ı, and smaller-amplitude echoes from the side-
lobes are present. Weaker reﬂectors correspond to larger
thresholds when their on-axis echoes normalize to 0 dB.
The beam pattern model explains how arc length varies
with object reﬂecting strength. The indicated thresholds
were found by matching the angular beam width to the
arc extent.
It is apparent that PAS maps provide information
useful for solving the inverse problem, that of de-
termining the identity of the object from the echoes.
Figure 30.15 shows that PAS maps contain informa-
tion about the echo amplitude. While it is true that the
conventional TOF sonar maps, represented by the clos-
est arc, can determine the object location from the arc
center and can infer the echo amplitude from the arc
extent, it is also true that this information is presented
in a more robust way in the PAS maps. For this sim-
ple case of isolated objects, the posts can be clearly
differentiated from the pole, while the corresponding
conventional TOF arcs are comparable. A tenfold in-
0
10
20
–10
–20
0.6 mm
1.5 mm
8 mm
2.85 cm
8.9 cm
Plane
Echo magnitude (dB)
Bearing (deg)
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
–25
–30
–35
–40
–45
–50
Fig. 30.16 Transmitter–receiver beam pattern. Dashed
lines indicate the equivalent threshold level for each object

Sonar Sensing
30.10 Echo Waveform Processing
767
Part C | 30.10
1
B
C
A
B
C
p
p
p
P
P
P
T/R
T/R
T/R
A
0
–1
2
3
Cross range (m)
Range (m)
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Fig. 30.17 PAS sonar map of 2:85 cm-diameter post (p)
and 8:9 cm-diameter post (P). The transducer is located at
(0,0). A: Artifact caused by echo originating at transmitter
T, reﬂected by p, bouncing off P back to p, and directed
toward receiver T ! p ! P ! p ! R. B: T ! P ! p !
P ! R. C: T ! p ! P ! R and T ! P ! p ! R
crease in post diameter yields only a modest increase
in the conventional TOF arc length, while increasing
the number of arcs from two to three in the PAS maps.
Spike data can be processed to produce sonar images
of the environment that are similar to diagnostic ul-
trasound B-scans [30.49].
VIDEO 315 shows a sonar
B-scan of a tree.
When examining the entire echo waveform, one
must account for artifacts that are produced when ob-
jects interact acoustically. Some artifacts occur after the
ﬁrst detected echo, so these are not a problem in TOF
sonar maps [30.4], but must be addressed in interpreting
PAS maps. Consider a simple environment consisting
of two posts: a 2:85 cm-diameter post (p), located at
r D 1 m and bearing 12ı, and an 8:9 cm-diameter post
(P), at r D 1:3 m and bearing 10ı. The corresponding
PAS map shown in Fig. 30.17 displays the echoes from
the two objects plus additional echoes that illustrate two
types of multiple reﬂection artifacts.
The ﬁrst type, indicated by A and B, results when
only one object is within the transducer beam. An in-
terrogation pulse that is redirected by a reﬂected object
must be directed back to the receiver within its beam
pattern in order to be detected. The paths that do this
are shown in the ﬁgure. The single-arc convex shape
of A indicates that the echo has a small amplitude. This
is reasonable since both reﬂectors are nonplanar, and
hence weak.
The second type of artifact (C) shown in Fig. 30.17
occurs when both objects are within the beam pattern.
This allows two distinct paths for the echoes to return to
the receiver, occurring in opposite directions and dou-
bling the artifact amplitude. With both objects lying
near the beam edges, the echo amplitude is small. Since
the distance traveled by these echoes is slightly greater
than the range to the farther object, this artifact shows
a range slightly beyond the more distant object. The su-
perposition of these two components makes the echo
from the farther object appear spread out in time. This
pulse stretching explains why four arcs are observed,
and at one angle ﬁve arcs. If the bearing angle between
p and P was increased to exceed the beam width, this
artifact would disappear.
30.10 Echo Waveform Processing
In this section pulse-echo sonar that processes sam-
pled digitized receiver waveforms is described. These
systems offer superior performance over the simple Po-
laroid ranging module systems described above, which
report the TOF based on a threshold. Echo waveform
processing does however incur the overhead of more-
complex electronics and signal processing and is not
readily available commercially.
30.10.1 Ranging
and Wide-Bandwidth Pulses
It is shown in [30.11, 50] that the maximum-likelihood
estimator (MLE) for the TOF is obtained by maximiz-
ing the correlation cor./ between the received pulse
p.t/ (containing Gaussian white noise) and the known
pulse shape shifted by , rec.t  /
cor./ D
R b
a p.t/rec.t  /dt
qR b
a p2.t/dt
R b
a rec2.t/dt
;
(30.15)
where the pulse extends from time a to b. The known
pulse shape at the receiver depends on the angle of
transmission and reception with respect to the normals
of the respective transducers. The pulse shape can be
obtained by collecting a good signal to noise pulse at
1 m range at normal incidence to the receiver and trans-
mitter and using elliptical impulse response models to
obtain template pulses at angles different to normal in-
cidence. Pulse shape also changes with range due to
the dispersive properties of absorption due losses in air

Part C | 30.10
768
Part C
Sensing and Perception
transmission. These can be modeled using an estimate
of the impulse response due to one meter path through
air as is done in [30.11].
The correlation, cor./ is normalized in (30.15) to
be between 1 and C1. The correlation at the maxi-
mum thus gives a good indication of the match between
T/R1
T'
R2
90–θ
θ
d
c t2
c t1
Fig. 30.18 Bearing () calculation for a plane using a transceiver
T/R1 and a receiver R2. T0 is the virtual image of T
T/R1
T'
R2
90–θ
θ
d
c t2
c t1
Fig. 30.19 Bearing () calculation for a corner using a transceiver
T/R1 and a receiver R2. T0 is the virtual image of T
T/R1
R2
90–θ
θ
d
ct2–ct1/2
ct1/2
Fig. 30.20 Bearing () calculation for an edge using a transceiver
T/R1 and a receiver R2. No virtual image is present since the edge
radiates from a point source at the edge
the expected and actual pulse shapes and can be used
to assess the quality of the TOF estimate. In practice
(30.15) is used in discrete time form, where the inte-
grals are replaced by sums of products and digital signal
processors are an ideal implementation since they are
highly optimized to perform this calculation [30.51,
52]. Finding the maximum correlation of (30.15) is
known as template matching. To achieve an arrival time
estimator with resolution smaller than the discrete time
sample rate, parabolic interpolation can be used on the
maximum three correlations [30.11]. Of interest is the
jitter standard deviation R in the TOF estimator due to
receiver noise. From [30.11, 50]
R D
n
B
pP
k rec.kTs/2 ;
(30.16)
where the summation index k is over the entire receiver
pulse sampled every Ts seconds (1 —s in [30.11, 51]), B
is the bandwidth of the receiver pulse, and n is the stan-
dard deviation of the receiver noise. Equation (30.16)
shows that broadband high-energy pulses achieve low
errors in the TOF estimator. In [30.11] this is achieved
by using a 300 V pulse to excite the transmitter and
achieve close to the impulse response from the device
with a pulse shape similar to that shown in Fig. 30.6d.
30.10.2 Bearing Estimation
There are many proposed methods for bearing esti-
mation. A single transducer [30.53] can be used by
exploiting the dependency of the received pulse shape
on the angle of reception. This approach works for
angles within one half of the beam width since the
pulse shape is symmetric with respect to the transducer
normal angle. Differences in zero-crossing times ei-
ther side of the maximum amplitude of the pulse are
used to obtain an accuracy of the order of 1ı. Other
single-receiver techniques rely on repeated measure-
ments from a scan across the scene [30.54, 55] and
achieve a similar level of accuracy but at much slower
sensing speed since multiple readings are necessary.
Other single measurement approaches rely on two
or more receivers [30.11, 12, 25]. This gives rise to
a correspondence problem where data must be associ-
ated between the receivers. The closer the spacing be-
tween receivers, the simpler and more reliable the corre-
spondence procedure. The misconception that bearing
accuracy improves with larger receiver spacing ignores
the correlation between measurement errors that can
arise due to the measurements sharing an overlapping
space of air in the propagation of the ultrasound. Due
to the high accuracy of TOF estimation in [30.11] the
receivers could be spaced as close as physically feasi-
ble (35 mm) and still bearing accuracies lower than any

Sonar Sensing
30.11 CTFM Sonar
769
Part C | 30.11
other systems are reported. Standard deviations of bear-
ing errors are reported to be below 0:2ı for a plane at
a range of 4 m within a 10ı to C10ı beam width.
There are two common approaches to bearing esti-
mation – interaural amplitude difference (IAD) [30.56]
and interaural time difference (ITD) [30.11, 25, 51–53,
56]. IAD uses two receivers pointing away from each
other so that an echo has a different amplitude response
in each receiver’s beam width. In ITD both receivers
usually point in the same direction and the TOF is mea-
sured on each receiver and triangulation is applied to
determine the angle of arrival. The bearing calculation is
dependent on the target type, such as a plane, corner or
edge; these geometries are analyzed in [30.11]. A simple
arrangement with a transceiver and receiver is shown in
Fig. 30.18, where T/R1 is the transceiver and R2 is the
second receiver, spaced a distance d from each other.
The virtual image of the transmitter is shown as T0.
The two TOFs measured on the two receivers are t1 and
t2, and these are used to estimate the bearing angle, , to
the plane which is the angle to the plane normal. Apply-
ing the cosine rule to the triangle R2 R1 T0 in Fig. 30.18
gives
cos.90  / D sin  D d2 C c2t2
1  c2t2
2
2dct1
:
(30.17)
When d  ct1, (30.17) can be approximated by
sin  
 c.t1  t2/
d
:
(30.18)
Note that any common (i. e., correlated) noise in t1 and
t2 is removed by the difference in (30.18) and hence the
correlation in noise components of the TOF cannot be
overlooked in bearing estimation as described above.
The situation for a corner is shown in Fig. 30.19 and
the same result applies as in (30.17).
For an edge the situation is shown in Fig. 30.20,
where R1 has a TOF from T to the edge and back to
R1, whilst R2 has a TOF from T to the edge and back
to R2.
From the geometry, we use the same approach as in
(30.17) to give
sin  D d2 C c2t2
1
4  c2 
t2  t1
2
2
2dc t1
2
D d2 C c2t2.t1  t2/
dct1
:
(30.19)
Note that (30.19) can be approximated by (30.18) when
d  ct1.
30.11 CTFM Sonar
The
continuous-transmission
frequency-modulated
(CTFM) sonar differs from the more common pulse-
echo sonar discussed in previous sections in the
transmission coding and the processing required to
extract information from the receiver signal.
30.11.1 CTFM Transmission Coding
The CTFM transmitter continuously emits a varying-
frequency signal, usually based on a sawtooth pattern
as shown in Fig. 30.21, where the frequency is often
swept through an octave every sweep cycle T.
The transmitted signal with a linearly changing fre-
quency can be expressed as
S.t/ D cos

2

fHt  bt2	
(30.20)
for 0 	 t < T. The sweep cycle is repeated every T sec-
onds as shown in Fig. 30.21. Frequency is 1=2 times
the time derivative of the phase in (30.20). Note that
the highest frequency is fH and the lowest transmitted
frequency is fH  2bT, where b is a constant that de-
termines the sweep rate. We can then deﬁne the swept
frequency F as
F D 2bT :
(30.21)
30.11.2 CTFM TOF Estimation
Echoes are generated when the transmitted wavefront
encounters reﬂectors and are an attenuated, delayed ver-
sion of the transmitted signal
E.t/ D AS

t  2R
c

;
(30.22)
where R is the range to the reﬂector, c is the speed of
sound and A is the amplitude that may in the case of
curved objects depend on the frequency of the sound at
reﬂection.
The TOF is estimated by the two step process of
demodulation and spectral analysis. Demodulation is
achieved by multiplying the received signal by a copy
of the transmitted signal and low pass ﬁltering. This can
best be understood in the simple case of one echo. The

Part C | 30.11
770
Part C
Sensing and Perception
signal D.t/ is obtained using (30.20) and (30.22)
D.t/ D E.t/S.t/
D A
2

cos

2fet  

C cos

2fut  2bt2  
	
for fe D 4Rb
c
;
fu D

2fH C 4Rb
c

;
 D fH
2R
c C 4bR2
c2
;
(30.23)
where the following trigonometric identity has been
used in (30.23)
cos.x/ cos.y/ D 1
2Œcos.xy/Ccos.xCy/ : (30.24)
A low-pass ﬁlter removes frequency components above
fH and this results in the base-band signal
Db.t/ D A
2

cos

2 4Rb
c t  

;
(30.25)
which has a frequency proportional to the range R. The
ranges of echoes can be extracted by examining the
spectrum of Db using, for example, a discrete Fourier
transform (DFT) or the fast Fourier transform (FFT).
From (30.25) for a frequency peak of fr Hz the corre-
sponding range R is given by
R D fr
c
4b :
(30.26)
Note that the above analysis relies on excluding the
receiver waveform at the start of each sweep for a blind
time (Fig. 30.21) of Rm=2c, where Rm is the maximum
target range. During this blind time the receiver signal
is dependent on the previous sweep rather than the
0
T
2T
R/2c
Transmission
Blind time
Echo
Frequency
Time
fH
fH– 2bT
Fig. 30.21 18 Plot of frequency versus time for CTFM.
The blind time applies if the shown echo corresponds to
a maximum range target at Rm
current sweep as assumed in the analysis above. The
sweep time T needs to be much larger than this blind
time for the sonar to operate effectively. The blind
time can be eliminated at the expense of introducing
complexity in the demodulation process as described
in [30.57], where an interlaced double demodulation
scheme is described.
30.11.3 CTFM Range Discrimination
and Resolution
We deﬁne range discrimination as the separation in
range of two targets that can be simultaneously detected
as distinct. The range resolution is deﬁned as the small-
est increment in range that can be measured by the
sonar.
Suppose that, in order to extract ranges of tar-
gets, Db.t/ from (30.25) is sampled at T intervals
and k samples are collected before a DFT (or FFT)
is performed. The frequency samples of the DFT will
be f D 1=.kT/ apart. From (30.26), this represents
a range resolution R of
R D cf
4b D
c
4bkT :
(30.27)
We can relate this to the swept frequency F from
(30.21) as
R D
c
2F 
T
kT ;
(30.28)
where the second term is the ratio of the sweep time to
the spectral sample time. In order to discriminate two
peaks in the DFT, they must be at least two samples
apart and hence
range discrimination D
c
F 
T
kT :
(30.29)
Note that (30.28),(30.29)) show that, subject to
signal-to-noise constraints, CTFM can lengthen the
data integration time kT in order to improve the
range discrimination and resolution of the sonar. Also
it is possible, subject to signal noise, to use interpo-
lation techniques (e.g., parabolic interpolation) on the
DFT peaks to resolve to a smaller than f frequency
and hence improve range resolution (but not range
discrimination).
30.11.4 Comparison of CTFM
and Pulse-Echo Sonar

The range resolution of pulse-echo sonar and
CTFM sonar is theoretically the same given the
same signal-to-noise ratios and bandwidths [30.57].

Sonar Sensing
30.11 CTFM Sonar
771
Part C | 30.11
The range discrimination in pulse-echo sonar is lim-
ited by the pulse length, where shorter pulse lengths
require higher bandwidth. However in CTFM,
range discrimination can be improved by increas-
ing the data integration time, allowing more design
ﬂexibility.

CTFM also allows for the energy of the transmit-
ted signal to be spread evenly over time, resulting
in lower peak acoustic power emission compared to
pulse-echo systems with the same receiver signal-
to-noise ratio. CTFM can provide a greater aver-
age power in a practical context and consequently
a greater sensitivity to weak reﬂectors is possible.

CTFM requires more-complex transmitter circuitry
and the requirement for FFT processing on the re-
ceiver side.

Separate transmitter and receiver transducers are
necessary with CTFM, whilst pulse-echo systems
can use a single transducer for both transmission
and reception, resulting in restriction on the mini-
mum range of pulse-echo sonar due to the blanking
of the receiver during transmission. CTFM has no
inherent restriction on minimum range.

CTFM sonar can continuously derive range infor-
mation from targets every kT seconds at a delay of
R=c C kT compared to every 2Rm=c with a delay
of 2R=c in pulse-echo sonar (ignoring processing
delays in both), which may be important in real-
time tracking applications.

Other beneﬁts of CTFM are that the number of
range measurements per cycle is limited only by the
range discrimination constraint of (30.28) and the
signal-to-noise ratio.

In terms of bearing estimation and classiﬁcation of
targets from a moving platform, short pulse-echo
sonar systems like [30.27, 51] do not suffer from
the CTFM data integration time required to esti-
mate accurately the frequencies corresponding to
ranges (and hence bearing). During the data inte-
gration time, the target can move with respect to the
sensor and blur the measurements, making bearing
estimation and classiﬁcation less accurate. In short
pulse-echo systems, the target is effectively sampled
with a pulse of less than 100 s, resulting in a con-
sistent snapshot of the target.
30.11.5 Applications of CTFM
Kay [30.58, 59] developed a mobility aid for blind peo-
ple using a CTFM sonar system based on a sweep
of fH D 100 down to 50 kHz with a sweep period of
T D 102:4 ms. After demodulation, ranges are heard
as audible tones with frequencies up to 5 kHz cor-
responding to ranges of up to 1:75 m. The system
uses one transmitter and three receivers as shown in
Fig. 30.22.
Users of the system can listen to the demodulated
signal in stereo headphones corresponding to the left
and right receivers, each mixed with the large central
oval receiver. Higher frequencies correspond to more-
distant ranges. To illustrate the sensitivity, a 1:5 mm-
diameter wire is easily detectable at 1 m range – the echo
produced is 35 dB above the noise ﬂoor in the system.
CTFM sonar has been used to recognize isolated
plants [30.41, 60]. The advantage gained from CTFM
is that extensive range and echo amplitude information
is obtained from the whole plant given the spectrum
of the demodulated received signal, and these echoes
are obtained from an excitation across an octave of
frequencies from 100 down to 50 kHz with a high
signal-to-noise ratio that allows weak reﬂections from
leaves to be sensed. This information is called the
acoustic density proﬁle and 19 different features are
found to be useful in classifying the plants, such as the
number of range cells above a threshold in amplitude,
the sum of all range cells, the variation about the cen-
troid, the distance from the ﬁrst to the highest amplitude
cell, and the range over which reﬂections are detected.
With a population of 100 plants, an average of 90:6%
correct pairwise classiﬁcation was obtained using a sta-
tistical classiﬁer.
Fig. 30.22 Aid for blind people – the small oval trans-
ducer is the transmitter and the other three components
are receivers. The large oval receiver provides high reso-
lution, enabling ﬁxation by users’ ﬁne neck control (after
Kay [30.58])

Part C | 30.12
772
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Scanning CTFM with a singe transmitter and sin-
gle receiver has been successfully applied to mapping
of indoor environments that include smooth and rough
surfaces [30.55] with bearing errors on the order of
0:5ı for smooth surfaces and higher for edges. The
classiﬁcation uses amplitude information that is nor-
malized with range using a ﬁxed attenuation constant of
sound. In practice this attenuation constant varies with
temperature and humidity and needs to be calibrated
before each experiment for consistent results. Greater
robustness, speed, and accuracy has been demonstrated
with TOF methods of classiﬁcation that require at least
two transmitter positions and two receivers as described
in [30.11, 51]. CTFM could be applied to array systems
to achieve higher sensitivity to weak targets than the ex-
isting pulse-echo systems.
CTFM has been employed in three binaural sys-
tems [30.12] where a rigorous theoretical and experi-
mental comparison of these ultrasonic sensing systems
based on different range and bearing estimators is made.
Stanley [30.12] also contains detailed engineering de-
sign information of CTFM sonar systems. The conclu-
sion is that CTFM can insonify large areas due to its
higher average power transmissions and consequently
good signal to noise performance. The use of autore-
gressive estimators for spectral lines in the demodu-
lated signal were found to provide better resolution
than the DFT. The interaural distance and power differ-
ence CTFM approaches provided state-of-the-art per-
formance except that the pulse-echo approach in [30.11]
using a high-energy short pulse was found to be a factor
of six to eight times superior in bearing precision.
30.12 Multipulse Sonar
This section examines sonar systems that employ more
than one pulse in the transmitter(s). The main motiva-
tions are interference rejection and on-the-ﬂy classiﬁ-
cation. Multipulse sonar has also been used to generate
a better signal-to-noise ratio by creating longer trans-
mitted pulse sequence using Barker codes [30.61]. The
autocorrelation of a Barker code gives a narrow peak
with low autocorrelation away from the central lobe.
The matched ﬁlter then gives rise to pulse compression
that averages noise over a longer time period.
30.12.1 Interference Rejection
External acoustic noise, such as compressed air, is
a source of sonar interference. Sonar systems attempt
to reduce the effects of external interference by ﬁlter-
ing the signal and the optimal ﬁlter is the matched ﬁlter
where the impulse response is the time reversal of the
pulse shape that is expected. Since a time-reversed con-
volution is a correlation, the matched ﬁlter then acts as
a correlation with the expected pulse shape as discussed
in Sect. 30.10. Approximations to matched ﬁltering can
be designed based on a bandpass ﬁlter with a frequency
response that is similar to the spectrum of the expected
receiver pulse. CTFM systems allow robust suppression
of external interference by employing a matched ﬁlter
across a broad range of frequencies contained in the
continuous chirp transmission.
When more than one sonar system operates in
the same environment, the transmitted signal from
one sonar system can be received by another, causing
crosstalk errors. This is particularly evident in classical
sonar rings constructed from Polaroid ranging modules.
Error-eliminating rapid ultrasonic ﬁring strategies have
been developed [30.62] and are claimed to remove most
of this interference and allow faster operation of these
sonar rings.
More-sophisticate coding of transmitted pulse(s)
has been employed [30.23, 63–66] to allow rejection
of external interference and crosstalk. One difﬁculty
with multiple transmitted pulses over a greater time
period than a single pulse is that target clutter can pro-
duce many overlapping pulses at the receivers that are
difﬁcult to unravel and interpret, and the sonar range
discrimination can be compromised.
30.12.2 On-the-Fly Target Classification
Target classiﬁcation into planes, cylinders, and edges
has been achieved by deploying a single transmitter
and three receivers [30.25] using a single measurement
cycle. At least two transmitters are required to differen-
tiate planes from concave right-angled corners [30.11]
where a two transmitter arrangement is used to classify
targets into planes, corners, and edges in two successive
measurement cycles. The method of classiﬁcation can
be understood with virtual images and mirrors, since
specular sonar reﬂections occur. Looking into a plane
mirror gives an image that is left–right reversed com-
pared to looking into a right-angled mirror. An edge is
analogous to observing a high-curvature specular sur-
face, such as a polished chair leg, where the whole
image is compressed to a point. Sonar classiﬁcation ex-
ploits the difference in bearing angles to a target from

Sonar Sensing
30.13 Sonar Rings and Arrays
773
Part C | 30.13
two transmitters to classify as follows: a positive dif-
ference ı indicates a plane, a negative ı value indicates
a corner, and zero difference an edge, where the angle ı
depends on the sensor geometry and target range. More
sophistication can be added by using range measure-
ments in addition to bearing, with maximum-likelihood
estimation.
This arrangement [30.11] was reﬁned to work with
just one measurement cycle of around 35 ms to 5 m
range: hence the term on-the-ﬂy in [30.51]. This on-
the-ﬂy approach uses pulses ﬁred at a precise time
difference T and 40 mm apart from two transmitters
with two further receivers completing a square. T
is usually around 200 s but can vary randomly from
cycle to cycle to achieve interference rejection (both
crosstalk and environmental) with identical sonar sys-
tems. Classiﬁcation is performed simultaneously in one
measurement cycle. The sensor achieves high accu-
racy in range and bearing with robust classiﬁcation
by exploiting the tight correlation between TOF jit-
ter in the different transmitter to receiver paths due
to the close temporal and spatial arrangement. The
sensor has been deployed for large-scale mapping
in [30.67].
30.13 Sonar Rings and Arrays
Since sonar only detects objects lying within its beam,
a common means to scan the entire environment outside
the robot is to use an array of sonars, or a ring [30.68].
30.13.1 Simple Ranging Module Rings
The most common is the Denning ring that contains 24
sonars equally spaced around the robot periphery. This
15ı spacing allows some overlap in the sonar beams so
at least one of the sonars will detect a strong reﬂecting
object. The sonars in the ring are typically employed
sequentially one at a time. Using a 50 ms probing pulse
period to reduce false readings a complete environmen-
tal scan is accomplished every 1:2 s. This sample time is
adequate for a translate-and-stop operation in research
settings, but may be too slow for a continually moving
robot. A robot moving at 1 m=s may not detect an object
with sufﬁcient warning to prevent a collision. Some re-
searchers propose simultaneously employing sonars on
opposite ends of the ring to speed up acquisition times,
while others also reduce the probing pulse period and
attempt to identify artifacts.
30.13.2 Advanced Rings
Yata et al. [30.53] developed a 32 cm-diameter sonar
ring with 30 transmitters and 30 receivers placed al-
ternately. Murata piezoelectric MA40S4R wide-angle
transducers are used to enable overlapping reception
of echoes produced by ﬁring all the transmitters si-
multaneously. An axial symmetrical exponential horn
structure is used to narrow the beam shape of the trans-
mitters vertically to avoid reﬂections from the ﬂoor.
Received signals are compared with a decaying thresh-
old to produce a 1 bit digitized sampled signal without
rectiﬁcation. Bearing is estimated from the leading edge
of echoes and an error standard deviation of 0:4ı is re-
ported for ranges up to 1:5 m.
A sonar ring with seven digital signal processors
(DSPs) [30.52, 69, 70] that uses 24 pairs of 7000 se-
ries Polaroid transducers consisting of a transceiver
and receiver has been developed (Fig. 30.23). Each
pair can derive range and accurate bearing informa-
tion using template-matching digital signal processing
(Sect. 30.10) on each of the two receiver channels,
which are sampled at 250 kHz with 12 bit analog to
digital converters. In total eight receiver channels are
processed per DSP. All transceivers are ﬁred simul-
taneous to enable full surrounding sensing of the en-
vironment approximately 11 times a second to a 6 m
range with experimentally validated range and bear-
ing accuracies to smooth targets of 0:6 mm and 0:2ı,
respectively. To suppress interference between neigh-
Fig. 30.23 DSP sonar ring hardware

Part C | 30.13
774
Part C
Sensing and Perception
boring pairs, two different transmitted pulse shapes
are employed in an interleaved fashion around the
perimeter of the ring. The pulse shapes are derived
from two and three cycles of 65 kHz excitation. The
7
8
6
22
4
11
15
12
1
19
13
15
2
15
21
17
19
10
8
16
24
12
14
40
25
10
18
140
26
178
23
174
17
85
16
19
9
11
10
103
5
7
3
99
11
125
22
44
27
42
28
91
12
73
20
24
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
c) Y (m)
X (m)
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
b) Y (m)
X (m)
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
a)
Fig.30.24a–c DSP sonar ring mapping an indoor environ-
ment (a), raw data (b) and SLAM feature map with feature
number and number of associations shown as numbers (c).
The sonar ring is moving at 10 cm=s with a 11:5 Hz sam-
pling rate
DSP sonar ring allows rapid and accurate wall follow-
ing, map building, and obstacle avoidance due to the
high repetition and accurate range and bearing sens-
ing. The beam width of the transducer pairs allows
full 360ı coverage with respect to smooth specular
targets to a range of 3 m. An example of the DSP
sonar ring producing a feature for a simultaneous lo-
calization and mapping (SLAM) map is shown in
Fig. 30.24.
30.13.3 Sonar Rings
with FPGA Hardware Processing
One of the limitations of DSP based implementation of
the signal processing arrangments such as [30.52, 69,
70] is that insufﬁcient processing is available to per-
form matched ﬁltering on the complete receiver echo
signals in a multi-channel sonar ring. That is selected
segments of the echo are processed where the signal
exceeds a threshold in order to limit the computational
load on the DSP processors. Once the full echo has
arrived, matched ﬁltering is then applied to these seg-
ments. More recent work [30.71, 72] describes a sonar
ring that processes the complete echo signals from 48
receivers as the signal arrives with matched ﬁltering.
Complete processing of the entire receiver signal al-
lows weak echoes to be detected that would be below
the threshold of segmentation in [30.52, 69, 70]. This is
achieved using a single ﬁeld programmable gate array
(FPGA) conﬁgured with a custom data path hardware
design performing 4.9 Giga-arithmetic operations per
Fig. 30.25 FPGA based sonar ring

Sonar Sensing
30.14 Motion Effects
775
Part C | 30.14
second.
VIDEO 313 shows DSP sonar tracking an ob-
ject. Range and bearing measurements are obtained at
a rate of 30 Hz to 4 m range with full surrounding 360ı
angular coverage.
A photo of the FPGA sonar ring is shown in
Fig. 30.25. Note that two layers of receivers are em-
ployed to reduce the radius of the 48 receiver ring. The
other notable feature is the use of a single transmitter
at the center of the ring. The transmitter is a hemi-
spheric tweeter ESTD01 from Murata and a conical
parabolic reﬂector to distribute the transmitter pulse
uniformly in all directions horizontally [30.73]. Two cy-
cles of a 48 kHz sine wave form the transmitter pulse.
The transmitter can be modelled as point source and
the pulse shape is approximately invariant with respect
to received angle for each pair of receivers. This sim-
pliﬁes the matched ﬁltering since the template for each
receiver pair does not depend on the receiver angle.
However there is some variation of pulse shape be-
tween different pairs in practice and as a function of
range. The template match correlation processing hard-
ware has been designed to allow dynamic switching of
the template at predetermined ranges to account for the
range variation of the pulse shape.
30.13.4 Double Refresh Rate Sonar Ring
Sonar rings have been limited in their ﬁring rate by
waiting for maximum range echoes to return before
a consecutive ﬁring of the transmitter. For example,
the FPGA sonar ring presented in [30.71] is limited to
30 Hz refresh rate by this constraint. A double refresh
rate FPGA sonar ring is presented in [30.74] that op-
erates at 60 Hz for a 5.7 m range. To achieve a double
refresh rate, the next sonar transmission is scheduled
by selecting a transmit time from a random set so as
to minimize interference with predicted echo arrival
times. Two matched ﬁlters are applied to the receiver
signal based on the two possible transmit times. Echoes
are associated with a transmit epoch with the following
criteria:

The arrival time must be consistent with previous
echoes since this is bounded by the sensor to obsta-
cle relative speed

The pulse energies should be within 50% of a pre-
vious echo from the same obstacle, and ﬁnally

The template match correlation must be acceptable
for the assumed range.
30.13.5 Sparse 3-D Arrays
The work by Steckel et al. [30.75] presents a sonar sys-
tem that borrows beamforming theory from the design
of antenna arrays. The sonar array is based on a sparse
random array of 32 condensor omnidirectional ultra-
sonic microphones and a single Polaroid 7000 acting
as a transmitter. The microphone signals are sampled at
a maximum rate of 500 kHz and processed by an FPGA
to produce a measurement repetition rate of 12 Hz. The
transmitter waveform is a carefully controlled hyper-
bolic chirp of 100 down to 20 kHz in 3 ms. Matched
ﬁltering and beamforming processing are applied to the
received signals to generate an energy scape – the distri-
bution of energy from reﬂectors from discrete directions
of around 1ı resolution. Experiments show the sys-
tem can discriminate 20 mm diameter poles at 800 mm
with 5ı separation. The minimum angular separation is
related to the width of the mainlobe of the spatial ar-
ray ﬁlters. Azimuth and elevation standard deviations
of errors are reported as 1.1 and 0:6ı respectively for
a 80 mm sphere at 1.5 m. The advantage of the system
is its ability to discriminate overlapping echoes in clut-
tered environments.
30.14 Motion Effects
When a sensor moves with respect to its targets, sonar
measurements are effected. For example, a sonar sen-
sor moving at a speed of 1% of the speed of sound
(around 3:4 m=s) will experience errors of the order
of 0:6ı for some bearing measurements. The effects
of linear velocity on the TOF and reception angle are
dependent on the target type and hence for motion com-
pensation to be meaningful a target classiﬁcation sensor
is needed. We consider the classical plane, edge, and
corner target types in this section. Rotational motion
effects are discussed in [30.27] where it is shown that
very high speeds of rotation are necessary to give rise to
a small bearing error (e.g., 0:1ı error for approximately
1700 deg=s). Narrowing of the effective beam width is
another effect of high rotation speeds of a sonar sensor.
The sensor is assumed to transmit from a point la-
beled T and receiver measurements are referenced to
this position on the sensor. However, due to the motion
of the sensor, the ground referenced position R at the
time of reception of the echo moves from T over the
course of the TOF. For a linear velocity, the distance
between T and R is TOFv, where v is the magni-
tude of the sensor velocity vector relative to the ground,
with components vx and vy parallel to their respective

Part C | 30.14
776
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Moving
observer
c
Arrival
wave
direction
vy
vx
α
a)
b)
c)
T
R
R
T
d
d
T
E
C
X
X
T'
t2c
t1vx
vx
vy
vyTOF
vyTOF
vxTOF
vxTOF
cTOF
t2vx
t1c
d1
d1
d2
d1
R
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ+φ
φ
θ
θ
(t1+t2)vy
Fig.30.27a–c Observing a target from a moving sensor. T is the
position of the transmitter and R is where the echo is received at the
end of the TOF. The target is a plane in (a), a corner in (b), and an
edge in (c)
Fig. 30.26 Observation of arriving wave from a moving
observer J
coordinate axes. The expressions derived for linear mo-
tion apply to any sonar sensor, since only the physics of
sound propagation and reﬂection are used. All targets
are assumed to be stationary.
This section is based on [30.27], where further ex-
perimental work not included here can be found.
30.14.1 Moving Observation of a Plane
A plane target reﬂects the transmission from position T
to R as shown in Fig. 30.26a. The TOF is broken up into
two parts: t1 is the time of propagation to the plane and
t2 from the plane to the receiver R. Here we derive the
effect of linear motion on the TOF D t1 Ct2 and the an-
gle of reception  all taken from the view of a stationary
observer. A moving observer is discussed below.
From the right-angle triangle on the left of
Fig. 30.27a, we have
sin  D vx
c and cos  D
r
1 
vx
c
2
(30.30)
and also
cos  D d1
t1c H) t1 D
d1
c cos  :
(30.31)
From
the
right-angled
triangle
on
the
right
of
Fig. 30.27a, we have
cos  D .t1 C t2/vy C d1
t2c
H) t2 D .t1 C t2/vy C d1
c cos 
:
(30.32)
The TOF is obtained by adding (30.31) and (30.32) and
then substituting (30.31) giving
TOF D
2d1
c

1
q
1  vx
c
2  vy
c
:
(30.33)
The ﬁrst factor in (30.33) represents the stationary TOF.
The second factor approaches unity as the velocity ap-
proaches zero.
30.14.2 Moving Observation of a Corner
Figure 30.27b shows the situation for a corner with the
virtual image of T is shown as T0. From the right-angled
triangle T0XR
c2TOF2 D .2d1 C vyTOF/2 C v 2
x TOF2 ;
(30.34)

Sonar Sensing
30.14 Motion Effects
777
Part C | 30.14
which gives
TOF D 2d1
c
0
B@
q
1   vx
c
2 C vy
c
1 
 v
c
2
1
CA ;
(30.35)
where v 2 D v 2
x C v 2
y . The left-hand term of (30.35) is
the stationary TOF and the right-hand term approaches
unity for small velocities. The angle  in Fig. 30.27b is
the angle deviation due to motion as reference by a sta-
tionary observer. From the triangles T0XR and CXR
tan  D
vxTOF
2d1 C vyTOF
and
tan. C / D
vxTOF
d1 C vyTOF :
(30.36)
From (30.36), we have
tan. C / D

2 
vyTOF
d1 C vyTOF

tan 
(30.37)
and solving for tan  yields
tan  D tan 
 
1  sin2 
vyTOF
d1
C 1 C sin2 
!
D
 
vx
2d1
TOF C vy
!  
1  sin2 
vyTOF
d1
C 1 C sin2 
!
:
(30.38)
For vx; vy  c, sin   1 and 2d1=TOF 
 c we can ap-
proximate (30.38) as
 
 vx
c :
(30.39)
30.14.3 Moving Observation of a Edge
Since an edge reradiates the incoming ultrasound from
an effective point source, the reception angle with re-
spect to a stationary observer is unaffected by motion
as shown in Fig. 30.27c. The TOF is affected due to
the motion moving the receiving position. From the
right-angled triangle XER, d2
2 D .d1 C vy/2 C v 2
x TOF2
and d1 C d2 D cTOF leads to
TOF D 2d1
c
 
1 C vy
c
1  v2
c2
!

 2d1
c

1 C vy
c

;
(30.40)
where the approximate holds in (30.40) for v  c.
30.14.4 The Effect of a Moving
Observation on the Angle
of Reception
The expressions for the reception angle in the previous
sections are based on an observer that is stationary with
respect to the propagating medium air. In practice the
observer is the sensor, and is moving with a velocity v.
Suppose that the sonar wave arrives at an angle ˛ rela-
tive to the air, as shown in Fig. 30.26.
The velocity components of the wavefront relative
to the observer, wx and wy, are as follows
wx D c sin ˛  vx and wy D c cos ˛  vy :
(30.41)
From (30.41) the observed angle of arrival, ˇ is
tan ˇ D c sin ˛  vx
c cos ˛  vy
D sin ˛  vx
c
cos ˛  vy
c
:
(30.42)
30.14.5 Plane, Corner, and Edge
Moving Observation Arrival Angles
In this section the arrival angles (in radians) for each tar-
get type are summarized and approximated for speeds
expected of a mobile robot. The speed is assumed
to be less than a few percent of the speed of sound
(typically 340 m=s at room temperature). These effects
have been observed experimentally at speeds of up to
1 m=s [30.27].
Equations (30.41) and (30.30) cancel exactly, and
for a plane the arrival angle relative to the sensor is ex-
actly zero
ˇplane D 0 :
(30.43)
This can be explained by noting that the forward wave
velocity component is always the same as the sensor’s
as reﬂection preserves this component.
For a corner the angle  results in a wavefront that
appears to be displaced in the same direction as the sen-
sor motion from the real corner direction, as can be seen
in Fig. 30.27b. The effect of the moving observer dou-
bles this effect as seen by (30.41) and (30.39)
ˇcorner 
 2vx
c
:
(30.44)
For an edge the result is due to the observer only
ˇedge 
 tan1
 
0  vx
c
cos ˛  vy
c
!

 vx
c :
(30.45)

Part C | 30.15
778
Part C
Sensing and Perception
30.15 Biomimetic Sonars
The success of biosonars, bats and dolphins [30.76],
has led researchers to implement sonars based on
biosonar morphology, strategy, nonlinear processing
and cleverness [30.77]. The capabilities exhibited by
biosonars have caused researchers to examine biomim-
icking (biomimetic) systems.
Biosonar
morphology
typically
has
a
single
transmitter and a pair of receivers. Bats transmit
sound pulses through the mouth or nose, while
dolphins transmit through a melon. The two re-
ceivers correspond to ears that permit binaural pro-
cessing. Mimicking binaural hearing
has led
to
small arrays that localize objects [30.8] and scan-
ning strategies [30.78].
VIDEO 311 ,
VIDEO 316 ,
VIDEO 317 show biomemetic sonars in action. Mov-
able pinnae observed in bats have motivated research
Fig. 30.28 Biomimetic conﬁguration sonar with center
transmitter ﬂanked by receivers that rotate
Fig. 30.29 Biomimetic sonar mounted on the end of
a robot arm
in receivers that rotate [30.79, 80] and deform [30.81].
VIDEO 312
shows pinna deformation. Figure 30.28
shows one such example.
Rotating the receivers so their axes fall onto the
reﬂecting object not only increases the detected echo
amplitude, but also its bandwidth, both effects improv-
ing the ability to classify an object.
Biosonar strategy provides clues for successful ob-
ject localization. It is well known that the object lo-
cation within the transducer beam affects the echo
waveform and complicates the inverse problem of ob-
ject classiﬁcation [30.10, 82]. Dolphin movies show
that they maneuver to position an object at a re-
peatable location and range, guided by binaural echo
processing. This has motivated a dolphin-mimicking
movable sonar positioned at the end of a robot
arm for object classiﬁcation [30.10, 82], as shown in
Fig. 30.29.
a)
b)
25
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
bearing (degrees)
dB
Fig.30.30a,b Binaural vergence sonar (a) and beam pat-
terns (b) along the sonar axis with vergence angle ˛ D 80:
solid-left transducer, dashed-right transducer

Sonar Sensing
30.16 Conclusions
779
Part C | 30.16
This system was able to differentiate reliably the
head and tail side of a coin, but only after introducing
a scan in elevation to accommodate for the lack of such
positioning afforded by binaural hearing. The idea for
a scan over elevation was motivated by the nodding mo-
tion that dolphins exhibit when searching for prey lying
under the sand.
Another useful strategy, suggested by probing
pulses emitted by bats, is processing echo sequences.
As an extension to the conventional stop-and-scan oper-
ation of most sonars, sonar data were acquired while the
sonar was moving along piecewise linear paths to re-
veal hyperbolic trends, similar to acoustic ﬂow [30.83].
Matching data to hyperbolic trends permits the es-
timation of the passing range, which is useful for
collision avoidance and passing through narrow open-
ings [30.83].
Most sonar systems use classical estimation pro-
cedures involving correlation detection and spectrum
analysis. The cochlear model has led to multiple
band-pass ﬁlters to process wide-band pulses for envi-
ronmental landmark classiﬁcation [30.43]. The action
potential spikes observed in the biological nervous
system also suggest neuromorphic processing based
on coincidence detection. The sparse information pro-
vided by conventional TOF measurements motivated
sonar detectors that provided complete echo wave-
form information from multiple detections that result
in spike-like data [30.24, 84]. Applying temporal and
spacial coincidence to spike data has led to rever-
beration artifact recognition [30.36] and passing-range
estimation [30.85].
VIDEO 302 shows a simulation of
side-looking sonar passing two targets.
VIDEO 314
shows camera view of mobile robot traveling down cor-
ridor.
VIDEO 303 shows sonar spike map of corridor.
One shortcoming of sonar is its relatively wide
beam that limits the accuracy of the reﬂector bear-
ing estimate. Biosonars have two ears that assist in
echolocation, with a strategy that is surprising for engi-
neers. Figure 30.30 shows a biomimetic binaural sonar
described in [30.86] that employs two Polaroid 6500
ranging modules connected to series-7000 ultrasound
transducers (dia d D 2:5 cm), designated as right and
left. Both transducers transmit emissions simultane-
ously, but each makes a TOF reading. The transducers
are separated by D cm, with D minimized so that the
incident echo wavefront is as similar as possible across
both transducers. If both transducers are oriented par-
allel to the sonar axis, the TOF difference for an echo
from an object at bearing  is
TOF D D
c sin I ;
(30.46)
which is small for small D.
While most sensor engineers would maximize sig-
nal strength by having both transducers point at the
object, biological sonars trade off signal strength for
improved localization by directing the ears away from
the object with vergence angle ˛. This vergence an-
gle spreads the sensitivity patterns away from the
sonar axis, as shown in Fig. 30.30. As was shown
in Fig. 30.12, this enhances TOF by increasing the
echo amplitude difference.
VIDEO 301
shows ver-
gence sonar in operation.
Such a vergence sonar has several applications for
mobile robots. By noting when both TOFs are nearly
coincident, the binaural vergence sonar can detect when
a reﬂecting object is within ˙0:1ı of the sonar orienta-
tion. This sonar is useful for mobile robot navigation
because, in addition to a range measurement, it in-
dicates whether an obstacle is to the left or right of
the intended path.
VIDEO 295
shows mobile robot
equipped with multiple vergence sonars. Also, the oc-
clusion problem associated with sonar sensing is solved
by placing vergence sonars on the outside limits of a
robot to determine if an opening lies to the outside of
the robot dimensions, thus allowing the robot to pass
through narrow openings.
Such biomimetic techniques provide insights into
the information content present in echoes and the type
of sensing tasks for which sonar is best suited.
30.16 Conclusions
Sonar is a useful, inexpensive, low-power, light-weight
and simple ranging sensor for robotics applications
that can provide accurate object localisation. For sonar
to be effectively employed, understanding its physical
principles and implementation is important and these
topics are covered in the early sections of this chap-
ter. Various approaches to sonar sensing are highlighted
from simple single-transducer ranging to more sophis-
ticated multi-transducer and multi-pulse conﬁgurations
with associated signal processing requirements. Sophis-
ticated sonars are capable of measuring target range and
angle accurately as well as classifying targets, reject-
ing interference, and compensating for motion. Sonar
rings provide surrounding environmental coverage, and
CTFM systems improve the sensitivity for detecting
small reﬂectors. Research is ongoing in areas such as

Part C | 30
780
Part C
Sensing and Perception
signal and data processing, sonar map building, sonar
conﬁgurations, transducer technology and biomimetic
sonar that draw inspiration from biological sonar sys-
tems, such as used by bats and dolphins.
Video-References
VIDEO 295
Sonar guided chair at Yale
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/30/videodetails/295
VIDEO 301
Vergence sonar
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/30/videodetails/301
VIDEO 302
Side-looking TOF sonar simulation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/30/videodetails/302
VIDEO 303
Side-looking multi-pulse sonar moving down cider-block hallway
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/30/videodetails/303
VIDEO 311
Antwerp biomimetic sonar tracking complex object
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/30/videodetails/311
VIDEO 312
Biological bat ear deformation in sonar detection
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/30/videodetails/312
VIDEO 313
Monash DSP sonar tracking a moving plane
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/30/videodetails/313
VIDEO 314
Side-looking sonar system traveling down hallway (camera view)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/30/videodetails/314
VIDEO 315
B-scan image of indoor potted tree using multi-pulse sonar
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/30/videodetails/315
VIDEO 316
Antwerp biomimetic sonar tracking single ball
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/30/videodetails/316
VIDEO 317
Antwerp biomimetic sonar system tracking two balls
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/30/videodetails/317
References
30.1
L.E. Kinsler, A.R. Frey, A.B. Coppens, J.V. Sanders:
Fundamentals
of
Acoustics
(Wiley,
New
York
1982)
30.2
R.C. Weast, M.J. Astle (Eds.): CRC Handbook of
Chemistry and Physics, 59th edn. (CRC, Boca Raton
1978)
30.3
J. Borenstein, H.R. Everett, L. Feng: Navigating Mo-
bile Robots (Peters, Wellesley 1996)
30.4
R. Kuc, M.W. Siegel: Physically-based simulation
model for acoustic sensor robot navigation, IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 9(6), 766–778
(1987)
30.5
SensComp: 7000, http://www.senscomp.com (2007)
30.6
H.H. Poole: Fundamentals of Robotics Engineering
(Van Nostrand, New York 1989)
30.7
J.E. Piercy: American National Standard: Method
for Calculation of the Absorption of Sound by the
Atmosphere, Vol. ANSI SI-26-1978 (Acoust. Soc. Am.,
Washington 1978)
30.8
B. Barshan, R. Kuc: A bat-like sonar system for ob-
stacle localization, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern.
22(4), 636–646 (1992)
30.9
R. Kuc: Three dimensional docking using quali-
tative sonar. In: Intelligent Autonomous Systems
IAS-3, ed. by F.C.A. Groen, S. Hirose, C.E. Thorpe
(IOS, Washington 1993) pp. 480–488
30.10
R. Kuc: Biomimetic sonar locates and recognizes
objects, J. Ocean Eng. 22(4), 616–624 (1997)
30.11
L. Kleeman, R. Kuc: Mobile robot sonar for target
localization and classification, Int. J. Robotics Res.
14(4), 295–318 (1995)
30.12
B. Stanley: A Comparison of Binaural Ultrasonic
Sensing Systems, Ph.D. Thesis (University of Wol-
longong, Wollongong 2003)
30.13
Material Systems Inc.: http://www.matsysinc.com/
30.14
F.L. Degertekin, S. Calmes, B.T. Khuri-Yakub, X. Jin,
I. Ladabaum: Fabrication and characterization of
surface micromachined capacitive ultrasonic im-
mersion transducers, J. Microelectromech. Syst.
8(1), 100–114 (1999)
30.15
B. Barshan, R. Kuc: Differentiating sonar reflections
from corners and planes by employing an intelli-
gent sensor, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.
12(6), 560–569 (1990)
30.16
A. Freedman: A mechanism of acoustic echo for-
mation, Acustica 12, 10–21 (1962)
30.17
A. Freedman: The high frequency echo structure
of somae simple body shapes, Acustica 12, 61–70
(1962)
30.18
Ö. Bozma, R. Kuc: A physical model-based analy-
sis of heterogeneous environments using sonar –
ENDURA method, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell. 16(5), 497–506 (1994)
30.19
Ö. Bozma, R. Kuc: Characterizing pulses reflected
from rough surfaces using ultrasound, J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 89(6), 2519–2531 (1991)

Sonar Sensing
References
781
Part C | 30
30.20
P.J. McKerrow: Echolocation – from range to outline
segments. In: Intelligent Autonomous Systems IAS-
3, ed. by F.C.A. Groen, S. Hirose, C.E. Thorpe (IOS,
Washington 1993) pp. 238–247
30.21
J. Thomas, C. Moss, M. Vater (Eds.): Echolocation
in Bats and Dolphins (University of Chicago Press,
Chicago 2004)
30.22
J. Borenstein, Y. Koren: Error eliminating rapid ul-
trasonic firing for mobile robot obstacle avoidance,
IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 11(1), 132–138 (1995)
30.23
L. Kleeman: Fast and accurate sonar trackers using
double pulse coding, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (1999) pp. 1185–1190
30.24
R. Kuc: Pseudo-amplitude sonar maps, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 17(5), 767–770 (2001)
30.25
H. Peremans, K. Audenaert, J.M. Van Campenhout:
A high-resolution sensor based on tri-aural per-
ception, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 9(1), 36–48
(1993)
30.26
A. Sabatini, O. Di Benedetto: Towards a robust
methodology for mobile robot localization using
sonar, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1994) pp. 3142–3147
30.27
L. Kleeman: Advanced sonar with velocity compen-
station, Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(2), 111–126 (2004)
30.28
A. Elfes: Sonar-based real world mapping and nav-
igation, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 3, 249–265
(1987)
30.29
S. Thrun, M. Bennewitz, W. Burgard, A.B. Cre-
mers, F. Dellaert, D. Fox, D. Haehnel, C. Rosenberg,
N. Roy, J. Schulte, D. Schulz: MINERVA: A sec-
ond geration mobile tour-guide robot, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1999) pp. 1999–
2005
30.30
K. Konolige: Improved occupancy grids for map
building, Auton. Robotics 4, 351–367 (1997)
30.31
R. Grabowski, P. Khosla, H. Choset: An enhanced
occupancy map for exploration via pose separation,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robotics Syst. (IROS)
(2003) pp. 705–710
30.32
J.D. Tardos, J. Neira, P.M. Newman, J.J. Leonard:
Robust mapping and localization in indoor envi-
ronments using sonar data, Int. J. Robotics Res.
21(6), 311–330 (2002)
30.33
O. Aycard, P. Larouche, F. Charpillet: Mobile robot
localization in dynamic environments using places
recognition, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1998) pp. 3135–3140
30.34
B. Kuipers, P. Beeson: Bootstrap learning for place
recognition, Proc. 18th Nat. Conf. Artif. Intell. (ANAI)
(2002)
30.35
A. Bandera, C. Urdiales, F. Sandoval: Autonomous
global localization using Markov chains and op-
timized sonar landmarks, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2000) pp. 288–293
30.36
R. Kuc: Biomimetic sonar and neuromorphic pro-
cessing eliminate reverberation artifacts, IEEE Sens.
J. 7(3), 361–369 (2007)
30.37
A.M. Sabatini: A stochastic model of the time-
of-flight noise in airborne sonar ranging systems,
IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control 44(3),
606–614 (1997)
30.38
C. Biber, S. Ellin, E. Sheck, J. Stempeck: The Po-
laroid ultrasonic ranging system, Proc. 67th Audio
Eng. Soc. Conv. (1990)
30.39
R. Kuc: Forward model for sonar maps produced
with the Polaroid ranging module, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 19(2), 358–362 (2003)
30.40
M.K. Brown: Feature extraction techniques for rec-
ognizing solid objects with an ultrasonic range
sensor, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 1(4), 191–205 (1985)
30.41
N.L. Harper, P.J. McKerrow: Classification of plant
species from CTFM ultrasonic range data using
a neural network, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Neural Netw.
(1995) pp. 2348–2352
30.42
Z. Politis, P.J. Probert: Target localization and iden-
tification using CTFM sonar imaging: The AUR-
BIT method, Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Comput. Intell.
Robotics Autom. (CIRLA) (1999) pp. 256–261
30.43
R. Mueller, R. Kuc: Foliage echoes: A probe into the
ecological acoustics of bat echolocation, J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 108(2), 836–845 (2000)
30.44
P.N.T. Wells: Biomedical Ultrasonics (Academic,
New York 1977)
30.45
J.L. Prince, J.M. Links: Medical Imaging Signals and
Systems (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River 2006)
30.46
F.J. Alvarez, R. Kuc: High resolution adaptive spik-
ing sonar, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq.
Control 56(5), 1024–1033 (2009)
30.47
F.J. Alvarez, R. Kuc, T. Aguilera: Identifying fabrics
with a variable emission airborne spiking sonar,
IEEE Sens. J. 11(9), 1905–1912 (2011)
30.48
J.J. Leonard, H.F. Durrant-Whyte: Mobile robot
localization by tracking geometric beacons, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 7(3), 376–382 (1991)
30.49
R. Kuc: Generating B-scans of the environmental
with conventional sonar, IEEE Sens. J. 8(2), 151–160
(2008)
30.50
P.M. Woodward: Probability and Information The-
ory with Applications to Radar, 2nd edn. (Perga-
mon, Oxford 1964)
30.51
A. Heale, L. Kleeman: Fast target classification using
sonar, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2001) pp. 1446–1451
30.52
S. Fazli, L. Kleeman: A real time advanced sonar
ring with simultaneous firing, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2004) pp. 1872–1877
30.53
T. Yata, A. Ohya, S. Yuta: A fast and accurate sonar-
ring sensor for a mobile robot, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1999) pp. 630–636
30.54
L. Kleeman: Scanned monocular sonar and the
doorway problem, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (1996) pp. 96–103
30.55
G. Kao, P. Probert: Feature extraction from a broad-
band sonar sensor for mapping structured envi-
ronments efficiently, Int. J. Robotics Res. 19(10),
895–913 (2000)
30.56
B. Stanley, P. McKerrow: Measuring range and bear-
ing with a binaural ultrasonic sensor, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1997) pp. 565–
571
30.57
P.T. Gough, A. de Roos, M.J. Cusdin: Continuous
transmission FM sonar with one octave bandwidth
and no blind time. In: Autonomous Robot Vehicles,

Part C | 30
782
Part C
Sensing and Perception
ed. by I.J. Cox, G.T. Wilfong (Springer, Berlin, Hei-
delberg 1990) pp. 117–122
30.58
L. Kay: A CTFM acoustic spatial sensing technol-
ogy: Its use by blind persons and robots, Sens. Rev.
19(3), 195–201 (1999)
30.59
L. Kay: Auditory perception and its relation to ul-
trasonic blind guidance aids, J. Br. Inst. Radio Eng.
24, 309–319 (1962)
30.60
P.J. McKerrow, N.L. Harper: Recognizing leafy plants
with in-air sonar, IEEE Sens. J. 1(4), 245–255 (2001)
30.61
K. Audenaert, H. Peremans, Y. Kawahara, J. Van
Campenhout: Accurate ranging of multiple ob-
jects using ultrasonic sensors, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1992) pp. 1733–1738
30.62
J. Borenstein, Y. Koren: Noise rejection for ul-
trasonic sensors in mobile robot applications,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1992)
pp. 1727–1732
30.63
K.W. Jorg, M. Berg: Mobile robot sonar sensing
with pseudo-random codes, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1998) pp. 2807–2812
30.64
S. Shoval, J. Borenstein: Using coded signals to
benefit from ultrasonic sensor crosstalk in mo-
bile robot obstacle avoidance, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2001) pp. 2879–2884
30.65
K. Nakahira, T. Kodama, T. Furuhashi, H. Maeda:
Design of digital polarity correlators in a multiple-
user sonar ranging system, IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas. 54(1), 305–310 (2005)
30.66
A. Heale, L. Kleeman: A sonar sensor with random
double pulse coding, Aust. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(2000) pp. 81–86
30.67
A. Diosi, G. Taylor, L. Kleeman: Interactive SLAM us-
ing Laser and Advanced Sonar, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005) pp. 1115–1120
30.68
S.A. Walter: The sonar ring: obstacle detection for a
mobile robot, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1987) pp. 1574–1578
30.69
S. Fazli, L. Kleeman: Wall following and obstacle
avoidance results from a multi-DSP sonar ring on a
mobile robot, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Mechatron. Au-
tom. (2005) pp. 432–436
30.70
S. Fazli, L. Kleeman: Sensor design and signal pro-
cessing for an advanced sonar ring, Robotica 24(4),
433–446 (2006)
30.71
D. Browne, L. Kleeman: An advanced sonar ring
design with 48 channels of continuous echo pro-
cessing using matched filters, Proc. IEEE/RSJ In-
tell. Robots Syst. Conf. (IROS) (2009) pp. 4040–
4046
30.72
D.C. Browne, L. Kleeman: A sonar ring with contin-
uous matched filtering and dynamically switched
templates, Robotica 30(6), 891–912 (2012)
30.73
L. Kleeman, Akihisa Ohya: The design of a trans-
mitter with a parabolic conical reflector for a sonar
ring, Aust. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Auckland
(2006)
30.74
D.C. Browne, L. Kleeman: A double refresh rate
sonar ring with FPGA-based continuous matched
filtering, Robotica 30(7), 1051–1062 (2012)
30.75
J. Steckel, A. Boen, H. Peremans: Broadband 3-D
sonar system using a sparse array for indoor navi-
gation, IEEE Trans. Robotics 91, 1–11 (2012)
30.76
W.W.L. Au: The Sonar of Dolphins (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 1993)
30.77
R. Kuc, V. Kuc: Bat wing air pressures may deflect
prey structures to provide echo cues for detecting
prey in clutter, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 132(3), 1776–1779
(2012)
30.78
B. Barshan, R. Kuc: Bat-like sonar system strategies
for mobile robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man
Cybern. (1991)
30.79
R. Kuc: Biologically motivated adaptive sonar,
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 100(3), 1849–1854 (1996)
30.80
V.A. Walker, H. Peremans, J.C.T. Hallam: One tone,
two ears, three dimensions: A robotic investigation
of pinnae movements used by rhinolophid and
hipposiderid bats, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 104, 569–579
(1998)
30.81
L. Gao, S. Balakrishnan, W. He, Z. Yan, R. Mueller:
Ear deformations give bats a physical mechanism
for fast adaptation of ultrasonic beam patterns,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 1007, 214–301 (2011)
30.82
R. Kuc: Biomimetic sonar system recognizes ob-
jects using binaural information, J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 102(2), 689–696 (1997)
30.83
R.
Kuc:
Recognizing
retro-reflectors
with
an
obliquely-oriented multi-point sonar and acoustic
flow, Int. J. Robotics Res. 22(2), 129–145 (2003)
30.84
T. Horiuchi, T. Swindell, D. Sander, P. Abshire: A
low-power CMOS neural amplifier with amplitude
measurements for spike sorting, Proc. Int. Symp.
Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), Vol. IV (2004) pp. 29–32
30.85
R. Kuc: Neuromorphic processing of moving sonar
data for estimating passing range, IEEE Sens. J. 7(5),
851–859 (2007)
30.86
R. Kuc: Binaural sonar electronic travel aid pro-
vides vibrotactile cues for landmark, reflector mo-
tion, and surface texture classification, IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng. 49(10), 1173–1180 (2002)

Multimedia Contents Range Sensin
783
Part C | 31.1
31. Range Sensing
Kurt Konolige, Andreas Nüchter
Range sensors are devices that capture the three-
dimensional (3-D) structure of the world from the
viewpoint of the sensor, usually measuring the
depth to the nearest surfaces. These measurements
could be at a single point, across a scanning plane,
or a full image with depth measurements at ev-
ery point. The benefits of this range data is that
a robot can be relatively certain where the real
world is, relative to the sensor, thus allowing the
robot to more reliably find navigable routes, avoid
obstacles, grasp objects, act on industrial parts,
etc.
This chapter introduces the main represen-
tations for range data (point sets, triangulated
surfaces, voxels), the main methods for extracting
usable features from the range data (planes, lines,
triangulated surfaces), the main sensors for ac-
quiring it (Sect. 31.1 – stereo and laser triangulation
and ranging systems), how multiple observations
of the scene, for example, as if from a moving
robot, can be registered (Sect. 31.3) and several in-
door and outdoor robot applications where range
data greatly simplifies the task (Sect. 31.4).
31.1
Range Sensing Basics...........................
783
31.1.1
Range Images and Point Sets .....
783
31.2
Sensor Technologies.............................
785
31.2.1
Triangulation ............................
786
31.2.2
Time of Flight............................
786
31.2.3
Comparison of Methods .............
788
31.2.4
Stereo Vision.............................
789
31.2.5
Structured Light Stereo...............
793
31.3
Registration ........................................
794
31.3.1
The ICP Algorithm ......................
794
31.3.2
Marker and Feature-Based
Registration ..............................
795
31.3.3
Multiple-View Registration.........
801
31.3.4
Model Matching ........................
802
31.3.5
Relative Pose Estimation ............
802
31.3.6
3-D Applications .......................
803
31.4
Navigation and Terrain Classification
and Mapping.......................................
804
31.4.1
Mobile Mapping ........................
804
31.4.2
Urban Navigation ......................
805
31.4.3
Rough Terrain ...........................
806
31.5
Conclusions and Further Reading .........
807
References...................................................
807
31.1 Range Sensing Basics
Here we present the basic representations used for range
image data and discuss some issues relating to repre-
sentations and robotics applications. While there are
ranging devices that use sound or other waves to de-
termine distance, this chapter concentrates on sensors
that use light.
31.1.1 Range Images and Point Sets
Range data is a two-and-a-half-dimensional (2.5-D)
or 3-D representation of the scene around the robot.
The 3-D aspect arises because we are measuring the
.X; Y; Z/ coordinates of one or more points in the
scene. Often only a single range image is used at each
time instance. This means that we only observe the
front sides of objects – the portion of the scene vis-
ible from the robot. In other words, we do not have
a full 3-D observation of all sides of a scene. This is
the origin of the term 2.5-D. Figure 31.1 shows a sam-
ple range image and a registered reﬂectance image,
where each pixel records the level of reﬂected infrared
light.

Part C | 31.1
784
Part C
Sensing and Perception
a)
b)
Fig.31.1a,b 3-D laser scan with a ﬁeld of view of 360ı  100ı acquired in an urban environment (Bremen downtown).
(a) Registered infrared reﬂectance image. (b) Range image where closer is darker
a)
b)
Fig. 31.2 (a) Mesh showing the
rasterization of a 3-D range scanner
using rotating mirrors and axis.
(b) Sphere with superimposed
reﬂectance values
There are two standard formats for representing
range data. The ﬁrst is an image d.i; j/, which records
the distance d to the corresponding scene point .x; y; z/
for each image pixel .i; j/. There are several common
mappings from .i; j; d.i; j// to .X; Y; Z/, usually aris-
ing from the geometry of the range sensor or from the
application needs. The most common image mappings
are illustrated in Fig. 31.3. Range scanners with ro-
tating mirrors sample in spherical coordinates, that is,
Fig. 31.3 (a) Equirectangular projection of a spherical
range scan. Latidute and longitude mesh is shown. (b) Rec-
tilinear projection with three images compined to unwrap
a scanning sphere I
a)
b)

Range Sensing
31.2 Sensor Technologies
785
Part C | 31.2
Fig. 31.4 3-D range scan represented with three rectilinear projections (Fig. 31.1)
.;'; d/. Figure 31.2 shows a sphere as longitude and
latitude mesh and superimposed with the reﬂectance
values of Fig. 31.1. The most natural range image rep-
resentation is to put .; '/ on the .i; j/-axis of the range
image, that is,
i D  ;
j D ' ;
where the longitude  and the latitude ' are the spher-
ical coordinates. This is a projection of the samples
sphere to a two-dimensional (2-D) image, which in-
cludes a distortion. The conversion between .i; j; d/ D
.;'; d/ and .x; y; z/ proceeds as
d D
p
x2 C y2 C z2 ;
 D arccos
z
r

;
' D arctan2 .y; x/ :
Conversely, the Cartesian coordinates may be retrieved
from the spherical coordinates by
x D d sin  cos ' ;
y D d sin  sin ' ;
z D d cos  :
The further common projection is the perspective one,
usually called rectilinear projection. It is also called
gnomonic or tangent-plane projection. This include
range images produced by kinetic-like devices. Here the
range values are assumed to be projected in a pinhole
camera like fashion. The primary advantage of the rec-
tilinear projection is that it maps straight lines in the
3-D space and in the 2-D image. Its disadvantage is the
smaller ﬁeld of view (FOV). The projection is stretched
toward the corners and the distortion grow with larger
ﬁelds of view. Furthermore, FOVs are often not realiz-
able by the hardware. The projection proceeds as
i D
cos ' sin .  0/
sin '1 sin ' C cos '1 cos ' cos .  0/ ;
j D cos '1 sin '  sin '1 cos ' cos .  0/
sin '1 sin ' C cos '1 cos ' cos .  0/ ;
where 0 and '1 are the central longitude and central
latitude, respectively. Figure 31.4 shows a 360ı scan
composed of three rectilinear range images.
Further common projections are the isogonic Mer-
cator projection, the cylindrical projection, Pannini
projection, and the stereographic [31.1]. All these pro-
jections are used to unwrap the scanning sphere to a 2-D
array representation. In some applications, orthographic
projections are processed from 3-D point cloud data.
Some range sensors only record distances in a slice, so
the scene .x; z/ is represented by the linear image d.i/
for each pixel i.
The second format is as a list f.xi; yi; zi/g of 3-D
data points, but this format can be used with all of
the mappings listed above. Given the conversions from
image data d.i;j/ to .x; y; z/ the range data is only
supplied as a list, which is usually called the point
cloud.
31.2 Sensor Technologies
There are two main technologies for range sensing:
triangulation and time-of-ﬂight. There are many vari-
ations of each of these, with different strengths and
weaknesses. Here we brieﬂy describe the basic con-
cepts, and summarize the characteristics of the main
types of sensors. More detailed descriptions of stereo
and structured light sensors are given in subsequent
sections.

Part C | 31.2
786
Part C
Sensing and Perception
31.2.1 Triangulation
Triangulation sensors measure depth by determining
the angle formed by the rays from a world point to
two sensors. The sensors are separated by a baseline
of length b, which forms the third segment of a triangle
between the two sensors and the point. For simplicity,
let one of the rays form a right angle with the baseline.
Then the angle  of the other sensor ray is related to the
depth Z perpendicular to the baseline by
tan  D Z
b :
(31.1)
An image sensor measures the angle  by an offset on
an image plane from the primary ray; this offset x is
called the disparity. If we assume that the image plane
is parallel to the baseline, then tan  D f =x, and we get
the basic equation of triangulation depth sensors
Z D fb
x :
(31.2)
Depth Precision
An important concept is the depth resolution of a sen-
sor: how precisely can the sensor measure the depth?
Differentiating with respect to x and substituting for x
gives
dZ
dx D Z2
fb
:
(31.3)
Triangulation precision falls off with the square of the
distance to an object: if it is 1 mm at 1 m, then it is
4 mm at 2 m. Increasing the baseline or reducing the
ﬁeld of views FOV is inversely related to precision,
that is, if the baseline is doubled or FOV is halved, the
precision is halved (e.g., from 1 mm at 0:1 m baseline
to 0:5 mm at 0:2 m baseline). This makes triangulation
sensors more difﬁcult to use at a distance; changing
the FOV or baseline can help compensate, but brings
in other tradeoffs (Sect. 31.2.4).
Types of Triangulation Sensors
The two main types are stereo cameras, which have
two cameras separated by a baseline, and structured
light sensors, which substitute a projector for one of the
cameras.
Stereo cameras take images of a scene from two
slightly different viewpoints, and match texture in the
images to determine corresponding points and dispari-
ties. Some issues with stereo cameras are that there is
often too little texture, especially indoors, to make re-
liable matches; and the matching uses small patches,
which blurs out the spatial resolution. Many ingenious
methods have been developed to deal with these issues,
including painting a texture with a projector (not to be
confused with structured light), using different kinds of
support neighborhoods and regularization methods.
Structured light sensors project a known pattern
from one end of a baseline, and view the pattern with
a camera from the other. By decoding the pattern in
the image, the placement of the pattern in the projec-
tor is determined, and hence the disparity. The simplest
type of projectors output a point or a line, usually with
a laser; the decoding problem is easy, but the amount of
information is restricted to the point or line, and must
be scanned to produce a full 3-D image.
A full-image structured light system projects a pat-
tern covering the whole image, that can be decoded to
get information at each pixel or small group of pix-
els. The PrimeSense technology, used in the Kinect,
projects a known pattern of dots and decodes a small
neighborhood to ﬁnd the projected coordinates; thus
this sensor also blurs out the spatial resolution. Other
sensors project a time series of images with a vertical
structure, so that each pixel on a horizontal line accu-
mulates a unique code, which is then decoded against
the projected images. Popular binary codes are Gray
codes, which require N images if the image width is 2N;
and sinusoidal phase-shifted patterns, which typically
use three images and are decoded by determining the
phase at each point. These time-series structured light
systems can produce very good spatial and depth reso-
lution.
In general, structured light systems are not used out-
doors because of interference from natural light, and
for distant objects indoors. They can also have difﬁ-
culty with high-contrast and specular objects, and the
phase-based systems can suffer from 2 phase ambigu-
ities. Relative motion between the sensor and the scene
can also distort readings for time series and scanning
sensors, although very fast projectors and cameras can
alleviate this problem for the former.
31.2.2 Time of Flight
The principle behind time-of-ﬂight (TOF) sensors is
like that of radar: measure the time it takes for light to
be projected out to an object and return. Because light
travels about 0:3 m per nanosecond, very precise timers
are required for direct TOF measurement; an alterna-
tive is indirect methods, typically phase difference with
a modulated reference beam.
Because they measure time of ﬂight, these sen-
sors can theoretically have constant precision in depth
measurement, no matter how far an object – unlike
triangulation sensors, which fall off as the square of
distance. But TOF sensors cannot duplicate the very
ﬁne precision of triangulation sensors for close objects,

Range Sensing
31.2 Sensor Technologies
787
Part C | 31.2
and hence are not used in close-range metrology ap-
plications, such as small object reconstruction or parts
quality measurements.
Direct Time of Flight
In direct TOF sensors, the travel time is measured
by a high-speed chronometer. Laser-based direct TOF
range sensors are also called LIDAR (light detection
and ranging) or LADAR (laser radar) sensors. The
travel time multiplied by the speed of light (in the given
medium – space, air, or water and adjusted for the den-
sity and temperature of the medium) gives the distance
2d D ct ;
(31.4)
where d is the distance to the object, c is the speed of
light, and t is the measured travel time. Error in measur-
ing the time t gives rise to a proportional distance error.
In practice, one tries to measure the peak of the output
pulse, which has a ﬁnite extent; weak reﬂections from
distant objects make it harder to measure this peak and
hence the error tends to increase with distance. Aver-
aging multiple readings can reduce the random error in
these readings.
The simplest TOF sensors transmit only a single
beam, thus range measurements are only obtained from
a single surface point. Robotics applications usually
need more information, so the range data is usually sup-
plied as a vector of range to surfaces lying in a plane
(Fig. 31.5) or as an image (Fig. 31.1). To obtain these
denser representations, the laser beam is swept across
the scene. Normally, the beam is swept by a set of mir-
rors rather than moving the laser and detector them-
selves (mirrors are lighter and less prone to motion dam-
age). The most common technologies for this are using
a stepper motor (for program-based range sensing) or
rotating or oscillating mirrors for automatic scanning.
Scanning or averaging requires multiple TOF pulses
at perhaps high repetition rates, which can give rise to
–90
0
+90
Range
Angle
Fig. 31.5 Plot of ideal one-dimensional (1-D) range image
of sample distance versus angle of measurement
ambiguity about which pulse is actually being received.
If •t is the time between pulses, then the ambiguity in-
terval for the device is 1=2c•t, for example, for a pulse
repetition rate of 100 kHz, the ambiguity interval is
1500 m. If an object is further than this, it will be seen as
within the interval, with distance zmod1=2c•t. An un-
winding algorithm can recover the true depth, if range
values for the scanning system change slowly, and start
within the ambiguity interval.
Typical ground-based time of ﬂight sensors suitable
for robotics applications have a range of 10100 m,
and an accuracy of 510 mm. The amount of the scene
scanned will depend on the sweep rate of the mirrors
and the pulse rate, but 1–25k points per second are
typical. Manufacturers of these sensors include Acuity,
Hokuyo, Sick, Mensi, DeltaSphere, and Cyrax.
Multiple-beam scanning LIDARs can increase the
amount of information available. Velodyne [31.2]
makes three devices, with 16, 32, and 64 beams ar-
ranged vertically, that acquire point data at rates of up
to 15 scans=s (1:3 MPixel=s), with a full 360ı horizon-
tal scan and a 27ı vertical FOV from the laser array.
The laser pulses are 5 ns long, and depth precision is
approximately 2 cm. These devices are typically used
in autonomous driving, for environment reconstruction
and obstacle avoidance.
Flash LIDAR
In contrast to scanning devices, a ﬂash LIDAR has a 2-D
detector array (also called a focal plane array similar
to a camera imager, but where each pixel incorporates
timing circuitry to measure TOF of a laser pulse). In-
stead of a single or multiple laser beams, a light source
pulse (LED (light-emitting diode) or laser) is shaped to
cover a large area. All pixels have their timers started
when the pulse is initiated, and measure the time it
takes to receive the backscattered light. Typically, some
tens of samples are captured and averaged, to reduce
noise in the measurements – the amount of energy re-
ceived is quite small, since the laser is not focused into
a beam. As might be expected, the detector array pixels
are quite large because of the timing electronics; a typ-
ical device from ASC [31.3] has 128  128 pixels, and
can capture data at rates up to 60 Hz (
 1 MPixel=s,
similar to the Velodyne devices). These devices are
expensive, and hence not used in consumer applica-
tions. Alternatively, indirect ways of measuring TOF
have simpler per-pixel electronics – see the next subsec-
tion. Table 31.1 lists the characteristics of one of ASC’s
devices.
Table 31.1 Characteristics of TigerEye device
Manuf./Model
Resolution
Max range
Repeatability
ASC Inc. TigerEye 128  128
601100 m 0:04 m @ 60 m

Part C | 31.2
788
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Indirect Time of Flight Sensors
Indirect TOF sensors measure the distance by inferring
transit times from particular properties of a propagating
beam. The two main methods are based on modulation
and phase differences and gated intensity.
Modulation-Based TOF
Modulation-based range sensors are commonly of two
types, where a continuous laser signal is either ampli-
tude or frequency modulated. By observing the phase
shift between the outgoing and return signals, the signal
transit time is estimated and from this the target distance.
Amplitude modulation works by varying the inten-
sity of a light signal s.t/ D sin.2ft/ with frequency f .
The signal reﬂected from an object has a phase shift ',
and the returned signal is
r.t/ D R sin.2ft  '/ D R sin

2f

t  2d
c

;
d D c'
4f ;
(31.5)
with c is the speed of light, d the distance to the object,
and R the reﬂected amplitude. Measuring the phase shift
yields the distance; note because the phase shift wraps
around at 2, the ambiguity interval is c=2f . For a mod-
ulation of 10 MHz, the interval is 15 m.
To measure the phase difference, the returned sig-
nal is mixed with the original reference signal and a 90ı
shifted version, then low-pass ﬁltered. Figure 31.6 com-
pares the two mixed signals that give both the phase
difference and the intensity.
There are commercial devices using single-beam
and planar array versions of amplitude modulation. The
planar arrays take advantage of CMOS integration to
implement the full signal comparison at each pixel, in
a compact sensor [31.4, 5]. Because the signal-to-noise
sin(2fmt)
cos(2fmt)
X = (R/2) cos(–φ)
Y = (R/2)sin(–φ)
R = 2√——––
(R/2)[cos(–φ) – cos(4fmt–φ)]
(R/2)[sin(–φ) + sin(4fmt–φ)]
φ = arctan(–Y/X)
X 2+Y 2
Low-pass
filter
Low-pass
filter
Received
light
R sin(2fmt–φ)
Mixer
Mixer
Fig. 31.6 Comparing the two mixed signals gives both the phase
difference and the intensity
ratio (SNR) depends on the amplitude of the returned
signal, these devices typically have a depth resolution
that falls off as d2, comparable to triangulation devices.
Typical repeatability is about 3 cm at 0:5 m, signiﬁ-
cantly less than triangulation devices; the arrays are
up to 200  200 pixels. The attraction of the planar ar-
ray is that it is a single-chip ranging device, simple
and potentially cheap to produce. They also have good
ambient light rejection, and potentially can be used
outdoors.
Frequency modulation, also called frequency mod-
ulation continuous wave (FMCW), modulates a laser
frequency with a sawtooth ramp of period tm, where
the maximum frequency spread is f . The outgoing
and incoming signals are mixed to give a signal dif-
ference fi, which is measured by frequency counting.
The distance is calculated as d D fictm=2f . Since the
frequency difference can be measured very accurately,
this technique can yield excellent depth precision, on
the order of 5 mm at 2 m [31.6]. The electronics re-
quired for mixing and frequency counting, as well as
the difﬁculty of linear laser frequency modulation, have
restricted this technique to high-end single-beam de-
vices [31.7].
Range-Gated Intensity
Another indirect method for measuring TOF of a pulse
is to measure the amount of the pulse that gets re-
turned within a precise time period. If a pulse of width
w is emitted, a detector will start to receive the pulse
reﬂected from an object of distance d at t0 D 2d=c,
and ﬁnish receiving it at tw D .w C 2d/=c. If the de-
tector is open for a precise amount of time t, then
the amount of the reﬂected signal it receives, relative
to the full pulse reﬂection, is a linear measure of the
distance d. Thus, by comparing two returns, one with
a large open time to measure the full pulse, and one with
a smaller open time, d can be determined. A planar ar-
ray CMOS device can be fabricated to measure the two
pulse returns sequentially, as long as each pixel can be
triggered to be photosensitive for a precise amount of
time. Commercial devices using this principle have pre-
cision on the order of a few cm at 1 m, with arrays up to
128  96 [31.8, 9].
31.2.3 Comparison of Methods
A useful overall summary of different types of range-
sensing technology is in reference [31.6]. The two main
parameters are spatial precision and depth precisions.
In Fig. 31.7, available sensors are classiﬁed along these
two dimensions. The direct TOF laser scanners (LMS,
UT devices) cluster around 0:51 cm in both spatial
and range precision. The Photon80 device uses FMCW

Range Sensing
31.2 Sensor Technologies
789
Part C | 31.2
modulation with outstanding spatial and range preci-
sion; it is also a scanning device.
Triangulation devices (stereo, Kinect, and struc-
tured light in general) have less favorable characteris-
tics. However, the target is at 2 m, and with triangulation
precision falling with d2, the comparison is biased. All
these devices would be better than the TOF devices
at 0:5 m in terms of range error. The stereo sensors
can also exhibit much better spatial density in different
conﬁgurations, that is, higher resolution sensors, larger
baseline, smaller correlation window. In general, we
would expect the triangulation sensors to outperform
TOF sensors at shorter distances.
Finally, a single-chip ﬂash LIDAR device, the IFM
O3D200, uses amplitude modulation, and gives charac-
teristically poor results relative to the other sensors.
31.2.4 Stereo Vision
This section discusses stereo analysis in more detail.
Stereo analysis uses two or more input images to es-
timate the distance to points in a scene. The basic
concept is triangulation: a scene point and the two cam-
era points form a triangle, and knowing the baseline
between the two cameras, and the angle formed by the
camera rays, the distance to the object can be deter-
mined.
In practice, there are many difﬁculties in making
a stereo imaging system that is useful for robotics
applications. Most of these difﬁculties arise in ﬁnd-
ing reliable matches for pixels in the two images that
correspond to the same point in the scene. A further
consideration is that stereo analysis for robotics has
a real-time constraint, and the processing power needed
for some algorithms can be very high. But, in recent
years much progress has been made, and the advantage
of stereo imaging is that it can provide full 3-D range
images, registered with visual information, potentially
out to an inﬁnite distance, at high frame rates – some-
thing which no other range sensor can match.
Fig. 31.8
Ideal stereo geometry. The global coordinate
system is centered on the focal point (camera center) of
the left camera. It is a right-handed system, with positive Z
in front of the camera, and positive X to the right. The cam-
era principal ray pierces the image plane at Cx; Cy, which
is the same in both cameras (a variation for verged cameras
allows Cx to differ between the images). The focal length is
also the same. The images are lined up, with y D y0 for the
coordinates of any scene point projected into the images.
The difference between the x coordinates is called the dis-
parity. The vector between the focal points is aligned with
the X-axis I
0
0.005
0.01
LMS111
Structured light
Stereo
O3-D200
LMS291
Kinect
Photon80
LMS200
LMS511
UTM30-LX
0.015
0.02
Interpolation distance (m) – Lower is better
Range error (m) – Lower is better
0.03
0.025
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
Fig. 31.7 Range device characteristics (after [31.6]). Spatial preci-
sion is on the Y-axis, depth precision on the X-axis. Measurements
are taken on a target at 2 m
In this subsection, we will review the basic algo-
rithms of stereo analysis, and highlight the problems
and potential of the method. For simplicity, we use
binocular stereo.
Cx, Cy
Cx, Cy
x
s
s'
y
x'
y'
f
f
Y
X
Z
S
Tx

Part C | 31.2
790
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Stereo Image Geometry
This subsection gives some more detail of the fun-
damental geometry of stereo, and in particular the
relationship of the images to the 3-D world via pro-
jection and reprojection. A more in-depth discussion of
the geometry and the rectiﬁcation process can be found
in [31.10].
The input images are rectiﬁed, which means that the
original images are modiﬁed to correspond to ideal pin-
hole cameras with a particular geometry, illustrated in
Fig. 31.8. Any 3-D point S projects to a point in the
images along a ray through the focal point. If the prin-
cipal rays of the cameras are parallel, and the images are
embedded in a common plane and have collinear scan
lines, then the search geometry takes a simple form.
The epipolar line of a point s in the left image, de-
ﬁned as the possible positions of s0 in the right image,
is always a scan line with the same y coordinate as s.
Thus, search for a stereo match is linear. The process
of ﬁnding a rectiﬁcation of the original images that puts
them into standard form is called calibration, and is dis-
cussed in [31.10].
The difference in the x coordinates of s and s0 is
the disparity of the 3-D point, which is related to its
distance from the focal point, and the baseline Tx that
separates the focal points.
A 3-D point can be projected into either the left or
right image by a matrix multiplication in homogenous
coordinates, using the projection matrix. The 3-D co-
ordinates are in the frame of the left camera (Fig 31.8)
P D
0
@
Fx
0
Cx
FxTx
0
Fy
Cy
0
0
0
1
0
1
A :
(31.6)
This is the projection matrix for a single camera. Fx
and Fy are the focal lengths of the rectiﬁed images, and
Cx and Cy are the optical center; Tx is the translation of
the camera relative to the left (reference) camera. For
the left camera, it is 0; for the right camera, it is the
baseline times the x focal length.
A point in 3-D is represented by homogeneous co-
ordinates and the projection is performed using a matrix
multiply
0
@
x
y
z
1
A D P
0
BB@
X
Y
Z
1
1
CCA ;
(31.7)
where .x=w; y=w/ are the idealized image coordinates.
If points in the left and right images correspond to
the same scene feature, the depth of the feature can be
calculated from the image coordinates using the repro-
jection matrix
Q D
0
BBB@
1
0
0
Cx
0
1
0
Cy
0
0
0
Fx
0
0
1=Tx
.CxCx0/
Tx
1
CCCA :
(31.8)
The primed parameters are from the left projection ma-
trix, the unprimed from the right. The last term is zero
except for verged cameras. If x; y and x0; y are the two
matched image points, with d D x  x0, then
0
BB@
X
Y
Z
W
1
CCA D Q
0
BB@
x
y
d
1
1
CCA ;
(31.9)
where .X=W; Y=W;Z=W/ are the coordinates of the
scene feature, and d D x  x0 is the disparity. Assum-
ing Cx D C0
x, the Z distance assumes the familiar inverse
form of triangulation
Z D FxT0
x
d
:
(31.10)
Reprojection is valid only for rectiﬁed images – for
the general case, the projected lines do not intersect.
The disparity d is an inverse depth measure, and the
vector .x; y; d/ is a perspective representation range im-
age (Sect. 31.1.1), sometimes called the disparity space
representation. The disparity space is often used in ap-
plications instead of 3-D space, as a more efﬁcient
representation for determining obstacles or other fea-
tures (Sect. 31.4.3).
Equation (31.9) is a homography between dispar-
ity space and 3-D Euclidean space. Disparity space
is also useful in translating between 3-D frames. Let
p0 D Œx0; y0; d0; 1 in frame 0, with frame 1 related
by the rigid motion R; t. From the reprojection (31.9)
the 3-D position is Qp0. Under the rigid motion, this
becomes
 R
t
0
1

Qp0 ;
and ﬁnally applying Q1 yields the disparity represen-
tation in frame 1. The concatenation of these operations
is the homography
H.R; t/ D Q1
R
t
0
1

Q :
(31.11)
Using the homography allows the points in the refer-
ence frame to be directly projected onto another frame,
without translating to 3-D points.

Range Sensing
31.2 Sensor Technologies
791
Part C | 31.2
Stereo Matching Methods
The fundamental problem in stereo analysis is matching
image elements that represent the same object or object
part in the scene. Once the match is made, the range to
the object can be computed using the image geometry.
Matching methods can be characterized as local
or global. Local methods attempt to match small re-
gions of one image to another based on intrinsic fea-
tures of the region. Global methods supplement local
methods by considering physical constraints such as
surface continuity or base of support. Local methods
can be further classiﬁed by whether they match dis-
crete features among images, or correlate a small area
patch [31.11]. Features are usually chosen to be light-
ing and viewpoint independent, for example, corners
are a natural feature to use because they remain cor-
ners in almost all projections. Feature-based algorithms
compensate for viewpoint changes and camera differ-
ences, and can produce rapid, robust matching. But
they have the disadvantage of requiring perhaps expen-
sive feature extraction, and yielding only sparse range
results.
In the next section, we present local area correlation
in more detail, since it is one of the most efﬁcient and
practical algorithms for real-time stereo. A survey and
results of recent stereo matching methods are in [31.12],
and the authors maintain a web page listing up-to-date
information in [31.13].
Area Correlation Stereo
Area correlation compares small patches among im-
ages using correlation. The area size is a compromise,
since small areas are more likely to be similar in images
with different viewpoints, while larger areas increase
the signal-to-noise ratio. In contrast to the feature-based
method, area-based correlation produces dense results.
Because area methods need not compute features, and
have an extremely regular algorithmic structure, they
can have optimized implementations.
The typical area correlation method has ﬁve steps
(Fig. 31.9):
1. Geometry correction. In this step, distortions in the
input images are corrected by warping into a stan-
dard form.
2. Image transform. A local operator transforms each
pixel in the grayscale image into a more appropriate
form, for example, normalizes it based on average
local intensity.
3. Area correlation. This is the correlation step, where
each small area is compared with other areas in its
search window.
4. Extrema extraction. The extreme value of the corre-
lation at each pixel is determined, yielding a dispar-
Greyscale image
A pixels
Transform
images
Area correlation
disparities D
Filtered disparity
image
Disparity image
I
C
M
F
Fig. 31.9 Basic stereo processing (see text for details)
ity image: each pixel value is the disparity between
the left and right image patches at the best match.
5. Post-ﬁltering. One or more ﬁlters clean up noise in
the disparity image result.
Correlation of image areas is disturbed by illu-
mination, perspective, and imaging differences among
images. Area correlation methods usually attempt to
compensate by correlating not the raw intensity images,
but some transform of the intensities. Let u; v be the
center pixel of the correlation, d the disparity, and Ix;y,
I0
x;y the intensities of the left and right images:
1. Normalized cross-correlation
P
x;yŒIx;y  OIx;yŒI0
xd;y  OI0xd;y
qP
x;yŒIx;y  OIx;y2 P
x;yŒI0x;y  OI0xd;y2
2. High-pass ﬁlter such as Laplacian of Gaussian
(LOG). The Laplacian measures directed edge in-
tensities over some area smoothed by the Gaussian.
Typically, the standard deviation of the Gaussian is
1–2 pixels
X
x;y
s.LOGx;y  LOGxd;y/ ;
where s.x/ is x2 or jjxjj.
3. Nonparametric. These transforms are an attempt to
deal with the problem of outliers, which tend to
overwhelm the correlation measure, especially us-
ing a square difference. The census method [31.14]
computes a bit vector describing the local environ-
ment of a pixel, and the correlation measure is the
Hamming distance between two vectors
X
x;y
.Ix;y > Iu;v/ ˚

I0
xd;y > I0
u;v

:
Results on the different transforms and their error
rates for some standard images are compiled in [31.13].
Another technique for increasing the signal-to-noise
ratio of matches is to use more than two images [31.15].

Part C | 31.2
792
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Table 31.2 Post-ﬁltering techniques for eliminating false
matches in area correlation
Correlation surface [31.17]
Peak width: Wide peak indi-
cates poor feature localization
Peak height: Small peak
indicates poor match
Number of peaks: Multiple
peaks indicate ambiguity
Mode ﬁlter
Lack of supporting disparities
violates smoothness
Left/right check [31.18, 19]
Nonsymmetric match indi-
cates occlusion
Texture [31.20]
Low texture energy yields
poor matches
This technique can also overcome the problem of view-
point occlusion, where the matching part of an object
does not appear in the other image. The simple tech-
nique of adding the correlations between images at the
same disparity seems to work well [31.16]. Obviously,
the computational expenditure for multiple images is
greater than that for two.
Dense range images usually contain false matches
that must be ﬁltered, although this is less of a problem
with multiple-image methods. Table 31.2 lists some of
the post-ﬁlters that have been discussed in the literature.
Disparity images can be processed to give subpixel
accuracy, by trying to locate the correlation peak be-
tween pixels. This increases the available range resolu-
tion without much additional work. Typical accuracies
are 1=10 pixel.
Stereo Range Quality
Various artifacts and problems affect stereo range im-
ages.
Smearing. Area correlation introduces expansion in
foreground objects, for example, the woman’s head in
Fig. 31.10. The cause is the dominance of strong edges
on the object. Nonparametric measures are less subject
to this phenomenon. Other approaches include multiple
correlation windows and shaped windows.
250
200
150
100
50
a)
b)
c)
Fig.31.10a–c Sample stereo results from an outdoor garden scene; baseline is 9 cm. (a) original left image. (b) computed
3-D points from a different angle. (c) disparity in pseudo-color
Dropouts. These are areas where no good matches can
be found because of low texture energy. Dropouts are
a problem for indoor and outdoor man-made surfaces.
Projecting a random texture can help [31.21].
Range Resolution. Unlike LADAR devices, stereo
range accuracy is a quadratic function of distance,
found by differentiating (31.10) with respect to
disparity
•Z D FxT0
x
d2
:
(31.12)
The degradation of the stereo range with distance
can be clearly seen in the 3-D reconstruction of
Fig. 31.10.
Processing. Area correlation is processor-intensive,
requiring Awd operations, where A is the image
area, w is the correlation window size, and d is
the number of disparities. Clever optimizations take
advantage of redundant calculations to reduce this
to Ad (independent of window size), at the ex-
pense of some storage. Real-time implementations ex-
ist for standard personal computers (PC)s [31.22, 23],
graphics accelerators [31.24, 25], digital signal pro-
cessors (DSPs) [31.26], ﬁeld programmable gate ar-
rays (FPGAs) [31.22, 27], and specialized application-
speciﬁc integrated circuits (ASICs) [31.28].
Other Visual Sources of Range Information
Here we brieﬂy list the most popular, but less reliable
sources of range information. These sources can poten-
tially supplement other sensors:

Focus/defocus: Knowledge of the camera parame-
ters and the amount of blur of image features allows
the estimation of how far the corresponding scene
features are from the perfect focus distance [31.29].
Sensors may be passive (using a precaptured image)
or active (capturing several images with different
focus settings).

Range Sensing
31.2 Sensor Technologies
793
Part C | 31.2

Structure and motion: Structure and motion algo-
rithms compute 3-D scene structure and the sensor
positions simultaneously [31.30]. This is essentially
a binocular stereo process (see discussion before),
except that only a single moving camera is used.
Thus, the images needed by the stereo process
are acquired by the same camera in several differ-
ent positions. Video camcorders are also used, but
they have lower resolution. One important advan-
tage of this approach over the normal algorithm is
that features can be tracked easily if the time be-
tween frames or the motion is small enough. This
simpliﬁes the correspondence problem; however,
it can lead to another problem. If the pair of im-
ages used for the stereo calculation are taken close
together in time, then the separation between the
cameras’ images will not be much – this is a short
baseline. Triangulation calculations are then more
inaccurate, as small errors in estimating the po-
sition of image features results in large errors in
the estimated 3-D position (particularly the depth
estimate). This problem can be partly avoided by
tracking for longer periods. A second problem that
can arise is that not all motions are suitable for es-
timate of the full 3-D scene structure. For example,
if the video recorder only rotates about its optical
axis or about its focus point, then no 3-D informa-
tion can be recovered. A little care can avoid this
problem.

Shading: The pattern of shading on a surface is re-
lated to the orientation of the surface relative to the
observer and light sources. This relationship can
be used to estimate the surface orientation across
the surface. The surface normals can then be in-
tegrated to give an estimate of the relative surface
depth.

Photometric stereo: Photometric stereo [31.31] is
a combination of shading and stereo processes. The
key concept is that the shading of an object varies
with the position of the light sources. Hence, if you
had several aligned pictures of an object or scene
with the light source in different positions (e.g.,
the sun moved), then you can calculate the scene’s
surface normals. From these, the relative surface
depth can be estimated. The restriction of a station-
ary observer and changing light sources makes this
approach less likely to be useful to most robotics
applications.

Texture: The way uniform or statistical textures vary
on a surface is related to the orientation of the sur-
face relative to the observer. As with shading, the
texture gradients can be used to estimate the surface
orientation across the surface [31.32]. The surface
normals can then be integrated to give an estimate
of the relative surface depth.
31.2.5 Structured Light Stereo
Recently, the Kinect range-sensing device became
the fastest-selling consumer electronics device in his-
tory [31.33]. The Kinect uses a structured-light stereo
technique from PrimeSense (bought out by Apple, Inc.)
to give a reasonable balance of spatial and depth pre-
cision, in a highly-integrated device, at a very low
price.
The PrimeSense technology projects a struc-
tured pattern generated from an IR (infrared) laser
and patented combination of diffractive elements
(Fig. 31.11). The pattern consists of bright dots on
a grid, with unique combinations of dots over a horizon-
tal area. A camera with resolution 1280  960 captures
the IR image at a horizontal offset of 7:5 cm from
the projector, and correlates a 19  19 block against
the known dot pattern for a given horizontal line. If
a match is found, the position of the pattern in the
known projected pattern gives the angle subtended by
the reﬂecting object to the projector and camera, and
hence the distance. A depth image is returned at a reso-
lution of 640480, with 11 bits of depth precision, over
an FOV of approximately 50ı; the depth is interpolated
to a precision of 1=8 pixel. Error characteristics for the
Kinect have been studied in [31.34]. The depth decision
is limited by the resolution, similarly to (31.3).
There are additional sources of error. Dropouts oc-
cur when the surfaces are minimally reﬂective, or spec-
ular. False positives, where there are gross mismatches
in the match, are very rare with PrimeSense technology.
Spatial precision is much lower than the returned 640
480 depth image would indicate, because of the smear-
Fig. 31.11 The laser grid of the Kinect for calculating depth

Part C | 31.3
794
Part C
Sensing and Perception
ing effect of block correlation. The projected pattern
expands and contracts based on temperature, leading to
offset in disparities along the vertical axis. While the
projector is temperature controlled via a Peltier unit, its
temperature can vary. A temperature sensor measures
this variation, and applies disparity steps across the im-
age, which are apparent as vertical steps in the depth
image.
31.3 Registration
This section introduces techniques for 3-D localiza-
tion of parts for robot manipulation, self-localization of
robot vehicles, and scene understanding for robot nav-
igation. All of these are based on the ability to register
3-D shapes, for example, range images to range images,
triangulated surfaces or geometric models. Registration
puts two or more independently acquired 3-D shapes
into one frame of reference. It can be solved as an
optimization problem that uses a cost function for the
quality of the alignment. The 3-D shapes are registered
by determining the rigid transformation (rotation and
translation) which minimizes the cost function. Feature
based registration extracts distinguishing features of the
range images and uses corresponding features for calcu-
lating the alignment.
31.3.1 The ICP Algorithm
The following method is used for the registration of
point sets. The complete algorithm was invented at the
same time in 1991 by Besl and McKay [31.35], by Chen
and Medioni [31.36], and by Zhang [31.37]. The method
is called iterative closest points (ICP) algorithm. It is the
de-facto standard for registration of point sets, but is also
applicable to 3-D shapes, if one samples them.
Given two independently acquired sets of 3-D
points, OM (model set) and OD (data set) which correspond
to a single shape, we want to ﬁnd the transformation
.R; t/ consisting of a rotation matrix R and a translation
vector t which minimizes the following cost function,
E.R; t/ D 1
N
N
X
iD1
kmi  .Rdi C t/k 2 :
(31.13)
a)
b)
Fig.31.12a,b Initial alignment of
two 3-D point clouds (a) and after
optimization with ICP (b)
All the corresponding points can be represented in a tu-
ple .mi; di/ where mi 2 M  OM and di 2 D  OD. Two
things have to be calculated. First, the corresponding
points, and second, the transformation (R, t) that mini-
mizes E.R; t/ on the basis of the corresponding points.
The ICP algorithm uses closest points as correspond-
ing points. A sufﬁciently good starting guess enables
the ICP algorithm to converge to the correct minimum.
Figure 31.12 shows two 3-D point clouds, their ini-
tial alignment and the ﬁnal registration after a few ICP
iterations.
Implementations of ICP (Algorithm 31.1) use
a maximal distance for closest points to handle par-
tially overlapping point sets. In this case, the proof
about ICP’s monotonic convergence in [31.35] no
longer holds, since the number of points as well as
the value of E.R; t/ might increase after applying
a transformation.
Algorithm 31.1 The ICP algorithm
1: for i D 0 to maxIterations do
2:
for all dj 2 D do
3:
ﬁnd the closest point within a range dmax in the
set M for point dj
4:
end for
5:
Calculate transformation (R; t) that minimizes
the error function (31.13)
6:
Apply the transformation found in step 5 to the
data set D.
7:
Compute the difference of the quadratic error,
that is, compute the difference of the value
kEi1.R; t/  Ei.R; t/k before and after the ap-

Range Sensing
31.3 Registration
795
Part C | 31.3
plication of the transformation. If this difference
falls below a threshold ", terminate.
8: end for
Current research in the context of ICP algo-
rithms mainly focuses on fast variants of ICP al-
gorithms [31.38]. If the input are 3-D meshes then
a point-to-plane metric can be used instead of (31.13).
Minimizing using a point-to-plane metric outperforms
the standard point-to-point one, but requires the com-
putation of normals and meshes in a preprocessing
step.
The computation of closest points is the crucial
step of the ICP algorithm. A naive implementation
examines all points in OM and the resulting computa-
tion time for ICP is O.j ODj j OMj/, that is, O.n2/. Note
that ON can be very large; advanced high-precise 3-D
laser scanners such as the Zoller C Fröhlich yield a data
rate up to 1 000 000 3-D points per second. An efﬁ-
cient tree data structure, a k-d tree, is widely used to
speed up the closest point computation. Every node
of the k-d tree represents a partition of the point set
into two distinct sets, the successor nodes. The root
of the tree represents the whole point set. The leaves
of the tree are called buckets and are a partition of
the set into small, disjunctive point sets. Furthermore,
every node of the tree consists of the center and the
dimension of the point set. In the original k-d tree
paper, these so-called split dimensions have been cho-
sen depending on the depth of node in a robin-round
fashion [31.39]. The split dimension and value deﬁne
an axis-aligned hyperplane in the k-dimensional space.
The data are partitioned according to their position
to the hyperplane into the successor nodes. The k-d
tree is constructed until the number of points in the
nodes falls below a threshold b (bucket size). Only the
leaves of the tree contain the data points. Searching
in k-d trees is done recursively. A given 3-D point pq
needs to be compared to the separating plane (split-
ting dimension and splitting value) in order to decide
on which side the search must continue. This proce-
dure is executed until the leaves are reached. There,
the algorithm has to evaluate all bucket points. How-
ever, the closest point may be in a different bucket,
iff the distance d of the query point pq to the lim-
its is smaller than the one to the closest point in
the bucket pb. In this case backtracking has to be
performed. The test is known as Ball-Within-Bounds
test [31.39–41]. The optimized k-d tree chooses the split
dimension and split value [31.40], such that the ex-
pected amount of backtracking is minimized. Since one
typically has no information about the query points k-d
tree algorithms take only the distribution of the given
points into account. For all possible queries, this works
sufﬁciently, but it will not be optimal for a speciﬁc
query [31.40]. This enables the recursive construction
and avoids the overall optimization that is known to be
NP-complete [31.42].
Improvements to k-d tree search, especially for
small dimensions, have been shown in the last decade.
They include approximate k-d tree search [31.41], reg-
istration using d2-trees [31.43] and cached k-d tree
search [31.44]. In addition, the spatial data structure oc-
tree might, which is discussed later in this section, can
be used to search the point clouds with similar perfor-
mance.
In each ICP iteration, the transformation can be cal-
culated in O.N/ by any of these four methods:
1. A
singular
value
decomposition
(SVD)-based
method by Arun et al. [31.45]
2. A quaternion-based method by Horn et al. [31.46]
3. An
algorithm using orthonormal matrices by
Horn [31.47]
4. A calculation based on dual quaternions by Walker
et al. [31.48]. Besides these closed-form solutions,
there are several linearized, approximative ver-
sion [31.49].
The challenge is to ensure thar R is orthonormal.
Most often, the ﬁrst method is implemented, due to it’s
simplicity and the availability of numerical SVDs in
various libraries. The rotation R is represented as an
orthonormal 3  3 matrix. The optimal rotation is cal-
culated by R D VUT. Here the matrices V and U are
derived by the SVD H D UƒVT of a cross-correlation
matrix H. This 3  3 matrix H is given by
H D
N
X
iD1
m0T
i d0
i D
0
@
Sxx
Sxy
Sxz
Syx
Syy
Syz
Szx
Szy
Szz
1
A ;
(31.14)
where
Sxx D
N
X
iD1
m0
x;id0
x;i; Sxy D
N
X
iD1
m0
x;id0
y;i; : : : :
31.3.2 Marker and Feature-Based
Registration
To avoid issues with starting guess in the ICP frame-
work, marker-based registration uses deﬁned artiﬁcial
or natural landmarks as corresponding points. This
manual data association ensures that by minimizing
(31.13) the scans are registered at the correct location.
Iterations are no longer required, but possible as ver-
iﬁcation with the RANSAC algorithm. The RANSAC
algorithm is a general, randomized procedure that iter-

Part C | 31.3
796
Part C
Sensing and Perception
atively ﬁnds an accurate model for observed data that
may contain a large number of outliers [31.50].
3-D Feature Representations and Extraction
There are many representations available for encoding
3-D scene structure and model representations, but the
following representations are the ones most commonly
encountered in robotics applications. Some scene mod-
els or descriptions may use more than one of these
simultaneously to describe different aspects of the scene
or object models.
Normals. Normals describe the surface orientation in
a points. There are a number of approaches that have
been developed for computing normals in point clouds
and range images. Most of these approaches involves
some form of eigenvalue decomposition resembling
total linear least squares. The normals are usually com-
puted when taking into account the nearby neighbor
points which are computed using a variety of methods
like nearest neighbor search. These methods include
k nearest neighbors (k-NN) and radius search among
others. The method of total least squares is robust to
noise as it inherently includes low-pass ﬁltering, but
it is sensitive to the distribution and density of the
point samples as well as the curvature of the underlying
manifold. Improvements to the above method by using
higher order surfaces are discussed in [31.51] and it is
noted that such methods can fail even with arbitrarily
dense samples.
The total least-squares problem ﬁnds the plane pa-
rameters that optimally ﬁt a small surface area in a point
set given by the the nearest neighbors. A plane is de-
ﬁned by
nxx C nyy C nzz  d D 0 ;
where p D .x; y; z/T lies on the plane and .nx; ny; nz; d/
are the parameters to compute. Given a subset of k 3-D
points pi; i D 1; 2; : : : ; k of the surface, least squares
ﬁnds the optimal normal vector n D .nx; ny; nz/T and
scalar d that minimizes the following error equation
e D
k
X
iD1
.pin  d/ :
(31.15)
The basic method for normal estimation from the neigh-
boring points using a ﬁtting plane is the principal
component analysis (PCA). PCA is the eigenvalue de-
composition of the data covariance (or correlation)
matrix or singular value decomposition of a data ma-
trix, usually after mean centering (and normalizing) the
data matrix for each attribute (3-D query point). PCA
can be interpreted as ﬁtting a Gaussian distribution and
computing the main axes. For each query point
 D 1
k
k
X
iD1
pi ;
† D 1
k
k
X
iD1
.pi  /T.pi  / :
The vector corresponding to the smallest eigenvalue of
the above matrix † is the normal direction if the neigh-
boring points belong to a plane and this is also the
closed form solution of the total least-squares problem.
For equirectangular range images, that is, spheri-
cal coordinates, a fast algorithm has been developed
in [31.52] that avoids computing eigenvalues. Dividing
(31.15) by d2 gives a simpliﬁed function and further di-
vision by the squared range 	2 yields
e D
k
X
iD1

.	1pi/Tn  	1
i
2 ;
pi D
0
@
cos i sin 'i
sin i sin 'i
cos 'i
1
A :
Therefore, a solution for n is given as
n D M1b ;
where
M D
k
X
iD1
pipT
i ; b D
k
X
iD1
pi
	i
:
This way the computation of eigenvalues is avoided and
the matrix M can be precomputed for the desired im-
age coordinates as it does not depend on the range. The
tangential surface and therefore its normal vector are
obtained by simply taking the derivative of the surface
function in the point of interest
n D r	 D r	.; '/
D
0
B@
cos  sin  
sin 
 sin '
@
@ C cos  cos '

@
@'
sin  sin  
cos 
 sin '
@
@ C sin  cos '

@
@'
cos '  sin '

@
@'
1
CA :
3-D Point Features. This is a set fpi D .xi; yi; zi/g of
3-D points that describe some salient and identiﬁable
points in the scene. They might be the centers of spheres
(often used as markers), corners where three planes

Range Sensing
31.3 Registration
797
Part C | 31.3
intersect, or the extrema of some protrusion or inden-
tation on a surface. They may be a subset of an initially
acquired 3-D full scene point set, or they might be ex-
tracted from a range image, or they might be computed
theoretical points based on extracted data features.
An early example of 3-D point features and de-
scriptors are spin images, which are used for surface
matching between point clouds and meshes. Scanned
3-D points become the vertices of the mesh and con-
nectivity is established by the 3-D scanning geometry.
A fundamental component of the surface matching rep-
resentation is an oriented point, a three-dimensional
point with an associated direction. Huber et al. deﬁne
an oriented point O at a surface mesh vertex using the
3-D position of the vertex p and the surface normal at
the vertex n [31.53]. Two coordinates can be calculated
given an oriented point: ˛ the radial distance to the sur-
face normal line L and ˇ the axial distance above the
tangent plane P (Fig 31.13).
.x/ 7! .˛; ˇ/
D
p
jjx  pjj2  Œn  .x  p/2 :n  .x  p/

The term spin map originates from the cylindrical
symmetry of the oriented point basis; the basis can spin
about its axis with no effect on the coordinates of points
with respect to the basis [31.53]. A consequence of the
cylindrical symmetry is that points that lie on a circle
that is parallel to P and centered on L will have the same
coordinates .˛; ˇ/ with respect to the basis.
Seminal work on 3-D point features are the point
feature histogram (PFH) descriptors. They encode
a point’s k-neighborhood geometrical properties by
generalizing the mean curvature around the point using
a multidimensional histogram of values [31.54]. This
highly dimensional hyperspace aims at providing an in-
formative signature for the feature representation, being
invariant to the six-dimensional (6-D) pose of the un-
derlying surface, and coping very well with different
sampling densities or noise levels present in the neigh-
borhood [31.55].
α
B
n
p
P
L
x
β
Fig. 31.13 Deﬁnition of a spin image
To formulate the new feature space, the concept of
a dual-ring neighborhood is ﬁrst introduced. Following
the notation and the text of [31.54], let P be a set of 3-D
points with xi; yi; zi being the geometric coordinates.
A point pi of P is said to have a dual-ring neighborhood
if
r1; r2 2 Rr1 < r2 ; such that
(
r1 ! Pk1
r2 ! Pk2
;
with 0 < k1 < k2. The two radii r1 and r2 are used to
determine two distinct layers of feature representations
for pi. The ﬁrst layer represents the surface normal at
the query point from the neighborhood patch Pk1. The
second layer comprises the PFH as a set of angular fea-
tures (Fig. 31.14)
˛ D v  nt ;
' D u  .pt  ps/
d
;
 D arctan.w  nt; u  nt/ :
In addition to 3-D structural features, 3-D features
derived from texture, for example, coregistered color
images or scan reﬂectivities, are widely used for reg-
istration [31.56, 57]. Figure 31.15 shows scale invariant
feature transform (SIFT) features extracted from a 3-D
scanner with calibrated reﬂectivity values.
v = [pt – ps] × u
pt – ps
pk1
pk5
pk2
pk3
pk4
pq
p6
p7
p11
p10
a)
b)
p9
p8
pt
nt
v
u
w
ps
w = u × v
ns = u
φ
θ
α
Fig.31.14a,b Angular features in PFHs (a) and the deﬁni-
tion of the two regions (b)

Part C | 31.3
798
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Fig. 31.15 Sift features extracted from the reﬂectivity val-
ues of a 3-D laser scan
Planes. A planar surface may only be described by
the inﬁnite surface as given by the equation, but it
may also include a description of the boundary of the
surface patch. Convenient representations for robotics
applications are lists of the 3-D points f.xi; yi; zi/g that
form the patch boundary, or polylines, which repre-
sent the boundary by a set of connected line segments.
A polyline is represented by the sequence of 3-D points
f.xi; yi; zi/g that form the vertices that join the line
segments.
Plane extraction, or plane ﬁtting, is the problem of
modeling a given 3-D point cloud as a set of planes
that ideally explain every data point. The RANSAC al-
gorithm is one possible algorithm. When adapted for
plane ﬁnding, this algorithm selects three 3-D points
at random (although exploiting some locality to the
point selection algorithm can improve the efﬁciency of
the algorithm). These three points determine a plane
with a parameter vector a. Test all points fpg in the
set for belonging to the plane (j pi  a j< ). If enough
points are close to the plane, then potentially a plane
has been found. These points should also be processed
to ﬁnd a connected set, from which a more accurate
set of plane parameters can be estimated using the
least-squares algorithm given above. If a planar patch
is successfully found, the points that lie in that plane
are removed from the dataset. The random selection of
three points then continues until no more planes are
found (a bound on how many tries to make can be
estimated). For example, Schnabel et al. [31.58] have
adapted RANSAC for plane extraction and found that
the algorithm performs precise and fast plane extrac-
tion, but only if the parameters have been ﬁne-tuned
properly. For their optimization, they use information
, which is not readily available in point cloud data,
such as normals, neighboring relations, and outlier
ratios.
A further standard method for plane detection is
region growing, based on a seed patch. When the
scene largely consists of planes, a particularly sim-
ple approach is based on selecting a previously un-
used point and the set of points fpi D .xi; yi; zi/g in its
neighborhood. A plane is ﬁt to these points using the
least-squares method (cf. normal computation). This
hypothesized plane then needs to be tested for reason-
ableness by 1) examining the smallest eigenvalue – it
should be small and of the order of the square of the ex-
pected noise level and 2) ensuring that most of the 3-D
points in the ﬁtted set lie on the plane (j pi  a j< ).
Larger planar regions are grown by locating new
adjacent points pi that lie on the plane (j pi  a j< ).
When enough of these are found, the parameters a of
the plane are re-estimated. Points on the detected plane
are removed and the process is repeated with a new seed
patch. This process continues until no more points can
be added. Complete descriptions of planar feature ex-
traction with region growing are given in [31.59].
Bauer and Polthier use the radon transform to de-
tect planes in volume data [31.60]. The idea and the
speed of the algorithm are similar to that of the stan-
dard Hough transform. The Hough transform [31.61]
is a method for detecting parametrized objects. For the
Hough transform, planes are represented in the Hesse
normal form, using normal vectors. A plane is thereby
given by a point p on the plane, the normal vector n that
is perpendicular to the plane and the distance 	 to the
origin
	 D p  n D pxnx C pyny C pznz D 	 :
Considering the angles between the normal vector and
the coordinate system, the coordinates of n are factor-
ized to
px  cos   sin ' C py  sin '  sin  C pz  cos ' D 	 ;
(31.16)
with  is the angle of the normal vector on the xy-
plane and ' the angle between the xy-plane and the
normal vector in the z direction. ', , and 	 deﬁne the 3-
dimensional Hough space (; '; 	) such that each point
in the Hough space corresponds to one plane in R3.
To ﬁnd planes in a point set, one calculates the Hough
transform for each point. Given a point p in Cartesian
coordinates, one ﬁnds all planes the point lies on, that
is, ﬁnd all the , ', and 	 that satisfy (31.16). Mark-
ing these points in the Hough space, that is, leads to
a 3-D sinusoid curve as shown in Fig. 31.16. The inter-
sections of two curves in the Hough space denote the
planes that are rotated around the line built by the two
points. Consequently, the intersection of three curves

Range Sensing
31.3 Registration
799
Part C | 31.3
(0,0,1)
(0,1,0)
(1,0,0)
Plane
0
1
2
3
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
φ
θ
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
Fig. 31.16 Transformation of three points from R to the
Hough space (; '; 	). The intersection of the curves
(marked in black) depicts the plane spanned by the three
points
in the Hough space corresponds to the polar coordi-
nates deﬁning the plane spanned by the three points.
In Fig. 31.16, the intersection is marked in black. Given
a set P of points in Cartesian coordinates, one trans-
forms all points pi 2 P into the Hough space. The more
curves intersect in hj 2 .;'; 	/, the more points lie on
the plane represented by hj and the higher is the proba-
bility that hj is actually extracted from P.
The standard Hough transform is far too slow for
plane detection in real-world data. A variant called
randomized Hough transform is the method of choice
when dealing with 3-D data due to its exceptional
performance as far as runtime and quality are con-
cerned [31.62].
Other plane extraction algorithms are highly spe-
cialized for a speciﬁc application and are not in
widespread use for miscellaneous reasons. Lakaemper
and Latecki [31.63] used an expectation maximization
(EM) algorithm to ﬁt planes that are initially randomly
generated, Wulf et al. [31.64] detected planes relying
on the speciﬁc properties of a sweeping laser scanner
and Yu et al. [31.65] developed a clustering approach to
solve the problem.
Triangulated Surfaces. Most commonly, surfaces are
approximated by polygonal meshes, particularly tri-
Fig. 31.17 (a) Image acquired with
a kinect-like sensor. (b) Reconstruc-
tion with kinect fusion
angle meshes, a standard data structure in computer
graphics to represent 3-D objects. This representation
describes an object or scene by a set of triangular
patches. More general polygonal surface patches or
even various smooth surface representations are also
used, but triangles are most commonly used because
they are simpler and there are inexpensive PC graphics
cards that display triangles at high speed.
The triangles can be large (e.g., when represent-
ing planar surfaces) or small (e.g., when representing
curved surfaces). The size chosen for the triangles re-
ﬂects the accuracy desired for representing the object or
scene surfaces. The triangulated surface might be com-
plete in the sense that all observable scene or objects
surfaces are represented by triangles, or there might
be disconnected surface patches with or without inter-
nal holes. For grasping or navigation, you do not want
any unrepresented scene surface to lie in front of the
represented portion of the surface where a gripper or
vehicle might collide with it. Hence, we assume that
the triangulation algorithms produce patch sets that, if
completely connected at the edges, implicitly bound
all real scene surfaces. Figure 31.17 shows an exam-
ple of a triangulated surface and the original point
cloud.
The de-facto standard is the marching cubes method
introduced by Lorensen nad Cline [31.66]. This algo-
rithm subdivides the scanned volume into cubic cells
or voxels. For each cell, the intersections between the
cell edges and the surface are calculated. Precalculated
surface patterns are then used to generate a local trian-
gle mesh approximation. An example of such patterns
are given in Fig. 31.18. To interpolate the intersections,
implicit continuous surface representations like planes
or splines are ﬁtted to the local data using least-squares
ﬁts [31.67, 68]. A feature of the marching cubes algo-
rithm is that it produces more triangles than are needed
to represent an object. Hence, several mesh simpliﬁ-
cation algorithms have been introduced over the past
years. Most of them deﬁne error metrics that indicate
the error that a certain operation causes to the model,
that is, the removal of an edge [31.69, 70]. To optimize
the model, the edges causing the minimal error to the

Part C | 31.3
800
Part C
Sensing and Perception
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Fig. 31.18 Pattern for meshing 3-D
voxels. 256 combinations are possible,
but it is sufﬁcient to model 16, iff
symmetries are considered
topology are removed iteratively. Since after each edge
removal new vertices have to be inserted into the mesh,
the initial topology can be altered.
The kinect fusion approach modiﬁes Hoppe’s dis-
tance function [31.71]. It exploits the properties of
the depth image (rectangular) to calculate normals and
the associated planes. The method is massively paral-
lelized by a GPU (graphics processing unit) implemen-
tation and can reconstruct and register meshes in real
time.
3-D Lines. The 3-D lines where planar surfaces meet
are features that can be easily detected by both stereo
and range sensors. These features occur commonly in
built environments (e.g., where walls, ﬂoors, ceilings,
and doorways meet, around the edges of wall structures
like notice boards, at the edges of ofﬁce and warehouse
furniture, etc.). They are also common on manmade ob-
jects. In the case of stereo, changes of surface shape or
coloring are detected as edges, which can be matched in
the stereo process to directly produce the 3-D edge. In
the case of a range sensor, planar surfaces can be easily
extracted from the range data (see the next section) and
adjacent planar surfaces can be intersected to give the
edges.
The most straightforward representation for 3-D
lines is the set of points x D p C v for all , where v
is a unit vector. This has 5 degrees of freedom; more
complex representations for example, with 4 degrees of
freedom exist [31.10].
Voxels. The voxel (volume pixel) approach represents
the 3-D world by 3-D boxes/cells that indicate where
there is a scene structure and where there is free space.
The simplest representation is a 3-D binary array, en-
coded as 1 for having a structure and 0 for free space.
This can be quite memory intensive, and also requires
a lot of computation to check many voxels for content.
A more complex but more compact representation is
the hierarchical representation called the octree [31.72].
This divides the entire (bounded) rectangular space into
eight rectangular subspaces called octants (Fig. 31.19).
A tree data structure encodes the content of each octant
as empty, full or mixed. Mixed octants are then sub-
divided into eight smaller rectangular octants, encoded
as subtrees of the larger tree. Subdivision continues un-
til some minimum octant size is reached. Determining
whether a voxel is empty, full, or mixed depends on the
sensor used, however, if no 3-D data points are located
in the volume of a voxel, then it is likely to be empty.
Similarly, if many 3-D points are present, then the voxel
is likely to be full. Currently, many implementations
using octrees for range data are available [31.73, 74].
Furthermore, these voxel representations are the basis
of surface/mesh reconstruction algorithms as described
earlier.

Range Sensing
31.3 Registration
801
Part C | 31.3
For the purpose of robot navigation, localization or
grasping, only the surface and free-space voxels need to
be marked accurately. The interior of objects and scene
structure are largely irrelevant.
Straight Lines. While straight lines are common in
man-made scenes, direct extraction from 3-D datasets
is not easy. The main source of the difﬁculty is that
the 3-D sensors often do not acquire good responses
at edges of surfaces. For this reason, most 3-D line de-
tection algorithms are indirect, whereby planes are ﬁrst
detected, for example, using the method of the previous
section, and then adjacent planes are intersected. Adja-
cency can be tested by ﬁnding paths of connected pixels
that lead from one plane to the other. If planes 1 and 2
contains points p1 and p2 and have surface normals n1
and n2, respectively, then the resulting intersection line
has equation x D a C d where a is a point on the line
and d D
n1n2
jjn1n2jj is the line direction.
There are an inﬁnite number of possible points a,
which can be found by solving the equations a0n1 D
p0
1n1 and a0n2 D p0
2n2. A reasonable third constraint
that obtains a point near p2 is the equation a0d D p0
2d.
This gives us an inﬁnite line. Most practical applica-
tions require a ﬁnite segment. The endpoints can be
estimated by (1) ﬁnding the points on the line that
lie close to observed points in both planes and then
(2) ﬁnding the two extremes of those points. On the
other hand, ﬁnding straight 3-D lines can be easier
with a stereo sensor, as these result from matching two
straight 2-D image lines.
31.3.3 Multiple-View Registration
A globally consistent representation of a robot’s en-
vironment is crucial for many robotic applications.
Equipped with a 3-D depth-perceiving sensor, many
mobile systems gather spatial information about their
a)
b)
Fig. 31.19 (a) Spatial subdivisions of an octree up to
level 3. Occupied leaf nodes are shaded grey. (b) The cor-
responding tree structure of the sparse data structure
local 3-D environments. Any iterative application of
matching algorithms leads to inconsistencies due to
sensing errors and due to the inaccuracies in the
matching procedures itself. To avoid these problems,
global matching algorithms are needed, taking global
correspondences between range sensor data into ac-
count. Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM)
algorithms as discussed in Chap. 46 solve a very
similar problem. In addition to registering multiple
views, they estimate a map. Multiple-view registra-
tion also relates to bundle adjustment in the pho-
togrammetry community and structure from motion
(SFM).
If n-views have to be registered, any sequential ap-
plication of a two point-set registration method will
accumulate errors, and therefore the registration algo-
rithm (Sect. 31.3.1) has to be extended. The global error
function becomes
E D
X
l!k
X
i
k.Rlml;i C tl/  .Rkdk;i C tk/k 2 ;
(31.17)
where all views have their unique pose .R; t/. After the
point pairs for all overlapping views .l; k/ have been
found, (31.17) is minimized. Unfortunately, a closed-
form solution for minimizing (31.17) is not know, but
a small angle approximation or the helix transform
yield a system of linear equations that can be solved by
Choleskey decomposition [31.49]. In an ICP-like fash-
ion after every transformation new point pairs have to
be found (Algorithm 31.2).
Algorithm 31.2 The globally consistent ICP algo-
rithm
1: for i D 0 to maxIterations do
2:
ﬁnd the closest point within a range dmax of every
pair of overlapping 3-D point clouds .l; k/.
3:
Calculate n transformations (R; t) simultane-
ously that minimize the error function (31.17)
4:
Apply the n transformations found in step 4 to all
data sets.
5:
Compute the difference of the quadratic error,
that is, compute the difference of the value
kEi1  Eik before and after the application of
the transformation. If this difference falls below
a threshold ", terminate.
6: end for
A probabilistic SLAM-like notation of (31.17) was
formulated in [31.75] for 2-D range scans. For each
pose X, the term NX denotes a pose estimate, and X
is the pose error. The positional error of two poses Xj

Part C | 31.3
802
Part C
Sensing and Perception
and Xk is described by
Ej;k D
m
X
iD1
Xj ˚ di  Xk ˚ mi
 2 :
Here, ˚ is the compounding operation that transforms
a point into the global coordinate system. For small
pose differences, Ej;k can be linearized by using a Tay-
lor expansion. With the linearized error metric E0
j;k and
the Gaussian distribution . NEj;k; Cj;k/ a Mahalanobis dis-
tance that describes the global error of all the poses is
constructed
W D
X
j!k
 NEj;k  E0
j;k
T C1
j;k

NE
0
j;k  E0
j;k

D
X
j!k
 NEj;k 

X0
j  X0
k
	
C1
j;k
h
NE
0
j;k 

X0
j  X0
k
i
;
(31.18)
which can be solved efﬁciently using iterative least
squares techniques, for example, Levenberg–Marquadt
or conjugate gradient methods [31.76, 77]. The covari-
ances are computed from point pairs. In the presence
of correct covariances, (31.18) is minimized once.
In case of scan matching, new pose estimates yield
new closest point pairs and in turn new covariances.
Iterating the process of calculating point pairs and
minimization yields a stable algorithm that converges
rapidly. The probabilisty notation and the global ICP
notation are very similar [31.49]. The solution for
2-D range scans has been extended to to 6-DOF
in [31.78].
31.3.4 Model Matching
Model matching is the process of matching some stored
representation to some observed data. In the case dis-
cussed here, we assume that both are 3-D representa-
tions. Furthermore, we assume that the representations
being matched are both of the same type, for example,
3-D model and scene lines. (While different types of
data can also be matched, we ignore these more spe-
cialized algorithms here.)
A special case of matching is when the two struc-
tures being matched are both scene or model surfaces.
The algorithm used for matching depends on the com-
plexity the structures being matched. If the structures
being matched are extended geometric entities such as
planes or 3-D lines, then a discrete matching algorithm
like the Interpretation Tree algorithm [31.79] can be
used. It is suitable for matching small numbers (e.g.,
less than about 2030) discrete objects, such as ver-
tical edges seen in 2-D or 3-D. If there are M model
and D data objects, then potentially there are MD dif-
ferent matches. The key to efﬁcient matching is to
identify pairwise constraints that eliminate unsuitable
matches. Constraints between pairs of model features
and pairs of data features also greatly reduce the match-
ing space. If the constraints eliminate enough features,
a polynomial time algorithm results. The core of the
algorithm is deﬁned as follows. Let fmig and fdjg be
the sets po model and data features to be matched,
u.mi; dj/ is true if mi and dj are compatible features,
b.mi; mj; dk; dl/ is true if the four model and data fea-
tures are compatible and T is the minimum number of
matched features before a successful match is declared.
Pairs is the set of successfully matched features. The
function truesizeof counts the number of actual
matches in the set, disregarding matches with the wild-
card * which matches anything.
Algorithm 31.3
pairs=it(0,{})
if truesizeof(pairs) >= T, then success
function pairs=it(level,inpairs)
if level >= T, then return inpairs
if M-level+truesizeof(inpairs) < T
then return {} % can never succeed
for each d_i % loopD start
if not u(m_level,d_i), then
continue loopD
for each (m_k,d_l) in inpairs
if not b(m_level,m_k,d_i,d_l)
then continue loopD
endfor
% have found a~successful new pair
% to add
pairs = it(level+1,
union(inpairs,(m_level,d_i)))
if truesizeof(pairs) >= T, then return
endfor % loopD end
% no success, so try wildcard
it(level+1,union(inpairs,(m_level,*)))
31.3.5 Relative Pose Estimation
Central to many tasks is the estimation of the coordinate
system relative position or pose transformation between
two coordinate systems. For example, this might be the
pose of a scanner mounted on a mobile vehicle relative
to scene landmarks. Or, it might be the relative pose
of some scene features as observed in two views taken
from different positions.
We present here three algorithms that cover most
instances of the pose estimation process, which differ
slightly based on the type of feature being matched.

Range Sensing
31.3 Registration
803
Part C | 31.3
Point Set Relative Pose Estimation
The ICP algorithm can be used relative pose estimation
as well (Sect. 31.3.1).
Straight Line Relative Pose Estimation
If 3-D lines are the features that are extracted, then the
relative pose transformation can be estimated as fol-
lows. Assume N paired lines. The ﬁrst set of lines is
described by direction vectors feig and a point on each
line faig. The second set of lines is described by di-
rection vectors ff ig and a point on each line fbig. In
this algorithm, we assume that the direction vectors
on the matched segments always point the same direc-
tion (i. e., are not inverted). This can be achieved by
exploiting some scene constraints, or trying all com-
binations and eliminating inconsistent solutions. The
points ai and bi need not correspond to the same point
after alignment. The desired rotation matrix R mini-
mizes P
i jj Rei  f i jj2. Construct the 3  N matrices
E that consists of the vectors feig stacked up. Con-
struct the 3  N matrices F in a similar way from the
vectors ff ig. Compute the singular value decomposi-
tion svd(FE0) = U0DV0. Compute the rotation matrix
R D VU0. The translation estimate t minimizes the sum
of the square of the distances i between the rotated
points ai and corresponding line .f i; bi/. Deﬁne ma-
trix L D P
i.I  f if 0
i/0.I  f 0
i/. Deﬁne the vector n D
P
i.If if 0
i/0.If if 0
i/.Rai bi/. Then the translation is
t D L1n.
Plane Relative Pose Estimation
Finally, if planes are the 3-D features extracted for
matching, then the relative pose transformation can be
estimated as follows. Assume N paired planes. The ﬁrst
set of planes is described by surface normals feig and
a point on each plane faig. The second set of planes
is described by surface normals ff ig and a point on
each plane fbig. Here we assume that the surface nor-
mals always point outward from the surface. The points
ai and bi need not correspond to the same point af-
ter alignment. The desired rotation matrix R minimizes
P
i jj Rei  f i jj2. Construct the 3  N matrices E that
consists of the vectors feig stacked up. Construct the
3  N matrices F in a similar way from the vectors ff ig.
Compute the singular value decomposition svd(FE0) =
U0DV0 [31.45]. Compute the rotation matrix R = VU0.
The translation estimate t minimizes the sum of the
square of the distances i between the rotated point
ai and the corresponding plane .f i; bi/. Deﬁne matrix
L D P
i f if 0
i. Deﬁne the vector n D P
i f if 0
i.Rai  bi/.
Then the translation is t D L1n.
In all of the calculations described above, we as-
sumed normally distributed errors. For techniques to
robustify these sorts of calculations, see Zhang [31.80].
31.3.6 3-D Applications
This section links the techniques presented above to
the robotics applications of 3-D localization of parts
for robot manipulation, self-localization of robot vehi-
cles and scene understanding for robot navigation. The
robotics tasks mentioned here are discussed in more de-
tail in other chapters in the series. While this chapter
focusses on robotics applications, there are many other
3-D sensing applications. An area of much current re-
search is that of acquiring 3-D models, particularly for
reverse engineering of mechanical parts [31.81], histor-
ical artifacts [31.82], buildings [31.83] and people for
computer games and movies (Cyberware Whole Body
X 3-D Scanner).
The key tasks in robot manipulation are:
1. Identiﬁcation of grasping points (Chaps. 37 and 38),
2. Identiﬁcation of a collision free grasp (Chaps. 37
and 38),
3. Recognition of parts to be manipulated (Chap. 32)
and
4. Position estimation of parts for manipulation
(Chaps. 32 and 42).
The key tasks in robot navigation and self-
localization are:
4. Identiﬁcation of a navigable groundplane (Sect.
31.4),
5. Identiﬁcation of a collision free path (Chap. 47),
6. Identiﬁcation of landmarks (Chap. 45) and
7. Estimation of vehicle location (Chap. 53).
The mobile and assembly robotics tasks link to-
gether rather naturally. Tasks 1 and 5 have a connection,
when we consider these tasks in the context of un-
known parts or paths. Part grasping requires ﬁnding
regions on a part that are graspable, which usually
means locally planar patches that are large enough that
a gripper can make good contact with them. Similarly,
navigation usually requires smooth ground regions that
are large enough for the vehicle – again locally pla-
nar patches. Both tasks are commonly based on tri-
angulated scene methods to represent the data, from
which connected regions of nearly coplanar patches can
be extracted. The main difference between these two
tasks is the groundplane detection task is looking for
a larger patch, that must be on the ground and upward
facing.
Tasks 2 and 6 require a method of representing
empty space along the proposed trajectory of the grip-
per contacts or the vehicle. The voxel representation is
good for this task.

Part C | 31.4
804
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Tasks 3 and 7 are model matching tasks and can use
the methods of Sect. 31.3.3 to match observed scene
features to prestored models of known parts or scene
locations. Commonly used features are large planar sur-
faces, 3-D edges and 3-D feature points.
Tasks 4 and 8 are pose estimation tasks and can use
the methods of Sect. 31.3.5 to estimate the pose of the
object relative to the sensor or vehicle (i. e., sensor) rel-
ative to the scene. Again, commonly used features are
large planar surfaces, 3-D edges and 3-D feature points.
31.4 Navigation and Terrain Classification and Mapping
One of the more compelling uses for range data is for
navigation of mobile robot vehicles. Range data pro-
vides information about obstacles and free space for
the vehicle, in a direct geometric form. Because of the
real-time constraints of navigation, it is often impracti-
cal to reconstruct a full 3-D model of the terrain using
the techniques presented in this chapter. Instead, most
systems use an elevation model. An elevation model
is a tesselated 2-D representation of space, where at
each cell there is information about the distribution of
3-D points in the cell. In its simplest incarnation, the
elevation map just contains the mean height of range
points above the nominal ground plane (Fig. 31.20).
This representation is sufﬁcient for some indoor and
urban environments; more sophisticated versions that
determine a local plane, scatter of points in the cell, etc.,
are useful for more complicated off-road driving. Ele-
vation maps marked with obstacles have obvious utility
for planning a collision-free path for the vehicle.
31.4.1 Mobile Mapping
Laser range scanning provides an efﬁcient way to ac-
tively acquire accurate and dense 3-D point clouds of
object surfaces or environments. Mobile scanning is
currently used for modeling in architecture and agri-
culture as well as urban and regional planning. Modern
systems like the Riegl VMX-450 and the Lynx mobile
mapper as produced by Optech work along the same
basic principal. They combine a highly accurate global
Fig. 31.20 Elevation map in urban terrain. Each cell holds the
height of the terrain at that point. More extensive features can also
be incorporated: slope, point variance, etc.
positioning system (GPS), a high precision inertial mea-
surement unit (IMU) and the odometry of the vehicle to
compute the fully timestamped trajectory. Using a pro-
cess called motion compensation this trajectory is then
used to unwind the laser range measurements that were
acquired by the 2-D laser scanner also mounted on the
vehicle. The quality of the resulting point cloud de-
pends on several factors:

The calibration of the entire system, that is, the ac-
curacy to which the position and orientation of each
individual sensor in relation to the vehicle has been
determined.

The accuracy of the external positioning sensors,
that is, the GPS, IMU and odometry.

The availability of the GPS, as it may suffer tem-
porary blackouts under bridges, in tunnels and be-
tween high-rises.

The accuracy of the laser scanner itself.
The movement of the mobile laser scanner between
time t0 and tn creates a trajectory T D fV0; : : : ; Vng,
where Vi D .tx;i; ty;i; tz;i; x;i; y;i; z;i/ is the 6-DOF
(degree of freedom) pose of the vehicle at time ti with
t0 	 ti 	 tn. Using the trajectory of the vehicle a 3-D
representation of the environment can be obtained by
unwinding the laser measurements M to create the ﬁnal
map P. However, sensor errors in odometry, IMU and
GPS as well as systematic calibration errors and the
accumulation of pose errors during temporary GPS
outages degrade the accuracy of the trajectory and
therefore the point cloud quality. Furthermore, please
note that modern systems easily create thouthands of
3-D scan slices.
These mobile mapping systems extend the early
work on 3-D reconstruction with two 2-D lasers un-
der exploitation of the robot motion [31.84]. One laser
scanner is scanning horizontal, one is mounted verti-
cally. The resultant point cloud is typically registered
using the pose of the robot as corrected by the 2-D
SLAM algorithm, rather than any of the 3-D registration
techniques covered in this chapter. The current state of
the art developed by Bosse et al. [31.85] for improving
overall map quality of mobile mappers in the robotics

Range Sensing
31.4 Navigation and Terrain Classification and Mapping
805
Part C | 31.4
a)
b)
c)
Springs
2-D laser
IMU
Fig. 31.21 (a) Mobile mapping car and (b) Zedebee hand-
held mapper. (c) 3-D point cloud acquired with the Riegl
VMX-250 system. (d) 3-D point cloud from Zedebee
community is to coarsely discretize the time. This re-
sults in a partition of the trajectory into subscans that are
treated rigidly. Then rigid registration algorithms like
the ICP and other solutions to the SLAM problem are
employed.
Figure 31.21 shows a car equipped with the Riegl
VMX-450 mobile mapping system of the company
Riegl laser measurement systems and the Zebedee
handhald mapper from CSIRO. Figure 31.21 shows typ-
ical resulting 3-D point clouds as well.
31.4.2 Urban Navigation
In urban navigation, the environment is structured, with
roads, buildings, sidewalks, and also moving objects –
people and other vehicles. There are two main chal-
lenges: how to register laser scans from a fast-moving
vehicle for consistent mapping, and how to detect mov-
ing objects using range scans (of course, other methods
Fig. 31.22 Elevation map of an urban scene, using 10 
10 cm cells. Obstacles in red, ground plane in green (af-
ter [31.88])
are also used for detecting moving objects, for example,
appearance-based vision).
Outdoor vehicles can use precision GPS, inertial
measurement units, and wheel odometry to keep track
of their position and orientation, typically with an ex-
tended Kalman ﬁlter. This method is good enough
to obviate the need for precise registration matching
among scans, as long as the motion model of the vehi-
cle, and timing from the range scanner, is used to place
each scan reading in its proper position in the world
model. This method also works in relatively easy off-
road terrain such as in the DARPA (Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency) Grand Challenge [31.86]. In
all cases, the reduction of pose estimation error is criti-
cal for good performance [31.87].
Once scan readings are registered using the vehi-
cle pose estimation, they can be put into an elevation
map, and obstacles detected using the slope and verti-
cal extent of the range readings in the cells of the map.
A complication is that there may be multiple levels of
elevation in an urban setting, for example, an overpass
would not be an obstacle if it were high enough. One
proposal is to use multiple elevation clusters within
each cell; this technique is called a multilevel surface
map (MLS, [31.88]). Each cell in the map stores a set
of surfaces represented by a mean height and variance.
Figure 31.22 shows an MLS with a cell size of 10 cm2,
with ground plane and obstacles marked.
For dynamic objects, real-time stereo at 1530 Hz
can capture the motion of the objects. When the stereo
rig is ﬁxed, range background subtraction isolates just
the moving objects [31.89]. When the rig is on a moving
vehicle, the problem is more difﬁcult, since the whole
scene is moving with respect to the rig. It can be solved
by estimating the motion of the rig with respect to the
dominant rigid background of the scene. Let R; t be the
motion of the rig between two frames, estimated by
extracting features and matching them across the two

Part C | 31.4
806
Part C
Sensing and Perception
a)
b)
c)
Fig.31.23a–c Independent motion detection from a moving platform. Reference image on panel (a) is forward-projected
using the motion homography to the image on panel (b); image on panel (c) is the difference with the actual image
temporal frames, using the techniques of Chap. 46. The
homography H.R; t/ of (31.11) provides a direct pro-
jection of the disparity vectors p0 D Œx0; y0; d0; 1 of the
ﬁrst frame to their correspondences H.R; t/p0 under R; t
in the second frame. Using the homography allows the
points in the reference frame to be directly projected
onto the next frame, without translating to 3-D points.
Figure 31.23 shows the projected pixels under rigid mo-
tion from a reference scene. The difference between
the projected and actual pixels gives the independently
moving objects (from [31.90]).
31.4.3 Rough Terrain
Rough outdoor terrain presents two challenges:

There may be no extensive ground plane to charac-
terize driveability and obstacles.

Vegetation that is pliable and driveable may appear
as an obstacle in range images.
Figure 31.24 shows a typical outdoor scene, with
a small (1 m) robot driving through vegetation and
rough ground [31.91]. Range data from stereo vision
Fig. 31.24 Rough terrain, no ground plane, driveable veg-
atation
on the robot will see the top of the vegetation and some
ground points below. The elevation model can be ex-
tended to look at point statistics within each cell, to
capture the notion of a local ground plane and pene-
trability related to vegetation. In [31.92], for example,
the set of proposed features includes:

Major plane slope using a robust ﬁt (Sect. 31.3.2,
3-D Feature Representations and Extraction)

Height difference of max and min heights

Points above the major plane

Density: ratio of points in the cell to rays that pass
through the cell.
The density feature is interesting (and expensive to
compute), and attempts to characterize vegetation such
a grass or bushes, by looking at whether range readings
penetrate an elevation cell. The idea of using vegeta-
tion permeability to range readings has been discussed
in several other projects on off-road driving [31.94–96].
Elevation map cells can be characterized as ob-
stacles or driveable through learning or hand-built
classiﬁers. Among the learning techniques are neu-
ral nets [31.92] and Gaussian mixture models with
Fig. 31.25 Classiﬁcation using point statistics. Red is pla-
nar surface, blue is thin linear surface, green is scattered
penetrable surface (after [31.93])

Range Sensing
References
807
Part C | 31
expectation-maximization learning [31.93]. The latter
work also includes a lower level of interpretation, clas-
sifying surfaces into planar patches (ground plane, solid
obstacles), linear features (telephone wires), and scat-
tered features (vegetation). Figure 31.25 shows some
results from a laser-scanned outdoor scene. Linear fea-
tures such as telephone wires and the telephone pole are
accurately determined, as well as vegetation with high
penetrability.
Some additional problems occur in rough-terrain
navigation. For planar laser rangeﬁnders that are swept
over the terrain by vehicle motion, the precision of vehi-
cle pose estimation is important for accurate reconstruc-
tion. Attitude errors of less than 0:5ı can cause false
positives in obstacle detection, especially for sweeps far
ahead of the vehicle. In [31.87], this problem is solved
by looking at the time of each laser reading, and noting
a correlation between height errors and time difference
in the readings.
Negative obstacles (ditches and cliffs) are difﬁcult
to detect with range information, because the sensor
may not see the bottom of the obstacle. This is espe-
cially true for vehicle-mounted sensors that are not very
high off the ground, and that are looking far ahead. Neg-
ative obstacles can be inferred when there is a gap in the
ground plane, and a plane slanted upward at the back
edge of the gap. Such artifacts can be efﬁciently found
using column search on the disparity image [31.97].
31.5 Conclusions and Further Reading
Range sensing is an active and expanding ﬁeld of re-
search in robotics. The presence of new types of de-
vices – ﬂash ladars, multibeam ladars, on-camera stereo
processing – and the continuing development of robust
algorithms for object reconstruction, localization and
mapping has helped to bring applications out of the lab-
oratory and into the real world. Indoor navigation with
ladars is already being exploited in commercial products
(for example, [31.98]). As the basic capabilities become
more robust, researchers are looking to perform useful
tasks, such as fetching items or doing dishes [31.99].
Another set of challenges are found in less be-
nign environments, such as urban and off-road driv-
ing (DARPA Grand Challenge and Urban Chal-
lenge [31.86]). Stereo vision and laser rangeﬁnding
also will play a role in helping to provide autonomy
for a new generation of more-capable robotic plat-
forms that rely on walking for locomotion [31.100].
The challenges are dealing with motion that is less
smooth than wheeled platforms, environments that con-
tain dynamic obstacles, and task-oriented recognition of
objects.
References
31.1
H. Houshiar, J. Elseberg, D. Borrmann, A. Nüchter:
A study of projections for key point based regis-
tration of panoramic terrestrial 3D laser scans, J.
Geo-Spat. Inf. Sci. 18(1), 11–31 (2015)
31.2
Velodyne:
High
definition
lidar,
http://
velodynelidar.com/ (2015)
31.3
R. Stettner,
H. Bailey, S. Silverman: Three-
dimensional flash Ladar focal planes and time-
dependent imaging, Int. J. High Speed Electron.
Syst. 18(2), 401–406 (2008)
31.4
S.B. Gokturk, H. Yalcin, C. Bamji: A time-of-flight
depth sensor – system description, issues and
solutions, Computer Vis. Pattern Recognit. Work-
shop (CVPRW) (2004)
31.5
T.
Oggier,
M.
Lehmann,
R.
Kaufmannn,
M. Schweizer, M. Richter, P. Metzler, G. Lang,
F. Lustenberger, N. Blanc: An all-solid-state op-
tical range camera for 3D-real-time imaging with
sub-centimeter depth-resolution (SwissRanger),
Proc. SPIE 5249, 534–545 (2003)
31.6
U. Wong, A. Morris, C. Lea, J. Lee, C. Whittaker,
B. Garney, R. Whittaker: Red: Comparative eval-
uation of range sensing technologies for under-
ground void modeling, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011) pp. 3816–3823
31.7
D.D. Lichti: A review of geometric models and
self-calibration
methods
for
terrestrial
laser
scanner, Bol. Cienc. Géod. 16(1), 3–19 (2010)
31.8
G. Iddan, G. Yahav: 3D imaging in the studio (and
elsewhere...), Proc. SPIE 4298 (2003) pp. 48–55
31.9
TriDiCam GmbH: http://www.tridicam.de/en.html
(2015)
31.10
R. Hartley, A. Zisserman: Multiple View Geometry
in Computer Vision (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cam-
bridge 2000)
31.11
S. Barnard, M. Fischler: Computational stereo, ACM
Comput. Surv. 14(4), 553–572 (1982)
31.12
D. Scharstein, R. Szeliski, R. Zabih: A taxonomy
and evaluation of dense two-frame stereo cor-
respondence algorithms, Int. J. Computer Vis.
47(1–3), 7–42 (2002)
31.13
D. Scharstein, R. Szeliski: Middlebury College
Stereo
Vision
Research
Page,
http://vision.
middlebury.edu/stereo (2007)

Part C | 31
808
Part C
Sensing and Perception
31.14
R. Zabih, J. Woodfill: Non-parametric local trans-
forms for computing visual correspondence, Proc.
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., Vol. 2 (1994) pp. 151–158
31.15
O. Faugeras, B. Hotz, H. Mathieu, T. Viéville,
Z. Zhang, P. Fua, E. Théron, L. Moll, G. Berry,
J. Vuillemin, P. Bertin, C. Proy: Real time corre-
lation based stereo: algorithm implementations
and applications, Int. J. Computer Vis. 47(1–3),
229–246 (2002)
31.16
M. Okutomi, T. Kanade: A multiple-baseline
stereo, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.
15(4), 353–363 (1993)
31.17
L. Matthies: Stereo vision for planetary rovers:
stochastic modeling to near realtime implemen-
tation, Int. J. Comput. Vis 8(1), 71–91 (1993)
31.18
R. Bolles, J. Woodfill: Spatiotemporal consistency
checking of passive range data, Proc. Int. Symp.
Robotics Res. (1993)
31.19
P. Fua: A parallel stereo algorithm that produces
dense depth maps and preserves image features,
Mach. Vis. Appl. 6(1), 35–49 (1993)
31.20
H. Moravec: Visual mapping by a robot rover, Proc.
Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI) (1979) pp. 598–600
31.21
A. Adan, F. Molina, L. Morena: Disordered patterns
projection for 3D motion recovering, Proc. Int.
Conf. 3D Data Process. Vis. Transm. (2004) pp. 262–
269
31.22
Videre Design LLC: http://www.videredesign.com
(2007)
31.23
Point Grey Research Inc.: http://www.ptgrey.com
(2015)
31.24
C. Zach, A. Klaus, M. Hadwiger, K. Karner: Accurate
dense stereo reconstruction using graphics hard-
ware, Proc. EUROGRAPHICS (2003) pp. 227–234
31.25
R. Yang, M. Pollefeys: Multi-resolution real-time
stereo on commodity graphics hardware, Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis Pattern Recognit., Vol. 1 (2003)
pp. 211–217
31.26
K. Konolige: Small vision system. Hardware and
implementation, Proc. Int. Symp. Robotics Res.
(1997) pp. 111–116
31.27
Focus Robotics Inc.: http://www.focusrobotics.
com (2015)
31.28
TYZX Inc.: http://www.tyzx.com (2015)
31.29
S.K. Nayar, Y. Nakagawa: Shape from Focus, IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 16(8), 824–831
(1994)
31.30
M. Pollefeys, R. Koch, L. Van Gool: Self-calibration
and metric reconstruction inspite of varying and
unknown intrinsic camera parameters, Int. J.
Computer Vis. 32(1), 7–25 (1999)
31.31
A. Hertzmann, S.M. Seitz: Example-based photo-
metric stereo: Shape reconstruction with general,
Varying BRDFs, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. In-
tell. 27(8), 1254–1264 (2005)
31.32
A. Lobay, D.A. Forsyth: Shape from texture without
boundaries, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 67(1), 71–91 (2006)
31.33
Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_
fastest-selling_products (2015)
31.34
K. Khoshelham, S.O. Elberink: Accuracy and res-
olution of kinect depth data for indoor mapping
applications, Sensors 12(5), 1437–1454 (2012)
31.35
P.J. Besl, N.D. McKay: A method for registration of
3D shapes, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.
14(2), 239–256 (1992)
31.36
Y. Chen, G. Medioni: Object modeling by registra-
tion of multiple range images, Image Vis. Comput.
10(3), 145–155 (1992)
31.37
Z. Zhang: Iterative Point Matching for Registration
of Free–Form Curves, Tech. Rep. Ser., Vol. RR-1658
(INRIA–Sophia Antipolis, Valbonne Cedex 1992)
31.38
S. Rusinkiewicz, M. Levoy: Efficient variants of the
ICP algorithm, Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. 3D Digital Imag-
ing Model. (2001) pp. 145–152
31.39
J.L. Bentley: Multidimensional binary search trees
used for associative searching, Commun. ACM
18(9), 509–517 (1975)
31.40
J.H. Friedman, J.L. Bentley, R.A. Finkel: An al-
gorithm for finding best matches in logarithmic
expected time, ACM Trans. on Math. Software 3(3),
209–226 (1977)
31.41
M. Greenspan, M. Yurick: Approximate K-D tree
search for efficient ICP, Proc. 4th IEEE Int. Conf.
Recent Adv. 3D Digital Imaging Model. (2003)
pp. 442–448
31.42
L. Hyafil, R.L. Rivest: Constructing optimal binary
decision trees is NP-complete, Inf. Proc. Lett. 5,
15–17 (1976)
31.43
N.J. Mitra, N. Gelfand, H. Pottmann, L. Guibas:
Registration of point cloud data from a geometric
optimization perspective, Proc. Eurographics/ACM
SIGGRAPH Symp. Geom. Process. (2004) pp. 22–31
31.44
A. Nüchter, K. Lingemann, J. Hertzberg: Cached k-
d tree search for ICP Algorithms, Proc. 6th IEEE Int.
Conf. Recent Adv. 3D Digital Imaging Model. (2007)
pp. 419–426
31.45
K.S. Arun, T.S. Huang, S.D. Blostein: Least-squares
fitting of two 3-D point sets, IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell. 9(5), 698–700 (1987)
31.46
B.K.P. Horn, H.M. Hilden, S. Negahdaripour:
Closed–form solution of absolute orientation us-
ing orthonormal matrices, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 5(7),
1127–1135 (1988)
31.47
B.K.P. Horn: Closed–form solution of absolute ori-
entation using unit quaternions, J. Opt. Soc. Am.
A 4(4), 629–642 (1987)
31.48
M.W. Walker, L. Shao, R.A. Volz: Estimating 3-d
location parameters using dual number quater-
nions, J. Comput. Vis. Image Underst. 54, 358–367
(1991)
31.49
A. Nüchter, J. Elseberg, P. Schneider, D. Paulus:
Study of parameterizations for the rigid body
transformations of the scan registration problem,
J. Comput. Vis. Image Underst. 114(8), 963–980
(2010)
31.50
M.A. Fischler, R.C. Bolles: Random sample con-
sensus: A paradigm for model fitting with appli-
cations to image analysis and automated cartog-
raphy, Comm. ACM 24(6), 381–395 (1981)
31.51
N.J. Mitra, A. Nguyen: Estimating surface normals
in noisy point cloud data, Proc. Symp. Comput.
Geom. (SCG) (2003) pp. 322–328
31.52
H. Badino, D. Huber, Y. Park, T. Kanade: Fast and
accurate computation of surface normals from

Range Sensing
References
809
Part C | 31
range images, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 3084–3091
31.53
D. Huber: Automatic Three-Dimensional Model-
ing from Reality, Ph.D. Thesis (Robotics Institute,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburg 2002)
31.54
R.B. Rusu: Semantic 3D Object Maps for Every-
day Manipulation in Human Living Environments,
Dissertation (TU Munich, Munich 2009)
31.55
Point
Cloud
Library
(PCL):
http://www.
pointclouds.org (2015)
31.56
J. Böhm, S. Becker: Automatic marker-free regis-
tration of terrestrial laser scans using reflectance
features, Proc. 8th Conf. Opt. 3D Meas. Tech. (2007)
pp. 338–344
31.57
N. Engelhard, F. Endres, J. Hess, J. Sturm, W. Bur-
gard: Real-time 3D visual SLAM with a hand-
held camera, Proc. RGB-D Workshop 3D Percept.
Robotics at Eur. Robotics Forum (2011)
31.58
R. Schnabel, R. Wahl, R. Klein: Efficient RANSAC for
point-cloud shape detection, Computer Graph.
Forum (2007)
31.59
A. Hoover, G. Jean-Baptiste, X. Jiang, P.J. Flynn,
H. Bunke, D. Goldgof, K. Bowyer, D. Eggert,
A. Fitzgibbon, R. Fisher: An experimental com-
parison of range segmentation algorithms, IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 18(7), 673–689
(1996)
31.60
U. Bauer, K. Polthier: Detection of planar re-
gions in volume data for topology optimization,
Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Adv. Geom. Model. Process.
(2008)
31.61
P.V.C. Hough: Method and means for recognizing
complex patterns, Patent US 306 9654 (1962)
31.62
D. Borrmann, J. Elseberg, A. Nüchter, K. Linge-
mann: The 3D Hough transform for plane de-
tection in point clouds – A review and a new
accumulator design, J. 3D Res. 2(2), 1–13 (2011)
31.63
R. Lakaemper, L.J. Latecki: Extended EM for pla-
nar approximation of 3D data, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006)
31.64
O. Wulf, K.O. Arras, H.I. Christensen, B.A. Wagner:
2D Mapping of cluttered indoor environments
by means of 3D perception, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 4204–4209
31.65
G. Yu, M. Grossberg, G. Wolberg, I. Stamos: Think
globally, cluster locally:A unified framework for
range segmentation, Proc. 4th Int. Symp. 3D Data
Process. Vis. Transm. (2008)
31.66
W.E. Lorensen, H.E. Cline: Marching Cubes: A high
resolution 3D surface construction algorithm,
Computer Graph. 21(4), 163–169 (1987)
31.67
M. Alexa, J. Behr, D. Cohen-Or, S. Fleishman,
D. Levin, C.T. Silva: Computing and rendering
point set surfaces, IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph.
9(1), 3–15 (2003)
31.68
H. Hoppe, T. DeRose, T. Duchamp, J. McDonald,
W. Stuetzle: Surface reconstruction from unorga-
nized points, Comput. Graph. 26(2), 71–78 (1992)
31.69
S. Melax: A Simple, fast and effective polygon re-
duction algorithm, Game Dev. 5(11), 44–49 (1998)
31.70
M. Garland, P. Heckbert: Surface simplification
using quadric error metrics, Proc. SIGGRAPH (1997)
31.71
S. Izadi, D. Kim, O. Hilliges, D. Molyneaux, R. New-
combe, P. Kohli, J. Shotton, S. Hodges, D. Free-
man, A. Davison, A. Fitzgibbon: KinectFusion:
Real-time 3D reconstruction and interaction using
a moving depth camera, ACM Symp. User Interface
Softw. Technol. (2011)
31.72
J.D. Foley, A. van Dam, S.K. Feiner, J.F. Hughes:
Computer Graphics: Principles and Practice, 2nd
edn. (Addison-Wesley, Reading 1996)
31.73
J. Elseberg, D. Borrmann, A. Nüchter: One billion
points in the cloud – An octree for efficient pro-
cessing of 3D laser scans, ISPRS J. Photogramm.
Remote Sens. 76, 76–88 (2013)
31.74
A. Hornung, K.M. Wurm, M. Bennewitz, C. Stach-
niss, W. Burgard: OctoMap: An efficient proba-
bilistic 3D mapping framework based on octrees,
Auton. Robots 34(3), 189–206 (2013)
31.75
F. Lu, E. Milios: Globally consistent range scan
alignment for environment mapping, Auton.
Robots 4, 333–349 (1997)
31.76
K. Konolige: Large-scale map-making, Proc. Natl.
Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI) (2004) pp. 457–463
31.77
A. Kelly, R. Unnikrishnan: Efficient construction of
globally consistent ladar maps using pose net-
work topology and nonlinear programming, Proc.
Int. Symp. Robotics Res. (2003)
31.78
D.
Borrmann,
J.
Elseberg,
K.
Lingemann,
A. Nüchter, J. Hertzberg: Globally consistent
3d mapping with scan matching, J. Robotics
Auton. Syst. 56(2), 130–142 (2008)
31.79
E. Grimson, T. Lozano-Pérez, D.P. Huttenlocher:
Object Recognition by Computer: The Role of Ge-
ometric Constraints (MIT Press, Cambridge 1990)
31.80
Z. Zhang: Parameter estimation techniques: a tu-
torial with application to conic fitting, Image Vis.
Comput., Vol. 15 (1997) pp. 59–76
31.81
P. Benko, G. Kos, T. Varady, L. Andor, R.R. Martin:
Constrained fitting in reverse engineering, Com-
puter Aided Geom. Des. 19, 173–205 (2002)
31.82
M. Levoy, K. Pulli, B. Curless, S. Rusinkiewicz,
D. Koller, L. Pereira, M. Ginzton, S. Anderson,
J. Davis, J. Ginsberg, J. Shade, D. Fulk: The digital
Michelangelo project: 3D scanning of large stat-
ues, Proc. 27th Conf. Computer Graph. Interact.
Tech. (SIGGRAPH) (2000) pp. 131–144
31.83
I. Stamos, P. Allen: 3-D model construction using
range and image data, Proc. IEEE Conf. Computer
Vis. Pattern Recognit., Vol. 1 (2000) pp. 531–536
31.84
S. Thrun, W. Burgard, D. Fox: A real-time algo-
rithm for mobile robot mapping with applications
to multi-robot and 3D mapping, Proc. IEEE Inf.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (2000) pp. 321–328
31.85
M. Bosse, R. Zlot, P. Flick: Zebedee: Design of
a spring-mounted 3-D range sensor with appli-
cation to mobile mapping, IEEE Trans. Robotics
28(5), 1104–1119 (2012)
31.86
The DARPA Grand Challenge: http://archive.darpa.
mil/grandchallenge05/gcorg/index.html (2015)
31.87
S.
Thrun,
M.
Montemerlo,
H.
Dahlkamp,
D. Stavens, A. Aron, J. Diebel, P. Fong, J. Gale,
M. Halpenny, G. Hoffmann, K. Lau, C. Oakley,
M. Palatucci, V. Pratt, P. Stang, S. Strohband,

Part C | 31
810
Part C
Sensing and Perception
C. Dupont, L.-E. Jendrossek, C. Koelen, C. Markey,
C. Rummel, J. van Niekerk, E. Jensen, P. Alessan-
drini, G. Bradski, B. Davies, S. Ettinger, A. Kaehler,
A. Nefian, P. Mahoney: Stanley: The robot that
won the DARPA grand challenge, J. Field Robot.
23(9), 661–692 (2006)
31.88
R. Triebel, P. Pfaff, W. Burgard: Multi-level surface
maps for outdoor terrain mapping and loop clos-
ing, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intel. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2006)
31.89
C. Eveland, K. Konolige, R. Bolles: Background
modeling for segmentation of video-rate stereo
sequences, Proc. Int. Conf. Computer Vis. Pattern
Recog. (1998) pp. 266–271
31.90
M. Agrawal, K. Konolige, L. Iocchi: Real-time de-
tection of independent motion using stereo, IEEE
Workshop Motion (2005) pp. 207–214
31.91
K. Konolige, M. Agrawal, R.C. Bolles, C. Cowan,
M. Fischler, B. Gerkey: Outdoor mapping and
Navigation using stereo vision, Intl. Symp. Exp.
Robotics (ISER) (2006)
31.92
M. Happold, M. Ollis, N. Johnson: Enhancing
supervised terrain classification with predictive
unsupervised learning, Robotics: Sci. Syst. Phila.
(2006)
31.93
J. Lalonde, N. Vandapel, D. Huber, M. Hebert:
Natural
terrain
classification
using
three-
dimensional
ladar
data
for
ground
robot
mobility,
J.
Field
Robotics
23(10),
839–862
(2006)
31.94
R. Manduchi, A. Castano, A. Talukder, L. Matthies:
Obstacle detection and terrain classification for
autonomous off-road navigation, Auton. Robots
18, 81–102 (2005)
31.95
J.-F. Lalonde, N. Vandapel, M. Hebert: Data struc-
ture for efficient processing in 3-D, Robotics: Sci.
Syst. (2005)
31.96
A. Kelly, A. Stentz, O. Amidi, M. Bode, D. Bradley,
A.
Diaz-Calderon,
M.
Happold,
H.
Herman,
R. Mandelbaum, T. Pilarski, P. Rander, S. Thayer,
N. Vallidis, R. Warner: Toward reliable off road
autonomous vehicles operating in challenging
environments, Int. J. Robotics Res. 25(5/6), 449–
483 (2006)
31.97
P. Bellutta, R. Manduchi, L. Matthies, K. Owens,
A. Rankin: Terrain perception for Demo III, Proc.
IEEE Intell. Veh. Conf. (2000) pp. 326–331
31.98
KARTO: Software for robots on the move, http://
www.kartorobotics.com (2015)
31.99
The Stanford Artificial Intelligence Robot: http://
www.cs.stanford.edu/group/stair (2015)
31.100
Perception for Humanoid Robots: https://www.ri.
cmu.edu/research_project_detail.html?project_
id=595 (2015)

Multimedia Contents 3-D Vision fo
811
Part C | 32
32. 3-D Vision for Navigation
and Grasping
Danica Kragic, Kostas Daniilidis
In this chapter, we describe algorithms for
three-dimensional (3-D) vision that help robots
accomplish navigation and grasping. To model
cameras, we start with the basics of perspective
projection and distortion due to lenses. This pro-
jection from a 3-D world to a two-dimensional
(2-D) image can be inverted only by using infor-
mation from the world or multiple 2-D views. If we
know the 3-D model of an object or the location
of 3-D landmarks, we can solve the pose estima-
tion problem from one view. When two views are
available, we can compute the 3-D motion and
triangulate to reconstruct the world up to a scale
factor. When multiple views are given either as
sparse viewpoints or a continuous incoming video,
then the robot path can be computer and point
tracks can yield a sparse 3-D representation of the
32.1
Geometric Vision..................................
812
32.1.1
Calibration................................
812
32.1.2
Pose Estimation or PnP ..............
813
32.1.3
Triangulation ............................
814
32.1.4
Moving Stereo ...........................
815
32.1.5
Structure from Motion................
815
32.1.6
Multiple Views SfM ....................
818
32.2 3-D Vision for Grasping........................
820
32.3 Conclusion and Further Reading...........
822
Video-References.........................................
822
References...................................................
822
world. In order to grasp objects, we can estimate
3-D pose of the end effector or 3-D coordinates of
the graspable points on the object.
With the rapid progress and cost reduction in digital
imaging, cameras became the standard and probably the
cheapest sensor on a robot. Unlike positioning (global
positioning system – GPS), inertial (IMU), and dis-
tance sensors (sonar, laser, infrared) cameras produce
the highest bandwidth of data. Exploiting information
useful for a robot from such a bit stream is less explicit
than in case of GPS or a laser scanner but semanti-
cally richer. In the years since the ﬁrst edition of the
handbook, we had signiﬁcant advances in hardware
and algorithms. RGB-D sensors like the Primesense
Kinect enabled a new generation of full model re-
construction systems [32.1] with an arbitrary camera
motion. Google’s project Tango [32.2] established the
state of the art in visual odometry using the latest fu-
sion methods between visual and inertial data ([32.3]
and
VIDEO 120 ). 3-D modeling became a commod-
ity software (see, for example, 123D Catch App from
Autodesk) and the widely used open source Bundler
([32.4]
VIDEO 121 ) has been possible by advances in
wide baseline matching and bundle adjustment. Meth-
ods for wide baseline matching have been proposed
for several variations of pose and structure from mo-
tion [32.5]. Last, the problem of local minima for non-
minimal overconstrained solvers has been addressed by
a group of method using Branch and Bound global
optimization of a sum of fractions subject to convex
constraints [32.6] or an L1-norm of the error func-
tion [32.7].
Let us consider the two main robot perception domains:
navigation and grasping. Assume for example the sce-
nario that a robot vehicle is given the task of going
from place A to place B given as instruction only inter-
mediate visual landmarks and/or GPS waypoints. The
robot starts at A and has to decide where is a driv-
able path. Such a decision can be accomplished through

Part C | 32.1
812
Part C
Sensing and Perception
the detection of obstacles from at least two images by
estimating a depth or occupancy map with a stereo al-
gorithm. While driving, the robot wants to estimate its
trajectory which can be accomplished with a matching
and structure from motion algorithm. The result of the
trajectory can be used to build a lay out of the environ-
ment through dens matching and triangulation which
in turn can be used as a reference for a subsequent
pose estimation. At each time instance the robot has to
parse the surrounding environment for risks like pedes-
trians, or for objects it is searching for like a trash-can.
It has to become aware of loop closing or a reentry if
the robot has been kidnaped or blind for a while. This
can be accomplished through object and scene recogni-
tion yielding the what and where of objects around the
robot. In an extreme scenario, a vehicle can be left to
explore a city and build a semantic 3-D map as well as
a trajectory of all places it visited, the ultimate visual
simultaneous localization and semantic mapping prob-
lem. In the case of grasping, the robot detects an object
given a learnt representation, and subsequently, it has
to estimate the pose of the object and in some cases its
shape by triangulation. When a camera is not mounted
on an end-effector, the absolute orientation between the
hand the object has to be found.
In the next section we will present the geometric
foundations for 3-D vision and in the last section we
describe approaches for grasping.
32.1 Geometric Vision
Let us start by introducing the projection of the world
to an image plane. Assume that a point in the world
.X; Y; Z/ has coordinates .Xci; Yci; Zci/ with respect to
the coordinate system of a camera ci related to each
other by the following transformation
0
@
Xci
Yci
Zci
1
A D Ri
0
@
X
Y
Z
1
A C Ti ;
(32.1)
where Ri is a rotation matrix whose columns are the
world axes with respect to the camera. The translation
vector Ti is starting from the origin of the camera and
ending at the origin of the world coordinate system.
The rotation matrix is orthogonal RTR D 1 with deter-
minant one. We assume that the center of projection is
the origin of the coordinate system and that the optical
axis is the Zci axis of the camera. If we assume that the
image plane is the plane Zci D 1 then the image coordi-
nates .xi; yi/ read
xi D Xci
Zci
;
yi D Yci
Zci
:
(32.2)
In practice, what we measure are the pixel coordinates
.ui; vi/ in the image which are related to image coordi-
nates .xi; yi/ with the afﬁne transformation
ui D f ˛xi C ˇyi C cu ;
vi D fyi C cv ;
(32.3)
where f is the distance of the image plane to the
projection center measured in pixels. It is also called fo-
cal length, because they are considered approximately
equal. The aspect ratio ˛ is a scaling induced by
nonsquare sensor cells or different sampling rates hor-
izontally and vertically. The skew factor ˇ accounts
for a shearing induced by a nonperfectly frontal image
plane. The image center cu; cv is the point of intersec-
tion of the image plane with the optical axis called the
image center. These ﬁve parameters are called intrinsic
parameters and the process of recovering them is called
intrinsic calibration. Upon recovering them we can talk
about a calibrated system and we can work with the im-
age coordinates .xi; yi/ instead of the pixel coordinates
.ui; vi/. In many vision systems in particular on mobile
robots, wide-angle lenses introduce a radial distortion
around the image center which can be modelled poly-
nomially
xdist
i
D xi.1 C k1r C k2r2 C k3r3 C : : :/
ydist
i
D yi.1 C k1r C k2r2 C k3r3 C : : :/
where
r2 D x2
i C y2
i ;
where we temporarily assumed that the image cen-
ter is at (0,0). The image coordinates .xi; yi/ in
((32.3)) have to be replaced with the distorted coordi-
nates .xdist; ydist/.
32.1.1 Calibration
Recovering the intrinsic parameters when we can make
multiple views of a reference pattern like a checker
board without variation of the intrinsic parameters
has become a standard procedure using tools like the
MATLAB calibration toolbox or Zhang’s OpenCV cal-
ibration function [32.8]. When intrinsics like the focal
length vary during operation and viewing reference pat-
terns is not practically feasible, we rely on the state
of the art method by Pollefeys et al. [32.9, 10]. When
all intrinsic are unknown on the Kruppa equations and

3-D Vision for Navigation and Grasping
32.1 Geometric Vision
813
Part C | 32.1
several stratiﬁed self-calibration approaches [32.11, 12]
which require at least three views. Apart radial dis-
tortion, the projection relations shown above can be
summarized in matrix form. By denoting
ui D .ui; vi; 1/
and
X D .X; Y; Z; 1/
we obtain
iui D Ki

Ri
Ti

X D PX ;
(32.4)
where i D Zci is the depth of point X in camera coordi-
nates and P is the 3  4 projection matrix. The depth i
which can be eliminated to obtain two equations relat-
ing the world to the pixel coordinates.
32.1.2 Pose Estimation or PnP
When we have landmarks in the world with known
positions X and we can measure their projections, the
problem of recovering the unknown rotation and trans-
lation in the calibrated case is called pose estimation
or the Prespective-n-Point problem (PnP). Of course,
it presumes the identiﬁcation of the world points in
the image. In robotics, the pose estimation is a vari-
ant of the localization problem in a known environment.
When grasping objects of known shape PnP yields the
target pose for an end-effector module the grasping
point positions. We assume that a camera is cali-
brated and that measurements of N points are given in
world coordinates XjD1::N and calibrated image coor-
dinates xjD1::N. Let us assume two scene points and
denote the known angle between their projections x1
and x2 as ı12 (Fig. 32.1). Let us denote the squared dis-
tance kXi  Xjk2 with d2
ij and the lengths of Xj with d2
j .
Then cosine law reads
d2
i C d2
j  2didj cos ıij D d2
ij :
(32.5)
If we can recover di and dj the rest will be an absolute
orientation problem
djxj D RXj C T
(32.6)
to recover translation and rotation between camera and
world coordinate system.
Minimal Solution
The cosine law has two unknowns d1 and d2 so with
three points we should be able to solve for the pose es-
timation problem. Indeed, three points yield a system of
three quadratic equations in three unknowns, so it will
have a maximum of eight solutions.
We follow here the analysis of the classic solution
in [32.13] and set d2 D ud1 and d3 D vd1 and solve all
three equations for d1
d2
1 D
d2
23
u2 C v 2  2uv cos ı23
;
d2
1 D
d2
13
1 C v 2  2v cos ı13
;
d2
1 D
d2
12
u2 C 1  2u cos ı12
;
which is equivalent to two quadratic equations in u
and v
d2
12.1 C v 2  2v cos ı13/
D d2
13.u2 C 1  2u cos ı12/ ;
(32.7)
d2
13.u2 C v 2  2uv cos ı23/
D d2
23.1 C v 2  2v cos ı13/ :
(32.8)
Solving (32.8) for u2 and substituting in (32.7) allows
solving E1 for u because u appears linearly. Substitut-
ing u back in (32.8) yields a quartic in v which can
have as many as four real roots. For each v we obtain
two roots for u through any of the quadratic equations
yielding a maximum of eight solutions [32.13, 14]. Pop-
ular pose estimation algorithms are based either on an
iterative method [32.15, 16] or linear versions using
auxiliary unknowns of higher dimension [32.17, 18].
A more recent method [32.19] for n world points ex-
presses 3-D points as the barycentric coordinates with
d1
d3
δ23
δ13
d13
d23
d12
d2
Fig. 32.1 Pose estimation problem: A camera seeing 3
points at unknown distances d1, d2, and d3 with known
angles between the rays and known point distances
d12; d13; d23

Part C | 32.1
814
Part C
Sensing and Perception
respect to four virtual control points
Xi D
4
X
jD1
˛ijCj ;
where
4
X
jD1
˛ij D 1 :
A rigid transformation to the camera coordinate system
leaves the barycentric coordinates invariant and a per-
spective projection yields
ixi D
4
X
jD1
˛ij

Xci; Yci; Zci
T :
Eliminating i yields two linear equations for each
point
4
X
jD1
˛ijCxcj D ˛ijxiCzcj
4
X
jD1
˛ijCycj D ˛ijyiCzcj
with the coordinate triples of the control points in the
camera frame being the 12 unknowns. This is a lin-
ear homogeneous system with the solution being the
nullspace of a 2n  12 matrix. The unknown control
points are found up to a scale factor which is easily ﬁxed
because we know the inter point distances. The pose is
found from absolute orientation between control points
in the camera and the world frame. This yields a very
efﬁcient solution for n  6 points but leaves you with
the initial choice of the control points as a factor affect-
ing the solution.
In case that n  4 points lie on a plane we can
compute the homography H between the world and the
camera plane [32.8]. Assuming Z D 0 is the world plane
the homography reads
0
@
u
v
w
1
A 
 K

r1
r2
T

„
ƒ‚
…
H
0
@
X
Y
W
1
A ;
where r1;2 are the ﬁrst two columns of the rotation ma-
trix and 
 denotes the projective equivalence, namely,
for any two points p and p0 in the projective plane p 
 p0
iff p D p0 for real  ¤ 0. Hence the ﬁrst two columns
of K1H
K1H D

h0
1
h0
2
h0
3

have to be orthogonal. We seek thus an orthogonal ma-
trix R that is the closest to 
h0
1
h0
2
h0
1  h0
2

arg min
R2SO.3/
kR 

h0
1
h0
2
h0
1  h0
2

k2
F :
If the singular value decomposition (SVD) of

h0
1
h0
2
h0
1  h0
2

D USVT ;
then the solution is [32.20]
R D U
0
@
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
det.UVT/
1
A VT :
(32.9)
The diagonal matrix is a projection from the orthogonal
group O.3/ to the special orthogonal group SO.3/.
Last, we present a method [32.21] for n points that
computes all local minima of the over constrained PnP
problem. This involves solving the ﬁrst derivatives ex-
plicitly with respect to the pose unknowns. To achieve
this, following observation allows the elimination of the
depths  and the translation. Rigid transformation x D
RX C T can be written for n points as a linear system
for jD1::n and the translation T
0
B@
x1
I
:::
:::
xn
I
1
CA
0
BBB@
1
:::
n
T
1
CCCA D
0
B@
RX1
:::
RXn
1
CA :
We can solve for the unknown depths-translation vector
and back substitute it into a least squares minimization
problem with respect to rotation parameters. It turns out
that if we use the three Rodriguez parameters as ro-
tation parametrization the necessary conditions for an
extremum (vanishing derivatives) turn out to be three
cubic equations [32.21]. Last we would like to point out
to the reader that a nonlinear function of the rotation
matrix can also be solved as an optimization problem
on the Lie-group SO(3) [32.22–24] for the case of line
correspondences.
32.1.3 Triangulation
When we know both the intrinsics and extrinsics or
their summarization in matrix P and we measure a point
we cannot recover its depth from just one camera posi-
tion. Assuming that we have the projection of the same
point X in two cameras
1u1 D P1
X
1

;
2u2 D P2
X
1

;
(32.10)
with known projection matrices P1 and P2 we can re-
cover the position X in space, a process well known

3-D Vision for Navigation and Grasping
32.1 Geometric Vision
815
Part C | 32.1
as triangulation. Observe that we can achieve triangula-
tion without decomposing the projection matrices into
intrinsic and extrinsic parameters, we neeed though to
remove the distortion in order to write them as above.
Having correspondences of the same point in two
cameras with known projection matrices Pl and Pr we
can solve the two projection equations for the world
point X. It is worth noting that each point provides two
independent equations so that triangulation becomes
an overconstrained problem for two views. This is not
a contradiction since two rays do not intersect in gen-
eral in space unless they satisfy the epipolar constraint
as presented in the next paragraph. The following ma-
trix in the left hand side has in general rank 4 unless
the epipolar constraint is satisﬁed in which case it has
rank 3.
0
BB@
xPl.3;W/  Pl.1;W/
yPl.3;W/  Pl.2;W/
xPr.3;W/  Pr.1;W/
yPr.3;W/  Pr.2;W/
1
CCA
0
BB@
X
Y
Z
1
1
CCA D 0 ;
(32.11)
where P.i; W/ means the i-th row of matrix P.
Obviously, the homogeneous system above can be
transformed into an inhomogeneous linear system with
unknowns .X; Y; Z/. Otherwise it can be solved by ﬁnd-
ing the vector closest to the null-space of the 4  4
matrix above using SVD. A thorough treatment of tri-
angulation is the classic [32.25].
32.1.4 Moving Stereo
Imagine now that a rigid stereo system consisting of
cameras cl (left) and cr (right)
uli 
 PlXi ;
(32.12)
uri 
 PrXi ;
(32.13)
is attached to a moving robot and observe this system at
two time instances
X0 D R1X1 C T1 ;
(32.14)
where X0 are point coordinates with respect to the world
coordinate system, usually assumed aligned with one of
the camera instances, and X1 are the coordinates of the
same point with respect to the camera rig, after a mo-
tion .R1; T1/. To estimate the motion of the rig, we
have to solve two correspondence problems, ﬁrst, be-
tween left and right image, and second, between left
(or right) at the ﬁrst time instance and left (or right, re-
spectively) at the second time instance. The left to right
correspondence enable the solution of the triangulation
problem at each time instance. Motion can be obtained
then by solving equations (32.14) for .R1; T1/, a prob-
lem called absolute orientation. Alternatively one can
avoid the second triangulation and solve the pose es-
timation problem between triangulated points in 3-D
and points in the left image only. The most popular vi-
sual odometry system today is libviso [32.26] and is
based on a moving stereo rig (
VIDEO 122 ).
Absolute Orientation
The treatment for moving stereo will be short and the
reader is referred to a similar treatment in the chapter
about range sensing. We assume that correspondences
between two time instances have been established based
on tracking in the images so that we can formulate equa-
tions of the form
X2 D RX1 C T :
The standard way [32.20, 27] to solve this problem is
to eliminate the translation by subtracting the centroids
yielding
X2  X2 D R.X1  X1/ :
We need at least three points in total to obtain at least
two noncollinear mean-free X  NX vectors. If we con-
catenate the mean free vectors for n points into an n  3
matrix A1;2 we can formulate the following minimiza-
tion of the Frobenius norm
min
R2SO.3/ kA2  RA1kF ;
which is known as the Procrustes problem. It can be
shown [32.20] that the solution is obtained through
SVD as in (32.9) where U, V are obtained from the sin-
gular value decomposition
A2AT
1 D USVT :
Solutions are usually obtained with RANSAC by sam-
pling triples of points and veriﬁcation with the Pro-
crustes method.
32.1.5 Structure from Motion
Relax now the assumption that projection matrices are
known and remain with measuring and matching cor-
responding points u1 and u2. This is the well known
structure from motion problem or more precisely struc-
ture and 3-D-motion from 2-D motion. In photogram-
metry, it is well known as relative orientation problem.
Even after eliminating the ’s from equations (32.12)

Part C | 32.1
816
Part C
Sensing and Perception
or by writing them in projective equivalence form
u1 
 P1
X
1

;
u2 
 P2
X
1

;
(32.15)
we realize that we if .X; P1; P2/ is a solution than
.HX; P1H1; P2H1/ is a solution, too, where H an in-
vertible 44 real matrix or in other words a collineation
in P 3. Even if we align the world coordinate system
with the coordinate system of the ﬁrst camera, which
practice is common
u1 

I
0

X ;
u2 
 P2X ;
(32.16)
we remain with the same ambiguity where H is of the
form
H 
0
BB@
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
h41
h42
h43
h44
1
CCA ;
(32.17)
with h44 ¤ 0. This ambiguity is possible when the
projection matrices are arbitrary rank 3 real matrices
without any constraint on their elements. If we assume
that we have calibrated our cameras then the projection
matrices depend only on displacements
u1 

I
0

X ;
u2 

R
T

X ;
(32.18)
and the only remaining ambiguity is the scale ambi-
guity where H looks like an identity matrix except
h44 D s ¤ 1 being the scale factor. In other words if
.R; T; X/ is a solution then .R; sT; 1=sX/ is a solu-
tion, too. These remarks generalize in multiple views.
Because, in robotics the .R; T/ matrices correspond
to location and X to mapping of the environment, the
problem has the more proper term SLAM: Simultane-
ous localization and mapping. However, because the
term SLAM has been used with a variety of sensors
like sonar and laser range scanners, the term monoc-
ular SLAM is better suited to describe structure from
motion from multiple views [32.28].
Epipolar Geometry
This is probably one of the most studied problems in
computer vision. We constrain ourselves to the cali-
brated case which is most relevant to robotics appli-
cations. The necessary and sufﬁcient condition for the
intersection of the two rays Rx1 and x2 is that the two
rays are coplanar with the baseline T
xT
2.T  Rx1/ D 0 ;
(32.19)
which is the epipolar constraint (Fig. 32.2). To avoid the
scale ambiguity we assume that T is a unit vector. We
proceed by summarizing the unknowns into one matrix
E D OTR
(32.20)
where OT is the 3  3 skew-symmetric matrix to the vec-
tor T. The E matrix is called the essential matrix. The
epipolar constraint reads then
xT
2Ex1 D 0 ;
(32.21)
which is the equation of a line in the x2 plane with co-
efﬁcients Ex1 or a coefﬁcient of a line in the x1 plane
with coefﬁcients ETx2. These lines are called epipo-
lar and form pencils whose centers are the epipoles e1
and e2, in the ﬁrst and second image plane respectively.
The epipoles are the intersections of the baseline with
the two image planes, hence e2 
 T and e1 
 RTT.
Looking at the equations of the epipolar lines we can
immediately infer that ETe1 D 0 and Ee2 D 0.
The set of all essential matrices
E D
n
E 2 R33 j E D bTR;
where T 2 S2 and R 2 SO(3)

has been characterized as a manifold of dimension
5 [32.29]. It has been proven [32.30] that
Proposition 32.1
A matrix E 2 R33 is essential if and only if it has two
singular values equal to each other and third singular
value equal zero.
RX1
Rx1
x2
X2
T
Fig. 32.2 A point is perspectively projected to calibrated
image vectors Rx1 and x2 which are coplanar with base-
line T

3-D Vision for Navigation and Grasping
32.1 Geometric Vision
817
Part C | 32.1
We present here Nister’s method [32.31] for recovering
an essential matrix from ﬁve point correspondences and
which gained in popularity because of its suitability for
RANSAC methods.
Minimal Case
We expand the epipolar constraint in terms of homoge-
neous coordinates x1 D .x1; y1; z1/ and x2 D .x2; y2; z2/
(when the points are not at inﬁnity zi D 1) and obtain

x1xT
2
y1xT
2
z1xT
3

Es D 0 ;
(32.22)
where Es is the raw by raw stacked version of ma-
trix E. When we use only ﬁve point correspondences
the resulting linear homogeneous system will have as
a solution any vector in the four dimensional kernel of
the data matrix
Es D 1u1 C 2u2 C 3u3 C 4u4 :
(32.23)
At this point we want the matrix E resulting from Es to
be an essential matrix satisfying Proposition 32.1. It has
been proven [32.30] that
Proposition 32.2
A matrix E 2 R33 is essential if and only if
EETE D 1
2trace.EET/E :
(32.24)
Though the det.E/ D 0 constraint can be inferred from
(32.24) we are still going to use it together with (32.24)
to obtain ten cubic equations in the elements of E.
As described in [32.31], one can obtain a tenth de-
gree polynomial in 4. The number of real roots of
this polynomial are computed with a Sturm sequence.
There is no proof beyond physical plausibility of the
existence of at least one solution that a real root will ex-
ist at all. Several alternative 5-point solvers have been
proposed since Nister’s paper [32.32–35] and an exten-
sive list including code has been established by Pajdla’s
group [32.36].
Assuming that we have recovered an essential
matrix from point correspondences, the next task is
to recover an orthogonal matrix R and a unit vec-
tor translation T from the essential matrix. If E D
Udiag.; ; 0/VT, there are four solutions for the pair
.bT; R/
. b
T1; R1/ D .URz;C=2˙UT; URT
z;C=2VT/ ;
. b
T2; R2/ D .URz;=2˙UT; URT
z;=2VT/ ;
. b
T1; R2/ D .URz;C=2˙UT; URT
z;=2VT/ ;
. b
T2; R1/ D .URz;=2˙UT; URT
z;C=2VT/ ;
where Rz denotes rotation around the z-axis. The four
solutions can be split into two two-fold ambiguities:

Mirror ambiguity: If T is a solution, then T is a so-
lution, too. There is no way to disambiguate from
the epipolar constraint: xT
2..T/  Rx1/ D 0.

Twisted pair ambiguity: If R is a solution, then
also RT;R is a solution. The ﬁrst image is twisted
around the baseline 180 degrees.
These ambiguities are resolved by checking if
depths of triangulated points are positive.
Critical Ambiguities
The approach with ﬁve point correspondences has a ﬁ-
nite number of feasible (feasible means that they may
produce multiple interpretations of structures in front
of the camera) solutions when the points in the scene lie
on a plane (a two fold ambiguity) [32.37] or when the
points on the scene and the camera centers lie on a dou-
ble sheet hyperboloid with the additional constraint that
the camera centers lie symmetrically to the main gen-
erator of the hyperboloid [32.38]. These are inherent
ambiguities which hold for any number of point cor-
respondences when one seeks a solution for an exact
essential matrix.
When someone is solving the linear least squares
system for the essential matrix, a planar scene as well
as the case of all points and the camera centers lying
on a quadric causes a rank deﬁciency of the system and
thus inﬁnite solutions for E.
Beyond the ambiguous situations, there is a con-
siderable amount of literature regarding instabilities
in the two view problem. In particularly, it has been
shown [32.37, 39, 40] that a small ﬁeld of view and in-
sufﬁcient depth variation can cause an indeterminacy
in the estimation of the angle between translation and
optical axis. An additional small rotation can cause
a confounding between translation and rotation [32.41].
Moreover, it has been shown, that there exist local min-
ima close to the global minimum that can fool any
iterative scheme [32.42, 43].
3-Point SfM
Minimal solutions based on 5 points are still too slow to
be used on mobile platforms where additional informa-
tion like a reference gravity vector might be obtained
from an IMU. We present here a recent solution using
a reference direction and only 3 points [32.44].
We are given three image correspondences from
calibrated cameras, and a single directional correspon-
dence like the gravity vector or a vanishing point. This
problem is equivalent to ﬁnding the translation vec-
tor t and a rotation angle  around an arbitrary rotation
axis.

Part C | 32.1
818
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Let us choose the arbitrary rotation axis to be e2 D
Œ0; 1; 0T. After taking the directional constraint into ac-
count, from the initial ﬁve parameters in the essential
matrix, we now only have to estimate three. We can use
the axis-angle parameterization of a rotation matrix to
rewrite the essential matrix constraint as follows
p2i
T QEp1 D 0 ;
(32.25)
where
QE DbQt.I C sin be2 C .1  cos /be2
2/ ;
and Qt D .x; y; 1/.
Each image point correspondence gives us one such
equation, for a total of three equations in three un-
knowns (elements of t and ). To create a polynomial
system, we set s D sin  and c D cos , and add the
trigonometric constraint s2 C c2  1 D 0, for a total of
four equations in four unknowns. In order to reduce the
number of unknowns, we choose the direction of the
epipole by assuming that the translation vector Qt has the
form Œx; y; 1>. This means that for each Qt that we re-
cover, Qt will also need to be considered as a possible
solution.
Once we substitute for QE in (32.25), the result-
ing system of polynomial equations has the following
form
ai1xs C ai2xc C ai3ys C ai4yc
C ai5x  ai2s C ai1c C ai6 D 0
(32.26)
for i D 1; ::; 3, and the equation
s2 C c2  1 D 0 :
(32.27)
This polynomial system can be solved in closed form
and has up to four solutions. The total number of pos-
sible pose matrices arising from our formulation is
therefore at most 8, when we take into account the fact
that we have to consider the sign ambiguity in transla-
tion.
32.1.6 Multiple Views SfM
When we talk about simultaneous localization and map-
ping we obviously mean over a longer period of time.
The question is how do we integrate additional frames
in our 3-D motion estimation (localization) process.
To exploit multiple frames we introduce rank con-
straints [32.45]. We assume that the world coordinate
system coincides with the coordinate system of the ﬁrst
frame and that a scene point is projected to xi in the i-th
frame and that its depth with respect to the 1st frame
is 1
ixi D Ri.1x1/ C Ti :
(32.28)
Taking the cross product with xi and writing it for n
frames yields a homogeneous system
0
B@
b
x2R2x1
b
x2T2
:::
:::
b
xnRnx1
b
x2Tn
1
CA
1
1

D 0 ;
(32.29)
that has the depth of a point in the ﬁrst frame as an
unknown. The 3n  2 multiple view matrix has to have
rank one [32.46], a constraint that infers both the epipo-
lar and the trifocal equations. The least squares solution
for the depth can easily be derived as
1 D 
Pn
iD1.xi  Ti/T.xi  Rix1/
kxi  Rix1k2
:
(32.30)
Given a depth for each point we can solve for motion
by rearranging the multiple views constraint (32.29) as
0
BB@
1
1x1T
1 ˝ Ox1
i
Ox1
i
:::
:::
n
1xnT
1 ˝ Oxn
i
Oxn
i
1
CCA
Rstacked
i
Ti

D 0 ;
(32.31)
where xn
i is the n-th image point in the i-th frame
and Ri; Ti is the motion from 1st to the i-th frame
and Rstacked
i
is the 12  1 vector of stacked elements of
the rotation matrix Ri. Suppose that k is the 12  1 ker-
nel (or closest kernel in a least squares sense) of the
3n  12 matrix in the left hand side obtained through
singular value decomposition and let us call A the 33
matrix obtained from the ﬁrst 9 elements of k and a the
vector of elements 1012. To obtain a rotation matrix
we follow the SVD steps in the solution of absolute ori-
entation (32.14) to ﬁnd the closest orthogonal matrix to
an arbitrary invertible matrix.
Bundle Adjustment
On top of such an approach, a bundle adjust-
ment [32.47] minimizes the sum of all deviations be-
tween image coordinates and the backprojections of the
points to be reconstructed.
arg min
Rf ;Tf ;Xp
TC1 ;
minimized with respect to all 6.F  1/ motions and
3N  1 structure unknowns, where  is the vector con-

3-D Vision for Navigation and Grasping
32.1 Geometric Vision
819
Part C | 32.1
taining all errors
f
p D
 
xf
p  Rf
11Xp C Rf
12Yp C Rf
13Zp C Tx
Rf
31Xp C Rf
32Yp C Rf
33Zp C Tz
yf
p  Rf
21Xp C Rf
22Yp C Rf
23Zp C Ty
Rf
31Xp C Rf
32Yp C Rf
33Zp C Tz
!
and C is the error covariance matrix. We will continue
with the assumption that C D I.
Call the objective function ˚.u/ D .u/T.u/ with u
the vector of unknowns. Given a starting value for the
vector of unknowns u we iterate with steps u by lo-
cally ﬁtting a quadratic function to ˚.u/
˚.uCu/ D ˚.u/CuTr˚.u/C 1
2uTH.u/u ;
where r˚ is the gradient and H is the Hessian of ˚.
The minimum of this local quadratic is at u satisfying
Hıu D r˚.u/ :
If ˚.u/ D .u/T.u/ then
r˚ D 2
X
i
i.u/ri.u/T D J.u/T ;
where the Jacobian J consists of elements
Jij D @i
@uj
;
and the Hessian reads
H D 2
X
i

ri.u/ri.u/T C i.u/@2i
@u2

D 2
 
J.u/TJ.u/C
X
i
i.u/@2i
@u2
!

 2J.u/TJ.u/
by omitting quadratic terms inside the Hessian. This
yields the Gauss–Newton iteration
.JTJ/u D JT ;
involving the inversion of a .6FC3N 7/.6FC3N 
7/ matrix. Bundle adjustment is about the art of invert-
ing efﬁciently .JTJ/.
Let us split the unknown vector u into u D .a; b/ fol-
lowing [32.48] obtaining

6F  6 motion unknowns a,

3P  1 structure unknonws b,
and we will explain this case better if we assume two
motion unknowns a1 and a2 corresponding to 2 frames,
and 3 unknown points b1; b2; b3.
For keeping symmetry in writing we do not deal
here with the global reference and the global scale am-
biguity.
The Jacobian for 2 frames and 3 points has 6 pairs
of rows (one pair for each image projection) and 15
columns/unknowns
J D
@
@.a; b/ D
0
BBBBBBBBBBB@
A1
1
0
0
A2
1
A1
2
0
0
A2
2
A1
3
0
0
A2
3
„ ƒ‚ …
motion
B1
1
0
0
B2
1
0
0
0
B1
2
0
0
B2
2
0
0
0
B1
3
0
0
B2
3
„
ƒ‚
…
structure
1
CCCCCCCCCCCA
;
with A matrices being 2  6 and B matrices being 2  3
being Jacobians of the error f
i of the projection of the i-
th point in the f -th frame. We observe now a pattern
emerging in JTJ
JTJ D
0
BBBB@
U1
0
W1
1
W1
2
W1
3
0
U2
W2
1
W2
2
W3
3
::
::
V1
0
0
::
::
0
V2
0
::
::
0
0
V3
1
CCCCA
;
with the block diagonals for motion and structure sepa-
rated. Let us rewrite the basic iteration .JTJ/u D JT
as
 U
W
WT
V
 a
b

D
0
a
0
b

;
and premultiply with
I
WV1
0
I
  U
W
WT
V
 a
b

D
I
WV1
0
I
 0
a
0
b

We ﬁnd out that motion parameters can be updated sep-
arately by inverting a 6F  6F matrix
.U  WV1WT/a D 0
a  WV10
b :
Each 3-D point can be updated separately by inverting
a 3  3 matrix V
Vb D 0
b  WTa

Part C | 32.2
820
Part C
Sensing and Perception
It is worth mentioning that bundle adjustment though
extremely slow captures the correlation between motion
estimates and structure (3-D points) estimates which is
artiﬁcially hidden in the iterative scheme in (32.29).
The largest scale motion estimation and registration
of views has been performed by Teller et al. [32.49]
with a decoupled computation ﬁrst of relative rotations
and ﬁnally of relative translations. The above multiple
view SfM techniques can also be applied in a sliding
window mode in time. Davison et al. [32.28] showed
the ﬁrst real-time recursive approach by decoupling the
direction of the viewing rays from the depth unknowns.
For other recursive approaches the reader is referred to
the corresponding SLAM chapter.
32.2 3-D Vision for Grasping
In this section we will move from the basic geometry
required for grasping to the main 3-D vision challenges
associated with the limited knowledge we might have
about the shape of the object as well as the actual selec-
tion of 3-D grasping poses.
Naturally, object grasping and manipulation is
closely related to general scene understanding and
problems such as object detection, recognition, catego-
rization and pose estimation. Taking all the above, there
are very few approaches that address all the problems
in a single system. One example, reported in [32.50],
addresses the problem of enabling transfer of grasp
knowledge between object categories, deﬁned using
both their physical properties and functionality. This is
a challenging problem given that a number of objects
with similar physical properties afford different tasks.
An example can be a screwdriver and a carrot that are
structurally alike, but only the former can be used as
a tool, or a ball and an orange where only the latter af-
fords eating (Fig. 32.3).
In relation to object grasping in particular, there are
methods that assume that full 3-D model of the object
is available and concentrate on grasp synthesis solely.
In addition, many of the approaches conduct experi-
ments in a simulated environment without working with
real sensory data. However, the knowledge generated in
simulation can also be applied later onto sensory data.
Another group of approaches considers grasp synthe-
sis on real sensory data directly, dealing with problems
such as noise, occlusions and missing data.
If the object to be grasped is known, there are ap-
proaches that store a database of grasp hypotheses,
generated either in simulation or through experiments
in a real setting. Most of the approaches assume that
Tool-use
Eating
Playing
Pouring
Fig. 32.3 Examples of physically
similar objects that afford different
tasks
a 3-D mesh of the object is available and the challenge
is then to automatically generate a set of feasible grasp
hypotheses. This involves sampling the inﬁnite space of
possible hand conﬁgurations and ranking the resulting
grasps according to some quality metric.
To simplify the process, a common approach is
to approximate object’s shape with a constellation of
primitives such as spheres, cones, cylinders, boxes or
superquadrics [32.51–55]. The purpose of using shape
primitives is to reduce the number of candidate grasps
and thus prune the search space for ﬁnding the optimal
set of grasp hypotheses.
One example, shown in Fig. 32.4 and reported
in [32.52], decomposes a point cloud from a stereo cam-
era into a constellation of boxes. Grasp planning is per-
formed directly on the boxes which reduces the number
of potential grasps. El-Khoury and Sahbani [32.56]
distinguish between graspable and nongraspable parts
of an object where each part is represented by ﬁt-
ting a superquadric to the point cloud data. Pelossof
et al. [32.57] approximate an object with a single su-
perquadric and use a Support Vector Machines based
approach to search for the grasp that maximizes the
grasp quality. Boularias et al. [32.58] model an object
as a Markov random ﬁeld (MRF) in which the nodes
are points from the point cloud and edges are spanned
between the six nearest neighbors of a point. A node
in the MRF carries either one of the two labels: a good
or a bad grasp location. Detry et al.[32.59] model the
object as a constellation of local multimodal contour
descriptors. The set of associated grasp hypotheses is
modeled as a nonparametric density function in the
space of six-dimensional (6-D) gripper poses, referred
to as a bootstrap density. Papazov et al. [32.60] demon-

3-D Vision for Navigation and Grasping
32.2 3-D Vision for Grasping
821
Part C | 32.2
Fig. 32.4 Generation of grasp candidates through ob-
ject shape approximation and decomposition from (af-
ter [32.52])
Hand-over
Pouring
Tool-use
Glass
Knife
Hammer
Fig. 32.5 Ranking of approach vectors on different objects
given a speciﬁc task. The brighter an area the higher the
rank. The darker an area, the lower the rank (after [32.62])
strates 3-D object recognition and pose estimation in
a grasping scenario considering cluttered scenes. Weisz
and Allen [32.61] proposes a metric suitable for predict-
ing grasp stability under pose uncertainty.
There are several approaches that deal speciﬁcally
with incomplete point clouds. Marton et al. [32.63]
exploit symmetry by ﬁtting a curve to a cross sec-
tion of the point cloud. Rao et al. [32.64] concen-
trates of depth segmentation and sample grasp points
from the surface of a segmented object using sur-
face normals. Bohg et al. [32.65] presents a related
approach that reconstructs full object shape assuming
planar symmetry and generates grasps based on the
global shape of the object. Bone et al. [32.66] makes
no prior assumption about the shape of the object
and apply shape carving for generating a parallel-jaw
gripper grasps. Hsiao et al. [32.67] employs heuris-
tics for generating grasp hypotheses dependent on the
shape of the point cloud. Recent work in [32.68]
identiﬁes regions that afford force closure grasps by
evaluating local curvature of the objects to create an
initial opposing grasp with two or three ﬁngers, de-
pendent on the relative size of the object with re-
spect to the hand. Richtsfeld and Vincze [32.69] uses
a stereo-camera setup to generate a 3-D representa-
tion of a scene with several objects and then gen-
erates various top grasps on object candidates. Mal-
donado et al. [32.70] use time-of-ﬂight range data,
model objects using 3-D Gaussians and rely on ﬁn-
ger torque information during grasping to monitor the
grasp execution. Stückler et al. [32.71] generate grasp
hypotheses based on eigenvectors of the object’s foot-
prints that are generated by projecting the 3-D object
point cloud onto the supporting surface. The work
of [32.72] presents a system for general scene under-
standing used for grasp planning and execution. The
system uses a bottom-up grouping approach where con-
tour and surface structures are used as the basis for
grasp planning. The work builds upon previous work
presented in [32.73].
Most of the recent work concentrates on grasp
generalization either by observing human grasping or
through off- and on-line learning directly on the robot.
Kroemer et al. [32.74] demonstrates generalization ca-
pabilities using a pouring task scenario. The goal of
the approach is to ﬁnd a part of the object that is most
likely to afford the demonstrated action. The learning
method is based on the kernel logistic regression. Her-
zog et al. [32.75] stores a set of local templates of object
that a human is interacting with. If a local part of an
object segmented online is similar to a template in the
database, the associated grasp hypothesis is executed.
Song et al. [32.62] approach the problem of inferring
a full grasp conﬁguration in relation to a speciﬁc task
the object is intended for. As in [32.76], the joint dis-
tribution over various grasping variables is modeled as
a Bayesian network. Additional variables like task, ob-
ject category and task constraints are introduced. The
structure of this model is learned given a large number
of grasp examples generated in a simulator and anno-
tated with grasp quality metrics as well as suitability for
a speciﬁc task. The learned quality of grasps on speciﬁc
objects given a task is visualized in Fig. 32.5.

Part C | 32
822
Part C
Sensing and Perception
32.3 Conclusion and Further Reading
As main additional sources of reading, we recommend
the textbooks by Hartley and Zisserman [32.12], Ma
et al. [32.46], Faugeras [32.77], and Faugeras and Lu-
ong [32.11]. The reader is referred to Chap. 5 for
fundamentals of estimation, to Chap. 35 for sensor fu-
sion, to Chap. 34 for visual servoing, to Chap. 31 for
range sensing, to Chap. 45 for 3-D models of the world,
and to Chap. 46 for SLAM.
3-D vision is a rapidly advancing ﬁeld and
in
this
chapter
we
have
covered
only
geomet-
ric approaches based on RGB cameras. Although
depth sensors will become ubiquitous indoors and
might
be
outdoors
as
well,
RGB
cameras
re-
main formidable because of the higher number and
larger diversity of features that can be matched
and used for pose estimation and 3-D-modelling.
Long range sensing can still be covered from mo-
tion with large translation while active sensors are
constrained in terms of energy reﬂected from the
environment.
Video-References
VIDEO 120
Google’s project Tango
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/32/videodetails/120
VIDEO 121
Finding paths through the world’s photos
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/32/videodetails/121
VIDEO 122
LIBVISO: Visual odometry for intelligent vehicles
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/32/videodetails/122
VIDEO 123
Parallel tracking and mapping for small AR workspaces (PTAM)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/32/videodetails/123
VIDEO 124
DTAM: Dense tracking and mapping in real-time
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/32/videodetails/124
VIDEO 125
3-D models from 2-D video – automatically
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/32/videodetails/125
References
32.1
S. Izadi, R.A. Newcombe, D. Kim, O. Hilliges,
D. Molyneaux, S. Hodges, P. Kohli, J. Shotton,
A.J. Davison, A. Fitzgibbon: Kinectfusion: Real-time
dynamic 3D surface reconstruction and interaction,
ACM SIGGRAPH 2011 Talks (2011) p. 23
32.2
Google: Atap project tango, https://www.google.
com/atap/projecttango (2014)
32.3
J.A. Hesch, D.G. Kottas, S.L. Bowman, S.I. Roumeli-
otis: Camera-IMU-based localization: Observabil-
ity analysis and consistency improvement, Int. J.
Robotics Res. 33(1), 182–201 (2014)
32.4
N. Snavely, S.M. Seitz, R. Szeliski: Modeling the
world from internet photo collections, Int. J. Com-
put. Vis. 80(2), 189–210 (2008)
32.5
Z. Kukelova, M. Bujnak, T. Pajdla: Polynomial
eigenvalue solutions to minimal problems in com-
puter vision, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.
34(7), 1381–1393 (2012)
32.6
F. Kahl, S. Agarwal, M.K. Chandraker, D. Kriegman,
S. Belongie: Practical global optimization for mul-
tiview geometry, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 79(3), 271–284
(2008)
32.7
R.I. Hartley, F. Kahl: Global optimization through
rotation space search, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 82(1), 64–
79 (2009)
32.8
Z. Zhang: A flexible new technique for camera cal-
ibration, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 22,
1330–1334 (2000)
32.9
M. Pollefeys, L. Van Gool, M. Vergauwen, F. Verbiest,
K. Cornelis, J. Tops, R. Koch: Visual modeling with a
hand-held camera, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 59, 207–232
(2004)
32.10
M. Pollefeys, L. Van Gool: Stratified self-calibration
with the modulus constraint, IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell. 21, 707–724 (1999)
32.11
O. Faugeras, Q.-T. Luong, T. Papadopoulo: The Ge-
ometry of Multiple Images: The Laws That Govern
the Formation of Multiple Images of a Scene and
Some of Their Applications (MIT Press, Cambridge
2001)
32.12
R. Hartley, A. Zisserman: Multiple View Geometry
(Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge 2000)
32.13
K. Ottenberg, R.M. Haralick, C.-N. Lee, M. Nolle: Re-
view and analysis of solutions of the three-point
perspective problem, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 13, 331–
356 (1994)
32.14
M.A. Fischler, R.C. Bolles: Random sample consen-
sus: A paradigm for model fitting with applications
to image analysis and automated cartography, ACM
Commun. 24, 381–395 (1981)

3-D Vision for Navigation and Grasping
References
823
Part C | 32
32.15
R. Kumar, A.R. Hanson: Robust methods for es-
timaging pose and a sensitivity analysis, Comput.
Vis. Image Underst. 60, 313–342 (1994)
32.16
C.-P. Lu, G. Hager, E. Mjolsness: Fast and glob-
ally convergent pose estimation from video images,
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 22, 610–622
(2000)
32.17
L. Quan, Z. Lan: Linear n-point camera pose deter-
mination, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 21,
774–780 (1999)
32.18
A. Ansar, K. Daniilidis: Linear pose estimation from
points and lines, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell. 25, 578–589 (2003)
32.19
V. Lepetit, F. Moreno-Noguer, P. Fua: EPNP: An
accurate o.n/ solution to the PNP problem, Int.
J. Comput. Vis. 81(2), 155–166 (2009)
32.20
G.H. Golub, C.F. van Loan: Matrix Computations
(Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore 1983)
32.21
J.A. Hesch, S.I. Roumeliotis: A direct least-squares
(dls) method for pnp, IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV) (2011) pp. 383–390
32.22
C.J. Taylor, D.J. Kriegman: Minimization on the Lie
Group SO(3) and Related Manifolds (Yale University,
New Haven 1994)
32.23
P.-A. Absil, R. Mahony, R. Sepulchre: Optimization
Algorithms on Matrix Manifolds (Princeton Univ.
Press, Princeton 2009)
32.24
Y. Ma, J. Košecká, S. Sastry: Optimization criteria
and geometric algorithms for motion and struc-
ture estimation, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 44(3), 219–249
(2001)
32.25
R.I. Hartley, P. Sturm: Triangulation, Comput. Vis.
Image Underst. 68(2), 146–157 (1997)
32.26
B. Kitt, A. Geiger, H. Lategahn: Visual odometry
based on stereo image sequences with ransac-
based outlier rejection scheme, IEEE Intell. Veh.
Symp. (IV) (2010)
32.27
B.K.P.
Horn,
H.M.
Hilden,
S.
Negahdaripour:
Closed-form solution of absolute orientation using
orthonormal matrices, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 5, 1127–1135
(1988)
32.28
A.J. Davison, I.D. Reid, N.D. Molton, O. Stasse:
Monoslam: Real-time single camera SLAM, IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 29(6), 1052–1067
(2007)
32.29
R. Tron, K. Daniilidis: On the quotient represen-
tation for the essential manifold, Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (2014) pp. 1574–1581
32.30
T.S. Huang, O.D. Faugeras: Some properties of the E
matrix in two-view motion estimation, IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 11, 1310–1312 (1989)
32.31
D. Nister: An efficient solution for the five-point
relative pose problem, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. 26, 756–777 (2004)
32.32
H. Li, R. Hartley: Five-point motion estimation
made easy, IEEE 18th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit.
(ICPR), Vol. 1 (2006) pp. 630–633
32.33
Z. Kukelova, M. Bujnak, T. Pajdla: Polynomial
eigenvalue solutions to the 5-pt and 6-pt relative
pose problems, BMVC (2008) pp. 1–10
32.34
H. Stewenius, C. Engels, D. Nistér: Recent de-
velopments on direct relative orientation, ISPRS
J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 60(4), 284–294
(2006)
32.35
D. Batra, B. Nabbe, M. Hebert: An alternative for-
mulation for five point relative pose problem, IEEE
Workshop Motion Video Comput. (2007) pp. 21–21
32.36
Center for Machine Perception, Minimal prob-
lems in computer vision; http://cmp.felk.cvut.cz/
minimal/5_pt_relative.php
32.37
S. Maybank: Theory of Reconstruction from Image
Motion (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1993)
32.38
S.J. Maybank: The projective geometry of am-
biguous surfaces, Phil. Trans. Royal Soc. Lond. A
332(1623), 1–47 (1990)
32.39
A. Jepson, D.J. Heeger: A fast subspace algorithm
for recovering rigid motion, Proc. IEEE Workshop
Vis. Motion, Princeton (1991) pp. 124–131
32.40
C. Fermüller, Y. Aloimonos: Algorithmic indepen-
dent instability of structure from motion, Proc. 5th
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vision, Freiburg (1998)
32.41
K. Daniilidis, M. Spetsakis: Understanding noise
sensitivity in structure from motion. In: Visual Nav-
igation, ed. by Y. Aloimonos (Lawrence Erlbaum,
Mahwah 1996) pp. 61–88
32.42
S. Soatto, R. Brockett: Optimal structure from mo-
tion: Local ambiguities and global estimates, IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Santa Barbara
(1998)
32.43
J. Oliensis: A new structure-from-motion ambi-
guity, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 22,
685–700 (1999)
32.44
O. Naroditsky, X.S. Zhou, J. Gallier, S. Roumelio-
tis, K. Daniilidis: Two efficient solutions for visual
odometry using directional correspondence, IEEE
Trans. Patterns Anal. Mach. Intell. (2012)
32.45
Y. Ma, K. Huang, R. Vidal, J. Kosecka, S. Sastry: Rank
conditions of the multiple view matrix, Int. J. Com-
put. Vis. 59(2), 115–139 (2004)
32.46
Y. Ma, S. Soatto, J. Kosecka, S. Sastry: An Invitation
to 3-D Vision: From Images to Geometric Models
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2003)
32.47
W. Triggs, P. McLauchlan, R. Hartley, A. Fitzgibbon:
Bundle adjustment – A modern synthesis, Lect.
Notes Comput. Sci 1883, 298–372 (2000)
32.48
M. Lourakis, A. Argyros: The Design and Implemen-
tation of a Generic Sparse Bundle Adjustment Soft-
ware Package Based on the Levenberg–Marquard
Method, Tech. Rep, Vol. 340 (ICS/FORTH, Heraklion
2004)
32.49
S. Teller, M. Antone, Z. Bodnar, M. Bosse, S. Coorg:
Calibrated, registered images of an extended ur-
ban area, Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
Kauai, Vol. 1 (2001) pp. 813–820
32.50
D. Kragic, M. Madry, D. Song: From object cate-
gories to grasp transfer using probabilistic reason-
ing, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2012) pp. 1716–1723
32.51
A.T. Miller, S. Knoop, H.I. Christensen, P.K. Allen:
Automatic grasp planning using shape primitives,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2003)
pp. 1824–1829
32.52
K. Hübner, D. Kragic: Selection of robot pre-grasps
using box-based shape approximation, IEEE/RSJ

Part C | 32
824
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2008) pp. 1765–
1770
32.53
C. Dunes, E. Marchand, C. Collowet, C. Leroux: Active
rough shape estimation of unknown objects, IEEE
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2008) pp. 3622–
3627
32.54
M. Przybylski, T. Asfour: Unions of balls for shape
approximation in robot grasping, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Taipei (2010) pp. 1592–
1599
32.55
C. Goldfeder, P.K. Allen, C. Lackner, R. Pelossof:
Grasp Planning Via Decomposition Trees, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2007) pp. 4679–
4684
32.56
S. El-Khoury, A. Sahbani: Handling objects by their
handles, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
Workshop Grasp Task Learn. Imitation (2008)
32.57
R. Pelossof, A. Miller, P. Allen, T. Jebera: An SVM
learning approach to robotic grasping, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 3512–
3518
32.58
A. Boularias, O. Kroemer, J. Peters: Learning robot
grasping from 3-d images with markov random
fields, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2011) pp. 1548–1553
32.59
R. Detry, E. Başeski, N. Krüger, M. Popović, Y. Touati,
O. Kroemer, J. Peters, J. Piater: Learning object-
specific grasp affordance densities, IEEE Int. Conf.
Dev. Learn. (2009) pp. 1–7
32.60
C. Papazov, S. Haddadin, S. Parusel, K. Krieger,
D. Burschka: Rigid 3D geometry matching for grasp-
ing of known objects in cluttered scenes, Int. J.
Robotics Res. 31(4), 538–553 (2012)
32.61
J. Weisz, P.K. Allen: Pose error robust grasping from
contact wrench space metrics, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012) pp. 557–562
32.62
D. Song, C.H. Ek, K. Hübner, D. Kragic: Multivari-
ate discretization for bayesian network structure
learning in robot grasping, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 1944–1950
32.63
Z.C. Marton, D. Pangercic, N. Blodow, J. Kleine-
hellefort, M. Beetz: General 3D modelling of novel
objects from a single view, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2010) pp. 3700–3705
32.64
D. Rao, V. Le Quoc, T. Phoka, M. Quigley, A. Sudsang,
A.Y. Ng: Grasping novel objects with depth segmen-
tation, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS),
Taipei (2010) pp. 2578–2585
32.65
J. Bohg, M. Johnson-Roberson, B. León, J. Fe-
lip, X. Gratal, N. Bergström, D. Kragic, A. Morales:
Mind the gap – Robotic grasping under incomplete
observation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2011)
32.66
G.M. Bone, A. Lambert, M. Edwards: Automated
Modelling
and
Robotic Grasping of Unknown
Three-Dimensional Objects, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2008) pp. 292–298
32.67
K. Hsiao, S. Chitta, M. Ciocarlie, E.G. Jones: Con-
tact-reactive grasping of objects with partial shape
information, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2010) pp. 1228–1235
32.68
M.A.
Roa,
M.J.
Argus,
D.
Leidner,
C.
Borst,
G. Hirzinger: Power grasp planning for anthropo-
morphic robot hands, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2012)
32.69
M. Richtsfeld, M. Vincze: Grasping of Unknown Ob-
jects from a Table Top, ECCV Workshop Vis. Action:
Effic. Strateg. Cogn. Agents Complex Environ. (2008)
32.70
A. Maldonado, U. Klank, M. Beetz: Robotic grasping
of unmodeled objects using time-of-flight range
data and finger torque information, IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2010) pp. 2586–2591
32.71
J. Stückler, R. Steffens, D. Holz, S. Behnke: Real-
time 3d perception and efficient grasp planning
for everyday manipulation tasks, Eur. Conf. Mob.
Robots (ECMR) (2011)
32.72
G. Kootstra, M. Popovic, J.A. Jørgensen, K. Kuk-
linski, K. Miatliuk, D. Kragic, N. Kruger: Enabling
grasping of unknown objects through a synergis-
tic use of edge and surface information, Int. J.
Robotics Res. 31(10), 1190–1213 (2012)
32.73
D. Kraft, N. Pugeault, E. Baseski, M. Popovic,
D. Kragic, S. Kalkan, F. Wörgötter, N. Krueger: Birth
of the object: Detection of objectness and ex-
traction of object shape through object action
complexes, Int. J. Humanoid Robotics pp, 247–265
(2009)
32.74
O. Kroemer, E. Ugur, E. Oztop, J. Peters: A Kernel-
based Approach to Direct Action Perception, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012)
32.75
A. Herzog, P. Pastor, M. Kalakrishnan, L. Righetti,
T. Asfour, S. Schaal: Template-based learning of
grasp selection, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2012)
32.76
L. Montesano, M. Lopes, A. Bernardino, J. Santos-
Victor: Learning object affordances: From sensory–
motor
coordination
to
imitation,
IEEE
Trans.
Robotics 24(1), 15–26 (2008)
32.77
O. Faugeras: Three-Dimensional Computer Vision
(MIT Press, Cambridge 1993)

Multimedia Contents Visual Object
825
Part C | 33.1
33. Visual Object Class Recognition
Michael Stark, Bernt Schiele, Aleš Leonardis
Object class recognition is among the most funda-
mental problems in computer vision and thus has
been researched intensively over the years. This
chapter is mostly concerned with the recognition
and detection of basic level object classes such as
cars, persons, chairs, or dogs. We will review the
state of the art and in particular discuss the most
promising methods available today.
33.1
Object Classes ......................................
825
33.2 Review of the State of the Art ..............
826
33.2.1
Bag-of-Words Models................
826
33.2.2
Spatial Pyramid Matching...........
828
33.2.3
Flexible Part Models ..................
829
33.2.4
Histogram
of Oriented Gradients ................
831
33.2.5 The Deformable Part Model ........
832
33.2.6 Convolutional
Neural Networks........................
834
33.2.7
Fine-Grained
Categorization...........................
836
33.2.8 Datasets ...................................
836
33.3 Discussion and Conclusions ..................
837
33.3.1
Task .........................................
837
33.3.2
Data.........................................
838
33.3.3
Efficiency..................................
838
References...................................................
838
33.1 Object Classes
Generic object class recognition has been one of the
goals of computer vision since its beginnings [33.1,
2]. In this context, it is important to emphasize that
the notion and the abstraction level of object classes is
far from being uniquely and clearly deﬁned. Notably,
the question of how humans organize knowledge at dif-
ferent levels has received much attention in cognitive
psychology [33.3, 4]. Taking an example from Brown’s
work, a dog can not only be thought of as a dog, but also
as a boxer, a quadruped, or in general an animate be-
ing [33.3]. Yet, dog is the term that comes to mind most
easily, which is by no means accidental. Experiments
show that there is a basic level in human categorization
at which most knowledge is organized [33.5]. Accord-
ing to Rosch et al. and Lakoff [33.5, 6], this basic level
is also:

The highest level at which category members have
similar perceived shape

The highest level at which a single mental image
can reﬂect the entire category

The highest level at which a person uses similar mo-
tor actions for interacting with category members

The level at which human subjects are fastest at
identifying category members

the ﬁrst level named and understood by children.
Given that the basic level of categorization is eas-
iest for humans, it should be a good starting point
for machine vision, too [33.7]. The next lower level,
subordinate categories, corresponds to the individual
level used in object identiﬁcation, e.g., the next higher
level, super-ordinate categories, requires a higher de-
gree of abstraction and world knowledge. The fol-
lowing will thus discuss state-of-the-art approaches
ﬁrst for basic-level categorization but then also brieﬂy
touch upon subordinate categorization for ﬁne-grained
classiﬁcation.

Part C | 33.2
826
Part C
Sensing and Perception
33.2 Review of the State of the Art
One can think of all current methods in object class
recognition as being part-based methods, in which ob-
ject class instances are described by a set of parts (such
as human body parts, for instance), and the topology
between the parts (such as the kinematic tree deﬁned
by the joints that connect the human body parts). The
following sections give a systematic treatment of differ-
ent instantiations of state of the art, part-based methods,
ranging from the bag-of-words model (Sect. 33.2.1) and
spatial pyramid matching (Sect. 33.2.2), over ﬂexible
part models (Sect. 33.2.3) and rigid histogram of ori-
ented gradients templates (Sect. 33.2.4) to deformable
part models (Sect. 33.2.5) and convolutional neural net-
works (Sect. 33.2.6). Table 33.1 summarizes the various
part-based methods presented in this section. Later sec-
tions highlight recent trends in ﬁne-grained categoriza-
tion (Sect. 33.2.7) and datasets for visual recognition
(Sect. 33.2.8).
Table 33.1 Classiﬁcation of some prominent approaches
as part-based models
Model
Parts
Topology
Bag-of-words
Feature
clusters
No spatial information
coded
Spatial pyramid
Feature
clusters
Hierarchical but rigid
spatial grid
Constellation
model
Feature
clusters
Full covariance matrix
between clusters
Implicit shape
model
Feature
clusters
Star-shaped model
HOG
HOG-cells
Rigid spatial grid
DPM
HOG-parts
Star-model
Pictorial
structures model
Semantic parts
Tree structure
Convolutional
neural networks
Convolution
ﬁlters
Spatial spooling and
hierarchy
a)
b)
c)
Fig.33.1a–c The bag-of-words
representation. (a) Image; (b) BOw
histogram; (c) codebook of words
33.2.1 Bag-of-Words Models
Apart from allowing to establish pointwise correspon-
dences between multiple images of the same scene,
local image patches also provide the foundation for
a variety of object class representations for visual
recognition. Inspired by the natural language process-
ing literature, the bag-of-words (BOw) or bag of fea-
tures model [33.8] represents an image as an unordered
collection (a bag) of local patches. This representation
assumes that most of the important information about
the image content is captured purely by which patches
occur (and how often), irrespective of where they oc-
cur. While this is clearly an approximation, it seems
reasonable from the text document analogy: even if the
words in a text document are shufﬂed randomly, the
mere occurrence of certain key terms provides a strong
cue about the document’s topic. Likewise, a collection
of local image patches, such as two eye patches, mouth,
and nose, provide strong cues for the presence of a face
in an image.
The bag-of-words model is typically based on
a codebook of visual words: a ﬁxed, discrete set of vi-
sual features relative to which all others are described
(Fig. 33.1c). An input image (Fig. 33.1a) can then be
described relative to that codebook, by counting how
often each codeword appears (Fig 33.1b). In the fol-
lowing paragraphs, we describe in detail the extraction
of visual features, the generation of codebooks of vi-
sual words, and their use in image classiﬁcation using
probabilistic generative and discriminative models.
Feature Extraction
Locations and scales for feature extraction are typ-
ically either picked sparsely, based on an interest
operator, such as the difference of Gaussian (DOG)

Visual Object Class Recognition
33.2 Review of the State of the Art
827
Part C | 33.2
interest point detector for scale invariant feature trans-
form (SIFT) [33.9], Harris corners, scale- and afﬁne-
invariant Hessian–Laplace interest points [33.10], max-
imally stable extremal regions (MSER) [33.11], or
based on dense feature sampling using a ﬁxed spatial
grid [33.12]. While interest operators generally pro-
vide well-localized, repeatable features with sufﬁcient
recall, the increasing availability of compute power to-
day has made very dense feature sampling feasible
(e.g., with a stride of only one pixel, resulting in many
thousands of features in an image) – in the limit, dense
sampling typically outperforms sparse interest opera-
tors in image classiﬁcation as interest point detectors
are designed to sample particular types of image struc-
ture whereas dense sampling allows to sample any type
of image structure (note that this might be different for
other applications, such as structure from motion, in
which it is more important to ﬁnd smaller numbers of
features with high precision).
Codebook Generation
Codebooks of visual features are typically constructed
by applying an unsupervised clustering algorithm,
such as k-means or hierarchical agglomerative cluster-
ing [33.13], to a training set of image feature vectors.
The result is a vector-quantized representation of the
visual feature space that groups similar feature descrip-
tors into clusters. Each cluster thus effectively general-
izes over its members, such that small visual differences
are suppressed – this is often seen as a crucial trait for
categorization even though larger codebook sizes typi-
cally result in better performance. Each cluster is iden-
tiﬁed with a representative member, i. e., its centroid
(for k-means) or medoid (for agglomerative clustering).
In order to represent a new image with respect to the
generated codebook, image features are extracted, and
matched to the representative of each cluster (e.g., by
computing pairwise distances and deﬁning a matching
threshold). The result of this matching is then recorded
(e.g., as a histogram over the number of times each clus-
ter has been matched) to yield the image or object rep-
resentation. Note that in the context of BOw models the
terms object and image representation are synonymous.
For codebook generation, the number of clusters is
an important free parameter: it has been found that large
codebook sizes typically improve recognition perfor-
mance, since they represent the original feature space
more faithfully, with lower reconstruction error. On the
other hand, large codebooks generalize less, and come
at the cost of increased computational cost when build-
ing bag-of-words representations and classifying them
with nonlinear classiﬁers. Typically, codebooks with
several and even 10 000s (multiples of ten thousand) of
clusters are chosen for optimal performance [33.14].
Generative Models
Inspired by their success in the text domain, genera-
tive probabilistic models have also been adopted for
image classiﬁcation in connection with BOw represen-
tations. The arguably simplest one is the naive Bayes
model [33.8, 15], in which the posterior probability of
an image having a certain class factors into independent
contributions from each histogram bin (i. e., for a given
class, knowing about the presence of one feature does
not make the presence of another feature any more or
less likely). While this model is agnostic of correlations
that often exist between features (for instance, having
already observed two wheel features in a sideview of
a car makes it unlikely to observe one more, assuming
that only a single car is present in the image), it often
works well in practice and is appealing due to its sim-
plicity.
In line with the text domain, more powerful models
have been proposed for image classiﬁcation that ex-
plicitly capture the co-occurrence of features through
a generative process. Here, the features contained in
an image are assumed to be generated in a sequence
of steps, where each step determines the choices avail-
able for the next step. More precisely, each step is
implemented by sampling from a probability distri-
bution, conditioned on the outcome of the previous
step.
A popular class of generative models is the topic
model [33.16, 17]: an image is considered to be an
orderless document of visual words, composed of mul-
tiple topics (in an image depicting a beach scene, there
could be a water topic, a sand topic, and a sky topic,
for instance). In order to generate a particular feature
in the image, a topic is ﬁrst sampled from a dis-
crete distribution over topics (a beach scene could be
a roughly uniform distribution over water, sand, and
sky). Then, a visual feature is sampled from a dis-
crete distribution over features, conditioned on the
previously sampled topic (e.g., for a water topic, the
sampled feature is likely to be a blue image patch
with a ripple pattern). In practice, the assignment of
visual features to topics is represented through la-
tent variables, which means that it has to be inferred
from other quantities that can be observed (such that
the likelihood of the features is maximized). This is
typically implemented by means of the expectation
maximization (EM) [33.18] algorithm, which alternates
(re-)estimation of topic distributions (E-step) and im-
putation of latent variables (M-step) in an iterative
procedure.
In the literature, there exists a large variety of
topic models, ranging from the basic probabilistic la-
tent semantic analysis (PLSA) [33.16] over its Bayesian
extension, latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) [33.17], to

Part C | 33.2
828
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Image
Spatial pyramid representation
Level 0
Level 1
Level 2
Fig. 33.2 Spatial pyramid matching
as a multilevel BOw representation
(after [33.20])
inﬁnite hierarchical models of images and their fea-
tures [33.19].
Discriminative Models
Once an image is represented as a histogram of matched
features with respect to a codebook, it can be classiﬁed
by means of any discriminative classiﬁer that is appli-
cable to histograms. Popular choices include support
vector machines [33.21] with histogram intersection
kernels or their approximate counterpart [33.22], boost-
ing [33.23], or random forest classiﬁers [33.24].
Extensions
While the bag-of-words representation inherently ig-
nores spatial information, it can be re-introduced by
restricting the support of a bag-of-words representation
to a local image region, and processing multiple re-
gions independently. Speciﬁcally, instances of an object
class can be localized by sliding a rectangular window
over the image under consideration, extracting a bag-
of-words representation at each location, and feeding
the result into a classiﬁer that distinguishes the object
class of interest from a background. Objects of differ-
ent sizes can be localized by applying this scheme to
multiple re-scaled versions of the input image [33.25]
(called an image pyramid).
Rather than applying the sliding window in a brute
force fashion, it has been realized that the classiﬁer
score that an image window can attain can be bounded
from above by the scores of the subwindows that it
contains. This observation gives rise to an efﬁcient
subwindow search [33.26] that greatly reduces the num-
ber of classiﬁer evaluations needed in connection with
sliding window bag of words representations, making
powerful but slow nonlinear kernel SVMs applicable.
33.2.2 Spatial Pyramid Matching
Instead of completely ignoring the spatial layout of
local features in an image, it seems reasonable to in-
clude at least a rough notion of locality in order to
increase the discriminative power of an object class
representation. Spatial pyramid matching implements
this notion as an extension of the bag-of-words model
(Sect. 33.2.1), by extracting multiple bag-of-words rep-
resentations for a single input image at different spatial
locations and scales, and aggregating these local rep-
resentations into a single global representation for the
entire image. Speciﬁcally, spatial pyramid matching
(SPM) [33.27] extracts bag-of-words histograms for
each cell in a rectangular grid overlaid onto the input
image (typically, coarse grids of 2l for l 2 f0; 1; 2g).
This process is repeated multiple times with different
numbers of cells (e.g., four by four plus two by two
plus a single cell), forming an overcomplete pyramid
structure of decreasing spatial resolution (Fig. 33.2).
The resulting bag-of-words histograms for each cell are
concatenated (and re-normalized). The appeal of SPM
lies in representing the spatial layout at multiple levels
of resolution without committing to any one in partic-
ular – instead, the representations of all resolutions are
kept, and have the chance to contribute to image classi-
ﬁcation in case they prove useful.
The basic SPM methodology appears in numerous
variations in the literature, but often follows the same
pipeline of four steps (feature extraction, feature cod-
ing, spatial pooling, and classiﬁcation), each of which
we review in the following sections.
Feature Extraction
Like the basic bag-of-words model, the SPM model
has been used in connection with various feature types,
ranging from SIFT [33.9] appearance features to lo-
cal edge conﬁgurations [33.28] and self-similarity fea-
tures [33.29].
Feature Coding
Representing visual features relative to a pretrained
codebook obtained by vector quantization is only one
special case of feature coding (performing a change of
representation), and several improvements have been
proposed in the literature [33.30–32]. Most importantly,
it has proven beneﬁcial to explicitly formulate the code-
book training and feature coding as a joint optimization
problem, such that the original features can be recon-
structed with small error from their respective codes.
In addition, this formulation allows us to relax the as-
sumption that each feature is matched to exactly one
codebook entry by replacing the cardinality constraint
with an L1 regularization. The resulting sparse coding
(SC) formulation [33.31] has been shown to outperform
the original SPM [33.27] by signiﬁcant margins, even

Visual Object Class Recognition
33.2 Review of the State of the Art
829
Part C | 33.2
when combined with a linear SVM (while SPM works
best in connection with nonlinear histogram intersec-
tion or chi-square kernels, which are computationally
expensive). An improved version of SC is given by
locality constrained linear coding (LLC) [33.32]. It re-
places sparsity by locality constraints that encourage
features to be reconstructed by nearby features in fea-
ture space, such that similar features yield similar codes
(which is obviously desirable in order to facilitate clas-
siﬁer learning).
Instead of relying solely on counting the number
of occurrences of visual features in a spatial region
as promoted by SPM, SC, and LLC, the Fisher vec-
tor [33.30] method characterizes that region by how well
a pretrained generative probabilistic model (a Gaussian
mixture model, GMM) explains the contained features.
Speciﬁcally, it builds a vector from the derivatives of
the log-likelihood of the image features, given the mix-
ture coefﬁcients, means, and diagonal covariances of
a GMM. Note that this vector has much more entries
than a histogram of occurrences using the same GMM
as a codebook, allowing to build highly discrimina-
tive representations already for small numbers of GMM
mixture components (typically only a few hundred).
Both sparse coding and Fisher vector represen-
tations haven proven to be very effective for im-
age classiﬁcation in connection with spatial pyramids,
and have been successfully applied also in large-scale
settings, such as classiﬁcation on ImageNet [33.33]
(Sect. 33.2.8).
Spatial Pooling
Apart from the classic pyramid scheme [33.27] in
which histograms of different pyramid levels are con-
catenated, retaining the maximum value of a particular
bin over a spatial region or even multiple pyramid levels
(max-pooling) has gained increasing attention [33.31],
in particular in connection with CNNs (Sect. 33.2.6).
Max-pooling has the advantage that it promotes invari-
ance to local translations and scale changes, and has
been found to be present in the human visual cortex
(V1) [33.34].
In
addition to
pooling features
in
the two-
dimensional (2-D) image plane, more object-centric
pooling techniques have been developed in the context
of ﬁne-grained categorization [33.35, 36] (Sect. 33.2.7).
Classification
The last stage in an SPM pipeline is typically given
by a discriminative classiﬁer that is trained on a train-
ing set of ﬁxed length vectors created from the SPM
representations. Depending on the sophistication of the
feature coding step, support vector machines with non-
linear histogram intersection or chi-square [33.27] or
linear kernels [33.30–32] achieve state-of-the-art per-
formance. Further extensions include the use of multi-
ple kernels with learned contribution weights [33.37].
When evaluated as part of a classiﬁcation cascade, mul-
tiple kernel learning (MKL) can also be used in a sliding
window object class detector [33.38].
33.2.3 Flexible Part Models
While orderless bags of visual features (Sect. 33.2.1) or
spatial pyramids with a ﬁxed grid layout (Sect. 33.2.2)
have proven to be effective object class representations
for classiﬁcation, they both fail to explicitly capture the
ﬂexible nature of physical objects that are composed
of multiple parts – as an example, consider the human
face with eyes, eyebrows, mouth, nose, and ears: ob-
viously, the precise shape and spatial arrangement of
these parts will vary from person to person, but varia-
tions in shape and arrangement are constrained to lie
within a plausible range (i. e., the parts are not un-
ordered as in a bag-of-words representation). It also
seems intuitive that the constraints that govern the range
of plausible variations should be soft, and not bound to
a ﬁxed binning or a ﬁxed spatial grid (as in spatial pyra-
mid matching). In this section, we review a family of
ﬂexible part models that implement this intuition.
Constellation Model
The constellation model [33.39–41] represents an ob-
ject class as a ﬂexible arrangement of a ﬁxed number
of parts. It consists of two components: ﬁrst, a model
of the appearance of each part, and second, a model
of the relative spatial layout of the parts. It is formu-
lated in a fully probabilistic way, such that each part
is characterized by a probabilistic, generative model of
its appearance, and the spatial layout of the parts is
governed by a joint Gaussian distribution that captures
how the location (and scale) of each part is expected to
vary with the location of each other part. Interestingly,
the deﬁnition of what constitutes a part is driven en-
tirely by the training data: parts are chosen and placed
such that the likelihood of the training data, given the
model, is maximized during training. This can be seen
as an instance of a missing data problem (the asso-
ciation between features and parts is unknown), and
solved by means of the expectation maximization (EM)
algorithm.
Unfortunately, the representative power of the joint
Gaussian spatial distribution comes at a cost: the fully
connected dependency structure demands examining
each of the exponentially many combinations of plac-
ing all parts in an image in order to ﬁnd the global
optimum – the exact inference problem is known to be
intractable. As a consequence, the original constellation

Part C | 33.2
830
Part C
Sensing and Perception
model [33.40, 41] is limited to a few dozen candidates
per part, per image, limiting its generality. An alterna-
tive approach to solving the exact inference problem is
to resort to an approximation, e.g., by sampling likely
constellations from part detection proposals [33.42]. In
this way, the number of part candidates can be scaled
up to several thousands.
Due to its probabilistic nature, the constellation
model has also been extended to a full Bayesian
model [33.43], in which the object class model it-
self is governed by a prior distribution over models.
This abstraction allows to separate characteristics of
one particular object class (e.g., the particular shape
of a horse’s head) from properties that are shared by
classes (e.g., all quadrupeds are four legged). These
shared properties can be re-used in multiple object class
detectors (e.g., for horses, cows, dogs, etc.), facilitating
learning from limited training data. The underlying idea
of re-use of information is known as transfer learning in
the machine learning literature, and has been success-
fully applied for image classiﬁcation [33.43] as well as
object class detection.
Implicit Shape Model
The implicit shape model (ISM) [33.44] relaxes the as-
sumption of the constellation model that the locations
and scales of all parts are mutually dependent. Instead,
it limits the dependency structure to a star topology, in
which part locations and scales are conditionally inde-
pendent, given the object center (i. e., given the object
center, revealing information about the location of one
part does not alter the expectation of where to observe
any other part). While this model clearly constitutes an
approximation of the physical world, it greatly simpli-
ﬁes the inference problem of ﬁnding the conﬁguration
with maximum score (there exists an algorithm that is
exact and efﬁcient).
Speciﬁcally, the ISM represents an object class as
a collection of local feature matches – the supply of
matchable features is given by a codebook of visual
words, as it is also used in bag-of-words (Sect. 33.2.1)
or spatial pyramid representations (Sect. 33.2.2). In
contrast to those, however, each ISM codebook entry
also maintains a list of feature matches from a training
set of images: each match speciﬁes where the match oc-
curred relative to the object center. As a result, this list
of occurrences constitutes a nonparametric probability
density estimate of the location of the object center,
given the matched feature – in other words, each feature
can cast votes for likely object center positions (e.g.,
a wheel feature can cast two votes: one to the left of
it, assuming that it is the front wheel of a car, and one
to the right, assuming it’s the back wheel). This voting
procedure can directly be translated into a recognition
algorithm: at recognition time, all test image features
cast their votes into a three-dimensional (3-D) voting
space (x, y, and scale). All votes are accumulated, and
since multiple features are likely to agree on the true
object center, the maxima of this voting space can be
considered candidate object detections (note that this
voting can be considered a generalized Hough trans-
form). In practice, continuous voting space maxima are
found using a mean-shift algorithm.
In order to increase its discriminative power,
the basic ISM model is extended by a veriﬁcation
step [33.44], in which object detection candidates are
veriﬁed based on how consistent they are with re-
spect to foreground–background segmentation. To that
end, feature occurrences stored as part of the code-
book are enriched with segmentation mask fragments
(which have to be provided as additional supervision
during training). At recognition time, the consistency
of the cast segmentation mask votes is quantiﬁed based
on minimum description length (MDL). In addition, it
has been suggested to learn weights that regulate the
contributions of feature matches to the ﬁnal detection
hypotheses in a discriminative way (i. e., optimized to
distinguish object and background ﬁrings). This dis-
criminative Hough transform [33.45] further improves
the performance of the ISM and constitutes the basis
for the poselet framework [33.46], in which a multitude
of small HOG [33.47] detectors (Sect. 33.2.4) are com-
bined in order to detect people.
Since, in theory, the ISM voting space can accom-
modate arbitrary quantities in addition to object center
and scale, there have been extensions to predict the
walking poses of pedestrians [33.48] as well as pre-
dicting the viewpoint from which the detected object
is imaged [33.49, 50].
Pictorial Structures
While being the ﬁrst to conceptualize the idea of objects
being composed of ﬂexible parts, the pictorial structures
model [33.39, 51] is typically understood as a simpli-
ﬁed version of the constellation model. The full mutual
dependency structure between parts is relaxed to a tree
(or a mixture of trees in more advanced incarnations) –
note that the star-shaped ISM (Sect. 33.2.3) is hence
a special case of a pictorial structures model with tree-
depth one. In contrast to the constellation model, where
parts are deﬁned in a data-driven way, the pictorial
structures model is typically associated with a seman-
tic notion of parts. An intuitive example is the set of
human body parts (head, torso, upper arm, lower arm,
etc.) in connection with the natural kinematic tree struc-
ture (Fig. 33.3).

Visual Object Class Recognition
33.2 Review of the State of the Art
831
Part C | 33.2
Orientation K
Likelihood
of part N
Estimated
pose
Part
posteriors
Local
features
AdaBoost
a)
b)
···
···
Fig.33.3a,b Human body
pose estimation with the
pictorial structures model.
(a) Image likelihoods for in-
dividual parts; (b) ﬁnal pose
estimate using spatial layout
prior
In fact, current state-of-the-art systems for people
detection and human body pose estimation are typically
built upon the pictorial structures model [33.52]. Here,
pairwise relations between body parts express the an-
gular constraints of the human body as well as the prior
probability of observing people in various poses (e.g., it
is unlikely to observe extreme angles at certain joints,
Fig. 33.3b). In order to compensate for the weaker spa-
tial model in comparison to the constellation model, the
pictorial structures model typically relies on a strong
model for the appearance of each part that is trained dis-
criminatively (distinguishing the part from background,
Fig. 33.3a) rather than in a generate way (explaining the
part’s appearance). Examples of discrimative part ap-
pearance models include AdaBoost [33.23] classiﬁers
trained on dense shape context features [33.52]. Also
note that part appearance and spatial layout models are
trained independently (joint training has been realized
to bear large potential for improvement in the context
of the deformable part model [33.53] which we will re-
view in Sect. 33.2.5).
The use of semantic parts naturally demands to
provide additional supervision in the form of part anno-
tations during training; human body parts are typically
annotated with a ﬁxed size relative to the size of the
person. For recognition, inference in the tree-structured
probabilistic graphical model can be carried out exactly
and efﬁciently by max-product or sum-product be-
lief propagation, depending on whether the maximum
a posteriori (MAP) or marginal solution is preferred.
Extensions to the pictorial structures model in-
clude learning the tree structure instead of using the
natural kinematic tree [33.54], introducing additional
lateral edges in addition to the tree edges [33.55],
and combining pictorial structures models with non-
parametric representations of partial human poses
(poselets [33.46]).
33.2.4 Histogram of Oriented Gradients
At the opposite end of the spectrum from the
bag-of-words (Sect. 33.2.1) or ﬂexible part models
(Sect. 33.2.3) are approaches that represent an object
class as a rigid template of local features with a ﬁxed
spatial layout. Conceptually, this corresponds to the
ﬁnest level of a spatial pyramid in which each feature
gets assigned its own exclusive set of histogram bins
(with values equal to the feature itself). The by far most
successful rigid template detector is the histogram of
oriented gradients (HOG) [33.47] detector, and we will
discuss its properties in detail in this section. Origi-
nally developed for people detection, the HOG feature
has evolved into one of the most frequently used fea-
tures in computer vision to date, and also constitutes
the basis for the successful deformable part model
(DPM) [33.53] described in Sect. 33.2.5.
Feature Extraction
The HOG feature can be seen as an extension of
SIFT [33.9] from a single circular interest region to
a rectangular detection window – at its core, it bins gra-
dient directions into histograms, weighting their con-
tributions by their respective magnitudes. Like SIFT, it
has been carefully engineered and its parameters empir-
ically tuned for performance (more recently, learning
features end-to-end has received renewed attention,
Sect. 33.2.6).
The ﬁrst step for the computation of a HOG fea-
ture is to divide the detection window into a ﬁxed grid
of cells: a cell is the basic spatial unit of measurement
for the HOG feature. The second step is to gamma-
normalize the pixel content of each cell, in order to
increase robustness to lighting changes. Third, the im-
age is smoothed and image gradients computed using
discrete derivative masks. Fourth, gradients are binned,
such that each gradient casts weighted votes (by mag-
nitude) according to nine different gradient orientation
bins. Votes are interpolated bilinearly in both orien-
tation and position. And ﬁfth, the per-cell histograms
are contrast normalized with respect to a larger block
of surrounding cells in order to compensate for lo-
cal variations in lighting and foreground–background
contrast. Crucially, blocks are formed such that they
overlap, which means that each cell contributes mul-
tiple times to the ﬁnal feature descriptor, normalized in
different ways, resulting in an over-complete represen-

Part C | 33.2
832
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Slide detection window
over all positions and scales
Extract
feature vector
Scan
image
Classify
feature vector
Non-maxima
suppression
Fig. 33.4 Sliding window object class
detection
Root template
•••
•••
•••
Part templates
Deformations
a)
b)
Fig.33.5a,b The deformable part
model with multiple mixture com-
ponents. (a) Mixture component for
a frontal view of object class car.
(b) Mixture component for a side view
of object class car (after [33.56])
tation. This step has been found to be essential for good
performance.
Sliding Window Object Detection
Similar to pure bag-of-words and spatial pyramid-based
detectors, the HOG detector is typically run in a sliding
window fashion over a test image, over different loca-
tions and scales (Fig. 33.4). That is, HOG features are
computed for a detection window of ﬁxed size, resulting
in a feature vector that can then be fed into a discrimi-
native classiﬁer, such as a linear support vector machine
(SVM).
Bootstrapping
One of the key ingredients for good detection per-
formance of the HOG detector [33.47] is a technique
termed as bootstrapping(not to be confused with a tech-
nique of the same name known from statistics, in
which a dataset is repeatedly subsampled). An initially
trained model is reﬁned by re-training it on an ex-
tended set of negative training images, similar in spirit
to boosting [33.23]. Speciﬁcally, the initial model is run
on a validation set, and the false positive detections
(wrongly detected objects) are added to the negative
training set. As a result, the decision boundary of the re-
trained classiﬁer is pushed further away from these hard
negatives. Note that this procedure is not guaranteed to
always lead to an improvement, but often improves per-
formance substantially in practice.
Extensions
Due to its simple grid structure, the HOG feature lends
itself to being combined with other feature channels ex-
tracted from a similar spatial grid. Notably, it has been
successfully combined with optical ﬂow features for
people detection in video [33.57].
33.2.5 The Deformable Part Model
The section provides an introduction to one of the
most successful computer vision algorithms to date, the
DPM [33.53]. Its success is partly due to its consistently
high performance for detecting a wide variety of ob-
ject classes, but also due to the fact that a high quality
implementation has been made publicly available from
the start. The original implementation has constantly
been improved and updated, and even found its way
into OpenCV [33.58]. The HOG [33.47] implementa-
tion at its core has found wide spread use throughout
the computer vision community.
Model Structure and Inference
The DPM can be seen as a proper generalization of
the fully rigid HOG [33.47] template to a ﬂexible,
part-based object class representation (Fig. 33.5). It
generalizes HOG in two different ways that both in-
crease its ability to handle intraclass variation: ﬁrst, it
divides the single HOG template into a collection of
multiple templates that can move relative to one another
and capture small variations in object shape (hence the
name Deformable Part Model). Speciﬁcally, it includes
a low-resolution root template for the entire object plus
a number of high-resolution parts that are constrained
to occur not too far from their expected positions
relative to the root – this constitutes a star-shaped
probabilistic graphical model (PGM) in full analogy

Visual Object Class Recognition
33.2 Review of the State of the Art
833
Part C | 33.2
to the implicit shape model [33.44] (Sect. 33.2.3) or
a special case of a tree-structured pictorial structures
model [33.39] (Sect. 33.2.3). While this is less powerful
than a full constellation model [33.41] in terms of rep-
resentation, it has proven very effective in connection
with a discriminative learning regime.
Second, the DPM is formulated as a mixture model
with multiple components, where each component
takes care of another aspect of the object class of inter-
est, such as a particular viewpoint or a particular context
in which the object occurs (e.g., a person sitting on
a chair). Each component consists of a star-model with
root and multiple part templates as described earlier,
trained to respond the strongest to its dedicated aspect –
this separation of concerns leads to a simpler learning
problem than trying to handle all aspects with a single
component.
For recognition, each of the DPM components pro-
duces a score as follows: ﬁrst, all of the component’s
templates (root and parts) are convolved with the im-
age in a sliding window fashion, as in the original
HOG [33.47] work (Sect. 33.2.4), resulting in dense
score maps over image locations and scales. Second,
root and part scores are combined with spatial defor-
mation terms that reﬂect the star-shaped spatial de-
pendency structure, resulting in new score maps over
locations and scales – note that this inference step
can be carried out by max-product belief propagation,
which is exact and efﬁcient due to the star topology,
and implemented as an instance of a generalized dis-
tance transform [33.59]. And third, for each image
location and scale, the maximum response over all com-
ponents is kept as the ﬁnal detection score (which is
then further processed by a standard, greedy nonmax-
ima suppression).
Learning
It has been argued that much of the DPM’s excellent
detection performance is due to the speciﬁc way in
which parameters are learned from training data, in ad-
dition to the added expressive power in comparison to
a single, rigid HOG template. This learning also consti-
tutes the major difference between the DPM and earlier
ﬂexible part models such as the ISM [33.44] or the pic-
torial structures model [33.39] (Sect. 33.2.3) that are
structurally equivalent, but less effective in terms of
performance.
In contrast to these earlier models, where local part
appearance and spatial layout models are trained sep-
arately, all DPM parameters are learned jointly, such
that a single binary classiﬁcation objective is opti-
mized (distinguish between the object class of interest
and background). Crucially, this includes the placement
of parts relative to the root template as well as the
selection of the mixture component that is deemed re-
sponsible; both are treated as latent variables at training
(and test) time. As a consequence, all aspects of the
DPM are optimized towards the single goal of object
class detection, without being convoluted by potentially
suboptimal choices of part placement based on appear-
ance similarity (ISM) or semantic meaning (pictorial
structures).
The joint optimization problem is phrased as a gen-
eralization of the linear SVM [33.21] formulation of
a single HOG template, termed latent support vector
machine (LSVM) [33.60]. It is based on the following
intuition: assuming that the latent variables (part place-
ments and mixture component selection) are observed,
all model parameters (HOG template and part displace-
ment weights) can be learned using standard linear
SVM procedures (the resulting objective function is
convex, assuming the use of a hinge loss). Conversely,
assuming known model parameters, the optimal values
of all hidden variables can be found exactly and efﬁ-
ciently (using the distance transform for part placement
and exhaustive search over components). This intuition
gives rise to an EM-like alternation of two steps, which
can be shown to converge to a local optimum of the
original, nonconvex objective function.
Naturally, a good initialization is needed in order
to reach good local optima during learning. The DPM
suggests a clustering of training examples based on as-
pect ratio, which has proven to work surprisingly well
in practice (clustering based on appearance typically re-
sults in small improvements but is much more costly
in terms of computation time). As for the HOG de-
tector [33.47], bootstrapping (here called hard negative
mining) allows to escape bad local optima.
While the concept of jointly optimizing part appear-
ance and placement has already existed in the constel-
lation model [33.41], the DPM achieves this goal by
largely different technical means, resulting in better per-
formance: (1) it uses sliding-window HOG templates
with linear SVM classiﬁers instead of a generative
model over local interest point descriptors to represent
local appearance, and (2) it relaxes the fully connected
probabilistic graphical model topology to a star, making
exact inference tractable and efﬁcient for learning. The
DPM has achieved excellent performance on a wide va-
riety of benchmark datasets, including PASCAL VOC
(visual object class) [33.61] (Sect. 33.2.8).
Multiview and 3-D DPMs
While the original DPM [33.53] achieves remarkable
performance on standard detection benchmarks, it is
inherently limited to predicting 2-D bounding boxes.
While this might be sufﬁcient for some applications
(such as counting the number of objects in an image), it

Part C | 33.2
834
Part C
Sensing and Perception
is clearly not enough for others: suppose an autonomous
driving scenario in which vehicles are to be tracked
across multiple frames, and their spatial extent to be
estimated in order to avoid collisions – here, a 3-D rep-
resentation of each vehicle is required.
To that end, the DPM has been extended [33.56,
62, 63] to output richer object hypotheses than 2-D
bounding boxes, in the form of additional viewpoint
estimates (providing a better notion of 3-D object ex-
tent than a 2-D bounding box alone) and 3-D parts that
are consistent across viewpoints (providing a basis for
establishing correspondences across multiple frames
in a sequence). Providing these richer outputs can be
achieved by extending the original DPM in two differ-
ent ways: ﬁrst, the classiﬁcation problem solved during
learning can be reformulated as a structured output pre-
diction problem [33.62]. In this way, the model can
be optimized for the prediction of other quantities than
a binary object-background label, such as 2-D bounding
box overlap or angular viewpoint estimates, through the
use of different loss functions. In its simplest variant,
viewpoint estimation can be implemented by a binning
of angles, and dedicating a single DPM mixture com-
ponent to each angular bin. While this model is still
inherently view-based, it has been shown to deliver
excellent performance in both 2-D bounding box local-
ization and viewpoint estimation (note that viewpoint
labels have to be available during training in addition to
bounding box annotations).
Second, instead of parameterizing the DPM parts
in the image plane, an object-centric 3-D coordinate
system can be used, such that parts from different mix-
ture components refer to the same 3-D object portion
(Fig. 33.6a). Part deformations are then governed by
3-D displacement distributions (Fig. 33.6b), and object
as well as part appearance can be captured in a continu-
P1(x,y,z)
N(pj|μj, Σj)
N(pυ
j |Qυ
jμj,(Qυ
j ) Σj(Qυ
j )T)
(x,y,z)
P M(x,y,z)
P M
P 1
a)
b)
Fig.33.6a,b Part representation in the 3-D deformable part
model (3-D DPM). (a) 3-D/2-D part coordinate systems;
(after [33.62]) (b) 3-D/2-D part spatial distributions (af-
ter [33.63])
ous appearance model (Fig. 33.7a). The result is a 3-D
object class representation [33.63] that can synthesize
previously unseen viewpoints at test time (by inter-
polating between a number of supporting viewpoints
for which training data is available) and thus estimate
viewpoints up to arbitrary granularity. The learning of
this 3-D object class representation is facilitated by us-
ing 3-D computer-aided design (CAD) models of the
object class of interest in addition to real-world im-
ages (Fig. 33.7b). During training, the CAD models
serve both to establish a 3-D coordinate system and to
generate artiﬁcial training data for different viewpoints
through rendering. Figure 33.8 shows example detec-
tions obtained by the 3-D2PM.
Computational Considerations
Interestingly, it has been realized that the major com-
putational bottleneck of the original DPM [33.53] at
recognition time is the convolution of HOG templates
with image features (and not probabilistic graphical
model inference as one might think). As a consequence,
there have been attempts to minimize the number of
HOG convolutions by various means, e.g., by part shar-
ing parts across components and object classes [33.64],
re-using parts of templates by decomposing them into
an overcomplete set of dictionary elements [33.65] or
cascaded detector evaluation [33.66]. Likewise, there
have been attempts to reduce the training time for the
DPM by exploiting HOG feature statistics to re-use
computation across models [33.67, 68].
33.2.6 Convolutional Neural Networks
While artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) [33.69] had
largely been neglected in favor of support vector ma-
chines, random forests, and other learners until around
2010, they have recently returned to the scene, with
quite remarkable success. Among a number of artiﬁcial
VP1
Unseen viewpoints
• • •
VP M
a)
b)
Fig.33.7a,b Continuous appearance model (a) in the
3-D2PM, trained from rendered 3-D CAD models (af-
ter [33.63]) (b) and real images (not shown)

Visual Object Class Recognition
33.2 Review of the State of the Art
835
Part C | 33.2
neural network architectures that had been suggested
already in the early days of computer vision, the convo-
lutional neural network (CNN) [33.70] has emerged as
a particularly promising candidate for becoming a stan-
dard tool for visual recognition tasks.
One of the key properties of the CNN is its speciﬁc
structure (Fig. 33.9), which is both amenable to deal-
ing with multidimensional input (such as a color image)
and effective for preventing overﬁtting when learned
from limited training data. As an ANN, a CNN de-
ﬁnes an artiﬁcial neural network with multiple layers
on an input image, such that image pixels provide the
input to the neurons of the ﬁrst layer, and the outputs
of each layer of neurons provide the inputs to the next
layer (the ﬁnal layer can provide a task speciﬁc output,
such as an encoding of different image classes). Now,
the topology of the CNN is restricted in two speciﬁc
ways: ﬁrst, neurons in one layer can only be connected
to a ﬁxed spatial region of neurons in the preceding
layer (the receptive ﬁeld) – this dramatically reduces the
total number of connections in the network and hence
parameters of the model that have to be learned. And
second, most layers of neurons (typically the lower lay-
ers) are formed by replicating local groups of neurons
multiple times, including the weights associated with
their connections to the preceding layer (weight shar-
ing) – this further reduces the number of parameters of
the model, and encourages the network to learn a repre-
sentation for the input that is invariant to translation. As
a result of their speciﬁc structure, CNNs are less prone
to overﬁtting than fully connected ANNs, and can be
successfully trained using gradient-based methods and
back-propagation of errors.
Fig. 33.8 3-D2PM example detections (car, bicycle, human head, cell phone)
Filter size
11×11×3
Stride
4
1
Image size
227×227×3
27×27×96
Contrast
norm.
3×3
max pool
stride 2
55×55×96
5×5×96
Input image
Layer 1
(Convolution)
1
13×13×256
Contrast
norm.
3×3
max pool
stride 2
27×27×256
3×3×256
1
13×13×384
3×3×384
1
13×13×384
3×3×384
Layer 2
(Convolution)
6×6×256
3×3
max pool
stride 2
13×13×256
4096
units
Layer 5
(Convolution)
Layer 6
(Fully
connected)
4096
units
Layer 7
(Fully
connected)
C
class
softmax
Output
(Softmax)
Layer 3
(Convolution)
Layer 4
(Convolution)
Fig. 33.9 The CNN model of (after [33.71]) in the implementation of Caffe (after [33.72, 73])
CNNs for Image Classification
CNNs have recently achieved remarkable performance
in large-scale image classiﬁcation [33.71], fueled
by the availability of large-scale datasets like Ima-
geNet [33.33] that provide thousands of images per
object class. The success of CNNs in image classiﬁca-
tion is mostly attributed to their ability to learn useful
image representations end-to-end (deep learning) rather
than relying on engineered features, such as SIFT [33.9]
or HOG [33.47]. While the latter have been carefully
designed and empirically tuned over many years, they
are general purpose and not speciﬁcally adapted to
the classiﬁcation task at hand, and hence suboptimal.
A recent study provides further insights into the op-
eration of individual CNN components (hidden layers
and classiﬁers) through visualization [33.74], resulting
in a further boost in performance.
Region Proposals for Detection
Since the evaluation of a CNN is computationally ex-
pensive due to convolutions, a CNN is typically applied
to preselected candidate regions rather than in a dense
sliding window fashion for detection. Candidate regions
can be generated either by a specialized detector trained
for the object class of interest (such as HOG [33.47],
Sect. 33.2.4) that is weaker but also much faster to
evaluate than the CNN, or by a more general atten-
tion mechanism that generates bounding boxes that are
likely to contain an object instance of any class. Among
various methods that generate proposal regions with
a high degree of objectness [33.75] ([33.76] for a recent
discussion and analysis of region proposal methods),
selective search [33.77] has been successfully used in

Part C | 33.2
836
Part C
Sensing and Perception
connection with CNN-based, object class speciﬁc clas-
siﬁers for detection [33.78]. Selective search is built
upon a superpixel-based oversegmentation of an image,
and suggests a greedy procedure to group adjacent su-
perpixels into regions of high objectness. The resulting
detector [33.79] has been shown to outperform previ-
ous results in generic object class detection by a large
margin (notably outperforming the previous best re-
sults of the DPM [33.53], Sect. 33.2.5, on PASCAL
VOC [33.61], Sect. 33.2.8). Curiously, it is not nec-
essary to train this detector end-to-end for the task of
object class detection for good performance – instead,
the lower layers of the CNN can be pretrained for classi-
ﬁcation on ImageNet as in [33.71], and later ﬁne-tuned
for detection. Both the CNN pretrained on ImageNet
and the resulting state-of-the-art object class detector
are publicly available under the name Caffe [33.72] and
likely to ﬁnd their way into the toolboxes of many com-
puter vision practitioners.
Structured Outputs
While artiﬁcial neural networks can represent any func-
tion in theory, effective learning of ANNs with more
complex, structured outputs than single class labels or
continuous values remains a challenge. Instead of learn-
ing a full network end-to-end, structured outputs are
typically obtained by feeding the outputs of the last
layer of neurons into an existing structured model, such
as multiple body joint regressors for human body pose
estimation [33.80].
33.2.7 Fine-Grained Categorization
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in dis-
tinguishing objects not only with respect to basic-level
categories [33.5] (such as car, bicycle, and person), but
also on a ﬁner level of granularity (such as different car
models or plant and animal species). This ﬁne-grained
categorization is deemed particularly challenging: the
distinction between two categories is often determined
by small visual differences (such as the shape of a car’s
headlight): these differences are easily outweighed by
appearance differences due to change in lighting or
viewpoint (a car looks largely different from the front
and from the side), bearing the risk of overﬁtting to ir-
relevant details.
Feature Selection
A ﬁrst strategy to identifying subtle discriminative fea-
tures while at the same time preventing overﬁtting
is to combine classical feature selection techniques
with randomization, e.g., in the form of random for-
est classiﬁers [33.35, 81]. Here, randomization acts as
a regularizer that prevents multiple trees to latch onto
the same potentially irrelevant feature, hence reducing
the risk of overﬁtting. Feature selection can also be per-
formed with humans in the loop, using crowd-sourcing
and gamiﬁcation [33.82].
Pose Normalization
A second, orthogonal strategy in ﬁn-grained categoriza-
tion is to devise factored object class representations
that explicitly capture different modes of variation in
object appearance, thereby separating variations caused
by category membership from variations caused by
other factors, such as viewpoint changes. The main idea
is to establish a common frame of reference for the
extraction of visual features (e.g., a local coordinate
system for the dense extraction of SIFT [33.9] features),
such that the same object instance will always result in
(roughly) the same visual features being extracted, irre-
spective of viewpoint, lighting, etc.
Speciﬁcally, such a frame of reference can be estab-
lished by ﬁrst detecting the object of interest in a test
image and also localizing its semantic parts. Visual fea-
tures are then extracted and described relative to the
estimated object position and detected parts, ensuring
that a feature on the beak of a bird will only ever
be compared to a corresponding feature on the beak
of another bird, and not on its tail (assuming perfect
detection, viewpoint estimation, and part localization).
This kind of part-based pose normalization has been
demonstrated to be effective for bird species categoriza-
tion [33.83, 84].
Instead of localizing object parts in 2-D, some
works establish a common reference frame by esti-
mating a rough 3-D geometry of the object of interest
prior to feature extraction, in addition to estimating
its viewpoint. This allows not only to describe fea-
ture locations relative to the object surface rather than
the 2-D image plane (effectively performing the pool-
ing in 3-D [33.36]), but also to rectify image patches
with respect to the estimated surface normals, improv-
ing the robustness of the resulting feature descriptors
with respect to small viewpoint changes. This strategy
has proven effective in connection with a prebuilt bird
model [33.35] as well as in connection with predicted
3-D CAD model matches for ﬁne-grained car catego-
rization [33.36].
33.2.8 Datasets
Since visual object class recognition approaches rely on
machine learning algorithms at their core, they are very
much dependent on the availability of sufﬁcient train-
ing data – it has in fact been argued that major advances

Visual Object Class Recognition
33.3 Discussion and Conclusions
837
Part C | 33.3
in the ﬁeld might have occurred in response of obtain-
ing more data rather than by developing more powerful
algorithms [33.85]. At the same time, datasets are of
utmost importance in order to quantify and compare
the performance of different methods under controlled
conditions, and checking the sanity of newly developed
algorithms. To that end, benchmark datasets for visual
object class recognition typically consist of a collec-
tion of images split into training, validation, and test
sets, plus a set of ground truth annotations, and often
also evaluation scripts that measure the performance
of a recognition algorithm relative to the provided
annotations.
Since each dataset provides only a small sample of
the visual world, there is an inherent danger of being
biased [33.85] with respect to which images are se-
lected to be part of a dataset (and which ones are not),
and by what means images are captured. As a result,
new recognition algorithms should always be tested and
cross-trained on multiple datasets in order to prevent
overﬁtting to the characteristics of a particular dataset
rather than learning a concept of interest. The following
paragraphs give a small, by no means complete, selec-
tion of some of today’s inﬂuential datasets for visual
object class recognition.
PASCAL VOC
The PASCAL visual object classes challenge [33.61]
stands for a succession of datasets that have been re-
leased on a yearly basis from 2005 to 2012. Each dataset
consists ofmultiplechallenges (imageclassiﬁcation, ob-
ject class detection, segmentation, human body pose es-
timation) that are deﬁned on a given set of images. No-
tably, the set of images is steadily increased, such that
images ofyearn arere-used in yearnC1. PASCALVOC
counteracts dataset overﬁtting by not releasing test set
ground truth annotations to the public, but instead main-
taining an evaluation server that runs a limited number
of automated tests for a particular recognitionalgorithm.
PASCAL VOC images have been equipped with addi-
tional annotations, e.g., in the form of aligned 3-D CAD
models (3-D-PASCAL [33.86]).
SUN and COCO
The scene understanding (SUN) [33.87] and common
objects in context (COCO) [33.88] datasets have been
built in an effort to capture entire visual scenes rather
than objects in isolation. They are meant as benchmarks
for methods that reason jointly about multiple objects
in a scene rather than performing independent classiﬁ-
cation or detection.
ImageNet
ImageNet [33.33] is one of the largest image datasets
to date, consisting of over 14 million internet im-
ages that have been annotated with object labels from
the WordNet [33.89] hierarchy. Like PASCAL VOC,
it constitutes the basis for multiple challenges that
are deﬁned on the dataset, ranging from classiﬁca-
tion (1000 classes) over object class detection to ﬁne-
grained categorization. Due to its massive size, the
collection of the ImageNet dataset has been performed
mostly by means of crowd sourcing. ImageNet con-
stitutes the basis for pretraining some of the most
successful CNN-based image classiﬁers to date [33.71]
(Sect. 33.2.6).
33.3 Discussion and Conclusions
In this chapter, we have discussed visual object class
recognition as one of the most fundamental prob-
lems in computer vision, with a focus on presenting
the most promising models available to practitioners
today. The selection of methods that we have re-
viewed is by no means complete – in favor of going
into some depth for the most common techniques,
we have skipped over object representations based
on manifold learning [33.90] as well as representa-
tions based on grammars [33.91, 92], to mention just
a few.
As we have seen, practically all available models are
inherently based on some notion of object parts that are
governed by certain topological constraints. Naturally,
the choice of which part-based model to pick is not an
easy one, as it depends on many different factors that
should be carefully considered.
33.3.1 Task
First of all, the appropriate choice of model is depen-
dent on the application scenario and the resulting de-
sired recognition output: different methods can generate
outputs of different granularity, ranging from image-
level class labels (basic bag-of-words, Sect. 33.2.1, spa-
tial pyramid matching, Sect. 33.2.2) over 2-D bound-
ing box locations (bag-of-words and spatial pyramid
matching run in sliding window fashion, histogram of
oriented gradient detectors, Sect. 33.2.4, ﬂexible part
models, Sect. 33.2.3, basic deformable part models,
Sect. 33.2.5) to multiview detections and viewpoint
estimates (multiview ISM, Sect. 33.2.3, 3-D DPM,
Sect. 33.2.5).
Secondly, an application scenario typically comes
with a certain set of object classes of interest, which

Part C | 33
838
Part C
Sensing and Perception
are in turn characterized by rather different visual prop-
erties. Rigid objects (like cars or mugs) tend to be
handled well by rigid templates (like histogram of ori-
ented gradients, Sect. 33.2.4) or deformable part models
(Sect. 33.2.5), while articulate objects (like cats and
dogs) can be more reliably represented using looser
spatial models like bag of words (Sect. 33.2.1), or by
explicitly modeling their kinematic tree structure (pic-
torial structures, Sect. 33.2.3).
Finally, it should be noted that the distinction be-
tween object classes itself is quite arbitrary when draw-
ing strict borders between any two classes. In reality,
some classes are inherently more similar than others
(e.g., dogs and horses are more similar than dogs and
cars, since dogs and horses are both quadrupeds). Look-
ing at multiple levels of object categorization rather
than individual classes, it becomes a desired prop-
erty that objects from the same super-ordinate cate-
gory, such as quadrupeds, be classiﬁed as more similar
than objects from different super-ordinate categories.
In other words, an object categorization system should
degrade gracefully: if the object itself is not correctly
recognized, then we want it to be assigned at least to
a similar category. We thus need a way of representing
the relationship and grading similarities between object
categories [33.93].
33.3.2 Data
A particular choice of model implies a certain amount
of parameters that have to be learned and additional
latent parameters that have to be inferred at test time.
A model has to be chosen not only appropriate for
the task (above) but also in accordance with the avail-
able data at hand in order to prevent over or under
ﬁtting.
33.3.3 Efficiency
While simple feedforward models like histograms of
oriented gradients (Sect. 33.2.4) and bag-of-words
(Sect. 33.2.1) are very efﬁcient, modeling deforma-
tions and interdependence of parts (ﬂexible part models,
Sect. 33.2.3, deformable part models, Sect. 33.2.5)
comes at the cost of inferring latent quantities in the
model. Notably, this inference often has to be per-
formed repeatedly during learning, underlining the im-
portance of efﬁcient inference procedures.
References
33.1
D. Marr: Vision (Freeman, San Francisco 1982)
33.2
D.H. Ballard, C.M. Brown: Computer Vision (Prentice
Hall, Englewood Cliffs 1982)
33.3
R. Brown: How shall a thing be called?, Psychol.
Rev. 65, 14–21 (1958)
33.4
R. Brown: Social Psychology (Free, New York 1965)
33.5
E. Rosch, C. Mervis, W. Gray, D. Johnson, P. Boyes-
Braem: Basic objects in natural categories, Cogn.
Psychol. 8, 382–439 (1976)
33.6
G. Lakoff: Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things –
What Categories Reveal About the Mind (Univ.
Chicago Press, Chicago 1987)
33.7
S. Dickinson, A. Leonardis, B. Schiele, M. Tarr: Object
Categorization: Computer and Human Vision Per-
spectives (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge 2009)
33.8
G. Csurka, C.R. Dance, L. Fan, J. Willarnowski,
C. Bray: Visual categorization with bags of key-
points, Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV) (2004)
33.9
D. Lowe: Distinctive image features from scale-
invariant keypoints, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 60(2), 91–
110 (2004)
33.10
K. Mikolajczyk, C. Schmid: A performance evalua-
tion of local descriptors, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. 27(10), 1615–1630 (2004)
33.11
J. Matas, O. Chum, M. Urban, T. Pajdla: Robust wide
baseline stereo from maximally stable extremal re-
gions, Image Vis. Comput. 22(10), 761–767 (2004)
33.12
T. Tuytelaars: Dense interest points, IEEE Conf. Com-
put. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) (2010)
33.13
R.O. Duda, P.E. Hart, D.G. Stork: Pattern Classifica-
tion (Wiley, New York 2000)
33.14
F. Jurie, B. Triggs: Creating efficient codebooks for
visual recognition, 10th IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV) (2005)
33.15
B. Schiele, J.L. Crowley: Recognition without cor-
respondence using
multidimensional
receptive
field histograms, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 36(1), 31–52
(2000)
33.16
T. Hofmann: Probabilistic latent semantic indexing,
Proc. 22nd Annu. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Dev. Inf.
Retr. (1999)
33.17
D.M. Blei, A.Y. Ng, M.I. Jordan: Latent dirichlet al-
location, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 3, 983–1022 (2003)
33.18
A.P. Dempster, N.M. Laird, D.B. Rubin: Maximum
likelihood from incomplete data via the EM algo-
rithm, J. R. Statist. Soc. B 39, 1–38 (1977)
33.19
Z. Shi, Y. Yang, T.M. Hospedales, T. Xiang: Weakly
supervised learning of objects, attributes and their
associations, Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV) (2014)
pp. 472–487
33.20
S. Lazebnik, C. Schmid, J. Ponce: Spatial pyramid
matching. In: Object Categorization, ed. by S. Dick-
inson, A. Leonardis, B. Schiele, M. Tarr (Cambridge
Univ. Press, Cambridge 2009) pp. 401–415
33.21
C. Cortes, V. Vapnik: Support-vector networks,
Mach. Learn. 20(3), 273–297 (1995)
33.22
S. Maji, A.C. Berg, J. Malik: Classification using
intersection kernel support vector machines is ef-
ficient, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR) (2008)
33.23
Y. Freund, R.E. Schapire: A decision-theoretic gen-
eralization of on-line learning and an application

Visual Object Class Recognition
References
839
Part C | 33
to boosting, J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 55(1), 119–139
(1997)
33.24
L. Breiman: Random forests, Mach. Learn. 45(1), 5–
32 (2001)
33.25
T. Lindeberg: Feature detection with automatic
scale selection, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 30(2), 79–116
(1998)
33.26
C.H. Lampert, M.B. Blaschko, T. Hofmann: Efficient
subwindow search: A branch and bound frame-
work for object localization, IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell. 31(12), 2129–2142 (2009)
33.27
S. Lazebnik, C. Schmid, J. Ponce: Beyond bags of
features: Spatial pyramid matching for recogniz-
ing natural scene categories, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) (2006)
33.28
V. Ferrari, L. Fevrier, F. Jurie, C. Schmid: Groups of
adjacent contour segments for object detection,
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 30(1), 36–51
(2008)
33.29
E. Shechtman, M. Irani: Matching local self-
similarities across images and videos, IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) (2007)
33.30
F. Perronnin, C. Dance: Fisher kernels on visual
vocabularies for image categorization, IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) (2007)
33.31
J. Yang, K. Yu, Y. Gong, T. Huang: Linear spatial
pyramid matching using sparse coding for im-
age classification, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recogn. (CVPR) (2009)
33.32
J. Wang, J. Yang, K. Yu, F. Lv, T. Huang, Y. Gong:
Locality-constrained linear coding for image clas-
sification, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recogn.
(CVPR) (2010)
33.33
J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, L. Fei-
Fei: ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image
database, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR) (2009)
33.34
N.
Kruger, P.
Janssen, S.
Kalkan,
M.
Lappe,
A. Leonardis, J. Piater, A.J. Rodriguez-Sanchez,
L. Wiskott: Deep hierarchies in the primate visual
cortex: What can we learn for computer vision?,
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 35(8), 1847–
1871 (2013)
33.35
R. Farrell, O. Oza, N. Zhang, V.I. Morariu, T. Dar-
rell, L.S. Davis: Birdlets: Subordinate categorization
using volumetric primitives and pose-normalized
appearance, IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV) (2011)
33.36
J. Krause, M. Stark, J. Deng, L. Fei-Fei: 3d ob-
ject representations for fine-grained categoriza-
tion, 4th Int. IEEE Workshop 3D Represent. Recog-
nit. (3dRR-13), Sydney (2013)
33.37
M. Varma, D. Ray: Learning the discriminative
power-invariance trade-off, IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recogn. (CVPR) (2007)
33.38
A. Vedaldi, V. Gulshan, M. Varma, A. Zisserman:
Multiple kernels for object detection, IEEE Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV) (2009)
33.39
M.A. Fischler, R.A. Elschlager: The representation
and matching of pictorial structures, IEEE Trans.
Comput. 22(1), 67–92 (1973)
33.40
M. Weber, M. Welling, P. Perona: Unsupervised
learning of models for recognition, Eur. Conf. Com-
put. Vis. (ECCV) (2000)
33.41
R. Fergus, P. Perona, A. Zisserman: Object class
recognition by unsupervised scale-invariant learn-
ing, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR)
(2003)
33.42
M. Stark, M. Goesele, B. Schiele: A shape-based ob-
ject class model for knowledge transfer, IEEE Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV) (2009)
33.43
L. Fei-Fei, R. Fergus, P. Perona: Learning generative
visual models from few training examples: An in-
cremental Bayesian approach tested on 101 object
categories, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog-
nit. (CVPR) (2004) pp. 178–186
33.44
B. Leibe, A. Leonardis, B. Schiele: Robust object
detection by interleaving categorization and seg-
mentation, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 77(1–3), 259–289
(2008)
33.45
S. Maji, J. Malik: Object detection using a max-
margin Hough transform, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) (2009)
33.46
L. Bourdev, J. Malik: Poselets: Body part detectors
trained using 3D human pose annotations, IEEE Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV) (2009)
33.47
N. Dalal, B. Triggs: Histograms of oriented gradi-
ents for human detection, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) (2005) pp. 886–893
33.48
B. Leibe, E. Seemann, B. Schiele: Pedestrian detec-
tion in crowded scenes, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pat-
tern Recognit. (CVPR), Washington (2005) pp. 878–
885
33.49
A. Thomas, V. Ferrari, B. Leibe, T. Tuytelaars,
B. Schiele, L. Van Gool: Towards multi-view ob-
ject class detection, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR) (2006)
33.50
M. Arie-Nachimson, R. Basri: Constructing implicit
3D shape models for pose estimation, IEEE Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV) (2009)
33.51
P.F.
Felzenszwalb,
D.P.
Huttenlocher:
Efficient
matching of pictorial structures, IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) (2000)
33.52
M. Andriluka, S. Roth, B. Schiele: Pictorial structures
revisited: People detection and articulated pose
estimation, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog-
nit. (CVPR) (2009)
33.53
P.F. Felzenszwalb, R. Girshick, D. McAllester, D. Ra-
manan: Object detection with discriminatively
trained part based models, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Machin. Intell. 32(9), 1627–1645 (2010)
33.54
F. Wang, Y. Li: Beyond physical connections: Tree
models in human pose estimation, IEEE Conf. Com-
put. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) (2013) pp. 596–
603
33.55
M. Sun, M. Telaprolu, H. Lee, S. Savarese: An ef-
ficient branch-and-bound algorithm for optimal
human pose estimation, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recogn. (CVPR) (2012)
33.56
P. Bojan, M. Stark: Multi-view and 3D deformable
part models, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.
(TPAMI) 37(11), 2232–2245 (2015)
33.57
N. Dalal, B. Triggs, C. Schmid: Human detection us-
ing oriented histograms of flow and appearance,
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV) (2006)
33.58
G. Bradski: Opencv. http://opencv.org/ (July 09,
2015)

Part C | 33
840
Part C
Sensing and Perception
33.59
P.F.
Felzenszwalb,
D.P.
Huttenlocher:
Distance
transforms of sampled functions, Technical Report
1963 (Cornell Univ., Ithaca 2004)
33.60
C.-N.J. Yu, T. Joachims: Learning structural SVMs
with latent variables, ACM Proc. 26th Annu. Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn., New York (2009) pp. 1169–1176
33.61
M. Everingham, L. Gool, C.K. Williams, J. Winn,
A. Zisserman: The PASCAL visual object classes (VOC)
challenge, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 88(2), 303–338 (2010)
33.62
B. Pepik, M. Stark, P. Gehler, B. Schiele: Teaching
3d geometry to deformable part models, IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recogn. (CVPR) (2012)
33.63
B. Pepik, P. Gehler, M. Stark, B. Schiele: 3D2PM–
3D deformable part models, Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ECCV) (2012)
33.64
P. Ott, M. Everingham: Shared parts for deformable
part-based models, IEEE Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR) (2011)
33.65
H.O. Song, S. Zickler, T. Althoff, R. Girshick, M. Fritz,
C. Geyer, P. Felzenszwalb, T. Darrell: Sparselet mod-
els for efficient multiclass object detection, Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV) (2012)
33.66
P. Felzenszwalb, R. Girshick, D. McAllester: Cascade
object detection with deformable part models, IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) (2010)
33.67
T. Gao, M. Stark, D. Koller: What makes a good de-
tector? — structured priors for learning from few
examples, Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV) (2012)
33.68
B. Hariharan, J. Malik, D. Ramanan: Discriminative
decorrelation for clustering and classification, Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV) (2012)
33.69
S. Haykin: Neural Networks: A Comprehensive
Foundation, 2nd edn. (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle
River 1998)
33.70
Y. LeCun, B. Boser, J.S. Denker, D. Henderson,
R.E. Howard, W. Hubbard, L.D. Jackel: Backprop-
agation applied to handwritten zip code recogni-
tion, Neural Comput. 1(4), 541–551 (1989)
33.71
A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, G.E. Hinton: Imagenet
classification with deep convolutional neural net-
works, Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst. 25, 1097–
1105 (2012)
33.72
Y. Jia, E. Shelhamer, J. Donahue, S. Karayev,
J. Long, R. Girshick, S. Guadarrama, T. Darrell:
Caffe: Convolutional architecture for fast feature
embedding, http://caffe.berkeleyvision.org/ (arXiv
preprint arXiv:1408.5093) (2014)
33.73
J. Hosang, M. Omran, R. Benenson, B. Schiele:
Taking a deeper look at pedestrians, IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) (2015)
33.74
M.D. Zeiler, R. Fergus: Visualizing and understand-
ing convolutional networks, Eur. Conf. Comput Vis.
(ECCV) (2014)
33.75
B. Alexe, T. Deselares, V. Ferrari: Measuring the
objectness of image windows, IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell. 34(11), 2189–2202 (2012)
33.76
J. Hosang, R. Benenson, B. Schiele: How good are
detection proposals, really?, 25th Br. Mach. Vis.
Conf. (BMVC) (2014)
33.77
K.E.A. van de Sande, J.R.R. Uijlings, T. Gev-
ers, A.W.M. Smeulders: Segmentation as selective
search for object recognition, IEEE Int. Conf. Com-
put. Vis. (ICCV) (2013)
33.78
B. Hariharan, P. Arbeláez, R. Girshick, J. Malik:
Simultaneous detection and segmentation, Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV) (2014)
33.79
R. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, J. Malik: Rich
feature hierarchies for accurate object detection
and semantic segmentation, IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recogn. (CVPR) (2014)
33.80
A. Toshev, C. Szegedy: Deeppose: Human pose esti-
mation via deep neural networks, IEEE Conf. Com-
put. Vis. Pattern Recogn. (CVPR) (2014)
33.81
J. Deng, J. Krause, M. Stark, L. Fei-Fei: Leverag-
ing the wisdom of the crowd for fine-grained
recognition, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intel.
(2015)
33.82
J. Deng, J. Krause, L. Fei-Fei: Fine-grained crowd-
sourcing for fine-grained recognition, IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recogn. (CVPR) (2013)
33.83
N. Zhang, R. Farrell, T. Darrell: Pose pooling kernels
for sub-category recognition, IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recogn. (CVPR) (2012)
33.84
T. Berg, P.N. Belhumeur: Poof: Part-based one-vs-
one features for fine-grained categorization, face
verification, and attribute estimation, IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recogn. (CVPR) (2013)
33.85
A. Torralba, A.A. Efros: Unbiased look at dataset
bias, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR) (2011)
33.86
Y. Xiang, R. Mottaghi, S. Savarese: Beyond pascal:
A benchmark for 3d object detection in the wild,
IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV) (2014)
33.87
J. Xiao, J. Hays, K. Ehinger, A. Oliva, A. Torralba:
Sun database: Large-scale scene recognition from
abbey to zoo, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recogn. (CVPR) (2010)
33.88
T.-Y. Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona,
D. Ramanan, P. Dollár, C.L. Zitnick: Microsoft coco:
Common objects in context, Lect. Notes Comput.
Sci. 8693, 740–755 (2014)
33.89
G.A. Miller: Wordnet: A lexical database for english,
ACM Communication 38(11), 39–41 (1995)
33.90
M.A. Turk, A.P. Pentland: Face recognition using
eigenfaces, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog-
nit. (CVPR) (1991) pp. 586–591
33.91
Z.W. Tu, X.R. Chen, A.L. Yuille, S.C. Zhu: Im-
age parsing: Unifying segmentation, detection and
recognition, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 63(2), 113–140
(2005)
33.92
L. Zhu, Y. Chen, A.L. Yuille: Unsupervised learning
of probabilistic Grammar–Markov models for ob-
ject categories, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Machin.
Intell. 31(1), 114–128 (2009)
33.93
J. Deng, J. Krause, A. Berg, L. Fei-Fei: Hedging your
bets: Optimizing accuracy-specificity trade-offs in
large scale visual recognition, IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Providence (2012)

Multimedia Contents Visual Servoi
841
Part C | 34
34. Visual Servoing
François Chaumette, Seth Hutchinson, Peter Corke
This chapter introduces visual servo control, using
computer vision data in the servo loop to control
the motion of a robot. We first describe the ba-
sic techniques that are by now well established
in the field. We give a general overview of the
formulation of the visual servo control problem,
and describe the two archetypal visual servo con-
trol schemes: image-based and pose-based visual
servo control. We then discuss performance and
stability issues that pertain to these two schemes,
motivating advanced techniques. Of the many
advanced techniques that have been developed,
we discuss two-and-a-half-dimensional (2.5-D),
hybrid, partitioned, and switched approaches.
Having covered a variety of control schemes, we
deal with target tracking and controlling motion
directly in the joint space and extensions to under-
actuated ground and aerial robots. We conclude
by describing applications of visual servoing in
robotics.
34.1
The Basic Components
of Visual Servoing...............................
842
34.2
Image-Based Visual Servo...................
843
34.2.1
The Interaction Matrix.............
843
34.2.2
Approximating
the Interaction Matrix .............
844
34.2.3
A Geometrical Interpretation
of IBVS ...................................
846
34.2.4
Stability Analysis ....................
847
34.2.5
IBVS with a Stereo Vision
System...................................
848
34.2.6
IBVS with
Cylindrical Coordinates
of Image Points ......................
849
34.2.7
IBVS with Other Geometrical
Features.................................
849
34.2.8
Non-Perspective Cameras ........
850
34.2.9
Direct Estimation ....................
850
34.3
Pose-Based Visual Servo .....................
851
34.4
Advanced Approaches.........................
854
34.4.1
Hybrid VS ...............................
854
34.4.2
Partitioned VS.........................
855
34.5
Performance Optimization
and Planning.....................................
856
34.5.1
Optimal Control
and Redundancy Framework ...
856
34.5.2
Switching Schemes .................
856
34.5.3
Feature Trajectory Planning .....
857
34.6
Estimation of 3-D Parameters .............
858
34.7
Determining s and Matching Issues...
859
34.8
Target Tracking...................................
859
34.9
Eye-in-Hand and Eye-to-Hand
Systems Controlled in the Joint Space .
860
34.10 Under Actuated Robots .......................
861
34.11
Applications.......................................
863
34.12
Conclusions........................................
863
Video-References.........................................
863
References...................................................
863
Visual servo (VS) control refers to the use of computer
vision data to control the motion of a robot. The vision
data may be acquired from a camera that is mounted di-
rectly on a robot manipulator or on a mobile robot, in
which case motion of the robot induces camera motion,
or the camera can be ﬁxed in the workspace so that it
can observe the robot motion from a stationary conﬁgu-
ration. Other conﬁgurations can be considered, such as

Part C | 34.1
842
Part C
Sensing and Perception
for instance several cameras mounted on pan–tilt heads
observing the robot motion. The mathematical devel-
opment of all these cases is similar, and in this chapter
we will focus primarily on the former, so-called eye-in-
hand, case.
Visual servo control relies on techniques from image
processing, computer vision, and control theory. In the
present chapter, we will deal primarily with the issues
from control theory, making connections to previous
chapters when appropriate.
34.1 The Basic Components of Visual Servoing
The aim of all vision-based control schemes is to mini-
mize an error e.t/, which is typically deﬁned by
e.t/ D s.m.t/; a/  s :
(34.1)
This formulation is quite general, and it encom-
passes a wide variety approaches, as we will see below.
The parameters in (34.1) are deﬁned as follows. The
vector m.t/ is a set of image measurements (e.g., the im-
age coordinates of interest points, or the parameters of
a set of image lines or segments). These image measure-
ments are used to compute a vector of k visual features,
s.m.t/; a/, in which a is a set of parameters that rep-
resent potential additional knowledge about the system
(e.g., true or approximate camera intrinsic parameters
or a model of the object to be tracked). The vector s
contains the desired values of the features. Note that
the order of the desired and actual values in (34.1) is
reversed with respect to the common convention for
feedback control systems.
For now, we consider the case of a ﬁxed goal pose
and a motionless target, i. e., s is constant, and changes
in s depend only on camera motion. Further, we con-
sider here the case of controlling the motion of a camera
with six degrees of freedom (e.g., a camera attached to
the end effector of a six-degree-of-freedom arm). We
will treat more general cases in later sections.
Visual servoing schemes mainly differ in the way
that s is designed. In Sects. 34.2 and 34.3, we de-
scribe classical approaches, including image-based vi-
sual servo control (IBVS), in which s consists of a set
of features that are immediately available in the image,
and pose-based visual servo control (PBVS), in which s
consists of a pose, which must be estimated from image
measurements. Note that in the older visual servoing
literature PBVS is named position-based, rather than
pose-based, visual servoing [34.1, 2]. We also present
in Sect. 34.4 several more-advanced methods.
Once s is selected, the design of the control scheme
can be quite simple. Perhaps the most straightforward
approach is to design a velocity controller. To do this,
we require the relationship between the time variation
of s and the camera velocity. Let the spatial velocity of
the camera be denoted by v c D .vc; !c/ where vc is the
instantaneous linear velocity of the origin of the camera
frame and !c is the instantaneous angular velocity of
the camera frame. The relationship between Ps and v c is
given by
Ps D Lsv c ;
(34.2)
in which Ls 2 Rk6 is called the interaction matrix re-
lated to s [34.3]. The term feature Jacobian is also used
somewhat interchangeably in the visual servo litera-
ture [34.2], but in the present chapter we will use this
latter term to relate the time variation of the features to
the robot’s joint velocity (Sect. 34.8).
Using (34.1) and (34.2) we immediately obtain the
relationship between camera velocity and the time vari-
ation of the error
Pe D Lev c ;
(34.3)
where Le D Ls. Considering v c as the input to the robot
controller, and if we would like, for instance, to design
for an exponential and decoupled decrease of the error
(i. e., Pe D e) then using (34.3) we obtain as controller
v c D LC
e e ;
(34.4)
where LC
e 2 R6k is the Moore–Penrose pseudo-
inverse of Le, that is, LC
e D .LT
e Le/1LT
e when k  6
and Le is of full rank 6. When k D 6, if det Le ¤ 0 it is
possible to invert Le, giving the control v c D L1
e e.
When k 	 6 and Le is of full rank k, LC
e is given by
LC
e D LT
e

LeLT
e
1 :
When Le is not full rank, the numerical value of LC
e
can be obtained from the singular value decomposi-
tion of Le. In all cases, control scheme (34.4) allows
kPe  LeLC
e ek and kv ck to be minimal. Note that
the desired behavior Pe D e is obtained only when
LeLC
e D Ik, where Ik is the k  k identity matrix, that
is, only when Le if of full rank k, k 	 6.
In real visual servo systems, it is impossible to know
perfectly in practice either Le or LC
e . So an approxima-
tion or an estimation of one of these two matrices must

Visual Servoing
34.2 Image-Based Visual Servo
843
Part C | 34.2
be realized. In the sequel, we denote both the pseudo-
inverse of the approximation of the interaction matrix
and the approximation of the pseudo-inverse of the in-
teraction matrix by the symbolb
LC
e . Using this notation,
the control law is in fact
v c D b
LC
e e D b
LC
s .s  s/ :
(34.5)
Closing the loop and assuming that the robot con-
troller is able to realize perfectly v c, that is insert-
ing (34.5) into (34.3), we obtain
Pe D Leb
LC
e e :
(34.6)
This equation characterizes the actual behavior of
the closed-loop system, which is different from the de-
sired one (Pe D e) when ever
Leb
LC
e ¤ Ik :
It is also the basis of the stability analysis of the system
using Lyapunov theory.
What we have presented above is the basic design
implemented by most visual servo controllers. All that
remains is to ﬁll in the details. How should s be cho-
sen? What then is the form of Ls? How should we
estimateb
LC
e ? What are the performance characteristics
of the resulting closed-loop system? These questions
are addressed in the remainder of the chapter. We ﬁrst
describe the two basic approaches, IBVS and PBVS,
whose principles were proposed more than 20 years
ago [34.1]. We then present more-recent approaches
that have improved their performance.
34.2 Image-Based Visual Servo
Traditional image-based control schemes [34.1, 4] use
the image-plane normalised coordinates of a set of
points to deﬁne the vector s. The image measure-
ments m are usually the pixel coordinates of the set
of image points (although this is not the only possible
choice), and the parameters a in the deﬁnition of s D
s.m; a/ in (34.1) are nothing but the camera intrinsic
parameters to go from image measurements expressed
in pixels to the features.
34.2.1 The Interaction Matrix
A three-dimensional world point with coordinates X D
.X; Y; Z/ in the camera frame projects into the image
plane of a conventional perspective camera as a two-
dimensional point with normalised coordinates x D
.x; y/. More precisely we have
8
ˆˆ<
ˆˆ:
x
D X
Z D u  cu
f ˛
y
D Y
Z D v  cv
f
;
(34.7)
where m D .u;v/ gives the coordinates of the image
point expressed in pixel units, and a D .cu; cv; f ; ˛/ is
the set of camera intrinsic parameters as deﬁned in
Chap. 32: cu and cv are the coordinates of the prin-
cipal point, f is the focal length, and ˛ is the ratio of
the pixel dimensions. The intrinsic parameter ˇ deﬁned
in Chap. 32 has been assumed to be 0 here. In this
case, we take s D x D .x; y/, the image plane coordi-
nates of the point. The details of the imaging geometry
and perspective projection can be found in many com-
puter vision texts, including [34.5–7].
Taking the time derivative of the projection equa-
tions (34.7), we obtain
8
ˆˆ<
ˆˆ:
Px
D
PX
Z  X PZ
Z2 D
PX  xPZ
Z
Py
D
PY
Z  Y PZ
Z2 D
PY  yPZ
Z
:
(34.8)
We can relate the velocity of the 3-D point to the camera
spatial velocity using the well-known equation
PX D vc  !c  X ,
8
ˆˆ<
ˆˆ:
PX D vx  !yZ C !zY
PY D vy  !zX C !xZ
PZ D vz  !xY C !yX ;
(34.9)
where vc D .vx; vy; vz/ and !c D .!x; !y; !z/. Insert-
ing (34.9) into (34.8), grouping terms, and using (34.7)
we obtain
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
Px D vx
Z
C xvz
Z C xy!x  .1 C x2/!y C y!z
Py D vy
Z
C yvz
Z C .1 C y2/!x  xy!y  x!z ;
(34.10)
which can be written
Px D Lxv c ;
(34.11)

Part C | 34.2
844
Part C
Sensing and Perception
where the interaction matrix Lx is given by
Lx D
0
B@
1
Z
0
x
Z
xy
.1 C x2/
y
0
1
Z
y
Z 1 C y2
xy
x
1
CA :
(34.12)
In the matrix Lx, the value Z is the depth of the point
relative to the camera frame. Therefore, any control
scheme that uses this form of the interaction matrix
must estimate or approximate the value of Z. Similarly,
the camera intrinsic parameters are involved in the com-
putation of x and y. Thus LC
x cannot be directly used
in (34.4), and an estimation or an approximation b
LC
x
must be used, as in (34.5). We discuss this in more de-
tail below.
To control the six degrees of freedom, at least
three points are necessary (i. e., we require k  6). If
we use the feature vector x D .x1; x2; x3/, by merely
stacking interaction matrices for three points we
obtain
Lx D
0
@
Lx1
Lx2
Lx3
1
A :
In this case, there will exist some conﬁgurations
for which Lx is singular [34.8]. Furthermore, there ex-
ist four distinct camera poses for which e D 0, i. e.,
four global minima exist for the error function kek,
and it is impossible to differentiate them [34.9]. For
these reasons, more than three points are usually
considered.
a)
b)
c)
Fig.34.1a–c Example of positioning task: (a) the desired camera pose with respect to a simple target, (b) the initial
camera pose, and (c) the corresponding initial and desired image of the target
34.2.2 Approximating
the Interaction Matrix
There are several choices available for constructing the
estimateb
LC
e to be used in the control law. One popular
scheme is of course to choose
b
LC
e D LC
e
if Le D Lx is known, that is if the current depth Z of
each point is available [34.2]. In practice, these param-
eters must be estimated at each iteration of the control
scheme. The basic IBVS methods use classical pose-
estimation methods (Chap. 32 and the beginning of
Sect. 34.3). Another popular approach is to choose
b
LC
e D LC
e
where Le is the value of Le for the desired position e D
e D 0 [34.3]. In this case,b
LC
e is constant, and only the
desired depth of each point has to be set, which means
no varying 3-D parameters have to be estimated during
the visual servo. Finally, the choice
b
LC
e D
Le
2 C Le
2
C
has been proposed [34.10]. Since Le is involved in this
method, the current depth of each point also has to be
available.
We illustrate the behavior of these control schemes
with an example. The goal is to position the cam-
era so that it observes a square centered in the image
(Fig. 34.1). We deﬁne s to include the x and y co-
ordinates of the four points forming the square. Note

Visual Servoing
34.2 Image-Based Visual Servo
845
Part C | 34.2
0
25
50
75
–20
–20
0
20
0
0
20
40
60
20
100
a)
b)
c)
8
4
0
–4
–8
Fig.34.2a–c IBVS system behavior using s D .x1; y1; : : : ; x4; y4/ and c
LC
e D LC
e: (a) image point trajectories including
the trajectory of the center of the square, which is not used in the control scheme, (b) v c components (cm=s and deg=s)
computed at each iteration of the control scheme, and (c) the 3-D trajectory of the camera optical center expressed in the
desired camera frame Rc (cm)
0
25
50
75
–20
–20
0
20
0
0
20
40
60
20
100
a)
b)
c)
8
4
0
–4
–8
Fig.34.3a–c IBVS system behavior using s D .x1; y1; : : : ; x4; y4/ and c
LC
e D LC
e (refer to Fig. 34.2a-c for description)
that the initial camera pose has been selected far away
from the desired pose, particularly with regard to the
rotational motions, which are known to be the most
problematic for IBVS. In the simulations presented in
the following, no noise or modeling errors have been
introduced in order to allow comparison of different be-
haviors in perfect conditions. The accompanying videos
show experimental results obtained using an Adept
Viper robot arm and the ViSP library [34.11]. The
videos all show the same task being performed from the
same initial conditions, and only the control approach
varies.
The results obtained by using
b
LC
e D LC
e
are given in Fig. 34.2 and
VIDEO 59 . Note that de-
spite the large displacement that is required the system
converges. However, neither the behavior in the image,
nor the computed camera velocity components, nor the
3-D trajectory of the camera present desirable proper-
ties far from the convergence (i. e., for the ﬁrst 30 or so
iterations).
The results obtained using
b
LC
e D LC
e
are given in Fig. 34.3 and
VIDEO 60 . In this case, the
trajectories of the points in the image are almost straight
lines, which means that the points never leave the cam-
era’s ﬁeld of view. However the behavior induced in the
camera frame is even less satisfactory than for the case
of b
LC
e D LC
e :
The large camera velocities at the beginning of the
servo indicate that the condition number ofb
LC
e is high
at the start of the trajectory, and the camera trajectory is
far from a straight line.
The choice
b
LC
e D
Le
2 C Le
2
C
provides good performance in practice. Indeed, as can
be seen in Fig. 34.4, the camera velocity compo-
nents do not include large oscillations, which provides

Part C | 34.2
846
Part C
Sensing and Perception
0
25
50
75
–20
–20
0
20
0
0
20
40
60
20
100
a)
b)
c)
8
4
0
–4
–8
Fig. 34.4 IBVS system behavior using s D .x1; y1; : : : ; x4; y4/ and c
LC
e D

Le=2 C L
e =2
C (refer to Fig. 34.2a-c for
description)
a smooth trajectory in both the image and in 3-D space
(
VIDEO 61 ).
34.2.3 A Geometrical Interpretation of IBVS
It is quite easy to provide a geometric interpretation of
the behavior of the control schemes deﬁned above. The
example illustrated in Fig. 34.5 corresponds to a pure
rotation around the optical axis from the initial conﬁg-
uration (shown in blue) to the desired conﬁguration of
four coplanar points parallel to the image plane (shown
in red).
As explained above, using LC
e in the control scheme
attempts to ensure an exponential decrease of the er-
Fig. 34.5 Geometrical interpretation of IBVS: going from
the blue position to the red one. In green, image motion
when LC
e is used in the control scheme; in blue, when LC
e
is used; and in black when .Le=2 C Le=2/C is used (see
the text for more details)
ror e. This means that, when x and y image point coor-
dinates compose this error, the points’ trajectories in the
image follow straight lines from their initial to their de-
sired positions, when this is possible. This leads to the
image motion plotted in green in the ﬁgure. The cam-
era motion to realize this image motion can be easily
deduced and is indeed composed of a rotational motion
around the optical axis, but combined with a retreat-
ing translational motion along the optical axis [34.12].
This unexpected motion is due to the choice of the fea-
tures and the form of the third and sixth columns in the
interaction matrix, which induces a coupling between
the features and the two degrees of freedom involved
(vz and !z). If the rotation between the initial and de-
sired conﬁgurations is very large, this phenomenon is
ampliﬁed, and leads to a particular case for a rotation
of  radians where no rotational motion at all will be
induced by the control scheme [34.13]. On the other
hand, when the rotation is small, this phenomenon al-
most disappears. To conclude, the behavior is locally
satisfactory (i. e., when the error is small), but it can be
unsatisfactory when the error is large. As we will see
below, these results are consistent with the local asymp-
totic stability results that can be obtained for IBVS.
If instead we use LC
e in the control scheme, the im-
age motion generated can easily be shown to be the blue
one plotted in Fig. 34.5. Indeed, if we consider the same
control scheme as before but starting from s to reach s,
we obtain
v c D LC
e.s  s/ ;
which again induces straight-line trajectories from the
red points to the blue ones, causing the image motion
plotted in brown. Going back to our problem, the con-
trol scheme computes a camera velocity that is exactly
the opposite one
v c D LC
e.s  s/ ;

Visual Servoing
34.2 Image-Based Visual Servo
847
Part C | 34.2
and thus generates the image motion plotted in red at the
red points. Transformed to the blue points, the camera
velocity generates the blue image motion and corre-
sponds once again to a rotational motion around the
optical axis, combined now with an unexpected forward
motion along the optical axis. The same analysis can
be done as before for the case of large or small errors.
We can add that, as soon as the error decreases signiﬁ-
cantly, both control schemes get closer, and tend to the
same one (since Le D Le when e D e) with a nice be-
havior characterized with the image motion plotted in
black and a camera motion composed of only a rotation
around the optical axis when the error tends towards
zero.
If we instead use
b
LC
e D
Le
2 C Le
2
C
;
it is intuitively clear that considering the mean of Le
and Le generates the image motion plotted in black,
even when the error is large. In all cases but the rotation
of  radians, the camera motion is now a pure rotation
around the optical axis, without any unexpected trans-
lational motion.
34.2.4 Stability Analysis
We now consider the fundamental issues related to
the stability of IBVS. To assess the stability of the
closed-loop visual servo systems, we will use Lya-
punov analysis. In particular, consider the candidate
Lyapunov function deﬁned by the squared error norm
L D 1
2ke.t/k2, whose derivative is given by
PL D eTPe D eTLeb
LC
e e
since Pe is given by (34.6). The global asymptotic stabil-
ity of the system is thus obtained when the following
sufﬁcient condition is satisﬁed
Leb
LC
e > 0 :
(34.13)
If the number of features is equal to the number
of camera degrees of freedom (i. e., k D 6), and if the
features are chosen and the control scheme designed
so that Le and b
LC
e
are of full rank 6, then the condi-
tion (34.13) is satisﬁed if the approximations involved
inb
LC
e are not too coarse.
As discussed above, for most IBVS approaches we
have k > 6. Therefore the condition (34.13) can never
be ensured since
Leb
LC
e 2 Rkk
is at most of rank 6, and thus Leb
LC
e has a nontrivial null
space. In this case, conﬁgurations such that e 2 kerb
LC
e
correspond to local minima. Reaching such a local
minimum is illustrated in Fig. 34.6. As can be seen
in Fig. 34.6d, each component of e has a nice exponen-
tial decrease with the same convergence speed, causing
straight-line trajectories to be realized in the image, but
the error reached is not exactly zero, and it is clear
from Fig. 34.6c that the system has been attracted to
a local minimum far away from the desired conﬁg-
uration. Thus, only local asymptotic stability can be
obtained for IBVS.
To study local asymptotic stability when k > 6, let
us ﬁrst deﬁne a new error e0 with e0 Db
LC
e e. The time
derivative of this error is given by
Pe0 Db
LC
e Pe C
:b
LC
e e D
b
LC
e Le C O

v c ;
where O 2 R66 is equal to 0 when e D 0, what-
ever the choice of b
LC
e
[34.14]. Using the control
scheme (34.5),w e obtain
Pe0 D 
b
LC
e Le C O

e0 ;
which is known to be locally asymptotically stable in
a neighborhood of e D e D 0 if
b
LC
e Le > 0 ;
(34.14)
where b
LC
e Le 2 R66. Indeed, only the linearized sys-
tem
Pe0 D b
LC
e Lee0
has to be considered if we are interested in the local
asymptotic stability [34.15].
Once again, if the features are chosen and the con-
trol scheme designed so that Le and b
LC
e
are of full
rank 6, then condition (34.14) is ensured if the approx-
imations involved inb
LC
e are not too coarse.
To end the demonstration of local asymptotic sta-
bility, we must show that there does not exist any
conﬁguration e ¤ e such that e 2 ker b
LC
e
in a small
neighborhood of e and in a small neighborhood of
the corresponding pose p. Such conﬁgurations corre-
spond to local minima where v c D 0 and e ¤ e. If such
a pose p would exist, it is possible to restrict the neigh-
borhood around p so that there exists a camera velocity
v to reach p from p. This camera velocity would im-
ply a variation of the error Pe D Lev. However, such
a variation cannot belong to ker b
LC
e
since b
LC
e Le > 0.
Therefore, we have v c D 0 if and only if Pe D 0, i. e.,
e D e, in a neighborhood of p.

Part C | 34.2
848
Part C
Sensing and Perception
a)
b)
c)
v0
v1
v2
v3
v4
v5
0
20
40
c0
c1
c2
c3
c4
c5
c6
c7
60
80
100
d)
0.05
0
–0.05
–0.1
–0.15
–0.2
–0.25
0
20
40
60
80
100
e)
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
–1.5
Fig.34.6a–e IBVS reaching a local minimum using s D .x1; y1; : : : ; x4; y4/ and c
LC
e D LC
e : (a) the initial conﬁguration,
(b) the desired one, (c) the conﬁguration reached after the convergence of the control scheme, (d) the evolution of the
error e at each iteration of the control scheme, and (e) the evolution of the six components of the camera velocity v c
Even though local asymptotic stability can be en-
sured when k > 6, we recall that global asymptotic
stability cannot be ensured. For instance, as illustrated
in Fig. 34.6, there may exist local minima correspond-
ing to conﬁgurations where e 2 ker b
LC
e , which are
outside of the neighborhood considered above. Deter-
mining the size of the neighborhood in which stability
and the convergence are ensured is still an open issue,
even if this neighborhood is surprisingly quite large in
practice.
34.2.5 IBVS with a Stereo Vision System
It is straightforward to extend the IBVS approach to
a multicamera system. If a stereo vision system is used,
and a world point is visible in both left and right images
(Fig. 34.7), it is possible to use as visual features
s D xs D .xl; xr/ D .xl; yl; xr; yr/
i. e., to represent the point by just stacking in s the x and
y coordinates of the observed point in the left and right
images [34.16]. However, care must be taken when con-
structing the corresponding interaction matrix since the
form given in (34.11) is expressed in either the left or
right camera frame. More precisely, we have
(
Pxl
D Lxl v l ;
Pxr
D Lxr v r ;
where v l and v r are the spatial velocity of the left
and right camera, respectively, and where the analyti-
cal form of Lxl and Lxr are given by (34.12).
By choosing a sensor frame rigidly linked to the
stereo vision system, we obtain
Pxs D
Pxl
Pxr

D Lxsv s ;
where the interaction matrix related to xs can be de-
termined using the spatial motion transform matrix V
deﬁned in Chap. 02 to transform velocities expressed in
the left or right cameras frames to the sensor frame. We

Visual Servoing
34.2 Image-Based Visual Servo
849
Part C | 34.2
recall that V is given by
V D
R
ŒtR
0
R

;
(34.15)
where Œt is the skew-symmetric matrix associated to
the vector t and where .R; t/ 2 SE.3/ is the rigid-body
transformation from the camera to the sensor frame.
The numerical values for these matrices are directly
obtained from the calibration step of the stereo vision
system. Using this equation, we obtain
Lxs D
Lxl
lVs
Lxr
rVs

:
Note that Lxs 2 R46 is always of rank 3 because of
the epipolar constraint that links the perspective projec-
tion of a 3-D point in a stereo vision system (Fig. 34.7).
Another simple interpretation is that a 3-D point is rep-
resented by three independent parameters, which makes
it impossible to ﬁnd more than three independent pa-
rameters using any sensor observing that point.
To control the six degrees of freedom of the sys-
tem, it is necessary to consider at least three points, as
the rank of the interaction matrix considering only two
points is 5.
Using a stereo vision system, since the 3-D coordi-
nates of any point observed in both images can be easily
estimated by a simple triangulation process it is possi-
ble and quite natural to use these 3-D coordinates in
the features set s. Such an approach would be, strictly
speaking, a position-based approach, since it would re-
quire 3-D parameters in s.
34.2.6 IBVS with Cylindrical Coordinates
of Image Points
In the previous sections, we have considered the
Cartesian coordinates of image points. As proposed
in [34.17] it may be useful to consider instead the
cylindrical coordinates  D .	; / of the image points
Dcl
Cl
Cr
cl
cr
x l
x r
πl
πr
Dcr
X
Epipolar plane
Fig. 34.7 A stereo vision system
instead of their Cartesian coordinates x D .x; y/. They
are given by
	 D
p
x2 C y2 ;  D arctan y
x
from which we deduce
P	 D xPx C yPy
	
; P D xPy  yPx
	2
:
Using (34.11) and then substituting x by 	 cos  and y
by 	 sin , we obtain immediately
L D
0
B@
c
Z
s
Z
	
Z
.1 C 	2/s .1 C 	2/c
0
s
	Z
c
	Z
0
c
	
s
	
1
1
CA ;
(34.16)
where c D cos  and s D sin . Note that  is not de-
ﬁned when the image point lies at the principal point
(where x D y D 	 D 0). It is thus not surprising that the
interaction matrix L is singular in that case.
If we go back to the example depicted in Fig. 34.5,
the behavior obtained using cylindrical coordinates
will be the expected one, that is a pure rotation
around the optical axis, by using either LC
e , LC
e or
.Le=2 C Le=2/C in the control scheme. This is due to
the form of the third and sixth columns of the interac-
tion matrix (34.16), which leads to a decoupled system.
34.2.7 IBVS with Other Geometrical Features
In the previous sections, we have only considered image
point coordinates in s. Other geometrical primitives can
of course be used. There are several reasons to do so.
Firstly, the scene observed by the camera cannot always
be described merely by a collection of points, in which
case the image processing provides other types of mea-
surements, such as a set of straight lines or the contours
of an object. Secondly, richer geometric primitives may
ameliorate the decoupling and linearizing issues that
motivate the design of partitioned systems (Sect. 34.4).
Finally, the robotic task to be achieved may be ex-
pressed in terms of virtual linkages (or ﬁxtures) be-
tween the camera and the observed objects [34.18, 19],
sometimes expressed directly by constraints between
primitives, such as point-to-line [34.20] (which means
that an observed point must lie on a speciﬁed line).
It is possible to determine the interaction matrix
related to the perspective projection of a large class
of geometrical primitives, such as segments, straight
lines, spheres, circles, and cylinders. The results are
given in [34.3, 18]. Recently, the analytical form of the
interaction matrix related to any image moments cor-
responding to planar objects has been computed. This

Part C | 34.2
850
Part C
Sensing and Perception
P = (X,Y,Z)
Principal point
Principal axis
Equator
Image plane
p
p'
y
l
z
u
m
x
O
F
υ
Fig. 34.8 Uniﬁed imaging model of Geyer and Daniilidis
(after [34.7])
makes it possible to consider planar objects of any
shape [34.21]. If a collection of points is measured in
the image, moments can also be used [34.22]. In both
cases, moments allow the use of intuitive geometrical
features, such as the center of gravity or the orienta-
tion of an object. By selecting an adequate combination
of moments, it is then possible to determine partitioned
systems with good decoupling and linearizing proper-
ties [34.21, 22].
Note that, for all these features (geometrical prim-
itives, moments), the depth of the primitive or of the
object considered appears in the coefﬁcients of the
interaction matrix related to the translational degrees
of freedom, as was the case for the image points.
An estimation of this depth is thus generally neces-
sary (Sect. 34.6). In a few situations, for instance with
a suitable normalization of moments [34.22], only the
constant desired depth appears in the interaction matrix,
which makes estimating depth unnecessary.
34.2.8 Non-Perspective Cameras
The vast majority of cameras we use, and our own eyes,
are characterized by a perspective projection model
which closely approximate the ideal pinhole imaging
model. Such cameras have a narrow ﬁeld of view, typ-
ically less than one half hemisphere. For robotics it is
often advantageous to have a large ﬁeld of view and
this can be achieved using a ﬁsheye lens camera or
a catadioptric (lens and mirror system) camera (often
referred to as a panoramic camera). For these non-
perspective sensors the interaction matrix of any visual
feature has a different form to those discussed above,
such as (34.12) and (34.16) for an image point.
Rather than determine the interaction matrix of
visual features expressed in the image plane of non-
perspective cameras, we can transform the images from
these cameras to the view that would be seen by an ideal
spherical camera. The spherical model projects world
points onto a unit sphere, the intersection of the unit
sphere with the ray from the world point to the center of
the sphere. Such an ideal camera has the largest possible
ﬁeld of view. The uniﬁed imaging model [34.23] shown
in Fig 34.8b provides a general mechanism to project
a world point to the image plane of a large class of
cameras. To be precise it includes all central projection
cameras and this includes perspective and some cata-
dioptric cameras with particular mirror shapes, but in
practice it is a very good approximation to non-central
cameras including ﬁsheye and general catadioptric sys-
tems. The mechanism of this uniﬁed model can also be
used to reproject points from these varied image planes
to a spherical camera.
Referring to Fig. 34.8 the world point P is rep-
resented by the vector X D .X; Y; Z/ in the camera
frame, and is projected onto the surface of the unit
sphere at the point xs D .xs; ys; zs/ with
xs D X
R ;
ys D Y
R ;
and zs D Z
R ;
where R D
p
X2 C Y2 C Z2 is the distance from the
sphere center to the world point.
The interaction matrix of xs is derived in essentially
the same manner as for the perspective camera, and it
can be shown to be [34.24]
Lxs D

 1
R

xsxsT  I3

Œxs

:
(34.17)
Note that R can be expressed as a function of the point
depth Z by using R D Z
p
1 C x2s C y2s. Therefore, the
general spherical model does not add any supplemen-
tary unknown in the interaction matrix.
A particular advantage of the spherical model is that
for pure camera rotation the shape of an object is in-
variant, which eases determining visual features that are
only linked to translational motions.
34.2.9 Direct Estimation
In the previous sections, we have focused on the ana-
lytical form of the interaction matrix. It is also possible
to estimate its numerical value directly using either an
ofﬂine learning step, or an online estimation scheme.
All the methods proposed to estimate the inter-
action matrix numerically rely on the observation of
a variation of the features due to a known or measured
camera motion. More precisely, if we measure a fea-
ture’s variation s due to a camera motion v c, we

Visual Servoing
34.3 Pose-Based Visual Servo
851
Part C | 34.3
have from (34.2)
Lsv c D s ;
which provides k equations while we have k  6 un-
known values in Ls. Using a set of N independent
camera motions with N > 6, it is thus possible to es-
timate Ls by solving
LsA D B ;
where the columns of A 2 R6N and B 2 RkN are, re-
spectively, formed from the set of camera motions and
the set of corresponding features variations. The least-
square solution is of course given by
b
Ls D BAC :
(34.18)
Methods based on neural networks have also been de-
veloped to estimate Ls [34.25, 26]. It is also possible to
estimate the numerical value of LC
s
directly, which in
practice provides a better behavior [34.27]. In this case,
the basic relation is
LC
s s D v c ;
which provides six equations. Using a set of N measure-
ments, with N > k, we now obtain
b
LC
s D ABC :
(34.19)
In the ﬁrst case (34.18), the six columns of Ls are esti-
mated by solving six linear systems, while in the second
case (34.19), the k columns of LC
s
are estimated by
solving k linear systems, which explains the difference
in the results.
Estimating the interaction matrix online can be
viewed as an optimization problem, and consequently
a number of researchers have investigated approaches
that derive from optimization methods. These methods
typically discretize the system equation (34.2), and use
an iterative updating scheme to reﬁne the estimate of b
Ls
at each stage. One such online and iterative formulation
uses the Broyden update rule given by [34.28, 29]
b
Ls.t C 1/ D b
Ls.t/
C
˛
v T
c v c
h
x  b
Ls.t/v c
i
v T
c ;
where ˛ deﬁnes the update speed. This method has been
generalized to the case of moving objects in [34.30].
The main interest of using such numerical estima-
tions in the control scheme is that it avoids all the
modeling and calibration steps. It is particularly use-
ful when using features whose interaction matrix is not
available in analytical form. For instance, in [34.31], the
main eigenvalues of the principal component analysis
of an image have been considered in a visual servoing
scheme. The drawback of these methods is that no the-
oretical stability and robustness analysis can be made.
34.3 Pose-Based Visual Servo
Pose-based control schemes (PBVS) [34.1, 32, 33] use
the pose of the camera with respect to some reference
coordinate frame to deﬁne s. Computing this pose from
a set of measurements in one image necessitates the
camera intrinsic parameters and the 3-D model of the
object observed to be known. This classic computer vi-
sion problem is called the 3-D localization problem.
While this problem is beyond the scope of the present
chapter, many solutions have been presented in the lit-
erature [34.34, 35] and its basic principles are recalled
in Chap. 32.
It is then typical to deﬁne s in terms of the parame-
terization used to represent the camera pose. Note that
the parameters a involved in the deﬁnition (34.1) of s
are now the camera intrinsic parameters and the 3-D
model of the object.
It is convenient to consider three coordinate frames:
the current camera frame Fc, the desired camera
frame Fc, and a reference frame Fo attached to the
object. We adopt here the standard notation of using
a leading superscript to denote the frame with respect
to which a set of coordinates is deﬁned. Thus, the co-
ordinate vectors cto and cto give the coordinates of the
origin of the object frame expressed relative to the cur-
rent camera frame, and relative to the desired camera
frame, respectively. Furthermore, let R D cRc be the
rotation matrix that gives the orientation of the current
camera frame relative to the desired frame.
We can deﬁne s to be .t; u/, in which t is a trans-
lation vector, and u gives the angle/axis parameteriza-
tion for the rotation. We now discuss two choices for t,
and give the corresponding control laws.
If t is deﬁned relative to the object frame Fo, we
obtain
s D .cto; u/ ; s D .cto; 0/ ;
and
e D .cto  cto; u/ :

Part C | 34.3
852
Part C
Sensing and Perception
0
25
50
75
–20
–20
0
20
0
0
20
40
60
20
100
a)
b)
c)
8
4
0
–4
–8
Fig. 34.9 PBVS system behavior using s D .cto; u/ (refer to Fig. 34.2a-c for description)
In this case, the interaction matrix related to e is given
by
Le D
I3
Œcto
0
Lu

;
(34.20)
in which I3 is the 33 identity matrix and Lu is given
by [34.36]
Lu D I3 C 
2 Œu C

1 
sinc 
sinc2=2

Œu2
 ;
(34.21)
where sinc x is the sinus cardinal deﬁned such that
x sinc x D sin x and sinc 0 D 1.
Following the development in Sect. 34.1, we obtain
the control scheme
v c D b
L1
e e
since the dimension k of s is six, that is, the number of
camera degrees of freedom. By setting
b
L1
e
D
 
I3
Œcto L1
u
0
L1
u
!
;
(34.22)
we obtain after simple developments
8
<
:
vc D 
h
cto  cto
i
C Œcto u
!c D u
:
(34.23)
since Lu is such that
L1
uu D u :
Ideally, that is, if the pose parameters are per-
fectly estimated, the behavior of e will be the expected
one (Pe D e). The choice of e causes the rotational
motion to follow a geodesic with an exponential de-
creasing speed and causes the translational parameters
involved in s to decrease at the same speed. This ex-
plains the nice exponential decrease of the camera
velocity components in Fig. 34.9. Furthermore, the tra-
jectory in the image of the origin of the object frame
follows a straight line (here the center of the four points
has been selected as this origin). On the other hand,
the camera trajectory does not follow a straight line
(
VIDEO 62 ).
Another PBVS scheme can be designed by using
s D .ctc; u/. In this case, we have s D 0, e D s, and
Le D
R
0
0
Lu

:
(34.24)
Note the decoupling between translational and rota-
tional motions, which allows us to obtain a simple
control scheme
(
vc
D RT ctc
!c
D  u
:
(34.25)
In this case, as can be seen in Fig. 34.10 and
in
VIDEO 63 , if the pose parameters involved
in (34.25) are estimated perfectly, the camera trajec-
tory is a straight line, while the image trajectories are
less satisfactory than before. Some particular conﬁgu-
rations can be found which will lead to some points
leaving the camera ﬁeld of view during the robot
motion.
The stability properties of PBVS seem quite attrac-
tive. Since Lu given in (34.21) is nonsingular when
 ¤ 2k, 8k 2 Z, we obtain from (34.13) the global
asymptotic stability of the system since Leb
L1
e
D I6,
under the strong hypothesis that all the pose parame-
ters are perfect. This is true for both methods presented
above, since the interaction matrices given in (34.20)
and (34.24) are full rank when Lu is nonsingular.

Visual Servoing
34.3 Pose-Based Visual Servo
853
Part C | 34.3
0
25
50
75
–20
–20
0
20
0
0
20
40
60
20
100
a)
b)
c)
8
4
0
–4
–8
Fig. 34.10 PBVS system behavior using s D .ctc; u/ (refer to Fig. 34.2a-c for description)
a)
b)
c)
Fig.34.11a–c Two different camera poses (a,c) that provide almost the same image of four coplanar points shown over-
laid in (b)
With regard to robustness, feedback is computed us-
ing estimated quantities that are a function of the image
measurements and the system calibration parameters.
For the ﬁrst method presented in Sect. 34.3 (the analy-
sis for the second method is analogous), the interaction
matrix given in (34.20) corresponds to perfectly esti-
mated pose parameters, while the real one is unknown
since the estimated pose parameters may be biased due
to calibration errors, or inaccurate and unstable due
to noise [34.13]. The true positivity condition (34.13)
should in fact be written
LOeb
L1
Oe
> 0 ;
(34.26)
where b
L1
Oe
is given by (34.22) but where LOe is un-
known, and not given by (34.20). Indeed, even small
errors in computing the position of points in the im-
age can lead to pose errors which will signiﬁcantly
impact the accuracy and the stability of the system
(Fig. 34.11).

Part C | 34.4
854
Part C
Sensing and Perception
34.4 Advanced Approaches
34.4.1 Hybrid VS
Suppose we have access to a control law for !c, such as
the one used in PBVS ((34.23) or (34.25))
!c D  u :
(34.27)
How could we use this in conjunction with IBVS?
Considering a feature vector st and an error et de-
voted to control the translational degrees of freedom,
we can partition the interaction matrix as follows
Pst D Lstv c
D

Lv L!
  vc
!c

D Lvvc C L!!c :
Now, setting Pet D et, we can solve for the desired
translational control input as
et D Pet D Pst D Lvvc C L!!c ;
) vc D LC
v .et C L!!c/ :
(34.28)
We can think of the quantity .et C L!!c/ as
a modiﬁed error term, one that combines the orig-
inal error with the error that would be induced by
the rotational motion due to !c. The translational
control input vc D LC
v .et C L!!c/ will drive this
error to zero. The method known as 2.5-D visual
servo [34.36] was the ﬁrst to exploit such a parti-
tioning in combining IBVS and PBVS. More pre-
cisely, in [34.36], st has been selected as the coor-
dinates of an image point, and the logarithm of its
depth, so that Lv is a triangular always invertible
matrix. More precisely, we have st D .x; log Z/, s
t D
.x; log Z/, et D .x  x; log 	Z/ where 	Z D Z=Z,
and
Lv D
1
Z	Z
0
@
1
0
x
0
1
y
0
0
1
1
A L!
D
0
@
xy
.1 C x2/
y
1 C y2
xy
x
y
x
0
1
A :
Note that the ratio 	Z can be obtained directly from the
partial pose estimation algorithm that will be described
in Sect. 34.6.
If we come back to the usual global representation
of visual servo control schemes, we have e D .et; u/
and Le given by
Le D
Lv
L!
0
Lu

;
from
which
we
immediately
obtain
the
control
law (34.27) and (34.28) by applying (34.5).
The behavior obtained using this choice for st is
shown in Fig. 34.12 and
VIDEO 64 . Here, the point
that has been considered in st is the center of gravity
xg of the target. We note the image trajectory of that
point, which is a straight line as expected, and the nice
decreasing of the camera velocity components, which
makes this scheme very similar to the ﬁrst PBVS one.
As for stability, it is clear that this scheme is
globally asymptotically stable in perfect conditions.
Furthermore, thanks to the triangular form of the inter-
action matrix Le, it is possible to analyze the stability
of this scheme in the presence of calibration errors us-
ing the partial pose-estimation algorithm that will be
described in Sect. 34.6 [34.37]. Finally, the only un-
known constant parameter involved in this scheme, that
is Z, can be estimated online using adaptive tech-
niques [34.38].
Other hybrid schemes can be designed. For in-
stance, in [34.39], the third component of st is different
and has been selected so that all the target points remain
in the camera ﬁeld of view as far as possible. Another
example has been proposed in [34.40]. In that case, s
is selected as s D .ctc; xg; uz/ which provides with
a block-triangular interaction matrix of the form
Le D
 R
0
L0
v
L0
!

;
where L0
v and L0
! can easily be computed. This scheme
is such that, under perfect conditions, the camera tra-
jectory is a straight line (since ctc is a part of s), and
the image trajectory of the center of gravity of the ob-
ject is also a straight line (since xg is also a part of
s). The translational camera degrees of freedom are
devoted to realize the 3-D straight line, while the rota-
tional camera degrees of freedom are devoted to realize
the 2-D straight line and also compensate the 2-D mo-
tion of xg due to the translational motion. As can be seen
in Fig. 34.13 and
VIDEO 65 , this scheme is particu-
larly satisfactory in practice.
Finally, it is possible to combine 2-D and 3-D
features in different ways. For instance, in [34.41],
it has been proposed to use in s the 2-D homoge-
neous coordinates of a set of image points expressed
in pixels multiplied by their corresponding depth:

Visual Servoing
34.4 Advanced Approaches
855
Part C | 34.4
0
25
50
75
–20
–20
0
20
0
0
20
40
60
20
100
a)
b)
c)
8
4
0
–4
–8
Fig. 34.12 2.5-D VS system behavior using s D .xg; log .Zg/; u/ (refer to Fig. 34.2a-c for description)
0
25
50
75
–20
–20
0
20
0
0
20
40
60
20
100
a)
b)
c)
8
4
0
–4
–8
Fig. 34.13 2.5-D VS system behavior using s D .ctc; xg; uz/ (refer to Fig. 34.2a-c for description)
s D .u1Z1; v1Z1; Z1;    ; unZn; vnZn; Zn/. As for classi-
cal IBVS, we obtain in this case a set of redundant
features, since at least three points have to be used to
control the six camera degrees of freedom (here k  9).
However, it has been demonstrated in [34.42] that this
selection of redundant features is free of attractive local
minima.
34.4.2 Partitioned VS
The hybrid visual servo schemes described above have
been designed to decouple the rotational motions from
the translational ones by selecting adequate visual fea-
tures deﬁned in part in 2-D, and in part in 3-D (which is
why they have been called 2.5-D visual servoing). This
work has inspired some researchers to ﬁnd features that
exhibit similar decoupling properties but using only fea-
tures expressed directly in the image. More precisely,
the goal is to ﬁnd six features such that each is related
to only one degree of freedom (in which case the inter-
action matrix is a diagonal matrix). The Grail is to ﬁnd
a diagonal interaction matrix whose elements are con-
stant, as near as possible to the identity matrix, leading
to a pure, direct, and simple linear control problem.
The ﬁrst work in this area partitioned the interaction
matrix to isolate motion related to the optic axis [34.12].
Indeed, whatever the choice of s, we have
Ps D Lsv c
D Lxyv xy C Lzv z
D Psxy C Psz
in which Lxy includes the ﬁrst, second, fourth, and
ﬁfth columns of Ls, and Lz includes the third and
sixth columns of Ls. Similarly, v xy D .vx; vy; !x; !y/
and v z D .vz; !z/. Here, Psz D Lzv z gives the component
of Ps due to the camera motion along and rotation about
the optic axis, while Psxy D Lxyv xy gives the component
of Ps due to velocity along and rotation about the camera
x and y axes.
Proceeding as above, by setting Pe D e we obtain
e D Pe D Ps D Lxyv xy C Lzv z ;
which leads to
v xy D LC
xy Œe.t/ C Lzv z :
As before, we can consider Œe.t/CLzv z as a modiﬁed
error that incorporates the original error while taking
into account the error that will be induced by v z.

Part C | 34.5
856
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Given this result, all that remains is to choose s and
v z. As for basic IBVS, the coordinates of a collection
of image points can be used in s, while two new image
features can be deﬁned to determine v z:

Deﬁne ˛, with 0 	 ˛ < 2, as the angle between the
horizontal axis of the image plane and the directed
line segment joining two feature points.
It is clear that ˛ is closely related to the rotation
around the optic axis.

Deﬁne 2 to be the area of the polygon deﬁned by
these points. Similarly, 2 is closely related to the
translation along the optic axis.
Using these features, v z has been deﬁned in [34.12]
as
(
vz
D vz ln 
 ;
!z
D !z.˛  ˛/ :
34.5 Performance Optimization and Planning
In some sense, partitioned methods represent an effort
to optimize system performance by assigning distinct
features and controllers to individual degrees of free-
dom. In this way, the designer performs a sort of
ofﬂine optimization when allocating controllers to de-
grees of freedom. It is also possible to explicitly design
controllers that optimize various system performance
measures. We describe a few of these in this section.
34.5.1 Optimal Control
and Redundancy Framework
An example of such an approach is given in [34.43]
and [34.44], in which linear quadratic Gaussian (LQG)
control design is used to choose gains that mini-
mize a linear combination of state and control inputs.
This approach explicitly balances the trade-off between
tracking errors (since the controller attempts to drive
s  s to zero) and robot motion. A similar control
approach is proposed in [34.45] where joint limit avoid-
ance is considered simultaneously with the positioning
task.
It is also possible to formulate optimality criteria
that explicitly express the observability of robot motion
in the image. For example, the singular value decompo-
sition of the interaction matrix reveals which degrees of
freedom are most apparent and can thus be easily con-
trolled, while the condition number of the interaction
matrix gives a kind of global measure of the visibility
of motion. This concept has been called resolvabil-
ity in [34.46] and motion perceptibility in [34.47]. By
selecting features and designing controllers that max-
imize these measures, either along speciﬁc degrees of
freedom or globally, the performance of the visual servo
system can be improved.
The constraints considered to design the control
scheme using the optimal control approach may be con-
tradictory in some cases, leading the system to fail due
to local minima in the objective function to be min-
imized. For example, it may happen that the motion
produced to move away from a robot joint limit is ex-
actly the opposite of the motion produced toward the
desired pose, which results in a zero global motion. To
avoid this potential problem, it is possible to use the gra-
dient projection method, which is classical in robotics.
Applying this method to visual servoing has been pro-
posed in [34.3, 19]. The approach consists of projecting
the secondary constraints es onto the null space of the
vision-based task e so that they have no effect on the
regulation of e to 0
eg Db
LC
e e C Pe es ;
where eg is the new global task considered and
Pe D

I6 b
LC
e b
Le

is such that
b
LePees D 0 ; 8es :
Avoiding the robot joint limits using this approach has
been presented in [34.48]. However, when the vision-
based task constrains all the camera degrees of freedom,
the secondary constraints cannot be considered since,
when b
Le is of full rank 6, we have Pees D 0; 8es. In this
case, it is necessary to insert the constraints into a global
objective function, such as navigation functions that are
free of local minima [34.49, 50].
34.5.2 Switching Schemes
The partitioned methods described previously attempt
to optimize performance by assigning individual con-
trollers to speciﬁc degrees of freedom. Another way to
use multiple controllers to optimize performance is to
design switching schemes that select at each moment

Visual Servoing
34.5 Performance Optimizationand Planning
857
Part C | 34.5
0
50
100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Fig. 34.14 Image feature trajectories for a rotation of 160ı
about the optical axis using a switched control scheme (ini-
tial point positions in blue, and desired points position in
red)
in time which controller to use based on criteria to be
optimized.
A simple switching controller can be designed us-
ing an IBVS and a PBVS controller as follows [34.51].
Let the system begin by using the IBVS controller.
Consider the Lyapunov function for the PBVS con-
troller given by LP D 1
2keP.t/k2, with eP.t/ D .cto 
cto; u/. If at any time the value of this Lyapunov
function exceeds a threshold P, the system switches
to the PBVS controller. While using the PBVS con-
troller, if at any time the value of the Lyapunov function
LI for the IBVS controller exceeds a threshold, LI D
1
2keI.t/k2 > I, the system switches to the IBVS con-
troller. With this scheme, when the Lyapunov function
for a particular controller exceeds a threshold, that con-
troller is invoked, which in turn reduces the value of
the corresponding Lyapunov function. If the switching
thresholds are selected appropriately, the system is able
to exploit the relative advantages of IBVS and PBVS,
while avoiding their shortcomings.
An example of such a system is shown in Fig. 34.14
for the case of a rotation by 160ı about the optical axis.
Note that the system begins in IBVS mode and the fea-
tures initially move on straight lines toward their goal
positions in the image. However, as the camera retreats,
the system switches to PBVS, which allows the camera
to reach its desired position by combining a rotational
motion around its optic axis and a forward translational
motion, producing the circular trajectories observed in
the image.
Other examples of temporal switching schemes can
be found, such as the one developed in [34.52], to en-
sure the visibility of the target observed.
34.5.3 Feature Trajectory Planning
It is also possible to treat the optimization problem
ofﬂine, during a planning stage, if we have sufﬁcient
knowledge of the system and world. In this case, several
constraints can be taken into account simultaneously,
such as obstacle avoidance [34.53], joint limit and oc-
clusions avoidance, and ensuring the visibility of the
target [34.54]. The feature trajectories s.t/ that allow
the camera to reach its desired pose while ensuring that
the constraints are satisﬁed are determined using path
planning techniques, such as the well-known potential
ﬁeld approach [34.54] or linear matrix inequality opti-
mizations [34.55].
Coupling path planning with trajectory following
also allows the robustness of the visual servo with re-
spect to modeling errors to be signiﬁcantly improved.
Indeed, modeling errors may have large effects when
the error ss is large, but have little effect when ss
is small. Once the desired features trajectories s.t/
such that s.0/ D s.0/ have been designed during the
planning stage, it is easy to adapt the control scheme to
take into account the fact that s is varying, and to make
the error s  s remain small. More precisely, we now
have
Pe D Ps  Ps D Lev c  Ps ;
from which we deduce, by selecting as usual Pe D e
as the desired behavior,
v c D b
LC
e e Cb
LC
e Ps :
The new second term of this control law anticipates the
variation of s, removing the tracking error it would
produce. We will see in the 34.8 that the form of the
control law is similar when tracking of a moving target
is considered.

Part C | 34.6
858
Part C
Sensing and Perception
34.6 Estimation of 3-D Parameters
All the control schemes described in the previous sec-
tions use 3-D parameters that are not directly available
from the image measurements. As for IBVS, we recall
that the range of the object with respect to the camera
appears in the coefﬁcients of the interaction matrix re-
lated to the translational degrees of freedom. Noticeable
exceptions are the schemes based on a numerical esti-
mation of Le or of LC
e (Sect. 34.2.8). Another exception
is the IBVS scheme that uses the constant matrix b
LC
e
in the control scheme, in which only the depth for the
desired pose is required, which is not so difﬁcult to ob-
tain in practice. As for PBVS and hybrid schemes that
combine 2-D and 3-D data in e, 3-D parameters ap-
pear both in the error e and in the interaction matrix.
A correct estimation of the 3-D parameters involved is
thus important for IBVS since they will have an effect
on the camera motion during the task execution (they
appear in the stability conditions (34.13) and (34.14)),
while a correct estimation is crucial in PBVS and hy-
brid schemes since they will have also an effect on the
accuracy of the pose reached after convergence.
If a calibrated stereo vision system is used, all 3-D
parameters can be easily determined by triangulation,
as mentioned in Sect. 34.2.5 and described in Chap. 32.
Similarly, if a 3-D model of the object is known, all 3-D
parameters can be computed from a pose-estimation al-
gorithm. However, we recall that such an estimation can
be quite unstable due to image noise (Sect. 34.3). As
already said, IBVS does not require full pose estima-
tion, simply the range of the object with respect to the
camera. When image points are involved in s, the range
is expressed as the scalar depth Z or distance R of the
corresponding world points, which appears in the inter-
action matrix (34.12), (34.16) and (34.17). This can be
considered as a parameter estimation problem, that is,
estimating the 3-D parameters from knowledge of the
analytical form of the interaction matrix, and measure-
ments of camera motion and visual feature position and
velocity [34.56–58].
It is also possible to estimate 3-D parameters by us-
ing the epipolar geometry that relates the images of the
same scene observed from different viewpoints. Indeed,
in visual servoing, two images are generally available:
the current one and the desired one. Given a set of
matches between the image measurements in the cur-
rent image and in the desired one, the fundamental
matrix, or the essential matrix if the camera is cali-
brated, can be recovered [34.6], and then used in visual
servoing [34.59]. Indeed, from the essential matrix, the
rotation and the translation up to a scalar factor between
the two views can be estimated. However, near the con-
vergence of the visual servo, that is, when the current
and desired images are similar, the epipolar geometry
becomes degenerate and it is not possible to estimate
accurately the partial pose between the two views. For
this reason, using homography is generally preferred.
Let xi and x
i denote the homogeneous image co-
ordinates for a point in the current and desired images.
Then xi is related to x
i by
xi D Hix
i
in which Hi is a homography matrix.
If all feature points lie on a 3-D plane, then there
is a single homography matrix H such that xi D Hx
i
for all i. This homography can be estimated using the
position of four matched points in the desired and the
current images. If all the features points do not belong
to the same 3-D plane, then three points can be used to
deﬁne such a plane and ﬁve supplementary points are
needed to estimate H [34.60].
Once H is available, it can be decomposed as
H D R C t
d nT ;
(34.29)
in which R is the rotation matrix relating the orienta-
tion of the current and desired camera frames, n is the
normal to the chosen 3-D plane expressed in the de-
sired frame, d is the distance to the 3-D plane from
the desired frame, and t is the translation between cur-
rent and desired frames. From H, it is thus possible to
recover R, t=d, and n. In fact, two solutions for these
quantities exist [34.61], but it is quite easy to select the
correct one using some knowledge about the desired
pose. It is also possible to estimate the depth of any
target point up to a common scale factor [34.54]. The
unknown depth of each point that appears in classical
IBVS can thus be expressed as a function of a sin-
gle, constant parameter whatever the number of points.
Similarly, the pose parameters required by PBVS can
be recovered up to a scalar factor as for the transla-
tion term. The PBVS schemes described previously can
thus be revisited using this approach, with the new er-
ror deﬁned as the translation up to a scalar factor and
the angle/axis parameterization of the rotation. This ap-
proach has also been used for the hybrid visual servoing
schemes described in Sect. 34.4.1. In that case, using
such homography estimation, it has been possible to an-
alyze the stability of hybrid visual servoing schemes in
the presence of calibration errors [34.36]. Finally, it is
also possible to directly use the homography in the con-
trol scheme, avoiding thus its decomposition as a partial
pose [34.62].

Visual Servoing
34.8 Target Tracking
859
Part C | 34.8
34.7 Determining s and Matching Issues
All visual servo methods require knowledge of the
desired feature values s which implicitly deﬁne con-
straints on the desired camera or robot pose with respect
to the target. Three common approaches are employed.
The ﬁrst is when the task is directly speciﬁed as a de-
sired value of some features to be reached. This is the
case for instance when a target has to be centered in
the image. This is also the case when the task is speci-
ﬁed as a particular pose to reach and a PBVS is chosen.
In that case however, the camera will reach its desired
pose only if the camera is perfectly calibrated. Indeed,
a coarse camera calibration will induce a biased estima-
tion of the pose, which will make the ﬁnal pose different
from the desired one.
For IBVS and hybrid schemes, the second approach
is to use knowledge of the object and camera projec-
tion models to compute s for the desired relative pose.
Once again, the accuracy of the system directly depends
on the camera calibration, since the camera intrinsic pa-
rameters are involved to compute s.
Finally, the third approach is to simply record the
feature values s when the camera or robot has the de-
sired pose with respect to the target. This is usually
done during an off-line teaching step. When it is pos-
sible in practice, this approach is very efﬁcient since
the positioning accuracy does not depend anymore on
the camera calibration. This is still true for PBVS since,
even if the pose estimated from the desired image is bi-
ased due to calibration errors, the same biased pose will
be estimated once the robot will have converged so that
the ﬁnal image acquired by the camera will be the de-
sired one.
So far we have not commented on the matching is-
sues involved in visual servo methods. Two cases can
be differentiated in function of the nature of the com-
ponents of s. When some components of s come from
a pose estimation, it is necessary to match the measure-
ments in the image (usually some image points) to the
model of the object (usually some world points). Incor-
rect association will lead to an erroneous estimation of
the pose. In all other cases, the calculation of the er-
ror vector e deﬁned in (34.1) necessitates a matching
between the measurements m.t/ in the current image
and m in the desired image. For instance, in all IBVS
examples presented above, the camera observes four
image points and we need to determine which of the
four desired points to associate with each observed
point so that the visual features s are correctly asso-
ciated to their desired value s. Incorrect association
will lead to incorrect ﬁnal camera pose and possibly
a conﬁguration which can not be achieved from any real
camera pose. If we want to use the epipolar geometry or
estimate a homography matrix, a similar matching pro-
cess is necessary (Sect. 34.6).
This matching process is a classical computer vi-
sion problem. Note that it may be particularly difﬁcult
for the very ﬁrst image, especially when the robot dis-
placement to achieve is large, which generally implies
large disparities between the initial and desired images.
Once the association has been correctly performed for
the very ﬁrst image, the matching is greatly simpliﬁed
since it transforms to a visual tracking problem where
the results obtained for the previous image can be used
as initialization for the current one.
34.8 Target Tracking
We now consider the case of a moving target and a con-
stant desired value s for the features, the generaliza-
tion to varying desired features s.t/ being immediate.
The time variation of the error is now given by
Pe D Lev c C @e
@t ;
(34.30)
where the term @e=@t expresses the time variation of e
due to the generally unknown target motion. If the con-
trol law is still designed to try to ensure an exponential
decoupled decrease of e (that is, once again Pe D e),
we now obtain using (34.30)
v c D b
LC
e e b
LC
e
c
@e
@t ;
(34.31)
where 1
@e=@t is an estimation or an approximation of
@e=@t. This term must be introduced into the control law
to compensate for the target motion.
Closing
the
loop,
that
is,
inserting
(34.31)
into (34.30), we obtain
Pe D Leb
LC
e e  Leb
LC
e
c
@e
@t C @e
@t :
(34.32)
Even if Leb
LC
e > 0, the error will converge to zero only
if the estimation of 1
@e=@t is sufﬁciently accurate so that
Leb
LC
e
c
@e
@t D @e
@t ;
(34.33)

Part C | 34.9
860
Part C
Sensing and Perception
otherwise tracking errors will be observed. Indeed, by
just solving the scalar differential equation Pe D e C
b, which is a simpliﬁcation of (34.32), we obtain e.t/ D
e.0/ exp.t/Cb=, which converges towards b=. On
one hand, setting a high gain  will reduce the tracking
error, but on the other hand, setting the gain too high
can make the system unstable. It is thus necessary to
make b as small as possible.
Of course, if the system is known to be such that
@e=@t D 0 (that is, the camera observes a motionless
object, as described in Sect. 34.1), no tracking error
will appear with the most simple estimation given by
1
@e=@t D 0. Otherwise, a classical method in automatic
control to cancel tracking errors consists of compensat-
ing the target motion through an integral term in the
control law. In this case, wehave
c
@e
@t D 
X
j
e.j/ ;
where  is the integral gain that has to be tuned. This
scheme allows the tracking errors to be canceled only if
the target has a constant velocity. Other methods, based
on feedforward control, estimate the term 1
@e=@t directly
through the image measurements and the camera veloc-
ity, when it is available. Indeed, from (34.30), we obtain
c
@e
@t DbPe  b
Le b
v c ;
wherebPe can, for instance, be obtained asbPe.t/ D Œe.t/ 
e.t  t/=t, t being the duration of the control
loop. A Kalman ﬁlter [34.63] or more-elaborate ﬁlter-
ing methods [34.64] can then be used to improve the
estimated values obtained. If some knowledge about
the target velocity or the target trajectory is available,
it can of course be used to smooth or predict the mo-
tion [34.65–67]. For instance, in [34.68], the periodic
motion of the heart and breathing are compensated for
an application of visual servoing in medical robotics.
Finally, other methods have been developed to remove
the perturbations induced by the target motion as fast
as possible [34.43], using for instance predictive con-
trollers [34.69].
34.9 Eye-in-Hand and Eye-to-Hand Systems Controlled
in the Joint Space
In the previous sections, we have considered the six
components of the camera velocity as the input of the
robot controller. As soon as the robot is not able to real-
ize this motion, for instance, because it has fewer than
six degrees of freedom, the control scheme must be ex-
pressed in the joint space. In this section, we describe
how this can be done, and in the process develop a for-
mulation for eye-to-hand systems.
In the joint space, the system equations for both the
eye-to-hand and eye-in-hand conﬁgurations have the
same form
Ps D Js Pq C @s
@t :
(34.34)
Here, Js 2 Rkn is the feature Jacobian matrix, which
can be linked to the interaction matrix, and n is the num-
ber of robot joints.
For an eye-in-hand system (Fig. 34.15a), @s=@t is
the time variation of s due to a potential object motion,
and Js is given by
Js D Ls
cXNJ.q/ ;
(34.35)
where:

cXN is the spatial motion transform matrix (as de-
ﬁned in Chap. 02 and recalled in (34.15)) from the
vision sensor frame to the end-effector frame. It is
usually a constant matrix (as long as the vision sen-
sor is rigidly attached to the end-effector). Thanks
to the robustness of closed-loop control schemes,
a coarse approximation of this transform matrix is
sufﬁcient in visual servoing. If needed, an accurate
estimation is possible through classical hand–eye
calibration methods [34.70].

J.q/ is the robot Jacobian expressed in the end-
effector frame (as deﬁned in Chap. 02)
For an eye-to-hand system (Fig. 34.15b), @s=@t is
now the time variation of s due to a potential vision sen-
sor motion and Js can be expressed as
Js D Ls cXNNJ.q/ ;
(34.36)
D Ls cX00J.q/ :
(34.37)
In (34.36), the classical robot Jacobian NJ.q/ expressed
in the end-effector frame is used but the spatial motion
transform matrix cXN from the vision sensor frame to
the end-effector frame changes all along the robot mo-

Visual Servoing
34.10 Under Actuated Robots
861
Part C | 34.10
a)
b)
Fig.34.15a,b (a) Eye-in-hand system, (b) eye-to-hand sys-
tem: system schematic (top) and opposite image motion
produced by the same robot motion (bottom)
tion, and it has to be estimated at each iteration of the
control scheme, usually using pose-estimation methods.
In (34.37), the robot Jacobian 0J.q/ is expressed
in the robot reference frame, and the spatial motion
transform matrix cX0 from the vision sensor frame to
that reference frame is constant as long as the cam-
era does not move. In this case, which is convenient
in practice, a coarse approximation of cX0 is usually
sufﬁcient.
Once the modeling step is ﬁnished, it is quite easy to
follow the procedure that has been used above to design
a control scheme expressed in the joint space, and to
determine the sufﬁcient condition to ensure the stability
of the control scheme. We obtain, considering again e D
s  s, and an exponential decoupled decrease of e
Pq D c
JC
e e  c
JC
e
c
@e
@t :
(34.38)
If k D n, considering as in Sect. 34.1 the Lyapunov
function L D 1
2ke.t/k2, a sufﬁcient condition to ensure
the global asymptotic stability is given by
Je c
JC
e > 0 :
(34.39)
If k > n, we obtain similarly to Sect. 34.1
c
JC
e Je > 0
(34.40)
to ensure the local asymptotic stability of the system.
Note that the actual extrinsic camera parameters appear
in Je while the estimated ones are used in c
JC
e . It is thus
possible to analyze the robustness of the control scheme
with respect to the camera extrinsic parameters. It is
also possible to estimate directly the numerical value
of Je or JC
e using the methods described in Sect. 34.2.8.
Finally, to remove tracking errors, we have to ensure
that
Je c
JC
e
c
@e
@t D @e
@t :
Let us note that, even if the robot has six degrees of
freedom, it is generally not equivalent to ﬁrst compute
v c using (34.5) and then deduce Pq using the robot in-
verse Jacobian, and to compute directly Pq using (34.38).
Indeed, it may occur that the robot Jacobian J.q/ is
singular while the feature Jacobian Js is not (that may
occur when k < n). Furthermore, the properties of the
pseudo-inverse ensure that using (34.5), kv ck is mini-
mal while using (34.38), kPqk is minimal. As soon as
JC
e ¤ JC.q/NXcLC
e ;
the control schemes will be different and will induce
different robot trajectories. The choice of the state space
is thus important.
34.10 Under Actuated Robots
Many useful robots are under actuated, that is, they
cannot move instantaneously in all directions because
of the number or conﬁguration of their actuators
(Chap. 52). For instance, a quadrotor ﬂying robot is un-
der actuated since it has only four actuators while the
dimension of its conﬁguration space is six. Many other
useful robots are subject to non-holonomic constraints
(Chap. 49), leading to similar motion inability. A car for
instance has only two degrees of freedom (for velocity
and steering) while the dimension of its conﬁguration
space is three (position and orientation in the ground
plane).
A consequence of under actuation is that time vary-
ing manoeuvres may be required in order to achieve
particular goal states. For example, if a quadrotor has
to move forward, it must ﬁrst change its attitude, pitch-
ing down, so that a component of its thrust vector is
able to accelerate the vehicle forward. For a visual servo
system this can be problematic since the initial attitude
change will affect the value of the visual features even
before the vehicle has moved. In fact the attitude change
increases the error and this is ultimately destabilising.
A common and expedient solution [34.71] is to
de-rotate the image, that is, to use information from

Part C | 34.10
862
Part C
Sensing and Perception
a non-vision attitude sensor such as an inertial mea-
surement unit (IMU) (Chap. 29) to correct the feature
coordinates as if they had been viewed by a vir-
tual camera whose optical axis has a constant ori-
entation in space, typically, straight down. As dis-
cussed in Sect. 34.2.8, the spherical projection model
is well suited for such image transformation, thanks
to its invariance properties with respect to rotational
motion.
For a non-holonomic vehicle, there are several so-
lutions. In the non-general case where the vehicle is
able to follow a smooth path from its initial to goal
Fig. 34.16 Few applications
of visual servoing: Gaze
control for target tracking,
navigation of a mobile
robot to follow a wall using
an omnidirectional vision
sensor, grasping a ball with
a humanoid robot, assembly
of MEMS and ﬁlm of a dia-
logue within the constraints
of a script in animation
conﬁguration, a controller based on visually estimated
relative pose (range, heading angle and lateral offset)
can be used (Chap. 49), following a PBVS strategy.
Particular controllers based on the epipolar geometry
or the trifocal tensor have also been designed [34.72,
73]. For the more general case, switching control laws
can be used. If possible in practice, another common
solution is to add a controlled DOF between the vehicle
and the camera in order to bypass the non-holonomic
constraint through redundancy. It is thus possible to
control the full camera conﬁguration, but not the robot
one.

Visual Servoing
References
863
Part C | 34
34.11 Applications
Applications of visual servoing in robotics are numer-
ous. It can be used as soon as a vision sensor is available
and a task is assigned to a dynamic system to con-
trol its motion. A non exhaustive list of examples are
(Fig. 34.16):

The control of a pan-tilt-zoom camera for target
tracking

Grasping using a robot arm

Locomotion and dextrous manipulation with a hu-
manoid robot

Micro or nano manipulation of microelectrome-
chanical system (MEMS) or biological cells

Accurate positioning of a parallel robot

Pipe inspection by an underwater autonomous vehi-
cle

Autonomous navigation of a mobile robot in indoor
or outdoor environment

Aircraft landing

Autonomous satellite rendezvous

Biopsy using ultrasound probes or heart motion
compensation in medical robotics

Virtual cinematography in animation.
Software are available to help any user interested
in developing visual servoing applications. We rec-
ommend the Robotics, Machine Vision Toolbox for
Matlab [34.74] and the ViSP C++ library [34.11].
34.12 Conclusions
In this chapter we have only considered velocity con-
trollers, which are convenient for most classical robot
arms. However, the dynamics of the robot must of
course be taken into account for high-speed tasks.
Features related to the image motion [34.75], image
intensity [34.76], or coming from other vision sensors
(RGB-D sensors, ultrasonic probes [34.77], etc.) neces-
sitate reconsideration of the modeling issues to select
adequate visual features. Finally, fusing visual features
with data coming from other sensors (force sensor,
proximity sensors, etc.) at the level of the control
scheme will allow new research topics to be addressed.
The end of fruitful research in the ﬁeld of visual servo
is thus nowhere yet in sight.
Video-References
VIDEO 59
IBVS on a 6 DOF robot arm (1);
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/34/videodetails/59
VIDEO 60
IBVS on a 6 DOF robot arm (2);
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/34/videodetails/60
VIDEO 61
IBVS on a 6 DOF robot arm (3);
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/34/videodetails/61
VIDEO 62
PBVS on a 6 DOF robot arm (1);
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/34/videodetails/62
VIDEO 63
PBVS on a 6 DOF robot arm (2);
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/34/videodetails/63
VIDEO 64
2.5-D VS on a 6 DOF robot arm (1);
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/34/videodetails/64
VIDEO 65
2.5-D VS on a 6 DOF robot arm (2);
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/34/videodetails/65
References
34.1
L. Weiss, A. Sanderson, C. Neuman: Dynamic
sensor-based control of robots with visual feed-
back, IEEE J. Robot. Autom. 3, 404–417 (1987)
34.2
S. Hutchinson, G. Hager, P. Corke: A tutorial on vi-
sual servo control, IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 12,
651–670 (1996)
34.3
B. Espiau, F. Chaumette, P. Rives: A new approach to
visual servoing in robotics, IEEE Trans. Robot. Au-
tom. 8, 313–326 (1992)
34.4
J. Feddema, O. Mitchell: Vision-guided servo-
ing with feature-based trajectory generation, IEEE
Trans. Robot. Autom. 5, 691–700 (1989)

Part C | 34
864
Part C
Sensing and Perception
34.5
D. Forsyth, J. Ponce: Computer Vision: A Mod-
ern Approach (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River
2003)
34.6
Y. Ma, S. Soatto, J. Kosecka, S. Sastry: An Invitation
to 3-D Vision: From Images to Geometric Models
(Springer, New York 2003)
34.7
P. Corke: Robotics, Vision and Control: Fundamental
Algorithms in MATLAB (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2011)
34.8
H. Michel, P. Rives: Singularities in the Determina-
tion of the Situation of a Robot Effector from the
Perspective View of Three Points. Res. Rep. RR-1850
(INRIA 1993)
34.9
M. Fischler, R. Bolles: Random sample consensus:
a paradigm for model fitting with applications to
image analysis and automated cartography, Com-
munications ACM 24, 381–395 (1981)
34.10
E. Malis: Improving vision-based control using
efficient second-order minimization techniques,
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., New Orleans (2004)
pp. 1843–1848
34.11
E. Marchand, F. Spindler, F. Chaumette: ViSP for
visual servoing: A generic software platform with
a wide class of robot control skills, IEEE Robot. Au-
tom. Mag. 12(4), 40–52 (2005), https://team.inria.
fr/lagadic/visp/visp.html
34.12
P. Corke, S. Hutchinson: A new partitioned ap-
proach to image-based visual servo control, IEEE
Trans. Robot. Autom. 17, 507–515 (2001)
34.13
F. Chaumette: Potential problems of stability and
convergence in image-based and position-based
visual servoing, Lect. Note. Contr. Inform. Sci. 237,
66–78 (1998)
34.14
E. Malis: Visual servoing invariant to changes in
camera intrinsic parameters, IEEE Trans. Robot. Au-
tom. 20, 72–81 (2004)
34.15
A. Isidori: Nonlinear Control Systems, 3rd edn.
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1995)
34.16
G. Hager, W. Chang, A. Morse: Robot feedback con-
trol based on stereo vision: Towards calibration-
free hand-eye coordination, IEEE Control Syst. Mag.
15, 30–39 (1995)
34.17
M. Iwatsuki, N. Okiyama: A new formulation of
visual servoing based on cylindrical coordinate
system, IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 21, 266–273
(2005)
34.18
F. Chaumette, P. Rives, B. Espiau: Classification
and realization of the different vision-based tasks,
Robot. Autom. Syst. 7, 199–228 (1993)
34.19
A. Castano, S. Hutchinson: Visual compliance: Task
directed visual servo control, IEEE Trans. Robot. Au-
tom. 10, 334–342 (1994)
34.20
G. Hager: A modular system for robust position-
ing using feedback from stereo vision, IEEE Trans.
Robot. Autom. 13, 582–595 (1997)
34.21
F. Chaumette: Image moments: A general and use-
ful set of features for visual servoing, IEEE Trans.
Robot. Autom. 20, 713–723 (2004)
34.22
O. Tahri, F. Chaumette: Point-based and region-
based image moments for visual servoing of planar
objects, IEEE Trans. Robot. 21, 1116–1127 (2005)
34.23
C. Geyer, K. Daniilidis: Catadioptric
projective
geometry, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 45(3), 223–243
(2001)
34.24
T. Hamel, R. Mahony: Visual servoing of an under-
actuated dynamic rigid-body system: An image-
based approach, IEEE Trans Robot. 18(2), 187–198
(2002)
34.25
I. Suh: Visual servoing of robot manipulators by
fuzzy membership function based neural networks.
In: Visual Servoing, Robotics and Automated Sys-
tems, Vol. 7, ed. by K. Hashimoto (World Scientific,
Singapore 1993) pp. 285–315
34.26
G. Wells, C. Venaille, C. Torras: Vision-based robot
positioning using neural networks, Image Vis.
Comput. 14, 75–732 (1996)
34.27
J.T. Lapresté, F. Jurie, F. Chaumette: An efficient
method to compute the inverse jacobian matrix in
visual servoing, IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., New
Orleans (2004) pp. 727–732
34.28
K. Hosada, M. Asada: Versatile visual servoing
without knowledge of true jacobian, IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., München (1994) pp. 186–
193
34.29
M. Jägersand, O. Fuentes, R. Nelson: Experimental
evaluation of uncalibrated visual servoing for pre-
cision manipulation, IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
Albuquerque (1997) pp. 2874–2880
34.30
J. Piepmeier, G.M. Murray, H. Lipkin: Uncalibrated
dynamic visual servoing, IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom.
20, 143–147 (2004)
34.31
K. Deguchi: Direct interpretation of dynamic images
and camera motion for visual servoing without im-
age feature correspondence, J. Robot. Mechatron.
9(2), 104–110 (1997)
34.32
W. Wilson, C. Hulls, G. Bell: Relative end-effector
control using cartesian position based visual ser-
voing, IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 12, 684–696 (1996)
34.33
B. Thuilot, P. Martinet, L. Cordesses, J. Gallice: Po-
sition based visual servoing: Keeping the object in
the field of vision, IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
Washington (2002) pp. 1624–1629
34.34
D. Dementhon, L. Davis: Model-based object pose
in 25 lines of code, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 15, 123–141
(1995)
34.35
D. Lowe: Three-dimensional object recognition
from single two-dimensional images, Artif. Intell.
31(3), 355–395 (1987)
34.36
E. Malis, F. Chaumette, S. Boudet: 2-1/2 D visual ser-
voing, IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 15, 238–250 (1999)
34.37
E. Malis, F. Chaumette: Theoretical improvements in
the stability analysis of a new class of model-free
visual servoing methods, IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom.
18, 176–186 (2002)
34.38
J. Chen, D. Dawson, W. Dixon, A. Behal: Adaptive
homography-based visual servo tracking for fixed
camera-in-hand configurations, IEEE Trans. Control
Syst. Technol. 13, 814–825 (2005)
34.39
G. Morel, T. Leibezeit, J. Szewczyk, S. Boudet, J. Pot:
Explicit incorporation of 2-D constraints in vision-
based control of robot manipulators, Lect. Note.
Contr. Inform. Sci. 250, 99–108 (2000)

Visual Servoing
References
865
Part C | 34
34.40
F. Chaumette, E. Malis: 2 1/2 D visual servoing:
a possible solution to improve image-based and
position-based visual servoings, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom., San Fransisco (2000) pp. 630–
635
34.41
E. Cervera, A.D. Pobil, F. Berry, P. Martinet: Im-
proving image-based visual servoing with three-
dimensional features, Int. J. Robot. Res. 22, 821–
840 (2004)
34.42
F. Schramm, G. Morel, A. Micaelli, A. Lottin: Ex-
tended 2-D visual servoing, IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., New Orleans (2004) pp. 267–273
34.43
N. Papanikolopoulos, P. Khosla, T. Kanade: Visual
tracking of a moving target by a camera mounted
on a robot: A combination of vision and control,
IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 9, 14–35 (1993)
34.44
K. Hashimoto, H. Kimura: LQ optimal and nonlinear
approaches to visual servoing, Robot. Autom. Syst.
7, 165–198 (1993)
34.45
B. Nelson, P. Khosla: Strategies for increasing the
tracking region of an eye-in-hand system by sin-
gularity and joint limit avoidance, Int. J. Robot.
Res. 14, 225–269 (1995)
34.46
B. Nelson, P. Khosla: Force and vision resolvabil-
ity for assimilating disparate sensory feedback, IEEE
Trans. Robot. Autom. 12, 714–731 (1996)
34.47
R. Sharma, S. Hutchinson: Motion perceptibility
and its application to active vision-based servo
control, IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 13, 607–617
(1997)
34.48
E. Marchand, F. Chaumette, A. Rizzo: Using the
task function approach to avoid robot joint lim-
its and kinematic singularities in visual servoing,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Osaka (1996)
pp. 1083–1090
34.49
E. Marchand, G. Hager: Dynamic sensor planning
in visual servoing, IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
Leuven (1998) pp. 1988–1993
34.50
N. Cowan, J. Weingarten, D. Koditschek: Visual ser-
voing via navigation functions, IEEE Trans. Robot.
Autom. 18, 521–533 (2002)
34.51
N. Gans, S. Hutchinson: An asymptotically stable
switched system visual controller for eye in hand
robots, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Las
Vegas (2003) pp. 735–742
34.52
G. Chesi, K. Hashimoto, D. Prattichizio, A. Vicino:
Keeping features in the field of view in eye-in-
hand visual servoing: a switching approach, IEEE
Trans. Robot. Autom. 20, 908–913 (2004)
34.53
K. Hosoda, K. Sakamato, M. Asada: Trajectory gen-
eration for obstacle avoidance of uncalibrated
stereo visual servoing without 3-D reconstruction,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. 3, Pittsburgh
(1995) pp. 29–34
34.54
Y. Mezouar, F. Chaumette: Path planning for robust
image-based control, IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 18,
534–549 (2002)
34.55
G. Chesi: Visual servoing path-planning via homo-
geneous forms and LMI optimizations, IEEE Trans.
Robot. 25(2), 281–291 (2009)
34.56
L. Matthies, T. Kanade, R. Szeliski: Kalman filter-
based algorithms for estimating depth from im-
age sequences, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 3(3), 209–238
(1989)
34.57
C.E. Smith, N. Papanikolopoulos: Computation
of shape through controlled active exploration,
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., San Diego (1994)
pp. 2516–2521
34.58
A. De Luca, G. Oriolo, P. Robuffo Giordano: Feature
depth observation for image-based visual servo-
ing: Theory and experiments, Int. J. Robot. Res.
27(10), 1093–1116 (2008)
34.59
R. Basri, E. Rivlin, I. Shimshoni: Visual homing:
Surfing on the epipoles, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 33, 117–
137 (1999)
34.60
E. Malis, F. Chaumette, S. Boudet: 2 1/2 D visual
servoing with respect to unknown objects through
a new estimation scheme of camera displacement,
Int. J. Comput. Vis. 37, 79–97 (2000)
34.61
O. Faugeras: Three-Dimensional Computer Vision:
A Geometric Viewpoint (MIT Press, Cambridge 1993)
34.62
G. Silveira, E. Malis: Direct visual servoing: Vision-
based estimation and control using only nonmetric
information, IEEE Trans. Robot. 28(4), 974–980
(2012)
34.63
P. Corke, M. Goods: Controller design for high per-
formance visual servoing, 12th World Congr. IFAC’93,
Sydney (1993) pp. 395–398
34.64
F. Bensalah, F. Chaumette: Compensation of abrupt
motion changes in target tracking by visual servo-
ing, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Pitts-
burgh (1995) pp. 181–187
34.65
P. Allen, B. Yoshimi, A. Timcenko, P. Michelman:
Automated tracking and grasping of a moving ob-
ject with a robotic hand-eye system, IEEE Trans.
Robot. Autom. 9, 152–165 (1993)
34.66
K. Hashimoto, H. Kimura: Visual servoing with
non linear observer, IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
Nagoya (1995) pp. 484–489
34.67
A. Rizzi, D. Koditschek: An active visual estimator
for dexterous manipulation, IEEE Trans. Robot. Au-
tom. 12, 697–713 (1996)
34.68
R. Ginhoux, J. Gangloff, M. de Mathelin, L. Soler,
M.A. Sanchez, J. Marescaux: Active filtering of
physiological motion in robotized surgery using
predictive control, IEEE Trans. Robot. 21, 67–79
(2005)
34.69
J. Gangloff, M. de Mathelin: Visual servoing of
a 6-DOF manipulator for unknown 3-D profile fol-
lowing, IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 18, 511–520 (2002)
34.70
R. Tsai, R. Lenz: A new technique for fully au-
tonomous efficient 3-D robotics hand-eye calibra-
tion, IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 5, 345–358 (1989)
34.71
N. Guenard, T. Hamel, R. Mahony: A practical visual
servo control for an unmanned aerial vehicle, IEEE
Trans. Robot. 24(2), 331–340 (2008)
34.72
G.L. Mariottini, G. Oriolo, D. Prattichizo: Image-
based visual servoing for nonholonomic mobile
robots using epipolar geometry, IEEE Trans. Robot.
23(1), 87–100 (2007)
34.73
G. Lopez-Nicolas, J.J. Guerrero, C. Sagues: Visual
control through the trifocal tensor for nonholo-
nomic robots, Robot. Auton. Syst. 58(2), 216–226
(2010)

Part C | 34
866
Part C
Sensing and Perception
34.74
P. Corke: Robotics, Vision and Control: Fundamental
Algorithms in MATLAB, Springer Tracts in Advanced
Robotics, Vol. 73 (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2011)
34.75
A. Crétual, F. Chaumette: Visual servoing based on
image motion, Int. J. Robot. Res. 20(11), 857–877
(2001)
34.76
C. Collewet, E. Marchand: Photometric visual ser-
voing, IEEE Trans. Robot. 27(4), 828–834 (2011)
34.77
R. Mebarki, A. Krupa, F. Chaumette: 2D ultrasound
probe complete guidance by visual servoing using
image moments, IEEE Trans. Robot. 26(2), 296–306
(2010)

Multimedia Contents Multisensor
867
Part C | 35.1
35. Multisensor Data Fusion
Hugh Durrant-Whyte, Thomas C. Henderson
Multisensor data fusion is the process of combining
observations from a number of different sensors
to provide a robust and complete description of
an environment or process of interest. Data fusion
finds wide application in many areas of robotics
such as object recognition, environment mapping,
and localization.
This chapter has three parts: methods, ar-
chitectures, and applications. Most current data
fusion methods employ probabilistic descriptions
of observations and processes and use Bayes’ rule
to combine this information. This chapter sur-
veys the main probabilistic modeling and fusion
techniques including grid-based models, Kalman
filtering, and sequential Monte Carlo techniques.
This chapter also briefly reviews a number of
nonprobabilistic data fusion methods. Data fu-
sion systems are often complex combinations
of sensor devices, processing, and fusion algo-
rithms. This chapter provides an overview of key
principles in data fusion architectures from both
a hardware and algorithmic viewpoint. The ap-
plications of data fusion are pervasive in robotics
and underly the core problem of sensing, estima-
tion, and perception. We highlight two example
applications that bring out these features. The
first describes a navigation or self-tracking ap-
plication for an autonomous vehicle. The second
describes an application in mapping and environ-
ment modeling.
35.1
Multisensor Data Fusion Methods .........
867
35.1.1
Bayes’ Rule ...............................
868
35.1.2
Probabilistic Grids .....................
869
35.1.3
The Kalman Filter ......................
872
35.1.4
Sequential Monte Carlo Methods
876
35.1.5
Alternatives to Probability..........
878
35.2 Multisensor Fusion Architectures ..........
880
35.2.1
Architectural Taxonomy..............
880
35.2.2
Centralized, Local Interaction,
and Hierarchical........................
882
35.2.3 Decentralized, Global Interaction,
and Heterarchical......................
882
35.2.4 Decentralized, Local Interaction,
and Hierarchical........................
883
35.2.5 Decentralized, Local Interaction,
and Heterarchical......................
884
35.3 Applications ........................................
885
35.3.1
Dynamic System Control .............
885
35.3.2
ANSER II:
Decentralized Data Fusion ..........
888
35.3.3 Recent Developments ................
889
35.4 Conclusions .........................................
889
Video-References.........................................
889
References...................................................
890
The essential algorithmic tools of data fusion
are reasonably well established. However, the
development and use of these tools in realistic
robotics applications is still developing.
35.1 Multisensor Data Fusion Methods
The most widely used data fusion methods employed in
robotics originate in the ﬁelds of statistics, estimation,
and control. However, the application of these meth-
ods in robotics has a number of unique features and
challenges. In particular, autonomy is most often the
goal and so results must be presented and interpreted in
a form from which autonomous decisions can be made,
for recognition or navigation, for example.

Part C | 35.1
868
Part C
Sensing and Perception
In this section we review the main data fusion meth-
ods employed in robotics. These are very often based
on probabilistic methods, which are indeed now con-
sidered the standard approach to data fusion in all
robotics applications [35.1]. Probabilistic data fusion
methods are generally based on Bayes’ rule for com-
bining prior and observation information. Practically,
this may be implemented in a number of ways: through
the use of the Kalman and extended Kalman ﬁlters,
through sequential Monte Carlo methods, or through
the use of functional density estimates. Each of these
is reviewed. There are a number of alternatives to
probabilistic methods. These include the theory of evi-
dence and interval methods. Such alternative techniques
are not as widely used as they once were, however
they have some special features that can be advan-
tageous in speciﬁc problems. These, too, are brieﬂy
reviewed.
35.1.1 Bayes’ Rule
Bayes’ rule lies at the heart of most data fusion meth-
ods. In general, Bayes’ rule provides a means to make
inferences about an object or environment of interest
described by a state x, given an observation z.
Bayesian Inference
Bayes’ rule requires that the relationship between x
and z be encoded as a joint probability or joint prob-
ability distribution P.x; z/ for discrete and continuous
variables, respectively. The chain rule of conditional
probabilities can be used to expand a joint probability
in two ways
P.x; z/ D P.x j z/P.z/ D P.z j x/P.x/:
(35.1)
Rearranging in terms of one of the conditionals, Bayes’
rule is obtained
P.x j z/ D P.z j x/P.x/
P.z/
:
(35.2)
The value of this result lies in the interpretation of the
probabilities P.x j z/, P.z j x/, and P.x/. Suppose it is
necessary to determine the various likelihoods of dif-
ferent values of an unknown state x. There may be prior
beliefs about what values of x might be expected, en-
coded in the form of relative likelihoods in the prior
probability P.x/. To obtain more information about the
state x an observation z is made. These observations are
modeled in the form of a conditional probability P.z j x/
that describes, for each ﬁxed state x, the probability
that the observation z will be made, i. e., the probabil-
ity of z given x. The new likelihoods associated with
the state x are computed from the product of the orig-
inal prior information and the information gained by
observation. This is encoded in the posterior probabil-
ity P.x j z/, which describes the likelihoods associated
with x given the observation z. In this fusion process,
the marginal probability P.z/ simply serves to normal-
ize the posterior and is not generally computed. The
marginal P.z/ plays an important role in model valida-
tion or data association as it provides a measure of how
well the observation is predicted by the prior, because
P.z/ D
R
P.z j x/P.x/dx. The value of Bayes’ rule is
that it provides a principled means of combining ob-
served information with prior beliefs about the state of
the world.
Sensor Models
and Multisensor Bayesian Inference
The conditional probability P.z j x/ serves the role of
a sensor model and can be thought of in two ways.
First, in building a sensor model, the probability is
constructed by ﬁxing the value of x D x and then ask-
ing what probability density P.z j x D x/ on z results.
Conversely, when this sensor model is used and ob-
servations are made, z D z is ﬁxed and a likelihood
function P.z D z j x/ on x is inferred. The likelihood
function, while not strictly a probability density, models
the relative likelihood that different values of x gave rise
to the observed value of z. The product of this likelihood
with the prior, both deﬁned on x, gives the posterior or
observation update P.x j z/. In a practical implementa-
tion of (35.2), P.z j x/ is constructed as a function of
both variables (or a matrix in discrete form). For each
ﬁxed value of x, a probability density on z is deﬁned.
Therefore, as x varies, a family of likelihoods on z is
created.
The multisensor form of Bayes’ rule requires con-
ditional independence
P.z1;    ; zn j x/ D P.z1 j x/    P.zn j x/
D
n
Y
iD1
P.zi j x/ ;
(35.3)
so that
P.x j Zn/ D CP.x/
n
Y
iD1
P.zi j x/ ;
(35.4)
where C is a normalizing constant. Equation 35.4 is
known as the independent likelihood pool [35.2]. This
states that the posterior probability on x given all ob-
servations Zn, is simply proportional to the product of
prior probability and individual likelihoods from each
information source.

Multisensor Data Fusion
35.1 Multisensor Data Fusion Methods
869
Part C | 35.1
The recursive form of Bayes’ rule is
P.x j Zk/ D P.zk j x/P.x j Zk1/
P

zk j Zk1
:
(35.5)
The advantage of (35.5) is that we need to compute and
store only the posterior density P.x j Zk1/, which con-
tains a complete summary of all past information. When
the next piece of information P.zk j x/ arrives, the pre-
vious posterior takes on the role of the current prior and
the product of the two becomes, when normalized, the
new posterior.
Bayesian Filtering
Filtering is concerned with the sequential process of
maintaining a probabilistic model for a state which
evolves over time and which is periodically observed
by a sensor. Filtering forms the basis for many prob-
lems in tracking and navigation. The general ﬁltering
problem can be formulated in Bayesian form. This is
signiﬁcant because it provides a common representa-
tion for a range of discrete and continuous data fusion
problems without recourse to speciﬁc target or observa-
tion models.
Deﬁne xt as the value of a state of interest at time t.
This may, for example, describe a feature to be tracked,
the state of a process being monitored, or the location
of a platform for which navigation data is required. For
convenience, and without loss of generality, time is de-
ﬁned at discrete (asynchronous) times tk , k. At a time
instant k, the following quantities are deﬁned:

xk: The state vector to be estimated at time k.

uk: A control vector, assumed known, and applied
at time k  1 to drive the state from xk1 to xk at
time k.

zk: An observation taken of the state xk at time k.
In addition, the following sets are also deﬁned:

The history of states:
Xk D fx0; x1;    ; xkg D fXk1; xkg.

The history of control inputs:
Uk D fu1; u2;    ; ukg D fUk1; ukg.

The history of state observations:
Zk D fz1; z2;    ; zkg D fZk1; zkg.
In probabilistic form, the general data fusion prob-
lem is to ﬁnd the posterior density
P

xk j Zk; Uk; x0

(35.6)
for all times k given the recorded observations and
control inputs up to and including time k together (pos-
sibly) with knowledge of the initial state x0: Bayes’
rule can be used to write (35.6) in terms of a sen-
sor model P.zk j xk/ and a predicted probability den-
sity P.xk j Zk1; Uk; x0/ based on observations up to
time k  1 as
P

xk j Zk; Uk; x0

D P.zk j xk/P xk j Zk1; Uk; x0

P

zk j Zk1; Uk
:
(35.7)
The denominator in (35.7) is independent of the state
and following (35.4) can be set to some normalizing
constant C. The sensor model makes use of the condi-
tional independence assumption from (35.3).
The total probability theorem can be used to rewrite
the second term in the numerator of (35.7) in terms of
the state transition model and the joint posterior from
time step k  1 as
P

xk j Zk1; Uk; x0

D
Z
P

xk; xk1 j Zk1; Uk; x0

dxk1
D
Z
P xk j xk1; Zk1; Uk; x0

 P

xk1 j Zk1; Uk; x0

dxk1
D
Z
P.xk j xk1; uk/
 P

xk1 j Zk1; Uk1; x0

dxk1 ;
(35.8)
where the last equality implies that the future state de-
pends only on the current state and the control exerted
at this time. The state transition model is described in
terms of a probability distribution in the form P.xk j
xk1; uk/. That is, the state transition may reasonably
be assumed to be a Markov process in which the next
state xk depends only on the immediately proceeding
state xk1 and the applied control uk, and is indepen-
dent of both the observations and preceding states.
Equations (35.7) and (35.8) deﬁne a recursive so-
lution to (35.6). Equation (35.8) is the time update or
prediction step for the full Bayes data fusion algorithm.
A graphical description of this equation is shown in
Fig. 35.1. Equation (35.7) is the observation update
step for the full Bayes data fusion algorithm. A graph-
ical description of this equation is shown in Fig. 35.2.
The Kalman ﬁlter, grid-based methods, and sequential
Monte Carlo methods, to be described, are speciﬁc im-
plementations of these general equations.
35.1.2 Probabilistic Grids
Probabilistic grids are conceptually the simplest way of
implementing Bayesian data fusion methods. They can

Part C | 35.1
870
Part C
Sensing and Perception
P(xk–1,xk)
P(xk–1)
P(xk–1|xk–1)
∫P(xk,xk–1)dxk–1
∫P(xk,xk–1)dxk
P(xk)
0
5
10
15
50
40
30
20
10
0
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
xk = f (xk–1, Uk)
xk–1
xk
Fig. 35.1 Time update step for the full Bayes ﬁlter. At a time k  1, knowledge of the state xk1 is summarized in
a probability distribution P.xk1/. A vehicle model, in the form of a conditional probability density P.xk j xk1/, then
describes the stochastic transition of the vehicle from a state xk1 at a time k1 to a state xk at a time k. Functionally, this
state transition may be related to an underlying kinematic state model in the form xk D f.xk1; uk/. The ﬁgure shows
two typical conditional probability distributions P.xk j xk1/ on the state xk given ﬁxed values of xk1. The product
of this conditional distribution with the marginal distribution P.xk1/, describing the prior likelihood of values of xk,
gives the the joint distribution P.xk; xk1/ shown as the surface in the ﬁgure. The total marginal density P.xk/ describes
knowledge of xk after state transition has occurred. The marginal density P.xk/ is obtained by integrating (projecting) the
joint distribution P.xk; xk1/ over all xk1. Equivalently, using the total probability theorem, the marginal density can
be obtained by integrating (summing) all conditional densities P.xk j xk1/ weighted by the prior probability P.xk1/ of
each xk1. The process can equally be run in reverse (a retroverse motion model) to obtain P.xk1/ from P.xk/ given
a model P.xk1 j xk/
be applied both to problems in mapping [35.3, 4] and
tracking [35.5].
In mapping applications, the environment of in-
terest is divided into a grid of equally sized spatial
cells. Each cell is indexed and labeled with a prop-
erty, thus the state xij may describe a two-dimensional
world indexed by ij and having the property x. Inter-
est is focused on maintaining a probability distribution
on possible state values P.xij/ at each grid cell. Typi-
cally, in navigation and mapping problems, the property
of interest has only two values O and E, occupied and
empty, respectively, and it is then usual to assume that
P.xij D O/ D 1  P.xij D E/. However, there is no par-
ticular constraint on the property encoded by the state
xij which could have many values (green, red, blue, for
example) and indeed be continuous (the temperature at
a cell, for example).
Once the state has been deﬁned, Bayesian meth-
ods require that a sensor model or likelihood function
for the sensor be established. In theory, this requires
speciﬁcation of a probability distribution P.z j xij D xij/
mapping each possible grid state xij to a distribution on

Multisensor Data Fusion
35.1 Multisensor Data Fusion Methods
871
Part C | 35.1
P(xk
–)
P(zk|xk=x1)
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
5
10
15
z
x
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
P(zk=x1|xk)
P(zk|xk=x2)
Fig. 35.2 Observation update for the full Bayes ﬁlter. Prior to observation, an observation model in the form of the
conditional density P.zk j xk/ is established. For a ﬁxed value of xk, equal to x1 or x2 for example, a density function
P.zk j xk D x1/ or P.zk j xk D x2/ is deﬁned describing the likelihood of making the observation zk. Together the density
P.zk j xk/ is then a function of both zk and xk. This conditional density then deﬁnes the observation model. Now, in
operation, a speciﬁc observation zk D x1 is made and the resulting distribution P.zk D x1 j xk/ deﬁnes a density function
(now termed the likelihood function) on xk. This density is then multiplied by the prior density P.x
k / and normalized to
obtain the posterior distribution P.xk j zk/ describing knowledge in the state after observation
observations. Practically, however, this is implemented
simply as another observation grid so that for a speciﬁc
observation z D z (taken from a speciﬁc location), a grid
of likelihoods on the states xij is produced in the form
P.z D z j xij/ D .xij/. It is then trivial to apply Bayes’
rule to update the property value at each grid cell as
PC.xij/ D C.xij/P.xij/ ;
8i; j ;
(35.9)
where C us a normalizing constant obtained by sum-
ming posterior probabilities to one at node ij only.
Computationally, this is a simple pointwise multipli-
cation of two grids. Some care needs to be taken that
the two grids appropriately overlap and align with each
other at the right scale. In some instances it is also valu-
able to encode the fact that spatially adjacent cells will
inﬂuence each other; that is, if we knew the value of
the property (occupancy, temperature, for example) at
ij we will have some belief also of the value of this
property at adjacent nodes i C 1; j, i; j C 1, etc. Differ-
ent sensors and the fusion of different sensor outputs is
accommodated simply by building appropriate sensor
models .xij/.
Grids can also be used for tracking and self-tracking
(localization). The state xij in this case is the location of
the entity being tracked. This is a qualitatively different
deﬁnition of state from that used in mapping. The prob-
ability P.xij/ must now be interpreted as the probability
that the object being tracked occupies the grid cell ij. In
the case of mapping, the sum of property probabilities at
each grid cell is one, whereas in the case of tracking, the

Part C | 35.1
872
Part C
Sensing and Perception
sum of location probabilities over the whole grid must
sum to one. Otherwise, the procedure for updating is
very similar. An observation grid is constructed which,
when instantiated with an observation value, provides
a location likelihood grid
P.z D z j xij/ D .xij/ :
Bayes’ rule is then applied to update the location proba-
bility at each grid cell in the same form as (35.9) except
that now the normalization constant C is obtained by
summing posterior probabilities over all ij grid cells.
This can become computationally expensive, especially
if the grid has three or more dimensions. One major
advantage of grid-based tracking is that it is easy to
incorporate quite complex prior information. For exam-
ple, if it is known that the object being tracked is on
a road, then the probability location values for all off-
road grid cells can simply be set to zero.
Grid-based fusion is appropriate to situations where
the domain size and dimension are modest. In such
cases, grid-based methods provide straightforward and
effective fusion algorithms. Grid-based methods can
be extended in a number of ways; to hierarchical
(quad-tree) grids, or to irregular (triangular, pentago-
nal) grids. These can help reduce computation in larger
spaces. Monte Carlo and particle ﬁltering methods
(Sect. 35.1.4) may be considered as grid-based meth-
ods, where the grid cells themselves are sample of the
underlying probability density for the state.
35.1.3 The Kalman Filter
The Kalman ﬁlter is a recursive linear estimator that
successively calculates an estimate for a continuous val-
ued state, that evolves over time, on the basis of periodic
observations of the state. The Kalman ﬁlter employs an
explicit statistical model of how the parameter of in-
terest x.t/ evolves over time and an explicit statistical
model of how the observations z.t/ that are made are re-
lated to this parameter. The gains employed in a Kalman
ﬁlter are chosen to ensure that, with certain assumptions
about the observation and process models used, the re-
sulting estimate Ox.t/ minimizes mean-squared error and
is thus the conditional mean Ox.t/ D EŒx.t/ j Zt: an av-
erage, rather than a most likely value.
The Kalman ﬁlter has a number of features which
make it ideally suited to dealing with complex multisen-
sor estimation and data fusion problems. In particular,
the explicit description of process and observations al-
lows a wide variety of different sensor models to be
incorporated within the basic algorithm. In addition,
the consistent use of statistical measures of uncertainty
makes it possible to quantitatively evaluate the role each
sensor plays in overall system performance. Further, the
linear recursive nature of the algorithm ensures that its
application is simple and efﬁcient. For these reasons,
the Kalman ﬁlter has found widespread application in
many different data fusion problems [35.6–9].
In robotics, the Kalman ﬁlter is most suited to prob-
lems in tracking, localization, and navigation, and less
so to problems in mapping. This is because the algo-
rithm works best with well-deﬁned state descriptions
(positions, velocities, for example), and for states where
observation and time-propagation models are also well
understood.
Observation and Transition Models
The Kalman ﬁlter may be considered a speciﬁc instance
of the recursive Bayesian ﬁlter of (35.7) and (35.8) for
the case where the probability densities on states are
Gaussian. The starting point for the Kalman Filter algo-
rithm is to deﬁne a model for the states to be estimated
in the standard state-space form
Px.t/ D F.t/x.t/ C B.t/u.t/ C G.t/v.t/ ;
(35.10)
where x.t/ is the state vector of interest, u.t/ is a known
control input, v.t/ is a random variable describing un-
certainty in the evolution of the state, and F.t/, B.t/,
and G.t/ are matrices describing the contribution of
states, controls, and noise to state transition [35.7]. An
observation (output) model is also deﬁned in standard
state-space form
z.t/ D H.t/x.t/ C D.t/w.t/ ;
(35.11)
where z.t/ is the observation vector, w.t/ is a random
variable describing uncertainty in the observation, and
where H.t/ and D.t/ are matrices describing the contri-
bution of state and noise to the observation.
These equations deﬁne the evolution of a contin-
uous-time system with continuous observations being
made of the state. However, the Kalman Filter is al-
most always implemented in discrete time tk D k. It is
straightforward [35.8] to obtain a discrete-time version
of (35.10) and (35.11) in the form
x.k/ D F.k/x.k  1/ C B.k/u.k/ C G.k/v.k/ ;
(35.12)
z.k/ D H.k/x.k/ C D.k/w.k/ :
(35.13)
A basic assumption in the derivation of the Kalman
ﬁlter is that the random sequences v.k/ and w.k/ de-
scribing process and observation noise are all Gaussian,
temporally uncorrelated, and zero-mean
EŒv.k/ D EŒw.k/ D 0 ;
8k ;
(35.14)

Multisensor Data Fusion
35.1 Multisensor Data Fusion Methods
873
Part C | 35.1
with known covariance
EŒv.i/vT.j/ D ıijQ.i/ ;
EŒw.i/w T.j/ D ıijR.i/ :
(35.15)
It is also generally assumed that the process and obser-
vation noises are also uncorrelated
EŒv.i/w T.j/ D 0 ;
8i; j :
(35.16)
These are equivalent to a Markov property requiring
observations and successive states to be conditionally
independent. If the sequences v.k/ and w.k/ are tem-
porally correlated, a shaping ﬁlter can be used to whiten
the observations, again making the assumptions re-
quired for the Kalman ﬁlter valid [35.8]. If the process
and observation noise sequences are correlated, then
this correlation can also be accounted for in the Kalman
ﬁlter algorithm [35.10]. If the sequence is not Gaussian,
but is symmetric with ﬁnite moments, then the Kalman
ﬁlter will still produce good estimates. If however, the
sequence has a distribution which is skewed or other-
wise pathological, results produced by the Kalman ﬁlter
will be misleading and there will be a good case for us-
ing a more-sophisticated Bayesian ﬁlter [35.5].
Filtering Algorithm
The Kalman ﬁlter algorithm produces estimates that
minimize mean-squared estimation error conditioned
on a given observation sequence and so is the condi-
tional mean
Ox.i j j/ , EŒx.i/ j z.1/;   ; z.j/ , EŒx.i/ j Zj :
(35.17)
The estimate variance is deﬁned as the mean-squared
error in this estimate
P.i j j/ , EfŒx.i/  Ox.i j j/Œx.i/  Ox.i j j/T j Zjg :
(35.18)
The estimate of the state at a time k given all informa-
tion up to time k is written Ox.k j k/. The estimate of the
state at a time k given only information up to time k 1
is called a one-step-ahead prediction (or just a predic-
tion) and is written Ox.k j k  1/.
The Kalman ﬁlter algorithm is now stated with-
out proof. Detailed derivations can be found in many
books on the subject, for example [35.7, 8]. The state is
assumed to evolve in time according to (35.12). Obser-
vations of this state are made at regular time intervals
according to (35.13). The noise processes entering the
system are assumed to obey (35.14–35.16). It is also
assumed that an estimate Ox.k  1 j k  1/ of the state
x.k1/ at time k1 based on all observations made up
to and including time k 1 is available, and that this es-
timate is equal to the conditional mean of the true state
x.k  1/ conditioned on these observations. The condi-
tional variance P.k  1 j k  1/ in this estimate is also
assumed known. The Kalman ﬁlter then proceeds re-
cursively in two stages (Fig. 35.3).
Prediction. A prediction Ox.k j k  1/ of the state at
time k and its covariance P.k j k  1/ is computed ac-
cording to
Ox.k j k  1/ D F.k/Ox.k  1 j k  1/ C B.k/u.k/ ;
(35.19)
P.k j k  1/ D F.k/P.k  1 j k  1/FT.k/
C G.k/Q.k/GT.k/ :
(35.20)
Update. At time k an observation z.k/ is made and the
updated estimate Ox.k j k/ of the state x.k/, together with
the updated estimate covariance P.k j k/, is computed
from the state prediction and observation according to
Ox.k j k/ D Ox.k j k  1/ C W.k/Œz.k/
 H.k/Ox.k j k  1/ ;
(35.21)
P.k j k/ D P.k j k  1/  W.k/S.k/WT.k/ ;
(35.22)
where the gain matrix W.k/ is given by
W.k/ D P.k j k  1/H.k/S1.k/ ;
(35.23)
where
S.k/ D R.k/ C H.k/P.k j k  1/H.k/
(35.24)
is the innovation covariance. The difference between
the observation z.k/ and the predicted observation
H.k/Ox.k j k  1/ is termed the innovation or resid-
ual .k/
.k/ D z.k/  H.k/Ox.k j k  1/ :
(35.25)
The innovation is an important measure of the devi-
ation between the ﬁlter estimates and the observation
sequence. Indeed, because the true states are not usu-
ally available for comparison with the estimated states,
the innovation is often the only measure of how well the
estimator is performing. The innovation is particularly
important in data association.
The Extended Kalman Filter
The extended Kalman ﬁlter (EKF) is a form of the
Kalman ﬁlter that can be employed when the state
model and/or the observation model are nonlinear. The
EKF is brieﬂy described in this section.

Part C | 35.1
874
Part C
Sensing and Perception
True state
Control at tk
u(k)
Estimation
of state
State estimate
at tk–1
x(k–1|k–1)
State covariance
computation
State error covariance
at tk–1
P(k–1|k–1)
State transition
x(k)=F(k)x(k–1)
+G(k)u(k)+υ(k)
State prediction
x(k|k–1) =
F(k)x(k–1|k–1)+G(k)u(k)
State prediction
 covariance
P(k|k–1) =
F(k)P(k–1|k–1)F(k)+Q(k)
Innovation
v(k) = z(k)– z(k|k–1)
Filter gain
W(k) =
P(k|k–1)H'(k)S –1(k)
Updated state estimate
x(k|k) =
x(k|k–1)+W(k)υ(k)
Updated state covariance
P(k|k) =
P(k|k–1)–W(k)S(k)W'(k)
Measurement at tk
z(k)=H(k)x(k)+w(k)
Measurement prediction
z(k|k–1) =
H(k)x(k|k–1)
Innovation covariance
S(k) =
H(k)P(k|k–1)H'(k)+R(k)
Fig. 35.3 Block diagram of the Kalman ﬁlter cycle (after Bar-Shalom and Fortmann [35.7])
The state models considered by the EKF are de-
scribed in state-space notation by a ﬁrst-order nonlinear
vector differential equation or state model of the form
Px.t/ D fŒx.t/; u.t/;v.t/; t ;
(35.26)
where fŒ; ; ;  is now a general nonlinear mapping of
state and control input to state transition. The observa-
tion models considered by the EKF are described in
state-space notation by a nonlinear vector function in
the form
z.t/ D hŒx.t/; u.t/;w.t/; t ;
(35.27)
where hŒ; ; ;  is now a general nonlinear mapping of
state and control input to observations.
The EKF, like the Kalman ﬁlter, is almost always
implemented in discrete time. By integration and with
appropriate identiﬁcation of discrete time states and ob-
servations, the state model is written
x.k/ D fŒx.k  1/;u.k/; v.k/; k ;
(35.28)
and the observation model as
z.k/ D hŒx.k/; w.k/ :
(35.29)
Like the Kalman ﬁlter, it is assumed that the noises v.k/
and w.k/ are all Gaussian, temporally uncorrelated,
and zero-mean with known variance as deﬁned in
(35.14–35.16). The EKF aims to minimize the mean-
squared error and thereby compute an approxima-
tion to the conditional mean. It is assumed therefore
that an estimate of the state at time k  1 is avail-
able which is approximately equal to the conditional
mean, Ox.k  1 j k  1/ 
 EŒx.k  1/ j Zk1. The EKF
algorithm will now be stated without proof. Detailed
derivations may be found in any number of books
on the subject. The principle stages in the deriva-
tion of the EKF follow directly from those of the
linear Kalman ﬁlter with the additional step that the
process and observation models are linearized as a Tay-
lor series about the estimate and prediction, respec-
tively. The algorithm has two stages: prediction and
update.
Prediction. A prediction Ox.k j k  1/ of the state at
time k and its covariance P.k j k  1/ is computed ac-
cording to
Ox.k j k  1/ D fŒOx.k  1 j k  1/; u.k/ ;
(35.30)
P.k j k  1/ D rf x.k/P.k  1 j k  1/rTf x.k/
C rfv.k/Q.k/rTfv.k/ :
(35.31)

Multisensor Data Fusion
35.1 Multisensor Data Fusion Methods
875
Part C | 35.1
Update. At time k an observation z.k/ is made and the
updated estimate Ox.k j k/ of the state x.k/, together with
the updated estimate covariance P.k j k/ is computed
from the state prediction and observation according to
Ox.k j k/ D Ox.k j k  1/
C W.k/fz.k/  hŒOx.k j k  1/g ;
(35.32)
P.k j k/ D P.k j k  1/  W.k/S.k/WT.k/ ;
(35.33)
where
W.k/ D P.k j k  1/rThx.k/S1.k/ ;
(35.34)
and
S.k/ D rhw.k/R.k/rThw.k/
C rhx.k/P.k j k  1/rThx.k/ ;
(35.35)
and where the Jacobian rf .k/ is evaluated at x.k 
1/ D Ox.k  1 j k  1/ and rh.k/ is evaluated at x.k/ D
Ox.k j k  1/.
A comparison of (35.19–35.24) with (35.30–35.35)
makes it clear that the EKF algorithm is very similar to
the linear Kalman ﬁlter algorithm, with the substitutions
F.k/ ! rf x.k/ and H.k/ ! rhx.k/ being made in the
equations for the variance and gain propagation. Thus,
the EKF is, in effect, a linear estimator for a state error
which is described by a linear equation and which is
being observed according to a linear equation of the
form of (35.13).
The EKF works in much the same way as the linear
Kalman ﬁlter with some notable caveats:

The Jacobians rf x.k/ and rhx.k/ are typically not
constant, being functions of both state and time step.
This means that unlike the linear ﬁlter, the covari-
ances and gain matrix must be computed online as
estimates and predictions are made available, and
will not in general tend to constant values. This
signiﬁcantly increases the amount of computation
which must be performed online by the algorithm.

As the linearized model is derived by perturbing
the true state and observation models around a pre-
dicted or nominal trajectory, great care must be
taken to ensure that these predictions are always
close enough to the true state that second order
terms in the linearization are indeed insigniﬁcant.
If the nominal trajectory is too far away from the
true trajectory then the true covariance will be much
larger than the estimated covariance and the ﬁlter
will become poorly matched. In extreme cases the
ﬁlter may also become unstable.

The EKF employs a linearized model that must be
computed from an approximate knowledge of the
state. Unlike the linear algorithm this means that the
ﬁlter must be accurately initialized at the start of op-
eration to ensure that the linearized models obtained
are valid. If this is not done, the estimates computed
by the ﬁlter will simply be meaningless.
The Information Filter
The information ﬁlter is mathematically equivalent to
a Kalman ﬁlter. However, rather than generating state
estimates Ox.i j j/ and covariances P.i j j/ it uses infor-
mation state variables Oy.i j j/ and information matri-
ces Y.i j j/, which are related to each other through the
relationships
Oy.i j j/ D P1.i j j/Ox.i j j/ ;
Y.i j j/ D P1.i j j/ :
(35.36)
The information ﬁlter has the same prediction–update
structure as the Kalman ﬁlter.
Prediction. A prediction Oy.k j k1/ of the information
state at time k and its information matrix Y.k j k  1/ is
computed according to (Joseph form [35.8])
Oy.k j k  1/ D .1  GT/FTOy.k  1 j k  1/
C Y.k j k  1/Bu.k/ ;
(35.37)
Y.k j k  1/ D M.k/  †T ;
(35.38)
respectively, where
M.k/ D FTY.k  1 j k  1/F1 ;
† D GTM.k/G C Q1 ;
and
 D M.tk/G†1 :
It should be noted that †, whose inverse is required to
compute , has the same dimensionality as the process
driving noise, which is normally considerably smaller
than the state dimension. Further, the matrix F1 is the
state-transition matrix evaluated backwards in time and
so must always exist.
Update. At time k an observation z.k/ is made and
the updated information state estimate Oy.k j k/ together
with the updated information matrix Y.k j k/ is com-
puted from
Oy.k j k/ D Oy.k j k  1/ C H.k/R1.k/z.k/ ;
(35.39)
Y.k j k/ D Y.k j k  1/ C H.k/R1.k/HT.k/ :
(35.40)

Part C | 35.1
876
Part C
Sensing and Perception
We emphasize that (35.38) and (35.37) are math-
ematically identical to (35.19) and (35.20), and
that (35.39) and (35.40) are mathematically identi-
cal to (35.21) and (35.22). It will be noted that
there is a duality between information and state space
forms [35.10]. This duality is evident from the fact
that  and † in the prediction stage of the informa-
tion ﬁlter play an equivalent role to the gain matrix W
and innovation covariance S in the update stage of the
Kalman ﬁlter. Furthermore, the simple linear update
step for the information ﬁlter is mirrored in the simple
linear prediction step for the Kalman ﬁlter.
The main advantage of the information ﬁlter over
the Kalman ﬁlter in data fusion problems is the rela-
tive simplicity of the update stage. For a system with n
sensors, the fused information state update is exactly the
linear sum of information contributions from all sensors
as
Oy.k j k/ D Oy.k j k  1/ C
n
X
iD1
Hi.k/R1
i
.k/zi.k/ ;
Y.k j k/ D Y.k j k  1/ C
n
X
iD1
Hi.k/R1
i
.k/HT
i .k/ :
(35.41)
The reason such an expression exists in this form is
that the information ﬁlter is essentially a log-likelihood
expression of Bayes’ rule, where products of likeli-
hoods (35.4) are turned into sums. No such simple ex-
pression for multisensor updates exists for the Kalman
ﬁlter. This property of the information ﬁlter has been
exploited for data fusion in robotic networks [35.11,
12] and more recently in robot navigation and localiza-
tion problems [35.1]. One substantial disadvantage of
the information ﬁlter is the coding of nonlinear models,
especially for the prediction step.
When to Use a Kalman or Information Filter
Kalman or information ﬁlters are appropriate to data
fusion problems where the entity of interest is well
deﬁned by a continuous parametric state. This would
include estimation of the position, attitude, and veloc-
ity of a robot or other object, or the tracking of a simple
geometric feature such as a point, line or curve. Kalman
and information ﬁlters are inappropriate for estimating
properties such as spatial occupancy, discrete labels, or
processes whose error characteristics are not easily pa-
rameterized.
35.1.4 Sequential Monte Carlo Methods
Monte Carlo (MC) ﬁlter methods describe probability
distributions as a set of weighted samples of an underly-
ing state space. MC ﬁltering then uses these samples to
simulate probabilistic inference usually through Bayes’
rule. Many samples or simulations are performed. By
studying the statistics of these samples as they progress
through the inference process, a probabilistic picture of
the process being simulated can be built up.
Representing Probability Distributions
In sequential Monte Carlo methods, probability dis-
tributions are described in terms of a set of support
points (state-space values) xi, i D 1;    ; N, together
with a corresponding set of normalized weights w i,
i D 1;    ; N, where P
i w i D 1. The support points and
weights can be used to deﬁne a probability density func-
tion in the form
P.x/ 
N
X
iD1
w iı.x  xi/ :
(35.42)
A key question is how these support points and weights
are selected to obtain a faithful representation of the
probability density P.x/. The most general way of
selecting support values is to use an importance den-
sity q.x/. The support values xi are drawn as samples
from this density; where the density has high proba-
bility, more support values are chosen, and where the
density has low probability, few support support vectors
are selected. The weights in (35.42) are then computed
from
w i / P.xi/
q.xi/ :
(35.43)
Practically, a sample xi is drawn from the impor-
tance distribution. The sample is then instantiated in
the underlying probability distribution to yield the
value P.x D xi/. The ratio of the two probability values,
appropriately normalized, then becomes the weight.
There are two instructive extremes of the impor-
tance sampling method:
1. At one extreme, the importance density could be
taken to be a uniform distribution, so the support
values xi are uniformly distributed on the state space
in a close approximation to a grid. The probabilities
q.xi/ are also therefore equal. The weights com-
puted from (35.43) are then simply proportional
to the probabilities w i / P.x D xi/. The result is
a model for the distribution which looks very like
the regular grid model.
2. At the other extreme, we could choose an impor-
tance density equal to the probability model q.x/ D
P.x/. Samples of the support values xi are now
drawn from this density. Where the density is high

Multisensor Data Fusion
35.1 Multisensor Data Fusion Methods
877
Part C | 35.1
there will be many samples, where the density is
low there will be few samples. However, if we sub-
stitute q.xi/ D P.xi/ into (35.43), it is clear that the
weights all become equal w i D 1
N . A set of samples
with equal weights is known as a particle distribu-
tion.
It is, of course, possible to mix these two representa-
tions to describe a probability distribution both in terms
of a set of weights and in terms of a set of support
values. The complete set of samples and weights de-
scribing a probability distribution fxi; w igN
iD1 is termed
a random measure.
The Sequential Monte Carlo Method
Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) ﬁltering is a simulation
of the recursive Bayes update equations using sample
support values and weights to describe the underlying
probability distributions.
The starting point is the recursive or sequential
Bayes observation update given in (35.7) and (35.8).
The SMC recursion begins with an a posterior proba-
bility density represented by a set of support values and
weights fxi
k1; w i
k1jk1gNk1
iD1 in the form
P

xk1 j Zk1
D
Nk1
X
iD1
w i
k1ı

xk1  xi
k1

:
(35.44)
The prediction step requires that (35.44) is substituted
into (35.8) where the joint density is marginalized.
Practically however, this complex step is avoided by im-
plicitly assuming that the importance density is exactly
the transition model as
qk

xi
k

D P

xi
k j xi
k1

:
(35.45)
This allows new support values xi
k to be drawn on
the basis of old support values xi
k1 while leaving the
weights unchanged w i
k D w i
k1. With this, the predic-
tion becomes
P

xk j Zk1
D
Nk
X
iD1
w i
k1ı

xk  xi
k

:
(35.46)
The SMC observation update step is relatively straight-
forward. An observation model P.zk j xk/ is deﬁned.
This is a function on both variables, zk and xk, and
is a probability distribution on zk (integrates to unity).
When an observation or measurement is made, zk D zk,
the observation model becomes a function of state xk
only. If samples of the state are taken xk D xi
k, i D
1    ; Nk, the observation model P.zk D zk j xk D xi
k/
becomes a set of scalars describing the likelihood that
the sample xi
k could have given rise to the observation
zk. Substituting these likelihoods and (35.46) into (35.7)
gives
P

xk j Zk
D C
Nk
X
iD1
w i
k1P

zk D zk j xk D xi
k

ı

xk  xi
k

:
(35.47)
This is normally implemented in the form of an updated
set of normalized weights
w i
k D
w i
k1P

zk D zk j xk D xi
k

PNk
jD1 w j
k1P

zk D zk j xk D xj
k
 ;
(35.48)
and so
P

xk j Zk
D
Nk
X
iD1
w i
kı

xk  xi
k

:
(35.49)
Note that the support values in (35.49) are the same as
those in (35.46), only the weights have been changed
by the observation update.
The implementation of the SMC method requires
the enumeration of models for both the state transi-
tion P.xk j xk1/ and the observation P.zk j xk/. These
need to be presented in a form that allows instantia-
tion of values for zk, xk, and xk1. For low-dimensional
state spaces, interpolation in a lookup table is a viable
representation. For high-dimensional state spaces, the
preferred method is to provide a representation in terms
of a function.
Practically, (35.46) and (35.49) are implemented as
follows.
Time Update. A process model is deﬁned in the usual
state-space form as xk D f.xk1; w k1; k/, where w k is
an independent noise sequence with known probability
density P.w k/. The prediction step is now implemented
as follows: Nk samples w i
k, i D 1;    ; Nk are drawn
from the distribution P.w k/. The Nk support values
xi
k1 together with the samples w i
k are passed through
the process model as
xi
k D f xi
k1; w i
k1; k ;
(35.50)
yielding a new set of support vectors xi
k. The weights for
these support vectors w i
k1 are not changed. In effect,
the process model is simply used to do Nk simulations
of state propagation.

Part C | 35.1
878
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Observation
Update. The
observation
model
is
also deﬁned in the usual state-space form as zk D
h.xk; v k; k/, where v k is an independent noise sequence
with known probability density P.v k/. The observation
step is now implemented as follows. A measurement
zk D zk is made. For each support value xi
k, a likelihood
is computed as


xi
k

D P

zk D zk j xk D xi
k

:
(35.51)
Practically, this requires that the observation model be
in an equational form (such as a Gaussian) which al-
lows computation of the likelihood in the error between
the measured value zk and the observations predicted by
each particle h.xi
k; k/. The updated weights after obser-
vation are just
w i
k / w i
k1P

zk D zk j xi
k

:
(35.52)
Resampling
After the weights are updated it is usual to resample
the measure fxi
k; w i
kgN
iD1. This focuses the samples in
on those areas that have most probability density. The
decision to resample is made on the basis of the effective
number, Neff of particles in the sample, approximately
estimated from
Neff D
1
P
i.w i
k/2 :
The sampling importance resampling (SIR) algorithm
resamples at every cycle so that the weights are always
equal. One of the key problems with resampling is that
the sample set ﬁxates on a few highly likely samples.
This problem of ﬁxating on a few highly likely particles
during resampling is known as sample impoverishment.
Generally, it is good to resample when Neff falls to some
fraction of the actual samples (say 1=2).
When to Use Monte Carlo Methods
Monte Carlo (MC) methods are well suited to problems
where state-transition models and observation mod-
els are highly nonlinear. This is because sample-based
methods can represent very general probability densi-
ties. In particular multimodal or multiple hypothesis
density functions are well handled by Monte Carlo
techniques. One caveat to note however is that the mod-
els P.xk j xk1/ and P.zk j xk/ must be enumerable in all
cases and must typically be in a simple parametric form.
MC methods also span the gap between parametric and
grid-based data fusion methods.
Monte Carlo methods are inappropriate for prob-
lems where the state space is of high dimension. In
general the number of samples required to faithfully
model a given density increases exponentially with
state-space dimension. The effects of dimensionality
can be limited by marginalizing out states that can be
modeled without sampling, a procedure known as Rao–
Blackwellization.
35.1.5 Alternatives to Probability
The representation of uncertainty is so important to the
problem of information fusion that a number of alter-
native modeling techniques have been proposed to deal
with perceived limitations in probabilistic methods.
There are three main perceived limitations of prob-
abilistic modeling techniques:
1. Complexity: the need to specify a large number of
probabilities to be able to apply probabilistic rea-
soning methods correctly.
2. Inconsistency: the difﬁculties involved in specifying
a consistent set of beliefs in terms of probability and
using these to obtain consistent deductions about
states of interest.
3. Precision of models: the need to be precise in the
speciﬁcation of probabilities for quantities about
which little is known.
4. Uncertainty about uncertainty: the difﬁculty in as-
signing probability in the face of uncertainty, or
ignorance about the source of information.
There are three main techniques put forward to ad-
dress these issues: interval calculus, fuzzy logic, and
the theory of evidence (Dempster–Shafer methods). We
brieﬂy discuss each of these in turn.
Interval Calculus
The representation of uncertainty using an interval to
bound true parameter values has a number of potential
advantages over probabilistic techniques. In particular,
intervals provide a good measure of uncertainty in situ-
ations where there is a lack of probabilistic information,
but in which sensor and parameter error is known to be
bounded. In interval techniques, the uncertainty in a pa-
rameter x is simply described by a statement that the
true value of the state x is known to be bounded from
below by a, and from above by b; x 2 Œa; b. It is im-
portant that no other additional probabilistic structure
is implied; in particular the statement x 2 Œa; b does not
necessarily imply that x is equally probable (uniformly
distributed) over the interval Œa; b.
There are a number of simple and basic rules for
the manipulation of interval errors. These are described
in detail in the book by Moore [35.13] (whose analysis
was originally aimed at understanding limited-precision
computer arithmetic). Brieﬂy, with a; b; c; d 2 R, addi-

Multisensor Data Fusion
35.1 Multisensor Data Fusion Methods
879
Part C | 35.1
tion, subtraction, multiplication, and division are de-
ﬁned by the following algebraic relations
Œa; b C Œc; d D Œa C c; b C d ;
Œa; b  Œc; d D Œa  d; b  c ;
(35.53)
Œa; b  Œc; d D Œmin.ac;ad; bc; bd/;
max.ac; ad; bc; bd/ ;
(35.54)
Œa; b
Œc; d D Œa; b 

1
d ; 1
c

;
0 62 Œc; d :
(35.55)
It can be shown that interval addition and multiplication
are both associative and commutative. Interval arith-
metic admits an obvious metric distance measure
d.Œa;b; Œc; d/ D max.ja  cj; jb  dj/ :
(35.56)
Matrix arithmetic using intervals is also possible, but
substantially more complex, particularly when matrix
inversion is required.
Interval calculus methods are sometimes used for
detection. However, they are not generally used in data
fusion problems since:
1. It is difﬁcult to get results that converge to anything
of value (it is too pessimistic), and
2. It is hard to encode dependencies between variables
which are at the core of many data fusion problems.
Fuzzy Logic
Fuzzy logic has found widespread popularity as
a method for representing uncertainty particularly in
applications such as supervisory control and high-level
data fusion tasks. It is often claimed that fuzzy logic
provides an ideal tool for inexact reasoning, particu-
larly in rule-based systems. Certainly, fuzzy logic has
had some notable success in practical application.
A great deal has been written about fuzzy sets and
fuzzy logic (e.g. [35.14] and the discussion in [35.15,
Chap. 11]). Here we brieﬂy describe the main deﬁni-
tions and operations without any attempt to consider the
more advanced features of fuzzy-logic methods.
Consider a universal set consisting of the ele-
ments x; X D fxg. Consider a proper subset A  X
such that
A D fx j x has some speciﬁc propertyg :
In conventional logic systems, we can deﬁne a mem-
bership function A.x/ (also called the characteristic
function which reports if a speciﬁc element x 2 X is
a member of this set
A • A.x/ D
(
1
if x 2 A
0
if x 62 A :
For example X may be the set of all aircraft. The set A
may be the set of all supersonic aircraft. In the fuzzy
logic literature, this is known as a crisp set. In contrast,
a fuzzy set is one in which there is a degree of mem-
bership, ranging between 0 and 1. A fuzzy membership
function A.x/ then deﬁnes the degree of membership
of an element x 2 X to the set A. For example, if X is
again the set of all aircraft, A may be the set of all fast
aircraft. Then the fuzzy membership function A.x/ as-
signs a value between 0 and 1 indicating the degree of
membership of every aircraft x to this set. Formally
A • A 7! Œ0; 1 :
Composition rules for fuzzy sets follow the compo-
sition processes for normal crisp sets, for example,
A \ B • A\B.x/ D minŒA.x/; B.x/ ;
A [ B • A[B.x/ D maxŒA.x/; B.x/ :
The normal properties associated with binary logic now
hold: commutativity, associativity, idempotence, dis-
tributivity, De Morgan’s law, and absorption. The only
exception is that the law of the excluded middle is no
longer true
A [ A 6D X ;
A \ A 6D ; :
Together these deﬁnitions and laws provide a system-
atic means of reasoning about inexact values.
The relationship between fuzzy set theory and prob-
ability is still hotly debated.
Evidential Reasoning
Evidential reasoning (often called the Dempster–Shafer
theory of evidence after the originators of these ideas)
has seen intermittent success particularly in automated
reasoning applications. Evidential reasoning is quali-
tatively different from either probabilistic methods or
fuzzy set theory in the following sense. Consider a uni-
versal set X. In probability theory or fuzzy set theory,
a belief mass may be placed on any element xi 2 X and
indeed on any subset A  X. In evidential reasoning,
belief mass can not only be placed on elements and sets,
but also sets of sets. Speciﬁcally, while the domain of
probabilistic methods is all possible subsets X, the do-
main of evidential reasoning is the power set 2X.
As an example, consider the mutually exclusive
set X D foccupied, emptyg. In probability theory we

Part C | 35.2
880
Part C
Sensing and Perception
might assign a probability to each possible event, for
example, P.occupied/ D 0:3, and thus P.empty/ D 0:7.
In evidential reasoning, we construct the set of all sub-
sets
2X D ffoccupied; emptyg; foccupiedg; femptyg; ;g ;
and belief mass is assigned to all elements of this set as
m.foccupied; emptyg/ D 0:5 ;
m.foccupiedg/ D 0:3 ;
m.femptyg/ D 0:2 ;
m.;/ D 0:0 ;
(the null set ; is assigned a belief mass of zero for nor-
malization purposes). The interpretation of this is that
there is a 30% chance of occupied, a 20% chance of
empty, and a 50% chance of either occupied or empty.
In effect, the measure placed on the set containing
both occupied and empty is a measure of ignorance
or inability to distinguish between the two alternatives.
See [35.16] for a more-detailed example of applying the
evidential method to certainty-grid navigation.
Evidential reasoning thus provides a method of cap-
turing ignorance or an inability to distinguish between
alternatives. In probability theory, this would be dealt
with in a very different manner by assigning an equal
or uniform probability to each alternative. Yet, stating
that there is a 50% chance of occupancy is clearly not
the same as saying that it is unknown whether it will
occupied or not. The use of the power set as the frame
of discernment allows a far richer representation of be-
liefs. However, this comes at the cost of a substantial
increase in complexity. If there are n elements in the
original set X, then there will be 2n possible subsets on
which a belief mass will be assigned. For large n, this is
clearly intractable. Further, when the set is continuous,
the set of all subsets is not even measurable.
Evidential reasoning methods provide a means of
assigning, and combining belief masses on sets. Meth-
ods also exist for obtaining related measures called
support and plausibility which, in effect, provide upper
and lower probability bounds in agreement with Demp-
ster’s original formulation of this method.
Evidential reasoning can play an important role in
discrete data fusion systems, particularly in areas such
as attribute fusion and situation assessment, where in-
formation may be unknown or ambiguous. Its use in
lower-level data fusion problems is challenging as the
assignment of belief mass to the power set scales expo-
nentially with state cardinality.
35.2 Multisensor Fusion Architectures
The multisensor fusion methods described in the pre-
vious section provide the algorithmic means by which
sensor data and their associated uncertainty models can
be used to construct either implicit or explicit mod-
els of the environment. However, a multisensor fusion
system must include many other functional compo-
nents to manage and control the fusion process. The
organization of these is termed a multisensor fusion ar-
chitecture.
35.2.1 Architectural Taxonomy
Multisensor systems architectures can be organized in
various ways. The military community has developed
a layout of functional architectures based on the joint
directors of the laboratories (JDL) model for multisen-
sor systems. This approach views multisensor fusion
in terms of signal, feature, threat and situation anal-
ysis levels (so-called JDL levels). The assessment of
such systems is speciﬁed in terms of tracking perfor-
mance, survivability, efﬁciency and bandwidth. Such
measures are not generally appropriate in robotics ap-
plications and so the JDL model is not discuss this
further here (see [35.17, 18] for details). Other classiﬁ-
cation schemes distinguish between low- and high-level
fusion [35.19], or centralized versus decentralized pro-
cessing or data versus variable [35.20].
A general architectural framework for multisensor
robotic systems has been developed and described in
detail by Makarenko [35.21], and we will base our
discussion on this approach. A system architecture is
deﬁned as follows.
Meta-Architecture
A set of high-level considerations that strongly char-
acterize the system structure. The selection and or-
ganization of the system elements may be guided by
aesthetics, efﬁciency, or other design criteria and goals
(for example, system and component comprehensibil-
ity, modularity, scalability, portability, interoperability,
(de)centralization, robustness, fault tolerance).
Algorithmic Architecture
A speciﬁc set of information fusion and decision-
making methods. These methods address data hetero-
geneity, registration, calibration, consistency, informa-

Multisensor Data Fusion
35.2 Multisensor Fusion Architectures
881
Part C | 35.2
tion content, independence, time interval and scale, and
relationships between models and uncertainty.
Conceptual Architecture
The granularity and functional roles of components
(speciﬁcally, mappings from algorithmic elements to
functional structures).
Logical Architecture
Detailed canonical component types (i. e., object-
oriented speciﬁcations) and interfaces to formalize in-
tercomponent services. Components may be ad hoc
or regimented, and other concerns include granularity,
modularity, reuse, veriﬁcation, data structures, seman-
tics, etc. Communication issues include hierarchical
versus heterarchical organization, shared memory ver-
sus message passing, information-based characteriza-
tions of subcomponent interactions, pull/push mech-
anisms, subscribe–publish mechanisms, etc. Control
involves both the control of actuation systems within
the multisensor fusion system, as well as control of
information requests and dissemination within the sys-
tem, and any external control decisions and commands.
Execution Architecture
Deﬁnes mapping of components to execution elements.
This includes internal or external methods of ensur-
ing correctness of the code (i. e., that the environment
and sensor models have been correctly transformed
from mathematical or other formal descriptions into
computer implementations), and also validation of the
models (i. e., ensure that the formal descriptions match
physical reality to the required extent).
In any closed-loop control system, sensors are used
to provide the feedback information describing the cur-
rent status of the system and its uncertainties. Building
a sensor system for a given application is a system
engineering process that includes the analysis of sys-
tem requirements, a model of the environment, the
determination of system behavior under different con-
ditions, and the selection of suitable sensors [35.22].
The next step in building the sensor system is to assem-
ble the hardware components and develop the necessary
software modules for data fusion and interpretation.
Finally, the system is tested, and the performance is
analyzed. Once the system is built, it is necessary to
monitor the different components of the system for
the purpose of testing, debugging, and analysis. The
system also requires quantitative measures in terms
of time complexity, space complexity, robustness, and
efﬁciency.
In addition, designing and implementing real-time
systems are becoming increasingly complex owing to
many added features such as graphical user interfaces
(GUIs), visualization capabilities, and the use of many
sensors of different types. Therefore, many software
engineering issues such as reusability and the use of
commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) components [35.23],
real-time issues [35.24–26], sensor selection [35.27],
reliability [35.28–30], and embedded testing [35.31] are
now receiving more attention from system developers.
Each sensor type has different characteristics
and functional descriptions. Consequently, some ap-
proaches aim to develop general methods of modeling
sensor systems in a manner that is independent of the
physical sensors used. In turn, this enables the per-
formance and robustness of multisensor systems to be
studied in a general way. There have been many at-
tempts to provide the general model, along with its
mathematical basis and description. Some of these
modeling techniques concern error analysis and fault
tolerance of multisensor systems [35.32–37]. Other
techniques are model based, and require a priori knowl-
edge of the sensed object and its environment [35.38–
40]. These help ﬁt data to a model, but do not al-
ways provide the means to compare alternatives. Task-
directed sensing is another approach to devising sensing
strategies [35.41–43]. General sensor modeling work
has had a considerable inﬂuence on the evolution of
multisensor fusion architectures.
Another approach to modeling sensor systems is to
deﬁne sensori-computational systems associated with
each sensor to allow design, comparison, transforma-
tion, and reduction of any sensory system [35.44]. In
this approach, the concept of an information invariant
is used to deﬁne a measure of information complexity.
This provides a computational theory allowing analysis,
comparison, and reduction of sensor systems.
In general terms, multisensor fusion architectures
may be classiﬁed according to the choice along four in-
dependent design dimensions:
1. Centralized–decentralized,
2. Local–global interaction of components,
3. Modular–monolithic, and
4. Heterarchical–hierarchical.
The most prevalent combinations are:

Centralized, global interaction, and hierarchical,

Decentralized, global interaction, and heterarchical,

Decentralized, local interaction, and hierarchical,

Decentralized, local interaction, and heterarchical.
In some cases explicit modularity is also desirable.
Most existing multisensor architectures ﬁt reasonably
well into one of these categories. These categories make
no general commitment to the algorithmic architecture.

Part C | 35.2
882
Part C
Sensing and Perception
If the algorithmic architecture is the predominant fea-
ture of a system, it will be characterized as part of
multisensor fusion theory in Sect. 35.1; otherwise, it
merely differentiates methods within one of the four
meta-architectures.
35.2.2 Centralized, Local Interaction,
and Hierarchical
Centralized, local interaction and hierarchical archi-
tectures encompass a number of system philosophies.
Least representationally demanding is the subsumption
architecture initially proposed by Braitenberg [35.45]
and popularized by Brooks [35.46]. The subsumption
multisensor architecture deﬁnes behaviors as the basic
components, and employs a layered set of behaviors
to embody one program (monolithic). Any behavior
may utilize the output of other behaviors, and may also
inhibit other behaviors. The hierarchy is deﬁned by
the layers, although this is not always clear-cut. The
major design philosophy is to develop behaviors di-
rectly from perception–action loops without recourse to
brittle, environment representations. This leads to ro-
bustness in operation, but a lack of composite behavior
predictability.
A more sophisticated (representationally) behavior-
based system is the distributed ﬁeld robot architecture
(DFRA) [35.47]. This is a generalization of the sen-
sor fusion effects (SFX) architecture [35.48]. This ap-
proach exploits modularity, and aims to achieve both
behavior-based and deliberative action, reconﬁgurabil-
ity and interoperability through the use of Java, Jini, and
XML, fault tolerance, adaptability, longevity, consistent
interfaces, and dynamic components. The algorithmic
architecture is based on fuzzy logic controllers. Experi-
ments have been demonstrated on outdoor mobile robot
navigation.
Other similar architectures of this type include per-
ception action networks Lee and Ro [35.49, 50], while
Draper et al. [35.51] focuses on types of information
needed to perform tasks (higher-level integration); see
also [35.52].
Another approach to this type of sensor fusion is to
use artiﬁcial neural networks. The advantage is that the
user, at least in principle, does not need to understand
how sensor modalities relate, nor model the uncertain-
ties, nor in fact determine the structure of the system
more than to specify the number of layers in the net-
work and the number of nodes per layer. The neural
network is presented with a set of training examples,
and must determine through the weights on the neuron
connections the optimal mapping from inputs to desired
outputs (classiﬁcations, control signals, etc.) [35.53,
54].
Various other methods exist; for example, Hager
and Mintz [35.42, 43] deﬁnes a task-oriented approach
to sensor fusion based on Bayesian decision theory and
develops an object-oriented programming framework.
Joshi and Sanderson [35.55] describe a
methodology for addressing model selection and
multisensor fusion issues using representation size
(description length) to choose (1) model class and
number of parameters, (2) model parameter resolu-
tion (3) subset of observed features to model, and
(4) correspondence to map features to models.
Their approach is broader than an architecture and
uses a minimization criterion to synthesize a multi-
sensor fusion system to solve speciﬁc two-dimensional
(2-D) and three-dimensional (3-D) object recognition
problems.
35.2.3 Decentralized, Global Interaction,
and Heterarchical
The major example of the decentralized, global interac-
tion meta-architecture is the blackboard system. There
have been many examples of blackboard systems de-
veloped for data fusion applications. For example, the
SEPIA system of Berge-Cherfaoui and Vachon [35.56]
uses logical sensors (see below) in the form of modu-
lar agents that post results to a blackboard. The overall
architectural goals for blackboards include efﬁcient col-
laboration and dynamic conﬁguration. Experiments are
reported on an indoor robot moving from room to
room.
The MESSIE (multi expert system for scene inter-
pretation and evaluation) system [35.57] is a scene in-
terpretation system based on multisensor fusion; it has
been applied to the interpretation of remotely sensed
images. A typology of the multisensor fusion concepts
is presented, and the consequences of modeling prob-
lems for objects, scene, and strategy are derived. The
proposed multispecialist architecture generalized the
ideas of their previous work by taking into account
the knowledge of sensors, the multiple viewing notion
(shot), and the uncertainty and imprecision of models
and data modeled with possibility theory. In particular,
generic models of objects are represented by concepts
independent of sensors (geometry, materials, and spa-
tial context). Three kinds of specialists are present in
the architecture: generic specialists (scene and conﬂict),
semantic object specialists, and low-level specialists.
A blackboard structure with a centralized control is
used. The interpreted scene is implemented as a matrix
of pointers enabling conﬂicts to be detected very easily.
Under the control of the scene specialist, the conﬂict

Multisensor Data Fusion
35.2 Multisensor Fusion Architectures
883
Part C | 35.2
specialist resolves conﬂicts using the spatial context
knowledge of objects. Finally, an interpretation system
with SAR (synthetic aperture radar)/SPOT sensors is
described, and an example of a session concerned with
bridge, urban area, and road detection is shown.
35.2.4 Decentralized, Local Interaction,
and Hierarchical
One of the earliest proposals for this type of architecture
is the real-time control system (RCS) [35.58]. RCS is
presented as a cognitive architecture for intelligent con-
trol, but essentially uses multisensor fusion to achieve
complex control. RCS focuses on task decomposition
as the fundamental organizing principle. It deﬁnes a set
of nodes, each comprised of a sensor processor, a world
model, and a behavior generation component. Nodes
communicate with other nodes, generally in a hierar-
chical manner, although across-layer connections are
allowed. The system supports a wide variety of algorith-
mic architectures, from reactive behavior to semantic
networks. Moreover, it maintains signals, images, and
maps, and allows tight coupling between iconic and
symbolic representations. The architecture does not
generally allow dynamic reconﬁguration, but maintains
the static module connectivity structure of the speciﬁca-
tion. RCS has been demonstrated in unmanned ground
vehicles [35.59]. Other object-oriented approaches have
been reported [35.34, 60].
An early architectural approach which advocated
strong programming semantics for multisensor systems
is the logical sensor system (LSS). This approach ex-
ploits functional (or applicative) language theory to
achieve that.
The most developed version of LSS is instrumented
LSS (ILLS) [35.22]. The ILLS approach is based on
the LSS introduced by Shilcrat and Henderson [35.61].
The LSS methodology is designed to specify any sen-
sor in a way that hides its physical nature. The main
goal behind LSS was to develop a coherent and efﬁ-
cient presentation of the information provided by many
sensors of different types. This representation provides
a means for recovery from sensor failure, and also facil-
itates reconﬁguration of the sensor system when adding
or replacing sensors [35.62].
ILSS is deﬁned as an extension to LSS, and is com-
prised of the following components (Fig. 35.4):
1. ILS name: uniquely identiﬁes a module
2. Characteristic output vector (COV): strongly typed
output structure, with one output vector and zero or
more input vectors
3. Commands: input commands to the module, and
output commands to the other modules
4. Select function: a selector that detects the failure of
an alternate and switches to another alternate if pos-
sible
5. Alternate subnets: alternative ways of producing the
COVout; it is these implementations of one or more
algorithms that carry the main functions of the mod-
ule
6. Control command interpreter (CCI): interpreter of
the commands to the module
7. Embedded tests: self-testing routines that increase
robustness and facilitate debugging
8. Monitors: modules that check the validity of the re-
sulting COVs
9. Taps: hooks on the output lines to view different
COV values.
These components identify the system behavior
and provide mechanisms for online monitoring and
debugging. In addition, they provide handles for mea-
suring the runtime performance of the system. Monitors
are validity check stations that ﬁlter the output and
alert the user to any undesired results. Each moni-
tor is equipped with a set of rules (or constraints)
that governs the behavior of the COV under different
conditions.
Embedded testing is used for online checking and
debugging purposes. Weller et al. proposed a sensor-
processing model with the ability to detect measure-
ment errors and to recover from these errors [35.31].
This method is based on providing each system module
with veriﬁcation tests to verify certain characteristics in
the measured data, and to verify the internal and output
data resulting from the sensor-module algorithm. The
recovery strategy is based on rules that are local to the
Commands out
COVin
Commandsin
Command control interpreter (CCI)
Select function
. . . . . . 
Monitors
Subnet 1
ILSS name
COVout
Tap
Subnet 2
Subnet 3
Subnet n
Embedded
tests
Fig. 35.4 Instrumented logical sensor module

Part C | 35.2
884
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Table 35.1 Canonical components and the roles they play. Multiple in the same row indicate that some interrole
relationships are internalized within a component. Frame does not participate in information fusion or decision making
but is required for localization and other platform-speciﬁc tasks (after [35.21])
Component
Belief
Plan
Action
Type
Source
Fuse/dist
Sink
Source
Fuse/dist
Sink
Source
Sink
Sensor

Node


Actuator

Planner




UI




Frame
different sensor modules. ILSS uses a similar approach
called local embedded testing, in which each module is
equipped with a set of tests based on the semantic deﬁ-
nition of that module. These tests generate input data to
check different aspects of the module, then examine the
output of the module using a set of constraints and rules
deﬁned by the semantics. These tests can also take input
from other modules to check the operation of a group
of modules. Examples are given of a wall-posed esti-
mation system comprised of a Labmate platform with
a camera and sonars. Many extensions have been pro-
posed for LSS [35.63, 64].
35.2.5 Decentralized, Local Interaction,
and Heterarchical
The best example of this meta-architecture is the active
sensor network (ASN) framework for distributed data
fusion developed by Makarenko et al. [35.21, 65]. The
distinguishing features of the various architectures are
now described.
Meta-architecture
The distinguishing features of ASN are its commit-
ment to decentralization, modularity, and strictly lo-
cal interactions (this may be physical or by type).
Thus, these are communicating processes. Decentral-
ized means that no component is central to operation
of the system, and the communication is peer to peer.
Also, there are no central facilities or services (e.g., for
communication, name and service lookup or timing).
These features lead to a system that is scalable, fault
tolerant, and reconﬁgurable.
Local interactions mean that the number of commu-
nication links does not change with the network size.
Moreover, the number of messages should also remain
constant. This makes the system scalable as well as re-
conﬁgurable.
Modularity leads to interoperability derived from
interface protocols, reconﬁgurability, and fault toler-
ance: failure may be conﬁned to individual modules.
Algorithmic Architecture
There are three main algorithmic components: belief fu-
sion, utility fusion, and policy selection. Belief fusion is
achieved by communicating all beliefs to neighboring
platforms. A belief is deﬁned as a probability distribu-
tion of the world state space.
Utility fusion is handled by separating the individ-
ual platform’s partial utility into the team utility of
belief quality and local utilities of action and commu-
nication. The downside is that the potential coupling
between individual actions and messages is ignored be-
cause the utilities of action and communication remain
local.
The communication and action policies are chosen
by maximizing expected values. The selected approach
is to achieve point maximization for one particular state
and follows the work of Durrant-Whyte et al. [35.11,
66].
Conceptual Architecture
The data types of the system include:
1. Beliefs: Current world beliefs
2. Plans: Future planned world beliefs
3. Actions: Future planned actions.
The deﬁnition of component roles leads to a natural
partition of the system.
The information fusion task is achieved through the
deﬁnition of four component roles for each data type:
source, sink, fuser, and distributor. (Note that the data
type action does not have fuser or distributor component
roles.)
Connections between distributors form the back-
bone of the ASN framework, and the information ex-
changed is in the form of their local beliefs. Similar
considerations are used to determine component roles
for the decision-making and system conﬁguration tasks.
Logical Architecture
A detailed architecture speciﬁcation is determined
from the conceptual architecture. It is comprised of

Multisensor Data Fusion
35.3 Applications
885
Part C | 35.3
six canonical component types as described in Ta-
ble 35.1 [35.21].
Makarenko then describes how to combine the com-
ponents and interfaces to realize the use cases of the
problem domain in ASN.
Execution Architecture
The execution architecture traces the mapping of log-
ical components to runtime elements such as pro-
cesses and shared libraries. The deployment view shows
the mapping of physical components onto the nodes
of the physical system. The source code view ex-
plains how the software implementing the system is
organized. At the architectural level, three items are
addressed: execution, deployment, and source code
organization.
The experimental implementation of the ASN
framework has proven to be ﬂexible enough to ac-
commodate a variety of system topologies, platform,
and sensor hardware, and environment representations.
Several examples are given with a variety of sensors,
processors, and hardware platforms.
35.3 Applications
Multisensor fusion systems have been applied to a wide
variety of problems in robotics (see the references
for this chapter and
VIDEO 132 ,
VIDEO 638
and
VIDEO 639 ), but the two most general areas are
dynamic system control and environment modeling. Al-
though there is some overlap between these, they may
generally be characterized as:

Dynamic system control: The problem is to use ap-
propriate models and sensors to control the state
of a dynamic system (e.g., industrial robot, mobile
robot, autonomous vehicle, surgical robot). Usu-
ally such systems involve real-time feedback con-
trol loops for steering, acceleration, and behavior
selection. In addition to state estimation, uncer-
tainty models are required. Sensors may include
force/torque sensors, gyros, global positioning sys-
tem (GPS), position encoders, cameras, range ﬁnd-
ers, etc..

Environment modeling: The problem is to use ap-
propriate sensors to construct a model of some
aspect of the physical environment. This may be
a particular object, e.g., a cup, a physical part,
a face, or a larger part of the surroundings, e.g.,
the interior of a building, part of a city or an ex-
tended remote or underground area. Typical sensors
include cameras, radar, 3-D range ﬁnders, infrared
(IR), tactile sensors and touch probes (CMMs),
etc. The result is usually expressed as geometry
(points, lines, surfaces), features (holes, sinks, cor-
ners, etc.), or physical properties. Part of the prob-
lem includes the determination of optimal sensor
placement.
35.3.1 Dynamic System Control
The EMS-Vision system [35.67] is an outstanding ex-
emplar of this application domain. The goal is to
develop a robust and reliable perceptual system for au-
tonomous vehicles. The development goals, as stated by
the EMS-Vision team, are:

COTS components

Wide variety of objects modeled and incorporated
into behaviors

Inertial sensors for ego-state estimation

Peripheral/foveal/saccadic vision

Knowledge and goal driven behavior

State tracking for objects

25 Hz real-time update rate.
The approach has been in development since the
1980s. Figure 35.5 shows the ﬁrst vehicle to drive fully
autonomously on the German autobahn for 20 km and
at speeds up to 96 km=h.
Information from inertial and vision sensors is com-
bined to produce a road scene tree (Fig. 35.6). A four-
Fig. 35.5 First fully autonomous vehicle on German autobahn

Part C | 35.3
886
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Other
vehicle
Wide angle right
Road at
cg
Own vehicle
Platform base
Wide angle left
Pan and movable part
of gaze control platform
Road at
lookahead
distance Lf
Fixed on two-axis
gaze control platform
Extended stretch of road
xR1
xR0
yR0
zR0
yR1
zR1
xRf
yRf
zRf
xwl
xT
xwT
ywl
yT
ywr
zT
x
y
z
zW
z
x
y
Color tele straight
Fig. 35.6 EMS-Vision road scene tree
Best low frequency inertial ego-state estimate
t/TV-cycles
Typical time delays in image sequence processing
Time
delayed
vis-
ual
+
No
time
delays
Short-term (high-frequency, 100 Hz)
Strap-down navigation
4-D visual/inertial joint data interpretation
for dynamic ground vehicle guidance
Xi,st
Xυ,E
High-frequency inertial
ego-state
Gaze control
Gaze
platform
3 orthogonal
angular rates
Frame
grabber
0
1
2
3
4
5
V
Cameras
Feature
extract.
Ego-state (own body)
Conventional
sensors
Environment
γ, , μ, Hgeo
Low frequency
(time delayed)
estimates
of inertial data
of the surface:
(static objects)
ωyeωze
ωz
ay
ax
3 orthogonal
accelerations
Low-pass filtering
for stationary
components
(gravity vector)
States of
other
objects
Prediction
for inertial
measurements
Fig. 35.7 EMS-Vision guidance system

Multisensor Data Fusion
35.3 Applications
887
Part C | 35.3
Fast ethernet
Switch
Switch
Radar
Parallel
Video
VaPM only
Image-
proc.
PC 2
SCI-Net
Link or CAN
+ Accel.
 sensors
+ Rate
 sensors
+ Angle
 sensors
+ Odometry
+ Steering angle
+ Throttle position
+ Brake pressure
+ Motor revolution
Link
Serial
Transputers
Image-
proc.
PC 1
Image-
proc.
PC 3
Platform-
subsystem
Vehicle-
subsystem
Inertial
sensors
+ Throttle
+ Brake
+ Stearing
Actuators
Convent. sensors
GPS
Ethernet
Behavior
PC
Gateway
PC
Fig. 35.8 EMS-Vision hardware layout (CAN: controller area network)
Density
fitting
Likelihood
model
Time update
(convolution)
Assimilation
(multiplication)
Sensor node
zi(k)
Pi (z|x)
P(xk|Z k–1,zi(k))
P(xk|Z k–1,zi(k))
P(xk|zQ,zP)
P(xk|Z k–1)
P(xk|Z k)
Pi (z=zi(k)|x)
Channel filter
P
Channel filter
Channel
manager
Q
Preprocess
and feature
extraction
Observation
update
(multiplication)
Fig. 35.9 Mathematical structure of a decentralized data fusion node

Part C | 35.3
888
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Fig.35.10a–i A synopsis of the ANSER II autonomous network and its operation. (a–c) Main system components: (a) air vehicle,
(b) ground vehicle, (c) human operative. (d–e) The perception process: (d) top three dimensions of features discovered from
ground-based visual sensor data along with the derived mixture model describing these feature properties, (e) sector of the
overall picture obtained from fusing air vehicle (UAV), ground vehicle (GV), and human operator (HO) information. Each set
of ellipses corresponds to a particular feature and the labels represent the identity state with highest probability. (f–i) Sequential
fusion process for two close landmarks: (f) a tree and a red car, (g) bearing-only visual observations of these landmarks are
successively fused, (h) to determine location and identity (i). Note the Gaussian mixture model for the bearing measurement
likelihood
dimensional (4-D) generic object representation is built
which includes background knowledge of the object
(e.g., roads), its behavioral capabilities, object state and
variances, and shape and aspect parameters. Figure 35.7
shows the 4-D inertial/vision multisensor guidance sys-
tem, while Fig. 35.8 shows the hardware aspects.
In summary, the EMS-Vision system is an interest-
ing and powerful demonstration of multisensor fusion
for dynamic system control.
35.3.2 ANSER II: Decentralized Data Fusion
Decentralized data fusion (DDF) methods were initially
motivated by the insight that the information or canon-
ical form of the conventional Kalman ﬁlter data fusion
algorithm could be implemented by simply adding in-
formation contributions from observations as shown
in (35.41). As these (vector and matrix) additions are
commutative, the update or data fusion process can

Multisensor Data Fusion
35.4 Conclusions
889
Part C | 35.4
be optimally distributed amongst a network of sen-
sors [35.11, 12, 68]. The aim of the ANSER II project
was to generalize the DDF method to deal with non-
Gaussian probabilities for observations and states, and
to incorporate information from a diversity of sources
including uninhabited air and ground vehicles, terrain
databases, and human operatives.
The mathematical structure of a DDF sensor node
is shown in Fig. 35.9. The sensor is modeled directly
in the form of a likelihood function. Once instanti-
ated with an observation, the likelihood function is
input to a local fusion loop which implements a lo-
cal form of the Bayesian time and observation update
of (35.7) and (35.8). Network nodes accumulate proba-
bilistic information from observation or communication
and exchange mutual information (information gain)
with other nodes in the network [35.21]. This mutual
information is transmitted to and assimilated by other
nodes in the network in an ad hoc manner. The result is
that all nodes in the network obtain a single integrated
posterior-probability-based all-node observations.
The ANSER II system consists of a pair of au-
tonomous air vehicles equipped with infrared and vi-
sual sensors, a pair of unmanned ground vehicles
equipped with visual and radar sensors, and additional
information provided by geometric and hyperspectral
databases, along with information input by human op-
eratives [35.69]. The likelihood functions for single-
sensor features are obtained through a semisupervised
machine learning method [35.70]. The resulting prob-
abilities are modeled in the form of a mixture of
Gaussians. Each platform then maintains a bank of
decentralized, non-Gaussian Bayesian ﬁlters for the ob-
served features, and transmits this information to all
other platforms. The net result is that each platform
maintains a complete map of all features observed by
all nodes in the network. Multiple observations of the
same feature, possibly by different platforms, result in
an increasingly accurate estimate of the feature loca-
tion for all nodes. A corresponding discrete probability
measure is used for Fig. 35.10 shows a synopsis of the
operation of the ANSER II system.
The ANSER II system demonstrates a number of
general principles in Bayesian data fusion methods,
speciﬁcally the need to model sensors appropriately
through the likelihood function, and the possibility of
building very different data fusion architectures from
the essential Bayesian form.
35.3.3 Recent Developments
There have been recent developments in multisensor
fusion methods: see [35.71–73] for more theoreti-
cal work, vision and biomedical applications [35.74–
77], tracking and terrain classiﬁcation [35.78–81], and
robotics and automation [35.82–87].
35.4 Conclusions
Multisensor data fusion has progressed greatly in the
last few decades; further advances in the ﬁeld will be
documented in the robotics and multisensor fusion and
integration conference and journal literature. Robust ap-
plications are being ﬁelded based on the body of theory
and experimental knowledge produced by the research
community. Current directions of interest include:
1. Large-scale, ubiquitous sensor systems,
2. Bio-based or biomimetic systems,
3. Medical in situ applications,
4. Wireless sensor networks.
Representative large-scale examples include intelli-
gent vehicle and road systems, as well as instrumented
contexts such as cities. Biological principles may pro-
vide fundamentally distinct approaches to the exploita-
tion of dense, redundant, correlated, noisy sensors,
especially when considered as part of a Gibbsian frame-
work for behavioral response to environmental stimuli.
Another issue here is the development of a theoretical
understanding of sensor system development, adaptiv-
ity, and learning with respect to the particular context in
which the system is deployed.
Further pushing the envelope of both technology
and theory will permit the introduction of micro- and
nanosensors into the human body and allow the mon-
itoring and locally adaptive treatment of various ill-
nesses. Finally, a more-complete theoretical framework
that encompasses system models for wireless sensor
networks is still required. This should include models
of the physical phenomena being monitored, as well
as operational and network issues. Finally, numerical
analysis of the algorithmic properties of data-driven
systems with sensor data error sources must be uni-
ﬁed with the analysis of truncation, roundoff, and other
errors.
A ﬁrm foundation exists upon which to build these
new theories, systems, and applications. It will be a vi-
brant area of research for years to come.

Part C | 35
890
Part C
Sensing and Perception
Video-References
VIDEO 132
AnnieWay
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/35/videodetails/132
VIDEO 638
Application of visual odometry for sewer inspection robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/35/videodetails/638
VIDEO 639
Multisensor remote surface inspection
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/35/videodetails/639
References
35.1
S. Thrun, W. Burgard, D. Fox: Probabilistic Robotics
(MIT Press, Cambridge 2005)
35.2
J.O.
Berger:
Statistical
Decision
Theory
and
Bayesian Analysis (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
1985)
35.3
A. Elfes: Sonar-based real-world mapping and
navigation, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 3(3), 249–
265 (1987)
35.4
L. Matthies, A. Elfes: Integration of sonar and
stereo range data using a grid-based representa-
tion, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1988) pp. 727–733
35.5
L.D. Stone, C.A. Barlow, T.L. Corwin: Bayesian Mul-
tiple Target Tracking (Artech House, Norwood 1999)
35.6
Y. Bar-Shalom: Multi-Target Multi-Sensor Tracking
(Artec House, Norwood 1990)
35.7
Y. Bar-Shalom, T.E. Fortmann: Tracking and Data
Association (Academic, New York 1988)
35.8
P.S. Maybeck: Stochastic Models, Estimaton and
Control (Academic, New York 1979)
35.9
W. Sorensen: Special issue on the applications of
the Kalman filter, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 28(3),
254–255 (1983)
35.10
B.D.O. Anderson, J.B. Moore: Optimal Filtering
(Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs 1979)
35.11
J. Manyika, H.F. Durrant-Whyte: Data Fusion and
Sensor Management: An Information-Theoretic
Approach (Ellis Horwood, New York 1994)
35.12
S. Sukkarieh, E. Nettleton, J.H. Kim, M. Rid-
ley, A. Goktogan, H. Durrant-Whyte: The ANSER
project: Data fusion across multiple uninhabited
air vehicles, Int. J. Robotics Res. 22(7), 505–539
(2003)
35.13
R.E. Moore: Interval Analysis (Prentice Hall, Engle-
wood Cliffs 1966)
35.14
D. Dubois, H. Prade: Fuzzy Sets and Systems: Theory
and Applications (Academic, New York 1980)
35.15
S. Blackman, R. Popoli: Design and Analysis of
Modern Tracking Systems (Artec House, Boston
1999)
35.16
D. Pagac, E.M. Nebot, H. Durrant-Whyte: An evi-
dential approach to map-building for autonomous
vehicles, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 14(4), 623–629
(1998)
35.17
D. Hall, J. Llinas: Handbook of Multisensor Data Fu-
sion (CRC, Boca Raton 2001)
35.18
E.L. Waltz, J. Llinas: Sensor Fusion (Artec House,
Boston 1991)
35.19
M. Kam, Z. Zhu, P. Kalata: Sensor fusion for mo-
bile robot navigation, Proceedings IEEE 85, 108–119
(1997)
35.20
H. Carvalho, W. Heinzelman, A. Murphy, C. Coelho:
A general data fusion architecture, Proc. 6th Int.
Conf. Inf. Fusion, Cairns (2003)
35.21
A. Makarenko: A Decentralized Architecture for Ac-
tive Sensor Networks, Ph.D. Thesis (University of
Sydney, Sydney 2004)
35.22
M. Dekhil, T. Henderson: Instrumented logical sen-
sors systems, Int. J. Robotics Res. 17(4), 402–417
(1998)
35.23
J.A. Profeta: Safety-critical systems built with COTS,
Computer 29(11), 54–60 (1996)
35.24
H. Hu, J.M. Brady, F. Du, P. Probert: Distributed real-
time control of a mobile robot, J. Intell. Autom. Soft
Comput. 1(1), 63–83 (1995)
35.25
S.A. Schneider, V. Chen, G. Pardo: ControlShell:
A real-time software framework, AIAA Conf. Intell.
Robotics Field Fact. Serv. Space (1994)
35.26
D. Simon, B. Espiau, E. Castillo, K. Kapellos:
Computer-aided design of a generic robot con-
troller handling reactivity and real-time issues,
IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol. 4(1), 213–229 (1993)
35.27
C. Giraud, B. Jouvencel: Sensor selection in a fu-
sion process: a fuzzy approach, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Multisens. Fusion Integr., Las Vegas (1994) pp. 599–
606
35.28
R. Kapur, T.W. Williams, E.F. Miller: System test-
ing and reliability techniques for avoiding failure,
Computer 29(11), 28–30 (1996)
35.29
K.H. Kim, C. Subbaraman: Fault-tolerant real-time
objects, Communication ACM 40(1), 75–82 (1997)
35.30
D.B. Stewart, P.K. Khosla: Mechanisms for detecting
and handling timing errors, Communication ACM
40(1), 87–93 (1997)
35.31
G. Weller, F. Groen, L. Hertzberger: A sensor
processing model incorporating error detection
and recovery. In: Traditional and Non-Traditional
Robotic Sensors, ed. by T. Henderson (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 1990) pp. 351–363
35.32
R.R. Brooks, S. Iyengar:
Averaging
Algorithm
for
Multi-Dimensional
Redundant
Sensor
Ar-
rays: Resolving Sensor Inconsistencies, Tech. Rep.
(Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge 1993)
35.33
T.C. Henderson, M. Dekhil: Visual Target Based Wall
Pose Estimation, Tech. Rep. UUCS-97-010 (Univer-
sity of Utah, Salt Lake City 1997)

Multisensor Data Fusion
References
891
Part C | 35
35.34
S. Iyengar, D. Jayasimha, D. Nadig: A versatile ar-
chitecture for the distributed sensor integration
problem, Computer 43, 175–185 (1994)
35.35
D. Nadig, S. Iyengar, D. Jayasimha: A new architec-
ture for distributed sensor integration, Proc. IEEE
Southeastcon (1993)
35.36
L. Prasad, S. Iyengar, R.L. Kashyap, R.N. Madan:
Functional characterization of fault tolerant inte-
gration in distributed sensor networks, IEEE Trans.
Syst. Man Cybern. 25, 1082–1087 (1991)
35.37
L. Prasad, S. Iyengar, R. Rao, R. Kashyap: Fault-
tolerence sensor integration using multiresolution
decomposition, Am. Phys. Soc. 49(4), 3452–3461
(1994)
35.38
H.F.
Durrant-Whyte:
Integration,
Coordination,
and Control of Multi-Sensor Robot Systems (Kluwer,
Boston 1987)
35.39
F. Groen, P. Antonissen, G. Weller: Model based
robot vision, IEEE Instrum. Meas. Technol. Conf.
(1993) pp. 584–588
35.40
R. Joshi, A.C. Sanderson: Model-based multisensor
data fusion: A minimal representation approach,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1994)
35.41
A.J. Briggs, B.R. Donald: Automatic sensor con-
figuration for task-directed planning, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1994) pp. 1345–
1350
35.42
G. Hager: Task Directed Sensor Fusion and Planning
(Kluwer, Boston 1990)
35.43
G. Hager, M. Mintz: Computational methods for
task-directed sensor data fusion and sensor plan-
ning, Int. J. Robotics Res. 10(4), 285–313 (1991)
35.44
B. Donald: On information invariants in robotics,
Artif. Intell. 72, 217–304 (1995)
35.45
V. Braitenberg: Vehicles: Experiments in Synthetic
Psychology (MIT Press, Cambridge 1984)
35.46
R.A. Brooks: A robust layered control system for
a mobile robot, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 2(1), 14–
23 (1986)
35.47
K.P. Valavanis, A.L. Nelson, L. Doitsidis, M. Long,
R.R. Murphy: Validation of a Distributed Field Robot
Architecture Integrated with a Matlab Based Con-
trol Theoretic Environment: A Case Study of Fuzzy
Logic Based Robot Navigation, CRASAR Tech. Rep. 25
(University of South Florida, Tampa 2004)
35.48
R.R. Murphy: Introduction to AI Robotics (MIT Press,
Cambridge 2000)
35.49
S. Lee: Sensor fusion and planning with per-
ception-action network, Proc. IEEE Conf. Multisens.
Fusion Integr. Intell. Syst., Washington (1996)
35.50
S. Lee, S. Ro: Uncertainty self-management with
perception net based geometric data fusion, Proc.
IEEE Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Albuquerque
(1997)
35.51
B.A. Draper, A.R. Hanson, S. Buluswar, E.M. Rise-
man: Information acquisition and fusion in the
mobile perception laboratory, Proc. SPIE Sens. Fu-
sion VI (1993)
35.52
S.S. Shafer, A. Stentz, C.E. Thorpe: An architecture
for sensor fusion in a mobile robot, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1986) pp. 2002–2007
35.53
S. Nagata, M. Sekiguchi, K. Asakawa: Mobile robot
control by a structured hierarchical neural network,
IEEE Control Syst. Mag. 10(3), 69–76 (1990)
35.54
M. Pachter, P. Chandler: Challenges of autonomous
control, IEEE Control Syst. Mag. 18(4), 92–97 (1998)
35.55
R. Joshi, A.C. Sanderson: Multisensor Fusion (World
Scientific, Singapore 1999)
35.56
V. Berge-Cherfaoui, B. Vachon: Dynamic configura-
tion of mobile robot perceptual system, Proc. IEEE
Conf. Multisens. Fusion Integr. Intell. Syst., Las Ve-
gas (1994)
35.57
V. Clement, G. Giraudon, S. Houzelle, F. Sandakly:
Interpretation of Remotely Sensed Images in a Con-
text of Multisensor Fusion Using a Multi-Specialist
Architecture, Rapp. Rech.: No. 1768 (INRIA, Sophia-
Antipolis 1992)
35.58
J. Albus: RCS: A cognitive architecture for intelli-
gent multi-agent systems, Proc. IFAC Symp. Intell.
Auton. Veh., Lisbon (2004)
35.59
R. Camden, B. Bodt, S. Schipani, J. Bornstein,
R. Phelps, T. Runyon, F. French: Autonomous Mo-
bility Technology Assessment, Interim Rep., ARL-
MR 565 (Army Research Laboratory, Washington
2003)
35.60
T. Queeney, E. Woods: A generic architecture for
real-time multisensor fusion tracking algorithm
development and evaluation, Proc. SPIE Sens. Fu-
sion VII, Vol. 2355 (1994) pp. 33–42
35.61
T. Henderson, E. Shilcrat: Logical sensor systems,
J. Robotics Syst. 1(2), 169–193 (1984)
35.62
T. Henderson, C. Hansen, B. Bhanu: The specifica-
tion of distributed sensing and control, J. Robotics
Syst. 2(4), 387–396 (1985)
35.63
J.D. Elliott: Multisensor Fusion within an Encap-
sulated Logical Device Architecture, Master’s Thesis
(University of Waterloo, Waterloo 2001)
35.64
M.D. Naish: Elsa: An Intelligent Multisensor Inte-
gration Architecture for Industrial Grading Tasks,
Master’s Thesis (University of Western Ontario, Lon-
don 1998)
35.65
A. Makarenko, A. Brooks, S. Williams, H. Durrant-
Whyte, B. Grocholsky: A decentralized architec-
ture for active sensor networks, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), New Orleans (2004)
pp. 1097–1102
35.66
B. Grocholsky, A. Makarenko, H. Durrant-Whyte:
Information-theoretic coordinated control of mul-
tiple sensor platforms, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA), Taipei (2003) pp. 1521–1527
35.67
R. Gregor, M. Lützeler, M. Pellkofer, K.-H. Sieder-
sberger, E. Dickmanns: EMS-Vision: A perceptual
system for autonomous vehicles, IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst. 3(1), 48–59 (2002)
35.68
B. Rao, H. Durrant-Whyte, A. Sheen: A fully de-
centralized multi-sensor system for tracking and
surveillance, Int. J. Robotics Res. 12(1), 20–44 (1993)
35.69
B. Upcroft: Non-gaussian state estimation in an
outdoor decentralised sensor network, Proc. IEEE
Conf. Decis. Control (CDC) (2006)
35.70
S. Kumar, F. Ramos, B. Upcroft, H. Durrant-Whyte:
A statistical framework for natural feature repre-

Part C | 35
892
Part C
Sensing and Perception
sentation, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS), Edmonton (2005) pp. 1–6
35.71
S. Gao, Y. Zhong, W. Li: Random weighting method
for multisensor data fusion, IEEE Sens. J. 11(9),
1955–1961 (2011)
35.72
M. Lhuillier: Incremental fusion of structure-from-
motion and GPS using constrained bundle adjust-
ments, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 34(12),
2489–2495 (2012)
35.73
S. Yu, L. Tranchevent, X. Liu, W. Glanzel, J. Suykens,
B. DeMoor, Y. Moreau: Optimized data fusion
for
kernel
k-means
clustering,
IEEE
Trans.
Pattern
Anal.
Mach.
Intell.
34(5),
1031–1039
(2012)
35.74
K. Kolev: Fast joint estimation of silhouettes and
dense 3D geometry from multiple images, IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 34(3), 493–505
(2012)
35.75
C. Loy: Incremental activity modeling in multiple
disjoint cameras, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell. 34(9), 1799–1813 (2012)
35.76
N. Poh, J. Kittler: A unified framework for biomet-
ric expert fusion incorporating quality measures,
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 34(1), 3–18
(2012)
35.77
M.-F. Weng, Y.-Y. Chuang: Cross-domain multi-
cue fusion for concept-based video indexing, IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 34(10), 1927–1941
(2012)
35.78
M. Hwangbo, J.-S. Kim, T. Kanade: Gyro-aided
feature tracking for a moving camera: fusion,
auto-calibration and GPU implementation, Intl.
J. Robotics Res. 30(14), 1755–1774 (2011)
35.79
H. Seraji, N. Serrano: A multisensor decision fusion
system for terrain safety assessment, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 25(1), 99–108 (2009)
35.80
H. Himberg, Y. Motai, A. Bradley: Interpolation
volume calibration: a multisensor calibration tech-
nique for electromagnetic trackers, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 28(5), 1120–1130 (2012)
35.81
K. Zhou, S.I. Roumeliotis: Optimal motion strate-
gies for range-Only constrained multisensor tar-
get tracking, IEEE Trans. Robotics 24(5), 1168–1185
(2008)
35.82
N.R. Ahmed, E.M. Sample, M. Campbell: Bayesian
multicategorical soft data fusion for human–robot
collaboration, IEEE Trans. Robotics PP(99), 1–18
(2012)
35.83
H. Frigui, L. Zhang, P.D. Gader: Context-dependent
multisensor fusion and its application to land mine
detection, IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 48(6),
2528–2543 (2010)
35.84
J.G. Garcia, A. Robertson, J.G. Ortega, R. Johansson:
Sensor fusion for compliant robot motion control,
IEEE Trans. Robotics 24(2), 430–441 (2008)
35.85
R. Heliot, B. Espiau: Multisensor input for CPG-
based sensory—motor coordination, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 24(1), 191–195 (2008)
35.86
S. Liu, R.X. Gao, D. John, J.W. Staudenmayer,
P.S. Freedson: Multisensor data fusion for physi-
cal activity assessment, IEEE Trans. Bio-Med. Eng.
59(3), 687–696 (2012)
35.87
A. Martinelli: Vision and IMU data fusion: closed-
Form solutions for attitude, speed, absolute scale,
and bias determination, IEEE Trans. Robotics 28(1),
44–60 (2012)

893
Multimedia Contents Manipu
Part D
Part D Manipulation and Interfaces
Ed. by Makoto Kaneko
36 Motion for Manipulation Tasks
James Kuffner, Pittsburgh, USA
Jing Xiao, Charlotte, USA
37 Contact Modeling and Manipulation
Imin Kao, Stony Brook, USA
Kevin M. Lynch, Evanston, USA
Joel W. Burdick, Pasadena, USA
38 Grasping
Domenico Prattichizzo, Siena, Italy
Jeffrey C. Trinkle, Troy, USA
39 Cooperative Manipulation
Fabrizio Caccavale, Potenza, Italy
Masaru Uchiyama, Sendai, Japan
40 Mobility and Manipulation
Oliver Brock, Berlin, Germany
Jaeheung Park, Suwon, Korea
Marc Toussaint, Stuttgart, Germany
41 Active Manipulation for Perception
Anna Petrovskaya, Stanford, USA
Kaijen Hsiao, Palo Alto, USA
42 Haptics
Blake Hannaford, Seattle, USA
Allison M. Okamura, Stanford, USA
43 Telerobotics
Günter Niemeyer, Glendale, USA
Carsten Preusche, Wessling, Germany
Stefano Stramigioli, Enschede, The
Netherlands
Dongjun Lee, Seoul, Korea
44 Networked Robots
Dezhen Song, College Station, USA
Ken Goldberg, Berkeley, USA
Nak-Young Chong, Ishikawa, Japan

894
Part D, Manipulation and Interfaces, is separated into
two subparts; the ﬁrst half is concerned with manipula-
tion where frameworks of modeling, motion planning,
and control of grasp and manipulation of an object are
addressed, and the second half is concerned with in-
terfaces where physical human–robot interactions are
handled. Humans can achieve grasping and manipula-
tion of an object dexterously through hand–arm coordi-
nation. An optimum control skill for such a redundant
system is naturally and gradually acquired through ex-
perience in our daily life. Especially, ﬁngers play an
important role for expressing human dexterity. With-
out dexterous ﬁngers, it is hard for us to handle any
daily tool, such as a pencil, keyboard, cup, knife, or
fork. This dexterity is supported with active and pas-
sive compliance as well as the multiple sensory organs
existing at the ﬁngertip. Such dexterous manipulation
enables us to clearly differentiate humans from other
animals. Thus, manipulation is one of the most im-
portant functions for humans. We eventually acquired
the current shape of ﬁnger, the sensory organs, and
skill for manipulation, through a long history of evo-
lution, over more than six million years. While humans
and robots are largely different in terms of actuators,
sensors, and mechanisms, achieving dexterous manipu-
lation like that of a human in a robot is a challenging
subject in robotics. As we overview current robot tech-
nology, however, we observe that the dexterity of robots
is still far behind that of humans. With this overview, we
now provide a brief synopsis of each chapter in the ﬁrst
half of Part D.
Chapter 36, Motion for Manipulation Tasks, dis-
cusses algorithms that generate motion for manipula-
tion tasks at the arm level, especially in an environment,
by using the conﬁguration space formalism. While in
previous chapters (6 and 7) the focus was on speciﬁc
algorithmic techniques for robot motion, this chapter
is focused on a speciﬁc application for robot manipu-
lation. The important example of assembly motion is
discussed through the analysis of contact states and
compliant motion control.
Chapter 37, Contact Modeling and Manipulation,
provides the contact modeling on rigid contact with and
without friction, and also the modeling on soft con-
tact, such as elastic and viscoelastic contact interfaces.
Kinematics and mechanics with friction are precisely
handled under rigid-body contact. The selection ma-
trix H is introduced to understand the force and velocity
constraints at the contact interface. Pushing manipu-
lation is also addressed by using the concept of the
friction limit surface.
Chapter 38, Grasping, discusses based on the clo-
sure property, grasping with many examples, supposing
multiﬁngered robotic hands. A strong constraint for
grasping is the unilateral characteristic,where a ﬁnger-
tip can push but not pull an object through a contact
point. The rigid-body model is further extended for
considering compliance in grasping with robotic hands
having a low number of degrees of freedom (DOFs).
Kinematics and closure issues are also addressed under
this unilateral constraint.
Chapter 39, Cooperative Manipulators, addresses
the strategies for controlling both the motion of coop-
erative system and the interaction forces between the
manipulators and the grasped object when two manip-
ulator arms ﬁrmly grasp a common object. It should be
noted that this chapter allows the bilateral constraint
where both directional force and moment are permis-
sible. A general cooperative task-space formulation is
introduced for different classes of multiarm robotic sys-
tems.
Chapter 40, Mobile Manipulation, focuses on re-
search conducted on an experimental platform that
combines capabilities in mobility and manipulation.
Furthermore, it involves the interaction between the
robots and real-world environment, unstructured envi-
ronments. The main research objective here is to max-
imize task generality of autonomous robotic systems,
under minimizing the dependence on task-speciﬁc,
hard-coded, or narrowly-relevant information.
Chapter 41, Active Manipulation for Perception,
covers perceptual methods in which manipulation is
an integral part of perception. There are advantages to
use manipulation rather than vision for perception. For
example, manipulation can be used to sense in poor-
visibility conditions, and also to determine properties
that require physical interaction. This chapter includes
the methods that have been developed for inference,
planning, recognition, and modeling in sensing-via-
manipulation approaches are cover.
Without dexterity like that of humans, future robots
will not be able to work instead of humans in en-
vironments where human cannot enter. In this sense,
the implementation of dexterity into robots is one of
the highlights of future robot design. Chapters 36–
41 provide a good hint for enhancing dexterity for
robots.
The second half of Part D addresses interfaces
where humans control a robot or multiple robots
through direct or indirect contact with robot(s).We now

895
provide a brief synopsis of each chapter in the second
half of Part D.
Chapter 42, Haptics, discusses robotics devices that
allow human operators to experience the sense of touch
in remote or virtual environment. Two classes of force
feedback haptic devices are discussed. One is an ad-
mittance device that senses the force applied by the
operator and constrains the operator’s position to match
the appropriate deﬂection of a simulated object or sur-
face; the other is an impedance haptic device that senses
the position of the operator and then applies a force
vector to the operator according to the computed behav-
ior of the simulated object or surface. Haptic rendering
from real time three-dimensional (3-D) image is also
introduced in this chapter.
Chapter 43, Telerobotics, starts with a discussion
on the classiﬁcation of three different concepts: direct
control where all slave motions are directly controlled
by the user via the master interface, shared control
where task execution is shared between direct con-
trol and local sensory control, and supervisory control
where the user and slave are connected loosely with
strong local autonomy. Various control issues such as
lossy communication with Internet and operation with
mobile robots, are also addressed.
Chapter 44, Networked Robots, focuses on the
framework of computer networks which offer exten-
sive computing, memory, and other resources that can
dramatically improve performance. The chapter covers
a wide span from the history of networked robots as it
evolves from teleoperation to cloud robotics to how to
build a networked robot. The very recent progress on
cloud robotics and potential topics for future research
are included later in the chapter.
In Haptics (Chap. 42) direct contact between
human and robot is made, while in both Telerobotics
(Chap. 43) and Networked Robots (Chap. 44), an
appropriate distance between the human and robot
is kept. One of the main issues is how to maintain
appropriate control performance of the system in the
presence of humans or a time lag between humans and
robots.

Multimedia Contents Motion for M
897
Part D | 36
36. Motion for Manipulation Tasks
James Kuffner, Jing Xiao
This chapter serves as an introduction to Part D
by giving an overview of motion generation and
control strategies in the context of robotic ma-
nipulation tasks. Automatic control ranging from
the abstract, high-level task specification down
to fine-grained feedback at the task interface are
considered. Some of the important issues include
modeling of the interfaces between the robot and
the environment at the different time scales of
motion and incorporating sensing and feedback.
Manipulation planning is introduced as an exten-
sion to the basic motion planning problem, which
can be modeled as a hybrid system of continu-
ous configuration spaces arising from the act of
grasping and moving parts in the environment.
The important example of assembly motion is dis-
cussed through the analysis of contact states and
compliant motion control. Finally, methods aimed
at integrating global planning with state feedback
control are summarized.
36.1
Overview.............................................
898
36.2 Task-Level Control................................
900
36.2.1
Operational Space Control .........
900
36.2.2
Combined Force
and Position Control.................
901
36.2.3
Operational Space Control
of Redundant Mechanisms .......
901
36.2.4
Combining Mobility
and Manipulation....................
902
36.2.5
Combining Multiple Task
Behaviors ................................
902
36.3 Manipulation Planning ........................
904
36.3.1
Configuration Space Formalism .
904
36.3.2
Example of a Three-DOF
Planar Manipulator ..................
907
36.3.3
Inverse Kinematics
Considerations.........................
908
36.3.4
Continuum Manipulation..........
910
36.4 Assembly Motion .................................
911
36.4.1
Topological Contact States.........
912
36.4.2
Passive Compliance ..................
912
36.4.3
Active Compliant Motion...........
914
36.4.4
Compliant Motion
Under Manipulator Constraints..
917
36.5 Unifying Feedback Control
and Planning ......................................
918
36.5.1
Feedback Motion Planning........
918
36.5.2
Augmenting Global Plans
with Feedback .........................
920
36.6 Conclusions and Further Reading .........
920
36.6.1
General Contact Models ............
921
36.6.2
Cooperative Manipulation
Control....................................
921
36.6.3
Control of Branching
Mechanisms ............................
921
36.6.4
Nonholonomic Mobile
Manipulation...........................
921
36.6.5
Learning Models
with Uncertainty......................
921
36.6.6
Grasping
and Regrasp Planning ..............
921
36.6.7
Multiple Parts ..........................
922
36.6.8
Planning
for Multiple Robots ..................
922
36.6.9
Planning
for Closed Kinematic Chains ......
922
36.6.10 Planning
with Movable Obstacles ............
922
36.6.11
Nonprehensile Manipulation ....
922
36.6.12 Assembly Motion Extensions .....
922
Video-References.........................................
923
References...................................................
923

Part D | 36.1
898
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
36.1 Overview
Part D of this handbook is concerned with the interfaces
that connect robots to their environment. We differen-
tiate three such interfaces, depicted in Fig. 36.1. The
ﬁrst interface, between the robot and the computer,
is primarily concerned with the automatic generation
of motion for performing a task. The second inter-
face is concerned with the physical interaction between
the robot and the environment. This chapter relates
both interfaces in the context of manipulation tasks.
It is focused on automatic speciﬁcation, planning, and
execution of motion of the robot manipulator or the
manipulated object to meet a task goal under the con-
straints of the physical environment. Chapters 37–39,
40, and 42 address other important issues pertaining to
the second interface, such as the physical characteris-
tics of contacts between the robot and the environment,
grasping and active manipulation (i. e., the interaction
between the robot and the object for manipulation),
the interaction between cooperative manipulators, and
the interaction between mobility and manipulation. The
third interface, described in Chaps. 41, 43, and 44,
lies between humans and robots. Key issues that need
to be addressed involve displaying appropriate sensor
information to humans, or permitting humans to inter-
actively specify the task or motion a robot is supposed
to perform.
Manipulation refers to the process of moving or re-
arranging objects in the environment [36.1]. To perform
a manipulation task, a robot establishes physical con-
tact with objects in the environment and subsequently
moves these objects by exerting forces and moments.
The object to be manipulated can be large or small,
and may serve various purposes in relation to the ma-
nipulation task (e.g., ﬂipping a switch, opening a door,
polishing a surface). In the context of automated as-
sembly and industrial manipulation, the object to be
manipulated is often referred to as a part. The end-effec-
tor generally refers to the link of the manipulator that
makes contact and applies forces to the part. The end-
effector is so named as it is often the end link in a se-
Robot
Human
Human/robot interaction
(Chap. 41,43–44)
Manipulation planning
and control (Chap. 36)
Contact
(Chap. 37–40,42)
Task
Environment
Fig. 36.1 Overview of Part D
rial kinematic chain. However, complex manipulation
tasks may require the simultaneous exertion of multiple
forces and moments at different contact points as well
as the execution of sequences of force applications to
several objects.
To understand the challenge of generating the mo-
tion required for the execution of a manipulation task,
we will consider the classic example of inserting a peg
into a hole. The mobile manipulator shown in Fig. 36.2
is commanded to perform the peg insertion manipu-
lation task, whose general problem structure arises in
a number of contexts such as compliant assembly. For
simplicity, we will only consider the transfer motion
(Sect. 36.3) and assume that the robot has already es-
tablished a stable grasp (Chap. 38) and is holding the
peg. If the clearance between the peg and the hole is
very small, the peg may not be able to enter the hole
easily, and often some contact occurs. In order to guide
the peg successfully into the hole, the robot has to deal
with the possible contact states between the peg and the
hole (Sect. 36.4) and select an appropriate sequence of
control strategies that will result in successful comple-
tion of the task.
The peg-and-hole example illustrates that success-
ful robotic manipulation involves dealing with models
of object geometry and contact in the presence of uncer-
tainty. There are various kinds of uncertainty, including
modeling, actuation, and sensing uncertainty. To plan
motion strategies in the presence of uncertainty poses
difﬁcult computational challenges. Historically, motion
planning for manipulation has been divided into gross
motion planning and ﬁne motion planning. The former
involves reasoning about the manipulator motion on the
macro scale and considers its overall global movement
Fig. 36.2 A mobile manipulator inserting a peg into a hole

Motion for Manipulation Tasks
36.1 Overview
899
Part D | 36.1
strategy, while the latter considers how to deal with un-
certainty to accomplish a task requiring high precision
robustly. The primary reason for the historical division
stems from attempts to simplify the various aspects of
the problem into something computationally tractable.
Assuming that the uncertainty in actuator position, ob-
ject models, and environment obstacle shapes can be
bounded, gross motion planning can be formulated pri-
marily in terms of geometry (Sect. 36.3). As the robot or
the manipulated object makes contact with the environ-
ment, such as in the example of the insertion task, ﬁne
motion planning techniques are employed to take into
account contact geometry, forces, friction, and uncer-
tainty effectively (see Mason’s book [36.1] and [36.2, 3]
for an overview and historical perspective on ﬁne mo-
tion strategies for manipulation tasks).
This peg-and-hole insertion example also illustrates
that motion in the context of manipulation tasks is
subject to constraints. These constraints have to be
maintained to perform the task successfully. The spe-
ciﬁc constraints depend on the type of manipulation
task, but they may include contact constraints, position,
and force constraints for the point at which the manip-
ulator makes contact with the environment, kinematic
and dynamic constraints imposed by the mechanism
and its actuation capabilities, posture constraints that
specify behavior to be performed in addition to the
manipulation task, reactive obstacle avoidance in an un-
predictably changing environment, and global motion
constraints to ensure that a speciﬁc goal location is at-
tained. These motion constraints are imposed by the
task, by the kinematics of the mechanism performing
the task, by the actuation capabilities of the mechanism,
and by the environment.
To ensure that constraints are satisﬁed in spite of
uncertainty, sensory information (see Part C – Sensing
and Perception) is considered in the context of feed-
back control loops (Chaps. 8 and 47). Depending on the
type of constraint, this feedback has to be considered at
various time scales. For example, the exertion of a con-
stant force on an object in the environment requires
high-frequency feedback at rates up to 1000Hz. At the
other end of the time scale, we consider changes to the
global connectivity of the environment. These changes,
resulting from opening doors or moving obstacles, for
example, occur relatively slowly or infrequently and
feedback about these changes only has to be considered
a few times per second. Figure 36.3 graphically illus-
trates a task-dependent ordering of motion constraints
encountered in manipulation tasks and their associated
feedback requirements.
This chapter is concerned with algorithms that gen-
erate motion for manipulation tasks. Previous chapters
already discussed planning algorithms (Chap. 7 and
control methods (Chap. 8). While in these two former
chapters the focus was on speciﬁc algorithmic tech-
niques for robot motion, the current chapter is focused
on a speciﬁc application, namely robotic manipulation.
This application dictates motion constraints and their
feedback requirements that will have to be satisﬁed dur-
ing the motion for a manipulation task. In contrast, the
methods discussed in the two aforementioned chapters
each only address a subset of the motion constraints, as
indicated in Fig. 36.3.
This chapter ﬁrst discusses task-level control in
Sect. 36.2. Task-level control describes a set of tech-
niques to control a robotic mechanism in terms of
its contact points with the environment. These contact
points are controlled to perform motion that accom-
plishes a speciﬁc manipulation task. This means that,
instead of directly controlling the mechanism, task-rel-
evant points on the mechanism, so-called operational
points, are controlled. This indirect control provides an
intuitive means to specify desired motion for manipula-
tion tasks.
Section 36.3 gives an overview of the conﬁgura-
tion space formalization for manipulation planning, and
how it can be cast as a classical motion planning prob-
lem (Chap. 7). Through this formalism, we can gain
an understanding and intuition regarding how the ge-
ometry and relative positions of the manipulator, the
manipulated objects, and the obstacles in the workspace
determine both the geometry and topological structure
of the manipulation conﬁguration space. As we shall
see, there are often an inﬁnite number of possible ways
to accomplish a manipulation task. Thus, the challenge
in manipulation planning is to develop methods that
deal effectively with the combinatorics of the search
over all possible motions.
Section 36.4 addresses planning motion for assem-
bly tasks, for which the peg-in-hole insertion is a typical
example. The focus is on motion constrained by con-
tact, called compliant motion. There are two broad
Motion
constraints
Feedback
Position
force
Position
force
Control
Subject to local minima
Planning
Violates feedback requirements
Kinematics
dynamics
Posture
Required frequency of feedback
1000Hz
1Hz
Reactive
obstacle
avoidance
Global
motion
Fig. 36.3 Examples of motion constraints encountered in manipu-
lation tasks and their feedback requirements

Part D | 36.2
900
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
classes of assembly strategies involving compliant mo-
tion; one class is through special mechanism or control,
called passive compliance, and the other is through ac-
tive reasoning of contact states, called active compliant
motion. Fine motion planning is discussed within the
class of active compliant motion.
Methods from task-level control and manipulation
planning address aspects of motion in a complemen-
tary fashion. While control methods are able to satisfy
the feedback requirements of manipulation tasks, they
often do not account for the overall global progress
in accomplishing the manipulation task. Manipulation
planners, on the other hand, reason about the global
nature of the task at the high level, but are often com-
putationally too expensive to deal with uncertainty or
satisfy the high-frequency feedback requirements of
manipulation tasks. A robust and skillful manipula-
tor must satisfy all feedback requirements while at the
same time ensuring the accomplishment of the manip-
ulation task. Section 36.5 discusses various techniques
that offer a uniﬁed view of planning and control for ma-
nipulation tasks.
36.2 Task-Level Control
To perform a manipulation task, a robot has to establish
contact with the environment. Through contact points
the robot is able to apply forces and moments to objects.
By controlling the position and velocity of the contact
points as well as the forces acting at them, the robot
causes the desired motion of objects, thereby perform-
ing the manipulation task. The programming of such
a task is most conveniently accomplished by directly
specifying positions, velocities, and forces at the con-
tact points, rather than by specifying the joint positions
and velocities required to achieve them.
Consider the manipulation task of serving a cup
of water shown in Fig. 36.2. This task can easily be
speciﬁed by providing a trajectory for the cup’s mo-
tion. To determine a joint space trajectory that achieves
the same motion, however, would be much more com-
plex. One would have to rely on inverse kinematics
(Sect. 2.9), which can be computationally challenging.
More importantly, the task constraints imposed on the
cup’s motion do not uniquely specify the cup’s trajec-
tory. For example, while the cup is not allowed to tilt,
it can be delivered to the goal location in any vertical
orientation. Such task constraints can easily be speci-
ﬁed in terms of the object motion – at the task level –
but would be very difﬁcult to characterize in terms of
joint trajectories. Operational space control is there-
fore a natural choice for performing manipulation tasks.
We will see in Sect. 36.2.3 that the operational space
framework provides important additional advantages
over joint space control in the context of redundant
manipulators.
The advantages associated with task-level control
come at the cost of depending on the manipulator Ja-
cobian. For singular conﬁgurations of the manipulator
(Chap. 4), the manipulator Jacobian is not well deﬁned.
In these conﬁgurations, task-level control of a manipu-
lator becomes unstable. Special care has to be applied
to prevent the manipulator from entering these con-
ﬁgurations, or to resort to specialized controllers in
the proximity of these conﬁgurations. Most commonly,
the manipulator is controlled so as to avoid singular
conﬁgurations.
36.2.1 Operational Space Control
Task-level control – also called operational space con-
trol [36.4, 5] (Sect. 8.2) – speciﬁes the behavior of
a robot in terms of operational points rather than joint
positions and velocities. An operational point is an
arbitrary point on the robot that is required to per-
form a particular motion or to exert a speciﬁed force
to accomplish a manipulation task. In a serial-chain
manipulator arm the operational point is most com-
monly chosen to coincide with the end-effector. More
complex, branching mechanisms, such as humanoid
robots, but also redundant serial-chain mechanisms, can
have several operational points. To specify positions,
velocities, accelerations, forces, and moments at the
operational point, it is convenient to deﬁne a coor-
dinate system with an origin that coincides with the
operation point. This coordinate frame is called the op-
erational frame. The orientation of the frame should
be chosen in accordance with the task. For now we
will ignore the orientation, however, and only consider
tasks that require positioning of the operational point.
In Sect. 36.2.2, we will consider more general tasks,
combining position and force control.
Let us consider an operational point x on a robot.
The relationship between the joint velocities Pq and
the velocity of the operational point Px is given by the
Jacobian matrix of the mechanism (Sect. 2.8) at the op-
erational point x
Px D Jx.q/Pq :
(36.1)
Note that the Jacobian J depends on the placement of
the operational point x, and on the current conﬁgura-

Motion for Manipulation Tasks
36.2 Task-Level Control
901
Part D | 36.2
tion q of the robot. For simplicity, we will omit this
dependency from our notation and just write Px D JPq.
From (36.1) we can derive an expression for the instan-
taneous torques  acting at the joints when the forces
and moments described by F is applied at the opera-
tional point x
 D JT.q/Fx :
(36.2)
The vector F captures the task to be performed at opera-
tional point x. If the task speciﬁes the complete position
and orientation of the operational frame, F will be given
by F D .fx; fy; fz; ux; uy; uz/, where f and u designate
forces along and moments about the respective axes.
(For easy of presentation, we will refer to F as a force
vector, even if it describes forces and moments. The ex-
ecution of such a task requires a manipulator with at
least six degrees of freedom. If a task does not spec-
ify one of the components of F, this component can be
omitted and the corresponding column of the Jacobian
matrix is dropped (or a manipulator with fewer than six
degrees of freedom can be used to accomplish the task).
For example, dropping uz would indicate that the orien-
tation about the z-axis is not speciﬁed by the task. The
motion behavior in the dimensions of the task space that
have been dropped is unspeciﬁed and the robot will ﬂoat
in these dimensions [36.4]. In Sect. 36.2.3 we will dis-
cuss how additional behavior can be performed in these
unspeciﬁed dimensions of the task space.
Similarly to joint space control, we have to account
for manipulator dynamics to achieve acceptable perfor-
mance in operational space control. Using (36.1), we
can project the joint space dynamics into operational
space to obtain
Fx D ƒ.q : : : Rx C .q; Pq/Px C .q/ ;
(36.3)
where ƒ is the operational space inertial matrix, 
captures centrifugal and Coriolis forces in operational
space, and  compensates for gravity forces. This equa-
tion pertains to a particular operational point. Intuitively
speaking, the operational space inertia matrix ƒ cap-
tures the resistance of the operational point to accelera-
tion along and about different axes. More details about
operational space control and its relationship to joint
space control are provided in Sect. 8.2 (motion control,
joint space versus operational space control).
36.2.2 Combined Force and Position Control
Let us consider the example task of controlling the
motion of a peg inside a hole. We assume the peg is al-
ready inserted into the hole and rigidly connected to the
robot’s end-effector. We attach the operational frame to
a point on the peg so that its z-axis is aligned with the
desired direction of motion of the peg inside the hole.
To perform this task, the robot has to control the posi-
tion of the peg along the z-axis of the operational frame
and it also has to control contact forces between the peg
and the hole to avoid jamming. Thus, the task of mov-
ing a peg inside a hole requires that position and force
control be seamlessly integrated.
To address contact forces within the operational
space framework, we rewrite (36.3) as
Fx D Fc C ƒ.q/Fm C .q; Pq/Px C .q/ ;
(36.4)
where Fc represents the contact forces acting at the end-
effector [36.4]. We can replace Rx with Fm because Rx is
acting on a dynamically decoupled system, i. e., a sys-
tem that acts like a unit point mass. We can now control
forces and motion in the operational frame by selecting
the following control structure
Fx D Fm C Fc ;
(36.5)
where
Fm D ƒ.q/ F0
m C .q; Pq/Px C .q/ ;
(36.6)
Fc D ƒ.q/ NF0
c ;
(36.7)
where  and N represent complementary task spec-
iﬁcation matrices [36.4] that determine along which
directions the end-effector is position controlled and
along which it is force controlled. By selecting 
appropriately, the combination of position and force
control can be tailored to the task. In its simplest form,
 and N D I   are diagonal matrices. The i-th diag-
onal entry of  is 1 if the i-th operational coordinate
of the end-effector is position controlled and 0 if it is
force controlled. In this simplest case, positions and
forces are controlled along axes of the same coordi-
nate frame. The concept of task speciﬁcation matrix can
be extended to include differently oriented coordinate
frames for position and force control [36.4].
Once the force Fx has been computed as given by
(36.5), the corresponding joint torques used to control
the robot are computed based on (36.1).
36.2.3 Operational Space Control
of Redundant Mechanisms
The full expressiveness of task-level control comes to
bear in the context of redundant manipulators. A manip-
ulator is considered redundant with respect to the task
it is performing if has more degrees of freedom than
required by the task. For example, the task of holding
a cup of water only speciﬁes two degrees of freedom,

Part D | 36.2
902
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
namely the two rotations about the axes spanning the
horizontal plane – this task has two degrees of freedom.
The mobile manipulator shown in Fig. 36.2 has ten de-
grees of freedom, leaving eight redundant degrees of
freedom with respect to the task.
The operational space framework for task-level con-
trol of redundant manipulators decomposes the overall
motion behavior into two components. The ﬁrst com-
ponent is given by the task, speciﬁed in terms of forces
and moments Ftask acting at an operational point. This
vector F is translated into a joint torque based on (36.2):
 D JTFtask. For a redundant manipulator, however, the
torque vector  is not uniquely speciﬁed and we can se-
lect from a set of task-consistent torque vectors. The
operational space framework performs this selection
by considering a secondary task, the so-called pos-
ture behavior, making up the second component of the
overall motion behavior. Posture behavior can be spec-
iﬁed by an arbitrary torque vector posture. To ensure
that this additional torque does not affect the task be-
havior (Ftask), the torque posture is projected into the
null space N [36.6] of the task Jacobian J. The null
space of the Jacobian is the space orthogonal to the one
spanned by J and will be of rank NJ  k, where NJ is
the number of degrees of freedom of the manipulator
and k D rank.J/. The torque NTposture resulting from
the null space projection is task consistent, i. e., it is
guaranteed not to affect the behavior of the operational
point. Since the vector NTposture may not lie entirely
within the null space of J, however, the execution of the
posture behavior cannot be guaranteed.
The operational space task (JTFtask) and the posture
behavior (NTposture) are combined to obtain the gen-
eral expression for the torque-level decomposition of
the overall motion behavior
 D JTFtask::::: C NTposture :
(36.8)
The null-space projection N associated with the task Ja-
cobian J can be obtained by
N D I  NJJ ;
(36.9)
where I is the identity matrix, and NJ is the dynamically
consistent generalized inverse of J, given by
NJ D H1JTƒ ;
(36.10)
where H is the joint space inertia matrix and ƒ is
the operational space inertia matrix for the operational
point for which J is deﬁned. The use of this speciﬁc in-
verse to compute the null-space projection results in the
selection of the task-consistent torque vector that mini-
mizes kinetic energy.
36.2.4 Combining Mobility
and Manipulation
The operational space framework does not distinguish
between degrees of freedom used for mobility and
those used for manipulation. The end-effector-centric
perspective of this approach considers all degrees of
freedom to be in service to position and move the end-
effector. An explicit coordination of manipulation and
mobility for task-level control is not necessary.
A computationally efﬁcient approach for coordinat-
ing manipulation and mobility was introduced in [36.7].
A similar, schema-based coordination of manipulation
and mobility in the presence of dynamic obstacles
was demonstrated in [36.8]. This approach is based on
(36.2) and projects the forces that are derived from var-
ious schemas into the conﬁguration space of the robot
to determine its motion. Another coordination approach
for manipulation and mobility considers a given end-
effector path and generates a path of the base that
maintains manipulability criteria [36.9]. This underly-
ing representation of mobile manipulators can also be
used to generate obstacle avoidance behavior of the
base for a given end-effector path [36.10].
The coordination of a nonholonomic mobility plat-
form and a cart-pushing task is addressed in [36.11].
In [36.12], an analysis of the task space for a mobile
base with two manipulators is presented. Such a system
with two manipulator arms can be viewed as a branch-
ing kinematic chain. Section 36.6 discusses extensions
to the operational space framework to such branching
mechanisms.
36.2.5 Combining Multiple Task Behaviors
The concept of decomposing a redundant robot’s over-
all motion into task and posture behavior can be gener-
alized to an arbitrary number of behaviors [36.13, 14].
Assume a set of n tasks Ti, where Ti has higher pri-
ority than Tj if i < j. Every task Ti is associated with
a force vector Fi and the corresponding joint torque i.
These tasks can be performed simultaneously by pro-
jecting the joint torque associated with each task into
the combined null space of all tasks with higher pri-
ority, just as task and posture behavior were combined
in the previous section. The null-space projection en-
sures that the execution of task i does not affect the
execution of tasks with higher priority, given by the
set prec.i/.
Given a task i, the joint torque consistent with the
set of higher priority tasks prec.i/ can be obtained by
projecting i into the combined null space of prec.i/,
ijprec.i/ D NT
prec.i/i ;
(36.11)

Motion for Manipulation Tasks
36.2 Task-Level Control
903
Part D | 36.2
where the combined null space NT
prec.i/ is computed as
Nprec.n/ D Nn1Nn2    N1 :
(36.12)
We say that ijprec.i/ is the torque for task i given the pre-
ceding tasks prec.i/. Applying this torque to the robot
will not affect the execution of higher-priority tasks.
The original torque vector i can be computed based
on (36.2).
Given the ability to compute a task torque that is
consistent with preceding tasks we are able to combine
an arbitrary number of tasks into a single motion behav-
ior
 D 1 C 2jprec.2/ C 3jprec.3/ C    njprec.n/ ;
(36.13)
where  is the torque used to control the robot.
Note that 1 is not projected into any null space,
since it is the task with the highest priority. Task 1
is therefore performed in the full space deﬁned by
the robot’s kinematics. If the robot has N degrees
of freedom, this space has N dimensions. As the
number of tasks performed on the robot increases,
the null-space projections Nprec.i/ will project the N-
dimensional torque vectors associated with lower-pri-
ority tasks into a subspace of decreasing dimension.
Eventually, the null space will be reduced to the triv-
ial case, when all torque vectors are projected onto the
null vector. This prevents lower-priority tasks from be-
ing executed. The dimensionality of the null space of
tasks prec.i/ can be computed by counting the nonzero
singular values [36.6] of Nprec.i/, permitting a program-
matic assessment of task feasibility.
If the execution of a particular task has to be guar-
anteed, it should be associated with task 1 in (36.13).
Therefore, the highest-priority task is generally used
for hard constraints that under no circumstances should
be violated. These constraints may include contact
constraints, joint limits, and balancing in the case of hu-
manoid robots, for example (Chap. 67).
The projection of (36.11) maps the torque i of
task i into the null space of all preceding tasks. This
projection also scales the vector, which may signiﬁ-
cantly impair the execution of task i. This effect can
be reduced by scaling the desired accelerations Rx at the
operational point with the task-consistent inertia ma-
trix ƒijprec.i/, given by
ƒijprec.i/ D

Jijprec.i/H1JT
ijprec.i/
1
;
(36.14)
where H is the joint space inertia matrix and
Jijprec.i/ D JiNprec.i/
(36.15)
is the task Jacobian consistent with all preceding tasks.
This Jacobian projects operational space forces into
joint torques that do not cause any acceleration at the
operational points of tasks in prec.i/. The task-consis-
tent inertia matrix ƒijprec.i/ then captures the inertia
perceived at the operational point when its motion is
limited to the subspace consistent with all preceding
tasks.
Using the task-consistent inertia matrix, we can ob-
tain the task-consistent operational space dynamics by
projecting the joint space dynamics into the space de-
ﬁned by the dynamically consistent inverse of Jijprec.i/.
Inverting (36.2) and replacing  based on (36.2) we ob-
tain
NJ
T
ijprec.i/

H.q/ C C.q; Pq/ C g.q/ D kjprec.i/

;
(36.16)
which yields the task-consistent equivalent to (36.3)
Fijprec.i/ D ƒijprec.i/Rx C ijprec.i/Px C ijprec.i/ ;
(36.17)
where ƒijprec.i/ is the task-consistent operational space
inertial matrix, ijprec.i/ captures centrifugal and Cori-
olis forces in operational space, and ijprec.i/ compen-
sates for gravity forces. Equation 36.17 can be used
to control a task at a particular operational point in
a task-consistent manner, i. e., without causing accel-
eration at the operational points associated with the
tasks in prec.i/. Note that in practice the terms C.q; Pq/
and g.q/ can be computed in the joint space; they only
need to be accounted for once in the case of multiple
tasks.
Referring back to Fig. 36.3, we can analyze the ef-
fectiveness of the operational space framework. The
control of operational points directly addresses force
and position constraints on motion in manipulation
tasks. Additional behaviors with lower priority than
the task can be used to ensure the maintenance of
kinematic and dynamic constraints, implement pos-
ture behavior, or perform reactive obstacle avoidance
based on artiﬁcial potential ﬁelds [36.15]. The con-
trol of all of these aspects of manipulation tasks is
computationally efﬁcient. As a consequence, the op-
erational space framework is able to maintain these
motion constraints while satisfying feedback frequency
requirements. However, the operational space frame-
work does not include the consideration of global
motion constraints, such as those imposed by the con-
nectivity of the work space. Therefore, the operational
space framework is susceptible to local minima, simi-
larly to the artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method. Such local

Part D | 36.3
904
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
minima can occur for all of the aforementioned mo-
tion constraints and would prevent the robot from
accomplishing its task. To overcome this problem,
planning methods have to be applied (Chap. 7 and
Sect. 36.3).
The control basis approach [36.16] provides an al-
ternative, compact formalism for combining multiple
behaviors. Each individual behavior is described by
a controller, represented by a potential function  2
˚, sensors  2 ˙, and effectors  2 ( . A particular
controller  can be parameterized with sensors and
effectors. A particular instance of a behavior can be
written as j
 . These controllers can be combined us-
ing null-space projections, similar to (36.13). In the
control basis framework, (36.13) would be written more
compactly as
n G    G 3 G 2 G 1 ;
(36.18)
where we abbreviate iji
i with i. The relation i G j
means that i is projected into the null space of j. We
say that i is executed subject to j. If more than two
behaviors are combined, as shown in (36.18), each con-
troller i is projected into the combined null space of
all superior tasks.
The control basis represents a general framework
for combining controllers and is not limited to the
notion of task-level control. In addition to the afore-
mentioned formalism for representing combinations of
controllers, the control basis also encompasses discrete
structures that deﬁne transitions between combinations
of controllers. Such transitions can be speciﬁed by the
user or learned with techniques from reinforcement
learning [36.16]. The control basis can compose mul-
tiple task-level controllers to implement manipulation
tasks that cannot be described in terms of a single task-
level controller.
36.3 Manipulation Planning
In order to appreciate the computational challenges in-
herent to gross motion planning for manipulation, it
is useful to adopt a mathematical formalism for anal-
ysis. The chapter on planning (Chap. 7) introduced
the conﬁguration space (C-space), which represents the
space of allowable transformations of the robot. In gen-
eral, the set of all allowable transformations forms an
n-dimensional manifold, in which n is the total number
of degrees of freedom (DOF) of the mechanical sys-
tem. For a robotic manipulator, the conﬁguration space
is deﬁned by its kinematic structure (Chap. 2). One
common class of manipulators is serial-chain manipu-
lators, which consist of a series of revolute or prismatic
joints connected to form a linear kinematic chain. The
discussion of manipulation planning in this section fo-
cuses on conﬁguration spaces arising from single serial-
chain manipulators. However, the mathematical for-
mulation generalizes to more complex robots such as
Fig. 36.4 Simulation of the H6 humanoid robot manipulating an
object
humanoids (Fig. 36.4; Chap. 67), whose upper body
consists of two cooperating manipulator arms attached
to a movable base (Chap. 39). The model considered
here greatly simpliﬁes the problems of grasping, stabil-
ity, friction, mechanics, and uncertainties and instead
focuses on the geometric aspects. In this section, we
will consider a simple example of a manipulation task
that involves a classic pick-and-place operation. Sec-
tion 36.4 further considers grasping and contact states
in the context of assembly operations, and Sect. 36.5
gives an overview of techniques to unify feedback
control and planning for more complex manipulation
tasks.
36.3.1 Configuration Space Formalism
The basic motion planning problem is deﬁned as ﬁnd-
ing a path in the conﬁguration space connecting a start
and a goal conﬁguration while avoiding static ob-
stacles in the environment (Chap. 7). Manipulation
planning involves additional complexity because ma-
nipulation tasks fundamentally require contact with
objects in the environment. When objects are grasped,
regrasped, and moved, the structure and topology of
the free conﬁguration space can change drastically.
However, manipulation planning shares the same basic
theoretical foundations and computational complexity
as classical path planning, such as PSPACE-hardness
(Chap. 7).
To be more precise, we will utilize a formalization
for manipulation planning that is primarily due to Alami

Motion for Manipulation Tasks
36.3 Manipulation Planning
905
Part D | 36.3
et al. [36.17], and adapted in LaValle’s book [36.18].
Our goal is to gain understanding and intuition re-
garding the search space for manipulation tasks and
the different situations that can arise. Throughout this
discussion, bear in mind that the geometry and rel-
ative positions of the manipulator, the manipulated
objects, and the obstacles in the workspace determine
both the geometry and topological structure of the
free conﬁguration space. Within this framework, ma-
nipulation planning can be intuitively placed in the
context of planning for hybrid systems [36.19]. Hy-
brid systems involve a mixture of continuous vari-
ables and discrete modes, whose transitions are de-
ﬁned by switching functions (for a discussion of hy-
brid systems in a planning context, see Chap. 7 of
LaValle’s book [36.18]). In the case of manipulation
planning, the effect of grasping, repositioning, and
releasing objects in the environment corresponds to
switching between different continuous conﬁguration
spaces.
Let us consider a simple example of a simple pick-
and-place manipulation task that requires a robot ma-
nipulator A to reposition a single movable rigid object
(part) P from its current location in the workspace to
some desired goal location. Note that accomplishing
the task only requires that the part P reach the goal
location, without regard to precisely how the manipu-
lator does so. Because the part cannot move by itself,
it must either be transported by the robot or be placed
at rest in some stable intermediate conﬁguration. There
are some conﬁgurations in which the robot is able to
grasp and move the part to other locations in the en-
vironment. There are also forbidden conﬁgurations in
which the robot or the part collides with obstacles in
the environment. The solution of a manipulation plan-
ning problem consists of a sequence of subpaths for
the robot moving alone or moving while grasping the
part. The primary constraints on the allowable motions
are:
1. The robot manipulator must not collide with any
obstacles in the environment while reaching for,
grasping, or regrasping the part.
2. The robot must adequately grasp the part while
transporting it (for details on grasping and metrics
for stable grasps see Chap. 38).
3. The robot manipulator and movable part must not
collide with any obstacles in the environment while
the part is being transported.
4. If the part is not being transported by the robot, it
must be placed at rest in some stable intermediate
placement.
5. The part must end up at the desired goal location in
the workspace.
The two modes of operation give rise to the hybrid sys-
tems formulation: either the robot moves alone, or the
robot moves while grasping the part. In the literature,
motions of the robot holding the object at a ﬁxed grasp
are called transfer paths, and motions of the robot while
the part stays at a stable placement are called transit
paths [36.17, 20, 21]. Solving a manipulation planning
problem involves searching for a connected sequence of
transit and transfer paths for the manipulator that will
accomplish the task. For an autonomous robot, the ideal
is to utilize planning algorithms that will automatically
produce correct sequences of transfer and transit paths
separated by grasping and ungrasping operations.
Admissible Configurations
Building
on the notation introduced in Chap. 7, we
deﬁne a robot manipulator A with n degrees of free-
dom operating in a Euclidean world or workspace,
W D RN, in which N D 2 or N D 3. Let CA represent
the n-dimensional C-space of A, and qA be a conﬁgura-
tion. CA is called the manipulator conﬁguration space.
Let P denote a movable part, which is a solid rigid body
modeled with geometric primitives. We will assume
that P is allowed to undergo rigid-body transforma-
tions. This gives rise to a part conﬁguration space,
CP D SE.2/ or CP D SE.3/. Let qP 2 CP denote a part
conﬁguration. The area or volume in the workspace
occupied by the transformed part model is denoted
by P.qP/.
We deﬁne the combined (robot and part) conﬁgura-
tion space C as the Cartesian product
C D CA  CP ;
in which each conﬁguration q 2 C is of the form q D
.qA; qP/. Note that the set of admissible conﬁgurations
for manipulation planning purposes is more restrictive
than simply Cfree, the space free of collisions with obsta-
cle regions as deﬁned in Chap. 7. We must incorporate
the constraints on the allowable motions by remov-
ing inadmissable conﬁgurations. Figure 36.5 illustrates
examples of some of the important subsets of C for ma-
nipulation planning.
We start by removing all conﬁgurations that involve
collisions with obstacles. Let the subset of conﬁgura-
tions in which the manipulator collides with obstacles
be given by
CA
obs D f.qA; qP/ 2 CjA.qA/ \ O ¤ ;g :
We also want to remove conﬁgurations for which the
part collides with obstacles. However, we will allow
the surface of the part to make contact with obstacle
surfaces. This happens for example, when the part is

Part D | 36.3
906
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
q ∈   P
obs
q ∈   A
obs
(qA)
(qA)
(qA)
(qA)
(qP)
(qP)
(qP)
(qP)
(qP)
q ∈   A
obs
q ∈   grasp
q ∈   trans
q ∈   stable
Fig. 36.5 Examples of the various conﬁguration space subsets de-
ﬁned for manipulation planning
resting on a shelf or table, or when a peg-shaped part is
being inserted into a hole. Therefore, let
CP
obs D f.qA; qP/ 2 Cjint.P.qP// \ O ¤ ;g
denote the open set for which O intersects the interior
volume int.P.qP// of the part for any conﬁguration qP.
If the interior of the part penetrates O, then clearly these
conﬁgurations should be avoided.
We can now deﬁne Cn.CA
obs[CP
obs/, which is the set
of all conﬁgurations in which both the robot and the part
do not inappropriately collide with O. Next consider the
interaction between A and P. The manipulator must be
allowed to make contact with the surface of the part, but
penetration is once again not allowed. Therefore, let all
conﬁgurations in which the interior of the part overlaps
with the robot geometry be deﬁned as
CPA
obs D
˚
.qA; qP/ 2 CjA.qA/ \ int.P.qP// ¤ ;

:
Finally, we are able to deﬁne
Cadm D C n

CA
obs [ CP
obs [ CPA
obs

;
which represents the set of conﬁgurations remaining af-
ter subtracting away all unwanted conﬁgurations. We
call this the set of admissible conﬁgurations.
Stable and Grasped Configurations
By deﬁnition, all conﬁgurations in the set Cadm are free
of penetrative collisions between the robot, the part,
and obstacles in the environment. However, many of
these conﬁgurations deﬁne the part as ﬂoating in space
or on the verge of falling. We now consider two im-
portant subsets of Cadm that are used in manipulation
planning (Fig. 36.5). Let CP
stable  CP denote the subset
of stable part conﬁgurations, which are conﬁgurations
at which the part can safely rest without any forces
being applied by the manipulator. Examples of stable
conﬁgurations include the part resting on a table or in-
serted into a larger assembly of other parts. The criteria
for inclusion into the set of stable conﬁgurations de-
pends on properties such as the part geometry, friction,
mass distribution, and contacts with the environment.
Our formalism does not consider these issues directly,
but assumes that some method for evaluating the sta-
bility of a part conﬁguration is available. Given CP
stable,
we deﬁne Cstable  Cadm to be the corresponding stable
conﬁgurations of the part–robot system
Cstable D
˚
.qA; qP/ 2 CadmjqP 2 CP
stable

:
The other important subset of Cadm is the set of all con-
ﬁgurations in which the robot is grasping the part and
is capable of manipulating it according to some deﬁned
criteria. Let Cgrasp  Cadm denote the set of grasp con-
ﬁgurations. For every conﬁguration, .qA; qP/ 2 Cgrasp,
the manipulator touches the part, which implies that
A.qA/ \ P.qP/ ¤ ;. Just as before, penetration be-
tween the robot and part geometry is not allowed
because Cgrasp  Cadm. In general, many conﬁgurations
at which A.qA/ contacts P.qP/ will not necessarily be
in Cgrasp. The criteria for a conﬁguration to lie in Cgrasp
depends on the particular characteristics of the manip-
ulator, the part, and the contact surfaces between them.
For example, a typical manipulator would not be able
to pick up a part by making contact at only a sin-
gle point. (For additional information, see Sect. 36.4
for contact state identiﬁcation, Chap. 37, and grasp-
ing criteria, such as force closure models in Chaps. 38
and 19).
For any robot and part conﬁguration q D .qA; qP/ 2
C that we consider for manipulation planning we must
always ensure that either q 2 Cstable or q 2 Cgrasp. We
therefore deﬁne Cfree D Cstable [ Cgrasp, to reﬂect the
subset of Cadm that is permissible for manipulation plan-
ning. In the context of hybrid systems, this gives rise
to the two distinct modes for manipulation planning:
the transit mode and the transfer mode. Recall that in
the transit mode, the manipulator is not carrying the
part (i. e., only the robot moves), which requires that
q 2 Cstable. In the transfer mode, the manipulator car-
ries the part (i. e., both the robot and the part move),
which requires that q 2 Cgrasp. Based on these condi-
tions, the only way the mode can change is if q 2
Cstable \ Cgrasp. When the manipulator is in these con-
ﬁgurations, it has two available actions: (1) continue
to grasp and move the part, or (2) release the part in
its currently stable conﬁguration. In all other conﬁgura-

Motion for Manipulation Tasks
36.3 Manipulation Planning
907
Part D | 36.3
tions the mode remains unchanged. For convenience,
we deﬁne Ctrans D Cstable \ Cgrasp to denote the set of
transition conﬁgurations, which are the places in which
the mode may change and the robot may grasp or re-
lease the part.
Manipulation Planning Task Definition
Finally, the basic pick-and-place manipulation planning
task can now be deﬁned. An initial part conﬁgura-
tion, qP
init 2 CP
stable, and a goal part conﬁguration, qP
goal 2
CP
stable, are speciﬁed. Recall that this high-level task
speciﬁcation is only deﬁned in terms of repositioning
the part, without regard to how the manipulator actually
accomplishes the task. Let Cinit  Cfree be the set of all
conﬁgurations in which the part conﬁguration is qP
init
Cinit D
˚
.qA; qP/ 2 CfreejqP D qP
init

:
We deﬁne Cgoal  Cfree similarly as the set of all conﬁg-
urations in which the part conﬁguration is qP
goal
Cgoal D
n
.qA; qP/ 2 CfreejqP D qP
goal
o
:
If the initial and ﬁnal conﬁgurations of the manipula-
tor are speciﬁed, then let qinit D .qA
init; qP
init/ 2 Cinit and
qgoal D .qA
goal; qP
goal/ 2 Cgoal. The objective of the plan-
ner is to compute a path  such that
 W Œ0; 1 7! Cfree ;
.0/ D qinitI .1/ D qgoal :
If the initial and ﬁnal positions of the manipulator are
unspeciﬁed, we implicitly deﬁne the objective of the
planner as computing a path  W Œ0; 1 7! Cfree such that
.0/ 2 Cinit and .1/ 2 Cgoal. In either case, a solution
is an alternating sequence of transit paths and transfer
paths, whose names follow from the mode. In between
each transfer path, the part is placed in a stable interme-
diate conﬁguration while the manipulator moves alone
(transit path) in order to regrasp the part. This sequence
continues until the part is ultimately placed to rest in its
ﬁnal goal conﬁguration. This is depicted in Fig. 36.6.
36.3.2 Example of a Three-DOF
Planar Manipulator
For manipulators with three or fewer degrees of free-
dom (DOF), we can construct visualizations of the
C-space in order to gain an intuition of the structure.
Throughout this section, we will use the example of
a three-DOF serial-chain manipulator whose end-effec-
tor operates a planar workspace (R2).
Figure 36.7 shows a simple redundant robot arm
originally illustrated in [36.22]. The robot has three rev-
olute joints with parallel axes and joint limits of ; 
radians, providing three degrees of freedom. Since the
end-effector of the robot can only reach positions in
a plane, the arm is redundant in this plane and since
it has only three DOF and limits imposed on the joint
angles, C can be visualized as a cube with an edge
length of 2. Generally, the C-space manifold of a ma-
nipulator with n revolute joints is homeomorphic to an
n-dimensional hypertorus if no joint limits are present,
and homeomorphic to an n-dimensional hypercube if
joint limits are present.
Recall that obstacles in the workspace are mapped
to regions in the C-space called C-obstacles (Chap. 7),
which represent the set of all joint conﬁgurations of the
robot that cause an intersection of the geometry of the
robot and the obstacle
CA
obs D
˚
.qA; qP/ 2 CjA.qA/ \ O ¤ ;

:
In general, the structure of CA
obs can be highly com-
plex and involve multiple connected components of C.
An example visualization of a conﬁguration space
for the planar three-DOF manipulator corresponding
Transfer 1
Transit
Transfer 2
grasp1
grasp2
qgoal
qinit
Fig. 36.6 Manipulation planning involves searching for
a sequence of transfer and transit paths in a set of hybrid
continuous conﬁguration spaces. In this example, transfer
paths in different C-spaces arise from different ways of
rigidly grasping a part
Sideview
Topview
space
θ1
θ1
θ2
θ3
θ1
θ2
θ3
θ2
θ3
Workspace
Fig. 36.7 Planar 3 DOF manipulator

Part D | 36.3
908
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
to a workspace with two differently colored box-
shaped obstacles is given in Fig. 36.8. The C-obstacles
are illustrated using the same color as the corre-
sponding box-shaped obstacle in the workspace. The
red, green, and blue coordinate axes correspond to
the three joint angles f1;2;3g of the manipulator,
respectively.
Self-collisions induce special C-obstacle regions
that do not involve environment geometry, but only
the geometric interference of the links of the robot
itself. The robot shown in Fig. 36.7 is, by design,
self-collision-free. Figure 36.9 shows a modiﬁed ver-
sion of the manipulator, where self-collision is actu-
ally possible, and a visualization of the corresponding
C-obstacles.
C-obstacles can cover large parts of the conﬁgu-
ration space and even cause a complete disconnection
between different components of Cfree. Figure 36.10
shows how the addition of only a small post as an
obstacle can cause a wide range of conﬁgurations
to produce collisions and disconnect regions of Cfree:
the C-obstacle corresponding to the post forms a wall
of conﬁgurations parallel to the 2–3-plane. This wall
represents the range of values for 1 for which the
ﬁrst link of the manipulator intersects with the post,
splitting Cfree into two disconnected components. Hav-
ing disconnected components C1; C2 2 Cfree means that
space
Topview
θ1
θ1
θ2
θ3
θ2
θ3
Workspace
Fig. 36.8 Planar 3 DOF manipulator in a workspace with
box-shaped obstacles and associated conﬁguration space
obstacles
Sideview
Topview
space
θ1
θ2
θ3
θ1
θ2
θ3
Workspace
θ1
θ2
θ3
Fig. 36.9 Non-planar 3 DOF manipulator and correspond-
ing self-collision C-obstacle
there is no collision-free path that starts in C1 and ends
in C2.
36.3.3 Inverse Kinematics Considerations
The typical formulation of a path planning problem re-
quires a goal conﬁguration qgoal as input (Chap. 7). For
the case of manipulation planning, this conﬁguration is
usually computed from the desired workspace pose of
the end-effector by an inverse kinematics (IK) solver
(Sect. 2.7). Apart from special cases, there currently ex-
ist no known analytical methods for solving the inverse
kinematics of a general redundant mechanism (greater
than six degrees of freedom). Iterative, numerical tech-
niques (such as Jacobian-based methods or gradient-
based optimization) are typically used to calculate solu-
tions in this case. Note that the numerical computation
of inverse kinematics solutions can suffer from poor
performance or even nonconvergence, depending on the
quality of the initial guess, the distribution of singular-
ities in the C-space or a combination of these effects
(Sect. 2.7).
Most IK solvers are only able to compute one con-
ﬁguration for a given end-effector pose. For a redundant
manipulator, however, an inﬁnite, continuous range of
conﬁgurations that cause the end-effector to assume the
desired pose usually exists. In the context of path plan-
ning, this means that the IK solver will select one out of
an inﬁnite number of conﬁgurations as qgoal. Note that
in some cases, the selected qgoal might not be collision-
free, i. e., it is not part of Cfree. Such a conﬁguration can-
not be used as a goal for computing a global reaching
strategy because no solution exists for the correspond-
ing path planning query in the classical sense (Chap. 7).
Another possibility is that the selected qgoal might
be disconnected from qinit. In this case, qgoal is unsuit-
able for planning despite the fact that it is a member
of Cfree, because it is in a component of Cfree that is
disconnected from the component in which qinit lies.
Consider the planar manipulator shown in Fig. 36.7.
Topview
Obstacle
θ1
θ2
θ3
Workspace
θ1
θ2
θ3
space
Fig. 36.10 Workspace mapping to a conﬁguration space
with topologically disconnected components

Motion for Manipulation Tasks
36.3 Manipulation Planning
909
Part D | 36.3
Figure 36.11 shows two possible solutions for a cer-
tain end-effector pose. The corresponding conﬁgura-
tions qa D .0; =2;0/ and qb D .=2;=2;=2/ are
marked by green spheres in the C-space visualiza-
tion. In this case, the IK solver might select one of
the two solutions as qgoal. If the same obstacle as
in Fig. 36.10 is added to the workspace, the two so-
lutions will lie in disconnected components of Cfree, as
shown in Fig. 36.12.
Let qinit D .0;0; 0/ be the zero conﬁguration,
marked by the point of intersection of the C-space axes
in Fig. 36.12. Let the component of Cfree in which it lies
be denoted by C1 and the other component by C2. Since
qb 2 C2 and C1 \ C2 D ;, no solution for the planning
problem can exist if the IK solver selects qb as qgoal.
This means that every planning attempt with this qgoal
will invariably fail.
Since computing a complete representation of the
connectivity of C is a problem of similar complexity to
path planning itself, it is virtually impossible to detect
a disconnection between qgoal and qinit before the plan-
ning attempt has failed.
a)
b)
c)
b) = (   ,–   ,   )
space
θ1
θ2
θ3
θ1
θ2
θ3
Workspace
θ1
θ2
θ3
2
π
2
π
2
π
a) = (0,  , 0)
2
π
Fig.36.11a–c Two inverse kinematics solutions for the
same end-effector pose of a planar 3 DOF arm; (a) solu-
tion 1, (b) solution 2, (c) solution shown in C space
a)
b)
c)
b)
a)
Workspace
Obstacle
Obstacle
θ1
θ2
θ3
space
Fig.36.12a–c Two inverse kinematics solutions lying in
disconnected components of Cfree due to a small obsta-
cle in the workspace; (a) solution 1, (b) solution 2, (c) the
two solutions shown in C space, which are in disconnected
components
Recall that the workspace goal for a classical ma-
nipulation planning problem is deﬁned by a desired
end-effector pose computed using inverse kinematics.
Note however, that the purpose of a manipulation task
may not require moving the end-effector to that par-
ticular location, but rather moving it to any feasible
location which enables the desired manipulation task to
be solved. Thus, it becomes important to devise compu-
tational methods and control schemes that are focused
around the task, and allow some ﬂexibility and freedom
with regards to the end-effector pose and manipula-
tor conﬁguration. This is one of the motivations and
advantages of task space or operational space control
techniques (Sect. 8.2).
As an example, consider the task of grasping
a cylindrical part with the planar three-DOF manipula-
tor. Figure 36.11 shows two possible solution conﬁgura-
tions yielding the same end-effector pose. The addition
of obstacles to this workspace may cause one of the
conﬁgurations to become disconnected from the zero
conﬁguration. These two conﬁgurations, however, may
not be the only valid conﬁgurations that allow the ma-
nipulator to grasp the cylindrical part. Figure 36.13a
shows several other conﬁgurations that allow the ma-
nipulator to grasp the part. By interpolating between
these, an inﬁnite number of different workspace poses
that provide solutions to the grasping problem is gener-
ated. The inverse kinematics solutions associated with
these workspace poses are contained in the continuous
subset Cgoal  C, as shown in Fig. 36.13b, which repre-
sents the actual solution space to the planning problem
for this reaching task.
Adding the obstacle from Fig. 36.10 to the
workspace of this manipulation task produces the con-
ﬁguration space depicted in Fig. 36.14. Note that the
C-obstacle corresponding to collisions between the ma-
nipulator and the cylinder itself has been disregarded in
this visualization for clarity. Approximately half of the
space solution region
Workspace example solutions
a)
b)
θ1
θ2
θ3
Fig. 36.13 (a) Multiple arm conﬁgurations that allow the
manipulator to grasp the cylinder and (b) C-space visual-
ization of the set of solution conﬁgurations

Part D | 36.3
910
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
possible solutions are disconnected from the zero con-
ﬁguration and a quarter are in collision, which leaves
only one quarter as reachable and therefore suitable
candidates for qgoal in a classical planning query.
36.3.4 Continuum Manipulation
As introduced in Chap. 20, a manipulator with far more
degrees of freedom than that of an object to be manipu-
lated is a hyperredundant manipulator. Hyperredundant
manipulators can be further classiﬁed into vertebrate-
like rigid-link manipulators, such as snakes, and inver-
tebrate-like continuum manipulators, such as octopus
arms or elephant trunks. Many vertebrate-like manip-
ulators inherit the kinematics of articulated arms, and
like the articulated arms, they are often used as carriers
θ1
θ1
θ2
θ2
θ3
Fig. 36.14 Two views of the set of goal conﬁgurations
(green) for grasping a cylindrical part in a disconnected
C-space
z
y
x
z
y
x
z
y
x
z
y
x
Fig. 36.15 Different conﬁgurations of the OctArm manipulator
of the actual manipulators: hands or grippers, such as in
surgical applications.
Continuum manipulators [36.23], on the other hand,
consist of deformable sections and are often used for
whole-arm manipulation without a divide between the
arm and hand/gripper, taking advantage of their com-
pliance and ﬂexibility. They can be viewed as the
extreme case of hyperredundancy but are fundamentally
different from articulated arms. A grasping conﬁgura-
tion for a continuum manipulator affects the whole arm
as it wraps around an object. The smooth and com-
pliant nature of a continuum manipulator allows it to
gently interact with the object by adapting its shape to
the object it wraps. The OctArm [36.24], with multi-
ple constant-curvature sections, is representative of the
general class of continuum manipulators.
Although each section i of a continuum manipulator
is deformable, and thus has inﬁnite degrees of freedom
theoretically, it often has three controllable degrees of
freedom, which describes the conﬁguration of the sec-
tion as a truncated torus when undeformed or a cylinder
if the curvature is zero. length si, curvature i, and the
orientation angle i between section i  1 and section i.
By changing those three variables for each section, the
conﬁguration of the whole manipulator can be changed.
Figure 36.15 shows different conﬁgurations of a three-
section OctArm.
Planning for continuum, whole-arm manipulation
is signiﬁcantly different from manipulation and grasp-
ing planning for conventional articulated arms with
hands/grippers. Here the inverse kinematics problem is
to ﬁnd end positions of each section for the manipulator,
given the conﬁguration variables of the section [36.25].
However, planning motion for whole-arm manipulation
has to consider directly a mixture of conﬁguration vari-
ables and Cartesian-space variables (i. e., the end posi-
tion of each section), because the shapes and grasping
capabilities of the end-effector (which can be viewed as
the portion of the continuum manipulator contacting the
target object) depend on both.
Given a target object, its location and size decide
if there exists a conﬁguration that a continuum ma-
nipulator can wrap around the object to grasp it. If
wrapping around the object along one circle is suf-
ﬁcient, that bounding circle of the object centered at
position c with radius rc determines the k (k 	 n) sec-
tions that are needed to wrap it, starting from the tip n-th
section backward. The poses of the remaining nk sec-
tions must satisfy the intersection constraints to form
feasible whole-arm conﬁgurations for grasping [36.26].
A feasible grasping conﬁguration can also be deter-
mined heuristically as an integral part of collision-free
motion planning [36.27]. Multiple grasping solutions
provide ﬂexibility to avoid obstacles (
VIDEO 357 ).

Motion for Manipulation Tasks
36.4 Assembly Motion
911
Part D | 36.4
A more practical approach [36.28] is to ﬁrst make
a contact between the manipulator and the target object
at the m-th section (m < n), and then generate wrapping
conﬁgurations for the m to n sections of the manipula-
tor one by one without overlap to form a tight, spiral
wrap (i. e., along multiple object bounding circles). In
a cluttered environment, progressive wrapping of an ob-
ject can be achieved through moving all arm sections
together led by the tip of the arm to surroun. the ob-
ject [36.29], which requires minimum free space for
the arm to manuever. Those approaches can generate
a better force-closure grasp and facilitate sensing-based
manipulation based on contact detection.
Finally, strategies for planning continuum manipu-
lation could also beneﬁt whole-arm manipulation with
vertebrate-like hyperredundant manipulators in that the
planned spatial curves for poses of a continuum manip-
ulator could be used as desired shapes for a hyperredun-
dant manipulator, such as a snake robot, to ﬁt its joint
conﬁgurations. Indeed, curve design and ﬁtting for hy-
perredundant manipulators has long been introduce. for
planning manipulator poses [36.30].
In this section, we have covered the basics of
manipulation planning, developed a mathematical for-
mulation for the kinds of search spaces that arise, and
discussed some of the important geometric and topo-
logical considerations, as well as different types of
manipulators and manipulation. Section 36.6 provides
an overview of additional topics and extensions with
pointers to further reading.
36.4 Assembly Motion
Assembly or an assembly task deﬁnes the process of
putting together manufactured parts to make a complete
product, such as a machine. It is a major operation in the
manufacturing process of any product. Assembly au-
tomation with robots aims to reduce cost and increase
the quality and efﬁciency of the operation. In environ-
ments hazardous to humans, such as in space, having
robots perform assembly tasks could save human lives.
Assembly has long been not only an important but also
one of the most challenging applications for robotics.
There are many signiﬁcant research issues related to the
broad scope of assembly automation, from design for
assembly [36.31] to tolerance analysis [36.32], assem-
bly sequence planning [36.33], ﬁxture design [36.34],
etc. This section is only focused on the issue of robotic
motion for assembly.
The concerned assembly motion is that of a robot
manipulator holding a part and moving it to reach
a certain assembled state, i. e., a required spatial ar-
rangement or contact against another part. The main
difﬁculty of assembly motion is due to the requirement
for high precision or low tolerance between the parts in
an assembled state. As a result, the assembly motion has
to overcome uncertainty to be successful. Compliant
motion is deﬁned as motion constrained by the contact
between the held part and another part in the environ-
ment. As it reduces uncertainty through reducing the
degrees of freedom of the held part, compliant motion
is desirable in assembly.
Consider the peg-in-hole insertion example intro-
duced earlier (Fig. 36.2). If the clearance between the
peg and the hole is very small, the effect of uncertainty
will most likely cause a downward insertion motion
of the peg to fail, i. e., the peg ends up colliding with
the entrance of the hole in some way without reach-
ing the desired assembled state. Therefore, a successful
assembly motion has to move the peg out of such an
unintended contact situation and lead it to reach the
desired assembled state eventually. To make this tran-
sition, compliant motion is preferred. Often a sequence
of contact transitions via compliant motion is neces-
sary before the desired assembled state can be reached.
Figure 36.16 shows a typical sequence of contact tran-
sitions for the peg-in-hole task.
Assembly motion strategies that incorporate com-
pliant motion can be broadly classiﬁed into two groups:
passive compliance and active compliant motion, and
both groups of strategies require certain informa-
Fig. 36.16 A sequence of contact transitions for the peg-
in-hole insertion task

Part D | 36.4
912
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
tion characterizing topological contact states between
parts.
36.4.1 Topological Contact States
When a part A contacts a part B, the conﬁguration of
A (or B) is a contact conﬁguration. Often a set of con-
tact conﬁgurations share the same high-level contact
characteristics. For example, a cup is on the table is
a high-level description shared by all the contact con-
ﬁgurations of the cup when its bottom are on the table.
Such a description is often what really matters in as-
sembly motion as it characterizes a spatial arrangement
that could be either an assembled state or just a contact
state between a part and another part.
For contacting polyhedral objects, it is common to
describe a contact state topologically as a set of prim-
itive contacts, each of which is deﬁned by a pair of
contacting surface elements in terms of faces, edges,
and vertices. Different contact state representations
essentially differ only in how primitive contacts are
deﬁned. One common representation [36.35] deﬁnes
primitive contacts as point contacts in terms of vertex–
edge contacts for two-dimensional (2-D) polygons, and
vertex–face and edge–edge contacts for three-dimen-
sional (3-D) polyhedra. Another representation [36.36]
deﬁnes a primitive contact as between a pair of topolog-
ical surface elements (i. e., faces, edges, and vertices).
Here a contact primitive can characterize a contact
region that is either a point, a line segment, or a pla-
nar face, unlike the point-contact notion. From the
viewpoint of contact identiﬁcation via sensing, how-
ever, both representations can result in states that are
different by deﬁnition but indistinguishable in identiﬁ-
cation due to uncertainties. Figure 36.17 shows such an
example.
The notion of a principal contact [36.37, 38]
presents a high-level primitive contact that is more ro-
bust to recognition. A principal contact (PC) denotes
a contact between a pair of topological surface elements
that are not boundary elements of other contacting topo-
logical surface elements. The boundary elements of
a face are the edges and vertices bounding it, and the
boundary elements of an edge are the vertices bound-
ing it. Different PCs between two objects correspond
to different degrees of freedom of the objects, which
often also correspond to signiﬁcant differences in the
contact forces and moments. As shown in Fig. 36.17,
the indistinguishable states in terms of the other contact
primitives are grouped as a single contact state in terms
of PCs. Thus, there are also fewer contact states in terms
of PCs, leading to a more concise characterization of
contact states. In fact, every contact state between two
convex polyhedral objects is described by a single PC.
36.4.2 Passive Compliance
Passive compliance refers to strategies that incorpo-
rate compliant motion for error correction during the
assembly motion without requiring active and explicit
recognition and reasoning of contact states between
parts.
Remote Center Compliance
In the 1970s, a remote center compliance (RCC) de-
vice was developed to assist high-precision peg-in-hole
insertion [36.39–41]. The RCC is a mechanical spring
structure used as a tool attached to the end-effector
of a robot manipulator to hold a round peg when it
is inserted into a round hole. The RCC is designed
to have high stiffness along the direction of insertion
but high lateral and angular compliances Kx and K,
and it projects the center of compliance near the tip
of the peg (hence the name remote center compli-
ance) to overcome small lateral and angular errors in
the peg’s position and orientation in response to the
contact forces applied to the peg by the hole during
insertion (Fig. 36.18). The large lateral and angular
compliance of the RCC also helps to avoid wedging and
jamming, conditions that cause the peg to stick in two-
point contacts due to contact forces in direct opposition
(wedging) or ill-proportioned contact forces/moments
(jamming). Because the RCC is low cost and reliable
for fast insertions, it has long seen successful industrial
applications.
However, the RCC has limitations. It only applies
to round peg-in-hole insertions, and a particular RCC
works better for a peg and hole of a particular size. At-
tempts have been made to expand the applicability of
the RCC. Some attempts try to make certain param-
f A
3
f A
1
f A
1
f A
1
f A
2
eA
6
eA
3
eA
4
eA
8
eA
5
vA
3
vA
4
vA
1
vA
1
eA
1
f B
3
eB
1
eB
5
eB
4
f B
1
f B
1
f B
1
f B
2
vB
1
vB
1
vB
1
eA
2
vA
2
eA
7
vA
3
a)
b)
c)
Fig.36.17a–c Indistinguishable contact states due to po-
sitional uncertainty of the top part; (a) two objects,
(b) state 1, (c) state 2

Motion for Manipulation Tasks
36.4 Assembly Motion
913
Part D | 36.4
eters of an RCC adjustable to achieve variable com-
pliance or projection (i. e., the position of the remote
center) [36.42–44]. A spatial RCC (SRCC) [36.45]
was proposed to achieve square-peg-in-hole insertions.
A notable difference with this extension is the combi-
natorial explosion of the number of possible contact
states, given the range of the position and orientation
uncertainty of the held part that have to be considered
in the design of the device. Unlike the case of the round
peg and hole, which is essentially a 2-D problem with
a handful of different contact states, there are hundreds
of possible different contact states between a square peg
and a square hole. From each of these possible contact
states, a motion leading the held part to the goal assem-
bled state has to be realized by the device. This makes it
difﬁcult to design an RCC device that works for parts of
more general and complex shapes with more possible
contact states between them. This is a major limiting
factor that prevent more extensions of the RCC to as-
sembly of different parts.
Admittance Matrix
As an alternative method to the RCC, a particular form
of manipulator force control, damping control, was pro-
posed to achieve compliant motion of the held part
by the manipulator and to correct small location er-
rors of the held part during assembly. This approach
eliminates the need to build a mechanical device like
an RCC to achieve error correction. Among the force
control laws [36.46], damping control is a common
strategy, where a commanded velocity of the held part
is modiﬁed based on the sensed force caused by con-
tact between the held part and the environment. The
resulted actual velocity leads to reduction and hopefully
eventual correction of small position or orientation er-
rors of the held part. Let v be a six-dimensional (6-D)
vector representing the actual translational and angu-
a)
b)
c)
Tooling interface
RCC
translational
part
RCC
rotational
part
Workpiece
Remote center
Remote
center
Fig. 36.18 (a) Planar representation of RCC. (b) Rota-
tional part of RCC allowing workpiece to rotate. (c) Trans-
lational part of RCC allowing workpiece to translate
lar velocity of the held part, v 0 be the six-dimensional
commanded velocity, and f be a six-dimensional vec-
tor representing the sensed force and moment. A linear
damping control law is described as
v D v 0 C Af ;
where A is a 6  6 matrix, called an admittance matrix
or accommodation matrix.
The effectiveness of such a damping control law
depends on the existence and ﬁnding of a proper ad-
mittance matrix A. There is considerable research on
the design of a single A that can make an assembly op-
eration successful regardless of what contact states the
held peg may encounter in the process [36.47–51]. This
is aimed at cases where a single commanded velocity
would be sufﬁcient to achieve an assembly operation
when there were no uncertainty or error, such as certain
peg-in-hole insertion operations. One main approach
to design A is based on explicit kinematic and static
analysis of contact conditions under all possible contact
states and mating requirements, which result in a set of
linear inequalities as constraints on A. Learning is also
used [36.50] to obtain an A that minimizes the force f
without causing instability. Another approach [36.51]
applies perturbations to the end-effector during inser-
tion in order to obtain richer force information.
Learning Control for Assembly
Another category of approaches is to learn proper con-
trol for a particular assembly operation through stochas-
tic or neural-network-based methods [36.52–56]. The
essence of most of these approaches is to learn to map
a reaction force upon the held object caused by contact
to the next commanded velocity in order to reduce er-
rors and to achieve an assembly operation successfully.
A more recent approach [36.56] maps fused sensory
data of pose and vision obtained during human demon-
stration of assembly tasks to compliant motion signals
for successful assembly.
A different approach observes assembly tasks per-
formed by human operators through vision [36.57] or in
a virtual environment [36.58, 59] and generates a mo-
tion strategy necessary for the success of the task that
consists of a sequence of recognized contact state tran-
sitions and associated motion parameters.
As a sequence of commanded velocities can be
generated, unlike RCC or strategies based on a sin-
gle admittance matrix described above, can be applied
to cases with large uncertainties. However, the learned
controllers are task dependent.
More recently, an approach combining vision and
force sensing for assembly was introduced [36.60]
based on measuring the deformation of parts through
vision to adjust desired forces for mating and achieve

Part D | 36.4
914
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
force control through force sensing and an impedance
controller. The approach was applied to the task of mat-
ing two power connectors. The effect was similar to
having an RCC device on the end-effector.
All of the above assembly motion strategies do
not require explicit recognition of contact states during
their execution.
36.4.3 Active Compliant Motion
Active compliant motion is characterized by error cor-
rection based on online identiﬁcation or recognition of
contact states in addition to feedback of contact forces.
The capability for active compliant motion allows
a robot the ﬂexibility to deal with a much broader range
of assembly tasks with large uncertainties and tasks be-
yond assembly where compliance is required. An active
compliant motion system generally requires the follow-
ing components: a planner to plan compliant motion
commands, an identiﬁer to recognize contact states,
state transitions, and other state information during task
operation, and a controller to execute compliant motion
plans based on both low-level feedback provided by
sensors and high-level feedback provided by the identi-
ﬁer. Research on each component is described below.
Fine Motion Planning
Fine motion planning refers to planning ﬁne-scale mo-
tions to make an assembly task successful in spite of
signiﬁcant uncertainties. A general approach was pro-
posed [36.61] based on the concept of preimages in
conﬁguration space (C-space) [36.35] to devise mo-
tion strategies that would not fail in the presence of
uncertainties. Given a goal state of the held part de-
ﬁned by a region of goal conﬁgurations, a preimage of
the goal state encodes those conﬁgurations from which
a commanded velocity will guarantee that the held part
reaches the goal state recognizably in spite of location
and velocity uncertainties (Fig. 36.19).
Given the initial location of the held part and the
goal state, the preimage approach generates a motion
a)
b)
p
υ0
εc
Fig.36.19a,b Location and velocity uncertainties (in the
C-space). (a) The actual conﬁguration of a part could be
inside an uncertainty ball centered at an observed conﬁgu-
ration. (b) The actual velocity of a part could be inside an
uncertainty cone of a commanded velocity
plan in backward chaining by ﬁnding the preimage of
the goal state associated with a commanded velocity
and then the preimage of the preimage, and so on, until
a preimage that includes the initial conﬁguration of the
held part is found. Figure 36.20 shows an example.
The sequence of commanded velocities associated
with the sequence of preimages (starting from the ini-
tial preimage that includes the initial location) forms
the motion plan that guarantees the success of the task.
Starting from the initial preimage, each subsequent
preimage in the sequence can be viewed as a subgoal
state. In this approach, compliant motions are preferred
wherever possible because they typically produce larger
preimages [36.61] than pure positioning motions, and
subgoal states are often contact states. The approach
was further extended [36.62] to include modeling un-
certainties of objects.
However, the computability of the approach is a ma-
jor problem. The requirement of both goal reachability
and recognizability under sensing uncertainties, which
are intertwined issues, complicates the computation of
preimages. It has been shown [36.63] that the time com-
plexity of generating a plan can be double exponential
in nmr, where n is the number of plan steps, m is the en-
vironment complexity (of the physical space), and r is
the dimension of the conﬁguration space. By separat-
ing reachability and recognizability and restricting the
recognizability power of the original preimage model,
computability was improved [36.64, 65].
As an alternative, a two-phase approach is to sim-
plify the ﬁne motion planning into (1) global and ofﬂine
nominal path planning assuming no uncertainty and
(2) local and online replanning to deal with unintended
contacts due to uncertainties. Different variations of the
two-phase approach have been proposed [36.66–72].
The success of such an approach depends on success-
ful online identiﬁcation of contact states (Sect. 36.4.3).
Several researchers also studied the representation
and propagation of uncertainties and constraints that
have to be satisﬁed for the success of a task [36.73–
77].
a)
b)
p
υ2
υ1
P2
P1 G
G
Fig.36.20a,b Backward chaining of preimages: P1 is the
preimage of the goal region G (a), and P2 is the preimage
of P1 (b)

Motion for Manipulation Tasks
36.4 Assembly Motion
915
Part D | 36.4
Compliant Motion Planning
Compliant motion planning focuses on planning mo-
tions of objects always in contact. Hopcroft and Wil-
fong [36.78] proved that, if two arbitrary objects in
contact can be moved to another conﬁguration where
they are also in contact, then there is always a path
of contact conﬁgurations (on the boundary of con-
ﬁguration space obstacles, or C-obstacles) connecting
the ﬁrst and second contact conﬁgurations. Therefore,
not only is compliant motion desirable in many cases,
but it is always possible given initial and goal contact
conﬁgurations.
Because compliant motion occurs on the bound-
ary of C-obstacles, planning compliant motion poses
special challenges not present in collision-free motion
planning: it requires the exact information of con-
tact conﬁgurations on the boundary of C-obstacles.
Unfortunately computing C-obstacles exactly remains
a formidable task to date. While there are exact descrip-
tions of C-obstacles for polygons [36.79, 80], which
are three dimensional, there are only approximations of
C-obstacles for polyhedra [36.81, 82], which are six di-
mensional. If m and n indicate the complexity of two
polyhedral objects in contact, the complexity of the cor-
responding C-obstacle is .m6n6/ [36.83].
Researchers have focused on either reducing the
dimensionality and scope of the problem or get-
ting around the problem of computing C-obstacles
altogether. Some researchers have studied compliant
motion planning on C-obstacles of reduced dimen-
sions [36.72, 84, 85]. It is more popular to plan com-
pliant motions based on a predetermined graph of
topological contact states to avoid the problem of
computing C-obstacles [36.86–89]. In particular, one
approach [36.87, 88] models an assembly task of polyg-
onal parts as a discrete event system using Petri nets.
However, contact states and transitions are often gen-
erated manually, which is awfully tedious for even
assembly tasks of simple geometry [36.45] and is prac-
tically infeasible for complex tasks due to the huge
number of different contact states.
Therefore, automatic generation of a contact state
graph is desirable and even necessary. A method was
ﬁrst developed to enumerate all possible contact states
and their connections between two convex polyhedral
objects [36.90]. Recall that a contact state between two
convex polyhedra can be described by a single prin-
cipal contact (Sect. 36.4.1), and any principal contact
between two topological surface elements of two con-
vex polyhedra describes a geometrically valid contact
state. These are nice properties and greatly simplify
the problem of contact state graph generation. In gen-
eral, however, to construct a contact state graph between
two objects automatically requires the handling of two
rather difﬁcult issues:
1. How to generate valid contact states, i. e., how to tell
if a set of principal contacts corresponds to a geo-
metrically valid contact state, given the geometries
of objects, and
2. How to link one valid contact state to another in
the graph, i. e., how to ﬁnd the neighboring (or
adjacency) relations among the regions of contact
conﬁgurations belonging to different contact states
in the contact conﬁguration space.
A general and efﬁcient divide-and-merge approach
was introduced [36.38] for automatically generating
a contact state graph between two arbitrary polyhedra.
Each node in the graph denotes a contact state, de-
scribed by a topological contact formation (CF) [36.37]
as a set of principal contacts and a conﬁguration sat-
isfying the CF. Each edge connects the nodes of two
neighboring contact states. Figure 36.21 shows an ex-
ample contact state graph between two planar parts.
The approach handled the above two issues si-
multaneously by directly exploiting both topological
and geometrical knowledge of contacts in the phys-
ical space of objects and by dividing the problem
into simpler subproblems of generating and merging
special subgraphs. Speciﬁcally, the approach takes ad-
vantage of the fact that a contact state graph can be
divided into special subgraphs called the goal-contact
relaxation (GCR) graphs, where each GCR graph is
deﬁned by a locally most constrained valid contact
state, called the seed, and its less-constrained neigh-
boring valid contact states, which is easier to gener-
ate because of several properties. The main properties
include:

Given a valid contact state CSi all of its less
constrained neighboring contact states can be hy-
Fig. 36.21 A contact state graph between two planar parts

Part D | 36.4
916
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
pothesized topologically from the principal contacts
in CSi.

A hypothesized less constrained neighboring con-
tact state CSj is valid, if and only if there exists
a compliant motion to relax certain constraints of
CSi to obtain CSj which does not result in any other
contact state, called neighboring relaxation.

Neighboring relaxation can often be achieved by in-
stantaneous compliant motion.
With this approach, a contact state graph of several
hundreds or thousands of nodes and links can be gener-
ated in a few seconds.
With a contact state graph, the problem of com-
pliant motion planning can be decomposed into two
simpler subproblems at two levels: (1) high level: graph
search for state transitions from one node to another
in a contact state graph, and (2) low level: contact
motion planning within the set of contact conﬁgura-
tions constrained by the same contact state (and the
same contact formation), called CF-compliant motion
planning. A general contact motion plan crossing sev-
eral contact states can be considered as consisting of
segments of CF-compliant motions in different con-
tact states. One approach plans [36.91] CF-compliant
motions based on random sampling of CF-compliant
conﬁgurations and extending the probabilistic roadmap
motion planning technique [36.92].
Contact State Identification
Successful execution of a ﬁne-motion or compliant mo-
tion plan depends on correct online identiﬁcation of
contact states during execution. Contact state identiﬁ-
cation uses both model information of contact states
(including topological, geometrical and physical in-
formation) and sensory information of location and
force/torque of the end-effector. The presence of sens-
ing uncertainties make the identiﬁcation problem non-
trivial. Approaches for contact state identiﬁcation are
different in ways of dealing with uncertainties.
One class of approaches obtain the mapping be-
tween sensory data (in the presence of sensing uncer-
tainties) and corresponding contact states through learn-
ing. Models for learning include hidden Markov mod-
els [36.93, 94], thresholds [36.95, 96], neural network
structures, and fuzzy classiﬁers [36.97–101]. Training
data are obtained either in an unsupervised way or by
human task demonstration. Such approaches are task
dependent: a new task or environment requires new
training.
Another class of approaches are based on analytical
models for contact states. A common strategy is to pre-
determine the set of conﬁgurations, constraints on con-
ﬁgurations, or the set of forces/torques or force/torque
constraints that are possible for each contact state and
match such information against the sensed data to iden-
tify contact states online. Some approaches do not
consider the effect of uncertainties [36.102, 103], while
others consider uncertainties modeled either by uncer-
tainty bounds or by probability distributions [36.36, 89,
104–108]. An alternative strategy is based on checking
the distance between contacting elements in Cartesian
space: either by growing the objects with pose uncer-
tainty and intersecting the obtained regions [36.109],
or by combining the distance between the objects with
several other factors such as the instantaneous approach
direction [36.110].
In terms of how sensory data are used, some iden-
tiﬁcation schemes are rather static because they do not
consider the prior motion and state identiﬁcations be-
fore the current contact state is reached, while others
use prior history or even use new motion or active
sensing to help current identiﬁcation. The latter in-
clude approaches that perform simultaneous contact
state identiﬁcation and parameter estimation. In such
approaches, an analytical contact state model is ex-
pressed as a function of uncertain parameters, such as
the pose or dimension of an object in contact. At each
contact state, some of the uncertain parameters can be
observed or estimated with reduced uncertainty. For
example, if the held object is at a face–face contact
with another object, parameters describing the nor-
mals of the contacting faces can be estimated with the
help of force/torque sensing. During a task execution
(i. e., the execution of a motion plan), the uncertain
parameters are estimated along with the identiﬁcation
of contact states with increasing accuracy, which in
turn makes the subsequent contact state identiﬁcations
more accurate. This also improves force control and
contact state transition monitoring. The increased per-
formance, however, comes at a higher computational
cost.
Simultaneous contact state identiﬁcation and pa-
rameter estimation is most often done by ruling out
contact state models that are inconsistent with sensed
data or parameter estimation results [36.111–117]. One
notable exception [36.118] performs a truly simulta-
neous estimation by describing the system as a hy-
brid joint probability distribution of contact states and
parameters.
Active sensing is about deliberate use of applied
force/torque or motion to better aid contact state iden-
tiﬁcation and parameter estimation. Earlier research
focused on simple force strategy [36.119] or movability
tests [36.36, 110]. More recently, methods were intro-
duced [36.120] to design sequences of contact state
transitions and compliant motion strategies that were
optimized for active sensing to determine all uncertain

Motion for Manipulation Tasks
36.4 Assembly Motion
917
Part D | 36.4
geometric parameters while achieving certain goal con-
tact state.
From a different perspective, an approach was in-
troduced to analyze contact state distinguishability and
unknown/uncertain parameter identiﬁability [36.121]
during the design phase of a contact state identiﬁer or
parameter estimator.
36.4.4 Compliant Motion
Under Manipulator Constraints
A general compliant motion plan (as the output of
a compliant motion or ﬁne motion planner) usually con-
sists of a sequence of contact states, and within each
contact state, a path of contact conﬁgurations compliant
to the contact state and leads to the next contact state in
the sequence. Each contact conﬁguration is described in
terms of the parts in contact. However, it takes a robot
manipulator to move one part against the others, espe-
cially in assembly tasks. Therefore, whether a contact
state can be formed and whether a compliant motion
and a contact state transition is possible is subject to the
constraints of the manipulator.
Feasibility of Contact States
and Compliant Motions
A contact state graph should be re-visited by consid-
ering manipulator constraints [36.122]. Contact conﬁg-
urations compliant to a given contact state are sampled
and applied inverse kinematics to check if there is a fea-
sible manipulator joint-space conﬁguration to realize
the contact state. If no feasible manipulator conﬁg-
uration can be found after a number of samples are
considered, the contact state is considered at least very
difﬁcult to reach, and is discarded from the graph as an
infeasible state.
Given two feasible adjacent contact states, a com-
pliant motion for their transition should also be checked
for feasibility under manipulator constraints. The main
issue here is how to deal with possible singularities
along the compliant path (of contact conﬁgurations).
Certain singularities can be escaped if the manipula-
tor is redundant (i. e., with more than six degrees of
freedom) [36.123]. With inescapable singularities, the
compliant path of the moved object is not feasible and
has to be either altered to avoid singularity [36.124]
or abandoned. However, an altered path may no longer
be compliant to the desired contact states. In practice,
it is preferred to check the feasibility of a compli-
ant path starting from the goal contact state of an
assembly task backward to make sure that the feasi-
ble portion leading to the goal as well as the feasible
contact states encountered are discovered and pre-
served [36.125].
Execution of Feasible Compliant Motion Plans
Depending on whether the manipulator is equipped
with a force/torque sensor or not, different control
schemes can be considered for executing a compliant
motion plan that includes multiple contact state transi-
tions (
VIDEO 356 ).
If the manipulator has a force/torque sensor, a hy-
brid position/force controller can be used. It requires
a speciﬁcation that separates dimensions of force con-
trol from those of position/velocity control. Such spec-
iﬁcations not only have to vary for different contact
states but may have to vary from one contact conﬁg-
uration to another within the same contact state, i. e.,
a control speciﬁcation is a function of time or conﬁgura-
tion along a compliant trajectory in general. Moreover,
it is far from trivial to make control speciﬁcations
for complex contact states involving multiple principal
contacts [36.126].
An approach was introduced [36.127] to convert au-
tomatically a compliant path of contact conﬁgurations
across a sequence of contact states into wrench, twist,
and position control signals w.t/, t.t/, and p.t/ for a hy-
brid controller to execute the plan. The approach was
experimentally veriﬁed successfully.
More recently, an approach was introduced [36.128]
to achieve force control by estimating contact force/
torque from the joint torques without using a force
sensor for the end-effector force/torque or torque sen-
sors for individual joints. By reducing the integral gain
of the joint PID (proportional–integral–derivative) con-
troller, the approach acts like a high-pass ﬁlter to detect
sharp force/torque changes more effectively, which of-
ten indicates contact state changes. Combining such
detection with position control, the approach was able
to execute an assembly motion plan successfully, even
though compliant motion could not always be main-
tained with position control.
Other approaches to realize force control without
a force sensor requires the dynamic model of the ma-
nipulator [36.128–130].
However, there is not yet a full integration of
planning, online contact state identiﬁcation, online re-
planning (to deal with contact states that are off the
preplanned path due to uncertainty), and compliant mo-
tion control.

Part D | 36.5
918
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
36.5 Unifying Feedback Control and Planning
In previous sections we discussed task-level control
methods and planning algorithms. Both task-level con-
trol and planning methods are able to address speciﬁc
constraints imposed on robot motion in the context of
manipulation tasks. However, as illustrated in Fig. 36.3,
neither of these categories of methods is able to address
all constraints completely. Control remains susceptible
to local minima and thus cannot guarantee that a par-
ticular motion will lead to the desired result. Planning
methods, on the other hand, overcome the problem of
local minima by projecting possible motions into the
future to predict if a sequence of motion will lead to
success. Given certain assumptions, the resulting plan
can be guaranteed to succeed. However, the compu-
tations associated with this process are generally too
computationally complex to satisfy the feedback re-
quirements of manipulation tasks. Unfortunately, this
means that control and motion planning by themselves
are unable to address the problem of moving robots for
general manipulations tasks.
In this ﬁnal section of this chapter, we will review
efforts to combine the advantages of control methods
and planning methods into a single approach to deter-
mine the motion of a robot. These efforts aim to create
methods that avoid the susceptibility to local minima
while satisfying the feedback requirements. Early at-
tempts of integrating planning and control occurred in
the early 1990s. Not all of these efforts are speciﬁcally
directed at manipulation but many contain insights rel-
evant to the topic. In this section, we will review these
efforts and also discuss some of the more recent re-
search efforts aimed at unifying motion planning and
feedback control.
Motion planning (Chap. 7) and motion control
(Chap. 8) have traditionally been regarded as two dis-
tinct areas of research. However, these areas have many
features in common. Both areas are concerned with the
motion of robotic mechanisms, and more importantly
planning and control methods both determine a repre-
sentation that maps robot state to robot motion. In the
case of feedback control, this representation is a po-
tential function deﬁned for a given region of the state
space. The gradient of the potential function at a spe-
ciﬁc state encodes the motion command. In contrast,
motion planning determines motion plans. These mo-
tion plans also encode motions for a set of states.
Motion planning and feedback control also differ
in certain aspects. A motion planner generally makes
stronger assumptions than a controller about the envi-
ronment, the ability to assess its state, and the changes
that can occur in the environment. Motion planning also
requires the ability to project the robot’s state into the
future, given its current state and a particular action. By
using this ability together with global information about
the environment, motion planners can determine mo-
tions that are not susceptible to local minima. This pos-
itive characteristic of motion planners, however, results
in signiﬁcantly increased computational cost (Chap. 7).
The large discrepancy in computational requirements
for planning and control and the resulting divergence of
computational techniques may explain the current sep-
aration of the two ﬁelds. Researchers are beginning to
attempt to reverse this separation by devising a uniﬁed
theory of planning and control.
36.5.1 Feedback Motion Planning
Feedback motion planning combines planning and
feedback into a single motion strategy. A planner con-
siders global information to compute a feedback motion
plan free of local minima. Such a feedback motion plan
can be interpreted as a potential function or vector ﬁeld
whose gradient will lead the robot to the goal state
from any reachable part of the state space [36.18]. Local
minima-free potential functions are also called naviga-
tion functions [36.131, 132]. Given the current state of
the robot and the global navigation function, feedback
control is used to determine the robot’s motion. The
consideration of feedback about the robot’s state in the
context of a global navigation function reduces the sus-
ceptibility to sensing and actuation uncertainty.
Feedback motion planning, in principle, can ad-
dress the entire spectrum of motion constraints and their
feedback requirements (Fig. 36.3). Given a global nav-
igation function that considers all motion constraints,
the feedback requirements can easily be satisﬁed, since
the feedback motion plan already speciﬁes the desired
motion command for the entire state space. Obviously,
the major challenge in feedback motion planning is the
computation of such a navigation function or feedback
motion plan. The problem becomes particularly difﬁ-
cult in the context of a manipulation task, since the state
space (or conﬁguration space) changes each time the
robot grasps or releases an object in the environment
(Sect. 36.3). This change makes it necessary to recom-
pute the feedback motion plan. Frequent recomputation
is also necessary in dynamic environments, where the
motion of obstacles can repeatedly invalidate a previ-
ously computed feedback motion plan.
In the remainder of this section, we will review a va-
riety of methods for computing navigation functions. In
general, the problem of efﬁciently computing feedback
motion plans for manipulation tasks remains unsolved.
We therefore also present methods that do not explicitly

Motion for Manipulation Tasks
36.5 Unifying Feedback Control and Planning
919
Part D | 36.5
consider manipulation. These methods can be divided
into three categories: (1) exact methods, (2) approx-
imate methods based on dynamic programming, and
(3) approximate methods based on composing and se-
quencing simpler potential functions.
The earliest exact methods for the computation of
navigation functions are applicable to simple environ-
ments with obstacles of speciﬁc shapes [36.131–133].
Approximate methods based on discretized spaces
(grids) overcome this limitation but possess an ex-
ponential computational complexity in the number of
dimensions of the state space. These approximate nav-
igation functions are called numerical navigation func-
tions [36.134]. These navigation functions are often
used for applications in mobile robotics. Due to the low-
dimensional conﬁguration space associated with mobile
robots, they can generally solve motion planning prob-
lems robustly and efﬁciently.
Some physical processes, such as heat transfer or
ﬂuid ﬂow, can be described by a speciﬁc type of dif-
ferential equation, called harmonic functions. These
functions possess properties that make them suitable
as navigation functions [36.135–139]. Navigation func-
tions based on harmonic functions are most commonly
computed in an approximate, iterative fashion. The
requirement for iterative computation increases the
computational cost relative to the simpler numerical
navigation functions [36.134].
More recent methods for the computation of numer-
ical navigation functions consider differential motion
constraints at a signiﬁcantly reduced computational
cost [36.140]. These methods rely on classical numer-
ical dynamic programming techniques and numerical
optimal control. However, in spite of their reduced
computational complexity, these methods remain too
computationally costly to be applied to manipula-
tion tasks with many degrees of freedom in dynamic
environments.
Navigation functions can also be computed by com-
posing local potential functions based on global infor-
mation. This is illustrated in Fig. 36.22. The goal is
to compute a navigation function for the entire conﬁg-
uration space C. This is accomplished by sequencing
overlapping funnels. Each of the funnels represents
a simple, local potential function. By following the
gradient of this potential function, motion commands
can be determined for a subset of the conﬁguration
space. If the funnels are sequenced correctly, the com-
position of local funnels can yield a global feedback
plan. This feedback plan can be viewed as a hybrid
system [36.141] in which the sequencing of funnels
represents a discrete transition structure, whereas the
individual controllers operate in a continuous domain.
The composition of funnels is considered planning. The
consideration of global information during the planning
permits to determine a funnel composition that avoids
local minima.
One of the earliest methods based on the global
composition of local funnels was proposed by Choi
and Latombe [36.142]. In this method, the state space
of the robot is decomposed into convex regions. The
connectivity of these regions is analyzed to determine
global information about the state space. This infor-
mation can be used to combine simple, local potential
functions, one for each convex regions of state space,
into a local minima-free potential function. More rigor-
ous approaches based on this idea have been developed.
These approaches can consider the dynamics of the
robot and nonholonomic motion constraints [36.143–
145]. These methods have only been applied to low-
dimensional state spaces and cannot easily be applied
to manipulation tasks.
The random neighborhood graph [36.146] is a sam-
pling-based method of computing a decomposition of
the overall state space. As before, a navigation function
can be computed by analyzing the global connectiv-
ity of the decomposition and imposing adequate local
potential functions for each subdivision. A special-
ized method following the same principle for planar
robots in polygonal environments has also been pro-
posed [36.147]. The idea of composing local potential
functions has also been applied successfully to a com-
plex robot control task [36.148]. Finally, in [36.149]
a general and efﬁcient method of computing a smooth
feedback plan over a cylindrical algebraic decomposi-
tion of conﬁguration space has been proposed.
The computation of a navigation function over the
entire conﬁguration space quickly becomes intractable
as the dimensionality of the space increases. To over-
come this challenge, in particular in the context of
autonomous mobile manipulation, workspace heuristics
have been employed to determine a navigation func-
tion efﬁciently. This navigation function does not cover
the entire conﬁguration space but only those regions
heuristically determined to be relevant to the motion
problem [36.150]. This method of generating feedback
C
Fig. 36.22 Composing funnels into a navigation function

Part D | 36.6
920
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
plans is able to satisfy the various motion constraints
depicted in Fig. 36.3 and their respective feedback re-
quirements.
36.5.2 Augmenting Global Plans
with Feedback
The manipulation planning techniques described in
Sect. 36.3 are not susceptible to local minima, as they
consider global state space information. Due to the
computational complexity associated with the consider-
ation of global information, these planning techniques
are not able to satisfy the feedback requirements of ma-
nipulation tasks. However, the required frequency of
feedback about global motion are relatively low: the
global connectivity of the conﬁguration space changes
relatively infrequently (Fig. 36.3). It would therefore be
possible to consider feedback for global motion at the
slow rates the planner can accommodate, while consid-
ering feedback for other motion constraints at higher
frequencies. To achieve this, global motion plans have
to be augmented with reactive components that incre-
mentally modify the global plan in response to feedback
from the environment. As long as the global connec-
tivity information captured by the plan remains valid,
the incremental modiﬁcations can ensure that all other
motion constraints, ranging from task requirements to
reactive obstacles avoidance, are satisﬁed.
The elastic-band framework [36.151] augments
global plans with reactive obstacle avoidance. A global
conﬁguration space path, determined by a planner, is
covered with local potential functions, each of which is
derived from the local distribution of obstacles around
the path. These local potentials cause the path to deform
so as to maintain a minimum distance from obsta-
cles. Visually, the path behaves as an elastic band
that is deformed by the motion of obstacles. The lo-
cal potential functions, together with the global path,
can be viewed as a navigation function for a lo-
cal region of the conﬁguration space. Integrated with
a global planner and replanner, the elastic-band frame-
work permits real-time obstacle avoidance that is not
susceptible to local minima. However, the feedback
frequency for global motion remains limited by the
global motion planner. Speciﬁc task constraints have
not been integrated into the elastic-band framework;
consequently, its application to manipulation tasks is
limited.
In its original formulation, the elastic-band frame-
work assumed that all degrees of freedom of the robot
are holonomic. An extended formulation augments mo-
tion paths for nonholonomic platforms with reactive
components [36.152].
The elastic-strip framework [36.153] also augments
global motion plans with reactive obstacle avoidance.
In addition to reactive obstacle avoidance, however,
the elastic-strip framework can accommodate task con-
straints. Similarly to an elastic band, an elastic strip
covers a global path with local potential functions. In
contrast to the elastic-band framework, these potential
functions are based on task-level controllers (Sect. 36.2)
and therefore allow the task-consistent modiﬁcation of
the global path. The elastic-strip framework is therefore
well suited for the execution of manipulation plans in
dynamic environments. An elastic strip will be incre-
mentally modiﬁed to represent a constraint-consistent
trajectory, as long as the global information captured
by the underlying plan remains valid. The elastic-strip
framework has been applied to a variety of manipula-
tion tasks on a mobile manipulation platform.
Extending the elastic-band and elastic-strips frame-
works, the elastic-roadmap framework combines re-
active task-level control with efﬁcient global motion
planning [36.150]. The elastic roadmap represents a hy-
brid system of task-level controllers that are composed
into a navigation function, thereby satisfying the motion
constraints depicted in Fig. 36.3 and their respective
feedback requirements.
36.6 Conclusions and Further Reading
In this chapter, an overview of motion generation and
control strategies in the context of robotic manipula-
tion tasks has been provided. Issues related to modeling
the interfaces between the robot and the environment at
the different time scales of motion and incorporating
sensing and feedback were considered. Manipulation
planning was introduced as an extension to the ba-
sic motion planning problem, which can be modeled
as a hybrid system of continuous conﬁguration spaces
arising from the act of grasping and moving parts in
the environment. The important example of assem-
bly motion has been discussed through the analysis of
contact states and compliant motion control. The op-
erational space framework, as described in Sect. 36.2,
permits the position and force control of operational
points on a serial-chain manipulator. A number of ex-
tensions have been proposed in the literature, extending
the framework to situations with multiple concurrent
contact points, cooperative manipulation scenarios, and
branching kinematic chains. For manipulation plan-

Motion for Manipulation Tasks
36.6 Conclusions and Further Reading
921
Part D | 36.6
ning, extensions involving grasp and regrasp planning,
multiple robots, multiple parts, and movable obstacles
have been considered. In this section we will brieﬂy
discuss these extensions and refer to the appropriate
literature.
36.6.1 General Contact Models
The hybrid force/motion control described by Raibert
and Craig [36.154] has been shown to have shortcom-
ings [36.155]. A general contact model for dynamically
decoupled force/motion control in the context of op-
erational space control that overcomes these problems
has been presented in [36.155]. This general contact
model has been extended into a compliant motion con-
trol framework to enable force control for multiple
contact points [36.126] in nonrigid environments, and
to enable force control for multiple contact points on
different links of a kinematic chain [36.156]. The oper-
ational space framework for task-level control has been
applied for the real-time simulation of complex dy-
namic environments [36.157]. Contact points between
objects in the environment are modeled as operation
points, resulting in a mathematically elegant framework
for resolving impulses and contact constraints for mov-
ing bodies.
36.6.2 Cooperative Manipulation Control
If multiple task-level controlled robots collaborate to
manipulate an object, they form a closed kinematic
chain that is connected through the object. The dy-
namics of the entire system can be described using
the notion of an augmented object [36.158, 159], in
which the dynamics of the manipulators and the object
are combined to form a model of the overall system.
The internal forces that occur at the grasp points dur-
ing motion can be modeled using the virtual linkage
framework [36.160]. A number of alternative strate-
gies for the cooperative manipulation of multiple robots
outside of the operational space framework have been
proposed [36.161–168].
36.6.3 Control of Branching Mechanisms
So far, we have implicitly assumed that the task-con-
trolled robot consists of a single kinematic chain. This
assumption does not hold in the case of kinemati-
cally more complex mechanisms, such as humanoid
robots (Chap. 67). These robots can consist of multi-
ple branching kinematic chains. If we consider the torso
of a humanoid robot to be the robot’s base, for exam-
ple, then the legs, arms, and the head represent ﬁve
kinematic chains attached to this base. We call such
a mechanism a branching mechanism if it does not con-
tain any closed kinematic loops. Tasks performed by
a branching mechanism may require the speciﬁcation
of operational points on any one of those branches; for
example, while the legs perform locomotion the hands
achieve a manipulation task and the head is oriented to
maintain visibility of the manipulated object.
The operational space framework has been extended
to task-level control of branching mechanisms [36.169].
This extension combined operational points and asso-
ciated Jacobians and computes an operational space
inertia matrix that combines all operational points. This
matrix can be computed efﬁciently with an algorithm
that in practice is linear in the number of operational
points [36.170, 171]. More recently, the operational
space framework has been applied to quadrupedal lo-
comotion [36.172].
36.6.4 Nonholonomic Mobile Manipulation
All previously discussed work on task-level control
assumes that the degrees of freedom are holonomic
(Chap. 40). For manipulator arms this is generally
a valid assumption. The most common type of mobil-
ity platform, however, is based on either differential
drives, synchro-drives, or Ackerman steerings (point
to a section), all of which are subject to nonholo-
nomic constraints. The operational space framework
has been extended to mobile manipulation platforms
that combine a nonholonomic mobility platform with
a holonomic manipulator arm [36.173–175], enabling
the task-level control of a large class of mobile manip-
ulation platforms.
36.6.5 Learning Models with Uncertainty
The efﬁcacy of operational space control depends on
the accuracy of the dynamic model of the robot. In par-
ticular when multiple behaviors are executed using null-
space projections, modeling errors can have signiﬁcant
effects. To overcome the reliance on accurate dynamic
models, reinforcement learning can be used to learn op-
erational space controllers [36.176].
36.6.6 Grasping and Regrasp Planning
Deciding the intermediate stable conﬁgurations for
a part necessary to complete a manipulation task and
selecting proper grasps are both difﬁcult problems in
themselves that operate over a continuum of possible
solutions. Simeon et al. developed a manipulation plan-
ning framework that considers continuous grasps and
placements [36.177]. However, selecting from among
all possible grasp conﬁgurations and deciding when

Part D | 36.6
922
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
to regrasp is still an open research problem. For an
overview of various grasp quality metrics, see Miller
and Allen [36.178, 179] and Chap. 38.
36.6.7 Multiple Parts
The manipulation planning framework nicely general-
izes to multiple parts, P1; : : : ; Pk. Each part has its
own C-space, and C is formed by taking the Cartesian
product of all the part C-spaces with the manipula-
tor C-space. The set Cadm is deﬁned in a similar way,
but now part–part collisions also have to be removed,
in addition to part–manipulator, manipulator–obstacle,
and part–obstacle collisions. The deﬁnition of Cstable re-
quires that all parts be in stable conﬁgurations; the parts
may even be allowed to stack on top of each other. The
deﬁnition of Cgrasp requires that one part is grasped and
all other parts are stable. There are still two modes, de-
pending on whether the manipulator is grasping a part.
Once again, transitions occur only when the robot is in
Ctrans D Cstable \ Cgrasp.
36.6.8 Planning for Multiple Robots
Generalizing to k robots would lead to 2k modes, in
which each mode indicates whether each robot is grasp-
ing a part. Multiple robots may even be allowed to grasp
the same part, which leads to the interesting problem of
planning for closed kinematic chains and cooperative
motion (Chap. 39). Koga addressed multi-arm manipu-
lation planning where the same object must be grasped
and moved by several manipulator arms [36.21]. An-
other generalization could allow a single robot to grasp
more than one part simultaneously.
36.6.9 Planning
for Closed Kinematic Chains
The subspace of C that results from maintaining kine-
matic closure arises when multiple robots grasp the
same part, or even when multiple ﬁngers of the same
hand grasp a single part (Chap. 19). Planning in this
context requires that paths remain on a lower-dimen-
sional variety for which a parameterization is not avail-
able. Planning the motion of parallel mechanisms or
other systems with loops typically requires maintaining
multiple closure constraints simultaneously (Chap. 18).
36.6.10 Planning with Movable Obstacles
In some cases, the robot may be allowed to reposi-
tion obstacles in the environment rather than simply
avoid them. Wilfong ﬁrst addressed motion planning
in the presence of movable obstacles [36.180]. Wil-
fong proved that the problem is PSPACE-hard even
in two-dimensional environments where the ﬁnal po-
sitions of all movable objects are speciﬁed. Erdmann
and Lozano-Perez considered coordinated planning for
multiple moving objects [36.181]. Alami et al. pre-
sented a general algorithm for the case of one robot
and one movable object and formulated the space
of grasping conﬁgurations into a ﬁnite number of
cells [36.17]. Chen and Hwang developed a plan-
ner for a circular robot that is allowed to push ob-
jects aside as it moves [36.182]. Stilman and Kuffner
considered movable obstacles in the context of nav-
igation planning [36.183], and manipulation plan-
ning [36.184]. Nieuwenhuisen et al. also developed
a general framework for planning with movable obsta-
cles [36.185].
36.6.11 Nonprehensile Manipulation
Lynch and Mason explored scenarios in which grasping
operations are replaced by pushing operations [36.186].
The space of stable pushing directions imposes non-
holonomic constraints on the motion of the robot,
which opens up issues related to controllability. Re-
lated issues also arise in the context of part-feed-
ers and manipulation for manufacturing and assembly
(Chap. 54).
36.6.12 Assembly Motion Extensions
The work in assembly motion described in this chapter
has focused on rigid-part assembly, and the parts con-
sidered are mostly polyhedral or of simple nonpolyhe-
dral shapes, such as round pegs and holes. More recent
work on contact state analysis for curved objects can be
found in [36.187]. An emerging ﬁeld in assembly is mi-
cro/nanoassembly (
VIDEO 359 ; Chap. 27). Flexible
or deformable part assembly has also begun to attract
attention [36.188–190]. Virtual assembly [36.191] for
simulation and prototyping is another interesting area
of study.

Motion for Manipulation Tasks
References
923
Part D | 36
Video-References
VIDEO 356
Reducing uncertainty in robotics surface assembly tasks
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/36/videodetails/356
VIDEO 357
Autonomous continuum grasping
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/36/videodetails/357
VIDEO 358
Robotic assembly of emergency stop buttons
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/36/videodetails/358
VIDEO 359
Meso-scale manipulation: System, modeling, planning and control
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/36/videodetails/359
VIDEO 360
Grasp and multi-fingers-3 cylindrical-peg-in-hole demonstration using manipulation primitives
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/36/videodetails/360
VIDEO 361
Demonstration of multi-sensor integration in industrial manipulation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/36/videodetails/361
VIDEO 363
Control pre-imaging for multifingered grasp synthesis
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/36/videodetails/363
VIDEO 364
Robust and fast manipulation of objects with multi-fingered hands
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/36/videodetails/364
VIDEO 366
Whole quadruped manipulation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/36/videodetails/366
VIDEO 367
The mobipulator
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/36/videodetails/367
VIDEO 368
Handling of a single object by multiple mobile robots based on caster-like dynamics
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/36/videodetails/368
VIDEO 369
Rollin’ Justin – Mobile platform with variable base
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/36/videodetails/369
VIDEO 370
Learning to place new objects
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/36/videodetails/370
References
36.1
M.T. Mason: Mechanics of Robotic Manipulation
(MIT Press, Cambridge 2001)
36.2
H. Inoue: Force Feedback in Precise Assembly
Tasks, Tech. Rep. Vol. 308 (Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory, MIT, Cambridge 1974)
36.3
T. Lozano-Pérez, M. Mason, R.H. Taylor: Automatic
synthesis of fine-motion strategies for robots, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 31(1), 3–24 (1984)
36.4
O. Khatib: A unified approach to motion and force
control of robot manipulators: The operational
space formulation, Int. J. Robotics Autom. 3(1),
43–53 (1987)
36.5
O. Khatib, K. Yokoi, O. Brock, K.-S. Chang, A. Casal:
Robots in human environments, Arch. Control Sci.
11(3/4), 123–138 (2001)
36.6
G. Strang: Linear Algegra and Its Applications
(Brooks Cole, New York 1988)
36.7
H. Seraji: An on-line approach to coordinated
mobility and manipulation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Atlanta, Vol. 1 (1993)
pp. 28–35
36.8
J.M.
Cameron,
D.C.
MacKenzie,
K.R.
Ward,
R.C. Arkin, W.J. Book: Reactive control for mobile
manipulation, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA), Atlanta, Vol. 3 (1993) pp. 228–235
36.9
M. Egerstedt, X. Hu: Coordinated trajectory fol-
lowing for mobile manipulation, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), San Francisco (2000)
36.10
P. Ögren, M. Egerstedt, X. Hu: Reactive mobile
manipulation using dyanmic trajectory tracking,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), San
Francicso (2000) pp. 3473–3478
36.11
J. Tan, N. Xi, Y. Wang: Integrated task plan-
ning and control for mobile manipulators, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 22(5), 337–354 (2003)
36.12
Y. Yamamoto, X. Yun: Unified analysis on mobil-
ity and manipulability of mobile manipulators,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), De-
troit (1999) pp. 1200–1206
36.13
L. Sentis, O. Khatib: Control of free-floating hu-
manoid robots through task prioritization, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Barcelona
(2005)
36.14
L. Sentis, O. Khatib: Synthesis of whole-body be-
haviors through hierarchical control of behavioral
primitives, Int. J. Hum. Robotics 2(4), 505–518
(2005)
36.15
O. Khatib: Real-time obstacle avoidance for ma-
nipulators and mobile robots, Int. J. Robotics Res.
5(1), 90–98 (1986)
36.16
M. Huber, R.A. Grupen: A feedback control struc-
ture for on-line learning tasks, Robotics Auton.
Syst. 22(3-4), 303–315 (1997)
36.17
R. Alami, J.P. Laumond, T. Siméon: Two ma-
nipulation planning algorithms, Proc. Workshop
Algorithm. Found. Robotics (1994)
36.18
S.M. LaValle: Planning Algorithms (Cambridge
Univ., Cambridge 2006)
36.19
R. Grossman, A. Nerode, A. Ravn, H. Rischel (Eds.):
Hybrid Systems (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1993)

Part D | 36
924
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
36.20
J.M. Ahuactzin, K. Gupta, E. Mazer: Manipulation
planning for redundant robots: A practical ap-
proach, Int. J. Robotics Res. 17(7), 731–747 (1998)
36.21
Y. Koga: On Computing Multi-Arm Manipula-
tion Trajectories, Ph.D. Thesis (Stanford University,
Stanford 1995)
36.22
D. Bertram, J.J. Kuffner, T. Asfour, R. Dillman:
A unified approach to inverse kinematics and
path planning for redundant manipulators, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006)
pp. 1874–1879
36.23
D. Trivedi, C.D. Rahn, W.M. Kier, I.D. Walker: Soft
robotics: Biological inspiration, state of the art,
and future research, Appl. Bionics Biomech. 5(3),
99–117 (2008)
36.24
B.A. Jones, I.D. Walker: Kinematics for multisec-
tion continuum robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics 22(1),
43–55 (2006)
36.25
S. Neppalli, M.A. Csencsits, B.A. Jones, I. Walker:
A geometrical approach to inverse kinematics for
continuum manipulators, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2008) pp. 3565–3570
36.26
J. Li, J. Xiao: Determining grasping configura-
tions for a spatial continuum manipulator, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011)
pp. 4207–4214
36.27
J. Xiao, R. Vatcha: Real-time adaptive motion
planning for a continuum manipulator, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2010)
pp. 5919–5926
36.28
J. Li, J. Xiao: Progressive generation of force-clo-
sure grasps for an n-section continuum manip-
ulator, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Auto. (ICRA)
(2013) pp. 4016–4022
36.29
J. Li, J. Xiao: Progressive, continuum grasping in
cluttered space, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2013) pp. 4563–4568
36.30
G.S. Chirikjian, J.W. Burdick: Kinematically opti-
mal hyperredundant manipulator configurations,
IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 11(6), 794–798 (1995)
36.31
G. Boothroyd: Assembly Automation and Product
Design, 2nd edn. (Taylor Francis, Boca Raton 2005)
36.32
D. Whitney, O.L. Gilbert, M. Jastrzebski: Repre-
sentation of geometric variations using matrix
transforms for statistical tolerance analysis in as-
semblies, Res. Eng. Des. 64, 191–210 (1994)
36.33
P. Jimenez: Survey on assembly sequencing:
A combinatorial and geometrical perspective,
J. Intell. Manuf. l24, 235–250 (2013)
36.34
B. Shirinzadeh: Issues in the design of the recon-
figurable fixture modules for robotic assembly,
J. Manuf. Syst. 121, 1–14 (1993)
36.35
T. Lozano-Pérez: Spatial planning: A configura-
tion space approach, IEEE Trans. Comput. C-32(2),
108–120 (1983)
36.36
R. Desai: On Fine Motion in Mechanical Assembly
in Presence of Uncertainty, Ph.D. Thesis (Univer-
sity of Michigan, Ann Arbor 1989)
36.37
J. Xiao: Automatic determination of topological
contacts in the presence of sensing uncertainties,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), At-
lanta (1993) pp. 65–70
36.38
J. Xiao, X. Ji: On automatic generation of high-
level contact state space, Int. J. Robotics Res.
20(7), 584–606 (2001)
36.39
S.N. Simunovic: Force information in assembly
processes, Proc. 5th Int. Symp. Ind. Robots (1975)
pp. 415–431
36.40
S.H. Drake: Using Compliance in Lieu of Sen-
sory Feedback for Automatic Assembly, Ph.D. The-
sis (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cam-
bridge 1989)
36.41
D.E. Whitney: Quasi-static assembly of compli-
antly supported rigid parts, ASME J. Dyn. Syst.
Meas. Control 104, 65–77 (1982)
36.42
R.L. Hollis: A six-degree-of-freedom magneti-
cally levitated variable compliance fine-motion
wrist: Design, modeling, and control, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 7(3), 320–332 (1991)
36.43
S. Joo, F. Miyazaki: Development of variable RCC
and ITS application, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS), Victoria, Vol. 3 (1998) pp. 1326–
1332
36.44
H. Kazerooni: Direct-drive active compliant end
effector (active RCC), IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 4(3),
324–333 (1988)
36.45
R.H. Sturges, S. Laowattana: Fine motion plan-
ning through constraint network analysis, Proc.
Int. Symp. Assem. Task Plan. (1995) pp. 160–170
36.46
D.E. Whitney: Historic perspective and state of the
art in robot force control, Int. J. Robotics Res. 6(1),
3–14 (1987)
36.47
M. Peshkin: Programmed compliance for error
corrective assembly, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
6(4), 473–482 (1990)
36.48
J.M. Schimmels, M.A. Peshkin: Admittance ma-
trix design for force-guided assembly, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 8(2), 213–227 (1992)
36.49
J.M. Schimmels: A linear space of admittance
control laws that guarantees force assembly with
friction, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 13(5), 656–
667 (1997)
36.50
S. Hirai, T. Inatsugi, K. Iwata: Learning of admit-
tance matrix elements for manipulative opera-
tions, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (1996) pp. 763–768
36.51
S. Lee, H. Asada:
A
perturbation/correlation
method for force guided robot assembly, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 15(4), 764–773 (1999)
36.52
H. Asada: Representation and learning of non-
linear compliance using neural nets, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 9(6), 863–867 (1993)
36.53
J. Simons, H. Van Brussel, J. De Schutter, J. Ver-
haert: A self-learning automaton with variable
resolution for high precision assembly by in-
dustrial robots, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 27(5),
1109–1113 (1982)
36.54
V. Gullapalli, J.A. Franklin, H. Benbrahim: Acquir-
ing robot skills via reinforcement learning, IEEE
Control Syst. 14(1), 13–24 (1994)
36.55
Q. Wang, J. De Schutter, W. Witvrouw, S. Graves:
Derivation of compliant motion programs based
on human demonstration, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1996) pp. 2616–2621

Motion for Manipulation Tasks
References
925
Part D | 36
36.56
R. Cortesao, R. Koeppe, U. Nunes, G. Hirzinger:
Data fusion for robotic assembly tasks based on
human skills, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 20(6),
941–952 (2004)
36.57
K. Ikeuchi, T. Suehiro: Toward an assembly plan
from observation. Part I: Task recognition with
polyhedral objects, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
10(3), 368–385 (1994)
36.58
H. Onda, H. Hirokawa, F. Tomita, T. Suehiro,
K. Takase: Assembly motion teaching system using
position/forcesimulator-generating control pro-
gram, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (1997) pp. 938–945
36.59
H. Onda, T. Suehiro, K. Kitagaki: Teaching by
demonstration of assembly motion in VR – non-
deterministic search-type motion in the teaching
stage, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2002) pp. 3066–3072
36.60
Y. Kobari, T. Nammoto, J. Kinugawa, K. Kosuge:
Vision based compliant motion control for part
assembly, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2013) pp. 293–298
36.61
T. Lozano-Pérez, M.T. Mason, R.H. Taylor: Au-
tomatic synthesis of fine-motion strategies for
robot, Int. J. Robotics Res. 31(1), 3–24 (1984)
36.62
B.R. Donald: Error Detection and Recovery in
Robotics (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1989)
36.63
J. Canny: On computability of fine motion plans,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1989)
pp. 177–182
36.64
M. Erdmann: Using backprojections for fine mo-
tion planning with uncertainty, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 5(1), 19–45 (1986)
36.65
J.C. Latombe: Robot Motion Planning (Kluwer,
Dordrecht 1991)
36.66
B. Dufay, J.C. Latombe: An approach to automatic
programming based on inductive learning, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 3(4), 3–20 (1984)
36.67
H. Asada, S. Hirai: Towards a symbolic-level force
feedback: Recognition of assembly process states,
Proc. Int. Symp. Robotics Res. (1989) pp. 290–
295
36.68
J. Xiao, R. Volz: On replanning for assembly tasks
using robots in the presence of uncertainties,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1989)
pp. 638–645
36.69
J. Xiao: Replanning with compliant rotations in
the presence of uncertainties, Proc. Int. Symp. In-
tell. Control, Glasgow (1992) pp. 102–107
36.70
G. Dakin, R. Popplestone: Simplified fine-motion
planning in generalized contact space, Proc. Int.
Symp. Intell. Control (1992) pp. 281–287
36.71
G. Dakin, R. Popplestone: Contact space analysis
for narrow-clearance assemblies, Proc. Int. Symp.
Intell. Control (1993) pp. 542–547
36.72
J. Rosell, L. Basañez, R. Suárez: Compliant-mo-
tion planning and execution for robotic assembly,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1999)
pp. 2774–2779
36.73
R. Taylor: The Synthesis of Manipulator Control
Programs from Task-Level Specifications, Ph.D.
Thesis (Stanford University, Stanford 1976)
36.74
R.A. Brooks: Symbolic error analysis and robot
planning, Int. J. Robotics Res. 1(4), 29–68 (1982)
36.75
R.A. Smith, P. Cheeseman: On the representa-
tion and estimation of spatial uncertaity, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 5(4), 56–68 (1986)
36.76
S.-F. Su, C. Lee: Manipulation and propagation
of uncertainty and verification of applicability of
actions in assembly tasks, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man
Cybern. 22(6), 1376–1389 (1992)
36.77
S.-F. Su, C. Lee, W. Hsu: Automatic generation of
goal regions for assembly tasks in the presence
of uncertainty, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 12(2),
313–323 (1996)
36.78
J. Hopcroft, G. Wilfong: Motion of objects in con-
tact, Int. J. Robotics Res. 4(4), 32–46 (1986)
36.79
F. Avnaim, J.D. Boissonnat, B. Faverjon: A practical
exact motion planning algorithm for polygonal
objects amidst polygonal obstacles, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1988) pp. 1656–1661
36.80
R. Brost: Computing metric and topological prop-
erties of c-space obstacles, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1989) pp. 170–176
36.81
B. Donald: A search algorithm for motion plan-
ning with six degrees of freedom, Artif. Intell.
31(3), 295–353 (1987)
36.82
L. Joskowicz, R.H. Taylor: Interference-free inser-
tion of a solid body into a cavity: An algorithm
and a medical application, Int. J. Robotics Res.
15(3), 211–229 (1996)
36.83
H. Hirukawa: On motion planning of polyhe-
dra in contact, Proc. Workshop Algorithm. Found.
Robotics, Toulouse (1996) pp. 381–391
36.84
S.J. Buckley: Planning compliant motion strate-
gies, Proc. Int.
Symp. Intell. Control
(1988)
pp. 338–343
36.85
E. Sacks: Path planning for planar articulated
robots using configuration spaces and compliant
motion, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 19(3), 381–
390 (2003)
36.86
C. Laugier: Planning fine motion strategies by
reasoning in the contact space, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1989) pp. 653–659
36.87
B.J. McCarragher, H. Asada: A discrete event ap-
proach to the control of robotic assembly tasks,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1993)
pp. 331–336
36.88
B.J. McCarragher, H. Asada: The discrete event
modeling and trajectory planning of robotic as-
sembly tasks, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 117,
394–400 (1995)
36.89
R. Suárez, L. Basañez, J. Rosell: Using configura-
tion and force sensing in assembly task planning
and execution, Proc. Int. Symp. Assem. Task Plan.
(1995) pp. 273–279
36.90
H. Hirukawa, Y. Papegay, T. Matsui: A motion
planning algorithm for convex polyhedra in con-
tact under translation and rotation, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), San Diego (1994)
pp. 3020–3027
36.91
X. Ji, J. Xiao: Planning motion compliant to com-
plex contact states, Int. J. Robotics Res. 20(6),
446–465 (2001)

Part D | 36
926
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
36.92
L.E. Kavraki, P. Svestka, J.C. Latombe, M. Over-
mars: Probabilistic roadmaps for path planning
in high-dimensional configuration spaces, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 12(4), 566–580 (1996)
36.93
B. Hannaford, P. Lee: Hidden Markov model anal-
ysis of force/torque information in telemanipula-
tion, Int. J. Robotics Res. 10(5), 528–539 (1991)
36.94
G.E. Hovland, B.J. McCarragher: Hidden Markov
models as a process monitor in robotic assembly,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 17(2), 153–168 (1998)
36.95
T. Takahashi, H. Ogata, S. Muto: A method for
analyzing human assembly operations for use in
automatically generating robot commands, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 2, At-
lanta (1993) pp. 695–700
36.96
P. Sikka, B.J. McCarragher: Rule-based contact
monitoring using examples obtained by task
demonstration, Proc. 15th Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. In-
tell., Nagoya (1997) pp. 514–521
36.97
E. Cervera, A. Del Pobil, E. Marta, M. Serna: Per-
ception-based learning for motion in contact in
task planning, J. Intell. Robots Syst. 17(3), 283–308
(1996)
36.98
L.M. Brignone, M. Howarth: A geometrically vali-
dated approach to autonomous robotic assembly,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS),
Lausanne (2002) pp. 1626–1631
36.99
M. Nuttin, J. Rosell, R. Suárez, H. Van Brussel,
L. Basañez, J. Hao: Learning approaches to con-
tact estimation in assembly tasks with robots,
Proc. 3rd Eur. Workshop Learn. Robotics, Herak-
lion (1995)
36.100
L.J. Everett, R. Ravari, R.A. Volz, M. Skubic: Gen-
eralized recognition of single-ended contact for-
mations, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 15(5), 829–
836 (1999)
36.101
M. Skubic, R.A. Volz: Identifying single-ended
contact formations from force sensor patterns,
IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 16(5), 597–603 (2000)
36.102
S. Hirai, H. Asada: Kinematics and statics of ma-
nipulation using the theory of polyhedral convex
cones, Int. J. Robotics Res. 12(5), 434–447 (1993)
36.103
H. Hirukawa, T. Matsui, K. Takase: Automatic de-
termination of possible velocity and applicable
force of frictionless objects in contact from a ge-
ometric model, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 10(3),
309–322 (1994)
36.104
B.J. McCarragher, H. Asada: Qualitative tem-
plate matching using dynamic process models for
state transition recognition of robotic assembly,
ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 115(2), 261–269
(1993)
36.105
T.M.
Schulteis,
P.E.
Dupont,
P.A.
Millman,
R.D. Howe: Automatic identification of remote
environments, Proc. ASME Dyn. Syst. Control Div.,
Atlanta (1996) pp. 451–458
36.106
A.O. Farahat, B.S. Graves, J.C. Trinkle: Identifying
contact formations in the presence of uncertainty,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS),
Pittsburg (1995) pp. 59–64
36.107
J. Xiao, L. Zhang: Contact constraint analysis and
determination of geometrically valid contact for-
mations from possible contact primitives, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 13(3), 456–466 (1997)
36.108
H. Mosemann, T. Bierwirth, F.M. Wahl, S. Stoeter:
Generating polyhedral convex cones from contact
graphs for the identification of assembly process
states, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2000) pp. 744–749
36.109
J. Xiao, L. Zhang: Towards obtaining all possible
contacts – Growing a polyhedron by its location
uncertainty, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 12(4),
553–565 (1996)
36.110
M. Spreng: A probabilistic method to analyze am-
biguous contact situations, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Atlanta (1993) pp. 543–
548
36.111
N. Mimura, Y. Funahashi: Parameter identification
of contact conditions by active force sensing, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), San Diego
(1994) pp. 2645–2650
36.112
B. Eberman: A model-based approach to Car-
tesian
manipulation
contact
sensing,
Int.
J. Robotics Res. 16(4), 508–528 (1997)
36.113
T. Debus, P. Dupont, R. Howe: Contact state es-
timation using multiple model estimation and
Hidden Markov model, Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(4-
5), 399–413 (2004)
36.114
J. De Geeter, H. Van Brussel, J. De Schutter, M. De-
créton: Recognizing and locating objects with
local sensors, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Minneapolis (1996) pp. 3478–3483
36.115
J. De Schutter, H. Bruyninckx, S. Dutré, J. De
Geeter, J. Katupitiya, S. Demey, T. Lefebvre: Es-
timating first-order geometric parameters and
monitoring contact transitions during force-con-
trolled compliant motions, Int. J. Robotics Res.
18(12), 1161–1184 (1999)
36.116
T. Lefebvre, H. Bruyninckx, J. De Schutter: Poly-
hedral contact formation identification for au-
tonomous compliant motion: Exact nonlinear
bayesian filtering, IEEE Trans. Robotics 21(1), 124–
129 (2005)
36.117
T. Lefebvre, H. Bruyninckx, J. De Schutter: On-
line statistical model recognition and state es-
timation for autonomous compliant motion sys-
tems, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. C 35(1), 16–29
(2005)
36.118
K. Gadeyne, T. Lefebvre, H. Bruyninckx: Bayesian
hybrid model-state estimation applied to simul-
taneous contact formation recognition and ge-
ometrical parameter estimation, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 24(8), 615–630 (2005)
36.119
K. Kitagaki, T. Ogasawara, T. Suehiro: Methods to
detect contact state by force sensing in an edge
mating task, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Atlanta (1993) pp. 701–706
36.120
T. Lefebvre, H. Bruyninckx, J. De Schutter: Task
planning with active sensing for autonomous
compliant motion, Int. J. Robotics Res. 24(1), 61–
82 (2005)
36.121
T. Debus, P. Dupont, R. Howe: Distinguishability
and identifiability testing of contact state models,
Adv. Robotics 19(5), 545–566 (2005)

Motion for Manipulation Tasks
References
927
Part D | 36
36.122
W. Meeussen, J. Xiao, J. De Schutter, H. Bruyn-
inckx,
E.
Staffetti:
Automatic
verification
of
contact states taking into account manipula-
tor constraints, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA), New Orleans (2004) pp. 3583–
3588
36.123
N.S. Bedrossian: Classification of singular config-
urations for redundant manipulators, Proc. 1990
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Cincinnati
(1990) pp. 818–823
36.124
F.-T. Cheng, T.-L. Hour, Y.-Y. Sun, T.-H. Chen:
Study and resolution of singularities for a 6-DOF
PUMA manipulator, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern.
B 27(2), 332–343 (1997)
36.125
A. Sarić, J. Xiao, J. Shi: Robotic surface assembly
via contact state transitions, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Autom. Sci. Eng. (CASE) (2013) pp. 954–959
36.126
J. Park, R. Cortesao, O. Khatib: Multi-contact com-
pliant motion control for robotic manipulators,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), New
Orleans (2004) pp. 4789–4794
36.127
W. Meeussen, E. Staffetti, H. Bruyninckx, J. Xiao,
J. De Schutter: Integration of planning and ex-
ecution in force controlled compliant motion,
J. Robotics Auton. Syst. 56(5), 437–450 (2008)
36.128
A. Stolt, M. Linderoth, A. Robertsson, R. Johans-
son: Force controlled robotic assembly without
a force sensor, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA), Minneapolis (2012) pp. 1538–1543
36.129
S.
Tachi,
T.
Sakaki,
H.
Arai,
S.
Nishizawa,
J.F. Pelaez-Polo: Impedance control of a direct-
drive manipulator without using force sensors,
Adv. Robotics 5(2), 183–205 (1990)
36.130
M. Van Damme, B. Beyl, V. Vanderborght, V. Grosu,
R.
Van
Ham,
I.
Vanderniepen,
A.
Matthys,
D. Lefeber: Estimating robot end-effector force
from noisy actuator torque measurements, Proc.
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Shanghai (2011)
pp. 1108–1113
36.131
D.E. Koditschek: Exact robot navigation by means
of potential functions: Some topological consid-
erations, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Raleigh (1987) pp. 1–6
36.132
E. Rimon, D.E. Koditschek: Exact robot naviga-
tion using artificial potential fields, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 8(5), 501–518 (1992)
36.133
E. Rimon, D.E. Koditschek: The construction of
analytic diffeomorphisms for exact robot naviga-
tion on star worlds, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA), Scottsdale (1989) pp. 21–26
36.134
J. Barraquand, J.-C. Latombe: Robot motion
planning: A distributed representation approach,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 10(6), 628–649 (1991)
36.135
C.I. Connolly, J.B. Burns, R. Weiss: Path plan-
ning using Laplace’s equation, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Cincinnati (1990)
pp. 2102–2106
36.136
C.I. Connolly, R.A. Grupen: One the applications of
harmonic functions to robotics, J. Robotics Syst.
10(7), 931–946 (1993)
36.137
S.H.J. Feder, E.J.-J. Slotine: Real-time path plan-
ning using harmonic potentials in dynamic en-
vironments, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Albuquerque (1997) pp. 811–874
36.138
J.-O. Kim, P. Khosla: Real-time obstacle avoid-
ance using harmonic potential functions, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Sacramento
(1991) pp. 790–796
36.139
K. Sato: Collision avoidance in multi-dimensional
space using Laplace potential, Proc. 15th Conf.
Robotics Soc. Jpn. (1987) pp. 155–156
36.140
S.M.
LaValle,
P.
Konkimalla:
Algorithms
for
computing numerical optimal feedback motion
strategies, Int. J. Robotics Res. 20(9), 729–752
(2001)
36.141
A. van der Schaft, H. Schumacher: An Introduc-
tion to Hybrid Dynamical Systems (Springer, Belin,
Heidelberg 2000)
36.142
W. Choi, J.-C. Latombe: A reactive architecture
for planning and executing robot motions with
incomplete knowledge, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Vol. 1, Osaka (1991)
pp. 24–29
36.143
D.C. Conner, H. Choset, A.A. Rizzi: Integrated
planning and control for convex-bodied non-
holonomic systems using local feedback control
policies, Proc. Robotics Sci. Syst., Philadelphia
(2006)
36.144
D.C. Conner, A.A. Rizzi, H. Choset: Composition of
local potential functions for global robot control
and navigation, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS), Las Vegas (2003) pp. 3546–
3551
36.145
S.R. Lindemann, S.M. LaValle: Smooth feedback
for car-like vehicles in polygonal environments,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Rome
(2007)
36.146
L. Yang, S.M. LaValle: The sampling-based neigh-
borhood graph: A framework for planning and
executing
feedback
motion
strategies,
Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Taipei
(2003)
36.147
C. Belta, V. Isler, G.J. Pappas: Discrete abstractions
for robot motion planning and control in polyg-
onal environments, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
21(5), 864–871 (2005)
36.148
R.R. Burridge, A.A. Rizzi, D.E. Koditschek: Se-
quential composition of dynamically dexterous
robot behaviors, Int. J. Robotics Res. 18(6), 534–
555 (1999)
36.149
S.R. Lindemann, S.M. LaValle: Computing smooth
feedback plans over cylindrical algebraic decom-
positions, Proc. Robotics Sci. Syst. (RSS), Philade-
phia (2006)
36.150
Y. Yang, O. Brock: Elastic roadmaps: Globally task-
consitent motion for autonomous mobile manip-
ulation, Proc. Robotics Sci. Syst. (RSS), Philade-
phia (2006)
36.151
S. Quinlan, O. Khatib: Elastic bands: Connect-
ing path planning and control, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 2, Atlanta (1993)
pp. 802–807
36.152
M. Khatib, H. Jaouni, R. Chatila, J.-P. Lau-
mond: How to implement dynamic paths, Proc.

Part D | 36
928
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Int. Symp. Exp. Robotics (1997) pp. 225–236,
Preprints
36.153
O. Brock, O. Khatib: Elastic strips: A framework for
motion generation in human environments, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 21(12), 1031–1052 (2002)
36.154
M.H. Raibert, J.J. Craig: Hybrid position/force con-
trol of manipulators, J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control
103(2), 126–133 (1981)
36.155
R. Featherstone, S. Sonck, O. Khatib: A gen-
eral contact model for dynamically-decoupled
force/motion control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA), Detroit (1999) pp. 3281–3286
36.156
J. Park, O. Khatib: Multi-link multi-contact force
control for manipulators, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Barcelona (2005)
36.157
D.C. Ruspini, O. Khatib: A framework for multi-
contact multi-body dynamic simulation and
haptic display, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS), Takamatsu (2000) pp. 1322–
1327
36.158
K.-S. Chang, R. Holmberg, O. Khatib: The aug-
mented object model: Cooperative manipluation
and parallel mechanism dynamics, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), San Francisco (2000)
pp. 470–475
36.159
O. Khatib: Object Manipulation in a multi-effec-
tor robot system. In: Robotics Research 4, ed. by
R. Bolles, B. Roth (MIT Press, Cambridge 1988)
pp. 137–144
36.160
D. Williams, O. Khatib: The virtual linkage:
A model for internal forces in multi-grasp ma-
nipulation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Vol. 1, Altanta (1993) pp. 1030–1035
36.161
J.A. Adams, R. Bajcsy, J. Kosecka, V. Kuma, R. Man-
delbaum, M. Mintz, R. Paul, C. Wang, Y. Ya-
mamoto, X. Yun: Cooperative material handling
by human and robotic agents: Module develop-
ment and system synthesis, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Pittsburgh (1995)
pp. 200–205
36.162
S. Hayati: Hybrid postiion/force control of multi-
arm cooperating robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), San Francisco (1986)
pp. 82–89
36.163
D. Jung, G. Cheng, A. Zelinsky: Experiments in
realizing cooperation between autonomous mo-
bile robots, Proc. Int. Symp. Exp. Robotics (1997)
pp. 513–524
36.164
T.-J. Tarn, A.K. Bejczy, X. Yun: Design of dynamic
control of two cooperating robot arms: Closed
chain formulation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (1987) pp. 7–13
36.165
M. Uchiyama, P. Dauchez: A symmetric hybrid po-
sition/force control scheme for the coordination
of two robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA), Philadelphia (1988) pp. 350–356
36.166
X. Yun, V.R. Kumar: An approach to simultane-
ious control fo trajecotry and integraction forces
in dual-arm configurations, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 7(5), 618–625 (1991)
36.167
Y.F. Zheng, J.Y.S. Luh: Joint torques for control of
two coordinated moving robots, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), San Francisco (1986)
pp. 1375–1380
36.168
T. Bretl, Z. McCarthy: Quasi-static manipulation of
a Kirchhoff elastic rod based on a geometric anal-
ysis of equilibrium configurations, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 33(1), 48–68 (2014)
36.169
J. Russakow, O. Khatib, S.M. Rock: Extended op-
erational space formation for serial-to-parallel
chain (branching) manipulators, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 1, Nagoya (1995)
pp. 1056–1061
36.170
K.-S. Chang, O. Khatib: Operational space dy-
namics: Efficient algorithms for modelling and
control of branching mechanisms, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), San Francisco (2000)
pp. 850–856
36.171
K. Kreutz-Delgado, A. Jain, G. Rodriguez: Recur-
sive formulation of operational space control, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 11(4), 320–328 (1992)
36.172
M. Hutter, H. Sommer, C. Gehring, M. Hoepflinger,
M. Bloesch, R. Siegwart: Quadrupedal locomotion
using hierarchical operational space control, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 33(8), 1047–1062 (2014)
36.173
B. Bayle, J.-Y. Fourquet, M. Renaud: A coordina-
tion strategy for mobile manipulation, Proc. Int.
Conf. Intell. Auton. Syst., Venice (2000) pp. 981–
988
36.174
B. Bayle, J.-Y. Fourquet, M. Renaud: Generalized
path generation for a mobile manipulator, Proc.
Int. Conf. Mech. Des. Prod., Cairo (2000) pp. 57–66
36.175
B. Bayle, J.-Y. Fourquet, M. Renaud: Using ma-
nipulability with nonholonomic mobile manip-
ulators, Proc. Int. Conf. Field Serv. Robotics,
Helsinki (2001) pp. 343–348
36.176
J. Peters, S. Schaal: Reinforcement learning for
operational space control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Rome (2007)
36.177
T. Simeon, J. Cortes, A. Sahbani, J.P. Laumond:
A manipulation planner for pick and place oper-
ations under continuous grasps and placements,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002)
36.178
A. Miller, P. Allen: Examples of 3D grasp quality
computations, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA), Vol. 2 (1999)
36.179
A.T. Miller: Graspit: A Versatile Simulator for
Robotic
Grasping,
Ph.D.
Thesis
(New
York,
Columbia University 2001)
36.180
G. Wilfong: Motion panning in the presence of
movable obstacles, Proc. ACM Symp. Comput.
Geom. (1988) pp. 279–288
36.181
M. Erdmann, T. Lozano-Perez: On multiple mov-
ing objects, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), San Francisco (1986) pp. 1419–1424
36.182
P.C. Chen, Y.K. Hwang: Pracitcal path planning
among movable obstacles, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1991) pp. 444–449
36.183
M. Stilman, J.J. Kuffner: Navigation among mov-
able obstacles: Real-time reasoning in complex
environments, Int. J. Hum. Robotics 2(4), 1–24
(2005)
36.184
M. Stilman, J.-U. Shamburek, J.J. Kuffner, T. As-
four: Manipulation planning among movable ob-

Motion for Manipulation Tasks
References
929
Part D | 36
stacles, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2007)
36.185
D.
Nieuwenhuisen,
A.F.
van
der
Stappen,
M.H.
Overmars:
An
effective
framework
for
path planning amidst movable obstacles, Proc.
Workshop Algorithm. Found. Robotics (2006)
36.186
K.M. Lynch, M.T. Mason: Stable pushing: Mechan-
ics, controllability, and planning, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 15(6), 533–556 (1996)
36.187
P. Tang, J. Xiao: Generation of point-contact
state space between strictly curved objects.
In: Robotics Science and Systems II, ed. by
G.S. Sukhatme, S. Schaal, W. Burgard, D. Fox (MIT
Press, Cambridge 2007) pp. 239–246
36.188
H. Nakagaki, K. Kitagaki, T. Ogasawara, H. Tsuku-
ne: Study of deformation and insertion tasks of
a flexible wire, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (1997) pp. 2397–2402
36.189
W. Kraus Jr., B.J. McCarragher: Case studies in
the manipulation of flexible parts using a hy-
brid position/force approach, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1997) pp. 367–372
36.190
J.Y. Kim, D.J. Kang, H.S. Cho: A flexible parts
assembly algorithm based on a visual sensing
system, Proc. Int. Symp. Assem. Task Plan. (2001)
pp. 417–422
36.191
B.J.
Unger,
A.
Nocolaidis,
P.J.
Berkelman,
A. Thompson, R.L. Klatzky, R.L. Hollis: Compari-
son of 3-D haptic peg-in-hole tasks in real and
virtual environments, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2001) pp. 1751–1756

Multimedia Contents Contact Mod
931
Part D | 37.1
37. Contact Modeling and Manipulation
Imin Kao, Kevin M. Lynch, Joel W. Burdick
Robotic manipulators use contact forces to grasp
and manipulate objects in their environments.
Fixtures rely on contacts to immobilize work-
pieces. Mobile robots and humanoids use wheels
or feet to generate the contact forces that al-
low them to locomote. Modeling of the contact
interface, therefore, is fundamental to analysis,
design, planning, and control of many robotic
tasks.
This chapter presents an overview of the mod-
eling of contact interfaces, with a particular focus
on their use in manipulation tasks, including gras-
pless or nonprehensile manipulation modes such
as pushing. Analysis and design of grasps and
fixtures also depends on contact modeling, and
these are discussed in more detail in Chap. 38.
Sections 37.2–37.5 focus on rigid-body models of
contact. Section 37.2 describes the kinematic con-
straints caused by contact, and Sect. 37.3 describes
the contact forces that may arise with Coulomb
friction. Section 37.4 provides examples of analy-
sis of multicontact manipulation tasks with rigid
bodies and Coulomb friction. Section 37.5 ex-
tends the analysis to manipulation by pushing.
Section 37.6 introduces modeling of contact inter-
faces, kinematic duality, and pressure distribution
and soft contact interface. Section 37.7 describes
the concept of the friction limit surface and il-
lustrates it with an example demonstrating the
construction of a limit surface for a soft contact.
Finally, Sect. 37.8 discusses how these more accu-
rate models can be used in fixture analysis and
design.
37.1
Overview.............................................
931
37.1.1
Choosing a Contact Model ..........
932
37.1.2
Grasp/Manipulation Analysis ......
932
37.2
Kinematics of Rigid-Body Contact.........
932
37.2.1
Contact Constraints....................
933
37.2.2
Collections of Parts ....................
934
37.2.3
Graphical Planar Methods ..........
935
37.3
Forces and Friction ..............................
936
37.3.1
Graphical Planar Methods ..........
937
37.3.2
Duality of Contact Wrenches
and Twist Freedoms...................
937
37.4
Rigid-Body Mechanics with Friction .....
939
37.4.1
Complementarity.......................
939
37.4.2
Quasistatic Assumption..............
940
37.4.3
Examples..................................
940
37.5
Pushing Manipulation..........................
942
37.6
Contact Interfaces and Modeling ..........
943
37.6.1
Modeling of Contact Interface.....
943
37.6.2
Pressure Distribution at Contacts.
945
37.7
Friction Limit Surface ...........................
946
37.7.1
The Friction Limit Surface
at a Soft Contact Interface ..........
947
37.7.2
Example of Constructing
a Friction Limit Surface ..............
948
37.8
Contacts in Grasping
and Fixture Designs .............................
949
37.8.1
Contact Stiffness of Soft Fingers ..
949
37.8.2
Application of Soft Contact Theory
to Fixture Design .......................
950
37.9
Conclusions and Further Reading .........
950
Video-References.........................................
951
References...................................................
951
37.1 Overview
A contact model characterizes both the forces that can
be transmitted through the contact as well as the allowed
relative motions of the contacting bodies. These char-
acteristics are determined by the geometry of the con-

Part D | 37.2
932
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
tacting surfaces and the material properties of the parts,
which dictate friction and possible contact deformation.
37.1.1 Choosing a Contact Model
The choice of a contact model largely depends upon the
application or analysis that must be carried out. When
appropriate analytical models are used, one can deter-
mine if a manipulation plan or ﬁxture design meets de-
sired functional requirements within the model’s limits.
Rigid-Body Models
Many approaches to manipulation, grasp, and ﬁxture
analysis are based on rigid-body models. In the rigid-
body model, no deformations are allowed at the points
or surfaces of contact between two bodies. Instead, con-
tact forces arise from two sources: the constraint of
incompressibility and impenetrability between the rigid
bodies, and surface frictional forces. Rigid-body mod-
els are straightforward to use, lead to computationally
efﬁcient planning algorithms, and are compatible with
solid-modeling software systems. Rigid-body models
are often appropriate for answering qualitative ques-
tions such as will this ﬁxture be able to hold my
workpiece? and for problems involving stiff parts with
low to moderate contact forces.
Rigid-body models are not capable of describing the
full range of contact phenomena, however; for example,
rigid-body models cannot predict the individual contact
forces of a multiple-contact ﬁxture (the static inde-
terminacy problem [37.1, 2]). Furthermore, workpieces
held in ﬁxtures experience non-negligible deformations
in many high-force manufacturing operations [37.3–6].
These deformations, which crucially impact machin-
ing accuracy, cannot be determined from rigid-body
models. Also, a rigid-body model augmented with
a Coulomb friction model can lead to mechanics prob-
lems that have no solution or multiple solutions [37.7–
15]. To overcome the limitations inherent in the rigid-
body model, one must introduce compliance into the
contact model.
Compliant Models
A compliant contact deforms under the inﬂuence of ap-
plied forces. The forces of interaction at the contact are
derived from the compliance or stiffness model. While
compliant contact models are typically more compli-
cated, they have several advantages: they overcome the
static indeterminacy inherent to rigid-body models and
they predict the deformations of grasped or ﬁxtured
parts during loading.
A detailed model of the deformations of real ma-
terials can be quite complex. Consequently, for analy-
sis we often introduce lumped-parameter or reduced-
order compliance models having a limited number of
variables. In this chapter we summarize a reduced-
order quasi-rigid-body approach to modeling that can
model a variety of compliant materials in a way
that is consistent with both the solid mechanics lit-
erature and conventional robot analysis and planning
paradigms.
Finally,
three-dimensional
ﬁnite-element
mod-
els [37.16–18] or similar ideas [37.19, 20] can be used
to analyze workpiece deformations and stresses in ﬁx-
tures. While accurate, these numerical approaches have
some drawbacks, for example, the grasp stiffness matrix
can only be found through difﬁcult numerical proce-
dures. Stiffness matrices are often needed to compute
quality measures that are the basis for optimal grasping
plans or ﬁxturing designs [37.21, 22]. Thus, these nu-
merical approaches are better suited for verifying ﬁnal
ﬁxture designs.
37.1.2 Grasp/Manipulation Analysis
Once a contact model has been chosen, we can use it
to analyze tasks involving multiple contacts. If a part is
subject to multiple contacts, the kinematic constraints
and force freedoms due to the individual contacts must
be combined. This combined analysis facilitates ma-
nipulation planning – choosing the contact locations,
and possibly the motions or forces applied by those
contacts, to achieve the desired behavior of the part.
A prime example is the grasping or ﬁxturing problem:
choosing contact locations, and possibly contact forces,
to prevent motion of a part in the face of external distur-
bances. This well-studied topic is discussed in greater
detail in Chap. 38. Other examples include problems
of partial constraint, such as pushing a part or inserting
a peg into a hole.
37.2 Kinematics of Rigid-Body Contact
Contact kinematics is the study of how two or more
parts can move relative to each other while respecting
the rigid-body impenetrability constraint. It also classi-
ﬁes motion in contact as either rolling or slipping.
Consider two rigid bodies whose position and ori-
entation (conﬁguration) is given by the local coordi-
nate column vectors q1 and q2, respectively. Writing
the composite conﬁguration as q D .qT
1; qT
2/T, we de-

Contact Modeling and Manipulation
37.2 Kinematics of Rigid-Body Contact
933
Part D | 37.2
ﬁne a distance function d.q/ between the parts that is
positive when they are separated, zero when they are
touching, and negative when they are in penetration.
When d.q/ > 0, there are no constraints on the motions
of the parts. When the parts are in contact (d.q/ D 0),
we look at the time derivatives Pd, Rd, etc., to determine
if the parts stay in contact or break apart as they follow
a trajectory q.t/. This can be determined by the follow-
ing table of possibilities
d
Pd
Rd
: : :
> 0
no contact,
< 0
infeasible (penetration),
D 0
> 0
breaking contact,
D 0
< 0
infeasible (penetration),
D 0
D 0
> 0
breaking contact,
D 0
D 0
< 0
infeasible (penetration),
etc.
The contact is maintained only if all time derivatives are
zero.
The ﬁrst two time derivatives are written
Pd D
@d
@q
T
Pq ;
(37.1)
Rd D PqT @2d
@q2 Pq C
@d
@q
T
Rq :
(37.2)
The terms @d=@q and @2d=@q2 carry information about
the local contact geometry. The former corresponds to
the contact normal, while the latter corresponds to the
relative curvature of the parts at the contact.
If contact is maintained, we can classify the contact
as slipping or rolling. Analogous to the table above, the
contact is rolling if and only if there is zero relative tan-
gential velocity, acceleration, etc., between the contact
points on the parts. If the relative tangential velocity is
nonzero, the parts are slipping; if the relative velocity is
zero but relative tangential acceleration or (higher-order
derivatives) is not, slipping is incipient.
In this section we focus on a ﬁrst-order analy-
sis of contact kinematics. A ﬁrst-order analysis con-
cludes that contact is maintained if d.q/ D 0 and Pd D 0.
This local linearization of contact kinematics focuses
on the velocity Pq and the contact normal in @d=@q;
higher-order spatial derivatives of the contact geom-
etry (curvature, etc.) are not considered. While this
is a good starting point, it may occasionally lead to
erroneous conclusions. For example, Rimon and Bur-
dick [37.23–25] showed that a ﬁrst-order analysis may
incorrectly predict mobility of a part in a ﬁxture when
a second-order analysis shows that it is in fact com-
pletely constrained.
Analysis of the kinematics of rolling contact of
parameterized surfaces can be found in [37.26]; see
also [37.27–30].
37.2.1 Contact Constraints
As described in Chap. 2, a rigid body in space has six
degrees of freedom, speciﬁed by the location of the ori-
gin of a coordinate frame P afﬁxed to the part and the
orientation of this coordinate frame relative to an in-
ertial frame O ﬁxed in the world. Let OpP 2 R3 be the
position of the part center of mass and ORP 2 SO.3/ be
the rotation matrix describing the orientation of the part
relative to O. The spatial velocity of the part can be writ-
ten as t 2 R6, sometimes called a twist,
t D

!T; v TT ;
where ! D .!x; !y; !z/T and v D .
x; 
y; 
z/T give the
angular velocity and linear velocity of P in the world
frame O, respectively, such that ! satisﬁes
O PRP D !  ORP
and v satisﬁes
v D OPpP  !  OpP :
It is worth taking a moment to really understand the
spatial velocity of a body. It consists of the body’s an-
gular velocity expressed in the world frame O, along
with the linear velocity of a point as if it were rigidly
attached to the body but currently at the origin of the
world frame. This point need not be physically on the
body. In other words, v is not simply OPpP. This nota-
tion will simplify the following expressions, where all
velocities and forces will be expressed in the common
world frame O. (Be aware that twists are sometimes de-
ﬁned in a body frame instead.)
A point contact acting on the part provides a uni-
lateral constraint which prevents the part from locally
moving against the contact normal. Let x be the loca-
tion of the contact in O. The linear velocity of the point
on the part in contact is
v C D v C !  x :
(We drop the pre-superscripts O for simplicity; for ex-
ample, Ox is written simply as x.) Let Ou be the unit
vector normal pointing into the part (Fig. 37.1). The
ﬁrst-order condition that the part not move into the uni-
lateral constraint can be written
v T
C Ou D .v C !  x/T Ou  0 :
(37.3)

Part D | 37.2
934
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Part
OpP
P
x
O
Contact
uˆ
Fig. 37.1 Notation for a part in contact with a manipulator
or the environment
In other words, the velocity of the part at C cannot have
a component in the opposite direction of the contact
normal. To write this another way, deﬁne a general-
ized force or wrench w consisting of the torque m and
force f acting on the part for a unit force along the con-
tact normal
w D

mT ; f TT D

.x  Ou/T ; OuT	T :
Then (37.3) can be rewritten as
tTw  0 :
(37.4)
If the external constraint point is moving with linear
velocity v ext, (37.4) changes to
tTw  v T
extOu ;
(37.5)
which reduces to (37.4) if the constraint is stationary.
Each inequality of the form (37.5) constrains the ve-
locity of the part to a half-space of its six-dimensional
velocity space bounded by the hyperplane tTw D v T
ext Ou.
Unioning the set of all constraints, we get a convex
polyhedral set of feasible part velocities. A constraint
is redundant if its half-space constraint does not change
the feasible velocity polyhedron. For a given twist t,
a constraint is active if
tTw D v T
ext Ou I
(37.6)
otherwise the part is breaking contact at that point. In
general, the feasible velocity polyhedron for a part can
consist of a six-dimensional interior (where no con-
tact constraint is active), ﬁve-dimensional hyperfaces,
four-dimensional hyperfaces, and so on, down to one-
dimensional edges and zero-dimensional points. A part
velocity on an n-dimensional facet of the velocity poly-
hedron indicates that 6n independent (nonredundant)
constraints are active.
If all of the constraints are stationary (v ext D 0),
then the boundary of each half-space deﬁned by (37.5)
passes through the origin of the velocity space, and
the feasible velocity set becomes a cone rooted at the
origin. Let w i be the constraint wrench of stationary
contact i. Then the feasible velocity cone is
V D ft j tTw i  0
8ig :
If the w i span the six-dimensional generalized force
space, or, equivalently, the convex hull of the w i con-
tains the origin in the interior, then V is the null set,
the stationary contacts completely constrain the motion
of the part, and we have form closure, as discussed in
Chap. 38.
In the discussion above, each constraint (37.5) di-
vides the part velocity space into three categories:
a hyperplane of velocities that maintain contact, a half-
space of velocities that separate the parts, and a half-
space of velocities that cause the parts to penetrate.
Velocities where the contact is maintained can be fur-
ther broken down into two categories: velocities where
the part slips over the contact constraint, and velocities
where the part sticks or rolls on the constraint. In the
latter case, the part velocity satisﬁes the three equations
v C !  x D v ext :
(37.7)
Now we can give each point contact i a label mi
corresponding to the type of contact, called the contact
label: b if the contact is breaking, f if the contact is
ﬁxed (including rolling), and s if the contact is slip-
ping, i. e., (37.6) is satisﬁed but (37.7) is not. The
contact mode for the entire system can be written as
the concatenation of the contact labels at the k contacts,
m1m2 : : : mk.
37.2.2 Collections of Parts
The discussion above can be generalized to ﬁnd the fea-
sible velocities of multiple parts in contact. If parts i
and j make contact at a point x, where Oui points into
part i and w i D Œ.x  Oui/T; OuT
i T, then their spatial ve-
locities ti and tj must satisfy the constraint
.ti  tj/Tw i  0
(37.8)
to avoid penetration. This is a homogeneous half-space
constraint in the composite .ti; tj/ velocity space. In
an assembly of multiple parts, each pairwise contact
contributes another constraint in the composite part ve-
locity space, and the result is a polyhedral convex cone
of kinematically feasible velocities rooted at the origin
of the composite velocity space. The contact mode for
the entire assembly is the concatenation of the contact
labels at each contact in the assembly.

Contact Modeling and Manipulation
37.2 Kinematics of Rigid-Body Contact
935
Part D | 37.2
If there are moving contacts whose motion is pre-
scribed, e.g., robot ﬁngers, the constraints on the motion
of the remaining parts will no longer be homogeneous.
As a result, the convex polyhedral feasible velocity
space is no longer a cone rooted at the origin.
37.2.3 Graphical Planar Methods
When a part is conﬁned to move in the x–y-plane,
the twist t reduces to t D .!x; !y; !z; vx; vy; vz/T D
.0;0; !z; vx; vy; 0/T. The point .vy=!z; vx=!z/ is called
the center of rotation (COR) in the projective plane, and
we can represent any planar twist by its COR and rota-
tional velocity !z. (Note that the case !z D 0 must be
treated with care, as it corresponds to a COR at inﬁn-
ity.) This is sometimes useful for graphical purposes:
for a single part constrained by stationary ﬁxtures, at
least, we can easily draw the feasible twist cone as
CORs [37.14, 31].
As an example, Fig. 37.2a shows a planar part stand-
ing on a table and being contacted by a robot ﬁnger.
x
slslb
at infinity
slslb
at infinity
bslb
bslsl
srbsr
srbb
fbb
slbb
bbsr
bbsr
bbsl
bbf
bbb
w3
w3
w2
w2
w1
w1
y
–
–
bbb
+
+
ωz
υx
υy
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig. 37.2 (a) A part resting on a table and the three con-
tact constraints. (b) The twist cone satisfying the contact
constraints. The contact normals are shown with their asso-
ciated constraint planes. (c) The equivalent representation
as CORs, shown in grey. Note that the lines that extend
off to the left and to the bottom wrap around at inﬁnity
and come back in from the right and the top, respec-
tively, so this COR region should be interpreted as a single
connected convex region, equivalent to the twist cone rep-
resentation in (b). (d) The contact modes assigned to each
feasible motion. The zero velocity contact mode is fff
This ﬁnger is currently stationary, but we will later set
it in motion. The ﬁnger deﬁnes one constraint on the
part’s motion and the table deﬁnes two more. (Note
that contact points in the interior of the edge between
the part and the table provide redundant kinematic con-
straints.) The constraint wrenches can be written
w 1 D .0; 0; 1; 0; 1; 0/T ;
w 2 D .0; 0; 1; 0; 1; 0/T ;
w 3 D .0; 0; 1; 1; 0; 0/T :
For a stationary ﬁnger, the kinematic constraints yield
the feasible twist cone shown in Fig. 37.2b. This re-
gion can also be easily visualized in the plane by using
the following method: at each contact, draw the con-
tact normal line. Label all points on the normal ˙,
points to the left of the inward normal C, and points
to the right . For each contact constraint, all the points
labeled C can serve as CORs with positive angular ve-
locity, and all the points labeled  can serve as CORs
with negative angular velocity, without violating the
contact constraint. After doing this for all the contact
normals, keep only the CORs that are consistently la-
beled. These CORs are a planar representation of the
feasible twist cone (Fig. 37.2c).
We can reﬁne this method by assigning contact
modes to each feasible COR. For each contact nor-
mal, label the COR at the contact point f for ﬁxed,
other CORs on the normal line s for slipping, and all
other CORs b for breaking contact. The concatenation
of these labels gives the part’s contact mode for a par-
ticular part motion. In the planar case, the label s on
the contact normal line can be further reﬁned into sr or
sl, indicating whether the part is slipping right or left
relative to the constraint. An s COR labeled C above
the contact (in the direction of the contact normal) or 
below the contact should be relabeled sr, and an s COR
labeled  above the contact or C below should be rela-
beled sl (Fig. 37.2d).
This method can be used readily to determine if the
part is in form closure. If there is no COR labeled con-
sistently, then the feasible velocity cone consists of only
the zero velocity point, and the part is immobilized by
the stationary contacts. This method also makes it clear
that at least four contacts are necessary to immobilize
the part by the ﬁrst-order analysis (Chap. 38). This is
a weakness of the ﬁrst-order analysis – curvature ef-
fects can be used to immobilize a part with three or
even two contacts [37.24]. This weakness can also be
seen in Fig. 37.2d. A pure rotation about the COR la-
beled fC; srbsrg is actually not feasible, but it would
be if the part had a small radius of curvature at the con-
tact with the ﬁnger. The ﬁrst-order analysis ignores this
curvature.

Part D | 37.3
936
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
37.3 Forces and Friction
A commonly used model of friction in robotic manip-
ulation is Coulomb’s law [37.32]. This experimental
law states that the friction force magnitude ft in the
tangent plane at the contact interface is related to the
normal force magnitude fn by ft 	 fn, where  is called
the friction coefﬁcient. If the contact is sliding, then
ft D fn, and the friction force opposes the direction of
motion. The friction force is independent of the speed
of sliding.
Often two friction coefﬁcients are deﬁned, a static
friction coefﬁcient s and a kinetic (or sliding) fric-
tion coefﬁcient k, where s  k. This implies that
a larger friction force may be available to resist initial
motion, but once motion has begun, the resisting force
decreases. Many other friction models have been devel-
oped with different functional dependencies on factors
such as the speed of sliding and the duration of static
contact before sliding. All of these are aggregate mod-
els of complex microscopic behavior. For simplicity, we
will assume the simplest Coulomb friction model with
a single friction coefﬁcient . This model is reasonable
for hard, dry materials. The friction coefﬁcient depends
on the two materials in contact, and typically ranges
from 0.1 to 1.
Figure 37.3a shows that this friction law can be
interpreted in terms of a friction cone. The set of all
forces that can be applied to the disk by the supporting
x
1
μ
	
f2
f1
w2
w1
y
mz
fx
fy
a)
b)
w2
w1
w3
w4
mz
Composite
wrench cone
fx
fy
c)
Fig. 37.3 (a) A planar friction cone. (b) The correspond-
ing wrench cone. (c) An example composite wrench cone
resulting from two frictional contacts
line is constrained to be inside this cone. Correspond-
ingly, any force the disk applies to the support is inside
the negative of the cone. The half-angle of the cone
is ˇ D tan1 , as shown in Fig. 37.4. If the disk slips
to the left on the support, the force the support applies
to it acts on the right edge of the friction cone, with
a magnitude determined by the normal force.
If we choose a coordinate frame, the force f ap-
plied to the disk by the support can be expressed as
a wrench w D Œ.x  f/T; f TT, where x is the contact lo-
cation. Thus the friction cone turns into a wrench cone,
as shown in Fig. 37.3b. The two edges of the planar fric-
tion cone give two half-lines in the wrench space, and
the wrenches that can be transmitted to the part through
the contact are all nonnegative linear combinations of
basis vectors along these edges. If w 1 and w 2 are ba-
sis vectors for these wrench cone edges, we write the
wrench cone as
WC D fk1w 1 C k2w 2 j k1; k2  0g :
If there are multiple contacts acting on a part, then
the total set of wrenches that can be transmitted to the
part through the contacts is the nonnegative linear com-
bination of all the individual wrench cones WCi,
WC D pos.fWCig/
D
(X
i
kiw ijw i 2 WCi; ki  0
)
:
This composite wrench cone is a convex polyhedral
cone rooted at the origin. An example composite
x
μfz
y
fz
a)
b)
z
	 = tan–1μ
Fig. 37.4 (a) A spatial friction cone. The half-angle of the
cone is ˇ D tan1 . (b) An inscribed pyramidal approx-
imation to the friction cone. A more accurate inscribed
pyramidal approximation can be used by increasing the
number of faces of the pyramid. Depending on the appli-
cation, a circumscribed pyramid could be used instead of
an inscribed pyramid

Contact Modeling and Manipulation
37.3 Forces and Friction
937
Part D | 37.3
wrench cone arising from two planar frictional contacts
is shown in Fig. 37.3c. If the composite wrench cone is
the entire wrench space, then the contacts can provide
a force-closure grasp (Chap. 38).
In the spatial case, the friction cone is a circular
cone, deﬁned by
q
f 2x C f 2y 	 fz ;
fz  0 ;
(37.9)
when the contact normal is in the Cz-direction
(Fig. 37.4). The resulting wrench cone, and compos-
ite wrench cone pos.fWCig/ for multiple contacts, is
a convex cone rooted at the origin, but it is not poly-
hedral. For computational purposes, it is common to
approximate circular friction cones as pyramidal cones,
as shown in Fig. 37.4. Then individual and composite
wrench cones become polyhedral convex cones in the
six-dimensional wrench space.
If a contact or set of contacts acting on a part is
ideally force controlled, the wrench w ext speciﬁed by
the controller must lie within the composite wrench
cone corresponding to those contacts. Because these
force-controlled contacts choose a subset of wrenches
(possibly a single wrench) from this wrench cone, the
total composite wrench cone that can act on the part
(including other non-force-controlled contacts) may no
longer be a homogeneous cone rooted at the origin. This
is roughly analogous to the case of velocity-controlled
contacts in Sect. 37.2.1, which results in a feasible twist
set for the part that is not a cone rooted at the origin.
Ideal robot manipulators may be controlled by position
control, force control, hybrid position–force control, or
some other scheme. The control method must be com-
patible with the parts’ contacts with each other and the
environment to prevent excessive forces [37.33].
37.3.1 Graphical Planar Methods
Just as homogeneous twist cones for planar problems
can be represented as convex signed (C or ) COR
regions in the plane, homogeneous wrench cones for
planar problems can be represented as convex signed
regions in the plane. This is called moment label-
ing [37.14, 34]. Given a collection of lines of force in
the plane (e.g., the edges of friction cones from a set of
point contacts), the set of all nonnegative linear combi-
nations of these can be represented by labeling all the
points in the plane with either a C if all resultants make
nonnegative moment about that point, a  if all make
nonpositive moment about that point, a ˙ if all make
zero moment about that point, and a blank label if there
exist resultants making positive moment and resultants
making negative moment about that point.
The idea is best illustrated by an example. In
Fig. 37.5a, a single line of force is represented by la-
beling the points to the left of the line with a C and
points to the right of the line with a . Points on
the line are labeled ˙. In Fig. 37.5b, another line of
force is added. Only the points in the plane that are
consistently labeled for both lines of force retain their
labels; inconsistently labeled points lose their labels.
Finally, a third line of force is added in Fig. 37.5c.
The result is a single region labeled C. A nonnegative
combination of the three lines of force can create any
line of force in the plane that passes around this re-
gion in a counterclockwise sense. This representation
is equivalent to a homogeneous convex wrench cone
representation.
37.3.2 Duality of Contact Wrenches
and Twist Freedoms
Our discussion of kinematic constraints and friction
should make it apparent that, for any point contact and
contact label, the number of equality constraints on the
part’s motion caused by that contact is equal to the
number of wrench freedoms it provides. For example,
a breaking contact b provides zero equality constraints
on the part motion and also allows no contact force.
A ﬁxed contact f provides three motion constraints (the
motion of a point on the part is speciﬁed) and three free-
doms on the contact force: any wrench in the interior
of the contact wrench cone is consistent with the con-
tact mode. Finally, a slipping contact s provides one
equality motion constraint (one equation on the part’s
motion must be satisﬁed to maintain the contact), and
for a given motion satisfying the constraint, the con-
tact wrench has only one freedom, the magnitude of
the contact wrench on the edge of the friction cone and
opposite the slipping direction. In the planar case, the
motion constraints and wrench freedoms for b, s, and f
contacts are zero, one, and two, respectively.
+
±
–
+
+
±
–
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 37.5 (a) Representing a line of force by moment la-
bels. (b) Representing the nonnegative linear combinations
of two lines of force by moment labels. (c) Nonnegative
linear combinations of three lines of force

Part D | 37.3
938
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Table 37.1 Duality of the kinematics of contact interface. The force/motion relationships for ﬁnger and grasped object
are dual to each other in the joint space, contact interface, and the Cartesian space of the object. In this table, the
notation of , xf, xp, and xb are the displacement in the joint space, the Cartesian space at the contact point on the
ﬁnger, the Cartesian space at the contact point on the object, and the reference frame on the object, respectively, with xtr
denoting the transmitted components. The ı preﬁx denotes inﬁnitesimal changes in the named coordinates. The forces
with corresponding subscripts are referenced to the corresponding coordinates as those of the displacement described
before
Jθ
(6× m)(m×1) (6×1)
δθ
= δxf
Motion
Joints
H
(n× 6)(6×1) (n ×1)
δxf
δxp
= δxtr
(n × 6)(6×1)
= H
= H
Contact
Jc
(6 ×6)(6×1) (6×1)
δxb
= δxp
Jθ
(m×6)(6×1)
(m×1)
ff
= τ
Force
ff
(6×1) (6× n)(n×1)
ftr
(6×1)
= fp
(6 ×6)(6×1) (6×1)
fp
= fp
Object
Jc
At each contact, the force and velocity constraints
can be represented by an n  6 constraint or selection
matrix, H [37.3], at the contact interface. This con-
straint matrix works like a ﬁlter to transmit or deny
certain components of motion across the contact inter-
face. By the same token, forces/moments applied across
the contact interface are also ﬁltered by the same con-
straint matrix, HT, in a dual relationship. Three typical
contact models are illustrated below. Contact forces and
wrenches are measured in a frame at the contact, with
the contact normal in the Cz-direction:

The point contact without friction model. Only
a normal force fz can be exerted between the con-
tacting bodies
fz  0 ; w D HTfz D .0 0 1 0 0 0/Tfz :
(37.10)

The point contact with friction model includes tan-
gential friction forces, fx and fy, in addition to
normal force fz,
fz  0 I jftj D
q
f 2x C f 2y 	 fz ;
w D HT
0
@
fx
fy
fz
1
A D
0
BBBBBB@
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCA
0
@
fx
fy
fz
1
A ;
(37.11)
where fx and fy are the x- and y-components of the
tangential contact force, and fz is the normal force.

The soft ﬁnger contact model with a ﬁnite contact
patch allows, in addition to the friction and normal
forces, a torsional moment with respect to the con-
tact normal [37.35–39]. We have
fz  0 I
w DHT
0
BB@
fx
fy
fz
mz
1
CCAD
0
BBBBBB@
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
CCCCCCA
0
BB@
fx
fy
fz
mz
1
CCA ;
(37.12)
where mz is the moment with respect to the normal
of contact. The ﬁnite contact area assumed by the
soft contact interface results in the application of
a friction moment in addition to the traction forces.
If the resultant force on the tangential plane of con-
tact is denoted as
ft D
q
f 2x C f 2y
and the moment with respect to the contact normal
is mz, the following elliptical equation represents
the relationship between the force and moment at
the onset of sliding
f 2
t
a2 C m2
z
b2 D 1 ;
(37.13)
where a D fz is the maximum friction force, and
b D .mz/max is the maximum moment deﬁned in
equation (37.36). Further readings on this subject
can be found in [37.35–42].
As can be appreciated from the three cases above,
the rows of H are the directions along which contact
forces are supported. Conversely, relative motions of
the two objects are constrained along these same di-
rections: HPq D 0. Thus, the constraint matrix works
like a kinematic ﬁlter which dictates the components

Contact Modeling and Manipulation
37.4 Rigid-Body Mechanics with Friction
939
Part D | 37.4
of motions that can be transmitted through the con-
tact interface. The introduction of this matrix makes it
easy to model the contact mechanics in analysis using
the dual kinematic relationship between force/moment
and motion, as described in Table 37.1. For example,
the constraint ﬁlter matrix in (37.12) describes that all
three components of forces and one component of the
moment with respect to the normal of contact can be
transmitted through the contact interface of a soft ﬁnger.
In Chap. 38, when multiple contacts are considered,
such H matrices associated with each ﬁnger can be
concatenated in an augmented matrix to work in con-
junction with the grasp and Jacobian matrices for the
analysis of grasping and manipulation.
Table 37.1 summarizes the dual relationship be-
tween the force/moment and displacement – a result
that is derived from the principle of virtual work. In Ta-
ble 37.1, J is the joint Jacobian matrix relating joint
velocities to ﬁngertip velocities, and Jc is the Cartesian
coordinate transformation matrix relating the contact
point with the centroidal coordinates of the grasped
object. In addition, the number of degrees of freedom
(DOFs) in the task space is n and the number of DOFs
in the joint spaces is m.
37.4 Rigid-Body Mechanics with Friction
The manipulation planning problem is to choose the
motions or forces applied by manipulator contacts so
that the part (or parts) moves as desired. This requires
solving the subproblem of determining the motion of
parts given a particular manipulator action.
Let q 2 Rn be local coordinates describing the com-
bined conﬁguration of the system consisting of one or
more parts and robot manipulators, and let w i 2 R6
represent a wrench at an active contact i, measured
in the common coordinate frame O. Let w all 2 R6k
be the vector obtained by stacking the w i, w all D
.w T
1; w T
2; : : : ; w T
k /T (where there are k contacts), and
let A.q/ 2 Rn6k be a matrix indicating how (or if) each
contact wrench acts on each part. (Note that a con-
tact wrench w i acting on one part means that there is
a contact wrench w i acting on the other part in con-
tact.) The problem is to ﬁnd the contact forces w all and
the system acceleration Rq, given the state of the system
.q; Pq/, the system mass matrix M.q/ and resulting Cori-
olis matrix C.q; Pq/, the gravitational forces g.q/, the
control forces , and the matrix T.q/ indicating how the
control forces  act on the system. (Alternatively, if we
view the manipulators as position controlled, the ma-
nipulator components of Rq can be directly speciﬁed and
the corresponding components of the control forces 
solved for.) One way to solve this problem is to (a) enu-
merate the set of all possible contact modes for the
current active contacts, and (b) for each contact mode,
determine if there are wrenches w all and accelerations Rq
that satisfy the dynamics
A.q/w all C T.q/  g.q/ D M.q/Rq C C.q; Pq/Pq ;
(37.14)
and that are consistent with the contact mode’s
kinematic constraints (constraints on Rq) and friction
cone force constraints (constraints on w all). This for-
mulation is quite general and applies to multiple
parts in contact. Equation (37.14) may be simpli-
ﬁed by appropriate representations of the conﬁgu-
rations and velocities of rigid-body parts (for ex-
ample, using angular velocities of the rigid bod-
ies instead of derivatives of local angular coordi-
nates).
This formulation leads to some surprising conclu-
sions: there may be multiple solutions to a particular
problem (ambiguity) or there may be no solutions (in-
consistency) [37.7–14]. This strange behavior arises
from the status of Coulomb’s law as an approximate
law, and it disappears for zero friction, or friction that
is small enough. Despite this weakness of the Coulomb
friction law, it is a useful approximation. Nonetheless, if
we would like to prove (under the Coulomb model) that
a particular desired part motion occurs, we generally
must also show that no other motion can occur. Other-
wise we have only shown that the desired motion is one
of the possible outcomes.
37.4.1 Complementarity
The conditions that each contact provides an equal
number of motion constraints and wrench freedoms
(Sect. 37.3.2) can be written as complementarity con-
ditions. Thus the problem of solving (37.14), subject
to contact constraints, can be formulated as a comple-
mentarity problem (CP) [37.12, 13, 43–46]. For planar
problems, or spatial problems with approximate pyra-
midal friction cones, the problem is a linear comple-
mentarity problem [37.47]. For circular spatial friction
cones, the problem is a nonlinear complementarity
problem, due to the quadratic constraints describing
the cones. In either case, standard algorithms can be
used to solve for possible contact modes and part
motions.

Part D | 37.4
940
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Alternatively, assuming linearized friction cones,
we can formulate a linear constraint satisfaction pro-
gram (LCSP) for each contact mode (e.g., a linear
program with no objective function). The contact mode
places linear constraints on the part accelerations, and
the solver solves for the part accelerations and the non-
negative coefﬁcients multiplying each of the edges of
the friction cones, subject to the dynamics (37.14). Each
LCSP with a feasible solution represents a feasible con-
tact mode.
37.4.2 Quasistatic Assumption
A common assumption in robot manipulation planning
is the quasistatic assumption. This assumption says that
parts move slowly enough that inertial effects are neg-
ligible. This means that the right- and left-hand sides
of (37.14) are zero. With this assumption, we often
solve for part velocities rather than accelerations. These
velocities must be consistent with the kinematic con-
straints and force constraints, and forces acting on the
parts must always sum to zero.
37.4.3 Examples
While rigid-body mechanics problems with friction are
usually solved using computational tools for CPs and
LCSPs, equivalent graphical methods can be used for
some planar problems to assist the intuition. As a simple
example, consider the pipe clamp in Fig. 37.6 [37.14].
Under the external wrench w ext, does the clamp slide
down the pipe, or does it remain ﬁxed in place? The
ﬁgure uses moment labeling to represent the compos-
ite wrench cone of contact forces that can act on the
clamp from the pipe. The wrench w ext acting on the
clamp can be exactly balanced by a wrench in the com-
w2
w4
wext
w1
+
w3
Fig. 37.6 The moment-labeling representation of the com-
posite wrench cone of contact forces the pipe can apply to
the pipe clamp. In this ﬁgure, the wrench w ext applied to
the pipe clamp can be resisted by forces within the com-
posite wrench cone
posite wrench cone. This is evident from the fact that
the wrench opposing w ext passes around the C labeled
region in a counterclockwise sense, meaning that it is
contained in the contact wrench cone. As a result, static
equilibrium (the ff contact mode) is a feasible solu-
tion for the pipe clamp. To arrive at the same result
using an LCSP, label the unit wrenches at the edges of
the friction cones w 1; : : : ; w 4. Then the clamp can re-
main at rest if there exist coefﬁcients a1; : : : ; a4 such
that
a1; a2; a3; a4  0 ;
a1w 1 C a2w 2 C a3w 3 C a4w 4 C w ext D 0 :
To show that static equilibrium is the only solution, all
other contact modes must be ruled out. Note that, if
the friction coefﬁcient at the contacts is too small, the
clamp will fall under w ext.
Analysis of the classic peg-in-hole problem is sim-
ilar to that of the pipe clamp. Figure 37.7a shows an
angled peg making two-point contact with the hole. If
we apply the wrench w 1, the forces from the two-point
contact cannot resist, so the ff mode contact mode is
not a possibility, and the peg will continue to move into
the hole. If we apply the wrench w 2, however, the con-
tacts can resist, and the peg will get stuck. This is called
jamming [37.48]. If there is higher friction at the con-
tacts, as in Fig. 37.7b, then each friction cone may be
able to see the base of the other, and the feasible contact
wrenches span the entire wrench space [37.49]. In this
case, any wrench we apply may be resisted by the con-
tacts. The peg is said to be wedged [37.48]. Whether
or not the peg will actually resist our applied wrench
depends on how much internal force acts between the
contacts. This cannot be answered by our rigid-body
model; it requires a compliant contact model, as dis-
cussed in Sect. 37.6.
As a slightly more complex quasistatic example,
consider a block on a table being pushed by a ﬁnger
w2
w1
+
a)
b)
Fig. 37.7 (a) The peg will proceed into the hole under the
external wrench w 1 but will get stuck under the wrench w2.
(b) The peg is wedged

Contact Modeling and Manipulation
37.4 Rigid-Body Mechanics with Friction
941
Part D | 37.4
sr
mg
+
f
b
–
+
sl
sl
f
–
a)
b)
c)
d)
+
sl
sr
b
–
Fig. 37.8 (a) A ﬁnger moves left into a planar block resting
on a table in gravity. The contact friction cones are shown.
(b) Possible contact forces for the contact label f at the
leftmost bottom contact, b at the rightmost bottom con-
tact, and sr at the pushing contact. This contact mode fbr
corresponds to the block tipping over the leftmost contact.
Note that the contact wrench cone (represented by moment
labels) can provide a force that exactly balances the grav-
itational force. Thus this contact mode is quasistatically
possible. (c) The contact wrench cone for the slslf con-
tact mode (block slides left on the table) cannot balance
the gravitational force. This contact mode is not quasistat-
ically possible. (d) The contact wrench cone for the slbsr
contact mode (block slides and tips) is not quasistatically
possible
that moves horizontally to the left (Fig. 37.8) [37.50,
51]. Does the part begin to tip over, slide, or both
tip and slide? The corresponding contact modes are
fbsr, slslf, and slbsr, as shown in Fig. 37.8. The
ﬁgure also shows the composite contact wrench cones
using moment labels. It is clear that quasistatic bal-
ance between the gravitational force and the contact
wrench cone can only occur for the tipping with-
out slipping contact mode fbsr. Therefore, the only
quasistatic solution is that the block begins to tip
without sliding, and the speed of this motion is de-
termined by the speed of the ﬁnger’s motion. The
graphical construction can be used to conﬁrm our in-
tuition that tipping of the block occurs if we push
high on the block or if the friction coefﬁcient at the
block’s support is high. Try it by pushing a can or
0
0
T
2T
a)
b) Velocity
Slope = –μg
x·s
x·p
xp
xs
g
Fig. 37.9 (a) A part supported by a horizontally vibrat-
ing surface. (b) Friction between the part and the surface
causes the part to always try to catch up to the surface,
but its acceleration is bounded by ˙g. The asymmetric
motion of the surface gives the part an average positive ve-
locity over a cycle
glass. Quasistatically, the height of the center of mass
is immaterial.
A ﬁnal example is given in Fig. 37.9. A part of
mass m and friction coefﬁcient  is supported by a hor-
izontal surface that moves periodically in the horizontal
direction. The periodic motion consists of a large neg-
ative acceleration for a short duration and a smaller
positive acceleration for a longer duration. The hori-
zontal friction force that can be applied to the part is
bounded by ˙mg, so the part’s horizontal accelera-
tion is bounded by ˙g. As a result, the part cannot
keep up with the surface as it accelerates backward. In-
stead, the part slips forward with respect to the surface,
which means that the maximal friction force acts in the
negative direction, and the part attempts to slow down
to the surface’s velocity. Eventually the part catches up
with the surface as it executes its slow forward acceler-
ation, which is less than g. Once the part catches up
to the surface, it sticks to it, until the next backward ac-
celeration phase. As is evident in Fig. 37.9, the average
part velocity over a cycle is positive, so the part moves
forward on the surface [37.52, 53]. This idea can be ex-
tended to create a wide variety of frictional force ﬁelds
on a rigid plate vibrated with three degrees of freedom
in a horizontal plane [37.54, 55] or with a full six de-
grees of freedom [37.56].
For further examples of manipulation planning
using the rigid-body model with Coulomb friction,
see [37.14] and the references therein.

Part D | 37.5
942
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
37.5 Pushing Manipulation
The friction limit surface (Sect. 37.7) is useful for ana-
lyzing pushing manipulation, as it describes the friction
forces that can occur as a part slides over a support sur-
face. When the part is pushed with a wrench contained
within the limit surface, friction between the part and
the support resists the pushing wrench and the part re-
mains motionless. When the part slides quasistatically,
the pushing wrench w lies on the limit surface, and
the part’s twist t is normal to the limit surface at w
(Fig. 37.10). When the part translates without rotating,
the friction force magnitude is mg, where m is the
part’s mass and g is gravitational acceleration. The force
applied by the part to the surface is directed through the
part’s center of mass in the direction of translation.
If the pushing wrench makes positive moment about
the part’s center of mass, the part will rotate counter-
clockwise (CCW), and if it makes negative moment
about the part’s center of mass, it will rotate clock-
wise (CW). Similarly, if the contact point on the part
moves along a line that passes around the part’s cen-
ter of mass in a CW (respectively, CCW) sense, then
the part will rotate CW (CCW). From these two ob-
servations and considering all possible contact modes,
we can conclude that a part pushed at a point contact
will rotate CW (CCW) if either (1) both edges of the
contact friction cone pass CW (CCW) about the cen-
x
Limit
surface
Unit twist
sphere
w3
w4
w3
w2
w2
w1
w1
w4
fx
t2
y
mz
ωz
υx
υy
a)
b)
c)
d)
t1
t3
t1
t4
t2
t3
t4
w2
w1
w3
w4
mz
Composite
wrench cone
fx
fy
Fig. 37.10 (a) Contact between a pusher and a sliding object.
(b) The composite contact wrench cone. (c) Mapping the wrench
cone through the limit surface to twists of the object. (d) The unit
twists that can result from forces in the composite wrench cone
ter of mass, or (2) one edge of the friction cone and
the pushing direction at the contact both pass around
the center of mass in a CW (CCW) sense [37.14, 57],
(Fig. 37.11).
This observation allows pushing to be used to re-
duce uncertainty in part orientation. A series of pushes
with a ﬂat fence can be used to completely elimi-
nate the uncertainty in the orientation of a polygo-
nal part [37.57–59]. Bounds on the rate of rotation
of parts [37.14, 60, 61] allow the use of a sequence
of stationary fences suspended above a conveyor belt
to orient parts by pushing them as they are carried
along by the conveyor [37.62, 63]. Stable pushing plans
(Fig. 37.12) use pushing motions that are guaranteed
to keep the part ﬁxed to the pusher as it moves, even
Pushing
direction
Friction
cone
Fig. 37.11 The pusher’s motion direction votes for counter-
clockwise rotation of the part, but it is outvoted by the two
edges of the friction cone, which both indicate clockwise
rotation
Fig. 37.12 Stable pushes can be used to maneuver a part
among obstacles

Contact Modeling and Manipulation
37.6 Contact Interfaces and Modeling
943
Part D | 37.6
in the face of uncertainty in the part’s pressure dis-
tribution [37.14, 64, 65]. Extensions of this work ﬁnd
pushing motions for planar assemblies of parts so that
they remain ﬁxed in their relative conﬁgurations during
motion [37.66–68].
The examples above assume that pushing forces and
support friction forces act in the same plane. Other work
on pushing has considered three-dimensional effects,
where pushing forces are applied above the support
plane [37.69].
37.6 Contact Interfaces and Modeling
Contact interface is a general expression to describe the
kinematics and kinetics of contacts. Contact applies in
various contexts in robotics research; thus, it is more
meaningful to refer to generic contact as an interface,
which is not limited to ﬁngers in grasping and manip-
ulation. The concept of contact interface extends the
traditional context of physical contact. It refers to an in-
terface which imparts kinematic ﬁltering as well as the
duality of force/motion transmitted across the contact
interface.
Consequently, a contact interface, whether it is rigid
or deformable, can be considered as a kinematic ﬁl-
ter which includes two characteristics: (a) motion and
force transmission, and (b) kinematic duality between
force/moment and motion. Different contact interfaces
will be described in the following sections.
Previous sections of this chapter have assumed rigid
bodies in contact. In reality, however, all contacts are
accompanied by some deformation of the objects. Of-
ten this is by design, as in the case of compliant robot
ﬁngertips. When deformation is non-negligible, elastic
contact models can be used.
37.6.1 Modeling of Contact Interface
Contact modeling depends on the nature of bodies
in contact, including their material properties, applied
force, contact deformation, and elastic properties. This
section discusses different contact models.
Rigid-Body and Point-Contact Models
With the rigid-body assumption, as discussed in the pre-
vious sections of this chapter, two models are often
used: (a) point contact without friction and (b) point
contact with friction. In the former case, the contact can
only apply force in the direction normal to the contact.
In the latter case, a tangential friction force is applied
in addition to the normal force. The simplest analytical
model for point contact with friction is the Coulomb
friction model as presented in (37.9).
Hertzian Contact Model
Elastic contact modeling was ﬁrst studied and formu-
lated more than a century ago by Hertz in 1882 [37.70]
based on contact between two linear elastic materials
with a normal force which results in very small con-
tact deformation. This is commonly called the Hertzian
contact and can be found in most mechanics textbooks,
such as [37.71, 72]. Hertz made two important explicit
assumptions in order for his contact model to be appli-
cable:
1. Objects of linear elastic materials in contact,
2. Small contact deformation compared to the dimen-
sion of object.
Hertz also conducted experiments using a spheri-
cal glass lens against a planar glass plate to validate the
contact theory.
Two relevant results of the Hertzian contact theory
applied to robotic contact interfaces are summarized as
follows. The ﬁrst pertains to the radius of the contact
area. Hertz [37.70] studied the growth of the contact
area as a function of the applied normal force N based
on the linear elastic model. Based on ten experimental
trials, he concluded that the radius of contact is propor-
tional to the normal force raised to the power of 1=3,
which is consistent with the analytical results he derived
based on the linear elastic model. That is, the radius of
contact, a, is related to the normal force, N, by
a / N
1
3 :
(37.15)
The second result pertains to the pressure distri-
bution over the assumed symmetric contact area –
a second-order pressure distribution of the nature of an
ellipse or circle. For a symmetric and circular contact
area, the pressure distribution is
p.r/ D N
a2
r
1 
 r
a
2
;
(37.16)
where N is the normal force, a is the radius of contact,
and r is the distance from the center of contact with
0 	 r 	 a.
Soft Contact Model. A typical contact interface be-
tween a soft ﬁnger and contact surface is illustrated in
Fig. 37.13. In typical robotic contact interfaces, the ma-
terials of the ﬁngertips are not linear elastic. A model

Part D | 37.6
944
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
that extends linear to nonlinear elastic contact was pre-
sented in [37.38] with a power-law equation which
subsumes the Hertzian contact theory,
a D c N ;
(37.17)
where  D n=.2nC 1/ is the exponent of the normal
force, n is the strain-hardening exponent, and c is
a constant depending on the size and curvature of the
ﬁngertip as well as the material properties. Equation
(37.17) is the new power law that relates the growth of
the circular contact radius to the applied normal force
for soft ﬁngers. Note that the equation is derived assum-
ing circular contact area. For linear elastic materials, the
constant n is equal to 1 with  D 1=3, resulting in the
Hertzian contact model in (37.15). Therefore, the soft
contact model in (37.17) subsumes the Hertzian contact
model.
Viscoelastic Soft Contact Model. Typical soft mate-
rials used in robotic ﬁngertip, e.g., rubber, silicone and
polymers, show viscoelastic properties. Viscoelasticity
is a physical phenomenon of time-dependent strain and
stress [37.73]. Speciﬁcally in the context of robotic
grasping and manipulation, there are two types of time
dependent responses [37.74–76]:
1. Relaxation: The evolution of force in grasping while
the displacement is held constant;
2. Creep: The evolution of displacement in contact and
grasping while the external force is held constant.
Such time-dependent responses would approach
equilibrium asymptotically. Viscoelastic materials also
exhibit the properties of:
1. Strain history dependence: The response of the ma-
terial depends on prior strain history; and
2. Energy dissipation: A net energy dissipation asso-
ciated with a complete cycle of loading and unload-
ing.
Finger
N
a
d
R0
R0–d
2a
Fig. 37.13 An elastic soft ﬁngertip with a hemispherical tip
making contact with a rigid surface
Two popular viscoelastic models include: the
Kelvin–Voigt/Maxwell
model
(the
spring-damper
model) and the Fung’s model, which will be described
in the following.
(1)
Kelvin–Voigt/Maxwell
model. The
Kelvin–
Voigt’s solid model was constructed by a spring and
a damper connected in parallel [37.77] as shown in
Fig. 37.14. The relation between the stress, , and
strain, , can be formulated as
 D k C c d
dt :
(37.18)
Maxwell
proposed
in
1867
the
Maxwell
ﬂuid
model [37.78] as a single set of spring and damper in
series as shown in Fig. 37.15. The relationship between
the stress, , and strain, , can be expressed as
1
k
d
dt C 
c D d
dt :
(37.19)
The generalized Maxwell model utilizes multiple
serial spring-damper sets and a spring connected in par-
allel. One can employ the curve-ﬁtting techniques using
the experimental data to ﬁnd the modeling parameters
of springs and dampers.
However, the issue of this model is often on the
lack of consistency of the parameters (stiffness con-
stants and damping factors) obtained from the model.
Such parameters can have large discrepancy in nu-
merical values, often in two orders of magnitude or
higher, while representing the same material with sup-
posedly similar values of springs and dampers. These
parameters sometimes can also present unrealistic dif-
ference in scales under different experimental setup
(e.g., in [37.79, 80]).
(2) Fung’s model. A popular viscoelastic model
in
modeling biomedical materials
is the Fung’s
model [37.76], proposed by Fung in 1993. The main
idea of the model is to represent the reacting force as
the product of two independent responses: the temporal
response and the elastic response, while incorporating
k
c
Fig. 37.14
Kelvin–Voigt
model
k
c
Fig. 37.15
Maxwell model

Contact Modeling and Manipulation
37.6 Contact Interfaces and Modeling
945
Part D | 37.6
the history of the stress response. The model may be
written as
T.t/ D
t
Z
1
G.t  /@T.e/Œ.t/
@
@./
@
d ;
(37.20)
where T.t/ is the tensile stress at time t, with a step
increase of size  in elongation on the specimen, the
function T.e/./ is the so-called elastic response, and
G.t/, a normalized function of time, is the reduced re-
laxation function.
Tiezzi and Kao [37.42, 81, 82] simpliﬁed this model
to study the soft contact interface by assuming no past
stress history, as expressed in (37.21)
G.ı; t/ D N.e/.ı/  g.t/ ;
(37.21)
where G.ı; t/ represents the grasping force as a func-
tion of the displacement ı and time t, N.e/.ı/ represents
the elastic response of normal force as a function of the
displacement (or depression unto the object), and g.t/
represents the temporal response of relaxation or creep.
The important property of this model is the separation
of the spatial response and temporal response as two
independent functions. It was shown that the viscoelas-
tic model has an important implication on the stability
of grasping which cannot be captured by rigid or linear
elastic modeling.
Other Models. In addition to the aforementioned
models, other models from different viewpoints were
proposed, as follows: From the viewpoint of rheo-
logical perspectives [37.83–86]; molecular perspec-
tives [37.73, 87–92]; energy perspectives [37.85]; dis-
tributed modeling perspectives [37.93–98] and stress
wave propagation perspectives [37.99–102].
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
–1
k=2
k→∞
k=3
k=4
k=5
2
1.5
1
0.5
Fig. 37.16 Illustration of pressure distribution with respect to the normalized radius, r=a. The plot shows an axisymmetric
pressure distribution with k D 2; 3; 4; 5, and 1. As k increases, the pressure proﬁle becomes more uniform
37.6.2 Pressure Distribution at Contacts
In Sect. 37.6.1, when the Hertzian contact theory is
considered, the assumed pressure distribution for small
elastic deformation is given in (37.16). As the radius of
curvature of the two asperities increases and the ma-
terial properties change to hyperelastic, the pressure
distribution becomes more uniform [37.38, 103, 104].
Generalizing equation (37.16), the pressure distribution
function for circular contact area with radius a is
p.r/ D Ck
N
a2

1 
 r
a
k 1
k
;
(37.22)
where N is the normal force, a is the radius of con-
tact, r is the radius with 0 	 r 	 a, k determines the
shape of the pressure proﬁle, and Ck is a coefﬁcient
that adjusts for the proﬁle of pressure distribution over
the contact area to satisfy the equilibrium condition.
In (37.22), p.r/ is deﬁned for 0 	 r 	 a. By symmetry,
p.r/ D p.r/ when a 	 r 	 0, as shown in Fig. 37.16.
When k becomes larger, the pressure distribution ap-
proaches uniform distribution, as shown in Fig. 37.16.
It is also required that the integral of the pressure over
the contact area be equal to the normal force; that is
Z
R
p.r/ dA D
2
Z
D0
a
Z
rD0
p.r/r dr d D N :
(37.23)
The coefﬁcient Ck can be obtained by substitut-
ing (37.22) into (37.23). It is interesting to note that
when (37.23) is integrated, both the normal force and
radius of contact vanish, leaving only the constant Ck
as follows
Ck D 3
2
k&
 3
k

&
 1
k

&
 2
k
 ;
(37.24)

Part D | 37.7
946
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
where k D 1; 2; 3; : : : are typically integer values (al-
though noninteger k values are also possible) and & ./ is
the gamma function [37.105]. The numerical values of
Ck for a few values of k are listed in Table 37.2 for refer-
ence. A normalized pressure distribution with respect to
the normalized radius, r=a, is plotted in Fig. 37.16. As
can be seen from the ﬁgure, when k approaches inﬁn-
ity, the pressure proﬁle will become that of a uniformly
distributed load with magnitude of N=. a2/, in which
case Ck D 1:0.
For linear elastic materials, k D 2 can be used,
although it is found that k Š 1:8 is also appro-
Table 37.2 Values of the coefﬁcient Ck in the pressure dis-
tribution (37.22)
k
Coefﬁcient Ck
k D 2 (circular)
C2 D 1:5
k D 3 (cubic)
C3 D 1:24
k D 4 (quadruple)
C4 D 1:1441
k ! 1 (uniform)
C1 D 1:0
priate in some cases [37.106]. For nonlinear elas-
tic and viscoelastic materials, the value of k tends
to be higher, depending on the properties of the
material.
37.7 Friction Limit Surface
Section 37.3 introduced the notion of a wrench cone,
describing the set of wrenches that can be applied
through a point contact with friction. Any contact
wrench is limited to lie within the surface of the cone.
This gives rise to the general notion of a friction limit
surface – the surface bounding the set of wrenches that
can be applied through a given contact or set of con-
tacts.
In this section we study the particular case of limit
surfaces arising from planar contact patches [37.7, 107].
A planar contact patch occurs when a ﬂat object slides
on the ﬂoor, a soft robot ﬁnger presses against a face
of a polyhedron, or a foot of a humanoid robot pushes
on the ground. We would like to know what wrenches
can be transmitted through such a contact. In the rest of
this section, we focus on the properties of the limit sur-
face of a planar contact patch with a speciﬁed pressure
distribution over the patch.
For ease of discussion, we will call one of the ob-
jects in contact the part (e.g., the ﬂat object on the ﬂoor
or the robot ﬁnger) and the other object a stationary sup-
port. We deﬁne a coordinate frame so that the planar
contact patch is in the z D 0 plane, and let p.r/  0 be
the contact pressure distribution between the part and
support as a function of the location r D .x ; y/T. The
friction coefﬁcient at the contact patch is . If the planar
velocity of the part is t D .!z; vx; vy/T, then the linear
velocity at r is
v.r/ D .vx  !zy; vy C !zx/T ;
and the unit velocity is Ov.r/ D v.r/=kv.r/k. The in-
ﬁnitesimal force applied by the part to the support at r,
in the plane of sliding, is
df.r/ D Œdfx.r/; dfy.r/T D p.r/ Ov.r/ :
(37.25)
The total wrench the part applies to the support is
w D
0
@
mz
fx
fy
1
A
D
Z
A
0
@
xdfy.r/  ydfx.r/
dfx.r/
dfy.r/
1
A dA ;
(37.26)
where A is the support area.
As expected, the wrench is independent of the speed
of motion: for a given t0 and all ˛ > 0, the wrench re-
sulting from velocities ˛t0 is identical. Viewing (37.26)
as a mapping from twists to wrenches, we can map the
surface of the unit twist sphere (kOtk D 1) to a surface
in the wrench space. This surface is the limit surface,
and it is closed, convex, and encloses the origin of the
wrench space (Fig. 37.17). The portion of the wrench
CoR
Z
a
p (r)
x
y
r
A
υ
θ
dA
dc
ft
Fig. 37.17 Contact and coordinates for COR and local in-
ﬁnitesimal area dA for numerical integration to construct
the limit surface of soft ﬁngers

Contact Modeling and Manipulation
37.7 Friction Limit Surface
947
Part D | 37.7
space enclosed by this surface is exactly the set of
wrenches the part can transmit to the support. When the
part slips on the support (t ¤ 0), the contact wrench w
lies on the limit surface, and by the maximum-work in-
equality, the twist t is normal to the limit surface at w.
If the pressure distribution p.r/ is ﬁnite everywhere,
the limit surface is smooth and strictly convex, and the
mapping from unit twists to unit wrenches, and vice
versa, is continuous and one-to-one. The limit surface
also satisﬁes the property w.Ot/ D w.Ot/.
37.7.1 The Friction Limit Surface at a Soft
Contact Interface
Given a pressure distribution in (37.22) we can numer-
ically construct the corresponding friction limit surface
by using (37.25) and (37.26). For an inﬁnitesimal con-
tact area, the contact resembles a point contact. Hence,
the Coulomb’s law of friction can be employed.
In the following, we will exploit the kinematic
property of center of rotation (COR) with modeling
symmetry to formulate equations for the magnitudes of
friction force and moment on a circular contact patch.
Figure 37.17 shows a circular contact patch with an in-
stantaneous COR. By moving (or scanning) the COR
along the x-axis, different possible combinations of fric-
tion force and moment can be obtained to construct the
limit surface. More details can be found in [37.35–38,
41, 41, 42, 107–109].
The following derivation is for the total friction
force (ft) and moment (mz) on the contact interface for
the COR at a distance dc along the x-axis, as shown in
Fig. 37.17. By varying the COR distance dc from 1
to 1, all possible combinations of .ft; mz/ can be found
in order to construct the entire friction limit surface.
The tangential force over the entire contact area
can be obtained by integrating shear force on each in-
ﬁnitesimal areas, dA, on which the Coulomb’s law of
friction is observed, over the entire contact area, A.
When Hertzian contact pressure distribution [37.70] is
considered, use k D 2 in (37.22). Setting r D .x ; y/T
and r D krk, the total tangential force can be integrated
using (37.25) to obtain
f t D
 fx
fy

D 
Z
A
 Ov.r/ p.r/ dA ;
(37.27)
where A denotes the circular contact region in
Fig. 37.17, f t is the tangential force vector with the
direction shown in Fig. 37.17,  is the coefﬁcient of
friction, Ov.r/ is the unit vector in the direction of the
velocity vector v.r/ with respect to the COR on the
inﬁnitesimal area dA at the location r, and p.r/ is the
pressure distribution at distance r from the center of
contact. Since the pressure along the annular ring with
distance r from the center is the same, we denote it by
p.r/ instead of p.r/. The minus sign denotes the oppo-
site directions of Ov.r/ and f t. Since we are primarily
interested in the magnitude of the friction force and
moment, we shall omit this sign in the later derivation
when magnitudes are concerned.
Similarly, the moment about the z-axis, or the nor-
mal to the contact area, is
mz D
Z
A
kr  Ov.r/k p.r/dA ;
(37.28)
where kr  Ov.r/k is the magnitude of the cross product
of the vectors r and Ov.r/, whose direction is normal to
the contact surface.
The unit vector Ov.r/ is related to the distance dc
from the origin to the COR chosen on the x-axis from
Fig. 37.17, and can be written as follows
Ov.r/ D
1
p
.x  dc/2 C y2

y
.x  dc/

D
1
p
.r cos   dc/2 C .r sin /2


r sin 
.r cos   dc/

:
(37.29)
Due to symmetry, fx D 0 for all CORs along the x-
axis; therefore, the magnitude of the tangential force in
the contact tangent plane is ft D fy. Substituting equa-
tions (37.22) and (37.29) into (37.27) and (37.28), we
obtain
ft D
Z
A

.r cos   dc/
p
r2 C d2c  2rdc cos 
Ck
 N
a2

1 
 r
a
k 1
k
dA :
(37.30)
Similarly, the moment about the axis normal to the
plane is
mz D
Z
A

r2  r dc cos 
p
r2 C d2
c  2rdc cos 
Ck
 N
a2

1 
 r
a
k 1
k
dA:
(37.31)
In (37.30) and (37.31), polar coordinates are deﬁned
such that x D r cos , y D r sin , and dA D rdrd.
We also introduce a normalized coordinate
Qr D r
a :
(37.32)

Part D | 37.7
948
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
From (37.32), we can write dr D adQr. We also de-
note Qdc D dc=a, and assume that  is constant through-
out the contact area. Substituting the normalized co-
ordinate into equation (37.30) and dividing both sides
by N, we can derive
f t
N D Ck

2
Z
0
1
Z
0

Qr2 cos   QrQdc

q
Qr2 C Qd2c  2QrQdc cos 
 .1  Qrk/
1
k dQrd :
(37.33)
Substituting again Qr D r=a and dr D adQr into (37.31)
and normalizing with aN, we obtain
mz
aN D Ck

2
Z
0
1
Z
0

Qr3 cos   Qr2Qdc

q
Qr2 C Qd2c  2QrQdc cos 
 .1  Qrk/
1
k dQrd :
(37.34)
Equations (37.33) and (37.34) can be numerically
integrated for a distance dc or Qdc to yield a point on
the limit surface for a prescribed pressure distribution
p.r/ given by (37.22). Both equations involve elliptic
integrals whose closed-form solutions may not exist but
can be evaluated numerically. When the COR distance
dc varies from 1 to 1, all possible combinations of
.ft; mz/ can be obtained for plotting the friction limit
surface.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Normalized force,
ft
μN
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Normalized moment,
mz
α μN
Elliptical approximation
Pressure
distribution: k=4
Pressure
distribution: k=2
Numerical integration
Fig. 37.18 Example limit surface obtained by numerical integration
and elliptical approximation. The numerical integration is based on
the pressure distribution, p.r/, and the coefﬁcient, Ck. In this ﬁgure,
the pressure distributions in (37.22) of both k D 2 and k D 4 are
used
37.7.2 Example of Constructing a Friction
Limit Surface
When
the
pressure
distribution
is
fourth
order
with
k D 4,
the
coefﬁcient
from
Table
37.2
is
C4 D .6=p/.& .3=4/=& .1=4// D 1:1441. Equations
(37.33) and (37.34) can be written as
ft
N D 0:3642
2
Z
0
1
Z
0

Qr2 cos   QrQdc

q
Qr2 C Qd2
c  2QrQdc cos 
 .1  Qr4/
1
4 dQrd :
mz
aN D 0:3642
2
Z
0
1
Z
0

Qr3 cos   Qr2Qdc

q
Qr2 C Qd2c  2QrQdc cos 
 .1  Qr4/
1
4 dQrd :
Numerical integration for different values of Qdc
yields pairs of .ft=.N/; mz=.aN//. Plots of these
pairs are shown in Fig. 37.18.
A reasonable approximation to these numerical re-
sults is given by the following equation of an ellipse
 ft
N
2
C

mz
.mz/max
2
D 1 ;
(37.35)
where the maximum moment .mz/max is
.mz/max D
Z
A
 jrjCk
N
a2

1 
 r
a
k 1
k
dA ;
(37.36)
μN
fx
a)
b)
mn
fx
fy
mn
(mn)max
Fig.37.19a,b Friction
limit
surface
for
soft
ﬁngers:
(a) a 3-D ellipsoid representing the limit surface, and
(b) a section of the ellipsoidal limit surface showing the
coupled relationship between the force and moment, as
those obtained in Fig. 37.18

Contact Modeling and Manipulation
37.8 Contacts in Grasping and Fixture Designs
949
Part D | 37.8
obtained by (37.31) with the COR at dc D 0. This de-
ﬁnes the quarter-elliptical curves in Fig. 37.18. This
approximation is the basis for constructing a three-
dimensional (3-D) ellipsoidal limit surface, as illus-
trated in Fig. 37.19, and is a good model for the soft
contact described in Sect. 37.6.1. More details can be
found in [37.35–37, 39–42].
37.8 Contacts in Grasping and Fixture Designs
It is often important to relate the force and con-
tact displacement (or deformation of contact inter-
face) in grasping and ﬁxture design in which de-
formable contacts are concerned. Furthermore, such
a force–displacement relationship is typically nonlin-
ear due to the nature of contact. A linear expression
such as Hooke’s law cannot capture the instantaneous
and overall characteristics of force and displacement
for these contacts. In this section, we formulate and
discuss such a relationship using the elastic contact
model.
From Fig. 37.13 and the geometry of con-
tact, (37.17), relating the contact radius with normal
force, can be rewritten. Assuming d  R0, the follow-
ing equation can be derived [37.39]
N D cd d ;
(37.37)
where cd is a proportional constant, and  is
 D 1
2 :
(37.38)
Both cd and  can be obtained experimentally. The ex-
ponent  can also be obtained from  through (37.38)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Stiffness ks (N/mm)
Normal force N (N)
Vertical depression d (mm)
150
100
50
0
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Fig. 37.20 The typical load–depression curve in (37.37)
shown with a scale to the right, and the contact stiffness,
ks, as given by (37.39) with a scale to the left
if  is already known for the ﬁngertip. The range of
the exponent in (37.37) is 3=2 	  < 1. In (37.37),
the approach or the vertical depression of the ﬁnger-
tip, d, is proportional to the normal force raised to
the power of 2 (cf. (37.38)) which ranges from 0
to 2=3.
A plot of normal force versus displacement of con-
tact is shown in Fig. 37.20 using (37.37) with a nonlin-
ear power-law equation. Experimental data of contact
between a soft ﬁnger and ﬂat surface show consistent
results when compared with Fig. 37.20 [37.39].
37.8.1 Contact Stiffness
of Soft Fingers
The nonlinear contact stiffness of a soft ﬁnger is deﬁned
as the ratio of the change in normal force with respect
to the change in vertical depression at the contact. The
contact stiffness of soft ﬁngers can be obtained by dif-
ferentiating (37.37) as follows
ks D @N
@d D cd  d1 D 
N
d

:
(37.39)
Substitute (37.37) with d D

N
cd
1=
into (37.39) to de-
rive
ks D c
1

d  N
1

D c2
d
 N12 :
(37.40)
Thus, the nonlinear contact stiffness of soft ﬁngers, de-
rived in a succinct form in (37.39), is the product of the
exponent  and the ratio of the normal force versus the
approach, N=d. A typical contact stiffness as a func-
tion of vertical depression is plotted in Fig. 37.20. The
stiffness shown in the ﬁgure increases with the force.
The expressions for the stiffness, ks, as a function of
various parameter(s) are summarized in the following
Table 37.3.
Table 37.3 Summary of equations of contact stiffness
f.d/
f.N/
f.N; d/
ks
cdd1
c
1

d N
1


 N
d


Part D | 37.9
950
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Table 37.4 Summary of the contact mechanics equations
for linear elastic (when  D 1=3 or  D 3=2) and nonlinear
elastic soft ﬁngers
Description
Equation for soft
ﬁngers
Parameters
Power law
a D c N
0    1
3
Pressure distribution
p.r/ D
p.0/
h
1 
 r
a
ki 1
k
Typically k  1:8
Contact approach
N D cd d
3
2    1
Contact stiffness
ks D  N
d
Nonlinear
The change in stiffness can be obtained by differen-
tiating (37.39) to derive the following equations
@ks
@d D cd .  1/ d2 ;
(37.41)
@ks
@N D   1
d
:
(37.42)
Equation (37.39) suggests that the stiffness of soft con-
tacts always increases because the ratio N=d always
increases, with constant  for prescribed ﬁngertip ma-
terial and range of normal force. This is consistent with
the observation that the contact stiffness becomes larger
(i. e., stiffer) with larger depression and force. Addition-
ally, (37.42) suggests that the contact stiffness ks always
increases with the normal force because @ks=@N > 0
owing to   1:5. Moreover, the change in stiffness with
respect to the normal load is inversely proportional to
the vertical depression, d, as derived in (37.42). This
result asserts that the rate of increase in the contact stiff-
ness will gradually become less and less as the normal
load and vertical depression increase.
A summary of the equations for soft ﬁngers is pre-
sented in Table 37.4. The range of the exponent of
the general power-law equation in (37.17) is 0 	  	
1=3. The Hertzian contact has an exponent of  D 1=3;
therefore, the Hertzian contact theory for linear elas-
tic materials is a special case of (37.17). Linear elastic
materials, such as steel or other metallic ﬁngertips, un-
der small deformation, generally follow the Hertzian
contact theory fairly well. The power-law equation
in (37.17) should be employed for ﬁngertips made of
softer materials, such as soft rubber or silicone or even
viscoelastic ﬁngertips.
37.8.2 Application
of Soft Contact Theory
to Fixture Design
The preceding analysis and results can be applied
in ﬁxturing design and other applications that in-
volve contact with ﬁnite areas [37.6]. In ﬁxture de-
sign with soft contacts (e.g., copper surfaces) un-
der relatively large deformation and load, the power-
law equations in Table 37.4 should be considered
in place of the Hertzian contact equation. In these
cases, the Hertzian contact model is no longer ac-
curate and should be replaced. On the other hand,
if linear elastic materials are used in ﬁxture design
with relatively small deformation (d=R0 	 5%), the ex-
ponent should be taken as  D 1=3 when applying
the contact theory. Furthermore, the exponent  was
found to be material dependent and not geometry de-
pendent in general [37.38]. Once the value of  is
determined for the material (for example, using a ten-
sile testing machine with the experimental procedure
in [37.38]), it can be employed for the analysis of ﬁx-
turing design using the relevant equations presented
herewith.
37.9 Conclusions and Further Reading
In this chapter, both rigid-body and elastic models
of contact interfaces are discussed, including kine-
matic constraints and the duality between the contact
wrenches and twists. Contact forces that may arise
with Coulomb friction are described. Multiple-contact
manipulation tasks with rigid-body and Coulomb fric-
tion are presented. Soft and viscoelastic contact inter-
faces are presented and discussed. The friction limit
surface is introduced and utilized to analyze pushing
problems. An example of constructing a friction limit
surface for soft contact is presented based on the for-
mulation of force/moment of soft contact interface.
Applications of these contact models in ﬁxture anal-
ysis and design are presented with the modeling of
contact interface. Many references in the bibliography
section of this chapter provide further reading on this
subject.
Manipulation modes include grasping, pushing,
rolling,
batting,
throwing,
catching,
casting,
and
other kinds of quasistatic and dynamic manipula-
tion [37.110]. This chapter presents an overview of
contact modeling interfaces, with a particular focus on
their use in manipulation tasks, including graspless or
nonprehensile manipulation modes such as pushing.
Analyses of grasps and ﬁxtures are also presented. Ma-
son’s textbook [37.14] expands on a number of themes
in this chapter, including the theory of polyhedral con-
vex cones, graphical methods for planar problems, and

Contact Modeling and Manipulation
References
951
Part D | 37
applications to manipulation planning. Fundamental
material on polyhedral cones can be found in [37.111]
and their application to representations of twists and
wrenches in [37.10, 112–114]. Twists and wrenches are
elements of classical screw theory, which is covered in
the texts [37.115, 116] and from the point of view of
robotics in the texts [37.30, 117, 118].
In addition, several relevant chapters in this hand-
book provide further reading for theory and applica-
tions, for example, Chaps. 2 and 38.
Video-References
VIDEO 802
Pushing, sliding, and toppling
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/37/videodetails/802
VIDEO 803
Horizontal Transport by 2-DOF Vibration
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/37/videodetails/803
VIDEO 804
Programmable Velocity Vector Fields by 6-DOF Vibration
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/37/videodetails/804
References
37.1
A. Bicchi: On the problem of decomposing grasp
and manipulation forces in multiple whole-limb
manipulation, Int. J. Robotics Auton. Syst. 13, 127–
147 (1994)
37.2
K. Harada, M. Kaneko, T. Tsuji: Rolling based ma-
nipulation for multiple objects, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), San Francisco (2000)
pp. 3888–3895
37.3
M.R. Cutkosky, I. Kao: Computing and control-
ling the compliance of a robotic hand, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 5(2), 151–165 (1989)
37.4
M.R. Cutkosky, S.-H. Lee: Fixture planning with
friction for concurrent product/process design,
Proc. NSF Eng. Des. Res. Conf. (1989)
37.5
S.-H. Lee, M. Cutkosky: Fixture planning with fric-
tion, ASME J. Eng. Ind. 113(3), 320–327 (1991)
37.6
Q. Lin, J.W. Burdick, E. Rimon: A stiffness-based
quality measure for compliant grasps and fix-
tures, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 16(6), 675–688
(2000)
37.7
P. Lötstedt: Coulomb friction in two-dimensional
rigid body systems, Z. Angew. Math. Mech. 61,
605–615 (1981)
37.8
P. Lötstedt: Mechanical systems of rigid bodies
subject to unilateral constraints, SIAM J. Appl.
Math. 42(2), 281–296 (1982)
37.9
P.E. Dupont: The effect of Coulomb friction on the
existence and uniqueness of the forward dynam-
ics problem, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Nice (1992) pp. 1442–1447
37.10
M.A. Erdmann: On a representation of friction in
configuration space, Int. J. Robotics Res. 13(3),
240–271 (1994)
37.11
K.M. Lynch, M.T. Mason: Pulling by pushing,
slip with infinite friction, and perfectly rough
surfaces, Int. J. Robotics Res. 14(2), 174–183
(1995)
37.12
J.S. Pang, J.C. Trinkle: Complementarity formu-
lations and existence of solutions of dynamic
multi-rigid-body contact problems with Coulomb
friction, Math. Prog. 73, 199–226 (1996)
37.13
J.C. Trinkle, J.S. Pang, S. Sudarsky, G. Lo: On dy-
namic multi-rigid-body contact problems with
Coulomb friction, Z. Angew. Math. Mech. 77(4),
267–279 (1997)
37.14
M.T. Mason: Mechanics of Robotic Manipulation
(MIT Press, Cambrige 2001)
37.15
Y.-T. Wang, V. Kumar, J. Abel: Dynamics of rigid
bodies undergoing multiple frictional contacts,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Nice
(1992) pp. 2764–2769
37.16
T.H. Speeter: Three-dimensional finite element
analysis of elastic continua for tactile sensing, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 11(1), 1–19 (1992)
37.17
K. Dandekar, A.K. Srinivasan: A 3-dimensional
finite element model of the monkey finger-
tip for predicting responses of slowly adapting
mechanoreceptors, ASME Bioeng. Conf., Vol. 29
(1995) pp. 257–258
37.18
N. Xydas, M. Bhagavat, I. Kao: Study of soft-finger
contact mechanics using finite element analysis
and experiments, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA), San Francisco (2000)
37.19
K. Komvopoulos, D.-H. Choi: Elastic finite element
analysis of multi-asperity contacts, J. Tribol. 114,
823–831 (1992)
37.20
L.T. Tenek, J. Argyris: Finite Element Analysis for
Composite Structures (Kluwer, Bosten 1998)
37.21
Y. Nakamura: Contact stability measure and op-
timal finger force control of multi-fingered robot
hands, crossing bridges: Advances in flexible au-
tomation and robotics, Proc. U.S.-Jpn. Symp.
Flex. Autom. (1988) pp. 523–528
37.22
Y.C. Park, G.P. Starr: Optimal grasping using
a multifingered robot hand, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Cincinnati (1990) pp. 689–
694
37.23
E. Rimon, J. Burdick: On force and form closure
for multiple finger grasps, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1996) pp. 1795–1800
37.24
E. Rimon, J.W. Burdick: New bounds on the num-
ber of frictionless fingers required to immobilize

Part D | 37
952
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
planar objects, J. Robotics Sys. 12(6), 433–451
(1995)
37.25
E. Rimon, J.W. Burdick: Mobility of bodies in con-
tact – Part I: A 2nd-order mobility index for
multiple-finger grasps, IEEE Trans. Robotics Au-
tom. 14(5), 696–708 (1998)
37.26
D.J. Montana: The kinematics of contact and
grasp, Int. J. Robotics Res. 7(3), 17–32 (1988)
37.27
C.S. Cai, B. Roth: On the planar motion of rigid
bodies with point contact, Mech. Mach. Theory
21(6), 453–466 (1986)
37.28
C. Cai, B. Roth: On the spatial motion of a rigid
body with point contact, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1987) pp. 686–695
37.29
A.B.A. Cole, J.E. Hauser, S.S. Sastry: Kinematics
and control of multifingered hands with rolling
contact, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 34(4), 398–404
(1989)
37.30
R.M. Murray, Z. Li, S.S. Sastry: A Mathematical
Introduction to Robotic Manipulation (CRC, Boca
Raton 1994)
37.31
F. Reuleaux: The Kinematics of Machinery (Dover,
New York 1963), reprint of MacMillan, 1876
37.32
C.A. Coulomb: Theorie des Machines Simples en
Ayant Egard au Frottement de Leurs Parties et a la
Roideur des Cordages (Bachelier, Paris 1821)
37.33
Y. Maeda, T. Arai: Planning of graspless manipula-
tion by a multifingered robot hand, Adv. Robotics
19(5), 501–521 (2005)
37.34
M.T. Mason: Two graphical methods for planar
contact problems, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS), Osaka (1991) pp. 443–448
37.35
R. Howe, I. Kao, M. Cutkosky: Sliding of robot fin-
gers under combined torsion and shear loading,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 1,
Philadelphia (1988) pp. 103–105
37.36
I. Kao, M.R. Cutkosky: Dextrous manipulation with
compliance and sliding, Int. J. Robotics Res. 11(1),
20–40 (1992)
37.37
R.D. Howe, M.R. Cutkosky: Practical force-motion
models for sliding manipulation, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 15(6), 555–572 (1996)
37.38
N. Xydas, I. Kao: Modeling of contact mechan-
ics and friction limit surface for soft fingers with
experimental results, Int. J. Robotics Res. 18(9),
941–950 (1999)
37.39
I. Kao, F. Yang: Stiffness and contact mechanics
for soft fingers in grasping and manipulation, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 20(1), 132–135 (2004)
37.40
J.
Jameson,
L.
Leifer:
Quasi-Static
Analysis:
A method for predicting grasp stability, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1986) pp. 876–
883
37.41
S. Goyal, A. Ruina, J. Papadopoulos: Planar sliding
with dry friction: Part 2, Dynamics of motion Wear
143, 331–352 (1991)
37.42
P. Tiezzi, I. Kao: Modeling of viscoelastic contacts
and evolution of limit surface for robotic con-
tact interface, IEEE Trans. Robotics 23(2), 206–217
(2007)
37.43
M. Anitescu, F. Potra: Formulating multi-rigid-
body contact problems with friction as solvable
linear complementarity problems, ASME J. Non-
lin. Dyn. 14, 231–247 (1997)
37.44
S. Berard, J. Trinkle, B. Nguyen, B. Roghani,
J. Fink, V. Kumar: daVinci code: A multi-model
simulation and analysis tool for multi-body sys-
tems, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2007)
37.45
P. Song, J.-S. Pang, V. Kumar: A semi-implicit
time-stepping model for frictional compliant
contact problems, Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng.
60(13), 2231–2261 (2004)
37.46
D. Stewart, J. Trinkle: An implicit time-stepping
scheme for rigid body dynamics with inelastic
collisions and Coulomb friction, Int. J. Numer.
Methods Eng. 39, 2673–2691 (1996)
37.47
R.W. Cottle, J.-S. Pang, R.E. Stone: The Linear
Complementarity Problem (Academic, New York
1992)
37.48
S.N. Simunovic: Force information in assembly
processes, Int. Symp. Ind. Robots (1975)
37.49
V.-D. Nguyen: Constructing force-closure grasps,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 7(3), 3–16 (1988)
37.50
K.M. Lynch: Toppling manipulation, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1999)
37.51
M.T. Zhang, K. Goldberg, G. Smith, R.-P. Berretty,
M. Overmars: Pin design for part feeding, Robotica
19(6), 695–702 (2001)
37.52
D. Reznik, J. Canny: The Coulomb pump: A novel
parts feeding method using a horizontally-
vibrating surface, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (1998) pp. 869–874
37.53
A.E. Quaid: A miniature mobile parts feeder: Op-
erating principles and simulation results, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1999)
pp. 2221–2226
37.54
D. Reznik, J. Canny: A flat rigid plate is a universal
planar manipulator, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (1998) pp. 1471–1477
37.55
D. Reznik, J. Canny: C’mon part, do the local mo-
tion!, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2001) pp. 2235–2242
37.56
T. Vose, P. Umbanhowar, K.M. Lynch: Vibration-
induced frictional force fields on a rigid plate,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2007)
37.57
M.T. Mason: Mechanics and planning of manipu-
lator pushing operations, Int. J. Robotics Res. 5(3),
53–71 (1986)
37.58
K.Y. Goldberg: Orienting polygonal parts without
sensors, Algorithmica 10, 201–225 (1993)
37.59
R.C. Brost: Automatic grasp planning in the pres-
ence of uncertainty, Int. J. Robotics Res. 7(1), 3–17
(1988)
37.60
J.C. Alexander, J.H. Maddocks: Bounds on the
friction-dominated motion of a pushed object,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 12(3), 231–248 (1993)
37.61
M.A. Peshkin, A.C. Sanderson: The motion of
a pushed, sliding workpiece„ IEEE J. Robotics Au-
tom. 4(6), 569–598 (1988)
37.62
M.A. Peshkin, A.C. Sanderson: Planning robotic
manipulation strategies for workpieces that slide,
IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 4(5), 524–531 (1988)

Contact Modeling and Manipulation
References
953
Part D | 37
37.63
M. Brokowski, M. Peshkin, K. Goldberg: Curved
fences for part alignment, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Atlanta (1993) pp. 467–
473
37.64
K.M. Lynch: The mechanics of fine manipulation
by pushing, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Nice (1992) pp. 2269–2276
37.65
K.M. Lynch, M.T. Mason: Stable pushing: Mechan-
ics, controllability, and planning, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 15(6), 533–556 (1996)
37.66
K. Harada, J. Nishiyama, Y. Murakami, M. Kaneko:
Pushing multiple objects using equivalent friction
center, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2002) pp. 2485–2491
37.67
J.D. Bernheisel, K.M. Lynch: Stable transport of
assemblies: Pushing stacked parts, IEEE Trans. Au-
tom. Sci. Eng. 1(2), 163–168 (2004)
37.68
J.D. Bernheisel, K.M. Lynch: Stable transport of
assemblies by pushing, IEEE Trans. Robotics 22(4),
740–750 (2006)
37.69
H. Mayeda, Y. Wakatsuki: Strategies for pushing
a 3D block along a wall, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS), Osaka (1991) pp. 461–466
37.70
H. Hertz: On the Contact of Rigid Elastic Solids
and on Hardness. In: Miscellaneous Papers, ed.
by H. Hertz (MacMillan, London 1882) pp. 146–
183
37.71
K.L. Johnson: Contact Mechanics (Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge 1985)
37.72
S.P. Timoshenko, J.N. Goodier: Theory of Elasticity,
3rd edn. (McGraw-Hill, New York 1970)
37.73
M.A. Meyers, K.K. Chawla: Mechanical Behavior of
Materials (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, 1999)
37.74
C.D. Tsai: Nonlinear Modeling on Viscoelastic Con-
tact Interface: Theoretical Study and Experimental
Validation, Ph.D. Thesis (Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook 2010)
37.75
C. Tsai, I. Kao, M. Higashimori, M. Kaneko: Mod-
eling, sensing and interpretation of viscoelastic
contact interface, J. Adv. Robotics 26(11/12), 1393–
1418 (2012)
37.76
Y.C. Fung: Biomechanics: Mechanical Properties of
Living Tissues (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1993)
37.77
W. Flugge: Viscoelasticity
(Blaisdell, Waltham
1967)
37.78
J.C. Maxwell: On the dynamical theory of gases,
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 157, 49–88 (1867)
37.79
N. Sakamoto, M. Higashimori, T. Tsuji, M. Kaneko:
An optimum design of robotic hand for handling
a visco-elastic object based on maxwell model,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2007)
pp. 1219–1225
37.80
D.P. Noonan, H. Liu, Y.H. Zweiri, K.A. Althoe-
fer, L.D. Seneviratne: A dual-function wheeled
probe for tissue viscoelastic property indentifica-
tion during minimally invasive surgery, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2007) pp. 2629–
2634
37.81
P. Tiezzi, I. Kao: Characteristics of contact and limit
surface for viscoelastic fingers, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Orlando (2006) pp. 1365–
1370
37.82
P. Tiezzi, I. Kao, G. Vassura: Effect of layer compli-
ance on frictional behavior of soft robotic fingers,
Adv. Robotics 21(14), 1653–1670 (2007)
37.83
M. Kimura, Y. Sugiyama, S. Tomokuni, S. Hirai:
Constructing rheologically deformable virtual ob-
jects, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2003) pp. 3737–3743
37.84
W.N. Findley, J.S.Y. Lay: A modified superposi-
tion principle applied to creep of non-linear vis-
coelastic material under abrupt changes in state
of combined stress, Trans. Soc. Rheol. 11(3), 361–
380 (1967)
37.85
D.B. Adolf, R.S. Chambers, J. Flemming: Potential
energy clock model: Justification and challenging
predictions, J. Rheol. 51(3), 517–540 (2007)
37.86
A.Z. Golik, Y.F. Zabashta: A molecular model of
creep and stress relaxation in crystalline poly-
mers, Polym. Mech. 7(6), 864–869 (1971)
37.87
B.H. Zimm: Dynamics of polymer molecules in di-
lute solution: Viscoelasticity, flow birefringence
and dielectric loss, J. Chem. Phys. 24(2), 269–278
(1956)
37.88
T. Alfrey: A molecular theory of the viscoelas-
tic behavior of an amorphous linear polymer,
J. Chem. Phys. 12(9), 374–379 (1944)
37.89
P.E. Rouse Jr.: A theory of the linear viscoelastic
properties of dilute solutions of coiling polymers,
J. Chem. Phys. 21(7), 1272–1280 (1953)
37.90
F. Bueche: The viscoelastic properties of plastics,
J. Chem. Phys. 22(4), 603–609 (1954)
37.91
L.R.G. Treloar: The Physics of Rubber Elasticity
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1975)
37.92
T.G.
Goktekin,
A.W.
Bargteil,
J.F.
O’Brien:
A
method
for
animating
viscoelastic
fluid,
ACM Trans. Graph. 23(3), 463–468 (1977)
37.93
S. Arimoto, P.A.N. Nguyen, H.Y. Han, Z. Doulgeri:
Dynamics and control of a set of dual fingers with
soft tips, Robotica 18, 71–80 (2000)
37.94
T. Inoue, S. Hirai: Modeling of soft fingertip for
object manipulation using tactile sensig, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Las
Vegas, Nevada (2003)
37.95
T. Inoue, S. Hirai: Rotational contact model of soft
fingertip for tactile sensing, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 2957–2962
37.96
T. Inoue, S. Hirai: Elastic model of deformable fin-
gertip for soft-fingered manipulation, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 22, 1273–1279 (2006)
37.97
T. Inoue, S. Hirai: Dynamic stable manipula-
tion via soft-fingered hand, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2007) pp. 586–591
37.98
V.A. Ho, D.V. Dat, S. Sugiyama, S. Hirai: Develop-
ment and analysis of a sliding tactile soft finger-
tip embedded with a microforce/moment sensor,
IEEE Trans. Robotics 27(3), 411–424 (2011)
37.99
D. Turhan, Y. Mengi: Propagation of initially plane
waves in nonhomogeneous viscoelastic media,
Int. J. Solids Struct. 13(2), 79–92 (1977)
37.100
P. Stucky, W. Lord: Finite element modeling of
transient ultrasonic waves in linear viscoelas-
tic media, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq.
Control 48(1), 6–16 (2001)

Part D | 37
954
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
37.101
J.M. Pereira, J.J. Mansour, B.R. Davis: Dynamic
measurement of the viscoelastic properties of
skin, J. Biomech. 24(2), 157–162 (1991)
37.102
R. Fowles, R.F. Williams: Plane stress wave propa-
gation in solids, J. Appl. Phys. 41(1), 360–363 (1970)
37.103
E. Wolf: Progress in Optics (North-Holland, Ams-
terdam 1992)
37.104
E.J. Nicolson, R.S. Fearing: The reliability of cur-
vature estimates from linear elastic tactile sen-
sors, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1995)
37.105
M. Abramowitz, I. Stegun: Handbook of Math-
ematical Functions with Formulas, Graphs, and
mathematical Tables, 7th edn. (Dover, New York
1972)
37.106
I. Kao, S.-F. Chen, Y. Li, G. Wang: Application
of bio-engineering contact interface and MEMS
in robotic and human augmented systems, IEEE
Robotics Autom, Mag. 10(1), 47–53 (2003)
37.107
S. Goyal, A. Ruina, J. Papadopoulos: Planar sliding
with dry friction: Part 1. Limit surface and moment
function, Wear 143, 307–330 (1991)
37.108
J.W. Jameson: Analytic Techniques for Automated
Grasp. Ph.D. Thesis (Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford 1985)
37.109
S. Goyal, A. Ruina, J. Papadopoulos: Limit surface
and moment function description of planar slid-
ing, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Scottsdale (1989) pp. 794–799
37.110
K.M. Lynch, M.T. Mason: Dynamic nonprehensile
manipulation: Controllability, planning, and ex-
periments, Int. J. Robotics Res. 18(1), 64–92 (1999)
37.111
A.J. Goldman, A.W. Tucker: Polyhedral convex
cones. In: Linear Inequalities and Related Sys-
tems, ed. by H.W. Kuhn, A.W. Tucker (Princeton
Univ. Press, Princeton 1956)
37.112
M.A. Erdman: A configuration space friction cone,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Osaka
(1991) pp. 455–460
37.113
M.A. Erdmann: Multiple-point contact with fric-
tion: Computing forces and motions in configura-
tion space, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS), Yokohama (1993) pp. 163–170
37.114
S. Hirai, H. Asada: Kinematics and statics of ma-
nipulation using the theory of polyhedral convex
cones, Int. J. Robotics Res. 12(5), 434–447 (1993)
37.115
R.S. Ball: The Theory of Screws (Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge 1900)
37.116
K.H. Hunt: Kinematic Geometry of Mechanisms
(Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford 1978)
37.117
J.K. Davidson, K.H. Hunt: Robots and Screw The-
ory (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford 2004)
37.118
J.M. Selig: Geometric Fundamentals of Robotics,
2nd edn. (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2005)

Multimedia Contents Grasping
955
Part D | 38
38. Grasping
Domenico Prattichizzo, Jeffrey C. Trinkle
This chapter introduces fundamental models of
grasp analysis. The overall model is a coupling of
models that define contact behavior with widely
used models of rigid-body kinematics and dy-
namics. The contact model essentially boils down
to the selection of components of contact force
and moment that are transmitted through each
contact. Mathematical properties of the complete
model naturally give rise to five primary grasp types
whose physical interpretations provide insight for
grasp and manipulation planning.
After introducing the basic models and types of
grasps, this chapter focuses on the most important
grasp characteristic: complete restraint. A grasp
with complete restraint prevents loss of contact
and thus is very secure. Two primary restraint prop-
erties are form closure and force closure. A form
closure grasp guarantees maintenance of contact
as long as the links of the hand and the object
are well-approximated as rigid and as long as the
joint actuators are sufficiently strong. As will be
seen, the primary difference between form clo-
sure and force closure grasps is the latter’s reliance
on contact friction. This translates into requiring
fewer contacts to achieve force closure than form
closure.
The goal of this chapter is to give a thorough
understanding of the all-important grasp proper-
ties of form and force closure. This will be done
through detailed derivations of grasp models and
38.1
Models and Definitions ........................
956
38.1.1
Velocity Kinematics....................
957
38.1.2
Dynamics and Equilibrium .........
960
38.2 Controllable Twists and Wrenches.........
961
38.2.1
Grasp Classifications ..................
962
38.2.2 Limitations of Rigid-Body
Formulation..............................
963
38.2.3 Desirable Properties...................
963
38.3 Compliant Grasps.................................
965
38.4 Restraint Analysis ................................
967
38.4.1
Form Closure.............................
968
38.4.2 Force Closure.............................
972
38.5 Examples ............................................
975
38.5.1
Example 1: Grasped Sphere ........
975
38.5.2 Example 2: Grasped Polygon
in the Plane..............................
978
38.5.3 Example 3: Hyperstatic Grasps ....
980
38.5.4 Example 4: Duality ....................
983
38.5.5 Example 5: Form Closure............
983
38.6 Conclusion and Further Reading...........
985
Video-References.........................................
986
References...................................................
986
discussions of illustrative examples. For an in-
depth historical perspective and a treasure-trove
bibliography of papers addressing a wide range of
topics in grasping, the reader is referred to [38.1].
Mechanical hands were developed to give robots the
ability to grasp objects of varying geometric and
physical properties. The ﬁrst robotic hand designed
for dexterous manipulation was the Salisbury Hand
(Fig. 38.1) [38.2]. It has three three-jointed ﬁngers;
enough to control all six degrees of freedom of an
object and the grip pressure. The fundamental grasp
modeling and analysis done by Salisbury provides a ba-
sis for grasp synthesis and dexterous manipulation
research which continues today. Some of the most ma-

Part D | 38.1
956
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
ture analysis techniques are embedded in the widely
used software GraspIt! [38.3] and SynGrasp [38.4, 5].
GraspIt! contains models for several robot hands and
provides tools for grasp selection, dynamic grasp sim-
ulation, and visualization. SynGrasp is a MATLAB
Toolbox that can be obtained from [38.6] and pro-
vides models and functions for grasp analysis with
both fully and underactuated hands. It can be a useful
educational tool to get aquainted with the mathemat-
ical framework of robotic grasping described in this
Chapter. Over the years since the Salisbury Hand was
built, many articulated robot hands have been devel-
oped. Nearly all of these have one actuator per joint or
fewer. A notable exception is the DLR hand arm system
developed by DLR (Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und
Raumfahrt), which has two actuators per joint that drive
each joint independently with two antagonistic tendons
(Fig. 38.7) [38.7].
38.1 Models and Definitions
A mathematical model of grasping must be capable of
predicting the behavior of the hand and object under
various loading conditions that may arise during grasp-
ing. Generally, the most desirable behavior is grasp
maintenance in the face of unknown disturbing forces
and moments applied to the object. Typically these
disturbances arise from inertia forces which become
appreciable during high-speed manipulation or applied
forces such as those due to gravity. Grasp maintenance
means that the contact forces applied by the hand are
such that they prevent contact separation and unwanted
contact sliding. The special class of grasps that can be
maintained for every possible disturbing load is known
as closure grasps. Figure 38.1 shows the Salisbury
Hand [38.2, 8], executing a closure grasp of an object by
wrapping its ﬁngers around it and pressing it against its
palm. Formal deﬁnitions, analysis, and computational
tests for closure will be presented in Sect. 38.4.
Figure 38.2 illustrates some of the main quantities
that will be used to model grasping systems. Assume
that the links of the hand and the object are rigid and
that there is a unique, well-deﬁned tangent plane at each
contact point. Let fNg represent a conveniently chosen
inertial frame ﬁxed in the workspace. The frame fBg
Fig. 38.1 The Salisbury Hand grasping an object
is ﬁxed to the object with its origin deﬁned relative
to fNg by the vector p 2 R3, where R3 denotes three-
dimensional Euclidean space. A convenient choice for
p is the center of mass of the object. The position of
contact point i in fNg is deﬁned by the vector ci 2 R3.
At contact point i, we deﬁne a frame fCgi, with axes
fOni;Oti; Ooig (fCg1 is shown in exploded view). The unit
vector Oni is normal to the contact tangent plane and
directed toward the object. The other two unit vec-
tors are orthogonal and lie in the tangent plane of the
contact.
Let the joints be numbered from 1 to nq. Denote
by q D Œq1    qnqT 2 Rnq the vector of joint displace-
ments, where the superscript T indicates matrix trans-
position. Also, let  D Œ1    nqT 2 Rnq represent joint
loads (forces in prismatic joints and torques in revolute
joints). These loads can result from actuator actions,
other applied forces, and inertia forces. They could
also arise from interaction at the contacts between the
object and hand. However, it will be convenient to sep-
g
y
{B}
x
p
z
y
{N }
x
z
oˆ1
nˆ1
tˆ1
c2
c1
τ2, q2
τ1, q1
τ3, q3
τ4, q4
τ5, q5
Fig. 38.2 Main quantities for grasp analysis

Grasping
38.1 Models and Definitions
957
Part D | 38.1
arate joint loads into two components: those arising
from contacts and those arising from all other sources.
Throughout this Chapter, non-contact loads will be de-
noted by .
Let u 2 Rnu denote the vector describing the posi-
tion and orientation of fBg relative to fNg. For planar
systems nu D 3. For spatial systems, nu is three plus
the number of parameters used to represent orienta-
tion; typically three (for Euler angles) or four (for unit
quaternions). Denote by  D Œv T !TT 2 Rn, the twist
of the object described in fNg. It is composed of the
translational velocity v 2 R3 of the point p and the
angular velocity ! 2 R3 of the object, both expressed
in fNg. A twist of a rigid body can be referred to any
convenient frame ﬁxed to the body. The components of
the referred twist represent the velocity of the origin of
the new frame and the angular velocity of the body, both
expressed in the new frame (Table 38.1). For a rigorous
treatment of twists and wrenches see [38.9, 10]. Note
that for planar systems, v 2 R2, ! 2 R, and so n D 3.
Another important point is Pu ¤ . Instead, these
variables are related by the matrix V as
Pu D V ;
(38.1)
where the matrix V 2 Rnun is not generally square,
but nonetheless satisﬁes VTV D I [38.11], where I is
the identity matrix, and the dot over the u implies dif-
ferentiation with respect to time. Note that for planar
systems, V D I 2 R33.
Let f 2 R3 be the force applied to the object at the
point p and let m 2 R3 be the applied moment. These
are combined into the object load, or wrench, vector
denoted by g D

f T mT	T 2 Rn, where f and m are ex-
pressed in fNg. Like twists, wrenches can be referred to
any convenient frame ﬁxed to the body. One can think
of this as translating the line of application of the force
until it contains the origin of the new frame, then ad-
justing the moment component of the wrench to offset
the moment induced by moving the line of the force.
Last, the force and adjusted moment are expressed in
the new frame. As done with the joint loads, the object
wrench will be partitioned into two main parts: contact
and non-contact wrenches. Throughout this chapter, g
will denote the non-contact wrench on the object.
38.1.1 Velocity Kinematics
The material in this chapter is valid for a wide range
of robot hands and other grasping mechanisms. The
hand is assumed to be composed of a palm that serves
as the common base for any number of ﬁngers, each
with any number of joints. The formulations given in
this chapter are expressed explicitly in terms of only
Table 38.1 Primary notation for grasp analysis
Notation
Deﬁnition
nc
Number of contacts
nq
Number of joints of the hand
n
Number of degrees of freedom of object
n	
Number of contact wrench components
q 2 Rnq
Joint displacements
Pq 2 Rnq
Joint velocities
 2 Rnq
Non-contact joint loads
u 2 Rnu
Position and orientation of object
 2 Rn
Twist of object
g 2 Rn
Non-contact object wrench
 2 Rn	
Transmitted contact wrenches
cc 2 Rn	
Transmitted contact twists
fBg
Frame ﬁxed in object
fCgi
Frame at contact i
fNg
Inertial frame
revolute and prismatic joints. However, most other com-
mon joints can be modeled by combinations of revolute
and prismatic joints (e.g., cylindrical and planar). Any
number of contacts may occur between any link and the
object.
Grasp Matrix and Hand Jacobian
Two matrices are of the utmost importance in grasp
analysis: the grasp matrix G and the hand Jacobian J.
These matrices deﬁne the relevant velocity kinemat-
ics and force transmission properties of the contacts.
The following derivations of G and J will be done un-
der the assumption that the system is three-dimensional
(n D 6). Changes for planar systems will be noted
later.
Each contact should be considered as two coinci-
dent points; one on the hand and one on the object. The
hand Jacobian maps the joint velocities to the twists of
the hand to the contact frames, while the transpose of
the grasp matrix maps the object twist to the contact
frames. Finger joint motions induce a rigid body motion
in each link of the hand. It is implicit in the terminology,
twists of the hand, that the twist referred to contact i is
the twist of the link involved in contact i. Thus these
matrices can be derived from the transforms that change
the reference frame of a twist.
To derive the grasp matrix, let !N
obj denote the angu-
lar velocity of the object expressed in fNg and let v N
i;obj,
also expressed in fNg, denote the velocity of the point
on the object coincident with the origin of fCgi. These
velocities can be obtained from the object twist referred
to fNg as
 
v N
i;obj
!N
obj
!
D PT
i ;
(38.2)

Part D | 38.1
958
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
where
Pi D

I33
0
S.ci  p/
I33

(38.3)
I33 2 R33 is the identity matrix, and S.ci  p/ is the
cross product matrix, that is, given a three-vector r D
Œrx ry rzT, S.r/ is deﬁned as follows
S.r/ D
0
@
0
rz
ry
rz
0
rx
ry
rx
0
1
A :
The object twist referred to fCgi is simply the vector
on the left-hand side of (38.2) expressed in fCgi.
Let Ri D .Oni Oti Ooi/ 2 R33 represent the orientation
of the i-th contact frame fCgi with respect to the inertial
frame (the unit vectors Oni, Oti, and Ooi are expressed in
fNg). Then the object twist referred to fCgi is given as
i;obj D R
T
i
 
v N
i;obj
!N
obj
!
;
(38.4)
where Ri D Blockdiag.Ri; Ri/ D
Ri
0
0
Ri

2 R66.
Substituting PT
i  from (38.2) into (38.4) yields the
partial grasp matrix QGT
i 2 R66, that maps the object
twist from fNg to fCgi
i;obj D QGT
i  ;
(38.5)
where
QGT
i D R
T
i PT
i :
(38.6)
The hand Jacobian can be derived similarly. Let
!N
i;hnd be the angular velocity of the link of the hand
touching the object at contact i, expressed in fNg, and
deﬁne v N
i;hnd as the translational velocity of contact i
on the hand, expressed in fNg. These velocities are re-
lated to the joint velocities through the matrix Zi whose
columns are the Plücker coordinates of the axes of the
joints [38.9, 10]. We have
 
v N
i;hnd
!N
i;hnd
!
D ZiPq ;
(38.7)
where Zi 2 R6nq is deﬁned as
Zi D
di;1
  
di;nq
i;1
  
i;nq

;
(38.8)
with the vectors di;j; i;j 2 R3 deﬁned as
di;j D
8
ˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆ:
031
if contact force i does
not affect joint j ;
Ozj
if joint j is prismatic ;
S.ci  
j/TOzj
if joint j is revolute ;
i;j D
8
ˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆ:
031
if contact force i does
not affect joint j ;
031
if joint j is prismatic ;
Ozj
if joint j is revolute ;
where 
j is the origin of the coordinate frame associated
with the j-th joint and Ozj is the unit vector in the direction
of the z-axis in the same frame, as shown in Fig. 38.12.
Both vectors are expressed in fNg. These frames may
be assigned by any convenient method, for example, the
Denavit–Hartenberg method [38.12]. The Ozj-axis is the
rotational axis for revolute joints and the direction of
translation for prismatic joints.
The ﬁnal step in referring the hand twists to the con-
tact frames is change the frame of expression of v N
i;hnd
and !N
i;hnd to fCgi
i;hnd D R
T
i
 
v N
i;hnd
!N
i;hnd
!
:
(38.9)
Combining (38.9) and (38.7) yields the partial hand
Jacobian QJi 2 R6nq, which relates the joint velocities
to the contact twists on the hand
i;hnd D QJiPq ;
(38.10)
where
QJi D R
T
i Zi:
(38.11)
To simplify notation, stack all the twists on the hand
and object into the vectors c;hnd 2 R6nc and c;obj 2
R6nc as follows
c; D

T
1;
  
T
nc;
T
;
 D fobj, hndg :
Now the complete grasp matrix QG 2 R66nc and com-
plete hand Jacobian QJ 2 R6ncnq relate the various ve-
locity quantities as follows
c;obj D QGT ;
(38.12)
c;hnd D QJPq ;
(38.13)
where
QGT D
0
B@
QGT
1:::
QGT
nc
1
CA ;
QJ D
0
B@
QJ1
:::
QJnc
1
CA :
(38.14)

Grasping
38.1 Models and Definitions
959
Part D | 38.1
The term complete is used to emphasize that all 6nc
twist components at the contacts are included in the
mapping. See Example 1, Part 1 and Example 3, Part 1
at the end of this chapter for clariﬁcation.
Contact Modeling
Contacts play a central role in grasping. Contacts al-
lows to impose a given motion to the object or to apply
a given force through the object. All grasping actions
go through contacts whose model and control is cru-
cial in grasping. Three contact models useful for grasp
analysis are reviewed here. For a complete discussion
of contact modeling in robotics, readers are referred to
Chap. 37.
The three models of greatest interest in grasp analy-
sis are known as point-contact-without-friction, hard-
ﬁnger, and soft-ﬁnger [38.13]. These models select
components of the contact twists to transmit between
the hand and the object. This is done by equating a sub-
set of the components of the hand and object twist
at each contact. The corresponding components of the
contact force and moment are also equated, but without
regard for the constraints imposed by a friction model
(Sect. 38.4.2).
The point-contact-without-friction (PwoF) model is
used when the contact patch is very small and the sur-
faces of the hand and object are slippery. With this
model, only the normal component of the translational
velocity of the contact point on the hand (i. e., the
ﬁrst component of i;hnd) is transmitted to the object.
The two components of tangential velocity and the
three components of angular velocity are not transmit-
ted. Analogously, the normal component of the contact
force is transmitted, but the frictional forces and mo-
ments are assumed to be negligible.
A hard ﬁnger (HF) model is used when there is
signiﬁcant contact friction, but the contact patch is
small, so that no appreciable friction moment exists.
When this model is applied to a contact, all three trans-
lational velocity components of the contact point on
the hand (i. e., the ﬁrst three components of i;hnd)
and all three components of the contact force are
transmitted through the contact. None of the angu-
lar velocity components or moment components are
transmitted.
The soft ﬁnger (SF) model is used in situations in
which the surface friction and the contact patch are
large enough to generate signiﬁcant friction forces and
a friction moment about the contact normal. At a con-
tact where this model is enforced, the three translational
velocity components of the contact on the hand and
the angular velocity component about the contact nor-
mal are transmitted (i. e., the ﬁrst four components of
i;hnd). Similarly, all three components of contact force
and the normal component of the contact moment are
transmitted.
Remark 38.1
The reader may see a contradiction between the rigid-
body assumption and the soft-ﬁnger model. The rigid-
body assumption is an approximation that simpliﬁes all
aspects of the analysis of grasping, but nonetheless is
sufﬁciently accurate in many real situations. Without it,
grasp analysis would be impractical. On the other hand,
the need for a soft-ﬁnger model is a clear admission that
the ﬁnger links and object are not rigid. However, it can
be usefully applied in situations in which the amount
of deformation required to obtain a large contact patch
is small. Such situations occur when the local surface
geometries are similar. If large ﬁnger or body deforma-
tions exist in the real system, the rigid-body approach
presented in this chapter should be used with caution.
To develop the PwoF, HF, and SF models, deﬁne
the relative twist at contact i as follows
QJi
 QGT
i
 Pq


D i;hnd  i;obj :
A particular contact model is deﬁned through the ma-
trix Hi 2 Rn	i6, which selects n	i components of the
relative contact twist and sets them to zero
Hi.i;hnd  i;obj/ D 0 :
These components are referred to as transmitted de-
grees of freedom (DOF). Deﬁne Hi as follows
Hi D

 HiF
0
0
HiM

;
(38.15)
where HiF and HiM are the translational and rotational
component selection matrices. Table 38.2 gives the def-
initions of the selection matrices for the three contact
models, where vacuous for HiM means that the corre-
sponding block row matrix in (38.15) is void (i. e., it has
zero rows and columns). Notice that for the SF model,
HiM selects rotation about the contact normal.
After choosing a transmission model for each con-
tact, the kinematic contact constraint equations for all
nc contacts can be written in compact form as
H.c;hnd  c;obj/ D 0 ;
(38.16)
Table 38.2 Selection matrices for three contact models
Model
ni
HiF
HiM
PwoF
1
.1 0 0/
Vacuous
HF
3
I33
Vacuous
SF
4
I33
.1 0 0/

Part D | 38.1
960
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
where
H D Blockdiag.H1; : : : ; Hnc/ 2 Rn	6nc;
and the number of twist components n	 transmitted
through the nc contacts is given by n	 D Pnc
iD1 n	i.
Finally, by substituting (38.12) and (38.13) into
(38.16) one gets the compact form of the velocity kine-
matic contact constraints

J
GT Pq


D 0 ;
(38.17)
where the grasp matrix and hand Jacobian are ﬁnally
deﬁned as
GT D H QGT 2 Rn	6 ;
J D HQJ 2 Rn	nq :
(38.18)
For more details on the construction of H, the grasp
matrix, and the hand Jacobian, readers are referred
to [38.14–16] and the references therein. Also, see Ex-
ample 1, Part 2 and Example 3, Part 2.
It is worth noting that (38.17) can be written in the
following form
JPq D cc;hnd D cc;obj D GT ;
(38.19)
where cc;hnd and cc;obj contain only the components of
the twists that are transmitted by the contacts. To under-
line the central role of contact constraints in grasping,
it is worth noting that grasp maintenance is deﬁned
as the situation in which constraints (38.19) are main-
tained over time. The kinematic contact constraint holds
only if the contact force satisﬁes the friction constraints
for the contact models with friction or the unilat-
eral constraint for the contact model without friction
(Sect. 38.4.2).
Thus, when a contact is frictionless, contact mainte-
nance implies continued contact, but sliding is allowed.
However, when a contact is of the type HF, con-
tact maintenance implies sticking contact, since sliding
would violate the HF model. Similarly, for a SF con-
tact, there may be no sliding or relative rotation about
the contact normal.
For the remainder of this chapter, it will be assumed
that cc;hnd D cc;obj, so the notation will be shortened
to cc.
Planar Simplifications
Assume that the plane of motion is the .x; y/-plane
of fNg. The vectors  and g reduce in dimension
from six to three by dropping components three, four,
and ﬁve. The dimensions of vectors ci and p re-
duce from three to two. The i-th rotation matrix be-
comes Ri D ŒOni Oti 2 R22 (where the third component
of Oni and Oti is dropped) and (38.4) holds with Ri D
Blockdiag.Ri; 1/ 2 R33. Equation (38.2) holds with
Pi D

I22
0
S2.ci  p/
1

;
where S2 is the analog of the cross product matrix for
two-dimensional vectors, given as
S2.r/ D

ry
rx

:
Equation (38.7) holds with di;j 2 R2 and i;j 2 R de-
ﬁned as
di;j D
8
ˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆ:
021
if contact force i does
not affect the joint j ;
Ozj
if joint j is prismatic ;
S.ci  
j/T
if joint j is revolute ;
i;j D
8
ˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆ:
0
if contact force i does
not affect joint j ;
0
if joint j is prismatic ;
1
if joint j is revolute :
The complete grasp matrix and hand Jacobian have re-
duced sizes: QGT 2 R3nc3 and QJ 2 R3ncnq. As far as
contact constraint is concerned, (38.15) holds with HiF
and HiM deﬁned in Table 38.3.
In the planar case, the SF and HF models are equiv-
alent, because the object and the hand lie in a plane.
Rotations about the contact normals would cause out-
of-plane motions. Finally, the dimensions of the grasp
matrix and hand Jacobian are reduced to the follow-
ing sizes: GT 2 Rn	3 and J 2 Rn	nq. See Example 1,
Part 3 and Example 2, Part 1.
38.1.2 Dynamics and Equilibrium
Dynamic equations of the system can be written as
Mhnd.q/Rq C bhnd.q; Pq/ C JT	 D app
Mobj.u/P C bobj.u; /  G	 D gapp
subject to constraint (38.17) ;
(38.20)
Table 38.3 Deﬁnitions
Model
ni
HiF
HiM
PwoF
1

1
0

Vacuous
HF/SF
2
I22
Vacuous

Grasping
38.2 Controllable Twists and Wrenches
961
Part D | 38.2
Table 38.4 Vectors of contact force and moment compo-
nents, also known as the wrench intensity vector, transmit-
ted through contact i
Model
i
PwoF
.fin/
HF
.fin fit fio/T
SF
.fin fit fio min/T
where Mhnd./ and Mobj./ are symmetric, positive def-
inite inertia matrices, bhnd.; / and bobj.;/ are the
velocity-product terms, gapp is the force and moment
applied to the object by gravity and other external
sources, app is the vector of external loads and ac-
tuator actions, and the vector G	 is the total wrench
applied to the object by the hand. The vector 	 contains
the contact force and moment components transmit-
ted through the contacts and expressed in the contact
frames. Speciﬁcally, 	 D Œ	T
1    	T
ncT, where
	i D HiŒfin fit fio min mit mioT :
The subscripts indicate one normal (n) and two tangen-
tial (t,o) components of contact force f and moment m.
For a SF, HF, or PwoF contact, 	i is deﬁned as in Ta-
ble 38.4. Finally, it is worth noting that Gi	i D QGiHT
i 	i
is the wrench applied through contact i, where QGi and
Hi are deﬁned in (38.6) and (38.15). The vector 	i is
known as the wrench intensity vector for contact i.
Equation (38.20) represents the dynamics of the
hand and object without regard for the kinematic con-
straints imposed by the contact models. Enforcing
them, the dynamic model of the system can be written
as follows
 JT
G

	 D

g

(38.21)
subject to JPq D GT D cc, where
 D app  Mhnd.q/Rq  bhnd.q; Pq/
g D gapp  Mobj.u/P  bobj.u; / :
(38.22)
One should notice that the dynamic equations
are closely related to the velocity kinematic model
in (38.17). Speciﬁcally, just as J and GT transmit only
selected components of contact twists, JT and G in
(38.20) serve to transmit only the corresponding com-
ponents of the contact wrenches.
When the inertia terms are negligible, as occurs dur-
ing slow motion, the system is said to be quasi-static. In
this case, (38.22) becomes
 D app ;
g D gapp ;
(38.23)
and does not depend on joint and object velocities. Con-
sequently, when the grasp is in static equilibrium or
moves quasi-statically, one can solve the ﬁrst equation
and the constraint in (38.21) independently to compute
	, Pq, and . It is worth noting that such a force/velocity
decoupled solution is not possible when dynamic ef-
fects are appreciable, since the ﬁrst equation in (38.21)
depends on the third one through (38.22).
Remark 38.2
Equation (38.21) highlights an important alternative
view of the grasp matrix and the hand Jacobian. G can
be thought of as a mapping from the transmitted con-
tact forces and moments to the set of wrenches that the
hand can apply to the object, while JT can be thought
of as a mapping from the transmitted contact forces and
moments to the vector of joint loads. Notice that these
interpretations hold for both dynamic and quasi-static
conditions.
38.2 Controllable Twists and Wrenches
In hand design and in grasp and manipulation planning,
it is important to know the set of twists that can be im-
parted to the object by movements of the ﬁngers, and
conversely, the conditions under which the hand can
prevent all possible motions of the object. The dual
view is that one needs to know the set of wrenches that
the hand can apply to the object and under what con-
ditions any wrench in R6 can be applied through the
contacts. This knowledge will be gained by studying the
various subspaces associated with G and J [38.17].
The spaces, shown in Fig. 38.3, are the column
spaces and null spaces of G, GT, J, and JT. Column
space (also known as range) and null space will be de-
noted by R./ and N ./, respectively. The arrows show
the propagation of the various velocity and load quan-
tities through the grasping system. For example, in the
left part of Fig. 38.3 it is shown how any vector Pq 2 Rnq
can be decomposed into a sum of two orthogonal vec-
tors in R.JT/ and in N .J/ and how Pq is mapped to
R.J/ by multiplication by J.
It is important to recall two facts from linear al-
gebra. First, a matrix A maps vectors from R.AT/ to
R.A/ in a one-to-one and onto fashion, that is, the
map A is a bijection. The generalized inverse AC of

Part D | 38.2
962
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
0
J
(JT)
(J)
0
G+
(GT)
(G)
(J)
(GT)
(G )
(JT)
λ
λ
Fig. 38.3 Linear maps relating twists
and wrenches of a grasping system
A is a bijection that maps vectors in the opposite direc-
tion [38.18]. Also, A maps all vectors in N .A/ to zero.
Finally, there is no non-trivial vector that A can map
into N .AT/. This implies that if N .GT/ is non-trivial,
then the hand will not be able to control all degrees of
freedom of the object’s motion. This is certainly true for
quasi-static grasping, but when dynamics are important,
they may cause the object to move along the directions
in N .GT/.
38.2.1 Grasp Classifications
The four null spaces motivate a basic classiﬁcation of
grasping systems deﬁned in Table 38.5. Assuming so-
lutions to (38.21) exist, the following force and velocity
equations provide insight into the physical meaning of
the various null spaces
Pq D JCcc C N.J/ ;
(38.24)
 D .GT/Ccc C N.GT/ ;
(38.25)
	 D GCg C N.G/ ;
(38.26)
	 D .JT/C C N.JT/ :
(38.27)
In these equations, AC denotes the generalized inverse,
henceforth pseudoinverse, of a matrix A, N.A/ denotes
Table 38.5 Basic grasp classes
Condition
Class
Many-to-one
N .J/ ¤ 0
Redundant
Pq ! cc
 ! 
N .GT/ ¤ 0
Indeterminate
 ! cc
g ! 
N .G/ ¤ 0
Graspable
 ! g
cc ! 
N .JT/ ¤ 0
Defective
 ! 
cc ! Pq
a matrix whose columns form a basis for N .A/, and 
is an arbitrary vector of appropriate dimension that pa-
rameterizes the solution sets. If not otherwise speciﬁed,
the context will make clear if the generalized inverse is
left or right.
If the null spaces represented in the equations are
non-trivial, then one immediately sees the ﬁrst many-
to-one mapping in Table 38.5. To see the other many-
to-one mappings, and in particular the defective class,
consider (38.24). It can be rewritten with cc decom-
posed into orthogonal components rs and lns in R.J/
and N .JT/, respectively
Pq D JC.rs C lns/ C N.J/ :
(38.28)
Recall that every vector in N .AT/ is orthogonal to ev-
ery row of AC. Therefore JClns D 0. If  and rs are
ﬁxed in (38.28), then Pq is unique. Thus it is clear that
if N .JT/ is non-trivial, then a subspace of twists of the
hand at the contacts will map to a single joint velocity
vector. Applying the same approach to the other three
equations (38.25)–(38.27) yields the other many-to-one
mappings listed in Table 38.5.
Equations (38.21) and (38.24)–(38.27), motivate the
following deﬁnitions.
Definition 38.1 Redundant
A grasping system is said to be redundant if N .J/ is
non-trivial.
Joint velocities Pq in N .J/ are referred to as internal
hand velocities, since they correspond to ﬁnger mo-
tions, but do not generate motion of the hand in the
constrained directions at the contact points. If the quasi-
static model applies, it can be shown that these motions
are not inﬂuenced by the motion of the object and vice
versa.

Grasping
38.2 Controllable Twists and Wrenches
963
Part D | 38.2
Definition 38.2 Indeterminate
A grasping system is said to be indeterminate if N .GT/
is non-trivial.
Object twists  in N .GT/ are called internal object
twists, since they correspond to motions of the object,
but do not cause motion of the object in the constrained
directions at the contacts. If the static model applies, it
can be shown that these twists cannot be controlled by
ﬁnger motions.
Definition 38.3 Graspable
A grasping system is said to be graspable if N .G/ is
non-trivial.
Wrench intensities 	 in N .G/ are referred to as inter-
nal object forces. These wrenches are internal because
they do not contribute to the acceleration of the object,
i. e., G	 D 0. Instead, these wrench intensities affect
the tightness of the grasp. Thus, internal wrench inten-
sities play a fundamental role in maintaining grasps that
rely on friction (Sect. 38.4.2).
Definition 38.4 Defective
A grasping system is said to be defective if N .JT/ is
non-trivial.
Wrench intensities 	 in N .JT/ are called internal
hand forces. These forces do not inﬂuence the hand
joint dynamics given in (38.20). If the static model
is considered, it can be easily shown that wrench in-
tensities belonging to N .JT/ cannot be generated by
joint actions, but can be resisted by the structure of the
hand.
See Example 1, Part 4, Example 2, Part 2 and Ex-
ample 3, Part 3.
38.2.2 Limitations of Rigid-Body
Formulation
The rigid-body dynamics equation (38.20) can be
rewritten with Lagrange multipliers associated with the
contact constraints as
Mdyn
0
@
Rq
P
	
1
A D
0
@
  bhnd
  bobj
bc
1
A ;
(38.29)
where bc D Œ@.JPq/=@qPq  Œ@.G/=@uPu and
Mdyn D
0
@
Mhnd
0
JT
0
Mobj
G
J
GT
0
1
A :
In order for this equation to completely determine the
motion of the system, it is necessary that matrix Mdyn be
invertible. This case is considered in detail in [38.19],
where the dynamics of multi-ﬁnger manipulation is
studied under the hypothesis that the hand Jacobian is
full row rank, i. e., N .JT/ D 0. For all manipulation
systems with non-invertible Mdyn, rigid-body dynamics
fails to determine the motion and the wrench intensity
vector. By observing that
N .Mdyn/
D f.Rq; P; 	/TjRq D 0; P D 0;	 2 N .JT/ \ N .G/g ;
the same arguments apply under quasi-static condi-
tions deﬁned by (38.21) and (38.23). When N .JT/ \
N .G/ ¤ 0, the rigid-body approach fails to solve the
ﬁrst equation in (38.21), thus leaving 	 indeterminate.
Definition 38.5 Hyperstatic
A grasping system is said to be hyperstatic if
N .JT/ \ N .G/
is non-trivial.
In such systems there are internal forces (Deﬁni-
tion 38.3) belonging to N .JT/ that are not controllable
as discussed for defective grasps. Rigid-body dynam-
ics is not satisfactory for hyperstatic grasps, since the
rigid-body assumption leads to undetermined contact
wrenches [38.20].
See Example 3, Part 3.
38.2.3 Desirable Properties
For a general purpose grasping system, there are three
main desirable properties: control of the object twist ,
control of object wrench g, and control of the internal
forces. Control of these quantities implies that the hand
can deliver the desired  and g with speciﬁed grip pres-
sure by the appropriate choice of joint velocities and
actions. The conditions on J and G equivalent to these
properties are given in Table 38.6.
We derive the conditions in two steps. First, we
ignore the structure and conﬁguration of the hand (cap-
tured in J) by assuming that each contact point on each
Table 38.6 Desirable properties of a grasp
Task requirement
Required conditions
All wrenches possible, g
All twists possible, 
)
rank.G/ D n
Control all wrenches, g
Control all twists, 
)
rank.GJ/ D rank.G/ D n
Control all internal forces
N .G/ \ N .JT/ D 0

Part D | 38.2
964
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Fig. 38.4 The Salisbury Hand
ﬁnger can be commanded to move in any direction
transmitted by the chosen contact model. An important
perspective here is that cc is seen as the independent
input variable and  is seen as the output. The dual
interpretation is that the actuators can generate any con-
tact force and moment in the constrained directions at
each contact. Similarly, 	 is seen as the input and g is
seen as the output. The primary property of interest un-
der this assumption is whether or not the arrangement
and types of contacts on the object (captured in G) are
such that a sufﬁciently dexterous hand could control its
ﬁngers so as to impart any twist  2 R6 to the object
and, similarly, to apply any wrench g 2 R6 to the object.
All Object Twists Possible
Given a set of contact locations and types, by solv-
ing (38.19) for  or observing the map G on the right
side of Fig. 38.3, one sees that the achievable object
twists are those in R.G/. Those in N .GT/ cannot be
achieved by any hand using the given grasp. Therefore,
to achieve any object twist, we must have: N .GT/ D 0,
or equivalently, rank.G/ D n. Any grasp with three
non-collinear hard contacts or two distinct soft contacts
satisﬁes this condition.
All Object Wrenches Possible
This case is the dual of the previous case, so we ex-
pect the same condition. From (38.21), one immediately
obtains the condition N .GT/ D 0, so again we have
rank.G/ D n.
To obtain the conditions needed to control the var-
ious quantities of interest, the structure of the hand
cannot be ignored. Recall that the only achievable con-
tact twists on the hand are in R.J/, which is not
necessarily equal to Rn	.
Control All Object Twists
By solving (38.17) for , one sees that in order to cause
any object twist  by choice of joint velocities Pq, we
must have R.GJ/ D Rn and N .GT/ D 0. These con-
ditions are equivalent to rank.GJ/ D rank.G/ D n.
Control All Object Wrenches
This property is dual to the previous one. Analysis of
(38.21) yields the same conditions:
rank.GJ/ D rank.G/ D n :
Control All Internal Forces
Equation (38.20) shows that wrench intensities with no
effect on object motion are those in N .G/. In general,
not all the internal forces may be actively controlled by
joint actions. In [38.16, 21] it has been shown that all
internal forces in N .G/ are controllable if and only if
N .G/ \ N .JT/ D 0.
See Example 1, Part 5 and Example 2, Part 3.
Design Considerations
of the Salisbury Hand
The Salisbury Hand in Fig. 38.4 was designed to have
the smallest number of joints that would meet all the
task requirements in Table 38.6. Assuming HF contacts,
three non-collinear contacts is the minimum number
such that rank.G/ D n D 6. In this case, G has six
rows and nine columns and the dimension of N .G/ is
three [38.2, 8]. The ability to control all internal forces
and apply an arbitrary wrench to the object requires
that N .G/ \ N .JT/ D 0, so the minimum dimension
of the column space of J is nine. To achieve this, the
hand must have at least nine joints, which Salisbury
implemented as three ﬁngers, each with three revolute
joints.
The intended way to execute a dexterous manipula-
tion task with the Salisbury Hand is to grasp the object
at three non-collinear points with the ﬁngertips, forming
a grasp triangle. To secure the grasp, the internal forces
are controlled so that the contact points are maintained
without sliding. Dexterous manipulation can be thought
of as moving the ﬁngertips to control the positions of
the vertices of the grasp triangle.

Grasping
38.3 Compliant Grasps
965
Part D | 38.3
38.3 Compliant Grasps
In this section we extend the rigid-body model to in-
clude compliance. This is needed to design controllers
that can implement desired compliance behaviors of
a grasped object when it contacts the environment,
which can increase the robustness of static grasps and
dexterous manipulation tasks. It also facilitates the
analysis of hands designed with ﬂexible mechanical
elements [38.22, 23] and grasp control strategies that
exploit grasp synergies [38.24, 25]. Thanks to compli-
ance, hands can be designed to maintain a secure grasp
with fewer joints, which provides greater mechani-
cal robustness and reduces the complexity of planning
grasps.
On the other hand, reducing the number of DOFs
in robotic hands demands a compliant design of the
whole structure to adapt the shape of the hand to dif-
ferent objects and to improve robustness with respect
to uncertainties [38.26]. Compliance can be passive or
active. Passive compliance is due to the structural de-
formation of robot components, including joints, while
active compliance refers to virtual elasticity of actua-
tors, e.g., due to the proportional action of a PD joint
controller, that can be actively set by changing the con-
trol parameters [38.26–29].
In the following, we extend the grasp analysis re-
laxing the rigid-body contact constraints to take into
account both the compliance and the low number of
DOFs in robotic hands.
If the hand structure is not perfectly stiff, as shown
in Fig. 38.5, the actual vector of joint variables q can
be different from the reference one qr, given to the joint
actuator controllers, and their difference is related to the
joint effort  through a compliance matrix Cq 2 Rnqnq
by the constitutive equation
qr  q D Cq :
(38.30)
Note that if the hand structure is perfectly rigid, Cq D 0
and the hand stiffness Kq D C1
q
is not deﬁned.
It will be clear in a moment that to deal with
a low number of DOFs of the hand, a compliant
model of the contact must be considered. Accord-
ing to Deﬁnition 38.4, in case of a low number of
DOFs, it is very likely that the grasp will be defec-
tive, i. e., with a non-trivial N .JT/. It is worth noting
that this typically happens also in power grasps [38.30]
where the hand envelops the object establishing con-
tacts even with inner limbs. In this case the hand
Jacobian is a tall matrix with a non-trivial null space
of its transpose.
If the system is very defective, it is very likely
that the grasp will be hyperstatic according to Def-
{B}
{N}
τ1
τ2
q1
q2
kq,1
qr,1
kq,2
qr,2
τ3
Kci
q3
kq,3
ci
o
ci
h
qr,3
Fig. 38.5 Compliant joints and compliant contacts, main
deﬁnitions
inition 38.5 and consequently the rigid-body model
in (38.21) is under-determined and does not admit
a unique solution for the contact force vector 	 as dis-
cussed in Sect. 38.2.2. Note that computing the force
distribution 	 is crucial in grasp analysis since it allows
one to evaluate if the contact constraints are fulﬁlled,
and consequently, if the grasp will be maintained.
The force distribution problem in hyperstatic grasps
is an under-determined problem of statics under the as-
sumption of rigid contacts of (38.17). To solve the prob-
lem, we need to enrich the model with more information
on the contact forces. A possibile solution is to sub-
stitute the rigid-body kinematic constraint (38.19) with
a compliant model of the contact interaction [38.21],
obtained introducing a set of springs between the con-
tact points on the hand ch and on the object co as shown
in Fig. 38.5
Cc	 D ch  co ;
(38.31)

Part D | 38.3
966
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
where Cc 2 Rn	n	 is the contact compliance matrix
which is symmetric and positive deﬁnite. The contact
stiffness matrix is deﬁned as the reciprocal of the con-
tact compliance matrix Kc D C1
c .
The analysis is presented in a quasi-static frame-
work: from an equilibrium reference conﬁguration qr;0,
q0, 0, 	0, u0 and g0, a small input perturbation is
applied to the joint references qr;0 C qr and to the ex-
ternal load g0 C g which moves the grasp system to
a new equilibrium conﬁguration whose linear approxi-
mation is represented by q0 C q, 0 C , 	0 C 	,
u0 C u.
In the following, for the sake of simplicity, it is
convenient to refer G and J matrices to the object ref-
erence frame fBg and not to the inertial frame fNg as
previously described. Note that this only applies to this
section on compliance analysis, while the rest of this
chapter still refers to matrices G and J as described in
Sect. 38.1.1.
Let Rb 2 R33 represent the orientation of the ob-
ject frame fBg with respect to the inertial frame. Then
the object twist referred to fBg is given as
i;obj D R
T
b
 
v N
i;obj
!N
obj
!
;
(38.32)
where
Rb D Blockdiag.Rb; Rb/ D
Rb
0
0
Rb

2 R66 :
Then, substituting PT
i  from (38.2) into (38.32) yields
the partial grasp matrix QGT
i 2 R66, that maps the object
twist from fNg to contact frame fCgi referred to fBg.
Similarly, the hand twists can be expressed to the
object frame fBg
i;hnd D R
T
b
 
v N
i;hnd
!N
i;hnd
!
(38.33)
and combining (38.33) and (38.7) yields the partial
hand Jacobian QJi 2 R6nq, which relates the joint ve-
locities to the contact twists on the hand expressed with
respect to fBg.
Table 38.7 gives the deﬁnitions of the selection ma-
trices for the three contact models when object and hand
twists are referred to frame fBg. In the planar case, as
far as contact constraint is concerned, equation (38.15)
holds with HiF and HiM deﬁned in Table 38.8.
The contact force variation 	 from the equilib-
rium conﬁguration is then related to the relative dis-
placement between the object and the ﬁngers at the
contact points as
Cc	 D .Jq GTu/ :
(38.34)
Table 38.7 Selection matrices for three contact models,
when the object twists are expressed with respect to fBg
Model
ni
HiF
HiM
PwoF
1
OnbT
i
Vacuous
HF
3

Onb
i ;Otb
i ; Oob
i
	T
Vacuous
SF
4

Onb
i ;Otb
i ; Oob
i
	T
OnbT
i
Onb
i is the normal unit vector at the contact i expressed with re-
spect to fBg reference system.
Table 38.8 Selection matrices for the planar simpliﬁed
case, when the object twists are expressed with respect
to fBg
Model
ni
HiF
HiM
PwoF
1
OnbT
i
Vacuous
HF/SF
2

Onb
i ;Otb
i
	T
Vacuous
By assuming that the perturbed conﬁguration is suf-
ﬁciently near to the reference one, the following lin-
earized relationships can be found for g, and 
g D G	
(38.35)
 D JT	 C KJ;qq C KJ;uu
(38.36)
where
KJ;q D @J	0
@q
and
KJ;u D @J	0
@u
are the variation of the hand Jacobian with respect to q
and u variations, respectively.
Remark 38.3
In (38.35) and (38.36) both the grasp matrix and hand
Jacobian are expressed with respect to the object ref-
erence frame, and by neglecting rolling between the
ﬁngers and the object at the contact points, G becomes
constant, while J.q; u/, in general, depends on both
hand and object conﬁgurations. Matrix KJ;q represent
the variability of J.q; u/ matrix with respect to hand and
object conﬁgurations.
Matrices KJ;q 2 Rnqnq and KJ;u 2 Rnqn are usu-
ally referred to as geometric stiffness matrices [38.28].
Furthermore, it can be veriﬁed that the matrix KJ;q is
symmetric [38.27].
By substituting (38.36) in (38.30) we get
JRCqJT	 D JRqr  Jq  JRCqKJ;uu ;
(38.37)
where
JR D J

I C CqKJ;q
1 :

Grasping
38.4 Restraint Analysis
967
Part D | 38.4
Summing (38.34) and (38.37) the following expression
can be found for the contact forces displacement 	
	 D Kc;e

JRqr  GT
Ru

(38.38)
where
GT
R D GT C JRCqKJ;u
and
Kc;e D Cc C JRCqJT1 :
(38.39)
Matrix Kc;e represents the equivalent contact stiffness,
that takes into account both the joint and the contact
compliance. If the geometrical terms are neglected, i. e.,
KJ;q D 0 and KJ;u D 0, the classical expression Kc;e D

Cc C JCqJT
for the equivalent contact stiffness ma-
trix can be found [38.28].
By substituting (38.38) in (38.35), the object dis-
placement can be evaluated as a function of the small
input perturbations qr and g
u D GKc;eGT
R
1 .GKc;eJRqr C g/ : (38.40)
When qr D 0, (38.40) can be rewritten as
g D Ku ;
with K D GKc;eGT
R ;
where the term that multiplies the external wrench vari-
ation g represents the reciprocal of the grasp stiffness
matrix K. The grasp stiffness evaluates ability of the
robotic grasp to resist to external load variations applied
to the object.
Regarding the force distribution 	, by substituting
(38.40) into (38.38), the variation of the contact forces
is evaluated as
	 D GC
g g C Pqr ;
(38.41)
where
GC
g D Kc;eGT
R
GKc;eGT
R
1 ;
P D

I  GC
g G

Kc;eJR :
Matrix GC
g is a right pseudo-inverse of grasp matrix G
that takes into account both the geometrical effects
and the hand and contact stiffness. Matrix P maps the
reference joint variables qr to the contact force varia-
tion 	.
It is worth noting that

I  GC
g G

is a projector onto
the null space of G and then each contact force variation
	h D Pqr, produced by modifying joint reference
values, satisﬁes the equation
G	h D 0 ;
and then belongs to the internal force subspace.
Summarizing, compliant grasps have been analyzed
with a linearized quasi-static model and the main re-
lationships mapping joint references, the controlled
inputs, and external disturbances, the wrenches, onto
object motions and contact forces have been evaluated
in (38.40) and (38.41), respectively.
38.4 Restraint Analysis
The most fundamental requirements in grasping and
dexterous manipulation are the abilities to hold an ob-
ject and control its position and orientation relative to
the palm of the hand. The two most useful character-
izations of grasp restraint are force closure and form
closure. These names were in use as early as 1876 in
the ﬁeld of machine design to distinguish between joints
that required an external force to maintain contact, and
those that did not [38.31]. For example, some water
wheels had a cylindrical axle that was laid in a hori-
zontal semi-cylindrical groove split on either side of the
wheel. During operation, the weight of the wheel acted
to close the groove-axle contacts, hence the term force
closure. By contrast, if the grooves were replaced by
cylindrical holes just long enough to accept the axle,
then the contacts would be closed by the geometry
(even if the direction of the gravitational force was re-
versed), hence the term form closure.
When applied to grasping, form and force clo-
sure have the following interpretations. Assume that
a hand grasping an object has its joint angles locked
and its palm ﬁxed in space. Then the grasp has form
closure, or the object is form-closed, if it is impossi-
ble to move the object, even inﬁnitesimally. Under the
same conditions, the grasp has force closure, or the
object is force-closed, if for any non-contact wrench
experienced by the object, contact wrench intensities
exist that satisfy (38.20) and are consistent with the
constraints imposed by the friction models applica-
ble at the contact points. Notice that all form closure
grasps are also force closure grasps. When under form
closure, the object cannot move even inﬁnitesimally rel-
ative to the hand, regardless of the non-contact wrench.
Therefore, the hand maintains the object in equilib-
rium for any external wrench, which is the force closure
requirement.

Part D | 38.4
968
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Roughly speaking, form closure occurs when the
palm and ﬁngers wrap around the object forming a cage
with no wiggle room such as the grasp shown in
Fig. 38.6. This kind of grasp is also called a power
grasp [38.32] or enveloping grasp [38.33]. However,
force closure is possible with fewer contacts, as shown
in Fig. 38.7, but in this case, force closure requires
the ability to control internal forces. It is also possible
for a grasp to have partial form closure, indicating that
Fig. 38.6 The palm and ﬁngers combine to create a very
secure form closure grasp of a router
Fig. 38.7 Hand and wrist of the tendon driven DLR
Hand Arm System grasping a tool [38.7]. This grasp has
a force closure grasp appropriate for dexterous manipu-
lation. (DLR Hand Arm System, Photo courtesy of DLR
2011)
only a subset of the possible degrees of freedom are re-
strained [38.34]. An example of such a grasp is shown
in Fig. 38.8. In this grasp, ﬁngertip placement between
the ridges around the periphery of the bottle cap pro-
vides form closure against relative rotation about the
axis of the helix of the threads and also against trans-
lation perpendicular to that axis, but the other three
degrees of freedom are restrained through force closure.
Strictly speaking, given a grasp of a real object by a hu-
man hand it is impossible to prevent relative motion of
the object with respect to the palm due to the compli-
ance of the hand and object. Preventing all motion is
possible only if the contacting bodies are rigid, as is as-
sumed in most mathematical models employed in grasp
analysis.
38.4.1 Form Closure
To make the notion of form closure precise, introduce
a signed gap function denoted by  i.u; q/ at each of
the nc contact points between the object and the hand.
The gap function is zero at each contact, becomes
positive if contact breaks, and negative if penetration
occurs. The gap function can be thought of as distance
between the contact points. In general, this function is
dependent on the shapes of the contacting bodies. Let
Nu and Nq represent the conﬁgurations of the object and
hand for a given grasp; then
 i.Nu; Nq/ D 0
8 i D 1; : : : ; nc :
(38.42)
The form closure condition can now be stated in terms
of a differential change du of Nu:
Fig. 38.8 In the grasp depicted, contact with the ridges on
the bottle cap create partial form closure in the direction
of cap rotation (when screwing it in) and also in the direc-
tions of translation perpendicular to the axis of rotation. To
achieve complete control over the cap, the grasp achieves
force closure over the other three degrees of freedom

Grasping
38.4 Restraint Analysis
969
Part D | 38.4
Definition 38.6
A grasp .Nu; Nq/ has form closure if and only if the fol-
lowing implication holds
 .Nu C du; Nq/  0 ) du D 0 ;
(38.43)
where  is the nc-dimensional vector of gap functions
with i-th component equal to  i.u; q/. By deﬁnition,
inequalities between vectors imply that the inequality
is applied between corresponding components of the
vectors.
Expanding the gap function vector in a Taylor series
about Nu, yields inﬁnitesimal form closure tests of var-
ious orders. Let ˇ .u; q/; ˇ D 1; 2; 3; : : : ; denote the
Taylor series approximation truncated after the terms of
order ˇ in du. From (38.42), it follows that the ﬁrst-
order approximation is
1 .Nu C du; Nq/ D @ .u; q/
@u
j.Nu;Nq/du ;
where @ .u;q/
@u
j.Nu;Nq/ denotes the partial derivative of  
with respect to u evaluated at .Nu; Nq/. Replacing  with
its approximation of order ˇ in (38.43) implies three
relevant cases of order ˇ:
1. If there exists du such that ˇ .Nu C du; Nq/ has at
least one strictly positive component, then the grasp
does not have form closure of order ˇ.
2. If for every non-zero du, ˇ .NuCdu; Nq/ has at least
one strictly negative component, then the grasp has
form closure of order ˇ.
3. If neither case i) nor case ii) applies for all  .Nu C
du; Nq/ 8  	 ˇ, then higher-order analysis is re-
quired to determine the existence of form closure.
Figure 38.9 illustrates form closure concepts using
several planar grasps of gray objects by ﬁngers shown
as black disks. The concepts are identical for grasps of
three-dimensional objects, but are more clearly illus-
trated in the plane. The grasp on the left has ﬁrst-order
Fig. 38.9 Three planar grasps; two with form closure of
different orders and one without form closure
form closure. Note that ﬁrst-order form closure only
involves the ﬁrst derivatives of the distance functions.
This implies that the only relevant geometry in ﬁrst-
order form closure are the locations of the contacts
and the directions of the contact normals. The grasp in
the center has form closure of higher order, with the
speciﬁc order depending on the degrees of the curves
deﬁning the surfaces of the object and ﬁngers in the
neighborhoods of the contacts [38.35]. Second-order
form closure analysis depends on the curvatures of the
two contacting bodies in addition to the geometric in-
formation used to analyze ﬁrst-order form closure. The
grasp on the right does not have form closure of any
order, because the object can translate horizontally and
rotate about its center.
First-Order Form Closure
First-order form closure exists if and only if the follow-
ing implication holds
@ .u; q/
@u
j.Nu;Nq/du  0 ) du D 0 :
The ﬁrst-order form closure condition can be written in
terms of the object twist 
GT
n  0 )  D 0 ;
(38.44)
where GT
n D @ =@uV 2 Rnc6. Recall that V is the
kinematic map deﬁned in (38.1). Also notice that Gn
is the grasp matrix, when all contact points are friction-
less.
Because the gap functions only quantify distances,
the product GT
n is the vector of normal components of
the instantaneous velocities of the object at the contact
points (which must be non-negative to prevent interpen-
etration). This in turn implies that the grasp matrix is
the one that would result from the assumption that all
contacts are of the type PwoF.
An equivalent condition in terms of the contact
wrench intensity vector 	n 2 Rnc can be stated as fol-
lows. A grasp has ﬁrst-order form closure if and only
if
Gn	n D g
	n  0

8 g 2 R6 :
(38.45)
The physical interpretation of this condition is that equi-
librium can be maintained under the assumption that
the contacts are frictionless. Note that the components
of 	n are the magnitudes of the normal components of
the contact forces. The subscript .:/n is used to em-
phasize that 	n contains no other force or moment
components.

Part D | 38.4
970
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Since g must be in the range of Gn for equilibrium to
be satisﬁed, and since g is an arbitrary element of R6,
then in order for condition (38.45) to be satisﬁed, the
rank of Gn must be six. Assuming rank.Gn/ D 6, an-
other equivalent mathematical statement of ﬁrst-order
form closure is: there exists 	n such that the following
two conditions hold [38.36]
Gn	n D 0 ;
	n > 0 :
(38.46)
This means that there exists a set of strictly compressive
normal contact forces in the null space of Gn. In other
words, one can squeeze the object as tightly as desired
while maintaining equilibrium. A second interpretation
of this condition is that the non-negative span of the
columns of Gn must equal R6. Equivalently, the con-
vex hull of the columns of Gn must strictly contain the
origin of R6. As will be seen, the span and hull interpre-
tations will provide a conceptual link called frictional
form closure that lies between form closure and force
closure.
The duality of conditions (38.44) and (38.45) can
be seen clearly by examining the set of wrenches
that can be applied by frictionless contacts and the
corresponding set of possible object twists. For this dis-
cussion, it is useful to give deﬁnitions of cones and their
duals.
Definition 38.7
A cone C is a set of vectors & such that for every & in
C, every non-negative scalar multiple of & is also in C.
Equivalently, a cone is a set of vectors closed under
addition and non-negative scalar multiplication.
Definition 38.8
Given a cone C with elements &, the dual cone C
with elements &, is the set of vectors such that the dot
product of & with each vector in C is non-negative.
Mathematically
C D f&j&T&  0; 8& 2 Cg :
(38.47)
See Example 4.
First-Order Form Closure Requirements
Several useful necessary conditions for form closure
are known. In 1897 Somov proved that at least seven
contacts are necessary to form close a rigid object
with six degrees of freedom [38.37, 38]. Lakshmi-
narayana generalized this to prove that n C1 contacts
are necessary to form close an object with n degrees
of freedom [38.34] (based on Goldman and Tucker
1956 [38.39]) (Table 38.9). This led to the deﬁnition
of partial form closure that was mentioned above in
the discussion of the hand grasping the bottle cap.
Markenscoff and Papadimitriou determined a tight up-
per bound, showing that for all objects whose surfaces
are not surfaces of revolution, at most n C 1 contacts
are necessary [38.40]. Form closure is impossible to
achieve for surfaces of revolution.
To emphasize the fact that n C 1 contacts are nec-
essary and not sufﬁcient, consider grasping a cube with
seven or more points of contact. If all contacts are on
one face, then clearly, the grasp does not have form
closure.
First-Order Form Closure Tests
Because form closure grasps are very secure, it is de-
sirable to design or synthesize such grasps. To do this,
one needs a way to test candidate grasps for form clo-
sure, and rank them, so that the best grasp can be
chosen. One reasonable measure of form closure can be
derived from the geometric interpretation of the condi-
tion (38.46). The null space constraint and the positivity
of 	n represent the addition of the columns of Gn scaled
by the components of 	n. Any choice of 	n closing
this loop is in N .Gn/. For a given loop, if the mag-
nitude of the smallest component of 	n is positive, then
the grasp has form closure, otherwise it does not. Let
us denote this smallest component by d. Since such
a loop, and hence d, can be scaled arbitrarily, 	n must
be bounded.
After verifying that Gn has full row rank, a quanti-
tative form closure test based on the above observations
can be formulated as a linear program (LP) in the un-
knowns d and 	n as follows
LP1:
maximize:
d
(38.48)
subject to:
Gn	n D 0
(38.49)
I	n  1d  0
(38.50)
d  0
(38.51)
1T	n 	 nc ;
(38.52)
where I 2 Rncnc is the identity matrix and 1 2 Rnc is
a vector with all components equal to 1. The last in-
equality is designed to prevent this LP from becoming
unbounded. A typical LP solution algorithm determines
Table 38.9 Minimum number of contacts nc required to
form close an object with n degrees of freedom
n
nc
3 (planar grasp)
4
6 (spatial grasp)
7
n (general)
n C 1

Grasping
38.4 Restraint Analysis
971
Part D | 38.4
infeasibility or unboundedness of the constraints in
Phase I of the algorithm, and considers the result be-
fore attempting to calculate an optimal value [38.41]. If
LP1 is infeasible, or if the optimal value d is zero, then
the grasp is not form closed.
The quantitative form closure test (38.48)–(38.52)
has nc C 8 constraints and nc C 1 unknowns. For a typ-
ical grasp with nc < 10, this is a small linear program
that can be solved very quickly using the simplex
method. However, one should note that d is dependent
on the choice of units used when forming Gn. It would
be advisable to non-dimensionalize the components of
the wrenches to avoid dependence of the optimal d on
one’s choice of units. This could be done by dividing
the ﬁrst three rows of Gn by a characteristic force and
the last three rows by a characteristic moment. If one
desires a binary test, LP1 can be converted into one by
dropping the last constraint (38.52) and applying only
Phase I of the simplex algorithm.
In summary, quantitative form closure testing is
a two-step process:
Form Closure Test.
1. Compute rank.Gn/.
a) If rank.Gn/ ¤ n, then form closure does not
exist. Stop.
b) If rank.Gn/ D n, continue.
2. Solve LP1.
a) If d D 0, then form closure does not exist.
b) If d > 0, then form closure exists and dnc is
a crude measure of how far the grasp is from
losing form closure.
See Example 5, Part 1.
Variations of the Test. If the rank test fails, then the
grasp could have partial form closure over as many
as rank.Gn/ degrees of freedom. If one desires to
test this, then LP1 must be solved using a new Gn
formed by retaining only the rows corresponding to
the degrees of freedom for which partial form closure
is to be tested. If d > 0, then partial form closure
exists.
A second variation arises when one knows in ad-
vance that the object is already partially constrained.
For example, in the case of a steering wheel, the driver
knows, that relative to her, the steering wheel has only
one degree of freedom. A form closure grasp suit-
able for driving would be required only to restraint the
wheel’s rotation about the steering column. In general,
assume that the object is constrained by a set of bilateral
constraints, which can be written as
BT D 0 :
(38.53)
With these additional constraints, the form closure
property can be expressed as follows
GT
n  0
BT D 0
)
)  D 0 ;
(38.54)
which can be shown to be equivalent to
G
T
n  0 )  D 0 ;
(38.55)
where  is an arbitrary vector with length equal to the
dimension of the null space of BT and Gn D ABGn,
where AB is an annihilator of the column space of B.
One possible way to construct this annihilator is AB D

N

BTT, where N

BT
is a matrix whose columns
form a basis for the null space of BT. Also note that
N.BT/ is a possible twist of the object consistent with
the bilateral constraints (i. e., the twists that must be
eliminated by the unilateral constraints).
The form closure condition for an object partially
constrained by bilateral constraints can also be stated in
terms of wrenches
Gn	n D 0 ;
	n > 0 :
(38.56)
Notice that twist conditions (38.44) and (38.55) and
wrench conditions (38.46) and (38.56) are formally
analogous, and therefore, the quantitative form clo-
sure test can be applied by substituting Gn for Gn and
.n  rank.B// for n. For detailed information on the
derivations of the constrained form closure conditions,
please refer to [38.42].
See Example 5, Part 2.
Monotonicity. In grasp synthesis, sometimes it is de-
sirable for the grasp metric to increase monotonically
with the number of contact points, the intuition be-
ing, that adding contacts to a stable grasp will make it
more stable. The solution d does not have this prop-
erty. However formClosure.m, a Matlab function
which is available at [38.43], returns dnc as the metric,
because it nearly maintains monotonicity when adding
random contacts to random grasps. This can be demon-
strated by running test_monotonicity.m.
One can design metrics that are monotonic with
norms on the set of wrenches that the hand can apply.
Let the polytope G D fgjg D Gn	n; 0 	 	n 	 1g denote
the wrench space, which is the set of wrenches that can
be applied by the hand if the contact forces magnitudes
are limited to one. A metric proposed by Ferrari and
Canny [38.44] is the radius of the largest sphere in G
with origin at the origin of the wrench space. The ra-
dius is greater than 0 if and only if the grasp has form

Part D | 38.4
972
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
closure. In addition, adding a contact point will always
produce a new G that is a superset of the original G.
Thus the radius of the sphere cannot reduce as a result.
Hence the monotonicity property holds.
See Example 5, Part 3.
Planar Simplifications
In the planar case, Nguyen [38.45] developed a graphi-
cal qualitative test for form closure. Figure 38.10 shows
a form closure grasp with four contacts. To test form
closure one partitions the normals into two groups of
two. Let C1 be the non-negative span of two normals in
one pair and C2 be the non-negative span of the other
pair. A grasp has form closure if and only if C1 and C2
or C1 and C2 see each other for any pairings. Two
cones see each other if the open line segment deﬁned
by the vertices of the cones lies in the interior of both
cones. In the presence of more than four contacts, if
any set of four contacts satisﬁes this condition, then the
grasp has form closure.
Notice that this graphical test can be difﬁcult to ex-
ecute for grasps with more than four contacts. Also, it
does not extend to grasps of three-dimensional (3-D)
objects and does not provide a closure measure.
38.4.2 Force Closure
A grasp has force closure, or is force-closed, if the grasp
can be maintained in the face of any object wrench.
Force closure is similar to form closure, but relaxed to
allow friction forces to help balance the object wrench.
A beneﬁt of including friction in the analysis is the
reduction in the number of contact points needed for
closure. A three-dimensional object with six degrees
of freedom requires seven contacts for form closure,
but for force closure, only two contacts are needed if
they are modeled as soft ﬁngers, and only three (non-
collinear) contacts are needed if they are modeled as
hard ﬁngers.
Force closure relies on the ability of the hand to
squeeze arbitrarily tightly in order to compensate for
large applied wrenches that can only be resisted by
friction. Figure 38.15 shows a grasped polygon. Con-
3
3
2
2
1
1
4
4
C2
C1
C1
C2
Fig. 38.10 Planar grasps with ﬁrst-order form closure
sider applying a wrench to the object that is a pure
force acting upward along the y-axis of the inertial
frame. It seems intuitive that if there is enough fric-
tion, the hand will be able to squeeze the object with
friction forces preventing the object’s upward escape.
Also, as the applied force increases in magnitude, the
magnitude of the squeezing force will have to increase
accordingly.
Since force closure is dependent on the friction
models, common models will be introduced before giv-
ing formal deﬁnitions of force closure.
Friction Models
Recall the components of force and moment transmit-
ted through contact i under the various contact models
given earlier in Table 38.4. At contact point i, the fric-
tion law imposes constraints on the components of the
contact force and moment. Speciﬁcally, the frictional
components of 	i are constrained to lie inside a limit
surface, denoted by Li, that scales linearly with the
product ifin, where i is the coefﬁcient of friction at
contact i. In the case of Coulomb friction, the limit sur-
face is a circle of radius ifin. The Coulomb friction
cone Fi is a subset of R3
Fi D f.fin; fit; fio/j
q
f 2
it C f 2
io 	 ifing :
(38.57)
More generally, the friction laws of interest have
limit surfaces deﬁned in the space of friction compo-
nents, Rn	i1 and friction cones Fi deﬁned in the space
of 	i, Rn	i. They can be written as follows
Fi D f	i 2 Rn	i j jj	ijjw 	 fing ;
(38.58)
where jj	ijjw denotes a weighted quadratic norm of the
friction components at contact i. The limit surface is
deﬁned by jj	ijjw D fin.
Table 38.10 deﬁnes useful weighted quadratic
norms for the three contact models: PwoF, HF, and SF.
The parameter i is the friction coefﬁcient for the tan-
gential forces, %i is the torsional friction coefﬁcient,
and a is the characteristic length of the object that is
used to ensure consistent units for the norm of the SF
model.
Table 38.10 Norms for the three main contact models
Model
jjijjw
PwoF
0
HF
1
i
q
f 2
it C f 2
io
SF
1
i
q
f 2
it C f 2
io C
1
a i jminj

Grasping
38.4 Restraint Analysis
973
Part D | 38.4
Remark 38.4
There are several noteworthy points to be made about
the friction cones. First, all of them implicitly or ex-
plicitly constrain the normal component of the con-
tact force to be non-negative. The cone for SF con-
tacts has a cylindrical limit surface with circular
cross section in the (fit; fio)-plane and rectangular cross
section in the (fit; min)-plane. With this model, the
amount of torsional friction that can be transmitted
is independent of the lateral friction load. An im-
proved model that couples the torsional friction limit
with the tangential limit was studied by Howe and
Cutkosky [38.46].
A Force Closure Definition
One common deﬁnition of force closure can be stated
simply by modifying condition (38.45) to allow each
contact force to lie in its friction cone rather than
along the contact normal. Because this deﬁnition does
not consider the hand’s ability to control contact
forces, this deﬁnition will be referred to as frictional
form closure. A grasp will be said to have frictional
form closure if and only if the following condition is
satisﬁed
G	 D g
	 2 F

8 g 2 Rn;
where F
is the composite friction cone deﬁned
as:
F D F1      Fnc
D f	 2 Rmj	i 2 FiI i D 1; : : : ; ncg ;
and each Fi is deﬁned by (38.58) and one of the models
listed in Table 38.10.
Letting Int.F/ denote the interior of the composite
friction cone, Murray et al. give the following equiva-
lent deﬁnition [38.19]:
Definition 38.9
(Proposition 5.2, Murray et al.) A grasp has frictional
form closure if and only if the following conditions are
satisﬁed:
1. rank.G/ D n
2. 9 	 such that G	 D 0 and 	 2 Int.F/.
These conditions deﬁne what Murray et al. call
force closure. The force closure deﬁnition adopted here
is stricter than frictional form closure; it additionally re-
quires that the hand be able to control the internal object
forces.
Definition 38.10
A grasp has force closure if and only if
rank.G/ D n, N .G/ \ N .JT/ D 0 ;
and there exists 	 such that G	 D 0 and 	 2 Int.F/.
The full row rank condition on the matrix G is the
same condition required for form closure, although G
is different from Gn used to determine form closure. If
the rank test passes, then one must still ﬁnd 	 satisfying
the remaining three conditions. Of these, the null space
intersection test can be performed easily by linear pro-
gramming techniques, but the friction cone constraint
is quadratic, and thus forces one to use non-linear pro-
gramming techniques. While exact non-linear tests have
been developed [38.47], only approximate tests will be
presented here.
Approximate Force Closure Tests
Any of the friction cones discussed can be approxi-
mated as the non-negative span of a ﬁnite number ng
of generators sij of the friction cone. Given this, one
can represent the set of applicable contact wrenches at
contact i as follows
Gi	i D Si i;
 i  0 ;
where Si D Œsi1    sing and  i is a vector of non-
negative generator weights. If contact i is frictionless,
then ng D 1 and Si D ŒOnT
i ..ci  p/  Oni/TT.
If contact i is of type HF, we represent the friction
cone by the non-negative sum of uniformly spaced con-
tact force generators (Fig. 38.11) whose non-negative
span approximates the Coulomb cone with an inscribed
regular polyhedral cone. This leads to the following def-
Linearized
friction cone
fin
fio
fit
Fig. 38.11 Quadratic cone approximated as a polyhedral
cone with seven generators

Part D | 38.4
974
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
inition of Si
Si D
0
@
  
1
  
  
i cos.2k=ng/
  
  
i sin.2k=ng/
  
1
A ;
(38.59)
where the index k varies from one to ng. If one prefers
to approximate the quadratic friction cone by a circum-
scribing polyhedral cone, one simply replaces i in the
above deﬁnition with i= cos.=ng/.
The adjustment needed for the SF model is quite
simple. Since the torsional friction in this model is de-
coupled from the tangential friction, its generators are
given by Œ1 0 0 ˙ b%iT. Thus Si for the SF model is
Si D
0
BB@
  
1
  
1
1
  
i cos.2k=ng/
  
0
0
  
i sin.2k=ng/
  
0
0
  
0
  
b%i
b%i
1
CCA ;
(38.60)
where b is the characteristic length used to unify units.
The set of total contact wrenches that may be applied
by the hand without violating the contact friction law at
any contact can be written as
G	 D S;
  0 ;
where
S D .S1;    ; Sng/
and
 D . T
1     T
ng/T :
It is convenient to reformulate the friction con-
straints in a dual form
Fi	i  0 :
(38.61)
In this form, each row of Fi is normal to a face formed
by two adjacent generators of the approximate cone. For
an HF contact, row i of Fi can be computed as the cross
product of si and siC1. In the case of an SF contact, the
generators are of dimension four, so simple cross prod-
ucts will not sufﬁce. However, general methods exist to
perform the conversion from the generator form to the
face normal form [38.39].
The face normal constraints for all contacts can be
combined into the following compact form
F	  0 ;
(38.62)
where F D Blockdiag.F1; : : : ; Fnc/.
Let ei 2 Rn	i be the ﬁrst row of Hi. Further let
e D Œe1; : : : ; enc 2 Rn	
and let
E D Blockdiag.e1; : : : ; enc/ 2 Rn	nc :
The following linear program is a quantitative test for
frictional form closure. The optimal objective function
value d is a measure of the distance the contact forces
are from the boundaries of their friction cones, and
hence a crude measure of how far a grasp is from losing
frictional form closure.
LP2:
maximize:
d
subject to:
G	 D 0
F	  1d  0
d  0
e	 	 nc :
The last inequality in LP2 is simply the sum of the mag-
nitudes of the normal components of the contact forces.
After solving LP2, if d D 0 frictional form closure
does not exist, but if d > 0, then it does.
If the grasp has frictional form closure, the last step
to determine the existence of force closure is to verify
the condition N .G/ \ N .JT/ D 0. If it holds, then the
grasp has force closure. This condition is easy to verify
with another linear program LP3.
LP3:
maximize:
d
subject to:
G	 D 0
JT	 D 0
E	  1d  0
d  0
e	 	 nc :
In summary, force closure testing is a three-step
process.
Approximate Force Closure Test.
1. Compute rank.G/.
a) If rank.G/ ¤ n, then force closure does not ex-
ist. Stop.
b) If rank.G/ D n, continue.
2. Solve LP2: Test frictional form closure.
a) If d D 0, then frictional form closure does not
exist. Stop.
b) If d > 0, then frictional form closure exists and
d is a crude measure of how far the grasp is
from losing frictional form closure.

Grasping
38.5 Examples
975
Part D | 38.5
3. Solve LP3: Test control of internal force.
a) If d > 0, then force closure does not exist.
b) If d D 0, then force closure exists.
Variation of the Test. A variation of the approximate
force closure test arises when the object is partially
constrained with the bilateral constraints described by
(38.53), in such a cases the deﬁnitions of frictional form
closure becomes
G	 D 0 ;
	 2 int.F/ ;
(38.63)
where G D ABG, AB is an annihilator of the column
space of B. Similarly, the force closure condition can
be stated as
G	 D 0 ;
	 2 int.F/ ;
N .G/ \ N .JT/ D 0 ;
(38.64)
Since the frictional form closure deﬁnition (38.63)
is analogous to Deﬁnition 38.9 and the force closure
deﬁnition (38.64) is analogous to Deﬁnition 38.10, the
force closure test can be applied by substituting G for
G, provided that, .n  rank.B// is substituted for n.
For detailed information on the derivation of these con-
ditions, please refer to [38.42].
See Example 1, Part 6.
Planar Simplifications
In planar grasping systems, the approximate method de-
scribed above is exact. This is because the SF models
are meaningless, since rotations about the contact nor-
mal would cause motions out of the plane. With regard
to the HF model, for planar problems, the quadratic
friction cone becomes linear, with its cone represented
exactly as
Fi D
1
q
1 C 2
i
i
1
i
1

:
(38.65)
Nguyen’s graphical form closure test can be applied
to planar grasps with two frictional contacts [38.45].
The only change is that the four contact normals are re-
placed by the four generators of the two friction cones.
However, the test can only determine frictional form
closure, since it does not incorporate the additional in-
formation needed to determine force closure.
38.5 Examples
38.5.1 Example 1: Grasped Sphere
Part 1: QG and QJ
Figure 38.12 shows a planar projection of a three-
dimensional sphere of radius r grasped by two ﬁn-
gers, which make two contacts at angles 1 and 2.
The frames fCg1 and fCg2 are oriented so that their
Oo-directions point out of the plane of the ﬁgure (as indi-
cated by the small ﬁlled circles at the contact points).
The axes of the frames fNg and fBg were chosen to
be axis-aligned with coincident origins located at the
center of the sphere. The z-axes are pointing out of the
page. Observe that since the two joint axes of the left
ﬁnger are perpendicular to the .x; y/-plane, it operates
in that plane for all time. The other ﬁnger has three rev-
olute joints. Because its ﬁrst and second axes, Oz3 and Oz4,
currently lie in the plane, rotation about Oz3 will cause
Oz4 to attain an out-of-plane component and would cause
the ﬁnger tip at contact 2 to leave the plane.
In the current conﬁguration, the rotation matrix for
the i-th contact frame is deﬁned as follows
Ri D
0
@
 cos.i/
sin.i/
0
 sin.i/
 cos.i/
0
0
0
1
1
A :
(38.66)
The vector from the origin of fNg to the i-th contact
point is given by
ci  p D r

cos.i/
sin.i/
0
T :
(38.67)
Substituting into (38.3) and (38.6) yields the complete
grasp matrix for contact i
QGi D
0
BBBBBB@
ci
si
0
si
ci
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
rsi
ci
si
0
0
0
rci
si
ci
0
0
r
0
0
0
1
1
CCCCCCA
;
(38.68)
where 0 2 R33 is the zero matrix and ci and si are
abbreviations for cos.i/ and sin.i/, respectively. The
complete grasp matrix is deﬁned as: QG D . QG1 QG2/ 2
R612.
The accuracy of this matrix can be veriﬁed by in-
spection, according to Remark 38.2. For example, the
ﬁrst column is the unit wrench of the unit contact nor-
mal; the ﬁrst three components are the direction cosines

Part D | 38.5
976
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
of Oni and the last three are .ci  p/  Oni. Since Oni is
collinear with .ci p/, the cross products (the last three
components of the column) are zero. The last three
components of the second column represent the mo-
ment of Oti about the x-, y-, and z-axes of fNg. Since Oti
lies in the .x; y/-plane, the moments with the x- and y-
axes are zero. Clearly Oti produces a moment of r about
the z-axis.
Construction of the hand Jacobian QJi for contact i
requires knowledge of the joint axis directions and the
origins of the frames ﬁxed to the links of each ﬁnger.
Figure 38.13 shows the hand in the same conﬁguration
as in Fig. 38.12, but with some additional data needed
to construct the hand Jacobian. Assume that the origins
of the joint frames lie in the plane of the ﬁgure. In the
current conﬁguration, the quantities of interest for con-
tact 1, expressed in fCg1 are
c1  
1 D

l2
l1
0
T ;
(38.69)
r
y
x
z
c1–1
θ1
c2–4
tˆ2
tˆ1
zˆ 2
nˆ 1
nˆ 2
zˆ5
oˆ 2
oˆ 1
zˆ 3
zˆ 4
zˆ1
Fig. 38.12 A sphere grasped by a two-ﬁngered hand with 5
revolute joints
zˆ 2
zˆ5
{C }2
l4
l6
l5
l3
l7
l2
l1
{C }1
zˆ 3
zˆ 4
zˆ1
Fig. 38.13 Relevant
data
for
the
hand
Jacobian
in
Fig. 38.12
c1  
2 D

l7
l3
0
T ;
(38.70)
Oz1 D Oz2 D 
0
0
1
T :
(38.71)
The quantities of interest for contact 2, in fCg2 are
c2  
3 D c2  
4 D

l4
l5
0
T ;
(38.72)
c2  
5 D

l6
0
0
T ;
(38.73)
Oz3 D

0
1
0
T ;
(38.74)
Oz4.q3/ D
p
2
2

1
1
0
T ;
(38.75)
Oz5.q3; q4/ D

0
0
1
T :
(38.76)
Generally all of the components of the c  
 and Oz
vectors (including the components that are zero in the
current conﬁguration), are functions of q and u. The de-
pendencies of the Oz vectors are shown explicitly.
Substituting into (38.14), (38.11) and (38.8) yields
the complete hand Jacobian QJ 2 R125
QJ D
0
BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB@
l1
l3
l2
l7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
l6
l4
p
2
2 .l4 C l5/
0
0
0

p
2
2
0
1

p
2
2
0
0
0
1
1
CCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCA
:
The horizontal dividing line partitions QJ into QJ1 (on
top) and QJ2 (on the bottom). The columns correspond
to joints 1 through 5. The block diagonal structure is
a result of the fact that ﬁnger i directly affects only con-
tact i.
Example 1, Part 2: G and J
Assume that the contacts in Fig. 38.12 are both of type
SF. Then the selection matrix H is given by
H D
0
BBBBBBBBBB@
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
CCCCCCCCCCA
;

Grasping
38.5 Examples
977
Part D | 38.5
thus the matrices GT 2 R86 and J 2 R85 are con-
structed by removing rows 5, 6, 11, and 12 from QGT
and QJ
GT D
0
BBBBBBBBBB@
c1
s1
0
0
0
0
s1
c1
0
0
0
r
0
0
1
r s1
r c1
0
0
0
0
c1
s1
0
c2
s2
0
0
0
0
s2
c2
0
0
0
r
0
0
1
r s2
r c2
0
0
0
0
c2
s2
0
1
CCCCCCCCCCA
;
(38.77)
J D
0
BBBBBBBBBBB@
l1
l3
l2
l7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
l6
0
l4
p
2
2 .l4 C l5/
0
0

p
2
2
0
1
CCCCCCCCCCCA
:
(38.78)
Notice that changing the contact models is easily ac-
complished by removing more rows. Changing con-
tact 1 to HF would eliminate the fourth rows from GT
and J. Changing it to PwoF would eliminate the second,
third and fourth rows of GT and J. Changing the model
at contact 2 would remove either just the eighth row or
the sixth, seventh, and eighth rows.
Example 1, Part 3: Reduce to Planar Case
The grasp shown in Fig. 38.12 can be reduced to
a planar problem by following the explicit formulas
given above, but it can also be done by understand-
ing the physical interpretations of the various rows and
columns of the matrices. Proceed by eliminating veloc-
ities and forces that are out of the plane. This can be
done by removing the z-axes from fNg and fBg, and
the Oo-directions at the contacts. Further, joints 3 and 4
must be locked. The resulting GT and J are constructed
eliminating certain rows and columns. GT is formed
by removing rows 3, 4, 7, and 8 and columns 3, 4,
and 5. J is formed by removing rows 3, 4, 7, and 8 and
columns 3 and 4 yielding
GT D
0
BB@
c1
s1
0
s1
c1
r
c2
s2
0
s2
c2
r
1
CCA ;
(38.79)
J D
0
BB@
l1
l3
0
l2
l7
0
0
0
0
0
0
l6
1
CCA :
(38.80)
Example 1, Part 4: Grasp Classes
The ﬁrst column of Table 38.11 reports the dimen-
sions of the main subspaces of J and G for the sphere
grasping example with different contact models. Only
non-trivial null spaces are listed.
In the case of two HF contact models, all four null
spaces are non-trivial, so the system satisﬁes the condi-
tions for all four grasp classes. The system is graspable
because there is an internal force along the line segment
connecting the two contact points. Indeterminacy is
manifested in the fact that the hand cannot resist a mo-
ment acting about that line. Redundancy is seen to exist
since joint 3 can be used to move contact 2 out of the
plane of the ﬁgure, but joint 4 can be rotated in the op-
posite direction to cancel this motion. Finally, the grasp
is defective, because the contact forces and the instanta-
neous velocities along the Oo1 and On2 directions of con-
tact 1 and 2, respectively, cannot be controlled through
the joint torques and velocities. These interpretations
are borne out in the null space basis matrices below,
computed using r D 1, cos.1/ D 0:8 D  cos.2/,
sin.1/ D cos.2/ D 0:6, l1 D 3, l2 D 2, l3 D 1, l4 D
2, l5 D 1, l6 D 1, and l7 D 0
N.J/ 
0
BBBB@
0
0
0:73
0:69
0
1
CCCCA
;
N.GT/ 
0
BBBBBB@
0
0
0:51
0:86
0
0
1
CCCCCCA
;
(38.81)
N.G/ 
0
BBBBBB@
0:57
0:42
0
0:57
0:42
0
1
CCCCCCA
;
N.JT/ D
0
BBBBBB@
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCA
:
(38.82)
Table 38.11 Dimensions of main subspaces and classiﬁca-
tions of grasp studied in Example 1
Models
Dimension
Class
HF,HF
dim N .J/ D 1
Redundant
dim N .GT/ D 1
Indeterminate
dim N .G/ D 1
Graspable
dim N .JT/ D 2
Defective
SF,HF
dim N .J/ D 1
Redundant
dim N .G/ D 1
Graspable
dim N .JT/ D 3
Defective
HF,SF
dim N .G/ D 1
Graspable
dim N .JT/ D 2
Defective
SF,SF
dim N .G/ D 2
Graspable
dim N .JT/ D 3
Defective

Part D | 38.5
978
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Notice that changing either contact to SF makes it
possible for the hand to resist external moments applied
about the line containing the contacts, so the grasp loses
indeterminacy, but retains graspability (with squeezing
still possible along the line of the contacts). However,
if contact 2 is the SF contact, the grasp loses its re-
dundancy. While the second contact point can still be
moved out of the plane by joint 3 and back in by joint 4,
this canceled translation of the contact point yields a net
rotation about On2 (this also implies that the hand can
control the moment applied to the object along the line
containing the contacts). Changing to SF at contact 2
does not affect the hand’s inability to move contact 1
and contact 2 in the Oo1 and On2 directions, so the defec-
tivity property is retained.
Example 1, Part 5: Desirable Properties
Assuming contact model types of SF and HF at con-
tacts 1 and 2, respectively, G is full row rank and
so N .GT/ D 0 (see Table in part 4 of this example).
Therefore, as long as the hand is sufﬁciently dexterous,
it can apply any wrench in R6 to the object. Also, if the
joints are locked, object motion will be prevented. As-
suming the same problem values used in the previous
part of this problem, the matrix GT is
GT D
0
BBBBBBBB@
c1
s1
0
0
0
0
s1
c1
0
0
0
r
0
0
1
rs1
rc1
0
0
0
0
c1
s1
0
c2
s2
0
0
0
0
s2
c2
0
0
0
r
0
0
1
rs2
rc2
0
1
CCCCCCCCA
(38.83)
Bases for the three non-trivial null spaces are
N.JT/ D
0
BBBBBBBB@
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCCCA
;
(38.84)
N.J/ 
0
BBBB@
0
0
0:73
0:69
0
1
CCCCA
;
N.G/ 
0
BBBBBBBB@
0:57
0:42
0
0
0:57
0:42
0
1
CCCCCCCCA
:
(38.85)
Since R.J/ is four-dimensional and N .G/ is
one-dimensional, the maximum dimension of R.J/ C
N .G/ cannot be more than 5, and therefore, the hand
cannot control all possible object velocities. For ex-
ample, the contact velocity cc D .0 0 0 0:8 0 0 0/T is
in N .JT/, and so cannot be controlled by the ﬁngers.
It is also equal to 0.6 times the third column of GT
plus the 4th column of GT and therefore is in R.GT/.
Since the mapping between R.G/ and R.GT/ is one-
to-one and onto, this uncontrollable contact velocity
corresponds to a unique uncontrollable object veloc-
ity,  D .0 0 0:6 1 0 0/. In other words, the hand cannot
cause the center of the sphere to translate in the z-
direction, while also rotating about the x-axis (and not
other axes simultaneously).
On the question of controlling all internal object
forces, the answer is yes, since N .JT/ \ N .G/ D 0:
This conclusion is clear from the fact that N .G/ has
non-zero values in the ﬁrst, second, and sixth posi-
tions, while all columns of N .JT/ have zeros in those
positions.
Example 1, Part 6: Force Closure
Again assume that contacts 1 and 2 on the grasped
sphere were modeled as SF and HF contacts, respec-
tively. Under this assumption, G is full row rank, and
the internal force corresponds to equal and opposite
contact forces. For frictional form closure to exist, the
internal force must lie within the friction cones. Choos-
ing r and the sines and cosines of 1 and 2 as in
example 1, part 4, frictional form closure can be shown
to exist if both friction coefﬁcients are greater than
0:75. For this grasp, since N .JT/ \ N .G/ D 0, fric-
tional form closure is equivalent to force closure.
The plot in Fig. 38.14 was generated by ﬁxing 2
at a speciﬁc value and varying 1 from 0.5 to 2.0.
Notice that for 1 < 0:75, force closure does not ex-
ist regardless of the value of 2. The metric increases
smoothly until a speciﬁc value of 1. From that point
on, the friction coefﬁcient at contact 2 is the limit-
ing factor. To increase the metric further, 2 must be
increased.
38.5.2 Example 2: Grasped Polygon
in the Plane
Part 1: G and J
Figure 38.15 shows a planar hand grasping a polygon.
Finger 1 (on the right) contains two joints numbered 1
and 2. Finger 2 contains joints 3–7, which are numbered
in increasing order moving from the palm distally. The
inertial frame has been chosen to lie inside the object,
with its x-axis passing through contacts 1 and 2, and
collinear with the normal vector of contact 2.

Grasping
38.5 Examples
979
Part D | 38.5
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
μ1, friction coefficient at contact 1
Frictional form closure metric
μ2 = 0.7
μ2 = 0.8
μ2 = 1.3
μ2 = 2.0
Fig. 38.14 Plot of force closure metric versus friction co-
efﬁcient on contact 1
l2
l5
l7
x
y
l6
l8
l1
l3
l4
τ1, q1
τ2, q2
τ3, q3
Fig. 38.15 Planar hand with 2 ﬁngers and 7 joints grasping
a polygonal object
The rotation matrices are given by
R1 D
0:8
0:6
0:6
0:8

;
R2 D
1
0
0
1

:
(38.86)
Assuming HF contacts, G is given as follows
G D
0
@
0:8
0:6
1
0
0:6
0:8
0
1
l6
l7
0
l8
1
A :
(38.87)
Notice that the ﬁrst two columns of G correspond to
the normal and tangential unit vectors at contact 1. The
third and fourth columns correspond to contact 2.
Assuming HF contacts and all joints are active (i. e.,
not locked), J is
JT D
0
BBBBBBBB@
0:8l1
0:6l1
0
0:6l2
0:8l2
l1
0
l3
0
0
l3
l5
l3 C l4
l5
l3 C l4
0
1
CCCCCCCCA
:
(38.88)
The ﬁrst two columns of JT are the torques required to
produce a unit force in the On1 and Ot1 directions at con-
tact 1. The horizontal line through the matrix partitions
the contributions for the ﬁrst ﬁnger (the upper part) and
second ﬁnger. Notice that both JT and G are full column
rank.
Example 2, Part 2: Grasp Classes
This example clearly illustrates the physical qualities of
the various grasp classes without introducing features
that can cloud the descriptions.
We now discuss the details of the four grasp classes
using the previous planar example. During these dis-
cussions it is useful to choose non-dimensional values
for the parameters in the grasping system. The lengths
were assumed to have the following values (the results
are the same, regardless of a particular choice of units,
so units are not speciﬁed)
l1 D 2:89 ;
l2 D 0:75 ;
l3 D 1:97 ;
(38.89)
l4 D 0:80 ;
l5 D 0:80 ;
l6 D 0:90 ;
(38.90)
l7 D 1:20 ;
l8 D 1:35 :
(38.91)
Redundant. Redundancy exists if N .J/ is non-triv-
ial. Assuming that both contacts are hard contacts and
all the joints are active, rank.J/ D 4, so N .J/ is three-
dimensional. A basis for N .J/ was obtained using
Matlab’s null() function
N.J/ 
0
BBBBBBBB@
0
0
0
0
0
0
0:49
0:31
0:27
0:53
0:64
0:17
0:49
0:50
0:02
0:49
0:50
0:02
0:02
0:01
0:95
1
CCCCCCCCA
:
(38.92)
Since the ﬁrst two rows are zero, N .J/ does not
include motions of the ﬁrst ﬁnger (on the right of the
palm). To understand this, assume the object is ﬁxed in
the plane. Then the ﬁrst ﬁnger cannot maintain sticking
contact at contact 1 unless its joints are also ﬁxed.

Part D | 38.5
980
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
The three non-zero columns corresponding to ﬁn-
ger 2 show that there are 3 basis motions of its joints
that allow the ﬁnger contact to stick to the object con-
tact. For example, the ﬁrst column shows that if joint 3
moves roughly as much as joints 4, 5, and 6, but in the
opposite direction as joints 4 and 5 and in the same di-
rectionas joint 6, while joint 7 is more or less ﬁxed, then
contact 2 will be maintained.
Notice that ﬁnger 2 contains a parallelogram. Be-
cause of this geometry, one can see that the vector
.0 0 0 1 1 1 1/T is an element of N .J/. The veloc-
ity interpretation of this vector is that the link of the
ﬁnger connected to the palm, and the link touching the
object remain ﬁxed in space, while the parallelogram
moves as a simple four-bar mechanism. Similarly, joint
actions in N .J/ do not affect the contact forces, but
cause internal hand velocities. Also, notice that since
N .JT/ D 0, the entire space of possible generalized ve-
locities and forces at the contacts can be generated by
the joints.
Indeterminate. As noted above, with HF contact
models, the system is graspable. However, replacing
the HF models with PwoF models removes the tan-
gent force components in the Ot1 and Ot2 directions.
This effectively removes columns 2 and 4 from G,
which guarantees that the system will be indeterminate.
The reduced matrix is denoted by G.1;3/. In this case
N

GT
.1;3/

is
N

GT
.1;3/


0
@
0
0:83
0:55
1
A :
(38.93)
Physically, this basis vector corresponds to moving the
object such that the point coincident with the origin of
fNg moves directly downward, while the object rotates
counter clockwise. Also, if the analogous force and mo-
ment were applied to the object, the frictionless contacts
could not maintain equilibrium.
Graspable. With two HF contact models in force,
rank.G/ D 3, so N .G/ is one–dimensional and the sys-
tem is graspable. The null space basis vector of the
grasp matrix is
N.G/ 
0
BB@
0:57
0:42
0:71
0
1
CCA :
(38.94)
The physical interpretation of this basis vector is two
opposing forces acting through the two contact points.
Recall that because the contact model is kinematic,
there is no consideration of contact friction. However,
given the direction of the contact normal relative to the
line of the internal force, one can see that if the co-
efﬁcient of friction is not greater than 0.75, squeezing
tightly will cause sliding at contact 1, thus violating the
kinematic contact model.
Defective. In a defective grasp, N .JT/ ¤ 0. Given
that the original J is full row rank, the grasp is not de-
fective. However, it can be made defective by locking
a number of joints and/or changing the hand’s conﬁg-
uration so that J is no longer full rank. For example,
locking joints 4, 5, 6, and 7 makes ﬁnger 2 a single-
link ﬁnger with only joint 3 active. In this new grasping
system, JT
.1;2;3/ is simply the ﬁrst three rows of the orig-
inal JT given in (38.88), where the subscript is the list
of indices of active joints. The null space basis vector
is
N.JT
.1;2;3// D
0
BB@
0
0
0
1
1
CCA :
(38.95)
This grasp is defective, since there is a subspace
of contact velocities and forces that cannot be con-
trolled by joint generalized velocities and forces. Since
only the last component of N.JT
.1;2;3// is non-zero, it
would be impossible for the hand to give the contact
point 2 on the object a velocity in the Ot2-direction while
maintaining the contact. This is also clear from the ar-
rangement of joint 3, contact 2, and the direction of the
contact normal. The dual interpretation is that forces
in N .JT/ are resisted by the structure and the corre-
sponding joint loads is zero, or equivalently that those
forces are not controllable by the hand. Notice that if
the model of contact 2 were changed to point-without-
friction, then N.JT
.1;2;3// D 0 and the system would no
longer be defective.
38.5.3 Example 3: Hyperstatic Grasps
Part 1: QG and QJ
Figure 38.16 shows a planar projection of a three-
dimensional sphere of radius l grasped by one ﬁnger
only, with 3 revolute joints, through 3 contacts. The
frames fCg1, fCg2 and fCg3 are oriented so that their
Oo-directions point out of the plane of the ﬁgure (as indi-
cated by the small ﬁlled circle). The axes of the frames
fNg and fBg were chosen to be axis-aligned with coin-
cident origins located at the center of the sphere. The
z-axes are pointing out of the page. Observe that since

Grasping
38.5 Examples
981
Part D | 38.5
zˆ 2
zˆ3
nˆ 2
nˆ 1
λh
nˆ 3
tˆ1
tˆ2
tˆ3
zˆ1
Fig. 38.16 A sphere grasped by a ﬁnger with three revo-
lute joints. The force direction 	h (dashed line) is a force
that belongs to both N .G/ and N .JT/ and causes hyper-
staticity
the three joint axes of the ﬁnger are perpendicular to
the .x; y/-plane, the grasp operates in that plane for all
time.
Assume that the width of all the links of the robotic
hand is zero. Rotation matrices Ri and vectors ci p for
i D 1; : : : ; 3, can be computed as in (38.66) and (38.67)
considering that 1 D , for contact 1, 2 D =2 and
3 D 0, for contact 2 and 3, respectively. Finally, the
complete grasp matrix is
QGT D  QG1
QG2
QG2
T 2 R186 ;
where QGi is as deﬁned in (38.68)
QGT D
0
BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB@
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
l
0
0
1
0
l
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
l
0
0
1
l
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
l
0
0
1
0
l
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
CCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCA
Construction of the complete hand Jacobian QJi for con-
tact i requires knowledge of the joint axis directions and
the origins of the frames ﬁxed to the links of each ﬁn-
ger. Assume that the origins of the Denavit–Hartenberg
(DH) frames lie in the plane of the ﬁgure. In the current
conﬁguration, the quantities of interest for contact 1, ex-
pressed directly in fNg are
c1  
1 D

0
l
0
T ;
Oz1 D

0
0
1
T :
The quantities of interest for contact 2, in fNg are
c2  
1 D

l
2l
0
T ;
c2  
2 D 
l
0
0
T ;
Oz1 D

0
0
1
T ;
Oz2 D

0
0
1
T :
The quantities of interest for contact 3, in fNg are
c3  
1 D

2l
l
0
T ;
c3  
2 D

2l
l
0
T ;
c3  
3 D

0
l
0
T ;
Oz1 D

0
0
1
T ;
Oz2 D

0
0
1
T ;
Oz3 D

0
0
1
T :
The complete hand Jacobian QJ 2 R183 (contact ve-
locities are expressed in fCgi) is
QJ D
0
BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB@
l
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
l
l
0
2l
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
l
l
l
2l
2l
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
CCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCA
:

Part D | 38.5
982
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
The horizontal dividing lines partition QJ into QJ1 (on top),
QJ2, and QJ3 (on the bottom). The columns correspond to
joints 1 through 3.
Example 3, Part 2: G and J
Assume that the 3 contacts in Fig. 38.16 are of type HF.
Then the selection matrix H is given by
H D
0
@
I
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
I
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
I
0
1
A ;
(38.96)
where I and 0 are in R33, thus matrices GT 2 R96
and J 2 R93 are obtained by removing rows related to
rotations from QGT and QJ
GT D
0
BBBBBBBBBBBB@
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
l
0
0
1
0
l
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
l
0
0
1
l
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
l
0
0
1
0
l
0
1
CCCCCCCCCCCCA
;
J D
0
BBBBBBBBBBBB@
l
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
l
l
0
2l
0
0
0
0
0
l
l
l
2l
2l
0
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCCCCCCCA
:
Example 3, Part 3: Grasp Classes
The ﬁrst column of Table 38.12 reports the dimen-
sions of the main subspaces of JT and G for the sphere
grasping example with three hard ﬁnger contacts. Only
non-trivial null spaces are listed.
The system is defective because there are general-
ized contact forces belonging to the subspace that are
resisted by the structure, which correspond to zero joint
Table 38.12 Dimensions of main subspaces and classiﬁca-
tion of grasp given in Example 3
Dimension
Class
dim N .JT/ D 6
Defective
dim N .G/ D 3
Graspable
dim N .JT/ \ N .G/ D 1
Hyperstatic
actions
N.JT/ D
0
BBBBBBBBBBBB@
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCCCCCCCA
:
The ﬁrst three columns represent generalized forces
acting at the three contact points in a direction perpen-
dicular to the plane of the Fig. 38.16. The fourth column
corresponds to a contact force applied only along the Ot1
direction.
System is graspable because the subspace of internal
forces is three-dimensional; a possible basis matrix is
N.G/ D
0
BBBBBBBBBBBB@
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
CCCCCCCCCCCCA
:
The three force vectors of subspace N.G/ are easily
identiﬁed from Fig. 38.16. Note that all forces are ex-
pressed in local contact frames. The ﬁrst column vector
of N.G/ represents opposed forces at contacts 1 and 2
along the line joining contacts 1 and 2. The second col-
umn vector parameterizes opposed forces at contacts 1
and 3 along the line joining contacts 1 and 3. The last
vector represents forces along direction 	h, shown as
the (dashed lines) in Fig. 38.16. Note that this direction
(in wrench intensity space) corresponds to two upward
friction forces at the left and right contacts and one
downward with double the magnitude from the center
of the top link in the work space.
Finally, the grasp is hyperstatic because
N.G/ \ N.JT/ D
0
BBBBBBBBBBBB@
0
1
0
2
0
0
0
1
0
1
CCCCCCCCCCCCA
¤ 0 :

Grasping
38.5 Examples
983
Part D | 38.5
Hyperstatic forces in this subspace, are internal forces
that cannot be controlled through the hand joints. In
Fig. 38.16 the internal force 	h that is also in N.JT/
is reported.
The grasp in Fig. 38.16 is an example of power
grasp, style of grasp mentioned earlier that uses many
contact points not only on the ﬁngertips but also on the
links of ﬁngers and the palm [38.8, 28, 33].
All power grasps are kinematically
defective
.N .JT/ ¤ 0/ and usually are hyperstatic. According to
Sect. 38.2.2, rigid-body modeling is not sufﬁcient to
capture the overall system behavior, because the gen-
eralized contact forces in N .G/ \ N .JT/ leave the
dynamics indeterminate.
Many approaches have been used to overcome
rigid-body limitation in hyperstatic grasps such as those
proposed in [38.16, 20, 21] where visco–elastic contact
models have been used to solve the force indeterminacy.
In [38.48], authors found that a sufﬁcient condition for
hyperstaticity is m > qC6 where m is the dimension of
contact force vector.
38.5.4 Example 4: Duality
Consider a frictionless disc constrained to translate in
the plane; (Fig. 38.17). In this problem n D 2, so the
space of applied contact forces and object velocities is
x
y
2-D grasp
of a disc
Force and
velocity cones
Force cone
is ray
Force cone
Force cone is
the plane
Velocity cone is
half plane
Velocity cone is
the origin
Velocity cone
1
1
1
2
2
1
x
y
1
x
y
1
3
3
2
Fig. 38.17 Case of a translating disc in the plane: Rela-
tionship between frictionless contacts and possible disc
velocities and net contact forces
the plane R2. In the top pair of pictures, a single (ﬁxed)
contact point imposes a half space constraint on the in-
stantaneous velocity and limits the force at a frictionless
contact to the ray. Both the ray and the (dark gray) half
space are deﬁned by the contact normal pointing into
the object. Notice that the ray and half space are dual
cones. When two contacts are present, the (light gray)
force cone becomes the non-negative span of the two
contact normals and the velocity cone is its dual. With
the addition of the third contact, the grasp has form clo-
sure as indicated by the degeneration of the velocity
cone to the origin and the expansion of the force cone
to become equal to the plane.
It is important to point out that the discussion of
the dual cones applies to three-dimensional bodies after
replacing the contact normals with the columns of G.
38.5.5 Example 5: Form Closure
Part 1: Unilateral Constraints
Form closure of a spatial object requires seven unilat-
eral contacts, which is difﬁcult to illustrate. Therefore,
the only form closure example analyzed in this chap-
ter is the planar problem shown in Fig. 38.18. In the
plane only four unilateral contacts are needed. In this
problem, even though the fourth contact is at a vertex
of the object, the contact normal is still well-deﬁned.
The angle ˛ of the ﬁnger is allowed to vary, and it can
be shown that form closure exists if ˛ lies in the in-
terval: 1:0518 < ˛ < 
2 . Notice that a critical value of
˛ occurs when the lower edge of C2 contains contact
point 3 (˛ 
 1:0518) and contact point 2 (˛ D 
2 ). Be-
yond these angles, the cone C1 and C2 can no longer see
each other.
Choosing the frame for analysis with origin at the
fourth contact point, the grasp matrix for this example
x
α
C2
C1
y
4
2
1
3
l
l
7
4
Fig. 38.18 Plot of closure metrics versus angle of contact
for 1:04 < ˛ < 1:59

Part D | 38.5
984
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Form closure metrics vs contact angle α 
α (rad)
LP1 metric
LP1
FC
Fig. 38.19 Planar grasp with ﬁrst-order form closure if
1:052 < ˛ < 
2
is
G D
0
@
0
0
1
 cos.˛/
1
1
0
 sin.˛/
l
0
7
4l
0
1
A :
(38.97)
Form closure was tested for a range of angles. The
blue curve in Fig. 38.19 is the LP1 metric (d  nc
returned by the function formClosure.m, available
from [38.43]), which indicates that the grasp farthest
from losing form closure has ˛ 
 1:222 radians, which
is the conﬁguration shown in Fig. 38.18. For compari-
son purposes, the Ferrari–Canny metric (scaled to have
the same maximum as the LP1 metric) is plotted in red.
They agree on the angles for which form closure exists,
but differ on the optimal ˛.
Example 5, Part 2: Bilateral Constraints
Let us next consider form closure with a mix of bilateral
and unilateral constraints using (38.54). For example,
if contact 1 is treated as a bilateral constraint and the
remaining are considered to be unilateral, Gn and B are
B D
0
@
0
1
l
1
A ;
Gn D
0
@
0
1
 cos.˛/
1
0
 sin.˛/
0
7
4l
0
1
A :
(38.98)
Additional contacts can be converted to bilateral by
moving their corresponding columns from Gn to B. Fig-
ure 38.20 shows ﬁve plots of the form closure metric
LP1. In the legend, 4 refers to the grasp with all four
contacts treated as unilateral, 5 means that contact 1
has been converted to bilateral as deﬁned by the previ-
ous equation, 6 means that contacts 1 and 2 have been
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
LP1 metric with bilateral constraints
α (rad)
LP1 metric
4
5
6
7
8
Fig. 38.20 First-order form closure metric for Fig. 38.18
with progressively more contacts converted to bilateral
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
0
2
4
6
8
LP1 metric as number of contacts grows
α (rad)
LP1 metric
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
0
1
2
3
4
5
FC metric as number of contacts grows
α (rad)
FC metric
4
5
6
7
8
9
4
5
6
7
8
9
Fig. 38.21 Comparison of the monotonicity properties of
the LP1 and Ferrari–Canny form closure metrics
converted to bilateral, etc. The plots show an important
property of the LP1 metric; the maximum value is equal
to the number of unilateral contacts (bilateral contacts
count as two unilateral contacts), which is attained for
curves 7 and 8. For this particular problem, these max-
ima are achieved for all ˛.
Example 5, Part 3: Monotonicity
If one were to zoom in on curves 4 and 5 near ˛ D 1:5,
one would see that LP1 is not monotonic as constraints
are added. That is, when contact 1 is converted from
unilateral (curve 4) to bilateral (curve 5), for some val-
ues of ˛, the LP1 metric is smaller despite the additional
constraint. To demonstrate monotonicity, the mono-
tonic Ferrari–Canny metric and the non-monotonic LP1

Grasping
38.6 Conclusion and Further Reading
985
Part D | 38.6
metric were computed as a function of ˛ for a sequence
of grasps. Starting with the original four contacts, ﬁve
unilateral contacts were added: f.0;1:3l/, .0:5l; 0/,
.0;1:75l/, .l; 0:6l/, .0:7l; 0/g. Figure 38.21 shows
the metrics with 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 contacts, as indicated
by the legend.
The LP1 metric does not increase monotonically as
contacts are added for every ˛. Near ˛ D 1:2 adding
the ﬁfth contact reduces the metric slightly. Also, near
˛ D 1:55, adding the eighth contact reduces the metric.
By contrast, the Ferrari–Canny metric is monotonic, al-
though not strictly monotonic; the plots labeled 6 and
7 are identical for all ˛ and there are other intervals of
˛ where the metric is constant as contacts are added.
For example, near ˛ D 1:35, the grasps with 5, 6, and 7
contacts all have the same metric value.
38.6 Conclusion and Further Reading
A great deal of understanding of grasping systems can
be derived from the simple linear kinematic, dynamic,
and contact models presented in this chapter. The most
widely used grasp classiﬁcations and closure proper-
ties can all be derived from these models under the
rigid-body assumption. Linearizing these models leads
to metrics and tests that can be computed efﬁciently
using computational linear algebra and linear program-
ming techniques. Grasp synthesis tools built on these
tests take object and hand models as inputs and return
a set of possible grasp conﬁgurations as outputs (see for
example [38.3]). In-depth discussions of grasp kinemat-
ics and grasp classiﬁcations can be found in [38.15, 20,
20, 34, 48–52].
One has to wonder what insights have been lost as
a result of the simplifying assumptions made in this
chapter. For the interested reader, there are a host of
papers that analyze grasping systems under more so-
phisticated assumptions. In general, bodies are curved
and compliant [38.17, 28, 35, 53–55] and contact fric-
tion models are not quite as simple as the linearized
ones so widely adopted. For example, if a contact has
to resist a moment about its normal, its effective tan-
gential friction coefﬁcient is reduced [38.46, 56]. In
this chapter, the quadratic Coulomb friction cone was
approximated by a polyhedral cone. The analysis prob-
lems are more difﬁcult when using the quadratic cone,
but they are quite tractable [38.47, 57].
In principle, a properly designed grasping system
could be controlled to maintain all contacts, but worldly
realities can lead to unwanted slipping or twisting. This
leads us back to the topic of grasp stability, which
is too often equated to grasp closure. However, grasp
closure is really equivalent to the existence of equilib-
rium, which is a necessary, but not sufﬁcient, condition
for stability. The common deﬁnition of stability out-
side of the ﬁeld of robotic grasping requires that when
a system is deﬂected from an equilibrium point, the sys-
tem returns to this point. From this perspective, and
under the assumption of no slipping at the contact
points, it is known that all closure grasps are stable, but
the converse is not necessarily true [38.53, 54, 58, 59].
However, stability analysis when contacts slide is still
an open question.
Given a stable grasp, another important consider-
ation not discussed in this chapter is that of grasp
force distribution problem, i. e., ﬁnding good actuator
torques and contact forces to balance a given external
load applied to the object. This problem was studied in
the context of walking machines ﬁrst by McGhee and
Orin [38.60] and later by several others [38.61, 62]. Ku-
mar and Waldron applied similar techniques to force
distribution problems in grasping [38.63]. Work by Han
et al. and Buss et al. solved the force distribution prob-
lem with non-linear friction cone constraints by taking
advantage of convex optimization techniques [38.47,
57, 64]. In power grasps, this problem of ﬁnding a good
distribution is difﬁcult, because the space of control-
lable contact wrenches is severely restricted by the large
number of contacts [38.21, 32, 33, 65].
Grasp synthesis largely depends on the structure of
the robotic hands that are often very complex systems
with many degrees of freedom, sensors and actua-
tors, which are necessary to adapt to many different
objects and tasks. An important research area, not dis-
cussed in this chapter, is that of designing simpliﬁed
hands coupling some of the degrees of freedom, re-
ducing the number of effective inputs, and leading to
more efﬁcient, simpler and reliable designs [38.23, 66].
A reduction of independent inputs is observed also in
human hand movement data, where few variables, de-
ﬁned as postural synergies, explain most of the variance
in the conﬁgurations of the hand while grasping dif-
ferent objects [38.25, 67]. The reduction of the number
of independently controlled inputs in the hand affects
grasp properties, and in particular the ability of the hand
to dexterously controlling grasp forces and in-hand ma-
nipulation as discussed in [38.68–71]
All of the above considerations implicitly assume
that a grasp has been achieved, which is no easy task.
The bulk of today’s research in robotic grasping can
be fairly characterized as focused on grasp acquisition.

Part D | 38
986
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
In other words, the problem is to move the hand from
a state of no contact with the object to one in which
a satisfactory grasp has been achieved. When a robot
identiﬁes an object to grasp, its knowledge of the ob-
ject’s pose and geometry are not perfect. Even if they
were, the robot’s control system could not move the
hand perfectly to the desired grasping points. The hand
will bump the object accidentally, altering its pose, pos-
sibly leading to grasp failure.
Areas of current research cover methods that ex-
ploit some detailed aspects of planned or sensed con-
tact interactions that occur before achieving the ﬁnal
grasp and those that try to be robust to pre-grasp con-
tact interactions. In the ﬁrst category are quasistatic
push-grasping, dynamic grasp acquisition, and percep-
tion. Push-grasping seeks out contact prior to wrapping
the ﬁngers in order to allow the object to settle into
a good position against the palm. It has, so far, been
applied to objects that can slide stably across a hor-
izontal surface cluttered with object that are not to
be grasped [38.72]. Dynamic planning combines a dy-
namic model of grasping that includes intermittent con-
tact to design optimal controllers and grasping actions
simultaneously [38.73]. The performance of both of the
above in real-time implementations could be improved
by new grasp perception methods, which estimate the
pose of the object relative to the hand [38.74–76].
Impedance controllers are being developed to re-
duce the negative effects of unexpected contacts be-
tween the hand and object as the grasp is being
formed [38.77] and between the object and environ-
ment during object transport tasks [38.78]. Independent
contact regions are surface patches on the object which
have the property: if a contact point is stabilized any-
where inside each region, then the grasp will have
force closure [38.79, 80]. With this approach, a small
amount of jostling will not cause grasp failure. Perhaps
caging takes the independent regions idea to the ex-
treme. Here the goal is to ﬁnd a conﬁguration of the
hand that loosely surrounds the object with the addi-
tional condition that the object cannot escape without
deforming itself or the hand [38.81, 82]. The challenges
in caging are in ﬁnding a pre-cage conﬁguration and
a ﬁnger motion plan that impose the least restrictive
accuracy requirements on the robots perception and
control systems.
Video-References
VIDEO 551
Grasp analysis using the MATLAB toolbox SynGrasp
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/04/videodetails/551
References
38.1
A. Bicchi: Hands for dextrous manipulation and
powerful grasping: A difficult road towards sim-
plicity, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 16, 652–662
(2000)
38.2
J.K. Salisbury: Kinematic and Force Analysis of Ar-
ticulated Hands, Ph.D. Thesis (Stanford University,
Stanford 1982)
38.3
A.T. Miller, P.K. Allen: GraspIt! A versatile simula-
tor for robotic grasping, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag.
11(4), 110–122 (2004)
38.4
M. Malvezzi, G. Gioioso, G. Salvietti, D. Prattichizzo:
SynGrasp: A matlab toolbox for underactuated and
compliant hands, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 22(4),
52–68 (2015)
38.5
M. Malvezzi, G. Gioioso, G. Salvietti, D. Prattichizzo,
A. Bicchi: Syngrasp: A matlab toolbox for grasp
analysis of human and robotic hands, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2013) pp. 1088–
1093
38.6
SynGrasp: A MATLAB Toolbox for Grasp Analysis
of Human and Robotic Hands, http://syngrasp.dii.
unisi.it/
38.7
M. Grebenstein, A. Albu-Schäffer, T. Bahls, M. Chal-
on, O. Eiberger, W. Friedl, R. Gruber, S. Haddadin,
U. Hagn, R. Haslinger, H. Hoppner, S. Jorg, M. Nickl,
A. Nothhelfer, F. Petit, J. Reill, N. Seitz, T. Wimbock,
S. Wolf, T. Wusthoff, G. Hirzinger: The DLR hand arm
system, IEEE Conf. Robotics Autom. (2011) pp. 3175–
3182
38.8
K. Salisbury, W. Townsend, B. Ebrman, D. DiPietro:
Preliminary design of a whole-arm manipulation
system (WAMS), Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (1988) pp. 254–260
38.9
M.S. Ohwovoriole, B. Roth: An extension of screw
theory, J. Mech. Des. 103, 725–735 (1981)
38.10
K.H. Hunt: Kinematic Geometry of Mechanisms (Ox-
ford Univ. Press, Oxford 1978)
38.11
T.R. Kane, D.A. Levinson, P.W. Likins: Spacecraft Dy-
namics (McGraw Hill, New York 1980)
38.12
J.J. Craig: Introduction to Robotics: Mechanics and
Control, 2nd edn. (Addison-Wesley, Reading 1989)
38.13
J.K. Salisbury, B. Roth: Kinematic and force analysis
of articulated mechanical hands, J. Mech. Transm.
Autom. Des. 105(1), 35–41 (1983)

Grasping
References
987
Part D | 38
38.14
M.T. Mason, J.K. Salisbury Jr: Robot Hands and the
Mechanics of Manipulation (MIT Press, Cambridge
1985)
38.15
A. Bicchi: On the closure properties of robotic
grasping, Int. J. Robotics Res. 14(4), 319–334 (1995)
38.16
D. Prattichizzo, A. Bicchi: Consistent task spec-
ification for manipulation systems with general
kinematics, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 119(4),
760–767 (1997)
38.17
J. Kerr, B. Roth: Analysis of multifingered hands,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 4(4), 3–17 (1986)
38.18
G. Strang: Introduction to Linear Algebra (Welles-
ley-Cambridge Press, Wellesley 1993)
38.19
R.M. Murray, Z. Li, S.S. Sastry: A Mathematical In-
troduction to Robot Manipulation (CRC, Boca Raton
1993)
38.20
D. Prattichizzo, A. Bicchi: Dynamic analysis of mo-
bility and graspability of general manipulation
systems, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 14(2), 241–258
(1998)
38.21
A. Bicchi: On the problem of decomposing grasp
and manipulation forces in multiple whole-limb
manipulation, Int. J. Robotics Auton. Syst. 13, 127–
147 (1994)
38.22
A.M. Dollar, R.D. Howe: Joint coupling and ac-
tuation design of underactuated hands for un-
structured environments, Int. J. Robotics Res. 30,
1157–1169 (2011)
38.23
L. Birglen, T. Lalibertè, C. Gosselin: Underactuated
robotic hands, Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2008)
38.24
M.G. Catalano, G. Grioli, A. Serio, E. Farnioli, C. Pi-
azza, A. Bicchi: Adaptive synergies for a humanoid
robot hand, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid
Robots (2012) pp. 7–14
38.25
M. Gabiccini, A. Bicchi, D. Prattichizzo, M. Malvezzi:
On the role of hand synergies in the optimal choice
of grasping forces, Auton. Robots 31, 235–252 (2011)
38.26
M. Malvezzi, D. Prattichizzo: Evaluation of grasp
stiffness in underactuated compliant hands, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2013) pp. 2074–2079
38.27
S.F. Chen, I. Kao: Conservative congruence trans-
formation for joint and cartesian stiffness matrices
of robotic hands and fingers, Int. J. Robotics Res.
19(9), 835–847 (2000)
38.28
M.R. Cutkosky, I. Kao: Computing and control-
ling the compliance of a robotic hand, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 5(2), 151–165 (1989)
38.29
A. Albu-Schaffer, O. Eiberger, M. Grebenstein,
S. Haddadin, C. Ott, T. Wimbock, S. Wolf, G. Hirzin-
ger: Soft robotics, IEEE Robotics Autom, Mag. 15(3),
20–30 (2008)
38.30
A. Bicchi: Force distribution in multiple whole-limb
manipulation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(1993)
38.31
F. Reuleaux: The Kinematics of Machinery (Macmil-
lan, New York 1876), Republished by Dover, New
York, 1963
38.32
T. Omata, K. Nagata: Rigid body analysis of the
indeterminate grasp force in power grasps, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 16(1), 46–54 (2000)
38.33
J.C. Trinkle: The Mechanics and Planning of En-
veloping Grasps, Ph.D. Thesis (University of Penn-
sylvania, Department of Systems Engineering, 1987)
38.34
K. Lakshminarayana: Mechanics of Form Closure,
Tech. Rep., Vol. 78-DET-32 (ASME, New York 1978)
38.35
E. Rimon, J. Burdick: Mobility of bodies in contact
i: A 2nd order mobility index for multiple-finger
grasps, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 14(5), 696–708
(1998)
38.36
B. Mishra, J.T. Schwartz, M. Sharir: On the existence
and synthesis of multifinger positive grips, Algo-
rithmica 2(4), 541–558 (1987)
38.37
P.
Somov:
Über
Schraubengeschwindigkeiten
eines festen Körpers bei verschiedener Zahl von
Stützflächen, Z. Math. Phys. 42, 133–153 (1897)
38.38
P.
Somov:
Über
Schraubengeschwindigkeiten
eines festen Körpers bei verschiedener Zahl von
Stützflächen, Z. Math. Phys. 42, 161–182 (1897)
38.39
A.J. Goldman, A.W. Tucker: Polyhedral convex
cones. In: Linear Inequalities and Related Systems,
ed. by H.W. Kuhn, A.W. Tucker (Princeton Univ., York
1956) pp. 19–40
38.40
X. Markenscoff, L. Ni, C.H. Papadimitriou: The ge-
ometry of grasping, Int. J. Robotics Res. 9(1), 61–74
(1990)
38.41
D.G. Luenberger: Linear and Nonlinear Program-
ming, 2nd edn. (Addison-Wesley, Reading 1984)
38.42
G. Muscio. J.C. Trinkle: Grasp Closure Analysis of Bi-
laterally Constrained Objects, Tech. Rep. Ser., Vol.
13-01 (Department of Computer Science, Rensselear
Polytechnic Institute, Troy 2013)
38.43
Rensselaer Computer Science: http://www.cs.rpi.
edu/twiki/bin/view/RoboticsWeb/LabSoftware
38.44
C. Ferrari, J. Canny: Planning optimal grasps, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (1986) pp. 2290–
2295
38.45
V.D. Nguyen: The Synthesis of Force Closure Grasps
in the Plane, M.S. Thesis Ser. (MIT Department of
Mechanical Engineering, Cambridge 1985), AI-TR861
38.46
R.D. Howe, M.R. Cutkosky: Practical force-motion
models for sliding manipulation, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 15(6), 557–572 (1996)
38.47
L. Han, J.C. Trinkle, Z. Li: Grasp analysis as lin-
ear matrix inequality problems,IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 16(6), 663–674 (2000)
38.48
J.C. Trinkle: On the stability and instantaneous ve-
locity of grasped frictionless objects, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 8(5), 560–572 (1992)
38.49
K.H. Hunt, A.E. Samuel, P.R. McAree: Special config-
urations of multi-finger multi-freedom grippers –
A kinematic study, Int. J. Robotics Res. 10(2), 123–134
(1991)
38.50
D.J. Montana: The kinematics of multi-fingered
manipulation, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 11(4),
491–503 (1995)
38.51
Y. Nakamura, K. Nagai, T. Yoshikawa: Dynamics and
stability in coordination of multiple robotic mech-
anisms, Int. J. Robotics Res. 8, 44–61 (1989)
38.52
J.S. Pang, J.C. Trinkle: Stability characterizations of
rigid body contact problems with coulomb friction,
Z. Angew. Math. Mech. 80(10), 643–663 (2000)

Part D | 38
988
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
38.53
M.R. Cutkosky: Robotic Grasping and Fine Manip-
ulation (Kluwer, Norwell 1985)
38.54
W.S. Howard, V. Kumar: On the stability of grasped
objects, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 12(6), 904–917
(1996)
38.55
A.B.A. Cole, J.E. Hauser, S.S. Sastry: Kinematics and
control of multifingered hands with rolling con-
tacts, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 34, 398–404 (1989)
38.56
R.I. Leine, C. Glocker: A set-valued force law for
spatial Coulomb–Contensou friction, Eur. J. Mech.
A 22(2), 193–216 (2003)
38.57
M. Buss, H. Hashimoto, J. Moore: Dexterous hand
grasping force optimization, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 12(3), 406–418 (1996)
38.58
V. Nguyen: Constructing force-closure grasps, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 7(3), 3–16 (1988)
38.59
E. Rimon, J.W. Burdick: Mobility of bodies in con-
tact II: How forces are generated by curvature ef-
fects, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (1998)
pp. 2336–2341
38.60
R.B. McGhee, D.E. Orin: A mathematical program-
ming approach to control of positions and torques
in legged locomotion systems, Proc. ROMANCY (1976)
38.61
K. Waldron: Force and motion management in
legged locomotion, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 2(4),
214–220 (1986)
38.62
T. Yoshikawa, K. Nagai: Manipulating and grasping
forces in manipulation by multi-fingered grip-
pers, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (1987)
pp. 1998–2007
38.63
V. Kumar, K. Waldron: Force distribution in closed
kinematic chains, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 4(6), 657–
664 (1988)
38.64
M. Buss, L. Faybusovich, J. Moore: Dikin-type algo-
rtihms for dexterous grasping force optimization,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 17(8), 831–839 (1998)
38.65
D. Prattichizzo, J.K. Salisbury, A. Bicchi: Contact and
grasp robustness measures: Analysis and experi-
ments. In: Experimental Robotics-IV, Lecture Notes
in Control and Information Sciences, Vol. 223, ed. by
O. Khatib, K. Salisbury (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
1997) pp. 83–90
38.66
A.M. Dollar, R.D. Howe: The highly adaptive sdm
hand: Design and performance evaluation, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 29(5), 585–597 (2010)
38.67
M.G. Catalano, G. Grioli, E. Farnioli, A. Serio, C. Pi-
azza, A. Bicchi: Adaptive synergies for the design
and control of the Pisa/IIT SoftHand, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 33(5), 768–782 (2014)
38.68
M.T. Ciocarlie, P.K. Allen: Hand posture subspaces
for dexterous robotic grasping, Int. J. Robotics Res.
28(7), 851–867 (2009)
38.69
T.
Wimbock,
B.
Jahn,
G.
Hirzinger:
Synergy
level impedance control for multifingered hands,
IEEE/RSJ Int Conf Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011)
pp. 973–979
38.70
D. Prattichizzo, M. Malvezzi, M. Gabiccini, A. Bicchi:
On the manipulability ellipsoids of underactuated
robotic hands with compliance, Robotics Auton.
Syst. 60(3), 337–346 (2012)
38.71
D. Prattichizzo, M. Malvezzi, M. Gabiccini, A. Bic-
chi: On motion and force controllability of pre-
cision grasps with hands actuated by soft syn-
ergies,
IEEE
Trans.
Robotics
29(6),
1440–1456
(2013)
38.72
M.R. Dogar, S.S. Srinivasa: A framework for push-
grasping in clutter, Robotics Sci. Syst. (2011)
38.73
M. Posa, R. Tedrake: Direct trajectory optimization
of rigid body dynamical systems through contact,
Proc. Workshop Algorithm. Found. Robotics (2012)
38.74
L. Zhang, J.C. Trinkle: The application of particle fil-
tering to grasp acquistion with visual occlusion and
tactile sensing, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf Robotics Autom.
(2012)
38.75
P. Hebert, N. Hudson, J. Ma, J. Burdick: Fusion
of stereo vision, force-torque, and joint sensors
for estimation of in-hand object location, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2011) pp. 5935–
5941
38.76
S. Haidacher, G. Hirzinger: Estimating finger con-
tact location and object pose from contact mea-
surements in 3nd grasping, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (2003) pp. 1805–1810
38.77
T. Schlegl, M. Buss, T. Omata, G. Schmidt: Fast dex-
trous re-grasping with optimal contact forces and
contact sensor-based impedance control, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2001) pp. 103–
108
38.78
G. Muscio, F. Pierri, J.C. Trinkle: A hand/arm con-
troller that simultaneously regulates internal grasp
forces and the impedance of contacts with the en-
vironment, IEEE Conf. Robotics Autom. (2014)
38.79
M.A. Roa, R. Suarez: Computation of independent
contact regions for grasping 3-D objects, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 25(4), 839–850 (2009)
38.80
M.A. Roa, R. Suarez: Influence of contact types and
uncertainties in the computation of independent
contact regions, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (2011) pp. 3317–3323
38.81
A. Rodriguez, M.T. Mason, S. Ferry: From caging to
grasping, Int. J. Robotics Res. 31(7), 886–900 (2012)
38.82
C. Davidson, A. Blake: Error-tolerant visual plan-
ning of planar grasp, 6th Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(1998) pp. 911–916

Multimedia Contents Cooperative
989
Part D | 39
39. Cooperative Manipulation
Fabrizio Caccavale, Masaru Uchiyama
This chapter is devoted to cooperative manipula-
tion of a common object by means of two or more
robotic arms. The chapter opens with a historical
overview of the research on cooperative manipula-
tion, ranging from early 1970s to very recent years.
Kinematics and dynamics of robotic arms cooper-
atively manipulating a tightly grasped rigid object
are presented in depth. As for the kinematics and
statics, the chosen approach is based on the so-
called symmetric formulation; fundamentals of
dynamics and reduced-order models for closed
kinematic chains are discussed as well. A few spe-
cial topics, such as the definition of geometrically
meaningful cooperative task space variables, the
problem of load distribution, and the definition of
manipulability ellipsoids, are included to give the
reader a complete picture of modeling and evalua-
tion methodologies for cooperative manipulators.
Then, the chapter presents the main strategies
for controlling both the motion of the coopera-
tive system and the interaction forces between
the manipulators and the grasped object; in de-
tail, fundamentals of hybrid force/position control,
proportional–derivative (PD)-type force/position
control schemes, feedback linearization tech-
niques, and impedance control approaches are
given. In the last section further reading on ad-
vanced topics related to control of cooperative
39.1
Historical Overview ..............................
990
39.2 Kinematics and Statics .........................
991
39.2.1
Symmetric Formulation..............
992
39.2.2 Multifingered Manipulation .......
994
39.3 Cooperative Task Space.........................
995
39.4 Dynamics and Load Distribution ...........
996
39.4.1
Reduced-Order Models ..............
997
39.4.2 Load Distribution ......................
997
39.5 Task-Space Analysis .............................
998
39.6 Control................................................
999
39.6.1
Hybrid Control...........................
999
39.6.2 PD Force/Motion Control ............. 1000
39.6.3 Feedback Linearization
Approaches............................... 1001
39.6.4 Impedance Control .................... 1002
39.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ......... 1003
Video-References......................................... 1004
References................................................... 1004
robots is suggested; in detail, advanced nonlinear
control strategies are briefly discussed (i.e., intel-
ligent control approaches, synchronization control,
decentralized control); also, fundamental results
on modeling and control of cooperative systems
possessing some degree of flexibility are briefly
outlined.
It was not long after the emergence of robotics tech-
nologies that multi-arm robot systems began to be
investigated by robotics researchers. In the early 1970s,
research on this topic had already started. This inter-
est was mainly due to typical limitations in applications
of single-arm robots. It has been recognized, in fact,
that many tasks that are difﬁcult or impossible to ex-
ecute by a single robot become feasible when two
or more manipulators are employed in a cooperative
way. Such tasks include, for instance, carrying heavy
or large payloads, the assembly of multiple parts with-
out using special ﬁxtures, and handling of objects that
are ﬂexible or possess extra degrees of freedom. Re-
search on this subject has been aimed at solving existing
problems and opening up a new stream of applica-
tions in ﬂexible manufacturing systems as well as in
poorly structured environments (e.g., outer space and
undersea).

Part D | 39.1
990
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
39.1 Historical Overview
Examples of research work in the early days include
that by Fujii and Kurono [39.1], Nakano et al. [39.2],
and Takase et al. [39.3]. Already in those pieces
of work important key issues in the control of
multi-arm robots were investigated: master/slave con-
trol, force/compliance control, and task-space control.
In [39.1] Fujii and Kurono proposed to adopt a com-
pliance control concept for the coordination of multiple
manipulators; they deﬁned a task vector with respect
to the object frame and controlled the compliance ex-
pressed in the same coordinate frame. An interesting
feature of the work by Fujii and Kurono [39.1] and
by Takase et al. [39.3] is that force/compliance con-
trol was implemented by exploiting back-drivability of
the actuators, without using force/torque sensors. The
importance of this technique in practical applications,
however, was not recognized at that time, and more
complex approaches using force/torque sensors lured
people in robotics. Nakano et al. [39.2, 4] proposed
a master/slave force control approach for the coordina-
tion of two arms carrying an object cooperatively and
pointed out the necessity of force control for coopera-
tive multiple robots.
In the 1980s, based on several fundamental theo-
retical results for single-arm robots, strong research on
multi-arm robotic systems was renewed [39.5]. Def-
inition of task vectors with respect to the object to
be handled [39.6], dynamics and control of the closed
kinematic chain formed by the multi-arm robot and the
object [39.7, 8], and force control issues, such as hy-
brid position/force control [39.9–12], were explored.
Through this research work, a strong theoretical back-
ground for the control of multi-arm robots has been
formed, providing the basis for research on more ad-
vanced topics from the 1990s to today.
How to parameterize the constraint forces/moments
on the object based on the dynamic model of the whole
cooperative system has been recognized as a critical
issue; in fact, this parametrization leads to the deﬁ-
nition of task variables for the control and hence to
an answer to one of the most frequently asked ques-
tions in the ﬁeld of multi-arm robotics: how to control
simultaneously the trajectory of the object, the me-
chanical stresses (internal forces/moments) acting on
the object, load sharing among the arms, and even the
external forces/moments on the object. Force decom-
position may be a key to solving these problems and
has been studied by Uchiyama and Dauchez [39.11,
12] and Walker et al. [39.13] as well as Bonitz and
Hsia [39.14]. In detail, devising a geometrically clear
parametrization of the internal forces/moments acting
on the object has been recognized as an important
problem, solved in [39.15, 16]. Several cooperative con-
trol schemes based on the sought parameterizations
have been designed, including control of motion and
force [39.11, 12, 17–19] and impedance/compliance
control [39.20–22]. Other approaches include adaptive
control [39.23, 24], kinematic control [39.25], task-
space regulation [39.26], joint-space control [39.27,
28], and coordinated control [39.29].
Also, the deﬁnition of user-oriented task-space vari-
ables for coordinated control [39.26, 30] and the devel-
opment of meaningful performance measures [39.31–
34] have been fruitfully investigated in 1990s.
Load sharing among the arms is also an inter-
esting issue on which many papers have been pub-
lished [39.35–40]. Load sharing may be exploited both
for optimal load distribution among arms and for robust
holding of the object, when the object is held by the
arms without being grasped rigidly. In both cases, any-
how, this becomes a problem of optimization and can
be solved by either heuristic [39.41] or mathematical
methods [39.42].
Other research efforts have been focused on coop-
erative handling of multibodied or even ﬂexible ob-
jects [39.43–45]. Control of multi-ﬂexible-arm robots
has been investigated [39.46–48], since the merits of
ﬂexible-arm robots can be exploited in cooperative
systems [39.49], i. e., lightweight structure, intrinsic
compliance and hence safety, etc.
Robust holding of an object in the presence of slip-
page of end-effectors on the object may be achieved as
well, if the slippage is detected correctly [39.50].
A more recent control framework for cooperative
systems is so-called synchronization control [39.51,
52]; in this class of approaches the control prob-
lem is formulated in terms of suitably deﬁned errors
accounting for the motion synchronization between
the manipulators involved in the cooperative task. As
for the nonlinear control of cooperative manipula-
tion systems, efforts have been spent on intelligent
control (e.g., [39.53–55]) as well as on the investi-
gation of control strategies in the presence of partial
state feedback [39.56]. The problem of controlling un-
deractuated cooperative manipulators is tackled, e.g.,
in [39.57].
The problem of the implementation of cooperative
control strategies on conventional industrial robots has
attracted the increasing interest of the research commu-
nity. In fact, the control units of industrial robots do
not present all the features needed to implement non-
linear torque control schemes, while the integration of
force/torque sensing in standard industrial robot control
units is often cumbersome and tends to be avoided in in-

Cooperative Manipulation
39.2 Kinematics and Statics
991
Part D | 39.2
dustry for many reasons: unreliability, cost, etc. Hence,
the rebirth of the early methods, where force sensors
were not used (Fujii and Kurono [39.1], Inoue [39.58]),
has become attractive for industrial settings. Hybrid po-
sition/force control without using force/torque sensors
has been successfully implemented [39.59]. Interesting
results on the implementation of effective cooperative
control strategies for industrial robots are presented,
e.g., in [39.60], where a design approach that makes
use of tool-based coordinate systems, trajectory gen-
eration, and distributed control of multiple robots is
presented. Also, a task planning approach for multi-arm
industrial robotic work-cells has been recently proposed
in [39.30], together with a language for cooperative task
programming.
Another interesting aspect, related to the reliability
and safety of cooperative manipulation systems, is in-
vestigated in [39.61], where the use of nonrigid grippers
is considered to avoid large internal forces and, at the
same time, to achieve safe manipulation of the object,
even in the presence of failures and unpredicted con-
tacts with the external environment.
It is worth mentioning the strict relationship be-
tween issues related to grasping of objects by ﬁn-
gers/hands (widely described in Chap. 38) and those
related to cooperative manipulation. In fact, in both
cases, multiple manipulation structures grasp a com-
monly manipulated object. In multiﬁngered hands only
some motion components are transmitted through the
contact point to the manipulated object (unilateral con-
straints), while cooperative manipulation via robotic
arms is achieved by rigid (or near-rigid) grasp points
and interaction takes place by transmitting all the mo-
tion components through the grasping points (bilateral
constraints). While many common problems between
the two ﬁelds can be tackled in a conceptually similar
way (e.g., kinetostatic modeling, force control), many
other are speciﬁc of each of the two application ﬁelds
(e.g., form and force closure for multiﬁngered hands).
Interestingly, a common frame for both cooperative and
multiﬁngered manipulation has been proposed [39.25];
namely rolling/sliding of the grasp points on the ob-
ject is taken into account by modeling the contacts via
rotational/prismatic joints; then, the desired manipula-
tor/ﬁnger joints trajectories are derived from the desired
object motion by using numerical inverse kinematics
algorithms. In [39.62–64], contributions to modeling
and control of cooperative manipulation systems in the
presence of different types of manipulators/object con-
tact can be found. Moreover, since cooperative manipu-
lators can be often viewed as closed-chain mechanisms,
a strong link with research related to parallel manipula-
tors (Chap. 18) exists, especially from a modeling point
of view.
Finally, it is worth mentioning the important issue of
cooperative transportation and manipulation of objects
via multiple mobile robotic system [39.65, 66], which
is currently subject of investigation.
39.2 Kinematics and Statics
Consider a system composed by M manipulators, each
equipped with Ni joints (i D 1; : : : ; M). Let pi denote
the (31) vector of the position of the i-th end-effector
coordinate frame, Ti, with respect to a common base
frame, T ; let Ri denote the (3  3) matrix which ex-
presses the orientation of Ti with respect to the base
frame T .
Both pi and Ri can be expressed as a function of the
(Ni  1) vector of the joints variables of each manipula-
tor qi through the direct kinematics equations
 pi D pi.qi/ ;
Ri D Ri.qi/ :
(39.1)
Of course, the orientation of the end-effector frame may
be expresses in terms of a minimal set of angles, i. e.,
a set of three Euler angles i. In this case, direct kine-
matics can be expressed in terms of an operational space
(pseudo-)vector xi as follows
xi D ki.qi/ D
pi.qi/
i.qi/

:
(39.2)
The linear Ppi and angular !i velocity of the i-th end-
effector can be collected in the (6  1) generalized
velocities vector v i D

PpT
i !T
i
T. Then, the differential
direct kinematics can be expressed as
v i D Ji.qi/Pqi ;
(39.3)
where the (6  Ni) matrix Ji is the so-called geometric
Jacobian of the i-th manipulator (Chap. 2). When the
velocity is expressed as the derivative of the operational
space vector, differential kinematics takes a formally
similar form
Pxi D @ki.qi/
@qi
Pqi D JAi.qi/Pqi ;
(39.4)
where the (6  Ni) matrix JAi is the so-called ana-
lytical Jacobian of the i-th manipulator (Chap. 2).
Let us consider the (6  1) vector of the generalized
forces acting at the i-th end-effector
hi D
f i
ni

;
(39.5)

Part D | 39.2
992
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
where f i and ni denote the force and moment, re-
spectively. By invoking the principle of virtual work,
a relation dual to (39.3) can be derived
i D JT
i .qi/hi ;
(39.6)
where i is the (Ni 1) vector of the forces/torques act-
ing at the joints of the i-th manipulator.
For the sake of simplicity, consider a system of two
cooperative robots (Fig. 39.1) manipulating a common
object. Let C be a ﬁxed point of the object (e.g., the cen-
ter of mass of the object), whose position in the base
frame is given by the vector pC; moreover, let TC be
a coordinate frame attached to object with origin in C.
The virtual stick [39.11, 12] is deﬁned as the vector ri
(i D 1; 2) which determines the position of TC with re-
spect to Ti (i D 1; 2); it is assumed that ri behaves as
a rigid stick ﬁxed to the i-th end-effector. Hence, each
virtual stick, expressed in the frame Ti (or TC), is a con-
stant vector if the commonly grasped object is rigid and
tightly grasped by each manipulator. In this case, the
direct kinematics of each manipulator can be expressed
in terms of a virtual end-effector frame TS;i D TC, hav-
ing the same orientation of TC and origin located in
pS;i D pi C ri D pC. Hence, the position and orientation
at the tip of each virtual stick are given by (i D 1; 2)
pS;i D pC ;
RS;i D RC :
The set of Euler angles corresponding to RS;i will be
denoted by the (3  1) vector S;i. Hereafter, it is as-
sumed that the object grasped by the two manipulators
can be considered rigid (or nearly rigid) and tightly (or
nearly tightly) attached to each end-effector. Hence, the
displacements between the above deﬁned frames can be
considered null or negligible. Otherwise, if the manip-
ulated object is subject to deformation (e.g., in the case
p1
p2
pc
r1
C
r2
1
c
2
Fig. 39.1 Grasp geometry for a two-manipulator coopera-
tive system manipulating a common object
of a ﬂexible object) and/or the grasp is not tight (e.g.,
in the case of compliant grippers) the above deﬁned
coordinate frames, will be subject to nonnegligible dis-
placements with respect to each other.
Let hS;i denote the vector of generalized forces act-
ing at the tip of the i-th virtual stick; it can be easily
veriﬁed that the following equation holds
hS;i D

I3
O3
S.ri/
I3

hi D Wihi ;
(39.7)
where Ol and Il denote, respectively, the null matrix and
the identity matrix of (ll) dimensions, and S.ri/ is the
(3  3) skew-symmetric matrix operator performing the
cross product. It is worth noticing that Wi is always full
rank.
By invoking the virtual works principle, a relation
dual to (39.7) can easily be derived
v i D
 I3
S.ri/
O3
I3

v S;i D WT
i v S;i ;
(39.8)
where v S;i is the generalized velocity vector of the vir-
tual stick endpoint. When ri D 0, it is Wi D I6; in other
words, if the end-effector kinematics of each manipu-
lator is referred to the corresponding virtual stick (or
the object reduces to point), the forces and velocities at
the two end-effectors coincide with their counterparts
referred at the virtual sticks.
39.2.1 Symmetric Formulation
The kinetostatic formulation proposed by Uchiyama
and Dauchez [39.12], i. e., the so-called symmetric for-
mulation, is based on kinematic and static relationships
between generalized forces/velocities acting at the ob-
ject and their counterparts acting at the manipulators
end-effectors (or at the virtual sticks endpoints).
Let us deﬁne ﬁrst the external forces as the (6  1)
vector of generalized forces given by
hE D hS;1 C hS;2 D WS hS ;
(39.9)
with WS D .I6 I6/ and hS D

hT
S;1 hT
S;2
T; in other
words, hE represents the vector of generalized forces
causing the object’s motion. From (39.7) and (39.9)
it follows that hE can be expressed in terms of end-
effector forces as well
hE D W1 h1 C W2 h2 D Wh ;
(39.10)
with W D .W1 W2/ and h D

hT
1 hT
2
T. It can be recog-
nized that WS (W) is a (6  12) matrix, having a six-
dimensional (6-D) range space and a six-dimensional

Cooperative Manipulation
39.2 Kinematics and Statics
993
Part D | 39.2
null space, describing the geometry of the grasp, and
thus is usually termed the grasp matrix.
The inverse solution to (39.9) yields
hS D W
S hE C VS hI D US hO ;
(39.11)
where W
S denotes the Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse
of WS
W
S D 1
2
I6
I6

:
(39.12)
VS is a matrix whose columns are a basis of the null
space of WS, e.g.,
VS D
I6
I6

;
(39.13)
hO D

hT
E hT
I
T, and
US D

W
S VS

:
(39.14)
The second term on the right-hand side of (39.11), i. e.,
VShI, represents a vector of generalized forces, referred
at the tip of the virtual sticks, which lies in the null
space of WS; thus, such forces do not contribute to
external forces. Hence, the (6  1) vector hI is a gen-
eralized force which does not contribute to the object’s
motion. Therefore, it represents internal loading of the
object (i. e., mechanical stresses) and is termed the in-
ternal forces vector [39.12]. A similar argument can be
used for equation (39.10), whose inverse solution is
h D WhE C VhI D UhO ;
(39.15)
where
U D .W V/:
(39.16)
In [39.13] it has been shown that the ﬁrst term on the
right-hand side of (39.15) represents only contributions
to external forces if the pseudoinverse of the grasp ma-
trix is properly deﬁned, i. e.,
W D
0
BB@
1
2I3
O3
1
2S.r1/
1
2I3
1
2I3
O3
1
2S.r2/
1
2I3
1
CCA :
(39.17)
As VS in (39.11), the columns of V span the null space
of W, and can be chosen as [39.31]
V D
0
BB@
I3
O3
S.r1/
I3
I3
O3
S.r2/
I3
1
CCA :
(39.18)
A different parametrization of the inverse solutions
to (39.9) and (39.10) can be expressed, respectively, as
hS D W
ShE C

I12  W
SWS

h?
S
(39.19)
and
h D WhE C

I12  WW

h? ;
(39.20)
where h?
S (h?) is an arbitrary (121) vector of general-
ized forces acting at the tip of the i-th virtual stick (i-th
end-effector) projected onto the null space of WS (W)
via I12  W
SWS (I12  WW).
By exploiting the principle of virtual work, the
mappings between generalized velocities, dual to those
derived above, can be established. In detail, the map-
ping dual to (39.11) is
v O D UT
S v S ;
(39.21)
where v S D
v T
S;1 v T
S;2
T, v O D
v T
E v T
I
T. The vector
v E can be interpreted as the absolute velocity of the ob-
ject, while v I represents the relative velocity between
the two coordinate frames TS;1 and TS;2 attached to the
tips of the virtual sticks [39.12]; this vector is null when
the manipulated object is rigid and rigidly grasped. In
a similar way, from (39.15), the following mapping can
be devised
v O D UT v ;
(39.22)
where v D v T
1 v T
2
T.
Moreover, a set of position and orientation vari-
ables corresponding to v E and v I can be deﬁned as
follows [39.12, 25]
pE D 1
2.pS;1 C pS;2/ ;
pI D pS;2  pS;1 ;
(39.23)
RE D R1R1.k1
21; #21=2/ ;
R1
I D R1
2 ;
(39.24)
where R1
2 D RT
1R2 is the matrix expressing the ori-
entation of T2 with respect to the axes of T1, while
k1
21 and #21 are, respectively, the equivalent unit vec-
tor (expressed with respect to T1) and rotation angle
that determine the mutual orientation expressed by R1
2.
Hence, RE expresses a rotation about k1
21 by an angle
which is half the angle needed to align T2 with T1.
In turn, if the orientation variables are expressed in
terms of Euler angles, a set of operational space vari-
ables can be deﬁned as
xE D
pE
E

;
xI D
pI
I

;
(39.25)

Part D | 39.2
994
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
where
E D 1
2.S;1 CS;2/ ;
I D S;2 S;1 : (39.26)
It must be remarked, however, that the deﬁnitions
in (39.26) keep a clear geometric meaning only if
the orientation displacements between the virtual stick
frames are small. In this case, as shown in [39.11, 12],
the corresponding operational space velocities, PxE and
PxI, correspond to v E and v I, respectively, with good
approximation. Otherwise, if the orientation displace-
ments become large, the variables deﬁned in (39.26)
do not represent any meaningful quantities, and other
orientation representations have to be adopted, e.g., the
unit quaternion (see Chap. 2 on kinematics for a gen-
eral introduction to quaternions and Sect. 39.3 for an
application to cooperative robots kinematics).
Finally, by using (39.15) and (39.22), together with
equations (39.3) and (39.6), the kinetostatic mappings
between the force/velocities at the object and their
counterparts in the joint space of the manipulators can
be given
 D JT
O hO ;
(39.27)
v O D JO Pq ;
(39.28)
where  D T
1 T
2
T, q D qT
1 qT
2
T, and
JO D UTJ ;
J D
J1
O6
O6
J2

:
(39.29)
Formally similar mappings can be established in terms
of operational space velocities PxE and PxI [39.11, 12] and
the corresponding operational space forces/moments.
39.2.2 Multifingered Manipulation
Hereafter some connections between the ﬁeld of multi-
arm cooperative manipulation, described in this chapter,
and multiﬁngered manipulation, described in Chap. 38,
are brieﬂy outlined, focusing on the kinetostatics of the
two classes of manipulation systems.
Both in the case of multi-arm cooperative systems
and of multiﬁngered manipulation, two or more ma-
nipulation structures grasp a commonly manipulated
object.
Cooperative manipulation via multiple robotic arms
is achieved by rigidly grasping the object (e.g., via rigid
ﬁxtures), and thus interaction takes place by exchanging
both forces and moments at the grasp points. In other
words, all the translational and rotational motion com-
ponents are transmitted through the grasp points.
On the other side, when a multiﬁngered hand ma-
nipulates an object, only some components of the mo-
tion are transmitted through the contact points. This is
effectively modeled via properly deﬁned constraint ma-
trices, whose expression depends on the type of contact.
In other words, constraint matrices act as ﬁlters select-
ing the components of the motion transmitted through
each contact. In fact, as shown in Chap. 38, it is con-
venient to think of the object–ﬁnger contact point as
twofold: a point on the tip of the ﬁnger and a point on
the object. Hence, two generalized velocity vectors are
deﬁned for the i-th contact point (both expressed with
respect to frame Ti): the velocity of the contact point
on the hand, v i
h;i, and the velocity of the contact point
on the object v i
o;i. The corresponding dual generalized
force vectors are hi
h;i and hi
o;i, respectively. A contact
model is then deﬁned via the (mi  6) constraint ma-
trix Hi, selecting mi velocity components transmitted
through the contact (v i
t;i), i. e.,
v i
t;i D Hiv i
h;i D Hiv i
o;i :
(39.30)
The relation dual to (39.30) is
HT
i hi
t;i D hi
h;i D hi
o;i ;
(39.31)
where hi
t;i is the vector of the transmitted generalized
forces. Hence, (39.10) can be rewritten as
hE D W1R1HT
1h1
t;1 C W2R2HT
2h2
t;2 ;
(39.32)
where Ri D diagfRi; Rig. Hence, a conceptually simi-
lar kinetostatic analysis can be developed, leading to
the concept of external and internal forces (and related
kinematic quantities) as well.
However, it must be remarked that, while in the case
of cooperative manipulators, tightly grasping the object,
internal stresses are usually undesirable effects (unless
controlled squeezing of a deformable object has to be
achieved), in multiﬁngered hands suitably controlled in-
ternal forces are useful to guarantee a ﬁrm grasp even
in the presence of external loading applied to the object
(see the problem of form and force closure discussed
in Chap. 38).

Cooperative Manipulation
39.3 Cooperative Task Space
995
Part D | 39.3
39.3 Cooperative Task Space
The symmetric formulation reviewed in Sect. 39.2.1
deﬁnes the fundamental variables and the primary re-
lationships needed to describe the kinematics and the
statics of the cooperative manipulators. However, the
symmetric formulation was not originally conceived
for task and motion planning of cooperative robotic
systems, since this formulation effectively describes
a cooperative system in terms of forces and veloci-
ties at the virtual sticks, while the user is expected
to plan the task in terms of geometrically meaningful
variables describing the position and the orientation of
a set of relevant coordinate frames. Thus, starting from
equations (39.23) and (39.24), further research efforts
have been devoted to deﬁne alternative kinematic for-
mulations, explictly aimed at planning the coordinated
motion of general multi-arm systems. A notable exam-
ple of such alternative formulations is the task-oriented
formulation for the deﬁnition of the cooperative task
space originally proposed in [39.25, 26]. By starting
from (39.23) and (39.24), this formulation deﬁnes di-
rectly the task variables in terms of the absolute and
relative motion of the cooperative system, which can
be directly computed from the position/orientation of
the end-effector coordinate frames.
Let us deﬁne as absolute coordinate frame, Ta, the
frame whose position in the base frame is given by the
position vector pa (absolute position)
pa D 1
2.p1 C p2/ :
(39.33)
The orientation of Ta with respect to the base frame (ab-
solute orientation) is deﬁned by means of the rotation
matrix Ra
Ra D R1R1 
k1
21; #21=2

:
(39.34)
Of course, the sole absolute variables cannot
uniquely specify the cooperative motion, since 12 vari-
ables are required, e.g., for a two-arm system. Hence, in
order to devise a complete description of the system’s
conﬁguration, the position/orientation of each manip-
ulator relative to the other manipulators in the system
must be considered. In detail, for a two-arm system, the
relative position between the manipulators is deﬁned as
pr D p2  p1;
(39.35)
while the relative orientation between the two end-
effector frames is expressed via the following rotation
matrix
R1
r D RT
1R2 D R1
2 :
(39.36)
The variables pa, Ra, pr, and R1
r deﬁne the cooper-
ative task space. Remarkably, Ra and R1
r coincide with
RE and R1
I , respectively.
It is worth pointing out a useful feature of the above
deﬁned cooperative task space formulation. In fact, it
can be recognized that deﬁnitions (39.33)–(39.36) are
not based on any special assumption on the nature of
the manipulated object and/or the grasp. In other words,
the cooperative task space variables can be effectively
used to describe cooperative systems manipulating non-
rigid objects and/or characterized by a non-rigid grasp.
Also, the same task-space variables can be used to
describe a pure motion coordination task, i. e., when
the arms are required to perform a coordinated motion
without physically interacting via a commonly manipu-
lated object. When the manipulators hold a rigid object
(or a deformable object for which deformations are not
commanded), then relative position and orientation are
to be kept constant. Otherwise, if a relative motion be-
tween the end-effectors is allowed, then p1
r and R1
r may
vary according to the actual relative motion.
As shown in [39.25, 26], absolute
Ppa D 1
2.Pp1 C Pp2/ ;
!a D 1
2.!1 C !2/ ;
(39.37)
and relative
Ppr D .Pp2  Pp1/ ;
!r D !2  !1 ;
(39.38)
linear and angular velocities can be readily derived, as
well as their dual variables (i. e., absolute/relative forces
and moments)
f a D f 1 C f 2 ;
na D n1 C n2 ;
(39.39)
f r D 1
2.f 2  f 1/ ;
nr D 1
2.n2  n1/ :
(39.40)
Kinetostatic mappings, analogous to those derived
in the previous section, can be established between lin-
ear/angular velocities (force/moments) and their coun-
terparts deﬁned at the end-effectors (or joints) level of
each manipulator [39.25, 26].
Remarkably, the variables deﬁned by the symmetric
formulation and those used in the task-oriented formu-
lation are related via simple mappings. In fact, forces
(angular velocities, orientation variables) always coin-
cide in the two formulations, while moments (linear
velocities, position variables) coincide only when the
object reduces to a point, or when the kinematics of
each manipulator is referred to the tip of the corre-
sponding virtual stick.

Part D | 39.4
996
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
As shown in the following example, in the case of
planar cooperative systems, the deﬁnition of the coop-
erative task-space variables is straightforward.
Example 39.1 (Cooperative Task-Space Variables for
a Planar Two-Arm System)
For a planar two-arm system the i-th end-effector coor-
dinates can be deﬁned via the (3  1) vector
xi D
pi
'i

;
i D 1; 2 ;
where pi is the (2  1) vector of the i-th end-effector
position in the plane and 'i is the angle describing its
orientation (i. e., the rotation of the end-effector frame
about an axis orthogonal to the plane). Hence, the task-
space variables can be readily deﬁned as
xa D 1
2.x1 C x2/ ;
(39.41)
xr D x2  x1 ;
(39.42)
since the orientation of each end-effector is simply rep-
resented by an angle.
In the spatial case, the deﬁnition of the orientation
variables in terms of Euler angles, as in (39.34) and
(39.36), is somewhat critical; in fact, since T1 and T2 do
not coincide in general, orientation displacements are
likely to be large and deﬁnitions analogous to (39.26)
are not correct. Hence, geometrically meaningful ori-
entation representations have to be adopted, e.g., the
unit quaternion (Chap. 2). In detail, by following the
approach in [39.26], the orientation variables can be de-
ﬁned as follows. Let
Q1
k> D
˚
k; 1
k

D

cos #21
4 ; k1
21 sin #21
4

(39.43)
denote the unit quaternion extracted from R1.k1
21;
#21=2/; let, also, Q1 D f1; 1g and Q2 D f2; 2g de-
note the unit quaternions extracted from R1 and R2,
respectively. Then, the absolute orientation can be ex-
pressed in terms of quaternion product as follows
Qa D fa; ag D Q1  Q1
k ;
(39.44)
while the relative orientation can be expressed as the
quaternion product
Q1
r D ˚r; 1
r
 D Q1
1
 Q2 ;
(39.45)
where Q1
1
D f1; 1g (i. e., the conjugate of Q1) rep-
resents the unit quaternion extracted from RT
1.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that a more gen-
eral cooperative task-space formulation is developed
for different classes of multi-arm robotic systems
in [39.30].
39.4 Dynamics and Load Distribution
The equations of motion of the i-th manipulator in a co-
operative manipulation system are given by
Mi.qi/ Rqi C ci.qi; Pqi/ D i  JT
i .qi/hi ;
(39.46)
where Mi.qi/ is the symmetric positive-deﬁnite inertia
matrix and ci.qi; Pqi/ is the vector of the forces/torques
due to the centrifugal, Coriolis, gravity, and friction ef-
fects. The model can be expressed in compact form as
M.q/Rq C c.q; Pq/ D   JT.q/h ;
(39.47)
where the matrices are block-diagonal (e.g., M D
blockdiagfM1; M2g) and the vectors are stacked (e.g.,
q D qT
1 qT
2
T).
The object’s motion is described by the classical
Newton–Euler equations of rigid body
ME.RE/ Pv E C cE.RE; !E/v E D hE D Wh ;
(39.48)
where ME is the inertia matrix of the object and
cE collects the nonlinear components of the inertial
forces/moments (i. e., gravity, centrifugal and Coriolis
forces/moments).
The above equations must be completed by impos-
ing the closed-chain constraints arising from the kine-
matic coupling between the two manipulators through
the commonly manipulated rigid object. The constraints
can be expressed by imposing a null internal velocity
vector in the mapping (39.21)
v I D VT
Sv S D v S;1  v S;2 D 0 ;
(39.49)
which can be expressed, by using (39.8) and (39.22),
in terms of end-effector velocities (where the notation
WT
i
stands for .WT
i /1)
VTv D WT
1 v 1  WT
2 v 2 D 0 ;
(39.50)
and, ﬁnally, in terms of joint velocities
VTJ.q/Pq D WT
1 J1.q1/Pq1  WT
2 J2.q2/Pq2 D 0 :
(39.51)

Cooperative Manipulation
39.4 Dynamics and Load Distribution
997
Part D | 39.4
Equations (39.47), (39.48), and (39.51) represent
a constrained dynamical model of the cooperative sys-
tem in the joint space; N1 C N2 generalized coordinates
(i. e., q1 and q2) are related to each other by the six alge-
braic closed-chain constraints (39.51). This implies that
the total number of degrees of freedom is N1 C N2  6
and the model has the form of a set of differential-
algebraic equations.
39.4.1 Reduced-Order Models
The above derived dynamic model incorporates a set
of closed-chain constraints, which reduces the number
of independent generalized coordinates to N1 C N2  6.
Hence, it is expected that, by eliminating six equations
via the constraints (39.51), a reduced-order model can
be obtained. Early work on reduced-order modeling
of closed chains can be, e.g., found in [39.67]. Later,
in [39.68, 69], this problem has been tackled by ﬁrst de-
riving, from (39.47), (39.48), and (39.51), a joint space
model of the whole closed chain in the form
MC.q/ Rq C cC.q; Pq/ D DC.q/ ;
(39.52)
where MC, DC, and cC depend on the dynamics of the
manipulators and the object, as well as on the geometry
of the grasp. The above model can be integrated, once
the joint torques vector  is speciﬁed over an assigned
time interval, to solve for the joint variables q (for-
ward dynamics). However, the model cannot be used
to ﬁnd  from assigned q, Pq, and Rq (inverse dynamics),
since the ..N1 C N2/  .N1 C N2// matrix DC is not full
rank [39.69], and thus the inverse dynamics problem
turns out to be underspeciﬁed.
In order to ﬁnd a reduced-order model, composed
by N1 C N2  6 equations, a ..N1 C N2  6/  1/ pseu-
dovelocity vector has to be considered
 D B.q/Pq ;
(39.53)
where the ..N1 C N2  6/  .N1 C N2// matrix B.q/ is
selected so that .AT.q/ BT.q//T is nonsingular and
A.q/ D WT
2 VT.q/ :
Then, the reduced-order model can be written in terms
of the variables q, , and P as
†T.q/MC.q/†.q/ P C †T.q/cR.q; / D †T.q/ ;
(39.54)
where † is an ..N1 CN2/  .N1 CN2 6// matrix such
that
A
B
1
D .… †/ ;
and cR depends on cC, †, and … [39.69]. The reduced-
order model can be used for computing the forward
dynamics; in this case, however, the problem of ex-
pressing a reduced set of pseudocoordinates related
to  in the numerical integration has to be consid-
ered. Since †T is nonsquare, the inverse dynamics
problem still admits inﬁnitely many solutions in terms
of . However, this does not prevent the application
model (39.54) to cooperative manipulators control (e.g.,
the decoupled control architecture proposed in [39.68,
69]).
39.4.2 Load Distribution
The problem of load sharing in multi-arm robotic sys-
tems is that of distributing the load among the arms
composing the system (e.g., a strong arm may share the
load more than a weak one). This is possible because
a multi-arm system has redundant actuators; in fact, if
a robotic arm is equipped with the number of actuators
strictly needed for supporting the load, no optimization
of load distribution is possible. In this section, this prob-
lem is presented according to the results in [39.36–42].
We can introduce a load-sharing matrix in the
framework adopted for presenting the kinematics of
the cooperative manipulators. By replacing the Moore–
Penrose inverse in equation (39.11) with a suitably
deﬁned generalized inverse, W
S , the following expres-
sion can be devised for the generalized forces at the tip
of the virtual sticks
hS D W
S hE C VS h0
I ;
(39.55)
where
W
S D

L
I6  L
T
;
(39.56)
and the matrix L is the so-called load sharing matrix.
It can be easily proved that the nondiagonal elements
of L only yield a hS vector in the null space of WS,
that is, the space of internal forces/moments. Therefore,
without losing generality, let us choose L such that
L D diag f	g ;
(39.57)
where the vector 	 D .1; : : : ; 6/T collects a set of
constants i representing the load-sharing coefﬁcients.
The problem is that of properly tuning the load-
sharing coefﬁcients to ensure correct cooperative ma-
nipulation of the object by the arms. In order to answer
this question, it must be noticed that, by combining
equations (39.11) and (39.55), the following relation
can be obtained
hI D V
S

W
S  W
S

hE C h0
I ;
(39.58)

Part D | 39.5
998
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
which, bearing in mind that only hE and hS are really
existing forces/moments, indicates that:

hI, h0
I, and i can be thought of as artiﬁcial pa-
rameters, introduced for better understanding of the
manipulation process.

h0
I and i are not independent; the concept of inter-
nal forces/moments and the concept of load sharing
are mathematically mixed with each other.
Therefore, tuning the load-sharing coefﬁcients or
choosing suitable internal forces/moments is strictly
equivalent from the mathematical (and, also, from the
performance) point of view. Only one variable among
hI, h0
I, and 	 is independent; hence, any of those redun-
dant parameters, to be optimized for load sharing, can
be exploited. This is more generally stated in [39.39,
40]. In [39.42], internal forces/moments hI are tuned,
both for the sake of simplicity and for consistency with
the adopted control laws.
A very relevant problem related to load sharing is
that of robust holding, i. e., the problem of determin-
ing forces/moments applied to object by the arms, hS,
required to keep the grasp even in the presence of dis-
turbing external forces/moments. This problem can be
solved by tuning the internal forces/moments (or the
load-sharing coefﬁcients, of course) and is addressed,
e.g., in [39.41], where conditions to keep the grasp are
expressed via end-effector forces/moments. Namely, by
replacing hS in (39.55) into the equations expressing the
grasp conditions, a set of linear inequalities for both h0
I
and 	 are obtained
ALh0
I C BL	 < cL ;
(39.59)
where AL and BL are 6  6 matrices and cL is a (6  1)
vector. In [39.41], a solution 	 for the inequality is ob-
tained heuristically. The above inequality can be trans-
formed into another inequality expressed with respect
to hI, of course; however, 	 is ﬁtter to such heuristic
algorithm because it can be understood intuitively. The
same problem may be solved mathematically, by intro-
ducing an objective function to be optimized; in this
way, the problem is recast in the framework of math-
ematical programming. To this purpose, let us choose
a quadratic cost function of hI to be minimized
f D hT
I QhI ;
(39.60)
where Q is a (66) positive-deﬁnite matrix. The above
cost function can be seen as a (pseudo)energy to be
dissipated by the joint actuators: i. e., the arms dis-
sipate electrical energy in the actuators to yield the
internal forces/moments hI. A solution to the quadratic
programming problem (39.60) can be found, e.g.,
in [39.42].
For further insights on the problem of robust hold-
ing in the framework of multiﬁngered manipulation, the
reader is referred to Chap. 38.
Interestingly, in [39.37] the problem of load distri-
bution is formulated in such a way to take into account
manipulators dynamics at the joint level. This approach
allows the expression of the load-sharing problem di-
rectly in terms of joints actuators torques; at this level,
different subtask performance indexes can be used,
in a similar way as was done to solve the inverse
kinematics of redundant manipulators, to achieve load
distribution solutions.
39.5 Task-Space Analysis
As for single-arm robotic systems, a major issue in
cooperative manipulation is that of task-space perfor-
mance evaluation via the deﬁnition of suitable manipu-
lability ellipsoids. These concepts have been extended
to multi-arm robotic systems in [39.31]. Namely, by
exploiting the kinetostatic formulation in Sect. 39.3, ve-
locity and force manipulability ellipsoids are deﬁned by
regarding the whole cooperative system as a mechanical
transformer from the joint space to the cooperative task
space. Since the construction of force/velocity ellip-
soids involves nonhomogeneous quantities (i. e., forces
and moments, linear and angular velocities), special
attention must be paid to the deﬁnition of such con-
cepts [39.14, 70, 71]. Also, as for the ellipsoids involv-
ing internal forces, a major issue is that of physically
meaningful parametrization of the internal forces (see,
e.g., the work in [39.15, 16]).
In detail, by following the approach in [39.31], the
external force manipulability ellipsoid can be deﬁned
by the following scalar equation
hT
E

JEJT
E

hE D 1 ;
(39.61)
where JE D WTJ. The external velocity manipulabil-
ity ellipsoid is deﬁned dually by the following scalar
equation
v T
E

JEJT
E
1 v E D 1 :
(39.62)
In the case of dual-arm systems the internal force ma-
nipulability ellipsoid can be deﬁned as
hT
I

JIJT
I

hI D 1 ;
(39.63)

Cooperative Manipulation
39.6 Control
999
Part D | 39.6
where JI D VTJ. Also, the internal velocity ellipsoid
can be deﬁned, via kinetostatic duality, as
v T
I

JIJT
I
1 v I D 1 :
(39.64)
The internal force/velocity ellipsoids can be deﬁned in
the case of cooperative systems composed of more than
two manipulators by considering one pair of interacting
end-effectors at a time [39.31].
The manipulability ellipsoids can be seen as per-
formance measures aimed at determining the arms’
attitude to cooperate in a given system’s conﬁguration.
Also, as for the single-arm systems, the manipulability
ellipsoids can be used to determine optimal postures for
redundant multi-arm systems.
Besides the above described approach, two other
main approaches have been proposed to analyze the
manipulability of cooperative multi-arm systems: the
task-oriented manipulability measure [39.32] and poly-
topes [39.33]. Moreover, in [39.34] a systematic ap-
proach to perform dynamic analysis of multi-arm sys-
tems is presented. Namely, the concept of dynamic ma-
nipulability ellipsoid is extended to multi-arm systems,
and indexes of the system’s capability of generating ob-
ject accelerations along assigned task-space directions
are devised.
39.6 Control
When a cooperative multi-arm system is employed for
the manipulation of a common object, it is important to
control both the absolute motion of the held object and
the internal stresses applied to it. Hence, most of the
control approaches to cooperative robotic systems can
be classiﬁed as force/motion control schemes, in that
they decompose the control action in a motion control
loop, aimed at tracking of the desired object motion,
and a force control loop, aimed at controlling the inter-
nal loading of the object.
Early approaches to the control of cooperative sys-
tems are based on the master/slave concept [39.2].
Namely, the cooperative system is decomposed into:

A master arm, which is in charge of imposing the
absolute motion of the object; hence, the master arm
is position controlled so as to achieve accurate and
robust tracking of position/orientation reference tra-
jectories, in the face of external disturbances (e.g.,
forces due to the interaction with the other coop-
erating arms); in other words, the master arm is
controlled so as to have a stiff behavior.

The slave arms, which are force controlled so as to
achieve a compliant behavior with respect to the in-
teraction forces; hence, it is expected that the slave
arms are capable of following (as smoothly as pos-
sible) the motion imposed by the master arm.
A natural evolution of the above approach is the
so-called leader–follower [39.67], where the follower
arms reference motion is computed via closed-chain
constraints.
However, such approaches suffered from imple-
mentation issues, mainly due to the fact that the com-
pliance of the slave arms has to be very large, so as to
follow the motion imposed by the master arm smoothly.
Also, a difﬁculty arises when the roles of master and
slave have to be assigned to the arms for a given coop-
erative task, since the master/slave modes may need to
be dynamically changed during the task execution.
Hence, a more natural non-master/slave approach
has been pursued later, where the cooperative system
is seen as a whole. Namely, the reference motion of the
object is used to determine the motion of all the arms in
the system and the interaction forces acting at each end-
effector are fed back so as to be directly controlled. To
this aim, the mappings between the forces and veloc-
ities at the end-effector of each manipulator and their
counterparts at the manipulated object are to be consid-
ered in the design of the control laws.
39.6.1 Hybrid Control
In [39.11, 12] a non-master/slave approach has been
proposed, based on the well-known scheme proposed
by Raibert and Craig for the robot/environment inter-
action control of single-arm systems (Chap. 9). The
operational space vector for the hybrid position/force
control is deﬁned via the following variables
xO D
xE
xI

;
(39.65)
where xE, xI are the operational space vectors, deﬁned
by specifying the orientation via a minimal set of ori-
entation angles (e.g., Euler angles). The generalized
forces vector to be considered is
hO D
hE
hI

:
(39.66)
The organization of the control scheme is shown
diagrammatically in Fig. 39.2. The sufﬁxes d and m

Part D | 39.6
1000
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
hO          h
B
I-S
S
Gx(s)
Kx
Js
–1
Gh(s)
Kh
Js
T
xO          q
q
h
Two-
arm
system
q
h
xO
hO
xd
hd
Δx
τm
τp
τh
Δh
+
+
–
+
+
–
Fig. 39.2 A hybrid position/force control scheme
represent the desired value and the control command,
respectively. The command vector m to the actuators
of the two arms is given by two contributions
m D p C h :
(39.67)
The ﬁrst term, p, is the command vector for the posi-
tion control and is given by
p D Kx J1
s
Gx.s/SB.xO;d  xO/ ;
(39.68)
while h is the command vector for the force control
h D Kh JT
s Gh.s/.I  S/.hO;d  hO/ :
(39.69)
The matrix B transforms the errors on the orienta-
tion angles into equivalent rotation vectors. The matrix
Js is the Jacobian matrix that transforms the joint
velocity Pq into the task-space velocity v O. The ma-
trix operators Gx.s/ and Gh.s/ represent position and
force control laws, respectively. The gain matrices Kx
and Kh are assumed to be diagonal; their diagonal
elements convert velocity and force commands into ac-
tuator commands, respectively. The matrix S selects the
position-controlled variables; it is diagonal and its di-
agonal entries take the values of 1 or 0; namely, the
i-th workspace coordinate is position controlled if the
i-th diagonal element of S is 1, while it is force con-
trolled if it is 0. Finally, I is the identity matrix having
the same dimensions as S, while q and h are the vectors
of measured joint variables and measured end-effector
generalized forces, respectively.
39.6.2 PD Force/Motion Control
In [39.17] a Lyapunov-based approach is pursued to de-
vise force/position PD-type control laws. Namely, the
joints torques inputs to each arm are computed as the
combination of two contributions
m D p C h ;
(39.70)
where p is a PD-type term (eventually includ-
ing a feedback/feedforward model-based compensation
term), taking care of position control, while h is in
charge of internal forces/moments control.
Namely, the PD and model-based terms can be com-
puted at the joint level
p D Kpeq  KdPq C g C JTWgE ;
(39.71)
where eq D qd q, qd is the vector of desired joint vari-
ables, Kp and Kd are positive-deﬁnite matrix gains,
g is the vector of the gravitational forces/torques acting
at the manipulators joints, gE is the vector of gravity
forces/moments at the manipulated object.
Since the cooperative task is usually assigned in
terms of absolute and relative motion, the equivalent
end-effector desired trajectories are to be computed by
using the closed-chain constraints, as in the following
example.
Example 39.2 (Computation of Desired Trajectories
for a Planar Two-Arm System)
For the planar two-arm system, the desired trajectories
deﬁning the cooperative task are assigned by specify-
ing the absolute, xa;d.t/, and relative, xr;d.t/, desired
motion. Then, the corresponding end-effectors desired
trajectories can be computed as
x1;d.t/ D xa;d.t/  1
2xr;d.t/ ;
(39.72)
x2;d.t/ D xa;d.t/ C 1
2xr;d.t/ ;
(39.73)
where (39.41) and (39.42) have been exploited.
In the spatial case (39.72) and (39.73) do not
hold, since the absolute and relative orientation must
be expressed in terms of geometrically meaningful
quantities, e.g., via (39.44) and (39.45). However, the
same approach may be pursued at the expense of
a slightly more complex expressions of the above for-
mulas [39.26].
Once, the desired position/orientation for each end-
effector has been obtained, the inverse kinematics of
each arm has to be computed to provide the desired
joint trajectories, qd, to the control loop; to this aim,
e.g., numerical inverse kinematics algorithms may be
employed (Chaps. 2 and 10).
Also, a PD-type control law can be expressed in
terms of end-effector variables, i. e.,
p D JT.KpeKvv/KdPqCgCJTWgE ; (39.74)
where e is the tracking error computed in terms of end-
effector position/orientation variables, v is the vector

Cooperative Manipulation
39.6 Control
1001
Part D | 39.6
collecting the end-effector velocities, and Kp, Kv, and
Kd are positive-deﬁnite matrix gains.
Finally, the same concept may be exploited to de-
sign a PD control law directly in the object space
p D JTW.KpeE  Kvv E/  KdPq C g C JTWgE ;
(39.75)
where eE is the tracking error computed in terms of ob-
ject absolute position/orientation variables, v E is the
object’s generalized velocity vector, and Kp, Kv, and
Kd are positive-deﬁnite matrix gains.
The internal force control term can instead be de-
signed as follows
h D JTVhI;c ;
(39.76)
where
hI;c D hI;d C Gh.s/.hI;d  hI/ ;
(39.77)
Gh.s/ is a matrix operator representing a strictly proper
linear ﬁlter, such that I  Gh.s/ has zeros only in the
left half plane, and hI;d is the vector of desired internal
forces; the internal force vector can be computed from
the vector of measured end-effector forces as hI D Vh.
A particularly simple choice, ensuring a null error at
steady state, is given by
Gh.s/ D 1
s Kh ;
where Kh is a positive-deﬁnite matrix. Remarkably,
when an inﬁnitely rigid object/grasp is considered,
preprocessing of the force error via a strictly proper
ﬁlter is needed to ensure closed-loop stability [39.17];
e.g., if a simple proportional feedback is adopted (i. e.,
Gh.s/ D Kh), the closed loop will be unstable in the
presence of an arbitrary small time delay, unless a small
(namely, smaller than 1) force gain is adopted. In prac-
tice, the closed kinematic chain will be characterized
by some elasticity (e.g., due to grippers, end-effector
force/torques sensors, joints); in this case, the product
between the control gain Kh and the stiffness of the ﬂex-
ible components has to be chosen sufﬁciently small to
ensure stability.
An interesting extension of the above approach has
been given in [39.26, 28], where kinetostatic ﬁltering
of the control action is performed so as to ﬁlter all
the components of the control input which contribute
to internal stresses at the object. Namely, the control
law (39.71) can be modiﬁed by weighting the propor-
tional term (Kp eq) via the ﬁltering matrix
 D JT.WW C V†V/JT ;
where the (66) diagonal matrix † D diagfig weights
the components of JTKpeq in each direction of the
subspace of the internal forces via the constant values
0 	 i 	 1. In detail, if † D O6 then all these compo-
nents are completely canceled from the control action,
while the choice † D I6 leads to the control law (39.71)
without kinetostatic ﬁltering. In a similar way, the con-
trol laws (39.74) and (39.75) can be modiﬁed so as
to introduce proper kinetostatic ﬁltering of Kp e and
Kp eE, respectively.
39.6.3 Feedback Linearization Approaches
A further improvement of the PD-plus-gravity com-
pensation control approach has been achieved by in-
troducing a full model compensation, so as to achieve
feedback/feedforward linearization of the closed-loop
system. The feedback linearization approach formu-
lated at the operational space level is the base for the
so-called augmented object approach [39.72, 73]. In
this approach the system is modeled in the operational
space as a whole, by suitably expressing its inertial
properties via a single augmented inertia matrix MO.
Hence, the dynamics of the cooperative system in the
operational space can be written as
MO.xE/RxE C cO.xE; PxE/ D hE :
(39.78)
In (39.78), MO and cO are the operational space terms
modeling, respectively, the inertial properties of the
whole system (manipulators and object) and the Cori-
olis, centrifugal, friction, and gravity terms.
In the framework of feedback linearization (formu-
lated in the operational space), the problem of control-
ling the internal forces can be solved, e.g., by resorting
to the virtual linkage model [39.16] or according to the
scheme proposed in [39.29], i. e.,
 D JTW MO
RxE;d C KvPeE C KpeE
 C cO
	
C JTV

hI;d C Kh
Z
.hI;d  hI/

:
(39.79)
The above control law yields a linear and decoupled
closed-loop dynamics
ReE C KvPeE C KpeE D 0 ;
QhI C Kh
Z
QhI dt D 0 ;
(39.80)
where QhI D hI;d  hI. Hence, the closed-loop dynamics
guarantees asymptotically vanishing motion and force
errors.

Part D | 39.6
1002
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
39.6.4 Impedance Control
An alternative control approach can be pursued based
on the well-known impedance concept (Chap. 9). In
fact, when a manipulation system interacts with an ex-
ternal environment and/or other manipulators, large val-
ues of the contact forces and moments can be avoided
by enforcing a compliant behavior, with suitable dy-
namic features, of the robotic system. Impedance con-
trol schemes have been proposed in the case of co-
operative manipulation to control object/environment
interaction forces [39.21] or internal forces [39.22].
More recently, an impedance scheme for the control
of both external forces and internal forces has been
proposed [39.74] (in
VIDEO 67
some experimental
results of impedance control ar a dual-arm cooperative
system are documented).
In detail, the impedance scheme in [39.21] enforces
the following mechanical impedance behavior between
the object displacements and the forces acting on object
due to interaction with the environment
MEQaE C DE Qv E C KeeE D henv ;
(39.81)
where:

eE represents the vector of the object’s displace-
ments between the desired and actual pose

Qv E is the difference between the object’s desired
and actual generalized velocities

QaE is the difference between the object’s desired and
actual generalized accelerations,
and henv is the generalized force acting on object due
to the interaction with the environment. The impedance
dynamics is characterized in terms of given positive-
deﬁnite mass (ME), damping (DE), and stiffness (KE)
matrices to be properly chosen so as to achieve the de-
sired compliant behavior of the object.
As for the pose displacements used in (39.81), spe-
cial attention has to be paid to the orientation variables.
Example 39.3 (External Impedance for a Planar
Two-Arm System)
For the planar two-arm system the quantities in (39.81)
can be deﬁned in a straightforward way. Namely,
eE D xE;d  xE ;
(39.82)
Qv E D PxE;d  PxE ;
(39.83)
QaE D RxE;d  RxE ;
(39.84)
where xE is the (3  1) vector collecting the object’s
position and the orientation, while xE;d represents its
desired counterpart. Hence, ME, DE, and KE are (33)
matrices.
In the spatial case, orientation displacements cannot
be deﬁned as in (39.82), and geometrically meaning-
ful orientation representations (i. e., rotation matrices
and/or angle/axis representations) or in terms of oper-
ational space variables (i. e., differences between oper-
ational space vectors) have to be adopted [39.74].
The impedance scheme in [39.22], enforces a me-
chanical impedance behavior between the i-th end-
effector displacements and the internal forces, i. e.,
MI;i Qai C DI;i Qv i C KI;i ei D hI;i ;
(39.85)
where:

ei is the vector expressing the displacement of the
i-th end-effector between the desired and actual pose

Qv i is the vector expressing the difference between
the desired and actual velocities of the i-th end-
effector

Qai is the vector expressing the difference between
the desired and actual accelerations of the i-th end-
effector,
and hI;i is the contribution of the i-th end-effector to
the internal force, i. e., the i-th component of the vector
VVh. Again, the impedance dynamics is characterized
in terms of given positive-deﬁnite mass (MI;i), damping
(DI;i), and stiffness (KI;i) matrices, to be properly cho-
sen so as to achieve a suitable compliant behavior of the
end-effectors with respect to internal forces.
Example 39.4 (Internal Impedance for a Planar
Two-Arm System)
For the planar two-arm system the quantities in (39.85)
can be deﬁned in a straightforward way as well
ei D xi;d  xi ;
(39.86)
Qv i D Pxi;d  Pxi ;
(39.87)
Qai D Rxi;d  Rxi ;
(39.88)
where xi is the (3  1) vector collecting the position
in the plane and the orientation angle of the i-th end-
effector, while xi;d represents its desired counterpart.
Again, MI;i, DI;i, and KI;i are (3  3) matrices.
As for the spatial case, orientation displacements
in (39.85) cannot be deﬁned as in (39.86), and geo-
metrically meaningful orientation representations (i. e.,
rotation matrices and/or angle/axis representations) or
in terms of operational space variables (i. e., differ-
ences between operational space vectors) have to be
adopted [39.74].
The above two approaches have been combined
in [39.74], where two control loops are designed to en-
force an impedance behavior both at the object level
(external forces) and at the end-effector level (internal
forces).

Cooperative Manipulation
39.7 Conclusions and Further Reading
1003
Part D | 39.7
39.7 Conclusions and Further Reading
In this chapter, the fundamentals of cooperative manip-
ulation have been presented. A historical overview of
the research on cooperative manipulation has been pro-
vided. The kinematics and dynamics of robotic arms
cooperatively manipulating a tightly grasped rigid ob-
ject are considered. Special topics, such as the deﬁnition
of a cooperative task space and the problem of load dis-
tribution, have also been touched on. Then, the main
control approaches for cooperative systems have been
discussed. A few advanced topics related to control of
cooperative robots, i. e., advanced nonlinear control as
well as the modeling and control of cooperative systems
including ﬂexible elements, will be brieﬂy outlined in
the following.
Some of the ﬁrst attempts to cope with uncer-
tainties and disturbances in cooperative robots control
focused on adaptive strategies [39.23, 24], in which
the unknown parameters are estimated online, based
on a suitable linear-in-the-parameters model of the un-
certainties. In detail, the approach in [39.23] is aimed
at controlling the object motion, the interaction force
due to the contact object/environment, and the in-
ternal forces; the adaptive control law estimates the
unknown model parameters, both of the manipulators
and of the object, on the basis of suitable error equa-
tions. In [39.24], the adaptive control concept is used
to design a decentralized scheme, i. e., a centralized
coordinator is not used, for redundant cooperative ma-
nipulators.
A recently developed control framework for coop-
erative systems is the so-called synchronization con-
trol [39.51, 52]; in this approach the control problem
is formulated in terms of suitably deﬁned errors ac-
counting for motion synchronization between the ma-
nipulators involved in the cooperative task. Namely, the
key idea in [39.51] is to ensure tracking of the desired
trajectory assigned to each manipulator, while syn-
chronizing its motion with other manipulators motion.
In [39.52], the problem of synchronizing the motion of
multiple manipulators systems is solved by using only
position measurements; the synchronization controller
consists of a feedback control law and a set of nonlinear
observers, and synchronization is ensured by suitably
deﬁning the coupling errors between the manipulators’
motions.
Recently, research efforts have been spent on intel-
ligent control [39.53–55]. Namely, in [39.53], a semi-
decentralized adaptive fuzzy control scheme, with H1
performance in motion and internal force tracking,
is proposed; the controller of each robot consists of
two parts: a model-based adaptive controller and an
adaptive fuzzy logic controller; the model-based adap-
tive controller handles the nominal dynamics, includ-
ing a purely parametric uncertainties model, while the
fuzzy logic controller is aimed at counteracting the
effect of unstructured uncertainties and external dis-
turbances. In [39.54], a decentralized adaptive fuzzy
control scheme is proposed, where the control law
makes use of a multi-input multi-output fuzzy logic
engine and a systematic online adaptation mechanism.
The approach has been further extended in [39.55].
Finally it is worth mentioning the efforts invested in
the investigation of control strategies using partial state
feedback, i. e., only joints position and end-effector
forces are fed back to the controller. A recent contri-
bution was provided by the work in [39.56], in which
a decentralized control algorithm that achieves asymp-
totic tracking of desired positions and forces by using
a nonlinear observer for velocities was proposed.
Flexibility in a cooperative system may arise, e.g.,
due to the use of nonrigid grippers to grasp the ma-
nipulated object. In fact, the adoption of compliant
grippers allows large internal forces to be avoided and,
at the same time, achieves safe manipulation of the ob-
ject, even in the presence of failures and unpredicted
contacts with the external environment. In detail, the
work in [39.61] develops a non-model-based decentral-
ized control scheme. Namely, a proportional–derivative
(PD) position feedback control scheme with gravity
compensation, is designed; the PD scheme is capable
of regulating the position/orientation of the manipu-
lated object and, simultaneously, achieves damping of
the vibrations induced by the compliant grippers; also,
a hybrid scheme is adopted to control internal forces
along the directions in which the compliance of grip-
pers is too low to ensure limited internal stresses at the
manipulated object.
Other research efforts have been focused on
handling multibodied objects, or even ﬂexible ob-
jects [39.43–45]. Those objects are difﬁcult to handle
and, therefore, assembly of those objects in manu-
facturing industry is not automated. Also, cooperative
control of multi-ﬂexible-arm robots has been inves-
tigated [39.46–48]. Once the modeling and control
problem is solved (Chap. 11), the ﬂexible-arm robot is
a robot with many merits [39.49]: it is lightweight, com-
pliant, and hence safe, etc. Combining control methods
for ﬂexible-arm robots, such as vibration suppression,
with the cooperative control methods presented in this
chapter is straightforward [39.46]. Automated object-
retrieval operation with a two-ﬂexible-arm robot has
been demonstrated in [39.47, 48] and in
VIDEO 68 .
Finally, cooperative transportation and manipu-
lation of objects via multiple mobile manipulators

Part D | 39
1004
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
can be considered still an open research subject. In
fact, although notable research results have been al-
ready devised [39.65, 75–77], the foreseen use of
robotic teams in industrial settings (hyperﬂexible
robotic workcells) and/or in collaboration with hu-
mans (robotic co-worker concept) raises new chal-
lenges related to autonomy and safety of such systems.
A recently emerged application scenario is the co-
operative transportation of objects via multiple aerial
robots [39.66] (see
VIDEO 66
for an example of co-
operative transportation via multiple unmanned aerial
vehicles).
Video-References
VIDEO 66
Cooperative grasping and transportation of objects using multiple UAVs
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/39/videodetails/66
VIDEO 67
Impedance control for cooperative manipulators
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/39/videodetails/67
VIDEO 68
Cooperative capturing via flexible manipulators
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/39/videodetails/68
VIDEO 69
Cooperative grasping and transportation of an object using two industrial manipulators
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/39/videodetails/69
VIDEO 70
Control of cooperative manipulators in the operational space
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/39/videodetails/70
References
39.1
S. Fujii, S. Kurono: Coordinated computer control
of a pair of manipulators, Proc. 4th IFToMM World
Congr. (1975) pp. 411–417
39.2
E. Nakano, S. Ozaki, T. Ishida, I. Kato: Coopera-
tional control of the anthropomorphous manip-
ulator MELARM, Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Ind. Robots,
Tokyo (1974) pp. 251–260
39.3
K. Takase, H. Inoue, K. Sato, S. Hagiwara: The design
of an articulated manipulator with torque con-
trol ability, Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Ind. Robots, Tokyo
(1974) pp. 261–270
39.4
S. Kurono: Cooperative control of two artificial
hands by a mini-computer, Prepr. 15th Jt. Conf. Au-
tom. Control (1972) pp. 365–366, (in Japanese)
39.5
A.J. Koivo, G.A. Bekey: Report of workshop on co-
ordinated multiple robot manipulators: planning,
control, and applications, IEEE J. Robotics Autom.
4(1), 91–93 (1988)
39.6
P. Dauchez, R. Zapata: Co-ordinated control of two
cooperative manipulators: The use of a kinematic
model, Proc. 15th Int. Symp. Ind. Robots, Tokyo
(1985) pp. 641–648
39.7
N.H. McClamroch: Singular systems of differen-
tial equations as dynamic models for constrained
robot systems, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), San Francisco (1986) pp. 21–28
39.8
T.J. Tarn, A.K. Bejczy, X. Yun: New nonlinear con-
trol algorithms for multiple robot arms, IEEE Trans.
Aerosp. Electron. Syst. 24(5), 571–583 (1988)
39.9
S. Hayati: Hybrid position/force control of multi-
arm cooperating robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics
Autom.
(ICRA),
San
Francisco
(1986)
pp. 82–89
39.10
M. Uchiyama, N. Iwasawa, K. Hakomori: Hybrid po-
sition/force control for coordination of a two-arm
robot, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Raleigh (1987) pp. 1242–1247
39.11
M. Uchiyama, P. Dauchez: A symmetric hybrid po-
sition/force control scheme for the coordination of
two robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Philadelphia (1988) pp. 350–356
39.12
M. Uchiyama, P. Dauchez: Symmetric kinematic for-
mulation and non-master/slave coordinated con-
trol of two-arm robots, Adv. Robotics 7(4), 361–383
(1993)
39.13
I.D. Walker, R.A. Freeman, S.I. Marcus: Analysis
of motion and internal force loading of objects
grasped by multiple cooperating manipulators, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 10(4), 396–409 (1991)
39.14
R.G. Bonitz, T.C. Hsia: Force decomposition in co-
operating manipulators using the theory of metric
spaces and generalized inverses, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), San Diego (1994)
pp. 1521–1527
39.15
D. Williams, O. Khatib: The virtual linkage: A model
for internal forces in multi-grasp manipulation,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Atlanta
(1993) pp. 1025–1030
39.16
K.S. Sang, R. Holmberg, O. Khatib: The augmented
object model: cooperative manipulation and par-
allel mechanisms dynmaics, Proc. 2000 IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), San Francisco (1995)
pp. 470–475
39.17
J.T. Wen, K. Kreutz-Delgado: Motion and force con-
trol of multiple robotic manipulators, Automatica
28(4), 729–743 (1992)
39.18
T. Yoshikawa, X.Z. Zheng: Coordinated dynamic hy-
brid position/force control for multiple robot ma-
nipulators handling one constrained object, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 12, 219–230 (1993)

Cooperative Manipulation
References
1005
Part D | 39
39.19
V. Perdereau, M. Drouin: Hybrid external control for
two robot coordinated motion, Robotica 14, 141–153
(1996)
39.20
H. Bruhm, J. Deisenroth, P. Schadler: On the design
and simulation-based validation of an active com-
pliance law for multi-arm robots, Robotics Auton.
Syst. 5, 307–321 (1989)
39.21
S.A. Schneider, R.H. Cannon Jr.: Object impedance
control for cooperative manipulation: Theory and
experimental results, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
8, 383–394 (1992)
39.22
R.G.
Bonitz,
T.C.
Hsia:
Internal
force-based
impedance
control
for
cooperating
manipu-
lators, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 12, 78–89
(1996)
39.23
Y.-R. Hu, A.A. Goldenberg, C. Zhou: Motion and
force control of coordinated robots during con-
strained motion tasks, Int. J. Robotics Res. 14,
351–365 (1995)
39.24
Y.-H. Liu, S. Arimoto: Decentralized adaptive and
nonadaptive position/force controllers for redun-
dant manipulators in cooperation, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 17, 232–247 (1998)
39.25
P. Chiacchio, S. Chiaverini, B. Siciliano: Direct and
inverse kinematics for coordinated motion tasks of
a two-manipulator system, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas.
Control 118, 691–697 (1996)
39.26
F. Caccavale, P. Chiacchio, S. Chiaverini: Task-space
regulation of cooperative manipulators, Automat-
ica 36, 879–887 (2000)
39.27
G.R. Luecke, K.W. Lai: A joint error-feedback ap-
proach to internal force regulation in cooperating
manipulator systems, J. Robotics Syst. 14, 631–648
(1997)
39.28
F. Caccavale, P. Chiacchio, S. Chiaverini: Stability
analysis of a joint space control law for a two-
manipulator system, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 44,
85–88 (1999)
39.29
P. Hsu: Coordinated control of multiple manipula-
tor systems, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 9, 400–410
(1993)
39.30
F. Basile, F. Caccavale, P. Chiacchio, J. Coppola,
C. Curatella: Task-oriented motion planning for
multi-arm robotic systems, Robotics Comp.-Integr.
Manuf. 28, 569–582 (2012)
39.31
P. Chiacchio, S. Chiaverini, L. Sciavicco, B. Sicil-
iano: Global task space manipulability ellipsoids
for multiple arm systems, IEEE Trans. Robotics Au-
tom. 7, 678–685 (1991)
39.32
S. Lee: Dual redundant arm configuration op-
timization with task-oriented dual arm manip-
ulability, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 5, 78–97
(1989)
39.33
T. Kokkinis, B. Paden: Kinetostatic performance
limits of cooperating robot manipulators using
force-velocity polytopes, Proc. ASME Winter Annu.
Meet. Robotics Res., San Francisco (1989)
39.34
P. Chiacchio, S. Chiaverini, L. Sciavicco, B. Siciliano:
Task space dynamic analysis of multiarm system
configurations, Int. J. Robotics Res. 10, 708–715
(1991)
39.35
D.E. Orin, S.Y. Oh: Control of force distribution in
robotic mechanisms containing closed kinematic
chains, Trans. ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 102,
134–141 (1981)
39.36
Y.F. Zheng, J.Y.S. Luh: Optimal load distribution
for two industrial robots handling a single object,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Phila.
(1988) pp. 344–349
39.37
I.D. Walker, S.I. Marcus, R.A. Freeman: Distribution
of dynamic loads for multiple cooperating robot
manipulators, J. Robotics Syst. 6, 35–47 (1989)
39.38
M. Uchiyama: A unified approach to load sharing,
motion decomposing, and force sensing of dual
arm robots, 5th Int. Symp. Robotics Res., ed. by
H. Miura, S. Arimoto (1990) pp. 225–232
39.39
M.A. Unseren: A new technique for dynamic load
distribution when two manipulators mutually lift
a rigid object. Part 1: The proposed technique, Proc.
1st World Autom. Congr. (WAC), Maui, Vol. 2 (1994)
pp. 359–365
39.40
M.A. Unseren: A new technique for dynamic load
distribution when two manipulators mutually lift
a rigid object. Part 2: Derivation of entire sys-
tem model and control architecture, Proc. 1st World
Autom. Congr. (WAC), Maui, Vol. 2 (1994) pp. 367–
372
39.41
M. Uchiyama, T. Yamashita: Adaptive load sharing
for hybrid controlled two cooperative manipula-
tors, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
Sacramento (1991) pp. 986–991
39.42
M. Uchiyama, Y. Kanamori: Quadratic program-
ming for dextrous dual-arm manipulation, Trans.
IMACS/SICE Int. Symp. Robotics Mechatron. Manuf.
Syst., Kobe (1993) pp. 367–372
39.43
Y.F. Zheng, M.Z. Chen: Trajectory planning for two
manipulators to deform flexible beams, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Atlanta (1993)
pp. 1019–1024
39.44
M.M. Svinin, M. Uchiyama: Coordinated dynamic
control of a system of manipulators coupled via
a flexible object, Prepr. 4th IFAC Symp. Robot Con-
trol, Capri (1994) pp. 1005–1010
39.45
T. Yukawa, M. Uchiyama, D.N. Nenchev, H. Inooka:
Stability of control system in handling of a flex-
ible object by rigid arm robots, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Minneapolis (1996)
pp. 2332–2339
39.46
M. Yamano, J.-S. Kim, A. Konno, M. Uchiyama: Co-
operative control of a 3D dual-flexible-arm robot,
J. Intell. Robotics Syst. 39, 1–15 (2004)
39.47
T. Miyabe, M. Yamano, A. Konno, M. Uchiyama:
An approach toward a robust object recovery with
flexible manipulators, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Maui (2001) pp. 907–
912
39.48
T. Miyabe, A. Konno, M. Uchiyama, M. Yamano:
An approach toward an automated object retrieval
operation with a two-arm flexible manipulator,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 23, 275–291 (2004)
39.49
M. Uchiyama, A. Konno: Modeling, controllability
and vibration suppression of 3D flexible robots. In:

Part D | 39
1006
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Robotics Research, The 7th Int. Symp, ed. by G. Gi-
ralt, G. Hirzinger (Springer, London 1996) pp. 90–99
39.50
K. Munawar, M. Uchiyama: Slip compensated ma-
nipulation with cooperating multiple robots, 36th
IEEE Conf. Decis. Control, San Diego (1997)
39.51
D. Sun, J.K. Mills: Adaptive synchronized control
for coordination of multirobot assembly tasks, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 18, 498–510 (2002)
39.52
A. Rodriguez-Angeles, H. Nijmeijer: Mutual syn-
chronization of robots via estimated state feed-
back: a cooperative approach, IEEE Trans. Control
Syst. Technol. 12, 542–554 (2004)
39.53
K.-Y. Lian, C.-S. Chiu, P. Liu: Semi-decentralized
adaptive fuzzy control for cooperative multirobot
systems with H-inf motion/internal force tracking
performance, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 32, 269–
280 (2002)
39.54
W. Gueaieb, F. Karray, S. Al-Sharhan: A robust
adaptive fuzzy position/force control scheme for
cooperative manipulators, IEEE Trans. Control Syst.
Technol. 11, 516–528 (2003)
39.55
W. Gueaieb, F. Karray, S. Al-Sharhan: A robust hy-
brid intelligent position/force control scheme for
cooperative manipulators, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mecha-
tron. 12, 109–125 (2007)
39.56
J. Gudiño-Lau, M.A. Arteaga, L.A. Muñoz, V. Parra-
Vega: On the control of cooperative robots without
velocity measurements, IEEE Trans. Control Syst.
Technol. 12, 600–608 (2004)
39.57
R. Tinos, M.H. Terra, J.Y. Ishihara: Motion and force
control of cooperative robotic manipulators with
passive joints, IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol. 14,
725–734 (2006)
39.58
H. Inoue: Computer controlled bilateral manipula-
tor, Bulletin JSME 14(69), 199–207 (1971)
39.59
M. Uchiyama, T. Kitano, Y. Tanno, K. Miyawaki:
Cooperative multiple robots to be applied to indus-
tries, Proc. World Autom. Congr. (WAC), Montpellier
(1996) pp. 759–764
39.60
B.M. Braun, G.P. Starr, J.E. Wood, R. Lumia:
A framework for implementing cooperative motion
on industrial controllers, IEEE Trans. Robotics Au-
tom. 20, 583–589 (2004)
39.61
D. Sun, J.K. Mills: Manipulating rigid payloads
with multiple robots using compliant grippers,
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 7, 23–34 (2002)
39.62
M.R. Cutkosky, I. Kao: Computing and control-
ling the compliance of a robot hand, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 5, 151–165 (1989)
39.63
A. Jazidie, T. Tsuji, M. Nagamachi, K. Ito: Multi-
point compliance control for dual-arm robots uti-
lizing kinematic redundancy, Trans. Soc. Instr. Con-
trol Eng. 29, 637–646 (1993)
39.64
T. Tsuji, A. Jazidie, M. Kaneko: Distributed trajectory
generation for multi-arm robots via virtual force
interactions, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 27, 862–
867 (1997)
39.65
O. Khatib, K. Yokoi, K. Chang, D. Ruspini, R. Holm-
berg, A. Casal: Coordination and decentralized
cooperation of multiple mobile manipulators,
J. Robotics Syst. 13, 755–764 (1996)
39.66
J. Fink, N. Michael, S. Kim, V. Kumar: Planning and
control for cooperative manipulation and trans-
portation with aerial robots, Int. J. Robotics Res.
30, 324–334 (2011)
39.67
J.Y.S. Luh, Y.F. Zheng: Constrained relations be-
tween two coordinated industrial robots for mo-
tion
control,
Int.
J.
Robotics
Res.
6,
60–70
(1987)
39.68
A.J. Koivo, M.A. Unseren: Reduced order model and
decoupled control architecture for two manipula-
tors holding a rigid object, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas.
Control 113, 646–654 (1991)
39.69
M.A. Unseren: Rigid body dynamics and decoupled
control architecture for two strongly interacting
manipulators manipulators, Robotica 9, 421–430
(1991)
39.70
J. Duffy: The fallacy of modern hybrid control the-
ory that is based on Orthogonal Complements of
twist and wrench spaces, J. Robotics Syst. 7, 139–
144 (1990)
39.71
K.L. Doty, C. Melchiorri, C. Bonivento: A theory
of generalized inverses applied to robotics, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 12, 1–19 (1993)
39.72
O. Khatib: Object manipulation in a multi-effector
robot system. In: Robotics Research, Vol. 4, ed.
by R. Bolles, B. Roth (MIT Press, Cambridge 1988)
pp. 137–144
39.73
O. Khatib: Inertial properties in robotic manipu-
lation: An object level framework, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 13, 19–36 (1995)
39.74
F. Caccavale, P. Chiacchio, A. Marino, L. Villani: Six-
DOF impedance control of dual-arm cooperative
manipulators, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 13, 576–
586 (2008)
39.75
T.G. Sugar, V. Kumar: Control of cooperating mobile
manipulators, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 18, 94–
103 (2002)
39.76
C.P. Tang, R.M. Bhatt, M. Abou-Samah, V. Krovi:
Screw-theoretic analysis framework for coopera-
tive payload transport by mobile manipulator col-
lectives, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 11, 169–178
(2006)
39.77
H. Bai, J.T. Wen: Cooperative load transport: A for-
mation-control perspective, IEEE Trans. Robotics
26, 742–750 (2010)

Multimedia Contents Mobility and
1007
Part D | 40
40. Mobility and Manipulation
Oliver Brock, Jaeheung Park, Marc Toussaint
Mobile manipulation requires the integration of
methodologies from all aspects of robotics. Instead
of tackling each aspect in isolation, mobile manip-
ulation research exploits their interdependence to
solve challenging problems.As a result, novel views
of long-standing problems emerge. In this chap-
ter, we present these emerging views in the areas
of grasping, control, motion generation, learning,
and perception. All of these areas must address
the shared challenges of high-dimensionality,
uncertainty, and task variability. The section on
grasping and manipulation describes a trend to-
wards actively leveraging contact and physical and
dynamic interactions between hand, object, and
environment. Research in control addresses the
challenges of appropriately coupling mobility and
manipulation. The field of motion generation in-
creasingly blurs the boundaries between control
and planning, leading to task-consistent motion
in high-dimensional configuration spaces, even
in dynamic and partially unknown environments.
A key challenge of learning for mobile manipulation
consists of identifying the appropriate priors, and
we survey recent learning approaches to percep-
tion, grasping, motion, and manipulation. Finally,
a discussion of promising methods in perception
shows how concepts and methods from navigation
and active perception are applied.
40.1 Grasping and Manipulation.................. 1009
40.1.1
Problem Description .................. 1009
40.1.2
Evaluation of the State of the Art 1010
40.1.3
Toward Robust Grasping
and Manipulation ..................... 1013
40.2 Control................................................ 1013
40.2.1
Problem Description .................. 1014
40.2.2 Evaluation of the State of the Art 1014
40.2.3 Toward Control
in Mobile Manipulation ............. 1016
40.3 Motion Generation............................... 1017
40.3.1
Problem Description .................. 1017
40.3.2 Evaluation of the State of the Art 1018
40.3.3 Toward Motion Generation
for Mobile Manipulation ............ 1020
40.4 Learning ............................................. 1021
40.4.1
Problem Description .................. 1021
40.4.2 Evaluation of the State of the Art 1023
40.4.3 Toward Learning
in Mobile Manipulation ............. 1025
40.5 Perception........................................... 1025
40.5.1
Problem Description .................. 1026
40.5.2 Evaluation of the State of the Art 1026
40.5.3 Toward Robust Perception.......... 1028
40.6 Conclusions and Further Reading ......... 1029
Video-References......................................... 1029
References................................................... 1030
What exactly is mobile manipulation? To ﬁnd an an-
swer to this question, we must consider the historical
development of this research area. The term mobile ma-
nipulation was coined in the late 1980s to early 1990s,
when research labs began to mount robot manipulators
on mobile platforms [40.1, 2]. Back then, the term was
intended to capture just that: research was conducted on
an experimental platform that combines capabilities in
mobility and manipulation. A series of mobile manipu-
lation platforms is shown in Fig. 40.1.
With the introduction of such platforms it soon became
apparent that combining mobility with manipulation
was a game changer. Mobility enables manipulators to
leave the lab. They now have to face the complexi-
ties of the real world. And in the real world, much of
the research that had been successful in the carefully

Part D | 40
1008
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
controlled environments in research labs proved to be
brittle or inadequate. This traditional research often re-
lied on strong assumptions about the environment to be
successful – an untenable assumption in unpredictable,
nonstationary everyday environments.
In the context of mobile manipulation research, con-
trolled environments, such as factory ﬂoors and speciﬁc
experimental setups, are often referred to as structured
environments. In contrast, unstructured environments
are environments that have not been modiﬁed specif-
ically to facilitate the execution of a task by a robot.
These two types of environments are opposites on
a continuous scale with many possible intermediates.
And, of course, structured environments are still laden
with uncertainty just the same as unstructured environ-
ments still contain a signiﬁcant structure that can be
exploited by the robot.
In unstructured environments, it becomes a neces-
sity for the robot to perform a wide variety of tasks,
instead of a single speciﬁc task. Any speciﬁc task, such
as retrieving a book from the library, might require the
robot to solve additional challenges, such as opening
doors, operating elevators, moving a chair out of the
way to approach the shelf, or asking for the location
of the stacks. Today, no robotic system possesses such
capabilities.
Researchers in mobile manipulation have learned
that the progress achieved in traditional research ar-
eas of robotics cannot simply be combined to produce
the level of competency they aim for. This insight
motivated the founding of mobile manipulation as a re-
search area. The research in this area seeks to develop
robotic systems capable of autonomous task execution
in unstructured or minimally structured environments.
Clearly, the transition from single-purpose lab demon-
stration – a common practice in robotics – toward such
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.40.1a–d Some exemplary mobile manipulation platforms developed throughout the decades (a) Herbert (MIT,
1985), (b) Stanford assistent mobile manipulator (1995), (c) PR2 (Willow Garage, 2009), (d) Herb (CMU, 2013)
mobile manipulation systems is a gradual one. Mobile
manipulation research therefore gradually increases the
autonomy, robustness, and task generality of robotic
systems, while at the same time gradually reducing the
dependence on prior information about the environment
and the task.
The objective of mobile manipulation research is to:
1. Maximize task generality of autonomous robotic
systems, while at the same time
2. Minimizing the dependence on task-speciﬁc, hard-
coded, or narrowly-relevant information.
Some people argue that this is exactly what main
stream robotics is doing and what most of this Hand-
book is about. And they might be right. But over the last
20 years, the mobile manipulation community, forced
by failures of robotic systems in the real world, has be-
gun to explore alternatives and extensions to the body
of robotics knowledge collected in this tome. It is these
alternatives or extensions that this chapter is about. In
each of the subsequent sections, our goal is to showcase
work in mobile manipulation that opens up possible
novel directions for future advances toward robots op-
erating in real-world environments. For the areas of
grasping and manipulation, mobility, control, motion
generation, learning, and perception, we will analyze
how the main challenges of the ﬁeld change when sys-
tems are operating in the real world. We will show
how each of these ﬁelds has developed and advanced
to increasingly address the challenges of unstructured
environments.
Before we embark on this journey, it is worthwhile
to agree on the challenges that are in fact encoun-
tered when robots are supposed to perform a variety
of tasks in an unconstrained and uncontrolled envi-

Mobility and Manipulation
40.1 Grasping and Manipulation
1009
Part D | 40.1
ronment. These challenges are common to all of the
subdisciplines we discuss in the following sections.
First, the necessity to perform a variety of tasks,
instead of a single one, requires that the robot be
equipped with general means of mobility, manipulation,
and perception. Its capabilities must be the union of
the minimum capabilities required for each task. This
entails the need for versatile sensing and dexterous ma-
nipulation. This, in turn, implies that the sensor input
of the robot is high dimensional and so is the conﬁgu-
ration space of the robot. The ﬁrst challenge therefore
consists of dealing with the high dimensionality and the
inherent complexity of the state spaces required for task
generality. To make matters worse, task generality most
often requires system dynamics to be hybrid, i. e., ex-
hibit discrete as well as continuous behavior.
Second, by the deﬁnition of mobile manipulation,
the robot cannot rely on a complete, continuously, and
globally updated world model. While some part of the
robotics community attempts to structure the world to
become such a world model – by using RFID tags or
by placing sensors everywhere – many in the mobile
manipulation community believe it to be more effective
and more insightful to make robots smarter. Not hav-
ing a complete world model means that the robot has
to use perception to acquire relevant information about
the world; it means that the robot has to address the un-
certainty in its sensing, but also the uncertainty in its
world model which might change unbeknownst to the
robot. The second challenge therefore consists of ap-
propriately handling the uncertainty inherent to sensing
and actuation and the uncertainty caused by a dynamic
world.
Third, in the real world, objects exhibit large vari-
ability from the perspective of their appearance, even
when they perform exactly the same function. This
means that there is a layer of indirection through ap-
pearance when a robot wants to operate autonomously
in the real world. There are so many different kinds
of door handles, they differ signiﬁcantly in appearance,
but perform the same function. The challenge therefore
is to cope with the variability in the world by revealing
the functional principles underlying the world’s appear-
ance. A natural way of addressing variability are skills
that generalize to novel situations.
As we will see in subsequent sections, attempts to
address these challenges by the robotics community
have produced innovative and successful concepts, al-
gorithms, mechanisms, and integrated systems. Some
of them were not covered in previous chapters, as they
do not (yet?) belong to the canon of robotic wisdom.
Maybe this chapter can contribute to changing this.
40.1 Grasping and Manipulation
Robots accomplish tasks by grasping, manipulating,
and placing objects. Several chapters in this Handbook
are concerned with associated mechanisms, methods,
and concepts: Chapter 19 discusses robot hands, the
most versatile type of end-effector for grasping and
manipulation. Chapter 37 discusses manipulation in
general and Chap. 38 presents the state of the art in
grasping. Important for grasping and manipulation are
also force and tactile sensors, which are discussed in
Chap. 28. While these four chapters describe the well-
established foundation of grasping and manipulation, in
this chapter we want to take a higher level perspective,
assess the suitability of these approaches in the context
of mobile manipulation, and speculate about possible
novel approaches.
Both grasping and manipulation exemplify the chal-
lenges for mobile manipulation we laid out above:
uncertainty, high dimensionality, and task variability.
Uncertainty is relevant as minor inaccuracies in the
object model, minor errors in motion execution, and
small differences in positioning relative to the ob-
ject can cause grasp failure. The high dimensionality
of grasping results from the many degrees of free-
dom of the hand as well as from those of the objects
in the environment. Finally, grasping and manipula-
tion occur in a large number of variations, each in-
volving vastly different interactions with objects. It
is therefore not surprising that decades of research
on grasping and manipulation have made signiﬁcant
progress but so far were unable to create skills suf-
ﬁciently robust for autonomous operation in the real
world.
In this section, we describe a recent development
in the ﬁeld of grasping and manipulation away from
the foundational techniques laid out elsewhere in this
Handbook toward novel approaches that seem better
suited for addressing the manipulation challenges in
mobile manipulation.
40.1.1 Problem Description
First, a word on deﬁning the problem. Traditionally,
grasping and manipulation are viewed as two distinct
problems. But there is signiﬁfant ambiguity with re-
spect to these terms in the literature [40.3]. In this
section, we limit ourselves to grasping and manipula-
tion with robot hands. And in this context, we deﬁne
the following terms:

Part D | 40.1
1010
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Grasping refers to gaining reliable control over the
extrinsic degrees of freedom of an object through the
robot’s degrees of freedom, i. e., the robot grasps an ob-
ject so that it can change the object’s extrinsic degrees
of freedom by changing its own, excluding the degrees
of freedom of the hand, which remain static once the
grasp is achieved. To perform grasping, the overall de-
grees of freedom of the robot have traditionally been
divided into two parts: those required to impart forces
on an object (usually addressed using grasp planning
approaches) and the remaining ones that can be used to
reposition the object, once a grasp is obtained (general
motion and manipulation planning). Note, however, that
in contrast to this traditional decomposition, coordina-
tion of arm and hand degrees of freedom are usually
required during grasping.
By dexterous grasping we refer to grasping while
optimizing the grasp posture for (a) robustness and
(b) suitability for the execution of a speciﬁc task. In
the relevant literature, the overall degrees of freedom
are still most commonly divided into those responsible
for the grasp and those able to change the pose of the
grasped object.
By dexterous in-hand manipulation, we refer to the
ability to actuate the extrinsic degrees of freedom of the
object using all degrees of freedom of the arm and the
hand so that the object moves relative to a reference
frame placed at the hand’s wrist [40.4].
Classical approaches to all three of these problems
rely on precise models of the environment and of the
hand, carefully reason about contact points and states,
and attempt to determine and precisely execute a de-
tailed plan. We would like to point to the emergence of
a novel approach to all three of these problems. Since
this novel approach, however, has been mainly explored
in the context of grasping at this early point in time, we
will focus our discussion on grasping. But we will also
make the point that in this new way of thinking about
grasping and manipulation both of these problems be-
come similar, if not identical.
40.1.2 Evaluation of the State of the Art
The earliest and still most fundamental considerations
of grasping are based on the notions of force and form
closure (Chap. 38).
Force and Form Closure
These notions express the effect of a set of disembod-
ied contact points, i. e., ignoring the body on which that
contact point lies, such as the ﬁnger, on the ability of an
object to move. They reﬂect a static view of grasping,
in which the physical interactions that will invariably
occur during the grasp are not considered.
This line of research continues to be active and suc-
cessful, as evidenced by a large number of sophisticated
and capable grasp planners and simulators [40.5]. The
resulting grasps, however, often do not result in success-
ful real-world grasps. These failures are a consequence
of model uncertainty and motion execution noise. The
assumptions made during planning, i. e., that the disem-
bodied contact points can be realized precisely by the
hand, more often than not do not hold.
Interactions Between Hand and Object
There is a very simple strategy to overcome many of the
theoretical failures of the approaches based on precise
models and the notion of force closure – and this strat-
egy is used tacitly by all grasping research: just keep
closing the hand, even if you think you have attained the
right conﬁguration for your contact points. This strat-
egy effectively leverages mechanical compliance of the
hand to adapt the hand’s conﬁguration to the object’s
shape. This adaptation of shape has several positive ef-
fects for grasping:
1. Sensing and actuation uncertainty are compensated,
2. Large surface areas are established, and
3. Grasping forces are distributed and balanced.
These effects lead to an increase in grasp success
and grasp quality. It is fair to say that this is a standard
trick in the grasp planning community.
This insight is also strongly driving contemporary
hand design. To maximize the effect of shape adapta-
tion, Rodriguez and Mason [40.6] optimize ﬁnger shape
to yield similar contact conﬁguration irrespective of the
size of the object. A different way of increasing shape
adaptability is to include compliant components in the
hand design [40.7]. The shape deposition manufactur-
ing (SDM) hand [40.8], the Velo gripper [40.9], the
i-HY hand [40.10], and the Pisa/IIT SoftHand [40.11]
achieve shape adaptability through underactuation by
coupling degrees of freedom of the hand, adapting the
shape of the hand to the object while equalizing contact
forces. An extreme case of this is the positive pressure
gripper [40.12], which presses a bag ﬁlled with granular
material onto the object to be grasped. The bag adapts to
the shape of the object. When the air is evacuated from
the bag, the granular material jams, forming a gripper
perfectly adapted to the shape of the object.
From this brief analysis it is fair to say that the
shape adaptability between hand and object is routinely
leveraged in grasp planning, simply by closing the hand
until a certain grasping force is reached. Also, shape
adaptability has emerged as an important design crite-
rion for hands, as it very obviously improves grasping
performance.

Mobility and Manipulation
40.1 Grasping and Manipulation
1011
Part D | 40.1
Interactions Between Hand, Object,
and Environment
Features in the environment, provided by other objects
or support surfaces, for example, may constrain the mo-
tion of hand and object. This is most evident for support
surfaces, such as tables and ﬂoors. These constraints,
when used properly, can aid grasping. Furthermore, it
might be the case that the necessary perceptual infor-
mation for leveraging such constraints is often easier to
obtain than the information required for the successful
execution of an unconstrained grasp.
Recent research in robotic grasping leverages en-
vironmental constraints in the suggested manner, e.g.,
to position the hand relative to the object [40.13], to
cage objects [40.13, 14], or to ﬁxate an object during
planar sliding [40.13, 15]. Some pregrasp manipulation
relies on environmental constraints to improve grasp
success. For example, Chang et al. [40.16] rotate pan
handles into a speciﬁc orientation prior to grasping
by exploiting the pan’s friction and remote center of
mass.
But, in addition to external contacts, environmental
constraints can also be created by exploiting gravity, in-
ertia, or dynamic motion of the arm and hand. In this
way, in-hand manipulation is accomplished by using
what has been called extrinsic dexterity [40.17].
All of the aforementioned grasp strategies rely on
multiple interactions between hand, object, and envi-
ronment prior to attaining the ﬁnal grasp posture. These
phases often are designed to reduce uncertainties in spe-
ciﬁc variables relevant to grasp success.
The idea of environmental constraints appears in
early work by Mason et al. [40.18, 19]. Here, the intrin-
sic mechanics of the task environment are exploited to
eliminate uncertainty and to achieve robustness.
The study of environmental constraint exploitation
by humans so far has been limited to replicating in-
stances of observed behavior on robots [40.16, 20]. For
example, Kaneko et al. [40.20] extracted a set of grasp-
ing strategies from observations of a human subject.
These strategies include interactions with environmen-
tal constraints.
We believe that this recent trend toward the ex-
ploitation of environmental constraints represents an
important opportunity to improve robotic grasping ca-
pabilities. To take full advantage of this opportunity, we
should understand the strategies humans employ, trans-
fer them to robotic systems, and develop robotic hands
tailored to this exploitation [40.21]. This will be dis-
cussed in the next section.
Insights from Human Grasping
Interestingly, the study of human grasping paralleled
the development in the robotics community. Early stud-
ies of human grasping followed the static view captured
by force closure concepts. This is reﬂected in grasp
taxonomies, classifying grasp according to the ﬁnal
hand posture attained after the grasp process is com-
pleted [40.22, 23].
Even the early work on postural synergies, which
has had a profound impact on robotics, initially only
considered synergies of static grasp postures [40.24].
These studies do not capture the dynamic processes and
the exploitation of environmental constraints we believe
to be crucial for robust grasping. Nevertheless, these
studies of human grasping have led to signiﬁcant ad-
vances in robotic grasping [40.11].
The nature of hand–object interaction has also
been studied in humans. The effect of shape adapt-
ability is well known for human hands and studies
have elucidated the degree to which humans vary their
behavior to take advantage of it. Christopoulos and
Schrater [40.25] showed that humans react to pose un-
certainty of a cylinder and orient their hand to align it,
presumably to be able to maximize the beneﬁts of shape
adaptability. However, other experiments may point at
the fact that humans also rely on more complex interac-
tions with the environment for grasping under difﬁcult
conditions. When the vision of humans is impaired,
they fail more often at ﬁrst grasp attempts of isolated
(environmental-constraint free) objects [40.26]. The de-
gree of the demonstrated effect seems surprising. We
believe that in this speciﬁc experiment, it is due to
the lack of environmental constraints exploitable for
grasping.
More recently, studies of human grasping have
shown the deliberate use of environmental constraints
during grasping. For example, humans increase their
use of environmental constraints when their vision is
impaired [40.21]. This seems to indicate that the use
of environmental constraints will play a crucial role in
achieving robust and task-general grasping and manip-
ulation in robotics.
Robot Hands
Many highly capable robotic hands exist. A histori-
cal overview, collecting robotic hands from over ﬁve
decades, was compiled by Controzzi et al. [40.27].
An analysis of robot hand designs with respect to
grasping capabilities was recently presented by Greben-
stein [40.28]. As the notion of compliance is central to
our hand design, we will limit our discussion to hands
designs that deliberately include this concept.
We distinguish two main approaches for designing
compliant hands. Compliance can be achieved using
active control, and implemented on a fully actuated
or even hyper-actuated systems, where every degree
of freedom can be controlled. An impressive exam-

Part D | 40.1
1012
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
a)
b)
d)
e)
c)
Fig.40.2a–e Various hand designs leveraging compliance to improve performance. (a) Awiwi hand (DLR), (b) SDM hand
(Havard), (c) Pisa-IIT hand, (d) i-HY hand (iRobot, Havard, Yale), (e) RBO hand z (TU Berlin)
ple of this type of hand is the Awiwi hand [40.28],
the ShadowRobot Shadow Dexterous Hand, and the
SimLab Allegro Hand [40.29]. These hands achieve
dexterity through accurate control, which comes at the
price of mechanical complexity, making them difﬁcult
and costly to build and prone to failure.
An alternative approach is to make hands compliant
by including elastic or ﬂexible materials (passive com-
pliance). Building a passively compliant joint is much
cheaper than an actively controlled one, in terms of
costs, volume and system complexity. Passive compli-
ance can easily absorb impact forces – a desirable prop-
erty for an end-effector designed to establish contact
with the world. The cost of adding additional (passive)
degrees of freedom is low, compared to actively compli-
ant hands. The resulting ability to passively adapt to the
shape of an object greatly enhances grasp success and
grasp quality. At the same time, the hand can be under-
actuated, effectively ofﬂoading control to the physical
material.
A pioneering work in grasping with passive compli-
ance was the soft gripper by Hirose and Umetani [40.7].
Recently, a whole range of grippers and hands were
built using passive compliance, such as the FRH-4
hand [40.30], the SDM hand and its successor [40.10,
31, 32], the starﬁsh gripper [40.33], the THE Second
Hand and the Pisa-IIT Soft Hand [40.34], the Positive
Pressure Gripper [40.12], the RBO Hands [40.13, 35],
and the Velo Gripper [40.9]. A different source of in-
spiration was taken by Giannaccini et al. [40.36], who
built an octopus-inspired compliant gripper. Some of
these hands are shown in Fig. 40.2.
The practical realization of underactuated hands
is matched by theoretical approaches to analyze and
evaluate their dexterity [40.37, 38]. However, these ap-
proaches require accurate knowledge of grasp posture,
contact point locations, and contact forces. Given to-
day’s sensor technologies, this information is difﬁcult
to obtain in physical implementations.
The inclusion of compliance into the design of
robotic hands has led to signiﬁcant improvements in
power-grasping of objects. Given the insights obtained
from human grasping (see the previous section), it is
plausible that these improvements are the result of these
hands’ capabilities to engage in beneﬁcial contact inter-
actions with the environment. While these beneﬁts have
been demonstrated extensively in the context of power
grasping, little work has examined the beneﬁcial effects
of compliance and underactuation on the dexterity of
robotic hands [40.35].

Mobility and Manipulation
40.2 Control
1013
Part D | 40.2
40.1.3 Toward Robust Grasping
and Manipulation
The key to robust grasping and manipulation – an im-
portant prerequisite for mobile manipulation – appears
to be the deliberate and purposeful use of interactions
between hand, object, and environment. This is sup-
ported by evidence from human grasping as well as
from the design features of successful robotic hands.
If this claim is true, it fundamentally changes the game
in grasping and manipulation. The notion of a speciﬁc
contact point conﬁguration, which has for the last 50
years been of pivotal importance, is superseded by de-
liberate constraint exploitations. The traditional, static
view of grasping is replaced with a dynamic view that
emphasizes motion of hand, object, and environment
in contact with each other. Rather than placing ﬁn-
gers carefully at exactly the right place, this new way
of thinking requires ﬁngers to slide across surfaces, to
comply to object shapes, and to balance and maintain
contact forces through intelligent hardware design.
Especially in hardware design, there has been sig-
niﬁcant progress. The newest generation of hands
are built for the exploitation of constraints: with-
out sensing and explicit control, they support shape
adaptation and compliant contact maintenance. One
of the future challenges will be the development of
grasp planning methods and perceptual capabilities
to leverage the advantages afforded by these novel
hands.
40.2 Control
Mobile manipulators are robotic systems with capabili-
ties for both manipulation and mobility. A typical setup
of mobile manipulator, therefore, consists of manipu-
lator and mobile robot. Traditionally, mobile manip-
ulators were implemented as wheeled mobile robots,
providing mobility on two-dimensional ﬂat surfaces.
Mobility, however, can be provided by other types of
robots depending on the operating environment. Legged
robot systems operate well in uneven or rough terrain.
Aerial or underwater robots allow operation in environ-
ments with totally different characteristics.
Controlling such mobile manipulators involves con-
trol for the subsystems. The control issues of manipu-
lators are explained and discussed earlier in Chaps. 8
and 9. Modeling and control of various types of mobile
a)
b)
c)
work space
work space
Fig.40.3a–c Increased workspace and redundancy of mobile manipulators. (a) A manipulator on a ﬁxed base; (b) in-
creased work space of a mobile manipulator; (c) redundancy due to the added mobility
platforms will be introduced later in detail in Chaps.
from 48 to 52 in Part E. In these chapters, we would like
to discuss unique control problems in mobile manipu-
lation, which arise when the manipulator and mobile
platform operate simultaneously.
Control of mobile manipulators also has to address
the three challenges we stated initially: high dimen-
sionality, uncertainty, and task variabilty. The mobile
manipulator was ﬁrst implemented to provide mobil-
ity to the manipulator. One of the main purposes is
to increase the manipulation workspace of the robot
(Fig. 40.3). This mobile platform naturally adds more
degrees of freedom to the system by providing mo-
bility. The additional degrees of freedom increase the
dimensionality of the control problem. The robot be-

Part D | 40.2
1014
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
comes a redundant system because the speciﬁed task
to the robot is still the same, while the overall degrees
of freedom have been increased. That is, there are inﬁ-
nite number of conﬁgurations that can execute the same
task.
Second, uncertainty becomes severe in control of
mobile manipulators due to the mobile platform. The
uncertainty is larger when controlling a mobile plat-
form compared to control of a manipulator. The reasons
for the higher uncertainty are imperfect information
or model about the operating environment, such as
ground and underwater. Additionally mobile platforms
with only internal sensors do not have access to per-
fect state information because drift raises uncertainty
while moving. However, mobile manipulators need to
solve the same manipulation tasks as stationary ma-
nipulators. They have to overcome this uncertainty to
operate reliably.
Third, the variability of the mobile platform exists
depending on the operating environment, although the
high dimensionality and uncertainty are the common
factors across the various mobile platforms. The differ-
ent issues due to various mobile platforms are also to be
discussed later in this chapter.
40.2.1 Problem Description
Control of mobile manipulators must provide capabil-
ities for manipulation and mobility. Often times, these
two are treated completely separate. The robot moves
to a certain location using its mobile platform. Then,
the manipulator performs speciﬁc tasks without mov-
ing the platform. In this approach, the mobile platform
considers the manipulator as a static load. The mobile
platform is then considered as a ﬁxed base for the ma-
nipulator. There is no major difﬁculty implementing
this approach, unless manipulator or mobile platform
is unable to hold its position steadily.
The main problem to be discussed in this chapter
arises when both manipulator and mobile base oper-
ate simultaneously. Although the previously mentioned
approach of a separately controlling manipulator and
a platform increases the workspace of the robot, it does
not exploit the full capabilities of mobile platforms.
Instead, the advantage of mobile manipulator can be
maximized when the manipulator operates while the
bases moves in coordination. This kind of operation will
not only reduce the total operation time but will also in-
crease task variability.
In this chapter, therefore, we will discuss how to
control mobile manipulators by operating both sub-
systems at the same time. During this operation, the
whole system becomes redundant due to the added de-
grees of freedom (DOF) from the mobile platform. How
to exploit this increased number of DOF is one im-
portant problem in mobile manipulation. Secondly, the
increased uncertainty due to the mobile platform re-
quires more robust control strategies than that only for
manipulator. Finally, various issues for different types
of mobile platforms will be discussed.
40.2.2 Evaluation of the State of the Art
First
mobile
manipulators
were
implemented
as
wheeled robots and wheels are still the most popular
tool to enable a manipulator to move. Most of the issues
that have been dealt with in wheeled mobile manipula-
tor can be shared with other types of mobile platforms.
Therefore, we start discussing wheeled mobile plat-
forms in this chapter and discuss issues speciﬁc to other
types of mobile platforms afterward.
Redundancy Resolution and Control
One of the main issues in controlling mobile manip-
ulators has been how to use the additional DOFs to
execute manipulation tasks in a stable way. An early
study [40.39] investigated how to obtain solutions to the
inverse kinematics problem that prevent the robot from
tipping over.
Other approaches exploited the increased number
of DOFs to avoid obstacles, increase manipulability,
handle singularities, or achieve lower priority tasks.
In [40.40], a preferred region to maximize the manip-
ulability of the robotic arm is deﬁned and the nonholo-
nomic mobile platform is controlled to be within the
region. The same concept of a preferred region is also
applied to the force control of a mobile manipulator
in [40.41]. These approaches are typical examples for
approaches that coordinate with the manipulator and
base motion, but control the subsystems separately.
The redundancy of mobile manipulators allows
dealing with multiple tasks simultaneously. In the
conﬁguration approach [40.42, 43], additional tasks or
speciﬁcations are deﬁned to be simultaneously con-
trolled with the end-effector. To obtain solutions online,
a weighted damped least-squares approach was pre-
sented in [40.44]. The conﬁguration approach is further
developed to be used both for holonomic and nonholo-
nomic bases in [40.45].
In [40.46], the uniﬁed control of the arm and holo-
nomic base was achieved by applying the operational
space control framework to the mobile manipulator.
The coordination of the arm and base can be imple-
mented in the null-space of the task control, which does
not affect the control of the end-effector. Later, this ap-
proach was extended to deal with nonholonomic bases
in [40.47]. It uses a complete model of the system with
nonholonomic constraints to devise one uniﬁed con-

Mobility and Manipulation
40.2 Control
1015
Part D | 40.2
troller for the whole system. The redundancy was used
to deal with internal and external constraints. Another
model-based control is derived in [40.48] for a car-like
and differentially-driven system.
Similarly, an approach of exploiting redundancy for
avoiding singularities and maximizing manipulability is
proposed in [40.49] using an event-based planner and
a nonlinear feedback controller with the dynamic model
of the robot.
As can be seen from the above literature, the is-
sue of redundancy resolution in mobile manipulator has
been often dealt with as an extension from the control
of redundant systems but with the special case of non-
holonomic constraints.
Uncertainty Due to Mobile Platform
Another main problem arising when controlling mobile
manipulators, is the additional uncertainty due to the
mobile platform. This is because the mobile platform in
real world moves on the imperfect ground, which cre-
ates a large uncertainty on the manipulation although
it can be negligible for navigation. Early work in the
nineties studied how to control the manipulator when
the base is under disturbance due to the ground con-
dition in [40.50]. The disturbance was assumed to be
unknown and considered as rotational motion only.
Also, model-based approaches are not always suited
for the control of mobile manipulator because accurate
models of mobile platforms are harder to obtain than
models of manipulators. The extended Jacobian trans-
pose algorithm is proposed in [40.51] for controlling
the manipulator to overcome the excessive end-effector
error or instability due to unmodeled vehicle dynamics.
Similarly, since precise modeling of the interaction is
difﬁcult, decentralized control is proposed in [40.52]. It
regards the interaction force from each system as un-
known disturbance.
In [40.53], the control system is divided into mobile
platform and manipulator, and two low-level controllers
are used to control each system. The dynamic inter-
Fig. 40.4 Mobile manipulators in various environments
action force from the base is modeled as an unknown
disturbance in manipulator control, and an adaptive
controller was designed to deal with this disturbance.
A redundancy resolution scheme avoids singularities.
On the other hand, the effects of dynamic interactions
between manipulator and wheeled base on the perfor-
mance of the end-effector task are studied in [40.54].
In another aspect, there have been approaches with-
out modeling interaction or dynamics of each system.
A robust damping controller is proposed in [40.55] for
the motion control subject to kinematic constraints but
without any knowledge of dynamic parameters.
Neural network-based control also has been pro-
posed in this respect. In [40.56], a neural network-based
joint space control is developed for a mobile manipula-
tor with unknown dynamic model and disturbance. Two
neural network controllers are applied to manipulator
and vehicle, respectively. The radial basis function net-
work with weight adaptation is used in [40.57] for on-
line estimation of nonlinear dynamics. The algorithm
is applied to a simulation of a two-link manipulator on
a mobile platform. Adaptive robust motion/force con-
trol has been developed for both holonomic and non-
holonomic constrained mobile manipulators in [40.58].
It ensures stability and the boundedness of tracking
errors in the presence of uncertainties in dynamic pa-
rameters and disturbances.
Sliding mode control and adaptive neural network
control are combined together in [40.59]. Multilayered
perceptrons are applied to estimate the dynamic model
as one system, and the adaptive control is designed in
the task space control. A sliding mode approach with
neural network-based control is proposed in [40.60] for
omnidirectional wheeled mobile manipulators.
Control Issues on Various Types
of Mobile Platform
Although wheeled vehicles are one of the most gen-
eral types of platform to provide mobility, there is an
increasing tendency of using other types (Fig. 40.4).

Part D | 40.2
1016
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Legged
locomotion systems like
humanoids and
quadrupeds are becoming popular. The interesting new
aspect of these systems is that the platform for loco-
motion can actively participate in manipulation. That
is, the legs of the humanoid system can provide not
only locomotion but also assist in manipulation. This
is especially enabled by using the whole-body control
framework [40.61–64]. This control framework consid-
ers the robotic system as a whole and utilize all the
joints for both manipulation and locomotion. This is es-
pecially justiﬁed in legged robots because the mobile
platform and manipulator use the same type of actuator.
Other platforms use different types of actuation for base
and manipulator.
Also, quadruped robots such as Robosimian from
NASA JPL uses the leg parts to increase the workspace
and dexterity of the manipulation. The legged sys-
tem can provide more capability of manipulation than
wheeled mobile platform because it can provide the full
three-dimensional (3-D) motion of the base part such
that the manipulation part can have much larger manip-
ulation capability. The whole-body control framework
is also applied to a quadrupedal robot in [40.65]. The
robot does not yet have manipulator in this system,
but the control framework can support the manipulation
control if needed.
Mobile manipulators operating underwater are be-
coming more prevalent. The main difference to wheeled
mobile platform is the effect of hydrodynamic forces
during motion. An efﬁcient dynamic simulation algo-
rithm is developed for underwater mobile manipulator
in [40.66], where various hydrodynamic forces can
be modeled and incorporated. In [40.67], the hydro-
dynamic effect between the manipulator and vehicle
is modeled and compensated. The demonstrated re-
sults improved performance in controlling both vehicle
and manipulator. The underwater mobile manipulator is
modeled using Kane’s method in [40.68], which also
incorporates the major hydrodynamic forces such as
added mass, proﬁle drag, ﬂuid acceleration, and buoy-
ancy.
Underwater mobile manipulators also have redun-
dant degrees of freedom. In [40.69], redundancy created
by the underwater vehicle is utilized to achieve sec-
ondary tasks, such as reducing energy consumption and
maximizing dexterity, while executing the main task at
the end-effector. A task-priority redundancy resolution
technique is applied for this purpose. The restoring mo-
ment is minimized in [40.70] in redundancy resolution
so that the performance of the coordinated motion con-
trol is improved.
Similar to other mobile platforms, the uncertainty
due to the underwater vehicle is one of the major
difﬁculties. To deal with this issue, an adaptive con-
trol approach is proposed in [40.71] that is robust in
the presence of uncertainties in the vehicle and envi-
ronment. An iterative learning algorithm is developed
for the hydrodynamic effects in [40.72]. An adap-
tive tracking control is proposed in [40.73] that keeps
the advantage of model-based control and has a mod-
ular structure. An observer–controller strategy deals
with the difﬁculty of obtaining precise velocity mea-
surements in [40.74]. This signiﬁcantly improves the
chattering of the output actuator caused by noise and
quantization.
Aerial mobile manipulation has been actively in-
vestigated in recent years. Aerial mobile manipulation
has different characteristics in another sense: stability
and load capability. The dynamics of the manipulator
or interactions with the environment can create stability
problem in aerial mobile manipulation. Also, interac-
tion forces and load are limited due to the capability of
lift provided by the aerial platform.
An aerial mobile manipulator system with three
2-DOF arms is developed in [40.75]. The interaction
between the manipulators and quadrotors is modeled so
that the reaction forces and torques during ﬂight and
manipulation are compensated for stable ﬂight.
A Cartesian impedance control is implemented
in [40.76] and [40.77], while the task redundancy due
to the added DOF from the aerial vehicle is used for
secondary tasks in [40.76]. Hybrid force and motion
control of tool operation in quadrotors are proposed
in [40.78]. The dynamics of quadrotors are transformed
into the tool-tip position and decomposed into the tan-
gential and normal directions with respect to the contact
surface. Then, a stabilizing controller is designed for the
hybrid motion and force control.
40.2.3 Toward Control
in Mobile Manipulation
Control of mobile manipulators is one of the most in-
vestigated topics since the beginning of the concept of
mobile manipulation. Although the issues discussed so
far in this chapter are still very important and need to
be further investigated, interaction with humans and the
environment is another important aspect to handle to
enable mobile manipulators to come into our daily life.
In this respect, force control at the end-effector of the
mobile manipulator has been studied in [40.79, 80]. The
issue of contact transition has been studied for non-
holonomic mobile manipulators in [40.81]. A control
strategy is proposed to deal with impulsive contact force
on the mobile manipulator in [40.82].
On the other hand, the use of compliant actuators
such as series elastic actuators (SEA) and variable stiff-
ness actuators (VSAs) is expected to become more

Mobility and Manipulation
40.3 Motion Generation
1017
Part D | 40.3
popular. The topic of compliant actuators is covered ex-
tensively Chap. 21. The SEA has been developed for
the purpose of safety and energy efﬁciency in the com-
promise of precise control. The VSA can overcome
the disadvantage of SEA with additional actuation for
changing stiffness.
Despite the complexity of implementing these actu-
ators in terms of both hardware and algorithms, they are
expected to be used more because there is an increasing
need for safe robot–human or robot–environment inter-
action. The application of compliant actuators to mobile
manipulators would provide new challenges to the con-
trol issues of dealing with uncertainty and stability in
addition to the precision of the manipulator itself. The
compliance on the joints will provide larger uncertainty
in the manipulator. This uncertainty affects not only the
control of the manipulator but also the control of the
mobile platform. The effect on the mobile base will be
the stability problem in addition to the precision in con-
trol. Nevertheless, the introduction of soft/compliant
actuators will be one of the important future directions
to enable safe interaction in mobile manipulation.
40.3 Motion Generation
Methods to generate the motion of robots are funda-
mental to robotics. They are treated extensively in this
Handbook (Chaps. 7, 8 as well as the entire Part E). As
in the previous sections of this chapter, we will consider
the state of the art in motion generation in the con-
text of mobile manipulation. We will identify aspects of
motion in mobile manipulation currently not fully ad-
dressed and will speculate about how these gaps might
be closed.
In the context of mobile manipulation, the gener-
ation of robot motion poses a number of challenges,
related to those laid out in the introduction to this
chapter. Robotic systems able to perform a variety
of tasks must possess versatile motion capabilities.
This is usually realized through a large number of
degrees of freedom, leading to high-dimensional mo-
tion generation problems. The humanoid robot Justin,
for example, possesses 58 DOFs; the latest version
of the Honda ASIMO has 57 DOFs. In addition to
the high dimensionality of the associated conﬁguration
spaces, uncertainty represents a major challenges when
generating robot motion. For applications in mobile ma-
nipulation, one simply cannot assume that a precise
and complete world model is available at all times.
The generation of motion therefore must consider the
uncertainties present in the robot’s world model. Fur-
thermore, it is unrealistic to assume that the entire
world will be perceivable all at once. This implies
that the robot’s world model will always be partial
and potentially wrong in important ways. All this is
compounded by the fact that the robots sensors and
actuators themselves are prone to uncertainty. It is
therefore apt to state that motion generation in mo-
bile manipulation is subject to two of the problems we
identiﬁed in the introduction: high dimensionality and
uncertainty.
In this section, we will examine major branches of
research in motion generation and analyze the degree
to which they are poised to address the challenges of
motion generation in manipulation. But before that, of
course, we must discuss what exactly these challenges
are.
40.3.1 Problem Description
What are the requirements for robot motion in the con-
text of mobile manipulation? Just as in the classical
motion planning problem, a robot must be able to move
from one place to another. This requires information
about the spatial extent of objects and the resulting
global connectivity of world. Algorithms that address
this most basic requirement of robot motion are dis-
cussed extensively in Chap. 7.
In addition to global, goal-oriented motion, a mo-
bile manipulator must also be able to maintain task
constraints during motion: holding a glass of water
upright, pointing a camera in an inspection task, or
coordinating motion with another robot during cooper-
ative manipulation. At the same time, it must be able
to react quickly to unforeseen changes in the environ-
ment; global motion planning might not be fast enough
and therefore has to be complemented by reactive ob-
stacle avoidance.
While performing this task-consistent, global, and
reactive motion, the safe and efﬁcient movements of
a mobile manipulator may also depend on kinematic,
dynamic, or postural constraints. Postural constraints
may be used to perform additional tasks or simply to
move in the most energy economical posture to extend
battery life.
Finally, all of the motion requirements (global,
task-consistent, reactive, joint-limit avoiding, posture-
optimizing) must be achieved and maintained in the
presence of various sources of uncertainty. In mobile
manipulation, there will always be uncertainty about the
world model, which might be incomplete or partially

Part D | 40.3
1018
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
wrong; changes to the world model may happen without
knowing the robot. And, of course, there is uncertainty
in regards to sensing, affecting the robot’s knowledge
of its own state or the ability to predict the outcome of
its actions.
As we will see, most existing areas of research in
motion generation today cannot address all the afore-
mentioned requirements at the same time. Furthermore,
these motion requirements also necessitate sensing ca-
pabilities. It is therefore difﬁcult to treat motion gen-
eration for mobile manipulation independently from
sensing and perception.
40.3.2 Evaluation of the State of the Art
Sampling-based motion planning is the de facto stan-
dard for motion planning in robotics; the state of the
art in that ﬁeld is described in detail in appendix of
Chap. 7. Here, we want to show some work that ex-
tends standard methods, such as probabilistic roadmaps
(PRMs) and rapidly-exploring random trees (RRTs), to
address some of the motion requirements of mobile
manipulation.
Motion Planning
Motion planners have been devised to account for the
changes in the conﬁguration space when robots ma-
nipulate objects by picking and placing them, possibly
handing them off to another robot in order to fulﬁll
a motion task [40.83]. This enables complex sequences
of repeated reach and grasps in very tight environments
to achieve a planning objective.
Other planners enable the combination of global
motion with task constraints [40.84, 85]. The resulting
planners generate globally goal-directed motion while
maintaining task constraints at the robot’s end-effector.
This enables collision-free motion while maintaining
a ﬁxed orientation of the end-effector, for example.
This is realized by identifying lower dimensional, task-
consistent manifolds in conﬁguration space and conﬁn-
ing possible motions to those manifolds. This is usually
achieved through iterative optimization of sampled con-
ﬁgurations, adding the computational complexity of
global motion planning.
Planners are also able to devise global motion
that is consistent with kinodynamic constraints and
with actuation limits of robotic platforms. Kinody-
namic planning addresses, for example, constraints im-
posed by nonholonomicity or by the dynamics of the
robot [40.86]. Actuation limits become important when
a robot is unable to lift a heavy load with its arm
fully extended. In such a situation, a planner can gen-
erate a motion to slide the object closer to a region
of the workspace where the mechanical advantage of
the robot kinematics enables the desired motion objec-
tive [40.87].
Global motion planning is computationally expen-
sive. Therefore, it generally cannot operate at reactive
rates. As a result, they are unable to satisfy the motion
requirement of reactive obstacle avoidance. Of course,
ideally one would determine a global motion plan at
high frequencies; then planners would be able to satisfy
global and reactive motion requirements. To overcome
the provable computational complexity of planning,
one has to resort to approximation algorithms. In other
words, one has to trade completeness for computational
efﬁciency. While there are probably many ways of ac-
complishing this, which may be the subject of future
research, one possibility presented in the literature is the
balancing of exploration and exploitation [40.88]. By
replacing the exploration of motion planners with ex-
ploitation on those areas of conﬁguration space where
helpful information is available, it is possible to speed
up planning by more than one order of magnitude.
Common to all of the motion planning approaches
in this section is that they ignore uncertainty. They
assume a perfect geometric world model and perfect
execution capabilities. These assumptions generally do
not hold in mobile manipulation. Hence, it will be dif-
ﬁcult to extend traditional motion planning approaches
so as to address the entire spectrum of motion require-
ments described above.
Further information regarding motion generation
for mobile manipulation, in particular in the context of
humanoid robots, has been collected in a special vol-
ume [40.89].
Feedback Motion Planning
Feedback motion planning [40.86, 90] addresses a par-
ticular type of uncertainty: actuation uncertainty. With
this type of uncertainty, the robot might end up in
a different state than it intended. An appropriate plan
must therefore contain the correct action to take in ev-
ery possible conﬁguration the robot might end up in.
Such a plan is called a navigation function. Given such
a navigation function, the robot can perform Markovian
gradient descent until the goal is reached.
Feedback motion planning also assumes a perfect
knowledge of the world. The ability to address actuation
uncertainty comes at a signiﬁcant computational cost.
Instead of having to compute a single path, an implicit
representation of all paths has to be determined.
Trajectory Modification
There is an appealing complementarity between motion
planning and control methods. While the former are
good at addressing global motion constraints, the latter
excel at reactive behavior, including obstacle avoid-

Mobility and Manipulation
40.3 Motion Generation
1019
Part D | 40.3
ance, force control, maintaining task constraints, etc. If
the advantages of these two approaches could be com-
bined, one would have made signiﬁcant progress toward
motion generation for mobile manipulation.
The simplest way of achieving this objective is
through consecutive invocation: ﬁrst determine a path
consistent with global motion requirements, then apply
control methods to the entire path to continuously opti-
mize in response to changes in the environment or task
constraints. This latter part, applying control to an entire
path or trajectory as opposed to a single robot conﬁgu-
ration, is called incremental trajectory modiﬁcation.
All methods in this category perform optimization
of a function, encoding various desirable properties
of the trajectory, through some kind of gradient de-
scent. The earliest method, called elastic bands [40.91],
applies repulsive forces from obstacles and attractive
internal forces to a discretization of the conﬁguration
space trajectory, leading to a behavior reminiscent of
elastic material. This method was extended in the elas-
tic strip framework [40.92] by applying these forces
directly in the workspace to a discretization of the vol-
ume swept by the robot along its conﬁguration space
trajectory. Approaching obstacles deform the trajectory;
when obstacles recede, the trajectory is shortened by the
internal forces.
In contrast to the local reaction forces computed by
the elastic band and elastic strip approaches, other ap-
proaches optimize trajectories globally in accordance
with various criteria of optimality. This optimization
problem can be cast as approximate probabilistic in-
ference [40.93], then using message passing algorithms
to ﬁnd the maximum likelihood trajectory for a given
objective. Alternatively, the optimization problem can
be solved using the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo algo-
rithm [40.94], where covariant functional gradient de-
scent techniques perform local optimization. A stochas-
tic variation of this method seems to be able to deal
better with local minima [40.95].
Even though trajectory modiﬁcation methods are
often times labeled as motion planning methods, they
do not perform global planning. They have been shown
to work well in many realistic scenarios but can fail
when gradient information is insufﬁcient to ﬁnd a so-
lution. As a result, trajectory modiﬁcation can serve as
a powerful component for motion generation, but they
cannot address all requirements of motion generation in
mobile manipulation.
Integrating Planning and Control
Traditionally, global motion planners produce paths or
trajectories that then get passed to the robot for ex-
ecution. At execution time, these trajectories can be
modiﬁed, for example, by the methods described in the
previous section. It is striking, however, that a plan-
ner determines an entire trajectory from start to goal,
knowing well that in dynamic environments most of the
trajectory will be invalidated within seconds due to the
motion of obstacles.
To fully leverage the complementarity of global
planning and control mentioned in the previous section,
it might be necessary to shift the boundary between
these two ﬁelds. This would imply that, instead of
computing a detailed trajectory, global motion planning
would only provide as much information as is required
to avoid local minima during control. This leads to the
idea of sequencing local controllers, which can be visu-
alized as funnels, in such a way that a global motion
task can be achieved [40.96]. Referring to Fig. 40.5,
each controller can be viewed as a local plan for region
of the conﬁguration space (in the image, the conﬁg-
uration space is the imagined plane above which the
funnels are arranged). Each funnel has an exit (the con-
verged state of the controller) that leads into the opening
of the next funnel. Arrangements of these funnels rep-
resent robust motion plans as each funnel (controller)
inherently rejects uncertainty.
Such a shift of the boundary between planning
and control is realized in the Elastic Roadmap ap-
proach [40.97]. It combines global planning with trajec-
tory modiﬁcation to yield an approach to motion gen-
eration capable of generating global, task-consistent,
reactive, and constraint-respecting motion. It does so,
however, by deliberately trading completeness for com-
putational efﬁciency. While this approach works well
in practices, no performance guarantees can be made.
Also, this approach is not able to address uncertainty; it
still assumes that the world and its changes are perfectly
known.
Reasoning About Uncertainty
Partially
observable
Markov
decision
processes
(POMDP) are a general framework to formalize
Fig. 40.5 Representing a motion plan as a sequence of
funnels

Part D | 40.3
1020
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
problems involving actions that perform uncertain
transition (uncertain outcome) between uncertain (not
fully known) states (Chap. 15). POMDPs are so general
that they can easily characterize the type of motion
planning problem occurring in mobile manipulation.
A downside of their generality and expressive power
is the computational complexity of ﬁnding an exact
solution, which is often intractable. To overcome this
problem, one must resort to approximations.
Point-based POMDP solvers [40.98] provide such
an effective approximation for the case that there is
an uncertainty about the robot’s state. The key idea
of point-based solvers is to sample only parts of the
solution space, avoiding regions unlikely to contain
a solution [40.99]. Effectively, these methods exploit
additional knowledge about the speciﬁc problem to
guide the search for a solution.
In the context of motion generation, the roadmaps
generated by traditional sampling-based motion plan-
ners can provide such knowledge for ﬁnding solutions
to a speciﬁc motion planning problem [40.100, 101]
or to any motion planning query in a given environ-
ment [40.4].
Considering uncertainty not only for the robot’s
state but also about the world model makes the prob-
lem even more difﬁcult. Here also, it becomes necessary
to approximate the state space of the world, leading
to discrete approximations of the corresponding state
space [40.102, 103].
While all the methods mentioned so far success-
fully address uncertainty, their computational complex-
ity prevents them from being reactive. This means
that all initial assumptions about the world, including
assumptions about uncertainty distributions (encoded
in the POMDP), must be correct and remain correct
throughout the entire motion. In the context of mobile
manipulation, it is difﬁcult to think that even the initial
assumptions could be correct.
If one does not want to rely on ﬁxed assumptions
about uncertainty, for example in the state transition
function, one has to rely on sensing. For example,
a robot might be able to reduce the uncertainty about
its own state sufﬁciently well to be able to avoid rea-
soning about this type of uncertainty. But this in itself
is a very strong assumption. By making such strong
assumptions, it is possible to reduce the complexity
of addressing uncertainty in a meaningful way, lead-
ing to a polynomial time to address uncertainty in the
context of mobile manipulation [40.104]. While this ap-
proach achieves reactivity, task consistency, and is able
to address other constraints, it is incomplete and no per-
formance guarantees exist.
40.3.3 Toward Motion Generation
for Mobile Manipulation
The literature contains a number of powerful techni-
cal tools and conceptual approaches that have proven
effective in the context of motion generation: sampling-
based motion planners, planning for feedback, opti-
mization for incremental trajectory modiﬁcation, se-
quencing of controllers, shifting the boundary between
planning and control, and approximative solutions to
POMDP-based formalization of motion planning prob-
lems. The use of assumptions to improve the computa-
tional efﬁciency is inherent to all of them – no surprise,
given that even simple motion planning problems are
already PSPACE-complete.
For each of the aforementioned motion require-
ments in mobile manipulation, when considered in
isolation, an adequate solution exists. But no method
or approach addresses all of them in coherent fash-
ion with characterizable performance. Nevertheless,
in practice, motion generation capabilities exist for
many interesting applications in mobile manipula-
tion.
With respect to the goals laid out in the intro-
duction to this chapter, this discussion has exposed,
however, that all approaches still depend on detailed
prior knowledge about the environment. Most of this
prior knowledge is difﬁcult to obtain in the context of
mobile manipulation. For example, accurate geometric
models of the environment are unlikely to be obtain-
able at a global scale. And even if they were attainable,
they will likely be outdated very quickly and would re-
quire constant updating. It might be even more difﬁcult
to obtain adequate characterizations of uncertainty for
arbitrary motion problems.
In response to these difﬁculties, it is highly likely
that the close integration of real-world sensing into
motion generation will become a more active area of re-
search. This sensing must be used to alleviate the needs
for prior world models. This development might par-
allel the shifting the boundary between planning and
control, only this time between planning and sensing.
Instead of performing planning on very detailed and all
encompassing world models, it might be more practical
to plan in a coarse and approximate world world, leav-
ing it to perception to ﬁll in the details as they become
relevant.

Mobility and Manipulation
40.4 Learning
1021
Part D | 40.4
40.4 Learning
We mentioned high dimensionality, uncertainty, and
variability as core challenges for robotic systems that
leave prestructured lab environments. Learning is the
core approach to cope with the variability of tasks
a robot may need to perform in unstructured environ-
ments.
The topic of learning is orthogonal to all of the other
topics discussed in this section: Learning methods are
successfully applied to grasping and manipulation, mo-
bility, control, motion generation, and perception. We
will highlight representative approaches in these areas
below, but ﬁrst we want to discuss in more general
terms the relation between the areas of machine learn-
ing and robotics.
A core question is whether existing machine learn-
ing methods can without need for modiﬁcation be
applied in robotic domains. Or whether genuinely novel
issues are raised in the context of robot learning that
necessarily go beyond core machine learning research.
This is fundamentally related to the question Is there
a generic prior?
In the Bayesian view, learning means computing the
posterior
P.MjD/ D P.DjM/P.M/
P.D/
:
(40.1)
A similar discussion could refer to the choice of hy-
pothesis space and regularization. But for simplicity we
take the Bayesian view as a reference. The machine-
learning community has made great progress in two
respects: First, it developed a rapidly growing set of
general and fundamental modeling tools to formalize
learning problems, including standard parametric and
nonparametric models, graphical models, inﬁnite (hier-
archical Dirichlet process) models, models combining
probabilities with ﬁrst-order logic, random set models,
etc.
Second, the community has developed a large set
of methods to solve learning problems, i. e., compute
the posterior or optimize discriminative models, includ-
ing a wide range of probabilistic inference methods
and leveraging the tight relations to the ﬁeld of (con-
strained) optimization.
With this range of modeling formalisms and com-
putational methods available, what problems are left?
Interestingly, a core issue remains the concrete spec-
iﬁcation of the prior P.M/ or hypothesis space itself.
An example is the current research on deep represen-
tations: Weston et al. [40.105], for instance, argue that
deep learning can concisely be understood as a form of
regularization of intermediate representations, includ-
ing auto-encoders as special case but generalizing it
to arbitrary choices of embeddings. Such a regular-
ization is one-to-one with the choice of model prior
in the Bayesian formulation of learning methods. The
large majority of (non-deep) regression and classiﬁca-
tion models are linear in some features (we include
Hilbert space features here). The regularization is typ-
ically generic: L2 or L1 on the respective parameters.
Therefore, the model prior is primarily determined by
the choice of features.
Researchers generally agree that a core chal-
lenge of machine learning is in the speciﬁcation of
the prior P.M/ – respectively the choice of fea-
tures [40.106, 107]. However, is the question about
the right prior a genuine machine learning question?
In other terms: Does there exist a generic prior that
might perform well in any domain, or is a good choice
of prior inherently domain speciﬁc, requiring expert
knowledge?
Related to this question is the idea of learning the
prior – or learning the right features. Of course, in the
strict sense, a prior must not be data based. When dis-
cussing the learning of features, people usually presume
a hyperprior that implies a class of potential features.
However, it is questionable whether there exist generic
hyperpriors over feature classes that would allow sys-
tems to learn arbitrary features suited in any domain.
Some aspects of priors seem generic and are discussed
extensively within machine learning: L1 or L2 regu-
larization to enforce sparsity and penalize complexity;
metric or topological embedding to enforce the preser-
vation of information in internal (deep) representations.
However, the structural complexity of suitable features
in real-world domains seems – in the eyes of a roboti-
cist – beyond such generic properties.
In this light, it is not surprising that the success
of learning methods within robotics often relies on an
insightful way to model the problem using machine
learning formalisms combined with a good choice of
features. Both depends on the roboticist’s expert knowl-
edge and his understanding of appropriate priors in real
world domains, contrasting the idea that generic ma-
chine learning and priors could be applied for learning
in robotic manipulation.
40.4.1 Problem Description
Perhaps a reason for the great success of machine learn-
ing is that its problems are – in constrast to robotics –
rather straightforward to deﬁne rigorously. In most
cases a learning problem is deﬁned in terms of mini-
mizing a loss or risk (often approximated using cross

Part D | 40.4
1022
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
validation), computing a posterior, or maximizing an
expected return. Feature and hyperparameter selection
are subsumed in these objectives.
To make this more concrete, we choose to detail
one speciﬁc machine learning approach: conditional
random ﬁelds (CRF) [40.108]. CRFs have become
a default starting point for addressing many learn-
ing problems, especially in robotics. And CRFs are
a very general way of modeling problems, as we dis-
cuss brieﬂy in the following, and should therefore be
a standard tool for roboticists.
A CRF could also be named a conditional graphical
model or conditional factor graph. It describes a struc-
tured probability distribution over labels y where the
factors that deﬁne this distribution additionally depend
on some input x. The following summarizes the essen-
tials of CRFs:

We consider output variables y D .y1; : : : ; yl/ and
input variables x. A CRF is deﬁned by a joint func-
tion over x and y of the form
f .x; y/ D
k
X
jD1
j.x; y@j/ˇj D .x; y/Tˇ ;
(40.2)
which describes the predicted output as
y.x/ D argmaxyf .x; y/ :
(40.3)
Each feature j.x; y@j/ depends on a subset y@j of
output variables, @j  f1; : : : ; lg. The function f is
also called (neg-) energy or discriminative function.
CRFs can be trained based on a probabilistic inter-
pretation or with a hinge loss.

In the probabilistic interpretation [40.108], CRFs
deﬁne a conditional probability distribution over y,
p.yjx/ D
ef.x;y/
P
y0 ef.x;y0/ D ef.x;y/Z.x;ˇ/
(40.4)
D eZ.x;ˇ/
kY
jD1
ej.x;y@j/ˇj ;
(40.5)
which is a Boltzmann distribution of f with log-
partition function
Z.x; ˇ/ D log
X
y0
ef.x;y0/
ensuring the conditional normalization. This is
trained by minimizing
ˇ D argminˇ L.D; ˇ/ C kˇk ;
(40.6)
where the second term is an L2 (Ridge) or L1 (Lasso)
regularization and the ﬁrst the neg-log-likelihood on
data D D f.xi; yi/gN
iD1. The optimum is found using
a Newton method, using the following gradient and
Hessian terms:
L.D; ˇ/ D 
X
i
log p.yijxi/
D 
X
i
Œ.x; y/Tˇ  Z.xi; ˇ/ ;
(40.7)
rˇZ.x; ˇ/ D
X
y
p.yjx/ .x; y/ ;
(40.8)
r2
ˇ Z.x; ˇ/ D
X
y
p.yjx/ .x; y/ .x; y/T
 rˇZ ŒrˇZT :
(40.9)
Computing
p.yjxi/
(or
the
factor
marginals
p.y@jjxi/) for all xi is analogous to the E-step of
expectation maximization; the parameter update
of ˇ in each Newton iteration is analogous to
the M-step. For arbitrary structures, the Hessian
term P
y p.yjx/.x; y/.x;y/T may be infeasible
to compute exactly. Still, Newton methods with
approximate Hessian may be signiﬁcantly faster
than gradient-based methods.

In the discriminative interpretation [40.109], the
CRF is trained by minimizing a hinge loss
min
ˇ; ˇ2 C C
n
X
iD1
i
s:t: 8y6Dyi W f .xi; yi/  f .xi; y/  1  i; i  1 ;
(40.10)
using either perceptron or linear programming
methods similar to how SVMs use them [40.109].
This approach is also called structured output SVM.

Kernelization works for both types of training. Fur-
ther, in the probabilistic interpretation, the ridge
regularization can be replaced by a Gaussian
prior P.ˇ/ D N .ˇ j 0; 2=/ and a fully Bayesian
predictive posterior P.yjx; D/ can be computed (just
as for Bayesian ridge regression and Gaussian pro-
cesses).

CRFs are a very general class of learning tool. We
list special cases, where the options concern the
special case input and output spaces, probabilistic or
hinge loss training, kernelization, bayesianization,
and of course the choice of features (explained be-
low):
SVM D CRF(kernel, hinge, y 2 f0; 1g; C)
logistic regression D CRF(prob, y 2 f0; 1g, C)

Mobility and Manipulation
40.4 Learning
1023
Part D | 40.4
Gaussian process (GP) D CRF(prob, bayes, kernel,
y 2 R, R).
GP classiﬁcation D CRF(prob, bayes, kernel,
y 2 f0; 1g, C)
factor graph (MRF) D CRF(prob, x D ;)
hidden Markov model (HMM) D CRF(prob, y D
.y1; : : : ; yT/, ftg)
ridge regression D CRF(prob, y 2 R, R)
The regression case is somewhat special, see below.

We give three feature examples for the cases of mul-
ticlass classiﬁcation, Markov chains (like HMMs),
and the somewhat special case of regression.
For a three-class classiﬁcation, one chooses
C.y; x/ D
0
B@
Œy D 1.x/
Œy D 2.x/
Œy D 3.x/
1
CA
2 R3k
where y 2 f1; 2; 3g, Œexpr. 2 f0; 1g is the indicator
function and .x/ 2 Rk an arbitrary (e.g., polyno-
mial) input feature vector. The effect of the in-
dicators is that for each class, a different subset
of ˇ-elements deﬁne the function f .
For a Markov chain y D .y1; : : : ; yT/ with binary yt,
one chooses
t.ytC1; yt; x/ D
0
BBBBBB@
Œyt D 0 ^ ytC1 D 0
Œyt D 0 ^ ytC1 D 1
Œyt D 1 ^ ytC1 D 0
Œyt D 1 ^ ytC1 D 1
Œyt D 1t.x/
1
CCCCCCA
2 R4Ck ;
where ˇ1W4 determines the transition probabilities,
and ˇ5W5Ck1 plays the same role as in the logistic
regression of yt on input features t.x/ 2 Rk. If x D
.x1; : : : ; xT/ is also a time series and if we choose
input features t.x/ D t.xt/ to depend only on xt,
we are in the case of HMMs. The great strengths
of Markov chain-CRFs over HMMs is that t.x/
may depend arbitrarily on the whole of x. In the (un-
usual) regression case, we may choose
R.y; x/ D
 
 1
2y2=2
.x/y=2
!
2 R1Ck ;
which leads to y.x/ D .x/Tˇ and p.yjx/ D N .y j
y.x/; 2/ with a partition function independent of x
and ˇ. Therefore, a single Newton step leads to the
well-known optimal parameters of ridge regression.
GPs are the bayesian kernel variant of this.
An extreme special case is logistic regression, where
the graphical model only concerns a single binary out-
put variabley, thedistribution overwhich depends on the
input x. On the other side, also any kind of standard (non-
conditional)graphical model overy is an extremespecial
case of a CRF that lacks the dependence on any exter-
nal x. Conditional Markov chains (e.g., in linguistics),
Markov random ﬁelds (in computer vision), and many
other models can be viewed as instances of CRFs.
Given this concrete framework of CRFs, the prob-
lem – from the robotics perspective – essentially be-
comes to propose an appropriate graphical model struc-
ture over y, and to choose appropriate features .x; y/.
Both choices together correspond to the choice of hy-
pothesis space or prior as discussed above.
40.4.2 Evaluation of the State of the Art
Perhaps the best developed area for the application of
learning methods in robotics is perception.
Learning for Perception
and Scene Understanding
Saxena et al. developed a series of methods that very
successfully employ the general framework of CRFs
in various perception tasks. In [40.110] they train
CRFs to predict the depth in two-dimensional (2-D)
views; [40.111] learns CRFs to classify a grasp-
affordance in the 2-D view; [40.112] learns CRFs
(or SVMs) to classify the place-affordance of loca-
tions; [40.113] learns CRFs to label and thereby an-
ticipate the actions and movements of demonstrators.
These works are exemplary for the power of current
machine-learning methods for perception – but also in
that their success relies on the creative choice of prob-
lem formalization and features. As an example, we
would like to mention the unique features chosen to
be indicative of concavity and place stability to predict
cup-like place locations in [40.111]. Could such types
of features ever be discovered autonomously by more
advanced machine learning methods?
Also, for 3-D point cloud data the deﬁnition of
clever features turned out to be essential for basic reg-
istration and classiﬁcation problems [40.114].
With respect to our discussion of learning fea-
tures, in standard image classiﬁcation tasks there has
recently been great success in using generic (sparse
coding) priors to learn features that signiﬁcantly outper-
form hand-coded features (like robust features (SURF)
and histograms of oriented features (HOG) [40.115].
Such learned features correspond to local 2-D or 3-D
appearance patterns (which deﬁne the codebook); the
histogram of such patterns turns out to be an excellent
basis for image classiﬁcation. It seems promising that

Part D | 40.4
1024
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
typical 2-D CRF approaches to classify affordances –
as those mentioned above – can be extended to also use
learned local features. However, there may be limita-
tions to such generically learned features. For instance,
naively they do not respect any natural invariances
(such as afﬁne or illumination invariance; this can be
ﬁxed by artiﬁcially incorporating such invariances in
the dataset). Using merely sparse coding priors, they are
unlikely to reﬂect stronger priors (e.g., Gestalt laws, or
kinematic understanding of rigid body scenes) of natu-
ral physical environments. For instance, the concavity
feature for placement prediction seems in strong con-
trast to such learned features.
As a conclusion with respect to perception, the
existing machine learning machinery, including novel
feature learning methods have shown great success.
For speciﬁc mobile manipulation tasks (like affordance
prediction) this often relied on well chosen problem for-
malization. As is the case also in the following topics,
a core question for future research are novel ideas for
feature classes and priors, that are generic and support
the learning of features for manipulation tasks, but in-
corporate stronger physical world priors than existing
approaches.
Learning for Grasping
The ability to grasp is essential to manipulation and ap-
proaches to learning to grasp therefore deserves special
attention. Learning to grasp has been addressed from at
least two perspectives.
First, on the perceptual side, several authors
have proposed methods to directly classify 2-D or
3-D appearance patterns that predict a grasp affor-
dance [40.111]. On the positive side, this implies a very
close perception–action cycle; the percept is directly
translated to a potential pregrasp location without need
to estimate a 3-D shape of the object or even a notion of
objects and shapes. Such approaches provide a sort of
heat map of potential affordances, e.g., for exploration
or to reduce the number of options for manipulation.
But they lack the generality of grasp approaches that
take into account the goal of applying a certain force
or motion to an object – but classically require a shape
estimate.
Second, concerning the grasp motion itself, a ba-
sic approach is to employ policy search methods to
improve a parametric dynamic movement primitive
(DMP) model of the grasp motion [40.116].
Learning for Motion Generation
There exists extensive work on learning methods for
control, e.g., in the form of system identiﬁcation,
(model-based and model-free) reinforcement learning
and learning from demonstration. It is beyond the scope
of this chapter to cover this. Instead, here we focus on
learning in the context of path ﬁnding or trajectory plan-
ning for manipulation.
A core issue of motion generation for manipulation
is the question of the right task space. For instance,
the work by Cakmak and Thomaz on learning from hu-
man interaction [40.117] suggests that the question of
what is the actual task space should be in the center of
communication. In a certain formalization, the choice
of the task space of a motion is perfectly analogous to
the choice of features in machine learning: The map-
ping from a geometric problem setting to an appropriate
motion can be formalized as a CRF [40.118], where
the optimal motion maximizes a discriminative function
(or neg-cost function). Typically such a cost function
is a sum of squares of features, where each feature
captures some error in some nonlinear task space. The
problem of ﬁnding appropriate task spaces – the right
features of motion – is therefore analogous to the prob-
lem of ﬁnding appropriate features in machine learning.
And as for generic machine learning, the core questions
are: what is a general class of potential features (of po-
tential task spaces), and what is a possible prior over
this class.
Jetchev and Toussaint’s task space retrieval (TRIC)
approach [40.119] considers a combinatorial set of po-
tential task dimensions that refer to various absolute
and relative coordinates of objects and uses a Lasso
prior to select those features that best explain a set
of demonstrated trajectories. While this successfully
extracts the ground-truth task spaces w.r.t. which the
given trajectories have been optimized, the approach
still seems limited by the crude set of allowed fea-
tures. Relative coordinates (w.r.t. object centers) can-
not express more meaningful and better generalizing
concepts, e.g., ﬁtting one piece into another. Further,
features of manipulation motions might refer to the tem-
porary interaction with contacts or other environmental
constraints [40.120, 121]. It should be the subject of
future research how such aspects could span a well-
formalized set of features that leads to an appropriate
prior over manipulation motions and respective opti-
mization methods.
The above discussion views motion as being mod-
eled by a cost (or discriminative) function. This is close
to the view of motion as being modeled by an attrac-
tor (Lyapunov or potential) function; a cost function
implies such a potential in the form of the cost-to-
go function, and shifting the modeling directly to the
cost-to-go function avoids the optimization step. The
core issue of ﬁnding the right features for modeling
the potential remains unchanged. TRIC [40.119] in fact
models on the level of the cost-to-go instead of the cost
function.

Mobility and Manipulation
40.5 Perception
1025
Part D | 40.5
However, these views on modeling motion seem or-
thogonal to sample-based path ﬁnding approaches, as
they traditionally operate only in conﬁguration space
and employ a discrete notion of feasible/infeasible and
goal region.
Learning Sequential Manipulation
from Demonstration
It is fairly recent that learning has also been applied
on the level of higher level sequential manipulation.
Niekum et al. [40.122] present a complete system to
analyze a demonstrated sequential manipulation and re-
play it in a robust way on a robot, including its ability to
search for alternative steps if some manipulation failed.
Again, the choice of representation is the heart of this
method: in [40.122] skill trees are used to represent the
learned policy. Alexandrova et al. [40.123] extend such
approaches by proposing an explicit user interface that
allows the demonstrator to correct the robot’s interpre-
tation of the task and e.g., explicitly communicate the
relevant task spaces.
Learning sequential manipulation is structurally one
of the most interesting research challenges as it even-
tually requires choices of representations and priors
on all levels, from perception and motion generation
to the higher level representation of action and coop-
eration policies. The abovementioned work does ﬁrst
steps in the context of learning from demonstration.
But much research needs to be done to enable robots
to autonomously acquire skills that would allow them
to control and manipulate the state of their environment
as dexterously as we humans do.
40.4.3 Toward Learning
in Mobile Manipulation
We above raised the question whether existing ma-
chine learning methods can without need for mod-
iﬁcation be applied in robotic domains, or whether
genuinely novel issues are raised in the context of
robot learning that necessarily go beyond core machine
learning research. The above examples give two an-
swers to this: First, standard machine learning tools
like CRFs are widely and very successfully applied
within the area mobile manipulation, employing off-
the-shelf algorithms for training. Second, however, the
above examples all show that the actual crux is in
the modeling of the learning problem itself, in partic-
ular in the choice of features, the used regularization
and the chosen structure of the output. These are is-
sues that require substantial domain expertise. In some
cases, modern approaches to feature learning or fea-
ture selection are indeed successful – particularly im-
pressive are novel sparse coding principles to train
perceptual features [40.115]. However, in many cases
successful learning for mobile manipulation requires
that a very speciﬁc feature space has been chosen based
on the roboticist’s insight (e.g., the potential operational
spaces in TRIC, or the shape concavity feature to pre-
dict placement).
If we had a more fundamental theory of real-world
mobile manipulation problems, we could hope that such
a theory would also inform us on what are promising
and general feature spaces and priors for learning in
manipulation.
40.5 Perception
The need for perception is one of the main culprits
in making problems in manipulation high dimensional.
Technological as well as biological agents possess
many sensors to perceive their environment. Humans,
for example, possess on the order of 300 million nerve
endings that produce a rich, continuous stream of in-
formation about the world, which is preprocessed and
ultimately routed to the brain. The same is true in mo-
bile manipulation: it is not uncommon for robots to be
equipped with several cameras, each having millions of
pixels, and each contributing to the high dimensionality
of the input space.
To illustrate this point: A simple, black and white
(not gray scale!) camera with only one thousand pixels
can sense many, many more distinct images (namely,
21000 
 10310) than there are atoms in the observable
universe (about 1080) or than nanoseconds have elapsed
since the big bang (about 4:354  1026). Even if ev-
ery atom in the universe would generate one such
image every nanosecond, all possible images would
not have been generated by the time the universe
dies its postulated heat death in 10100 years. Biologi-
cal agents can cope with this high dimensionality, of
course, because there is substantial structure in the
world, i. e., many of the possible images simply do
not occur in nature or some of the variability in the
data is not relevant for the task at hand and can be
ignored.
In this section, we will survey different success-
ful approaches to perception for mobile manipulation
that leverage this structure in perceptual data. We will
mostly focus on visual perception, reﬂecting the em-
phasis of ongoing research activities. The foundations
of perception in robotics are presented in great detail
in Part C of this Handbook. Chapter 42 also contains
relevant approaches to perception.

Part D | 40.5
1026
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
40.5.1 Problem Description
Perception is the process of interpreting sensory data
to enable useful actions. In the context of robotics, this
may be – given the state of the art – the most suitable,
albeit very broad deﬁnition of the perception prob-
lem. It differs appropriately from the deﬁnition most
commonly used in psychology in that the goal of per-
ception is not solely to gain an understanding of the
world, but also to use such an understanding to en-
able task-directed actions. This modiﬁcation in fact can
be seen as a simpliﬁcation of the original perception
problem, as only those aspects of the environment must
be perceived that are relevant to a particular action.
And, in fact, there is evidence from the human per-
ceptual system that such a limitation does indeed take
place, and sometimes leads to odd perceptual deﬁcien-
cies [40.124].
In the context of robotics, the earliest perception
work followed the psychologists’ deﬁnition of percep-
tion. It focused on the use of visual perception to derive
an exact 3-D model of the thing being perceived from
its two-dimensional optical projection onto a camera
sensor [40.125]. However, this problem is mathemat-
ically ill-posed (three-dimensional shape information
cannot be reconstructed unambiguously from its two-
dimensional projection) and, as we argued above, also
high dimensional. To enable robust and competent per-
ception in the context of mobile manipulation, it there-
fore seems sensible to attempt to reduce the complexity
of perception, lending further support to our deﬁnition
of perception above.
40.5.2 Evaluation of the State of the Art
Much of the work we will discuss in the remainder
of this section follows the robotics-speciﬁc view of
the perception problem given above. However, we will
start out by surveying impressive advances made to-
ward the objective of reconstructing three-dimensional,
geometric models of the environment. Only the fu-
ture can tell us if these methods are well suited to
supporting the kind of complex and general manip-
ulation tasks encountered in mobile manipulation. In
the subsequent sections, we will then cover alternative
approaches.
3-D Mapping and Localization
Recently, there has been remarkable progress in dense
3-D mapping and visual SLAM. What originated with
DTAM [40.126] lead to current systems like LSD-
SLAM [40.127] which efﬁciently and rather robustly
estimates a 3-D environment model in real-time, with-
out GPU, from monocular video.
Efficient Dense and Multiresolution Mapping
Recent multiscale surfel models [40.128, 129] using
RGB-D sensors are an alternative to directly pixel-
based reconstruction methods and provide a similarly
dense 3-D model. In [40.130] and [40.131], a 3-D
representation, Octree, is proposed having multiple res-
olutions based on a probabilistic approach. This 3-D
multiresolution method can provide ﬂexible occupancy
mapping depending on the demand of the high or low
resolutions. Saarinen et al. [40.132] proposed normal
distributions transform occupancy map (NDT-OM),
which has the compactness from NDT maps and the
robustness from occupancy maps. This algorithm sup-
ports for multiresolution maps and it efﬁciently enables
mapping in dynamic environments.
These developments imply that, leaving system in-
tegration problems aside, we may today assume to
have access to precise 3-D mesh models of the envi-
ronment. In the concrete mobile manipulation context
3-D information is needed with high resolution only
when the robot is near the object or the environment.
Therefore, practical techniques for multiresolution map
are developed based on the distance from the robot.
Droeschel et al. [40.133, 134] show 3-D multiresolution
maps where sparse resolution is used for the environ-
ment far away and high resolution is used for the object
to be interacted soon.
Mapping and Tracking with Moving Objects
Most methods for 3-D mesh estimation assume a static
environment (but moving sensor). The segmentation
into objects and dealing with moving objects – or rather
exploiting the movement of objects – is left aside.
However, fortunately recent approaches adopt a more
integrated view on perception by jointly addressing the
problems of dense 3-D reconstruction, moving object
segmentation and tracking, and kinematic joint per-
ception [40.135, 136], similarly as has previously been
done on the basis of key points. We think that such
integrated perception systems, fusing visual evidences
and priors on multiple levels of representations (from
low-level dense pixels to high-level rigid body hypothe-
ses) should be the core effort of future research in this
area.
Other approaches deal with general dynamic envi-
ronments by efﬁciently updating the map continuously.
Especially, in the real world problem, there are al-
ways moving obstacles and the environment itself can
change over time. A incremental update algorithm is
proposed in [40.137] for grid-based spatial representa-
tions for dynamic environment due to moving obstacles.
Distance maps, Voronoi diagrams, and conﬁguration-
space collision maps are updated with the algorithm for
the changes in the environment. In [40.138], velocity

Mobility and Manipulation
40.5 Perception
1027
Part D | 40.5
occupancy space is proposed by adding the velocity ob-
stacle concept into occupancy grid. This is to enable the
robot to efﬁciently navigate through uncertain moving
obstacles.
Indoor/Outdoor
Finally, the usage of a map can be different for indoor
or outdoor applications. The outdoor map is mainly
used for navigation whereas the indoor map is for both
navigation and manipulation. The map for outdoor or
ﬁeld applications needs to cover wider range of area
for navigation and the mobile platforms do not require
high resolution maps compared to indoor applications.
Indoor applications, however, typically require higher
resolution even for navigation because there are more
obstacles and less free space. Because of this space
restriction, the navigation route needs to be planned
carefully considering the obstacles. Manipulation tasks
are more involved in the indoor applications such as
cleaning, connecting hoses, and locking a valve, which
tasks must require much higher resolution than typical
navigation tasks.
For such different applications, the maps for indoor
and outdoor can be quite different. Thus, in [40.139]
pictures are used for the classiﬁcation of the cur-
rent environment. Speciﬁcally, Hue color component
and color temperature values from each image are
used with k-nearest neighbor (KNN) classiﬁer to clas-
sify the environment into indoor or outdoor. Payne
and Singh [40.140] proposed a simple system for the
indoor–outdoor classiﬁcation, which can be used as
a real-time system. It is based on the assumption that
indoor images contain more straight lines that outdoor
environments.
Differently from indoors, the outdoor map often
requires terrain information. In [40.141], the system
classify if the current environment is indoor or outdoor,
then terrain mapping is used for outdoor environment. It
also provides seamless integration of mapping between
indoor and outdoor environment.
Active and Interactive Perception
The success of the 3-D mapping approaches presented
in the previous section is enabled by camera motion.
This motion provides a continuous stream of incre-
mentally changing two-dimensional projections of the
three-dimensional scene. This enriched perceptual in-
formation helps resolve the ambiguities of the projec-
tion from 3-D to 2-D, thus overcoming limitations of
static vision approaches.
Perceptual algorithms that deliberately change the
sensor to optimize the perceptual processes are called
active. Among active perception methods, active vision
is probably the most prominent one [40.142–144]. But
active haptic perception methods also hold promise as
a perceptual approach for mobile manipulation. Active
haptic perception has been used for object localiza-
tion [40.145, 146], contact point localization [40.147],
and for estimating the object’s shape [40.148].
The concept of active perception can be extended to
include interactions with the environment. Now the ob-
server is able to manipulate the environment to reveal
additional perceptual information, either by removing
obstructions or by creating sensory signals that would
otherwise not be observable. The class of perceptual al-
gorithms relying on motion of the sensor as well as the
deliberate application of forces to the environment is
referred to as interactive perception.
Interactive perception eliminates the traditional
boundary between perception and manipulation, com-
bining both into a tightly coupled feedback loop.
Manipulation now becomes an integral part of per-
ception – in addition to being an objective in itself.
At the same time, perception of task-relevant informa-
tion is now critically enabled by manipulation. This
combined perception-and-manipulation process links
inseparably the goals of achieving a manipulation task
and of acquiring perceptual information. These two
goals must be balanced appropriately, as it is not
desirable to perceive the world without progress to-
ward the task, and it most often is not possible to
achieve the task without perceiving something about
the world ﬁrst. Now, in addition to perception and
manipulation, we must also consider aspects of ma-
chine learning: how do we balance progress toward
the task (exploitation) with the goal of acquiring sufﬁ-
cient information to reach the goal robustly and reliably
(exploration)? These and many related questions are
current topics of research in this emerging ﬁeld at the
intersection of perception, manipulation, and machine
learning.
Using interactive perception (or perceptual manipu-
lation, if one prefers), it is possible to separate piles of
objects so that they can be perceived, manipulated, and
sorted [40.149–151]. It is also possible to interactively
search for objects by removing obstructions [40.152].
Using interactive perception, it becomes possible to
reveal sensory information about the articulations of
objects in the environment, i. e., about their inherent de-
grees of freedom [40.153]. This ability is a perceptional
prerequisite for mobile manipulation, as the degrees of
freedom of an object are generally linked to its func-
tion. For example, by pushing on a door handle and
observing its motion, it is possible to perceive the rev-
olute joint connecting the handle to the door. Operating
this revolute joint is necessary to open the door.
Interactive perception approaches based purely on
vision data exist for planar objects [40.154] and three-

Part D | 40.5
1028
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
dimensional articulated objects [40.155, 156]. Their
performance can be improved signiﬁcantly by relying
on RGB-D data [40.157, 158]. Interactive perception
methods have been integrated with object databases
so as to recognize previously seen objects and the as-
sociated kinematic model [40.159]. Online interactive
perception enables the integration of interactive per-
ception directly into the manipulation process [40.153].
This permits to detect failures, monitor progress, and
identify the successful completion of a manipulation
action. It is also possible to categorize novel types of
articulation with interactive perception [40.160, 161].
Interactive perception can include additional modali-
ties, such as proprioception and audition, for example,
to identify objects [40.162].
One of the challenges remains the selection of ap-
propriate actions for interactive perception. There are
many possible ways to interact with the environment
but only few of them will reveal relevant informa-
tion. The selection of promising actions can be learned
from experience [40.163] or by entropy-driven explo-
ration [40.164]. The information obtained from such
exploration can be represented in relational knowledge
about the world [40.165].
The work discussed above has demonstrated that
interactive perception is a promising approach to per-
ception and manipulation in the context of mobile
manipulation. It has resulted in robust perception that
relies on few assumptions about the world, and in par-
ticular does not rely on the existence of prior geometric
models. It also has resulted in robust manipulation,
supported by the most task-relevant perceptual feed-
back. Interactive perception eliminates the boundaries
between perception, action, and learning. While this
seems like a complication, the close integration of these
different aspects of robot behavior lead to novel so-
lutions of long-standing challenges in perception and
manipulation.
Affordance Detection
An affordance can be viewed as an opportunity of an
agent to perform an action in its environment. The
term dates back to 1977, when it was introduced by
psychologist Gibson [40.166]. Since then the term has
been used inconsistently with slight variations of mean-
ing [40.167].
Here, we regard an affordance as an opportunity to
instantiate a behavioral capability of the agent. Such an
instantiation of a pushing action, for example, selects
the objects involved (the robot’s hand and a door han-
dle within reach) and determines other free parameters
of the behavior (pushing down on one side of the door
handle).
It is appealing to focus perception of affordances as,
by deﬁnition, this will focus perception only on those
aspects of the environment that must be known to in-
stantiate and successfully execute a certain behavior.
Research on affordance perception is intimately
linked with research on affordance learning [40.168–
170]. A modern view perspective is to consider affor-
dance learning for manipulation as a statistical rela-
tional learning problem [40.171].
More low-level affordance perception research con-
siders the problem of labeling scene segments by their
affordance of certain actions, often using conditional
random ﬁelds (CRFs) to train the labeled segmentation.
This has extensively been addressed in the case of learn-
ing to detected grasp affordances [40.172–175].
40.5.3 Toward Robust Perception
Perception is one of the great challenges in mobile
manipulation. We recall that the objective of mobile
manipulation research is to a) maximize task general-
ity of autonomous robotic systems, while at the same
time b) minimizing the dependence on task-speciﬁc,
hard-coded, or narrowly-relevant information. Given
these objectives, it becomes clear that the complex and
diverse information required for task generally must
be acquired through perception. And perception must
also compensate for the envisaged reduction of a pri-
ori knowledge available to the agent. Perception plays
a central role in realizing mobile manipulation.
In this section, we surveyed some approaches de-
signed to meet the challenges posed by the perception
requirements of mobile manipulation. While a mul-
titude of promising approaches exist, today there is
no generally accepted framework or philosophy for
machine perception. Evidence from human perception
may suggest that such a common framework exists.
Some results seem to imply that there are some shared
working principles between vision and audition [40.3].
Irrespective of this, there is strong evidence that human
perception is built to support action. This becomes ap-
parent already in the retina, which is far from being
a general sense organ; it contains highly specialized
circuitry tailored for task-relevance [40.176]. Maybe
this too can be a clue for how to address percep-
tion in robotics: Maybe we need much better low-level
features?

Mobility and Manipulation
40.6 Conclusions and Further Reading
1029
Part D | 40.6
40.6 Conclusions and Further Reading
While mobile manipulation requires the integration of
methodologies from almost all aspects of robotics –
we mentioned grasping, control, motion generation,
learning and perception – it also suggests alterna-
tive approaches to the state of the art in these ar-
eas of research. Instead of considering each research
area as independent, research in mobile manpulation
exploits their interdependence when this simpliﬁes
the overall problem. Active and interactive percep-
tion, i. e., combining manipulation and 3-D percep-
tion, is one example that departs from the goals of
the individual subareas: (1) general 3-D reconstruc-
tion from passive data and (2) manipulation planning
given a 3-D environment model. Instead, these ap-
proaches view both as an integrated and potentially
simpler problem.
In the present survey we only brieﬂy covered the
various aspects and their interdependencies. Which of
the approaches will turn out to be the most successful
for the integrated overall goal of mobile manipulation is
an ongoing debate. An interesting starting point for fur-
ther reading are the various workshops that focus on the
integrated nature of mobile manipulation and robotics
as a whole. A list of these workshops is maintained on
the Website of the Technical Committee on Mobile Ma-
nipulation.
Video-References
VIDEO 650
Learning dexterous grasps that generalize to novel objects by combining hand and contact models
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/650
VIDEO 651
Atlas whole-body grasping
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/651
VIDEO 652
Handle localization and grasping
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/652
VIDEO 653
Catching objects in flight
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/653
VIDEO 654
Avian-inspired grasping for quadrotor micro UAVs
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/654
VIDEO 655
A compliant underactuated hand for robust manipulation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/655
VIDEO 656
Yale Aerial Manipulator – Dollar Grasp Lab
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/656
VIDEO 657
Exploitation of environmental constraints in human and robotic grasping
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/657
VIDEO 658
Adaptive synergies for a humanoid robot hand
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/658
VIDEO 660
Universal gripper
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/660
VIDEO 661
DLR’s Agile Justin plays catch with Rollin’ Justin
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/661
VIDEO 662
Atlas walking and manipulation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/662
VIDEO 664
Dynamic robot manipulation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/664
VIDEO 665
CHOMP trajectory optimization
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/665
VIDEO 667
Motor skill learning for robotics
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/667
VIDEO 668
Policy learning
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/668
VIDEO 669
Autonomous robot skill acquisition
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/669
VIDEO 670
State representation learning for robotics
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/670
VIDEO 671
Extracting kinematic background knowledge from interactions using task-sensitive relational learning
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/671
VIDEO 673
DART: Dense articulated real-time tracking
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/673

Part D | 40
1030
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
VIDEO 674
Reaching in clutter with whole-arm tactile sensing
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/674
VIDEO 675
Adaptive force/velocity control for opening unknown doors
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/675
VIDEO 676
Interactive perception of articulated objects
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/676
VIDEO 776
A day in the life of Romeo and Juliet (Mobile Manipulators)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/776
VIDEO 782
Flight stability in aerial redundant manipulator
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/782
VIDEO 783
HERMES, A humanoid experimental robot for mobile manipulation and exploration services
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/783
VIDEO 784
Task consistent Obstacle avoidance for mobile manipulation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/784
VIDEO 785
Handling of a single object by multiple mobile robots based on caster-like dynamics
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/785
VIDEO 786
Rolling Justin – a platform for mobile manipulation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/786
VIDEO 787
Combined mobility and manipulation – operational space control of free-flying space robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/787
VIDEO 788
Mobile robot helper
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/788
VIDEO 789
Free-floating autonomous underwater manipulation: Connector plug/unplug
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/789
VIDEO 790
Development of a versatile underwater robot – GTS ROV ALPHA
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/40/videodetails/790
References
40.1
R.A. Brooks, J. Connell, P. Ning: Herbert: A Sec-
ond Generation Mobile Robot, Technical Report,
AI Memo 1016 (MIT, Cambridge 1988)
40.2
O. Khatib, K. Yokoi, O. Brock, K. Chang, A. Casal:
Robots
in
human
environments:
Basic
au-
tonomous capabilities, Int. J. Robotics Res. 18(7),
684–696 (1999)
40.3
R.J. Adams, P. Sheppard, A. Cheema, M.E. Mercer:
Vision vs. hearing: Direct comparison of the hu-
man contrast sensitivity and audibility functions,
J. Vis. 13(9), 870 (2013)
40.4
A.-A. Agha-Mohammadi, S. Chakravorty, N.M. A-
mato: Firm: Sampling-based feedback motion
planning under motion uncertainty and imper-
fect measurements, Int. J. Robotics Res. 33(2),
268–304 (2013)
40.5
A. Miller, P. Allen: Graspit! a versatile simulator for
robotic grasping, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 11(4),
110–122 (2004)
40.6
A. Rodriguez, M.T. Mason: Grasp invariance, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 31(2), 236–248 (2012)
40.7
S. Hirose, Y. Umetani: The development of soft
gripper for the versatile robot hand, Mech. Mach.
Theory 13(3), 351–359 (1978)
40.8
A.M. Dollar, R.D. Howe: The highly adaptive SDM
hand: Design and performance evaluation, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 29(5), 585–597 (2010)
40.9
M. Ciocarlie, F.M. Hicks, S. Stanford: Kinetic and
dimensional optimization for a tendon-driven
gripper, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2013) pp. 217–224
40.10
L.U. Odhner, L.P. Jentoft, M.R. Claffee, N. Cor-
son, Y. Tenzer, R.R. Ma, M. Buehler, R. Ko-
hout, R.D. Howe, A.M. Dollar: A compliant, un-
deractuated hand for robust manipulation, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 33(5), 736–752 (2014)
40.11
M.G. Catalano, G. Grioli, E. Farnioli, A. Serio,
C. Piazza, A. Bicchi: Adaptive synergies for the
design and control of the Pisa/IIT SoftHand, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 33(5), 768–782 (2014)
40.12
J. Amend, E. Brown, N. Rodenberg, H. Jaeger,
H. Lipson: A positive pressure universal gripper
based on the jamming of granular material, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 28(2), 341–350 (2012)
40.13
R. Deimel, O. Brock: A compliant hand based on
a novel pneumatic actuator, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) Karlsruhe (2013) pp. 472–
480
40.14
M. Kazemi, J.-S. Valois, J.A.D. Bagnell, N. Pol-
lard: Robust object grasping using force com-
pliant motion primitives, Techn. Rep. CMU-RI-
TR-12-04 (Carnegie Mellon University Robotics In-
stitute, Pittsburgh 2012)
40.15
M. Dogar, S. Srinivasa: Push-grasping with dex-
terous hands: Mechanics and a method, IEEE/RSJ
Int.
Conf.
Intell.
Robots
Syst.
(IROS)
(2010)
pp. 2123–2130
40.16
L. Chang, G. Zeglin, N. Pollard: Preparatory object
rotation as a human-inspired grasping strategy,
IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoids (2008) pp. 527–534
40.17
N. Chavan-Dafle, A. Rodriguez, R. Paolini, B. Tang,
S. Srinivasa, M. Erdmann, M.T. Mason, I. Lund-

Mobility and Manipulation
References
1031
Part D | 40
berg, H. Staab, T. Fuhlbrigge: Extrinsic dexterity:
In-hand manipulation with external forces, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2014)
40.18
T. Lozano-Pérez, M.T. Mason, R.H. Taylor: Au-
tomatic synthesis of fine-motion strategies for
robots, Int. J. Robotics Res. 3(1), 3–24 (1984)
40.19
M.T. Mason: The mechanics of manipulation,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1985)
pp. 544–548
40.20
M. Kaneko, T. Shirai, T. Tsuji: Scale-dependent
grasp, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern., A: Syst. Hum.
30(6), 806–816 (2000)
40.21
R. Deimel, C. Eppner, J.L. Ruiz, M. Maertens,
O. Brock: Exploitation of environmental con-
straints in human and robotic grasping, Proc. Int.
Symp. Robotics Res. (2013)
40.22
M.R. Cutkosky: On grasp choice, grasp models,
and the design of hands for manufacturing tasks,
IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 5(3), 269–279 (1989)
40.23
T. Feix, R. Pawlik, H. Schmiedmayer, J. Romero,
D. Kragic: A comprehensive grasp taxonomy,
Robotics Sci. Syst.: Workshop Underst. Hum. Hand
Adv. Robotics Manip. (2009)
40.24
M. Santello, M. Flanders, J. Soechting: Patterns of
hand motion during grasping and the influence
of sensory guidance, J. Neurosci. 22(4), 1426–1435
(2002)
40.25
V.N. Christopoulos, P.R. Schrater: Grasping objects
with environmentally induced position uncer-
tainty, PLoS Comput. Biol. 5(10), 10 (2009)
40.26
D.R. Melmoth, A.L. Finlay, M.J. Morgan, S. Grant:
Grasping deficits and adaptations in adults with
stereo vision losses, Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci.
50(8), 3711–3720 (2009)
40.27
M. Controzzi, C. Cipriani, M.C. Carozza: Design of
artificial hands: A review. In: The Human Hand
as an Inspiration for Robot Hand Development,
Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics, Vol. 95,
ed. by R. Balasubramanian, V.J. Santos (Springer,
Berlin, Heidlberg 2014) pp. 219–247
40.28
M. Grebenstein: Approaching Human Perfor-
mance – The Functionality Driven Awiwi Robot
Hand, Ph.D. Thesis (ETH, Zürich 2012)
40.29
J. Bae, S. Park, J. Park, M. Baeg, D. Kim, S. Oh: De-
velopment of a low cost anthropomorphic robot
hand with high capability, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2012) pp. 4776–4782
40.30
I. Gaiser, S. Schulz, A. Kargov, H. Klosek, A. Bier-
baum, C. Pylatiuk, R. Oberle, T. Werner, T. Asfour,
G. Bretthauer, R. Dillmann: A new anthropomor-
phic robotic hand, 8th IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Hu-
manoid Robotics (Humanoids) (2008) pp. 418–422
40.31
A.M. Dollar, R.D. Howe: Simple, reliable robotic
grasping for human environments, IEEE Int.
Conf. Technol. Pract. Robot Appl. (TePRA) (2008)
pp. 156–161
40.32
R. Ma, L. Odhner, A. Dollar: A modular, open-
source 3-D printed underactuated hand, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2013)
40.33
F. Ilievski, A. Mazzeo, R.F. Shepherd, X. Chen,
G.M. Whitesides:
Soft robotics for chemists,
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 50(8), 1890–1895 (2011)
40.34
G. Grioli, M. Catalano, E. Silvestro, S. Tono, A. Bic-
chi: Adaptive synergies: An approach to the de-
sign of under-actuated robotic hands, IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2012) pp. 1251–
1256
40.35
R. Deimel, O. Brock: A novel type of compliant,
underactuated robotic hand for dexterous grasp-
ing, Proc. Robotics Sci. Syst., Berkeley (2014)
40.36
M.E.
Giannaccini,
I.
Georgilas,
I.
Horsfield,
B.H.P.M. Peiris, A. Lenz, A.G. Pipe, S. Dogramadzi:
A variable compliance, soft gripper, Auton. Robots
36(1/2), 93–107 (2014)
40.37
D. Prattichizzo, M. Malvezzi, M. Gabiccini, A. Bic-
chi: On the manipulability ellipsoids of underac-
tuated robotic hands with compliance, Robotics
Auton. Syst. 60(3), 337–346 (2012)
40.38
M. Gabiccini, E. Farnioli, A. Bicchi: Grasp analysis
tools for synergistic underactuated robotic hands,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 32(13), 1553–1576 (2013)
40.39
Y. Li, A.A. Frank: A moving base robot, Am. Control
Conf. 1986 (1986) pp. 1927–1932
40.40
Y. Yamamoto, X. Yun: Coordinating locomotion
and manipulation of a mobile manipulator, Proc.
31st IEEE Conf. Decis. Control IEEE (1992) pp. 2643–
2648
40.41
Y. Yamamoto, X. Yun: Control of mobile manipu-
lators following a moving surface, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1993) pp. 1–6
40.42
H. Seraji: Configuration control of redundant
manipulators: Theory and implementation, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 5(4), 472–490 (1989)
40.43
H. Seraji, R. Colbaugh: Improved configuration
control for redundant robots, J. Robotics Syst.
7(6), 897–928 (1990)
40.44
H. Seraji: An on-line approach to coordinated
mobility and manipulation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1993) pp. 28–35
40.45
H. Seraji: A unified approach to motion control of
mobile manipulators, Int. J. Robotics Res. 17(2),
107–118 (1998)
40.46
O. Khatib, K. Yokoi, K. Chang, D. Ruspini, R. Holm-
berg, A. Casal: Coordination and decentralized
cooperation of multiple mobile manipulators,
J. Robotics Syst. 13(11), 755–764 (1996)
40.47
V. Padois, J.-Y. Fourquet, P. Chiron: Kinematic and
dynamic model-based control of wheeled mobile
manipulators: A unified framework for reactive
approaches, Robotica 25(02), 157–173 (2007)
40.48
E. Papadopoulos, J. Poulakakis: Planning and
model-based control for mobile manipulators,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2000) pp. 1810–1815
40.49
J. Tan, N. Xi: Unified model approach for plan-
ning and control of mobile manipulators, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 3 (2001)
pp. 3145–3152
40.50
J. Joshi, A.A. Desrochers: Modeling and control
of a mobile robot subject to disturbances, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 3 (1986)
pp. 1508–1513
40.51
N. Hootsmans, S. Dubowsky: Large motion con-
trol of mobile manipulators including vehicle

Part D | 40
1032
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
suspension characteristics, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1991) pp. 2336–2341
40.52
K. Liu, F.L. Lewis: Decentralized continuous robust
controller for mobile robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1990) pp. 1822–1827
40.53
J.H. Chung, S.A. Velinsky, R.A. Hess: Interaction
control of a redundant mobile manipulator, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 17(12), 1302–1309 (1998)
40.54
Y. Yamamoto, X. Yun: Effect of the dynamic inter-
action on coordinated control of mobile manipu-
lators, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 12(5), 816–824
(1996)
40.55
S. Lin, A.A. Goldenberg: Robust damping control
of mobile manipulators, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cy-
bern. B: Cybern 32(1), 126–132 (2002)
40.56
S. Lin, A.A. Goldenberg: Neural-network control
of mobile manipulators, IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
12(5), 1121–1133 (2001)
40.57
C.Y. Lee, I.K. Jeong, I.H. Lee, J.J. Lee: Motion
control of mobile manipulator based on neural
networks and error compensation, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 4627–
4632
40.58
Z. Li, S.S. Ge, A. Ming: Adaptive robust motion/
force control of holonomic-constrained nonholo-
nomic mobile manipulators, IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man, Cybern. B: Cybern 37(3), 607–616 (2007)
40.59
Y. Liu, Y. Li: Sliding mode adaptive neural-net-
work control for nonholonomic mobile modular
manipulators, J. Intell. Robotics Syst. 44(3), 203–
224 (2005)
40.60
D. Xu, D. Zhao, J. Yi, X. Tan: Trajectory tracking
control of omnidirectional wheeled mobile ma-
nipulators: Robust neural network-based sliding
mode approach, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern.
39(3), 788–799 (2009)
40.61
L. Righetti, J. Buchli, M. Mistry, S. Schaal: Inverse
dynamics control of floating-base robots with
external constraints: A unified view, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 1085–
1090
40.62
C. Ott, M.A. Roa, G. Hirzinger: Posture and balance
control for biped robots based on contact force
optimization, 11th IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid
Robotics (Humanoids) (2011) pp. 26–33
40.63
O. Khatib, L. Sentis, J. Park, J. Warren: Whole-
body dynamic behavior and control of human-
like robots, Int. J. Humanoid Robotics 1(01), 29–
43 (2004)
40.64
J. Park, O. Khatib: Contact consistent control
framework for humanoid robots, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 1963–1969
40.65
M. Hutter, H. Sommer, C. Gehring, M. Hoepflinger,
M. Bloesch, R. Siegwart: Quadrupedal locomotion
using hierarchical operational space control, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 33, 1062 (2014)
40.66
S. McMillan, D.E. Orin, R.B. McGhee: Efficient dy-
namic simulation of an underwater vehicle with
a robotic manipulator, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cy-
bern. 25(8), 1194–1206 (1995)
40.67
T.W. McLain, S.M. Rock, M.J. Lee: Experiments
in the coordinated control of an underwater
arm/vehicle system. In: Underwater Robots, ed.
by J. Yuh, T. Ura, G.A. Bekey (Kluwer, Boston 1996)
pp. 139–158
40.68
T.J. Tarn, G.A. Shoults, S.P. Yang: A dynamic model
of an underwater vehicle with a robotic ma-
nipulator using Kane’s method. In: Underwater
Robots, ed. by J. Yuh, T. Ura, G. Bekey (Kluwer,
Boston 1996) pp. 195–209
40.69
G. Antonelli, S. Chiaverini: Task-priority redun-
dancy resolution for underwater vehicle-manip-
ulator systems, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA), Vol. 1 (1998) pp. 768–773
40.70
J. Han, J. Park, W.K. Chung: Robust coordinated
motion control of an underwater vehicle-ma-
nipulator system with minimizing restoring mo-
ments, Ocean Eng. 38(10), 1197–1206 (2011)
40.71
H. Mahesh, J. Yuh, R. Lakshmi: A coordinated
control of an underwater vehicle and robotic ma-
nipulator, J. Robotics Syst. 8(3), 339–370 (1991)
40.72
S. Kawamura, N. Sakagami: Analysis on dynam-
ics of underwater robot manipulators based on
iterative learning control and time-scale trans-
formation, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom (ICRA),
Vol. 2 (2002) pp. 1088–1094
40.73
G. Antonelli, F. Caccavale, S. Chiaverini: Adaptive
tracking control of underwater vehicle-manipu-
lator systems based on the virtual decomposition
approach, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 20(3), 594–
602 (2004)
40.74
G. Antonelli, F. Caccavale, S. Chiaverini, L. Vil-
lani: Tracking control for underwater vehicle-ma-
nipulator systems with velocity estimation, IEEE
J. Ocean. Eng. 25(3), 399–413 (2000)
40.75
M. Orsag, C. Korpela, P. Oh: Modeling and con-
trol of mm-uav: Mobile manipulating unmanned
aerial vehicle, J. Intell. Robotics Syst. 69(1–4),
227–240 (2013)
40.76
V. Lippiello, F. Ruggiero: Exploiting redundancy
in cartesian impedance control of uavs equipped
with a robotic arm, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2012) pp. 3768–3773
40.77
F. Forte, R. Naldi, A. Macchelli, L. Marconi:
Impedance control of an aerial manipulator, Am.
Control Conf. (ACC) (2002) pp. 3839–3844
40.78
H.-N. Nguyen, D. Lee: Hybrid force/motion con-
trol and internal dynamics of quadrotors for tool
operation, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2013) pp. 3458–3464
40.79
F. Inoue, T. Murakami, K. Ohnishi: A motion
control of mobile manipulator with external
force, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 6(2), 137–142
(2001)
40.80
Z. Li, J. Gu, A. Ming, C. Xu, M. Shinojo: Intel-
ligent compliant force/motion control of non-
holonomic mobile manipulator working on the
nonrigid surface, Neural Comput. Appl. 15(3/4),
204–216 (2006)
40.81
V. Padois, J.-Y. Fourquet, P. Chiron, M. Renaud: On
contact transition for nonholonomic mobile ma-
nipulators. In: Experimental Robotics IX, ed. by
O. Khatib, V. Kumar, D. Rus (Springer, Berlin, Hei-
delberg 2006) pp. 207–216

Mobility and Manipulation
References
1033
Part D | 40
40.82
S. Kang, K. Komoriya, K. Yokoi, T. Koutoku, B. Kim,
S. Park: Control of impulsive contact force be-
tween mobile manipulator and environment us-
ing effective mass and damping controls, Int.
J. Precis. Eng. Manuf. 11(5), 697–704 (2010)
40.83
T. Simèon, J.-P. Laumond, J. Cortès, A. Sah-
bani: Manipulation planning with probabilistic
roadmaps, Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(7/8), 729–746
(2004)
40.84
M. Stilman: Global manipulation planning in
robot joint space with task constraints, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 26(3), 576–584 (2010)
40.85
D. Berenson, S.S. Srinivasa, J. Kuffner: Task space
regions: A framework for pose-constrained ma-
nipulation planning, Int. J. Robotics Res. 30(12),
1435–1460 (2011)
40.86
S.M. LaValle: Planning Algorithms (Cambridge
Univ. Press, Cambridge 2004)
40.87
D. Berenson, S. Srinivasa, D. Ferguson, J.J. Kuff-
ner: Manipulation planning on constraint mani-
folds, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2009) pp. 625–632
40.88
M. Rickert, A. Sieverling, O. Brock: Balancing ex-
ploration and exploitation in sampling-based
motion planning, IEEE Trans. Robotics 30(6),
1305–1317 (2014)
40.89
K. Harada, E. Yoshida, K. Yokoi (Eds.): Motion
Planning for Humanoid Robots (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 2010)
40.90
W. Choi, J.-C. Latombe: A reactive architecture
for planning and executing robot motions with
incomplete knowledge, Proc. RSJ/IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Intell. Syst. (IROS) Osaka, Vol. 1 (1991)
pp. 24–29
40.91
S. Quinlan, O. Khatib: Elastic Bands: Connecting
path planning and control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 2 (1993) pp. 802–807
40.92
O. Brock, O. Khatib: Elastic strips: A framework for
motion generation in human environments, Int.
J. Robotics Autm. 21(10), 1031–1052 (2014)
40.93
M. Toussaint: Robot trajectory optimization using
approximate inference, Proc. 26th Ann. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn. (2009) pp. 1049–1056
40.94
M. Zucker, N. Ratliff, A.D. Dragan, M. Piv-
toraiko, M. Klingensmith, C.M. Dellin, J.A. Bagnell,
S.S. Srinivasa: CHOMP: Covariant Hamiltonian op-
timization for motion planning, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 32(9/10), 1164–1193 (2013)
40.95
M. Kalakrishnan, S. Chitta, E. Theodorou, P. Pastor,
S. Schaal: STOMP: Stochastic trajectory optimiza-
tion for motion planning, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 4569–4574
40.96
R.R. Burridge, A.A. Rizzi, D.E. Koditschek: Se-
quential composition of dynamically dexterous
robot behaviors, Int. J. Robotics Res. 18(6), 534–
555 (1999)
40.97
Y. Yang, O. Brock: Elastic roadmaps—motion gen-
eration for autonomous mobile manipulation,
Auton. Robots 28(1), 113–130 (2010)
40.98
J. Pineau, G. Gordon, S. Thrun: Point-based value
iteration: An anytime algorithm for POMDPs, Int.
Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI) (2003) pp. 1025–1032
40.99
H. Kurniawati, D. Hsu, W.S. Lee: SARSOP: Efficient
point-based POMDP planning by approximating
optimally reachable belief spaces, Robotics Sci.
Syst. (2008)
40.100
J. Van Den Berg, P. Abbeel, K. Goldberg: LQG-MP:
Optimized path planning for robots with motion
uncertainty and imperfect state information, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 30(7), 895–913 (2011)
40.101
S. Prentice, N. Roy: The belief roadmap: Efficient
planning in belief space by factoring the co-
variance, Int. J. Robotics Res. 28(11), 1448–1465
(2009)
40.102
H. Kurniawati,
T. Bandyopadhyay, N.M. Pa-
trikalakis: Global motion planning under un-
certain motion, sensing, and environment map,
Auton. Robots 33(3), 255–272 (2012)
40.103
L.P. Kaelbling, T. Lozano-Pérez: Integrated task
and
motion
planning
in
belief
space,
Int.
J. Robotics Res. 32(9/10), 1194–1227 (2013)
40.104
A. Sieverling, N. Kuhnen, O. Brock: Sensor-based,
task-constrained motion generation under un-
certainty, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2014)
40.105
J. Weston, F. Ratle, R. Collobert: Deep learning via
semi-supervised embedding, Proc. 25th Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn. (ICML) (2008)
40.106
T.G. Dietterich, P. Domingos, L. Getoor, S. Mug-
gleton, P. Tadepalli: Structured machine learn-
ing: The next ten years, Mach. Learn. 73, 3–23
(2008)
40.107
R. Douglas, T. Sejnowski: Future Challenges for the
Science and Engineering of Learning, Final NSF
Workshop Report (NSF, Arlington County 2008)
40.108
J. Lafferty, A. McCallum, F. Pereira: Conditional
random fields: Probabilistic models for segment-
ing and labeling sequence data, Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn. (ICML) (2001) pp. 282–289
40.109
Y. Altun, I. Tsochantaridis, T. Hofmann: Hidden
Markov support vector machines, Proc. 20th Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn. (2003) pp. 3–10
40.110
A. Saxena, M. Sun, A.Y. Ng: Make 3-D: Depth per-
ception from a single still image, Proc. 23rd AAAI
Conf. Artif. Intell. (2008) pp. 1571–1576
40.111
A. Saxena, J. Driemeyer, A.Y. Ng: Robotic grasping
of novel objects using vision, Int. J. Robotics Res.
27(2), 157–173 (2008)
40.112
Y. Jiang, M. Lim, C. Zheng, A. Saxena: Learning to
place new objects in a scene, Int. J. Robotics Res.
31(9), 1021–1043 (2012)
40.113
Y. Jiang, A. Saxena: Modeling and control of a mo-
bile robot subject to disturbances, Proc. Robotics
Sci. Syst., Berkeley (2014)
40.114
R.B. Rusu, N. Blodow, M. Beetz: Fast point feature
histograms (fpfh) for 3-D registration, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2009) pp. 3212–
3217
40.115
K. Lai, L. Bo, D. Fox: Unsupervised feature learn-
ing for 3-D scene labeling, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2014)
40.116
F. Stulp, E. Theodorou, J. Buchli, S. Schaal: Learn-
ing to grasp under uncertainty, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 5703–5708

Part D | 40
1034
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
40.117
M. Cakmak, A.L. Thomaz: Designing robot learners
that ask good questions, Proc. Int. Conf. Hum.-
Robot Interact. (HRI) (2012)
40.118
N. Jetchev, M. Toussaint: Fast motion planning
from experience: Trajectory prediction for speed-
ing up movement generation, Auton. Robots 34,
111–127 (2013)
40.119
N. Jetchev, M. Toussaint: Discovering relevant task
spaces using inverse feedback control, Auton.
Robots 37, 169–189 (2014)
40.120
C. Eppner, O. Brock: Grasping unknown objects by
exploiting shape adaptability and environmental
constraints, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2013)
40.121
M. Toussaint, N. Ratliff, J. Bohg, L. Righetti, P. En-
glert, S. Schaal: Dual execution of optimized con-
tact interaction trajectories, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2014)
40.122
S. Niekum, S. Osentoski, G. Konidaris, A.G. Barto:
Learning and generalization of complex tasks
from
unstructured
demonstrations,
IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robotics Systems (IROS) (2012)
pp. 5239–5246
40.123
S. Alexandrova, M. Cakmak, K. Hsiao, L. Takayama:
Robot programming by demonstration with in-
teractive action visualizations, Proc. Robotics Sci.
Syst. (2014)
40.124
M.M. Chun, R. Marois: The dark side of visual
attention, Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 12(2), 184–189
(2002)
40.125
D. Marr: Vision: A Computational Investigation
Into the Human Representation and Processing of
Visual Information (Henry Holt, New York 1982)
40.126
R.A. Newcombe, S.J. Lovegrove, A.J. Davison:
Dtam: Dense tracking and mapping in real-time,
IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV) (2011) pp. 2320–
2327
40.127
J. Engel, T. Schöps, D. Cremers: LSD-SLAM: Large-
scale direct monocular SLAM, Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ECCV) (2014)
40.128
P. Henry, M. Krainin, E. Herbst, X. Ren, D. Fox:
Rgb-d mapping: Using kinect-style depth cam-
eras for dense 3-D modeling of indoor envi-
ronments, Int. J. Robotics Res. 31(5), 647–663
(2012)
40.129
J. Stückler, S. Behnke: Multi-resolution surfel
maps for efficient dense 3-D modeling and track-
ing, J. Vis. Commun. Image Represent. 25(1), 137–
147 (2014)
40.130
K.M. Wurm, A. Hornung, M. Bennewitz, C. Stach-
niss, W. Burgard: Octomap: A probabilistic, flex-
ible, and compact 3-D map representation for
robotic systems, Proc. ICRA 2010 Workshop Best
Practice 3-D Percept. Model. Mob. Manip., Vol. 2
(2010)
40.131
A. Hornung, K.M. Wurm, M. Bennewitz, C. Stach-
niss, W. Burgard: Octomap: An efficient proba-
bilistic 3-D mapping framework based on octrees,
Auton. Robots 34(3), 189–206 (2013)
40.132
J.P. Saarinen, H. Andreasson, T. Stoyanov, A.J. Li-
lienthal:
3-D
normal distributions
transform
occupancy maps: An efficient representation
for mapping in dynamic environments, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 32(14), 1627–1644 (2013)
40.133
D. Droeschel, J. Stückler, S. Behnke: Local multi-
resolution representation for 6d motion estima-
tion and mapping with a continuously rotating
3-D laser scanner, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2014)
40.134
D. Droeschel, J. Stückler, S. Behnke: Local mul-
tiresolution surfel grids for MAV motion estima-
tion and 3-D mapping, Proc. Int. Conf. Intell.
Auton. Syst. (IAS) (2014)
40.135
M. McElhone, J. Stuckler, S. Behnke: Joint detec-
tion and pose tracking of multi-resolution surfel
models in RGB-D, IEEE Eur. Conf. Mobile Robots
(ECMR) (2013) pp. 131–137
40.136
J. Stückler, B. Waldvogel, H. Schulz, S. Behnke:
Dense real-time mapping of object-class seman-
tics from RGB-D video, J. Real-Time Image Pro-
cess. 8, 1–11 (2014)
40.137
B. Lau, C. Sprunk, W. Burgard: Efficient grid-
based spatial representations for robot naviga-
tion in dynamic environments, Robotics Auton.
Syst. 61(10), 1116–1130 (2013)
40.138
R. Bis, H. Peng, G. Ulsoy: Velocity occupancy
space: Robot navigation and moving obstacle
avoidance with sensor uncertainty, ASME Dyn.
Syst. Control Conf. (2009) pp. 363–370
40.139
A.N. Ghomsheh, A. Talebpour: A new method for
indoor-outdoor image classification using color
correlated temperature, Int. J. Image Process 6(3),
167–181 (2012)
40.140
A. Payne, S. Singh: Indoor vs. outdoor scene clas-
sification in digital photographs, Pattern Recogn.
38(10), 1533–1545 (2005)
40.141
J. Collier, A. Ramirez-Serrano: Environment clas-
sification for indoor/outdoor robotic mapping,
IEEE Can. Conf. Comput. Robot Vis. (CRV) (2009)
pp. 276–283
40.142
J. Aloimonos, I. Weiss, A. Bandyopadhyay: Active
vision, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 1(4), 333–356 (1988)
40.143
R. Bajcsy: Active perception, Proceedings IEEE
76(8), 996–1006 (1988)
40.144
A. Blake, A. Yuille: Active Vision (MIT, Cambridge
1992)
40.145
A. Petrovskaya, O. Khatib: Global localization of
objects via touch, IEEE Trans. Robotics 27(3), 569–
585 (2011)
40.146
P. Hebert, T. Howard, N. Hudson, J. Ma, J.W. Bur-
dick: The next best touch for model-based lo-
calization, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2013) pp. 99–106
40.147
H. Lee, J. Park: An active sensing strategy for con-
tact location without tactile sensors using robot
geometry and kinematics, Auton. Robots 36(1/2),
109–121 (2014)
40.148
M.J. Kim, M. Choi, Y.B. Kim, F. Liu, H. Moon,
J.C. Koo, H.R. Choi: Exploration of unknown ob-
ject by active touch of robot hand, Int. J. Control
Autom. Syst. 12(2), 406–414 (2014)
40.149
L. Chang, J.R. Smith, D. Fox: Interactive singula-
tion of objects from a pile, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012)

Mobility and Manipulation
References
1035
Part D | 40
40.150
M. Gupta, G.S. Sukhatme: Using manipulation
primitives for brick sorting in clutter, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012)
40.151
D. Katz, M. Kazemi, J.A. Bagnell, A. Stentz: Au-
tonomous pile clearing using interactive percep-
tion, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2013)
40.152
M.R. Dogar, M.C. Koval, A. Tallavajhula, S.S. Srini-
vasa: Object search by manipulation, Auton.
Robots 36(1/2), 153–167 (2014)
40.153
R. Martín Martín, O. Brock: Online interactive per-
ception of articulated objects with multi-level
recursive estimation based on task-specific pri-
ors, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2014)
40.154
D. Katz, O. Brock: Manipulating articulated ob-
jects with interactive perception, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2008) pp. 272–277
40.155
D. Katz, A. Orthey, O. Brock: Interactive perception
of articulated objects, Int. Symp. Exp. Robotics
(2010)
40.156
D. Katz, A. Orthey, O. Brock: Interactive percep-
tion of articulated objects, Springer Tract. Adv.
Robotics 79, 301–315 (2014)
40.157
D. Katz, M. Kazemi, J.A. Bagnell, A. Stentz: In-
teractive segmentation, tracking, and kinematic
modeling of unknown articulated objects, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2013)
pp. 5003–5010
40.158
X. Huang, I. Walker, S. Birchfield: Occlusion-
aware multi-view reconstruction of articulated
objects for manipulation, Robotics Auton. Syst.
63(4), 497–505 (2014)
40.159
S. Pillai, M. Walter, S. Teller: Learning articu-
lated motions from visual demonstration, Proc.
Robotics Sci. Syst. (2014)
40.160
J. Sturm, K. Konolige, C. Stachniss, W. Burgard:
Vision-based detection for learning articulation
models of cabinet doors and drawers in house-
hold environments, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2010) pp. 362–368
40.161
J. Sturm, A. Jain, C. Stachniss, C. Kemp, W. Bur-
gard: Operating articulated objects based on ex-
perience, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2010)
40.162
J. Sinapov, T. Bergquist, C. Schenck, U. Ohiri,
S. Griffith, A. Stoytchev: Interactive object recog-
nition using proprioceptive and auditory feed-
back, Int. J. Robotics Res. 30(10), 1250–1262
(2011)
40.163
D. Katz, Y. Pyuro, O. Brock: Learning to manipulate
articulated objects in unstructured environments
using a grounded relational representation, Proc.
Robotics Sci. Syst., Zurich (2008) pp. 254–261
40.164
S. Otte, J. Kulick, M. Toussaint, O. Brock: Entropy-
based strategies for physical exploration of the
environment’s degrees of freedom, IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2014)
40.165
S. Höfer, T. Lang, O. Brock: Extracting kinematic
background knowledge from interactions using
task-sensitive relational learning, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2014)
40.166
J.J. Gibson: The theory of affordances. In: Per-
ceiving, Acting, and Knowing, ed. by R. Shaw,
J. Bransford (Lawrence Erlbaum, Hilldale 1977)
40.167
E. Şahin, M. Çakmak, M.R. Doğar, E. Uğur,
G. Üçoluk: To afford or not to afford: A new
formalization of affordances toward affordance-
based robot control, Adapt. Behav. 15(4), 447–472
(2007)
40.168
L. Montesano, M. Lopes, A. Bernardino, J. Santos-
Victor: Learning object affordances: From senso-
ry–motor coordination to imitation, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 24(1), 15–26 (2008)
40.169
L. Paletta, G. Fritz, F. Kintzler, J. Irran, G. Dorffner:
Learning to perceive affordances in a framework
of developmental embodied cognition, IEEE 6th
Int. Conf. IEEE Dev. Learn. (ICDL) (2007) pp. 110–
115
40.170
P. Sequeira, M. Vala, A. Paiva: What can i do
with this?: Finding possible interactions between
characters and objects, Proc. 6th ACM Int. Jt. Conf.
Auton. Agents Multiagent Syst. (2007) p. 5
40.171
B. Moldovan, M. van Otterlo, P. Moreno, J. Santos-
Victor, L. De Raedt: Statistical relational learning
of object affordances for robotic manipulation,
Latest Adv. Inductive Logic Program. (2012) p. 6
40.172
C. de Granville, J. Southerland, A.H. Fagg: Learn-
ing grasp affordances through human demon-
stration, Proc. Int. Conf. Dev. Learn. (ICDL06)
(2006)
40.173
L. Montesano, M. Lopes: Learning grasping affor-
dances from local visual descriptors, IEEE 8th Int.
Conf. Dev. Learn. (ICDL) (2009) pp. 1–6
40.174
D. Kraft, R. Detry, N. Pugeault, E. Baseski, J. Pi-
ater, N. Krüger: Learning objects and grasp af-
fordances through autonomous exploration, Lect.
Notes Comput. Sci. 5815, 235–244 (2009)
40.175
R. Detry, D. Kraft, O. Kroemer, L. Bodenhagen,
J. Peters, N. Krüger, J. Piater: Learning grasp af-
fordance densities, Paladyn 2(1), 1–17 (2011)
40.176
T. Gollisch, M. Meister: Eye smarter than scientists
believed: Neural computations in circuits of the
retina, Neuron 65(2), 150–164 (2010)

Multimedia Contents Active Manip
1037
Part D | 41.1
41. Active Manipulation for Perception
Anna Petrovskaya, Kaijen Hsiao
This chapter covers perceptual methods in which
manipulation is an integral part of perception.
These methods face special challenges due to data
sparsity and high costs of sensing actions. How-
ever, they can also succeed where other perceptual
methods fail, for example, in poor-visibility con-
ditions or for learning the physical properties of
a scene.
The chapter focuses on specialized methods
that have been developed for object localization,
inference, planning, recognition, and modeling in
active manipulation approaches.We conclude with
a discussion of real-life applications and directions
for future research.
41.1
Perception via Manipulation ................ 1037
41.2
Object Localization .............................. 1038
41.2.1
Problem Evolution..................... 1038
41.2.2
Bayesian Framework.................. 1039
41.2.3
Inference.................................. 1041
41.2.4
Advanced Inference Methods ..... 1043
41.2.5
Planning .................................. 1045
41.3
Learning About an Object..................... 1049
41.3.1
Shape of Rigid Objects ............... 1049
41.3.2
Articulated Objects .................... 1051
41.3.3
Deformable Objects ................... 1052
41.3.4
Contact Estimation .................... 1053
41.3.5
Physical Properties .................... 1054
41.4
Recognition......................................... 1054
41.4.1
Object Shape Matching .............. 1054
41.4.2
Statistical Pattern Recognition .... 1055
41.4.3
Recognition
by Material Properties................ 1056
41.4.4
Combining Visual
and Tactile Sensing.................... 1056
41.5 Conclusions ......................................... 1057
41.5.1
Real-Life Applications................ 1057
41.5.2
Future Directions of Research ..... 1057
41.5.3
Further Reading ........................ 1057
Video-References......................................... 1058
References................................................... 1058
41.1 Perception via Manipulation
In this chapter, we focus on perceptual methods that
rely on manipulation. As we will see, sensing-via-
manipulation is a complex and highly intertwined
process, in which the results of perception are used
for manipulation and manipulation is used to gather
additional data. Despite this complexity, there are
three main reasons to use manipulation either to-
gether or instead of the more commonly used vision
sensors.
First, manipulation can be used to sense in poor-
visibility conditions: for example, sensing in muddy
water or working with transparent objects. In fact, due
to its high accuracy and ability to sense any hard sur-
face regardless of its optical properties, contact sensing
is widely used for accurate localization of parts in
manufacturing. Second, manipulation is useful for de-
termining properties that require physical interaction,
such as stiffness, mass, or the physical relationship of
parts. Third, if the actual goal is to manipulate the
object, we might as well use data gathered from ma-
nipulation attempts to improve both perception and
subsequent attempts at manipulation.
Sensing-via-manipulation also
faces
signiﬁcant
challenges. Unlike vision sensors, which provide
a whole-scene view in a single snapshot, contact sensors
are inherently local, providing information only about
a very small area of the sensed surface at any given
time. In order to gather additional data, the manipu-

Part D | 41.2
1038
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
lator has to be moved into a different position, which
is a time-consuming task. Hence, unlike vision-based
perception, contact-based methods have to cope with
very sparse data and very low data acquisition rates.
Moreover, contact sensing disturbs the scene. While in
some situations this can be desirable, it also means that
each sensing action can increase uncertainty. In fact,
one can easily end up in a situation where the infor-
mation gained via sensing is less than the information
lost due to scene disturbance.
Due to these challenges, specialized perceptual
methods had to be developed for perception-via-
manipulation. Inference methods have been developed
to extract the most information from the scarce data and
to cope with cases in which the data are insufﬁcient to
fully solve the problem (i. e., under-constrained scenar-
ios). Planning methods have been developed to make
the most efﬁcient sensing decisions based on the little
data available and taking into account time, energy, and
uncertainty costs of sensing actions. Modeling methods
have been developed to build the most accurate models
from small amounts of data.
In this chapter, the material is organized by per-
ceptual goal: localizing an object (Sect. 41.2), learning
about an object (Sect. 41.3), and recognizing an object
(Sect. 41.4). Since the chapter topic is broad, to keep it
concise, we provide a tutorial-level discussion of object
localization methods, but give a birds-eye view of the
methods for the other two perceptual goals. However,
as we point out along the way, many object localiza-
tion methods can be reused for the other two perceptual
goals.
41.2 Object Localization
Tactile object localization is the problem of estimating
the object’s pose – including position and orientation –
based on a set of data obtained by touching the object.
A prior geometric model of the object is assumed to be
known and the sensing is performed using some type of
contact sensor (wrist force/torque sensor, tactile array,
ﬁngertip force sensor, etc.). The problem is typically
restricted to rigid objects, which can be stationary or
moving.
Tactile object localization involves several compo-
nents, including manipulator control methods, model-
ing, inference, and planning. During data collection,
some form of sensorimotor control is used for each
sensing motion of the manipulator. For information on
manipulator control, the reader is encouraged to refer-
ence Chaps. 8 and 9. With few exceptions, the sensing
motions tend to be poking motions rather than fol-
lowing the surface. This is due to the fact that robots
are usually unable to sense with all parts of the ma-
nipulator, and, hence, the poking motions are chosen
to minimize the possibility of accidental non-sensed
contact.
Due to the properties of sensing-via-contact, spe-
cial methods for modeling, inference, and planning
had to be developed for tactile localization. Model-
ing choices include not only how to model the object
itself, but also models of the sensing process and
models of possible object motion. We discuss mod-
els of sensing and motion in Sect. 41.2.2, but leave
an in-depth discussion of object modeling techniques
until Sect. 41.3. We also cover specialized inference
and planning methods in Sect. 41.2.3 and 41.2.5,
respectively.
41.2.1 Problem Evolution
Attempts to solve the tactile object localization date
back to early 80s. Over the years, the scope of the prob-
lem as well as methods used to solve it have evolved as
we detail below.
Early Methods
Early methods for tactile object localization generally
ignore the sensing process uncertainties and focus on
ﬁnding a single hypothesis that best ﬁts the measure-
ments. For example, Gaston and Lozano-Perez used
interpretation trees to efﬁciently ﬁnd the best match for
3 DOF (degrees of freedom) object localization [41.1].
Grimson and Lozano-Perez extended the approach to
6 DOF [41.2]. Faugeras and Hebert used least squares
to perform geometrical matching between primitive sur-
faces [41.3]. Shekhar et al. solved systems of weighted
linear equations to localize an object held in a robotic
hand [41.4]. Several methods use geometric constraints
together with kinematic and dynamic equations to esti-
mate or constrain the pose of known planar objects in
plane by pushing them with a ﬁnger [41.5] or parallel-
jaw gripper [41.6], or by tilting them in a tray [41.7].
Workpiece Localization
Single hypothesis methods are also widely used to solve
the workpiece localization problem in manufacturing
applications for dimensional inspection [41.8], ma-
chining [41.9], and robotic assembly [41.10]. In these
applications, the measurements are taken by a coordi-
nate measurement machine (CMM) [41.11] or by on-
machine sensors [41.12]. Workpiece localization makes

Active Manipulation for Perception
41.2 Object Localization
1039
Part D | 41.2
a number of restrictive assumptions that make it inap-
plicable to autonomous robot operation in unstructured
environments. One important restriction is that there is
a known correspondence between each measured data
point and a point or patch on the object surface (called
home point or home surface, respectively) [41.13]. In
semiautomated settings, the correspondence assump-
tion is satisﬁed by having a human direct the robot to
speciﬁc locations on the object. In fully automated set-
tings, the object is placed on the measurement table
with low uncertainty to make sure each data point lands
near the corresponding home point.
Further restrictions include assumptions that the
data are sufﬁcient to fully constrain the object, the ob-
ject does not move, and there are no unmodeled effects
(e.g., vibration, deformation, or temperature variation).
All of these parameters are carefully controlled for in
structured manufacturing environments.
The workpiece localization problem is usually
solved in least squares form using iterative optimiza-
tion methods, including the Hong-Tan method [41.14],
the
Variational
method
[41.15],
and
the
Menq
method [41.16]. Since these methods are prone to get-
ting trapped in local minima, low initial uncertainty
is usually assumed to make sure the optimization al-
gorithm is initialized near the solution. Some attempts
have been made to solve the global localization problem
by rerunning the optimization algorithm multiple times
from prespeciﬁed and random initial points [41.17]. Re-
cent work has focused on careful selection of the home
points to improve localization results [41.18–20] and
on improving localization efﬁciency for complex home
surfaces [41.21, 22].
Bayesian Methods
In the last decade, there has been increased interest in
Bayesian state estimation for the tactile object local-
ization problem [41.23–27]. These methods estimate
the probability distribution over all possible states (the
belief), which captures the uncertainty resulting from
noisy sensors, inaccurate object models, and other ef-
fects present during the sensing process. Thus, estima-
tion of the belief enables planning algorithms that are
resilient to the uncertainties of the real world. Unlike
workpiece localization, these methods do not assume
known correspondences. In contrast to single hypoth-
esis or set-based methods, belief estimation methods
allow us to better describe and track the relative likeli-
hoods of hypotheses in the under-constrained scenario,
in which the data are insufﬁcient to fully localize the
object. These methods can also work with moving ob-
jects and answer important questions such as: have we
localized the object completely? and where is the best
place to sense next?.
41.2.2 Bayesian Framework
All Bayesian methods share a similar framework. We
start with a general deﬁnition of a Bayesian problem
(not necessarily tactile object localization), and then,
explain how this formulation can be applied to tactile
localization.
General Bayesian Problem
For a general Bayesian problem, the goal is to infer the
state X of a system based on a set of sensor measure-
ments D WD fDkg. Due to uncertainty, this information
is best captured as a probability distribution
bel.X/ WD p.XjD/ ;
(41.1)
called the posterior distribution or the Bayesian belief.
Figure 41.1a shows a Bayesian network representing all
the random variables involved and all the relationships
between them.
In a dynamic Bayesian system, the state changes
over time, which is assumed to be discretized into small
time intervals (Fig. 41.1b). The system is assumed to
evolve as a Markov process with unobserved states. The
goal is to estimate the belief at time t
belt.Xt/ WD p.XtjD1; : : : ; Dt/ :
(41.2)
The behavior of the system is described via two prob-
abilistic laws: (i) the measurement model p.DjX/ cap-
tures how the sensor measurements are obtained and (ii)
the dynamics model p.XtjXt1/ captures how the sys-
tem evolves between time steps.
For brevity, it is convenient to drop the arguments
in bel.X/ and belt.Xt/, and simply write bel and belt,
but these two beliefs should always be understood as
functions of X and Xt, respectively.
Tactile Localization in Bayesian Form
Tactile object localization can be formulated as an
instance of the general Bayesian problem. Here, the
X
• • •
• • •
• • •
X1
X2
Xt
D2
DK
D1
1
a) Static case
b) Dynamic case
2
t
Fig.41.1a,b Bayesian network representation of the relationships
between the random variables involved in a general Bayesian prob-
lem. The directional arrows are read as causes. (a) In the static case,
a single unknown state X causes a collection of measurements fDkg.
(b) In the dynamic case, the state Xt changes over time and at each
time step causes a set of measurements Dt

Part D | 41.2
1040
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
a)
b)
Handle
Door
Fig.41.2a,b Examples of objects (a) and their polygonal mesh models (b). Five objects are shown: cash register, toy
guitar, toaster, box, and door handle. The ﬁrst three models were constructed by collecting surface points with the
robot’s end effector. The last two were constructed from hand measurements made with a ruler. The door handle model
is 2-D. Model complexity ranges from 6 faces (for the box) to over 100 faces (for the toaster) (after [41.28])
robot needs to determine the pose X of a known ob-
ject O based on a set of tactile measurements D.
The state is the 6 DOF pose of the object – includ-
ing position and orientation – in the manipulator co-
ordinate frame. A number of state parameterizations
are possible, including matrix representations, quater-
nions, Euler angles, and Rodrigues angles, to name
a few. For our discussion here, assume that the state
X WD .x; y; z; ˛; ˇ; /, where .x; y; z/ is the position and
.˛; ˇ; / are orientation angles in Euler representation.
The measurements D WD fDkg are obtained by
touching the object with the robot’s end effector. The
end effector can be a single probe, a gripper, or a hand.
Thus, it may be able to sense multiple contacts Dk si-
multaneously, for example, in a single grasping attempt.
We will assume that for each touch Dk, the robot is able
to measure the contact point and also possibly sense
the normal of the surface (perhaps as the direction of
reaction force). Under these assumptions, each mea-
surement Dk WD .Dpos
k ; Dnor
k / consists of the measured
Cartesian position of the contact point Dpos
k
and the
measured surface normal Dnor
k . If measurements of sur-
face normals are not available, then Dk WD Dpos
k .
Measurement Model
In order to interpret tactile measurements, we need to
deﬁne a model of the object and a model of the sens-
ing process. For now, assume that the object is modeled
as a polygonal mesh, which could be derived from
a CAD model or a 3-D scan of the object, or built
using contact sensors. Examples of objects and their
polygonal mesh representations are shown in Fig. 41.2.
Other types of object models can also be used. We pro-
vide an in-depth look at object modeling techniques in
Sect. 41.3.
Typically, the individual measurements Dk in a data
set D are considered independent of each other given
the state X. Then, the measurement model factors over
the measurements
p.DjX/ D
Y
k
p.DkjX/ :
(41.3)
Sampled Models. Early Bayesian tactile localization
work used sampled measurement models. For example,
Gadeyne and Bruyninckx used numerical integration to
compute the measurement model for a box and stored
it in a look-up table for fast access [41.23]. Chhatpar
and Branicky sampled the object surface by repeatedly
touching it with the robot’s end-effector to compute the
measurement probabilities (Fig. 41.3) [41.24].
Proximity Model. One common model for the inter-
pretation of tactile measurements is the proximity mea-
surement model [41.29]. In this model, the measure-
ments are considered to be independent of each other,
with both position and normal components corrupted by
Gaussian noise. For each measurement, the probability
depends on the distance between the measurement and
the object surface (hence the name proximity).
a)
b)
Fig.41.3a,b Sampled measurement model for a key lock.
(a) The robot exploring the object with a key. (b) The re-
sulting lock-key contact C-space (after [41.24])

Active Manipulation for Perception
41.2 Object Localization
1041
Part D | 41.2
Since the measurements contain both contact coor-
dinates and surface normals, this distance is taken in
the 6-D space of coordinates and normals (i. e., in the
measurement space). Let OO be a representation of the
object in this 6-D space. Let Oo WD .Oopos; Oonor/ be a point
on the object surface, and D be a measurement. Deﬁne
dM.Oo; D/ to be the Mahalanobis distance between Oo and
D
dM.Oo; D/ WD
s
jjOopos  Dposjj2
2pos
C jjOonor  Dnorjj2
2nor
;
(41.4)
where 2
pos and 2
nor are Gaussian noise variances of
position and normal measurement components, respec-
tively. In the case of a sensor that only measures posi-
tion (and not surface normal), only the ﬁrst summand
is used inside the square root. The distance between
a measurement D and the entire object OO is obtained
by minimizing the Mahalonobis distance over all object
points Oo
dM. OO; D/ WD min
Oo2 OO
dM.Oo; D/ :
(41.5)
Let OOX denote the object in state X. Then, the mea-
surement model is computed as
p.DjX/ D  exp
"
1
2
X
k
d2
M. OOX; Dk/
#
:
(41.6)
In the above equation and throughout the chapter,  de-
notes the normalization constant, whose value is such
that the expression integrates to 1.
VIDEO 723 shows
the proximity model being used to localize a door han-
dle.
Integrated Proximity Model. A variation of the prox-
imity model is called the integrated proximity model.
Instead of assuming that the closest point on the object
caused the measurement, it considers the contribution
from all surface points to the probability of the mea-
surement [41.25]. This is a much more complex model
that in general can not be computed efﬁciently. More-
over, for an unbiased application of this model, we need
to compute a prior over all surface points, i. e., how
likely each surface point is to cause a measurement.
This prior is usually nonuniform and highly depen-
dent on the object shape, the manipulator shape, and
the probing motions. Nevertheless, in some cases this
model can be beneﬁcial as it is more expressive than
the proximity model.
Negative Information. The models we have de-
scribed so far do not take into account negative infor-
mation, i. e., information about the absence rather than
presence of measurements. This includes information
that the robot was able to move through some parts of
space without making contact with the object. Nega-
tive information is very useful for active exploration
strategies and has been taken into account by [41.26]
and [41.25]. Although adding negative information
makes the belief more complex (e.g., discontinuous), in
most cases, it can be superimposed on top of the belief
computed using one of the above measurement models.
Dynamics Model
Free-standing objects can move during probing, and
hence, a dynamics model is needed to describe this pro-
cess. In most situations, little is known about possible
object motions, and thus, a simple Gaussian model is
assumed. Hence, p.XtjXt1/ is a Gaussian with mean at
Xt1 and variances 2
met and 2
ang along metric and angu-
lar axes respectively. If additional properties of object
motion are known, then a more informative dynam-
ics model can be used. For example, if we know the
robot shape and the magnitude and direction of the con-
tact force, we can use Newtonian dynamics to describe
object motion. This motion may be further restricted,
if it is known that the object is sliding on a speciﬁc
surface.
41.2.3 Inference
Once the models are deﬁned and the sensor data are
obtained, the next step is to estimate the resulting prob-
abilistic belief. This process is called inference and
can be viewed as numerical estimation of a real-valued
function over a multidimensional space. We can distin-
guish two cases: a static case where the object is rigidly
ﬁxed and a dynamic case where the object can move.
The dynamic case is solved recursively at each time step
using a Bayesian ﬁlter. The static case can be solved
either recursively or in a single step by combining all
the data into a single batch. The other important dif-
ferentiator is the amount of initial uncertainty. In low
uncertainty problems, the pose of the object is approx-
imately known and only needs to be updated based on
the latest data. This type of problem usually arises dur-
ing tracking of a moving object, in which case it is
known as pose tracking. In global uncertainty problems,
the object can be anywhere within a large volume of
space and can have arbitrary orientation. This case is
often referred to as global localization. Global local-
ization problems arise for static objects, when the pose
of the object is unknown, or as the initial step in pose
tracking of a dynamic object. It is also the fallback

Part D | 41.2
1042
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
whenever the pose tracking method fails and uncer-
tainty about the object pose becomes large.
The belief tends to be a highly complex function
with many local extrema. For this reason, parametric
methods (such as Kalman ﬁlters) do not do well for this
problem. Instead, the problem is usually solved using
nonparametric methods. The complexity of the belief is
caused directly by properties of the world, the sensors,
and models thereof. For more insight into causes of be-
lief complexity and appropriate estimation methods, see
the discussion of belief roughness in [41.28, Chap. 1].
We start by describing basic nonparametric meth-
ods, which are efﬁcient enough to solve problems
with up to three degrees of freedom (DOFs). Then, in
Sect. 41.2.4, we describe several advanced methods that
have been developed to solve the full 6 DOF problem in
real-time.
Basic Nonparametric Methods
Nonparametric methods typically approximate the be-
lief by points. There are two types of nonparametric
methods: deterministic and Monte Carlo (i. e., nonde-
terministic). The most common deterministic methods
are grids and histogram ﬁlters (HF). For these meth-
ods, the points are arranged in a grid pattern with each
point representing a grid cell. The most common Monte
Carlo methods are importance sampling (IS) and parti-
cle ﬁlters (PF). For Monte Carlo methods, the points
are sampled randomly from the state space and called
samples or particles.
Static Case
Via Bayes rule, the belief bel.X/ can be shown to be
proportional to p.DjX/p.X/. The ﬁrst factor is the mea-
surement model. The second factor, bel.X/ WD p.X/, is
called the Bayesian prior, which represents our belief
about X before obtaining measurements D. Hence, with
this notation, we can write
bel D  p.DjX/ bel :
(41.7)
In the most common case, where it is only known that
the object is located within some bounded region of
space, a uniform prior is most appropriate. In this case,
the belief bel is proportional to the measurement model
and the equation (41.7) simpliﬁes to
bel D  p.DjX/ :
(41.8)
However, if an approximate object pose is known ahead
of time (e.g., an estimate produced from a vision sen-
sor), then it is common to use a Gaussian prior of some
covariance around the approximate pose.
Grid methods compute the unnormalized belief
p.DjX/ bel at the center of each grid cell and then nor-
malize over all the grid cells to obtain an estimate of the
belief bel.
Monte Carlo methods use importance sampling. For
uniform priors, the particles are sampled uniformly
from the state space. For more complex priors, the parti-
cles have to be sampled from the prior distribution bel.
The importance weight for each particle is set to the
measurement model p.DjX/ and the entire set of im-
portance weights is normalized so that the weights add
up to 1.
Dynamic Case
Given the measurement model p.DjX/, the dynamics
model p.XtjXt1/, and measurements fD1; : : : ; Dtg up
to time t, the belief can be computed recursively us-
ing a Bayesian ﬁlter algorithm, which relies on the
Bayesian recursion equation
belt D  p.DtjXt/ belt :
(41.9)
To compute (41.9), the Bayesian ﬁlter alternates two
steps: (a) the dynamics update, which computes the
prior
belt D 
Z
p .XtjXt1/ belt1 dXt1 ;
(41.10)
and (b) the measurement update, which computes the
measurement model p.DtjXt/.
A grid-based implementation of the Bayesian ﬁlter
is called a histogram ﬁlter. Histogram ﬁlters compute
(41.9) for each grid cell separately. At the start of time
step t, the grid cell stores its estimate of the belief
belt1 from the previous time step. During the dynam-
ics update, the value of the prior belt at this grid cell is
computed using (41.10), where the integral is replaced
by a summation over all grid cells. During the measure-
ment update, the measurement model is computed at
the center of the grid cell and multiplied by the value
of the grid cell (i. e., the prior). Then, values of all grid
cells are normalized so they add up to 1. Since during
dynamics update, a summation over all grid cells has to
be carried out for each grid cell, the computational com-
plexity of histogram ﬁlters is quadratic in the number of
grid cells.
A Monte Carlo implementation of the Bayesian ﬁl-
ter is called a particle ﬁlter. The particle set representing
the prior belt is produced during the dynamics update
as follows. The particles are resampled (see [41.30] for
a tutorial on resampling) from the belief at the previous
time step, belt1, and then moved according to the dy-
namics model with the addition of some motion noise.
This produces a set of particles representing the prior
belt. The measurement update is performed using im-
portance sampling as in the static case above. Note that

Active Manipulation for Perception
41.2 Object Localization
1043
Part D | 41.2
unlike for the histogram ﬁlters, there is no per-particle
summation during the dynamics update, and thus, the
computational complexity of particle ﬁlters is linear in
the number of particles.
41.2.4 Advanced Inference Methods
Although suitable for some problems, basic nonpara-
metric methods have a number of shortcomings. There
are two main issues.
1. While a rigid body positioned in space has 6 DOFs,
the basic methods can only be used for localiza-
tion with up to 3 DOFs. Beyond 3 DOFs, these
methods become computationally prohibitive due
to exponential growth in the number of particles
(or grid cells) required. The reason for the expo-
nential blow-up is as follows. In order to localize
the object, we need to ﬁnd its most likely poses,
i. e., the peaks of belt. These peaks (also called
modes) are very narrow, and, hence, the space needs
to be densely populated with particles in order to
locate them. The number of particles required to
achieve the same density per unit volume goes up
exponentially with the number of DOFs. Hence, the
computational complexity of nonparametric meth-
ods also grows exponentially with the number of
DOFs. This is known as the curse of dimensionality.
2. Another important issue is that the performance
of basic nonparametric methods actually degrades
with increase in sensor accuracy. This problem is
especially pronounced in particle ﬁlters. Although
it may seem very unintuitive at ﬁrst, the reason is
simple. The more accurate the sensor the narrower
the peaks of the belief. Thus, more and more par-
ticles are required to ﬁnd these peaks. We can call
this problem curse of accurate sensor.
Several more advanced methods have been devel-
oped to combat the shortcomings of basic methods.
Below, we detail one such method, called scaling se-
ries, and brieﬂy discuss a few others.
Scaling Series
Scaling series is an inference algorithm designed to
scale better to higher dimensional problems than the
basic methods [41.28, Chap. 2]. In particular, it is
capable of solving the full 6 DOF localization prob-
lem. Moreover, unlike for basic methods, the accu-
racy of scaling series improves with increase in sen-
sor accuracy. For this reason, this algorithm may be
preferable to basic methods even in low-dimensional
problems.
Scaling series represents the belief by broad parti-
cles. Each particle is thought of as a representative for
an entire ı-neighborhood, that is, the volume of space of
radius ı surrounding the sample point. Instead of ﬁxing
the total number of particles (as in the basic methods),
scaling series adjusts this number as needed to obtain
good coverage of main peaks.
Peak width can be controlled using annealing,
which means that for a given temperature , the mea-
surement model is raised to the power of 1=. Hence,
for  D 1, the original measurement model is obtained,
whereas for  > 1 the measurement model is heated-
up. Annealing broadens the peaks of belt, making them
easier to ﬁnd. However, it also increases ambiguity and
decreases accuracy (Fig. 41.4). To make sure that ac-
curacy is not compromised, scaling series combines
annealing with iterative reﬁnements as we detail below.
The Static Case Algorithm. Let us ﬁrst consider the
case, where the prior bel is uniform. Scaling series starts
by uniformly populating the space with very broad
particles (i. e., with large ı). It evaluates the annealed
measurement model for each particle and prunes out
low probability regions of space. Then, it reﬁnes the
estimate with slightly narrower particles, and repeats
again and again until a sufﬁciently accurate estimate is
obtained. Peak width is controlled during iterations us-
ing annealing, to make sure that each particle is able
to represent its ı-neighborhood well. As the value of
ı decreases during iterations, the density of particles
per volume of ı-neighborhood is kept constant to main-
tain good particle density near peaks. We can think of
ı as peak width, which decreases (due to annealing)
with iterations. At each iteration, the ı-neighborhood
of each peak will have the same ﬁxed number of
particles.
The formal algorithm listing is given in Algo-
rithm 41.1, where
Sı
denotes a ı-neighborhood
and
dim X
is
the
dimensionality
of
the
state
space. The algorithm relies on three subroutines.
Even_Density_Cover samples a ﬁxed number
a)
b)
Fig.41.4a,b True (a) and annealed (b) belief for localization of the
cash register [41.28]. The cash register model is shown as a wire
frame. The small colored squares represent high likelihood parti-
cles. Note that annealing makes the problem much more ambiguous

Part D | 41.2
1044
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
of particles from each ı-neighborhood of a volume
of space. It can be easily implemented using rejec-
tion sampling. Importance_Weights computes
normalized importance weights using the annealed
measurement model p.DjX/1=. The Prune sub-
routine prunes out low probability regions. This step
can be done either by weighted resampling or by
thresholding on the weights.
The algorithm returns an approximation of the be-
lief represented by a weighted particle set X, where
the weights W are set according to the measurement
model, which in the case of uniform prior is propor-
tional to the belief (41.8). Extension to the case of
nonuniform prior can be done by simply multiplying
the resulting weights by the prior. Sampling from the
prior at the start of scaling series may also be useful.
See
VIDEO 721 for an example, where scaling series
is successfully applied to 6-DOF localization of a cash
register.
Algorithm 41.1 Scaling series algorithm for belief
estimation
Input:
V0 – initial uncertainty region,
D – data set,
M – number of particles per ı-neighborhood,
ı – terminal value of ı.
1: ı0  Radius.V0/
2: zoom  21=dim X
3: N  blog2.Volume.Sı0/=Volume.Sı//c
4: for n D 1 to N do
5:
ın  zoom  ın1
6:
n  .ın=ı/2
7:
Xn  Even_Density_Cover (Vn1; M)
8:
Wn  Importance_Weights (Xn; n; D)
9:
Xn  Prune (Xn; Wn)
10:
Vn  Union_Delta_Neighborhoods
(Xn; ın)
11: end for
12: X  Even_Density_Cover (VN; M)
13: W  Importance_Weights(X; 1; D)
Output:
.X; W/ – a weighted particle set approximating the
belief.
Dynamic Case. Scaling series can be extended to
the dynamic case using the same technique as in the
histogram ﬁlter. During the measurement update, the
measurement model is estimated using scaling series
with a uniform prior. This produces a set of weighted
particles Xt. During the dynamics update, the impor-
tance weights are adjusted to capture the motion model
via the Bayesian recursion equation (41.9). To do this,
for each particle Xt in Xt, the importance weight is
multiplied by the prior belt.Xt/. Like in the histogram
ﬁlter, the prior at a point Xt is computed by replacing
the integral in (41.10) with a summation, except now
the summation is done over all particles in Xt1. For
other versions of dynamic scaling series, refer to [41.28,
Chapter 2].
Other Advanced Inference Methods
Other advanced methods have been used to solve
the tactile object localization problem, including the
annealed particle ﬁlter (APF) [41.25], the GRAB
algorithm [41.31], and the manifold particle ﬁlter
(MPF) [41.32].
The APF algorithm is similar to scaling series as
it also uses particles and iterative annealing. This al-
gorithm was originally developed for articulated object
tracking based on vision data [41.33, 34]. Unlike scal-
ing series, APF keeps the number of particles constant
at each iteration and the annealing schedule is derived
from the particle set itself based on survival rate. Due
to these properties, APF handles poorly in multimodal
scenarios [41.35], which are prevalent in tactile object
localization.
The GRAB algorithm is based on grids and mea-
surement model bounds. It performs iterative grid re-
ﬁnements and prunes low-probability grid cells based
on measurement model bounds. Unlike the majority of
inference methods, GRAB is able to provide guaranteed
results as long as the measurement model bounds are
sound. It is well-suited for problems with many discon-
tinuities, for example, whenever negative information is
used in the measurement model. However, for smooth
measurement models (such as the proximity model),
GRAB has been shown to be slower than scaling se-
ries [41.28].
Similarly to the dynamic version of scaling se-
ries, the MPF algorithm samples particles from the
measurement model and weighs them by the dynam-
ics model. However, to sample from the measure-
ment model, MPF draws a set of particles from the
contact manifold, deﬁned as the set of object states
that contact a sensor without penetrating. Then, MPF
weights these new particles by propagating prior par-
ticles forward using the dynamics model and applying
kernel density estimation. Since the contact manifold
is a lower dimensional manifold than the full state
space of object poses, the MPF requires fewer parti-
cles than a traditional PF. It is not yet known if the
improvement is sufﬁcient to handle the full 6 DOF
problem. However, it has been shown that MPF is
capable of handling accurate sensors [41.32]. While
MPF provides a method for sampling from the contact
manifold for a single contact, it is unclear how to ex-

Active Manipulation for Perception
41.2 Object Localization
1045
Part D | 41.2
tend this approach to the case of multiple simultaneous
contacts.
41.2.5 Planning
In order to localize an object, we need a strategy for
gathering the data. Since each touch action can take
signiﬁcant time to execute, it is particularly important
to accomplish the task with as few touches as possible.
In this section, we will cover how to generate candi-
date actions and how to select which action to execute,
with the goal of either localizing the object or grasping
it with a high probability of task success.
Candidate Action Generation
The ﬁrst step in selecting actions for tactile localiza-
tion is to generate a set of candidate motions. While
the object’s pose is uncertain, we would like to avoid
knocking over the object or damaging the robot. For this
reason, actions are generally guarded motions, where
the robot stops moving upon detecting contact. For
multiﬁngered robots, it may be advantageous to close
the ﬁngers upon detecting contact, in order to generate
more than one contact point per action.
Candidate motions can be automatically generated
in a similar manner to randomized or heuristic grasp
planning methods (such as [41.36] or [41.37]). This ap-
proach is particularly useful if the goal is to generate
multiple ﬁngertip contacts, because any motion that is
likely to grasp the object is also likely to result in infor-
mative contacts.
One option is to generate a small pool of good
candidate motions based on the object shape, and to ex-
ecute them relative to the current most-likely state of
the object, as in [41.38]. Another option is to generate
a larger pool of motions that are ﬁxed with respect to the
world, as in [41.39]. Finally, we can generate paths that
speciﬁcally target disambiguating features. For exam-
ple, Schneiter and Sheridan [41.40] show how to select
paths that are guaranteed to disambiguate among re-
maining object shape and pose hypotheses, or if none
such are possible, how to select paths that at least guar-
antee that something will be learned.
Bayesian Formulation of Planning
Once a pool of candidate actions has been created, the
problem of selecting an optimal action to take next can
be formulated as a partially observable Markov deci-
sion process (POMDP). Details on POMDPs can be
found in Chap. 14. Brieﬂy, a POMDP consists of a set
of states X WD fXig, a set of actions A WD fAjg, a set of
observations D WD fDkg. Both measurement model and
dynamics model from Sect. 41.2.2 are now conditioned
on the action A taken. This change is clearly visible
• • •
• • •
X0
A1
A2
At
X1
Xt
1
X2
2
t
Fig. 41.5 Bayesian network representation of the planning
problem. Note how it differs from Fig. 41.1b. Measure-
ments Dt now depend on both the state Xt and the action
chosen At. The state Xt evolves based on both the prior
state Xt1 and the chosen action At
in the dynamic Bayesian network representation of the
problem: compare Fig. 41.5 to Fig. 41.1b. Hence, the
dynamics model is now p.XtjXt1; At/, which is often
called the transition model in the context of POMDPs. It
represents the probability distribution of state Xt, given
that we were in state Xt1 and executed action At. Sim-
ilarly, the measurement model is now p.DjX; A/. For
problems where the state X is continuous, the state
space is typically discretized using either a grid or a set
of particles.
For tactile object localization, the states are the ac-
tual object poses, the actions are our candidate robot
motions (which may or may not touch the object), and
the observations can include tactile and/or propriocep-
tive information gained while executing actions. We do
not actually know the true underlying object pose, but
at any given time t, we can estimate the uncertain be-
lief belt about the object pose using methods described
in Sect. 41.2.3. In the context of POMDPs, the belief is
often referred to as the belief state.
A POMDP policy speciﬁes an action A, for every
possible belief. Intuitively, there is an optimal policy
that would get the robot to the goal state most efﬁciently
for any possible starting state. This optimal policy can
be found using value or policy iteration algorithms.
However, for the problem of tactile localization, these
algorithms are typically computationally prohibitive for
any practical discretization of the state space. Hence,
this problem is usually solved using methods that ap-
proximate the optimal policy for a subset of states.
For instance, online replanning using one-step or multi-
step lookahead is nonoptimal but usually provides good
results.
For a subset of tactile localization problems, one-
step lookahead has been shown to be nearly opti-
mal [41.41]. Problems in this class satisfy two as-
sumptions: (1) the object is stationary and does not
move when touched (e.g., a heavy appliance), and
(2) the actions being considered are a ﬁxed set of
motions regardless of the current belief. With these as-

Part D | 41.2
1046
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
sumptions, tactile localization can be formulated as an
adaptive submodular information-gathering problem.
Adaptive submodularity is a property of information-
gathering problems where actions have diminishing
returns, and taking additional actions never results in
loss of information.
One-Step Lookahead
One way to select the next action is to consider the
expected effect of each action on the belief about the
object pose. Figure 41.6 shows examples of the effect
of different actions on different beliefs.
Based on the possible object poses according to the
current belief belt, we need to consider the possible out-
comes of each action A. However, the same action can
result in different outcomes depending on the actual ob-
ject pose, which is not known to us exactly.
Simulation Experiments. Since we can not deter-
mine the effect of action A exactly, we approximate it
by performing a series of simulation experiments. Let
Xt be the current set of state hypotheses. For histogram
ﬁlters, this can be the entire set X. For particle ﬁlters,
it is the current set of particles. For each particular ob-
ject pose X 2 Xt, we can use a geometric simulation
to determine where the hand will stop along a guarded
motion A, and what observation D we are likely to see.
Then, we can perform a Bayesian update of belt to ob-
tain the simulated belief f
belA;D that would result if we
chosen action A and observed D. Let DA denote the set
of all simulated observations we obtained for an action
A using these experiments.
z
z
z
y
a)
b)
c)
d)
y
z
y
y
abest
abest
abest
abest
Σ
Σ
Σ
Σ
Fig.41.6a-d Selecting an action using a KLD-based utility func-
tion on examples of localizing a door handle. For each example, the
starting belief belt is shown on the left. The action chosen A WD abest
and the resulting belief beltC1 after executing the action are shown
on the right. Color shows the probability of the state, ranging from
high (red) to low (blue). (a) Sharp prior along the z-axis. (b) Sharp
prior diagonal z–y-axis. (c) Sharp prior along the y-axis. (d) Wide
prior along the diagonal z–y-axis (after [41.39])
To completely account for all possible outcomes,
we need to simulate all possible noisy executions of
action A and all possible resulting noisy observations
D. However, restricting our consideration to the set of
noise-free simulations works well in practice.
Each action A may also have an associated cost
C.A; D/, which represents how expensive or risky it is
to execute A. Note, that the action cost may depend on
the observation D. For example, if the cost is the amount
of time it takes to execute A, then depending on where
the contact is sensed, the same guarded motion will stop
at a different time along the trajectory.
Utility Function. In order to decide which action to
take, we need a utility function U.A/ that allows us to
compare different possible actions. The utility function
should take into account both the usefulness of the ac-
tion as well as its cost.
To localize the object, we want to reduce the un-
certainty about its pose. Hence, we can measure action
usefulness in terms of uncertainty of the resulting be-
lief. Intuitively, the lower the uncertainty, the higher
the usefulness of an action. The amount of uncertainty
in a belief can be measured using entropy, which for
a probability distribution q.X/ is deﬁned as
H.q/ WD 
Z
q.X/ log q.X/ dX :
(41.11)
For each simulated belief f
belA;D, we deﬁne its utility to
be a linear combination of its usefulness (i. e., certainty)
and cost
U.f
belA;D/ WD H.f
belA;D/  ˇC.A; D/ ;
(41.12)
where ˇ is a weight that trades off cost and useful-
ness [41.39]. Since we do not know what observation
we will get after executing action A, we deﬁne its util-
ity to be the expected utility of the resulting belief based
on all possible observations
U.A/ WD ED
h
U.f
belA;D/
i
:
(41.13)
Based on the simulation experiments, this expectation
can be estimated as a weighted sum over all the experi-
ments
U.A/ 
X
D2DA
wDU.f
belA;D/ ;
(41.14)
where the weight wD is the probability of the state X that
was used to generate the observation D. More specif-
ically, for a grid representation of state space, each
D 2 DA was generated using some X 2 Xt, and thus, wD

Active Manipulation for Perception
41.2 Object Localization
1047
Part D | 41.2
is the belief estimated for the grid point X. If Xt is rep-
resented by a set of weighted particles, then wD is the
weight of particle X 2 Xt used to generate the observa-
tion D.
With this utility function in mind, the best action to
execute is the one with the highest utility
Abest WD argmax
A
h
U.A/
i
:
(41.15)
Since the utility function depends on negative entropy,
methods that maximize this utility function are often
called entropy minimization methods.
Alternative Utility Measures. Other measures of use-
fulness are also possible, such as reduction in average
variance of the belief or Kullback–Leibler divergence
(KLD) of the simulated belief from the current belief.
However, KLD is only applicable for problems where
the object is stationary as this metric does not support
a changing state. An example of action selection using
KLD metric is shown in Fig. 41.6.
If the goal is to successfully grasp the object, not
just to localize it, then it makes more sense to select ac-
tions that maximize probability of grasp success rather
than simply minimizing entropy. Success criteria for
grasping can, for instance, be expressed geometrically
as ranges in particular dimensions of object pose uncer-
tainty that are required for a task to succeed. For a given
belief, we can add up the probabilities correspond-
ing to the object poses (states) for which executing
a desired, task-directed grasp would succeed open-
loop, and maximize that value rather than minimizing
entropy. Action selection can still be done using one-
step-lookahead. Using this metric instead of the one in
(41.12) simply allows us to concentrate on reducing
uncertainty along important dimensions, while pay-
ing less attention to unimportant dimensions [41.42].
For example, the axial rotation of a nearly cylindrical
object is unimportant if it only needs to be grasped
successfully.
Multi-step Planning in Belief Space
While in some situations one-step-lookahead methods
give good results, in other situations it may be ad-
vantageous to look more than one step ahead. This is
especially true if actions take a long time to execute,
and/or if the plan can be stored and reused for multiple
manipulation attempts.
Multi-step lookahead can be performed by con-
structing a ﬁnite-depth search tree (Fig. 41.7 for il-
lustration). Starting with the current belief belt, we
consider possible ﬁrst-step actions A1; : : : ; A3 and sim-
ulate observations D11; : : : ; D32. For each simulated
observation, we perform a belief update to obtain the
simulated beliefs B11; : : : ; B32. For each of these simu-
lated beliefs, we consider possible second-step actions
(of which only A4; : : : ; A6 are shown). For each of
the second-step actions, we again simulate observations
and compute simulated beliefs. This process is repeated
for third-step actions, fourth-step actions, and so on, un-
til the desired number of steps is reached. The example
in Fig. 41.7 shows the search tree for two-step looka-
head.
After the tree is constructed from the top down to
the desired depth, scoring is performed from the bottom
up. Leaf beliefs are evaluated using the chosen utility
metric. In the example in Fig. 41.7, the leafs shown
are B41; : : : ; B62. For each leaf, we show the entropy
H and cost ˇC. The utility of each corresponding ac-
tion A4; : : : ; A6 is then computed by taking expectation
over all observations that were simulated for that ac-
tion. Note that we have to take expectations at this level
because we have no control over which of the simu-
lated observations we will actually observe. However,
at the next level, we do have control over which action
to execute, and we select the action with the maxi-
mum utility [41.42]. We compute the utility of beliefs
B11; : : : ; B32 by subtracting their cost from the utility of
the best action among their children. For example,
U.B22/ D U.A6/  ˇC.A2; D22/ :
(41.16)
In this manner, expectation and maximization can be
carried out for multiple levels of the tree until the top
is reached. Maximization at the very top level selects
the most optimum action to execute next. Bold lines
in Fig. 41.7 show the possible action sequences this
algorithm would consider optimal depending on the
possible observations made.
When searching to a depth greater than 1, branch-
ing on every possible observation is likely to be pro-
hibitive. Instead, we can cluster observations based on
how similar they are into a small number of canon-
ical observations and only branch on these canonical
observations.
Performing a multistep search allows us to include
any desired ﬁnal grasps as actions. These actions can re-
sult in early termination if the success criterion is met,
but can also function as possible information-gathering
actions if the criterion is not met. It also allows us to rea-
son about actions that may be required to make desired
grasps possible, such as reorienting the object to bring
it within reach. As shown in [41.42], a two-step looka-
head search is usually sufﬁcient. Searching to a depth of
3 generally yields little additional beneﬁt. One full se-
quence of information-gathering, grasping, and object
reorientation using a multistep search with a depth of 2

Part D | 41.2
1048
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
···
U=6.7
···
U=3.6
···
U=7.6
Maximum
Expectation
A1
U=4.1
B11
	C=0.4
B12
	C=1.7
A2
U=8.2
D22
P=0.7
U=8.8
Expectation
D12
P=0.5
U=1.9
D11
P=0.5
U=6.3
A1
U=4.1
B31
	C=0.5
B32
	C=0.9
···
U=9.7
···
U=6.8
Expectation
D32
P=0.8
U=5.9
D31
P=0.2
U=9.2
B21
	C=0.8
B22
	C=0.7
Maximum
Expectation
A5
U=5.2
D52
P=0.7
U=4.2
D51
P=0.3
U=7.5
B52
	C=1.5
H=–5.7
B51
	C=0.9
H=–8.4
Expectation
A4
U=6.9
D42
P=0.8
U=6.5
D41
P=0.2
U=8.7
B42
	C=0.6
H=–7.1
B41
	C=0.8
H=–9.5
Expectation
A6
U=9.5
D62
P=0.6
U=10.1
D61
P=0.4
U=8.6
B62
	C=0.5
H=–10.6
B61
	C=1.2
H=–9.8
D21
P=0.3
U=6.8
belt
Fig. 41.7 Part of a depth-2 search tree through belief space, for three actions at each level and two canonical observa-
tions for each action; belt is the current belief. A1; : : : ; A6 are actions. D11; : : : ; D62 are simulated observations. And
B11; : : : ; B62 are simulated beliefs. We can compute the entropy H and action cost ˇ C at the leafs, and thus compute
the utility metric U for each leaf. Then, working upward from the bottom, we can compute the expected utility U of
actions A4; : : : ; A6 by taking a weighted sum of their children. We then select the action with maximum utility (A6 in this
example) and use its utility U.A6/ to compute the utility at node B22 using (41.16). The same operation is repeated for
the upper levels, and at the top level we ﬁnally select the action with the highest utility as the best action to be performed
(A2 in this example) (after [41.42])
for grasping a power drill is shown in Fig. 41.8, and in
VIDEO 77 .
Other Planning Methods
There are many other possible methods for selecting
actions while performing Bayesian state estimation for
tactile object localization and grasping. As long as we
continue to track the belief with one of the inference
methods described above, even random actions can
make progress toward successfully localizing the ob-
ject. In this section, we will describe a few signiﬁcantly
different approaches to action selection for Bayesian
object localization.
The planning methods we have described so far
used either guarded motions or move-until-contact, to
avoid disturbing or knocking over the object. However,
one can instead use the dynamics of object pushing
to both localize and constrain the object’s pose in
the process of push-grasping, as in Dogar and Srini-
vasa [41.43].
Also, instead of using entire trajectories as ac-
tions, we could consider smaller motions as actions
out of which larger trajectories could be built. In this
case, one- or two-step lookahead will be insufﬁcient
to get good results. Instead, we would need to con-
struct plans consisting of many steps. In other words,
we would need a much longer planning horizon. The
challenge is that searching through belief space as de-
scribed above is exponential in the planning horizon. In
Platt et al. [41.44], the authors get around this problem
by assuming the current most likely state is true and
searching for longer horizon plans that will both reach
the goal and also differentiate the current most likely
hypothesis from other sampled, competing states. If we

Active Manipulation for Perception
41.3 Learning About an Object
1049
Part D | 41.3
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
g)
h)
i)
Fig.41.8a–i An example sequence of grasping a powerdrill based on a depth-2 search through belief space. The right-
hand side of each pair of images shows the grasp just executed, while the left-hand side shows the resulting belief.
The dark blue ﬂat rectangle and the red point-outline of the powerdrill show the most likely state, while the light blue
rectangles show states that are 1 standard deviation away from the mean in each dimension .x; y; /. Panels (a–c) and
(e–g) show information-gathering grasps being used to localize the drill, panel (d) shows the robot reorienting the drill
to bring the desired grasp within reach, and panels (h) and (i) show the robot using the desired ﬁnal grasp on the drill,
lifting, and pulling the trigger successfully (after [41.42])
monitor the belief during execution and replan when-
ever it diverges by more than a set threshold, the goal
will eventually be reached because each hypothesis will
be either conﬁrmed (and thus the goal reached) or dis-
proved.
Finally, while the above methods can be used for
planning for what we termed global localization (i. e.,
object localization under high uncertainty), if the ob-
ject needs to be localized in an even broader context, as
when trying to locate an object somewhere in a kitchen,
then we may have to plan to gather information with
higher level actions (e.g., opening cabinets). Such ac-
tions could be reasoned about using symbolic task
planning, as in Kaelbling and Lozano-Perez [41.45].
41.3 Learning About an Object
While the previous section focused on localization of
known objects, in this section, we discuss methods for
learning about a previously unknown object or environ-
ment. The goal is to build a representation of the object
that can later be useful for localization, grasp planning,
or manipulation of the object. A number of properties
may need to be estimated, including shape, inertia, fric-
tion, contact state, and others.
41.3.1 Shape of Rigid Objects
In this set of problems, the goal is to construct a 2-D or
a 3-D model of the object’s geometric shape by touch-
ing the object. Due to low data acquisition rate, touch-
based shape reconstruction faces special challenges as
compared to methods based on dense 3-D cameras or
scanners. These challenges dictate the choice of object
representation and exploration strategy.
While most of the work on shape reconstruction fo-
cuses on poking motions with the end-effector, some
methods rely on techniques such as rolling the object
in between planar palms equipped with tactile sen-
sors. In these methods, shape of the object can be
reconstructed from the contact curves traced out by the
object on the palms. These methods were ﬁrst devel-
oped for planar 2-D objects [41.46], and later extended
to 3-D [41.47].
Representation
The shape reconstruction process is heavily dependent
on the chosen representation. Since the data are sparse,
a simpler shape representation can signiﬁcantly speed
up the shape acquisition process.
Shape Primitives. The simplest representation is
a primitive shape: plane, sphere, cylinder, torus, tetrahe-

Part D | 41.3
1050
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Explored surface
Lateral wall
Ocean floor
Pipe
Stone
Reconstructed surface
Fig. 41.9 A combination of primitive
shapes and polygonal mesh is used
for modeling objects during an
underwater mapping experiment
(after [41.48])
dra, or cube. In this case, only a few parameters need to
be estimated based on the gathered data. For example,
Slaets et al. estimate the size of a cube by performing
compliant motions with the cube pressed against a ta-
ble [41.49].
Patchwork of Primitives. If one primitive does not
describe the whole object well, a patchwork of several
primitives may be used. Parts of the object are repre-
sented with subsurfaces of different primitives, which
are fused together [41.48] (Fig. 41.9),
VIDEO 76 . In
this case, a strategy for reﬁning the fusion boundaries
between primitives is needed and additional data may
be gathered for this speciﬁc purpose.
Super-quadrics. A slightly more complex primitive
shape is a super-quadric surface, which gives more ﬂex-
ibility than a simple primitive. Super-quadric surfaces
are surfaces described in spherical coordinates by
S.!1; !2/ WD
0
@
cx cos1 .!1/ cos2 .!2/
cy cos1 .!1/ sin2 .!2/
cz sin1 .!1/
1
A : (41.17)
The parameters cx; cy; and cz describe the extent of the
super-quadric along the axes x; y; and z, respectively.
By adjusting the exponents 1 and 2, we can vary the
resulting shape anywhere from an ellipse to a box. For
example, setting 1; 2 
 0 results in box shapes; 1 D
1; 2 
 0 results in cylindrical shapes; 1; 2 D 1 results
in ellipses. Hence, by estimating cx; cy; cz; 1; and 2, we
can model a rich variety of shapes [41.50].
Polygonal Mesh. When none of the parametric rep-
resentations capture the object’s shape well enough,
a polygonal mesh can be used. A polygonal mesh (or
poly-mesh) can represent arbitrary shapes as it con-
sists of polygons (typically, triangles) linked together
to form a surface (Fig. 41.2). The simplest method is
to link up collected data points to create faces (i. e., the
polygons) of the mesh. However, this method tends to
under-estimate the overall size of the object because
data points at object corners are rarely gathered. This
effect is present even for dense 3-D sensors, but espe-
cially noticeable here due to sparsity of the data. A more
accurate representation can be obtained by collecting
several data points for each polygonal face and, then,
intersecting the polygonal faces to obtain the corners of
the mesh. However, this tends to be a more involved,
manual process [41.28].
Point Cloud. Objects can also be represented as
clouds of gathered data points. In this case, the accuracy
of the representation directly depends on the density of
the gathered data and, hence, these methods typically
spend a lot of time collecting data [41.51, 52].
Splines. Two-dimensional objects can be represented
by splines. For example, Walker and Salisbury used
proximity sensors and a planar robot to map smooth
shapes placed on a ﬂat surface [41.53] (Fig. 41.10).
Fig. 41.10 A 2-D object is explored and represented by
splines (after [41.53])

Active Manipulation for Perception
41.3 Learning About an Object
1051
Part D | 41.3
Volumetric Grid Maps. Objects can also be repre-
sented by volumetric grids. For 2-D objects, this rep-
resentation is called an occupancy grid map. For 3-D
objects, it is called a voxel grid map. Each grid cell
represents a small part of the surface (or space) and
records a binary value (e.g., whether the cell is occupied
or not). This value is estimated based on gathered data
using probabilistic methods similar to the methods used
for mobile robot mapping with a 2-D laser [41.48, 54]
(Fig. 41.11). For additional information on occupancy
grid maps see Chap. 45.
Data Gathering
Different types of data can be collected during mapping.
Tactile array images can be very informative for map-
ping planar objects. Sensed end-effector contact gives
3-D data points on the object surface. Link contacts can
also be estimated and used for mapping even without
sensory skin (Sect. 41.3.4 for more details). Moreover,
the volume swept by the robot arm provides negative
information, that is, the absence of obstacles in this
volume. All of this information can be used both for
mapping and for planning the next most informative
move.
Guided Exploration. In many applications, it is ac-
ceptable to have a human operator guide the collection
of data. This method allows for more accurate model
building because humans can select the best points to
sense on the object. Humans can also build variable
accuracy models, where more data are collected near
areas/features of interest and less data are collected
elsewhere.
Autonomous
Exploration. When
autonomous
model-building is required, a number of exploration
strategies exist. The simplest approach is to select
the sensing locations randomly. However, when using
random sampling, the density of the gathered data can
vary. An exhaustive strategy can ensure that points
are gathered with a speciﬁed density. A triangular
lattice arrangement has been shown to be the most
×104
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
–1.5
×104
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
×104
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
–1.5
×104
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
–1.5
–2
–2.5
×104
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
Fig. 41.11 Reconstruction of letters from tactile images. Pixels are colored by probability of occupancy in log-odds form. This
probability can be seen to be high on the letters themselves, to be low in the surrounding area where measurements were taken,
and to decay to the prior probability in the surrounding un-sensed area (after [41.54])
optimal for such a strategy; however, this method takes
considerable time. The most optimal decision about
the next sensing location can be made by considering
the amount of information that can be gained. These
techniques are similar to the techniques described in
Sect. 41.2.5. Several primitive and advanced explo-
ration strategies for tactile mapping are compared
in [41.48].
41.3.2 Articulated Objects
In all the prior sections, we were concerned with rigid
objects, which tend to be simpler to model. The next
step up in terms of complexity are objects comprised
of several rigid parts, which can move with respect to
each other. These objects are called articulated objects.
For many objects, the motion of connected parts with
respect to each other is restricted to only one or two
DOFs by prismatic or revolute joints. Examples of ar-
ticulated objects include simple objects such as doors,
cabinet drawers, and scissors, as well as more complex
objects such as robots and even humans (Fig. 41.12).
Manipulation can play an important role in mod-
eling novel articulated objects. By applying a force to
one part of an articulated object, we can observe how
the other parts move and thus infer relationships be-
tween parts. Observation can be performed via the sense
of touch or via some other sense, for example, vision.
For example, if a robot arm pulls/pushes a door com-
pliantly, its trajectory allows the robot to determine the
width of the door [41.57]. Alternatively, if a robot arm
pushes one handle of a pair of scissors, the location of
the scissors joint can be inferred by tracking visual fea-
tures with an overhead camera (Fig. 41.13).
A kinematic structure consisting of several revolute
and prismatic joints can be represented as a relational
model, which describes relationships between object
parts. In order to build a relational model of a multijoint
object, a robot needs an efﬁcient exploration strategy
for gathering the data. The exploration task can be de-
scribed using a Markov decision process, similar to
the ones discussed in Sect. 41.2.5. Since the goal is

Part D | 41.3
1052
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
0
0
Fig. 41.12 Robot manipulating a variety of common articulated objects (from left to right): a cabinet door that opens to the right,
a cabinet door that opens to the left, a dishwasher, a drawer, and a sliding cabinet door (after [41.55])
a)
b)
Fig.41.13a,b Robot exploring an
articulated object (after [41.56])
(a) a robot arm pushes one handle of
a pair of scissors to infer the location
of its joint, (b) the view from the
robot’s camera with tracked visual
features shown as green dots
to learn relational models, these Markov decision pro-
cesses (MDPs) are called relational Markov decision
processes (RMDPs). With the aid of RMDPs, robots
can learn efﬁcient strategies for exploring previously
unknown articulated objects, learning their kinematic
structure, and later manipulating them to achieve the
goal state [41.56].
Some kinematic structures do not consist entirely
of revolute and prismatic joints. A common exam-
ple is garage doors, which slide in and out along
a curved trajectory. General kinematic models can be
represented by Gaussian processes, which can capture
revolute, prismatic and other types of connections be-
tween parts [41.55],
VIDEO 78 .
41.3.3 Deformable Objects
Even more complex than articulated objects are de-
formable objects, which can be moved to form arbi-
trary shapes. The simplest of these are one-dimensional
(1-D) deformable objects, such as ropes, strings, and
cables. These objects are typically modeled as line
objects with arbitrary deformation capability (except
for stretching). A number of approaches can be found
in [41.58].
A more complex type of deformable objects are pla-
nar deformable objects, such as fabric or deformable
plastic sheets. While these objects can be represented as
networks of nodes, modeling interaction between these
nodes can get expensive and is not always necessary.
For example, Platt et al. developed an approach to map
planar deformable objects by swiping them between
the robot’s ﬁngers [41.59] (Fig. 41.14). These maps
can later be used for localization during subsequent
swipes, in a manner similar to indoor robot localization
on a map.
The most complex deformable objects are 3-D de-
formable objects. This category includes a great variety
of objects in our everyday environments: sponges, so-
fas, and bread are just a few examples. Moreover, in
medical robotics, tissues typically have to be mod-
eled as 3-D deformable objects. Since the stiffness and
composition of these objects can vary, they need to
be modeled as networks of nodes, where different in-
teraction can take place between distinct nodes. Such
Fig. 41.14 Robot exploring a 2-D deformable object (af-
ter [41.59])

Active Manipulation for Perception
41.3 Learning About an Object
1053
Part D | 41.3
a)
b)
c)
Fig.41.15a-c Model of a 3-D de-
formable object. The object at rest (a).
The object under inﬂuence of an
external force (b,c) (after [41.60]
models typically require a lot of parameters to describe
even reasonably small objects. Although, some efﬁ-
ciency improvements can be obtained by assuming that
subregions of the object have similar properties. De-
spite the challenges, 3-D deformable object modeling
has many useful applications, for example, a surgery
simulator or 3-D graphics. Burion et al. modeled 3-D
objects as a mass-spring system (Fig. 41.15), where
mass nodes are interconnected by springs [41.60]. By
applying forces to the object, we can observe the de-
formation and infer stiffness parameters of the springs
(i. e., elongation, ﬂexion, and torsion).
41.3.4 Contact Estimation
Up until now, we have assumed that the contact location
during data gathering was somehow known. However,
determining the contact point is not as straightforward
for robots as it is for humans, because robots are not
fully covered in sensory skin. Thus, during interaction
between a robot and its environment, nonsensing parts
of the robot can come in contact with the environment.
If such contact goes undetected, the robot and/or the
environment may be damaged. For this reason, touch
sensing is typically performed by placing sensors at the
end-effector and ensuring that the sensing trajectories
never bring nonsensing parts of the robot in contact with
the environment.
Clearly, end-effector-only sensing is a signiﬁcant
constraint, which is difﬁcult to satisfy in real-world
conditions. Work on whole-body sensory skin is on-
going [41.61], yet for now only small portions of
the robot’s surface tend to be covered with sensory
skin.
In lieu of sensory skin, contact can be estimated
from geometry of the robot and the environment via
active sensing with compliant motions. Once a con-
tact between the robot and the environment is detected
(e.g., via deviation in joint torques or angles), the robot
switches to the active sensing procedure. During this
procedure, the robot performs compliant motions (ei-
ther in hardware or software), by applying a small force
toward the environment and moving back and forth. In-
tuitively, the robot’s body carves out free space as it
moves, and thus, via geometrical reasoning, the shape
of the environment and contact points can be deduced.
However, from a mathematical perspective, this can be
done in several different ways.
One of the earliest approaches was developed by
Kaneko and Tanie, who formulated the self-posture
changability (SPC) method [41.63]. In SPC, the inter-
section of ﬁnger surfaces during the compliant motions
is taken to be the point of contact. This method works
well in areas of high curvature of the environment (e.g.,
corners), but can give noisy results in areas of shallow
curvature. In contrast to SPC, the space sweeping algo-
rithm by Jentoft and Howe marks all points on ﬁnger
surfaces as possible contact, and then gradually rules
out the possibilities [41.62] (Fig. 41.16). The space
sweeping algorithm provides less noisy estimates in ar-
eas of shallow curvature, but can be more susceptible
to even the smallest disturbances of the environment’s
surface.
Mathematically, contact estimation can also be for-
mulated as a Bayesian estimation problem. If the robot
moves using compliant motions as described above, the
>40mm
27 mm
14 mm
1 mm
Unexplored
Empty
Contact
–20
0
20
40
60
80
100
a)
b)
Electromagnetic
trackers
Finger
surface
Compliant
joint
Base link
Distal
link
60
40
20
0
–20
Fig. 41.16 (a) A two-link compliant ﬁnger used for contact
sensing. (b) The resulting model built by the space sweep-
ing algorithm (after [41.62])

Part D | 41.4
1054
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
sensor data are the joint angles of the robot. The state
is the shape and position of the environment, repre-
sented using one of the rigid object models described
in Sect. 41.3.1. Then, each possible state can be scored
using a probabilistic measurement model, for example,
the proximity model described in Sect. 41.2.2, and the
problem can be solved using Bayesian inference meth-
ods [41.64].
41.3.5 Physical Properties
Up until now, we have focused on ﬁguring out the shape
and articulation of objects. While there are some advan-
tages to doing so with tactile data as opposed to visual
data, visual data can also be used to generate shape and
articulation models. However, there are many proper-
ties of objects that are not easily detectable with vision
alone, such as surface texture and friction, inertial prop-
erties, stiffness, or thermal conductivity.
Friction and Surface Texture
Surface friction, texture, and roughness can be esti-
mated by dragging a ﬁngertip over the object. The
forces required to drag a ﬁngertip over a surface at
different velocities can be used to estimate surface
friction parameters [41.65–67]. Accelerometer or pres-
sure data is useful for estimating surface roughness (by
the amplitude and frequency of vibration while slid-
ing) [41.67, 68], or more directly identifying surface
textures using classiﬁcation techniques such as sup-
port vector machines (SVMs) or k-nearest neighbours
(k-NNs) [41.69]. The position of the ﬁngertip being
dragged across the surface is also useful for estimating
surface roughness and for mapping out small surface
features [41.65]. Static friction is also often estimated
as a by-product of trying to avoid object slip during
a grasp, based on the normal force being applied at
the moment when slip happens [41.70, 71]. Finally, the
support friction distribution for an object sliding on
a surface can be estimated by pushing the object at
different locations and seeing how it moves [41.53,
72].
Inertia
Atkeson et al. [41.73] estimate the mass, center of mass,
and moments of inertia of a grasped object, using mea-
surements from a wrist force-torque sensor. Objects
that are not grasped but that are sitting on a table can
be pushed; if the pushing forces at the ﬁngertips are
known, the object’s mass as well as the center of mass
(COM) and inertial parameters in the plane can be
estimated. Yu et al. [41.74] do so by pushing objects us-
ing two ﬁngertips equipped with force/torque sensors
and recording the ﬁngertip forces, velocities, and accel-
erations. Tanaka and Kushihama [41.75] estimate the
object’s mass by pushing the object with known contact
force and watching the resulting motion with a camera.
Stiffness
Identifying the stiffness (or the inverse, compliance)
of an object is useful in terms of modeling the ma-
terial properties of an object, but more directly, it is
also useful for preventing the robot from crushing or
damaging delicate objects. Gently squeezing an ob-
ject and measuring the deﬂection seen for a given
contact normal force is one method often used to es-
timate stiffness [41.68, 76, 77]. Omata et al. [41.78] use
a piezoelectric transducer and a pressure sensor element
in a feedback circuit that changes its resonant frequency
upon touching an object, to estimate the object’s acous-
tic impedance (which varies with both object stiffness
and mass). Burion et al. [41.60] use particle ﬁlters to es-
timate the stiffness parameters of a mass-spring model
for deformable objects, based on the displacements seen
when applying forces to different locations on the ob-
ject.
Thermal Conductivity
Thermal sensors are useful for identifying the ma-
terial composition of objects based on their thermal
conductivity. Fingertips with internal temperature sen-
sors [41.68, 79] can estimate the thermal conductivity
of the object by heating a robot ﬁngertip to above room
temperature, touching the ﬁngertip to the object, and
measuring the rate of heat loss.
41.4 Recognition
Another common goal of touch-based perception is to
recognize objects. As with more typical, vision-based
object recognition, the goal is to identify the object from
a set of possible objects. Some methods assume known
object shapes and try to ﬁgure out which object geom-
etry matches the sensor data best. Other methods use
feature-based pattern recognition to identify the object,
often with a bag-of-features model that does not rely
on geometric comparisons to overall object shape. Fi-
nally, there are methods that use object properties such
as elasticity or texture to identify objects.
41.4.1 Object Shape Matching
Any of the methods for shape-based localization can
also be used for recognition, by performing localiza-

Active Manipulation for Perception
41.4 Recognition
1055
Part D | 41.4
tion on all potential objects. In terms of the equations
used in Sect. 41.2, if we are considering a limited num-
ber of potential objects with known mesh models, we
can simply expand our state space to include hypothe-
ses over object identity and pose, instead of just pose. If
we add an object identiﬁer (ID) to each state in the state
vector X, and use the appropriate mesh model for that
object ID for the measurement model for each state, all
of the equations used in the previous sections still hold.
The object ID for the combined object shape and pose
that best matches the collected sensor data is then our
top object hypothesis.
Nonprobabilistic methods for localization and ob-
ject recognition often involve geometrically pruning
objects from a set of possible object shapes/poses
that do not match sensed data. For instance, Gaston
and Lozano-Perez [41.1] and Grimson and Lozano-
Perez [41.2] recognize and localize polyhedral objects
by using the positions and normals of sensed contact
points in a generate-and-test framework: generate fea-
sible hypotheses about pairings between sensed contact
points and object surfaces, and test them for consis-
tency based on constraints over pairs of sensed points
and their hypothesized face locations and normals. Rus-
sell [41.80] classify tactile array images as point, line,
or area contacts, and use the time-sequence of contacts
seen when rolling the object over the array to prune in-
consistent object shapes.
Other methods recognize objects by
forming
a model of the object, then matching the new
model with database objects. For instance, Allen and
Roberts [41.81] build superquadric models of the ob-
ject from contact data, then match the superquadric
parameters against a database of object models. Caselli
et al. [41.82] build polyhedral representations of objects
(one based on contact points and normals that repre-
sents the space that the true object must ﬁt inside, and
one based on just contact points that the true object
Fig. 41.17 Some objects and their associated tactile images for both left and right ﬁngertips (after [41.83])
Fig. 41.18 Vocabulary of tactile images created using unsupervised clustering. Only the left ﬁnger’s image is shown for
each pair (after [41.83])
must envelop), and use the resulting representations to
prune incompatible objects in a database of polyhedral
objects.
41.4.2 Statistical Pattern Recognition
Many methods for tactile object recognition use tech-
niques from statistical pattern recognition, summariz-
ing sensed data with features and classifying the re-
sulting feature vectors to determine the identity of the
object. For instance, Schöpfer et al. [41.84] roll a tactile
array over objects along a straight line, compute fea-
tures such as image blob centroids and second or third
moments over the resulting time series of tactile im-
ages, and use a decision tree to classify objects based
on the resulting features. Bhattacharjee et al. [41.85]
use k-nearest-neighbors on a set of features based on
time series images from a forearm tactile array to iden-
tify whether an object is ﬁxed or movable, and rigid or
soft, in addition to recognizing the speciﬁc object.
Tactile array data is very similar to small image
patches in visual data, and so techniques for object
recognition using tactile arrays can look much like ob-
ject recognition techniques that use visual data. For
instance, Pezzementi et al. [41.86] and Schneider and
Sturm [41.83] both use a Bag-of-Features model on
ﬁngertip tactile array data to recognize objects. The
process for tactile data is almost the same as for vi-
sual images: for each training object (image), a set of
tactile array images (2-D image patches) is obtained
(Fig. 41.17), features (which are vectors of descriptive
statistics) based on each tactile image are computed,
and the features for all objects in the training set are
clustered to form a vocabulary of canonical features
(Fig. 41.18). Each object is represented as a histogram
of how often each feature occurs. When looking at
a new unknown object, the features computed from the
tactile array images are similarly used to compute a his-

Part D | 41.4
1056
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
togram, and then the new histogram is compared against
those of the objects in the database to ﬁnd the best
match. The one notable difference in the two domains
is that tactile data is much more time-consuming and
difﬁcult to obtain than appropriate image patches: in
2-D visual object recognition, an interest point detec-
tion algorithm can quickly produce hundreds of salient
patches from a given 2-D image, whereas for tactile ob-
ject recognition, each tactile array requires touching the
object, which in turn requires a planner (such as the
ones described in Sect .41.2.5) to decide how to gather
appropriate tactile data.
Tactile object exploration also allows one to gather
and use information besides just tactile image patches:
for instance, Gorges and Navarro [41.87] envelop ob-
jects in a multiﬁngered hand, and use the resulting
joint angles as features that directly relate to object
dimensions, alongside additional features computed
from tactile image patterns. In [41.88], Pezzementi and
Hager combine techniques from vision-based object
recognition with the type of Bayesian recognition-by-
localization described in Sect. 41.4.1, using pairs of
ﬁngertip tactile image features along with their posi-
tions and surface normals to update a belief state over
object poses and identities.
41.4.3 Recognition by Material Properties
Tactile object recognition sometimes has signiﬁcant
advantages over purely visual object recognition, par-
ticularly in cases where objects are visually similar
but have different material properties detectable by
tactile sensors. A number of recent methods classify ob-
jects using properties such as elasticity, surface texture,
and thermal conductivity. Any of the methods listed
in Sect. 41.3.5 can be used to identify objects, using
many of the techniques described in Sect. 41.4.2. For
instance, surface texture and roughness can be used to
distinguish objects, as in [41.69] or [41.67], as can ther-
mal conductivity, as in [41.79].
More speciﬁc properties can also be used to clas-
sify objects of particular types: for instance, Chitta
et al. [41.89] identify bottles and also classify them as
open or closed, full or empty by squeezing and rolling
them from side to side and using decision tree clas-
siﬁers on the resulting tactile measurements. Drimus
et al. [41.90] also identify objects by squeezing them,
but using k-nearest neighbor on the time series data
of tactile measurements after performing dynamic time
warping to align them.
41.4.4 Combining Visual and Tactile Sensing
Of course, visual object recognition also has advan-
tages over purely tactile methods, and so combining
data from both modalities can lead to even better object
recognition and localization. For instance, Allen [41.91]
uses sparse stereo data to provide regions of interest
to explore with tactile sensors, then fuses the stereo
data with the resulting tactile points to create sur-
face and feature descriptions, which are then matched
against objects in the database; object hypotheses are
further veriﬁed with tactile exploration. Boshra and
Zhang [41.92] recognize polyhedral objects by using
tactile features and visual vertices and edges to for-
mulate constraints in a constraint-satisfaction problem.
Nakamura [41.93] grasps objects and learns object cat-
egories based on visual data (in the form of SIFT
descriptors), audio information obtained while shaking
(using a codebook of audio features based on mel-
frequency cepstral coefﬁcients), and haptic information
obtained while squeezing (using hardness estimates
based on ﬁnger pressure sensor readings); the learning
and inference are done using probabilistic latent seman-
tic analysis (PLSA).
Segmenting an object from a visual scene (which
makes further efforts at recognition much easier) is
also made easier by combining visual and tactile sens-
ing; by pushing on an object and seeing which parts
of the visual scene move together, objects can be seg-
mented both from the background and from each other.
For instance, Gupta and Sukhatme [41.94] use RG-
B-D data along with manipulation primitives such as
spreading motions to segment and sort Duplo bricks,
and Hausman et al. [41.95] segment textureless ob-
jects in RGB-D data by performing visual segmen-
tation and then resolving ambiguities using pushing
motions.
Work on categorizing objects by their affordances
or functions often also uses both visual and tactile data.
For instance, Sutton et al. [41.96] uses both shape-based
reasoning (using shape derived from range images) as
well as interaction-based reasoning (using data from
the robot physically interacting with the object) to
predict and conﬁrm object affordances such as grasp-
ing, containing, and sitting (being suitable for humans
to sit upon). Bekiroglu [41.97] performs inference on
a Bayesian network using visual, proprioceptive, and
tactile data to assess whether an object/grasp combina-
tion will be both stable and also good for a task such as
pouring, hand-over, or dishwashing.

Active Manipulation for Perception
41.5 Conclusions
1057
Part D | 41.5
41.5 Conclusions
This chapter described perceptual methods that rely on
manipulation. Although these methods are generally
more complex than vision-based perception, they are
useful in low-visibility conditions, in determining prop-
erties that require manipulation, and in situations where
perception is needed for subsequent manipulation tasks.
Perception-via-manipulation faces special challenges
due to the low data acquisition rate and the fact that
each sensing action disturbs the scene. To address these
challenges, special inference methods have been devel-
oped to cope with situations where data are insufﬁcient
to fully constrain the problem (Sect. 41.2.3). Special
planning methods had to be applied to minimize the
number of sensing actions and reduce the possibility
of signiﬁcant scene disturbance or non-sensed contacts
(Sect. 41.2.5). These challenges also dictate the choice
of object models (Sect. 41.3), and play a role in object
recognition methods (Sect. 41.4).
41.5.1 Real-Life Applications
Perception-via-manipulation is already used in a num-
ber of real-world applications and an even greater
number of applications will likely beneﬁt from it in the
near future. In manufacturing, touch-based localization
of parts for machining or assembly is often preferred
to optical methods because it is not affected by optical
properties of objects (e.g., transparency or reﬂectivity).
At present, low uncertainty in part positioning is re-
quired prior to touch-based localization, which leads to
high instrumentation and reconﬁguration costs. How-
ever, the new localization methods presented in this
chapter can cope with high uncertainty and thus en-
able ﬂexible manufacturing lines capable of producing
a variety of parts without reconﬁguration. In the future,
fully automated in-home manufacturing may even be-
come possible.
Medical robotics is another mature real-world appli-
cation, in which robotic contact with the environment
(i. e., the patient) is not only unavoidable, it is in fact
required for many of the procedures. Visibility is often
poor, and sensing with devices that emit sound, light, or
other waves can be harmful to the patient. Under these
conditions, sensing-via-contact can sometimes be the
most viable option. The environment is inherently de-
formable, and thus, medical robotics has been a strong
driver for research on manipulation and perception of
deformable objects.
Another area in which robots are indispensable is
underwater robotics. It is not always safe or convenient
for humans to be performing tasks deep underwater,
and hence, remotely operated robots (ROVs) are a nat-
ural choice. ROVs even made international news during
recovery operations from the BP oil spill disaster in
the spring of 2010. Since visibility underwater is often
poor, perception-via-contact plays an even more impor-
tant role.
Beyond the more established robotic applications,
as the ﬁelds of service robotics and disaster recovery
develop, the necessity of sensing-via-contact becomes
more and more obvious. In these applications, robots
often have to work in clutter and in close proximity to
humans. Under these conditions, visibility can be poor,
yet at the same time, unsensed contact can be disas-
trous.
41.5.2 Future Directions of Research
Inspired by the many existing and potential applica-
tions, the ﬁeld of perception-by-manipulation is evolv-
ing and receiving more attention. Despite the chal-
lenges, there are bountiful opportunities for further
fruitful research:

The vast majority of touch-based perception work
deals with rigid objects, whereas many objects in
our environments are articulated and/or deformable.
These types of objects need to be studied in more
detail.

For rigid objects, touch-based perception of moving
objects, object piles, and objects in clutter has been
under-explored.

Whole-body contact estimation needs further atten-
tion, with or without sensory skin. The challenges
here are signiﬁcant, but good solutions would in-
crease the safety of robots in service applications
and other unstructured environments.

Last but not least, while Bayesian methods have
found wide acceptance in other areas of robotics,
touch-based perception has yet to fully beneﬁt from
these methods. Thus, application of Bayesian meth-
ods to any of the above listed areas is particularly
promising.
41.5.3 Further Reading
For a broader view, a lot of related material can be
found in other chapters throughout this handbook. Most
sensing-via-manipulation is done using contact or near-
contact (i. e., close-range) sensors. These sensors are
described in Chap. 28. A few approaches use classical
vision sensors in conjunction with manipulation (as in

Part D | 41
1058
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Sect. 41.3.2, for example). Vision sensors and methods
are covered in Chaps. 32 and 34. Manipulator design
and control are covered in Chaps. 4, 8, and 9. Other
relevant chapters include 7, 14 and 47 for planning
methods, 37, 45, and 46 for modeling, 33 for recogni-
tion, 5 and 35 for inference.
Video-References
VIDEO 76
Tactile exploration and modeling using shape primitives
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/41/videodetails/76
VIDEO 77
Tactile localization of a power drill
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/41/videodetails/77
VIDEO 78
Modeling articulated objects using active manipulation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/41/videodetails/78
VIDEO 721
Touch-based door handle localization and manipulation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/41/videodetails/721
VIDEO 723
6-DOF object localization via touch
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/41/videodetails/723
References
41.1
P.C. Gaston, T. Lozano-Perez: Tactile recognition
and localization using object models: The case of
polyhedra on a plane, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Ma-
chine Intell. 6(3), 257–266 (1984)
41.2
W.E.L. Grimson, T. Lozano-Perez: Model-based
recognition and localization from sparse range or
tactile data, Int. J. Robotics Res. 3, 3–35 (1984)
41.3
O.D. Faugeras, M. Hebert: A 3-D recognition and
positioning algorithm using geometrical matching
between primitive surfaces, Proc. 8th Intl. Jt. Conf.
Artif. Intell., Los Altos (1983) pp. 996–1002
41.4
S. Shekhar, O. Khatib, M. Shimojo: Sensor fu-
sion and object localization, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 3 (1986) pp. 1623–1628
41.5
Y.-B. Jia, M. Erdmann: Pose from pushing, Proc.
IEEE
Int. Conf.
Robotics
Autom. (ICRA)
(1996)
pp. 165–171
41.6
K.Y. Goldberg: Orienting polygonal parts without
sensors, Algorithmica 10(2-4), 201–225 (1993)
41.7
M.A. Erdmann, M.T. Mason: An exploration of sen-
sorless manipulation, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 4(4),
369–379 (1988)
41.8
H.T. Yau, C.H. Menq: An automated dimensional
inspection environment for manufactured parts
using coordinate measuring machines, Int. J. Prod.
Res. 30(7), 1517–1536 (1992)
41.9
K.T. Gunnarsson, F.B. Prinz: CAD model-based lo-
calization of parts in manufacturing, Computer
20(8), 66–74 (1987)
41.10
K.T. Gunnarsson: Optimal Part Localization by Data
Base Matching with Sparse and Dense Data, Ph.D.
Thesis (Dept. Mech. Eng., Carnegie Mellon Univ.
Pittsburgh 1987)
41.11
H.J. Pahk, W.J. Ahn: Precision inspection system
for aircraft parts having very thin features based
on CAD/CAI integration, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol.
12(6), 442–449 (1996)
41.12
M.W. Cho, T.I. Seo: Inspection planning strategy for
the on-machine measurement process based on
CAD/CAM/CAI integration, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Tech-
nol. 19(8), 607–617 (2002)
41.13
Z. Xiong: Workpiece Localization and Computer
Aided Setup System, Ph.D. Thesis (Hong Kong Univ.
Sci. Technol., Hong Kong 2002)
41.14
J. Hong, X. Tan: Method and apparatus for de-
termining position and orientation of mechanical
objects, US Patent US520 8763 A (1993)
41.15
B.K.P. Horn: Closed-form solution of absolute ori-
entation using unit quaternions, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A
4(4), 629–642 (1987)
41.16
C.H. Menq, H.T. Yau, G.Y. Lai: Automated precision
measurement of surface profile in CAD-directed in-
spection, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 8(2), 268–278
(1992)
41.17
Y. Chu: Workpiece Localization: Theory, Algorithms
and Implementation, Ph.D. Thesis (Hong Kong
Univ. Sci. Technol., Hong Kong 1999)
41.18
Z. Xiong, M.Y. Wang, Z. Li: A near-optimal prob-
ing strategy for workpiece localization, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 20(4), 668–676 (2004)
41.19
Y. Huang, X. Qian: An efficient sensing localiza-
tion algorithm for free-form surface digitization,
J. Comput. Inform. Sci. Eng. 8, 021008 (2008)
41.20
L.M. Zhu, H.G. Luo, H. Ding: Optimal design of mea-
surement point layout for workpiece localization,
J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. 131, 011006 (2009)
41.21
L.M. Zhu, Z.H. Xiong, H. Ding, Y.L. Xiong: A distance
function based approach for localization and pro-
file error evaluation of complex surface, J. Manuf.
Sci. Eng. 126, 542–554 (2004)
41.22
Y. Sun, J. Xu, D. Guo, Z. Jia: A unified localization
approach for machining allowance optimization of
complex curved surfaces, Precis. Eng. 33(4), 516–
523 (2009)
41.23
K. Gadeyne, H. Bruyninckx: Markov techniques for
object localization with force-controlled robots,
10th Int. Conf. Adv. Robotics (ICAR) (2001) pp. 91–
96

Active Manipulation for Perception
References
1059
Part D | 41
41.24
S.R. Chhatpar, M.S. Branicky: Particle filtering for
localization in robotic assemblies with position
uncertainty, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2005)
41.25
C. Corcoran, R. Platt: A measurement model for
tracking hand-object state during dexterous ma-
nipulation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2010)
41.26
K. Hsiao, L. Kaelbling, T. Lozano-Perez: Task-driven
tactile exploration, Robotics Sci. Syst. Conf. (2010)
41.27
A. Petrovskaya, O. Khatib: Global localization of ob-
jects via touch, IEEE Trans. Robotics 27(3), 569–585
(2011)
41.28
A. Petrovskaya: Towards Dependable Robotic Per-
ception, Ph.D. Thesis (Stanford Univ., Stanford 2011)
41.29
A. Petrovskaya, O. Khatib, S. Thrun, A.Y. Ng:
Bayesian estimation for autonomous object ma-
nipulation based on tactile sensors, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 707–
714
41.30
S. Arulampalam, S. Maskell, N. Gordon, T. Clapp:
A tutorial on particle filters for on-line non-
linear/non-Gaussian Bayesian tracking, IEEE Trans.
Signal Process. 50(2), 174–188 (2002)
41.31
A. Petrovskaya, S. Thrun, D. Koller, O. Khatib:
Guaranteed inference for global state estimation
in human environments, Mob. Manip. Workshop
Robotics Sci. Syst. (RSS) (2010)
41.32
M.C. Koval, M.R. Dogar, N.S. Pollard, S.S. Srini-
vasa: Pose estimation for contact manipulation
with manifold particle filters, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2013) pp. 4541–4548
41.33
J. Deutscher, A. Blake, I. Reid: Articulated body
motion capture by annealed particle filtering, IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. (CVPR) (2000)
41.34
J. Deutscher, I. Reid: Articulated body motion cap-
ture by stochastic search, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 61(2),
185–205 (2005)
41.35
A.O. Balan, L. Sigal, M.J. Black: A quantitative eval-
uation of video-based 3D person tracking, 2nd
Jt. IEEE Int. Workshop Vis. Surveill. Perform. Eval.
Track. Surveill. (2005) pp. 349–356
41.36
K. Huebner: BADGr – A toolbox for box-based
approximation,
decomposition
and
grasping,
Robotics Auton. Syst. 60(3), 367–376 (2012)
41.37
A.T. Miller, P.K. Allen: Graspit! a versatile simulator
for robotic grasping, IEEE Robotics Autom, Magaz.
11(4), 110–122 (2004)
41.38
K. Hsiao, T. Lozano-Pérez, L.P. Kaelbling: Robust
belief-based execution of manipulation programs,
8 Int. Workshop Algorithm. Found. Robotics (WAFR)
(2008)
41.39
P. Hebert, T. Howard, N. Hudson, J. Ma, J.W. Bur-
dick: The next best touch for model-based local-
ization, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2013) pp. 99–106
41.40
J.L. Schneiter, T.B. Sheridan: An automated tactile
sensing strategy for planar object recognition and
localization, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.
12(8), 775–786 (1990)
41.41
S. Javdani, M. Klingensmith, J.A. Bagnell, N.S. Pol-
lard, S.S. Srinivasa: Efficient touch based local-
ization through submodularity, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2013) pp. 1828–
1835
41.42
K. Hsiao, L.P. Kaelbling, T. Lozano-Pérez: Robust
grasping under object pose uncertainty, Auton.
Robots 31(2/3), 253–268 (2011)
41.43
M. Dogar, S. Srinivasa: A framework for push-
grasping in clutter. In: Robotics: Science and
Systems VII, ed. by H.F. Durrant-Whyte, N. Roy,
P. Abbeel (MIT, Cambridge 2011)
41.44
R. Platt, L. Kaelbling, T. Lozano-Perez, R. Tedrake:
Efficient planning in non-Gaussian belief spaces
and its application to robot grasping, Int. Symp.
Robotics Res. (2011)
41.45
L.P. Kaelbling, T. Lozano-Pérez: Integrated task and
motion planning in belief space, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 32(9/10), 1194–1227 (2013)
41.46
M. Erdmann: Shape recovery from passive lo-
cally dense tactile data, Proc. Workshop Algorithm.
Found. Robotics (1998) pp. 119–132
41.47
M. Moll, M.A. Erdmann: Reconstructing the shape
and motion of unknown objects with active tactile
sensors, Algorithm. Found. Robotics, Vol. V (2003)
pp. 293–309
41.48
F. Mazzini: Tactile Mapping of Harsh, Constrained
Environments, with an Application to Oil Wells,
Ph.D. Thesis (MIT, Cambridge 2011)
41.49
P. Slaets, J. Rutgeerts, K. Gadeyne, T. Lefebvre,
H. Bruyninckx, J. De Schutter: Construction of a
geometric 3-D model from sensor measurements
collected during compliant motion, 9th. Proc. Int.
Symp. Exp. Robotics (2004)
41.50
A. Bierbaum, K. Welke, D. Burger, T. Asfour, R. Dill-
mann: Haptic exploration for 3D shape reconstruc-
tion using five-finger hands, 7th IEEE-RAS Int. Conf.
Hum. Robots (2007) pp. 616–621
41.51
S.R. Chhatpar,
M.S.
Branicky:
Localization
for
robotic assemblies using probing and particle
filtering, Proc. IEEE/ASME Int. Conf. Adv. Intell.
Mechatron. (2005) pp. 1379–1384
41.52
M. Meier, M. Schopfer, R. Haschke, H. Ritter: A prob-
abilistic approach to tactile shape reconstruction,
IEEE Trans. Robotics 27(3), 630–635 (2011)
41.53
S. Walker, J.K. Salisbury: Pushing using learned
manipulation maps, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2008) pp. 3808–3813
41.54
Z. Pezzementi, C. Reyda, G.D. Hager: Object map-
ping, recognition, and localization from tactile ge-
ometry, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2011) pp. 5942–5948
41.55
J. Sturm, A. Jain, C. Stachniss, C.C. Kemp, W. Bur-
gard: Operating articulated objects based on expe-
rience, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2010) pp. 2739–2744
41.56
D. Katz, Y. Pyuro, O. Brock: Learning to manipu-
late articulated objects in unstructured environ-
ments using a grounded relational representation,
Robotics Sci. Syst. (2008)
41.57
C. Rhee, W. Chung, M. Kim, Y. Shim, H. Lee: Door
opening control using the multi-fingered robotic
hand for the indoor service robot, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004)

Part D | 41
1060
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
41.58
D. Henrich, H. Wörn: Robot Manipulation of
Deformable Objects (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2000)
41.59
R. Platt, F. Permenter, J. Pfeiffer: Using bayesian fil-
tering to localize flexible materials during manip-
ulation, IEEE Trans. Robotics 27(3), 586–598 (2011)
41.60
S. Burion,
F.
Conti,
A. Petrovskaya, C.
Baur,
O. Khatib: Identifying physical properties of de-
formable objects by using particle filters, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2008) pp. 1112–1117
41.61
A. Jain, M.D. Killpack, A. Edsinger, C. Kemp: Reach-
ing in clutter with whole-arm tactile sensing, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 32(4), 458–482 (2013)
41.62
L.P. Jentoft, R.D. Howe: Determining object geom-
etry with compliance and simple sensors, IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011) pp. 3468–
3473
41.63
M. Kaneko, K. Tanie: Contact point detection for
grasping an unknown object using self-posture
changeability, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 10(3),
355–367 (1994)
41.64
A. Petrovskaya, J. Park, O. Khatib: Probabilistic es-
timation of whole body contacts for multi-contact
robot control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2007) pp. 568–573
41.65
A.M. Okamura, M.A. Costa, M.L. Turner, C. Richard,
M.R. Cutkosky: Haptic surface exploration, Lec.
Notes Control Inform. Sci. 250, 423–432 (2000)
41.66
A. Bicchi, J.K. Salisbury, D.L. Brock: Experimental
evaluation of friction characteristics with an artic-
ulated robotic hand, Lec. Notes Control Inform. Sci.
190, 153–167 (1993)
41.67
J.A. Fishel, G.E. Loeb: Bayesian exploration for in-
telligent identification of textures, Frontiers Neu-
rorobot. 6, 4 (2012)
41.68
P. Dario, P. Ferrante, G. Giacalone, L. Livaldi, B. Al-
lotta, G. Buttazzo, A.M. Sabatini: Planning and
executing tactile exploratory procedures, IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1992) pp. 1896–
1903
41.69
J. Sinapov, V. Sukhoy: Vibrotactile recognition and
categorization of surfaces by a humanoid robot,
IEEE Trans. Robotics 27(3), 488–497 (2011)
41.70
M.R. Tremblay, M.R. Cutkosky: Estimating friction
using incipient slip sensing during a manipulation
task, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1993) pp. 429–434
41.71
R. Bayrleithner, K. Komoriya: Static friction co-
efficient determination by force sensing and its
application, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (1994) pp. 1639–1646
41.72
K.M. Lynch: Estimating the friction parameters of
pushed objects, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (1993) pp. 186–193
41.73
C.G. Atkeson, C.H. An, J.M. Hollerbach: Estimation
of inertial parameters of manipulator loads and
links, Int. J. Robotics Res. 5(3), 101–119 (1986)
41.74
Y. Yu, T. Arima, S. Tsujio: Estimation of object inertia
parameters on robot pushing operation, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005) pp. 1657–
1662
41.75
H.T. Tanaka, K. Kushihama: Haptic vision-vision-
based haptic exploration, Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Pat-
tern Recognit. (2002) pp. 852–855
41.76
H. Yussof, M. Ohka, J. Takata, Y. Nasu, M. Yamano:
Low force control scheme for object hardness dis-
tinction in robot manipulation based on tactile
sensing, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2008) pp. 3443–3448
41.77
J. Romano, K. Hsiao, G. Niemeyer, S. Chitta,
K.J. Kuchenbecker: Human-inspired robotic grasp
control with tactile sensing, IEEE Trans. Robotics 27,
1067–1079 (2011)
41.78
S. Omata, Y. Murayama, C.E. Constantinou: Real
time robotic tactile sensor system for the determi-
nation of the physical properties of biomaterials,
Sens. Actuators A 112(2), 278–285 (2004)
41.79
C.H. Lin, T.W. Erickson, J.A. Fishel, N. Wettels,
G.E. Loeb: Signal processing and fabrication of
a biomimetic tactile sensor array with thermal,
force and microvibration modalities, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Biomim. (ROBIO) (2009) pp. 129–134
41.80
R.A. Russell: Object recognition by a ’smart’ tac-
tile sensor, Proc. Aust. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2000)
pp. 93–98
41.81
P.K. Allen, K.S. Roberts: Haptic object recognition
using a multi-fingered dextrous hand, Proc. IEEE
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1989) pp. 342–347
41.82
S. Caselli, C. Magnanini, F. Zanichelli, E. Caraffi: Effi-
cient exploration and recognition of convex objects
based on haptic perception, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 4 (1996) pp. 3508–
3513
41.83
A. Schneider, J. Sturm: Object identification with
tactile sensors using bag-of-features, IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2009) pp. 243–248
41.84
M. Schöpfer, M. Pardowitz, R. Haschke, H. Ritter:
Identifying relevant tactile features for object iden-
tification, Springer Tracts Adv, Robotics 76, 417–430
(2012)
41.85
T. Bhattacharjee, J.M. Rehg, C.C. Kemp: Haptic clas-
sification and recognition of objects using a tactile
sensing forearm, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2012) pp. 4090–4097
41.86
Z. Pezzementi, E. Plaku, C. Reyda, G.D. Hager:
Tactile-object recognition from appearance in-
formation, IEEE Trans. Robotics 27(3), 473–487
(2011)
41.87
N. Gorges, S.E. Navarro: Haptic object recogni-
tion using passive joints and haptic key features,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2010)
pp. 2349–2355
41.88
Z. Pezzementi, G.D. Hager: Tactile object recogni-
tion and localization using spatially-varying ap-
pearance, Int. Symp. Robotics Res. (ISRR) (2011)
41.89
S. Chitta, J. Sturm, M. Piccoli, W. Burgard: Tac-
tile sensing for mobile manipulation, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 27(3), 558–568 (2011)
41.90
A. Drimus, G. Kootstra, A. Bilberg, D. Kragic: De-
sign of a flexible tactile sensor for classification of
rigid and deformable objects, Robotics Auton. Syst.
62(1), 3–15 (2012)

Active Manipulation for Perception
References
1061
Part D | 41
41.91
P. Allen: Integrating vision and touch for object
recognition tasks, Int. J. Robotics Res. 7(6), 15–33
(1988)
41.92
M. Boshra, H. Zhang: A constraint-satisfaction ap-
proach for 3D vision/touch-based object recogni-
tion, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS),
Vol. 2 (1995) pp. 368–373
41.93
T. Nakamura: Multimodal object categorization by
a robot, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2007) pp. 2415–2420
41.94
M. Gupta, G. Sukhatme: Using manipulation prim-
itives for brick sorting in clutter, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012) pp. 3883–3889
41.95
K. Hausman, F. Balint-Benczedi, D. Pangercic, Z.-
C. Marton, R. Ueda, K. Okada, M. Beetz: Tracking-
based interactive segmentation of textureless ob-
jects, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2013) pp. 1122–1129
41.96
M. Sutton, L. Stark, K. Bowyer: Function from
visual
analysis
and
physical
interaction:
A
methodology for recognition of generic classes
of objects, Image Vis. Comput. 16(11), 745–763
(1998)
41.97
Y. Bekiroglu: Learning to Assess Grasp Stability from
Vision, Touch and Proprioception Ph.D. Thesis (KTH
Roy. Inst. Technol., Stockholm 2012)

Multimedia Contents Haptics
1063
Part D | 42
42. Haptics
Blake Hannaford, Allison M. Okamura
The word haptics, believed to be derived from
the Greek word haptesthai, means related to the
sense of touch. In the psychology and neuroscience
literature, haptics is the study of human touch
sensing, specifically via kinesthetic (force/position)
and cutaneous (tactile) receptors, associated with
perception and manipulation. In the robotics
and virtual reality literature, haptics is broadly
defined as real and simulated touch interac-
tions between robots, humans, and real, remote,
or simulated environments, in various com-
binations. This chapter focuses on the use of
specialized robotic devices and their correspond-
ing control, known as haptic interfaces, that allow
human operators to experience the sense of touch
in remote (teleoperated) or simulated (virtual)
environments.
42.1
Overview............................................. 1064
42.1.1
Human Haptics ......................... 1065
42.1.2
Application Examples ................ 1066
42.2 Haptic Device Design............................ 1068
42.2.1
Mechanisms.............................. 1068
42.2.2
Sensing .................................... 1069
42.2.3 Actuation and Transmission ....... 1070
42.2.4 An Example Device .................... 1070
42.3 Haptic Rendering................................. 1071
42.3.1
Rendering Complex
Environments ........................... 1072
42.3.2
Virtual Coupling ........................ 1073
42.4 Control and Stability
of Force Feedback Interfaces ................ 1073
42.5 Other Types of Haptic Interfaces ........... 1075
42.5.1
Vibrotactile Feedback................. 1075
42.5.2 Contact Location, Slip,
and Shear Display ..................... 1076
42.5.3 Slip and Shear........................... 1076
42.5.4 Local Shape .............................. 1077
42.5.5 Surface Displays ........................ 1078
42.5.6 Temperature ............................. 1078
42.6 Conclusions and Further Reading ......... 1079
References................................................... 1079
Haptic technology is intimately connected with robotics
through its reliance on dexterous mechatronic devices
and draws heavily on the theoretical foundations of
manipulator design, actuation, sensing, and control. In
this chapter, we begin with motivation for haptic in-
terface design and use, including the basic design of
a haptic interface, information about human haptics,
and examples of haptic interface applications. Next, we
review concepts in the mechatronic design of kines-
thetic haptic interfaces, including sensors, actuators,
and mechanisms. We then examine the control aspect of
kinesthetic haptic interfaces, particularly the rendering
of virtual environments and stable and accurate display
of forces. We next review tactile displays, which vary
widely in their design due to the many types of tactile
information that can be presented to a human opera-
tor. Finally, we provide resources for further study of
haptics.

Part D | 42.1
1064
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
42.1 Overview
Haptics is the science and technology of experienc-
ing and creating touch sensations in human operators.
Imagine trying to button a coat, shake someone’s hand,
or write a note without the sense of touch. These sim-
ple tasks become extremely difﬁcult to perform without
adequate haptic feedback. To improve human operator
performance in simulated and teleoperated environ-
ments, haptic interfaces seek to generate a compelling
sensation that the operator is directly touching a real
environment.
Haptic interfaces attempt to replicate or enhance the
touch experience of manipulating or perceiving a real
environment through mechatronic devices and com-
puter control. They consist of a haptic device (HD,
a manipulandum with sensors and actuators) and a con-
trol computer with software relating human operator in-
puts to haptic information display. While the low-level
design of haptic interfaces varies widely depending on
the application, their operation generally follows the
haptic loop shown in Fig. 42.1. First, the haptic device
senses an operator input, which may be position (and
its derivatives), force, muscle activity, etc. Second, the
sensed input is applied to a virtual or teleoperated en-
vironment. For a virtual environment, the effect of the
operator’s input on virtual objects and the subsequent
response to be displayed to the operator are computed
based on models and a haptic rendering algorithm. In
teleoperation, a manipulator that is remote in space,
scale, or power attempts to track the operator’s input.
When the manipulator interacts with its real environ-
ment, haptic information to be relayed to the operators
is recorded or estimated. Finally, actuators on the haptic
device are used to physically convey touch sensations
to the human operator. Based on the haptic feedback,
whether through unconscious or conscious human con-
trol, or simply system dynamics, the operator input is
modiﬁed. This begins another cycle of the haptic loop.
Despite the simplicity of the concept of haptic
display, there exist many challenges to developing com-
pelling haptic interfaces. Many of these are addressed
through fundamental robotics theory and an under-
standing of human haptic capabilities. In general, haptic
interface performance speciﬁcations are based on hu-
man sensing and motor control characteristics. One ma-
jor challenge in artiﬁcially generating haptic sensations
is that the human operator’s motion should be unre-
stricted when there is no contact with a virtual or remote
object. Haptic devices must allow the human operator to
make desired motions, thus requiring back-drivability
and sufﬁcient degrees of freedom of motion. A variety
of robotic designs are used in haptic devices, includ-
ing exoskeletons, actuated grippers, parallel and serial
manipulators, small-workspace mouse-like devices, and
large-workspace devices that capture whole arm, and
even whole body, movement. Another challenge is that
humans integrate kinesthetic (force/position) and cu-
taneous (tactile) information with motion and control
cues to form haptic perceptions. Haptic devices would
ideally include both force and tactile displays, although
this has been rarely done due to size and weight limi-
tations of actuators. Because of the human’s sensitivity
to high-frequency information, for many haptic inter-
faces and applications, this loop must repeat at a high
Measured
operator input
Human operator and haptic device
Virtual
environment
or
Robot
Real (teleoperated) 
environment
Desired haptic
display output
a)
b)
Fig. 42.1 (a) The haptic loop of a generic haptic inter-
face. A haptic device senses human operator input, such
as position or force, and the system applies this input to
a virtual or teleoperated environment. The response of the
environment to be relayed to the human operator is com-
puted through models, haptic rendering, sensing, and/or
estimation. Finally, actuators on the haptic device display
corresponding touch sensations to the human operator.
(b) The ideal result is that the human operator feels that
he or she is interacting directly with a real environment

Haptics
42.1 Overview
1065
Part D | 42.1
frequency, typically 1 kHz. Not only does a high update
rate provide realistic (nondiscretized) touch sensations
to the human operator, it also typically helps to maintain
system stability. Controls analysis for haptic devices
must consider both the continuous nature of the phys-
ical dynamics and the discrete nature of the computer
control.
Before we examine the various components of hap-
tic interfaces in detail, it is useful to motivate their
design through a review of human haptics and applica-
tions of haptics. The remainder of this section is devoted
to those topics.
42.1.1 Human Haptics
Two functions of the human nervous system play a pri-
mary role in haptics: kinesthesia (the internal sensing of
forces and displacements inside muscles, tendons, and
joints), and tactile sensing (the sensation of deforma-
tions of the skin).
Anatomy and Physiology
Haptics incorporates both, and is associated with an
activity such as manipulation or exploration. Most
of this chapter will address systems meant to inter-
act primarily with the kinesthetic modality. Devices
speciﬁcally aimed at tactile perception are described
in Sect. 42.5. Even if tactile stimuli are not explicitly
generated by a haptic device, tactile receptors are still
stimulated, and are known to respond to frequencies as
high as 10 000 Hz [42.1] and displacements as small as
24 m [42.2–4].
Kinesthesia is mediated by muscle spindles, which
transduce stretch of muscles, and Golgi tendon or-
gans, which transduce joint rotation, especially at the
extremes of motion. In principle, these and similar re-
ceptors could be stimulated directly to produce haptic
sensations. For example, a vibration applied to a muscle
tendon creates a strong sensation of muscle lengthen-
ing and corresponding joint motion in humans [42.5,
6]. Research in peripheral nerve stimulation for prosthe-
sis control has demonstrated that electrodes implanted
within individual fascicles of peripheral nerve stumps
in amputees can be stimulated to produce sensations of
touch or movement referred to the amputee’s phantom
hand [42.7].
Psychophysics
At the next level up from physiology and anatomy,
psychophysics [42.8], the science of the physical capa-
bilities of the senses, has been a rich source of design
data for haptic device development. Its chief contribu-
tion has been methodologies that haptics researchers
have applied to answer questions about what capa-
bilities are needed in haptic devices. These sensory
capabilities could then be translated into design require-
ments. Some of the chief psychophysical methods that
have been fruitfully applied to haptics include threshold
measurement by the method of limits and adaptive up-
down methods. However, perception at threshold is not
100% reliable. Perception accuracy tends to depend on
the strength of the stimulus, and the tradeoff between
hit rate and false alarms depends strongly on the prob-
ability that a stimulus will be present in a given time
interval (Pstim).
A more general notion is the receiver operating
curve (Fig. 42.2, borrowed by psychophysics from
radar theory), which plots the probability of a subject
response given the existence of a stimulus, versus the
probability of response given no stimulus. The curve
is generated by measuring both probabilities at several
different values of Pstim. The ideal response is the point
(0,1): 100% response for stimuli and 0% response for
nonstimuli. Human response is near this point for stim-
uli much above threshold, but declines to a rounded
curve and eventually the 45ı line as response below
threshold becomes equal to chance.
Another relevant concept from psychophysics is the
just noticeable difference (JND), commonly expressed
as a percentage. This is the magnitude of a relative
change in a stimulus, such as a force or displacement
applied to the ﬁnger that is just perceivable by subjects.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.7
0.7
0.9
0.9
0.1
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Hit rate (p (yes|stimulus))
False alarm rate (p (yes |no stimulus))
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Fig. 42.2 Receiver operating curve (ROC). The ROC en-
codes the tradeoffs made by a subject between risk of false
alarm and risk of missing a valid stimulus. Each point en-
codes a speciﬁc tradeoff between these two risks observed
when stimuli are presented with a speciﬁed probability.
ROCs for stronger signals tend towards the upper left hand
corner (after [42.8] with permission from Lawrence Erl-
baum and Associates, Mahwah)

Part D | 42.1
1066
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
For example, Jones [42.9] has measured JNDs of 6%
for force applied to the human ﬁnger over a range of
0:5200 N.
Psychology: Exploratory Procedures
In inﬂuential research starting in the 1980s, Leder-
man and Klatzky deﬁned stereotyped hand motions
called exploratory procedures (EPs), which are charac-
teristic of human haptic exploration [42.10–12]. They
placed objects into the hands of blindfolded subjects,
and videotaped their hand motions. Their initial exper-
iments [42.11] showed that the EPs used by subjects
could be predicted based on the object property (tex-
ture, mass, temperature, etc.) that the subjects needed
to discriminate. They also showed that the EPs cho-
sen by subjects were the ones best able to discriminate
that property. Furthermore, when asked to answer spe-
ciﬁc questions about objects (Is this an eating utensil,
further a fork?), subjects used a two-stage sequence in
which a more general lifting EP preceded more speciﬁc
EPs [42.12].
Lederman and Klatzky’s eight EPs (Fig. 42.3) and
the property for which they are optimal are:
1. Lateral motion (texture)
2. Pressure (hardness)
3. Static contact (temperature)
4. Unsupported holding (weight)
5. Enclosure (global shape, volume)
6. Contour following (exact shape, volume)
7. Part motion test (part motion)
8. Function testing (speciﬁc function).
Each of these EPs is a bimanual task involving con-
tact with all interior surfaces of the hand, motion of the
wrist and various degrees of freedom of the hand, and
tactile and temperature sensors in the skin (e.g., EPs 1
and 3), and kinesthetic sensors in the arm (EP 4). A hap-
tic device capable of supporting all of these EPs is far
beyond today’s state of the art. However, the signiﬁ-
cance of these results for the design of haptic interface
is great, since they allow us to derive device require-
ments from EPs.
42.1.2 Application Examples
The most common haptic device encountered by the
general population is a vibration display device that
provides haptic feedback while an operator plays
a video game. For example, when the operator drives
off the virtual road or bumps into a virtual wall, the
hand controller shakes to imply driving over a rough
surface or displays an impulse to represent the shock of
hitting a hard surface. We examine two more pragmatic
examples, medical simulators and computer-aided de-
sign (CAD) systems, in detail below. In addition, we
review several commercially available haptic devices.
Although haptic interfaces are not yet in widespread
commercial use outside of entertainment, they are being
integrated into numerous applications where the poten-
tial beneﬁts are clear enough to justify the adoption of
new technologies. A variety of novel and creative ap-
plications are being developed regularly in numerous
ﬁelds, including:

Assistive technology

Automotive

Design

Education

Entertainment

Human–computer interaction

Manufacturing/assembly

Medical simulation

Micro/nanotechnology

Molecular biology

Prosthetics

Rehabilitation

Scientiﬁc visualization

Space

Surgical robotics.
Medical Simulations
A major example driving much of today’s haptic vir-
tual environment research is simulation for training of
hands-on medical procedures. Medical invasive thera-
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.42.3a–d Four
of
the
eight
human
exploratory
procedures
(EPs).
(a)
Lateral
motion
(texture);
(b)
pressure (hardness); (c) static contact (temperature);
(d) unsupported holding (weight) (after Lederman and
Klatzky [42.11])

Haptics
42.1 Overview
1067
Part D | 42.1
peutic and diagnostic procedures, ranging from drawing
blood samples to surgery, are potentially dangerous
and painful for the patient and require the student to
learn hands-on skills mediated by haptic information
pathways [42.13]. Simulators both with and without
haptic feedback aim to replace supervised learning di-
rectly on human patients or on animals. Simulators
have proven highly effective in developing minimally
invasive surgery skills [42.14], especially when haptic
feedback is provided in early training [42.15]. Expected
beneﬁts of training with haptic simulators include:

Reduced risk to patients both during and immedi-
ately after training

Increased ability to simulate unusual conditions or
medical emergencies.

Ability to collect physical data during the training
process and provide speciﬁc and directed feedback
to the student.

Increased training time per unit of instructor effort.
Approaches for simulator designs, speciﬁc medical
applications, and training evaluation methods have also
been widely studied in the last two decades, e.g., [42.16,
17]. However, the costs of this technology are still
high. In addition, it is not always clear which improve-
ments in simulator technology, such as haptic device
performance or accuracy of soft-tissue modeling, lead
to improved clinical performance and, ultimately, pa-
tient outcomes.
Computer-Aided Design
The Boeing Company [42.18] has studied the use of
haptic interfaces for solving advanced problems in
CAD. One such problem is veriﬁcation of the ability
to efﬁciently maintain a complex system such as an
aircraft. In the past, mechanics could verify the pro-
cedures (such as change-out of parts) on a physical
prototype. However, this analysis is difﬁcult or impos-
sible to perform visually on an advanced CAD system.
The VoxMap Pointshell system (Fig. 42.4) was devel-
oped to allow test extraction of parts with a haptic
interface. Force sensations from the haptic interface re-
produce for the operator the physical constraints of the
part bumping into elements of the complex workplace.
If the operator can remove the part in the haptic in-
terface, it is veriﬁed that this part can be maintained
without undue disassembly of the aircraft. This capa-
bility has been proved useful in actual design activities.
Commercially Available Haptic Devices
and Systems
There are a wide variety of haptic devices available
from companies, although many researchers build their
own haptic devices for special purposes. At the time
of this writing, one of the most popular commercially
available haptic devices is the Geomagic Touch [42.19],
formerly known as the Phantom Omni from SensAble
Technologies (Fig. 42.5). In the 1990s and 2000s, Sens-
Able developed the Phantom line of stylus-type haptic
devices. The Phantom Premium [42.20], a higher ﬁ-
delity, larger workspace device, has also been used
widely in haptics research. The high price of hap-
tic devices (compared to visual displays) restricts the
development of some commercial applications. The Ge-
omagic Touch (Phantom Omni), which is an order of
magnitude less expensive than the Phantom Premium,
has gained popularity among haptics and robotics re-
Fig. 42.4 Boeing computer-aided design (CAD) applica-
tion for assembly and maintenance veriﬁcation of com-
plex aircraft systems. Boeing researchers developed the
Voxmap/Pointshell software for haptically rendering very
complex models in six degrees of freedom at high rates
(courtesy of Bill McNeely, Boeing Phantom Works)
Fig. 42.5 The Phantom Omni device from SensAble Tech-
nologies, now marketed as the Geomagic Touch. This
relatively low-cost device senses motion in six degrees of
freedom from the stylus and can apply forces in the x, y,
and z directions to the stylus tip (courtesy SensAble Tech-
nologies, Inc., Woburn)

Part D | 42.2
1068
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
searchers. In 2007, Novint Technologies [42.21] re-
leased the Novint Falcon, an inexpensive 3-DOF (three-
degree-of-freedom) haptic device that is in turn an
order of magnitude less expensive than the Phantom
Omni.
Immersion has aimed at the mass market and con-
sumer segments with a wide variety of haptics-based
products, many of them involving a single degree of
freedom. For example, they have licensed technology
to makers of various video games, as well as mobile
phone manufacturers, in the form of vibratory feedback
in handheld devices and haptic-enabled steering wheels
for driving games. Immersion also has a medical divi-
sion selling medical simulators with haptic feedback.
Software for haptic rendering has also become
widely available, through both commercial sources and
research groups. Most companies that sell haptic de-
vices also provide a standard development kit (SDK)
with haptic rendering capability. In addition, not-for-
proﬁt open-source projects such as Chai3D [42.22] aim
to make rendering algorithms from different groups
publicly available, shortening application development
time and allowing direct comparison of algorithms for
benchmarking purposes.
42.2 Haptic Device Design
There are two broad classes of haptic devices: ad-
mittance and impedance devices. Admittance devices
sense the force applied by the operator and constrain
the operator’s position to match the appropriate deﬂec-
tion of a simulated object or surface in a virtual world.
In contrast, an impedance haptic device senses the po-
sition of the operator, and then applies a force vector
to the operator according to computed behavior of the
simulated object or surface.
Robots of the impedance type are back-drivable,
have low friction and inertia, and have force-source
actuators. A commonly used impedance haptic de-
vice in robotics-related research is the Phantom Pre-
mium [42.20, 23]. Robots of the admittance type, such
as typical industrial robots, are non-back-drivable and
have velocity-source actuators. The velocity is con-
trolled with a high-bandwidth low-level controller, and
is assumed to be independent of applied external forces.
Some commercially available haptic devices, such as
the HapticMaster [42.24], do operate under admittance
control. While such closed-loop force control has been
used for haptic display, more commonly designers have
opted for mechanisms specially designed for open-loop
force control to achieve simultaneously low cost and
high bandwidth.
The choice of admittance or impedance architecture
has many profound implications in the design of the
software and hardware system. For a variety of reasons,
including cost, the majority of haptic devices imple-
mented today are of the impedance type. Because the
preponderance of systems today are impedance devices
and limitations on space, we limit our subsequent dis-
cussion to that class.
42.2.1 Mechanisms
Creating high-ﬁdelity haptic sensations in the operator
requires attention to mechanism design (Chap. 5). The
requirements for impedance haptic devices are similar
to those for designing manipulators suitable for force
control. Desirable mechanism attributes for open-loop
force control include low inertia, high stiffness, and
good kinematic conditioning throughout a workspace
designed to effectively match the appropriate human
limb, primarily the ﬁnger or arm. The weight of the
mechanism should be minimized, as it is perceived
by the operator as weight and inertia of the virtual
or teleoperated environment. Kinematic singularities
(Chaps. 2, 5, and 18) are detrimental to haptic inter-
faces because they create directions in space in which
the end-point cannot be moved by the human operator
and thus impose disturbances on the illusion of haptic
contact with virtual objects. High transmission ratios
must be avoided as they introduce signiﬁcant amounts
of friction. This constraint requires haptic interfaces to
make high demands on actuator performance.
Measures of Mechanism Performance
The ideal haptic device can move freely in any
direction and is free of singular conﬁgurations as
well as the bad effects of operating in their neigh-
borhood. Traditionally, kinematic performance has
been derived from the mechanism’s Jacobian ma-
trix, J.p;q/, using some of the following well-known
measures:

Manipulability [42.25]: the product of the singular
values of J.p;q/

Mechanism isotropy [42.26]: the ratio of smallest to
the largest singular value of J.p;q/

Minimum force output [42.25, 27, 28]: maximizing
the force output in the worst direction.
Dynamics can also be introduced into the cost
function using measures such as dynamic manipulabil-
ity [42.29]. This is still an active area of research and

Haptics
42.2 Haptic Device Design
1069
Part D | 42.2
there is no consensus yet on which dexterity measure is
most appropriate for haptic devices.
Kinematic and Dynamic Optimization
This aspect of design requires synthesis of mechanisms
that match the workspace of the (most often) human
ﬁnger or arm while simultaneously avoiding kinematic
singularities.
A haptic device workspace is deﬁned to match that
of the targeted human limb. This can be assisted by the
use of anthropometric data [42.30]. The performance
goals, such as low inertia and avoidance of kinematic
singularities, must be formalized into a quantitative
performance measure which can be computed for any
candidate design. Such a measure must account for:

Uniformity of kinematic conditioning throughout
the target workspace

Favoring designs with lower inertia

Guaranteeing that the target workspace is reachable.
The measures of mechanism performance deﬁned
above operate at a single point in space and thus must
be integrated over the entire workspace to derive a ﬁg-
ure of merit for a proposed haptic device design. For
example, if S is the set of all joint angles , such that
the end effector is inside the target workspace, one such
measure is
M D min
S W./ ;
(42.1)
where W./ is a measure of design performance.
The performance measure should include a link length
penalty such as
M D min
S
W./
l3
;
(42.2)
in order to avoid solutions which have excessive size,
compliance, and mass of long links. We could search
a large family of mechanism designs to maximize M.
For example, if a design has ﬁve free parameters (typi-
cally link lengths and offsets), and we study ten possible
values for each parameter, 105 designs must be evalu-
ated.
Available computing power has grown much faster
than the complexity of realizable mechanisms on the
human scale (as measured by their DOF). Thus, brute-
force search of design spaces is often sufﬁcient, and
sophisticated optimization techniques are not necessary.
Grounded Versus Ungrounded Devices
Most current devices that provide kinesthetic feedback
are physically grounded, that is, forces felt by the opera-
tor are with respect to the operator’s ground, such as the
ﬂoor or desktop. Ungrounded haptic feedback devices
are more mobile and can operate over larger workspaces
compared to grounded devices, which enables them to
be used in large-scale virtual environments. A number
of ungrounded kinesthetic feedback devices have been
developed, for example [42.31–33]. Comparisons have
been made between the performance of ungrounded and
grounded haptic displays [42.34]. Some ungrounded
devices provide tactile rather than kinesthetic sensa-
tions, and these are described in Sect. 42.5.
42.2.2 Sensing
Haptic devices require sensors to measure the state
of the device. This state may be modiﬁed by the op-
erator’s applied position/force, the haptic control law,
and/or device and environment dynamics. The opera-
tor’s input is sensed in the form of an applied position
or an applied force. Sensing requirements for haptics
are similar to those of other robotic devices (Chap. 29)
so only haptics-speciﬁc sensing issues are discussed
here.
Encoders
Rotary optical quadrature encoders are typically used
as position sensors on the joints of haptic devices. They
are often integrated with rotary motors, which serve
as actuators. The underlying sensing mechanism for
encoders is described in Sect. 29.1. The required res-
olution of an encoder for a haptic device depends on
the ratio between the angular distance of a single en-
coder tick to the end-point motion in Cartesian space.
The resolution of the selected position encoder has
effects beyond simple spatial resolution of the end-
point, including the maximum stiffness that can be
rendered (Sect. 42.4) without unstable or nonpassive
behavior [42.35].
Many haptic applications, such as the rendering
of virtual environments with damping (in which force
is proportional to velocity), require velocity measure-
ment. Velocity is typically obtained by numerical differ-
entiation of the position signal obtained by an encoder.
An algorithm for velocity estimation must be selected
which is free of noise but minimizes phase lag at the
frequencies of interest [42.36]. Thus, an alternative
method is to use specialized hardware that measures the
time between encoder ticks in order to compute the ve-
locity [42.37].
Force Sensors
Force sensors are used in haptic devices as the operator
input to an admittance-controlled device, or as a mecha-
nism for canceling device friction and other undesirable
dynamic properties in an impedance-controlled device.

Part D | 42.2
1070
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
When a force sensor such as a strain gauge or load
cell measures the operator’s applied force, care must be
taken to thermally isolate the sensor, since thermal gra-
dients in the sensor caused by body heat can affect force
readings.
42.2.3 Actuation and Transmission
Haptic devices are differentiated from traditional com-
puter input devices by actuators that are controlled to
provide appropriate haptic sensations to the human op-
erator. The performance of the haptic device depends
heavily on the actuator properties and the mechanical
transmission between the actuator and the haptic inter-
action point (HIP).
Requirements for Haptics
The primary requirements for actuators and mechan-
ical transmission in impedance-type haptic devices
are: low inertia, low friction, low torque ripple, back-
driveability, and low backlash. In addition, if the design
is such that the actuator itself moves as the user’s posi-
tion changes, a higher power-to-weight ratio is desired.
Although closed-loop force control has been used for
haptic display in impedance devices, most often the
mechanism is designed to have sufﬁciently low friction
and inertia so that open-loop force control is accurate
enough.
One common mechanical transmission for haptic
devices is the capstan drive (Fig. 42.6), which consists
of smooth cables wrapped around pulleys of differing
diameter to provide a gear ratio. A no-slip, high-friction
contact between the cable and the pulleys is maintained
through several wraps of the cable. The capstan drive
DC motor
with encoder
Thermal
insulator
Capstan drive
Axis of
rotation
Load
cell
Fig. 42.6 This version of the Haptic Paddle [42.38] in-
cludes an encoder for position sensing, a single-axis load
cell for force sensing, and a brushed motor with capstan
transmission for actuation
minimizes friction forces felt by the human operator be-
cause it prevents translational forces on motor and joint
axes.
Current ampliﬁers are typically used to create a di-
rect relationship between the voltage output by the
computer via a digital-to-analog (D/A) converter and
the torque output by the motor. The effect of actuator
and ampliﬁer dynamics and D/A resolution on sys-
tem stability is typically negligible in comparison to
position sensor resolution and sampling rate for most
haptic devices. Actuator or ampliﬁer saturation can pro-
duce undesirable behavior, particularly in multi-DOF
haptic devices where a single saturated motor torque
may change the apparent geometry of virtual objects.
The force vector, and thus the corresponding actuator
torques, must be scaled appropriately if any actuator is
saturated.
42.2.4 An Example Device
As an illustrative example, we will provide detailed
design information for a simple 1-DOF haptic device
known as the Haptic Paddle [42.38]. This section is
meant to provide a concrete description of the types
of components that are used in kinesthetic haptic de-
vices, and the device can also be constructed following
the instructions provided by Johns Hopkins University.
Many widely available haptic devices share the com-
mon working principles of this device and differ chieﬂy
in kinematic details arising from a greater number of
DOF.
The haptic paddle shown in Fig. 42.6 is equipped
with two sensors: a position a position encoder and
a force sensor. A 500-counts-per-turn Hewlett-Packard
HEDS 5540 encoder that is mounted directly on the
motor. The quadrature process yields 2000 counts per
revolution; the capstan transmission gear ratio and lever
arm result in a position resolution of 2:24 105 m at
the haptic interaction point (HIP). An optional load cell
is used to measure the applied operator force. A plastic
cap thermally insulates the load cell. In this device, the
load cell can be used to minimize the effect of friction
through a control law that attempts to zero the applied
operator force when the HIP is not in contact with a vir-
tual object.
The Haptic Paddle shown uses a brushed DC (di-
rect current) motor with an aluminum pulley attached
to the shaft. Like many commercial haptic devices, it
uses a capstan drive: a cable is wrapped several times
around the motor pulley and attached at each end of
the large partial pulley. In one instantiation, the output
of the digital-to-analog (D/A) converter from the mi-
croprocessor is passed through a current ampliﬁer that
gives a current through the motor that is proportional

Haptics
42.3 Haptic Rendering
1071
Part D | 42.3
to the D/A voltage. This gives direct control of applied
torque on the motor. The resulting system has a force
felt at the driving point that is proportional to the out-
put voltage during static operation. When the system is
moving, the force applied to the operator may differ due
to human and device dynamics.
42.3 Haptic Rendering
Haptic rendering (in impedance systems) is the process
of computing the force required by contacts with vir-
tual objects based on measurements of the operator’s
motion. This section describes haptic rendering for vir-
tual environments. Haptic feedback for teleoperators is
described in Chap. 43.
An important property of haptic systems is that
their timing constraints are quite severe. To illustrate
this point, tap a pencil on the table top. You hear
a sound which is an audio representation of the con-
tact dynamics between pencil tip and table top. Tactile
receptors in the human ﬁngers are known to respond up
to 10 kHz [42.1]. To realistically render this type of con-
tact between hard surfaces would require response well
into the audio range of frequencies (up to 20 kHz) and
thus sampling times of around 25 s. Even with special-
ized designs, haptic devices do not have this bandwidth,
and such high ﬁdelity is not usually a goal of haptic
rendering. Achieving stability in any type of hard con-
tact requires very high sampling rates. In practice, most
haptic simulation systems are implemented with at least
1000Hz sampling rate. This can be reduced to the low
hundreds of Hertz if the virtual environment is limited
to soft materials.
Basic Haptic Rendering
The computational process of haptic rendering can be
formulated into the following seven sequential steps
for each cycle (Fig. 42.7). The rendering cycle must
typically be completed in under 1 ms for stability and
realism:
1. Sensing (Sect. 42.2.2)
2. Kinematics
3. Collision detection
4. Determining surface point
5. Force calculation
6. Kinematics
7. Actuation (Sect. 42.2.3).
Kinematics
The position and velocity measurements acquired by
sensors are typically in joint space. These must be con-
verted through the forward kinematics model and the
Jacobian matrix (Chap. 2) to the Cartesian position and
velocity of the operator’s hand or ﬁngertip. In some
applications the operator is virtually holding a tool or
object whose shape is represented in the virtual environ-
ment but whose position and orientation are determined
by the operator. In whose others, the operator’s ﬁnger-
tip or hand is represented by a point which makes only
point contact with objects in the virtual environment
(VE). We refer to a virtual handheld object as a vir-
tual tool and, following [42.39], we refer to the single
end-point as the haptic interaction point (HIP).
Collision Detection
For the point contact case, the collision detection soft-
ware must determine if the position of the HIP at the
current instant of time represents contact with a virtual
object. In practice this usually means to determine if the
HIP is penetrating or inside the object surface. The ob-
ject surface is represented by a geometric model such
as polygons or splines.
Although there is an extensive literature on colli-
sion detection in computer graphics, there are unique
aspects of the collision detection problem for haptics.
In particular, speed of computation is paramount and
worst-case speed, as opposed to average speed, is what
counts. Solutions that evaluate in constant time are pre-
Haptic
device
Joint
sensors
Forward
kinematic
equations
Virtual environment
Amplifier
x, x·
3, 4, 5
2
f
i
τ
Θ
1
6
7
Kinematics
τ =J Tf
Fig. 42.7 Schematic diagram of the haptic rendering cy-
cle for an impedance haptic display system. Virtual object
moves in the virtual environment according to operator’s
displacement of the haptic device. Joint displacements ()
sensed in the device (1) are processed through kinematics
(2), collision detection (3), surface point determination (4),
force calculation (5), kinematics (6), and actuation (7)

Part D | 42.3
1072
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
ferred. Section 42.3.1 addresses collision detection and
haptic rendering for complex environments.
If the HIP is found to be outside all objects, then
a force of zero is returned.
Determining Surface Point
Once it is determined that the HIP is inside a surface,
the force to be displayed to the operator must be com-
puted. Many researchers have used the idea of a virtual
spring connecting the HIP to the nearest point on the
surface as a model of interpenetration and force gener-
ation [42.39–41]. Basdogan and Srinivasan named this
point the intermediate haptic interaction point (IHIP).
However all of these authors realized that the closest
surface point is not always the most faithful model of
contact. For example, as the HIP moves laterally below
the top surface of a cube (Fig. 42.8), eventually it be-
comes close enough to the edge that the closest surface
point becomes the side of the cube. In this situation, the
algorithm needs memory to keep the IHIP on the top
surface and generate an upward force at all times or the
operator is suddenly ejected out the side of the cube.
Force Calculation
Force is commonly computed by using the spring model
(Hooke’s Law)
f D kx ;
(42.3)
where x is the vector from the HIP to the IHIP, and k >
0. When k is sufﬁciently large, the object surface will
feel like a wall perpendicular to x. This virtual wall,
or impedance surface, is a fundamental building block
P0
F1
P1
F2
P2
F3
P3
F4
F4
P4
Correct
Virtual object
User trajectory
Incorrect
Fig. 42.8 Illustration of subtle aspects of haptic rendering
of contact force. The operator ﬁngertip trajectory enters
object surface moving down and to right. Haptic interac-
tion points (HIP) are shown at times 1–4 (solid circles,
P0–P4). Intermediate haptic interaction points (IHIP) are
shown when the HIP is inside the object (open circles).
At position P4, the algorithm must not render force based
on the closest surface point or the operator will be ejected
from the side of the object (feeling unnatural force tangen-
tial to the top surface)
of most haptic virtual environments. Because the vir-
tual wall is only displayed if a collision between the
HIP and virtual object is detected, the wall is a uni-
lateral constraint, governed by a nonlinear switching
condition. As will be described in the following section,
haptic virtual environments with complex geometries
are often formed using a polygonal mesh in which each
polygon is essentially a virtual wall. A virtual surface
may also be allowed to deform globally, while the local
interaction with the operator is governed by a virtual
wall. Virtual ﬁxtures, which are often constructed from
virtual walls, can be overlaid on haptic feedback teleop-
erators to assist the operator during a teleoperated task
(Chap. 43).
The pure stiffness model described above can be
augmented to provide other effects, particularly through
the use of the virtual coupling described in Sect. 42.3.2.
Damping can be added perpendicular or parallel to the
surface. In addition, Coulomb or other nonlinear fric-
tion may be displayed parallel to the surface. To provide
a more realistic display of hard surfaces, vibrations can
also be displayed open loop at the moment of colli-
sion between the HIP and the surface, as is described
in Sect. 42.5.
Kinematics
The computed force in Cartesian space must then be
transformed into torques in the actuator space. Typi-
cally the calculation is
 D JTf ;
(42.4)
where  is the torque command to the actuators, f is
the desired force vector, and JT is the transpose of the
haptic device Jacobian matrix (Chap. 2). If the haptic
device has no dynamics and the actuators are perfect,
the exact desired force is displayed to the operator.
However, real device dynamics, time delays, and other
nonidealities result in applied operator forces that differ
from the desired forces.
42.3.1 Rendering Complex Environments
Today’s computer power is sufﬁcient that a variety
of relatively simple algorithms can effectively render
haptics for simple virtual environments, say consist-
ing of a handful of simple geometric primitives such
as spheres, cubes, and planes. However, the challenge
is to scale these algorithms to complex environments
such as those we are used to seeing in computer
graphic renderings consisting of 105107 polygons.
A variety of approaches have been tried in the liter-
ature for efﬁcient rendering of complex scenes. Zilles
and Salisbury [42.40] found planar constraints due to

Haptics
42.4 Control and Stability of Force Feedback Interfaces
1073
Part D | 42.4
the nearby surface polygons and solved for the clos-
est IHIP point using Lagrange multipliers. Ruspini and
Khatib [42.42] added force shading and friction mod-
els. Ho et al. [42.39] used a hierarchy of bounding
spheres to determine the initial contact (collision) point,
but thereafter searched neighboring surfaces, edges, and
vertices (referred to as geometric primitives) of the cur-
rent contacted triangle to ﬁnd the closest point for the
IHIP. Gregory et al. [42.43] imposed a discretization
of three-dimensional (3-D) space onto the hierarchy to
speed up the detection of initial contact with the surface.
Johnson et al. [42.44] performed haptic rendering on
moving models based on local extrema in distance be-
tween the model controlled by the haptic device and the
rest of the scene. Lin and Otaduy [42.45, 46] used level-
of-detail representations of the objects for performing
multiresolution collision detection, with the goal of
satisfying real-time constraints while maximizing the
accuracy of the computed proximity information.
Alternative algorithms and efﬁciencies can be de-
rived by not representing the object surface as polygons.
Thompson and Cohen [42.47] derived the mathematics
for computing the interpenetration depth for surfaces
directly from non-uniform rational B-spline (NURBS)
models. McNeely et al. [42.18] took the extreme ap-
proach of voxelizing space at the millimeter scale. Each
voxel contained a precomputed normal vector, stiffness
properties, etc. 1000Hz rendering was achieved with
very complex CAD models containing millions of poly-
gons (in the graphical equivalent representation), but
large amounts of memory and precomputation are re-
quired. The performance of this algorithm is sufﬁciently
high that it can be used to render hundreds of contact
points simultaneously. This allows the operator to hold
an arbitrarily shaped tool or object. The tool/object is
populated by points surrounding its surface and the re-
sultant force and moment on the tool is the sum of
interaction forces computed on all of the surface points.
For surgical simulation, researchers have focused
on the modeling and haptic rendering of the interaction
between surgical instruments and organs. Researchers
have attempted to model virtual tissue behavior in
a wide variety of ways, which can be broadly classiﬁed
as:
1. Linear elasticity based
2. Nonlinear
(hyperelastic)
elasticity-based
ﬁnite-
element (FE) methods
3. Other techniques that are not based on FE methods
or continuum mechanics.
While most conventional linear and nonlinear FE al-
gorithms cannot be run in real time, methods such
as preprocessing can allow them to run at haptic
rates [42.48]. Many researchers rely on data acquired
from real tissues to model organ deformation and
fracture accurately. Major challenges in this ﬁeld in-
clude the modeling of connective tissue supporting the
organ, friction between instruments and tissues, and
topological changes occurring during invasive surgical
procedures.
42.3.2 Virtual Coupling
So far we have rendered forces by computing the length
and direction of a virtual spring and applying Hooke’s
Law (42.3). This spring is a special case of a virtual
coupling [42.41] between the HIP and the IHIP. The
virtual coupling is an abstraction of the interpenetration
model of force rendering. Instead of viewing the objects
as compliant, we assume them to be rigid but connect
them to the operator through a virtual spring. This im-
poses an effective maximum stiffness (that of the virtual
coupling).
Problems with stable contact rendering (Sect. 42.4)
often require more sophisticated virtual couplings than
a simple spring. For example, damping can be added,
generalizing the force rendering model of (42.3) to
f D kx C bPx :
(42.5)
The parameters k and b can be empirically tuned for
stable and high-performance operation. More-formal
design methods for the virtual coupling are covered in
Sect. 42.4.
42.4 Control and Stability of Force Feedback Interfaces
Introduction to the Problem
The haptic rendering system depicted in Fig. 42.7 is
a closed-loop dynamical system. It is a challenge to ren-
der realistic contact forces yet retain the stable behavior
of human-environment contact in the natural world. In-
stability in haptic interfaces manifests itself as buzzing,
bouncing, or even wildly divergent behavior. The worst
case for impedance devices is during attempted contact
with stiff objects. Empirically, instability is frequently
encountered when developing haptic interfaces with
stiff virtual objects, but this instability can be elimi-
nated by reducing the stiffness of the virtual object or
by the operator making a ﬁrmer grasp on the haptic
device.

Part D | 42.4
1074
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Problem Description in Classical Control Terms
Although linear theory is of very limited use in haptic
control applications, it can be applied to a basic anal-
ysis of the factors affecting instability [42.49]. Such
a highly simpliﬁed model of an impedance device is
shown in Fig. 42.9. G1.s/ and G2.s/ represent dynamics
of the haptic device for both operator position sensing
and force display respectively. Assume that the virtual
environment and human operator/user (HO) can each
be represented by a linear impedance such as
ZVE D FVE.s/
XVE.s/ ;
(42.6)
ZHO D FHO.s/
XHO.s/ :
(42.7)
Then the loop gain of the closed-loop system from the
human operator and back again is
Gl.s/ D G1.s/G2.s/ ZVE.s/
ZHO.s/ :
(42.8)
Stability in the classical sense is assessed by applying
the magnitude and phase criteria of Nyquist to Gl.s/.
Increasing ZVE (corresponding to stiffer or heavier vir-
tual objects) increases the magnitude of Gl.s/ and thus
destabilizes the system while a ﬁrmer grasp by the hu-
man operator, which increases the magnitude of ZHO,
has a stabilizing effect. Similar arguments apply to
phase shifts that might be present in any part of the
system.
Limitations of Linear Theory
Although the model of Fig. 42.9 illustrates some quali-
tative features of haptic interface stability, linear contin-
uous time theory is of little use in designing methods to
stabilize the loop. Interesting virtual environments are
nonlinear. Furthermore, they can rarely be linearized
because applications often simulate discontinuous con-
tact, for example, between a stylus in free space and
a hard surface. A second feature is digital implementa-
tion, which introduces sampling and quantization – both
of which have signiﬁcant effects.
XHO
XVE
G2 (s)
XHO
XVE
G2 (s)
ZHO
–1
ZVE
Fig. 42.9 Highly simpliﬁed linear model of haptic render-
ing to highlight some stability issues
Sampling
Colgate et al. [42.41] incorporated consideration of dis-
crete time sampling behavior in the stability analysis.
They considered the problem of implementing a virtual
wall of stiffness
H.z/ D K C Bz  1
Tz
;
(42.9)
where K is the virtual wall stiffness, B is the virtual wall
damping coefﬁcient, z is the z-transform variable, and
T is the sampling time. They further modeled the haptic
device (HD) in continuous time as
ZHD.s/ D
1
ms C b ;
(42.10)
where m and b are the mass and damping of the haptic
device, respectively. They derived the following condi-
tion for passivity of the device
b > KT
2 C jBj ;
(42.11)
showing a signiﬁcant stabilizing effect of high sampling
rates and also of high mechanical damping in the haptic
device.
Quantization
Additional factors include delays due to numerical in-
tegration schemes and quantization. These contributing
factors to instability have been termed energy leaks by
Gillespie and Cutkosky [42.50].
Passivity
Interesting virtual environments are always nonlinear
and the dynamic properties of a human operator are im-
portant. These factors make it difﬁcult to analyze haptic
systems in terms of known parameters and linear con-
trol theory. One fruitful approach is to use the idea
of passivity to guarantee stable operation. Passivity is
a sufﬁcient condition for stability, and is reviewed more
completely in Chap. 43 on telerobotics. There are many
similarities between the control of haptic interfaces and
bilateral teleoperation.
The major problem with using passivity for design
of haptic interaction systems is that it is overly conser-
vative, as shown in [42.35]. In many cases, performance
can be poor if a ﬁxed damping value is used to guar-
antee passivity under all operating conditions. Adams
and Hannaford derived a method of virtual coupling
design from two-port network theory which applied to
all causality combinations and was less conservative
than passivity based design [42.51]. They were able to
derive optimal virtual coupling parameters using a dy-
namic model of the haptic device and by satisfying
Lewellyn’s absolute stability criterion, an inequality

Haptics
42.5 Other Types of Haptic Interfaces
1075
Part D | 42.5
composed of terms in the two-port description of the
combined haptic interface and virtual coupling system.
Miller et al. derived another design procedure which
extended the analysis to nonlinear environments and
extracted a damping parameter to guarantee stable op-
eration [42.52–54].
42.5 Other Types of Haptic Interfaces
While kinesthetic (force feedback) haptic interfaces
have the closest relationship to robotics, there are a va-
riety of other types of haptic interfaces which are
usually classiﬁed as tactile displays. Tactile displays
are used to convey force, contact and shape informa-
tion to the skin. They purposely stimulate cutaneous
receptors, with little effect on kinesthetic sensation.
This is in contrast to kinesthetic displays, which must
inherently provide some cutaneous sensations through
physical contact with a tool or thimble, but whose
primary output is force or displacement to the limbs
and joints. Tactile displays are usually developed for
a speciﬁc purpose, such as display of contact events,
contact location, slip/shear, texture, and local shape.
Special purpose tactile displays can be targeted at dif-
ferent types of cutaneous receptors, each with its own
frequency response, receptive ﬁeld, spatial distribution,
and sensed parameter (e.g., local skin curvature, skin
stretch, and vibration) and each receptor type is associ-
ated with different exploratory procedures described in
Sect. 42.1.1.
In contrast, tactile displays that render contact infor-
mation for virtual reality or teleoperation have proven
far more challenging. Accurate recreation of the lo-
cal shape and pressure distribution at each ﬁngertip
requires a dense array of actuators. Devices speciﬁ-
cally aimed at tactile perception are an active area of
research but most have not reached the stage of ap-
plications or commercial distribution, with the notable
exception of Braille displays for the blind. In this sec-
tion, we describe the various types of tactile displays,
their design considerations and specialized rendering
algorithms, and applications.
42.5.1 Vibrotactile Feedback
Vibrotactile feedback is a popular method of providing
tactile feedback. It can be used as a stand-alone method
for haptic feedback or as an addition to a kinesthetic dis-
play. Vibrating elements, such as piezoelectric materials
and small voice-coil motors, are lighter than the actua-
tors used in kinesthetic devices, and can often be added
to kinesthetic devices with little impact on existing
mechanisms. In addition, high-bandwidth kinesthetic
displays can be programmed to display open-loop vi-
brations through their normal actuators. The sensitivity
for human vibration sensing ranges from DC to over
1 kHz, with peak sensitivity around 250 Hz.
We ﬁrst consider the use of vibrations to convey
impact or contact events – a technique that straddles
kinesthetic and tactile feedback. When humans touch
an environment, fast-acting sensors embedded in the
skin record the minute vibrations occurring from this
interaction. As described in Sect. 42.3, conventional
approaches to haptic display usually consist of design-
ing a virtual model with simple geometry, then using
a ﬁrst-order stiffness control law to emulate a surface.
However, such ﬁrst-order models often lack the realism
of higher-order effects such as impact. With com-
mon haptic rendering algorithms, surfaces feel squishy
or unrealistically smooth. One solution to improving
the realism of such environments is to add higher-
order effects such as textures and contact vibrations.
These effects can use a library of surface models based
on ad hoc analytical descriptions [42.55], which are
sometimes tuned using qualitative operator feedback,
physical measurements (reality-based models created
from empirical data) [42.56, 57], or a combination of
the two [42.58]. At the instant collision is detected
between the HIP and a surface of the virtual object,
the appropriate waveform is called out of the library,
scaled according to the context of the motion (such
as velocity or acceleration), and played open loop
through an actuator. That actuator may be the same
one simultaneously displaying lower-frequency force
information, as shown in Fig. 42.10, or it might be
a separate transducer. Kuchenbecker et al. [42.59] con-
sidered the dynamics of the haptic device to display
the most accurate vibration waveforms possible, and
compared a number of different vibration waveform
generation techniques meant to convey impact super-
imposed on force feedback in virtual environments.
Most of the vibration feedback methods performed
similarly in terms of realism, and they were also signif-
icantly more realistic than conventional force feedback
alone.
Vibration feedback can also be used to provide
information about patterned textures, roughness, and
other phenomena that have clear vibratory signals. This
type of vibration feedback is often termed vibrotac-
tile feedback. In teleoperated environments, Kontarinis
and Howe [42.60] showed that damaged ball bear-

Part D | 42.5
1076
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
ings could be identiﬁed through vibration feedback,
and Dennerlein et al. [42.61] demonstrated that vibra-
tion feedback improved performance over no haptic
feedback, for a telemanipulation task inspired by un-
dersea ﬁeld robotics. In these teleoperator systems,
vibration-sensitive sensors such as accelerometers and
piezoelectric sensors are used to pick up and, in most
cases, directly provide the vibration signals as inputs
to a vibrotactile actuator. In virtual environments, Oka-
mura et al. [42.62] displayed vibrations modeled based
on textures and puncture of a membrane. Similar to
the event-based haptics above, the vibration wave-
forms were modeled based on earlier experiments and
played open loop during interaction with the virtual
environment.
Finally, vibration feedback has been used as
a method of sensory substitution, to convey direction,
attention, or other information, e.g., [42.63–65]. In this
case, the strength and clarity of the signal, not real-
ism, is the goal. Vibration frequencies near the peak
human sensitivity are most effective, and there exist
commercially available vibrotactile actuators (or tac-
tors) suitable for such applications, e.g., Engineering
Acoustic, Inc.’s C2 Tactor [42.66]. Elements within an
array of tactors can be selectively turned on and off
to evoke the sensory saltation phenomenon, in which
a pattern of brief pulses on a series of tactors is per-
ceived not as successive taps at different locations, but
as a single tap that is traveling or hopping over the
skin.
Time
Time
Transient
Force
Position
Vn
Proportional
Fig. 42.10 Event-triggered open-loop force signals super-
impose on traditional penetration-based feedback forces,
providing vibration feedback that improves the realism of
hard surfaces in virtual environments (after [42.59] with
permission)
42.5.2 Contact Location, Slip,
and Shear Display
In early work related to robotic dexterous manipula-
tion, it was found that knowledge of the contact point
between a robot hand and a grasped object is essen-
tial for manipulation. Without this knowledge, the robot
will easily drop the object due to rapid accumulation
of grasp errors. While many robotics researchers and
some companies have developed tactile array sensors
capable of measuring contact location, pressure distri-
bution, and local object geometry (Chap. 28), practical
methods for display of this information to the human
operator of a virtual or teleoperated environment have
proven much more difﬁcult. We begin our discussion
of contact display by considering contact location, slip,
and shear display, which have the common goal of dis-
playing the motion of a single area of contact relative
to the skin (almost invariably on a ﬁnger). Arrays of
pins that rise and fall to create a pressure distribution
on the skin have been the most popular method to date
for displaying contact information, but we will address
those designs in the following section on local shape,
since their primary advantage is the display of spatially
distributed information. Instead, we will focus here on
tactile devices that are designed to speciﬁcally address
the problem of contact location and motion.
As
an
example
of
contact
location
display,
Provancher et al. [42.67] developed a system that ren-
ders the location of the contact centroid moving on
the user’s ﬁngertip. The tactile element is a free-rolling
cylinder that is normally suspended away from the ﬁn-
gertip, but comes into contact with the skin when the
operator pushes on a virtual object. The motion of
the cylinder over the skin is controlled by sheathed
push-pull wires. This allows the actuators to be placed
remotely, creating a lightweight, thimble-sized pack-
age that can be unobtrusively mounted on a kinesthetic
haptic device. An experiment demonstrated that human
operators performed similarly during real manipulation
and virtual manipulation (using the tactile display) in an
object curvature discrimination task. In addition, oper-
ators were able to use the device to distinguish between
manipulations of rolling and anchored but rotating vir-
tual objects.
42.5.3 Slip and Shear
Humans use slip and incipient slip widely during ma-
nipulation tasks [42.68]. To reproduce these sensations
for experiments to characterize human slip sensation,
researchers have created stand-alone 1-DOF slip dis-
plays [42.69–71]. Webster et al. [42.71] created a 2-
DOF tactile slip display, which uses an actuated ro-

Haptics
42.5 Other Types of Haptic Interfaces
1077
Part D | 42.5
tating ball positioned under the user’s ﬁngertip. The
lightweight, modular tactile display can be attached to
a multi-DOF kinesthetic interface and used to display
virtual environments with slip. Experimental results
demonstrate that operators complete a virtual manipula-
tion task with lower applied forces using combined slip
and force feedback in comparison with conventional
force feedback alone. Skin stretch can also be integrated
with a slip display to provide information about pre-slip
conditions. For example, Tsagarakis et al. [42.72] de-
veloped a lightweight device that uses a V conﬁguration
of miniature motors to provide sensations of relative
lateral motion (direction and velocity) onto the opera-
tor’s ﬁngertips. Generation of two-dimensional (2-D)
slip/stretch is achieved by coordinating the rotational
speed and direction of the two motors.
In terms of tactile device kinematics, slip and shear
displays can be quite similar. However, the goal of
shear, or skin stretch, displays is to maintain a no-slip
condition such that shear forces/motions can be accu-
rately controlled with respect to the human operator,
typically on the ﬁnger. The use of shear (tangential skin
stretch) is motivated by perceptual experiments demon-
strating that the human ﬁngerpad is more sensitive to
tangential displacement compared to normal displace-
ment [42.73]. A variety of tangential skin stretch de-
vices have been designed, with applications in wearable
haptics, high-ﬁdelity tactile rendering, and teleopera-
tion. Hayward and Cruz-Hernandez [42.74] developed
a tactile device consisting of closely packed piezoelec-
tric actuators, which generates a programmable stress
ﬁeld within the ﬁngerpad. Single skin-stretch tactors
have also been used to convey two-dimensional di-
rectional information (for navigation) [42.75] and to
enhance perception of virtual environments (e.g., fric-
tion) [42.76] alone or in combination with kinesthetic
haptic interfaces. A similar approach has been used
for 3-DOF skin stretch, in combination with cutaneous
normal force [42.77, 78]. In a different form factor, re-
searchers have developed rotational skin stretch devices
that can act as a substitute for natural proprioceptive
feedback [42.79, 80].
42.5.4 Local Shape
Most tactile devices for local shape display consist of
an array of individual pin elements that move nor-
mal to the surface. Often, a layer of elastic material
is used to cover the pins so that the operator con-
tacts a smooth surface rather than the pins directly.
Other systems use individual elements that move later-
ally, and some substitute electrodes for moving parts to
form an array of electrocutaneous elements. A number
of researchers have used psychophysical and percep-
tual experimental results to deﬁne design parameters
such as number of pins, spacing, and amplitude of pin-
based tactile displays. A commonly used metric is the
two-point discrimination test, which deﬁnes the mini-
mum distance between two contact points on the skin
at which they are perceived as two, rather than one
point. This discrimination limit varies widely for skin
on different parts of the body, with the ﬁngertips hav-
ing one of the smallest (usually cited as less than 1 mm,
although this depends on the shape and size of the
contacts) [42.81, 82]. Moy et al. [42.83] quantiﬁed sev-
eral perceptual capabilities of the human tactile system
based on predicted subsurface strain and psychophysi-
cal experiments that measured amplitude resolution, the
effects of shear stress, and the effects of viscoelastic-
ity (creep and relaxation) on tactile perception for static
touch. They found ﬁnd that 10% amplitude resolution
is sufﬁcient for a teletaction system with a 2 mm elas-
tic layer and 2 mm tactor spacing. A different type of
experiment examines the kind of tactile information rel-
evant to a particular application. For example, Peine and
Howe [42.84] found that sensed deformation of the ﬁn-
gerpad, and not changes in pressure distribution, were
responsible for localizing lumps in a soft material, such
as a tumor in tissue.
We will now highlight a few distinctive designs
of array-type tactile displays. A number of actuator
technologies have been applied to create tactile arrays,
including piezoelectric, shape-memory alloy (SMA),
electromagnetic, pneumatic, electrorheological, micro-
electromechanical system (MEMS), and electrotactile.
Further reading on tactile display design and actuation
is available in review papers, including [42.85–90].
We will ﬁrst consider two ends of the spectrum in
complexity/cost of the pin-based approach. Killebrew
et al. [42.91] developed a 400-pin, 1 cm2 tactile stim-
ulator to present arbitrary spatiotemporal stimuli to the
skin for neuroscience experiments. Each pin is under in-
dependent computer control and can present over 1200
stimuli per minute. While not practical for most haptic
applications due to the size and weight of the actua-
tion unit, it is the highest-resolution tactile display built
to date and can be used to evaluate potential designs
for lower-resolution displays. Wagner et al. [42.92] cre-
ated a 36-pin, 1 cm2 tactile shape display that uses
commercially available radio-controlled (RC) servomo-
tors. The display can represent maximum frequencies
of 7:525 Hz, pending on the amount of pin deﬂec-
tion, and is shown in Fig. 42.11. Howe et al. [42.93,
94] have also explored the use of shape-memory al-
loys for pin actuation, for the application of remote
palpation.
In contrast to pins that move normal to the sur-
face, recent tactile array designs have incorporated

Part D | 42.5
1078
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
pins that move laterally. First introduced by Hayward
and Cruz-Hernandez [42.95], the most recent com-
pact, lightweight, modular design [42.96] uses a 6  10
piezo bimorph actuator array with a spatial resolution
of 1:8 mm  1:2 mm. The force of the individual ac-
tuators provides sufﬁcient skin pad motion/stretch to
excite mechanoreceptors [42.97]. A pilot test demon-
strated that subjects could detect a virtual line randomly
located on an otherwise smooth virtual surface, and the
device has also been tested as a Braille display [42.98].
Another lateral stretch display and its evaluation is de-
scribed in [42.99]. Other novel approaches to tactile
display include sending small currents through the skin
or tongue using an electrocutaneous array [42.100] and
the application of air pressure to stimulate only superﬁ-
cial mechanoreceptors [42.101].
42.5.5 Surface Displays
In recent years, the concept of surface displays, which
modulate surface friction in order to display changing
shear forces as a user moves the ﬁnger over the sur-
face. One example device that uses slip and friction
to display compelling tactile sensations is the TPaD
a)
b)
Fig. 42.11 (a) A low-cost 36-pin tactile display using RC
servomotor actuation. (b) A closeup of the 6  6 dis-
play, showing a sine wave grating (after [42.92] with
permission)
(tactile pattern display) [42.102]. Ultrasonic frequency,
low amplitude vibrations of a ﬂat plate create a ﬁlm
of air between the plate and a human ﬁnger touching
the plate, thereby reducing friction. The 33 kHz vibra-
tion of the plate cannot be perceived by the human.
The amount of friction reduction varies with vibration
amplitude, allowing indirect control of shear forces on
the ﬁnger during active exploration. Finger position and
velocity feedback enables haptic rendering of spatial
texture sensations. This work has been expanded into
a variety of different surface displays, including de-
vices that generate active forces [42.103] and those that
use electrostatic forces to modulate friction [42.104,
105].
42.5.6 Temperature
Because the human body is typically warmer than ob-
jects in the environment, thermal perceptions are based
on a combination of thermal conductivity, thermal ca-
pacity, and temperature. This allows us to infer not
only temperature difference, but also material compo-
sition [42.106]. Most thermal display devices are based
on thermoelectric coolers, also known as Peltier heat
pumps. Thermoelectric coolers consist of a series of
semiconductor junctions connected electrically in series
and thermally in parallel. The thermoelectric cooler is
designed to pump heat from one ceramic faceplate to
the other, but if used in reverse, a temperature gradient
across the device produces a proportional potential; as
a measure of relative temperature change. The designs
of haptic thermal displays mostly use off-the-shelf com-
ponents, and their applications are typically straightfor-
ward, enabling identiﬁcation of objects in a virtual or
teleoperated environment by their temperature and ther-
mal conductivity.
Ho and Jones [42.107] provide a review of haptic
temperature display, as well as promising results sug-
gesting that a thermal display is capable of facilitating
object recognition when visual cues are limited. Al-
though numerous systems have integrated thermal dis-
play with other types of haptic display, the Data Glove
Input System designed by Caldwell et al. [42.108, 109]
was one of the ﬁrst to do so. Their haptic interface pro-
vides simultaneous force, tactile, and thermal feedback.
The Peltier device used for thermal display contacts the
dorsal surface of the index ﬁnger. Subjects achieved
a 90% success rate in identifying materials such as
a cube of ice, a soldering iron, insulating foam, and
a block of aluminum, based only on thermal cues. The
study of human temperature perception is particularly
interesting, including issues such as spatial summation
and the psychological relevance of temperature display.
For example, in prosthetic limbs, temperature display

Haptics
References
1079
Part D | 42
may be useful not only for practical reasons such as
safety and material identiﬁcation, but also for reasons of
personal comfort, such as feeling the warmth of a loved
one’s hand.
42.6 Conclusions and Further Reading
Haptic technology, which attempts to provide com-
pelling sensations to human operators in virtual and
teleoperated environments, is a relatively new, but fast-
growing and dynamic area of research. The ﬁeld relies
not only on fundamental foundations from robotics and
control theory, but also on ﬁelds in the human sci-
ences, particularly neuroscience and psychology. To
date, commercial success of haptics has been in the ar-
eas of entertainment, medical simulation, and design,
although novel devices and applications are regularly
appearing.
There exist many books on the topic of haptic
technology, most of them compendiums from work-
shops or conferences on the subject. One of the earliest
books on haptics, by Burdea [42.110], provides a thor-
ough review of applications and haptic devices up
to 1996. A book speciﬁcally focused on haptic ren-
dering, designed for potential use as a textbook, has
been edited by Lin and Otaduy [42.111]. In addition,
we recommend the following useful articles: Hayward
and MacLean [42.112, 113] describe the fundamentals
of constructing experimental haptic devices of modest
complexity, the software components needed to drive
them, and the interaction design concepts important to
creating usable systems. Hayward et al. [42.114] also
provide a tutorial on haptic devices and interfaces. Sal-
isbury et al. [42.115] describe the basic principles of
haptic rendering. Hayward and MacLean [42.116] de-
scribes a number of tactile illusions that can inspire
creative solutions for haptic interface design. Robles-
De-La-Torre [42.117] underscores the importance of
haptics with compelling examples of humans who have
lost the sense of touch.
Finally, there exist two journals that are speciﬁc to
the ﬁeld of haptics: Haptics-e [42.118] and IEEE Trans-
actions on Haptics (ﬁrst issue expected 2008). Several
conferences are speciﬁcally devoted to haptics: Euro-
haptics and the Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for
Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems are held
separately in even years, and on the odd years become
a single conference, World Haptics. The IEEE (Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers) technical com-
mittee on haptics [42.119] provides information about
relevant publication forums.
References
42.1
K.B. Shimoga: A survey of perceptual feedback
issues in dexterous telemanipulation. I. Finger
force feedback, Proc. Virtual Real. Annu. Int.
Symp. (1993) pp. 263–270
42.2
M.A. Srinivasan, R.H. LaMotte: Tactile discrimina-
tion of shape: responses of slowly and rapidly
adapting mechanoreceptive afferents to a step
indented into the monkey fingerpad, J. Neurosci.
7(6), 1682–1697 (1987)
42.3
R.H. LaMotte, R.F. Friedman, C. Lu, P.S. Khalsa,
M.A. Srinivasan: Raised object on a planar sur-
face stroked across the fingerpad: Responses
of cutaneous mechanoreceptors to shape and
orientation,
J.
Neurophysiol.
80,
2446–2466
(1998)
42.4
R.H. LaMotte, J. Whitehouse: Tactile detection of
a dot on a smooth surface: Peripheral neural
events, J. Neurophysiol. 56, 1109–1128 (1986)
42.5
R. Hayashi, A. Miyake, H. Jijiwa, S. Watanabe:
Postureal readjustment to body sway induced by
vibration in man, Exp. Brain Res. 43, 217–225 (1981)
42.6
G.M. Goodwin, D.I. McCloskey, P.B.C. Matthews:
The contribution of muscle afferents to kines-
thesia shown by vibration induced illusions of
movement an the effects of paralysing joint af-
ferents, Brain 95, 705–748 (1972)
42.7
G.S. Dhillon, K.W. Horch: Direct neural sensory
feedback and control of a prosthetic arm, IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 13(4), 468–472
(2005)
42.8
G.A. Gescheider: Psychophysics: The Fundamen-
tals (Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale 1985)
42.9
L.A. Jones: Perception and control of finger forces,
Proc. ASME Dyn. Syst. Control Div. (1998) pp. 133–
137
42.10
R. Klatzky, S. Lederman, V. Metzger: Identifying
objects by touch, An ‘expertt system’, Percept.
Psychophys. 37(4), 299–302 (1985)
42.11
S.
Lederman, R. Klatzky:
Hand
movements:
A window into haptic object recognition, Cogn.
Psychol. 19(3), 342–368 (1987)
42.12
S. Lederman, R. Klatzky: Haptic classification of
common objects: Knowledge-driven exploration,
Cogn. Psychol. 22, 421–459 (1990)
42.13
O.S. Bholat, R.S. Haluck, W.B. Murray, P.G. Gor-
man, T.M. Krummel: Tactile feedback is present

Part D | 42
1080
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
during minimally invasive surgery, J. Am. Coll.
Surg. 189(4), 349–355 (1999)
42.14
C. Basdogan, S. De, J. Kim, M. Muniyandi, M.A. Sri-
nivasan: Haptics in minimally invasive surgical
simulation and training, IEEE Comput. Graph.
Appl. 24(2), 56–64 (2004)
42.15
P. Strom, L. Hedman, L. Sarna, A. Kjellin, T. Wred-
mark, L. Fellander-Tsai: Early exposure to hap-
tic feedback enhances performance in surgi-
cal simulator training: A prospective randomized
crossover study in surgical residents, Surg. En-
dosc. 20(9), 1383–1388 (2006)
42.16
A. Liu, F. Tendick, K. Cleary, C. Kaufmann: A survey
of surgical simulation: Applications, technology,
and education, Presence Teleop. Virtual Environ.
12(6), 599–614 (2003)
42.17
R.M. Satava: Accomplishments and challenges of
surgical simulation, Surg. Endosc. 15(3), 232–241
(2001)
42.18
W.A. McNeely, K.D. Puterbaugh, J.J. Troy: Six de-
gree-of-freedom haptic rendering using voxel
sampling, Proc. SIGGRAPH 99 (1999) pp. 401–408
42.19
Geomagic Touch: http://www.geomagic.com
42.20
T.H. Massie, J.K. Salisbury: The phantom hap-
tic interface: A device for probing virtual objects,
Proc. ASME Dyn. Syst. Contr. Div., Vol. 55 (1994)
pp. 295–299
42.21
Novint Technologies: http://www.novint.com
42.22
Chai3D: http://www.chai3d.org
42.23
M.C. Cavusoglu, D. Feygin, F. Tendick: A critical
study of the mechanical and electrical properties
of the PHANToM haptic interface and improve-
ments for high-performance control, Presence
11(6), 555–568 (2002)
42.24
R.Q. van der Linde, P. Lammerste, E. Frederiksen,
B. Ruiter: The HapticMaster, a new high-perfor-
mance haptic interface, Proc. Eurohaptics Conf.
(2002) pp. 1–5
42.25
T. Yoshikawa: Manipulability of robotic mecha-
nisms, Int. J. Robotics Res. 4(2), 3–9 (1985)
42.26
J.K. Salibury, J.T. Craig: Articulated hands: Force
control and kinematics issues, Int. J. Robotics Res.
1(1), 4–17 (1982)
42.27
P. Buttolo, B. Hannaford: Pen based force display
for precision manipulation of virtual environ-
ments, Proc. Virtual Reality Annu. International
Symposium (VRAIS) (1995) pp. 217–225
42.28
P. Buttolo, B. Hannaford: Advantages of actua-
tion redundancy for the design of haptic displays,
Proc. ASME 4th Annu. Symp. Haptic Interfaces
Virtual Environ. Teleop. Syst., Vol. 57-2 (1995)
pp. 623–630
42.29
T. Yoshikawa: Foundations of Robotics (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1990)
42.30
S. Venema, B. Hannaford: A probabilistic repre-
sentation of human workspace for use in the de-
sign of human interface mechanisms, IEEE Trans.
Mechatron. 6(3), 286–294 (2001)
42.31
H. Yano, M. Yoshie, H. Iwata: development of
a non-grounded haptic interface using the gyro
effect, Proc. 11th Symp. Haptic Interfaces Virtual
Environ. Teleop. Syst. (2003) pp. 32–39
42.32
C. Swindells, A. Unden, T. Sang: TorqueBAR: an
ungrounded haptic feedback device, Proc. 5th
Int. Conf. Multimodal Interface (2003) pp. 52–59
42.33
Immersion Corporation: CyberGrasp – Ground-
breaking haptic interface for the entire hand,
http://www.immersion.com/3d/products/cyber_
grasp.php (2006)
42.34
C. Richard, M.R. Cutkosky: Contact force percep-
tion with an ungrounded haptic interface, Proc.
ASME Dyn. Syst. Control Div. (1997) pp. 181–187
42.35
J.J. Abbott, A.M. Okamura: Effects of position
quantization and sampling rate on virtual-wall
passivity, IEEE Trans. Robotics 21(5), 952–964
(2005)
42.36
S. Usui, I. Amidror: Digital low-pass differentia-
tion for biological signal processing, IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng. 29(10), 686–693 (1982)
42.37
P. Bhatti, B. Hannaford: Single chip optical en-
coder based velocity measurement system, IEEE
Trans. Contr. Syst. Technol. 5(6), 654–661 (1997)
42.38
A.M. Okamura, C. Richard, M.R. Cutkosky: Feel-
ing is believing: Using a force-feedback joystick to
teach dynamic systems, ASEE J. Eng. Educ. 92(3),
345–349 (2002)
42.39
C.H. Ho, C. Basdogan, M.A. Srinivasan: Efficient
point-based rendering techniques for haptic dis-
play of virtual objects, Presence 8, 477–491 (1999)
42.40
C.B. Zilles, J.K. Salisbury: A constraint-based god-
object method for haptic display, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1995) pp. 146–
151
42.41
J.E. Colgate, M.C. Stanley, J.M. Brown: Issues in
the haptic display of tool use, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1995) pp. 140–145
42.42
D. Ruspini, O. Khatib: Haptic display for human
interaction with virtual dynamic environments,
J. Robot. Syst. 18(12), 769–783 (2001)
42.43
A. Gregory, A. Mascarenhas, S. Ehmann, M. Lin,
D. Manocha: Six degree-of-freedom haptic dis-
play of polygonal models, Proc. Conf. Vis. 2000
(2000) pp. 139–146
42.44
D.E. Johnson, P. Willemsen, E. Cohen: 6-DOF
haptic rendering using spatialized normal cone
search, Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 11(6), 661–670
(2005)
42.45
M.A. Otaduy, M.C. Lin: A modular haptic rendering
algorithm for stable and transparent 6-DOF ma-
nipulation, IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 22(4),
751–762 (2006)
42.46
M.C. Lin, M.A. Otaduy: Sensation-preserving hap-
tic rendering, IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 25(4),
8–11 (2005)
42.47
T. Thompson, E. Cohen: Direct haptic rendering of
complex trimmed NURBS models, Proc. ASME Dyn.
Syst. Control Div. (1999)
42.48
S.P. DiMaio, S.E. Salcudean: Needle insertion
modeling and simulation, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 19(5), 864–875 (2003)
42.49
B. Hannaford: Stability and performance trade-
offs in bi-lateral telemanipulation, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 3 (1989)
pp. 1764–1767

Haptics
References
1081
Part D | 42
42.50
B. Gillespie, M. Cutkosky: Stable user-specific
rendering of the virtual wall, Proc. ASME Int.
Mech. Eng. Cong. Exhib., Vol. 58 (1996) pp. 397–
406
42.51
R.J. Adams, B. Hannaford: Stable haptic inter-
action with virtual environments, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 15(3), 465–474 (1999)
42.52
B.E. Miller, J.E. Colgate, R.A. Freeman: Passive
implementation for a class of static nonlinear en-
vironments in haptic display, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1999) pp. 2937–2942
42.53
B.E. Miller, J.E. Colgate, R.A. Freeman: Computa-
tional delay and free mode environment design
for haptic display, Proc. ASME Dyn. Syst. Cont. Div.
(1999)
42.54
B.E. Miller, J.E. Colgate, R.A. Freeman: Environ-
ment delay in haptic systems, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2000) pp. 2434–2439
42.55
S.E. Salcudean, T.D. Vlaar: On the emulation of
stiff walls and static friction with a magnetically
levitated input/output device, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 119 (1997) pp. 127–132
42.56
P. Wellman, R.D. Howe: Towards realistic vibro-
tactile display in virtual environments, Proc. ASME
Dyn. Syst. Control Div. (1995) pp. 713–718
42.57
K. MacLean: The haptic camera: A technique for
characterizing and playing back haptic properties
of real environments, Proc. 5th Annu. Symp. Hap-
tic Interfaces Virtual Environ. Teleop. Syst. (1996)
42.58
A.M. Okamura, J.T. Dennerlein, M.R. Cutkosky:
Reality-based models for vibration feedback in
virtual environments, ASME/IEEE Trans. Mecha-
tron. 6(3), 245–252 (2001)
42.59
K.J. Kuchenbecker, J. Fiene, G. Niemeyer: Improv-
ing contact realism through event-based haptic
feedback, IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 12(2),
219–230 (2006)
42.60
D.A. Kontarinis, R.D. Howe: Tactile display of vi-
bratory information in teleoperation and virtual
environments, Presence 4(4), 387–402 (1995)
42.61
J.T. Dennerlein, P.A. Millman, R.D. Howe: Vibro-
tactile feedback for industrial telemanipulators,
Proc. ASME Dyn. Syst. Contr. Div., Vol. 61 (1997)
pp. 189–195
42.62
A.M. Okamura, J.T. Dennerlein, R.D. Howe: Vibra-
tion feedback models for virtual environments,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1998)
pp. 674–679
42.63
R.W. Lindeman, Y. Yanagida, H. Noma, K. Hosaka:
Wearable vibrotactile systems for virtual contact
and information display, Virtual Real. 9(2-3), 203–
213 (2006)
42.64
C. Ho, H.Z. Tan, C. Spence: Using spatial vibro-
tactile cues to direct visual attention in driving
scenes, Transp. Res. F Traffic Psychol. Behav. 8,
397–412 (2005)
42.65
H.Z. Tan, R. Gray, J.J. Young, R. Traylor: A hap-
tic back display for attentional and directional
cueing, Haptics-e Electron. J. Haptics Res. 3(1), 20
(2003)
42.66
C2 Tactor: Engineering Acoustic Inc.: http://www.
eaiinfo.com
42.67
W.R. Provancher, M.R. Cutkosky, K.J. Kuchen-
becker, G. Niemeyer: Contact location display for
haptic perception of curvature and object motion,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 24(9), 691–702 (2005)
42.68
R.S. Johansson: Sensory input and control of grip,
Novartis Foundat. Symp., Vol. 218 (1998) pp. 45–
59
42.69
K.O. Johnson, J.R. Phillips: A rotating drum stimu-
lator for scanned embossed patterns and textures
across the skin, J. Neurosci. Methods 22, 221–231
(1998)
42.70
M.A. Salada, J.E. Colgate, P.M. Vishton, E. Frankel:
Two experiments on the perception of slip at the
fingertip, Proc. 12th Symp. Haptic Interfaces Vir-
tual Environ. Teleop. Syst. (2004) pp. 472–476
42.71
R.J.
Webster
III,
T.E.
Murphy,
L.N.
Verner,
A.M. Okamura: A novel two-dimensional tactile
slip display: Design, kinematics and perceptual
experiment,
ACM
Trans.
Appl.
Percept.
2(2),
150–165 (2005)
42.72
N.G. Tsagarakis, T. Horne, D.G. Caldwell: SLIP
AESTHEASIS: A portable 2D slip/skin stretch dis-
play for the fingertip, 1st Jt. Eurohaptics Conf.
Symp. Haptic Interfaces Virtual Environ. Teleop.
Syst. (World Haptics) (2005) pp. 214–219
42.73
J. Biggs, M. Srinivasan: Tangential versus nor-
mal displacements of skin: Relative effectiveness
for producing tactile sensations, Proc. 10th Symp.
Haptic Interfaces Virtual Environ. Teleop. Syst.
(2002) pp. 121–128
42.74
V. Hayward, J.M. Cruz-Hernandez: Tactile display
device using distributed lateral skin stretch, Proc.
8th Symp. Haptic Interfaces Virtual Environ. Tele-
operator Syst. (2000) pp. 1309–1314
42.75
B. Gleeson, S. Horschel, W. Provancher: Per-
ception of direction for applied tangential skin
displacement: Effects of speed, displacement,
and repetition, IEEE Trans. Haptics 3(3), 177–188
(2010)
42.76
W.R. Provancher, N.D. Sylvester: Fingerpad skin
stretch increases the perception of virtual friction,
IEEE Trans. Haptics 2(4), 212–223 (2009)
42.77
Z.F. Quek, S.B. Schorr, I. Nisky, W.R. Provancher,
A.M. Okamura: Sensory substitution using 3-
degree-of-freedom tangential and normal skin
deformation feedback, IEEE Haptics Symp. (2014)
pp. 27–33
42.78
A. Tirmizi, C. Pacchierottie, D. Prattichizzo: On the
role of cutaneous force in teleoperation: Subtract-
ing kinesthesia from complete haptic feedback,
IEEE World Haptics Conf. (2013) pp. 371–376
42.79
K. Bark, J. Wheeler, P. Shull, J. Savall, M. Cutkosky:
Rotational skin stretch feedback: A wearable hap-
tic display for motion, IEEE Trans. Haptics 3(3),
166–176 (2010)
42.80
P.B. Shull, K.L. Lurie, M.R. Cutkosky, T.F. Be-
sier: Training multi-parameter gaits to reduce
the knee adduction moment with data-driven
models and haptic feedback, J. Biomech. 44(8),
1605–1609 (2011)
42.81
K.O. Johnson, J.R. Phillips: Tactile spatial resolu-
tion. I. Two-point discrimination, gap detection,

Part D | 42
1082
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
grating resolution, and letter recognition, J. Neu-
rophysiol. 46(6), 1177–1192 (1981)
42.82
N. Asamura, T. Shinohara, Y. Tojo, N. Koshida,
H. Shinoda: Necessary spatial resolution for re-
alistic tactile feeling display, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2001) pp. 1851–1856
42.83
G. Moy, U. Singh, E. Tan, R.S. Fearing: Human psy-
chophysics for teletaction system design, Haptics-
e Electron. J. Haptics Res. 1, 3 (2000)
42.84
W.J. Peine, R.D. Howe: Do humans sense fin-
ger deformation or distributed pressure to detect
lumps in soft tissue, Proc. ASME Dyn. Syst. Contr.
Div., Vol. 64 (1998) pp. 273–278
42.85
K.B. Shimoga: A survey of perceptual feedback
issues in dexterous telemanipulation: Part II, Fin-
ger touch feedback, Proc. IEEE Virtual Real. Annu.
Int. Symp. (1993) pp. 271–279
42.86
K.A. Kaczmarek, P. Bach-Y-Rita: Tactile displays.
In: Virtual Environments and Advanced Interface
Design, ed. by W. Barfield, T.A. Furness (Oxford
Univ. Press, Oxford 1995) pp. 349–414
42.87
M. Shimojo: Tactile sensing and display, Trans.
Inst. Electr. Eng. Jpn. E 122, 465–468 (2002)
42.88
S. Tachi: Roles of tactile display in virtual reality,
Trans. Inst. Electr. Eng. Jpn. E 122, 461–464 (2002)
42.89
P. Kammermeier, G. Schmidt: Application-specific
evaluation of tactile array displays for the human
fingertip. In: IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst.
(IROS) 2002)
42.90
S.A. Wall, S. Brewster: Sensory substitution us-
ing tactile pin arrays: Human factors, technology
and applications, Signal Process. 86(12), 3674–
3695 (2006)
42.91
J.H. Killebrew, S.J. Bensmaia, J.F. Dammann,
P. Denchev, S.S. Hsiao, J.C. Craig, K.O. Johnson: A
dense array stimulator to generate arbitrary spa-
tio-temporal tactile stimuli, J. Neurosci. Methods
161(1), 62–74 (2007)
42.92
C.R. Wagner, S.J. Lederman, R.D. Howe: Design
and performance of a tactile shape display us-
ing RC servomotors, Haptics-e Electron. J. Haptics
Res. 3, 4 (2004)
42.93
R.D. Howe, W.J. Peine, D.A. Kontarinis, J.S. Son:
Remote palpation technology, IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. 14(3), 318–323 (1995)
42.94
P.S. Wellman, W.J. Peine, G. Favalora, R.D. Howe:
Mechanical design and control of a high-band-
width shape memory alloy tactile display, Lect.
Notes Comput. Sci. 232, 56–66 (1998)
42.95
V. Hayward, M. Cruz-Hernandez: Tactile display
device using distributed lateral skin stretch, Hap-
tic Interfaces Virtual Environ. Teleop. Syst. Symp.,
Vol. 69-2 (2000) pp. 1309–1314
42.96
Q. Wang, V. Hayward: Compact, portable, modu-
lar, high-performance, distributed tactile trans-
ducer device based on lateral skin deformation,
Haptic Interfaces Virtual Environ. Teleop. Syst.
Symp. (2006) pp. 67–72
42.97
Q. Wang, V. Hayward: In vivo biomechanics of
the fingerpad skin under local tangential traction,
J. Biomech. 40(4), 851–860 (2007)
42.98
V. Levesque, J. Pasquero, V. Hayward: Braille dis-
play by lateral skin deformation with the STReSS2
tactile transducer, 2nd Jt. Eurohaptics Conf. Symp.
Haptic Interfaces Virtual Environ. Teleop. Syst.
(World Haptics) (2007) pp. 115–120
42.99
K. Drewing, M. Fritschi, R. Zopf, M.O. Ernst,
M. Buss: First evaluation of a novel tactile display
exerting shear force via lateral displacement, ACM
Trans. Appl. Percept. 2(2), 118–131 (2005)
42.100
K.A. Kaczmarek, J.G. Webster, P. Bach-Y-Rita,
W.J. Tompkins: Electrotactile and vibrotactile dis-
plays for sensory substitution systems, IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng. 38, 1–16 (1991)
42.101
N. Asamura, N. Yokoyama, H. Shinoda: Selectively
stimulating skin receptors for tactile display, IEEE
Comput. Graph. Appl. 18, 32–37 (1998)
42.102
L. Winfield, J. Glassmire, J.E. Colgate, M. Peshkin:
T-PaD: Tactile pattern display through variable
friction reduction, 2nd Jt. Eurohaptics Conf. Symp.
Haptic Interfaces Virtual Environ. Teleop. Syst.
(World Haptics) (2007) pp. 421–426
42.103
J.
Mullenbach,
D.
Johnson,
J.E.
Colgate,
M.A.
Peshkin:
ActivePaD
surface
haptic
de-
vice, IEEE Haptics Symp. (2012) pp. 407–414
42.104
O. Bau, I. Poupyrev, A. Israr, C. Harrison: Tesla-
Touch: Electrovibration for touch surfaces, Proc.
23nd Annu. ACM Symp. User Interface Softw. Tech-
nol. (2012) pp. 283–292
42.105
D.J. Meyer, M.A. Peshkin, J.E. Colgate: Fingertip
friction modulation due to electrostatic attrac-
tion, IEEE World Haptics Conf. (2013)
42.106
H.-N. Ho, L.A. Jones: Contribution of thermal cues
to material discrimination and localization, Per-
cept. Psychophys. 68, 118–128 (2006)
42.107
H.-N. Ho, L.A. Jones: Development and evalua-
tion of a thermal display for material identifica-
tion and discrimination, ACM Trans. Appl. Percept.
4(2), 118–128 (2007)
42.108
D.G. Caldwell, C. Gosney: Enhanced tactile feed-
back (tele-taction) using a multi-functional sen-
sory system, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1993) pp. 955–960
42.109
D.G. Caldwell, S. Lawther, A. Wardle: Tactile per-
ception and its application to the design of multi-
modal cutaneous feedback systems, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1996) pp. 3215–
3221
42.110
C.G. Burdea: Force and Touch Feedback for Virtual
Reality (Wiley, New York 1996)
42.111
M.C. Lin, M.A. Otaduy (Eds.): Haptic Rendering:
Foundations, Algorithms, and Applications (AK
Peters, Wellesley 2008)
42.112
V. Hayward, K.E. MacLean: Do it yourself haptics,
Part I, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 14(4), 88–104
(2007)
42.113
K.E. MacLean, V. Hayward: Do It Yourself Haptics,
Part II, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 15(1), 104–119
(2008)
42.114
V. Hayward, O.R. Astley, M. Cruz-Hernandez,
D. Grant, G. Robles-De-La-Torre: Haptic inter-
faces and devices, Sensor Rev. 24(1), 16–29 (2004)

Haptics
References
1083
Part D | 42
42.115
K. Salisbury, F. Conti, F. Barbagli: Haptic render-
ing: Introductory concepts, IEEE Comput. Graph.
Appl. 24(2), 24–32 (2004)
42.116
V. Hayward, K.E. MacLean: A brief taxonomy of
tactile illusions and demonstrations that can be
done in a hardware store, Brain Res. Bull. 75(6),
742–752 (2007)
42.117
G. Robles-De-La-Torre: The importance of the
sense of touch in virtual and real environments,
IEEE Multimedia 13(3), 24–30 (2006)
42.118
Haptics-e: The Electronic Journal of Haptics Re-
search, http://www.haptics-e.org
42.119
Haptics
Technical
Committee:
http://www.
worldhaptics.org

Multimedia Contents Telerobotics
1085
Part D | 43.1
43. Telerobotics
Günter Niemeyer, Carsten Preusche, Stefano Stramigioli, Dongjun Lee
In this chapter we present an overview of the field
of telerobotics with a focus on control aspects.
To acknowledge some of the earliest contribu-
tions and motivations the field has provided to
robotics in general, we begin with a brief historical
perspective and discuss some of the challenging
applications. Then, after introducing and classify-
ing the various system architectures and control
strategies, we emphasize bilateral control and
force feedback. This particular area has seen in-
tense research work in the pursuit of telepresence.
We also examine some of the emerging efforts,
extending telerobotic concepts to unconventional
systems and applications. Finally, we suggest some
further reading for a closer engagement with the
field.
43.1
Overview and Terminology ................... 1085
43.2 Telerobotic Systems and Applications.... 1087
43.2.1
Historical Perspective................. 1087
43.2.2
Applications.............................. 1090
43.3 Control Architectures............................ 1090
43.3.1
Supervisory Control.................... 1091
43.3.2
Shared Control .......................... 1092
43.3.3 Direct and Bilateral
Teleoperation............................ 1093
43.4 Bilateral Control and Force Feedback .... 1095
43.4.1
Position/Force Control ................ 1095
43.4.2 Passivity and Stability................ 1096
43.4.3 Transparency and Multichannel
Feedback.................................. 1097
43.4.4 Time Delay
and Scattering Theory ................ 1098
43.4.5 Wave Variables.......................... 1098
43.4.6 Teleoperation
with Lossy Communication......... 1099
43.4.7
Port-Based Approaches.............. 1099
43.5 Emerging Applications of Telerobotics... 1101
43.5.1
Telerobotics for Mobile Robots.... 1101
43.5.2 Multilateral Telerobotics............. 1102
43.6 Conclusions and Further Reading ......... 1104
Video-References......................................... 1104
References................................................... 1105
43.1 Overview and Terminology
Telerobotics is perhaps one of the earliest aspects and
manifestations of robotics. Literally meaning robotics
at a distance, it is generally understood to refer to
robotics with a human operator in control or human-
in-the-loop. Any high-level, planning, or cognitive de-
cisions are made by the human user, while the robot
is responsible for their mechanical implementation. In
essence, the brain is removed or distant from the body.
Herein the term tele, which is derived from the
Greek and means distant, is generalized to imply a bar-
rier between the user and the environment. This barrier
is overcome by remote-controlling a robot at the en-
vironment, as indicated in Fig. 43.1. Besides distance,
barriers may be imposed by hazardous environments or
scaling to very large or small environments. All barri-
ers prevent the user from physically reaching or directly
interacting with the environment.
While the physical separation may be very small,
with the human operator and the robot sometimes oc-
cupying the same room, telerobotic systems are often
at least conceptually split into two sites. The local site
encompasses the human operator and all elements nec-
essary to support the system’s connection with the user,
which could be joysticks, monitors, keyboards, or other

Part D | 43.1
1086
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Visual
display
Acoustic
display
Operator-site
Remote-site
Local control
measures
Barriers
Haptic
display
Environment
Teleoperator
Acoustic
Visual haptic
Kinesthetic-tactile
Sensors/actuators
Tactile
display
Fig. 43.1
Overview of a telerobotic system (after [43.1], adapted
from [43.2])
input/output devices. The remote site contains the robot,
supporting sensors and control elements, and the envi-
ronment to be manipulated.
To support its operation, telerobotics integrates
many areas of robotics. At the remote site, to operate
the robot and execute the human’s commands, the sys-
tem may control the motion and/or forces of the robot.
We refer to Chaps. 7 and 8 for detailed descriptions of
these areas. Also, sensors are invaluable (Chap. 5), in-
cluding force sensors (Chap. 28) and others (Part C).
Meanwhile, at the local site information is often dis-
played haptically (Chap. 41).
A recent addition to telerobotics is the use of
computer networks to transmit information between
the sites. The ubiquity of network access is allow-
ing remote control from anywhere on demand. Chap-
ter 44 discusses some of these developments, de-
tailing network infrastructure and focusing on vi-
sual, often web-based, user interfaces, avoiding the
need for specialized mechanical I/O (input/output)
devices. Computer networks also allow new multi-
lateral telerobotic architectures. For example, mul-
tiple users may share a single robot or a single
user may control multiple robots (Sect. 43.5.2). Un-
fortunately, computer networks often see transmis-
sion delays and can introduce nondeterministic effects
such as variable delay times and data losses. These
effects can easily destabilize force feedback loops
and require particular countermeasures (Sects. 43.4.4–
43.4.6).
We should also point out the relation between
telerobotics and human exoskeletons, as described in
Chap. 69. Exoskeletons are also controlled by a human
operator, leaving all planning and high-level challenges
to the user, and their control systems share many as-
pects with telerobotics. However, the two sites are
physically combined in an exoskeleton as the user di-
rectly touches and interacts with the robot. In this
chapter, we will disallow any such direct mechanical
connection.
The inclusion of the human operator makes teler-
obotics very attractive to handle unknown and unstruc-
tured environments. Applications are plentiful (Part F)
and range from space robotics (Chap. 55) to dealing
with hazardous environments (Chap. 58), from search
and rescue situations (Chap. 60), to medical systems
(Chap. 63) and rehabilitation (Chap. 64).
Before proceeding, we deﬁne some basic termi-
nology. Indeed many other terms are used nearly
synonymously with telerobotics, in particular teleop-
eration and telemanipulation. Telerobotics is the most
common, emphasizing a human’s (remote) control of
a robot. Teleoperation stresses the task-level operations,
while telemanipulation highlights object-level manipu-
lation.
Within telerobotics, a spectrum of control architec-
tures is used. Direct control or manual control falls
at one extreme, indicating that the user is controlling
the motion of the robot directly and without any auto-
mated help. At the other extreme, supervisory control
implies that user’s commands and feedback occur at
a very high level and the robot requires substantial in-
telligence or autonomy to fulﬁll its function. Between
the two extrema lie a variety of shared control archi-
tectures, where some degree of autonomy or automated
help is available to assist the user.
In practice, many systems involve at least some
level of direct control and accept the user’s motion
commands via a joystick or similar device in the user in-
terface. The joystick is an instrumented mechanism and
can itself be viewed as a robot. The local and remote
robots are called master and slave respectively, while
the system is referred to as a master–slave system. To
provide direct control, the slave robot is programmed to
follow the motions of the master robot, which is posi-
tioned by the user. It is not uncommon for the master
robot (joystick) to be a kinematic replica of the slave,
providing an intuitive interface.
Some master–slave systems provide force feedback,
such that the master robot not only measures motions
but also displays forces to the user. The user inter-
face becomes fully bidirectional and such telerobotic
systems are often called bilateral. The human–master
interactions are a form of human–robot interaction
(Chap. 69). The ﬁeld of haptics (Chap. 41) also dis-
cusses bidirectional user interfaces, involving both mo-
tion and force, though more commonly to interface the
user with virtual instead of remote environments. We
should note that both motion and force may become the
input or output to/from the user, depending on the sys-
tem architecture.
Finally, telepresence is often discussed as an ul-
timate goal of master–slave systems and telerobotics
in general. It promises to the user not only the abil-

Telerobotics
43.2 Telerobotic Systems and Applications
1087
Part D | 43.2
ity to manipulate the remote environment, but also to
perceive the environment as if encountered directly.
The human operator is provided with enough feed-
back and sensations to feel present in the remote site.
This combines the haptic modality with other modali-
ties serving the human senses of vision, hearing or even
smell and taste. See videos
VIDEO 297 ,
VIDEO 318
and
VIDEO 319 , and
VIDEO 321
for some early
and recent results aiming for this telepresence. We fo-
cus our descriptions on the haptic channel, which is
created by the robotic hardware and its control sys-
tems. The master–slave system becomes the medium
through which the user interacts with the remote en-
vironment and ideally they are fooled into forgetting
about the medium itself. If this is achieved, we say that
the master–slave system is transparent.
While bilateral master–slave systems have held the
biggest promise for telepresence and intuitive opera-
tions, they have also posed some of the largest stabil-
ity and control problems. Especially considering force
feedback from sensors at the remote site, these systems
close multiple interwoven feedback loops and have to
deal with large uncertainties in the environment. They
have received heavy research attention and will there-
fore be a repeated focus in some of our following
discussions.
43.2 Telerobotic Systems and Applications
Telerobotic systems, like most robotic devices, are typ-
ically designed for speciﬁc tasks and according to
explicit requirements. As such, many unique systems
have evolved, of which we present an overview for dif-
ferent applications. We begin with a short historical
perspective, then describe different applications with
various robot designs and user interfaces.
43.2.1 Historical Perspective
Teleoperation enjoys a rich history and dates back to nu-
clear research by Raymond C. Goertz in the 1940s and
1950s. In particular, he created systems for humans to
handle radioactive material from behind shielded walls.
The ﬁrst systems were electrical, controlled by an array
of on–off switches to activate various motors and move
various axes [43.3]. Without any feel, these manipu-
lators were slow and somewhat awkward to operate,
leading Goertz to build pairs of mechanically linked
master–slave robots [43.3, 4]. Connected by gears, link-
ages, and cables, these systems allowed the operator to
use natural hand motions and transmitted forces and vi-
brations through the connecting structure (Fig. 43.2).
Unfortunately they limited the distance between the
operator and environment and required the use of kine-
matically identical devices. Goertz quickly recognized
the value of electrically coupled manipulators and laid
the foundations of modern telerobotics and bilateral
force-reﬂecting positional servos [43.5].
At the beginning of the 1960s the effects of time
delay on teleoperation started to become a topic of re-
search [43.6, 7]. To cope with this problem the concept
of supervisory control was introduced [43.2] and in-
spired the next years of development. In the late 1980s
and early 1990s theoretical control came into play with
Lyapunov-based analysis and network theory [43.8–
13]. Using these new methods, bilateral control of
telerobotic systems became the vital research area it is
today (Sect. 43.4). The growth of the Internet and its
use as a communication medium has further fueled this
trend, adding the challenges of nondeterministic time
delay.
On the hardware side, the Central Research Labora-
tory model M2 of 1982 was the ﬁrst telerobotic system
which realized force feedback while separating master
and slave electronics. It was developed together with the
Oak Ridge National Laboratory and was used for some
time for a wide range of demonstration tasks includ-
ing military, space or nuclear applications. The National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) tested
the M2 system to simulate the ACCESS space truss
assembly with excellent results (Fig. 43.3). The ad-
Fig. 43.2 Raymond C. Goertz used electrical and mechan-
ical teleoperators in the early 1950s to handle radioactive
material (courtesy Argonne National Labs)

Part D | 43.2
1088
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Fig. 43.3 The telerobotic system CRL Model M2 is used
to verify the assembly of space truss structures (1982)
(courtesy Oak Ridge National Laboratory)
vanced servomanipulator (ASM) was developed from
the M2 to improve the remote maintainability of ma-
nipulators and intended as a foundation for telerobotic
systems [43.14].
Also driven by the nuclear application, bilateral
servomanipulators for teleoperation were developed in
France at the Commission de Energie Atomique (CEA)
by Vertut and Coiffet [43.15]. With the MA 23 they
demonstrated telerobotic operation including computer-
assisted functionalities to improve the operator’s perfor-
mance [43.16]. The assistance included software jigs
and ﬁxtures or virtual walls and restrictions [43.17]
(Sect. 43.3.2).
For space applications a dual-arm force reﬂecting
telerobotic system was developed by Bejczy at the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) [43.18] and
VIDEO 298 .
This system was the ﬁrst use of kinematically and dy-
namically different master and slave robots. It required
control in the Cartesian space coordinates of the opera-
tor’s hand and slave robot’s tool. Figure 43.4 shows the
master control station with its two back-drivable hand
controllers. The system was used to simulate teleopera-
tion in space.
In 1993 the ﬁrst telerobotic system was ﬂown in
space with the German Spacelab Mission D2 on board
Fig. 43.4 JPL ATOP control station (early 1980s) (JPL
No. 19902Ac, courtesy NASA/JPL-CALTECH)
Fig. 43.5 ROTEX, the ﬁrst remotely controlled robot in
space (1993). Telerobot in space and ground operator sta-
tion (courtesy German Aerospace Center, DLR)
the Space Shuttle Columbia. The robot technology ex-
periment (ROTEX), shown in Fig. 43.5, demonstrated
remote control of a space robot by means of local
sensory feedback, predictive displays, and teleopera-
tion [43.19]. In this experiment the round trip delay
was 67 s, such that it was not feasible to include force
feedback into the control loop.
Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, as nuclear power
activities began to decline, interests expanded into new
areas including medicine and undersea operations. Ef-

Telerobotics
43.2 Telerobotic Systems and Applications
1089
Part D | 43.2
Computer
Computer
Endoscopic camera
Videoconference
Videoconference
Robot
High-speed
fiberoptic service
10Mb/s
Robot command station
Broadcast-quality
video monitor
Voice over IP
Voice over IP
Fig. 43.6 Operation Lindberg.
The ﬁrst transcontinental teler-
obotic surgery (2001) (courtesy
M. Ghodoussi)
forts were accelerated by the availability of increasing
computer power as well as the introduction of novel
hand controllers, e.g., the PHANToM device [43.20],
popularized by haptic applications in virtual reality
(Chap. 41).
Simultaneously, surgery was seeing the trend to-
ward minimally invasive techniques, highlighted by
the ﬁrst laparoscopic cholecystectomy (removal of the
gallbladder) in 1987. Several groups saw the potential
for telerobotics and pursued telesurgical systems. Most
noteworthy are the Telepresence Surgery System de-
veloped at the Stanford Research Institute (now SRI
International) in 1987 [43.21], the Laparoscopic As-
sistant Robotic System (LARS) created at the IBM
Watson Research Center [43.22], the teleoperated surgi-
cal instrument Falcon designed at MIT (Massachusetts
Institute of Technology) [43.23], and the Robot As-
Fig. 43.7 Intuitive Surgical Inc. makes the da Vinci teler-
obotic system, which is used in minimally invasive surgery
(courtesy 2008 Intuitive Surgical, Inc.)
sisted Microsurgery (RAMS) workstation developed at
JPL [43.24].
In 1995 Intuitive Surgical Inc. was founded to lever-
age several of these concepts, leading to the da Vinci
telesurgical system [43.25] and its introduction to mar-
ket in 1999. Meanwhile Computer Motion started with
a voice-controlled robot moving an endoscopic cam-
era [43.26] and extended those capabilities into the
Fig. 43.8 tEODor, a telerobotic system for disarming
of explosives (courtesy telerob Gesellschaft für Fern-
hantierungstechnik mbH, Ostﬁldern, Germany)

Part D | 43.3
1090
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Haptic control
Stereo video
Fig. 43.9 ROKVISS, a telerobotic system providing stereo vision
and haptic feedback to the ground operator (courtesy German
Aerospace Center, DLR)
ZEUS system. In 2001 a surgeon in New York (USA)
used a ZEUS system to perform the ﬁrst transatlantic
telesurgical laparoscopic cholecystectomy on a patient
located in Strasbourg (France) [43.27], as depicted in
Fig. 43.6. The system did not include force feedback,
so the surgeon had to rely on visual feedback only.
In this perspective we have given reference only to
the systems that may be seen as milestones within the
history of telerobotics. Other systems, which have been
developed and added value to the research ﬁeld, unfor-
tunately could not be mentioned here.
43.2.2 Applications
Telerobotic systems have been motivated by issues
of human safety in hazardous environments (e.g., nu-
clear or chemical plants), the high cost of reaching
remote environments (e.g., space), scale (e.g., power
ampliﬁcation or position scaling in micromanipulation
or minimally invasive surgery), and many others. Not
surprisingly, after their beginning in nuclear research,
telerobotic systems have evolved to many ﬁelds of ap-
plication. Nearly everywhere a robot is used, telerobotic
systems can be found. The following are some of the
more exciting uses.
In minimally invasive surgery telerobots allow pro-
cedures to be performed through small incisions, reduc-
ing the trauma to the patient compared to traditional
surgery [43.28]. The da Vinci system, made by Intu-
itive Surgical Inc. [43.25] and shown in Fig. 43.7, is the
only commercially available device at present. Other ef-
forts, however, have included computer motion [43.26]
and endoVia Medical [43.29] on the commercial side,
as well as the University of Washington [43.30], Johns
Hopkins University [43.31], the German Aerospace
Center [43.32], and many others (
VIDEO 322 ).
Protecting the operator from having to reach into
ahazardous environment, teleroboticsystems arewidely
used in nuclear or chemical industry. Some systems have
been developed for the maintenance of high-voltage
electrical power lines, which can be safely repaired
without service interruption by a human operator using
a telerobotic system. Disarming of explosives is another
important task. Many systems like the telerob explo-
sive ordnance disposal and observation robot (tEODor)
shown in Fig. 43.8 or PackBot, made by iRobot [43.33],
are used by police and military to disarm mines and other
explosives. Similar vehicles are remote controlled for
search and rescue in disaster zones [43.34].
Space robotics is a classic application, in which
distance is the dominating barrier, as discussed in
Chap. 55. The NASA rovers on Mars are a famous
example. Due to the time delay of several minutes,
the rovers are commanded using supervisory control,
in which the human operator is deﬁning the goal of
a movement and the rover achieves the goal by local
autonomy using sensory feedback directly [43.35].
In orbital robotics the German technology experi-
ment ROKVISS (robot component veriﬁcation on the
international space station (ISS)) was the most ad-
vanced telerobotic system [43.36]. Launched in 2004
and operational through 2010, it was installed outside
the Russian module of the international space station. It
validated advanced robot components in the slave sys-
tem, including torque sensors and stereo video cameras,
in real space conditions. Using a direct communication
link between the space station and the operator station
at DLR (German Aerospace Center), the time delay
was kept at about 20 ms allowing a bilateral control
architecture with high-ﬁdelity force feedback to the op-
erator [43.37] (Fig. 43.9). This technology is leading to-
ward robotic service satellites, called Robonauts, which
can be controlled remotely from the ground to help real
astronauts during extravehicular activities (EVA) or to
perform repair and maintenance tasks [43.38].
43.3 Control Architectures
Compared to plain robotic systems, in which a robot
executes a motion or other program without further
consultation of a user or operator, telerobotic systems
provide information to and require commands from
the user. Their control architectures can be described
by the style and level of this connection, as shown in
Fig. 43.10. Organized in a spectrum, the three main cat-
egories are:

Direct control

Shared control

Supervisory control.

Telerobotics
43.3 Control Architectures
1091
Part D | 43.3
Visual display
Acoustic display
Haptic display
Tactile display
(Multimodal) man–machine interface
Shared control
Direct control
Sensory functions
Shared taskspace
Augmented feedback
Unilateral command
Bilateral control
Supervisory control
Local autonomy
Tele-sensor programming
Teleoperator
Teleoperator
Teleoperator
Autonomy
Fig. 43.10 Different concepts for
telerobotic control architectures
In practice, however, control architectures often in-
clude parts of all strategies.
Direct control implies no intelligence or autonomy
in the system, so that all slave motion is directly con-
trolled by the user via the master interface. This may
incorporate sensory feedback to the user in a bilat-
eral conﬁguration. If the slave motion is controlled by
a combination of direct user commands and local sen-
sory feedback or autonomy, the architecture is denoted
as shared control. It is similarly shared if user feedback
is augmented from virtual reality or by other automatic
aids. In supervisory control user commands and feed-
back occur at a higher level. The connection is more
loose and the slave has to rely on stronger local auton-
omy to reﬁne and execute tasks. The following explains
the architectures in reverse order, leading to a detailed
treatment of direct and bilateral control in Sect. 43.3.3,
which introduces the basic ideas for Sect. 43.4.
43.3.1 Supervisory Control
Supervisory control, introduced by Ferell and Sheridan
in 1967 [43.2], is derived from the analog of supervis-
ing a human subordinate staff member. The supervisor
gives high-level directives to and receives summary
information from, in this case, the robot. Sheridan de-
scribes this approach in comparison with manual and
automatic robot control [43.39]:
Human operators are intermittently programming
and continually receiving information from a com-
puter that itself closes an autonomous control loop
through artiﬁcial effectors and sensors.
In general, supervisory control techniques will al-
low more and more autonomy and intelligence to shift
to the robot system. Today simple autonomous control
loops may be closed at the remote site, with only state
and model information being transmitted to the opera-
tor site. The operator supervises the telerobotic system
closely and decides exactly how to act and what to do.
A speciﬁc implementation of supervisory control is the
telesensor programming approach, which is presented
hereafter. See also
VIDEO 299 for another implemen-
tation of supervisory control for space operation.
Telesensor Programming
Developed for space applications with large communi-
cation delays, the telesensor programming (TSP) ap-
proach has been characterized as a task-level-oriented
programming technique and sensor-based teaching by
showing [43.40, 41]. In essence, operators interact with
a complex simulation of the robot and remote environ-
ment, in which they can test and adjust tasks. The tasks,
consisting of robot and environment signals and conﬁg-
uration parameters, are then uploaded to the remote site.
The approach presumes that the sensor systems provide
sufﬁcient information about the actual environment so
that the tasks can be executed autonomously. Speciﬁca-
tions and high-level planning remain the responsibility
of the human operator.
Figure 43.11 shows the structure of a TSP imple-
mentation, consisting of two control loops working in
parallel. One loop controls the real (remote) system,
which contains internal feedback for local autonomy.
The other loop establishes a simulation environment
which is structurally equivalent to the real system, with
a few exceptions. Most importantly, any signal delay
which may result from communication to the remote
system, in particular in space applications, is not du-
plicated in the simulation. This makes the simulation
predictive with respect to the real system. A second
exception is the display of internal variables in the sim-

Part D | 43.3
1092
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
A posteriori knowledge
update of world model
World model data base
sensor fusion algorithms
Path planning
and
parameter
determination
Task planning
and
error handling
Predictive
control
loop
Real
system
control
loop
Virtual
feedback
Graphics
and animation
Images
plots
graphics
Real
feedback
A priori knowledge
usage of world model
Robot
model
Controller
Sensor
models
Environment
model
Robot
Controller
Sensors
Environment
(Ground)
simulation
(Remote)
real system
Local autonomy loop
Local autonomy loop
Fig. 43.11 The concept of telesensor programming as demonstrated during the ROTEX mission
ulation, which cannot be observed (measured) in the
real system. This gives the operator or task planner
more insight into what is happening or may happen in
the system in response to commands. Communication
between the two loops occurs via a common model data
base which delivers a priori knowledge for execution on
the remote system and a posteriori knowledge for model
updating in the simulated world.
Unique tools are necessary to implement the func-
tionality required for such a telerobotic control system.
First a sophisticated simulation system has to be pro-
Control
commands
Scale
pose
Shared
control
Camera image
Force feedback
Scale
force
Fig. 43.12 An example for the shared control concept in telerobotic
surgery
vided to emulate the real robot system. This includes the
simulation of sensory perception within the real envi-
ronment. Also, the operator needs an efﬁcient interface
to set up task descriptions, to conﬁgure the task control
parameters, to decide what kind of sensors and control
algorithms should be used, and to debug an entire job
execution phase.
For telerobotic systems with large time delays of
a few seconds or more, e.g., in space and undersea
applications, such a sensor-based task-directed pro-
gramming approach has advantages. It is not feasible
for human operators to handle the robot movements
directly under delayed visual feedback. Only a predic-
tive simulation allows the operator to telemanipulate
the remote system [43.42]. In addition, the use of force
reﬂecting hand controllers to feed back force signals
from the simulated predicted world can improve the
operator’s performance [43.43]. Finally, an interactive
supervisory user interface makes it possible to conﬁg-
ure the environmental and control parameters.
43.3.2 Shared Control
Shared control tries to combine the basic reliability and
sense of presence achievable by direct control with the
smarts and possible safety guarantees of autonomous
control ([43.44, 45] and
VIDEO 299 ). This may occur
in various forms. For example, the slave robot may need

Telerobotics
43.3 Control Architectures
1093
Part D | 43.3
to correct motion commands, regulate subsets of joints
or subtasks, or overlay additional commands.
With large communication delays, a human opera-
tor may only be able to specify gross path commands,
which the slave must ﬁne-tune with local sensory in-
formation [43.46]. We may also want the slave to as-
sume control of subtasks, such as maintaining a grasp
over long periods of time [43.47]. And in surgical ap-
plications, shared control has been proposed to com-
pensate for beating heart movements (Fig. 43.12). The
sensed heart motion is overlaid on the user commands,
so the surgeon can operate on a virtually stabilized pa-
tient [43.48].
A special application of shared control is the use
of virtual ﬁxtures ([43.49–51] and
VIDEO 72 ). Vir-
tual elements, such as virtual surfaces, virtual velocity
ﬁeld, guide tubes, or other appropriate objects, are su-
perimposed into the visual and/or haptic scene for the
user. These ﬁxtures can help the operator perform tasks
by limiting movement into restricted regions and/or
inﬂuencing movement along desired paths. Control is
thus shared at the master site, taking advantage of pre-
knowledge of the system or task to modify the user’s
commands and/or to combine them with autonomously
generated signals.
Capitalizing on the accuracy of robotic systems
while sharing control with the operator, telerobotic sys-
tems with virtual ﬁxtures can achieve safer, faster and
more intuitive operation. Abbott et al. describe the ben-
eﬁts by comparison to the common physical ﬁxture of
a ruler [43.50]:
A straight line drawn by a human with the help of
a ruler is drawn faster and straighter than a line
drawn freehand. Similarly, a [master] robot can ap-
ply forces or positions to a human operator to help
him or her draw a straight line.
Based on the nature of the master robot and its con-
troller, the virtual ﬁxtures may apply corrective forces
or constrain positions. In both cases, and in contrast to
physical ﬁxtures, the level and type of assistance can be
programmed and varied.
43.3.3 Direct and Bilateral Teleoperation
To avoid difﬁculties in creating local autonomy, most
telerobotic systems include some form of direct control:
they allow the operator to specify the robot’s motions.
This may involve commanding either position or ve-
locity or acceleration. We begin our discussions with
the later two options, which are generally implemented
unilaterally without force feedback to the user. We then
focus on position control, which is more suited to bilat-
eral operation. We will assume a master–slave system,
i. e., the user is holding a joystick or master mechanism
serving as an input device.
Unilateral Acceleration or Rate Control
For underwater, airborne, or space applications, a slave
robot may be a vehicle actuated by thrusters. Direct
control thus requires the user to power the thrusters,
which in turn accelerates the vehicle. For other ap-
plications, the user may be required to command the
rate or velocity of the vehicle or slave robot. In both
scenarios, the input device is commonly a joystick,
often spring centered, where the acceleration or rate
commands are proportional to the joystick displace-
ment. For six degree-of-freedom (DOF) applications,
i. e., when the slave needs to be controlled in translation
and orientation, a six-dimensional (6-D) space mouse
can be used. Alternatively two joysticks may separately
command translation and orientation.
Acceleration and rate control are very attractive
when the master and slave robots are fundamentally
different, for example if the slave robot can reach an
effectively unbounded workspace. Unfortunately, basic
implementations can require considerable effort for the
operator to reach and hold a given target location. As ex-
pected, users can more accurately position a system un-
der rate control than under acceleration control [43.52].
Indeed acceleration control necessitates users to regu-
late a second-order system versus a ﬁrst-order system
for rate control. Assuming the slave has local position
feedback available, a control system is often incorpo-
rated locally, such that the user may specify position
commands and is relieved from the dynamic control
problem. We refer to Sect. 43.5.1 for some emerging de-
velopments for bilateral control of mobile robots.
Position Control and Kinematic Coupling
Assuming that the slave is under position control, we
can consider a kinematic coupling between master and
slave, i. e., a mapping between master and slave posi-
tions. In particular, we must remember that the master
mechanism moves in the master workspace, while the
slave robot moves in the slave workspace. The mapping
connects these two spaces, which are nearly always
somewhat different.
Clutching and Offsets. Before discussing how the
two robots are coupled, we must understand that they
are not always coupled. For example, before the system
is turned on, master and slave robots may, for whatever
reason, be placed in some initial position/conﬁguration.
We have three options of how to engage the system:
1. First autonomously move one or both robots so they
come to the same position

Part D | 43.3
1094
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
2. Wait until someone (the user) externally moves one
robot to match the location of the other, or
3. Connect the two robots with some offset.
Once connected, most systems also allow a tempo-
rary disconnection between the two sites. The reason is
twofold: to allow the user to rest without affecting the
slave state and to allow a shift between the two robots.
The later is most important if the workspaces of both
robots do not perfectly overlap. This is much like pick-
ing up your mouse off your mouse pad to reposition
without moving the cursor. In telerobotics the process
is called clutching or sometimes indexing. If clutching
is allowed, or both robots are not constrained to start
at the same location, the system must allow for offsets
between the two robots.
When clutched or disconnected, most systems hold
the slave at rest or allow it to ﬂoat in response to en-
vironment forces. It is also possible for the slave to
retain its preclutching momentum and continue mov-
ing, similar to kinetic scrolling popularized in smart-
phones [43.53].
Kinematically Similar Mechanisms. The simplest
scenario involves a master and slave mechanism that are
kinematically equivalent if not entirely identical. In this
case, the two robots can be connected at a joint level.
With q denoting joint values and subscripts “m” refer-
ring to the master, “s” to the slave, “offset” to a shared
offset, and “d” to a desired value, we can write
qsd D qm C qoffset ;
qmd D qs  qoffset :
(43.1)
At the instance the two robots are to be connected
or reconnected, the offset is computed as
qoffset D qs  qm :
(43.2)
Most kinematically similar master–slave systems have
the same workspace at both sites and do not allow
clutching. By construction the offset is then always
zero.
Depending on the controller architecture, the joint
velocities may be similarly related, taking derivatives
of (43.1). An offset in velocities is not necessary.
Kinematically Dissimilar Mechanisms. In many
cases, the master and slave robots differ. Consider that
the master is connected to the human user and thus
should be designed accordingly. Meanwhile the slave
works in some environment and may have a very differ-
ent joint conﬁguration and different number of joints.
As a result, connecting the robots joint by joint may not
be feasible or appropriate.
Instead kinematically dissimilar robots are com-
monly connected at their tips. If x is a robot’s tip
position, we have
xsd D xm C xoffset ;
xmd D xs  xoffset :
(43.3)
If orientations are also connected, with R describing
a rotation matrix, we have
Rsd D RmRoffset ;
Rmd D RsRT
offset ;
(43.4)
where the orientational offset is deﬁned as slave relative
to master
Roffset D RT
mRs :
(43.5)
Again velocities and angular velocities may be con-
nected if needed and do not require offsets.
Finally note that most telerobotic systems use
a video camera at the remote site and a monitor at
the local site. To make the connection appear natural,
the slave position and orientation should be measured
relative to the camera, while the master position and ori-
entation should be measured relative to the user’s view.
Scaling and Workspace Mapping. Kinematically
dissimilar master–slave robots are commonly also of
different size. This means not only do they require
clutching to fully map one workspace to another, but
they often necessitate motion scaling. And so (43.3) be-
comes
xsd D xm C xoffset ;
xmd D .xs  xoffset/

:
(43.6)
The orientation, however, typically should not be
scaled. The scale  may be set to either map the two
workspaces as best possible, or to provide the most
comfort to the user.
If force feedback is provided, as described below, an
equivalent force scale may be desired. This will prevent
distortion of the remote environmental conditions, such
as stiffness or damping, by the scaling. In addition to
the motion and force scalings, it is also possible to di-
rectly achieve power scaling between master and slave
systems [43.51].
Beyond linear scaling, several research efforts have
created nonlinear or time-varying mappings, which de-
form the workspaces. These may effectively change the
scale in the proximity of objects [43.54] or drift the off-
set to best utilize the master workspace [43.55].

Telerobotics
43.4 Bilateral Control and Force Feedback
1095
Part D | 43.4
Local Position and Advanced Control. By construc-
tion we are now assuming that the slave follows a posi-
tion command. This necessitates a local slave controller
to regulate its position. In particular for kinematically
dissimilar mechanisms, this will be a Cartesian tip po-
sition controller (Chap. 7).
If the slave robot has redundancies or possesses
a large number of DOFs, these may be controlled either
automatically to optimize some criterion or manually
with additional user commands. Indeed some emerging
applications are coordinating multiple users to con-
trol such complex systems. This is particularly relevant
when the kinematic dissimilarity becomes extreme and
has received considerable research attention. We refer
here to Chap. 11 and especially Sect. 43.5 for appropri-
ate techniques and new developments.
43.4 Bilateral Control and Force Feedback
In pursuit of telepresence and to increase task perfor-
mance, many master–slave systems incorporate force
feedback. That is, the slave robot doubles as a sensor
and the master functions as a display device, so that the
system provides both forward and feedback pathways
from the user to the environment and back. Figure 43.13
depicts the common architecture viewed as a chain of
elements from the user to the environment.
The bilateral nature of this setup makes the control
architecture particularly challenging: multiple feedback
loops form and even without environment contact or
user intervention, the two robots form an internal closed
loop. The communications between the two sites often
inserts delays into the system and this loop, so that sta-
bility of the system can be a challenging issue [43.56].
To present force information without stability prob-
lems, it is possible to use alternate displays, such as
audio or tactile devices [43.57]. Meanwhile, the com-
bination of vibrotactile methods with explicit force
feedback can increase high-frequency sensations and
provide beneﬁts to the user [43.58]. Tactile shape sens-
ing and display also extends the force information
presented to the user [43.59].
In the following we discuss explicit force feedback.
We ﬁrst examine the basic architectures before dis-
cussing stability and some advanced techniques.
43.4.1 Position/Force Control
Two basic architectures couple the master and slave
robots: position–position and position–force. We as-
sume that the robot tips are to be connected by the
equations of Sect. 43.3.3 and give the control laws for
Master
manipulator
Master
controller
Slave
controller
Environ-
ment
Communications
Telerobot
T
T
CPU
CPU
Human
operator
Fig. 43.13 A typical bilateral tele-
operator can beviewed as a chain of
elements reaching from user to envi-
ronment (CPU – central processing
unit)
translation. Control of orientation or joint motions fol-
lows equivalent patterns.
Position–Position Architecture
In the simplest case, both robots are instructed to track
each other. Both sites implement a tracking controller,
often a proportional–derivative (PD) controller, to fulﬁll
these commands,
Fm D Km.xm  xmd/  Bm.Pxm  Pxmd/ ;
Fs D Ks.xs  xsd/  Bs.Pxs  Pxsd/ :
(43.7)
If the position and velocity gains are the same
(Km D Ks D K, Bm D Bs D B), then the two forces are
the same and the system effectively provides force feed-
back. This may also be interpreted as a spring and
damper between the tips of each robot, as illustrated in
Fig. 43.14. If the two robots are substantially different
and require different position and velocity gains, some
suitable force, position or power scalings, as explained
in Sect. 43.3.3, may be utilized.
Note we have assumed the slave is under impedance
control and back-drivable. If the slave is admittance
controlled, i. e., it accepts position commands directly,
the second part of (43.7) is unnecessary.
Also note that by construction the user feels the
slave’s controller forces, which include forces asso-
ciated with the spring–damper and slave inertia in
addition to environment forces. Indeed while moving
without contact, the user will feel the inertial and other
dynamic forces needed to move the slave. Furthermore,
if the slave is not back-drivable, i. e., does not easily
move under environment forces, the environment force

Part D | 43.4
1096
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
B
K
Hm
Hs
Fig. 43.14 A position–position architecture effectively
creates a spring and damper between the two robots
may be entirely hidden from the user. Naturally this
defeats the purpose of force feedback. In these cases,
a local force control system may be used to render the
slave back-drivable. Alternatively, a position–force ar-
chitecture may be selected.
Position–Force Architecture
In the above position–position architecture, the user
was effectively presented with the slave’s controller
force. While this is very stable, it also means the
user feels the friction and inertia in the slave robot,
which the controller is actively driving to overcome. In
many scenarios this is undesirable. To avoid the issue,
position–force architectures place a force sensor at the
tip of the slave robot and feedback the force from there.
That is, the system is controlled by
Fm D Fsensor ;
Fs D Ks.xs  xsd/  Bs.Pxs  Pxsd/ :
(43.8)
This allows the user to only feel the external forces
acting between the slave and the environment and
presents a more clear sense of the environment. How-
ever, this architecture is less stable: the control loop
passes from master motion to slave motion to envi-
ronment forces back to master forces. There may be
some lag in the slave’s motion tracking not to mention
any delay in communications. Meanwhile the loop gain
can be very high: a small motion command can turn
into a large force if the slave is pressing against a stiff
environment. In combination, stability may be compro-
mised in stiff contact and many systems exhibit contact
instability in these cases.
43.4.2 Passivity and Stability
The two basic architectures presented in Sect. 43.4.1
clearly illustrate one of the basic tradeoffs and chal-
Controller
Commu-
nication
Controller
Slave
Environment
Human
Master
Fig. 43.15 A teleoperator can be analyzed as a chain of-two port elements connecting the one-port operator to the one-
port environment
lenges in force feedback: stability versus performance.
Stability issues arise because any models of the system
depend on the environment as well as the user. Both
these elements are difﬁcult to capture and, if we assume
we want to explore unknown environments, impossible
to predict. This issue makes a stability analysis very dif-
ﬁcult. A common tool that avoids some of these issues
is the concept of passivity. Although passivity provides
only a sufﬁcient (not a necessary) condition for stability,
it incorporates the environmental uncertainly very well.
Passivity is an intuitive tool that examines the en-
ergy ﬂows in a system and makes stability assertions if
energy is dissipated instead of generated. Three rules
are of importance here. First, a system is passive if
and only if it cannot produce energy. That is the out-
put energy from the system is limited by the initial and
accumulated energy in the system. Second, two passive
systems can be combined to form a new passive system.
Third, the feedback connection of two passive systems
is stable.
In the case of telerobotics, we generally assume that
the slave robot will only interact with passive environ-
ments, that is, that the environments do not contain
active motors or the like. Without the human opera-
tor, stability can therefore be assured if the system is
also passive, without needing an explicit environment
model.
On the master side the operator closes a loop and
has to be considered in the stability analysis. In gen-
eral, the master robot will be held by the user’s hand
and arm. A variety of models and parameters describe
the human arm dynamics, mainly in the form of a mass–
damper–spring system. In [43.60] we ﬁnd a summary
of model parameters used by different authors. For an
impedance-controlled haptic interface, found in many
systems, the operator adds some physical damping and
a light touch (Fhuman 
 0) is often one of the more chal-
lenging scenarios [43.61, 62]. As such some analyses
ignore the human operator entirely. But even in gen-
eral, humans seem to achieve stable interactions with
all passive systems and passivity is usually considered
sufﬁcient for stable human–telerobot interactions.
To apply passivity, we take the system originally de-
picted in Fig. 43.13 and describe it as two-port elements
in Fig. 43.15. Each port describes the energy ﬂow be-
tween subsystems, where power is the product of a pair

Telerobotics
43.4 Bilateral Control and Force Feedback
1097
Part D | 43.4
of collocated physical variables. We can choose a sign
convention, for example declaring positive power to
ﬂow toward the remote environment. Then at the ﬁrst
boundary, the positive power ﬂow is the product of mas-
ter velocity Pxm times applied (human) force Fhuman
Pleft D PxT
mFhuman :
(43.9)
Meanwhile at the last boundary, the positive power ﬂow
is the product of the slave velocity Pxs times the environ-
ment force Fenv (which ultimately opposes the human
force)
Pright D PxT
s Fenv :
(43.10)
Therefore the entire telerobotic system is passive if
t
Z
0
Pinput dt D
t
Z
0
.Pleft  Pright/dt
D
t
Z
0

PxT
mFhuman  PxT
s Fenv

dt
> Estore.0/ :
(43.11)
Obviously, the ideal teleoperator (Pxm D Pxs; Fhuman D
Fenv) is passive. These deﬁnitions can also be gener-
alized to six dimensional twists and wrenches.
To simplify the analysis, we can examine the pas-
sivity of each two-port element or subsystem and then
deduce the overall passivity. The master and slave
robots are mechanical elements and hence passive. The
controllers of a position–position architecture mimic
a spring and damper, which are also passive ele-
ments. So without delay and ignoring discretization,
quantization, and other unmodelled effects, a simple
position–position architecture is passive. The following
sections will address some of these limitations and thus
create controllers that are passive under more circum-
stances.
While powerful to handle uncertainty, passivity
can be overly conservative. Many controllers are over-
damped if every subsystem is passive. In contrast, the
combination of an active and a passive subsystem may
be passive and stable and show less dissipation. This is
particularly true for the cascaded arrangement of two-
port elements in the telerobotic system of Fig. 43.15.
From network theory, the Llewellyn criterion speci-
ﬁes when a possibly active two-port connected with
any passive one-port becomes passive. This two-port is
then labeled unconditionally stable, as it will be sta-
ble in connection to any two passive one-ports. The
Llewellyn criterion may hence be used as a more
general stability test for telerobotic systems or compo-
nents [43.63].
Passive controllers are also limited as they can-
not hide the dynamics of the slave robot. In the
above position–position architecture, the user will feel
the forces associated with the slave inertia. In con-
trast the position–force architecture hides the slave
inertia and friction from the user. As such, when
the user inserts kinetic energy into the master with-
out feeling any resistance, the system itself creates
and injects the kinetic energy for the slave. This vi-
olates passivity and provides another insight as to
why the architecture suffers from potential stability
problems.
43.4.3 Transparency and Multichannel
Feedback
Both basic architectures can be captured by the
general teleoperator control system described by
Lawrence [43.13], and later expanded by Hashtrudi-
Zaad and Salcudean [43.63] and shown in Fig. 43.16.
Ideally a system will equalize both the operator and
environment forces as well as the master and slave mo-
tions. Therefore, it is desirable to measure both force
and velocity (from which position may be integrated or
vice versa) at both sites. With this complete informa-
tion, the slave may, for example, start moving as soon
Environment
Communi-
cation
channel
Slave
Master
Operator
1/Zs
1/Zm
+
–
Ze
Zh
Fe
Zto
Fe*= 0
Fh*
Fh
Vh
Ve
+
+
+
Cs
C2
e–sTd
e–sTd
C4
C1
e–sTd
e–sTd
C3
Cm
Fcm
Fcs
C5
C6
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
– – –
Fig. 43.16 In general, a controller will use both position
and force information from both master and slave robot
(after [43.63], adapted from [43.13])

Part D | 43.4
1098
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
as the user applies a force to the master, even before the
master itself has moved.
Following these concepts derived in [43.13], we can
examine the relationships between velocity and force,
in the form of impedances and admittances. Note we
do this in a single degree of freedom, assuming that all
degrees of freedom may be treated independently. The
environment will exhibit some impedance Ze.s/ that is
not known in advance and relates the environment force
to the slave’s velocity
Fe.s/ D Ze.s/vs.s/ :
(43.12)
If we describe the teleoperator in whole as a two-port
with a hybrid matrix formulation
Fh.s/
v m.s/

D
H11.s/
H12.s/
H21.s/
H22.s/
  v s.s/
Fe.s/

; (43.13)
then the user will perceive the impedance
Zto.s/ D Fh.s/
v m.s/ D .H11  H12Ze/.H21  H22Ze/1 :
(43.14)
Transparency describes how close the user’s per-
ceived impedance comes to recreating the true environ-
ment impedance.
For a detailed treatment of passivity in telerobotics,
impedance and admittance interpretations and designs,
and transparency, we refer to some of the seminal works
in [43.11–13, 63–66].
43.4.4 Time Delay and Scattering Theory
When delays occur in the communications between the
local and remote site, even position–position architec-
tures can suffer from serious instabilities [43.67, 68].
This can be traced to the communications block in
Fig. 43.15, where the power entering the left side and
exiting the right side do not add up. Rather energy may
be generated inside the block, which feeds the instabil-
ity [43.9].
Several approaches to operate under delay have
been studied [43.69], in particular shared compli-
ant control [43.70] and the addition of local force
loops [43.71]. The use of the Internet for communica-
tion, adding variability to the delay, is also an area of
interest [43.72, 73]. This further evokes issues of data
reduction [43.74].
Here we note that natural wave phenomena are
bilateral passive elements that tolerate delay. If the
control system is described in the frequency domain
and scattering matrices are used in place of impedance
and admittance matrices, the system can tolerate de-
lays [43.75]. Scattering matrices relate the sum of
velocity and force to their difference, so that passivity
becomes a condition on the system gain, which is unaf-
fected by the delay.
43.4.5 Wave Variables
Building on the realization that delay communications
can be active and that wave phenomena circumvent the
issue, wave variables provide an encoding scheme that
is tolerant of delay [43.76]. Consider the power ﬂow-
ing through the system and separate the power moving
forward and returning.
P D PxTF D 1
2uTu  1
2v Tv D Pforward  Preturn ;
(43.15)
where the forward and returning power are by con-
struction nonnegative. This leads to the deﬁnition of the
wave variables
u D bPx C F
p
2b
;
v D bPx  F
p
2b
;
(43.16)
where u is the forward-moving and v the returning
wave.
If velocity and force signals are encoded into wave
variables, transmitted across the delay, and decoded at
the far site, the system remains passive regardless of de-
lay. In fact, in the wave domain, passivity corresponds
to a wave gain of less than or equal to unity. No require-
ments are placed on phase and so lag does not destroy
stability.
The wave impedance b relates velocity to force and
provides a tuning knob to the operator. Large b val-
ues mean the system increases force feedback levels
at the cost of feeling high inertial forces. Small values
of b lower any unwanted sensations, making it easy to
move quickly, but also lower the desirable environment
forces. Ideally the operator would lower b when there
is no risk of contact and raise b when contact is immi-
nent. The concept of scattering has also been extended
to a coordinate free context [43.77].
Recent developments are incorporating both posi-
tion–position and position–force architectures within
the wave frame work, so the resulting systems are stable
with any environment, stable with any delay, yet main-
tain the feedback of high-frequency forces that help the
operator identify happenings at the remote site [43.78].
To improve performance and assist the operator, es-
pecially across the Internet, predictors may also be
incorporated [43.79].

Telerobotics
43.4 Bilateral Control and Force Feedback
1099
Part D | 43.4
43.4.6 Teleoperation
with Lossy Communication
The Internet provides an affordable and ubiquitously
accessible communication medium. However, it can
also introduce nondeterministic effects and lossy con-
nections due to time-varying delays, packet losses, and
packet reordering. How to achieve passive bilateral tele-
operation over such lossy communication network has
been an active research topic in telerobotics.
Many telerobotic systems have relied on the
position-position architecture (43.7) with extra damp-
ing injection. This leads to the following proportional-
derivative (PD) control law, with a simple structure and
explicit position feedback,
Fm D BdPxm.t/  BŒPxm.t/  Pxs.t  1/
 KŒxm.t/  xs.t  1/
Fs D BdPxs.t/  BŒPxs.t/  Pxm.t  2/
 KŒxs.t/  xm.t  2/ ;
(43.17)
where Bd; K; B are the stabilizing absolute damping and
the PD control gains, and 1; 2  0 are the communi-
cation delays from slave to master and from master to
slave, respectively.
The usage of this controller across lossy commu-
nication was yet hampered (or at least reserved) due
to the lack of theoretical guarantees for its passivity
and stability. Anecdotes say that with sufﬁciently large
damping and small delays and PD gains, the closed-
loop system remains stable. This anecdotal observation
was justiﬁed in [43.80] for the case of constant delay,
that is, the PD-like controller (43.17) is passive if the
following condition is met,
Bd > N1 C N2
2
K ;
(43.18)
where .N1 C N2/=2 is the upper-bound of the round-trip
delay, which can typically be estimated easily. Without
human or environment forcing, master and slave posi-
tions will also converge to each other. This result was
extended in [43.81] for the case of time-varying delay.
Passivity of the PD-like controller (43.17) is guaranteed
if
Bd >
q
N2
1 C N2
2
2
K
and
jPi.t/j < 1 ;
(43.19)
where the second condition means the delay i.t/ nei-
ther grows nor decreases faster than time t. We refer
to [43.81] for cases with asymmetric controller gains
and to [43.82, 83] for extensions to general digital lossy
communication networks.
With a ﬁxed structure, the PD controller (43.17)
has to be tuned to the worst-case conditions accord-
ing to (43.18) and (43.19). It may thus exhibit drastic
performance degradation for severely variable commu-
nications. To overcome such ﬁxed structure limitation,
several passivity-enforcing ﬂexible control techniques
have been recently proposed.
The technique of passivity-observer/passivity-con-
troller (PO/PC) was originally devised for haptic device
control [43.84] and has been extended for the bilateral
teleoperation with digital network with time-varying
delay [43.85–87]. Each PO does real-time bookkeep-
ing of energy ﬂows at the master and slave sites. The
PC is activated to dissipate energy whenever a passivity
violation is detected. The passive set-position modula-
tion (PSPM) framework was proposed in [43.88], where
the desired set-position signal received from a general
digital lossy communication network is real-time mod-
ulated as close to the original set-position signal as pos-
sible, yet, only to the extent permissible by the available
energy in the system. Passiﬁcation of a desired con-
trol force utilizing the device’s physical damping was
addressed in [43.89] under the name of energy bound-
ing algorithm (EBA). The idea of modulating a control
signal or action under the passivity constraint was also
adopted in the two-layer approach [43.90], where the
transparency-layer is designed for best performance,
while the passivity-layer superimposes constraints to
enforce passivity.
Overall, the PO/PC approach may be considered
as corrective (i. e., detect violation of passivity ﬁrst
and then apply passifying action) whereas the PSPM,
EBA and the two-layer approaches are preventive (i. e.,
modulate/bound control action to prevent passivity vi-
olation). Interestingly, all the PO/PC, PSPM, EBA and
two-layer approaches share some common characteris-
tics: 1) they transmit energy packets along with other
information over the communication network to replen-
ish energy levels and enable useful work; and 2) each of
these approaches activates their passifying action only
when necessary, thus, can signiﬁcantly improve con-
trol performance compared to ﬁxed-structure teleopera-
tion controllers, while also robustly enforcing passivity
against a variety of communication imperfectness.
43.4.7 Port-Based Approaches
From Sect. 43.4.2 we know that energy ﬂows provide
a great description of telerobotic systems that physi-
cally interact with unknown environments and a human
user. Indeed all physical interaction dynamics are fun-
damentally bound to energy exchanges. Passivity is
a well suited analysis tool and assures stability if the
system energy is bounded. All possible instabilities

Part D | 43.4
1100
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Energy balance:
Passivity condition:
HT(t) = Hm(t) + Hc(t) + Hs(t)
HT(t) ≤ Pm(t) + Ps(t)
Hm(t)
Hc(t)
Hs(t)
Master robot
Master
controller
Master
channel
Slave
controller
Slave
robot
Ps(t)
Pm(t)
Fig. 43.17 Energy balance of
the telemanipulation chain
(after [43.90])
can be traced to unsupervised energy injections via the
actuators. In Sect. 43.4.6 we also saw methods that
explicitly monitor energy ﬂows. Here we describe port-
based approaches designed explicitly around energy
exchanges. This can be advantageous to handle non-
linear system dynamics, discretization, time-varying
delays, and other issues.
The concept of power ports and energy ﬂows
(Sect. 43.4.2) allows a precise analytical formulation
of physical systems. This approach, which stems from
concepts used in bond-graphs, enables a pure energy
based analysis of complex nonlinear physical sys-
tems [43.91]. It has also provided new perspectives on
modeling and robot control [43.92].
To handle sampling issues and prevent instabilities
due to limited sampling rates, consider an energy-
consistent discretization [43.93]. Rather than measuring
power ﬂow at discrete intervals, consider the energy
ﬂow that occurs continuously over the entire sampling
interval. An exact measure of the energy transfer be-
tween sample time kT and the following sample time
.k C 1/T is
Ek D
.kC1/T
Z
kT
.t/Pq.t/dt :
(43.20)
Assume an electric motor with an ideal current ampli-
ﬁer and without any commutation effects is generating
the torque as commanded by a zero order hold (ZOH)
digital to analog converter. Further assume the position
sensor is collocated and synchronized to the ZOH tran-
sitions. The torque may then be considered constant
during the interval, so that
Ek D
.kC1/T
Z
kT
k;kC1Pq.t/dt :
(43.21)
Taking the torque out of the integral, we realize that
Ek D k;kC1Œq.k C 1/  q.k/ :
(43.22)
This simple result has far reaching consequences for
interfacing the digital and physical world and can
be easily calculated even if the sampling time varies
VIDEO 724 . And some of the assumptions may be re-
laxed with suitable adaptation. Using this more precise
measurement of energy ﬂow leads to more consistent
energy book-keeping.
As it is shown in Fig. 43.17, we can now track
energy in the digital world, associating individual avail-
able energy reservoirs Hm and Hs with the master and
slave controllers. The communication channel transmits
both data and energy packets (EPs), where EPs contain
only information about an energy quanta. An EP is only
sent if the transmitter has sufﬁcient available energy,
which is then decreased by the quanta. An arriving EP
injects the quanta into the receiver’s available energy.
In this way the total virtual energy in the system will
never increase. If the communication protocol allows
an EP to be lost, this will remove energy similar to dis-
sipation. This process is independent of any constant or
variable delay.
The port-based paradigm allows any nonlinear con-
trol algorithm. But any applied control force will
have an energetic consequence and will be allowed
if and only if the associated available energy level
is sufﬁciently high. Following the classiﬁcation of
Sect. 43.4.6, this paradigm is preventive. It prevents
energy generation without needing to dissipate unex-
pected energy appearances.
Strategies are needed to address the exchange of
energy between master and slave. A simple protocol
introduced in [43.90] continually transmits EPs with
a percentage of the locally stored energy. It can be
shown that this will result in an equal distribution of
energy between the master and slave controller. Also,
if necessary, a small damper can be superimposed at
the master side to extract energy from the human as
needed.
With the port-based paradigm, the data communi-
cation (related to transparency) and the energy commu-
nication (related to passivity) are split: controllers may
be nonlinear, energy and data transmission may be in-
dependent, and there is basically no restriction on the
kind of controller which can be implemented. The fact
that energy and data are separated gives the name to the
two-layer approach [43.90].

Telerobotics
43.5 Emerging Applications of Telerobotics
1101
Part D | 43.5
43.5 Emerging Applications of Telerobotics
Historically, telerobotics research has focused on a con-
ventional setup with two ﬁxed-based robotic manipula-
tors serving as the master and slave devices. Recently,
there have been substantial efforts to extend the teler-
obotic theories and frameworks to more unconventional
scenarios. Here we summarize some recent results on
these emerging applications. The summary is by no
means exhaustive and, to be consistent with the chap-
ter, focuses on controls aspects and providing a stable
bilateral user interface.
43.5.1 Telerobotics for Mobile Robots
Mobile robots are useful slave devices if the task covers
a large spatial area. Flying robots, in particular, can op-
erate in three-dimensional space without being bound to
the ground. For mobile robot teleoperation, force feed-
back may be used to convey proprioceptive information
of the slave robot (e.g., velocity), or haptic feedback of
virtual (or real) objects in the remote environment.
A key difference of mobile and ﬂying robot teleop-
eration compared to a conventional setup is kinematic
dissimilarity [43.94]: the workspace of the master de-
vice is bounded while the workspace of the slave robot
is unbounded. This suggests to couple the master posi-
tion to the slave velocity, as with rate-control described
in Sect. 43.3.3. A direct coupling between master po-
sition and slave velocity, however, cannot be addressed
by the standard passivity framework (Sect. 43.4.2). The
master position and the slave velocity possess differ-
ent relative degrees with respect to the torque. One way
to circumvent this difﬁculty is to utilize so called r-
variable
r WD Pq C q :
(43.23)
That is, by utilizing inverse-dynamics similar to adap-
tive control design [43.95, 96] or by injecting some PD-
type local state feedback with redeﬁned output r [43.97]
(Fig. 43.18), it is possible to render the master device to
be passive with this r-variable replacing the velocity Pq
in its original passivity relation (43.9). This implies that
we can couple the r-variable and the slave’s velocity
passively, just like standard passivity-based controllers.
Ms
1
s
Λ
1+
B+ s
K
–
+
q.
r
τ'+f
Fig. 43.18
Feedback r-
passivation by
using PD-type
state feedback
Meanwhile the r-variable contains the master position
information.
We can also achieve passive mobile robot tele-
operation with time-varying delays by extending the
port-based ideas presented in Sect. 43.4.7 with the con-
cept of a virtual vehicle [43.98]. This virtual vehicle
is a simulated slave system, evolving in a gravitation-
free ﬁeld and having a ﬁnite energy tank. Commands
from the master are only allowed to transfer energy
from the tank to accelerate the vehicle or to return en-
ergy by decelerating the vehicle. This creates a closed
energy system for the slave. A passive behavior can
be achieved with a viscoelastic connection between the
virtual and real vehicles.
Mobile telerobotics often uses nonholonomically-
constrained wheeled mobile robots (WMRs) with pure-
rolling wheels. For slave WMRs, it is often possible
(with some low-level control as stated below) to split
motions (i. e., velocity directions) into those requir-
ing a position-velocity coupling as stated above (e.g.,
forward velocity of WMR), and others that may be con-
trolled by a standard position-position coupling (e.g.,
rotation angle of WMR) as explained in Sects. 43.4.1
and 43.4.6.
Other mobile robots, particularly quadrotor or
ducted-fan type aerial robots (Chap. 36) or thrust-
propelled
autonomous
aquatic
vehicles
(AUVs,
Chap. 25), are under-actuated with fewer control vari-
ables than degrees of freedom and also defy standard
teleoperation techniques. To address under-actuation,
abstraction of the slave robot has been utilized [43.98,
99], that is, human users telecontrol a fully-actuated
virtual system, assuming that its motion is adequately
describing that of the real slave robot, while a certain
low-level tracking control is employed to drive the
under-actuated slave mobile robot to tightly follow this
virtual system. This abstraction leads to a hierarchical
control design, composed of: 1) a high-level teleoper-
ation control layer between the virtual vehicle and the
master device; and 2) a low-level tracking control layer,
into which the issue of the slave’s under-actuation is
conﬁned.
For the teleoperation layer, we may then use
the conventional teleoperation techniques explained in
Sect. 43.4 with the .r; v/-coupling as explained above.
We may also use the recently proposed control tech-
niques explained in Sect. 43.4.6, which promise sharper
haptic feedback with guaranteed stability against lossy
communication. Presenting both the slave robot’s pro-
prioceptive information and the presence of surround-
ing objects for obstacle avoidance via the same hap-
tic feedback channel, however, typically results in

Part D | 43.5
1102
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
a perceptual ambiguity [43.100]. A further perceptual
modality (e.g., vision) is usually necessary to resolve
this ambiguity. In some applications, the slave mobile
robots are required to move around in but to not directly
contact any physical environments. In these cases, vir-
tual forces can be generated for any obstacles and the
slave robot is interacting only with this precisely known
virtual force ﬁeld. This suggests it would be sufﬁcient
to enforce slave stability versus slave passivity ([43.99],
VIDEO 71
and
VIDEO 72 ), as a less conservative
controller will likely give better system performance.
43.5.2 Multilateral Telerobotics
Many practical telerobotic tasks require dexterous,
complicated, and large degree-of-freedom motions,
e.g., in surgical training, rehabilitation, or exploration.
For such tasks, we may utilize a team of multiple co-
operative slave robots or a single slave robot possessing
many degrees of freedom. The complexity involved in
both cases may require multiple human operators to ad-
equately control and coordinate all degrees of freedom.
Following [43.102], we thus consider the following
scenarios:
1. Single-master multiple-slave (SMMS) systems
2. Multiple-master multiple-slave (MMMS) systems
3. Multiple-master single-slave (MMSS) systems
4. Single-master single-slave (SMSS) systems, which
constitute the conventional telerobotic setup.
Master 
robot
(m-DOF)
Human
operator
Master workspace
Slave workspace (remote)
Communication
network
(e.g., internet)
Slave
robot 1
Slave
robot 2
Slave
robot 3
Slave
robot 4
Slave
robot 5
Common
object
Fig. 43.19 SMMS telerobotic control of multiple slave robots (after [43.101])
Here we introduce some recent results applicable to
SMMS and MMSS systems.
It is common for single-master multiple-slave
(SMMS) systems to autonomously control simple sub-
tasks among the slaves, e.g., maintaining a grasp, main-
taining connectivity, or avoiding collisions (Fig. 43.19).
In particular, in [43.101, 104, 105], passive decomposi-
tion [43.106] is utilized to decompose the dynamics of
multiple slave robots into their shape system, describ-
ing the inter-slave formation aspects, and the locked
system, abstracting their collective motion and centroid
behavior. The locked system can be telecontrolled by
a single human user, while an autonomous controller
regulates the shape system to maintain the cooperative
grasp of an object between the slaves.
Another interesting development in SMMS teler-
obotics is the combination with the frameworks of mul-
tiagent cooperative control (i. e., consensus, ﬂocking,
synchronization, and other behaviors). For instance,
in [43.103] and
VIDEO 73 , a single human user
directly telecontrols a single leader agent among the
slaves, while the behavior of the other slaves is dictated
by a leader-follower information graph (Fig. 43.20).
A time-varying graph topology with arbitrary split/join
operations among the slaves allows for reconﬁgura-
tion, e.g., for navigation in cluttered environments. And
the concept of virtual energy tanks, along with the
port-Hamiltonian modeling and port-based approach
(Sect. 43.4.7), is utilized to enforce passivity and sta-
bility of the total system.

Telerobotics
43.5 Emerging Applications of Telerobotics
1103
Part D | 43.5
Master
Leader
robot l
Decentralizd multirobot
slave system
Followers
Fh
FS
υl
υj
Fm
F j
e
rM
rM
Obstacle
Fig. 43.20 SMMS telerobotic control architecture with possibly time-varying leader-follower information topology (af-
ter [43.103])
UAV1
vp1
vp4
UAV4
vp3
UAV3
vp2
UAV2
u1
t
u4
t
Obstacle
y3
u3
t
y2
Fig. 43.21 SMMS control architecture for multiple un-
manned aerial vehicles (UAVs; after [43.99]), where a sin-
gle user telecontrols some of the virtual systems (via
ut
1; ut
4) while telesensing the state of some of real UAVs
(i. e., y2; y3), which are low-level controlled to follow their
respective virtual systems
A distributed SMMS approach was also proposed
in [43.99], in
VIDEO 71
and
VIDEO 72 , to en-
able a single human user to telecontrol some of the
slave robots. The inter-slave behaviors are encoded via
a distributed artiﬁcial potential constructed on a time-
invariant undirected information graph (Fig. 43.21). By
using kinematic virtual systems to abstract the slave
robots, the work achieves the combination of master-
passivity and slave-stability. It guarantees no collisions
among the slave robots or with obstacles and no sepa-
rations among the slave robots.
A control approach for MMSS telerobotic systems
was proposed in [43.107] and in
VIDEO 75 , where
two human users telecontrol distinct frames on a single
large-DOF slave robot. The velocity space of the slave
is decomposed according to the two command motions,
resolving conﬂicts between and constraints imposed on
them. Priority is given to the primary user’s commands
Redundant Slave
A
B
C
P
Teleoperation
and redundancy
controller
Primary
master
Secondary
master
Fig. 43.22 Trilateral teleoperation (after [43.107]), where
the primary master controls the end-effector frame P, while
the secondary master controls task-space frame A, B or
C: if A is chosen, primary and secondary tasks are non-
conﬂicting/nonconstrained; if B is chosen, nonconﬂicting,
yet, the secondary task is constrained; if C is chosen,
conﬂicting, thus, prioritized nullspace control is necessary
between primary and secondary tasks
(Fig. 43.22). The kinematics-level prioritized velocity
commands are realized by dynamics-level adaptive con-
trol for all master and slave robots.
A different shared trilateral MMSS teleoperation
framework was developedin [43.108], where two hu-
man users teleoperate the same point of a single slave

Part D | 43.6
1104
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
robot. Their control authority is adjusted with a domi-
nance factor ˛ 2 Œ0; 1 set according to the task objec-
tive (e.g., ˛ D 1 for training or ˛ D 0 for evaluation).
The MMSS system is optimized for a measure of trans-
parency and Llewellyn’s criteria is applied to the equiv-
alent two-port system (with environment impedance Ze
embedded) to establish unconditional stability.
These multilateral and the previous mobile teler-
obotic approaches are promising to signiﬁcantly expand
the utility and application horizons of conventional
telerobotics. Signiﬁcant technical challenges and re-
search questions remain, for example:
1. How to assign and determine the roles for multiple
coordinating human users?
2. How to systematically split control tasks into tele-
operative and autonomous control?
3. What are the most suitable performance measures,
which are likely different from the conventional
metrics?
4. What is the best form of human interface (or hap-
tic feedback) [43.100] for the mobile and mul-
tilateral telerobotics and how to complement the
interface with other modality (e.g., visual feed-
back).
43.6 Conclusions and Further Reading
Despite its age, telerobotics remains an exciting and vi-
brant area of robotics. In many ways, it forms a platform
which can utilize the advances in robotic technologies
while simultaneously leveraging the proven skills and
capabilities of human users. Compare this, for example,
with the development of the automobile and its relation
to the driver. As cars are gradually becoming more so-
phisticated with added electronic stability control and
navigation systems, they are becoming safer and more
useful to their operators, not replacing them. Similarly
telerobotics serves as a pathway for gradual progress
and, as such, is perhaps best suited to fulﬁll robotics
long-held promise of improving human life. It is seeing
use in the challenging area of search and rescue. And
with the recent developments and commercializations
in telerobotic surgery systems, it is indeed impacting
on the lives of tens of thousands of patients in a pro-
found fashion and extending the reach of robotics into
our world.
For further reading in the area of supervisory con-
trol, we refer to Sheridan [43.39]. Though published
in 1992, it remains the most complete discussion on
the topic. Unfortunately few other books are devoted
to or even fully discuss telerobotics. In [43.109] many
recent advances, including methods, experiments, ap-
plications, and developments, are collected. Beyond
this, in the areas of bilateral and shared control, as
well as to understand the various applications, we can
only refer to the citations provided. Finally, in addition
to the standard robotics journals, we note in particu-
lar Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments,
published by the MIT Press. Combined with virtual-
reality applications, it focuses on technologies with
a human operator.
Video-References
VIDEO 71
Semi-autonomous teleoperation of multiple UAVs: Passing a narrow gap
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/43/videodetails/71
VIDEO 72
Semi-autonomous teleoperation of multiple UAVs: Tumbing over obstacle
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/43/videodetails/72
VIDEO 73
Bilateral teleoperation of multiple quadrotors with time-varying topology
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/43/videodetails/73
VIDEO 74
Passive teleoperation of nonlinear telerobot with tool-dynamics rendering
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/43/videodetails/74
VIDEO 75
Asymmetric teleoperation of dual-arm mobile manipulator
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/43/videodetails/75
VIDEO 297
Tele-existence master–slave system for remote manipulation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/43/videodetails/297
VIDEO 298
JPL dual-arm telerobot system
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/43/videodetails/298
VIDEO 299
Single and dual arm supervisory and shared control
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/43/videodetails/299
VIDEO 318
Teleoperated humanoid robot – HRP
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/43/videodetails/318
VIDEO 319
Teleoperated humanoid robot – HRP: Tele-driving of lifting vehicle
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/43/videodetails/319

Telerobotics
References
1105
Part D | 43
VIDEO 321
Multi-modal multi-user telepresence and teleaction system
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/43/videodetails/321
VIDEO 322
Laparoscopic telesurgery workstation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/43/videodetails/322
VIDEO 724
Passivity of IPC strategy at 30 Hz sample rate
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/43/videodetails/724
References
43.1
M. Buss, G. Schmidt: Control problems in multi-
modal telepresence systems. In: Advances in Con-
trol, ed. by P.M. Frank (Springer, London 1999)
pp. 65–101
43.2
W.R. Ferell, T.B. Sheridan: Supervisory control of
remote manipulation, IEEE Spectrum 4(10), 81–88
(1967)
43.3
R.C. Goertz: Fundamentals of general-purpose
remote manipulators, Nucleonics 10(11), 36–42
(1952)
43.4
R.C. Goertz: Mechanical master–slave manipula-
tor, Nucleonics 12(11), 45–46 (1954)
43.5
R.C. Goertz, F. Bevilacqua: A force-reflecting po-
sitional servomechanism, Nucleonics 10(11), 43–45
(1952)
43.6
W.R. Ferell: Remote manipulation with transmis-
sion delay, IEEE Trans. Hum. Factors Electron. 6,
24–32 (1965)
43.7
T.B. Sheridan, W.R. Ferell: Remote manipulative
control with transmission delay, IEEE Trans. Hum.
Factors Electron. 4, 25–29 (1963)
43.8
F. Miyazaki, S. Matsubayashi, T. Yoshimi, S. Ari-
moto: A new control methodology towards ad-
vanced teleoperation of master–slave robot sys-
tems, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1986) pp. 997–1002
43.9
R.J. Anderson, M.W. Spong: Asymptotic stability
for force reflecting teleoperators with time delay,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 11(2), 135–149 (1992)
43.10
G. Niemeyer, J.-J.E. Slotine: Stable adaptive tele-
operation, IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 16(1), 152–162 (1991)
43.11
J.E. Colgate: Robust impedance shaping telema-
nipulation, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 9(4), 374–
384 (1993)
43.12
B. Hannaford: A design framework for teleop-
erators with kinesthetic feedback, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 5(4), 426–434 (1989)
43.13
D.A. Lawrence: Stability and transparency in bi-
lateral teleoperation, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
9(5), 624–637 (1993)
43.14
D. Kuban, H.L. Martin: An advanced remotely
maintainable servomanipulator concept, Proc.
1984 Natl. Top. Meet. Robotics Remote Handl.
Hostile Environ., Washington (1984)
43.15
J. Vertut, P. Coiffet: Teleoperation and Robotics:
Evolution and Development (Kogan Page, London
1985)
43.16
J. Vertut: MA23M contained servo manipulator
with television camera, PICA and PIADE tele-
scopic supports, with computer-integrated con-
trol, Proc. 28th Remote Syst. Technol. Conf. (1980)
pp. 13–19
43.17
J. Vertut, P. Coiffet: Bilateral servo manipulator
MA23 in direct mode and via optimized computer
control, Proc. 2nd Retote Manned Syst. Technol.
Conf. (1977)
43.18
A.K. Bejczy: Towards advanced teleoperation in
space, Prog. Astronaut. Aeronaut 161, 107–138
(1994)
43.19
G. Hirzinger, B. Brunner, J. Dietrich, J. Heindl:
Sensor-based space robotics – ROTEX and its
telerobotic features, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
9(5), 649–663 (1993)
43.20
T.H. Massie, J.K. Salisbury: The phantom hap-
tic interface: A device for probing virtual objects,
Proc. ASME Int. Mech. Eng. Congr. Exhib., Chicago
(1994) pp. 295–302
43.21
P.S. Green, J.W. Hill, J.F. Jensen, A. Shah: Telep-
resence Surgery, IEEE Eng. Med. Bio. Mag. 14(3),
324–329 (1995)
43.22
R.H. Taylor, J. Funda, B. Eldridge, S. Gomory,
K. Gruben, D. LaRose, M. Talamini, L. Kavoussi,
J. Anderson: A telerobotic assistant for laparo-
scopic surgery, IEEE Eng. Med. Bio. Mag. 14(3),
279–288 (1995)
43.23
A.J. Madhani, G. Niemeyer, J.K. Salisbury: The
black falcon: A teleoperated surgical instrument
for minimally invasive surgery, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Victoria (1998)
pp. 936–944
43.24
S. Charles, H. Das, T. Ohm, C. Boswell, G. Ro-
driguez, R. Steele, D. Istrate: Dexterity-enhanced
telerobotic microsurgery, Proc. Int. Conf. Adv.
Robotics (1997) pp. 5–10
43.25
G.S.
Guthart,
J.K.
Salisbury:
The
Intuitive ˚U
telesurgery system: Overview and application,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2000)
pp. 618–621
43.26
J.M. Sackier, Y. Wang: Robotically assisted laparo-
scopic surgery: From concept to development,
Surg. Endosc. 8(1), 63–66 (1994)
43.27
J. Marescaux, J. Leroy, F. Rubino, M. Vix, M. Si-
mone, D. Mutter: Transcontinental robot assisted
remote telesurgery: Feasibility and potential ap-
plications, Ann. Surg. 235, 487–492 (2002)
43.28
G.H.
Ballantyne:
Robotic
surgery, telerobotic
surgery, telepresence, and telementoring – Re-
view of early clinical results, Surg. Endosc. 16(10),
1389–1402 (2002)
43.29
D.H. Birkett: Electromechanical instruments for
endoscopic surgery, Minim. Invasive Ther. Allied
Technol. 10(6), 271–274 (2001)
43.30
J. Rosen, B. Hannaford: Doc at a distance, IEEE
Spectrum 8(10), 34–39 (2006)

Part D | 43
1106
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
43.31
A.M. Okamura: Methods for haptic feedback in
teleoperated robot-assisted surgery, Ind. Robot
31(6), 499–508 (2004)
43.32
T. Ortmaier, B. Deml, B. Kübler, G. Passig,
D. Reintsema, U. Seibold: Robot assisted force
feedback surgery, Springer Tracts Adv. Robotics 31,
361–379 (2007)
43.33
B.M. Yamauchi: PackBot: A versatile platform for
military robotics, Proc. SPIE 5422, 228–237 (2004)
43.34
R.R. Murphy: Trial by fire [rescue robots], IEEE
Robotics Autom. Mag. 11(3), 50–61 (2004)
43.35
J. Wright, A. Trebi-Ollennu, F. Hartman, B. Cooper,
S. Maxwell, J. Yen, J. Morrison: Driving a rover on
mars using the rover sequencing and visualiza-
tion program, Int. Conf. Instrumentation, Control
Inf. Technol. (2005)
43.36
G.
Hirzinger,
K.
Landzettel,
D.
Reintsema,
C. Preusche, A. Albu-Schäffer, B. Rebele, M. Turk:
ROKVISS – Robotics component verification on
ISS, Proc. 8th Int. Symp. Artif. Intell. Robotics
Autom. Space (iSAIRAS) (2005), Session2B
43.37
C.
Preusche,
D.
Reintsema,
K.
Landzettel,
G. Hirzinger: ROKVISS – Preliminary results for
telepresence mode, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2006) pp. 4595–4601
43.38
G. Hirzinger, K. Landzettel, B. Brunner, M. Fis-
cher, C. Preusche, D. Reintsema, A. Albu-Schäf-
fer, G. Schreiber, M. Steinmetz: DLR’s robotics
technologies for on-orbit servicing, Adv. Robotics
18(2), 139–174 (2004)
43.39
T.B. Sheridan: Telerobotics, Automation and Hu-
man Supervisory Control (MIT Press, Cambridge
1992)
43.40
G. Hirzinger, J. Heindl, K. Landzettel, B. Brun-
ner: Multisensory shared autonomy – A key issue
in the space robot technology experiment ROTEX,
Proc. RSJ/IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(1992) pp. 221–230
43.41
B. Brunner, K. Arbter, G. Hirzinger: Task di-
rected programming of sensor based robots, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1994)
pp. 1080–1087
43.42
A.K. Bejczy, W.S. Kim: Predictive displays and
shared compliance control for time-delayed tele-
manipulation, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Workshop Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (1990) pp. 407–412
43.43
P. Backes, K. Tso: UMI: An interactive supervi-
sory and shared control system for telerobotics,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1990)
pp. 1096–1101
43.44
L. Conway, R. Volz, M. Walker: Tele-autonomous
systems: Methods and architectures for intermin-
gling autonomous and telerobotic technology,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1987)
pp. 1121–1130
43.45
S. Hayati, S.T. Venkataraman: Design and im-
plementation of a robot control system with
traded and shared control capability, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1989) pp. 1310–
1315
43.46
G. Hirzinger, B. Brunner, J. Dietrich, J. Heindl: RO-
TEX – The first remotely controlled robot in space,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1994)
pp. 2604–2611
43.47
W.B. Griffin, W.R. Provancher, M.R. Cutkosky:
Feedback strategies for telemanipulation with
shared control of object handling forces, Presence
14(6), 720–731 (2005)
43.48
T. Ortmaier, M. GrÖger, D.H. Boehm, V. Falk,
G. Hirzinger: Motion estimation in beating heart
surgery, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 52(10), 1729–1740
(2005)
43.49
L. Rosenberg: Virtual fixtures: Perceptual tools for
telerobotic manipulation, Proc. IEEE Virtual Real.
Int. Symp. (1993) pp. 76–82
43.50
J.J. Abbott, P. Marayong, A.M. Okamura: Haptic
virtual fixtures for robot-assisted manipulation,
Proc. 12th Int. Symp. Robotics Res. (2007) pp. 49–
64
43.51
D.J. Lee, P.Y. Li: Passive bilateral control and
tool dynamics rendering for nonlinear mechan-
ical teleoperators, IEEE Trans. Robotics 21(5), 936–
951 (2005)
43.52
M.J. Massimino, T.B. Sheridan, J.B. Roseborough:
One handed tracking in six degrees of freedom,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man Cybern. (1989)
pp. 498–503
43.53
A. Ruesch, A.Y. Mersha, S. Stramigioli, R. Car-
loni: Kinetic scrolling-basedposition mapping for
haptic teleoperation of unmanned aerial vehi-
cles, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2012) pp. 3116–3121
43.54
A. Casals, L. Munoz, J. Amat: Workspace defor-
mation based teleoperation for the increase of
movement precision, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2003) pp. 2824–2829
43.55
F. Conti, O. Khatib: Spanning large workspaces
using small haptic devices, Proc. 1st Jt. Eurohap-
tics Conf. Symp. Haptic Interfaces Virtual Environ.
Teleoperator Syst. (2005) pp. 183–188
43.56
R.W. Daniel, P.R. McAree: Fundamental limits of
performance for force reflecting teleoperation,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 17(8), 811–830 (1998)
43.57
M.J. Massimino, T.B. Sheridan: Sensory substi-
tution for force feedback in teleoperation, Pres-
ence Teleoperator Virtual Environ. 2(4), 344–352
(1993)
43.58
D.A. Kontarinis, R.D. Howe: Tactile display of vi-
bratory information in teleoperation and virtual
environments, Presence Teleoperator Virtual Env-
iron. 4(4), 387–402 (1995)
43.59
D.A. Kontarinis, J.S. Son, W.J. Peine, R.D. Howe:
A tactile shape sensing and display system for
teleoperated manipulation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1995) pp. 641–646
43.60
J.J. Gil, A. Avello, Á. Rubio, J. Flórez: Stability
analysis of a 1 DOF haptic interface using the
Routh–Hurwitz criterion, IEEE Trans. Control Syst.
Technol. 12(4), 583–588 (2004)
43.61
N. Hogan: Controlling impedance at the man/
machine interface, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (1989) pp. 1626–1631
43.62
R.J.
Adams,
B.
Hannaford:
Stable
hap-
tic
interaction
with
virtual
environments,

Telerobotics
References
1107
Part D | 43
IEEE
Trans.
Robotics
Autom.
15(3),
465–474
(1999)
43.63
K. Hashtrudi-Zaad, S.E. Salcudean: Analysis of
control architectures for teleoperation systems
with impedance/admittance master and slave
manipulators, Int. J. Robotics Res. 20(6), 419–445
(2001)
43.64
Y. Yokokohji, T. Yoshikawa: Bilateral control of
master-slave manipulators for ideal kinesthetic
coupling – Formulation and experiment, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 10(5), 605–620 (1994)
43.65
K.B. Fite, J.E. Speich, M. Goldfarb: Transparency
and stability robustness in two-channel bilateral
telemanipulation, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control
123(3), 400–407 (2001)
43.66
S.E. Salcudean, M. Zhu, W.-H. Zhu, K. Hashtrudi-
Zaad: Transparent bilateral teleoperation under
position and rate control, Int. J. Robotics Res.
19(12), 1185–1202 (2000)
43.67
W.R. Ferrell: Remote manipulation with trans-
mission delay, IEEE Trans. Hum. Factors Electron.
6, 24–32 (1965)
43.68
T.B. Sheridan: Space teleoperation through time
delay: Review and prognosis, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 9(5), 592–606 (1993)
43.69
A. Eusebi, C. Melchiorri: Force reflecting telema-
nipulators with time-delay: Stability analysis and
control design, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 14(4),
635–640 (1998)
43.70
W.S. Kim, B. Hannaford, A.K. Bejczy: Force-reflec-
tion and shared compliant control in operating
telemanipulators with time delays, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 8(2), 176–185 (1992)
43.71
K. Hashtrudi-Zaad, S.E. Salcudean: Transparency
in time-delayed systems and the effect of local
force feedback for transparent teleoperation, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 18(1), 108–114 (2002)
43.72
R. Oboe, P. Fiorini: A design and control en-
vironment for internet-based telerobotics, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 17(4), 433–449 (1998)
43.73
S. Munir, W.J. Book: Control techniques and pro-
gramming issues for time delayed internet based
teleoperation, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control
125(2), 205–214 (2003)
43.74
S. Hirche, M. Buss: Transparent data reduction in
networked telepresence and teleaction systems.
Part II: Time-delayed communication, Presence
Teleoperator Virtual Environ. 16(5), 532–542 (2007)
43.75
R.J. Anderson, M.W. Spong: Bilateral control of
tele-operators with time delay, IEEE Trans. Autom.
Control 34(5), 494–501 (1989)
43.76
G. Niemeyer, J.-J.E. Slotine: Telemanipulation
with time delays, Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(9), 873–
890 (2004)
43.77
S. Stramigioli, A. van der Schaft, B. Maschke,
C. Melchiorri: Geometric scattering in robotic tele-
manipulation, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 18(4),
588–596 (2002)
43.78
N.A. Tanner, G. Niemeyer: High-frequency ac-
celeration
feedback
in
wave
variable
teler-
obotics, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 11(2), 119–127
(2006)
43.79
S. Munir, W.J. Book: Internet-based teleoperation
using wave variables with prediction, IEEE/ASME
Trans. Mechatron. 7(2), 124–133 (2002)
43.80
D.J. Lee, M.W. Spong: Passive bilateral teleopera-
tion with constant time delay, IEEE Trans. Robotics
22(2), 269–281 (2006)
43.81
E. Nuno, L. Basanez, R. Ortega, M.W. Spong: Po-
sition tracking for non-linear teleoperators with
variable time delay, Int. J. Robotics Res. 28(7),
895–910 (2009)
43.82
K. Huang, D.J. Lee: Consensus-based peer-to-
peer control architecture for multiuser haptic in-
teraction over the internet, IEEE Trans. Robotics
29(2), 417–431 (2013)
43.83
K. Huang, D.J. Lee: Hybrid pd-based control
framework for passive bilateral teleoperation
over the Internet, Proc. IFAC World Congr. (2011)
pp. 1064–1069
43.84
B. Hannaford, J.H. Ryu: Time domain passivity
control of haptic interfaces, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 18(1), 1–10 (2002)
43.85
J.-H. Ryu, C. Preusche, B. Hannaford, G. Hirzinger:
Time domain passivity control with reference en-
ergy following, IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol.
13(5), 737–742 (2005)
43.86
J. Artigas, C. Preusche, G. Hirzinger: Time do-
main passivity-based telepresence with time de-
lay, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2006) pp. 4205–4210
43.87
J. Ryu, C. Preusche: Stable bilateral control of
teleoperators under time-varying communica-
tion delays: Time domain passivity approach,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2007)
pp. 3508–3513
43.88
D.J. Lee, K. Huang: Passive-set-position-mod-
ulation framework for interactive robotic sys-
tems, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 26(2), 354–369
(2010)
43.89
J.P. Kim, J. Ryu: Robustly stable haptic interaction
control using an energy-bounding algorithm, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 29(6), 666–679 (2010)
43.90
M.C.J. Franken, S. Stramigioli, S. Misra, S. Secchi,
A. Macchelli: Bilateral telemanipulation with time
delays: A two-layer approach combining passivity
and transparency, IEEE Trans. Robotics 27(4), 741–
756 (2011)
43.91
V. Duindam, A. Macchelli, S. Stramigioli, H. Bruyn-
inckx: Modeling and Control of Complex Physical
Systems (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2009)
43.92
S. Stramigioli: Modeling and IPC Control of In-
teractive Mechanical Systems: A Coordinate-Free
Approach, Lecture Notes in Control and Informa-
tion Sciences, Vol. 266 (Springer, London 2001)
43.93
S. Stramigioli, C. Secchi, A.J. Van der Schaft,
C. Fantuzzi: Sampled Data Systems Passivity and
Discrete Port-Hamiltonian Systems, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 21(4), 574–587 (2005)
43.94
D.J. Lee, O. Martinez-Palafox, M.W. Spong: Bi-
lateral teleoperation of a wheeled mobile robot
over delayed communication networks, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 3298–
3303

Part D | 43
1108
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
43.95
N. Chopra, M.W. Spong, R. Lozano: Synchroniza-
tion of bilateral teleoperators with time delay,
Automatica 44, 2142–2148 (2008)
43.96
J.-J.E. Slotine, W. Li: On the adaptive control of
robot manipulators, Int. J. Robotics Res. 6(3), 49–
59 (1987)
43.97
D.J. Lee, D. Xu: Feedback r-passivity of lagrangian
systems for mobile robot teleoperation, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 2118–
2123
43.98
S. Stramigioli, R. Mahony, P. Corke: A novel ap-
proach to haptic tele-operation of aerial robot
vehicles, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2010) pp. 5302–5308
43.99
D.J. Lee, A. Franchi, H.-I. Son, C. Ha, H.H. Bülthoff,
P.R. Giordano: Semi-autonomous haptic tele-
operation control architecture of multiple un-
manned aerial vehicles, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mech.
18, 1334–1345 (2013)
43.100
H.I.
Son,
A.
Franchi,
L.L.
Chuang,
J.
Kim,
H.H. Bülthoff, P.R. Giordano: Human-centered
design and evaluation of haptic cueing for tele-
operation of multiple mobile robots, IEEE Trans.
Cybern. 43(2), 597–609 (2013)
43.101
D.J. Lee, M.W. Spong: Bilateral teleoperation of
multiple cooperative robots over delayed com-
munication networks: Theory, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005) pp. 362–367
43.102
P.F. Hokayem, M.W. Spong: Bilateral teleopera-
tion: An historical survey, Automatica 42, 2035–
2057 (2006)
43.103
A. Franchi, C. Secchi, H.I. Son, H.H. Bülthoff,
P.R.
Giordano:
Bilateral
teleoperation
of
groups
of
mobile
robots
with
time-varying
topology, IEEE Trans. Robotics 28(5), 1019–1033
(2012)
43.104
G. Hwang, H. Hashimoto: Development of a hu-
man-robot-shared controlled teletweezing sys-
tem, IEEE Trans. Control Sys. Technol. 15(5), 960–
966 (2007)
43.105
E.J.
Rodriguez-Seda,
J.J.
Troy,
C.A.
Erignac,
P. Murray, D.M. Stipanovic, M.W. Spong: Bilat-
eral teleoperation of multiple mobile agents:
Coordinated motion and collision avoidance,
IEEE Trans. Control Sys. Technol. 18(4), 984–992
(2010)
43.106
D.J. Lee, P.Y. Li: Passive decomposition of multiple
mechanical systems under motion coordination
requirements, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 58(1),
230–235 (2013)
43.107
P. Malysz, S. Sirouspour: Trilateral teleoperation
control of kinematically redundant robotic ma-
nipulators, Int. J. Robotics Res. 30(13), 1643–1664
(2011)
43.108
B. Khademian, K. Hashtrudi-Zaad: Shared con-
trol architectures for haptic training: performance
and coupled stability analysis, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 30(13), 1627–1642 (2011)
43.109
M. Ferre, M. Buss, R. Aracil, C. Melchiorri, C. Bal-
ague (Eds.): Advances in Telerobotics, Springer
Tracts in Advanced Robotics, Vol. 31 (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 2007)

Multimedia Contents Networked R
1109
Part D | 44.1
44. Networked Robots
Dezhen Song, Ken Goldberg, Nak-Young Chong
As of 2013, almost all robots have access to com-
puter networks that offer extensive computing,
memory, and other resources that can dramatically
improve performance. The underlying enabling
framework is the focus of this chapter: networked
robots. Networked robots trace their origin to teler-
obots or remotely controlled robots. Telerobots are
widely used to explore undersea terrains and outer
space, to defuse bombs and to clean up hazardous
waste. Until 1994, telerobots were accessible only
to trained and trusted experts through dedicated
communication channels. This chapter will de-
scribe relevant network technology, the history of
networked robots as it evolves from teleoperation
to cloud robotics, properties of networked robots,
how to build a networked robot, example sys-
tems. Later in the chapter, we focus on the recent
progress on cloud robotics, and topics for future
research.
44.1 Overview and Background.................... 1109
44.2 A Brief History ..................................... 1110
44.2.1
Networked Teleoperation ........... 1110
44.2.2 Cloud Robotics and Automation.. 1111
44.3 Communications and Networking......... 1112
44.3.1
The Internet.............................. 1113
44.3.2 Wired Communication Links ....... 1113
44.3.3 Wireless Links ........................... 1114
44.3.4 Video and Audio Transmission
Standards ................................. 1114
44.4 Properties of Networked Robots ........... 1115
44.4.1 Overall Structure........................ 1115
44.4.2 Building a Networked Robot
System ..................................... 1116
44.4.3 State-Command Presentation..... 1117
44.4.4 Command Execution/State
Generation ............................... 1119
44.4.5 Virtual Fixtures.......................... 1119
44.4.6 Collaborative Control
and Crowd Sourcing................... 1120
44.5 Cloud Robotics..................................... 1121
44.5.1 Big Data ................................... 1122
44.5.2 Cloud Computing....................... 1122
44.5.3 Collective Robot Learning ........... 1123
44.5.4 Open Source and Open Access..... 1123
44.5.5 Crowdsourcing and Call Centers .. 1124
44.6 Conclusion and Future Directions.......... 1125
Video-References......................................... 1126
References................................................... 1126
44.1 Overview and Background
As illustrated in Fig. 44.1, the ﬁeld of networked
robots locates at the intersection between two exciting
ﬁelds: robotics and networking. Similarly, teleopera-
tion (Chap. 43)
and multiple mobile robot systems
(Chap. 51) also ﬁnd their overlaps in the intersection.
The primary concerns of the teleoperation are stability
and time delay. Multiple mobile robot systems con-
cerns coordination and planning of autonomous robots
and sensors communicating over local networks. The
subﬁeld of Networked Robots focuses on the robot sys-
tem architectures, interfaces, hardware, software, and
applications that use networks (primarily the Inter-
net/Cloud).
By 2012, several hundred networked robots have
been developed and put online for public use. Many
papers have been published describing these systems
and a book on this subject by Goldberg and Siegwart
is available [44.1]. Updated information about new re-
search and an archive/survey of networked robots is
available on the website of the IEEE technical commit-
tee on networked robots, which fosters research in this
area [44.2].

Part D | 44.2
1110
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Fig. 44.1 Relationship between the subjects of networked
robots (Chap. 44, this chapter), teleoperation (Chap. 43),
and multiple mobile robot systems (Chap. 53) I
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows: we
ﬁrst review the history and related work in Sect. 44.2.
In Sect. 44.3, we review network and communica-
tion technology to provide necessary background for
the following two main Sects. 44.4 and 44.5. Sec-
tion 44.4 focuses on traditional networked robots while
Sect. 44.5 summarize the new development in cloud
Chap. 44 
Chap. 43 
Chap. 53 
Robotics
Networking
robotics. Section 44.6, we conclude the chapter with re-
cent applications and future directions.
44.2 A Brief History
Networked robots have their root in teleoperation sys-
tems, which started as remotely controlled devices.
However, thanks to the recent evolution of the Inter-
net and wireless networks, networked robots quickly
expand their scope from the traditional master–slave
teleopereation relationship to an integration of robots,
human, agents, off-board sensors, databases, and clouds
over the globe. To review the history of networked
robots, we trace back to the root: remotely controlled
devices.
44.2.1 Networked Teleoperation
Like many technologies, remotely controlled devices
were ﬁrst imagined in science ﬁction. In 1898, Nicola
Tesla [44.3] demonstrated a radio-controlled boat in
New York’s Madison Square Garden. The ﬁrst ma-
jor experiments in teleoperation were motivated by
the need to handle radioactive materials in the 1940s.
Goertz and Thompson demonstrated one of the ﬁrst
bilateral simulators in the 1950s at the Argonne Na-
tional Laboratory [44.4]. Remotely operated mech-
anisms have been designed for use in inhospitable
environments such as undersea [44.5] and space explo-
ration [44.6]. At General Electric, Mosher [44.7] devel-
oped a two-arm teleoperator with video cameras. Pros-
thetic hands were also applied to teleoperation [44.8].
More recently, teleoperation is being considered for
medical diagnosis [44.9], manufacturing [44.10] and
micromanipulation [44.11]. See Chap. 43 and the book
from Sheridan [44.12] for excellent reviews on teleop-
eration and telerobotics research.
The concept of hypertext (linked references) was
proposed by Vannevar Bush in 1945 and was made pos-
sible by the subsequent developments in computing and
networking. In the early 1990s, Berners-Lee introduced
the hypertext transmission protocol (HTTP). A group
of students led by Marc Andreessen developed an open
source version of the ﬁrst graphical user interface, the
Mosaic browser, and put it online in 1993. The ﬁrst
networked camera, the predecessor of today’s webcam,
went online in November 1993 [44.13]
Approximately nine months later, the ﬁrst net-
worked telerobot went online. The Mercury Project
combined an IBM industrial robot arm with a digi-
tal camera and used the robot’s air nozzle to allow
remote users to excavate for buried artifacts in a sand-
box [44.14, 15]. Working independently, a team led
by Taylor and Trevelyan at the University of Western
Australia demonstrated a remotely controlled six-axis
telerobot in September 1994 [44.16, 17]. These early
projects pioneered a new ﬁeld of networked telerobots.
See [44.18–26] for other examples.
Networked telerobots are a special case of supervi-
sory control telerobots, as proposed by Sheridan and his
colleagues [44.12]. Under supervisory control, a local
computer plays an active role in closing the feedback
loop. Most networked robotics are type (c) supervisory
control systems (Fig. 44.2).
Although a majority of networked telerobotic sys-
tems consist of a single human operator and a single
robot [44.27–34], Chong et al. [44.35] propose a use-
ful taxonomy: single operator single robot (SOSR), sin-
gle operator multiple robot (SOMR) [44.36, 37], multi-
ple operator single robot (MOSR), and multiple opera-
tor multiple robot (MOMR) [44.38, 39] (
VIDEO 81 ,
VIDEO 84 ). These frameworks greatly extend sys-
tem architecture of networked robots. In fact, human op-
erators can often be replaced with autonomous agents,
off-board sensors, expert systems, and programmed
logics, as demonstrated by Xu and Song [44.40] and
Sanders et al. [44.41]. The extended networked con-
nectivity also allows us to employ techniques such as
crowd sourcing and collaborative control for demand-
ing applications such as nature observation and environ-
ment monitoring [44.42, 43]. Hence, networked teler-

Networked Robots
44.2 A Brief History
1111
Part D | 44.2
Human
operator
Task
(b)
Direct control
Controller
Display
Actuator
Sensor
Computer
Human
operator
Task
(a)
Controller
Display
Actuator
Sensor
Human
operator
Task
(d)
Full automatic control
Supervisory control
Controller
Display
Actuator
Sensor
Computer
Human
operator
Task
(e)
Display
Actuator
Sensor
Computer
Human
operator
Task
(c)
Controller
Display
Actuator
Sensor
Computer
Fig. 44.2 A spectrum of teleoperation control modes adapted from Sheridan’s text (after [44.12]). We label them (a–e),
in order of increasing robot autonomy. At the far left would be a mechanical linkage where the human directly operates
the robot from another room through sliding mechanical bars, and on the far right is the system where the human role is
limited to observation/monitoring. In (c–e), the dashed lines indicated that communication may be intermittent
obots fully evolute into networked robots: an integration
of robots, humans [44.44], computing power, off-board
sensing, and databases over the Internet.
The last 18 years (19942012) witnessed the exten-
sive development in networked robots. New systems,
new experiments, and new applications go well beyond
traditional ﬁelds such as defense, space, and nuclear
material handing [44.12] that motivated teleoperation in
early 1950s. As the Internet introduces universal access
to every corner of life, the impact of networked robots
becomes broader and deeper in modern society. Recent
applications range from education, industry, commer-
cial, health care, geology, environmental monitoring, to
entertainment, and arts.
Networked robots provide a new medium for people
to interact with remote environment. A networked robot
can provide more interactivity beyond what a normal
videoconferencing system. The physical robot not only
represents the remote person but also transmits multi-
modal feedback to the person, which is often referred as
telepresence in the literature [44.30]. Paulos et al.’s Per-
sonal ROving Presence (PRoP) robot [44.45], Jouppi
and Thomas’ Surrogate robot [44.30], Takayama et al.’s
Texai [44.46], and Lazewatsky and Smart’s inexpensive
platform [44.47] are representative work.
Networked robots have great potential for educa-
tion and training. In fact, one of the earliest networked
telerobot systems [44.48] originates from the idea of
a remote laboratory. Networked telerobots provide uni-
versal access to the general public, who may have
little to no knowledge of robots, with opportunities
to understand, learn, and operate robots, which were
expensive scientiﬁc equipment limited to universities
and large corporate laboratories before. Built on net-
worked telerobots, online remote laboratories [44.49,
50] greatly improves distance learning by providing an
interactive experience. For example, teleoperated tele-
scopes help students to understand astronomy [44.51].
Teleoperated microscope [44.52] helps student to ob-
serve micro-organisms. The Tele-Actor project [44.53]
allows a group of students to remotely control a human
tele-actor to visit environments that are normally not ac-
cessible to them such as clean-room environments for
semiconductor manufactory facility and deoxyribonu-
cleic acid (DNA) analysis laboratories.
44.2.2 Cloud Robotics and Automation
Recent development of cloud computing provide
new means and platform for networked robots. In

Part D | 44.3
1112
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
2010, Kuffner at Google introduced the term Cloud
robotics [44.54] to describe a new approach to robotics
that takes advantage of the Internet as a resource for
massively parallel computation and real-time sharing
of vast data resources. The Google autonomous driv-
ing project exempliﬁes this approach: the system in-
dexes maps and images that are collected and updated
by satellite, Streetview, and crowdsourcing from the
network to facilitate accurate localization. Another ex-
ample is Kiva Systems new approach to warehouse
automation and logistics using large numbers of mo-
bile platforms to move pallets using a local network to
coordinate planforms and update tracking data. These
are just two new projects that build on resources from
the Cloud. Steve Cousins of Willow Garage aptly sum-
marized the idea: No robot is an island. Cloud robotics
recognizes the wide availability of networking, incorpo-
rates elements of open-source, open-access, and crowd-
sourcing to greatly extend earlier concepts of Online
Robots [44.1] and Networked Robots [44.55, 56].
The Cloud has been used as a metaphor for
the Internet since the inception of the World Wide
Web in the early 1990s. As of 2012, researchers are
pursuing a number of cloud robotics and automa-
tion projects [44.57, 58]. New resources range from
software architectures [44.59–62] to computing re-
sources [44.63]. The RoboEarth project [44.64] aims to
develop [44.65]:
a World Wide Web for robots: a giant network
and database repository where robots can share in-
formation and learn from each other about their
behavior and their environment.
Cloud robotics and automation is related to concepts of
the Internet of Things [44.66] and the Industrial Inter-
net, which envision how radio-frequency identiﬁcation
(RFID) and inexpensive processors can be incorporated
into a vast array of objects from inventory items to
household appliances to allow them to communicate
and share information.
44.3 Communications and Networking
Below is a short review of relevant terminologies and
technologies on networking. For details, see the texts
by [44.67].
A communication network includes three elements:
links, routers/switchers, and hosts. Links refer to the
physical medium that carry bits from one place to an-
other. Examples of links include copper or ﬁber-optic
cables and wireless (radio frequency or infrared) chan-
nels. Switches and routers are hubs that direct digital
information between links. Hosts are communication
end points such as browsers, computers, and robots.
Networks can be based in one physical area (local-
area network, or LAN), or distributed over wide dis-
tances (wide-area network, or WAN). Access control
is a fundamental problem in networking. Among a va-
riety of methods, the ethernet protocol is the most
popular. Ethernet provides a broadcast-capable multi-
access LAN. It adopts a carrier-sense multiple-access
(CSMA) strategy to address the multiple-access prob-
lem. Deﬁned in the IEEE 802.x standard, CSMA allows
each host to send information over the link at any
time. Therefore, collisions may happen between two
or more simultaneous transmission requests. Collisions
can be detected either by directly sensing the voltage
in the case of wired networks, which is referred to
as collision detection (CSMA/CD), or by checking the
time-out of an anticipated acknowledgement in wireless
networks, which is referred to as collision avoidance
(CSMA/CA). If a collision is detected, both/all senders
randomly back off a short period of time before retrans-
mitting. CSMA has a number of important properties:
(1) it is a completely decentralized approach, (2) it does
not need clock synchronization over the entire network,
and (3) it is very easy to implement. However, the disad-
vantages of CSMA are: (1) the efﬁciency of the network
is not very high and (2) the transmission delay can
change drastically.
As mentioned previously, LANs are interconnected
with each other via routers/switchers. The information
transmitted is in packet format. A packet is a string
of bits and usually contains the source address, the
destination address, content bits, and a checksum.
Routers/switchers distribute packets according to their
routing table. Routers/switchers have no memory of
packets, which ensures scalability of the network. Pack-
ets are usually routed according to a ﬁrst-in ﬁrst-out
(FIFO) rule, which is independent of the application.
The packet formats and addresses are independent of
the host technology, which ensures extensibility. This
routing mechanism is referred to as packet switching
in the networking literature. It is quite different from
a traditional telephone network, which is referred to as
circuit switching. A telephone network is designed to
guarantee a dedicated circuit between a sender and a re-
ceiver once a phone call is established. The dedicated
circuitry ensures communication quality. However, it
requires a large number of circuits to ensure the qual-
ity of service (QOS), which leads to poor utilization
of the overall network. A packet-switching network
cannot guarantee dedicated bandwidth for each indi-

Networked Robots
44.3 Communications and Networking
1113
Part D | 44.3
vidual pair of transmissions, but it improves overall
resource utilization. The Internet, which is the most
popular communication media and the infrastructure of
networked telerobots, is a packet-switching network.
44.3.1 The Internet
The creation of the Internet can be traced back to US
Department of Defense’s (DOD) APRA NET network
in the 1960s. There are two features of the APRA
NET network that enabled the successful evolution of
the Internet. One feature is the ability for information
(packets) to be rerouted around failures. Originally, this
was designed to ensure communication in the event of
a nuclear war. Interestingly, this dynamic routing capa-
bility also allows the topology of the Internet to grow
easily. The second important feature is the ability for
heterogeneous networks to interconnect with one an-
other. Heterogeneous networks, such as X.25, G.701,
ethernet, can all connect to the Internet as long as they
can implement the Internet protocol (IP). The IP is me-
dia, operating system (OS), and data rate independent.
This ﬂexible design allows a variety of applications and
hosts to connect to the Internet as long as they can gen-
erate and understand IP.
Figure 44.3 illustrates a four-layer model of the pro-
tocols used in the Internet. On the top of the IP, we have
two primary transport layer protocols: the transmis-
sion control protocol (TCP) and the user data protocol
(UDP). TCP is an end-to-end transmission control pro-
tocol. It manages packet ordering, error control, rate
control, and ﬂow control based on packet round-trip
time. TCP guarantees the arrival of each packet. How-
ever, excessive retransmission of TCP in a congested
network may introduce undesirable time delays in a net-
IP
X.25, G.701, Ethernet, token ring, FDDI, T1, ATM,
etc.
TCP
SSH/
SFTP
SMTP
SNMP
NFS
H.263
TFTP
HTTP
UDP
Fig. 44.3 A four-layer model of Internet protocols (af-
ter [44.67])
worked telerobotic system. UDP behaves differently; it
is a broadcast-capable protocol and does not have a re-
transmission mechanism. Users must take care of error
control and rate control themselves. UDP has a lot less
overhead compared to TCP. UDP packets are transmit-
ted at the sender’s preset rate and the rate is changed
based on the congestion of a network. UDP has great
potential, but it is often blocked by ﬁrewalls because
of a lack of a rate control mechanism. It is also worth
mentioning that the widely accepted term TCP/IP refers
to the family of protocols that build on IP, TCP, and
UDP.
In the application layer of the Internet protocols, the
HTTP is one of the most important protocols. HTTP is
the protocol for the World Wide Web (WWW). It allows
the sharing of multimedia information among hetero-
geneous hosts and OSs including text, image, audio,
and video. The protocol has signiﬁcantly contributed
to the boom of the Internet. It also changes the tradi-
tional client/server (C/S) communication architecture to
a browser/server (B/S) architecture. A typical conﬁgu-
ration of the B/S architecture consists of a web server
and clients with web browsers. The web server projects
the contents in hypertext markup language (HTML)
format or its variants, which is transmitted over the
Internet using HTTP. User inputs can be acquired
using the common gateway interface (CGI) or other
variants. The B/S architecture is the most accessible
because no specialized software is needed at the client
end.
44.3.2 Wired Communication Links
Even during peak usage, the network backbones of
the Internet often run at less than 30% of their over-
all capacity. The average backbone utilization is around
1520%. The primary speed limitation for the Internet
Table 44.1 Last-mile Internet speed by wired connection
type (if not speciﬁed, the downstream transmission and the
upstream transmission share the same bandwidth)
Types
Bits per second
Dialup modem (V.92)
Up to 56 K
Integrated services digital
network (ISDN)
64160 K for BRI, up to
2048 K for PRI
High data rate digital sub-
scriber line (HDSL)
Up to 2:3 M duplex on two
twisted-pair lines
Asymmetric digital sub-
scriber line (ADSL)
1:54424:0 M downstream,
0:53:3 M upstream
Cable modem
2400 M downstream,
0:4108 M upstream
Fiber to the home (FTTH)
0:0051 G downstream,
0:0021 G upstream
Direct Internet II node
1:010:0 G

Part D | 44.3
1114
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Table 44.2 Survey of wireless technologies in terms of bit rate and range
Types
Bit rate (bps)
Band (Hz)
Range (m)
Zigbee (802.15.4)
20250 K
868915 M/2:4 G
50
Bluetooth
732 K3:0 M
2:4 G
100
3G HSPA
400 K14:0 M
 3:5 G
N/A
HSPA+
5:76 M44:0 M
 3:5 G
N/A
LTE
10 M300 M
 3:5 G
N/A
WiFi (802.11a,b,g,n)
11600 M
2:4 G/5 G
100
is the last mile, the link between clients and their local
Internet service providers (ISP).
Table 44.1 lists typical bit rates for different con-
nection types. It is interesting to note the asymmetric
speeds in many cases, where upstream bit rate (from the
client to the Internet), are far slower than downstream
bit rates (from the Internet to the client). These asym-
metries introduce complexity into the network model
for teleoperation. Since the speed difference between
the slowest modem link and the fastest Internet II node
is over 10 000, designers of a networked telerobotic
system should anticipate a large variance of communi-
cation speeds.
44.3.3 Wireless Links
Table 44.2 compares the speed, band, and range of
wireless standards as of 2012. Increasing bit rate and
communication range requires increasing power. The
amount of radio frequency (RF) transmission power re-
quired over a distance d is proportional to dk, where
2 	 k 	 4 depending on the antenna type. In Table 44.2,
Bluetooth and Zigbee are typical low-power transmis-
sion standards that are good for short distances. HSPA+
and LTE are commercially marketed as the 4G cell-
phone network.
By providing high-speed connectivity at low cost,
WiFi is the most popular wireless standard in 2012. Its
range is approximate 100 m line of sight and the WiFi
wireless network usually consists of small-scale inter-
connected access points. The coverage range usually
limits these networks to an ofﬁce building, home, and
other indoor environments. WiFi is a good option for
indoor mobile robots and human operators. If the robot
needs to navigate in the outdoor environment, the 3G
or 4G cellphone network can provide the best cover-
age available. Although obvious overlap exists among
wireless standards in coverage and bandwidth, there are
two import issues that have not been covered by Ta-
ble 44.2. One is mobility. We know that, if an RF source
or receiver is moving, the corresponding Doppler effect
causes a frequency shift, which could cause problems in
communication. WiFi is not designed for fast-moving
hosts. 3G HSPA cellphone allows the host to move at
a vehicle speed under 120 km=h. However, LTE allows
the host to move at a speed of 350 or 500km=h, which
even works for high-speed trains.
Long range wireless links often suffer from latency
problem, which may drastically decreases system per-
former as discussed in Chap. 43. One may notice that
we did not list satellite wireless in Table 44.2 because
the long latency (0:51:7 s) and high price makes it dif-
ﬁcult to be useful for robots. The large antenna size
and high power consumption rate also limits its usage
in mobile robots. In fact, the best option for long range
wireless is LTE. LTE is designed with a transmission
latency of less that 4 ms whereas 3G HSPA cellphone
networks have a variable latency of 10500 ms.
44.3.4 Video and Audio Transmission
Standards
In networked robots systems, the representation of the
remote environment is often needed to be delivered
to online users in video and audio format. To deliver
video and audio over the Internet, raw video and audio
data from camera optical sensor and microphone must
be compressed according to different video and au-
dio compression standards to ﬁt in the limited network
bandwidth. Due to lack of bandwidth and computing
power to encode streaming video, most early systems
only transmit periodic snapshots of the remote scene in
JPEG format at limited frame rate, i. e., 12 frames per
second or less. Audio was rarely considered in the early
system design. The rudimentary video delivery meth-
ods in the early system were mostly implemented using
HTML and JavaScript to reload the JPEG periodically.
Today, the expansion of HTML standards allow web
browsers to employ plug-ins as the client end of stream-
ing video. HTML5 even natively supports video decod-
ing. Therefore, the server end of recent systems often
employs streaming server software, such as Adobe
Flash Media Encoder, Apple Quick Time Streaming
Server, Oracle Java Media Framework, Helix Media
Delivery Platform, Microsoft DirectX, SkypeKit, etc.,
to encode and deliver video. These streaming video
sever packages often provide easy-to-use software de-
velopment kit (SDK) to facilitate system integration.
It is worth noting that these different software pack-
ages are just different implementations of video/audio

Networked Robots
44.4 Properties of Networked Robots
1115
Part D | 44.4
Table 44.3 A comparison of existing videostreaming stan-
dards for the same resolution under the same ﬁxed band-
width (FMBT represents buffering time settings that would
not signiﬁcantly decrease compression ratio or video qual-
ity.)
Standards
Feasible minimum
buffering time
(FMBT)
Framerate
MJPEG
Zero (< 10 ms)
Low
MPEG2
Variable (i. e., 50 ms –
video length), 210 s
are common
Moderate
H.263+
< 300 ms
High
H.264/ MPEG4-AVC
Zero (< 10 ms)
Highest
streaming protocols. Not every protocol is suitable for
networked robots. Some protocols are designed to de-
liver video on demand while others are designed for live
streaming for videoconferencing purposes. Networked
robots use real-time video as feedback information,
which imposes strict requirements in latency and band-
width similar to those of videoconferencing. One way
latency of more than 150 ms can signiﬁcantly degrade
telepresence and hence the performance of the human
operator.
Latency is often caused by bandwidth and video
encoding/decoding time. Since audio data amount is
negligible when comparing to that video data. We will
focus the discussion on video compression standards.
There is always a tradeoff between frame rate and reso-
lution for a given bandwidth. There is also a tradeoff
between compression ratio and computation time for
a given central processing unit (CPU). The computation
time includes both CPU time and data-buffering time at
both client and server ends. Video encoding is a very
computationally intensive task. A long computation pe-
riod introduces latency and signiﬁcantly impair the sys-
tem performance. It is possible to use hardware to cut
down the computation time but not the data-buffering
time, which are controlled by the video encoder.
There are many standards and protocols avail-
able but most of them are just variations of MJPEG,
MPEG2, H.263, and MPEG4/AVC/H.264. We compare
those standards in Table 44.3. Note that the compari-
son is qualitative and may not be the most accurate due
to the fact that each video encoding standard has many
parameters that affect the overall buffering time.
From networked robot point of view, the buffer-
ing time determines the latency and the frame rate
determines the responsiveness of the system. An ideal
videostream should have both high frame rate and low
buffering time. But if both cannot be achieved at the
same time, low latency is preferred. From Table 44.3,
H.264/MPEG4-AVC clearly outperforms other com-
petitors and is the most popular video compression
method.
44.4 Properties of Networked Robots
Networked robots have the following properties:

The physical world is affected by a device that is
locally controlled by a network server, which con-
nects to the Internet to communicate with remote
human users, databases, agents, and off-board sen-
sors, which are referred to as clients of the system.

Human decision making capability is often an inte-
gral part of the system. If so, humans often access
the robot via web browsers, such as Internet Ex-
plorer or Firefox, or apps in mobile device. As of
2012, the standard protocol for network browsers is
the hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP), a stateless
transmission protocol.

Most networked robots are continuously accessible
(online), 24 h a day, 7 days a week.

Networks may be unreliable or have different speed
for clients with different connections.

Since hundreds of millions of people now have
access to the Internet, mechanisms are needed to
handle client authentication and contention. System
security and privacy of users are important in the
networked robots.

Input and output for human users for networked
robots are usually achieved with the standard com-
puter screen, mouse, and keyboard.

Clients may be inexperienced or malicious, so on-
line tutorials and safeguards are generally required.

Additional sensing, databases, and computing re-
sources may be available over the network.
44.4.1 Overall Structure
As deﬁned by Mason, Peshkin, and others [44.68, 69],
in quasistatic robot systems, accelerations, and inertial
forces are negligible compared to dissipative forces. In
quasistatic robot systems, motions are often modeled as
transitions between discrete atomic conﬁgurations.
We adopt a similar terminology for networked teler-
obots. In quasistatic telerobotics (QT), robot dynamics
and stability are handled locally. After each atomic mo-
tion, a new state report is presented to the remote user,

Part D | 44.4
1116
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
who sends back an atomic command. The atomic state
describes the status of the robot and its corresponding
environment. Atomic commands refer to human direc-
tives, which are desired robotic actions.
Several issues arise:

State-command presentation: How should state and
available commands be presented to remote human
operators using the two-dimensional (2-D) screen
display?

Command execution/state generation: How should
commands be executed locally to ensure that the de-
sired state is achieved and maintained by the robot?

Command coordination: How should commands be
resolved when there are multiple human operators
and/or agents? How to synchronize and aggregate
commands issued by users/agents with different
network connectivity, background, responsiveness,
error rate, etc., to achieve the best possible system
performance?

Virtual Fixture: Error prevention and state correc-
tion: How should the system prevent the wrong
commands that may lead the robot to collision or
other undesirable states?
Before we detail these issues, let us walk through
how to build a minimum networked robot system.
Users
Web server
Robot
Camera
The
Internet
Fig. 44.4 Typical system architecture for a networked telerobot
User
Web server
Web browser
HTTPD server
CGI scripts
HTML
HTTP
Images
HTTP
Java applet
Fig. 44.5 A sample software architecture of a networked telerobot
A reader can follow the below example to build his/her
owner networked robot system as well as understand
challenges in the issues.
44.4.2 Building a Networked Robot System
This minimal system is a networked telerobotic sys-
tem which allows a group of users to access a robot
via web browsers. As illustrated in Fig. 44.4, a typical
or minimal networked telerobotic system typically in-
cludes three components:

Users: Anyone with an Internet connection and
a web browser or equivalent apps that understand
HTTP.

Web server: A computer running a web server soft-
ware.

Robot: A robot manipulator, a mobile robot, or any
device that can modify or affect its environment.
Users access the system via their web browsers.
Any web browser that is compatible with W3C’s
HTML standard can access a web server. In 2012, the
most popular web browsers are Microsoft Internet Ex-
plorer, Mozilla Firefox, Google Chrome, Apple Safari,
and Opera. New browsers and updated versions with
new features are introduced periodically. All of these
popular browsers issue the corresponding mobile apps
to support mobile devices such as Apple iPads, Apple
iPhones, and Google Andriod-based Tablets and smart
phones.
A web server is a computer that responds to HTTP
requests over the Internet. Depending upon the operat-
ing system of the web server, popular server software
packages include Apache and Microsoft Internet In-
formation Services (IIS). Most servers can be freely
downloaded from the Internet.
To develop a networked telerobot, one needs a basic
knowledge of developing, conﬁguring, and maintaining
web servers. As illustrated in Fig. 44.5, the development
requires knowledge of HTML and at least one local pro-
gramming languages such as C, C#, CGI, Javascript,
Perl, PHP, .Net, or Java.
It is important to consider compatibility with the va-
riety of browsers. Although HTML is designed to be
compatible with all browsers, there are exceptions. For
example, Javascript, which is the embedded scripting
language of web browsers, is not completely compat-
ible between Internet Explorer and Firefox. One also
needs to master the common HTML components such
as forms that are used to accept user inputs, frames that
are used to divide the interface into different functional
regions, etc. An introduction to HTML can be found
in [44.70].

Networked Robots
44.4 Properties of Networked Robots
1117
Part D | 44.4
User commands are usually processed by the web
server using CGI, the common gateway interface. Most
sophisticated methods such as PHP, Java Server Pages
(JSP), and socket-based system programming can also
be used. CGI is invoked by the HTTP server when the
CGI script is referred in the uniform resource locator
(URL). The CGI program then interprets the inputs,
which is often the next robot motion command, and
sends commands to the robot via a local communica-
tion channel. CGI scripts can be written in almost any
programming language. The most popular ones are Perl
and C.
A simple networked telerobotic system can be con-
structed using only HTML and CGI. However, if the
robot requires a sophisticated control interface, ad-
vanced plug-ins such as Java Applet, Silver Light, or
Flash, are recommended. These plug-ins run inside
the web browser on the client’s computer. Information
about these plug-ins can be found at home pages of Or-
acle, Microsoft, and Adobe, respectively. Java applet is
highly recommended because it is the most widely sup-
ported by different browsers. Recently, the fast adoption
of HTML5 also provide a new long term solution to
solve the compatibility issue.
Most telerobotic systems also collect user data and
robot data. Therefore, database design and data pro-
cessing program are also needed. The most common
used databases include MySQL and PostgresSQL. Both
are open-source databases and support a variety of
platforms and operation systems. Since a networked
telerobotic system is online 24 h a day, reliability is also
an important consideration in system design. Website
security is critical. Other common auxiliary develop-
ments include online documentation, online manual,
and user feedback collection.
It is not difﬁcult to expand this minimal networked
telerobotic system into a full-ﬂedged networked robot
system. For example, some users can be replaced by
agents that runs 24 h a day and 7 days a week to
monitor system states and co-perform tasks with hu-
mans or take over the system when nobody is online.
These agents can be implemented using cloud comput-
ing. Such extensions are usually based on the need of
the task.
44.4.3 State-Command Presentation
To generate a correct and high-quality command de-
pends on how effectively the human operator under-
stands the state feedback. The state-command presenta-
tion contains three subproblems: the 2-D representation
of the true robot state (state display), the assistance
provided by the interface to generate new commands
(spatial reasoning), and the input mechanism.
State Displays
Unlike traditional point-to-point teleoperation, where
specialized training and equipment are available to op-
erators, networked telerobots offer wide access to the
general public. Designers cannot assume that operators
Fig. 44.6 Browser’s view of the ﬁrst networked telerobot
interface (after [44.55]). The schematic at lower right gives
an overhead view of position of the four-axis robot arm
(with the camera at the end marked with X), and the image
at the lower left indicates the current view of the cam-
era. The small button marked with a dot at the left directs
a 1 s burst of compressed air into the sand below the cam-
era. The Mercury Project was online from August 1994 to
March 1995
Fig. 44.7 Browser interface to the Australian networked telerobot
which was a six-axis arm that could pick up and move blocks (af-
ter [44.17])

Part D | 44.4
1118
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
have any prior experience with robots. As illustrated
in Fig.44.6, networked telerobotic systems must display
the robot state on a 2-D screen display.
z
x
y
0
z
x
y
0
z
x
y
0
z
x
y
0
Fig. 44.8 Use of a multicamera system for multiviewpoint state
feedback (after [44.71])
Fig. 44.9 Camera control and mobile robot control in Patrick
Saucy and Francesco Mondada’s Khep on the web project
The states of the teleoperated robot are often char-
acterized in either world coordinates or robot joint con-
ﬁguration, which are either displayed in numerical for-
mat or through a graphical representation. Figure 44.6
lists robot XYZ coordinates on the interface and draws
a simple 2-D projection to indicate joint conﬁgura-
tions. Figure 44.7 illustrates another example of tele-
operation interface that was developed by Taylor and
Trevelyan [44.48]. In this interface, XYZ coordinates are
presented in a sliding bar near the video window.
The state of the robot is usually displayed in a 2-D
view as shown in Figs. 44.6 and 44.7. In some systems,
multiple cameras can help the human operator to un-
derstand the spatial relationship between the robot and
the objects in the surrounding environment. Figure 44.8
shows an example with four distinct camera views for
a six-degree-of-freedom industrial robot.
Figure 44.9 demonstrate an interface with a pan–
tilt–zoom robotic camera. The interface in Fig. 44.9 is
designed for a mobile robot.
More sophisticated spatial reasoning can eliminate
the need for humans to provide low-level control by au-
tomatically generating a sequence of commands after
it receives task-level commands from the human op-
erator. This is particularly important when the robotic
system is highly dynamic and requires a very fast re-
sponse. In this case, it is impossible to ask the human to
generate intermediate steps in the robot control; for ex-
ample, Belousov et al. adopt a shared autonomy model
to direct a robot to capture a moving rod [44.28] as
shown in Fig. 44.10. Fong and Thorpe [44.72] sum-
marize vehicle teleoperation systems that utilize these
supervisory control techniques. Su and Luo developed
an incremental algorithm for better translation of the in-
tention and motion of operators into remote robot action
commands [44.33].
The fast development of sensing and display tech-
nology makes it possible to visualize robot and envi-
ronment states in three-dimensional (3-D) displays or
generate synthetic eco-centric views (a.k.a. third person
views) (
VIDEO 82 (. To achieve that, it often requires
the robot to be equipped with multiple cameras and
laser range ﬁnders to quickly reconstruct the remote
environment [44.73, 74]. Sometimes, the reconstructed
sensory information can be superimposed on priorly
known 3-D information to form an augmented reality.
This kind of display can drastically increase telepres-
ence and performance.
Human Operator Input
Most networked telerobotic systems only rely on
mouses and keyboards for input. The design problem
is what to click on in the interface. Given the fact that
user commands can be quite different, we need to adopt

Networked Robots
44.4 Properties of Networked Robots
1119
Part D | 44.4
a)
b)
Fig.44.10a,b A web-based teleoperation system that al-
lows a robot to capture a fast-moving rod. (a) User inter-
face, and (b) system setup (after [44.28])
an appropriate interface for inputs; for example, inputs
could be Cartesian XYZ coordinates in world coordi-
nate system or robot conﬁgurations in angular joint
conﬁgurations.
For angular inputs, it is often suggested to use
a round dial as a control interface, as illustrated in
bottom left of Fig. 44.7 and the right-hand side of
Fig. 44.9. For linear motion in Cartesian coordinate, ar-
rows operated by either mouse clicks or the keyboard
are often suggested. Position and speed controls are of-
ten needed, as illustrated in Fig. 44.9. Speed control is
usually controlled by mouse clicks on a linear progress
bar for translation and a dial for rotation.
The most common control type is the position con-
trol. The most straightforward way is to click on the
video image directly. To implement the function, the
software needs to translate the 2-D click inputs into
three-dimensional (3-D) world coordinates. To simplify
the problem, the system designer usually assumes that
the clicked position is on a ﬁxed plane; for example,
a mouse click on the interface of Fig. 44.6 assumes
the robot moves on the X–Y plane. The combination of
a mouse click on the image can also allow abstract task-
level command. The example in Fig. 44.12 uses mouse
clicks to place votes on an image to generate a command
that directs a robot to pick up a test agent at the task level.
44.4.4 Command Execution/State
Generation
When a robot receives a command, it executes the
command and a new state is generated and transmit-
ted back to the human operator. However, commands
may not arrive in time or may get lost in transmis-
sion. Also, because users are often inexperienced, their
commands may contain errors. Over the limited com-
munication channel, it is impossible to ask the human to
control the manipulator directly. Computer vision, laser
range ﬁnder, local intelligence, and augmented-reality-
based displays [44.74] are required to assist the human
operator.
Belousov et al. demonstrated a system that allowed
a web user to capture a fast rod that is thrown at a robot
manipulator [44.28]. The rod is on biﬁlar suspension,
performing complicated oscillations. Belousov et al.
designed a shared-autonomy control to implement the
capture. First, an operator chooses the desired point for
capture on the rod and the capture instant using a 3-D
online virtual model of the robot and the rod. Then, the
capturing operation is performed automatically using
a motion prediction algorithm that is based on the rod’s
motion model and two orthogonal camera inputs, which
perceive the rod’s position locally in real time.
This shared autonomy approach is often required
when the task execution requires much faster response
than the Internet can allow. Human commands have to
remain at the task level instead of directing the move-
ments of every actuators. The root of this approach can
be traced back to the Tele-Autonomous concept pro-
posed by Conway et al. [44.75] in 1990. In this paper,
two important notions including time clutch and po-
sition clutches are introduced to illustrate the shared
autonomy approach. The time clutch disengages the
time synchronization between the human operator and
the robot. The human operator veriﬁes his/her com-
mands on a predictive display before sending a set of
veriﬁed commands to remote robots. The robot can
then optimize the intermediate trajectory proposed by
the human operator and disengage the position corre-
spondence, which is referred to as the position clutch.
Recent work [44.76] uses the similar idea to guide load-
haul-dump vehicles in the underground mines by com-
bining human inputs with tunnel following behavior.
44.4.5 Virtual Fixtures
Due to time delay, lack of background, and possible ma-
licious behavior, human errors are inevitably introduced

Part D | 44.4
1120
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
to system from time to time. Erroneous states may be
generated from the incorrect commands. If unchecked,
robots or objects in the environment may be damaged.
Sometimes, users may have good intention but are not
able to generate accurate commands to control the robot
remotely. For example, it is hard to generate a set of
commands to direct a mobile robot to move along the
wall and maintain a distance of 1 m to the wall at the
same time.
Virtual ﬁxtures are designed to cope with these
challenges in teleoperation tasks. Proposed by Rosen-
berg [44.77], virtual ﬁxtures are deﬁned as an overlay
of abstract sensory information on a robot workspace in
order to improve the telepresence in a telemanipulation
task. To further explain the deﬁnition, Rosenberg uses
a ruler as an example. It is very difﬁcult for a human
to draw a straight line using bare hands. However, if
a ruler, which is a physical ﬁxture, is provided, then the
task becomes easy. Similar to a physical ﬁxture, a vir-
tual ﬁxture is designed to guide robot motion through
some ﬁctitious boundaries or force ﬁelds, such as vir-
tual tubes or surface, generated according to sensory
data. The virtual ﬁxtures are often implemented us-
ing control laws [44.78, 79] based on a virtual contact
model.
Virtual ﬁxtures serve for two main purposes: avoid-
ing operation mistakes and guide robots along the
designable trajectories. This is also a type of shared
autonomy that is similar to that in Sect. 44.4.4 where
both the robot and the human share control in the sys-
tem. Chapter 43 details the shared control scheme. It is
worth noting that virtual ﬁxtures should be visualized in
the display to help operators understand the robot state
to maintain situation awareness. This actually turns the
display to augmented reality [44.80].
44.4.6 Collaborative Control
and Crowd Sourcing
When more than one human is sharing control of the
device, command coordination is needed. According
to [44.81], multiple human operators can reduce the
chance of errors, cope with malicious inputs, utilize
operators’ different expertise, and train new operators.
In [44.82, 83], a collaboratively controlled networked
robot is deﬁned as a telerobot simultaneously controlled
by many participants, where input from each participant
is combined to generate a single control stream.
When group inputs are in the form of direc-
tion vectors, averaging can be used as an aggrega-
tion mechanism [44.84]. When decisions are distinct
choices or at the abstract task level, voting is a better
choice [44.53]. As illustrated in Fig. 44.11, Goldberg
and Song (
VIDEO 83 ) develop the Tele-Actor sys-
Which test agent should we
add next?
Fig. 44.11 Spatial dynamic voting interface for the Tele-
Actor system: the spatial dynamic voting (SDV) interface
as viewed by each user. In the remote environment, the
Tele-Actor takes images with a digital camera, which are
transmitted over the network and displayed to all partici-
pants with a relevant question. With a mouse click, each
user places a color-coded marker (a votel or voting ele-
ment) on the image. Users view the position of all votels
and can change their votel positions based on the group’s
response. Votel positions are then processed to identify
a consensus region in the voting image that is sent back
to the Tele-Actor. In this manner, the group collaborates to
guide the actions of the Tele-Actor (after [44.53])
tem using spatial dynamic voting. The Tele-Actor is
a human equipped with an audio/video device and con-
trolled by a group of online users. Users indicate their
intensions by positioning their votes on a 320  320
pixel voting image during the voting interval. Votes are
collected at the server and used to determine the Tele-
Actor’s next action based on the most requested region
on the voting image [44.85].
Another approach to collaboratively control a net-
worked robot is the employ a optimization frame-
work. Song et al. [44.86, 87] developed a collabora-
tively controlled camera that allowed many clients to
share control of its camera parameters, as illustrated
in Fig. 44.12. Users indicate the area they want to view
by drawing rectangles on a panoramic image. The algo-
rithm computes an optimal camera frame with respect
to the user satisfaction function, which is deﬁned as the
frame selection problem [44.88, 89].
Recent work by Xu et al. [44.40, 90] further the
optimization framework to p-frames that allows multi-
ple cameras to be controlled and coordinated whereas

Networked Robots
44.5 Cloud Robotics
1121
Part D | 44.5
a)
b)
Requested
frames
Optimal camera
frame
Fig.44.12a,b Frame selection inter-
face (after [44.86]). The user interface
includes two image windows. The
lower window (b) displays a ﬁxed
panoramic image based on the cam-
era’s full workspace (reachable ﬁeld
of view). Each user requests a cam-
era frame by positioning a dashed
rectangle in (b). Based on these
requests, the algorithm computes an
optimal camera frame (shown with
a solid rectangle), moves the camera
accordingly, and displays the resulting
live streaming video image in the
upper window (a)
human inputs can also be replaced by autonomous
agents and other sensory inputs. These developments
have been applied to a recent project, the Collabo-
rative Observatory for Nature Environments (CONE)
project [44.91], which aims to design a networked
robotic camera system to collect data from the wilder-
ness for natural scientists.
One important issue in collaborative control is the
disconnection between individual commands and the
robot action, which may lead to the loss of situation
awareness, less participation, and eventual system fail-
ure. Inspired by engaging power in scoring systems in
computer games, Goldberg et al. [44.92] design scoring
mechanism for the collaborative control architecture by
evaluating the individual leadership level. The early
results show great improvement in the group perfor-
mance. Furthermore, the recent development of social
media, such as Blog and Twitter, can also be employed
in the collaborative control to facilitate user interaction
in real time, which can make the system more engag-
ing and effective. The resulting new architecture can be
viewed as a crowd sourcing [44.42, 93] type approach
to networked robots that combines human recognition
and decision making capabilities to robot execution at
a different scale and depth than a regular teleoperation
system.
44.5 Cloud Robotics
As noted earlier, the term Cloud Robotics is increas-
ingly common based on advances in what is now called
Cloud Computing. Cloud Robotics extends what were
previously called Online Robots [44.1] and Networked
Robots [44.55, 56]. Cloud computing provides robots
with vast resources in computation, memory, program-
ming.
Here we review ﬁve ways that cloud robotics and
automation can potentially improve robots and automa-
tion performance:
1. Providing access to global libraries of images,
maps, and object data, eventually annotated with ge-
ometry and mechanical properties.

Part D | 44.5
1122
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
2. Massively parallel computation on demand for de-
manding tasks like optimal motion planning and
sample-based statistical modeling
3. Robot sharing of outcomes, trajectories, and dy-
namic control policies.
4. Human sharing of open-source code, data, and de-
signs for programming, experimentation, and hard-
ware construction.
5. On-demand human guidance (call centers) for ex-
ception handling and error recovery. Updated infor-
mation and links are available at [44.94].
44.5.1 Big Data
The term Big Data describes data sets that are beyond
the capabilities of standard relational database systems,
which describes the growing library of images, maps,
and many other forms of data relevant to robotics and
automation on the Internet. One example is grasping,
where online datasets can be consulted to determine ap-
propriate grasps. The Columbia Grasp dataset [44.95]
and the MIT KIT object dataset [44.96] are available
online and have been widely used to evaluate grasping
algorithms [44.97–100].
Related work explores how computer vision can
be used with Cloud resources to incrementally learn
grasp strategies [44.102, 103] by matching sensor data
against 3-D computer-aided drafting (CAD) models in
an online database. Examples of sensor data include
2-D image features [44.104], 3-D features [44.105], and
3-D point clouds [44.106]. Google Goggles [44.107],
a free network-based image recognition service for
mobile devices, has been incorporated into a sys-
Cloud
Object label
Google
object recognition
engine
Google
cloud storage
Grasp
execution
results
Candidate
grasps
3D CAD
model
Image
Robots
Camera
3D Sensor
Point cloud
Pose
estimation
Select feasible
grasp with
highest success
probability
Fig. 44.13 System architecture for cloud-based object recognition for grasping. The robot captures an image of an object
and sends via the network to the Google object recognition server. The server processes the image and returns data for
a set of candidate objects, each with precomputed grasping options. The robot compares the returned CAD models with
the detected point cloud to reﬁne identiﬁcation and to perform pose estimation, and selects an appropriate grasp. After
the grasp is executed, data on the outcome is used to update models in the cloud for future reference (after [44.101])
tem for robot grasping [44.101] as illustrated in
Fig. 44.13.
Dalibard et al. attach manuals of manipulation
tasks to objects [44.108]. The RoboEarch project stores
data related to objects maps, and tasks, for applications
ranging from object recognition to mobile navigation to
grasping and manipulation (Fig. 44.14) [44.64].
As noted below, online datasets are effectively used
to facilitate learning in computer vision. By leveraging
Google’s 3-D warehouse, [44.109] reduced the need for
manually labeled training data. Using community photo
collections, [44.110] created an augmented reality ap-
plication with processing in the cloud.
44.5.2 Cloud Computing
As of 2012, Cloud Computing services like Ama-
zon’s EC2 elastic computing engine provide massively
parallel computation on demand [44.111]. Examples in-
clude Amazon Web Services [44.112] Elastic Compute
Cloud, known as EC2 [44.113], Google Compute En-
gine [44.114], Microsoft Azure [44.115]. These provide
a large pool of computing resources that can be rented
by the public for short-term computing tasks. These ser-
vices were originally used primarily by web application
developers, but have increasingly been used in scien-
tiﬁc and technical high-performance computing (HPC)
applications [44.116–119].
Cloud computing is challenging when there are
real-time constraints [44.120]; this is an active area of
research. However, there are many robotics applications
that are not time sensitive such as decluttering a room
or precomputing grasp strategies.

Networked Robots
44.5 Cloud Robotics
1123
Part D | 44.5
Robot
– Learning controller
– Local world model
– Action and situation
 recognition and labeling
RobotEarth
– Learning controller
– Global knowledge or
 the enviroment
– Knowledge on objects
 and on action recipes
Interface
common
language
Sensing
Acting
Environment
Fig. 44.14 RoboEarth architecture (after [44.64])
There are many sources of uncertainty in robotics
and automation [44.121]. Cloud computing allows mas-
sive sampling over error distributions and Monte Carlo
sampling is embarrassingly parallel; recent research
in ﬁelds as varied as medicine [44.122] and particle
physics [44.123] have taken advantage of the cloud.
Real-time video and image analysis can be performed
in the Cloud [44.109, 124, 125]. Image processing in
the cloud has been used for assistive technology for
the visually impaired [44.126] and for senior citi-
zens [44.127]. Cloud computing is ideal for sample-
based statistical motion planning under uncertainty,
where it can be used to explore many possible per-
turbations in object and environment pose, shape, and
robot response to sensors and commands [44.128].
Cloud-based sampling is also being investigated for
grasping objects with shape uncertainty [44.129, 130]
(Fig. 44.15). A grasp planning algorithm accepts as
input a nominal polygonal outline with Gaussian un-
certainty around each vertex and the center of mass to
compute a grasp quality metric based on a lower bound
on the probability of achieving force closure.
44.5.3 Collective Robot Learning
The Cloud allows robots and automation systems to
share data from physical trials in a variety of envi-
Fig. 44.15 A cloud-based approach to geometric shape uncertainty for grasping (after [44.129, 130])
ronments, for example, initial and desired conditions,
associated control policies and trajectories, and impor-
tantly: data on performance and outcomes. Such data
are a rich source for robot learning.
One example is for path planning, where previ-
ously generated paths are adapted to similar environ-
ments [44.131] and grasp stability of ﬁnger contacts can
be learned from previous grasps on an object [44.98].
The MyRobots project [44.132] from RobotShop
proposes a social network for robots [44.133]:
In the same way humans beneﬁt from socializing,
collaborating and sharing, robots can beneﬁt from
those interactions too by sharing their sensor infor-
mation giving insight on their perspective of their
current state.
44.5.4 Open Source and Open Access
The Cloud facilitates sharing by humans of designs
for hardware, data, and code. The success of open-
source software [44.134–136] is now widely accepted
in the robotics and automation community. A primary
example is ROS, the Robot Operating System, which
provides libraries and tools to help software developers
create robot applications [44.137, 138]. ROS has also
been ported to Android devices [44.139]. ROS has be-

Part D | 44.5
1124
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
Fig. 44.16 Suckerbot, designed by Tom Tilley of Thai-
land, a winner of the $10 Robot Design Challenge (af-
ter [44.140])
come a standard akin to Linux and is now used by
almost all robot developers in research and many in
industry.
Additionally, many simulation libraries for robotics
are now open-source, which allows students and re-
searchers to rapidly set up and adapt new systems and
share the resulting software. Open-source simulation
libraries include Bullet [44.141], a physics simulator
originally used for video games, OpenRAVE [44.142]
and Gazebo [44.143], simulation environments geared
speciﬁcally toward robotics, OOPSMP, a motion-
planning library [44.144], and GraspIt!, a grasping
simulator [44.145].
Autonomous image acquisition
Sparse 3-D reconstruction
TURK: Outline opbjects
TURK: Model evaluation
Dense surface reconstruction
TURK: Group by object
Manipulation
Recognition
Filtered out
Filtered out
Fig. 44.17 A cloud robot system that incorporates Amazon’s Mechanical Turk to crowdsource object identiﬁcation to
facilitate robot grasping (after [44.146])
Another exciting trend is in open-source hard-
ware, where CAD models and the technical details
of construction of devices are made freely avail-
able [44.147, 148]. The Arduino project [44.149] is
a widely used open-source microcontroller platform,
and has been used in many robotics projects. The
Raven [44.150] is an open-source laparoscopic surgery
robot developed as a research platform an order of
magnitude less expensive than commercial surgical
robots [44.151].
The Cloud can also be used to facilitate open
challenges and design competitions. For example, the
African Robotics Network with support from IEEE
Robotics and Automation Society hosted the $10 Robot
Design Challenge in the summer of 2012. This open
competition attracted 28 designs from around the world
including a winning entry from Thailand (Fig. 44.16)
that modiﬁed a surplus Sony game controller, adapt-
ing its embedded vibration motors to drive wheels and
adding lollipops to the thumb switches as inertial coun-
terweights for contact sensing, which can be built from
surplus parts for US $8.96 [44.140].
44.5.5 Crowdsourcing and Call Centers
In contrast to automated telephone reservation and
technical support systems, consider a future scenario
where errors and exceptions are detected by robots
and automation systems, which then access human
guidance on-demand at remote call centers. Human
skill, experience, and intution is being tapped to solve
a number of problems such as image labeling for
computer vision [44.54, 62, 102, 152]. Amazon’s Me-
chanical Turk is pioneering on-demand crowdsourcing
that can draw on human computation or social com-
puting systems. Research projects are exploring how

Networked Robots
44.6 Conclusion and Future Directions
1125
Part D | 44.6
this can be used for path planning [44.153], to de-
termine depth layers, image normals, and symmetry
from images [44.154], and to reﬁne image segmenta-
tion [44.155]. Researchers are working to understand
pricing models [44.156] and apply crowdsourcing to
grasping [44.146] (Fig. 44.17).
44.6 Conclusion and Future Directions
As this technology matures, networked robots will
gradually go beyond university laboratories and ﬁnd ap-
plication in the real world.
As mentioned earlier in Sects. 44.2.2 and 44.5,
the new efforts in cloud robotics lead by Google and
RoboEarth naturally bridge research and applications.
The open source nature and ready-to-use APIs can
quickly spread and deploy research results. Japan’s
Advanced Telecommunications Research Institute In-
ternational (ATR) Intelligent Robotics and Communi-
cation Laboratory has also announced its networked
robot project led by Norihiro Hagita (ATR). Its mis-
sion is to develop network-based intelligent robots
for applications such as service, medical, and safety.
Hideyuki Tokuda (Keio University) chaired the Net-
worked Robot Forum in Spring 2005, which promotes
research and development (R&D) and standardiza-
tion on network robots through activities to support
awareness campaigns and veriﬁcation experiments in
collaboration among wide-ranging parties, which in-
cludes over 100 industry and academic members. Ko-
rea’s Ministry of Information and Communication has
also announced the Ubiquitous Robotic Companion
(URC) project to develop network-based intelligent
robots.
Networked robots have allowed tens of thousands of
nonspecialists around the world to interact with robots.
The design of networked robots presents a number of
engineering challenges to build reliable systems that
can be operated by nonspecialists 24 h a day, 7 days
a week, and remain online for years. Many new research
challenges remain:

New interfaces: As portable devices such as cell-
phones and tablet computers increase in computa-
tion power, networked robotics should be able to
adopt them as new interfaces. As computers be-
comes increasingly powerful, they become capable
of visualizing more sophisticated sensor inputs. De-
signers of new interfaces should also keep track
of new developments in hardware such as haptic
interfaces and voice recognition systems. New soft-
ware standards such as ﬂash, extensible markup
language (XML), extensible hyper text markup lan-
guage (XHTML), virtual reality modeling language
(VRML), and wireless markup language (WML)
will also change the way we design interface.
New interface technology arises as human com-
puter interaction technology, mobile computing,
and computer graphics areas progress. Recent
progresses on brain–machine interaction explore
the possibility of using brain wave, such as elec-
troencephalography
(EEG)
signals,
to
control
robot movements for ground robots [44.157]
and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV)s [44.158].
Gesture [44.159] and multitouch [44.160] are also
used to generate control commands. Unlike the
traditional mouse and keyboard interfaces, the
new interfaces facilitate more natural interaction
but suffers from precision issues, because these
methods have large noise and require more research
efforts in improving robustness and accuracy.

New algorithms: Algorithms determine perfor-
mance. Scalable algorithms that are capable of
handing large amounts of data such as video/sensor
network inputs and utilize fast-evolving hardware
capability such as distributed and parallel compu-
tation will become increasingly important in the
networked robotics, especially in cloud robotics.

New protocols: Although we have listed some
pioneering work in changing the network en-
vironment to improve teleoperation, there are
still a large number of open problems such as
new
protocols,
appropriate
bandwidth
alloca-
tion [44.161], QoS [44.162], security, routing
mechanisms [44.29, 163], and many more. Network
communication is a very fast-evolving ﬁeld. The
incorporation/modiﬁcation of
network
commu-
nication ideas into networked telerobotic system
design will continue to be an active research area.
The common object request broker architecture
(CORBA) or real-time CORBA [44.20, 21, 39, 164,
165] have great potential for networked robots.

New performance metrics: As more and more
robots enter service, it is important to develop
metrics to quantify the performance of the robot–
human team. As we are more familiar with metrics
developed to assess robot performance or task
performance [44.162], recent progresses on using
the robot to assess human performance [44.166,

Part D | 44
1126
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
167] shed light on new metrics. Standardizing these
metrics will also be an important direction.

Video for robotics: Another interesting observation
is that all of existing video compression and trans-
mission standards try to rebuild a true and complete
representation of camera ﬁeld of view. However,
it might not be necessary or infeasible due to
bandwidth limit for a networked robot [44.168].
Sometimes, a high level abstraction is sufﬁcient.
For example, when a mobile robot is avoiding
an moving obstacle, all the robot needs to know
is the speed and bounding box of the moving
object instead of knowledge that whether this
object is human or other robots. We might want to
control the level of details in video perception and
transmission. This actually imposes an interesting
problem: we need a new streaming standard that
serves for networked robots.

Applications:
Recent
successful
applications
include
environment
monitoring
[44.43, 169],
manufacturing [44.170, 171], and infrastructure
inspection and maintenance [44.172, 173]. The
fast development of networked robot systems is
worldwide. Many new applications are emerging
in areas such as security, inspection, education, and
entertainment. Application requirements such as
reliability, security, and modularity will continue to
pose new challenges for system design.
Video-References
VIDEO 81
A heterogeneous multiple-operator-multiple-robot system
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/44/videodetails/81
VIDEO 82
Teleoperation of a mini-excavator
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/44/videodetails/82
VIDEO 83
Tele-Actor
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/44/videodetails/83
VIDEO 84
A multi-operator-multi-robot teleoperation system
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/44/videodetails/84
References
44.1
K. Goldberg, R. Siegwart (Eds.): Beyond Webcams:
An Introduction to Online Robots (MIT Press, Cam-
bridge 2002)
44.2
IEEE Technical Committee on Networked Robots:
http://tab.ieee-ras.org/
44.3
N. Tesla: Method of and apparatus for control-
ling mechanism of moving vessels or vehicles, US
Patent 61 3809 A (1898)
44.4
R. Goertz, R. Thompson: Electronically controlled
manipulator, Nucleonics 12(11), 46–47 (1954)
44.5
R.D. Ballard: A last long look at titanic, Nat. Geogr.
170(6), 698–727 (1986)
44.6
A.K. Bejczy: Sensors, controls, and man-machine
interface for advanced teleoperation, Science
208(4450), 1327–1335 (1980)
44.7
R.S. Mosher: Industrial manipulators, Sci. Am.
211(4), 88–96 (1964)
44.8
R. Tomovic: On man-machine control, Automatica
5, 401–404 (1969)
44.9
A. Bejczy, G. Bekey, R. Taylor, S. Rovetta: A research
methodology for tele-surgery with time delays,
1st Int. Symp. Med. Robotics Comput. Assist. Surg.
(MRCAS) (1994)
44.10
M. Gertz, D. Stewart, P. Khosla: A human-machine
interface for distributed virtual laboratories, IEEE
Robotics Autom. Mag. 1, 5–13 (1994)
44.11
T. Sato, J. Ichikawa, M. Mitsuishi, Y. Hatamura:
A new micro-teleoperation system employing
a hand-held force feedback pencil, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1994)
44.12
T.B. Sheridan: Telerobotics, Automation, and Hu-
man Supervisory Control (MIT Press, Cambridge
1992)
44.13
FirstWebcam:
http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/coffee/
qsf/timeline.html. (1993)
44.14
K. Goldberg, M. Mascha, S. Gentner, N. Rothen-
berg, C. Sutter, J. Wiegley: Robot teleoperation via
WWW, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1995)
44.15
K. Goldberg, M. Mascha, S. Gentner, N. Rothen-
berg, C. Sutter, J. Wiegley: Beyond the web:
Manipulating the physical world via the WWW,
Comput.
Netw.
ISDN
Syst.
J.
28(1),
209–219
(1995)
44.16
B. Dalton, K. Taylor: A framework for internet
robotics, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (1998)
44.17
K. Taylor, J. Trevelyan: The telelabs project, http://
telerobot.mech.uwa.edu.au (1994)
44.18
H. Hu, L. Yu, P.W. Tsui, Q. Zhou: Internet-based
robotic systems for teleoperation, Assem. Au-
tomat. 21(2), 143–151 (2001)

Networked Robots
References
1127
Part D | 44
44.19
R. Safaric, M. Debevc, R. Parkin, S. Uran: Teler-
obotics experiments via internet, IEEE Trans. Ind.
Electron. 48(2), 424–431 (2001)
44.20
S. Jia, K. Takase: A corba-based internet robotic
system, Adv. Robotics 15(6), 663–673 (2001)
44.21
S. Jia, Y. Hada, G. Ye, K. Takase: Distributed tele-
care robotic systems using corba as a communi-
cation architecture, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2002)
44.22
J. Kim, B. Choi, S. Park, K. Kim, S. Ko: Remote
control system using real-time MPEG-4 stream-
ing technology for mobile robot, IEEE Int. Conf.
Consum. Electron. (2002)
44.23
T. Mirfakhrai, S. Payandeh: A delay prediction ap-
proach for teleoperation over the internet, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002)
44.24
K. Han, Y. Kim, J. Kim, S. Hsia: Internet control of
personal robot between KAIST and UC Davis, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002)
44.25
L. Ngai, W.S. Newman, V. Liberatore: An ex-
periment
in
internet-based,
human-assisted
robotics, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2002)
44.26
R.C.
Luo,
T.M.
Chen:
Development
of
a multibehavior-based mobile robot for re-
mote supervisory control through the internet,
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 5(4), 376–385 (2000)
44.27
D. Aarno, S. Ekvall, D. Kragi: Adaptive virtual fix-
tures for machine-assisted teleoperation tasks,
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
pp. 1151–1156
44.28
I. Belousov, S. Chebukov, V. Sazonov: Web-based
teleoperation of the robot interacting with fast
moving objects, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2005) pp. 685–690
44.29
Z. Cen, A. Goradia, M. Mutka, N. Xi, W. Fung, Y. Liu:
Improving the operation efficiency of superme-
dia enhanced internet based teleoperation via an
overlay network, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2005) pp. 691–696
44.30
N.P. Jouppi, S. Thomas: Telepresence systems with
automatic preservation of user head height, local
rotation, and remote translation, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005) pp. 62–68
44.31
B. Ricks, C.W. Nielsen, M.A. Goodrich: Ecological
displays for robot interaction: A new perspective,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS),
Vol. 3 (2004) pp. 2855–2860
44.32
D. Ryu, S. Kang, M. Kim, J. Song: Multi-modal
user interface for teleoperation of ROBHAZ-DT2
field robot system, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS), Vol. 1 (2004) pp. 168–173
44.33
J. Su, Z. Luo: Incremental motion compression for
telepresent walking subject to spatial constraints,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
pp. 69–74
44.34
I. Toshima, S. Aoki: Effect of driving delay with
an acoustical tele-presence robot, telehead, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
pp. 56–61
44.35
N. Chong, T. Kotoku, K. Ohba, K. Komoriya,
N. Matsuhira, K. Tanie: Remote coordinated con-
trols in multiple telerobot cooperation, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 4 (2000)
pp. 3138–3343
44.36
P. Cheng, V. Kumar: An almost communication-
less approach to task allocation for multiple
unmanned aerial vehicles, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2008) pp. 1384–1389
44.37
X. Ding, M. Powers, M. Egerstedt, S. Young,
T. Balch: Executive decision support, IEEE Robotics
Autom. Mag. 16(2), 73–81 (2009)
44.38
J. Liu, L. Sun, T. Chen, X. Huang, C. Zhao: Com-
petitive multi-robot teleoperation, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
44.39
Z. Zhang, Q. Cao, L. Zhang, C. Lo: A CORBA-based
cooperative mobile robot system, Ind. Robot Int.
J. 36(1), 36–44 (2009)
44.40
Y. Xu, D. Song: Systems and algorithms for au-
tonomous and scalable crowd surveillance using
robotic PTZ cameras assisted by a wide-angle
camera, Auton. Robots 29(1), 53–66 (2010)
44.41
D. Sanders, J. Graham-Jones, A. Gegov: Improving
ability of tele-operators to complete progressively
more difficult mobile robot paths using simple
expert systems and ultrasonic sensors, Ind. Robot
Int. J. 37(5), 431–440 (2010)
44.42
S. Faridani, B. Lee, S. Glasscock, J. Rappole,
D. Song, K. Goldberg: A networked telerobotic ob-
servatory for collaborative remote observation of
avian activity and range change, IFAC Workshop
Netw. Robots (2009)
44.43
R. Bogue: Robots for monitoring the environ-
ment, Ind. Robot Int. J. 38(6), 560–566 (2011)
44.44
R. Murphy, J. Burke: From remote tool to shared
roles, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 15(4), 39–49
(2008)
44.45
E. Paulos, J. Canny, F. Barrientos: Prop: Personal
roving presence, SIGGRAPH Vis. Proc. (1997) p. 99
44.46
L. Takayama, E. Marder-Eppstein, H. Harris,
J. Beer: Assisted driving of a mobile remote pres-
ence system: System design and controlled user
evaluation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2011) pp. 1883–1889
44.47
D. Lazewatsky, W. Smart: An inexpensive robot
platform for teleoperation and experimentation,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011)
pp. 1211–1216
44.48
K. Taylor, J.P. Trevelyan: Australia’s telerobot on
the web, 26th Symp. Ind. Robotics (1995) pp. 39–
44
44.49
A. Khamis, D.M. Rivero, F. Rodriguez, M. Salichs:
Pattern-based architecture for building mobile
robotics remote laboratories, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2003) pp. 3284–3289
44.50
C. Cosma, M. Confente, D. Botturi, P. Fiorini: Lab-
oratory tools for robotics and automation educa-
tion, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2003) pp. 3303–3308
44.51
K.W. Dorman, J.L. Pullen, W.O. Keksz, P.H. Eis-
mann, K.A. Kowalski, J.P. Karlen: The servicing
aid tool: A teleoperated robotics system for space
applications, 7th Annu. Workshop Space Operat.
Appl. Res. (SOAR), Vol. 1 (1994)

Part D | 44
1128
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
44.52
C. Pollak, H. Hutter: A webcam as recording device
for light microscopes, J. Comput.-Assist. Microsc.
10(4), 179–183 (1998)
44.53
K. Goldberg, D. Song, A. Levandowski: Collabo-
rative teleoperation using networked spatial dy-
namic voting, Proceedings IEEE 91(3), 430–439
(2003)
44.54
J.J. Kuffner: Cloud-Enabled Robots, IEEE-RAS Int.
Conf. Humanoid Robots (2010)
44.55
K. Goldberg, M. Mascha, S. Gentner, N. Rothen-
berg, C. Sutter, J. Wiegley: Desktop teleoperation
via the World Wide Web, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom., Vol. 1 (1995) pp. 654–659
44.56
G. McKee: What is networked robotics?, Inf. Con-
trol Autom. Robotics 15, 35–45 (2008)
44.57
E. Guizzo: Cloud robotics: Connected to the
cloud, robots get smarter, IEEE Spectrum http://
spectrum.ieee.org/automaton/robotics/robotics-
software/cloud-robotics (2011)
44.58
M. Tenorth, A.C. Perzylo, R. Lafrenz, M. Beetz:
The RoboEarth language: Representing and ex-
changing knowledge about actions, objects, and
environments, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2012) pp. 1284–1289
44.59
R. Arumugam, V.R. Enti, L. Bingbing, W. Xiaojun,
K. Baskaran, F.F. Kong, A.S. Kumar, K.D. Meng,
G.W. Kit: DAvinCi: A cloud computing framework
for service robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2010) pp. 3084–3089
44.60
Z. Du, W. Yang, Y. Chen, X. Sun, X. Wang, C. Xu:
Design of a robot cloud center, Int. Symp. Auton.
Decentralized Syst. (2011) pp. 269–275
44.61
G. Hu, W.P. Tay, Y. Wen: Cloud robotics: Architec-
ture, challenges and applications, IEEE Network
26(3), 21–28 (2012)
44.62
K. Kamei, S. Nishio, N. Hagita, M. Sato: Cloud net-
worked robotics, IEEE Network 26(3), 28–34 (2012)
44.63
D.
Hunziker,
M.
Gajamohan,
M.
Waibel,
R.
D’Andrea:
Rapyuta: The
RoboEarth
cloud
engine, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2013)
44.64
M. Waibel, M. Beetz, J. Civera, R. D’Andrea,
J. Elfring, D. Gálvez-López, K. Häussermann,
R. Janssen, J.M.M. Montiel, A. Perzylo, B. le
Schieß, M. Tenorth, O. Zweigle, R. De Molengraft:
RoboEarth, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 18(2), 69–
82 (2011)
44.65
RoboEarth: What is RoboEarth?, http://www.
roboearth.org/what-is-roboearth
44.66
L. Atzori, A. Iera, G. Morabito: The internet of
things: A survey, Comput. Netw. 54(15), 2787–2805
(2010)
44.67
J. Walrand, P. Varaiya: High-Performance Com-
munication Networks, 2nd edn. (Morgan Kauf-
mann Press, San Francisco 2000)
44.68
M.A. Peshkin, A.C. Sanderson: Minimization of
energy in quasi-static manipulation, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 5(1), 53–60 (1989)
44.69
M.T. Mason: On the scope of quasi-static pushing,
3rd Int. Symp. Robotics Res. (1986)
44.70
E. Ladd, J. O’Donnell: Using Html 4, Xml, and Java
1.2 (QUE Press, Indianapolis 1998)
44.71
H. Friz: Design of an Augmented Reality User
Interface for an Internet based Telerobot us-
ing Multiple Monoscopic Views, Ph.D. Thesis
(Technical Univ. Clausthal, Clausthal-Zellerfeld
2000)
44.72
T. Fong, C. Thorpe: Vehicle teleoperation inter-
faces, Auton. Robots 11, 9–18 (2001)
44.73
A. Birk, N. Vaskevicius, K. Pathak, S. Schwert-
feger, J. Poppinga, H. Buelow: 3-D perception and
modeling, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 16(4), 53–60
(2009)
44.74
A. Kellyo, N. Chan, H. Herman, D. Huber, R. Mey-
ers, P. Rander, R. Warner, J. Ziglar, E. Capstick:
Real-time photorealistic virtualized reality in-
terface for remote mobile robot control, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 30(3), 384–404 (2011)
44.75
L. Conway, R.A. Volz, M.W. Walker: Teleau-
tonomous systems: Projecting and coordinat-
ing intelligent action at a distance, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 6(20), 146–158 (1990)
44.76
J. Larsson, M. Broxvall, A. Saffiotti: An evaluation
of local autonomy applied to teleoperated vehi-
cles in underground mines, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2010) pp. 1745–1752
44.77
L.B. Rosenberg: Virtual fixtures: Perceptual tools
for telerobotic manipulation, IEEE Virtual Real.
Annu. Int. Symp. (VRAIS) (1993) pp. 76–82
44.78
P. Marayong, M. Li, A. Okamura, G. Hager: Spatial
motion constraints: Theory and demonstrations
for robot guidance using virtual fixtures, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 2 (2003)
pp. 1954–1959
44.79
A. Bettini, P. Marayong, S. Lang, A. Okamura,
G. Hager: Vision-assisted control for manipula-
tion using virtual fixtures, IEEE Trans. Robotics
20(6), 953–966 (2004)
44.80
R. Azuma: A survey of augmented reality, Presence
6(4), 355–385 (1997)
44.81
K. Goldberg, B. Chen, R. Solomon, S. Bui, B. Farzin,
J. Heitler, D. Poon, G. Smith: Collaborative tele-
operation via the internet, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 2 (2000) pp. 2019–
2024
44.82
D. Song: Systems and Algorithms for Collabora-
tive Teleoperation, Ph.D. Thesis (Univ. California,
Berkeley 2004)
44.83
D. Song: Sharing a Vision: Systems and Algorithms
for Collaboratively-Teleoperated Robotic Cameras
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2009)
44.84
K. Goldberg, B. Chen: Collaborative teleoperation
via the internet, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2001)
44.85
K. Goldberg, D. Song: Tele-Actor http://www.
tele-actor.net, Univ. of California, Berkeley
44.86
D. Song, A. Pashkevich, K. Goldberg: Sharecam
part II: Approximate and distributed algorithms
for a collaboratively controlled robotic webcam,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots (IROS), Vol.
2 (2003) pp. 1087–1093
44.87
D. Song, K. Goldberg: Sharecam part I: Inter-
face, system architecture, and implementation of
a collaboratively controlled robotic webcam, Proc.

Networked Robots
References
1129
Part D | 44
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Vol. 2
(2003) pp. 1080–1086
44.88
D. Song, K. Goldberg: Approximate algorithms for
a collaboratively controlled robotic camera, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 23(5), 1061–1070 (2007)
44.89
D. Song, A.F. van der Stappen, K. Goldberg: Exact
algorithms for single frame selection on multi-
axis satellites, IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng. 3(1),
16–28 (2006)
44.90
Y. Xu, D. Song, J. Yi: An approximation algorithm
for the least overlapping p-frame problem with
non-partial coverage for networked robotic cam-
eras, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2008)
44.91
D. Song, N. Qin, K. Goldberg: Systems, control
models, and codec for collaborative observation
of remote environments with an autonomous
networked robotic camera, Auton. Robots 24(4),
435–449 (2008)
44.92
K. Goldberg, D. Song, I.Y. Song, J. McGonigal,
W. Zheng, D. Plautz: Unsupervised scoring for
scalable internet-based collaborative teleopera-
tion, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2004)
44.93
J. Rappole, S. Glasscock, K. Goldberg, D. Song,
S. Faridani: Range change among new world
tropical
and
subtropical
birds,
Bonn.
Zool.
Monogr. 57, 151–167 (2011)
44.94
http://goldberg.berkeley.edu/cloud-robotics/, UC
Berkeley
44.95
C. Goldfeder, M. Ciocarlie, P.K. Allen: The Columbia
grasp database, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2009) pp. 1710–1716
44.96
A. Kasper, Z. Xue, R. Dillmann: The KIT object
models database: An object model database for
object recognition, localization and manipulation
in service robotics, Int. J. Robotics Res. 31(8), 927–
934 (2012)
44.97
H. Dang, J. Weisz, P.K. Allen: Blind grasping: Sta-
ble robotic grasping using tactile feedback and
hand kinematics, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 5917–5922
44.98
H. Dang, P.K. Allen: Learning grasp stability,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012)
pp. 2392–2397
44.99
J. Weisz, P.K. Allen: Pose error robust grasping
from contact wrench space metrics, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012) pp. 557–562
44.100
M. Popovic, G. Kootstra, J.A. Jorgensen, D. Kragic,
N. Kruger: Grasping unknown objects using an
Early Cognitive Vision system for general scene
understanding, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011) pp. 987–994
44.101
B. Kehoe, A. Matsukawa, S. Candido, J. Kuffner,
K. Goldberg: Cloud-based robot grasping with the
Google object recognition engine, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2013)
44.102
M. Ciocarlie, C. Pantofaru, K. Hsiao, G. Bradski,
P. Brook, E. Dreyfuss: A side of data with my robot,
IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 18(2), 44–57 (2011)
44.103
M.A. Moussa, M.S. Kamel: An experimental ap-
proach to robotic grasping using a connectionist
architecture and generic grasping functions, IEEE
Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. C 28(2), 239–253 (1998)
44.104
K.
Huebner,
K.
Welke,
M.
Przybylski,
N. Vahrenkamp, T. Asfour, D. Kragic: Grasp-
ing
known
objects
with
humanoid
robots:
A box-based approach, Int. Conf. Adv. Robotics
(2009)
44.105
C. Goldfeder, P.K. Allen: Data-driven grasping,
Auton. Robots 31(1), 1–20 (2011)
44.106
M. Ciocarlie, K. Hsiao, E.G. Jones, S. Chitta,
R.B. Rusu, I.A. Sucan: Towards reliable grasping
and manipulation in household environments,
Intl. Symp. Exp. Robotics (2010) pp. 1–12
44.107
Google Goggles, http://www.google.com/mobile/
goggles/
44.108
S. Dalibard, A. Nakhaei, F. Lamiraux, J.-P. Lau-
mond: Manipulation of documented objects by
a walking humanoid robot, IEEE-RAS Int. Conf.
Humanoid Robots (2010) pp. 518–523
44.109
K. Lai, D. Fox: Object recognition in 3-D point
clouds using web data and domain adaptation,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 29(8), 1019–1037 (2010)
44.110
S. Gammeter, A. Gassmann, L. Bossard, T. Quack,
L. Van Gool: Server-side object recognition and
client-side object tracking for mobile augmented
reality, IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pat-
tern Recognit. (2010) pp. 1–8
44.111
M. Armbrust, I. Stoica, M. Zaharia, A. Fox, R. Grif-
fith, A.D. Joseph, R. Katz, A. Konwinski, G. Lee,
D. Patterson, A. Rabkin: A view of cloud comput-
ing, Communication ACM 53(4), 50 (2010)
44.112
Amazon Web Services, http://aws.amazon.com
44.113
Amazon Elastic Cloud (EC2), http://aws.amazon.
com/ec2/
44.114
Google Compute Engine, https://cloud.google.
com/products/compute-engine
44.115
Microsoft Azure, http://www.windowsazure.com
44.116
G. Juve, E. Deelman, G.B. Berriman, B.P. Berman,
P. Maechling: An evaluation of the cost and per-
formance of scientific workflows on Amazon EC2,
J. Grid Comput. 10(1), 5–21 (2012)
44.117
P. Mehrotra, J. Djomehri, S. Heistand, R. Hood,
H. Jin, A. Lazanoff, S. Saini, R. Biswas: Perfor-
mance evaluation of Amazon EC2 for NASA HPC
applications, Proc. 3rd Workshop Sci. Cloud Com-
put. Date (ScienceCloud) (2012)
44.118
R. Tudoran, A. Costan, G. Antoniu, L. Bougé: A per-
formance evaluation of Azure and Nimbus clouds
for scientific applications, Proc. 2nd Int. Work-
shop Cloud Comput. Platf. (CloudCP) (2012) pp. 1–6
44.119
TOP500 List, http://www.top500.org/list/2012/06/
100 (June 2012)
44.120
N.K. Jangid: Real time cloud computing, Proc. 1st
Natl. Conf. Data Manag. Secur., Jaipur (2011)
44.121
J. Glover, D. Rus, N. Roy: Probabilistic models of
object geometry for grasp planning. In: Robotics:
Science and Systems IV, ed. by O. Brock, J. Trinkle,
F. Ramos (MIT Press, Cambridge 2008)
44.122
H. Wang, Y. Ma, G. Pratx, L. Xing: Toward real-time
Monte Carlo simulation using a commercial cloud
computing infrastructure, Phys. Med. Biol. 56(17),
175–181 (2011)

Part D | 44
1130
Part D
Manipulation and Interfaces
44.123
M. Sevior, T. Fifield, N. Katayama: Belle monte-
carlo production on the Amazon EC2 cloud,
J. Phys. 219(1), 012003 (2010)
44.124
D. Nister, H. Stewenius: Scalable recognition with
a vocabulary tree, IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comp.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., Vol. 2 (2006) pp. 2161–2168
44.125
J. Philbin, O. Chum, M. Isard, J. Sivic, A. Zisserman:
Object retrieval with large vocabularies and fast
spatial matching, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (2007) pp. 1–8
44.126
B. Bhargava, P. Angin, L. Duan: A mobile-cloud
pedestrian crossing guide for the blind, Int. Conf.
Adv. Comput. Commun. (2011)
44.127
J.J.S. García: Using cloud computing as a HPC plat-
form for embedded systems, http://www.atc.us.
es/descargas/tfmHPCCloud.pdf (2011)
44.128
J. van den Berg, P. Abbeel, K. Goldberg: LQG-MP:
Optimized path planning for robots with motion
uncertainty and imperfect state information, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 30(7), 895–913 (2011)
44.129
B. Kehoe, D. Berenson, K. Goldberg: Estimating
part tolerance bounds based on adaptive cloud-
based grasp planning with slip, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Automat. Sci. Eng. (2012)
44.130
B. Kehoe, D. Berenson, K. Goldberg: Toward
cloud-based grasping with uncertainty in shape:
Estimating lower bounds on achieving force clo-
sure with zero-slip push grasps, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012) pp. 576–583
44.131
D. Berenson, P. Abbeel, K. Goldberg: A robot path
planning framework that learns from experience,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012)
pp. 3671–3678
44.132
MyRobots.com, http://myrobots.com
44.133
What is MyRobots?, http://myrobots.com/wiki/
About
44.134
L. Dabbish, C. Stuart, J. Tsay, J. Herbsleb: Social
coding in GitHub: transparency and collaboration
in an open software repository, Proc. ACM Conf.
Comp. Support. Coop. Work (2012) pp. 1277–1286
44.135
A. Hars: Working for free? Motivations of partici-
pating in open source projects, Proc. 34th Annu.
Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci. (2001)
44.136
D. Nurmi, R. Wolski, C. Grzegorczyk, G. Obertelli,
S. Soman, L. Youseff, D. Zagorodnov: The Eu-
calyptus open-source cloud-computing system,
IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. Clust. Comput. Grid (2009)
pp. 124–131
44.137
ROS (Robot Operating System), http://ros.org.
44.138
M. Quigley, B. Gerkey: ROS: An open-source robot
operating system, ICRA Workshop Open Source
Softw. (2009)
44.139
rosjava, an implementation of ROS in pure Java
with Android support, http://cloudrobotics.com
44.140
The African Robotics Network (AFRON): Ten Dollar
Robot design challenge winners, http://robotics-
africa.org/design_challenge.html (2012)
44.141
Bullet Physics Library, http://bulletphysics.org
44.142
OpenRAVE, http://openrave.org/
44.143
Gazebo, http://gazebosim.org
44.144
E. Plaku, K.E. Bekris, L.E. Kavraki: OOPS for mo-
tion planning: An online, open-source, program-
ming system, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(2007) pp. 3711–3716
44.145
A.T. Miller, P.K. Allen: GraspIt! A versatile simu-
lator for robotic grasping, IEEE Robotics Autom.
Mag. 11(4), 110–122 (2004)
44.146
A. Sorokin, D. Berenson, S.S. Srinivasa, M. Hebert:
People helping robots helping people: Crowd-
sourcing for grasping novel objects, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2010) pp. 2117–
2122
44.147
S. Davidson: Open-source hardware, IEEE Des.
Test Comput. 21(5), 456–456 (2004)
44.148
E. Rubow: Open Source Hardware, Tech. Rep.
http://cseweb.ucsd.edu/classes/fa08/cse237a/
topicresearch/erubow_tr_report.pdf (2008)
44.149
Arduino: http://www.arduino.cc
44.150
H.H. King, L. Cheng, P. Roan, D. Friedman, S. Nia,
J. Ma, D. Glozman, J. Rosen, B. Hannaford: Raven
II: Open platform for surgical robotics research,
Hamlyn Symp. Med. Robotics (2012)
44.151
An open-source robo-surgeon, The Economist,
http://www.economist.com/node/21548489
(2012)
44.152
L. von Ahn: Human computation, Des. Autom.
Conf. (2009) pp. 418–419
44.153
J.C. Gamboa Higuera, A. Xu, F. Shkurti, G. Dudek:
Socially-driven collective path planning for robot
missions, 9th Conf. Comput. Robot Vis. (2012)
pp. 417–424
44.154
Y. Gingold, A. Shamir, D. Cohen-Or: Micro per-
ceptual human computation for visual tasks, ACM
Trans. Graphics 31(5), 1–12 (2012)
44.155
M.
Johnson-Roberson, J.
Bohg,
G.
Skantze,
J. Gustafson, R. Carlson, B. Rasolzadeh, D. Kragic:
Enhanced visual scene understanding through
human-robot dialog, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011) pp. 3342–3348
44.156
A. Sorokin, D. Forsyth: Utility data annotation
with Amazon Mechanical Turk, IEEE Comput. Soc.
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops
(2008) pp. 1–8
44.157
C. Escolano, J. Antelis, J. Minguez: Human brain-
teleoperated robot between remote places, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2009)
pp. 4430–4437
44.158
A. Akce, M. Johnson, T. Bretl: Remote teleop-
eration of an unmanned aircraft with a brain-
machine interface: Theory and preliminary re-
sults, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2010) pp. 5322–5327
44.159
J. Roselln, R. Suárez, C. Rosales, A. Pérez: Au-
tonomous motion
planning
of a hand-arm
robotic
system
based
on
captured
human-
like hand postures, Auton. Robots 31(1), 87–102
(2011)
44.160
K. Onda, F. Arai: Parallel teleoperation of holo-
graphic optical tweezers using multi-touch user
interface, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2012) pp. 1069–1074
44.161
P.X. Liu, M. Meng, S.X. Yang: Data communications
for internet robots, Auton. Robots 15, 213–223
(2003)

Networked Robots
References
1131
Part D | 44
44.162
W. Fung, N. Xi, W. Lo, B. Song, Y. Sun, Y. Liu, I.H. El-
hajj: Task driven dynamic QOS based bandwidth
allcoation for real-time teleoperation via the in-
ternet, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2003)
44.163
F. Zeiger, N. Kraemer, K. Schilling: Commanding
mobile robots via wireless ad-hoc networks –
A comparison of four ad-hoc routing protocol
implementations, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2008) pp. 590–595
44.164
M. Amoretti, S. Bottazzi, M. Reggiani, S. Caselli:
Evaluation of data distribution techniques in a
corba-based telerobotic system, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2003)
44.165
S. Bottazzi, S. Caselli, M. Reggiani, M. Amoretti:
A software framework based on real time COBRA
for telerobotics systems, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2002)
44.166
J. Chen, E. Haas, M. Barnes: Human performance
issues and user interface design for teleoperated
robots, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. C 37(6), 1231–
1245 (2007)
44.167
Y. Jia, N. Xi, Y. Wang, X. Li: Online identification
of quality of teleoperator (QoT) for performance
improvement of telerobotic operations, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012) pp. 451–
456
44.168
S. Livatino, G. Muscato, S. Sessa, C. Koffel,
C. Arena, A. Pennisi, D. Di Mauro, F. Malkondu:
Mobile robotic teleguide based on video images,
IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 15(4), 58–67 (2008)
44.169
G. Podnar, J. Dolan, A. Elfes, S. Stancliff, E. Lin,
J. Hosier, T. Ames, J. Moisan, T. Moisan, J. Higin-
botham, E. Kulczycki: Operation of robotic science
boats using the telesupervised adaptive ocean
sensor fleet system, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2008) pp. 1061–1068
44.170
Y. Kwon, S. Rauniar: E-quality for manufactur-
ing (EQM) within the framework of internet-based
systems, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. C 37(6),
1365–1372 (2007)
44.171
L. Wang: Wise-shopfloor: An integrated approach
for web-based collaborative manufacturing, IEEE
Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. C 38(4), 562–573 (2008)
44.172
P.
Debenest,
M.
Guarnieri,
K.
Takita,
E. Fukushima, S. Hirose, K. Tamura, A. Kimura,
H. Kubokawa, N. Iwama, F. Shiga: Expliner –
Robot for inspection of transmission lines, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2008)
pp. 3978–3984
44.173
N. Pouliot, S. Montambault: Linescout technol-
ogy: From inspection to robotic maintenance on
live transmission power lines, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2009) pp. 1034–1040

1133
Multimedia Contents Moving
Part E
Part E Moving in the Environment
Ed. by Raja Chatila
45 World Modeling
Wolfram Burgard, Freiburg, Germany
Martial Hebert, Pittsburgh, USA
Maren Bennewitz, Bonn, Germany
46 Simultaneous Localization
and Mapping
Cyrill Stachniss, Bonn, Germany
John J. Leonard, Cambridge, USA
Sebastian Thrun, Mountain View, USA
47 Motion Planning
and Obstacle Avoidance
Javier Minguez, Zaragoza, Spain
Florant Lamiraux, Toulouse, France
Jean-Paul Laumond, Toulouse, France
48 Modeling and Control of Legged Robots
Pierre-Brice Wieber, Grenoble, France
Russ Tedrake, Cambridge, USA
Scott Kuindersma, Cambridge, USA
49 Modeling and Control of Wheeled
Mobile Robots
Claude Samson, Sophia-Antipolis, France
Pascal Morin, Paris, France
Roland Lenain, Aubiere, France
50 Modeling and Control of Robots
on Rough Terrain
Keiji Nagatani, Sendai, Japan
Genya Ishigami, Yokohama, Japan
Yoshito Okada, Sendai, Japan
51 Modeling and Control
of Underwater Robots
Gianluca Antonelli, Cassino, Italy
Thor I. Fossen, Trondheim, Norway
Dana R. Yoerger, Woods Hole, USA
52 Modeling and Control of Aerial Robots
Robert Mahony, Canberra, Australia
Randal W. Beard, Provo, USA
Vijay Kumar, Philadelphia, USA
53 Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
Lynne E. Parker, Knoxville, USA
Daniela Rus, Cambridge, USA
Gaurav S. Sukhatme, Los Angeles, USA

1134
Until the mid 1960s, robots were only able to move in
a predetermined workspace, the one they could reach
from their ﬁrmly ﬁxed base. Part E is about their con-
quest of the whole space. Mobile Robotics started as
a research domain in its own right in the late 1960s
with the Shakey project at SRI. 2015 marks the 50th
anniversary of this seminal project that had a lasting
legacy such as A. The seminal paper by N.J. Nils-
son A Mobile Automaton: An Application of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Techniques at the International Joint Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI) 1969, already
addressed perception, mapping, motion planning, and
the notion of control architecture. Those issues would
indeed be at the core of mobile robotics research for
the following decades. The 1980s boomed with mo-
bile robot projects, and as soon as it was necessary
to cope with the reality of the real physical world,
problems appeared that fostered novel research direc-
tions, actually moving away from the original concept
in which the robot was just an application of artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) techniques. This part addresses all the
issues that, put together, are necessary to build and con-
trol a mobile robot, except for the mechanical design
itself.
Navigation is the capacity of moving from one
location to another arbitrarily distant one. To move
efﬁciently, a robot needs to use appropriate represen-
tations of its environment in order to plan and control
its motions according to the presence of obstacles and
terrain difﬁculties, and also to use environment fea-
tures as landmarks for its localization. This is the topic
of Chapter 45 which addresses the different repre-
sentations used for indoors or outdoors environments,
including topological maps and semantic attributes.
However, building environment maps is usually
achieved incrementally, as the robot discovers its envi-
ronment while navigating in it. Hence partial percep-
tions built from different positions, need to be fused
together – taking into account sensing errors and un-
certainties (see Chapter 5, Part A) to construct a con-
sistent global map. This requires the robot to know
these positions, and, because of motion inaccuracies,
the transforms between them are uncertain. This re-
quires to reference the positions to environment features
which are only deﬁned in the environment map itself.
As a result, localization needs the map and mapping
needs localization. Hence, localization and mapping are
two interwound problems that must be solved simul-
taneously. The solution to this problem is the topic of
Chapter 46.
Once environment maps are available, or during
their construction, the robot has to plan its path as op-
timally as possible to reach its targets while avoiding
obstacles. Chapter 7 in Part A overviews the tech-
niques for solving this central problem, which requires
geometrical reasoning in the conﬁguration space (CS)
whose construction is complex. To avoid an explicit
construction of the CS, probabilistic techniques proved
the most efﬁcient way to compute paths – at the price
of optimality. However, the kinematic constraints of
the robot’s locomotion system such as non-holonomy
have to be taken into account. We see in Chapter 47
in this part how control problems cannot be separated
from geometry. This chapter addresses motion planning
from the viewpoint of mobile robotics and introduces
the tools from control theory and differential geometry
that enable to tackle kinematics constraints. In addition,
it provides an overview of local sensor-based methods
that are used when the robot encounters unknown or
mobile obstacles while moving.
The rest of this part essentially focusses on various
means of locomotion used to move in the environment:
legged locomotion (Chapter 48), robots with wheels
(Chapter 49), with tracks (Chapter 50), and underwa-
ter and aerial robots (Chapters 51 and 52 respectively)
which face the speciﬁc problems of three-dimensional
(3-D) motion with environment perturbations. In these
two last cases the close links between Robotics and
Control are of course central.
Finally, after explaining how one single robot
moves in different environments, Part E concludes
with Chapter 53 on the interaction and coordination of
multiple mobile robot systems.

Multimedia Contents World Mode
1135
Part E | 45
45. World Modeling
Wolfram Burgard, Martial Hebert, Maren Bennewitz
In this chapter we describe popular ways to rep-
resent the environment of a mobile robot. For
indoor environments, which are often stored us-
ing two-dimensional representations, we discuss
occupancy grids, line maps, topological maps, and
landmark-based representations. Each of these
techniques has its own advantages and disadvan-
tages. Whilst occupancy grid maps allow for quick
access and can efficiently be updated, line maps
are more compact. Also landmark-based maps can
efficiently be updated and maintained, however,
they do not readily support navigation tasks such
as path planning like topological representations
do.
Additionally, we discuss approaches suited
for outdoor terrain modeling. In outdoor envi-
ronments, the flat-surface assumption underling
many mapping techniques for indoor environ-
ments is no longer valid. A very popular approach
in this context are elevation and variants maps,
which store the surface of the terrain over a reg-
ularly spaced grid. Alternatives to such maps are
point clouds, meshes, or three-dimensional grids,
45.1
Historical Overview .............................. 1136
45.2 Models for Indoors
and Structured Environments............... 1137
45.2.1
Occupancy Grids........................ 1137
45.2.2 Line Maps................................. 1138
45.2.3 Topological Maps....................... 1140
45.2.4 Landmark-Based Maps .............. 1141
45.3 World and Terrain Models
for Natural Environments..................... 1141
45.3.1
Elevation Grids.......................... 1141
45.3.2 3-D Grids and Point Sets ............ 1143
45.3.3 Meshes..................................... 1145
45.3.4 Cost Maps ................................. 1145
45.3.5 Semantic Attributes ................... 1146
45.3.6 Heterogeneous
and Hierarchical Models............. 1148
45.4 Dynamic Environments ........................ 1149
45.5 Summary and Further Reading............. 1149
Video-References......................................... 1150
References................................................... 1150
which provide a greater flexibility but have higher
storage demands.
The construction of models of the environment is cru-
cial to the development of several applications of mobile
robot systems. It is through these environment mod-
els that the robot can adapt its decisions to the current
state of the world. The models are constructed from sen-
sor data as the robot discovers its environment. There
are three challenges in constructing environment mod-
els from sensor data. First, the models must be compact
so that they can be used efﬁciently by other compo-
nents of the system, such as path planners. Second, the
models must be adapted to the task and to the type of
environment. For example, modeling the environment
as a set of planes is not relevant to a robot operating in
natural terrain. In particular, this implies that a univer-
sal representation for mobile robots in not possible and
that we must instead choose from an array of different
approaches. Third, the representation must accommo-
date the uncertainty inherent to both sensor data and to
the robot’s state estimation system. The latter point is
particular important since environment models typically
accumulate sensor readings over substantial distances
into a common reference frame. Drift in position esti-
mates are unavoidable and must be accounted for in the
model representation and in its construction.

Part E | 45.1
1136
Part E
Moving in the Environment
45.1 Historical Overview
Historically, work in this area concentrated ﬁrst on
robots operating in indoor environments. In that case,
the models take advantage of the fact that the world
can be represented as vertical structures on reference
ground planes. This simpliﬁcation can be used for rep-
resenting the world as a two-dimensional (2-D) grid.
Uncertainty in the measurements and in the robot’s pose
can then be modeled by using probabilities of occu-
pancy in the grid rather than binary occupied/empty
ﬂags. Another feature of indoor environments is that
they are highly structured in that they contain primarily
linear structures such as lines and planes. This obser-
vations led to a second class of representations based
on collections of points, lines, and planes to represent
the environment. Here again, a lot of attention was paid
to representing the uncertainty on the relative poses
of these geometric elements, including a considerable
amount of work in the 1980s on using Kalman ﬁlters
and other probabilistic techniques.
With continued progress on sensing (e.g., three-
dimensional laser range scanners and stereo vision), and
on mechanical and controls aspects of mobile robots
systems, it became possible to develop mobile robot
systems for operations in unstructured, natural terrain,
motivated in part by planetary exploration and military
applications. In these scenarios, it is no longer appropri-
ate to project the data in a 2-D grid, and environments
cannot be described adequately by a small vocabulary
of geometric elements. Since, in most cases, it is still
appropriate to assume (at least locally) that there is
a reference ground plane, a natural representation is
a two-and-a half-dimensional 2.5-D grid, in which each
cell contains the elevation (and possibly other features)
of the terrain at that location. Although they have been
used extensively, the main challenges with such eleva-
tion maps are that they are not compact representations
and that it is difﬁcult to incorporate uncertainty in the
representation. Accordingly, much of the research has
focused on designing efﬁcient data structures and al-
gorithms for elevation maps, for example, hierarchical
representations. Recently, the uncertainty challenge has
been tackled by using probabilistic variants of elevation
maps.
While elevation maps provide a natural represen-
tation for many types of natural terrains, they cannot
represent environments with vertical or overhanging
structures. This limitation has become more evident in
recent years as applications of mobile robots are in-
creasingly demanding operation in urban environment
(in which building walls and other structures cannot be
represented by elevation maps) and the use of aerial
data, which involves overhanging structures such as tree
canopies. This has led to the development of represen-
tations that are truly three-dimensional (3-D), such as
point clouds, 3-D grids, and meshes. The two chal-
lenges described above apply here as well, except that
the situation is more complicated because of the in-
creased complexity introduced by the third dimension.
Current research includes efﬁcient computation over
3-D structures and probabilistic representations of 3-D
data.
Because of the large volume of data involved in all
of these representations, it is important to be able to
group the data into larger chunks corresponding to se-
mantically meaningful parts of the environment. This
can be done at different levels, depending on the ap-
plication the environment. At the lowest level, work
in this area involves classifying the points into classes
that are relevant to navigation tasks (e.g., distinguish-
ing between vegetation and ground, extracting walls,
tree surfaces, etc.). At an intermediate level of repre-
sentation, this part of the work involves extracting parts
of the environments that are considered landmarks of
interest for the navigation task (e.g., roads). Finally,
the highest representation level involves extracting and
representing objects in the environments (e.g., natural
obstacles, or speciﬁc objects such as cars for operation
in urban environments).
All of these representations assume a static envi-
ronment. In fact, many of the current applications of
mobile robots call for operation in mixed environments
in which the robot shares its environments with other
moving agents, including other robots, people, and ve-
hicles. Assuming that perception algorithms are able to
detect and track individual moving objects in the envi-
ronment, the challenge here is to insert this information
into a representation that can be used by a planner. In
this case, any one of the previous representations can
be used as a foundation, but it needs to be extended to
handle the temporal dimension by storing a history of
the locations and states of the detected objects. Such
representations include the trajectories of the detected
objects and, in some cases, information on the future
predicted trajectories of the objects.

World Modeling
45.2 Models for Indoors and Structured Environments
1137
Part E | 45.2
45.2 Models for Indoors and Structured Environments
45.2.1 Occupancy Grids
Occupancy grid maps, which were introduced in the
1980s by Moravec and Elfes [45.1], are a popular, prob-
abilistic approach to represent the environment. They
are an approximative technique in which we calculate
for each cell of a discrete grid the posterior probability
that the corresponding area in the environment is occu-
pied by an obstacle. The advantage of occupancy grid
maps lies in the fact that they do not rely on any prede-
ﬁned features. Additionally, they offer a constant-time
access to grid cells and provide the ability to represent
unknown (unobserved) areas, which can be important,
for example, in exploration tasks. Their disadvantage
lies in potential discretization errors and the high mem-
ory requirements.
Throughout this section we assume that the map m
consists of a discrete, two-dimensional grid of L cells
denoted as m1; : : : ; mL. Given the sensory input z1Wt ob-
tained by the robot at the corresponding positions x1Wt,
the occupancy grid mapping approach calculates a pos-
terior probability p.m j x1Wt; z1Wt/.
To keep the calculations tractable, the overall ap-
proach assumes that the individual cells of the grid
are independent, i. e., that the following equation
holds
p.m j x1Wt; z1Wt/ D
L
Y
lD1
p.ml j x1Wt; z1Wt/ :
(45.1)
Note that this assumption is rather strong. It basically
states that any information about the occupancy of one
cell does not tell us anything about its neighboring cells.
In practice, we often ﬁnd objects that are larger than
the individual grid cells, like doors, cabinets, chairs etc.
Thus, if we know that one cell is occupied, for each
of its neighboring cells the probability raises that it is
occupied. Despite this fact, occupancy grid maps have
been successfully applied in numerous installations of
mobile robots and have been proven to be a powerful
tool that supports various navigation tasks such as lo-
calization and path planning.
Because of the independence assumption expressed
by (45.1) we can concentrate on the estimation of the
occupancy probability of the individual cells ml in m.
Under additional independence assumptions one can ﬁ-
nally arrive at the following formula for calculating the
occupancy probability p.ml j x1Wt; z1Wt/ that cell ml is oc-
cupied given the prior probability p.ml j x1Wt1; z1Wt1/
and the new observation zt observed at position xt
p.ml j x1Wt; z1Wt/
D

1 C .1  p.ml j xt; zt//
p.ml j xt; zt/

p.ml/
.1  p.ml//
1  p.ml j x1Wt1; z1Wt1/
p.ml j x1Wt1; z1Wt1/
1
:
(45.2)
In practice, one often assumes that the prior p.ml/ is 0:5
so that the second factor in the product becomes 1 and
therefore vanishes from the equation.
Additionally, if we deﬁne
Odds.x/ D
p.x/
1  p.x/ ;
(45.3)
the incremental updates can be computed using the fol-
lowing equation
Odds.ml j x1Wt; z1Wt/
D Odds.ml j xt; zt/  Odds.ml/1
 Odds.ml j x1Wt1; z1Wt1/ :
(45.4)
To recover the occupancy probability from the Odds
representation given in (45.4), one can use the follow-
ing formula, which can easily be derived using (45.3)
p.x/ D
Odds.x/
1 C Odds.x/ :
(45.5)
It remains to describe how to compute the oc-
cupancy probability p.ml j xt; zt/ of a grid cell given
a single observation zt and the corresponding pose xt of
the robot. This quantity strongly depends on the sensor
of the robot and has to be deﬁned individually for each
type of sensor. Additionally, the parameters of these
models have to be adapted according to the properties of
each sensor. Let us assume that the function dist.xt; ml/
refers to the distance between the sensor at pose xt and
the center of the cell ml. Let us ﬁrst assume that we only
need to consider the optical axis of the sensor cone as is,
for example, the case for laser beams sent out by a laser
range ﬁnder. Then, p.ml j xt; zt/ can be formulated as
p.ml j xt; zt/ D
8
ˆˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆˆ:
pprior;
zt is a maximum range
reading
pprior;
ml is not covered by zt
pocc;
jzt  dist.xt; ml/j < r=2
pfree;
zt  dist.xt; ml/
;
(45.6)

Part E | 45.2
1138
Part E
Moving in the Environment
0
0.4
0
0.2
0.2
–0.2
–0.4
2.5
x
y
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0
0.4
0
–0.2
–0.4
2.5
x
y
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
a)
b)
Fig.45.1a,b Occupancy probability introduced by a single ultrasound measurement of (a) z D 2:0 m and (b) z D 2:5 m
(after [45.2])
where r is the resolution of the grid map. Obviously, it
must hold 0 	 pfree < pprior < pocc 	 1.
If a sonar sensor is used, the sensor model is slightly
more complicated, since the sensor is not a beam sen-
sor and the observations are more noisy than the ones
of a laser range ﬁnder. To deal with these properties,
one can use a mixture of three functions to express the
model. First, the inﬂuence of an observation (which is
represented by the difference between pprior and pocc as
well as between pprior and pfree) decreases with the mea-
sured distance. Second, the proximity information of
a sonar is substantially affected by noise. This can be
considered by employing a piecewise linear function to
model a smooth transition from pfree to pocc. Finally, the
sonar sensor should not be modeled as a beam sensor,
since it sends out a conic signal. The accuracy of an ob-
servation decreases with the angular distance between
the cell under consideration and the optical axis of the
observation. This is expressed by the derivation from
the prior and is typically modeled using a Gaussian with
zero mean. Therefore, it is maximal along the optical
axis and decreases the bigger the angular distance form
the optical axis is [45.2].
Two examples of resulting models are depicted in
Fig. 45.1, which shows two three-dimensional plots of
the resulting occupancy probabilities for a measurement
of 2 m (Fig. 45.1a) and 2:5 m (Fig. 45.1b). In this ﬁgure,
the optical axis of the sensor cone was identical with
the x-axis and the sensor was placed in the origin of the
coordinate frame. As can be seen, the occupancy prob-
ability is high for cells whose distance to xt is close to
zt. It decreases for cells with shorter distance than zt as
well as with increasing values of the angular distance.
Figure 45.2 depicts the mapping process for a se-
quence of observations recorded with an iRobot B21r
robot. The ﬁrst row shows how a map was built from
a sequence of previous ultrasound scans. Afterwards the
robot perceived a series of 18 ultrasound scans, each
consisting of 24 measurements. The occupancy proba-
bilities for these 18 scans are depicted in rows 27. The
occupancy probability grid obtained by integrating the
individual observations into the map is shown in the last
row of this ﬁgure. As can be seen, the belief converges
to a representation of the corridor structure in which the
scans where recorded. A typical resulting map obtained
for an indoor environment is depicted in Fig. 45.3.
45.2.2 Line Maps
The representation of the environment by line models is
a popular alternative to the grid-based approximations
described above. Line models have several advantages
over these nonparametric representations. They require
substantially less memory than grids and therefore scale
better with the size of the environment. They further-
more are more accurate since they do not suffer from
discretization problems. In this section, we consider the
problem of calculating lines that provide the approxi-
mation of a set of range points by a line. If the data
points are given by n pairs .xi; yi/ of Cartesian coordi-
nates, the line that minimizes the squared distances to
all points can be calculated in closed form according to
tan 2 D
2 P
i.Nx  xi/.Ny  yi/
P
i Œ.Ny  yi/2  .Nx  xi/2 ;
(45.7)
r D Nx cos  C Ny sin  ;
(45.8)
where Nx D 1
n
P
i xi and Ny D 1
n
P
i yi. In these equations,
r is the normal distance of the line from the origin and 
is angle of the normal.

World Modeling
45.2 Models for Indoors and Structured Environments
1139
Part E | 45.2
Unfortunately, there is no closed-form solution for
situations in which the data points are generated by
multiple linear structures. In such a situation two prob-
lems arise. First one has to answer the question how
many lines there are, and second one has to solve a data
association problem, which is to ﬁnd the assignment of
the data points to the individual lines. Once the num-
ber of lines and the associations are known, we can
apply (45.7) and (45.8) to calculate the individual line
parameters.
There is a popular approach to solve this problem
for range scans with multiple linear structures. This ap-
proach, which goes back to the work of Douglas and
Peucker [45.3], is also known as the split-and-merge
algorithm. Its key idea is to recursively subdivide the
point set into subsets that can be more accurately ap-
proximated by a line. The approach starts with the line
calculated from all data points and determines the data
point with maximum distance from this line. If this
distance is below a given threshold, the algorithm termi-
nates and provides the ﬁtted line as output. Otherwise,
it calculates the point with the largest distance from the
line that connects the ﬁrst and the last point. This point
is the so-called splitting point. It then divides the point
set into two subsets, one containing all points from the
ﬁrst up to the splitting point and one containing all
points after the splitting point. The algorithm is then re-
cursively applied to the two subsets. Figure 45.4 shows
a visualization of the procedure.
Whereas the split-and-merge algorithm is quite ef-
fective and efﬁcient, it is not guaranteed that the result-
ing model is actually optimal, i. e., is the model that
minimizes the squared distances of all data points. One
approach that is able to ﬁnd such a model is based on
the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm, which in
the application described here can be regarded as a vari-
ant of the fuzzy k-means clustering algorithm. Let us
suppose that the number m of lines in the model  is
known. Let us furthermore suppose that the likelihood
of a data point z D .x; y/ given the model  consisting
of the line set f1; : : : ; mg is deﬁned as
p.z j / D
1
p
2
exp

1
2
d.z; k/2
2

;
(45.9)
where  is the standard deviation of the measurement
noise and k is the line for which Euclidean distance
d.z;k/ to z is minimal.
The goal of the EM algorithm is to generate an it-
erated sequence of models of increased likelihood. To
achieve this, one introduces so-called correspondence
variables cij 2 f0; 1g that specify to which linear compo-
nent of the model each point belongs. Since the correct
values of these assignment variables are unknown, one
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Fig. 45.2 Incremental mapping in a corridor environment. The up-
per left image shows the initial map and the lower one shows the
resulting map. The maps in between are the local maps built from
the individual ultrasound scans perceived by the robot (after [45.2])
Fig. 45.3 Occupancy grid map obtained from ultrasound
data (after [45.2])
estimates a posterior about their values. Let j be a com-
ponent of the model and zi be a measurement. Then the
expectation about cij, i. e., that measurement i belongs

Part E | 45.2
1140
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Fig. 45.4 Split-and-merge algorithm applied to a point set
to line j is computed in the E-step as
EŒcij j j; zi D p.cij j j; zi/ ;
(45.10)
D ˛p.zi j cij; j/p.cij j j/ ;
(45.11)
D ˛0p.zi j j/ :
(45.12)
In the M-step, the algorithm then computes the param-
eters of the model by taking into account the expecta-
tions computed in the E-step

j D arg min
0
j
X
i
X
j
EŒcij j j; zid2.zi; 0
j / :
(45.13)
Given a ﬁxed variance  for all data points in z we can
determine the most likely model in closed form accord-
ing to the following equations, which are probabilistic
variants of (45.7) and (45.8) that take into account the
data association uncertainty given by the expectations
calculated in the E-step
tan 2j D
2 P
i EŒcijjj; zi.Nx  xi/.Ny  yi/
P
i EŒcijjj; ziŒ.Ny  yi/2  .Nx  xi/2 ;
(45.14)
rj D Nx cos j C Ny sin j :
(45.15)
Here Nx and Ny are computed as
Nx D
P
i EŒcijjj; zixi
P
i EŒcijjj; zi ;
Ny D
P
i EŒcijjj; ziyi
P
i EŒcijjj; zi :
(45.16)
Figure 45.5 depicts a line map extracted from 311 823
data points using the EM-based approach. In this ex-
ample, the model consists of 94 lines. One approach to
Fig. 45.5 Line map consisting of 94 lines generated for
311 823 range points generated with the EM-based ap-
proach (after [45.4])
determine the optimal number of lines is to utilize the
Bayesian information criterion [45.4].
45.2.3 Topological Maps
In contrast to the previously discussed representations,
which mainly focus on the geometric structure of the
environment, topological representations have also re-
ceived signiﬁcant attraction. One of the pioneering ap-
proaches to topological mapping, which has been pre-
sented in 1988, is the work by Kuipers and Byun [45.7].
In this approach, the environment is represented by
a graph-like structure, in which the nodes are locally
distinguishable places and the nodes are travel edges
along which the robot can move between the places
(
VIDEO 270 ). Here, distinctive places are identiﬁed
according to the distance to nearby objects. The dis-
tinctive places were been deﬁned by Choset and Na-
gatani [45.8] as the meet-points in the generalized
Voronoi diagrams, i. e., the points with an out-degree
of three or more. A generalized Voronoi diagram is
the set of points equidistant from the closest two or
more obstacle boundaries. Generalized Voronoi dia-
grams are a very popular representation as they can be
considered as road-maps with a high correspondence
to the topological structure of the environment. They
Fig. 45.6 Example of a generalized Voronoi graph (af-
ter [45.5])

World Modeling
45.3 World and Terrain Models for Natural Environments
1141
Part E | 45.3
b)
a)
Fig. 45.7 (a) Mobile robot mapping
a set of stone rocks. The image
(b) depicts the path and the estimated
landmark positions. The manually
determined positions of the rocks are
marked by circles (after [45.6])
have been used extensively for path planning. To plan
a path from a starting position to a goal point in the
environment, all the robot has to do is to ﬁrst plan
a path to the generalized Voronoi graph, than along
the generalized Voronoi graph, and then from the gen-
eralized Voronoi graph to the goal point [45.8]. Fig-
ure 45.6 shows an example generalized Voronoi graph
for an indoor environment. Note that in this ﬁgure
only those parts of the graph that can be traversed
by the robot without colliding with objects are dis-
played.
45.2.4 Landmark-Based Maps
For environments with locally distinguishable features,
landmark-based maps have been extensively used. If we
assume that the position of the robot is always known, it
simply remains to maintain an estimate about the posi-
tions of the individual landmarks over time. In a planar
environment, m is represented by K two-dimensional
Gaussians with mean k and covariance ˙k, one for
each landmark. If a linearized version of the perception
problem is given, the individual Gaussians can be up-
dated using the equations for the extended Kalman ﬁlter.
Note that, compared to the use of the extended Kalman
ﬁlter EKF for landmark-based simultaneous localiza-
tion and mapping (SLAM), where we needed a 2K C3-
dimensional state vector (3 dimensions for the position
of the robot and 2K dimensions for the positions of the
individual landmarks), we only need K two-dimensional
Gaussians to represent the entire map since the robot
pose is known. This property, for example, has been uti-
lized in the FastSLAM algorithm [45.6]. Over the last
few years, the graph-based SLAM paradigm has be-
come a popular approach for estimating landmark maps
due to their ability of relinearizing the motion and the
measurement functions (for more details see Chap. 46).
Figure 45.7a shows a robot equipped with a SICK
laser range ﬁnder that maps the position of rocks. The
right image depicts the path of the vehicle as well as
the manually determined and automatically estimated
landmark positions.
45.3 World and Terrain Models for Natural Environments
From a survey of environment modeling [45.9] with an
emphasis on probabilistic techniques for indoor envi-
ronments, a taxonomy can be created along several axis:
metric versus topological versus semantic, robot-centric
versus world-centric, or application-based. We choose
to ﬁrst review purely geometric models (elevation grid,
3-D grid, meshes), then geometric models with low-
level attributes (cost maps), and then models with richer
semantic attributes, to ﬁnish with heterogeneous and hi-
erarchical models.
45.3.1 Elevation Grids
Assuming that the terrain can be represented as a func-
tion h D f .x; y/, where x and y are the coordinates of
a reference place and h is the corresponding eleva-
tion. A natural representation is a digital elevation map
which stores the value of h at discrete locations .xi; yi/.
Because they are simple data structures and can be gen-
erated from sensor data in a relatively straightforward
manner, elevation maps have been used extensively for
mobile robots operating in natural environments with
no vertical surfaces or overhangs (e.g., for planetary ex-
ploration scenarios [45.10]). Several issues need to be
addressed when using elevation maps for mobile robots.
A regularly sampled grid is appropriate when the
sensor data is roughly uniformly distributed on the ref-
erence plane. This is the case, for example, with aerial
data. For ground robots, however, the distribution of the
data on the reference ground plane varies dramatically

Part E | 45.3
1142
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Fig. 45.8 Example elevation map built by accumulating 3-D data
from a range sensor
because of the small incidence angles with the refer-
ence plane. This can be addressed by using variable-size
cells instead of regularly sampled cells. In that case,
the distribution of the cells on the reference plane is
designed to approximate the distribution of points that
would be measured by the sensor on this reference
plane. Such nonuniform representations are useful pri-
marily in cases in which the map is referenced to the
current position of the robot [45.11] (Fig. 45.9). Fre-
quent resampling is needed if the map is expressed in
a global reference frame.
Irrespective of the sampling scheme used to con-
struct the reference grid, the density of data in the grid
varies due to local self-occlusions of the terrain surface
and to mismatches between the resolution of the pro-
jected sensor data and the resolution of the grid. This
can be problematic because, from the point of view of
a planner, the elevation map would appear as a scat-
tering of cells with elevation data and cells with no
evidence (Fig. 45.8). Various schemes have been pro-
posed to remedy this problem. The basic idea is to
estimate the elevation values of the empty cells by in-
terpolating across the cells with know elevation values.
This has to be done with great care to avoid ﬁlling
up regions that correspond to parts of the environment
Fig. 45.9 Example of a robot-centric map with variable
size (after [45.11])
occluded by the terrain (range shadows) in which ele-
vation data should not be inferred. Such mistakes can be
catastrophic since a planner may generate paths through
areas that are entirely unknown. One general approach
to this problem is to use surface interpolation tech-
niques including a term that allows for discontinuities in
the resulting surfaces [45.12]. An alternative approach
is to use the visibility constraints induced by the known
geometry of the sensor in order to estimate plausible
values of elevation at each cell [45.13, 14].
A difﬁculty in interpolating techniques is to explic-
itly take into account the sensor uncertainty. In partic-
ular, it is difﬁcult to account for the varying resolution
of the sensor as a function of range in a ﬁxed-resolution
grid. An alternative is to use multiple grids at differ-
ent resolutions. The appropriate resolution to be used
at a particular point .x; y/ can be decided based on the
range from .x; y/ to the closest sensor location to re-
trieve the value at .x; y/ from the appropriate map for
that resolution. Generally, coarser map resolutions are
used for longer ranges. This approach eliminates the
gaps in the map due to undersampling at long range
from the sensor by using the optimal resolution based
on sensor geometry [45.15].
Uncertainty in the sensor measurement is expressed
most naturally with respect to the sensor frame, for ex-
ample, by expressing the uncertainty in the direction
of the measurement. As a result, converting such un-
certainty models to elevation maps is difﬁcult because
a distribution in the direction of the measurement maps
to a distribution in the reference plane, not a distribu-
tion on the elevation value at a particular grid point.
When updating a cell based on sensory input, one has
to take into account that the uncertainty in a measure-
ment increases with the distance measured due to errors
in the tilting angle. A popular approach to estimate the
height h at location .x; y/ is to use a Kalman ﬁlter. If
we assume that  is the standard deviation of the cur-
rent measurement h in the vertical direction in .x; y/
and t1 is the standard deviation of the current esti-
mate or ht1, we can apply the following equations to
Fig. 45.10 The standard deviation of a height measure-
ments can be modeled to depend linearly on the distance
of the grid cell to the sensor

World Modeling
45.3 World and Terrain Models for Natural Environments
1143
Part E | 45.3
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.45.11a–d Different versions of digital elevation maps (after [45.16]): (a) scan (point set) of a bridge, (b) a standard elevation
map computed from this data set, (c) an extended elevation map, which correctly represents the underpass under the bridge, and
(d) a multilevel surface map that correctly represents the height of the vertical objects
obtain the new estimate ht with standard deviation t,
ht D 2ht1 C 2
t1h
2
t1 C 2
;
(45.17)
2
t D
2
t12
2
t1 C 2 :
(45.18)
One possible solution to deal with varying uncertain-
ties is to use a model in which the standard deviation
of the height of a measurement increases linearly with
the length of the range measurement, as indicated in
Fig. 45.10.
Vegetation cover is another source of error in the
recovery of terrain elevation by totally or partially oc-
cluding the ground surface from the vehicle sensors.
Online learning techniques can address this issue by
predicting ground elevation ahead of the vehicle based
on past appearance observations of similar terrain and
vehicle state over the terrain [45.17].
Intermediate representations between 2-D elevation
maps and full 3-D representations, addressed below, are
extended elevation maps [45.18] and so-called multi-
level surface maps [45.16]. Such approaches are specif-
ically useful in structured terrain with vertical objects
or overhangs such as bridges (Fig. 45.11).
45.3.2 3-D Grids and Point Sets
Elevation maps as described above assume a reference
direction. In many cases, that assumption is violated.
An alternative is to represent the data directly in 3-D
without projecting it on a reference 2-D plane. The ad-
vantage of doing this is that all the sensor data can
be preserved in its original distribution and that there
is no restriction on the geometry of the environment.
Figure. 45.12 shows an example representation using
3-D points. The drawbacks of SLAM systems oper-
ating on such point clouds [45.19–21] is that neither
free space nor unknown areas can be modeled and that
sensor noise and dynamic objects cannot be dealt with
directly. Another problem is that very large sets of 3-D
points are difﬁcult to handle efﬁciently. The point cloud
library [45.22] addresses this problem by providing an
octree-based implementation to store and address large
point clouds in an efﬁcient manner.
Data structures based on dynamic 3-D grids can
also be used for this purpose [45.26]. An interesting
characteristic of these representations is that they en-
able the computation of cost evaluated from the true
local 3-D distribution of the data (as opposed to costs
a)
b)
Fig.45.12a,b Example of mapping and classiﬁcation of
3-D point sets: (a) 3-D data and classiﬁcation result (green
D vegetation, red D surfaces, blue D lines; the saturation
of the color is proportional to the conﬁdence in the classi-
ﬁcation result); (b) map accumulated over a large number
of scans

Part E | 45.3
1144
Part E
Moving in the Environment
15
10
–5
0
5
a)
b)
X (m)
Y (m)
h
3
2
1
0
–1
Fig.45.13a,b Examples of volumetric maps for a natural environment. Whereas (a) shows a map of an underwater cave
(after [45.23]), (b) depicts a terrain map obtained from a radar (after [45.24])
Fig. 45.14 Resulting octree-based representation of an outdoor environment at 0:2 m resolution (size of the scene:
292 m  167 m  28 m) (after [45.25]). For clarity, only occupied volumes are shown with height visualized by a color
(gray scale) coding
computed from a local surface z D f .x; y/). This is im-
portant, for example, in environments with vegetation
scatter, which cannot be modeled as a surface.
Extensions of occupancy grids to dense 3-D oc-
cupancy grids have been used successfully to model
natural environments using a radar [45.24]. For more ef-
ﬁciently maintaining 3-D representations of even large-
scale environments, also tree-based representations can
been employed. In particular, octree-based 3-D repre-
sentations have been employed, for example, to map
an underwater cave from several sonars mounted on
an underwater vehicle [45.23]. Example maps for these
methods are presented in Fig. 45.13.
The OctoMap approach [45.27] uses octrees and
supports a compact memory representation, multireso-
lution queries, and probabilistic occupancy estimates.
The volumetric representation of space allows for ex-
plicitly representing free space and unknown areas.
To exploit hierarchical dependencies in the environ-
ment it can be extended to maintain a collection of
submaps in a tree-structure, where each node represents
a subspace of the environment [45.28]. Figure. 45.14
and
VIDEO 79
show an example outdoor map ac-
quired from laser data and built by OctoMap. The
OctoMap framework has been used successfully for
various tasks including autonomous navigation with air
vehicles [45.29], humanoid navigation in multilevel in-
door environments [45.30], and mobile manipulation in
cluttered environments [45.31, 32] where volumetric in-
formation is necessary to plan paths.

World Modeling
45.3 World and Terrain Models for Natural Environments
1145
Part E | 45.3
a)
b)
c)
Fig.45.15a–c Two views (b–c) of the mesh representation of a map (a) obtained by scanning an environment.The meshes
are reduced by a factor of 10 from the initial data
In the approaches mentioned above, the data sets
are accumulated, sometimes probabilistically, into dis-
crete environment volumes. A different approach is to
represent the environment with discrete sensor samples
integrated probabilistically into a metric map [45.33].
Such an approach is different from occupancy grids in
several aspects: the storage requirement and resolution
is adaptive instead of ﬁxed and the potential for exten-
sibility and scalability is higher.
45.3.3 Meshes
As described above, elevation maps are compact and
easy to implement but they are restricted to a particular
class of terrain; at the other extreme, using 3-D repre-
sentations directly is more general but it is also more
expensive computationally, and it does not represent ex-
plicitly surface continuity. A compromise is to represent
the map by a mesh. This approach is attractive because
it can, in principle, represent any combination of sur-
faces. It is also a compact representation in that, even
though the size of the mesh may be initially very large,
efﬁcient mesh simpliﬁcation algorithms exist in the lit-
erature [45.34] and can be used to reduce the map to
a small number of vertices.
The key issue with meshes is that extraction of
the correct surfaces from raw data can be difﬁcult in
complex environments. In practice, the data may be
corrupted by sensor noise and by random clutter from
other sources, such as vegetation, which cannot be rep-
resented as a continuous surface. In addition, it is nec-
essary to precisely detect discontinuities in the data so
that disconnected pieces of surface do not become acci-
dentally linked in the mesh formation process [45.18].
Figure 45.15 shows typical mesh representations of an
urban environment.
In some applications, the objective is to produce
terrain models not to support autonomous navigation
but to produce a model to be visualized to a human.
City planning is a typical application. Examples include
producing 3-D texture models of urban environments
using videos from a camera mounted on a moving vehi-
cle equipped with an inertial navigation system [45.35]
(
VIDEO 269 ), using two laser scanners in push-broom
mode, one for mapping and the other for localiza-
tion [45.36], with a camera coregistered with the map-
ping laser, and collecting high-resolution laser data and
imagery to produce geometric and photometric correct
3-D models of buildings [45.37]. Figure 45.16 depicts
examples of textured meshes representing urban terrain.
45.3.4 Cost Maps
The most direct use of elevation maps is to compute
traversability costs at each cell of the grid. The costs
are computed by comparing the local terrain shape with
a kinematic model of the robot. Several approaches
have been proposed for computing the costs depending
on the exact vehicle model; for example, a cost can be
computed by considering the local slope and 3-D tex-
ture of the terrain [45.38]. More involved models take
into account a detailed model of the robot dynamics. In
that case, different costs are generated for different pos-
sible robot speeds and path curvatures. The cost grid is
used in a minimum-cost planner (
VIDEO 271 ). Since
the terrain map is updated continuously as the robot tra-
verses the environment, it is also necessary to update the
costs continuously as new data arrives. Consequently, it
is important that the planner is able to support changing
costs without needing to process the entire grid every
time new data is inserted.
An example of such a combination of grid repre-
sentation and dynamic planner is the D* system, which
uses a version of A* that fully supports dynamic grid
updates [45.39–41]. Whenever a grid cell (or a group of
grid cells) is updated, the planner makes minimal up-
dates to its internal representation so that the optimal
path can be updated quickly.

Part E | 45.3
1146
Part E
Moving in the Environment
a)
b)
c)
Fig.45.16a–c Examples of urban terrain modeled as a textured mesh (a) (after [45.35]), (b) (after [45.37]), and (c)
(after [45.36])
Deﬁning the exact relation between the costs and
the elevation values stored in the grid can be quite
difﬁcult. In fact, beyond the limiting cases of terrain
with large elevation gradient or large slope, there is lit-
tle guidance as to why a particular part of the terrain
may be more traversable than another as it depends
critically on the exact conﬁguration of the robot. For
this reason, recent work has focused on deriving cost
maps directly from observations, rather than by using
handcrafted algorithms. One approach involves learn-
ing the best weights to combine a set of predeﬁned
Fig. 45.17 Example
of
online
learning
of
cost
(af-
ter [45.42]). The vehicle trajectory is represented in red.
As the vehicle progresses, note the change in cost over all
the map. The darker the appearance, the lower the cost
costs. Another approach uses costs computed from
other sources for inferring how to determine the costs
on the terrain currently seen by the robot; for exam-
ple, data from overhead imagery can be used to predict
the traversability costs that should be used for a ground
robot [45.42] (Fig. 45.17) or for learning to map local
elevation distributions to costs values by analyzing ac-
tual robot trajectories through the terrain. Similar online
learning approaches are used to predict terrain rough-
ness [45.43], terrain slippage [45.44], or traversability
in general [45.45, 46] to be used in a cost map.
45.3.5 Semantic Attributes
The representations described above are concerned only
with storing the data in a way that is compact and that
can be used to estimate drivability costs. Often it is
necessary to reason with high-level knowledge about
the environment, e.g., the location and types of ob-
jects around the robot or the type of terrain (vegetation,
mud, wall) in the environment. For convenience we
will refer to this type of information as semantic at-
tributes attached to different parts of the environment.
There are several different ways to approach the prob-
lem of generating and representing semantic attributes.
One possible direction is to approach the problem as

World Modeling
45.3 World and Terrain Models for Natural Environments
1147
Part E | 45.3
one of extracting landmarks from the environment. As
for their indoor counterparts, outdoor environments can
also be modeled using landmarks. Landmarks are de-
ﬁned broadly as scene elements easy to detect, salient
in their surroundings, and easy to recognize. They can
be speciﬁc objects, such as rocks [45.47], tree trunks in
forest [45.48], or locations with a distinct appearance
signature in 2-D or 3-D, for urban terrain [45.49, 50] or
natural environments [45.51]. Landmarks can be used
to produce topological representations of the environ-
ment or used in conjunction with metric maps. Recent
efforts involve learning a compact representation of en-
vironments without deﬁning a priori what a landmark
should be [45.52, 53] or using statistical learning tech-
niques [45.54] to extract new features from images.
Nonlinear dimension-reduction techniques are used to
obtain the representation and the results were demon-
strated onboard ground and aerial vehicles (Fig. 45.18).
Another view of the problem is as a classiﬁcation
and grouping problem. Indeed, the map representations
described in the earlier sections are low-level represen-
tations in that they do not attempt to group the data
points into larger structures that are coherent with re-
spect to geometry, terrain type, or semantic content. In
practice, one would like to abstract the data into larger
units that can be used by a planner or transmitted to
another robot or an operator; for example, in an urban
environment, one would like to group the parts of the
data that belong to planes corresponding to pieces of
walls. One such example is presented in Fig. 45.19.
One approach is to group 3-D points into com-
ponents based on low-level classiﬁcation and feature
detection [45.58]. The shape of these component is an-
alyzed further to discriminate between various natural
object components (tree trunks, branches) and man-
made obstacle (wires). Geometric primitives are then
ﬁtted to the components (mesh for the ground surface,
ball tree for the vegetation, and cylinder to branches) to
produce a compact high-level geometric description of
the terrain.
Local terrain classiﬁcation can be achieved by com-
puting local features from the map and classifying each
element of the map in different classes of terrain. This
can be done from an elevation map, in which case the
elements are the cells of the elevation map, or from
a point cloud representation in which case the elements
are 3-D locations. Given a location in the map x, a fea-
ture vector is V.x/ is computed in a neighborhood N.x/
of x and a classiﬁer f .V/ returns the type of terrain at x.
Features that have been used in the past are statistics of
the distribution of the map data around each element,
such as the slope and distribution of elevation [45.59],
and the second-order moment of the distribution of
the 3-D points in a neighborhood [45.58]. The ter-
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
Fig. 45.18 Sample image and low-dimensional embedding of ran-
domly sampled high-dimensional image patches (after [45.53])
Fig. 45.19 Terrain classiﬁcation and extraction of geomet-
ric features.Whereas the 3-D data is shown on the left, the
feature map with extracted planes and vegetation regions
is shown on the right (after [45.55])
rain classes depend on the application. The most direct
classiﬁcation approach uses a binary classiﬁer that sep-
arates the terrain into obstacle regions and traversable
regions. More involved classiﬁers segment the map into
more classes such as vegetation, solid surfaces, and
linear structures [45.13, 58, 60]; an example is shown
in Fig. 45.12. In some cases, it is possible to store,
with each data element x in the map, the direction in
which a measurement was taken for this element. In this
case, it is possible to reﬁne the classiﬁcation by rea-

Part E | 45.3
1148
Part E
Moving in the Environment
b)
a)
Fig. 45.20 (a) Structure learning for
terrain classiﬁcation (after [45.56])
and (b) building features extraction
(after [45.57])
soning about the intersection of the measurement ray
d.x/ with the rest of map; for example, this type of geo-
metric reasoning [45.61] has been exploited to recover
the load-bearing surface obscured by vegetation [45.51,
62, 63] and for extracting negative obstacles (such as
ditches) [45.64]. In all of these cases, the classiﬁca-
tion information cannot be recovered directly from local
statistics and must be inferred from longer-range geo-
metric reasoning.
This class of approaches to local feature classiﬁca-
tion is similar to approaches for extracting features from
images and it suffers from similar limitations. Speciﬁ-
cally, these representations are sensitive to the choice
of neighborhood used for computing the features. If
it is too large, information over a large area is aver-
aged out, leading to poor classiﬁcation performance.
If it is too small, there is not enough information in
the neighborhood for reliable classiﬁcation. The situ-
ation is complicated by the fact that the resolution of
the map, or more precisely the density of data points
in the map, may vary drastically as the distance from
the sensor changes. This problem is addressed by using
different neighborhood sizes at different locations in the
map, or by tuning the classiﬁer differently depending on
the map location, typically based on distance from the
sensor [45.15, 65]. A second problem is to generate the
classiﬁer f . This can be done by using a physical model
that predicts the statistics of the local data distribution in
the map assuming different terrain types [45.66]. This
is generally difﬁcult and a preferred approach is to train
the classiﬁer on training data.
This level of classiﬁcation provides information
about the local type of terrain, which can be used
in planning, but it does not extract the extended
geometric structures that may exist in the environ-
ment (Fig. 45.19). Geometric structures such as planar
patches can in principle be extracted by using tech-
niques similar to the ones described in the context
of indoor environments, such as EM, with the added
difﬁculty that there is a larger amount of clutter that
complicates the extraction of the patches. Robust tech-
niques that can handle this level of clutter are typically
used for extracting the planes [45.67, 68].
Classiﬁcation based on local attributes can be im-
proved signiﬁcantly by taking into account contex-
tual information; for example, hidden Markov models
have been successfully used for laser data analysis
to determine terrain traversability [45.69]. Another
structure learning approach based on Markov random
ﬁelds in conjunction with margin-maximization crite-
rion has been demonstrated for a wide class of appli-
cations, including 3-D terrain classiﬁcation and object
segmentation [45.56] or building structures extrac-
tion [45.57] (Fig. 45.20). Finally there are approaches to
detect, select, model, and recognize natural landmarks
automatically for robot localization and environment
mapping [45.47].
45.3.6 Heterogeneous
and Hierarchical Models
For long-range navigation, an autonomous vehicle must
perform numerous tasks, including absolute and rela-
tive localization, path planning, and reactive obstacle
avoidance. In addition, it must perform some tasks to
fulﬁll the mission requirements, detecting and model-
ing objects, for example. To achieve this, a hierarchical
framework has been presented that accounts for the
different scales and granularities of the representation
needed [45.59]. Furthermore, models built from het-
erogeneous imagery sources (overhead, descent, and
ground) have been used to produce 3-D multiresolution
terrain models that support Mars exploration [45.70].
The hybrid metric map [45.71], enhances feature maps

World Modeling
45.5 Summary and Further Reading
1149
Part E | 45.5
b)
c)
a)
Fig. 45.21 (a) A mobile robot acquiring a three-dimensional scan of an urban scene. (b) The people in the scene cause
spurious data points in the resulting meshes. (c) The same scene after ﬁltering people
with metric maps to provide a dense but compact envi-
ronment representation. Another representation extracts
landmarks based on laser/imagery appearance as well
as a metric map [45.72].
45.4 Dynamic Environments
The majority of techniques for mapping have been de-
veloped for static environments. Certain approaches
like occupancy grids or elevation maps can in prin-
ciple deal with dynamic environments in which ob-
jects move. Their drawback lies in the fact that the
time to unlearn that a cell is free or that the eleva-
tion has changed can require as many observations
as the robot received with the same area being oc-
cupied or with a different elevation. To resolve this
problem, several alternative approaches have been pro-
posed in the past. One very popular technique is to
track moving objects using feature-based tracking al-
gorithms [45.73, 74]. Such approaches are especially
useful when the type of the dynamic objects is known
in advance. They have been successfully applied in
the context of learning three-dimensional city maps
from range data. Figures 45.21 and 45.22 show appli-
cations in which dynamic objects were removed from
the 3-D data acquired with mobile robots in urban
scenes. Alternative approaches to such tracking tech-
niques include those that learn maps on different time
scales [45.75], that explicitly learn different states of
dynamic environments [45.76, 77], or that only map the
static aspects [45.78].
Fig. 45.22 Complex three-dimensional scene acquired
with a mobile robot after ﬁltering dynamic objects (af-
ter [45.74])
45.5 Summary and Further Reading
Further reading about typical representations and how
they can be utilized for mobile robot navigation can be
found in recent textbooks on mobile robotics [45.2, 79,
80]. A comprehensive survey of the fundamentals of
spatial data structures and their applications is available
in Samet [45.81].

Part E | 45
1150
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Video-References
VIDEO 79
OctoMap visualization
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/45/videodetails/79
VIDEO 269
3-D textured model of urban environments
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/45/videodetails/269
VIDEO 270
Service robot navigation in urban environments
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/45/videodetails/270
VIDEO 271
Learning navigation cost grids
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/45/videodetails/271
References
45.1
H.P. Moravec, A.E. Elfes: High resolution maps from
wide angle sonar, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (1985)
45.2
H. Choset, K. Lynch, S. Hutchinson, G. Kantor,
W. Burgard, L. Kavraki, S. Thrun: Principles of Robot
Motion: Theory, Algorithms and Implementation
(MIT Press, Cambridge 2005)
45.3
D.H. Douglas, T.K. Peucker: Algorithms for the re-
duction of the number of points required to rep-
resent a line or its caricature, Cdn. Cartogr. 10(2),
112–122 (1973)
45.4
D. Sack, W. Burgard: A comparison of methods for
line extraction from range data, Proc. IFAC Symp.
Intell. Auton. Veh. (IAV) (2004)
45.5
P. Beeson, N.K. Jong, B. Kuipers: Towards au-
tonomous topological place detection using the
extended Voronoi graph, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
45.6
M. Montemerlo, S. Thrun, D. Koller, B. Wegbreit:
FastSLAM: A factored solution to the simultaneous
localization and mapping problem, Proc. Nat. Conf.
Artif. Intell. (AAAI) (2002)
45.7
B.J. Kuipers, Y.-T. Byun: A robust qualitative
method for spatial learning in unknown environ-
ments, Proc. Nat. Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI) (1988)
45.8
H. Choset, K. Nagatani: Topological simultaneous
localization and mapping (SLAM): Toward exact lo-
calization without explicit localization, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 17(2), 125–137 (2001)
45.9
S. Thrun: Robotic mapping: A survey. In: Explor-
ing Artificial Intelligence in the New Millenium, ed.
by G. Lakemeyer, B. Nebel (Morgan Kaufmann, San
Diego 2003)
45.10
M. Maimone, P. Leger, J. Biesiadecki: Overview of
the Mars exploration rovers’ autonomous mobil-
ity and vision capabilities, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2007)
45.11
S. Lacroix, A. Mallet, D. Bonnafous, G. Bauzil,
S. Fleury, M. Herrb, R. Chatila: Autonomous rover
navigation on unknown terrains: functions and in-
tegration, Int. J. Robotics Res. 21(10-11), 917–942
(2002)
45.12
R. Olea: Geostatistics for Engineers and Earth Sci-
entists (Kluwer, Boston 1999)
45.13
A. Kelly, A. Stentz, O. Amidi, M. Bode, D. Bradley,
A. Diaz-Calderon, M. Happold, H. Herman, R. Man-
delbaum, T. Pilarki, P. Rander, S. Thayer, N. Vallidi,
R. Warner: Toward reliable off road autonomous
vehicles operating in challenging environments,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 25(5-6), 449–483 (2006)
45.14
I.S. Kweon, T. Kanade: High-resolution terrain map
from multiple sensor data, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. 14(2), 278–292 (1992)
45.15
M. Montemerlo, S. Thrun: A multi-resolution pyra-
mid for outdoor robot terrain perception, Proc. AAAI
Nat. Conf. Artif. Intel., San Jose (2004)
45.16
R. Triebel, P. Pfaff, W. Burgard: Multi-level surface
maps for outdoor terrain mapping and loop clos-
ing, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robotics Syst.
(IROS) (2006)
45.17
C. Wellington, A. Courville, A. Stentz: A genera-
tive model of terrain for autonomous navigation
in vegetation, Int. J. Robotics Res. 25(12), 1287–1304
(2006)
45.18
P. Pfaff, R. Triebel, W. Burgard: An efficient exten-
sion to elevation maps for outdoor terrain mapping
and loop closing, Int. J. Robotics Res. 26(2), 217–230
(2007)
45.19
D.M. Cole, P.M. Newman: Using laser range data for
3D SLAM in outdoor environments, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006)
45.20
A. Nüchter, K. Lingemann, J. Hertzberg, H. Sur-
mann: 6D SLAM – 3D mapping outdoor environ-
ments: Research articles, J. Field Robotics 24(8–9),
699–722 (2007)
45.21
J. Elseberg, D. Borrmann, A. Nüchter: Efficient pro-
cessing of large 3D point clouds, Proc. 23rd Int.
Symp. Infor. Commun. Autom. Technol. (ICAT) (2011)
45.22
R.B. Rusu, S. Cousins: 3D is here: Point cloud library
(PCL), Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2011)
45.23
N. Fairfield, G. Kantor, D. Wettergreen: Real-time
SLAM with octree evidence grids for exploration in
underwater tunnels, J. Field Robotics 24(1), 3–21
(2007)
45.24
A. Foessel: Scene Modeling from Motion-Free Radar
Sensing, Ph.D. Thesis (Carnegie Mellon Univ., Pitts-
burgh 2002)
45.25
K.M. Wurm, A. Hornung, M. Bennewitz, C. Stach-
niss, W. Burgard: OctoMap: A probabilistic, flexible,
and compact 3D map representation for robotic
systems, Proc. ICRA Workshop Best Pract. 3D Per-
cept. Model. Mob. Manip. (2010)
45.26
J.-F. Lalonde, N. Vandapel, M. Hebert: Data struc-
ture for efficient processing in 3-D, Proc. Robotics
Sci. Syst., Vol. I (2005) p. 48

World Modeling
References
1151
Part E | 45
45.27
A. Hornung, K.M. Wurm, M. Bennewitz, C. Stach-
niss, W. Burgard: OctoMap: An efficient probabilis-
tic 3D mapping framework based on octrees, Auton.
Robots 34(3), 189–206 (2013)
45.28
K.M. Wurm, D. Hennes, D. Holz, R.B. Rusu, C. Stach-
niss, K. Konolige, W. Burgard: Hierarchies of octrees
for efficient 3D mapping, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011)
45.29
L. Heng, L. Meier, P. Tanskanen, F. Fraundorfer,
M. Pollefeys: Autonomous obstacle avoidance and
maneuvering on a vision-guided MAV using on-
board processing, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2011)
45.30
S. Oßwald, A. Hornung, M. Bennewitz: Improved
proposals for highly accurate localization using
range and vision data, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2012)
45.31
M. Ciocarlie, K. Hsiao, E.G. Jones, S. Chitta,
R.B. Rusu, I.A. Sucan: Towards reliable grasping
and manipulation in household environments, Int.
Symp. Exp. Robotics (ISER) (2010)
45.32
A. Hornung, M. Phillips, E.G. Jones, M. Bennewitz,
M. Likhachev, S. Chitta: Navigation in three-
dimensional cluttered environments for mobile
manipulation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2012)
45.33
J. Leal: Stochastic Environment Representation,
Ph.D. Thesis (Univ. of Sydney, Sydney 2003)
45.34
P.
Heckbert,
M.
Garland:
Optimal
triangula-
tion and quadric-based surface simplification,
J. Comput. Geom. Theory Appl. 14(1-3), 49–65
(1999)
45.35
A. Akbarzadeh: Towards urban 3d reconstruction
from video, Proc. Int. Symp. 3D Data Vis. Transm.
(2006)
45.36
C. Frueh, S. Jain, A. Zakhor: Data processing algo-
rithms for generating textured 3d building facade
meshes from laser scans and camera images, Int.
J. Comput. Vis. 61(2), 159–184 (2005)
45.37
I. Stamos, P. Allen: Geometry and texture recovery
of scenes of large scales, Comput. Vis. Image Un-
derst. 88, 94–118 (2002)
45.38
D. Gennery: Traversability analysis and path plan-
ning for a planetary rover, Auton. Robotics 6, 131–
146 (1999)
45.39
D. Ferguson, A. Stentz: The delayed D* algorithm
for efficient path replanning, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
45.40
D. Ferguson, A. Stentz: Field D*: An interpolation-
based path planner and replanner, Proc. Int. Symp.
Robotics Res. (ISRR) (2005)
45.41
M. Likhachev, D. Ferguson, G. Gordon, A. Stentz,
S. Thrun: Anytime dynamic A*: An anytime, replan-
ning algorithm, Proc. Int. Conf. Autom. Plan. Sched.
(ICAPS) (2005)
45.42
B. Sofman, E. Lin, J. Bagnell, J. Cole, N. Vandapel,
A. Stentz: Improving robot navigation through self-
supervised online learning, J. Field Robotics 23(12),
1059–1075 (2006)
45.43
D. Stavens, S. Thrun: A self-supervised terrain
roughness estimator for off-road autonomous
driving, Uncertainty Artif. Intell., Boston (2006)
45.44
A. Angelova, L. Matthies, D. Helmick, P. Perona: Slip
prediction using visual information, Robotics Sci.
Syst., Philadelphia (2006)
45.45
D. Kim,
J.
Sun, S. Oh, J.
Rehg, A. Bobick:
Traversability classification using unsupervised on-
line visual learning for outdoor robot naviga-
tion, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2006)
45.46
S. Thrun, M. Montemerlo, A. Aron: Probabilis-
tic terrain analysis for high-speed desert driving,
Robotics Sci. Syst. (2005)
45.47
R. Murrieta-Cid, C. Parra, M. Devy: Visual naviga-
tion in natural environments: From range and color
data to a landmark-based model, Auton. Robotics
13(2), 143–168 (2002)
45.48
D. Asmar, J. Zelek, S. Abdallah: Tree trunks as land-
marks for outdoor vision SLAM, Proc. Conf. Comp.
Vis. Pattern Recogn. Workshop (2006)
45.49
I. Posner, D. Schroeter, P. Newman: Using scene
similarity for place labelling, Int. Symp. Exp.
Robotics (2006)
45.50
A. Torralba, K.P. Murphy, W.T. Freeman, M.A. Rubin:
Context-based vision system for place and object
recognition, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV)
(2003)
45.51
D. Bradley, S. Thayer, A. Stentz, P. Rander: Vegeta-
tion Detection for Mobile Robot Navigation, Tech.
Rep. CMU-RI-TR-04-12
(Carnegie Mellon Univ.,
Pittsburgh 2004)
45.52
S. Kumar, J. Guivant, H. Durrant-Whyte: Infor-
mative representations of unstructured environ-
ments, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2004)
45.53
S. Kumar, F. Ramos, B. Douillard, M. Ridley,
H.
Durrant-Whyte:
A
novel
visual
perception
framework, Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Control Autom.
Robotics Vis. (ICARCV) (2006)
45.54
F. Ramos, S. Kumar, B. Upcroft, H. Durrant-Whyte:
Representing natural objects in unstructured en-
vironments, NIPS Workshop Mach. Learn. Robotics
(2005)
45.55
C. Pantofaru, R. Unnikrishnan, M. Hebert: Toward
generating labeled maps from color and range data
for robot navigation, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robotics Syst. (2003)
45.56
D. Anguelov, B. Taskar, V. Chatalbashev, D. Koller,
D. Gupta, G. Heitz, A. Ng: Discriminative learning of
Markov random fields for segmentation of 3D scan
data, Proc. Conf. Comp. Vis. Pattern Recogn. (CVPR)
(2005)
45.57
R. Triebel, K. Kersting, W. Burgard: Robust 3D scan
point classification using associative Markov net-
works, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2006)
45.58
J.F. Lalonde, N. Vandapel, D. Huber, M. Hebert: Nat-
ural terrain classification using three-dimensional
ladar data for ground robot mobility, J. Field
Robotics 23(10), 839–861 (2006)
45.59
M. Devy, R. Chatila, P. Fillatreau, S. Lacroix,
F. Nashashibi: On autonomous navigation in a nat-
ural environment, Robotics Auton. Syst. 16(1), 5–16
(1995)

Part E | 45
1152
Part E
Moving in the Environment
45.60
R. Manduchi, A. Castano, A. Talukder, L. Matthies:
Obstacle detection and terrain classification for
autonomous off-road navigation, Auton. Robotics
18(1), 81–102 (2005)
45.61
D. Huber, M. Hebert: 3D modeling using a statisti-
cal sensor model and stochastic search, Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recogn. (CVPR) (2003)
pp. 858–865
45.62
S. Balakirsky, A. Lacaze: World modeling and be-
havior generation for autonomous ground vehi-
cles, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2000)
45.63
A. Lacaze, K. Murphy, M. Delgiorno: Autonomous
mobility for the demo III experimental unmanned
vehicles, Proc. AUVSI Int. Conf. Unmanned Veh.
(2002)
45.64
P. Bellutta, R. Manduchi, L. Matthies, K. Owens,
A. Rankin: Terrain perception for demo III, Proc. In-
tell. Veh. Symp. (2000)
45.65
J.F.
Lalonde,
R.
Unnikrishnan,
N.
Vandapel,
M.
Hebert:
Scale
selection
for
classifica-
tion of point-sampled 3D surfaces, Proc. 5th
Int. Conf. 3-D Digital
Imaging
Model. (3DIM)
(2005)
45.66
J. Macedo, R. Manduchi, L. Matthies: Ladar-based
discrimination of grass from obstacles for au-
tonomous navigation, Proc. 7th Int. Symp. Exp.
Robotics (ISER) (2000)
45.67
H. Chen, P. Meer, D. Tyler: Robust regression
for
data
with
multiple structures, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recogn. (CVPR)
(2001)
45.68
R. Unnikrishnan, M. Hebert: Robust extraction of
multiple structures from non-uniformly sampled
data, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robotics Syst.
(IROS) (2003)
45.69
D. Wolf, G. Sukhatme, D. Fox, W. Burgard: Au-
tonomous terrain mapping and classification us-
ing hidden Markov models, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
45.70
C. Olson, L. Matthies, J. Wright, R. Li, K. Di: Visual
terrain mapping for Mars exploration, Comput. Vis.
Underst. 105, 73–85 (2007)
45.71
J. Nieto, J. Guivant, E. Nebot: The hybrid met-
ric maps (hymms): A novel map representation for
denseSLAM, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2004)
45.72
F. Ramos, J. Nieto, H. Durrant-Whyte: Recognising
and modelling landmarks to close loops in outdoor
SLAM, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2007)
45.73
D. Hähnel, D. Schulz, W. Burgard: Mobile robot
mapping
in
populated
environments,
Adv.
Robotics 17(7), 579–598 (2003)
45.74
C.-C. Wang, C. Thorpe, S. Thrun: Online simultane-
ous localization and mapping with detection and
tracking of moving objects: Theory and results from
a ground vehicle in crowded urban areas, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2003)
45.75
P. Biber, T. Duckett: Dynamic maps for long-term
operation of mobile service robots, Proc. Robotics
Sci. Syst. (2005)
45.76
D. Meyer-Delius, J. Hess, G. Grisetti, W. Burgard:
Temporary maps for robust localization in semi-
static environments, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS), Taipei (2010)
45.77
C. Stachniss, W. Burgard: Mobile robot mapping
and localization in non-static environments, Proc.
Nat. Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI), Pittsburgh (2005)
45.78
D. Hähnel, R. Triebel, W. Burgard, S. Thrun: Map
building with mobile robots in dynamic environ-
ments, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2003)
45.79
R. Siegwart, I. Nourbakhsh: Introduction to Au-
tonomous Mobile Robots (MIT Press, Cambridge
2001)
45.80
S. Thrun, W. Burgard, D. Fox: Probabilistic Robotics
(MIT Press, Cambridge 2005)
45.81
H. Samet: Foundations of Multidimensional and
Metric Data Structures (Elsevier, Amsterdam 2006)

Multimedia Contents Simultaneou
1153
Part E | 46
46. Simultaneous Localization
and Mapping
Cyrill Stachniss, John J. Leonard, Sebastian Thrun
This chapter provides a comprehensive intro-
duction in to the simultaneous localization and
mapping problem, better known in its abbreviated
form as SLAM. SLAM addresses the main percep-
tion problem of a robot navigating an unknown
environment. While navigating the environment,
the robot seeks to acquire a map thereof, and
at the same time it wishes to localize itself us-
ing its map. The use of SLAM problems can be
motivated in two different ways: one might be in-
terested in detailed environment models, or one
might seek to maintain an accurate sense of a mo-
bile robot’s location. SLAM serves both of these
purposes.
We review the three major paradigms from
which many published methods for SLAM are de-
rived: (1) the extended Kalman filter (EKF); (2)
particle filtering; and (3) graph optimization. We
also review recent work in three-dimensional (3-D)
SLAM using visual and red green blue dis-
46.1 SLAM: Problem Definition..................... 1154
46.1.1
Mathematical Basis ................... 1154
46.1.2
Example: SLAM
in Landmark Worlds .................. 1155
46.1.3 Taxonomy of the SLAM Problem .. 1156
46.2 The Three Main SLAM Paradigms ........... 1157
46.2.1
Extended Kalman Filters ............ 1157
46.2.2 Particle Methods ....................... 1159
46.2.3 Graph-Based
Optimization Techniques............ 1162
46.2.4 Relation of Paradigms................ 1166
46.3 Visual and RGB-D SLAM ........................ 1166
46.4 Conclusion and Future Challenges ........ 1169
Video-References......................................... 1170
References................................................... 1171
tance-sensors (RGB-D), and close with a discussion
of open research problems in robotic mapping.
This chapter provides a comprehensive introduction
into one of the key enabling technologies of mobile
robot navigation: simultaneous localization and map-
ping, or in short SLAM. SLAM addresses the problem
of acquiring a spatial map of an environment while si-
multaneously localizing the robot relative to this model.
The SLAM problem is generally regarded as one of the
most important problems in the pursuit of building truly
autonomous mobile robots. It is of great practical im-
portance; if a robust, general-purpose solution to SLAM
can be found, then many new applications of mobile
robotics will become possible.
While the problem is deceptively easy to state, it
presents many challenges, despite signiﬁcant progress
made in this area. At present, we have robust methods
for mapping environments that are mainly static, struc-
tured, and of limited size. Robustly mapping unstruc-
tured, dynamic, and large-scale environments in an on-
line fashion remains largely an open research problem.
The historical roots of methods that can be applied
to address the SLAM problem can be traced back to
Gauss [46.1], who is largely credited for inventing the
least squares method. In the Twentieth Century, a num-
ber of ﬁelds outside robotics have studied the making
of environment models from a moving sensor platform,
most notably in photogrammetry [46.2–4] and com-
puter vision [46.5]. Strongly related problems in these
ﬁelds are bundle adjustment and structure from mo-
tion. SLAM builds on this work, often extending the
basic paradigms into more scalable algorithms. Mod-
ern SLAM systems often view the estimation problem
as solving a sparse graph of constraints and applying

Part E | 46.1
1154
Part E
Moving in the Environment
nonlinear optimization to compute the map and the tra-
jectory of the robot. As we strive to enable long-lived
autonomous robots, an emerging challenge is to handle
massive sensor data streams.
This chapter begins with a deﬁnition of the SLAM
problem, which shall include a brief taxonomy of dif-
ferent versions of the problem. The centerpiece of this
chapter is a layman introduction into the three major
paradigms in this ﬁeld, and the various extensions that
exist. As the reader will quickly recognize, there is no
single best solution to the SLAM method. The method
chosen by the practitioner will depend on a number of
factors, such as the desired map resolution, the update
time, and the nature of the features in the map, and so
on. Nevertheless, the three methods discussed in this
chapter cover the major paradigms in this ﬁeld.
For more a detailed treatment of SLAM, we refer
the reader to Durrant-Whyte and Bailey [46.6, 7], who
provide an in-depth tutorial for SLAM, Grisetti et al.
for a tutorial on graph-based SLAM [46.8], and Thrun
et al., which dedicates a number of chapters to the topic
of SLAM [46.9].
46.1 SLAM: Problem Definition
The SLAM problem is deﬁned as follows: A mobile
robot roams an unknown environment, starting at an
initial location x0. Its motion is uncertain, making it
gradually more difﬁcult to determine its current pose in
global coordinates. As it roams, the robot can sense its
environment with a noisy sensor. The SLAM problem
is the problem of building a map of the environment
while simultaneously determining the robot’s position
relative to this map given noisy data.
46.1.1 Mathematical Basis
Formally, SLAM is best described in probabilistic ter-
minology. Let us denote time by t, and the robot
location by xt. For mobile robots on a ﬂat ground, xt is
usually a three-dimensional vector, comprising its two-
dimensional (2-D) coordinate in the plane plus a single
rotational value for its orientation. The sequence of lo-
cations, or path, is then given as
XT D fx0; x1; x2; : : : ; xTg :
(46.1)
Here T is some terminal time (T might be 1). The
initial location x0 often serves as a point of reference
for the estimation algorithm; other positions cannot be
sensed.
Odometry provides relative information between
two consecutive locations. Let ut denote the odometry
that characterized the motion between time t  1 and
time t; such data might be obtained from the robot’s
wheel encoders or from the controls given to those mo-
tors. Then the sequence
UT D fu1; u2; u3 : : : ; uTg
(46.2)
characterizes the relative motion of the robot. For noise-
free motion, UT would be sufﬁcient to recover the poses
from the initial location x0. However, odometry mea-
surements are noisy, and path integration techniques
inevitably diverge from the truth.
Finally, the robot senses objects in the environment.
Let m denote the true map of the environment. The
environment may be comprised of landmarks, objects,
surfaces, etc., and m describes their locations. The en-
vironment map m is often assumed to be time-invariant,
i. e., static.
The robot measurements establish information be-
tween features in m and the robot location xt. If we,
without loss of generality, assume that the robot takes
exactly one measurement at each point in time, the se-
quence of measurements is given as
ZT D fz1; z2; z3; : : : ; zTg :
(46.3)
Figure 46.1 illustrates the variables involved in the
SLAM problem. It shows the sequence of locations and
sensor measurements, and the causal relationships be-
tween these variables. This diagram represents a graph-
zt+1
x t+1
x t
x t –1
zt
zt –1
ut+1
ut
ut –1
m
Fig. 46.1 Graphical model of the SLAM problem. Arcs in-
dicate causal relationships, and shaded nodes are directly
observable to the robot. In SLAM, the robot seeks to re-
cover the unobservable variables

Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
46.1 SLAM: Problem Definition
1155
Part E | 46.1
ical model for SLAM. It is useful in understanding the
dependencies in the problem at hand.
The SLAM problem is now the problem of recov-
ering a model of the world m and the sequence of
robot locations XT from the odometry and measurement
data. The literature distinguishes two main forms of the
SLAM problem, which are both of equal practical im-
portance. One is known as the full SLAM problem: it
involves estimating the posterior over the entire robot
path together with the map
p.XT; m j ZT; UT/ :
(46.4)
Written in this way, the full SLAM problem is the
problem of calculating the joint posterior probability
over XT and m from the available data. Notice that the
variables right of the conditioning bar are all directly
observable to the robot, whereas those on the left are
the ones that we want. As we shall see, algorithms for
the full SLAM problem are often batch, that is, they
process all data at the same time.
The second, equally important SLAM problem is
the online SLAM problem. This problem is deﬁned via
p.xt; m j Zt; Ut/ :
(46.5)
Online SLAM seeks to recover the present robot loca-
tion, instead of the entire path. Algorithms that address
the online problem are usually incremental and can pro-
cess one data item at a time. In the literature, such
algorithms are typically called ﬁlters.
To solve the SLAM problem, the robot needs to
be endowed with two more models: a mathematical
model that relates odometry measurements ut to robot
locations xt1 and xt; and a model that relates measure-
ments zt to the environment m and the robot location xt.
These models correspond to the arcs in Fig. 46.1.
In SLAM, it is common to think of those mathemat-
ical models as probability distributions: p.xt j xt1; ut/
characterizes the probability distribution of the location
xt assuming that a robot started at a known location
xt1 and measured the odometry data ut. And likewise,
p.zt j xt; m/ is the probability for measuring zt if this
measurement is taken at a known location xt in a known
environment m. Of course, in the SLAM problem we do
not know the robot location, and neither do we know the
environment. As we shall see, Bayes rule takes care of
this, by transforming these mathematical relationships
into a form where we can recover probability distribu-
tions over those latent variables from the measured data.
46.1.2 Example: SLAM in Landmark Worlds
One common setting of SLAM involves an assumption
that the environment is populated by point-landmarks.
When building 2-D maps, point-landmarks may cor-
respond to door posts and corners of rooms, which,
when projected into a 2-D map are characterized by
a point coordinate. In a 2-D world, each point-landmark
is characterized by two coordinate values. Hence the
world is a vector of size 2N, where N is the number
of point-landmarks in the world. In a commonly stud-
ied setting, the robot can sense three things: the relative
range to nearby landmarks, their relative bearing, and
the identity of these landmarks. The range and bearing
may be noisy, but in the most simple case the identity
of the sensed landmarks is known perfectly. Determin-
ing the identity of the sensed landmarks is also known
as the data association problem. In practice, it is one of
the most difﬁcult problems in SLAM.
To model the above described setup, one begins
with deﬁning the exact, noise-free measurement func-
tion. The measurement function h describes the work-
ings of the sensors: it accepts as input a description of
the environment m and a robot location xt, and it com-
putes the measurement
h.xt; m/ :
(46.6)
Computing h is straightforward in our simpliﬁed land-
mark setting; it is a simple exercise in trigonometry. The
probabilistic measurement model can be derived from
this measurement function by adding a noise term. It
is a probability distribution that peaks at the noise-free
value h.xt; m/ but allows for measurement noise, for ex-
ample,
p.zt j xt; m/ D N .h.xt; m/; Qt/ :
(46.7)
Here N denotes the 2-D normal distribution, which is
centered at h.xt; m/. The 2-by-2 matrix Qt is the noise
covariance, indexed by time.
The motion model is derived from a kinematic
model of robot motion. Given the location vector xt1
and the motion ut, textbook kinematics tells us how to
calculate xt. Let this function be denoted by g
g.xt1; ut/ :
(46.8)
The motion model may then be deﬁned by a normal dis-
tribution centered at g.xt1; ut/ but subject to Gaussian
noise
p.xt j xt1; ut/ D N .g.xt1; ut/; Rt/ :
(46.9)
Here Rt is a covariance. It is of size 3-by-3, since the
location is a three-dimensional 3-D vector.
With these deﬁnitions, we have all we need to
develop a SLAM algorithm. While in the literature,

Part E | 46.1
1156
Part E
Moving in the Environment
point-landmark problems with range-bearing sensing
are by far the most studied, SLAM algorithms are not
conﬁned to landmark worlds. But no matter what the
map representation and the sensor modality, any SLAM
algorithm needs a similarly crisp deﬁnition of the fea-
tures in m, the measurement model p.zt j xt; m/, and the
motion model p.xt j xt1; ut/. Note that none of those
distributions has to be restricted to Gaussian noise as
done in the example above.
46.1.3 Taxonomy of the SLAM Problem
SLAM problems are distinguished along a number of
different dimensions. Most important research papers
identify the type of problems addressed by making the
underlying assumptions explicit. We already encoun-
tered one such distinction: full versus online. Other
common distinctions are as follows:
Volumetric Versus Feature-Based
In volumetric SLAM, the map is sampled at a resolution
high enough to allow for photo-realistic reconstruction
of the environment. The map m in volumetric SLAM
is usually quite high-dimensional, with the result that
the computation can be quite involved. Feature-based
SLAM extracts sparse features from the sensor stream.
The map is then only comprised of features. Our
point-landmark example is an instance of feature-based
SLAM. Feature-based SLAM techniques tend to be
more efﬁcient, but their results may be inferior to volu-
metric SLAM due to the fact that the extraction of fea-
tures discards information in the sensor measurements.
Topological Versus Metric
Some mapping techniques recover only a qualitative de-
scription of the environment, which characterizes the
relation of basic locations. Such methods are known as
topological. A topological map might be deﬁned over
a set of distinct places and a set of qualitative rela-
tions between these places (e.g., place A is adjacent to
place B). Metric SLAM methods provide metric infor-
mation between the relation of such places. In recent
years, topological methods have fallen out of fashion,
despite ample evidence that humans often use topolog-
ical information for navigation.
Known Versus Unknown Correspondence
The correspondence problem is the problem of relat-
ing the identity of sensed things to other sensed things.
In the landmark example above, we assumed that the
identity of landmarks is known. Some SLAM algo-
rithms make such an assumption, others do not. The
ones that do not provide special mechanisms for es-
timating the correspondence of measured features to
previously observed landmarks in the map. The prob-
lem of estimating the correspondence is known as data
association problem. It is one of the most difﬁcult prob-
lems in SLAM.
Static Versus Dynamic
Static SLAM algorithms assume that the environment
does not change over time. Dynamic methods allow
for changes in the environment. The vast literature on
SLAM assumes static environments. Dynamic effects
are often treated just as measurement outliers. Meth-
ods that reason about motion in the environment are
more involved, but they tend to be more robust in most
applications.
Small Versus Large Uncertainty
SLAM problems are distinguished by the degree of
location uncertainty that they can handle. The most sim-
ple SLAM algorithms allow only for small errors in
the location estimate. They are good for situations in
which a robot goes down a path that does not intersect
itself, and then returns along the same path. In many
environments it is possible to reach the same location
from multiple directions. Here the robot may accrue
a large amount of uncertainty. This problem is known
as the loop closing problem. When closing a loop, the
uncertainty may be large. The ability to close loops is
a key characteristic of modern-day SLAM algorithms.
The uncertainty can be reduced if the robot can sense
information about its position in some absolute coor-
dinate frame, e.g., through the use of a satellite-based
global positioning system (GPS) receiver.
Active Versus Passive
In passive SLAM algorithms, some other entity controls
the robot, and the SLAM algorithm is purely observing.
The vast majority of algorithms are of this type; they
give the robot designer the freedom to implement ar-
bitrary motion controllers, and pursue arbitrary motion
objectives. In active SLAM, the robot actively explores
its environment in the pursuit of an accurate map. Ac-
tive SLAM methods tend to yield more accurate maps
in less time, but they constrain the robot motion. There
exist hybrid techniques in which the SLAM algorithm
controls only the pointing direction of the robot’s sen-
sors, but not the motion direction.
Single-Robot Versus Multi-Robot
Most SLAM problems are deﬁned for a single robot
platform, although recently the problem of multi-
robot exploration has gained in popularity. Multi-robot
SLAM problems come in many ﬂavors. In some, robots
get to observe each other, in others, robots are told their
relative initial locations. Multirobot SLAM problems

Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
46.2 The Three Main SLAM Paradigms
1157
Part E | 46.2
are also distinguished by the type of communication al-
lowed between the different robots. In some, the robots
can communicate with no latency and inﬁnite band-
width. More realistic are setups in which only nearby
robots can communicate, and the communication is
subject to latency and bandwidth limitations.
Any-Time and Any-Space
Robots that do all computations onboard have limited
resources in memory and computation power. Any-
time and any-space SLAM systems are an alternative
to traditional methods. They enable the robot to com-
pute a solution given the resource constraints of the
system. The more resources available, the better the
solution.
As this taxonomy suggests, there exists a ﬂurry of
SLAM algorithms. Most modern-day conferences ded-
icate multiple sessions to SLAM. This chapter focuses
on the very basic SLAM setup. In particular it assumes
a static environment with a single robot. Extensions are
discussed towards the end of this chapter, in which the
relevant literature is discussed.
46.2 The Three Main SLAM Paradigms
This section reviews three basic SLAM paradigms,
from which most others are derived. The ﬁrst, known as
EKF SLAM, is in robotics historically the earliest but
has become less popular due to its limiting computa-
tional properties and issues resulting from performing
single linearizations only. The second approach uses
nonparametric statistical ﬁltering techniques known as
particle ﬁlters. It is a popular method for online SLAM
and provides a perspective on addressing the data asso-
ciation problem in SLAM. The third paradigm is based
on graphical representations and successfully applies
sparse nonlinear optimization methods to the SLAM
problem. It is the main paradigm for solving the full
SLAM problem and recently also incremental tech-
niques are available.
46.2.1 Extended Kalman Filters
Historically, the EKF formulation of SLAM is the earli-
est, and perhaps the most inﬂuential, SLAM algorithm.
EKF SLAM was introduced in [46.10, 11] and [46.12,
13], which were the ﬁrst papers to propose the use of
a single state vector to estimate the locations of the
robot and a set of features in the environment, with an
associated error covariance matrix representing the un-
certainty in these estimates, including the correlations
between the vehicle and feature state estimates. As the
robot moves through its environment taking measure-
ments, the system state vector and covariance matrix
are updated using the extended Kalman ﬁlter [46.14,
15]. As new features are observed, new states are added
to the system state vector; the size of the system covari-
ance matrix grows quadratically.
This approach assumes a metrical, feature-based
environmental representation, in which objects can be
effectively represented as points in an appropriate pa-
rameter space. The position of the robot and the loca-
tions of features form a network of uncertain spatial
relationships. The development of appropriate repre-
sentations is a critical issue in SLAM, and intimately
related to the topics of sensing and world modeling dis-
cussed in Chap. 36 and in Part C.
The EKF algorithm represents the robot estimate by
a multivariate Gaussian
p.xt; m j Zt; Ut/ D N .t; †t/ :
(46.10)
The high-dimensional vector t contains the robot’s
best estimate of its own current location xt and the
location of the features in the environment. In our
point-landmark example, the dimension of t would be
3 C 2N, since we need three variables to represent the
robot location and 2N variables for the N landmarks in
the map.
The matrix †t is the covariance of the robot’s as-
sessment of its expected error in the guess t. The
matrix †t is of size .3 C 2N/ .3 C 2N/ and it is pos-
itive semi-deﬁnite. In SLAM, this matrix is usually
dense. The off-diagonal elements capture the correla-
tions in the estimates of different variables. Nonzero
correlations come along because the robot’s location is
uncertain, and as a result the locations of the landmarks
in the maps are uncertain.
The EKF SLAM algorithm is easily derived for our
point-landmark example. Suppose, for a moment, the
motion function g and the measurement function h were
linear in their arguments. Then, the vanilla Kalman ﬁl-
ter, as described in any textbook on Kalman ﬁltering,
would be applicable. EKF SLAM linearizes the func-
tions g and h using Taylor series expansion. In its most
basic form and in the absence of any data association
problems, EKF SLAM is basically the application of
the EKF to the online SLAM problem.
Figure 46.2 illustrates the EKF SLAM algorithm for
an artiﬁcial example. The robot navigates from a start
pose that serves as the origin of its coordinate system.
As it moves, its own pose uncertainty increases, as in-
dicated by uncertainty ellipses of growing diameter. It

Part E | 46.2
1158
Part E
Moving in the Environment
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.46.2a–d EKF applied to the
online SLAM problem. The robot’s
path is a dotted line, and its estimates
of its own position are shaded ellipses.
Eight distinguishable landmarks of
unknown location are shown as small
dots, and their location estimates are
shown as white ellipses. In (a–c)
the robot’s positional uncertainty is
increasing, as is its uncertainty about
the landmarks it encounters. In (d) the
robot senses the ﬁrst landmark again,
and the uncertainty of all landmarks
decreases, as does the uncertainty
of its current pose (image courtesy
of Michael Montemerlo, Stanford
University)
also senses nearby landmarks and maps them with an
uncertainty that combines the ﬁxed measurement uncer-
tainty with the increasing pose uncertainty. As a result,
the uncertainty in the landmark locations grows over
time. The interesting transition happens in Fig. 46.2d:
Here the robot observes the landmark it saw in the very
beginning of mapping, and whose location is relatively
well known. Through this observation, the robot’s pose
error is reduced, as indicated in Fig. 46.2d – notice
the very small error ellipse for the ﬁnal robot pose.
This observation also reduces the uncertainty for other
landmarks in the map. This phenomenon arises from
a correlation that is expressed in the covariance matrix
of the Gaussian posterior. Since most of the uncertainty
in earlier landmark estimates is caused by the robot
pose, and since this very uncertainty persists over time,
the location estimates of those landmarks are correlated.
When gaining information on the robot’s pose, this in-
formation spreads to previously observed landmarks.
This effect is probably the most important characteristic
of the SLAM posterior [46.16]. Information that helps
localize the robot is propagated through the map, and as
a result improves the localization of other landmarks in
the map.
With a few adaptations, EKF SLAM can also be ap-
plied in the presence of uncertain data association. If
the identity of observed features is unknown, the basic
EKF idea becomes inapplicable. The solution here is
to reason about the most likely data association when
a landmark is observed. This is usually done based
on proximity: which of the landmarks in the map cor-
responds most likely to the landmark just observed?
The proximity calculation considers the measurement
noise and the actual uncertainty in the poster estimate,
and the metric used in this calculation is known as
a Mahalanobis distance, which is a weighted quadratic
distance. To minimize the chances of false data asso-
ciations, many implementations use visible features to
distinguish individual landmarks and associate groups
of landmarks observed simultaneously [46.17, 18], al-
though distinct features can also be computed from
laser data [46.19, 20]. Typical implementations also
maintain a provisional landmark list and only add
landmarks to the internal map when they have been
observed sufﬁciently frequently [46.16, 21]. With an
appropriate landmark deﬁnition and careful implemen-
tation of the data association step, EKF SLAM has been
applied successfully in a wide range of environments,
using airborne, underwater, indoor, and various other
platforms.
The basic formulation of EKF SLAM assumes that
the location of features in the map is fully observable
from a single position of the robot. The method has
been extended to situations with partial observability,

Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
46.2 The Three Main SLAM Paradigms
1159
Part E | 46.2
with range-only [46.22] or angle-only [46.23, 24] mea-
surements. The technique has also been utilized using
a feature-less representation, in which the state consists
of current and past robot poses, and measurements take
the form of constraints between the poses (derived for
example from laser scan matching or from camera mea-
surements) [46.25, 26].
A key concern of the EKF approach to SLAM
lies in the quadratic nature of the covariance matrix.
A number of researchers have proposed extensions to
the EKF SLAM algorithms that achieve scalability, for
example through submap decomposition [46.27–30].
A related family of approaches [46.31–34] employs the
Extended Information Filter, which operates on the in-
verse of the covariance matrix. A key insight is that
whereas the EKF covariance is densely populated, the
information matrix is sparse when the full robot tra-
jectory is maintained, leading to the development of
efﬁcient algorithms and providing a conceptual link
to the pose graph optimization methods described in
Sect. 46.2.3.
The issues of consistency and convergence in
EKF SLAM have been investigated in [46.35, 36].
Observability-based rules for designing consistent EKF
SLAM estimators are presented in [46.37].
46.2.2 Particle Methods
The second principal SLAM paradigm is based on par-
ticle ﬁlters. Particle ﬁlters can be traced back to [46.38],
but they have become popular only in the last two
decades. Particle ﬁlters represent a posterior through
a set of particles. For the novice in SLAM, each par-
ticle is best thought as a concrete guess as to what
the true value of the state may be. By collecting many
such guesses into a set of guesses, or set of particles,
the particle ﬁlter approximates the posterior distribu-
tion. Under mild conditions, the particle ﬁlter has been
shown to approach the true posterior as the particle set
size goes to inﬁnity. It is also a nonparametric repre-
sentation that represents multimodal distributions with
ease.
The key problem with the particle ﬁlter in the con-
text of SLAM is that the space of maps and robot paths
is huge. Suppose we have a map with 100 features. How
many particles would it take to populate that space?
In fact, particle ﬁlters scale exponentially with the di-
mension of the underlying state space. Three or four
dimensions are thus acceptable, but 100 dimensions are
generally not.
The trick to make particle ﬁlters amenable to the
SLAM problem goes back to [46.39, 40] and is known
as Rao–Blackwellization. It has been introduced into
the SLAM literature in [46.41], followed by [46.42],
who coined the name fastSLAM (fast simultaneous lo-
calization and mapping). Let us ﬁrst explain the basic
FastSLAM algorithm on the simpliﬁed point-landmark
example, and then discuss the justiﬁcation for this ap-
proach.
At any point in time, FastSLAM maintains K parti-
cles of the type
XŒk
t ; Œk
t;1; : : : ; Œk
t;N; †Œk
t;1; : : : ; †Œk
t;N:
(46.11)
Here Œk is the index of the sample. This expression
states that a particle contains:

A sample path XŒk
t , and

A set of N 2-D Gaussians with means Œk
t;n and
variances †Œk
t;n), one for each landmark in the en-
vironment.
Here n is the index of the landmark (with 1 	 n 	
N). From that it follows that K particles possess K path
samples. It also possesses KN Gaussians, each of which
models exactly one landmark for one of the particles.
Initializing FastSLAM is simple: just set each parti-
cle’s robot location to the starting coordinates, typically
.0; 0; 0/T, and zero the map. The particle update then
proceeds as follows:

When an odometry reading is received, new loca-
tion variables are generated stochastically, one for
each of the particles. The distribution for generat-
ing those location particles is based on the motion
model
xŒk
t

 p.xt j xŒk
t1; ut/ :
(46.12)
Here xŒk
t1 is the previous location, which is part
of the particle. This probabilistic sampling step is
easily implemented for any robot whose kinematics
can be computed.

When a measurement zt is received, two things hap-
pen: ﬁrst, FastSLAM computes for each particle the
probability of the new measurement zt. Let the in-
dex of the sensed landmark be n. Then the desired
probability is deﬁned as follows
w Œk
t
D N .zt j xŒk
t ; Œk
t;n; †Œk
t;n/ :
(46.13)
The factor w Œk
t
is called the importance weight,
since it measures how important the particle is in
the light of the new sensor measurement. As before,
N denotes the normal distribution, but this time it
is calculated for a speciﬁc value, zt. The importance
weights of all particles are then normalized so that
they sum to 1.
Next, FastSLAM draws with replacement from the
set of existing particles a set of new particles. The
probability of drawing a particle is its normalized

Part E | 46.2
1160
Part E
Moving in the Environment
importance weight. This step is called resampling.
The intuition behind resampling is that particles
for which the measurement is more plausible have
a higher chance of surviving the resampling pro-
cess.
Finally, FastSLAM updates for the new particle set
the mean Œk
t;n and covariance †Œk
t;n, based on the
measurement zt. This update follows the standard
EKF update rules – note that the extended Kalman
ﬁlters maintained in FastSLAM are, in contrast to
EKF SLAM, all low-dimensional (typically 2-D).
This all may sound complex, but FastSLAM is
quite easy to implement. Sampling from the motion
model usually involves simple kinematic calculations.
Computing the importance of a measurement is often
straightforward too, especially for Gaussian measure-
ment noise. And updating a low-dimensional particle
ﬁlter is also not complicated.
FastSLAM has been shown to approximate the full
SLAM posterior. The derivation of FastSLAM exploits
three techniques: Rao–Blackwellization, conditional in-
dependence, and resampling. Rao–Blackwellization is
the following concept. Suppose we would like to com-
pute a probability distribution p.a;b/, where a and b
are arbitrary random variables. The vanilla particle ﬁlter
would draw particles from the joint distributions, that
is, each particle would have a value for a and one for b.
However, if the conditional p.b j a/ can be described in
closed form, it is equally legitimate to just draw parti-
cles from p.a/, and attach to each particle a closed-form
description of p.b j a/. This trick is known as Rao–
zt–1
zt+1
xt+1
zt
xt
ut–1
ut+1
ut
xt–1
m1
m2
zt+2
xt+2
ut+2
m3
Fig. 46.3 The SLAM problem depicted as Bayes network graph.
The robot moves from location xt1 to location xtC2, driven by
a sequence of controls. At each location xt it observes a nearby
feature in the map m D fm1; m2; m3g. This graphical network illus-
trates that the location variables separate the individual features in
the map from each other. If the locations are known, there remains
no other path involving variables whose value is not known, be-
tween any two features in the map. This lack of a path renders the
posterior of any two features in the map conditionally independent
(given the locations)
Blackwellization, and it yields better results than sam-
pling from the joint. FastSLAM applies this technique,
in that it samples from the path posterior p.XŒk
t
j Ut; Zt/
and represents the map p.m j XŒk
t ; Ut; Zt/ in Gaussian
form.
FastSLAM also breaks down the posterior over
maps (conditioned on paths) into sequences of low-
dimensional Gaussians. The justiﬁcation for this de-
composition is subtle. It arises from a speciﬁc condi-
tional independence assumption that is native to SLAM.
Fig. 46.3 illustrates the concept graphically. In SLAM,
knowledge of the robot path renders all landmark esti-
mates independent. This is easily shown for the graph-
ical network in Fig. 46.3: we ﬁnd that if we remove
the path variables from Fig. 46.3, then the landmark
variables are all disconnected [46.43]. Thus, in SLAM
any dependence between multiple landmark estimates
is mediated through the robot path. This subtle but
important observation implies that even if we used
a large, monolithic Gaussian for the entire map (one
per particle, of course), the off-diagonal element be-
tween different landmarks would simply remain zero.
It is therefore legitimate to implement the map more
efﬁciently, using N small Gaussians, one for each land-
mark. This explains the efﬁcient map representation in
FastSLAM.
Figure 46.4 shows results for a point-feature prob-
lem; here the point features are the centers of tree
trunks as observed by an outdoor robot. The dataset
used here is known as the Victoria Park dataset [46.44].
Fig. 46.4a shows the path of the vehicle obtained by
integrating the vehicle controls, without perception. As
can be seen, controls are a poor predictor of location for
this vehicle; after 30 min of driving, the estimated po-
sition of the vehicle is well over 100 m away from its
GPS position.
The FastSLAM algorithm has a number of inter-
esting properties. First, it solves both full and online
SLAM problems. Each particle has a sample of an en-
tire path but the actual update equation only uses the
most recent pose. This makes FastSLAM a ﬁlter. Sec-
ond, FastSLAM can maintain multiple data association
hypotheses. It is straightforward to make data associa-
tion decisions on a per-particle basis, instead of having
to adopt the same hypothesis for the entire ﬁlter. While
we will not give any mathematical justiﬁcation, we
note that the resulting FastSLAM algorithm can even
deal with unknown data association – something that
the extended Kalman ﬁlter cannot claim. And third,
FastSLAM can be implemented very efﬁciently using
advanced tree methods to represent the map estimates,
the update can be performed in time logarithmic in the
size of the map N, and linear in the number of parti-
cles M.

Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
46.2 The Three Main SLAM Paradigms
1161
Part E | 46.2
a)
b)
c)
Raw vehicle path
FastSLAM (solid), GPS path (dashed)
Path and map with aerial image
Fig. 46.4 (a) Vehicle path predicted by the odometry; (b) True path (dashed line) and FastSLAM 1.0 path (solid line);
(c) Victoria Park results overlaid on aerial imagery with the GPS path in blue (dashed), average FastSLAM 1.0 path in
yellow (solid), and estimated features as yellow dots (data and aerial image courtesy of José Guivant and Eduardo Nebot,
Australian Centre for Field Robotics)
a)
b)
Fig. 46.5 Occupancy grid map generated from laser range data and based on pure odometry (image courtesy of Dirk
Hähnel, University of Freiburg)
FastSLAM has been extended in several ways. One
set of variants are grid-based versions of FastSLAM,
in which the Gaussians used to model point landmarks
are replaced by an occupancy grid map [46.45–47]. The
variant of [46.46] is illustrated in Fig. 46.5.
Figure 46.6 illustrates a simpliﬁed situation with
three particles just before closing a large loop. The three
different particles each stand for different paths, and
they also posses their own local maps. When the loop
is closed importance resampling selects those particles
whose maps are most consistent with the measure-
ment. A resulting large-scale map is shown in Fig. 46.5.
Further extensions can be found in [46.48, 49], whose
methods are called DP-SLAM and operate on ances-
try trees to provide efﬁcient tree update methods for
grid-based maps. Related to that, approximations to
FastSLAM in which particles share their maps have
been proposed [46.50].
The works in [46.45, 47, 51] provide ways to in-
corporate new observations into the location sampling

Part E | 46.2
1162
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Map of particle 1
Map of particle 1
Map of particle 1
3 particles and their trajectories
Fig. 46.6 Application of the grid-based variant of the FastSLAM algorithm. Each particle carries its own map and the
importance weights of the particles are computed based on the likelihood of the measurements given the particle’s own
map
process for landmarks and grid maps, based on prior
work in [46.52]. This leads to an improved sampling
process
xŒk
t

 p.zt j mŒk
t1; xt/ p.xt j xŒk
t1; ut/
p.zt j mŒk
t1; xŒk
t1; ut/
;
(46.14)
which incorporates the odometry and the observation
at the same time. Using an improved proposal dis-
tribution leads to more accurately sampled locations.
This in turn leads to more accurate maps and requires
a smaller number of particles compared to approaches
using the sampling process given in (46.12). This ex-
tension makes FastSLAM and especially its grid-based
variants robust tools for addressing the SLAM problem.
Finally, there are approaches that aim to overcome
the assumption that the observations show Gaussian
characteristics. As shown in [46.47], there are sev-
eral situations in which the model is nonGaussian and
also multimodal. A sum of Gaussians model on a per-
particle bases, however, can be efﬁciently considered
in the particle ﬁlter and it eliminates this problem in
practice without introducing additional computational
demands.
The so-far developed particle ﬁlters-based SLAM
systems suffer from two problems. First, the number of
samples that are required to compute consistent maps
is often set manually by making an educated guess.
The larger the uncertainty that the ﬁlter needs to rep-
resent during mapping, the more critical becomes this
parameter. Second, nested loops combined with exten-
sive re-visits of previously mapped areas can lead to
particle depletion, which in turn may prevent the system
from estimating a consistent map. Adaptive resampling
strategies [46.45], particles sharing maps [46.50], or ﬁl-
ter backup approaches [46.53] improve the situation but
cannot eliminate this problem in general.
46.2.3 Graph-Based
Optimization Techniques
A third family of algorithms solves the SLAM problem
through nonlinear sparse optimization. They draw their
intuition from a graphical representation of the SLAM
problem and the ﬁrst working solution in robotics was
proposed in [46.54]. The graph-based representation
used here is closely related to a series of papers [46.55–
64]. We note that most of the earlier techniques are
ofﬂine and address the full SLAM problem. In more
recent years, new incremental versions that effectively
re-use the previously computed solution have been pro-
posed such as [46.65–67].
The basic intuition of graph-based SLAM is a fol-
lows. Landmarks and robot locations can be thought of
as nodes in a graph. Every consecutive pair of locations
xt1; xt is tied together by an edge that represents the
information conveyed by the odometry reading ut. Fur-
ther edges exist between the nodes that correspond to
locations xt and landmarks mi, assuming that at time t
the robot sensed landmark i. Edges in this graph are

Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
46.2 The Three Main SLAM Paradigms
1163
Part E | 46.2
soft constraints. Relaxing these constraints yields the
robot’s best estimate for the map and the full path.
The construction of the graph is illustrated in
Fig. 46.7. Suppose at time t D 1, the robot senses
landmark m1. This adds an arc in the (yet highly in-
complete) graph between x1 and m1. When caching
the edges in a matrix format (which happens to cor-
respond to a quadratic equation deﬁning the resulting
constraints), a value is added to the elements be-
tween x1 and m1, as shown on the right hand side of
Fig. 46.7a.
Now suppose the robot moves. The odometry read-
ing u2 leads to an arc between nodes x1 and x2, as
shown in Fig. 46.7b. Consecutive application of these
two basic steps leads to an graph of increasing size,
as illustrated in Fig. 46.7c. Nevertheless this graph is
sparse, in that each node is only connected to a small
number of other nodes (assuming a sensor with limited
sensing range). The number of constraints in the graph
is (at worst) linear in the time elapsed and in the num-
ber of nodes in the graph.
m2
x2
x3
x4
x1
m3
m4
m1
m4
m3
m2
m1
x4
x3
x2
x1
x1
x2
x3
x4
m1
m2
m3
m4
x1
m1
m1
x1
x1
m1
a)
c)
x2
x1
m1
m1
x2
x1
x1
x2
m1
b)
Fig.46.7a–c Illustration of the graph construction. The (a)
diagram shows the graph, the (b) the constraints in matrix
form. (a) Observation ls landmark m1. (b) Robot motion
from x1 to x2. (c) Several steps later
If we think of the graph as a spring-mass mod-
el [46.60], computing the SLAM solution is equivalent
to computing the state of minimal energy of this model.
To see, we note that the graph corresponds to the log-
posterior of the full SLAM problem (46.4)
log p.XT; m j ZT; UT/ :
(46.15)
Without derivation, we state that this logarithm is of the
form
log p.XT; m j ZT; UT/
D const C
X
t
log p.xt j xt1; ut/
C
X
t
log p.zt j xt; m/ ;
(46.16)
assuming independence between the individual obser-
vations and odometry readings. Each constraint of the
form log p.xt j xt1; ut/ is the result of exactly one robot
motion event, and it corresponds to an edge in the graph.
Likewise, each constraint of the form log p.zt j xt; m/ is
the result of one sensor measurement, to which we can
also ﬁnd a corresponding edge in the graph. The SLAM
problem is then simply to ﬁnd the mode of this equa-
tion, i. e.,
X
T ; m D argmax
XT;m
log p.XT; m j ZT; UT/ :
(46.17)
Without derivation, we note that under the Gaussian
noise assumptions, which was made in the point-
landmark example, this expression resolves to the fol-
lowing quadratic form
log p.XT; m j ZT; UT/ D const
C
X
t
Œxt  g.xt1; ut/T R1
t
Œxt  g.xt1; ut/
„
ƒ‚
…
odometry reading
C
X
t
Œzt  h.xt; m/T Q1
t
Œzt  h.xt; m/
„
ƒ‚
…
feature observation
:
(46.18)
This quadratic form yields a sparse system of equations
and a number of efﬁcient optimization techniques can
be applied. Common choices include direct methods
such as sparse Cholesky and QR decomposition, or iter-
ative ones such as gradient descent, conjugate gradient,
and others. Most SLAM implementations rely on iter-
atively linearizing the functions g and h, in which case
the objective in (46.18) becomes quadratic in all of its
variables.
Extensions to support an effective correction of
large-scale graphs are hierarchical methods. One of

Part E | 46.2
1164
Part E
Moving in the Environment
the ﬁrst is the ATLAS framework [46.25], which con-
structs a two-level hierarchy combining a Kalman ﬁlter
that operates in the lower level and a global optimiza-
tion at the higher level. Similar to that, Hierarchical
SLAM [46.68] is a technique for using independent
local maps, which are merged in case of re-visiting
a place. A fully hierarchical approach has been pre-
sented in [46.65]. It builds a multilevel pose-graph and
employs an incremental, lazy optimization scheme that
allows for optimizing large graphs and at the same time
can be executed at each step during mapping. An al-
ternative hierarchical approach is [46.69], which recur-
sively partitions the graph into multiple-level submaps
using the nested dissection algorithm.
When it comes to computing highly accurate envi-
ronment reconstructions, approaches that do not only
optimize the poses of the robot but also each indi-
vidual measurement of a dense sensor often provide
better results. In the spirit of bundle adjustment [46.4],
approaches for laser scanners [46.70] and Kinect cam-
eras [46.71] have been proposed.
The graphical paradigm can be extended to han-
dle the data association problems as we can integrate
additional knowledge on data association into (46.18).
Suppose some oracle informed us that landmarks mi
and mj in the map corresponded to one and the same
physical landmark in the world. Then, we can ei-
ther remove mj from the graph and attach all adjacent
edges to mi, or we can add a soft correspondence con-
straint [46.72] of the form
.mj  mi/T  .mj  mi/ :
(46.19)
Here  is 2-by-2 diagonal matrix whose coefﬁcients de-
termine the penalty for not assigning identical locations
to two landmarks (hence we want  to be large). Since
graphical methods are usually used for the full SLAM
problem, the optimization can be interleaved with the
search for the optimal data association.
Data association errors typically have a strong im-
pact in the resulting map estimate. Even a small number
of wrong data associations is likely to result in incon-
sistent map estimates. Recently, novel approaches have
been proposed that are robust under a certain number of
false associations. For example, [46.73, 74] propose an
iterative procedure that allows for disabling constraints,
an action that is associated with a cost. A generalization
of this method introduced in [46.75] formulates [46.74]
as a robust cost function also reducing the compu-
tational requirements. Such approaches can deal with
a signiﬁcant number of false associations and still pro-
vide high-quality maps. Consistency checks for loop
closure hypotheses can be found in other approaches
as well, both in the front-end [46.76] and in the opti-
mizer [46.77]. There has also been an extension that can
deal with multimodal constraints [46.78], proposing
a max-mixture representation for maintaining efﬁciency
of the log likelihood optimizing in (46.16). As a result
of that, the multimodal extension has only little im-
pact on the runtime and can easily be incorporated in
most optimizers. Also robust cost function are used for
SLAM, for example pseudo Huber and several alterna-
tives [46.75, 79–81].
Graphical SLAM methods have the advantage that
they scale to much higher-dimensional maps than EKF
SLAM, exploiting the sparsity of the graph. The key
limiting factor in EKF SLAM is the covariance matrix,
which takes space (and update time) quadratic in the
size of the map. No such constraint exists in graphical
methods. The update time of the graph is constant, and
the amount of memory required is linear (under some
mild assumptions). A further advantage of graph-based
methods over the EKF is their ability to constantly re-
linearize the error function which often leads to better
results. Performing the optimization can be expensive,
however. Technically, ﬁnding the optimal data associa-
tion is suspected to be an NP-hard problem, although in
practice the number of plausible assignments is usually
small. The continuous optimization of the log likeli-
hood function in (46.18) depends among other things
on the number and size of loops in the map. Also the
initialization can have a strong impact on the result and
a good initial guess can simplify the optimization sub-
stantially [46.8, 82, 83].
We note that the graph-based paradigm is very
closely linked to information theory, in that the soft con-
straints constitute the information the robot has on the
world (in an information-theoretic sense [46.92]). Most
methods in the ﬁeld are ofﬂine and they optimize for
the entire robot path. If the robot path is long, the opti-
mization may become cumbersome. Over the last ﬁve
years, however, incremental optimization techniques
have been proposed that aim at providing a sufﬁcient
but not necessarily perfect model of the environment
at every point in time. This allows a robot to make
decisions based on the current model, for example, to
determine exploration goals. In this context, incremen-
tal variants [46.93, 94] of stochastic gradient descent
techniques [46.8, 91] have been proposed that estimate
which part of the graph requires re-optimization given
new sensor data. Incremental methods [46.66, 79, 95] in
the smoothing and mapping framework can be execute
at each step of the mapping process and achieve the
performance by variable ordering and selective relin-
earization. As also evaluated in [46.96] for the SLAM
problem, variable ordering impacts the performance of
the optimization. Others use hierarchical data struc-
tures [46.89] and pose-graphs [46.97] combined with

Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
46.2 The Three Main SLAM Paradigms
1165
Part E | 46.2
Table 46.1 Recent open-source graph-based SLAM implementations
Name
Comment
Dynamic covariance
scaling (DCS) [46.75]
Optimization with a robust cost function for dealing with outliers
Integrated into g2o
g2o [46.80]
Flexible and easily extendable optimization framework for SLAM
Comes with different optimization approaches and error functions
Supports external plugins
GTSAM2.1 [46.79]
Flexible optimization framework for SLAM and SFMstructure from motion
Implements direct and iterative optimization techniques
Implements smoothing and mapping (SAM), iSAM, and iSAM2
Implements bundle adjustment for Visual SLAM and SFM
HOG-Man [46.65]
Incremental optimization approach via hierarchical pose graphs and lazy optimization
Requires pose-graphs with full rank constraints
iSAM2 [46.66]
General incremental nonlinear optimization with variable elimination
Variable re-ordering to retain sparsity
On-demand re-linearization of selected variables
KinFu (KinectFusion
reimplemented)
Open source reimplementation of KinectFusion [46.84] within the point cloud library (PCL)
Dense and highly accurate reconstruction using a Kinect camera
Currently limited to medium sized rooms
MaxMixture [46.78]
Optimization for multimodal constraints and outliers
Robust to outliers
Plugin for g2o
Parallel tracking and
mapping (PTAM) [46.85]
System for tracking a hand-held monocular camera and observed features
Operates on comparably small workspaces
RGBD-SLAM [46.86]
Kinect-frontend for HOG-Man and g2o
Fairly standard combination of SURF matching and RANSAC
ScaViSLAM [46.87]
SLAM system for stereo and Kinect-style cameras
Combines local bundle adjustment with sparse global optimization for on-the-ﬂy processing
SLAM6-D [46.88]
SLAM system that operates on point clouds from 3-D laser data
Applies iterative closest point algorithm (ICP) and global relaxation
Sparse surface adjustment
(SSA) [46.70, 71]
Optimizes robot poses and proximity sensor data jointly
Provides smooth surface estimates
Assumes a range sensor (e.g., laser scanner, Kinect, or similar)
TreeMap [46.89]
Incremental optimization approach
Update in O .log N/ time
Provides only a mean estimate
TORO [46.90]
Optimization approach that extends stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [46.91]
Robust under bad initial guesses
Recovers quickly from large errors but slow convergence at minimum
Assumes that constraints have roughly spherical covariance matrices
Provides only a mean estimate
Vertigo [46.74]
Switchable constraints for robust optimization
Plugin for g2o
a lazy optimization for on-the-ﬂy mapping [46.65]. As
an alternative to global methods, relative optimization
approaches [46.98] aim at computing locally consistent
geometric maps but only topological maps on the global
scale. Hybrid approaches [46.87] seek to combine the
best of both worlds.
There also exists a number of cross-overs that ma-
nipulate the graph online so as to factor out past
robot location variables. The resulting algorithms are
ﬁlters [46.25, 33, 99, 100], and they tend to be inti-
mately related to information ﬁlter methods. Many of
the original attempts to decompose EKF SLAM repre-
sentations into smaller submaps to scale up are based
on motivations that are not dissimilar to the graphical
approach [46.27, 28, 101].
Recently, researchers addressed the problem of
long-term operation and frequent revisits of already
mapped terrain. To avoid densely connected pose-
graphs that lead to slow convergence behavior, the robot
can switch between SLAM and localization, can merge
nodes to avoid a growth of the graph [46.90, 102], or
can discard nodes or edges [46.32, 103–105].
Graphical and optimization-based SLAM algorithm
are still subject of intense research and the paradigm
scales to maps large numbers of nodes [46.25, 55, 57,
59, 63–65, 89, 90, 106, 107]. Arguably, the graph-based

Part E | 46.3
1166
Part E
Moving in the Environment
paradigm has generated some the largest SLAM maps
ever built. Furthermore, the SLAM community started
to release ﬂexible optimization frameworks and SLAM
implementations under open source licenses to sup-
port further developments and to allow for efﬁcient
comparisons, (Table 46.1). Especially the optimization
frameworks [46.66, 79, 80] are ﬂexible and powerful
state of the art tools for developing graph-based SLAM
systems. They can be either used as a black box or can
be easily extended though plugins.
46.2.4 Relation of Paradigms
The three paradigms just discussed cover the vast ma-
jority of work in the ﬁeld of SLAM. As discussed,
EKF SLAM comes with a computational hurdle that
poses serious scaling limitations and the linearization
may lead to inconsistent maps. The most promising ex-
tensions of EKF SLAM are based on building local
submaps; however, in many ways the resulting algo-
rithms resemble the graph-based approach.
Particle ﬁlter methods sidestep some of the is-
sues arising from the natural inter-feature correlations
in the map – which hindered the EKF. By sampling
from robot poses, the individual landmarks in the map
become independent, and hence are decorrelated. As
a result, FastSLAM can represent the posterior by
a sampled robot pose, and many local, independent
Gaussians for its landmarks. The particle representation
offers advantages for SLAM as it allows for compu-
tationally efﬁcient updates and for sampling over data
associations. On the negative side, the number of neces-
sary particles can grow very large, especially for robots
seeking to map multiple nested loops.
Graph-based methods address the full SLAM prob-
lem, hence are in the standard formulation not online.
They draw their intuition form the fact that SLAM
can be modeled by a sparse graph of soft constraints,
where each constraint either corresponds to a motion or
a measurement event. Due to the availability of highly
efﬁcient optimization methods for sparse nonlinear op-
timization problems, graph-based SLAM has become
the method of choice for building large-scale maps.
Recent developments have brought up several graph-
based methods for incremental map building that can
be executed at every time step during navigation. Data
association search can be incorporated into the basic
mathematical framework and different approaches that
are even robust under wrong data associations are avail-
able today.
46.3 Visual and RGB-D SLAM
A popular and important topic in recent years has been
Visual SLAM – the challenge of building maps and
tracking the robot pose in full 6-DOF using data from
cameras [46.108] or RGB-D (Kinect) sensors [46.86,
109]. Visual sensors offer a wealth of information that
enables the construction of rich 3-D models of the
world. They also enable difﬁcult issues such as loop-
closing to be addressed in novel ways using appearance
information [46.110]. Visual SLAM is anticipated to
be a critical area for future research in perception for
robotics, as we seek to develop low-cost systems that
are capably of intelligent physical interaction with the
world.
Attempting SLAM with monocular, stereo, om-
nidirectional, or RGB-D cameras raises the level-of-
difﬁculty of many of the SLAM components, such
as data association and computational efﬁciency, de-
scribed above. A key challenge is robustness. Many
visual SLAM applications of interest, such as aug-
mented reality [46.85], entail handheld camera motions,
which present greater difﬁculties for state estimation,
in comparison to the motion of a wheeled robot across
a ﬂat ﬂoor.
Visual navigation and mapping was a key early goal
in the mobile robotics community [46.111, 112], but
early approaches were hampered by the lack of sufﬁ-
cient computational resources to handle massive video
data streams. Early approaches were typically based
on extended Kalman ﬁlters [46.113–116], but did not
compute the full covariance for the feature poses and
camera trajectory, resulting in a loss of consistency.
Visual SLAM is closely related to the structure from
motion (SFM) problem in computer vision [46.4, 5].
Historically, SFM was primarily concerned with off-
line batch processing, whereas SLAM seeks to achieve
a solution for online operation, suitable for closed-loop
interaction of a robot or user with its environment. In
comparison to laser scanners, cameras provide a ﬁre hy-
drant of information, making online processing nearly
impossible until recent increases in computation have
become available.
Davison was an early pioneer in developing com-
plete visual SLAM systems, initially using a real-time
active stereo head [46.121] that tracked distinctive vi-
sual features with a full covariance EKF approach. Sub-
sequent work developed the ﬁrst real-time SLAM sys-
tem that operated with a single freely moving camera
as the only data source [46.23, 122]. This system could
build sparse, room-size maps of indoor scenes at 30 Hz
frame-rate in real-time, a notable historical achievement

Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
46.3 Visual and RGB-D SLAM
1167
Part E | 46.3
a)
b)
–50
0
50
100
150
200
250
–50
0
50
100
150
200
250
50
0
–50
–100
–150
–200
–140
–120
–100
– 80
– 60
– 40
–20
0
20
y (m)
y (m)
x (m)
Fig. 46.8 (a) A 2-km path and 50 000 frames estimated for the New College Dataset (after [46.117]) using relative
bundle adjustment (after [46.98]). (b) the relative bundle adjustment solution is easily improved by taking FAB-MAP
(after [46.118]) loop-closures into account – this is achieved without global optimization (after [46.119]). Sibley et al.
advocate that relative metric accuracy and topological consistency are the requirements for autonomous navigation,
and these are better achieved using a relative manifold representation instead of using a conventional single Euclidean
representation [46.120]
a)
b)
Fig. 46.9 (a) 3-D Model and (b) close-up view of a corridor environment in the Paul G. Allen building at University of
Washington built from Kinect data (after [46.109]; image courtesy of Peter Henry, University of Washington)
in visual SLAM research. A difﬁculty encountered with
initial monocular SLAM [46.23] was coping with the
initialization of points that were far away from the cam-
era, due to nonGaussian distributions of such feature lo-
cations resulting from poor depth information. This lim-
itation was overcome in [46.24], introducing an inverse
depth parameterization for monocular SLAM, a key
development for enabling a uniﬁed treatment of initial-
ization and tracking of visual features in real-time.
A milestone in creating robust visual SLAM sys-
tems was the introduction of keyframes in parallel
tracking and mapping (PTAM) [46.85], which sep-
arated the tasks of keyframe mapping and localiza-
tion into parallel threads, improving robustness and
performance for online processing. Keyframes are
now a mainstream concept for complexity reduc-
tion in visual SLAM systems. Related approaches
using keyframes include [46.87, 123–126]. The work

Part E | 46.3
1168
Part E
Moving in the Environment
in [46.108] analyzes the tradeoffs between ﬁltering and
keyframe-based bundle adjustment in visual SLAM,
and concluded that keyframe bundle adjustment outper-
forms ﬁltering, as it provides the most accuracy per unit
of computing time.
As pointed out by Davison and other researchers,
an appealing aspect of visual SLAM is that camera
measurements can provide odometry information, and
indeed visual odometry is a key component of modern
SLAM systems [46.127]. Here, [46.128] and [46.129]
provide an extensive tutorial of techniques for visual
odometry, including feature detection, feature match-
ing, outlier rejection, and constraint estimation, and
trajectory optimization. Finally, a publicly available vi-
sual odometry library [46.130] that is optimized for
efﬁcient operation on small unmanned aerial vehicles
is available today.
Visual information offers a tremendous source of in-
formation for loop closing, not present in the canonical
2-D laser SLAM systems developed in the early 2000s.
The work in [46.110] was one of the ﬁrst to employ
techniques for visual object recognition [46.131] to lo-
cation recognition. More recently FAB-MAP [46.118,
132] has demonstrated appearance-only place recogni-
tion at large scale, mapping trajectories with a length
of 1000km. Combining a bag-of-features approach
with a probabilistic place model and Chow–Liu tree
inference leads to place recognition that is robust
against perceptual aliasing while remaining compu-
tationally efﬁcient. Other work on place recognition
includes [46.133], which combines bag-of-words loop
closing with tests of geometrical consistency based on
conditional random ﬁelds (Fig. 46.8).
The techniques described above have formed the
basis for a number of notable large-scale SLAM sys-
tems developed in recent years. A 2008 special is-
sue of the IEEE Transactions on Robotics provides
a good snapshot of recent state-of-the-art SLAM tech-
niques [46.135]. Other notable recent examples in-
clude [46.98, 119, 126, 136–138]. The idea of employ-
ing relative bundle adjustment [46.98] to compute a full
maximum likelihood solution in an online fashion,
even for loop closures, by employing a manifold rep-
resentation that does not attempt to enforce Euclidean
constraints results in maps that can be computed at
high frame rate (see also Fig. 46.8). Finally, view-based
mapping systems [46.126, 136, 137] aim at large-scale
and/or life-long visual mapping based on the pose
graph optimization techniques described above in Sec-
tion 46.2.3.
Several compelling 3-D mapping and localization
have been created in recent years with RGB-D (Kinect)
sensors. The combination of direct range measurements
with dense visual imagery can enable dramatic im-
provements in mapping and navigation systems for in-
door environments. State-of-the-art RGB-D SLAM sys-
tems include [46.109] and [46.86]. Figure 46.9 shows
examples of the output of these systems.
Other researchers aim at exploiting the surface
properties of scanned environments to correct for sen-
a)
b)
c)
Fig.46.10a–c Results obtained with KinectFusion (af-
ter [46.134]). (a) A local scene as a normal map and (b) as
a Phong-shaded rendering. The (c) image depicts a larger
scene (image courtesy of Richard Newcombe, Imperial
College London)

Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
46.4 Conclusion and Future Challenges
1169
Part E | 46.4
Fig. 46.11 Spatially ex-
tended KinectFusion output
produced in real-time with
Kintinuous (after [46.139])
sor noise of range sensors such as the Kinect [46.71].
They jointly optimize the poses of the sensor and
the positions of the surface points measured and it-
eratively reﬁne the structure of the error function
by recomputing the data associations after each opti-
mization, resulting in accurate smooth models of the
environment.
An emerging area for future research is the de-
velopment of fully dense processing methods that
exploit recent advances in commodity graphical pro-
cessing unit (GPU) technology. Kinect-based dense
tracking and mapping, a fully-dense method for small-
scale visual tracking and reconstruction is described
in [46.140]. Dense modeling and tracking are achieved
via highly parallelized operations on commodity GPU
hardware to yield a system that outperforms previ-
ous methods such as PTAM for challenging camera
trajectories. Dense methods offer an interesting per-
spective from which to address long-standing problems,
such as visual odometry, from a fresh perspective,
without requiring explicit feature detection and match-
ing [46.141]. KinectFusion [46.84, 134] is a dense mod-
eling system that tracks the 3-D pose of a handheld
Kinect while concurrently reconstructing high-quality
scene 3-D models in real-time. See Fig. 46.10 for an
example. KinectFusion has been applied to spatially ex-
tended environments in [46.139, 142]. An example is
shown in Fig. 46.11.
46.4 Conclusion and Future Challenges
This chapter has provided an introduction into SLAM,
which is deﬁned as the problem faced by a mobile
platform roaming an unknown environment, and seek-
ing to localize itself while concurrently building a map
of the environment. The chapter discussed three main
paradigms in SLAM, which are based on the ex-
tended Kalman ﬁlter, particle ﬁlters, and graph-based
sparse optimization techniques, and then described re-
cent progress in Visual/Kinect SLAM.
The following references provide an in-depth tuto-
rial on SLAM and much greater depth of coverage on
the details of popular SLAM algorithms. Furthermore,
several implementations of popular SLAM systems, in-
cluding most of the approaches listed in Table 46.1,
can be found in online resources such as http://www.
openslam.org or in the references [46.6, 9, 21, 62].
The considerable progress in SLAM in the past
decade is beyond doubt. The core state estimation at

Part E | 46
1170
Part E
Moving in the Environment
the heart of SLAM is now quite well understood,
and a number of impressive implementations have
been developed, including several widely used open
source software implementations and some commer-
cial projects. None-the-less, a number of open research
challenges remain for the general problem of robotic
mapping in complex and dynamic environments over
extended periods of time, including robots sharing, ex-
tending, and revising previously built models, efﬁcient
failure recovery, zero user intervention, and operation
on resource-constrained systems. Another exciting area
for the future is the further development of fully dense
visual mapping systems exploiting the latest advances
in GPU hardware development.
An ultimate goal is to realize the challenge of per-
sistent navigation and mapping – the capability for
a robot to perform SLAM robustly for days, weeks,
or months at a time with minimal human supervi-
sion, in complex and dynamic environments. Taking
the limit as t ! 1 poses difﬁcult challenges to most
current algorithms; in fact, most robot mapping and
navigation algorithms are doomed to fail with the
passage of time, as errors inevitably accrue. Despite
recent encouraging solutions [46.102, 105], more re-
search is needed for techniques that can recover from
mistakes and enable robots to deal with changes in
the environment and enabling a long-term autonomous
existence.
Video-References
VIDEO 439
Deformation-based loop closure for Dense RGB-D SLAM
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/46/videodetails/439
VIDEO 440
Large-scale SLAM using the Atlas framework
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/46/videodetails/440
VIDEO 441
Graph-based SLAM
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/46/videodetails/441
VIDEO 442
Graph-based SLAM
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/46/videodetails/442
VIDEO 443
Graph-based SLAM
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/46/videodetails/443
VIDEO 444
Graph-based SLAM
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/46/videodetails/444
VIDEO 445
Graph-based SLAM
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/46/videodetails/445
VIDEO 446
Graph-based SLAM using TORO
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/46/videodetails/446
VIDEO 447
Sparse pose adjustment
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/46/videodetails/447
VIDEO 449
Pose graph compression for laser-based SLAM
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/46/videodetails/449
VIDEO 450
Pose graph compression for laser-based SLAM
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/46/videodetails/450
VIDEO 451
Pose graph compression for laser-based SLAM
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/46/videodetails/451
VIDEO 452
DTAM: Dense tracking and mapping in real-time
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/46/videodetails/452
VIDEO 453
MonoSLAM: Real-time single camera SLAM
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/46/videodetails/453
VIDEO 454
SLAM++: Simultaneous localisation and mapping at the level of objects
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/46/videodetails/454
VIDEO 455
Extended Kalman filter SLAM
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/46/videodetails/455

Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
References
1171
Part E | 46
References
46.1
C.F. Gauss: Theoria Motus Corporum Coelestium
(Theory of the Motion of the Heavenly Bodies Mov-
ing about the Sun in Conic Sections) (Perthes and
Bessen, Hamburg 1809), Republished in 1857 and
by Dover in 1963
46.2
D.C. Brown: The bundle adjustment – Progress
and prospects, Int. Arch. Photogramm. 21(3), 3:3–
3:35 (1976)
46.3
G. Konecny: Geoinformation: Remote Sensing,
Photogrammetry and Geographical Information
Systems (Taylor Francis, London 2002)
46.4
B. Triggs, P. McLauchlan, R. Hartley, A. Fitzgibbon:
Bundle adjustment – A modern synthesis, Lect.
Notes Comput. Sci. 62, 298–372 (2000)
46.5
R. Hartley, A. Zisserman: Multiple View Geometry
in Computer Vision (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cam-
bridge 2003)
46.6
T. Bailey, H.F. Durrant-Whyte: Simultaneous lo-
calisation and mapping (SLAM): Part II, Robotics
Autom. Mag. 13(3), 108–117 (2006)
46.7
H.F. Durrant-Whyte, T. Bailey: Simultaneous lo-
calisation and mapping (SLAM): Part I, Robotics
Autom. Mag. 13(2), 99–110 (2006)
46.8
G. Grisetti, C. Stachniss, W. Burgard: Nonlinear
constraint network optimization for efficient map
learning, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 10(3),
428–439 (2009)
46.9
S.
Thrun,
W.
Burgard,
D.
Fox:
Probabilistic
Robotics (MIT Press, Cambridge, 2005)
46.10
R. Smith, M. Self, P. Cheeseman: A stochastic
map for uncertain spatial relationships, Proc. Int.
Symp. Robotics Res. (ISRR) (MIT Press, Cambridge
1988) pp. 467–474
46.11
R. Smith, M. Self, P. Cheeseman: Estimating un-
certain spatial relationships in robotics. In: Au-
tonomous Robot Vehicles, ed. by I.J. Cox, G.T. Wil-
fong (Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg 1990)
pp. 167–193
46.12
P. Moutarlier, R. Chatila: Stochastic multisensory
data fusion for mobile robot location and envi-
ronment modeling, 5th Int. Symp. Robotics Res.
(ISRR) (1989) pp. 207–216
46.13
P. Moutarlier, R. Chatila: An experimental sys-
tem for incremental environment modeling by
an autonomous mobile robot, 1st Int. Sym. Exp.
Robotics (ISER) (1990)
46.14
R. Kalman: A new approach to linear filtering and
prediction problems, J. Fluids 82, 35–45 (1960)
46.15
A.M. Jazwinsky: Stochastic Processes and Filtering
Theory (Academic, New York 1970)
46.16
M.G.
Dissanayake,
P.M.
Newman,
S.
Clark,
H.F. Durrant-Whyte, M. Csorba: A solution to
the simultaneous localization and map building
(SLAM) Problem, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 17(3),
229–241 (2001)
46.17
J. Neira, J. Tardos, J. Castellanos: Linear time
vehicle relocation in SLAM, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2003) pp. 427–433
46.18
J. Neira, J.D. Tardos: Data association in stochas-
tic mapping using the joint compatibility test,
IEEE
Trans.
Robotics
Autom.
17(6),
890–897
(2001)
46.19
G.D. Tipaldi, M. Braun, K.O. Arras: Flirt: interest
regions for 2D range data with applications to
robot navigation, Proc. Int. Symp. Exp. Robotics
(ISER) (2010)
46.20
G.D. Tipaldi, L. Spinello, W. Burgard: Geometrical
flirt phrases for large scale place recognition in 2D
range data, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2013)
46.21
T. Bailey: Mobile Robot Localisation and Mapping
in Extensive Outdoor Environments, Ph.D. Thesis
(Univ. of Sydney, Sydney 2002)
46.22
J.J. Leonard, R.R. Rikoski, P.M. Newman, M. Bosse:
Mapping partially observable features from mul-
tiple uncertain vantage points, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 21(10), 943–975 (2002)
46.23
A.J. Davison: Real-time simultaneous localisation
and mapping with a single camera, Proc. IEEE 9th
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (2003) pp. 1403–1410
46.24
J.M.M. Montiel, J. Civera, A.J. Davison: Unified in-
verse depth parametrization for monocular SLAM,
Robotics Sci. Syst., Vol. 1 (2006)
46.25
M. Bosse, P.M. Newman, J. Leonard, S. Teller:
Simultaneous localization and map building in
large-scale cyclic environments using the Atlas
Framework, Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(12), 1113–1139
(2004)
46.26
J. Nieto, T. Bailey, E. Nebot: Scan-SLAM: Combin-
ing EKF-SLAM and scan correlation, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
46.27
J. Guivant, E. Nebot: Optimization of the si-
multaneous localization and map building algo-
rithm for real time implementation, IEEE Trans.
Robotics. Autom. 17(3), 242–257 (2001)
46.28
J.J. Leonard, H. Feder: A computationally efficient
method for large-scale concurrent mapping and
localization, Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Robotics Res.
(ISRR), ed. by J. Hollerbach, D. Koditschek (1999)
pp. 169–176
46.29
J.D. Tardós, J. Neira, P.M. Newman, J.J. Leonard:
Robust mapping and localization in indoor envi-
ronments using sonar data, Int. J. Robotics Res.
21(4), 311–330 (2002)
46.30
S.B. Williams, G. Dissanayake, H.F. Durrant-
Whyte: Towards multi-vehicle simultaneous lo-
calisation and mapping, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002) pp. 2743–2748
46.31
R.M. Eustice, H. Singh, J.J. Leonard: Exactly sparse
delayed-state filters for view-based SLAM, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 22(6), 1100–1114 (2006)
46.32
V. Ila, J.M. Porta, J. Andrade-Cetto: Information-
based compact pose SLAM, IEEE Trans. Robotics
26(1), 78–93 (2010)
46.33
S. Thrun, D. Koller, Z. Ghahramani, H.F. Durrant-
Whyte, A.Y. Ng: Simultaneous mapping and lo-
calization with sparse extended information fil-
ters, Proc.5th Int. Workshop Algorithmic Found.
Robotics, ed. by J.-D. Boissonnat, J. Burdick,
K. Goldberg, S. Hutchinson (2002)

Part E | 46
1172
Part E
Moving in the Environment
46.34
M.R. Walter, R.M. Eustice, J.J. Leonard: Exactly
sparse extended information filters for feature-
based SLAM, Int. J. Robotics Res. 26(4), 335–359
(2007)
46.35
T. Bailey, J. Nieto, J. Guivant, M. Stevens, E. Nebot:
Consistency of the EKF-SLAM algorithm, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2006)
pp. 3562–3568
46.36
S. Huang, G. Dissanayake: Convergence and con-
sistency analysis for extended Kalman filter based
SLAM, IEEE Trans. Robotics 23(5), 1036–1049 (2007)
46.37
G.P. Huang, A.I. Mourikis, S.I. Roumeliotis: Ob-
servability-based Rules for Designing Consistent
EKF SLAM Estimators, Int. J. Robotics Res. 29, 502–
528 (2010)
46.38
N. Metropolis, S. Ulam: The Monte Carlo method,
J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 44(247), 335–341 (1949)
46.39
D. Blackwell: Conditional expectation and unbi-
ased sequential estimation, Ann. Math. Stat. 18,
105–110 (1947)
46.40
C.R. Rao: Information and accuracy obtainable in
estimation of statistical parameters, Bull. Calcutta
Math. Soc. 37(3), 81–91 (1945)
46.41
K. Murphy, S. Russel: Rao–Blackwellized parti-
cle filtering for dynamic Bayesian networks. In:
Sequential Monte Carlo Methods in Practice, ed.
by A. Docout, N. de Freitas, N. Gordon (Springer,
Berlin 2001) pp. 499–516
46.42
M. Montemerlo, S. Thrun, D. Koller, B. Wegbreit:
FastSLAM: A factored solution to the simultane-
ous localization and mapping problem, Proc. AAAI
Natl. Conf. Artif. Intell. (2002)
46.43
J. Pearl: Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent
Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference (Morgan
Kaufmann, San Mateo 1988)
46.44
J. Guivant, E. Nebot, S. Baiker: Autonomous nav-
igation and map building using laser range sen-
sors in outdoor applications, J. Robotics Syst.
17(10), 565–583 (2000)
46.45
G. Grisetti, C. Stachniss, W. Burgard: Improved
techniques for grid mapping with Rao-Black-
wellized particle filters, IEEE Trans. Robotics 23,
34–46 (2007)
46.46
D. Hähnel, D. Fox, W. Burgard, S. Thrun: A highly
efficient FastSLAM algorithm for generating cyclic
maps of large-scale environments from raw laser
range measurements, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2003)
46.47
C. Stachniss, G. Grisetti, W. Burgard, N. Roy:
Evaluation of gaussian proposal distributions for
mapping with rao-blackwellized particle filters,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2007)
46.48
A. Eliazar, R. Parr: DP-SLAM: Fast, robust simulta-
neous localization and mapping without prede-
termined landmarks, Proc. 16th Int. Jt. Conf. Artif.
Intell. (IJCAI) (2003) pp. 1135–1142
46.49
A. Eliazar, R. Parr: DP-SLAM 2.0, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 2 (2004)
pp. 1314–1320
46.50
G. Grisetti, G.D. Tipaldi, C. Stachniss, W. Burgard,
D. Nardi: Fast and accurate SLAM with Rao-Black-
wellized particle filters, J. Robotics Auton. Syst.
55(1), 30–38 (2007)
46.51
D. Roller, M. Montemerlo, S. Thrun, B. Wegbreit:
FastSLAM 2.0: An improved particle filtering algo-
rithm for simultaneous localization and mapping
that provably converges, Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell.
(IICAI) (Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco 2003)
pp. 1151–1156
46.52
R. van der Merwe, N. de Freitas, A. Doucet, E. Wan:
The unscented particle filter, Proc. Adv. Neural In-
form. Process. Syst. Conf. (2000) pp. 584–590
46.53
C. Stachniss, G. Grisetti, W. Burgard: Recovering
particle diversity in a Rao-Blackwellized parti-
cle filter for SLAM after actively closing loops,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
pp. 655–660
46.54
F. Lu, E. Milios: Globally consistent range scan
alignment for environmental mapping, Auton.
Robots 4, 333–349 (1997)
46.55
F. Dellaert: Square root SAM, Robotics Sci. Syst.,
ed. by S. Thrun, G. Sukhatme, S. Schaal, O. Brock
(MIT Press, Cambridge 2005)
46.56
T. Duckett, S. Marsland, J. Shapiro: Learning glob-
ally consistent maps by relaxation, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2000) pp. 3841–3846
46.57
T. Duckett, S. Marsland, J. Shapiro: Fast, on-
line learning of globally consistent maps, Auton.
Robots 12(3), 287–300 (2002)
46.58
J. Folkesson, H.I. Christensen: Graphical SLAM:
A self-correcting map, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 383–390
46.59
U. Frese, G. Hirzinger: Simultaneous localization
and mapping – A discussion, Proc. IJCAI Workshop
Reason. Uncertain. Robotics (2001) pp. 17–26
46.60
M. Golfarelli, D. Maio, S. Rizzi: Elastic correction
of dead-reckoning errors in map building, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1998)
pp. 905–911
46.61
J. Gutmann, K. Konolige: Incremental mapping of
large cyclic environments, Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Comput. Intell. Robotics Autom. (CIRA) (2000)
pp. 318–325
46.62
G. Grisetti, R. Kümmerle, C. Stachniss, W. Burgard:
A Tutorial on Graph-based SLAM, IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst. Mag. 2, 31–43 (2010)
46.63
K. Konolige: Large-scale map-making, Proc. AAAI
Natl. Conf. Artif. Intell. (MIT Press, Cambridge
2004) pp. 457–463
46.64
M. Montemerlo, S. Thrun: Large-scale robotic 3-D
mapping of urban structures, Springer Tract. Adv.
Robotics 21, 141–150 (2005)
46.65
G. Grisetti, R. Kümmerle, C. Stachniss, U. Frese,
C. Hertzberg: Hierarchical optimization on mani-
folds for online 2D and 3D mapping, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2010)
46.66
M. Kaess, H. Johannsson, R. Roberts, V. Ila,
J.J. Leonard, F. Dellaert: iSAM2: Incremental
smoothing and mapping using the Bayes tree,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 31, 217–236 (2012)
46.67
M. Kaess, A. Ranganathan, F. Dellaert: iSAM: In-
cremental Smoothing and Mapping, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 24(6), 1365–1378 (2008)

Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
References
1173
Part E | 46
46.68
C. Estrada, J. Neira, J.D. Tardós: Hierarchical
SLAM: Real-time accurate mapping of large en-
vironments, IEEE Trans. Robotics 21(4), 588–596
(2005)
46.69
K. Ni, F. Dellaert: Multi-level submap based SLAM
using nested dissection, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2010)
46.70
M. Ruhnke, R. Kümmerle, G. Grisetti, W. Burgard:
Highly accurate maximum likelihood laser map-
ping by jointly optimizing laser points and robot
poses, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2011)
46.71
M. Ruhnke, R. Kümmerle, G. Grisetti, W. Burgard:
Highly accurate 3D surface models by sparse sur-
face adjustment, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2012)
46.72
Y. Liu, S. Thrun: Results for outdoor-SLAM using
sparse extended information filters, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2003)
46.73
N. Sünderhauf, P. Protzel: BRIEF-Gist – Closing the
loop by simple means, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011) pp. 1234–1241
46.74
N. Sünderhauf, P. Protzel: Switchable constraints
for robust pose graph SLAM, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2012)
46.75
P. Agarwal, G.D. Tipaldi, L. Spinello, C. Stach-
niss, W. Burgard: Robust map optimization using
dynamic covariance scaling, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2013)
46.76
E. Olson: Recognizing places using spectrally clus-
tered local matches, J. Robotics Auton. Syst.
57(12), 1157–1172 (2009)
46.77
Y. Latif, C. Cadena Lerma, J. Neira: Robust loop
closing over time, Robotics Sci. Syst. (2012)
46.78
E. Olson, P. Agarwal: Inference on networks of
mixtures for robust robot mapping, Robotics Sci.
Syst. (2012)
46.79
F. Dellaert: Factor graphs and GTSAM: A hands-on
introduction, Tech. Rep. GT-RIM-CP & R-2012-002
(Georgia Tech, Atlanta 2012)
46.80
R. Kümmerle, G. Grisetti, H. Strasdat, K. Konolige,
W. Burgard: G²o: A general framework for graph
optimization, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2011)
46.81
D.M. Rosen, M. Kaess, J.J. Leonard: An incre-
mental trust-region method for robust online
sparse least-squares estimation, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012) pp. 1262–
1269
46.82
L. Carlone, R. Aragues, J. Castellanos, B. Bona:
A linear approximation for graph-based simul-
taneous localization and mapping, Robotics Sci.
Syst. (2011)
46.83
G. Grisetti, R. Kümmerle, K. Ni: Robust optimiza-
tion of factor graphs by using condensed mea-
surements, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2012)
46.84
S. Izadi, R.A. Newcombe, D. Kim, O. Hilliges,
D. Molyneaux, S. Hodges, P. Kohli, J. Shotton,
A.J. Davison, A. Fitzgibbon: Kinectfusion: Real-
time dynamic 3D surface reconstruction and in-
teraction, ACM SIGGRAPH Talks (2011) p. 23
46.85
G. Klein, D. Murray: Parallel tracking and map-
ping for small AR workspaces, IEEE ACM Int. Symp.
Mixed Augment. Real. (ISMAR) (2007) pp. 225–
234
46.86
F. Endres, J. Hess, N. Engelhard, J. Sturm, D. Cre-
mers, W. Burgard: An evaluation of the RGB-D
SLAM system, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2012)
46.87
H. Strasdat, A.J. Davison, J.M.M. Montiel, K. Kono-
lige: Double window optimisation for constant
time visual SLAM, Int. Conf. Computer Vis. (ICCV)
(2011)
46.88
A. Nüchter: 3D robot mapping, Springer Tract. Adv.
Robotics 52 (2009)
46.89
U. Frese: Treemap: An O.log n/ algorithm for in-
door simultaneous localization and mapping,
Auton. Robots 21(2), 103–122 (2006)
46.90
G. Grisetti, C. Stachniss, S. Grzonka, W. Burgard:
A tree parameterization for efficiently computing
maximum likelihood maps using gradient de-
scent, Robotics Sci. Syst. (2007)
46.91
E. Olson, J.J. Leonard, S. Teller: Fast iterative
alignment of pose graphs with poor initial esti-
mates, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2006) pp. 2262–2269
46.92
T.M. Cover, J.A. Thomas: Elements of Information
Theory (Wiley, New York 1991)
46.93
E. Olson, J.J. Leonard, S. Teller: Spatially-adap-
tive learning rates for online incremental SLAM,
Robotics Sci. Syst. (2007)
46.94
G. Grisetti, D. Lordi Rizzini, C. Stachniss, E. Olson,
W. Burgard: Online constraint network optimiza-
tion for efficient maximum likelihood map learn-
ing, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2008)
46.95
M. Kaess, A. Ranganathan, F. Dellaert: Fast incre-
mental square root information smoothing, Int.
Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell. (ISCAI) (2007)
46.96
P. Agarwal, E. Olson: Evaluating variable reorder-
ing strategies for SLAM, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intel Robots Syst. (IROS) (2012)
46.97
K. Ni, D. Steedly, F. Dellaert: Tectonic SAM: exact,
out-of-core, submap-based SLAM, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2007) pp. 1678–1685
46.98
G. Sibley, C. Mei, I. Reid, P. Newman: Adaptive
relative bundle adjustment, Robotics Sci. Syst.
(2009)
46.99
P.M. Newman, J.J. Leonard, R. Rikoski: Towards
constant-time SLAM on an autonomous under-
water vehicle using synthetic aperture sonar, 11th
Int. Symp. Robotics Res. (2003)
46.100
M.A. Paskin: Thin junction tree filters for simul-
taneous localization and mapping, Int. Jt. Conf.
Artif. Intell. (IJCAI) (Morgan Kaufmann, New York
2003) pp. 1157–1164
46.101
S.B. Williams: Efficient Solutions to Autonomous
Mapping and Navigation Problems, Ph.D. Thesis
(ACFR Univ. Sydney, Sydney 2001)
46.102
H. Johannsson, M. Kaess, M.F. Fallon, J.J. Leonard:
Temporally scalable visual SLAM using a reduced
pose graph, RSS Workshop Long-term Oper. Au-
ton. Robotic Syst. Chang. Environ. (2012)

Part E | 46
1174
Part E
Moving in the Environment
46.103
N. Carlevaris-Bianco, R.M. Eustice: Generic factor-
based node marginalization and edge sparsifi-
cation for pose-graph SLAM, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2013)
46.104
M. Kaess, F. Dellaert: Covariance recovery from
a square root information matrix for data asso-
ciation, J. Robotics Auton. Syst. 57(12), 1198–1210
(2009)
46.105
H. Kretzschmar, C. Stachniss: Information-theo-
retic compression of pose graphs for laser-based
SLAM, Int. J. Robotics Res. 31(11), 1219–1230 (2012)
46.106
U. Frese, L. Schröder: Closing a million-landmarks
loop, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2006)
46.107
J. McDonald, M. Kaess, C. Cadena, J. Neira,
J.J. Leonard: Real-time
6-DOF
multi-session
visual
SLAM
over
large
scale
environments,
J. Robotics Auton. Syst. 61(10), 1144–1158 (2012)
46.108
H. Strasdat, J.M.M. Montiel, A.J. Davison: Real-
time monocular SLAM: Why filter?, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2010)
46.109
P. Henry, M. Krainin, E. Herbst, X. Ren, D. Fox:
RGB-D mapping: Using depth cameras for dense
3D
modeling
of
indoor
environments,
Int.
J. Robotics Res. 31(5), 647–663 (2012)
46.110
D. Nister, H. Stewenius: Scalable recognition with
a vocabulary tree, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (ICCVPR) (2006) pp. 2161–
2168
46.111
R.A. Brooks: Aspects of mobile robot visual map
making, Proc. Int. Symp. Robotics Res. (ISRR) (MIT
Press, Cambridge 1984) pp. 287–293
46.112
H. Moravec: Obstacle Avoidance and Navigation
in the Real World by a Seeing Robot Rover, Ph.D.
Thesis (Stanford Univ., Stanford 1980)
46.113
N. Ayache, O. Faugeras: Building, registrating, and
fusing noisy visual maps, Int. J. Robotics Res. 7(6),
45–65 (1988)
46.114
D. Kriegman, E. Triendl, T. Binford: Stereo vi-
sion and navigation in buildings for mobile
robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 5(6), 792–803
(1989)
46.115
L. Matthies, S. Shafer: Error modeling in stereo
navigation, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 3(3), 239–248
(1987)
46.116
S. Pollard, J. Porrill, J. Mayhew: Predictive feed-
forward stereo processing, Alvey Vis. Conf. (1989)
pp. 97–102
46.117
M. Smith, I. Baldwin, W. Churchill, R. Paul,
P. Newman: The new college vision and laser data
set, Int. J. Robotics Res. 28(5), 595–599 (2009)
46.118
M. Cummins, P.M. Newman: Appearance-only
SLAM at large scale with FAB-MAP 2.0, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 30(9), 1100–1123 (2010)
46.119
P.M. Newman, G. Sibley, M. Smith, M. Cum-
mins, A. Harrison, C. Mei, I. Posner, R. Shade,
D. Schroter, L. Murphy, W. Churchill, D. Cole,
I. Reid: Navigating, recognising and describing
urban spaces with vision and laser, Int, J. Robotics
Res. 28, 11–12 (2009)
46.120
G. Sibley, C. Mei, I. Reid, P. Newman: Vast-scale
outdoor navigation using adaptive relative bun-
dle adjustment, Int. J. Robotics Res. 29(8), 958–
980 (2010)
46.121
A. Davison, D. Murray: Mobile robot localisation
using active vision, Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV)
(1998) pp. 809–825
46.122
A.J. Davison, I. Reid, N. Molton, O. Stasse:
MonoSLAM: Real-time single camera SLAM, IEEE
Trans., Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 29(6), 1052–1067
(2007)
46.123
R.O. Castle, G. Klein, D.W. Murray: Wide-area aug-
mented reality using camera tracking and map-
ping in multiple regions, Comput. Vis. Image Un-
derst. 115(6), 854–867 (2011)
46.124
E. Eade, T. Drummond: Unified loop closing and
recovery for real time monocular SLAM, Br. Mach.
Vis. Conf. (2008)
46.125
E.
Eade,
P.
Fong,
M.E.
Munich:
Monocular
graph SLAM with complexity reduction, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2010)
pp. 3017–3024
46.126
K. Konolige, M. Agrawal: FrameSLAM: From bun-
dle adjustment to real-time visual mapping, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 24(5), 1066–1077 (2008)
46.127
D. Nister, O. Naroditsky, J. Bergen: Visual odometry
for ground vehicle applications, J. Field Robotics
23(1), 3–20 (2006)
46.128
D. Scaramuzza, F. Fraundorfer: Visual odometry.
Part I: The first 30 years and fundamentals, IEEE
Robotics Autom. Mag. 18(4), 80–92 (2011)
46.129
F. Fraundorfer, D. Scaramuzza: Visual odometry.
Part II: Matching, robustness, optimization, and
applications, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 19(2), 78–
90 (2012)
46.130
A.S. Huang, A. Bachrach, P. Henry, M. Krainin,
D. Maturana, D. Fox, N. Roy: Visual odometry and
mapping for autonomous flight using an RGB-D
camera, Proc. Int. Symp. Robotics Res. (ISRR) (2011)
46.131
J. Sivic, A. Zisserman: Video Google: A text re-
trieval approach to object matching in videos, Int.
Conf. Computer Vis. (ICCV) (2003) p. 1470
46.132
M. Cummins, P.M. Newman: Probabilistic ap-
pearance based navigation and loop closing,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2007)
pp. 2042–2048
46.133
C. Cadena, D. Gálvez, F. Ramos, J.D. Tardós,
J. Neira: Robust place recognition with stereo
cameras, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2010)
46.134
R.A. Newcombe, A.J. Davison, S. Izadi, P. Kohli,
O. Hilliges, J. Shotton, D. Molyneaux, S. Hodges,
D. Kim, A. Fitzgibbon: Kinectfusion: Real-time
dense surface mapping and tracking, IEEE/ACM
Int. Sym. Mixed Augment. Real. (ISMAR) (2011)
pp. 127–136
46.135
J. Neira, A.J. Davison, J.J. Leonard: Guest editorial
special issue on visual SLAM, IEEE Trans. Robotics
24(5), 929–931 (2008)
46.136
K. Konolige, J. Bowman: Towards lifelong visual
maps, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2009) pp. 1156–1163
46.137
K. Konolige, J. Bowman, J.D. Chen, P. Mihe-
lich, M. Calonder, V. Lepetit, P. Fua: View-

Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
References
1175
Part E | 46
based maps, Int. J. Robotics Res. 29(8), 941–957
(2010)
46.138
G. Sibley, C. Mei, I. Reid, P. Newman: Planes,
trains and automobiles – Autonomy for the mod-
ern robot, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2010) pp. 285–292
46.139
T. Whelan, H. Johannsson, M. Kaess, J.J. Leonard,
J.B. McDonald: Robust real-time visual odometry
for dense RGB-D mapping, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA (2013)
46.140
R.A. Newcombe, S.J. Lovegrove, A.J. Davison:
DTAM: Dense tracking and mapping in real-time,
Int. Conf. Computer Vis. (ICCV) (2011) pp. 2320–
2327
46.141
F. Steinbruecker, J. Sturm, D. Cremers: Real-
time visual odometry from dense RGB-D images,
Workshop Live Dense Reconstr. Mov. Cameras Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV) (2011)
46.142
H. Roth, M. Vona: Moving volume kinectfusion,
Br. Mach. Vis. Conf. (2012)

Multimedia Contents Motion Plan
1177
Part E | 47
47. Motion Planning
and Obstacle Avoidance
Javier Minguez, Florant Lamiraux, Jean-Paul Laumond
This chapter describes motion planning and ob-
stacle avoidance for mobile robots. We will see
how the two areas do not share the same mod-
eling background. From the very beginning of
motion planning, research has been dominated
by computer sciences. Researchers aim at devising
well-grounded algorithms with well-understood
completeness and exactness properties.
The challenge of this chapter is to present both
nonholonomic motion planning (Sects. 47.1–47.6)
and obstacle avoidance (Sects. 47.7–47.10) issues.
Section 47.11 reviews recent successful approaches
that tend to embrace the whole problem of motion
planning and motion control. These approaches
benefit from both nonholonomic motion planning
and obstacle avoidance methods.
47.1
Nonholonomic Mobile Robots:
Where Motion Planning Meets
Control Theory ................................... 1178
47.2
Kinematic Constraints
and Controllability ............................. 1179
47.2.1
Definitions ............................. 1179
47.2.2
Controllability......................... 1179
47.2.3
Example:
The Differentially-Driven
Mobile Robot.......................... 1180
47.3
Motion Planning and Small-Time
Controllability .................................... 1180
47.3.1
The Decision Problem.............. 1180
47.3.2
The Complete Problem ............ 1181
47.4
Local Steering Methods
and Small-Time Controllability............ 1181
47.4.1
Local Steering Methods
Accounting for Small-Time
Controllability......................... 1182
47.4.2
Equivalence Between
Chained-Formed and
Feedback-Linearizable Systems 1184
47.5
Robots and Trailers............................. 1184
47.5.1
Differentially-Driven
Mobile Robots ........................ 1184
47.5.2
Differentially-Driven
Mobile Robots
Towing One Trailer .................. 1184
47.5.3
Car-Like Mobile Robots............ 1185
47.5.4
Bi-Steerable Mobile Robots ..... 1185
47.5.5
Differentially-Driven Mobile
Robots Towing Trailers............. 1185
47.5.6
Open Problems ....................... 1186
47.6
Approximate Methods......................... 1186
47.6.1
Forward Dynamic
Programming ......................... 1186
47.6.2
Discretization
of the Input Space .................. 1186
47.6.3
Input-Based Rapidly
Exploring Random Trees .......... 1187
47.7
From Motion Planning
to Obstacle Avoidance......................... 1187
47.8
Definition of Obstacle Avoidance ......... 1187
47.8.1
Obstacle Avoidance Problem .... 1187
47.9
Obstacle Avoidance Techniques ........... 1188
47.9.1
Potential Field Methods .......... 1189
47.9.2
Vector Field Histogram ............ 1190
47.9.3
The Obstacle Restriction
Method.................................. 1191
47.9.4
Dynamic Window Approach ..... 1192
47.9.5
Velocity Obstacles ................... 1192
47.9.6
Nearness Diagram Navigation... 1193
47.10
Robot Shape, Kinematics,
and Dynamics
in Obstacle Avoidance......................... 1194
47.10.1
Techniques that Abstract
Vehicle Aspects....................... 1194
47.10.2
Techniques of Decomposition
in Subproblems ...................... 1195

Part E | 47.1
1178
Part E
Moving in the Environment
47.11
Integration Planning – Reaction ......... 1196
47.11.1
Systems
of Path Deformation ............... 1196
47.11.2
Systems of Tactical Planning .... 1197
47.12
Conclusions, Future Directions,
and Further Reading .......................... 1198
Video-References......................................... 1199
References................................................... 1199
The introduction of nonholonomic constraints has en-
tailed revisiting these algorithms via the introduction
of differential geometry materials. Such a combination
has been made possible for certain classes of systems,
the so-called small-time controllable ones. It remains
that the underlying hypothesis of motion planning al-
gorithms is the knowledge of a global and accurate
map of the environment. More than that the consid-
ered system is a formal system of equations that does
not account for the entire physical system: uncertain-
ties in the world or system modeling are not considered.
Such hypotheses are too strong in practice. This is why
other complementary research has been done in par-
allel in a more pragmatic but realistic manner. Such
research deals with obstacle avoidance. The problem
here is not to deal with complicated systems like a car
with multiple trailers. The considered systems are much
simpler with respect to their geometric shape. The prob-
lem considers sensor-based motions to face the physical
issues of a real system navigating in a real world better
than motion planning algorithms. How can we navigate
toward a goal in a cluttered environment when the ob-
stacles to avoid have just been discovered in real time?
This is the question that obstacle avoidance addresses.
The appearance of mobile robots in the late 1960s early
1970s initiated a new research domain: autonomous
navigation. It is interesting to note that the ﬁrst nav-
igation systems were published at the very ﬁrst In-
ternational Joint Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(IJCAI 1969). These systems were based on seminal
ideas, which have been very fruitful in the development
of robot motion planning algorithms. For instance, in
1969, the mobile robot Shakey used a grid-based ap-
proach to model and explore the environment [47.1], in
1977 Jason used a visibility graph built from the corners
of the obstacles [47.2], and in 1979 Hilare decomposed
the environment into collision-free convex cells [47.3].
In the late 1970s, studies of robot manipulators pop-
ularized the notion of the conﬁguration space of a me-
chanical system [47.4]. In the conﬁguration space the
piano becomes a point. The motion planning problem
for a mechanical system was thus reduced to ﬁnding
a path for a point in the conﬁguration space. The way
was open to extending the seminal ideas and to develop-
ing new and well-grounded algorithms (see Latombe’s
book [47.5]).
One decade later, the notion of nonholonomic sys-
tems (also borrowed from mechanics) appeared in the
literature [47.6] on robot motion planning through the
problem of car parking. This problem had not been
solved by the pioneering works on mobile robot nav-
igation. Nonholonomic motion planning then became
an attractive research ﬁeld [47.7].
Besides this research effort in path planning, work
was initiated in order to make robots move out of their
initially artiﬁcial environments where the world was
cylindrical and composed of wooden vertical boards.
Robots started to move in laboratory buildings, with
people walking around. Inaccurate localization, uncer-
tain and incomplete maps of the world, and unexpected
moving or static obstacles made roboticists aware of the
gap between planning a path and executing a motion.
Since then the domain of obstacle avoidance has been
very active.
In the 2000s a lot of effort has been made toward
the integration of motion planning and obstacle avoid-
ance. This effort was stimulated by the DARPA Urban
challenge competition. The most successful integration
was done by the Carnegie Mellon University team, who
won the competition [47.8].
47.1 Nonholonomic Mobile Robots: Where Motion Planning Meets
Control Theory
Nonholonomic constraints are nonintegrable linear con-
straints over the velocity space of a system. For
instance, the rolling without slipping constraint of
a differentially-driven mobile robot (Fig. 47.1) is lin-
ear with respect to the velocity vector (vector of linear
and angular velocities) of the differentially-driven robot
and is non integrable (it cannot be integrated into
a constraint over the conﬁguration variables). As a con-
sequence, a differentially-driven mobile robot can go
anywhere but not following any trajectory. Other types
of nonholonomic constraints arise when considering
second-order differential equations such as the conser-

Motion Planning and Obstacle Avoidance
47.2 Kinematic Constraints and Controllability
1179
Part E | 47.2
vation of inertial momentum. A number of papers in-
vestigate the famous falling cat problem or free-ﬂoating
robots in space [47.7]. This chapter is devoted to non-
holonomic constraints for mobile robots with wheels.
While the constraints due to obstacles are expressed
directly in the conﬁguration space, that is a manifold,
nonholonomic constraints are expressed in the tangent
space. In the presence of a linear kinematic constraint,
the ﬁrst question that naturally arises is: does this con-
straint reduce the space reachable by the system? This
question can be answered by studying the structure of
the distribution spanned by the Lie algebra of the con-
trol system.
Even in the absence of obstacles, planning admissi-
ble motions (i. e., that satisfy the kinematic constraints)
for a nonholonomic system between two conﬁgurations
is not an easy task. Exact solutions have been proposed
only for some classes of systems but a lot of systems
remain without exact solution. In the general case, how-
ever, approximate solutions can be used.
The motion planning problem for a nonholonomic
system can be stated as follows: given a map of the
environment with obstacles in the workspace, a robot
subject to nonholonomic constraints, an initial conﬁg-
uration and a goal conﬁguration, ﬁnd an admissible
collision-free path between the initial and goal con-
ﬁgurations. Solving this problem requires taking into
account both the conﬁguration space constraints due
to obstacles and the nonholonomic constraints. The
tools developed to address this issue thus combine
motion planning and control theory techniques. Such
a combination is possible for the class of so-called
small-time controllable systems due to topological ar-
guments (Theorem 47.2 in Sect. 47.3).
47.2 Kinematic Constraints and Controllability
In this section, we give the main deﬁnition of controlla-
bility, using Sussman’s terminology [47.9].
47.2.1 Definitions
Let us denote by CS the conﬁguration space of dimen-
sion n of a given mobile robot and by q the conﬁgura-
tion of this robot. If the robot is mounted on wheels, it
is subject to kinematic constraints, linear in the velocity
vector
!i.q/Pq D 0 ;
i 2 f1; : : : ; kg :
We assume that these constraints are linearly indepen-
dent for any q. Equivalently, for each q, there exists
m D n  k linearly independent vectors f1.q/;: : : ; fm.q/
such that the above constraints are equivalent to
9.u1; : : : ; um/ 2 Rm ;
Pq D
m
X
iD1
uifi.q/ :
(47.1)
Let us note that the choice of vectors fi.q/ is not
unique. Fortunately, all the following developments are
valid whatever choice we make. Moreover, if the linear
constraints are smooth, vector ﬁelds f1; : : : ; fm can be
chosen smooth with respect to q. We assume this con-
dition from now on.
Let us deﬁne by U a compact subset of Rm. We
denote by ˙ the control system deﬁned by (47.1), with
.u1; : : : ; um/ 2 U.
Definition 47.1
A local and small-time controllability:
1. ˙ is locally controllable about conﬁguration q
iff the set of conﬁgurations reachable from q by
an admissible trajectory contains a neighborhood
of q.
2. ˙ is small-time controllable about conﬁguration q
iff the set of conﬁgurations reachable from q by an
admissible trajectory in time less than T contains
a neighborhood of q for any T.
f1; : : : ; fm are called control vector ﬁelds of ˙. A sys-
tem’s small-time controllable about each conﬁguration
is said to be small-time controllable.
47.2.2 Controllability
Checking the controllability properties of a system re-
quires the analysis of the control Lie algebra associated
with the system. Let us illustrate in an informal way
what the Lie bracket of two vector ﬁelds is. Consider
two basic motions: go along a straight line and turn on
the spot, supported by vector ﬁelds denoted by f and g,
respectively. Now consider the following combination:
go forward during a time t, turn clockwise during the
same time t, go backward during the same time t and
then turn counterclockwise during the time t. The sys-
tem reaches a conﬁguration that is not the starting one.
Of course when t tends to 0 the goal conﬁguration is
very close to the starting one. The direction indicated
by such goal conﬁgurations when t tends to 0 corre-
spond to a new vector ﬁeld, which is the Lie bracket of
f and g. In a more mathematical formulation, the Lie

Part E | 47.3
1180
Part E
Moving in the Environment
bracket Œf ; g of two vector ﬁelds f and g is deﬁned as
being the vector ﬁeld @f :g  @g:f . The k-th coordinate
of Œf ; g is
Œf ; gŒk D
n
X
iD1

gŒi @
@xi
f Œk  f Œi @
@xi
gŒk

:
The following theorem [47.10] gives a powerful result
for symmetric systems (a system is said to be symmetric
when U is symmetric with respect to the origin).
Theorem 47.1
A symmetric system is small-time controllable about
conﬁguration q iff the rank of the vector space spanned
by the family of vector ﬁelds fi together with all their
brackets is n at q.
Checking the Lie algebra rank condition (LARC) on
a control system consists in trying to build a basis of the
tangent space from a basis (e.g., a P. Hall family) of the
free Lie algebra spanned by the control vector ﬁelds. An
algorithm is proposed in [47.11, 12].
47.2.3 Example: The Differentially-Driven
Mobile Robot
To illustrate the notions developed in this section,
we consider the differentially-driven mobile robot dis-
played in Fig. 47.1. The conﬁguration space of this
robot is R2  S1, and a conﬁguration can be repre-
sented by q D .x; y; / where .x; y/ is the position
in the horizontal plane of the center of the wheel
axis of the robot and  the orientation with respect
to the x-axis. The rolling without slipping kinematic
x
θ
y
Fig. 47.1 A differentially-driven mobile robot is subject to
one linear kinematic constraint, due to the rolling without
slipping constraint of the wheel axis
constraint
Px sin  C Py cos  D 0
is linear with respect to the velocity vector .Px; Py; P/.
Therefore, the subspace of admissible velocities is
spanned by two vector ﬁelds, for instance,
f1.q/ D
0
@
cos 
sin 
0
1
A
and
f2.q/ D
0
@
0
0
1
1
A :
(47.2)
The Lie bracket of these two vector ﬁelds is
f3.q/ D
0
@
sin 
 cos 
0
1
A :
This implies that about any conﬁguration q, the rank of
the vector space spanned by f1.q/; f2.q/; f3.q/ is 3 and,
therefore, that the differentially-driven mobile robot is
small-time controllable.
47.3 Motion Planning and Small-Time Controllability
Motion planning raises two problems: the ﬁrst one ad-
dresses the existence of a collision-free admissible path;
this is the decision problem. The second one addresses
the computation of such a path; this is the complete
problem.
47.3.1 The Decision Problem
From now on, we assume that the set of collision-free
conﬁgurations is an open subset. This implies that con-
tact conﬁgurations are assumed in collision.
Theorem 47.2
The existence of a collision-free admissible path for
a symmetric small-time controllable mobile robot be-
tween two conﬁgurations is equivalent to the existence
of a collision-free (not necessarily admissible) path be-
tween these conﬁgurations.
Proof: Let us consider a not necessarily admissi-
ble collision-free path between two conﬁgurations q1
and q2 as a continuous mapping & from interval Œ0; 1
into the conﬁguration space CS such that:
1. & .0/ D q1, & .1/ D q2,
2. for any t 2 Œ0; 1, & .t/ is collision free.
Point 2 implies that for any t there exists a neighbor-
hood U.t/ of & .t/ included in the collision-free subset
of the conﬁguration space.
Let us denote by ".t/ the bigger lower bound of
the time to collision of all the trajectories starting from

Motion Planning and Obstacle Avoidance
47.4 Local Steering Methods and Small-Time Controllability
1181
Part E | 47.4
& .t/. As the control vector .u1; : : : ; um/ remains in the
compact set U, ".t/ > 0.
As the system is small-time controllable about & .t/,
the set reachable from & .t/ in time less than ".t/ is
a neighborhood of & .t/, which we denote by V.t/.
The collection fV.t/; t 2 Œ0; 1g is an open cover-
ing of the compact set f& .t/; t 2 Œ0; 1g. Therefore, we
can extract a ﬁnite covering, fV.t1/; : : : ; V.tl/g, where
t1 D 0 < t2 < : : : < tl1 < tl D 1 such that for any i be-
tween 1 and l  1, V.ti/ \ V.tiC1/ 6D ;. For each i
between 1 and l  1, we choose one conﬁguration ri
in V.ti/ \ V.tiC1/. As the system is symmetric, there
exists an admissible collision-free path between q.ti/
and ri and between ri and q.tiC1/. The concatenation of
these paths is a collision-free admissible path between
q1 and q2.

47.3.2 The Complete Problem
In the former section, we have established that the de-
cision problem, i. e., determining whether there exists
a collision-free admissible path between two conﬁgu-
rations, is equivalent to determining whether the con-
ﬁgurations lie in the same connected component of
the collision-free conﬁguration space. In this section
we present the tools necessary to solve the complete
problem. These tools blend ideas from the classical
motion planning problem addressed in Chap. 7 and
from open loop control theory, but require speciﬁc de-
velopments that we are going to present in the next
section. Two main approaches have been devised in
order to plan admissible collision-free motions for non-
holonomic systems. The ﬁrst one proposed by [47.13]
exploits the idea of the proof of Theorem 47.2 by re-
cursively approximating a not necessarily admissible
collision-free path by a sequence of feasible paths. The
second approach replaces the local method of proba-
bilistic roadmap method (PRM) algorithms (Chap. 7)
by a local steering method that connects conﬁguration
pairs by admissible paths (
VIDEO 707 ).
Both approaches use a steering method. Before
brieﬂy describing them, we give the deﬁnition of a local
steering method.
Definition 47.2
A local steering method for system ˙ is a mapping
Sloc W CS  CS ! C1
pw.Œ0; 1; CS/
.q1; q2/ 7! Sloc.q1; q2/
5 where
Sloc.q1; q2/ is a piecewise continuously
differentiable curve in CS satisfying the following
properties:
1.
Sloc.q1; q2/ satisﬁes the kinematic constraints asso-
ciated to ˙,
2.
Sloc.q1; q2/ connects q1 to q2: Sloc.q1; q2/.0/ D q1,
Sloc.q1; q2/.1/ D q2.
Approximation of a Not Necessarily
Admissible Path
A
not
necessarily
admissible
collision-free
path
& .t/; t 2 Œ0; 1 connecting two conﬁgurations and a lo-
cal steering method Sloc being given, the approxima-
tion algorithm proceeds recursively, by calling function
approximation deﬁned by Algorithm 47.1 with in-
put & , 0 and 1.
Algorithm 47.1
approximation function: inputs are a path & and
two abscissas t1 and t2 along this path
if Sloc(& (t1), & (t2)) collision free then
return Sloc(& (t1), & (t2))
else
return concat(approximation(& ,t1,(t1+t2)/2),
approximation(& ,(t1+t2)/2,t2))
end if
Sampling-Based Roadmap Methods
Most sampling-based roadmap methods as described
in Chap. 6 can be adapted to nonholonomic systems
by replacing the connection method between pairs of
conﬁgurations by a local steering method. This strat-
egy is rather efﬁcient for PRM algorithms. For the
rapidly-exploring random tree (RRT) method, the efﬁ-
ciency strongly depends on the metric used to choose
the nearest neighbor. The distance function between
two conﬁgurations needs to account for the length of
the path returned by the local steering method to con-
nect these conﬁgurations [47.14].
47.4 Local Steering Methods and Small-Time Controllability
The approximation algorithm described in the former
section is recursive and raises the completeness ques-
tion: does the algorithm ﬁnish in ﬁnite time or may it
fail to ﬁnd a solution?
A sufﬁcient condition for the approximation algo-
rithm to ﬁnd a solution in a ﬁnite number of iterations
is that the local steering method accounts for small-time
controllability.

Part E | 47.4
1182
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Definition 47.3
A local steering method Sloc accounts for the small-time
controllability of system ˙ iff
For any q 2 CS, for any neighborhood U of q, there
exists a neighborhood V of q such that for any r 2
V; Sloc.q; r/.Œ0; 1/  U.
In other words, a local steering method accounts for
the small-time controllability of a system if it produces
paths getting closer to the conﬁgurations it connects
when these conﬁgurations get closer to each other.
This property is also sufﬁcient for probabilistic
completeness of roadmap sampling-based methods.
47.4.1 Local Steering Methods Accounting
for Small-Time Controllability
Constructing a local steering method that accounts
for small-time controllability is a difﬁcult task that
has been achieved only for a few classes of systems.
Most mobile robots studied in the domain of motion
planning are wheeled mobile robots towing trailers or
not.
a)
b)
–2
2
0
2
0
–2
2π
π
0
–2
2
0
2
0
–2
2π
π
0
Fig. 47.2 (a) Two perspective views of an RS (Reeds and Shepp)
ball: set of conﬁgurations reachable by a path of length less than
a given distance for the Reeds and Shepp car. (b) Perspective
views of two DD (differentially driven) balls: set of conﬁgurations
reachable by a path of a length less than a given distance for the
differentially-driven robot. Orientation  is represented on z-axis
Steering Using Optimal Control
The simplest system, namely the differentially-driven
robot presented in Sect. 47.2.3 with bounded veloc-
ities or the so-called Reeds and Shepp [47.15] car
with bounded curvature have the same control vector
ﬁelds (47.2). The difference lies in the domain of the
control variables:

1 	 u1 	 1, ju2j 	 ju1j for RS car,

ju1j C bju2j 	 1 for the differentially-driven robot,
where b is half of the distance between the right and
left wheels. For these systems, a local steering method
accounting for small-time controllability can be con-
structed using optimal control theory. For any admis-
sible path deﬁned over an interval I of one of these
systems, we deﬁne a length as follows
Z
I
ju1j
for the RS car ;
Z
I
ju1j C bju2j
for the differentially-driven robot :
The length of the shortest path between two conﬁgura-
tions in both cases deﬁnes a metric over the conﬁgura-
tion space. The synthesis of the shortest paths, i. e., the
determination of the shortest path between any pair of
conﬁgurations was achieved by [47.16] for the RS car
and later by [47.17] for the differentially-driven robot.
Figure 47.2 shows a representation of the balls corre-
sponding to these metrics.
Optimal control naturally deﬁnes a local steering
method that associates a shortest path between these
conﬁgurations to any pair of conﬁgurations. Let us note
that the shortest path is unique between most pairs of
conﬁgurations. A general result states that the collec-
tion of balls of radius r > 0 centered about q induced
by nonholonomic metrics constitutes an increasing col-
lection of neighborhoods of q, the intersection of which
is fqg. This property directly implies that local steering
methods based on shortest paths account for small-time
controllability.
The main advantage of optimal control is that it
provides both a local steering method and a distance
metric consistent with the steering method. This makes
the steering methods well suited for path planning al-
gorithms designed for holonomic systems and using
a distance function, such as RRT (Chap. 7), for instance.
Unfortunately, the synthesis of the shortest paths
has been realized only for the two simple systems de-
scribed in this section. For more complex systems, the
problem remains open.
The main drawback of the shortest path-based steer-
ing methods described in this section is that input

Motion Planning and Obstacle Avoidance
47.4 Local Steering Methods and Small-Time Controllability
1183
Part E | 47.4
functions are not continuous. This requires an ad-
ditional step to compute a time-parameterization of
the paths before motion execution. Along this time-
parameterization, input discontinuities force the robot
to stop. For instance, to follow two successive arcs of
circles of opposite curvature a mobile robot needs to
stop between the arcs of circle in order to ensure conti-
nuity of the linear and angular velocities u1 and u2.
Steering Chained-Form Systems
Some classes of systems can be put into the form called
the chained-form system by a change of variable
Pz1 D u1 ;
(47.3)
Pz2 D u2 ;
(47.4)
Pz3 D z2u1 ;
(47.5)
:::
:::
Pzn D zn1u1 :
(47.6)
Let us consider the following inputs [47.18]
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
u1.t/
D a0 C a1 sin !t ;
u2.t/
D b0 C b1 cos !t
C : : : C bn2 cos.n  2/!t :
(47.7)
Let Zstart 2 Rn be a starting conﬁguration. Each zi.1/
can be computed from the coordinates of Zstart and
parameters
.a0; a1; b0; b1; : : : ; bn2/.
For
a
given
a1 ¤ 0 and a given conﬁguration Zstart, the mapping
from .a0; b0; b1; b2; b3/ to Z.1/ is a C1-diffeomorphism
at the origin; the system is then invertible. For n smaller
or equal to 5, parameters .a0; b0; b1; : : : ; bn2/ can
be analytically computed from the coordinates of the
two conﬁgurations Zstart and Zgoal. The corresponding
sinusoidal inputs steer the system from Zstart to Zgoal.
The shape of the path only depends on parameter a1.
Each value of a1 thus deﬁnes a local steering method
denoted by Sa1
sin. None of these steering methods
account for small-time controllability since for any
Z 2 Rn, Sa1
sin.Z; Z/.Œ0;1/ is not reduced to fZg. To
construct a local steering method accounting for
small-time controllability from the collection of Sa1
sin,
we need to make a1 depend on the conﬁgurations Z1
and Z2 that we want to connect
lim
Z2!Z1 a1.Z1; Z2/ D 0 ;
lim
Z2!Z1 a0

Z1; Z2; a1.Z1; Z2/
	
D 0 ;
lim
Z2!Z1 bi

Z1; Z2; a1.Z1; Z2/
	
D 0 :
Such a construction is achieved in [47.19].
Steering Feedback-Linearizable Systems
The concept of feedback linearizability (or differential
ﬂatness) was introduced by Fliess et al. [47.20, 21].
A system is said to be feedback linearizable if there
exists an output (i. e., function of the state, input and in-
put derivatives) called the linearizing output, such that
the state and the input of the system is a function of the
linearizing output and its derivatives. The dimension of
the linearizing output is the same as the dimension of
the input.
Let us illustrate this notion with a simple example.
We consider a differentially-driven mobile robot towing
a trailer hitched on top of the wheel axis of the robot,
as displayed in Fig. 47.3. The tangent to the curve fol-
lowed by the center of the wheel axis of the trailer gives
the orientation of the trailer. From the orientation of the
trailer along the curve, we can deduce the curve fol-
lowed by the center of the robot. The tangent to the
curve followed by the center of the robot gives the ori-
entation of the robot. Thus the linearizing output of this
system is the center of the wheel axis of the trailer. By
differentiating the linearizing output twice, we can re-
construct the conﬁguration of the system.
Feedback linearizability is very interesting for steer-
ing purposes. Indeed, the linearizing output is not
subject to any kinematic constraints. Therefore, if we
know the relation between the state and the linearizing
output, planning an admissible path between two con-
ﬁgurations simply consists in building a curve in Rm,
(y1, y2)
P
l
(x1, x2)
θ
φ
Fig. 47.3 A differentially-driven robot towing a trailer.
Hitched on top of the wheel axis of the robot is a feedback-
linearizable system. The linearizing output is the center of
the wheel axis of the trailer. The conﬁguration of the sys-
tem can be reconstructed by differentiating the curve y.s/,
where s is an arc-length parameterization, followed by the
linearizing output. The orientation of the trailer is given
by  D arctan.Py2=Py1/. The angle between the robot and the
trailer is given by  D l arctan.d=ds/. l is the length of
the trailer connection

Part E | 47.5
1184
Part E
Moving in the Environment
where m is the dimension of the input with differen-
tial constraints at both ends. This problem can be easily
solved using, for instance, polynomials.
For two input driftless systems like ˙, the lineariz-
ing output only depends on state q. The state q depends
on the linearizing output through the parameterization
invariant values, namely, the linearizing output y, the
orientation  of the vector tangent to the curve followed
by y and the successive derivatives of  with respect to
the curvilinear abscissa s.
Thus, the conﬁguration of a two input feedback-
linearizable driftless system of dimension n can be
represented by a vector .y; ; 1; : : : ; n3/ represent-
ing the geometric properties of the curve followed by
the linearizing output along an admissible path passing
through the conﬁguration.
Therefore, designing a local steering method for
such a system is equivalent to associating to any pair
of vectors .y1; 1; 1
1 ; : : : ; n3
1
/, .y2; 2; 1
2 ; : : : ; n3
2
/
a curve in the plane starting from y1 and ending
at y2 with orientation of the tangent vector and
successive derivatives with respect to s and equal to
1; 1
1 ; : : : ; n3
1
at the beginning and to 2; 1
2 ; : : : ; n3
2
at the end. This exercise is relatively easy using poly-
nomials and transforming the boundary conditions
into linear equations over the coefﬁcients of the
polynomials. However, taking into account small-
time controllability is a little bit more tricky. Refer-
ence [47.22] proposes a ﬂatness-based steering method
built on convex combinations of canonical curves.
47.4.2 Equivalence Between
Chained-Formed and
Feedback-Linearizable Systems
In the previous section, we proposed methods to
steer feedback-linearizable control systems or sys-
tems that can be put into chained-form. We now
give a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for feedback-
linearizability.
Feedback-Linearizability:
A Necessary and Sufficient
Condition
In
[47.23],
Rouchon
gives
conditions
to
check
whether or not a system is feedback-linearizable.
For two-input driftless systems a necessary and suf-
ﬁcient condition is the following: let us deﬁne
as k, k > 0 the collection of distributions (i. e.,
set of vector ﬁelds) iteratively deﬁned by: 0 D
spanff1; f2g, 1 D spanff1; f2; Œf1; f2g and iC1 D 0C
Œi; i with Œi; i D spanfŒf ; g ; f 2 i; g 2 ig.
A system with two-dimensional input is feedback-
linearizable iff rank.i/ D 2 C i.
Example: The Chained-Form System
Let us consider the chained-form system deﬁned
by (47.3)–(47.6). The control vector ﬁelds of this sys-
tem are
f1 D .1;0; z2; : : : ; zn1/ ;
f2 D .0; 1; : : : ; 0/ ;
rank0 D 2. If we compute f3 D Œf1; f2 D .0; 0; 1; 0;
: : : ; 0/, we note that rank1 D 3. By computing fi D
Œf1; fi1 for i up to n, we ﬁnd a sequence fi D
.0; : : : ; 0; 1; 0; : : : ; 0/, where 1 is at position i. There-
fore, ranki D 2 C i for i up to n  2 and the chained-
form system is feedback linearizable. This conclu-
sion could have been drawn in a more straight-
forward way by noticing that the state can be re-
constructed from .z1; z2/ and its derivatives. .z1; z2/
is thus the linearizing output of the chained-form
system.
47.5 Robots and Trailers
Robotics systems studied in motion planning are mainly
those composed of a mobile robot alone or towing one
or several trailers. The input of these systems is two di-
mensional.
47.5.1 Differentially-Driven
Mobile Robots
The simplest mobile robot, namely the differentially-
driven mobile robot displayed in Fig. 47.1, is obviously
feedback-linearizable. the trajectory of the center of the
wheel axis (the linearizing output) of the robot gives
the orientation of the robot. It can thus be steered using
a ﬂatness-based local steering method.
47.5.2 Differentially-Driven Mobile Robots
Towing One Trailer
The differentially-driven mobile robot towing a trailer
hitched on top of the wheel axis of the robot displayed
in Fig. 47.3 is feedback linearizable and the linearizing
output is the center of the wheel axis of the trailer. The
differentially-driven mobile robot towing a trailer with
hitched kingpin (Fig. 47.4) is also feedback lineariz-

Motion Planning and Obstacle Avoidance
47.5 Robots and Trailers
1185
Part E | 47.5
 y = (y1, y2)
b
a
x = (x1, x2)
θ
φ
Fig. 47.4 A differentially-driven mobile robot towing
a trailer with hitched kingpin is feedback linearizable
able [47.24] but the relation between linearizing output
and conﬁguration variables is more intricate
8
ˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆ:
y1 D x1  b cos  C L./ b sin  C a sin. C /
p
a2 C b2 C 2ab cos 
;
y2 D x2  b sin   L./a cos. C / C b cos 
p
a2 C b2 C 2ab cos 
;
where L is deﬁned by the following elliptic integral
L./ D ab

Z
0
cos 
p
a2 C b2 C 2ab cos./
d ;
which is the linearizing output of the system. These re-
lations together with the following ones
tan  D a sin. C / C b sin 
b cos  C a cos. C / ;
 D
sin./
cos 
p
a2 C b2 C 2ab cos  C L./ sin./
;
make it possible to reconstruct the conﬁguration vari-
ables from the linearizing output and its two ﬁrst deriva-
tives.
47.5.3 Car-Like Mobile Robots
A car-like mobile robot is constituted of a ﬁxed rear
wheel axis and of two steerable front wheels, the axes
of which intersect at the center of curvature (Fig. 47.5).
A car-like mobile robot is kinematically equivalent to
a differentially-driven mobile robot towing a trailer
hitched on top of the wheel axis of the robot (Fig. 47.3):
the virtual front wheel corresponds to the differentially-
driven robot, while the body of the car corresponds to
the trailer.
θ
φ
Fig. 47.5 Car-like mobile robot. The axes of the front
wheels intersect at the center of curvature. The steering
angle  is the angle between the longitudinal axis of the
car and a virtual front wheel in the middle of the two front
wheels
θ
α
φ
Fig. 47.6 Bi-steerable robot. The front and rear wheels are
steerable and there is a relation between the rear steering
angle and the front steering angle: ˛ D f./
47.5.4 Bi-Steerable Mobile Robots
The bi-steerable mobile robot (Fig. 47.6) is a car with
front and rear steerable wheels and with a relation be-
tween the front and rear steering angles. This system
has been proved to be feedback linearizable in [47.25].
As for the mobile robot towing a trailer with hitched
kingpin, the linearizing output is a moving point in the
robot reference frame.
47.5.5 Differentially-Driven Mobile Robots
Towing Trailers
Let us consider the differentially-driven mobile robot
towing a trailer connected on top of the wheel axis of
the robot, and let us add an arbitrary number of trailers,

Part E | 47.6
1186
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Fig. 47.7 A truck towing a towbar trailer with hitched
kingpin and a differentially-driven mobile robot towing
two trailers with hitched kingpin: two open problems for
exact path planning for nonholonomic systems
each one connected on top of the wheel axis of the pre-
vious one. By differentiating once the curve followed
by the center of the last trailer, we get the orientation
of the last trailer (this orientation coincides with the
orientation of the tangent to the curve). If we know
the orientation and the position of the center of the
last trailer along the path, we can reconstruct the curve
followed by the center of the previous trailer. Repeat-
ing this reasoning, we can reconstruct the trajectory of
the whole system by differentiating a sufﬁcient number
of times. The system is therefore feedback lineariz-
able and the linearizing output is the center of the last
trailer.
Combining the above reasoning with the sys-
tems reviewed in this section, we can build hy-
brid feedback-linearizable trailer systems. For instance,
a differentially-driven mobile robot towing an arbitrary
number n of trailers each one connected on top of the
wheel axis of the previous trailer, except the last trailer
with hitched kingpin is feedback linearizable. Simply
consider the two last trailers as a feedback-linearizable
system composed of a mobile robot with one trailer as
in Fig. 47.4. The linearizing output of this system en-
ables us to reconstruct the trajectory of the two last
trailers. The center of trailer n1 is a linearizing output
for the mobile robot towing the n  1 last trailers.
47.5.6 Open Problems
Finally, all the systems for which we are able to plan
exact motions between arbitrary pairs of conﬁgurations
are included in the large class of feedback-linearizable
systems. We have indeed seen that chained-form sys-
tems are also part of this class. For other systems, no
exact solution has been proposed up to now. For in-
stance, neither of the systems displayed in Fig. 47.7 is
feedback linearizable. They do not satisfy the necessary
condition of Sect. 47.4.2.
47.6 Approximate Methods
To deal with nonholonomic systems not belonging to
any class of systems for which exact solutions exist,
numerical approximate solutions have been developed.
We review some of these methods in this section.
47.6.1 Forward Dynamic Programming
In [47.26] Barraquand and Latombe propose a dy-
namic programming approach to nonholonomic path
planning. Admissible paths are generated by a sequence
of constant input values, applied over a ﬁxed interval of
time •t. Starting from the initial conﬁguration the search
generates a tree: the children of a given conﬁguration q
are obtained by setting the input to a constant value and
integrating the differential system over •t. The conﬁgu-
ration space is discretized into an array of cells of equal
size (i. e., hyper-parallelepipeds). A child q0 of a conﬁg-
uration q is inserted in the search tree if and only if the
computed path from q to q0 is collision free and q0 does
not belong to a cell containing an already generated
conﬁguration. The algorithm stops when it generates
a conﬁguration belonging to the same cell as the goal
(i. e., it does not necessarily reach the goal exactly).
The algorithm has been proved to be asymptotically
complete with respect to both •t and the size of the cells.
As a brute force method, it remains quite time consum-
ing in practice. Its main interest is that the search is
based on Dijkstra’s algorithm, which allows taking into
account optimality criteria such as the path length or the
number of reversals. Asymptotical optimality to gener-
ate the minimum of reversals is proved for the car-like
robot alone.
47.6.2 Discretization of the Input Space
In [47.27] Divelbiss and Wen propose a method to
produce an admissible collision-free path for a non-
holonomic mobile robot in the presence of obstacles.
They restrict the set of input functions over the subspace
spanned by Fourier basis over interval Œ0; 1. An in-

Motion Planning and Obstacle Avoidance
47.8 Definition of Obstacle Avoidance
1187
Part E | 47.8
put function is thus represented by a ﬁnite-dimensional
vector . Reaching a goal conﬁguration thus becomes
a nonlinear system of equations, the unknowns of which
are the coordinates i’s of . The authors use the
Newton–Raphson method to ﬁnd a solution. Obstacles
are deﬁned by inequality constraints over the conﬁgura-
tion space. The path is discretized into N samples. The
noncollision constraint expressed at these sample points
yields the inequality constraint over vector . These in-
equality constraints are turned into equality constraints
through function g deﬁned as
g.c/ D
(
.1  ec/2
if c > 0 ;
0
if c 	 0 :
Reaching a goal conﬁguration while avoiding obstacles
thus becomes a nonlinear system of equations over vec-
tor  again solved using the Newton–Raphson method.
The method is rather efﬁcient for short maneuvers. The
main difﬁculty is to tune the order of the Fourier expan-
sion. Long motions in cluttered environments require
a higher order, while motion in empty space can be
solved with a low order. The authors do not mention
the problem of numerical instability in the integration
of the dynamic system.
47.6.3 Input-Based Rapidly
Exploring Random Trees
The RRT algorithms described in Chap. 7 can be used
without a local steering method to plan paths for non-
holonomic systems. New nodes can be generated from
existing nodes by applying random input functions over
an interval of time [47.28]. The main difﬁculty consists
in ﬁnding a distance function that really accounts for
the distance the system needs to travel to go from one
conﬁguration to another. Moreover, the goal is never ex-
actly reached. This latter drawback can be overcome by
post-processing the path returned by RRT using a path
deformation method, as described in [47.29].
47.7 From Motion Planning to Obstacle Avoidance
Up to now we have described motion planning tech-
niques. Their objective is to compute a collision-free
trajectory to the target conﬁguration that complies with
the vehicle constraints. They assume a perfect model
of the robot and scenario. The advantage of these
techniques is that they provide complete and global
solutions of the problem. Nevertheless, when the sur-
roundings are unknown and unpredictable, these tech-
niques fail.
A complementary way to face the motion problem
is obstacle avoidance. The objective is to move a ve-
hicle towards a target location free of collisions with
the obstacles collected by the sensors during motion
execution. The advantage of reactive obstacle avoid-
ance is to compute motion by introducing the sensor
information within the control loop, used to adapt the
motion to any contingency incompatible with initial
plans.
The main cost of considering the reality of the world
during execution is locality. In this instance, if global
reasoning is required, a trap situation could occur. De-
spite this limitation, obstacle avoidance techniques are
mandatory to deal with mobility problems in unknown
and evolving surroundings.
Notice that methods have been developed to com-
bine both the global point of view of motion planning
and the local point of view of obstacle avoidance. How
can we consider robot perception at the planning level?
This is so-called sensor-based motion planning. Several
variants exists, such as the Bug algorithms initially in-
troduced in [47.30]. However, non of them consider the
practical context of nonholonomic mobile robots.
47.8 Definition of Obstacle Avoidance
Let A be the robot (a rigid object) moving in the
workspace W, whose conﬁguration space is CS. Let q
be a conﬁguration, qt this conﬁguration in time t,
A.qt/ 2 W the space occupied by the robot in this con-
ﬁguration. In the vehicle there is a sensor, which in qt
measures a portion of the space S.qt/  W identifying
a set of obstacles O.qt/  W.
Let u be a constant control vector and u.qt/ this
control vector applied in qt during time •t. Given u.qt/,
the vehicle describes a trajectory qtC•t D f .u; qt; •t/,
with •t  0. Let Qt;T be the set of conﬁgurations of
the trajectory followed from qt with •t 2 Œ0; T, a given
time interval. T > 0 is called the sampling period. Let
F W CS  CS ! RC be a function that evaluates the
progress of one conﬁguration to another.
47.8.1 Obstacle Avoidance Problem
Let qtarget be a target conﬁguration. Then, in time ti
the robot A is in qti, where a sensor measurement

Part E | 47.9
1188
Part E
Moving in the Environment
a)
b)
Robot (A)
Area sensed (S)
ti+3T
ti+2T
ti+T
ti
Motion (U) 
Unknown space
Target
Target
Obstacles (O)
Fig. 47.8 (a) Obstacle avoidance problem consists of com-
puting motion control that avoids collisions with the ob-
stacles gathered by the sensors whilst driving the robot
towards the target location. (b) The result of applying this
technique at each time is a sequence of motions that drive
the vehicle free of collisions to the target
is obtained S.qti/, and thus an obstacle description
O.qti/.
The objective is to compute a motion control ui,
such that .i/ the trajectory generated is free of col-
lisions with the obstacles A.Qti;T/ T
O.qti/ D ;;
and (ii) it makes the vehicle progress to the target
location F.qti; qtarget/ < F.qtiCT; qtarget/.
The result of solving this problem at each sample
time (Fig. 47.8a) is a sequence of motion controls fu1
: : : ung computed in execution time that avoids the ob-
stacles gathered by the sensors, while making the vehi-
cle progress towards the target location in each conﬁgu-
ration fqt1 : : : qtargetg (Fig. 47.8b). Notice that the motion
problem is a global problem. The obstacle avoidance
methods are local and iterative techniques to address
this problem. The disadvantage of locality (trap situa-
tions) is counteracted with the advantage of introducing
the sensory information within the control cycle (to take
into account the reality of the world in execution).
There are at least three aspects that affect the devel-
opment of an obstacle avoidance method: the avoidance
technique, the type of robot-sensor and the type of
scenario. These subjects correspond to the next three
sections. First, we describe the obstacle avoidance tech-
niques (Sect. 47.9). Second, we discuss the techniques
to adapt a given obstacle avoidance method to work
on a vehicle taking into account the shape, kinematics,
and dynamics (Sect. 47.10). The sensory processing is
detailed in Chaps. 5 and 25 of this book. Finally, the us-
age of an obstacle avoidance technique on a vehicle in
a given scenario is highly dependent on the scenario na-
ture (static or dynamic, unknown or known, structured
or not, or its size, for example). Usually, this problem is
associated with the integration of planning and obstacle
avoidance (Sect. 47.11).
47.9 Obstacle Avoidance Techniques
We describe here a taxonomy of obstacle avoidance
techniques and some representative methods. First there
are two groups, methods that compute the motion in one
step and methods that do it in more than one. Methods
of one step directly reduce the sensor information to
motion control. There are two types:

The heuristic methods were the ﬁrst techniques
used to generate motion based on sensors. The ma-
jority of this work was derived in classic planning
methods and will not be described here. See [47.1,
30–33] for some representative work.

The methods of physical analogies assimilate the
obstacle avoidance to a known physical problem.
We discuss here the potential ﬁeld methods [47.34,
35]. Other works are variants adapted to uncertain
models [47.36] or that use other analogies [47.37–
39].
Methods with more than one step compute some
intermediate information, which is processed next to
obtain the motion:

The methods of subset of controls compute an in-
termediate set of motion controls, and next they
choose one of them as a solution. There are two
types: (i) methods that compute a subset of motion
directions. We describe here the vector ﬁeld his-
togram (VFH) [47.40] and the obstacle restriction
method [47.41] (see [47.42] for three-dimensional
(3-D) workspaces). Another method is the steer
angle ﬁeld approach [47.43]. (ii) Methods that com-

Motion Planning and Obstacle Avoidance
47.9 Obstacle Avoidance Techniques
1189
Part E | 47.9
pute a subset of velocity controls. We describe here
the dynamic window approach (DWA) [47.44] and
velocity obstacles [47.45] (see [47.46] for moving
obstacles). Another method based on similar prin-
ciples but developed independently is the curvature
velocity method [47.47].

Finally, there are methods that compute some high-
level information such as intermediate information,
which is translated next in motion. We describe
the basic versions of the nearness diagram naviga-
tion [47.48, 49]. The reader is directed to [47.50–
52] for further improvements.
All the methods outlined here have advantages and
disadvantages, depending on the navigation context,
like uncertain worlds, motion at high speeds, motion
in conﬁned or troublesome spaces, etc. Unfortunately
there is no metric available to quantitatively measure
the performance of the methods. However, for an exper-
imental comparison in terms of their intrinsic problems
see [47.48].
47.9.1 Potential Field Methods
The potential ﬁeld method (PFM) uses an analogy in
which the robot is a particle that moves in the conﬁgu-
ration space under the inﬂuence of a force ﬁeld. While
the target location exerts a force that attracts the par-
ticle Fatt, the obstacles exert repulsive forces Frep. At
each time ti, the motion is computed to follow the di-
rection of the artiﬁcial force induced by the sum of
both potentials Ftot.qti/ D Fatt.qti/CFrep.qti/ (the most
promising motion direction), Fig. 47.9.
Example
Fatt.qti/ D Kattnqtarget
(47.8)
Frep.qti/ D
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
Krep
X
j

1
d.qti; pj/  1
d0

npj
if d.qti; pj/ < d0 ;
0
otherwise
(47.9)
where Katt and Krep are the constants of the forces, d0
is the inﬂuence distance of the obstacles pj, qti is the
current vehicle conﬁguration and nqtarget and npj are the
unitary vectors that point from qti to the target and each
obstacle pj. From Ftot.qti/, the control ui can be ob-
tained with a position or force control [47.53].
This is the classic version, where the potentials only
depend on the current vehicle conﬁguration. Comple-
mentarily the generalized potentials depend also on the
instantaneous robot velocity and vehicle accelerations.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Obstacle
Robot
Target
Target
Fatt
Ftot
Frep
a)
b)
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Fig. 47.9 (a) Computation of the motion direction with
a potential ﬁeld method. The target attracts the particle Fatt
while the obstacle exerts a repulsive force Frep. The re-
sulting force Ftot is the most promising motion direction.
(b) Motion directions computed in each point of the space
with the classic method
Example
Frep.qti/ D
8
ˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆ:
Krep
X
j
 
aPqti
Œ2ad.qti; pj/  Pq2
ti
!
npj  nPqti
if Pqti > 0 ;
0
otherwise
(47.10)
where Pqti is the current robot velocity, nPqti the unitary
vector pointing in the direction of the robot velocity,
and a is the maximum vehicle acceleration. This ex-
pression arises when the repulsive potential is deﬁned
as the inverse of the difference between the estimated
time until a collision takes place and the time needed to
stop the robot until full backward acceleration. Notice
how the repulsive only affect in the direction of motion
of the vehicle, as opposed to the classic potential. For
a comparison of the classic and generalized versions,

Part E | 47.9
1190
Part E
Moving in the Environment
and the relation with the way to compute the motion
controls next, see [47.53]. This method is widely used
because it is easy to understand and due to its clear
mathematic formalism.
47.9.2 Vector Field Histogram
The vector ﬁeld histogram (VFH) solves the problem
in two steps by computing a set of candidate motion
directions and then selecting one of them.
Candidate Set of Directions
Firstly the space is divided into sectors from the robot
location. The method uses a polar histogram H con-
structed around the robot, where each component rep-
resents the obstacle polar density in the corresponding
sector. The function that maps the obstacle distribution
in sector k on the corresponding component of the his-
togram hk.qti/ is
hk.qti/ D
Z
˝k
P.p/n:

1  d.qti; p/
dmax
m
dp :
(47.11)
The dominion of integration is ˝k D fp 2 Wnp 2
k ^ d.qti; p/ < d0g. The density hk.qti/ is proportional
to the probability P.r/ that a point was occupied by an
obstacle, and to a factor that increases when the distance
to the point decreases.
Typically the resulting histogram has peaks (di-
rections with high density of obstacles) and valleys
(directions with low density). The set of candidate
directions is the set of adjacent components with den-
sity lower than a given threshold, and closest to the
component that contains the target direction. This
set of components (sectors) is called the selected
valley, and represents a set of candidate directions
(Fig. 47.10).
Motion Computation
The objective of the next step is to choose a direction
of this set. The strategy is to apply three heuristics that
depend on the component that contains the target or on
the size of the selected valley. The cases are checked in
sequence:
1. Case 1: goal sector in the selected valley. Solution:
ksol D ktarget, where ktarget is the sector that contains
the goal location.
2. Case 2: goal sector not in the selected valley and
number of sectors of the valley greater than m. So-
lution: ksol D ki ˙ m=2, where m is a ﬁxed number
of sectors and ki the sector of the valley closer to the
ktarget.
90°
0°
270°
Sectors
b)
a)
hk(qti)
kj
ksol
ktarget
Candidate
valley
Threshold
ki
Obstacle
density
Selected set of
directions
Directions
90°
270°
0°
180°
qti
Target
θi
θj
θsol
Fig.47.10a,b Computation of the motion direction sol
with VFH. (a) Robot and obstacle occupancy distribution.
(b) The candidate valley is the set of adjacent components
with values lower than the threshold. The navigation case is
Case 3, since the sector of the target ktarget is not in the val-
ley and the number of sectors is lower than a ﬁxed quantity
m (m D 8, i. e., 45ı). Thus the solution is ksol D .ki Ckj/=2,
whose bisector is sol in (a). The bisectors of ki and kj are
i and j, respectively
3. Case 3: goal sector not in the selected valley and
number of sectors of the valley lower or equal to m.
Solution: ksol D .ki C kj/=2, where ki and kj are the
extreme sectors of the valley.
The result is a component or sector ksol, whose bi-
sector is the direction solution sol. The velocity vsol is
inversely proportional to the distance to the closest ob-
stacle. The control is ui D .vsol; sol/.
VFH is a method formulated to work with probabil-
ity obstacle distributions, and thus, it is well adapted to
work with uncertain sensors as ultrasonic sonars.

Motion Planning and Obstacle Avoidance
47.9 Obstacle Avoidance Techniques
1191
Part E | 47.9
47.9.3 The Obstacle Restriction Method
The obstacle restriction method (ORM) solves the prob-
lem in three steps, where the result of the two ﬁrst steps
is a set of candidate motion directions. The ﬁrst step is
to compute an instantaneous subgoal if necessary. The
second one associates a motion constraint to each obsta-
cle and joins them next to compute the set of desirable
directions. The last step is an strategy to compute the
motion given this set.
Instantaneous Target Selection
This step computes a subgoal when is better to direct
the motion towards a given zone of the space (which
ameliorates the situation to reach the goal latter), rather
than directly towards the goal itself. The subgoals are
located in between obstacles or in the edge of an ob-
stacle (Fig. 47.11a). Next, the process is to check with
a local algorithm whether the goal can be reached from
the robot location. If it is not, then the closest reachable
subgoal to the goal is selected. To check if a point can
be reached, there is a local algorithm that computes the
existence of a local path that joins two locations [47.48].
Let xa and xb be two locations of the space, R the
robot radius, and La list of obstacle points, where pi is an
obstacle of the list. Let A and B be the two semiplanes
divided by the line that joins xa and xb. Then, if for all
the points of L, d.pj; pk/ > 2R (with pj 2 A and pk 2 B),
there is a collision free path that joins both locations. If
this condition is not satisﬁed, then there is no local path
(although a global one could exist). The interesting re-
sult is when the result is positive, since the guarantee that
one point can be reached from the other exists.
The result of the process is the goal or an instan-
taneous subgoal (from now this location is called the
target location). Note that this process is general and
can be used as a preprocess step by other methods to
instantaneously validate the goal location or to compute
an instantaneous subgoal to drive the vehicle.
Candidate Set of Directions
For each obstacle i a set of not desirable directions for
motion Si
nD is computed (motion constraint). This set
is the union of two subsets Si
1 and Si
2. Si
1 represents
the side of the obstacle not suitable to do the avoid-
ance and Si
2 is an exclusion area around the obstacle
(Fig. 47.11b). The motion constraint for the obstacle
is the union of both sets Si
nD D Si
1 [ Si
2. The set of de-
sired directions of motion is the complementary SD D
fŒ;  n SnDg, where SnD D [iSi
nD.
Motion Computation
The ﬁnal step is to select a direction of motion. There
are three cases that depend on the set of desirable direc-
Goal
Obstacle
Left bound
Target
x2
x3
SnD
SD
S2
S1
θsol
φL
x4
x1
a)
b)
Fig. 47.11 (a) Distribution of the subgoals xi. The selected
instantaneous target location is x2. The set of candidate di-
rections is SnD and the solution is sol (the second case).
(b) The two sets of not desirable directions S1 and S2 for
a given obstacle
tions SD and on the target direction target. The cases are
checked in sequence:
1. Case 1: SD ¤ ; and target 2 SD. Solution: sol D
target.
2. Case 2: SD ¤ ; and target … SD. Solution: sol D
lim, where lim is the direction of SD closest to
target.
3. Case 3: SD D ;. Solution: sol D .l
lim C r
lim/=2,
where l
lim and r
lim are the directions of SDr and SDl
closer to target (SDr and SDl are the set of desirable

Part E | 47.9
1192
Part E
Moving in the Environment
directions of obstacles on the left and right-hand
sides of the target, respectively).
The result is a direction of motion solution sol. The
velocity vsol is inversely proportional to the distance
to the closest obstacle. The control is ui D .vsol; sol/.
This is a geometric-based method based on cases. The
advantage is that it has been demonstrated to address
effective motion in conﬁned spaces.
47.9.4 Dynamic Window Approach
The dynamic window approach (DWA) (
VIDEO 712 )
is a method that solves the problem in two steps, by
computing as intermediate information a subset of the
control space U. For simplicity, we consider a mo-
tion control such as translational and rotational velocity
.v; w/; U is deﬁned by
U D f .v; w/ 2 R2 n
v 2 Œvmax; vmax ^
w 2 Œwmax; wmax g :
(47.12)
Set of Candidate Controls
The candidate set of controls UR contains the controls:
(i) within the maximum velocities of the vehicle U,
(ii) that generate safe trajectories UA, and (iii) that
can be reached within a short period of time given
the vehicle accelerations UD. The set UA contains the
admissible controls. These controls can be canceled
before collision by applying the maximum decelera-
tion .av; aw/
UA D
n
.v; w/ 2 Ujv 	
p
2dobsav ^ w 	
p
2obsaw
o
;
(47.13)
where dobst and obst are the distance to the obstacle and
the orientation of the tangent to the trajectory in the ob-
stacle. The set UD contains the controls reachable in
a short period
UD D f .v; w/ 2 U n
v 2 Œvo  avT; vo C avT ^
w 2 Œwo  awT; wo C awTg ;
(47.14)
where Pqti D .vo; wo/ is the current velocity.
The resulting subset of controls is (Fig. 47.12)
UR D U \ UA \ UD :
(47.15)
Motion Computation
The next step is to select one control ui 2 UR. The
problem is set out as the maximization of an objective
UA
UD
U
wmax
Current
velocity
(υ0,w0)
Non
admissible
–wmax
υmax
–υmax
Fig. 47.12 Subset of controls UR D U \ UA \ UD, where
U contains the controls within the maximum velocities,
UA the admissible controls, and UD the controls reachable
in a short period of time
function
G.u/ D ˛1  Goal.u/ C ˛2  Clearance.u/
C ˛3  Velocity.u/ :
(47.16)
This function is a compromise among Goal.u/
that favors velocities that offer progress to the goal,
Clerance.u/ that favors velocities far from the ob-
stacles, and Velocity.u/ that favors high speeds. The
solution is the control ui that maximizes this function.
DWA solves the problem in the control space using
information of the vehicle dynamics, thus the method
is well adapted to work on vehicles with slow dynamic
capabilities or that work at high speeds.
47.9.5 Velocity Obstacles
The method of velocity obstacles (VO) solves the prob-
lem in two steps, by computing as intermediate infor-
mation a subset of the U. The framework is equal to
that of DWA. The difference is that the computation of
the set of safe trajectories UA takes into account the
velocity of the obstacles, which is described next.
Let v i be the velocity of obstacle i (which became
enlarged with the vehicle radius occupying an area Bi)
and u a given vehicle control. The set of colliding rela-
tive velocities is called collision cone
CCi D
n
uiji
\
Bi 6D ;
o
;
(47.17)
where i is the direction of the unitary vector ui D
ui  v i. The velocity obstacle is this set in a common
absolute system of reference
VOi D CCi ˚ v i ;
(47.18)
where ˚ is the Minkowski vector sum. The set of un-
safe trajectories is the union of the velocity obstacles for

Motion Planning and Obstacle Avoidance
47.9 Obstacle Avoidance Techniques
1193
Part E | 47.9
VO1
VO2
B2
B1
Robot
υ2
υ1
Fig. 47.13 Subset of not safe controls
N
UA D VO1 [ VO2.
A control vector out of this velocity generates a collision-
free motion with the moving obstacles
each moving obstacle NUA D [iVOi (Fig. 47.13). The
advantage of this method is that takes into account the
velocity of the obstacles; thus it is well suited in dy-
namic scenarios.
47.9.6 Nearness Diagram Navigation
This method is more a methodology to design obstacle
avoidance methods rather than a method in itself. Near-
Target
Security
distance
Area of motion
Obstacles
Robot location
Situations
Obstacle
information
Goal location
Decision tree
Goal
in motion
region
Wide
motion
region
Yes
No
Yes
Goal
in motion
region
No
Obstacles
in security
zone
No
Yes
No
Yes
Obs. 2
sides of motion
region
No
Yes
HSWR
HSWR
HSNR
HSNR
HSGR
HSGR
LS1
LS1
LS2
LS2
LSGR
LSGR
Actions
Ds
θdisc
θsol
α
Motion
commands
(υ, w)
a)
b)
Fig. 47.14 (a) Design diagram of the method. Given the obstacle information and the target location, one situation is identiﬁed
given some criteria. Next the associated action is executed computing the motion. (b) Example of computation of the solution
of the ND (geometric implementation). The ﬁrst step is to identify the situation. There are no obstacles closer than the security
distance Ds. Next qtarget is not within the motion area. Third, the motion area is wide. With these three criteria we identify the cur-
rent situation, HSWR. In this situation, the associated action computes the control as ui D .vsol; sol/, where vsol is the maximum
velocity and sol is computed as a deviation ˛ from the limit direction disc of the motion area closer to the target direction
ness diagram navigation (ND) is an obstacle avoidance
method obtained with a geometric implementation fol-
lowing this methodology. The idea behind is to employ
a divide and conquer strategy based on situations to
simplify the obstacle avoidance problem following the
situated-activity paradigm [47.54]. First, there is a set
of situations that represent all the cases among robot
locations, obstacles, and target locations. Also, for each
case there is a motion law associated with it. During the
execution phase, at time ti one situation is identiﬁed and
the corresponding law is used to compute the motion.
Situations
The situations are represented in a binary decision tree.
The selection of a situation depends on the obstacles
O.qti/, on the robot location qti and target qtarget. The
criteria are based on high-level entities, like a security
distance around the robot bounds and a motion area
(that identiﬁes suitable areas of motion). For example,
one criterion is if there are obstacles within the security
zone. Another is if the motion area is large or narrow.
The result is only one situation, since by deﬁnition and
representation (binary decision tree) the set of situations
is complete and exclusive (Fig. 47.14).
Actions
Associated to any situation there is an action that com-
putes the motion to adapt the behavior to the case

Part E | 47.10
1194
Part E
Moving in the Environment
represented by each situation. At a high level the ac-
tions describe the behavior desired in each situation.
For example, one situation is when there are no obsta-
cles within a security area and the goal is within the
motion area (HSGR). The solution is to move towards
the goal. Another situation is when there are no obsta-
cles within a security area, and the goal is not within
the motion area but is wide (HSWR). The solution is to
move towards the limit of the motion area but clearing
the security area of obstacles.
The interesting aspect of this method is that it
employs a divide and conquer strategy to solve the
navigation. As a consequence, it simpliﬁes the difﬁ-
culty of the problem. The ﬁrst advantage is that the
methodology is described at a symbolic level and, thus,
there are many ways to implement the method. Sec-
ond, a geometric implementation of this methodology
(ND method) has been demonstrated to address difﬁ-
cult navigation cases, which translate in to achieve safe
navigation in dense, complex, and difﬁcult scenarios.
47.10 Robot Shape, Kinematics, and Dynamics in Obstacle Avoidance
There are three aspects of the vehicle that have to be
taken into account during the obstacle avoidance pro-
cess: shape, kinematics, and dynamics. The shape with
the kinematics is a geometric problem that involves the
representation of the vehicle conﬁgurations in collision,
given the admissible trajectories Qt;1. The dynamics
involves the accelerations and temporal considerations,
and is derived in two aspects: (i) choosing a control
reachable in a short period of time T given the cur-
rent velocity Pqti and the maximum accelerations. (ii)
Taking the braking distance into account, so that after
a control execution, the vehicle can always stop before
collision by applying the maximum deceleration (im-
proving safety).
The problem of shape, kinematics, and dynamics in
obstacle avoidance has been taken into account from
three different points of view:
1. Designing a way to incorporate the constraints
within the method (Sect. 47.9.4)
2. Developing techniques that abstract the vehicle as-
pects from the application of the method [47.55–58]
3. By techniques that break down the problem into
subproblems and incorporate the aspects in se-
quence [47.59–61] after method usage.
47.10.1 Techniques that Abstract Vehicle
Aspects
These techniques are based on constructing an abstrac-
tion layer between the aspects of the vehicle and the
obstacle avoidance method, in such a way that when the
method is applied its solutions already take into account
these aspects [47.55–58]. We consider here vehicles
whose elementary paths obtained under execution of
constant controls can be approximated by circular arcs
(for example, a differential-drive robot, syncro-drive, or
a tri-cycle). To simplify, a control is translational and
rotational velocity u D .v; w/. The set of reachable con-
trols UA given the current velocity Pqti D .v0; w0/ and the
maximum accelerations .av; aw/ is obtained by (47.14).
Abstraction Construction
For these vehicles, the conﬁguration space CS is three-
dimensional. The idea is to construct, centered in the
robot at each time ti, the manifold of the conﬁguration
space ARM.qti/  ARM deﬁned by elementary circular
paths. The function that deﬁnes the manifold is
 D f .x; y/ D
8
ˆˆ<
ˆˆ:
arctan 2

x; x2  y2
2y

if y  0 ;
 arctan 2

x; x2  y2
2y

otherwise :
(47.19)
It is easy to see that function f is differentiable in
R2n.0;0/. Thus .x; y; f .x; y// deﬁnes a two-dimen-
sional manifold in R2S1 when .x; y/ 2 R2n.0; 0/. This
manifold ARM contains all the conﬁgurations that can
be reached at each step of the obstacle avoidance.
Next, in the ARM one computes the exact region of
the conﬁgurations in collision COARM given any shape
of the robot (i. e., obstacle representation in the man-
ifold). Given an obstacle point .xp; yp/ and a point of
the robot bounds .xr; yr/, a point .xs; ys/ of the COARM
boundary is obtained by
xs D .xf C xi/  a ;
ys D .yf  yi/  a ;
(47.20)
with
a D
n 
y2
f  y2
i

C

x2
f  x2
i
	 
.yf  yi/2 C .xf  xi/2	o

h
.yf  yi/4 C 2

x2
f C x2
i

.yf  yi/2
C x2
f  x2
i
2 i1
:
This result is used to map the robot bounds for all ob-
stacles in the manifold, computing the exact shape of
the COARM. Next, one compute the nonadmissible con-
ﬁgurations CNAARM in the manifold ARM, which cor-
respond to conﬁgurations that once reached at a given

Motion Planning and Obstacle Avoidance
47.10 Robot Shape, Kinematics, and Dynamicsin Obstacle Avoidance
1195
Part E | 47.10
–3
–2
–1
0
Goal
Target
2
Obstacles
(υ0, w0)
RCARM
RC
p
ARM
q
p
sol
	sol
CNA
p
ARM
Y
X
1
2
3
a)
b)
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
Fig. 47.15 (a) Robot location, obstacle information and
goal location. (b) The abstraction layer in ARMp. In this
representation the obstacles are the nonadmissible region
CNAp
ARM in ARM and that the motion is omnidirectional
(applicability conditions of many obstacle avoidance meth-
ods). The method is applied to obtain the most promising
direction ˇsol, used to obtain the conﬁguration solution qp
sol
in the set of reachable conﬁgurations RCp
ARM. Finally, the
solution is the control usol that reaches this conﬁguration
at time T. This control complies with the kinematics and
dynamics and takes into account the exact vehicle shape
velocity in time T, the vehicle cannot be stopped by
applying the maximum deceleration without collision
(i. e., there is not enough braking distance). These re-
gions CNAARM are the COARM enlarged by a magnitude
that depends on the maximum vehicle accelerations.
The set of conﬁgurations RCARM reachable by controls
in a short period of time UA is also computed in the
ARM. Finally, a change of coordinates is applied to
ARM leading to ARMp. Its effect is that the elementary
circular paths become straight segments in the mani-
fold. As a consequence, the problem now is to move an
omnidirectional point in a bidimensional space free of
any constraint.
Method Application
The ﬁnal step is to apply the avoidance method on the
ARMp to avoid the CNAp
ARM regions. The method so-
lution ˇsol is the most promising direction in ARMp.
This direction is used to select and admissible location
qp
sol … CNAp
ARM in the set of dynamic reachable conﬁg-
urations RCp
ARM. Finally, the control usol that leads to
this location at time T is selected. By construction, this
control is kinematically and dynamically admissible,
avoids collisions with the exact vehicle shape, and takes
into account the braking distance (Fig. 47.15).
Note
how
with
these
techniques,
the
three-
tridimensional obstacle avoidance problem is converted
into the simple problem of moving a point in a two-
dimensional space without kinematic and dynamic re-
strictions (applicability conditions of many existing
methods). Thus, many existing methods can be applied
in this abstraction, and as a consequence, the solutions
take the vehicle constraints into account.
47.10.2 Techniques of Decomposition
in Subproblems
These techniques address the obstacle avoidance prob-
lem taking into account the vehicle constraints by
breaking down this problem into subproblems:
1. Obstacle avoidance
2. Kinematics and dynamics
3. The shape.
Each
subproblem
is
dealt
with
in
sequence
(Fig. 47.16).
Obstacle Avoidance
First the obstacle avoidance method is used by assum-
ing a circular and omnidirectional vehicle. The solution
is the most promising motion direction and the velocity
u1 D .v1; 1/ to direct the vehicle towards the target.
Kinematics and Dynamics
Second, this control is converted into a control that
complies with the kinematics and dynamics, which
tends to align the vehicle with the instantaneous mo-
tion direction 1 of u1. For example, [47.60, 61] modify
the output of the obstacle avoidance method by a feed-
back action that aligns the vehicle with the direction
solution in a least squares fashion. Moreover, [47.59]
use a dynamic controller of the vehicle. This con-
troller models the behavior of the vehicle as it would
be pulled by a virtual force, and computes the mo-

Part E | 47.11
1196
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Steps
Robot
aspects
Subproblem
(solution)
Circular
omnidirectional
Obstacle
avoidance
Circular
with kinematics
and dynamics
Motion
controller
Rectangular
with kinematics
and dynamics
Shape
corrector
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Fig. 47.16 Decomposition of the obstacle avoidance problem into
subproblems that are addressed in steps, successively incorporating
the vehicle aspects
tion that would result after applying this force during
a short period of time. The motion generated is the
new control. In order to use the controller, the previ-
ous control u1 is converted into an instantaneous force
F D .1; Fmax.v1=vmax// input of the controller, which
computes a control u2 that complies with the kinematic
and dynamics.
Shape
The ﬁnal step is to assure that the control u2 obtained in
the previous step avoids collisions with the exact shape
of the vehicle. To do this, a shape corrector is used to
check collisions by dynamic simulation of the control.
If there is collision, there is a search in the set of reach-
able controls (47.14) until one of them is collision free.
The result of this process is a motion control ui that
guarantees obstacle avoidance and complies with the
kinematics and dynamics of the vehicle.
47.11 Integration Planning – Reaction
In this section we show how the obstacle avoidance
methods are integrated in real systems. On the one hand,
the obstacle avoidance methods are local techniques to
address the motion problem. Thus, they are doomed to
fall in local minima that translate in trap situations or
cyclic motions. This reveals the necessity of a more
global reasoning. On the other hand, motion planning
techniques compute a geometric path free of collisions,
which guarantees global convergence. However, when
the scenarios are unknown and evolve, these techniques
fail, since the precomputed paths will almost surely col-
lide with obstacles. It seems clear that one key aspect
to build a motion system is to combine the best of both
worlds: the global knowledge given by motion planning
and the reactivity of the obstacle avoidance methods.
The most extended ways to specify the interaction
between the deliberation and reaction are: (i) to pre-
compute a path to the target deformed in execution as
a function of the changes in the scenario obtained from
the sensor information (systems of path deformation),
for example, [47.62–67]. (ii) To use a planner at a high
frequency with a tactical role, leaving the degree of ex-
ecution to the reactor [47.68–73].
47.11.1 Systems of Path Deformation
Elastic bands is a method that initially assumes the
existence of a geometric path to the target location
(computed by a planner). The path is assimilated with
a band, subjected to two types of forces: an inner con-
traction force and an external force. The inner force
simulates the tension of a strip and maintains the stress.
The external force is exerted by the obstacles and moves
the band far from them. During the execution, the new
obstacles produce forces that remove the band far from
them, guaranteeing their avoidance. These methods are
described in Chap. 37.
An extension of the method of path deformation
was proposed in [47.64] for nonholonomic systems
(
VIDEO 80 ). Even though the objective is the same
as for mobile robots without kinematic constraints,
avoiding obstacle while following a trajectory, the con-
cepts are completely different. The trajectory & of
a nonholonomic system is completely deﬁned by an ini-
tial conﬁguration & .0/ and the value of the input func-
tion u 2 C1.I; Rm/, where I is an interval. The trajectory
deformation method for nonholonomic systems is thus
based on the perturbation of the input function of the
current trajectory in order to achieve three objectives:
1. Keeping the nonholonomic constraints satisﬁed
2. Getting away from obstacles detected online by on-
board sensors
3. Keeping unchanged the initial and last conﬁgura-
tions of the trajectory after deformation.
Perturbing the input function of & , by a vec-
tor-valued input perturbation v 2 C1.I; Rm/, yields
a trajectory deformation  2 C1.I; Rn/
u  u C v ) &  & C  ;
where  is a positive, asymptotically small real number.
As an approximation of order 1, the relation between
u and  is given by the linearized system, which we do
not express here.
Potential Field of Obstacles
Obstacles are taken into account by deﬁning a potential
ﬁeld over the conﬁguration space, which increases when

Motion Planning and Obstacle Avoidance
47.11 Integration Planning – Reaction
1197
Part E | 47.11
the robot gets closer to obstacles. This potential ﬁeld is
lifted into the space of trajectories by integration along
the trajectory of the conﬁguration potential value.
Discretization of the Input Space
The space C1.I; Rm/ of input perturbations is an
inﬁnite-dimensional vector space. The choice of an in-
put perturbation is restricted to a ﬁnite-dimensional
subspace spanned
by
p
arbitrary
test
functions,
e1; : : : ; ep where p is a positive integer. An input per-
turbation: u D Pp
iD1 iei is thus deﬁned by a vector
 2 Rp. The variation of the trajectory potential is linear
with respect to .
Boundary Conditions
The boundary conditions consisting in applying a tra-
jectory perturbation equal to zero at both ends of inter-
val I is linear with respect to . It is, therefore, easy to
ﬁnd a vector  making the potential decrease and satis-
fying the boundary conditions.
Nonholonomic Constraint Deviation
The approximation of order 1 in the relation between
the input perturbation and trajectory deformation in-
duces a side effect: after a few iterations, the non-
holonomic constraints are no longer satisﬁed. This side
effect is corrected by considering an augmented sys-
tem with n control vector ﬁelds f1; : : : ; fn spanning Rn
for each conﬁguration and by keeping the input com-
ponents umC1 to un along the additional vector ﬁelds
as close as possible to 0. Figure 47.17 shows an exam-
ple of the trajectory deformation algorithm applied to
a nonholonomic system.
47.11.2 Systems of Tactical Planning
The systems of tactical planning recompute at a high
frequency a path to the target location, and use the
main course to advise the obstacle avoidance mod-
ule. The design of these motion systems involves at
least the synthesis of three functionalities. The con-
struction of a model, the deliberative planning, and the
obstacle avoidance. The modeler constructs a represen-
tation base for deliberation and memory for the reactive
behavior. The planner generates global plans used tac-
tically to guide the obstacle avoidance module, which
generates the local motion. Next we give a perspective
of the three functionalities and three possible tools to
implement them [47.73].
Model Builder Module
Construction of a model of the environment (to increase
the spatial domain of the planning and used as local
Fig. 47.17 A differentially-driven mobile robot towing a trailer ap-
plying the trajectory deformation algorithm to avoid obstacles
detected online
memory for obstacle avoidance). One possibility is to
use a binary occupancy grid that is updated whenever
a new sensory measurement is available, and to employ
a scan matching technique [47.74, 75] to improve the
vehicle odometry before integrating any new measure
in the grid.
Planner Module
Extraction of the connectivity of the free space (used
to avoid the cyclical motions and trap situations).
A good choice is a dynamic navigation function such
as the D [47.76, 77]. The idea behind the planner is to
focus the search locally in the areas where the changes
in the scenario structure have occurred and affect the
computation of the path. The planner avoids the local
minima and is computationally very efﬁcient for real-
time implementations.
Obstacle Avoidance Module
Computation of the collision-free motion. Any of the
methods described in this chapter could be used.
One possibility is the ND method (Sect. 47.9.6),
since it has been demonstrated to be very efﬁ-
Planning
Modeling
Obstacle
avoidance
Sensors
Controller
Robot
Action
– Motion
Perception
– Laser scan
– Odometry
Fig. 47.18 Overview of the system of motion

Part E | 47.12
1198
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Obstacle
Tactical
planning
Reactive
motion
Free
a)
b)
Fig. 47.19 (a) Snapshot of an experiment carried out with
the motion system described working on a wheelchair
robot equipped with a planar range laser sensor. (b) In-
formation of the motion system at a given time: current
accumulated map of the scenario, path computed with the
planner and tactical direction of motion, and solution of the
reactive obstacle avoidance method J
cient and robust in environments with little space to
manoeuvre.
Globally the system works as follows (Fig. 47.18):
given a laser scan and the odometry of the vehicle, the
model builder incorporates this information into the ex-
isting model. Next, the information of the changes in
obstacle and free space in the model is used by the plan-
ner module to compute the course to follow to reach
the goal. Finally, the avoidance module uses the in-
formation of the obstacles contained in the grid and
information of this tactical planner to generate the mo-
tion (to drive the vehicle free of collisions towards the
goal). The motion is executed by the vehicle controller
and the process restarts with a new sensorial measure-
ment. It is important to stress that the three modules
should work synchronously within the perception – ac-
tion cycle for consistency reasons. The advantage of
these systems is that the synergy of the modules allows
to avoid trap situations and the cyclic motions (limi-
tations associated to the local nature of the avoidance
methods). Figure 47.19 shows a snapshot of an experi-
ment carried out with this motion system.
47.12 Conclusions, Future Directions, and Further Reading
The algorithmic tools presented in this chapter show
that motion planning and obstacle avoidance research
techniques have reached a level of maturity that al-
low their transfer onto real platforms (
VIDEO 710 ,
VIDEO 714 ). Today, several indoor mobile robots use
obstacle avoidance techniques on a daily basis to guide
visitors in museums. Outdoor applications still require
some developments in perception and modeling. For
these applications, 3-D sensing capabilities are nec-
essary to model the environment but also to detect
obstacles. As an example, several car manufacturer are
working on parallel parking assistance. The difﬁcult
point of this application is to build a model of a parking
spot from 3-D data in a great variety of environments.
The main challenge of autonomous motion in mo-
bile robots currently consists in integrating techniques
from different robotics research domains in order to
plan and execute motions for very complex systems,
like humanoid robots, for instance. Integration in the
sense that different software components need to work
together on a machine but also in a scientiﬁc mean-
ing: the classical motion planning formulation with
conﬁguration variables that locate the robot with re-
spect to a global reference frame does not ﬁt partially
known environments with imprecise maps. Robotic
tasks like motion need to be speciﬁed with respect
to landmarks of the environment. For instance, grasp-
ing an object is by deﬁnition a motion speciﬁed with
respect to the position of the object. Very little has
been done to design a general framework in this
direction.
For useful complementary reading on motion
planning and obstacle avoidance for mobile robots
see [47.5, 78–80].

Motion Planning and Obstacle Avoidance
References
1199
Part E | 47
Video-References
VIDEO 80
Sensor-based trajectory deformation and docking for nonholonomic mobile robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/47/videodetails/80
VIDEO 707
Autonomous robotic smart wheelchair navigation in an urban environment
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/47/videodetails/707
VIDEO 708
Sena wheelchair: Autonomous navigation at University of Malaga (2007)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/47/videodetails/708
VIDEO 709
Robotic wheelchair: Autonomous navigation with Google Glass
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/47/videodetails/709
VIDEO 710
A ride in the google self driving car
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/47/videodetails/710
VIDEO 711
Mobile robot navigation system in outdoor pedestrian environment
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/47/videodetails/711
VIDEO 712
Mobile robot autonomous navigation in Gracia district, Barcelona
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/47/videodetails/712
VIDEO 713
Autonomous navigation of a mobile vehicle
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/47/videodetails/713
VIDEO 714
Autonomous robot cars drive DARPA Urban challenge
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/47/videodetails/714
References
47.1
N.J. Nilson: A mobile automaton: An application of
artificial intelligence techniques, 1st Int. Jt. Conf.
Artif. Intell. (1969) pp. 509–520
47.2
A. Thompson: The navigation system of the JPL
robot, 5th Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell., Cambridge
(1977) pp. 749–757
47.3
G. Giralt, R. Sobek, R. Chatila: A multi-level plan-
ning and navigation system for a mobile robot:
A 1st approach to Hilare, 6th Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. In-
tell. (1979) pp. 335–337
47.4
T. Lozano-Pérez: Spatial planning: A configuration
space approach, IEEE Trans. Comput. 32(2), 108–120
(1983)
47.5
J.C. Latombe: Robot Motion Planning (Kluwer, Dor-
drecht 1991)
47.6
J.-P. Laumond: Feasible trajectories for mobile
robots with kinematic and environment con-
straints. In: Intelligent Autonomous Systems, ed.
by F.C.A. Groen (Hertzberger, Amsterdam 1987)
pp. 346–354
47.7
Z. Li, J.F. Canny: Nonholonomic Motion Planning
(Kluwer, Dordrecht 1992)
47.8
M.
Likhachev,
D.
Ferguson:
Planning
long
dynamically-feasible maneuvers for autonomous
vehicles, Int. J. Robotics Res. 28(8), 933–945
(2009)
47.9
H. Sussmann: Lie brackets, real analyticity and ge-
ometric control. In: Differential Geometric Control
Theory, Progress in Mathematics, Vol. 27, ed. by
R. Brockett, R. Millman, H. Sussmann (Birkhauser,
New York 1982) pp. 1–116
47.10
H.J. Sussmann, V. Jurdjevic: Controllability of non-
linear systems, J. Differ. Equ. 12, 95–116 (1972)
47.11
J.-P. Laumond: Singularities and topological as-
pects in nonholonomic motion planning. In: Non-
holonomic motion Planning, ed. by Z. Li, J.F. Canny
(Kluwer, Boston 1992) pp. 149–199
47.12
J.-P. Laumond, J.J. Risler: Nonholonomic systems:
Controllability and complexity, Theor. Comput. Sci.
157, 101–114 (1996)
47.13
J.-P.
Laumond,
P.
Jacobs, M.
Taix,
R.
Mur-
ray: A motion planner for nonholonomic mobile
robot, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 10(5), 577–593
(1994)
47.14
P. Cheng, S.M. LaValle: Reducing metric sensitivity
in randomized trajectory design, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2001) pp. 43–48
47.15
J.A. Reeds, R.A. Shepp: Optimal paths for a car that
goes both forward and backwards, Pac. J. Math.
145(2), 367–393 (1990)
47.16
P. Souères, J.-P. Laumond: Shortest path synthe-
sis for a car-like robot, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control
41(5), 672–688 (1996)
47.17
D. Balkcom, M. Mason: Time optimal trajectories
for bounded velocity differential drive vehicles, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 21(3), 199–218 (2002)
47.18
D. Tilbury, R. Murray, S. Sastry: Trajectory genera-
tion for the n-trailer problem using Goursat normal
form, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 40(5), 802–819
(1995)
47.19
S. Sekhavat, J.-P. Laumond: Topological property
for collision-free nonholonomic motion planning:
The case of sinusoidal inputs for chained form sys-
tems, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 14(5), 671–680
(1998)
47.20
M. Fliess, J. Lévine, P. Martin, P. Rouchon: Flatness
and defect of non-linear systems: Introductory
theory and examples, Int. J. Control 61(6), 1327–1361
(1995)
47.21
P. Rouchon, M. Fliess, J. Lévine, P. Martin: Flatness
and motion planning: The car with n trailers, Eur.
Control Conf. (1993) pp. 1518–1522
47.22
F. Lamiraux, J.-P. Laumond: Flatness and small-
time controllability of multibody mobile robots:

Part E | 47
1200
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Application to motion planning, IEEE Trans. Autom.
Control 45(10), 1878–1881 (2000)
47.23
P. Rouchon: Necessary condition and genericity of
dynamic feedback linearization, J. Math. Syst. Es-
tim. Control 4(2), 1–14 (1994)
47.24
P. Rouchon, M. Fliess, J. Lévine, P. Martin: Flatness,
motion planning and trailer systems, IEEE Int. Conf.
Decis. Control (1993) pp. 2700–2705
47.25
S. Sekhavat, J. Hermosillo: Cycab bi-steerable cars:
A new family of differentially flat systems, Adv.
Robotics 16(5), 445–462 (2002)
47.26
J. Barraquand, J.C. Latombe: Nonholonomic multi-
body mobile robots: Controllability and motion
planning in the presence of obstacles, Algorithmica
10, 121–155 (1993)
47.27
A. Divelbiss, T. Wen: A path space approach to
nonholonomic motion planning in the presence of
obstacles, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 13(3), 443–
451 (1997)
47.28
S. LaValle, J. Kuffner: Randomized kinodynamic
planning, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1999) pp. 473–479
47.29
F. Lamiraux, E. Ferré, E. Vallée: Kinodynamic mo-
tion planning: Connecting exploration trees using
trajectory optimization methods, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 3987–3992
47.30
V. Lumelsky, A. Stepanov: Path planning strategies
for a point mobile automation moving admist un-
known obstacles of arbitrary shape, Algorithmica 2,
403–430 (1987)
47.31
R. Chatila:
Path planning and environmental
learning in a mobile robot system, Eur. Conf. Artif.
Intell. (1982)
47.32
L. Gouzenes: Strategies for solving collision-free
trajectories problems for mobile robots and ma-
nipulator robots, Int. J. Robotics Res. 3(4), 51–65
(1984)
47.33
R. Chattergy: Some heuristics for the navigation of
a robot, Int. J. Robotics Res. 4(1), 59–66 (1985)
47.34
O. Khatib: Real-time obstacle avoidance for ma-
nipulators and mobile robots, Int. J. Robotics Res.
5, 90–98 (1986)
47.35
B.H. Krogh, C.E. Thorpe: Integrated path planning
and dynamic steering control for autonomous ve-
hicles, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1986) pp. 1664–1669
47.36
J. Borenstein, Y. Koren: Real-time obstacle avoid-
ance for fast mobile robots, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man
Cybern. 19(5), 1179–1187 (1989)
47.37
K. Azarm, G. Schmidt: Integrated mobile robot mo-
tion planning and execution in changing indoor
environments, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (1994) pp. 298–305
47.38
A. Masoud, S. Masoud, M. Bayoumi: Robot nav-
igation using a pressure generated mechanical
stress field, the biharmonical potential approach,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1994)
pp. 124–129
47.39
L. Singh, H. Stephanou, J. Wen: Real-time robot
motion control with circulatory fields, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1996) pp. 2737–
2742
47.40
J. Borenstein, Y. Koren: The vector field histogram-
fast obstacle avoidance for mbile robots, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 7, 278–288 (1991)
47.41
J. Minguez: The obstacle restriction method (ORM):
Obstacle avoidance in difficult scenarios, IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robot Syst. (IROS) (2005)
47.42
D. Vikerimark, J. Minguez: Reactive obstacle avoid-
ance for mobile robots that operate in confined
3-D workspaces, IEEE Mediterr. Electrotech. Conf.
(2006)
47.43
W. Feiten, R. Bauer, G. Lawitzky: Robust obsta-
cle avoidance in unknown and cramped environ-
ments, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1994) pp. 2412–2417
47.44
D. Fox, W. Burgard, S. Thrun: The dynamic window
approach to collision avoidance, IEEE Robotics Au-
tom. Mag. 4(1), 23–33 (1997)
47.45
P. Fiorini, Z. Shiller: Motion planning in dy-
namic environments using velocity obstacles, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 17(7), 760–772 (1998)
47.46
F. Large, C. Laugier, Z. Shiller: Navigation among
moving obstacles using the NLVO: Principles and
applications to intelligent vehicles, Auton. Robots
19(2), 159–171 (2005)
47.47
R. Simmons: The curvature-velocity method for
local obstacle avoidance, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1996) pp. 3375–3382
47.48
J. Minguez, L. Montano: Nearness diagram (ND)
navigation: Collision avoidance in troublesome
scenarios, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 20(1), 45–59
(2004)
47.49
J. Minguez, J. Osuna, L. Montano: A divide and con-
quer strategy to achieve reactive collision avoid-
ance in troublesome scenarios, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004)
47.50
J.W. Durham, F. Bullo: Smooth nearness-diagram
navigation, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2008)
47.51
C.-C. Yu, W.-C. Chen, C.-C. Wang: Self-tuning near-
ness diagram navigation, Int. Conf. Serv. Interact.
Robotics (SIRCon) (2009)
47.52
M. Mujahad, D. Fischer, B. Mertsching, H. Jaddu:
Closest gap based (CG) reactive obstacle avoid-
ance Navigation for highly cluttered environments,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2010)
pp. 1805–1812
47.53
R.B. Tilove: Local obstacle avoidance for mobile
robots based on the method of artificial potentials,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1990)
pp. 566–571
47.54
R.C. Arkin: Behavior-Based Robotics (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1999)
47.55
J. Minguez, L. Montano: Abstracting any vehicle
shape and the kinematics and dynamic constraints
from reactive collision avoidance methods, Eur.
Conf. Mob. Robots (2007)
47.56
J. Minguez, L. Montano, J. Santos-Victor: Abstract-
ing the vehicle shape and kinematic constraints
from the obstacle avoidance methods, Auton.
Robots 20(1), 43–59 (2006)
47.57
L. Armesto, V. Girbés, M. Vincze, S. Olufs, P. Muñoz-
Benavent: Mobile robot obstacle avoidance based

Motion Planning and Obstacle Avoidance
References
1201
Part E | 47
on quasi-holonomic smooth paths, Lect. Notes
Comput. Sci. 7429, 244–255 (2012)
47.58
J.L. Blanco, J. González, J.A. Fernández-Madrigal:
Foundations of parameterized trajectories-based
space transformations for obstacle avoidance. In:
Motion Planning, ed. by X.-Y. Jing (InTech, Rijeka
2008)
47.59
J. Minguez, L. Montano: Robot navigation in very
complex dense and cluttered indoor/outdoor en-
vironments, 15th IFAC World Congr. (2002)
47.60
A. De Luca, G. Oriolo: Local incremental planning for
nonholonomic mobile robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1994) pp. 104–110
47.61
A. Bemporad, A. De Luca, G. Oriolo: Local incremen-
tal planning for car-like robot navigating among
obstacles, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1996) pp. 1205–1211
47.62
S. Quinlan, O. Khatib: Elastic bands: Connecting
path planning and control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1993) pp. 802–807
47.63
O. Brock, O. Khatib: Real-time replanning in high-
dimensional configuration spaces using sets of ho-
motopic paths, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2000) pp. 550–555
47.64
F. Lamiraux, D. Bonnafous, O. Lefebvre: Reac-
tive path deformation for nonholonomic mobile
robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics 20(6), 967–977 (2004)
47.65
Y. Yang, O. Brock: Elastic roadmaps – Motion gen-
eration for autonomous mobile manipulation, Au-
ton. Robots 28(1), 113–130 (2010)
47.66
E. Yoshida, C. Esteves, I. Belousov, J.-P. Laumond,
T. Sakaguchi, K. Yokoi: Planning 3-d collision-free
dynamic robotic motion through iterative reshap-
ing, IEEE Trans. Robotics 24, 1186–1198 (2008)
47.67
H. Kurniawati, T. Fraichard: From path to trajectory
deformation, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2007)
47.68
O. Brock, O. Khatib: High-speed navigation using
the global dynamic window approach, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1999) pp. 341–346
47.69
I. Ulrich, J. Borenstein: VFH*: Local obstacle avoid-
ance with look-ahead verification, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2000) pp. 2505–2511
47.70
J. Minguez, L. Montano: Sensor-based motion
robot motion generation in unknown, dynamic
and troublesome scenarios, Robotics Auton. Syst.
52(4), 290–311 (2005)
47.71
C. Stachniss, W. Burgard: An integrated approach to
goal-directed obstacle avoidance under dynamic
constraints for dynamic environments, IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2002) pp. 508–513
47.72
R. Philipsen, R. Siegwart: Smooth and efficient ob-
stacle avoidance for a tour guide robot, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2003)
47.73
L. Montesano, J. Minguez, L. Montano: Lessons
learned in integration for sensor-basedrobot navi-
gation systems, Int. J. Adv. Robotics Syst. 3(1), 85–91
(2006)
47.74
F. Lu, E. Milios: Robot pose estimation in unknown
environments by matching 2-D range scans, Intell.
Robotic Syst. 18, 249–275 (1997)
47.75
J. Minguez, L. Montesano, F. Lamiraux: Metric-
based iterative closest point scan matching for sen-
sor displacement estimation, IEEE Trans. Robotics
22(5), 1047–1054 (2006)
47.76
A. Stenz: The focussed d Algorithm for real-time
replanning, Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI) (1995)
pp. 1652–1659
47.77
S. Koenig, M. Likhachev: Improved fast replanning
for robot navigation in unknown terrain, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002)
47.78
J.-P. Laumond: Robot motion planning and con-
trol. In: Lecture Notes in Control and Information
Science, ed. by J.P. Laumond (Springer, New York
1998)
47.79
H. Choset, K.M. Lynch, S. Hutchinson, G. Kantor,
W. Burgard, L.E. Kavraki, S. Thrun: Principles of
Robot Motion (MIT Press, Cambridge 2005)
47.80
S.M. LaValle: Planning Algorithms (Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge 2006)

Multimedia Contents Modeling an
1203
Part E | 48
48. Modeling and Control
of Legged Robots
Pierre-Brice Wieber, Russ Tedrake, Scott Kuindersma
The promise of legged robots over wheeled robots
is to provide improved mobility over rough ter-
rain. Unfortunately, this promise comes at the cost
of a significant increase in complexity. We now
have a good understanding of how to make legged
robots walk and run dynamically, but further re-
search is still necessary to make them walk and
run efficiently in terms of energy, speed, reactiv-
ity, versatility, and robustness. In this chapter, we
will discuss how legged robots are usually mod-
eled, how their stability analysis is approached,
how dynamic motions are generated and con-
trolled, and finally summarize the current trends
in trying to improve their performance. The main
problem is avoiding to fall. This can prove diffi-
cult since legged robots have to rely entirely on
available contact forces to do so. The temporal-
ity of leg motions appears to be a key aspect in
this respect, as current control solutions include
continuous anticipation of future motion (using
some form of model predictive control), or focus-
ing more specifically on limit cycles and orbital
stability.
48.1 A Brief History of Legged Robots........... 1204
48.2 The Dynamics
of Legged Locomotion.......................... 1204
48.2.1
Lagrangian Dynamics................. 1205
48.2.2 Newton and Euler Equations
of Motion ................................. 1205
48.2.3 Contact Models.......................... 1207
48.3 Stability Analysis – Not Falling Down.... 1209
48.3.1
Fixed Points.............................. 1210
48.3.2 Limit Cycles............................... 1210
48.3.3 Viability.................................... 1211
48.3.4 Controllability ........................... 1212
48.3.5 Robust or Stochastic Stability...... 1213
48.3.6 Input-Output Stability ............... 1214
48.3.7 Stability Margins ....................... 1214
48.4 Generation of Dynamic Walking
and Running Motions .......................... 1214
48.4.1 Early Offline Motion Generation
Schemes ................................... 1215
48.4.2 Online Motion Generation:
A Model Predictive Control
Point of View ............................ 1215
48.4.3 Motion
in Constrained Environments...... 1219
48.4.4 Motion Generation with Limited
Computing Resources................. 1220
48.5 Motion and Force Control ..................... 1222
48.6 Towards More Efficient Walking ............ 1225
48.6.1 Gait Generation
for Dynamic Walking.................. 1225
48.6.2 Orbital Trajectory
Stabilization and Control............ 1226
48.7 Different Contact Behaviors .................. 1227
48.7.1
Wall Climbing............................ 1227
48.7.2
Tethered Walking ...................... 1227
48.7.3
Legs with Wheels ...................... 1228
48.7.4
Wheels with Legs ...................... 1228
48.8 Conclusion........................................... 1228
References................................................... 1228
The promise of legged robots over standard wheeled
robots is to provide improved mobility over rough ter-
rain. This promise builds on the decoupling between
the environment and the main body of the robot that
the presence of articulated legs allows, with two conse-
quences. First, the motion of the main body of the robot
can be made largely independent from the roughness of
the terrain, within the kinematic limits of the legs: legs
provide an active suspension system. Indeed, one of the
most advanced hexapod robots of the 1980s was aptly
called the Adaptive Suspension Vehicle [48.1]. Second,
this decoupling allows legs to temporarily leave their

Part E | 48.2
1204
Part E
Moving in the Environment
contact with the ground: isolated footholds on a dis-
continuous terrain can be overcome, allowing to visit
places absolutely out of reach otherwise. Note that hav-
ing feet ﬁrmly planted on the ground is not mandatory
here: skating is an equally interesting option, although
rarely approached so far in robotics.
Unfortunately, this promise comes at the cost of a hin-
dering increase in complexity. It is only with the un-
veiling of the Honda P2 humanoid robot in 1996 [48.2],
and later of the Boston Dynamics BigDog quadruped
robot in 2005 that legged robots ﬁnally began to deliver
real-life capabilities that are just beginning to match
the long sought animal-like mobility over rough ter-
rain. Not matching yet the capabilities of humans and
animals, legged robots do contribute however already
to understanding their locomotion, as evidenced by
the many fruitful collaborations between robotics and
biomechanics researchers.
48.1 A Brief History of Legged Robots
Before the advent of digital computers, legged ma-
chines could be approached only by electromechanical
means, lacking in advanced feedback control. This pre-
robotics period culminated with the General Electric
Walking Truck developed by Ralph Mosher, which in-
spired awe in the mid 1960s. The limb motions of this
elephant-size quadruped machine were directly reﬂect-
ing the limb motions of the onboard operator, who was
responsible for all motion control and synchronization.
Unfortunately, the strenuous concentration that this re-
quired limited operation to less than 15 minutes.
Digitally controlled legged robots started to ap-
pear in the late 1960s. Among early pioneers, Robert
McGhee initiated a series of quadruped and hexapod
robots ﬁrst at University of South California, then at
Ohio State University, culminating in the mid 1980s
with the Adaptive Suspension Vehicle, a human carry-
ing hexapod vehicle walking on natural and irregular
outdoor terrain [48.1], while Ichiro Kato initiated a long
series of biped and humanoid robots in the Waseda Uni-
versity, a series still continuing nearly half a century
later [48.3]. But by the end of the 1970s, all legged
robots were still limited to quasi-static gaits, i. e., slow
walking motions with the center of mass of the robot
always kept above its feet.
The transition to dynamic legged locomotion oc-
curred in the beginning of the 1980s, with the ﬁrst
dynamically walking bipedal robot demonstrated at the
Tokyo University [48.4], and the famous series of hop-
ping and running monopedal, bipedal and quadrupedal
robots developed at the MIT (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology) LegLab under the direction of Marc Raib-
ert [48.5]. Key theoretical breakthroughs came in the
end of the 1980s, when Tad McGeer demonstrated that
stable dynamic walking motions could be obtained by
pure mechanical means, giving rise to a whole new ﬁeld
of research, passive dynamic walking, introducing new,
key concepts such as orbital stability using Poincaré
maps [48.6], with one simple conclusion: you need not
have complete (or any) control to be able to walk dy-
namically and efﬁciently.
Legged robots were still mostly research labora-
tory curiosities working in limited situations when
Honda unveiled the P2 humanoid robot in 1996 [48.2],
a decade long secret project demonstrating unprece-
dented versatility and robustness, followed in 2000 by
the Asimo humanoid robot. The world of humanoid
and legged robots was ripe for companies to begin in-
vesting. A handful of other Japanese companies such
as Toyota or Kawada were quick to follow with their
own humanoid robots, while Sony began selling more
than 150 000 of its Aibo home companion robot dogs.
Boston Dynamics, a company Marc Raibert founded
after leaving the MIT LegLab, ﬁnally unveiled its Big-
Dog quadruped robot in 2005 [48.7], which was the ﬁrst
to demonstrate true animal-like locomotion capabilities
on rough terrain.
The progress over the last decades has been remark-
able. Profound questions have ﬁnally been answered:
we now understand how to make legged robots walk
and run dynamically. But other profound questions still
have to be answered, such as how best to make them
walk and run efﬁciently. The performance of legged
robots needs to be improved in many ways: energy,
speed, reactivity, versatility, robustness, etc. We will
therefore discuss in this chapter how legged robots
are usually modeled in Sect. 48.2 and how dynamic
motions are currently generated and controlled in Sec-
tions 48.4 and 48.5, before discussing in Sect. 48.6 the
current trends in improving their efﬁciency.
48.2 The Dynamics of Legged Locomotion
One of the major difﬁculties in making a legged robot
walk or run is keeping its balance: where should the
robot place its feet, how should it move its body in or-
der to move safely in a given direction, even in case

Modeling and Control of Legged Robots
48.2 The Dynamicsof Legged Locomotion
1205
Part E | 48.2
of strong perturbations? This difﬁculty comes from the
fact that contact forces with the environment are an ab-
solute necessity to generate and control locomotion, but
they are limited by the mechanical laws of unilateral
contact.
This essential role of the contact forces is partic-
ularly clear in the derivatives of the total linear and
angular momenta of the robot, the former involving the
motion of its center of mass. Because of the importance
of contact forces for legged locomotion, we brieﬂy dis-
cuss here their different models.
48.2.1 Lagrangian Dynamics
Structure of the Configuration Space
As for every robot moving in their 3-D environment
(in space or underwater for example), the conﬁguration
space of legged robots combines the conﬁguration Oq 2
RN of their N joints with a global position x0 2 R3 and
orientation 0 2 R3 (representing an element of SO.3/)
q D
0
@
Oq
x0
0
1
A :
(48.1)
The position x0 and orientation 0 are typically those of
a central body (pelvis or trunk) or of an extremity (foot
or hand).
Structure of the Lagrangian Dynamics
The speciﬁc structure of the conﬁguration space out-
lined above is naturally reﬂected in the Lagrangian
dynamics
M.q/
2
4
0
@
ROq
Rx0
R0
1
A C
0
@
0
g
0
1
A
3
5 C n.q; Pq/
D
0
@
u
0
0
1
A C
X
i
Ci.q/Tf i
(48.2)
of the system, where M.q/ 2 R.NC6/.NC6/ is the gen-
eralized inertia matrix of the robot, g 2 R3 is the
constant gravity acceleration vector, n.q; Pq/ 2 RNC6 is
the vector of Coriolis and centrifugal effects, u 2 RN
is the vector of joint torques, and for all i, f i 2 R3
is a force exerted by the environment on the robot
and Ci.q/ 2 R.NC6/3 is the associated Jacobian ma-
trix [48.8].
Since the vector u of joint torques has the same size
as the vector Oq of joint positions, the whole dynamics
including the global position x0 and orientation 0 ap-
pears to be underactuated if no external forces f i are
exerted.
48.2.2 Newton and Euler Equations
of Motion
Center of Mass and Angular Momentum
A consequence of the structure (48.2) of the Lagrangian
dynamics is that the part of this dynamics which is not
directly actuated involves the Newton and Euler equa-
tions of motion of the robot taken as a whole ([48.8]
for detailed derivations). The Newton equation can be
written in the following way
m .Rc C g/ D
X
i
f i ;
(48.3)
with m the total mass of the robot and c the position
of its center of mass (COM). The Euler equation can
be expressed with respect to the COM in the following
way
PL D
X
i
.pi  c/  f i ;
(48.4)
with pi the points of applications of the forces f i and
L D
X
k
.xk  c/  mkPxk C Ik!k
(48.5)
the angular momentum of the whole robot with respect
to its COM, with Pxk and !k the translation and rotation
velocities of the different parts k of the robot, mk and Ik
their masses and inertia tensor matrices (expressed in
global coordinates).
The Newton equation makes it obvious that the
robot needs external forces f i in order to move its COM
in a direction other than that of gravity. The Euler equa-
tion is more subtle, as we will see during ﬂight phases.
Flight Phases
During ﬂight phases, when a legged robot is not in con-
tact with its environment, not experiencing any contact
forces f i, the Newton equation (48.3) simpliﬁes to
Rc D g :
(48.6)
In this case, the COM invariably accelerates along the
gravity vector g with constant horizontal speed, fol-
lowing a standard falling motion: there is absolutely no
possibility to control the COM to move in any different
way. The Euler equation (48.4) simpliﬁes in the same
way to
PL D 0 ;
(48.7)
imposing a conservation of the angular momentum L.
In this case, however, the robot is still able to gener-
ate and control both joint motions and global rotations,
this is how cats are able to fall back on their feet when

Part E | 48.2
1206
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Fig. 48.1 Even though the angular momentum is constant
during ﬂight phases, the robot is still able to generate and
control rotations of the whole body with the help of leg or
arm motions (light brown), as a result of the nonholonomy
of the angular momentum. This is how cats fall back on
their feet when dropped from any initial orientation
dropped from any initial orientation (Fig. 48.1). This
is a result of the nonholonomy of the angular momen-
tum (48.5) which is not the derivative of any function of
the conﬁguration of the robot [48.9]. As a result, even
though the angular momentum L is kept constant dur-
ing the whole ﬂight phase, the joint conﬁguration Oq, and
the global orientation 0 of the robot can be driven to
any desired value at the end of the ﬂight phase. We will
see in Sect. 48.5 how this impacts the control of legged
robots. Note that the dynamics of legged robots during
ﬂight phases is similar to the dynamics of free-ﬂoating
space robots discussed in Chap. 55. Further discussion
and developments can be found there.
In Contact with a Flat Ground:
The Center of Pressure
In case the forces applied by the environment on the
robot are due to contacts with a ﬂat ground (while stand-
ing still, walking or running), let us consider a reference
frame oriented along the ground, with the z axis orthog-
onal to it (therefore tilted if the ground is tilted, see
Fig. 48.5). Without loss of generality, let us suppose
that the points of contact, pi, with the ground are all
such that pz
i D 0.
Let us consider then the sum of the Euler (48.4) and
the cross product of the COM c with the Newton (48.3)
m c  .RcC g/ C PL D
X
i
pi  f i ;
(48.8)
and let us divide the result by the z coordinate of the
Newton equation to obtain
m c  .RcC g/ C PL
m.Rcz C gz/
D
P
i pi  f i
P
i f z
i
:
(48.9)
Since pz
o D 0, the x and y coordinates of this equation
can be simpliﬁed in the following way
cx;y 
cz
Rcz C gz .Rcx;y C gx;y/ C
1
m.Rcz C gz/S PLx;y
D
P
i f z
i px;y
i
P
i f z
i
;
(48.10)
with a simple rotation matrix
S D
0
1
1
0

:
On the right hand side of (48.10) appears the deﬁnition
of the center of pressure (COP) z of the contact forces,
f i. These contact forces are usually unilateral (the robot
can push on the ground, not pull)
f z
i  0 ;
(48.11)
which implies that the CoP is bound to lie in the convex
hull of the contact points (Fig. 48.2)
zx;y D
P
i f z
i px;y
i
P
i f z
i
2 conv ˚px;y
i
 :
(48.12)
Combining this inclusion with the dynamic (48.10) re-
veals an ordinary differential inclusion (ODI)
cx;y 
cz
Rcz C gz .Rcx;y C gx;y/ C
1
m.Rcz C gz/S PLx;y
D zx;y 2 conv
˚
px;y
i

;
(48.13)
f 1
z
p1
p4
p3
p2
f 2
z
f 3
z
f 4
z
x
z
z
y
Fig. 48.2 The CoP z is bound to lie in the convex hull of
contact points pi

Modeling and Control of Legged Robots
48.2 The Dynamicsof Legged Locomotion
1207
Part E | 48.2
which bounds the motion of the COM c, of the robot
and the variations of its angular momentum L with re-
spect to the position px;y
i
of the contact points.
This ODI can be reorganized in the following way
cz
Rcz C gz .Rcx;yCgx;y/ D .cx;yzx;y/C
1
m.Rcz C gz/S PLx;y ;
(48.14)
in order to expose its simple geometric meaning in
Fig. 48.3. We can see especially that aside from the ef-
fects of gravity gx;y and variations PLx;y of the angular
momentum, the horizontal acceleration Rcx;y of the COM
is the result of a force pushing the COM cx;y away from
the CoP zx;y, which is bound to lie in the convex hull of
the contact points. We have here an intrinsically unsta-
ble dynamics.
Note ﬁnally that the deﬁnition (48.12) of the CoP
can be reorganized to show that the horizontal momenta
of the contact forces f i with respect to the CoP z are
equal to zero
"X
i
.pi  z/  f i
#x;y
D
X
i
.px;y
i
 zx;y/ f z
i D 0 :
(48.15)
Hence the CoP is also referred to as the zero moment
point (ZMP) [48.10, 11].
In Contact with Multiple Surfaces
If the contact points pi are not all on the same plane, we
can introduce a CoP for each contact surface, but we
cannot introduce a unique CoP for all contact forces as
we did previously. Approximations, and generalizations
z x,y
c x,y
g x,y
L· x,y
c z
+ g z
c··z
c··x, y
1
+ g z)
c··z
c z
+ g z
c··z
m(
–
Fig. 48.3 The horizontal acceleration Rcx;y of the COM of
the robot is the sum of a force pushing the COM cx;y away
from the CoP zx;y the effect of gravity gx;y and variations
PLx;y of the angular momentum
to limited multiple contact situations have been pro-
posed but haven’t been widely adopted [48.11–14]. In
the general case, the Newton and Euler equations (48.3)
and (48.4) have to be considered explicitly together
with the unilaterality condition (48.11) in order to check
which motion is feasible or not [48.15–17]. The prob-
lem we have to solve then relates very closely to the
force closure problem discussed in Chap. 38 on grasp-
ing. Different ways to solve it as quickly as possible
have been proposed [48.15, 18], and used mostly so far
to measure ofﬂine the stability robustness of a given
motion [48.19, 20], and only recently for motion plan-
ning, once again ofﬂine [48.21]. Reﬁnements to curved
contact surfaces have also been proposed [48.22].
48.2.3 Contact Models
The structure of the Lagrangian dynamics makes it
clear that contact forces are central to the modeling
and control of legged robots. But note that the only
characteristics of these forces that we have introduced
so far is their unilaterality (48.11). As a result, the
previous analysis applies to various contact situations:
walking and running motions, but also sliding situations
such as when skiing or skating, or even rolling situa-
tions [48.23, 24].
Let us brieﬂy discuss now standard contact models
(more details can be found in Chap. 37 on contact mod-
eling and manipulation). Concerning motion and forces
tangential to the contact surfaces, a simple Coulomb
friction model is usually considered. Concerning mo-
tion and forces orthogonal to the contact surfaces, two
options are generally considered: a compliant or a rigid
model, introducing impacts and other nonsmooth be-
haviors.
Coulomb Friction
When a contact point pi is sliding on its contact surface,
the corresponding tangential contact force f x;y
i
is pro-
portional to the normal force f z
i in a direction opposite
to the sliding motion
f x;y
i
D 0f z
i
Ppx;y
i
kPpx;y
i k if Ppx;y
i
¤ 0 ;
(48.16)
with 0 > 0 the friction coefﬁcient. When the contact
point is sticking and not sliding, the norm of the tan-
gential force is simply bounded, with the same friction
coefﬁcient
kf x;y
i k 	 0f z
i if Ppx;y
i
D 0 :
(48.17)
This is typically referred to as the friction cone. Note
that this friction model directly implies the unilaterality
condition (48.11).

Part E | 48.2
1208
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Compliant Contact Models
Compliant contact models take into account the visco-
elastic properties of the materials in contact in the
direction orthogonal to the contact surfaces
f z
i D Kipz
i  iPpz
i if pz
i 	 0 ;
(48.18)
where Ki and i are stiffness and damping coefﬁcients,
respectively. In this case, the normal force f z
i appears to
be the result of a penetration of the contact point below
the contact surface, i. e., when pz
i < 0. Note that, as it
is here, this model doesn’t satisfy the unilaterality con-
dition (48.11) in all situations and needs therefore to be
saturated to enforce this property. Of course, when there
is no contact, there is no contact force
f z
i D 0 if pz
i > 0 :
(48.19)
A similar spring-damper model can also be used to de-
termine the frictional contact force f x;y
i
, subject to the
bounds of the friction cone (48.17).
Rigid Contact Models
Rigid contact models are somewhat simpler to intro-
duce: either there is contact and the normal force can
take any nonnegative value,
f z
i  0 if pz
i D 0 ;
(48.20)
or there is no contact and no contact force
f z
i D 0 if pz
i > 0 :
(48.21)
In this case, no penetration of the contact points be-
low the contact surfaces are considered. Note also that
the unilaterality condition (48.11) is satisﬁed here by
deﬁnition. As a matter of fact, this rigid model can be
summarized in the following way
f z
i  0; pz
i  0; f z
i pz
i D 0 ;
(48.22)
where it appears that both the normal force f z
i and the
position of the contact point with respect to the contact
surface pz
i must be nonnegative, but at least one of them
must be equal to 0. This is called a complementarity
condition. Analogous to (48.20) and (48.21), it deﬁnes
the normal force to be either zero, or the force necessary
to maintain pz
i D 0. Note that the sticking-or-sliding
behavior of Coulomb friction can also be represented
with such a complementarity condition. Note also that
this set of implicit equations may not have a solution
or may have multiple ones in certain pathologic situa-
tions [48.25].
Rigid and compliant contact models are compared
in Fig. 48.4 in a static situation (when Ppz
i D 0), showing
pi
z
pi
z ≤ 0
fi
z
Fig. 48.4 Comparison of a rigid (blue) and compliant
(red) contact model in a static situation. Unlike the rigid
model, the compliant model considers a penetration of the
contact point below the contact surface, when pz
i < 0. The
graph of the rigid model, with the speciﬁc shape of a right
angle, is called a Signorini graph
clearly how the rigid model corresponds to an inﬁnitely
stiff compliant model. Compliant contact models can
model more accurately the deformation of the contact-
ing bodies, but accurate models often require very stiff
springs, causing the resulting differential equations to
be numerically stiff, what can slow down or compli-
cate numerical analysis. Rigid models are compara-
tively more straightforward to integrate and analyze,
with purely rigid bodies and contact surfaces. They are
therefore preferred when theoretically or numerically
studying the stability of legged robots, when optimiz-
ing walking or running trajectories, etc.
Impacts
Since rigid contact models do not allow penetration
of the contact points below the contact surfaces, when
a point pi reaches a contact surface pz
i D 0 with a veloc-
ity Ppz
i < 0, this velocity has to change instantaneously
in order to satisfy the no-penetration assumption, pz
i 
0 [48.26]. What happens in this situation is an im-
pact, a discontinuity of the velocity, where we need
to distinguish the velocity of the robot before impact
Pq, and its velocity after impact, PqC. A straightfor-
ward integration of the Lagrangian dynamics (48.2)
over a time singleton [48.27] gives us a relation be-
tween pre- and post-impact velocities and impulsive
forces Fi
M.q/

PqC  Pq
D
X
i
Ci.q/TFi :
(48.23)
But in order to completely deﬁne the impact law and
compute the post-impact velocity, we also need a model
of the impulsive forces. Unfortunately, this is a complex
problem still open to research [48.28, 29], especially
in situations of multiple contacts which are the stan-
dard situation for legged robots. The usual approach for

Modeling and Control of Legged Robots
48.3 Stability Analysis – Not Falling Down
1209
Part E | 48.3
legged robots is therefore to assume the post-impact
behavior, usually considering that the contact points
eventually stick to the contact surfaces
PpC
i
D CiPqC D 0 :
(48.24)
This is, however, a strong assumption, and reality can
be much more complex, as demonstrated in [48.30].
Moreover, a recent study shows that post-impact stick-
ing may not always be desirable [48.31].
Impacts are central in most stability analyses of pas-
sive dynamic walking machines (Sect. 48.6), but they
can be potentially destructive for the mechanical parts
of a robot. As a result, they are often carefully avoided
and therefore generally disregarded outside of passive
dynamic walkers. A recent study shows however that
this is probably a mistake [48.32].
Hybrid and Nonsmooth Dynamics
With rigid contacts, the dynamics of legged robots
appears to switch, depending on the contact situa-
tions (48.20) or (48.21). Discontinuities of the state
of the robot also occur at impacts. A classical way
to combine these different aspects is with a hybrid
dynamical system. This approach has however some
limitations [48.33, 34], the most obvious one being its
incapacity to handle properly Zeno behaviors, inﬁnite
accumulations of impacts in ﬁnite time [48.35]. An ex-
ample of such a situation is when a legged robot is
rigidly standing on one foot, and gently rocking from
one contact edge to the opposite contact edge, with
a continuously decreasing period (at least according to
the perfectly rigid model).
Impacts with multiple contacts and Zeno behaviors
are not the only difﬁculties with rigid contact models:
there is also the Painlevé paradox, tangential impacts,
impacts without collisions, etc. The nonsmooth dynam-
ics approach [48.25, 27, 33, 34], where the Lagrangian
dynamics is turned into a measure differential equation,
accelerations being abstract measures, velocities being
functions with locally bounded variations, appears to be
a much more adequate way to deal with all these intri-
cacies. But it has not been widely adopted for legged
robots because of a signiﬁcant increase in mathemati-
cal complexity.
Many of the complexities of rigid body contact
dynamics can be avoided by discretizing the system
dynamics in time and reasoning about the integral of
contact forces acting over a time step. In particular,
no distinction is made between impulses and ﬁnite
contact forces over a time step. By conservatively ap-
proximating the friction cone as a polyhedron, forward
dynamics can be cast as a linear complementarity prob-
lem (LCP) [48.36], for which efﬁcient solvers exist.
This has become a popular formulation for simula-
tion of rigid bodies in frictional contact and it has
recently seen applications to control design for legged
systems [48.37].
48.3 Stability Analysis – Not Falling Down
The robot model described above represents a complex,
constrained, nonlinear dynamical system. Our goal for
this section is to understand the long-term behavior of
this dynamical system, to answer questions like, Will
the robot fall down? As we will see in the following
sections, this long-term behavior can be changed by
open-loop or closed-loop feedback control, with the ex-
plicit goal of minimizing the likelihood that the robot
will fall down.
For controlled nonlinear dynamical systems, there
are a number of useful concepts relating to their safe-
ness and stability, including:

Fixed points: Stable ﬁxed points represent the static
postures in which the robot can safely stand still.

Limit cycles: Limit cycles provide a natural exten-
sion of ﬁxed-point analysis to periodic walking or
running motions.

Viability: Viability is a concept of controlled invari-
ance, which analyzes the set of states from which
the robot is able to avoid to fall. Unfortunately, this
property can be intractable to compute.

Controllability: Controllability provides a slightly
restricted notion of viability, analyzing the set of
states from which the robot is capable of returning
to a particular ﬁxed point (or limit cycle). This can
be more tractable to compute than viability, espe-
cially for simple models.
In addition, if there are unknown errors in the robot
model, if there is uncertainty about the environment
(e.g., the location of the ground), or if there are unmod-
eled disturbances, then additional tools are available
from robustness analysis and stochastic stability:

Robust stability: Robust stability (or viability) ex-
amines the properties of the system considering
worst-case (bounded) disturbances. For instance,
a robust controller may be able to guarantee that
a ﬁxed point is stable even if the estimate of the
mass of the trunk is wrong by ˙10%.

Part E | 48.3
1210
Part E
Moving in the Environment

Stochastic stability: Stochastic analysis provides
tools to investigate the probability of falling down.
For many robot disturbance models, the system will
always fall eventually (with probability one), but
analysis can reveal long-living metastable distribu-
tions.

Input-output stability: This analysis treats a partic-
ular disturbance as an input, a performance criteria
as output, and attempts to compute a relative gain
or sensitivity of the robot performance due to this
input.

Stability margins: Robustness analysis can be difﬁ-
cult. In practice control designers often settle for the
system staying comfortably away from the bound-
aries of deterministic stability.
We give a very brief overview of these tools in the
remainder of this section, with an attempt to empha-
size features of the analysis that are particular to legged
robots.
48.3.1 Fixed Points
Given a ﬁrst-order ordinary differential equation gov-
erned by Px D a.x/, a ﬁxed point of the system is a state
x, for which a.x/ D 0. The governing equations for
a legged robot, given in Sect. 48.2, are second-order,
take a control input, and potentially require a differ-
ential inclusion to describe the contact forces, but the
notion of a ﬁxed point is still meaningful. Here a ﬁxed
point is a conﬁguration q, for which there exists feasi-
ble control inputs u, and feasible contact forces f , so
that Pq D Rq D 0 is a solution to (48.2). A ﬁxed point
of this system is a posture in which the legged robot is
able to stand still.
In static situations, when Rc D PL D 0, the ODI
(48.13) gives the following necessary condition
cx;y  cz
gz gx;y D zx;y 2 conv ˚px;y
i

(48.25)
for a static equilibrium on a ﬂat ground. This necessary
condition states that the COM c must project on the
ground along the gravity vector g, inside the convex
hull of the contact points pi, also known as the sup-
port polygon (Fig. 48.5). This is a very well known and
widely used necessary condition. Note, however, that
it is valid only when considering contacts with a ﬂat
ground [48.15].
Once a ﬁxed point has been found, one would of-
ten like to examine its stability. For smooth nonlinear
differential equations, local stability can often be estab-
lished via linearizing the dynamics at the ﬁxed point
and then applying well-known tools from linear sys-
tems theory. Indeed, these tools can also be applied
g z
c z
c z
g z
g
g
–
c
P1
P2
x
z
z
Fig. 48.5 A necessary static equilibrium condition on
a ﬂat ground is that the COM c must project on the ground
along the gravity vector g inside the convex hull of the
contact points Pi also known as the support polygon (red)
here, under the strong assumption that the contact con-
ditions do not change (e.g., either f z
i D 0 and pz
i  0, or
f z
i  0 and pz
i D 0). Each active contact adds an equality
constraint to the linearized system and the eigenvalues
of this constrained linear system are only meaningful
in the minimal coordinates; e.g., for a robot standing
on horizontal ground the assumption precludes the abil-
ity to examine a perturbation of the entire robot in the
vertical direction. Note that in a hybrid model of the
legged robot, this assumption is equivalent to lineariz-
ing within a single hybrid mode, and it is common
practice to describe each hybrid mode in its minimal
coordinates [48.38]. Once local stability is established,
it may also be possible to understand the region of at-
traction of the ﬁxed point [48.39, 40]. Evaluating the
stability of these models through changes in contact
conﬁgurations is a new and important area of research.
For recent work, see for instance [48.41].
48.3.2 Limit Cycles
A natural extension of ﬁxed-point analysis to walk-
ing and running motions is to examine the existence
and stability of periodic orbits, or limit cycles, of
the dynamical system. Here a periodic orbit is a so-
lution fhq.t/; u.t/; f.t/i j t 2 Œ0; 1/g of the dynamical
system with a ﬁnite period T > 0 such that q.t C T/ D
q.t/; u.t C T/ D u.t/; and f.t C T/ D f.t/. Almost al-
ways, periodic orbits are discovered numerically using
techniques from motion planning like those described
in Sect. 48.4. For passive, or very minimally actuated
robots, the very existence of a periodic solution can be
exciting [48.42]; robots with more actuators typically
have an abundance of periodic solutions and planning
techniques can be used to ﬁnd solutions that, for in-
stance, minimize the a quantity of interest such as the

Modeling and Control of Legged Robots
48.3 Stability Analysis – Not Falling Down
1211
Part E | 48.3
cost of transport [48.43] or a measure of open-loop sta-
bility [48.44].
A periodic solution hq0./;u0./;f 0./i with period
T, is (asymptotically) orbitally stable [48.45] or limit-
cycle stable if, given initial conditions q.0/ we have
lim
t!1

min
0t0<T kq.t/  q0.t0/k

D 0 :
(48.26)
The key feature here that there is no requirement that
system trajectories converge in time; only the distance
to the closest point on the orbit must go to zero. This
stability can be deﬁned for initial conditions restricted
to a local neighborhood of q0./, for a region containing
q0./, or globally (though no interesting legged robot
is globally stable) and for inputs determined by a va-
riety of open- or closed-loop control policies, u.t/ D
.t; q.t/; Pq.t/;f.t//: Under mild conditions, a sufﬁcient
criteria for establishing orbital stability is establish-
ing ﬁxed-point stability of a Poincaré map [48.46], as
illustrated in Fig. 48.6. Due to the limitation that ﬁnd-
ing periodic solutions is typically done numerically,
Poincaré map analysis is also typically done numeri-
cally, e.g., using ﬁnite differences to evaluate a local
linearization of the map. This does not necessarily
preclude rigorous analysis, and techniques exist to com-
pute regions of attraction to hybrid limit cycles despite
potential numerical inaccuracies [48.47]. Finally we
note that limit cycle analysis can be applied (carefully)
to solutions that are not periodic in all states – for in-
stance, the x; y location of the ﬂoating base should be
left out if the robot needs to make forward progress!
The primary advantage of limit cycle analysis is
that, using the Poincaré map and related methods, many
of the tools from ﬁxed point analysis and linear systems
theory can be easily extended to evaluate (local) stabil-
ity and even to design a (locally) stabilizing controller.
However, this is a very limited deﬁnition of locomotion;
useful locomotion through nontrivial environments will
likely require aperiodic motions.
Fig. 48.6 Illustration of a Poincaré surface P deﬁned on
a periodic orbit (red) and a trajectory converging to the
orbit (black)
Extensions to Aperiodic Stability
The notion of stability requires convergence to some
nominal solution as time goes to inﬁnity, thus the
nominal solution must be deﬁned over an inﬁnite
interval. A common approach involves stitching to-
gether periodic solutions with provably bounded ﬁnite-
time transition maneuvers which can switch between
them [48.48]. Orbital stability of an (inﬁnite) aperi-
odic trajectory can be established using a transverse
linearization or moving Poincaré section [48.49]. For
real-world situations where the entire desired trajectory
cannot be known apriori, these guarantees can also be
provided using online motion planning and receding-
horizon control [48.50].
48.3.3 Viability
If the objective of a legged robot is simply to avoid
falling down, it can be possible then to directly deﬁne
(at least theoretically) the set of postures F  RNC6,
where the robot has fallen down and that the robot
should simply avoid. This leads to introducing the set
of states from which the robot is able to avoid enter-
ing F – the set of states from which the robot is able to
avoid falling down. These states will be called viable,
following the viability theory developed in [48.51] for
general ODIs and introduced in the analysis of walking
robots in [48.52]. In principle, the set of all viable states
represents a safe operating envelope for the robot. It is
typically intractable to compute explicitly but it can be
approached indirectly in the case of walking robots in
the following way.
Center of Mass Dynamics
During Horizontal Walking
In case the robot is walking on a horizontal ground,
the z axis is aligned with gravity, so gx;y D 0 and the
ODI (48.13) becomes
cx;y 
cz
Rcz C gz Rcx;y C
1
m.Rcz C gz/S PLx;y 2 conv
˚
px;y
i

:
(48.27)
We can observe that it is linear with respect to the hor-
izontal motion cx;y, Rcx;y of the COM and variations of
the angular momentum Lx;y. The vertical motion cz, Rcz
of the COM can usually be bounded, but in order to
simplify the following derivations, let us suppose that
the COM moves strictly horizontally above the ground,
i. e., cz is constant and Rcz D 0, so the ODI becomes
cx;y  cz
gz Rcx;y C S PLx;y
mgz 2 conv
˚
px;y
i

:
(48.28)
Variations of the angular momentum L can also be
bounded in the x and y directions, but to make things

Part E | 48.3
1212
Part E
Moving in the Environment
a
Fig. 48.7 A situation where, for some reason, no steps can
be undertaken beyond a certain line (red), with a a vector
orthogonal to this line and pointing beyond it
as simple as possible, let us consider these variations to
be equal to 0, so the ODI takes a very simple second
order linear form
cx;y  cz
gz Rcx;y D zx;y 2 conv
˚
px;y
i

:
(48.29)
An Example of Inevitable Fall
Let us consider furthermore a situation where, for some
reason (e.g., a cliff), no contact with the ground can
be realized beyond a certain line (Fig. 48.7), with a
a vector orthogonal to this line and pointing beyond
it. If the COM of the robot reaches this line at a time
t0 with a speed pointing beyond it (aTPcx;y.t0/ > 0), this
linear ODI can be integrated analytically very simply
and lead to the following inequality [48.53], valid at all
time t  t0
aT Œcx;y.t/  cx;y.t0/  aTPcx;y.t0/
!
sinh Œ!.t  t0/ ;
(48.30)
with
! D
r
gz
cz :
(48.31)
The right hand side is increasing exponentially with
time. As a result, the position cx;y of the COM is di-
verging exponentially in the direction of the vector a,
leading inexorably to a fall.
A Sufficient Condition for Viability
In the simpliﬁed linear case developed above, the in-
equality (48.30) establishes that in the case of a fall, the
motion of the COM diverges exponentially, so the in-
tegral of the norm of any nth derivative of its position,
1
Z
t0
c.n/.t/
 dt ;
(48.32)
would be inﬁnite. Therefore, if we can ﬁnd a ﬁnite value
for such an integral from a given initial state of the
robot, we can conclude that this state is viable.
48.3.4 Controllability
For any dynamical system, an initial condition x0 is
controllable to a ﬁnal state xf , if there exists a feasible
input trajectory u./, which takes the system from x0 to
xf. An initial state x0 is denoted ﬁnite-time controllable
to xf if the minimum time required is ﬁnite. Control-
lability analysis is a well understood topic for linear
dynamical systems, where a simple rank condition on
the controllability matrix provides necessary and sufﬁ-
cient conditions to establish whether or not any initial
condition can be driven to any ﬁnal state [48.54]. For
nonlinear systems, the property is dependent on both
the initial and ﬁnal states.
In the case of legged robots, instead of consider-
ing the set of all viable states introduced earlier, we
could consider instead the more limited set of states
that are controllable to stable ﬁxed-points – states that
can come to a stable stop after a given number of steps.
This is a sufﬁcient condition for viability. Such states
have been called capturable [48.55], and arguably en-
compass most of the states of interest for legged robots.
A variant would be to consider states from which the
robot is able to reach a stable limit cycle, or any other
state which is known to be viable in the ﬁrst hand.
The Capture Point
In the simple linear case developed above, the cap-
turable states can be identiﬁed analytically with the help
of the compound variable
 D c C 1
! Pc ;
(48.33)
introduced independently as the extrapolated center of
mass (XCOM) [48.56], the capture point [48.57] or the
divergent component of the dynamics [48.58]. These
three denominations correspond to three key properties
of this variable. First of all, a trivial reformulation gives
Pc D !.  c/ ;
(48.34)
revealing that this point  is the point where the COM is
converging to, hence the extrapolated COM. Following
the linear dynamics (48.29), the horizontal motion of
this point satisﬁes
Px;y D !.x;y  zx;y/ ;
(48.35)
where we can see that this point  diverges away from
the CoP z. But if this point is above the support polygon,

Modeling and Control of Legged Robots
48.3 Stability Analysis – Not Falling Down
1213
Part E | 48.3
z x,y
ξ x,y
ξ· x,y
c··x,y
1
ω2
1
ω
c· x,y
c x,y
1
ω
Fig. 48.8 The speed of the COM c points towards the cap-
ture point , while the speed of this capture point points
away from the CoP, z. The combination of these two ﬁrst-
order dynamics gives the acceleration Rc, pushing the COM
away from the CoP
if we have
x;y 2 conv
˚
px;y
i

;
(48.36)
we can have zx;y D x;y so the point  can stay mo-
tionless, and the COM will converge to it and come
to a stop, hence it can be seen as a capture point
(CP). Finally, we can observe that the second-order
linear dynamics (48.29) has been decomposed here as
two ﬁrst-order linear dynamics (48.34) and (48.35), the
ﬁrst one being stable, with the COM converging to the
XCOM, the second one being unstable, with the XCOM
diverging away from the CoP, hence the divergent part
of the dynamics (48.29). Here appears an interesting
structure relating the motion of the points z, Pc and ,
shown in Fig. 48.8 [48.59, 60].
An important observation here is that if the state
of the robot satisﬁes the condition (48.36), then the
robot can stop without making any step and it is cap-
turable and viable. Further analysis, considering any
given number of steps and a nonzero angular momen-
tum L can be found in [48.60].
48.3.5 Robust or Stochastic Stability
For the deterministic robot dynamics models described
in Sect. 48.2, the concepts of ﬁxed-points, limit cy-
cles, viability, and controllability form the core issues
of analysis. However, in the presence of disturbances,
such as model inaccuracies or unpredicted variation in
terrain, tools from robust veriﬁcation must be called
upon to characterize the stability of a system. Broadly
speaking, robust stability analysis exists in two forms.
In worst-case analysis, an upper bound is given for
a disturbance and the goal is to demonstrate that for any
disturbance within this bound, the system will not reach
an unstable state. Alternatively, stochastic analysis can
be performed where a disturbance probability distri-
bution is speciﬁed with the goal being to demonstrate
that the system avoids unstable states with high prob-
ability. Worst-case analysis has received surprisingly
little attention to date in the legged robotics commu-
nity, however analysis approaches based on Lyapunov
functions [48.38, 41, 47] can be easily extended using
the notion of a common Lyapunov function [48.61]. One
challenge here is that the nominal solutions, e.g., the ex-
act shape of the nominal limit cycle, are often parameter
dependent: the system might still be stable with differ-
ent parameters, but to a slightly different limit cycle.
Stochastic stability has received relatively more
attention in the legged robotics community, perhaps be-
cause many interesting models of possible disturbances
do result in robots that walk for a long time, but do
eventually fall over. Such systems cannot be classiﬁed
as stable, but it seems incomplete to simply call them
unstable. Such systems are said to be metastable, a con-
cept ﬁrst established in the physics community [48.62]
and later used to analyze walking systems [48.63].
From this point of view, the stability of a system can
be characterized by its mean time to failure.
Recall the idea of Poincaré maps described above,
but now consider the discrete time stochastic return map
dynamics for a periodic walking system,
xkC1 D r.xk; hk/ ;
(48.37)
where hk  P.h/ is a random variable that, e.g., captures
the terrain height at time step k. Discretizing the state
space X  R.NC6/  R.NC6/ into d states allows us to
deﬁne the Markov process based on the above return
map
pkC1 D Tpk ;
(48.38)
where pk 2 Rd is the state probably distribution vec-
tor and T is a stochastic matrix with entries Tij D
Pr.xi
kC1jxj
k/. If we assume that all failure states are ab-
sorbing and can be grouped together into a single state,
this corresponds to a column in T containing a sin-
gle 1 and d  1 zeros. The largest eigenvalue of T must
then be 1 D 1 with a corresponding eigenvector v 1,
describing the stationary distribution of the absorbing
state. Interestingly, the second largest eigenvalue has
been found to be close to unity 2 
 1 and much larger
than the remaining d2 eigenvalues, for several simple
walking systems [48.63]. This suggests the existence
of a metastable neighborhood in state space captured
by the distribution v 2 with an associated time constant
 D 1= log.2/. Other approaches to computing these
stochastic stability bounds are also possible [48.64].

Part E | 48.4
1214
Part E
Moving in the Environment
48.3.6 Input-Output Stability
Input-output methods deﬁne sensitivity measures to
summarize the system’s response to disturbances. For
example, for a walking system, one could deﬁne a vec-
tor l 2 Rm composed of m gait variables that directly
relate to failure modes (such as foot-ground clearance)
and measure the effect that a set of input disturbances
w, have on their values. The gait sensitivity norm does
exactly this [48.65]; here the dynamic system response
k@l=@wk2 is used as a measure of disturbance rejection.
How is this response actually computed? In practice,
computing the system response can be done experi-
mentally by generating a variety of perturbations and
measuring the effect in the gait variables. Although la-
borious, this approach is probably the most appropriate
for physical systems. Alternatively, for simulated limit
cycle walkers, linearization of the Poincaré return map
and perturbation analysis yields a complete characteri-
zation of the dynamic system response.
More general tools from nonlinear control theory
can also be applied. The L2 gain is a sensitivity mea-
sure that has seen widespread application in nonlinear
control theory. For complex dynamical systems such as
walking robots, an upper bound on the L2 gain can be
approximated using storage functions, which can often
be computed using convex optimization [48.66, 67].
48.3.7 Stability Margins
In practice, computing performance measures like the
ones mentioned above for complex walking systems
can be very difﬁcult. As a result, researchers often em-
ploy heuristic stability margins to keep the robot away
from the boundary of stability. Here the deﬁnition of
stability can vary widely. The simplest stability margins
rely only on the static conﬁguration of the robot, where
if the COM ground projection leaves the support poly-
gon, this corresponds to an uncompensated moment on
the foot resulting in a rotation along its edge. Popular
static metrics include the distance between the ground
projection of the COM and the edges of the support
polygon or the minimum potential energy required to
tip the robot over sideways [48.68]. Because these sta-
bility criteria are based only on statics, they are only
practically useful for slow (or quasi-static) motions.
The most commonly used dynamic stability mar-
gin requires that the CoP (or ZMP) remains within the
boundary of the support polygon. When this condition
is satisﬁed, the foot cannot rotate around the boundary
of the support polygon. Note that this is certainly very
conservative – many bipedal robots walk dynamically
even with point feet (resulting in a CoP that is always
on the boundary of the support polygon) – but this met-
ric has proven extremely useful for ﬂat-foot dynamic
walking. Goswami introduced the related concept of the
foot rotation indicator (FRI) [48.69] that is deﬁned as
the point on the ground where the net ground reaction
force would have to act to keep the foot from rotat-
ing; this point need not stay inside the support polygon
and can therefore be applied for a wider range of gaits.
However, the stability claims based on these criteria
are valid only on ﬂat terrain and they do not constitute
necessary or sufﬁcient conditions for stable walking in
general [48.15, 55].
When the COM projection exits the support poly-
gon, there are two ways to make it return: by accelerat-
ing the COM in the direction of the support polygon
through changes in angular momentum or by chang-
ing the support polygon by taking a step. This basic
insight led to stability margins based on capture re-
gions [48.55, 60]. A capture region is simply the set
of all capture points (deﬁned in Sect. 48.3.4). The cap-
ture margin is a metric that determines the capturability
of a walking system. If the capture region and support
polygon overlap, it is deﬁned as the maximum distance
between the points in the capture region and the clos-
est edge of the support polygon, otherwise it is the
negative distance between the capture region and sup-
port polygon. Note that large values under this metric
are related to the total capture region area, which is in
turn related to the ability of the walking system to sta-
bilize itself, e.g., with upper body motions that affect
angular momentum [48.60]. Extensions to n-step cap-
ture margins have also been developed and described in
detail [48.55].
48.4 Generation of Dynamic Walking and Running Motions
As mentioned in the brief historical introduction to this
chapter, early legged robots were maintaining quasi-
static equilibrium postures at all time. The transition
to more dynamic motions took place at the beginning
of the 1980s, associated with biped [48.4] and mono-
pod [48.5] robots. As a result, this Section on dynamic
legged locomotion will focus on results obtained mostly
with biped robots, although most of the methods dis-
cussed here could be applied as well to other legged
robots.

Modeling and Control of Legged Robots
48.4 Generation of Dynamic Walking and Running Motions
1215
Part E | 48.4
48.4.1 Early Offline Motion Generation
Schemes
The very limited computing power of early robots
allowed very limited online decisions. As a result, tra-
jectories were usually computed ofﬂine, especially in
complex situations such as for legged robots. Online
motion generation has ﬁnally become possible only by
the year 2000, thanks to the exponential increase in
computing power and the continuous progress of nu-
merical methods during the last decades.
Trajectory Optimization
One of the earliest approaches to computing walking
and running motions was through numerical optimiza-
tion [48.70]. The idea is to leverage the capacity of
trajectory optimization methods to take into account
nonlinear dynamics and objectives such as minimizing
energy consumption, and compute the corresponding
optimal motion. Unfortunately, the dynamics of legged
robots are so complex that this approach was still
stuck with simple planar models by the end of the
1990s [48.71–75]. It is only by the year 2000 that the
ﬁrst optimal walking motions for complete 3-D models
could be computed [48.76, 77].
Fortunately, numerical methods have continued to
improve (as discussed in Sect. 48.6.1), allowing re-
searchers to solve complex problems such as optimizing
trajectories and the mass distribution of the robot si-
multaneously and maximizing the open-loop stability
of trajectories [48.78].
Unfortunately, this approach still requires time con-
suming computations that often cannot be realized
online. Not being able to compute walking or running
motions online limits the robots to a predeﬁned set of
precomputed actions, potentially ruining their versatil-
ity and reactivity. One way to alleviate this serious lim-
itation is to generate a database of trajectories [48.79]
that can be queried online, possibly conditioned on or-
ders given to the robot [48.80] or the current state of the
robot in order to improve its stability [48.40, 81, 82].
Artificial Synergy Synthesis
and the ZMP Approach
Partitioning the problem is another early approach, that
aimed at palliating the complexity of the dynamics
of legged robots that hindered trajectory optimization.
The idea is to assign some degrees of freedom of the
robot to take care of dynamic constraints such as the
ODI (48.13), allowing the rest of the robot to be oper-
ated more or less independently. This general approach
has been called artiﬁcial synergy synthesis [48.10].
The original proposition in [48.10] was to use trunk
rotations to ensure dynamic feasibility while the legs of
the robot executed a given prerecorded motion. More
precisely, leg motions and contact points pi being pre-
deﬁned, the trajectory of the CoP z could be predeﬁned
accordingly, so that it was just a matter of solving the
ordinary differential equation (ODE) (48.13) for this
predeﬁned z to obtain the required rotations of the trunk.
This original proposition was demonstrated experimen-
tally 20 years later on the Waseda University WL-12RV
biped walking robot [48.83]. This method of predeﬁn-
ing the trajectory of the CoP has eventually been called
the ZMP approach to walking motion generation (re-
member the ZMP is just another name given to the
CoP). This ZMP approach has been associated later
with having feet always ﬂat on the ground, exclud-
ing heel and toe rotation phases. Note, however, that
such phases were considered in the original proposi-
tion [48.10].
Some aspects of this proposition can be questioned.
It has been argued ﬁrst of all that predeﬁning the
evolution of the CoP is not necessary nor even desir-
able [48.84, 85]. Then, the ODI (48.13) clearly shows
that dynamic feasibility depends on both variations of
the angular momentum L, and motion of the COM c
with respect to contact points, pi. While trunk rotations
mostly involve variations of the angular momentum,
a recent analysis showed that this has only a weak inﬂu-
ence on the balance of legged robots [48.86]. Dynamic
feasibility can be handled much more efﬁciently by
adapting the motion of the COM, which has been the
prevailing approach.
The core idea of partitioning the motion of the robot
builds on a profound and far-reaching observation: if
the robot has a sufﬁcient number of degrees of freedom
and sufﬁcient control authority, then every part of the
motion that is not involved in the dynamic constraints –
everything but angular momentum and motion of the
COM with respect to contact points – can be operated
more or less independently, and appears therefore to be
relatively peripheral to the problem of legged locomo-
tion. It is the same key observation that implicitly drives
the templates and anchors approach and the long history
of simple biomechanical models of legged locomotion
that focus on a few meaningful degrees of freedom,
mostly the motion of the COM with respect to contact
points, and abstract all the rest [48.87–89]. This idea has
been tremendously successful in the legged locomotion
research community.
48.4.2 Online Motion Generation:
A Model Predictive Control
Point of View
If the algorithms for motion generation could work
sufﬁciently fast to be applied online, then the robot

Part E | 48.4
1216
Part E
Moving in the Environment
could achieve reactivity and robustness by continuously
adapting the motions to the current state of the robot and
its environment. But therein lies a problem: how can we
make sure that the continuous re-evaluation of online
decisions maintains long term viability? One solution
comes from the model predictive control (MPC) theory.
The online motion generation schemes that allow
most of the great humanoid robots of today and yes-
terday to walk and run can all be related to MPC
theory and can all be seen as variants of the same MPC
scheme, although they have rarely been introduced in
that way. Most adopt the artiﬁcial synergy synthesis
approach described in the previous Section, focusing
almost exclusively on the motion of the COM with re-
spect to contact points and assuming that the rest of the
robot can be operated more or less independently.
Viability, Optimal Control and MPC
When trying to identify viable states in Sect. 48.3.3, the
ﬁrst option was to check if the integral (48.32) could
have a ﬁnite value. A classical result from optimal con-
trol theory is that an optimal control law minimizing
this integral would make it decrease with time. As a re-
sult, if this integral was ﬁnite in the beginning, it would
stay ﬁnite: if the state of the robot was viable in the
beginning, it would stay viable. The problem is, the
dynamics of legged robots is too complex to be able
to compute such an optimal control law in the general
case.
MPC is one way to obtain a computable approx-
imation to this optimal control law. The fundamental
idea is to introduce a terminal constraint [48.90], im-
posing that the integral (48.32) is equal to zero after
a ﬁnite length of time. Introducing such an artiﬁcial
constraint naturally yields a suboptimal control law, but
this allows considering the integral (48.32) over only
a ﬁnite length of time while preserving viability. Note
that enforcing viability in ﬁnite time means in this case
enforcing capturability: here, the terminal constraint is
a capturability constraint.
Many MPC variants have been proposed [48.91],
but two extremes are going to be signiﬁcant in the fol-
lowing. One extreme is to observe that minimizing an
integral of the form (48.32) is not necessary to obtain
a viable behavior: the terminal, capturability constraint
can be sufﬁcient in this respect [48.92]. In this case,
however, it is not possible to continuously re-evaluate
and adapt the motion to the state of the system: this
must be done at carefully chosen moments, what lim-
ited the reactivity of the robots. The other extreme is
to observe that the terminal constraint is not absolutely
necessary [48.93]: simply minimizing a truncated ver-
sion of the integral (48.32) over a sufﬁciently long but
ﬁnite length of time can still lead to an integral de-
creasing with time, ensuring viability. In this case, it is
possible to continuously re-evaluate and adapt the mo-
tion to the state of the system without any problem.
Let us see now how all this theory is applied to the
online generation of walking and running motions. In
all the following examples, the robot is supposed to
walk on a ﬂat horizontal ground.
Predefined Footsteps
and Capturability Constraint
Let us have a look ﬁrst at motion generation schemes
implementing the original ZMP approach, with prede-
ﬁned footsteps and a predeﬁned CoP, and considering
a capturability constraint to ensure viability. Let us
begin with the walking motion generation scheme im-
plemented in the long series of Waseda University
humanoid robots [48.94], which considers a four point
mass model with predeﬁned motion except for the hor-
izontal motion of the waist and trunk masses which is
assigned to follow a reference trajectory for the CoP.
An iterative procedure based on fast fourier transforms
is used then to solve the dynamics
P mi.Rcz
i C gz/cx;y
i
 mi cz
i Rcx;y
i
P mi.Rcz
i C gz/
! zx;y
ref :
(48.39)
In order to execute this scheme online, a capturabil-
ity constraint is introduced, imposing that the robot is
always able to stop within two steps [48.95]. Unfortu-
nately, details about the choice of the reference CoP and
the exact terminal constraint are not disclosed.
The walking motion generation scheme imple-
mented in the Munich University Johnny robot [48.96]
considers only a three point mass model with predeﬁned
motion, except for the horizontal motion of the main
mass in the trunk which is assigned to follow a piece-
wise linear reference trajectory for the CoP. One degree
of freedom is left in this reference trajectory in order
to impose a terminal constraint on the position of the
COM at the end of the next two steps
cx;y D cx;y
ref :
(48.40)
This constraint appears to be incomplete in imposing
capturability, what would require to consider also the
velocity of the COM (Sect. 48.3.3).
The walking motion generation scheme imple-
mented in the Honda Asimo robot [48.58] is very
similar, three point masses and a piecewise linear ref-
erence for the CoP with one degree of freedom left to
satisfy the terminal constraint. The difference lies in the
terminal constraint which is a true capturability con-
straint, imposing cyclicity of the motion through the
capture point/XCOM/divergent component of the dy-

Modeling and Control of Legged Robots
48.4 Generation of Dynamic Walking and Running Motions
1217
Part E | 48.4
namics at the end of the next step
x;y D x;y
ref :
(48.41)
The walking motion generation scheme imple-
mented in the Tokyo University H7 robot [48.97] con-
siders the whole dynamics (48.13) of the robot. The
whole motion of the robot is predeﬁned, except the hor-
izontal motion of the COM which is assigned to follow
a reference trajectory for the CoP, set in the middle of
the contact points. An iterative procedure is used then
to solve the dynamics
cx;y  m cz Rcx;y  S PLx;y
m.Rcz C gz/
! px;y
i
:
(48.42)
The terminal constraint (48.40) on the position of the
COM (incomplete with respect to capturability) is also
considered at the end of the next two steps.
The walking and running motion generation scheme
implemented in the Toyota Partner robot [48.98] is ex-
actly the same, except for the terminal constraint which
is a true capturability constraint imposing cyclicity of
the motion through both the position and velocity of the
COM.
The walking and running motion generation scheme
implemented in the Sony QRIO robot [48.99] follows
a similar design, but considers only a single point mass
at a constant height, with its horizontal motion assigned
to minimizing the deviation of the CoP from the middle
of the contact points
min
Z cx;y  cz
gz Rcx;y  px;y
i

2
dt ;
(48.43)
while imposing a capturability constraint on both the
position and velocity of the COM.
Another variant tested on the Kawada HRP-2
robot [48.100] also considers a single point mass at
a constant height, but the CoP follows a piecewise poly-
nomial trajectory
cx;y  cz
gz Rcx;y D zx;y
ref ;
(48.44)
with some degrees of freedom left to satisfy the same
capturability constraint as before, through both the
position and velocity of the COM. An important charac-
teristic of this scheme is that the piecewise polynomial
trajectory of the CoP may ﬂuctuate strongly, threatening
to violate the ODI (48.13). An automatic adjustment of
the step timings is proposed therefore in order to mini-
mize this risk.
All of these walking and running motion generation
schemes try to impose capturability through terminal
constraints, but some of them appear to fail properly
doing so by only constraining the position of the COM.
None of them consider an integral of the form (48.32):
the integral (48.43) does not match. We have seen ear-
lier that in this case, it is possible to re-evaluate and
adapt the motion at speciﬁc instants, what has been
done when having to realize new steps, or when chang-
ing the walking speed or direction. But to adapt the
motion to a perturbation, a speciﬁc observer would
be required to trigger the adaptation at the correct in-
stant [48.92], and it appears that this option hasn’t been
investigated: no state feedback has been experimented
with these motion generation schemes.
Predefined Footsteps,
Without Capturability Constraint
In the standard walking motion generation scheme
implemented in the Kawada HRP-2 humanoid ro-
bot [48.101], the whole motion of the robot is prede-
ﬁned as before, except the horizontal motion of the
COM which is assigned this time to minimize the
weighted integral
min
Z
k«cx;yk2 C ˇ
cx;y  cz
gz Rcx;y C SPLx;y
mgz  px;y
i

2
dt
(48.45)
of the norm of the third derivative of the motion of the
COM and the deviation of the CoP from a reference in
the middle of the contact points. This is clearly an inte-
gral of the form (48.32), and we have seen that viability
can be ensured in this case if we consider a truncated
version of this integral over a sufﬁciently long but ﬁ-
nite length of time, typically the next two steps, without
the need to impose any terminal constraint. We have
also seen that it is possible in this case to continuously
re-evaluate and adapt the motion to the state of the sys-
tem, a clear improvement over the previous approaches
based solely on terminal constraints. This has been val-
idated experimentally in various situations, effectively
adapting the walking motion to perturbations [48.102].
An interesting variant [48.103] introduces varia-
tions of the angular momentum L as an additional
variable to minimize the combined integral
min
Z
k«cx;yk2 C ˇ
cx;y  cz
gz Rcx;y C S PLx;y
mgz  px;y
i

2
C kLx;yk2dt ;
(48.46)
showing an improvement in the tracking of the gener-
ated motion (and the same closed loop robustness to
small perturbations).

Part E | 48.4
1218
Part E
Moving in the Environment
A problem however with these approaches is that
simply minimizing the deviation of the CoP from the
middle of the contact points doesn’t preclude it from
ﬂuctuating, so the ODI (48.13) could be violated, es-
pecially in case of perturbations. This is monitored
in [48.102] to trigger a change of footstep if neces-
sary, but without any clear guarantee that this change
is appropriate. For this reason, it has been proposed
in [48.85] to impose the ODI (48.13) as a strict con-
straint, considering a single point mass model with
a constant height
cx;y  cz
gz Rcx;y 2 conv ˚px;y
i
 ;
(48.47)
and simply minimize the integral
min
Z
k«cx;yk2dt
(48.48)
over a sufﬁciently long but ﬁnite length of time to
ensure viability. This is the walking motion gen-
eration scheme implemented in the Aldebaran Nao
robot [48.104].
A variant tested successfully on the DLR (Deut-
sches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt) biped ro-
bot [48.105] considers minimizing the deviation from
a reference trajectory for the XCOM together with the
derivative of the CoP
min
Z x;y  x;y
ref
2 C ˇkPzx;yk2dt :
(48.49)
An additional terminal constraint was considered but
not tested.
A last proposition, tested only in simple simula-
tions, not with a real robot [48.106], considers a single
point mass which is assigned to minimize the deviation
of the leg length l from a given reference, and the devi-
ation of the CoP from the middle of the contact points
over the next two steps
min
Z
.l  lref/2 C ˇ
cx;y  cz Rcx;y
Rcz C gz  px;y
i

2
dt :
(48.50)
What makes this proposition particularly stimulating
is that this is not an integral of the form (48.32), that
can ensure viability, and no terminal constraint is there
to impose capturability, so there is no direct relation
with the viability/capturability analysis developed in
Sect. 48.3.3, on which all the previous schemes were
based. What this minimization only imposes is the abil-
ity to realize two more steps in the future, with legs
approximately at a nominal length: the situation in the
end of these two steps is not controlled (no terminal
constraint), so the robot might very well be falling after-
wards. However, in the presented simulations, it appears
that maintaining this ability to make two more steps in
the future is a sufﬁcient condition for generating stable
walking and running motions. The conclusion is that
terminal constraints or integrals of the form (48.32) are
in fact not mandatory and could be relaxed altogether.
In all of these approaches, the footsteps were pre-
deﬁned and kept ﬁxed, which is obviously a strong
limitation on the robot’s capacity to adapt to a chang-
ing environment or to strong perturbations.
Adaptive Footsteps
In fact, adapting foot placement is straightforward,
and has already been validated on a Kawada HRP-2
robot [48.107]: the only required change is to consider
foot placement as a decision variable, used in addition
to the horizontal motion of the COM, in order to both
satisfy the ODI (48.47) and minimize the integral
min
Z Pcx;y  Pcx;y
ref
2 dt
(48.51)
over a sufﬁciently long length of time to ensure viabil-
ity (since this is clearly an integral of the form (48.32)),
and have the COM follow on top of that the refer-
ence velocity Pcx;y
ref . Now, since the footstep placement
is decided online, geometric feasibility needs to be
checked online as well. A simple but effective option
is to consider a polygonal approximation of the reach-
able volume of the COM with respect to each foot on
the ground [48.108].
Yet, the timing of the steps was still predeﬁned,
what has a huge inﬂuence on the reactivity of legged
robots [48.60]. In order to adapt it as well, it has been
proposed in [48.109] to minimize the combined integral
min
Z Pcx;y  Pcx;y
ref
2 C kRf x;yk2dt ;
(48.52)
with Rf x;y the horizontal acceleration of the feet. But this
approach has been tested only in simple simulations so
far. Moreover, the underlying optimization problem be-
comes nonlinear, what is signiﬁcantly more involved to
solve.
Another approach, quite unique, starts with a sin-
gular linear quadratic regulator (LQR) design [48.110],
considering the classical single point mass at a constant
height, assigned to minimize the deviation of the CoP
from a combination of a reference CoP and the XCOM
min
Z cx;y  cz
gz Rcx;y C ˛zx;y
ref  .1 C ˛/x;y

2
dt
(48.53)
for some ˛ > 0. An interesting feature of this singular
LQR design is that it can be solved analytically. And an

Modeling and Control of Legged Robots
48.4 Generation of Dynamic Walking and Running Motions
1219
Part E | 48.4
interesting property of this singular objective function
is that it can be reduced to zero, in which case we have
cx;y  cz
gz Rcx;y D .1 C ˛/x;y  ˛zx;y
ref ;
(48.54)
what can be combined with the dynamics (48.35) of the
XCOM to obtain a stable ﬁrst order dynamics
Px;y D ˛!.zx;y
ref  x;y/ ;
(48.55)
according to which the XCOM  is going to converge
to zx;y
ref , and the CoP z as well according to (48.54).
But in a very unusual twist, this LQR design is not
used as is, and is inverted analytically to ﬁnd un-
der which condition does a piecewise constant trajec-
tory of the CoP generate a nondiverging motion of
the COM. Unsurprisingly, this nondiverging condition
ends up being a terminal constraint on the capture
point/XCOM/diverging part of the dynamics, with tra-
jectories corresponding in the end exactly to those
found in [48.59]. But here, this terminal constraint is
used in the end to decide online the footstep placement
that will ensure viability, what is eventually validated
experimentally with very strong perturbations.
All Variants of a Common Design
The viability analysis of Sect. 48.3.3 attested the crucial
importance of anticipation to avoid falling. We observe
now that the walking and running motion generation
schemes that power most of the greatest humanoid
robots of today and yesterday, the Honda Asimo, the
Toyota Partner, the Sony Qrio, the Aldebaran Nao, the
Kawada HRP-2, the Tokyo University H7, the Munich
University Johnny, the DLR biped, the long series of
Waseda University humanoids and many others, are all
structured around this necessity to anticipate, at least
a couple steps ahead of time. Viability is secured then in
different ways, always related to MPC theory, through
capturability or through minimizing an integral of the
form (48.32). In all cases, adopting the artiﬁcial synergy
synthesis approach, focusing on the motion of the COM
of the robot with respect to contact points, considering
that the rest of the motion can be handled more or less
independently, is the key to enable efﬁcient computa-
tions. All these motion generation schemes appear then
to share the same general design: MPC of the COM of
the robot with respect to contact points. The rest is de-
tails.
The compelling consequence of identifying this
common design, is revealing the possibility to cross-
breed all these approaches, retaining the best features
of each: more precise multiple mass models, for gener-
ating both walking and running motions, with adaptive
footstep placement and adaptive timing, sensor feed-
back, all in order to obtain in the end the ultimate robust
and versatile online motion generation scheme. These
are the next obvious steps.
Missing in this gallery of great legged robots, the
Boston Dynamics biped and quadruped robots. They
are without a doubt the legged robots exhibiting the
most impressive dynamic motions today, robust and
versatile. Exact details about their control algorithms
are scarce, but various clues suggest that they might
share the same design.
48.4.3 Motion in Constrained Environments
We have seen so far how to generate dynamic walk-
ing and running motions by considering the dynamic
feasibility constraint (48.13) independently from any
other concern. But on truly rough terrain or in clut-
tered spaces, kinematic constraints on the motion of
the robot cannot be disregarded and can further compli-
cate the problem. More precisely, kinematic constraints
generally make the reachable space of the robot non-
convex, so that deciding actions and motions with only
a local view on the situation can quickly get the robot
stuck in local loops or dead-ends. One way to decide
actions and motions with a global view on the situation
is with planning techniques, as described in Chap. 7
on motion planning and Chap. 47 on motion planning
and obstacle avoidance. In the case of legged robots,
three classes of problems of increasing complexity have
been considered: dynamic manipulation without loco-
motion, locomotion on a ﬂat ground with obstacles, and
locomotion on rough terrain with complex contact tran-
sitions.
Dynamic Manipulation Without Locomotion
In the case of manipulation tasks without locomo-
tion, the only difference of legged robots with respect
to more traditional manipulator robots is the dynamic
feasibility constraint (48.13). Therefore, a mere appli-
cation of the standard planning techniques described
in Chaps. 7 and 47 including this feasibility constraint
has proved to be fully sufﬁcient. But these techniques
are strongly biased towards quasi-static motions. As
a result, a sequence of statically stable postures is com-
puted ﬁrst, and the motion is smoothed and accelerated
afterwards, ﬁnally taking into account dynamic feasi-
bility [48.111]. Much more involved are the problems
involving locomotion, which attracted therefore much
more attention.
Legged Locomotion on a Flat Ground
with Obstacles
If we consider that the problem of generating dynamic
legged locomotion is properly solved thanks to the dif-

Part E | 48.4
1220
Part E
Moving in the Environment
ferent methods described earlier in this section, we can
try to abstract its details and plan the navigation of
the upper body of a legged robot between obstacles
as for any other mobile robot, with the same planning
techniques, regardless of the exact locomotion method.
It has been shown indeed that legged robots present
a form of small-space controllability, which means that
their upper-body can follow any given path with any
given accuracy [48.112], although this can require im-
practically quick steps. A different option to follow
exactly any given path with the upper-body is to cross
legs, as if walking on a balance beam, and some robots
have been speciﬁcally designed to be able to realize
such feats [48.113], but this can require impractically
slow steps. Ruling out impractically slow or imprac-
tically quick steps, the legged locomotion may ﬁnally
differ from the planned path and fail to avoid obstacles.
In this case, iterative replanning techniques have been
proposed [48.114].
In this approach, however, it is assumed that ﬁnally
ﬁnding proper footholds to follow the path planned
for the upper body is not a problem. Yet, the appeal
of legged robots is to provide improved mobility on
difﬁcult terrain, situations where ﬁnding footholds is
actually a problem. A solution then is to check the avail-
ability of proper footholds when planning the upper
body motion [48.115], an approach recently reﬁned to
show how to obtain in the general case an exact equiva-
lence between planning a continuous path and planning
a sequence of footholds on a ﬂat ground [48.116, 117].
A different approach is to plan directly the footholds
with respect to obstacles on the ground, and gen-
erate afterwards the corresponding dynamic legged
locomotion [48.118]. This has been applied success-
fully to long distance navigation with a tiered strat-
egy [48.119], with computations fast enough to run
online in changing environments [48.120], taking into
account deterministically moving obstacles [48.121],
on mildly rough terrain [48.122–124], using on-board
sensing [48.125]. Obstacles above the ground can be
considered then with a hybrid bounding box or more re-
ﬁned swept volumes [48.126, 127], or one can approxi-
mate the free-space with convex segmentation [48.128].
Legged Locomotion
with Complex Contact Transitions
On truly rough terrain or in cluttered environments,
legged locomotion may require much more complex
contact situations and contact transitions than in stan-
dard walking or running, involving not only contacts
between the feet and the ground, but all potential con-
tact surfaces on the robot and on the environment. The
variability of these situations is beyond comparison
with the previous case on ﬂat ground, and chances of
precomputations or simpliﬁcations are strongly lacking
in respect. Notably, the kinematic and dynamic con-
straints cannot be tackled independently, and having to
consider them simultaneously results in an overwhelm-
ing computational problem. As a result, a major effort
has been to ﬁnd a proper ordering of the different sub-
problems in order to obtain a tractable problem in the
end, ﬁnally opting for planning contacts before mo-
tion [48.129–131]. Complex real-life use-cases have
been solved this way [48.132–134], but the computa-
tional requirements still limit our ability to achieve the
versatility of locomotion possible on ﬂat ground. On-
line adaptation to changing environments has yet to be
convincingly demonstrated and remains an active area
of research.
As noted before, the underlying planning tech-
niques manifest a strong bias towards quasi-static
motions: some post-processing is necessary to obtain
a truly dynamic motion in the end. The same two op-
tions as in Sect. 48.4.1 have been proposed, standard
trajectory optimization [48.135], or following the arti-
ﬁcial synergy synthesis approach and computing ﬁrst
the motion of the COM of the robot with respect to the
different contact points, independently from the rest of
the motion of the robot, which is computed only after-
wards [48.21]. But the strong interdependency between
kinematic and dynamic constraints defeats the core as-
sumption of the artiﬁcial synergy synthesis approach in
this case: dynamic feasibility can’t always be handled
independently from the rest of the motion of the robot,
so there is a signiﬁcant risk that this method fails ﬁnd-
ing in the end a feasible motion even if one exists.
Further discussion of all these problems in the
speciﬁc case of humanoid robots can be found in
Chap. 67.5 on whole-body activities of humanoid
robots, or in [48.136]. There is also a rich literature
on gait selection for many-legged robots, starting as
early as [48.137] but this is still an active area of re-
search [48.138].
48.4.4 Motion Generation
with Limited Computing Resources
The walking and running motion generation schemes
presented so far in this chapter all require signiﬁcant
computation, even when they consider only simpliﬁed
dynamical models. Early legged robots, which had very
limited computing resources, had to rely on much less
demanding approaches. One option is to combine sim-
ple explicit rules, each one focusing on a different part
of the overall motion. Another option is to try to mimic
biological hypotheses on how animals generate and
control their motion, what ended up in fact with some-
how similar propositions.

Modeling and Control of Legged Robots
48.4 Generation of Dynamic Walking and Running Motions
1221
Part E | 48.4
Combining Simple Rules
Thanks to simplifying symmetries in biped orquadruped
running gaits such as trot, pace and bound, the whole
family of robots hopping in the MIT LegLab through-
out the 1980s on one, two or four legs, in 2-D (two-di-
mensional) or 3-D(three-dimensional), could rely on the
same simple control design [48.5]. The general idea is to
apply simple control laws independently to the different
parts of the overall locomotion task. The vertical oscilla-
tions were controlled by open-loop vertical thrusts, sim-
ply stabilized by mechanical energy losses. Since the an-
gular momentum is conserved during ﬂight phases, the
body attitude was controlled only during stance phases,
with standard proportional–derivative (PD) control. The
key to maintaining long-term balance, and controlling
the global motion was foot placement. An elementary
analysis of the motion of the COM during the stance
phaserevealed the role of the so-called neutral foot posi-
tion, which would make the stance phase perfectly sym-
metric. It is then just a matter of linear corrections of
the foot position with respect to this neutral position to
make the stance phase asymmetric in order to control
the robot’s speed and balance. The direct combination of
theseutterly simplecontrol laws resulted in impressively
robust and versatile locomotion.
The ﬁrst biped robot that walked dynamically re-
lied on an equally simple approach [48.4]. This robot
emulated walking on stilts, with contact surfaces be-
tween the feet and the ground reduced to single points,
so z D p. With a single, ﬁxed contact point during sin-
gle support phases (the double support phases were
supposed negligible), the ODI (48.29) can be solved an-
alytically: for t  t0,
cx;y.t/  px;y.t0/
Pcx;y.t/

D A.t/
cx;y.t0/  px;y.t0/
Pcx;y.t0/

(48.56)
with
A.t/ D
 cosh !.t  t0/
!1sinh !.t  t0/
! sinh !.t  t0/
cosh !.t  t0/

;
! D
r
gz
cz :
(48.57)
If the next single support phase starts at time t1 with
a foot position px;y.t1/, we end up having
cx;y.t1/  px;y.t1/
Pcx;y.t1/

D
A.t1/
cx;y.t0/  px;y.t0/
Pcx;y.t0/

C
px;y.t0/  px;y.t1/
0

;
(48.58)
which describes the motion of the COM cx;y with re-
spect to the contact points px;y, from one step, starting
at time tk, to the next, starting at time tkC1. This dis-
crete time dynamical system can be controlled then
with the foot placement px;y.tk/. Since it is linear, stan-
dard pole placement can be applied, yielding a standard
PD control of foot placement. This simple approach
has been successfully applied on more complex biped
robots [48.139, 140].
The drawback of combining independent control
laws is to lack coordination yielding potentially harsh,
unreﬁned motion, but this approach demonstrates that
stable locomotion is possible even with very limited
control resources. Of primary importance here are foot
placement and upper body attitude; the rest of the mo-
tion appears to be secondary, at least with respect to
balance control. Pushing this observation further, it has
been proposed, and validated in simulation, that a large
variety of walking patterns could be used, and stabilized
only with upper body attitude and foot placement con-
trol, both with simple PD control laws [48.141]. It is
not surprising then that hand-designed motion patterns
can be used successfully on robots as complex as the
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
(KAIST) Hubo humanoid robot [48.142], although this
may require delicate ﬁne tuning.
Reducing even further the control requirements, the
mechanics of the robots could be tuned so that passive
motions would automatically land the feet on the appro-
priate locations with respect to stability, ending up with
perfectly passive stable dynamic locomotion. This idea
will be discussed more thoroughly in Sect. 48.6.
Biomimetic Motion Generation
Current theories on locomotion control in animals in-
clude central pattern generators (CPGs) and cascades
of reﬂex motions, which interact and combine to gen-
erate the ﬁnal motion. CPGs are tunable oscillators,
generating synchronized quasi-cyclic motion patterns
in response to simple control signals such as loco-
motion speed or turning angle [48.143]. In order to
introduce such CPGs in legged robots, standard oscil-
lators such as the Van der Pol equation or the Hopf
oscillator have been proposed [48.144, 145], or more
biologically inspired neural oscillators [48.146] (iron-
ically, central pattern generators often happen to be
decentralized, composed of a collection of synchro-
nized oscillators [48.143, 145, 147]).
But CPGs are intrinsically open-loop motion gen-
erators, so to stabilize and adapt the motion of the
robot to their environment, limited feedback loops have
been introduced, similar to the simple control laws dis-
cussed earlier in this Section, focusing on upper body
attitude and foot placement [48.145, 147, 148]. Contin-

Part E | 48.5
1222
Part E
Moving in the Environment
uing with the biological analogy, these simple feed-
back loops have been called reﬂexes. Following ideas
discussed more thoroughly in Chap. 13 on behavior-
based systems, the subsumption architecture has been
proposed to build much more complex networks of
reactive behaviors or reﬂexes [48.149], and has al-
lowed a hexapod robot to walk successfully on mildly
rough terrain without any careful planning of the mo-
tion [48.150].
Fundamentally
the Same Decoupling Approach
Being inspired by simple mechanical analyses or by
animals, these approaches based on combinations of
simple rules demonstrate that stable walking can be
realized without much computation, at least in simple
situations. More complex situations may require more
reﬁned motions and therefore more reﬁned motion gen-
eration schemes, such as the ones discussed earlier in
this chapter. But it is striking to observe again the same
focus here on the motion of the COM of the robot
with respect to the contact points, when controlling ei-
ther the upper body attitude or the foot placement (or
both), regardless of the rest of the motion, which can
be generated by CPGs, inverse kinematics or any other
approach, simple or complex. This is fundamentally the
same decoupling as proposed earlier with the artiﬁcial
synergy synthesis approach.
48.5 Motion and Force Control
Properly executing the walking and running motions
computed in the previous section requires precise con-
trol of the motion of the robot and of the contact
forces with the environment, applying techniques from
Chapters 8 and 9 on motion and force control. But
since legged robots are often complex mechanical sys-
tems with many degrees of freedom and some form of
redundancy, techniques from Chap. 10 on redundant
manipulators also need to be applied frequently. And
in case of contact with multiple surfaces, problems of
contact force distribution appear, requiring techniques
similar to those found in Chap. 38 on grasping. And in
the opposite case, during ﬂight phases, when the robot
is not at all in contact with its environment, its dynamics
appear to share important properties with free-ﬂoating
space robots, requiring control techniques similar to
those found in Chap. 55 on space robotics. All these
techniques (and many more) are necessary to make
legged robots walk and run efﬁciently. The purpose of
this Section is to see how they connect and are imple-
mented in the case of legged robots.
Whole-Body Motion
Humanoid and other legged robots are often complex
mechanical systems with a large number of degrees of
freedom in order to accomplish the various kinematic
and dynamic tasks necessary for simultaneously achiev-
ing locomotion, perception and manipulation of the
environment, interaction with humans, etc. Making use
of all available degrees of freedom, and not only those
in the legs, to achieve multiple simultaneous objectives,
and not only locomotion, is usually called whole-body
motion control (Chap. 67.5). We have seen previously
that locomotion mostly involves the motion of the COM
c with respect to points pi of contact with the environ-
ment. Other objectives involve end-effector motion for
manipulation, gaze control for perception, motion of
speciﬁc parts of the robot for obstacle avoidance, etc.
In all of these cases, what needs to be controlled is
Cartesian motion of different parts of the robot, rather
than joint motion. Several control schemes have been
proposed to do this, standard inverse kinematics fol-
lowed by joint space control [48.139], virtual model
control [48.151], the task function approach [48.152,
153], operational space control [48.154].
Interestingly, the last two options allow specifying
different priorities to the different objectives assigned
to the robot, so in case these objectives are not feasible
jointly, the robot tries ﬁrst to achieve the objectives with
higher priority. In the case of legged robots, maintain-
ing balance and avoiding falls appear to be of primary
importance for the safety of both the robot and its
environment, so being able to consider this objective
with a higher priority can be crucial in this regard.
These control schemes allow moreover some form of
decoupling between the different objectives, further
contributing to the artiﬁcial synergy synthesis approach
introduced earlier in the previous Section. We are going
therefore to continue focusing here exclusively on the
locomotion objective, since the other ones can be con-
sidered more or less independently and are not speciﬁc
to legged robots.
Flight Phases
We have seen earlier in this chapter that during ﬂight
phases, when a legged robot is not in contact with its
environment, the motion of the COM invariably fol-
lows a standard falling motion: there is no possibility
to make it move in any other way. But we have seen
that even though the angular momentum L is constant
during ﬂight phases, the joint conﬁguration Oq and the
global orientation 0 of the robot can still be driven

Modeling and Control of Legged Robots
48.5 Motion and Force Control
1223
Part E | 48.5
concurrently together to any desired value thanks to
the nonholonomy of the angular momentum (48.5).
However, a famous theorem due to Brockett [48.155]
implies that continuous time-invariant feedback control
laws such as those proposed in [48.156, 157] are not
able to do so. The solution is to use discontinuous or
time-varying control laws [48.158], an approach well
established in space robotics [48.159, 160].
In the case of running motions, it has been pro-
posed to speciﬁcally adapt leg trajectories during ﬂight
phases in order to control both the joint conﬁgura-
tion and the global orientation at the end of the ﬂight
phases [48.161]. It has been measured indeed that
a simple difference in the height of a single step can
result in 1 or 2 degrees of difference in the global ori-
entation of the robot [48.8]. Albeit small, this effect
is far from negligible. More thorough discussions of
nonholonomic constraints and the impact of Brockett’s
theorem can be found in Chap. 49 on the modeling and
control of wheeled mobile robots or in [48.158].
Angular Momentum
Either considering the ODI (48.13) when walking on
a ﬂat ground, or the Newton and Euler equations (48.3)
and (48.4) in the general case, the dynamic feasibility
of legged motions appears to be directly and entirely
related to the motion of the COM c, and the angular
momentum, L. It has been naturally proposed there-
fore to control speciﬁcally those two quantities con-
currently [48.162–164]. Of course, since COM motion
and angular momentum are directly related to contact
forces f i (or equivalently to the CoP, z), controlling
the former is absolutely equivalent to controlling the
latter. The question however is whether the angular mo-
mentum should be speciﬁcally controlled to some given
value and what that value should be [48.163, 164].
Of course, since the angular momentum is directly
related to contact forces, it should comply with the uni-
laterality and Coulomb friction limitations on contact
forces (48.11) and (48.17). As a matter of fact, the
regulation of angular momentum has been discussed
only in quasi-static situations [48.162–164], where the
reference value is clearly zero, which generally com-
plies well with these limitations. And in the only case
where walking was considered, the horizontal angular
momentum Lx;y, that appears in the ODI (48.13) when
walking on a ﬂat horizontal ground, was explicitly not
controlled [48.162]. It appears, in fact, that during walk-
ing motions, the question of which value the angular
momentum should have is very intricate, because of its
nonholonomy, but it is deﬁnitely not zero [48.8, 103].
Even in quasi-static situations, both joint conﬁgu-
ration and global orientation can be controlled inde-
pendently from the angular momentum; the connection
between these different values is very subtle. As a re-
sult, controlling the angular momentum does not induce
a control of either joint conﬁguration or global ori-
entation (due to its nonholonomy). The opposite is
true however: controlling joint conﬁguration and global
orientation does induce a control of the angular momen-
tum as a derived quantity. It has been argued further-
more that common whole body motion objectives such
as manipulation or interaction with humans are more
directly related to joint conﬁguration and global orien-
tation than to angular momentum [48.165]. As a matter
of fact, disregarding the exact variations of the angu-
lar momentum has been the most frequent option so
far [48.139, 151–154, 165]. In the end, it is not clear if
speciﬁcally controlling the angular momentum can help
controlling legged robots: this is still an open question.
COM Motion Control
Putting the angular momentum aside, and considering
only the simple linear dynamics (48.29) when walking
on a ﬂat ground, and more precisely its decomposition
(48.34) and (48.35), we have seen that every state satis-
fying the condition (48.36), such that the capture point
 is in the support polygon, is capturable and can there-
fore be stabilized. If the capture point is strictly inside
the support polygon, the COM can even be stabilized to
any reference position cref above the support polygon,
with a simple linear feedback of the capture point
zx;y D cx;y
ref C k.x;y  cx;y
ref / ;
(48.59)
where the feedback gain k > 1 must be tuned in order
to keep the CoP z within the support polygon, ensur-
ing dynamic feasibility of the motion. Indeed, using
this feedback with the dynamics (48.35) yields a stable
closed loop dynamics
Px;y D !.k  1/.cx;y
ref  x;y/ ;
(48.60)
according to which the capture point  will converge to
the reference position cref, and the COM c will converge
to it as a result of the stable dynamics (48.34). It has
been shown that among all proportional-derivative (PD)
feedback of the motion of the COM
zx;y D cx;y
ref C k.cx;y C Pcx;y  cx;y
ref / ;
(48.61)
the feedback (48.59) of the capture point, with a choice
of  D !1, is the only one that will successfully
stabilize all capturable states [48.166]. It has been suc-
cessfully applied to walking motions on the DLR biped
robot [48.59].
Now, if there is a time-varying perturbation or er-
ror " in our dynamics, such that
cx;y  cz
gz Rcx;y D zx;y C " ;
(48.62)

Part E | 48.5
1224
Part E
Moving in the Environment
the PD feedback (48.61) can be shown to be robustly
stable (input-to-state stable, to be precise) with respect
to ", but with  < !1 and k >
1
	2!2 [48.167]. As dis-
cussed above, with this choice of , not all capturable
states will be stabilized successfully, even if there is no
perturbation. This is unfortunately a usual trade-off in
robust control.
Force Feedback
Motion control of legged robots without contact force
sensing and feedback has been shown to be possible
for simple quasi-static balancing tasks, using passiv-
ity based control [48.168]. However, force sensing and
feedback is commonly used when realizing more dy-
namic motions such as walking or running. One of the
ﬁrst problems to overcome in this case is the compli-
ance of both the robot and its environment, which easily
generates destabilizing oscillations [48.169–172]. Con-
tact force control schemes of various complexity have
been proposed, but always with the goal of damping
these undesired oscillations. The exact implementation
of these force control schemes generally relies on a stiff
lower-level joint motion control in order to enhance
disturbance rejection, leading to admittance control im-
plementations [48.139, 169–173]. More details on such
control schemes can be found in Chap. 9 on force
control.
Now, these damping control schemes inevitably in-
troduce some delay in the realization of the desired
contact forces. One option is to show that the COM
motion control scheme described earlier, which entirely
relies on contact forces, is robust to such delay [48.59].
Another option is to take this delay into account with
a simple ﬁrst-order dynamics of the CoP
Pz D !z.zd  z/ ;
(48.63)
and adapt the previous COM motion control scheme ac-
cordingly [48.174, 175]
zx;y
d
D cx;y
ref C k.x;y  cx;y
ref / C k0.zx;y  cx;y
ref / : (48.64)
This introduces some force feedback directly in the
COM motion control through the measurement of the
CoP z, what can help improve the reactivity of the con-
troller to perturbations.
Contact Forces Distribution
In case of contact with multiple surfaces, computing
contact forces f i, that allow realizing the desired motion
control scheme through the Newton and Euler equa-
tions (48.3) and (48.4), and yet comply with both the
unilaterality condition (48.11) and the Coulomb fric-
tion model (48.17), can be slightly more involved. The
standard approach is through optimization, and more
precisely quadratic programming (QP) with linear con-
straints, using a faceted, linear approximation of the
Coulomb friction model (48.17)
A f i 	 b :
(48.65)
It has been proposed then to minimize when possible
the norm of the joint torques u in order to reduce energy
consumption [48.152],
min
fi
kuk2 ;
(48.66)
or to balance the contact forces between the different
contact points, either by minimizing the sum of their
norms [48.165],
min
fi
X
i
kf ik2 ;
(48.67)
or the norm of their difference [48.176],
min
fi
kf left  f rightk2 ;
(48.68)
or minimizing the tangential forces in order to reduce
the risk of slipping [48.177],
min
fi
X
i
kf x;y
i k2 :
(48.69)
More
general
QP
formulations
have
been
pro-
posed [48.178, 179], including hierarchies of kinematic
and dynamic tasks and constraints [48.153].
But contact forces obtained in these ways are not
explicitly kept away from the edges of the friction cone
and unilaterality condition, so that the slightest pertur-
bation may quickly lead to sliding or tipping, what can
lead to serious issues. The simplest way to steadily im-
prove the robustness of the robot to such perturbations
is to introduce a security margin w
A f i 	 b  w1 ;
(48.70)
where 1 is a vector of ones, but there is no obvious way
to decide which value would be appropriate. One option
then is to try to maximize it with a linear program (LP)
max
w;f i w ;
(48.71)
improving as much as possible the robustness of the
robot to perturbations by selecting contact forces f i the
farthest possible from the edges of the (faceted) friction
cone and unilaterality condition. Note that the maximal
value w  obtained in this way is the residual radius dis-
cussed in [48.19].

Modeling and Control of Legged Robots
48.6 Towards More Efficient Walking
1225
Part E | 48.6
48.6 Towards More Efficient Walking
Examples of remarkably efﬁcient locomotion are ubiq-
uitous in nature. From sprinting cheetahs to leaping
sifakas, the variety and beauty of animal motion has in-
spired roboticists for decades. Yet some of the most im-
pressive examples of humanoid walking, e.g., Honda’s
Asimo or Boston Dynamics’ Atlas, have employed
high-impedance joint control to achieve stable locomo-
tion. As a result, the ﬂuidity of their motions is far from
that of their biological counterpart. Indeed, these robots
expend an order of magnitude more energy than a typi-
cal human while walking [48.180].
In contrast, the passive dynamic walking machines
of McGeer and others [48.6, 181] have been able to
achieve surprisingly human-like gaits without any actu-
ation, relying solely upon their carefully designed body
dynamics. These machines moved down sloped terrain,
relying upon the conversion of potential to kinetic en-
ergy to balance the losses introduced by impacts and
friction. Subsequent examples of minimally-actuated
bipeds capable of walking under their own power on
ﬂat terrain made the ﬁrst steps toward realizing efﬁcient
walking machines [48.180, 182].
The existence of these robots leads to several inter-
esting questions. For example, how can we ﬁnd limit
cycles of underactuated walkers and reason about their
stability? Simple models of walking systems have been
used to try to answer these questions for over two
decades. Such analyses typically rely upon linearization
of the model dynamics to integrate the equations of mo-
tion or numerical simulation of the nonlinear dynamics
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.48.9a–f Passive-dynamic walking machines. (a) The Wilson Walkie (after [48.183]). (b) A slightly improved ver-
sion (after [48.184]). Both (c) and (d) walk down a slight ramp with the comical, awkward, waddling gait of the penguin
(after [48.183]). (e) Cornell copy (after [48.185]) of McGeer’s capstone design. This four-legged biped has two pairs
of legs, an inner and outer pair, to prevent falling sideways. (f) The Cornell passive biped with arms (photo by Hank
Morgan) (after [48.181]). This walker has knees and arms and is perhaps the most human-like passive-dynamic walker
to date (photo reproduced with permissions from [48.180])
and analysis via Poincaré maps (Sect. 48.3.2). For ex-
ample, the compass gait model is one of the simplest
walking models, consisting of three point masses – one
at the hip and one on each leg – and the legs connected
to the hip with a pin joint (Fig. 48.10). Although even
this very simple model cannot be analyzed analytically,
a variety of stable gaits have been identiﬁed using nu-
merical techniques [48.186].
Today there exists a community of researchers
working to bridge the gap between stable and versa-
tile machines like Asimo and efﬁcient dynamic walkers.
Topics of particular interest include navigating ro-
bustly over rough terrain, generating and stabilizing
nonperiodic gaits, and scaling up to more complex
robot models. New computational tools for generating
and stabilizing trajectories for underactuated dynamical
systems have been an important result of this work. In
this section we highlight the fundamental insights pro-
vided by work on passive dynamic walking machines
and describe ways in which these ideas have been ex-
tended to more general systems.
48.6.1 Gait Generation
for Dynamic Walking
The most direct approach to producing efﬁcient walking
gaits in underactuated robots is to design controllers that
produce actuated trajectories that mimic passive ones.
Fundamental to these methods is the idea of restora-
tion of mechanical energy. Since mechanical energy is

Part E | 48.6
1226
Part E
Moving in the Environment
a
m
mh
θst
θsw
τ
γ
b
Fig. 48.10 The compass gait
lost at each heel strike, passive dynamic walkers require
gravitational force to restore energy to the system before
the next step. By choosing control inputs that regulate
mechanical energy, for example by simulating gravity,
walking on level terrain can be achieved [48.187, 188].
However, such approaches are still largely limited to
modest terrains and periodic motions.
Trajectory optimization methods offer the potential
to move beyond limit cycle gaits and to more com-
plicated systems without passive stability properties.
However, the fact that walking systems must make and
break contact with the world complicates the trajectory
optimization problem. Simulating rigid-body contact
forces continuously using spring and damper models
often results in stiff differential equations that can lead
to numerical and computational issues. An alternative
approach is to capture discontinuities in velocity by
modeling collisions as impulsive events using a hybrid
system representation (Sect. 48.2.3). For a walking hy-
brid system, a set of autonomous guard functions are
deﬁned such that i.q/ D 0 implies that body i is in con-
tact and i.q/ > 0 implies the opposite. When a body
comes into contact, the generalized velocity undergoes
an instantaneous change, PqC D f.q; Pq/, where Pq
and PqC are the velocities pre and post-impact, respec-
tively. The mode of the system is deﬁned by the set
of active contacts, C D fiji.q/ D 0g, which in turn de-
ﬁnes the set of Jacobian matrices in (48.2).
The hybrid system representation creates several
challenges for trajectory optimization methods. The
discontinuities due to mode transitions are typically
accounted for explicitly using either direct or multiple-
shooting methods [48.189]. Since each mode implies
a different dynamics and mode changes are neces-
sary for walking, this leads to the question of how
to formulate the dynamics constraints. One solution
is to predeﬁne the sequence of mode transitions. For
simple models with point feet, this approach can
work quite well. However, for more complex mod-
els with many contacts, the number of modes grows
exponentially, making mode sequence prespeciﬁcation
impractical.
The complementarity-based methods for simulating
rigid body systems in contact described in Sect. 48.2.3
suggest another approach. By discretizing the dynam-
ics in time and considering only the integral of contact
forces over a time interval, the forward dynamics of
a walking system can be greatly simpliﬁed. Since many
trajectory optimization methods already discretize by
evaluating a ﬁnite set of points along a trajectory, in-
corporation of contact forces as optimization variables
leads to trajectory optimization as a nonlinear optimiza-
tion problem with complementarity constraints [48.37].
Many impressive examples of trajectory optimiza-
tion for walking and running exist in the literature. For
example, Mombaur [48.78] simultaneously optimized
motion and physical parameters for simulated bipeds
to achieve open-loop stable running and Remy [48.190]
applied trajectory optimization to generate efﬁcient run-
ning for a quadruped. There are many more examples
and it remains an active area of research. The problem of
stabilizing trajectories optimized ofﬂine remains a chal-
lenge, particularly when the execution deviates from the
planned mode sequence. Computational requirements
still prevent nonlinear trajectory optimization methods
from being applied online as an MPC algorithm, but im-
provements in numerical solvers and computing hard-
ware will likely continue to reduce this gap.
48.6.2 Orbital Trajectory
Stabilization and Control
Once an open-loop gait is generated, it must typically
be stabilized in order to be executed on a robot. Clas-
sical techniques for trajectory stabilization from linear
control can work, but a strong theme in stabilization
for legged robots has been the idea that one should
not enforce the precise timing of the trajectory. Sec-
tion 48.3.2 discussed the notion of orbital stability
and introduced Poincaré maps as a tool for stability
analysis. Orbital stabilization, rather than traditional
trajectory stabilization, sacriﬁces little and appears to
be more compatible with underactuated robots. These
ideas have also played an important role in developing
stable dynamic walking and running controllers using
virtual constraints [48.38]. Virtual constraints are holo-
nomic constraints on monotonic functions of the robot’s
conﬁguration variables. For example, for a forward pe-
riodic gait, it might be reasonable to assume that the
angle of the stance leg with respect to the ground st is
monotonically increasing in time throughout the stance
phase. The remaining conﬁguration variables are writ-
ten as functions of st, effectively reparametrizing time,
and constraints are imposed that, e.g., enforce sym-

Modeling and Control of Legged Robots
48.7 Different Contact Behaviors
1227
Part E | 48.7
metry in stance and swing leg angles (sw D st) or
coordinate arm and leg motion. This leads to outputs
y D
2
4
h1.q/
: : :
hd.q/
3
5 ;
(48.72)
where each hi.q/ encodes a virtual constraint. For ex-
ample, h.q/ D sw C st encodes the virtual constraint
for swing-stance leg symmetry. By driving the output
dynamics asymptotically to 0 using high-gain control,
the system can be seen to evolve according to the vir-
tual constraints, yielding a lower dimensional problem
for control design and stability analysis. This approach
has been used to produce remarkable dynamic walking
and running examples in real robots [48.191].
Poincaré maps are deﬁned with respect to a trans-
verse surface at a single point on a periodic orbit, which
limits their usefulness for designing stabilizing con-
trollers. The transverse dynamics, on the other hand, is
deﬁned with respect to a continuous family of surfaces
S.t/, transverse to the orbit [48.45]. In the neighborhood
of these coordinates, the dynamics can be written as
P D 1 C f1.; x?/
(48.73)
Px? D A./x? C f2.; x?/ ;
(48.74)
where  2 Œ0; tf represents the orbit phase, x? are the
2N  1 coordinates orthogonal to the ﬂow of the sys-
tem, and f1./, f2./ are functions containing nonlinear
terms. Note that unlike the discrete Poincaré map, these
dynamics do not require the trajectory of interest to be
a periodic orbit.
By extracting the linear part of the transversal dy-
namics and incorporating control inputs, we obtain the
transverse linearization
Pz.t/ D A.t/z.t/ C B.t/u.t/ ;
(48.75)
for t 2 Œ0; tf. Stabilization of this system, and therefore
the underlying trajectory, can be approached using stan-
0
0
t
t
Fig. 48.11 A simple illustration of transverse linearization along
a nominal trajectory (red) for systems with impacts
dard techniques from linear control theory. For walking
systems with impulses, the dynamics can be extended
to include a linearized impact map, z.tC
i / D Ciz.t
i /,
where ti; i 2 C are times at which impacts occur. Fig-
ure 48.11 illustrates the idea of transversal surfaces
about a trajectory for a system with impacts. Manch-
ester et al. [48.50] showed that under some mild as-
sumptions, local exponential orbital stability of planned
motions on a hybrid nonlinear system can be achieved
using a receding horizon control with the transverse lin-
ear dynamics.
Minor variations in impact timing can be handled
in linearization-based approaches to stabilizing walk-
ing trajectories, but perturbations that lead to changes
in mode ordering often cannot. To address this problem,
we need algorithms for adjusting walking trajectories
online. As described in the previous section, the hybrid
nature of walking systems makes this challenging. One
way to avoid this issue is to employ smooth approxi-
mations of the dynamics that permit the use of efﬁcient
local trajectory optimization techniques at the expense
of violating complementarity condition (48.22) by, e.g.,
allowing interpenetration of rigid bodies. This approach
has led to impressive examples of online trajectory op-
timization for simulated systems [48.192], but it is yet
unknown how well these approximations will transfer
to physical systems.
48.7 Different Contact Behaviors
Contact forces have appeared throughout this chapter
to be central for the modeling and control of legged
robots. As a result, a different contact behavior can re-
sult in a signiﬁcantly different dynamical behavior of
the whole robot, and this can be extremely useful in sit-
uations where standard walking or running is inefﬁcient
or downright impossible.
48.7.1 Wall Climbing
Wall climbing legged robots rely on various devices
such as suction cups, magnets, adhesive materials,
miniature spine arrays, that can generate adhesive
forces in order to stick to various vertical surfaces such
as glass, steel, concrete, brick, stone [48.193–195]. In
this case, the unilaterality condition (48.11), which was
central throughout this chapter, is no more relevant. As
a result, the whole locomotion modeling and control is
deeply transformed.
48.7.2 Tethered Walking
On steep slopes, rappelling is an interesting option, teth-
ering the robot to anchors in order to avoid tumbling

Part E | 48
1228
Part E
Moving in the Environment
down. This has been experienced successfully on con-
struction sites [48.196], or in a volcano in the case
of the impressive Carnegie Mellon University (CMU)
Dante II octopod robot [48.197]. In this case, the loco-
motion problem is similar to the general case described
throughout this chapter, but the tether introduces an ad-
ditional contact between the robot and the environment,
on which the robot can pull but not push, so a unilat-
eral contact exactly opposite to the standard unilateral
contact between the feet and the ground, what can be
treated however in exactly the same way.
48.7.3 Legs with Wheels
Adapting wheeled vehicles to rough terrain has led
in some cases to implant wheels on legs, combining
the ﬂexibility of articulated legs on rough terrain with
the efﬁciency of wheels on ﬂat terrain. Different op-
tions are possible, passive or active wheels, passive
or active legs [48.198–202]. In this case, the unilat-
erality condition (48.11) is fundamental like in the
rest of this chapter, but the contact points can move
freely on the contact surfaces along the direction of
the wheels, what can signiﬁcantly increase the array of
possible motions [48.203]. Problems similar to those of
standard legged robots include ﬁnding stable postures
and allocating contact forces for maximizing stabil-
ity and efﬁciency [48.200–202]. Interestingly, the case
of passive wheels results in motions similar to skat-
ing [48.198].
48.7.4 Wheels with Legs
Evolving the mechanical design of legs for greater sim-
plicity and improved efﬁciency has led in some cases to
directly implant the legs on wheels [48.204, 205]. This
results in very impressive outdoor performance, but not
much related to standard legged robots in the end.
48.8 Conclusion
Legged systems are at the heart of some of the most
exciting work in modern robotics. They offer the oppor-
tunity to travel to places beyond the reach of wheeled
systems and gain fundamental insights into the con-
ditions under which stable and efﬁcient locomotion is
possible. At the same time, their complex dynamics
pose signiﬁcant challenges for our computational ap-
proaches to control and stability analysis. Indeed, the
simple fact that every walking system must engage in
intermittent contact with its environment has signiﬁcant
mathematical implications.
A large number of success stories for legged sys-
tems moving with remarkable precision and reliability
have been witnessed over the past decade, and the de-
velopment of exciting new tools for optimization-based
planning, control, and analysis offers the promise to
develop machines that achieve even higher levels of ro-
bustness and efﬁciency.
References
48.1
K.J. Waldron, R.B. McGhee: The adaptive suspen-
sion vehicle, IEEE Control Syst. Mag. 6, 7–12 (1986)
48.2
K. Hirai, M. Hirose, Y. Haikawa, T. Takenaka:
The development of honda humanoid robot,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1998)
pp. 1321–1326
48.3
H. Lim, A. Takanishi: Biped walking robots created
at waseda university: WL and WABIAN family, Phi-
los. Trans. Royal Soc. A 365(1850), 49–64 (2007)
48.4
H. Miura, I. Shimoyama: Dynamic walk of a biped,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 3(2), 60–74 (1984)
48.5
M. Raibert: Legged Robots that Balance (MIT
Press, Cambridge 1986)
48.6
T. McGeer: Passive Dynamic Walking, Simon Fraser
University Tech. Rep., (Simon Fraser Univ., Burn-
aby 1988)
48.7
M. Raibert, K. Blankespoor, G. Nelson, R. Playter,
the BigDog Team: BigDog, the rough-terrain
quadruped robot, Proc. 17th World Cong. Int. Fed.
Autom. Control. (2008)
48.8
P.-B. Wieber: Holonomy and nonholonomy in
the dynamics of articulated motion, Proc. Ru-
perto Carola Symp. Fast Motion Biomech. Robotics
(2005)
48.9
R.M. Murray, Z. Li, S.S. Sastry: A Mathematical
Introduction to Robotic Manipulation (CRC, Boca
Raton 1994)
48.10
M.K. Vukobratović: Contribution to the study
of anthropomorphic systems, Kybernetika 8(5),
404–418 (1972)
48.11
P. Sardain, G. Bessonnet: Forces acting on a biped
robot. center of pressure—zero moment point,
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man. Cybern. A 34(5), 630–637
(2004)
48.12
K. Harada, S. Kajita, K. Kaneko, H. Hirukawa: ZMP
analysis for arm/leg coordination, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2003) pp. 75–
81
48.13
K. Harada, H. Hirukawa, F. Kanehiro, K. Fujiwara,
K. Kaneko, S. Kajita, M. Nakamura: Dynamical

Modeling and Control of Legged Robots
References
1229
Part E | 48
balance of a humanoid robot grasping an envi-
ronment, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2004) pp. 1167–1173
48.14
Y. Or, E. Rimon: Analytic characterization of a class
of 3-contact frictional equilibrium postures in 3D
gravitational environments, Int. J. Robotics Res.
29(1), 3–22 (2010)
48.15
P.-B. Wieber: On the stability of walking systems,
Proc. Int. Workshop Humanoids Hum. Friendly
Robots (2002)
48.16
T. Saida, Y. Yokokoji, T. Yoshikawa: FSW (feasible
solution of wrench) for multi-legged robots, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2003)
48.17
H. Hirukawa, S. Hattori, K. Harada, S. Kajita,
K. Kaneko, F. Kanehiro, K. Fujiwara, M. Mori-
sawa: A universal stability criterion of the foot
contact of legged robots – adios ZMP, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 1976–
1983
48.18
T. Bretl, S. Lall: Testing static equilibrium for
legged robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics 24(4), 794–807
(2008)
48.19
S. Barthélemy, P. Bidaud: Stability measure of
postural dynamic equilibrium based on resid-
ual radius, Proc. Int. Symp. Adv. Robot Kinemat.
(2008)
48.20
Z. Qiu, A. Escande, A. Micaelli, T. Robert: Human
motions analysis and simulation based on a gen-
eral criterion of stability, Proc. Int. Symp. Digit.
Hum. Model. (2011)
48.21
Z. Qiu, A. Escande, A. Micaelli, T. Robert: A hi-
erarchical framework for realizing dynamically-
stable motions of humanoid robot in obstacle-
cluttered environments, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf.
Humanoid Robots (2012)
48.22
E. Rimon, R. Mason, J.W. Burdick, Y. Or: A gen-
eral stance stability test based on stratified morse
theory with application to quasi-static locomo-
tion planning, IEEE Trans. Robotics 24(3), 626–641
(2008)
48.23
Q. Huang, S. Sugano, K. Tanie: Stability com-
pensation of a mobile manipulator by manip-
ulator motion: Feasibility and planning, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1997)
pp. 1285–1292
48.24
J. Kim, W.K. Chung, Y. Youm, B.H. Lee: Real-
time ZMP compensation method using null mo-
tion for mobile manipulators, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002) pp. 1967–1972
48.25
B. Brogliato: Nonsmooth Mechanics, Communica-
tions and Control Engineering (Springer, London
1999)
48.26
F. Pfeiffer, C. Glocker: Multibody Dynamics with
Unilateral Contacts (Wiley, New York 1996)
48.27
S. Chareyron, P.-B. Wieber: Stability and Regula-
tion of Nonsmooth Dynamical Systems INRIA Res.
Rep. RR-5408 (INRIA, Montbonnot Saint-Ismier
2004)
48.28
C. Liu, Z. Zhao, B. Brogliato: Frictionless mul-
tiple impacts in multibody systems. I. Theoret-
ical framework, Proc. R. Soc. A 464, 3193–3211
(2008)
48.29
Y.-B. Jia, M. Mason, M. Erdmann: Multiple im-
pacts: A state transition diagram approach, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 32(1), 84–114 (2013)
48.30
J.-M. Bourgeot, C. Canudas de Wit, B. Brogliato:
Impact shaping for double support walk: From
the rocking block to the biped robot, Proc. Int.
Conf. Climb. Walk. Robots (2005)
48.31
B. Gamus, Y. Or: Analysis of dynamic bipedal robot
locomotion with stick-slip transitions, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2013) pp. 3348–
3355
48.32
S. Kajita, K. Miura, M. Morisawa, K. Kaneko,
F. Kanehiro, K. Yokoi: Evaluation of a stabilizer for
biped walk with toe support phase, Proc. IEEE-
RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (2012)
48.33
V. Acary, B. Brogliato: Numerical Methods for
Nonsmooth Dynamical Systems, Lect. Notes Appl.
Comput. Mech., Vol. 35 (Springer, Berlin, Heidel-
berg 2008)
48.34
R.I. Leine, N. van de Wouw: Stability and Conver-
gence of Mechanical Systems with Unilateral Con-
straints, Lect. Notes Appl. Comput. Mech., Vol. 36
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2008)
48.35
Y. Or, A.D. Ames: Stability and completion of
zeno equilibria in lagrangian hybrid systems, IEEE
Trans. Autom. Control 56(6), 1322–1336 (2011)
48.36
D.E. Stewart, J.C. Trinkle: An implicit time-step-
ping scheme for rigid body dynamics with inelas-
tic collisions and coulomb friction, Int. J. Numer.
Methods Eng. 39(15), 2673–2691 (1996)
48.37
M. Posa, C. Cantu, R. Tedrake: A direct method
for trajectory optimization of rigid bodies through
contact, Int. J. Robotics Res. 33(1), 69–81 (2014)
48.38
E.R. Westervelt, J.W. Grizzle, C. Chevallereau,
J.H. Choi, B. Morris: Feedback Control of Dynamic
Bipedal Robot Locomotion (CRC, Boca Raton 2007)
48.39
M. Wisse: Essentials of Dynamic Walking: Analy-
sis and Design of Two-Legged Robots, Dissertation
(Technische Universiteit, Delft 2004)
48.40
R. Tedrake, I.R. Manchester, M.M. Tobenkin,
J.W. Roberts: LQR-Trees: Feedback motion plan-
ning via sums of squares verification, Int. J.
Robotics Res. 29, 1038–1052 (2010)
48.41
M. Posa, M. Tobenkin, R. Tedrake: Lyapunov anal-
ysis of rigid body systems with impacts and fric-
tion via sums-of-squares, Proc. Int. Conf. Hybrid
Syst. Comput. Control (2013) pp. 63–72
48.42
S. Cotton, I. Olaru, M. Bellman, T. van der Ven,
J. Godowski, J. Pratt: Fastrunner: A fast, efficient
and robust bipedal robot. concept and planar
simulation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2012)
48.43
M. Srinivasan, A. Ruina: Computer optimization
of a minimal biped model discovers walking and
running, Nature 439, 72–75 (2006)
48.44
K. Mombaur, H.G. Bock, J.P. Schloder, R.W. Long-
man: Open-loop stable solutions of periodic op-
timal control problems in robotics, Z. Angew.
Math. Mech. 85(7), 499–515 (2005)
48.45
J. Hauser, C.C. Chung: Converse Lyapunov func-
tions for exponentially stable periodic orbits, Syst.
Control Lett. 23(1), 27–34 (1994)

Part E | 48
1230
Part E
Moving in the Environment
48.46
J. Guckenheimer, P. Holmes: Nonlinear Oscilla-
tions, Dynamical Systems, and Bifurcations of
Vector Fields (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1983)
48.47
I.R. Manchester, M.M. Tobenkin, M. Levashov,
R. Tedrake: Regions of attraction for hybrid limit
cycles of walking robots, Proc. 21st World Cong.
Int. Fed. Autom. Control (2011)
48.48
E.R. Westervelt, G. Buche, J.W. Grizzle: Experi-
mental validation of a framework for the design
of controllers that induce stable walking in planar
bipeds, Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(6), 559–582 (2004)
48.49
A.S. Shiriaev, L.B. Freidovich, I.R. Manchester: Can
we make a robot ballerina perform a pirouette?
Orbital stabilization of periodic motions of under-
actuated mechanical systems, Annu. Rev. Control
32(2), 200–211 (2008)
48.50
I.R. Manchester, U. Mettin, F. Iida, R. Tedrake: Sta-
ble dynamic walking over uneven terrain, Int. J.
Robotics Res. 30(3), 265–279 (2011)
48.51
J.-P. Aubin: Viability Theory (Birkhäuser, Basel
1991)
48.52
P.-B.
Wieber:
Constrained
dynamics
and
parametrized control in biped walking, Proc.
Int. Symp. Math. Theory Networks Syst. (2000)
48.53
P.-B. Wieber: Viability and predictive control for
safe locomotion, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2008)
48.54
K. Ogata: Modern Control Engineering, 3rd edn.
(Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River 1996)
48.55
J. Pratt, R. Tedrake: Velocity based stability mar-
gins for fast bipedal walking, Proc. Ruperto Carola
Symp. Fast Motion Biomech. Robotics (2005)
48.56
A.L. Hof, M.G.J. Gazendam, W.E. Sinke: The con-
dition for dynamic stability, J. Biomech. 38, 1–8
(2005)
48.57
J. Pratt, J. Carff, S. Drakunov, A. Goswami: Capture
point: A step toward humanoid push recovery,
Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (2006)
48.58
T. Takenaka, T. Matsumoto, T. Yoshiike: Real time
motion generation and control for biped robot –
1st report: Walking gait pattern generation, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2009)
48.59
J. Englsberger, C. Ott, M.A. Roa, A. Albu-Schäffer,
G. Hirzinger: Bipedal walking control based on
capture point dynamics, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011)
48.60
T. Koolen, T. de Boer, J. Rebula, A. Goswami,
J. Pratt: Capturability-based analysis and control
of legged locomotion, Part 1: Theory and applica-
tion to three simple gait models, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 31(9), 1094–1113 (2012)
48.61
A. Papachristodoulou, S. Prajna: Robust stability
analysis of nonlinear hybrid systems, IEEE Trans.
Autom. Control 54(5), 1035–1041 (2009)
48.62
P. Hanggi, P. Talkner, M. Borkovec: Reaction-rate
theory: Fifty years after Kramers, Rev. Mod. Phys.
62(2), 251–342 (1990)
48.63
K. Byl: Metastable Legged-Robot Locomotion,
Dissertation (MIT, Cambridge 2008)
48.64
J. Steinhardt, R. Tedrake: Finite-time regional
verification of stochastic nonlinear systems, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 31(7), 901–923 (2012)
48.65
D.G.E. Hobbelen, M. Wisse: A disturbance rejec-
tion measure for limit cycle walkers: The gait
sensitivity norm, IEEE Trans. Robotics 23(6), 1213–
1224 (2007)
48.66
C. Ebenbauer: Polynomial Control Systems: Anal-
ysis and Design via Dissipation Inequalities and
Sum of Squares, Dissertation (Univ. Stuttgart,
Stuttgart 2005)
48.67
H. Dai, R. Tedrake: L2-gain optimization for robust
bipedal walking on unknown terrain, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2013)
48.68
E. Garcia, J. Estremera, P. Gonzalez de Santos:
A classification of stability margins for walking
robots, Proc. Int. Conf. Climb. Walk. Robots (2002)
48.69
A. Goswami: Postural stability of biped robots
and the foot rotation indicator (FRI) point, Int. J.
Robotics Res. 18(6), 523–533 (1999)
48.70
C.K. Chow, D.H. Jacobson: Studies of human lo-
comotion via optimal programming, Tech. Rep.
No. 617 (Harvard Univ., Cambridge 1970)
48.71
P.H. Channon, S.H. Hopkins, D.T. Phan: Derivation
of optimal walking motions for a biped walking
robot, Robotica 10(2), 165–172 (1992)
48.72
G. Cabodevilla, N. Chaillet, G. Abba: Energy-min-
imized gait for a biped robot, Proc. Auton. Mob.
Syst. (1995)
48.73
C. Chevallereau, A. Formal’sky, B. Perrin: Low en-
ergy cost reference trajectories for a biped robot,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1998)
48.74
M. Rostami, G. Bessonnet: Impactless sagittal gait
of a biped robot during the single support phase,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1998)
48.75
L. Roussel, C. Canudas de Wit, A. Goswami: Gen-
eration of energy optimal complete gait cycles for
biped robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1998)
48.76
J. Denk, G. Schmidt: Synthesis of a walking primi-
tive database for a humanoid robot using optimal
control techniques, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Hu-
manoid Robots (2001)
48.77
T. Buschmann, S. Lohmeier, H. Ulbrich, F. Pfeif-
fer: Optimization based gait pattern generation
for a biped robot, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Hu-
manoid Robots (2005)
48.78
K. Mombaur: Using optimization to create self-
stable human-like running, Robotica 27(3), 321–
330 (2009)
48.79
J. Denk, G. Schmidt: Synthesis of walking prim-
itive databases for biped robots in 3D-environ-
ments, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2003)
48.80
S.A. Setiawan, S.H. Hyon, J. Yamaguchi, A. Takan-
ishi: Quasi real-time walking control of a bipedal
humanoid robot based on walking pattern syn-
thesis, Proc. Int. Symp. Exp. Robotics (1999)
48.81
P.-B. Wieber, C. Chevallereau: Online adaptation
of reference trajectories for the control of walk-
ing systems, Robotics Auton. Syst. 54(7), 559–566
(2006)
48.82
C. Liu, C.G. Atkeson: Standing balance control us-
ing a trajectory library, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2009) pp. 3031–3036

Modeling and Control of Legged Robots
References
1231
Part E | 48
48.83
J. Yamaguchi, A. Takanishi, I. Kato: Development
of biped walking robot compensating for three-
axis moment by trunk motion, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1993)
48.84
Q. Huang, K. Yokoi, S. Kajita, K. Kaneko, H. Arai,
N. Koyachi, K. Tanie: Planning walking patterns
for a biped robot, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
17(3), 280–289 (2001)
48.85
P.-B. Wieber: Trajectory free linear model pre-
dictive control for stable walking in the presence
of strong perturbations, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf.
Humanoid Robots (2006)
48.86
T. de Boer: Foot placement in robotic bipedal
locomotion, Dissertation (Technische Univ. Delft,
Dleft 2012)
48.87
R.J. Full, D.E. Koditschek: Templates and anchors:
Neuromechanical hypotheses of legged locomo-
tion on land, J. Exp. Biol. 202, 3325–3332 (1999)
48.88
R.M. Alexander: Mechanics of bipedal locomo-
tion, Persp. Exp. Biol. 1, 493–504 (1976)
48.89
R.M. Alexander: Simple models of human move-
ment, ASME Appl. Mech. Rev. 48(8), 461–470
(1995)
48.90
S.S. Keerthi, E.G. Gilbert: Optimal infinite-hori-
zon feedback laws for a general class of con-
strained discrete-time systems: Stability and
moving-horizon approximations, J. Optim. The-
ory Appl. 57(2), 265–293 (1988)
48.91
D.Q.
Mayne,
J.B.
Rawlings,
C.V.
Rao,
P.O.M.
Scokaert:
Constrained
model
predic-
tive control: Stability and optimality, Automatica
26(6), 789–814 (2000)
48.92
M. Alamir, N. Marchand: Numerical stabilisation
of non-linear systems: Exact theory and approx-
imate numerical implementation, Eur. J. Control
5(1), 87–97 (1999)
48.93
M. Alamir, G. Bornard: Stability of a truncated in-
finite constrained receding horizon scheme: The
general discrete nonlinear case, Automatica 31(9),
1353–1356 (1995)
48.94
A. Takanishi, M. Tochizawa, H. Karaki, I. Kato:
Dynamic biped walking stabilized with optimal
trunk and waist motion, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1989)
48.95
H. Lim, Y. Kaneshima, A. Takanishi: Online walk-
ing pattern generation for biped humanoid robot
with trunk, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2002)
48.96
T. Buschmann, S. Lohmeier, M. Bachmayer, H. Ul-
brich, F. Pfeiffer: A collocation method for real-
time walking pattern generation, Proc. IEEE-RAS
Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (2007)
48.97
K. Nishiwaki, S. Kagami, Y. Kuniyoshi, M. Inaba,
H. Inoue: Online generation of humanoid walk-
ing motion based on a fast generation method
of motion pattern that follows desired ZMP, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2002)
48.98
R. Tajima, D. Honda, K. Suga: Fast running experi-
ments involving a humanoid robot, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2009)
48.99
K. Nagasaka, Y. Kuroki, S. Suzuki, Y. Itoh, J. Ya-
maguchi: Integrated motion control for walking,
jumping and running on a small bipedal en-
tertainment robot, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2004)
48.100
M. Morisawa, K. Harada, S. Kajita, K. Kaneko,
F. Kanehiro, K. Fujiwara, S. Nakaoka, H. Hirukawa:
A biped pattern generation allowing immediate
modification of foot placement in real-time, Proc.
IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (2006)
48.101
S. Kajita, F. Kanehiro, K. Kaneko, K. Fujiwara,
K. Harada, K. Yokoi, H. Hirukawa: Biped walk-
ing pattern generation by using preview control of
zero moment point, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2003) pp. 1620–1626
48.102
K. Nishiwaki, S. Kagami: Online walking control
systems for humanoids with short cycle pattern
generation, Int. J. Robotics Res. 28(6), 729–742
(2009)
48.103
J. Park, Y. Youm: General ZMP preview control for
bipedal walking, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2007)
48.104
D. Gouaillier, C. Collette, C. Kilner: Omni-direc-
tional closed-loop walk for NAO, Proc. IEEE-RAS
Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (2010)
48.105
M. Krause, J. Englsberger, P.-B. Wieber, C. Ott:
Stabilization of the capture point dynamics for
bipedal walking based on model predictive con-
trol, Proc. IFAC Symp. Robot Control (2012)
48.106
M. van de Panne: From footprints to animation,
Comput. Graph. 16(4), 211–223 (1997)
48.107
A. Herdt, H. Diedam, P.-B. Wieber, D. Dimitrov,
K. Mombaur, M. Diehl: Online walking motion
generation with automatic foot step placement,
Adv. Robotics 24(5-6), 719–737 (2010)
48.108
A. Herdt, N. Perrin, P.-B. Wieber: LMPC based
online generation of more efficient walking mo-
tions, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots
(2012)
48.109
Z. Aftab, T. Robert, P.-B. Wieber: Ankle, hip
and stepping strategies for humanoid balance
recovery with a single model predictive con-
trol scheme, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid
Robots (2012)
48.110
J. Urata, K. Nishiwaki, Y. Nakanishi, K. Okada,
S. Kagami, M. Inaba: Online decision of foot
placement using singular LQ preview regulation,
Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (2011)
48.111
J. Kuffner, S. Kagami, K. Nishiwaki, M. Inaba,
H. Inoue: Dynamically-stable motion planning
for humanoid robots, Auton. Robots 12, 105–118
(2002)
48.112
S. Dalibard, A. El Khoury, F. Lamiraux, M. Taix,
J.-P. Laumond: Small-space controllability of
a walking humanoid robot, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int.
Conf. Humanoid Robots (2011)
48.113
K. Kaneko, F. Kanehiro, S. Kajita, H. Hirukawa,
T. Kawasaki, M. Hirata, K. Akachi, T. Isozumi: Hu-
manoid robot HRP-2, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 1083–1090
48.114
E. Yoshida, C. Esteves, I. Belousov, J.-P. Laumond,
T. Sakaguchi, K. Yokoi: Planning 3-D collision-free
dynamic robotic motion through iterative reshap-
ing, IEEE Trans. Robotics 24(5), 1186–1198 (2008)

Part E | 48
1232
Part E
Moving in the Environment
48.115
J.-D. Boissonnat, O. Devillers, S. Lazard: Motion
planning of legged robots, SIAM J. Comput. 30(1),
218–246 (2000)
48.116
N. Perrin, O. Stasse, F. Lamiraux, E. Yoshida:
Weakly collision-free paths for continuous hu-
manoid footstep planning, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011)
48.117
N. Perrin: From discrete to continuous motion
planning, Proc. Int. Workshop Algorithm. Found.
Robotics (2012)
48.118
J. Kuffner, S. Kagami, K. Nishiwaki, M. Inaba,
H. Inoue: Online footstep planning for humanoid
robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2003)
48.119
J. Chestnutt, J. Kuffner: A tiered planning strat-
egy for biped navigation, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf.
Humanoid Robots (2004)
48.120
P. Michel, J. Chestnutt, J. Kuffner, T. Kanade:
Vision-Guided Humanoid Footstep Planning for
Dynamic Environments. In: Proc. IEEE/RAS Int.
Conf. Humanoid Robots 2005)
48.121
J. Chestnutt, P. Michel, J. Kuffner, T. Kanade: Loco-
motion among dynamic obstacles for the honda
asimo, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2007)
48.122
J.-M. Bourgeot, N. Cislo, B. Espiau: Path-planning
and tracking in a 3D complex environment for an
anthropomorphic biped robot, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2002)
48.123
J. Chestnutt, J. Kuffner, K. Nishiwaki, S. Kagami:
Planning biped navigation strategies in com-
plex environments, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Hu-
manoid Robots (2003)
48.124
M. Zucker, J.A. Bagnell, C. Atkeson, J. Kuffner: An
optimization approach to rough terrain locomo-
tion, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2010)
48.125
J. Chestnutt, Y. Takaoka, K. Suga, K. Nishi-
waki, J. Kuffner, S. Kagami: Biped navigation
in rough environments using on-board sensing,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2009)
48.126
N.
Perrin,
O.
Stasse,
F.
Lamiraux,
Y.
Kim,
D. Manocha: Real-time footstep planning for hu-
manoid robots among 3D obstacles using a hybrid
bounding box, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2012)
48.127
N. Perrin, O. Stasse, L. Baudoin, F. Lamiraux,
E. Yoshida: Fast humanoid robot collision-free
footstep planning using swept volume approxi-
mations, IEEE Trans. Robotics 28(2), 427–439 (2012)
48.128
R.L.H. Deits, R. Tedrake: Computing large convex
regions of obstacle-free space through semidefi-
nite programming, Proc. Int. Workshop Algorith-
mic Found. Robotics (2014)
48.129
T. Bretl, S. Lall, J.-C. Latombe, S. Rock: Multi-step
motion planning for free-climbing robots, Proc.
Int. Workshop Algorithmic Found. Robotics (2004)
48.130
K. Hauser, T. Bretl, J.-C. Latombe: Non-gaited hu-
manoid locomotion planning, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int.
Conf. Humanoid Robots (2005)
48.131
K. Hauser, T. Bretl, J.-C. Latombe, K. Harada,
B. Wilcox: Motion planning for legged robots on
varied terrain, Int. J. Robotics Res. 27(11/12), 1325–
1349 (2008)
48.132
A. Escande, A. Kheddar, S. Miossec: Planning sup-
port contact-points for humanoid robots and
experiments on HRP-2, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2006)
48.133
A. Escande, A. Kheddar, S. Miossec, S. Garsault:
Planning support contact-points for acyclic mo-
tions and experiments on HRP-2, Proc. Int. Symp.
Exp. Robotics (2008)
48.134
K. Bouyarmane, J. Vaillant, F. Keith, A. Kheddar:
Exploring humanoid robots locomotion capabil-
ities in virtual disaster response scenarios, Proc.
IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (2012)
48.135
S. Lengagne, J. Vaillant, E. Yoshida, A. Khed-
dar: Generation of whole-body optimal dy-
namic multi-contact motions, Int. J. Robotics Res.
32(9/10), 1104–1119 (2013)
48.136
K. Harada, E. Yoshida, K. Yokoi: Motion Planning
for Humanoid Robots (Springer, Berlin, Heidel-
berg 2010)
48.137
R.B. McGhee, A.A. Frank: On the stability proper-
ties of quadruped creeping gaits, Math. Biosci. 3,
331–351 (1968)
48.138
G.C. Haynes, A.A. Rizzi: Gaits and gait transitions
for legged robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 1117–1122
48.139
Y. Fujimoto, A. Kawamura: Proposal of biped
walking control based on robust hybrid posi-
tion/force control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom.
(ICRA),
Minneap.
(1996)
pp.
2724–
2730
48.140
S. Kajita, F. Kanehiro, K. Kaneko, K. Fujiwara,
K. Yokoi, H. Hirukawa: A realtime pattern gen-
erator for biped walking, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002) pp. 31–37
48.141
K. Yin, K. Loken, M. van de Panne: SIMBICON:
Simple Biped Locomotion Control, Proc. ACM SIG-
GRAPH (2007)
48.142
I.-W. Park, J.-Y. Kim, J.-H. Oh: Online biped
walking pattern generation for humanoid robot
KHR-3(KAIST humanoid robot – 3: HUBO), Proc.
IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (2006)
48.143
A. Ijspeert, A. Crespi, D. Ryczko, J.-M. Cabelguen:
From swimming to walking with a salamander
robot driven by a spinal cord model, Science
315(5817), 1416–1420 (2007)
48.144
R. Katoh, M. Mori: Control method of biped lo-
comotion giving asymptotic stability of trajectory,
Automatica 20(4), 405–414 (1984)
48.145
L. Righetti, A. Ijspeert: Programmable central pat-
tern generators: An application to biped locomo-
tion control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2006)
48.146
K. Matsuoka: Sustained oscillations generated
by mutually inhibiting neurons with adaptation,
Biol. Cybern. 52, 367–376 (1985)
48.147
G. Endo, J. Morimoto, J. Nakanishi, G. Cheng: An
empirical exploration of a neural oscillator for

Modeling and Control of Legged Robots
References
1233
Part E | 48
biped locomotion control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 3036–3042
48.148
Y. Fukuoka, H. Kimura, A. Cohen: Adaptive dy-
namic walking of a quadruped robot on irreg-
ular terrain based on biological concepts, Int. J.
Robotics Res. 22(3-4), 187–202 (2003)
48.149
R. Brooks: Elephants don’t play chess, Robotics
Auton. Syst. 6, 3–15 (1990)
48.150
R. Brooks: A robot that walks; emergent behav-
iors from a carefully evolved network, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1989) pp. 292–
296
48.151
J. Pratt, C.-M. Chew, A. Torres, P. Dilworth,
G. Pratt: Virtual model control: An intuitive ap-
proach for bipedal locomotion, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 20, 129–143 (2001)
48.152
F. Génot, B. Espiau: On the control of the mass
center of legged robots under unilateral con-
straints, Proc. Int. Conf. Climb. Walk. Robots
(1998)
48.153
L. Saab, O.E. Ramos, F. Keith, N. Mansard,
P. Souères, J.-Y. Fourquet: Dynamic whole-body
motion generation under rigid contacts and other
unilateral constraints, IEEE Trans. Robotics 29(2),
346–362 (2013)
48.154
L. Sentis, J. Park, O. Khatib: Compliant control
of multicontact and center-of-mass behaviors in
humanoid robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics 26(3), 483–
501 (2010)
48.155
R.W. Brockett: Asymptotic stability and feedback
stabilization. In: Differential Geometric Control
Theory, (Birkhäuser, Boston 1983)
48.156
S. Kajita, T. Nagasaki, K. Kaneko, K. Yokoi,
K. Tanie: A running controller of humanoid biped
HRP-2LR, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2005) pp. 618–624
48.157
L. Sentis, O. Khatib: Control of free-floating hu-
manoid robots through task prioritization, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
pp. 1730–1735
48.158
A. De Luca, G. Oriolo: Modelling and control
of nonholonomic mechanical systems, CISM Int.
Centre Mech. Sci. 360, 277–342 (1995)
48.159
Y. Nakamura, R. Mukherjee: Exploiting nonholo-
nomic redundancy of free-flying space robots,
IEEE
Trans.
Robotics
Autom.
9(4),
499–506
(1993)
48.160
E. Papadopoulos: Nonholonomic behaviour in
free-floating space manipulators and its utiliza-
tion. In: Nonholonomic Motion Planning, ed. by
Y. Xu, T. Kanade (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht
1993)
48.161
C. Chevallereau, E.R. Westervelt, J.W. Grizzle:
Asymptotically stable running for a five-link,
four-actuator,
planar
bipedal
robot,
Int.
J.
Robotics Res. 24(6), 431–464 (2005)
48.162
S. Kajita, F. Kanehiro, K. Kaneko, K. Fujiwara,
K. Harada, K. Yokoi, H. Hirukawa: Resolved mo-
mentum control: Humanoid motion planning
based on the linear and angular momentum,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2003) pp. 1644–1650
48.163
M. Popovic, A. Hofmann, H. Herr: Zero spin an-
gular momentum control: definition and ap-
plicability, IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots
(2004)
48.164
S.-H. Lee, A. Goswami: Ground reaction force
control at each foot: A momentum-based hu-
manoid balance controller for non-level and
non-stationary ground, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2010) pp. 3157–3162
48.165
C. Ott, M.A. Roa, G. Hirzinger: Posture and balance
control for biped robots based on contact force
optimization, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid
Robots (2011)
48.166
T. Sugihara: Standing stabilizability and stepping
maneuver in planar bipedalism based on the best
COM-ZMP regulator, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2009)
48.167
Y. Choi, D. Kim, B.-J. You: On the walking control
for humanoid robot based on the kinematic res-
olution of CoM jacobian with embedded motion,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006)
pp. 2655–2660
48.168
S.-H. Hyon: Compliant terrain adaptation for
biped humanoids without measuring ground
surface and contact forces, IEEE Trans. Robotics
25(1), 171–178 (2009)
48.169
S. Kajita, K. Yokoi, M. Saigo, K. Tanie: Balanc-
ing a humanoid robot using backdrive concerned
torque control and direct angular momentum
feedback, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2001) pp. 3376–3382
48.170
S. Lohmeier, K. Löffler, M. Gienger, H. Ulbrich,
F. Pfeiffer: Computer system and control of biped
Johnnie, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2004) pp. 4222–4227
48.171
J.-H. Kim, J.-H. Oh: Walking control of the hu-
manoid platform KHR-1 based on torque feed-
back control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2004) pp. 623–628
48.172
M.-S. Kim, J.-H. Oh: Posture control of a hu-
manoid robot with a compliant ankle joint, Int.
J. Humanoid Robotics 7(1), 5–29 (2010)
48.173
T. Buschmann, S. Lohmeier, H. Ulbrich: Biped
walking control based on hybrid position/force
control, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2009) pp. 3019–3024
48.174
S. Kajita, M. Morisawa, K. Miura, S. Nakaoka,
K. Harada, K. Kaneko, F. Kanehiro, K. Yokoi: Biped
walking stabilization based on linear inverted
pendulum tracking, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2010) pp. 4489–4496
48.175
M. Morisawa, S. Kajita, F. Kanehiro, K. Kaneko,
K. Miura, K. Yokoi: Balance control based on cap-
ture point error compensation for biped walking
on uneven terrain, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Hu-
manoid Robots (2012)
48.176
Y. Fujimoto, A. Kawamura: Simulation of an au-
tonomous biped walking robot including envi-
ronmental force interaction, IEEE Robotics Autom.
Mag. 5(2), 33–41 (1998)
48.177
L. Righetti, J. Buchli, M. Mistry, M. Kalakrishnan,
S. Schaal: Optimal distribution of contact forces

Part E | 48
1234
Part E
Moving in the Environment
with inverse dynamics control, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 32(3), 280–298 (2013)
48.178
A.D. Ames: Human-inspired control of bipedal
robotics via control lyapunov functions
and
quadratic programs, Proc. Int. Conf. Hybrid Syst.
Comput. Control (2013)
48.179
S. Kuindersma, F. Permenter, R. Tedrake: An effi-
ciently solvable quadratic program for stabilizing
dynamic locomotion, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2014)
48.180
S.H. Collins, A. Ruina, R. Tedrake, M. Wisse: Effi-
cient bipedal robots based on passive-dynamic
walkers, Science 307, 1082–1085 (2005)
48.181
S.H. Collins, M. Wisse, A. Ruina: A three-dimen-
sional passive-dynamic walking robot with two
legs and knees, Int. J. Robotics Res. 20(7), 607–
615 (2001)
48.182
R. Tedrake, T.W. Zhang, H.S. Seung: Stochastic
policy gradient reinforcement learning on a sim-
ple 3D biped, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2004) pp. 2849–2854
48.183
J.E. Wilson: Walking Toy, Patent 0 (1936)
48.184
R. Tedrake, T.W. Zhang, M.F. Fong, H.S. Seung:
Actuating a simple 3D passive dynamic walker,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004)
pp. 4656–4661
48.185
M. Garcia, A. Chatterjee, A. Ruina: Efficiency,
speed, and scaling of two-dimensional passive-
dynamic walking, Dyn. Stab. Sytems 15(2), 75–99
(2000)
48.186
A. Goswami, B. Thuilot, B. Espiau: Compass-Like
Biped Robot Part I : Stability and Bifurcation of
Passive Gaits, INRIA Res. Rep. No. 2996 (INRIA, Les
Chesnay Cedex 1996)
48.187
M.W. Spong, G. Bhatia: Further results on con-
trol of the compass gait biped, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2003) pp. 1933–
1938
48.188
F. Asano, Z.-W. Luo, M. Yamakita: Biped gait gen-
eration and control based on a unified property
of passive dynamic walking, IEEE Trans. Robotics
21(4), 754–762 (2005)
48.189
J.T. Betts: Survey of numerical methods for tra-
jectory optimization, J. Guid. Control, Dyn. 21(2),
193–207 (1998)
48.190
C.D. Remy: Optimal Exploitation of Natural Dy-
namics in Legged Locomotion, Dissertation (ETH,
Zurich 2011)
48.191
K. Sreenath, H.W. Park, I. Poulakakis, J.W. Griz-
zle: A compliant hybrid zero dynamics controller
for stable, efficient and fast bipedal walking
on MABEL, Int. J. Robotics Res. 30(9), 1170–1193
(2011)
48.192
Y. Tassa, T. Erez, E. Todorov: Synthesis and sta-
bilization of complex behaviors through online
trajectory optimization, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2012) pp. 4906–4913
48.193
S. Hirose, A. Nagakubo, R. Toyama: Machine that
can walk and climb on floors, walls and ceilings,
Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Robotics (1991) pp. 753–758
48.194
T. Yano, S. Numao, Y. Kitamura: Development of
a self-contained wall climbing robot with scan-
ning type suction cups, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1998) pp. 249–254
48.195
S. Kim, A. Asbeck, W. Provancher, M.R. Cutkosky:
SpinybotII: Climbing hard walls with compliant
microspines, Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Robotics (2005)
pp. 18–20
48.196
S. Hirose, K. Yoneda, H. Tsukagoshi: TITAN VII:
quadruped walking and manipulating robot on
a steep slope, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (1997) pp. 494–500
48.197
J. Bares, D. Wettergreen: Dante II: technical de-
scription, results and lessons learned, Int. J.
Robotics Res. 18(7), 621–649 (1999)
48.198
G. Endo, S. Hirose: Study on roller-walker (system
integration and basic experiments), IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (1999) pp. 2032–2037
48.199
R. Siegwart, P. Lamon, T. Estier, M. Lauria,
R. Piguet: Innovative design for wheeled loco-
motion in rough terrain, Robotics Auton. Syst. 40,
151–162 (2002)
48.200
K. Iagnemma, A. Rzepniewski, S. Dubowsky: Con-
trol of robotic vehicles with actively articulated
suspensions in rough terrain, Auton. Robots 14,
5–16 (2003)
48.201
K. Iagnemma, S. Dubowsky: Traction control of
wheeled robotic vehicles in rough terrain with
application to planetary rovers, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 23(10–11), 1029–1040 (2004)
48.202
C. Grand, F. Ben Amar, F. Plumet, P. Bidaud:
Stability and traction optimization of a wheel-
legged robot, Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(10–11), 1041–
1058 (2004)
48.203
G. Besseron, C. Grand, F. Ben Amar, F. Plumet,
P. Bidaud: Locomotion modes of an hybrid
wheel-legged robot, Proc. Int. Conf. Climb. Walk.
Robots (2004)
48.204
U. Saranli, M. Buehler, D.E. Koditschek: Rhex -
a simple and highly mobile hexapod robot, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 20(7), 616–631 (2001)
48.205
T. Allen, R. Quinn, R. Bachmann, R. Ritzmann:
Abstracted biological principles applied with re-
duced actuation improve mobility of legged ve-
hicles, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2003) pp. 1370–1375

Multimedia Contents Modeling an
1235
Part E | 49
49. Modeling and Control of Wheeled
Mobile Robots
Claude Samson, Pascal Morin, Roland Lenain
This chapter may be seen as a follow up to Chap. 24,
devoted to the classification and modeling of ba-
sic wheeled mobile robot (WMR) structures, and
a natural complement to Chap. 47, which surveys
motion planning methods for WMRs. A typical out-
put of these methods is a feasible (or admissible)
reference state trajectory for a given mobile robot,
and a question which then arises is how to make
the physical mobile robot track this reference tra-
jectory via the control of the actuators with which
the vehicle is equipped. The object of the present
chapter is to bring elements of the answer to this
question based on simple and effective control
strategies.
The chapter is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 49.2 is devoted to the choice of control models
and the determination of modeling equations as-
sociated with the path-following control problem.
In Sect. 49.3, the path following and trajectory sta-
bilization problems are addressed in the simplest
case when no requirement is made on the robot
orientation (i.e., position control). In Sect. 49.4
the same problems are revisited for the control
of both position and orientation. The previously
mentionned sections consider an ideal robot sat-
isfying the rolling-without-sliding assumption. In
Sect. 49.5, we relax this assumption in order to
take into account nonideal wheel-ground contact.
This is especially important for field-robotics ap-
plications and the proposed results are validated
through full scale experiments on natural terrain.
Finally, a few complementary issues on the feed-
back control of mobile robots are briefly discussed
in the concluding Sect. 49.6, with a list of com-
mented references for further reading on WMRs
motion control.
49.1 Background......................................... 1236
49.1.1
Path Following.......................... 1237
49.1.2
Stabilization of Trajectories ........ 1237
49.1.3
Stabilization
of Fixed Postures....................... 1237
49.2 Control Models .................................... 1238
49.2.1
Kinematics
Versus Dynamics........................ 1238
49.2.2 Modeling
in an Absolute Frame................. 1238
49.2.3 Modeling in a Frénet Frame ....... 1239
49.3 Adaptation of Control Methods
for Holonomic Systems......................... 1240
49.3.1
Stabilization of Trajectories
for a Nonconstrained Point ........ 1240
49.3.2 Path Following
with no Orientation Control........ 1240
49.4 Methods Specific
to Nonholonomic Systems .................... 1241
49.4.1
Transformation
of Kinematic Models
into the Chained Form............... 1242
49.4.2 Tracking
of a Reference Vehicle
with the Same Kinematics.......... 1242
49.4.3 Path Following
with Orientation Control ............ 1244
49.4.4 Asymptotic Stabilization
of Fixed Postures....................... 1246
49.4.5 Limitations Inherent
to the Control
of Nonholonomic Systems .......... 1250
49.4.6 Practical Stabilization
of Arbitrary Trajectories .............. 1251
49.5 Path Following in the Case
of Nonideal Wheel-Ground Contact ...... 1255
49.5.1
Extended Control Models
in the Presence of Sliding .......... 1255
49.5.2 On-Line Estimation
of Sliding Angles ....................... 1257
49.5.3 Feedback Laws
for Path Following..................... 1259

Part E | 49.1
1236
Part E
Moving in the Environment
49.5.4 Path Following Illustrations
in Low Grip Conditions............... 1259
49.6 Complementary Issues
and Bibliographical Guide.................... 1261
49.6.1 General Trailer Systems .............. 1261
49.6.2 Sensor-Based Motion Control ..... 1262
49.6.3 Sliding Effects
and Other Dynamical Issues ....... 1262
49.6.4 Bibliographical Guide ................ 1262
Video-References......................................... 1263
References................................................... 1263
49.1 Background
Wheeled mobile robotics remains a very active
research topic, as witnessed by the Darpa Grand Chal-
lenges [49.1]. The ﬁrst Grand Challenge, in 2005,
took place in a clear environment and was won by
Stanley (Fig. 49.1a). The second Grand Challenge, in
2007, took place in urban environment and demon-
strated autonomous driving capabilities, especially in
complex environments with strong safety and relia-
bility issues. This made possible the development of
autonomous cars, such as google car (Fig. 49.1b).
Whatever the sensors used for localization and de-
tection, the use in every day life of cybercars, such
as VipaLab (Fig. 49.1c), is becoming a reality. Nu-
merous tests are under progress all around the world
showing the beneﬁts of autonomous transportation sys-
tems. On-road transportation probably constitutes the
main and most visible application domain of emerg-
ing autonomous wheeled robots. Driving assistance for
human activities in off-road conditions constitutes an-
other application domain. Indeed, WMRs can also be
used in hazardous environments, or in environments
that are not reachable by humans. Planetary exploration
(Chap. 55), with the example of Curiosity (Fig. 49.1d),
is a popular example of such applications. Other devel-
opments, concerning people well-being and safety, are
also investigated in the ﬁeld of environment monitoring,
surveillance, agriculture, civil protection or defence.
Figure 49.1e,f illustrate these developments with the
ﬁrst one representing the Claas etrion robot (for au-
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
Fig.49.1a–f Some example of mobile
robots for different applications: (a)
Stanley (Stanford Univ.), off-road
motion; (b) Google car, autonomous
car; (c) Vipa (Institut Pascal/Ligier),
urban transportation; (d) Curiosity
(NASA) planetary exploration; (e)
Etrion (Claas), agriculture robot; (f)
PackBot (iRobot), public safety
tonomous farming, see also Chap. 56) and the second
one representing the SUGV robot manufactured by
iRobot. This robot, dedicated to civil protection, was
the ﬁrst one to enter the damaged Fukushima power
plant. All these examples highlight the possible bene-
ﬁts and different applications of WMRs. The variety of
robot designs (in term of scale, locomotion mode, or
related actuation strategy see Chap. 24), is in line with
the diversity of application needs. Whatever the system
and application, however, autonomy relies on the de-
sign of efﬁcient feedback laws that can ensure precise
autonomous motion of the vehicle despite all possible
modeling errors and perturbations. This chapter is ded-
icated to this issue and aims at providing the basics of
feedback control design for nonholonomic WMRs. Im-
plementation of these control laws supposes that one
is able to measure the variables involved in the control
loop (typically the position and orientation of the mo-
bile robot with respect to either a ﬁxed frame or a path
that the vehicle should follow). Throughout this chapter
we will assume that these measurements are available
continuously in time and that they are not corrupted by
noise. In a general manner, robustness considerations
will not be discussed in detail, one reason being that,
beyond imposed space limitations, a large part of the
presented approaches are based on linear control the-
ory. The feedback control laws then inherit the strong
robustness properties associated with stable linear sys-
tems. Results can also be subsequently reﬁned by using

Modeling and Control of Wheeled Mobile Robots
49.1 Background
1237
Part E | 49.1
complementary, eventually more elaborate, automatic
control techniques. For the sake of simplicity, the con-
trol methods are developed mainly for unicycle-type
and car-like mobile robots, which correspond respec-
tively to the types .2;0/ and .1;1/ in the classiﬁcation
proposed in Chap. 24. Most of the results can in fact
be easily extended/adapted to other mobile robots, in
particular to systems with trailers. We will mention the
cases where such extensions are straightforward. All
reported simulation results, illustrating various control
problems and solutions, are carried out for a car-like ve-
hicle, whose kinematics is slightly more complex than
that of unicycle-type vehicles.
Recall (Fig. 49.2) that:
1. A unicycle-type mobile robot is schematically com-
posed of two independent actuated wheels on
a common axle whose direction is rigidly linked
to the robot chassis, and one or several passively
orientable – or caster – wheels, which are not con-
trolled and serve for sustentation purposes.
2. A (rear-drive) car-like mobile robot is composed of
a motorized wheeled axle at the rear of the chas-
sis, and one (or a pair of) orientable front steering
wheel(s).
Note also, as illustrated by the diagram below
(Fig. 49.3), that a car-like mobile robot can be viewed
(at least kinematically) as a unicycle-type mobile robot
to which a trailer is attached.
Despite the variety of application, three generic
control problems can mainly be considered in mobile
robotics and are detailed in this chapter.
49.1.1 Path Following
Given a curve C on the plane, a (nonzero) longitudinal
velocity v0 for the robot chassis, and a point P attached
to the chassis, the goal is to have the point P follow
the curve C when the robot moves with the velocity
v0. The variable that one has to stabilize at zero is thus
the distance between the point P and the curve (i. e.,
the distance between P and the closest point M on C).
This type of problem typically corresponds to driving
on a road while trying to maintain the distance between
Fig.49.2a,b Unicycle-type (a) and car-like (b) mobile
robots
the vehicle chassis and the side of the road constant. Au-
tomatic wall following is another possible application.
49.1.2 Stabilization of Trajectories
This problem differs from the previous one in that the
vehicle’s longitudinal velocity is no longer predeter-
mined because one also aims to monitor the distance
gone along the curve C. This objective supposes that
the geometric curve C is complemented with a time
schedule, i. e., that it is parameterized with the time
variable t. This boils down to deﬁning a trajectory
t 7! .xr.t/; yr.t// with respect to a reference frame F0.
Then the goal is to stabilize the position error vector
.x.t/xr.t/;y.t/yr.t// at zero, with .x.t/; y.t// denot-
ing the coordinates of point P in F0 at time t. The
problem may also be formulated as one of control-
ling the vehicle in order to track a reference vehicle
whose trajectory is given by t 7! .xr.t/; yr.t//. Note
that perfect tracking is achievable only if the reference
trajectory is feasible for the physical vehicle, and that
a trajectory which is feasible for a unicycle-type vehicle
is not necessarily feasible for a car-like vehicle. Also,
in addition to monitoring the position .x.t/; y.t// of the
robot, one may be willing to control the chassis orien-
tation .t/ at a desired reference value r.t/ associated
with the orientation of the reference vehicle. For a non-
holonomic unicycle-type robot, a reference trajectory
.xr.t/; yr.t/; r.t// is feasible if it is produced by a refer-
ence vehicle which has the same kinematic limitations
as the physical robot. For instance, most trajectories
produced by an omnidirectional vehicle (omnibile vehi-
cle in the terminology of Chap. 24) are not feasible for
a nonholonomic mobile robot. However, nonfeasibility
does not imply that the reference trajectory cannot be
tracked in an approximate manner, i. e., with small (al-
though nonzero) tracking errors.
49.1.3 Stabilization of Fixed Postures
Let F1 denote a frame attached to the robot chassis. In
this chapter, we call a robot posture (or situation) the
association of the position of a point P located on the
robot chassis with the orientation .t/ of F1 with re-
spect to a ﬁxed frame F0 in the plane of motion. For
φ
φ
Fig. 49.3 Analogy car/unicycle with trailer

Part E | 49.2
1238
Part E
Moving in the Environment
this last problem, the objective is to stabilize at zero the
posture vector .t/ D .x.t/; y.t/; .t//, with .x.t/; y.t//
denoting the position of P expressed in F0. Although
a ﬁxed desired (or reference) posture is obviously a par-
ticular case of a feasible trajectory, this problem cannot
be solved by classical control methods.
49.2 Control Models
49.2.1 Kinematics Versus Dynamics
In order to proceed with the control of mobile robots,
a model describing its motion has to be derived. Several
levels of motion equations may be derived, pending on
the targeted application (expected velocity, terrain con-
ﬁguration, etc.). Chapter 24 provides a general conﬁg-
uration dynamic model for WMRs. Its particularization
to the case of unicycle-type and car-like mobile robots
gives
H.q/Pu C F.q; u/u D ./ ;
(49.1)
with q denoting a robot’s conﬁguration vector, u a vec-
tor of independent velocity variables associated with the
robot’s degrees of freedom, H.q/ a reduced inertia ma-
trix (which is invertible for any q), F.q; u/u a vector
of forces combining the contribution of Coriolis and
wheel–ground contact forces,  the orientation angle
of the car’s steering wheel,  an invertible control ma-
trix (which is constant in the case of a unicycle-type
vehicle), and  a vector of independent motor torques
(whose dimension is equal to the number of degrees
of freedom in the case of full actuation, i. e., equal to
two for the vehicles considered herein). In the case of
a unicycle-type vehicle, a conﬁguration vector is com-
posed of the components of the chassis posture vector 
and the orientation angles of the castor wheels (with re-
spect to the chassis). In the case of a car-like vehicle,
a conﬁguration vector is composed of the components
of  and the steering wheel angle . To be complete,
this dynamic model must be complemented with kine-
matic equations in the form
Pq D S.q/u ;
(49.2)
from which one can extract a reduced kinematic model
Pz D B.z/u ;
(49.3)
with z D , in the case of a unicycle-type vehicle,
and z D .; / in the case of a car-like vehicle. In the
automatic control terminology, the complete dynamic
model (49.1) and (49.2) forms a control system which
can be written as
PX D f .X; /
with
X D .q; u/
denoting the state vector of this system, and  the vec-
tor of control inputs. The kinematic models (49.2) and
(49.3) are also control systems with respective state
vectors q and z and control vector u. Any of these mod-
els can be used for control design and analysis purposes.
In the remainder of this chapter, we have chosen to work
with the kinematic model (49.3). By analogy with the
motion control of manipulator arms, this boils down
to using a model with velocity control inputs, rather
than a model with torque control inputs. This is jus-
tiﬁed when dynamic effects are not preponderant and
low-level velocity control loops on the wheels motor are
powerful enough to ensure good velocity tracking. In
Sect. 49.5, however, when nonideal wheel-ground con-
tact is addressed, dynamics is considered.
49.2.2 Modeling in an Absolute Frame
For the unicycle-type mobile robot, the kinematic
model (49.3) used from now on is
8
ˆˆ<
ˆˆ:
Px D u1 cos  ;
Py D u1 sin  ;
P D u2 ;
(49.4)
where .x; y/ represents the coordinates of the point Pm
located at mid-distance of the actuated wheels, and the
angle  characterizes the robot’s chassis orientation
(Fig. 49.4). In this equation, u1 represents the intensity
of the vehicle’s longitudinal velocity, and u2 is the chas-
sis instantaneous velocity of rotation. The variables u1
and u2 are themselves related to the angular velocity of
the actuated wheels via the one-to-one relations
u1 D r
2. P r C P `/ ;
u2 D r
2R. P r  P `/ ;
with r the wheels’ radius, R the distance between the
two actuated wheels, and P r (resp. P `) the angular ve-
locity of the right (resp. left) rear wheel.

Modeling and Control of Wheeled Mobile Robots
49.2 Control Models
1239
Part E | 49.2
For the car-like mobile robot, the kinematic model
(49.3) used from now on is
8
ˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆ:
Px D u1 cos  ;
Py D u1 sin  ;
P D u1
L tan  ;
P D u2 ;
(49.5)
where  represents the vehicle’s steering wheel angle,
and L is the distance between the rear and front wheels’
axles. In all forthcoming simulations, L is set equal to
1:2 m.
49.2.3 Modeling in a Frénet Frame
The object of this subsection is to generalize the pre-
vious kinematic equations when the reference frame is
a Frénet frame. This generalization will be used later on
when addressing the path following problem.
Let us consider a curve C in the plane of motion, as
illustrated on Fig. 49.5, and let us deﬁne three frames
F0, Fm, and Fs, as follows. F0 D f0; i; jg is a ﬁxed
frame, Fm D fPm; im; jmg is a frame attached to the mo-
bile robot with its origin – the point Pm – located on the
rear wheels axle, at the mid-distance of the wheels, and
Fs D fPs; is; jsg, which is indexed by the curve’s curvi-
linear abscissa s, is such that the unit vector is tangents
C. Consider now a point P attached to the robot chassis,
and let .l1; l2/ denote the coordinates of P expressed in
the basis of Fm. To determine the equations of motion
of P with respect to the curve C let us introduce three
variables s, d, and e, deﬁned as follows:

s is the curvilinear abscissa at the point Ps obtained
by projecting P orthogonally on C. This point exists
and is unique if the point P is close enough to the
curve. More precisely, it sufﬁces that the distance
between P and the curve be smaller than the lower
bound of the curve radii. We will assume that this
condition is satisﬁed.

d is the ordinate of P in the frame Fs; its absolute
value is also the distance between P and the curve.

e D   s is the angle characterizing the orien-
tation of the robot chassis with respect to the
frame Fs.
We also deﬁne the curvature c.s/ of C at Ps, i. e.,
c.s/ D @s=@s.
φ
θ
O
y
j
i
x
x
Pm
θ
Pm
Fig. 49.4 Conﬁguration variables
θs
O
j
i
d
C
is
js
im
jm
θe
Ps
s
Pm
P
Fig. 49.5 Representation in a Frénet frame
Using these notations one easily deduces from
(49.4) the following system of equations ([49.2] for de-
tails), which generalizes (49.4)
8
ˆˆ<
ˆˆ:
Ps D
1
1dc.s/Œ.u1  l2u2/ cos e  l1u2 sin e ;
Pd D .u1  l2u2/ sin e C l1u2 cos e ;
Pe D u2  Psc.s/ :
(49.6)
For car-like vehicles, one easily veriﬁes, by using
(49.5), that the system (49.6) becomes
8
ˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆ:
Ps D
u1
1dc.s/

cos e  tan 
L .l2 cos e C l1 sin e/
	
;
Pd D u1

sin e C tan
L .l1 cos e  l2 sin e/
	
;
Pe D u1
L tan   Psc.s/ ;
P D u2 :
(49.7)

Part E | 49.3
1240
Part E
Moving in the Environment
49.3 Adaptation of Control Methods for Holonomic Systems
We address in this section the problems of trajectory
stabilization and path following. When we deﬁned these
problems in the introduction, we considered a reference
point P attached to the robot chassis. It turns out that
the choice of this point is important. Indeed, consider
for instance the equations (49.6) for a unicycle point P
when C is the axis .O; i/. Then, s D xP, d D yP, and
e D  represent the robot’s posture with respect to the
ﬁxed reference frame F0. There are two possible cases
depending on whether P is, or is not, located on the ac-
tuated wheels axle. Let us consider the ﬁrst case, for
which l1 D 0. From the ﬁrst two equations of (49.6),
one has
PxP D .u1  l2u2/ cos  ;
PyP D .u1  l2u2/ sin  :
These relations indicate that P can move only in the
direction of the vector .cos ; sin /. This is a direct
consequence of the nonholonomy constraint to which
the vehicle is subjected. Now, if P is not located on the
wheels axle, then
PxP
PyP

D
cos 
l1 sin 
sin 
l1 cos 
 1
l2
0
1
 u1
u2

:
(49.8)
The fact that the two square matrices in the right-hand
side of this equality are invertible indicates that PxP
and PyP can take any values, and thus that the motion of
P is not constrained. By analogy with holonomic ma-
nipulator arms, this means that P may be seen as the
extremity of a two-degree-of-freedom (2-DOF) manip-
ulator, and thus that it can be controlled by applying
the same control laws as those used for manipulators.
In this section, we assume that the point P, used to char-
acterize the robot’s position, is chosen away from the
rear wheels axle. In this case we will see that the prob-
lems of trajectory stabilization and path following can
be solved very simply. However, as shown in the subse-
quent section, choosing P on the wheels axle may also
be of interest in order to better control the vehicle’s ori-
entation.
49.3.1 Stabilization of Trajectories
for a Nonconstrained Point
Unicycle
Consider a differentiable reference trajectory t 7!
.xr.t/; yr.t// in the plane. Let e D .xP  xr; yP  yr/ de-
note the tracking error in position. The control objective
is to asymptotically stabilize this error at zero. In view
of (49.8), the error equations are
Pe D
cos 
l1 sin 
sin 
l1 cos 
 u1  l2u2
u2


Pxr
Pyr

:
(49.9)
Introducing new control variables .v1; v2/ deﬁned by
v1
v2

D
cos 
l1 sin 
sin 
l1 cos 
 u1  l2u2
u2

;
(49.10)
the equations (49.9) become simply
Pe D
v1
v2


Pxr
Pyr

:
The classical techniques of stabilization for linear sys-
tems can then be used. For instance, one may consider
a proportional feedback control with precompensation
such as
v1 D Pxr  k1e1 D Pxr  k1.xP  xr/ ;
.k1 > 0/ ;
v2 D Pyr  k2e2 D Pyr  k2.yP  yr/ ;
.k2 > 0/ ;
which yields the closed-loop equation Pe D Ke. Of
course, this control can be rewritten for the initial con-
trol variables u, since the mapping .u1; u2/ 7! .v1; v2/
is bijective.
Car
This technique extends to car-like vehicles (and also to
trailer systems) by choosing a point P attached to the
steering wheel frame and not located on the steering
wheel axle.
49.3.2 Path Following
with no Orientation Control
Unicycle
Let us adopt the notation of Fig. 49.5 to address the
problem of following a path associated with a curve C
in the plane. The control objective is to stabilize the dis-
tance d at zero. From (49.6), one has
Pd D u1 sin e C u2.l2 sin e C l1 cos e/ :
(49.11)
Recall that in this case the vehicle’s longitudinal veloc-
ity u1 is either imposed or prespeciﬁed. We will assume
that the product l1u1 is positive, i. e., the position of the
point P with respect to the actuated wheels axle is cho-
sen in relation to the sign of u1. This assumption will

Modeling and Control of Wheeled Mobile Robots
49.4 Methods Specific to Nonholonomic Systems
1241
Part E | 49.4
be removed in Sect. 49.4. To simplify, we will also as-
sume that l2 D 0, i. e., the point P is located on the axis
.Pm; im/. Let us then consider the following feedback
control law
u2 D u1 tan e
l1

u1
cos e
k.d; e/d ;
(49.12)
with k a continuous, strictly positive, function on
R  .=2;=2/ such that k.d; ˙=2/ D 0. Since l2 D
0, applying the control (49.12) to (49.11) gives
Pd D l1u1k.d; e/d ;
which suggests that the control law (49.12) ensures con-
vergence of d to zero under adequate conditions on
l1; u1, and k. This is made precise in the following result
([49.2] for details).
Proposition 49.1
Consider the path following problem for a unicycle-
type mobile robot with
A. A strictly positive, or strictly negative, longitudinal
velocity u1.
B. A reference point P of coordinates .l1; 0/ in the ve-
hicle’s chassis frame, with l1u1 > 0.
Let k denote a continuous function, strictly posi-
tive on R.=2;=2/, and such that k.d; ˙=2/ D 0
for every d (for instance, k.d; e/ D k0 cos e). Then, for
any initial conditions .s.0/;d.0/;e.0// such that
e.0/ 2 .=2; =2/ ;
l1cmax
1  jd.0/jcmax
< 1 ;
with cmax D maxsjc.s/j, the feedback control (49.12)
makes the distance jdj between P and the curve non-
increasing, and makes it converge to zero if
t
Z
0
ju1.s/jds ! C1
when t ! C1 :
Car
This control technique also applies to car (or trailer sys-
tems) by considering a point P attached to the steering
wheel frame, with u1 positive.
49.4 Methods Specific to Nonholonomic Systems
The control methods recalled in the previous section are
simple and sufﬁcient for many applications. Their main
limitation comes from the fact that the robot’s orienta-
tion is not actively controlled. This becomes a problem
when the application requires manœuvers (i. e., when
the vehicle’s velocity u1 has to become negative). This
issue is especially critical for trailer systems (including
car-like vehicles). Indeed, when the longitudinal veloc-
ity is positive, the leader vehicle has a pulling action
which tends to align the followers along the curve. In
the other case, the leader has a pushing action which
tends to misalign them, thus leading to collisions be-
t = 1
t = 0
P
u1
P
u1
Fig. 49.6 Path-following instability with reverse longitu-
dinal velocity
tween the vehicles’ components (the jackknife effect,
see Fig. 49.6 for illustration). In order to remove this
constraint on the sign of the longitudinal velocity, the
control has to be designed so that all orientation an-
gles are actively stabilized. An indirect way to do this
consists in choosing the point P on the actuated wheels
axle, at the mid-distance of the wheels, for instance. In
this case, the nonholonomy constraints intervene much
more explicitly, and the control can no longer be ob-
tained by applying the techniques used for holonomic
manipulators.
This section is organized as follows. First, the mod-
eling equations with respect to a Frénet frame are recast
into a canonical form called the chained form. From
there, a solution to the path-following problem with ac-
tive stabilization of the vehicle’s orientation is worked
out. The problem of (feasible) trajectory stabilization
is also revisited with the complementary objective of
controlling the vehicle’s orientation. The asymptotic
stabilization of ﬁxed postures is then addressed. Finally,
some comments on the limitations of the proposed con-
trol strategies, in relation to the objective of asymptotic
stabilization, serve to motivate and introduce a new con-
trol approach developed in the subsequent section.

Part E | 49.4
1242
Part E
Moving in the Environment
49.4.1 Transformation of Kinematic Models
into the Chained Form
The chapter dedicated to path planning shows how the
kinematic equations of the mobile robots here con-
sidered (unicycle-type, car-like, with trailers) can be
transformed into the chain form via a change of state
and control variables. In particular, the equations of
a unicycle (49.4), and those of a car (49.5), can be trans-
formed into a three-dimensional and a four-dimensional
chained system, respectively. Those of a unicycle-type
vehicle with N trailers yield a chained system of dimen-
sion N C3 when the trailers are hooked to each other in
a speciﬁc way. As shown below, this transformation can
be generalized to the kinematic models derived with re-
spect to a Frénet frame. The result will be given only for
the unicycle and car cases (49.6) and (49.7), but it also
holds for trailer systems. The reference point P is now
chosen at the mid-distance of the vehicle’s rear wheels
(or at the mid-distance of the wheels of the last trailer,
when trailers are involved).
Let us start with the unicycle case. Under the as-
sumption that P corresponds to the origin of Fm, one
has l1 D l2 D 0 so that the system (49.6) simpliﬁes to
8
ˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆ:
Ps D
u1
1  dc.s/ cos e ;
Pd D u1 sin e ;
Pe D u2  Psc.s/ :
(49.13)
Let us determine a change of coordinates and con-
trol variables .s;d; e; u1; u2/ 7! .z1; z2; z3; v1; v2/ al-
lowing to (locally) transform (49.13) into the three-
dimensional chained system
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
Pz1 D v1 ;
Pz2 D v1z3 ;
Pz3 D v2 :
(49.14)
By ﬁrst setting
z1 D s ;
v1 D Ps D
u1
1  dc.s/ cos e ;
we already obtain Pz1 D v1. This implies that
Pd D u1 sin e D
u1
1  dc.s/ cos eŒ1  dc.s/tan e
D v1Œ1  dc.s/tan e :
We then set z2 D d and z3 D Œ1dc.s/ tan e, so that the
above equation becomes Pz2 D v1z3. Finally, we deﬁne
v2 D Pz3
D

Pdc.s/  d @c
@s Ps

tan e
C Œ1  dc.s/.1C tan2e/ Pe :
The equations (49.14) are satisﬁed with the variables zi
and vi so deﬁned.
From this construction it is simple to verify that the
mapping .s; d; e/ 7! z is a local change of coordinates
deﬁned on R2  .=2;=2/ (to be more rigorous,
one should also take the constraint jdj < 1=c.s/ into
account). Let us ﬁnally remark that the change of con-
trol variables involves the derivative .@c=@s/ of the
path’s curvature (whose knowledge is thus needed for
the calculations). In summary, we have shown that
the change of coordinates and of control variables
.s; d; e; u1; u2/ 7! .z1; z2; z3; v1; v2/ deﬁned by
.z1; z2; z3/ D .s;d; Œ1  dc.s/tan e/
.v1; v2/ D .Pz1; Pz3/
transforms the model (49.13) of a unicycle-type ve-
hicle into a three-dimensional (3-D) chained system.
One can similarly transform the car’s equations into
a four-dimensional (4-D) chained system, although the
calculations are slightly more cumbersome. More pre-
cisely, the change of coordinates and control variables
.s; d; e; ; u1; u2/ 7! .z1; z2; z3; z4; v1; v2/ deﬁned by
.z1; z2; z3; z4/ D

s; d; Œ1  dc.s/tan e;
 c.s/Œ1  dc.s/

1 C 2tan2e

 d @c
@s tan e
CŒ1  dc.s/2 tan 
L
1 C tan2e
cos e

;
.v1; v2/ D .Pz1; Pz4/
transforms the model (49.7) of a car-like vehicle (with
l1 D l2 D 0) into a four-dimensional chained system.
49.4.2 Tracking of a Reference Vehicle
with the Same Kinematics
Let us ﬁrst consider the problem of tracking, in both po-
sition and orientation, a reference vehicle (Fig. 49.7).
For simplicity, we choose P as the origin Pm of the
robot’s chassis frame Fm.

Modeling and Control of Wheeled Mobile Robots
49.4 Methods Specific to Nonholonomic Systems
1243
Part E | 49.4
Although the terminology is rather loose, the track-
ing problem is usually associated, in the control liter-
ature, with the problem of asymptotically stabilizing
the reference trajectory. In this case, a necessary con-
dition for the existence of a control solution is that
the reference is feasible. Feasible trajectories t 7!
.xr.t/; yr.t/; r.t// are smooth time functions which
are solution to the robot’s kinematic model for some
speciﬁc control input t 7! ur.t/ D .u1;r.t/; u2;r.t//T,
called the reference control. For a unicycle-type robot
for example, this means in view of (49.4) that
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
Pxr D u1;r cos r ;
Pyr D u1;r sin r ;
Pr D u2;r :
(49.15)
In other words, feasible reference trajectories corre-
spond to the motion of a reference frame Fr D fPr; ir; jrg
rigidly attached to a reference unicycle-type robot,
with Pr (alike P D Pm) located at the mid-distance of the
actuated wheels (Fig. 49.7). From there, the problem is
to determine a feedback control which asymptotically
stabilizes the tracking error .xxr; yyr;  r/ at zero,
with .xr; yr/ being the coordinates of Pr in F0, and r
the oriented angles between i and ir. One can proceed
as in the path-following case, ﬁrst by establishing the
error equations with respect to the frame Fr, then by
transforming these equations into the chain form via
a change of variables like the one used to transform the
kinematic equations of a mobile robot into a chained
system, and ﬁnally by designing stabilizing control laws
for the transformed system.
Expressing the tracking error in position .x  xr;
y  yr/ with respect to the frame Fr gives the vector
(Fig. 49.7)
xe
ye

D
 cos r
sin r
 sin r
cos r
 x  xr
y  yr

:
(49.16)
Calculating the time derivative of this vector yields
Pxe
Pye

D
u2;rye C u1 cos.  r/  u1;r
u2;rxe C u1 sin.  r/

:
O
Reference
vehicle
j
i
im
jm
θe
Pm
ir
jr
xe
ye
Pr
Fig. 49.7 Reference vehicle and error coordinates
By denoting e D   r, the orientation error between
the frames Fm and Fr, we obtain
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
Pxe D u2;rye C u1 cos e  u1;r ;
Pye D u2;rxe C u1 sin e ;
Pe D u2  u2;r :
(49.17)
To determine a control .u1; u2/ which asymptotically
stabilizes the error .xe; ye; e/ at zero, let us consider the
following change of coordinates and control variables
.xe; ye; e; u1; u2/ 7! .z1; z2; z3; w1; w2/ ;
deﬁned by
z1 D xe ;
z2 D ye ;
z3 D tan e ;
w1 D u1 cos e  u1;r ;
w2 D u2  u2;r
cos2e
:
(49.18)
Note that, around zero, this mapping is only deﬁned
when e 2 .=2;=2/. In other words, the orientation
error between the physical robot and the reference robot
has to be smaller than =2.
It is immediate to verify that, in the new variables,
the system (49.17) can be written as
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
Pz1 D u2;rz2 C w1 ;
Pz2 D u2;rz1 C u1;rz3 C w1z3 ;
Pz3 D w2 :
(49.19)
We remark that the last term in each of the above three
equations corresponds to the one of a chained system.
From here, it can be shown that the feedback control
law
(
w1 D k1ju1;rj.z1 C z2z3/
.k1 > 0/ ;
w2 D k2u1;rz2  k3ju1;rjz3 ;
.k2; k3 > 0/ ;
(49.20)
makes the origin of system (49.19) globally asymp-
totically stable provided essentially that u1;r does not
tend to zero as t tends to inﬁnity. A precise stability
statement and associated proof are provided in [49.2],
together with complementary details about the gain tun-
ing. Finally, the velocity control inputs u1 and u2 can be
deduced from w1 and w2 by using the two last lines of
(49.18).

Part E | 49.4
1244
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Generalization to a Car-Like Vehicle
The previous method extends to the car case. We pro-
vide below the main steps of this extension. Consider
the car’s kinematic model (49.5) and a reference ve-
hicle satisfying the same kinematic equations with all
variables indexed by the subscript r. We assume that
there exists ı 2 .0;=2/ such that the reference steer-
ing angle r belongs to the interval Œı; ı. By deﬁning
xe, ye, and e as in the unicycle case, and by setting
e D   r, one obtains the following system
8
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ:
Pxe D
u1;r
L tan r

ye C u1 cos e  u1;r ;
Pye D 
u1;r
L tan r

xe C u1 sin e ;
Pe D u1
L tan   u1;r
L tan r ;
Pe D u2  u2;r :
(49.21)
Let us introduce the following new state variables
8
ˆˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆˆ:
z1 D xe ;
z2 D ye ;
z3 D tan e ;
z4 D tan   cos e tan r
Lcos3e
C k2ye ; .k2 > 0/ :
We note that for any r 2 .=2;=2/, the mapping
.xe; ye; e; / 7! z deﬁnes a diffeomorphism between
R2  .=2; =2/2 and R4. Introduce now the new
control variables
8
ˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆ:
w1 D u1 cos e  u1;r ;
w2 D Pz4 D k2Pye C
3 tan 
cos e
 2 tan r
 sin e
Lcos3e
Pe

u2;r
Lcos2rcos2e
C
u2
Lcos2cos3e
:
(49.22)
One shows that .u1; u2/ 7! .w1; w2/ deﬁnes a change
of variables for e, , and r, inside the interval
.=2;=2/. These changes of state and control vari-
ables transform the system (49.21) into
8
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ:
Pz1 D
u1;r
L tan r

z2 C w1 ;
Pz2 D 
u1;r
L tan r

z1 C u1;rz3 C w1z3 ;
Pz3 D k2u1;rz2 C u1;rz4
Cw1

z4  k2z2 C .1 C z2
3/tan r
L

;
Pz4 D w2 :
(49.23)
From here, one can deduce that the control law w1
and w2 deﬁned as
8
ˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆ:
w1 D k1ju1;rj


z1 C z3
k2

z4 C .1 C z2
3/tan r
L

;
w2 D k3u1;rz3  k4ju1;rjz4 ;
(49.24)
with k1;2;3;4 denoting positive numbers, makes the ori-
gin of system (49.23) globally asymptotically stable
provided essentially that u1;r does not tend to zero as t
tends to inﬁnity.
Simulation Results
The simulation shown on Fig. 49.8 and
VIDEO 181
illustrates this control scheme. The gain parameters ki
have been chosen as .k1; k2; k3; k4/ D .1; 1;3; 3/. The
initial conﬁguration of the reference vehicle (i. e., at
t D 0), which is represented in Fig. 49.8a by dashed
lines, is .xr; yr; r/.0/ D .0;0; 0/. The reference con-
trol ur is deﬁned by (49.25). The initial conﬁguration
of the controlled robot, represented in the ﬁgure by
plain lines, is .x; y; /.0/ D .0;1:5; 0/. The conﬁg-
urations at time t D 10, 20, and 30, are also rep-
resented on the ﬁgure. Due to the fast convergence
of the tracking error to zero (see the time evolution
of the components xe; ye; e of the tracking error in
Fig. 49.8b), one can basically consider that the con-
ﬁgurations of both vehicles coincide after time t D
10.
ur.t/ D
8
ˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆ:
.1; 0/T ;
if t 2 Œ0; 10 ;
f1; 0:5 cosŒ2.t  10/=5gT ;
if t 2 Œ10; 20 ;
.1; 0/T ;
if t 2 Œ20; 30 :
(49.25)
49.4.3 Path Following
with Orientation Control
We reconsider the path-following problem with the ref-
erence point P now located on the actuated wheels axle,
at the mid-distance of the wheels. The objective is to
synthesize a control law which allows the vehicle to fol-
low the path in a stable manner, independently of the
sign of the longitudinal velocity.
Unicycle Case
We have seen in Sect. 49.4.1 how to transform kine-
matic equations with respect to a Frénet frame into the

Modeling and Control of Wheeled Mobile Robots
49.4 Methods Specific to Nonholonomic Systems
1245
Part E | 49.4
three-dimensional chained system
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
Pz1 D v1 ;
Pz2 D v1z3 ;
Pz3 D v2 :
(49.26)
Recall that .z1; z2; z3/ D .s;d; .1  dc.s// tan e/ and
that v1 D u1=.1  dc.s//cos e. The objective is to de-
termine a control law which asymptotically stabilizes
.d D 0; e D 0/ and also ensures that the constraint on
the distance d to the path (i. e., jdc.s/j < 1) is satisﬁed
along the trajectories of the controlled system. For the
control law, a ﬁrst possibility consists in considering
a proportional feedback like
v2 D v1k2z2  jv1jk3z3 ;
.k2; k3 > 0/ :
(49.27)
It is straightforward to verify that the origin of the
closed-loop subsystem
(
Pz2 D v1z3 ;
Pz3 D v1k2z2  jv1jk3z3
(49.28)
is asymptotically stable when v1 is constant, either pos-
itive or negative. Since u1 (not v1) is the intensity of
the vehicle’s longitudinal velocity, one would rather
establish stability conditions which depend on u1. As
detailed in [49.2], the control law (49.27) in fact makes
the origin of system (49.28) asymptotically stable un-
der the main condition that u1 does not tend to zero a t
tends to inﬁnity. Note that the sign of u1 now does not
need to be constant. As for the constraint jdc.s/j < 1, it
is satisﬁed along any solution to the controlled system
provided that
z2
2.0/ C 1
k2
z2
3.0/ <
1
c2max
;
with cmax D maxsjc.s/j.
From a practical point of view it can be useful to
complement the control action with an integral term.
More precisely, let us deﬁne a variable z0 by Pz0 D v1z2
with z0.0/ D 0. The control (49.27) can be modiﬁed as
follows
v2 D jv1jk0z0  v1k2z2  jv1jk3z3 ;
D jv1jk0
t
Z
0
v1z2  v1k2z2  jv1jk3z3 ;
.k0; k2; k3 > 0; k0 < k2k3/
(49.29)
leading to similar stability results as before. The con-
straint jdc.s/j < 1 is now satisﬁed along any solution to
the controlled system provided that
z2
2.0/ C
1
k2  k0
k3
z2
3.0/ <
1
c2max
:
Generalization
One of the assets of this type of approach, besides
the simplicity of the control law and little demanding
conditions of stability associated with it, is that it can
be generalized in a straightforward manner to car-like
vehicles and unicycle-type vehicles with trailers. The
result is summarized hereafter by considering an n-
dimensional chained system
8
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ:
Pz1 D v1 ;
Pz2 D v1z3 ;
:::
Pzn1 D v1zn ;
Pzn D v2 ;
(49.30)
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
a) y
x
t=0
t=0
t=10
t=30
t=20
4
3
2
1
0
 –1
–2
–3
–4
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
b) (xe, ye, θe)
t
xe
ye
θe
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
–1.5
Fig.49.8a,b Tracking of a reference vehicle. (a) Cartesian motion;
(b) error coordinates versus time

Part E | 49.4
1246
Part E
Moving in the Environment
with n  3. Its proof is a direct extension of the one in
the three-dimensional case. The dimension n D 4 corre-
sponds to the car case (Sect. 49.4.1). As for a unicycle-
type vehicle with N trailers, one has n D N C 3. Recall
also that, in all cases, z2 represents the distance d
between the path and the point P located at the mid-
distance of the rear wheels of the last vehicle. The
control objective is then to ensure the convergence of
z2; : : : ; zn to zero. A solution to this problem, which ex-
tends the solution (49.27) proposed for the unicycle, is
given by
v2 D v1
n
X
iD2
sign.v1/nC1ikizi :
(49.31)
where the control gains k2; : : : ; kn are chosen such that
the polynomial
sn1 C knsn2 C kn1sn3 C : : : C k3s C k2
is
Hurwitz
stable. Satisfaction
of
the
constraint
jdc.s/j < 1 along any solution to the controlled sys-
tem can also be guaranteed, upon a condition on
.z2.0/;   ; zn.0// speciﬁed in [49.2]. The possibility of
adding an integral correction term in (49.31) is also ad-
dressed in [49.2].
Simulation Results
The simulation results reported in Fig. 49.9 and
VIDEO 181
illustrate how this control scheme per-
forms for a car-like vehicle. The reference curve is the
circle of radius equal to four, centered at the origin. The
robot’s longitudinal velocity u1 is deﬁned by u1 D 1
for t 2 Œ0; 5, and u1 D 1 for t > 5. The control gains
have been chosen as .k2; k3; k4/ D .1; 3; 3/. The mo-
tion of the car-like robot in the plane is represented in
Fig. 49.9a, and its conﬁguration at times t D 0, 5, and 25
are also depicted in the ﬁgure. The time evolution of the
variables z2; z3; z4 (deﬁned at the end of Sect. 49.4.1)
is represented in Fig. 49.9b. One can observe that the
(discontinuous) change of the longitudinal velocity u1
at t D 5 does not affect the convergence of these vari-
ables to zero.
49.4.4 Asymptotic Stabilization
of Fixed Postures
We now consider the problem of asymptotic stabiliza-
tion of a ﬁxed desired (reference) posture (i. e., position
and orientation) for the robot chassis. This problem
may be seen as a limit case of the trajectory track-
ing problem. However, none of the feedback controllers
proposed previously in this chapter provides a solu-
tion to this problem. From the automatic control point
of view, the asymptotic stabilization of ﬁxed postures
is very different from the problems of path following
and trajectory tracking with nonzero longitudinal ve-
locity, much in the same way as a human driver knows,
from experience, that parking a car at a precise loca-
tion involves techniques and skills different from those
exercised when cruising on a road. In particular, it can-
not be solved by any classical control method for linear
systems (or based on linearization). Technically, the
underlying general problem is the one of asymptotic
stabilization of equilibria of controllable driftless sys-
tems with less control inputs than state variables. This
problem has motivated numerous studies during the last
decade of the last century, from many authors and with
various angles of attack, and it has remained a sub-
ject of active research at the beginning of this century.
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
a) y
x
t=25
t=0
t=5
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
0
5
10
15
20
25
b) (z2, z3, z4)
t
z2
z3
z4
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
Fig.49.9a,b Path following along a circle. (a) Cartesian
motion; (b) coordinates z2;3;4 versus time

Modeling and Control of Wheeled Mobile Robots
49.4 Methods Specific to Nonholonomic Systems
1247
Part E | 49.4
The variety of candidate solutions proposed until now,
the mathematical technicalities associated with several
of them, together with unsolved difﬁculties and limita-
tions, particularly (but not only) in terms of robustness
(an issue on which we will return), prevent us from
attempting to cover the subject exhaustively. Instead,
we have opted for a somewhat informal exposition of
approaches which have been considered, with the illus-
tration of a few control solutions, without going into
technical and mathematical details.
A central aspect of the problem, which triggered
much of the subsequent research on the control of non-
holonomic systems, is that asymptotic stabilization of
equilibria (or ﬁxed points) cannot be achieved by using
continuous feedbacks which depend on the state only
(i. e., continuous pure-state feedbacks). This is a conse-
quence of an important result due to Brockett in 1983.
The original result by Brockett concerned differentiable
feedbacks; it has later been extended to the larger set of
feedbacks which are only continuous.
Theorem 49.1 (Brockett [49.3])
Consider a control system
Px D f .x; u/
.x 2 Rn; u 2 Rm/ ;
with f a differentiable function and .x; u/ D .0;0/ an
equilibrium of this system. A necessary condition for
the existence of a continuous feedback control u.x/
which renders the origin of the closed-loop system
Px D f .x; u.x//
asymptotically stable is the local surjectivity of the ap-
plication .x; u/ 7! f .x; u/. More precisely, the image
by f of any neighborhood ˝ of .0; 0/ in RnCm must be
a neighborhood of 0 in Rn.
This result implies that the equilibria of many con-
trollable (nonlinear) systems are not asymptotically
stabilizable by continuous pure-state feedbacks. All
nonholonomic WMRs belong to this category of sys-
tems. This will be shown in the case of a unicycle-type
vehicle; the proof for the other mobile robots is simi-
lar. Let us thus consider a unicycle-type vehicle, whose
kinematic equations (49.4) can be written as Px D f .x; u/
with x D .x1; x2; x3/T, u D .u1; u2/T, and f .x; u/ D
.u1 cos x3; u1 sin x3; u2/T, and let us show that f is not
locally onto in the neighborhood of .x; u/ D .0;0/. To
this purpose, take a vector in R3 of the form .0; ı; 0/T. It
is obvious that the equation f .x; u/ D .0;ı; 0/T does not
have a solution in the neighborhood of .x; u/ D .0;0/
since the ﬁrst equation, namely u1 cos x3 D 0, implies
that u1 D 0, so that the second equation cannot have
a solution if ı is different from zero.
It is also obvious that the linear approximation
about the equilibrium .x; u/ D .0; 0/ of the unicycle
kinematic equations is not controllable. If it were, it
would be possible to (locally) asymptotically stabilize
this equilibrium with a linear (thus continuous) state
feedback.
Therefore, by application of the above theorem,
a unicycle-type mobile robot (like other nonholonomic
robots) cannot be asymptotically stabilized at a desired
posture (position/orientation) by using a continuous
pure-state feedback. This impossibility has motivated
the development of other control strategies in order to
solve the problem. Three major types of controls have
been considered:
1. Continuous time-varying feedbacks, which, besides
from depending on the state x, depend also on the
exogenous time variable (i. e., u.x; t/ instead of u.x/
for classical feedbacks).
2. Discontinuous feedbacks, in the classical form u.x/,
except that the function u is not continuous at the
equilibrium that one wishes to stabilize.
3. Hybrid discrete/continuous feedbacks. Although
this class of feedbacks is not deﬁned as precisely as
the other two sets of controls, it is mostly composed
of time-varying feedbacks, either continuous or dis-
continuous, such that the part of the control which
depends upon the state is only updated periodically,
e.g., u.t/ D NuŒx.kT/; t for any t 2 ŒkT; .k C 1/T,
with T denoting a constant period, and k 2 N.
We focus hereafter on continuous time-varying feed-
backs. Examples of hybrid discrete/continuous feed-
backs for unicycle and car-like vehicles are provided in
[49.2, Sect 34.4.4], together with associated simulation
results. As for discontinuous feedbacks, they involve
difﬁcult questions (existence of solutions, mathemati-
cal meaning of these solutions, etc.) which complicate
their analysis and for which complete answers are not
available. Moreover, for most of the discontinuous con-
trol strategies described in the literature, the property of
stability in the sense of Lyapunov is either not granted
or remains an open issue.
The use of time-varying feedbacks for the asymp-
totic stabilization of a ﬁxed desired equilibrium, for
a nonholonomic WMR, in order to circumvent the
obstruction pointed out by Brockett’s Theorem, was
ﬁrst proposed in [49.4]. Since then, very general re-
sults about the stabilization of nonlinear systems by
means of time-varying feedbacks have been obtained.
For instance, it has been proved that any controllable
driftless system can have any of its equilibria asymp-
totically stabilized with a control of this type [49.5].
This includes the kinematic models of the nonholo-

Part E | 49.4
1248
Part E
Moving in the Environment
nomic mobile robots here considered. We will illustrate
this approach in the case of unicycle-type and car-like
mobile robots modeled by three- and four-dimensional
chained systems, respectively. In order to consider the
three-dimensional case, let us come back on the results
obtained in Sect. 49.4.3 for path following. The control
law (49.27), i. e., v2 D v1k2z2 jv1jk3z3 applied to the
system
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
Pz1 D v1 ;
Pz2 D v1z3 ;
Pz3 D v2 ;
renders the function
V.z/ WD 1
2.z2
2 C 1
k2
z2
3/
nonincreasing along any trajectory of the controlled
system, i. e.,
PV D k3
k2
jv1jz2
3 ;
and ensures the convergence of z2 and z3 to zero if, for
instance, v1 does not tend to zero as t tends to inﬁnity.
For example, if v1.t/ D sin t, z2 and z3 tend to zero, and
z1.t/ D z1.0/ C
t
Z
0
v1.s/ds D z1.0/ C
t
Z
0
sin sds
D z1.0/ C 1  cos t ;
so that z1.t/ oscillates around the mean value z1.0/ C
1. To reduce these oscillations, one can multiply v1 by
a factor which depends on the current state. Take, for
example, v1.z; t/ D k.z2; z3/k sin t, that we complement
with a stabilizing term like k1z1 with k1 > 0, i. e.,
v1.z; t/ D k1z1 C k.z2; z3/k sin t :
The feedback control so obtained is time-varying and
asymptotically stabilizing.
Proposition 49.2
The continuous time-varying feedback
(
v1.z;t/ D k1z1 C ˛k.z2; z3/k sin t ;
v2.z;t/ D v1.z; t/k2z2  jv1.z;t/jk3z3 ;
(49.32)
with ˛; k1;2;3 > 0, renders the origin of the 3-D chained
system globally asymptotically stable [49.6].
The above proposition can be extended to chained sys-
tems of arbitrary dimension [49.6]. For the case n D 4,
which corresponds to the car-like robot, one has the fol-
lowing result.
Proposition 49.3
The continuous time-varying feedback
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
v1.z; t/ D k1z1 C ˛k.z2; z3; z4/k sin t ;
v2.z; t/ D jv1.z; t/jk2z2  v1.z; t/k3z3
jv1.z; t/jk4z4 ;
(49.33)
with ˛; k1;2;3;4 > 0 chosen such that the polynomial
s3 C k4s2 C k3s C k2 is Hurwitz stable, renders the ori-
gin of the 4-D chained system globally asymptotically
stable [49.6].
Figure 49.10 below illustrates the previous re-
sult. For this simulation, the parameters ˛; k1;2;3;4 in
the feedback law (49.33) have been chosen as ˛ D 3
and k1;2;3;4 D .1:2; 10;18; 17/. Figure 49.10a shows the
motion of the car-like robot in the plane. The initial
conﬁguration, at time t D 0, is depicted in plain lines,
whereas the desired conﬁguration is shown in dashed
lines. The time evolution of the variables x, y, and 
(i. e., the position and orientation variables correspond-
ing to the model (49.5)) is shown in Fig. 49.10b.
A shortcoming of this type of control, very clear
from this simulation, is that the system’s state con-
verges to zero quite slowly. One can show that the
rate of convergence is only polynomial, i. e., it is com-
mensurable with t˛ (for some ˛ 2 .0; 1/) for most
of the trajectories of the controlled system. This slow
rate of convergence is related to the fact that the con-
trol function is Lipschitz-continuous with respect to x.
It is a characteristics of systems the linear approxi-
mation of which is not stabilizable. Indeed, it can be
shown that exponential stability (in the classical sense
of linear systems) of an equilibrium point of a nonlinear
system cannot be obtained with a Lipschitz-continuous
feedback when the system’s linear approximation at
that point is not stabilizable ([49.2, Prop. 34.11] for
a precise statement and details). The need of better per-
formance and efﬁciency, has triggered the development
of stabilizing time-varying feedbacks which are contin-
uous, but not Lipschitz-continuous. Examples of such
feedbacks, yielding uniform exponential convergence,
are given in the following propositions for chained sys-
tems of dimension three and four, respectively.
Proposition 49.4
Let ˛; k1;2;3 > 0 denote scalars such that the polynomial
p.s/ D s2 C k3s C k2 is Hurwitz stable. For any integers
p; q 2 N, let 	p;q denote the function deﬁned on R2 by
8Nz2 D .z2; z3/ 2 R2; 	p;q.Nz2/
D

jz2j
p
qC1 C jz3j
p
q
 1
p :

Modeling and Control of Wheeled Mobile Robots
49.4 Methods Specific to Nonholonomic Systems
1249
Part E | 49.4
Then, there exists q0 > 1 such that, for any q  q0 and
p > q C 2, the continuous state feedback
8
ˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆ:
v1.z; t/ D k1.z1 sin t  jz1j/ sin t
C˛	p;q.Nz2/ sin t
v2.z; t/ D v1.z; t/k2
z2
	2
p;q.Nz2/  jv1.z; t/jk3
z3
	p;q.Nz2/
(49.34)
renders the origin of the three-dimensional chained
system globally asymptotically stable, with a uniform
exponential rate of convergence [49.7].
The parenthood of the controls (49.32) and (49.34) is
noticeable. One can also verify that the control (49.34)
is well deﬁned (by continuity) at Nz2 D 0. More precisely,
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
b) (x, y, θ)
t
x
y
θ
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
–1
–0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
a) y
x
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
Fig.49.10a,b Asymptotic stabilization with a Lipschitz-
continuous controller. (a) Cartesian motion; (b) error co-
ordinates versus time
the ratios
z2
	2
p;q.Nz2/
and
z3
	p;q.Nz2/ ;
which are obviously well deﬁned when Nz2 ¤ 0, tend to
zero when Nz2 tends to zero. This guarantees the conti-
nuity of the control law.
The property of exponential convergence pointed
out in the above result calls for some remarks. Indeed,
this property does not exactly correspond to the clas-
sical exponential convergence property associated with
stable linear systems. In this latter case, exponential
convergence means that for some constant K, , and
along any solution to the controlled system, one has
kz.t/k 	 Kkz.t0/ke.tt0/
This corresponds to the common notion of exponential
stability. In the present case, this inequality becomes
	Œz.t/ 	 K	Œz.t0/e.tt0/
for some function 	, deﬁned for example by
	.z/ D jz1j C 	p;q.z2; z3/ ;
with 	p;q as speciﬁed in Proposition 49.4. Although the
function 	 shares common features with the Euclidean
norm of the state vector (it is deﬁnite positive and it
tends to inﬁnity when kzk tends to inﬁnity), it is not
equivalent to this norm. Of course, this does not change
the fact that each component zi of z converges to zero
exponentially. However, the transient behavior is differ-
ent because one only has
jzi.t/j 	 Kkz.t0/k˛e.tt0/ ;
with ˛ < 1, instead of
jzi.t/j 	 Kkz.t0/ke.tt0/ :
In the case of the four-dimensional chained system,
one can establish the following result, which is similar
to Proposition 49.4.
Proposition 49.5
Let ˛; k1; k2; k3; k4 > 0 be chosen such that the polyno-
mial p.s/ D s3 C k4s2 C k3s C k2 is Hurwitz stable. For
any integers p; q 2 N, let 	p;q denote the function de-
ﬁned on R3 by
	p;q.Nz2/ D

jz2j
p
qC2 C jz3j
p
qC1 C jz4j
p
q
 1
p
with Nz2 D .z2; z3; z4/ 2 R3. Then, there exists q0 > 1
such that, for any q  q0 and p > q C 2, the continuous

Part E | 49.4
1250
Part E
Moving in the Environment
state feedback
8
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ:
v1.z; t/ D k1.z1 sin t  jz1j/ sin t
C˛	p;q.Nz2/ sin t ;
v2.z; t/ D jv1.z; t/jk2
z2
	3p;q.Nz2/  v1.z; t/k3
z3
	2p;q.Nz2/
jv1.z; t/jk4
z4
	p;q.Nz2/ ;
(49.35)
renders the origin of the 4-D chained system globally
asymptotically stable, with a uniform exponential rate
of convergence [49.7].
The performance of the control law (49.35) is illustrated
by the simulation results shown in Fig. 49.11. The con-
trol parameters have been chosen as follows: ˛ D 0:6,
k1;2;3;4 D .1:6;10; 18;17/, q D 2, p D 5. The compar-
ison with the simulation results of Fig. 49.10 shows
a clear gain in performance.
49.4.5 Limitations Inherent to the Control
of Nonholonomic Systems
Let us ﬁrst mention some problems associated with
the nonlinear time-varying feedbacks just presented. An
ever important issue, when studying feedback control,
is robustness. Indeed, if it were not for the sake of ro-
bustness, feedback control would lose much of its value
and interest with respect to open-loop control solutions.
There are various robustness issues. One of them con-
cerns the sensitivity to modeling errors. For instance, in
the case of a unicycle-type robot whose kinematic equa-
tions are in the form Px D u1b1.x/ C u2b2.x/, one would
like to know whether a feedback law which stabilizes an
equilibrium of this system also stabilizes this equilib-
rium for the neighbor system Px D u1Œb1.x/ C "g1.x/ C
u2Œb2.x/ C "g2.x/, with g1 and g2 denoting continu-
ous applications, and " a parameter which quantiﬁes
the modeling error. This type of error can account, for
example, for a small uncertainty concerning the orien-
tation of the actuated wheels axle with respect to the
chassis, which results in a bias in the measurement of
this orientation. One can show that time-varying control
laws like (49.34) are not robust with respect to this type
of error in the sense that, for certain functions g1 and g2,
and for " arbitrarily small, the system’s solutions end up
oscillating in the neighborhood of the origin, instead of
converging to the origin. In other words, both the prop-
erties of stability of the origin and of convergence to
this point can be jeopardized by arbitrarily small mod-
eling errors, even in the absence of measurement noise.
In view of these problems, one is brought to question
the existence of fast (exponential) stabilizers endowed
with robustness properties similar to those of stabiliz-
ing linear feedbacks for linear systems. The answer is
that, to our knowledge, no such control solution (ei-
ther continuous or discontinuous) has ever been found.
More than likely such a solution does not exist for non-
holonomic systems. Robustness of the stability property
against modeling errors, and control discretization and
delays, has been proved in some cases, but this could
only be achieved with Lipschitz-continuous feedbacks
which, as we have seen, yield slow convergence. The
classical compromise between robustness and perfor-
mance thus seems much more acute than in the case of
stabilizable linear systems (or nonlinear systems whose
linear approximation is stabilizable).
A second issue is the proven nonexistence of a uni-
versal feedback controller capable of stabilizing any
feasible reference state trajectory asymptotically [49.8].
–1
–0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
a) y
x
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
b) (x, y, θ)
t
x
y
θ
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
Fig.49.11a,b Asymptotic stabilization with a continuous
(non-Lipschitz) time-varying feedback. (a) Cartesian mo-
tion; (b) error coordinates versus time

Modeling and Control of Wheeled Mobile Robots
49.4 Methods Specific to Nonholonomic Systems
1251
Part E | 49.4
This is another notable difference with the linear case.
Indeed, given a controllable linear system Px D Ax C
Bu, the feedback controller u D ur CK.x xr/, with K
a gain matrix such that ACBK is Hurwitz stable, expo-
nentially stabilizes any feasible reference trajectory xr
(solution to the system) associated with the control in-
put ur. The nonexistence of such a controller, in the
case of nonholonomic mobile robots, is related to the
conditions upon the longitudinal velocity stated in pre-
vious propositions concerning trajectory stabilization.
This basically indicates that such conditions cannot be
removed entirely: whatever the chosen feedback con-
troller, there always exists a feasible reference trajec-
tory that this feedback cannot asymptotically stabilize.
Note that this limitation persists when considering non-
standard feedbacks (such as, e.g., time-varying periodic
feedbacks capable of asymptotically stabilizing refer-
ence trajectories which are reduced to a single point).
Moreover, it has clear practical consequences because
there are applications (automatic tracking of a human-
driven car, for instance) for which the reference trajec-
tory, and thus its properties, are not known in advance
(is the leading car going to keep moving or stop?) so
that one cannot easily decide on which controller to
use. Switching between various controllers is a possi-
ble strategy, which has been studied by some authors
and may give satisfactory results in many situations.
However, since implementing a predeﬁned switching
strategy between two controllers sums up to designing
a third controller, this does not solve the core of the
problem nor grant any certitude of success.
A third issue, which is not speciﬁc to nonholonomic
systems, but has seldom been addressed in the nonlin-
ear control literature, concerns the problem of tracking
nonfeasible trajectories (i. e., trajectories which are not
solutions to the system’s equations). Since exact track-
ing is not possible, by the deﬁnition of a nonfeasible
trajectory, the control objective is then to ensure that
the tracking errors shrink to, and ever after never ex-
ceed, certain nonzero thresholds. The fact that these
thresholds can theoretically be arbitrarily small in the
case of nonholonomic systems, if the amplitude of the
velocity control inputs is not limited, makes this prob-
lem particularly relevant for these systems. This can
be termed as a practical stabilization objective which,
although slightly less ambitious than the objective of
asymptotic stabilization considered in previous sec-
tions, opens up both the control design problem and
the range of applications signiﬁcantly. For instance, it
allows one to address the problem of tracking an om-
nidirectional vehicle with a unicycle-type, or a car-like,
vehicle. In the context of planning a trajectory with ob-
stacle avoidance, transforming a nonfeasible trajectory
into a feasible approximation for a certain mobile robot
can be performed by applying a practical stabilizer
to a model of this robot and by numerical integra-
tion of the system’s closed-loop equations. Also, if one
reformulates the former question about the existence
of a universal stabilizer, with the objective of asymp-
totic stabilization now replaced by the one of practical
stabilization, then the answer becomes positive: such
a stabilizer exists and, moreover, the reference trajec-
tories do not even have to be feasible.
49.4.6 Practical Stabilization
of Arbitrary Trajectories
A possible approach for the design of practical stabi-
lizers in the case of controllable driftless systems is
described in [49.9]. Some of its basic principles, here
adapted to the speciﬁc examples of unicycle-type and
car-like mobile robots, are recalled next.
Let us introduce some matrix notation that will be
used in this section.
R./ D
cos 
 sin 
sin 
cos 

;
S D
0
1
1
0

NR./ D
R./
0
0
1

:
Unicycle Case
With the above notation, the kinematic model (49.4) can
be written as
Pg D NR./Cu ;
(49.36)
with g D .x; y; /0 and
C D
0
@
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
A :
Let us now consider a smooth function
f W ˛ 7! f .˛/ D
0
@
fx.˛/
fy.˛/
f.˛/
1
A ;
with ˛ 2 S1 D R=2Z (i. e., ˛ is an angle variable), and
deﬁne
Ng WD
0
@
Nx
Ny
N
1
A WD g  NR .  f.˛// f .˛/
D
0
@
x
y

 R.  f.˛//
fx.˛/
fy.˛/

  f.˛/
1
A :
(49.37)

Part E | 49.4
1252
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Note that
Ng can be viewed as the situation of
a frame N
Fm.˛/ the origin of which has components
R.f.˛//
fx.˛/
fy.˛/

in the frame Fm. In term of differential geometry, Ng
is the product of g by the inverse f .˛/1 of f .˛/, in
the sense of the Lie group operations in SE.2/. Hence,
NFm.˛/ is all the closer to Fm as the components of f .˛/
are small. For any smooth time function t 7! ˛.t/, and
along any solution to system (49.36), the time derivative
of Ng is given by
PNg D NR. N/Nu ;
(49.38)
with
Nu D A.˛/

NR.f.˛//  @f
@˛ .˛/
 Cu
P˛

;
(49.39)
and
A.˛/ D
0
@I2
S
fx.˛/
fy.˛/

0
1
1
A :
(49.40)
From (49.38) and (49.39), one can view P˛ as a comple-
mentary control input that can be used to monitor the
motion of the frame N
Fm.˛/. More precisely, N
Fm.˛/ can
be viewed as an omnidirectional frame provided that Nu
can be rendered equal to any vector of R3, i. e., provided
that the mapping .u; P˛/ 7! Nu is onto. Let us determine
when this condition is satisﬁed. Equation (49.39) can
also be written as
Nu D A.˛/H.˛/
u
P˛

;
(49.41)
with
H.˛/ D
0
BB@
cos f.˛/
0
 @fx
@˛ .˛/
sin f.˛/
0
 @fy
@˛ .˛/
0
1
 @f
@˛ .˛/
1
CCA :
(49.42)
Since A.˛/ is invertible, N
Fm.˛/ is omnidirectional if
and only if the matrix H.˛/ is also invertible. A func-
tion f which satisﬁes this property for any ˛ 2 S1 is
called a transverse function [49.10]. The issue of the
existence of such functions has been treated in the
much more general context of the transverse function
approach [49.9, 10]. In the present case, a family of
transverse functions is given by
f .˛/ D
0
B@
" sin ˛
"2sin 2˛
4
arctan."cos ˛/
1
CA
with
";  > 0 :
(49.43)
Indeed, with this function one can verify that, for
any ˛ 2 S1,
detH.˛/ D "2
2 cos.arctan." cos ˛// < 0 :
Note that the components of f uniformly tend to zero
as " tends to zero, so that the associated omnidirectional
frame NFm.˛/ can be made arbitrarily close to Fm by
choosing " small (but different from zero).
Now, let
t 7! gr.t/ D Œxr.t/;yr.t/; r.t/T
denote a smooth, but otherwise arbitrary, reference
trajectory. It is not difﬁcult to derive from (49.38)
a feedback law Nu which asymptotically stabilizes Ng at gr.
A possible choice is given by
Nu D NR. N/ŒPgr  k.Ng  gr/ ;
(49.44)
which implies that
.PNg  Pgr/ D k.Ng  gr/
and therefore that Ng  gr D 0 is an exponentially stable
equilibrium of the above equation for any k > 0. Then,
it follows from (49.37) that
lim
t!C1
˚g.t/  gr.t/  NRŒr.t/f Œ˛.t/ D 0 :
(49.45)
The norm of the tracking error kg  grk is thus ulti-
mately bounded by the norm of f .˛/ which, in view
of (49.43), can be made arbitrarily small via the choice
of ". It is in this sense that practical stabilization is
achieved. The control u for the unicycle-like robot is
then calculated by inverting the relation (49.41) and us-
ing the expression (49.44) of Nu.
While it can be tempting to use very small val-
ues of " for the transverse function f in order to
obtain a good tracking precision, one must be aware
of the limits of this strategy. Indeed, when " tends to

Modeling and Control of Wheeled Mobile Robots
49.4 Methods Specific to Nonholonomic Systems
1253
Part E | 49.4
zero, the matrix H.˛/ deﬁned by (49.42) becomes ill-
conditioned, and its determinant tends to zero. This
implies, by (49.41), that the robot’s velocities u1 and
u2 may become very large. In particular, when the ref-
erence trajectory gr is not feasible, many manoeuvres
are likely to occur. Note that this difﬁculty is intrinsic
to the robot’s nonholonomy and that it cannot be cir-
cumvented (think about the problem of parking a car
in a very narrow parking place). For this reason, trying
to impose very accurate tracking of nonfeasible tra-
jectories is not necessarily a good option in practice.
On the other hand, when the trajectory is feasible, ma-
noeuvres are not needed to achieve accurate tracking,
so that smaller values of " can be used in this case.
This clearly leads to a dilemma when the reference tra-
jectory is not known in advance and its properties in
term of feasibility can vary with time. A control strat-
egy which addresses this issue, based on the use of
transverse functions whose magnitude can be adapted
online, is proposed in [49.11]. Experimental validations
of the present approach on a unicycle-like robot can also
be found in [49.12].
Car Case
The control approach presented above can be extended
to car-like vehicles (and also to the trailer case). Again,
the idea is to associate with the robot’s frame Fm an
omnidirectional companion frame N
Fm.˛/ which can be
maintained arbitrarily close to Fm via the choice of
some design parameters. Let us show how this can be
done for a car-like vehicle. To simplify the forthcoming
equations, let us rewrite system (49.5) as
8
ˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆ:
Px D u1 cos  ;
Py D u1 sin  ;
P D u1 ;
P D u ;
with  D .tan /=L and u D u2.1 C tan2/=L. This
system can also be written as (compare with (49.36))
(
Pg D NR./C./u1 ;
P D u ;
(49.46)
with g D .x; y; /T and C./ D .1; 0; /T. Let us now
consider a smooth function
f W ˛ 7! f .˛/ D
fg.˛/
f.˛/

D
0
BB@
fx.˛/
fy.˛/
f.˛/
f.˛/
1
CCA ;
with ˛ 2 S1  S1 (i. e., ˛ D .˛1; ˛2/), and deﬁne (com-
pare with (49.37))
Ng WD
0
@
Nx
Ny
N
1
A WD g  NR.  f.˛//fg.˛/
D
0
@
x
y

 R.  f.˛//
fx.˛/
fy.˛/

  f.˛/
1
A ;
(49.47)
which, as in the unicycle case, can be viewed as the
situation of some companion frame N
Fm.˛/. By differ-
entiating Ng along any smooth time function t 7! ˛.t/
and any solution to system (49.46), one can verify that
(49.38) is still satisﬁed, except that Nu is now given by
Nu D A.˛/

NRŒf.˛/  @fg
@˛1 .˛/  @fg
@˛2 .˛/


0
B@
C./u1
P˛1
P˛2
1
CA
(49.48)
rather than by (49.39) (with A.˛/ still deﬁned by
(49.40)). Using the fact that
C./u1 D C.f.˛//u1 C fC./  CŒf.˛/gu1
D
0
B@
1
0
f.˛/
1
CA u1 C
0
B@
0
0
  f.˛/
1
CA u1 ;
(49.48) can also be written as
Nu D A.˛/H.˛/
0
@
u1
P˛1
P˛2
1
A C A.˛/
0
@
0
0
u1Œ  f.˛/
1
A ;
(49.49)
with
H.˛/ D
0
BB@
cos f.˛/
 @fx
@˛1 .˛/
 @fx
@˛2 .˛/
sin f.˛/
 @fy
@˛1 .˛/
 @fy
@˛2 .˛/
f.˛/
 @f
@˛1 .˛/
 @f
@˛2 .˛/
1
CCA :
(49.50)
By setting
u D Pf.˛/  k.  f.˛/ ;
(49.51)

Part E | 49.4
1254
Part E
Moving in the Environment
with k > 0, it follows from (49.46) that   f.˛/ expo-
nentially converges to zero. Hence, after some transient
phase whose duration is commensurable with 1=k,  
f.˛/ 
 0, and (49.49) reduces to
Nu D A.˛/H.˛/
0
@
u1
P˛1
P˛2
1
A :
(49.52)
Provided that the function f is such that H.˛/ is
always invertible, this latter relation means that the
frame NFm.˛/ associated with Ng is omnidirectional. Any
function f for which this property is satisﬁed is called
a transverse function. Once it has been determined, one
can proceed as in the unicycle case to asymptotically
stabilize an arbitrary reference trajectory gr for Ng, for
example, by deﬁning Nu as in (49.44). The control u1 for
the car is then obtained by inverting relation (49.52).
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
a) y
x
t=20
t=0
t=45
t=34
t=57
t=80
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
 –1
–2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
b) (x, y, θ)
t
x
y
θ
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
Fig.49.12a,b Practical stabilization of an arbitrary trajec-
tory by the transverse function approach. (a) Cartesian
motion; (b) error coordinates versus time
The following lemma speciﬁes a family of transverse
functions for the car case.
Lemma 49.1
For any " > 0 and any 1; 2; 3 such that 1; 2; 3 > 0
and 623 > 83 C 12, the function f deﬁned by
f .˛/ D
0
BB@
Nf1.˛/
Nf4.˛/
arctan. Nf3.˛//
Nf2.˛/cos3f3.˛/
1
CCA
with
Nf W S1  S1 ! R4
given by
Nf.˛/ D
0
BBBBBBBB@
".sin ˛1 C 2 sin ˛2/
"1 cos ˛1
"2
1 sin 2˛1
4
 3 cos ˛2

"3
 
1
sin2˛1 cos ˛1
6
 23 sin 2˛2
4
 3 sin ˛1 cos ˛2
!
1
CCCCCCCCA
;
satisﬁes the transversality condition detH.˛/ ¤ 0 8˛,
with H.˛/ deﬁned by (49.50) [49.13].
The simulation results reported in Fig. 49.12 il-
lustrate the application of this control approach for
a car-like robot. The reference trajectory is deﬁned by
the initial condition gr.0/ D 0 and its time derivative
Pgr.t/ D
8
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ:
.0; 0; 0/T
if t 2 Œ0; 30
.1; 0; 0/T
if t 2 Œ30; 38
.0; 0:3; 0/T
if t 2 Œ38; 53
.1; 0; 0/T
if t 2 Œ53; 61
.0; 0; 0:2/T
if t 2 Œ61; 80
:
This corresponds to a ﬁxed situation when t 2 Œ0; 30,
three sequences of pure translational motion when t 2
Œ30; 61, and a pure rotational motion when t 2 Œ61; 80.
Let us remark that this trajectory is not feasible for the
car-like robot when t 2 Œ38; 53, since it corresponds to
a lateral translation in the direction of the unit vec-
tor jr of the frame Fr associated with gr, nor when
t 2 Œ61; 80, since a rear-drive car cannot perform pure
rotational motion. The initial conﬁguration of the car-
like robot, at t D 0, is g.0/ D .0; 1:5; 0/, and the initial
steering wheel angle is .0/ D 0.

Modeling and Control of Wheeled Mobile Robots
49.5 Path Following in the Caseof Nonideal Wheel-Ground Contact
1255
Part E | 49.5
In Fig. 49.12a, the robot is drawn with a solid line
at several time instants, whereas the chassis of the ref-
erence vehicle is shown as a dashed line at the same
time instants. The ﬁgure also shows the trajectory of
the point located at the mid-distance of the robot’s
rear wheels. Figure 49.12b shows the time evolution
of the tracking error expressed in the reference frame
(i. e., .xe; ye/ as deﬁned by (49.16), and e D   r). It
follows from (49.45) that, after the transient phase asso-
ciated with the exponential convergence of Ng to zero, the
ultimate bound for jxej, jyej, and jej is upper-bounded
by the maximum amplitude of the functions fx, fy, and
f, respectively. For this simulation, the control param-
eters of the transverse function f of Lemma 49.1 have
been chosen as follows: " D 0:17, 1;2;3 D .12;2; 20/.
With these values, one can verify that jfxj, jfyj, and jfj
are bounded by 0:51, 0:11, and 0:6, respectively. This is
consistent with the time evolution of the tracking error
observed in the ﬁgure. As pointed out for the unicycle
case, tracking errors could be diminished by decreasing
the value of ", but this would involve larger values of the
control inputs and also more frequent manoeuvres, es-
pecially on the time intervals Œ38; 53 and Œ61; 80 when
the reference trajectory is not feasible. Additional sim-
ulation and experimental results on this approach are
illustrated by
VIDEO 182 and
VIDEO 243 .
49.5 Path Following in the Case of Nonideal Wheel-Ground Contact
The kinematic models used in the previous sections
are derived under the classical rolling-without-sliding
assumption for the vehicle’s wheels. This assump-
tion is satisﬁed with a good degree of accuracy for
many applications both indoor and outdoor (e.g., on-
road). In some cases, however, sliding can be sig-
niﬁcant. This happens for example when a vehicle
operates on natural terrain with poor grip conditions
(grass, earth) and when the vehicle’s speed is sig-
niﬁcant and/or the terrain is not perfectly horizon-
tal. In these cases, the control laws presented in the
previous sections may not give full satisfaction. We
show in this section that these control laws can still
be used successfully, provided that sliding is taken
into account at the modelling level and estimated on-
line via a dedicated observer. For simplicity, only the
path following problem is addressed, but the tech-
niques here presented can be extended to other control
problems.
x
i
O
j
y
L
vR
vF
βR
βF
φ
θ
PR
PF
Fig. 49.13 Car-like vehicle in the presence of sliding
49.5.1 Extended Control Models
in the Presence of Sliding
Extended Kinematic Model
Consider the two-wheels schematic representation of
a car-like vehicle on Fig. 49.13. The angles ˇR and ˇF
are introduced in order to represent the sliding of the
rear and front wheels respectively. More precisely, de-
noting the centres of the rear and front wheels as PR
and PF respectively, ˇR is the angle between the vec-
tor PRPF and the velocity vector v R of PR, whereas ˇF
represents the angle between the steering direction and
the velocity vector v F of PF. The kinematic modeling of
Sect. 49.2 is easily extended to the present case [49.14],
resulting in the following model
8
ˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆ:
Px D u1 cos. C ˇR/
Py D u1 sin. C ˇR/
P D u1 cos.ˇR/tan. C ˇF/  tan.ˇR/
L
P D u2
;
(49.53)
with u1 the (signed) intensity of the vector v R. Note that
these equations reduce to (49.5) when ˇF D ˇR D 0.
Kinematic Model in a Frénet Frame
In the context of path following, a kinematic model with
reference to a Frénet frame moving along the desired
path is obtained via a straightforward adaptation of the
pure-rolling case discussed in Sect. 49.2.3. Deﬁning the
distance between the vehicle and the desired path C
as the distance d between the point PR and this path
(Fig. 49.5), the equations of this model are readily de-

Part E | 49.5
1256
Part E
Moving in the Environment
duced from (49.53) (compare with (49.13))
8
ˆˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆˆ:
Ps D u1
cos.e C ˇR/
1  d c.s/
Pd D u1 sin.e C ˇR/
Pe D u1 Œcos.ˇR/1  2
P D u2
;
(49.54)
with
e
the
angle
between
the
vehicle’s
body
axis PRPF
and the tangent to the desired path
evaluated at the projection of the point PR
on
this
path,
c.s/
the
path
curvature
at
the
pro-
jected point, 1 D .tan. C ˇF/  tan.ˇR//=L and 2 D
.c.s/ cos.e C ˇR//=.1  d c.s//.
Dynamic Model of Sliding Angles
The kinematic model (49.53) can be used for control
design once it is completed by a model of the dynamics
of the sliding angles ˇR and ˇF. Such a model can be
obtained from Newton’s law and a model of tire/ground
interactions. A few notation (Fig. 49.14 for details) and
assumptions are introduced for this purpose:

The vehicle’s mass is denoted as m and its moment
of inertia with respect to the (body-ﬁxed) vertical
axis is denoted as Iz. The vehicle’s center of mass G
is located on the segment joining PR to PF, at a dis-
tance LR from PR and LF from PF.

The longitudinal dynamics is neglected. More pre-
cisely, it is assumed that the traction force applied
to the vehicle, in relation to the monitoring of lon-
gitudinal tire/ground contact forces, is controlled
independently of the vehicle’s lateral dynamics and
that, as a result of this control, the longitudinal ve-
locity of the vehicle expressed in body frame, i. e.,
u1 cos ˇr, varies slowly so that its time-derivative
x
i
O
j
y
L
G
βR
LR
LF
FR
FF
βF
φ
θ
PR
PF
Fig. 49.14 Lateral forces applying to a car-like vehicle
can be neglected in the calculus of the lateral
dynamics.

Lateral tire/ground contact forces, that are orthogo-
nal to the wheels planes, are denoted as FR and FF
respectively.

The lateral component of the gravity force is de-
noted as FG. This force applies at G and its mag-
nitude is mg sin ˛ with ˛ denoting the terrain slope
angle in the lateral direction.
Application of Newton’s law yields [49.15], after
projection in the direction orthogonal to v R,
PˇR D
1
mu1
h
.FR C mg sin ˛/ cos ˇR
CFF cos.ˇR  /  mLR R cos ˇR
i
 P
with FF and FR the (signed) intensity of the lateral
forces FF and FR and
R D 1
Iz
.LFFF cos   LRFR/
(49.55)
From (49.53)
tan. C ˇF/ D tan ˇR 
L P
u1 cos ˇR
:
Differentiating this equation with respect to time and
using the assumption that u1 cos ˇR is constant yields
PˇF D cos2. C ˇF/
 
PˇR
cos2 ˇR
 L
R
u1 cos ˇR
!
 P :
The dynamics of the sliding angles is thus given by
8
ˆˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆˆ:
PˇR D
1
mu1
h
.FR C mg sin ˛/ cos ˇR
CFF cos.ˇR  /  mLR R cos ˇR
i
 P ;
PˇF D cos2. C ˇF/
 
PˇR
cos2 ˇR
 L
R
u1 cos ˇR
!
 P :
(49.56)
Replacing the vehicle’s angular acceleration R by its
expression (49.55), and P; P by (49.53), one obtains ex-
pressions of the sliding angles dynamics in terms of ,
˛, u1, u2, FR, and FF.
Tire/Ground Interaction Models
for Lateral Forces Computation
In view of (49.56), knowledge of the lateral ground
forces FR and FF is needed to calculate the evolu-
tion of the sliding angles and the vehicle’s motion. In

Modeling and Control of Wheeled Mobile Robots
49.5 Path Following in the Caseof Nonideal Wheel-Ground Contact
1257
Part E | 49.5
this respect, a model of tire/ground interactions is use-
ful, in particular for simulation purposes. The Coulomb
model, although very popular, does not allow one to
describe the complexity of tire/ground interactions in
a large operating domain. For this reason, other con-
tact models have been proposed in the literature. For
instance, the Dahl [49.16] and LuGre [49.17] models,
eventhough they are not dedicated to tire/ground con-
tact description, give a relationship between contact
force and sliding velocity with a small number of pa-
rameters. They are used to describe a vehicle’s dynam-
ics in [49.18]. Of particular interest is the celebrated
tire/ground contact model of Pacejka et al. [49.19], of
which several versions depending on the application
have been derived. A convenient model for mobile robot
simulation and analysis is the so-called magic formula
proposed in [49.20]. Alike other contact models, this
formula expresses the lateral ground force in term of
the sliding angle. It is deﬁned as follows,
8
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ:
F D D sin

c arctan.BŒ1  E/ˇ C E
B arctan.Bˇ/

D D a1.F
z /2 C a2F
z
E D a6.F
z /2 C a7F
z C a8
B D a3 sin.a4 arctan.a5F
z //
cD
;
(49.57)
with  2 fF; Rg used to denote either the front (F) or
Rear (R) wheel, and F
z the corresponding tire load
here deﬁned as L
L m. The parameters ai, i 2 Œ1; : : : ; 8
and c are representative of the grip conditions and tire
properties (pressure, contact patches). Table 49.1 shows
typical values of these parameters for a vehicle moving
on wet grass at a velocity of 2 m=s (Sect. 49.5.4 fur-
ther on). Fig. 49.15 depicts the corresponding relation
between the front lateral force FF and the front sliding
angle ˇF. This relationship is symmetric with respect
Table 49.1 Parameters used for dynamic modelling
Coefﬁcients
Values
a1
25
a2
500
a3
1000
a4
2
a5
1
a6
0
a7
0:35
a8
5
c
1.6
L D LF C LR
1:3 D 0:6 C 0:7
m
380
Iz
300
to the origin, is quasi linear for small angles, has an ex-
tremum near ˙10ı, and involves a saturation for large
sliding angles. The linear part of the function is often
sufﬁcient to account for slow to moderately fast motion
in the case of good grip conditions, whereas its non-
linear part becomes important when the vehicle moves
on natural ground or at high speed with possibly large
sliding angles.
Tire/ground contact models are necessary to de-
scribe the sliding angles’ dynamics with some accuracy
and are useful to evaluate the performance of control
laws in simulation. The main drawback of these mod-
els is the large number of involved parameters and
the difﬁculty to evaluate appropriate values in prac-
tical applications, since such values heavily depend
on imprecisely known ground characteristics which,
furthermore, may rapidly change along the vehicle’s
trajectory. For these reasons, previously evoked mod-
els may not be best suited for control design. In many
cases, rather than trying to exploit a complete model in-
volving unreliable and rapidly varying parameters it is
preferable to use cruder models associated with an on-
line estimation procedure. The control design proposed
further on follows this latter avenue.
49.5.2 On-Line Estimation of Sliding Angles
As already mentionned, some knowledge of the sliding
angles ˇF and ˇR is useful to precisely control the lat-
eral distance d between the vehicle and the desired path.
Since direct measurement of these angles via the use of
dedicated sensors is quite difﬁcult in practice, an alter-
native consists in designing an observer that produces
on-line estimates of the sliding angles based on the
measurement of the relative vehicle/path position and
orientation. The underlying implicit (crude) model used
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
Lateral force (N)
Sideslip angle (°)
1000
500
0
–500
–1000
Fig. 49.15 Relationship between lateral force and sliding angle ob-
tained using Pacejka Model

Part E | 49.5
1258
Part E
Moving in the Environment
for the design of this observer is that the sliding angles
do not change rapidly, as can be anticipated in common
situations like driving along a road with a slowly vary-
ing curvature or following a straight line across a ﬁeld
with a constant slope. A solution of this type, exploiting
also the vehicle’s kinematic model (49.54), is proposed
next.
Deﬁne  D .d;e/T, ˇ D .ˇF; ˇR/T, and consider
the function f deﬁned by
f .;ˇ; ; c.s// D
0
@
sin.2 C ˇ2/
cos.ˇ2/tan. C ˇ1/  tan.ˇ2/
L
 c.s/ cos.2 C ˇ2/
1  1c.s/
1
A :
From (49.54),
P D u1f .;ˇ; ;c.s// :
(49.58)
Deﬁne an observer of the form
(PO D u1f .; Oˇ; ; c.s// C ˛ ;
POˇ D ˛ˇ :
(49.59)
The estimation error .Q; Qˇ/T D .  O; ˇ  Oˇ/T satisﬁes
(PQ D u1Œf .;ˇ; ; c.s//  f .; Oˇ; ;c.s//  ˛ ;
PQˇ D ˛ˇ C Pˇ :
(49.60)
The objective is to deﬁne the terms ˛ and ˛ˇ so as
to ensure the asymptotic stability of the origin of the
above estimation error system when ˇ is constant, i. e.,
when Pˇ D 0, and thus the asymptotic convergence of
the estimate Oˇ to ˇ in this case. Furthermore, if ˇ varies
slowly the estimation error should remain small.
Proposition 49.6
Let
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
˛ D ju1jK1 Q
˛ˇ D K2u1

 @f
@ˇ .; Oˇ; ; c.s//
T
Q
(49.61)
with K1 a 22 positive deﬁnite matrix and K2 a positive
scalar. Assume that ˇ is constant and that
i)
The variables u1; ; ; c.s/;1  dc.s/ are bounded,
differentiable,
and
their
time-derivatives
are
bounded.
ii) There exists  > 0 such that
j C ˇ1j; jˇ2j; j2 C ˇ2j 	 =2   :
iii) The function u1 is persistently exciting in the sense
that there exist two constants T; ı > 0 such that
8t;
tCT
Z
t
ju1.s/j ds  ı :
Then, the origin of system (49.60) is locally expo-
nentially stable.
Sketch of Proof : From (49.61), the estimation error dy-
namics (49.60) can be written as
8
ˆˆ<
ˆˆ:
PQ D u1

 @f
@ˇ .; Oˇ; ; c.s// Qˇ C O2. Qˇ/

 ju1jK1 Q ;
PQˇ D K2u1

 @f
@ˇ .; Oˇ; ; c.s//
T
Q ;
(49.62)
where O2. Qˇ/ denotes a second-order term in
Qˇ in
a neighborhood of Qˇ D 0. Note that this term also de-
pends on ;, c.s/ and 1dc.s/. The linearized system
associated with system (49.62) is thus given by
8
ˆˆ<
ˆˆ:
PQ D u1
@f
@ˇ .; ˇ; ; c.s// Qˇ  ju1jK1 Q ;
PQˇ D K2u1

 @f
@ˇ .;ˇ; ;c.s//
T
Q :
(49.63)
Consider the candidate Lyapunov function V deﬁned by
V.Q; Qˇ/ D K2jQj2 C j Qˇj2 :
One veriﬁes that the time-derivative of V along the so-
lutions of system (49.63) satisﬁes
PV D ju1jK2 QTK1 Q :
Since K1 is positive deﬁnite and K2 is positive, V
is decreasing. This ensures the stability of the origin
.Q; Qˇ/ D 0. Using assumptions i) and ii) and the fact
that the matrix @f =@ˇ.;ˇ; ; c.s// is invertible one can
show, that the origin of system (49.63) is asymptotically
stable. Assumption iii) implies that the origin is in fact
exponentially stable. Using assumptions i) and ii) again,
one shows that the origin of the original (nonlinear) sys-
tem (49.62) is locally exponentially stable.

Proposition 49.6 calls for a few remarks. Although
convergence of the estimation errors is proved in the
case of constant sliding angles only, the observer can
still provide a good estimate of ˇ if Pˇ is small. For
fast variations of ˇ, estimation based on a dynamic
model and IMU measurements (inertial measurement

Modeling and Control of Wheeled Mobile Robots
49.5 Path Following in the Caseof Nonideal Wheel-Ground Contact
1259
Part E | 49.5
unit) will usually provide better results [49.21]. Satis-
faction of assumptions i) and ii) is strongly related to the
choice of the controller used to determine the steering
wheel angular velocity u2 in (49.54). In this respect, let
us recall that the separation principle, which allows one
to design independently a feedback controller and an
observer for a linear system with a guarantee of stabil-
ity of the coupled system, is not systematically satisﬁed
for nonlinear systems.
49.5.3 Feedback Laws for Path Following
The kinematic model (49.54) can be transformed into
a chained system. This is a direct extension of the
results of Sect. 49.4.1. More precisely, the change of co-
ordinates and control variables .s; d; e; ; u1; u2/ 7!
.z1; z2; z3; z4; v1; v2/ deﬁned by
.z1; z2; z3; z4/ D

s; d; Œ1  dc.s/ tan.e C ˇR/;
 c.s/Œ1  dc.s/

1 C 2tan2.e C ˇR/
	
 d @c
@s tan.e C ˇR/
CŒ1  dc.s/2 tan. CˇF/  tan ˇR
L
1Ctan2.e CˇR/
cos.e CˇR/

;
.v1; v2/ D .Pz1; Pz4/
transforms the model (49.54) of a car-like vehicle into
a 4-D chained system.
Based on this transformation, Sect. 49.4 provides
a feedback control solution v2 to the path following
problem. Since the relation between v2 and the origi-
nal control variable u2 involves the sliding angles ˇF
and ˇR, u2 can be computed from the outputs OˇF; OˇR of
the observer proposed in the previous section.
In practice, preexisting low-level control loops may
use the steering angle  itself, rather than its time-
derivative, as a control input. In this case the expression
for the desired steering angle can be obtained by iden-
tifying the expression of Pe in (49.54) with the one in
(49.13), where u2 is the feedback law deduced from the
(chained-form) control law (49.27) of a unicycle-like
robot. Further assuming that c.s/ is constant, one ob-
tains the following expression
ref D arctan
"
tan. OˇR/
C
L
cos. OˇR/
 
c.s/ cos Q2

C A cos3 Q2
2
!#
 OˇF
(49.64)
with
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
Q2 D e C OˇR
 D 1  c.s/ d
A D k2d  k3  sign.u1/ tan Q2 C c.s/ tan2 Q2 :
(49.65)
49.5.4 Path Following Illustrations
in Low Grip Conditions
Simulation Results
The simulation results presented next have been ob-
tained by using the kinematic and dynamic models
(49.54) and (49.56) respectively, with the set of pa-
rameters for the tire/ground interaction speciﬁed in
Table 49.1. The reference path, depicted on Fig. 49.16
in black plain line, is composed of two straight lines
connected by a circular path with a radius of 13 m.
The simulated grip conditions generate sliding along
the circular part of the path. The transitions between
this circular part and the straight lines yield transient
errors due to the curvature discontinuity. The vehicle’s
velocity is 3 m=s.
The steering velocity u2 is computed according to
the simple proportional feedback law
u2 D k.  ref/
with ref deﬁned by (49.64) and the control gain k D
12 (settling time of 250 ms). The other control gains
in (49.64) are deﬁned as .k2; k3/ D .0:09;0:6/, yield-
ing a settling distance of 12m without overshoot. First,
–30
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
Y coordinates (m)
X coordinates (m)
25
20
15
10
5
0
–5
Fig. 49.16 Reference path and trajectories in Cartesian
plane

Part E | 49.5
1260
Part E
Moving in the Environment
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Tracking error (m)
Time (s)
1
0.5
0
–0.5
Fig. 49.17 Lateral tracking error (d)
the control law is applied with . OˇF; OˇR/ D .0; 0/ (i. e.,
without considering sliding). The results are shown
in blue on Figs. 49.16 and 49.17. Then, the control
law is applied with OˇF and OˇR obtained via the ob-
server (49.59)–(49.61), using for K1 a diagonal matrix
–5
0
10
5
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
40
20
0
0
10
20
30
40
Tracking error (m)
Lateral inclination (°)
a)
c)
b)
Y coordinates (m)
X coordinates (m)
Curvilienar abscissa (m)
1.25
1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
20
15
10
5
0
Fig.49.19a–c Path following with sliding effects for an autonomous off-road robot: (a) Reference trajectory in 3-D
frame (b) Robot during autonomous tracking (c) Tracking errors (dashed: without sliding compensation, dash-dotted:
with sliding estimation and compensation)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Sideslip angles
Time (s)
6
4
2
0
–2
Fig. 49.18 Comparison of estimated and actual sliding
angles
with elements equal to 10 and 20 and the gain K2 D 10.
The results are shown in red. Fig. 49.17 clearly illus-
trates the reduction of lateral error resulting from the
sliding angles estimation.

Modeling and Control of Wheeled Mobile Robots
49.6 Complementary Issues and Bibliographical Guide
1261
Part E | 49.6
Performance of the proposed observer is illustrated
on Fig. 49.18 with the true sliding angles (i. e., obtained
from the simulated dynamics) in plain lines and the es-
timated angles in dashed lines. One can verify that the
sliding angles are correctly estimated. In practice, using
an observer allows one to also compensate for vari-
ous unmodeled dynamics resulting, for instance, from
imprecise knowledge of the vehicle’s geometry (the dis-
tance L, for example) or from an unknown offset on the
steering angle.
Experimental Results
Full scale experiments on natural terrain with the car-
like vehicle of Fig. 49.19 are reported next and in
VIDEO 435 . This mobile robot is equipped with a real
time kinematics global positioning system (RTK-GPS)
producing a ˙2 cm accurate absolute position mea-
surement. The GPS antenna is located straight above
the control point PR. The reference path, consisting of
a straight line perpendicular to the slope direction, has
been previously recorded during a manual driving. The
top left of Fig. 49.19 shows the recorded coordinates in
x-y plane, and the z axis represents the absolute value
of the lateral slope angle ˛. This angle progressively
reaches the value of 10ı at the curvilinear abscissa 27 m,
and it subsequently rapidly increases up to about 18ı.
As for the simulation results reported previ-
ously, the feedback control (49.64) was ﬁrst applied
with
OˇF D OˇR D 0
(i. e., without taking sliding into account), then with
OˇF; OˇR given by the observer. In both cases, control
gains equal to these used in simulation have been used,
i. e., .k2; k3/ D .0:09; 0:6/. The vehicle’s longitudinal
velocity during experiments was 3 m=s. The bottom
part of Fig. 49.19 shows the tracking error along the
path with the blue dashed line corresponding to using
.ˇF; ˇR/ D .0;0/ in the control law, and the red dashed-
dotted line corresponding to the use of sliding angles
estimated values.
These experimental results conﬁrm the simulation
ones reported before. The improvement in tracking
accuracy resulting from the use of estimated sliding
angles in the control law is clearly illustrated: the lat-
eral error remains small (smaller than 0:25 m) all the
time and it becomes negligible as soon as the ter-
rain’s slope is alsmost constant (beyond the curvilinear
abcissa 30 m). This is consistent with the observer’s sta-
bility and convergence analysis when the sliding angles
are assumed constant.
49.6 Complementary Issues and Bibliographical Guide
49.6.1 General Trailer Systems
Most of the control design approaches here presented
and illustrated for unicycle-like and car-like vehicles
can be extended to the case of trains of vehicles com-
posed of trailers hitched to a leading vehicle. In par-
ticular, the methods of Sect. 49.4 which are speciﬁc to
nonholonomic systems can be extended to this case,
provided that the kinematic equations of motion of
the system can be transformed (at least semiglobally)
into a chained system [49.6]. This basically requires
that the hitch point of each trailer is located on the
rear-wheel axle of the preceding vehicle [49.22]. For
instance, the transformation to the chained form is not
possible when there are two (or more) successive trail-
ers with off-axle hitch points [49.23]. So-called general
trailer systems (with off-axle hitch points) raise difﬁ-
cult control design issues, and the literature devoted
to them is sparse. For this reason, and also because
these systems are not met in applications as frequently
as simpler vehicles, control methods speciﬁcally devel-
oped for them are not reported here. Nonetheless, a few
related references are given next. The path-following
problem has been considered in, e.g., [49.24] for a sys-
tem with two trailers and, more generally, in [49.25,
Chap. 3] and [49.26] for an arbitrary number of trailers.
To our knowledge, the problem of stabilizing nonsta-
tionary reference trajectories has not been addressed
for these systems (except in the single trailer case for
which the system can be transformed into the chained
form [49.23, 27]). In fact, the explicit calculation of
feasible trajectories joining a given conﬁguration to an-
other is already a very difﬁcult problem, even in the
absence of obstacles. As for the asymptotic stabilization
of ﬁxed conﬁgurations, the problem can (in theory) be
solved by using existing general methods developed for
the larger class of controllable driftless systems. How-
ever, the calculations associated with these methods
quickly become intractable when the number of trail-
ers increases. More speciﬁc and simpler ones have been
proposed in [49.28], for an arbitrary number of trail-
ers and the asymptotic stabilization of a reduced set of
conﬁgurations, and in [49.29], in the case of two trailers
and arbitrary ﬁxed conﬁgurations.

Part E | 49.6
1262
Part E
Moving in the Environment
49.6.2 Sensor-Based Motion Control
The control laws described in the present chapter,
and their calculation, involve the online measurement,
eventually complemented by the online estimation, of
variables depending on the position of the vehicles in
their environment. Measures can be acquired via the use
of various sensors (odometry, GPS, proximetry, vision,
etc.). Usually, various treatments are applied to raw
sensory data prior to computing the control variables
themselves. For instance, noise ﬁltering and state esti-
mation are such basic operations, well documented in
the automatic-control literature. Among all sensors, vi-
sion sensors play a particularly important role in robotic
applications, due to the richness and versatility of the
information which they provide. The combination of vi-
sual data with feedback control is often referred to as
visual servoing. In Chap. 34, a certain number of visual
servoing tasks are addressed, mostly in the context of
manipulation and/or under the assumption that realiz-
ing the robot task is equivalent to controlling the pose of
a camera mounted on an omnidirectional manipulator.
In a certain number of cases, the concepts and methods
described in this chapter can be adapted, without much
effort, to the context of mobile robots. These cases ba-
sically correspond to the control methods adapted from
robotic manipulation which are described in Sect. 49.3
of the present chapter. For instance, automatic driving
via the control of the visually estimated lateral distance
between a robotic vehicle and the side of a road, or
car-platooning by controlling the frontal and lateral dis-
tances to a leading vehicle, can be addressed with the
control techniques reported in Chap. 34. The reason is
that it is possible to simply recast these techniques in
the form of the control laws proposed in Sect. 49.3.
However, there are also vision-based applications for
nonholonomic mobile robots which cannot be solved
by applying classical visual-servoing techniques. This
is the case, for instance, of the task objectives addressed
in Sect. 49.4, an example of which is the stabilization
of the complete posture (i. e., position and orientation)
of a nonholonomic vehicle at a desired one. Vision-
based control problems of this type have been addressed
in [49.11, 30].
49.6.3 Sliding Effects
and Other Dynamical Issues
Results of Sect. 49.5 can be viewed as a ﬁrst step to
addressing dynamical issues associated with sliding ef-
fects. The kinematic control models (49.53)–(49.54)
can be extended to other wheeled vehicles ([49.31]
for the mobile robot classiﬁcation proposed by [49.32]
and [49.33] for a trailer system). On-line estimation of
sliding angles via an observer can also be achieved by
exploiting the dynamics of these angles and making use
of complementary measurements (from an IMU for ex-
ample). A result in this direction is proposed in [49.21]
where a model of sliding angle dynamics is used at the
observer level, thus yielding a much more reactive esti-
mation of these angles. Note that the kinematic control
law of Sect. 49.5 may still be used in this case. When
prior knowledge of the reference path is available, a pre-
dictive control strategy may also be adopted to reduce
transient error effects associated with slow steering an-
gle dynamics.
Various risks related to the vehicle’s integrity when
operating at high speed, like e.g., swing around or roll-
over, were not addressed in this chapter. In [49.34]
these issues are treated at the path planning level.
Knowledge of the robot’s dynamics can also be used
to relate control inputs to a metrics measuring the im-
portance of such risks in order to introduce constraints
at the control level [49.35]. A multimodels approach
(kinematic and dynamic) can be used to translate sta-
bility aspects into control constraints, for instance by
deﬁning a maximal admissible longitudinal velocity.
A predictive control strategy may also help to limit
the risk of roll-over, of steering saturation, or of swing
around [49.36]. Finally, it is possible to take advantage
of additional actuators, as in the case of four indepen-
dent actuated wheels [49.37], or by using inclination
actuators [49.38].
49.6.4 Bibliographical Guide
A few former surveys on the control of WMRs have
been published. Let us mention [49.39–41], which con-
tain chapters on the modeling and control issues. A de-
tailed classiﬁcation of kinematic and dynamic models
for the different types of WMR structures, on which
Chap. 24 is based, is provided in [49.32]. The use of
the chain form to represent WMR equations has been
proposed in [49.42], then generalized in [49.22].
Path following may have been the ﬁrst mobile robot
control problem addressed by researchers in robotics.
Among the pioneering works, let us cite [49.43, 44].
Several results presented in the present chapter are
based on [49.6, 45].
The problem of tracking admissible trajectories for
unicycle-type and car-like vehicles is treated in the
books [49.39–41], and also in numerous conference
and journal papers. Several authors have addressed this
problem by applying dynamic feedback linearization
techniques. In this respect, one can consult [49.46–48],
and [49.39, Chap. 8], for instance.
Numerous papers on the asymptotic stabilization
of ﬁxed conﬁgurations have been published. Among

Modeling and Control of Wheeled Mobile Robots
References
1263
Part E | 49
them, [49.49] provides an early overview of feed-
back control techniques elaborated for this purpose,
and also a list of references. The ﬁrst result present-
ing a time-varying feedback solution to this problem,
in the case of a unicycle-type vehicle, is in [49.4].
The conference paper [49.50] provides a survey on
time-varying feedback stabilization, in the more gen-
eral context of nonlinear control systems. More spe-
ciﬁc results, like Propositions 49.2 and 49.4, are given
in [49.6, 7]. Other early results on the design of
smooth time-varying feedbacks can be found in [49.51,
52], for example. Concerning continuous (but not
Lipschitz-continuous) time-varying feedbacks yield-
ing exponential convergence, one can consult [49.53].
Designs of hybrid discrete/continuous ﬁxed-point sta-
bilizers can be found in [49.54–57], for instance.
Discontinuous control design techniques are not ad-
dressed in the present chapter, but the interested
reader will ﬁnd examples of such feedbacks in [49.58,
59].
To our knowledge, the control approach presented
in Sect. 49.4.6, which is based on the concept of
transverse functions [49.9, 10], is the ﬁrst attempt to
address the problem of tracking arbitrary trajectories
(i. e., not necessarily feasible for the controlled robot).
Implementation issues and experimental results for this
approach can be found in [49.11, 12]. An overview of
trajectory tracking problems for wheeled mobile robots,
with a detailed case study of car-like systems, is pre-
sented in [49.13].
Video-References
VIDEO 181
Tracking of an admissible trajectory with a car-like vehicle
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/49/videodetails/181
VIDEO 182
Tracking of arbitrary trajectories with a truck-like vehicle
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/49/videodetails/182
VIDEO 243
Tracking of an omnidirectional frame with a unicycle-like robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/49/videodetails/243
VIDEO 435
Mobile robot control in off-road condition and under high dynamics
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/49/videodetails/435
References
49.1
M. Buehler, K. Iagnemma, S. Sanjiv (Eds.): The
2005 DARPA Grand Challenge: The Great Robot
Race, Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics, Vol. 36
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2007)
49.2
P. Morin, C. Samson: Motion control of wheeled
mobile robots. In: Springer Handbook of Robotics,
ed. by B. Siciliano, O. Khatib (Springer, Berlin, Hei-
delberg 2008) pp. 799–826
49.3
R.W. Brockett: Asymptotic stability and feed-
back stabilization. In: Differential Geometric Con-
trol Theory, ed. by R.W. Brockett, R.S. Millman,
H.J. Sussmann (Birkhäuser, Boston 1983)
49.4
C. Samson: Velocity and torque feedback control of
a nonholonomic cart, Lect. Notes Control Inform.
Sci. 162, 125–151 (1991)
49.5
J.-M. Coron: Global asymptotic stabilization for
controllable systems without drift, Math. Control
Signals Syst. 5, 295–312 (1992)
49.6
C. Samson: Control of chained systems. Applica-
tion to path following and time-varying point-
stabilization, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 40, 64–77
(1995)
49.7
P. Morin, C. Samson: Control of non-linear chained
systems. From the Routh–Hurwitz stability criterion
to time-varying exponential stabilizers, IEEE Trans.
Autom. Control 45, 141–146 (2000)
49.8
D.A. Lizárraga: Obstructions to the existence of uni-
versal stabilizers for smooth control systems, Math.
Control Signals Syst. 16, 255–277 (2004)
49.9
P. Morin, C. Samson: Practical stabilization of drift-
less systems on Lie groups: the transverse function
approach, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 48, 1496–1508
(2003)
49.10
P. Morin, C. Samson: A characterization of the Lie
algebra rank condition by transverse periodic func-
tions, SIAM J. Control Optim. 40(4), 1227–1249 (2001)
49.11
G. Artus, P. Morin, C. Samson: Control of a maneu-
vering mobile robot by transverse functions, Symp.
Adv. Robot Kinemat. (ARK) (2004) pp. 459–468
49.12
G. Artus, P. Morin, C. Samson: Tracking of an
omnidirectional target with a nonholonomic mo-
bile robot, IEEE Conf. Adv. Robotics (ICAR) (2003)
pp. 1468–1473
49.13
P. Morin, C. Samson: Trajectory tracking for non-
holonomic vehicles: overview and case study, Proc.
4th Int. Workshop Robot Motion Control (RoMoCo),
ed. by K. Kozlowski (2004) pp. 139–153
49.14
R. Lenain, B. Thuilot, C. Cariou, P. Martinet: High
accuracy path tracking for vehicles in presence
of sliding. application to farm vehicle automatic
guidance for agricultural tasks, Auton. Robots 21(1),
79–97 (2006)

Part E | 49
1264
Part E
Moving in the Environment
49.15
T.D. Gillespie: Fundamentals of Vehicle Dynamics
(SAE, Warrendale 1992)
49.16
P.R. Dahl: Solid friction damping of mechanical vi-
brations, AIAA J. 14(12), 1675–1682 (1976)
49.17
C.
Canudas
de
Wit,
H.
Olsson,
K.J.
Astrom,
P. Lischinsky: A new model for control of systems
with friction, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 40(3), 419–
425 (1995)
49.18
C. Canudas de Wit, P. Tsiotras: Dynamic tire friction
models for vehicle traction control, Proc. 38th IEEE
Conf. Decis. Control, Vol. 4 (1999)
49.19
E. Bakker, L. Nyborg, H.B. Pacejka: Tyre modeling
for use in vehicle dynamics studies, International
Conference of the Society of Automotive Engineers
(SAE) (1987) pp. 2190–2204
49.20
H.B.
Pacejka:
Tyre
and
Vehicle
Dynamics
(Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford 2002)
49.21
R. Lenain, B. Thuilot, C. Cariou, P. Martinet: Mixed
kinematic and dynamic sideslip angle observer for
accurate control of fast off-road mobile robots, J.
Field Robotics 27(2), 181–196 (2010)
49.22
O.J. Sørdalen: Conversion of the kinematics of a car
with n trailers into a chained form, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom. (ICRA) (1993) pp. 382–387
49.23
P. Rouchon, M. Fliess, J. Lévine, P. Martin: Flatness,
motion planning and trailer systems, IEEE Int. Conf.
Decis. Control (1993) pp. 2700–2705
49.24
P. Bolzern, R.M. DeSantis, A. Locatelli, D. Mas-
ciocchi: Path-tracking for articulated vehicles with
off-axle hitching, IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol.
6, 515–523 (1998)
49.25
D.A. Lizárraga: Contributions à la Stabilisation des
Systèmes Non-Linéaires et à la Commande de
Véhicules Sur Roues, Ph.D. Thesis (INRIA-INPG, Uni-
versity of Grenoble, Grenoble 2000)
49.26
C. Altafini: Path following with reduced off-
tracking
for
multibody
wheeled
vehicles,
IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol. 11, 598–605
(2003)
49.27
F. Lamiraux, J.-P. Laumond: A practical approach
to feedback control for a mobile robot with trailer,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1998)
pp. 3291–3296
49.28
D.A. Lizárraga, P. Morin, C. Samson: Chained form
approximation of a driftless system. Application
to the exponential stabilization of the general
N-trailer system, Int. J. Control 74, 1612–1629
(2001)
49.29
M. Venditelli, G. Oriolo: Stabilization of the general
two-trailer system, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2000) pp. 1817–1823
49.30
M. Maya-Mendez, P. Morin, C. Samson: Control of
a nonholonomic mobile robot via sensor-based
target tracking and pose estimation, IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2006) pp. 5612–
5618
49.31
D. Wang, C.B. Low: An analysis of wheeled mobile
robots in the presence of skidding and slipping:
Control design perspective, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2007) pp. 2379–2384
49.32
G. Campion, G. Bastin, B. d’Andréa-Novel: Struc-
tural properties and classification of kynematic and
dynamic models of wheeled mobile robots, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 12, 47–62 (1996)
49.33
C. Cariou, R. Lenain, M. Berducat, B. Thuilot: Au-
tonomous maneuvers of a farm vehicle with a
trailed implement in headland, Proc. 7th Int. Conf.
Inform. Control Autom. Robotics (ICINCO), Vol. 2
(2010) pp. 109–114
49.34
K. Iagnemma, S. Shimoda, Z. Shiller: Near-optimal
navigation of high speed mobile robots on uneven
terrain, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2008) pp. 4098–4103
49.35
N. Bouton, R. Lenain, B. Thuilot, P. Martinet: A
new device dedicated to autonomous mobile robot
dynamic stability: application to an off-road mo-
bile robot, Proc. IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (2010) pp. 3813–
3818
49.36
O. Hach, R. Lenain, B. Thuilot, P. Martinet: Avoid-
ing steering actuator saturation in off-road mobile
robot path tracking via predictive velocity control,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011)
pp. 5523–5528
49.37
E. Lucet, C. Grand, D. Salle, P. Bidaud: Stabilization
algorithm for a high speed car-like robot achiev-
ing steering maneuver, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2008) pp. 2540–2545
49.38
M. Krid, F. Ben-Amar: Design and control of an
active anti-roll system for a fast rover, IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011) pp. 274–
279
49.39
C. Canudas de Wit, B. Siciliano, G. Bastin (Eds.):
Theory of Robot Control (Springer, Berlin, Heidel-
berg 1996)
49.40
J.-P. Laumond (Ed.): Robot Motion Planning and
Control, Lecture Notes in Control and Informa-
tion Sciences, Vol. 229 (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
1998)
49.41
Y.F. Zheng (Ed.): Recent Trends in Mobile Robots,
World Scientific Series in Robotics and Automated
Systems, Vol. 11 (World Scientific, Singapore 1993)
49.42
R.M. Murray, S.S. Sastry: Steering nonholonomic
systems in chained form, IEEE Int. Conf. Decis. Con-
trol (1991) pp. 1121–1126
49.43
E.D. Dickmanns, A. Zapp: Autonomous high speed
road vehicle guidance by computer vision, Proc.
IFAC 10th World Congr. Autom. Control. (1987)
49.44
W.L. Nelson, I.J. Cox: Local path control for an
autonomous vehicle, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom. (ICRA) (1998) pp. 1504–1510
49.45
C. Samson: Path following and time-varying feed-
back stabilization of a wheeled mobile robot,
Proc. Int. Conf. Autom. Robotics Comput. Vis.
(1992)
49.46
B. d’Andréa-Novel, G. Campion, G. Bastin: Control
of nonholonomic wheeled mobile robots by state
feedback linearization, Int. J. Robotics Res. 14, 543–
559 (1995)
49.47
A. De Luca, M.D. Di Benedetto: Control of nonholo-
nomic systems via dynamic compensation, Kyber-
netica 29, 593–608 (1993)
49.48
M. Fliess, J. Lévine, P. Martin, P. Rouchon: Flatness
and defect of non-linear systems: Introductory

Modeling and Control of Wheeled Mobile Robots
References
1265
Part E | 49
theory and examples, Int. J. Control 61, 1327–1361
(1995)
49.49
I. Kolmanovsky, N.H. McClamroch: Developments in
nonholonomic control problems, IEEE Control Syst.
15, 20–36 (1995)
49.50
P. Morin, J.-B. Pomet, C. Samson: Developments
in time-varying feedback stabilization of nonlinear
systems, IFAC Nonlinear Control Syst. Design Symp.
(1998) pp. 587–594
49.51
J.-B. Pomet: Explicit design of time-varying sta-
bilizing control laws for a class of controllable
systems without drift, Syst. Control Lett. 18, 467–
473 (1992)
49.52
A.R. Teel, R.M. Murray, G. Walsh: Nonholonomic
control systems: from steering to stabilization with
sinusoids, Int. J. Control 62, 849–870 (1995)
49.53
R.T. M’Closkey, R.M. Murray: Exponential stabiliza-
tion of driftless nonlinear control systems using
homogeneous feedback, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control
42, 614–6128 (1997)
49.54
M.K. Bennani, P. Rouchon: Robust stabilization of
flat and chained systems, Eur. Control Conf. (1995)
pp. 2642–2646
49.55
P. Lucibello, G. Oriolo: Stabilization via iterative
state feedback with application to chained-form
systems, IEEE Conf. Decis. Control (1996) pp. 2614–
2619
49.56
O.J. Sørdalen, O. Egeland: Exponential stabilization
of nonholonomic chained systems, IEEE Trans. Au-
tom. Control 40, 35–49 (1995)
49.57
P. Morin, C. Samson: Exponential stabilization of
nonlinear driftless systems with robustness to un-
modeled dynamics, ESAIM Control Optim. Calc. Var.
4, 1–36 (1999)
49.58
A. Astolfi: Discontinuous control of nonholonomic
systems, Syst. Control Lett. 27, 37–45 (1996)
49.59
C. Canudas de Wit, O.J. Sørdalen: Exponential sta-
bilization of mobile robots with nonholonomic
constraints, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 37(11), 1791–
1797 (1992)

Multimedia Contents Modeling an
1267
Part E | 50
50. Modeling and Control of Robots
on Rough Terrain
Keiji Nagatani, Genya Ishigami, Yoshito Okada
In this chapter, we introduce modeling and control
for wheeled mobile robots and tracked vehicles.
The target environment is rough terrains, which
includes both deformable soil and heaps of rubble.
Therefore, the topics are roughly divided into two
categories, wheeled robots on deformable soil and
tracked vehicles on heaps of rubble.
After providing an overview of this area in
Sect. 50.1, a modeling method of wheeled robots
on a deformable terrain is introduced in Sect. 50.2.
It is based on terramechanics, which is the study
focusing on the mechanical properties of natural
rough terrain and its response to off-road vehicle,
specifically the interaction between wheel/track
and soil. In Sect. 50.3, the control of wheeled
robots is introduced. A wheeled robot often expe-
riences wheel slippage as well as its sideslip while
traversing rough terrain. Therefore, the basic ap-
proach in this section is to compensate the slip
via steering and driving maneuvers. In the case
of navigation on heaps of rubble, tracked vehicles
have much advantage. To improve traversability
in such challenging environments, some tracked
vehicles are equipped with subtracks, and one
kinematical modeling method of tracked vehi-
cle on rough terrain is introduced in Sect. 50.4.
In addition, stability analysis of such vehicles is
introduced in Sect. 50.5. Based on such kinemat-
ical model and stability analysis, a sensor-based
control of tracked vehicle on rough terrain is in-
troduced in Sect. 50.6. Sect. 50.7 summarizes this
chapter.
50.1
Overview............................................. 1268
50.1.1
Modeling Deformable Terrain
for Robots................................. 1268
50.1.2
Controlling Robots
in Deformable Terrain ................ 1268
50.1.3
Modeling and Controlling Robots
in Heaps of Rubble .................... 1269
50.2 Modeling of Wheeled Robot
in Rough Terrain.................................. 1270
50.2.1
Dynamics of Mobile Robots ........ 1270
50.2.2 Wheel–Terrain Interaction
Mechanics ................................ 1271
50.2.3 Wheel Traction Performance ....... 1273
50.2.4 Model Uncertainty and Soil
Parameter Identification ............ 1273
50.3 Control of Wheeled Robot
in Rough Terrain.................................. 1274
50.3.1
Slip-Compensated
Path Follower............................ 1274
50.3.2 Steering and Driving Maneuvers . 1275
50.4 Modeling of Tracked Vehicle
on Rough Terrain ................................. 1276
50.4.1
Parameterization of a Track ........ 1277
50.4.2 Contact with a Single Point
in the Terrain Surface................. 1277
50.4.3 Contact with the Terrain Surface
Represented by a Point Cloud..... 1277
50.5 Stability Analysis of Tracked Vehicles..... 1278
50.6 Control of Tracked Vehicle
on Rough Terrain ................................. 1279
50.6.1 Ground Detection and Trimming
of the Scanned Data .................. 1280
50.6.2 Determination
of Desired Posture ..................... 1280
50.6.3 Determination
of Desired Subtrack Positions...... 1280
50.6.4 Stability Evaluation of Desired
Pose......................................... 1281
50.6.5 Stabilization of Desired Pose ...... 1281
50.6.6 Position Control of Subtracks ...... 1281
50.7 Summary ............................................ 1281
Video-References......................................... 1281
References................................................... 1282

Part E | 50.1
1268
Part E
Moving in the Environment
50.1 Overview
50.1.1 Modeling Deformable Terrain
for Robots
The category of rough terrain includes a variety of
ground conditions. In the case of weak and ﬁne gravel,
the motion of a wheeled mobile robot becomes rela-
tively complicated because the interaction mechanics
of the wheel in a rough terrain differs from that of an
indoor robot on a ﬂat surface; a wheel on gravel has
multiple point contact, and a wheel on loose soil has
a surface contact that deforms the soil around the wheel.
There has been a large amount of research on robot
mobility analysis in the military community [50.1, 2].
These studies have primarily focused on empirical anal-
yses of large vehicles (i. e., gross vehicle weights of
several tons). The mobility analyses of small mobile
robots that consider the interaction mechanics of a slip-
ping wheel on rough terrain have also been investigated.
Additionally, a multibody system simulation for the
longitudinal slip of tires with respect to the tire–soil in-
teraction has been demonstrated [50.3]. A dynamic in-
teraction model, denoted as soil contact model (SCM),
has been developed to provide the dynamics of a plasti-
cally deformable surface using an elevation grid, as well
as to consider the multipass effect of wheels, shown in
Fig. 50.1 [50.4]. Recently, multibody dynamics toolkit,
such as Vortex (
VIDEO 184 ), can be used to simulate
terrain reaction forces for mobility analyses of mobile
robots [50.5].
Recently, terramechanics [50.6] has been widely
used in applications such as off-road UGVs (unmanned
ground vehicles) [50.7, 8] and planetary rovers on Mars.
A fundamental requirement for such off-road mobile
robots is to maintain a traversing capability in rough
Following wheels
Leading wheels
Fig. 50.1 Dynamics of a plastically deformable surface
in consideration with the multipass effect of wheels (af-
ter [50.4])
terrain composed of loose sand, mud, pebbles, etc. One
typical issue in such an environment is wheel slippage,
which is generated because of the soil deformation at
the wheel–terrain contact patch. Wheel slippage often
degrades the mobility performance of the robot because
some amount of tractive power from a driving actua-
tor is consumed by the soil deformation. Furthermore,
the wheel slippage induces vehicle sideslip, which is
an additional disturbance for the motion control of
a wheeled robot. Figure 50.2 shows one typical ex-
ample of lateral- and side-slip situation of a wheeled
mobile robot in rough terrain. One typical example of
terramechanics-based modeling of rough terrain is de-
scribed in Sect. 50.2. Recently, a study of terradynamics
of legged locomotion was proposed for traversal in
granular media in [50.9] and is shown in
VIDEO 186 .
50.1.2 Controlling Robots
in Deformable Terrain
A wheeled robot often experiences wheel slippage as
well as vehicle sideslip while traversing rough terrain.
This degrades the motion control performance of the
robot, i. e., a robot could deviate from the path to be fol-
lowed or a wheel may get trapped in loose soil. There-
fore, a control scheme that can derive the appropriate
steering/driving maneuvers is necessary for a wheeled
robot to achieve traversability on a rough terrain and to
manage any slippage problems that may arise.
A large number of studies related to the path-
following control of mobile robots have been published.
General information on path-following issues can be
obtained from [50.10–12]. Rezaei et al. investigated an
online path-following strategy combined with a simul-
taneous localization and mapping (SLAM) algorithm
for a car-like robot in outdoor environments [50.13].
Fig. 50.2 Lateral- and side-slip situation of wheeled mo-
bile robot

Modeling and Control of Robots on Rough Terrain
50.1 Overview
1269
Part E | 50.1
Coelho and Nunes et al. proposed a Kalman-based
active observer controller for the path-following of
wheeled mobile robots [50.14]. Helmick et al. devel-
oped a path-following algorithm that included slip
compensation by using visual odometry and a Kalman
ﬁlter [50.15, 16]. The method was applied to the rocker-
bogie conﬁguration with six steerable wheels robot,
shown in Fig. 50.3. In Sect. 50.3, a path-following
control scheme for a four-wheeled mobile robot is in-
troduced. The experimental validation of the control
described in the section was reported in [50.17].
50.1.3 Modeling and Controlling Robots
in Heaps of Rubble
In environments that involve heaps of rubble, such as
an urban search and rescue situation, the approach for
modeling and controlling robots is different from the
afore mentioned methodology. To tackle such chal-
lenging environments, tracks are used to enhance the
mobility of a robot in such environments because they
have more contact with the terrain than wheels. Some
tracked vehicles are equipped with active subtracks,
and multitracks conﬁguration enables the vehicle to
get over relatively large steps. A typical geometrical
model of tracked vehicles with subtracks is introduced
in Sect. 50.4.
In case that the target rubble is stable, kinematic ap-
proaches are useful for navigation and control of the
robot. In this case, stability analysis is very important.
In classical stability analysis, the energy stability mar-
gin (ESM) proposed by Messuri and Klein was deﬁned
in terms of the potential energy of the robot [50.18].
Hirose assumed that increasing the robot’s weight did
not always contribute to its stability because it also in-
creased the dynamic disturbance around its center of
gravity. Therefore, he proposed the normalized ESM
Fig. 50.3 Rocky 8: rocker-bogie conﬁguration with six
steerable wheels robot
(NESM), in which the robot’s weight was normal-
ized [50.19]. For this criterion, the NESM is used to
evaluate the stability of a robot on the basis of the verti-
cal distance between the initial and largest heights of the
center of gravity during a rollover. Recently, Tubouchi’s
group proposed a method to control tracked vehicles
exposed to random steps [50.20] (Fig. 50.4). An artiﬁ-
cial uneven environment is random steps, arranged with
different lengths of squared timbers. It also appears in
VIDEO 189 . This environment is used to evaluate the
performance for urban search and rescue robots [50.21].
The basic objective is to maintain the maximal stability
of the robot at every step of its path in the random step
ﬁeld. The earlier-given topic relating to stability anal-
ysis is introduced in Sect. 50.5. Another approach for
stability analysis of tracked vehicles-based NESM was
reported in [50.22].
To evaluate the stability of vehicles, terrain de-
tection is an important technology. Therefore, many
robotics researchers have focused on the terrain map-
ping, particularly based on the SLAM, described
in Chap. 46, and machine learning. LIDAR (light detec-
tion and ranging) and stereo cameras are widely used
for the terrain mapping (Sect. 22.3). Vandapel et al.
proposed a classiﬁcation method of three-dimensional
(3-D) point cloud data on the basis of its geometri-
cal features [50.23], and Lacaze et al. demonstrated
a method of ﬁnding a path in heavy grasses [50.25]. To
improve the LIDAR-based mapping, Ohno et al. pro-
posed a method to obtain thin objects such as nets,
poles, and wires [50.26]. Figure 50.5 shows a mapping
result at an outdoor rough terrain.
If the rubble is unstable, modeling the machine-
rubble interaction is very complicated. One challenging
Driving commands
Good path
proposal
Sensory data
Sensory data
a)
b)
c)
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
30
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Fig.50.4a-c Teleoperated system of tracked vehicle. Itconsists of
(a) a remote operation station, (b) a mobile robot platform, and (c)
path planner that maintain the maximal stability of the robot (af-
ter [50.20])

Part E | 50.2
1270
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Thin structure
Rubble
a)
b)
Fig.50.5a,b Classiﬁcation of outdoor
rubble data. (a) Target ﬁeld: Hyogo
Prefectural Emergency Management
and Training Center, and (b) classiﬁed
result for traversal (after [50.23])
Real house
Real gareki
Earthquake
Measuring
Real model
Digital gareki archives
Model gareki
Experiment
Sensing
Digital model
Virtual gareki
Simulation
Exporting
Full scale
Miniature
Fig. 50.6 Approaches for gareki data acquisition (af-
ter [50.24])
approach to modeling rubble is called gareki (rub-
ble in Japanese) engineering [50.27, 28]. The model
includes not only the structure data, but also the in-
ternal force of each gareki element. To obtain the
data, they proposed to use information about the fol-
lowing, as shown in Fig. 50.6: (1) a real-collapsed
building, (2) artiﬁcial full- and miniature-scale col-
lapsed buildings, and (3) a simulated virtual digital
building. Their research aims to eventually apply the
gareki model for the control of mobile robots and res-
cue missions.
The sensor-based method is another approach for
controlling robots in unstable rubbles. Such robots often
have multiple tracks connected by joints to maneuver
over natural/artiﬁcial steps, bumps, and stairs. Some
are equipped with passive joints [50.29], but many are
equipped with active joints [50.30]. Multitrack conﬁg-
urations enable the vehicle to maneuver over a step that
is higher than the radius of the tracks. To enable such
motion, a sensor-based method is proposed to control
the multitracks. The robot moves and detects the sur-
face shape of the ground continuously, and it changes
the conﬁguration of the subtracks based on the sur-
face information. Once the surface of the ground is
deformed by the traversal of the robot, the subtracks
adapt quickly. A representative example for the con-
trol of robots in unstable rubble is shown in Sect. 50.6.
Another sensor-based approach is to use force-feedback
from contact points. Inoue et al., embedded force sen-
sors in their subtracks to obtain the contact force, and
changed the conﬁguration of the subtracks [50.31].
50.2 Modeling of Wheeled Robot in Rough Terrain
This section introduces a mechanics of wheeled mobile
robot in rough terrain, particularly focusing on a mod-
eling of wheel–terrain interaction.
50.2.1 Dynamics of Mobile Robots
Figure 50.7 depicts a schematic illustration of a dy-
namic model for a wheeled mobile robot. The robot is
modeled as an articulated multibody system. The equa-
tion of motion for the robot is numerically given by
H
 PVb
Rq

C C C G D

Fb


C JTFe ;
(50.1)
where the symbols have the following meanings: H: in-
ertia matrices composed of multibody of the robot,
C: velocity depending term, G: gravity term, Vb: trans-
lational and angular velocities of the vehicle, q: joint
angles (such as wheel rotation and steering angles),
Fb: forces and moments at the centroid of the vehicle
body, : torques acting at each joint (driving/steering
torques), J: Jacobian matrix, Fe: external forces and
moments acting at the centroid of each wheel, namely
fij.i D fr; lg; j D fr; m; f g/ :
The dynamic motion of the robot with given trav-
eling and steering maneuvers are numerically obtained

Modeling and Control of Robots on Rough Terrain
50.2 Modeling of Wheeled Robot in Rough Terrain
1271
Part E | 50.2
by successively solving (50.1). Here, a key approach
for the dynamic model is to incorporate a well-deﬁned
contact model into the equation of motion in order to
calculate the external forces and torques at the con-
tact patch between the wheel and terrain. Some recent
works have reported dynamic simulation tools com-
bined with the terramechanics wheel model: for exam-
ple, [50.32, 33] for the NASA’s rovers, and [50.4, 34]
for the ExoMars.
50.2.2 Wheel–Terrain Interaction Mechanics
Terramechanics is a study focusing on the mechan-
ical properties of natural rough terrain and its re-
sponse to off-road vehicle, speciﬁcally the interaction
between wheel/track and soil. In 1960s, Bekker de-
veloped a classical terramechanics with many of the
key concepts related to vehicle–terrain response, such
as a well-known pressure-sinkage equation and shear
stress model [50.35, 36]. Wong developed a compre-
hensive procedure for predicting the performance of
both driven and towed wheels [50.37–39]. The proce-
dure calculates the wheel mechanics with applying the
stress distribution model beneath the wheel.
Terramechanics-based approach for vehicle–terrain
mechanics includes mainly three methodologies [50.40,
41]: (1) Analytical approach, (2) empirical approach,
and (3) numerical approach.
The analytical approach is based on a theoreti-
cal model for vehicle–terrain interactions along with
experimental model validation. The empirical method
is to utilize a practical measurement of soil strength
r
ω
θf
θm
θr
z(θ)
θ
	
	
x
x
y
z
b
x
y
y
z
z
Fy
Fy Fx
Fz
Tz
T
Fx
Fy
Rb
W
Fz
σ(θ)
τx(θ)
τy(θ)
vy
vy
v
v
vx
vx
Soil surcharges
Soil surface
Fig. 50.8 Wheel–terrain contact
model
fmf
frr
frf
flr
flm
flf
Rocker joint
Bogie joint
Steering joint
Driving joint
Fig. 50.7 Dynamic model of wheeled mobile robot
by a specialized apparatus in order to estimate vehi-
cle traversability on weak/rough terrain. The numerical
method includes the ﬁnite element method (FEM) and
discrete element method (DEM) that models soils as
vast numbers of multiple particles and simulates each
particle’s behavior while accounting vehicle–terrain in-
teraction [50.42–44].
This subsection focuses on the analytical method
and introduces a typical interaction model of rigid
wheel on deformable terrain (Fig. 50.8). It should be
noted that Chap. 55.3.13 also addresses the wheel trac-
tion mechanics in detail, and therefore, the following
subsection recalls some key equations in order to dis-

Part E | 50.2
1272
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Torque
Force-y
Force-z
Carrige motor
Slide guides
F/T sensor
Lunar regolith simulant
y
x
z
Linear
potentiometer
Angle (sinkage)
a)
b)
c)
d)
y
z
Fig.50.9a–d Single wheel test
beds for experimental validation of
terramechanics models. (a) Single
wheel test bed at MIT (after [50.45]),
(b) Single track test bed at JAXA
(after [50.46]), (c) Single wheel test
bed at DLR (after [50.47]), (d) Single
wheel test bed at Tohoku University.
(after [50.48])
cuss a wheel traction characteristics on rough terrain,
soil parameter identiﬁcation, and model uncertainty.
Wheel Slippage
Wheel slippage is generally observed when a robot
travels on loose soil. Also, the wheel will slip in the lat-
eral direction while the robot steering or traversing on
sloped terrain. The slip ratio (i. e., slip in the longitudi-
nal direction of wheel travel) is deﬁned as a function of
the longitudinal traveling velocity of the wheel vx and
the circumferential velocity of the wheel r!, where r is
the wheel radius and ! represents the angular velocity
of the wheel [50.37]
s D
(
.r!  vx/=r!
.jr!j  jvxj W driving/ ;
.r!  vx/=vx
.jr!j < jvxj W braking/ :
(50.2)
The slip ratio assumes a value in the range from 1 to 1.
The slip in the lateral direction of the wheel is
expressed by the slip angle ˇ, which is deﬁned as
a function of vx and the lateral traveling velocity vy,
as
ˇ D
(
tan1.vy=vx/
.vx ¤ 0/ ;
sgn.vy/  =2
.vx D 0/ :
(50.3)
Wheel Traction Forces
The wheel–terrain contact forces, including the drawbar
pull Fx, side force Fy, vertical force Fz, and resistance
torque T, are calculated as the integral of the normal
and shear stresses from the entry angle f and the exit
angle r [50.38, 48]
Fx D rb
f
Z
r
fx./ cos   ./ sin g d ;
(50.4)
Fy D
f
Z
r

rby./ C Rb fr  z./ cos g
	
d ; (50.5)
Fz D rb
f
Z
r
fx./ sin  C ./ cos g d ;
(50.6)
Tx D r2b
f
Z
r
x./ d ;
(50.7)
where ./ is the normal stress, x./ and y./ are
the shear stresses in the longitudinal or lateral direction.
z./ is the wheel sinkage at an angle of , b is the wheel
width, and Rb is the bulldozing resistance generated on
a side wall of the wheel.
Experimental Validation
An experimental validation of the afore mentioned
wheel–terrain interaction model is performed by the
use of a single wheel test bed (Fig. 50.9), with
varied state parameters such as soil or wheel slip
conditions. A carriage velocity controlled relative to
a wheel velocity realizes a wheel slip (or traction
load) while measuring wheel traction forces, wheel

Modeling and Control of Robots on Rough Terrain
50.2 Modeling of Wheeled Robot in Rough Terrain
1273
Part E | 50.2
sinkage, and others. Experimental data obtained from
the test bed are then compared with the values ob-
tained from numerical simulation of the wheel traction
model.
50.2.3 Wheel Traction Performance
The wheel–terrain model can be exploited for an
evaluation of the mobility performance of a wheeled
robot (i. e., traversability on sloped or deformable ter-
rain [50.49, 50]). Such mobility evaluation technique is
further valuable for the mobility system design in or-
der to ﬁnd a feasible wheel/track design that maximizes
the traction performance for off-road locomotion under
some speciﬁc constraints [50.46, 47, 51].
Ishigami et al. proposed a wheel traction diagram
called a thrust–cornering characteristic diagram that
determines the slope traversal criteria with respect to
wheel slip conditions [50.17]). Figure 50.10 illustrates
the relationship between the thrust and cornering forces
of wheel on rough terrain, with varied slip ratios/slip
angles. The thrust and cornering forces Fc and FT
are obtained by calculating the drawbar pull and side
force
Fc D Fx sin ˇ C Fy cos ˇ ;
(50.8)
FT D Fx cos ˇ  Fy sin ˇ :
(50.9)
Considering the slope traversal scenario as shown in
Fig. 50.11, the thrust–cornering characteristic diagram
can draw the criteria with a minimum cornering force
and thrust force required for a slope traversal: Case 1 as
a traversal and uphill traveling, Case 2 as a straight-line
traversal, and Case 3 as a traversal and downhill trav-
eling. In addition, a robot decelerates or cannot move
forward due to its negative thrust force. This diagram,
for example, indicates that the slip ratio must exceed
0.6 in order to generate positive thrust force, and also,
the cornering force varies primarily with the slip an-
gle. Therefore, the diagram can determine the slope
traversability on the basis of the corresponding slip-
page, indicated by several characteristic curves on the
diagram.
50.2.4 Model Uncertainty and Soil
Parameter Identification
It should be noted that the classical terramechanics
model has primarily developed for an application for
large-heavy vehicles (hundreds/thousands kg weight).
Therefore, several assumptions that may cause an in-
accurate calculation of wheel traction performance of
the classical model would be omitted while exploiting
the classical model to an analysis of small lightweight
robot, resulting in an inaccurate calculation of wheel
traction performance. The error due to the inadequate
assumptions for the small-lightweight robot can be ad-
dressed by the following approaches: model improve-
ment and uncertainty analysis of model parameters.
It should be noted that the Bekker’s pressure-sinkage
model is assumed that the contact patch of wheel on
deformable soil (circumferential section) is discretized
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
Cornering force (N)
FT = 0.0 (N)
FC = 3.0 (N)
Thrust force (N)
10
5
0
–5
–10
	 = 28(deg)
s = 0
s = 0.1
s = 0.2
s = 0.3
s = 0.4
s = 0.5
s = 0.6
s = 0.7
s = 0.8
s = 0.9
	 = 24(deg)
	 = 20(deg)
	 = 16(deg)
	 = 12(deg)
	 = 8(deg)
	 = 4(deg)
	 = 0(deg)
	 = –4(deg)
	 = –28(deg)
	 = –24(deg)
	 = –20(deg)
	 = –16(deg)
Case 1: Traversal and uphill traveling
Case 2: Straight-line traversal
Case 3: Traversal and downhill traveling
Deceleration/ non-traversal
	 = –12(deg)
	 = –8(deg)
Fig. 50.10 Thrust–cornering characteristic diagram
Traction
force
H
W
θs
Wsinθs
(downhill-slope force)
Fc2
Fc1
Fc4
W1,2
W3,4
Fc3,4
Fc1,2
Fc3
dL
dR
v0
v0
	 (= δ)
FT2
FT1
FT4
FT3
lr
lf
Fc
FT
Fx
Fy
Fig. 50.11 Force balance on slope traversal

Part E | 50.3
1274
Part E
Moving in the Environment
as a series of consecutive ﬂat plate; however, Bekker
noted [50.36]:
Predictions for wheels smaller than 20 inches in
diameter become less accurate as wheel diameter
decreases, because the sharp curvature of the load-
ing area was neither considered in its entirety nor is
it reﬂected in bevameter tests.
Also another research reported that the assumptions
provide inaccurate prediction for vehicles with wheels
diameter less than about 50 cm (approx.) and normal
loading less than 45 N (approx.) [50.36].
Some researchers have tried to update/improve the
classical terramechanics model that can be successfully
applied to relatively light weight vehicles: For example,
Nagatani et al. developed a direct measurement de-
vice for the normal stress distribution [50.52]. A wheel
diameter dependent pressure-sinkage model has been
proposed by [50.53]. Senatore and Iagnemma proposed
an improved approach for the calculation of shear de-
formation modulus [50.54].
Model parameters in the wheel–terrain interaction
related to the soil properties are subject to uncer-
tainties since their values would stochastically vary
with location. Several researches have addressed the
soil parameter identiﬁcation: an on-line terrain pa-
rameter estimator with simplifying classical terrame-
chanics equations was proposed by [50.55]; a mod-
iﬁed nonlinear wheel–terrain interaction model for
an identiﬁcation of pressure-sinkage coefﬁcient, in-
ternal friction angle, and shear deformation modu-
lus [50.56]. Some recent works have also attempted
to predict rover mobility even in uncertain condi-
tions: a learning-based approach for slip-prediction
and traversability analysis of a wheeled robot [50.57];
and a statistical method for mobility prediction of
a robot with taking into account of terrain uncer-
tainty [50.58].
50.3 Control of Wheeled Robot in Rough Terrain
This section introduces a control scheme for the
wheeled robot that compensates wheel-and-vehicle
slippages while following a given path is described.
A wheeled robot often experiences wheel slip-
pages as well as vehicle sideslip while traversing in
rough terrain, which degrades a performance of a mo-
tion control of the robot: i. e., a robot will deviate
from a path to be followed, or a wheel might get
stuck into loose soil. Therefore, a control scheme
that can derive appropriate steering/driving maneu-
vers is necessary for a wheeled robot to achieve
a rough terrain traverse and to manage any slippage
problems.
A signiﬁcant number of studies related to the path
following control of mobile robot have been published.
A general note for path following issues can be seen
in [50.10–12]. Rezaei et al. investigated an online path
following strategy combined with a simultaneous local-
ization and mapping (SLAM) algorithm for a car-like
robot in outdoor environments [50.13]. Coelho and
a)  No-slippage condition
Reference path
v0
v0
	 0 = 0
b)  Slippage condition
Reference path
v0
v0
	 0 =\ 0
	 0
	 0
Fig.50.12a,b Path following
problem without (a) and with
(b) slip angle of vehicle
Nunes et al. proposed a Kalman-based active observer
controller for the path following of wheeled mobile
robots [50.14].
As noted before, a key issue of the path following
on rough terrain is to compensate wheel-and-vehicle
slippage. This subsection brieﬂy introduces a slip-
compensated path follower along with a derivation
for steering and driving maneuvers for path follow-
ing [50.15–17] which is shown in
VIDEO 188 .
50.3.1 Slip-Compensated Path Follower
A two-dimensional path-following problem of
a mobile robot is shown in Fig. 50.12. Here, a path
following control generally performs to let the vehi-
cle velocity v0 coincide with the tangent of a given
path such that the distance and orientation errors de-
crease to zero. However, once the vehicle experiences
a sideslip with a certain amount of slip angle ˇ0, the
vehicle has an additional orientation error of ˇ0 even

Modeling and Control of Robots on Rough Terrain
50.3 Control of Wheeled Robot in Rough Terrain
1275
Part E | 50.3
when the vector of vehicle velocity completely follows
the path (Fig. 50.12b).
The path follower basically derives a commanded
robot velocity vector .Pxcmd; Pycmd; Pcmd/ while the robot
position .x0; y0; 0/ and a reference path vector .xp; yp/
are given. The slip-compensated path follower de-
scribed here consists of two algorithms to achieve a path
following task through high-slip environments.
First, the carrot heading algorithm determines
the heading error of the robot e, which is an an-
gle calculated from the intersection of a circle cen-
tered on the robot coordinate with the desired path
(Fig. 50.13):
e D d  0
(50.10)
Here, d is the desired heading angle which is a tan-
gent angle on the intersection point and 0 is the robot
heading angle. A large radius of the circle will generate
a smooth motion of the robot while neglect a small fea-
ture of the path. A small radius will reduce the total path
following error, but requires frequent heading changes
for small path errors.
Once the heading error is determined, the slip-
compensated path following algorithm executes the
heading controller that calculates the commanded yaw
rate of the robot Pcmd from the heading error e and the
yaw slip rate Pˇ0
Pcmd D

K1  e C K2  Pˇ0

Ts
;
(50.11)
where K1 and K2 are the tuned controller gains, and Ts
is the sampling period.
Note that the command for the linear velocity Pxcmd
and Pycmd are closely related to the maximum speed
of the driving motors and the desired heading angle
Pcmd. Practically, these commands are accomplished by
actuators of the robotic mobility system, namely steer-
ing and driving mechanisms. The following subsection
describes the derivation of those steering and driving
maneuvers that satisﬁes the heading controller com-
mand Pcmd as deﬁned in (50.11).
50.3.2 Steering and Driving Maneuvers
Here, a nonholonomic kinematic model of a four-
wheeled mobile robot with each wheel being inde-
pendently steerable is considered. Figure 50.14 illus-
trates a two-dimensional kinematic model of the mo-
bile robot having the slip angle of the vehicle ˇ0
and lateral wheel slippage ˇi (the subscript i denotes
the wheel identiﬁcation number, i D 1; : : : ; 4 in this
case). The dimension of the rover is deﬁned by lf,
lr, dR, and dL. The position and orientation of the
vehicle are deﬁned as (x0, y0, 0), and the position
of each wheel is deﬁned as (xi, yi). In this model,
the following assumptions are considered: the dis-
tance between the wheels is constant, and the steering
axle of each wheel is perpendicular to the terrain
surface.
The nonholonomic constraints of the mobile robot
are deﬁned by the following equations, with taking
the lateral slips of wheels and that of vehicle into
account
Px0 sin 0  Py0 cos 0 D 0 ;
Pxi sin i  Pyi cos i D 0 ;
(50.12)
where 0 D 0 Cˇ0 and i D 0 Cıi Cˇi. The geomet-
ric constraints between each wheel and the centroid of
Way points
Circle radius
θd
θ0
v0
x0
(xp, yp)
y0
y
x
Fig. 50.13 Path following with carrot heading calculation
dL
dR
y0
yi
y
	i
θ0
θ0
di
(i = 1)
(i = 4)
(i = 3)
x0
xi
x
(i = 2)
lr
lf
v0 	0
vi
	i
vix
vi
viy
Fig. 50.14 Kinematic
model
of
four-wheeled
rover
with
wheel/vehicle slips

Part E | 50.4
1276
Part E
Moving in the Environment
the vehicle are written as
x1 D x0 C lf cos 0  dL sin 0
x2 D x0  lr cos 0  dL sin 0
x3 D x0  lr cos 0 C dR sin 0
x4 D x0 C lf cos 0 C dR sin 0
9
>>>=
>>>;
! xi D x0 C Xi ;
(50.13)
y1 D y0 C lf sin 0 C dL cos 0
y2 D y0  lr sin 0 C dL cos 0
y3 D y0  lr sin 0  dR cos 0
y4 D y0 C lf sin 0  dR cos 0
9
>>>=
>>>;
! yi D y0 C Yi :
(50.14)
Given the desired heading angle 0 D d and de-
sired linear velocity vd, the desired steering angle ıdi
that satisﬁes the path following control as well as the
slip compensation is obtained as follows: ﬁrst, trans-
form (50.12)
ıdi D tan1 .Pyi=Pxi/  d  ˇi :
(50.15)
Subsequently, substituting (50.13) and (50.14) into
(50.15), the desired steering angle is determined as fol-
lows
ıdi D tan1
 
vd sin d  PYi. Pd/
vd cos d  PXi. Pcmd/
!
 d  ˇi :
(50.16)
The desired yaw rate Pcmd is given from (50.11).
The driving maneuver is practically executed by the
wheel angular velocity of the robot. From Fig. 50.14,
the wheel linear velocity vi is given as
vi D r!i= cos ˇi ;
(50.17)
vi is also expressed by Pxi or Pyi
vi D Pxi= cos i D Pyi= sin i :
(50.18)
Substituting (50.13) or (50.14) into the above equations,
the desired wheel angular velocity !di can be obtained
!di D
8
ˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆ:

vd cos d C PXi. Pcmd/

cos ˇi=r cos i
.d 	 =4/ ;

vd sin d C PYi. Pcmd/

cos ˇi=r sin i
.d  =4/ :
(50.19)
Position and orientation errors relative to a desired
path should be accurately determined for deriving the
control input as well as calculating the correspond-
ing steering and driving maneuvers. A visual odometry
method is of promising technique for such accurate
measurement of position, orientation, velocity, and slip-
page, and also it is sufﬁciently robust for loose sandy
terrain.
The visual odometry estimates the traveling velocity
of the vehicle based on the optical ﬂow vectors obtained
from the time-consecutive images taken by an onboard
camera(s). Integrating the velocity estimates with iner-
tial measurement unit (IMU) readouts or stereo images
for pose estimation provides an accurate estimation of
the six degrees of freedom of the rover motion.
50.4 Modeling of Tracked Vehicle on Rough Terrain
Tracks are one of typical mechanism that can enhance
the mobility of a robot on rough terrain because they
can have contacts between the terrain more widely
than wheels. Thus, many types of robots which are
required to maneuver rough terrain such as military
and search-and-rescue robots have been equipped with
tracks.
Some tracked vehicles often have multiple tracks
connected by joints to maneuver natural/artiﬁcial steps,
bumps and stairs. Some are equipped with passive
joints, but many are equipped with active joints. Mul-
titracks conﬁguration enables the vehicle to get over
a step which is higher than the radius of the tracks.
It should be noted that many tracked vehicles are
intended to maneuver the unknown rough terrain con-
sisted of rubbles, rocks, concrete, and woods. Because
such types of terrain are nonuniform unlike ﬁne soil dis-
cussed in the Sect. 50.2, to dynamicaly model them is
obviously difﬁcult. In other words, we can easily sense
the shape of the terrain, but dynamic parameters as well
as center of gravity (COG), weight or stiffness of terrain
cluster.
Thus, to geometrically consider the interaction be-
tween tracks and terrain is a reasonable approach. In
this section, a geometrical model of a contact between
a track and the terrain surface is introduced. The analy-
sis includes (1) a parameterization of a generic shaped
track, (2) contacts between the track and a single point
in the terrain surface, and (3) contacts between the track
and the terrain surface represented by a point cloud.

Modeling and Control of Robots on Rough Terrain
50.4 Modeling of Tracked Vehicle on Rough Terrain
1277
Part E | 50.4
50.4.1 Parameterization of a Track
The geometry of a generic-shaped track is the key issue
that should be discussed for modeling a tracked vehicle
on rough terrain. In this section, we introduce a param-
etarization of the shape of a generic track.
As shown in Fig. 50.15, a generic track can be pa-
rameterized by the radius of the ﬁrst and the second
pulleys, R and r respectively, and the distance between
the centers of the pulleys L.
In addition, let us embed the coordinate frame; its
origin is at the center of the adjacent track and the x
axis is along the center line of the adjacent track. The
relative pose of the track respect to the adjacent track
can be parameterized by the distance between the origin
and the center of the ﬁrst pulley, and the angle of the
joint that connects the tracks .
50.4.2 Contact with a Single Point
in the Terrain Surface
To discuss contacts between a track and a single point
in the terrain surface is a good entrance to understand
it between a track and the whole terrain surface. In the
following sections, we geometrically describe the for-
mer contacts with the parameters of the track deﬁned in
the previous section.
As shown in Fig. 50.16, a track generally has four
sections that can contact with the terrain surface; since
it is tracked, it comprises a round and straight sections.
Moreover, it can be in two states, namely, folded and
spread states. When the track is in the spaded state,
side-S supports the robot; on the other hand, when it
is in the folded state, side-F is in contact with the ter-
rain. We call the case where side-S is in contact with
the ground as the spreading mode and the case where
side-F is in contact with the ground as the folding
mode.
O
x
d
R
L
r
z
xsupport
θcontact
θ2
θ1
(x, z)
Fig. 50.15 Example of geometrical analysis contact be-
tween track and single point on the terrain surface
In addition, we have assumed the pose of the track
to be 0Œı when its straight section on side-S is in con-
tact with the ﬂat surface; we have also assumed the
direction in which the track lifts its second pulley from
0Œı to be positive.
The geometrical relationship between the contact
point and pose of the track is summarized in Table 50.1.
For example, in the case of the spreading mode and the
contact on the straight section (Fig. 50.15), we can de-
rive the following equation according to the geometry
of the track contacting with the surface
contact D 1 C 2
D tan1
z
x  xsupport
C sin1
r
p
.x  xsupport/2 C z2 :
(50.20)
50.4.3 Contact with the Terrain Surface
Represented by a Point Cloud
Now we are well prepared to geometrically understand
contacts between the track and the terrain surface. In
this section, we describe those contacts by iterating
a point cloud that represents the terrain surface.
Let the shape of the terrain surface be represented
by a set of points fu1; u2; : : : ; ung. Then, the contact an-
gle of the track with the surface is determined using the
following equation
ref D
8
ˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆ:
min.contact;1; : : : ; contact;n/W
in spreading mode ;
max.contact;1; : : : ; contact;n/W
in folding mode :
(50.21)
To calculate a contact angle of the track with a single
point in the terrain surface, we need to determine which
section and which side of the track makes the contact.
Side-S
Side-F
Straight
Round
Fig. 50.16 Generic-shaped track consisted of staraight and
round sections

Part E | 50.5
1278
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Table 50.1 Geometric-based contact angle of subtrack
Section
contact
Spreading
Straight
tan1
z
x  xsupport
C sin1
r
q
.x  xsupport/2 C z2
Round
cos1 d2 C L2  R2
2Ld
C tan1
z
x  xsupport
 sin1 R  r
L
Folding
Straight
tan1
z
x  xsupport
 sin1
r
q
.x  xsupport/2 C z2
 2 sin1 R  r
L
Round
tan1
z
x  xsupport
 sin1 R  r
L
 cos1 d2 C L2  R2
2Ld
The type of the section can be determined by checking
the distance between the center of the ﬁrst pulley and
the point; if d <
p
L2 C R2 the straight section makes
the contact, else the round section does. On the other
hand, the side will be determined by the choice of the
application.
Now we understand a geometric model which de-
scribes contacts between the tracked vehicle consisted
of multiple tracks and the free-formed terrain surface
whose shape is represented as a point cloud. In the fol-
lowing subsection, we introduce an application example
utilizing the contact model.
50.5 Stability Analysis of Tracked Vehicles
As shown in the previous sections, it is hardly possible
to build an indention model of a rough terrain consisted
of rubbles. Thus, in this research domain, stability cri-
teria based only on geometrical parameters are often
used to evaluate pose of the tracked vehicle on the rough
terrain.
This section introduces two typical stability crite-
ria which have been adopted for tracked vehicles; (1)
a)
b)
Label
Balance quality
Technical details
Red
Orange
Magenta
Cyan
Yellow
Green
Turn upside down or
 
get stuck
Lose balance on
 
purpose
Climb up or slide down
Jump down
Fair
Good
Pitch > π /4 or roll
 
> π /6 or at least
 
one of conditions A
 
is not satisfied
Two optional postures
 
exist
Oscillations in
 
posture estimation
 
algorithm
Jump of CM between
 
two stable postures
 
< 50 mm
NESM parameter < 1
NESM parameter ≥ 1
zG, zL
cM
zG
zL
cM
zG
zL
cM
Fig.50.17a,b Example of stability analysis of tracked vehicle on a rough terrain based on support polygon and NESM
(after [50.20]); (a) Stable posture corresponding to green label in table. (b) Unstable posture corresponding to orange
label in table
support polygon and (2) normalized energy stability
margin.
The support polygon is a simple and reasonable cri-
terion to determine whether an object on a surface is
statically stable. The support polygon for the tracked
vehicle is equal to the horizontal projection of the con-
vex hull of all the contact points between the tracks and
the terrain. With this support polygon, we can consider

Modeling and Control of Robots on Rough Terrain
50.6 Control of Tracked Vehicle on Rough Terrain
1279
Part E | 50.6
that the vehicle is statically stable when it contains the
projection of the vehicle’s center of gravity.
Another stability criterion is the normalized energy
stability margin, or NESM, proposed by Hirose. The
NESM is a criterion that is used to evaluate the stability
of a robot on the basis of the vertical distance between
the initial position of its center of gravity and its high-
est position during tumbling. Although it is mainly used
for walking robots, its evaluation only requires the posi-
tions of contact points with the ground and the center of
gravity of the robot. In other words, there is no concep-
tual difference if this criterion is applied to the stability
of tracked vehicles.
One typical application of stability criteria for the
tracked vehicle is to rank possible path in a naviga-
tion. For example, Magid proposed a rating method for
possible paths based on stability analysis utilizing the
support polygon and NESM. This method evaluates the
stability of each adjacent grid of the current position of
the vehicle; paths to grids on which the support polygon
condition is violated are denied. Then survived paths
are ranked utilizing the NESM (Fig. 50.17).
50.6 Control of Tracked Vehicle on Rough Terrain
In this section, an approach for the autonomous control
of active joints in a tracked vehicle with multiple tracks
is introduced. As shown in the previous subsections, the
geometric model of the tracked vehicle gives the pose of
each track, which makes contact with the rough terrain
on the basis of the shape of the terrain surface near the
vehicle. The autonomous control utilizes the geomet-
ric model to determine the desired angles of the active
joints between the tracks to perform a smooth maneuver
on an unknown rough terrain.
Tracked vehicles with multiple tracks and joints
typically have better locomotion than single-tracked
vehicles. This is because one can change the pose
of a track by actuating an adequate joint to negoti-
ate bumps or steps in a rough terrain. Some multi-
tracked vehicles a are equipped with a single-degree-of-
freedom (1-DOF) tracked arms, often called subtracks,
and the others are snake shaped.
However, multitracked vehicles are difﬁcult to con-
trol manually because of their multiple degrees of
Active flippers
LIDAR sensors
Fig. 50.18 Tracked vehicle Kenaf equipped with four sub-
tracks enhansing mobility and three LIDAR sensors sens-
ing shape of terrain
freedom. For military and search-and-rescue robots
in particular, which are likely to be teleoperated on
an unknown rough terrain with limited camera views,
it is quite difﬁcult to control all of their DOFs
manually.
In the rest of this section, an approach for the au-
tonomous control of active subtracks on the basis of
the geometric model of a multitracked vehicle is intro-
duced. In the control algorithm, the geometric model
automatically determines the desired poses of active
joints, which support subtracks on the basis of the ter-
rain shape obtained in real time.
The multitracked vehicle Kenaf, which has au-
tonomous subtrack control, is shown in Fig. 50.18.
Kenaf has two main tracks covering its main body
and four subtracks actuated by 1-DOF joints on each
corner of the main body. It has 6-DOFs in total: 4-
DOFs corresponding to joints supporting the subtracks,
1-DOF corresponding to the one main track and two
subtrack belts on the right, and 1-DOF corresponding
to the one main track and two subtrack belts on the
left.
In addition, Kenaf is equipped with three LIDAR
sensors, one on the front, one on the right side, and
one on the left side of the main body, to obtain data
on the shape of the terrain online. Scans from LIDARs
are integrated to estimate the three-dimensional shape
of the terrain near the vehicle. The aforementioned ap-
proach for autonomous control of active subtracks are
described in [50.59].
Figure 50.19 shows the ﬂowchart of the algorithm
for the autonomous subtrack control, and its actual mo-
tions can be seen in
VIDEO 190
and
VIDEO 191 .
The control algorithm is divided into six steps and sum-
marized as follows:
1. Slices of the shape of the terrain around the robot
are ﬁrst obtained from the LIDAR sensors attached

Part E | 50.6
1280
Part E
Moving in the Environment
to the robot body and the three-dimensional terrain
shape near the robot is estimated.
2. The desired posture (roll and pitch angles) of the
body is then calculated on the basis of the estimated
terrain shape.
3. The desired positions of the subtracks that realize
the desired posture of the robot body are also deter-
mined.
4. Next, the stability of the desired posture and sub-
track positions is evaluated.
5. If the desired pose (posture of the robot body and
subtrack positions) are unstable, then the desired
pose is redeﬁned and steps (3)–(5) are repeated.
6. When the desired subtrack positions that realize
a stable posture are generated, position control of
the subtracks is ﬁnally performed.
In the following sections, we explain each step of
the algorithm.
50.6.1 Ground Detection and Trimming
of the Scanned Data
In this step, we obtain the scanned points Utarget near the
robot using the LIDAR sensors attached to the robot;
ground detection is performed according to the ap-
proach described in the paper [50.59]. We ﬁrst obtain
two-dimensional terrain slices from three LIDAR sen-
sors and integrate them according to each tagged and
estimated position of the robot to generate the three-
dimensional information of the terrain shape. At the end
of this step, we ﬁlter distant points from the integrated
terrain shape.
Utarget D fu1; u2; : : : ; umg
(50.22)
Position control of subtracks
Stabilization of desired posture
unstable
stable
Evaluation of
desired pose
Determination of desired subtrack positions
Ground detection and
trimming of scanned data
Determination of
desired posture
Side
Top
Fig. 50.19 Algorithm for autonomous control of subtracks
50.6.2 Determination of Desired Posture
We then determine the desired posture on the basis
of the least-squares plane for the target terrain Utarget.
This is intended to enable smooth locomotion on rough
terrain. Parameters a, b, and c of the least-squares
plane z D ax C by C c are determined using the follow-
ing equations (an over-bar indicates the average of m
scanned points in Utarget)
a D ˛z;x˛y;y  ˛x;y˛y;z
˛x;x˛y;y  ˛x;y˛x;y
;
(50.23)
b D ˛y;z˛x;x  ˛x;y˛z;x
˛x;x˛y;y  ˛x;y˛x;y
;
(50.24)
c D zv  xva  yvb ;
(50.25)
˛x;y D xu  yu  xu  yu ;
(50.26)
˛y;z D yu  zu  yu  zu ;
(50.27)
˛z;x D zu  xu  zu  xu ;
(50.28)
˛x;x D xu  xu  xu  xu ;
(50.29)
˛y;y D yu  yu  yu  yu :
(50.30)
Then, a translation to the coordinate system, if the
robot body is parallel to the least-squares plane of the
ground surface and makes contact with the ground,
is described by the following equation in quaternion
algebra:
0
BB@
0
xu0
i
yu0
i
zu0
i
1
CCA D q0 
0
BB@
0
xui
yui
zui
1
CCA  q01 
0
BB@
0
0
0
max.zu0/
1
CCA ;
(50.31)
q0 D
0
BBBBBB@
cos rot
2
b sin rot
2
a sin rot
2
0
1
CCCCCCA
;
(50.32)
rot D cos1
1
p
a2 C b2 C 1
:
(50.33)
50.6.3 Determination
of Desired Subtrack Positions
In this step, using the desired body posture and the inte-
grated terrain slices, we determine the desired subtrack
positions on the basis of the geometric model of con-
tacts between the vehicle and the terrain surface.

Modeling and Control of Robots on Rough Terrain
50.7 Summary
1281
Part E | 50.7
Our application allows the operator to manually
switch between the spreading and the folding control
modes. Each control mode employs a corresponding ge-
ometric calculation method described in Sect. 50.4 In
other words, the autonomous controller uses the corre-
sponding calculation to determine the desired subtrack
positions according to the control mode speciﬁed by the
operator.
In both modes, we determine the desired subtrack
positions to make contact with the ground through the
desired robot posture. In particular, we calculate the an-
gular position of each subtrack that makes contact with
each point scanned by the left and the right LIDAR
sensors. The desired position of each subtrack is deter-
mined for the maximum or minimum angular position
of the subtrack in the spreading or folding mode, re-
spectively.
50.6.4 Stability Evaluation of Desired Pose
In the proposed controller, we have adopted the nor-
malized energy stability margin (NESM) [50.19] as the
stability criterion for the desired pose. The stability of
a desired pose is evaluated by NESM, and the pose is
redeﬁned if the stability is insufﬁcient.
In the case of a tracked vehicle with four subtracks,
four contact points (front-right, front-left, rear-right,
and rear-left) can be determined by the step described
in Sect. 50.6.3. In addition, the four axes of tumbling
that pass through the front, rear, right, and left contact
points can be assumed. Hence, the stability of a tracked
vehicle with four subtracks can be determined from the
minimum value of the NESM about these four axes.
50.6.5 Stabilization of Desired Pose
When the NESM of the robot is less than a predeter-
mined threshold, we repeat the following steps until
a desired, stable pose is realized. This step is intended
to realize the strategy 4:
1a. If the NESM about the front or rear is adopted, re-
duce the pitch angle of the desired posture to zero.
1b. When the NESM about the right or left is adopted,
reduce the roll angle of the desired posture to zero.
2. Redeﬁne the desired subtrack positions by recalcu-
lating them to realize the redeﬁned desired posture.
3. Evaluate the NESM about the redeﬁned posture and
positions of subtracks.
50.6.6 Position Control of Subtracks
Finally, we perform position control of the subtracks to
realize the desired subtrack position produced through
the above-mentioned steps on the basis of the strategy
described in the previous subsection.
All subtracks of Kenaf and Quince are controlled by
microprocessors present on the built-in motor drivers.
Each desired subtrack position is sent to the correspond-
ing microprocessor as a reference for position control
using the conventional proportional–integral–derivative
(PID) controller.
50.7 Summary
In this chapter, an overview of the modeling and con-
trol of robots on the rough terrain motion has been
provided. The target environment was rough terrains,
which includes a variety of ground conditions. In the
case of weak and ﬁne gravel, the motion of a wheeled
mobile robot becomes relatively complicated because
the interaction mechanics of the wheel in rough terrains
differs greatly from that of an indoor robot on a ﬂat sur-
face. In this chapter, we introduced a terramechanics-
based model for the interactions between wheels and
deformable terrains. Furthermore, we explained the
steering control of wheeled mobile robots to enable
path-following in such environments. In the case of
an environment with heaps of rubble, the approach for
controlling robots is different from the terramechanics
approach. Therefore, we introduced an initial attempt
at a sensor-based approach that involved measuring the
terrain shape.
Video-References
VIDEO 184
Mobility prediction of rovers on soft terrain
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/50/videodetails/184
VIDEO 185
Experiments of wheeled rovers in a sandbox covered with loose soil
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/50/videodetails/185

Part E | 50
1282
Part E
Moving in the Environment
VIDEO 186
Terradynamics of legged locomotion for traversal in granular media
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/50/videodetails/186
VIDEO 187
Interaction human-robot supervision, long range science rover for Mars exploration
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/50/videodetails/187
VIDEO 188
A path-following control scheme for a four-wheeled mobile robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/50/videodetails/188
VIDEO 189
Evaluation test of tracked vehicles on random step fields in the Disaster City
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/50/videodetails/189
VIDEO 190
Autonomous sub-tracks control
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/50/videodetails/190
VIDEO 191
Autonomous sub-tracks control
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/50/videodetails/191
References
50.1
M. Jurkat, C. Nuttall, P. Haley: The AMC’ 74 Mobility
Model, Tech. Rep. 11921 (US Army Tank Automotive
Command, Warren, 1975)
50.2
R.B. Ahlvin, P.W. Haley: NATO Reference Mobility
Model Edition II, NRMM User’s Guide, Tech. Rep. GL-
92-19 (US Army WES, Vicksburg, 1992)
50.3
A. Gibbesch, B. Schäfer: Multibody system mod-
elling and simulation of planetary rover mobility
on soft terrain, 8th Int. Symp. Artif. Intell. Robotics
Autom. Space (i-SAIRAS), Munich (2005)
50.4
R. Krenn, A. Gibbesch, G. Hirzinger: Contact dy-
namics simulation of rover locomotion, Proc. 9th
Int. Symp. on Artif. Intell., Robotics Autom. Space,
Los Angeles (2007)
50.5
D. Holz, A. Azimi, M. Teichmann, J. Kövecses: Mo-
bility prediction of rovers on soft terrain: Effects
of wheel- and tool-induced terrain deformations,
Proc. 15th Int. Conf. Climbing Walk. Robots Support
Technol. Mob. Mach. (CLAWAR) (2012)
50.6
J.Y. Wong: Theory of Ground Vehicles (Wiley, New
York 1978)
50.7
M. Buehler, K. Iagnemma, S. Singh (Eds.): The
2005 DARPA Grand Challenge: The Great Robot Race
Springer Tracts Adv. Robotics Ser, Vol. 36 (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 2005)
50.8
M. Buehler, K. Iagnemma, S. Singh (Eds.): The
DARPA Urban Challenge: Autonomous Vehicles in
City Traffic, Springer Tracts Adv. Robotics, Vol. 56
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2009)
50.9
C. Li, T. Zhang, D.I. Goldman: A terradynamics of
legged locomotion on granular media, Science 339,
1408–1412 (2013)
50.10
C. de Wit, H. Khennouf, C. Samson, O. Sordalen:
Nonlinear control design for mobile robots. In:
Recent Trends in Mobile Robots, World Scien-
tific Series in Robotics and Automated System,
Vol. 11, ed. by Y. Zheng (World Scientific, Singapore
1993)
50.11
A. Luca, G. Oriolo, C. Samson: Feedback control of
nonholonomic car-like robots. In: Robot Motion
Planning and Control, ed. by J. Laumond (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 1998) pp. 171–254
50.12
F. Rio, G. Jimenez, J. Sevillano, S. Vicente, A. Bal-
cells: A generalization of path following for mobile
robots, Proc. 1999 IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Detroit (1999) pp. 7–12
50.13
S. Rezaei, J. Guivant, E. Nebot: Car-like robot
path following in large unstructured environments,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2003)
pp. 2468–2473
50.14
P. Coelho, U. Nunes: Path-following control of mo-
bile robots in presence of uncertainties, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 21(2), 252–261 (2005)
50.15
D. Helmick, Y. Cheng, D. Clouse, L. Matthies,
S. Roumeliotis: Path following using visual odom-
etry for a Mars rover in high-slip environments,
Proc. 2004 IEEE Aerosp. Conf., Big Sky (2004)
pp. 772–789
50.16
D. Helmick, S. Roumeliotis, Y. Cheng, D. Clouse,
M. Bajracharya, L. Matthies: Slip-compensated
path following for planetary exploration rovers,
Adv. Robotics 20(11), 1257–1280 (2006)
50.17
G. Ishigami, K. Nagatani, K. Yoshida: Slope traversal
controls for planetary exploration rover on sandy
terrain, J. Field Robotics 26(3), 264–286 (2009)
50.18
D.A. Messuri, C.A. Klein: Automatic body regulation
for maintaining stability of a legged vehicle during
rough-terrain locomotion, IEEE J. Robotics Autom.
1(3), 132–141 (1985)
50.19
S. Hirose, H. Tsukagoshi, K. Yoneda: Normalized
energy stability margin and its contour of walk-
ing vehicles on rough terrain, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2001) pp. 181–186
50.20
E. Magid, T. Tsubouchi, E. Koyanagi, T. Yoshida,
S. Tadokoro: Controlled balance losing in random
step environment for path planning of a teleoper-
ated crawler-type vehicle, J. Field Robotics 28(6),
932–949 (2011)
50.21
A. Jacoff, E. Messina, B.A. Weiss, S. Tadokoro,
Y. Nakagawa: Test arenas and performance metrics
for urban search and rescue robots, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Las Vegas (2003)
pp. 3396–3403
50.22
K. Ohno, V. Chun, T. Yuzawa, E. Takeuchi, S. Ta-
dokoro, T. Yoshida, E. Koyanagi: Rollover avoidance
using a stability margin for a tracked vehicle with
sub-tracks, IEEE Int. Workshop Saf. Sec. Rescue
Robotics (2009)
50.23
N. Vandapel, D. Huber, A. Kapuria, M. Hebert: Natu-
ral terrain classification using 3-D ladar data, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 5 (2004)
pp. 5117–5122

Modeling and Control of Robots on Rough Terrain
References
1283
Part E | 50
50.24
M. Onosato, S. Yamamoto, M. Kawajiri, F. Tanaka:
Digital gareki archives: An approach to know more
about collapsed houses for supporting search and
rescue activities, IEEE Int. Symp. Saf. Secur. Rescue
Robotics (SSRR) (2012) pp. 1–6
50.25
A. Lacaze, K. Murphy, M. Del Giorno: Autonomous
mobility for the demo III experimental unmanned
vehicles, AUVS Int. Conf. Unnanned Veh. (2002)
50.26
K.
Ohno,
T.
Suzuki,
K. Higashi,
M.
Tsubota,
E. Takeuchi, S. Tadokoro: Classification of 3-D point
cloud data that includes line and frame objects on
the basis of geometrical features and the pass rate
of laser rays, Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Field Serv. Robotics
(2012)
50.27
M. Onosato, T. Watasue: Two attempts at linking
robots with disaster information: InfoBalloon and
gareki engineering, Adv. Robotics 16(6), 545–548
(2002)
50.28
M. Onosato: Digital GAREKI modeling for explor-
ing knowledge of disaster-collapsed houses, IEEE
Int. Workshop Saf. Secur. Rescue Robotics (SSRR)
(2006)
50.29
L. Woosub, K. Sungchul, K. Munsang, P. Mignon:
ROBHAZ-DT3: Teleoperated mobile platform with
passively adaptive double-track for hazardous en-
vironment applications, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2004) pp. 33–38
50.30
B. Yamauchi: Packbot: A versatile platform for mil-
itary robotics, Proc. SPIE 5422, 228–237 (2004)
50.31
D. Inoue, K. Ohno, S. Nakamura, S. Tadokoro,
E. Koyanagi: Whole-body touch sensors for tracked
mobile robots using force-sensitive chain guides,
IEEE Int. Workshop Saf. Secur. Rescue Robotics
(SSRR) (2008) pp. 71–76
50.32
A. Jain, J. Balaram, J. Cameron, J. Guineau, C. Lim,
M. Pornerantz, G. Sohl: Recent developments in
the ROAMS planetary rover simulation environ-
ment, Proc. 2004 IEEE Aerosp. Conf., Big Sky (2004)
pp. 861–876
50.33
K. Iagnemma, C. Senatore, B. Trease, R. Arvidson,
A. Shaw, F. Zhou, L. Van Dyke, R. Lindemann: Ter-
ramechanics modeling of mars surface exploration
rovers for simulation and parameter estimation,
ASME Int. Des. Eng. Tech. Conf. (2011)
50.34
R. Bauer, W. Leung, T. Barfoot: Development of
a dynamic simulation tool for the exomars rover,
Proc. 8th Int. Symp. Artif. Intell., Robotics Autom.
Space, Munich (2005)
50.35
M.G. Bekker: Theory of Land Locomotion (Univ.
Michigan Press, Ann Arbor 1956)
50.36
M.G. Bekker: Introduction to Terrain-Vehicle Sys-
tems (Univ. Michigan Press, Ann Arbor 1969)
50.37
J.Y. Wong: Theory of Ground Vehicles, 4th edn. (Wi-
ley, Hoboken 2008)
50.38
J.Y. Wong, A.R. Reece: Prediction of rigid wheel
performance based on the analysis of soil-wheel
stresses – Part I: Performance of driven rigid
wheels, J. Terramechanics 4(1), 81–98 (1967)
50.39
J.Y. Wong, A.R. Reece: Prediction of rigid wheel
performance based on the analysis of soil-wheel
stresses – Part II: Performance of towed rigid
wheels, J. Terramechanics 4(2), 7–25 (1967)
50.40
I.C. Schmid: Interaction of vehicle and terrain re-
sults from 10 years research at IKK, J. Terramechan-
ics 32(1), 3–25 (1995)
50.41
L. Ding, Z. Deng, H. Gao, K. Nagatani, K. Yoshida:
Planetary rovers’ wheel-soil interaction mechan-
ics: New challenges and applications for wheeled
mobile robots, Intell. Serv. Robotics 4(1), 17–38
(2010)
50.42
H. Nakashima, H. Fujii, A. Oida, M. Momozu,
Y. Kawase, H. Kanamori, S. Aoki, T. Yokoyama: Para-
metric analysis of lugged wheel performance for
a lunar microrover by means of DEM, J. Terrame-
chanics 44, 153–162 (2007)
50.43
H. Nakashima, H. Fujii, A. Oida, M. Momozu,
H. Kanamori, S. Aoki, T. Yokoyama, H. Shimizu,
J. Miyasaka, K. Ohdoi: Discrete element method
analysis of single wheel performance for a small
lunar rover on sloped terrain, J. Terramechanics 47,
307–321 (2010)
50.44
W. Li, Y. Huang, Y. Cui, S. Dong, J. Wang: Trafficabil-
ity analysis of lunar mare terrain by means of the
discrete element method for wheeled rover loco-
motion, J. Terramechanics 47, 161–172 (2010)
50.45
K. Iagnemma: A Laboratory single wheel testbed
for studying planetary rover wheel-terrain inter-
action, Tech. Rep. 01-05-05 (MIT, Cambridge 2005)
50.46
S. Wakabayashi, H. Sato, S. Nishida: Design and
mobility evaluation of tracked lunar vehicle, J. Ter-
ramechanics 46(3), 105–114 (2009)
50.47
N. Patel, R. Slade, J. Clemmet: The ExoMars rover
locomotion subsystem, J. Terramechanics 47, 227–
242 (2010)
50.48
G. Ishigami, A. Miwa, K. Nagatani, K. Yoshida:
Terramechanics-based model for steering maneu-
ver of planetary exploration rovers on loose soil,
J. Field Robotics 24(3), 233–250 (2007)
50.49
R. Lindemann, D. Bickler, B. Harrington, G. Ortiz,
C. Voorhees: Mars exploration rover mobility de-
velopment, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 13(2), 19–26
(2006)
50.50
G. Ishigami, A. Miwa, K. Nagatani, K. Yoshida: Ter-
ramechanics-based analysis on slope traversability
for a planetary exploration rover, Proc. 25th Int.
Symp. Space Technol. Sci. (2006) pp. 1025–1030
50.51
S. Michaud, L. Richter, T. Thueer, A. Gibbesch,
T. Huelsing, N. Schmitz, S. Weiss, A. Krebs, N. Patel,
L. Joudrier, R. Siegwart, B. Schäfer, A. Ellery: Rover
chassis evaluation and design optimisation using
the RCET, Proc. 9th ESA Workshop Adv. Space Tech-
nol. Robotics Autom. (ASTRA) (2006)
50.52
K. Nagatani, A. Ikeda, K. Sato, K. Yoshida: Accu-
rate estimation of drawbar pull of wheeled mo-
bile robots traversing sandy terrain using built-in
force sensor array wheel, Proc. 2009 IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Robots Syst. (IROS), St. Loius (2009) pp. 2373–
2378
50.53
G. Meirion-Griffith, M. Spenko: A Modified pres-
sure-sinkage model for small, rigid wheels on de-
formable terrains, J. Terramechanics 48(2), 149–155
(2011)
50.54
C. Senatore, K. Iagnemma: Direct shear behaviour
of dry, granular soils for low normal stress with

Part E | 50
1284
Part E
Moving in the Environment
application to lightweight robotic vehicle model-
ing, 17th Conf. Terrain-Veh. Syst. (ISTVS), Blacksburg
(2011)
50.55
K. Iagnemma, S. Kang, H. Shibly, S. Dubowsky:
Online terrain parameter estimation for wheeled
mobile robots with application to planetary rovers,
IEEE Trans. Robotics 20(5), 921–927 (2004)
50.56
S. Hutangkabodee, Y. Zweiri, L. Seneviratne, K. Al-
thoefer: Soil parameter identification for wheel-
terrain interaction dynamics and traversability
prediction, Int. J. Autom. Comput. 3(3), 244–251
(2006)
50.57
D. Helmick, A. Angelova, L. Matthies, C. Brooks,
I. Halatci, S. Dubowsky, K. Iagnemma: Experimen-
tal results from a terrain adaptive navigation sys-
tem for planetary rovers, Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Artif.
Intell., Robotics Autom. Space (i-SAIRAS), Holly-
wood (2008)
50.58
G. Ishigami, G. Kewlani, K. Iagnemma: A statisti-
cal approach to mobility prediction for planetary
surface exploration rovers in uncertain terrain, IEEE
Robotics Autom. Mag. 16(4), 61–70 (2009)
50.59
O. Yoshito, K. Nagatani, K. Yoshida, S. Tadokoro,
T. Yoshida, E. Koyanagi: Shared autonomy sys-
tem for traversing and turning tracked vehicles
on rough terrain based on continuous three-di-
mensional terrain scanning, J. Field Robotics 28(6),
875–893 (2011)

Multimedia Contents Modeling an
1285
Part E | 51.1
51. Modeling and Control
of Underwater Robots
Gianluca Antonelli, Thor I. Fossen, Dana R. Yoerger
This chapter deals with modeling and control
of underwater robots. First, a brief introduction
showing the constantly expanding role of marine
robotics in oceanic engineering is given; this sec-
tion also contains some historical backgrounds.
Most of the following sections strongly overlap
with the corresponding chapters presented in this
handbook; hence, to avoid useless repetitions,
only those aspects peculiar to the underwater en-
vironment are discussed, assuming that the reader
is already familiar with concepts such as fault de-
tection systems when discussing the corresponding
underwater implementation. The modeling section
is presented by focusing on a coefficient-based
approach capturing the most relevant underwater
dynamic effects. Two sections dealing with the de-
scription of the sensor and the actuating systems
are then given. Autonomous underwater vehicles
require the implementation of mission control sys-
tem as well as guidance and control algorithms.
Underwater localization is also discussed. Under-
water manipulation is then briefly approached.
Fault detection and fault tolerance, together with
the coordination control of multiple underwater
vehicles, conclude the theoretical part of the
51.1
The Expanding Role
of Marine Robotics
in Oceanic Engineering ........................ 1285
51.1.1
Historical Background............... 1287
51.2
Underwater Robotics ........................... 1287
51.2.1
Modeling................................. 1287
51.2.2
Sensor Systems ........................ 1293
51.2.3
Actuating Systems .................... 1295
51.2.4
Communication Systems ........... 1296
51.2.5
Mission Control System ............. 1296
51.2.6
Guidance and Control............... 1297
51.2.7
Localization............................. 1299
51.2.8
Underwater Manipulation......... 1299
51.2.9
Fault Detection/Tolerance.......... 1300
51.2.10
Multiple Underwater Vehicles.... 1301
51.3
Applications ........................................ 1302
51.4
Conclusions and Further Reading ......... 1303
Video-References......................................... 1304
References................................................... 1304
chapter. Two final sections, reporting some
successful applications and discussing future per-
spectives, conclude the chapter. The reader is
referred to Chap. 25 for the design issues.
The world’s oceans cover 2=3 of the Earth’s surface and
have been critical to human welfare throughout history.
As in ancient times, they enable the transport of goods
between nations. Presently, the seas represent critical
sources of food and other resources such as oil and gas.
In the near term, we may soon see the emergence of
offshore mining for metals as well as the exploitation
of gas hydrates. Conversely, the ocean can also threaten
human safety and damage infrastructure through natural
phenomena such as hurricanes and tsunamis.
51.1 The Expanding Role of Marine Robotics in Oceanic Engineering
Our scientiﬁc understanding of the deep sea is expand-
ing rapidly through the use of a variety of technologies.
The ﬁrst scientiﬁc explorations were conducted pri-
marily through the use of diving and human-occupied

Part E | 51.1
1286
Part E
Moving in the Environment
submersibles, complemented by a variety of other tech-
nologies such as towed or lowered instruments, trawls,
dredges, autonomous seaﬂoor instruments, and deep-
sea drilling. More recently remotely operated and au-
tonomous vehicles have begun to revolutionize seaﬂoor
exploration, often returning superior data at reduced
costs. In the near future, seaﬂoor observatories linked
by ﬁber-optic cables and satellites will return massive
amounts of data from coastal and deep-sea sites. These
observations will complement those from conventional
expeditionary investigations, and will require teleoper-
ated or robotic intervention during installation and for
service. An example of a remotely operated vehicle de-
veloped for the scientiﬁc study of the seaﬂoor is the
Jason 2 vehicle developed at the Woods Hole Oceano-
graphic Institution (shown in Fig. 51.1), and a list of
remotely operated vehicles for scientiﬁc exploration ap-
pears in Table 51.1 (the last vehicle in the table, Kaiko,
was lost several years ago).
Offshore oil and gas installations are presently ser-
viced almost exclusively by remotely operated vehicles
(ROVs), physically connected via a tether to receive
power and data, with human divers used only for the
shallowest installations. Subsea systems require ex-
tensive work capability during installation, and need
frequent inspection and intervention to support drilling
operations, actuate valves, repair or replace subsea
components, and to accomplish a variety of tasks re-
quired to maintain production rates and product quality.
The trend toward robotic and teleoperated subsea inter-
vention is certain to continue as offshore oil and gas
production moves into deeper waters, and economic
considerations push key production steps from surface
platforms to the seaﬂoor. Remotely operated manipu-
lators enable these systems to perform complex tasks
such as debris removal, cleaning using abrasive tools,
Fig. 51.1 The ROV Jason 2 (courtesy of Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution)
Table 51.1 ROVs for scientiﬁc use
Vehicle
Depth (m)
Institution
Manufacturer
Hyperdolphin
3000
JAMSTECa
ISE
Dolphin 3K
3000
JAMSTEC
JAMSTEC
Quest
4000
MARUMb
Shilling
Tiburon
4000
MBARIc
MBARI
ROPOS
5000
CSSFd
ISE
Victor
6000
IFREMERe
IFREMER
Jason
6500
WHOIf
WHOI
ISIS
6500
NOCg
WHOI
UROV 7K
7000
JAMSTEC
JAMSTEC
Kaiko
11 000
JAMSTEC
JAMSTEC
a Japan Marine Science and Technology Center; b Zentrum für
Marine Umweltwissenschaften; c Monterey Bay Aquarium Re-
search Institute; d Canadian Scientiﬁc Submersile Facility; e
Institut français de recherche pour l’exploitation de la mer; f
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution; g National Oceanogra-
phy Centre
and to operate a variety of nondestructive testing tools.
The effectiveness of using ROVs decreases with depth
mainly due to the cost increase and the difﬁculties of
handling the long tether.
Autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) are free-
swimming unoccupied underwater vehicles that can
overcome the limitations imposed by ROV tethers for
some tasks. Such vehicles carry their own energy sup-
plies (presently batteries, perhaps fuel cells in the
future) and communicate only through acoustics and
perhaps optical links in the near future. Limited com-
munications require these vehicles to operate indepen-
dently of continuous human control, in many cases
the vehicles operate completely autonomously. AUVs
are currently used for scientiﬁc survey tasks, oceano-
graphic sampling, underwater archeology and under-ice
survey. Military applications, such as mine detection
and landing site survey, are presently operational, and
more ambitious applications such as long-term un-
dersea surveillance are in engineering development.
Presently, AUVs are incapable of sampling or manip-
ulations tasks like those done routinely by ROVs, as
typical work environments tend to be complex and chal-
lenging even to skilled human pilots.
Today, approximately 1000 AUVs are operational,
many of them experimental. However, they are ma-
turing rapidly. Recently several companies now offer
commercial services with AUVs. As an example, for
the oil and gas industry the cost reduction of a survey
performed with an AUVs instead of a towed vehi-
cle is up to 30% and the data quality is generally
higher. Likewise, commercial manufacturers in several
countries now offer turnkey AUV systems for speciﬁc,
well-deﬁned tasks. Currently, remotely operated manip-

Modeling and Control of Underwater Robots
51.2 Underwater Robotics
1287
Part E | 51.2
ulators are standard equipment for most ROVs, while on
the contrary autonomous manipulation is still a research
challenge; the projects SAUVIM [51.1], ALIVE [51.2]
and TRIDENT [51.3] were devoted to studying this
control problem.
VIDEO 88
shows a graphical ren-
dering of a mission with the AUV Nereus,
VIDEO 87
shows the perspective view from the Remus AUV,
VIDEO 92
a 10-minutes long documentary of an
underice mission and ﬁnally
VIDEO 90
a strong in-
teraction with a shark.
51.1.1 Historical Background
Boats have been used by humans since the start of
recorded history, but vehicles able to go under wa-
ter are more recent. Perhaps the ﬁrst recorded idea of
an underwater machine came from Aristotle; accord-
ing to legend he built the: skaphe andros (boat-man)
that allowed Alexander the Great (Alexander III of
Macedonia, 356323 BC) to stay submerged for at
least half a day during the war of Tiro in 325 BC.
This is probably unrealistic; if true it would precede
Archimedes’ law, which was ﬁrst articulated in approx-
imately 250 BC. Leonardo Da Vinci may have been
the ﬁrst to design an underwater vehicle. His efforts
were recorded in the Codice Atlantico (Codex Atlanti-
cus), written between 1480 and 1518. Legends say that
Leonardo worked on the idea of an underwater military
machine but he destroyed the results as he judged them
to be too dangerous. The ﬁrst use of feedback theory for
marine control was probably the Northseeking device,
patented in 1908, that used gyroscopic principals to de-
velop the ﬁrst autopilot [51.4]. From that point on, the
use of feedback theory in marine control grew contin-
uously; it is interesting to notice that the proportional–
integral–derivative (PID) control commonly used today
in numerous industrial applications was ﬁrst formally
analyzed in 1929 by Minorsky [51.5]. The ﬁrst remotely
operated underwater vehicle, POODLE, was built in
1953, and the ROV evolved through the 1960s and
1970s, mostly for military purposes. In the 1980s ROVs
became established for use in the commercial offshore
industry and began to emerge for scientiﬁc applications.
The ﬁrst tetherless, autonomous vehicles were built for
experimental purposes in the 1970s. Currently, AUVs
are becoming increasingly commonplace for scientiﬁc,
military, and commercial applications. Turnkey AUV
systems for a range of tasks are available from commer-
cial vendors, and AUV services can be acquired from
a number of companies [51.6].
51.2 Underwater Robotics
51.2.1 Modeling
A rigid body is completely described by its position and
orientation with respect to a reference frame ˙i; Oi 
xyz that is supposed to be Earth-ﬁxed and inertial. Let
us deﬁne 1 2 R3 as
1 D .x y z/T ;
the vector of the body position coordinates in an Earth-
ﬁxed reference frame. The vector P1 is the correspond-
ing time derivative (expressed in the Earth-ﬁxed frame).
If one deﬁnes
1 D .u v w/T
as the linear velocity of the origin of the body-ﬁxed
frame ˙b; Ob  xb yb zb with respect to the origin of
the Earth-ﬁxed frame expressed in the body-ﬁxed frame
(from now on: body-ﬁxed linear velocity) the following
relation between the deﬁned linear velocities holds
1 D RB
I P1 ;
(51.1)
where RB
I is the rotation matrix expressing the transfor-
mation from the inertial frame to the body-ﬁxed frame.
Let us deﬁne 2 2 SO.3/ as
2 D .   /T
the vector of body Euler angle coordinates in a Earth-
ﬁxed reference frame. In the nautical ﬁeld those are
commonly named roll, pitch, and yaw. Yaw is deﬁned
as rotation around the z axis of the ﬁxed frame; pitch is
deﬁned as rotation around the y axis resulting after the
yaw movement; and roll is deﬁned as rotation around
the x axis resulting after both yaw and pitch movements.
The vector P2 is the corresponding time derivative (ex-
pressed in the inertial frame). Let us deﬁne
2 D .p q r/T
as the angular velocity of the body-ﬁxed frame with
respect to the Earth-ﬁxed frame expressed in the body-
ﬁxed frame (from now on: body-ﬁxed angular velocity).
The vector P2 does not have a physical interpretation
and it is related to the body-ﬁxed angular velocity by
a proper Jacobian matrix
2 D Jk;o.2/ P2 :
(51.2)

Part E | 51.2
1288
Part E
Moving in the Environment
The matrix Jk;o 2 R33 can be expressed in terms of the
Euler angles as
Jk;o.2/ D
0
B@
1
0
s
0
c
cs
0
s
cc
1
CA ;
(51.3)
where c˛ and s˛ are abbreviations for cos.˛/ and
sin.˛/, respectively. The matrix Jk;o.2/ is not invert-
ible for every value of 2. In detail, it is
J1
k;o.2/ D 1
c
0
B@
1
ss
cs
0
cc
cs
0
s
c
1
CA ;
(51.4)
that it is singular for  D .2lC1/ 
2 rad, with l 2 N, i. e.,
for a pitch angle of ˙ 
2 rad.
The rotation matrix RB
I , needed in (51.1) to trans-
form the linear velocities, is expressed in terms of the
Euler angles by
RB
I .2/ D
0
B@
c c
s c
s
s c C c ss
c c C s ss
sc
s s C c sc
c s C s sc
cc
1
CA :
(51.5)
Table 51.2 shows the common notation used for ma-
rine vehicles according to the Society of Naval Archi-
tects and Marine Engineers (SNAMEs) notation [51.7];
a sketch is shown in Fig. 51.2.
As for any representation of a rigid body’s orienta-
tion several possibilities arise, among them, the use of
a four-parameter description given by unit quaternions.
The term quaternion was introduced by Hamilton in
Table 51.2 Common notation for the motion of a marine
vehicle
Forces
and moments
1; 2
1; 2
Motion in the
x-direction
Surge
X
u
x
Motion in the
y-direction
Sway
Y
v
y
Motion in the
z-direction
Heave
Z
w
z
Rotation about
the x-axis
Roll
K
p

Rotation about
the y-axis
Pitch
M
q

Rotation about
the z-axis
Yaw
N
r
 
y
zb
η1
x
z
θ (pitch)
φ (roll)
ψ (yaw)
ω (heave)
υ (sway)
yb
υ (surge)
xb
Fig. 51.2 Motion variables for an underwater vehicle
1840, 70 years after the introduction of a four-parameter
rigid-body attitude representation by Euler. An intro-
duction to alternative orientation representations can be
found in Chap. 2 and concerning the marine environ-
ment in [51.8].
It is useful to collect the kinematic equations in six-
dimensional matrix forms. Let us deﬁne the vector  2
R6 as
 D
 
1
2
!
;
(51.6)
and the vector  2 R6 as
 D
 
1
2
!
;
(51.7)
and, deﬁning the matrix Je.RI
B/ 2 R66
Je.RI
B/ D
 
RB
I
033
033
Jk;o
!
;
(51.8)
where the rotation matrix RB
I is given in (51.5) and Jk;o
is given in (51.3),
 D Je.RI
B/ P :
(51.9)
The inverse mapping, given the block-diagonal struc-
ture of Je, is given by
P D J1
e .RI
B/ D
 
RI
B
033
033
J1
k;o
!
 ;
(51.10)
where J1
k;o is given in (51.4).
Deﬁning as
v D
 
1
2
!
;
the vector of generalized forces, where
1 D .X Y Z/T ;
(51.11)

Modeling and Control of Underwater Robots
51.2 Underwater Robotics
1289
Part E | 51.2
the resultant forces acting on the rigid body expressed
in a body-ﬁxed frame, and
2 D .K M N/T ;
(51.12)
the corresponding resultant moment to the pole Ob, it is
possible to rewrite the Newton–Euler equations of mo-
tion of a rigid body moving in the space as
MRB P C CRB./ D v :
(51.13)
The derivation of (51.13) can be found in Chap. 3.
The matrix MRB is constant, symmetric, and pos-
itive deﬁnite, i. e., PMRB D 0 and MRB D MT
RB > 0. Its
unique parametrization is of the form
MRB D
 
mI3
mS.rb
C/
mS.rb
C/
IOb
!
;
(51.14)
where rb
C is the 3  1 distance vector to the center of
gravity (CG) expressed in the body-ﬁxed frame, I3 is
the 3  3 identity matrix, and IOb is the inertia tensor
expressed in the body-ﬁxed frame S.x/ is the matrix
operator performing the cross product between two .3
1/ vectors
S.x/ D
0
B@
0
x3
x2
x3
0
x1
x2
x1
0
1
CA :
On the other hand, there does not exist a unique
parametrization of the matrix CRB, which represents the
Coriolis and centripetal terms. It can be demonstrated
that the matrix CRB can always be parameterized such
that it is skew symmetric, i. e.,
CRB./ D CT
RB./
8 2 R6 I
(51.15)
explicit expressions for CRB can be found in [51.8].
Notice that (51.13) can be greatly simpliﬁed if the
origin of the body-ﬁxed frame is chosen to be coinci-
dent with the central frame, i. e., rb
C D 0.
Hydrodynamic Generalized Forces
Equation (51.13) represents the motion of a rigid body
in an empty space, while dealing with ships or underwa-
ter vehicles requires the consideration of the presence of
the hydrodynamics generalized forces, i. e., the forces
and moments caused by the presence of the ﬂuid. In
hydrodynamics it is common to assume that the gen-
eralized hydrodynamics forces on a rigid body can be
linearly superimposed [51.9]; in particular, those are
separated into radiation-induced forces, environmental
disturbances, and restoring forces due to gravity and
buoyancy.
Radiation-induced forces are deﬁned as the:
forces on the body when the body is forced to os-
cillate with the wave excitation frequency and there
are no incident waves;
these can be identiﬁed as the sum of the added mass due
to the inertia of the surrounding ﬂuid and the radiation-
induced potential damping due to the energy dissipated
by generated surface waves.
Environmental disturbances can be identiﬁed as the
generalized forces caused by the wind, the waves, and
the ocean current.
The overall equations of motions can therefore be
written in matrix form as [51.8, 10, 11]
Mv P C Cv./ C Dv./ C gv.RI
B/ D v ;
(51.16)
where Mv D MRB C MA and Cv D CRB C CA also in-
clude the added mass terms.
In the following sections these generalized forces,
speciﬁc to the marine environment, will be brieﬂy dis-
cussed.
Added Mass and Inertia
When a rigid body is moving in a ﬂuid, the addi-
tional inertia of the ﬂuid surrounding the body that is
accelerated by the movement of the body has to be
considered. This effect can be neglected in industrial
robotics since the density of the air is much lower than
the density of a moving mechanical system. In under-
water applications, however, the density of the water,
	 
 1000 kg=m3, is comparable with the density of the
vehicles. In particular, at 0 ıC, the density of freshwater
is 1002:68kg=m3; for sea water with 3:5% salinity it is
	 D 1028:48kg=m3.
The ﬂuid surrounding the body is accelerated with
the body, so a force is necessary to achieve this accel-
eration, while the ﬂuid exerts a reaction force which is
equal in magnitude and opposite in direction. This re-
action force is the added mass contribution. The added
mass is not a quantity of ﬂuid to add to the system such
that it has an increased mass. Different properties hold
with respect to the 6  6 inertia matrix of a rigid body
due to the fact that the added mass is a function of the
body’s surface geometry.
The hydrodynamic force along xb due to the linear
acceleration in the xb-direction is deﬁned as
XA WD XPuPu ;
where
XPu WD XPu WD @X
@Pu ;
where the symbol @ denotes the partial derivative. In the
same way it is possible to deﬁne all the remaining 35
elements that relate the six force/moment components
.X Y Z K M N/T to the six linear/angular accelera-
tions .Pu Pv Pw Pp Pq Pr/T. These elements can be grouped

Part E | 51.2
1290
Part E
Moving in the Environment
into the added mass matrix MA 2 R66. Usually, all the
elements of the matrix are nonzero.
In general, added mass and potential damping will
be frequency dependent and depend on the forward
speed. This is also the case for certain viscous damp-
ing terms (skin friction, roll damping, etc.). This gives
a pseudo differential equation describing the frequency
response of the vehicle. Since some of the coefﬁcients
depend on the frequency this is not an ordinary differen-
tial equation (ODE). The frequency equation, however,
can be transformed to the time domain using the con-
cepts described in [51.12] and [51.13], and recently
in [51.14]. The time-domain equations will in general
include ﬂuid memory effects [51.4]. However, under-
water robots are usually modelled using maneuvering
theory where the potential coefﬁcients are evaluated at
the zero frequency. The resulting equation is an ODE
where the added inertia matrix MA is constant, speed
independent, and positive deﬁnite
MA D MT
A > 0 ;
PMA D 0 :
(51.17)
This result is well known from ship hydrodynam-
ics; [51.15] for instance. The matrix MA can be
computed using numerical programs such as WAMIT
or Matlab, based on the US Air Force Digital Dat-
com [51.16]; in this case, the zero-frequency result
should be used, that is, MA D A.0/ where A.!/ is the
frequency-dependent added mass matrix. The potential
damping matrix will be small compared to the vis-
cous effects and drag/lift terms. Hence, this term can be
set to zero for underwater vehicles. If the added mass
is computed experimentally, it is common practice to
symmetrize the results such that
MA D 1
2

Aexp C AT
exp

;
where Aexp denotes the experimentally obtained added
mass terms.
If the body is completely submerged in the wa-
ter and is designed with port/starboard symmetry (xz-
plane) as is common for underwater vehicles in six
degrees-of-freedom (DOF), the following structure of
the matrices MA can be considered
MA D 
0
BBBBBBBBB@
XPu
0
X Pw
0
XPq
0
0
YPv
0
YPp
0
YPr
ZPu
0
Z Pw
0
ZPq
0
0
KPv
0
KPp
0
KPr
MPu
0
M Pw
0
MPq
0
0
NPv
0
NPp
0
NPr
1
CCCCCCCCCA
:
(51.18)
The added mass coefﬁcients can theoretically be de-
rived by exploiting the geometry of the rigid body or
numerically by strip theory [51.17].
In [51.18] the coefﬁcients for the experimental
AUV Phoenix of the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS)
are reported. These coefﬁcients have been derived ex-
perimentally, and the geometry gives a nondiagonal MA
matrix. To provide an order of magnitude for the added
mass terms, for the vehicle mass of about 5000kg, the
XPu is approximately 500 kg.
The added mass also makes an added Coriolis and
centripetal contribution. It can be demonstrated that the
matrix expression can always be parameterized such
that
CA./ D CT
A./ ;
8 2 R6 ;
whose symbolic expressions can be found in [51.4].
Hydrodynamic Damping
The hydrodynamic damping for marine vehicles is
mainly caused by:

Potential damping

Skin friction

Wave drift damping

Vortex shedding damping

Viscous damping.
The radiation-induced potential damping due to
forced body oscillations is commonly known as po-
tential damping; its dynamic contribution is usually
negligible with respect to, e.g., the viscous friction for
underwater vehicles while it may be signiﬁcant for sur-
face vessels.
Linear skin friction is due to laminar boundary lay-
ers and can affect the low-frequency motion of the ve-
hicle. Together with this effect, at high frequencies it is
possible to observe a quadratic, or nonlinear, skin fric-
tion phenomenon caused by turbulent boundary layers.
Wave drift damping is the dominant dynamic damp-
ing effect in surge motion of surface vessels in high sea.
It can be considered as an added resistance for boats ad-
vancing in waves; its drift is proportional to the square
of the signiﬁcant wave height. In the sway and yaw di-
rections, however, its dynamic contribution is negligible
with respect to the effect of vortex shedding.
A body moving in a ﬂuid causes a separation of
the ﬂow; this can still be considered as laminar in the
upstream while two antisymmetric vortices can be ob-
served in the downstream. In case that the body is
a cylinder moving in a direction normal to its axis, the
result is a periodic force normal to both the velocity
and the axis. This effect may cause the oscillation of
cables and other underwater structures. However, con-
cerning underwater vehicles, this effect is negligible for

Modeling and Control of Underwater Robots
51.2 Underwater Robotics
1291
Part E | 51.2
ROVs and may be counteracted by designing proper
small control surfaces for torpedo-like AUVs.
Vortex shedding is an unsteady ﬂow that takes place
at special ﬂow velocities (according to the size and
shape of the cylindrical body). In this ﬂow vortices are
created at the back of the body, periodically from each
side.
The viscosity of the ﬂuid also causes dissipative
forces. These are composed of drag and lift forces, the
former being parallel to the relative velocity of the vehi-
cle with respect to the water while the latter are normal
to it. For a sphere moving in a ﬂuid, the drag force can
be modeled as [51.9]
Fdrag D 1
2	U2SCd.Rn/ ;
(51.19)
where 	 is the ﬂuid density, U is the velocity of the
sphere, S is the frontal area of the sphere, Cd is the
nondimensional drag coefﬁcient, and Rn is the Reynolds
number. For a generic body, S is the projection of the
frontal area along the ﬂow direction. The drag force
can be considered as the sum of two physical effects:
the frictional contribution of the surface whose normal
is perpendicular to the ﬂow velocity, and the pressure
contribution of the surface whose normal is parallel to
the ﬂow velocity. For a hydrofoil moving in a ﬂuid, the
lift force can be modeled as [51.9]
Flift D 1
2	U2SCl.Rn; ˛/ ;
(51.20)
where S is now the area, Cl is the nondimensional lift
coefﬁcient, and ˛ is the angle of attack, i. e., the an-
gle between the relative velocity and the tangent to the
surface. For small angles of attack, i. e., j˛j < 10ı, the
lift coefﬁcient is approximatively proportional to ˛ and
rapidly decays to zero as ˛ increases [51.19].
The drag and lift coefﬁcients are therefore de-
pendent on the Reynolds number, i. e., on the lami-
nar/turbulent ﬂuid motion
Rn D 	jUjD

;
where D is the characteristic dimension of the body
perpendicular to the direction of U and  is the dy-
namic viscosity of the ﬂuid. Table 51.3 reports the drag
coefﬁcients as a function of the Reynolds number for
a cylinder [51.20].
Table 51.3 Lift and drag coefﬁcient for a cylinder
Reynolds number
Regime motion
Cd
Cl
Rn < 2  105
Subcritical ﬂow
1
30:6
2  105 < Rn < 5  105
Critical ﬂow
10:4
0:6
5  105 < Rn < 3  105
Transcritical ﬂow
0:4
0:6
A common simpliﬁcation considers only linear and
quadratic damping terms and group these into a ma-
trix Dv as in (51.16) such that
Dv./ > 0 ;
8 2 R6 :
Gravity and Buoyancy
When a rigid body is completely or partially submerged
in a ﬂuid under the effect of the gravity two more forces
have to be considered: the gravitational force and buoy-
ancy. The latter is the only hydrostatic effect, i. e., it
is not a function of the relative movement between the
body and ﬂuid.
Let us deﬁne as
gI D .0 0 9:81/Tm=s2
the acceleration of gravity. This effect is not constant
but varies with depth, longitude, and latitude; however,
this value is usually accurate enough for most applica-
tions except for inertial navigation systems.
For a completely submerged body the computation
of these dynamic effects is straightforward. The sub-
merged weight of the body is deﬁned as W D mjjgIjj,
while its buoyancy B D 	rjjgIjj, where r is the vol-
ume of the body and m is its mass. The gravity force,
which acts at the center of mass rB
C, is represented in the
body-ﬁxed frame by
f G.RB
I / D RB
I
0
B@
0
0
W
1
CA ;
while the buoyancy force, acting at the center of buoy-
ancy rB
B, is represented in the body-ﬁxed frame by
f B.RB
I / D RB
I
0
B@
0
0
B
1
CA :
The 6  1 vector of force/moment due to gravity and
buoyancy in the body-ﬁxed frame, included in the left-
hand side of the equations of motion, is represented by
gv.RB
I / D 
 
f G.RB
I / C f B.RB
I /
rB
G  f G.RB
I / C rB
B  f B.RB
I /
!
:

Part E | 51.2
1292
Part E
Moving in the Environment
In the following, the symbol rB
G D .xG yG zG/T (with
rB
G D rB
C) will be used for the center of gravity. The ex-
pression for gv in terms of the Euler angles is
gv.2/ D
0
BBBBBBBBB@
.W  B/s
.W  B/cs
.W  B/cc
.yGW  yBB/cc C .zGW  zBB/cs
.zGW  zBB/s C .xGW  xBB/cc
.xGW  xBB/cs  .yGW  yBB/s
1
CCCCCCCCCA
:
(51.21)
Current
Ocean currents are mainly caused by tidal movement,
the atmospheric wind system over the sea surface, heat
exchange at the sea surface, salinity changes, the Cori-
olis force due to the Earth’s rotation, nonlinear waves,
the major ocean circulations such as the Gulf Stream,
the effect of setup phenomena or storm surges, and
strong density gradients in the upper ocean. Currents
can be very different due to local climatic and/or ge-
ographic characteristics; as an example, in fjords, the
tidal effect can cause currents of up to 3 m=s, moreover,
speciﬁc mathematical models exist for the various com-
ponents [51.8].
Let us assume that the ocean current, expressed in
the inertial frame, I
c, is constant and irrotational, i. e.,
I
c D .
c;x 
c;y 
c;z 0 0 0/T ;
and PI
c D 0; its effects can be added to the dynamics of
a rigid body moving in a ﬂuid simply by considering
the relative velocity in the body-ﬁxed frame
r D   RB
I I
c
(51.22)
in the derivation of the added Coriolis and centripetal
and the damping terms.
Mv P C CRB./ C CA.r/r C Dv.r/r C gv.RI
B/
D v :
(51.23)
Notice that the term CA.r/r includes the important
destabilizing effect known as the Munk moment [51.9].
If Dv.r/ is unknown, quadratic surge resistance
and the cross-ﬂow drag principle can be used to de-
scribe the dissipative forces and moments in surge,
sway, and yaw [51.9]. Moreover
CA.r/r C Dv.r/r 
 .Xc Yc 0 0 0 Nc/T
(51.24)
for large relative current angles jˇc   j, where ˇc is
the current direction, the cross-ﬂow principles models
the sway force Yc and yaw moment Nc as
Yc D 	
2
Z
L
H.x/CD.x/v x
r .x/jv x
r .x/jdx
(51.25)
Nc D 	
2
Z
L
xH.x/CD.x/v x
r .x/jv x
r .x/jdx  Xrjrjrjrj ;
(51.26)
where L is the vehicle length, H.x/ is the vehicle
height, CD.x/ is the two-dimensional drag coefﬁcient,
and v x
r .x/ D vr C rx is the relative cross-ﬂow velocity
at x. In practice CD.x/ can be chosen as a constant be-
tween 0 and 1. The proper value can be determined by
curve ﬁtting of experimental data. Along the surge di-
rection, however, the quadratic damping contribution Xc
is still well represented by a term proportional to the
square of the relative velocity, whose symbolic expres-
sion can be written as
Xc D Xujujurjurj ;
(51.27)
where Xujuj > 0 is the quadratic surge damping coef-
ﬁcient, which can be found by curve ﬁtting of exper-
imental data or relating it to the drag coefﬁcient Cd
as in (51.19). The approximation embedded in (51.24)
does not represent sufﬁciently enough the dynamics at
low velocities, when the quadratic terms are negligible.
Hence, it is common to add a linear optional damper in
surge, sway and yaw; this can be physically explained
as skin friction which shows a linear behavior.
Alternatively, the computation of the quadratic
surge resistance, nonlinear roll damping, and the cross-
ﬂow drag effect can be made by resorting to the Datcom
database for aircraft, as shown in [51.21].
Model Properties
For completely submerged bodies in an ideal ﬂuid mov-
ing at low velocity where there are no currents or
waves, (51.16) satisﬁes the following properties:

The inertia matrix is symmetric and positive deﬁ-
nite, i. e.,
Mv D MT
v > 0 :

The damping matrix is positive deﬁnite, i. e.,
Dv./ > 0 :

The matrix Cv./ is skew symmetric, i. e.,
Cv./ D CT
v./; 8 2 R6 :
Hydrodynamic Modeling
The mathematical model of an underwater robot as ex-
pressed in (51.16) is of great importance; even when

Modeling and Control of Underwater Robots
51.2 Underwater Robotics
1293
Part E | 51.2
Table 51.4 Dorado payload for scientiﬁc sampling (courtesy of Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute [51.22])
Sensor model
Description
WHN300
300 kHz Acoustic Doppler Current Proﬁler/Doppler Velocity Log, manufactured by Teledyne/RD Instruments
8CB4000I
Paroscientiﬁc Digiquartz pressure sensor, 4000 m full scale
Gulpers
10  2 liter Water Samplers
HS2
Hobilabs 2 channel backscatter/ﬂuorometer, 420 nm/700 nm excitation
LISST-100
Sequoia Scientiﬁc particle size spectrum instrument
ISUS
In-situ ultraviolet spectrometer for nitrate measurement
2xSBE3/SBE4
Seabird temperature/conductivity instrument, 2 pairs of instruments carried
SBE43
Seabird dissolved oxygen cell
2xSBE5
Pumps for C/T/DO/ISUS and C/T/LISST ﬂow paths
UBAT
Wetlabs bioluminescence assessment tool (bathyphtometer for measuring plankton bio-luminsescence)
LOPC
Laser Optical Plankton Counter
ECO-CDOM
Fluorometer for measuring CDOM (colored dissolved organic matter)
simpliﬁed it captures the most important part of the
dynamics. Moreover, it is in a form appropriate for
control design. A wide literature exists on AUV/ROV
controllers whose stability relies on the properties re-
ported above. On the other hand, there are working
conditions in which these assumptions are no longer
valid, i. e., when the AUV is traveling at high speed,
or close to the surface, or when its shape does not al-
low geometric simpliﬁcations. The latter is the case
of, e.g., several ROVs. In addition, it is still com-
mon to design the controllers for AUVs based on
linearized models and to control ROVs with simple PID
controllers.
These considerations justify a modeling effort to
calculate the hydrodynamic terms more accurately with
the aim of prediction, simulation, and performance
analysis rather than control design. This can be done
by switching from a coefﬁcient-based approach, such
as that presented above, to a component modeling
method, the latter being based on computational ﬂuid
dynamics theory. In detail, each vehicle geometry,
with its speciﬁc angle of attack and sideslip, is taken
into consideration when computing the hydrodynamic
forces/moments. This increased computational effort
makes it possible to capture some dynamic effects, such
as the vortex-induced roll moment, not justiﬁable with
the coefﬁcient-based approach.
The control plant model is usually a simpliﬁed
model that captures the most important parts of the dy-
namics. The most accurate model of the vehicle should
be used for prediction and motion simulation.
51.2.2 Sensor Systems
Underwater vehicles are equipped with a sensor system
devoted to enabling motion control as well as accom-
plishing the speciﬁc mission it has been commanded
to complete. In the latter case, sensors developed for
chemical/biological measurements or mapping may be
installed, which is beyond the scope of this chapter. For
seek of example, Table 51.4 reports the payload for the
AUV Dorado, shown in Fig. 51.3.
AUVs need to operate underwater most of the time;
one of the major problems with underwater robotics is
in the localization task due to the absence of a single,
proprioceptive sensor to measure the vehicle position.
The global positioning system (GPS) cannot be used
underwater. Redundant multisensor systems are com-
monly combined using state estimation or sensor fusion
techniques to provide fault detection and tolerance ca-
pability to the vehicle. Table 51.5 lists the types of
sensors and the corresponding variable measured com-
monly available for unmanned underwater vehicles
(UUVs).
The sensors that can be found on an underwater ve-
hicle are:

Compass: A gyrocompass can provide an estimate
of geodetic north accurate to a fraction of a de-
gree. Magnetic compasses can provide estimates of
Fig. 51.3 The AUV Dorado (courtesy of Monterey Bay
Aquarium Research Institute [51.22])

Part E | 51.2
1294
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Table 51.5 UUVs: possible instrumentation
Sensor
Measured variable
Inertial system
Linear acceleration and angular
velocity
Pressure meter
Vehicle depth
Frontal sonar
Distance from obstacles
Vertical sonar
Distance from the bottom
Doppler velocity log
Relative velocity vehicle/bottom
Current meter
Relative velocity vehicle/current
Global positioning
system
Absolute position at the surface
Compass
Orientation
Acoustic positioning
Absolute position in known area
Vision systems
Relative position/velocity
Acoustic Doppler
current proﬁler
Relative water velocity
magnetic north with an accuracy of less than 1ı
if carefully calibrated to compensate for magnetic
disturbances from the vehicle itself. Tables or mod-
els can be used to convert from magnetic north to
geodetic north.

Gyroscope: The term gyroscope, or gyro, is the
name given generically to any instrument measuring
inertial angular rotation. Those are based on inertial
properties of a vibrating mass or of light. Very accu-
rate gyros may output signal that, when integrated,
give heading information with a small enough drift
for practical purposes.

Inertial measurement unit (IMU): An IMU provides
information about the vehicle’s linear acceleration
and angular velocity. These measurements are com-
bined to form estimates of the vehicle’s attitude in-
cluding an estimate of geodetic (true) north from the
most complex units. In most cases, for slow-moving
underwater vehicles, an independent measurement
of the vehicle’s velocity is also required to produce
accurate estimates of the translational velocity or
relative displacement.

Depth sensor: Measuring the water pressure gives
the vehicle’s depth. At depths beyond a few hundred
meters, the equation of state of seawater must be in-
voked to produce an accurate depth estimate based
on the ambient pressure [51.23]. With a high-quality
sensor, these estimates are reliable and accurate,
giving a small error of order 0:01%.
Table 51.6 JHUROV instrumentation
Measured variable
Sensor
Precision
Update rate
3-DOF vehicle position
SHARP acoustic transponder
0:5 cm
10 Hz
Depth
Foxboro/ICT model n. 15
2:5 cm
20 Hz
Heading
Litton LN200 IMU Gyro
0:01ı
20 Hz
Roll and pitch
KVH ADGC
0:1ı
10 Hz
Heading
KVH ADGC
1ı
10 Hz

Altitude and forward-looking sonar: These are used
to detect the presence of obstacles and distance from
the seaﬂoor.

Doppler velocity log (DVL): By processing reﬂected
acoustic energy from the seaﬂoor and the water col-
umn from three or more beams, estimates of vehicle
velocity relative to the seaﬂoor and relative water
motion can be obtained. Bottom-tracking velocity
estimates can be accurate to 
 1 mm=s.

Global navigation satellite system (GLS): This is
used to localize the vehicle while on the surface
to initialize or reduce drift of estimates from an
IMU/DVL combination. GNSS, such as GPS or
Galileo, only works at the surface.

Acoustic positioning: A variety of schemes exist for
determining vehicle position using acoustics. Long-
baseline navigation can determine the position of
the vehicle relative to a set of acoustic beacons an-
chored to the seaﬂoor or on the surface through
range estimates obtained from acoustic travel times.
Ultrashort-baseline navigation uses phase informa-
tion to determine direction from a cluster of hy-
drophones; this is most often used to determine
the direction of the vehicle (in two dimensions)
from a surface support vessel, which is then com-
bined with an acoustic travel-time measurement to
produce an estimate of relative vehicle position in
Fig. 51.4 The
fully
actuated
AUV
ODIN
(courtesy
of
Autonomous
Systems
Laboratory,
University
of
Hawaii [51.24])

Modeling and Control of Underwater Robots
51.2 Underwater Robotics
1295
Part E | 51.2
Table 51.7 ODIN III sensors summary
Measured variable
Sensor
Update rate
xy vehicle position
8 sonars
3 Hz
Depth
Pressure sensor
30 Hz
Roll, pitch, and yaw
IMU
30 Hz
spherical coordinates. These techniques will be dis-
cussed later in the localization section.

Vision systems: Cameras can be used to obtain
estimates of relative, and in some cases abso-
lute, motion using a type of simultaneous localiza-
tion and mapping (SLAM) algorithm [51.25] and
used to perform tasks such as visual tracking of
pipelines, station keeping, visual servoing or image
mosaicking.
As an example, Table 51.6 reports some data from
the instrumentation of the ROV developed at the John
Hopkins University [51.26], and Table 51.7 some data
from the AUV ODIN III [51.27] shown in Fig. 51.4.
Majumder et al. [51.28] show some data fusion results
with a redundant sensorial system mounted on the AUV
Oberon, while [51.29] reviews advances in navigation
technology.
51.2.3 Actuating Systems
Marine vehicles are generally propelled by means of
thrusters or hydrojets. In the case of ROVs with struc-
tural pitch–roll stability, there are usually four thrusters
that provide holonomic mobility to the four remained
DOFs, in particular, the depth is often decoupled and
the vehicle is controlled on a plane in the surge, sway,
and yaw DOFs. Those vehicles, being underactuated,
cannot easily be used for interactive control by means of
a manipulator due to the impossibility of counteracting
the generalized forces exchanged with the manipu-
lator’s base; in such case, six or more thrusters are
required. AUVs generally have a torpedo-like shape and
are used for mapping/exploration. They are propelled
using one or two thrusters parallel to the fore–aft direc-
tion and a ﬁn and a rudder; this kind of propulsion is
obviously nonholonomic and experiences a loss of mo-
bility at low velocities. Hydrojets, also known as pump
jets or water jets, are systems that create a jet of wa-
ter for propulsion; they have certain advantages over
thrusters such as a higher power density and usability
in shallow water, but can provide thrust in one direction
only.
Several efforts have been made to accurately
and efﬁciently describe the mathematical model of
a thruster; [51.30] reports a one-state model where the
state is n, the propeller shaft speed. In [51.31] a two-
state model is proposed to take into account the ex-
perimentally observed overshoot in the thrust; together
with n, the additional state variable is up, the axial
ﬂow velocity in the propeller disc. In [51.32] a thruster
model incorporating the effects of rotational ﬂuid ve-
locity and inertia on thruster responses is presented
together with a method for experimentally determining
nonsinusoidal lift/drag curves. A three-state model is
described in [51.33]
JmPn C Knn D   Q ;
mf Pup C df0up C dfjupj.up  ua/ D T ;
.m  XPu/Pu  Xuu  Xujujujuj D .1  t/T ;
where Jm is the moment of inertia for the dc-
motor/propeller, Kn is the linear motor damping coef-
ﬁcient,  is the motor control input, Q is the propeller
torque, mf is the mass of water in the propeller control
volume, up is the axial ﬂow velocity in the propeller
disc, df0 and df are the linear and quadratic damping
coefﬁcients for control volume, respectively, ua is the
ambient water velocity, T is the propeller thrust, and t
is the thrust deduction number (Fig. 51.5). In the case
of steady-state motion, i. e., Pu D 0, the ambient water
velocity ua is related to the surge by the wake fraction
number w as
ua D .1  w/u :
(51.28)
Notice also that the unmeasured variable up can be esti-
mated using a nonlinear observer [51.33].
The outputs of the nonlinear three-state dynamic
systems are the thrust T and the torque Q, which
are functions of several variables; in the following,
unsteady ﬂow effects such as air suction, cavitation,
the in-and-out-of-water (Wagner), boundary layer, and
ua
up
u
Fig. 51.5 Ambient water and axial ﬂow velocities affect-
ing thruster behavior

Part E | 51.2
1296
Part E
Moving in the Environment
gust (Kuessner) effects will be neglected. This leads to
a quasi-steady representation of the model
T D 	D4KT.J0/njnj ;
(51.29)
Q D 	D5KQ.J0/njnj ;
(51.30)
where D is the propeller diameter and KT.J0/ and
KQ.J0/ are the thrust and torque coefﬁcients, respec-
tively. The latter are function of the advance ratio J0
J0 D ua
nD :
(51.31)
The open-water propeller efﬁciency in undisturbed wa-
ter is given as the ratio of the work done by the propeller
in producing a thrust force divided by the work required
to overcome the shaft torque
0 D
uaT
2nQ D J0
2  KT
KQ
:
(51.32)
Figure 51.6 shows the values of KT, KQ, and 0 as func-
tions of the advance ratio for the Wageningen B4-70
propeller [51.34].
Controlling a marine vehicle usually requires that
desired forces/moments act on the vehicle’s body; these
generalized forces are mapped into desired thrusts to be
provided by the propellers. There is, thus, a nontrivial
control problem in that the motors are required to pro-
vide the appropriate propeller shaft speed n that satisﬁes
the nonlinear relationship with the thrust T presented
above.
To enable robustness with respect to possible fail-
ures, the actuating system is often redundant. In
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
KT, 10 KQ, η0
J0
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1.2
Fig. 51.6 Values of KT (solid), 10KQ (dotted), and 0 (dash-dotted)
as a function of J0 (after [51.34])
this case, the problem of allocation of the desired
force/moment acting on the vehicle among the thrusters
must also be solved. Reference [51.35] reports a survey
of control allocation methods of ships and underwater
vehicles.
51.2.4 Communication Systems
Autonomous underwater vehicles may require to com-
municate with a remote operator or with a base sta-
tion for monitoring purposes. In case of coordinated
mission among several AUVs a network of vehi-
cles/modes communicating among them need to be
developed.
Due to the physical characteristics of the water,
the more diffused communication technology is based
on acoustic propagation. However, the performance of
acoustic modems are not as efﬁcient as their aerial
conuterparts. Three main factors affect the acoustic
propagation: a low speed of sound (
 1500m=s), the
presence of time-varying multiple paths, an attenuation
increasing with the frequency. Finally, the channel ca-
pacity is function of the distance and is limited [51.36].
For such a challenging communication medium, ef-
ﬁcient communication protocols need to be properly
designed [51.37].
51.2.5 Mission Control System
The mission control system (MCS) can be considered
as the highest-level process running during an AUV’s
mission; it is responsible for achieving several control
objectives. At the highest level it works as an inter-
face between the operator, accepting his instructions in
a higher-level language and decomposing those instruc-
tions into mission tasks according to the implemented
software architecture. The mission tasks are generally
concurrent and their handling depends on the vehicle
state and environmental conditions; it is therefore the
MCS that handles the tasks, eventually suppressing, se-
quencing, modifying, and prioritizing them. An MCS
is also usually equipped with a graphical user interface
(GUI) to report the mission state to the operator, see,
e.g., the Neptus Command and Control Infrastructure
in
VIDEO 324 .
As for most advanced robotics applications, an ef-
ﬁcient MCS should allow the use of complex robotic
systems by users that do not necessarily know all of
their technical details. An overview relevant to un-
derwater mission control is given in [51.38], which
includes an interesting classiﬁcation of the MCSs in use
in several laboratories according to which four major
AUV control architectures were identiﬁed: the hierar-
chical, heterarchical, subsumption, and hybrid.

Modeling and Control of Underwater Robots
51.2 Underwater Robotics
1297
Part E | 51.2
From a mathematical point of view, the MCS gener-
ally needs to be designed in order to be able to address
hybrid dynamical systems, i. e., handling both event-
driven and time-driven processes. In [51.39], e.g., the
MCS developed at the Portuguese Instituto Superior
Técnico (IST), named CORAL, is implemented by re-
sorting to a Petri-net-based architecture that properly
handles all the necessary tasks in order to manage
navigation, guidance and control, sensing, communica-
tions, etc.
The motion-oriented operating system (MOOS), de-
signed at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is
a software tool capable of executing and coordinating
a multitude of subsea operations. The MCS developed
at the Naval Postgraduate School is in the framework of
the behavioral control organized in three layers [51.40];
it is based on PROLOG, an artiﬁcial intelligence lan-
guage for predicate logic.
51.2.6 Guidance and Control
The terms guidance and control can be deﬁned
as [51.8]:

Guidance is the action of determining the course,
attitude, and speed of the vehicle, relative to some
reference frame (usually the Earth), to be followed
by the vehicle.

Control is the development and application to a ve-
hicle of appropriate forces and moments for operat-
ing point control, tracking, and stabilization. This
involves designing the feedforward and feedback
control laws.
Figure 51.7 shows the corresponding block dia-
gram, in which the navigation component is also out-
lined.
Trajectory
generator
ROV/AUV
Autopilot
Observer
Guidance system
Control system
Sensors
Navigation system
Way points
Disturbances
Control
allocation
Fig. 51.7 Guidance, navigation, and control for an autonomous marine vehicle
Guidance of Underwater Vehicles
Guidance algorithms may beneﬁt from a wide range of
inputs, overall mission information, real-time operator
input, environmental measured data such as the ocean
current, environmental topological information such as
a bathymetric map, exteroceptive sensors for obstacle
avoidance, and obviously the vehicle state as output
from the navigation system.
The vehicle may be required to follow a path, i. e.,
a curve geometrically represented in two or three di-
mensions, or a trajectory, i. e., a path with a speciﬁc
time law assigned. Moreover, when the desired position
is constant, the problem is called set-point regulation or
maneuvering. The guidance problem is commonly de-
composed into simple subtasks of lower dimension: an
attitude control problem and a path control. Moreover,
attitude is usually considered as a simple depth set-point
with null roll and pitch and the path is usually a line in
the horizontal plane.
One of the most common guidance approaches is
based on the generations of way-points. Those are usu-
ally stored in a database and are used to generate the
vehicle path/trajectory; a passing velocity, in fact, may
be deﬁned together with the Cartesian coordinates of
the points. The simplest way to connect the way-points
is to use the segments connecting two successive way-
points. Efﬁcient way-point-based guidance approaches
need to take into account the presence of the current and
the eventual nonholonomicity of the vehicle [51.41].
A technique for adaptively tracking bathymetric con-
tours by proper generation of way-points is presented
in [51.42]; environment information is acquired by
mean of a single vertical sonar. An alternative method
is based on line-of-sight guidance [51.43–45]. In this
case, the heading control is computed by considering as
input the angle formed by the vector from the vehicle to
the next way-point rather than requiring the vehicle to

Part E | 51.2
1298
Part E
Moving in the Environment
exactly follow the line segment between the current and
the following way-point. For docking maneuvers, algo-
rithms must enable control that meets the precision and
alignment constraints of the docking ﬁxture [51.46].
By combining vision-based guidance with a neuro-
controller trained by reinforcement learning, in [51.47],
an algorithm aimed at a hold station on a reef or
swimming along a pipe has been presented. In [51.48]
guidance for AUVs speciﬁcally involved in a pre-
deployment survey of the sea bottom and visual inspec-
tion of pipelines is given. Hyland and Taylor [51.49]
report a speciﬁc guidance system aimed at mine avoid-
ance for AUVs. Based on a three-dimensional dis-
cretization of the environment, the path-planning tech-
nique consists of computing a safe path avoiding the
unsafe cells of the map. Due to the poor manoeuvrabil-
ity at low speed under some conditions, the vehicle has
to make a 360ı turn to avoid stopping and to map the
environment close to it before generating a safe path.
A deep discussion on guidance for surface and un-
derwater vehicles can be found in [51.4, 8].
Control of Underwater Vehicles
Control of underwater vehicles needs to consider the
different operating conditions and actuating conﬁgu-
rations in which a submerged vehicle is required to
operate. In particular, there are three main control prob-
lems:

An AUV traveling at high speed (>1 m=s) generally
equipped with at least one thruster aligned in the
fore–aft direction and at least two control surfaces
(stern and rudder).

An underactuated ROV, with high metacentric sta-
bility, i. e., structurally stable in roll and pitch, and
equipped with at least four thrusters.

A fully actuated AUV equipped with at least six
trusters.
AUVs equipped with control surfaces are under-
actuated vehicles mainly used for survey/exploration
missions. Inheriting the common practice of submarine
control, they are not allowed to perform arbitrary mo-
tions in six DOFs but are rather designed to perform
speciﬁc movements such as: cruising along a given di-
rection at constant depth, steering at constant depth,
or diving. Marine experience and mathematical insight,
in fact, demonstrate that these movements are lightly
coupled in dynamic terms. For these vehicles, more-
over, speciﬁc manoeuvres such as homing or docking
require special capabilities [51.46]. This requires the
design of vehicles that are structurally stable in the roll
DOF. Cruising requires control of the surge velocity
u.t/; steering requires control of the sway velocity v.t/
and the yaw DOF r.t/,  .t/, diving requires control of
the heave DOF !.t/, z.t/ and the pitch DOF q.t/, .t/.
The simplest conﬁguration of actuators that can con-
trol an AUV through these movements is composed of
one thruster aligned along the fore–aft direction, one
stern, and one rudder; the control variables, thus, are the
propeller speed and the deﬂection of the ﬁns. Several
approaches can then be considered to solve this con-
trol problem, among them, in [51.50] the sliding mode
control is proposed, while [51.51] presents an adaptive
sliding mode control for the diving manoeuvre. Healey
and Lienard [51.18] reports a successful implementa-
tion of multivariable sliding mode control on the NPS
AUV II, later also implemented on the NPS ARIES
AUV [51.52]. As the model of an AUV traveling at high
speed is nonlinear and coupled, the tuning of the param-
eters is mainly based on a linearized model around the
working conditions.
From a descriptive point of view, an ROV is mainly
a box-shaped underwater vehicle equipped with tools
such as a video camera or robot manipulator, while its
payload is often variable depending on the task. It is
remotely operated and physically connected to another
vehicle, either an underwater or a surface vessel. It is
mainly designed to travel at low speed and it is struc-
turally stable in roll and pitch, while its depth, surge,
sway, and yaw are independently controllable. Due to
the absence of a speciﬁc shape, the varying payload, and
the relatively low required performances, it is common
to control a ROV by means of single-input single-output
(SISO) controllers. Moreover, the PID approach is of-
ten used due to its simplicity. A two-layer guidance
and control architecture for the ROV Romeo is given
in [51.53].
Control of a fully actuated AUV in six DOFs is
needed in the case of, e.g., an interaction task performed
by a manipulator mounted on a vehicle; the latter, in
fact, needs to provide all the force/moment compo-
nents in order to counteract the presence of the ma-
nipulator dynamically. This problem is kinematically
similar to the problem of controlling a satellite in six
DOFs; the underwater environment, however, makes
it signiﬁcatively different from the dynamic point of
view. In kinematic terms the main issue is in imple-
menting a suitable policy for orientation control; any
three-parameter representation of orientation, in fact,
experiences representation singularities (Chap. 2). This
problem may be overcome by resorting to a redundant
representation of the orientation such as the quater-
nion. Most of the six-DOF controllers proposed in the
literature are based on (51.16), which model the simpli-
ﬁed effect of the hydrodynamic terms and which have
very similar properties as the equations of motion of
an industrial manipulator. Based on this, it is obviously
possible to ﬁnd a collection of approaches inherited

Modeling and Control of Underwater Robots
51.2 Underwater Robotics
1299
Part E | 51.2
from classical robotics, [51.4, 8] for some examples.
In [51.54], some speciﬁc considerations for the under-
water environment lead to a quaternion-based, adaptive
controller; it is worth noticing that adaptive control
requires a suitable, and simpliﬁed, expression for the
hydrodynamic terms. In [51.55] a comparison among
several 6-DOF controllers is made.
VIDEO 267
and
VIDEO 268
show two controllers validation imple-
mented in a pool.
51.2.7 Localization
Localization in the underwater environment can be
a complex task, mainly due to the absence of a single
external sensor that gives the vehicle position such as,
e.g., the GPS for outdoor ground vehicles; moreover,
the environment is often poorly structured.
One of the most reliable methods is based on
the use of acoustic systems such as the baseline
systems: the long-baseline system (LBL), the short-
baseline system (SBL), and the ultrashort-baseline sys-
tem (USBL). These systems are based on the presence
of a transceiver mounted on the vehicle and a variable
number of transponders located in known positions.
The transceiver’s distance from each transponder can
be measured via the measurement of an echo delay;
from this information the position of the vehicle can
be calculated by basic triangulation operations [51.56].
The USBL can be used with a single transponder,
which is usually mounted on a surface ship whose posi-
tion is measured by GPS. Recent works are aimed at
developing localization algorithms based on a single
beacon, i. e., range-only measurement among vehicles
and buoys [51.57].
Another localization system is called terrain-aided
navigation and is based on the use of terrain elevation
maps; bathymetric maps are available, especially in the
case of well-known locations such as harbors where
they usually have a resolution of 
 1 m. In this case, the
vehicle position is obtained by ﬁltering the information
coming from a downward-looking sonar. In [51.58],
a particle ﬁlter approach was used to localize an AUV
in Sydney harbor.
Moving vehicles may be equipped with an IMU or
DVL in order to measure its velocity and/or accelera-
tion. This data can then be integrated to estimate the
vehicle position. This kind of information is subject to
the drift phenomenon and may not be reliable for long-
duration runs or may become cost ineffective if accurate
IMU devices are needed.
Relative localization can be obtained by resorting to
any device that provides information about the relative
position of the vehicle with respect to the environ-
ment, even in the absence of a map. In this case, by
ﬁltering the distance measurements taken along the mo-
tion, the vehicle’s position can be measured. This is the
case, e.g., of sonar or vision-based localization tech-
niques [51.59].
Often, the techniques presented above are used to-
gether in a redundant system and the effective position
is obtained by resorting to sensor fusion techniques
such as the Kalman ﬁltering approach.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), also
known as concurrent mapping and localization (CML),
is a wide topic in mobile robotics. The problem can
be formulated as the requirement for a mobile robot
to be placed in an unknown environment and progres-
sively build a map while locating itself inside the map.
Chapter 46 discusses this topic in detail. For the ma-
rine environment an additional issue arises due by the
large-scale map that needs to be used for long-duration
missions; [51.60] implements a decoupled stochastic
mapping to handle this computational problem in an
extended Kalman ﬁlter. Terrain-aided navigation with
the use of a scanning sonar is implemented in [51.61].
Newman and Leonard [51.62] use long-baseline range
measurements as the input for a nonlinear least-squares
approach solved by the Gauss–Newton method; both
the initially unknown position of the transponders and
the vehicle position are estimated. An interesting sur-
vey on navigation and SLAM for underwater vehicles
is given in [51.29].
51.2.8 Underwater Manipulation
A manipulator may be mounted on an AUV or a ROV
in order to accomplish interaction operations. In this
case, the vehicle needs to be fully actuated to counteract
the forces and moments generated by the manipulator’s
base. By considering a manipulator with n links, thus
six DOFs, the underwater vehicle manipulator system
(UVMS) is a .6Cn/-DOF robotic system whose veloc-
ity vector is

 D .T
1 T
2 PqT/T ;
(51.33)
where q 2 Rn is the vector collecting the manipulator
joints positions.
Repeating the same considerations as for an under-
water vehicle, it is possible to write the equations of
motions of an UVMS in matrix form as
M.q/ P
 C C.q; 
/
 C D.q; 
/
 C g.q; RI
B/ D  ;
(51.34)
where M 2 R.6Cn/.6Cn/ is the inertia matrix, includ-
ing added mass terms, C.q; 
/
 2 R6Cn is the vector of

Part E | 51.2
1300
Part E
Moving in the Environment
the Coriolis and centripetal terms, D.q; 
/
 2 R6Cn is
the vector of dissipative effects, and g.q; RB
I / 2 R6Cn is
the vector of gravity and buoyancy effects. The relation-
ship between the generalized forces  and the control
input is given by
 D
 
v
q
!
D
 
Bv
06n
0n6
In
!
u D Bu ;
(51.35)
where u 2 RpvCn is the vector of the control input. No-
tice that, while for the vehicle a generic number pv  6
of control inputs is assumed, for the manipulator it is
supposed that n joint motors are available.
Under this hypothesis, which can be considered as
reasonable at low velocity, it holds that:

The inertia matrix M of the system is symmetric and
positive deﬁnite.

For a suitable choice of the parametrization of C and
if all the single bodies of the system are symmetric,
PM  2C is skew symmetric.

The matrix D is positive deﬁnite.
In [51.20] the mathematical model written with
respect to the Earth-ﬁxed-frame vehicle position and
the manipulator end-effector can be found. However,
it must be noted that, in this case, a six-dimensional
manipulator is considered in order to have a square Ja-
cobian to work with; moreover, kinematic singularities
need to be avoided.
The equations of motion of UVMSs in matrix form
presented in (51.34) are formally similar to the equa-
tions of motion of ground ﬁxed manipulators (Chap. 3)
for which a wide control literature exists. This has sug-
gested a suitable translation/implementation of existing
control algorithms. However, some differences, crucial
from the control aspect, need to be underlined. UVMSs
are complex systems characterized by several strong
constraints:

Uncertainty in the model knowledge, mainly due to
the poor knowledge about the hydrodynamic effects

The complexity of the mathematical model

The kinematic redundancy of the system

The difﬁculty in controlling the vehicle in hovering,
mainly due to poor thruster performance

The dynamic coupling between the vehicle and the
manipulator

The low bandwidth of the sensor readings.
In 1996 McLain et al. [51.63] presented a control
law for UVMSs with some interesting experimental
results conducted at the Monterey Bay Aquarium Re-
search Institute (MBARI). A one-link manipulator was
Fig. 51.8 An
underwater
vehicle–manipulator
system
(courtesy of FP7-TRIDENT Project Consortium)
mounted on the OTTER vehicle controlled in all six
DOFs by means of eight thrusters. A coordinated con-
trol system was then implemented to improve the track-
ing errors of the end effector.
The monograph [51.64] is focused on the modeling
and control issues of such systems, and can be con-
sidered as a reference for further reading. Moreover,
interaction with the environment is also discussed.
Currently, remotely operated manipulator are stan-
dard equipment for several underwater ROVs. However,
autonomous manipulation is still a research challenge.
The SAUVIM vehicle, developed at the Autonomous
Systems Laboratory, University of Hawaii, one of the
ﬁrst semiautonomous underwater vehicle manipulator
systems. Similar research projects, ALIVE and TRI-
DENT were funded by the Framework Program of the
European Community [51.2]. Figure 51.8 reports the
UVMS developed under the TRIDENT project [51.3].
VIDEO 89
shows a sampling performed with the
Nereus arm.
51.2.9 Fault Detection/Tolerance
Generally, AUVs must operate over long periods of
time in unstructured environments in which an unde-
tected failure could cause the loss of the vehicle. Failure
detection and a fault-tolerant strategy are required to de-
termine whether a mission must be terminated in the
safest manner possible or if the vehicle can continue in
a diminished capacity. An example is the case of the
arctic mission of Theseus [51.65].
In the case of the use of ROVs, a skilled human op-
erator is in charge of commanding the vehicle; a failure
detection strategy is then of help in the human decision-
making process. Based on the information detected, the
operator can decide on vehicle rescue or to terminate
the mission by, e.g., turning off a thruster.

Modeling and Control of Underwater Robots
51.2 Underwater Robotics
1301
Part E | 51.2
Fault detection is the process of monitoring a sys-
tem in order to recognize the presence of a failure;
fault isolation or diagnosis is the capability to deter-
mine which speciﬁc subsystem is subject to failure.
Often in the literature there is a certain overlap in the
use of these terms. Fault tolerance is the capability to
complete the mission in the case of the failure of one
or more subsystems; it is also known as fault control,
fault accommodation, or control reconﬁguration. In the
following the terms fault detection/tolerance will be
used.
The characteristics of a fault detection scheme are
the capability to isolate the detected failure, sensitivity
in terms of the magnitude of the failure that can be de-
tected, and robustness in the sense of the capability to
continue working properly in non-nominal conditions.
The requirements of a fault-tolerant scheme are reliabil-
ity, maintainability, and survival. The common concept
is that, to overcome the loss of capability due to a fail-
ure, a kind of redundancy is required in the system.
In this section, a survey of existing fault-detection
and fault-tolerant schemes for underwater vehicles is
presented. For these speciﬁc systems, if proper strate-
gies are applied, a hardware/software (HW/SW) sensor
or thruster failure can be successfully handled. In some
conditions, the fault-detection scheme must also be
able to diagnose some external abnormal working con-
ditions such as a multipath phenomena affecting the
echo-sounder system. It is worth noticing that, for au-
tonomous systems such as AUVs, space systems or
aircraft, a fault-tolerant strategy is necessary to safely
recover the damaged vehicle and, obviously, there is no
panic button in the sense that the choice of turning off
the power or activating some kind of brake is not avail-
able.
Most fault-detection schemes are model based
[51.66, 67] and consider the dynamic relationship be-
tween the actuators and vehicle behavior or the spe-
ciﬁc input–output thruster dynamics. In general, fault-
detection/tolerance theory has been applied to the spe-
ciﬁc case of the underwater environment even if only
a few papers report experimental results; see [51.68] for
a survey on this topic.
Most fault-tolerant schemes consider a thruster-
redundant vehicle that, after a fault has occurred in
one of its thrusters, is still actuated in six DOFs.
Based on this assumption a reallocation of the desired
forces on the vehicle over the working thrusters is per-
formed [51.69]. Of interest is also the study of reconﬁg-
uration strategies if the vehicle becomes underactuated.
Possible Failures
Underwater vehicles are currently equipped with sev-
eral sensors in order to provide information about their
localization and velocity. The problem is not easy. No
single, reliable sensor is available that gives the re-
quired position/velocity measurement, or information
about the environment such as the presence of obsta-
cles. For this reason the use of sensor fusion by, e.g.,
a Kalman ﬁltering approach, is a common technique
to provide the controller with the required variables.
This structural redundancy can be used to provide fault-
detection capabilities to the system.
For each of the sensors listed in Sect. 51.2.2 failure
can consist of an output of zero if, e.g., there is an elec-
trical trouble, or a loss of meaning. It can be considered
as sensor failure also an external disturbance such as
a multipath reading of the sonar that can be interpreted
as a sensor fault and correspondingly detected.
Thruster blocking occurs when a solid body is
present between the propeller blades. It can be checked
by monitoring the current required by the thruster. This
was observed, e.g., during the Antarctic mission of
Romeo [51.70], in that case caused by a block of ice.
During the same mission a thruster also ﬂooded with
water. The consequence was an electrical dispersion,
causing an increasing blade rotation velocity and thus
a thruster force higher then desired.
A possible consequence of different failures of
the thrusters is the zeroing of the blade rotation. The
thruster in question thus simply stops working. This
has been intentionally experienced during experiments
with, e.g., ODIN [51.67, 69], Roby 2 [51.66], and
Romeo [51.70].
Other failures include a hardware/software crash or
the occurrence of ﬁn sticking or loss. A very common
type of failure involves the loss of electrical isolation
due to seawater intrusion into underwater electrical ca-
bles or connectors. Such a condition can be detected
through a technique called ground-fault monitoring.
Should this occur, electrical power must be removed
from the affected device.
51.2.10 Multiple Underwater Vehicles
A growing research effort has recently been devoted
to developing strategies to design coordinated con-
trol for underwater vehicles. The use of multiple
AUVs, in fact, might improve overall mission perfor-
mance as well as provide greater tolerance to failures.
Speciﬁc applications of this method in the underwa-
ter environment might include the naval mine coun-
termeasure problem, harbor monitoring, and inspec-
tion, exploration, and mapping of large areas. AUVs
might be coordinated with one or more surface ves-
sels or connected to ground or aerial vehicles to form
a coordinated network of heterogeneous autonomous
robots.

Part E | 51.3
1302
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Beside several institutions that have developed sim-
ulation packages for multiple-AUV operations, the use
of real multiple AUVs is being considered for the adap-
tive sampling and forecasting plan of the Autonomous
Ocean Sampling Network, formed by several research
institutions such as (for the robotic components) Cal-
tech, MBARI, Princeton, and WHOI [51.71]. Adap-
tive sampling is also investigated within the project
Adaptive Sampling and Prediction (ASAP) [51.72].
The Australian National University is currently work-
ing on a shoal of small, autonomous robots, named
Seraﬁna [51.73]. At Instituto Superior Técnico (IST),
work is ongoing on the coordination between an AUV
and a catamaran [51.74], i. e., a multirobot system
constituted by heterogeneous autonomous vehicles.
In [51.75] the cooperation between AUVs and a sensor
network is experimentally investigated.
VIDEO 323
and
VIDEO 94
show two examples of multi-vehicle
bathymetry mission and multi-vehicle patrolling, re-
spectively.
51.3 Applications
Underwater robots currently play prominent roles in
a number of scientiﬁc, commercial, and military tasks.
Remotely teleoperated vehicles are very well estab-
lished in all these areas, and are becoming increasingly
automated to relieve the burden on human operators
and to improve performance. Increasingly, autonomous
underwater vehicles are ﬁnding application in these
areas as well. Presently, AUVs are used almost ex-
clusively for survey work, but sampling and other
intervention tasks are becoming more feasible. Addi-
tionally, the line between ROVs and AUVs continues
to blur, as systems that have the best properties of both
evolve.
The offshore oil and gas industry relies heavily
on ROVs for installation, inspection, and servicing of
platforms, pipelines, and subsea production facilities.
As the search for oil and gas goes deeper, this trend
can only continue. The Marine Technology Society
estimates that there are over 435 work-class ROVs oper-
ating in the commercial offshore industry today. AUVs
are now beginning to appear in the commercial off-
shore industry for survey tasks, and concepts for hybrid
systems that can perform intervention tasks are now ap-
pearing. The goal is not only for these robotic vehicles
to replace human divers or human-occupied vehicles,
but to enable an entire new generation of subsea equip-
ment that is serviced without intervention by drill ships
or other heavy-lifting vessels. This holds the prospect
of greatly reduced cost.
Scientiﬁc demand for ROVs and AUVs is also in-
creasing dramatically. Scientiﬁc applications for ROVs
include survey, inspection, and sampling tasks previ-
ously performed by human-occupied submersibles or
towed vehicles. While ROVs operating for science are
not nearly as numerous as those in the offshore oil
and gas industry, they are becoming commonplace.
Most nations involved in global seaﬂoor studies have
several vehicles. Like the vehicles for the commer-
cial offshore sector, these vehicles are becoming in-
creasingly automated. High-quality electronic imaging,
including high-deﬁnition television, is becoming in-
creasingly common. Scientiﬁc ROVs are now equipped
with sophisticated sampling devices for sampling ani-
mals, microbes, caustic hydrothermal vent ﬂuids, and
a variety of rock samples. Moreover, ROVs are also
used to deploy and operate seaﬂoor experiments, which
can involve difﬁcult tasks such as drilling and delicate
placement of instruments.
ROVs have also emerged as powerful tools for in-
vestigating underwater shipwrecks and other cultural
sites. Applications include forensic investigations of
modern shipwrecks to determine the cause of sinking,
archaeology, and salvage. For archaeology, the goals are
the same as for excavation on land: detailed mapping
followed by careful excavation. Beyond diver depths,
ROVs are the preferred method for these investigations.
Great progress has been made in the detailed map-
ping phase, and capabilities for excavation are evolving.
Unfortunately, the same technology also opens the pos-
sibility for shipwrecks to be looted for ﬁnancial gain,
which usually results in the loss of the most valuable
historical information.
After a long period of skepticism, AUVs are now
accepted for scientiﬁc tasks. Presently, AUVs most of-
ten perform mapping tasks while tended by a vessel.
Speciﬁc mapping tasks include seaﬂoor bathymetry,
sidescan sonar imaging, magnetic ﬁeld mapping, hy-
drothermal vent localization, and photo surveys. AUVs
have been shown to improve productivity and data qual-
ity compared to towed and tethered systems. They have
also operated in environments where no other means of
gathering data is possible, such as under ice shelves.
Likewise, the increasing availability of sophisticated
in situ chemical sensors, biological sensors, and mass
spectrometers now allows AUVs to build spatial and
temporal maps of environmental features that could pre-

Modeling and Control of Underwater Robots
51.4 Conclusions and Further Reading
1303
Part E | 51.4
viously only be studied by bringing samples back to the
laboratory. AUV systems that can dock to subsea nodes
to recharge batteries, ofﬂoad data and receive new in-
structions are presently being tested.
The military has always been a leader in the devel-
opment of underwater robotic capabilities. They pio-
neered ROVs for tasks such as recovering test weapons
and deep-sea salvage, and present-day commercial and
scientiﬁc ROVs have descended directly from these
early systems. Likewise, military interests are presently
pushing AUV technology very hard. Many different
countries operate AUVs for military surveys, gather-
ing environmental data as well as searching for hazards
such as mines. An operational success was achieved
in surveying for mines in the Persian Gulf harbor of
Umm Qasr using REMUS vehicles. AUVs in devel-
opment will not only be able to detect mines, but to
disable them. Bolder, more innovative concepts are also
in development. These include networks of AUVs that
can act as extensions of conventional surface vessels
and submarines, enabling surveillance over wide ar-
eas for extended periods of time at costs far less than
could be achieved with conventional surface vessels,
submarines, and aircraft. These developments will rely
on improvements in acoustic communications, energy
systems, sensors, and onboard intelligence that will
likely ﬁnd their way into commercial and scientiﬁc
practice.
51.4 Conclusions and Further Reading
The underwater environment is extremely hostile for
human engineering activities. In addition to high pres-
sures and hydrodynamic forces that are both nonlinear
and unpredictable, water is not an appropriate media for
electromagnetic communication except at short ranges.
This pushes underwater technology to rely on acous-
tic communication and positioning systems that are
characterized by low bandwidth. On the other hand,
the ocean is extremely important for numerous human
activities from the commercial, cultural, and environ-
mental points of view.
Research on underwater robotic applications is ac-
tive both from the technological and methodological
aspects. The power endurance of commercially AUVs
is currently up to 50 h; this will increase as energy-
storage devices improve. Improved energy and power
capability will enable longer missions, higher speeds,
or better/additional sensors such as, e.g., more pow-
erful lighting for underwater video/photography. The
current trend for the price of AUVs prices is down-
ward, with more and smaller research institutions
building or buying AUVs to enrich their research re-
sults; moreover the setup of multiple-AUV systems
is becoming cost effective. The goal is to develop
fully autonomous, reliable, robust, decision-making
AUVs.
There are a number of technology issues that are
needed in order to improve AUV capabilities: to in-
crease the underwater bandwidth of current acoustic
modems, to increase onboard power to handle larger
tools and interact more strongly with the environment,
to create AUVs with signiﬁcant hovering capability to
allow better interaction, and to enable easier launch and
recovery.
In the near future, the ROV/AUV dichotomy will
likely become less prominent, with a variety of systems
appearing that have attributes of both systems:

For offshore oil and gas intervention tasks, a vehicle
could transit to the work site as a self-powered, fully
autonomous vehicle, then dock to the work site. Uti-
lizing energy and communications infrastructure at
the work site, the vehicle could then be operated
much like a conventional ROV.

Battery-operated ROVs can communicate with the
surface by very lightweight ﬁber-optic links, en-
abling the mobility of an AUV but with a high-
bandwidth connection to skilled human operators
for complex intervention or scientiﬁc sampling
tasks.

Acoustic and optical data links can provide moder-
ate to high communication bandwidths over short
ranges, enabling human supervision without any
tether restrictions. At longer ranges, more modest
acoustic bandwidths are available.
These developments make marine robotics a chal-
lenging engineering problem with strong connections to
several engineering domains. Sending an autonomous
vehicle into an unknown and unstructured environment
with limited online communication requires some on-
board intelligence and the ability for the vehicle to react
in a reliable way to unexpected situations.
A major challenge concerning underwater robotics
is the interaction with the environment by means of one
or more manipulators. Autonomous UVMSs are still
the object of research; the current trend is in devel-
oping the ﬁrst semiautonomous robotic devices, which

Part E | 51
1304
Part E
Moving in the Environment
might be acoustically operated; moreover, if physically
possible, the capability to dock to the structure where
the intervention is needed might signiﬁcatively sim-
plify the control. The ﬁnal aim might be to develop
a completely autonomous UVMS, able to localize the
intervention site, recognize the task to be performed,
and act on it without docking to the station and with-
out human intervention. This might make it possible to
perform missions that are currently impossible such as
autonomous archaeological intervention at deep sites.
This would also enable the oil and gas industry to sig-
niﬁcatively decrease costs and risks to humans.
The Marine Systems Simulator [51.76] is a Mat-
lab/Simulink library and simulator for marine systems.
It includes models for ships, underwater vehicles, and
ﬂoating structures. The library also contains guidance,
navigation, and control (GNC) blocks for real-time
simulation. A numerical simulator including also the
presence of a manipulator has been developed under the
TRIDENT project [51.77].
For further reading on the topic of underwater
systems, the reader is referred to several survey arti-
cles, including [51.6, 29, 35, 38, 68]. Additionally, sev-
eral journals cover oceanic engineering topics, in-
cluding robotics aspects. A variety of symposia and
workshops have been held on a regular basis. Some
books/monographs treating marine robotics are [51.4,
8, 9, 17, 64].
Video-References
VIDEO 87
Dive with REMUS
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/51/videodetails/87
VIDEO 88
Underwater vehicle Nereus
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/51/videodetails/88
VIDEO 89
Mariana Trench: HROV Nereus samples the Challenger Deep seafloor
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/51/videodetails/89
VIDEO 90
REMUS SharkCam: The hunter and the hunted
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/51/videodetails/90
VIDEO 92
The Icebot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/51/videodetails/92
VIDEO 94
Two underwater Folaga vehicles patrolling a 3-D area
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/51/videodetails/94
VIDEO 267
Adaptive L1 depth control of a ROV
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/51/videodetails/267
VIDEO 268
Saturation based nonlinear depth and yaw control of an underwater vehicle
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/51/videodetails/268
VIDEO 323
Multi-vehicle bathymetry mission
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/51/videodetails/323
VIDEO 324
Neptus command and control infrastructure
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/51/videodetails/324
References
51.1
J. Yuh, S.K. Choi, C. Ikehara, G.H. Kim, G. McMurty,
M. Ghasemi-Nejhad, N.N. Sarkar, K. Sugihara: De-
sign of a semi-autonomous underwater vehicle for
intervention missions (SAUVIM), IEEE Int. Symp. Un-
derw. Technol. (1998) pp. 63–68
51.2
P. Marty: ALIVE: An autonomous light intervention
vehicle, Adv. Technol. Underw. Veh. Conf., Oceanol.
Int. (2004)
51.3
M. Prats, J.C. Garcia, S. Wirth, D. Ribas, P.J. Sanz,
P. Ridao, N. Gracias, G. Oliver: Multipurpose au-
tonomous underwater intervention: A systems in-
tegration perspective, 20th IEEE Mediterr. Conf.
Contr. Autom., Barcelona (2012) pp. 1379–1484
51.4
T.I. Fossen: Handbook of Marine Craft Hydrody-
namics and Motion Control (Wiley, New York 2011)
51.5
S. Bennett: A brief history of automatic control, IEEE
Control Syst. Mag. 16(3), 17–25 (1996)
51.6
J. Yuh, M. West: Underwater robotics, J. Adv.
Robotics 15(5), 609–639 (2001)
51.7
SNAME: Nomenclature for Treating the Motion of
a Submerged Body Through a Fluid, Techn. Res.
Bull. (SNAME, New York 1952) pp. 1–5
51.8
T.I. Fossen: Guidance and Control of Ocean Vehicles
(Wiley, New York 1994)
51.9
O.M. Faltinsen: Sea Loads on Ships and Off-
shore Structures (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge
1990)
51.10
J. Yuh: Modeling and control of underwater robotic
vehicles, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 20, 1475–1483
(1990)

Modeling and Control of Underwater Robots
References
1305
Part E | 51
51.11
T.I. Fossen, A. Ross: Guidance and Control of Un-
manned Marine Vehicles, IEEE Control Engineering
(Wiley, Chichester 1999) pp. 23–42
51.12
W.E. Cummins: The impulse response function and
ship motions, Techn. Rep. 1661 (DTIC, Washington
1962)
51.13
T.F. Ogilvie: Recent progress towards the under-
standing and prediction of ship motions, 5th Symp.
Nav. Hydrodyn. (1964) pp. 3–79
51.14
T. Perez, T.I. Fossen: Time-domain models of ma-
rine surface vessels for simulation and control de-
sign based on seakeeping computations, 7th Conf.
Manoeuvring Control Mar. Craft, (IFAC) (2006)
51.15
T.I. Fossen: A nonlinear unified state-space model
for ship maneuvering and control in a seaway,
J. Bifurc. Chaos 15(9), 2717–2746 (2005)
51.16
M. Nahon: Determination of undersea vehicle hy-
drodynamic derivatives using the USAF, Datcom,
Proc. Ocean. Conf., Victoria (1993) pp. 283–288
51.17
J.N. Newman: Marine Hydrodynamics (MIT, Cam-
bridge 1977)
51.18
A.J. Healey, D. Lienard: Multivariable sliding mode
control for autonomous diving and steering of un-
manned underwater vehicles, IEEE J. Ocean. Eng.
18, 327–339 (1993)
51.19
B. Stevens, F. Lewis: Aircraft Control and Simula-
tions (Wiley, New York 1992)
51.20
I. Schjølberg, T.I. Fossen: Modelling and con-
trol of underwater vehicle-manipulator systems,
3rd Conf. Manoeuvring Control Mar. Craft (IFAC),
Southampton (1994) pp. 45–57
51.21
E.A. de Barros, A. Pascoal, E. de Sea: Progress to-
wards a method for predicting AUV derivatives, 7th
Conf. Manoeuvring Control Mar. Craft (IFAC), Lisbon
(2006)
51.22
Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute: http://
www.mbari.org
51.23
N.P. Fofonoff, R.C. Millard: Algorithms for Com-
putation of Fundamental Properties of Seawater,
UNESCO Tech. Pap. Mar. Sci. No. 44 (UNESCO, Paris
1983)
51.24
Autonomous
Systems
Laboratory, University of
Hawaii: http://www.eng.hawaii.edu/~asl/
51.25
R. Eustice, H. Singh, J.J. Leonard, M. Walter: Vi-
sually mapping the RMS Titanic: Conservative co-
variance estimates for SLAM information filters, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 25(12), 1223–1242 (2006)
51.26
D.A. Smallwood, L.L. Whitcomb: Adaptive iden-
tification of dynamically positioned underwater
robotic vehicles, IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol.
11(4), 505–515 (2003)
51.27
S. Zhao, J. Yuh: Experimental study on advanced
underwater robot control, IEEE Trans. Robotics
21(4), 695–703 (2005)
51.28
S. Majumder, S. Scheding, H.F. Durrant-Whyte:
Multisensor data fusion for underwater navigation,
Robotics Auton. Syst. 35(2), 97–108 (2001)
51.29
J.C. Kinsey, R.M. Eustice, L.L. Whitcomb: A survey
of underwater vehicle navigation: Recent advances
and new challenges, 7th Conf. Manoeuvring Control
Mar. Craft (IFAC), Lisbon (2006)
51.30
D.R. Yoerger, J.G. Cooke, J.J. Slotine: The influence
of thruster dynamics on underwater vehicle be-
havior and their incorporation into control system
design, IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 15, 167–178 (1990)
51.31
A.J. Healey, S.M. Rock, S. Cody, D. Miles, J.P. Brown:
Toward an improved understanding of thruster dy-
namics for underwater vehicles, IEEE J. Ocean. Eng.
20(4), 354–361 (1995)
51.32
L. Bachmayer, L.L. Whitcomb, M.A. Grosenbaugh:
An accurate four-quadrant nonlinear dynamical
model for marine trhusters: Theory and experi-
mental validation, IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 25, 146–159
(2000)
51.33
T.I. Fossen, M. Blanke: Nonlinear output feed-
back control of underwater vehicle propellersusing
feedback form estimated axial flow velocity, IEEE
J. Ocean. Eng. 25(2), 241–255 (2000)
51.34
W.P.A. Van Lammeren, J. van Manen, M.W.C. Oost-
erveld: The wageningen B-screw series, Trans.
SNAME 77, 269–317 (1969)
51.35
T.I. Fossen, T.I. Johansen: A survey of control allo-
cation methods for ships and underwater vehicles,
14th IEEE Mediterr. Conf. Control Autom., Ancona
(2006) pp. 1–6
51.36
M. Stojanovic, J. Preisig: Underwater acoustic com-
munication channels: Propagation models and
statistical characterization, IEEE Commun. Mag.
47(1), 84–89 (2009)
51.37
D. Pompili, I. Akyildiz: Overview of networking pro-
tocols for underwater wireless communications,
IEEE Commun. Mag. 47(1), 97–102 (2009)
51.38
K.P. Valavanis, D. Gracanin, M. Matijasevic, R. Kol-
luru: Control architecture for autonomous under-
water vehicles, IEEE Control Syst. 17, 48–64 (1997)
51.39
P. Oliveira, A. Pascoal, V. Silva, C. Silvestre: Mission
control of the MARIUS AUV: System design, imple-
mentation, and sea trials, Int. J. Syst. Sci. 29(10),
1065–1080 (1998)
51.40
D. Brutzman, M. Burns, M. Campbell, D. Davis,
T. Healey, M. Holden, B. Leonhardt, D. Marco,
D. McClarin, B. McGhee: NPS Phoenix AUV software
integration and in-water testing, Proc. IEEE Symp.
Auton. Underw. Veh. Technol. (AUV) (1996) pp. 99–
108
51.41
A.P. Aguiar, A.M. Pascoal: Dynamic positioning and
way-point tracking of underactuated AUVs in the
presence of ocean currents, Int. J. Control 80(7),
1092–1108 (2007)
51.42
A.A. Bennett, J.J. Leonard: A behavior-based ap-
proach to adaptive feature detection and follow-
ing with autonomous underwater vehicles, IEEE
J. Ocean. Eng. 25(2), 213–226 (2000)
51.43
M. Breivik, T.I. Fossen: Principles of guidance-
based path following in 2D and 3D, 44th IEEE Conf.
Decis. Control 8th Eur. Control Conf., Sevilla (2005)
51.44
F.A. Papoulias: Bifurcation analysis of line of sight
vehicle guidance using sliding modes, Int. J. Bifurc.
Chaos 1(4), 849–865 (1991)
51.45
R. Rysdyk: UAV path following for constant line-
of-sight, Proc. 2nd AIAA Unmanned Unltd. Syst.
Technol. Oper. Aerosp., San Diego (2003)

Part E | 51
1306
Part E
Moving in the Environment
51.46
M.D.
Feezor,
F.Y.
Sorrel,
P.R.
Blankinship,
J.G. Bellingham: Autonomous underwater vehicle
homing/docking
via
electromagnetic guidance,
IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 26(4), 515–521 (2001)
51.47
D. Wettergreen, A. Zelinsky, C. Gaskett: Autonomous
guidance and control for an underwater robotic
vehicle, Int. Conf. Field Serv. Robotics (1999)
51.48
G. Antonelli, S. Chiaverini, R. Finotello, R. Schiavon:
Real-time path planning and obstacle avoidance
for RAIS: An autonomous underwater vehicle, IEEE
J. Ocean. Eng. 26(2), 216–227 (2001)
51.49
J.C. Hyland, F.J. Taylor: Mine avoidance techniques
for underwater vehicles, IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 18,
340–350 (1993)
51.50
D.R. Yoerger, J.J. Slotine: Robust trajectory control
of underwater vehicles, IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 10, 462–
470 (1985)
51.51
R. Cristi, F.A. Pappulias, A. Healey: Adaptive sliding
mode control of autonomous underwater vehicles
in the dive plane, IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 15(3), 152–160
(1990)
51.52
D.B. Marco, A.J. Healey: Command, control and
navigation experimental results with the NPS ARIES
AUV, IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 26(4), 466–476 (2001)
51.53
M. Caccia, G. Veruggio: Guidance and control of
a reconfigurable unmanned underwater vehicle,
Control Eng. Prac. 8(1), 21–37 (2000)
51.54
G. Antonelli, F. Caccavale, S. Chiaverini, G. Fusco:
A novel adaptive control law for underwater vehi-
cles, IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol. 11(2), 221–232
(2003)
51.55
G. Antonelli: On the use of adaptive/integral ac-
tions for 6-degrees-of-freedom control of au-
tonomous underwater vehicles, IEEE J. Ocean. Eng.
32(2), 300–312 (2007)
51.56
M. Erol-Kantarci, H.T. Mouftah, S. Oktug: A survey of
architectures and localization techniques for un-
derwater acoustic sensor networks, IEEE Commun.
Surv. Tutor. 13(3), 487–502 (2011)
51.57
A. Bahr, J.J. Leonard, M.F. Fallon: Cooperative local-
ization for autonomous underwater vehicles, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 28(6), 714–728 (2009)
51.58
S.B. Williams, I. Mahon: A terrain-aided tracking
algorithm for marine systems. In: Field and Ser-
vice Robotics, (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2006)
pp. 93–102
51.59
M. Dunbabin, P. Corke, G. Buskey: Low-cost vision-
based AUV guidance system for reef navigation,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA) (2004)
pp. 7–12
51.60
J.J. Leonard, H.J.S. Feder: Decoupled stochastic
mapping, IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 26(4), 561–571 (2001)
51.61
S. Williams, G. Dissanayake, H. Durrant–Whyte:
Towards terrain-aided navigation for underwater
robotics, Adv. Robotics 15(5), 533–549 (2001)
51.62
P. Newman, J. Leonard: Pure range-only sub-sea
SLAM, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA)
(2003) pp. 1921–1926
51.63
T.W. McLain, S.M. Rock, M.J. Lee: Experiments in the
coordinated control of an underwater arm/vehicle
system, Auton. Robots 3(2), 213–232 (1996)
51.64
G. Antonelli (Ed.): Underwater Robots. Motion
and Force Control of Vehicle-Manipulator Systems,
Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 2014), 3rd edn.
51.65
J.S. Ferguson, A. Pope, B. Butler, R. Verrall: Theseus
AUV – Two record breaking missions, Sea Technol.
Mag. 40, 65–70 (1999)
51.66
A. Alessandri, M. Caccia, G. Veruggio: Fault detec-
tion of actuator faults in unmanned underwater
vehicles, Control Eng. Prac. 7, 357–368 (1999)
51.67
K.C. Yang, J. Yuh, S.K. Choi: Fault-tolerant system
design of an autonomous underwater vehicle –
ODIN: An experimental study, Int. J. Syst. Sci. 30(9),
1011–1019 (1999)
51.68
G. Antonelli: A survey of fault detection/tolerance
strategies for AUVs and ROVs. Recent advances. In:
Fault Diagnosis and Tolerance for Mechatronic Sys-
tems, Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics, ed. by
F. Caccavale, L. Villani (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2002) pp. 109–127
51.69
T.K. Podder, G. Antonelli, N. Sarkar: An experi-
mental investigation into the fault-tolerant con-
trol of an autonomous underwater vehicle, J. Adv.
Robotics 15, 501–520 (2001)
51.70
M. Caccia, R. Bono, G. Bruzzone, G. Bruzzone,
E. Spirandelli, G. Veruggio: Experiences on actu-
ator fault detection, diagnosis and accomodation
for ROVs, Int. Symp. Unmanned Untethered Sub-
mers. Technol. (2001)
51.71
E. Fiorelli, P. Bhatta, N.E. Leonard, I. Shul-
man: Adaptive sampling using feedback control
of an autonomous underwater glider fleet, Int.
Symp. Unmanned Untethered Submers. Technol.
(2003)
51.72
N.E. Leonard, D.A. Paley, R.E. Davis, D.M. Fratan-
toni, F. Lekien, F. Zhang: Coordinated control of
an underwater glider fleet in an adaptive ocean
sampling field experiment in Monterey Bay, J. Field
Robotics 27(6), 718–740 (2010)
51.73
S. Kalantar, U. Zimmer: Distributed shape control of
homogeneous swarms of autonomous underwater
vehicles, Auton. Robots 22(1), 37–53 (2006)
51.74
A. Pascoal, C. Silvestre, P. Oliveira: Vehicle and mis-
sion control of single and multiple autonomous
marine robots. In: Advances in Unmanned Ma-
rine Vehicles, IEEE Control Engineering, ed. by
G. Roberts, R. Sutton (Peregrinus, New York 2006)
pp. 353–386
51.75
M. Dunbabin, I. Vasilescu, P. Corke, D. Rus: Ex-
periments with cooperative networked control
of underwater robots. In: Experimental Robotics,
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2008) pp. 463–470
51.76
Marine
Systems
Simulator:
http://www.
marinecontrol.org
51.77
TRIDENT project: http://www.irs.uji.es/uwsim

Multimedia Contents Modeling an
1307
Part E | 52.1
52. Modeling and Control
of Aerial Robots
Robert Mahony, Randal W. Beard, Vijay Kumar
Aerial robotic vehicles are becoming a core field
in mobile robotics. This chapter considers some of
the fundamental modelling and control architec-
tures in the most common aerial robotic platforms;
small-scale rotor vehicles such as the quadrotor,
hexacopter, or helicopter, and fixed wing vehi-
cles. In order to control such vehicles one must
begin with a good but sufficiently simple dynamic
model. Based on such models, physically moti-
vated control architectures can be developed. Such
algorithms require realisable target trajectories
along with real-time estimates of the system state
obtained from on-board sensor suite. This chap-
ter provides a first introduction across all these
subjects for the quadrotor and fixed wing aerial
robotic vehicles.
52.1
Overview............................................. 1307
52.2 Modeling Aerial Robotic Vehicles .......... 1309
52.2.1
Rigid Body Motion
of the Airframe ......................... 1309
52.2.2
Modeling for Quadrotors ............ 1310
52.2.3 Modeling
of Fixed-Wing Airplanes ............ 1312
52.3 Control................................................ 1316
52.3.1
Quadrotor Control ..................... 1316
52.3.2
Control
of Fixed-Wing Aircraft................ 1319
52.4 Trajectory Planning ............................. 1324
52.4.1
Trajectory Planning
for Quadrotors........................... 1324
52.4.2 Trajectory Planning
for Fixed-Wing Aircraft............... 1325
52.5 Estimating the Vehicle State................. 1328
52.5.1
Estimating Attitude.................... 1328
52.5.2 Estimating Velocity
and Position ............................. 1329
52.6 Conclusion........................................... 1330
Video-References......................................... 1331
References................................................... 1331
52.1 Overview
The term aerial robotics is often attributed to Robert
Michelson [52.1], as a term to capture a new class
of autonomous and intelligent small ﬂying machines.
The quest for autonomy of aerial vehicles goes back
almost to the origins of powered ﬂight. The ﬁrst au-
topilot for a ﬁxed wing vehicle (the Sperry autopilot)
was demonstrated in 1912, only a decade after the ﬁrst
powered ﬂight by the Wright brothers. As early as
World War I, the potential for an autonomously stabi-
lized and remotely controlled airplane to be an effective
weapon was understood and the Curtis–Sperry ﬂying
bomb ﬁrst demonstrated autonomous unmanned ﬂight
in 1918 [52.2]. Autopilot technology was perfected dur-
ing the 1930s as improving aircraft technology lead
to longer ﬂight times and the need to relieve the pilot
from constant attention to ﬂight stability of the vehi-
cle. Autonomous and radio controlled target aircraft
were developed in the late 1930s and were extensively
used during World War II for training. The German V-1
cruise missile, commonly known as the buzz bomb or
doodlebug, was a highly successful autonomous vehi-
cle; its relatively low impact in World War II being due
to more British intelligence efforts than to the vehicles
capabilities.
Following the World War II, the relative matu-
rity of autopilot technology and airplane construction
meant that the construction of unmanned ﬁxed-wing
vehicles was straightforward. Remote-controlled heli-

Part E | 52.1
1308
Part E
Moving in the Environment
copters, such as the Gyrodyne QH-50 DASH, were
developed as early as the 1960s. The Yamaha R-50
and subsequent Yamaha R-Max (Fig. 52.1), was devel-
oped during the 1980s and provides a remote controlled
commercial aerial platform, with signiﬁcant onboard
autonomy, used primarily for agricultural applications.
Extensive development of ﬁxed-wing autonomous
vehicles was held back in the mid-20th century by the
difﬁculty of localizing a vehicle when far from the base
station. Indeed, the requirements of navigation systems
for cruise missiles developed during the cold war was
one of the main drivers for the development of satel-
lite global positioning system (GPS) technology. Full
operational capability of the United States GPS sys-
tem with 24 satellites was declared in April 1995 and
it was mandated as a dual-use system (both commer-
cial and military) in 1996. Smaller scale commercial
unmanned aerial vehicles were also constrained by the
lack of robust and small-scale avionics systems. The
availability of small low power computers, the devel-
opment of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)
that provide affordable and robust Inertial Measurement
Units (IMUs), and access to reliable GPS, lead to the
beginning of the modern era of nonmilitary UAV and
aerial robotic systems in the mid-1990s.
The largest class of commercial and military robotic
aerial vehicles ﬂy predominantly in obstacle free
airspace. For such vehicles, once the aircraft has taken
off, there is no need to employ obstacle avoidance
techniques or interact with cluttered three-dimensional
environments.
Definition 52.1
An unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) is a system capa-
ble of sustained ﬂight with no direct human control and
able to perform a speciﬁc task.
Fig. 52.1 Autonomous aerial robotic vehicle based on the
Yamaha RMAX platform developed in the University of
New South Wales, Australia (after [52.3, 4])
Navigation and control of an unmanned aerial vehi-
cle is typically based on stabilizing a reference heading
and altitude derived from the error between preset
GPS way-points and the present vehicle position us-
ing a classical autopilot control system. The sensor
suite used for control and navigation is usually a GPS
and IMU along with barometric pressure. These sen-
sor suites can be thought of as proprioceptive sensors,
since they measure the internal state of the vehicle with-
out reference to the external world. The kinds of tasks
that UAVs are ideal for include high level surveillance
and sensing tasks where the payload sensing suite is
separate from the vehicle systems, with applications
in agriculture, environmental monitoring, geophysical
surveys, search and rescue, and security surveillance, as
well as deployment of materials, where once again the
payload is separate from the vehicle system, with appli-
cations in agriculture, search and rescue, and of course
military missions. Such systems are a natural develop-
ment of traditional ﬂight technology and much of the
research and development that goes into these vehicles
is undertaken in aerospace departments in universities
and aerospace companies.
Definition 52.2
An aerial robotic vehicle is an aerial vehicle capable
of autonomously interacting with a complex dynamic
three-dimensional environment and achieving complex
environment-dependent goals.
The nature of the interaction with the environment
for an aerial robotic vehicle, means that the presence
of exteroceptive sensors, those that sense the environ-
ment around the vehicle, and how these sensor inputs
are integrated into the vehicle guidance is the deﬁning
property of such a vehicle. Typical examples of exte-
roceptive sensors for aerial robotic vehicles are vision
systems, laser range ﬁnders, acoustic sensors, etc., and
external sensor systems such as VICON [52.5] and Op-
titrack [52.6] systems. The close coupling between the
goal of the vehicle, its sensing suite, and the dynamic
nature of the environment makes the simple way-point
navigation control architecture of an unmanned aerial
vehicle unsuitable for aerial robotic vehicles. The kinds
of tasks that aerial robotic vehicles are ideal for are
small-scale interactive tasks such as inspection of civil
infrastructure including dam walls, girders of bridges,
industrial pressure vessels; and surveillance tasks such
as, inspection of damaged or burning buildings, moni-
toring of crowds, etc. Future applications may involve
aerial manipulation including repair of infrastructure,
and material handling in the construction and agricul-
tural industries. Although the ﬂight technology remains
important, the sensing and control tasks become cru-

Modeling and Control of Aerial Robots
52.2 Modeling Aerial Robotic Vehicles
1309
Part E | 52.2
cial in such applications and the development that goes
into these vehicles tends to be undertaken in robotics
departments in universities and in the growing ﬁeld of
new aerial-robotics start-up companies. The ability to
move in three-dimensional space brings new research
challenges to the robotics community compared to the
wheeled mobile robot technology that has motivated
mobile robotics research over the last couple of decades.
The term unmanned aerial system (UAS) is useful
to refer to the combination of the infrastructure, human
interfaces, aerial platform, and sensing and control sub-
systems. It is clear that certain vehicles may spend time
operating in either UAV mode or aerial robotic mode
and the terms are more useful to describe the way of
thinking about the operation of a system rather than
classifying a vehicle.
52.2 Modeling Aerial Robotic Vehicles
There is already a vast range of aerial vehicle and UAV
designs in existence, and there are even more ideas un-
der development by companies and research groups as
we write. In one short chapter, we must limit the scope
of our presentation to a couple of the key examples.
There are two major categories of vehicles that are used
as platforms for aerial robotics: small-scale rotor vehi-
cles such as the quadrotor, hexacopter, or helicopter,
and ﬁxed wing vehicles. The word quad is derived
from the Latin quadrangulum for a four-sided ﬁgure.
Rotor is derived from the Latin rotationem for a ro-
tating object. However, hexa is derived directly from
Greek for six. Heli is derived from ancient Greek he-
likos for spiral, while the term copter is derived from
the modern term helicopter, a combination of helikos
with the ancient Greek pteron for wing. Based on this
etymology, we propose the terms quadrotor and hex-
acopter to describe the most common modern rotary
wing aerial robotic vehicles in preference to the ety-
mological questionable terms quadcopter and hexarotor
that are also in common usage in the literature. We will
present modeling and control material relevant to these
two categories, focusing on the basic structure of the
model. We will also focus on vehicles in 500g–4 kg
weight range as this corresponds to the primary general
robotics applications where avionics and sensor suites
take up the majority of the payload. Other classes of
autonomous aerial vehicles that we are unable to cover
in this chapter include lighter-than-air vehicles such as
blimps and balloons, ﬂapping wing vehicles, ducted
fans, and rockets.
52.2.1 Rigid Body Motion of the Airframe
Heavier-than-air aerial robotic vehicles consist of
a rigid airframe coupled with aerodynamic mechanisms
to generate lift and thrust. For vehicles in the weight
range considered, the compactness and structural in-
tegrity of the airframe means that there is little ﬂexing
of the airframe in normal operation and the rigid-body
assumption is an effective model. In this case, the ve-
hicle model can be developed based on rigid-body
dynamics with exogenous forces and torque generated
by an aerodynamic model.
Let fe1; e2; e3g be the coordinate axis unit vec-
tors e1 D .1;0; 0/T, e2 D .0; 1; 0/T, and e3 D .0;0; 1/T
without speciﬁcation of a frame of reference. Let fBg
be a (right-hand) body ﬁxed frame for the airframe
with unit vectors fb1; b2; b3g where these vectors are
the axes of frame fBg with respect to frame fAg as
shown in Fig. 52.2. Note that the convention for choice
of axes shown in Fig. 52.2 is the convention com-
mon in the aerial robotics community [52.7–14], but
is opposite to the usual convention in the aerospace
community where the b2 and b3 axes are usually re-
versed in order so that b3 points down in the direction
of gravity. In this chapter, we have chosen to follow
the robotic community convention and this will lead to
some nonconventional deﬁnitions for the modeling of
ﬁxed-wing airplanes. We will discuss this further in the
speciﬁc sections on ﬁxed-wing airplane modeling and
control.
The orientation of the rigid body is given by a rota-
tion matrix ARB D R D Œb1; b2; b3 2 SO.3/ in the spe-
x, b1
z, b3
y, b2
Front
d
T3
T4
ω3
ω4
T1
ω1
T2
ω2
Fig. 52.2 The body-ﬁxed frame and the directions of rota-
tion for the propellers

Part E | 52.2
1310
Part E
Moving in the Environment
cial orthogonal group. We have b1 D Re1, b2 D Re2,
b3 D Re3 by construction.
We will use Z-X-Y Euler angles to model this ro-
tation as shown in Fig. 52.3. Note that this is not the
normal roll-pitch-yaw convention used in aerospace. To
get from fAg to fBg, we ﬁrst rotate about e3 by the yaw
angle,  , and we will call this intermediary frame fDg
with a basis fd1; d2; d3g where di is expressed with re-
spect to frame fAg. This is followed by a rotation about
the x-axis in the rotated frame through the roll angle,
, to intermediary frame fEg, followed by a third pitch
rotation about the new y-axis through the pitch angle
 which results in the body-ﬁxed triad fb1; b2; b3g. The
associated rotation matrix is
R D
0
@
c c  ss s
cs 
c s C css 
cs C c ss
cc 
s s  c cs
cs
s
cc
1
A :
(52.1)
where c and s are shorthand for cosine and sine, respec-
tively.
Let  denote the position of the center of mass of
the airframe in frame fAg and assume that this is also
the origin of frame fBg. Let v 2 fAg denote the linear
velocity of fBg with respect to fAg expressed in fAg.
Let ˝ 2 fBg denote the angular velocity of fBg with
respect to fAg, this time expressed in fBg. Let m de-
note the mass of the rigid object and I 2 R33 denote
the constant inertia matrix (expressed in the body ﬁxed
frame fBg). The rigid body equations of motion of the
airframe are [52.15, 16]
P D v ;
(52.2a)
mPv D mge3 C RF ;
(52.2b)
b1
d1
d2
ψ
ψ
d1
d2
d3
a3
ξ
a1
a2
b2
b3
Fig. 52.3 The vehicle model. The position and orientation
of the robot in the global frame are denoted by  and R,
respectively
PR D R˝ ;
(52.2c)
I P˝ D ˝  I˝ C  :
(52.2d)
The notation ˝ denotes the skew-symmetric matrix
such that ˝v D ˝  v for the vector cross-product
 and any vector v 2 R3. The vectors F;  2 fBg com-
bine the principal nonconservative forces and torques
applied to the airframe by the aerodynamics of the
propulsion systems and lifting surfaces of the vehicle.
52.2.2 Modeling for Quadrotors
Quadrotors are currently the most popular research
aerial robotics research platform because they are
highly maneuverable and enable safe and low-cost
experimentation in mapping, navigation, and control
strategies in three dimensions. They are also arguably
the simplest of the aerial robotics platforms to model
for robotics applications. Early work in aerial robotics
modeling and control dates back to the late 1990s and
the ﬁeld has remained active since [52.15–21].
In its most common form, the quadrotor vehicle is
a very simple machine. It consists of four individual
rotors attached to a rigid cross airframe as shown in
Fig. 52.4. Control of a quadrotor is achieved by dif-
ferential control of the thrust generated by each rotor.
Pitch, roll, and heave (total thrust) control is straight-
forward to conceptualize. As shown in Fig. 52.2, rotor
i rotates anticlockwise (positive about the z-axis) if
i is even and clockwise if i is odd. Yaw control is
obtained by adjusting the average speed of the clock-
wise and anticlockwise rotating rotors. The system is
under-actuated and the remaining degrees of freedom
corresponding to the translational velocity in the b1–b2
plane, must be controlled through the system dynamics.
The aerodynamics of rotors was extensively studied
during the mid, 1900s with the development of manned
helicopters and detailed models of rotor aerodynamics
Fig. 52.4 A quadrotor made by Ascending Technologies
at the University of Pennslvania with Vicon markers for
state estimation

Modeling and Control of Aerial Robots
52.2 Modeling Aerial Robotic Vehicles
1311
Part E | 52.2
are available in the literature [52.22, 23]. Much of the
detail in these aerodynamic models is useful for the de-
sign of rotor systems where the whole range of param-
eters (rotor geometry, proﬁle, hinge mechanism, and
much more) are fundamental to the design problem. For
a typical robotic quadrotor vehicle, the rotor design is
a question of choosing one among the several available
rotors from the hobby shop and most of the complexity
of aerodynamic modeling is best ignored. Nevertheless,
a basic level of aerodynamic theory is important to un-
derstand the particularities of the control design.
The steady-state thrust generated by a hovering
rotor (i. e., a rotor that is not translating horizon-
tally or vertically) in free air may be modeled [52.23,
Sect. 2.26] as
Ti WD CT	Arir2
i $2
i ;
(52.3)
where for rotor i, Ari is the rotor disk area, ri is the
radius, $i is the angular velocity, CT is the thrust coef-
ﬁcient that depends on rotor geometry and proﬁle, and
	 is the density of air. In practice, a simple lumped pa-
rameter model
Ti D cT$2
i ;
(52.4)
is used where cT > 0 is modeled as a constant that can
be easily determined from static thrust tests.
The reaction torque (due to rotor drag) acting on the
airframe generated by a hovering rotor in free air may
be modeled as [52.23, Sect. 2.30]
Qi WD cQ$2
i ;
(52.5)
where the coefﬁcient cQ (which also depends on Ari, ri,
and 	) can be determined by static thrust tests.
As a ﬁrst approximation, assume that each rotor
thrust is oriented in the b3-axis of the vehicle, although
we note that this assumption does not hold exactly for
a rotor translating through the air.
The total thrust at hover T applied to the airframe
is the sum of the thrusts from each individual rotor
(Fig. 52.2)
T D
4
X
iD1
jTij D cT
 4
X
iD1
$2
i
!
:
(52.6)
The hover thrust is the primary component of the ex-
ogenous force
F D Te3 C 
(52.7)
in (52.2b) where  comprises secondary aerodynamic
forces that are induced when the assumption that the
rotor is in hover is violated.
The net moment arising from the aerodynamics (the
combination of the individual rotor forces) applied to
the quadrotor vehicle in directions b1, b2, and b3, re-
spectively, are
1 D cTd.$2
2  $2
4/ ;
2 D cTd.$2
1  $2
3 / ;
3 D cQ
4
X
iD1
i$2
i ;
(52.8)
where d is the arm length of the quadrotor. A con-
sequence of the structure of the thrust generation and
the lack of aerodynamic lifting surfaces for a quadrotor
means that one can solve for the heave and torque in
a single equation in terms of the motor inputs
0
BB@
T
1
2
3
1
CCA D
0
BB@
cT
cT
cT
cT
0
dcT
0
dcT
dcT
0
dcT
0
cQ
cQ
cQ
cQ
1
CCA
„
ƒ‚
…

0
BB@
$2
1
$2
2
$2
3
$2
4
1
CCA :
(52.9)
Inverting this relationship provides a mapping from de-
sired control input for the rigid-body dynamics to rotor
speed set-points for the motor control.
In practice, there are additional second-order aero-
dynamic effects present in the thrust generation
for quadrotor vehicles [52.17, 19–21]. The principle
second-order aerodynamic effects that are present at
low speeds are inﬂow variation, rotor ﬂapping, and in-
duced drag. The ﬁrst of these effects reduces the heave
thrust when the quadrotor is ascending and increases
the thrust when it is descending due to variation in
rotor inﬂow velocity caused by the quadrotor motion.
This acts as a damping term in the vertical direction
of motion for the quadrotor. The remaining two effects
generate forces that oppose horizontal translation of the
quadrotor; blade ﬂapping by inclining the rotor plane of
ﬂexible blade rotors and tilting the thrust vector away
from the direction of motion, and induced drag by in-
creasing the drag on the blade of a rigid rotor advancing
in the direction of motion of the quadrotor [52.21]. In
practice, it is difﬁcult to separate the difference between
the various effects and it is sufﬁcient to model them all
by a single damping force
 D Dv ;
(52.10)
where D is a diagonally dominant positive deﬁnite ma-
trix. For small quadrotors with relatively rigid rotor
blades designed for hover performance, that is with

Part E | 52.2
1312
Part E
Moving in the Environment
close to ideal chord and ideal twist, these effects are
far more signiﬁcant than is usual in classical helicopters
and the effect must be modeled to achieve good con-
trol performance. These aerodynamic effects are also
important in providing key low-frequency excitation
to attitude and velocity estimation in the absence of
GPS [52.21, 24–26].
At higher translation speeds, a quadrotor also ex-
periences translational lift, translational drag, and par-
asitic drag. These aerodynamic effects are associated
with efﬁciency gains in the rotor operation associated
with increased inﬂow velocity generated by the forward
velocity of the vehicle. Such effects are extremely im-
portant in large scale manned helicopters, which spend
much of their time in forward ﬂight. For many robotics
applications, however, the vehicle is in quasi-stationary
or near hover ﬂight almost all the time and these sec-
ondary aerodynamic effects may be ignored. We will
not discuss them further in this chapter but refer the in-
terested reader to recent work [52.18, 20] and any of the
classical helicopter texts [52.22, 23, 27].
52.2.3 Modeling of Fixed-Wing Airplanes
The conventional model for ﬁxed-wing airplane uses
a north-east-down frame of reference. The frame of
reference used in this chapter, corresponding to the
common aerial robotics convention inherited from the
mobile-robotics community, is a north-west-up con-
vention. We will still need to deﬁne the usual auxil-
iary angles associated with ﬁxed-wing modeling and
control, in particular; the angle-of-attack, side-slip,
aerodynamic-bank, ﬂight-path, and course angles. We
will use the normal conventions to deﬁne these angles.
The north-west-up convention now means that ﬂight-
path angle is positive when descending and negative
when ascending, and positive roll leads course angle to
decrease. The careful reader can easily transform be-
tween the conventions used here and the conventional
airplane modeling approach and the authors apologize
for any confusion that is caused by using a single con-
vention for the whole chapter.
The key difference in modeling ﬁxed-wing air-
planes to quadrotors is that they rely on lift generated
by airﬂow over the wings to support them in ﬂight.
The angle of incidence of the wind on the wing is
a key variable in the dynamics of the vehicle and
must be modeled in the dynamics. Since the main lift
force is generated by an aerodynamic process, rather
than directly by a controlled input as was the case for
quadrotors and blimps, the modeling and control of an
airplane is somewhat more complicated.
The aerodynamics of a ﬁxed wing vehicle are de-
ﬁned relative to the local wind frame fWg. Frame fWg
is chosen co-linear with the inertial frame fAg, but with
linear velocity equal to the average extrinsic wind ve-
locity with respect to the inertial frame. The wind frame
is a Galilean frame (moving with constant velocity)
with the property that it has zero extrinsic wind on av-
erage. Let va 2 fWg denote the aerodynamic velocity of
the vehicle, that is the linear velocity of the vehicle in
the wind frame fWg. Let vw 2 fAg denote the average
wind velocity as measured in the inertial frame fAg.
Since the orientation of frames fAg and fWg are equal,
the inertial velocity of the vehicle can be written as
v D va C vw 2 fAg :
To model the incident wind as seen by the vehicle
as it ﬂies through the air we introduce the ﬂow frame
(also termed the air frame) denoted by fFg D .f 1; f 2; f 3/
where the orientation vectors ff ig are expressed in the
wind frame fFg which is co-linear with the inertial
frame fAg. The ﬁrst axis of the ﬂow frame f 1 is oriented
in the direction of the incident wind on the vehicle, f 3
is chosen to lie in the plane of symmetry of the vehicle
orthogonal to b2, and f 2 makes up the right-hand frame.
By construction, the velocity of the vehicle in the ﬂow
frame always lies in the direction f 1.
We deﬁne two orientation matrices associated with
the wind frame. The angle-of-attack (AOA) matrix
BRF D R˛;ˇ describes the orientation of the airﬂow
frame fFg with respect to the body-ﬁxed-frame fBg in
terms of the angle-of-attack ˛, and the side-slip angle
ˇ [52.28] (Fig. 52.5). Using the Z–Y–X Euler angle
convention (yaw by ˇ, pitch by ˛, and there is no roll)
we have
R˛;ˇ D
0
@
c˛cˇ
c˛sˇ
s˛
sˇ
cˇ
0
s˛cˇ
s˛sˇ
c˛
1
A :
(52.11)
vair
α > 0
β > 0
Fig. 52.5 Representation of angle-of-attack, side-slip an-
gle, and airspeed. Here vair is denoted by va in the text to
save space

Modeling and Control of Aerial Robots
52.2 Modeling Aerial Robotic Vehicles
1313
Part E | 52.2
The second orientation matrix is the ﬂight-path matrix
WRF D R;; that denotes the orientation of the ﬂow
frame fFg with respect to the wind frame fWg in terms
of the aerodynamic bank angle , the ﬂight path angle
, and the course angle . Using the Z-Y-X Euler angle
convention (yaw by , pitch by , and roll by ) we
have
R;; D
0
@
cc
ssc  cs
scc C ss
cs
sss C cc
scs  sc
s
cs
cc
1
A :
(52.12)
Note that the frames fWg and fAg are co-linear so
ARF D WRF. It follows that WRF D ARF D ARB BRF.
Aerodynamic forces generated by lifting surfaces
are proportional to the dynamic pressure [52.28]
NQ D 1
2	jvaj2 ;
(52.13)
where 	 is the air density and jvaj represents the air-
speed or norm of the velocity va. Consider the situation
where the aircraft is in normal ﬂight, that is cruising at
subsonic velocity while avoiding stall phenomenon. Let
S denote the surface area of the wing (or lifting surface
of the vehicle). The lift L D Fa
Z generated by the lifting
surface is deﬁned as the aerodynamic force oriented in
the f 3 direction in ﬂow frame fFg and can be modeled
as
L D NQSC˛
L .˛ C ˛0/ C NQSCˇ
L ˇ

 NQS.CL C C˛
L ˛/
(52.14)
for sufﬁciently small angle of attack ˛ (typically less
that 15ı). The terms C˛
L .˛ C ˛0/ and Cˇ
L ˇ are linear
approximations to the lift-coefﬁcient curves for small ˛
and ˇ [52.28]. The offset angle of attack ˛0 is thought
of as the effective angle of attack of the wing in normal
level ﬂight conditions. In particular, at normal cruising
speed in level ﬂight, NQSC˛
L ˛0 D mg is the lift required
to sustain the vehicle in level ﬂight, so that ˛; ˇ D 0
in level ﬂight. The term NQSCˇ
L ˇ is small and can be
discarded in many applications.
The drag D D Fa
X is a combination of parasitic and
induced drag and is oriented in the f 1 direction.
D D NQS

Cp
D C .C˛
L /2.˛ C ˛0/2	

 NQS.CD C C˛
D˛/ ;
(52.15)
where  is the Oswald coefﬁcient [52.28] and the sec-
ond equation is obtained by ignoring ˛2 terms. The
constant CD combines the parasitic drag coefﬁcient
Cp
D along with the induced drag .C˛
L /2˛2
0 due to ˛0,
while CD D 2˛0.C˛
L /2 is the linear coefﬁcient for the
dependence of induced drag on the angle-of-attack.
It is also possible to model a contribution NQSCˇ
Dˇ
to the drag force, however, this is sufﬁciently small
that it is normally ignored. There is a ﬁnal lateral
aerodynamic force component Fa
Y that is due to side-
slip
Fa
Y D NQSCˇ
Y ˇ :
(52.16)
The propeller or thrust mechanism of a ﬁxed wing
vehicle generates thrust T in direction bx in the body-
ﬁxed-frame. The total linear force F 2 fBg applied to
the vehicle due to aerodynamic effects and thrust effects
is
F D R˛;ˇ.Fa
X; Fa
Y; Fa
Z/T C .T; 0; 0/T
D
0
@
T
0
0
1
A C NQS
0
@
CDc˛cˇ  CLs˛
CDsˇ
CDs˛cˇ C CLc˛
1
A
C NQS
0
@
C˛
Dc˛cˇ  C˛
L s˛
C˛
Dsˇ
C˛
Ds˛cˇ C C˛
L c˛
1
A ˛
C NQS
0
B@
Cˇ
Dc˛cˇ  Cˇ
Y c˛sˇ  Cˇ
L s˛
Cˇ
Dsˇ C Cˇ
Y cˇ
Cˇ
Ds˛cˇ C Cˇ
Y s˛sˇ C Cˇ
L c˛
1
CA ˇ
(52.17)
expressed in the ﬂow frame.
The aerodynamic moments  2 fBg in the body-
ﬁxed frame are modeled by
0
@
x
y
z
1
A D
NQSl
0
BBBBBB@
Cˇ
x ˇ C Cp
x
c˝x
2jvaj C Cr
x
c˝z
2jvaj C Cı
x ıx
Cy C C˛
y ˛ C Cq
y
b˝y
2jvaj C Cı
y .ıy C ı0
y /
Cˇ
z ˇ C Cr
z
c˝z
2jvaj C Cı
z ız
1
CCCCCCA
;
(52.18)
where .˝x; ˝y; ˝z/ are the components of the an-
gular velocity ˝ 2 fBg and represent the roll, pitch
and yaw rates of body-ﬁxed frame, respectively; b
is the wing span, c is the mean cord of the wing,

Part E | 52.2
1314
Part E
Moving in the Environment
and .ıx; ıy; ız/ are deﬂections of the airplane con-
trol surfaces (ailerons, elevator, and rudder). The con-
stants fCp
x; Cr
x; Cı
x ; Cy; C˛
y ; Cq
y; Cı
y ; Cˇ
z ; Cr
z; Cı
z g are di-
mensionless aerodynamic coefﬁcients [52.28]. In nor-
mal trim conditions, the trimmed elevator deﬂection ı0
y
is chosen to cancel the static moment Cy generated by
the wing in level ﬂight, Cı
y ı0
y D Cy.
Combining (52.17) and (52.18) with (52.2) yields
a dynamic model for a ﬁxed wing vehicle with mini-
mal approximations. The resulting equations of motion
are complex and can be difﬁcult to work with directly.
The most common approach to control ﬁxed-wing ve-
hicles based on the full model is to take this model
and linearize the state equations, either along a trajec-
tory, or in regions of state space. The resulting model
is either a linear time-varying or linear parameter vary-
ing system and can be controlled using classical linear
system control techniques [52.29]. Although this ap-
proach is well established in the aerospace industry it
tends to hide the underlying structure of the dynamics
and requires good models of the various aerodynamic
parameters, a challenge for many aerial robots with air-
frames that are always subject to being ﬁddled with
and having sensor packages attached externally. For
aerial robotic applications it is of interest to consider
a simpliﬁed but still structurally consistent model of
ﬁxed wing dynamics and use robust and simple control
strategies.
Bank-to-Turn Flight Regime
In this section, we propose a model that is suitable for
a wide range of ﬁxed-wing applications where the ve-
hicle is in normal ﬂight mode. The approach taken uses
a ﬂight regime where the lateral acceleration required
to turn the vehicle is obtained by tilting the lift gen-
erated by the wings, a strategy termed bank-to-turn or
coordinated turn in the aerospace literature [52.30, 31].
A bank-to-turn maneuver is characterized by zero side-
slip, ˇ D 0, and leads to considerable simpliﬁcation of
the equations of motion. This is a very common mode
of ﬂying for any ﬁxed-wing vehicle and, unless the task
requires aerobatic maneuvers or the vehicle lacks con-
trol surface actuation, is the natural mode to control
a UAV.
Given that accurate measurements of the roll rates
˝ are available through an onboard IMU system and
most UAV systems have large control surfaces relative
to their size, it is possible to use high gain to dominate
the attitude dynamics (52.2d) and (52.18). That is, the
angular velocity ˝ 
 ˝? can be thought of as an in-
put to the reduced order model (52.2a), (52.2b), (52.2c).
The above discussion motivates a dynamic reduction of
the system equations with new inputs ˝?, as well as T
the propeller thrust.
Based on the assumption that the vehicle is ﬂying
using bank-to-turn control and for small angle-of-attack
then the approximation ˇ 
 0 holds and simpliﬁed
dynamic equations can be derived. Using this approx-
imation and canceling all second-order terms in ˛ and
ˇ allows one to rewrite (52.17) as
F D
0
@
T
0
0
1
A C NQS
0
@
CD
0
CL
1
A C NQS
0
@
C˛
D  CL
0
C˛
L  CD
1
A ˛ :
(52.19)
From the construction of fFg we have vFa D jvajf 1
by deﬁnition. It follows that (52.2a) can be written
as
P D va D jvajR;;e1 :
Note that R;;e1 D .cc; sc; s/T does not
depend on the aerodynamic bank angle . Thus,
.jvaj; ; / can be used as generalized coordinates for
the velocity of the vehicle
P D jvaj.cc; sc; s/T :
(52.20)
Differentiating va D P and rearranging yields
Pva D R;;
0
@
1
0
0
0
jvajcs
jvajs
0
jvajcs
jvajc
1
A
0
@
P
jvaj
P
P
1
A :
(52.21)
Consider the .3;2/ element of (52.12) and recall
that R;; D R;; R˛;ˇ and applying ˇ  0 then
sc D s and we have
s D s
c
(52.22)
for normal ﬂight conditions where c 6D 0 and s < c.
By simple geometry,
c D 1
c
q
c2  s2
 ;
and the dependence on the bank angle can be removed
entirely from kinematics of .jvaj; ; / to be replaced by
the roll angle .

Modeling and Control of Aerial Robots
52.2 Modeling Aerial Robotic Vehicles
1315
Part E | 52.2
Inverting (52.21) and substituting for (52.2b),
(52.19) and for (52.22) we obtain
d
dtjvaj D gs C T
mc˛  ˛
NQS
m .C˛
D C CL/

NQS
m CD ;
(52.23a)
P D s
c
 NQS
mc
CL C .C˛
L  CD/˛
!
;
(52.23b)
P D gc
jvaj C ˛
NQS
m .C˛
L  CD/
 CL
NQS
q
c2
  s2

mjvajc
;
(52.23c)
where one should recall that NQ D 1
2	jvaj2 (52.13) de-
pends on jvaj.
Note that for ˛ small, T provides a free input to sta-
bilize the speed of the vehicle in (52.23a), although we
have seen in Sect. 52.3.2 that a different approach is ad-
vantageous in practice. In (52.23b), there is no direct
input variable, however, the roll  will play this role
in the control design. Similarly, in (52.23c), the angle-
of-attack ˛, which itself has dynamics, must be used to
control . In fact, both (52.23b) and (52.23c) depend on
a complex mix of variables including dynamic pressure
(and consequently jvaj) as well as , ˛ and . Neverthe-
less, the identiﬁcation of roll  with control of heading
and angle-of-attack ˛ with control of ﬂight path is a nat-
ural approach in the development of aircraft control.
The kinematics of  are straightforward to compute
by differentiating (52.1). Differentiating the .3;2/ entry
of R;; (52.1) we have
P D ˝xc C ˝zs :
(52.24)
The primary control for P is the roll angular velocity ˝x
and this control will be used to cancel the disturbance
created by ˝z as discussed in Sect. 52.3.2.
To model the dynamics of ˛, recall the relationship
R;; D R;; R˛;ˇ again. This time considering the
.3;1/ element of R;; we obtain
P˛ .css˛ C c˛cc/ D
 sc˛˝x C ss˛˝z
C .css˛ C ccc˛/˝y
 c P :
(52.25)
Back substituting from (52.23c) and rearranging yields
P˛ D ˝y C ss˛˝z  sc˛˝x
.css˛ C c˛cc/
 c
"
gc
jvaj C ˛
NQS
m .C˛
L  CD/ 
NQSc
mjvaj CL
#
;
(52.26)
where the denominators are always well deﬁned for
normal ﬂight conditions. The angular velocity ˝y enters
(52.26) as a free input providing the control for AOA.
Equations (52.23a), (52.23c) and (52.26) lead to
a cascade nonlinear system
P D s
 
jvaj2
c2
A2 C ˛
c
A3
!
;
(52.27a)
P D u ;
(52.27b)
Ph D jvajs ;
(52.27c)
d
dtjvaj D TA1  gs C f1.; ˛; jvaj/ ;
(52.27d)
P D ˛jvaj2A4  jvaj
c
.c2
  s2
/
1
2 A5
C f2.; jvaj/ ;
(52.27e)
P˛ D u˛ C f3.; ˛; jvajI t/ ;
(52.27f)
with the following constants
A1 D c˛
m ;
A2 D CL	S
2m
;
A3 D .C˛
L  CD/ ;
A4 D 	S
2m.C˛
L  CD/ ;
A5 D CL
	S
2m ;
functions;
f1.; ˛; jvaj/ D ˛
NQS
m .C˛
D C CL/ 
NQS
m CD ;
f2.; jvaj/ D gc
jvaj ;
f3.; ˛; jvaj/ D c
"
gc
jvaj C ˛
NQS
m .C˛
L  CD/

NQSc
mjvaj CL
#
;
and the input functions;
u D˝xc C ˝zs ;
u˛ D˝y C ss˛˝z  sc˛˝x
.css˛ C c˛cc/:

Part E | 52.3
1316
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Here the height h kinematics have been added to com-
plete the bank-to-turn dynamics. The course (52.27a),
and the height (52.27c) dynamics have negative signs
compared to conventional ﬁxed-wing modeling devel-
opments due to the nonstandard north-west-up conven-
tion chosen.
These equations are fully nonlinear equations based
on the sliding mode simpliﬁcation associated with hold-
ing ˇ  0. The condition on side-slip angle will can be
enforced using the free degree of freedom in ˝z as will
be discussed in Sect. 52.3.2. We note that the dynam-
ics presented in this section are closely related to the
longitudinal dynamics considered in classical aeronau-
tical texts that treat the angle of attack, glide angle, and
velocity of the vehicle. The more classical expressions
for longitudinal control of a ﬁxed-wing vehicle are ob-
tained from the above model by setting P D  D  D 0.
An additional simplifying assumption often made for
the course kinematics (52.27a) is that lift is compensat-
ing gravity during level-ﬂight. With these assumptions,
(52.27a) can be replaced by
P D  g
jvaj tan./
based on centripetal force balance.
52.3 Control
Control for aerial vehicles is challenging for a number
of reasons. First, most aerial vehicles are under actu-
ated and the control design must exploit interactions
between dynamic states to control the vehicle. Second,
aerial vehicles use aerodynamic effects for thrust and
lift generation, and regulation of these forces is by na-
ture approximate, leading to signiﬁcant modeling error.
Third, external effects such as wind, turbulence, and
vortex generation, lead to high levels of load distur-
bance in the control loops. Finally, it is often difﬁcult
or impossible to measure the vehicle and aerodynamic
state directly making it necessary to use an observer or
design the controller from ﬁrst principles to use explicit
measurements.
Most aerial vehicles are controlled using a hier-
archical control structure with nested feedback loops
based on three levels; planning, guidance, and control:

Planning: It is the outermost loop in aerial vehicle
control and is associated with path planning, setting
way-points, etc.

Guidance: The guidance level of control concerns
tracking trajectories to achieve local goals. This
control loop is typically designed using the attitude
reference as a virtual input, leading to a fully actu-
ated control problem.

Control: It is the high gain innermost loop of the
control hierarchy and is concerned primarily with
attitude and ﬂight stability of the vehicle. This con-
trol problem is typically fully actuated and can be
tackled using standard control techniques.
The more dynamic and aggressive the task consid-
ered is, the more these levels of control will interact and
an integrated control design must be considered. How-
ever, in most real-world situations, splitting the control
into three hierarchical levels leads to a simpler design
problem that achieves the desired performance. For ex-
ample, the recent aggressive maneuvers undertaken and
demonstrated in quadrotor control are based on hier-
archical control strategies that use trajectory planning
processes for the outer loop that specify achievable
trajectories that then are stabilized in real-time using at-
titude as a virtual input, with high-gain feedback on the
inner-loop attitude stability control. Most of this work
has been done with the use of external motion capture
systems to provide the inertial frame position and ve-
locity feedback [52.7–12, 32]. However, more recently
there have been a few attempts to do this with on-
board cameras and inertial measurement units [52.13,
14].
52.3.1 Quadrotor Control
The quadrotor control and guidance problem is con-
ceptually more straightforward than that of ﬁxed-
wing vehicles. In its simplest form, the goal is
to design control algorithms to track smooth fea-
sible trajectories .R?.t/; ?.t// 2 SE.3/. We will as-
sume that a planner speciﬁes the full desired tra-
jectory, including the higher order derivative terms
.˝?.t/; P?.t// and . P˝?.t/; R?.t//. A quadrotor vehi-
cle is an under-actuated system – there are four inputs
u D .T; T/T, while the trajectory lives in SE.3/ and
is six-dimensional. The hierarchical control structure
proposed leads to an inner loop regulating the attitude
using the moments  as the control input. The guidance
level utilizes the attitude R and heave T to regulate the
trajectory .t/ to track ?.t/. In high performance con-
trol of a quadrotor, the major limitation to performance
comes from the limits of motor response and the control
hierarchy must be augmented by a low level motor reg-
ulation system. The proposed control architecture forms
nested feedback loops as shown in Fig. 52.6.

Modeling and Control of Aerial Robots
52.3 Control
1317
Part E | 52.3
Attitude
planner
Attitude
controller
Trajectory
planner
Position
controller
Motor
controller
Rigid body
dynamics
ξ, v
ξ *
R*
R, Ω
u1
u2
ψ *
Fig. 52.6 Typical control architecture. A base-level motor regulation, an inner attitude control loop, an intermediate
position guidance loop, with an outer trajectory planner
Motor Regulation
The aerodynamics of thrust generation by rotors is
a subject that has been studied in detail in the classical
rotorcraft literature [52.22, 23, 27]. Using a full model
of rotor aerodynamics has signiﬁcant potential in the
design of the motor control for high-performance rotor
control for aerial robotic applications [52.33]. Despite
this, it is sufﬁcient in most cases to consider a static
thrust model that holds for a rotor in hover and is a rea-
sonable approximation for most robotic applications. In
such a model, the thrust generated is proportional to the
square of the rotor speed. Since most quadrotor vehicles
are equipped with brushless DC motors that use back
EMF sensing for rotor commutation, making it possible
to measure rotor angular velocity, the control of the ro-
tor thrust is usually implemented as a local control loop
on the electronic speed controller (ESC) regulating ro-
tor speed.
Most ESC use PWM (pulse width modulation) reg-
ulation of voltage bus to provide voltage control of the
motors. A typical rise time for the uncontrolled system
is in the order of 200 ms and it is necessary to include
a local control loop to improve the system response.
The aerodynamic drag of the rotor means that the sys-
tem is naturally heavily damped and there is no need for
derivative control. Similarly, an integral term is rarely
deemed necessary at the rotor control level since the
thrust model used is not particularly accurate anyway
and it will always be necessary to have integral control
at higher levels in the control hierarchy. Since an inte-
gral term is inadvisable, it is important to use the best
model of the thrust generation possible as a feedforward
term Vff.$?
i / to minimize the requirement on the pro-
portional regulation. Thus, a typical ESC rotor control
is given by saturated proportional control with feedfor-
ward [52.34]
Vi D sat

k.$?
i  $i/ C Vff.$?
i /
	
;
(52.28)
where Vi is the applied motor voltage, $?
i
is the
desired speed and the actual motor speed $i is mea-
sured from the electronic commutation in the embedded
speed controller. The performance of the motor con-
trollers is ultimately limited by the current that can be
supplied from the batteries [52.34] and a saturation on
the demanded voltage is necessary. Without the satu-
ration, extreme maneuvers may cause the voltage bus
to drop excessively, destroying the rotor regulation per-
formance and unless care is taken, causing the onboard
electronics to brownout.
Attitude Control
The control problem considered in attitude regulation is
to use full actuation of  in (52.2d) to control (52.2c)
to track a desired attitude trajectory R?.t/ along with
its velocity ˝?.t/ such that PR?.t/ D R?.t/˝?.t/. The
approach described uses a global stability design based
on minimizing the matrix error
QR D .R?/TR
(52.29)
similar to [52.7, 35]. Driving QR ! I3 ensures that R !
R?. The kinematics of the tracking error is given by
PQR D ˝?
 QR C QR˝
D ŒQR; ˝?
 C QR.˝  ˝?
/
D ŒQR; ˝?
 C QR Q˝ ;
(52.30)
where ŒA; B D AB  BA is the matrix commutator and
Q˝ WD ˝  ˝? :
(52.31)
We assume that derivative P˝? of the target angu-
lar velocity is available for the purposes of designing
a feedforward torque for the angular velocity dynamics
? WD I P˝? C ˝?
I˝ ;
(52.32)
where I is the inertia matrix of the airframe (52.2d).
Feed-forward control for the angular velocity of the
attitude is important for high-performance maneuvers,
especially when the motor response is pushed to near
performance limits. The higher derivative information

Part E | 52.3
1318
Part E
Moving in the Environment
for the angular velocity is available from path planning
algorithms such as those discussed in Sect. 52.4.1 or us-
ing predictive control algorithms [52.8–10, 36]. Choose
the control input
 WD ? C u2
(52.33)
where u2 2 R3 is the free control that will be used to
stabilize the error dynamics (Fig. 52.6). The error dy-
namics for the angular velocity error are now
I PQ˝ D  Q˝I˝ C u2 :
(52.34)
The goal is to choose u2 in order to stabilize the
error dynamics (52.30) and (52.34) robustly. Deﬁne
P.QR/ WD 1
2
QR  QRT
to be the skew-symmetric projection of the error matrix.
It can be veriﬁed that P.QR/ D sin./a where .a; /
is the angle-axis representation of QR. That is the skew-
symmetric projection is the axis of rotation that rotates
R to R? (equivalently rotates QR to the identity) scaled
by the sin of the angle between the two orientations.
Choose a proportional–derivative (PD) control
u2 D kPvex.P.QR//  kD Q˝ ;
where vex: R33 ! R3 is the inverse of the skew-
symmetric operator applied to skew-symmetric ma-
trices, vex.˝/ D ˝. The proportional term applies
a torque associated with a nonlinear spring associated
with a potential energy tr.QRT QR/ while the derivative
kD Q˝ provides damping. It is straightforward to demon-
strate that the Lyapunov function
L WD kPtr.QRT QR/ C 1
2
Q˝TI Q˝
is decreasing
d
dt L WD kDk Q˝k2 :
Invoking Barbalat’s lemma, with some care, it follows
that the system is almost globally asymptotically stable.
The zero measure exception set for the basin of attrac-
tion is associated with situations where the quadrotor
is completely ﬂipped,  D  rad, and P.QR/ D 0 even
though QR 6D I.
To verify the local exponential convergence and
provide guidance for the gain tuning, we consider the
linearization of (52.30) and (52.34). Write QR 
 I C
.zR/ where the skew-symmetric matrix .zR/ (for zR 2
R3) is the linear approximation of QR around the identity
matrix I. Write Q˝ 
 z˝ for the linear approximation
of Q˝ around the origin Q˝ D 0. The linearization of the
error z D .zR; z˝/ system is given by
 PzR
Pz˝

D

.˝?/
0
0
I1.I˝/

C

0
1
kPI1
kDI1
  zR
z˝

(52.35)
or in more compact notation Pz D A.t/z where A.t/ D
A1.t/ C A2 comprises the sum of two matrices in
(52.35). The matrix A1.t/ is a time-varying matrix de-
pending on the exogenous system signals ˝ and ˝?
while the second matrix A2 is a time-invariant Hurwitz
second-order linear system matrix. It is straightforward
to show that this system is asymptotically stable us-
ing a Lyapunov function ` D kP=2jzRj2 C 1=2zT
˝Iz˝,
using an analog of the nonlinear argument made ear-
lier. We have that P` D kDjz˝j2. Deﬁne C D

0
I3

2
R36 then if the pair .A.t/; C/ is uniformly completely
observable (UCO) asymptotic stability implies expo-
nentially stability [52.37, pp. 626–628]. It is intuitively
clear that the system matrices .A.t/; C/ associated with
(52.35) are UCO, although providing the algebraic
proof is beyond the scope of the this chapter. Tuning
the gains is then a process of choosing kP and kD to as-
sign the eigenvalues of the Hurwitz system matrix, with
an eye to dominate the oscillatory, but bounded energy,
disturbance introduced by A1.t/.
Trajectory Tracking Control
The trajectory planning algorithm, discussed later in
Sect. 52.4.1, provides a full trajectory speciﬁcation as
well as the feedforward inputs consisting of (p, Pp,
Rp, ˝p, P˝p, up
1, up
2) and their derivatives. The goal of
trajectory tracking control is to regulate the linear dy-
namics of a quadrotor to track a speciﬁed goal trajectory
?.t/. Trajectory tracking control operates at a higher
level in the hierarchy of the quadrotor control architec-
ture (Fig. 52.6) and the desired attitude R? used in the
attitude control loop is designed as an input in the tra-
jectory loop control design. In addition to specifying the
attitude goal, R?, the trajectory tracking control speci-
ﬁes the heave (total thrust), T, input reference that is
used along with (52.33) for the low-level motor control
reference (52.9).
The linear trajectory goal ? D p and P? D Pp are
used directly from the path planning design as the goal
of the trajectory planner. The actuation for the lin-
ear dynamics, however, depends on the attitude of the
vehicle. Thus, it is necessary to deﬁne the goal for
the attitude control R? as a part of the control design

Modeling and Control of Aerial Robots
52.3 Control
1319
Part E | 52.3
rather than rely on the planned trajectory set-point; in
particular R? 6D Rp in general. Note that the feedfor-
ward control in Sect. 52.3.1 requires ˝? and P˝? to
plan the feedforward torque input for the attitude dy-
namics. Feed-forward in the attitude regulation loop is
a critical component of high-performance control and
without this input, there will not be sufﬁcient gain in
the attitude dynamics to track aggressive attitude tra-
jectories. However, computing the angular velocity goal
that corresponds to a feedback dependent attitude con-
trol goal R? in real-time requires forward prediction
of the control trajectory using tools such as model
predictive control (MPC) [52.8–10, 36]1. A simpler ap-
proach for trajectory tracking is to use the planned
angular velocity ˝? D ˝p even though it does not ex-
actly match the variation of R?. As long as .; P/ is
close to .?; P?/ D .p; Pp/ then R? is close to Rp and
.˝?; P˝?/ D .˝p; P˝p/ will provide a good estimate of
the critical feedforward attitude input.
We will discuss here the linear trajectory tracking
algorithm for which the speciﬁed trajectory is required
to have roll and pitch values that are small thus justi-
fying a linear approximation of the dynamics. Accord-
ingly, we assume that the Euler angles associated with
the rotation Rp (52.1), are given by p D p D 0, while
 p is a speciﬁed function of t. For a given arbitrary
yaw angle, we can linearize the dynamics about the
hover position ( D 0,  D 0,  D  p) and the nom-
inal inputs u1 D mg, u2 D 0. Linearizing (52.2a), we
obtain
R1 D g. cos  p C  sin  p/ ;
R2 D g. sin  p   cos  p/ ;
R3 D 1
mu1  g ;
(52.36)
where  D ? and  D ? represent the small devi-
ations from the hover position. In order to exponentially
drive all three components of error in the position part
of the trajectory, we want the acceleration vector R to
satisfy
.R?  R/ C Kd.P?  P/ C Kp.?  / D 0 :
From (52.36), we can immediately write
u1 D m
h
g C R?
3 C kd;z.P?
3  P3/ C kp;z.?
3  3/
i
;
(52.37)
to guarantee .3.t/  ?
3 .t// ! 0. We choose the appro-
priate desired roll, pitch, and yaw angles for ?, ?,
and  ? to guarantee exponential convergence:
? D 1
g.R?
1 sin   R?
2 cos  / ;
(52.38a)
? D 1
g.R?
1 cos  C R?
2 sin  / ;
(52.38b)
 ? D  p :
(52.38c)
Now . ?; ?; ?/ deﬁne the rotation matrix R? (52.1)
provided as a set point for the exponentially convergent
attitude controller discussed in the previous section.
Thus, as shown in Fig. 52.6, the control problem is ad-
dressed by decoupling the position control and attitude
control subproblems and the position control loop pro-
vides the attitude set points for the attitude controller.
The position controller can also be obtained without
linearization. This is done by projecting the position er-
ror (and its derivatives) along b3 and applying the input
u1 that cancels the gravitational force and provides the
appropriate proportional plus derivative feedback
u1 D mbT
3
h
R? C Kd.P?  P/ C Kp.?  / C ge3
i
:
(52.39)
Note that the projection operation is a nonlinear func-
tion of the roll and pitch angles and thus this is a non-
linear controller. In [52.7, 35], it is shown that this
approach results in exponential stability and allows the
robot to track trajectories in SE.3/.
52.3.2 Control of Fixed-Wing Aircraft
An aircraft is a highly coupled nonlinear dynamical
system and it may seem most natural to treat the con-
trol problem as an integrated multi-input multi-output
(MIMO) nonlinear design [52.29, 38–40]. However, de-
spite the nonlinear coupling of aircraft states there
are still clear dependencies between speciﬁc actuators
and certain dynamic modes of the open-loop response.
A disadvantage of the MIMO approach is that it tends
to obscure insight between control design and speciﬁc
open-loop mode response. Moreover, and as a conse-
quence, it tends to be less robust to large changes in
model parameters (such as caused by using a different
set of wings, or bolting on a completely new sensor
package, not an uncommon situation for a small UAV
system) than a classical control design. The classical,
and more intuitive, control architecture for ﬁxed wing
vehicles is to consider a set of separate, but intercon-
nected, single-input single-output (SISO) control loops.
Such an approach has the advantage of being highly in-
tuitive and leading to a modular design methodology

Part E | 52.3
1320
Part E
Moving in the Environment
based on successive loop closure, providing a straight-
forward gain tuning regime [52.31]. The robustness and
simplicity of the SISO architecture make it the preferred
choice for most small UAV control systems. A modern
implementation, however, uses the total energy con-
trol system (TECS) architecture and input decoupling
to overcome some of the limitations of classical ﬁxed-
wing control design.
The main control actions for a ﬁxed wing aircraft
are associated with the throttle, and the three aerody-
namic control surfaces; rudder, ailerons, and elevators.
The throttle regulates power to the motor and gov-
erns thrust T. The rudder, ailerons and elevators actuate
the angular velocities ˝z, ˝x, and ˝y, respectively,
through the angular dynamics of the vehicle. For a small
ﬁxed-wing UAV in normal ﬂight, a simple high-gain
proportional control scheme will effectively regulate
and decouple the variables .T; ˝x; ˝y; ˝z/ [52.31].
The control problem can then be posed as one where
.T; ˝x; ˝y; ˝z/ are inputs for regulation of the re-
mainder of the vehicle dynamics. Since there is weak
physical coupling between the lateral variables (roll
rate, bank angle, yaw rate, and course angle) and the
longitudinal variables (airspeed, pitch rate, pitch an-
gle, altitude rate, and altitude), and since the elevator
and rudder most strongly effect the lateral variables and
the throttle and aileron most strongly inﬂuence the lon-
gitudinal variables, most control architectures separate
functionality into a lateral control system and a longi-
tudinal control system. The input to the lateral control
system is the desired course angle, and the input to the
longitudinal control system is the desired airspeed and
the desired altitude.
Lateral Control System
There are three open-loop dynamic modes associated
with the response of the lateral dynamics of a ﬁxed-
wing aircraft: the roll mode, the spiral mode, and
the dutch roll mode. The roll mode is associated
with the ﬁrst-order response of the roll rate of the
vehicle to aileron input. Usually the wings and air-
frame are designed (e.g., with a positive dihedral angle
Chap. 26.4.4) so that this mode is highly stable and is
regulated using high-gain in the aileron input – indeed,
this mode is subsumed into the control simpliﬁcation
(regulation of ˝x) proposed above.
The spiral mode is associated with the natural turn-
ing motion of the vehicle. That is, if the vehicle is
banked into a turn, it will continue to turn until control
action is applied to ﬂatten the vehicle out. The spiral
mode is a linearization of the bank-to-turn dynamics
and is a single real pole close to the origin (Chap. 26,
Fig. 26.22). Typically the spiral mode is slightly un-
stable due to the tendency of the vehicle to side-slip
into a turn. In manned ﬂight, the spiral mode can be
dangerous since there is very little external perception
of turning. The nature of the banked turn dynamics
ensure that the body-ﬁxed-frame acceleration remains
oriented through the central axis of the vehicle and rate
of rotation is slow and nearly constant. The mode be-
comes dangerous if the pilot is not aware as the vehicle
slowly side-slips down into the turn, progressively div-
ing more and more steeply and increasing airspeed in
what is known as a spiral-dive. For autonomous ﬂight
control, the spiral mode is relatively benign since au-
topilots never stop looking at the instruments and take
immediate action if the vehicle is drifting off course.
The dutch-roll mode, is associated with the oscilla-
tion of the vehicle around a heading. In this motion, the
vehicle yaws away from the heading and then rolls due
to the dihedral effect, before the tilted lift vector and
rudder action force the airplane back toward the inci-
dent wind. If the rudder is small and does not provide
sufﬁcient damping, the vehicle can overshoot to yaw
and roll in the other orientation before repeating the os-
cillatory sequence. Dutch role motion is less dangerous
for manned ﬂight since it is usually stable (except for
vehicles with strongly swept back wings or negative di-
hedral) and produces unpleasant sideways acceleration
with the side-slip motion that is immediately apparent
to a pilot. Damping is increased by large tail plane sur-
faces and moderate to small dihedral. A ﬁgure of the
typical pole positions of an aerobatic RC airplane is
shown in Chap. 26, Fig. 26.22.
To understand the control problem for lateral dy-
namics, consider ﬁrst the angular yaw velocity ˝z
induced by rudder actuation. The primary effect of ˝z
will yaw the vehicle in the air and generate nonzero
side-slip ˇ. In the bank-to-turn control paradigm de-
scribed later, we will use ˝z to regulate ˇ  0, however,
it is instructive ﬁrst to consider the effect of nonzero
side-slip in order to build an intuitive understanding of
the lateral dynamics. If the side-slip ˇ 6D 0, the airplane
will be sliding sideways or crabbing through the air. In
particular, applying rudder input (nonzero ˝z) acts to
twist the airplane in the air; it does not in itself cause
the trajectory of the airplane to curve. For a typical air-
plane with dihedral, this will lead the aircraft to bank
away from the side-slip, and if the dutch-roll mode is
stable, the airplane will settle into a banked turn. The
causality of the system signals is given by
˝z ! ˇ !  !  :
Here the actuation from ˇ !  relies on the inherent
stability of the dutch roll mode of the lateral open-loop
dynamics of the airframe. Indeed, small-scale vehicles
with strong dihedral and large tail planes can be ﬂown

Modeling and Control of Aerial Robots
52.3 Control
1321
Part E | 52.3
without aileron surfaces. For example, the aerial robotic
vehicle as shown in Fig. 52.7, designed for slow low-
level ﬂight and equipped for visual terrain tracking
using optic ﬂow computed from a pair of downward
pointing web cameras [52.41], does not have ailerons
and the lateral motion is controlled using only the
rudder.
This control paradigm has several negatives. It is
rarely used for manned ﬂight because side-slip motion
generates sideways accelerations that do not feel natural.
More importantly, the control response is limited by the
low pass response of the open loop dutch roll dynamics
of the aircraft. Although this mode is stable, there is of-
ten a noticeable damped oscillatory response that causes
the vehicletrajectory to wander around the desired head-
ing and degrades course tracking performance.
The alternative is to explicitly use the ailerons to im-
pose the desired roll angle  on the vehicle and actuate
the heading dynamics (52.27a) without using the rud-
der. The rudder then becomes a separate control input
that can be used to regulate ˇ. That is
˝z ! ˇ ;
˝x !  !  :
Although, this may seem counter intuitive, (the rud-
der is not used to steer the airplane) it is, however, the
most effective heading control strategy. Using this con-
trol strategy and regulating the side-slip ˇ  0 ensures
that the bank-to-turn simpliﬁcations can be applied to
the model as was shown in Sect. 52.2.3.
Speciﬁcally, in the bank-to-turn strategy where side-
slip ˇ is regulated to zero using the rudder, the lateral
equations of motion are given by (52.24) and (52.27a).
In level ﬂight where the pitch angle is small and the ve-
locity and angle of attack are roughly a constant, these
Fig. 52.7 An autonomous ﬁxed-wing aerial robot for ex-
perimental work on vision-based terrain tracking at ANU
(after [52.41]). Note the upswept wings to generate dihe-
dral and the lack of ailerons
equations simplify to the cascade structure
P D ˝x C d ;
P D A C d ;
where A is a constant and d and d are disturbance
signals introduced through the modeling process. From
classical control theory, we know that a step in the head-
ing command ? can be tracked while simultaneously
rejecting low-frequency disturbances d and d using
a nested PI control law given by
? D kP.?  / C kI
t
Z
1
.?  / d ;
(52.40)
˝x D kP.?  / C kI
t
Z
1
.?  / d ;
(52.41)
where kP, kI, kP, and kI are positive control gains.
The proportional control
˝z D kPˇˇ;
(52.42)
is usually effective at regulating the side-slip angle to
zero, where kPˇ is a positive control gain.
Longitudinal Control System
The longitudinal dynamics concern the thrust T and
elevator (regulating ˝y) inputs, along with the an-
gle of attack ˛, the ﬂight path angle , the airspeed
jvaj, and the altitude h. There are two primary open-
loop dynamic modes associated with the open loop
response of the longitudinal dynamics, the short-period
and phugoid modes. The short-period mode is associ-
ated with variation of pitch of the vehicle for constant
velocity, constant altitude ﬂight. It is a consequence
of the linear dependence of lift of the primary wing
to angle-of-attack as the vehicle pitches up and down
around its center of the mass. The center of mass of
an airplane is always designed to lie in front of the
center of force of the primary wing surface to ensure
that the short-period mode oscillation is stable, (placing
the mass further forward increases the stability margin,)
while damping provided by the tail plane of the vehicle
ensures asymptotic stability (Chap. 26.4.2).
The phugoid mode is associated with the interplay
of aerodynamic lift, velocity, glide path, and height of
the vehicle for constant angle-of-attack ﬂight. As a ve-
hicle starts to descend gently, the airspeed increases
as the loss of potential energy in height is transferred
into kinetic energy. As the vehicle accelerates, the in-
creased airspeed leads to increased primary lift on the
wings leading the vehicle to pull out of the dive and
to start to ascend again. The vehicle will slow as the

Part E | 52.3
1322
Part E
Moving in the Environment
stored kinetic energy is traded back into potential en-
ergy. The resulting open-loop unstabilized motion is
a repeated swooping cycle. Since aircraft are designed
with low drag coefﬁcients, the phugoid mode is usually
very lightly damped, however, it is slow and easily sta-
bilized. A key point to note in phugoid motion is that
it is a constant energy oscillation; potential energy is
transformed into kinetic energy and is then transformed
back into potential energy.
Both thrust and pitch rate inputs affect both velocity
and angle-of-attack of an airplane. In turn, the glide-
path angle can be controlled through regulation of either
angle-of-attack or velocity of the vehicle. The coupling
associated with these dependencies mean that simple
thrust to velocity or pitch-rate to glide-path SISO con-
trol loops cannot cover the full ﬂight regime of a typical
aircraft, a limitation of many existing autopilot systems
even in commercial airliners. The industry standard ap-
proach to address this issue is to have different control
modes for different ﬂight conditions, take-off and climb,
level ﬂight, and descent, that exploit different input to
state control mappings [52.31]. The total energy control
system (TECS) design paradigm [52.42, 43] partially
avoids these difﬁculties for a wide range of operating
conditions and has the additional advantage of minimiz-
ing the control activity undertaken by the throttle.
Due to the energy preserving nature of the phugoid
mode, small variations in velocity and height tend to be
stable and energy conserving. Based on this insight, it
is desirable to allow small variations of the airspeed of
the vehicle as long as it is associated with the phugoid
mode response. The key characteristic of the phugoid
mode is that it preserve total energy
E WD 1
2mjvaj2 C mgh
(52.43)
of the aircraft. The TECS control architecture uses the
total energy as an output and uses the throttle to regulate
this output to a desired energy set point. The set point
E?.t/ WD 1
2mjv ?
a j2 C mgh?
is chosen to correspond to the desired trajectory. The
energy error is
QE WD E?.t/  E.t/ ;
and the throttle input is assigned as
ıt D kPE QE.t/ C kIE
t
Z
1
QE./ d ;
(52.44)
where kPE and kIE are positive control gains.
Once the throttle input is assigned, the remaining
longitudinal dynamics must be controlled using the el-
evator to servo the pitch rate ˝y. The primary effect
of pitch rate is to rotate the wing section of the air-
craft, directly effecting the angle-of-attack. Changing
the angle-of-attack effects lift and drag generated by the
wing, with lift most strongly effected since it depends
linearly on ˛ (52.14) while drag is small and only varies
with the square of the angle-of-attack (52.15). By def-
inition, the lift L is the component of airfoil force that
lies perpendicular to the velocity. As a consequence the
lift force L does not contribute directly to changes in
the total energy E of the vehicle. In particular, actu-
ation of the pitch dynamics of the vehicle is (almost)
decoupled from total energy regulation loop. It is now
possible to choose an output for the elevator input and
have conﬁdence that the resulting SISO loop response
will only marginally disturb the total energy regulation
loop. Rather than simply regulate the height or velocity,
both variables that have been considered as outputs for
elevator regulation loops in classical ﬁxed-wing control
architectures [52.31], it is of interest to regulate a bal-
ance between kinetic and potential energy [52.42].
Consider the kinetic energy and potential energy of
the vehicle separately
K D 1
2mjvaj2 ;
U WD mgh :
A given ﬂight trajectory corresponding to desired val-
ues of .jv ?
a .t/j;h?.t// deﬁnes desired set points for
kinetic and potential energy K?.t/ D 1
2mjv ?
a .t/j2 and
U? D mgh?.t/. Deﬁne the errors in the kinetic and po-
tential energy along the trajectory as
QK D K?.t/  K.t/ D 1
2m

jv ?
a .t/j2  jva.t/j2	
;
QU D U?.t/  U.t/ D mg

h?.t/  h.t/
	
;
(52.45)
and deﬁne the combined energy balance error QB by
QB D QK  QU :
The proposed control strategy is to use the commanded
pitch angle ? to regulate QB ! 0.
To understand this control architecture, note that if
QE D 0 then QK D QE  QU D  QU and hence
QB D 2 QK D 2 QU :
It follows that driving QB to zero forces both jvaj ! jv ?
a j
and h ! h?. The real advantage of the balanced energy
control architecture occurs when QE 6D 0. In this case,
driving QB ! 0 will not force either jvaj or h to its ref-
erence set point at all costs, but rather, it will balance
the excess or deﬁcit energy between kinetic and po-
tential energy set points around the desired trajectory.

Modeling and Control of Aerial Robots
52.3 Control
1323
Part E | 52.3
Balancing the energy error in this way is a highly ro-
bust control strategy that maximizes the ability of the
throttle to maintain good control of the total energy.
An additional insight is that the difference of the en-
ergy terms QB is maximally sensitive to excitation in the
phugoid mode. In particular, if power ﬂows between po-
tential and kinetic energy levels, then the relative vari-
ation in QB is maximal compared to any other combined
measure incorporating jvaj and h subject to scaling fac-
tors. Thus, the balanced energy control strongly directly
damps the phugoid mode that is uncontrolled by the
thrust control.
The desired pitch angle is therefore given by
? D kPB QB.t/ C kIB
t
Z
1
QB./ d ;
(52.46)
where kPB and kIB are positive control gains. In practice,
the pitch angle actuates stable angle-of-attack dynam-
ics that in turn lead to regulation of the ﬂight-path
angle and ﬁnally control the tradeoff encoded in QB.
The stability of the internal dynamics for the proposed
SISO control loop are handled by suitable tuning of the
PI gains, avoiding the need to explicitly model these
dynamics. The effectiveness and robustness of this ap-
proach is well established in the literature [52.31].
Control Implementation and Gain Tuning
The lateral control strategy for ﬁxed wing aircraft is
based on (52.40), (52.41), and (52.42). In using these
commands, we are assuming high-bandwidth feedback
loops regulating ˝x and ˝z using the ailerons and rud-
der, respectively. Practical implementation of the lateral
control loops required saturating the roll command ?
to ˙ N, where, for most airframes, a reasonable value
is N D 30ı. Commanding higher roll angles usually re-
sults in large side-slip angles, which leads to unaccept-
ably large drops in altitude during turns. The roll rate
command ˝x is also saturated to a fraction of the limits
of the rate gyro sensor to ensure adequate convergence
of the attitude estimator. Practical implementation of
(52.40) also requires careful wrapping of the angles 
and ? around ˙180ı to avoid large heading errors that
result in not associating 180ı with 180ı.
The gains of the lateral control loops can be tuned in
ﬂight by selectively enabling one loop at a time. A strat-
egy that has proven success over numerous ﬂight test is
to tune the gains in the following order:
1. Attitude rate loops regulating ˝x and ˝z.
2. Side slip gain kPˇ.
3. The proportional gain on roll error kP, followed by
the integral gain kI. The integral gain kI is often
set to zero, since the integrator on the heading loop
provides suitable robustness.
4. The proportional gain on the heading loop kP, fol-
lowed by the integral gain kI.
The use of (52.46) assumes a high-bandwidth pitch
control loop using the elevator as an actuator. Practical
implementation of (52.44) requires saturating ıt above
by ımax
t
and below by ımin
t
 0. Saturating the pitch an-
gle is also critical to avoid stall conditions that occur at
large angles of attack. An effective method to do this is
to saturate the altitude error in computing the error in
potential energy, replacing (52.45) with
QU D mg sat

h?.t/  h.t/; Nh
	
;
(52.47)
where
sat.x; `/ D
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
`
if x  ` ;
`
if x 	 ` ;
x
otherwise :
Saturating the altitude error will cause a steady climb
rate when h?  h is large. To understand why, assume
that velocity is well regulated, and that the altitude error
is large, then QB 
 mg sat.h?  h; Nh/ D mgNh. Ignor-
ing the integrator, this will cause a constant pitch angle
command from (52.46). However, simply saturating the
pitch angle will not result in good performance since
driving
QB D QK  QU D 1
2m

jv ?
a .t/j2  jva.t/j2
 mgŒh?.t/  h.t/
to zero will cause errors in kinetic and potential energy
to balance. Therefore, a large unsaturated altitude error
will result in the controller increasing the airspeed er-
ror. A sustained altitude error will cause the integrator
in (52.46) to wind up. Therefore, an integrator anti-
windup scheme is essential.
Similar to the lateral control loop, the gains for the
longitudinal controller can be tuned in ﬂight by selec-
tively enabling one loop at time. The gains should be
tuned in the following order:
1. The pitch attitude loops is ﬁrst tuned. Pitch attitude
is typically controlled using a PID controller. The
derivative gain can be tuned to provide adequate
damping on the RC controller. The proportional
gain is then added and adjusted to provide adequate
transient response. The integrator is added after-
ward to remove steady state error in pitch.
2. The throttle gains kPE and kIE in (52.44) are then
adjusted. We have found that normalizing the en-
ergy error QE by the reference kinetic energy Kref D
1
2mjv ref
a j makes these gains particularly easy to tune,

Part E | 52.4
1324
Part E
Moving in the Environment
and that the scaling results in similar gains working
across different platforms.
3. The energy balance gains kPB and kIB are tuned last.
Again, scaling QB by Kref seems to simplify the tun-
ing process for different airframes.
An advantage of the TECS is that it reduces the
need for different control modes for the longitudinal au-
topilot. In particular, the altitude hold mode, the climb
mode, and the descend mode described in [52.31] are
reduced to one mode using TECS. However, we should
note that the take-off mode described in [52.31] is still
needed for this scheme. For small aircraft that are hand
launched, or any aircraft whose velocity at take off is
signiﬁcantly below the commanded velocity, the TECS
control in (52.46) will cause the vehicle to pitch down
to gain airspeed when the airspeed error is large. This
pitch-down behavior will cause the airframe to crash if
it is executed immediately after take-off. Therefore, the
best strategy is to apply full throttle immediately after
take-off, and to set the commanded pitch angle to ﬁxed
value that is adequate for a climb rate that avoids stall.
52.4 Trajectory Planning
There are many different control tasks that aerial
robotic vehicles will be required to undertake in the
coming years. In this chapter, it is impossible to cover
the whole range of potential tasks along with their asso-
ciated planning problems. We will consider only basic
trajectory or path planning problems for both quadrotor
and ﬁxed-wing vehicles. This problem is fundamental
to ﬁxed-wing navigation where the distances involved
are such that path and trajectory planning is sufﬁcient
for almost all goals. For small aerial robotic vehicles
ﬂying in cluttered 3-D-spaces, there is a much wider
selection of goals including things such as, physical
interaction with the environment, obstacle avoidance,
etc., as well as simply planning and following a tra-
jectory to a given way-point. However, the trajectory
planning provides a basic building block in achieving
a wide range of goals, and is a necessary component of
achieving high-performance tasks.
52.4.1 Trajectory Planning for Quadrotors
The quadrotor is underactuated and this makes it difﬁ-
cult to plan trajectories in 12-dimensional state space
(6DOF position and velocity). However, the problem
is considerably simpliﬁed if we use the fact that the
quadrotor dynamics are differentially ﬂat [52.44]. To
see this, we consider the output position  and the yaw
angle  . We show that we can write all state variables
and inputs as functions of the outputs (;  ) and their
derivatives. Derivatives of  yield the velocity v, and
the acceleration,
Pv D 1
mu1b3 C ge3 :
From Fig. 52.3, we see that
d1 D Œcos  ; sin  ; 0T
and the unit vectors for the body-ﬁxed frame, can be
written in terms of the variables  and Pv as follows
b3 D
Pv  ge3
kPv  ge3k; b2 D
b3  d1
kb3  d1k; b1 D b2  b3
provided b3  d1 ¤ 0. This deﬁnes the rotation matrix
ARB as a function of Pv (the second derivative of ) and
 . In this way, we write the angular velocity and the
four inputs as functions of the position, velocity (v D
P), acceleration (a D R), jerk ( D .iii/), and snap or
the derivative of jerk ( D .iv/). From these equations,
it is possible to verify that there is a diffeomorphism
between the 18  1 vector
X D

T; v T; aT; T; T;  T; P T; R 
T
and the state augmented with the inputs and their
derivatives

T; PT; R; ˝T; u1; Pu1; Ru1; uT
2
T
:
This property of differential ﬂatness makes it easy
to design trajectories that respect the dynamics of the
underactuated system. Any four-times-differentiable
trajectory in the space of ﬂat outputs, .T.t/;  .t//T,
corresponds to a feasible trajectory, one that satisﬁes
the equations of motion. All inequality constraints of
states and inputs can be expressed as functions of
the ﬂat outputs and their derivatives. This mapping to
the space of ﬂat outputs can be used to generate tra-
jectories that minimize a cost functional formed by
a weighted combination of the different ﬂat outputs and

Modeling and Control of Aerial Robots
52.4 Trajectory Planning
1325
Part E | 52.4
their derivatives
.p.t/;  p.t// D
arg
min
.t/; .t/
T
Z
0
L.; v; a; ; ;  ; P ; R / dt ;
g..t/; .t// 	 0 :
(52.48)
In [52.7], minimum snap trajectories were generated by
minimizing a cost functional derived from the snap and
the angular yaw acceleration with
L.; P; R;«;¬ ; P ; R / D .1  ˛/.¬/4 C ˛. R /2 :
By suitable parameterizing trajectories with basis func-
tions in the ﬂat space and by considering linear inequal-
ities in the ﬂat space to model constraints on states and
inputs (e.g., u1  0), it is possible to turn this optimiza-
tion into a quadratic program which can be solved in
real-time for planning.
Finally, as shown in [52.45], it is possible to com-
bine this controller with attitude only controllers to ﬂy
through vertical windows or land on inclined perches
with close to zero normal velocity. A trajectory con-
troller is used by the robot to build up momentum while
the attitude controller enables reorientation when coast-
ing with the generated momentum.
52.4.2 Trajectory Planning
for Fixed-Wing Aircraft
For ﬁxed wing vehicles, the critical constraints that in-
ﬂuence path planning is the minimum turn radius and
the maximum ﬂight path angle. As shown in [52.29,
31], a good approximation for the minimum turn radius
is given by
Rmin D jvaj2
g
tan N ;
where g is the acceleration of gravity at sea level, and N
is the maximum allowable bank angle. From (52.27c),
we see that a good approximation for the maximum
ﬂight path angle is
N D sin1
 Phmax
jvaj
!
;
where Phmax is the maximum climb/descent rate of the
airframe. Fixed wing aircraft are typically designed
to ﬂy at a speciﬁc airspeed where the lift-to-drag ra-
tio is maximized, thereby minimizing fuel expenditure.
Therefore path planners for ﬁxed wing vehicles com-
monly assume a constant airspeed. In this section, we
will assume zero wind conditions where airspeed equals
ground speed. Therefore, the path planning problem
for ﬁxed wing vehicles is naturally posed as planning
a constant velocity path between two conﬁgurations that
satisfy the minimum turn radius and maximum ﬂight
path angle constraints.
If the maneuver is executed at a constant altitude,
then a traditional Dubins car planner can be used to
ﬁnd a constant velocity path satisfying the turn rate
constraints [52.46]. Using the Dubins car model for
UAV path planning is a common practice in the litera-
ture [52.31, 47–50]. However, the constant altitude lim-
itation can be removed by extending the traditional Du-
bins car model to the Dubins airplane model given by
Pn D V cos  ;
Pw D V sin  ;
P D u1 ;
Ph D V sin u2 ;
where .n;w/ is the inertial North–West position, V is
the speed of the Dubins airplane, and in the case of zero
ambient wind is V D jvaj, and where ju1j 	 V=Rmin,
and ju2j 	 N [52.51].
The conﬁguration of a Dubins airplane is given by
C D .n; w; h; /, where n and w are North–West iner-
tial coordinates, h is the altitude, and  is the course
angle. The Dubins airplane planning problem is to ﬁnd
a minimum distance path between a start conﬁguration
Cs and an end conﬁguration Ce that satisﬁes the con-
straints ju1j 	 V=Rmin, and ju2j 	 N.
Recall that Dubins car paths are composed of three
segments: a turn segment that follows a circle with the
minimum turn radius Rmin, a straight line segment, and
ﬁnally another turn segment that again follows a cir-
cle with minimum turn radius [52.46]. The planning
problem for the Dubins airplane is closely related to
the planning problem for the Dubins car, with some
variation due to the altitude component. As explained
in [52.51, 52], Dubins airplane paths can be separated
into three categories based on the altitude gain/loss
between the start and end conﬁgurations, i. e., h D
jhe  hsj.
If h is small enough, then the Dubins airplane can
follow the standard Dubins car path while gaining or
losing altitude at a constant rate that satisﬁes the ﬂight
path angle constraint and that allows the altitude differ-
ence to be realized. Such paths are termed low-altitude
paths in [52.51]. If on the other hand, h is so large that
ﬂying the Dubins car path at the ﬂight path angle con-
straints does not result in sufﬁcient altitude gain/loss,

Part E | 52.4
1326
Part E
Moving in the Environment
then the Dubins car path must be suitably modiﬁed. One
alternative is to ﬂy at the ﬂight path angle constraint
while making multiple complete orbits on the minimum
turn radius helix at the beginning of the Dubins car path
before proceeding along the straight line segment of the
path. Of course, a similar strategy would be to make
multiple complete orbits on the minimum turn radius
helix at the end of the Dubins car path. Such paths are
termed high-altitude paths in [52.51]. The middle case
is when the ﬂight path angle constraint does not allow
sufﬁcient altitude gain/loss following the Dubins car
path, but where one complete orbit along the start or end
circle of the Dubins car path at the maximum ﬂight path
angle results in more altitude gain/loss than is needed.
In this case, a deviation can be placed in the Dubins car
path to extend the path length to just the right amount
so that the altitude gain/loss can be achieved while ﬂy-
ing at the ﬂight path angle constraint. These paths are
termed medium-altitude paths in [52.51].
Following the notation deﬁned in [52.52] let
Lcar.Cs; Ce; R/ denote the path length of the Dubins car
path between the projection of the start conﬁguration
Cs onto the North–West plane, and the projection of the
end conﬁguration Ce onto the North–West plane, using
R as the turn radius of the vehicle.
Low-Altitude Dubins Paths
The altitude gain between the start and end conﬁgura-
tion is said to be low altitude if
jhe  hsj 	 Lcar.Cs; Ce; Rmin/ tan N ;
where the term on the right is the maximum altitude
gain that can be obtained by ﬂying at ﬂight-path angle
˙ N for a distance of Lcar.Cs; Ce; Rmin/.
In the low-altitude case, the altitude gain between
the start and end conﬁgurations can be achieved by
ﬂying the Dubins car path with a ﬂight-path angle satis-
fying ju2j 	 N. Therefore, the optimal ﬂight-path angle
can be computed by
u
2 D tan1

jhe  hsj
Lcar.Cs; Ce; Rmin/

:
Medium-Altitude Dubins Paths
The altitude gain between the start and the end conﬁg-
uration is said to be medium altitude if
Lcar.Cs; Ce; Rmin/ tan N < jhe  hsj
	 ŒLcar.Cs; Ce; Rmin/ C 2Rmin tan N ;
(52.49)
where the addition of the term 2Rmin accounts for
adding one orbit at radius Rmin to the path length.
In the medium-altitude case, the altitude difference
between the start and end conﬁgurations is too large to
obtain by ﬂying the Dubins car path at the ﬂight-path
angle constraint, but small enough that adding a full
turn on the helix at the beginning or end of the path and
ﬂying so that  D ˙ N results in more altitude gain/loss
than is needed. As shown in [52.51], the minimum dis-
tance path is achieved by setting  D sign .he  hs/ N
and inserting an extra maneuver in the Dubins car path
that extends the path length so that the altitude gain
when  D ˙ N is exactly jhe  hsj. While there are nu-
merous possible ways to extend the path length, the
method proposed in [52.52] is to add an additional in-
termediate arc to the start or end of the path, as shown in
Figs. 52.8 and 52.9. If the start altitude is lower than the
end altitude, then the intermediate arc is inserted imme-
diately after the start helix. If on the other hand, the start
altitude is higher than the end altitude, then the interme-
diate arc is inserted immediately before the end helix.
High-Altitude Dubins Paths
The altitude gain between the start and end conﬁgura-
tions is said to be high altitude if
jhe  hsj > ŒLcar.Cs; Ce; Rmin/ C 2Rmin tan N :
In the high-altitude case, the altitude gain cannot
be achieved by ﬂying the Dubins car path within the
ﬂight-path angle constraints. As shown in [52.51], the
minimum distance path is achieved when the ﬂight-
path angle is set at its limit of ˙ N, and the Dubins car
path is extended to facilitate the altitude gain. While
there are many different ways to extend the Dubins car
path, [52.52] suggests extending the path by spiraling
a certain number of turns at the beginning or end of the
path, and then by increasing the turn radius by the ap-
propriate amount.
For UAV scenarios, the most judicious strategy is
typically to spend most of the trajectory at as high an
altitude as possible. Therefore, if the altitude at the end
conﬁguration is higher than the altitude at the start con-
ﬁguration, then the path will be extended by a climbing
helix at the beginning of the path. If on the other hand,
the altitude at the start conﬁguration is higher than the
end conﬁguration, then the path will be extended by
a descending helix at the end of the path. If multiple
turns around the helix are required, then the turns could
be split between the start and end helices and still re-
sult in the same path length. For high-altitude Dubins
paths, the required number of turns in the helix will be
the smallest integer k such that
ŒLcar.Cs; Ce; Rmin/ C 2kRmin tan N 	 jhe  hsj
< ŒLcar.Cs; Ce; Rmin/ C 2.k C 1/Rmin tan N ;
(52.50)

Modeling and Control of Aerial Robots
52.4 Trajectory Planning
1327
Part E | 52.4
300
0
50
100
150
200
High altitude
Low altitude
Medium altitude
250
North (m)
West (m)
200
150
100
50
0
–50
Fig. 52.8 A top down view of low altitude, medium alti-
tude, and high-altitude Durbin airplane paths. The initial
and end conﬁgurations are identical except for the ﬁnal al-
titude
or in other words
k D

1
2Rmin

jhe  hsj
tan N
 Lcar.Cs; Ce; Rmin/

;
where bxc is the ﬂoor function that rounds x down to the
nearest integer. The radius of the start and end helices
is then increased to R? so that
Lcar.Cs; Ce; R?/ C 2kR?	 tan N D jhe  hsj :
(52.51)
Figures 52.8 and 52.9 show two perspective of three
different Dubins airplane paths that start and end in the
same conﬁguration with the exception of the ﬁnal al-
titude, which changes from 250 m for the low-altitude
path, to 350 m for the medium-altitude path, to 450 m
for the high-altitude path. A top down view is shown
in Fig. 52.8. Note that for both the low-altitude and
medium-altitude paths, that the minimum turn radius
constraint is active, whereas for the high-altitude path,
the turn radius in the turns is larger than the mini-
mum turn radius constraint. A three-dimensional view
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
100
200
High altitude
Low altitude
Medium altitude
Altitude
   (m)
North
(m)
West (m)
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
Fig. 52.9 A three-dimensional
view of low altitude,
medium altitude, and high-altitude Durbin airplane paths.
The initial and end conﬁgurations are identical except for
the ﬁnal altitude
is shown in Fig. 52.9. Note that for both the medium-
and high-altitude paths, the ﬂight path angle constraint
is active, but that it is not active for low-altitude paths.
There are a variety of techniques that allow the
control architecture described in Sect. 52.3.2 to follow
Dubins airplane paths. A simple method is to parame-
terize the path using a path parameter . Suppose that
the resulting parameterized path is given by p./. At
each sample time, the path parameter is advanced along
the path so as to minimize the distance to the path from
the aircraft
tC1 D arg min
st k.t/  p.s/k ;
where .t/ is the inertial position of the aircraft. The
commanded airspeed jv ?
a j, course angle ?, and alti-
tude h? at time t are then given by the parameterized
Dubins airplane path p.tC1/. This technique is similar
to the guidance strategy suggested in [52.53]. Alterna-
tive method based on vector ﬁeld methods are described
in [52.54–56].

Part E | 52.5
1328
Part E
Moving in the Environment
52.5 Estimating the Vehicle State
A critical aspect in implementation of real world aerial
robotic vehicles is providing good estimates of the state
of the vehicle. The key state estimates required for
control of an aerial vehicle are associated with the rigid-
body dynamics of its airframe, height, attitude, angular
velocity, and linear velocity. Moreover, ﬁxed-wing ve-
hicle dynamics depend on the aerodynamics states of
angle-of-attack and side-slip angle. Of these states, the
attitude and angular velocity are the most important as
they are the primary variable used in attitude control
and ﬂight-regulation of the vehicle. Angle-of-attack and
side-slip angles are rarely estimated explicitly and are
dealt with as internal dynamics in the control design
rather than explicit outputs or disturbances.
The ubiquitous instrumentation carried by any
aerial vehicle is an inertial measurement unit (IMU)
often augmented by some form of height measure-
ment, either acoustic, infra red, barometric, or laser
based. Vehicles that ﬂy in outside environments carry
a GPS system, most of which now provide velocity
estimation as well as position. Many ﬁxed wing vehi-
cles also include a pitot tube (for dynamic pressure)
or an anemometer to measure forward velocity. In-
door aerial robotic vehicles in research laboratories are
often ﬂown in ﬂight environments equipped with mo-
tion capture systems like VICON or Optitrack [52.5,
6]. Finally, many aerial robotic systems have also been
equipped with exteroceptive sensor systems including
Kinect 3D-range cameras, scanning laser rangeﬁnder,
integrated stereo camera systems, or simple monocular
cameras. There is an active research ﬁeld in developing
3-D-SLAM (simultaneous localization and mapping;
Chap. 46.4) algorithms for mapping and localization of
aerial robotic vehicles.
The rigid-body dynamic state is crucial to the con-
trol performance of an aerial robotic system and we will
concentrate on this estimation problem in this chap-
ter. A natural approach to state-estimation is to apply
classical ﬁlter design to a coordinate representation
of the rigid-body state. A good development of this
approach for small-scale aerial robotic systems is pre-
sented in [52.31]. An alternative approach is to exploit
the nonlinear structure of the rigid-body kinematics to
develop nonlinear observers. This approach has been
shown to generate simple, robust, and highly effective
ﬁlters for small-scale aerial robotic systems, especially
for the key problem of attitude estimation.
52.5.1 Estimating Attitude
A typical IMU includes a three-axis rate gyro, three-
axis accelerometer, and three-axis magnetometer. The
rate gyro measures angular velocity of fBg relative to
fAg expressed in the body-ﬁxed-frame of reference fBg
˝IMU D ˝ C b˝ C  2 fBg ;
where  denotes additive measurement noise and b˝
denotes a constant (or slowly time-varying) gyro bias.
Generally, the gyroscopes installed on quadrotor vehi-
cles are lightweight MEMS devices that are reasonably
robust to noise and quite reliable.
The accelerometers (in a strap down IMU conﬁgu-
ration) measure the instantaneous linear acceleration of
fBg due to exogenous force
aIMU D RT.Pv C ge3/ C ba C a 2 fBg ;
(52.52)
where ba is a bias term, a denotes additive measure-
ment noise, and Pv is in the inertial frame. Accelerom-
eters are highly susceptible to vibration and mounted
on a typical aerial robotic platform they require signif-
icant low-pass mechanical and/or electrical ﬁltering to
be reliable. Most vehicles avionics will incorporate an
analogue anti-aliasing ﬁlter on a MEMS accelerometer
before the signal is sampled.
The magnetometers provide measurements of the
ambient magnetic ﬁeld
mIMU D RT Am C Bm C b 2 fBg ;
where Am is the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld vector (ex-
pressed in the inertial frame), Bm is a body-ﬁxed-frame
expression for the local magnetic disturbance and b
denotes measurement noise. The noise b is usually
quite low for magnetometer readings, however, the lo-
cal magnetic disturbance Bm can be very signiﬁcant,
especially if the sensor is placed near power cables for
the motors.
In outdoor environments, the GPS is typically used
to provide position, inertial velocity, and course angle.
The GPS system consists of a constellation of 24 satel-
lites that continuously orbit the earth at an altitude of
20 180 km. The position of a GPS receiver is deter-
mined by observing the time-of-ﬂight of signals sent
from the satellites and detected by the receiver. If ac-
curate timing information is available at the receiver,
then a minimum of three satellites signals are neces-
sary to resolve the position of the receiver. However, for
low-cost GPS receivers, timing information must also
be received and this requires a minimum of four satel-
lite signals. A variety of factors effect the accuracy of
GPS estimates. The dominant sources of error include
inaccurate satellite orbital data, inaccuracy in the satel-
lite clocks, variable signal delay as it passes through

Modeling and Control of Aerial Robots
52.5 Estimating the Vehicle State
1329
Part E | 52.5
the ionosphere, weather conditions near the earth sur-
face, and multipath reﬂections from nearby buildings
and mountains. Total GPS bias error is approximately
510 m. Modern GPS receivers exploit doppler shift in
the carrier phase of the received signals to estimate the
course angle  and the ground speed.
The accelerometers and magnetometers can be used
to provide absolute attitude information on the vehicle
while the rate gyroscope provides complementary
angular velocity measurements. The attitude informa-
tion in the magnetometer signal is straightforward to
understand; in the absence of noise and bias then mIMU
provides a body-ﬁxed frame measurement of RTAm,
and consequently constrains two degrees of freedom in
the rotation R. The accelerometer can also be used as
long as the component of acceleration associated with
the inertial motion of the vehicle is compensated. The
simplest way in which to do this is to use an absolute
external signal such as GPS to estimate the vehicle
acceleration
aCTD D aIMU  ORT RGPS ;
where aCTD is the corrected acceleration. In this case,
aCTD 
 RTe3 and this provides attitude information. It
is important to note that in the complementary ﬁl-
ter proposed below (52.53), only the low-frequency
component of aCTD is required. As such, the potential
noise in the second derivative of a GPS signal RGPS
is not necessarily the problem that may be initially
feared. The key to good ﬁlter performance is to en-
sure that the cross over frequency of the complimentary
sensitivity is low enough that any phase distortion asso-
ciated with low-pass ﬁltering of RGPS does not effect the
estimate.
Remark 52.1
There may be issues in applying the correction ORT RGPS
if there is a delay in receiving the GPS signals. This
can be addressed, at the cost of storing IMU data, by
combining a short time prediction along with a time-
lagged observer [52.57].
In the case where GPS or an external measure of the
vehicles motion is not available, there are a number of
alternative techniques available to use the accelerome-
ter information for attitude estimation. For ﬁxed-wing
vehicles, the most important disturbance is due to cen-
tripetal acceleration due to the vehicle turning. It is
possible to model the centripetal acceleration using
airspeed and angular velocity and compensate using
a feedforward term [52.58, 59]. In the case of rotor-
craft in mostly hover ﬂight conditions, it turns out
that using the raw IMU accelerometer readings still
works extremely well [52.60–62] due to the disturbance
caused by the aerodynamic drag term  D Dv (52.10)
[52.21, 24, 25, 63]. In this case the corrected accelerom-
eter aCTD used in the ﬁlter (52.53) below is just the raw
IMU accelerometer measurement.
The attitude kinematics of the quadrotor are given
by (52.2c). Let OR denote an estimate for attitude R of
the quadrotor vehicle. The following observer [52.61,
62] fuses accelerometer, magnetometer, and gyroscope
data as well as other direct attitude estimates RE (such
as provided by a VICON or other external measurement
system) should they be available
POR WD OR

˝IMU  Ob

  ( ;
(52.53a)
POb WD kb( ;
(52.53b)
( WD
ka
g2
h
.ORTe3/  aCTD
i
C km
Am2
h
.ORTAm/  mIMU
i

C kEPso.3/

ORRT
E

;
(52.53c)
where ka, km, kE, and kb are arbitrary nonnegative
observer gains and Pso.3/.M/ D .M  MT/=2 is the
Euclidean matrix projection onto the skew-symmetric
matrices. If any one of the measurements in the in-
novation ( are not available or unreliable, then the
corresponding gain should be set to zero in the ob-
server. Note that both the attitude OR and the bias
corrected angular velocity O˝ D ˝IMU  Ob are estimated
by this observer. The observer (52.53) has been exten-
sively studied in the literature [52.61, 62] and shown to
converge exponentially (both theoretically and exper-
imentally) to the desired attitude estimate of attitude
with Ob converging to the gyroscope bias b. The ﬁlter has
a complementary nature, using the high-frequency part
of the gyroscope signal and the low-frequency parts of
the magnetometer, accelerometer, and external attitude
measurements [52.61]. The roll off frequencies associ-
ated with each of these signals is given by the gains ka,
km, and kE in rad=s.
52.5.2 Estimating Velocity and Position
Estimating velocity and position is a straightforward
process if the vehicle is equipped with a GPS system.
In this case, the dynamics (52.2a) and (52.2b) are linear,
and a linear ﬁlter can be used. Let O denote the estimate
of position and Ov denote the estimate of velocity. A sim-

Part E | 52.6
1330
Part E
Moving in the Environment
ple linear ﬁlter is given by
PO D Ov  kx.O  GPS/ ;
POv D ORTaIMU  ge3  kv.O  GPS/ ;
for gains kx; kv > 0. As long as the attitude estimate
OR is accurate, this ﬁlter design is highly robust. It is
easily possible to add bias estimates for the accelerom-
eter if desired. Equally well it is straightforward to use
Kalman ﬁlter techniques to tune the gains kx and kv in
real-time if that is considered advisable. In practice, for
small aerial robotic systems, the noise characteristics of
the measurements are so poor that it is often best to use
a constant gain ﬁlter rather than introduce the additional
complexity and potential instability of the Riccati equa-
tion associated with a Kalman ﬁlter.
In the absence of GPS, estimating position depends
on the availability of additional sensor systems. Since
most aerial robots are equipped with a barometer to pro-
vide an estimate of height and this can be utilized for an
estimate of the vertical motion of the vehicle
POh D Ovz  kh.Oh  h/ ;
(52.54a)
POvz D eT
3 ORTaIMU  g  kvz.Oh  h/ ;
(52.54b)
where kh; kvz > 0 are positive gains.
For quadrotor vehicles, there is also the possibility
of exploiting the linear drag aerodynamic forces (52.10)
associated with blade ﬂapping and induced drag to es-
timate horizontal velocity for a vehicle in near hover
conditions [52.24]. Deﬁne a projector matrix
Ph WD
1
0
0
0
1
0

(52.55)
that takes the ﬁrst two components of a vector. Then the
horizontal component of the inertial acceleration can be
measured by
Aah WD Ph
Aa D PhRa 
 Ph ORa ;
(52.56)
where we assume that the estimate OR is close to R. If we
assume the vehicle is only slowly varying in height one
has vz 
 0 in comparison to horizontal velocity
vh 
 P T
h v :
Furthermore, the thrust T 
 mg must compensate the
weight of the vehicle. Recalling (52.10) and taking just
the horizontal component one has
Aah 
 gPh ORe3  gPh ORDRTP T
h vh :
(52.57)
If the attitude ﬁlter estimate is good and the as-
sumptions about vehicle motion hold then (52.56) and
(52.57) can be solved for an estimate of vh
vh 
 1
g

Ph ORDORTP T
h
1 
Aah C gPh ORe3

:
(52.58)
Equation (52.58) provides a measurement of the
horizontal velocity, however, since it directly incorpo-
rates the unﬁltered accelerometer readings it is gener-
ally too noisy to be of much use. Its low-frequency
content can, however, be used to drive a velocity com-
plementary observer that uses the attitude estimate and
the system model (52.2b). Let Ovh be an estimate of the
horizontal component of the inertial velocity of the ve-
hicle then an observer is given by
POvh D gP T
h
ORe3 C ORDORTP T
h Ovh

kw.Ovh vh/ ; (52.59)
where vh is given by (52.58). The gain kw > 0 provides
a tuning parameters that indicates the roll-off frequency
for the information from Ovh that is used in the ﬁlter. It
also uses estimated velocity Ovh to provide an approx-
imation of the more correct RDRTP T
h vh term in the
feedforward velocity estimate, however, since the un-
derlying dynamics associated with this term is stable,
then the observer is stable even with this approximation.
It is found that this observer works remarkably well in
practice for quadrotor vehicles that are not engaged in
acrobatic maneuvers [52.21, 24, 25, 63].
52.6 Conclusion
This chapter has focused on the fundamental technol-
ogy associated with making an aerial robotic system
operate effectively and efﬁciently. In particular, we have
focused on the design of control and navigation algo-
rithms, and along with that the associated questions of
modeling and state estimation. Once a robust and re-
liable aerial robotic platform is available, the range of
potential applications for unmanned aerial systems is
vast. An indication of the potential is given by a list
of application categories that are already under con-
sideration [52.64, 65]: Remote sensing such as pipeline
spotting, power-line monitoring, volcanic sampling,
mapping, meteorology, geology, and agriculture [52.66,
67], as well as unexploded mine detection [52.68].

Modeling and Control of Aerial Robots
References
1331
Part E | 52
Disaster response such as chemical sensing, ﬂood mon-
itoring, and wildﬁre management. Surveillance such as
law enforcement, trafﬁc monitoring, coastal and mar-
itime patrol, and border patrols [52.69]. Search and
rescue in low-density or hard-to-reach areas. Trans-
portation including small and large cargo transport,
and possibly passenger transport. Communications as
permanent or ad hoc communication relays for voice
and data transmission, as well as broadcast units for
television or radio. Payload delivery for a wide range
of applications including agriculture, ﬁreﬁghting, and
even logistics of product delivery. Image acquisition
for cinematography and real-time entertainment. It is
no surprise that aerial robotics is one of the most dy-
namic and exciting ﬁelds of robotics research at the
moment.
Video-References
VIDEO 436
Autopilot using total energy control
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/52/videodetails/436
VIDEO 437
Dubins airplane
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/52/videodetails/437
References
52.1
R.C. Michelson: International aerial robotics com-
petition – The world’s smallest intelligent flying
machines, 13th RPVs/UAVs International Conference
(1998), pp. 31.1–31.9
52.2
L.R. Newcome: Unmanned Aviation, a Brief History
of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Reston 2004)
52.3
M.A. Garratt, J.S. Chahl:
Vision-based terrain
following for an unmanned rotorcraft, J. Field
Robotics 25(4/5), 284–301 (2008)
52.4
M. Garratt, H. Pota, A. Lambert, S. Eckersley-Maslin,
C. Farabet: Visual tracking and lidar relative posi-
tioning for automated launch and recovery of an
unmanned rotorcraft from ships at sea, Naval Eng.
J. 121(2), 99–110 (2009)
52.5
Vicon Motion Systems Ltd: http://www.vicon.com/
52.6
NaturalPoint
Inc.:
OptiTrack,
http://www.
naturalpoint.com/optitrack/
52.7
D. Mellinger, V. Kumar: Minimum snap trajectory
generation and control for quadrotors, Proc. Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011)
52.8
M. Hehn, R. D’Andrea: Quadrocopter trajectory
generation and control, IFAC World Congress (2011)
pp. 1485–1491
52.9
M.W. Mueller, R. D’Andrea:
A model predic-
tive controller for quadrocopter state intercep-
tion, European Control Conference (2013) pp. 1383–
1389
52.10
M.W. Mueller, M. Hehn, R. D’Andrea: A compu-
tationally efficient algorithm for state-to-state
quadrocopter trajectory generation and feasibil-
ity verification, IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) (2013)
pp. 3480–3486
52.11
J. Thomas, J. Polin, K. Sreenath, V. Kumar: Avian-
inspired grasping for quadrotor micro uavs, ASME
Int. Des. Eng. Tech. Conf. (IDETC) (2013)
52.12
M. Turpin, N. Michael, V. Kumar: Trajectory de-
sign and control for aggressive formation flight
with quadrotors, Auton. Robots 33(1/2), 143–156
(2012)
52.13
S. Shen, Y. Mulgaonkar, N. Michael, V. Kumar: Vi-
sion-based state estimation for autonomous rotor-
craft MAVs in complex environments, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (2013)
52.14
S. Shen, Y. Mulgaonkar, N. Michael, V. Kumar: Ini-
tialization-free monocular visual-inertial estima-
tion with application to autonomous mavs, Int.
Symp. Exp. Robotics (ISER) (2014)
52.15
T. Hamel, R. Mahony, R. Lozano, J. Ostrowski: Dy-
namic modelling and configuration stabilization
for an X4-flyer, Proc. Int. Fed. Autom. Control Symp.
(IFAC) (2002)
52.16
S. Bouabdallah, P. Murrieri, R. Siegwart: Design
and control of an indoor micro quadrotor, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 5 (2004)
pp. 4393–4398
52.17
P.-J. Bristeau, P. Martin, E. Salaän, N. Petit: The
role of propeller aerodynamics in the model of
a quadrotor uav, Proc. Eur. Control Conf. (2009)
pp. 683–688
52.18
H.
Huang,
G.M.
Hoffmann,
S.L.
Waslander,
C.J. Tomlin: Aerodynamics and control of au-
tonomous quadrotor helicopters in
aggressive
maneuvering, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2009) pp. 3277–3282
52.19
P. Pounds, R. Mahony, P. Corke: Modelling and con-
trol of a large quadrotor robot. Control Eng, Pract.
18(7), 691–699 (2010)
52.20
M. Bangura, R. Mahony: Nonlinear dynamic mod-
eling for high performance control of a quadrotor,
Australas. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2012)
52.21
R. Mahony, V. Kumar, P. Corke: Multirotor aerial
vehicles: Modeling, estimation, and control of
quadrotor, Robotics Autom. Mag. 19(3), 20–32 (2012)
52.22
R.W. Prouty: Helicopter Performance, Stability and
Control (Krieger, Malabar 1995), reprint with addi-
tions

Part E | 52
1332
Part E
Moving in the Environment
52.23
J.G. Leishman: Principles of helicopter aerodynam-
ics, Cambridge Aerospace Series (Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge 2000)
52.24
P. Martin, E. Salaun: The true role of accelerometer
feedback in quadrotor control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (2010) pp. 1623–1629
52.25
D. Abeywardena, S. Kodagoda, G. Dissanayake,
R. Munasinghe: Improved state estimation in
quadrotor mavs: A novel drift-free velocity estima-
tor, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 20(4), 32–39 (2013)
52.26
R. Leishman, J. Macdonald, R.W. Beard, T.W. Mc-
Lain: Quadrotors and accelerometers: State estima-
tion with an improved dynamic model. IEEE Control
Syst, Mag. 34(1), 28–41 (2014)
52.27
A. Bramwell, G. Done, D. Balmford: Bramwell’s
Helicopter Dynamics (Butterworth Heinenmann,
Woburn 2001)
52.28
J.-L. Boiffier: The Flight Dynamics: The Equations
(Wiley, Chichester 1998)
52.29
B.L. Stevens, F.L. Lewis: Aircraft Control and Simu-
lation, 2nd edn. (Wiley, Hoboken 2003)
52.30
L.H. Carter, J.S. Shamma: Gain-scheduled bank-
to-turn autopilot design using linear parameter
varying transformations. J. Guid, Control Dyn. 19(5),
1056–1063 (1996)
52.31
R.W. Beard, T.W. McLain: Navigation, Guidance,
and Control of Small Unmanned Aircraft (Princeton
University Press, Princeton 2012)
52.32
M.-D. Hua, T. Hamel, P. Morin, C. Samson: A control
approach for thrust-propelled underactuated ve-
hicles and its application to vtol drones, IEEE Trans.
Autom. Control 54(8), 1837–1853 (2009)
52.33
M. Bangura, H. Lim, H. Jin Kim, R. Mahony: Aerody-
namic power control for multirotor aerial vehicles,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2014), Paper
MoB03.2.
52.34
P. Pounds, R. Mahony, P. Corke: Design of a
static thruster for micro air vehicle rotorcraft, ASCE
J. Aerosp. Eng. 22(1), 85–94 (2009)
52.35
T. Lee, M. Leok, N.H. McClamroch: Geometric track-
ing control of a quadrotor UAV on se.3/, Proc. IEEE
Conf. Decis. Control (2010)
52.36
M. Bangura, R. Mahony: Real-time model predic-
tive control for quadrotors, Proc. IFAC World Conf.
(2014)
52.37
H.K. Khalil: Nonlinear Systems, 2nd edn. (Prentice
Hall, Upper Saddle River 1996)
52.38
D. Pucci: Flight dynamics and control in relation to
stall, IEEE Am. Control Conf. (ACC) (2012) pp. 118–124
52.39
S. Devasia, D. Chen, B. Paden: Nonlinear inversion-
based output tracking, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control
41(7), 930–942 (1996)
52.40
J.-F. Magni, S. Bennani, J. Terlouw: Robust Flight
Control: A Design Challenge, Lecture Notes in Con-
trol and Information Sciences, Vol. 224 (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 1997)
52.41
E. Slatyer, R. Mahony, P. Corke: Terrain following
using wide field optic flow, Proc. Australas. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ACRA) (2010)
52.42
A.A. Lambregts: Vertical fight path and speed con-
trol autopilot design using total energy principles,
Proc. AIAA Guid. Control Conf. (1983) pp. 559–569
52.43
L.F. Faleiro, A.A. Lambregts: Analysis and tuning
of a total energy control system control law using
eigenstructure assignment, Aerosp. Sci. Technol.
3(3), 127–140 (1999)
52.44
M.J. Van Nieuwstadt, R.M. Murray: Real-time tra-
jectory generation for differentially flat systems,
Int. J. Robust Nonlinear Control 8, 995–1020
(1998)
52.45
D. Mellinger, N. Michael, V. Kumar: Trajectory gen-
eration and control for precise aggressive maneu-
vers with quadrotors, Int. J. Robotics Res. 31, 664–
674 (2012)
52.46
L.E. Dubins: On curves of minimal length with
a constraint on average curvature, and with pre-
scribed initial and terminal positions and tangents,
Am. J. Math. 79, 497–516 (1957)
52.47
G. Yang, V. Kapila: Optimal path planning for un-
manned air vehicles with kinematic and tactical
constraints, Proc. IEEE Conf. Decis. Control (2002)
pp. 1301–1306
52.48
A. Rahmani, X.C. Ding, M. Egerstedt: Optimal mo-
tion primitives for multi-UAV convoy protection,
Proc. Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2010) pp. 4469–
4474
52.49
S. Hosak, D. Ghose: Optimal geometrical path in 3D
with curvature constraint, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2010) pp. 113–118
52.50
H. Yu, R.W. Beard: A vision-based collision avoid-
ance technique for micro air vehicles using local-
level frame mapping and path planning, Auton.
Robots 34(1/2), 93–109 (2013)
52.51
H. Chitsaz, S.M. LaValle: Time-optimal paths for a
Dubins airplane, Proc. 46th IEEE Conf. Decis. Control
(2007) pp. 2379–2384
52.52
M. Owen, R.W. Beard, T.W. McLain: Implement-
ing dubins airplane paths on fixed-wing UAVs. In:
Handbook of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, ed. by
G.J. Vachtsevanos, K.P. Valavanis (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 2014) pp. 1677–1702
52.53
S. Park, J. Deyst, J.P. How: Performance and lya-
punov stability of a nonlinear path-following
guidance method, AIAA J. Guid. Control Dyn. 30(6),
1718–1728 (2007)
52.54
D.R. Nelson, D.B. Barber, T.W. McLain, R.W. Beard:
Vector field path following for miniature air vehi-
cles, IEEE Trans. Robotics 37(3), 519–529 (2007)
52.55
D.A. Lawrence, E.W. Frew, W.J. Pisano: Lyapunov
vector fields for autonomous unmanned aircraft
flight control, AIAA J. Guid. Control Dyn. 31(5), 1220–
12229 (2008)
52.56
V.M.
Goncalves,
L.C.A.
Pimenta,
C.A.
Maia,
B.C.O. Durtra, G.A.S. Pereira: Vector fields for
robot navigation along time-varying curves in
n-dimensions, IEEE Trans. Robotics 26(4), 647–659
(2010)
52.57
A. Khosravian, J. Trumpf, R. Mahony, T. Hamel:
Velocity aided attitude estimation on so.3/ with
sensor delay, Proc. Conf. Decis. Control (2014)
52.58
M. Euston, P. Coote, R. Mahony, J. Kim, T. Hamel:
A complementary filter for attitude estimation of
a fixed-wing UAV, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2008) pp. 340–345

Modeling and Control of Aerial Robots
References
1333
Part E | 52
52.59
R. Mahony, M. Euston, J. Kim, P. Coote, T. Hamel:
A nonlinear observer for attitude estimation of a
fixed-wing UAV without GPS measurements, Trans.
Inst. Meas. Control 33(6), 699–717 (2011)
52.60
R. Mahony, T. Hamel, J.-M. Pflimlin: Complemen-
tary filter design on the special orthogonal group
SO.3/, Proc. IEEE Conf. Decis. Control (CDC) (2005)
pp. 1477–1484
52.61
R. Mahony, T. Hamel, J.-M. Pflimlin: Non-linear
complementary filters on the special orthogonal
group, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 53(5), 1203–1218
(2008)
52.62
S. Bonnabel, P. Martin, P. Rouchon: Non-linear
symmetry-preserving observers on lie groups, IEEE
Trans. Autom. Control 54(7), 1709–1713 (2009)
52.63
J. Macdonald, R. Leishman, R. Beard, T. McLain:
Analysis of an improved imu-based observer for
multirotor helicopters, J. Intell Robotic Syst. 74(3/4),
1049–1061 (2014)
52.64
D. Hughes: Uavs face hurdles in gaining access to
civil airspace, Aviation Week (2007)
52.65
K.C. Wong, C. Bil, G. Gordon, P.W. Gibbens: Study
of the Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) Market in
Australia, Tech. Rep. (Aerospace Technology Forum
Report, Sydney 1997)
52.66
R. Sugiura, N. Noguchi, K. Ishii, H. Terao: Devel-
opment of remote sensing system using an un-
manned helicopter, J. Jap. Soc. Agricult. Mach.
65(1), 53–61 (2003)
52.67
R. Sugiura, T. Fukagawa, N. Noguchi, K. Ishii, Y. Shi-
bata, K. Toriyama: Field information system using
an agricultural helicopter towards precision farm-
ing, IEEE/ASME Int. Conf. Adv. Intell. Mechatron.
(2003) pp. 1073–1078
52.68
K. Schutte, H. Sahli, D. Schrottmayer, F.J. Varas:
Arc: A camcopter based mine field detection
system, 5th Int. Airborne Remote Sens. Conf.
(2001)
52.69
S.E. Wright: Uavs in community police work, AIAA
Infotechs., Aerospace (2005)

Multimedia Contents Multiple Mob
1335
Part E | 53
53. Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
Lynne E. Parker, Daniela Rus, Gaurav S. Sukhatme
Within the context of multiple mobile, and net-
worked robot systems, this chapter explores the
current state of the art. After a brief introduction,
we first examine architectures for multirobot co-
operation, exploring the alternative approaches
that have been developed. Next, we explore com-
munications issues and their impact on multirobot
teams in Sect. 53.3, followed by a discussion of
networked mobile robots in Sect. 53.4. Following
this we discuss swarm robot systems in Sect. 53.5
and modular robot systems in Sect. 53.6. While
swarm and modular systems typically assume large
numbers of homogeneous robots, other types of
multirobot systems include heterogeneous robots.
We therefore next discuss heterogeneity in coop-
erative robot teams in Sect. 53.7. Once robot teams
allow for individual heterogeneity, issues of task
allocation become important; Sect. 53.8 therefore
discusses common approaches to task allocation.
Section 53.9 discusses the challenges of multirobot
learning, and some representative approaches. We
outline some of the typical application domains
which serve as test beds for multirobot systems
research in Sect. 53.10. Finally, we conclude in
Sect. 53.11 with some summary remarks and sug-
gestions for further reading.
53.1
History............................................... 1336
53.2
Architectures for Multirobot Systems ... 1337
53.2.1
The Nerd Herd ........................ 1337
53.2.2
The ALLIANCE Architecture ........ 1338
53.2.3
The Distributed Robot
Architecture ........................... 1339
53.3
Communication.................................. 1339
53.4
Networked Mobile Robots ................... 1340
53.4.1
Overview................................ 1341
53.4.2
State of the Art and Potential .. 1342
53.4.3
Research Challenges................ 1344
53.4.4
Control................................... 1346
53.4.5
Communication for Control ...... 1347
53.4.6
Communication for Perception. 1347
53.4.7
Control for Perception ............. 1349
53.4.8
Control for Communication ...... 1350
53.5
Swarm Robots .................................... 1351
53.6
Modular Robotics ............................... 1354
53.6.1
Chain Systems ........................ 1354
53.6.2
Lattice Systems ....................... 1354
53.6.3
Truss Systems ......................... 1356
53.6.4
Free-Form Systems ................. 1356
53.6.5
Self-Assembling Systems ......... 1356
53.7
Heterogeneity .................................... 1357
53.8
Task Allocation ................................... 1359
53.8.1
Taxonomy for Task Allocation ... 1359
53.8.2
Representative Approaches...... 1360
53.9
Learning ............................................ 1361
53.10 Applications....................................... 1362
53.10.1
Foraging and Coverage ............ 1362
53.10.2
Flocking and Formations ......... 1362
53.10.3
Object Transportation
and Cooperative Manipulation. 1363
53.10.4 Multitarget Observation........... 1364
53.10.5 Traffic Control and Multirobot
Path Planning ........................ 1365
53.10.6 Soccer.................................... 1365
53.11
Conclusions and Further Reading ........ 1366
Video-References......................................... 1366
References................................................... 1367

Part E | 53.1
1336
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Researchers generally agree that multirobot sys-
tems have several advantages over single-robot sys-
tems [53.1, 2]. The most common motivations for de-
veloping multirobot system solutions are that:
1. The task complexity is too high for a single robot to
accomplish.
2. The task is inherently distributed.
3. Building several resource-bounded robots is much
easier than having a single powerful robot.
4. Multiple robots can solve problems faster using par-
allelism.
5. The introduction of multiple robots increases ro-
bustness through redundancy.
The issues that must be addressed in developing
multirobot solutions are dependent upon the task re-
quirements and the sensory and effector capabilities of
the available robots.
The types of robots considered in the study of mul-
tiple mobile robot systems are those robots that move
around in the environment, such as ground vehicles,
aerial vehicles, or underwater vehicles. This chapter fo-
cuses speciﬁcally on the interaction of multiple mobile
robots, as distinguished from other types of multirobot
interaction. For example, a special case of multiple mo-
bile robot systems are the reconﬁgurable or modular
robots that interconnect with each other for the purposes
of navigation or manipulation. Algorithmic aspects of
these systems are covered in Sect. 53.5, while hardware
aspects are covered in Chap. 22. Networked robotics is
very closely related to multiple mobile robot systems;
the focus in networked robotics is on systems of robots,
sensors, embedded computers, and human users that are
all connected by networked communication. Another
variant of multirobot cooperation is multiple manipula-
tor arm cooperation. Chapter 39 describes these systems
in detail.
53.1 History
Since the earliest work on multiple mobile robot sys-
tems in the 1980s, the ﬁeld has grown signiﬁcantly, and
covers a large body of research. At the most general
level, approaches to multiple mobile robot systems fall
into one of two broad categories: collective swarm sys-
tems and intentionally cooperative systems. Collective
swarm systems are those in which robots execute their
own tasks with only minimal need for knowledge about
other robot team members. These systems are typiﬁed
by the assumption of a large number of homogeneous
mobile robots, in which robots make use of local con-
trol laws to generate globally coherent team behaviors,
with little explicit communication among robots. On
the other hand, robots in intentionally cooperative sys-
tems have knowledge of the presence of other robots
in the environment and act together based on the state,
actions, or capabilities of their teammates in order to
accomplish the same goal. Intentionally cooperative
systems vary in the extent to which robots take into ac-
count the actions or state of other robots, and can lead to
either strongly or weakly cooperative solutions [53.3].
Strongly cooperative solutions require robots to act in
concert to achieve the goal, executing tasks that are
not trivially serializable. Typically, these approaches re-
quire some type of communication and synchronization
among the robots. Weakly cooperative solutions allow
robots to have periods of operational independence,
subsequent to coordinating their selection of tasks or
roles. Intentionally cooperative multirobot systems can
deal with heterogeneity in the robot team members, in
which team members vary in their sensor and effector
capabilities. In these teams, the coordination of robots
can be very different from collective swarm approaches,
since robots are no longer interchangeable.
Most of the work speciﬁc to multiple mobile robot
cooperation can be categorized into a set of key top-
ics of study. These topics, which are the foci of this
chapter, include architectures, communication, swarm
robots, heterogeneity, task allocation, and learning. Ar-
chitectures and communication in multirobot systems
are relevant for all types of multirobot systems, as these
approaches specify how the robot team members are
organized and interact. Swarm robots is a particular
type of multirobot system, typiﬁed by large numbers
of homogeneous robots that interact implicitly with
each other. Such systems are often contrasted with
heterogeneous robots, in which team members may
vary signiﬁcantly in their capabilities. When robots
vary in capabilities, challenges arise in determining
which robots should perform which tasks – a chal-
lenge commonly referred to as task allocation. Finally
learning in multirobot teams is of particular inter-
est in designing teams that are adaptive over time
and can learn new behaviors. Illustrating the advances
in each of these areas often takes place in a set
of representative application domains; these applica-
tions are the ﬁnal major topic of discussion in this
chapter.

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
53.2 Architectures for Multirobot Systems
1337
Part E | 53.2
53.2 Architectures for Multirobot Systems
The design of the overall control architecture for the
multirobot team has a signiﬁcant impact on the robust-
ness and scalability of the system. Robot architectures
for multirobot teams are composed of the same fun-
damental components as in single-robot systems, as
described in Chap. 12. However, they also must address
the interaction of robots and how the group behavior
will be generated from the control architectures of the
individual robots in the team. Several different philoso-
phies for multirobot team architectures are possible; the
most common are centralized, hierarchical, decentral-
ized, and hybrid.
Centralized architectures that coordinate the entire
team from a single point of control are theoretically
possible [53.4], although often practically unrealistic
due to their vulnerability to a single point of failure,
and due to the difﬁculty of communicating the entire
system state back to the central location at a frequency
suitable for real-time control. Situations in which these
approaches are relevant are cases in which the central-
ized controller has a clear vantage point from which to
observe the robots, and can easily broadcast group mes-
sages for all robots to obey [53.5].
Hierarchical architectures are realistic for some ap-
plications. In this control approach, each robot oversees
the actions of a relatively small group of other robots,
each of which in turn oversees yet another group of
robots, and so forth, down to the lowest robot, which
simply executes its part of the task. This architecture
scales much better than centralized approaches, and is
reminiscent of military command and control. A point
of weakness for the hierarchical control architecture is
recovering from failures of robots high in the control
tree.
Decentralized control architectures are the most
common approach for multirobot teams, and typically
require robots to take actions based only on knowledge
local to their situation. This control approach can be
highly robust to failure, since no robot is responsible
for the control of any other robot. However, achiev-
ing global coherency in these systems can be difﬁcult,
because high-level goals have to be incorporated into
the local control of each robot. If the goals change,
it may be difﬁcult to revise the behavior of individual
robots.
Hybrid control architectures combine local control
with higher-level control approaches to achieve both ro-
bustness and the ability to inﬂuence the entire team’s
actions through global goals, plans, or control. Many
multirobot control approaches make use of hybrid ar-
chitectures.
A plethora of multirobot control architectures have
been developed over the years. We focus here on three
early approaches that illustrate the spectrum of control
architectures. The ﬁrst, the Nerd Herd, is representative
of a pure swarm robotics approach using large num-
bers of homogeneous robots. The second, ALLIANCE,
is representative of a behavior-based approach that
enables coordination and control of possibly heteroge-
neous robots without explicit coordination. The third,
distributed robot architecture (DIRA), is a hybrid ap-
proach that enables both robot autonomy and explicit
coordination in possibly heterogeneous robot teams.
53.2.1 The Nerd Herd
One of the ﬁrst studies of social behaviors in multi-
robot teams was conducted by Matari´c [53.6], with
results being demonstrated on the Nerd Herd team of
20 identical robots (shown in Fig. 53.1). This work is
an example of swarm robotic systems, as described fur-
ther in Sect. 53.4. The decentralized control approach
was based on the subsumption architecture (Chap. 12),
and assumed that all robots were homogeneous, but
with relatively simple individual capabilities, such as
detecting obstacles and kin (i. e., other robot team
members). A set of basic social behaviors were de-
ﬁned and demonstrated, including obstacle avoidance,
homing, aggregation, dispersion, following, and safe
wandering. These basic behaviors were combined in
various ways to yield more composite social behaviors,
including ﬂocking (composed of safe wandering, aggre-
gation, and dispersion), surrounding (composed of safe
wandering, following, and aggregation), herding (com-
posed of safe wandering, surrounding, and ﬂocking),
and foraging (composed of safe wandering, dispersion,
following, homing, and ﬂocking). The behaviors were
Fig. 53.1 The Nerd Herd robots

Part E | 53.2
1338
Part E
Moving in the Environment
implemented as rules, such as the following rule for ag-
gregate:
Aggregate:
If agent is outside aggregation
distance
turn toward aggregation centroid
and go.
Else
stop.
This work showed that collective behaviors could be
generated through the combination of lower-level ba-
sic behaviors. Related work on this project studied
issues such as using bucket brigades to reduce interfer-
ence [53.7], and learning [53.8].
53.2.2 The ALLIANCE Architecture
Another early work in multirobot team architectures
is the ALLIANCE architecture (Fig. 53.2), developed
by Parker [53.9] for fault-tolerant task allocation in
heterogeneous robot teams. This approach builds on
the subsumption architecture by adding behavior sets
and motivations for achieving action selection with-
out explicit negotiations between robots. Behavior sets
group low-level behaviors together for the execution of
a particular task. The motivations consist of levels of
impatience and acquiescence that can raise and lower
a robot’s interest in activating a behavior set corre-
sponding to a task that must be accomplished.
In this approach, the initial motivation to perform
a given behavior set is set to zero. Then, at each
Actuators
Sensors
Motivational
behavior
Motivational
behavior
Cross-inhibition
Motivational
behavior
Layer 2
Layer 1
Layer 0
Behavior
set 0
Behavior
set 1
Behavior
set 2
Interrobot
communi-
cation
Alliance
Fig. 53.2 The ALLIANCE architecture
time step, the motivation level is recalculated based
on:
1. The previous motivation level
2. The rate of impatience
3. Whether the sensory feedback indicates the behav-
ior set is needed
4. Whether the robot has another behavior set already
activated
5. Whether another robot has recently begun work on
this task
6. Whether the robot is willing to give up the task,
based on how long it has been attempting the task.
Effectively, the motivation continues to increase at
some positive rate unless one of four situations oc-
curs:
1. The sensory feedback indicates that the behavior set
is no longer needed.
2. Another behavior set in the robot activates.
3. Some other robot has just taken over the task for the
ﬁrst time.
4. The robot has decided to acquiesce the task.
In any of these four situations, the motivation re-
turns to zero. Otherwise, the motivation grows until it
crosses a threshold value, at which time the behavior
set is activated and the robot can be said to have selected
an action. When an action is selected, cross-inhibition
within that robot prevents other tasks from being ac-
tivated within that same robot. When a behavior set is
active in a robot, the robot broadcasts its current activity
to other robots at a periodic rate.
The L-ALLIANCE extension [53.10] allows a robot
to adapt the rate of change of the impatience and ac-
Fig. 53.3 Robots using the ALLIANCE architecture for
a mock clean-up task

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
53.3 Communication
1339
Part E | 53.3
Planner
Planner
Executive
Robot 1
Robot 2
Robot 3
Planner
Executive
Executive
Behaviors
Behaviors
Behaviors
Fig. 53.4 The distributed robot architecture
quiescence values depending on the quality with which
that robot is expected to accomplish a given task. The
result is that robots that have demonstrated their abil-
ity to better accomplish certain tasks are more likely
to choose those tasks in the future. Additionally, if
problems occur during team performance, then robots
may dynamically reallocate their tasks to compensate
for the problems. This approach was demonstrated
on a team of three heterogeneous robots performing
a mock clean-up task, two robots performing a box-
pushing task, and four robots performing a cooperative
target observation problem. The approach has also been
demonstrated in the simulation of a janitorial service
task and a bounding overwatch task. Figure 53.3 shows
robots using ALLIANCE to perform the mock clean-up
task.
53.2.3 The Distributed Robot
Architecture
Simmons et al. [53.11] have developed a hybrid archi-
tecture called the distributed robot architecture (DIRA).
Similar to the Nerd Herd and ALLIANCE approaches,
the DIRA approach allows autonomy in individual
robots. However, unlike the previous approaches, DIRA
also facilitates explicit coordination among robots. This
approach is based on layered architectures that are
popular for single-robot systems (Chap. 12). In this
approach (Fig. 53.4), each robot’s control architecture
Fig. 53.5 Robots using the distributed robot architecture
for assembly tasks
consists of a planning layer that decides how to achieve
high-level goals; an executive layer that synchronizes
agents, sequences tasks, and monitors task execution;
and a behavioral layer that interfaces to the robot’s sen-
sors and effectors. Each of these layers interacts with
those above and below it. Additionally, robots can in-
teract with each other via direct connections at each of
the layers.
This architecture has been demonstrated in a team
of three robots – a crane, a roving eye, and a mo-
bile manipulator – performing a construction assembly
task (Fig. 53.5). This task requires the robots to work
together to connect a beam at a given location. In
these demonstrations, a foreman agent decides which
robot should move the beam at which times. Initially,
the crane moves the beam to the vicinity of the em-
placement based on encoder feedback. The foreman
then sets up a behavioral loop between the roving eye
and the crane robot to servo the beam closer to the
point of emplacement. Once the beam is close enough,
the foreman tasks the roving eye and the mobile ma-
nipulator to servo the arm to grasp the beam. After
contact is made, the foreman tasks the roving eye
and the mobile manipulator to coordinate to servo the
beam to the emplacement point, thus completing the
task.
53.3 Communication
A fundamental assumption in multirobot systems re-
search is that globally coherent and efﬁcient solutions
can be achieved through the interaction of robots lack-
ing complete global information. However, achieving
these globally coherent solutions typically requires
robots to obtain information about their teammates’
states or actions. This information can be obtained in
a number of ways; the three most common techniques
are:
1. The use of implicit communication through the
world (called stigmergy), in which robots sense the
effects of teammate’s actions through their effects
on the world [53.6, 12–16]

Part E | 53.4
1340
Part E
Moving in the Environment
2. Passive action recognition, in which robots use
sensors to directly observe the actions of their team-
mates [53.17]
3. Explicit (intentional) communication, in which
robots directly and intentionally communicate rele-
vant information through some active means, such
as radio [53.9, 18–21] – an area widely studied in
the ﬁeld of networked robot systems.
Each of these mechanisms for exchanging infor-
mation between robots has its own advantages and
disadvantages [53.22]. Stigmergy is appealing because
of its simplicity and its lack of dependence upon ex-
plicit communications channels and protocols. How-
ever, it is limited by the extent to which a robot’s
perception of the world reﬂects the salient states of
the mission the robot team must accomplish. Passive
action recognition is appealing because it does not de-
pend upon a limited-bandwidth, fallible communication
mechanism. As with implicit cooperation, however, it
is limited by the degree to which a robot can success-
fully interpret its sensory information, as well as the
difﬁculty of analyzing the actions of robot team mem-
bers. Finally, the explicit communication approach is
appealing because of its directness and the ease with
which robots can become aware of the actions and/or
goals of its teammates. The major uses of explicit
communication in multirobot teams are to synchro-
nize actions, exchange information, and to negotiate
between robots. Explicit communication is a way of
dealing with the hidden-state problem [53.23], in which
limited sensors cannot distinguish between different
states of the world that are important for task perfor-
mance. However, explicit communication is limited in
terms of fault tolerance and reliability, because it typ-
ically depends upon a noisy, limited-bandwidth com-
munications channel that may not continually connect
all members of the robot team. Thus, approaches that
make use of explicit communications must also provide
mechanisms to handle communication failures and lost
messages.
Selecting the appropriate use of communication in
a multirobot team is a design choice dependent upon the
tasks to be achieved by the multirobot team. One needs
to carefully consider the costs and beneﬁts of alternative
communications approaches to determine the method
that can reliably achieve the required level of system
performance. Researchers generally agree that commu-
nication can have a strong positive impact on the per-
formance of the team. One of the earliest illustrations
of this impact was given in the work of MacLennan and
Burghardt [53.24], which investigates the evolution of
communication in simulated worlds and concludes that
the communication of local robot information can result
in signiﬁcant performance improvements. Interestingly,
for many representative applications, researchers have
found a nonlinear relationship between the amount of
information communicated and its impact on the per-
formance of the team. Typically, even a small amount of
information can have a signiﬁcant impact on the team,
as found in the study of Balch and Arkin [53.25]. How-
ever, more information does not necessarily continue
to improve performance, as it can quickly overload
the communications bandwidth without providing an
application beneﬁt. The challenge in multirobot sys-
tems is to discover the optimal pieces of information
to exchange that yield these performance improvements
without saturating the communications bandwidth. Cur-
rently, no general approaches to identifying this critical
information are available; thus, the decision of what to
communicate is an application-speciﬁc question to be
answered by the system designer. Dudek et al.’s tax-
onomy of multirobot systems [53.26] includes axes
related to communication, including communication
range, communication topology, and communication
bandwidth. These characteristics can be used to com-
pare and contrast multirobot systems.
Several related issues of active research in commu-
nications for multirobot teams deal with dynamic net-
work connectivity and topologies; for example, robot
teams must either be able to maintain communications
connectivity as they move, or employ recovery strate-
gies that allow the robot team to recover when the com-
munications connectivity is broken. These concerns
may require robots to adapt their actions in response to
the anticipated effects on the communications network,
or in response to knowledge of the anticipated prop-
agation behavior of information through the dynamic
network. These and related issues are discussed next in
the context of networked robot systems.
53.4 Networked Mobile Robots
Networked robots are multiple robots operating to-
gether coordinating and cooperating by networked com-
munication to accomplish a speciﬁed task. Multiple
robots enable new capabilities and the communication
network enables new approaches and solutions that are
difﬁcult with just perception and control. Communica-
tion enables new control and perception capabilities in
the system (e.g., access to information outside the per-
ception range of the robot system). Conversely, control
enables solutions for problems that are difﬁcult with-

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
53.4 Networked Mobile Robots
1341
Part E | 53.4
out mobility (e.g., localization). Section 53.4.1 deﬁnes
the ﬁeld, examines the beneﬁts of networking in robot
coordination, and discusses applications. Section 53.4.2
highlights a few projects focused on networked robotics
and discusses the application potential of the ﬁeld. Sec-
tion 53.4.3 discusses the research challenges at the
intersection of control, communication, and perception.
Section 53.4.4 deﬁnes a model for the control of a net-
worked system which is used in Sects. 53.4.5–53.4.8
to examine speciﬁc research issues and opportunities
facilitated by the interplay between communication,
control, and perception.
53.4.1 Overview
The term networked robots refers to multiple robots
operating together coordinating and cooperating by
networked communication to accomplish a speciﬁed
task. Communication between entities is fundamental
to cooperation (and coordination), hence there is a cen-
tral role for the communication network in networked
robots. Networked robots may also involve coordina-
tion and cooperation with stationary sensors, embedded
computers, and human users. The central feature of net-
worked robots is the ability of the system to perform
tasks that are well beyond the abilities of a single robot
or multiple uncoordinated robots.
The IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers) Technical Committee on Networked Robots
has adopted the following deﬁnition of a networked
robot:
A networked robot is a robotic device connected
to a communications network such as the Internet or
local-area network (LAN). The network could be wired
or wireless, and based on any of of a variety of proto-
cols such as the transmission control protocol (TCP),
the user datagram protocol (UDP), or 802.11. Many
new applications are now being developed ranging from
automation to exploration. There are two subclasses of
networked robots:
1. Teleoperated, where human supervisors send com-
mands and receive feedback via the network. Such
systems support research, education, and public
awareness by making valuable resources accessible
to broad audiences.
2. Autonomous, where robots and sensors exchange
data via the network. In such systems, the sensor
network extends the effective sensing range of the
robots, allowing them to communicate with each
other over long distances to coordinate their ac-
tivity. Sensing, actuation, and computation need
no longer be collocated. A broad challenge is to
develop a science base that couples communica-
tion, perception, and control to enable such new
capabilities.
This deﬁnition of autonomous networked robots
also includes a third class of distributed systems, mobile
sensor networks, which is a natural evolution of sen-
sor networks. Robot networks allow robots to measure
spatially and temporally distributed phenomena more
efﬁciently. The robots in turn can deploy, repair, and
maintain the sensor network to increase its longevity,
and utility. The focus of this chapter is autonomous net-
worked robots.
Embedded computers and sensors are becoming
ubiquitous in homes and factories, and increasingly
wireless ad hoc networks or plug-and-play wired net-
works are becoming commonplace. Human users inter-
act with embedded computers and sensors to perform
tasks ranging from monitoring (e.g., supervising the op-
eration of a factor and surveillance in a building) to
control (e.g., running an assembly line consisting of
sensors, actuators, and material-handling equipment).
In most of these cases, the human users, embedded
computers, and sensors are not collocated and the co-
ordination and communication happens through a net-
work. Networked robots extends this vision to multiple
robots functioning in a wide range of environments per-
forming tasks that require them to coordinate with other
robots, cooperate with humans, and act on information
derived from multiple sensors.
Figure 53.6 shows prototype concepts derived from
academic laboratories and industry. In all these exam-
a)
b)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.53.6a–d Small modules (after [53.27]) can automat-
ically connect and communicate information to perform
locomotion tasks (a); robot arms (after [53.28]) on mo-
bile bases can cooperate to perform household chores (b);
swarms of robots (after [53.29]) can be used to explore an
unknown environment (c); and industrial robots can coop-
erate in welding operations (d)

Part E | 53.4
1342
Part E
Moving in the Environment
a)
b)
b)
c)c)
Fig.53.7a–c Robotic modules (after [53.30]) can be re-
conﬁgured to morph into different locomotion systems
including (a) a wheel-like rolling system, (b) a snake-like
undulatory locomotion system, and (c) a four-legged walk-
ing system
ples, independent robot or robotic modules can coop-
erate to perform tasks that a single robot (or module)
cannot perform. Robots can automatically couple to
perform locomotion tasks (also Fig. 53.7) and manip-
ulation tasks that either a single robot cannot perform,
or that would require a special-purpose larger robot to
perform. They can also coordinate to perform search
and reconnaissance tasks exploiting the efﬁciency that
is inherent in parallelism. They can also perform inde-
pendent tasks that need to be coordinated. Examples in
the manufacturing industry include, for example, ﬁxtur-
ing and welding.
Besides being able to perform tasks that individual
robots cannot perform, networked robots also result in
improved efﬁciency. Networking gives each robot ac-
cess to information outside its perception range. Tasks
such as searching or mapping can, in principle, be
performed faster with an increase in the number of
robots. A speed up in manufacturing operations can be
achieved by deploying multiple robots performing op-
erations in parallel but in a coordinated fashion.
Another advantage of using the network to connect
robots is the ability to connect and harness physically
removed assets. Mobile robots can react to informa-
tion sensed by other mobile robots at a remote location.
Industrial robots can adapt their end-effectors to new
parts being manufactured upstream in the assembly
line. Human users can use machines that are remotely
located via the network.
The ability to network robots also enables fault tol-
erance in design. If robots can dynamically reconﬁgure
themselves using the network, they are more tolerant
to robot failures. This is seen in the Internet where
multiple gateways, routers, and computers provide for
a fault-tolerant system (although the Internet is not ro-
bust in other ways). Similarly, robots that can plug and
play can be swapped in and out automatically to provide
for a robust operating environment.
Finally, networked robots have the potential to pro-
vide great synergy by bringing together components
with complementary beneﬁts and making the whole
greater than the sum of the parts.
Applications for networked robots abound. The US
military routinely deploys unmanned vehicles that are
reprogrammed remotely based on intelligence gathered
by other unmanned vehicles, sometimes automatically.
The deployment of satellites in space, often by astro-
nauts in a shuttle with the shuttle robot arm, requires
the coordination of complex instrumentation onboard
the space shuttle, human operators on a ground station,
the shuttle arm, and a human user on the shuttle. Home
appliances now contain sensors and are becoming net-
worked. As domestic and personal robots become more
commonplace, it is natural to see these robots working
with sensors and appliances in the house while co-
operating with one or more human users. Networked
robots will likely be used as critical ingredients in the
environmental observatories of the future. Large-scale
ecological monitoring precludes the use of monolithic
infrastructure, and is envisioned to be built as a dis-
tributed, networked robotic system.
53.4.2 State of the Art and Potential
The growth in networked robot systems is broad-based,
across many industries. There is a strong connection
between this industry and the industry connected to sen-
sor networks. Sensor networks have been projected to
grow dramatically in terms of commercialization and
market value [53.31]. Robot networks are analogous
to sensor networks except that they allow sensors to
have mobility and allow the geographical distribution
of the sensors to be adapted based on the information
acquired.
A system of robots, embedded computers, actua-
tors, and sensors has tremendous potential in civilian,
defense, and manufacturing applications. Nature pro-
vides the proof of concept of what is possible [53.32].
Group behaviors in nature can be found in organisms
that are only microns to those that are several meters
in length. There are numerous examples of simple ani-
mals that execute simple behaviors with modest sensors
and actuators but communicate with and sense nearest
neighbors to enable complex emergent behaviors that
are fundamental to navigation, foraging, hunting, con-
structing nests, survival, and eventually growth. As seen

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
53.4 Networked Mobile Robots
1343
Part E | 53.4
Fig. 53.8 Ants are able to cooperatively manipulate and
transport objects often in large groups, without identiﬁed
or labeled neighbors, and without centralized coordination
in Fig. 53.8, relatively small agents are able to manip-
ulate objects that are signiﬁcantly larger in terms of
size and payload by cooperating with fairly simple in-
dividual behaviors. The coordination between agents is
completely decentralized, allowing scaling up to large
numbers of robots and large objects [53.33]. Individu-
als do not recognize each other. In other words, there
is no labeling or identiﬁcation of robots. The number
of agents in the team is not explicitly encoded. Agents
are identical, enabling robustness to failures and modu-
larity. There is minimal communication, and even that
which is present is only between neighbors. Further-
more, the optimal mode of group coordination may be
scale dependent. Studies of wasps show strong evidence
of centralized coordination among species with small
colony sizes, but a distributed, decentralized coordina-
tion in larger colonies [53.34]. All these attributes are
relevant to networked robots.
Biology has shown how simple decentralized be-
haviors in unidentiﬁed individuals (e.g., insects and
birds exhibiting swarming behaviors) can exhibit a wide
array of seemingly intelligent group behaviors. Sim-
ilarly networked robots can potentially communicate
and cooperate with each other, and even though indi-
vidual robots may not be sophisticated, it is possible for
networked robots to provide a range of intelligent be-
haviors that are beyond the scope of intelligent robots.
The signiﬁcance and potential impact of networked
robots is apparent from the following examples.
The manufacturing industry has always relied on in-
tegration between sensors, actuators, material-handling
equipment, and robots. Today companies are ﬁnding
it easier to reconﬁgure existing infrastructure by net-
working new robots and sensors with existing robots
via wireless networks. There is also an increasing trend
toward robots interacting with each other in operations
like welding and machining, and robots cooperating
with humans in assembly and material-handling tasks.
Workcells consist of multiple robots, numerous sensors
and controllers, automated guided vehicles, and one or
two human operators working in a supervisory role.
However, in most of these cells, the networked robots
operate in a structured environment with very little vari-
ation in conﬁguration and/or operating conditions.
There is a growing emphasis on networking robots
in applications of ﬁeld robotics, for example, in the
mining industry. Like the manufacturing industry, oper-
ating conditions are often unpleasant and the tasks are
repetitive. However, these applications are less struc-
tured and human operators play a more important role.
In the health care industry, networks allow health
care professionals to interact with their patients, other
professionals, expensive diagnostic instruments, and
surgical robots. Telemedicine is expected to provide
a major growth impetus for remote networked robotic
devices that will take the place of today’s stand-alone
medical devices.
There are already many commercial products, no-
tably in Japan, where robots can be programmed via
and communicate with cellular phones. For example,
the MARON robot developed by Fujitsu lets a human
user dial up their robot and instruct it to conduct sim-
ple tasks including sending pictures back to the user
via a cellular phone. Indeed these robots will inter-
act with other sensors and actuators in the home –
door openers equipped with Bluetooth cards and actua-
tors and computer-controlled lighting, microwaves, and
dishwashers. Indeed the Network Robot Forum [53.35]
is already setting standards for how stationary sensors
and actuators can interact with other robots in domestic
and commercial settings.
Environmental monitoring is a key application for
networked robots. By exploiting mobility and commu-
nication, robotic infrastructure enables observation and
data collection at unprecedented scales in various as-
pects of ecological monitoring. This is signiﬁcant for
environmental regulatory policies (e.g., clean air and
water legislation), as well as an enabler of new scientiﬁc
discovery. For example, it is possible to obtain maps
of salinity gradients in oceans, temperature and humid-
ity variations in forests, and chemical composition of
air and water in different ecological systems [53.36].
In addition to mobile sensor networks, it is also pos-
sible to use robots to deploy sensors and to retrieve
information from the sensors. Mobile platforms allow
the same sensor to collect data from multiple locations
while communication allows the coordinated control
and aggregation of information. Examples include sys-
tems built for aquatic [53.37], terrestrial [53.38], and
subsoil monitoring [53.39]. There are many efforts to
developed networked underwater platforms [53.40–42].

Part E | 53.4
1344
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Networks of static and robotic devices have been devel-
oped for aquatic monitoring [53.37] and to obtain high-
resolution information on the spatial and temporal dis-
tributions of plankton assemblages and concomitant en-
vironmental parameters. The RiverNet project [53.43]
at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) has focused
on the development of robotic sensor networks for
monitoring a river ecosystem. Recent work at Univer-
sity of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), University of
Southern California (USC), University of California,
Riverside, and University of California, Merced on the
networked infomechanical system project [53.38] has
focused on the development of robotic networks for
monitoring the forest canopy, with a view to provid-
ing data for modeling canopy and undercover growth.
Networked robotic mini-rhizotrons [53.39] are being
deployed in the forest to monitor root growth in the
soil.
In the defense industry, countries like the USA have
invested heavily in the concept of networked, geograph-
ically distributed assets. Unmanned aerial vehicles like
the Predators are operated remotely. Information from
sensors on the Predators triggers the deployment of
other vehicles and weapon systems at a different re-
mote location and allows commanders in a third lo-
cation to control and command all these assets. The
US military engaged in the large Future Combat Sys-
tems initiative to develop network-centric approaches
to deploying autonomous vehicles. The network-centric
tactical paradigms for modern warfare have created
networked robots for defense and homeland security.
While networked robots are already in operation, cur-
rent approaches are limited to human users command-
ing a single vehicle or sensor system. However, it
takes many human operators (between 210 depend-
ing on the complexity of the system) to deploy complex
systems like unmanned aerial vehicles. A Predator un-
manned aerial vehicle (UAV) is operated from a tactical
control station, which may be on an aircraft carrier, with
a basic crew of 310 operators.
The eventual goal, however, is to enable a single
human user to deploy networks of unmanned aerial,
ground, surface, and underwater vehicles. There have
been several recent demonstrations of multirobot sys-
tems exploring urban environments [53.44, 45] and the
interiors of buildings [53.46, 47] to detect and track in-
truders, and transmit all of the above information to
a remote operator. These examples show that it is possi-
ble to deploy networked robots using an off-the-shelf
802.11b wireless network and have the team be re-
motely tasked and monitored by a single operator. An
example of a project with heterogeneous vehicles in
an urban setting is shown in Fig. 53.9. An example
of a project with heterogeneous vehicles in an indoor
Fig. 53.9 A single operator commanding a network of
aerial and ground vehicles from a command and control
vehicle in an urban environment for scouting and recon-
naissance in a recent demonstration by the University of
Pennsylvania, Georgia Tech. and University of Southern
California (after [53.48])
setting is shown in Fig. 53.10 wherein robots map an
environment and deploy themselves to form a sensor
network to detect intruders.
Many research projects are addressing group be-
haviors or collective intelligence by realizing swarming
behaviors observed in nature. For example, the Euro-
pean Union (EU) funded several EU-wide coordinated
projects on collective intelligence or swarm intelli-
gence. The I-Swarm project in Karlsruhe [53.49] and
the Swarm-Bot project at Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale
de Lausanne (EPFL) [53.50] are examples of swarm
intelligence. The Laboratory for Analysis and Archi-
tecture of Systems (LAAS) has a strong group in
robotics and artiﬁcial intelligence. This group has had
a long history of basic and applied research in multi-
robot systems. The integration of multiple unmanned
vehicles for applications such as terrain mapping and
ﬁre-ﬁghting is addressed in [53.51]. A multi-university
US project addressed the development of networked ve-
hicles for swarming behaviors [53.52]. Projects such as
these are exploring the scalability of the basic concepts
to large numbers of robots, sensors, and actuators.
53.4.3 Research Challenges
While there are many successful embodiments of net-
worked robots with applications to manufacturing in-
dustry, the defense industry, space exploration, do-
mestic assistance, and civilian infrastructure, there are
signiﬁcant challenges that have to be overcome.
The problem of coordinating multiple autonomous
units and making them cooperate creates problems at
the intersection of communication, control, and percep-
tion. Who should talk to whom and what information
should be conveyed, and how? How does each unit

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
53.4 Networked Mobile Robots
1345
Part E | 53.4
Fig. 53.10 Under the DARPA SDR program, a team from
the University of Southern California, the University of
Tennessee, and Science Applications and International
Corporation (SAIC) demonstrated mapping, and intruder
detection by a team of networked robots (after [53.46])
move in order to accomplish the task? How should
the team members acquire information? How should
the team aggregate information? These are all basic
questions that need basic advances in control theory,
perception, and networking. In addition, because hu-
mans are part of the network (as in the case of the
Internet), we have to devise an effective way for mul-
tiple humans to be embedded in the network and
command/control/monitor the network without worry-
ing about the speciﬁcity of individual robots in the
network. Thus the underlying research challenges lie at
the intersection of control theory, perception, and com-
munication/networks, as shown in Fig. 53.11.
It is also worth noting that robot networks are dy-
namic, unlike networks of sensors, computers or ma-
chines which might be networked together in a ﬁxed
topology.When a robot moves, its neighbors change and
its relationship to the environment changes. As a con-
sequence, the information it acquires and the actions it
executes must change. Not only is the network topology
dynamic, but the robot’s behavior also changes as the
topology changes. It is very difﬁcult to predict the per-
formance of such dynamic robot networks, yet it is this
analysis problem that designers of robot networks must
solve before deploying the network.
This notion of a changing topology inevitably leads
us to complicated mathematical models. Traditionally,
models of group behavior have been built on continu-
ous models of dynamics of individuals, including local
interactions with neighbors, and models of control and
sensing with a ﬁxed set of neighbors. While dynamics
at the level of individual units may be adequately de-
scribed by differential equations, the interactions with
neighbors are best described by edges on a graph. Mod-
eling, analysis, and control of such systems will require
a comprehensive theoretical framework and new rep-
resentational tools. New mathematical tools that marry
dynamical system theory, switched systems, discrete
mathematics, graph theory, and computational geom-
etry are needed to solve the underlying problems. We
need a design methodology for solving the inverse
Sensor
networking
community
AI
community
Perception
Networking
Decision
making
Adaptation
Networked
humans,
sensors and
robots
Communi-
cation
Control
Robotics
community
Fig. 53.11 The paradigm of networked robots introduces
fundamental challenges at the intersection of control, per-
ception, and communication that is of interest to the
robotics, sensor networks, and artiﬁcial intelligence com-
munities
problem in navigation – behaviors for controlling in-
dividuals to achieve a speciﬁed aggregate motion and
shape of the group, and the application to active per-
ception and coverage. An overview of some of these
methods is provided in Sect. 53.4.4.
Problems of perception have been studied exten-
sively in the robotics community. However, the percep-
tion problems in a system of networked, mobile sensor
platforms bring a new set of challenges; for example,
consider the problem of estimating the state of the net-
work. State estimation requires the estimation of the
state of robots and the environment based on local,
limited-range sensory information. Localization of n
vehicles in an m-dimensional conﬁguration space re-
quires O..nm/k/ computations, where k is somewhere
between 3 and 6, depending on the algorithm and
domain-speciﬁc assumptions. The estimation problem
is further exacerbated by the fact that not all robots in
the network may be able to get the necessary informa-
tion in a time-critical fashion. There are deep issues of
representation and algorithmic development, which are
discussed in Sect. 53.4.6.
The paradigm of active perception [53.53] links
the control of sensor platforms to perception, bring-
ing control theory and perception together in a com-
mon framework. Extending this paradigm to networked
robots requires approaches of distributed control to be
merged with decentralized estimation. Robots can move
in order to localize themselves with respect to their
neighbors, to localize their neighbors, and also to iden-
tify, localize, and track features in the environment.
These problems are discussed in Sect. 53.4.7.
As discussed earlier, the communication network
is central to the functioning of a network of robots.

Part E | 53.4
1346
Part E
Moving in the Environment
However, if the network consists of mobile agents with
transmitters and receivers with ﬁnite power, there is
no guarantee that all agents can talk to teach other.
Unlike a static sensor network, robots in a network
can move toward each other to facilitate communica-
tion and adaptively maintain a communication network.
Some basic algorithmic problems and several pertinent
results are provided in Sect. 53.4.8.
53.4.4 Control
The control of individual robots is critical to the perfor-
mance and scope of robot networks. Indeed motion co-
ordination algorithms have been proposed for the pur-
pose of improving communication performance [53.54,
55], localization [53.56, 57], information integration,
deployment [53.58], and coverage [53.59–61], among
other tasks. Mobility allows the group of robots to self-
deploy, and self-organize by relocating themselves in
support of communication, sensing, or task needs; for
example, they can reconﬁgure to guarantee a desired
communication bandwidth, k-hop connectivity, or alge-
braic connectivity, enabling message delivery from one
robot to another. The group can also self-organize to
position sensors so as to cover a desired area and adapt
to shifts in the focus of monitoring activities. Control-
ling sensor position also supports map making, tracking
of objects and events, and goal-directed navigation for
users of the network. Finally, mobility allows robots to
accomplish tasks such as navigation, reconnaissance,
transportation, and search and rescue.
Given a group of mobile sensors, we would like
to have distributed control capabilities that realize de-
sirable global speciﬁcations. Thus, it is necessary to
be able to automatically determine the necessary po-
sition and orientation of the group members and/or
the distribution of group members, and their motion to
achieve the desired task. At a lower level, the robots
must be able to use information from the communi-
cation network and from their own sensors to derive
local estimates, reason about the spatial network (their
neighbors and their relationship to the environment),
and then use the appropriate control policies to achieve
the desired group speciﬁcations. We brieﬂy outline the
simplest mathematical model that is necessary to for-
mulate such problems in order to provide a better sense
of the underlying challenges.
In a robot network, we have multiple agents or
nodes in which each agent is a physical entity that
can be a robot, a vehicle with actuators and sensors,
a sensor platform (possibly static) or even a communi-
cation relay node. Each agent Ai is characterized by an
identiﬁer, i 2 I  Z, a state xi 2 Xi  Rn, and control in-
puts ui 2 Ui  R, with fi W Xi  Ui ! TXi specifying the
dynamics
Pxi D fi.xi; ui/ :
(53.1)
The state xi will consist of the position (and orienta-
tion), ri in some d-dimensional space, and its velocity,
Pri W xi D

rT
i ; PrT
i
T, with n D 2d. N c.ri/ and N s.ri/ are
neighborhoods of r that deﬁne the range and ﬁeld
of view of the communication hardware and sensors,
respectively.
A network of robots S consists of N agents with
a sensing graph and a communications graph that
is deﬁned by the physical distribution of the agents.
The sensing graph (and similarly the communications
graph) is deﬁned by a map Es W X1  X2    XN ! I  I,
where the edges of the graph are formed dynamically
depending on the physical proximity of pairs of agents.
Speciﬁcally, the N  N adjacency matrix, As (and sim-
ilarly Ac) has entries
Asij D
(
1;
if rj 2 N s.ri/ ;
0;
otherwise :
(53.2)
Agent Ai has estimates of its own state and the states
of neighbors (e.g., Aj), and these estimates are derived
from information associated with edges in the sensing
and communication graph
Ox.i/
j
D h.xi; zij/ ;
(53.3)
where zij represents measurements of the state of agent
Aj available to Ai by sensing or communication chan-
nels and h is the estimator used by Ai. Note that zij may
have dimension less than n and may therefore not con-
tain complete information about xij D xixj. Clearly the
relative position vector denoted by rij D ri  rj and its
magnitude are important quantities that may need to be
estimated for biological and artiﬁcial agents.
Finally, Ai can encode nbi behaviors, which we
will denote by Bi D B1; B2; : : : ; Bnbi . Each behavior Bj
is a controller, a function kj W R  Xi ! Ui. All agents
can be assigned identical or different behaviors. Each
behavior represents a set of unsynchronized, locally
executed computations (for control or estimation) be-
ing carried out for some collective purpose, with each
processor using in its computations only data from its
neighboring processors. Furthermore, even for a ﬁxed
assignment of behaviors, each processor’s neighbors
typically change with time because the processors are
moving in and out of the sets N c and N s. Thus the
methodology for modeling and analyzing such systems
will require the merging of graph theory and dynamical
system theory at a fundamental level.

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
53.4 Networked Mobile Robots
1347
Part E | 53.4
The reader is directed to the many survey articles
on this subject for further information. An overview
of challenges for the controls community is presented
in [53.62]. The underlying theory for networked mo-
bile systems has been explored in the context of au-
tomated highway systems [53.63], cooperative robot
reconnaissance [53.46] and manipulation [53.64], for-
mation ﬂight control [53.65], and the control of groups
of unmanned vehicles [53.45]. Our goal in the fol-
lowing sections is to explore the connections between
communication, perception, and control.
53.4.5 Communication for Control
Communication networks allow physically discon-
nected entities to exchange information. At the lowest
level, when groups of vehicles coordinate their actions,
communication allows vehicles to exchange state infor-
mation [53.66–68]. At a higher level, robots can plan
navigation and exploration tasks based on an integrated
map of the world derived from information acquired
from different robots [53.52].
The use of communication for control in the mul-
tivehicle context has been addressed in the PATH
project where formations of inline vehicles were stud-
ied [53.63]. Problems of the stability of the forma-
tion [53.69], the convergence of the formation to
shapes [53.70], and the overall performance of the sys-
tem [53.71] are of great interest. The performance of
the system is directly inﬂuenced by the interconnections
between agents. In addition to impacting on stabil-
ity [53.63], feedback of states from different agents
and feedforward information from the plans of differ-
ent agents affects the rates at which the system of agents
can respond to external stimuli [53.71] or to commands
from human operators [53.72].
In addition, communication can be used for high-
level control and planning of robots. There is great
interest in using static sensor nodes as beacons to guide
robot navigation. In [53.73], the problem of coverage
and exploration of an unknown dynamic environment
using a mobile robot is considered. An algorithm is
presented which assumes that global information is not
available (neither a map, nor global positioning system
(GPS) information). The algorithm deploys a network
of radio beacons that assists the robot in coverage. The
network is also used by the robot for navigation. The
deployed network can also be used for applications
other than coverage (such as multirobot task allocation).
A similar idea was presented using potential-ﬁeld-based
navigation in [53.52]. In this work the notion of no-
go or danger areas was incorporated into the navigation
cost function. Recent work along these lines with exper-
imental data from sensor nodes is reported in [53.74].
In such communication-enabled cooperative con-
trol and planning (see also [53.75]), the communication
network plays an important role in the creation of
a shared representation of information. This notion of
a shared representation is important to the scaling of
coordinated control algorithms to large numbers of de-
vices. For example, in [53.67], the information form
of the Kalman ﬁlter is used to derive a framework
for decentralizing estimation and fusion algorithms.
This approach was shown to be applicable to multi-
ple heterogenous ground and aerial platforms [53.56].
Such methodologies are transparent to the speciﬁcity
and identity of the cooperating vehicles. This is be-
cause vehicles share a common representation, which
consists of a certainty grid that contains information
about the probability of detection of targets, and an
information vector–matrix pair that is used in the infor-
mation form of the Kalman ﬁlter [53.45]. Observations
are propagated through the network by changing both
the certainty grid and the information vector/matrix.
This allows each vehicle to choose the action that
maximizes a utility function, which is the combined
mutual information gain from onboard sensors to-
wards the detection and localization of features in the
environment.
Thus, in summary, at the lowest level, communica-
tion enables either partial or complete state feedback of
the network and allows agents to exchange information
for feedforward control. At the higher levels, agents can
share information for planning and for control. This is
also discussed in Sect. 53.4.6 where the communication
network is shown to enable a network-centric approach
to perception.
53.4.6 Communication for Perception
While individual robots have sensors and the ability to
build maps and models by integrating sensory informa-
tion, networked robots can exchange information and
leverage sensory data, maps, and models from other
robots. The challenge is to exploit communication for
perception in tasks such as distributed mapping in the
presence of the delays, limited bandwidth, and disrup-
tion that are typical of communication networks.
Distributed localization is the term used to de-
scribe the merging of communication and perception
for state estimation. Localization is an essential tool
for the development of low-cost robot networks for use
in location-aware applications and ubiquitous network-
ing [53.76]. Location information is needed to track
the placement of the nodes and to correlate the values
measured by the node with their physical location. Dis-
tributed computation and robustness in the presence of
measurement noise are key ingredients for a practical

Part E | 53.4
1348
Part E
Moving in the Environment
localization algorithm that will give reliable results over
a large-scale network.
The methods for distributed localization can be clas-
siﬁed into two broad classes: algorithms that rely on
anchor nodes for localization and algorithms that use no
beacons. Localization may be computed using range in-
formation between nodes, bearing information, or both.
In [53.54] a theoretical foundation for network lo-
calization in terms of graph rigidity theory is provided.
The problem is solved when nodes have perfect range
information and it is show that a network has a unique
localization if and only if its underlying graph is gener-
ically globally rigid. In [53.77] the Cramér–Rao lower
bound (CRLB) for network localization is derived. This
work computes the expected error characteristics for
an ideal algorithm, and compares this to the actual er-
ror in an algorithm based on multilateration, drawing
the important conclusion that the error introduced by
the algorithm is just as important as the measurement
error in assessing end-to-end localization accuracy.
In [53.78] a distributed algorithm that uses no beacons
and is guaranteed to compute correct location infor-
mation under measurement noise for nodes that can
range to neighbors is presented. This algorithm relies
on the notion of robust quadrilaterals to compute ro-
bustly a global system of coordinates among the nodes.
The computation supports moving nodes. Extensions
of this work to passive tracking have been discussed
in [53.79]. Localization based on the propagation of lo-
cation information from known reference nodes based
on connectivity includes [53.80, 81]. Mobility-assisted
localization is introduced in [53.82]. Other techniques
use distributed propagation of location information us-
ing multilateration [53.77, 83]. In a recent paper [53.84]
the problem of evaluating the rigidity of a planar net-
work is treated while satisfying common objectives
of real-world systems: decentralization, asynchronicity,
and parallelization.
Two approaches for cooperative relative localiza-
tion of mobile robot teams are given in [53.85, 86].
Neither method uses GPS, landmarks, or maps of any
kind; instead, robots make direct measurements of the
relative pose of nearby robots and broadcast this in-
formation to the team as a whole. In [53.85], each
robot processes this information independently to gen-
erate an egocentric estimate for the pose of other robots
using a Bayesian formalism with a particle ﬁlter imple-
mentation. In [53.86], maximum-likelihood estimation
(MLE) and numerical optimization is used to achieve
a similar result.
A key issue is to be able to scale these computa-
tions for building a shared representation to large num-
bers of robots and sensors. This problem was studied
in experiments under the US Defense Advanced Re-
search Projects Agency (DARPA-funded software for
distributed robotics (SDR) program. The goal of these
experiments was to develop and demonstrate a multi-
robot system capable of carrying out a speciﬁc mission.
This required the ability to deploy a large number of
robots into an unexplored building, map the building
interior, detect and track intruders, and transmit all of
the above information to a remote operator. A report on
one set of experiments is presented in [53.46]. A tiered
strategy for deploying the robots is described, where
highly capable robots formed the ﬁrst wave to enter
and map a building, followed by a second wave which
used the resulting map to self-deploy and monitor the
environment for intruders. Both approaches relied ex-
tensively on networking the robots using commercial
802.11b wireless technology. This task involved both
communication for building a shared representation as
well control for perception.
Another important set of problems arises when
robot networks are used for identifying, localizing,
and then tracking targets in a dynamic setting. An
embedded stationary wireless sensor network is like
a virtual sensor spread over a large geographical area.
Such a network can provide information to mobile
robots about remote locations. Robot networks allow
this virtual sensor to move in response to external
stimuli and to track moving targets. Indeed, it is pos-
sible to cast this scenario as a pursuit-evasion game
with robotic sensor networks [53.87]. For example, the
Tenet project at USC addresses the design of network
primitives and abstractions for tiered network archi-
tectures, with robotic pursuit evasion as one of the
target applications. Algorithms for guiding the sam-
pling strategy of a robotic boat to model and locate
phenomena of interest (e.g., hotspots) in aquatic en-
vironments are discussed in [53.37]. The networked
infomechanical systems (NIMS) project has focused
on sensor-assisted techniques for mobile robot-based
adaptive sampling for event response [53.88] and ﬁeld
reconstruction [53.89].
The information collected by the nodes in a sensor
network can be processed at a central location or in a de-
centralized fashion. Such in-network data processing
techniques make better use of network communication
and computation resources than centralized process-
ing. This also enables the network to compute accurate
and up-to-date global pictures of the global perception
landscape that are available to all the robots in the sys-
tem. Methods for in-network data processing with static
nodes include artiﬁcial potential-ﬁeld computation, gra-
dient computations, particle ﬁlters, Bayesian inference,
and signal processing. Algorithms have been developed
for computing maps, paths, and predictors [53.52, 73,
90].

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
53.4 Networked Mobile Robots
1349
Part E | 53.4
A recent DARPA demonstration showed how com-
munication networks can be used effectively in per-
ception tasks involving heterogenous robots [53.44]. In
cooperative search, identiﬁcation, and localization un-
manned aerial vehicles (UAVs) can be used to cover
large areas, searching for targets. However, sensors on
UAVs are typically limited in their accuracy of localiza-
tion of targets on the ground. On the other hand, ground
robots can be deployed to accurately locate ground tar-
gets but have the disadvantage of not being able to move
rapidly and see through obstacles such as buildings or
fences. In [53.56], the synergy between these two de-
vices is exploited by creating a seamless network of
UAVs and unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs). As dis-
cussed in Sect. 53.2, the key to such network-centric
approaches for search and localization is a shared rep-
resentation of state information, which in this case is
easily scalable to large numbers of UAVs and UGVs
and is transparent to the speciﬁcity of individual plat-
forms. However, how to do this more generally and for
more unstructured information remains an issue for fu-
ture research.
53.4.7 Control for Perception
Networked mobile robots enable the exploration of
dynamic environments and the recovery of three-
dimensional information via distributed active percep-
tion [53.53]. Since the nodes are mobile, a natural
question is: where should the nodes be placed in or-
der to ensure successful integration of information from
multiple nodes, and to maximize the quality of the es-
timates returned by the team? Since there is a cost
associated with transmitting and processing data, it is
important to consider which sensor readings should
be used in the state estimation and what information
should be communicated to the rest of the system. The
quality of the information computed by the network de-
pends on the locations of the sensor platforms both in
an absolute and relative sense. The quality also depends
on the noise characteristics of each sensor, and the com-
munication network.
A robot network goes well beyond a ﬁxed sensor
network, which can only collect data at ﬁxed positions
in space; for example, when an event is detected at
a speciﬁc location it is possible to direct more sen-
sors toward the location of observation of the event for
more information (for example, higher-resolution data
or higher sampling frequency). Reconﬁguring the node
locations for adaptive resolution sampling relies on dis-
tributed control strategies.
Various strategies have been introduced for control-
ling mobile sensor network coverage. Mobile sensing
agents are controlled using gradients of information-
based objective functions [53.91]. Stability results are
derived without concerns for the optimality of the
network conﬁguration, but local guarantees are pro-
vided. Topology aware coordinated behavior is treated
in [53.92]. A body of results reported in [53.93]
and [53.94] describes decentralized control laws for po-
sitioning mobile sensor networks optimally with respect
to a known event distribution density function. This ap-
proach is advantageous because it guarantees that the
network (locally) minimizes a cost function relevant to
the coverage problem. However, the control strategy
requires that each agent have a complete knowledge
of the event distribution density, thus it is not reac-
tive to the sensed environment. The work by [53.95,
96] generalizes these results to situations in which the
nodes estimate rather than know ahead of time the event
distribution density function. A local (decentralized)
control law requires that each agent can measure the
value and gradient of the distribution density function
at its own position. This results in a sensor network
that is reactive to its sensed environment while main-
taining or seeking a near-optimal sensing conﬁguration.
In addition, the distribution density function approxi-
mation yields a closed-form expression for the control
law in terms of the vertices of an agent’s Voronoi
region. This eliminates the need for the numerical in-
tegration of a function over a polynomial domain at
every time step, thereby providing a signiﬁcant reduc-
tion in computational overhead for each agent. Other
work in event monitoring for unknown distributions
includes [53.59]. Krause et al. [53.97] have recently
proposed an approach for sensor placement that con-
siders both the sensing quality and communication cost
of imperfect sensing and communication components.
They use a parametric model for link reception rate that
assumes no acknowledgement and no temporal correla-
tion of lossy links.
Beginning with the art gallery problem, there have
been multiple efforts to determine an optimal conﬁgu-
ration of sensors to cover a given region [53.98–100].
A variant which allows the use of mobile sensors is
known as the watchmen tours problem. In these ap-
proaches the sensor model is abstract and not well
suited to real environments and cameras. Distributed
geometric optimization methods [53.94] have also been
used for mobile sensor network reconﬁguration. A re-
lated class of methods is the use of estimation-theoretic
optimization metrics and the application of informa-
tion ﬁlters to coordinate network-wide motion [53.56].
There are other distributed optimization methods which
use a distributed control law and show that it optimizes
a global metric of interest, such as using a potential
ﬁeld or other linear control law based only on local
neighbor interactions [53.101]. Research focusing on

Part E | 53.4
1350
Part E
Moving in the Environment
the control of cameras with pan, tilt, and zoom ca-
pabilities is due to [53.60, 102, 103]. In [53.102] an
approach is developed to calibrate a pan–tilt–zoom
camera automatically over its full zoom range and to
build very high-resolution panoramas. In [53.60], the
cameras are constantly moved to track observed targets,
using a factor graph. A recent algorithm due to [53.104]
signiﬁcantly improves on this by positioning cameras to
make the network better suited to detect and classify
targets as they emerge. Pan–tilt–zoom cameras allow
the construction of far more ﬂexible vision systems than
static cameras.
53.4.8 Control for Communication
In Sect. 53.4.5, we brieﬂy discussed the beneﬁts of
using the communication network to synthesize and
improve controller design. Conversely, the movement
of robots affects the network and data transmission in
the network. This gives rise to many challenges. If the
controllers for individual robots are known, can we pro-
vide guarantees about communication in the network
and can we develop robust information routing and net-
working algorithms in the presence of robot motion?
Another challenge concerns how information propa-
gates and diffuses in these networks. If the robots move
under a given control model, how does a piece of in-
formation propagate through the network and what can
we say about when and where that piece of information
will be heard? If we know the answers to such ques-
tions, it may be possible to design controllers to realize
desired communication network characteristics.
One simple control strategy that can affect network
performance is to control the robot motion to ensure
messages are transmitted between designated nodes.
The movement of robots in a network of robots and
sensors may cause network partitioning when nodes go
out of range. However, the ability of the robots to move
in a controlled way also leads to an opportunity to ad-
dress the information routing problem in disconnected
networks by turning the robots into relay nodes. The
key idea here is to enable the robot holding a current
message to an unavailable destination to modify their
trajectory in order to relay a message. This problem has
been formulated as an optimization problem. The goal
is to minimize the trajectory modiﬁcations necessary
to send a message to its destination. Several solutions
have been proposed depending on the information that
is available to the robots. If the robots’ trajectories are
known, path planning techniques can be used to com-
pute who moves where to relay what. If the robots’
trajectories are not known, a distributed spanning tree
can be created to enable robots to keep track of each
other. Each robot is assigned a region of movement and
a parent in the spanning tree. When the robot leaves its
region, the parent is informed. When the robot moves
too far away, the spanning tree is modiﬁed.
Mobile robots can be used to create desired network
topologies under suitable models of network commu-
nication. If a robot is used to emplace nodes in an
environment (or if sensor nodes robotically self-deploy)
to build a network, the problem is referred to as deploy-
ment. It is possible to control the motion of individual
nodes to guarantee that a speciﬁed topology is main-
tained [53.55]. It is also possible to reposition nodes
with the explicit aim of changing the network topol-
ogy – the so-called mobility-based topology control
problem.
A distributed algorithm for the deployment of mo-
bile robot teams has been described by [53.105] using
the concept of virtual pheromones: localized messages
from one robot to another. These messages are used
to generate either a gas expansion or a guided growth
deployment model. Similar algorithms based on arti-
ﬁcial potential ﬁelds are described in [53.106, 107],
where the latter incorporates a connectivity constraint.
An incremental deployment algorithm for mobile sen-
sor networks is given in [53.58]; nodes are deployed
one at a time into an unknown environment, with each
node making use of information gathered by previously
deployed nodes to determine its deployment location.
The algorithm is designed to maximize network cover-
age while ensuring that nodes retain line of sight with
one another.
Most work on network topology control has dealt
with uncontrolled deployments, where there is no ex-
plicit control of the positions of individual nodes. The
primary mechanisms proposed are power control and
sleep scheduling. These methods involve pruning an al-
ready existing, well-connected communication graph in
order to save power while ensuring that the resultant
subgraph preserves connectivity. Given a network that
is connected when all nodes are operating at maximum
power, the aim of power control is to use the minimum
power level at each node for which the network remains
connected [53.108]. Given an overdeployed network,
sleep scheduling seeks to activate a minimal subset
of nodes to maintain connectivity and achieve other
desired metrics [53.109]. In contrast, controlled de-
ployments are feasible when the positions of individual
nodes can be altered. Such deployments are interesting
for two reasons. First, network topology with wireless
communication relates directly to proximity relations
and hence the position of the nodes. Second, there is in-
creasing evidence that a large number of deployments
are likely to involve careful, nonrandom placement of
nodes. The positioning of nodes is controlled either by
the nodes themselves or by external agents. Such net-

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
53.5 Swarm Robots
1351
Part E | 53.5
works present a different and interesting scenario for
topology control since it is possible to exploit control of
the motion and placement of the nodes to build efﬁcient
topologies. A local, completely decentralized technique
for topology control using mobility is given in [53.110].
An important application for networked robots is
in monitoring and surveillance, where it is impor-
tant that the robots cover the space while remaining
within communication range [53.111–113]. In a recent
development [53.114] the problem of how to design
communication models and scheduling protocols for
choosing the appropriate path planning algorithms for
robotic data collection is discussed. Probing environ-
ment and adaptive sleeping protocol (PEAS) was one of
the ﬁrst attempts to address communication connectiv-
ity and sensing coverage simultaneously using heuris-
tic algorithms [53.115]. Wang et al. [53.116] proposed
a new coverage conﬁguration protocol (CCP) to pro-
duce an approach that simultaneously optimizes cov-
erage and connectivity while maximizing the number
of nodes that are placed into sleep mode. Furthermore,
they also identiﬁed three different classes of coverage–
connectivity problems with respect to the ratio of radio
and sensing ranges and recognized the critical ratio
where the former range is twice as long as the latter.
Zhang and Hou proved that, if the communication range
is at least twice the sensing range, complete coverage
of a convex area guarantees network communication
connectivity, and then used this theorem as a basis for
a localized density control algorithm [53.109]. This was
subsequently generalized to show that the condition that
the communication range is twice the sensing range
is sufﬁcient and is the tight lower bound to guarantee
that complete coverage preservation implies communi-
cation connectivity among nodes if the original network
topology is connected [53.117].
In summary, if the state of the communication
network and the desired state of the communication
network is known to each agent, it should be possible
to synthesize distributed controllers to move agents to
attain desired network characteristics. However, the as-
sumptions on the global state are clearly not justiﬁed.
Also, the desired motion to optimize network charac-
teristics will conﬂict with the motion that is required to
perform the desired task. However, as the brief discus-
sion above illustrates, there are many interesting studies
that point to promising directions for future work in this
very fertile research ﬁeld.
53.5 Swarm Robots
Historically, some of the earliest work in multirobot
systems [53.12, 13, 118–125] dealt with large numbers
of homogeneous robots, called swarms; swarm robotics
continues to be a very active area of research. Most
swarm approaches obtain inspiration from biological
societies – particularly ants, bees, and birds – to develop
similar behaviors in multirobot teams. Because biolog-
ical societies are able to accomplish impressive group
capabilities, such as the ability of termites to build large
complex mounds, or the ability of ants to collectively
carry large prey, robotics researchers aim to reproduce
these capabilities in robot societies.
Swarm robotics systems are often called collective
robotics, indicating that individual robots are often un-
aware of the actions of other robots in the system, other
than information on proximity. These approaches aim
to achieve a desired team-level global behavior from
the interaction dynamics of individual robots follow-
ing relatively simple local control laws. Swarm robotic
systems typically involve very little explicit communi-
cation between robots, and instead rely on stigmergy
(i. e., communication through the world) to achieve
emergent cooperation. Individual robots are assumed
to have minimal capabilities, with little ability to solve
meaningful tasks on their own. However, when grouped
with other similar robots, they are collectively able to
achieve team-level tasks. Ideally, the entire team should
be able to achieve much more than individual robots
working alone (i. e., it is superadditive, meaning that
the whole is bigger than the sum of the parts). These
systems assume very large numbers of robots (at least
dozens, and often hundreds or thousands) and explicitly
address issues of scalability. Swarm robotic approaches
achieve high levels of redundancy because robots are
assumed to be identical, and thus interchangeable with
each other.
Many types of swarm behaviors have been studied,
such as foraging, ﬂocking, chaining, search, herding,
aggregation, and containment. The majority of these
swarm behaviors deal with spatially distributed multi-
robot motions, requiring robots to coordinate motions
either:
1. Relative to other robots
2. Relative to the environment
3. Relative to external agents
4. Relative to robots and the environment
5. Relative to all (i. e., other robots, external agents,
and the environment).
Table 53.1 categorizes swarm robot behaviors ac-
cording to these groupings, citing representative exam-
ples of relevant research.

Part E | 53.5
1352
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Table 53.1 Categories of swarm behaviors
Relative motion requirements
Swarm behaviors
Relative to other robots
Formations [53.126, 127], ﬂocking [53.121], natural herding (as in herds of cattle), schooling,
sorting [53.14], clumping [53.14], condensation, aggregation [53.128], dispersion [53.129]
Relative to the environment
Search [53.130], foraging [53.131], grazing, harvesting, deployment [53.58], coverage [53.132],
localization [53.133], mapping [53.134], exploration [53.135]
Relative to external agents
Pursuit [53.136], predator–prey [53.137], target tracking [53.138], forced herding/shepherding
(as in shepherding sheep)
Relative to other robots and the
environment
Containment, orbiting, surrounding, perimeter search [53.139]
Relative to other robots,
external agents, and the
environment
Evasion, tactical overwatch, soccer [53.140]
Much of the current research in swarm robotics
is aimed at developing speciﬁc solutions to one or
more of the swarm behaviors listed in Table 53.1
(
VIDEO 214 ). Some of these swarm behaviors have
received particular attention, notably formations, ﬂock-
ing, search, coverage, and foraging. Section 53.10 dis-
cusses these behaviors in more detail. In general, most
current work in the development of swarm behaviors
is aimed not just at demonstrating group motions that
are similar to biological systems, but also at under-
standing the formal control theoretic principles that can
predictably converge to the desired group behaviors,
and remain in stable states.
Demonstration of physical robot swarms is both
a hardware and a software challenge. As discussed
in Sect. 53.2, the ﬁrst demonstrations were by
Matari´c [53.6], involving about 20 physical robots per-
forming aggregation, dispersion, and ﬂocking. This
work deﬁned composable basis behaviors as primitives
for structuring more complex systems. In later research,
McLurkin [53.141] (
VIDEO 215 ) developed an exten-
sive catalog of swarm behavior software, and demon-
strated these behaviors on about 100 physical robots
(called the SwarmBot robots), developed by iRobot, as
shown in Fig. 53.12. He created several group behav-
iors, such as avoidManyRobots, disperseFromSource,
disperseFromLeaves, disperseUniformly, computeAv-
erageBearing, avoidManyRobots, followTheLeader, or-
bitGroup, navigateGradient, clusterOnSource, and clus-
terIntoGroups. A swarm of 108 robots used the devel-
oped dispersion algorithms in an empty schoolhouse of
area of about 300 m2, and were able to locate an object
of interest and lead a human to its location [53.129].
The European Union has sponsored many swarm
robot projects, leading toward decreasingly smaller-
sized individual robots, and increasingly larger-sized
robot teams. The I-SWARM project, for instance, aimed
at developing millimeter-sized robots with full on-
board sensing, computation, and power for perform-
ing biologically inspired swarming behaviors, as well
Fig. 53.12 The SwarmBot robots
as collective perception tasks. This project was both
a hardware and a software challenge, in that develop-
ing microscale robots that are fully autonomous and can
perform meaningful cooperative behaviors will require
signiﬁcant advances in the current state of the art.
The EU-based SWARM-BOTS project studied new
concepts in the design and implementation of self-
organizing and self-assembling robots (
VIDEO 195 ).
In this work [53.142], s-bot robots are developed that
have grippers enabling the robots to create physical
links with other s-bots or objects, thus creating as-
semblies of robots. These assemblies can then work
together for navigation across rough terrain, or to col-
lectively transport objects. The s-bots are cylindrical,
with a ﬂexible arm and toothed gripper that can con-
nect one s-bot to another. An interesting application
of object transport using SWARM-BOTs is shown in
Figure 53.13, which shows the robots self-assembling
into four chains in order to pull a child across the ﬂoor
(
VIDEO 212 ).
Another notable effort in swarm robotics research
is the US multi-university SWARMS initiative led by
the University of Pennsylvania. Research in this project
aimed at developing a new system-theoretic frame-

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
53.5 Swarm Robots
1353
Part E | 53.5
Fig. 53.13 SWARM-BOTs
self-assembling
to
move
a child across the ﬂoor
work for swarming, developing models of swarms and
swarming behavior, analyzing swarm formation, stabil-
ity, and robustness, synthesizing emergent behaviors for
active perception and coverage, and developing algo-
rithms for distributed localization.
Besides the hardware challenges of dealing with
large numbers of small robots, there are many import-
ant software challenges that remain to be solved. From
a practical perspective, a common approach to creat-
ing homogeneous multirobot swarms is to hypothesize
a possible local control law (or laws), and then study
the resulting group behavior, iterating until the desired
global behavior is obtained. However, the longer-term
objective is to be able to both predict group perfor-
mance based on known local control laws, and to
generate local control laws based upon a desired global
group behavior.
More recent research has focused on the devel-
opment of analytical techniques that can synthesize
distributed controllers that achieve the desired macro-
level system behaviors. Mather and Hsieh [53.143]
address this challenge by proposing a technique that
ﬁrst identiﬁes robot–robot interactions at the macro-
scopic level; they then use this analysis to improve local
robot control policies by ﬁltering out spurious robot–
robot interactions. Another top-down design approach
is presented by Chen et al. [53.144] who show how
to automatically synthesize control and communication
strategies for a robot team based on global speciﬁca-
tions of the desired system-level behavior, stated using
regular expressions. The resulting control strategies are
formally proven to correctly achieve the desired global
behavior. The work of Melo and Veloso [53.145] takes
a different approach to the synthesis of local decision
policies by making use of the decentralized sparse-
interaction Markov decision process. This technique
allows agents to recognize states when interactions with
other robots might occur, thus enabling them to choose
better motions based on possible future inter-robot ac-
tions. Tsiotras and Castro [53.146] synthesize local
controllers by generalizing the standard consensus al-
gorithm, applied to geometric pattern formation.
A common theme in most of the works cited above
is that they ﬁrst make use of formal methods to de-
scribe the desired macro-level behavior, and then show
how to use this macro-level goal to synthesize individ-
ual robot controllers. Another use of formal methods is
to show how the individual goals of robot team mem-
bers can be considered collectively, with the objective
of maximizing the system’s achievement of individual
goals. Toward this end, game-theoretic techniques have
been shown useful in a variety of distributed robot for-
mulations. Cheng and Dasgupta [53.147] make use of
the game-theoretic technique called Weighted Voting
Games to address the problem of multi-robot team for-
mation control amidst obstacles. Taheri et al. [53.148]
also make use of game-theoretic principles, building
upon the Local Interaction Game diffusion model to in-
vestigate how a small number of agents can inﬂuence
the global society’s behavior through local interactions.
An interesting question in the design of distributed
robot coordination mechanisms is the extent to which
identical controllers can lead to diversity, specializa-
tion, or changes in robot behavior. Hsieh et al. [53.149]
study the emergence of specialization in robot swarms
by making use of a distributed adaptation algorithm.
They present a top-down analytical approach that de-
ﬁnes the system equilibrium using waiting time param-
eters, and then present adaptive optimization strategies
that converge to the optimal conﬁgurations that achieve
system equilibrium. Temporal changes in system-level
swarm behavior are addressed by Hoff et al. [53.150]
who show how a swarm can change and improve its for-
aging behavior by switching between algorithms based
on the environment in which the swarm ﬁnds itself.
Once the distributed controller is synthesized, most
of the works mentioned above presume that individual
robots execute their controller successfully. The typi-
cal presumption is that large swarms of interchangeable
robots automatically result in robust and scalable swarm
behavior. However, this presumption is challenged by
Winﬁeld and Nembrini [53.151], who illustrate that
overall swarm reliability quickly falls in the presence of
worst-case, partially failed robots. They conclude that
future large scale swarm systems must develop new ap-
proaches for achieving high levels of fault tolerance.
One example approach is shown in
VIDEO 194 .

Part E | 53.6
1354
Part E
Moving in the Environment
53.6 Modular Robotics
The modular robotics ﬁeld began with a paper pre-
sented at International Conference on Robotics and
Automation in the Spring of 1988 by Fukuda and Nak-
agawa [53.152] describing the abstract concept of a re-
conﬁgurable robotic system that can assume different
shapes and envisioned a robot system composed of dif-
ferent types of modules that can combine to accomplish
a variety of tasks. Over the past twenty years, modu-
lar robotics research developed many facets: hardware
design; planning and control algorithms; the trade-off
between hardware and algorithmic complexity; efﬁcient
simulation; and system integration.
Modular robots are collections of physically con-
nected, electromechanically active modules that, as
a whole, form robotic systems that exhibit capabilities
greater than those of the individual modules. Typically
modular robots can change their shape or conﬁguration
in order to adapt to a variety of different tasks. For ex-
ample, a collection of modules could reconﬁgure from
a closed chain that rolls quickly over open ground to
a legged robot that more easily traverses rough terrain.
Modular robots are typically touted for their adaptabil-
ity, their fault-tolerance, and the relative simplicity of
the unit modules. Modular robotic systems can be de-
scribed and classiﬁed on several axes using a variety of
properties. In what follows, we choose the traditional
route of classifying modular robotic systems by the ge-
ometry of the system: chain, lattice, truss, or free form.
For a more detailed history of the modular robotics
ﬁeld, consult [53.153, 154].
53.6.1 Chain Systems
The deﬁning characteristic of chain-type modular robot
systems is the fact that the modules, when connected
to their neighbors, are arranged in a chain. These
chains may be one-dimensional, or two-dimensional,
but three-dimensional chains are not as common. The
fact that a chain-type modular robot is two-dimensional,
or even one-dimensional, does not mean that it cannot
operate in three dimensions. In fact, snake-like modular
robots composed of segments with orthogonal joints are
quite common.
One of the ﬁrst chain-type modular robotic systems
was the polypod system developed by Yim [53.155, 156]
(
VIDEO 196 ). The polypod system was composed of
two types of modules: segments and nodes. It could form
a variety of shapes including rolling loops and hexapods,
and it went on to inspire many other chain-based sys-
tems. One was the CONRO system [53.157–159] in
which each module was composed of two orthogonal
servo motors controlling each module’s pitch and yaw.
Murata et al. developed the M-TRAN modular
robotic system [53.160–163] which has undergone
multiple revisions and improvements. In [53.161],
Kamimura et al. employ a set of interconnected, out
of phase oscillators to achieve walking gaits in the M-
TRAN system. Marbach and Ijspeert improved upon
the ability of systems like M-TRAN to generate gaits
in real-time by applying function optimization to their
modular system, YaMoR [53.164]. Murata et al. added
cameras to the M-TRAN system so that a set of M-
TRAN modules could separate, perform independent
tasks, and then rejoin into a larger structure [53.163].
The ATRON system [53.165, 166] was developed
to improve upon the M-TRAN. Lund et al. wanted to
keep M-TRAN’s ability to form dense lattices while
taking advantage of the two orthogonal degrees of free-
dom, (pitch and yaw), found in the CONRO system.
The Superbot system [53.167] also builds upon on the
mechanical design of M-TRAN by adding an additional
degree of rotational freedom between the two existing
rotation axes.
The PolyBot is chain-type modular robot [53.168,
169] with a single rotational degree of freedom. Poly-
Bot evolved into CKBot which has demonstrated the
ability to reassemble itself after being accidentally or
intentionally destroyed [53.170]. The Molecube sys-
tem [53.171], developed by Lipson et al. is another
example of a chain-type modular system with only one
degree of freedom but still able to achieve interesting
three-dimensional (3-D) conﬁgurations. Lipson et al.
showed that a short chain of Molecube modules, along
with some free modules, can self-replicate.
Yim et al. designed another unique chain-type sys-
tem named RATChET [53.172] which uses a connected
chain of inter-latching right angle tetrahedrons to form
structures. Neighboring RATChET modules latch to-
gether when the angle between them passes some crit-
ical value, and they unlatch through the use of shape
memory alloy (SMA) springs when heated beyond
70 ıC. Interestingly, the RATChET modules possess no
intelligence. Instead, they rely on an intelligent exter-
nal actuator which rotates to control one end of the
dangling chain. One unique property of the RATChET
system is its relatively strength.
53.6.2 Lattice Systems
Lattice-type modular robot systems are collections of
interconnected robotic modules in which the units are
situated at the intersection points of a two or three
dimensional grid. (A 1-D (one-dimensional) lattice sys-
tem is simply a chain-type robot.) The main characteris-

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
53.6 Modular Robotics
1355
Part E | 53.6
tic separating a lattice system from a densely conﬁgured
chain-type robot is the density of the interconnections
between the modules. In a lattice-type system, each
module is typically connected to all of its neighbors. In
a dense chain-type system, two modules may be neigh-
bors, but they will not be physically connected.
Additionally, lattice-type systems tend to be built
with modules that contain no rotational degrees of free-
dom. While the modules in a lattice system typically
have mechanisms which enable the modules to move
relative to, and bond with, their neighbors, they gener-
ally cannot bend themselves. In comparison, chain-type
systems are often built from modules that contain one or
more rotational degrees of free so that the modules can
ﬂex like links in a chain. There is some overlap between
between the two types of system.
Chirikjian
et al.
developed
one
of
the
ﬁrst
lattice-based modular robotic systems [53.173–175]
(
VIDEO 198 ) in which the modules are deformable
hexagons capable of bonding with their neighbors. Oth-
ers, such as Walter et al. [53.176] further analyzed these
hexagonal type systems to create distributed motion
planners capable of reconﬁguring the system from one
state to another.
Murata et al. were also early contributors to the
development of lattice-based modular robotic systems
with their development of a roughly hexagonal module
capable of rolling around its neighbors in two dimen-
sions [53.177, 178]. Kurokawa et al. presented a three
dimensional adaptation [53.179] composed of cubes
with six protruding arms capable of rotation. Yoshida
et al. improved on this system with a new design that
used shape-memory alloy actuators to rotate one robot
module around the perimeter of a neighbor [53.180].
One of the simplest lattice systems is the the Digital
Clay project [53.181]. The system was a set of com-
pletely passive modules that relied on the user to make
changes to it topology. The 2:5 cm rhombic dodecahe-
drons were able to sense and communicate with their
neighbors in order to create a virtual model of the phys-
ical arrangement of modules.
Rus et al. also explored the idea of 3-D mod-
ules capable reconﬁguration through a series of latch-
ings, rotations, and unlatchings with the Molecule
system [53.182–185]. In [53.186, 187], Vona and Rus
describe a different type of deformable lattice system.
The Crystal system is composed of square modules able
to expand and contract by a factor of two in the x–y
plane. Suh et al. expanded on the Crystal concept with
the Telecubes [53.188] that could move in three dimen-
sions by expanding all six faces.
Chiang and Chirikjian analyzed how to perform
motion planning in a lattice of rigid cubic modules
able to slide past each other [53.189]. The CHOBIE
robot developed by Koseki [53.190] is able to actu-
ally perform the sliding motion assumed by Chiang and
Chirikjian in [53.189]. More recently, An developed the
EM-Cube system [53.191] which is also capable of slid-
ing motion.
Another unique lattice is the I-Cube developed by
Khosla et al. [53.192, 193]. The 3-D I-Cube system con-
sists ofpassivecubes which areconnected by activelinks
with three rotational degrees of freedom that are able to
grab, reposition, and release the cubes. The 3-D I-Cube
system was an improvement of the two-dimensional
(2-D) system [53.194] developed by Hosokawa et al. for
rearranging cubic modules in a vertical plane.
Goldstein et al. initiated the Claytronics project
by publishing several papers [53.195, 196] propos-
ing lattice-based claytronic atoms or catoms. These
vertically-oriented cylindrical robots, which were inca-
pable of independent motion, used 24 electromagnets
around their perimeters to achieve rolling locomotion
about their neighbors. Goldstein et al. envisioned a sys-
tem in which millions of smaller catoms could form
arbitrary shapes using a randomized algorithm that
avoided conveying a complete description of the shape
to each module in the system.
The catoms continue to evolve. One of the newest
instantiations [53.197] employs hollow cylinders rolled
from SiO2 rectangles patterned with aluminum elec-
trodes. The authors hope that two of these cylinders,
when placed in close proximity with their axes aligned,
will be able to rotate with respect to one another using
electrostatic forces. Speciﬁcally, the electrodes, (which
reside on the inside of each cylinder and are electrically
isolated by the SiO2), will be charged so that they attract
and repel mirror charges on the neighboring cylinder in
a way that causes rotation. Currently, the system ap-
pears to be constrained to form 2-D structures. The
authors claim the completed system will have a yield
strength similar to that of plastic and that the modules
will be able to transfer power and communication sig-
nals capacitively from neighbor to neighbor.
The Claytronics project has proposed, but not yet
demonstrated with hardware, the use of sub-millimeter
intelligent particles as sensing and replication de-
vices [53.198]. In particular, Pillai et al. present a the-
oretical 3-D fax machine in which the object to be
faxed is immersed in a container of intelligent particles
that sense and encode the object’s dimensions. At the
receiving end, these same Claytronic particles decode
the shape description sent by the transmitter and bond
together to replicate the original object. Unlike our ap-
proach, Pillai’s approach is completely centralized and
relies on an external computer for computation.
White et al. developed hardware and algorithms for
several 2-D stochastically-driven self-assembling sys-

Part E | 53.6
1356
Part E
Moving in the Environment
tems [53.199]. To form speciﬁc shapes, each module is
provided with a representation of the desired shape and
decides, based on its location in the structure, whether
to allow other modules to bond to its faces. Lipson et al.
extended their 2-D system to 3-D [53.200–202] by using
cubic modules suspended in turbulent ﬂuid to achieve
self-assembly and reconﬁguration. As the free modules
circulate in the ﬂuid, they pass by a growing structure
of assembled modules. When they come close enough,
they are accreted onto the structure. The modules attract
or repel each other with ﬂuid suction or positive pres-
sure. Early versions of the system used modules with
interval values that could redirect these suction forces.
More recently, Lipson’s group has worked to move the
intelligence and actuation capabilities from the modules
to the tank in which the modules circulate [53.203].
The Miche system [53.204] consisting of 45 mm cu-
bic modules capable of mating with their neighbors us-
ing mechanically switchable permanent magnets. Each
module contains three switchable magnets, each of
which mated with a steel face on a neighboring module.
Because the connectors were gendered, any collection
of modules had to be assembled by hand so that the con-
nectors were always oriented correctly, but the system
was capable of self-disassembling to form 3-D struc-
tures. The Robot Pebbles (
VIDEO 211 ) are based, at
least in principle, on the Miche modules.
One of the newest lattice-type modular robotics
is an aerial system composed of identical, hexagonal,
single-rotor modules [53.205]. A group of modules may
connect to form a ﬂying platform with an arbitrary ar-
rangement of multiple rotors. In addition to the ability
to ﬂy, each module contains wheels so that the system
may self-reconﬁgure on the ground for the speciﬁc task
at hand.
53.6.3 Truss Systems
Truss systems, as their name implies, are modular
robotic systems in which the modules are nodes and
edges in a truss structure. Both the trusses and con-
nectors may be active in such systems. Unlike the
lattice-based systems, truss-based systems do not need
to operate on any regular lattice. Most truss-based sys-
tems under development employ struts that expand or
contract to achieve structural deformation. One of the
ﬁrst such system to do so was Tetrobot [53.206]. The
Odin system, conceived by Lyder et al. [53.207, 208]
consists of three physically different types of modules:
active strut modules capable of changing their length;
passive strut modules of ﬁxed length; and joint mod-
ules. The biologically inspired Morpho system [53.209]
developed by Nagpal et al. is similar to Odin. It also
uses active links, passive links, and connector cubes.
53.6.4 Free-Form Systems
Free-form systems are able to aggregate modules in at
least semi-arbitrary positions. One such system is the
Slimebot [53.210, 211]. The system consists of identi-
cal vertical cylindrical modules that move on a horizon-
tal plane. The perimeter of each module is covered by
six gender-less hook and loop patches used to bond with
neighboring modules. These patches oscillate radially
in and out from the center of the body. By control-
ling the frequency and phase of the oscillations between
neighbors, the system can achieve aggregate motion in
a given direction.
Researchers are also developing algorithms for free-
form systems. Funiak et al. developed a localization
algorithm [53.212] that is capable of localizing tens-
of-thousands of irregularly packed modules in 3-D.
Rubenstein and Shen developed a number of shape for-
mation algorithms for collections of two-dimensional
modules. These algorithms allow an arbitrary-sized col-
lection of modules to form arbitrary scale-independent
shapes [53.213, 214]. Once the shape is formed, mod-
ules can be added to or removed from the system, and
the system will reconﬁgure itself to incorporate the
new modules. The resulting shape will grow or shrink,
but its basic form will remain unchanged. Recently,
Rubenstein et al. developed a 1000 modules hardware
platform on which to deploy these algorithms [53.215].
Researchers have also explored the use of folding
to create reconﬁgurable foldable systems [53.216, 217].
These systems use ﬂexible wiring and shape mem-
ory alloy actuators embedded in composite sheets to
programmatically create origami-inspired shapes. By
controlling which actuators are energized, the system
can form multiple different shapes.
53.6.5 Self-Assembling Systems
Self-assembling modular robotic systems are collec-
tion of modules that are capable of autonomously
coalescing and bonding with their neighbors to form
a greater structure. The result is often robotic, but it
need not be. Whether a system is capable of self-
assembling is independent of whether it is free-form,
a chain, a lattice, or a truss-based system. Almost all of
aforementioned modular robot systems rely on human
intervention to assemble. In an attempt to automate the
process of creating intricate modular robotic systems,
researchers have attempted to mimic and improve upon
natural self-assembling systems. Whitesides et al. in-
vestigated a wide variety of engineered self-assembling
systems [53.218–220].
Miyashita et al. performed a more theoretical
analysis of self-assembly using pie-shaped pieces

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
53.7 Heterogeneity
1357
Part E | 53.7
to form complete circles [53.221] from pie-shaped
pieces. In the process, they followed Hosokawa et al.’s
lead [53.222] and modeled the system as a chemical
reaction. Shimizu and Suzuki developed a system of
passive modules capable of self-repair when placed on
a vibrating table [53.223].
Computer scientists have also investigated theoreti-
cal aspects of self-assembly in the context of 2-D tiles
which selectively bond with their neighbors to form
simple well-deﬁned shapes like squares [53.224–226].
Each side of every tile in the system has an associated
bonding strength. When two tiles collide, they remain
attached only if their cumulative bond strength exceeds
a globally deﬁned system entropy. To form a speciﬁc
shape, one must design a set of tiles with the appropri-
ate bonding strengths.
Klavins et al. worked to develop intelligent self-
assembling systems that employ triangular modules
driven by oscillating fans on an air table to self-
assemble different shapes [53.227]. The authors employ
knowledge of the module’s local topology and in-
ternal module state so that each module decides, in
a distributed fashion, when to maintain or break a con-
nection with its immediate neighbors. Grifﬁth et al. also
worked with intelligent modules capable of selective
bonding to show that self-assembling systems may self-
replicate [53.228].
Rus et al. [53.185] present the ﬁrst generic rule-
based approach to self-assembly, shape formation, and
locomotion by reconﬁguration. The rules can be used
on any modular robot system that can implement the
sliding cube model of relative motion. The result is an
abstract set of rules for each of these tasks, that can be
compiled down to module motions, taking into account
how the physical module implementes translation and
convex and concave transitions.
Jones and Matari´c [53.229] presented rule-based
approach to self-assembly termed transition rule sets.
In particular, they present a method that, given a goal
structure, produces a set of rules shared among all mod-
ules that govern when and where new modules are
allowed to attach to the growing structure. Kelly and
Zhang [53.230] expanded on this work by optimizing
the size of the rule sets used to form a speciﬁc shape.
Werfel [53.231] also applied the idea of a transition rule
set when studying the use of swarms to assemble com-
plex structures from passive materials.
Other
groups
have
attempted
to
make
self-
assembly more deterministic. The MEMS (micro-
electromechanical system) robots developed by Don-
ald et al. [53.232, 233] consists of thin (720 m),
rectangular (
 260 m 60 m), scratch-drive devices
capable of moving on an insulating substrate embed-
ded with electrodes. The authors used four of these
robots to build larger composite structures. The Sitti
group has developed a similar system of micro-meter
sized robots [53.234]. Instead of using a scratch drive
for locomotion, the robots are manipulated by exter-
nal magnetic ﬁelds. The authors can electrostatically
clamp any number of robots to the stage on which they
move. With all but one robot immobilized, the remain-
ing robot may be moved independently. The system
naturally self-assembles because the robots contain per-
manent magnets that attract their neighbors.
The majority of existing self-assembly systems aim
to form structures in one of two ways. Some systems
such as [53.221, 223–226] use a collection of applica-
tion speciﬁc differentiated modules, that are only capa-
ble of assembling in a particular fashion to form a spe-
ciﬁc shape. In contrast, other systems such as [53.199–
201, 227, 229–231, 235] use completely generic mod-
ules with more computation and communication ability
embedded in each module. Both types of systems aim to
form complex shapes in a direct manner: as these struc-
tures grow from a single module, new modules are only
allowed to attach to the structure in speciﬁc locations.
An alternative approach eliminates many of the
complexities of shape formation by active assembly
by using dissasemly for shape formation. The Smart
Pebble system [53.154, 204, 236, 237] employs a set of
distributed algorithms to perform two discrete steps:
1) rely on stochastic forces to self-assemble a close-
packed crystalline lattice of modules and 2) use the
process of self-disassembly to remove the extra material
from this block leaving behind the goal structure. By
approaching shape formation in this manner, the entire
shape-formation process is sped-up and the robustness
of the system is increased.
53.7 Heterogeneity
Robot heterogeneity can be deﬁned in terms of vari-
ety in robot behavior, morphology, performance quality,
size, and cognition. In most large-scale multirobot sys-
tems work, the beneﬁts of parallelism, redundancy, and
solutions distributed in space and time are obtained
through the use of homogeneous robots, which are
completely interchangeable (i. e., the swarm approach,
as described in Sect. 53.4). However, certain complex
applications of large-scale robot teams may require
the simultaneous use of multiple types of sensors and

Part E | 53.7
1358
Part E
Moving in the Environment
robots, all of which cannot be designed into a single
type of robot. Some robots may need to be scaled to
smaller sizes, which will limit their payloads, or cer-
tain required sensors may be too expensive to duplicate
across all robots on the team. Other robots may need
to be large to carry application-speciﬁc payload or sen-
sors, or to navigate long distances in a limited time.
These applications, therefore, require the collaboration
of large numbers of heterogeneous robots.
The motivation for developing heterogeneity in
multirobot teams is thus twofold: heterogeneity may be
a design feature beneﬁcial to particular applications, or
heterogeneity may be a necessity. As a design feature,
heterogeneity can offer economic beneﬁts, since it can
be easier to distribute varying capabilities across mul-
tiple team members rather than to build many copies
of monolithic robots. Heterogeneity can also offer en-
gineering beneﬁts, as it may simply be too difﬁcult to
design individual robots that incorporate all of the sens-
ing, computational, and effector requirements of a given
application. Heterogeneity in behavior may also arise in
an emergent manner in physically homogeneous teams,
as a result of behavior specialization.
A second compelling reason to study heterogeneity
is that it may be a necessity, in that it is nearly im-
possible in practice to build a truly homogeneous robot
team. The realities of individual robot design, construc-
tion, and experience will inevitably cause a multirobot
system to drift to heterogeneity over time. This is
recognized by experienced roboticists, who have seen
that several copies of the same model of robot can
vary widely in capabilities due to differences in sensor
tuning, calibration, etc. Over time, even minor initial
differences among robots will grow due to individual
robot drift and wear and tear. The implication is that,
to employ robot teams effectively, we must understand
diversity, predict how it will impact performance, and
enable robots to adapt to the diverse capabilities of their
peers. In fact, it is often advantageous to build diversity
explicitly into the design of a robot team.
There are a variety of research challenges in hetero-
geneous multirobot systems. A particular challenge to
achieving efﬁcient autonomous control is when overlap
in team member capabilities occurs, thus affecting task
allocation or role assignments [53.238]. Techniques as
described in Sect. 53.6 can typically deal with het-
erogeneous robots for the purposes of task allocation.
Another important topic in heterogeneity is how to rec-
ognize and quantify heterogeneity in multirobot teams.
Some types of heterogeneity can be evaluated quantita-
tively, using metrics such as the social entropy metric
developed by Balch [53.239]. Most research in hetero-
geneous multirobot systems assumes that robots have
a common language and a common understanding of
symbols in their language; developing a common un-
derstanding of communicated symbols among robots
with different physical capabilities is a fundamental
challenge, addressed by Jung and Zelinsky [53.240]
(
VIDEO 200 ).
As discussed in Sect. 53.2, one of the earliest
research demonstrations of heterogeneity in physi-
cal robot teams was in the development of the AL-
LIANCE architecture by Parker [53.9]. This work
demonstrated the ability of robots to compensate for
heterogeneity in team members during task alloca-
tion and execution. Murphy has studied heterogeneity
in the context of marsupial robot deployment, where
a mothership robot assists smaller robots in applications
such as search and rescue [53.241] (
VIDEO 206 ).
Grabowski et al. [53.134] developed modular milli-
bots for surveillance and reconnaissance that could
be composed of interchangeable sensor and effector
components, thus creating a variety of different het-
erogeneous teams. Simmons et al. [53.11] demonstrated
the use of heterogeneous robots for autonomous as-
sembly and construction tasks relevant to space appli-
cations. Sukhatme et al. [53.242] demonstrated a he-
licopter robot cooperating with two ground robots in
tasks involving marsupial-inspired payload deployment
and recovery, cooperative localization, and reconnais-
sance and surveillance tasks, as shown in Fig. 53.14.
Parker et al. [53.243] demonstrated assistive naviga-
tion for sensor network deployment using a more
intelligent leader robot for guiding navigationally chal-
lenged simple sensor robots to goal locations, as part of
a larger demonstration by Howard et al. [53.244] of 100
robots performing exploration, mapping, deployment,
and detection. Chaimowicz et al. [53.245] demonstrated
a team of aerial and ground robots cooperating for
surveillance applications in urban environments. Parker
and Tang [53.246] developed ASyMTRe (automated
Fig. 53.14 Heterogeneous team of an air and two ground
vehicles that can perform cooperative reconnaissance and
surveillance

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
53.8 Task Allocation
1359
Part E | 53.8
synthesis of multirobot task solutions through software
reconﬁguration), which enables heterogeneous robots
to share sensory resources to enable the team to ac-
complish tasks that would be impossible without tightly
coupled sensor sharing.
Many open research issues remain to be solved in
heterogeneous multirobot teams; for example, the issue
of optimal team design is a very challenging problem.
Clearly, the required behavioral performance in a given
application dictates certain constraints on the physi-
cal design of the robot team members. However, it is
also clear that multiple choices may be made in de-
signing a solution to a given application, based upon
cost, robot availability, ease of software design, ﬂexi-
bility in robot use, and so forth. Designing an optimal
robot team for a given application requires signiﬁcant
analysis and consideration of the tradeoffs in alternative
strategies.
53.8 Task Allocation
In many multirobot applications, the mission of the team
is deﬁned as a set of tasks that must be completed. Each
task can usually be worked on by a variety of differ-
ent robots; conversely, each robot can usually work on
a variety of different tasks. In many applications, a task
is decomposed into independent subtasks [53.9], hier-
archical task trees [53.247], or roles [53.11, 245, 248,
249] either by a general autonomous planner or by the
human designer. Independent subtasks or roles can be
achieved concurrently, while subtasks in task trees are
achieved according to their interdependence. Once the
set of tasks or subtasks have been identiﬁed, the chal-
lenge is to determine the preferred mapping of robots to
tasks (or subtasks). This is the task allocation problem.
The details of the task allocation problem can vary
in many dimensions, such as the number of robots re-
quired per task, the number of tasks a robot can work
on at a time, the coordination dependencies among
tasks, and the time frame for which task assignments
are determined. Gerkey and Matari´c [53.250] deﬁned
a taxonomy for task allocation that provides a way of
distinguishing task allocation problems along these di-
mensions, which is referred to as the multirobot task
allocation (MRTA) taxonomy.
53.8.1 Taxonomy for Task Allocation
Generally, tasks are considered to be of two principal
types: single-robot tasks (SR, according to the MRTA
taxonomy) are those that require only one robot at
a time, while multirobot tasks (MR) are those that re-
quire more than one robot working on the same task
at the same time. Commonly, single-robot tasks that
have minimal task interdependencies are referred to as
loosely coupled tasks, representing a weakly coopera-
tive solution. On the other hand, multirobot tasks are
often considered to be sets of subtasks that have strong
interdependencies. These tasks are therefore often re-
ferred to as tightly coupled tasks that require a strongly
cooperative solution. The subtasks of a loosely coupled
multirobot task require a high level of synchroniza-
tion or coordination between subtasks, meaning that
each task must be aware of the current state of the co-
ordinated subtasks within a small time delay. As this
time delay becomes progressively larger, coordinated
subtasks become more loosely coupled, representing
weakly cooperative solutions.
Robots can also be categorized as either single-task
robots (ST), which work on only one task at a time or
multitask robots (MT), which are able to make progress
on more than onetask at a time. Most commonly,task al-
location problems assume robots are single-task robots,
since more capable robots that perform multiple tasks in
parallel are still beyond the current state of the art.
Tasks can either be assigned to optimize the in-
stantaneous allocation of tasks (IA), or to optimize the
assignments into the future (TA, for time-extended as-
signment). In the case of instantaneous assignment,
no consideration is made for the effect of the cur-
rent assignment on future assignments. Time-extended
assignments attempt to assign tasks so that the perfor-
mance of the team is optimized for the entire set of tasks
that may be required, not just the current set of tasks that
need to be achieved at the current time step.
Using the MRTA taxonomy, triples of these abbre-
viations are used to categorize various task allocation
approaches, such as SR-ST-IA, which refers to an
assignment problem in which single-robot tasks are as-
signed once to single-task robots. Different variations
of the task allocation problem have different computa-
tional complexities. The easiest variant is the ST-SR-
IA problem, which can be solved in polynomial time
since it is an instance of the optimal assignment prob-
lem [53.251]. Other variants are much more difﬁcult,
and do not have known polynomial time solutions. For
example, the ST-MR-IA variant can be shown to be an
instance of the set partitioning problem [53.252], which
is strongly NP-hard. The ST-MR-TA, MT-SR-IA, and
MT-SR-TA variants have also all been shown to be
NP-hard problems. Because these problems are compu-
tationally complex, most approaches to task allocation
in multirobot teams generate approximate solutions.

Part E | 53.8
1360
Part E
Moving in the Environment
53.8.2 Representative Approaches
Approaches to task allocation in multirobot teams can
be roughly divided into behavior-based approaches and
market-based (sometimes called negotiation-style or
auction-based) approaches. The following subsections
describe some representative architectures for each of
these general approaches. Refer to [53.250] for a com-
parative analysis of some of these approaches, in terms
of computation and communications requirements and
solution quality.
Behavior-Based Task Allocation
Behavior-based approaches typically enable robots to
determine task assignments without explicitly dis-
cussing individual tasks. In these approaches, robots use
knowledge of the current state of the robot team mis-
sion, robot team member capabilities, and robot actions
to decide, in a distributed fashion, which robot should
perform which task.
One of the earliest architectures for multirobot task
allocation that was demonstrated on physical robots
was the behavior-based ALLIANCE architecture [53.9]
and the related L-ALLIANCE architecture [53.10]. AL-
LIANCE addresses the ST-SR-IA and ST-SR-TA vari-
ants of the task allocation problem without explicit com-
munication among robots about tasks. As described in
Sect. 53.2.2, ALLIANCE achieves adaptive action se-
lection through the use of motivational behaviors, which
are levels of impatience and acquiescence within each
robot that determine its own and its teammates’ relative
ﬁtness for performing certain tasks. These motivations
are calculated based upon the mission requirements, the
activities and capabilities of teammates, and the robots’
internal states. These motivations effectively calculate
utility measures for each robot–task pair.
Another behavior-based approach to multirobot
task
allocation
is
broadcast
of
local
eligibility
(BLE) [53.253], which addresses the ST-SR-IA variant
of task allocation. BLE uses a subsumption style be-
havior control architecture [53.254] that allows robots
to efﬁciently execute tasks by continuously broadcast-
ing locally computed eligibilities and only selecting the
robot with the best eligibility to perform the task. In
this case, task allocation is achieved through behav-
ior inhibition. BLE uses an assignment algorithm that
is very similar to Botelho and Alami’s M+ architec-
ture [53.255].
Market-Based Task Allocation
Market-based (or negotiation-based) approaches typi-
cally involve explicit communications between robots
about the required tasks, in which robots bid for tasks
based on their capabilities and availability. The nego-
tiation process is based on market theory, in which
the team seeks to optimize an objective function based
upon individual robot utilities for performing particular
tasks. The approaches typically greedily assign sub-
tasks to the robot that can perform the task with the
highest utility.
Smith’s contract net protocol (CNP) [53.256] was
the ﬁrst to address the problem of how agents can ne-
gotiate to collectively solve a set of tasks. The use
of a market-based approach speciﬁcally for multirobot
task allocation was ﬁrst developed by Botelho and
Alami with their M+ architecture [53.255]. In the M+
approach, robots plan their own individual plans for the
task they have been assigned. They then negotiate with
other teammates to incrementally adapt their actions to
suit the team as a whole, through the use of social rules
that facilitate the merging of plans.
Since these early developments, many alternative
approaches to market-based task allocation have been
developed. A thorough survey on the current state of
the art in market-based techniques for multirobot task
allocation is given in [53.257], comparing alternative
approaches in terms of solution quality, scalability,
dynamic events and environments, and heterogeneous
teams.
Most of the current approaches in market-based
task allocation address the ST-SR problem variant,
with some approaches (e.g., [53.11, 258–260]) deal-
ing with instantaneous assignment (IA), and others
(e.g., [53.135, 261–263]) addressing time-extended as-
signments (TA). More recent methods are beginning to
address the coaltion formation problem, which is the
allocation of multirobot tasks (i. e., the MR-ST prob-
lem variant), including [53.246, 264–269]. An example
approach to the MR-MT problem variant is found
in [53.270].
Some representative market-based techniques in-
clude MURDOCH [53.258], TraderBots [53.247,
263], and Hoplites [53.265]. The MURDOCH ap-
proach [53.258] employs a resource-centric, publish–
subscribe communication model to carry out auctions,
which has the advantage of anonymous communication.
In this approach a task is represented by the required
resources, such as the environmental sensors. The meth-
ods for how to use such a sensor to generate satisfactory
results is preprogrammed into the robot.
The TraderBots approach [53.247, 263] applies
market economy techniques for generating efﬁcient
and robust multirobot coordination in dynamic environ-
ments. In a market economy, robots act based on selﬁsh
interests. A robot receives revenue and incurs cost when
trying to accomplish a task. The goal is for robots to

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
53.9 Learning
1361
Part E | 53.9
trade tasks through auctions/negotiations such that the
team proﬁt (revenue minus cost) is optimized.
The Hoplites approach [53.265] focuses on the se-
lection of an appropriate joint plan for the team to
execute by incorporating joint revenue and cost into
the bid. This approach couples planning with passive
and active coordination strategies, enabling robots to
change coordination strategies as the needs of the task
change. Strategies are predeﬁned for a robot to accom-
plish a selected plan.
Some alternative approaches formulate the objects
to be assigned as roles, which typically package a set
of tasks and/or behaviors that a robot should undertake
when acting in a particular role. Roles can then be dy-
namically assigned to robots in a similar manner as in
the auction-based approaches [53.11, 248].
53.9 Learning
Multirobot learning is the problem of learning new
cooperative behaviors, or learning in the presence of
other robots. The other robots in the environment, how-
ever, have their own goals and may be learning in
parallel [53.271]. The challenge is that having other
robots in the environment violates the Markov prop-
erty that is a fundamental assumption of single-robot
learning approaches [53.271]. The multirobot learning
problem is particularly challenging because it combines
the difﬁculties of single-robot learning with multiagent
learning. Particular difﬁculties that must be consid-
ered in multirobot learning include continuous state
and action spaces, exponential state spaces, distributed
credit assignment, limited training time and insufﬁcient
training data, uncertainty in sensing and shared infor-
mation, nondeterministic actions, difﬁculty in deﬁning
appropriate abstractions for learned information, and
difﬁculty of merging information learned from differ-
ent robot experiences.
The types of applications that have been studied
for multirobot learning include multitarget observa-
tion [53.272, 273], air ﬂeet control [53.274], predator–
prey [53.137, 275, 276], box pushing [53.277], forag-
ing [53.23], and multirobot soccer [53.140, 278]. Partic-
ularly challenging domains for multirobot learning are
those tasks that are inherently cooperative. Inherently
cooperative tasks are those that cannot be decomposed
into independent subtasks to be solved by individual
robots. Instead, the utility of the action of one robot is
dependent upon the current actions of the other team
members. This type of task is a particular challenge in
multirobot learning, due to the difﬁculty of assigning
credit for the individual actions of the robot team mem-
bers.
The credit assignment problem is a particular chal-
lenge, since it is difﬁcult for a robot to determine
whether the ﬁtness (either good or bad) is due to its own
actions, or due to the actions of another robot. As dis-
cussed by Pugh and Martinoli in [53.279], this problem
can be especially difﬁcult in situations where robots do
not explicitly share their intentions. Two different vari-
ations of the credit assignment problem are common in
multirobot learning. The ﬁrst is when robots are learn-
ing individual behaviors in the presence of other robots
that can affect their performance. The second is when
robots are attempting to learn a task with a shared ﬁt-
ness function. It can be difﬁcult to determine how to
decompose the ﬁtness function to appropriately reward
or penalize the contributions of individual robots.
While learning has been explored extensively in
the area of single-robot systems (see, for example,
the discussion of learning in behavior-based systems
in Chap. 13, and a discussion of fundamental learn-
ing techniques in Chap. 15) and in multiagent sys-
tems [53.280], much less work has been done in the area
of multirobot learning, although the topic is gaining in-
creased interest. Much of the work to date has focused
on reinforcement learning approaches. Some examples
of this multirobot learning research include the work by
Asada et al. [53.281], who propose a method for learn-
ing new behaviors by coordinating previously learned
behaviors using Q-learning, and apply it to soccer-
playing robots. Matari´c [53.8] introduces a method
for combining basic behaviors into higher-level be-
haviors through the use of unsupervised reinforcement
learning, heterogeneous reward functions, and progress
estimators. This mechanism was applied to a team
of robots learning to perform a foraging task. Kubo
and Kakazu [53.282] proposed another reinforcement
learning mechanism that uses a progress value for
determining reinforcement, and applied it to simu-
lated ant colonies competing for food. Fernandez and
Parker [53.272] apply a reinforcement learning algo-
rithm that combines supervised function approximation
with generalization methods based on state-space dis-
cretization, and apply it to robots learning the multi-
object tracking problem. Bowling and Veloso [53.271]
developed a general-purpose, scalable learning algo-
rithm called GraWoLF (gradient-based win or learn
fast), which combines gradient-based policy learning

Part E | 53.10
1362
Part E
Moving in the Environment
techniques with a variable learning rate, and demon-
strated the results in the adversarial multirobot soccer
application.
Other multirobot learning approaches not based on
reinforcement include Parker’s L-ALLIANCE archi-
tecture [53.10], which uses parameter tuning, based on
statistical experience data, to learn the ﬁtness of differ-
ent heterogeneous robots in performing a set of tasks.
Pugh and Martinoli [53.279] apply particle swarm op-
timization techniques to distributed unsupervised robot
learning in groups, for the task of learning obstacle
avoidance.
53.10 Applications
Many real-world applications can potentially bene-
ﬁt from the use of multiple mobile robot systems.
Example applications include container management
in ports [53.283], extraplanetary exploration [53.284],
search and rescue [53.241], mineral mining, transporta-
tion, industrial and household maintenance, construc-
tion [53.11], hazardous waste cleanup [53.9], secu-
rity [53.285, 286], agriculture, and warehouse manage-
ment [53.287] (
VIDEO 210 ). Multiple robot systems
are also used in the domain of localization, map-
ping, and exploration; Chap. 46 mentions some of the
work in multirobot systems applied to these problems.
Parts F and G of this handbook outline many appli-
cation areas that are relevant not only to single-robot
systems, but also to multiple mobile robot systems.
To date, relatively few real-world implementations of
these multirobot systems have occurred, primarily due
to the complexities of multiple robot systems and the
relative newness of the supporting technologies. Nev-
ertheless, many proof-of-principle demonstrations of
physical multirobot systems have been achieved, and
the expectation is that these systems will ﬁnd their way
into practical implementations as the technology con-
tinues to mature.
Research in multiple mobile robot systems is often
explored in the context of common application test do-
mains. While not yet elevated to the level of benchmark
tasks, these common domains do provide opportuni-
ties for researchers to compare and contrast alterna-
tive strategies to multirobot control. Additionally, even
though these common test domains are usually just
laboratory experiments, they do have relevance to real-
world applications. This section outlines these common
application domains; see also [53.2] and [53.288] for
a discussion of these domains and a more detailed list-
ing of related research.
53.10.1 Foraging and Coverage
Foraging is a popular testing application for multirobot
systems, particularly for those approaches that address
swarm robotics, involving very large numbers of mobile
robots. In the foraging domain, objects such as pucks
or simulated food pellets are distributed across the pla-
nar terrain, and robots are tasked with collecting the
objects and delivering them to one or more gathering
locations, such as a home base. Foraging lends itself to
the study of weakly cooperative robot systems, in that
the actions of individual robots do not have to be tightly
synchronized with each other. This task has tradition-
ally been of interest in multirobot systems because of
its close analogy to the biological systems that motivate
swarm robotics research. However, it also has relevance
to several real-world applications, such as toxic waste
cleanup, search and rescue, and demining. Additionally,
since foraging usually requires robots to completely ex-
plore their terrain in order to discover the objects of
interest, the coverage domain has similar issues to the
foraging application. In coverage, robots are required
to visit all areas of their environment, perhaps search-
ing for objects (such as landmines) or executing some
action in all parts of the environment (e.g., for ﬂoor
cleaning). The coverage application also has real-world
relevance to tasks such as demining, lawn care, environ-
mental mapping, and agriculture.
In foraging and coverage applications, a fundamen-
tal question is how to enable the robots to explore their
environments quickly without duplicating actions or in-
terfering with each other. Alternative strategies can in-
clude basic stigmergy [53.14], forming chains [53.120],
and making use of heterogeneous robots [53.131].
Other research demonstrated in the foraging and/or cov-
erage domain includes [53.23, 132, 289–294].
53.10.2 Flocking and Formations
Coordinating the motions of robots relative to each
other has been a topic of interest in multiple mobile
robot systems since the inception of the ﬁeld. In particu-
lar, much attention has been paid to the ﬂocking and for-
mation control problems (
VIDEO 217 ,
VIDEO 293 ).
The ﬂocking problem could be viewed as a subcase
of the formation control problem, requiring robots to
move together along some path in the aggregate, but
with only minimal requirements for paths taken by spe-
ciﬁc robots. Formations are stricter, requiring robots to

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
53.10 Applications
1363
Part E | 53.10
maintain certain relative positions as they move through
the environment. In these problems, robots are assumed
to have only minimal sensing, computation, effector,
and communications capabilities. A key question in
both ﬂocking and formation control research is deter-
mining the design of local control laws for each robot
that generate the desired emergent collective behavior.
Other issues include how robots cooperatively localize
themselves to achieve formation control [53.133, 295],
and how paths can be planned for permutation-invariant
multirobot formations [53.296].
Early solutions to the ﬂocking problem in artiﬁ-
cial agents were generated by Reynolds [53.297] using
a rule-based approach. Similar behavior- or rule-based
approaches have been used physical robot demonstra-
tions and studies, such as in [53.121, 298]. These earlier
solutions were based on human-generated local con-
trol rules that were demonstrated to work in practice.
More recent work is based on control theoretic princi-
ples, with a focus on proving stability and convergence
properties in multirobot team behaviors. Examples of
this work include [53.128, 299–307]. Refer to [53.308,
309] for surveys of relevant control theoretic work.
53.10.3 Object Transportation
and Cooperative Manipulation
Some of the earliest work in swarm robotics was aimed
at the object transportation task [53.13, 123, 310–313],
which requires a team of robots to move an object
from its current position in the environment to some
goal destination (
VIDEO 193 ). The primary beneﬁt
of using collective robots for this task is that the indi-
vidual robots can combine forces to move objects that
are too heavy for individual robots working alone or in
small teams. However, the task is not without its chal-
lenges; it is non-trivial to design decentralized robot
control algorithms that can effectively coordinate robot
team members during object transportation. A further
complication is that the interaction dynamics of the
robots with the object can be sensitive to certain object
geometries [53.314, 315] and object rotations during
transportation [53.315], thus exacerbating the control
problem.
Object transportation
and cooperative manipula-
tion are popular domains for demonstrating multirobot
cooperation, because they offer a clear domain where
close coordination and cooperation is required. A com-
mon type of object transportation – box pushing –
requires robot teams to move boxes from their start-
ing positions to deﬁned goal conﬁgurations, sometimes
along speciﬁed paths. Typically, box pushing operates
in the plane, and the assumption is made that the boxes
are too heavy or too long to enable single robots to
push alone. Sometimes there are several boxes to be
moved, with ordering dependencies constraining the
sequence of motions. Cooperative manipulation is sim-
ilar, except it requires robots to lift and carry objects
to a destination. This test bed domain lends itself to
the study of strongly cooperative multirobot strategies,
since robots often have to synchronize their actions to
successfully execute these tasks. The domain of box
pushing and cooperative manipulation is also popular
because it has relevance to several real-world appli-
cations [53.288], including warehouse stocking, truck
loading and unloading, transporting large objects in
industrial environments, and assembly of large-scale
structures.
Researchers usually emphasize different aspects of
their cooperative control approach in the box push-
ing and cooperative manipulation domain. For example,
Kube and Zhang [53.13] (
VIDEO 199 ) demonstrate
how swarm-type cooperative control techniques could
achieve box pushing (Fig. 53.15), Parker [53.10, 316]
illustrates aspects of adaptive task allocation and learn-
ing, Donald et al. [53.317] (
VIDEO 208 ) illustrates
concepts of information invariance and the interchange-
ability of sensing, communication, and control, and
Simmons et al. [53.11] demonstrate the feasibility of co-
operative control for building planetary habitats.
In general, the manipulation techniques used for
collective object transportation can be grouped into
three primary methods [53.318]: pushing, grasping, and
caging. The pushing approach [53.10, 11, 13, 316, 317]
requires contact between each robot and the object, in
order to impart force in the goal direction; however,
the robots are not physically connected with the ob-
ject. In the grasping approach [53.123, 142, 310–312,
319–322], each robot in the team physically attaches to
the object being transported. See for example Fig. 53.16
Fig. 53.15 Collective pushing of lighted box

Part E | 53.10
1364
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Fig. 53.16 Cooperative stick pulling
Fig. 53.17 Collective transport via caging
for cooperative stick pulling work of [53.320]. Finally,
the caging approach [53.323–326] (
VIDEO 292 ) in-
volves robots encircling the object so that the object
moves in the desired direction, even without the con-
stant contact of all the robots with the object. See
Fig. 53.17 for an example of collective transport via
caging, from [53.323].
A closely related task is that of collective construc-
tion and wall building. The objective of the collective
construction and wall building task is for robots to
build structures of a speciﬁed form, in either 2-D or
3-D. This task is distinguished from self-reconﬁgurable
robots, whose bodies themselves serve as the dynamic
structure. Werfel and Nagpal have extensively explored
this topic (
VIDEO 216 ), developing distributed algo-
rithms that enable simpliﬁed robots to build structures
based on provided blueprints, both in 2-D [53.327–329]
and in 3-D [53.330]. In their 3-D approach, the sys-
tem consists of idealized mobile robots that perform
the construction, and smart blocks that serve as the pas-
sive structure. The robots’ job is to provide the mobility,
while the blocks’ role is to identify places in the grow-
ing structure at which an additional block can be placed
that is on the path toward obtaining the desired ﬁnal
structure. The goal of their work is to be able to deploy
some number of robots and free blocks into a construc-
tion zone, along with a single block that serves as a seed
for the structure, and then have the construction to pro-
ceed autonomously according to the provided blueprint
of the desired structure.
Hardware challenges of collective robot construc-
tion are addressed by Terada and Murata [53.331]. In
this work, a hardware design is proposed that deﬁnes
passive building blocks, along with an assembler robot
that constructs structures with the robots. Other related
work on the topic of collective construction includes the
work of Wawerla et al. [53.332], in which robots use
a behavior-based approach to build a linear wall using
blocks equipped with either positive or negative Velcro,
distinguished by block color. Their results show that
adding 1 bit of state information to communicate the
color of the last attached block provides a signiﬁcant
improvement in the collective performance. The work
by Stewart and Russell [53.333, 334] proposes a dis-
tributed approach to building a loose wall structure with
a robot swarm.
Another type of construction is called blind bull-
dozing, which is inspired by a behavior observed in
certain ant colonies. Rather than constructing by accu-
mulating materials, this approach achieves construction
by removing materials. This task has practical appli-
cation in site clearing, such as would be needed for
planetary exploration [53.335]. Early ideas of this con-
cept were discussed by Brooks et al. in [53.336], which
argues for large numbers of small robots to be deliv-
ered to the lunar surface for site preparation. Parker
et al. [53.337], further develop this idea by proposing
robots using force sensors to clear an area by pushing
material to the edges of the work site.
A signiﬁcant body of additional research has been
illustrated in this domain; representative examples in-
clude [53.3, 6, 123, 258, 284, 310, 323, 338–344].
53.10.4 Multitarget Observation
The domain of multitarget observation requires mul-
tiple robots to monitor and/or observe multiple tar-
gets moving through the environment. The objective
is to maximize the amount of time, or the likeli-
hood, that the targets remain in view by some team
member throughout task execution. The task can be
especially challenging if there are more targets than
robots. This application domain can be useful for study-
ing strongly cooperative task solutions, since robots
have to coordinate their motions or the switching of
targets to follow in order to maximize their objective.
In the context of multiple mobile robot applications,
the planar version of this test bed was ﬁrst introduced

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
53.10 Applications
1365
Part E | 53.10
in [53.345] as cooperative multirobot observation of
multiple moving targets (CMOMMT). Similar prob-
lems have been studied by several researchers, and
extended to more complex problems such as environ-
ments with complex topography or three-dimensional
versions for multiple aerial vehicle applications. This
domain is also related to problems in other areas, such
as art gallery algorithms, pursuit evasion, and sen-
sor coverage. This domain has practical application in
many security, surveillance, and reconnaissance prob-
lems. Research applied to the multitarget observation
problem in multirobot systems includes [53.138, 253,
346–353].
53.10.5 Traffic Control and Multirobot Path
Planning
When multiple robots are operating in a shared envi-
ronment, they must coordinate their actions to prevent
interference. These problems typically arise when the
space in which robots operate contains bottlenecks,
such as networks of roadways, or when the robots take
up a relatively large portion of the navigable space.
In these problems, the open space can be viewed as
a resource that robots must share as efﬁciently as possi-
ble, avoiding collisions and deadlocks. In this domain,
robots usually have their own individual goals, and must
work with other robots to ensure that they receive use of
the shared space to the extent needed to achieve their
goals. In some variants, the entire paths of multiple
robots need to be coordinated with each other; in other
variants, robots must simply avoid interfering with each
other.
A variety of techniques have been introduced to ad-
dress this problem, including trafﬁc rules, subdividing
the environment into single-ownership sections, and ge-
ometric path planning ([53.354] for an overview). Many
of the earliest research approaches to this problem were
based on heuristic approaches, such as predeﬁning mo-
tion control (or trafﬁc) rules that were shown to prevent
deadlock [53.355–358], or using techniques similar to
mutual exclusion in distributed computing [53.359,
360]. These approaches have the beneﬁt of minimiz-
ing the planning cost for obtaining a solution. Other,
more formal, techniques view the application as a ge-
ometric multirobot path planning problem that can be
solved precisely in conﬁguration space–time. Chapter 7
includes a discussion of motion planning for multiple
robots relevant to this domain. While geometric motion
planning approaches provide the most general solu-
tions, they can often be too computationally intensive
for practical application, impractical due to the dy-
namic nature of the environment, or simply unnecessary
Fig. 53.18 Legged robot teams competing in robot soccer
for the problem at hand. In these cases, approxima-
tion approaches may be sufﬁcient, such as centralized
techniques that limit the search space through roadmap-
ping [53.361, 362], and decoupled approaches that use
either prioritized planning [53.363–365] (i. e., generat-
ing robot paths one by one) or path coordination (i. e.,
ﬁrst planning individual paths for robots, then handling
collision avoidance).
53.10.6 Soccer
Since the inception of the RoboCup multirobot soc-
cer domain as a proposed challenge problem for
studying coordination and control in multirobot sys-
tems [53.366], research in this domain has grown
tremendously. This domain incorporates many chal-
lenging aspects of multirobot control, including col-
laboration, robot control architectures, strategy acqui-
sition, real-time reasoning and action, sensor fusion,
dealing with adversarial environments, cognitive mod-
eling, and learning. Annual competitions show the
ever-improving team capabilities of the robots in a var-
iety of settings, as shown in Fig. 53.18. A key aspect
of this domain that is not present in the other mul-
tirobot test domains is that robots must operate in
adversarial environments. This domain is also pop-
ular because of its educational beneﬁts, as it brings
together students and researchers from across the
world in competitions to win the RoboCup chal-
lenges. The RoboCup competitions have added an
additional search-and-rescue category to the competi-
tion [53.367], which has also become a signiﬁcant area
of research (Chap. 66 for more details on this ﬁeld).
Annual proceedings of the RoboCup competitions
document much of the research that is incorporated
into the multirobot soccer teams. Some representative
research works include [53.368–372] (
VIDEO 202 ,
VIDEO 209 ).

Part E | 53.11
1366
Part E
Moving in the Environment
53.11 Conclusions and Further Reading
This chapter has surveyed the current state of the art
in multirobot systems, examining architectures, com-
munications issues, swarm robot systems, heteroge-
neous teams, task allocation, learning, and applications.
Clearly, signiﬁcant advances have been made in the
ﬁeld in the last decade. The ﬁeld is still an active area
of research, however, since many open research issues
still remain to be solved. Key open research questions
remain in the broad areas of system integration, robust-
ness, learning, scalability, generalization, and dealing
with heterogeneity.
For example, in the area of system integration, an
open question is how to effectively allow robot teams
to combine a spectrum of approaches toward achieving
complete systems that can perform more than a limited
set of tasks. We are a long way from creating ro-
bust robot networks that can perform physical tasks
in the real world. In the area of robustness, multi-
robot teams still need improvements in the ability to
degrade gracefully, to reason for fault tolerance, and
to achieve complexity without escalating failure rates.
The area of learning in multirobot teams is still in its
infancy, with open questions including how to achieve
continual learning in multirobot teams, how to facilitate
the use of complex representations, and how to en-
able humans to inﬂuence and/or understand the results
of the team learning. Scalability is still a challeng-
ing problem, in terms of more complex environments
as well as ever-larger numbers of robots. We do not
yet have a methodology for creating self-organizing
robot networks that are robust to labeling (or num-
bering), with completely decentralized controllers and
estimators, and with provable emergent response. This
requires basic research at the intersection of control,
perception, and communication. Open issues in gen-
eralization include enabling the robot team to reason
about context and increasing the versatility of systems
so that they can operate in a variety of different appli-
cations. In dealing with heterogeneity, open questions
include determining theoretical approaches to predict-
ing system performance when all robots are not equal,
and determining how to design a robot team optimally
for a given application. Advances over the last decade
have provided human users with the ability to inter-
act with hundreds or thousands of computers on the
Internet. It is necessary to develop similar network-
centric approaches to interfacing, both for control and
for monitoring. Finally, a major challenge is to create
systems that are proactive and anticipate our needs and
commands rather than reacting (with delays) to human
commands.
For further reading on the topic of multiple mobile
robot systems, the reader is referred to survey articles
in the ﬁeld, including [53.2, 288, 373, 374]. Addition-
ally, several special journal issues on this topic have
appeared, including [53.1, 375–377]. Some taxonomies
of multirobot systems are given in [53.26, 288, 378].
A variety of symposia and workshops have been held
on a regular basis on the topic of multirobot systems,
in particular the DARS (distributed autonomous robotic
systems) series of symposia. Recent proceedings of
these workshops and symposia include [53.379–388].
Additional texts on this topic include [53.389–391].
For some excellent further background on networked
robotics we direct the reader to [53.31, 35, 46, 52, 55,
75, 90, 104].
Video-References
VIDEO 192
Agents at play: Off-the-shelf software for practical multi-robot applications
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/192
VIDEO 193
Handling of a single object by multiple mobile robots based on caster-like dynamics
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/193
VIDEO 194
Synchronization and fault detection in autonomous robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/194
VIDEO 195
Self-assembly and morphology control in a swarm-bot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/195
VIDEO 196
CKBOTS reconfigurable robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/196
VIDEO 197
Biologically inspired multi vehicles control algorithm
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/197
VIDEO 198
Metamorphic robotic system
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/198
VIDEO 199
Multi-robot box pushing
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/199

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
References
1367
Part E | 53
VIDEO 200
Elements of cooperative behavior in autonomous mobile robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/200
VIDEO 201
Coordination of multiple mobile platforms for manipulation and transportation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/201
VIDEO 202
Robots in games and competition
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/202
VIDEO 203
A robotic reconnaissance and surveillance team
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/203
VIDEO 204
MARS (multiple autonomous robots)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/204
VIDEO 205
A method for transporting a team of miniature robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/205
VIDEO 206
Reconfigurable multi-agents with distributed sensing for robust mobile robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/206
VIDEO 207
Miniature air vehicle cooperative timing missions
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/207
VIDEO 208
Distributed manipulation with mobile robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/208
VIDEO 209
Autonomous robot soccer – Through the wormhole with Morgan Freeman
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/209
VIDEO 210
A day in the life of a Kiva robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/210
VIDEO 211
Robot Pebbles – MIT developing self-sculpting smart sand robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/211
VIDEO 212
Transport of a child by swarm-bots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/212
VIDEO 213
Towards a swarm of nano quadrotors
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/213
VIDEO 214
Swarm robotics at CU-Boulder
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/214
VIDEO 215
Swarm robot system
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/215
VIDEO 216
Swarm construction robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/216
VIDEO 217
Multi robot formation control – Khepera team
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/217
VIDEO 292
Experiments of escorting a target
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/292
VIDEO 293
Formation control via a distributed controller-observer
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/53/videodetails/293
References
53.1
T. Arai, E. Pagello, L.E. Parker: Editorial: Advances
in multi-robot systems, IEEE Trans. Robotics Au-
tom. 18(5), 655–661 (2002)
53.2
Y. Cao, A. Fukunaga, A. Kahng: Cooperative mo-
bile robotics: Antecedents and directions, Auton.
Robots 4, 1–23 (1997)
53.3
R.G. Brown, J.S. Jennings: A pusher/steerer model
for strongly cooperative mobile robot manipula-
tion, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (1995)
pp. 562–568
53.4
D. Milutinović, P. Lima: Modeling and optimal
centralized control of a large-size robotic pop-
ulation, IEEE Trans. Robotics 22(6), 1280–1285
(2006)
53.5
B. Khoshnevis, G.A. Bekey: Centralized sensing
and control of multiple mobile robots, Comput.
Ind. Eng. 35(3/4), 503–506 (1998)
53.6
M.J. Matarić: Issues and approaches in the design
of collective autonomous agents, Robotics Auton.
Syst. 16, 321–331 (1995)
53.7
E. Ostergaard, G.S. Sukhatme, M.J. Matarić: Emer-
gent bucket brigading, 5th Int. Conf. Auton.
Agents (2001)
53.8
M. Matarić: Reinforcement learning in the multi-
robot domain, Auton. Robots 4, 73–83 (1997)
53.9
L.E. Parker: ALLIANCE: An architecture for fault-
tolerant multi-robot cooperation, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 14(2), 220–240 (1998)
53.10
L.E. Parker: Lifelong adaptation in heterogeneous
teams: Response to continual variation in in-
dividual robot performance, Auton. Robots 8(3),
239–267 (2000)
53.11
R. Simmons, S. Singh, D. Hershberger, J. Ramos,
T. Smith: First results in the coordination of het-

Part E | 53
1368
Part E
Moving in the Environment
erogeneous robots for large-scale assembly, Proc.
ISER 7th Int. Symp. Exp. Robotics (2000)
53.12
J. Deneubourg, S. Goss, G. Sandini, F. Ferrari,
P. Dario: Self-organizing collection and transport
of objects in unpredictable environments, Jpn.-
USA Symp. Flex. Autom. (1990) pp. 1093–1098
53.13
C.R. Kube, H. Zhang: Collective robotics: From so-
cial insects to robots, Adapt. Behav. 2(2), 189–219
(1993)
53.14
R. Beckers, O. Holland, J. Deneubourg: From local
actions to global tasks: Stigmergy and collective
robotics, Proc. 14th Int. Workshop Synth. Simul.
Living Syst. (1994) pp. 181–189
53.15
S. Onn, M. Tennenholtz: Determination of social
laws for multi-agent mobilization, Artif. Intell.
95, 155–167 (1997)
53.16
B.B. Werger: Cooperation without deliberation:
A minimal behavior-based approach to multi-
robot teams, Artif. Intell. 110(2), 293–320 (1999)
53.17
M.J. Huber, E. Durfee: Deciding when to commit
to action during observation-based coordina-
tion, Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Multi-Agent Syst. (1995)
pp. 163–170
53.18
H. Asama, K. Ozaki, A. Matsumoto, Y. Ishida,
I. Endo: Development of task assignment sys-
tem
using
communication
for multiple
au-
tonomous robots, J. Robotics Mechatron. 4(2),
122–127 (1992)
53.19
N. Jennings: Controlling cooperative problem
solving in industrial multi-agent systems us-
ing joint intentions, Artif. Intell. 75(2), 195–240
(1995)
53.20
M. Tambe: Towards flexible teamwork, J. Artif. In-
tell. Res. 7, 83–124 (1997)
53.21
R.T. Vaughan, K. Stoy, G.S. Sukhatme, M.J. Mata-
rić: LOST: Localization-space trails for robot teams,
IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 18(5), 796–812 (2002)
53.22
L.E. Parker: The Effect of action recognition and
robot awareness in cooperative robotic teams,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (1995)
pp. 212–219
53.23
M. Matarić: Behavior-based control: Examples
from navigation, learning, and group behavior,
J. Exp. Theor. Artif. Intell. 19(2/3), 323–336 (1997)
53.24
B. MacLennan, G.M. Burghardt: Synthetic ethol-
ogy and the evolution of cooperative communi-
cation, Adapt. Behav. 2, 161–188 (1993)
53.25
T. Balch, R.C. Arkin: Communiation in reactive
multiagent robotic systems, Auton. Robots 1(1),
27–52 (1995)
53.26
G. Dudek, M. Jenkin, E. Milios, D. Wilkes: A tax-
onomy for multi-agent robotics, Auton. Robots 3,
375–397 (1996)
53.27
Z. Butler, K. Kotay, D.L. Rus, M. Vona: Self-recon-
figuring robots, Commun. ACM 45(3), 39–45 (2002)
53.28
O. Khatib, K. Yokoi, K. Chang, D. Ruspini, R. Holm-
berg, A. Casal: Coordination and decentralized
cooperation of multiple mobile manipulators,
J. Robotic Syst. 13(11), 755–764 (1996)
53.29
L.E. Parker: The effect of heterogeneity in teams of
100+ mobile robots. In: Multi-Robot Systems Vol-
ume II: From Swarms to Intelligent Automata, ed.
by A. Schultz, L.E. Parker, F. Schneider (Kluwer,
Dordrecht 2003)
53.30
M. Yim, Y. Zhang, D. Duff: Modular robots, IEEE
Spectrum 39(22), 30–34 (2002)
53.31
D.
Estrin:
Embedded,
Everywhere
(National
Academies Press, Washington 2001)
53.32
J. Parrish, S. Viscido, D. Grünbaum: Self-organized
fish schools: An examination of emergent prop-
erties, Biol. Bull. 202, 296–305 (2002)
53.33
N.
Franks,
S.
Pratt,
E.
Mallon,
N.
Britton,
D. Sumpter: Information flow, opinion polling
and collective intelligence in house-hunting so-
cial insects, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 357, 1567–1584
(2002)
53.34
R.L. Jeanne: Group size, productivity, and in-
formation flow in social wasps. In: Information
Processing in Social Insects, ed. by C. Detrain,
J.M. Pasteels, J.L. Deneubourg (Birkhauser, Basel
1999)
53.35
T. Akimoto, N. Hagita: Introduction to a network
robot system, IEEE Int. Symp. Intell. Signal Proc.
Comm. (2006)
53.36
Argo Floats: A global array of 3000 Free-Drifting
Profiling Floats for Environmental Monitoring
(Argo Information Center, Ramonville 2007)
53.37
G.S. Sukhatme, A. Dhariwal, B. Zhang, C. Oberg,
B. Stauffer, D.A. Caron: The design and devel-
opment of a wireless robotic networked aquatic
microbial observing system, Environ. Eng. Sci.
24(2), 205–215 (2006)
53.38
W. Kaiser, G. Pottie, M. Srivastava, G.S. Sukhatme,
J. Villasenor, D. Estrin: Networked infomechanical
systems (NIMS) for ambient intelligence. In: Am-
bient Intelligence, ed. by W. Weber, J.M. Rabaey,
E. Aarts (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2005)
53.39
Amarss: Networked Minirhizotron Planning and
Initial Deployment (Center for Embedded Net-
workedsensing, Los Angeles 2007)
53.40
H. Singh, J. Catipovic, R. Eastwood, L. Freitag,
H. Henriksen, F.F. Hover, D. Yoerger, J.G. Belling-
ham, B.A. Moran: An integrated approach to mul-
tiple AUV communications, navigation and dock-
ing, MTS/IEEE Conf. Proc. OCEANS (1996) pp. 59–64
53.41
I. Vasilescu, M. Dunbabin, P. Corke, K. Kotay,
D. Rus: Data collection, storage, and retrieval with
an underwater sensor network, Proc. ACM Sens.
Syst. (2005)
53.42
N. Leonard, D. Paley, F. Lekien, R. Sepulchre,
D.M. Fratantoni, R. Davis: Collective motion, sen-
sor networks and ocean sampling, Proc. IEEE
95(1), 48–74 (2006)
53.43
D.O.
Popa,
A.S.
Sanderson,
R.J.
Komerska,
S.S. Mupparapu, D.R. Blidberg, S.G. Chappell:
Adaptive
sampling
algorithms
for
multiple
autonomous
underwater
vehicles,
IEEE/OES
AUV2004: A Workshop Multiple Auton. Underw.
Veh. Oper. (2004)
53.44
L.
Chaimowicz,
A.
Cowley,
B.
Grocholsky,
M.A. Hsieh, J.F. Keller, V. Kumar, C.J. Taylor:
Deploying
air-ground
multi-robot
teams
in
urban
environments,
3rd
Multi-Robot
Syst.
Workshop (2005)

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
References
1369
Part E | 53
53.45
B. Grocholsky, R. Swaminathan, J. Keller, V. Ku-
mar, G. Pappas: Information driven coordinated
air-ground proactive sensing, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
53.46
A. Howard, L.E. Parker, G.S. Sukhatme: Experi-
ments with a large heterogeneous mobile robot
team: Exploration, mapping, deployment and
detection, Int. J. Robotics Res. 25(5/6), 431–447
(2006)
53.47
D. Fox, J. Ko, K. Konolige, B. Limketkai, D. Schulz,
B. Stewart: Distributed multirobot exploration
and mapping, Proc. IEEE 94(7), 1325–1339 (2006)
53.48
M.A. Hsieh, A. Cowley, J.F. Keller, L. Chaimow-
icz, B. Grocholsky, V. Kumar, C.J. Talyor, Y. Endo,
R.
Arkin,
B.
Jung,
D.
Wolf,
G.
Sukhatme,
D.C. MacKenzie: Adaptive teams of autonomous
aerial and ground robots for situational aware-
ness, J. Field Robotics 24(11/12), 991–1014 (2007)
53.49
J. Seyfied, M. Szymanski, N. Bender, R. Estana,
M. Theil, H. Worn: The I-swarm project: Intelli-
gent small world autonomous robots for micro-
manipulation, SAB 2004 Int. Workshop (2004)
53.50
F.
Mondada,
G.C.
Pettinaro,
A.
Guignard,
I.W.
Kwee,
D.
Floreano,
J.-L.
Deneubourg,
S. Nofli, L.M. Gambardella, M. Dorigo: Swarm-
Bot: A new distributed robotic concept, Auton.
Robots 17, 193–221 (2004)
53.51
A. Ollero, S. Lacroix, L. Merino, J. Gancet, J. Wik-
lund, V. Remuss, I. Veiga, L.G. Gutierrez, D.X. Vie-
gas, M.A. Gonzalez, A. Mallet, R. Alami, R. Chatila,
G. Hommel, F.J. Colmenero, B. Arrue, J. Ferruz,
R. Martinez de Dios, F. Caballero: Architecture
and perception issues in the COMETS multi-UAV
project, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 12(2), 46–57
(2005)
53.52
Q. Li, D. Rus: Navigation protocols in sensor net-
works, ACM Trans. Sens. Netw. 1(1), 3–35 (2005)
53.53
R. Bajcsy: Active perception, Proc. IEEE 76, 996–
1005 (1988)
53.54
T. Eren, D. Goldenberg, W. Whitley, Y.R. Yang,
S. Morse, B.D.O. Anderson, P.N. Belhumeur: Rigid-
ity, computation, and randomization of network
localization, Proc. IEEE INFOCOM (2004)
53.55
A. Hsieh, A. Cowley, V. Kumar, C.J. Taylor: Towards
the deployment of a mobile robot network with
end-to-end performance guarantees, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006)
53.56
B. Grocholsky, S. Bayraktar, V. Kumar, C.J. Taylor,
G. Pappas: Synergies in feature localization by air-
ground teams, Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Exp. Robotics
(2004)
53.57
B. Grocholsky, E. Stump, V. Kumar: An extensive
representation for range-only SLAM, Int. Symp.
Exp. Robotics (2006)
53.58
A. Howard, M.J. Matarić, G.S. Sukhatme: An in-
cremental self-deployment algorithm for mo-
bile sensor networks, Auton. Robots 13(2), 113–126
(2002)
53.59
Z. Butler, D. Rus: Controlling mobile networks
for monitoring events with coverage constraints,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2003)
53.60
M. Chu, J. Reich, F. Zhao: Distributed attention
for large video sensor networks, Intell. Distrib.
Surveill. Syst. Semin (2004)
53.61
B. Jung, G.S. Sukhatme: Tracking targets using
multiple robots: The effect of environment occlu-
sion, Auton. Robots 13(3), 191–205 (2002)
53.62
R.M. Murray, K.J. Åström, S.P. Boyd, R.W. Brockett,
G. Stein: Future directions in control in an infor-
mation-rich world, IEEE Control Syst. Mag. (2003)
53.63
A. Pant, P. Seiler, K. Hedrick: Mesh stability of
look-ahead interconnected systems, IEEE Trans.
Autom. Control 47, 403–407 (2002)
53.64
T. Sugar, J. Desai, V. Kumar, J.P. Ostrowski: Coor-
dination of multiple mobile manipulators, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2001)
pp. 3022–3027
53.65
R.W. Beard, J. Lawton, F.Y. Hadaegh: A coordi-
nation architecture for spacecraft formation con-
trol, IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol. 9, 777–790
(2001)
53.66
A. Das, J. Spletzer, V. Kumar, C. Taylor: Ad hoc net-
works for localization and control, Proc. IEEE Conf.
Decis. Control (2002) pp. 2978–2983
53.67
J. Manyika, H. Durrant-Whyte: Data Fusion and
Sensor Management: An Information-Theoretic
Approach (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River 1994)
53.68
H.G. Tanner, A. Jadbabaie, G.J. Pappas: Stable
flocking of mobile agents, Part I: Fixed topology,
Proc. IEEE Conf. Decis. Control (2003) pp. 2010–2015
53.69
J.M. Fowler, R. D’Andrea: Distributed control of
close formation flight, Proc. IEEE Conf. Decis. Con-
trol (2002) pp. 2972–2977
53.70
J.P. Desai, J.P. Ostrowski, V. Kumar: Modeling and
control of formations of nonholonomic mobile
robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 17(6), 905–
908 (2001)
53.71
H.G. Tanner, V. Kumar, G.J. Pappas: Leader-to-
formation stability, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
20(3), 443–455 (2004)
53.72
S. Loizou, V. Kumar: Relaxed input to state sta-
bility properties for navigation function based
systems, Proc. IEEE Conf. Decis. Control (2006)
53.73
M. Batalin, G.S. Sukhatme: Coverage, exploration
and deployment by a mobile robot and com-
munication network, Telecommun. Syst. J. 26(2),
181–196 (2004)
53.74
K.J. O’hara, V. Bigio, S. Whitt, D. Walker, T.R. Balch:
Evaluation of a large scale pervasive embedded
network for robot path planning, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 2072–
2077
53.75
V. Kumar, N. Leonard, A.S. Morse (Eds.): Cooper-
ative control, Lecture Notes in Control and Infor-
mation Sciences, Vol. 309 (Springer, Berlin, Hei-
delberg 2004)
53.76
J. Chen, S. Teller, H. Balakrishnan: Pervasive pose-
aware applications and infrastructure, IEEE Com-
put. Graph. Appl. 23(4), 14–18 (2003)
53.77
A. Savvides, C.-C. Han, M. Srivastava: Dynamic
fine-grained localization in ad-hoc networks of
sensors, Proc. 7th Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Com-
put. Netw. (MOBICOM-01) (2001) pp. 166–179

Part E | 53
1370
Part E
Moving in the Environment
53.78
D. Moore, J. Leonard, D. Rus, S.J. Teller: Robust
distributed network localization with noisy range
measurements, Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Embed. Netw.
Sens. Syst. (SenSys) (2004) pp. 50–61
53.79
C. Detweiler, J. Leonard, D. Rus, S. Teller: Passive
mobile robot localization within a fixed bea-
con field, Proc. Int. Workshop Algorithmic Found.
Robotics (2006)
53.80
N. Bulusu, J. Heidemann, D. Estrin: Adaptive bea-
con placement, Proc. 21st Int. Conf. Distrib. Com-
put. Syst. (ICDCS-01) (2001) pp. 489–498
53.81
S.N. Simic, S. Sastry: Distributed Localization in
Wireless ad hoc Networks, Tech. Rep. UCB/ERL
M02/26
(2001),
http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/
Pubs/TechRpts/2002/4010.html
53.82
P. Corke, R. Peterson, D. Rus: Communication-as-
sisted localization and navigation for networked
robots, Int. J. Robotics Res. 4(9), 116 (2005)
53.83
R. Nagpal, H.E. Shrobe, J. Bachrach: Organizing
a global coordinate system from local information
on an ad hoc sensor network, Lect. Notes Comput.
Sci. 2634, 333–348 (2003)
53.84
R.K.
Williams,
A.
Gasparri,
A.
Priolo,
G.S. Sukhatme: Evaluating network rigidity in re-
alistic systems: Decentralization, asynchronicity,
and parallelization, IEEE Trans. Robotics 30(4),
950–965 (2014)
53.85
A. Howard, M.J. Matarić, G.S. Sukhatme: Putting
the ‘i’ in ‘team’: An ego-centric approach to
cooperative localization, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2003) pp. 868–892
53.86
A. Howard, M.J. Matarić, G.S. Sukhatme: Local-
ization for mobile robot teams using maximum
likelihood estimation, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (2002) pp. 434–459
53.87
R. Vidal, O. Shakernia, H.J. Kim, D.H. Shim, S. Sas-
try: Probabilistic pursuit-evasion games: Theory,
implementation and experimental evaluation,
IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 18(5), 662–669 (2002)
53.88
M. Batalin, M.H. Rahimi, Y. Yu, D. Liu, A. Kansal,
G.S. Sukhatme, W. Kaiser, M. Hansen, G. Pottie,
M. Srivastava, D. Estrin: Call and response: Exper-
iments in sampling the environment, Proc. 2nd
Int. Conf. Embed. Netw. Sens. Syst. (SenSys) (2004)
pp. 25–38
53.89
M.H. Rahimi, W. Kaiser, G.S. Sukhatme, D. Estrin:
Adaptive sampling for environmental field esti-
mation using robotic sensors, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (2005) pp. 747–753
53.90
F. Zhao, L. Guibas: Wireless Sensor Networks: An
Information Processing Approach (Morgan Kauf-
mann, New York 2004)
53.91
F. Zhang, B. Grocholsky, V. Kumar: Formations
for localization of robot networks, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (2004)
53.92
R.K. Williams, G.S. Sukhatme: Constrained in-
teraction and coordination in proximity-limited
multiagent systems, IEEE Trans. Robotics 29(4),
930–944 (2013)
53.93
J. Cortes, S. Martinez, T. Karatas, F. Bullo: Coverage
control for mobile sensing networks, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 20(2), 243–255 (2004)
53.94
J. Cortes, S. Martinez, F. Bullo: Spatially-dis-
tributed coverage optimization and control with
limited-range interactions, ESAIM Control Optim.
Calc. Var. 11, 691–719 (2005)
53.95
M. Schwager, J. McLurkin, D. Rus: Distributed
coverage control with sensory feedback for net-
worked robots, Proc. Robotics Sci. Syst. (RSS)
(2006)
53.96
M. Schwager, J.-J. Slotine, D. Rus: Decentral-
ized adaptive control for coverage for networked
robots, Proc. Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2007)
53.97
A. Krause, C. Guestrin, A. Gupta, J. Kleinberg:
Near-optimal sensor placements: Maximizing in-
formation while minimizing communication cost,
5th Int. Conf. Inf. Process Sens. Netw. (IPSN) (2006)
53.98
V. Chvatal: A combinatorial theorem in plane ge-
ometry, J. Comb. Theory Ser. 18, 39–41 (1975)
53.99
J. O’Rourke: Art Gallery Theorems and Algorithms
(Oxford Univ. Press, New York 1987)
53.100
S. Fisk: A short proof of Chvatal’s watchmen the-
orem, J. Comb. Theory Ser. 24, 374 (1978)
53.101
A. Jadbabaie, J. Lin, A.S. Morse: Coordination of
groups of mobile autonomous agents using near-
est neighbor rules, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control
48(6), 988–1001 (2003)
53.102
S. Sinha, M. Pollefeys: Camera network calibration
from dynamic silhouettes, Proc. IEEE Conf. Com-
put. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (2004)
53.103
R. Collins, A. Lipton, H. Fujiyoshi, T. Kanade: Algo-
rithms for cooperative multisensor surveillance,
Proc. IEEE 89(10), 1456–1477 (2001)
53.104
A. Kansal, W. Kaiser, G. Pottie, M. Srivastava,
G.S. Sukhatme: Reconfiguration methods for mo-
bile sensor networks, ACM Trans. Sens. Networks
3(4), 1–28 (2007)
53.105
D. Payton, M. Daily, R. Estkowski, M. Howard,
C. Lee: Pheromone robotics, Auton. Robots 11,
319–324 (2001)
53.106
A. Howard, M.J. Matarić, G.S. Sukhatme: Mo-
bile sensor network deployment using potential
fields: A distributed, scalable solution to the area
coverage problem, Proc. Int. Symp. Distrib. Auton.
Robotic Syst. (2002) pp. 299–308
53.107
S. Poduri, G.S. Sukhatme: Constrained cover-
age for mobile sensor networks, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (2004) pp. 165–172
53.108
R. Wattenhofer, L. Li, P. Bahl, Y.M. Wang: A cone-
based distributed topology-control algorithm for
wireless multi-hop networks, IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw. 13(1), 147–159 (2005)
53.109
H. Zhang, J.C. Hou: On deriving the upper bound
of alphalifetime for large sensor networks, ACM
Trans. Sens. Netw. 1(6), 272–300 (2005)
53.110
S.
Poduri,
S.
Pattem,
B.
Krishnamachari,
G.S. Sukhatme: Using local geometry for tunable
topology control in sensor networks, IEEE Trans.
Mobile Comput. 8(2), 218–230 (2009)
53.111
M.A. Hsieh, V. Kumar: Pattern generation with
multiple robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2006)
53.112
R.N. Smith, M. Schwager, S.L. Smith, B.H. Jones,
D. Rus, G.S. Sukhatme: Persistent ocean mon-

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
References
1371
Part E | 53
itoring with underwater gliders: Adapting spa-
tiotemporal sampling resolution, J. Field Robotics
28(5), 714–741 (2011)
53.113
J. Das, F. Py, T. Maughan, T. O’Reilly, M. Mes-
sié, J. Ryan, G.S. Sukhatme, K. Rajan: Coordinated
sampling of dynamic oceanographic features with
AUVs and drifters, Int. J. Robotics Res. 31(5), 626–
646 (2012)
53.114
G.A. Hollinger, S. Choudhary, P. Qarabaqi, C. Mur-
phy, U. Mitra, G.S. Sukhatme, M. Stojanovic,
H. Singh, F. Hover: Underwater data collection
using robotic sensor networks, IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun. 30(5), 899–911 (2012)
53.115
F. Ye, G. Zhong, J. Cheng, L. Zhang, S. Lu: Peas:
A robust energy conserving protocol for long-
lived sensor networks, Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput.
Syst. (2003)
53.116
X. Wang, G. Xing, Y. Zhang, C. Lu, R. Pless, C. Gill:
Integrated coverage and connectivity configura-
tion in wireless sensor networks, 1st ACM Conf.
Embed. Netw. Sens. Syst. (SenSys) (2003)
53.117
D. Tian, N.D. Georganas: Connectivity mainte-
nance and coverage preservation in wireless sen-
sor networks, Ad Hoc Networks 3(6), 744–761
(2005)
53.118
G. Theraulaz, S. Goss, J. Gervet, J.-L. Deneubourg:
Task differentiation in Polistes wasp colonies:
A model for self-organizing groups of robots,
Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Simul. Adapt. Behav. (1990)
pp. 346–355
53.119
L. Steels: Cooperation Between Distributed Agents
Through Self-Organization, Proc. IEEE Int. Work-
shop Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1990)
53.120
A. Drogoul, J. Ferber: From tom thumb to the
dockers: Some experiments with foraging robots,
Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Simul. Adapt. Behav. (1992)
pp. 451–459
53.121
M.J. Matarić: Designing emergent behaviors: From
local interactions to collective intelligence, Proc.
2nd Int. Conf. Simul. Adapt. Behav. (1992) pp. 432–
441
53.122
G. Beni, J. Wang: Swarm intelligence in cellu-
lar robotics systems, Proc. NATO Adv. Workshop
Robots Biol. Syst. (1989)
53.123
D. Stilwell, J. Bay: Toward the development of
a material transport system using swarms of ant-
like robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(1993) pp. 766–771
53.124
T. Fukuda, S. Nakagawa, Y. Kawauchi, M. Buss: Self
organizing robots based on cell structures – CE-
BOT, Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Intell. Robots Syst.
(1988) pp. 145–150
53.125
J.H. Reif, H.Y. Wang: Social Potential fields: A dis-
tributed behavior control for autonomous robots,
Robotics Auton. Syst. 27(3), 171–194 (1999)
53.126
L.E. Parker: Designing control laws for cooperative
agent teams, Proc. IEEE Int. Cont. Robotics Autom.
(1993) pp. 582–587
53.127
K. Sugihara, I. Suzuki: Distributed algorithms for
formation of goemetric patterns with many mo-
bile robots, J. Robotic Syst. 13(3), 127–139 (1996)
53.128
V. Gazi: Swarm aggregations using artificial po-
tentials and sliding-mode control, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 21(6), 1208–1214 (2005)
53.129
J. McLurkin, J. Smith: Distributed algorithms for
dispersion in indoor environments using a swarm
of autonomous mobile robots, Symp. Distrib. Au-
ton. Robots Syst. (2004)
53.130
D. Gage: Randomized search strategies with im-
perfect sensors, Proc. SPIE Mobile Robots VIII
(1993) pp. 270–279
53.131
T. Balch: The impact of diversity on performance
in robot foraging, Proc. 3rd Ann. Conf. Auton.
Agents (1999) pp. 92–99
53.132
Z.J. Butler, A.A. Rizzi, R.L. Hollis: Cooperative cov-
erage of rectilinear environments, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2000)
53.133
A.I. Mourikis, S.I. Roumeliotis: Performance anal-
ysis of multirobot cooperative localization, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 22(4), 666–681 (2006)
53.134
R. Grabowski, L.E. Navarro-Serment, C.J. Pare-
dis, P.K. Khosla: Heterogeneous teams of mod-
ular robots for mapping and exploration, Auton.
Robots 8(3), 271–298 (2000)
53.135
M. Berhault, H. Huang, P. Keskinocak, S. Koenig,
W. Elmaghraby, P. Griffin, A. Kleywegt: Robot
exploration with combinatorial auctions, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2003)
pp. 1957–1962
53.136
J. Kim, J.M. Esposito, V. Kumar: An RRT-based al-
gorithm for testing and validating mulit-robot
controllers, Proc. Robotics Sci. Syst. I (2005)
53.137
Z. Cao, M. Tin, L. Li, N. Gu, S. Wang: Cooperative
hunting by distributed mobile robots based on
local interaction, IEEE Trans. Robotics 22(2), 403–
407 (2006)
53.138
R.W. Beard, T.W. McLain, M. Goodrich: Coordi-
nated target assignment and intercept for un-
manned air vehicles, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2002) pp. 2581–2586
53.139
J. Clark, R. Fierro: Cooperative hybrid control of
robotic sensors for perimeter detection and track-
ing, Proc. Am. Control Conf. (2005) pp. 3500–3505
53.140
P. Stone, M. Veloso: A layered approach to learn-
ing client behaviors in the RoboCup soccer server,
Appl. Artif. Intell. 12, 165–188 (1998)
53.141
J. McLurkin: Stupid Robot Tricks: Behavior-Based
Distributed Algorithm Library for Programming
Swarms of Robots, Ph.D. Thesis (Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge 2004)
53.142
F. Mondada, L.M. Gambardella, D. Floreano,
S. Nolfi, J.L. Deneuborg, M. Dorigo: The coopera-
tion of swarm-bots: Physical interactions in col-
lective robotics, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 12(2),
21–28 (2005)
53.143
T.W. Mather, M.A. Hsieh: Macroscopic modeling of
stochastic deployment policies with time delays
for robot ensembles, Int. J. Robotics Res. 30(5),
590–600 (2011)
53.144
X.C. Ding, M. Kloetzer, Y. Chen, C. Belta: Automatic
deployment of robot teams, IEEE Robotics Autom.
Mag. 18(3), 75–86 (2022)

Part E | 53
1372
Part E
Moving in the Environment
53.145
F.S. Melo, M. Veloso: Decentralized MDPs with
sparse interactions, Artif. Intell. 175(11), 1757–1789
(2011)
53.146
P. Tsiotras, L.I.R. Castro: Extended multi-agent
consensus protocols for the generation of geo-
metric patterns in the plane, Am. Controls Conf.
(2011) pp. 3850–3855
53.147
K. Cheng, P. Dasgupta: Weighted voting game
based multi-robot team formation for distributed
area coverage, Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Pract. Cognit.
Agents Robots (2010) pp. 9–15
53.148
A.A. Taheri, M. Afshar, M. Asadpour: Influence
maximization for informed agents in collec-
tive behavior, Distrib. Auton. Robotic Syst. (2013)
pp. 389–402
53.149
M.A. Hsieh, A. Halász, E.D. Cubuk, S. Schoenholz,
A. Martinoli: Specialization as an optimal strategy
under varying external conditions, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (2009) pp. 1941–1946
53.150
N. Hoff, R. Wood, R. Nagpal: Distributed colony-
level algorithm switching for robot swarm forag-
ing, Distrib. Auton. Robotic Syst. (2013) pp. 417–
430
53.151
A. Winfield, J. Nembrini: Safety in numbers:
Fault-tolerance in robot systems, Int. J. Model.
Identif. Control 1(1), 30–37 (2006)
53.152
T. Fukuda, S. Nakagawa: Dynamically reconfig-
urable robotic system, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (1988) pp. 1581–1586
53.153
M. Yim, W.-M. Shen, B. Salemi, D. Rus, M. Moll,
H. Lipson, E. Klavins, G.S. Chirikjian: Modular self-
reconfigurable robot systems: Challenges and op-
portunities for the future, IEEE Robotics Autom.
Mag. 14(1), 43–52 (2007)
53.154
K. Gilpin, D. Rus: Modular robot systems: From
self-assembly to self-disassembly, IEEE Robotics
Autom. Mag. 17(3), 38–53 (2010)
53.155
M. Yim: A reconfigurable modular robot with
many modes of locomotion, JSME Int. Conf. Adv.
Mechatron. (1993) pp. 283–288
53.156
M. Yim: New locomotion gaits, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1994) pp. 2508–2514
53.157
A. Castano, P. Will: Mechanical design of a module
for reconfigurable robots, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2000) pp. 2203–2209
53.158
W.-M. Shen, P. Will: Docking in self-reconfig-
urable robots, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2001) pp. 1049–1054
53.159
A. Castano, A. Behar, P. Will: The conro modules
for reconfigurable robots, IEEE Trans. Mechatron.
7(4), 403–409 (2002)
53.160
S. Murata, E. Yoshida, A. Kamimura, H. Kurokawa,
K. Tomita, S. Kokaji: M-TRAN: Self-reconfigurable
modular robotic system, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mecha-
tron. 7(4), 431–441 (2002)
53.161
A. Kamimura, H. Kurokawa, E. Yoshida, S. Mu-
rata, K. Tomita, S. Kokaji: Automatic locomotion
design and experiments for a modular robotic
system, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 10(3), 314–
325 (2005)
53.162
H. Kurokawa, K. Tomita, A. Kamimura, E. Yoshida,
S. Kokahji, S. Murata: Distributed self-reconfigu-
ration control of modular robot M-TRAN, IEEE Int.
Conf. Mechatron. Autom. (2005) pp. 254–259
53.163
S. Murata, K. Kakomura, H. Kurokawa: Docking ex-
periments of a modular robot by visual feedback,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Systems
(IROS) (2006) pp. 625–630
53.164
D. Marbach, A.J. Ijspeert: Online optimization of
modular robot locomotion, IEEE Int. Conf. Mecha-
tron. Autom. (2005) pp. 248–253
53.165
E.H. Østergaard, H.H. Lund: Evolving control for
modular robotic units, IEEE Int. Symp. Comput.
Intell. Robotics Autom. (2003) pp. 886–892
53.166
M.W. Jørgensen, E.H. Østergaard, H.H. Lund: Mod-
ular ATRON: Modules for a self-reconfigurable
robot, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2004) pp. 2068–2073
53.167
B. Salemi, M. Moll, W.-M. Shen: SUPERBOT: A de-
ployable, multi-functional, and modular self-
reconfigurable robotic system, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2006) pp. 3636–
3641
53.168
M. Yim, D.G. Duff, K.D. Roufas: PolyBot: A modular
reconfigurable robot, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2000) pp. 514–520
53.169
M. Yim, Y. Zhang, K. Roufas, D. Duff, C. Elder-
shaw: Connecting and disconnecting for self–
reconfiguration with PolyBot, IEEE/ASME Trans.
Mechatron. 7(4), 442–451 (2003)
53.170
M. Yim, B. Shirmohammadi, J. Sastra, M. Park,
M. Dugan, C.J. Taylor: Towards robotic self-re-
assembly after explosion, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (2007) pp. 2767–2772
53.171
V. Zykov, E. Mytilinaios, M. Desnoyer, H. Lipson:
Evolved and designed self-reproducing modu-
lar robotics, IEEE Trans. Robotics 23(2), 308–319
(2007)
53.172
P.J. White, M.L. Posner, M. Yim: Strength anal-
ysis of miniature folded right angle tetrahedron
chain programmable matter, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2010) pp. 2785–2790
53.173
G.S. Chirikjian: Kinematics of a metamorphic
robotic system, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (1994) pp. 449–455
53.174
G. Chirikjian, A. Pamecha, I. Ebert-Uphoff: Evalu-
ating efficiency of self-reconfiguration in a class
of modular robots, J. Robotic Syst. 13(5), 317–388
(1996)
53.175
A. Pamecha, I. Ebert-Uphoff, G.S. Chirikjian: Use-
ful metrics for modular robot motion planning,
IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 13(4), 531–545 (1997)
53.176
J.E. Walter, E.M. Tsai, N.M. Amato: Algorithms
for fast concurrent reconfiguration of hexagonal
metamorphic robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics 21(4),
621–631 (2005)
53.177
S. Murata, H. Kurokawa, S. Kokaji: Self-assem-
bling machine, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (1994) pp. 441–448
53.178
E. Yoshida, S. Murata, K. Tomita, H. Kurokawa,
S.
Kokaji:
Distributed
formation
control
for
a modular mechanical system, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1997) pp. 1090–
1097

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
References
1373
Part E | 53
53.179
H. Kurokawa, S. Murata, E. Yoshida, K. Tomita,
S. Kokaji: A 3-D self-reconfigurable structure
and experiments, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (1998) pp. 860–865
53.180
E. Yoshida, S. Murata, S. Kokaji, A. Kamimura,
K. Tomita, H. Kurokawa: Get back in shape!
A hardware prototype self-reconfigurable modu-
lar microrobot that uses shape memory alloy, IEEE
Robotics Autom. Mag. 9(4), 54–60 (2002)
53.181
J. Gargus, B. Kim, I. Llamas, J. Rossignac, C. Shaw:
Finger Sculpting with Digital Clay, Tech. Rep. GIT-
GVU-02-22 (2002)
53.182
K. Kotay, D. Rus, M. Vona, C. McGray: The self-re-
configuring robotic molecule, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1998) pp. 424–431
53.183
K. Kotay, D. Rus: Motion synthesis for the self-
reconfiguring robotic molecule, IEEE Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (1998) pp. 843–851
53.184
K. Kotay, D. Rus: Algorithms for self-reconfigur-
ing molecule motion planning, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2000)
53.185
Z.J. Butler, K. Kotay, D. Rus, K. Tomita: Generic
decentralized control for lattice-based self-re-
configurable robots, Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(9),
919–937 (2004)
53.186
D. Rus, M. Vona: A basis for self-reconfiguring
robots using crystal modules, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2000) pp. 2194–
2202
53.187
D. Rus, M. Vona: Crystalline robots: Self-recon-
figuration with compressible unit modules, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 22(9), 699–715 (2003)
53.188
J.W. Suh, S.B. Homans, M. Yim: Telecubes: Me-
chanical design of a module for self-reconfig-
urable robotics, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2002) pp. 4095–4101
53.189
C.-J. Chiang, G.S. Chirikjian: Modular robot mo-
tion planning using similarity metrics, Auton.
Robots 10, 91–106 (2001)
53.190
M. Koseki, K. Minami, N. Inou: Cellular robots
forming a mechanical structure (evaluation of
structural formation and hardware design of CHO-
BIE II), Proc. 7th Int. Symp. Distrib. Auton. Robotic
Syst. (DARS) (2004) pp. 131–140
53.191
B.K. An: Em-cube: Cube-shaped, self-recon-
figurable robots sliding on structure surfaces,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2008)
pp. 3149–3155
53.192
C. Ünsal, P.K. Khosla: Mechatronic design of
a modular self-reconfiguring robotic system,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2000)
pp. 1742–1747
53.193
K.C. Prevas, C. Ünsal, M.Ö. Efe, P.K. Khosla: A hi-
erarchical motion planning strategy for a uni-
form self-reconfigurable modular robotic system,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002)
pp. 787–792
53.194
K. Hosokawa, T. Tsujimori, T. Fujii, H. Kaetsu,
H. Asama, Y. Kuroda, I. Endo: Self-organizing col-
lective robots with morphogenesis in a vertical
plane, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1998) pp. 2858–2863
53.195
S.
Goldstein,
J.
Campbell,
T.
Mowry:
Pro-
grammable Matter, IEEE Computer 38(6), 99–101
(2005)
53.196
S.C. Goldstein, J.D. Campbell, T.C. Mowry: Pro-
grammable matter, Computer 38(6), 99–101 (2005)
53.197
M.E. Karagozler, S.C. Goldstein, J.R. Reid: Stress-
driven MEMS assembly + electrostatic forces =
1 mm diameter robot, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2009) pp. 2763–2769
53.198
P. Pillai, J. Campbell, G. Kedia, S. Moudgal,
K. Sheth: A 3-D fax machine based on claytronics,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2006) pp. 4728–4735
53.199
P. White, K. Kopanski, H. Lipson: Stochastic
self-reconfigurable cellular robotics, IEEE Conf.
Robotics Autom. (2004) pp. 2888–2893
53.200
P. White, V. Zykov, J. Bongard, H. Lipson: Three di-
mensional stochastic reconfiguration of modular
robots, Robotics Sci. Syst. (2005)
53.201
M. Tolley, J. Hiller, H. Lipson: Evolutionary design
and assembly planning for stochastic modular
robots, Proc. IEEE/RSJ. Int. Conf. Intell. Robotics
Syst. (IROS) (2009) pp. 73–78
53.202
M. Tolley, H. Lipson: Fluidic manipulation for scal-
able stochastic 3-D assembly of modular robots,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2010)
pp. 2473–2478
53.203
M.T. Tolley, H. Lipson: Programmable3-D stochas-
tic fluidic assembly of cm-scale modules, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011)
pp. 4366–4371
53.204
K. Gilpin, K. Kotay, D. Rus, I. Vasilescu: Miche:
Modular shape formation by self-disassembly,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 27, 345–372 (2008)
53.205
R. Oung, F. Bourgault, M. Donovan, R. D’Andrea:
The distributed flight array, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2010)
53.206
G.J. Hamlin, A.C. Sanderson: Tetrobot: A modu-
lar system for hyper-redundant parallel robotics,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1995)
pp. 154–159
53.207
A. Lyder, R.F.M. Garcia, K. Stoy: Mechanical de-
sign of Odin, an extendable heterogeneous de-
formable modular robot, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2008) pp. 883–888
53.208
A. Lyder, H.G. Peterson, K. Stoy: Representation
and shape estimation of Odin, a parallel un-
der-actuated modular robot, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2009) pp. 5275–
5280
53.209
C.-H. Yu, K. Haller, D. Ingber, R. Nagpal: Morpho: A
self-deformable modular robot inspired by cellar
structure, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2008) pp. 3571–3578
53.210
M. Shimizu, A. Ishiguro, T. Kawakatsu: A modu-
lar robot that exploits a spontaneous connectivity
control mechanism, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2005) pp. 1899–1904
53.211
M. Shimizu, T. Mori, A. Ishiguro: A Development
of a modular robot that enables adaptive recon-
figuration, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2006) pp. 174–179

Part E | 53
1374
Part E
Moving in the Environment
53.212
S.
Funiak,
P.
Pillai,
M.P.
Ashley-Rollman,
J.D. Campbell, S.C. Goldstein: Distributed lo-
calization of modular robot ensembles, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 28(8), 946–961 (2009)
53.213
M. Rubenstein, W.-M. Shen: Scalable self-assem-
bly and self-repair in a collective of robots, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2009)
pp. 1484–1489
53.214
M. Rubenstein, W.-M. Shen: Automatic scalable
size selection for the shape of a distributed
robotic collective, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2010) pp. 508–513
53.215
M. Rubenstein, C. Ahler, R. Nagpal: Kilobot: A
low cost scalable robot system for collective be-
haviors, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2012)
53.216
E. Hawkes, B. An, N.M. Benbernou, H. Tanaka,
S. Kim, E.D. Demaine, D. Rus, R.J. Wood: Pro-
grammable matter by folding, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 107(28), 12441–12445 (2010)
53.217
B. An, D. Rus: Programming and controlling self-
folding sheets, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2012)
53.218
G. Whitesides, B. Grzybowski: Self-assembly at all
scales, Sci. USA 295, 2418–2421 (2002)
53.219
G.M.
Whitesides,
M.
Boncheva:
Beyond
molecules: Self-assembly of
mesoscope and
macroscopic
components,
Proc.
Natl.
Acad.
Sciences 99(8), 4769–4774 (2002)
53.220
D.H.
Garcias,
J.
Tien,
T.L.
Breen,
C.
Hsu,
G.M. Whitesides: Forming electrical networks
in three dimensions by self-assembly, Science
289(5482), 1170–1172 (2000)
53.221
S. Miyashita, M. Kessler, M. Lungarella: How mor-
phology affects self-assembly in a stochastic
modular robot, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(2008) pp. 3533–3538
53.222
K. Hosokawa, I. Shimoyama, H. Miura: Dynamics
of self-assembling systems: Analogy with chem-
ical kinematics, Artif. Life 1(4), 413–427 (1994)
53.223
M. Shimizu, K. Suzuki: A Self-repairing structure
for modules and its control by vibrating actua-
tion mechanisms, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2009) pp. 4281–4286
53.224
P.W.K. Rothemund, E. Winfree: The program-size
complexity of self-assembled squares, 32rd Annu.
ACM Symp. Theory Comput. (2000) pp. 459–468
53.225
L. Adleman, Q. Cheng, A. Goel, M.-D. Huang: Run-
ning time and program size for self-assembled
squares, 33rd Annu. ACM Symp. Theory Comput.
(2001) pp. 740–748
53.226
G.
Aggarwal,
M.H.
Goldwasser,
M.-Y.
Kao,
R.T.
Schweller:
Complexities
for
generalized
models of self-assembly, 15th Annu. ACM-SIAM
Symp.
Discrete
Algorithms
(2004)
pp.
880–
889
53.227
J. Bishop, S. Burden, E. Klavins, R. Kreisberg,
W. Malone, N. Napp, T. Nguyen: Programmable
parts: A demonstration of the grammatical ap-
proach to self-organization, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2005) pp. 3684–
3691
53.228
S. Griffith, D. Goldwater, J.M. Jacobson: Robotics:
Self-replication from random parts, Nature 437,
636 (2005)
53.229
C. Jones, M.J. Matarić: From local to global be-
havior in intelligent self-assembly, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2003) pp. 721–726
53.230
J. Kelly, H. Zhang: Combinatorial optimization
of sensing for rule-based planar distributed as-
sembly, IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (2006)
pp. 3728–3734
53.231
J. Werfel: Anthills Built to Order: Automating Con-
struction with Artificial Swarms, Ph.D. Thesis (MIT,
Cambridge 2006)
53.232
B. Donald, C.G. Levey, C.D. McGray, I. Paprotny,
D. Rus: An untethered, electrostatic, globally con-
trollable MEMS micro-robot, J. Microelectromech.
Syst. 15(1), 1–15 (2006)
53.233
B.R. Donald, C.G. Levey, I. Paprotny: Planar mi-
croassembly by parallel actuator of MEMS micro-
robots, J. Microelectromech. Syst. 17(4), 789–808
(2008)
53.234
C. Pawashe, S. Floyd, M. Sitti: Assembly and
disassembly of magnetic mobile micro-robots
towards 2-D reconfigurable micro-systems, Int.
Symp. Robotics Res. (2009)
53.235
N. Napp, S. Burden, E. Klavins: The statistical dy-
namics of programmed self-assembly, IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 1469–
1476
53.236
K. Gilpin, D. Rus: A distributed algorithm for 2-D
shape duplication with smart pebble robots, IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012)
53.237
K. Gilpin, A. Knaian, D. Rus: Robot pebbles: One
centimeter robotic modules for programmable
matter through self-disassembly, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2010)
53.238
L.E. Parker: The effect of heterogeneity in teams
of 100+ mobile robots. In: Multi-Robot Systems
Volume II: From Swarms to Intelligent Automata,
ed. by A. Schultz, L.E. Parker, F. Schneider (Kluwer,
Dordrecht 2003)
53.239
T. Balch: Hierarchic social entropy: An information
theoretic measure of robot team diversity, Auton.
Robots 8(3), 209–238 (2000)
53.240
D. Jung, A. Zelinsky: Grounded symbolic com-
munication between heterogeneous cooperating
robots, Auton. Robots 8(3), 269–292 (2000)
53.241
R.R. Murphy: Marsupial robots for urban search
and rescue, IEEE Intell. Syst. 15(2), 14–19 (2000)
53.242
G. Sukhatme, J.F. Montgomery, R.T. Vaughan:
Experiments
with
cooperative
aerial-ground
robots. In: Robot Teams: From Diversity to Poly-
morphism, ed. by T. Balch, L.E. Parker (A K Peters,
Natick 2002)
53.243
L.E. Parker, B. Kannan, F. Tang, M. Bailey: Tightly-
coupled navigation assistance in heterogeneous
multi-robot teams, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (2004)
53.244
A. Howard, L.E. Parker, G.S. Sukhatme: Experi-
ments with a large heterogeneous mobile robot
team: Exploration, mapping, deployment, and
detection, Int. J. Robotics Res. 25, 431–447 (2006)

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
References
1375
Part E | 53
53.245
L. Chaimowicz, B. Grocholsky, J.F. Keller, V. Kumar,
C.J. Taylor: Experiments in multirobot air-ground
coordination, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2004)
53.246
L.E. Parker, F. Tang: Building multi-robot coali-
tions through automated task solution synthesis,
Proc. IEEE 94(7), 1289–1305 (2006)
53.247
R. Zlot, A. Stentz: Market-based multirobot coor-
dination for complex tasks, Int. J. Robotics Res.
25(1), 73–101 (2006)
53.248
J. Jennings, C. Kirkwood-Watts: Distributed mo-
bile robotics by the method of dynamic teams. In:
Distributed Autonomous Robotic Systems 3, ed. by
T. Lueth, R. Dillmann, P. Dario, H. Wörn (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 1998)
53.249
E. Pagello, A. D’Angelo, E. Menegatti: Cooperation
issues and distributed sensing for multirobot sys-
tems, Proc. IEEE 94, 1370–1383 (2006)
53.250
B. Gerkey, M.J. Matarić: A formal analysis and tax-
onomy of task allocation in multi-robot systems,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(9), 939–954 (2004)
53.251
D. Gale: The Theory of Linear Economic Models
(McGraw-Hill, New York 1960)
53.252
E. Balas, M.W. Padberg: On the set-covering prob-
lem, Oper. Res. 20(6), 1152–1161 (1972)
53.253
B.B. Werger, M.J. Matarić: Broadcast of local el-
igibility for multi-target observation. In: Dis-
tributed Autonomous Robotic Systems 4, ed. by
L.E. Parker, G. Bekey, J. Barhen (Springer, Tokyo
2000)
53.254
R.A. Brooks: A robust layered control system for
a mobile robot, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. RA-2(1),
14–23 (1986)
53.255
S. Botelho, R. Alami: M+: A scheme for multi-
robot cooperation through negotiated task al-
location and achievement, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (1999) pp. 1234–1239
53.256
R.G. Smith: The contract net protocol: High-
level communication and control in a distributed
problem solver, IEEE Trans. Comput. C-29(12),
1104–1113 (1980)
53.257
B. Dias, R. Zlot, N. Kalra, A. Stentz: Market-based
multirobot coordination: A survey and analysis,
Proc. IEEE 94(7), 1257–1270 (2006)
53.258
B.P. Gerkey, M.J. Matarić: Sold! Auction methods
for multi-robot coordination, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 18(5), 758–768 (2002)
53.259
H. Kose, U. Tatlidede, C. Mericli, K. Kaplan,
H.L.
Akin:
Q-learning
based
market-driven
multi-agent collaboration in robot soccer, Proc.
Turk. Symp. Artif. Intell. Neural Netw. (2004)
pp. 219–228
53.260
D. Vail, M. Veloso: Multi-robot dynamic role as-
signment and coordination through shared po-
tential fields, multi-robot systems: From swarms
to intelligent automata, Proc. Int. Workshop
Multi-Robot Syst. (2003) pp. 87–98
53.261
M.
Lagoudakis,
E.
Markakis,
D.
Kempe,
P. Keshinocak, A. Kleywegt, S. Koenig, C. Tovey,
A. Meyerson, S. Jain: Auction-based multi-robot
routing, Robotics: Science and Systems I (MIT
Press, Cambridge 2005)
53.262
G. Rabideau, T. Estlin, S. Schien, A. Barrett: A com-
parison of coordinated planning methods for co-
operating rovers, Proc. AIAA Space Technol. Conf.
(1999)
53.263
R. Zlot, A. Stentz, M.B. Dias, S. Thayer: Multi-
robot exploration controlled by a market econ-
omy, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2002) pp. 3016–3023
53.264
J. Guerrero, G. Oliver: Multi-robot task alloca-
tion strategies using auction-like mechanisms,
Proc. 6th Congr. Catalan Assoc. Artif. Intell. (2003)
pp. 111–122
53.265
N. Kalra, D. Ferguson, A. Stentz: Hoplites: A mar-
ket-based framework for planned tight coordi-
nation in multirobot teams, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
53.266
L. Lin, Z. Zheng: Combinatorial bids based multi-
robot task allocation method, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics. Autom. (ICRA) (2005) pp. 1145–1150
53.267
C.-H. Fua, S.S. Ge: COBOS: Cooperative backoff
adaptive scheme for multirobot task allocation,
IEEE Trans. Robotics 21(6), 1168–1178 (2005)
53.268
E.G. Jones, B. Browning, M.B. Dias, B. Argall,
M. Veloso, A. Stentz: Dynamically formed hetero-
geneous robot teams performing tightly-coupled
tasks, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2006) pp. 570–575
53.269
Y. Zhang, L.E. Parker: IQ-ASyMTRe: Forming exe-
cutable coalitions for tightly coupled multirobot
tasks, IEEE Trans. Robotics 29(2), 400–416 (2012)
53.270
L. Vig, J.A. Adams: Multi-robot coalition forma-
tion, IEEE Trans. Robotics 22(4), 637–649 (2006)
53.271
M. Bowling, M. Veloso: Simultaneous adversarial
multi-robot learning, Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
Intell. (2003)
53.272
F. Fernandez, L.E. Parker: A reinforcement learn-
ing algorithm in cooperative multi-robot do-
mains, J. Intell. Robots Syst. 43, 161–174 (2005)
53.273
C.F. Touzet: Robot awareness in cooperative mo-
bile robot learning, Auton. Robots 2, 1–13 (2000)
53.274
R. Steeb, S. Cammarata, F. Hayes-Roth, P. Thorn-
dyke, R. Wesson: Distributed Intelligence for Air
Fleet Control, Rand Corp. Tech. Rep. R-2728-AFPA
(1981)
53.275
M. Benda, V. Jagannathan, R. Dodhiawalla: On
Optimal Cooperation of Knowledge Sources, Boe-
ing AI Center Tech. Rep. BCS-G2010-28 (1985)
53.276
T. Haynes, S. Sen: Evolving behavioral strate-
gies in predators and prey. In: Adaptation and
Learning in Multi-Agent Systems, ed. by G. Weiss,
S. Sen (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1986) pp. 113–
126
53.277
S. Mahadevan, J. Connell: Automatic program-
ming of behavior-based robots using reinforce-
ment learning, Proc. AAAI (1991) pp. 8–14
53.278
S. Marsella, J. Adibi, Y. Al-Onaizan, G. Kaminka,
I. Muslea, M. Tambe: On being a teammate: Ex-
periences acquired in the design of RoboCup
teams, Proc. 3rd Annu. Conf. Auton. Agents (1999)
pp. 221–227
53.279
J. Pugh, A. Martinoli: Multi-robot learning with
particle swarm optimization, Proc. 5th Int. Jt.

Part E | 53
1376
Part E
Moving in the Environment
Conf.
Auton. Agents
Multiagent
Syst.
(2006)
pp. 441–448
53.280
P. Stone, M. Veloso: Multiagent systems: A sur-
vey from a machine learning perspective, Auton.
Robots 8(3), 345–383 (2000)
53.281
M. Asada, E. Uchibe, S. Noda, S. Tawaratsumida,
K. Hosoda: Coordination of multiple behaviors
acquired by a vision-based reinforcement learn-
ing, Proc. IEEE/RSJ/GI Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(1994) pp. 917–924
53.282
M. Kubo, Y. Kakazu: Learning coordinated motions
in a competition for food between ant colonies,
Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Simul. Adapt. Behav. (1994)
pp. 487–492
53.283
R. Alami, S. Fleury, M. Herrb, F. Ingrand, F. Robert:
Multi-robot cooperation in the MARTHA project,
IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 5(1), 36–47 (1998)
53.284
A. Stroupe, A. Okon, M. Robinson, T. Huntsberger,
H. Aghazarian, E. Baumgartner: Sustainable co-
operative robotic technologies for human and
robotic outpost infrastructure construction and
maintenance, Auton. Robots 20(2), 113–123 (2006)
53.285
H.R.
Everett,
R.T.
Laird,
D.M.
Carroll,
G.A.
Gilbreath,
T.A.
Heath-Pastore,
R.S.
In-
derieden, T. Tran, K.J. Grant, D.M. Jaffee: Multiple
resource host architecture (MRHA) for the mo-
bile
detection
assessment
response
system
(MDARS), SPAWAR Systems Technical Documen
3026, Revision A ( 2000)
53.286
Y. Guo, L.E. Parker, R. Madhavan: Towards collab-
orative robots for infrastructure security applica-
tions, Proc. Int. Symp. Collab. Technol. Syst. (2004)
pp. 235–240
53.287
C. Hazard, P.R. Wurman, R. D’Andrea: Alphabet
Soup: A testbed for studying resource allocation in
multi-vehicle systems, Proc. AAAI Workshop Auc-
tion Mech. Robot Coord. (2006) pp. 23–30
53.288
D. Nardi, A. Farinelli, L. Iocchi: Multirobot sys-
tems: A classification focused on coordination,
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. B 34(5), 2015–2028
(2004)
53.289
K. Passino: Biomimicry of bacterial foraging for
distributed optimization and control, IEEE Control
Syst. Mag. 22(3), 52–67 (2002)
53.290
M.
Schneider-Fontan,
M.
Matarić:
Territorial
multi-robot task division, IEEE Trans. Robotics Au-
tom. 15(5), 815–822 (1998)
53.291
I. Wagner, M. Lindenbaum, A.M. Bruckstein: Mac
vs. PC – Determinism and randomness as com-
plementary approaches to robotic exploration of
continuous unknown domains, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 19(1), 12–31 (2000)
53.292
K. Sugawara, M. Sano: Cooperative behavior of
interacting simple robots in a clockface ar-
ranged foraging field. In: Distributed Autonomous
Robotic Systems, ed. by H. Asama, T. Arai,
T. Fukuda, T. Hasegawa (Springer, Berlin, Heidel-
berg 2002)
53.293
P. Rybski, S. Stoeter, C. Wyman, M. Gini: A cooper-
ative multi-robot approach to the mapping and
exploration of Mars, Proc. AAAI/IAAI (1997)
53.294
S. Sun, D. Lee, K. Sim: Artificial immune-based
swarm behaviors of distributed
autonomous
robotic systems, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (2001) pp. 3993–3998
53.295
A.I. Mourikis, S.I. Roumeliotis: Optimal sensor
scheduling for resource-constrained localization
of mobile robot formations, IEEE Trans. Robotics
22(5), 917–931 (2006)
53.296
S. Kloder, S. Hutchinson: Path planning for per-
mutation-invariant multirobot formations, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 22(4), 650–665 (2006)
53.297
C.W. Reynolds: Flocks, herds and schools: A dis-
tributed behavioral model, ACM SIGGRAPH Com-
put. Gr. 21, 25–34 (1987)
53.298
T. Balch, R. Arkin: Behavior-based formation con-
trol for multi-robot teams, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 14(6), 926–939 (1998)
53.299
A. Jadbabaie, J. Lin, A.S. Morse: Coordination of
groups of mobile autonomous agents using near-
est neighbor rules, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control
48(6), 988–1001 (2002)
53.300
C. Belta, V. Kumar: Abstraction and control for
groups of robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics 20(5), 865–
875 (2004)
53.301
C.M. Topaz, A.L. Bertozzi: Swarming patterns in
two-dimensional kinematic model for biological
groups, SIAM J. Appl. Math. 65(1), 152–174 (2004)
53.302
J.A. Fax, R.M. Murray: Information flow and coop-
erative control of vehicle formations, IEEE Trans.
Autom. Control 49(9), 1465–1476 (2004)
53.303
J.A. Marshall, M.E. Broucke, B.R. Francis: For-
mations of vehicles in cyclic pursuit, IEEE Trans.
Autom. Control 49(11), 1963–1974 (2004)
53.304
S.S. Ge, C.-H. Fua: Queues and artificial poten-
tial trenches for multirobot formations, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 21(4), 646–656 (2005)
53.305
P. Tabuada, G. Pappas, P. Lima: Motion feasibil-
ity of multi-agent formations, IEEE Trans. Robotics
21(3), 387–392 (2005)
53.306
G. Antonelli, S. Chiaverini: Kinematic control of
platoons of autonomous vehicles, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 22(6), 1285–1292 (2006)
53.307
J. Fredslund, M.J. Matarić: A general algorithm for
robot formations using local sensing and mini-
mal communication, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
18(5), 837–846 (2002)
53.308
Y. Cao, W. Yu, W. Ren, G. Chen: An overview of
recent progress in the study of distributed multi-
agent coordination, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 9(1), 427–
438 (2012)
53.309
R.M. Murray: Recent research in cooperative con-
trol of multivehicle systems, J. Dyn. Syst. Meas.
Control 129(5), 571–583 (2007)
53.310
P.J. Johnson, J.S. Bay: Distributed control of sim-
ulated autonomous mobile robot collectives in
payload transportation, Auton. Robots 2(1), 43–63
(1995)
53.311
Z. Wang, E. Nakano, T. Matsukawa: Realizing co-
operative object manipulation using multiple be-
haviour-based robots, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1996) pp. 310–317

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
References
1377
Part E | 53
53.312
K. Kosuge, T. Oosumi: Decentralized control of
multiple robots handling an object, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1996) pp. 318–
323
53.313
N. Miyata, J. Ota, Y. Aiyama, J. Sasaki, T. Arai: Co-
operative transport system with regrasping car-
like mobile robots, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (1997) pp. 1754–1761
53.314
C.R. Kube, E. Bonabeau: Cooperative transport by
ants and robots, Robotics Auton. Syst. 30(1), 85–
101 (2000)
53.315
R. Groß, M. Dorigo: Towards group transport by
swarms of robots, Int. J. Bio-Inspired Comput.
1(1), 1–13 (2009)
53.316
L.E. Parker: ALLIANCE: An architecture for fault
tolerant, cooperative control of heterogeneous
mobile robots, Proc. IEEE/RSJ/GI Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (1994) pp. 776–783
53.317
B. Donald, J. Jennings, D. Rus: Analyzing teams
of cooperating mobile robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (1994) pp. 1896–1903
53.318
Y. Mohan, S.G. Ponnambalam: An extensive re-
view of research in swarm robotics, World Congr.
Nat. Biol. Insp. Comput. (2009) pp. 140–145
53.319
A.J. Ijspeert, A. Martinoli, A. Billard, L.M. Gam-
bardella: Collaboration through the exploitation
of local interactions in autonomous collective
robotics: The stick pulling experiment, Auton.
Robots 11(2), 149–171 (2001)
53.320
A. Martinoli, K. Easton, W. Agassounon: Modeling
swarm robotic systems: A case study in collabo-
rative distributed manipulation, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 23(4-5), 415–436 (2004)
53.321
S. Berman, Q. Lindsey, M.S. Sakar, V. Kumar,
S.C. Pratt: Experimental study and modeling of
group retrieval in ants as an approach to collec-
tive transport in swarm robotic systems, Proc. IEEE
99(9), 1470–1481 (2011)
53.322
J.M. Esposito: Distributed grasp synthesis for
swarm manipulation with applications to au-
tonomous tugboats, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (2008) pp. 1489–1494
53.323
Z. Wang, V. Kumar: Object closure and manip-
ulation by multiple cooperating mobile robots,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002)
pp. 394–399
53.324
Z. Wang, Y. Hirata, K. Kosuge: Control a rigid
caging formation for cooperative object trans-
portation by multiple mobile robots, Proc. of IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 1580–
1585
53.325
J. Fink, N. Michael, V. Kumar: Composition of
vector fields for multi-robot manipulation via
caging, Robotics Sci. Syst. Conf. (2007)
53.326
F. Arrichiello, H.K. Heidarsson, S. Chiaverini,
G.S. Sukhatme: Cooperative caging and transport
using autonomous aquatic surface vehicles, In-
tell. Serv. Robotics 5(1), 73–87 (2012)
53.327
J. Werfel: Building patterned structures with
robot swarms, Proc. 19th Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell.
(IJCAI) (2005) pp. 1495–1502
53.328
J. Werfel, Y. Bar-Yam, D. Rus, R. Nagpal: Dis-
tributed construction by mobile robots with en-
hanced building blocks, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (2006) pp. 2787–2794
53.329
J. Werfel, R. Nagpal: Extended stigmergy in col-
lective construction, IEEE Intell. Syst. 21(2), 20–28
(2006)
53.330
J. Werfel, R. Nagpal: Three-dimensional con-
struction with mobile robots and modular blocks,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 27(3/4), 463–479 (2008)
53.331
Y. Terada, S. Murata: Automatic modular assembly
system and its distributed control, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 27, 445–462 (2008)
53.332
J. Wawerla, G.S. Sukhatme, M.J. Mataric: Col-
lective construction with multiple robots, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2002)
pp. 2696–2701
53.333
R.L. Stewart, R.A. Russell: Building a loose wall
structure with a robotic swarm using a spa-
tio-temporal varying template, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2004) pp. 712–
716
53.334
R.L. Stewart, R.A. Russell: A distributed feedback
mechanism to regulate wall construction by a
robotic swarm, Adapt. Behav. 14(1), 21–51 (2006)
53.335
T.
Huntsberger,
G.
Rodriguez,
P.
Schenker:
Robotics
challenges
for
robotic
and
human
Mars exploration, Proc. Robotics 2000 (2000)
pp. 340–346
53.336
R.A. Brooks, P. Maes, M.J. Mataric, G. More: Lunar
based construction robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Work-
shop Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1990) pp. 389–392
53.337
C.A.C. Parker, H. Zhang, C.R. Kube: Blind bull-
dozing: Multiple robot nest construction, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2003)
pp. 2010–2015
53.338
S. Sen, M. Sekaran, J. Hale: Learning to coor-
dinate without sharing information, Proc. AAAI
(1994) pp. 426–431
53.339
B. Tung, L. Kleinrock: Distributed control meth-
ods, Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. High Perform. Distrib.
Comput. (1993) pp. 206–215
53.340
Z.-D. Wang, E. Nakano, T. Matsukawa: Cooper-
ating multiple behavior-based robots for object
manipulation, Proc. IEEE/RSJ/GI Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (1994) pp. 1524–1531
53.341
D. Rus, B. Donald, J. Jennings: Moving furniture
with teams of autonomous robots, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (1995) pp. 235–242
53.342
F. Hara, Y. Yasui, T. Aritake: A kinematic analysis
of locomotive cooperation for two mobile robots
along a general wavy road, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (1995) pp. 1197–1204
53.343
J. Sasaki, J. Ota, E. Yoshida, D. Kurabayashi, T. Arai:
Cooperating grasping of a large object by multi-
ple mobile robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (1995) pp. 1205–1210
53.344
C. Jones, M.J. Matarić: Automatic synthesis of
communication-based coordinated multi-robot
systems, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2004) pp. 381–387

Part E | 53
1378
Part E
Moving in the Environment
53.345
L.E. Parker: Cooperative robotics for multi-target
observation, Intell. Autom. Soft Comput. 5(1), 5–
19 (1999)
53.346
A.W. Stroupe, M.C. Martin, T. Balch: Distributed
sensor fusion for object position estimation by
multi-robot systems, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2001) pp. 1092–1098
53.347
S. Luke, K. Sullivan, L. Panait, G. Balan: Tunably
decentralized algorithms for cooperative target
observation, Proc. 4th Int. Jt. Conf. Auton. Agents
Multiagent Syst. (2005) pp. 911–917
53.348
S.M. LaValle, H.H. Gonzalez-Banos, C. Becker, J.-
C. Latombe: Motion strategies for maintaining
visibility of a moving target, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (1997) pp. 731–736
53.349
T.H. Chung, J.W. Burdick, R.M. Murray: A decen-
tralized motion coordination strategy for dynamic
target tracking, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 2416–2422
53.350
A. Kolling, S. Carpin: Multirobot cooperation for
surveillance of multiple moving targets – A new
behavioral approach, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 1311–1316
53.351
B. Jung, G. Sukhatme: Tracking targets using mul-
tiple mobile robots: The effect of environment
occlusion, Auton. Robots 13(3), 191–205 (2002)
53.352
Z. Tang, U. Ozguner: Motion planning for mul-
titarget surveillance with mobile sensor agents,
IEEE Trans. Robotics 21(5), 898–908 (2005)
53.353
M.A. Vieira, R. Govindan, G.S. Sukhatme: Scalable
and practical pursuit-evasion with networked
robots, Intell. Serv. Robotics 2(4), 247–263 (2009)
53.354
L.E. Parker: Path planning and motion coordina-
tion in multiple mobile robot teams. In: Encyclo-
pedia of Complexity and System Science, ed. by
R.A. Meyers (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2009)
53.355
D. Grossman: Traffic control of multiple robot ve-
hicles, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 4, 491–497 (1988)
53.356
P. Caloud, W. Choi, J.-C. Latombe, C. Le Pape,
M. Yim: Indoor automation with many mobile
robots, IEEE Int. Workshop Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (1990) pp. 67–72
53.357
H. Asama, K. Ozaki, H. Itakura, A. Matsumoto,
Y. Ishida, I. Endo: Collision avoidance among
multiple mobile robots based on rules and com-
munication, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (1991) pp. 1215–1220
53.358
S. Yuta, S. Premvuti: Coordinating autonomous
and centralized decision making to achieve co-
operative behaviors between multiple mobile
robots, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(1992) pp. 1566–1574
53.359
J. Wang: Fully distributed traffic control strategies
for many-AGV systems, IEEE Int. Workshop Intell.
Robots Syst. (1991) pp. 1199–1204
53.360
J. Wang, G. Beni: Distributed computing problems
in cellular robotic systems, Proc. IEEE Int. Work-
shop Intell. Robots Syst. (1990) pp. 819–826
53.361
P. Svestka, M. Overmars: Coordinated path plan-
ning for multiple robots, Robotics Auton. Syst. 23,
125–152 (1998)
53.362
M. Peasgood, C. Clark, J. McPhee: A complete and
scalable strategy for coordinating multiple robots
within roadmaps, IEEE Trans. Robotics 24(2), 283–
292 (2008)
53.363
M. Erdmann, T. Lozano-Perez: On multiple mov-
ing objects, Algorithmica 2, 477–521 (1987)
53.364
C. Ferrari, E. Pagello, J. Ota, T. Arai: Multirobot
motion coordination in space and time, Robotics
Auton. Syst. 25, 219–229 (1998)
53.365
M. Bennewitz, W. Burgard, S. Thrun: Finding and
optimizing solvable priority schemes for decou-
pled path planning techniques for teams of mo-
biel robots, Robotics Auton. Syst. 41(2), 89–99
(2002)
53.366
H. Kitano, M. Asada, Y. Kuniyoshi, I. Noda, E. Os-
awa, H. Matasubara: RoboCup: A challenge prob-
lem of AI, AI Magazine 18(1), 73–86 (1997)
53.367
H. Kitano, S. Tadokoro: RoboCup rescue: A grand
challenge for multiagent and intelligent systems,
AI Magazine 22(1), 39–52 (2001)
53.368
B. Browning, J. Bruce, M. Bowling, M. Veloso: STP:
Skills, tactics and plays for multi-robot control
in adversarial environments, IEEE J. Control Syst.
Eng. 219, 33–52 (2005)
53.369
M. Veloso, P. Stone, K. Han: The CMUnited-97
robotic soccer team: Perception and multiagent
control, Robotics Auton. Syst. 29(2/3), 133–143
(1999)
53.370
T. Weigel, J.-S. Gutmann, M. Dietl, A. Kleiner,
B. Nebel: CS Freiburg: Coordinating robots for suc-
cessful soccer playing, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
5(18), 685–699 (2002)
53.371
P. Stone, M. Veloso: Task decomposition, dynamic
role assignemnt, and low-bandwidth commu-
nicaiton for real-time strategic teamwork, Artif.
Intell. 110(2), 241–273 (1999)
53.372
C. Candea, H.S. Hu, L. Iocchi, D. Nardi, M. Piag-
gio: Coordination in multi-agent Robocup teams,
Robotics Auton. Syst. 36(2), 67–86 (2001)
53.373
L.E. Parker: Current state of the art in dis-
tributed autonomous mobile robotics, Distrib.
Auton. Robotic Syst. 4, 3–12 (2000)
53.374
K.R. Baghaei, A. Agah: Task allocation and com-
munication methodologies for multi-robot sys-
tems, Intell. Autom. Soft Comput. 9, 217–226
(2003)
53.375
T. Balch, L.E. Parker: Guest editorial, special issue
on heterogeneous multi-robot systems, Auton.
Robots 8(3), 207–208 (2000)
53.376
M. Dorigo, E. Sahin: Guest editorial, special issue
on swarm robotics, Auton. Robots 17(2/3), 111–113
(2004)
53.377
M. Veloso, D. Nardi: Special issue on multirobot
systems, Proc. IEEE 94, 1253–1256 (2006)
53.378
T. Balch: Taxonomies of multi-robot task and
reward. In: Robot Teams: From Diversity to Poly-
morphism, ed. by T. Balch, L.E. Parker (A K Peters,
Natick 2002)
53.379
L.E. Parker, G. Bekey, J. Barhen (Eds.): Distributed
Autonomous Robotic Systems 4 (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 2000)

Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
References
1379
Part E | 53
53.380
H. Asama, T. Arai, T. Fukuda, T. Hasegawa
(Eds.): Distributed Autonomous Robotic Systems 5
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2002)
53.381
R. Alami, R. Chatila, H. Asama (Eds.): Distributed
Autonomous Robotic Systems 6 (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 2006)
53.382
M. Gini, R. Voyles (Eds.): Distributed Autonomous
Robotic Systems 7 (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2006)
53.383
H. Asama, H. Kurokawa, J. Ota, K. Sekiyama: Dis-
tributed Autonomous Robotic Systems 8 (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 2009)
53.384
A. Martinoli, F. Mondada, N. Correll, G. Mermoud,
M. Egerstedt, M.A. Hsieh, L.E. Parker, K. Stoy
(Eds.): Distributed Autonomous Robotic Systems,
Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics, Vol. 83
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2013)
53.385
A. Schultz, L.E. Parker (Eds.): Multi-Robot Systems:
From Swarms to Intelligent Automata (Kluwer,
Dordrecht 2002)
53.386
A.
Schultz,
L.E.
Parker,
F.
Schneider
(Eds.):
Multi-Robot Systems Volume II: From Swarms
to
Intelligent
Automata
(Kluwer,
Dordrecht
2003)
53.387
E. Sahin, W.M. Spears (Eds.): Swarm Robotics: SAB
2004 Int. Workshop (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2004)
53.388
L.E. Parker, F. Schneider, A. Schultz (Eds.): Multi-
Robot Systems Volume III: From Swarms to Intel-
ligent Automata (Kluwer, Dordrecht 2005)
53.389
T. Balch, L.E. Parker (Eds.): Robot Teams: From
Polymorphism to Diversity (A K Peters, Natick
2002)
53.390
F. Bullo, J. Cortés, S. Martinez: Distributed Control
of Robotic Networks: A Mathematical Approach to
Motion Coordination Algorithms (Princeton Uni-
versity Press, Princeton 2009)
53.391
S.
Kernbach
(Ed.):
Handbook
of
Collective
Robotics: Fundamentals and Challenges (CRC,
Boca Raton 2013)

1381
Multimedia Contents Robots
Part F
Part F Robots at Work
Ed. by Alex Zelinsky
54 Industrial Robotics
Martin Hägele, Stuttgart, Germany
Klas Nilsson, Lund, Sweden
J. Norberto Pires, Coimbra, Portugal
Rainer Bischoff, Augsburg, Germany
55 Space Robotics
Kazuya Yoshida, Sendai, Japan
Brian Wilcox, Pasadena, USA
Gerd Hirzinger, Wessling, Germany
Roberto Lampariello, Wessling, Germany
56 Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
Marcel Bergerman, Pittsburgh, USA
John Billingsley, Toowoomba, Australia
John Reid, Moline, USA
Eldert van Henten, Wageningen,
The Netherlands
57 Robotics in Construction
Kamel S. Saidi, Gaitherbsurg, USA
Thomas Bock, Munich, Germany
Christos Georgoulas, Munich, Germany
58 Robotics in Hazardous Applications
James Trevelyan, Crawley, Australia
William R. Hamel, Knoxville, USA
Sung-Chul Kang, Seoul, Korea
59 Robotics in Mining
Joshua A. Marshall, Kingston, Canada
Adrian Bonchis, Pullenvale, Australia
Eduardo Nebot, Sydney, Australia
Steven Scheding, Sydney, Australia
60 Disaster Robotics
Robin R. Murphy, College Station, USA
Satoshi Tadokoro, Sendai, Japan
Alexander Kleiner, Linköping, Sweden
61 Robot Surveillance and Security
Wendell H. Chun, Denver, USA
Nikolaos Papanikolopoulos, Minneapolis,
USA
62 Intelligent Vehicles
Alberto Broggi, Parma, Italy
Alex Zelinsky, Canberra, Australia
Ümit Özgüner, Columbus, USA
Christian Laugier, Saint Ismier, France
63 Medical Robotics
and Computer-Integrated Surgery
Russell H. Taylor, Baltimore, USA
Arianna Menciassi, Pisa, Italy
Gabor Fichtinger, Kingston, Canada
Paolo Fiorini, Verona, Italy
Paolo Dario, Pisa, Italy
64 Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
H.F. Machiel Van der Loos, Vancouver,
Canada
David J. Reinkensmeyer, Irvine, USA
Eugenio Guglielmelli, Rome, Italy
65 Domestic Robotics
Erwin Prassler, Sankt Augustin, Germany
Mario E. Munich, Pasadena, USA
Paolo Pirjanian, Bedford, USA
Kazuhiro Kosuge, Sendai, Japan
66 Robotics Competitions and Challenges
Daniele Nardi, Rome, Italy
Jonathan Roberts, Brisbane, Australia
Manuela Veloso, Pittsburgh, USA
Luke Fletcher, Brisbane, Australia

1382
Part F, Robots at Work, covers the advances in technol-
ogy that are concerned with the growing area of robot
applications, ranging from factory robotics, through
a diverse array of industry applications such mining,
agriculture, construction to health care and domestic
robotics. The future vision for robotics is for the per-
vasive application of robots. The robots of the future
will perform all the dangerous, dirty, and dreary (DDD)
tasks. Joe Engelberger, the pioneer of the robotics indus-
try, wrote in his 1989 book Robotics in Service that the
inspiration to write the book came as a reaction to a fore-
cast study of robot applications, which predicted that
in 1995 applications of robotics outside factories (the
traditional domain of industrial robots) would account
for less than 1% of total sales. Engelberger believed
that this forecast was wrong, and he instead predicted
that the non-industrial class of robot applications would
become the largest class of robot applications. Engel-
berger’s prediction has yet to come to pass. However, he
did correctly foresee the growth in non-traditional appli-
cations of robots. Previous parts of this Handbook show
the great strides that robotics technology has made in
the past 50 years. The technology has reached a level
of maturity such that robots are now marching from the
factories into ﬁeld and service applications.
The topics in Part F cover the essentials of what is
required to create robots that can operate in all environ-
ments and perform meaningful work. Part F describes
ﬁt-for-purpose robots and includes hardware design,
control (of locomotion, manipulation, and interaction),
perception, and user interfaces. The economic/social
drivers for the particular applications are also dis-
cussed. Part F builds on all of the previous parts of the
Handbook. Robotics Foundations (Part A) and Design
(Part B) are essential for providing the basic mech-
anisms and control structures for any robot that is
targeted for applications work. Sensing and Perception
(Part C) and Manipulation and Interfaces (Part D) are
critical capabilities for robots that need to interact with
changing environments and perform manipulation tasks
under human supervision. To fully utilize the potential
of a working robot requires mobility and the ability to
cooperate with other robotics, the basic technologies
described in Moving in the Environment (Part E) are
essential.
Chapter 54, Industrial Robotics, gives a history
and description of typical industrial robot applications.
Most robots today can trace their origin to early indus-
trial robot designs. All the important foundations for
robot control were initially developed with industrial
applications in mind. The chapter describes how robot
with different mechanisms are designed to ﬁt different
applications.
Chapter 55, Space Robots and Systems, deals with
robotics technology for space applications. It covers
two classes of robotics: orbital systems and opera-
tion of planetary surfaces. Any unmanned spacecraft is
a robotic spacecraft. However, space robots are more
capable devices that can facilitate manipulation, assem-
bly, assisting astronauts, and extending exploration to
remote planets as surrogates for human explorers. This
chapter covers the key issues in space robots and sys-
tems: manipulation, mobility, sensing and perception,
tele-operation and autonomy, and dealing with extreme
environments. A historical overview and a review of the
most recent technical advances for space robots is pro-
vided. An extensive description of the mathematics for
the control of robotic devices in microgravity environ-
ments is also provided.
Chapter 56, Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry,
describes how robotics has made a impact in the agri-
cultural and forestry industries. Agriculture is an in-
dustry that is driven by productivity. Growing human
population drives ever-increasing demands for greater
food production. Robotics is a productivity technology
that can be game changer in agriculture. The chapter fo-
cuses on case studies where robotics has made a marked
difference to agriculture and forestry. The case stud-
ies cover the use of robotics in ﬁeld crops, weeding,
seeding, irrigation, orchard crops – fruit and vegeta-
bles, forestry, and livestock applications – breeding,
harvesting, slaughter and processing. The case stud-
ies follow the progression of robotics technology from
sensing through mobility to manipulation. The chapter
emphasizes the agricultural ﬁeld as a fruitful source for
robotics applications, that are sufﬁciently demanding to
require the development of new techniques, methods
and technologies.
Chapter 57, Robotics in Construction, describes the
construction automation concepts that have been devel-
oped and presents examples of construction robots that
are in use and are in various stages of development.
The chapter gives an overview of the construction in-
dustry and discusses the concept of automation versus
robotics. The chapter discusses robotics in applications
that are on construction sites. The chapter deals with the
growing number robotics and automation application of
offsite construction tasks such as prefabrication. Un-
solved technical challenges including interoperability,
connection systems, tolerances, power, and communi-
cations are discussed.
Chapter 58, Robotics in Hazardous Applications,
discusses robot technologies for dealing with difﬁcult
and dangerous environments. The technology solutions
that are adopted depend on the nature and magnitude of

1383
the hazards. When the magnitudes of hazards reach the
point that human exposure represents a direct threat to
life or has long-term health consequences, e.g., nuclear
radiation, some form of remote operation must be used.
This chapter describes robotics technologies for dealing
with eradicating landmines, and hazardous materials
handling, such as explosives disposal, and handling of
dangerous biological and nuclear material. Enabling
technologies to support demining and hazardous mate-
rial handling are discussed, including mobile platforms,
manipulator design, teleoperation and control, and the
supply of energy and communication signals through
reliable and robust tethers. The chapter ends with a dis-
cussion of the advances that are required to progress the
ﬁeld. Progress is needed in mechatronics design, sens-
ing, machine intelligence, and fully understanding the
application and its associated economic factors.
Chapter 59, Mining Robotics, discusses the ap-
plication of robotics to the mining industry. Mining
remains physically demanding and hazardous work.
The scope for the application of robotics is great since
mining requires the handling of enormous quantities
of material in a cost-effective and safe manner. High
operational costs, the need for greater productivity,
and improved health and safety outcomes are powerful
drivers for robotics. Robotics and automation is pro-
viding the next step change in productivity and safety.
This chapter reviews the modern mining practice and
the technology drivers. It describes the enabling robot
technologies associated with surface mining and un-
derground mining. The chapter covers the technologies
associated with digging, drilling, explosives handling,
haulage, truck ﬂeet management, autonomous mapping
of mines and robotic rescue for recover in mining acci-
dents. The chapter considers the challenges associated
with mining in extreme environments such as undersea
extraction of resources and the long-term possibilities
of interplanetary exploration and mining.
Chapter 60, Disaster Robotics, describes the state
of the art of an emerging applications ﬁeld. In recent
times robots have served as extensions of responders to
a disaster, providing real-time video and other sensory
data about the situation. The technology is still emerg-
ing and is beginning to be adopted by the international
emergency response community. Robots are being used
by ﬁre departments and for bomb disposal. This chap-
ter describes the basic nature of disasters, the impact on
robot design, the types of robots actually used in disas-
ters such as the Fukushima Nuclear disaster, promising
designs, future concepts and benchmarks for evaluation
of disaster robotics. The chapter discusses the funda-
mental challenges facing disaster robotics, including
the key challenge of evolution from a concept to the
adoption as a solution technology.
Chapter 61, Robot Surveillance and Security in-
troduces surveillance and security robots for military
and civil applications. The chapter describes the ap-
plications environment that covers ground, aerial and
maritime domains for a wide range of surveillance and
security robots. A systems overview is provided of the
mobility component, sensor payload, communication
system, and operator control interface, together with
a description of the enabling technologies. The chap-
ter concludes with a review of current research topics
and discusses the future direction of robotic surveil-
lance and security.
Chapter 62, Intelligent Vehicles, describes the
emerging robotics application ﬁeld of intelligent vehi-
cles: motor vehicles that have autonomous functions
and capabilities. The chapter describes why the devel-
opment of intelligent vehicles is important and gives
a brief history of the ﬁeld and the potential beneﬁts
of the technology. It describes the enabling technolo-
gies for intelligent vehicles to sense vehicle, environ-
ment, and driver state, work with digital maps and
satellite navigation, and communicating with intelligent
transportation infrastructure. The chapter describes the
challenges and solutions associated with road scene un-
derstanding. Advanced driver assistance systems which
use robotics technologies to create new safety and con-
venience systems for motor vehicles, such as collision
avoidance, lane keeping, parking assistance, as well
as driver monitoring to mitigate against driver fatigue,
inattention, and impairment are described.
Chapter 63, Medical Robotics and Computer-
Integrated Surgery describes the development of med-
ical robotics. In the last 20 years starting with brain
surgery, orthopaedics, endoscopic surgery, and micro-
surgery, the ﬁeld has expanded to include commer-
cially marketed, clinically deployed systems and an
active research community. This chapter provides a his-
torical review of the ﬁeld and discusses the major
thrusts using examples from current and past research.
Medical robots are described within the context of
larger computer-integrated systems including presur-
gical planning, intraoperative execution, and post-
operative assessment and follow-up. The basic concepts
of computer-integrated surgery including the critical
factors affecting the deployment and acceptance of
medical robots are described. An overview of medical
robot systems is provided, including remote telesurgery
and robotic surgical simulators. The chapter concludes
with a discussion on future research directions.

1384
Chapter 64, Rehabilitation and Health Care Robot-
ics, describes robotic systems that assist persons who
have a disability or provide rehabilitation therapy for
persons. The chapter provides a historical review of the
ﬁeld. Physical therapy and training robots as well as
robotic aids for people with disabilities are described.
Advances in smart prostheses and orthoses for rehabili-
tation robotics are also described. An overview of work
in diagnosis and monitoring for rehabilitation is pro-
vided. The chapter provides a solid understanding of
the future challenges for rehabilitation and heath care
robotics.
Chapter 65, Domestic Robots, describes the tech-
nology that everyone would one day like in their home,
which will vacuum the house, clean the kitchen, load
the dishwasher, or polish the shoes. In spite of hun-
dreds of millions of potential users surprisingly not
many domestic robots exist, with one notable excep-
tion – the Roomba! This chapter examines what have
been the success factors for commercializing domestic
robots using cleaning robots as a representative ex-
ample. The chapter reviews domestic ﬂoor cleaning
robots, robotic pool cleaners, window cleaning robots,
and robotic lawn mowing. The chapter also examines
smart appliances such as sports robotics, and telepres-
ence robots. A description of research projects for smart
environments and smart homes is presented. The chap-
ter describes the important underpinning technologies
for domestic robots covering sensing, obstacle avoid-
ance, localization, mapping and coverage.
Chapter 66, Robotics Competitions and Chal-
lenges, explores the use of competitions to accelerate
robotics research and to promote education. Robot
competitions have been shown to drive innovation in
the robotics ﬁeld. The chapter covers the two broad
types of robot competition: human-inspired competi-
tions and task based challenges. Human-inspired robot
competitions, which are mostly sports contests, develop
platforms that support problem solving. Task based
challenges attract participants by presenting a tough
new challenge for robotics technology. Three case stud-
ies of robot competitions are presented Robot Soc-
cer, the Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) Challenge
and the DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency) Grand Challenges. The case studies describe
the organizational challenges for participants, the bene-
ﬁts and limitations of competitions and what it takes to
have a good robot competition.

Multimedia Contents Industrial Ro
1385
Part F | 54
54. Industrial Robotics
Martin Hägele, Klas Nilsson, J. Norberto Pires, Rainer Bischoff
Much of the technology that makes robots reli-
able, human friendly, and adaptable for numerous
applications has emerged from manufacturers of
industrial robots. With an estimated installation
base in 2014 of about 1:5 million units, some
171 000 new installations in that year and an
annual turnover of the robotics industry estimated
to be US$ 32 billion, industrial robots are by far the
largest commercial application of robotics tech-
nology today.
The foundations for robot motion planning
and control were initially developed with in-
dustrial applications in mind. These applications
deserve special attention in order to understand
the origin of robotics science and to appreciate
the many unsolved problems that still prevent
the wider use of robots in today’s agile manufac-
turing environments. In this chapter, we present
a brief history and descriptions of typical indus-
trial robotics applications and at the same time we
address current critical state-of-the-art techno-
logical developments. We show how robots with
different mechanisms fit different applications and
how applications are further enabled by latest
technologies, often adopted from technological
fields outside manufacturing automation.
We will first present a brief historical intro-
duction to industrial robotics with a selection of
contemporary application examples which at the
same time refer to a critical key technology. Then,
the basic principles that are used in industrial
robotics and a review of programming methods
54.1 Industrial Robotics: The Main Driver
for Robotics Research and Application . 1386
54.2 A Short History of Industrial Robots ...... 1386
54.3 Industrial Robot Kinematics ................. 1392
54.4 Typical Industrial Robot Applications .... 1393
54.4.1
Handling .................................. 1393
54.4.2 Welding.................................... 1396
54.4.3 Assembly .................................. 1398
54.4.4 Painting ................................... 1402
54.4.5 Processing ................................ 1402
54.5 Safe Human–Robot Collaboration ......... 1405
54.5.1
Overview of Basic
Robot Safety Standards .............. 1405
54.5.2 Types and Requirements
of Human–Robot Collaboration .. 1406
54.5.3 Examples of Human–Robot
Collaboration ............................ 1408
54.6 Task Descriptions –
Teaching and Programming ................. 1409
54.7 System Integration............................... 1414
54.8 Outlook and Long-Term Challenges ...... 1416
Video-References......................................... 1418
References................................................... 1418
will be outlined. We will also introduce the topic
of system integration particularly from a data in-
tegration point of view. The chapter will be closed
with an outlook based on a presentation of some
unsolved problems that currently inhibit wider use
of industrial robots.

Part F | 54.2
1386
Part F
Robots at Work
54.1 Industrial Robotics: The Main Driver for Robotics Research
and Application
Even though robots are considered a cornerstone of
today’s competitive manufacturing particularly in auto-
mobile and related component assembly, there are still
challenges to solve for manufacturing to efﬁciently re-
spond to changing consumer behavior and global shifts
in competitiveness. Furthermore, high-growth indus-
tries (in electronics, food, logistics, and life-sciences)
and emerging manufacturing processes (gluing, coat-
ing, laser-based processes, precision assembly, ﬁber
material processing) as well as fulﬁlling sustainabil-
ity regulations will increasingly depend on advanced
robot technology [54.1]. Additionally, the range of fea-
sible applications could signiﬁcantly increase if robots
were easier to install, to integrate with other manu-
facturing processes, and to program, particularly with
adaptive sensing and automatic error recovery. Further
challenges result from the integration of various types
of controls (programmable logic controller (PLC), com-
puter numerical control (CNC) sensors) with the robot
controller, from close human–robot collaboration and
fenceless production with both lightweight and heavy
duty robots, and from an increasing need to save
energy.
Design and production of industrial robots on the
one hand, and the planning, integration, and operation
of robot work cells on the other hand are largely in-
dependent engineering tasks. In order to be produced
in sufﬁciently large quantities, a robot design should
meet the requirements for the widest set of potential
applications. As this is difﬁcult to achieve in practice,
various classes of robot designs regarding payload ca-
pacity, number of robot axes, and workspace volume
have emerged for application categories such as as-
sembly, palletizing, painting, welding, machining, and
general handling tasks.
Generally, a robot workcell consists of one or more
robots with controllers and so-called robot peripherals,
e.g., grippers or tools, safety devices, sensors, and ma-
terial transfer components for moving and presenting
parts. Typically, the cost of a complete robot workcell
is four to ﬁve times the cost of the robots alone; how-
ever, efforts are underway to drastically reduce these
costs through use of increased robot functionality and
artiﬁcial intelligence [54.2]. A robot workcell is usually
the result of customized planning, integration, program-
ming, and conﬁguration, requiring signiﬁcant engineer-
ing expertise. Standardized engineering methods, tools,
and best-practice examples for specifying and designing
robot workcells have become available to provide pre-
dictable performance and to secure investments [54.3].
Today’s industrial robots are mainly rooted in the
requirements of capital-intensive large-volume manu-
facturing, typically deﬁned by the automotive, electron-
ics, and electrical goods industries which make up 80%
of all robot installations. Future industrial robots will
not be a mere extrapolation of today’s designs, but will
rather follow new design principles addressing a much
wider range of application areas and industries. At the
same time, new technologies, particularly from the in-
formation technology (IT) or the consumer domain will
have an increasing impact on the design, performance,
use and cost of future industrial robots.
International and national standards now help to
quantify robot performance and deﬁne safety precau-
tions, geometry, and media interfaces [54.4]. Most
robots operate behind secure barriers to keep people
at a safe distance. Recently, improved safety standards
have allowed direct human–robot collaboration, permit-
ting robots and human factory workers to share the
same workspace [54.5, 6].
54.2 A Short History of Industrial Robots
The invention of the industrial robot dates back to
1954 when inventor George Devol ﬁled a patent on
a programmed article transfer (Fig. 54.1). After team-
ing up with young engineer and entrepreneur Joseph
Engelberger, the ﬁrst robot company, Unimation, was
founded. It put the ﬁrst robot into service at a Gen-
eral Motors plant in 1961 for extracting parts from
a die-casting machine. Most of the hydraulically actu-
ated Unimates were sold through the following years
for workpiece handling and for spot-welding of car
bodies [54.7]. Soon, many other companies started to
develop and manufacture industrial robots in many
industrial nations; an innovation-driven industry was
born [54.8]. The ﬁrst International Symposium on In-
dustrial Robotics (now ISR) took place in Chicago in
1970 and proved that robotics had become the ﬁeld of
activity of a vibrant research community.
The breakthrough Stanford Arm was designed as
a research prototype in 1969 by Victor Scheinman
(Chap. 4). The six-degree-of-freedom (6-DOF) all-

Industrial Robotics
54.2 A Short History of Industrial Robots
1387
Part F | 54.2
a)
b)
Fig.54.1a,b The invention of the industrial robot. (a) This patent was the start of a joint effort between G. Devol and
J. Engelberger to form the ﬁrst robot company, Unimation, a fusion of the terms universal and automation. The company
was acquired by Westinghouse in the late 1980s and subsequently taken up by Stäubli in 1988. (b) The ﬁrst Unimation
performed a rather simple handling task in 1961 at a General Motors plant; other car manufacturers followed (courtesy
of Smithsonian Institution Archives, Washington DC)
a)
b)
Fig.54.2a,b The all-electric (a) IRB-6 and (b) a SCARA-type kinematic. (a) First introduced in 1973, the IRB-6 has
been a breakthrough development as it was the ﬁrst serially produced robot product, which combined all-electric-drives
technology and a microcomputer for motion control and programming. The robot proved very robust, and life-times of
more than 25 years in harsh productions were reported (courtesy of ABB Automation). (b) The selective compliance
assembly robot arm (SCARA) is particularly suited for assembly tasks as it combines rigidity in the vertical axis and
compliance in the horizontal axis. In 1978, the ﬁrst Hirata AR-300 was put together. Depicted is the successor design,
the AR-i350 (courtesy of HIRATA Robotics, Mainz)

Part F | 54.2
1388
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
Fig.54.3a,b The KUKA IR 601/60 (a) and the Unimation
PUMA (programmable universal machine for assembly)
560 (b). (a) In 1978, the novel 6 DOF KUKA robot fea-
tured a parallel linkage for its second and third axes. At
almost two tons of own weight, it could handle payloads
of some 60 kg at maximum operating speed. The robot
quickly became a workhorse for the automotive industry.
(b) The six axis PUMA was inspired by the dexterity of
a human arm. After its launch in 1979 by Unimation, it
became one of the most popular arms and was used, due
to its versatility and ease of use, as a reference in robotics
research for many years
electric manipulator was controlled by a state-of-the-art
computer of the time, a DEC PDP-6. The nonanthro-
pomorphic kinematic conﬁguration with one prismatic
and ﬁve rotational joints was conﬁgured such that the
equations for solving the robot kinematics were simple
enough to speed up computations. Drives consisted of
direct-current (DC) electric motors, harmonic drive and
spur gear reducers, potentiometers and tachometers for
position and velocity feedback [54.9]. Subsequent robot
designs were strongly inﬂuenced by Scheinman’s con-
cepts (Figs. 54.2 and 54.3).
In 1973, the company ASEA (now ABB) intro-
duced the ﬁrst microcomputer-controlled all-electric
industrial robot, the IRB-6, which allowed continuous
path motion (CP), a precondition for many applications
such as arc welding or material removal (Fig. 54.2). In
the 1970s, intense diffusion of robots into car manu-
facturing set in mostly for (spot-)welding and handling
applications (Fig. 54.3) [54.10].
In 1978, the selective compliance assembly robot
arm (SCARA) was invented by Makino of Yamanashi
University, Japan [54.11]. The ground-breaking four-
axis low-cost design was perfectly suited for small parts
assembly as the kinematic conﬁguration allows fast and
compliant arm motion (Fig. 54.4). Flexible assembly
systems based on the SCARA robot in conjunction with
compatible product designs (DFA) have contributed sig-
niﬁcantly to creating a boom in high-volume electron-
ics production and consumer products [54.12]. Further
optimization of robot dynamics and accuracy led to
the ﬁrst direct-drive SCARA robot, the AdeptOne in
1984 [54.13].
Requirements regarding a robot’s speed, accuracy
and weight have led to novel kinematic and transmis-
sion designs. An approach toward lightweight and stiff
structures has been pursued since the 1980s by develop-
ing parallel kinematic machines (PKM) which connect
the machine’s basis with its end-effector by three to six
parallel struts, see also Fig. 54.5. These so-called par-
allel robots (Chap. 4 and 18) are particularly suited to
achieve short cycle times (e.g., for picking), precision
(e.g., for material removal), or handling high workloads
(Fig. 54.5) and have found their niches in advanced
manufacturing [54.14]. However, workspace volumes
tend to be signiﬁcantly smaller than those of serial or
open kinematic chain robots which are comparable in
size.
Efforts of reducing mass and inertia of serial robot
structures have been a primary research target, where
the human arm with a weight-to-load ratio better
than 1 W 1 was considered the ultimate benchmark. In
2006, robot manufacturer KUKA introduced their LBR
lightweight prototype robot, a compact 7-DOF robot
arm with advanced torque-control capabilities which
has recently been introduced in high-performance in-
dustrial applications [54.15]. An obvious next step in
approaching human dexterity is the recent introduc-
tion of two-armed robot designs with some recent
developments being depicted in Fig. 54.7 [54.16]. In
conjunction with a robot’s capability to support safe
human–robot collaboration, new manufacturing con-
cepts can be implemented which expand capabilities,
productivity, and ergonomic quality to manual work-
places [54.17].

Industrial Robotics
54.2 A Short History of Industrial Robots
1389
Part F | 54.2
Fig. 54.4 An automated video cassette recorder (VCR) assembly line (about 1989) with SCARAs carrying a turret
with multigripper tools. Typically ﬁve parts are added by one robot before the VCR is moved to the next station of the
automated assembly line
a)
b)
c)
Fig.54.5a–c Parallel robots are slowly diffusing into various ﬁelds of industrial application: (a) the Neos Tricept 600,
(b) Fanuc F-200iB. (c) Adept Quattro. (a) In 1992, Neos Robotics represented with their Tricept robot range a concept
to combine the stiffness of machine tools with the dexterity of a robot for heavy-duty applications such as in friction
stir welding (FSW) or machining of aluminum for the aircraft industry. (b) The Fanuc F-200iB introduced in 2002 is
a 6-DOF parallel robot particularly designed for welding gun handling, deﬂashing, or for assembly tasks (100 kg payload,
˙0:1 mm accuracy) in automotive assembly processes; (c) the Adept Quattro (introduced in 2007, following the ABB
FlexPicker in 1998) is suited for high-speed applications in packaging, manufacturing, assembly, and material handling.
The quad dual-link arm design forms an over-determined kinematic linkage, which in the wrist is converted to the forth
axis of end-effector rotation by means of an internal transmission in the wrist
In parallel to industrial robots, automated guided
vehicles (AGV) have emerged. These mobile robots
are used for moving workpieces or loading equip-
ment following a predetermined or virtual path in
industrial environments. Within the concept of auto-
mated ﬂexible manufacturing systems (FMS) AGVs
have become an important part of their routing ﬂex-
ibility. Initially, AGVs relied on prepared ﬂoors such
as embedded wires, magnets, or other tags for mo-
tion guidance. Meanwhile, freely navigating AGVs
along virtual trajectories are entering large-scale man-
ufacturing and logistics. Usually, their navigation is
based on laser scanners that provide an accurate two-
or even three-dimensional map of the actual environ-
ment for self-localization and obstacle avoidance. Early
on, combinations of AGVs and robot arms were sug-

Part F | 54.2
1390
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
Fig.54.6a,b Mobile robots were introduced in the early 1980s for increased ﬂexibility and reliability in factory logistics.
(a) The MORO (1984) developed at Fraunhofer IPA was one of the ﬁrst prototypes to combine a robot arm on a wire-
bound mobile platform which follows a wire buried in the ﬂoor. (b) The KUKA omniRob features an omnidirectional
platform and the LBR iiwa lightweight arm which form a highly kinematically redundant robot system (courtesy of
KUKA)
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
Fig.54.7a–f Examples of different designs of dual-arm robots (courtesy of (a) Motoman, (b) ABB, (c) Rethink Robotics,
(d) Kawada Industries, (e) COMAU, (f) Seiko Epson)

Industrial Robotics
54.2 A Short History of Industrial Robots
1391
Part F | 54.2
China
Japan
America (USA, Canada,
Mexico, Brazil)
Germany
Worldwide
2014
2012
2010
Automotive industry
Manufacturing industry
2014
2012
2010
2000
2005
2010
2015
a)
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Korea
Japan
Germany
USA
Taiwan
Italy
Spain
France
UK
b)
1500
1000
500
0
d)
0
25
50
75
100
125
c)
Handling
Welding,
soldering
Assembly
Dispensing
Processing
Other
0
10
20
30
40
50
Parts, accessories
for motor vehicles
Motor vehicles
industry
Electrical/electronics
Basic metal
materials, products
Plastic, chemical
products
Food products,
beverages
Fig.54.8a–d Statistics of worldwide industrial robotics use (after [54.1]). (a) Estimated annual robot installations in
selected countries (1000 units, estimate for 2015), (b) Number of multipurpose industrial robots (all types) per 10 000
employees in the automotive and in manufacturing industries 2014. (c) Estimated worldwide annual shipments of indus-
trial robots in main application areas. (d) Estimated worldwide annual shipments of industrial robots in main industrial
branches
gested to automatically load and unload machine tools
(Fig. 54.6). Safety and power supply have been an ob-
stacle to these system’s diffusion in industrial practice.
Currently, ﬁrst solutions for mobile manipulation ap-
pear [54.18].
The ability to use human and robot workers either
interchangeably or in workspace sharing/collaboration
scenarios in human workplaces motivated the design
of anthropomorphic dual-arm robots (Fig. 54.7. Even
though industrial acceptance initially has been low, ad-
vances in programming comfort, securing safe human–
robot coexistence/collaboration and system cost have
led to signiﬁcant interest in using dual arms in ag-
ile manufacturing concepts, particularly in assembly
and handling applications [54.19]. The dual-arm sys-
tems suggest a new way of using powerful and lean
type of robot which is easy to install by the man-
ufacturing end-user with little adaptation of manual
workplaces.
Today, industrial robotics is seen as a central pillar
to future manufacturing competitiveness and economic
growth:

The International Federation of Robotics (IFR) es-
timates that between 2000 and 2008 the robotics
industry had created 810 million highly qualiﬁed
jobs, either directly or indirectly. The prediction
is that between 20122020 another 4 million jobs
will be created in the robot ecosystem [54.20]. The
extent of job creation by robotics has been dis-

Part F | 54.3
1392
Part F
Robots at Work
cussed controversially. It is undisputed, however,
that a wider use of robots in manufacturing is
able to signiﬁcantly strengthen a competitive posi-
tion of a company or an industrial sector [54.21].
Economically, manufacturing productivity gains are
particularly effective for economic growth. There is
no sustainable product innovation without manufac-
turing competence which includes knowledge and
practice of planning, designing, and operating ad-
vanced robotic systems [54.22] (Fig. 54.8).

The average price for a robot in 2014 was in the or-
der of US$ 46 800, which is about one-third of its
equivalent price in 1990. At the same time, robot
performance parameters such as speed, load capac-
ity, and mean time between failures (MTBF) have
dramatically improved. This means that automation
has become more affordable, providing a faster re-
turn on investment [54.1].

Traditionally, robot automation has not played a sig-
niﬁcant role in the implementation of lean manu-
facturing strategies. However, efforts are underway
to introduce industrial robots to lean, agile man-
ufacturing. Characteristics are robot solutions that
can be ﬂexibly added to manufacturing systems
on demand, that are signiﬁcantly less expensive
on a life-cycle-costing (LCC) basis than today’s
systems due to reduced peripherals and systems
integration (system out of the box) [54.23]. With
robots becoming commodities in manufacturing
they might be used as intuitively and naturally as
a handheld power tool today. This would imply
intuitive and safe human–robot collaboration and
versatility due to advanced sensing, control, and
embedding the robot set-up and operation in an IT
infrastructure.

Factories of the future will represent a network of
self-organizing cyber physical systems (CPS). As
part of this industrial internet CPSs embed compu-
tation, networking, and physical processes and can
either represent manufacturing equipment such as
machine tools, ﬁxtures, trays, conveyors, tools, etc.
or the workpiece which controls and memorizes its
production. Robots are considered the centerpiece
of future smart factories which combine manufac-
turing agility, proﬁtability, human ergonomics, and
minimized resource consumption [54.24].

Robots in assembly have not reached their pre-
dicted installation potential mainly due to cheap
labor cost and the lean assembly work systems
which support highest ﬂexibility and productivity at
minimal waste. A reason is partly seen in the slow
advances in dexterous manipulation for assembly
tasks with industrial robustness. Here, torque-con-
trolled lightweight robots [54.25] and two-armed
robot systems have been proposed to imitate human
ergonomics and task execution [54.26].

New ﬁnancing models such as leasing, pay by ser-
vice will allow end-users to use robots on demand
or to have manufacturing service providers to op-
erate manufacturing lines on a pay-on-production
basis [54.27].
Figure 54.8 depicts some key ﬁgures on the recent
extent of industrial robot diffusion into manufacturing.
54.3 Industrial Robot Kinematics
By deﬁnition, an industrial robot is an automatically
controlled, reprogrammable, multipurpose manipula-
tor, programmable in three or more axes, which can
be either ﬁxed in place or mobile for use in indus-
trial automation applications [54.28]. Robots can be
categorized according to their number of independent
kinematic axes, and their mechanical structure which
affect most of the robots’ kinematic properties, the com-
putation methods used to determine joint motions, and
the form and size of the robot workspace. Robot me-
chanical structures are composed of links that are rigid
bodies connecting neighboring (prismatic, rotary, cylin-
drical or spherical) joints. The diagrams in Table 54.1
show several common types of robot mechanical struc-
tures. Of course, the workspace of industrial robots can
be signiﬁcantly expanded by placing the robot arm on
an additional linear axis, sometimes reaching a length
of more than 50 m, or even on mobile platforms. Fur-
thermore, robot mechanical structures can be composed
by joint modules which are connected by links to form
task-speciﬁc designs.
With advances in the state of the art in motion
control and computer hardware processing capabilities,
computation is much less a constraint on mechanism
choice than it was for early robot designers. The choice
of mechanical structure of the robot depends mostly on
fundamental mechanical requirements such as payload
and workspace size. Considering a given level of cost,
there is usually a trade-off between workspace size and
stiffness. To enable the robot to reach inside or around
obstacles it is clearly advantageous to use an articulated
mechanical design.
Considering also the stiffness and accuracy (in
a practical sense considering what is reasonable to
build), the picture is more complex. Each of the ﬁrst
three types in Table 54.1 we refer to as serial kinematic

Industrial Robotics
54.4 Typical Industrial Robot Applications
1393
Part F | 54.4
Table 54.1 Main categories of mechanical structures of industrial robots: Gantry is what a Cartesian coordinate robot is
typically called with three prismatic joints, whose axes are coincident with a Cartesian coordinate system. The SCARA
or selective compliance assembly robot arm has two parallel rotary joints to provide compliance in a selected plane.
The articulated robot has three or more, typically six, rotary joints placed in series with their interconnecting links. The
parallel link robot is characterized by links that form closed loop structures shown with prismatic joints, but can also have
revolute joints such as the Delta robot (Fig. 54.5) (pictures courtesy of Güdel, ADEPT, ABB, PI Physik Instrumente)
Category
Gantry (or Cartesian)
SCARA
Articulate
Parallel
Robot main
axes structure
d2
d3
d1
x
y
z
yT
θ1
θ2
θ3
zT
xT
dz
yT
θ1
θ2
θ3
xT
zT
xS
yS
zS
3 prismatic joints
1 prismatic and
2(3) revolute joints
3 revolute joints
Typically with 3, 4 or 6
prismatic axis
Workspace
shape
Technical
example
machines (SKMs), while the last is a parallel kinematic
machine (PKM). To obtain maximum stiffness, again
for a certain minimum level of cost, the end-effector is
better supported from different directions, and here the
PKM has signiﬁcant advantages. On the other hand, if
high stiffness (but not low weight and high dexterity)
is the main concern, a typical computerized numerical
control (CNC) machine (e.g., for milling) is identical
in principle to the gantry mechanism. There are also
modular systems with servo-controlled actuators that
can be used to build both robots with purpose-designed
mechanisms.
54.4 Typical Industrial Robot Applications
Out of the many possible uses of industrial robots se-
lected case studies on high-potential robot applications
will be brieﬂy described. Typical associated enabling
technologies will be depicted.
54.4.1 Handling
Handling in robotics comprises numerous processes
such as grasping, transporting, packaging, palletizing,
and picking. As seen in Fig. 54.8 handling is the largest
robot application ﬁeld which is found in all branches
of manufacturing and logistics. A central feature and
major challenge in the engineering of robotic handling
systems is the design of the gripper and associated
grasping strategies given the physical properties of
the workpiece, throughputs, and uncertainties regarding
object geometry and location. Current high-potential
application of robot handling systems are: tending of
CNC machines for workerless shifts [54.29], palletiz-
ing, and lifting of objects for ergonomic reasons or

Part F | 54.4
1394
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.54.9a–d Units of sausage are cut from strings, then placed into the thermo-formed cavities before applying lidding.
The coordination of the robots and the optimization of the picking frequency require a selection of the best path for each
robot. Missed sausages are fed back on the conveyor for another try. The shown 4-DOF parallel robot reaches cycle times
of 13 Hz and can move payloads of up to 8 kg (courtesy of robomotion, Germany)
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.54.10a–d Lightweight customized vacuum gripper (0:75 kg mass) through additive manufacturing. Cookies are
delivered continuously on a belt, grasped from the belt, and batches of eight are put on a blister matrix before ﬁnal
packaging. The gripper’s spacing is pneumatically actuated and its rotation through the parallel robot’s central rotational
axis (courtesy of robomotion, Germany)
when limitations speciﬁed in load handling regulations
are exceeded [54.30], for reasons of cleanliness as is
typical in the food, pharmaceutical, and semiconduc-
tor industries [54.31–33], avoiding monotonous work
and psychological strain, and ensure logistics quality
through workpiece or object tracking [54.34]. In the
following, two use-cases of material handling will be
highlighted, each in a different industrial domain, and
based on speciﬁc industrial robot type and enabling
technologies.
Food Handling
The food sector is claimed to have signiﬁcant po-
tential for the application of robots as fundamental
change to productivity, product quality, and worker er-
gonomics can be achieved [54.35]. In food automation,
untouched by human hand entails critical requirements
for robot automation such as the need for hygienic
design, operational speed, ease of programming, and
cost. In the past, these requirements had been difﬁcult
to achieve due to high throughputs, therefore requir-
ing rapid grasps and fast robot motion, robust sensing
for detecting object locations on conveyor belts. High
speed at high ﬂexibility apparently is a key in the indi-
vidual handling of food objects. Therefore, fast SCARA
and parallel robots have found wide acceptance in this
ﬁeld.
An example of a packaging line in food produc-
tion is depicted in Fig. 54.9 where cut mini salamis
are delivered in four streams per conveyor belt in ran-
dom sequence. The positions of the sausages on the
translucent belt are determined by a computer vision
system. The robot picks the sausage from the mea-
sured position sequentially until the gripper holds three
sausages which are then placed into cavities. With four
parallel robots a maximum pick rate of 600 sausages
per minute can be processed. Key of the application is
its high-speed 2-D (two-dimensional) computer vision
system which feeds the robot’s path planning for col-
lision-free picks at a minimum loss rate of unpicked
salami [54.37].
Recent efforts have led to customized designs of
gripper systems through 3-D (three-dimensional) print-
ing (additive manufacturing) which for instance in-
cludes actuation through pneumatically driven bellows
and low-wear metal joints. An example of a highly ac-
tuated gripper based on 3-D-printing for use in food
handling is depicted in Fig. 54.10. Additive manufac-

Industrial Robotics
54.4 Typical Industrial Robot Applications
1395
Part F | 54.4
Detected workpiece poses
Object definition
Point teach-in
Feeding system
3-D scanning
Heuristic search tree
6-D-pose voting
Point cloud
POI_1
Rotation_1
Rotation_2
Voting data base
R-table
POI_2
Accumulation
On-line, cycle-time 0.5–2 s
Off-line
a)
b)
Fig.54.11a,b Procedure of a bin-picking method [54.36] (a) and gripper with additional degree of freedom for reaching
deep into bins (b). Depicted is a 2-D laser scanner on a swiveling unit for acquiring the point cloud in parallel to
the robot’s motion. The object detection itself consumes 0:52 s and is less time critical than the robot’s motion and
grasps
turing processes seem to be perfectly suited to achieve
higher ﬂexibility in manufacturing automation [54.38].
Numerous materials have become available for dif-
ferent additive manufacturing processes so that even
speciﬁc manufacturing requirements can be matched.
Initial doubts about gripper durability have been dis-
pelled: lifetimes of more than 10 million load cycles for
robot grippers manufactured on the basis of laser sin-
tered polyamide have been reported.
Bin-Picking
Generally, industrial practice in robot workcell plan-
ning aims at ﬁnding a compromise between reducing
the variation of the workpiece location and the cost
of sensor systems to compensate for residual variation
or uncertainties. Today, nearly all parts arrive at robot
workcells in a repeatable manner, either being stored in
special carriers or magazines, or by being transported
and oriented by vibrating devices that allow the parts
to settle into a predictable orientation for proper robot
grasping. However, cost and ﬂexibility requirements in
manufacturing automation will result in reducing cus-
tomized parts magazines to more universal carriers,
containers, or conveyor belts. If randomly oriented on
a conveyor belt or in a carrier, parts have to be properly
identiﬁed and located so that the robot can produce an
collision-free grasp.
The challenge of grasping partly or randomly or-
dered parts by robot has been referred to as bin-
picking and has been investigated by numerous re-
searchers since the mid-1980s [54.39]. Even though an
abundance of approaches has been presented, only re-
cently bin-picking installations have found their way
into daily manufacturing in signiﬁcant numbers. Bin-
picking algorithms follow a typical sequence of steps:
initial point cloud data acquisition, object detection,
pose estimation, collision-free path and grasp plan-
ning, object grasping, and object placement. Most
methods in bin-picking assume known geometrical
representations (a computer-aided design CAD-model)
of the workpiece in question including the speciﬁ-
cation of admissible grasps for applying template-
matching methods [54.40, 41]. Figure 54.11 depicts
a variant of a fast template-matching method, which
encompasses the following steps for detecting object
poses:

For detecting the scene (e.g., a carrier or box ﬁlled
randomly with workpieces) typically laser-based
sensor systems are used for acquiring a sufﬁciently
dense point cloud. The object pose detection then
is considered as a combinatorial optimization prob-
lem for which a construction heuristic is applied.
For this heuristic tree search, a ﬁnite set of possible
workpiece poses is initially derived from the search
space.

In order to use a decision tree, the elements of the
search set are split into two components: The ﬁrst
component describes a point of interest (POI) in
the search space which is part of the workpiece

Part F | 54.4
1396
Part F
Robots at Work
Dashboard
Doors
Running gear
Seats
Final assembly: low
degree of automation
Body in white: high
degree of automation
a)
b)
Processes adapted to
aluminium/steel sheets
Fig.54.12a,b Car production (a) usually follows the illustrated steps along the assembly line: Stamping of the metal
sheet into plates, ﬁxing and alignment of the plates on trays, spot welding, painting the car body, and ﬁnal assembly of
the car body (doors, dashboard, windscreens, power-train seats, and tires). Car factories can host over 1000 industrial
robots working typically three shifts per day (courtesy of PSA Peugeot Citroën, Paris and Art Movies, Paris). The Audi
plant in Ingolstadt Germany (b) is highly automated. The picture shows spot welding robots along the body-in-white
transfer line. Trays carrying car bodies pass through the robot garden
surface. The second component describes possi-
ble workpiece poses relative to a POI. The partial
search quantities obtained thereby have a signiﬁcant
lower complexity compared to the original search
set, since the points of interest can provide a con-
straint on relative workpiece poses, thus restricting
their assumed freedom of movement.

Typical tree search strategies such as best-ﬁrst
search can be used. In that case best-ﬁrst search
explores the search tree by expanding the most
promising nodes ﬁrst. These nodes are chosen
according to a heuristic evaluation score, repre-
senting the estimated distance from the node to
a solution.

Final evaluation of the workpiece poses is pro-
vided by a six-dimensional (6-D) Hough voting
procedure, i. e., a generalized Hough transform. The
features used for Hough voting are sensor measure-
ments located relative to a POI. For all possible
constellations of a sensor measurement relative to
a point of interest, a probabilistic statement about
possible workpiece poses can be made. Through
the superposition of all probability statements, solu-
tion candidates can be formed, which are subjected
to a statistical test based on a quality rating. The
obtained quality rating along with a given level of
signiﬁcance is used in order to decide about the ac-
ceptance of a workpiece pose.
The method is able to locate three to four work-
pieces on average within 0:52 s, using a stan-
dard desktop computer. Moreover, robot grippers are
equipped with a seventh axis to allow grasping parts
from corners of the bin. Furthermore, grippers should
be formed in such a way that they may reach deep
into the bin so that they offer only minimal collision
volumes.
54.4.2 Welding
Welding is a manufacturing process that joins materi-
als by applying heat, sometimes with pressure. Usually,
workpiece material is melted at the process location of-
ten with additional ﬁller material. Typical robot-based
welding processes are spot welding, particularly in
car body assembly, and gas-shielded metal arc weld-
ing (GMAW). With increasing compactness of laser
sources and robot motion accuracy, laser welding is in
the rise.
Manual welding requires skilled workers, as small
imperfections in the weld can lead to severe conse-
quences. Furthermore, welders are exposed to haz-
ardous working conditions (fumes, problematic er-
gonomic working positions, heat, and noise) so that
the use of robots has become beneﬁcial in GMAW
processes even for the smallest lot-sizes. Commonly,
the automatic arc-welding process is based on a con-
sumable wire electrode and a shielding gas that is fed
through a welding gun. Modern welding robots are
particularly suited through the following characteris-
tics:

Computer control allows efﬁcient programming of
task sequences, robot motions, external actuators,
sensors, and communication with external devices
such as welding sources.

Industrial Robotics
54.4 Typical Industrial Robot Applications
1397
Part F | 54.4
a)
b)
c)
Fig.54.13a–c Ofﬂine programming of a spot welding workcell. (a) The robot workcell and the task execution are mod-
eled on the basis of realistic robot models (geometry, kinematics, kinetics). (b) The shown laser tracker is a portable
measurement system that relies on laser beams to accurately measure in a radial volume (accuracy of ˙10 ppm D
10 m=m, up to 80 m in diameter, measuring rate up to 3000 points=s). If measured objects cannot be equipped with
reﬂecting targets or reached by the tracker, handheld probes are tracked instead. (c) A tracker in use for interactively
measuring the geometry of the robot workcell (courtesy of Leica, now Hexagon MI)
a)
b)
d)
c)
Fig.54.14a–d GMAW welding of building trusses in lot-size one by robot. Illustration (a) shows the CAD drawing of a steel
truss with relevant information for welding process, (b) one-half of the welding workcell with two welding robots working
simultaneously on the truss when the neighboring truss on the other half is loaded or unloaded, (c) the laser-based seam ﬁnding
and tracking sensors and (d) the welding robot (courtesy of Servo Robot, Canada; Goldbeck, Germany)

Free deﬁnition and parameterization of robot posi-
tions or orientations, reference frames, and paths.

High repeatability and positioning accuracy of
paths. Typically repeatability is some ˙0:05 mm
and positioning accuracy is better than ˙1:0 mm.
These values can be signiﬁcantly improved through
modern robot calibration methods [54.42].

High speeds of the end-effector of up to 8 m=s for
quick approach and depart motions.

Typically, articulated robots have six DOF so that
commanded orientations and positions in their
workspace can be reached, which in the welding
case means there is one DOF free for rotation
around a rotational-symmetric welding tool. Ad-
ditionally, workspace extensions by mounting the
robot on a linear axis (seventh DOF) or even on
mobile bases are common, especially for welding
of large structures.

Typical payloads range 6150 kg. Higher load ca-
pacities are required for spot-welding guns (typi-
cally > 50 kg) and their cable package.

Programmable logic controller (PLC) capabilities
such that fast input/output control and synchroniz-
ing actions within the robot workcell are accom-
plished.

Interfacing to high-level factory control through
factory communication networks.
Electric current sources, torches, and peripheral
devices for automatic cleaning and maintaining the
GMAW torch (anti-splatter, wire-cutting, tool changer,
etc.) are offered by specialized companies. Often sen-
sors are used to track welding gaps and measure weld
seams either before or synchronously with the weld-
ing process, thus adapting the robot’s trajectory in the
presence of workpiece variation and distortion. Also,
collaborating robots have been introduced where one
robot ﬁxes and moves the workpiece in synchronization
with another robot carrying a welding tool so that the
weld can be performed with the pool of molten metal
horizontal.
Spot Welding in the Automotive Industry
with Offline Programming
Car manufacturing has been one of the key drivers in the
technical development of industrial robots as the preci-
sion handling of spot-welding guns was one of the ﬁrst
breakthrough use cases (Fig. 54.12) body-in-white (i. e.,
unpainted car body) assembly is mostly done by robots,
very much in contrast to the ﬁnal assembly which is

Part F | 54.4
1398
Part F
Robots at Work
Cutter
Contour following sensor
Roller for feeding seal and
excerting contact forces
Tape removed from adhesive
Drum storage for seal
Car body with seal
Fig. 54.15 A robot-guided tool
for handling and processing limb
material, in this case a self-adhesive
seal for car bodies
dominated by manual work. Demands for faster cycle
times have led to a concurrent and coordinated motion
of the spot-welding gun and robot: the robot continues
to move while the weld gun is simultaneously rotated
about the electrode axis during welding [54.43].
Most of a spot welding robot’s programming
is done using ofﬂine programming (OLP) packages
(Fig. 54.13. A library of robots, devices, and ad-
vanced CAD capabilities helps plan, program, vi-
sualize, and optimize layouts and complete produc-
tion cycles under assumed manufacturing conditions.
Robot programs can be generated and downloaded
to robots workcells. A critical step is the calibration
a)
b)
Electronics (joint servo
amplifier, servo control,
communication)
Joint torque
measurement
(cross of strain gauges)
Servo
Hollow shaft
Harmonic drive
reduction gear
Housing (aluminium)
Fig.54.16a,b Design of the KUKA iiwa: (a) Shape and (b) integra-
tion of joint mechatronics
of the robot workcell with respect to the simula-
tions [54.44].
Arc Welding in Metal Construction
Normally steel constructions are designed using CAD
programs that offer functions for GMAW-task deﬁ-
nitions such as welding parameters, multipass seams,
weld beads sequencing, etc. This information may be
used for automatically generating welding robot pro-
grams, even in the case of lot-size one jobs.
As an example, the generation principle of a weld-
ing robot program is depicted in Fig. 54.14. Large-
scale trusses of up to 15 m for large halls are welded-
to-measure. The robot program is generated from the
CAD drawing with process relevant information. Work-
piece tolerances for example, induced by placing the
steel components into the ﬁxtures, by bending of the
material under its own weight are compensated through
active measurement. The robot-mounted sensor locates
the weld seam by laser-based vision for shifting the
generated programs in such a way that they match the
actual weld seams. This calibration is automatically
performed if expected and actual bead locations are
within a range of ˙2:5 cm.
54.4.3 Assembly
Assembly in manufacturing describes the combination
of subsystems or components to systems of a higher
complexity through joining. Assembly in manufactur-
ing comprises four process groups: joining, handling,
controlling, and auxiliary processes (cleaning, adjust-
ment, marking, etc.) [54.45]. The composition of these
four functions may vary depending on batch size,
product, and throughput: from assembly workcells to
high-throughput assembly lines. Assembly processes
form up to 80% of a product’s manufacturing cost
and this is where the greatest competitive advantage
can be gained [54.46]. Therefore, optimization in as-
sembly includes tightly interweaved aspects: Design

Industrial Robotics
54.4 Typical Industrial Robot Applications
1399
Part F | 54.4
Table 54.2 Assembly subprocesses or modules and their implementation on the KUKA LBR iiwa
Assembly
subprocess
Characterization
Principle
search: search
module which
supports several
search motions or
search strategies
Search motion type examples:

Linear

Zigzag

Spiral

Sinus

Lissajous
Commanding the search motion generation:

Position-based trajectory

Force-based trajectory

Combination of position and force-based trajectory
Sinus
motion type
Spiral
motion
Linear
motion
Lissajous (force
driven motion)
Defined zigzag
motion
Defined
motion
 area
peg in hole:
execution of
typical part
joining motions
Reduction of arbitrary joining part types to three ab-
stract planar types:

Round (arbitrary axial orientation)

Triangular (deﬁned axial orientation)

Rectangular (additionally deﬁned workpiece coordi-
nation system)
Strategy of triangular types is common for numerous
workpiece contours:

Orientation is given, tipping is executed in one step;
object pivots around one corner
Parts T and P of
joining motion with
local coordinate
systems
• Red dot: Corner which
 enters first
• Red dotted line: edge
 which follows in tip-
 ping
xT
xT
xT
xT
yT
yT
yT
yT
xP
xP
yP
yP
zT
zT
gear, search:
toothed gear
joining motion
and screw-in
motion

Meshing in toothed gears: Torque oscillations about
gear axis and linear forward motion

Screw-in motion: ﬁxed torque for torque-based
screwing

Angle-controlled tightening required in most screw-
ing process applications: command ﬁxed torque,
then turn by a deﬁned angular increment.
for Assembly (DFA), workcell and assembly line de-
sign as well as logistics and manufacturing organiza-
tion [54.12]. Early on, industrial robots were used in
assembly automation, particularly in high-throughput
manufacturing lines (Fig. 54.4). However, robots are
increasingly used in highly ﬂexible workcells and will
enter agile lean manufacturing workplaces as versatile
tools at the hands of the human worker. In the follow-
ing, selective use cases of robots in assembly will be
described by detailing on speciﬁc enabling technolo-
gies.
Assembly of Limb Material
Numerous assembly processes include handling of limb
materials such as rubber hoses, wire harnesses, etc.
that have to be ﬁxed in position in order to be joined
(Fig. 54.15). Obviously stabilizing the material and
securing process quality often result in ingenious grip-

Part F | 54.4
1400
Part F
Robots at Work
Search
Camera
Program
Peg
Robot
LOOP: [until force contact]
LOOP: [until enough points]
Move (next possible contact)
Move (spiral step from phi and radius)
Move (approximate position)
Detect assambly target()
Spiral search()
Find circle center()
Exact assembly position
Move (exact assembly position)
Approximate position
LBR iiwa
Stereo camera
Fixture
Chain saw
Combined
gripper,
screwing tool
Centrifugal
clutch
Fig. 54.17 Set up and implementation of a centrifugal clutch assembly for a chain saw with a sequence diagram depicting
the consecutive steps until tightening the clutch. Through the robot’s torque sensors in each of its links and an appropriate
kinematic and dynamic model, the resulting forces at the tool tip are controlled
per designs involving additional actuation and sensing
functionalities.
An example is the automatic application of self-ad-
hesive seals as they easily lose their shape and can be
stretched or compressed. Since manual application of
adhesive seals to vehicle bodies or doors is sensitive
and ergonomically problematic a robot-guided tool has
to secure bonding of the material’s surface to the car
body. The seal material is fed from a roll under correct
tension and the tape, which covers the adhesive, is re-
moved and stored in a small tank. At the tip of the tool
a laser sensor follows the car body or door contour and
an actuated roller produces a continuous normal force
on the seal. Both the laser sensor and roller’s motion
are translated into a tension free motion of the robot. In
addition, a magazine on a ﬂange ensures that the seal
is correctly tensioned and a material reserve for one car
door is provided [54.47].
Here, the robot acts as slave to guide a tool which
acts as both measuring unit and precision actuator with
own master controller. Further efforts aim at embedding
rich sensor and control modalities in the robot to ac-
count for complex process control based on tactile and
geometric information.
Advanced Robot-Based
Assembly Process Control
Automation of advanced assembly processes depends
on physical contact between the joined workpieces.
For this contact formation to be controlled a robot
should offer compliant motion control which is a con-
trol method that modulates robot position and velocity
based on measured or estimated joint torques or contact
forces [54.48]. Subject of intense research efforts for
a long time application packages for compliant force
control in industrial robots which fulﬁll requirements
regarding versatility, robustness, and ease of use in pro-
gramming have become available during the last ten
years [54.49]. The solutions are commonly based on
a 6-DOF force–torque sensor which is attached to the
robot ﬂange.
The fully torque-controlled DLR (Deutsches Zen-
trum für Luft- und Raumfahrt) lightweight robot broke
new grounds as its 7-DOF redundant kinematic struc-
ture, torque sensing in every joint and a variety of
compliance modes allowed difﬁcult assembly tasks
with complex contact formation during the joining pro-
cess [54.15]. DLR and KUKA managed to successfully
go the strenuous road from the original LBR inven-
tion, an idea made manifest in 1991, to a product, ﬁrst
applied in research and predevelopment of new indus-
trial manufacturing concepts in a series of development
steps: KUKA LBR3 (2006), LBR4 (2008), and LBR
iiwa (2012) [54.25]. Figure 54.16 depicts the integrated
mechatronic design of a joint with its unique joint-
torque measurement.
To simplify the programming of complex joining
processes several assembly subprocess modules were
developed of which three are depicted in Table 54.2:
the search for contact formation and the execution of
two typical joining motions (peg-in-hole, toothed gear
joining).
Figure 54.17 depicts a scenario of a force-based
centrifugal clutch assembly for a chain saw. The robot

Industrial Robotics
54.4 Typical Industrial Robot Applications
1401
Part F | 54.4
detects and locates the clutch workpieces on a tray by
vision sensors. Now the grasped workpiece has to be
joined and tightly screwed onto the shaft. In this case
the robot’s tactile capabilities and compliant behavior
are used to achieve a robust and quick assembly. Once
a rough shaft center position estimate is acquired by
the robot’s vision sensor, the robot approaches to this
position and starts performing a search pattern until
contact detection. The peg-in-hole process is followed
by a screw-in motion for tightening the clutch. Alterna-
tive designs may be based on 6-DOF industrial robots
with a wrist-mounted force–torque sensor to measure
process-induced forces on the robot, or simply estimate
the forces from the motor torque control [54.50].
The sequence diagram shows a simpliﬁed execution
trace of a spiral search of a circular shape. Listing 54.1
lists part of the Java code in the KUKA Sunrise control
system which identiﬁes the three parts of the compliant
assembly: main function, spiral search until collision,
and border walk.
Listing 54.1 Extract from the code controlling the
sequence of the centrifugal clutch assembly
Main Program:
Frame rough = camera.detectAssemblyTarget(); // Retrieve rough position from stereo vision
// Move robot at 30 mm/s. Linear motion. Stop if force > 20 Newton
ForceCondition forceCond = new ForceCondition(robot.getDefaultMotionFrame(), 20);
robot.move(lin(rough).setCartVelocity(30).breakWhen(forceCond)); // First approximation
Frame target = spiralSearch(rough,forceCond); // Obtain the assembly target
assemble(Target); // Assembles the shaft at the given position
Search Module. Returns the assembly target:
Frame spiralSearch(Frame rough, ForceCondition forceCond){ // Spiral search until collision
for (double phi = 0; phi < 10.0 * pi; phi +=pi / 90.0){ // 5 loops, 2° step
Frame spiral = rough.copy();
Double radius = max_radius * phi / (10.0 * pi);
spiral.setX(rough.getX + Math.cos(phi) * radius);
spiral.setY(rough.getY + Math.sin(phi) * radius);
robot.move(lin(spiral).setCartVelocity(30).breakWhen(forceCond));
if (motion.getFiredBreakConditionInfo())return findCircleCenter(); // It collides
}
return null; // Target not found}
Border walk to ﬁnd shaft center:
Frame findCircleCenter()\textbraceleft // Calculates the center of a circular shape
ArrayList contact = new ArrayList<Frame> (); // Stores frames where collisions take place
do{
Frame next = getNextFrame(robot.getForce());
// Force feedback combined with search pattern such as a grid produces next frame
robot.move(lin(next).breakWhen(forceCond)); // Move to next position, if possible
if (motion.getFiredBreakConditionInfo()) contact.add(robot.getDefaultMotionFrame());
} while (!areEnoughContacts(contact)); // Until enough contact points to identify center
return getCircleCenter(contact); // Circle center can be determined with three points
}

Part F | 54.4
1402
Part F
Robots at Work
Exp
Sim
–250
–200
–150
–100
–50
0
50
100
150
200
250
c) Film thickness (µm)
d)
a)
b)
Position (mm)
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Fig.54.18a–d High-speed rotating atomizer and a multirobot workcell for car body painting. (a) A Dürr EcoBell2 paint
gun which atomizes the paint material at the edge of the rotating bell disk by centrifugal forces. All current paint materials
such as solvent-based or water-borne paints can be used in car production. (b) Multiple robots work in parallel for optimal
throughput and accessibility of the car body. Most of the programming which includes the synchronization of the robots
is performed ofﬂine, also with respect to optimal coverage of the painted surface. (c) Simulation of the painting process is
critical for achieving highest yields (e.g., minimal overspray, uniform paint deposition, etc.) (d) Results from simulations
for optimized program generation are shown (courtesy of Dürr, Fraunhofer IPA, Stuttgart)
54.4.4 Painting
Hazardous working conditions for human operators
motivated Trallfa, a Norwegian company, to develop
simple spray-painting robots in 1969, particularly for
spraying bumpers and other plastic parts in the auto-
motive industry. Initially pneumatically driven for anti-
explosion reasons, today’s robot designs are fully elec-
tric. They also have hooks and grippers to open hoods
and doors during the painting task. Hollow wrists that
house gas and paint hoses allow fast and agile motions.
Spray guns for robots have evolved dramatically for de-
livering uniform quality using as little paint and solvent
as possible and also for switching between different
paint colors. Originally spray-painting robots replicated
movements copied from human workers. Most of the
programming for robot painting today is done ofﬂine as
state-of-the-art programming systems offer integrated
process simulations to optimize paint deposition, thick-
ness, and coverage (Fig. 54.18). The simulation of the
process is quite complex as different effects are taken
into account such as turbulent ﬂow ﬁeld between atom-
izer and target, static electrical ﬁeld between rotating
bell disk and target, charging of the paint droplets
at the bell, space charge effects due to the ﬂow of
charged paint droplets, and Coulomb forces acting on
the droplets [54.52].
54.4.5 Processing
Material removal processes such as grinding, debur-
ring, milling, and drilling are increasingly carried out
by industrial robots with serial kinematics as they
combine dexterity, versatility, and cost-effectiveness.
The employed process tools are often combined with
passive compliance or active force control as the
workpiece geometry commonly exhibits tolerances in
geometrical or material properties [54.53]. However,
robot accuracy (˙0:5 mm range) compares poorly to
values in the ˙0:01 mm range of typical machine

Industrial Robotics
54.4 Typical Industrial Robot Applications
1403
Part F | 54.4
Standard
industrial robot
accuracy
Model based
DH-parameter
compensation
Accuracy factors in
robot material removal:
• deburring
• milling
• grinding
• drilling
• deflashing
• polishing
Robot mechanics
• Compliance
• Backflash, play
• Gravity, inertia
• Process-related
• Static deflection
• Dynamic forces
 (tooth cutting)
Environment
• Fixtures
• Temperature
• Excitation
Signal processing
• Kinematics
• Path planning
• Motion control
Additional joint
encoders
Motion tracking
a)
b)
Methods for robot accuracy improvement
(slow motions, smooth forces)
Absolute motion
accuracy (+/– in mm)
Robot-internal error
compensation strategies
compliance models not included
External error
compensation;
(slow motions,
smooth forces)
1
0.5
0.1
Fig.54.19a–d For small-to-medium-sized parts, a preferred conﬁguration is to have the part grasped and guided by
the robot relative to the ﬁxed spindle. (a) The robot’s gripper is mounted on a force–torque sensor to measure and
limit process forces. For machining the edges of the workpiece (deﬂashing) the machining software package provides
a machine-learning technique for optimising the motions [54.51]. (b) Inﬂuences on accuracy in robotic machining and
methods for robot accuracy improvement. Still typical machine tool motion accuracies are in the order of ˙ 0:01 mm or
better (courtesy of ABB, Fraunhofer IPA)
tools [54.54]. The lower eigenfrequencies and damp-
ing coefﬁcients of mechanical structures should be
as high as possible for precision: The lower eigen-
frequencies of milling machines are in the range of
50100 Hz as compared to 2030 Hz for typical in-
dustrial robots [54.55, 56]. Figure 54.19 depicts the
factors that affect the robot’s accuracy in typical ma-
terial removal applications. Figure 54.20 shows ﬁrst
eigenfrequencies, damping, and stiffness in Cartesian
1000
1500
2000
X (mm)
Damping
First eigenfrequency (Hz)
Stiffness (N/mm)
Z (mm)
1400
1300
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
1000
1500
2000
X (mm)
Z (mm)
1400
1300
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
1000
1500
2000
X (mm)
Z (mm)
1400
1300
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
5500
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
Fig.54.20a–c Robot dynamics in Cartesian space: (a) Damping and (b) ﬁrst eigenfrequencies for a KUKA KR60 and
(c) stiffness for a KR125 in a typical XZ-process plane (measured from the robot’s ﬁrst axis) of the robot’s workspace
(courtesy of ISG Stuttgart, Fraunhofer IPA)
space. These characteristics are essential for the de-
sign of machining processes and resulting workpiece
quality. More robot-guided processes such as laser
welding and laser cutting depend on achieving similar
accuracies.
Robot position accuracy results from geometric er-
ror sources (deviations between actual robot structure
and assumed Denavit–Hartenberg (DH) parameters)
and nongeometric parameters (compliance of the me-

Part F | 54.4
1404
Part F
Robots at Work
Table 54.3 Characteristics of computerized numerical control (CNC) and robot controller (RC)
Category
CNC
RC
Interpretation
Targeted
application
Machining, material
removal
Handling, assembly
A CNC machine tool is single pur-
pose; generally robots are universal
machines
Motions
Path-based, complex contour-
oriented
Point- or path-based and mo-
tion time-oriented
Extended look-ahead of CNC
controllers allows detailed path de-
scription and adaption on  100 via
points (< 10 via points in most robot
controllers)
Programming
On-site programming based
on standardized program-
ming language (G-code), ISO
(International Organization
for Standardization) 6983,
use of computer aided manu-
facturing (CAM) tools
On-site teaching (teach
pendant, editor) based on
supplier speciﬁc languages,
use of typical robot simula-
tion environments
Whereas robots are traditionally pro-
grammed manually on site, CNC
controllers use CAM technology to
generate complex paths automatically
based on CAD data
Command
reading
Online interpreter, continu-
ous loading of instruction
Initial loading of programs,
which are usually interpreted,
sometimes compiled)
Program size in robot controllers
limited by memory, CNC interprets
programs online, may execute an un-
limited number of commands
1
2
3
4
5
6
CAD
CAM
Interpreter G-code
Interpreter RC-code
Interface (programming)
Tool radius compensation
Robot transformation, compensation, filter
Safety
Robot controller
NC controller
Robot axes
Contour-oriented
Time-oriented
Motion planning
path driving
Path interpolation in
dynamic state space
Path interpolation in
static state space
Motion planning
poses
Kinematic transformation
Fig. 54.21 Structure of an NC-kernel integrated into a ro-
bot controller (courtesy of ISG Stuttgart)
chanical structure and gear play). In order to reduce the
impact of the nongeometric parameters several stepwise
approaches can be implemented:

In combination with force prediction or online
measurements robot compliance can be compen-
sated by means of joint stiffness models [54.57]. In
drilling applications additional encoders are some-
times mounted on the arm side of robotic joints in
order to measure gear-induced joint compliance and
backlash, or those effects can be estimated based on
determined joint properties [54.58], so that a com-
pensation can be achieved.

In combination with the geometric error calibration
accuracies of better than ˙0:2 mm for typical robots
have been realized in larger robot workspaces of 3
3  2 m3 [54.59].

For higher accuracies further sensor and actuators
systems have been introduced. Using optical track-
ing deviations of ˙0:2 mm have been demonstrated
in steel [54.60]. With additional actuation devia-
tions could be reduced to ˙0:1 mm [54.61].
Robot and CNC machine tool controls may have
similar origins, but have taken different paths in de-
velopments over the years as depicted in the following
Table 54.3.
Increasingly CNC controllers are used for robots in
material removal applications for taking advantage of
the well-established off-line programming tools in the
CNC world and for improving motion accuracy of the
robot for complex 3-D contours (Figs. 54.21 and 54.22.
Modern robot controllers integrate so-called numerical
control (NC) kernels which share components of the
robot controller such as user interfaces, kinematic trans-
formations, and safety functions.

Industrial Robotics
54.5 Safe Human–Robot Collaboration
1405
Part F | 54.5
b)
a)
N05 T1 (N: line or block number, T1: selection of tool 1)
N05 T1 (N: line or block number, T1: selection of tool 1)
N10 G41 (turn on cutter radius compensition (CRC), left)
N10 G41 (turn on cutter radius compensition (CRC), left)
N20 G01 G90 X5 (G90: absolute position of x-axis, x=5)
N20 G01 G90 X5 (G90: absolute position of x-axis, x=5)
N30 G01 X10 (linear interpolation motion, x=10)
N30 G01 X10 (linear interpolation motion, x=10)
N40 G02 X17 Y5 I5 J0 (circular interpolation about
N40 G02 X17 Y5 I5 J0 (circular interpolation about
center, clockwise)
center, clockwise)
N50 G01 X20 Y0
N50 G01 X20 Y0
G60 G01 X15 Y-5
G60 G01 X15 Y-5
N70 G03 X20 Y-10 I2.5 J-2.5 (circular interpolation,
N70 G03 X20 Y-10 I2.5 J-2.5 (circular interpolation,
about center, counter clockwise)
about center, counter clockwise)
N80 G01 X10
N80 G01 X10
N90 G01 X5 Y0
N90 G01 X5 Y0
Intersection
calculation
Programmed path
Corrected path
Circular transition
(G26)
Linear slope transition
(G25)
Transition angle
Deselection
Tool
Selection
Work piece
Fig. 54.22 (a) A simple CNC program
(G-code, ISO 6983). A CNC program
normally is machine independent and
orients itself on the workpiece contour
after processing. (b) Most CNC
programs are generated automatically
through CAM tools that transfer
geometric information into executable
G-code. The example shows generated
tool trajectory generation for precision
milling of a carbon ﬁber (CF) part and
the ﬁnished workpiece (courtesy of
Delcam, Birmingham; ISG, Stuttgart)
54.5 Safe Human–Robot Collaboration
Human–robot collaboration allows the combination of
typical strengths of robots with some of the numer-
ous strengths of humans. Typical strengths of industrial
robots are high stamina, high payload capacity, pre-
cision, and repeatability. Strengths of human workers
that are unmatched by any machinery comprise ﬂexibil-
ity for new production tasks, creative problem-solving
skills, and the ability to react to unforeseen situations.
However, industrial robots have a signiﬁcant poten-
tial to harm humans. Therefore, standards for designing
and operating industrial robot automation systems have
been introduced and found international acceptance.
Since 1999, efforts have been made to deﬁne measures,
rules, and examples speciﬁcally for robots in collabora-
tive modes.
Design of the machine
Identification of hazards
Definition of the limits of
the machine
Risk = Severity ×
Likelihood (R = S×L)
Risk reduction
End
Yes
No
OK?
Type A: Basic safety standards
• Basic definitions, aspects and guidelines defining
 fundamental principles to achieve machine safety
• Valid for all types of machines
Type B: Generic safety standards
• Regulating specific safety aspect (B1), e.g., separation distances
 or protective devices (B2), e.g., laser scanners
• Valid for a spectrum of machines
Type C: Machine safety standards
• Detailed safety requirements for specific machines that are
 in priority in case of deviations to type A and B standard
• For particular machines and machine types
Fig. 54.23 Different types of standards and a simpliﬁed iterative risk assessment procedure. See ISO 12100 [54.62,
Fig. 1 and 2] for a more detailed schematic representation of risk reduction process
54.5.1 Overview of Basic
Robot Safety Standards
Machine safety standards provide guidelines for de-
signing and operating any type of machinery. Their
consideration is optional, but exhibits the straightfor-
ward way of verifying the fulﬁllment of the fundamen-
tal health and safety prerequisites of the Machinery
Directive [54.63, 64]. Generally, safety standards are
classiﬁed into three categories (Fig. 54.23):

Type A standards: basic standards that deﬁne fun-
damental principles to achieve machine safety.

Type B standards: generic standards that regulate
either a speciﬁc safety aspect, e.g., separating dis-

Part F | 54.5
1406
Part F
Robots at Work
tances, or speciﬁc protective devices, e.g., opto-
electronic protective equipment like laser scanners
or emergency stop (ISO 13850), and are valid for
a spectrum of machines.

Type C standards: machine standards that list de-
tailed safety requirements for a speciﬁc type of
machine, e.g., industrial robots.
For robotic safety the following standards are of
highest importance:

ISO 12100 [54.62]: Type A standard listing general
principles of machine safety, in particular the risk
assessment process.

ISO 13849 [54.65] and IEC 62061 [54.66, 67]: Type
B safety standards governing the design of control
systems with safety functions.

ISO 13855 and ISO 13857 [54.68, 69]: Safety
distances for separating and nonseparating safety
equipment, e.g., fences, light curtains, and laser
scanners.

ISO 10218-1/-2 [54.5, 6]: Type C standards specif-
ically covering safety of industrial robots and robot
system integration.
For the setup of any robot installation, an iterative
risk assessment process as deﬁned by ISO 12100 has
to be conducted. Its workﬂow as depicted in Fig. 54.23
starts with a functional and geometric design of the ma-
chine followed by the deﬁnition of the machine limits
including spatial boundaries and boundaries regarding
usage, e.g., typical tasks, operator qualiﬁcation, and en-
vironmental conditions. The process continues with an
identiﬁcation of the tasks which are consecutively as-
sessed on its risks. Methods for risk estimation are, for
example, risk trees as presented in Fig. 54.24. Thereby,
any individual hazard is rated on its risk level by quan-
titatively considering the potential injury severity, the
Required performance level PLr
P1
F1
F2
F1
S2
S2
Start (1)
F2
a
L
H
e
b
c
d
P2
P1
P2
P1
P2
P1
P2
Legend risk parameters:
S  
severity of injury
S1  
slight (normally reversible injury)
S2  
serious (normally irreversible injury or death)
F  
frequency and/or exposure to hazard
F1  
seldom-to-less-often and/or exposure time is short
F2  
frequent-to-continuous and/or exposure time is long
P  
possibility of avoiding hazard or limiting harm
P1  
possible under specific conditions
P2  
scarcely possible
L  
low contribution to risk reduction
H  
high contribution to risk reduction
PLr 
required performance defined in terms of probability
  
of dangerous failures per hour. Examples:
  
10–5 < a < 10–4 (dangerous failure per hour)
  
 
  …
  
10–8 < e < 10–7 (1/h)
Fig. 54.24 Risk graph for determining required PLr for safety function according to EN ISO 13849-1 (after [54.65])
exposition to the hazard, and the possibility to avoid it.
The risk estimation leads to a decision if all hazards
have been adequately addressed in the machine design.
If this is not the case, the machine design is modiﬁed to
reduce the speciﬁc risk and the risk assessment process
is repeated.
According to ISO 12100, measures to reduce risks
need to be carried out according to the following
priorities:

Risk reduction through inherently safe design

Risk reduction through safeguards and protective
devices

Risk reduction through information for use (e.g.,
work instructions, instructions to wear protective
equipment).
The central safety standard family for robot safety is
ISO 10218. Part 1 addresses the safety requirements of
the robots, complemented by part 2, which focuses on
the robot system, i. e., the complete integrated machine
performing a production task. The second revision of
part 1 and the ﬁrst revision of part 2 were released
in 2011 and replace any former robot safety standard,
such as EN 775. These standards for the ﬁrst time de-
ﬁne human–robot-collaboration as a speciﬁc form of
a robotic application in an industrial setting and pro-
vide guidelines for setting up such collaborative robot
systems.
54.5.2 Types and Requirements
of Human–Robot Collaboration
ISO 10218-1:2011 contains speciﬁc requirements on
human–robot-collaboration. It deﬁnes four types of
collaborative operations in which a human can collab-
orate with a robot in automatic mode, as depicted in
Fig. 54.25. All controller functions for safe human–

Industrial Robotics
54.5 Safe Human–Robot Collaboration
1407
Part F | 54.5
then v = 0
then v ≤ vred
else v = 0
a) Type 1  if (human = true)
b) Type 2  if (enable = true)
c) Type 3  d  1/f(vrobot, vhuman);
 
if d < dmin then stop
d) Type 4  hazardinduced_by_robot ≤ hazardallowed
Fig.54.25a–d Modes of human–robot
collaboration according to ISO 10218.
(a) Stop on access with automatic
task resumption, (b) hand-guiding
(c) separation and speed reduction,
(d) monitoring and power and force
limiting
robot collaboration have to comply with performance
level PLOd with category 3 structures (ISO 13849-1) or
SIL 2 (IEC 62061) if the safety assessment does not
yield a differing requirement:

Safety-rated monitored stop (Fig. 54.25 Type 1):
The robot is stopped upon access of the human to
the collaborative workspace with the robot drives
still in control. A so-called safety controller, now
offered by most robot manufacturers, assures the
standstill of the robot. The robot task can be auto-
matically resumed as soon as the human operator
has left the collaborative workspace. Human and
robot share the same workspace, but the robot does
not move while the human is present.

Hand-guiding (Fig. 54.25 Type 2): This type of
operation implies a direct physical interaction
between human and robot with full control of
the human over the robot movement. The human
guides the robot through a direct input device
(e.g., a handle) at or near the end-effector while
activating a three-position enabling device (three-
position hold-to run device). Thereby the position
of the worker within the collaborative workspace
is deﬁned. A safety controller for delimiting the
robot speed to a speciﬁed threshold is required.
Hand-guiding in combination with graphic support
through icons or 3-D simulation is in particular
suitable for intuitive programming of industrial
robots [54.70] during automatic mode of the robot.

Speed and separation monitoring (Type 3): The
relative speed between robot and human as well as
their distance are actively monitored. If the human
is present, the robot has to maintain a safe com-
bination of speed and distance to the human to be
able to stop any hazardous motion before a contact
with the human may occur. Again safety controllers
in conjunction with safe surveillance sensors (in-
cluding safe sensor data processing) are needed to
supervise speed and position of the robot for human
a)
b)
Safety-relevant part of system
Safe reduced
speed
Laserscanner
Hold-to-run device
Force-
torque-
sensor
Controller
ISO 13849
Safety
controller
Real-time
PC for motion
generation
Fig.54.26a,b Intuitive instruction of a welding robot by lead-
through programming: (a) the worker guides the robot by a ﬂange-
mounted (B) handle (A) while pressing safety switches (three-
position hold-to run button) (C) on either side. The force exerted on
the handle is measured by a force–torque sensor (E) and translated
into robot motion. The seam tracking sensor (F) simultaneously
measures the workpiece contour for precisely localizing and ex-
tracting weld seams. The recorded robot motion is visualized and
edited in a simulation environment before task execution. (b) The
safety relevant part of the system contains a three-position hold-to-
run device, a laser scanner for safety monitoring during automatic
program execution and a speed monitoring function during hand-
guiding is an operational feature which does not have to be realized
with a speciﬁc safety integrity level (courtesy of Fraunhofer IPA)

Part F | 54.5
1408
Part F
Robots at Work
motion capturing. Currently, relatively few sensors
in industrial automation offer this capability with
the required safety integrity level. However, such
systems will be available in the future, then being
able to feature novel safety strategies for dynamic
distance control [54.71].

Power and force limiting (Type 4): The mechanical
hazard potential of the robot is sufﬁciently reduced
to allow a direct, physical interaction of human
and robot without an additional safety controller.
This is achieved by appropriately limiting collision
forces through the design of the robot system such
that in the event of a contact between the human
and a robot biomechanical tolerance limits are not
exceeded.
The ISO 10218 standards in their latest revision as
of 2011 explicitly demand that speeds, distances, pow-
ers and forces are to be sufﬁciently limited, but does
not give precise threshold values for these limitations.
These threshold values need to be determined through
risk assessment for a speciﬁc application that is fore-
seen with the robot system. Currently, the technical
committee ISO/TC184/SC2 Robots and robotic devices
develops a technical speciﬁcation ISO/TS 15066 (in
committee draft (CD) status of December 2015). It has
been drafted to offer more guidance on the risk assess-
ment for collaborative robots and will be released in
the near future [54.72]. The procedure to achieve safety
outlined in TS 15066 is new for machine safety (not
only for robot safety) and is expected to make its way
into further standards, especially into the second revi-
sion of ISO 10218-2.
For the ﬁrst time, ISO/TS 15066 introduces tol-
erance values for the physical strain of the human
body. These strain thresholds include maximum forces
and maximum pressures for different body parts that
can be sustained without suffering from pain or even
injury. The risk assessment process involves determin-
ing body regions with risk of contact depending on
the speciﬁc applications and workﬂows. Based on this
information, it can be proved experimentally or in sim-
ulation that the given severity threshold values are not
exceeded due to limited mechanical or robot control pa-
rameters [54.73, 74]. The technical speciﬁcation aims
at transforming highly complex biomechanical injury
thresholds into controllable robot performance limits.
One of the principles used for dynamic collision analy-
sis is based on the fundamental robot dynamics theory
which enables the representation of the reﬂected in-
ertia of a robot system at any point along the robot
structure. Drop-test results from medical injury assess-
ment have been made available for designing robot
controllers [54.75].
Part 2 of the ISO 10218 standard provides guide-
lines regarding the aspects that need to be taken into
account during robot workcell setup and system inte-
gration. It states the need not only to assess the robot
itself, but to take into account the complete application,
particularly the end-effector, process, environment, and
typical work tasks. This is of special importance for col-
laborative human–robot operation. As the application
always needs to be taken into account, it is not possible
to design a safe robot, but only to provide robots that
are equipped with safety features for setting up a safe
collaborative operation.
54.5.3 Examples of Human–Robot
Collaboration
In the following, two examples for human–robot col-
laboration are given.
Intuitive Instruction of a Welding Robot
by Lead-Through Programming
Figure 54.26 presents a robot welding workcell which
is designed for small batch size production. An intuitive
teaching process implementing hand-guiding accord-
ing to ISO 10218 (Type 2 in Fig. 54.25) signiﬁcantly
speeds up robot programming time. The presence of
the human during the collaborative operation is mon-
itored via a laser-scanner activating safety zones and
safe speed reduction of the robot safety controller dur-
ing the hand-guiding operation. The recorded motion
can be executed automatically after switchover as soon
as the human is out of the collaborative workspace.
Collaborative Assembly of Battery-Cases
In this case, sensitive tasks are carried out by the hu-
man, while strenuous tasks are executed automatically
by a small payload robot (Fig. 54.27 for the cell design).
Thereby, the safety concept comprises the require-
ments for speed and separation monitoring (Type 1
in Fig. 54.25) from ISO 10218 and involves two light
curtains with a signal processing on a safety PLC and
a robot with a safety controller. Switchover between
the safety zones is activated upon detection of human
presence in a collaborative workplace area. Each safety
zone statically monitors the minimum possible distance
to the robot’s active workspace thereof deriving the
maximum possible robot speed. Such a system reduces
space requirements for a robot installation while en-
hancing the ﬂexibility of the assembly process due to
the collaborative nature of this assembly process.

Industrial Robotics
54.6 Task Descriptions – Teaching and Programming
1409
Part F | 54.6
Workspace
(robot)
Collaboration
space 1
Collaboration
space 2
Motion space
(worker)
Light curtain 1
Light curtain 2
Fig. 54.27 The robot’s
workcell is divided into
three segments by two light
curtains which trigger in
which area the robot works
at lower velocity when
collaborating with the worker
in the collaboration spaces
54.6 Task Descriptions – Teaching and Programming
Although desirable, a robot cannot be instructed in
the same way that one would instruct a skilled human
worker how to carry out a task. With skilled human
workers knowing the applications, devices, processes,
and the general requirements on the product to be man-
ufactured, we would only need to summarize what
needs to be done. Humans have, with or without aware-
ness thereof, extensive knowledge about motions, phys-
ical effects, cause–effect relationships, learned proce-
dures, etc., and they maintain such knowledge for their
own good. A human is skilled because physical capabil-
ities are combined with reuse of that learned/maintained
knowledge, and the purpose of the manufacturing oper-
ation can be explained and understood.
Robots are not capable of performing such knowl-
edge-based behaviors in a productive manner. Instead,
instructions have to be quite explicit and motion ori-
ented, and even motion planning is rarely used since
it is difﬁcult to encode much of the required back-
ground knowledge. We could aim for programming
principles that resemble instructing a (totally) unskilled
worker, telling precisely how every aspect of the task
is to be performed. Such an explicit way of instruct-
ing the robot then should be human friendly, but the
performance requirements motivated by productivity
needs imply that methods for deﬁning the task need
to reﬂect machine/robot properties considering prod-
uct data and production processes. Existing approaches
include:

Manually guiding the robot to the positions of inter-
est, or even along the desired paths or trajectories if
human accuracy is enough (Fig. 54.26).

Having simple ways to make use of CAD data
whenever available (Fig. 54.13).

Using different complementary modalities (paths of
communication between the human and the robot),
such as pointing devices and 3-D graphics.

Choreographing the task movements, for instance
loops and conditions, without requiring extensive
programming competencies.

Means of describing acceptable variation, e.g., ac-
ceptable deviations from the nominal path or POI.

Speciﬁcation of how external sensing should be
used for path adaptations or for handling unknown
variations.
Most of these items still mean that the robot is rather
dumb, and the knowledge of solutions is maintained
among human experts. Consequently, robots are time-
consuming and hard to instruct for productive indus-
trial tasks, and the created solutions are not reusable
since the knowledge is not explicitly represented in
a way that is useful for the robot. To embody knowledge
in the robot system is the way to make task deﬁni-
tion more efﬁcient, which can be better understood if
we review the origins and the progress so far. Initially,
mainly during the 1970s and 1980s, there were some
painting robots that could be programmed by man-
ual guidance. This was possible due to the following
abilities:

Applications such as painting permitted the use of
a lightweight arm, including the end-effector, possi-
ble balanced with respect to gravity if needed.

The accuracy requirements were (compared to to-
day) modest so it was possible to use back-drivable
drive trains and actuators, and the deﬁnition of the
motions could then be done manually by the op-
erator moving the end-effector along the path. The
recorded poses, including the timing/speed informa-
tion, deﬁned the programmed motion.

Since no inverse kinematics was needed during pro-
gramming or real-time operation, it was not a prob-
lem from a computing point of view to use arm
kinematics without singularities in the workspace.

Part F | 54.6
1410
Part F
Robots at Work

The requirements of optimality of painting motions
were also modest, compared to recent years when
environmental conditions (for nature and workers)
called for minimal use of paint.
It is often referred to as an inevitable problem
that there are singularities to be handled within the
workspace. However, to simplify the kinematics and
its inverse from a software point of view (e.g., during
the 1980s considering the power of the microproces-
sors and algorithms available at that time), robots were
actually designed to have simple (to compute) inverse
kinematics. For instance, the wrist orientation was de-
coupled from the translation by the arm by using wrist
axes that intersected with the arm axes. The resulting
singularities within the workspace could be managed by
restrictions on wrist orientations, but an unfortunate im-
plication was that robot arms were no longer back-driv-
able (close to the singularities) when designs were (due
to engineering and repeatability requirements) adopted
to standard industrial controllers. Then with the devel-
opment of microprocessor-based industrial controllers
and the deﬁnition of motions based on jogging (manual
moves by for instance using a joystick) and CAD data,
the means of robot programming became closer to com-
puter programming (extended with motion primitives).
Robot programming languages and environments
have traditionally been separated into online program-
ming (using the actual robot in situ) and OLP (using
software tools without occupying the robot). With the
increasing power of OLP tools, their emerging abil-
ity to connect to the physical robot, and the increasing
level of software functions that are embedded into the
robot control system, online programming is now un-
usual, except to verify and manually adjust programs
generated ofﬂine. Of course, it is economically impor-
tant to minimize downtime for robot programming, and
advanced sensor-based applications may be too hard
to develop without access to the true dynamics of the
physical workcell for ﬁne-tuning. Nevertheless, robot
languages and software tools must provide for both
methods of programming.
Even though robot languages from different man-
ufacturers look similar, there are semantic differences
that have to do with both the meaning when programs
are running (the robot performing its operations) and
the way the robot is instructed. The need to ensure
that existing robot programs can operate with replace-
ment robots and controllers, and also to make use
of existing knowledge in robot programmers and in-
corporated into OLP software, requires manufacturers
to continue supporting their original proprietary lan-
guages. Features such as backward execution (at least of
motion statements) and interactive editing during inter-
pretation by the robot (in combination with restrictions
to make the programming simpler) also make robot
languages different from conventional computer pro-
gramming languages.
During the last decade and in current developments,
the trend has been to focus on the tool (robot end-ef-
fector) and on the process knowledge needed for the
manufacturing process, and to let the operator express
the robot task in such terms. This development results
in a need for an increased level of abstraction to sim-
plify the programming, reﬂecting the fact that the so-
called robot programmer knows the production process
very well, but has quite limited programming skills. To
understand why such a high level of abstraction has not
come into widespread usage, we may compare this with
the early days of industrial robotics when there was no
kinematics software built into the controllers, and hence
the robots were programmed via joint-space motions.
(Kinematics here deals with the relation between robot
motors/joints and the end-effector motions.)
Built-in inverse kinematics permits tool motion to
be speciﬁed in Cartesian coordinates, which is clearly
a great simpliﬁcation in many applications. That is, the
robot user could focus more on the work to be carried
out by the robot and less on the robot itself. How-
ever, robot properties such as joint limits cannot be
neglected. Until the beginning of the 1990s, robots did
not follow programmed trajectories very well at high
speeds or accelerations, and full accuracy could only
be achieved at low speed. Modern robot systems with
high-performance model-based motion control perform
their tasks with much greater accuracy at high speed
due to model-based control features (Chap. 6).
There are increasing opportunities to raise the level
of abstraction to simplify the use of robots even more
by encoding more knowledge about the robot, tools,
the process, and workcells into control systems. This
is a gradual development with possibilities depending
on the application; when knowledge is not encoded the
robot programmer needs to be more aware of robot
properties and how to handle them. Reasons for not
including such knowledge typically lie in the fact that
it is simply too difﬁcult to do so or because the robot
programmer does neither have the competence nor the
tools nor reasons to do so. With reference to Table 54.4,
the following example explains that type of trade-off
and what it means in terms of centricity.
A machine part consisting of steel plates and pipes
is to be manufactured by means of welding, and there
is robot and process equipment available for production
of this (and other) types of workpieces:

A product-centric system would generate conﬁgu-
rations and robot programs, and instruct the oper-

Industrial Robotics
54.6 Task Descriptions – Teaching and Programming
1411
Part F | 54.6
Table 54.4 Robot-related centricity, ranging from a high-level view of the work to be accomplished in terms of the product to
manufacture, to a low-level robot motion view that, in practice, constraints what manufacturing operations can be performed
Product
Description of the ﬁnal shape and assemblies of the workpieces, in terms of that
product; the robot system plans the operations
Process
Based on known sequences of speciﬁc manufacturing operations, each of these is
speciﬁed in terms of their processes parameters
Tool
The motion of the robot-held tool is speciﬁed in terms of programs or manual guid-
ance; the user knows the process it accomplishes
Arm
The robot arm and its end-plate for tool mounting is programmed how to move in
Cartesian space
User application
Robot constraint
Joint
For each speciﬁed location, the joint angles are speciﬁed, so straight-line motions
are difﬁcult; the robot provides coordinated servo control
ator for whatever manual assistance that might be
needed (e.g. clamping and ﬁxturing). The system
would determine the welding data such as the type
of welding and how many passes for each seam.

A process-centric system would instead accept in-
put in terms of the welding parameters to use,
including the order of the welds. The system would
select input signals to the process equipment (such
as what output voltage the robot controller should
set such that the welding will be done with a certain
current), and robot programs specifying the motions
of the welding torch would be generated.

A tool-centric way of programming would require
the operator to set up the process manually by
conﬁguring the equipment in terms of their native
settings, and appropriate tool data would be conﬁg-
ured such that the robot controller can accomplish
the programmed motions, which are speciﬁed by
giving coordinates and motions data referring to the
end-effector.

An arm-centric system is similar to the tool-centric
approach in that Cartesian and straight-line mo-
tions can be (and need to be) explicitly speciﬁed/
programmed by the programmer, but extra work is
needed since the robot does not support a general
tool frame.

A joint-centric style would be needed if one of the
very early robot systems is being used, requiring
a straight line to be programmed by lots of joint-
space poses close to each other.
Thus, the question is, are you programming robot
joint servos to make the robot provide a service for
you, are you programming/commanding an arm how to
move a tool, is it the tool that is made programmable by
means of the robot, is it manufacturing services that are
ordered by specifying the desired process parameters,
or is it an intelligent system that simply can produce
your product? Still today in industry, there are reasons
to think and program considering all ﬁve levels, al-
though the tool-centric alternative is kind of a baseline.
Hence tool-data needs to be maintained in the robot pro-
gram, as in the next example below.
As a ﬁnal goal related to the product-centric view,
so-called task-level programming is desirable. This has
been a goal since the 1980s, and implicitly also since
the very beginning of robotics. It would mean that the
user simply tells the robot what should be done in com-
mon terms and the robot would know how to do it, but it
would require extensive knowledge about the environ-
ment and so-called machine intelligence. The need for
extensive modeling of the environment of the robot is
well known. Sensing of the environment is costly, but
in an industrial environment it should only be needed
occasionally. Modeling has to encompass full compo-
nent dynamics and the limitations of the manufacturing
process. With these difﬁculties, task-level programming
is not yet achievable in practice. If we limit our domain,
however, such as to machining where motion planning
is already used for so-called machine tools, generating
the robot programs from product descriptions is feasible
since the process (with tolerances due to robot compli-
ance) is modeled.
As indicated in the application examples, it is now
common practice to generate robot programs from
geometric data in CAD ﬁles. That is, the CAD appli-
cation could be the environment used for specifying
how the robot should perform the required operations
on the speciﬁed parts, which is the CAM part of
CAD/CAM (Computer Aided Manufacturing, often in
term of a back-end to the CAD system, and hence
usually not explicitly referred to). CAM is not quite
task-level programming since human operators do the
overall planning. CAD software packages are powerful
3-D tools that are very common among manufacturing
companies. Consequently, using these tools for robot
programming is desirable since the operator may start
the OLP of the necessary manufacturing operations us-

Part F | 54.6
1412
Part F
Robots at Work
ing the 3-D model of the product, even before selecting
a robot.
There is an ongoing competition along the so-called
vertical integration from product data down to machine
operations, including at least the following three ap-
proaches:

CAD providers increasingly offer advanced robot-
aware functions, thereby expanding their ﬁeld of
service and expertise from a higher (CAD) to
a lower (robot) level. An example of a robot-aware
CAM system is depicted in Fig. 54.22.

Robot providers have developed programming tools
with CAD data import and various motions plan-
ning modules, and thus, expanded their offerings
to higher levels. One such software is shown in
Fig. 54.29.

A further development is to include a CNC kernel
into the robot controller, as suggested in Fig. 54.21,
making the robot behave as a CNC machine.
These approaches as such are more complemen-
tary than competing, with the competing stakeholders
presently exploring what beneﬁts can be gained for cus-
tomers and business in each type of application.
Listing 54.2 Example pick-and-place operation in
the ABB robot programming language Rapid
PROC PickInPallet()
MoveJ Offs(pPickInPallet,-500,0,500),v2000,z100,tGripper\WObj:=wobjPalletStatic;
MoveL RelTool(pPickInPallet,0,0,-100),v2000,z100,tGripper\WObj:=wobjPallet;
MoveL RelTool(pPickInPallet,0,0,0),v100,fine,tGripper\WObj:=wobjPallet;
Grip;
MoveL RelTool(pPickInPallet,0,0,-100),v500,z10,tGripper\WObj:=wobjPallet;
MoveJDO Offs(pPickInPallet,-500,0,500),v2000,z100,tGripper\WObj:=wobjPalletStatic,
doNewObject,1;
ENDPROC
PROC PlaceAtOutFeeder()
MoveJ Offs(pDropOutFeeder,0,0,200),v2000,z10,tGripper\WObj:=wobjOutFeeder;
WaitDI diOutFeederReady,1;
MoveL Offs(pDropOutFeeder,0,0,0),v200,fine,tGripper\WObj:=wobjOutFeeder;
Release;
MoveLDO Offs(pDropOutFeeder,0,0,200),v500,z10,
tGripper\WObj:=wobjOutFeeder,doStartOutFeeder,1;
MoveL pFromOutFeeder,v2000,z10,tGripper\WObj:=wobjMachine;
ENDPROC
PROC Grip()
SetDO doGrip,1;
WaitDI diGripped,1;
ENDPROC
PROC Release()
SetDO doGrip,0;
WaitDI diGripped,0;
ENDPROC

Industrial Robotics
54.6 Task Descriptions – Teaching and Programming
1413
Part F | 54.6
Calculate toolpath
with PowerMILL robot
Set part and robot to
position
Select a robot
simulation
Simulate tool path
Convert simulation to
native robot language
Y
X
Fig. 54.28 Workﬂow according to
the PowerMill software from Delcam
with its robot module. Note that
step 4 includes also simulation of
robot properties such as closeness to
singularities
Fig. 54.29 Robot program-
ming environment, with
a virtual controller (console
to the lower right) for each
robot including the model-
based embedded control
software compiled for the
personal computer (PC). To
the left there are the instances
of all objects depicted as
a tree structure, ranging from
complete machines down to
the bits of the I/O signals
At step 5 in Fig. 54.28, the motion speciﬁcation is
generated and expressed in the native language of the
robot. On the other hand, the tool path could be ex-
pressed in machine-independent, standardized G-code.
A further step would be to integrate a machine tool in-
terface and control into the robot controller which is
depicted in Fig. 54.22. What approach to take is an area
of current research and development (R&D) and busi-
ness decisions, but most robots are programmed in their
own language only, since the needed system functions
as a consequence of Table 54.4.
To exemplify task deﬁnitions based on a native
robot language, consider the application depicted in
Fig. 54.29, which includes bin-picking, handling, ma-
chine tending, conveyer tracking, and palletizing. List-
ing 54.2 lists a sample program with some of the
functions from that application programmed in ABB’s
proprietary robot language Rapid. The program being

Part F | 54.7
1414
Part F
Robots at Work
tool-centric shows in the tool argument of the Move
statements, the tGripper that is a reference to the tool
data including the tool frame. At the same time, it is
arm-centric in the way that the execution of motions
is performed per arm (with support for synchronized
execution for multiarm robots), as expressed by the
MoveL statements. Correspondingly, the MoveJ per-
forms a joint-space motion.
Note that Grip and Release are in separate proce-
dures where execution waits until a hardware acknowl-
edged signal is obtained. For Move statements L denote
Linear, J means Jointspace, functions Offs and RelTool
compute target poses based on other determined poses
(i. e., frames). The v-constants are velocities in mm s1,
and z-constants (or ﬁne) specify how close to the target
pose the motion should be. DI refers to digital input and
DO to digital output. The WObj is the work object, i. e.,
the speciﬁcation of the base frame of the motions.
When programming motion behaviors like a search
strategy, which could be considered being a motion
primitive from an application point of view, use of the
end-user language of that robot might not be the best
option. Instead a computer programming language can
be more appropriate as shown in Listing 54.1. In the
ABB case, the strategies are implemented as part of an
application package as for assembly, and the code is
internally written in C (cannot be viewed or changed
by the user, but has optimized real-time performance)
while the functionality is exposed to the robot user via
special statements like FCRefSpiral [54.51] and more to
accomplish the principles of Table 54.2. A variety of so-
lutions are available for different robot brands [54.76].
Considering a complete setup with multiple robots,
either with a few robots and some peripherals like
in Fig. 54.9 or a complete manufacturing line as in
Fig. 54.12, there are several robot programs that need
to be programmed to work together and hence there
is a coordination and complexity problem. A useful
approach is to use a service-oriented approach, consid-
ering robots as servers providing services according to
a set of programs that are exposed on the factory or
production-cell network which means programming is
done by:

Building services (using several technologies)
which are available, discoverable or not, remotely
accessible by the application programmer

Building applications that coordinate and use those
services.
For such system to be programmable, however, the
equipment (typically from different suppliers) has to be
conﬁgured and interconnected according to the some-
times overlooked art of robot system integration.
54.7 System Integration
It is interesting to note that connecting different work-
cell devices with each other, and integrating them into
a working system, is hardly mentioned in the robotics
literature. Nevertheless, in actual nontrivial installa-
tions, this part typically represents, apart from the cost
for peripheral device, roughly half of the overall in-
stallation costs. The automation scenario includes all
the problems of integrating computers and their periph-
erals, plus additional issues that have to do with the
variety of (electrically and mechanically incompatible)
devices and their interaction with the physical environ-
ment (including their inaccuracies, tolerances, and un-
modeled physical effects such as backlash and friction).
The number of variations is enormous so it is often not
possible to create reusable solutions. In total, this re-
sults in a need for extensive engineering to put a robot
to work (Table 54.5). This engineering is what we call
system integration.
Carrying out system integration according to cur-
rent practice is not a scientiﬁc problem as such (al-
though how to improve the situation is), but the ob-
stacles it comprises form a barrier to applying ad-
vanced sensor-based control for improved ﬂexibility, as
Table 54.5 Stages of system integration, typically carried
out in the order listed
Physical
Selecting equipment based on dimensioning
for mechanical size, load, and stress
Mechanical interfacing (locations, adapter
plates, etc.)
Electrical power supply (voltages and cur-
rents for robots, effectors, feeders, etc.)
Connections for analog signals (shielding,
scaling, currents, binary levels, etc.)
Safety design and risk assessment
Communication
Interconnections for single-bit digital I/O
Byte-wise data communication, including
latencies and bit rates
Transfer of byte sequences
Conﬁguration
Conﬁguration of messages between inter-
acting devices
Establishment of services
Tuning for performance and resource uti-
lization
Application
Deﬁnition of application-level functions/
services
Task
Application programming, using the
application-level services

Industrial Robotics
54.7 System Integration
1415
Part F | 54.7
Fig. 54.30 Manufacturing cell with a multicontroller ar-
chitecture with dedicated controllers (robot motions, pro-
duction sequences, positioning systems, processes and
worker safety). In modern robot controllers, such as the
KUKA KR C4, these controllers are replaced by soft-
ware tasks of a single multifunctional robot controller,
thus reducing investment costs on controllers and com-
munication, simplifying engineering, programming and
diagnosis, and enhancing process quality and shortening
cycle time I
is needed in small series production. In particular, in
future types of applications using external sensing and
high-performance feedback control within the workcell,
system integration will be an even bigger problem since
it includes tuning of the feedback too.
For large series production (e.g. in the automotive
industry), the engineering cost of system integration is
Ethernet
Open controller
(Linux based)
L
P
C
S
D
M
A
P
C
Power
supply
CAN
Motors &
encoders
Fieldbus slaves
Safety
Robot
Auxiliary axes
XD2:/Comp:
2×
USB
2× USB
XD4:
XD5:
XD:
XD3
PLC
ETHERNET
POWERLINK
ETHERNET
POWERLINK
ETHERNET
POWERLINK
File transfer
Host PC
USB disk
WinC5G
TP5
USB disk
ACOPOS
servo drives
PROFIbus
DeviceNet
PROFInet
Ethernet/IP
(CANopen)
Fieldbus master
PROFIbus
DeviceNet
PROFInet
Ethernet/IP
(CANopen)
ETHERNET
POWERLINK
I/O
Analog-digital
Sensor track
Conveyor track
ETHERNET
POWERLINK
Fig. 54.31 Control modules and interfaces in a typical (but open) robot controller. Several of the named network tech-
nologies are based on Ethernet, ranging from normal LAN to different real-time protocols (courtesy of COMAU)
Robot
control
RC
Cell
control
PLC
Motion
control
MC
Process
control
PC
Safety
control
SC
Communication–synchronization–services
Manufacturing application programming
Integrated into one controller
less of a problem since its cost per manufactured part is
small. On the other hand, the trend toward smaller series

Part F | 54.8
1416
Part F
Robots at Work
of customized products, or products with many variants
that are not kept in stock, calls for high ﬂexibility and
short changeover times. Flexibility in this context refers
to variable product variants, batch sizes, and process pa-
rameters. In particular, this is a problem in small and
medium-sized productions, but the trend is similar for
larger enterprises as ﬂexibility requirements are contin-
uously on the rise. One may think that simply by using
standards for input/output (I/O) and well-deﬁned inter-
faces, integration should be just a matter of connecting
things together and run the system.
Of course, the object-oriented software solution
would be to have a gripper class with operations grasp
and release. That would be appropriate for a robot simu-
lator in pure software, but for integration of real systems
such encapsulation of data (abstract data types) would
introduce practical difﬁculties because:

Values are explicit and accomplished by external (in
this case) hardware, and for testing and debugging
we need to access and measure them.

Online operator interfaces permit direct manipula-
tion of values, including reading of output values.
The use of functions of object methods (so-called
set:ers and get:ers) would only complicate the pic-
ture; maintaining consistency with the external de-
vices would be no simpler.
Already in small installations, the complexity of
system integration becomes apparent. So-called vertical
integration means integration of low-level devices with
a high-level factory control system, whereas integration
of peripherals on (for instance) workcell level is called
horizontal integration (Fig. 54.30).
Lack of self-descriptive and self-contained data de-
scriptions that are also useful at the real-time level
further increases the integration effort since data inter-
faces/conversions typically have to be manually writ-
ten. In some cases, as illustrated in Fig. 54.31, there
are powerful software tools available for the inte-
gration of the robot user level and the engineering
level [54.77]. The fully (on all levels) integrated and
nonproprietary system such as the recently discussed
Industry4.0 or industrial Internet initiatives is still is
a challenge, particularly for small and medium-sized
productions [54.24].
54.8 Outlook and Long-Term Challenges
The widespread use of industrial robots in standard,
large-scale production such as the automotive indus-
try, where robots perform repetitive tasks in well-known
environments, resulted in the common opinion that in-
dustrial robotics is a solved problem. This opinion was
underpinned by the robot systems’ impressive auto-
matic performance, based on advanced semiautomatic
programming and resulting in an unbeatable product
quality when compared to manual labor. However,
large-scale production comprises only a minor part of
the work needed on an industrial scale in any wealthy
society, especially considering the number of compa-
nies and the variety of applications and processes that
could and should be automated for productivity, health
and sustainability reasons.
Global prosperity and wealth requires resource-efﬁ-
cient and human-assistive robots. The challenges today
are to recognize and overcome the barriers that are cur-
rently preventing robots from being more widely used,
especially in small and medium-sized manufacturing.
Taking a closer look at the scientiﬁc and technolog-
ical barriers, we ﬁnd the following challenges:

Human-friendly task speciﬁcation, including intu-
itive ways of expressing permitted/normal/expected
variations and errors. There are numerous upcom-
ing and promising techniques for user-friendly
human–robot interaction (such as speech, gestures,
manual guidance, and so on), but the focus is still
on speciﬁcation of the nominal task rather than
the complete task which is capable of handling
foreseen deviations from the nominal case (Part G,
Robots and Humans). Taking care of these expected
deviations can account for up to 80% of the total
programming time.

Intuitive human–robot interaction The foreseen
variations, and the unforeseen variations experi-
enced during robot work, are difﬁcult to manage.
When instructing a human, he/she has an extensive
and typically implicit knowledge about the work
and the involved processes. To teach a robot, it is
an issue both how to realize what the robot does not
know, and how to convey the missing information
efﬁciently. Furthermore, a person should feel com-
fortable and familiar with the robot’s functionality
and operation during all operational modes includ-
ing maintenance and error recovery. Research and
development toward industrial robotics usability
and ergonomics for increasing acceptance and
operator efﬁciency has been of surprisingly low
activity in the past.

Efﬁcient mobile manipulation. Successful imple-
mentations and systems are available for both
mobility and for manipulation, but accomplished

Industrial Robotics
54.8 Outlook and Long-Term Challenges
1417
Part F | 54.8
in different systems and using different types of
(typically incompatible) platforms. A ﬁrst step
would be to accomplish mobile manipulation at all,
combining all degrees of freedom of both the mo-
bile base and arm(s), intelligently exploiting system
redundancies to achieve a given task. A second step
providing truly dependable autonomous navigation
(with adaptive, but predictable understanding of
constraints, such as frequent environmental changes
and typical shop-ﬂoor dynamics, and appropriate
sensor-based reactions) dexterous manipulation
with multiﬁngered grippers, and robust force/torque
interaction with environments (that have unknown
stiffness). As a concluding step, all this needs to
be done with decent performance using reasonably
priced hardware, and with human–robot interfaces
according to the previous items.

Low-cost components including low-cost actuation.
Actuation of high-performance robots represent
about two-third of the overall robot cost, and
improved modularity often results in a higher
total hardware cost (due to less opportunities for
mechatronic optimization). On the other hand, cost-
optimized (with respect to certain applications)
systems result in more-specialized components
and smaller volumes, with higher costs for small
series production of those components. Since future
robotics and automation solutions might provide the
needed cost efﬁciency for small series customized
components, we can interpret this as a boot-strap-
ping problem, involving both technical and business
aspects. The starting point is probably new core
components that can ﬁt into many types of systems
and applications, calling for more mechatronics
research and synergies with other products.

Composition of subsystems. In most successful
ﬁelds of engineering, the principle of superposition
holds, meaning that problems can be divided into
subproblems and that the solutions can then be su-
perimposed (added/combined) onto each other such
that the total solution comprises a solution to the
overall problem. These principles are of key impor-
tance in physics and mathematics, and within engi-
neering some examples are solid-state mechanics,
thermal dynamics, civil engineering, and electron-
ics. However, there is no such thing for software,
and therefore not for mechatronics (which includes
software) or robotics (programmable mechatronics)
either.
Thus,
composition
of
un-encapsulated
subsystems is costly in terms of engineering effort.
Even worse, the same applies to encapsulated soft-
ware modules and subsystems. For efﬁciency, sys-
tem interconnections should go directly to known
(and hopefully standardized) interfaces, to avoid
the indirections and extra load (weight, mainte-
nance, etc.) of intermediate adapters (applying to
both mechanics for end-effector mounting and to
software). Interfaces can be agreed upon, but the
development of new versions typically maintains
backward compatibility (newer devices can be con-
nected to old controller), while including the reuse
of devices calls for mechanisms for forward com-
patibility (automatic upgrade based on meta in-
formation of new interfaces) to cover the case
that a device is connected to a robot that is not
equipped with all the legacy or vendor-speciﬁc
code.

Embodiment of engineering and research results.
Use or deployment of new technical solutions today
still starts from scratch, including analysis, under-
standing, implementation, testing, and so on. This is
the same as for many other technical areas, but the
exceptional wide variety of technologies involved
with robotics and the need for ﬂexibility and up-
grading makes it especially important in this ﬁeld.
Embodiment into components is one approach, but
knowledge can be applicable to engineering, de-
ployment, and operation, so the representation and
the principle of usage are two important issues. Im-
proved methods are less useful if they are overly
domain speciﬁc or if engineering is experienced to
be signiﬁcantly more complicated. Software is im-
perative, as well as platform and context dependent,
while know-how is more declarative and symbolic.
Thus, there is still a long way to go for efﬁcient
robotics engineering and reuse of know-how.

Open dependable systems. Systems need to be open
to permit extensions by third parties, since there is
no way for system providers to foresee all upcom-
ing needs in a variety of new application areas. On
the other hand, systems need to be closed such that
the correctness of certain functions can be ensured.
Extensive modularization in terms of hardware and
supervisory software make systems more expensive
and less ﬂexible (contrary to the needs of open-
ness). Highly restrictive frameworks and means of
programming will not be accepted for widespread
use within short-time-to-market development. Most
software modules do not come with formal spec-
iﬁcation, and there is less understanding of such
needs. Thus, systems engineering is a key prob-
lem.

Sustainable manufacturing. Manufacturing is about
transformation of resources into products, and pro-
ductivity (low cost and high performance) is a must.
One aspect of sustainability deals with energy-efﬁ-
ciency of the devices that are used for production.
Saving energy can constrain the path planning of an

Part F | 54
1418
Part F
Robots at Work
individual and a whole ﬂeet of robots, and even shift
the operation of energy-consuming tasks in periods
of the day where energy cost are low. A second as-
pect of sustainability deals with recycling of scarce
resources in terms of materials and noble earths. In
most cases, this can be achieved by crushing the
product and sorting the materials, but in some cases
disassembly and automatic sorting of speciﬁc parts
are needed. There is, therefore, a need for robots
in recycling and de-manufacturing. Based on future
solutions to the above items, this is then a robot ap-
plication challenge.
An overall issue is how both industry and academia
can combine their efforts such that sound business can
be combined with scientiﬁc research so that future de-
velopments overcome the barriers that are formed by
the above challenges.
Video-References
VIDEO 260
SMErobotics project video
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/54/videodetails/260
VIDEO 261
SMErobot video coffee break (English)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/54/videodetails/261
VIDEO 262
SMErobot final project video
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/54/videodetails/262
VIDEO 265
SMErobot – New parallel kinematic with unique concepts for demanding handling
and process applications
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/54/videodetails/265
VIDEO 266
SMErobot D4 The woodworking assistant
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/54/videodetails/266
VIDEO 380
SMErobotics demonstrator D1 assembly with dual-arm industrial manipulators
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/54/videodetails/380
VIDEO 381
SMErobotics demonstrator D2 human–robot cooperation in wooden house production
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/54/videodetails/381
VIDEO 382
SMErobotics demonstrator D3 assembly with sensitive compliant robot arms
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/54/videodetails/382
VIDEO 383
SMErobotics demonstrator D4 welding robot assistant
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/54/videodetails/383
References
54.1
The International Federation of Robotics (IFR):
World Robotics 2015. Statistics, Market Analysis,
Forecasts, Case Studies and Profitability of Robot
Investments (International Federation of Robotics,
Frankfurt 2015)
54.2
D. Bourne: My Boss the Robot, Scientific American
308(5), 37–41 (2013)
54.3
M.P. Groover: Automation, Production Systems,
and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 3rd edn.
(Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River 2007)
54.4
International
Organization
for Standardization:
Standards catalogue, 25.040.30: Industrial robots.
Manipulators, http://www.iso.org/iso/home/store/
catalogue_ics/catalogue_ics_browse.htm?ICS1=25&
ICS2=40&ICS3=30 (2014)
54.5
International Organization for Standardization: ISO
10218-1:2011. Robots and robotic devices – Safety
requirements for industrial robots – Part 1: Robots,
http://www.iso.org/iso/home/store/catalogue_
detail.html?csnumber=51330 (2011)
54.6
International
Organization
for Standardization:
ISO 10218-2:2011. Robots and robotic devices –
Safety requirements for industrial robots – Part 2:
Robot
systems
and
integration,
http://www.
iso.org/iso/home/store/catalogue_detail.html?
csnumber=41571 (2011)
54.7
L. Westerlund: The Extended Arm of Man. A His-
tory of the Industrial Robot (Informationsförlaget,
Stockholm 2000)
54.8
D. Hunt: Industrial Robotics Handbook (Industrial,
New York 1983)
54.9
V.D. Scheinman: Design of a Computer Controlled
Manipulator, Ph.D. Thesis (Stanford Univ., Stanford
1969)
54.10
International Federation of Robotics (IFR): History
of Industrial Robots. From the first installation
until today (International Federation of Robotics,
Frankfurt 2012), http://www.ifr.org/uploads/media/
History_of_Industrial_Robots_online_brochure_
by_IFR_2012.pdf
54.11
H. Makino: Assembly robot, US4341502 A (1982)
54.12
G. Boothroyd, P. Dewhurst, W. Knight: Product De-
sign for Manufacture and Assembly, 3rd edn. (CRC,
Boca Raton 2011)

Industrial Robotics
References
1419
Part F | 54
54.13
R. Curran, G. Mayer: The architecture of the
AdeptOne® direct-drive robot, Am. Control Conf.,
Boston (1985)
54.14
X.-J. Liu, J. Wang: Performance evaluation of par-
allel mechanisms. In: Parallel Kinematics, Springer
Tracts in Mechanical Engineering, (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 2014) pp. 185–238
54.15
S. Haddadin, S. Parusel, R. Belder, A. Albu-Schaef-
fer: It is (almost) all about human safety: A novel
paradigm for robot design control and planning,
Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 8153, 202–215 (2013)
54.16
R. Bloss: Innovations like two arms, cheaper prices,
easier programming, autonomous and collabora-
tive operation are driving automation deployment
in manufacturing and elsewhere, Assem. Autom.
33(4), 312–316 (2013)
54.17
S. Kock, T. Vitor, M. Björn, H. Jerregard, M. Käll-
mann, I. Lundberg: Robot concept for scalable,
flexible assembly automation, Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Assem. Manuf. (ISAM), Tampere (2011)
54.18
S. Bogh, M. Hvilshoj, M. Kristiansen, O. Madsen:
Identifying and evaluating suitable tasks for au-
tonomous industrial mobile manipulators (AIMM),
Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 61(5-8), 713–726 (2012)
54.19
C.Y.K. Smith, L. Nalpantidis, X. Gratal, P. Qi, D. Di-
marogonas, D. Kragic: Dual arm manipulation –
a survey, Robot. and Auton. Syst. 60(10), 1340–1353
(2012)
54.20
P. Gorle, A. Clive: Positive Impact of Industrial Im-
pacts on Employment (International Federation of
Robotics, Frankfurt 2013)
54.21
J. Manyika, M. Chui, J. Bughin, R. Dobbs, P. Bis-
son, A. Marrs: Disruptive technologies: Advances
that will transform life, business, and the global
economy,
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/
business_technology/disruptive_technologies
(2013)
54.22
E. Westkämper: Towards the Re-Industrialization
of Europe: A Concept for Manufacturing for 2030
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014)
54.23
M. Hedelind, M. Jackson: How to improve the use
of industrial robots in lean manufacturing systems,
J. Manuf. Technol. Manag. 22(7), 891–905 (2011)
54.24
H. Kagermann, W. Wahlster, J. Helbig: Recommen-
dations for Implementing the Strategic Initiative
INDUSTRIE 4.0. http://www.acatech.de/fileadmin/
user_upload/Baumstruktur_nach_Website/
Acatech/root/de/Material_fuer_Sonderseiten/
Industrie_4.0/Final_report__Industrie_4.0_
accessible.pdf (Forschungsunion/acatech, Frank-
furt 2013)
54.25
R. Bischoff, J. Kurth, G. Schreiber, R. Koeppe: The
KUKA-DLR lightweight robot arm – a new reference
platform for robotics research and manufactur-
ing, 41st Int. Symp. Robot. 6th Ger. Conf. Robot.
(ROBOTIK), Munich (2010)
54.26
M. Hedelind, S. Kock: Requirements on flexible
robot systems for small parts assembly: A case
study, Proc. 2011 IEEE Int. Symp. Assem. Manuf.
(ISAM), Tampere (2011) pp. 1–7
54.27
S. Kinkel, E. Kirner, H. Armbruster, A. Jäger: Rele-
vance and innovation of production-related ser-
vices in manufacturing industry, Int. J. Technol.
Manag. 55(3/4), 263–273 (2011)
54.28
International Organization for Standardization: ISO
8373. Robots and robotic devices – Vocabulary,
http://www.iso.org/iso/home/store/catalogue_
detail.html?csnumber=53830 (2012)
54.29
R. Bloss: Review of manufacturing cells as they
achieve high levels of autonomy and flexibility, As-
sem. Autom. 33(2), 112–116 (2013)
54.30
A. Kahn: The Encyclopedia of Work-related Ill-
nesses, Injuries, and Health Issues (Facts On File,
New York 2004)
54.31
M. Wilson: Developments in robot applications for
food manufacturing, Ind. Robot Int. J. 37(6), 498–
502 (2010)
54.32
R. Moreno Masey, J. Gray, T. Dodd, D. Caldwell:
Guidelines for the design of low-cost robots for
the food industry, Ind. Robot Int. J. 37(6), 509–517
(2010)
54.33
K. Mathia: Principles and Applications in Clean-
room Automation (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cam-
bridge 2010)
54.34
D. Rossi, E. Bertolini, M. Fenaroli, F. Marciano,
M. Alberti: A multi-criteria ergonomic and perfor-
mance methodology for evaluating alternatives in
“manuable” material handling, Int. J. Ind. Ergon.
43(4), 314–327 (2013)
54.35
D. Caldwell: Robotics and Automation in the Food
Industry: Current and Future Technologies (Wood-
head, Cambridge 2012)
54.36
M. Palzkill, A. Verl: Object pose detection in in-
dustrial environment, Proc. 7th Ger. Conf. Robot.
(ROBOTIK), Munich (2012)
54.37
R. Mattone, M. Divona, A. Wolf: Sorting of items
on a moving conveyor belt. Part 2: Performance
evaluation and optimization of pick-and-place
operations, Robot. Comput.-Integr. Manuf. 16(2/3),
81–90 (2000)
54.38
A. Grzesiak, R. Becker, A. Verl: The bionic handling
assistant: A success story of additive manufactur-
ing, Assem. Autom. 4, 329–333 (2011)
54.39
K. Ikeuchi, B. Horn, S. Nagata, T. Callahan, O. Fein:
Picking up an object from a pile of objects, A.I.
Memo No. 726 (Artif. Intell. Lab./MIT, Cambridge
1983)
54.40
M.-Y. Liu, O. Tuzel, A. Veeraraghavan, T. Marks,
R. Chellappa: Fast object localization and pose es-
timation in heavy clutter for robotic bin picking,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 31(8), 951–973 (2012)
54.41
J.J. Rodrigues, J.-S. Kim, M. Furukawa, J. Xavier,
P. Aguiar, T. Kanade: 6D pose estimation of tex-
tureless shiny objects using random ferns for bin
picking, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Vil-
amoura (2012)
54.42
Z. Pan, J. Polden, N. Larkin, S. Van Duin, J. Nor-
rish: Recent progress on programming methods for
industrial robots, Robot. Comput.-Integr. Manuf.
28(2), 87–94 (2012)
54.43
P. Klüger: Future body-in-white concepts. In-
creased sustainability with reduced investment
and
life-cycle-cost,
Automot.
Manuf.
Solut.,
Shanghai (2013)

Part F | 54
1420
Part F
Robots at Work
54.44
M. Shah, R.D. Eastman, T. Hong: An overview of
robot-sensor calibration methods for evaluation of
perception systems, Workshop Perform. Metr. In-
tell. Syst., New York (2012)
54.45
Deutsches Institut für Normung: DIN8593-0:2003-
09: Manufacturing processes joining – Part 0:
General; classification, subdivision, terms and
definitions,
http://www.beuth.de/de/norm/din-
8593-0/65031206 (2003)
54.46
N. Lohse, H. Hirani, S. Ratchev, M. Turitto: An on-
tology for the definition and validation of assembly
processes for evolvable assembly systems, Proc. 6th
IEEE Int. Symp. Assem. Task Plan. (2005) pp. 242–247
54.47
K. Malecki: Vehicle body mounted door seals on
a roll, Adhesion Adhesives Sealants 6(1), 23–25
(2009)
54.48
S. Kock, T. Vittor, B. Matthias: Robot concept for
scalable, flexible assembly automation, Proc. IEEE
Int. Symp. Assem. Manuf. (ISAM), Tampere (2011)
54.49
H. Chen, J. Wang, G. Zhang, T. Fuhlbrigge, S. Kock:
High-precision assembly automation based on
robot compliance, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol.
45(9/10), 999–1006 (2009)
54.50
A. Stolt, M. Linderoth, A. Robertsson, R. Johansson:
Force controlled robotic assembly without a force
sensor, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Saint Paul (2012)
54.51
ABB
Robotics:
Application
manual
–
force
control
for
machining,
http://new.abb.com/
products/robotics/application-equipment-and-
accessories/flexfinishing/function-package-for-
force-control (2013)
54.52
J. Domnick, Z. Yang, Q. Ye: Simulation of the film
formation at a high-speed rotary bell atomizer
used in automotive spray painting processes, Proc.
22nd Eur. Conf. Liq. At. Spray Syst. ILASS Eur., Como
(2008)
54.53
M. Jonsson, A. Stolt, A. Robertsson, S. von Gegerfelt,
K. Nilsson: On force control for assembly and de-
burring of castings, Prod. Eng. 7(4), 351–360 (2013)
54.54
Z. Pan, H. Zhanh, Z. Zhu, J. Wang: Chatter analy-
sis of robotic machining process, J. Mater. Process.
Technol. 173(3), 301–309 (2006)
54.55
M. Weck, C. Brecher: Werkzeugmaschinen 2 – Kon-
struktion und Berechnung (Springer, Berlin, Hei-
delberg 2006)
54.56
U. Schneider, M. Ansaloni, M. Drust, F. Leali,
A. Verl: Experimental investigation of sources of er-
ror in robot machining, Int. Workshop Robot. Smart
Manuf., Porto (2013)
54.57
J. Wang, H. Zhang, T. Fuhlbrigge: Improving ma-
chining accuracy with robot deformation compen-
sation, Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., St. Louis
(2009)
54.58
C. Lehmann, B. Olofsson, K. Nilsson, M. Halbauer,
M. Haage, A. Robertsson, O. Sornmo, U. Berger:
Robot joint modeling and parameter identifica-
tion using the clamping method, IFAC Conf. Manuf.
Modell. Manag. Control, Saint Petersburg (2013)
54.59
B. Saund, R. DeVlieg: High accuracy articulated
robots with CNC control system, SAE Int. J. Aerosp.
6(2), 780–784 (2013)
54.60
U. Schneider, J.R. Diaz Posada, M. Drust, A. Verl:
Position control of an industrial robot using an op-
tical measurement system for machining purposes,
Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Manuf. Res. (2013) pp. 307–
312
54.61
U. Schneider, B. Olofsson, O. Sörnmo, M. Drust,
A. Robertsson, M. Hägele, R. Johansson: Integrated
approach to robotic machining with macro/micro
actuation, Robotics Comput.-Integr. Manuf. 30(6),
636–647 (2014)
54.62
International
Organization
for
Standardization:
ISO 12100:2010. Safety of machinery – General
principles for design
– Risk assessment and
risk reduction, http://www.iso.org/iso/home/store/
catalogue_detail.html?csnumber=51528 (2010)
54.63
European
Parliament:
Directive
2006/42/EC
of
the European Parliament and the Council of 17
May 2006 on machinery, and amending Direc-
tive 95/16/EC (recast), http://eur-lex.europa.eu/
LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2006:157:0024:
0086:EN:PDF (2006)
54.64
Siemens: Easy Implementation of the European
Machinery Directive, Functional Safety of Machines
and Systems (Siemens, Fürth 2012)
54.65
International Organization for Standardization: ISO
13849-1:2006. Safety of machinery – Safety-related
parts of control systems – Part 1: General principles
for
design,
http://www.iso.org/iso/home/store/
catalogue_detail.html?csnumber=3491 (2006)
54.66
International
Electrotechnical
Commission:
IEC
62061 ed1.0. Safety of machinery – Functional
safety of safety-related electrical, electronic and
programmable electronic control systems: http://
webstore.iec.ch/webstore/webstore.nsf/artnum/
033604!opendocument (2005)
54.67
International
Electrotechnical
Commission:
IEC
61508
ed2.0.
Functional
safety
of
electrical/
electronic/programmable electronic safety-related
systems,
http://www.iec.ch/functionalsafety/
standards (2010)
54.68
International
Organization
for
Standardization:
ISO 13855:2010. Safety of machinery – Position-
ing of safeguards with respect to the approach
speeds of parts of the human body, http://www.
iso.org/iso/home/store/catalogue_detail.html?
csnumber=42845 (2010)
54.69
International Organization for Standardization: ISO
13857:2008. Safety of machinery – Safety distances
to prevent hazard zones being reached by upper
and lower limbs, http://www.iso.org/iso/home/
store/catalogue_detail.html?csnumber=39255
(2008)
54.70
R. Hollmann, A. Rost, M. Hägele, A. Verl: A HMM-
based approach to learning probability models of
programming strategies for industrial robots, 2010
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom., Anchorage (2010)
54.71
B. Lacevic, P. Rocco, A. Zanchettin: Safety assess-
ment and control of robotic manipulators using
danger field, IEEE Trans. Robotics 29(5), 1257–1270
(2013)
54.72
International
Organization
for
Standardization:
ISO/TC
184/SC
2.
Robots
and
robotic
devices,

Industrial Robotics
References
1421
Part F | 54
http://www.iso.org/iso/home/store/catalogue_
tc/catalogue_tc_browse.htm?commid=54138&
development=on (2014)
54.73
S. Oberer-Treitz, A. Puzik, A. Verl: Measuring the
collision potential of industrial robots, 41st Int.
Symp. Robot. 6th Germ. Conf. Robot. (2010)
54.74
R. Behrens, N. Elkmann: Study on meaningful
and verified thresholds for minimizing the conse-
quences of human-robot collisions, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2014) pp. 3378–3383
54.75
S. Haddadin, S. Haddadin, A. Khoury, T. Rokahr,
S. Parusel, R. Burgkart, A. Bicchi, A. Albu-Schaeffer:
On making robots understand safety: Embedding
injury knowledge into control, Int. J. Robotics Res.
31(13), 1578–1602 (2012)
54.76
J. Marvel, J. Falco: Best practices and performance
metrics using force control for robot assembly (Nat.
Inst. Stand. Technol., Gaithersburg 2012)
54.77
R. Zurawski: Integration Technologies for Industrial
Automated Systems (CRC, Boca Raton 2006)

Multimedia Contents Space Robot
1423
Part F | 55
55. Space Robotics
Kazuya Yoshida, Brian Wilcox, Gerd Hirzinger, Roberto Lampariello
In the space community, any unmanned space-
craft can be called a robotic spacecraft. However,
Space Robots are considered to be more capable
devices that can facilitate manipulation, assem-
bling, or servicing functions in orbit as assistants
to astronauts, or to extend the areas and abilities
of exploration on remote planets as surrogates for
human explorers.
In this chapter, a concise digest of the histori-
cal overview and technical advances of two distinct
types of space robotic systems, orbital robots and
surface robots, is provided. In particular, Sect. 55.1
describes orbital robots, and Sect. 55.2 describes
surface robots. In Sect. 55.3, the mathematical
modeling of the dynamics and control using ref-
erence equations are discussed. Finally, advanced
topics for future space exploration missions are
addressed in Sect. 55.4.
55.1
Historical Developments and Advances
of Orbital Robotic Systems.................... 1424
55.1.1
Robotic Arms for Assistance
of Human Space Flight ............. 1424
55.1.2
Future-Oriented Space Robot
Experiments ............................ 1426
55.2 Historical Developments and Advances
of Surface Robotic Systems ................... 1430
55.2.1
Teleoperated Rovers ................. 1430
55.2.2
Autonomous Rovers ................. 1432
55.2.3
Research Systems ..................... 1435
55.2.4
Sensing and Perception ............ 1436
55.2.5
Estimation............................... 1437
55.2.6
Manipulators
for In-Situ Science ................... 1437
55.3 Mathematical Modeling ....................... 1437
55.3.1
Space Robot
as an Articulated Body System... 1437
55.3.2
Equations for Free-Floating
Manipulator Systems ................ 1438
55.3.3
Generalized Jacobian
and Inertia Matrices ................. 1439
55.3.4
Linear and Angular Momenta.... 1440
55.3.5
Virtual Manipulator.................. 1440
55.3.6
Dynamic Singularity ................. 1441
55.3.7
Reaction Null-Space (RNS)......... 1441
55.3.8
Motion Planning Issues ............ 1441
55.3.9
Equations for Flexible-Based
Manipulator Systems ................ 1443
55.3.10 Advanced Control for Flexible
Structure Based Manipulators.... 1444
55.3.11
Contact Dynamics
and Impedance Control ............ 1446
55.3.12
Dynamics of Mobile Robots ....... 1447
55.3.13
Wheel Traction Mechanics ......... 1448
55.4 Future Directions of Orbital
and Surface Robotic Systems ................ 1452
55.4.1
Robotic Maintenance
and Service Missions ................ 1452
55.4.2
Robonaut and JUSTIN................ 1453
55.4.3
Aerial Platforms ....................... 1454
55.4.4
Mobility Concepts
and Subsurface Platforms ......... 1456
55.5 Conclusions and Further Reading ......... 1457
Video-References......................................... 1457
References................................................... 1458

Part F | 55.1
1424
Part F
Robots at Work
55.1 Historical Developments and Advances of Orbital Robotic Systems
Key issues in space robots and systems are character-
ized as follows:
Manipulation – Although manipulation is a basic tech-
nology in robotics, microgravity in the orbital en-
vironment requires special attention to the motion
dynamics of manipulator arms and objects being
handled. Reaction dynamics that affect the base
body, impact dynamics when the robotic hand con-
tacts an object to be handled, and vibration dynam-
ics due to structural ﬂexibility are included in this
issue.
Mobility – The ability for locomotion is particularly
important in exploration robots (rovers) that travel
on the surface of a remote planet. These surfaces are
natural and rough, and thus challenging to traverse.
Sensing and perception, traction mechanics, and ve-
hicle dynamics, control and navigation; all of these
mobile robotics technologies must be demonstrated
in a natural untouched environment.
Teleoperation and Autonomy – There is a signiﬁcant
time delay between a robotic system at a work site
and a human operator in an operation room on the
earth. In earlier orbital robotics demonstrations, the
latency was typically 5 s, but can be several tens of
minutes, or even hours for planetary missions. Teler-
obotics technology is therefore an indispensable
ingredient in space robotics, and the introduction of
autonomy is a reasonable consequence.
Extreme Environments – In addition to the micrograv-
ity environment that affects the manipulator dy-
namics or the natural and rough terrain that affects
surface mobility, there are a number of issues related
to extreme space environments that are challenging
and must be solved in order to enable practical engi-
neering applications. Such issues include extremely
high or low temperatures, high vacuum or high pres-
sure, corrosive atmospheres, ionizing radiation, and
very ﬁne dust.
The ﬁrst robotic manipulator arm used in the or-
bital environment is the shuttle remote manipulator
system (SRMS). It was successfully demonstrated in
the STS-2 mission in 1981 and was operational until
the end of the shuttle era. This success opened a new
era of orbital robotics and inspired a number of mis-
sion concepts to the research community. One ultimate
goal that has been discussed intensively after the early
1980s is the application to the rescue and servicing
of malfunctioning spacecraft by a robotic free-ﬂyer or
free-ﬂying space robot (e.g., ARAMIS report [55.1],
Fig. 55.1). In later years, manned service missions
were conducted for the capture-repair-deploy procedure
of malfunctioning satellites (Intelsat 603 by STS-49,
for example) and for the maintenance of the Hubble
space telescope (STS-61, 82, 103, and 109). For all of
the examples, the Space Shuttle, a manned spacecraft
with dedicated maneuverability, was used. However,
unmanned servicing missions have not yet become
operational. Although there were several demonstra-
tion ﬂights, such as ETS-VII and Orbital Express (to
be elaborated later), the practical technologies for un-
manned satellite servicing missions await solutions to
future challenges.
55.1.1 Robotic Arms for Assistance
of Human Space Flight
Space Shuttle Remote Manipulator System
Onboard the space shuttle, the SRMS, or Canadarm,
is a mechanical arm that maneuvers a payload from
the payload bay of the space shuttle orbiter to its de-
ployment position and then releases it [55.2]. It can
also grapple a free-ﬂying payload, maneuver it to the
payload bay of the orbiter, and berth it back into the
orbiter. The SRMS was ﬁrst used on the second Space
Shuttle mission STS-2, launched in 1981. Since then,
it was used more than 100 times during space shuttle
ﬂight missions, performing such payload deployment
or berthing as well as assisting human extra vehicular
activities (EVAs). Servicing and maintenance missions
to the Hubble space telescope and construction tasks
of the International Space Station (ISS) have also been
Fig. 55.1 A conceptual design of telerobotic servicer (af-
ter [55.1])

Space Robotics
55.1 Historical Developments and Advances of Orbital Robotic Systems
1425
Part F | 55.1
Shoulder
brace
Upper arm
boom
RMS boom
(cross section)
Orbiter
structure
Manipulator positioning
mechanism
Wrist and end effector
Wrist yaw joint
Wrist
roll joint
Viewing light
MPM
structure
Seperation
place
Elbow CCTV and pan
tilt unit (options)
Elbow pitch joint
RMS
MRL upper arm
Jettison
subsystem
Shoulder
pitch joint
Shoulder
yaw joint
Orbiter
longeron
Lower arm
boom
Standard
end effector
MRI-lower arm
MRI-wrist
Wrist CCTV and light
Wrist yaw joint
Wrist
roll joint
Wrist pitch joint
End effector
Television
camera
Fig. 55.2 Space Shuttle remote manipulator system (SRMS) (after [55.2])
successfully carried out by the cooperative use of the
SRMS with human EVAs.
As depicted in Fig. 55.2, the SRMS arm was 15 m
long and had 6-degrees of freedom (DOF), comprising
shoulder yaw and pitch joints, an elbow pitch joint, and
wrist pitch, yaw, and roll joints. Attached to the end of
the arm was a special gripper system called the stan-
dard end effector (SEE), which was designed to grapple
a pole-like ﬁxture (GF) attached to the payload.
By attaching a foothold at the end point, the arm
could serve as a mobile platform for an astronaut’s
EVAs (Fig. 55.3).
After the Space Shuttle COLUMBIA accident dur-
ing STS-107, NASA outﬁtted the SRMS with the
orbiter boom sensor system – a boom containing instru-
ments to inspect the exterior of the shuttle for damage
to the thermal protection system [55.3].
ISS Mounted Manipulator Systems
The ISS is the largest international technology project,
with 15 countries making signiﬁcant cooperative con-
tributions. The ISS is an outpost of human presence in
space, as well as a ﬂying laboratory with substantial fa-
cilities for science and engineering research. In order
Fig. 55.3 Space
shuttle
remote
manipulator
system
(SRMS) used as a platform for an astronaut’s extra
vehicular activity in the shuttle cargo bay

Part F | 55.1
1426
Part F
Robots at Work
to facilitate various activities on the station, there are
several robotic systems, some of which are already op-
erational, while others are ready for launch.
The space station remote manipulator system (SS-
RMS), or Canadarm 2 (Fig. 55.4), was the next gen-
eration of SRMS for use on the ISS [55.4]. Launched
in 2001 during STS-100 (ISS assembly ﬂight 6A),
the SSRMS has played a key role in the construction
and maintenance of the ISS both by assisting astro-
nauts during EVAs and using the SRMS on the Shuttle
to hand over a payload from a Shuttle to the SS-
RMS. The arm is 17:6 m long when fully extended
and has 7-DOF. Latching end effectors, through which
power, data, and video can be transmitted to and from
the arm, are attached to both ends. The SSRMS is
self-relocatable using an inch-worm like movement
with alternate grappling of power data grapple ﬁxtures
(PDGFs), which are installed over the station’s exterior
surfaces to provide the power, data, and video, as well
as a foothold.
As another mobility aid for the SSRMS to cover
wider areas of ISS, mobile base system (MBS) was
added in 2002 by STS-111 (ISS assembly ﬂight UF-2).
The MBS provides lateral mobility as it traverses the
rails on the main trusses [55.5].
The
special
purpose
dexterous
manipulator
(SPDM), or Dextre, which is attached at the end of the
SSRMS, is a capable mini-arm system to facilitate the
delicate assembly tasks currently handled by astronauts
during EVAs. The SPDM is a dual arm manipulator
system, where each manipulator (with 3 m length) has
7-DOF and is mounted on a one degree-of-freedom
Special purpose dextrous
manipulator (SPDM)
Space station remote
manipulator system
(SSRMS)
Trailing
umbilical
system (TUS)
Mobile base system
(MBS)
Mobile transporter (MT)
Mobile transporter
rails on truss
assembly
Fig. 55.4 Space station remote manipulator system (SSRMS) (af-
ter [55.4])
body joint. Each arm has a special tool mechanism
dedicated to the handling of standardized orbital
replacement units (ORUs). The arms are teleoperated
from a Robotic WorkStation (RWS) inside the space
station [55.6].
The European Space Agency (ESA) will also pro-
vide a robotic manipulator system for the ISS, the Eu-
ropean robotic arm (ERA), and will be used mainly to
work on the Russian segments of the station [55.7]. The
arm is 11:3 m long and has 7-DOF. The basic conﬁgu-
ration and functionality are similar to SSRMS [55.8].
In Japan, the Japanese experiment module remote
manipulator system (JEMRMS), as shown in Fig. 55.5,
was developed by the Japan Space Exploration Agency
(JAXA) [55.9–11]. The arm was launched with the
STS-124 Mission in 2008 and is now operative on the
Japanese module of the ISS. JEMRMS comprises two
components: the main arm, a 9:9 m long, six-degree-
of-freedom arm, and the small ﬁne arm, a 1:9 m long,
six-degree-of-freedom arm.
Unlike the SSRMS or the ERA, the main arm
does not have self-relocation capability, but is ﬁtted
with a small ﬁne arm, with which JEMRMS can form
a serial 12-degree-of-freedom macro-micro manipula-
tor system. After installation, the arm is used to handle
and relocate the components for the experiments and
observations on the exposed facility.
55.1.2 Future-Oriented Space Robot
Experiments
ROTEX
The Robot Technology Experiment (ROTEX) devel-
oped by the German Aerospace Agency (DLR), is one
of the important milestones of robotics technology in
space [55.12], as it demonstrated the ﬁrst (remote)
ground control of a space robot with of up to 6 s
round-trip signal delay using geostationary relay satel-
lites. A multisensory robotic arm was ﬂown on Space
Shuttle COLUMBIA (STS-55) in 1993. Although the
robot worked inside a work cell on the shuttle, sev-
eral key technologies, such as a multisensory gripper,
teleoperation from the ground and by the astronauts,
shared autonomy, and time-delay compensation by use
of a predictive graphic display were successfully tested
(Fig. 55.6 and
VIDEO 330 ).
Presumably the most spectacular experiment in RO-
TEX was the fully automatic grasping of a small
free-ﬂoating cube with ﬂattened edges by the ground
computers who evaluated the stereo images from the
robot gripper, estimated the motion, predicted for the
above-mentioned 6 s and sent up the commands for
grasping (
VIDEO 331 ).

Space Robotics
55.1 Historical Developments and Advances of Orbital Robotic Systems
1427
Part F | 55.1
ETS-VII
Engineering Test Satellite VII (ETS-VII), shown in
Fig. 55.7, is another milestone in the development of
robotics technology in space, particularly in the area of
satellite servicing. ETS-VII was an unmanned space-
craft developed and launched by the National Space De-
velopment Agency of Japan (NASDA, currently JAXA)
in November 1997. A number of experiments were
successfully conducted using a 2 m long, six-degree-
of-freedom manipulator arm mounted on its carrier
satellite.
The mission objective of ETS-VII was to test free-
ﬂying robotics technology and to demonstrate its utility
in unmanned orbital operation and servicing tasks. The
mission consisted of two subtasks: autonomous ren-
dezvous/docking (RVD) and a number of robot experi-
ments (RBT). The robot experiments included: (1) tele-
operation from the ground with a large time delay; (2)
robotic servicing task demonstrations such as ORU ex-
change and deployment of a space structure; (3) dynam-
ically coordinated control between the manipulator re-
action and the satellite attitude response; and (4) capture
and berthing of a cooperative target satellite [55.13].
The communication time delay due to radio propa-
gation (speed-of-light) is relatively small, for example
0:25 s for a round trip to geostationary Earth orbit
(GEO). However, to have a global coverage of com-
munication in low Earth orbit (LEO) operations, the
signals are transmitted via multiple nodes including
data relay satellites located at GEO and ground sta-
tions. This makes the transmission distance longer, and
even more additional delays are added at each node. As
a result, the cumulative delay becomes some seconds,
actually 57 s in case of ETS-VII mission, more or less
the same as in the ROTEX experiment. However, it is
important to state that these delays have been unneces-
sarily long as the optimal communication infrastructure
was (and is still) missing. Figure 55.8 shows that for
a low orbit robot satellite (with typically 1:5 h orbital
period) half of the orbit (i. e., around 45 min) would
have communication from the ground station via one
relay satellite yielding approximately 600 ms round trip
delay (including computational delays). For a robot in
geostationary orbit having permanent communication
to the ground station, the round trip delay would be only
300 ms.
In ETS-VII, opportunities for academic experi-
ments were also opened to Japanese universities and
European institutions (e.g., DLR and ESA), and impor-
tant ﬂight data were obtained that validate the concepts
and theories for free-ﬂying space robots [55.14, 15].
As an example, DLR performed experiments aiming
at demonstrating robot control methods for performing
ORU exchange tasks (see for example
VIDEO 332 )
Main arm joint 2
a)
b)
Main arm joint 1
Main arm boom 1
Main arm boom 2
Main arm base
Main arm joint 3
Main arm joint 4
Main arm joint 6
Main arm joint 5
Main arm  (MA):
10 m long, 6 DOF
Small fine arm  (SFA):
2 m long, 6 DOF
Main arm joint 3
Small fine arm electronics
Elbow visual device
Wrist visual device
Wrist roll joint
Torque sensor
Wrist yaw joint
Wrist camera head
Tool
Wrist pitch joint
Boom 2
Elbow pitch joint
Shoulder pitch joint
Boom 1
Shoulder roll joint
End effector
Grapple fixture
Camera electronics
Fig. 55.5 (a) Japan Experiment Module (JEM) on the ISS and
(b) the JEMRMS manipulator system
and dedicated satellite attitude control via swimming or
waiving motions of the robot arm.
Ranger
Ranger is a teleoperated space robot being devel-
oped at the University of Maryland, Space Systems
Laboratory [55.16]. Ranger consists of two seven-
degree-of-freedom manipulators with interchangeable
end effectors to perform such tasks as changeout of or-
bital replacement units (ORUs) in orbit. Also discussed
was the changeout of the electronics controller unit
(ECU) of the Hubble space telescope, which previously
required human EVA. A number of tests and demon-

Part F | 55.1
1428
Part F
Robots at Work
Fig. 55.6 ROTEX manipulator arm onboard the Spacelab
D2 mission, the ﬁrst remotely controlled space robot
Fig. 55.7 Japanese Engineering Test Satellite ETS-VII
strations for servicing missions have been conducted at
the University of Maryland Neutral Buoyancy Facility
(Fig. 55.9). Originally designed for a free-ﬂying ﬂight
experiment, Ranger had been redesigned for a shuttle
ﬂight experiment, but ultimately was not manifested on
a shuttle ﬂight.
Orbital Express
The Orbital Express Space Operations Architecture
program is a DARPA program developed to validate
the technical feasibility of robotic on-orbit refueling
and reconﬁguration of satellites, as well as autonomous
rendezvous, docking, and manipulator berthing [55.17].
The system consists of the autonomous space trans-
port robotic operations (ASTRO) vehicle, developed by
Boeing Integrated Defense Systems, and a prototype
modular next-generation serviceable satellite, NextSat,
developed by Ball Aerospace. The ASTRO vehicle is
Robot
in LEO
Robot
in GEO
Relais satellite in GEO
20 ms
500 ms
250 ms
Fig. 55.8 Minimal Roundtrip signal propagation delay to
robots in LEO is around 0:6 s, to robots in GEO around
0:3 s
Fig. 55.9 Neutral buoyancy test of the Ranger telerobotic
shuttle experiment
equipped with a robotic arm to perform satellite capture
and ORU exchange operations (Fig. 55.10).
After its launch in March 2007, various mission
scenarios were conducted. These scenarios include (1)
visual inspection, fuel transfer, and ORU exchange on
NextSat using ASTRO’s manipulator arm when both
spacecrafts are connected, (2) separation of NextSat
from ASTRO, orbital maneuvers by ASTRO, and ﬂy-
around, rendezvous, and docking with NextSat, and (3)
capture of NextSat using ASTRO’s manipulator arm.
These scenarios were successfully completed by
July 2007, with ASTRO’s onboard autonomy using on-
board cameras and advanced video guidance system.

Space Robotics
55.1 Historical Developments and Advances of Orbital Robotic Systems
1429
Part F | 55.1
ASTRO
ASTRO and NextSat
NextSat
Fig. 55.10 Orbital express ﬂight mission conﬁguration
ROKVISS and Delayed Teleoperation
As a precursor demonstration of the planned German
Orbital Servicing demonstration mission DEOS (see
below), the German Aerospace Agency (DLR) has de-
veloped and ﬂown a 0:5 m long, two-degree-of-freedom
manipulator arm with a dedicated test bench, called
robotic components veriﬁcation on the ISS (ROKVISS)
(Fig. 55.11) [55.18].
Using the 78 min contact window of the ISS over-
ﬂight through a dedicated real-time space link, resulting
in a roundtrip delay as small as 20 ms, this was the ﬁrst
high-ﬁdelity telepresence system in the history of space
ﬂight that allowed force feedback teleoperation. A large
amount of data documenting the evolution of electrical
and mechanical properties of the robot (such as sensor
accuracy, friction, and motor parameters) has been col-
lected during the six year mission.
ROKVISS was launched by an unmanned Russian
progress transport vehicle in 2004 and installed on the
outer platform of the Russian segment of the station in
early 2005 (
VIDEO 333 ).
After six years, the system was still fully functional,
even though it had undergone only low-cost qualiﬁ-
cation, i. e., most of the electronic components were
off-the-shelf and the system as a whole had been qual-
iﬁed by radiation, vibration, and temperature tests. The
long-time veriﬁcation of these joints for outer space has
been a second main goal of ROKVISS (
VIDEO 334 ).
Toward the end of the mission, ROKVISS was teleop-
erated from the private home of the project leader using
standard internet communication to DLR’s professional
ground station. Round-trip delay went then up to around
400 ms still allowing telepresence with force-reﬂection.
At the end of 2011, ROKVISS was brought back to
Earth for completion of veriﬁcation and validation tests
(
VIDEO 336 ).
Fig. 55.11 ROKVISS – 6 years on ISS
Although the numbers of joints was small, chal-
lenging experiments of telepresence were conducted,
in which human operators from ground teleoperated
the arm using a force feedback joystick and stereo vi-
sion images. The ROKVISS arm, on the other hand,
was equipped with joint torque sensors, allowing full
impedance control and advanced bilateral control tech-
niques. The secondary goal of the experiment was the
space qualiﬁcation of the joint drives, which are the key
components of DLR’s torque-controlled lightweight
robots [55.19].
No electrical or mechanical damages were visible,
and the main observation was that joint friction had
nearly doubled in vacuum on ISS, but went back to its
original value when the arm was back on earth again.
In the framework of ROKVISS and the accompanying
investigations, important basic clariﬁcations of the gen-
eral telepresence potentials and prerequisites could be
achieved.
Already in the early days of space telerobotics as
pushed forward by JPL, there have been estimates that
humans might be able to master signal delays of up to
1 s in the visual system (i. e., looking at delayed images)
and up to 500 ms with the haptic system from the pro-
prioceptive point of view.
The interesting, fairly recent result is here [55.20,
21], where feasibility of force-reﬂecting teleoperation
with communication delays as high as 650 ms has been
proven. By using the so-called time domain passiv-
ity control approach, the mechanical energy of the
system is observed and controlled in real time, such
that the system is passive for any given communi-
cation channel characteristics, including varying time
delays and packet loss. These results have been veri-
ﬁed with a unique teleperesence experiment, where two
torque-controlled light weight arms located in Oberp-
faffenhofen (Germany) were connected through a real
relayed communication link that used the geostationary
satellite ARTEMIS, ground station communication an-

Part F | 55.2
1430
Part F
Robots at Work
Fig. 55.12 Force-reﬂecting telepresence demos at DLR
tennas located in Garching (Germany) and a data mirror
in Redu (Belgium) [55.22].
Recently, telepresence experiments with a fairly
complex multidegree-of-freedom (DOF) system have
been performed [55.23]. The system consisted of the
DLR’s Space JUSTIN humanoid robot and a human–
machine interface based on two torque-controlled light
weight arms as a force reﬂecting hand controller
(haptic device) (Fig. 55.12 and
VIDEO 337 ). Com-
plex tasks that required with high levels of dexter-
ity, such (un)screwing with a screwdriver and solder-
ing, were performed with time delays up to 500 ms
(
VIDEO 338 ).
It is therefore concluded that teleoperation with
force feedback is possible over the whole earth orbit.
The DEOS Demonstration Project
The German space robotics-demonstration mission
DEOS, based on the ROKVISS-joint torque-controlled
arm technology, aims at the demonstration of the matu-
rity and availability of key technologies as needed for
an orbit servicing. DEOS is comprised of two satel-
Fig. 55.13 DEOS – orbital servicing experiment with
client (left) and servicer (right)
lites, servicer and client (Fig. 55.13). Its main goal
is to ﬁnd, approach, and capture an uncontrolled and
uncooperative satellite in LEO (
VIDEO 339 ). After
successful capturing some typical repair and mainte-
nance tasks are planned to be demonstrated before the
servicing satellite enters the atmosphere for a controlled
descent together with the captured satellite. Project de-
velopments are currently being pursued to advance the
technological readiness level, in view of future mis-
sions. Developments also include adaptations to Active
Debris Removal missions in study, such as e.Deorbit
(ESA), for the deorbiting of the ENVISAT satellite.
Robonaut and JUSTIN
Humanoid (human-like) robots have been developed
to conduct human-compatible dexterous tasks. NASA’s
Robonaut and DLR’s JUSTIN are such representative
examples. These robots are elaborated in Sect. 55.4.2.
55.2 Historical Developments and Advances of Surface Robotic Systems
The research on surface exploration rovers began in
the mid-1960s, with an initiative (that never ﬂew)
for an unmanned rover for the Surveyor lunar lan-
ders and a manned rover (Moon buggy) for the hu-
man landers in the United States. In the same period,
research and development began for a teleoperated
rover named Lunokhod in the Soviet Union. Both
the Apollo-manned rover and the Lunokhod-unmanned
rover were successfully demonstrated in the early 1970s
on Moon [55.24]. In the 1990s, the exploration tar-
get had expanded to Mars, and in 1997, the Mars
Pathﬁnder Mission successfully deployed a microrover
named Sojourner that safely traversed the rocky ﬁeld
adjacent to the landing site by autonomously avoid-
ing obstacles [55.25, 26]. Following this success, today,
autonomous robotic vehicles are considered indispens-
able technology for planetary exploration. The twin
Mars Exploration Rovers, Sprit and Opportunity, were
launched in 2003, and have had remarkable success in
terms of remaining operational in the harsh environ-
ment of Mars for over three years. Each has traveled
more than 5000 m and has made signiﬁcant scientiﬁc
discoveries using on-board instruments [55.27, 28].
55.2.1 Teleoperated Rovers
The ﬁrst remotely operated robotic space surface ve-
hicle was Lunokhod (Fig. 55.14) [55.24]. Lunokhod 1
landed on the Moon on November 17, 1970 as a payload
on the lander Luna-17, and Lunokhod 2 landed on the

Space Robotics
55.2 Historical Developments and Advances of Surface Robotic Systems
1431
Part F | 55.2
Fig. 55.14 Lunokhod
Moon on January 16, 1973. Both were 8-wheeled skid-
steered vehicles having a mass of about 840 kg, where
almost all the components were in a pressurized bathtub
thermal enclosure with a lid that closed over the tub to
allow it to survive the deep cold (
 100 K) of the long
lunar nights using only the heat emitted by small pel-
lets of radioisotope. On the inside of the lid were solar
arrays which recharged batteries during the day as re-
quired to maintain operation of the vehicle. Lunokhod
1 operated for 322 Earth days, traversing over 10:5 km
during that period, and returned over 20 000 TV im-
ages, 200 high-resolution panoramas, and the results of
more than 500 soil penetrometer tests and 25 soil analy-
ses using its x-ray ﬂuorescence spectrometer. Lunokhod
2 operated for about 4 months, having traversed more
than 37 km, with the mission ofﬁcially terminated on
June 4, 1973. It has been reported that Lunokhod 2 was
lost prematurely when it began sliding down a crater
slope and hasty commands were sent in response which
ultimately caused end-of-mission.
Each of the eight wheels on the Lunokhod vehi-
cles were 0:51 m in diameter and 0:2 m wide, giving an
effective ground pressure of less than 5 kPa based on
an assumed sinkage of 3 cm. Each wheel had a brush-
type DC motor, a planetary gear reduction, a brake, and
a dis-engagement mechanism allowing it to free-wheel
in the event of some problem with the motor or gears.
The mobility commands to the vehicle included two
speeds forward or backward, braking, and turning to the
right or the left either while moving or in place.
The vehicles had both gyroscope and accelerome-
ter-based tilt sensors which could automatically stop the
vehicle in the event of excessive tilt of the chassis. Typ-
ical mobility commands speciﬁed a time duration over
which the motors would run, and then stop. Precision
turning commands speciﬁed the angle through which
the vehicle should turn. These commands were termi-
nated when the speciﬁed turn angle had been reached
according to the heading gyroscope. Odometry was de-
termined by a ninth small wheel which was unpowered
and lightly loaded and used only to determine over-the-
ground distance. There was an on-board current over-
load system, and motor currents, pitch and roll mea-
surements, distance traversed, and many component
temperatures were telemetered to the ground operators.
The Lunakod crew consisted of a driver, a navigator,
a lead engineer, an operator for steering the pencil-
beam communication antenna, and a crew commander.
The driver viewed a monoscopic television image from
the vehicle, and gave the appropriate commands (turn,
proceed, stop, or back up) along with their associated
parametric value in terms of duration or angle. The nav-
igator viewed displays of telemetry from the vehicles’
course gyroscope, gyrovertical sensor, and odometer,
and was responsible for calculating the trajectory of the
vehicle and laying out the route to be followed. Thus,
the driver was responsible for vehicle stability about its
center of mass and the navigator was responsible for
the trajectory of that center of mass. The lead engineer
(assisted by many specialists as required), was respon-
sible for assessing the health of the on-board systems.
The lead engineer provided both routine updates on
energy supply, thermal conditions, etc., as well as possi-
ble emergency alerts such as extreme motor currents or
chassis tilt. The pencil-beam antenna operator oversaw
the functioning of an independent ground-based closed-
loop control system that servoed the antenna to always
point at Earth, independent of the vehicle motion. The
crew commander supervised the implementation and
execution of the overall plan, gave any detailed com-
mands for making actual contact with the surface (e.g.,
by the penetrometer) and also could override any com-
mand to the vehicle as he viewed the same information
as the driver.
The entire driving system was tested extensively
prior to the Lunokhod 1 mission at a lunodrome hav-
ing simulated lunar terrain which proved to be more
challenging than that actually encountered during the
Lunokhod 1 mission. Despite this, the operators of
Lunokhod 1 said they encountered a dangerous situ-

Part F | 55.2
1432
Part F
Robots at Work
ation (unforeseen entrance into a crater, rolling onto
a rock, etc.) slightly more often than once per kilometer.
This was attributed to inadequate driving experience,
the modest quality of the television images, and the
poor illumination conditions on the Moon. The driving
direction was often selected primarily to give the best
images; even so, the operators reported ﬁctitious dan-
gers caused by varying illumination conditions. In the
ﬁrst three months (lunar days) of operation, the vehicle
traversed 5224 m in 49 h of driving using 1695 driving
commands, including about 500 turns. Sixteen signals
were sent for protection against excessive tilt during
that time; approximately 140 craters were traversed at
maximum slope angles of 30ı.
With the approximately 2:6 s speed-of-light delay,
the operators stated that control experience conﬁrmed
the desirability of movement in a starting-stopping
regime with mandatory stopping each few meters. The
soil properties were found to differ substantially even in
terrain sectors not very distant from one another. The
soil penetrometer determined that the upper layer of
regolith varied from a stiffest where the penetrometer
required about 16 kg (Earth weight) of force to pen-
etrate about 26 mm, to a weakest measurement where
only 3 kg of Earth weight caused a penetration of about
39 mm. The cone penetrometer had a base diameter of
50 mm and a cone height of 44 mm. Thus the upper
layer of regolith had a rate of increase of loadbearing
strength ranging from about 400 kPa m1 for the weak-
est soil to about 3 MPa m1 for the stiffest soil. Crater
walls and the immediate ejecta blanket around craters
generally exhibited the weakest soil. Below 510 cm of
penetration depth, the regolith generally became rapidly
stiffer. The mean value of wheel slippage for the ﬁrst
three lunar days was about 10%. On horizontal terrain,
the slippage ranged from zero to 15% depending on
the surface irregularities and ground inhomogeneity. On
crater slopes, the slip increased to 2030%. The spe-
ciﬁc resistance of the Lunokhod wheels was generally
in the range of 0:050:25, while the speciﬁc free trac-
tion (the ratio of traction to weight) was in the range of
0:20:41. The crater distribution in the area explored
by Lunokhod 1 was found to be closely approximated
by the formula N.D/ D ADı, where N.D/ is the num-
ber of craters larger than diameter D meters per hectare
of lunar surface, A is a scale factor found to be about
250, and ı is the distribution exponent, found to be
about 1.4 [55.24].
55.2.2 Autonomous Rovers
In the mid-1960s, research began on a lunar rover at the
US Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, Cal-
ifornia, when it was proposed to put a small rover on
the Surveyor lunar landers. These landers were led by
JPL (based on a system-level contract to Hughes), and
were designed to land softly on the Moon to establish
the safety of such landing prior to the Apollo landers
with humans aboard. At the time it was speculated (no-
tably by T. Gold) that the Moon might be covered in
a thick layer of soft dust that would swallow any lan-
der. In 1963, JPL issued a contract to build a small
rover concept prototype in support of the Surveyor
program to the General Motors Defense Research Lab-
oratories in Goleta, California. That GM facility had
recently hired Bekker, who was considered the father
of off-road locomotion, having written several seminal
textbooks on the subject, and having introduced many
of the key concepts relating soil properties to off-road
vehicle performance that are still used today [55.29, 30]
(Sect. 55.3.12).
Bekker and his team proposed an articulated 6-
wheeled vehicle based on a novel 3 cab conﬁguration
with an axial spring-steel suspension. This vehicle ex-
hibited remarkable mobility, being able to climb ver-
tical steps up to 3 wheel radii high, and crossing
crevasses 3 wheel radii wide. Notable people working
with Bekker were Farenc Pavlics, who went on to lead
the development of the mobility system for the Apollo
lunar rover (under contract from Boeing), and Fred Jin-
dra, who developed the underlying equations describing
the mobility of the 6-wheeled articulated vehicle that
were later used by Don Bickler in conceiving of the
rocker bogie chassis used on Sojourner and the Mars
Exploration Rovers. Bekker and his team proposed the
6 wheeled articulated vehicle after experimenting with
many types of vehicles, including multitracked vehi-
cles, screw-type vehicles (for ﬁne powdered terrain),
and others. The 6-wheeled vehicle demonstrated in
scale-model testing superior performance in both soft
and rocky terrain.
They built and delivered two vehicles that were
about 2 m long with approximately 0:5 m wheel diam-
eters. Those vehicles were used in testing throughout
the 1960s and early 1970s to conduct simulated opera-
tions to determine how such vehicles could actually be
used on the Moon. One key issue was that the speed-of-
light round trip from the Moon (about 3 s) precluded
direct driving of the vehicle. Perhaps most annoying
was the fact that, during vehicle motion, the highly di-
rectional radio antenna used to communicate with Earth
would lose its pointing, and so communications would
brieﬂy be lost. This meant that operators driving the
rover would be confronted with a series of still im-
ages, instead of a stream of moving images. It was
quickly realized that much of an operator’s situation
awareness and depth perception needed to drive a ve-
hicle with a monocular camera comes from motion. It

Space Robotics
55.2 Historical Developments and Advances of Surface Robotic Systems
1433
Part F | 55.2
was very difﬁcult to drive from frozen monocular im-
ages. A crude form of stereo was incorporated where
the camera mast was raised and lowered slightly and
the operator could switch back and forth between the
two views.
Following the successful landing of several of the
Surveyor spacecraft, and the discovery that all landing
sites seemed to have relatively ﬁrm soil, it was con-
cluded that the Surveyor lunar rover was not needed.
As a result, the prototype was used for research into the
early 1970s, and subsequently restored for use again in
research in the 1980s, becoming the ﬁrst vehicle to be
outﬁtted with waypoint navigation of the sort later used
on the Sojourner and MER missions.
About the time Viking was conceived and devel-
oped, JPL began the 1984 Mars rover effort. (1984
was an energetically favorable launch opportunity from
Earth to Mars, and the next likely major mission oppor-
tunity after Viking.) Two testbed vehicles were devel-
oped, a software prototype and a hardware prototype.
The software prototype had a Stanford arm, designed
by Vic Scheinman (who went on to design the Unima-
tion PUMA arm and many other famous early robotic
devices). This was the only 1.5-scale Stanford arm ever
built. Lewis and Bejczy became well-known in robotics
for solving the kinematics of this arm, one of is not
the ﬁrst full kinematics ever done in robotics up to that
time, e.g., [55.31]. A stereo pan-tilt head was imple-
mented and equipped with the ﬁrst solid-state cameras
to become available. A number of very important works
were published in the 1977 International Joint Confer-
ence on artiﬁcial intelligence, e.g., [55.32, 33]. The ﬁrst
hand-eye-locomotion coordination was done with this
vehicle, where a rock was designated in a stereo image,
and the vehicle maneuvered autonomously to a point
where the arm could reach out and pick up the rock.
One of the ﬁrst demonstrations of pin in hole insertion
and other dexterous manipulations were also done with
this system in the 1970s.
The hardware prototype was built using elastic loop
wheels made by Lockheed [55.34]. The vehicle was bat-
tery powered and controlled via a handheld RC unit of
the type used by hobbyists.
In late 1982, JPL had a contract with the US Army
to study the use of robotic vehicles in support of the
US Army. During this study, Brian Wilcox at JPL pro-
posed a technique to reduce the need for a real-time
video link or high-bandwidth communication channel
between the vehicle and the operator. This technique
(which became known as computer-aided remote driv-
ing, or CARD) [55.35] required the transmission of
a single stereo image from the vehicle to the operator,
so the operator could designate waypoints in that image
using a 3-D cursor. By use of a single stereo image in-
stead of a continuous stream of monocular images, the
amount of information that needed to be transmitted by
the vehicle was reduced by orders of magnitude. JPL
ﬁrst demonstrated CARD on the resurrected surveyor
lunar rover vehicle (SLRV, which had been painted
baby-blue and so became known as the Blue Rover,
Fig. 55.15a), and later on a modiﬁed Humvee. During
ﬁeld tests in the Mojave desert in 1988, CARD was
demonstrated on the Humvee with path designations
of 100 m per stereo image, and with time-to-designate
each path of only a few seconds.
As the CARD work was ongoing, an internally
funded effort at JPL demonstrated a concept called
semiautonomous navigation (SAN). This concept in-
volved humans on Earth designating global paths using
maps of the sort that could be developed from orbiter
imagery, and then having the vehicle autonomously re-
ﬁne and execute a local path that avoids hazards. The
moderate success of that effort led to a NASA funded
effort, leading to the development of a new vehicle,
called Robby (Fig. 55.15b). Robby was a larger vehicle
that could support the on-board computing and power
a)
b)
Fig.55.15a,b Six-wheel articulated body rovers developed
by JPL (a) SLRV and (b) Robby

Part F | 55.2
1434
Part F
Robots at Work
needed for untethered operation. (The SLRV had been
tethered to a VAX 11/750 minicomputer over a 1500
foot tether during arroyo ﬁeld testing of CARD.) For the
ﬁrst time (in 1990), an autonomous vehicle had made
a traverse through an obstacle ﬁeld that was faster than
a rover could have done on Mars using human path des-
ignation done on Earth.
However, Robby had a severe public relations prob-
lem – it was perceived as too large. Of course, none
of the computers or power systems had been miniatur-
ized or lightweighted – it was composed entirely of the
lowest-cost components that could do the job. How-
ever, because it was the size of a large automobile,
observers and NASA management got the impression
that future rovers would be car-sized or even truck-
sized vehicles. This was compounded by the Mars rover
sample return (MRSR) study done by JPL in the late-
1980s which suggested a mass for the rover of 882 kg.
An independent study of the MRSR study by Science
Applications International, Inc. (SAIC) estimated the
overall cost at $13B. When word of this outrageous
price tag ﬁltered around NASA Headquarters and into
the Congressional Staff, MRSR was summarily killed.
Robby died along with it. At about the same time,
NASA funded Carnegie Mellon University to develop
Ambler (Fig. 55.16), a large walking robot that was able
to autonomously choose safe footfall locations, also as
a testbed Mars Rover [55.36, 37]. Ambler had a simi-
lar public-relations problem, being about the same mass
as Robby, that the NASA management community was
very skeptical that such large systems could affordably
be ﬂown to Mars. Both Robby and Ambler had all-on-
board power and computing systems, which at that time
were not sufﬁciently miniaturized to make autonomous
rovers credible for actual ﬂight missions. Moore’s law
Fig. 55.16 Ambler
was not only causing the computing technology to
become miniaturized at a high rate, but also the en-
ergy required per computing instruction was dropping
rapidly. This meant that early systems devoted most of
their power to computing rather than to motive power.
Later systems, such as the Mars exploration rovers,
have a more nearly equal balance between power for
mobility and power for computation. Future systems
will presumably devote the majority of their power to
mobility as opposed to computation.
Soon thereafter, the Mars Environmental Survey
(MESUR) mission set was proposed, as a lower cost
alternative to a sample return mission. The MESUR
Pathﬁnder mission was proposed as a ﬁrst test of what
was envisioned as a network of 1620 surface stations
to provide global coverage of Mars. A small rover was
proposed to the Mars Science Working group [55.38,
39]. A very short-term development effort culminated
in a demonstration in July 1992 of a 
 4 kg rover that
could move to directed points on the surface nearby
a lander using stereo designation of waypoints in a 3-D
display of frozen images taken from a lander mast
camera pair (Fig. 55.17). This demonstration was suf-
ﬁciently successful that a similar rover was manifested
for the Mars Pathﬁnder mission. The Pathﬁnder rover
(Fig. 55.18) was later named Sojourner, and became
the ﬁrst autonomous vehicle to traverse the surface of
another planet, using a hazard detection and avoid-
ance system to move safely between waypoints through
a rockﬁeld [55.25, 26]. The hazard detection system
avoided obstacles, and also was used to position the
vehicle accurately in front of rocks. Sojourner oper-
ated successfully for 83 Mars days (until the failure of
the lander, which was acting as a communications re-
lay between the rover and Earth). Sojourner examined
approximately a dozen rock and soil samples with its
Alpha-Proton-x-ray spectrometer, which gives the ele-
mental composition of the rocks and soil. The success
of Sojourner led directly to the decision to build the
twin Mars exploration rovers launched in 2003. Both
Sojourner and the subsequent Mars exploration rovers
Spirit and Opportunity, and the Mars Science Labora-
tory Curiosity, use waypoint designation in stereo im-
ages by the human operator together with autonomous
hazard detection and avoidance to keep the rovers safe
if they should wander off the designated path.
During the 19921993 summer season in Antarc-
tica, the Dante I robot, built by Carnegie-Mellon Uni-
versity and funded by NASA, attempted to rappel into
the caldera of the active volcano Mt. Erebus. Dante was
a walking robot, and was the ﬁrst serious attempt to
make a robot rappel down a grade that was too steep to
traverse using purely frictional contact. Unfortunately,
the extreme cold (even in the summer) compounded

Space Robotics
55.2 Historical Developments and Advances of Surface Robotic Systems
1435
Part F | 55.2
Fig. 55.17 Rocky 4
Fig. 55.18 The Pathﬁnder rover, Sojourner
by human error caused a kink in the ﬁber-optic um-
bilical to snag going through an eyelet, breaking the
high-bandwidth ﬁber communications on which the
system depended. The ﬁber could not be repaired in
the ﬁeld, and so the mission was aborted. Undaunted,
in the summer of 1994, Dante II (Fig. 55.19) made
a successful rappel into the caldera of Mt. Spur in
Alaska, exploring the active vents on the crater ﬂoor
in a way that would be unsafe in the extreme if done
with human explorers. The Dante robot series demon-
strated that rappelling, especially when combined with
legged locomotion, allows robots to conduct explo-
ration to extremely hazardous sites in ways that humans
cannot.
In 1984, NASA started the Telerobotics Research
program [55.40, 41]. This program demonstrated var-
ious aspects of on-orbit assembly, maintenance, and
servicing. Some highlights of this activity were the
automated tracking and grappling of a free-spinning
satellite (suspended with a counterweight and gimbal
Fig. 55.19 Dante II at Mt. Spur in Alaska
for realistic reactions under external forces), connection
of a ﬂight-like ﬂuid coupler, and many busy box func-
tions such as door opening, threaded fastener mating
and demating, use of power tools, dual-arm manipu-
lation of a simulated hatch cover and ﬂexible thermal
blanket, etc., by various control approaches ranging
from force-reﬂecting teleoperation to fully autonomous
sequences. This activity ended in about 1990.
55.2.3 Research Systems
There have been many mobile robots built by govern-
ment, university, and industrial groups whose objective
was to develop new technologies for planetary surface
exploration, or to excite students or young engineers
about the possibilities in that area. Carnegie Mel-
lon University developed the Ambler, Dante, Nomad,
Hyperion, Zoe, and Icebreaker robot series. The Jet
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Draper Labs, MIT, San-
dia National Lab, and Martin-Marietta (later Lockheed-
Martin) each built more than one planetary surface
robot testbed. The Marsokhod chassis built by VNII
Transmach of St. Petersburg, Russia was used by re-
search groups there and also in Toulouse (LAAS and
CNRS) [55.42, 43] as well as the NASA Ames Re-
search Center and McDonnell Douglas Corporation
(later part of the Boeing Company) in the US.

Part F | 55.2
1436
Part F
Robots at Work
These research platforms have been used for two ba-
sic avenues of research. One avenue is to perfect safe
driving techniques on planetary surfaces, despite the
speed-of-light latencies inherent in robotic exploration
of the planets. This includes the waypoint navigation
technology developed at JPL in the 1980s, where frozen
stereo images are used to plan a possibly lengthy se-
ries of waypoints or activity sites, and then executed
with various sorts of reﬂexive hazard avoidance or saf-
ing techniques, such as used on the Sojourner rover
on Mars in 1997. The other is to develop higher level
autonomy for improved science data return or mis-
sion robustness. Technologies in this latter category
include mission planners that attempt to optimize routes
and activity sequences based on time, limits to peak
power, total energy, expected temperature, illumina-
tion angles, availability of communications, and others.
Fig. 55.20 The Mars exploration rovers, Spirit and Oppor-
tunity, with a manipulator arm in front
Fig. 55.21 Rocky 7
Automated classiﬁcation of possible science targets
based on clustering of spectral data, ﬁgure-ground seg-
mentation of rocks, and other approaches have been
attempted with some success. At the time of this writ-
ing, some of these technologies have been uploaded to
the twin Mars exploration rovers Spirit and Opportu-
nity (Fig. 55.20) [55.27], including automated detection
of temporary events of scientiﬁc interest such as dust-
devils and clouds [55.44]. The Spirit rover was lost
when it broke through a surface crust into a small
crater ﬁlled with ﬁne dust in late 2009, with attempts
to free it continuing until mid 2010. The Mars Sci-
ence Laboratory Curiosity was landed in August 2012
and seeks to explore Mt. Sharpe in the center of Gale
Crater.
The ESA with a number of contractors, e.g., AS-
TRIUM and DLR has been working for several years
on a 6-wheeled Mars rover ExoMars that is supposed
to be ﬂown after 2018 as well as on a next lunar lan-
der NLL Rover, but it is not ﬁnally clear, when and in
which conﬁguration the mission might be realized.
55.2.4 Sensing and Perception
In the 1980s, most planetary rover sensing research
was based on laser ranging or stereo vision. Stereo
vision was too computationally intensive for early low-
power, radiation-hard processors, so the Sojourner Mars
rover used a simple form of laser ranging to determine
which areas were safe to traverse. Between the launch
of Sojourner (1996) and the Mars exploration rovers
(2003) sufﬁcient progress had been made in radiation-
hardened ﬂight processors that stereo vision was used
for hazard detection on MER [55.45], mostly in experi-
ments conducted with the Rocky-7 rover (Fig. 55.21).
This allowed much larger numbers of range points
to be incorporated into the hazard-detection algorithm
(thousands of points, instead of the 20 discrete range
points used by Sojourner). Perception of hazards on
Sojourner was based on simple computations of av-
erage slope and roughness over the 4  5 array of
range measurements, as well as the maximum height
differences.
The two MER rovers and the MSL rover use a more
sophisticated evaluation of the safety of the rovers
along a large number of candidate arcs from its cur-
rent location. Many other algorithms for perception of
terrain hazards have been used with reasonable suc-
cess by various organizations. Today it is probably fair
to say that the unsolved problems lie not in the area
of geometric hazards (e.g., hazards that can be eval-
uated completely based on accurate knowledge of the
shape of the terrain) but rather in the area of nonge-
ometric hazards (e.g., hazards where uncertainties in

Space Robotics
55.3 Mathematical Modeling
1437
Part F | 55.3
the load-bearing or frictional properties of the terrain
determine the safety of a proposed traverse). Accu-
rate estimation of load-bearing or friction properties of
terrain by remote sensing is a very challenging task
that will not be completely solved anytime soon, if
ever.
55.2.5 Estimation
Most estimation for planetary surface exploration re-
lates to the internal state of the robot, or its position,
pose and kinematic conﬁguration with respect to the en-
vironment. Internal state sensors such as encoders on
any active or passive articulations in the vehicle are
used, along with a kinematic model and inertial sen-
sors such as accelerometers and gyroscopes, to estimate
the pose of the vehicle in inertial space. Perceptual al-
gorithms such as surface reconstruction from clouds of
range-points as developed by stereo vision put terrain
geometry estimates into this same representation. Head-
ing in inertial space is generally the most difﬁcult to
reliably estimate, due to the lack of navigation aids such
as the global positioning system, or any easily mea-
sured heading reference such as a global magnetic ﬁeld.
Integration of rate-gyro data is used to maintain local
attitude during motion while accurate estimation of the
rotation axis for Mars is possible by long integrations of
3 axis rate-gyro data while the vehicle is stopped. Sim-
ilar approaches are probably not feasible for the Moon,
because of its slow rotation rate. Imaging of the solar
disk or constellations of stars at precisely known times
can be combined with stored models of the rotation of
the planet to allow accurate estimation of the complete
pose of the vehicle in inertial space. Kalman ﬁltering or
related techniques are generally employed to reduce the
effects of measurement noise.
55.2.6 Manipulators for In-Situ Science
The Mars exploration rovers were the ﬁrst planetary
exploration vehicles to have general-purpose manipula-
tors. (Lunokhod had a single-purpose soil penetrometer,
and Sojourner had a single degree-of-freedom device
to place an Alpha-Proton X-Ray spectrometer in direct
contact with the terrain.) The MER arms each have 5ı-
of-freedom and a reach of over 1 m. Accurate gravity-
sag models of the lightweight arm allow the precise po-
sition to be predicted in advance of any command to
deploy an instrument, and contact sensors allow the arm
to stop before any excessive forces build up in the rel-
atively ﬂexible arm. Future arms for planetary surface
operations, especially any proposed assembly, mainte-
nance, or servicing tasks as part of the proposed lunar
outpost, will require force sensing to protect the stronger
but much more rigid arms from damage, as well as to
allow controlled forces to be applied to the terrain or
workpieces. Of course, there is a huge body of knowl-
edge associated with industrial robot arms, and undersea
robotics (e.g., for the offshore oil industry), but such
arms are generally very heavy, fast, and stiff compared
with credible systems for planetary surface use. Delicate
force control has rarely been applied to industrial set-
tings. Space hardware is necessarily very lightweight,
and so both the arms and the workpieces will need to
have well-resolved force sensing and control to prevent
damage to one or both. Because of severe limits on both
mass and power, and to avoid unnecessary risk, space
manipulation tends to be slow. Historically, this means
the gear ratio between each motorand the corresponding
output shaft is very large, making the use of motor cur-
rent as an estimator for output torque very problematic.
Other low-mass and robust means for accurate sensing
of applied forces in the space environment are needed.
55.3 Mathematical Modeling
Broadly speaking, both on-orbit manipulators and sur-
face mobile robots are considered to be common ar-
ticulated body systems with a moving base. One point
that clearly distinguishes them from other ground-based
robots, such as industrial manipulators, is the existence
of a moving base.
55.3.1 Space Robot
as an Articulated Body System
The robotic systems discussed in this chapter comprise
one or multiple articulated limbs mounted on a base
body that has a dynamic coupling with these limbs.
Typical styles of such moving base systems are cate-
gorized into the following groups [55.46].
Free-Floating Manipulator Systems
A space free-ﬂyer that has one or more manipulator
arms, as illustrated schematically in Fig. 55.22a, is
a typical example of this group. When operating the
manipulator arm(s), the position and orientation of the
base spacecraft ﬂuctuates due to the manipulator reac-
tion. The kinetic momentum of the system is conserved
if no external forces or moments are applied, and the
conservation law for this system governs the reaction
dynamics. Coordination or isolation, between the base

Part F | 55.3
1438
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.55.22a–d Four basic types for moving base robots:
(a) Free-ﬂoating manipulator system, (b) macro–micro
manipulator system, (c) ﬂexible structure-based manipula-
tor system, and (d) surface locomotive robot system
and manipulator dynamics is key to advanced motion
control.
Macro–Micro Manipulator Systems
A robotic system that comprises a relatively small arm
(microarm) for ﬁne manipulation mounted on a rela-
tively large arm (macro-arm) for coarse positioning, is
called a macro–micro manipulator system. The SSRMS
(Canadarm2) and the SPDM (Dextre) system, as well
as the JEMRMS on the Japanese module of the ISS,
are good examples. Here, the connecting interface at the
end point of the macro arm or the root of the micro arm
is modeled as the base body (Fig. 55.22b). A free-ﬂying
space robot may be treated in this group when its base
body is actively controlled by actuators that produce ex-
ternal forces and moments, such as gas-jet thrusters. In
this case, these actuators can be modeled as a virtual
macro-arm [55.47].
Flexible-Based Manipulator Systems
If the macro arm behaves as a passive ﬂexible (elas-
tic) structure in a macro–micro manipulator system, the
system is considered to be a ﬂexible-based manipula-
tor (Fig. 55.22c). Such a situation can be observed in
the operation of the ISS, when the SSRMS is servo or
brake locked after its coarse operation. Here, the issue is
that the base body (the root of the micro arm, or the end
of the macro arm, according to the deﬁnition above) is
subject to vibrations that will be excited by the reaction
of the micro arm.
Mobile Robots with Articulated Limbs
Mobile robots for surface locomotion have the same
structure in terms of the dynamics equation as the
above groups. This group includes wheeled vehicles,
walking (articulated limb) robots, and their hybrids.
In a wheeled vehicle, suspension mechanisms, if any,
are also modeled as articulated limb systems. The
forces and moments yielded by contact with ground,
or planetary surface, govern the motion of the system
(Fig 55.22d).
55.3.2 Equations for Free-Floating
Manipulator Systems
Let us ﬁrst consider a free-ﬂoating system with a sin-
gle or multiple manipulator arm(s) mounted on a base
spacecraft. The pioneering work in the mathematical
models of this type of space manipulator systems were
conducted in late 1980s and early 1990s and collected
in the book [55.48], published in 1993. In this section,
the models that are widely accepted today are intro-
duced.
The base body, termed link 0, is ﬂoating in inertial
space without any external forces or moments. At the
end point of the arm(s), external forces/moments may
apply. For such a system, the equation of motion is ex-
pressed as follows
 Hb
Hbm
HT
bm
Hm
 Rxb
R

C
cb
cm

D
0


C
JT
b
JT
m

Fh :
(55.1)
The kinematic relationship among xh, xb, and  is ex-
pressed using Jacobian matrices as
Pxh D Jm P C JbPxb ;
(55.2)
Rxh D Jm R C PJm P C JbRxb C PJbPxb :
(55.3)

Space Robotics
55.3 Mathematical Modeling
1439
Part F | 55.3
Where the notations are listed as follows:
xb 2 R6:
position/orientation of the base
 2 Rn:
joint angle of the arm
xh 2 R6k: position/orientation of the end point(s)
 2 Rn:
joint torque of the arm
Fh 2 R6k: external forces/moments on the end point(s)
n:
number of total joints
k:
number of manipulator arms,
and Hb, Hm, and Hbm are inertia matrices for the base
body, manipulator arm, and the coupling between the
base and the arm, respectively, and cp and cq are non-
linear Coriolis and centrifugal forces, respectively.
For a free-ﬂoating manipulator in orbit, the gravity
forces exerted on the system can be neglected, and so
the nonlinear term becomes
cb D PHbPxb C PHbm Pb :
Integrating the upper set of equation in (55.1) with re-
spect to time, we obtain the total momentum of the
system as
L D
Z
JT
bFh dt D HbPxb C Hbm P :
(55.4)
For the case in which reaction wheels are mounted
on the base body, they are included as additional ma-
nipulator arms.
55.3.3 Generalized Jacobian
and Inertia Matrices
From (55.2) and (55.4), the coordinates of the ma-
nipulator base Pxb, which are passive and unactuated
coordinates, can be eliminated, as follows
Pxh D OJ P C Pxh0 ;
(55.5)
where
OJ D Jm  JbH1
b Hbm ;
(55.6)
and
Pxh0 D JbH1
b L :
(55.7)
Since Hb is the inertia tensor of a single rigid body (the
manipulator base), it is always positive deﬁnite, and so
its inverse exists.
The matrix OJ was ﬁrst introduced in [55.49, 50] and
is referred to as the generalized jacobian matrix. In
its original deﬁnition, it was assumed that no external
forces/moments acted on the system. If Fh D 0, then
the term Pxh0 becomes constant, and, in particular, if the
system has zero initial momentum Pxh0 D 0, then (55.5)
becomes simple. However, note that in the derivation of
(55.6), zero or constant momentum is not a necessary
condition.
Using this matrix, the manipulator hand can be op-
erated under a resolved motion-rate control or resolved
acceleration control in inertial space. Thanks to the gen-
eralized Jacobian, although the reactive base motion
occurs during the operation, the hand is not disturbed
by the motion.
From the upper and lower sets of equations in
(55.1), Rxb can be eliminated to obtain the following ex-
pression
OH R C Oc D  C OJFh ;
(55.8)
where
OH D Hm  HT
bmH1
b Hbm :
(55.9)
The matrix OH is known as the generalized inertia matrix
for space manipulators [55.48]. This matrix represents
the inertia property of the system in the joint space and
can be mapped onto the Cartesian space using the gen-
eralized Jacobian matrix
OG D OJ OH1OJT :
(55.10)
The matrix OG is referred to as the inversed inertia
tensor for space manipulators and is useful for the
discussion of impact dynamics when a space manip-
ulator collides with or captures a ﬂoating target in
orbit [55.51].
The generalized Jacobian matrix (GJM) is a use-
ful concept, with which the manipulator end point can
perform positioning or trajectory tracking control by
a simple control algorithm regardless of the attitude de-
viation during the operation.
A simpliﬁed laboratory demonstration was car-
ried out using a two-dimensional free-ﬂoating test bed
called EFFORTS [55.52]. To simulate the motion in
a microgravity environment, a robot model was ﬂoated
on a thin ﬁlm of pressurized air on a horizontal plate, so
that frictionless motion with momentum conservation
was achieved.
Figure 55.23 depicts the test bed and a typical ex-
perimental result. For Fig. 55.23b, the control command
was given to the ﬂoating robot by
P D OJ1Pxd ;
(55.11)

Part F | 55.3
1440
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
500 mm
Target
Δt=0.8s
Fig.55.23a,b Laboratory test bed for a free-ﬂoating space
robot: (a) The EFFORTS test bed, (b) a target capture result
where Pxd is the desired velocity of the manipulator end
point, the value of which was given and updated by on-
line measurement of the end point position xh and the
target position xt, as follows
Pxd D xt  xh
t
;
(55.12)
where t is the time interval of the on-line control loop.
The desired end point velocity was simply resolved into
the joint velocity by (55.11).
The result clearly shows that the manipulator end
point properly reached the target in an optimum man-
ner, although the robot base rotated considerably due to
the manipulator reaction. Note that, since the target was
stationary in this example, the resulting motion trace
was a straight line. However, thanks to the on-line con-
trol, the manipulator was also able to track and reach
a moving target with the same control law.
The validity and effectiveness of the GJM-based
manipulator control were also demonstrated in orbit by
Japanese ETS-VII mission [55.14].
55.3.4 Linear and Angular Momenta
The integral of the upper set of equation in (55.1) gives
a momentum equation, as shown in (55.4), which is
composed of the linear and angular momenta. The lin-
ear part is expressed as
MHbv b C MHbm P D P ;
(55.13)
where v b is the linear velocity of the base, P is the ini-
tial linear momentum, and the inertia matrices with the
mark of .M/ are the corresponding components for the
linear momentum [55.48]. When the linear momentum
is further integrated, the result veriﬁes the principle that
the mass centroid of the entire system either remains
stationary or translates with a constant velocity.
The angular momentum equation, however, does
not have a second integral, and therefore provides
a ﬁrst-order nonholonomic constraint [55.53]. The
equation can be expressed as
QHb!b C QHbm P D L ;
(55.14)
where !b is the angular velocity of the base, L is the
initial angular momentum, and the inertia matrices with
the mark of .Q/ are the corresponding components for
the angular momentum [55.48]; QHbm P represents the
angular momentum generated by the manipulator mo-
tion.
Equation (55.14) can be solved for !b with zero ini-
tial angular momentum
!b D  QH1
b
QHbm P :
(55.15)
This expression describes the resulting disturbance mo-
tion of the base when there is joint motion P in the
manipulator arm.
There are a number of points worth discussion when
analyzing this equation. The magnitudes and direc-
tions of the maximum and minimum disturbances can
be obtained from the singular value decomposition of
the matrix

 QH1
b
QHbm

and displayed on the map.
Such a map is called a disturbance map [55.54, 55].
Equation (55.15) is also used for the feed-forward com-
pensation in the coordinated manipulator/base control
model [55.56, 57].
55.3.5 Virtual Manipulator
The concept of the virtual manipulator (VM) is an
augmented kinematic representation that considers the
base motion due to reaction forces or moments. The
model is based on the fact that the mass centroid of the
entire system does not move in the free-ﬂoating sys-
tem without any external forces [55.58]. The mobility

Space Robotics
55.3 Mathematical Modeling
1441
Part F | 55.3
of the end point of the arm is decreased by the base
motion. In the VM representation, such mobility degra-
dation is expressed by virtually shrinking the length
of the real arm according to the mass property. Note
that the VM considers only linear momentum conser-
vation. If the differential expression of VM is obtained
using a Jacobian matrix, the Jacobian is not a conven-
tional kinematic Jacobian, but rather a version of the
generalized Jacobian deﬁned by the combination of the
kinematic equation (55.2), and the linear momentum
equation (55.13).
55.3.6 Dynamic Singularity
Dynamic singularities are singular conﬁgurations in
which the manipulator end point loses mobility in some
inertial direction [55.59]. Dynamic singularities are not
found in earth-based manipulators, but rather occur
in free-ﬂoating space manipulator systems due to the
coupling dynamics between the arm and the base. Dy-
namic singularities coincide with the singularities of the
generalized Jacobian matrix determined by (55.6). The
singular value decomposition (SVD) of a manipulator
Jacobian matrix provides manipulability analysis. Like-
wise, the SVD of the generalized Jacobian matrix yields
the manipulability analysis of a free-ﬂoating space ma-
nipulator [55.60]. Figure 55.24 shows the comparison
of the manipulability distribution between a 2-DOF
ground-based manipulator and a 2-DOF ﬂoating manip-
ulator, from which the degradation of the manipulability
is observed in the space arm due to the dynamic cou-
pling.
55.3.7 Reaction Null-Space (RNS)
From a practical point of view, any change in the base
attitude is undesirable. As such, manipulator motion
planning methods that minimize the base attitude dis-
turbance have been investigated extensively. Analysis
of the angular momentum equation reveals that the ulti-
mate goal of achieving zero disturbance is possible.
The following is the angular momentum equation
with zero initial angular momentum L D 0 and the zero
attitude disturbance !b D 0 given in (55.14)
QHbm P D 0 :
(55.16)
This equation yields the following null-space solution
P D .I  QHC
bm QHbm/P
 :
(55.17)
The joint motion given by (55.17) is guaranteed not to
disturb the base attitude. Here, the vector P
 2 Rn is ar-
bitrary and the null-space of the inertia matrix QHbm 2
R3n is called the reaction null-space (RNS) [55.61].
7
(Normalized manipulability value = index number/40)
a)
b)
4
3
2 1
5
8910
9
Fig.55.24a,b Manipulability distribution in the work space (af-
ter [55.60])
The DOF for P
 is n  3. For example, if a manip-
ulator arm mounted on a free-ﬂoating space robot has
6-DOF, i. e., n D 6, then 3-DOF remain in the reaction
null-space. These DOFs can be speciﬁed by introducing
additional motion criteria, such as end point positioning
of the arm. Such manipulator operation that produces
no reaction in the base is called the reactionless manip-
ulation [55.62].
The validity and effectiveness of the RNS-based re-
actionless manipulation were demonstrated in orbit by
Japanese ETS-VII mission [55.14].
55.3.8 Motion Planning Issues
This subsection addresses the generation of feasible
trajectories for a free-ﬂying robot for executing typi-
cal point-to-point or grasping tasks. The subject falls
under the problem domain of motion planning, with
the aim of satisfying motion constraints which gen-
erally cannot be satisﬁed with use of local methods
alone (feedback control and model predictive control).
A trajectory resulting from the motion planning is fed
to a tracking controller, which accounts for any mod-
eling errors, to accomplish the task in question. This
approach also aims at providing autonomous skills for
supporting a human ground operator.
A typical task of interest here is that of a point-
to-point maneuver of a robot manipulator mounted on
a servicer satellite, to bring its end-effector in some de-
sired inertial position and orientation. This task may
require actuation of the servicer, or may, if possible, be
preferably executed in free-ﬂoating mode, to avoid is-
sues related to the use of the on-board thrusters, such
as fuel expenditure. In this context, to minimize the
attitude change of the servicer resulting from the ma-
nipulator motion, a noticeable fundamental result for
a point-to-point maneuver, derived from nonlinear opti-
mization theory, is the V-maneuver [55.63]. Intuitively,

Part F | 55.3
1442
Part F
Robots at Work
the attitude change is minimized by making the robot
ﬁrst move radially inward, toward the system center of
mass, before turning and then radially outward, to reach
the new desired ﬁnal position.
A second task that has received much attention is
the grasping of a free tumbling target, like a defected
satellite. Currently, there are a number of space pro-
grams worldwide which are addressing this task, like
the preparation of the demonstration mission DEOS of
the DLR (Sect. 55.1.2) for grasping a small satellite in
LEO, the e.Deorbit study of the ESA for the deorbit-
ing of the defected ENVISAT satellite and PHOENIX
of DARPA for grasping a geostationary satellite in the
graveyard orbit. Different approaches can be found in
the literature to tackle this problem, to include [55.64,
65] for feedback control, [55.66] for model predic-
tive control, [55.67] for optimal control in Cartesian
space and [55.68] for nonlinear optimization, to men-
tion some.
Due to the nonholonomic nature of the dynamics
of a free-ﬂoating robot (Sect. 55.3.4), in order to sat-
isfy all relevant motion constraints, the motion planning
problems above can only be solved through numerical
integration. Note in fact, that the ﬁnal system conﬁgu-
ration for a given ﬁnal end-effector position in inertial
space is function of the whole path taken by the robot
throughout the motion.
Principally, the motion planning tasks above may be
formulated as an optimal control problem of the type
min
tf;.t/ & ..t/; .t/; tf/ ;
(55.18)
subject to
g.tf; .t// D 0
(55.19)
h.tf; .t// 	 0 ;
(55.20)
for 0 	 t 	 tf and where tf is the ﬁnal time; .t/ is
the vector of joint positions; .t/ is the vector of
joint torques; & is a predeﬁned cost function; g are
equality constraints to include, for example, the state
transition equations; h are inequality constraints, for ex-
ample the joint box constraints on position, velocity and
torque, or collision avoidance constraints. Other motion
constraints may include inequality constraints on the
end-effector forces during contact, or other operational
constraints.
This consists of an inﬁnite dimensional problem,
in the given time interval, which generally cannot be
solved in closed form. The direct shooting optimiza-
tion methods lend themselves well to solving these
problems iteratively [55.69], where for example the in-
dependent DOF (in the case of a free-ﬂoating system,
the robot joint angles) are parameterized in time as
 D .t; p/
(55.21)
with p 2 Rn, for n optimization parameters, where 
may be a polynomial function, a B-spline function,
or any other. This way, the problem becomes that of
ﬁnding a suitable value for the parameters p which
satisﬁes all motion constraints (feasibility), as well as
perhaps minimizes a cost function (optimality), like
the time-to-collision [55.70], the end time [55.67], or
the mechanical energy [55.68]. The problem is as such
transformed into a ﬁnite dimensional problem and can
be solved as a nonlinear programming problem (NLP)
with classical numerical iterative methods such as se-
quential quadratic programming (SQP).
For example, for a Cartesian point-to-point prob-
lem, we have the following supplementary equality
constrains at the end time
Xe D
tf
Z
0
OJ P.t; p/ dt D Xe
des ;
(55.22)
where Xe 2 Rn denotes the end-effector pose (array ma-
trix of dimension DOFe  1). Note that the constraint
itself has 1DOF+3–DOFe solutions for the system con-
ﬁguration (for DOF robot joints), however these all
imply a speciﬁc base body attitude as well as a speciﬁc
robot conﬁguration. Solving the problem of reaching
a speciﬁc system conﬁguration is a hard nonholonomic
control problem, which is avoided by solving the con-
straint thorough the integral above and an adequate
parameter set p.
Extensions of this are necessary to treat the grasp-
ing task. The latter can ideally be separated into three
phases: approach, tracking and, stabilization. The ﬁrst
comprises a point-to-point maneuver, however with
a nonzero end velocity. The second comprises a track-
ing maneuver, in which the Cartesian motion of the
robot end-effector is dictated by the tumbling motion
and the geometry of the target as it follows the grasp-
ing point and homes in onto it, to ﬁnally grasp it. Note
that this phase aims at minimizing the impact between
the end-effector and the target. The third phase involves
a robot joint velocity decay maneuver, once the target
is grasped. This formulation results in a multiple-phase
problem, for which the boundaries between the phases
introduce supplementary motion constraints in the mo-
tion planning problem.
From a methodological point of view, note that there
is no simple measure to determine if and when the
grasping point on the target will be reachable from the
current robot conﬁguration (Fig. 55.25) and whether

Space Robotics
55.3 Mathematical Modeling
1443
Part F | 55.3
Fig. 55.25 Orbital scenario: servicer satellite with 7-DOF
manipulator and target satellite with solar panels. Coordi-
nate system of a predeﬁned grasping point on target ring
shown
the trajectory which derives from a local control law
will be feasible at all times (accounting for the mo-
tion constraints listed above). It is also necessary to
provide information on the time synchronization be-
tween the motion of the grasping point on the target
and that of the robot. Furthermore, the nonlinear na-
ture of the robot kinematics needs to be exploited to
favor a successful grasp. These considerations speak
in favor of the use of a reference trajectory, which is
computed off-line by means of a global search, based
on a motion prediction of the target and on a ge-
ometric model of the same target and of the space
robot [55.68].
It is also well known that optimization methods
suffer from convergence issues (arising from local min-
ima), if a judicious initial guess is not available. It is
for this reason that a look-up table approach is nec-
essary [55.68] in order to provide a sufﬁciently high
probability of convergence for a given grasping task.
The necessity of a look-up table also arises from
the long computation times of the optimization pro-
cess, which result from the aforementioned necessity
to integrate the equations of motion for any given op-
timization iteration. This time is generally reduced if
a solution close to the sought one is given as a starting
point. An attempt to eliminate the necessity of integrat-
ing the equations of motion was also made in [55.71],
where a differentially ﬂat representation for a free-
ﬂoating robot was sought. In such a formulation, there
are as many differential equations as there are indepen-
dent state variables, or ﬂat variables, and as such, any
parameterization of the ﬂat variables is solution of the
equations of motion. Such a representation was found
for the case in which the robot has three joints and the
center of mass of its load lies on the rotation axis of the
last joint.
It is also of interest to make some considerations
on practical technological issues which can inﬂuence
one or the other future research direction. With regard
to the minimization of the servicer attitude change dur-
ing robotic operations, it is worth realizing that this is
generally only an issue for maintaining the communi-
cation link from low Earth orbit with a geostationary
satellite, for which a high pointing accuracy is required
(note that for a communication link from low Earth
orbit to ground instead, an omnidirectional antenna is
sufﬁcient). Therefore, rather than limiting the robot
workspace to its reaction null-space to avoid any at-
titude change at all, in which case the resulting robot
movements would generally be conﬁned to the extent
of becoming of little practical use, a simple technolog-
ical solution is possible through the implementation of
a gimbal joint for the communication antenna on the
servicer.
Another simple technological solution to a theoreti-
cally involved problem is that of controlling the attitude
of the servicer by means of adequate closed-loop ma-
neuvers of the robot. As is well known, reaction wheels
on a satellite achieve the same result, also with the same
principle of momentum transfer, but however with a far
simpler control law than that necessary for a robot. It is
then important to realize that, although reaction wheels
were until today far too small for any useful robotic
application, larger reaction wheels are currently being
developed, for example, in the context of the BIROS
mission of the DLR, which is planned to ﬂy in 2014.
Although these will still not be able to fully compensate
the typical robot dynamic coupling terms (if wanting to
fully stabilize the servicer attitude), they will however
be able to allow signiﬁcant attitude slew maneuvers of
the servicer quickly, without having to resort to the use
of the robot or of the thrusters. Furthermore, they will
be useful to reduce the robot singularities, due to the
enhanced system’s actuation.
55.3.9 Equations for Flexible-Based
Manipulator Systems
Next, let us consider a ﬂexible-based manipulator sys-
tem in which a single or multiple manipulator arm(s)
are supported by a ﬂexible beam or a spring and damper
(visco-elastic) system. For such a system, the equation
of motion is obtained using the following variables:
xb 2 R6:
position/orientation of the base
 2 Rn:
joint angle of the arm
xh 2 R6k: position/orientation of the end point(s)
Fb 2 R6: forces/moments to deﬂect the ﬂexible base
 2 Rn:
joint torque of the arm
Fh 2 R6k: external force/torque on the end point(s).

Part F | 55.3
1444
Part F
Robots at Work
 Hb
Hbm
HT
bm
Hm
 Rxb
R

C
cb
cm

D
Fb


C
JT
b
JT
m

Fh ;
(55.23)
Pxh D Jm P C JbPxb ;
(55.24)
Rxh D Jm R C PJm P C JbRxb C PJbPxb :
(55.25)
Here, with the gravitational force g in Cartesian space,
the term cb is generally expressed as
cb D f.xb; ; Pxb; P/ C g.xb; / :
(55.26)
The difference from the equation of a free-ﬂoating
manipulator system (55.1) is the existence of the base
constraint force Fb. Let Db and Kb be the matrix rep-
resenting the damping and spring factors, respectively,
of the ﬂexible-base. The constraint forces and moments
Fb are then expressed as
Fb D DbPxb  Kbxb :
(55.27)
Since the base is constrained, the total momentum is
not conserved, and it might be meaningless to check the
system momentum. However, it is important to consider
the partial momentum Lm for the part of the manipula-
tor arm
Lm D Hbm P ;
(55.28)
which is termed the coupling momentum [55.72]. Its
time derivative describes the forces and moments Fm,
which are yielded by the dynamic reaction from the ma-
nipulator arm to the base
Fm D Hbm R C PHbm P :
(55.29)
Using Fb and Fm, the upper set of equation in
(55.23) is rearranged as
HbRxb CDbPxb CKbxb D gFm CJT
bFh : (55.30)
Equation (55.23) or (55.30) is a familiar expression
for ﬂexible-base manipulators [55.73, 74].
55.3.10 Advanced Control for Flexible
Structure Based Manipulators
In this subsection, advanced control issues for a macro–
micro space manipulator are discussed. The SSRMS
attached to the SPDM (Fig. 55.4) and the JEMRMS
(Fig. 55.5) are examples. Operation modes for this class
of space manipulators include coarse motion by the
macro (long-reach) component and ﬁne manipulation
by the micro component. In normal cases, these two
control modes are executed exclusively. Namely, while
one component is active the other component should
be servo (or brake) locked. Thus, during the operation
of the micro component, the macro component behaves
just as a passive base.
Due to the ﬂexible nature of the space long-reach
arm, the macro part is subject to vibrations. These vi-
brations can be excited during coarse positioning and
may remain for a long time after each operation. In
ﬁne manipulation, the macro arm behaves as a pas-
sive ﬂexible structure, but then vibrations can be excited
by reactions from the motion of the micro arm. These
motions degrade the control accuracy and operational
performance of the system. In practice, the booms are
usually sufﬁciently stiff, but ﬂexibility comes mainly
from the low stiffness at the joints and gear trains.
Moreover, lightweight and microgravity characteristics
make the structure sensitive to yield vibrations, and the
surrounding vacuum, or the lack of air viscosity, pro-
vides a reduced damping effect to the structure.
Conventionally, the vibration issue has been man-
aged for SRMS and SSRMS by the operational skill
of well-trained astronauts and by limiting the maxi-
mum operational velocity according to the inertia of the
handling object. However, if an advanced controller is
introduced on the ISS, the training time for astronauts
will be reduced and the operational speed can be in-
creased.
Here, the following two subtasks are considered in
dealing with this issue:

Suppression of the vibrations of the ﬂexible base

End point control in the presence of vibrations.
To suppress the vibrations of the macro arm (ﬂex-
ible base), the coupled dynamics is effectively used.
Such control is called coupled vibration suppression
control [55.75]. The coupled dynamics is a solution
space of the micro arm motion with maximum coupling
with the vibration dynamics of the macro arm. Note
that this solution space is perpendicular to the reaction
null-space introduced in Sect. 55.3.7. Since the spaces
are orthogonal, the coupled vibration suppression con-
trol and reactionless manipulation can be superimposed
without any mutual interference.
The motion command of the micro arm to suppress
the vibrations is determined with a feedback of the lin-
ear and angular velocity of the end point of the macro
arm Pxb
R D HC
bmHbGbPxb ;
(55.31)
where ./C denotes the right pseudo-inverse, and Gb is
a positive deﬁnite gain matrix.

Space Robotics
55.3 Mathematical Modeling
1445
Part F | 55.3
If written in the form of a joint torque input, the
vibration control law is expressed as follows
 D HmHC
bmGbPxb :
(55.32)
In the presence of redundancy in the micro arm,
(55.31) can be extended to control with a null-space
component
Rm D HC
bm.HbGbPxb  PHbm Pm/ C PRNS
 ;
(55.33)
where 
 is an n-DOF arbitrary vector and PRNS D .E 
HC
bmHbm/ is a projector onto a null space of the coupling
inertia matrix Hbm. When the micro arm is operated us-
ing (55.33), the closed-loop system is expressed as
HbRxb C HbGbPxb C Kbxb D Fb C JT
bFh :
(55.34)
Equation (55.34) represents a second-order damped vi-
bration system. With no force input, i. e., Fb D Fh D 0,
the vibrations converge to zero with a proper choice of
the gain matrix Gb.
For the determination of vector 
, feedback control
to reduce the positioning error of the micro arm end
point is considered. The error vector is deﬁned as
exh D xd
h  xh :
(55.35)
After some derivation, the control law for the joint
torque of the micro arm is obtained in the following
form [55.75, 76]
 D ..JT
m/CHmPRNS/C.Kpexh  KdJm P/  Gm P ;
(55.36)
where Kp, Kd, and Gm are positive deﬁnite gain matri-
ces.
Figure 55.26 shows a block diagram for the control
system described by (55.32) and (55.36).
As a simpliﬁed demonstration, a planar system with
a four-joint redundant manipulator arm atop a ﬂexible
beam is considered. Figure 55.27 shows the vibra-
tion amplitude of the ﬂexible beam after an impulsive
external force. The graph labeled w/o vs depicts the vi-
brations of the beam without any manipulator control
but with natural damping. The graph labeled with vs
depicts the case in which vibration suppression con-
trol given by (55.32) is applied, where the vibrations
are damped quickly.
In addition, Fig. 55.28 shows the end point motion
of the manipulator arm during the control. The graph
labeled w/o RNS is the case of using (55.32), where
the base vibrations were successfully suppressed but
Macro
manipulator
(passive base)
Micro
manipulator
(active arm)
(HmPRNS)+
HmH+
bm
JT
m
Kd
Gb
Kp
xd
h
c~
m
Gm
τm
+
+
+
+
+
–
φm, φ·
m
xh, x·
h
x·
h
xh
x·b
φ·
m
Fig. 55.26 Block diagram for simultaneous vibration suppression
and manipulator end point control for a ﬂexible-structure-mounted
manipulator system
0
10
20
W/o vs
With vs
30
y deflection (m)
Time (s)
0.1
0.05
0
–0.05
–0.1
Fig. 55.27 Vibrations of the ﬂexible base
0
10
20
W/o RNS
With RNS
30
y deflection (m)
Time (s)
0.1
0.05
0
–0.05
–0.1
Fig. 55.28 Positioning error of the manipulator end tip
the position of the manipulator end point was deﬂected
by this suppression behavior. The graph labeled with
RNS depicts the case in which both vibration suppres-
sion control given by (55.32) and the end point control
given by (55.36) are applied simultaneously. This last
case shows that the vibrations were damped success-
fully and that the positioning error of the manipulator

Part F | 55.3
1446
Part F
Robots at Work
end point converged to zero. This is a result of the re-
dundancy of the arm.
Here, note that the proposed control method re-
quires precise information on dynamic characteristics,
such as the inertia parameters of the arms and the
handled payload, if any. To achieve more practical ap-
plications, the proposed method must be extended to
schemes for parameter identiﬁcation [55.77] and adap-
tive control [55.78], with which the convergence of
the control is guaranteed even with imprecise a priori
knowledge of the dynamic parameters [55.76].
55.3.11 Contact Dynamics
and Impedance Control
The capture and retrieval operation of a ﬂoating and
tumbling target, such as a malfunctioning satellite, by
a manipulator arm mounted on a servicing robot (called
a chaser) can be decomposed into the following three
phases:
1. Approaching phase (before contact with the target)
2. Contact/impact phase (at the moment of contact)
3. Post contact phase (after contact or grasping).
If the contact is impulsive, the ﬁrst and the third
phases are discontinued by the impulsive phenomena
of the second phase. Understanding of this impulsive
phenomena is indispensable when designing a compre-
hensive capture control scheme. In this subsection, the
formulation of impact dynamics is ﬁrst considered, and
impedance control (which is useful to minimize the im-
pact forces and prolong the contact duration) is then
discussed.
Let us consider a chain of rigid links composed of
n C 1 bodies freely ﬂoating in inertial space. As dis-
cussed in Sect. 55.3.3, the equation of motion for this
type of system becomes (55.8). Here, the impulsive
contact force is assumed to be applied at the manipu-
lator end tip and is expressed as Fh D .f T
h; nT
h/T 2 R6.
This impulsive force also yields a change in the system
momenta .PT
g; LT
g/T 2 R6, expressed as
PPg
PLg

D
wE
0
0
Ig
  Pv g
P!g

C

0
!g  Ig!g

D
 E
0
Qrgh
E
 f h
nh

;
(55.37)
where E is a 33 identity matrix, and the symbols with
the sufﬁx g indicate the corresponding values observed
around the mass centroid of the n C 1 link system.
In the above equations, (55.8) describes an inter-
nal joint motion (termed local motion) of the system,
whereas (55.37) describes the overall motion (termed
global motion) about the centroid of the system. As
a result of force input Fh, the ﬂoating chain induces
both the local motion around its articulated joints and
the global translation and rotation with respect to the
centroid.
From (55.8) and (55.37), the acceleration of the ma-
nipulator end tip ˛h can be expressed in the inertial
frame as
˛h D GFh C d ;
(55.38)
where
G D OJ OH1OJT C RhM1RT
h ;
(55.39)
Rh D
E
Qrgh
0
E

;
M D
wE
0
0
Ig

;
(55.40)
and d is a velocity dependent term.
Equations (55.38)–(55.40) are expressions for the
motion of the hand (the point at which collision occurs)
induced by the impact force Fh, where the matrix G,
which is the augmented version of (55.10), represents
the dynamic characteristics of this system.
Further augmentation for the inverted inertia ma-
trix has been discussed for the case in which the
contact duration is not considered to be inﬁnitesi-
mal [55.51].
Now let us assume the case in which two free-
ﬂoating chains, A and B, with dynamic characteristics
G
A and G
B collide with each other at their respective
hands (end points) and an impact force Fh is induced
by this collision.
The equations of motion at the instance of collision
are
G
AFh D
 Pv hA
P!hA

 d
A
(55.41)
for the chain A, and
G
B.Fh/ D
 PvhB
P!hB

 d
B
(55.42)
for the chain B, where the subscripts A and B indicate
the label of the chain.
Assuming that G
A and G
B remain constant during
the inﬁnitesimal contact duration and the velocity-
dependent terms d
A and d
B are small and negligible,
integration of (55.41) and (55.42) yields
G
A
tCıt
Z
t
Fh dt D
v
0
hA
!
0
hA


v hA
!hA

;
(55.43)
G
B
tCıt
Z
t
Fh dt D
v hB
!hB


v
0
hB
!
0
hB

;
(55.44)

Space Robotics
55.3 Mathematical Modeling
1447
Part F | 55.3
where f
0g indicates the velocity after the collision. Inte-
gration of Fh
Fh D lim
ıt!0
tCıt
Z
t
Fh dt
(55.45)
represents the impulse (force-time product) acting on
both chains. Providing that the total momenta of the two
systems are strictly conserved before and after the col-
lision, we obtain the following expression from (55.43)
and (55.44)

G
A C G
B

Fh D
v
0
hA
!
0
hA


v
0
hB
!
0
hB

C
v hB
!hB


v hA
!hA

:
(55.46)
In general collision analysis, the coefﬁcient of resti-
tution (elasticity factor) associated with the relative
velocities before and after the collision is often em-
ployed [55.79]. If we accept this restitution coefﬁcient
for 6-DOF linear and angular velocities, the relation-
ship between relative velocities before and after contact
becomes
v
0
hA
!
0
hA


v
0
hB
!
0
hB

D 
v hB
!hB


v hA
!hA

; (55.47)
where
  diag.e1; : : : ; e6/ ;
0 	 ei 	 1
(55.48)
is the restitution coefﬁcient matrix.
Substituting (55.47) into (55.46), the impulse in-
duced by this collision can be expressed only by the
relative velocity of two points before the contact
Fh D .E6 C /G1
˙
VhAB ;
(55.49)
where
G
˙ D G
A C G
B ;
(55.50)
VhAB D
v hB
!hB


v hA
!hA

:
(55.51)
Using the introduced notation, the magnitude of im-
pulse is expressed as
k Fh kD
q
.E6 C /TV T
hABGT
˙
G1
˙
VhAB.E6 C / ;
(55.52)
and the velocity after collision becomes
v
0
hA
!
0
hA

D

G1
A
C G1
B
1


.E6 C /G1
B
v hB
!hB

C.G1
A
 G1
B
/
v hA
!hA

;
(55.53)
where sufﬁxes A and B are interchangeable.
These expressions are considered to be an augmen-
tation of the impact theory for a two-point-mass system
into articulated body systems.
Impedance control is a concept by which we can
control the manipulator end tip so as to obtain the de-
sired mechanical impedance characteristics. Such con-
trol is useful to alter the dynamic characteristics of the
arm during the contact phase. In a special case, the de-
sired impedance of the manipulator end tip (hand) may
be tuned to achieve impedance matching with the col-
liding target object so that the hand can easily maintain
stable contact with the target [55.80].
Let Md, Dd, and Kd be the matrices for the desired
impedance properties of inertia, viscosity, and stiffness,
respectively, measured at the manipulator end point.
The equation of motion for the desired system is then
expressed as
MdRxh C DdPxh C Kdxh D Fh :
(55.54)
From (55.8) and (55.54), the impedance control
law for a free-ﬂoating manipulator system is obtained
as [55.81]
h D HOJ1fM1
d .DdPxh C Kdxh  Fh/
 POJ P  Rxghg  OJTFh C c :
(55.55)
The usefulness of the impedance control in free-
ﬂying space robots has been discussed in [55.81–83].
55.3.12 Dynamics of Mobile Robots
The equation of motion for a mobile robot that has mul-
tiple articulated limbs, such as that shown in Fig. 55.29,
m0g
nw4
fw5
nw6
mwi, Iwi
msi, Isi
m0, I0
nw5
nw1
fw1
fw2
fw4
fw6
ns2
Fig. 55.29 Schematic model of a mobile robot

Part F | 55.3
1448
Part F
Robots at Work
is given by the following equation
0
BBB@
Hb
Hbm1
  
Hbmk
HT
bm1
Hm11
  
Hm1k
:::
:::
:::
:::
HT
bmk
HT
m1k
  
Hmkk
1
CCCA
0
BBB@
Rxb
R1
:::
Rk
1
CCCA C
0
BBB@
cb
cm1
:::
cmk
1
CCCA
D
0
BBB@
Fb
1
:::
n
1
CCCA C
0
BBB@
JT
bFex
JT
m1Fex1
:::
JT
mkFexk
1
CCCA ;
(55.56)
where the symbols have the following meanings:
k
number of limbs
xb 2 R6: position/orientation of the base
 D .T
1; : : : ; T
k /T 2 Rn: articulated joint angles
xex D .xT
ex1; : : : ; xT
exk/T 2R6k: position/orientation of the
end points
Fb 2 R6: forces/moments directly apply on the base
 D .T
1; : : : ; T
k /T 2 Rn: joint articulated torque
Fex D .FT
ex1;    ; FT
exk/T 2 R6k: external
forces/moments on the end points.
Note that for Fig. 55.29, Fexi D Œf T
wi; nT
wiT.
Comparing the above equations with (55.1), no
difference is observed in the mathematical structure.
The gravity force on the vehicle main body and the
conﬁguration-dependent gravity terms of the articulated
bodies are included in cb and cmi, respectively. In prac-
tice, however, one substantial difference is the existence
of ground contact forces/moments at the end point of
each limb. Unlike ﬂoating target capture discussed in
Sect. 55.3.10, the contact is not considered impulsive,
but instead continues for a nonnegligible period of time.
In such cases, a well-accepted approach is to explicitly
evaluate the contact forces/moments Fex, according to
the virtual penetration of the end point into the collided
object or the ground surface [55.79].
In cases in which each limb has a wheel on its
end terminal, rather than the point penetration model,
a wheel traction model will be adopted to evaluate
Fex. For planetary exploration missions, rovers (mobile
robots) are expected to travel over natural rough terrain.
A number of studies have examined the modeling of
tire traction forces on loose soil, called regolith (where
there is no organic component) [55.84–98]. Particularly,
these studies investigate the soil mechanics called ter-
ramechanics to understand the tractive forces generated
by wheels.
In the following subsection, models for wheel trac-
tion mechanics are summarized.
55.3.13 Wheel Traction Mechanics
Terramechanics is the study of soil properties, specif-
ically the interaction of wheeled, legged, or tracked
vehicles and various surfaces. For the modeling of
the wheel traction forces and the analysis of the ve-
hicle mobility, textbooks written by Bekker [55.29,
30] and Wong [55.99] are good references. Although
these books were written in the 1960s and 1970s, ba-
sic formulae from these books are frequently cited by
researchers even today [55.88]. In this subsection, the
models for a rigid wheel on loose soil are summarized.
Slip Ratio and Slip Angle
Slips are generally observed when a rover travels on
loose soil. In particular, slips in the lateral direction are
observed during steering or slope-traversing maneuvers.
The slip in the longitudinal direction is measured
by slip ratio s, which is deﬁned as a function of the
longitudinal traveling velocity vx of the wheel and the
circumference velocity of the wheel r! (r is the wheel
radius and ! is the angular velocity of the wheel)
s D
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
r!  vx
r!
if jr!j > jvxj W driving
r!  vx
vx
ifjr!j < jvxj W braking :
(55.57)
The slip ratio takes a value from 1 to 1.
On the other hand, the slip in the lateral direction is
measured by slip angle ˇ, which is deﬁned in terms of
vx and the lateral traveling velocity vy as
ˇ D tan1
vy
vx

:
(55.58)
Note that the above deﬁnitions, (55.57) and (55.58)
have been traditionally used in the vehicle community
as standards. However, planetary rovers in a challeng-
ing terrain, such as Spirit and Opportunity on Mars,
experienced the cases in which the rovers slip backward
while attempting to drive up hill, or travel faster than the
wheel’s circumference velocity in downhill driving. In
these cases, the slip ratio can exceed the range from 1
to 1. Also while traversing side slopes, the case may
arise in which vy > 0 but vx is nearly 0, making the
deﬁnition (55.58) nearly singular. Therefore, these deﬁ-
nitions are needed to be further discussed for the rovers
in very loose terrain.
Wheel–Soil Contact Angle
Figure 55.30 depicts a schematic model of a rigid wheel
contacting loose soil. In the ﬁgure, the angle from the
surface normal to the point at which the wheel initially
makes contact with the soil († AOB) is deﬁned as the

Space Robotics
55.3 Mathematical Modeling
1449
Part F | 55.3
θ = 0
θf
υx
θr
O
h
λh
B
C
A
ω
–
+
Fig. 55.30 Wheel contact angles
entry angle. The angle from the surface normal to the
point at which the wheel departs from the soil († BOC
in Fig. 55.30) is the exit angle. The wheel contact region
on loose soil is represented from the entry angle to the
exit angle.
The entry angle f is geometrically described in
terms of wheel sinkage h as
f D cos1

1  h
r

:
(55.59)
The exit angle r is described using the wheel sink-
age ratio , which denotes the ratio between the forward
and rear sinkage of the wheel
r D cos1

1  h
r

:
(55.60)
The value of  depends on the soil characteristics, the
wheel surface pattern, and the slip ratio. It becomes
smaller than 1.0 when the soil compaction occurs, but
can be greater than 1.0 when the soil is dug up by the
wheel and transported to the rear region of the wheel.
Wheel Sinkage
The amount of wheel sinkage is constituted by static
and dynamic components. The static sinkage depends
on the vertical load on the wheel, while the dynamic
sinkage is caused by the rotation of the wheel.
According to the equation formulated by Bek-
ker [55.29], the static stress p.h/ generated under a ﬂat
plate, which has a sinkage h and a width b, is calculated
as
p.h/ D
kc
b C k

hn ;
(55.61)
where kc and k are pressure-sinkage modules, and n
is the sinkage exponent. Applying (55.61) to the wheel,
as shown in Fig. 55.31, the static sinkage is evaluated
as follows.
Stress distribution
Soil surface
θs
–θs
θ
p(θ)
h(θ)
hs
r
W
Fig. 55.31 Static sinkage
First, the wheel sinkage h./ at an arbitrary wheel
angle  is geometrically given by
h./ D r.cos   cos s/ ;
(55.62)
where s is the static contact angle. Then, substituting
(55.62) into (55.61) yields
p./ D rn
kc
b C k

.cos   cos s/n :
(55.63)
The wheel eventually sinks into the soil until the stress
from the soil balances the vertical load W on the wheel.
W D
s
Z
s
p./br cos  d
D rnC1 .kc C kb/
s
Z
s
.cos   cos s/n cos  d :
(55.64)
Using this equation, the static contact angle s is evalu-
ated for the given W. In practice, (55.64) does not yield
a closed form solution for s, although s can be evalu-
ated numerically.
Finally, the static sinkage hs is obtained by substi-
tuting s into the following equation
hs D r.1  cos s/ :
(55.65)
However, as illustrated in Fig. 55.32, the dynamic
sinkage becomes a complicated function depending on
the slip ratio of the wheel, the wheel surface pattern,
and the soil characteristics. Although it is difﬁcult to
obtain an analytical form for the dynamic sinkage, it
is again possible to evaluate the dynamic sinkage nu-
merically, using the condition W D Fz, where Fz is the
normal force given by (55.76), which will be presented

Part F | 55.3
1450
Part F
Robots at Work
Dynamic sinkage
Static sinkage
Slip ratio = small
Slip ratio = large
Soil surface
Fig. 55.32 Dynamic sinkage
later herein. The force Fz increases with the wheel sink-
age because the area of the contact patch increases
accordingly.
Stress Distribution Under the Wheel
Based on terramechanics models, the stress distribution
under the rotating wheel can be modeled as shown in
Fig. 55.33.
The normal stress ./ is determined by the follow-
ing equation [55.87, 88]
./ D rn
kc
b C k

.cos   cos f/n
for m 	  < f ;
./ D rn
kc
b C k
 
cos

f    r
m  r
.f  m/

 cos fgn
for r <  	 m :
(55.66)
υx
υx
υy
υ
	 (Slip angle)
θm
σ (θ)
τx(θ)
τy(θ)
θ
h
Normal stress distribution
Wheel-soil contact area
λh
r
x
z
x
b
y
ω
Fig. 55.33 Stress distribution model under a wheel
Note that the above equations are based on Bekker’s
formula, as given in (55.61), and they become
equivalent to the Wong–Reece model for normal
stress [55.100] when n D 1. Also note that by lin-
earizing this distribution, Iagnemma et al. [55.84, 88]
developed a Kalman-ﬁlter-based method to estimate the
soil parameters.
The term m is the speciﬁc wheel angle at which the
normal stress is maximized
m D .a0 C a1s/f ;
(55.67)
where a0 and a1 are parameters that depend on the
wheel–soil interaction. Their values are generally as-
sumed to be a0 
 0:4 and 0 	 a1 	 0:3 [55.100].
The maximum terrain shear force is a function of
the terrain cohesion c and internal friction angle , and
can be computed from Coulomb’s equation
max./ D c C max./ tan  :
(55.68)
Based on the above equation, the shear stresses un-
der the rotating wheel, x./ and y./, are written as
follows [55.101]
x./ D Œc C ./ tan 

1  ejx./=kx
;
(55.69)
y./ D Œc C ./ tan 

1  ejy./=ky
;
(55.70)
where kx and ky are the shear deformation moduli in
each direction. In addition, jx and jy, which are the soil
deformations in each direction, can be formulated as
a function of the wheel angle  with the slip ratio and
the slip angle, respectively [55.89, 100]
jx./ D rŒf    .1  s/.sinf  sin / ;
(55.71)
jy./ D r.1  s/.f  / tan ˇ :
(55.72)
Drawbar Pull: Fx
Using the normal stress ./ and the shear stress in
the x direction x./, the drawbar pull Fx, which is the
net traction force exerted from the soil to the wheel, is
calculated as the integral from the entry angle f to the
exit angle r [55.100]
Fx D rb
f
Z
r
Œx./ cos   ./ sin  d :
(55.73)
Side Force: Fy
The side force Fy appears in the lateral direction of the
wheel when the vehicle makes steering maneuvers or
traverses a side slope. The side force is decomposed
into two components [55.89]
Fy D Fu C Fs ;

Space Robotics
55.3 Mathematical Modeling
1451
Part F | 55.3
where Fu is the force produced by the shear stress in
the y direction y./ underneath the wheel and Fs is the
reaction force generated by the bulldozing phenomenon
on a side face of the wheel. The above equation can be
rewritten as
Fy D
f
Z
r
8
ˆ<
ˆ:
rby./
„ ƒ‚ …
Fu
C RbŒr  h./cos 
„
ƒ‚
…
Fs
9
>=
>;
d :
(55.74)
Here, Hegedus’s bulldozing resistance estima-
tion [55.102] is employed to evaluate the side face force
Fs. As shown in Fig. 55.34, a bulldozing resistance
Rb is generated on a unit width blade when the blade
moves toward the soil. According to Hegedus’s theory,
the bulldozed area is deﬁned by a destructive phase that
is modeled by a planar surface. In the case of a horizon-
tally placed wheel, the angle of approach ˛0 should be
zero; Rb can then be calculated as a function of wheel
sinkage h./
Rb.h/ D D1

ch./ C D2
	dh2./
2

;
(55.75)
where
D1.Xc; / D cot Xc C tan.Xc C / ;
D2.Xc; / D cot Xc C cot2 Xc
cot  :
In the above equations, 	d denotes the soil density.
Based on Bekker’s theory [55.29], the destructive angle
Xc can be approximated as
Xc D 45ı  
2 :
Normal Force: Fz
The normal force Fz is obtained in the same manner as
for the (55.73) [55.100]
Fz D rb
f
Z
r
Œx./ sin  C ./ cos  d ;
(55.76)
which should balance the normal load of the wheel in
a static condition.
α'
φ
h
h0
Rb
Xc
Bulldozing resistance
Bulldozing direction
Bulldozed area
Soil surface
Ground swell
Unit width blade
Destructive phase
Fig. 55.34 Estimation model of the bulldozing resistance
Motion dynamics simulation for a vehicle traveling
over loose soil can be performed by plugging the forces
Fx, Fy, and Fz obtained from the above equations into
the equation of motion (55.5).
A better understanding of the soil–wheel contact
and traction mechanics is important in order to improve
the navigation and control behavior of exploration
rovers, in terms of minimization of wheel slippage, for
example. Reducing the wheel slippage will increase the
power efﬁciency of surface locomotion, decrease the er-
rors in path tracking maneuvers, and decrease the risks
of wheel spinning and sinking, which can cause immo-
bilization of the vehicle.
One key in realizing such advanced control of
slippage minimization is determining how to properly
estimate the slip ratios and slip angles in real time us-
ing on-board sensors. The slip ratio is determined by the
ratio between the wheel spinning velocity and the trav-
eling velocity of the vehicle, but proper sensing of the
velocity of the vehicle is usually difﬁcult. One simple
solution is to use a free wheel specialized for traveling
velocity measurement. Another solution is to employ
inertial sensors, which are however usually subject to
noise and drift.
An alternative, but promising possibility is visual
odometry, which is based on optical ﬂow or feature
tracking in the sequence of optical images. Actually,
this technique has been applied to the Mars exploration
rovers, Spirit, and Opportunity, in their long range nav-
igation, and veriﬁed to be very useful. Particularly, the
algorithm based on feature detection and tracking us-
ing stereo pair of cameras provides reliable results with
good accuracy for the estimation of driving distance as
well as the wheel slippage [55.28].

Part F | 55.4
1452
Part F
Robots at Work
55.4 Future Directions of Orbital and Surface Robotic Systems
55.4.1 Robotic Maintenance
and Service Missions
For many years, we have sent satellites and other sys-
tems into space without caring too much about what
might happen at the end of their life cycle. There has
been recently awareness about the dramatic increase of
space debris and the danger of a fatal chain reaction in-
creased in collisions. Generally speaking, space debris
removal may become a prerequisite for future space-
ﬂight. Space systems above approx. 600 km ﬂight path
altitude are not currently accessible to astronauts by
means of present transport systems and therefore are
excluded from any kind of human removal, repair, or
maintenance.
In contrast, satellites equipped with robotic arms
or humanoid robonauts may be remotely controlled
or only supervised from Earth in any orbit including
the geostationary one. In the future, they should be
able to support astronauts during routine and mainte-
nance work on space stations, capture uncontrollably
tumbling satellites, prolong their life-time by repair or
refuel, deorbit or relocate them if necessary. Efﬁcient
telerobotic and telepresence technologies allow us to
select ﬂexibly the appropriate level of robot autonomy
within shared autonomy frameworks between ground
operator and space robot.
Telepresence technologies as mentioned above
make sure that by real-time feedback of stereo im-
ages and force/torque information, the operator on
the ground gets the feeling as though he was actu-
ally working at the remote site. High-quality telep-
resence requires low round-trip communication time
delays. The challenge here is twofold: (a) to pro-
vide the mentioned technically feasible communica-
tion infrastructure, and (b) to apply the mentioned
optimized delay-compensating telepresence technolo-
gies which yield satisfactory haptic feedback up to
650 ms delay. For large robots mounted on a car-
rier satellite, their dynamic interactions, including
the physical contacts when grasping a target, have
to be mastered (Sect. 55.3). Autonomous skills are
needed for supporting a human ground operator in
performing the risky task of grasping and stabiliz-
ing noncooperative tumbling targets (satellite or space
debris).
Due to the high cost of space validation missions,
simulation capabilities are crucial for the develop-
ment and veriﬁcation of on-orbit servicing systems.
This applies both for the required hardware simula-
tion facilities including sensors and illumination ef-
fects as well as for dynamics modeling techniques
and software tools. Various hardware simulators us-
ing industrial robots for simulation of chaser and tar-
get satellite motion and the dynamic interaction with
the space-robot have been built up not only in DLR
(Fig. 55.35).
Robotic maintenance and service missions for space
infrastructure have been a long-term dream in the
space robotics community since their conceptual de-
signs were ﬁrst published in ARAMIS report in the
early 1980s (Fig. 55.1) [55.1].
ROTEX, ETS-VII, Ranger, and ASTRO that were
introduced in the earlier section are technological de-
velopments toward this goal, but robotic maintenance
and service missions have not become routinely opera-
tional yet (A good comparative study of orbital robotic
missions is provided by [55.103]). The Hubble space
telescope (HST) is a huge space telescope which has
the capability to be serviced in orbit, but it has been
visited by Space Shuttle and serviced (components ex-
changed and trouble ﬁxed) only by human EVA. After
the COLUMBIA accident in 2003, NASA seriously
considered the possibility of robotic maintenance of
the HST, investigating available technologies and se-
lecting a prime contractor of the mission development.
Figure 55.36 depicts one possible conﬁguration for the
robotic rescue mission. Ultimately, it was decided to
perform this last servicing mission with human astro-
nauts. Maintenance of the HST involves tasks that are
too complicated to be done by a robot, because the HST
itself was designed for human-based maintenance and
not speciﬁcally designed for robots.
Robonaut, which is described in the following sub-
section, is therefore considered as an interesting option
to be capable in conducting practical maintenance and
service missions, due to its compatibility and similar
level of dexterity with human astronauts.
Fig. 55.35 OOS-SIM, a hardware-in-the-loop simulator in
DLR

Space Robotics
55.4 Future Directions of Orbital and Surface Robotic Systems
1453
Part F | 55.4
Fig. 55.36 A conceptual drawing for robotic rescue of
Hubble space telescope
55.4.2 Robonaut and JUSTIN
Robonaut is a humanoid robot designed by the Robot
Systems Technology Branch at NASA Johnson Space
Center in a collaborative effort with DARPA. The
Robonaut project seeks to develop and demonstrate
a robotic system that can function as an EVA astro-
naut equivalent. Robonaut jumps generations ahead by
eliminating the robotic scars (e.g., special robotic grap-
ples and targets), but it still keeps the human operator in
the control loop through its telepresence control system.
Robonaut is designed to be used for EVA tasks (extra-
vehicular activities or space walks), i. e., those which
were not speciﬁcally designed for robots.
A key challenge is to build machines that can help
humans work and explore in space. Working side by
side with humans, or going where the risks are too great
for people, machines like Robonaut will expand capa-
bilities for construction and discovery. Over the past
ﬁve decades, space ﬂight hardware has been designed
for human servicing. Space walks are planned for most
of the assembly missions for the ISS, and they are a key
contingency for resolving on-orbit failures. To maintain
compatibility with existing EVA tools and equipments,
a)
b)
c)
Fig.55.37a–c NASA’s Robonaut family: (a) Robonaut 2, (b) Zero-G Leg for surface inspection of ISS, (c) Centaur with
a surface mobility system
a humanoid shape and an assumed level of human per-
formance (at least a human in a space suit) are required
for this robotic surrogate.
The manipulator and dexterous hand have been de-
veloped with a substantial investment in mechatronics
design. The arm structure has embedded avionics el-
ements within each link, reducing cabling and noise
interference. Robonaut has been designed based on
a biologically inspired approach. For example, it uses
a chordate neurological system in data management,
bringing all feedback to a central nervous system,
where even low-level servo control is performed. Such
a biologically inspired approach is extended to left-
right computational symmetry, sensor and power du-
ality and kinematical redundancy, enabling learning
and optimization in mechanical, electrical and software
forms.
Robonaut has a broad mix of sensors including ther-
mal, position, tactile, force and torque instrumentation,
with over 150 sensors per arm. The control system
for Robonaut includes an onboard, real-time CPU with
miniature data acquisition and power management. Off-
board guidance is delivered with human supervision us-
ing a telepresence control station with human tracking.
Robonaut 2 (Fig. 55.37), the latest generation of
the Robonaut family, launched to the ISS aboard Space
Shuttle Discovery on the STS-133 mission in Febru-
ary 2011. It is the ﬁrst humanoid robot in space, and
although its initial job is demonstrating its capabili-
ties inside the space station, the goal is that through
upgrades and advancements it will one day venture
outside the station to help spacewalkers make repairs
or additions to the station. Robonaut 2 is a dexterous,
anthropomorphic robotic torso that has signiﬁcant tech-
nical improvements over its predecessor to make it a far
more valuable tool for astronauts. Upgrades include: in-
creased force sensing, greater range of motion, higher
bandwidth, and improved dexterity. Robonaut 2’s inte-
grated mechatronic design results in a more compact
and robust distributed control system with a fraction of
the wiring of the original Robonaut.

Part F | 55.4
1454
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
Fig.55.38a,b Robonaut 2 onboard
ISS: (a) measuring airﬂow, (b) shaking
hands with ISS Commander Dan
Burbank
Robonaut 2, also called R2, has completed many
ﬁrsts during its two years on the ISS. During its ini-
tial checkout, it used American sign language to say
Hello World. R2 illustrated its unique control system
design that permits it to work directly with astronauts
by shaking hands with ISS Commander Dan Burbank
(Fig. 55.38). More recently, it has been using standard
crew tools to measure airﬂow and demonstrate its abil-
ity to perform autonomous inventory scans. As part of
gaining experience that will be useful once R2 starts
working on the outside of the Space Station, on-board
crew have successfully demonstrated teleoperation. Us-
ing a variety of sensors that track human hand, arm and
neck motion, astronaut Tom Marshburn, while also on-
board the station, became the ﬁrst person to remotely
control R2 to have it catch a free ﬂying object inside
the ISS.
One potential application of Robonaut technology is
a regular monitoring and contingent maintenance work
of human habitant modules of the space station. Fig-
ure 55.37b depicts such an application where Robonaut
crawls on the surface of the station module by using
hand rails which were originally designed for human
EVA.
The application of the humanoid robot is not limited
to orbital tasks. Figure 55.37c depict an idea to combine
the humanoid torso on a surface mobility system, which
shall be useful for robotic planetary explorations.
DLR’s anthropomorphic JUSTIN is based on high-
ﬁdelity joint-torque-controlled light weight-technology
and adjustable whole-body compliance in Cartesian
space. JUSTIN on the mobile platform (Fig. 55.39)
has actuated joints and torque controlled sensors.
With JUSTIN’s upper body the new delay compen-
sating technologies have been veriﬁed using copies of
JUSTIN’s light weight arms as force reﬂecting hand-
controllers up to delays of slightly more than 700 ms.
The European space agency ESA too, is push-
ing forward robonaut-type concepts, e.g., via testing
a dexterous 4-ﬁnger-hand DEXHAND as developed in
contract by DLR (Fig. 55.40) In spring 2012, the DEX-
HAND successfully passed the acceptance test and is
delivered to ESA.
55.4.3 Aerial Platforms
There are three planetary candidates for aerial robotic
systems: Venus, Mars, and Titan (a moon of Sat-
urn) [55.104, 105]. Venus has a very dense but hot
atmosphere (460 ıC and 65 kg m3 at the surface), and
so can easily ﬂoat relatively heavy payloads. Mars has
a very thin and cold atmosphere (somewhat variable but
often 100 ıC and 0:02 kg m3). Titan has an atmo-
sphere even colder than Mars (
 100 K) but about 50%
denser than Earth’s atmosphere. Thus very different
vehicles have been envisioned for the three candidate
mission targets. On Venus, buoyant devices are gener-
ally considered, especially those that can continuously
or periodically rise high enough to reach moderate tem-
peratures where conventional electronics can survive.
One candidate is to use a phase-change ﬂuid as part of
the buoyant system, so that the ﬂuid can condense in
the cool upper atmosphere and be trapped in a pres-
sure vessel, causing a loss of buoyancy and allowing
the vehicle to descend, possibly all the way to the sur-
face. After a brief stay, and before the heat ﬂux to the
interior of the device destroys all the sensitive equip-
ment, a valve would be opened so that the phase change
ﬂuid can evaporate, increasing the buoyancy and allow-
ing the craft to ascend to the cool upper atmosphere.
After a suitable period of heat rejection into this cool
zone, the process can be repeated, perhaps indeﬁnitely.
The density of the Venus atmosphere is sufﬁciently high
that powered dirigibles can be used, so that the buoy-

Space Robotics
55.4 Future Directions of Orbital and Surface Robotic Systems
1455
Part F | 55.4
ant vehicles can use propulsion and steering to reach
particular locations in the atmosphere or on the sur-
face [55.106].
In contrast, the Mars atmosphere is too thin for
powered dirigibles to work (at least with the power-
to-weight ratio of any current propulsion technology).
Balloon aerobots could be deployed in the Mars atmo-
sphere, and could ascend and descend, but probably
could not be steered precisely to speciﬁc locations, at
least not by use of a propulsion system. Polar bal-
loons could circumnavigate either pole many times,
or equatorial balloons could make one partial circuit
around the planet, until they impact the Tharsis Bulge,
a North–South string of high-altitude volcanoes that
represents an essentially impenetrable barrier to any
equatorial balloon having a reasonable payload. Be-
cause of the problems with lighter-than-air vehicles
in the thin Mars atmosphere, there has been consid-
erable study of airplanes for use in exploring Mars.
Aircraft can be designed to have reasonable lift-to-drag
ratios in the Mars atmosphere, so that their performance
is not too different from airplanes on Earth. Most of-
ten considered are gliders that deploy directly from an
aeroshell that comes in to the Mars atmosphere at hy-
personic velocity, and then proceed to glide hundreds or
a thousand kilometers before impact. One common mis-
sion concept is to ﬂy down the great Valles Marineris
canyon, taking high-resolution imagery and spectrom-
etry of the walls of that canyon. Powered aircraft have
also been considered, including those that land and re-
generate their propellant (e.g., using solar power and
atmospheric CO2) so as to be able to make multiple
ﬂights.
On Titan, like Venus, buoyant devices are gener-
ally considered more attractive than surface vehicles
(although helicopters have been proposed). Also like
Venus, the atmosphere on Titan contains many ob-
scuring particles and aerosols so that high-resolution
imaging over a broad spectrum is only possible by
getting close to the surface. This makes balloons or
powered dirigibles very attractive. On Venus the ex-
treme surface temperature makes it challenging to make
a surface vehicle operate for any extended duration. On
Titan, there is a signiﬁcant risk that some sort of hy-
drocarbon goo exists on the surface that might foul any
surface vehicle. Thus both Titan and Venus are consid-
ered especially attractive targets for the use of aerobots,
especially in the form of powered dirigibles. Navigation
of such aerobots presumably would be accomplished
primarily by sensing the terrain and navigating relative
to any landmarks that can be discerned. When these
vehicles operate in the upper atmosphere, they can aug-
ment their position knowledge by means of sun or star
a)
b)
Fig.55.39a,b DLR’ JUSTIN, wheeled version (a) and legged ver-
sion (b)
Fig. 55.40 DEXHAND
tracking (as referenced to the local vertical). Deeper
in the atmosphere, this may not be possible. One key
issue is whether direct communications to Earth are en-
visioned, or relay via satellite. If there is a satellite in
orbit, it can provide considerable radio-navigation as-
sistance and relatively frequent communications when
the aerobot is on the side away from the Earth (both
Venus and Titan spin very slowly). But a satellite
relay is expensive, so the least expensive options re-
quire that the dirigible have a large high-gain antenna
(usually presumed to be inside the gas bag). Radio-
based servo pointing at the Earth will provide precise
navigation information (again along with precise mea-
surements of local vertical). However, when the aerobot
goes out-of-sight beyond the limb of the planet, it may
spend days or weeks out of communications with the
Earth. This is probably the situation calling for the
highest degree of autonomy of any that have been en-
visioned in robotic planetary exploration of the solar
system.

Part F | 55.4
1456
Part F
Robots at Work
55.4.4 Mobility Concepts
and Subsurface Platforms
For high mobility on Moon, planets, and asteroids there
is still not a ﬁnal answer which technology would be
optimal. Although multilegged crawlers (e.g., DLR’s
six-legged version as shown in Fig. 55.41) seem to be
the best alternative for investigating steep craters, 4-
wheeled rovers may climb up and down unbelievably
steep slopes. May be wheel–leg combinations as re-
alized in JPL’s ATHLETE (Fig. 55.42) or in DLR’s
conceptual design (Fig. 55.43) will turn out to be the
optimal solution.
Precise autonomous landing based on visual data is
a prerequisite for exploration, closely related to the Fu-
ture Space Systems program.
DLR’s main interest however aims at fast loco-
motion by local autonomy thus (including collision
avoidance and real-time path planning) circumventing
the problem of long signal delays from 3 s (Moon)
to 1530 min (Mars). Stereo cameras with ﬁeld-pro-
grammable gate array (FPGA) processor chips are ca-
pable of modeling the environment in 3-D real time,
Fig. 55.41 DLR’s six-legged crawler
Fig. 55.42 JPL’s ATHLETE
using e.g., the so-called semiglobal matching (SGM).
Thus the goal of moving up to 10 km per hour seems
realizable now.
Other modes of mobility may be superior when
gravity is e.g., only 10 000 times smaller than that
on earth as is the case on some asteroids. e.g., for
a Japanese mission Hayabusa 2 a jumping shoe-box is
developed by DLR using just a small excentric motor
that causes moderate hopping motions over a few 100 m
without reaching the fairly low escape velocity.
Subsurface exploration of planetary bodies holds
great promise: it is believed that a liquid-water aquifer
may exist at signiﬁcant depths on Mars, and perhaps
an under-ice ocean on Europa and Ganymede which
probably represent the best possible locations within the
solar system to look for extant (as opposed to extinct)
extraterrestrial life. Also, in the lunar polar dark craters
there is some evidence of the existence of water ice or
other volatiles, and perhaps there exists a layered ge-
ologic record of impacts in the Earth–Moon system in
these cold-traps. Even access to a depth of a few meters
holds the promise of reaching pristine scientiﬁc sam-
ples that have not been exposed to thermal cycling or
ionizing radiation [55.107].
The prevailing wisdom has been that traditional
sorts of drilling rigs are required to access deep un-
derground, involving drill towers, multisegmented drill
strings, large robotic systems to serve the function of
a terrestrial drilling crew, and large power systems.
Also, terrestrial drilling is usually done using large
amounts of ﬂuids (water, air, or mud) to ﬂush away cut-
tings and to cool and lubricate the cutter. The NASA
Mars Technology Program has funded contractors that
demonstrated reaching 10 m of depth in a realistic set-
ting with segmented drill strings without the use of
ﬂuids. While this is much less than needed to reach the
putative liquid water, it is much more than is reachable
by previous techniques [55.108].
Fig. 55.43 Modular rover concept

Space Robotics
55.5 Conclusions and Further Reading
1457
Part F | 55.5
Other approaches have been proposed such as
Moles or Inchworms that could be relatively self-
contained and yet might reach great depths without
the mass and complexity of a large drill tower and
segmented drill string. A key issue is that it appears
that the needed energy cannot be stored on-board such
self-contained drills, at least if it is stored as chemical
energy. This is because drilling through terrain requires
that some of the chemical bonds that hold the terrain
together be broken, and so if the energy of chemi-
cal bonds is used to provide that power, then a given
volume of chemical energy storage can only advance
some ﬁxed ratio of its length into the terrain, where
the ratio is determined by the efﬁciency in taking bond
energies of one sort to break bonds of a different sort.
Based on these considerations, it appears unlikely that
a completely self-contained subsurface vehicle could
advance more than perhaps a hundred times its own
length. Unless nuclear power sources are considered
(and they have been), this requires some sort of tether
to the surface to provide a nearly unlimited source
of energy. Another problem for subsurface vehicles is
that rock tends to expand when it is pulverized (in
a process called comminution). Nonporous rock typ-
ically expands in volume by a few tens of percent
when excavated, which means that fully self-contained
subsurface vehicles have a severe conservation of vol-
ume problem. In principle the rock can be compressed
back into its original volume, but this generally re-
quires pressures much greater than the compressive
strength of the original rock. The energy required to do
this is much larger than the energy required to exca-
vate the rock in the ﬁrst place, and would become the
dominant use of energy in an already energy-intensive
effort.
As a result, it is generally assumed that any sub-
surface vehicle must keep some access tunnel open to
the surface so that the excess volume of cuttings can
be transported out. If this tunnel is available, then it
seems that a means for getting power from the surface
is also available, so that self-contained nuclear power
is not needed. Subsurface vehicles with diameters as
small as one or a few centimeters have been proposed
that could potentially reach great depths within the mass
and power constraints of feasible planetary robotic ex-
ploration missions.
55.5 Conclusions and Further Reading
Space robotics as a ﬁeld is still in its infancy. The
speed-of-light delays inherent in remote space opera-
tions makes problematic the master–slave teleoperation
approach that has been very useful in the undersea
and nuclear industries. Space robotics lacks the highly
repetitive operations in a tightly structured environment
that characterize industrial robotics. Hardware handled
by space robots is very delicate and expensive. All three
of these considerations have led to the fact that rela-
tively few space robots have been ﬂown, they have been
very slow in operation, and only a small variety of tasks
have been attempted. Nonetheless, the potential rewards
of space robotics are great – exploring the solar sys-
tem, creating vast space telescopes that may unlock the
secrets of the universe, and enabling any viable space
industries all seem to require major use of space robots.
The scale of the solar system is not so great (a few
light-hours) that human intelligence cannot always sup-
plement even the most remote space robot that becomes
confused or stuck. Indeed, for the Moon (with only
a few seconds of time delay) it seems that hazard avoid-
ance and reliable closure of force-feedback loops is all
that is required to make a highly useful robotic system.
For Mars (with tens of minutes of time delay), along
with hazard avoidance and force loop closure, it seems
that robust anomaly detection (with modest reﬂexive
saﬁng procedures) and perhaps scientiﬁc-novelty de-
tection are probably all that is needed. High levels of
autonomy are enhancing but not enabling for work in
the inner solar system, and become more and more de-
sirable for robots that are sent farther into the outer solar
system.
For further reading, the following materials are sug-
gested [55.109–114].
Video-References
VIDEO 330
DLR ROTEX: The first remotely controlled space robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/55/videodetails/330
VIDEO 331
DLR predictive simulation compensating 6 seconds round-trip delay
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/55/videodetails/331

Part F | 55
1458
Part F
Robots at Work
VIDEO 332
DLR GETEX manipulation experiments on ETSVII
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/55/videodetails/332
VIDEO 333
DLR ROKVISS animation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/55/videodetails/333
VIDEO 334
DLR ROKVISS camera images pulling spring
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/55/videodetails/334
VIDEO 336
DLR ROKVISS disassembly
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/55/videodetails/336
VIDEO 337
DLR telepresence demo remove cover
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/55/videodetails/337
VIDEO 338
DLR telepresence demo with time delay
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/55/videodetails/338
VIDEO 339
DLR DEOS demonstration mission simulation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/55/videodetails/339
References
55.1
D.L. Akin, M.L. Minsky, E.D. Thiel, C.R. Kurtzman:
Space Applications of Automation, Robotics and
Machine Intelligence Systems (ARAMIS). Phase II
(NASA, Washington 1983)
55.2
C.G. Wagner-Bartak, J.A. Middleton, J.A. Hunter:
Shuttle remote manipulator system hardware test
facility, 11th Space Simulat. Conf. (1980) pp. 79–94,
NASA CP-2150
55.3
S. Greaves, K. Boyle, N. Doshewnek: Orbiter boom
sensor system and shuttle return to flight: Oper-
ations analyses, AIAA Guidance Navigation Contr.
Conf. Exhibit. San Francisco (2005)
55.4
C. Crane, J. Duffy, T. Carnahan: A kinematic anal-
ysis of the space station remote manipulator sys-
tem (SSRMS), J. Robotic Syst. 8, 637–658 (1991)
55.5
M.F. Stieber, C.P. Trudel, D.G. Hunter: Robotic sys-
tems for the International Space Station, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1997)
pp. 3068–3073
55.6
D. Bassett, A. Abramovici: Special purpose dex-
terous manipulator (SPDM) requirements verifi-
cation, Proc. 5th Int. Symp. Artif. Intell. Robotics
Autom. Space (1999) pp. 43–48, ESA SP-440
55.7
R. Boumans, C. Heemskerk: The European robotic
arm for the International Space Station, Robotics
Auton. Syst. 23(1), 17–27 (1998)
55.8
P. Laryssa, E. Lindsay, O. Layi, O. Marius, K. Nara,
L. Aris, T. Ed: International Space Station robotics:
A comparative study of ERA, JEMRMS and MSS,
Proc. 7th ESA Workshop Adv. Space Technol.
Robotics Autom. (ASTRA) (2002)
55.9
T. Matsueda, K. Kuraoka, K. Goma, T. Sumi,
R. Okamura: JEMRMS system design and develop-
ment status, Proc. IEEE Natl. Telesyst. Conf. (NTC)
(1991) pp. 391–395
55.10
S. Doi, Y. Wakabayashi, T. Matsuda, N. Satoh: JEM
remote manipulator system, J. Aeronaut. Space
Sci. Jpn. 50(576), 7–14 (2002)
55.11
H.
Morimoto,
N.
Satoh,
Y.
Wakabayashi,
M. Hayashi, Y. Aiko: Performance of Japanese
robotic arms of the International Space Station,
15th IFAC World Congr. (2002)
55.12
G. Hirzinger, B. Brunner, J. Dietrich, J. Heindl:
Sensor-based space robotics – ROTEX and its
telerobotic features, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
9(5), 649–663 (1993)
55.13
M. Oda, K. Kibe, F. Yamagata: ETS-VII – Space
robot in-orbit experiment satellite, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1996) pp. 739–744
55.14
K. Yoshida: Engineering test satellite VII flight ex-
periments for space robot dynamics and control:
Theories on laboratory test beds ten years ago,
now in orbit, Int. J. Robotics Res. 22(5), 321–335
(2003)
55.15
K. Landzettel, B. Brunner, G. Hirzinger, R. Lam-
pariello, G. Schreiber, B.-M. Steinmetz: A unified
ground control and programming methodology
for space robotics applications – demonstrations
on ETS-VII, Proc. Int. Symp. Robotics (ISR) (2000)
pp. 422–427
55.16
J.C. Parrish, D.L. Akin, G.G. Gefke: The ranger
telerobotic shuttle experiment: Implications for
operational EVA/robotic cooperation, Proc. SAE
Int. Conf. Environ. Syst. (2000)
55.17
J. Shoemaker, M. Wright: Orbital express space
operations architecture program, Proc. SPIE 5088,
1–9 (2003)
55.18
C.
Preusche,
D.
Reintsema,
K.
Landzettel,
G. Hirzinger: Robotics component verification on
ISS ROKVISS – Preliminary results for telepresence,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2006) pp. 4595–4601
55.19
K. Landzettel, A. Albu-Schaffer, C. Preusche,
D. Reintsema, B. Rebele, G. Hirzinger: Robotic on-
orbit servicing – DLR’s experience and perspec-
tive, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Systems
(IROS) (2006) pp. 4587–4594
55.20
J.-H. Ryu, J. Artigas, C. Preusche: A passive bi-
lateral control scheme for a teleoperator with
time-varying communication delay, Mechatron-
ics 20(7), 812–823 (2010)
55.21
J. Artigas, J.-H. Ryu, C. Preusche, G. Hirzinger:
Network representation and passivity of de-
layed teleoperation systems, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011) pp. 177–
183
55.22
E. Stoll, U. Walter, J. Artigas, C. Preusche, P. Kre-
mer, G. Hirzinger, J. Letschnik, H. Pongrac: Ground

Space Robotics
References
1459
Part F | 55
verification of the feasibility of telepresent on-
orbit servicing, J. Field Robotics 26(3), 287–307
(2009)
55.23
C. Ott, J. Artigas, C. Preusche, G. Hirzinger:
Subspace-oriented energy distribution for the
time domain passivity approach, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Systems (IROS’11) (2011)
pp. 665–671
55.24
A.P. Vinogradov: Lunokhod 1 Mobile Lunar Labo-
ratory (JPRS, Washington 1971), JPRS identification
number 54525
55.25
A. Mishkin: Sojourner: An Insider’s View of the
Mars Pathfinder Mission (Berkley Books, New York
2004)
55.26
B. Wilcox, T. Nguyen: Sojourner on mars and
lessons learned for future planetary rovers, 28th
Int. Conf. Environ. Syst. (1998)
55.27
M. Maimone, A. Johnson, Y. Cheng, R. Will-
son, L. Matthies: Autonomous navigation re-
sults from the Mars exploration rover (MER) mis-
sion, Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Exp. Robotics (ISER)
(2004)
55.28
M. Maimone, Y. Cheng, L. Matthies: Two years of
visual odometry on the Mars exploration rovers,
J. Field Robotics 24(3), 169–186 (2007)
55.29
M.G. Bekker: Off-The-Road Locomotion (Univ.
Michigan Press, Ann Arbor 1960)
55.30
M.G. Bekker: Introduction to Terrain-Vehicle Sys-
tems (Univ. Michigan Press, Ann Arbor 1969)
55.31
R.A. Lewis, A.K. Bejczy: Planning considerations
for a roving robot with arm, Int. Jt. Conf. Artif.
Intell. (IJCAI) (1973) pp. 308–316
55.32
A. Thompson: The navigation system of the JPL
Robot, Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI) (1977)
pp. 749–757
55.33
Y. Yakimovsky, R.T. Cunningham: A system for ex-
tracting three-dimensional measurements from
a stereo pair of TV cameras, Comp. Graph. Image
Process. 7, 195–210 (1978)
55.34
D. Dooling: Planetary rovers might roam better
with an elastic loop mobility system, NASA Science
News, http://science.nasa.gov/newhome/ head-
lines/msad28apr98_1b.htm 1989)
55.35
B.H. Wilcox: Computer-Aided Remote Driving,
NASA Tech Briefs 18; 3 (NASA, Washington 1994)
55.36
E. Krotkov, J. Bares, T. Kanade, T. Mitchell, R. Sim-
mons, W. Whittaker: Ambler: a six-legged plan-
etary rover, 5th Int. Conf. Adv. Robotics, Robots
Unstructured Environ. (ICAR), Vol. 1 (1991) pp. 717–
722
55.37
J. Bares, W. Whittaker: Walking robot with a circu-
lating gait, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS), Vol. 2 (1990) pp. 809–816
55.38
B. Wilcox, D. Gennery: A Mars rover for the 1990s,
J. Br. Interplanet. Soc. 40, 484–488 (1987)
55.39
B. Wilcox, L. Matthies, D. Gennery: Robotic vehi-
cles for planetary exploration, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1992)
55.40
D. Gennery, T. Litwin, B. Wilcox, B. Bon: Sensing
and perception research for space telerobotics at
JPL, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1987) pp. 311–317
55.41
J.
Balaram,
S.
Hayati:
A
supervisory
teler-
obotics testbed for unstructured environments,
J. Robotics Syst. 9(2), 261–280 (1992)
55.42
G.
Giralt, L. Boissier: The
French planetary
rover VAP: concept and current developments,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1992)
pp. 1391–1398, LAAS Report No. 92227
55.43
R. Chatila, S. Lacroiz, G. Giralt: A case study in ma-
chine intelligence: Adaptive autonomous space
rovers, Int. Conf. Field Serv. Robotics (FSR) (1997)
pp. 101–108, LAAS Report No. 97463
55.44
A.
Castano,
A.
Fukunaga,
J.
Biesiadecki,
L. Neakrase, P. Whelley, R. Greeley, M. Lem-
mon, R. Castano, S. Chien: Autonomous detection
of dust devils and clouds on Mars, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Image Process. (2006) pp. 2765–2768
55.45
L. Matthies: Stereo vision for planetary rovers:
Stochastic modeling to near real-time implemen-
tation, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 8(1), 71–91 (1992)
55.46
K. Yoshida, D.N. Nenchev, M. Uchiyama: Moving
base robotics and reaction management control,
7th Int. Symp. Robotics Res., ed. by G. Giralt,
G. Hirzinger (Springer, New York 1996) pp. 101–109
55.47
J. Russakow, S.M. Rock, O. Khatib: An operational
space formulation for a free-flying multi-arm
space robot, 4th Int. Symp. Exp. Robotics (1995)
pp. 448–457
55.48
Y. Xu, T. Kanade (Eds.): Space Robotics: Dynamics
and Control (Kluwer, Boston 1993)
55.49
Y. Umetani, K. Yoshida: Continuous path control
of space manipulators mounted on OMV, Acta As-
tronaut. 15(12), 981–986 (1987), presented at the
37th IAF Conf, Oct. 1986
55.50
Y. Umetani, K. Yoshida: Resolved motion rate
control of space manipulators with generalized
Jacobian matrix, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 5(3),
303–314 (1989)
55.51
K. Yoshida: Impact dynamics representation and
control with extended inversed inertia tensor for
space manipulators, 6th Int. Symp. Robotics Res.
(1994) pp. 453–463
55.52
K. Yoshida: Experimental study on the dynamics
and control of a space robot with the experimen-
tal free-floating robot satellite (EFFORTS) simula-
tors, Adv. Robotics 9(6), 583–602 (1995)
55.53
Y. Nakamura, R. Mukherjee: Nonholonomic path
planning of space robots via a bidirectional ap-
proach, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 7(4), 500–514
(1991)
55.54
S. Dubowsky, M. Torres: Minimizing attitude con-
trol fuel in space manipulator systems, Proc.
Int. Symp. Artif. Intell. Robotics Autom. (i-SAIRAS)
(1990) pp. 259–262
55.55
S. Dubowsky, M. Torres: Path planning for space
manipulators to minimize spacecraft attitude
disturbances, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Vol. 3 (1991) pp. 2522–2528
55.56
K. Yoshida: Practical coordination control be-
tween satellite attitude and manipulator reaction
dynamics based on computed momentum con-
cept, Proc. 1994 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (1994) pp. 1578–1585

Part F | 55
1460
Part F
Robots at Work
55.57
M. Oda: Coordinated control of spacecraft attitude
and its manipulator, Proc. 1996 IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1996) pp. 732–738
55.58
Z. Vafa, S. Dubowsky: On the dynamics of ma-
nipulators in space using the virtual manipulator
approach, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1987) pp. 579–585
55.59
E. Papadopoulos, S. Dubowsky: Dynamic singu-
larities in the control of free-floating space ma-
nipulators, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 115(1),
44–52 (1993)
55.60
Y. Umetani, K. Yoshida: Workspace and manipu-
lability analysis of space manipulator, Trans. Soc.
Instrum. Contr. Eng. E-1(1), 116–123 (2001)
55.61
D.N. Nenchev, Y. Umetani, K. Yoshida: Analysis of
a redundant free-flying spacecraft/manipulator
system, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 8(1), 1–6
(1992)
55.62
D.N. Nenchev, K. Yoshida, P. Vichitkulsawat,
M. Uchiyama: Reaction null-space control of flex-
ible structure mounted manipulator systems, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 15(6), 1011–1023 (1999)
55.63
V.H. Schulz: Reduced SQP Methods for Large Scale
Optimal Control Problems in DAE with Application
to Path Planning Problems for Satellite Mounted
Robots, Ph.D. Thesis (Univ. Heidelberg, Heidelberg
1995)
55.64
E. Papadopoulos, S. Moosavian: Dynamics and
control of multi-arm space robots during chase
and capture operations, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1994) pp. 1554–1561
55.65
K. Yoshida, D. Dimitrov, H. Nakanishi: On the cap-
ture of tumbling satellite by a space robot, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2006)
55.66
C.G. Henshaw: A unification of artificial potential
function guidance and optimal trajectory plan-
ning, 15th Space Flight Mech. Meet. (2005)
55.67
F. Aghili: A prediction and motion-planning
scheme for visually guided robotic capturing of
free-floating tumbling objects with uncertain dy-
namics, IEEE Trans. Robotics 28(3), 634–649 (2012)
55.68
R. Lampariello, G. Hirzinger: Generating feasible
trajectories for autonomous on-orbit grasping of
spinning debris in a useful time, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2013)
55.69
T. Binder, L. Blank, R. Bock, R. Bulirsch, W. Dah-
men, M. Diehl, T. Kronseder, W. Marquardt,
J.P. Schloeder, O. von Stryk: Introduction to model
based optimization of chemical processes on
moving horizons. In: Online Optimization of Large
Scale Systems, ed. by M. Grotschel, S.O. Krumke,
J. Rambau (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2001)
pp. 295–339
55.70
S. Jacobsen, C. Lee, C. Zhu, S. Dubowsky: Plan-
ning of safe kinematic trajectories for free-fly-
ing robots approaching an uncontrolled spinning
satellite, ASME Int. Des. Eng. Tech. Conf. Comput.
Inf. Eng. Conf. (DETC) (2002)
55.71
S.K. Agrawal, K. Pathak, J. Franch, R. Lampar-
iello, G. Hirzinger: A differentially flat open-chain
space robot with arbitrarily oriented joint axes
and two momentum wheels at the base, IEEE
Trans. Autom. Contr. 54(9), 2185–2191 (2009)
55.72
D.N. Nenchev, K. Yoshida, M. Uchiyama: Reac-
tion null-space based control of flexible structure
mounted manipulator systems, IEEE 35th Conf.
Decis. Control (1996) pp. 4118–4123
55.73
W.J. Book, S.H. Lee: Vibration control of a large
flexible manipulator by a small robotic arm, Proc.
Am. Control Conf. (1989)
55.74
M.A. Torres: Modelling, Path-Planning and Con-
trol of Space Manipulators: The Coupling Map
Concept, Ph.D. Thesis (MIT, Cambridge 1993)
55.75
S. Abiko, K. Yoshida: An effective control strategy
of japanese experimental module remote manip-
ulator system (JEMRMS) using coupled and un-
coupled dynamics, Proc. 7th Int. Symp. Artif. In-
tell. Robotics Autom. Space (2003), Paper AS18
(CD-ROM)
55.76
S. Abiko: Dynamics and Control for a Macro-Micro
Manipulator System Mounted on the Interna-
tional Space Station, Ph.D. Thesis (Tohoku Univ.,
Tokyo 2005)
55.77
S. Abiko, K. Yoshida: On-line parameter iden-
tification
of a payload handled
by flexible
based manipulator, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2004) pp. 2930–2935
55.78
S. Abiko, K. Yoshida: An adaptive control of
a space manipulator for vibration suppression,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2005)
55.79
G. Gilardi, I. Shraf: Literature survey of contact
dynamics modeling, Mech. Mach. Theory 37, 1213–
1239 (2002)
55.80
K. Yoshida, H. Nakanishi, H. Ueno, N. In-
aba, T. Nishimaki, M. Oda: Dynamics, control,
and impedance matching for robotic capture of
a non-cooperative satellite, Adv. Robotics 18(2),
175–198 (2004)
55.81
H. Nakanishi, K. Yoshida: Impedance control
of free-flying space robot for orbital servicing,
J. Robotics Mechatron. 18(5), 608–617 (2006)
55.82
P.M.
Pathak,
A.
Mukherjee,
A.
DasGupta:
Impedance control of space robots using passive
degrees of freedom in controller domain, J. Dyn.
Syst. Meas. Control 127, 564–578 (2006)
55.83
S. Abiko, R. Lampariello, G. Hirzinger: Impedance
control for a free-floating robot in the grasping
of a tumbling target with parameter uncertainty,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2006)
55.84
K. Iagnemma, H. Shibly, S. Dubowsky: On-
line traction parameter estimation for planetary
rovers, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2002)
55.85
K. Yoshida, H. Hamano: Motion dynamics of
a rover with slip-based traction model, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002)
55.86
A. Jain, J. Guineau, C. Lim, W. Lincoln, M. Pomer-
antz, G. Sohl, R. Steele: Roams: Planetary sur-
face rover simulation environment, Proc. 7th Int.
Symp. Artif. Intell. Robotics Autom. Space (i-
SAIRAS) (2003)
55.87
K. Yoshida, T. Watanabe, N. Mizuno, G. Ishigami:
Terramechanics-based analysis and traction con-

Space Robotics
References
1461
Part F | 55
trol of a lunar/planetary rover, Proc. Int. Conf.
Field Serv. Robotics (FSR) (2003)
55.88
K. Iagnemma, S. Dubowsky: Mobile Robots in
Rough Terrain: Estimation, Motion Planning, and
Control With Application to Planetary Rovers,
Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics, Vol. 12
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2004)
55.89
K. Yoshida, G. Ishigami: Steering characteristics
of a rigid wheel for exploration on loose soil,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2004)
55.90
H. Shibly, K. Iagnemma, S. Dubowsky: An equiv-
alent soil mechanics formulation for rigid wheels
in deformable terrain, with application to plan-
etary exploration rovers, J. Terramech. 42(1), 1–13
(2005)
55.91
R. Bauer, W. Leung, T. Barfoot: Experimental and
simulation results of wheel-soil interaction for
planetary rovers, Proc. 2005 IEEE Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2005)
55.92
A. Ellery, N. Patel, R. Bertrand, J. Dalcomo: Exo-
mars rover chassis analysis and design, Proc. 8th
Int. Symp. Artif. Intell. Robotics Autom. Space (i-
SAIRAS) (2005)
55.93
A. Gibbesch, B. Schäfer: Multibody system mod-
elling and simulation of planetary rover mobility
on soft terrain, Proc. 8th Int. Symp. Artif. Intell.
Robotics Autom. Space (i-SAIRAS) (2005)
55.94
G. Ishigami, K. Yoshida: Steering characteristics of
an exploration rover on loose soil based on all-
wheel dynamics model, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2005)
55.95
G. Ishigami, A. Miwa, K. Nagatani, K. Yoshida:
Terramechanics-based model for steering ma-
neuver of planetary exploration rovers on loose
soil, J. Field Robotics 24(3), 233–250 (2007)
55.96
V.K. Tiwari, K.P. Pandey, P.K. Pranav: A review on
traction prediction equations, J. Terramech. 47(3),
191–199 (2010)
55.97
L. Ding, H. Gao, Z. Deng, K. Nagatani, K. Yoshida:
Experimental study and analysis on driving
wheels’ performance for planetary exploration
rovers moving in deformable soil, J. Terramech.
48(1), 27–45 (2011)
55.98
G. Meirion-Griffith, M. Spenko: A modified pres-
sure-sinkage model for small, rigid wheels on
deformable terrains, J. Terramech. 48(2), 149–155
(2011)
55.99
J.Y. Wong: Theory of Ground Vehicles (Wiley, New
York 1978)
55.100
J.Y. Wong, A.R. Reece: Prediction of rigid wheel
preformance based on the analysis of soil-
wheel stresses. Part I, Preformance of driven rigid
wheels, J. Terramech. 4, 81–98 (1967)
55.101
Z. Janosi, B. Hanamoto: The analytical determi-
nation of drawbar pull as a function of slip for
tracked vehicle in deformable soils, Proc 1st Int.
Conf. Terrain-Veh. Syst. (1961)
55.102
E. Hegedus: A Simplified Method for the Deter-
mination of Bulldozing Resistance, Land Loco-
motion Laboratory, Rep. No. 61U.S. (Army Tank
Automotive Command, Warren 1960)
55.103
I. Rekleitis, E. Martin, G. Rouleau, R. L’Arche-
veque, K. Parsa, E. Dupuis: Autonomous capture
of a tumbling satellite, J. Field Robotics 24(4),
275–296 (2007)
55.104
J. Blamont: Balloons on other planets, Adv. Space
Res. 1, 63–69 (1981)
55.105
J.A. Cutts, K.T. Nock, J.A. Jones, G. Rodriguez,
J. Balaram, G.E. Powell, S.P. Synott: Aerovehi-
cles for planetary exploration, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1995)
55.106
M.K. Heun, J.A. Jones, J.L. Hall: Gondola design
for Venus deep-atmosphere aerobot operations,
AIAA 36th Aerosp. Sci. Meeting Exhibit. ASME Wind
Energy Symp. (1998)
55.107
S. Miller, J. Essmiller, D. Beaty: Mars deep drill
– A mission concept for the next decade, Space
Conf. Exhibit. (2004) pp. 2004–6048
55.108
S. Mukherjee, P. Bartlett, B. Glass, J. Guerrero,
S. Stanley: Technologies for exploring the martian
subsurface, Proc. IEEE Aerosp. Conf. (2006), Paper
No. 1349
55.109
C.F. Ruoff, S.B. Skaar (Eds.): Teleoperation and
Robotics in Space, Progress in Astronautics and
Aeronautics Series (AIAA, Notre Dame 1994)
55.110
J. Field Robot. Special Issue on Space Robotics,
Part I–Part III, 24(3–5), 167–434 (2007)
55.111
G.F. Bekey (Ed.): International Assessment of Re-
search and Development in Robotics (WTEC, Balti-
more 2006), http://www.wtec.org/robotics/
55.112
NSRC (Ed.): Assessment of Options for Extending
the Life of the Hubble Space Telescope, National
Research Council: Final Rep. (National Academies
Press, Washington 2005)
55.113
A.M. Howard, E.W. Tunstel: Intelligence for Space
Robotics (TSI, San Antonio 2006)
55.114
T.B. Sheridan: Space teleoperation through time
delay: Review and prognosis, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 9(5), 592–606 (1993)

Multimedia Contents Robotics in A
1463
Part F | 56
56. Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
Marcel Bergerman, John Billingsley, John Reid, Eldert van Henten
Robotics for agriculture and forestry (A&F) rep-
resents the ultimate application of one of our
society’s latest and most advanced innovations
to its most ancient and important industries.
Over the course of history, mechanization and au-
tomation increased crop output several orders of
magnitude, enabling a geometric growth in pop-
ulation and an increase in quality of life across
the globe. Rapid population growth and rising
incomes in developing countries, however, re-
quire ever larger amounts of A&F output. This
chapter addresses robotics for A&F in the form
of case studies where robotics is being success-
fully applied to solve well-identified problems.
With respect to plant crops, the focus is on the
in-field or in-farm tasks necessary to guarantee
a quality crop and, generally speaking, end at
harvest time. In the livestock domain, the focus
is on breeding and nurturing, exploiting, harvest-
ing, and slaughtering and processing. The chapter
is organized in four main sections. The first one
explains the scope, in particular, what aspects
of robotics for A&F are dealt with in the chap-
ter. The second one discusses the challenges and
opportunities associated with the application of
robotics to A&F. The third section is the core of
the chapter, presenting twenty case studies that
showcase (mostly) mature applications of robotics
in various agricultural and forestry domains. The
case studies are not meant to be comprehen-
sive but instead to give the reader a general
overview of how robotics has been applied to
A&F in the last 10 years. The fourth section con-
cludes the chapter with a discussion on specific
56.1 Section Scope ...................................... 1464
56.2 Challenges and Opportunities .............. 1465
56.3 Case Studies ........................................ 1467
56.3.1
Optimized Coverage
for Arable Farming ................... 1467
56.3.2
Weed Control ........................... 1468
56.3.3
High Precision Seeding ............. 1470
56.3.4
Crop Yield Estimation ............... 1471
56.3.5
Precision Irrigation................... 1471
56.3.6
Tree Fruit Production ................ 1472
56.3.7
Vehicle Formation Control ......... 1473
56.3.8
Date Palm Tree Spraying............ 1474
56.3.9
Plant Probing .......................... 1475
56.3.10 Cucumber Harvesting ............... 1476
56.3.11
Cucumber Leaf Removal............ 1477
56.3.12
Rose Harvesting ....................... 1477
56.3.13 Strawberry Harvesting .............. 1477
56.3.14 Pot Handling in Nurseries
and Greenhouses..................... 1478
56.3.15 Precision Forestry..................... 1479
56.3.16 Semi-Automation
of Forwarder Crane................... 1480
56.3.17
Livestock Breeding
and Nurturing.......................... 1482
56.3.18 Livestock Exploitation............... 1483
56.3.19 Livestock Harvesting,
Slaughtering, and Processing .... 1484
56.3.20 Aerial-Based Precision
Agriculture .............................. 1485
56.4 Conclusion........................................... 1487
Video-References......................................... 1488
References................................................... 1489
improvements to current technology and paths to
commercialization.

Part F | 56.1
1464
Part F
Robots at Work
Robotics for agriculture and forestry represents the ulti-
mate application of one of our society’s latest and most
advanced innovations to its most ancient industries.
Since the dawn of civilization, agriculture and forestry
(A&F for short) remain chief among humankind’s most
important economic activities, providing the food, feed,
ﬁber, and fuel necessary for our survival. (In this chap-
ter, agriculture is understood as in the Merriam-Webster
deﬁnition:
the science, art, or practice of cultivating the soil,
producing crops, and raising livestock and in vary-
ing degrees the preparation and marketing of the
resulting products.
Therefore, the term crop may be used here to denote any
product of an agricultural or forestry process, includ-
ing grains, cereals, fruit, vegetables, nuts, trees, beef,
wool, etc. Whenever necessary, we will differentiate
plant from animal products appropriately.)
Over the course of history, mechanization and au-
tomation – from the manual ploughs of yore to the
modern combines of today – increased crop output
several orders of magnitude. This, in turn, enabled
a geometric growth in population and a correspond-
ing increase in quality of life across the globe. Rapid
population growth and rising incomes in developing
countries, however, require ever larger amounts of A&F
output. Scientists predict that agricultural production
must double to meet the demands of nine billion people
in 2050 [56.1–3]. Clearly, this cannot be achieved by
simply doubling the inputs (land, water, seeds, labor,
etc.) because of constrained resources and environ-
mental concerns. Therefore, the efﬁciency of the A&F
system must increase in a sustainable and consistent
manner.
According to Reid [56.4], global agricultural total
factor productivity (TFP), or the output per unit of to-
tal resources used in production, must increase from
the current 1:4 to 1:75 to double agricultural output
by 2050. This requires signiﬁcant scientiﬁc, techno-
logic, and management advances in all of the factors
that impact TFP – seeds, soil, water, fertilizers, herbi-
cides, insecticides, crop architecture, cultural practices,
automation, labor, public policy, etc. While robotics is
but one of these factors, it is one with the potential to
effect A&F in a broad, systemic way, and contribute
signiﬁcantly to meeting our future needs.
In this chapter we address the ﬁeld of agricul-
tural and forestry robotics from the point of view of
the applications it enables, rather than from the point
of view of the elementary technologies it comprises.
Furthermore, we chose to present a limited number
of case studies where robotics is being successfully
applied to solve well-identiﬁed problems, rather than
a comprehensive survey of all work reported in the lit-
erature. We believe the former is more meaningful as it
showcases top-down, problem-oriented solutions (mar-
ket pull) rather than bottom-up, technology-led ones
(technology push). We focus on examples from the last
ﬁve to ten years, as they represent work that leverages
the most recent advances in sensors and computing.
We address applications of agricultural and forestry
robotics in the form of twenty case studies where
robotics is being successfully applied to solve well-
identiﬁed problems. With respect to plant crops, the
focus is on the in-ﬁeld or in-farm tasks necessary to
guarantee a quality crop and, generally speaking, end at
harvest time, before the crop is transported to a packing
plant or warehouse. In the livestock domain, the focus
is on breeding and nurturing, exploiting, harvesting, and
slaughtering and processing.
56.1 Section Scope
Before presenting the case studies that showcase recent
advances in robotics applied to A&F, we must deﬁne
the scope of the chapter, both in terms of crop produc-
tion processes and robotic technologies.
A typical crop production cycle includes sev-
eral processes, among them ﬁeld preparation, seed-
ing/breeding, transplanting, planting, growing, main-
tenance (including attaching plants to support struc-
tures, disbudding, removing leaves, pruning tree limbs
and shoots, thinning blossoms and fruit, nurturing ani-
mals, etc.), exploiting/harvesting/slaughtering, sorting,
and packing. In all of them, internal transport of peo-
ple, machines, and produce play a role. Single-harvest
crops such as lettuce must be replaced once harvested;
multiple-harvest crops such as apples, tomatoes, and
roses last a year or even several years before they need
to replanted. Depending on the crop, machinery with
varying levels of automation exists for some or all of
these processes. In grain and cereal production, for ex-
ample, farmers have access to commercial machines
for tilling, seeding, transplanting, spraying, irrigating,
and harvesting. In fresh fruits and vegetables, on the
other hand, mechanization and automation are more
prevalent at the early and late stages of the produc-
tion cycle [56.5], with crop maintenance and harvest
remaining for the most part manual tasks.
With respect to plant crops, this chapter’s scope
is limited to the in-ﬁeld or in-farm tasks necessary

Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
56.2 Challenges and Opportunities
1465
Part F | 56.2
to guarantee a quality crop and, generally speaking,
end at harvest time, before the crop is transported to
a packing plant or warehouse. Of course, there are
many opportunities for robotics in those latter environ-
ments, e.g., automatic sorting and grading. We exclude
them from our presentation as they are currently much
more the focus of automation efforts than of robotics
per se. In future editions of the Handbook, we will re-
visit this separation as robotics advances to post-harvest
tasks.
In the livestock domain, much of farming concerns
the nurturing, exploitation, harvesting, and slaughtering
of animals. Slaughtering extends beyond the killing of
the animal to its division into marketable portions, and
subsequent packing and marketing. The essential pro-
cesses considered in this section pertain to land animals
and birds and include:

Breeding and nurturing: Livestock can range from
poultry to cattle in feedlots, including pigs and other
animals. Their care involves environment and be-
havior monitoring, plus fodder distribution.

Exploiting: In many cases, products are obtained
from the live animals. Sheep are shorn for wool,
cows are milked, chickens lay eggs, and bees pro-
duce honey.

Harvesting: Mustering and collecting free-range
cattle, feral pigs, and other unconstrained animals.

Slaughtering and processing: Cattle, poultry, pigs,
other animals are killed subject to strict regulations,
then divided into marketable portions.
In a future edition of the Handbook ﬁshing should
be included, since many opportunities for robotics can
be imagined there.
56.2 Challenges and Opportunities
Since the end of the industrial revolution, (arguably) the
three most signiﬁcant impacts robotics and automation
have had on agriculture and forestry are:
1. Precision agriculture, or the use of sensors to pre-
cisely control when and where to apply inputs such
as fertilizers and water
2. Auto-guidance on ﬁeld crop machinery, which to-
day can drive down a ﬁeld with an accuracy
unattainable by human drivers
3. Machines that harvest fruits and vegetables for pro-
cessing (e.g., tomato paste and orange juice).
Academic and commercial researchers are now fo-
cusing on the next wave of sensing, mobility, and ma-
nipulation technologies that promise to increase A&F
output and productivity.
Sensing entails measuring crop temperature, hu-
midity, pH, wetness, image, range, and other physical
attributes, and combining and analyzing the data for
speciﬁc purposes. One example is a camera-based sys-
tem that takes pictures of an apple orchard a few
weeks before harvest and produces an accurate crop
yield estimate that growers can use to plan and manage
the harvest operation [56.6, 7]. The utility of sensing
to A&F is that it enables decision-making at a level
unattainable by human sensing alone, because the lat-
ter is either inherently inaccurate or slow or both.
Mobility relates to various levels of vehicle au-
tomation that enable driverless (or driver-assistive)
ﬁeld coverage; the most common example is a global
positioning system/global navigation satellite system
(GPS/GLS)-guided combine that harvests corn with
minimal intersection between passes on the ﬁeld, thus
optimizing coverage and minimizing fuel consump-
tion [56.8]. More recently, auto-guidance has started to
migrate to orchard vehicles as well, albeit here other
navigation sensors may be required because of poor
satellite reception under thick canopies (
VIDEO 26 ,
VIDEO 91 ). In A&F, automated vehicles equipped
with the appropriate implements enable (semi-) au-
tonomous seeding, spraying, mowing, weed removal,
harvesting, and animal feeding, among other opera-
tions (
VIDEO 306 ,
VIDEO 305 ). Mobility requires
some level of sensor-based perception, provided by
GPS/GNSS, inertial units, cameras, ladars, radars, etc.
These sensors are not to be confused with those de-
scribed in the previous paragraph, although there cer-
tainly are situations where a sensor can perform double
duty of sensing for decision making and for navigation.
In general, robotic mobility technology is currently less
advanced than sensing.
Manipulation refers to the various operations per-
formed directly on the crop, including pruning, thin-
ning, harvesting, tree training, leaf probing, tree cutting,
weed removal, etc. In general, this technology requires
more sophisticated sensor-based perception than mobil-
ity, and in terms of ﬁeld deployment is less advanced
than either sensing or mobility.
Two domains that are particularly challenging for
robotics research are orchard crops and crops in pro-
tected cultivation. (We use the term orchard liberally
to include grape vineyards and orange groves, among
other similar environments where crops are grown in
well-deﬁned rows.) These are highly valuable crops,
potentially generating one to three orders of magnitude
more revenue per acre than ﬁeld crops. They are also

Part F | 56.2
1466
Part F
Robots at Work
characterized by the need for intensive cultivation and
skilled labor. Consider, for example, apple production
in the US – no less than 50 to 60% of the variable
costs to produce an apple is due to labor [56.9]. On
top of that, labor is needed in bursts – in Washing-
ton state, in the US, up to seven times more workers
are needed during the fall harvest season than during
the winter pruning season. In many developed coun-
tries, labor availability for manual orchard operations
is a challenge, putting signiﬁcant pressure on growers
to ﬁnd innovative solutions to address their labor re-
quirements. In the 2011 Tree Fruit Industry Perspective
publication, industry leaders with the US Northwest
Farm Credit Services say that:
[: : :] seasonal labor force utilized by the tree fruit
industry for thinning and harvest operations will al-
ways be an issue of concern [: : :]. Labor shortages
at various times throughout the growing season
have occurred and will likely occur in the future.
The perishable nature of the tree fruit mandates
a strict timeliness in ﬁeld operations, and the gener-
ally narrow harvest windows do not accommodate
labor shortages at critical stages. [: : :] New tech-
nology [: : :] could reduce labor requirements sub-
stantially over the next ﬁve to 10 years. Speciﬁcally,
such technology would include the use of platforms
and mechanical-harvest methods in the orchards,
and increased use of robotics [: : :].
Partly in response to the high labor costs and partly
to increase production efﬁciency, the tree fruit industry
is moving in the direction of highly structured planting
architectures. Whereas before an apple grower had two
to four hundred trees per acre, she now has 1200 apple
trees per acre in a fruit wall conﬁguration that is much
more conducive to automation (Fig. 56.1a). This has led
to the development of autonomous vehicles and tractors
that drive from garage to block and traverse tree rows
for hours on end, including turning from row to row,
a)
b)
Fig. 56.1 (a) Modern apple orchard with trees arranged to form
a fruit wall. (b) Vine tomato in a protected cultivation environment.
These new architectures open the door to robotics-based production
technologies that increase efﬁciency and reduce labor costs
without any human assistance [56.10]. When equipped
with the appropriate implements, these robotic vehicles
can mow, spray, and collect tree and crop data for inven-
tory management; and when conﬁgured as platforms,
they can carry workers pruning, thinning, training trees,
and harvesting the top part of the trees, thus eliminating
the inefﬁciencies and injuries related to ladders. In the
future, manipulators mounted on such vehicles will be
able to probe plants for phenotyping purposes, and au-
tomatically prune, thin, and harvest.
A protected cultivation system is a powerful in-
strument to produce crops (Figure 56.1b). Greenhouses
protect crops from unfavorable climate conditions and
pests and offer the opportunity to modify the climate
to create an environment that is optimal in terms of
both crop quality and quantity. A protected cultivation
is an intensive production method with high investment
and operational costs, therefore permitting only the pro-
duction of high value fruit and vegetable crops such as
tomatoes, sweet peppers and cucumbers, ﬂowers such
as roses, chrysanthemums and gerberas and many types
of potted plants. In the past decades, in western soci-
eties, this type of production has been confronted with
increasing size of production facilities, increasing la-
bor costs, reduced availability of sufﬁciently skilled
labor, health problems of the employees due to heavy
and repetitive tasks, and growing competition on the
national and international markets. Automation and
robotics are considered to be a way to address these is-
sues. Additionally, growing concerns with food safety
call for such technology. Last but not least, more and
more a precision horticulture approach is adopted in
which plants are treated on an individual basis, to im-
prove quantity and quality of crop production whilst
using resources as efﬁciently as possible. Given the cur-
rent constraints on human labor, this has led to an even
stronger call for automation and robotics.
Within the context of agricultural production, in
terms of production area, protected cultivation is world-
wide a relatively small business. Total area in use with
protected cultivation worldwide is estimated at roughly
740 000 ha [56.11]. In terms of added value, however,
protected cultivation plays a much more important role.
In The Netherlands at a few percent of the area avail-
able for agricultural production, horticulture produces
roughly 35% of the economic return of total agricultural
production. In that case production is very capital and
labor intensive. On a global scale, the potential of pro-
tected cultivation is being increasingly acknowledged.
Yet, technology levels still vary widely, largely based
on signiﬁcant differences in local conditions in terms of
market, economy, resource availability, etc.
Robotics research in protected cultivation has a his-
tory of some thirty years [56.12], focused mainly on

Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
56.3 Case Studies
1467
Part F | 56.3
harvesting and chemical spraying operations. Robotic
harvesting focused mainly on tomatoes, cucumbers,
eggplants, sweet peppers, and strawberries, for which
multiple examples of research prototypes have been de-
veloped [56.12] (
VIDEO 304 ). Single examples are
known of a harvesting robot for roses [56.13] and ger-
bera [56.14]. Spraying robots have been reviewed in
detail in [56.15]. Only two robotic systems, other than
for harvesting or spraying, were found in the literature:
a leaf picking robot for cucumber [56.16] and a robot
for bagging, thinning, and spraying in grapes [56.17].
In protected cultivation robots have not yet been devel-
oped for actions like pruning, disbudding and attaching
of plants to support structures.
Challenges in livestock production are of a more
practical nature. When cattle roam freely they can be
difﬁcult to ﬁnd and muster. Spotting by helicopter is
expensive so there is great potential for the use of un-
manned aerial vehicles. The method of collecting feral
pigs and native kangaroos is usually by shooting, sup-
plying markets in Germany and Russia respectively.
There could in theory be an opportunity for the applica-
tion of robotics, but it is difﬁcult to see how this could
be compatible with safety. It has been suggested that
cattle could be located by carrying a transmitter. Ra-
dio communication involves considerable distances, so
the use of GPS/GNSS collars with transmitting systems
would pose interesting power and battery problems.
56.3 Case Studies
In this section we present a variety of case studies where
robotics technologies are being applied successfully to
problems in the agriculture and forestry sectors. The
presentation follows a somewhat loose categorization
by application domain, i. e., ﬁeld crops, orchard crops,
protected cultivation, forestry, and livestock. The point
here is to group examples that are domain-speciﬁc but
allow for the discussion of those that straddle across
domains. Within each domain, the case studies follow
(again, loosely) the progression from sensing to mobil-
ity to manipulation.
56.3.1 Optimized Coverage
for Arable Farming
Agricultural researchers and practitioners have long-
desired to have the capability to follow well-deﬁned
trafﬁc lanes with common-width equipment sys-
tems to minimize soil compaction effects on plant
growth [56.18]. The advent of automation and control
technology (e.g., GNSS, automatic steering) eliminated
the need for complex processes to deﬁne the controlled-
trafﬁc lanes by making it possible for agricultural
machine systems to follow precise paths spatially and
temporally.
Fig. 56.2 Results obtained with
the optimal coverage path planning
algorithm for two-dimensional (2-D)
terrains; the inner polygons indicate
non-traversable obstacles
With the rapid adoption of automatic guidance
systems, automated path planning has great potential
to further optimize ﬁeld operations. Field operations
should be done in a manner that minimizes time and
travel over ﬁeld surfaces and is coordinated with spe-
ciﬁc ﬁeld operations, machine characteristics, and to-
pographical features of arable lands. To reach this goal,
Jin and Tang [56.19] proposed an optimal coverage path
planning (OCPP) algorithm where coverage is repre-
sented by a geometric model. To determine the full cov-
erage pattern of a given ﬁeld by using boustrophedon
paths, it is necessary to know whether and how to de-
compose a ﬁeld into sub-regions and how to determine
the travel direction within each sub-region. The search
mechanism is guided by a customized cost function re-
sulting from the analysis of different headland turning
types and implemented with a divide-and-conquer strat-
egy. The complexity of the algorithm is O.n3 log.n3//
for a ﬁeld with n edges. In order to reduce the total
turning cost, the number of turns needed to be mini-
mized. Besides, turns with relatively high operational
costs needed to be avoided. Fields of irregular shapes
had inefﬁciencies related to headland turns when head-
lands were at an angle to the machine. Two-dimensional
ﬁeld examples with complexity ranging from a sim-

Part F | 56.3
1468
Part F
Robots at Work
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
160
× 1m
× 10m
a)
c)
b)
410
390
370
350
Fig.56.3a–c Results obtained with the optimal coverage path planning algorithm for a 3-D terrain with terraces and
valleys. (a) Aerial image. (b) Topographic map. (c) Optimal coverage path
ple convex shape to an irregular polygonal shape that
has multiple obstacles within its interior were tested
with the OCPP algorithm (Fig. 56.2). The results show
that, in the most extreme two-dimensional cases, OCPP
saved up to 16% in the number of turns and 15%
in headland turning cost. There were no cases where
OCPP outputted solutions worse than those adopted by
farmers.
When optimizing coverage path over three-dimen-
sional (3-D) terrains, more factors need to be consid-
ered, including headland turning cost, soil erosion cost,
and skipped area cost. Jin and Tang developed an ana-
lytical 3-D terrain model with B-splines; and analyzed
different categories of coverage costs on 3-D terrains
and developed methods to quantify soil erosion cost and
curving path cost corresponding to a particular coverage
solution. Similar to the 2-D coverage path optimiza-
tion, terrain decomposition and classiﬁcation methods
are used to divide a ﬁeld into sub-regions with similar
ﬁeld attributes and comparatively smooth boundaries.
The divide-and-conquer strategy was also applied in the
3-D terrain coverage planning. The most appropriate
path direction of each region was the one that achieved
the minimum coverage cost. A seed curve searching
algorithm was successfully developed and applied to
several practical farm ﬁelds with various topographic
features (Fig. 56.3). The 3-D planning algorithm has
shown its superiority on 3-D terrain ﬁelds compared
with the 2-D planner. On the tested ﬁelds, on aver-
age the 3-D version saved 10:3% on headland turning
cost, 24:7% on soil erosion cost, 81:2% on skipped area
cost, and 22:0% on the weighted sum of these costs,
where their corresponding weights were 1, 1, and 0:5,
respectively. In one of the regions, in particular, the
3-D planning algorithm generated a result with only
30:5% of the soil erosion caused by the 2-D planning
algorithm. It was also observed that the skipped area
resulting from the sharp turning curvature in 3-D plan-
ning is generally much smaller than the skipped area
between paths when projecting 2-D planning results to
a 3-D surface.
56.3.2 Weed Control
Weeds compete with the production crop for light, wa-
ter, and nutrients and can have a detrimental impact
on crop yield if uncontrolled [56.20]. For these rea-
sons chemical and mechanical weed control have long
received attention of agricultural engineers. Compared
to current methods, robotics offers the opportunity to
improve this important production task in two ways:
greater precision when done mechanically, and reduced

Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
56.3 Case Studies
1469
Part F | 56.3
A
B
E
C
D
Fig. 56.4 A robot to detect and control broad-leaved dock
in grassland. Weeds are detected with a texture-based
algorithm using images from a color camera (A). Nav-
igation is GPS-based (B). A diesel engine (C) provides
hydraulic power for the weeding implement (D), which can
be moved laterally along the rail (E)
emissions and environmental runoff when done chem-
ically. This section describes three examples of the
application of robotics to weed control; for an overview
of the ﬁeld see [56.20].
Broad-leaved dock is a troublesome weed in grass-
land. When not controlled it may reach a high density
and considerably reduce grass yield. In response to a re-
quest of seventeen organic Dutch dairy farmers, a robot
was constructed to detect and control broad-leaved dock
in grassland [56.21] (Fig. 56.4) (
VIDEO 310 ). It con-
sists of a custom platform with four independently
driven wheels powered by a 36 kW diesel engine. The
wheels are ﬁtted with golf cart tires that provide traction
on grass with minimal impact on the sod. Reduction
gears ensure high torque, allow centimeter-precision
forward movement, and limit maximum speed to a safe
3 mph. Skid steering was deemed sufﬁciently precise
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.56.5a–d Precision
removal of volunteer potatoes
in sugar beets. (a) Computer
vision-based detection of
the potato weeds (red)
among the sugar beet plants
(green). (b) A sugar beet ﬁeld
infested with potato weeds.
(c) A micro-spray system.
(d) The removal device pulled
by a tractor
under the circumstances. Traversal of a large, feature-
less pasture was achieved by using real-time kinematic
GPS (RTK-GPS) to follow a pre-deﬁned path consist-
ing of parallel segments connected by half-circle turns
at the ends. Because weeds and grass are both green,
a texture-based image analysis method was used to de-
tect the former [56.22, 23]. The weeder proposed by
Riesenhuber was used [56.24]. The method consists of
a rod weeder driven vertically into the ground to frag-
ment the weed’s taproot.
Volunteer potatoes are the leftovers of the previ-
ous year’s harvest. After a mild winter these potatoes
will sprout and constitute a serious weed. They not
only compete with the production crop, but also po-
tentially carry diseases. In The Netherlands, legislation
requires that they be removed annually by July 1st.
This labor-intensive task naturally called for automa-
tion. As a joint effort of industry, policy makers, and
scientists, a project to detect and control volunteer
potato plants was initiated [56.25–27]. A proof-of-
principle machine for sugar beet ﬁelds has been built
and tested (Fig. 56.5). Machine vision-based detection
at 100 mm2 precision was combined with a micro-
sprayer with ﬁve needles and a working width of 0:2 m.
The accuracy of the system was ˙14 mm in the lon-
gitudinal direction and ˙7:5 mm in the transversal
direction. The main error source was the variability
in micro-sprayer droplet velocity that caused longi-
tudinal errors. Still, 77% of volunteer plants with
a size larger than 1200mm2 were successfully con-
trolled at velocities up to 0:8 m s1. Within the seed
line, glyphosate was applied on weed potato plants, ac-
companied with up to 1:0% unwanted killed sugar beet
plants.
The Intelligent Autonomous Weeder (Fig. 56.6) is
a four-wheel steer, four-wheel drive platform to be
used for autonomous weeding operations in arable
farming [56.28–30]. The platform combines dual GPS-

Part F | 56.3
1470
Part F
Robots at Work
Fig. 56.6 The Intelligent Autonomous Weeder operates in
arable farming land
based navigation with computer vision-based row fol-
lowing. The four wheel steering construction offers
supreme maneuverability, which is not only an advan-
tage when precise operation within the crop is consid-
ered, but also offers the opportunity of very compact
head land turns.
56.3.3 High Precision Seeding
The premise behind this work is that, if an autonomous
agricultural machine could accurately follow a prede-
ﬁned path to carry out seeding, then the same machine
could drive in the ﬁeld throughout the entire growing
season carrying out subsequent tasks – e.g., weeding,
fertilizing, spraying, etc. – without the need for repeated
crop location sensing (
VIDEO 131 ). The primary
challenge is to develop centimeter-level path tracking
accuracy along straight runs by the mobile agricul-
tural machines, and even greater accuracy (12 cm) in
agricultural tool manipulation, e.g., controlling seeding
tines for seed placement.
While there are semi-automated seeding systems
currently on the market, they suffer from a number
of problems with major implications for environmental
sustainability, productivity, and economic return:

They are passive, i. e., unable to take action to cor-
rect the seeding tines’ path.

The seeding implements are towed by a tractor
which is GPS-guided, but with insufﬁcient accuracy
(usually 40 cm); moreover, accurate path following
by a tractor does not guarantee accurate seed place-
ment by the implement.

The tractor does not sense deviation of the seeding
implement’s path, causing the crop to be laid out
unpredictably.

Even when the system senses implement deviation,
it does not have the ability to correct the seeding im-
plement’s path, let alone the position of the seeding
tines.

Tractors used in current systems are massive, there-
fore must use ﬁxed tracks to limit ground com-
paction (however still causing compaction of up to
20% of arable land).

Insufﬁcient seeding accuracy does not permit inter-
row cropping in alternating seasons – a technique
that utilizes remnant nutrients in inter-row spaces,
and

Present day systems do not have fully autonomous
operational capability.
Katupitiya et al. [56.31] built and delivered a sys-
tem that advanced the ﬁeld in the following ways
(Fig. 56.7):

An active seeder equipped with sophisticated con-
trol systems that can take corrective action against
path deviations while ensuring high accuracy seed-
ing tine position control.

High accuracy localization of the seeder and tines
achieved via precise GPS, high-precision sensors,
data fusion, and control software to locate/position
the seeding tines. Control systems include those that
micro-adjust the seeding tines with respect to the
main seeder frame. This allows the seeding tine
positions to follow a more accurate path than the
seeder itself.

The seeder is force-controlled and self-propelled,
allowing for the size of the tractor to be greatly re-
duced. Smaller tractors also mean smaller wheels,
so the tractor wheel width can be smaller than
the inter-crop row width; hence the tractor can
use the inter-row space as its wheel tracks with-
out squashing the crop for subsequent operations.
Fig. 56.7 Precision seeding system for broad acre farming

Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
56.3 Case Studies
1471
Part F | 56.3
These result in the complete elimination of ground
compaction.

The level of automation integrated into the tractor-
seeder pair is such that the entire system is readily
autonomous with no operator required.

The seeder is modular, with either single or multiple
units operating around the clock. A special purpose
tandem, non-linear adaptive pursuit path tracking
algorithm is used to control the steering of the trac-
tor and the seeder wheels. The seeder has its wheels
under force control based on the tension at the off-
axle hitch point.
56.3.4 Crop Yield Estimation
One common desire of all fruit growers is knowledge of
the crop yield. Accurate yield prediction helps growers
improve fruit quality and reduce operating cost by mak-
ing better decisions on intensity of fruit thinning and
size of the harvest labor force. It beneﬁts the packing
industry as well, because managers can use estimation
results to optimize packing and storage capacity.
Typically, yield estimation is performed based on
historical data, weather conditions, and workers man-
ually counting fruit in multiple sampling locations.
Manually gathering samples is a time-consuming, la-
bor-intensive, and inaccurate process, and the number
of samples is usually far too small to capture the magni-
tude of the variation in yield across each block. Growers
are searching for an automated and efﬁcient alterna-
tive that can accurately capture spatial variation in
yield.
To deal with this need, Nuske et al. [56.6, 7] de-
veloped a computer vision-based system to detect and
count fruit. The system uses a camera rig for image ac-
quisition, working at nighttime with controlled artiﬁcial
lighting to reduce the variance of natural illumination.
An autonomous vehicle is used as the support platform
for automated data collection (Fig. 56.8). The system
scans both sides of each row of trees or vines, detect-
ing fruit captured within the image sequence, and then
generates yield estimates.
The accuracy of the system was demonstrated by
comparing its crop yield estimation with ground-truth
recorded via careful and tedious manual measurements.
Its end result is a yield map that closely resembles
the true spatial distribution of yield, which growers
can utilize to make critical production management
decisions.
The yield estimation system was deployed in
a number of vineyards, apple orchards, and strawberry
ranches, and the results show that the system works well
in a variety of crops and training structures (Figs. 56.9
and 56.10).
Cameras
Ring flashes
Fig. 56.8 Autonomous crop yield estimation system hardware,
composed of concentric cameras and ring ﬂashes for controlled il-
lumination during nighttime operations
a)
b)
c)
Fig.56.9a–c Output of the crop yield estimation sys-
tem in vineyards (a), apple orchards (c), and strawberry
ranches (b)
56.3.5 Precision Irrigation
Current irrigation practice within the agricultural com-
munity often dictates over-watering crops as opposed
to under-watering. This results in wasted resource, in-
creased leaching of fertilizers, and an increase in crop
disease. There are crop models that determine adequate
irrigation quantities, but they are seldom used as the
constant modifying of irrigation parameters is tedious
and difﬁcult.
Kohanbash et al. [56.32] used wireless sensor net-
works (WSN’s) to monitor environmental conditions in
real time and adjust irrigation parameters on the ﬂy.
WSN’s can do basic set-point control where irrigation is
enabled every time the soil moisture goes below a pre-
deﬁned threshold. More advanced control methods are
also possible by integrating crop water use models into
the system. WSN systems communicate with a central
base station that can be connected to the Internet, al-
lowing remote access for viewing crop condition and
modifying irrigation settings. Having a central base sta-

Part F | 56.3
1472
Part F
Robots at Work
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Section
Apples per tree
Row
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Row
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
100
80
60
40
20
Fig.56.10a,b Spatial yield
map collected by the system:
(a) Truth manual count,
(b) automated count
Table 56.1 Irrigation improvements at a greenhouse by us-
ing a wireless sensor network system (after [56.32])
Condition
Irrigations per day
Before WSN system installed (baseline)
8
With WSN system (monitoring)
45
With WSN system (monitoring and
control)
23
tion also allows growers the ability to monitor and
analyze the crop growing environment for trends and
long-term changes.
Early results (Tab. 56.1) show water savings of up
to 75%, fertilizer leaching reduced to near zero, in-
creased crop quality, speed of crop growth increased
by over 50%, and reduced occurrence of crop disease.
In addition to these savings, growers can use the data
from WSN systems to tailor their crop for speciﬁc mar-
kets. For example, by adjusting the irrigation set-point
Table 56.2 Control modes enabled by the family of autonomous orchard vehicles in Fig. 56.11, from least to most
complex
Mule mode
Scaffold mode
Pace mode
How it works
The vehicle drives
along rows of trees as
workers harvest fruit,
placing them in bins
on the vehicle
Farm workers stand on the vehicle
while it self-steers in the row
The vehicle autonomously drives an
entire block at a time without requiring
any further interaction
Production tasks
enabled
Fruit harvesting
Pruning, fruit and blossom thin-
ning, tree maintenance, harvesting,
pheromone dispenser placing
Mowing, spraying, and scouting for
disease, insects, and crop yield estima-
tion
Autonomous
functionalities
Row following (continuous or stop-and-go), end-of-row detec-
tion, obstacle detection
Row following, end-of-row detection,
turn and enter new row, obstacle detection
Vehicle speed
0:22 mph
0:10:2 mph
25 mph
Interface
Control box with
buttons
Control box and foot pedals
Handheld tablet or smartphone
Permanent infra-
structure installed in
orchard
None
None
None
value, a grower can choose between more expensive
(Grade A) product, or less expensive (Grade B) prod-
uct that they can sell more of.
56.3.6 Tree Fruit Production
Autonomous orchard vehicles will radically transform
tree fruit production by automating maintenance op-
erations such as mowing and spraying and augment-
ing workers pruning, thinning, and harvesting. From
a robotics point of view, these applications can be
realized with a relatively simple, yet challenging, ca-
pability: driving along one row of trees, turning at the
end of the row, and entering the next one. Challenges
involved include reliably sensing the trees in the pres-
ence of sloped terrain, branches, tall grass, and missing
trees; localizing the vehicle in the orchard; following
trajectories inside and outside the rows; and avoiding

Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
56.3 Case Studies
1473
Part F | 56.3
Fig. 56.11 A family of autonomous orchard vehicles ca-
pable of driving among tree rows, based on the Toro
Workman series. To keep cost low, the vehicles use only
a laser rangeﬁnder and steering and wheel encoder for per-
ception and navigation
obstacles. Additionally, the added cost of the autonomy
components should be as low as possible, to make such
vehicles commercially viable.
Figure 56.11 shows a family of autonomous orchard
vehicles with a common sensing and computing infras-
tructure that allows them to cover entire orchard blocks
continuously for several hours (
VIDEO 91 ). To keep
cost low, they are not equipped with GPS/GNSS or in-
ertial navigation systems; instead, perception and navi-
gation is achieved with a laser rangeﬁnder mounted on
the front of the vehicle and steering and wheel encoders.
Table 56.2 summarizes the three autonomous control
modes in which the vehicles can operate.
From 2008 to 2012 the vehicles drove a com-
bined 350 km in experimental and commercial or-
chards, vineyards, and nurseries in several US states,
including many in the largest apple producer in the
United States, Washington state. The longest run cov-
ered 25 km over ﬁve hours [56.10, 33]. Time trials
conducted by The Pennsylvania and Washington State
Universities Extension educators showed that work-
ers onboard an autonomous orchard platform can be
twice as fast as workers using ladders or on foot when
working on the top portion of apple and peach trees
(Fig. 56.12) [56.34].
56.3.7 Vehicle Formation Control
Multiple robotic agricultural vehicles driving in forma-
tion offer capabilities beyond those possible by a sin-
gle vehicle. Lenain et al. [56.35] developed a control
architecture that enables accurate and stable control of
several robots in a given and possibly variable forma-
tion. The method is based on a path tracking framework,
deﬁning the relative robot’s positions as a lateral dis-
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig. 56.12 (a) Autonomous orchard vehicle. (b) Workers on foot
harvest apples and deposit them on bins towed by the vehicle, elim-
inating the need for and the cost of a tractor driver. (c) In this version
the vehicle is equipped with a lift platform from where workers can
prune, thin, tie trees, and place pheromone dispensers up to twice
as fast as workers performing the same operations on ladders. Users
on the platform control the vehicle from an interface (d) that com-
municates with the onboard computer wirelessly
tance with respect to a given path, and the longitudinal
distance along this path. Perturbations due to motion
on natural environments (e.g., poor grip conditions and
uneven terrain topography)are compensated with a non-
linear model-based controller that includes an observer
for wheel sideslip. In the formation control point of view
the lateral error is no longer regulated to zero but to a de-
sired set-point, potentially variable and accounting for
other vehicle deviations. In addition, the velocity of each
vehicle is controlled in order to ensure a desired curvi-
linear distance with respect to the others, and imposing
a desired speed for one of them. Similarly to lateral dy-
namic, the desired distance may be deﬁned as varying,
and error may be constituted of a mix between longitu-
dinal errors of one vehicle with respect to the other.
This approach was tested in the ﬁeld with two elec-
trical off-road robots (Fig. 56.13a). They are equipped
with RTK-GPS providing an accuracy of ˙2 cm, and
are able to communicate their positions among each
other using wireless communications. Weighing around
500 kg each, these two-meter long vehicles are able to
reach speeds of 4 m s1 and climb up to 20 degrees ter-
rain. In this example, the ﬁrst vehicle has to follow the
trajectory depicted in black, composed of a straight line
along a 15 degree slope on grass at a speed of 2 m s1,
followed by a half turn coming back on ﬂat ground. The
second vehicle must follow the ﬁrst one with a desired
curvilinear distance of 10 m and a desired lateral

Part F | 56.3
1474
Part F
Robots at Work
Follower
Leader
Reference
trajectory
0
20
40
Flat part
Slope part
Y coordinates (m)
b)
a)
X coordinates (m)
40
30
20
10
0
Fig. 56.13 (a) Two agricul-
tural vehicles in formation
control. (b) Reference trajec-
tory and actual path achieved
by the two vehicles
Ultrasonic sensor
Potentiometer
Spray cannon
Valve control
Microcontroller
Proximity sensor
Fig. 56.14 Date tree tracking
system adapted to a commer-
cial sprayer. The system aims
the sprayer nozzle toward
the trees more efﬁciently and
safely than a human operator
deviation of 1 m. The positions of the ﬁrst and second
vehicles are shown in blue and red dots in Fig. 56.13b,
respectively. In these conditions, the accuracy of rela-
tive positioning is within ˙15 cm despite the challeng-
ing terrain conditions (low grip, uneven terrain, curved
θ
P
X
D1 = Distance
between trees
(Average is
known)
D2 = Distance from trees
(known constant)
Spraying
direction
Driving
direction
θ = arctan
D1–X
D2
X is measured using the
proximity sensor that is
mounted on the wheel
• Auto turn toward next
tree at X = D1
2
Fig. 56.15 Calculation of the desired spray angle
trajectory). This work demonstrated the capability of
maintaining a formation of several vehicles, compat-
ible with the conditions encountered in agriculture,
allowing to consider the introduction of multi-vehicle
platoons in the ﬁeld for precision agriculture.
56.3.8 Date Palm Tree Spraying
Dates palm tree spraying is normally done manually by
a team of three workers from a platform 18 m or more
above the ground. In the past, many accidents have oc-
curred due to instability of the platform when in a lifted
position. Degania Sprayers Company (Israel) developed
a sprayer with a tall air cannon and a pan-tilt unit at
the end to control the air ﬂow and spray direction. This
system, however, requires a worker to manually aim
the spray toward the tree. Shapiro et al. [56.36] devel-
oped an automatic tree tracking system for the sprayer
(Fig. 56.14).
The tracking system is based on an ultrasonic
range sensor to detect the trees and a proximity sen-

Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
56.3 Case Studies
1475
Part F | 56.3
sor mounted on the sprayer’s wheel to measure distance
traveled. A human driver is responsible for maintain-
ing the sprayer a distance D2 D 3:5 m from the trees.
Knowing the average distance between trees in the row
(D1 D 9 m), it is possible to compute the desired spray-
ing angle as  D tan1..D1  x/=D2/, where x is the
distance traveled since the last tree (Fig. 56.15). This
value is fed fed into a proportional–integral–derivative
(PID) controller that outputs a pulse-width modulation
(PWM) signal to an electrically-controlled hydraulic
valve that controls the spraying angle. The authors
opted to use an on/off valve driven by a PWM signal in-
stead of a proportional valve to reduce the system cost
and therefore make it more attractive to farmers. The
rotation angle of the sprayer is measured by a poten-
tiometer and used as feedback for the PID controller.
When the sprayer reaches the midpoint between two
trees, i. e., x D D1=2, the sprayer is set to rotate to-
ward the next tree in the row and start spraying it.
The tracking algorithm is implemented on an Arduino
microcontroller.
The system was built and deployed in date farms,
showing good tracking results. It replaces a human
worker which previously had to perform a dull task
controlling the sprayer to track the trees using a joy-
stick. A preliminary economic analysis indicates that
the additional cost of the sprayer tracking system can
be recovered in one harvest season.
56.3.9 Plant Probing
In large botanic experimentation ﬁelds, treatments (wa-
tering, nutrients, sunlight) that optimize certain desired
aspects (growth, appearance) need to be determined.
Towards this aim, experiments entailing many repetitive
actions need to be conducted. For example, measure-
ments and samples from leaves must be taken regularly
and some pruning may need to be performed. For
these tasks robots would be very handy, but difﬁcul-
ties arise from the complex structure and deformable
nature of plants, which do not only change appear-
ance through growing, but whose leaves also move on
a daily and sometimes hourly basis. Even though recent
advances in depth sensors, deformable object model-
ing, and autonomous mobile manipulation have brought
this goal in reach for robotic applications [56.37, 38],
many problems still exist, in particular concerning ro-
bust recognition and localization of plant parts (leaves,
ﬂowers, fruits, stems), and robot manipulation under
weakly constrained conditions in natural environments.
In this context, the European project GARNICS
(gardening with a cognitive system) aims at 3-D sensing
of plant growth and building perceptual representations
for learning the links to actions of a robot gardener.
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 56.16 (a) Chlorophyll measurements with a robot-mounted
spad meter. (b) Cutting of leaf disks with a robot-mounted, custom-
designed cutting tool. Both a color camera and a ToF camera are
mounted on the end-effector of the arm. (c) Close-up of prob-
ing: Chlorophyll measurements of a tobacco plant. The lightweight
time-of-ﬂight camera is seen at the top
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
Fig. 56.17 (a) Color image. (b) Infrared image. (c) ToF
depth. (d) Segmentation. (e) Surface models. (f) Color-
coded leaf conﬁdences and extracted probing points
Plant sensing and control is addressed by combining
active vision with appropriate perceptual representa-
tions, which are essential for cognitive interactions
(
VIDEO 95 ).
An application of robotized phenotyping related to
this project is the accurate placing of a measurement
tool on a leaf in order to either cut sample disks from
the leaf, or to measure chlorophyll content. The robotic
arm is equipped with a time-of-ﬂight (TOF) camera
and a measurement tool (Fig. 56.16) [56.39–41]. In
this approach, image segmentation and model ﬁtting are
employed to recognize and localize single leaves from
depth information. 3-D data is combined with color or

Part F | 56.3
1476
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
c)
Fig.56.18a–c A cucumber harvesting robot. (a) The robot in the
greenhouse. (b) Unprocessed image of cucumber crop in the near
infrared spectrum. (c) Detected cucumbers
a)
b)
Fig.56.19a,b Cucumber leaf removal robot. (a) Robot op-
erational in the crop. (b) End-effector (after [56.16])
infrared images and used to segment the data into sur-
face patches, which are assumed to correspond to actual
plant leaves [56.42].
In this approach, a next-best view strategy was pro-
posed for ﬁnding a non-obstructed and frontal view of
the leaf [56.41]. Initially, the robot arm is moved to
a position from which a general view of the plant is
obtained. The depth and infrared images acquired from
this position are segmented into their composite sur-
faces, leaf model contours are ﬁtted to the extracted
segments, and the validity of the ﬁt and the graspabil-
ity of the leaf are measured (Fig. 56.17). A target leaf
is selected and the robot moves the camera to a closer,
frontal view. The validity of the target and the graspa-
bility are re-evaluated. If the leaf is considered to be
suitable for sampling based on these criteria, the prob-
ing tool is placed onto the leaf following a two-step
path. If the target is not considered suitable for probing,
another target leaf (from the general view) is selected
and the procedure is repeated.
The method is based on several assumptions:
i)
The boundaries of leaves are visible in the infrared-
intensity image
ii) The leaf surfaces can be modeled by a basic
quadratic function
iii) Leaves of a speciﬁc plant type can be described by
a common 2-D contour
iv) Leaves are large enough to allow analysis by a ToF
camera, and
v) The leaves are static during probing.
These assumptions may be violated under certain
conditions, and further research will have to be under-
taken to solve the various problems originating mostly
from the complex and deformable nature of plants.
56.3.10 Cucumber Harvesting
A prototype robotic harvester for cucumbers is pre-
sented in Fig. 56.18. The machine consists of a mobile
platform that runs on rails (
VIDEO 308 ). These rails
are commonly used in greenhouses in The Netherlands
for the purpose of internal transport, but they are also
used as a hot water heating system of the greenhouse.
Harvesting requires functional steps such as the detec-
tion and localization of the fruit and assessment of its
ripeness. In case of the cucumber harvester, the differ-
ent reﬂection properties in the near infra-red spectrum
were exploited to detect green cucumbers in the green
environment [56.43–45]. Whether the cucumber was
ready for harvest was identiﬁed based on an estima-
tion of its weight. Since cucumbers consist almost 95%
of water, the weight estimation was achieved by esti-
mating the volume of the fruits. Stereovision principles
were then used to locate the fruits to be harvested in
the 3-D environment. For that purpose the camera was
shifted 50 mm on a linear slide and two images of the
same scene were taken and processed. A Mitsubishi
RV-E2 manipulator was used to steer the gripper-cutter
mechanism to the fruit and transport the harvested fruit
back to a storage crate. Collision-free motion planning
based on the A algorithm was used to steer the ma-
nipulator during the harvesting operation [56.44]. The
cutter consisted of a suction cup on a parallel gripper

Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
56.3 Case Studies
1477
Part F | 56.3
that grabbed the peduncle of the fruit. (The peduncle is
a stem segment that connects the fruit to the main stem
of the plant.) Then the action of a suction cup immobi-
lized the fruit in the gripper. A special thermal cutting
device was used to separate the fruit from the plant. The
high temperature of the cutting device also prevented
the potential transport of viruses from one plant to the
other during the harvesting process. For a successful
harvest this machine needed 65:2 s on average. The suc-
cess rate was 74:4% [56.43].
56.3.11 Cucumber Leaf Removal
Harvesting has received considerable attention in
robotics research focused on protected cultivation. Yet,
this is not the only time- and labor-consuming cul-
tivation operation. In cucumber production, amongst
others, removal of old non-productive leaves in the
lower regions of the plant is a time-consuming task.
Figure 56.19 shows the same platform used for har-
vesting, but in this case hardware and software were
used for removal of leaves from the plants [56.16]
(
VIDEO 309 ). In this system, the camera system is
used to identify and locate the main stem of the plants.
The gripper is sent to the plant and moved upwards.
Leaves encountered during this upward motion are sep-
arated from the plant using the similar thermal cutting
device as used for harvesting. An interesting feature of
this machine is that with slight modiﬁcations of soft-
ware and hardware, two greenhouse operations could
be performed.
56.3.12 Rose Harvesting
In recent years a harvesting robot for roses has been
developed and tested under practical circumstances in
The Netherlands. The prototype is shown in Fig. 56.20.
In this case, the rose plants are grown on moveable
benches. Thus plants move to the robot instead of the
robot moving to the plants in the greenhouse. During
the harvest cycle, a camera system travels over the rose
a)
b)
Fig.56.20a,b A rose harvesting robot.
(a) The robot with the rose crop on
a mobile growing system. (b) The
end-effector with stereo vision system
and a scissors-type cutting device
(courtesy Jentjens Machinetechniek
BV, Veghel, The Netherlands)
plants and locates the roses to be harvested. Then the
harvesting operation is performed with two manipu-
lators. One manipulator grips the rose just below the
ﬂower and pulls it gently aside to generate space for the
second manipulator to travel down the stem towards the
point where it will cut the stem. This manipulator carries
a small-sized stereovision system that is used for real-
time tracking of the stem during this downwards motion.
Upon arrival, the manipulator deploys a small scissor-
type cutter that will cut the stem. Then, ﬁnally, the rose
is pulled out and put in a storage by the ﬁrst manipula-
tor whilst the second manipulator moves out of the crop
and proceeds with the next harvest cycle. Details of this
system have been covered in [56.13].
56.3.13 Strawberry Harvesting
In Japan, the market of strawberries is large, as large
as the market of tomatoes, cucumbers, and mandarin
oranges. The potentially high-economic return of this
product together with the high labor intensity of pro-
cesses like harvesting, explains the long tradition of
research on robotic strawberry harvesting. As shown in
Fig. 56.21, the robot consists of a 4 degrees-of-freedom
(DOF) cylindrical manipulator. The robot carries 3
charge-coupled device (CCD) cameras. A square LED-
array is used for illumination of the scene. Two cameras
provide stereo vision for detection and localization of
the fruits. Once a fruit is detected, the end-effector
is positioned in front of the fruit. The third camera,
mounted on the end-effector, is then used to detect
the peduncle, i. e., the fruit stem, and calculate its in-
clination. Based on this data, the orientation of the
end-effector is modiﬁed with a tilt mechanism and it
then approaches the fruit. A successful approach of the
strawberry is detected by a reﬂection-type light sensor
in the end-effector. Upon successful completion of this
motion, the peduncle is grasped and the stem is cut with
a scissor-type cutting mechanism. A suitable manipula-
tor motion then sends the harvested strawberry to a tray.
This procedure is repeated for all detected fruits at the

Part F | 56.3
1478
Part F
Robots at Work
Fig. 56.21 A strawberry harvesting robot (courtesy IAM-
Brain, Japan)
current position of the robot. After all picking attempts
are completed the full robot platform is moved 210 mm
with a gantry-type transportation system running be-
low the strawberry benches. The current prototype has
achieved a picking speed of 6:3 s with a success rate of
52:6%. For more details refer to [56.46, 47].
56.3.14 Pot Handling in Nurseries
and Greenhouses
Nursery and greenhouse (N&G) farms in the United
States produce over two billion potted plants annually
(Fig. 56.22a). During the course of production plants
are moved several times – distributed onto indoor or
a)
b)
Fig.56.22a,b Potted plants destined
for garden stores and landscapers
are grown in containers on immense
nursery farms. Large amounts of stoop
labor is needed to place, maintain, and
retrieve these plants
outdoor growing beds, repositioned to recover space as
orders are ﬁlled, and collected for bulk transport. Un-
til recently, only scarce manual labor was suitable for
these jobs (Fig. 56.22b).
Harvest
Automation’s
recently-marketed
HV-
100 (Harvey) robot automates critical N&G tasks
(Fig. 56.23a). Plants are lifted and transported using
a one degree-of-freedom manipulator coupled with
a one degree-of-freedom gripper. The mobility system
employs two differentially-controlled drive wheels
balanced by a front roller.
Harvey uses a laser rangeﬁnder to identify the con-
tainers in which plants are grown. This sensor has
a horizontal ﬁeld-of-view greater than 180 degrees and
can detect poorly reﬂecting plant containers from at
least 4 m – even under bright sunlight. The robot also
uses the laser rangeﬁnder to detect obstacles and robot
teammates.
Four boundary sensors, two forward-pointing, two
rear-pointing, are used to ﬁnd and follow retroreﬂective
tape that marks the edge of the bed. The tape marker
performs double duty as both the robot’s global refer-
ence and as part of the user interface. By positioning the
boundary marker workers indicate to the robot where
plants should be placed.
A user interface consisting of a dial and buttons is
located on the back of the electronics box. The inter-
face enables users to input the desired plant spacing,
bed width, spacing pattern (hexagonal or rectangular)
and the number of aisles the robot should instantiate.
Robust operation of the robot is enabled by a be-
havior-based programming scheme. Figure 56.23b il-
lustrates spacing, a task that gives each plant sufﬁcient
room to grow without interfering with its neighbors.
The closely packed plants in the foreground have
been delivered to the growing bed and placed on the
ground. Robot A identiﬁes plant containers using the
rangeﬁnder; it selects for pick up the container farthest
down ﬁeld. After closing on and capturing a container
with its gripper the robot will turn toward the boundary
B. Nearing the tape marker the two forward boundary
sensors on the robot will detect the tape and compute
the relative angle between robot and tape. This enables

Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
56.3 Case Studies
1479
Part F | 56.3
a)
b)
E
B
B
C
A
C
D
A
F
B
Fig. 56.23 (a) HV-100 (Harvey) nursery and greenhouse automation robot with main components labeled: (A) laser
rangeﬁnder, (B) boundary sensor (two of four), (C) gripper, (D) emergency stop ﬂag (pulling the ﬂag stops the robot),
(E) electronics box, with user interface components mounted on the back, and (F) passive roller to balance the robot.
(b) Two robots operating as a team perform the spacing task. Robot A approaches the source plants in the foreground.
Boundary B marks the edge of the bed. Robot C carries a plant toward the destination
the robot to turn and align with the tape, keeping the
tape on its left side.
After acquiring the boundary marker the robot will
servo along the tape as robot C is doing. When the plant
destination comes within view the laser rangeﬁnder is
used to identify the next empty space in the pattern
of spaced plants. The robot then computes an efﬁcient
path to the put-down point, moves to that position, and
drops off the plant. Afterward, it turns back toward the
source of plants and repeats the process. The robot uses
dead reckoning to ﬁnd its way to the vicinity of the
source plants. Following this strategy robots can work
singly or in teams of various sizes.
56.3.15 Precision Forestry
About 30% of the land mass of the earth is covered by
forests. In addition to providing the raw materials for
furniture, paper, clothing, and heating, forests provide
habitats to diverse animal species and form the source
of livelihood for many different human settlements. In
2012, in Germany alone, an estimated 1:3 million jobs
in the wood processing industry generated a revenue
of more than 180 billion euros. To explore forests in
an environmentally-friendly but still economical way is
thus a major issue. Robotics is currently being used to
preserve the forest and secure the jobs in forestry and
related industries.
Today, work in forests is already highly mecha-
nized, and in the last decade, mobile robotics know-how
combined with new virtual reality and remote sens-
ing techniques paved the way for a new robotics view
onto work machines in the forest. Wood harvesters
(Fig. 56.24) and forwarders, advanced work machines
for log cutting and transport, are currently a major aim
of automation efforts [56.45, 48, 49]. Based on the in-
a)
b)
Fig. 56.24 (a) A simulated wood harvester equipped with
simulated laser scanners in a virtual testbed used for algo-
rithm development and evaluation. (b) The physical har-
vester in the woods, equipped with laser scanners mounted
to the right and left door of the cabin
sight that accurate machine localization cannot solely
be based on GPS, mobile robotics capabilities for local-
ization and navigation have been introduced. Measured
GPS errors of up to 50 m due to signal absorption in
the canopy and to multi-path effects make GPS practi-
cally useless for precise localization and navigation. In

Part F | 56.3
1480
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
c)
b)
Fig. 56.25 (a) Top-down view of the
machine, particles (gray dots), trees
from global tree map (light blue dots)
and trees from local tree map (dark
blue dots). (b) Particles accumulate
near the left edge of the cabin of
the forest machine and indicate
the newly calculated position in
comparison to the GPS-based position
(white rectangle below the harvester).
(c) A semantic world model turned
into a virtual forest.
the VisualGPS approach, the GPS position only serves
as a starting point for a combined Kalman ﬁlter and
Monte Carlo localization algorithm based on optical
range measurements by laser scanners (
VIDEO 96 ).
The approach yields a machine position with an ac-
curacy of 0:5 m and thus provides a sound basis for
the development of navigation and (semi-) autonomous
logging procedures [56.50, 51].
Practical experiments show that map building based
on simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM)
techniques [56.52] are not very applicable in these en-
vironments, because the resulting errors in the map are
not bounded and thus are not well-suited for large area
operation and for a matching against parcel borders.
Instead, the highly accurate position estimation from Vi-
sualGPS builds on a previously generated map of single
trees. A multi-sensor fusion approach helps to build this
map based on airborne and satellite imagery in multiple
spectral ranges as well as on airborne laser scanning.
The multispectral imagery data provides the basis for
the tree species determination which is solved as an ad-
vanced pattern classiﬁcation problem [56.53]. The next
step, single tree delineation, is based on airborne im-
agery in combination with 3-D surface data from the
laser scans. A modiﬁed watershed algorithm [56.54] de-
lineates the tree crowns. From the tree crowns’ sizes
and species information, the geo-referenced stem posi-
tion and even the trees’ diameters can be deduced. This
not only allows for generating a global, geo-referenced
tree map, but is also sufﬁcient for generating a semantic
world model, the virtual forest (Fig. 56.25).
Each work machine in the forest also builds lo-
cal maps of visible trees using machine-mounted laser
scanners and a compass. For localization purposes,
these local maps are matched against the previously
generated global map of trees by means of a particle ﬁl-
ter. For a moving machine, the prediction step is carried
out by a Kalman ﬁlter [56.50, 51].
Figure 56.25 shows the two important results of
the global map building process. The ﬁgures on the
left show just the tree map with the white noise in the
upper image denoting the particles representing poten-
tial poses for the Monte Carlo localization process. In
the lower image, the particles have converged against
the machine’s correct position. The right image gives
an impression of the virtual forest generated from the
same data that was used for the tree map. This vir-
tual forest is used to visualize the deduced information
(e.g., tree species, tree height, crown shape and size,
etc.) in a high-end virtual reality representation. This
approach follows a general trend in robotic applications
for natural or space environments: the development
of virtual testbeds for world model information vi-
sualization in an intuitively comprehensible manner.
Advanced virtual testbeds then provide the simulation
capabilities to develop and test the robotic application
against the virtual world in order to save time and
costs [56.55].
The developed laser rangeﬁnder-based VisualGPS
algorithms are being enhanced by optical stereo image
recognition capabilities and are being ported to mobile
platforms like the Seekur Jr. This is due to the fact that
the work that started as an automation effort for work
machines in the forest has recently turned into an envi-
ronment monitoring project which aids the forester to
inspect, protect, and attend to the forest with increased
efﬁciency and effectiveness.
56.3.16 Semi-Automation
of Forwarder Crane
In cut-to-length harvesting, which is the predominant
tree harvesting method in Europe, delimbed and bucked
timber is collected from the forest to the roadside by
a forwarder. For an operator of such a machine, a large
part of the work cycle consists of maneuvering the
onboard hydraulic crane (Fig. 56.26). The operator con-
trols the links individually using two joysticks. The
redundant kinematic design is necessary for dexterity
and the large active workspace of the machine, but it

Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
56.3 Case Studies
1481
Part F | 56.3
q3–outer boom
q4–telescope
End effector
Inner boom–q2
Slewing–q1
a)
b)
Out
In
Out
Right
Left
In
Open
Close
Down
Up
Outer
boom
Telescope
Grapple
Inner
boom
Left joystick
Right joystick
Slewing
Right
Left
Rotator
Fig. 56.26 (a) Valmet 830 forwarder with redundant kinematic design of the hydraulic crane. (b) The operator uses two
joysticks to control each link individually
also makes the crane control difﬁcult to learn and to
perform in an efﬁcient way.
Considering the technological progress and capabil-
ities of today’s forestry machines, the current manual
control approach creates bottlenecks in the forwarding
process. Semi-automation of these operations would
thus be beneﬁcial for productivity. Automation of some
repetitive motions is also desired in order to support the
operator and to reduce the physical and cognitive work-
load.
To this end, a small-scale hydraulic forwarder crane
has been installed in a laboratory environment [56.56].
The crane is equipped with position and pressure sen-
sors, as well as with electronics and software for rapid
prototyping of automated control strategies. The same
equipment has been installed on a commercial Valmet
830 forwarder by Komatsu Forest for ﬁeld testing.
Using these platforms, new feedback control meth-
ods and trajectory planning procedures have been de-
veloped to construct and implement time-efﬁcient mo-
tions [56.57]. For a given geometric path, the speed and
relative use of the different crane links along this path
can be shaped to achieve motions with optimal perfor-
mance within the limitations of the machine. Velocity
constraints for the individual joints are particularly re-
strictive in hydraulic manipulators.
In [56.58], trajectories planned with this approach
are compared with recorded motions by professional
human operators with respect to execution time. Re-
sults show that the performance can be improved
signiﬁcantly by path-constrained replanning of human-
operated motions (Fig. 56.27). Additional replanning
of the geometrical path, along with efﬁcient velocity
proﬁles along the path, can further improve the time ef-
ﬁciency of the crane motions.
Tracking the trajectories with feedback control re-
quires sensors for measuring the joint positions. Instal-
lation of such sensors may not be desired due to high
costs or durability problems in the rough outdoor en-
vironment. Using the approach in [56.59], motions can
be found that are robust to uncertainties in initial con-
ditions and therefore possible to perform in open loop.
The end effector position along the trajectory can also
be estimated using an observer and signals available
from pressure sensors. Such design can be a more con-
venient solution in the harsh conditions of the forest.
The introduction of new tasks or new ways to
perform tasks means new challenges for human-ma-
chine interaction (HMI). Semi-autonomous operation
requires the automated parts to be well integrated with
the manual work. In order to facilitate cooperation in
manipulator control between the human and computer,
the work distribution and work transitions between
them is important. Hansson and Servin [56.60] de-
scribes an implementation of shared and traded control
for this setup. The results from user tests show that
semi-autonomous operation reduces the workload and
shows signiﬁcant potential to improve the productivity
of inexperienced operators.
A reliable framework of sensors and low-level con-
trol, along with efﬁcient motion planning strategies,
allows for development of more advanced interaction
technologies. One such possible future scenario is tele-
operation, that presents several advantages to both ma-
chine owners and operators. Firstly, it opens up for
redesign of the machine with removal of the cabin
which saves weight and cost. Secondly, the working en-
vironment is improved with reduction of the noise and
vibration levels. A virtual environment-based system
for teleoperation of a forwarder crane was demonstrated
in [56.61]; follow-up work is investigating how a virtual
environment can be a useful tool for presenting feed-
back to the operator in different scenarios. This method
does however require environment reconstruction to lo-
cate logs and potential obstacles, both of which are
considered in [56.62].

Part F | 56.3
1482
Part F
Robots at Work
Driver
Optimal
Driver
Optimal
0
2
4
6
8
10
dθ/dt
b)
a)
θ
5
4
3
2
1
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
q1 (rad)
c)
t (s)
0
–1
–2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
q2 (rad)
1
0.5
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
q3 (rad)
0
–1
–2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
q4 (m)
3
2
1
0
Fig.56.27a–c Path-constrained replanning of human-operated motions. (a) Example of two crane motions performed by
a human operator: from the load bunk to the logs (A–B) and back (B–C). (b) Velocity proﬁles for the distance  along the
path A–B. A different distribution of the work between the joints allows for a higher velocity along the same path. The
gray area indicates velocity constraints not to be violated. (c) The resulting evolution of joint coordinates with respect to
time. The motion with a time-efﬁcient velocity proﬁle is clearly faster than the one of the driver
56.3.17 Livestock Breeding
and Nurturing
In some cases animal breeding is a proactive process,
such as in hatcheries where optimum conditions must
be managed. In others nature is allowed to take its
course. Sometimes intervention may be needed in the
Fig. 56.28 Lely Juno robot
birthing process, but in the Australian outback cattle
must take their chances. Nevertheless the newborn must
be marked with transponder tags under the national live-
stock identiﬁcation scheme, NLIS [56.63].
Other species such as kangaroos, feral pigs, wild
camels and horses can breed and run wild until har-
vested or culled. When creatures are conﬁned, tasks
Fig. 56.29 Lely Vector feeder

Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
56.3 Case Studies
1483
Part F | 56.3
include environmental monitoring and control, feeding,
cleaning and growth monitoring.
A Dutch company, Lely [56.64], is active in market-
ing products that have a strong robotic element. When
cattle are located in stalls, the Juno [56.65] patrols
the laneway at the side of the pen, pushing fodder to-
wards the rails to put it in reach of the feeding cattle
(Fig. 56.28).
The Vector [56.66] goes even further. A mobile
robot carrying a hopper, it navigates automatically be-
tween the barn that holds the feed and the stalls where
the cattle are waiting (Fig. 56.29).
Other equipment in Australian feedlots estimates
the weight gain of the cattle, such as a system that reads
the NLIS tag of a beast at a water trough and records
the weight imposed by the front legs.
In the Australian outback, similar sensing systems
perform a variety of functions. Water is scarce, so
watering points can be fenced, giving access only
via a laneway that can be monitored. Some earlier
projects [56.67] have involved species identiﬁcation to
control access by means of an automatically operated
gate, but similar technology has valuable use in cattle
production.
Again the NLIS tag is read, while a walk over
weighing system notes the weight gain of the animal.
Vision can be used to identify cows that are followed by
a calf. Now automatic gates can direct these to a sepa-
rate paddock for tagging the calves.
Many of the opportunities are for automation, which
may be a precursor for robotics. Several projects have
involved machine-vision monitoring of cattle [56.68]
or of pigs in piggeries [56.69]. The weight-gain is
estimated by visual means using precision cameras
(Fig. 56.30). Other analyses concern behavior [56.70].
Mobile robots can be involved in sheds where
chickens are bred for meat, rather than laying. A mobile
robot has been proposed for moving among the poul-
try to monitor air quality including temperature, relative
humidity and the concentrations of ammonia and dust.
Fig. 56.30 Measuring the live weight of cattle with vision
Australian honeybees must also be protected from
pests, carried by bees on arriving ships. Bait boxes are
deployed at ports around Australia to attract any such
swarms. A remote monitoring system with camera sens-
ing gives an early alert to the apiary ofﬁcer [56.71].
56.3.18 Livestock Exploitation
Traditional farming practices milk cows twice a day;
in morning and in the evening. Automatic milking par-
lors with robotic milking stations are being widely
adopted to improve diary productivity and convenience
(Fig. 56.31). These allow the cows to self-determine
when to come in for milking and feeding. In an auto-
mated milking station, teats are located and attachment
Fig. 56.31 Robot milking
Fig. 56.32 Engineers demonstrate how their pioneering
sheep shearing robot works at the University of Western
Australia in 1980 (courtesy National Archives of Australia:
A6180, 23/9/80/1)

Part F | 56.3
1484
Part F
Robots at Work
of milking systems is automatic. Yield is monitored
and udders are automatically inspected for injury and
disease. Human intervention is minimal. The Lely com-
pany is active in this area [56.72].
Once a year sheep must be shorn of their wool.
In the past, the University of Western Australia devel-
oped an automatic shearing system known as the Shear
Magic [56.73] (Fig. 56.32). The commercial exploita-
tion was not a success and there seems to have been
little activity in this area in recent years.
Fig. 56.33 Prototype computer vision system for scanning
the egg collection belt for potential blockages
Fig. 56.34 Precision Pastoral’s mustering method
Eggs must be collected from battery hens. As they
are laid, they roll from the cages onto a conveyer belt.
Among other robotic applications in egg production,
machine vision is used to detect foreign bodies or dam-
aged eggs [56.74] (Fig. 56.33).
56.3.19 Livestock Harvesting,
Slaughtering,
and Processing
The system already described for monitoring cat-
tle that approach a waterhole is also the subject of
a funded project for mustering. Cattle, selected by
means of their NLIS tags, are diverted into a com-
pound from which they can be collected for trans-
port to a feedlot, in preparation for slaughter [56.75]
(Fig. 56.34).
The vision-based system that can control access to
waterholes can also be used for the collection of feral
animals such as pigs. There are said to be more wild
camels in Australia than in Arabia and these too can be
captured by such a system.
At the start of the 1990s, Fututech was hailed as
the future of slaughterhouses [56.76]. Robotic sys-
tems to be installed at the Kilcoy pastoral company in
Queensland would automate the whole process from
the knocking box to the chillroom. Construction started
in 1992, but by June 1994 the project was abandoned,
at a cost of over $40 million [56.77]. It was a project
that was ahead of its time, relying on a central com-
puter and kilometers of cabling rather than distributed
intelligence.
But much is different now. Robots have become
commonplace in abattoirs, supported by sophisticated
sensing systems to locate skeletal features [56.78]
(Fig. 56.35). Pigs probably outnumber cattle and the
processed animals include sheep and goats. Deboning
systems are marketed for products including chicken
legs and ham bones [56.79, 80].
For slaughtering quantity, the lead must be held by
poultry, where a single plant can process up to 4000
birds per hour [56.81].
Fig. 56.35 Lamb processing

Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
56.3 Case Studies
1485
Part F | 56.3
56.3.20 Aerial-Based Precision Agriculture
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have recently begun
being applied to precision agriculture. This is a new
development and results are still preliminary, albeit
very promising (
VIDEO 307 ). In fact, the Association
for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International forecasts
that 80% of all UAVs sold in the United States in
the 2015–2025 period will go to serve the agricultural
market [56.82]. Even if the actual ﬁgure turns out not
to be that high, there is no question that roboticists
and agricultural engineers are investing signiﬁcant time
and resources to understanding how UAVs can improve
agricultural efﬁciency and reduce costs.
Dong et al. [56.83] use high-resolution images and
on-board sensor data from an aerial vehicle (Fig. 56.36)
to create a sequence of dense 3-D reconstructions of
the crop over time. This four-dimensional (4-D) spatio-
temporal reconstruction is used to segment the canopies
and estimate how the crown radius and height of each
plant evolve. The processing pipeline was tested on data
collected in a ﬁeld planted with corn, broccoli, and cab-
bage in Tifton, GA, USA (Fig. 56.37).
Fig. 56.36 AscTec Pelican quadrotor used for data collec-
tion over early season sweet corn
In many potato growing areas, the potato crop
does not senesce naturally and therefore tuber matu-
ration is artiﬁcially induced by killing the haulm 10
to 25 days prior to harvest. Reglone is a widely-used
potato haulm killing herbicide. Building on the knowl-
edge of the relationship between potato crop biomass
status, expressed in weighted difference vegetation
index (WDVI) [56.84], and the minimum effective
Week 1
Selection
Clustering
Week 2
Week 3
a) 3-D reconstructions
b) Canopy segmentation
Canopy 1
0.4
0
4
2
0
–2
–1 0
1
0.4
0
4
2
0
–2
–1 0
1
0.4
0
4
2
0
–2
–1 0
1
0.6
0
2
0
–2
0
1
0.6
0
2
0
–2
0
1
0.6
0
2
0
–2
0
1
0.4
0.2
0
0
10
Plants
Height (m)
Time (weeks)
0
2
4
0.4
0.2
0
0
10
Plants
Crown radius (m)
Time (weeks)
0
2
4
Canopy N ...
c) Crop analysis
d) Statistics
...
Fig.56.37a–d Dense 3-D reconstruction of the corn stalks,
used to estimate how the crown radius and the height of
each plant evolve over time. (a) 3-D reconstruction of crop,
(b) canopy segmentation, (c) crop analysis and (d) crop
statistics

Part F | 56.3
1486
Part F
Robots at Work
Fig. 56.38 Operator launching an unmanned aircraft over a potato ﬁeld via a launch rope. The plane then ﬂies au-
tonomously following a pre-programmed ﬂight path
0.001
0.116
0.233
a)
b)
0.56–0.66
0.67–0.76
0.77–0.86
0.87–0.97
0.98–1.07
1.08–1.17
1.18–1.27
1.28–1.37
Fig. 56.39 (a) Weighted difference
vegetation index (WDVI) map of
a potato ﬁeld; the legend on the
bottom represents the WDVI, which
varies from zero (no crop at all) to one
(theoretical maximum). A vigorous
potato crop has a value in the
0:60:7 range. (b) Reglone dose task
map; the legend represents dose in
liters per hectare
dose of Reglone, Kempenaar et al. [56.85] success-
fully demonstrated the use of crop biomass imaging
with a multi-spectral camera underneath an unmanned
aircraft (Fig. 56.38) for variable rate application. The
Fig. 56.40 Fixed-wing UAV launched over a black-grass-
infested wheat ﬁeld
WDVI map was converted into a 33 m 10 m dose grid
map (Fig. 56.39) adjusted to the boom width of the
ﬁeld sprayer. On the ﬁeld, the average use was 0:9 liters
of Reglone per ha, with satisfactory efﬁcacy. Standard
practice would have been the use of 2 liters per ha. The
use of unmanned aerial imaging thus prompted a sav-
ings of more than 50%, without loss in potato haulm
killing efﬁcacy, harvestability of the potatoes, and ﬁnal
product quality.
Wheat is the most widely grown arable crop in the
UK, covering around 1:6 million hectares and produc-
ing 11:9 million metric tons in 2013. As with other
crops, wheat has its share of weed competitors, one of
which is black-grass. This proliﬁc weed is highly com-
petitive and increasingly resistant to chemical control,
making it one of the biggest challenges facing UK’s
agricultural sector.
Researchers
from
URSULA
Agriculture
have
demonstrated a system that combines multispectral
sensing with UAVs to capture imagery at 10 cm resolu-

Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
56.4 Conclusion
1487
Part F | 56.4
tion (Fig. 56.40) [56.86]. Using the unique spectral and
morphological properties of the black-grass, they de-
veloped classiﬁcation processes that are applied to the
image to automatically delineate the black-grass from
the host crop.
For the farmer and agronomist, the output is sup-
plied in the form of visual maps and spatially attributed
data points that are transferable through farm planning
software to precision guided machinery (Fig. 56.41).
URSULA Agriculture’s imagery analysis is able to
not only identify the location and in-ﬁeld extent of
black-grass infestation, but also the density and area
of black-grass plants, all of which will have a bear-
ing on control decisions. The information provides the
farmer with vital data to help contain black-grass in-
festation in the current growing season. Crucially, it
also helps with long-term control by informing man-
agement methods such as higher seed rates to increase
competition in black-grass hotspots, alternative cultiva-
tion techniques, or adjusting cropping strategies, all of
a)
b)
c)
Fig.56.41a–b Black-grass analysis stack: High-resolution mul-
tispectral image (a), black-grass delineation (b), and density
map (c)
which can help control black-grass alongside chemical
herbicides.
56.4 Conclusion
The robotics community has made great strides toward
introducing robotic systems in agriculture and forestry.
The next ten years will bring improved sensing and
mobility, and some advances in manipulation for crop
production.
In orchard crops, there is still a need for improve-
ment in algorithms that calculate crop yield and canopy
volume or that automatically detect insects and disease.
Here the breakthroughs may end up coming from physi-
cists and engineers producing novel imaging systems
rather than from roboticists. The continued conversion
of existing orchards to the tree wall architecture means
that autonomous orchard vehicles and platforms will
soon have access to the vast majority of the fruit pro-
duction acreage, at least in developed countries.
Manipulation in orchard environments is a grow-
ing and challenging ﬁeld. The long-sought harvesting
robot is still an object of ﬁction, especially when it
comes to its economic feasibility. In the apple indus-
try, for example, the best human workers are capable
of picking 40 to 60 pieces of fruit per minute, keeping
bruising down to a few percent of the volume picked.
Our community is relatively far from achieving this
level of performance, but we do not need to get there
in one shot. Many value-added operations, including
pruning, thinning, and harvesting, could beneﬁt from
an automated manipulation-based solution. Manipula-
tion should be introduced into low-precision tasks ﬁrst,
where economic gains can be more readily realized, be-
fore the technology is reﬁned and directed at tasks such
as apple picking. One example is automatic grape shoot
and fruit thinning according to each individual vine’s
crop load [56.87]. This is in contrast to today’s methods,
where crop load management is conducted uniformly
over the entire vineyard, leading to signiﬁcant varia-
tions in yield. Achieving vine-level manipulation in an
economically sound way would help move the grape in-
dustry in the direction of variable rate management, so
that one day, each vine, leaf, and fruit will be treated
individually according to its own needs of water, nutri-
ents, light, etc. [56.88].
Despite more than thirty years of research, robotic
systems for plant maintenance operations in protected
cultivation have not become commercially available.
Clearly, the complexity of the operation is an issue.
This is due to the highly unstructured working environ-
ment, the inherent natural variability of the crop, and the
unfavorable environmental conditions, e.g., strong vari-
ations in lighting. In this domain, robust sensing and
perception is key to successful deployments. This in-
cludes aspects such as detection of fruits, stems, and
leaves, determination of their properties, e.g., ripeness,
and, ﬁnally, their accurate localization in the 3-D work-
ing environment. Object detection can be quite a chal-
lenge as in some cases it boils down to ﬁnding a green
object in a green background. When color differences
are more pronounced detection can be easier, but still
in many cases object occlusion poses another problem.

Part F | 56.4
1488
Part F
Robots at Work
This does not only prevent proper detection of the fruits,
but also adds difﬁculty in the proper assessment of their
properties.
In the cluttered environments of protected culti-
vation, manipulation is also quite challenging. While
performing a task, the robot should prevent damage to
the crop as this will immediately reduce its value. Still,
the robot should be allowed to hit objects such as leaves.
Humans tend to have quite intensive contact with the
crop during operations. To mimic this kind of behavior
requires knowledge about whether objects should not be
touched at all or whether they might be gently touched
and pushed aside, employing a kind of compliant mo-
tion.
Generally speaking, robotics-based crop produc-
tion can be seen as an instantiation of the hand-eye
coordination problem, or the integration of effective
sensing, perception, and intelligent manipulation; in
other words, those aspects of a well-trained human
that are hard to reproduce. Development of technol-
ogy to mimic human behavior is one way to go, but
it will always be limited by the environmental con-
ditions found at the time the robot was introduced.
A systemic approach where the crop production sys-
tem is designed top-down with the robotic system as
just one of its components is a much more promising
route, yet one that is still in its infancy. For example,
growing systems can be modiﬁed to make detection and
the approach of fruits and ﬂowers easier, thus allow-
ing for more simple design and operation of automated
systems. Likewise, cultural practices may be modiﬁed
to include the robot as part of the task [56.89, 90].
Human-robot interaction might be an interesting and
cost-effective intermediate step – allowing for human
guidance and supervision only when the machine needs
assistance. Such collaborative approaches facilitate data
collection in real working environments, offering the
opportunity for learning and improving algorithms, thus
paving the way for fully autonomous operations in the
future.
Another important aspect of the successful intro-
duction of robots in agriculture and forestry is that
related to the socio-economic barriers to adoption. In
addition to being able to execute a task correctly, the
robot must do it in a cost-effective way. Such efﬁ-
ciency can only be demonstrated via numerous ﬁeld
trials, which are time-consuming and costly. Further-
more, the robotic system must have a total ownership
cost, including acquisition, maintenance, user training,
and disposal, that is less than the ﬁnancial gains lever-
aged through its introduction in the production process.
Finally, one fundamental aspect is safety. Not only must
the hardware and software be designed and validated
based on explicit safety requirements, there must be
standards and regulations that dictate how and when
robots and humans can interact. For an example of
a study on the socio-economic barriers to adoption in
the apple industry, see [56.91].
The mechanization enabled by the Industrial Rev-
olution and the automation enabled by the information
technology era have revolutionized agricultural produc-
tion to the point where a single farmer can produce
grains to feed one hundred people. In the next ﬁfty
years, we will witness a similar occurrence in fruits,
vegetables, and other crops, thanks to the advances in
robotic technologies that our community is continually
developing for and applying to agriculture and forestry
(
VIDEO 93 ).
Video-References
VIDEO 26
Autonomous orchard tractors
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/56/videodetails/26
VIDEO 91
Autonomous orchard vehicle for specialty crop production
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/56/videodetails/91
VIDEO 93
Autonomous utility vehicle – R Gator
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/56/videodetails/93
VIDEO 95
Automatic plant probing
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/56/videodetails/95
VIDEO 96
Visual GPS – High accuracy localization for forestry machinery
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/56/videodetails/96
VIDEO 131
Smart Seeder: An autonomous high accuracy seed planter for broad acre crops
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/56/videodetails/131
VIDEO 304
A robot for harvesting sweet-pepper in greenhouses
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/56/videodetails/304
VIDEO 305
Ladybird: An intelligent farm robot for the vegetable industry
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/56/videodetails/305
VIDEO 306
An automated mobile platform for orchard scanning and for soil, yield, and flower mapping
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/56/videodetails/306

Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
References
1489
Part F | 56
VIDEO 307
A mini unmanned aerial system for remote sensing in agriculture
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/56/videodetails/307
VIDEO 308
An autonomous cucumber harvester
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/56/videodetails/308
VIDEO 309
An autonomous robot for de-leafing cucumber plants
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/56/videodetails/309
VIDEO 310
The Intelligent Autonomous Weeder
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/56/videodetails/310
References
56.1
J.A. Foley, N. Ramankutty, K.A. Brauman, E.S. Cas-
sidy,
J.S.
Gerber, M.
Johnston,
N.D.
Mueller,
C. O’Connell, D.K. Ray, P.C. West, C. Balzer, E.M. Ben-
nett, S.R. Carpenter, J. Hill, C. Monfreda, S. Polasky,
J. Rockström, J. Sheehan, S. Siebert, D. Tilman,
D.P.M. Zaks: Solutions for a cultivated planet, Na-
ture 478, 337–342 (2011)
56.2
A. Alleyne: Editor’s note: Agriculture and infor-
mation technology, Natl. Acad. Eng. Bridge, Issue
Agric. Inf, Technol. 41(3), 3–4 (2011)
56.3
Global Harvest Initiative: The 2012 Global Agricul-
tural Productivity Report, http://goo.gl/GBPvjK
56.4
J. Reid: The impact of mechanization on agri-
culture, Nat. Acad. Eng. Bridge, Issue Agric. Inf.
Technol. 41(3), 22–29 (2011)
56.5
E.J. Van Henten: Greenhouse mechanization: State
of the art and future perspective, Acta Hortic. 710,
55–69 (2006)
56.6
S.T. Nuske, S. Achar, T. Bates, S.G. Narasimhan,
S. Singh: Yield estimation in vineyards by visual
grape detection, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst., San Francisco (2011)
56.7
Q. Wang, S.T. Nuske, M. Bergerman, S. Singh: Au-
tomated crop yield estimation for apple orchards,
Int. Symp. Exp. Robotics, Quebec City (2012)
56.8
J. Deere: Integrated AutoTrac System, http://goo.gl/
CsxxfL
56.9
K. Gallardo, M. Taylor, H. Hinman: 2009 Cost esti-
mates of establishing and producing gala apples in
Washington, Washington State University Extension
Fact Sheet FS005E, http://goo.gl/BHBZrb (2010)
56.10
B. Hamner, M. Bergerman, S. Singh: Results with
autonomous vehicles operating in specialty crops,
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom., St. Paul, MN
(2012)
56.11
G.
Giacomelli,
N.
Castilla,
E.J.
Van
Henten,
D.R. Mears, S. Sase: Innovation in greenhouse en-
gineering, Acta Hortic. 801, 75–88 (2008)
56.12
C.W. Bac, E.J. van Henten, J. Hemming, Y. Edan:
Harvesting robots for high-value crops: State-of-
the-art review and challenges ahead, J. Field
Robotics 31(6), 888–911 (2012)
56.13
J.C. Noordam, J. Hemming, C. van Heerde, F. Gol-
bach, R. van Soest, E. Wekking: Automated rose
cutting in greenhouses with 3D vision and robotics:
Analysis of 3D vision techniques for stem detection,
Acta Hortic. 691, 885–892 (2005)
56.14
T. Rath, M. Kawollek: Robotic harvesting of Gerbera
Jamesonii based on detection and three-dimen-
sional modeling of cut flower pedicels, Comput.
Electron. Agric. 66, 85–92 (2009)
56.15
R. Berenstein, O.B. Shahar, A. Shapiro, Y. Edan:
Grape clusters and foliage detection algorithms for
autonomous selective vineyard sprayer, Intell. Serv.
Robotics 3, 233–243 (2010)
56.16
E.J. Van Henten, B.A.J. Van Tuijl, G.J. Hoogakker,
M.J. Van Der Weerd, J. Hemming, J.G. Kornet,
J. Bontsema: An autonomous robot for de-leafing
cucumber plants grown in a high-wire cultivation
system, Biosyst. Eng. 94, 317–323 (2006)
56.17
M. Monta, N. Kondo, Y. Shibano: Agricultural robot
in grape production system, Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (1995)
56.18
Wikipedia: Controlled Traffic Farming, http://goo.
gl/FODY04
56.19
J. Jin, L. Tang: Coverage path planning on three-
dimensional terrain for arable farming, J. Field
Robotics 28(3), 424–440 (2011)
56.20
D.C. Slaughter, D.K. Giles, D. Downey: Autonomous
robotic weed control systems: A review, Comput.
Electron. Agric. 61, 63–78 (2008)
56.21
F.K. Van Evert, J. Samsom, G. Polder, M. Vijn, H.-
J. van Dooren, A. Lamaker, G.W.A.M. van der Heij-
den, C. Kempenaar, T. van der Zalm, B. Lotz: A robot
to detect and control broad-leaved dock (Rumex
obtusifolius L.) in grassland, J. Field Robotics 28,
264–277 (2011)
56.22
G. Polder, F.K. Van Evert, A. Lamaker, A. De Jong,
G.W.A.M. Van der Heijden, L.A.P. Lotz, T. Van der
Zalm, C. Kempenaar: Weed detection using textural
image analysis, 6th Bienn. Conf. Eur. Fed. IT Agric.
(EFITA), Glasgow (2007), available online at http://
edepot.wur.nl/28203
56.23
F.K. Van Evert, G. Polder, G.W.A.M. Van der Heij-
den, C. Kempenaar, L.A.P. Lotz: Real-time, vision-
based detection of Rumex obtusifolius L. in grass-
land, Weed Res. 49, 164–174 (2009)
56.24
H. Böhm, J. Finze: Überprüfung der Effektivität
der maschinellen Ampferregulierung im Grünland
mittels WUZI unter differenzierten Standortbedin-
gungen [Testing the effectiveness of mechanical
control of docks in grassland with the WUZI un-
der a variety of conditions.], http://goo.gl/BVdqgy
(2004)
56.25
A.T. Nieuwenhuizen, J.W. Hofstee, E.J. van Hen-
ten: Adaptive detection of volunteer potato plants
in sugar beet fields, Precis. Agric. 11, 433–447
(2009)

Part F | 56
1490
Part F
Robots at Work
56.26
A.T. Nieuwenhuizen, J.W. Hofstee, J.C. van de
Zande, J. Meuleman, E.J. van Henten: Classification
of sugar beet and volunteer potato reflection spec-
tra with a neural network and statistical discrimi-
nant analysis to select discriminative wavelengths,
Comput. Electron. Agric. 73, 146–153 (2010)
56.27
A.T. Nieuwenhuizen, J.W. Hofstee, E.J. van Henten:
Performance evaluation of an automated detection
and control system for volunteer potatoes in sugar
beet fields, Biosyst. Eng. 107, 46–53 (2010)
56.28
T. Bakker, H. Wouters, K. Van Asselt, J. Bontsema,
L. Tang, J. Müller, G. Van Straten: A vision based row
detection system for sugar beet, Comput. Electron.
Agric. 60(1), 87–95 (2008)
56.29
T. Bakker, K. Van Asselt, J. Bontsema, J. Müller,
G. Van Straten: A path following algorithm for mo-
bile robots, Auton. Robots 29(1), 85–97 (2010)
56.30
T. Bakker, K. van Asselt, J. Bontsema, J. Müller,
G. van Straten: Autonomous navigation using a
robot platform in a sugar beet field, Biosyst. Eng.
109(4), 357–368 (2011)
56.31
J. Katupitiya, R. Eaton, T. Yaqub: Systems engi-
neering approach to agricultural automation: New
developments, 1st Annual IEEE Syst. Conf. (2007)
pp. 298–304
56.32
D. Kohanbash, A. Valada, G.A. Kantor: Irrigation
control methods for wireless sensor network, Am.
Soc. Agric. Biol. Eng. Annual Meeting (2012), avail-
able online at http://goo.gl/3NJyXb
56.33
S. Singh, M. Bergerman, J. Cannons, B. Grocholsky,
B. Hamner, G. Holguin, L. Hull, V. Jones, G. Kan-
tor, H. Koselka, G. Li, J. Owen, J. Park, W. Shi,
J. Teza: Comprehensive automation for specialty
crops: Year 1 results and lessons learned, J. Intell.
Serv. Robotics, Special Issue Agric, Robotics 3(4),
245–262 (2010)
56.34
B. Davis: CMU-led automation program puts robots
in the field, AUVSI’s Unmanned Syst.: Mission Crit.
2, 38–40 (2012)
56.35
R. Lenain, J. Preynat, B. Thuilot, P. Avanzini, P. Mar-
tinet: Adaptive formation control of a fleet of mo-
bile robots: Application to autonomous field oper-
ations, Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2010) pp. 1241–
1246
56.36
A. Shapiro, E. Korkidi, A. Demri, R. Riemer, Y. Edan,
O. Ben-Shahar: Toward elevated agrobotics: An au-
tonomous field robot for spraying and pollinating
date palm trees, J. Field Robotics 26(6/7), 572–590
(2009)
56.37
S. Foix, G. Alenyà, C. Torras: Lock-in time-of-flight
(ToF) cameras: A survey, IEEE Sensors J. 11(9), 1917–
1926 (2011)
56.38
R. Klose, J. Penlington, A. Ruckelshausen: Usability
study of 3D time-of-flight cameras for automatic
plant phenotyping, Workshop Comput. Image Anal.
Agric. (2009) pp. 93–105
56.39
G. Alenyà, B. Dellen, S. Foix, C. Torras: Leaf segmen-
tation from ToF data for robotized plant probing,
IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 20(3), 50–59 (2013)
56.40
G. Alenyà, B. Dellen, S. Foix, C. Torras: Robotic
leaf probing via segmentation of range data into
surface patches, IROS Workshop Agric. Robotics, Vil-
lamura (2012)
56.41
G. Alenyà, B. Dellen, C. Torras: 3D modelling of
leaves from color and ToF data for robotized plant
measuring, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom., Shang-
hai (2011) pp. 3408–3414
56.42
B. Dellen, G. Alenyà, S. Foix, C. Torras: Segment-
ing color images into surface patches by exploiting
sparse depth data, IEEE Workshop Appl. Comput.
Vis., Kona (2011) pp. 591–598
56.43
E.J. Van Henten, B.A.J. Van Tuijl, J. Hemming,
J.G. Kornet, J. Bontsema, E.A. Van Os: Field test of
an autonomous cucumber picking robot, Biosyst.
Eng. 86, 305–313 (2003)
56.44
E.J. Van Henten, J. Hemming, B.A.J. Van Tuijl,
J.G. Kornet, J. Bontsema: Collision-free motion
planning for a cucumber picking robot, Biosyst.
Eng. 86, 135–144 (2003)
56.45
E.J. Van Henten, J. Hemming, B.A.J. Van Tuijl,
J.G. Kornet, J. Meuleman, J. Bontsema, E.A. Van Os:
An autonomous robot for harvesting cucumbers in
greenhouses, Auton. Robots 13, 241–258 (2002)
56.46
S.
Hayashi,
K.
Shigematsu,
S.
Yamamoto,
K. Kobayashi, Y. Kohno, J. Kamata, M. Kurita:
Evaluation of a strawberry-harvesting robot in a
field test, Biosyst. Eng. 105, 160–171 (2010)
56.47
S. Hayashi, S. Yamamoto, S. Saito, Y. Ochiai,
Y. Kohno, K. Yamamoto, J. Kamata, M. Kurita:
Development of a movable strawberry-harvest-
ing robot using a travelling platform, Proc. Int.
Conf. Agric. Eng. CIGR-AgEng 2012, Valencia, Spain
(2012)
56.48
F. Georgsson, T. Hellström, T. Johansson, K. Pro-
rok, O. Ringdahl, U. Sandström: Development of
an autonomous path tracking forest machine – a
status report. In: Field and Service Robotics: Re-
sults of the 5th International Conference, ed. by
P. Corke, S. Sukkarieh (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2006) pp. 603–614
56.49
M. Miettinen, M. Öhman, A. Visala, P. Forsman:
Simultaneous localization and mapping for forest
harvesters, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2007)
pp. 517–522
56.50
J. Roßmann, M. Schluse, C. Schlette, A. Bücken,
P. Krahwinkler, M. Emde: Realization of a highly
accurate mobile robot system for multi purpose
precision forestry applications, The 14th Int. Conf.
Adv. Robotics (2009) pp. 133–138
56.51
J. Roßmann, P. Krahwinkler, A. Bücken: Mapping
and navigation of mobile robots in natural envi-
ronments. In: Advances in Robotics Research - The-
ory, Implementation, Application. German Work-
shop on Robotics, ed. by T. Kröger, F.M. Wahl
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2009) pp. 43–52
56.52
S. Thrun, W. Burgard, D. Fox: Probabilistic Robotics
(MIT Press, Cambridge 2005)
56.53
P. Krahwinkler, J. Roßmann, B. Sondermann: Sup-
port vector machine based decision tree for very
high resolution multispectral forest mapping, IEEE
Int. Geosci. Remote Sens. Symp. (2011) pp. 43–
46

Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
References
1491
Part F | 56
56.54
A. Bücken, J. Roßmann: From the volumetric algo-
rithm for single-tree delineation towards a fully-
automated process for the generation of virtual
forests. In: Progress and New Trends in 3D Geoinfor-
mation Sciences. Lecture Notes in Geoinformation
and Cartography, ed. by J. Pouliot, S. Daniel, F. Hu-
bert, A. Zamyadi (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2013)
pp. 79–99
56.55
J. Roßmann, T. Jung, M. Rast: Developing vir-
tual testbeds for mobile robotic applications in
the woods and on the moon, The IEEE/RSJ 2010
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (2010) pp. 4952–
4957
56.56
A. Shiriaev, L. Freidovich, I. Manchester, U. Met-
tin, P. La Hera, S. Westerberg: Status of Smart Crane
Lab Project: Modeling and Control for a Forwarder
Crane, Department of Applied Physics and Elec-
tronics (Umeå University, Umeå 2008)
56.57
U. Mettin, P.X. La Hera, D.O. Morales, A.S. Shiriaev,
L.B. Freidovich, S. Westerberg: Trajectory planning
and time-independent motion control for a kine-
matically redundant hydraulic manipulator, Int.
Conf. Adv. Robotics (2009)
56.58
U. Mettin, S. Westerberg, P.X. La Hera, A. Shiriaev:
Analysis of human-operated motions and trajec-
tory replanning for kinematically redundant ma-
nipulators, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(2009)
56.59
D. Morales, S. Westerberg, P. La Hera, U. Met-
tin, L. Freidovich, A. Shiriaev: Open-loop con-
trol experiments on driver assistance for crane
forestry machines, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(2011)
56.60
A. Hansson, M. Servin: Semi-autonomous shared
control of large-scale manipulator arms, Control
Eng. Pract. 18(9), 1069–1076 (2010)
56.61
S. Westerberg, I. Manchester, U. Mettin, P. La Hera,
A. Shiriaev: Virtual environment teleoperation of a
hydraulic forestry crane, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (2008)
56.62
Y.-C. Park, A. Shiriaev, S. Westerberg, S. Lee: 3D log
recognition and pose estimation for robotic forestry
machine, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2011)
56.63
NLIS: National Livestock Identification System, NSW
Department of Primary Industries, http://goo.gl/
WoHUi2
56.64
Lely home page: http://goo.gl/JCl8CI
56.65
Juno feed-pusher: http://goo.gl/V5H2Ye
56.66
Lely Vector feeder: http://goo.gl/dLiL3q
56.67
M. Dunn, J. Billingsley, N. Finch: Machine vi-
sion classification of animals, Mechatron. Mach.
Vis. 2003: Future Trends: Proc. 10th Annual Conf.
Mechatron. Mach. Vis. Pract. (Research Studies,
Baldock 2003)
56.68
C. McCarthy, J. Billingsley, N. Finch, P. Mur-
ray, J. Gaughan: Cattle liveweight estimation us-
ing machine vision assessment of objective body
measurements: First results, Proc. 28th Bienn.
Aust. Soc. Anim. Production Conf., Vol. 28 (Aus-
tralian Society of Animal Production, Wagga Wagga
2010)
56.69
Y. Wang, W. Yang, P. Winter, L.T. Walker: Non-con-
tact sensing of hog weights by machine vision,
Appl. Eng. Agric. 22(4), 577 (2006)
56.70
W. Zhu, F. Zhong, X. Li: Automated monitoring
system of pig behavior based on RFID and ARM-
LINUX, Third Int. Symp. Intell. Inf. Technol. Secur.
Inf. (2010) pp. 431–434
56.71
S. Barry, D. Cook, R. Duthie, D. Clifford, D. An-
derson: Future Surveillance Needs for Honeybee
Biosecurity, RIRDC Publication No. 10/107, http://
goo.gl/MUrPLo
56.72
Lely Astronaut A4 milking system: http://goo.gl/
wYhUVH
56.73
J.P. Trevelyan: Sensing and control for sheep-
shearing robots, IEEE J. Robotics Autom. 5(6), 716–
727 (1989)
56.74
Robotics in the Poultry Industry, Poultry CRC: http://
goo.gl/xH5vy6
56.75
A. J. Bubb, T. K. Driver, C. D. James: CASE STUDY -
Redefining the cowboy: Precision pastoral decision
making from remote monitoring and control of cat-
tle, http://goo.gl/Vu0FlQ (2010)
56.76
R. Rankin: Further automation, Meat ’93, Aust.
Meat Ind. Res. Conf., Gold Coast. (1993), available
online at http://goo.gl/lv2yjh
56.77
Performance Audit, Management of Project Fu-
tutech, The Meat Research Corporation, http://goo.
gl/C5jMgm
56.78
Robotic Technologies Limited: RTL – Scott and Silver
Fern Farms, http://goo.gl/xZxLOZ
56.79
Automated Boning Room System, Scott Group:
http://goo.gl/0zFVqi
56.80
Chicken Whole Leg Deboning Machine, Mayekawa:
http://goo.gl/xhj2Lf
56.81
Poultry slaughtering, Hyfoma: http://goo.gl/dzTfVT
56.82
Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems In-
ternational: The Economic Impact of Unmanned
Aircraft Systems Integration in the United States,
http://goo.gl/NS5EkT (2013)
56.83
J. Dong, L. Carlone, G.C. Rains, T. Coolong, F. Del-
laert: 4D mapping of fields using autonomous
ground and aerial vehicles, ASABE Int. Conf., Mon-
treal (2014), Paper No. 141912258
56.84
F.K. van Evert, P. van der Voet, E. van Valkengoed,
L. Kooistra, C. Kempenaar: Satellite-based herbi-
cide rate recommendation for potato haulm killing,
Eur. J. Agron. 43, 49–57 (2012)
56.85
C. Kempenaar, F.K. van Evert, T. Been: Use of vege-
tation indices in variable rate application of potato
haulm killing herbicides, Proc. ICPA Conf., Sacra-
mento, USA 2014 (2014)
56.86
C. Pugh, M. Jarman, S. Keyworth, J. Webber, I.
Cameron: URSULA Agriculture, http://goo.gl/HzGkRT
(2013)
56.87
S. Singh, S. Nuske, M. Bergerman, T. Bates,
J. M. Peltier: Vineyard efficiency through high-
resolution, spatiotemporal crop load measurement
and management, http://goo.gl/iqXgWy
56.88
S. Blackmore: New concepts in agricultural au-
tomation, HGCA Conf. (2009)
56.89
J.L. Glancey, W.E. Kee: Engineering aspects of pro-
duction and harvest mechanization for fresh and

Part F | 56
1492
Part F
Robots at Work
processed vegetables, HortTechnology 15, 76–79
(2005)
56.90
T. Burks, F. Villegas, M. Hannan, S. Flood, B. Sivara-
man, V. Subramanian, J. Sikes: Engineering and
horticultural aspects of robotic fruit harvesting:
Opportunities and constraints, HortTechnology 15,
79–87 (2005)
56.91
K. Ellis, T.A. Baugher, K. Lewis: Use of survey instru-
ments to assess technology adoption for tree fruit
production, HortTechnology 20, 1043–1048 (2010)

Multimedia Contents Robotics in C
1493
Part F | 57
57. Robotics in Construction
Kamel S. Saidi, Thomas Bock, Christos Georgoulas
This chapter introduces various construction au-
tomation concepts that have been developed over
the past few decades and presents examples of
construction robots that are in current use (as of
2006) and/or in various stages of research and de-
velopment. Section 57.1 presents an overview of
the construction industry, which includes descrip-
tions of the industry, the types of construction,
and the typical construction project. The industry
overview also discusses the concept of automa-
tion versus robotics in construction and breaks
down the concept of robotics in construction into
several levels of autonomy as well as other cate-
gories. Section 57.2 discusses some of the offsite
applications of robotics in construction (such as
for prefabrication), while Sect. 57.3 discusses the
use of robots that perform a single task at the
construction site. Section 57.4 introduces the con-
cept of an integrated robotized construction site
in which multiple robots/machines collaborate to
build an entire structure. Section 57.5 discusses un-
solved technical problems in construction robotics,
which include interoperability, connection sys-
tems, tolerances, and power and communications.
Finally, Sect. 57.6 discusses future directions in
construction robotics and Sect. 57.7 gives some
conclusions and suggests resources for further
reading.
57.1
Overview............................................. 1494
57.1.1
Industry Description .................. 1494
57.1.2
Automation in Construction ....... 1496
57.1.3
Classification of Robotics
in Construction ......................... 1496
57.2
Offsite Applications of Robotics
in Construction.................................... 1499
57.2.1
Robotics in Component
Production................................ 1499
57.3
Onsite Applications of Single Task
Construction Robots............................. 1504
57.3.1
Steel Welding............................ 1504
57.3.2
Reinforcement Manufacturing
and Positioning ........................ 1504
57.3.3
Concrete Distribution ................. 1504
57.3.4
Robots for Customized
Construction On-Site ................. 1505
57.3.5
Robotic Interior Finishing........... 1506
57.3.6
Robotic Facade Operation........... 1510
57.3.7
Earthmoving ............................. 1511
57.3.8
Road Maintenance .................... 1511
57.3.9
Material Handling ..................... 1511
57.4
Integrated Robotized Construction Sites 1511
57.4.1
Robotic Roof Field Factory
Approach.................................. 1511
57.4.2
Robotic Field Factory on-Ground
Approach.................................. 1513
57.4.3
Robotic Deconstruction
and Robotic Recycling................ 1513
57.5
Currently Unsolved Technical Problems . 1514
57.5.1
Interoperability ......................... 1514
57.5.2
Structural Connection Systems .... 1514
57.5.3
Tolerances ................................ 1515
57.5.4
Power and Communications
in the Field............................... 1515
57.5.5
Sensing .................................... 1516
57.6
Future Directions ................................. 1516
57.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ......... 1516
Video-References......................................... 1517
References................................................... 1517
Construction is a ubiquitous human activity that re-
lates to the creation or realization of physical artifacts
or custom-made capital goods. It is distinguished from
manufacturing in that the production activity normally
occurs in a ﬁeld setting and is undertaken in the open
air, on natural terrain, and often with naturally oc-

Part F | 57.1
1494
Part F
Robots at Work
curring materials. Typically, building and construction
products are large in scale and unique in form. More-
over, the environment or ﬁeld setting is typically unique
and requires a, rather ad hoc, factory to be synthesized
on site.
Over the centuries, various forms of machines and me-
chanical engineering systems have been introduced into
the construction engineering domain and into the build-
ing and construction industry to increase production
efﬁciency. In common with the ﬁelds of agriculture,
mining, and forestry, the long-term trend has been for
these ﬁelds to become increasingly mechanized [57.1].
In the last few decades, with the decrease in the rel-
ative cost of machinery to labor and with the globaliza-
tion of markets, the construction industry has become
signiﬁcantly more capital intensive and large-scale ma-
chinery systems and pieces of construction plant –
such as tunnel-boring machines and very large tower
cranes – have become commonplace. This trend to
mechanization is likely to continue with the progres-
sive introduction of computer-controlled construction
machinery and ﬂexible manufacturing concepts into the
industry.
With the relatively recent development of the micro-
processor and the availability of low-cost computer and
sensing technology, construction robots have become
a technical and economic possibility and this form of
technology is now gradually being used in the industry.
57.1 Overview
The application of robots in construction traditionally
falls under construction automation.As the term im-
plies, the ﬁeld of construction automation is focused
on automating construction processes, and the use of
robots is but one aspect of automation. Construction
processes also fall within several categories best de-
scribed through a brief introduction to the construction
industry.
57.1.1 Industry Description
The construction industry typically accounts for 5%
of a country’s gross domestic product (GDP) or gross
value added (GVA) and employs a signiﬁcant portion
of the country’s workforce. Table 57.1 presents some of
these statistics for the USA, the European Union (EU),
Japan and China [57.2–8]. Worldwide, construction in-
dustry spending was estimated at approximately 11% of
the world’s GDP at the end of the 20th century [57.9].
Construction is considered by many to be techno-
logically behind other industries, such as manufactur-
Table 57.1 Value of construction put in place and number
of construction workers for the USA, EU, Japan and China
Country
USA
EU
Japan
China
Data period (year)
2012
2009
2011
2011
Value of construction put
in place as percentage of
national GDP/GVA (%)
5
7
10
7
Number of construction
workers as percentage of the
total national workforce (%)
5
11
10
5
Total number of workers
in the national workforce
(million)
112
175
63
784
ing. In manufacturing, a product is designed for mass
production, whereas construction products (or projects)
are usually one-off and unique [57.10]. Thus the ef-
ﬁciencies achieved through mass production are not
easily achieved in construction.
Other often attributed reasons for the construction
industry’s technological lag are the industry’s fragmen-
tation and aversion to the risks associated with the
introduction of new technologies [57.10, 11]. For ex-
ample, in the US in 2010 ﬁrms with fewer than twenty
employees employed approximately 40% of all con-
struction workers, and 63% of all construction workers
worked for specialty trade contractors who accounted
for 64% of construction ﬁrms [57.10]. Specialty trade
contractors are usually subcontractors on a project and
are not responsible for the overall outcome of the
project.
In addition, unlike their manufacturing counter-
parts, construction sites are for the most part unstruc-
tured, cluttered, and congested, making them difﬁcult
environments for robots to operate in. Furthermore,
human workers are also present in large numbers on
a construction project, making safety a paramount con-
cern.
Types of Construction
Construction projects are usually classiﬁed as resi-
dential, commercial, industrial, or civil. Residential
construction generally involves single-family homes
or large apartment buildings; commercial focuses on
building structures such as ofﬁce and retail space, ware-
houses, and so on; industrial is involved in building
factories, power plants, and other similar structures; and
civil construction focuses on public infrastructure such
as highways, bridges, tunnels, and dams.

Robotics in Construction
57.1 Overview
1495
Part F | 57.1
The Typical Construction Project
A construction project typically goes through six major
phases, as shown in Fig. 57.1. Some projects may go
through different variations of the sequence shown, but
most projects include planning, design, construction,
and operation phases [57.4, 10]. Phase 1 begins when
a need for a project arises and the requirements are iden-
tiﬁed. Phase 2 involves developing alternative project
plans that could meet the identiﬁed needs and evaluat-
ing the technological and economic feasibility of each
alternative. Phase 3 develops detailed engineering de-
signs and speciﬁcations for the plan selected in phase 2.
The construction of the facility from ground-breaking
through to ﬁnal inspection takes place in phase 4 of the
project. The facility is occupied and commences oper-
ation in phase 5 and continues operating until it is time
to shut down and dismantle the facility once it becomes
obsolete (phase 6).
The actual physical work (building, operating,
maintaining, and dismantling) on a construction project
takes place in the last three phases. Although these are
the only phases in which machines are used, construc-
tion automation can also take place during the other
phases of a project, as described in Sect. 57.1.2.
During the various phases of a construction project,
several stakeholders may be involved at any time. The
major stakeholders include the following: the owner
and operator, whose needs initiated the project; the ar-
chitect and engineer, who have the task of translating
the owner’s needs into an aesthetically pleasing and
structurally sound design; and the general contractor,
whose task is to translate the design into a physical
structure. In addition several other stakeholders may
be involved either independently from the above stake-
holders or as part of their organizations; for example,
the constructor may employ a project manager, a con-
struction manager, a site superintendent, and others, and
he/she will typically subcontract major activities such
as excavation and concrete pouring. The subcontrac-
tors and sub-stakeholders are often the ones who use
a new technology and can either make or break its
implementation.
Although the builder is the most likely user of
robots on a construction project, the actual work on
site is often conducted by subcontractors who often are
reluctant or ﬁnancially unable to use advanced tech-
nologies which have not been entirely adopted by in-
dustry. A constructor’s goal is often to meet the owner’s
requirements by the most efﬁcient and least risky meth-
ods possible. Hence, traditional construction methods
that have stood the test of time are preferred. Nev-
ertheless, it has often been anecdotally reported that
the owner has the power to require the use of certain
technologies on a construction project, since that shifts
1. Requirements
identification
2. Project
planning
3. Design and
engineering
4. Construction
5. Operations
and
maintenance
6.
Decommissioning
Fig. 57.1 Phases of a typical construction project
part of the risk and cost associated with the use of
the technology to the owner. This phenomenon may be
partially responsible for the widespread penetration of
laser scanning technology into the construction industry
that is currently taking place [57.12].
Typical Construction Processes
From a purely physical-world and practical point of
view, construction may be viewed as being comprised
of a ﬁnite number of elementary processes [57.13–
16], which may be summarized by the following
list [57.11]:

Attaching

Building

Coating

Concreting

Connecting

Covering

Cutting

Digging

Finishing

Inlaying

Inspecting

Jointing

Measuring

Placing

Planning

Positioning

Spraying

Spreading.
Most of these processes can also be grouped into
three predominant types of functional operators as fol-
lows:

Materials handling (by bulk and unit load)

Materials shaping (cutting, breaking, compacting,
and machining)

Structural joining.
These functional operators are typically each ap-
plied to multiple operands. Common operands in build-

Part F | 57.1
1496
Part F
Robots at Work
ing and civil engineering are steel and other metals,
concrete, timber, earth and rock, masonry, plastic and
glass, cement, aggregate, epoxy resin, bitumen, and
other bulk and formed materials.
57.1.2 Automation in Construction
Construction automation describes the ﬁeld of research
and development focused on automating construction
processes, and the use of robots is but one aspect of
that ﬁeld. In short, construction automation deals with
applying the principles of industrial automation to the
construction sector, whether in building construction,
civil engineering (roadways, dams, bridges, etc.), or
in prefabrication of construction components [57.17].
This can be viewed as an extension to research in
ﬁeld service robots generally designed to replace or as-
sist humans in a speciﬁc construction-related task or
function.
From a historical perspective, research in construc-
tion robotics and automation started in the 1980s with
the introduction of single-purpose robots (principally
remotely controlled, or teleoperated, machines). The
Japanese led this effort, driven primarily out of con-
cern for societal demographics, which showed a sig-
niﬁcant future shortfall in personnel available for the
construction labor pool [57.18]. In the US the princi-
pal related work involved developing remote control
or teleoperated machinery for hazardous work that re-
quired modiﬁed construction equipment. Example ap-
plications include robots developed for rapid runway
repair and unexploded ordinance removal. In the EU,
research was focused on the development of large-size
masonry (brick laying, assembly) robots for residential
and industrial building construction.
During the next decade, as research on task-speciﬁc
construction robots continued, large Japanese construc-
tion ﬁrms introduced on-site factories for high-rise con-
struction. These construction systems included just-in-
time delivery of components, automated part tracking
and material handling, robotic connection and assem-
bly, and centralized control in an enclosed or semi-
enclosed environment. It is reported that the systems en-
able better working conditions (weather invariant) and
reduced project completion time [57.19]. Other beneﬁts
include improved productivity and quality, though over-
all construction costs are not necessarily lower [57.20].
Advanced concepts in integrated residential con-
struction automation were developed as part of the EU
FutureHome project. In this construction concept, each
structure consists of several high-quality, prefabricated
three-dimensional (3-D) modules and two-dimensional
(2-D) panels which are assembled production-style on
site [57.21]. An analogue of this approach for auto-
mated residential construction has been commercial-
ized in Japan [57.22].
New methods for collecting, processing, analyz-
ing, and communicating construction information are
a signiﬁcant area of construction automation re-
search [57.23]. This research includes data interoper-
ability and exchange through the design, construction,
operations, maintenance, and decommission phases of
a capital project [57.24]; advanced sensors for assess-
ing the status of the construction process [57.25–27];
visualization systems for planning construction events,
verifying constructability, and maintaining site situ-
ational awareness [57.28–30]; and information mod-
els which extend traditional computer-aided design
(CAD) modeling to combine both the physical (geo-
metric) and functional characteristics of building com-
ponents [57.31].
Finally, three notable, large-scale, EU projects at-
tempted to integrate construction automation into the
way construction projects are executed: the ManuBuild
(open building manufacturing) project dealt with,
among other things, the development of mobile ﬁeld
factories, including robots, for on-site modular con-
struction [57.32]; the I3CON (industrialized, integrated,
intelligent, construction) project dealt with the in-
door automation and robotization of buildings [57.33];
and the Tunconstruct project dealt with the robotiza-
tion of inspection and maintenance operations in tun-
nels [57.34].
57.1.3 Classification of Robotics
in Construction
Construction robotics is an advanced form of mecha-
nization (automation) in which an endeavour is made
to automate some industrially important operation and
thereby reduce the cost of this operation by either re-
moving a human operator from the control loop, or
enhance operational efﬁciency through machine control
systems. Due to the nature of construction work, most
robots which have been developed for the construction
industry are either mobile or relocatable systems. Some
platforms, such as ﬂoor-ﬁnishing robots and machine-
controlled earthmovers require mobility as a speciﬁc
function of the work process to be performed. Oth-
ers, such as wall and ceiling panel manipulators, re-
quire some level of mobility to extend their operating
workspace.
Robot terminology can vary depending upon the
research discipline. For this chapter two broad classi-
ﬁcations of construction robotics are onsite robots and
offsite robots. These are distinguished by whether they
are applied at the construction site or at a factory or pre-
fabrication facility. In addition, a further distinction can

Robotics in Construction
57.1 Overview
1497
Part F | 57.1
be made depending on whether a construction robot is
intended to be used for a single task (onsite or offsite)
or whether multiple robots are integrated into an auto-
mated construction site.
Single Task Construction Robots Versus
Integrated Robotized Construction Sites
After the initial experiments in large-scale industrial-
ized, automated and robotized pre-fabrication of system
houses were conducted successfully in Japan, and the
ﬁrst products (e.g. Sekisui M1) also proved successful in
the market, in 1975 a Japanese construction contractor,
Shimizu Corporation in Tokyo, set up a research group
for construction robots. The goal was now no longer
the mere shifting of complexity into a structured envi-
ronment as in prefabrication, but the development and
deployment of systems that could be used on the con-
struction site to create structures and buildings. The fo-
cus initially was set on simple systems in the form of
so-called single task construction robots that can exe-
cute a single, speciﬁc construction task in a repetitive
manner.
Single-task construction robots are systems that
support workers in executing one speciﬁc construction
process or task (e.g. digging, concrete levelling, con-
crete ﬁnishing, painting) or completely supplement the
physical activity of the human workers necessary to per-
form this one process or task. Further, the processes and
tasks they support or supplement can be allocated to
a speciﬁc profession or craft. In addition, the processes
and tasks for which single task robots were developed
had in common that they entailed frequent, repetitive
activities. Common characteristics of single-task con-
struction robots are as follows:

Highly specialized not only for a profession but
even for a task within a profession (e.g., concrete
pouring, levelling and ﬁnishing.

Enhanced productivity compared to conventional
labour. E.g., according to [57.17] the conventional
labour productivity rate for concrete ﬂoor ﬁnishing
is between 100 m3=h and 120 m3=h, whereas the
productivity using machines is between 300 m3=h
and 800 m3=h.

Improved quality through precise control of func-
tions and operations (e.g., uniform distribution of
paint) and by allowing real time monitoring (and
recording) of the operation.

Improved working conditions by removing work-
ers from dangerous environments and reducing the
amount of and heavy physical work.

Most robots allow various operation modes such as
autonomous or sensor guided, pre-programmed, or
tele-operated.

Reduced material consumption through precise
control of material delivery and collection and reuse
of unused material.

Most robots have simple yet robust sensor technolo-
gies, such as gyroscopes, simple laser systems, or
touch/pressure sensors.

Most robots only require 1 or 2 persons to operate.
The evolution of industrialized and automated
building prefabrication during the 1970s along with
the development of single tasks robots, envisioned the
concept of integrated robotized construction sites. This
concept combined prefabrication technology (process-
ing of prefabricated components instead of parts in
order to reduce complexity on the site), single task
construction robotic systems, and moving or stationary
site factories that were able to assemble the building’s
main structure (e.g., steel frame or concrete structure)
almost automatically. As those site factories not only
automated parts of the construction process but also
integrated prefabricated component technology and sin-
gle task automation can thus be called as integrated
robotized construction sites.
A major reason for the transition into integrated
robotized construction sites was that the construc-
tion companies realized that single task construction
robots which were not networked or embedded within
a greater infrastructure, turned out to be incompatible
with the way buildings were designed and built. Sin-
gle task robots were designed to execute certain tasks
meanwhile construction workers were not allowed to
interfere signiﬁcantly with the robots activity. However,
it turned out that under these premises, only a very
few number of robots could be used efﬁciently. The
constraints for the workers, the necessary safety regula-
tions, coupled with the unforeseen, unpredictable, and
dynamic processes at the construction site, led to the
implementation of individual robots working in paral-
lel. Although single task construction robots achieved
a high throughput, signiﬁcant time had to be spent
on-site for transportation, preparation, programming,
conﬁguration, etc. Besides the mentioned frictions sin-
gle task construction robots caused on (conventional)
construction sites, the emergence of concepts for inte-
grated sites was also nurtured by the new technological
possibilities. Important for the integration of such sys-
tems into larger and coordinated automated systems
was the development of systems that allowed control-
ling and monitoring an uninterrupted ﬂow of informa-
tion and material on-site, between individual automated
entities that are involved in the ﬁnal assembly of the
building.
The transition to integrated sites can also be ex-
plained from an evolutionary view. In many industries

Part F | 57.1
1498
Part F
Robots at Work
the evolution from more workshop like production with
individual and only loosely coupled production enti-
ties or stations, to ﬂow-line like or production line like
systems with stable processes and continuous material
ﬂow was part of the evolution of other well estab-
lished and known industries„ i. e., automotive, com-
puter industry.
Finally, three general categories of construction
robots are introduced. The ﬁrst class is teleoperated
systems, which for simplicity includes remote control
systems. The general distinction between the two terms
is whether or not the equipment must be operated in line
of sight from the human controller [57.35]. The second
category, programmable construction machines (PCM),
includes most construction equipment that is outﬁtted
with sensors and mechanisms to augment operation by
an onboard human operator. The ﬁnal category, intelli-
gent systems, relates to unmanned construction robots
which operate either in a semi- or fully autonomous
mode. In Sect. 57.3 this classiﬁcation will be expanded
to include examples based on various generic activities,
materials handled (operand types), levels of onboard in-
telligence, levels of commercialization, and levels of
system integration and computer integration.
Teleoperated Systems in Construction
In established engineering terminology, the term tele-
operation refers to the remote control of machines and
systems. In teleoperation (loosely referred to as teler-
obotics) the control of the machine is accomplished by
the use of remote control means such an umbilical cord
or wireless control. Teleoperation ideas and methods
are used extensively in the space and nuclear industries
(Chaps. 55 and 58, respectively).
In telerobotics, the machine does not operate au-
tonomously but is under the control of a human. Data
sensing and interpretation and cognitive activities such
as task planning are done by the operator.
Recently, many telerobotic devices have appeared
in the construction and mining industries. These ma-
chines have evolved in response to industrial situations
where there is danger to the operator and where remote-
controlled machinery is necessary (e.g., teleoperated
small compactors). Situations of this kind occur in the
construction, demolition, and mining industries and in
other hazardous locations.
The technology for telerobotics in construction is
well established, with a number of excellent examples
of such activity available, for example, a sophisticated
model-based supervisory-control-type distributed tele-
operation system for the construction of a trench for
a diversion dam in a lava ﬁeld in Japan using a ﬂeet
of heavy earthmoving machines [57.36].
Programmable Construction Machines
A software-programmable construction machine is
what most people would consider to be a robot. The
operator of this type of machine is able to vary the
task to be accomplished within certain constraints either
by choosing from a preprogrammed menu of functions
or by teaching the machine a new function. Variations
in the task to be accomplished could be as simple as
slight changes in the driving speed based on the cur-
rent load for an automated forklift, or as complex as
a change from being able to pick and place steel beams
and columns using an autonomous crane to being able
to deliver concrete autonomously using the same crane.
Generally,
software-programmable
construction
machines are identical to traditional construction ma-
chines (such as an excavator), but have been modiﬁed
to be controllable through a computer (similar to the
way in which traditional manufacturing machines –
such as mills and lathes – evolved into computer
numerically controlled (CNC) machines).
Software-programmable construction machines can
make use of an electronic representation of a portion
of the construction site where their work is to be con-
ducted in order to control all or part of the machine’s
operation. A commercialized example is stakeless grad-
ing, where data from a 3-D model is used in combina-
tion with global positioning systems (GPS) and/or laser
measurement systems to automate the blade control for
bulldozers and motor-graders.
Intelligent Systems in Construction
As opposed to a teleoperated or a software-pro-
grammable construction machine a fully autonomous
construction robot is expected to accomplish its task,
within a deﬁned scope, without human intervention.
A semiautonomous construction robot would be ex-
pected to accomplish its task with some level of
planning interaction conducted with a human super-
visor [57.35]. In each case the construction robot is
expected to adapt to its sensed environment, formu-
late plans for the execution of its task, and replan as
necessary (with possibly some human assistance in the
semiautonomous mode). The intelligent construction
robot should also be able to determine when its task-
ing is not executable and request assistance.
Example research in intelligent construction sys-
tems includes autonomous excavation [57.37, 38] and
autonomous crane operations [57.30, 39–41].

Robotics in Construction
57.2 Offsite Applications of Robotics in Construction
1499
Part F | 57.2
57.2 Offsite Applications of Robotics in Construction
The infusion of technologies (such as computer aided
design (CAD), computer aided manufacturing (CAM))
into the construction industry from other industries
(such as the automotive, airplane and shipbuilding in-
dustries) are the clearest proof for a shift in building
strategy. Fully automated concrete fabrication is cur-
rently a reality that are implemented by factories with
customized product delivery in order to adapt to the
changing requirements of the market. There are two ma-
jor industrialized production methods for prefabricated
concrete: Production methods that (a) use stationary
single formwork and (b) that use mobile formwork.
57.2.1 Robotics in Component Production
Production methods using stationary single formwork
comprise mobile workﬂows such as cleaning, pour-
ing/casting and moving the ﬁnal product to the storage,
while the formwork is stationary during the whole pro-
cess of prefabrication. In production methods using
mobile formwork, the work posts are stationary while
the formwork is mobile, moving into the various pre-
fabrication posts of the assembly line.
Concrete Production
A plant for combined manufacture of 2-D and 3-D pre-
cast concrete elements includes overhead gantry cranes
and electric hoists, used to transport consumable mate-
rials (such as lattice girders, steel coils, and parts to be
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
Fig. 57.2 (a) Pallet in concreting station; (b) bridge crane; (c) pallets molding systems; (d) demolding-depalletizing
device; (e) cleaning, measuring and oiling (after [57.42])
inserted/installed) as well as to lift elements from the
concreting station into the storage facility or onto trans-
port pallets. Pallets start at the discharging station, from
where they proceed via the pallet cleaning station to the
ﬁrst workstation. There, by means of a de-palletizing
device attached to a panel-stacking crane, the ﬁnished
ﬂooring elements are lifted off the pallets and stacked
directly within the working range of the discharging ve-
hicle. A cleaning and plotting (magazining, cleaning,
plotting (MCP)) robot is used for a variety of tasks: pick-
ing up, insertion of latitudinal anchors, cleaning of pal-
lets, full scale plotting of elements, and installation of
latitudinal anchors (Fig. 57.2). Figure 57.3 shows fur-
ther examples of robotic concrete component manufac-
turing and handling.
Brickwork Component Production
Since the late 1970s, due to the lack of skilled workers
in construction and increasing costs of buildings, ratio-
nalization developments were started. They mainly took
place in the masonry and the formwork sector, where no
ready solutions from other countries were available. In
Germany and also in most parts of Europe an often used
and still loved building material is brickwork. Most of
the building projects are constructed with this material.
Due to the lack of brickwork in Japan (not resistant
to earthquakes if not reinforced), and missing develop-
ments in other countries, main efforts were made in this
ﬁeld.

Part F | 57.2
1500
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
Fig. 57.3 (a) Automated
concrete pipe manufacturing
machines (courtesy Hawkeye
Group USA); (b) precast
concrete handling robot
(courtesy Halo, Inc.)
In the last few decades activities to develop ma-
chines that support the laying of bricks and even
automated robots have been increasing, especially in
Germany. Brick laying is a very labor-intensive activity,
which can lead to signiﬁcant health issues and early re-
tirement [57.43, 44]. Consequently a very small number
of skilled workers is available nowadays. This in turn
is reﬂected in ultimately high prices and wages, which
will make brick building in some time prohibitively ex-
pensive. Therefore it should just be a question of time
before only houses are put on the market that have not
been erected on site by a team of bricklayers, but by
a robot in the production shop.
Early Trials of Robotic Assembly
of Modular Blocks
One idea for Robot Oriented Design (ROD) [57.45–
47], in building construction is to change the conven-
tional construction works adaptable to robotics so that
construction system and advanced automation and/or
robotics are co-adapted. Thus a structural system for
the wall erection named SMAS (Solid Material As-
sembly System) [57.48] was proposed and developed
already in the 80s in Japan. SMAS is a of reinforced
masonry construction system. A standard building com-
ponent of this system, 30 cm  30 cm  18 cm in size
and 20 kg in weight, is made of pre-cast concrete and
includes cross-shaped steel bar inside each component
for the reinforced of structural wall. Components are
positioned automatically by the robot one by one with-
out arrangements of conventional bonding. Following
the positioning of each components, steel bars are con-
nected to those of adjacent components also by the
robot. The joint type of steel bar for vertical direction
is mechanical, and that for lateral direction is over-
lapping. Concrete is grouted from the top of the wall
which is erected one storey high (about 3 m). The newly
developed operating hand is installed to the mother
robot (6-articulation-type robot) which was developed
for a wide variety of applications in factory use and a se-
ries of experiments for wall erection were carried out.
The rapid progress being achieved today in the
modernization and industrialization of building con-
struction technology has triggered a trend to reduce
the complicate works at construction site and increas-
ingly produce building components at factories. It is
obviously that the prefabrication has been successful in
up-grading the quality of the building and in shorten-
ing the construction period. The sizes of those building
components such as prefabricated structural members
are also becoming larger to simplify assembling work
at the construction site.
However, these movements are not necessarily ori-
ented toward the introduction of robots. The heavy and
large components are difﬁcult to be operated by the
robots and the complicated assemble techniques are
sometimes too skilful for robots. Meanwhile, when one
looks at the prefabrication of compact and lightweight
structural components as a means of accomplishing
construction work more efﬁciently, robots can be used
for assembling these structural members efﬁciently.
From this point of view SMAS structural system was
developed and proposed as a robot-oriented construc-
tion system. A masonry structure has not been consid-
ered as a major structural system in Japan because of
earthquakes; however, it becomes to be recognized as
a ﬂexible structural system applied to various building
designs when properly reinforced. In addition, it has ad-
vantages in the construction cost and in the construction
period. The SMAS system itself was designed as a mod-
ularsystem forthepurposethat singlecomponents could
be developed further in the future. All system compo-
nents including stones are developed as complementary
parts according to the guidelines of Robot Oriented De-
sign (ROD) (Fig. 57.4). These robotic approaches were
meant to be applied on-site, but technologically they
wereproven to benot effective. Thus, they becamebetter
suited for offsite assembly operations.

Robotics in Construction
57.2 Offsite Applications of Robotics in Construction
1501
Part F | 57.2
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 57.4 (a) Building
component developed by
guidelines of Robot Oriented
Design (ROD), (b) SMAS
total system, (c) robot end-
effector/gripper with optical
ﬁber sensor guiding screwing
mechanism
Automated Brickwork Plants
The adoption of CAD/CAM systems combined with
implementation of Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
Solutions has made the implementation of advanced
technically reﬁned, fully automatic production plants
possible:

High degree of information and communications
technology (ICT) integrated and automated/inter-
connected processes

Integration of as many devices as possible by ICT
(interoperability)

CAD/CAM Systems

Integration of processes by ERP Systems

Just in Time and Just in Sequence supporting cus-
tomization.
Brickwork Robot Plant SüBA
Crucial technical developments preceded the construc-
tion of a fully automatic brickwork machine. The pro-
totype of the automatic brickwork plant was developed
by the company SüBA in Hockenheim, and the com-
pany Windhoff AG in Rheine at the beginning of the
1990s. The production of brickwork panes is appro-
priate for a capacity of 300 m2 net area of brickwork
panes – without windows and door recesses – in a shift
of eight hours. The employment of CAD in the archi-
a)
b)
Fig. 57.5 (a) Automated
reinforcement (horizontal)
station; (b) mortar dispensing
tect’s ofﬁces made it possible to transfer the large data
set for the production of brickwork panes directly with-
out manual input over CAM to the brickwork robots.
Considering the large number of data for the automat,
which was necessary for the production of a brickwork
pane, this was one of the most important problems of
the automation of bricking at that time. Figures 57.5
and 57.6 give an overview over the most important
SüBA factory modules and automation processes.
Brickwork Robot Plant Winkelmann
(Horizontal Brickwork Panel Production)
Today’s fully automated and highly robotized brick-
work plants can be distinguished into two basic types:
horizontal and vertical brickwork panel production. The
brickwork robot plant Winkelmann is a characteristic
example for horizontal panel production. All single de-
vices are equipped with Microsystems, interconnected
and part of a systemic logistic network. CAD/CAM
guarantees efﬁcient data processing between planning
section and production. After the delivery standard
palettes bricks are brought into processing order by an
automated palletizing system with a robot for distribu-
tion of bricks (Fig. 57.7a). After that the bricks are taken
up by automated de-palletizing system (Fig. 57.7b),
which supplies horizontal brickwork layering robot sta-
tion (Fig. 57.8a). Insertion of reinforcement and house

Part F | 57.2
1502
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
c)
b)
Fig. 57.6 (a) Brickwork positioning; (b) brickwork alignment; (c) automated reinforcement (vertical) station
a)
b)
Fig. 57.7 (a) Automated
palletizing system with robot
for distribution of bricks;
(b) automated de-palletizing
system
a)
b)
Fig. 57.8 (a) Automated
horizontal brickwork layering
robot station; (b) insertion
of reinforcement and house
infrastructure
infrastructure as well as plastering are done stationary
in the factory (Fig. 57.8b) until a ﬁnalized and dried-out
brickwork panel is delivered to the construction site.
Brickwork Robot Plant Leonhard Weiss
(Vertical Brickwork Panel Production)
The brickwork robot plant Leonhard Weiss is a char-
acteristic example for vertical brickwork panel produc-
tion. Many processes as for example the palletizing and
de-palletizing to bring the bricks into factory order are
similar to the horizontal type. Yet the central process of
positioning the bricks in given order is done vertically
layer by layer. High accuracy robots combined with lin-
ear axis are here in charge for the exact positioning. The
automated vertical brickwork layering has some advan-
tages in terms of efﬁcient use of the factory area and
moreover the ﬁrmness of the wall could be improved
whereas the exact positioning of reinforcement, cables
and other elements of the house infrastructure is done
easier with the horizontal type. CAD/CAM combined

Robotics in Construction
57.2 Offsite Applications of Robotics in Construction
1503
Part F | 57.2
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig. 57.9 (a) Sequencing station; (b) robotic assembly system for vertical brickwork layering; (c,d) ﬁnal brickwork panel
product
a)
b)
Fig.57.10a,b 3-D adjustable auto-
mated assembly welding unit (Sekisui
Heim)
a)
b)
Fig. 57.11 (a) On the 400 m
production-line, the steel frame
units (chassis) pass several worksta-
tions; (b) 10 Insertion of prepared
elements and by suppliers (e.g., Toto,
Inax) prefabricated bath modules into
the chassis unit
with variable production and ICT integrated produc-
tion allows individually fabricated brickwork panels
and necessary variations. Figure 57.9 shows the various
steps of the automated vertical brickwork panel con-
struction process.
Steel Component Production
Sekisui Heim introduced an automated steel frame pro-
duction. One of the basic features is the automated as-
sembling and welding station. Ceiling elements, ﬂoor-
ing elements and columns are fed into this station,
followed by automatic welding into a frame, which is
used as chassis and bearing structure during the further
completion process on the production line (Fig. 57.10).
After the automated welding process, the steel frame
chassis is streaming through the factory from work step
to work step, until all installations have been completed
(Fig. 57.11a). The factories of Sekisui and Toyota have
gates on both sides of the assembly lines in order to
receive material, parts, components and prefabricated
bath or kitchen modules, required for the customized
production of individual units. All of them arrive just-
in-time and just-in-sequence by cooperating suppliers
(Fig. 57.11b).

Part F | 57.3
1504
Part F
Robots at Work
57.3 Onsite Applications of Single Task Construction Robots
The construction of larger buildings that use steel as
the structural support system can involve a high to-
tal amount of welds. If the design of the columns and
beams can be adjusted in order to reduce the amount
and variety of welds, welding becomes a highly repeti-
tive operation suitable for being automated.
57.3.1 Steel Welding
Automated welding is able to control and guarantee
the quality of the connection between the welded parts
to a level similar to (and sometimes better than) that
achieved by professional human welders. Manual weld-
ing of these and other types of connections requires
highly specialized skills that are currently in short
supply. Furthermore, conventional welding can have
damaging long-term effects on a worker’s vision. Si-
multaneous automated welding on a beam (e.g., from
two or three coordinated positions) is even able to en-
sure that the steel component is not distorted by the
welding operation itself and thus improves the quality
of the constructed structures. In Fig. 57.12a the Shimizu
steel-welding robot is depicted. The robot can automat-
ically weld a column including the corner portions. The
conﬁguration of a joint is detected by a laser sensor, and
the welding is performed in an optimized way referring
to a database. In Fig. 57.12b, the Obayashi Corporation
Steel welding robot operates in a similar principle, us-
a)
b)
Fig.57.12a,b Steel welding robots.
(a) Shimizu Corp.; (b) Obayashi Corp
a)
b)
Fig. 57.13 (a) Automated reinforce-
ment production and (b) teleoperated
rebar placement (after [57.17])
ing a circular clamp-on type fastener to the column. The
welding process is computer-controlled, though work-
ers are still involved in overseeing operations at least
for the time being.
57.3.2 Reinforcement Manufacturing
and Positioning
Concrete reinforcement operations involve cutting and
bending of rebar (reinforcement bars), precise (relative
to each other) arrangement of those rebar, binding of re-
bar and ﬁnal positioning of the rebar elements or mesh
on a ﬂoor or in a mold or formwork system. These
tasks are labor intensive and hard on a worker’s body
(e.g., back accidents and damage to a worker’s mus-
culoskeletal system occur about ten times more during
reinforcement work than during painting work [57.49]).
Automated systems mitigate the risks and impacts on
the health of workers and enhance the quality of the
reinforced concrete structures. Figure 57.13a shows
a reinforcement production robot and Fig. 57.13b shows
a teleoperated rebar placing robot.
57.3.3 Concrete Distribution
Concrete distribution systems are used to distribute
mixed concrete with uniform quality over large sur-
faces or over formwork systems. Concrete distribution

Robotics in Construction
57.3 Onsite Applications of Single Task Construction Robots
1505
Part F | 57.3
a)
b)
Fig. 57.14 (a) Takenaka Corp. Automatic Concrete Distributor DB Robo; (b) Tokyu Concrete Distribution Robots
covers the continuous supply with concrete (pumps,
hoses), a system which slides in a certain pattern over
the area where the concrete has to be distributed and
a concrete ejection system. Systems can be operated
manually, tele-operated and sometimes sensor-guided
a)
b)
Fig. 57.16 (a) Programmable, articulated-boom machine for the pumped delivery of fresh concrete (after [57.50]) and
(b) teleoperated concrete spraying robot (courtesy MEYCO Equipment)
Fig. 57.15 Concrete slipform road paving machine (cour-
tesy GOMACO Corp.) J
or fully automatic. Depending on the surface where
the concrete needs to be distributed, concrete distri-
bution systems can be truck mounted, stationary or
mobile. In Fig. 57.14a, a track mounted automatic
concrete distributor robot (DB Robo) can be seen. In
Fig. 57.14b a mobile concrete distributor system can be
seen, which due to its wheel-based platform, enables
an enhanced operating range. Figures 57.15 and 57.16
show other examples of automated concrete distribution
systems.
57.3.4 Robots for Customized Construction
On-Site
Several masonry-wall erecting robots have been devel-
oped to-date. Examples of these are the SMAS in Japan

Part F | 57.3
1506
Part F
Robots at Work
and the ROCCO robot at the University of Stuttgart.
Many of these systems are still in the prototype stage.
The basic concepts that these systems have in common
are as follows:

Autonomous mobility on the construction site

Sensor systems determine the robot’s position and
orientation in its environment

Automatic pick up of the bricks from the pallets

Automatic application of mortar

Automatic positioning of the bricks.
ROCCO is a Robot Construction System [57.51,
52], for Computer Integrated Construction (CIC). Sev-
eral companies and institutes participated in this EU
funded project in an inter-disciplinary and international
approach with experts in the ﬁelds of construction
technology, mechanical and electrical engineering and
information technology from Germany, Spain and Bel-
gium. The goal of the project was the development of
a computer integrated robot system, which also contains
a continuous solution in the ICT (Information Commu-
nication Technology) for all steps from the architectural
design to the automated assembly of the components on
the construction site.
The main emphasis of the project lies on the real-
ization of a mobile robot system for construction site
operation as well as on the integration of a computer
based system for work preparation and quality control.
In the work preparation phase the necessary data is gen-
erated for the pre-fabrication and customization of the
masonry blocks, for the construction site layout and for
the automatic robot program generation.
Based on the CAD-representation of the building,
ﬁrst the walls are divided automatically into the nec-
essary blocks. In the next step the optimal working
a)
b)
Fig. 57.17 (a) Robot for residential buildings; (b) robot for indus-
trial use with long reach manipulator
positions of the mobile robot as well as the positions
of the pallets and the arrangement of the blocks on the
pallets are automatically calculated. With this informa-
tion the necessary non-standard and standard blocks can
be produced and palletized. Finally the robot programs
are generated automatically out of the calculated geom-
etry information. The user interface on the construction
site is graphically interactive and enables the user to
partially re-program the generated robot programs to
deal with the uncertainties of the construction process
without the need to learn a speciﬁc robot programming
language.
To test different approaches based on the construc-
tion application (residential buildings vs. industrial) and
the sensor integration (autonomous vehicle vs. long
reach), two systems were developed within the project.
The ﬁrst one, for residential buildings, has a reach of
4:5 m and it is able to handle up to 400 kg. This robot
is placed over an autonomous vehicle that allows the
movement on the construction site, Fig. 57.17a. Its main
task is the erection of walls in residential buildings.
The second one is able to handle up to 1000kg with
a reach of 8:5 m. This robot, Fig. 57.17b, is placed over
a towable platform and its main task is the erection of
external walls in industrial buildings with typical height
of up to 8 m and standardized layout.
57.3.5 Robotic Interior Finishing
Interior ﬁnishing work is work conducted inside a struc-
ture (e.g., an ofﬁce building) to complete construction
of the space within the structure (e.g., painting and
false ceiling and gypsum board installation). Due to
the conﬁned nature of interior ﬁnishing work traditional
material handling equipment (such as cranes) cannot be
used. The following four systems are examples of inte-
rior ﬁnishing robots:

The Shimizu CFR 1 (Fig. 57.18a) could be manu-
ally and tele-operated and allowed the installation of
suspended ceiling panels to a height of up to 3:5 m.
The robot’s compliant gripper mechanism was able
to ﬁnely adjust the positions of the panels.

The Tokyu ceiling panel installation robot (Fig.
57.18b) could position and adjust the panels and
also ﬁre nails into the panels to fasten them to the
underlying ceiling system.

Two variants (Fig. 57.18c,d) of interior ﬁnishing
modular mobile robot, developed in Technical Uni-
versity of Munich.

The Komatsu Mighty Hand LH (Fig. 57.18e) could
position and adjust interior wall panels, glass pan-
els, door frames, window casings and the outside
walls (up to 350 kg) with high accuracy.

Robotics in Construction
57.3 Onsite Applications of Single Task Construction Robots
1507
Part F | 57.3
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
Fig. 57.18 (a) Shimizu CFR 1 – Interior ﬁnishing robot; (b) the Tokyu ceiling panel installation robot; (c) BR2 TU
Munich – modular ceiling drilling robot system type 1; (d) BR2 TU Munich – modular ceiling drilling robot system
type 2; (e) Kajima interior wall setting – KOMATSU LH 150
Concrete Finishing
Floor ﬁnishing is one of the most critical construction
processes in which construction workers carry or guide
trowels over an unﬁnished, wet concrete ﬂoor for sev-
eral hours in a stooped posture. In order to reduce these
physical demands on the workers and to ensure a more
uniform ﬁnish quality, various companies developed
and employed concepts for robots that can perform
the concrete-leveling task: the Flat-Kun by Shimizu
(800 m2=h), the Kote King by Kajima (500 m2=h), the
Surﬁng Robo by Takenaka (300 m2=h), the Obayashi
made by Mitsubishi (500 m2=h) and the Floor Travel-
ing Robot MHE by Hazama (300 m2=h). Each of these
single task construction robots was able to operate on
a ﬂoor where it was set up into any desired direction
(e.g., not only move backwards and forwards and turn-
ing but also able to rotate 360ı in place).
The ﬁnishing mechanism consisted, in most cases,
of automatically controlled and operated rotating trow-
els. The degree of autonomy ranged from systems with
human-machine interfaces for tele-operation to systems
that could generate motions themselves and to pre-
programming of paths for the robot to follow. In many
cases gyroscopes and rotating laser levels assisted nav-
igation and motion planning at a low level. After an
intensive research and development phase that lasted
until 1985, the ﬁrst concrete ﬁnishing robots where de-
ployed commercially to ﬁnish concrete ﬂoors in ofﬁce
buildings, factories, warehouses and shopping centers.
The use of the robot systems became efﬁcient once
a ﬂoor plan allowed for a working area that could be
processed without interruption of more than 500 to
600 m2. Examples of commercial systems are depicted
below in Fig. 57.19.
Tile Placement
The exterior of many buildings are sometimes ﬁnished
with weather-resistant tiles. In Japan single-family
buildings, factories, ofﬁces and high-rise buildings are
often ﬁnished with tiles. Tiles are relatively small build-
ing elements compared to the total surface area of
a building and thus a very large number of tiles have
to be installed using the same, repetitive process, which
involves applying mortar and positioning the tiles on

Part F | 57.3
1508
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
d)
b)
c)
Fig. 57.19 (a) Hazama robot; (b) Kajima Kote King robot; (c) Tak-
enaka Surf Robo; (d) auto-leveling concrete screed machine (cour-
tesy Somero Enterprises, Inc.)
a)
b)
Fig.57.20a,b Hazama tile setting robot; (a) robot upon operation;
(b) ﬁnished tile setting
top of the mortar. This and the fact that building fa-
cades are generally difﬁcult to access make the use
of automated systems feasible. Hazama’s tile-setting
robot (Fig. 57.20) also showed that accuracy could be
enhanced and that the laying of patterns could be ac-
a)
b)
c)
Fig.57.23a–c Facade painting robots. (a) Shimizu; (b) Kajima; (c) Taisei
Fig.57.21a,b Shimizu ﬁreproof coating robots
a)
b)
Fig. 57.22 Concrete panel installation robot (courtesy of
Fujita Research)
complished without dramatically increasing construc-
tion time.
Fireproof Coating
In many countries building regulations require that
steel structures be coated with ﬁre proof materials
and/or a ﬁre-retarding paint. The application of the

Robotics in Construction
57.3 Onsite Applications of Single Task Construction Robots
1509
Part F | 57.3
a)
b)
c)
Fig.57.24a–c Kajima facade
inspection robot (a,b);
Comatec Robosoft glass
cleaning robot (c)
a)
b)
c)
e)
f)
d)
Fig.57.25a–f Earthmoving:
(a) Teleoperated excavation
system (courtesy Fujita
Research); (b) computer
assisted road compacting
system (after [57.53]);
(c) automated grading
system (courtesy Caterpillar,
Inc.); (d) automated drag line
control system (after [57.54]);
(e) autonomous excavator
robot (after [57.55]); (f) auto-
nomous off-road dump truck
(after [57.56])
ﬁre-roof coating and paint can only be done af-
ter the steel structure has been erected and joined
on site (e.g., by welding) in order not to inter-
fere with the joining process and in order to avoid
any damage to the ﬁre-proof coating. Therefore, it
is not possible to shift the coating operations to
upstream production steps that can be performed
in structured factory environments where high efﬁ-
ciency can be achieved. Due to seismic considera-
tions, most high-rise construction involves the use of
steel structures and thus, the development and em-
ployment of automated and robotic systems that are
able to apply the ﬁre-proof coatings after the struc-
ture is erected took place in Japan. Robots devel-

Part F | 57.3
1510
Part F
Robots at Work
oped by Shimizu (Fig. 57.21) and others were mostly
autonomous.
57.3.6 Robotic Facade Operation
Facade operations involve the installation of windows,
complete facade elements or building exterior walls.
Facade elements are, in modern architecture and es-
pecially in high-rise construction, decoupled from the
main load-bearing concrete or steel structure and can
thus be considered as a type of add-ons. Facade instal-
lation operations are complex operations that involve
the accurate positioning of heavy parts or elements at
locations that are difﬁcult to access (e.g., high eleva-
tions without scaffolding). This involves risk of injury
(and thus extensive safety measures must be taken)
and of damaging the building or the elements them-
selves. Furthermore, the positioning and alignment of
prefabricated facade elements requires precision and
low tolerances. A widespread trend (since the 1980s)
of designing large buildings as monolithic structures
that repeat the same or similar facade elements, has
been a major motivation for investment in automated
or robotic systems. Figure 57.22 shows an example of
a tele-operated façade installation robot.
Painting
Facade-painting robots were developed to simplify the
painting or re-painting of high-rise buildings during
construction and operation. Facade painting robots have
a particular advantage in that they can keep the paint ﬁn-
ish quality constant. They usually have multiple spray
nozzles and the spray area is either encapsulated or
hermetically sealed in order to avoid streaking. A fur-
ther advantage of facade painting robots is the fact that
workers are not exposed to harmful paint fumes and
vapours. Single task, facade-painting robots use one of
the following three different strategies to move along
the facade:

Cable-suspended cage/gondola systems

Rail guided systems

Vacuum or other adhesion technology.
The use of façade-painting robots was not con-
sidered efﬁcient for facades with an area < 2000 m2.
Facade-painting robots were thus used primarily to
paint large facades of warehouses and skyscrapers. Fa-
cades to be processed were required to have a low
curvature and wherever possible no corners or lugs
which can hinder the operation of the robot. Further,
the design of window frames as well as the num-
ber of windows and the area they cover impact the
feasibility and efﬁciency of facade-painting robots. Be-
tween 1984 and 1988 various companies introduced
facade-painting robots. Shimizu and Kajima Corpo-
rations of Japan both applied the principle of the
suspended cage or gondola (Fig. 57.23a,b, respec-
tively). The Taisei Corporation of Japan used a rail-
guided system and combined it with the gondola ap-
proach for their robot (Fig. 57.23c). The fastest of
the systems (Kajima’s robot) worked with a speed of
290 m2=h during the application of the primer paint,
200 m2=h for the base coat and 290 m2=h for the top
coat.
a)
b)
c)
Fig.57.26a–c Road maintenance: (a) Teleoperated pothole
patching robot (courtesy Leeboy); (b) semi-autonomous
road
crack sealing robot
(after
[57.57]); (c) semi-
autonomous road crack sealing robot (after [57.58])

Robotics in Construction
57.4 Integrated Robotized Construction Sites
1511
Part F | 57.4
a)
b)
c)
Fig.57.27a–c Material handling: (a) six degree of freedom robotic crane (after [57.59]); (b) large scale pipe manipulator; (c) large
manipulator system (courtesy of Shimizu Corp.)
Robotized Inspection and Maintenance
Facades of high-rise buildings are in many cases
equipped with tiles or other surface panels that have to
be inspected regularly during the building’s life-cycle in
order to detect structural damage and in order to replace
tiles or panels that might fall from the facade. Typically,
workers access those tiles or panels via cages or gondo-
las suspended from the roof of the buildings. This work
process was considered by Japanese construction ﬁrms
as monotonous, inefﬁcient and dangerous. Further,
since the method for identifying damaged tiles or pan-
els involves listening to the sound a tile or panel makes
when gently impacted by a handheld tool, the sounds
were difﬁcult to classify at high elevations due to wind
noise. Therefore, with substantial ﬁnancial commit-
ment, autonomous facade-inspection and maintenance
robots were developed. Between 1985 and 1988, six
different facade-inspection robots were developed in
Japan by the Kajima, Takenaka, Obayashi, Taisei, Tam-
agawa and Seki Corporations. For the inspection of the
facade of a 40 m high building (3000 m2 facade) an in-
spection robot needed in average 8 h including 
1 h for
task as preparation, conﬁguration, conversions, disman-
tling and cleaning of the robot (Fig. 57.24a,b).
Today robotic systems are not only developed for
the construction of buildings but also for the opera-
tion, maintenance and decommissioning of buildings
and other construction products. These types of ser-
vice robots were developed for the construction sector
for inspection of nuclear power plants, exterior walls of
high-rise buildings and cleaning of high-rise facades or
glass roofs (Fig. 57.24c).
57.3.7 Earthmoving
Earthmoving is a construction process for prepar-
ing project sites for construction by digging, grading,
trenching, scraping and other similar tasks. There have
been signiﬁcant developments in many earthmoving ar-
eas and certain tasks (such as grading) can now be
completely automated. Figure 57.25 shows several ex-
amples of automated earthmoving equipment some of
which were still in the research and development phase
while other are already commercial products.
57.3.8 Road Maintenance
Figure 57.26 shows three examples of machines that
perform pothole repairs and crack sealing on road with
various degrees of automation. Figure 57.26a is a com-
mercial product while the other two machines were
research projects undertaken by departments of trans-
portation in the US.
57.3.9 Material Handling
The transport and handling of materials is a critical ac-
tivity at most construction sites. Figure 57.27 shows
examples of material handling robots developed under
different research efforts.
57.4 Integrated Robotized Construction Sites
The ﬁrst prototypes for mainly automated high-rise
construction sites were put into operation in 1990 and
1991 by Shimizu (Fig. 57.28) after ﬁve years in devel-
opment and a ﬁnancial outlay of almost sixteen million
Euros. Since then, twenty automated high-rise sites
have been implemented by different companies (Taisei,
Takenaka, Kajima, Maeda, and Kumagai) [57.60, 61].
57.4.1 Robotic Roof Field Factory Approach
An integrated robotized construction site involves the
use of semi- and fully-automated storage, transport
and assembly equipment and/or robots that are used to
erect a building almost completely automatically. It is
an attempt to improve the sequencing of construction

Part F | 57.4
1512
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
Fig. 57.28 (a) Robotic trolleys for
transporting and positioning of beams,
columns, ﬂoor panels, building
services units and facades, in Shimizu
SMART system; (b) SMART roof
ﬁeld factory view
a)
b)
c)
Fig.57.29a–c Obayashi ABCS
(a) early construction phase; (b) inter-
mediate construction phase; (c) ﬁnal
construction phase
processes and construction site management by using
real-time control. This includes an unbroken ﬂow of in-
formation from the planning and design phase through
programming the on-site robots and controlling and
monitoring the construction operations.
The robotic roof ﬁeld factory approach is typically
implemented once the building foundations have been
laid. The production equipment, on which the steel con-
a)
b)
Fig.57.30a,b The AMURAD Construction Strategy: ﬂoor-wise up-
pushing of the whole building. Kajima, Japan (a) early construction
phase; (b) later construction phase
struction has been installed with assembly and transport
robots, is then covered completely with a roof made of
plastic ﬁlm. Depending on the roof system used, this
process takes from three to six weeks after which the
robots go into production. Due to the lack of space
around building sites in Japan, steel and concrete plants
are also often installed to supply parts in 10 min cycles
on a just-in-time basis.
Prefabricated parts are checked and then placed in
speciﬁc depots at the foot of the building or in the
building itself where they are readily accessible by the
robots. This is where the automated construction pro-
cess actually starts. As many as 22 robots equipped with
automatic crane winches deliver the columns, supports,
ﬂoors, ceilings, walls and other elements to the ﬂoor
of the steel skeleton under construction. These compo-
nents are then positioned and ﬁxed into place almost
completely automatically. The steel columns and sup-
ports are joined together by welding robots after they
have been positioned. The position and quality of the
welding seams are monitored with lasers.
In the Obayashi ACBS (Automatic Constructions
Building System) (Fig. 57.29 and in
VIDEO 272 ),
once a storey has been ﬁnished, the whole support struc-
ture, which rests on four columns, is pushed upwards
by hydraulic presses to the next storey over a 1:5 h pe-
riod. Fully extended, the support structure is 25 m high;
retracted it measures 4:5 m. Once everything has been

Robotics in Construction
57.4 Integrated Robotized Construction Sites
1513
Part F | 57.4
moved up, work starts on the next storey. By construct-
ing the topmost storey of the high-rise building as the
roof at the beginning of the building process, the site
is closed off in all directions, considerably reducing the
effect of the weather and any damage it might cause.
57.4.2 Robotic Field Factory on-Ground
Approach
The Amurad-system (Fig. 57.30), developed by the Ka-
jima Corporation, is a way of construction based on the
idea of after the ﬁrst ﬂoor is built (which is the top
ﬂoor), it is pushed up one ﬂoor at a time with the aid
of large hydraulic cylinders. The plumbing, electrical
and mechanical equipment and the interior ﬁttings and
cladding of the facade then begin. This process is re-
peated until the building is completed, where the last
ﬂoor to be built becomes the ground ﬂoor. In order to
realize the AMURAD System three automated systems
were developed for pushing up the whole building, for
transporting and assembling and for material handling.
57.4.3 Robotic Deconstruction and Robotic
Recycling
Controlled deconstruction supported by robotic sys-
tems can be combined with component reuse systems
since some elements such as structural steel have long
life spans, and total recycling (i. e., scrapping, melt-
ing and recasting) consumes large amounts of energy.
In a component reuse system all structural building
components are accepted as trade-ins. Therefore, the
deconstruction process comprises a reversed version of
the construction process, which if it is based on industri-
alized fabrication, all deconstructed parts and elements
could be directly reintroduced into the fabrication sys-
tems. The DARUMA system by Kajima Corporation
(Fig. 57.31) enables such a controlled deconstruction
process. Deconstructed structural steel elements are
transported to special dismantling factories just-in-time
a)
b)
Fig. 57.32 (a) Teleoperated
demolition robot (courtesy
Brokk AB); (b) water-jet
demolition robot (courtesy
Conjet AB)
a)
b)
Fig.57.31a,b Systemic and automated ﬂoor-by-ﬂoor building de-
construction, Kajima, DARUMA System, Japan (a) early decon-
struction phase; (b) later deconstruction phase
and just-in-sequence, where the old joints and ﬁnishes
can be dismantled under factory conditions and fed
into advanced reuse cycles. Modularized and standard-
ized structural units can be inspected and renewed and
then equipped with new ﬁnishes according to each
customer’s needs. Component Reuse systems could be
connected to Advanced Construction ERP Systems and
companies could match customers who want to sell
their modular building for reuse and customers willing
to buy reused building modules for further customiza-
tion. Renewed building components are reorganized
and customized in the factory and transported to other
building sites. A combined system of controlled decon-
struction and component reuse saves large amounts of
materials and energy.
By adopting integrated industrialization processes
the construction industry would have the chance to
address all parameters relevant for sustainable eco-
nomic, environmental and social development. In-
novative industrialization-oriented architectural design
structures, appropriate modularization and standardiza-
tion of building structures, logistics, equipment and

Part F | 57.5
1514
Part F
Robots at Work
processes, could serve as a fundamental integration
framework. Customized prefabrication could further be
able to supply construction sites with individualized el-
ements. Hyper-ﬂexible robotic systems could support
a limited amount of trained workers to perform posi-
tioning, joining and ﬁnishing operations. Construction
ERP systems could support organization as well as
a lean and demand oriented construction based on just-
in-time and just-in-sequence resource supply mean-
while locally based factories grant identity and reduced
logistic effort. Moreover integrated industrialization
would not only be limited to the fabrication but also link
systems of controlled deconstruction and component
reuse to a network for continuous resource circulation.
In addition to fully automated deconstruction sys-
tems, a number of teleoperated demolition robots have
been widely adopted in the construction industry. Two
examples of these are shown in Fig. 57.32.
57.5 Currently Unsolved Technical Problems
A recent study found that the US construction in-
dustry does not realize approximately 15 billion US
dollars per year in potential savings due to inadequate
interoperability related to information exchange and
management practices [57.62].
57.5.1 Interoperability
Although the lack of interoperability between the vari-
ous information systems used in construction is a sig-
niﬁcant source of inefﬁciency for the industry, it is
also a roadblock to the use of automated systems in
construction. Automated systems need electronic infor-
mation on past, current, and/or projected future states
of a construction project to function efﬁciently.
For example, in order for a robotic crane to pick
a steel beam from the site and deliver it to its target loca-
tion, the robot must be able to know that the steel beam
has been delivered to the site, as well as its current po-
sition and orientation. While information on the current
inventory of parts on a site may be available on paper,
it is rarely available electronically unless someone en-
ters it manually into some computer system, which in
turn may not be compatible with other systems used
in that project. In many of the examples of automated
construction technologies presented in this chapter, cus-
tom electronic databases and/or data formats have to be
devised to demonstrate the robot’s operation. In some
cases, the electronic information had to be entered man-
ually from paper into a computer for the robot to work
correctly.
In addition to information exchange and manage-
ment, many of the measurement instruments and sen-
sors used in construction are not interoperable. This
problem is not limited to the construction sector but
is a relatively large problem in many robotic appli-
cations where different types of sensors are used.
Several efforts are underway to make sensors inter-
operable [57.63] and construction equipment in gen-
eral [57.64], but the issues have yet to be resolved.
57.5.2 Structural Connection Systems
Traditionally, structural member connections in con-
struction have been designed for human installation.
Whether using bolted, welded, or other types of con-
nections, manual labor is usually involved in guiding
the mating parts together and in establishing the con-
nection.
For example, in structural steel erection, workers
perched on the structure typically guide a crane opera-
tor through visual or auditory cues in order to maneuver
a steel beam (or column) into place. The workers must
then physically manipulate the beam in order to align
corresponding surfaces for bolting or welding. Once the
correct beam pose has been achieved, it must be main-
tained while the workers temporarily fasten the beam to
the structure. The workers then release the beam from
the crane and permanently fasten the beam to the struc-
ture at a later stage.
For automated (or robotic) construction to work,
new connections that are more amenable to automation
Fig. 57.33 A drop-in, shear-load-only, steel connection

Robotics in Construction
57.5 Currently Unsolved Technical Problems
1515
Part F | 57.5
a)
b)
Fig.57.34a,b A piping and electrical
drop-in connector shown (a) disas-
sembled and (b) assembled
must be designed. These connections need not mimic
traditional, human-installed connections, but should
be optimized for use with robots instead. For exam-
ple, the Lehigh University Advanced Technology for
Large Structural Systems (ATLSS) Center designed
a gravity-load-only shear steel connector [57.65] back
in the early 1990s that is more suitable for automated
construction (Fig. 57.33). This type of male–female
connector for automatic assembly of building mod-
ules allows, together with an adequate control strategy,
small tolerances, which permit assembly by automatic
cranes [57.66].
An example of a nonstructural connector that is
more amenable to automation is the piping and elec-
trical connector developed for the FutureHome project,
shown in Fig. 57.34 [57.21, 67].
Although automated welding has been applied in
some limited form in construction, it is generally used
to replace manual welding without changing the design
of the parts being welded. In other words, no signiﬁcant
change in the way in which construction components
are designed has occurred as a result of automated
welding. Moreover, apart from a few examples of au-
tomated welding applied at the construction site, most
of the other limited applications are done at the compo-
nent fabrication facility.
57.5.3 Tolerances
Speciﬁcations for tolerances in the construction sector
exist for most types of construction, however, they are
not always achieved in practice [57.68]. For example,
it has been stated that one of the biggest sources of
problems in structural steel erection in the US is that
fabricated pieces are often out of tolerance, and that this
is only discovered during installation at the construc-
tion site [57.69]. However, since the ﬁnished facility
must meet the design tolerances before it is accepted,
this shifts the burden to workers and supervisors during
construction. The workers are expected to handle prob-
lems as they come up rather than expect all fabricated
construction components to be within tolerance. Since
most construction projects are under tight schedules, it
is often preferable to ﬁx these kinds of problems on site
rather than wait for replacement components to be fab-
ricated and delivered.
However, tolerance problems are not all due to
fabrication errors. Installation problems are also re-
sponsible for out-of-tolerance problems, for example,
anchor rod installation has been an area of concern for
structural steel erection. (Anchor rods (or bolts) are the
connection interface between the concrete foundation
and the structural steel columns. The rods are usually
installed by the concrete foundation crew before the
concrete is dry.) The situation of anchor rod patterns
that do not match the hole patterns in a mating column
is an identiﬁed problem in construction [57.26, 70].
Given the relatively loose achievable tolerances in
construction, the application of robotics in construc-
tion faces an uphill battle. This, in addition to the
unstructured nature of the construction site environ-
ment, requires that robots either be highly intelligent in
order to correctly interpret and react to their surround-
ings or to be human assisted. However, site structure
and tolerances are expected to improve as pressures to
reduce costs and improve productivity continue to rise.
Improvements in site organization and construction tol-
erances have already been proved to be achievable in
a few cases, as has been demonstrated in Japan [57.71].
However, the economic case for these demonstration
projects has yet to be made.
57.5.4 Power and Communications
in the Field
Unlike manufacturing environments, in which spe-
cially designed factories are outﬁtted with the necessary
power and communications installations, a construction
project often begins before such resources have been in-
stalled at the site. Therefore, robots with large power
requirements that need to communicate with supervi-
sory systems located off site would be challenging to
implement without signiﬁcant added cost.
Although communications technologies have ad-
vanced signiﬁcantly in the last few decades, it is still
considered difﬁcult to maintain a reliable local-area
network at a construction site and to connect that net-
work to the Internet. The use of cellular telephones

Part F | 57.7
1516
Part F
Robots at Work
with a press-to-talk (the digital version of the tradi-
tional two-way radio communication method) feature
has largely replaced the traditional two-way radios
that also revolutionized on-site construction commu-
nications. However, in order for construction sites
to become more automated, reliable interference-free
high-bandwidth networks must be able to carry data
transmission between sensors, machines, and supervi-
sory systems.
57.5.5 Sensing
Field measurements are an integral part of the construc-
tion process. The tape measure and the transit have
been used in construction for decades for measuring
distances and angles, respectively. However, construc-
tion measurements are not limited to distances and
angles, but can also include measurements of installed
quantities, percentages of completion of activities, and
so on. All of these measurements are necessary to be
able to lay out the site where a facility is to be built,
to measure the conformance of the as-built facility to
the intended design, and to monitor safety, productivity,
and progress.
In the past few decades, more advanced means
of making measurements on construction sites have
come into play. These include (but are not limited
to) total stations, GPS, indoor GPS, ultra-wide band,
laser scanners, ground-penetrating radar, equipment
and structural health monitoring sensors, concrete ma-
turity meters and radio frequency identiﬁcation [57.72–
84]. These technologies, as well as others that have
not yet been adopted in the construction industry, are
crucial for enabling more automation and robotics in
construction. Nevertheless, despite all of these advances
in technology, one of the biggest challenges for im-
plementing robotics at the construction site is to be
able to provide accurate and up-to-date information to
the robots about where everything is and what other
equipment are doing. This challenge will eventually be
solved by the introduction of more sophisticated sens-
ing and perception systems.
57.6 Future Directions
As previously discussed, developing new methods for
collecting, processing, analyzing, and communicating
construction information is a signiﬁcant area of con-
struction automation research, and will dominate near-
term efforts. As this construction information becomes
more readily accessible, automation of processes can be
enabled directly from the combination of design infor-
mation and current site status that is accurately captured
and shared. Resource tracking will become ubiquitous
and just-in-time delivery of needed materials and equip-
ment will happen throughout the site.
Advances in mobility (humanoid robotics, smart
cars, legged locomotion, etc.) will enable ever more
automated material handling on the job site. These
advances will require better control systems for the con-
struction robots that can provide high payload and good
positioning accuracy. The increased use of robots at
the construction site will also drive research into safety
systems for construction robots working around human
workers and other machines.
Perhaps most important, more extensive automatic
design systems will enable more prefabrication of
building components and new methods of assembling
those components on site, which in turn will provide
the promise of faster, better, and cheaper construction
robotics ﬁrst envisioned in the 1980s.
57.7 Conclusions and Further Reading
The application of robotics to construction has yet to
catch up with other industries such as automobile man-
ufacturing. Construction presents a unique challenge
for robotic applications. The construction environment
is cluttered, unstructured, and teaming with human
workers. In addition, construction processes are usually
labor intensive and have to accommodate wide mar-
gins of error in the constructed facility. The application
of robotics in construction to date has been limited
to commercial teleoperated and programmable ma-
chines. Autonomous or semiautonomous machines are
currently mostly limited to research projects within var-
ious nonconstruction organizations. With the increase
in competition throughout the global construction mar-
ket, construction companies are on the lookout for ways
to improve productivity, quality, and safety. The use of
automation and robotics is one answer that the industry
is slowly turning toward. However, before these poten-
tial solutions can be successfully applied, much work
is needed to improve construction tolerances, develop
standards, and achieve real-time site status monitoring.
The International Association for Automation and
Robotics in Construction holds an annual confer-
ence (the International Symposium on Automation and

Robotics in Construction
References
1517
Part F | 57
Robotics in Construction) at which researchers can
present the latest developments in the ﬁeld. The pro-
ceedings from this conference hold a wealth of informa-
tion on the state of the art of the ﬁeld and are accessible
to the general public through IAARC’s website (www.
iaarc.org).
There are several journals that publish articles
on various aspects of automation in construction.
Most notable of these are Automation in Construction,
Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering,
the Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, and
the Journal of Construction Engineering and Man-
agement. In addition, some journals publish special
editions on robotics in construction. Some examples
are Autonomous Robots and the Journal of Advanced
Robotic Systems.
Video-References
VIDEO 272
Obayashi ACBS (Automatic Constructions Building System)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/57/videodetails/272
References
57.1
E. Ginzberg: The mechanization of work, Sci. Am.
247(3), 66–75 (1982)
57.2
US Census Bureau: Value of Construction Put in
Place – Seasonally Adjusted Annual Rate (U.S.
Census Bureau, Washington DC 2012), http://www.
census.gov/
57.3
Bureau of Labor Statistics: Industries at a Glance:
Construction: NAICS 23 (US Department of La-
bor,
Washington
DC
2012),
http://www.bls.
gov/iag/tgs/iag23.htm
57.4
US Census Bureau: Statistics of U.S. Businesses (U.S.
Census Bureau, Washington DC 2012), http://www.
census.gov/csd/susb/
57.5
European Commission: Eurostat Regional Yearbook
2012 (Publications Office of the European Union,
Luxembourg
2012),
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
web/products-statistical-books/-/KS-HA-12-001
57.6
Statistics Bureau, Ministry of Internal Affairs and
Communications: Statistical Handbook of Japan
(Statistics Bureau, Tokyo 2012), http://www.stat.go.
jp/english/data/handbook/index.htm
57.7
National Bureau of Statistics of China: The Re-
sults of Preliminary Verified GDP for the First
Three Quarters in 2012 (National Bureau of Statis-
tics of China, Beijing 2012) http://www.stats.gov.cn/
english/pressrelease/201211/t20121102_72217.html
57.8
National
Bureau of Statistics
of China: China
Statistical Yearbook (China Statistics Press, Bei-
jing 2012), http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/ndsj/2012/
indexeh.htm
57.9
D. Crosthwaite: The global construction market:
A cross-sectional analysis, Constr. Manag. Econ.
18(5), 619–627 (2000)
57.10
D.W. Halpin, R.W. Woodhead: Construction Man-
agement, 2nd edn. (Wiley, New York 1998)
57.11
K.S. Saidi: Possible Applications of Handheld Com-
puters to Quantity Surveying, Dissertation (Univ.
Texas, Austin 2002)
57.12
T. Greaves, B. Jenkins: Capturing Existing Con-
ditions with Terrestrial Laser Scanning: A Report
on Opportunities, Challenges and Best Practices
for Owners, Operators, Engineering/Construction
Contractors and Surveyors of Built Assets and
Civil Infrastructure (Spar Point Research, Danvers
2004)
57.13
J.G. Everett, A.H. Slocum: Automation and robotics
opportunities – Construction versus manufactur-
ing, J. Constr. Eng. Manag. ASCE 120(2), 443–451
(1994)
57.14
L.A. Demsetz: Task identification for construction
automation, 6th Int. Symp. Autom. Robotics Constr.
(1989) pp. 95–102
57.15
R. Kangari, D.W. Halpin: Potential robotics utiliza-
tion in construction, J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 115(1),
126–143 (1989)
57.16
R.L. Tucker: High payoff areas for automation ap-
plications, 6th Int. Symp. Autom. Robotics Constr.
(1988) pp. 9–16
57.17
L. Cousineau, N. Miura: Construction Robots: The
Search for New Building Technology in Japan (ASCE,
Reston 1998)
57.18
J.G. Everett, H. Saito: Construction automation:
Demands and satisfiers in the United States and
Japan, J. Constr. Eng. Manag. ASCE 122(2), 147–151
(1996)
57.19
M. Taylor, S. Wamuziri, I. Smith: Automated con-
struction in Japan, Proc. ICE Civil Eng. 156(1), 34–41
(2003)
57.20
J. Maeda: Current research and development and
approach to future automated construction in
Japan, Proc. Constr. Res. Congr. (2005) p. 2403
57.21
C. Balaguer, M. Abderrahim, J.M. Navarro, S. Boud-
jabeur, P. Aromaa, K. Kahkonen, S. Slavenburg,
D. Seward, T. Bock, R. Wing, B. Atkin: FutureHome:
An integrated construction automation approach,
IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 9(1), 55–66 (2002)
57.22
Y. Maruyama, Y. Iwase, K. Koga, J. Yagi, H. Takada,
N. Sunaga, S. Nishigaki, T. Ito, K. Tamaki: De-
velopment of virtual and real-field construc-
tion management systems in innovative, intelli-
gent field factory, Autom. Constr. 9(5/6), 503–514
(2000)

Part F | 57
1518
Part F
Robots at Work
57.23
C. Balaguer: Soft robotics concept in construction
industry, World Autom. Congr. (2004) pp. 517–522
57.24
K.A. Reed: The role of the CIMSteel integration
standards in automating the erection and survey-
ing of structural steelwork, 19th Int. Symp. Autom.
Robotics Constr. SP989 (NIST, Gaithersburg 2002)
57.25
N.J. Shih: The application of a 3-D scanner in the
representation of building construction site, ISARC
2002: 19th Int. Symp. Autom. Robotics Constr. (2002)
pp. 337–342
57.26
B. Akinci, F. Boukamp, C. Gordon, D. Huber, C. Lyons,
K. Park: A formalism for utilization of sensor sys-
tems and integrated project models for active con-
struction quality control, Autom. Constr. 15(2), 124–
138 (2006)
57.27
G.S.
Cheok,
W.C.
Stone:
Non-intrusive
scan-
ning
technology
for
construction
assessment,
IAARC/IFAC/IEEE. Int. Symp. (1999) pp. 645–650
57.28
K. McKinney, M. Fischer: Generating, evaluating
and visualizing construction schedules with CAD
tools, Autom. Constr. 7(6), 433–447 (1998)
57.29
B. Akinci, M. Fischer, J. Kunz: Automated gen-
eration of work spaces required by construction
activities, J. Constr. Eng. Manag. ASCE 128(4), 306–
315 (2002)
57.30
V. Kamat, R. Lipman: Evaluation of standard prod-
uct models for supporting automated erection of
structural steelwork, Autom. Constr. 16(2), 232–241
(2006)
57.31
C.M. Eastman: Building Product Models (CRC, Boca
Raton 1999)
57.32
T.
Bock,
A.
Malone:
The
Integrated
Project
ManuBuild of the EU, ISARC 2006 23rd Int. Symp.
Autom. Robotics Constr. (2006) pp. 361–364
57.33
G. Aouad, J. Kirkham, P. Brandon, F. Brown,
G. Cooper, S. Ford, R. Oxman, M. Sarshar, B. Young:
Information modeling in the construction indus-
try – The information engineering approach, Con-
str. Manag. Econ. 11(5), 384–397 (1993)
57.34
G. Beer: Tunconstruct: A new european initiative,
T&T Int. FEV (2006) pp. 21–23
57.35
H.M. Huang: Autonomy Levels for Unmanned Sys-
tems (ALFUS) Framework Volume I: Terminology
Version 2.0, NIST Special Publication 1011-I-2.0
(NIST, Gaithersburg 2008), http://www.nist.gov/el/
isd/ks/upload/NISTSP_1011-I-2-0.pdf
57.36
Y.F. Ho, H. Masuda, H. Oda, L.W. Stark: Dis-
tributed control for tele-operations, IEEE/ASME
Trans. Mechatron. 5(2), 100–109 (2000)
57.37
S. Singh: State of the art in automation of earth-
moving, ASCE J. Aerosp. Eng. 10(4), 179–188 (2002)
57.38
H. Quang, M. Santos, N. Quang, D. Rye, H. Durrant-
Whyte: Robotic excavation in construction automa-
tion, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 9(1), 20–28 (2002)
57.39
J. Albus, R. Bostelman, N. Dagalakis: The NIST
RoboCrane, J. Robotic Syst. 10(5), 709–724 (1993)
57.40
K.S. Saidi, A.M. Lytle, W.C. Stone, N.A. Scott: De-
velopments toward automated construction, NIST
Interagency Rep. 7264 (NIST, Gaithersburg 2005)
57.41
S.C. Kang, E. Miranda: Physics based model for sim-
ulating the dynamics of tower cranes, 10th Int.
Conf. Comput. Civil Build. Eng. (ICCCBE) (2004)
57.42
Weckenmann LLC: Machinery and plant systems
for the production of precast concrete elements,
http://www.weckenmann.com/en
57.43
M. Damlund, S. Goth, P. Hasle, K. Munk: Low back
pain and early retirement among Danish semi-
skilled construction workers, Scand. J. Work, En-
viron. Health 8(1982), 100–104 (1982)
57.44
S. Schneider, P. Susi: Ergonomics and construction:
A review of potential hazards in new construction,
Am. Ind. Hyg. Assoc. J. 55, 635–649 (1994)
57.45
T. Bock: Robot Oriented Design (Shokokusha Pub-
lishing, Tokyo 1988)
57.46
T. Bock: A study on Robot-Oriented Construction
and Building System, Thesis for Doctorate of En-
gineering, Report Number 108066 (University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 1989)
57.47
T. Bock, T. Linner: Robot-Oriented Design and
Management (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge
2014)
57.48
T. Bock: The Japanese approach of SMAS-solid ma-
terial assembly system and the European approach
of ROCCO-robotic assembly system for computer
integrated construction, EC-Japan Conf. (Reading
University, Reading 1995)
57.49
G. Wickström, T. Niskanen, H. Riihimäki: Strain on
the back in concrete reinforcement work, Br. J. Ind.
Med. 42(4), 233–239 (1985)
57.50
H. Benckert: Mechydronic for boom control on
truck-mounted concrete pumps, Tech. Symp. Con-
str. Equip. Technol. 2003 (2003)
57.51
F. Gebhart, G. Mayer, F. Ott, A. Barren, B. Heid,
W.
Schencking,
E.
Andres
Puente,
T.
Bock,
A. Delchambre: Final report of the ROCCO project,
ESPRIT III program of the European Union (1998)
57.52
T. Bock: Plenary paper: State of the art of au-
tomation and robotics in construction in Germany
ROCCO: Robotic assembly system for computer in-
tegrated construction, 13th ISARC, Int. Conf. Autom.
Robotics Constr., Tokio (1996)
57.53
F. Peyret: The Achievements of the computer in-
tegrated road construction project, 17th IAARC/CIB/
IEEE/IFAC/IFR Int. Symp. Autom. Robotics Constr. (IS-
ARC) (2000)
57.54
Commonwealth Scientific, Industrial Research Or-
ganisation: Mining Robotics Project (CSIRO, Clay-
ton South 2006), https://wiki.csiro.au/display/ASL/
Dragline+Automation
57.55
D.A. Bradley, D.W. Seward: The development, con-
trol and operation of an autonomous robotic exca-
vator, J. Intell. Robotic Syst. 21(1), 73–97 (1998)
57.56
P. Coal, C. Hughes: Project C8001: Introduction of
Autonomous Haul Trucks. Final Report (Australian
Coal Research, Brisbane 1997)
57.57
C. Haas, K. Saidi, Y. Cho, W. Fagerlund, H. Kim,
Y. Kim: Implementation of an Automated Road
Maintenance Machine (ARMM), Center for Trans-
portation Research, Project Summary Report (NIST
Interagency Rep., 7264 2005)
57.58
D.A. Bennett, X. Feng, S.A. Velinsky: AHMCT auto-
mated crack sealing program and the operator con-
trolled crack sealing machine, Transp. Res. Board
Annu. Meet. (2003)

Robotics in Construction
References
1519
Part F | 57
57.59
A.M. Lytle, K.S. Saidi: NIST research in autonomous
construction, Auton. Robots 22(3), 211–221 (2007)
57.60
T. Linner: Automated and Robotic Construction: In-
tegrated Automated Construction Sites, Dissertation
(Universität München, München 2013)
57.61
T. Bock, T. Linner: Logistics, Site Automation
and Robotics: Automated/Robotic On-site Factories
(Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge 2014)
57.62
M.P. Gallaher, R.E. Chapman: Cost Analysis of Inad-
equate Interoperability in the US Capital Facilities
Industry (National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology, Gaithersburg 2004), US Dept. of Commerce,
Technology Administration
57.63
K.B. Lee, M.E. Reichardt: Open standards for home-
land security sensor networks, Instrum. Meas. Mag.
IEEE 8(5), 14–21 (2005)
57.64
E.F. Begley, M.E. Palmer, K.A. Reed: Semantic Map-
ping Between IAI ifcXML and FIATECH AEX Models for
Centrifugal Pumps (National Institute of Standards
and Technology, Gaithersburg 2005)
57.65
R. Fleischman, B.V. Viscomi, L.W. Lu: Development,
analysis and experimentation of ATLSS connections
for automated construction, Proc. 1st World Conf.
Steel Struct. (1992)
57.66
S. Garrido, M. Abderrahim, A. Gimenez, C. Balaguer:
Anti-swinging input shaping control of an auto-
matic construction crane, IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci.
Eng. 5(3), 549–557 (2007)
57.67
T. Bock: Montage und Demontage im Holzbau
mittels Schnellverschlüssen, BMBF Projektnummer:
0339835/5
57.68
J.K. Latta: Inaccuracies in Construction, Canadian
Building Digest 171 (Institute for Construction,
National
Research
Council
Canada,
Ottawa
1975),
http://web.mit.edu/parmstr/Public/NRCan/
CanBldgDigests/cbd171_e.html
57.69
A.M. Lytle, K.S. Saidi (Eds.): Proceedings of the
23rd ISARC (International Association for Automa-
tion and Robotics in Construction, Tokyo 2006)
57.70
A.M. Lytle, K.S. Saidi (Eds.): Automated Steel Con-
struction Workshop 2002 (National Institute of
Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg 2004)
57.71
Y. Miyatake: SMART system: A full-scale implemen-
tation of computer integrated construction, 10th
Int. Symp. Autom. Robotics Constr. (1993)
57.72
C. Lindfors, P. Chang, W. Stone: Survey of construc-
tion metrology options for AEC industry, J. Aerosp.
Eng. 12, 58 (1999)
57.73
S. Kang, D. Tesar: A novel 6-DoF measurement tool
with indoor GPS for metrology and calibration of
modular reconfigurable robots, IEEE ICM Int. Conf.
Mechatron., Istanbul (2004)
57.74
L.E. Bernold, L. Venkatesan, S. Suvarna: Equipment
mounted multi-sensory system to locate pipes,
Pipelines 130, 112 (2004)
57.75
D.A. Willett, K.C. Mahboub, B. Rister: Accuracy
of ground-penetrating radar for pavement-layer
thickness analysis, J. Transp. Eng. 132, 96–103
(2006)
57.76
C.L. Barnes, J.F. Trottier: Effectiveness of ground
penetrating radar in predicting deck repair quan-
tities, J. Infrastruct. Syst. 10, 69 (2004)
57.77
J.A. Huisman, S.S. Hubbard, J.D. Redman, A.P. An-
nan: Measuring soil water content with ground
penetrating radar – A review, Vadose Zone J. 2(4),
476–491 (2003)
57.78
G.W.
Housner,
L.A.
Bergman,
T.K.
Caughey,
A.G. Chassiakos, R.O. Claus, S.F. Masri, R.E. Skelton,
T.T. Soong, B.F. Spencer, J.T.P. Yao: Structural
control: Past, present, and future, J. Eng. Mech.
123(9), 897–971 (1997)
57.79
US Department of Transportation: Maturity Meters:
A Concrete Success, ed. by L. Pope (Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA), Washington 2002)
57.80
S.V. Ramaiah, B.F. McCullough, T. Dossey: Estimat-
ing in situ Strength of Concrete Pavements Under
Various Field Conditions (Univ. of Texas, Austin
2001), Center Transport. Res.
57.81
J. Song, C. Haas, C. Caldas, E. Ergen, B. Akinci,
C.R. Wood, J. Wadephul: Field Trials of RFID Tech-
nology for Tracking Fabricated Pipe – Phase II
(FIATECH,
Austin
2003),
http://www.fiatech.org/
images/stories/techprojects/project_deliverables
/SC_FieldTrialsofRFIDTechnologyfor
TrackingFabricatedPipe_PhaseII.pdf
57.82
J. Song, C.T. Haas, C. Caldas, E. Ergen, B. Ak-
inci: Automating the task of tracking the delivery
and receipt of fabricated pipe spools in industrial
projects, Autom. Constr. 15(2), 166–177 (2006)
57.83
J. Aksoy, I. Chan, K. Guidry, J. Jones, C. R. Wood:
Materials and Asset Tracking Using RFID: A Prepara-
tory Field Pilot Study (FIATECH, Austin 2004), http://
www.fiatech.org
57.84
J. Kang, P. Woods, J. Nam, C.R. Wood: Field Tests of
RFID Technology for Construction Tool Management
(FIATECH, Austin 2005), http://www.fiatech.org

Multimedia Contents Robotics in H
1521
Part F | 58.1
58. Robotics in Hazardous Applications
James Trevelyan, William R. Hamel, Sung-Chul Kang
Robotics researchers have worked hard to real-
ize a long-awaited vision: machines that can
eliminate the need for people to work in haz-
ardous environments. Chapter 60 is framed by
the vision of disaster response: search and res-
cue robots carrying people from burning buildings
or tunneling through collapsed rock falls to reach
trapped miners. In this chapter we review tangi-
ble progress towards robots that perform routine
work in places too dangerous for humans. Re-
searchers still have many challenges ahead of
them but there has been remarkable progress in
some areas. Hazardous environments present spe-
cial challenges for the accomplishment of desired
tasks depending on the nature and magnitude of
the hazards. Hazards may be present in the form of
radiation, toxic contamination, falling objects or
potential explosions. Technology that specialized
engineering companies can develop and sell with-
out active help from researchers marks the frontier
of commercial feasibility. Just inside this border
lie teleoperated robots for explosive ordnance dis-
posal (EOD) and for underwater engineering work.
Even with the typical tenfold disadvantage in ma-
nipulation performance imposed by the limits of
today’s telepresence and teleoperation technology,
in terms of human dexterity and speed, robots
often can offer a more cost-effective solution.
However, most routine applications in hazardous
58.1 Operation in Hazardous Environments:
The Need for a Robotics Solution.......... 1521
58.2 Applications ........................................ 1523
58.2.1
Eradicating Landmines .............. 1524
58.2.2 Hazardous Materials Handling
and Operations ......................... 1530
58.2.3 Lessons Learned from the
Fukushima Daiichi Disaster......... 1536
58.3 Enabling Technologies ......................... 1537
58.3.1
Mobility Issues .......................... 1537
58.3.2 Manipulator Design and Control
for Hazardous Object Handling ... 1539
58.3.3 Control for Hazardous Tasks ........ 1540
58.3.4 Data Communications................ 1542
58.3.5 Energetics................................. 1542
58.3.6 System Architectures
for Real-Time Mission Control..... 1543
58.4 Conclusions and Further Reading ......... 1544
Video-References......................................... 1545
References................................................... 1546
environments still lie far beyond the feasibility
frontier. Fire fighting, remediating nuclear con-
tamination, reactor decommissioning, tunneling,
underwater engineering, underground mining and
clearance of landmines and unexploded ordnance
still present many unsolved problems.
58.1 Operation in Hazardous Environments:
The Need for a Robotics Solution
Routine work in hazardous environments presents many
challenges for robotic devices that depend on both the
tasks and the hazards. Hazards may be present in the
form of temperature extremes, radiation, toxic fumes
and materials, potential explosions, risk of electrocu-
tion, the absence of breathable air in space, and the
high pressure of underwater environments. When the
magnitudes of one or more hazards reach the point

Part F | 58.1
1522
Part F
Robots at Work
that human exposure would either represent a direct
threat to life or unacceptable long-term health conse-
quences, some form of remote operations that separate
humans from the hazards must be employed. A long-
extant example of such operations is the nuclear indus-
try where telerobotics has become a well-established
technique for operations in environments with high lev-
els of nuclear radiation. Many of the technical roots
of modern robotics technology can be traced back to
nuclear remote handling manipulators and support sys-
tems. Remote handling and operations concepts using
engineered systems that allow humans to perform haz-
ardous work while staying in a safe environment have
evolved since the 1940s. Today, such remotely operated
systems are widely used and recently they have become
routinely used in explosives disposal, security opera-
tions, handling of dangerous biological materials, and
routine inspection of industrial systems such as power
lines, substations, sewers, piping systems, pressure ves-
sels and many others.
A remote handling system will generally involve
subsystems for mobility, manipulation, tooling, sens-
ing, and human–machine interfacing (Fig. 58.1). Nom-
inal operations involve the collective workings of these
subsystems to accomplish remote operational goals.
Any remote handling system will eventually experience
some aspect of off-nominal operation that may be the
result of unexpected environmental events or system
malfunctions. The fundamental idea is to connect the
human operator to the remote environment via a power
and signal infrastructure that allows effective operation
in the remote environment: mechanized devices and
sensor systems that allow the human’s perception and
action capabilities to be projected into the hazardous
environment to perform remote operations. The more
Signals
Physical
temporal
hazards
barriers
Hazardous environment
Remote work system
Tasks
Tools
Manipulators
Mobility platforms
Remote
sensors
Human safe environment
Human/machine
interface
Remote sensor-based
perception
Haptics I/F
master
controller
Controls &
displays
Power
Fig. 58.1 Basic subsystems of
a remote handling system
realistic this projection, the more natural and effective
the human remote control will be.
Because of their inherent complexity and the very
nature of remote operations, operator training is a major
challenge that requires the use of simulations and cold
testing facilities that provide operators with comprehen-
sive and realistic training. Such training will typically
encompass all aspects of nominal and anticipated off-
nominal operations.
Remote handling systems themselves will even-
tually experience equipment failures. Remote recov-
ery/maintenance/operation of failed remote systems
must be an integral part of their basic design and op-
erational features. Hardware/software features must be
provided for the analysis of, recovery from, and correc-
tion of problems.
Robotics researchers have worked hard to realize
a long-awaited vision: machines that enable people
to perform routine work without exposure to haz-
ards. In this chapter we review progress and some of
the current and future challenges that lie ahead for
researchers.
Technology that specialized engineering compa-
nies can develop and sell without active help from
researchers marks the frontier of commercial feasi-
bility. Just inside this border lie teleoperated robots
for explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) [58.1, 2] and
for underwater engineering work. Even with the typi-
cal tenfold disadvantage in manipulation performance
imposed by the limits of today’s telepresence and tele-
operation technology, compared with human dexterity
and speed, robots can often offer a more cost-effective
solution. Naturally, if people need to wear protective
suits to protect them from hazards, their endurance and
dexterity will be restricted.

Robotics in Hazardous Applications
58.2 Applications
1523
Part F | 58.2
Weight
Thruster
Winch
Steadying
arm
Mani-
pulator
Fig. 58.2 Remotely operated vehicles designed for underwater engineering work, demonstrating an ingeniously sim-
ple technical arrangement compared with conventional free-swimming vehicles. (courtesy of Total Marine Technology,
Australia)
Ingenuity stimulated by commercial incentives can
greatly reduce the operating costs of remotely operated
equipment. Figure 58.2 illustrates the elegant simplic-
ity of the NOMAD remotely operated vehicle (ROV)
that pulls itself deeper with a simple electric winch. It
can be left in place overnight or during rough weather.
Free-swimming robots are much more complicated and
expensive and have to be hauled out of the water when
not under active control.
Limited autonomy or autonomous operation for
a restricted time can relieve operator fatigue and allows
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs, often referred to as
drones) to ﬂy extended reconnaissance missions with
occasional precision weapon delivery. Such missions
would be too hazardous or too politically sensitive for
manned aircraft.
Even after the ﬁrst decade of the 21st century, with
60 years of remote operating experience, most haz-
ardous applications still lie far beyond the frontier of
commercial feasbility. Fire ﬁghting, remediating high-
level nuclear contamination [58.3], reactor decommis-
sioning, tunneling, underground mining, and most land-
mine and unexploded ordnance problems still present
many research challenges. Most attempts to use ﬁrst-
generation mine rescue robots reported in the press in
2000 and 2001 have merely created distractions for the
people who regularly have to risk their lives saving
their trapped colleagues (e.g., the Australian Numbat
robot [58.4]). The Fukushima Daiichi nuclear reactor
disaster triggered by the March 2011 tsunami that dev-
astated parts of Japan serves as a reality check on
our capacity to use robots effectively for hazardous
tasks. Beyond the carefully engineered environments
that characterize the nuclear material handling indus-
try, the disappointing performance of several robots has
demonstrated just how far we still have to go.
58.2 Applications
Potential applications of robotic systems in hazardous
environments encompass an extremely wide spectrum,
limited only by human imagination. The solutions for
these different environments are equally diverse. In
general such applications involve unique challenges as-
sociated with the uncertainty and unstructured nature
of the associated tasks. In this discussion, two appli-
cation areas that are very different have been selected
to give the reader a deeper sense of technology evolu-
tion, accomplishments, and remaining challenges. The
ﬁrst application we will discuss is landmine eradi-
cation, sometimes referred to as demining, a current
application domain with humanitarian importance and
extremely difﬁcult and hazardous outdoor conditions.
The second application area is hazardous nuclear and
biological material handling, a decades-old industry

Part F | 58.2
1524
Part F
Robots at Work
that has strongly inﬂuenced many aspects of robot ma-
nipulation and mobility research and development. We
conclude this section with a brief discussion on the
lessons learned from the Fukushima Daiichi disaster,
lessons that help to strengthen our argument that we are
still at a very early stage of development in robotics for
routine operations in hazardous environments.
58.2.1 Eradicating Landmines
Efforts to construct a practical robotic device to help
with landmine clearance have met with only limited
success. While remote control technology has enabled
some existing machines and vehicles to be used in
hazardous situations, we are still a long way from
achieving reliable robotic mine clearance. It is instruc-
tive to understand why many expectations turned out to
be hopelessly optimistic.
Landmines, a simple type of victim-activated explo-
sive device, were used extensively in Europe and North
Africa during the Second World War between 1939 and
1945. Extensive clearance operations in 1945 and 1946
removed nearly all of the landmines then in use [58.5,
part 1, pp. 15–25].
Landmines were used extensively in subsequent
decades. Along with antipersonnel cluster bombs, they
caused extensive civilian and military casualties in Viet-
nam and Cambodia from the 1960s onwards. However,
it was not until their widespread use in Afghanistan,
Tripwire
Detonator
Detonator
Cone spring
Firing pin
Explosive
Explosive
Pin
Fig. 58.3 Antipersonnel fragmentation mine (left) and buried blast
mine (right)
Angola, Cambodia, and several other countries in the
1980s that they were recognized as a major humanitar-
ian problem. Landmines blocked aid efforts needed to
rebuild communities following civil conﬂicts.
The Red Cross and the International Campaign to
Ban Landmines (ICBL) successfully promoted a ban
on the use of landmines that came into effect in 1997
as the Ottawa Treaty. The knowledge that thousands
of children were losing their legs, even their lives,
motivated hundreds of researchers to develop new
technologies to help eliminate this threat. By 2000
ICBL estimated that over 80 countries were affected
by landmines and other explosive remnants of war
such as cluster bombs. Although several countries that
have not signed the Ottawa Treaty still have extensive
stocks of landmines, the treaty has been effective
in restricting the use of landmines more through
peer pressure. A few countries and several non-state
actors continue to deploy landmines. However, other
explosive remnants of war such as cluster bombs and
other munitions have become, yet again, an increasing
problem in Iraq, Afghanistan, Libya and Syria.
There are several basic types of landmines and
unexploded ordnance (UXO) that continue to cause
problems in many countries.
Antipersonnel (AP) blast mines, made predomi-
nantly of plastic with small metal ﬁring pins and det-
onator cases, typically contain between 20 and 100 g of
explosive (Fig. 58.3). These mines only cause extensive
injuries when they detonate within a few centimetres of
a person. Typically they lie buried just below the ground
surface and are activated when the victim steps on top of
the mine. Shattered fragments of bone pass through the
ﬂesh of the leg at high velocity. If the victim survives
long enough to reach hospital, amputation above or be-
low the knee usually saves his or her life but the victim
will need prosthetic legs, replaced at regular intervals.
Antipersonnel fragmentation mines contain simi-
lar quantities of explosive with a thick metal case that
breaks into high-velocity fragments when the mine
explodes just above the ground surface. Older fragmen-
tation mines were mounted on posts; some varieties lie
buried but jump into the air when activated and explode
at waist height, killing or seriously wounding victims
up to 200 m away. These mines are much easier to de-
tect so they are often protected by nearby antipersonnel
blast mines to deter theft.
Anti-vehicle (AV) or anti-tank mines (ATs), made
predominantly of plastic with small metal ﬁring pins
and detonator cases, are large versions of the AP blast
mine and typically contain 510 kg of explosive. Some
have a thick metal plate on top that can penetrate 50 cm
of armor plate on the underside of a tank. These mines
cause signiﬁcant damage even to mine-resistant vehi-

Robotics in Hazardous Applications
58.2 Applications
1525
Part F | 58.2
cles which have blast-resistant hulls, offset wheels, and
additional protection for occupants.
Air-dispersed munitions such as cluster bombs
(CBs) were not intended to be victim-activated. Several
hundred are released at one time from a single canis-
ter and they are designed to explode on impact with the
ground. Typically between 5 and 25% fail to explode
immediately and lie in a partially triggered state either
on or just below the ground surface. Some will deto-
nate in response to electromagnetic ﬁelds from metal
detectors, and others will detonate with the slightest
movement. Most explode like powerful fragmentation
mines with a lethal radius of up to 200 m.
Improvised explosive devices (IEDs), often in the
form of roadside bombs, are increasingly used by insur-
gent groups ﬁghting organized military forces (asym-
metric warfare). They are often made from large UXOs
ﬁtted with remote controlled detonators
VIDEO 572 .
Ironically the UXO is often unintentionally donated by
the same organized military forces who become the
targets of these devices. IED detection and clearance
has become one of the highest priorities for military
robotics research.
Evolution of Landmine Clearance Techniques
Removing landmines is usually both laborious and
hazardous. It is important to distinguish between hu-
manitarian mine clearance and military mine clearance
methods (sometimes called breeching). Military mine
clearance has to work fast, in all conditions (even un-
der ﬁre), and therefore it is unrealistic to aim for 100%
clearance. In humanitarian operations there is less time
pressure and work can be suspended in unfavorable
conditions, and the aim is 100% clearance. Since the
1990s, the expectation in industrialized countries of
low casualties from military operations often demands
very high clearance standards even for urgent military
operations.
Humanitarian mine clearance typically starts years,
perhaps decades, after the mines were laid. The mines
lie buried or hidden from view. They deter people from
entering the land so vegetation often grows thickly
(Fig. 58.4). Drainage systems rapidly become clogged,
denying access in wet conditions.
The traditional manual method for removing land-
mines has been to use a metal detector to locate metal
fragments close to the ground surface and then to care-
fully check each metal fragment to see if it is associated
with a mine or explosive device
VIDEO 571 . Any trip-
wires and vegetation have to be removed, with great
care, before a metal detector can be used. In many
areas deminers have to investigate hundreds or thou-
sands of metal fragments for every mine found. Manual
mine clearance also requires careful organization and
Fig. 58.4 Typical ruined house overgrown by vegetation
in a village in northern Croatia, possibly containing mines
or booby traps. The entire village population was forced to
leave in 1991 and the houses were looted and intentionally
severely damaged. Vegetation problems like this must be
taken into account in considering practical mine and UXO
clearance devices. August 1999 (courtesy of J. Trevelyan)
marking of the ground to ensure safety and thorough
clearance. Currently it is still the method that guaran-
tees the lowest risk of residual mine contamination but
it is expensive, typically costing US$ 1–5 =m2.
Armored mine clearance machines using hammers
mounted on the end of rapidly spinning chains (ﬂails)
ﬁrst appeared in the 1940s but have not been able to
neutralize mines with sufﬁcient reliability for most hu-
manitarian applications [58.6].
In the late 1990s commercial mine clearance or-
ganizations operating in thick vegetation in Bosnia
Herzegovina and Croatia realized that ﬂails spinning
just above the ground could rapidly remove vegetation
and trip wires to prepare the ground for manual clear-
ance, often assisted by mine detection dogs. Clearance
costs have been reduced by up to 80% (particularly in
thick vegetation) using different combinations of ma-
chines, detection dogs, and manual clearance.
Ground milling machines use metal drums stud-
ded with hard cutters that shred buried objects. They
require more power than ﬂails but can operate with
greater levels of reliability (Fig. 58.5). Both ﬂails and
ground milling machines have been extensively used in
Croatia to recover large areas of formerly productive
agricultural land. Both kinds of machines can with-
stand a limited number of AT and moderate-size UXO
explosions before main bearings and other compo-
nents need to be replaced
VIDEO 574 ,
VIDEO 575 ,
VIDEO 576 ,
VIDEO 577 . Several of these machines
have remote operation capabilities (Fig. 58.6).
Naturally, machines operate best on ﬂat or gently
sloping ground, which is also the land that is most valu-
able for agriculture and human habitation. Thick forest

Part F | 58.2
1526
Part F
Robots at Work
Fig. 58.5 Flail machine using hammers on the ends of spinning chains to clear vegetation and tripwires. This machine
will also detonate a proportion of buried mines (inset) (courtesy of Scanjack AB, Sweden)
Fig. 58.6 Bozena teleoperated demining vehicle (courtesy of Way
Industry, Slovakia)
VIDEO 574
and mountainous terrain still requires traditional man-
ual clearance and, in most countries, will not be cleared
of mines for a long time, if ever.
Mechanized clearance methods continue to evolve
with improvements to machines and techniques. Ma-
chines can be used for survey, risk assessment, and risk
reduction tasks to help determine the need for more
expensive manual clearance methods. Mine action pro-
grams are gradually shifting from an emphasis on total
clearance in the 1990s to one of progressive prioritized
risk reduction involving a series of measures including
high-security fences, mechanized survey and risk re-
duction methods, and selective manual clearance [58.5,
part 4]. Protective measures applied to agricultural
machinery offer cheaper alternatives in low-AT-risk ar-
eas [58.7].
Evolution of Demining Research Priorities
Technological development in landmine clearance from
within the demining community has mainly been driven
by the search for improved productivity. Many of the
comments in this section are based on numerous discus-
sions with experienced demining personnel who have
tried new technologies in the ﬁeld. References have
been cited where further detailed written information
is available.
In the mid-1990s there was the expectation that,
with sufﬁcient research, advanced technology detectors
could replace eddy-current metal detector technology
that had been in use since the 1940s. Metal detectors
also react to metal fragments in the ground. A detec-
tor that could conﬁrm the presence of explosive, it was
thought, would save having to investigate all these false
alarms. The most promising line of research seemed
to be data fusion: combining signals from a metal
detector, ground-penetrating radar, infrared detectors,
thermal neutron detectors, and even acoustic detectors.
Astute observers at research conferences have pointed
out that these signals are often well correlated, even
in the presence of false alarms: producing a reliable
detector was going to be hard work. Their forecasts
turned out to be very accurate. Only one such detec-
tor is currently in operation: the handheld standoff mine
detection system (HSTAMIDS) detector used by US
military forces in Afghanistan employs a combination
of ground-penetrating radar and eddy-current metal de-
tection. Little information on its effectiveness has been
released and no independent trials have been reported.

Robotics in Hazardous Applications
58.2 Applications
1527
Part F | 58.2
Experienced research groups report that ground-pene-
trating radar requires accurate alignment of the detector
with the ground surface (to eliminate ground surface re-
turns) and also with the target center point to enable
the target to be characterized reliably. If the principal
metal component of the landmine coincides with its ge-
ometric center, a common feature of minimum metal
mines, the metal detector can be used for alignment.
However this is not always the case and one cannot
guarantee the absence of other metal fragments near
the mine. Ground-penetrating radar provides confusing
returns in very dry or very wet conditions and is also
susceptible to false alarm indications from underground
discontinuities such as stones, sticks, animal burrows
etc. Publishers mostly downplay these difﬁculties and
prefer only to report positive results, not false negatives.
These issues only emerge from discussions with devel-
opers who have seriously evaluated technology in ﬁeld
conditions.
The major performance improvements in sens-
ing have been obtained by compensating eddy-current
metal detectors for soil magnetization, enabling them
to work in a much wider range of soil conditions. Im-
provements in sensitivity can help with minimum metal
mines but can also result in a large number of false
alarms from smaller metal fragments. Metal detector ar-
rays have been ﬁtted to vehicles to speed up clearance
of paved areas and roads [58.8].
By the late 1990s slow progress with sensors had
become more apparent and research priorities after
2000 gradually turned to mine detection dogs and large
demining machines.
The Afghanistan Mine Action Center (MACA)
started using mine detection dogs around 1993 but
it was not until 1998 that this program was running
effectively. There were several difﬁculties. The ﬁrst
challenge was that close association between humans
and dogs was socially unacceptable in Afghanistan. The
second challenge was to devise ways to use dogs and
manual mine clearance in an effective combination pro-
viding reliable clearance with high productivity. This
was much the greater challenge, but by 1998 the cost of
clearance using dogs was around one-third the cost of
manual clearance. It was then that the problems started
to appear: the occasional missed mine that could not
be explained by lack of organization or failure to follow
procedures. At the same time, carefully controlled trials
of mine detection dogs in Bosnia had returned highly
variable results. On several occasions dogs had walked
past blocks of trinitrotoluene (TNT) lying almost visi-
ble in the ground. Yet, at the same time, a number of
commercial demining agencies were routinely declar-
ing land free of mines using similar dogs. In late 1999
the Bosnian Mine Action Center ran a carefully con-
trolled test in which around 80% of the dogs failed to
achieve the required performance standard. The results
were hotly contested at the time and the international
community organized a systematic trial of mine detec-
tion dogs through the Geneva International Centre for
Humanitarian Demining (GICHD).
By 2001 it was apparent that there had been lit-
tle scientiﬁc research on the fundamental physiological
mechanisms that enable dogs to locate sources of ex-
plosive vapor. Dogs had been able to ﬁnd mines using
explosives (such as high melting point explosives like
HMX) with vapor pressure far below measurable detec-
tion thresholds. The mechanism by which TNT vapor
and its breakdown products reach the ground surface
was the subject of considerable scientiﬁc debate. By
2003 a systematic trial in Afghanistan, scientiﬁc studies
at SANDIA Laboratories in the USA and in Scan-
dinavia, explosive trace detection studies with dogs
at Auburn University, and several other investigations
provided some insight into this problem for the ﬁrst
time [58.9]. However, the precise physiological mech-
anisms for canine explosive detection remain unclear,
especially for lower-vapor-pressure explosives. We still
do not know for sure whether dogs are reacting to va-
por, minute particles of explosive suspended in the air,
biochemical breakdown products, or a combination.
In 2003 a US company, NOMADICS, demonstrated
the FIDO detector, the ﬁrst that could reliably measure
the presence of TNT vapor with greater sensitivity than
a highly trained dog. However ﬁeld trials showed that
TNT vapor could be detected everywhere in a mine con-
taminated area. An explosive vapor sensor was just the
beginning of the story and warns of a complex cognitive
task ahead in using the patterns of variation to localize
targets.
By 2004 the international community realized that
the early conﬁdence in a breakthrough resulting from
advanced sensor technology, demining machinery, and
mine detection dogs had been misplaced. GICHD com-
missioned a detailed study of manual demining to see
whether productivity improvements could be made.
A systematic series of trials were conducted in Africa to
determine the effectiveness of several innovations such
as magnets and rakes. The ﬁnal report, issued in 2005,
revealed that greatly improved productivity was possi-
ble but would depend more on improving contracting
arrangements, management, and training than technol-
ogy.
The New York attacks in September 2001 funda-
mentally changed research priorities. Removing unex-
ploded ordnance, particularly cluster bombs, became
the top priority for the next 12 months in Afghanistan

Part F | 58.2
1528
Part F
Robots at Work
(Fig. 58.7). Since then the deteriorating security and
political situation in Afghanistan has focused mine
clearance agencies more on maintaining security for
their own workforce than trying to improve productivity
and safety.
Resistance to the US and international occupation
of Iraq and the easy availability of explosives both from
former Iraqi armed forces and unexploded ordnance
from US military operations led to the proliferation
of improvised explosive devices (IED) to attack or-
ganized military forces and police. These have now
become the main threat and the focus for much of the
funding, and operational and research expertise for-
merly available to support mine clearance operations.
This development has also placed ordnance disposal
teams at the front line for the ﬁrst time, rather than
working in well-protected secure areas. Iraqi insurgent
groups attack ordnance disposal teams both because
they are attempting to disarm some of the insurgents’
most effective weapons and also because they remove
the main sources of explosives available to insurgent
groups.
Improvised explosive devices, when detected, are
often investigated and neutralized using remotely op-
erated robots. While there are non-destructive methods
to neutralize IEDs, the fastest method usually involves
placing a small shaped charge device close to, and ac-
curately aligned with the device. Operational details
remain conﬁdential to reduce the risk that IEDs will be
modiﬁed to defeat current neutralization methods.
Paradoxically it is this development that has enabled
robotics to make a greater contribution to the problem
Fig. 58.7 Unexploded BLU-97 cluster bombs in Afgha-
nistan early in 2002. Two of the small yellow canisters with
parachutes still attached lie visible in the foreground. Oth-
ers lie in the houses in the distance. Some may lie up to
40 cm below the ground surface. Some can detonate when
a metal detector or mobile phone is used nearby. These
devices have a kill radius of 200 m and can sometimes
be set off by a strong gust of wind. They readily attract
the curiosity of children (courtesy of G. Zahachewsky and
N. Spencer)
by through improvements in remote manipulation tech-
nology. These improvements come more in the form of
low-cost commercial off-the-shelf components (mobile
platform, motors, TV cameras etc.) than from funda-
mental research advances. Improvements are still being
made: improved remote manipulation, blast surviv-
ability, operator interface improvements, and mobility
improvements have all contributed signiﬁcantly to per-
formance and reduced operating costs.
Advances in Demining Robotics Research
In a brief survey it is not possible to mention every con-
tribution. We have attempted to provide a sample of
research reports that illustrate the main achievements
and we present brief technical discussions on mobility
and manipulation dexterity.
Teleoperation remains the only robotics technology
that has been used in practical application in ﬁeld condi-
tions [58.10–12], even with devices such as iRobot and
machines such as MineWolf. Robotics research has not
yet been able to make a signiﬁcant contribution to mine
and unexploded clearance work. However, the problems
posed by landmine clearance have stimulated new re-
search results that could have other applications.
Robotics researchers started their efforts in the early
1990s, for example, Havlik and Trevelyan indepen-
dently proposed suspended cable robots to work in
mineﬁelds [58.13]. However, both have later argued in
favor of alternative solutions [58.10, 14].
Nicoud [58.15] wrote one of the ﬁrst surveys ex-
ploring the possibility of using robotics technology for
landmine clearance. Developments in robotics research
since the mid 1990s have been motivated both by a gen-
uine desire to help combat a serious humanitarian issue
and also by a desire to ﬁnd a justiﬁcation for more fun-
damental research. However, most researchers still have
not learned lessons from the ﬁeld such as the need to re-
move vegetation and the variety of situations in which
deminers ﬁnd themselves [58.16].
One of the most proliﬁc research areas justiﬁed in
part by humanitarian demining problems has been path
planning for autonomous agents [58.17]. Probabilistic
approaches were explored by [58.18]. Some researchers
have proposed multiple robot solutions, even swarms of
robots [58.19] and so-called immune systems [58.20].
Autonomous search and mapping algorithms have also
been explored [58.21], including even three-dimen-
sional (3-D) search techniques for locating underground
chemical sources [58.22].
Landmine clearance has also stimulated develop-
ments in autonomous robot vehicles, with many ex-
amples in the literature [58.23]. Tracked vehicles have
been proposed for working in rubble and built environ-
ments [58.24]. Walking vehicles have been proposed,

Robotics in Hazardous Applications
58.2 Applications
1529
Part F | 58.2
particularly for difﬁcult terrain in countries like Bosnia
and Afghanistan [58.25] even to the extent of exam-
ining how damaged robots with missing legs could
extricate themselves from a mined area [58.26].
The desire to keep human operators away from
the risk of handling unexploded ordnance has stim-
ulated research on artiﬁcial hands and telemanipula-
tion [58.27]. Purely mechanical devices have also been
explored [58.28]. Several researchers have provided de-
tailed results of tests with manipulators mounted on
autonomous vehicles [58.29] (Fig. 58.8).
Robotics solutions have also been proposed partly
to overcome the limitations of handheld sensors such as
ground-penetrating radar. A robot manipulator can con-
trol the motion of the sensor so much more precisely,
opening the possibility of synthetic aperture techniques
for both metal detection and radar [58.30].
Military research agencies in the United States,
Australia, Britain, and Canada devoted large research
budgets to the problem of road clearance since AT
mines and IEDs accounted for a large proportion
of military casualties in Somalia, Bosnia, Iraq and
Afghanistan. Insurgent forces had demonstrated that
they could bring organized military forces to a complete
standstill overnight simply by laying anti-vehicle mines
in a few road potholes. With most roads in poor con-
dition there was no easy way to detect that the mines
had been laid. Insurgents would typically use mines to
stop leading vehicles in a convoy in order to increase
the effectiveness of an ambush.
Most research teams proposed one or more vehicles
carrying multiple sensors including ground-penetrating
radar, metal detector arrays, passive and active infrared,
and even some acoustic arrays. Some sensor arrange-
ments were designed to look forward sufﬁciently far to
allow the carrier vehicle to stop before reaching a mine.
Others were to be carried by lightweight remotely con-
trolled lead vehicles. Military planners calculated that
search speeds of 
 30 km=h would be required to be
able to check roads daily in time for supply convoys
to use the roads in daylight hours. Many different ar-
rangements have been reported [58.31]. Other teams
proposed teleoperated devices for landmine and ex-
plosive ordnance detection and neutralization but few
anticipated the requirement to operate under armed at-
tack. Typical requirements envisaged secure rear area
mine clearance in combat situations and peace-keep-
ing on roads and tracks [58.32] or force protection
roles [58.33]. Most of these efforts were initiated in
the late 1990s but by 2005 it had become apparent
to military planners that vehicle protection rather than
mine detection was a more practical solution. Much
of today’s vehicle protection technology originated in
southern Africa with further development in Australia,
Fig. 58.8 Gryphon experimental robot on trial in Cambo-
dia (after [58.29] courtesy of S. Hirose)
the UK, and other countries, stimulated in part by South
African expatriates.
One way to reduce the distance between researchers
and ﬁeld problems, at least in terms of geographic
distance, has been to promote research in landmine-
affected countries such as Sri Lanka and Colom-
bia [58.34]. However this is not easy. Most countries
affected by landmines have been disrupted by social
conﬂict and destabilization that led to the military con-
ﬂicts in which landmines were used. This makes it
difﬁcult for local people to create sufﬁcient economic
and physical security for researchers to pursue their
work.
Future Prospects for Robotic Demining
What are the challenges for robotics researchers work-
ing on landmine clearance and other hazardous appli-
cations in the future?
We need further advances in mechatronics design,
sensing, and accurate understanding of the problems to
be solved using robots.
The best starting point for research is to witness
people undertaking hazardous work in several differ-
ent situations. Nuclear accidents, mine disasters, and
burning buildings are usually off-limits to researchers.
However, mine clearance operations are readily ac-
cessible in many countries. Though many researchers
think a visit would be far too hazardous, there is no
better way to appreciate the practical difﬁculties in-
volved. Photographs taken at mine clearance operations
are available to provide researchers with a web site for
reference purposes, partly in answer to this need to un-
derstand the practical realities [58.35].
One of the main motivations for robotics re-
searchers has been the perception that mine clearance
is a hazardous occupation and that it would be more
preferable for robots to be exposed to mineﬁeld risks

Part F | 58.2
1530
Part F
Robots at Work
than human beings [58.36]. While mine clearance is
certainly a hazardous occupation it is not necessarily
dangerous. Accident records show that mine clearance
in Afghanistan in 1998 resulted in about half the rate of
injury of the United States forestry industry and about
one third the rate of injury for the United States build-
ing construction industry per 100 000 working hours.
Mine clearance agencies use advanced techniques to
improve safety when possible [58.37]. In terms of
deaths, demining is considerably less hazardous than
mining, construction of building foundations, and es-
pecially offshore drilling rigs [58.38, pp. 11–14].
Another motivation for research is to reduce deaths
and injuries among local people who have to live with
the daily threat of landmines and unexploded ordnance.
Again, there are misperceptions of risk. The incidence
of death and injury from mine explosions is often very
small compared with disease, for example. The main
priorities for local people tend to be improvements for
water and food supplies, education, sanitation and phys-
ical security: landmine clearance is usually a much
lower priority and it is often hard to justify signiﬁcant
local resources.
It is also important that robotics researchers intend-
ing to contribute to the solution of this problem under-
stand the relatively small size of humanitarian demining
operations, which have been funded from a combined
international humanitarian aid budget of approximately
US$ 400 million. These programs spend an estimated
$ 20 million annually on all equipment needs. The mar-
ket for specialized humanitarian demining detectors is
therefore very small and manufacturers cannot afford
research and development speciﬁcally to support hu-
manitarian demining solutions [58.39]. Adapting tech-
nology developed for other purposes, such as military
equipment or civil engineering construction machinery,
is more likely to be feasible.
From 1990 to 2014 there were signiﬁcant improve-
ment in mine clearance techniques but overall progress
is still slow and robotics may well provide the ﬁnal
solution in the long term. There are still opportuni-
ties to develop robotic techniques that could ultimately
provide the only cost-effective method for ﬁnally elim-
inating this menace.
58.2.2 Hazardous Materials Handling
and Operations
The oldest application of robotics-related technology to
hazardous environments is various aspects of remote
nuclear operations dating back to the beginning of se-
rious work on atomic physics in the early 1940s. This
section discusses hazardous materials and operations in
the context of nuclear applications and some extrap-
olations to other domains. These applications run the
spectrum from low- to high-ﬁdelity manipulation and
multiple mobility modes.
In the 1940s, research in atomic physics led to a new
era in remote handling as scientists sought to explore
the nature of materials involving ionizing radiation. As
experiments became more complex, mechanical manip-
ulator systems were created which allowed operators
to perform increasingly complex tasks safely behind
thick biological shielding
VIDEO 586 ,
VIDEO 587 ,
VIDEO 588 ,
VIDEO 590 . These mechanical sys-
tems then evolved into electrical systems that allowed
larger work volumes to be considered. Incredible en-
gineering achievement occurred in a 15 year period
within the Remote Control Division of the Argonne
National Laboratory. Even though this era represented
tremendous technical achievement, it went further in
illustrating the intrinsic complexity of remote opera-
tions. The equivalent work performance achieved with
sophisticated teleoperated remote systems is poor in
comparison to what human workers can achieve with
direct contact operations and common tools. Typically,
this form of teleoperation (i. e., manual control over
a physical distance or barrier) is ten to hundreds of
times slower than the equivalent operations performed
directly by a human. Remote operations are extremely
expensive and time consuming and have been the con-
tinual target of engineering improvements over the
years.
Many research and development efforts have fo-
cused on different avenues for improving the work efﬁ-
ciency of teleoperated remote operations
VIDEO 589 .
These efforts have included the development of better
manipulators, control stations, control algorithms, etc.,
all intended to enhance reliability and maintainability.
In the late 1960s and early 1970s, as digital electronics
became more cost effective, interest began to emerge
in the integration of automation with teleoperation as
a scheme to effectively increase remote operations work
efﬁciency. It was around this time that industrial robot
concepts were also introduced. Combining selective
automation of speciﬁc subtasks with traditional teleop-
eration offers the potential to reduce labor requirements
and to improve the quality of repetitive task executions.
This integration of automation with teleoperation be-
came the foundation of what is now termed telerobotics.
From the 1970s until today, telerobotics has been an
active area of research and development in many dif-
ferent domains that include nuclear, space, and military
applications. Unlike manufacturing automation, remote
operations in hazardous and unstructured work task en-
vironments necessitate human-in-the-loop control, or
teleoperation, at least as a backup, to assure safe op-
erations. Teleoperation related to hazardous materials

Robotics in Hazardous Applications
58.2 Applications
1531
Part F | 58.2
and operations, in the most general sense, involve mo-
bility and the use of manipulators to handle objects and
tools to accomplish useful work in predominantly un-
structured and uncertain environments.
Over the years, there have been numerous papers,
books, and reports written concerning technical chal-
lenges, issues, and solutions. Readers will ﬁnd Vertut
and Coiffet [58.40] and Slutski [58.41] provide com-
prehensive and general information about manipulators
and systems
VIDEO 590 . The performance and design
of effective teleoperated systems are strong functions
of human factors and Kraiss [58.42] and Johnsen and
Corliss [58.43] provide good discussions of key princi-
ples. Finally, control system hierarchies and structures
are explained in depth by Sheridan [58.44]. A ﬁnal
emphasis to all readers would be to fully explore the
annals of the American Nuclear Society’s Remote Sys-
tems Division, later renamed Robotics and Remote
Systems Division (RRSD). Over the decades, this divi-
sion hosted numerous topical meetings and workshops
on all aspects of remote operations. A starting point is
http://rrsd.ans.org/pages/topicals.html.
Past Perspectives
Initially, science and experiments involving dangerous
radiation levels were accomplished through the inno-
vative use of shielding walls, long-handled tools, and
mirrors. As the tasks became more difﬁcult, mechanical
arms that could do a better job in emulating human mo-
tions were pursued. These ideas represented schemes
whereby human sensing and handling capabilities could
be more completely projected into the remote work
environment [58.45]. One of the ﬁrst challenges that
the Argonne group tackled was the development of
the mechanical master–slave manipulator. The basic
concept was to create a mechanism that would have
a master controller side where an operator could pro-
vide position and orientation commands to a slave-
side mechanism/linkage system that would replicate
motions and forces in the remote work area. It was
felt that force reﬂection to and from the master and
slave systems was essential for the operator’s sensory
awareness of the task execution. Experimentation has
repeatedly veriﬁed the signiﬁcance of both kinesthetic
and tactile feedback in performing more complicated
tasks [58.46].
Today, master–slave manipulator (MSMs) are used
around the world in nuclear, biological, and other types
of hazardous remote experimentation and operations.
(They have also become increasingly used for so-called
robotic surgery.) The remote work efﬁciency of a dual-
arm MSM with shielded-window viewing is around 5–
10 times slower than equivalent direct human contact
operations. Because the master and slave sections of
MSM’s are mechanically coupled through the metal-
tape drive transmission, the physical separation that
can exist between the safe operating area and the haz-
ardous remote work area is limited to a maximum
of 
 10 m. Because of this characteristic and their kine-
matics, MSMs are restrictive in many applications and
often have constrained the physical design of remote
cells. The Argonne group and others recognized that it
would be much better to have the equivalent of a ﬂy-
by-wire MSM in which the physical separation of the
master and slave could be larger. This need led to the
development of electrical master–slave manipulators
(EMSs) that are commonly called electrical servoma-
nipulators [58.47, 48]. Research and Development on
the EMS began in the late 1940s and continued into the
early 1950s.
The Argonne group was at that time limited by
the available electrical control technology. Nonethe-
less, they made noteworthy progress toward integrated
systems, as depicted in Fig. 58.9. The prototype sys-
tem shown is a dual-arm anthropomorphic system with
head-aiming remote television viewing and bilateral
force reﬂection. After the Argonne Remote Control
Division was disbanded, limited research and devel-
opment occurred until the 1970s when commercial
nuclear power growth was driving a number of re-
search programs in the US, West Germany, France,
and Japan. During this time, the programs in the US
and France were focused on electrical servomanipu-
lator systems which incorporated emerging micropro-
cessor technology. The Central Research Laboratories
model M2 system, shown in Fig. 58.10, was jointly
developed with the Oak Ridge National Laboratory
and was the ﬁrst force reﬂecting servomanipulator sys-
tem to use distributed digital electronics to implement
position–position force reﬂection with multiplexed se-
rial communications between the master and slave. The
Fig. 58.9 An integrated electrical master–slave manipula-
tor system (courtesy of Oak Ridge National Laboratory)

Part F | 58.2
1532
Part F
Robots at Work
Fig. 58.10 CRL Model M2 manipulator system perform-
ing space truss assembly (courtesy of Oak Ridge National
Laboratory)
model M2 system was used over the years to explore
remote operations for military, space, and nuclear ap-
plications.
The development of the advanced servomanipula-
tor (ASM) followed the M2 in an effort to improve the
remote maintainability of the manipulators themselves.
This work was one of the earliest modular robotics ef-
forts. The motivation for this work was to reduce main-
tenance technician radiation exposure and to increase
the overall availability of the remote maintenance sys-
tem. The ASM was designed from the beginning to
provide a foundation for telerobotics in addition to ef-
fective teleoperation [58.49] (Fig. 58.11).
At the time of the M2 and ASM developments,
Jean Vertut and his colleagues in the Commissariat à
l’Énergie Atomique (CEA) focused their research on
the development of telerobotic functionality for their
MA-23 electrical servomanipulator systems. This re-
search appears to include some of the earliest experi-
mental demonstrations of telerobotic functions [58.40].
They called their concept computer-assisted teleopera-
tion and it included both operator assists and robotic
teach/playback functions. Operator assists included
software jigs and ﬁxtures designed for the improve-
Fig. 58.11 Advanced servomanipulator system (courtesy
of Oak Ridge National Laboratory)
ment of the remote operation of tools such as saws,
drills, etc.
In the 1980s and 1990s as nuclear power activities
began to decline, nuclear remote operations technol-
ogy was migrated into other areas such as space and
the military. Nuclear remote operations experience with
teleoperation inﬂuenced the Space Shuttle remote ma-
nipulator system and the short-lived Flight Telerobotic
Servicer program.
In the mid 1990s, substantial interest developed in
the application of remote handling systems to deal with
problems in hazardous site/facility remediation, such as
those associated with defunct nuclear facilities in the
US and in Eastern Europe. The intrinsic complexity
of remote clean up operations continues to drive re-
search and development in all aspects of teleoperated
and telerobotic systems. Challenges and accomplish-
ments in this application area are discussed in the next
section.
Hazardous Site Clean Up Applications
Robotic and remote systems have been used in assess-
ing the status of sites contaminated with hazardous

Robotics in Hazardous Applications
58.2 Applications
1533
Part F | 58.2
materials. These surveys are essential in planning and
executing subsequent clean up operations. Such sys-
tems have been used most extensively in nuclear waste
sites around the world because remote techniques are
more common in many nuclear operations. There has
been some use of robotic survey systems in chemical
and biological hazard situations as well.
Survey Systems. Numerous robotic survey systems
have been developed and used. The basic idea is to inte-
grate a sensor suite, appropriate for the contaminants of
interest, with a suitable mobile platform that incorpo-
rates remote and/or autonomous driving functions and
requisite navigation and control functions. The desired
output of the survey process is a precise map of contam-
inant locations and concentrations. Such systems have
been developed for both outside and inside operations.
It was common practice in many industries for
a number of decades to bury hazardous wastes in
earthen trenches in isolated burial sites
VIDEO 591 ,
VIDEO 592 ,
VIDEO 593 . Usually, useful records of
what materials were buried at what locations either did
not exist or were not accurate. In fact, the general con-
ditions of such buried waste sites are often unknown
to the extent that human entrance is not allowed. As
a result, the ﬁrst step toward remediation is to quan-
titatively assess the physical and hazard conditions of
the site. The mobile robot shown in Fig. 58.12 is an
example of a survey system used to evaluate nuclear
waste buried waste sites. The robot’s location is moni-
tored with Global Positioning System (GPS). The suite
of sensors includes eddy-current probes and ground-
penetrating radar that reveal density contours, radia-
tion detectors, and gas emissions monitors. This system
was an initial prototype that could be operated from
a remote driving station or operated in autonomous pro-
grammed trajectory mode. The system was controlled
using a radio communication link. Its unique feature is
that it was designed with minimal use of ferromagnetic
materials to minimize interference with the magnetic
subsurface sensors.
The mobile characterization system shown in
Fig. 58.13 is a similar concept for radiation survey
of ﬂoored areas. This particular system uses a Cyber-
motion commercial mobile platform, triangulation of
optical ﬁducial markers for localization, and operates
primarily in a full autonomous mode. The objective in
this application is to reduce labor costs and eliminate
error-prone tedious human operations.
Excavation
Systems. The
actual
remediation
of
buried wastes ultimately leads to digging and object-
handling type operations. Various types of systems in-
Fig. 58.12 Prototype buried waste survey robot (courtesy
of Los Alamos National Laboratory)
Fig. 58.13 Mobile characterization system (courtesy of
Oak Ridge National Laboratory)
volving integrated mobility and manipulation-like func-
tions have been developed. One of the most popular and
low-cost approaches has been to retroﬁt conventional
excavation equipment with sensor and actuators that al-
low remote and robotics operations. Such systems have
been used in explosive ordnance disposal also. The sys-
tem shown in Fig. 58.14 is called the teleoperated small
emplacement excavator (TSEE) and is a prototype re-
motely operable backhoe for such applications. The unit
included a multi-camera remote viewing system that is
the primary basis for teleoperation. Radio and tether
communications connections are used to allow the hu-
man operators to be displaced up to several kilometers
from the hazardous operations.
Deactivation and Decommissioning Systems. In
recent years, one of the most complex forms of haz-
ardous operations is the deactivation and decommis-
sioning (D&D) of defunct facilities where nuclear ra-
diation or toxicity hazards preclude human presence.

Part F | 58.2
1534
Part F
Robots at Work
Fig. 58.14 Remotely operated excavator (courtesy of Oak Ridge National Laboratory)
D&D can be thought of as remote demolition for the
most part. Some operations are crude such as knock-
ing down building structures and debris removal. Other
operations may involve careful disassembly of equip-
ment and devices, size reduction and packaging of
handling/storage. These operations are essentially the
inverse of remote maintenance and require the dex-
terous use of tools and handling of objects. Tools
include saws, hydraulic shears, impact wrenches, and
the like. Planning and situational awareness are very
important in demolition-type operations because the
physical layout and stability of the basic environment is
changing during the process. Effective remote viewing
(adjustable multiview capabilities) and acoustic sensing
are essential. Audio feedback from the remote envi-
ronment provides the human operator with the ability
to monitor the normalcy of tooling operations such as
sawing. D&D applications require manipulators that are
both dexterous and massive. Experience has shown that
payload capacities on the order of 100 kg are needed
to deal with debris handling, typically with manipula-
tors of the type shown in Fig. 58.15. Figure 58.16 is
a frame view from one of the remote viewing cameras
used to operate a similar system that was used to D&D
an old experimental nuclear reactor. A manipulator is
being used to teleoperate a conventional circular saw to
segment a large-diameter aluminum tank. This operator
view of the remote environment provides a realistic per-
ception of the task environment lighting conditions and
complexity.
In recent years, numerous remote manipulation sys-
tems for nuclear applications have been developed
around industrial robots. These systems are augmented
with sensors and master controller arrangements to fa-
cilitate teleoperation. This approach offers signiﬁcant
cost savings and the level of teleoperation performance
achievable in complex task environments has steadily
increased [58.50–54].
Fig. 58.15 Dual-arm D&D manipulator system (courtesy
of Oak Ridge National Laboratory)
Fig. 58.16 Operator’s view of a remote sawing task (cour-
tesy of Oak Ridge National Laboratory)
Applications in Large Scale
Science Experiments
High radiation levels resulting from materials activation
in the target areas of high-energy particle accelera-

Robotics in Hazardous Applications
58.2 Applications
1535
Part F | 58.2
Fig. 58.17 SNS Telerob EMSM-2B Dual arm servomani-
plator
Fig. 58.18 Telerob EMSM-2B master control station
tor experiments often require remote operations. Since
these are unique scientiﬁc experiments, they involve
complex and specialized equipment that results in some
of the most challenging remote operations in the world.
Nonetheless these highly specialized remote operations
still involve the basic elements of remote operations
summarized in Fig. 58.1. The most recent example of
this class of remote systems is the comprehensive re-
mote handling system developed as an integral part of
the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) located at the Oak
Ridge National Laboratory [58.55].
The SNS is a neutron scattering facility in which
uniquely high-ﬂux neutron beams are generated by im-
pinging high-energy protons on to a mercury target.
The mercury is activated to the extent that the contact
dose rate in the associated piping and vessels can be
over 105 R=h and are long lived. The design and op-
eration of this target system are such that it must be
periodically replaced or refurbished. The mercury tar-
Fig. 58.19 SNS remote handling control room
Fig. 58.20 SNS pedestal manipulator system
get system and its support infrastructure are located in
a shielded hot cell that includes a comprehensive re-
mote handling system. The hot cell remote handling
system is comprised of combinations of conventional
mechanical master/slave manipulators, overhead cranes
and a state of the art dual arm telerobot. Details of the
overall system are provided in [58.55]. The focus of this
discussion will be the telerobotic system.
Figures 58.17 and 58.18 show a dual arm force re-
ﬂecting servomanipulator system, Telerob EMSM-2B,
that is mobile in 3-D throughout the hot cell by virtue
of a overhead bridge (X,Y motions) and rigid telescop-
ing tube (Z motion). The manipulators are 6 dof and
each have a 245 N continuous capacity and 445 N peak
capacity. A 2200 N auxilary hoist is integrated into the
bridge trolley to facilitate handling heavy objects with
the telerobot. The bridge system can be teleoperated or
robotically pre-programmed. A second dual arm servo-
manipulator package (Fig. 58.20) is part of a mobile
pedestal mounted system that is speciﬁcally designed
in the high bay area over the target hot cell. The con-
trol room, Fig. 58.19 includes 21 ﬂat panel displays

Part F | 58.2
1536
Part F
Robots at Work
Fig. 58.21 Fukushima Daiichi
Nuclear Plant after tsunami had
inundated entire site to depth of
over 13 m and subsequent hydrogen
explosions. (courtesy of Japan Atomic
Energy Agency)
that can be used with any of the 11 remote cameras lo-
cated in the hot cell. The telerobot operator is located
at the far end of the room and can operate either stand-
ing or sitting. This overall system is functionally similar
in concept to advanced servomanipulator systems dis-
cussed in the earlier sections. The system has been in
operation since 2006 and has been successfully used in
several major mercury target diagnostic/refurbishment
campaigns. The SNS remote system has shown that the
electromechanical equivalent of traditional MSM’s with
full remote hot cell mobility is practical and reliable.
Larger scale nuclear facilities involving higher level of
radiation are certain to follow the remote handling phi-
losophy represented by this system. Because this class
of electrical servomanipulators have all of the real-time
digital control features of modern robots, greater use of
programmed and intelligent control concepts for certain
types of remote tasks is expected in future.
58.2.3 Lessons Learned from the
Fukushima Daiichi Disaster
Japan has not only been at the forefront in the devel-
opment of robots to help in disaster situations, but has
also, sadly, experienced a major recent disaster of the
kind anticipated by robotics researchers and engineers
for decades previously. This disaster provided a real-
ity check for researchers and exposed just how far we
still need to progress before robots can be relied upon
to perform routinely in hazardous environments.
The March 2011 tsunami precipitated the Fuku-
shima Daiichi nuclear reactor disaster (Figs. 58.21
and 58.22). Even though the reactors were shut down
at the time, they still required signiﬁcant cooling wa-
ter supplies as they had been only recently shut down.
Fig. 58.22 Underwater reconnaissance robot being eval-
uated in search for human remains following the March
tsunami, Japan. (courtesy of Prof. Shigeo Hirose)
The tsunami destroyed the diesel back-up generators re-
quired to keep the cooling water pumps operating. The
resulting temperature rise in the reactors led to gas ex-
plosions that severely damaged the reactors, their cool-
ing systems and the containment buildings, spreading
radioactive contamination over a large area of nearby
land and ocean.
As Kawatsuma and his colleagues explained, many
different kinds of robots had been developed as a result
of earlier research and development programs [58.56].
Unfortunately, at the time of the disaster most of these
robots were either inoperative, unable to be repaired
and made ready, or unsuitable because of the need
for tether cables, or reliance on Wi-Fi communica-
tions which could not be operated satisfactorily in the
contaminated nuclear environment (Chap. 60.4). Sev-
eral teleoperated construction machines developed for

Robotics in Hazardous Applications
58.3 Enabling Technologies
1537
Part F | 58.3
the 1991 Mt. Fugen volcanic disaster were success-
fully deployed to clear contaminated wreckage and
debris
VIDEO 578 . Robots originally developed for
reconnaissance work, primarily investigation of unex-
ploded ordnance, were supplied by British and Ameri-
can sources
VIDEO 579 ,
VIDEO 580 ,
VIDEO 581 .
However only limited operations could be completed
with these robots as they could not reach many of the
places where they were needed. In the ﬁrst months
following the disaster, only one robot, the Japanese de-
signed Quince from Chiba Institute of Technology, was
successfully deployed inside the reactor buildings for
several weeks before it failed with a wiring fault. At the
time of writing, it had not yet been recovered for repairs
VIDEO 582 ,
VIDEO 584 . Since then more robots
have been successfully deployed to the site, though still
with limited operational capabilities.
The disaster exposed the need for prior planning and
continuous training, rehearsal and cooperation between
research and development agencies, defence disaster
relief agencies, robotic systems manufacturers and en-
gineers at the hazardous facilities where the robots
would be used. Rather than individual robots, systems
of which robots form a part need to be developed,
including shielded vehicles to allow close-up moni-
toring and control by human operators
VIDEO 583 .
Continuous updating of robot systems is needed: some
robots that could have been deployed relied on ob-
solete electronic and computer components that could
not be replaced. Following this disaster, we can expect
a signiﬁcantly increased effort to deploy robots over the
coming years to deal with the consequences of similar
events.
The Fukushima Daiichi disaster and other opera-
tions following the March 2011 tsunami demonstrated
that, as in the other applications discussed above, robots
can still only be expected to perform a niche role.
Robots have only performed consistently in such en-
vironments after decades of development, and invest-
ment in developing trained operators with appropri-
ate maintenance and support facilities. Our ability to
realistically predict the capabilities of robotic opera-
tions in unforeseen hazardous environments is still very
limited.
58.3 Enabling Technologies
There are a number of technology issues that are key
to the design and implementation of mobile robots that
can operate effectively in different types of hazardous
environments. A few of them are touched upon here to
give the reader additional insight into the foundational
aspects of this class of robots.
58.3.1 Mobility Issues
Hazardous applications such as ﬁre ﬁghting, EOD,
and demining require the ability to operate on un-
even ground in indoor and outdoor environments
where a normal wheel-type robot cannot easily op-
erate. Most mobile mechanisms are classiﬁed into
wheel type [58.57–60], track type [58.61–66], and leg
type [58.67]. For negotiability in uneven ground, the
wheel and track types need additional linkages with
ground adaptation. There are two kinds of this adap-
tation: active and passive adaptation. Active adaptation
uses an additional actuator to alter the linkage’s motion
while in passive ones the linkage motion is controlled
by the ground conditions and gravity effects.
Stability Conditions
Stability should be considered in the design process to
prevent rollover on uneven ground including stairways,
steps, and natural terrain. Stability can be investigated
in terms of three parameters: center of mass, support-
ing area, and stability margin. Static stability requires
that the center of mass remains inside the supporting
area, as shown in Fig. 58.23. The supporting area is
a polygon built by the edges connecting each contact
point on the horizontal plane. A conventional vehicle
has limitations in rugged terrain due to a ﬁxed center of
mass with respect to the body coordinates. The center
of mass greatly affects the stability margin (the mini-
mum length between the center of mass and edges of
a supporting area). If the center of mass is located out
Center of mass
Slope
Supporting area
Stability margin
Fig. 58.23 Stability condition

Part F | 58.3
1538
Part F
Robots at Work
Deformable wheels
a)
Adjustable wheels
b)
Fig. 58.24 Wheel conﬁgurations
a)
b)
Fig.58.25a,b Mobile robots with active adaptation mechanisms:
(a) Packbot (after [58.68]), (b) Andros Mark V-A1 (after [58.64])
of the supporting area, rollover can occur. The stability
margin of a conventional vehicle is mainly determined
by the terrain inclination. Many vehicles are designed
to have a low center of mass, thereby obtaining a large
stability margin on a slope. Furthermore, a vehicle is of-
ten designed to have multiple bodies to overcome this
limitation. For a multiple-link mechanism, the center of
mass varies and the relative motion of links when trav-
eling over the landform also alters the supporting area.
Active Adaptation Mechanisms
An active adaptation mechanism uses an additional ac-
tuator to generate motion of the adaptation linkage
on rugged ground. Although additional actuators and
linkages are required, the adaptation mechanism can
overcome variously shaped rugged landforms.
It is known that a vehicle can negotiate an obsta-
cle which is smaller than the wheel radius. One may
think that a vehicle which has large wheels can pass
over rough terrain like a monster truck. However, most
applications require a small vehicle to drive between
obstacles.
A deformable wheel or its equivalent mechanism
can be adopted: insufﬁciently inﬂated wheels, as shown
in Fig. 58.24a, adapt to irregular terrain by deformation
of wheels. However, their size should be big enough
to negotiate rough terrain, so this concept still has size
limitations. Their equivalent mechanisms are relatively
compact and yet they need sophisticated articulation
mechanisms, as shown in Fig. 58.24b. Two wheels are
attached to a link that rotates about a main body. There-
fore, revolution and rotation of wheels are made as
shown in Fig. 58.24b. If rotation is provided by actu-
ators at the main body (i. e., an active mechanism), the
vehicle has an equivalent wheel whose radius is equal
to that of the rotation. The vehicle in Fig. 58.24b can
pass a step by carriage rotation, although the radius of
a wheel is smaller than the height of the step.
Many track-type mechanisms have multiple link-
age structures with active adaptation [58.63–66, 68].
When traveling over uneven ground, these mechanisms
can negotiate rugged ground by changing the conﬁg-
uration of multiple track mechanisms, for example,
typical multiple-tracked robots with active adaptation
such as Andros [58.64] and Packbot [58.68], as shown
in Fig. 58.25a and 58.25b, commonly uses a small ac-
tive additional track called a ﬂipper. When moving on
relatively even ground the robot can reduce undesired
track resistance by lifting up the ﬂippers. When climb-
ing up stairs, touching the ﬂippers down to the ground
can increase the stability by enlarging the support-
ing area. Snake-like robots use active interconnecting
joints [58.65] and have the potential for mobility and
manipulation.
Passive Mechanisms
Passive adaptation mechanisms do not use any addi-
tional actuators; rather they simply utilize the gravity
effect to generate adaptation to irregular ground. This
approach is less adaptive but enables the operator to
drive the robot easily because he (or she) does not
have to take care of controlling the adaptation mech-
anism. Passive mechanisms usually include various
kinds of passive linkages activated by irregular ground
conditions.
For the wheeled vehicle shown in Fig. 58.24b,
a passive mechanism can be designed in which no addi-
tional actuators are needed, for example, when a wheel

Robotics in Hazardous Applications
58.3 Enabling Technologies
1539
Part F | 58.3
a)
b)
Fig.58.26a,b Mobile platforms with passive adaptation:
(a) Solero (after [58.60]) and (b) Robhaz-dt3
meets a sill whose height is greater than the radius
of a wheel, it will become stuck. Then high torque is
exerted at the wheel since the stall torque is usually
greater than the normal rotation torque of the wheel.
In this case, a closed linkage without any actuator ex-
cept the driving wheels can generate a passive motion to
climb over a step [58.58], for example, a smart mobile
robot with passive adaptation called Solero (depicted in
Fig. 58.26a) can climb up an obstacle by lowering the
instant center of rotation of the passive four-bar linkage
when coming into contact with the vertical surface of
the obstacle [58.60].
Similarly, multiple bodies with tracked and chained
passive joints can also adapt to irregular terrain. The
track type is inherently insensitive to the unevenness
of ground
VIDEO 584 . Thus passively chained mul-
tiple-tracked bodies can provide greater reliability and
better capabilities in ground adaptation. For example,
a mobile robot with a passively chained double-tracked
mechanism called Robhaz (shown in Fig. 58.26b) is
a practical design with simply adapted multiple tracked
bodies with passive joints [58.66]. As depicted in
Positive
rotation
rm
(B)
(1)
(2)
a)
Driving
Negative
rotation
rm
(B)
(1)
(2)
b)
Fig.58.27a,b Passive adaptation of double-tracked mech-
anism: (a) positive deﬂection and (b) negative deﬂection
Fig. 58.26, two tracks of the Robhaz rotate positively
or and negatively according to the contact situation
between the track and the stair surface. Based on
this behavior, in terms of the lower center of mass
(Fig. 58.27a) and the supporting area (Fig. 58.27b)
better stability in stair climbing than that of a single-
tracked vehicle can be achieved.
58.3.2 Manipulator Design and Control
for Hazardous Object Handling
Manipulation is essential for EOD missions. Gener-
ally, EOD missions have two phases: (1) approach, and
(2) object manipulation to achieve ordnance neutral-
ization. The second phase is generally controlled by
teleoperation. Both the human’s careful control and in-
nate intelligence, plus appropriate manipulator design
and control, are needed for such dangerous tasks.
Design Requirements
Unlike industrial manipulators, the design of manipula-
tors for many robots in hazardous environments does
not require very fast movement. Instead, high pay-
load, light weight, and compactness are more important.
Therefore, many manipulator designers locate actua-
tors and reducers, which typically have high weight
and large volume, on the base or lower links. This re-
duces the weight of the moving parts of the manipulator
and offers better stability and dynamic control proper-
ties. Consequently, they have a thin proﬁle, as shown
in Fig. 58.28a,b. This characteristic is usually associ-
ated with explosive ordnance disposal-type robots that

Part F | 58.3
1540
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
Fig.58.28a,b Hazardous application robots with manip-
ulator: (a) Packbot with manipulator and (b) Robhaz-dt2
with manipulator
require access to congested areas and normal human
living spaces. Mobile robots used in other hazardous
environments can be much larger, depending on the spe-
ciﬁc applications.
58.3.3 Control for Hazardous Tasks
In most cases, the operator does not have much in-
formation about the environment around the robot and
the manipulator. He may have very limited vision, and
unexpected collisions between the manipulator and ob-
stacles can easily happen, even if he (or she) tries to
be very careful. The robot should be able to handle
these risks by appropriate design of the manipulator
and good control algorithms. There are several ways to
solve these problems.
Proximity sensors that detect nearby objects can
be used to avoid a collision before it occurs [58.69].
However using many proximity sensors necessitates
large wiring bundles and complex manipulator design.
Force control is also a good way to handle collisions.
When a collision occurs, the manipulator can move
away from the collision point by using force/torque
sensor data. Often a six-axis force sensor attached at
the end-effector of the manipulator is used for the
force control [58.70]. Many researchers have devel-
oped stiffness/compliance/impedance control methods
for a manipulator with a force sensor. However, this
method can only handle a limited collision zone – only
the end-effector or the manipulator hand – because the
sensor cannot sense contact with intermediate links,
while a collision could occur at any point on the ma-
nipulator. For this reason, some manipulators use joint
torque sensors at all of their joints [58.71]. When us-
ing a joint torque sensor, contact at any point on the
manipulator can be sensed, however, gravity compen-
sation and errors in the transformation from the joints
to the Cartesian space introduce further difﬁculties.
The stability of telerobotic systems, particularly
when force feedback or reﬂection is involved, remains
a critical issue. Systems involving signiﬁcant data com-
munication time delays are even more difﬁcult. Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
groups have studied stability and bandwidth issues nu-
merous times over the years; one of the more recent
studies is provided by Uebel et al. [58.72]. Energy
methods have been applied to this problem showing
promise for enhanced stability and performance [58.4,
73].
Master Controllers
for Teleoperated Manipulation
In teleoperation, the robot is designed to be a faithful
slave to deal with a dangerous task while the operator
uses a control interface to direct the slave from a safe
location. The user interface usually provides a means
for:

Sending position commands to the manipulator.

Providing contact force feedback or force reﬂection
to the user.
Ideally, the design goal of a user interface is to make
it transparent, so the operator feels as if he or she is
directly manipulating the object handled by the slave
manipulator. To achieve this transparency, there are sev-
eral design issues:

Simplicity:
–
All indicators are uniﬁed as one scene.
–
All input button and joystick are integrated into
one haptic device.

Intuitiveness:
–
High-level command by speech recognition.
–
Human-friendly feedback such as graphical dis-
plays and human voice.

Robotics in Hazardous Applications
58.3 Enabling Technologies
1541
Part F | 58.3
–
Motion command matching between the haptic
device and the slave in Cartesian space.

Portability:
–
Small/lightweight and human-friendly design
for wearability
–
Tetherless operation without communication
lines and additional power.
An example of wearable multimodal user inter-
face is provided by [58.74], as shown in Fig. 58.29.
The operator wears a head-mounted display (HMD),
head tracker, and headset to interact with the slave.
A six-degree-of-freedom haptic master is attached on
his waist together with the standalone controller, and
the operator grips its handle to telemanipulate in Carte-
sian space. With wearable hardware, the user can walk
around to gain a better view during teleoperation using
wireless communication. It is composed of major three
operator interfaces.
Speech and Auditory Interfaces
An operator usually sends two types of commands to
the robot: selection and continuous motion commands.
For example, the selection between mobile and manip-
ulation mode, the reset of the robot arm and mobile
base, the on/off and reset of pan–tilt motors, speed
selection for the mobile platform, selection among in-
stalled cameras are deﬁned in the selection commands.
Voice commands offer convenience. When the operator
says a word that has been predeﬁned as a command,
the speech interface can sense that word and, if the
speech recognition system successfully recognizes it,
the recognized command pops up on the HMD for
conﬁrmation. Finally, the operator decides whether to
execute or cancel the command with a conﬁrmation but-
ton on the haptic master.
The auditory interface synthesizes the human voice
using a speech synthesis engine. It can warn of the ap-
proach of an obstacle by sound, or reveal the distance
and direction to a laser-designated object nearby.
Wearable Haptic Interfaces
A wearable haptic device is shown in Fig. 58.29. The
base linkage is designed as a serial RRP mechanism to
measure a translation, and an RRR z–y–z rotation mech-
anism is attached at the end of the base linkage.
Figure 58.30 shows a wearable haptic master device
for teleoperation of mobility and manipulation systems.
It has six degrees of freedom for motion input and three
degrees of freedom for force feedback.
To achieve a compact design and reduce its weight,
a tendon-driven mechanism is designed into each joint.
Due to weight constraints, only three actuators are in-
stalled for force feedback, and each actuator is specially
Wearable haptic interface
Speech and auditory interface
HMD and head tracker for visual interface
Fig. 58.29 Appearance of wearable multimodal user interface
Prismatic joint using coupled 3 pieces of links
Base mechanism
Waist belt
Wrist mechanism
Fig. 58.30 Picture of wearable haptic device
designed to ﬁt the joint. Because a passive actua-
tor is better than an active actuator with respect to
power density (power per unit volume or weight), small
magnetorheological (MR) brakes have been developed.
They are installed at each joint of the base linkage for
force feedback. Also a compact brake drive with current
feedback capability has been designed, which reduces
the response time of the MR brake. The controller is
packed into a bag that is attached to the back side of the
waist.
Visual Interfaces
The visual interface integrates the robot’s view, the sta-
tus of sensed data, and the status of speech commands.
Since the slave includes a stereoscopic camera, the user
sees a three-dimensional view on the head-mounted dis-
play (HMD). The operator wears a head tracker and it
generates a pan/tilt command from the two-degree-of-

Part F | 58.3
1542
Part F
Robots at Work
freedom head motion. In the integrated system, head
tracker data is used to command the direction of the re-
mote viewing camera, thus the user easily looks around
the environment of the robot, as shown in Fig. 58.31.
Moreover, the head tracker is useful to indicate an
object as a target. The operator moves his head and
looks at a target to get information of direction and dis-
tance, then triggers a laser displacement sensor that is
placed in parallel with the pan–tilt camera. A virtual
reality overlay is prepared with the reported data, as
shown Fig. 58.31. The recognized speech command is
highlighted on the left for conﬁrmation. These are over-
laid on the remote video source pictures and uniﬁed
into a single scene. Finally the operator sees the stereo-
scopic picture and the status of the robot at a glance
on the immersive HMD. The overlaid view is shown in
Fig. 58.31c.
58.3.4 Data Communications
Robots used in hazardous environments are almost
always mobile so that they can move about an area of in-
terest with ﬂexibility. The combination of mobility and
intrinsic operation across a physical or hazard barrier
introduces unique problems with respect to bidirec-
tional data communications (Fig. 58.1). Communica-
tions from the operator location to the robot is necessary
to achieve remote control or teleoperation. Communi-
Haptic feedback
manipulator
pan/tilt mechanism
 
.
 
.
 
.
Command area
Graphic indicator
a)
c)
b)
N
N
S
S
Vel.
Roll
Pitch
Vel.
Roll
Pitch
+8 (Km/h)
+180 (deg)
+180 (deg)
+8 (Km/h)
+180 (deg)
+180 (deg)
Fig.58.31a–c Appearance of integrated visual interface: (a) camera
view (b) overlay source view (c) user view
cations from the robot to the operator are essential for
situational awareness. The transmission of the electrical
and/or optical signals comprising such data communi-
cations can be quite complex due to a host of factors
such as penetration of physical barriers, signal transport
delays, signal attenuation, and data throughput require-
ments. Data throughput requirements are dominated by
the feedback of visual imagery or remote camera views
from the mobile system. Channel capacity necessary for
audio feedback and control are small in comparison. If
the mobile system involves precision manipulation with
force feedback, bidirectional data channels on the order
of 1 Mb=s are required.
For a mobile robot with high-ﬁdelity manipula-
tion, multichannel remote viewing, and other sensors,
on the order of hundreds of Mb=s are required for
the data communications path from the remote envi-
ronment to the operator station while on the order of
ten Mb=s are needed for the bidirectional control link.
Data throughput requirements can be reduced through
data compression hardware provided there is no signiﬁ-
cant increase in latency (time delay) which can degrade
control by humans if the delay exceeds 100 ms. The
choice of communication means is not easy: while wire-
less communication seems attractive, when multiple
robot systems need to cooperate in a shared space, the
communication systems need to be designed with this
in mind. All too often, communication systems have
evolved to support only a single robot system within
a given operating region. Tethered cables provide high
bandwidth, but pose extreme difﬁculties in unstructured
environments, and when multiple robot systems need to
work together (Table 58.1).
58.3.5 Energetics
Another key challenge in ﬁelding mobile robots in
hazardous environments is in the area of energetics in-
cluding power supply, consumption, conversion, and
management. The speciﬁcs of the given environment
often restrict the types of power supply/conversion that
are permissible, for example, the use of combustible
fuels and internal combustion engines is seldom al-
lowed within coal mines, reﬁneries, gas plants, offshore
platforms and nuclear facilities but can be entirely ac-
ceptable in demining and other outdoor operations.
The most common power systems used for research
robots are electrochemical batteries and electric mo-
tor drives. The power and energy density map [58.75]
given in Fig. 58.32 shows the fundamental situation
for mobile robots used in hazardous environments. For
perspective, a small passenger automobile is estimated
to need a minimum of 200 W h=km to meet road de-
mands, which in turn translates into 500 W h=kg. This

Robotics in Hazardous Applications
58.3 Enabling Technologies
1543
Part F | 58.3
Table 58.1 Example data communications requirements (minimum)
Type
Single channel resolution
Typical standard system
Standard black-and-white remote television (typical
for rad hard technology):
600  400 pixels
30 frames=s
12 bit gray scale
 10 Mb=s per viewing channel
3050 Mb=s for 35 channels
Color remote television:
red, blue, and green D 3  black and white
 30 Mb=s per viewing channel
90150 Mb=s for 35 channels
Color high deﬁnition (HD) 1080p television:
1920  1080 pixels
60 frames
	 1:5 Gb=s per viewing channel
with encoding compression
	 3 Gb=s uncompressed
5:515 Gb=s for 35 channels
Control
12 bit resolution input and output
200 Hz sampling rate
 4:8 kb=s per control channel
48 kb=s – ten control servo channels
Audio feedback
15 kHz signal capture
12 bit resolution
 180 kb=s per audio channel
540 kb=s – three remote micro-
phones
is why hybrid electric vehicles that combine spark ig-
nition engines with battery-powered electric motors are
becoming popular. A large mobile robot with dual ma-
nipulators operating in the payload range of hundreds of
kg would have power requirements similar to these and
would be well above the 100200W h=kg range that
batteries can provide. A force-reﬂecting six-degree-of-
freedom robot manipulator with a 20 kg payload will
have a peak power consumption on the order of 10 kW.
If a particular application domain is amenable to the
use of spark ignition engines, the order of magnitude
of power density compared with any type of battery-
powered system makes implementation feasible. If pure
battery power is necessary, then considerable attention
0
10
Lead-acid
Super-
capacitors
Spark-ignition engines
Nickel-metal hydride
Zinc-air secondary
lithium
Zinc-bromine
Nickel-cadmium
Fuel cell systems
Projected
Existing
100
1000
Power density (W/kg)
Energy density (Wh/kg)
1000
100
10
1
Fig. 58.32 Power and energy density for various power
storage and supply systems
must be given to the design, including state of charge
monitoring and mission provisions for recharging. In
the future, emerging fuel-cell technology may provide
better solutions for mobile robot power systems.
58.3.6 System Architectures
for Real-Time Mission Control
Because of the intrinsic nature of hazardous environ-
ments where uncertainty and lack of geometric struc-
ture are prevalent in the task environment, shared con-
trol architectures are commonly used. The degree of
human interaction runs the gamut from pure teleoper-
ation (manual control) to high-level intelligent control
operations (autonomous). For example, most low-cost
EOD type robots utilize simple manual control archi-
tectures, while at the other end of the spectrum, the
Mars rovers operate as autonomous agents responding
to mission-level commands from human operators on
the earth. The basic architectures for real-time mission
control are summarized in Fig. 58.33 [58.76]. Also,
see Sheridan for a comprehensive discussion of ar-
chitecture principles and design [58.44]. Between the
manual and autonomous control exist combinations of
computer assistance and semiautonomous (i. e., selec-
tive and in situ task automation) functions intended to
improve remote work performance by either reducing
operator workload or allocating tasks more suitable for
computer control to autonomous execution. It is im-
portant to recognize that, as one moves from manual
control toward autonomous control, the data through-
put rates for communication and control are reduced
because high-level commands are comparatively small
packets of information while force-reﬂection manual
control of a manipulator, for example, requires visual
feedback and high-bandwidth control interconnection

Part F | 58.4
1544
Part F
Robots at Work
Display
Controller
User interface
Human
Sensors
Actuators
Robot
Task
a) Direct manual
control with no
computer-aided
(Type 1)
Display
Controller
User interface
Computer
Human
Sensors
Actuators
Robot
Computer
Task
b) Indirect manual
control with
computer-aided
(Type 2)
Display
Controller
User interface
Computer
Human
Sensors
Actuators
Robot
Computer
Task
c) Parallel type
Display
Controller
User interface
Computer
Computer
Human
Sensors
Actuators
Robot
Computer
Computer
Task
Semi-autonomous control (Type 3–5)
d) Serial type
Display
Controller
User interface
Human
Sensors
Actuators
Robot
Task
f) Autonomous
(Type 6)
Computer
Computer
Display
Controller
User interface
Human
Sensors
Actuators
Robot
Task
e) Parallel and
serial combined
Fig. 58.33 System control architectures
of the slave and master controller. The data communi-
cation bandwidth available inﬂuences control architec-
ture. Untethered undersea applications usually require
semiautonomous architectures because of the band-
width limitations of acoustic communications links.
As intelligent systems research advances, it is ex-
pected that, for hazardous situations, robots will em-
ploy semiautonomous and autonomous architectures to
a greater degree as a fundamental approach to over-
all performance optimization. Operators will be able to
choose the control mode based on the task needs and the
likelihood that autonomous execution can be reliably
achieved. In this human-centered way, task execution
mode will be matched to best achievable performance.
58.4 Conclusions and Further Reading
If we are to learn anything from the experience of the
last decade we must appreciate that robotics research
is just one step in the development of tools that ex-
tend human capabilities. This search for improved tools
is as old as humanity itself, so great patience is re-
quired [58.77].
Researchers need to make signiﬁcant advances on
four different fronts: mechatronics design, sensing, ma-
chine intelligence, and problem understanding:

Mechatronics designers have to trade gains in pre-
cision, dexterity, mobility, and strength for losses
in endurance and reliability. We are mostly well
short of biological (e.g., human) capabilities ex-
cept for high-precision applications. Machines have
much the same environmental tolerance as peo-
ple. Machines need special precautions against
heat and cold outside the temperature range of
035 ıC, and operation beyond 60 or C60 ıC
is usually impractical. Dust, radiation, low or zero
air pressure, fumes, biological agents, even insects
can be fatal for machines without special design
features, which may result in performance reduc-
tions. Maintenance or repair work may necessitate
decontamination before people can work on the
machinery.

While electronic sensors can go far beyond biologi-
cal capabilities, hazardous applications still present
problems far beyond present capabilities as we have
seen in the case of landmine applications. Radiation
levels that are lethal for humans can also quickly
kill electronic sensors. Extreme heat or cold limits
sensor performance, as can contamination, and even
insects.

Robotics in Hazardous Applications
58.4 Conclusions and Further Reading
1545
Part F | 58.4

Advances in usable machine intelligence have been
much more difﬁcult than many expected. The only
real progress has been achieved with capabilities
often associated with clever people: logic, math-
ematical manipulation, and playing games. While
recent advances have enabled a remarkable de-
gree of understanding for some insect perception
and motor capabilities, the social behaviour of in-
sects still largely deﬁes present-day understanding.
However, teleoperation and supervisory control can
make up for this deﬁcit in the medium term. Short-
comings in machine intelligence represent less of
a barrier than the other three fronts.

Understanding the intended application and eco-
nomic factors has proved to be equally important for
researchers. Early success from exploiting speciﬁc
opportunities can generate conﬁdence that inspires
others to persevere with more difﬁcult general prob-
lems. Failures in understanding the desired task
performance, particularly with respect to economic
factors, can undermine conﬁdence and the credibil-
ity of research efforts. Attempts to develop land-
mine clearance robots provides a useful case study
that illustrates some of the difﬁculties in developing
robots for hazardous applications.
There is no question that future teleoperators will
become hybrid telerobotic systems that allow seamless
transfer between manual and autonomous operations.
Speciﬁc tasks will be selectively automated by opera-
tors for the purposes of enhancing quality and/or re-
ducing subtask execution times. Early systems will con-
tinue to incorporate high levels of human interactivity
to accommodate the limitations of current intelligent
systems technology. Real-time execution of complex
control algorithms and virtual-reality-like graphics en-
gines (which are really useful) have become routine. Ro-
bust machine learning that allows human task execution
skills to be captured through learning by observation or
imitation is gradually becoming realizable. Advances in
mass production of microelectrical mechanical systems
(MEMSs) technologies has greatly reduced the cost of
sensing devices. In the next decade, telerobots for haz-
ardous environments will become smarter and their re-
lationship with their human operators will become more
cooperative and less interactive. Human operators will
supervise the operation of multipletelerobots: at the mo-
ment, the number of support people required for real
operations is a multiple of the number of robots.
Readers are directed to the selection of references
provided in this chapter for further reading.
Video-References
VIDEO 571
UNMACCA: Demining Afghanistan
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/571
VIDEO 572
IED hunters
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/572
VIDEO 574
Bozena 5 remotely operated robot vehicle
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/574
VIDEO 575
DALMATINO
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/575
VIDEO 576
PT-400 D:Mine
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/576
VIDEO 577
DIGGER DTR demining destroying anti-tank mines
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/577
VIDEO 578
Remote-control heavy equipment used in debris removal at Fukushima reactor 3
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/578
VIDEO 579
iRobots used to examine interior of Fukushima powerplant
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/579
VIDEO 580
iRobots inspecting interior of Fukushima powerplant
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/580
VIDEO 581
Robot being used to carry vacuum cleaner head at Fukishima powerplant
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/581
VIDEO 582
Views of robot control screen – inspecting Fukushima power plant
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/582
VIDEO 583
Promotional video of robot for cleaning up Fukushima
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/583
VIDEO 584
Sukura robot developed for reconnaissance missions inside nuclear reactor buildings
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/584
VIDEO 586
HD Stock Footage 1950s atomic power plants – nuclear reactors
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/586

Part F | 58
1546
Part F
Robots at Work
VIDEO 587
Radioactive material handling 1954
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/587
VIDEO 588
Nuclear manipulator remote handling equipment (1960)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/588
VIDEO 589
1961 nuclear reactor meltdown: The SL-1 accident – United States Army Documentary
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/589
VIDEO 590
Jean Vertut master-slave manipulator arms
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/590
VIDEO 591
NanoMag magnetic crawler for remote inspection
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/591
VIDEO 592
Remote handling and inspection with the VT450
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/592
VIDEO 593
Robots answer nuclear waste challenges at SRS
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/58/videodetails/593
References
58.1
S. Kang, C. Cho, J. Lee, D. Ryu, C. Park, K.-C. Shin,
M. Kim: ROBHAZ-DT2: Design and integration of
passive double tracked mobile manipulator system
for explosive ordnance disposal, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (2003)
58.2
A. Kron, G. Schmidt, B. Petzold, M.I. Zah, P. Hinter-
seer, E. Steinbach: Disposal of explosive ordnances
by use of a bimanual haptic telepresence system,
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2004)
58.3
W.R. Hamel, R.L. Cress: Elements of Telerobotics
Necessary for Waste Clean Up Automation, IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (2001)
58.4
J.C. Ralston, D.W. Hainsworth, D.C. Reid, D.L. An-
derson, R.J. McPhee: Recent advances in remote
coal mining machine sensing, guidance, teleop-
eration and field robotics, Robotica 19(5), 513–526
(2001)
58.5
GICHD: A Study of Manual Mine Clearance (Interna-
tional Centre for Humanitarian Demining, Geneva
2005)
58.6
GICHD: A Study of Mechanical Application in Demi-
ning (Generva International Centre for Humanitar-
ian Demining, Geneva 2004)
58.7
J.P. Trevelyan, S. Tilli, B. Parks, H.C. Teng: Farm-
ing minefields: Economics of remediating land
with moderate landmine and UXO concentra-
tions, Demining Technol. Inform. Forum J. 1(3),
(2002)
58.8
C.G. Bruschini, B. Gross: A survey on sensor tech-
nology for landmine detection, J. Mine Action 2(1),
(1998)
58.9
A. Göth, I.G. McLean, J.P. Trevelyan: How do dogs
detect landmines? A summary of research re-
sults. In: Mine Detection Dogs: Training, Operations
and Odour Detection, ed. by I.G. McLean (Geneva
International Centre for Humanitarian Demining,
Geneva 2003)
58.10
S. Havlik: A modular concept of the robotic vehicle
for demining operations, Autonom. Robots 18(3),
253–262 (2005)
58.11
J.P. Wetzel: Robotic applications in humanitarian
demining, Proc. 9th Bienn. Conf. Eng. Constr. Oper.
Chall. Environ. Earth Sp. (2004)
58.12
R. Bogue: Detecting mines and IEDs: What are the
prospects for robots?, Ind. Robot 38(5), 456–460
(2011)
58.13
J.P. Trevelyan: A suspended device for humanitar-
ian demining, EUREL Int. Conf. Detect. Abandoned
Land Mines Humanit. Imperative Seek. Tech. Solut.
(1996)
58.14
J. Trevelyan: Robots: A premature solution for the
land mine problem, Proc. 8th Int. Symp. Robotics
Res. (1998)
58.15
J.-D. Nicoud: Vehicles and robots for humanitarian
demining, Ind. Robot 24(2), 164–168 (1997)
58.16
J.P. Trevelyan: Landmine research: Technology so-
lutions looking for problems, Proc. SPIE Detect.
Remediat. Technol. Mines
Minelike
Targets
IX
(2004)
58.17
H.M. Choset, E.U. Acar, A.A. Rizzi, J.E. Luntz: Sensor-
based planning: exact cellular decompositions in
terms of critical points, Proc. SPIE Mobile Robots XV
Telemanip. Telepresence Technol. VII (2000)
58.18
Y. Zhang, M. Schervish, E.U. Acar, H. Choset: Proba-
bilistic methods for robotic landmine search, Proc.
RSJ/IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (2001)
58.19
S. Singh, S. Thayer: Inspired by immunity, Nature
415, 468–470 (2002)
58.20
S. Sathyanath, F. Sahin: Application of artificial im-
mune system based intelligent multi agent model
to a mine detection problem, IEEE Int. Conf. Syst.
Man Cybern. (2002)
58.21
D. Goldberg, M.J. Mataric: Maximizing reward in
a non-stationary mobile robot environment, Au-
tonom. Agents Multi-Agent Syst. 6(3), 287–316
(2003)
58.22
R.A.
Russell:
Locating
underground
chemical
sources by tracking chemical gradients in 3 dimen-
sions, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2004)
58.23
D.C.
Conner,
P.R.
Kedrowski,
C.F.
Reinholtz,
J.S. Bay: Improved dead reckoning using caster
wheel sensing on a differentially steered three-
wheeled autonomous vehicle, Proc. SPIE Mobile
Robots XV Telemanip. Telepresence Technol. VII
(2000)

Robotics in Hazardous Applications
References
1547
Part F | 58
58.24
S.-D. Kim, C.-H. Lee, S.-J. Yoon, H.-K. Jeong, S.-
C. Kang, M.-S. Kim, Y.-K. Kwak: Variable configura-
tion tracked mobile robot for demining operations,
ASME Des. Eng. Tech. Conf. Comput. Inf. Eng. Conf.
(2004)
58.25
K. Nonami, R. Yuasa, D. Waterman, S. Amano,
H. Ono: Preliminary design and feasibility study
of a 6-degree of freedom robot for excavation
of unexploded landmine, Autonom. Robots 18(3),
293–301 (2005)
58.26
Y.-J. Lee, S. Hirose: Three-legged walking for
fault-tolerant locomotion of demining quadruped
robots, Adv. Robotics 16(5), 415–426 (2002)
58.27
T. Wojtara, K. Nonami, H. Shao, R. Yuasa, S. Amano,
D. Waterman, Y. Nobumoto: Hydraulic master-slave
land mine clearance robot hand controlled by pulse
modulation, Mechatronics 15(5), 589–609 (2005)
58.28
N. Furihata, S. Hirose: Development of mine hands:
Extended prodder for protected demining opera-
tion, Autonom. Robots 18(3), 337–350 (2005)
58.29
P. Debenest, E.F. Fukushima, Y. Tojo, S. Hirose:
A new approach to humanitarian demining: Part
2: Development and analysis of pantographic ma-
nipulator, Autonom. Robots 18(3), 323–336 (2005)
58.30
H. Yabushita, M. Kanehama, Y. Hirata, K. Ko-
suge: 3-D ground adaptive synthetic aperture radar
for landmine detection, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2005)
58.31
A.A. Faust, R.H. Chesney, Y. Das, J.E. McFee,
K.L. Russel: Canadian teleoperated landmine de-
tection systems. Part I: The improved landmine
detection project, Int. J. Syst. Sci. 36(9), 511–528
(2005)
58.32
A.A. Faust, R.H. Chesney, Y. Das, J.E. McFee,
K.L. Russel: Canadian teleoperated landmine de-
tection systems. Part II: Antipersonnel landmine
detection, Int. J. Syst. Sci. 36(9), 529–543 (2005)
58.33
K.N. Zachery, G.M. Schultz, L.M. Collins: Force pro-
tection demining system (FPDS) detection subsys-
tem, Proc. SPIE Detect. Remediat. Technol. Mines
Minelike Targets X (2005)
58.34
J. Coronado-Vergara, G. Avina-Cervantes, M. Devy,
C. Parra: Towards landmine detection using arti-
ficial vision, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(2005)
58.35
J.P. Trevelyan: Demining Research at the University
of Western Australia, http://www.mech.uwa.edu.
au/jpt/demining (Univ. Western Australia, Perth
2000)
58.36
S. Rajasekharan, C. Kambhampati: The current
opinion on the use of robots for landmine detec-
tion, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2003)
58.37
J.P. Trevelyan: Reducing Accidents in Demining:
Achievements in Afghanistan, J. Mine Action 1, 10–
17 (2000)
58.38
T. Lardner (Ed.): A Study of Manual Mine Clear-
ance: Part 4 – Risk Assessment and Risk Manage-
ment (Geneva International Centre for Humanitar-
ian Demining, Geneva 2005)
58.39
P. Newnham, D. Daniels: The market for advanced
humanitarian mine detectors, Proc. SPIE Detect.
Remediat. Technol. Mines Minelike Targets VI (2001)
58.40
J. Vertut, P. Coiffet: Teleoperation and robotics,
evolution and development, Robot Technol. 3A,
302–307 (1985)
58.41
L.I. Slutski: Remote Manipulation Systems: Quality
Evaluation and Improvement (Kluwer, Dordrecht
1998)
58.42
K.F. Kraiss: Advanced Man–Machine Interaction:
Fundamentals
and
Implementation
(Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 2006)
58.43
E.G. Johnsen, W.R. Corliss: Human Factors Applica-
tions in Teleoperator Design and Operation (Wiley,
New York 1971)
58.44
T.B. Sheridan: Telerobotics, Automation, and Hu-
man Supervisory Control, Technology and Indus-
trial Arts (MIT Press, Cambridge 1992) p. 432
58.45
W.R. Hamel: Sensor-based planning and control in
telerobotics. In: Control in Robotics and Automa-
tion, Sensor-Based Integration, ed. by B.K. Ghosh,
N. Xi, T.J. Tarn (Academic, New York 1999) pp. 285–
309
58.46
J.V. Draper: Effects of force reflection on servo-
manipulator performance, Int. Top. Meet. Robotics
Remote Handl. Hostile Environ. (1987)
58.47
R. Goertz: Manipulator system development at ANL,
12th Conf. Remote Syst. Technol. (1962)
58.48
R. Goertz: Some work on manipulator systems at
ANL, past, present and a look at the future, Sem.
Remot. Oper. Spec. Equip. (1964)
58.49
D.P. Kuban, H.L. Martin: An advanced remotely
maintainable servomanipulator concept, Natl. Top.
Meet. Robotics Remote Handl. Hostile Environ.
(1984)
58.50
D. Sands: Cost effective robotics in the nuclear in-
dustry, Ind. Robot 33(3), 170–173 (2006)
58.51
S. Sanders: Remote operations for fusion using
teleoperation, Ind. Robot 33(3), 174–177 (2006)
58.52
B.L. Luk, K.P. Liu, A.A. Collie, D.S. Cooke, S. Chen:
Teleoperated climbing and mobile service robots
for
remote
inspection
and
maintenance
in
nuclear
industry,
Ind.
Robot
33(3),
194–204
(2006)
58.53
P. Desbats, F. Geffard, G. Piolain, A. Coudray: Force-
feedback teleoperation of an industrial robot in
a nuclear spent fuel reprocessing plant, Ind. Robot
33(3), 178–186 (2006)
58.54
B. De Jong, E. Faulring, J.E. Colgate, M. Peshkin,
H. Kang, Y.S. Park, T. Ewing: Lessons learned from
a novel teleoperation testbed, Ind. Robot 33(3),
187–193 (2006)
58.55
M. Rennich, E. Bradley, T. Burgess, V. Graves: Spal-
lation neutron source remote handling implemen-
tation, 1st Jt. Emerg. Prep. Response/Robotics Re-
mote Syst. Top. Meet. (2006)
58.56
S. Kawatsuma, M. Fukushima, T. Okada: Emergency
response by robots to Fukushima-Daiichi accident:
Summary and lessons learned, Ind. Robot 39(5),
428–435 (2012)
58.57
S. Hirose, H. Kuwahara, Y. Wakabayashi, N. Yosh-
ioka: The Mobility Design Concepts/Characteristics
and Ground Testing of an Offset-Wheel Rover Vehi-
cle, Int. Conf. Mobile Planet. Robots Rover Roundup
(1997)

Part F | 58
1548
Part F
Robots at Work
58.58
T. Kagiwada: Robot design for stair navigation, Jpn.
Soc. Mech. Eng. Int. J. C 39(3), 629–635 (1996)
58.59
R. Volpe, R. Ohm, R. Petras, J. Welch, J. Blaram,
R. Ivlev: A prototype manipulation system for Mars
rover, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (1997)
58.60
R. Siegwart, P. Lamon, T. Estier, M. Lauria, R. Piguet:
Innovative design for wheeled locomotion in rough
terrain, Robot. Autonom. Syst. 40, 151–162 (2002)
58.61
K. Yoneda, Y. Ota, S. Hirose: Development of a hi-
grip stair climbing crawler with hysteresis compli-
ant blocks, 4th Int. Conf. Climbing Walk. Robots
(CLAWAR) (2001)
58.62
S. Hirose, T. Sensu, S. Aoki: The TAQT carrier: A prac-
tical terrain-adaptive quadru-track carrier robot,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (1992)
58.63
H. Schempf, E. Mutschler, C. Piepgras, J. Warwick,
B. Chemel, S. Boehmke, W. Crowley, R. Fuchs,
J. Guyot: Pandora: Autonomous Urban Robotic Re-
connaissance System, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (1999)
58.64
J.B. Coughlan: Small All Terrain Mobile Robot (Remo
Tec, Clinton 1991)
58.65
T. Takayama, S. Hirose: Development of Souryu-I
connected crawler vehicle for inspection of narrow
and winding space, 26th Annu. Conf. IEEE Ind. Elec-
tron. Soc. (2000)
58.66
C.H. Cho, W.S. Lee, S. Kang, M.S. Kim, J.B. Song:
Rough-terrain negotiable mobile platform with
passively adaptive double-tracks and its applica-
tion to rescue missions, Adv. Robotics 19(4), 459–
475 (2005)
58.67
K. Kato, S. Hirose: Development of the quadruped
walking robot, TITAN-IX-mechanical design con-
cept and application for the humanitarian de-
mining robot, Adv. Robotics 15(2), 191–204 (2001)
58.68
iRobot Inc.: http://www.irobot.com/
58.69
E. Cheung, V.J. Lumelsky: Proximity sensing in robot
manipulator motion planning: System and im-
plementation issues, IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 5,
740–751 (1989)
58.70
B.R. Shetty, M.H. Ang Jr.: Active compliance control
of a PUMA 560 robot, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(1996)
58.71
B.-S. Kim, S.-K. Yun, S. Kang, C.-S. Hwang, M.-
S. Kim, J.-B. Song: Development of a joint torque
sensor fully integrated with an actuator, Int. Conf.
Control Autom. Syst. (2005)
58.72
M. Uebel, M.S. Ali, I. Minis: The Effect of Bandwidth
on Telerobot System Performance (Goddard Space-
flight Center, Greenbelt 1991)
58.73
G. Niemeyer: Telemanipulation with time delays,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(9), 873–890 (2004)
58.74
D. Ryu, S. Kang, M. Kim, J.-B. Song: Multi-modal
user interface for teleoperation of ROBHAZ-DT2 field
robot system, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2004)
58.75
A.K. Skula, A.S. Arico, V. Antonucci: An appraisal of
electric automobile power sources, Renew. Sustain.
Energy Rev. 5, 137–155 (2001)
58.76
K.W. Ong, G. Seet, S.K. Sim: Sharing and trading in
a human-robot system. In: Cutting Edge Robotics,
ed. by V. Kordic, A. Lazinica, M. Merdan (pro liter-
atur, Augsburg 2005) pp. 467–496
58.77
J. Trevelyan: Redefining robotics for the new mil-
lennium, Int. J. Robotics Res. 18(12), 1211–1223
(1999)

Multimedia Contents Robotics in M
1549
Part F | 59
59. Robotics in Mining
Joshua A. Marshall, Adrian Bonchis, Eduardo Nebot, Steven Scheding
This chapter presents an overview of the state
of the art in mining robotics, from surface to
underground applications, and beyond. Min-
ing is the practice of extracting resources for
utilitarian purposes. Today, the international
business of mining is a heavily mechanized
industry that exploits the use of large diesel
and electric equipment. These machines must
operate in harsh, dynamic, and uncertain en-
vironments such as, for example, in the high
arctic, in extreme desert climates, and in deep
underground tunnel networks where it can be
very hot and humid. Applications of robotics in
mining are broad and include robotic dozing,
excavation, and haulage, robotic mapping and
surveying, as well as robotic drilling and explo-
sives handling. This chapter describes how many
of these applications involve unique technical
challenges for field roboticists. However, there
are compelling reasons to advance the disci-
pline of mining robotics, which include not only
a desire on the part of miners to improve pro-
ductivity, safety, and lower costs, but also out
of a need to meet product demands by access-
ing orebodies situated in increasingly challenging
conditions.
59.1
Modern Mining Practice ....................... 1550
59.1.1
Stages of Mining ...................... 1550
59.1.2
Technology Drivers in Mining .... 1551
59.2 Surface Mining .................................... 1552
59.2.1
Automated Haulage ................. 1552
59.2.2
Fleet Management ................... 1553
59.2.3
Robotic Digging ....................... 1554
59.2.4
Robotic Dozing......................... 1555
59.2.5
Autonomous Blasthole Drilling .. 1556
59.2.6
Telerobotic Rock Breaking ......... 1556
59.2.7
Automated Loading Unit
and Truck Interactions .............. 1557
59.2.8
Dragline Automation ................ 1558
59.2.9
Machine Positioning
and Terrain Mapping ................ 1560
59.2.10 Mine Safety ............................. 1561
59.3 Underground Mining ........................... 1562
59.3.1
Telerobotic Operations .............. 1562
59.3.2
Autonomous Tramming............. 1563
59.3.3
Robotic Loading....................... 1564
59.3.4
Longwall Automation ............... 1565
59.3.5
Robotic Explosives Loading ....... 1566
59.3.6
Underground Mapping,
Surveying, and Positioning ....... 1567
59.4 Challenges and Industry Acceptance ..... 1568
59.4.1
Technological Challenges .......... 1568
59.4.2
Socioeconomic Challenges ........ 1569
59.5 Challenges, Outlook, and Conclusion .... 1569
59.5.1
Technical Challenges ................ 1569
59.5.2
Socio-Economic Challenges....... 1570
59.5.3
Emerging Frontiers ................... 1570
59.5.4
Conclusion .............................. 1571
Video-References......................................... 1571
References................................................... 1572
There was a time, in recent history, when improved
productivity and lower mining costs could be achieved
purely by the economies of scale that arise from the
use of larger equipment [59.1]. However, this era is
likely over. Today’s mining companies and equipment
manufacturers have been making renewed efforts in the
pursuit of new and innovative approaches to the busi-
ness of resource exploration and mining.
Among these efforts has been a move toward increas-
ingly autonomous mobile equipment and processes. For
example, major suppliers of mining equipment for both
underground and surface mining operations now offer

Part F | 59.1
1550
Part F
Robots at Work
robotic driving, dumping, and other materials handling
functionalities. What is more, some global mining com-
panies are now operating their own technology-focused
divisions, each with goals of bringing new technologi-
cal developments to their mines worldwide.
Finally, there exist several emerging frontiers for
mining, where robotics is already playing a critical role.
These include not only very deep and high altitude
mining, but also undersea mining and extra-terrestrial
mining.
59.1 Modern Mining Practice
Mining is an ancient and broad practice, dating back
to Palaeolithic times (43 000 years ago) [59.2] and in-
volves the extraction of materials from the Earth’s crust
for utilitarian purposes. Today we mine minerals (e.g.,
gemstones, metals, salt, coal, and many others), aggre-
gates, natural gas, and petroleum. These resources are
used, for instance, to make the tools we use, shelter,
food products, medicine, and clothing. Try to imagine,
for a moment, a life where you endeavored to use (or
build a robot from) absolutely nothing derived from
mining. We beneﬁt greatly from mining, but there is
also increasing pressure and international recognition
that the often negative environmental, safety, and social
implications of mining and mineral processing must be
curtailed and balanced with economic and lifestyle con-
siderations. Robotics can play a vital role in all of these
efforts.
In this section, we brieﬂy provide some introductory
background about the fundamental stages of mining,
common to most operations, and discuss what drives
the ﬁeld of mining robotics, as well as its unique chal-
lenges, technical and otherwise.
59.1.1 Stages of Mining
Almost all mining operations have ﬁve fundamental
stages [59.3]:
1. Prospecting
2. Exploration
3. Development
4. Exploitation
5. Reclamation.
Prospecting involves the initial search for valu-
able materials. This stage is normally carried out by
geologists, and deposits may be located at or below
the surface. Prospecting usually happens by either di-
rect visual examination or by indirect methods (e.g.,
through the use of geophysical techniques) that look
for anomalies in seismic, magnetic, electrical, electro-
magnetic, and/or radiometric variables of the Earth.
Geochemistry and geobotany techniques are also em-
ployed. Although robotics has not yet played a pivotal
role in the search for minerals on the Earth, plane-
tary geologists have been collaborating with roboticists
for planetary prospecting; e.g., [59.4] and references
therein.
In the exploration phase, the objective is to deter-
mine as accurately as possible the size (tonnage) and
value (grade) of a deposit. This process is sometimes
called delineation and more often than not involves
collecting samples of material by drilling. Similar to
prospecting, robotic exploration drills for mining are
not yet common for surface exploration on the Earth.
However, there has been a signiﬁcant amount of work
on robotic drilling in extreme environments, such as un-
dersea and planetary exploration; see [59.5] for a good
introduction and ample references.
The development and exploitation phases of min-
ing are where tools and techniques from robotics have
been, to date, applied most. Development is the work
necessary to bring a mine into production, and usual
entails planning, design, construction (e.g., overburden
removal, shaft sinking, underground access) and the
installation of mine services (e.g., power, water, ven-
tilation, etc.).
It is during the exploitation phase that the resource
is physically extracted, processed, and shipped to buy-
ers. How exploitation occurs depends on the selected
mining methods, which depend on many factors. These
include the spatial characteristics of the deposit, ge-
ologic conditions, geotechnical conditions, economic
considerations, technological considerations (e.g., the
availability of advanced tools), and environmental con-
siderations. Generally speaking, mining methods can be
divided into two categories:
1. Surface mining methods;
2. Underground mining methods.
Surface-mining methods are used when the deposit
lies near the surface, are usually very large scale op-
erations and have high production rates. Underground
methods are used when the deposit is deeply buried.
Such methods have lower production rates and are usu-
ally more technically challenging and hazardous for
mine workers.

Robotics in Mining
59.1 Modern Mining Practice
1551
Part F | 59.1
Figure 59.1 shows examples of robotic vehi-
cles used in surface and underground mining. These
technologies, among others, are discussed further in
Sects. 59.2 and 59.3.
Mining must strive to meet the economic and envi-
ronmental needs of the present while at the same time
ensuring (or enhancing) the ability of future genera-
tions to meet their own needs. Mine reclamation is the
process of closing a mine, recontouring, revegetating,
and restoring the land and water to an acceptable post-
activity state. The objective is to minimize any adverse
effects on the environment or threat to human health
and safety. Some reclamation activities involve the con-
struction and monitoring of tailings impoundments,
where waste from mining and resource processing ac-
tivities is placed.
Recently, tools from robotics have been used
to conduct bathymetric surveys of tailings ponds,
which are unique environments with very speciﬁc
safety requirements. Figure 59.2 shows a robotic mar-
itime research vessel performing a bathymetric sur-
vey of a mine tailings pond at a potash mining op-
eration in eastern Canada. Performing robotic sur-
veys has been shown to be safer and more cost-
effective [59.6].
a)
b)
Fig. 59.1 (a) Examples of robotic vehicles in underground
and surface mining. Unmanned surface haul trucks (Photo:
Mobular Mining Systems, 2011); (b) an autonomous un-
derground load-haul-dump (LHD) machine at the Kvarn-
torp mine, Sweden (Photo: Joshua Marshall, 2007)
59.1.2 Technology Drivers in Mining
In order to better understand the potential for applica-
tions of robotics in mining, one must appreciate what
drives the development of equipment technology in the
mining industry. Mining is a dynamic process that must
deal with the uncertainties of outdoor environments,
and is usually conducted in as a series of interacting
unit operations (e.g., drilling, blasting, loading, hauling,
and processing). The harsh, extensive, and unstructured
environments found in mining often preclude the appli-
cation of existing techniques from other industries (e.g.,
from manufacturing robotics) [59.7, p. 806]. However,
the recent growth of mobile and ﬁeld robotics has re-
sulted in several opportunities for robotics in mining.
These opportunities stem mainly from a set of primary
technology drivers:

Working Environment. Mines are often developed
in harsh and remote areas. For example, several
companies operate mines and processing facili-
ties at high altitudes. Also, as mines strive to
operate at greater depths, extremely high ambi-
ent temperatures and humidity pose greater health
risks [59.8]. Robotics may serve to minimize infras-
tructure needs and physically remove people from
such hostile environments.

Labor Shortage. Miners have reported difﬁculties
ﬁnding the skilled labor needed to support their
operations [59.9]. The newest generation of work-
ers is technologically astute, but holds a different
attitude toward physical labor than previous genera-
tions. Robotization may be what is needed to entice
this new generation into mining.

Health and Safety. With increasing mine depths,
growing equipment sizes and speeds, and the tight-
Fig. 59.2 Robotic maritime research vessel conducting
a bathymetric survey of a mine tailings pond with overlaid
example bathymetry map (Photos: Clearpath Robotics,
2013)

Part F | 59.2
1552
Part F
Robots at Work
Multifactor
Labour
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
Productivity index
Year
160
140
120
100
80
60
Fig. 59.3 Experimental estimates of multifactor and labor
productivity for the mining industry in Australia (1986–
2011) showing decreasing productivity since 2001 (af-
ter [59.10])
ening of government regulations, it stands to reason
that the deployment of almost any new technology
that enhances the inherent safety of mining will be
viewed positively at all levels.

Equipment Maintenance. Maintenance costs and
machine failures can make up a very signiﬁcant
portion of mine operating costs [59.11]. Moreover,
operators often push equipment to its performance
limits. Recent wisdom from the ﬁeld of reliabil-
ity engineering suggests that the automation (or
partial automation) of mobile equipment may help
to signiﬁcantly reduce downtime and maintenance
costs [59.12].

Operational Efﬁciency. There are a great number
of areas in which efﬁciency improvements might
be realized by the application robotics in mining.
The most obvious lies in the fact that production
time is lost during shift changes and breaks, re-
sulting in much less than the desired 24/7 runtime.
Not as obvious, and more difﬁcult to quantify, is
the less-than-optimal way in which underground
mines typically operate. Without global and real-
time control over the assignment (and movement)
of machinery, the ability to optimize production
performance through, for example, reduced dilu-
tion and increased recovery is also very difﬁ-
cult [59.1].

Sustainability. Environmental and social responsi-
bility are expected of modern mining companies
and equipment suppliers. The alleviation of emis-
sions (e.g., through the coordination and optimiza-
tion of ﬂeets) or reduction in power consumption
by reduced operating demands (e.g., ventilation
support) might be realized by way of real-time mon-
itoring and automation of equipment.
Figure 59.3 shows multifactor and labor productiv-
ity for the mining industry in Australia between 1986
and 2011. Arguably encompassing all of the factors
above, this data shows a worrisome decrease in produc-
tivity since the turn of the century, and some believe that
robotics might help to reverse this trend [59.13].
59.2 Surface Mining
Surface mining is characterized by high tonnage op-
erations, massive mobile equipment, and challenges
that can include difﬁcult environments (e.g., dust, fog,
and extreme weather) together with remote locales and
a strict need for keeping costs low.
59.2.1 Automated Haulage
Haulage is the process of moving material from one lo-
cation to another. In the surface mining context, this is
typically achieved using haul trucks (Fig. 59.1a), which
move material from the point of blasting/excavation to
the point of processing or stockpiling. The material be-
ing moved is either the desired economic quantity or
overburden, and the destination is usually dependent on
the load in the truck.
Haulage is a repetitive process, and the one to which
automation can bring signiﬁcant beneﬁts, particularly
with respect to safety. Between 1989 and 1991, haul
trucks were involved in 42% of the accidents and 60%
of the fatalities in surface mining [59.14]. As with
most mining equipment, there are also potential beneﬁts
of automation in the areas of productivity, repeatabil-
ity, and reduced maintenance costs. Although it is too
early in the history of robotic mining equipment to
precisely deﬁne these beneﬁts, the lessons from port
automation (which use machines of similar scale, al-
beit in a more benign environment) have shown that
maintenance costs of autonomous straddle carriers (in
particular tyre wear and fuel costs) are reduced by ap-
proximately one-third [59.15] over their conventionally
operated counterparts.
Autonomous Haul Trucks
Autonomous haul trucks can be thought of as mobile
robots operating in a difﬁcult, dynamic environment. As

Robotics in Mining
59.2 Surface Mining
1553
Part F | 59.2
such, they are required to have systems to address the
standard issues of sensing and perception, situational
awareness, localization, and control. The unique chal-
lenges presented in surface mining not present in other
robotics applications include:

Scale (haul trucks can carry up to 400 t of material).

Mining pits often restrict the view of the sky, which
can dramatically decrease global navigation satellite
systems (GLS) reliability.

Surface mining environments are constantly chang-
ing, which limits the ability to install ﬁxed infras-
tructure.

Mixed manually operated and automated ﬂeets
of machines, which places strict requirements on
safety and integrity.

All-weather operational requirements.
In the commercial sector, both Caterpillar and Ko-
matsu had demonstrated the ability to automate haul
trucks as early as the mid-1 990s [59.16]. However, it
was not until 2008 that the ﬁrst commercial deploy-
ment of Komatsu driverless trucks was realised in the
Gaby Mine, operated by Codelco in Chile [59.17]. This
was followed closely by a deployment by Rio Tinto at
their West Angelas mine in the Pilbara, Western Aus-
tralia [59.18] (
VIDEO 145 ), where they have operated
continuously since and have moved more than 50 mil-
lion t of waste.
The Komatsu trucks operate using a high-precision
global positioning system (GPS) as the primary local-
ization sensor, radar sensors for obstacle detection and
situational awareness, a proprietary wireless communi-
cations system, and are given tasks (load, haul, dump,
etc.) using a proprietary scheduling system developed
by Modular Mining Systems [59.18].
At the time of writing, similar systems by Cater-
pillar [59.19] and Hitachi [59.20] are also in various
stages of trial and deployment, although there is scant
information available publicly regarding the speciﬁcs of
their designs and operation.
The automation of mining haul trucks is still an
area of active research, however, primarily due to
the challenging nature of the mining environment as
previously noted. New positioning systems [59.21],
situational awareness systems (Sect. 59.2.10), and plan-
ning and scheduling algorithms [59.22] are all un-
der active development, and are intended to improve
robustness, safety, and productivity, respectively. If
each of these challenges can be addressed, robotic
haulage technology will be able to applied in a much
greater range of operational scenarios than is currently
possible.
59.2.2 Fleet Management
Fleet management is a catch-all term that may de-
ﬁne a number of different technologies used in mining.
Commonly though, ﬂeet management is divided into
three main tasks:
1. Position (and perhaps materials) monitoring
2. Production monitoring
3. Equipment task assignment.
Fleet management solutions are typically deployed
to an ofﬁce environment and allow operators to quickly
survey large amounts of mine data so that appropri-
ate actions can be taken in real-time on the mine-
site. Computerized ﬂeet management must integrate
and evolve with the deployment of robotic mining
machines.
Position Monitoring
The position of mobile equipment is commonly re-
ported via wireless communications to a mine or re-
gion’s database, where it can be queried by a visualiza-
tion application. This provides a real-time picture of the
movement of all equipment that has been enabled for
such operation and allows an operator to quickly assess
whether planned operations are proceeding as expected.
Material movements may also be monitored in a similar
fashion, but the material type (ore or waste) and grade
must usually be entered manually by an operator. How-
ever some parameters, such as weight, are measured by
the system.
Production Monitoring
Given that vast quantities of data may exist (partic-
ularly from robotic machines) that give a historical
account of the evolution of a mine, or group of mines,
this data can be used to provide detailed reports to
mine management, and may also be useful as part of
a continual productivity improvement process. Exam-
ples of production monitoring data may include ma-
chine cycle times, average maintenance cycles, machine
failure events, payloads, or combinations of parame-
ters (e.g., machine failure events vs. machine payload
weight).
Equipment Task Assignment
At a typical mine, the equipment task assignment prob-
lem is addressed in a manner very similar to that of
the urban taxi dispatch problem: A centralized author-
ity decides, based on some predeﬁned high-level goals,
which machines must visit certain locations on the
mine-site and perform some useful action. A machine

Part F | 59.2
1554
Part F
Robots at Work
operator is generally given these instructions through
a user interface located in the machine’s cabin, which
must be acknowledged and accepted prior to carrying
out the task. The most typical implementation of the
task assignment problem addresses the haulage sce-
nario: when should a particular haul truck approach
a given shovel, and when and where should it dump
its subsequent load? Haulage is most commonly ad-
dressed, because it is here that even small changes
in efﬁciency can have signiﬁcant effects on overall
proﬁt.
Commercial Solutions
There are many commercial solutions for ﬂeet manage-
ment in the surface mining. The dominant solution is
Modular Mining’s DISPATCH system [59.23], which
was developed in the 1970s. It implements an optimiza-
tion algorithm to allocate trucks to shovels and dump
sites, and contains modules for the other tasks of pro-
duction and positioning monitoring. Modular Mining
joined the Komatsu group of companies in 1996 and
helped to deploy the FrontRunner autonomous haulage
system described previously [59.24].
Other commercial systems include Caterpillar’s
MineStar software [59.25], Wenco’s ﬂeet management
solution [59.26], Leica Geosystems Jigsaw suite of
software and hardware [59.27], and Devex’s Smart-
Mine system [59.28]. These systems all now offer very
similar overall functionality and differ mainly in imple-
mentation details.
Fleet Management Research
Although commercial systems for ﬂeet management ex-
ist, there is still a substantial amount of research being
undertaken, primarily in the area of task assignment
optimization. Most commercial systems optimize task
allocation using a heuristic that deﬁnes costs for allow-
ing a shovel to become idle and/or allowing haul trucks
to wait in a queue. In an ideal or optimal system, all
items of equipment are fully utilized. However in prac-
tice, a higher cost is usually given to shovel idle time.
The paper [59.29] gives a good overview of many of the
commonly used heuristics used in task allocation opti-
mization.
More recently, it has been acknowledged that
heuristic, deterministic optimizers may not always pro-
duce truly optimal task assignments. This is primarily
due to their inability to account for variability in the
duty cycles of the items of equipment (i. e., they are
stochastic rather than deterministic in nature), and any
unforeseen discrete events, such as equipment failure,
road blockage or operator error. The papers [59.22, 30–
33] all describe recent approaches to overcoming these
hurdles.
59.2.3 Robotic Digging
Mass excavation is one of the most important opera-
tions in mining. Being extremely sensitive to economies
of scale and requiring a signiﬁcant capital investment,
it became a target application for robotic technologies
starting in the mid-1990s. Surface mining typically uses
large hydraulic excavators, hydraulic shovels, and elec-
tric rope shovels (Fig. 59.4). See also Sect. 59.3.3,
which focuses on underground robotic loading.
Research in robotic digging involves systems de-
sign (including systems of systems), traditional robotics
topics (sensing, planning, control), and tool-ground
interaction problems. A framework for an intelligent
earthwork system is suggested by [59.34], which dis-
cusses factors that can affect earthwork operation
performance, identify key emerging technologies to
support the implementation, the system architecture,
and the system control strategy. A comprehensive re-
view by [59.35] examined various aspects of sens-
ing, planning, and control as they apply to earthmov-
ing automation. Later developments in these topics
are further discussed in [59.36]. Irrespective of the
manned/unmanned aspect of the operation, a typical
digging phase involves a number of critical steps: plan-
ning the bucket trajectory in contact with the ground,
bank or muck pile; detecting when the bucket is full;
and, detecting incipient stall and averting it. An analy-
sis of autonomy requirements for each of these steps is
detailed in [59.37] for the particular case of an electric
rope shovel.
In other work, authors of
[59.38, 39] proposed
an autonomous excavation system for front-end-loader
style machines that uses bucket force feedback, fuzzy
logic, and neural networks for control. In their ap-
proach, a set of fundamental bucket action sequences,
Fig. 59.4 A rope shovel dumping into a haul truck (cour-
tesy of Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research
Organisation (CSIRO), 2006)

Robotics in Mining
59.2 Surface Mining
1555
Part F | 59.2
typically used by human operators, was compiled for
use by the controller. A reactive approach, using fuzzy
behaviours, was designed to act on force data to assess
the excavation status and determine an appropriate con-
trol input. Experimental results, using a programmable
universal machine for assembly (PUMA) 560 arm, were
reported. Many more researchers have studied the
robotic loading problem for homogeneous materials,
such as soils and regolith. The majority of researchers
have advocated the use of manipulator impedance or
compliant motion control [59.40–43] and much of this
work has focused on estimating the properties of the
media [59.44] and on computing the resistive forces act-
ing on the budget during loading [59.45].
Invariably, all researchers agree that the biggest
challenge to robotic excavation is the interaction be-
tween the tool and the terrain (ground, pile). This
interaction is shaped by the properties of the media
(e.g., density and hardness), the rock pile geometry,
and the distribution of particle sizes and shapes. The
problem is compounded by the fact that it is difﬁcult
to predetermine the exact nature of interactions prior
to the execution of any particular excavation opera-
tion [59.46]. Signiﬁcant effort was dedicated to model-
ing the interaction between the bucket and the terrain in
excavation. This requires estimating the soil parameters
online, since these parameters can vary signiﬁcantly
with the strata being excavated. The classical funda-
mental equation of earthmoving [59.47] used to deter-
mine the forces required for digging will fail to predict
these forces if the soil parameters are not estimated cor-
rectly. Models for automated excavation using online
estimation of soil parameters are discussed in [59.48].
Situational awareness, which includes both work-
space and machine awareness, is another key aspect of
robotic digging. Workspace awareness implies a knowl-
edge of the terrain surrounding the digging machine. At
a primary level, this knowledge is gathered using a sen-
sor suite retroﬁtted to the machine, which in a typical
conﬁguration consists of a number of ranging sensors,
an inertial measurement unit, and a GNSS unit. The
acquired raw data is subsequently processed by higher
level processes to detect the location and conﬁguration
of the dig and dump regions, and the location of other
mobile equipment operating the workspace (e.g., haul
trucks, utility vehicles). Laser rangeﬁnders offer ade-
quate resolution to segment the scene. An example of
a workspace image in a form of a three-dimensional
(3-D) point cloud acquired with a long range laser scan-
ner installed on a shovel is shown in Figure 59.5. Color
is assigned to the points based on intensity returns from
the laser scanner.
Machine self-awareness is primarily concerned with
determining the position and orientation of the bucket
with respect to a referential ﬁxed with respect to the
machine. It also includes all the usual status data for
the main onboard systems: power plant, transmission,
tool actuation, etc.. The position and orientation of the
bucket are usually available from encoders and incli-
nometers. A better solution, however, is to use suitably
placed ranging sensors that are able to track the bucket
in all positions and orientations [59.49]. This latter
method avoids the errors typically associated with back-
lash in joints and dynamic effects in inclinometers. The
placement of the ranging sensors on the machine should
consider the need to provide an image of the ground un-
der the boom.
Autonomous digging systems offer the additional
beneﬁt of enabling dig-to-plan operation and reconcil-
ing actual versus planned volumes by providing ac-
curate real-time survey information. In surface mining
operations, the ﬂoor is usually mined and therefore dis-
turbed before accurate surveys are executed, and the
ﬂoor is graded on an as-needed basis to facilitate the
movement of the mobile equipment operating in the
pit [59.49].
59.2.4 Robotic Dozing
Dozers are used in most surface mines. Operating
a dozer under conditions that are dynamic, with hazards
that can vary and be subtle and difﬁcult to recognize,
adds to the complexity of the tasks that workers perform
on these machines. Many of these tasks require oper-
Truck
Shovel
Fig. 59.5 A top view of a 3-D point cloud coloured by in-
tensity returns from a long range laser scanner installed on
a mining shovel loading a haul truck (courtesy of CSIRO,
2008)

Part F | 59.2
1556
Part F
Robots at Work
ators that are highly skilled in ground-engaging tool
control and machine positioning. In addition, dozer op-
erators are exposed to a variety of risk factors that may
lead to health problems, including whole-body vibra-
tions, awkward postural requirements, noise, and shift
work. While machine guidance systems are now ubiq-
uitous, they still require an operator in the cab and
have known problems associated with their reliance on
GNSS-based localization. As alternatives, some equip-
ment manufacturers offer tele-remote-controlled and
autonomous dozers, which eliminate the need for an on-
board operator.
Remote control solutions for dozers have been in
use for two decades. They cannot perform in poor visi-
bility conditions (dust, fog, night operation, heavy rain)
and do not offer the possibility of automating machine
guidance and tool control tasks otherwise available if
operating the dozer from the cab. Other problems in-
clude loss of situational awareness, inaccurate attitude
judgement, and inaccurate depth perception. More re-
cent commercial remote control offerings include force
feedback. In the case of tele-operated control with
negligible latencies, imparting force feedback to the op-
erator has the beneﬁt of allowing the operator to feel and
control the machine.
In view of the limitations of remote control tech-
nologies, research on dozer automation has focused
on semi-autonomous and autonomous system retroﬁts.
Autonomous systems have already made signiﬁcant in-
roads in the mining industry, and the acceptance for
this technology is growing. Leica Geosystems offers an
autonomous ripping solution for track and wheel doz-
ers. Their system, called Leica J3dozer autorip, provides
a number of automatic functions, which include engine
start/stop engine, automatic control for steering, throt-
tle, transmission and ripper, accessories control, and an
emergency fail-safe system [59.50]. The system also
incorporates a path planner based on area coverage al-
gorithms.
59.2.5 Autonomous Blasthole Drilling
Blasthole drilling is a mining process typically em-
ployed during the exploitation phase of surface mining.
To excavate a material it must ﬁrst be blasted to fracture
the rock mass into small volumes suitable for haulage
and processing. This is achieved by drilling a matrix of
holes from the surface down into the rock mass; these
holes are then loaded with explosives and blasted. The
resultant fractured rock mass can be excavated by a va-
riety of machines. The matrix of holes (or drill pattern)
and the amount and type of explosives used are op-
timized to produce a desired rock size distribution in
order to minimize the cost of processing; however, there
can be signiﬁcant variation due to the variable nature of
the underlying geology.
Blasthole drill rigs are usually large tracked vehicles
with an articulated mast that contains the main drilling
components: the drill motor, drill rods, and drill bit. To
drill to depths longer than the mast, drill rods can be
concatenated to form a long drill string as drilling is
progressing. Like many home drills, most blasthole drill
rigs are capable of rotary drilling, as well as hammer
(or percussion) drilling. Rotary is typically preferred for
softer materials, with hammer drilling primarily used
for harder materials.
There are several facets of drilling amenable to au-
tomation: tramming (the process of moving the entire
rig from one hole location to another), drilling, and the
management of drill consumables (such as rod or bit
changes). A fully autonomous drill rig should have all
of these functions automated. The promise of automa-
tion is increased productivity and more consistency in
the placement and angle of drill holes, which in turn
should lead to better blasting outcomes. Consistency
in post-blast fragmentation results in a signiﬁcant eco-
nomic impact.
There are several high-proﬁle mining equipment
manufacturers and companies that have developed fully
automated drill rigs. Atlas Copco’s Rig Control Sys-
tem (RCS) has reportedly made signiﬁcant impact in
increasing average tramming speeds (from 0:8 m=min
to 2:6 m=min) and drilling efﬁciency (a savings of 1 h
per 12 holes drilled) [59.51]. Flanders [59.51], and Rio
Tinto [59.52] also have fully automated blast hole drill
rigs in production.
59.2.6 Telerobotic Rock Breaking
Drilling and blasting results are often far from ideal and
the resulting fragments of rock (called shot muck or just
muck) can be larger than the projected size. Some of
the shot muck can be too big for handling with a dig-
ging machine, and thus requires a secondary blasting.
Other boulders can be handled by the digging and haul-
ing machines but are still too large to ﬁt in the mouth of
a primary crusher. In this latter case, rockbreakers are
used to achieve a further reduction in ore and rock size.
A rockbreaker consists of a large 4-DOF (degree of
freedom) serial link manipulator arm that is ﬁtted with
a hydraulic hammer (Fig. 59.6), and is usually posi-
tioned in front of a run-of-mine (ROM) bin. The bin
is ﬁtted with horizontal bars at the bottom that prevent
oversized rocks from entering the crusher below (this
arrangement is called a grizzly). The size of the grill
openings is made in such a manner that only rocks small
enough to be crushed may pass through. Larger rocks
do not ﬁt and therefore must be broken. Haul trucks car-

Robotics in Mining
59.2 Surface Mining
1557
Part F | 59.2
a)
b)
Fig.59.6a,b Rock breaker at rest over
the ROM bin (a) and breaking a rock
on grizzly (b) (courtesy of CSIRO,
2007)
rying ore from a nearby quarry dump their load into the
ROM bin. Typically, an operator uses a line-of-sight re-
mote control to operate the arm.
Rio Tinto is pursuing a programme to automate the
vast majority of its Pilbara iron ore operations in West-
ern Australia, and control the operations from the Re-
mote Operations Centre (ROC) in Perth, situated over
1000km away from the Pilbara region. This effort in-
cludes the development of a telerobotic control system
for the primary rockbreaker at the West Angelas mine
in collaboration with the CSIRO [59.53]. This system
addresses known drawbacks in teleoperation (limited
communication bandwidth, high latency in the real-
time video feedback, lack of spatial situational aware-
ness, etc.) by improving the intelligence of the con-
trol system at the remote/machine end (e.g., Cartesian
motion and collision avoidance capability) and by pro-
viding the operator with a mixed-reality interface that
combines live video with 3-D computer visualization.
Each rockbreaker is ﬁtted with a number of sensors
to detect its pose in space, and actuated by signals that
bypass the existing remote-control system. PTU (pan,
tilt, zoom) cameras are ﬁtted to poles on either side
of the ROM bin and a pair of high-resolution digital
Fig. 59.7 A mixed reality user interface combines live
video and 3-D stereo reconstruction of the rocks above the
grizzly (courtesy of CSIRO, 2008)
stereo video cameras were mounted below. At the re-
mote end, in the control room, the operator is presented
with an overview of the rockbreaker from a wide-angle
video stream augmented by a synthetic computer image
(Fig. 59.7). The operator is able to walk around the rock-
breaker in the virtual world and inspect the rocks from
different angles, enabling the operator to determine the
appropriate breaking strategy. The operator deploys the
arm using commands from a joystick, and as the arm is
commanded to move, the motion of the arm is replicated
in the 3-D scene. Simultaneously,both PTZ cameras fol-
low the tip of the hammer. When the operator is ready
to break the rock, he/she can switch his/her attention to
the live video stream, which can be used to monitor the
breaking of the rock. Once complete, the arm can be au-
tomatically sent to the rest position.
59.2.7 Automated Loading Unit
and Truck Interactions
The main loading units used in surface mining are elec-
tric and hydraulic shovels and hydraulic excavators.
Given the large volumes of material that need to be
moved, and the comparatively small size of loading and
hauling units, cycle times are closely monitored. In the
continuous pursuit of efﬁciency, mining engineers dis-
sect cycles to look for potential savings. One area of
interest is truck spotting, which is the process of ma-
noeuvring the haul truck into a position and orientation
that is ideal for the loading unit to dump material into
the truck’s tray (Fig. 59.4).
The ideal truck placement for loading has both
productivity and safety implications. When a mining
shovel is used for loading, the haul truck must be po-
sitioned in such a manner that the swing motion of the
shovel is minimized and that the shovel boom does not
need to lower excessively to reach the tray. If the haul
truck is not placed optimally, the loader needs to repo-
sition itself to tip with a full load in the bucket, which
results in lost time. Lowering the loader arm excessively
and/or an uneven distribution of load in the haul truck

Part F | 59.2
1558
Part F
Robots at Work
tray may result in injuries to the operators and property
damage.
In open-pit mining, the shovel operator usually
guides the haul trucks to the desired location (spotting)
by placing the bucket in the location that is optimal for
the dumping phase, and waits for the truck to move into
position. A key requirement for achieving automatic
spotting is the availability of a robust localizer, that de-
termines the relative pose between the shovel and the
truck. Currently, most of the commercial guidance so-
lutions are based on the use of GNSS and GNSS-aided
inertial navigation systems on both the shovel and the
truck. This results in an indirect determination of the
relative pose between the shovel and the truck.
These systems, however, do not provide a robust so-
lution. For the haul truck, the proximity to the shovel
boom and crowd arm can lead to a degradation of the
GNSS solution due to multipath, while the placement
of the truck near highwalls leads to a partial obstruction
of the sky, with a loss of satellite tracking and a sig-
niﬁcant geometric dilution of precision. The guidance
system on the shovel can be impacted detrimentally by
the proximity to highwalls. Imaging sensors (e.g., laser
scanners) can be installed on both the shovel for a direct
determination of the relative pose between the shovel
and the truck [59.55]. However, this solution has po-
tential pitfalls, that are related to the sensitivity of the
imaging sensors to environmental conditions such as
dust, rain, and variable illumination during the day (or
during the 24 hour day/night cycle in cases where cam-
eras are used).
Some researchers have looked at modalities that
mitigate these pitfalls. One possible solution, suggested
Bench
Outgoing
truck
Incoming
truck
Work
zone
Handover
zone
Fig. 59.8 Trafﬁc management zones around a shovel in
a double–spotting conﬁguration, when the shovel loads on
both sides (after [59.54])
in [59.54], is to divide the space around the shovel into
three zones: the outer zone, the handover zone, and the
work zone (Fig. 59.8).
The relative size of the zones depends on the truck
and shovel geometries, and the chosen safe operating
speed limits within each zone. As the truck crosses into
the handover zone from the outer zone, the spotting
system ﬂags the truck as active and begins sending com-
mands to it. In this zone, the relative pose between the
shovel and truck is determined indirectly, based on the
method discussed above. In the handover zone the truck
is sufﬁciently far from the shovel and the highwall, and
therefore the localization errors due to multipath and
sky occlusion are minimized. Once the vehicle crosses
into the work zone, the spotting system begins comput-
ing the relative pose using the imaging sensors on the
shovel.
Since the sensors on the shovel are also able to
see the bench and other obstacles in the work zone,
the shovel is able to direct the truck around obsta-
cles as they appear in the work zone, and park the
trucks as close to the bench as practical. In other words,
since the shovel is actively aware of its environment,
it is able to deal with changes to the environment as
they occur. The spotting system generates an approach
path that will bring the truck in the optimum posi-
tion for loading, where this optimum is determined
in relation to the characteristics of the shovel and the
conﬁguration of the dig face. The path is also opti-
mized with respect to the positioning time. Spotting
times may be further minimized by double spotting,
when the shovel loads on both sides, as depicted in
Fig. 59.8.
The above discussion focused on shovel–truck in-
teractions. Similar issues aise when hydraulic exca-
vators are used for loading. Comprehensive research
results in autonomous truck loading using hydraulic ex-
cavators are discussed in [59.56].
59.2.8 Dragline Automation
Mining dragline excavators are massive electrically
powered machines used in open-pit coal mining to
remove overburden and uncover coal. A dragline com-
prises a rotating platform that supports the house (con-
sisting of the engine room and operator cabin), boom
and a bucket rigging structure, as illustrated in Fig. 59.9.
The house rotates on a base known as the tub which
rests on the ground. The mechanism has three degrees
of freedom:
1. Rotation with respect to the tub;
2. Hoist by a cable passing over sheaves at the tip of
the boom;

Robotics in Mining
59.2 Surface Mining
1559
Part F | 59.2
Rope plane
Radio
link
Rotational axis
Boom sheaves
Rope measurement
sensor package
Laser scanner
scanning plane
h
Ψ
Ψ
Ψ
Mast
Boom
Operator's 
cab
Hoist ropes
Drag rope
Bucket
House
Walking
shoes
Automation
computer
Operator’s 
cab
Bucket
Tub
θ
a)
b)
Fig.59.9a,b Schematic of a dragline excavator (a) front view (b) side view (after [59.2])
3. Drag by a cable passing over sheaves at the base of
the boom.
Digging is controlled using only the drag and hoist
ropes. When the bucket is ﬁlled it is hoisted clear of the
ground and swung to the dump position by swinging the
house and boom. The human operator ﬁlls the bucket
by dragging it through the ground, lifts and swings it
to the spoil pile, dumps it, and then returns to the dig
point. Each cycle moves up to 100 t of overburden, and
typically takes 60 s.
High capital costs are pushing the owners of these
machines to continually look for avenues to maxi-
mize productivity (m3=shift) in the presence of operator
variability and maintenance costs (around 30% of op-
erating cost) [59.2]. From this perspective, dragline
operations seem ripe for deploying robotic technolo-
gies. However, the idea of completely removing the
human operator from the dragline seat, while tempting
from a research perspective, it is not widely entertained
in the industry.
Swing control and digital terrain mapping are the
two robotic technologies at the core of the dragline au-
tomation efforts. During dragline operation, the bucket
naturally tends to swing with respect to the boom.
A skilled operator can coordinate the boom slew mo-
tion so as to control the natural tendency of the bucket
to swing during dumping and spotting operations.
A novice operator typically requires six months training
to become proﬁcient. This warrants the development
of a swing automation system to improve the produc-
tivity of the dig-to-dump and dump-to-dig phases of
a dragline operation. Automatic swing controllers of-
fer the additional beneﬁt of minimizing stress fatigue
on the boom.
An implementation of a dragline swing controller
is discussed in [59.57]. The control system moves
the bucket between operator-speciﬁed dig, and dump
points, passing through intermediate (via) points. The
rather rigid programming of control (dig, via, and
dump) points has a number of disadvantages. Firstly, as
the spoil pile grows the dump point must be raised. If
the automation system does not contain a model of spoil
growth, the operator has to make adjustments by re-
training the system, resulting in time losses. Secondly,
if the operator does not correctly identify a via point
at a critical area, such as the top of the high wall, the
swing automation system will not know the high-wall
is there and may attempt to swing the bucket through it.
Augmenting the automation system with a digital ter-
rain mapping capability provides a common solution to
these problems.
One implementation of a digital terrain mapping so-
lution for draglines is described in [59.58]. Maps were
created using data from an real-time kinematic (RTK)
GNSS system and a two-dimensional (2-D) laser scan-
ner. The laser scanner was mounted at boom tip in such
a way that the scanning plane intersected the ground un-
derneath the boom, and tilted by about 7 ı with respect
to the vertical. Tilting the laser minimizes the likeli-
hood of the bucket and ropes blocking the laser’s view.
The terrain is scanned as the dragline swings during
the normal operation cycle, a typical map is shown in
Fig. 59.10.

Part F | 59.2
1560
Part F
Robots at Work
Fig. 59.10 Image of a digital terrain map created from
a long range laser scanner installed at the tip of a boom
dragline (courtesy of CSIRO, 2005)
The implementation of a digital terrain mapping
function in dragline automation systems also enables
the measurement of dragline productivity in real time.
Commercial dragline monitoring systems can only
measure the approximate weight of each bucket, and
the approximate disengage and dump points. They can-
not provide indications of where the where the spoil
is located in relation to the dragline, of the actual vol-
ume of overburden moved, or how much re-handle took
place [59.58].
59.2.9 Machine Positioning
and Terrain Mapping
The task of establishing and maintaining the vehicle
positioning (i. e., position and orientation) relative to
an external frame of reference is a fundamental prob-
lem in autonomous vehicle navigation and control, and
this hold true for mining applications. High-accuracy
positioning technology is a dynamic area of research
and development, spurred on by the advances in satel-
lite positioning as well as by the current challenges
for the technology in mining systems, especially in
surface mining operations. The following initiatives
are underway to improve the availability and robust-
ness of current technologies, which have and will
further enable the application of robotics in surface
mining:

Public
GNSS
systems
(e.g.,
GPS
and
GLS
(global navigation satellite system))

Augmented public GNSS systems (e.g., GPS with
WAAS (wide area augmentation system))

Locally augmented GNSS systems (e.g., DGPS
(differential global positioning system) or RTK
GPS)

Pseudolite augmented GNSS systems (i. e., through
the installation of Earth-based transceivers)

Closed systems (i. e., wholly proprietary systems
relying on a constellation of locally installed Earth-
based pseudolites).
For example, in the mining domain, Leica Geosys-
tems offers the Jigsaw Positioning System (JPS),
a product that offers a signiﬁcant breakthrough in ad-
dressing the major shortcomings of GNSS [59.59].
Based on a technology developed by the Locata Cor-
poration [59.60], JPS is a ground-based network for
positioning that in principle mirrors the functionality of
GNSS. It circumvents the fallacies of GNSS by using
a terrestrial network of transmitters that can be placed
in optimal locations with respect to the mobiles being
tracked.
Different from pseudolites, an example of tech-
nology for positioning in GNSS-denied environments
is CSIRO’s wireless ad-hoc system for positioning
(WASP) wireless tracking technology. The system can
be conﬁgured as a mesh network and offers a unique
combination of high accuracy, high resistance to mul-
tipath interference, low-cost hardware, and ability to
be rapidly deployed [59.61]. The accuracy of WASP
depends upon the radio propagation environment, and
is typically better than 0:25 m under line-of-sight con-
ditions, even in the presence of substantial multipath
interference. The maximum range over which WASP
nodes can measure range and communicate is typically
over 400 m, and can exceed 1 km. As WASP can form
a mesh network, the overall network size is not limited.
The maximum location update rate is 200 Hz; however,
there is a tradeoff between the number of nodes and up-
date rate, and a typical update rate is 110 Hz.
Terrain Mapping and Surveying
The penetration of robotic and autonomous systems
in mining, coupled with new computer aided tools for
mine modeling and reconciliation, requires more accu-
rate and timely information about the current state of
the mine, and at higher spatial and temporal resolutions.
In the traditional surveying framework, one obvious so-
lution is to increase the number of surveys (reduce the
time gap between successive surveys) and the density
of survey points, while reducing the costs per survey.
To address this, a number of vehicle-based scanning
systems have been recently introduced to the market.
The mode of operation ranges from stop-and-go-type
systems (such as the Maptek I-Site), to continuous scan-
ning mobile systems, such as those offered by Riegl
(VMX 250), Topcon (IP-S2), and Trimble (MX-8). In
general, these systems integrate high-end LIDAR (light
detection and ranging) with GNSS-aided INS (inertial

Robotics in Mining
59.2 Surface Mining
1561
Part F | 59.2
Fig. 59.11 A 3-D map of a surface mine created from a mo-
bile mapping system installed on a four wheel drive (4WD)
vehicle (courtesy of CSIRO, 2012)
navigation system) and carry a signiﬁcant price tag,
which can limit deployment to a single dedicated sur-
vey vehicle.
On the other hand, consider the application of si-
multaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) in min-
ing. SLAM is a mature area in mobile robotics and
efforts are underway to transfer the technology to min-
ing. Data-fusion techniques used in SLAM make it
possible to use lower cost mapping sensors, which in
turn enables mining companies to deploy the equipment
on a multitude of utility vehicles and/or heavy-duty
mining equipment (Fig. 59.11). As a result, the vast
majority of survey work can be performed during the
normal operation of the equipment in pits, on haul
roads, or other site areas, without directly exposing
surveying personnel to the perils of conducting survey
work in high-risk areas.
59.2.10 Mine Safety
The increase in demand for resources has posed new
challenges to increase productivity, while at the same
Fig. 59.12 Complexity of mining equipment interactions
affected by adverse environmental conditions (courtesy of
CSIRO, 2012)
time continually improving the standard of safety.
Robotics is beginning to play a role in this. There are
inherent risks associated with manually operating ve-
hicles in mining environments. Operators work long
shifts and the view from the driver’s cabin can be very
restricted. Furthermore, vehicle interactions are inher-
ently difﬁcult due to the size of machines, and can be
further complicated by environmental conditions such
as dust, fog, and snow (Fig. 59.12).
Each year there are hundreds of mine haulage ac-
cidents that result in signiﬁcant numbers of injuries,
even deaths, and large ﬁnancial costs due to machine
downtime and repair of equipment. According to the
United States Mine Safety and Health Administration
(MSHA) [59.62], from 2002 to 2008 the United States
coal industry alone averaged 1206 accidents per year
involving mobile equipment.
During the past few years, a number of approaches
have been introduced to assist operators in becom-
ing more aware of safety risks in the local environ-
ment. These technologies and methods include prox-
imity awareness technology (PAT), proximity detection
technology (PDT) and collision avoidance technology
(CAT). It is important to note that, in surface mining,
these existing technologies do not perform any control
action. They merely provide information to the driver,
who remains in total control of the vehicle.
Detection of Threats
In general, most safety incidents are from vehicle in-
teractions with other vehicles, ﬁxed infrastructure, or
personnel. A large proportion of these incidents happen
at low speed. This is most likely to occur on vehi-
cle startup, or at the loading areas with interactions
between trucks, shovels, loaders, and other ancillary
equipment. These accidents are usually of low impact
but can cause serious damage to equipment and signiﬁ-
cant loss of production.
The fundamental approach to reducing the likeli-
hood of low-speed incidents is to provide the operator
of large vehicles with aids to see into blind areas
such at side or back of the vehicle. These aids are
normally based on standard video or infrared cam-
eras. The next level of risk reduction is achieved by
incorporating automatic detection of resources and peo-
ple in close proximity by utilizing range and bear-
ing sensors. Radar is a preferred sensor modality
for bad environmental conditions. Wide beam radars
are very common but they are prone to false alarm.
New recent developments mitigate this problem by us-
ing electronic-mechanical scanning narrow beam radar
technology [59.63, 64].
High-speed incidents occur less frequently than at
low speed, but often result in serious injuries and fatal-

Part F | 59.3
1562
Part F
Robots at Work
HV ≈ 68 m RIGHT
M P S
GPS
Large Intersection
Fig. 59.13 Graphical representation of the state of the
world close to the vehicle, including other vehicles in prox-
imity, maximum risk, most likely paths, and risk areas
(context) (courtesy of Eduardo Nebot, 2011)
ities. The time available to stop the vehicle or perform
an evasive maneuver is reduced and consequently long-
range detection of threats is necessary in order to take
early preventive action.
This is addressed by incorporating vehicle-to-
vehicle (V2V) communication with all nearby vehicles
at sufﬁcient range to provide early warning of potential
threats. V2V networks can also form a mesh structure.
The fundamental advantage of this approach is that no
ﬁxed infrastructure is required, and communication be-
tween vehicles can be guaranteed anywhere in the site
when vehicles are in radio range.
Positioning, Context, and Road Maps
Positioning is one of the fundamental components of
a comprehensive safety system. The incorporation of
GNSS systems, integrated with velocity and inertial
observations, allows for the evaluation of reliable time-
to-collision (TTC), especially when combined with
haulage road maps information.
Determining the risk of a situation is entirely de-
pendent on the context of the situation. One important
situation context is the location, or more speciﬁcally
the type of area the vehicle is currently operating. The
expected behavior and driver intent [59.65, 66] varies
depending on whether they are driving on a road, park-
ing in a designated area, or dumping ore in a crusher.
Map information is required to allow the system to vary
the information provided to the operator depending on
the location. An example is shown in Fig. 59.13, where
the map allows the operator to become aware of the
risks, and complexity of the situation, independent of
the weather or geometry of the terrain.
Monitoring and Design
The ultimate goal of any safety system is to ﬁnd a com-
plete solution to the safety problem by introducing new
technology, methods, and algorithms. It is very unlikely
that this can be achieved with a single technology alone,
perhaps with the exception of a fully autonomous sys-
tem implementation. An active area of research and
development aims to use both reactive and proactive
approaches to solve the safety problem. At the reac-
tive level, technology is used to assist the operator in
recognizing and avoiding the safety risks. At the proac-
tive level, managers are provided with tools to monitor,
analyze, design, and improve the safety of the mining
operation. This new comprehensive approach to safety
has the potential to eliminate all accidents in the mine
by integrating technology, procedures and intelligent al-
gorithms to make the mine safer and more productive.
59.3 Underground Mining
The especially hazardous and generally unpleasant na-
ture of underground mining environments, operator
safety and fatigue, labor costs, and the repetitive nature
of the ubiquitous load-haul-dump cycle all motivate
autonomous and semi-autonomous and teleoperation-
based solutions for underground machines and pro-
cesses.
59.3.1 Telerobotic Operations
In mining, remote control typically refers to the control
of a machine where the operator has a direct line-of-
sight view of the machine. Remote control is normally
used only for excavation (or mucking), not for driving
(or tramming) of loaders, for instance. Remote control
systems are widely used, for example, when loaders
must access underground drawpoints where there is
a risk of falling ground.
By remotely operating equipment or through the
partially autonomous operation of equipment, for ex-
ample, it stands to reason that the exposure of personnel
to unsafe circumstances might be signiﬁcantly reduced.
This was argued to be true at Inco Ltd. during the
1990s [59.67].
Telerobotic systems are those in which a human re-
mains part of the control loop, although at a distance
and not generally within direct view of the system be-
ing controlled. Many mining companies and equipment

Robotics in Mining
59.3 Underground Mining
1563
Part F | 59.3
manufacturers are now ﬁnding beneﬁt in the application
of telerobotics, particularly to underground equipment
such as LHD machines (Fig. 59.1b) and drills [59.67–
69]. This is normally done by the real-time transmission
of video and control signals to and from a remote con-
trol room; Figure 59.14, which shows a commercial
teleoperation station.
However, teleoperated equipment may not be as
productive as manually operated equipment, for ex-
ample, due to visibility and issues related to reduced
operator feedback. Recently, some researchers have
proposed the development of semi-autonomous tele-
operation systems, whereby the operator’s actions are
ﬁltered by a machine control system that regulates op-
erator commands with some degree of partial or local
autonomy [59.70].
59.3.2 Autonomous Tramming
Autonomous tramming refers to automating the driv-
ing task of underground mining vehicles, which is
often a repetitive activity. Most robotic tramming sys-
tems have been developed for LHD machines, such as
the one shown in Fig. 59.1b, although some suppliers
also have systems available for their underground haul
trucks.
Several challenges exist that make the autonomous
tramming problem difﬁcult. For example, the large in-
ertia of these vehicles and their hydraulically actuated,
center-articulated steering mechanisms make them dif-
ﬁcult to control at high speeds. Another is the problem
of precise and real-time underground localization in the
absence of global infrastructure (most notably, GNSS
available on the surface).
Underground Navigation
Early autonomous tramming systems worked by out-
ﬁtting the mine with signal-emitting cables [59.71],
Fig. 59.14 Teleoperator’s station for control of under-
ground robotic vehicles at the Kemi mine, Finland (cour-
tesy of Atlas Copco, 2009)
reﬂective strips [59.72], light-emitting ropes [59.73],
or reﬂective tape [59.74, 75]. Other systems required
beacons, placed at strategic locations throughout the
mine, which allowed the vehicle to estimate its posi-
tion by measuring angles to the beacons and comparing
the measured angles to those expected from a map of
known beacon locations [59.76].
One drawback to these early systems is the time-
consuming task of installing, localizing, and maintain-
ing the necessary infrastructure, particularly as the mine
advances. To the best of our knowledge, none of these
systems ever saw widespread use in industry. The state
of the art in underground autonomous vehicle systems
is infrastructureless.
One of the ﬁrst infrastructureless technologies was
one initially developed by an Inco Ltd. spin off. The
patent [59.77] describes the use of a map consisting
of a set of interlinking nodes intended to represent the
topology of the underground passageway environment.
The nodes themselves are located at points of interest,
such as at intersections, dead ends, etc. Thus, a topo-
logical map was used for navigation, which relied on an
algorithm capable of classifying all of the possible tun-
nel geometries encountered in the mine. Steering the
vehicle was then done by a lower-level reactive algo-
rithm, which tried to keep the machine near the tunnel
center. A range-sensing device was used to sense the
distance to walls.
This topological and reactive approach to under-
ground navigation and control was tried again af-
ter [59.77]; see also [59.78–81]. Recently, these meth-
ods have also been combined with radio frequency
identiﬁcation (RFID) tags to provide a global refer-
ence [59.82]. This general approach is what formed
the basis for one of the ﬁrst truly commercial au-
tonomous LHD systems, which is now offer as a prod-
uct by Caterpillar Inc. (see the following). However,
the main drawback to this technology is that it re-
lies on classifying tunnel and intersection topology.
As roboticists know, misclassiﬁcations can happen in
practice.
Inspired by advances in mobile robotics research,
some considered the application of alternative map-
based localization algorithms – the idea being to match
sensor measurements to a map rather than by classify-
ing tunnel topology [59.83, 84]. In most cases, a pla-
nar poly-line representation of the mine was used to
help the vehicle navigate. This is the approach taken
by Sandvik AB in their commercial offering. More
recently, Atlas Copco Rock Drills AB entered the un-
derground automation game by applying an approach
similar in philosophy, which generates sequences of
occupancy grid maps and subsequently uses these to es-
timate the vehicle’s position in real time by way of an

Part F | 59.3
1564
Part F
Robots at Work
unscented Kalman ﬁlter (UKF)-based algorithm [59.85,
86].
Vehicle Control
A machine control system capable of performing at or
better than a human operator is necessary in order for
robotic tramming systems to compete in industry with
manual operation. Many researchers have proposed ar-
ticulated vehicle steering controllers based solely on ve-
hicle kinematics [59.87–90], while few have considered
dynamics [59.91]. Others have contended that wheel
slip is signiﬁcant and should be explicitly accounted
for [59.92]. The paper [59.86] describes a control ar-
chitecture and implementation that permits high-speed
tramming by handling hydraulic vehicle steering and
driveline dynamics by explicitly forcing a bandwidth
separation between low-level machine/actuator dynam-
ics and the path-tracking control problem, which is
solved at the kinematic level.
Commercial Products
Although product descriptions are not the primary focus
of this chapter, it is worth brieﬂy mentioning that there
are (at the time of writing) three main commercially
available underground vehicle automation products:
Caterpillar MineStar system for underground [59.93],
Sandvik AutoMine [59.94], and the Atlas Copco ST14
ARV [59.85] (
VIDEO 142 ).
Mobile equipment vendors, not third-party suppli-
ers, sell all three. All three systems are infrastructure
free. They all operate by scanning the vehicle’s local
environment with a 2-D SICK laser rangeﬁnder and
combining this data with wheel encoder information.
All three systems operate in conjunction with a high-
Fig. 59.15 Scooptram (or LHD) components for robotic
tramming, including SICK scanning laser rangeﬁnders
(front and rear), articulation angle encoder, drive shaft en-
coder, onboard cameras, and computing subsystems (cour-
tesy of Atlas Copco, 2009)
speed wireless network. What is more also all perform
autonomous dumping. A schematic of the Atlas Copco
product is shown in Fig. 59.15, highlighting the sensor
and control components used for robotic tramming.
59.3.3 Robotic Loading
Despite a signiﬁcant amount of research effort in the
ﬁeld of robotic excavation, none has yet resulted in the
widespread development or adoption of autonomous or
semi-autonomous excavation technologies in the min-
ing industry. Although this section focuses on loading
from an underground mining perspective, robotic load-
ing is also applicable to surface mining operations
(Sect. 59.2.3).
Robotic excavation is especially challenging be-
cause of the dynamic and unpredictable nature of the
bucket-rock interactions. Also, a dig controller must
manage not only the motion of the excavation arms
(e.g., boom and bucket links), but also the penetra-
tion rate as determined by the motion of the mobile
platform. As a result, performance is highly inﬂuenced
by the conditions of interaction between the machine
and its environment. For example, the forces that act
on a bucket as it is actuated to penetrate a rock pile
may vary signiﬁcantly depending upon the properties
of the media (e.g., density and hardness), the rock
pile geometry, and the distribution of particle sizes and
shapes [59.95, p. 562].
It is important to distinguish between excava-
tion in homogeneous materials, such as soil, sand,
or regolith, and the challenge of excavating frag-
mented rock as in mining, which usually has a sig-
niﬁcant distribution of particle sizes. Fragmented rock
may consist of both ﬁnes (i. e., very small parti-
Fig. 59.16 EJC 9T LHD machine conducting robotic ex-
cavation experiments in fragmented rock at the engineer-
ing facilities of Sandvik Mining and Construction Canada,
Burlington, Ontario (courtesy of Joshua Marshall, 2000)

Robotics in Mining
59.3 Underground Mining
1565
Part F | 59.3
cles), oversize (i. e., particles too large for the exca-
vation tool), and a range of sizes in between. Fig-
ure 59.16 shows an EJC 9T LHD machine con-
ducting robotic digging experiments in fragmented
rock.
The robotic loading problem can be split into two
fundamental tasks [59.96]:
1. Dig planning
2. Dig execution and control.
Dig planning constitutes the problem of deciding
where and what to dig, possibly considering the geome-
try of the rock pile, the distribution of particles, and the
physical characteristics of the loader and bucket. Dig
control refers to algorithms for modifying plans based
on the nature of the media encountered, so as to efﬁ-
ciently ﬁll the loader’s bucket. This task of the problem
is particularly challenging in fragmented rock.
Dig Planning
Machine vision has been proposed as an enabling tech-
nology for dig planning. The paper [59.97] describes
a laboratory-scale excavation system that utilized cam-
era data for control and navigation. In [59.98], a scale-
model system was built to mimic the motions of an
LHD and different loading strategies were developed
that depend on sensed information about the rock pile.
Similar work, described in [59.99], employed a vision
system to obtain images of the rock pile. In their ap-
proach, these images were used to plan the excavation
task based on an estimated contour of the rock pile. In
more recent work, the authors of [59.100] conducted
an experimental study of two novel approaches for
selecting an attack pose from 3-D data, with the objec-
tive of eventually using this for the robotic loading of
sand.
Dig Execution and Control
The dig execution and control tasks have been tack-
led by several robotics researchers during the past two
decades. Much of this work has targeted surface mining
applications (Sect 59.2.3), although some concepts are
transferrable to underground. Targeting underground,
in [59.101] it was suggested that the trajectory of an ex-
cavator’s bucket through the rock pile should not have
priority in a devised control scheme, since the objective
is to effectively ﬁll the bucket, not to follow a prede-
termined path. This was explored further in [59.46, 95],
which proposed an algorithm for robotic digging that
would respond to bucket–rock interaction forces sensed
as changing pressures the excavators bucket cylinder by
commanding a change in the cylinders retraction ve-
locity, rather than its position. This strategy was based
on full-scale experiments with an LHD. Together with
Atlas Copco AB, researchers at Queen’s University
in Kingston, Canada have recently demonstrated this
admittance-based robotic loading strategy by way of
full-scale experiments on a modiﬁed Kubota loader (on
surface) and an ST14 LHD (underground), as shown in
VIDEO 718 .
59.3.4 Longwall Automation
Longwall mining is one of the main extraction methods
for underground coal mining. This method is highly ef-
ﬁcient in cases where thick seam reserves are present,
with high-quality coal at shallow depth and benign
geological conditions [59.102]. In the longwall pro-
cess, a shearer – a machine with large rotating cutting
drums – is driven back and forth across the seam, with
each pass taking a massive slice of coal.
Figure 59.17 shows a schematic representation of
a longwall mining equipment installation. Two long,
horizontal and permanent tunnels known as gate roads
are cut into a coal seam to form the main boundaries for
a large rectangular block of coal, known as a longwall
panel. The shearer travels in this panel along the face
on a structure also housing an armored (or articulated)
face conveyor (AFC) that carries the coal to one end
of the face. The coal is then removed via other convey-
ing systems to the surface. The roof is supported over
this operation by a number of adjacent powered roof
supports (also known as shields or chocks) which are
each connected to the AFC. After the shearer passes,
the chocks release from the roof, advance under hy-
draulic power into the cavity created by the removal
of the coal, reposition the AFC, and re-support the
roof [59.2].
Fig. 59.17 Schematic of a longwall mining equipment in-
stallation (courtesy of CSIRO, 2008)

Part F | 59.3
1566
Part F
Robots at Work
A concerted effort to deliver automation solutions
for longwall mining saw the establishment of the Long-
wall Automation Steering Committee (LASC) in 2000,
comprising Australian Coal Association Research Pro-
gram (ACARP) industry representatives, equipment
manufacturers, research providers and mine safety au-
thorities. With funding from ACARP, CSIRO and the
Cooperative Research Centre for Mining Technology
and Equipment (CMTE), now CRC Mining, embarked
in a major project to deliver automation solutions for
coal cutting and loading, maintaining face geometry
and manipulating roof supports without human inter-
vention.
Three issues were identiﬁed as critical for longwall
automation [59.103]: Face alignment, horizon control,
and creep control. Until recently, efforts to develop au-
tomatic controllers for face alignment were hindered
by the lack of an automatic and reliable method for
measuring the actual geometric proﬁle of the long-
wall face. The solution provided in this project em-
ployed a high-end inertial navigation system to provide
accurate shearer position and attitude information in
real time. The system is shearer-mounted and is re-
ferred to as the Shearer Position Measurement System
(SPMS). One of the major outcomes of this project was
the development of open speciﬁcations for the SPMS,
and as a direct result, all the major longwall equip-
ment manufacturers now offer automatic face alignment
systems.
The second signiﬁcant technological challenge
tackled by LASC was achieving enhanced horizon
control (EHC). While face alignment occurs in the
horizontal plane, horizon control occurs in the verti-
cal plane, and is signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult. In order
to maximize the extraction of coal and minimize the
extraction of waste, the roof and ﬂoor cutting hori-
zons need to stay within the coal seam. The EHC
incorporates two independent horizon controllers: one
for the ﬂoor and one for the roof. The set points for
the two controllers are generated by an integrated cut
model, which sits at the core of the EHC. The cut
model incorporates real-time information from navi-
gation sensors, coal interface detectors, seam tracking
sensors, as well as off-line geological and geotechnical
information.
Finally, creep control refers to maintaining the lat-
eral position of the longwall equipment in the panel.
As the longwall mining system progresses, the assem-
bly of supports should not creep toward either of the
two gate roads. The LASC solution measures creep us-
ing laser range ﬁnders that scan in a horizontal plane
in the panel and roadway directions. The creep infor-
mation is provided to the longwall shearer automation
processing system and generates corrections in the face
proﬁle in the form of a lead to either of the gate
ends [59.103].
59.3.5 Robotic Explosives Loading
Many tasks in mining and construction require the driv-
ing of horizontal and inclined tunnels (or drifts) by
drilling and blasting for rock fragmentation. Currently,
drilling and blasting also remains the primary method
for recovering ore from blocks (or stopes) in under-
ground hard-rock mining. Blasting engineers design
a blast hole pattern that speciﬁes the size and location
of the holes in order to achieve the desired rock frag-
mentation and minimize the damage to the rock mass
left behind.
Blast hole charging is a two-step operation. In the
ﬁrst step, the operator places a primer assembly at the
end of a ﬂexible hose, inserts the hose into the blast
hole, and pushes the hose until the primer reaches the
end of the hole. A primer is a compact device contain-
ing high strength, sensitive explosives used to safely
initiate the main column in the blast hole at a controlled
time provided by the detonator. Initiation requires elec-
tric energy, usually delivered by detonating cords. The
hole pushing is mechanized. In step two, an explosive
emulsion is pumped into the hole through a hose, the
hose is retracted as the explosive gradually ﬁlls the hole,
leaving the trailing detonator wire. Once a ring of blast
holes is ﬁlled, the detonator wires are joined and the
rock is blasted.
A robotic explosive charging system (RECS) devel-
oped by the CSIRO [59.104] incorporates technologies
that make the operation of loading holes safer with
comparable or better productivity than otherwise pos-
sible. The system incorporates mixed teleoperation and
robotic capabilities that allow the operator to load the
entire pattern from the comfort and safety of the cab
of the loading truck. The prototype RECS was de-
veloped for a mechanical manipulator derived from
a Palﬁnger truck crane. The system is able to lo-
cate blast holes using the laser rangeﬁnder attached
to the arm end effector. An automatic arm pose con-
trol function is used to achieve a sweeping motion
of the arm, during which the laser rangeﬁnder col-
lects images of the tunnel. These images are sub-
sequently processed to extract blast hole locations,
and presented to the operator via a human–machine
interface.
Once the holes are identiﬁed in the scan, they are
matched with the holes present in the blast plan and
the operator is ready to proceed with the charging.
The robot arm is sequenced to pick up the primer
assembly from a magazine, and transfers it to the
hole. The primer ends up at a pre-set offset from the

Robotics in Mining
59.3 Underground Mining
1567
Part F | 59.3
hole collar. In teleoperation mode the operator uses
in-cab joysticks to insert the primer and the hose in
the hole. The video system provides the operator with
real-time video images of the relative positioning be-
tween the tip of the end effector and the blast hole
collar.
In the work of [59.104], hole identiﬁcation was car-
ried out for 89 and 102 mm blast holes. While the hole
diameter is used as a parameter in the identiﬁcation
algorithm, determining the hole length was not a re-
quirement (this is not to say that in-situ validation of
drilled versus planned is not important). During scan-
ning, the robotic arm moves the end effector back and
forth through the tunnel. The end effector is sequen-
tially rotated, such that the laser is capable of scanning
a full 360ı pattern in the tunnel. Successful hole de-
tection is inﬂuenced by the relative alignment between
the laser beam and the hole axis. The larger the mis-
alignment, the greater the chance of generating a false
negative. Figure 59.18 shows a typical 3-D proﬁle used
for hole identiﬁcation.
Visual servoing requires locating the tool in relation
to the target hole. Cameras mounted on the end effector
provide estimates of the location of blast holes with re-
spect to the end effector. The control methodology does
not require extensive knowledge of the manipulator
physical parameters, and uses a minimal set of tuning
parameters, to allow operators to make adjustments if
and when required. However, ﬁnding an adequate so-
lution raises a number of signiﬁcant challenges when
using a typical truck crane as a robotic arm.
0
12 m
10 m
0
Fig. 59.18 A 3-D tunnel proﬁle generated for identifying
blast holes in a tunnel (courtesy of CSIRO, 2006)
59.3.6 Underground Mapping, Surveying,
and Positioning
Mapping, surveying, and real-time equipment position-
ing are core services in many industries, and min-
ing is no exception. In surface mining, the advent of
the satellite-based GPS in the 1980s led to funda-
mental changes in the way everyday operations are
carried out [59.105], with new applications being de-
veloped even more recently (Sect. 59.2). Based on
GNSS, accurate site surveys, information systems, and
robotic tools that enhance safety, improve productivity,
and cost-saving maintenance operations, for example,
have become commonplace in surface mining [59.1,
106].
However, similar progress has been made more
slowly in underground mining because no directly com-
parable positioning technology currently exists for the
accurate and real-time localization of mobile equip-
ment in underground mining operations. This section
discusses some tools and techniques from the ﬁeld of
robotics that have found their way into mining for
such purposes as surveying, mapping, and equipment
localization.
Underground Mapping and Surveying
At present, manually generated survey maps in min-
ing are used for the design and construction of
structures, ventilation, power, drainage, haulage plan-
ning, and tracking of development and ore extraction
progress [59.107]. However, traditional surveying tech-
niques are slow and laborious, involving many man-
ual steps, infrastructure installation (e.g., retroreﬂective
markers), and repeated measurements to obtain the nec-
essary accuracy for the given application. Conventional
survey maps are invariably a coarse approximation
of the actual mine structure because, while individual
observations may be accurate, few measurements are
taken (i. e., poor resolution). Also, surveying is a reg-
ulated practice; thus the use of new techniques from
robotics requires that current standards be updated.
Several recent advances out of the robotic mapping
community show promise for applications in under-
ground mining, and we mention just a select few here
as examples. Authors from Carnegie Mellon University
(CMU) [59.108, 109] describe robotic systems devel-
oped for acquiring volumetric maps of underground
mine workings; speciﬁcally abandoned mines where
ground conditions may be hazardous. SLAM results,
based on data from 2-D scanning laser rangeﬁnders,
were reported from data obtained in two mines: a re-
search mine in Bruceton, PA, and an abandoned coal
mine in Burgettstown, PA.

Part F | 59.4
1568
Part F
Robots at Work
Fig. 59.19 3-D SLAM-generated map of a decline at the
Northparkes mine (after [59.112]); the gaps on the ﬂoor
and ceiling are due to the blindspot between two vertically
oriented SICK laser rangeﬁnders; electrical cables can be
seen along the left side wall (courtesy of So Jung Yun,
2012)
Some have developed techniques for robotic explo-
ration and topological mapping [59.110] by focusing on
the detection and matching of underground mine tunnel
intersections as a basis for the creation of topological
maps.
New
scan
registration
techniques,
such
as
3-D-NDT
(three-dimensional
normal
distributions
transform) [59.111], have also been conceived specif-
ically for underground mine mapping. Authors from
the AASS in Sweden compared their results with the
popular iterative closest point (ICP) algorithm on actual
mine data.
Recently, researchers at CSIRO [59.112] demon-
strated a 3-D SLAM solution, consisting of a spin-
ning 2-D scanning laser rangeﬁnder and industrial-grade
micro-electromechanical system (MEMS) inertial mea-
surement unit (IMU). The system was mounted on
a site vehicle at the Northparkes mine (Parkes, NSW)
that continuously acquired data at typical mine driv-
ing speeds. The deployed system mapped over 17 km of
mine tunnels in under two hours, resulting in a dense
and accurate geo-referenced 3-D surface model. Fig-
ure 59.19 shows an example of the generated surface
model.
Underground Positioning and Tracking
The satellite-based GPS uses radio frequency sig-
nals that cannot usefully penetrate signiﬁcant obstacles
(e.g., rock); see any reference on the fundamentals
of GPS [59.113, 114]. Although high-sensitivity re-
ceivers are being developed [59.114], these will al-
most certainly not function underground. For build-
ings, some have proposed the use of signal re-
peaters [59.115], but this is again not practical for
most underground mine environments. These chal-
lenges necessitate a different approach for underground
mines.
As a result, several alternatives for underground
mining have appeared in recent years, many of which
have limited functionality or are, as of yet, unproven.
A recent summary, found in [59.116], presents a survey
of the most commonly cited approaches:

Employing RFID tags for event-based tracking of
equipment and personnel [59.117].

Use of radio signals (e.g., installed Wi-Fi ac-
cess points) for signal strength-based position-
ing [59.118, 119], which is very difﬁcult in under-
ground mines due to severe multipath and shadow-
ing, as well as non-line-of-sigh propagation and the
need for too many devices in order to obtain GPS-
like accuracies.

Dead reckoning using inertial sensors (e.g., IMUs)
and odometry for only short-term machine tracking.

Rock-penetrating very low frequency electromag-
netic
signals,
generally
limited
to
near
sur-
face (< 200 m) [59.120] with questionable accu-
racy [59.121].
However, none of these options yet offer a solu-
tion comparable to that provided by GNSS on sur-
face. Another issue is that mining practitioners often
do not appreciate the technical limitations of these
approaches [59.116, 122]. As a result, some have re-
cently proposed the adaptation of map-based localiza-
tion techniques for underground mining equipment. For
example, [59.123] describes a method for large-scale
mapping that employs a combination of RFID tags (as
landmarks) and occupancy grid mapping speciﬁcally
designed to facilitate real-time underground vehicle lo-
calization.
59.4 Challenges and Industry Acceptance
Despite the latest uptake of robotics technologies in
mining, signiﬁcant challenges remain. Next, we brieﬂy
review the most signiﬁcant ones that are likely to affect
the diffusion rate of autonomous systems in mining.
59.4.1 Technological Challenges
One expression that describes the current situation of
robotics in mining is islands of automation. This re-

Robotics in Mining
59.5 Challenges, Outlook, and Conclusion
1569
Part F | 59.5
ﬂects the signiﬁcant integration issues that exist in re-
lation to fully autonomous and mixed autonomous-
manual/remote equipment. The root cause of the prob-
lem is a lack of standards to which the various equipment
manufacturers should align. Although steps are now be-
ing taken to develop these standards (Sect. 59.5.3), the
situation is likely to persist for a number of years. In
addition to the time it will take to develop the required
standards, there will be a signiﬁcant lag at the equipment
manufacturers’ end, associated with the rolling out of
new products that align with these new standards.
Other challenges to the implementation of robotics
technology in mining include:

Reliability, availability, and fail-safe operation with
graceful failure

Ability to sustain productivity at current or better
levels

Mining in extreme environments and difﬁculties in
developing the required supporting infrastructure

Current design methodologies for mines and mining
systems are not geared to support robotic systems

Deploying systems in the ﬁeld and the fact that ev-
ery mine is different

Provision of technical support, shortfall in skilled
labor, lack of adequate training

Poorly designed or challenging man–machine inter-
faces.
59.4.2 Socioeconomic Challenges
The resource industry has a conservative history, and
the implementation of new technology and processes
must overcome signiﬁcant inertia. In general, the at-
titude of people, from those at the working face to
senior managers and company executives, mirrors the
attitude of the workforce in the manufacturing in-
dustry in the early days of industrial robotics; i. e.,
skepticism about technology and fear of losing one’s
job. The generational change is likely to alleviate the
fear of technology, but robots will be regarded by
many in the workforce as a competitor for years to
come.
Some researchers in human factors also point
to the over-reliance on the technology by operators
as a possible outcome of spreading robotic systems
in the industry. As a common trend across sev-
eral domains, it was noted that automation and new
technologies can sometimes result in operators en-
gaging in more risky behaviours in automated sys-
tems [59.124].
Legal issues and insurance are two other factors that
could create signiﬁcant headwinds to the rapid prolif-
eration of autonomous systems in mining or in other
civilian activity for that matter. Actuarial analysis is
very hard to do for a green ﬁeld, such as commercial
autonomous operations.
59.5 Challenges, Outlook, and Conclusion
This section brieﬂy summarizes some of the primary
challenges for robotics in mining, as well as exam-
ines some emerging themes within the ﬁeld of min-
ing robotics, beginning with those on the Earth and
followed by a short discussion about planetary explo-
ration and extra-terrestrial mining, all of which will
rely heavily on robotic tools. The section ends with
a short conclusion about the future outlook for mining
robotics.
59.5.1 Technical Challenges
Despite the recent uptake of robotics technologies in
mining, signiﬁcant challenges remain. One expression
that could be used to describe the current status of
robotics in mining is islands of automation. This re-
ﬂects the signiﬁcant integration issues that exist in
relation to fully autonomous, as well as mixed au-
tonomous/manual/remote robotic equipment. One spe-
ciﬁc challenge, for example, is the lack of stan-
dards to which the various equipment manufacturers
and technology developers should align. Although,
steps are now being taken to develop these standards
(Sect. 59.5.3), it may take some time before equipment
manufacturers roll out commercial products that adhere
to these standards.
Some other key challenges for miming robotics in-
clude:

Reliability, availability, and fail-safe operation with
graceful and safe failure modes for very large equip-
ment and (often) electric or hydraulically actuated
equipment.

Ability to sustain productivity at current or better
levels when compared with current methods and
systems.

Mining in extreme and unstructured environments
(e.g., far north, very deep underground, in harsh
weather) and the difﬁculties in developing and sup-
porting the necessary infrastructure in these envi-
ronments.

Current mining methods and design methodolo-
gies need to evolve so as to inherently incorporate
robotic systems.

Part F | 59.5
1570
Part F
Robots at Work

Field robotics deployment challenges and the fact
that every mine is different.

Provision of technical support in remote areas,
shortages of skilled labor, and the need to re-train
existing personnel.

Developing effective man–machine interfaces.

Safely managing the colocation of robotic machines
and human workers.
59.5.2 Socio-Economic Challenges
For the most part, the resource industry has a con-
servative history and the implementation of new tech-
nologies and processes must often overcome signiﬁcant
resistance to change. In many cases, the attitudes of
people – from those at the working face to senior
managers and company executives – mirror the atti-
tudes of the workforce in the manufacturing industry
in the early days of industrial robotics; i. e., skepticism
about technology and fear of losing one’s job. How-
ever, generational changes are likely to alleviate these
challenges.
Some researchers in human factors engineering also
point to the risk of over-reliance on technology by oper-
ators as a possible negative outcome of the proliferation
of robotic systems. As a common trend across several
domains, it was noted that automation and new tech-
nologies can sometimes result in operators engaging in
more risky behaviours [59.124], which would not be
looked favorably upon in mining.
59.5.3 Emerging Frontiers
There are several emerging frontiers for mining
robotics, from the creation of standards to robots
that improve safety in mining, and future-looking
robots for mining asteroids and other extra-terrestrial
bodies.
Emerging Standards for Mining Robotics
and Automation
Due to the increasing prevalence of automation in
mining, there is an immediate need to formulate stan-
dards for robotic equipment such that data may be
exchanged freely among systems developed by differ-
ent manufacturers. Currently, a tension exists between
manufacturers, for whom it may seem the commer-
cial imperative to design closed vertically integrated
systems, and the mine operators, who would like any
system they purchase to interoperate with all existing
items of equipment.
There currently exists a data interchange standard
known as the International Rock Excavation Data Ex-
change Standard (IREDES) [59.125]. This standard
uses the extensible markup language (XML) to deﬁne
a three-level architecture:
1. Administration level that deﬁnes reusable data ob-
jects such as coordinate systems
2. Application proﬁle level that covers general infor-
mation for one application purpose
3. Equipment proﬁle level that has detailed equipment
speciﬁc information.
The IREDES standard currently covers drill rigs and
LHD machines, with many prospective application pro-
ﬁles under active development.
There is also an ISO (International Organization for
Standardization) standard called Earth-moving machin-
ery – Autonomous machine safety (ISO 17757) [59.126]
currently under active development. However, at the
time of writing, there is no public information regarding
this standard apart from its December 2012 approval.
The standard will likely cover the risks inherent in large
equipment automation, and common ways that those
risks can be mitigated through design and/or procedure.
It is still early days for the standardization of au-
tonomous mining machines, and current efforts are far
from complete. However, it is a worthy goal, and one
which will only increase in importance as more mining
equipment is automated.
Mine Rescue Robots
Mining is inherently risky. Although infrequent today,
many fatalities have occurred in mining and the ne-
cessity of a mine rescue strategy at every operation –
particularly in underground mining – is clear. So why
not use robots to assist with mine rescue?
Although not mainstream, mine rescue robots have
been under development at a few research institutions,
including at Sandia National Laboratories where re-
searchers have focused on coal mines under funding
from the United States National Institute for Occupa-
tional Safety and Health (NIOSH) [59.127]. In coal
mining, the risk of explosions is high and poisonous
gases may be present, particularly after a disaster. Their
tracked Gemini Scout mine rescue robot is approxi-
mately 1:2 m long, equipped with an infrared camera
(to see through smoke and dust) and gas sensors that
allow rescuers to assess the situation before attempting
a rescue.
More about mine rescue robots can be found
in [59.128], including reference to the ﬁrst known mine
rescue robot prototype at the CSIRO, called Num-
bat [59.129].
Robotic Undersea Mining
There is a vast body of robotics research related to un-
dersea applications and remotely operated underwater

Robotics in Mining
59.5 Challenges, Outlook, and Conclusion
1571
Part F | 59.5
vehicles (ROVs) (Chap. 51 of this book is dedicated
to this topic). However, much of this work does not
yet directly target undersea mining. Nevertheless, ad-
vances in robotics – speciﬁcally computer-based map-
ping, multivehicle coordination, as well as telerobotic
drilling and excavation – are likely to make ocean ﬂoor
mining a reality in the very near future.
Although the pursuit of marine mining dates back
to the 1870s, large-scale operations have not yet been
realized at least in part due to technological barri-
ers [59.130]. Today, several venture mining compa-
nies, including most notably Vancouver-based Nautilus
Minerals Inc. (TSE:NUS), are targeting polymetallic
seaﬂoor massive sulphide deposits. However, these re-
sources are only accessible by using ROVs equipped
with telerobotic seaﬂoor production tools to disaggre-
gate and collect the rock from the seaﬂoor [59.131].
Thus, robotics is poised to play a signiﬁcant role in un-
dersea mining.
Planetary Exploration and Mining
Perhaps the next great frontier for mining is that of plan-
etary exploration and resource extraction, whether for
in-situ resource utilization (e.g., toward development of
the Moon) or for return to the Earth (e.g., mining of as-
teroids for valuable materials).
Several enabling technologies that support au-
tonomous off-world robotic excavation for large-scale
habitat construction and resource extraction have al-
ready been developed. For example, researchers from
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA) and CSIRO demonstrated remote excavation
of a trench as an example of site preparation and re-
golith mining [59.132]. This remote excavation system
consisted of a 1=7-th scale dragline excavator located
at a CSIRO test facility in Australia, a control inter-
face located at a NASA facility in the Unites States,
and a communication network between the two. The
tested use case scenario involved remote initiation of
terrain mapping, and a click-to-dig user interface that
allowed the speciﬁcation of material transfer in terms
of dig and dump points on the acquired terrain map.
The terrain map was used to generate a collision-free
terrain-skimming path from dig to dump. The onboard
path planner generated a bucket trajectory that included
engaging the dig face (bank), ﬁlling the bucket and dis-
engaging the bank. Tool force sensing was used as an
input to the planner in order to constrain the dig speed
and dig trajectory to remain within the operational lim-
its of the machine and ensure adequate material ﬂow
into the bucket. The system successfully completed 50
consecutive cycles without any operator intervention.
The average cycle time was approximately 63 s with the
entire mission taking 52 min to complete.
There is also a thriving space exploration commu-
nity, particularly within the mobile robotics community,
and there is a complete chapter of this book dedi-
cated to space robotics, Chap. 55. However, it is worth
mentioning here that mining and planetary resource
extraction have much in common and there is increas-
ing cooperation between planetary geologists, mining
equipment suppliers, and roboticists in problems re-
lated to Lunar and Mars exploration (e.g., see [59.4, 5,
133] and references therein for examples). Moreover,
new commercial ventures, such as the widely publi-
cized Planetary Resources, Inc., have been established
with the aim of pursuing commercial extra-terrestrial
resource discovery and utilization.
59.5.4 Conclusion
The desire to improve productivity, safety, and lower
the costs of mining is a key motivator for the use of
robotics in the mining industry. As highlighted in this
chapter, several robotics-related advances have been
made in recent history, for both surface and under-
ground mining environments and, after a long courting
period with robotics and automation, many mining
companies are embracing robotics as a credible and
practical tool. Moreover, with the emergence of ﬁeld
robotics as an increasingly popular subﬁeld within the
robotics research community, as well as the recent for-
mation of networks, centers, and institutes that focus
speciﬁcally on ﬁeld robotics (some on mining), the
domain of mining robotics appears poised to undergo
accelerated growth on the Earth, undersea, and beyond.
Video-References
VIDEO 142
Autonomous tramming
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/59/videodetails/142
VIDEO 145
Autonomous haulage system
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/59/videodetails/145
VIDEO 718
Autonomous loading of fragmented rock
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/59/videodetails/718

Part F | 59
1572
Part F
Robots at Work
References
59.1
M. Scoble, L.K. Daneshmend: Mine of the year
2020: Technology and human resources, CIM Bull.
91(1023), 51–60 (1998)
59.2
P. Corke, J. Roberts, J. Cunningham, D. Hains-
worth: Mining robotics. In: Springer Handbook of
Robotics, ed. by B. Siciliano, O. Khatib (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 2008) pp. 1127–1150, Chap. 49
59.3
H.L. Hartman, J.M. Mutmansky: Introductory
Mining Engineering, 2nd edn. (Wiley, Hoboken
2002)
59.4
G.R. Osinski, T.D. Barfoot, N. Ghafoor, M. Izawa,
N. Banerjee, P. Jasiobedzki, J. Tripp, R. Richards,
S. Auclair, H. Sapers, L. Thomson, R. Flemming:
Lidar and the mobile Scene Modeler (mSM) as
scientific tools for planetary exploration, Planet.
Space Sci. 58(4), 691–700 (2010)
59.5
Y. Bar-Cohen, K. Zacny: Drilling in Extreme
Environments: Penetration
and Sampling on
Earth and other Planets (Wiley-VCH, Weinheim
2009)
59.6
Clearpath Robotics: AMEC. Puts safety first and
uses
advanced
robotic
system
for
mapping
potash
tailings,
http://clearpath.wpengine.
netdna-cdn.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/
AMEC_SuccessStory_2013e.pdf (2013)
59.7
P. Lever: Automation and robotics. In: SME Mining
Engineering Handbook, ed. by P. Darling (SME,
Enlgewood 2011) pp. 805–824, Chap. 9.8
59.8
D. Zlotnikov: Mining in the extreme, CIM Mag. 7(5),
50–56 (2012)
59.9
P. Cross: Recent Trends in Output and Employ-
ment, Res. Pap. 13-604-MIE No. 054 (Statistics
Canada, Ottawa 2007)
59.10
Australian Bureau of Statistics: 5260.0.55.002 –
Experimental Estimates of Industry Multifac-
tor Productivity, 2010-11,
http://www.abs.gov.
au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/DetailsPage/5260.0.55.
0022010-11 (2011)
59.11
N.
Vagenas,
N.
Runciman,
S.R.
Clément:
A methodology for maintenance analysis of
mining equipment, Int. J. Min. Reclam. Environ.
11, 33–40 (1997)
59.12
A. Gustafson, H. Schunnesson, D. Galar, U. Ku-
mar: Production and maintenance performance
analysis: Manual Production maintenance per-
formance analytis: Manual versus semi-auto-
matic LHDs, J. Qual. Maint. Eng. 19(1), 74–88 (2013)
59.13
J. McGagh: The mine of the future: Rio Tinto’s
innovation
pathway, http://www.riotinto.com/
media/18435_presentations_22363.asp
(2012),
Presentation given at MINExpo 2012, Las Vegas
59.14
J.A. Aldinger, C.M. Keran: A Review of Accidents
During Surface Mine Mobile Equipment Opera-
tions, Proc. 25th Annu. Inst. Min. Health Saf. Res.
(1994) pp. 99–108
59.15
H.
Durrant-Whyte,
D.
Pagac,
B.
Rogers,
M.
Stevens,
G.
Nelmes:
Field
and
service
applications-an
autonomous
straddle
carrier
for movement of shipping containers-from re-
search to operational autonomous systems, IEEE
Robotics Autom. Mag. 14(3), 14–23 (2007)
59.16
J. Chadwick: Autonomous mine truck, Min. Mag.
175(5), 287–288 (1996)
59.17
Pav Jordan: Chile’s new Gaby copper mine steps
into
the
future
(Reuters),
http://uk.reuters.
com/article/2008/05/21/chile-codelco-gaby-
idUKN2133325020080521 (2008)
59.18
Komatsu: Autonomous haulage system – Ko-
matsu’s pioneering technology deployed at Rio
Tinto mine in Australia, http://www.komatsu.
com/ce/currenttopics/v09212/index.html (2008)
59.19
Caterpillar: Autonomous haulage improves mine
site safety, http://www.catminestarsystem.com/
articles/autonomous-haulage-improves-mine-
site-safety (2013)
59.20
Hitachi Construction Machinery: Hitachi chooses
South Burnett for three-year automated mine-
truck
trial,
http://www.stanwell.com/Files/
Hitachi_automated_truck_trial.PDF (2013)
59.21
J. Barnes, C. Rizos, J. Wang, D. Small, G. Voigt,
N. Gambale: Locata: A new positioning technol-
ogy for high precision indoor and outdoor po-
sitioning, Proc. 2003 Int. Symp. GPS/GNSS (2003)
pp. 9–18
59.22
G.S. Bastos, L.E. Souza, F.T. Ramos, C.H.C. Ribeiro:
A single-dependent agent approach for stochas-
tic time-dependent truck dispatching in open-
pit mining, IEEE 14th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst.
(ITSC) (2011) pp. 1057–1062
59.23
Modular
Mining:
DISPATCH,
http://
modularmining.com/product/dispatch/ (2013)
59.24
Komatsu:
Modular
mining
systems
unveils
the latest in mining technology, http://www.
komatsu.com/ce/support/v08412/index.html
(2008)
59.25
Caterpillar: Track, manage and assign all types
of equipment, across one site or many, https://
mining.cat.com/fleet (2013)
59.26
Wenco: Wenco fleet management systems, http://
www.wencomine.com/products/single-gallery/
9342146 (2013)
59.27
Leica
Geosystems:
JOptimiser,
http://mining.
leica-geosystems.com/products/Jsoftware/
Joptimizer/ (2013)
59.28
Devex: SMARTMINE, http://www.smartmine.com.
br/eng/smartmine (2012)
59.29
S. Alarie, M. Gamache: Overview of solution
strategies used in truck dispatching systems for
open pit mines, Int. J. Surf. Min. Reclam. Envi-
ron. 16(1), 59–76 (2002)
59.30
A. Arelovich, F. Masson, O. Agamennoni, S. Wor-
rall, E. Nebot: Heuristic rule for truck dispatching
in open-pit mines with local information-based
decisions, Proc. 13th IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Transp.
Syst. (ITSC) (2010) pp. 1408–1414
59.31
S.G. Ercelebi, A. Bascetin: Optimization of shovel-
truck system for surface mining, J. S. Afr. Inst. Min.
Metall. Optim. 109, 433–439 (2009)
59.32
R.F. Subtil, D.M. Silva, J.C. Alves: A Practical Ap-
proach to Truck Dispatch for Open Pit Mines, Proc.

Robotics in Mining
References
1573
Part F | 59
2011 APCOM Symp. (2011) pp. 765–777
59.33
C.H. Ta, J.V. Kresta, J.F. Forbes, H.J. Marquez: A
stochastic optimization approach to mine truck
allocation, Int. J. Surf. Min. Reclam. Environ.
19(3), 162–175 (2005)
59.34
S.-K. Kim, J.S. Russell: Framework for an intel-
ligent earthwork system. Part I, System architec-
ture, Autom. Constr. 12(1), 1–13 (2003)
59.35
S. Singh: The state of the art in automation of
earthmoving, ASCE J. Aerosp. Eng. 10(4), 179–188
(1997)
59.36
S. Singh: State of the art in automation of earth-
moving, Proc. Workshop Adv. Geomechatronics
(2002)
59.37
M. Dunbabin, P. Corke: Autonomous excavation
using a rope shovel, J. Field Robotics 23, 379–394
(2006)
59.38
P.J.A. Lever, F.-Y. Wang: Intelligent excavator con-
trol system for lunar mining system, J. Aerosp.
Eng. 8(1), 16–24 (1995)
59.39
X. Shi, P.J.A. Lever, F.-Y. Wang: Experimental
robotic excavation with fuzzy logic and neural
networks, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (1996) pp. 957–962
59.40
W.
Richardson-Little,
C.J.
Damaren:
Position
accommodation
and
compliance
control
for
robotic excavation, Proc. IEEE Conf. Control Appl.
(2005)
59.41
L.E. Bernold: Motion and Path Control for Robotic
Excavation, J. Aerosp. Eng. 6(1), 1–18 (1993)
59.42
Q. Ha, M. Santos, Q. Nguyen, D. Rye, H. Durrant-
Whyte: Robotic excavation in construction au-
tomation, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 9(1), 20–28
(2007)
59.43
S. Tafazoli, S.E. Salcudean, K. Hashtudi-Zaad,
P.D. Lawrence: Impedance control of a teleoper-
ated excavator, IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol.
10(3), 355–367 (2002)
59.44
C.P. Tan, Y.H. Zweiri, K. Althoefer, L.D. Seneviratne:
Online soil parameter estimation scheme based
on Newton–Raphson method for autonomous
excavation, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 10(2),
221–229 (2000)
59.45
S. Singh: Learning to predict resistive forces dur-
ing robotic excavation, Proc. 1995 IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (1995) pp. 2102–2107
59.46
J.A. Marshall: Towards Autonomous Excavation of
Fragmented Rock: Modelling, Identification and
Control, Ph.D. Thesis (Queen’s Univ., Kingston
2001)
59.47
A.R. Reece: The fundamental equation of earth-
moving mechanics, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. (1964)
59.48
H. Cannon, S. Sanjiv: Models for automated earth
moving, Lect. Note. Control Inform. Sci. 250, 163–
172 (2000)
59.49
E. Duff: Accurate guidance and measurement
for excavators using laser scanners, Techn. Rep.
C14043 (ACARP, Brishane 2006)
59.50
Leica Geosystems Mining: Jigsaw products: J3
dozer autorip, http://mining.leica-geosystems.
com/products/J3autonomous/J3dozer-autorip/
(2013)
59.51
Mining
Magazine:
Thinking
automatically,
http://www.miningmagazine.com/equipment/
thinking-automatically (2012)
59.52
Ry Crozier: Gears up for expansion across Pilbara
mines, http://www.itnews.com.au/News/312004,
rio-tinto-advances-autonomous-drill-project.
aspx (2012)
59.53
E. Duff, C. Caris, A. Bonchis, K. Taylor, C. Gunn,
M. Adcock: The development of a telerobotic rock
breaker, Springer Tract. Adv. Robot. 62, 411–420
(2010)
59.54
E. Duff, K. Usher, P. Ridley: Swing Loader Traf-
fic Control, Techn. Rep. C13041 (ACARP, Brishane
2006)
59.55
B. Owens: Concept Design and Testing of a
GPS-less System for Autonomous Shovel-Truck
Spotting, Ph.D. Thesis (Queen’s Univ., Kingston
2013)
59.56
A. Stentz, J. Bares, S. Singh, P. Rowe: A robotic
excavator for autonomous truck loading, Auton.
Robots 7(2), 175–186 (1999)
59.57
M. Dunbabin, G. Winstanley, P. Corke: Refine-
ment of Automated Dragline Swing Control Al-
gorithms, Techn. Rep. C13040 (ACARP, Brishane
2005)
59.58
J. Roberts: Dragline operational enhancements
through the use of digital terrain maps, ACARP Re-
port C13034 (2006)
59.59
Leica Geosystems Mining: Well positioned, http://
mining.leica-geosystems.com/products/Jassist/
Jps/ (2013)
59.60
Locata
Corporation:
Technology
brief,
http://
www.locatacorp.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/
09/Locata-Technology-Brief-13-June-2012-
Public.pdf (2013)
59.61
T. Sathyan, D. Humphrey, M. Hedley: WASP: A sys-
tem and algorithms for accurate radio localization
using low-cost hardware, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man
Cybern. C 41(2), 211–222 (2011)
59.62
United
States
Department
of
Labor:
Mine
safety and health administration report, http://
www.cdc.gov/niosh/mining/pubs/pdfs/mriit.pdf
(2010)
59.63
B. Clark, S. Worrall, G. Brooker, J. Martinez,
E. Nebot: Improving situational awareness with
radar information, Proc. 2012 IEEE Intell. Vehicle
Symp. (2012) pp. 535–540
59.64
K. Nienhaus, R. Winkel, W. Mayer, A. Gronau,
W. Menzel: An experimental study on using elec-
tronically scanning microwave radar systems on
surface mining machines, Proc. IEEE Radar Conf.
(2007) pp. 509–512
59.65
G. Agamennoni, J.I. Nieto, E.M. Nebot: Estimation
of Multivehicle Dynamics by Considering Con-
textual Information, IEEE Trans. Robotics 28(4),
855–870 (2012)
59.66
S. Worrall, G. Agamennoni, J.I. Nieto, E.M. Nebot:
A context-based approach to vehicle behavior
prediction, IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst. Mag. 4(3), 32–
44 (2012)
59.67
P.V. Golde: Implementation of drill teleoperation
in mine automation, Ph.D. Thesis (McGill Univ.,

Part F | 59
1574
Part F
Robots at Work
Montréal 1997)
59.68
J. Appelgren: Remote control and navigation sys-
tems, Min. Constr. Mag. 2, 16–19 (2003)
59.69
D. Hunter, D. Wells, K. Chrystall, P. Feighan:
Achieving effective telerobotic control of indus-
trial equipment, CIM Bull. 89(1002), 83–88 (1996)
59.70
J. Larsson, M. Broxvall, A. Saffiotti: An evaluation
of local autonomy applied to teleoperated vehi-
cles in underground mines, Proc. 2010 IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2010) pp. 1745–1752
59.71
K. Amdahl, M. Lundström: Automatic truck saves
money underground, World Mining 160, 40–44
(1972)
59.72
G.D.
Brophey:
Vehicle
guidance
system,
CA
204 1373A1 (1991)
59.73
R. Hurteau, M. St-Amant, Y. Laperriere, G. Chev-
rette: Optical guidance system for underground
mine vehicles, Proc. 1992 IEEE Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (1992) pp. 639–644
59.74
J.F. Purchase, R.A. Poole: Guidance system for
automated vehicles, and guidance strip for use
therewith, US 616 3745A (2000)
59.75
U. Wiklund, U. Andersson, K. Hyypä: AGV naviga-
tion by angle measurements, Proc. 6th Int. Conf.
Autom. Guided Veh. Syst. (1988) pp. 199–212
59.76
S. Scheding, G. Dissanayake, E.M. Nebot, H.F. Dur-
rant-Whyte: An experiment in autonomous nav-
igation of an underground mining vehicle, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 15(1), 85–95 (1999)
59.77
L.A. Bloomquist, E.H. Hinton: Autonomous vehi-
cle guidance system, US 599 9865A (1999)
59.78
P. Debanné, J.-Y. Hervé, P. Cohen: Global self-
localization of a robot in underground mines,
Proc. 1997 IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man Cybern. (1997)
pp. 4400–4405
59.79
J.M. Roberts, E.S. Duff, P.I. Corke: Reactive nav-
igation and opportunistic localization for au-
tonomous underground mining vehicles, Inform.
Sci. 145, 127–146 (2002)
59.80
J.M. Roberts, E.S. Duff, P.I. Corke, P. Sikka,
G.J. Winstanley, J.B. Cunningham: Autonomous
control of underground mining vehicles using re-
active navigation, Proc. 2000 IEEE Conf. Robotics
Autom. (2000) pp. 3790–3795
59.81
J. Steele, C. Ganesh, A. Kleve: Control and scale
model simulation of sensor-guided LHD mining
machines, IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. 29(6), 1232–1238
(1993)
59.82
J. Larsson, M. Broxvall, A. Saffiotti: A navigation
system for automated loaders in underground
mines, Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Field Serv. Robotics
(2005)
59.83
R. Madhavan, M.W.M.G. Dissanayake, H.F. Dur-
rant-Whyte: Autonomous underground naviga-
tion of an LHD using a combined ICP-EKF ap-
proach, Proc. IEEE Conf. Robotics Autom. (1998)
pp. 3703–3708
59.84
H. Mäkelä: Overview of LHD navigation without
artificial beacons, Robotics Auton. Syst. 36, 21–35
(2001)
59.85
J. Larsson, J. Appelgren, J.A. Marshall, T.D. Bar-
foot: Atlas Copco infrastructureless guidance sys-
tem for high-speed autonomous underground
tramming, Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Exhib. Mass Min.
(2008) pp. 585–594
59.86
J.A.
Marshall,
T.D.
Barfoot,
J.
Larsson:
Au-
tonomous underground tramming for center-ar-
ticulated vehicles, J. Field Robotics 25(6–7), 400–
421 (2008)
59.87
C. Altafini: A path-tracking criterion for an LHD
articulated vehicle, Int. J. Robotics Res. 18(5),
435–441 (1999)
59.88
A. Hemami, V. Polotski: Problem formulation for
path tracking automation of low speed articu-
lated vehicles, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Control Appl.
(1996) pp. 697–702
59.89
V. Polotski: New reference point for guiding an
articulated vehicle, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Control
Appl. (2000) pp. 455–460
59.90
P. Ridley, P. Corke: Autonomous control of an un-
derground mining vehicle, Proc. 2001 Austr. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (2001) pp. 26–31
59.91
R.M. DeSantis: Modeling and path-tracking for
a load-haul-dump mining vehicle, J. Dyn. Syst.
Meas. Control 119, 40–47 (1997)
59.92
S. Scheding, G. Dissanayake, E. Nebot, H. Durrant-
Whyte: Slip modelling and aided inertial navi-
gation of an LHD, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (1997) pp. 1904–1909
59.93
G.B. Smith, R.J. Butcher, A. Uzbekova, E. Mort,
A. Clement: Case study comparison of telere-
mote and autonomous assist underground loader
technology at the Kanowna Belle Mine, Proc.
11th AusIMM Underground Operators’ Conference
(2001) pp. 305–312
59.94
B. Cook, D. Burger, L. Alberts, R. Grobler: Auto-
mated loading and hauling experiences at De
Beers Finsch Mine, Proc. 10th AusIMM Under-
ground Operators’ Conference (2010) pp. 231–
238
59.95
J.A. Marshall, P.F. Murphy, L.K. Daneshmend:
Toward Autonomous Excavation of Fragmented
Rock: Full-Scale Experiments, IEEE Trans. Autom.
Sci. Eng. 5(3), 562–566 (2008)
59.96
S. Singh: Synthesis of Tactical Plans for Robotic Ex-
cavation, Ph.D. Thesis (Robotics Institute Carnegie
Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh 1995)
59.97
Q.
Ji,
R.L.
Sanford:
Autonomous
excavation
of fragmented rock using machine vision. In:
Emerging Computer Techniques for the Miner-
als Industry, ed. by B.J. Schneider, D.A. Stanley,
C.L. Karr (SME, Littleton 1993) pp. 221–228
59.98
M.K. Petty, J. Billingsley, T. Tran-Cong: Au-
tonomous LHD Loading, Proc. Annu. IEEE Conf.
Mechatron. Mach. Vis. Pract. (1997) pp. 219–224
59.99
H. Takahashi, M. Hasegawa, E. Nakano: Analysis
on the resistive forces acting on the bucket of a
Load-Haul-Dump machine and a wheel loader
in the scooping task, Adv. Robotics 13(2), 97–114
(1999)
59.100
M. Magnusson, H. Almqvist: Consistent pile-
shape
quantification
for
autonomous
wheel
loaders, Proc. 2011 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (2011) pp. 4078–4083

Robotics in Mining
References
1575
Part F | 59
59.101
A. Hemami: Fundamental analysis of automatic
excavation, J. Aerosp. Eng. 8(4), 175–179 (1995)
59.102
G.W. Mitchell: Longwall mining. In: Australian
Coal Mining Practice, ed. by R.J. Kininmouth,
E.Y. Baafi (AIMM, Carlton 2005) pp. 340–375
59.103
P.B. Reid, M.T. Dunn, D.C. Reid, J.C. Ralston:
Real-world automation: New capabilities for un-
derground longwall mining, Proc. Austr. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (2010)
59.104
A. Bonchis, E. Duff, J. Roberts, M. Bosse: Robotic
explosive charging in mining and construction
applications, IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng. (2013)
59.105
D.J. Peterson, T. LaTourette: New Forces at Work
in Mining: Industry Views of Critical Technolo-
gies (RAND Sci. Techn. Policy Inst., Santa Monica
2001)
59.106
J. Peck, J. Gray: The total mining system (TMS): The
basis for open pit automation, CIM Bull. 88(993),
38–44 (1995)
59.107
G. Schaffer, A. Stentz: Automated Surveying of
Mines Using a Laser Rangefinder, Emerg. Comp.
Techn. Miner. Ind. Symp. (SME) (1993) pp. 363–370
59.108
A.
Nuchter,
H.
Surmann,
K.
Lingemann,
J. Hertzberg, S. Thrun: 6D SLAM with an ap-
plication in autonomous mine mapping, Proc.
2004 IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2004)
pp. 1998–2003
59.109
S. Thrun, D. Hahnel, D. Ferguson, D. Montemerlo,
R. Triebel, W. Burgard, C. Baker, Z. Omohundro,
S. Thayer, W. Whittaker: A system for volumetric
robotic mapping of abandoned mines, Proc. 2003
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2003) pp. 4270–
4275
59.110
D. Silver, D. Ferguson, A. Morris, S. Thayer:
Topological exploration of subterranean environ-
ments, J. Field Robotics 23(6/7), 395–415 (2006)
59.111
M. Magnusson, A. Lilienthal, T. Duckett: Scan
registration for autonomous mining vehicles us-
ing 3D-NDT, J. Field Robotics 24(10), 803–827
(2007)
59.112
R. Zlot, M. Bosse: Efficient large-scale 3D mobile
mapping and surface reconstruction of an under-
ground mine, Proc. Int. Conf. Field Serv. Robotics
(2012)
59.113
Garmin Ltd.: What is GPS?, http://www.garmin.
com/aboutGPS/ (1996)
59.114
F. van Diggelen: Indoor GPS theory and imple-
mentation, Proc. IEEE Position Loc. Navig. Symp.
(2002) pp. 240–247
59.115
H. Niwa, K. Kodaka, Y. Sakamoto, M. Otake,
S. Kawaguchi, K. Kujii, Y. Kanemori, S. Sugano:
GPS-based indoor positioning system with multi-
channel pseudolite, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (2008) pp. 905–910
59.116
U. Artan, J.A. Marshall, N.J. Lavigne: Robotic map-
ping of underground mine passageways, Trans.
IMM A: Min. Technol. 120(1), 18–24 (2011)
59.117
E. Bartsch, M. Laine, M. Anderson: The application
and implementation of optimized mine ventila-
tion on demand (OMVOD) at the Xstrata Nickle Rim
South Mine, Sudbury, Ontario, Proc. 13th U.S./N.
Am. Mine Venti. Symp. (2010) pp. 1–15
59.118
J.C. Ralston, C.O. Hargrave, D.W. Hainsworth: Lo-
calisation of mobile underground mining equip-
ment using wireless ethernet, Proc. Ind. Appl.
Conf. (2005) pp. 225–230
59.119
M.M. Atia, A. Noureldin, J. Georgy, M. Korenberg:
Bayesian filtering based WiFi/INS integrated nav-
igation solution for GPS-denied environments,
Navigation 58(2), 111–125 (2011)
59.120
R. Wenger: La balise de positionnement U-GPS
(Underground-GPS), ISSKA Rapport Annuel (Swiss
Institute for Speleology and Karst Studies, La
Chaux-de-Fonds 2004), pp. 13–14
59.121
J. Chadwick: GPS for underground operations:
Great potential for controlling block caves, saving
trapped miners and machine automation, http://
www.mining.com (2008)
59.122
J.A. Marshall: Navigating the advances in under-
ground navigation, CIM Mag. 5(4), 20–21 (2010)
59.123
N.J. Lavigne, J.A. Marshall: A landmark-bounded
method for large-scale underground mine map-
ping, J. Field Robotics 29(6), 861–879 (2012)
59.124
D. Lynas, T. Horberry: Human factor issues with
automated mining equipment, Ergonomics Open
J. 4, 74–80 (2011)
59.125
IREDES: IREDES – International rock excavation
data exchange standard, http://www.iredes.org/
(2013)
59.126
International
Standards
Organisation:
ISO/NP
17757 earth-moving machinery – Autonomous
machine
safety,
http://www.iso.org/iso/home/
store/catalogue_tc/catalogue_detail.htm?
csnumber=60473 (2012)
59.127
D.
Hambling:
Next-Gen
coal
mining
res-
cue
robot,
popular
mechanics,
http://www.
popularmechanics.com/science/energy/coal-oil-
gas/next-gen-coal-mining-rescue-robot (2010)
59.128
R.R. Murphy, J. Kravitz, S. Stover, R. Shoureshi:
Mobile robots in mine rescue and recovery, IEEE
Robotics Autom. Mag. 16(2), 91–103 (2009)
59.129
D.W. Hainsworth: Teleoperation user interfaces
for mining robotics, Auton. Robots 11(1), 19–28
(2001)
59.130
A. MacDonald, E. Welsch: Robotics advance ocean
floor mining ventures, http://search.proquest.
com/docview/1018567281 (2012)
59.131
Nautilus
Minerals:
Fact
sheet,
http://www.
nautilusminerals.com/i/pdf/Factsheet-Q1-2013.
pdf (2013)
59.132
M. Dunbabin, P. Corke, G. Winstanley, J. Roberts:
Off-world
robotic
excavation
for
large-scale
habitat construction and resource extraction, to
boldly go where no human-robot team has gone
before, AAAI Spring Symp. (2006)
59.133
J.E. Moores, R. Francis, M. Mader, G.R. Osin-
ski, T. Barfoot, N. Barry, G. Basic, M. Battler,
M. Beauchamp, S. Blain, M. Bondy, R.-D. Capitan,
A. Chanou, J. Clayton, E. Cloutis, M. Daly, C. Dickin-
son, H. Dong, R. Flemming, P. Furgale, J. Gammel,
N. Gharfoor, M. Hussein, R. Grieve, H. Henrys,
P. Jaziobedski, A. Lambert, K. Leung, C. Marion,
E. McCullough, C. McManus, C.D. Neish, H.K. Ng,
A. Ozaruk, A. Pickersgill, L.J. Preston, D. Redman,

Part F | 59
1576
Part F
Robots at Work
H. Sapers, B. Shankar, A. Singleton, K. Souders,
B. Stenning, P. Stooke, P. Sylvester, L. Tornabene:
A mission control architecture for robotic lunar
sample return as field tested in an analogue de-
ployment to the sudbury impact structure, Adv.
Space Res. 50(12), 1666–1686 (2012)

Multimedia Contents Disaster Rob
1577
Part F | 60
60. Disaster Robotics
Robin R. Murphy, Satoshi Tadokoro, Alexander Kleiner
Rescue robots have been used in at least 28 dis-
asters in six countries since the first deployment
to the 9/11 World Trade Center collapse. All types
of robots have been used (land, sea, and aerial)
and for all phases of a disaster (prevention, re-
sponse, and recovery). This chapter will cover the
basic characteristics of disasters and their impact
on robotic design, and describe the robots ac-
tually used in disasters to date, with a special
focus on Fukushima Daiichi, which is providing
a rich proving ground for robotics. The chapter cov-
ers promising robot designs (e.g., snakes, legged
locomotion) and concepts (e.g., robot teams or
swarms, sensor networks), as well as progress
and open issues in autonomy. The methods of
evaluation in benchmarks for rescue robotics are
discussed and the chapter concludes with a dis-
cussion of the fundamental problems and open
issues facing rescue robotics, and their evolution
from an interesting idea to widespread adoption.
60.1 Overview............................................. 1578
60.1.1
Motivation............................... 1578
60.1.2
Disaster Robot Tasks ................. 1579
60.1.3
Types of Disaster Robots............ 1580
60.2 Disaster Characteristics
and Impact on Robots ......................... 1581
60.2.1
Natural Disasters ...................... 1581
60.2.2
Manmade Disasters .................. 1581
60.2.3
General Pattern
of Activity During
the Response Phase ................. 1582
60.3 Robots Actually Used at Disasters.......... 1582
60.3.1
Meteorological Events............... 1582
60.3.2
Geological Events..................... 1584
60.3.3
Manmade Events ..................... 1586
60.3.4
Mine Disasters ......................... 1587
60.4 Robots at the Fukushima-Daiichi
Nuclear Power Plant Accident............... 1588
60.4.1
Exterior Operations................... 1588
60.4.2
Interior Operations
in Nuclear Reactor Buildings ..... 1589
60.5 Lessons Learned, Challenges,
and Novel Approaches ......................... 1591
60.5.1
Mobility: UGVs ......................... 1591
60.5.2
Mobility: UAVs.......................... 1592
60.5.3
Mobility: UMVs......................... 1592
60.5.4
Communications ...................... 1593
60.5.5
Control.................................... 1593
60.5.6
Sensors and Sensing................. 1594
60.5.7
Power ..................................... 1595
60.5.8
Manipulation........................... 1595
60.5.9
Human–Robot Interaction (HRI) 1596
60.5.10 Multirobot Team Coordination ... 1596
60.5.11
Other Issues............................. 1597
60.6 Evaluation........................................... 1598
60.6.1
Computer Simulations
for Rescue Robotics .................. 1598
60.6.2
Physical Test Beds .................... 1598
60.6.3
Standards Activity .................... 1600
60.6.4
Evaluation............................... 1600
60.7 Conclusions and Further Reading ......... 1600
Video-References......................................... 1601
References................................................... 1601
Robots serve as extensions of emergency profession-
als. During the immediate response to a disaster, robots
can provide real-time data about the event and per-
haps even directly aid in inserting mitigation devices
and sensors, turning valves, and moving equipment. As
the immediate life-saving and stabilization phase of the
disaster ends, robots can help with the economic re-
covery. Robots for disaster are an emerging technology,

Part F | 60.1
1578
Part F
Robots at Work
and have not yet been widely adopted by the interna-
tional emergency response community. However, as of
2012, they have been used in 28 disasters in Cyprus,
Haiti, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, and the United States
primarily for mining disasters and structural collapses
or infrastructure damage. Robots have been used for
hazardous materials accidents, often referred to as
chemical, biological, nuclear, radiological, or explosive
(CBRNE) events, most recently the Fukushima Daiichi
nuclear accident. Both structural and CBRNE events
are generally handled by urban search and rescue teams
unless an industry-speciﬁc team assumes command. As
a result of the breadth of the term urban search and res-
cue contributes to a misperception that disaster robotics
is limited to urban or constructed environments. For ex-
ample, although technically an urban event, wilderness
search and rescue is often conducted by a local urban
search and rescue team. In general, disaster robotics
connotes extraordinary situations requiring special op-
erations; ﬁre ﬁghting is not considered as part of disas-
ter robotics as it is a routine emergency.
Disaster robotics can contribute to broad area
activities, local incidents, and routine emergencies,
though this chapter will focus on the use of robots
for disaster events. Interest in robotics for survey-
ing wildland ﬁres and ﬂooding is emerging, and the
few documented uses of robots are reported in this
chapter. Robots are also being increased use in lo-
cal incidents which do not qualify as true disas-
ters. For example, several ﬁre rescue departments in
Japan and the United Kingdom routinely use small
underwater robots for water-based search and recov-
ery of drowned victims and the interest in the use
of aerial vehicles for wilderness search and rescue is
growing.
Disaster robots have not been widely adopted, but
their use is increasing as the technology matures. The
general lack of adoption is to be expected since the tech-
nology is new and the concept of operations for these
novel technologies take time to evolve. Rescue appli-
cations are often similar enough to military operations
that the same platforms can be adapted; however, some
tasks are signiﬁcantly different than their military coun-
terpart, some are unique to rescue, and the human–robot
interaction for civilian response diverges from military
patterns of use.
60.1 Overview
Disaster response is always a race against time, to move
as fast as possible to reach all potential survivors and
yet move slowly enough to avoid creating additional
collapses, damage, risk to rescuers and victims, or con-
tention over airspace. The primary motivation is to save
lives; robots can assist in meeting this goal either by
interacting directly with victims or structures or au-
tomating support activities.
60.1.1 Motivation
Disasters are deﬁned as a discrete meteorological, geo-
logical, or manmade event, that exceeds local resources
to respond and contain. Disasters are distinct from an
ongoing condition such as global warming. In practice,
a disaster means that an agency has to engage additional
specially trained experts and equipment. For example,
a chemical spill may be routine and handled with exist-
ing personnel trained in hazardous materials or it may
be horriﬁc, such as the 1984 Bhopal disaster that killed
thousands of people.
Disaster activities are often referred to by phases,
though there is no single accepted model in emergency
management. After an event, public ofﬁcials are re-
sponsible for the life-saving response and economic
recovery activities focused on maximizing beneﬁt to the
largest population. Nongovernmental agencies may join
with other ofﬁcials and citizens in humanitarian relief
efforts which are generally focused on beneﬁting indi-
viduals. Emergency professionals are also tasked with
prevention of disasters and preparation should there be
sufﬁcient warning.
Disaster response activities are typically executed
by the urban search and rescue (USAR) task force
within a ﬁre rescue agency who work with law en-
forcement, transportation ofﬁcials, and others. USAR
is often used synonymously with any response activ-
ity. The term urban can be misleading as it sounds like
it is restricted to building collapses. USAR includes
hazardous material response, as these materials most
certainly have something to do with built structures.
USAR includes wilderness search and rescue which of-
ten involves searching tunnels and abandoned mines,
avalanches, not just locating lost hikers. It also includes
water-based search and rescue which deals with sav-
ing victims of ﬂoods or high currents (also known as
swift water rescue) or in the aftermath of trafﬁc ac-
cidents where victims are trapped in cars that have
plunged into a river or bay. Water-based search and
rescue does not necessarily have urban structures but
there is a similarity of rescue techniques and re-use of
equipment.

Disaster Robotics
60.1 Overview
1579
Part F | 60.1
Historically, disaster robotics concentrated on the
response phase of a disaster. The disaster robotics com-
munity began to form in 1995 as the outcome of the
tragic loss of life in the Hanshin–Awajii earthquake
in Kobe, Japan, and the bombing of the Murrah Fed-
eral Building in Oklahoma City, United States [60.1,
2]. In both cases, it was easy to imagine how small
ground robots may have been able to enter rubble to
ﬁnd trapped victims. As a result, research efforts began
in individual laboratories. Two mobile robot competi-
tions (the AAAI (Association for the Advancement of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence) mobile robot competition in the
United States, and the RoboCup rescue league interna-
tionally) were started in the late 1990s to engage the
scientiﬁc community in rescue research. The ﬁrst use of
robots for response was at the 2001 World Trade Center
(WTC) disaster, where ground robots were used to pen-
etrate the deeply packed rubble. Since then robots have
been used for response to earthquakes, hurricanes, mine
collapses, bridge collapses, explosions, and ﬂooding.
The deployment of disaster robots during the re-
sponse phase offers many potential beneﬁts. The 2010
World Disasters report [60.3] suggests just how many
lives have been, and will be, impacted by urban disas-
ters. Over 1:1 million people were reported killed from
2000 to 2009, with the total amount of disaster-related
damage estimated at 986:7 billion US dollars. Of the
victims in urban disasters, only a small fraction may
actually survive. Consider from [60.4, 5] that the ma-
jority of survivors (80%) of urban disasters are surface
victims, that is, the people lying on the surface of the
rubble or readily visible. However, only 20% of sur-
vivors of urban disasters come from the interior of the
rubble, yet the interior is often where the majority of
victims are located, providing motivation for robots that
can explore deep within collapses. The mortality rate
increases and peaks after 48 h, meaning that survivors
who are not extricated in the ﬁrst 48 h after the event are
unlikely to survive beyond a few weeks in the hospital.
However, disaster robotics is no longer focused on
response but has expanded to recovery. Recovery ac-
tivities consist of extricating any remaining bodies of
victims, re-establishing normal operations in the com-
munity, continuity of government, and resumption of
the economy. The activities are typically carried out
by various local, provincial, state, and federal agencies
as well as insurers and banks. Each municipality may
have different priorities in rebuilding schools, hospitals,
ports, and industry and there is usually no centralized
authority.
The beneﬁts of disaster robotics for the recovery
phase were seen in the ongoing aftermath of 2011
Tohoku earthquake and related Fukushima Daiichi nu-
clear accident. The tsunami generated by the earthquake
swept thousands of people into the sea. It also severely
damaged many ﬁshing ports and scattered debris and
pollutants throughout ﬁshing areas. Teams of roboti-
cists used underwater robots to search for victims and
to help re-open ports and clear ﬁshing beds. The de-
commissioning of the Fukushima Daiichi facility will
make use of robots, possibly some of those used in the
response.
Disaster robotics is also addressing prevention and
preparedness. As with recovery operations, prevention
and preparedness activities are similarly distributed
among many groups. It should be noted that the ﬁre
rescue and law enforcement teams will be the ﬁrst re-
sponders and whatever equipment they use locally will
be likely to be used at a disaster. Therefore, the dis-
aster robotics community has begun pushing for the
adoption of robots into daily use by ﬁre rescue and
bomb squads so that the responders will be familiar and
comfortable with the technology [60.6]. A lesson from
Fukushima was that robots built by the nuclear industry
in the aftermath of Chernobyl and Three Mile Island
had not been used in decades, with no one expert in
their use.
60.1.2 Disaster Robot Tasks
While the overall motivation for rescue robotics is to
save lives, the motivation for speciﬁc robot designs and
capabilities depend on their potential tasks. The types
of tasks that have been proposed for rescue robots are
described below. Some of the above tasks are similar to
tasks for military robots, especially search and recon-
naissance and mapping, but many are unique or have
a different ﬂavor. For example, structural inspection,
rubble removal, and adaptively shoring rubble are res-
cue speciﬁc. Tasks such as casualty extraction appear
to be similar but are signiﬁcantly different. Consider
that a wounded soldier is unlikely to have a spinal cord
injury and is likely to be in a space large enough for
a human to work in, so a robot entering the area and
dragging the soldier to safety is appropriate. However,
a crushed victim of a building collapse is physically
trapped or pinned in a small space, requiring rubble
removal, and the victim’s spinal cord must be immobi-
lized before extraction; clearly victim extraction in the
search-and-rescue domain is more challenging.
Search is a concentrated activity in the interior of
a structure, in caves or tunnels, or wilderness and aims
to ﬁnd a victim or potential hazards. The motivation for
the search task is speed and completeness without in-
creasing risk to victims or rescuers.
Reconnaissance and mapping is broader than
search. It provides responders with general situation
awareness and creates a reference of the destroyed en-

Part F | 60.1
1580
Part F
Robots at Work
vironment. The goal is speedy coverage of a large area
of interest at the appropriate resolution.
Rubble removal can be expedited by robotic ma-
chinery or exoskeletons. The motivation is to move
heavier rubble faster than could be done manually, but
with a smaller footprint than that of a traditional con-
struction crane.
Structural inspection may be either conducted on
the interior (e.g., to help rescuers understand the nature
of the rubble in order prevent secondary collapses that
may further injure survivors) or on the exterior (e.g., to
determine whether a structure is safe to enter). Robots
provide a means of getting structural sensor payloads
closer and in far more favorable viewing angles.
In situ medical assessment and intervention are
needed to permit doctors and paramedics to interact ver-
bally with victims, visually inspect the victim or apply
diagnostic sensors, or to provide life support by trans-
porting ﬂuids and medication through narrow tubing.
The objective is to provide telepresence for medical
personnel during the 4–10 h that it usually takes to
extricate a victim [60.4, 5]. The lack of medical inter-
vention was a major problem at the Oklahoma City
bombing [60.7]. Preliminary work has been conducted
for victim management, most notably in telemedicine
(also called medical reachback) [60.8], general assess-
ment and triage [60.9], and comforting trapped victims
as per the Survivor Buddy project [60.10].
Medically sensitive extrication and evacuation of
casualties may be needed to help provide medical as-
sistance while victims are still in the disaster area, also
known as the hot zone. In the case of a chemical, bio-
logical, or radiological event, the number of victims is
expected to exceed the number that can be carried out
by human rescuers in their highly restrictive protective
gear; this makes robot carriers attractive. Since medi-
cal doctors may not be permitted inside the hot zone,
which can extend for kilometers, robot carriers that
support telemedicine may be of huge beneﬁt. Remov-
ing survivors, particularly from a hazardous material
event where there may be many people immobilized
or disoriented is another area that is getting increasing
attention. The US Army Telemedicine and Advanced
Technology Research Center has been leading initia-
tives in robots such as the Vecna BEAR for autonomous
casualty extraction [60.11]. Other efforts such as those
by Yim and Laucharoen [60.12] have focused on civil-
ian casualty extraction which requires stabilization of
the spine.
Acting as a mobile beacon or repeater to extend
wireless communication ranges, enable localization of
personnel based on radio signal transmissions by pro-
viding more receivers, and to serve as landmarks to
allow rescuers to localize themselves. Active or passive
transponders such as wireless sensor nodes and RFIDs
(radio-frequency identiﬁcation) can be deployed in the
ﬁeld. They can also be used to support the localization
of personnel, but even more to leave mission-related
data such as the location of nearby victims and hazards
in the ﬁeld [60.13].
Serving as a surrogate for a team member, such as
a safety ofﬁcer or a logistics person. In this task, the
robot works side-by-side with rescuers, for example,
a group breaching rubble deep within the interior of
a disaster may have difﬁculty using a radio to request
additional resources because of noise. However, a team
member outside of the rubble can see and hear through
the robot the state of progress and anticipate needs. The
objective is to use robots to speed up and reduce the
demands of tasks, even if they are done by humans.
Adaptively shoring unstable rubble to expedite the
extrication process. Rubble removal is often hindered
by the need to adopt a conservative pace in order to
prevent a secondary collapse that might further injure
a trapped survivor.
Providing logistics support by automating the trans-
portation of equipment and supplies from storage areas
to teams or distribution points within the hot zone.
60.1.3 Types of Disaster Robots
Rescue robots are needed to help quickly locate, as-
sess, stabilize, and extricate victims who cannot be
easily reached. They typically do this by extending the
rescuers’ ability to see and act. On the ground, small un-
manned ground vehicles (UGVs) can enable rescuers to
ﬁnd and interact with trapped victims in voids that are
too small or too dangerous for human or canine entry.
Large UGVs can accomplish tasks such as removing
large rubble faster than humans. In the air, unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) robots extend the senses of the
responders by providing a bird’s eye view of the situa-
tion. In the water, unmanned marine vehicles (UMVs),
either underwater vehicles (UUVs) or surface vehicles
(USVs) robots can similarly extend and enhance the
rescuers’ senses.
Rescue robots can be broadly categorized into types
based on modality and size [60.14], though other tax-
onomies that mix modality, size, and task have been
proposed [60.15]. There are three modalities of robots:
ground, aerial, and marine. The modality impacts on
the basic design and capabilities of the robot. Within
each modality, rescue robots can be further described
as one of three sizes: man-packable, man-portable, and
maxi. The size of the robot impacts both on the tasks
for which it is suited and how soon after a disaster it
might be used. In order to be man-packable, the en-
tire robot system, including the control unit, batteries,

Disaster Robotics
60.2 Disaster Characteristics and Impact on Robots
1581
Part F | 60.2
and tools, must ﬁt into one or two backpacks. Man-
packable robots are more likely to be used immediately
after a disaster since they can be carried by responders
over debris and up and down ladders into the core of
the disaster, while larger equipment must wait for paths
to be carved out. The next larger size is man-portable;
these are robots that can be carried a short distance
by two people or on a small all-terrain vehicle. Man-
portable robots function in human-sized spaces such as
mine tunnels. They can be used as accessibility within
the hot zone improves or outside the hot zone for logis-
tics support. Maxi-sized robots require trailers or other
special transportation logistics. This inhibits their inser-
tion into the hot zone.
Aerial rescue robots represent the most advanced
robotics technology in use, and new concepts continue
to emerge. Aerial vehicles can be further subdivided
into ﬁxed wing (plane-like), rotary wing (helicopters),
lighter-than-air (blimp), and tethered (kite) platforms.
Fixed-wing UAVs typically travel long distances and
can circle points of interest, while rotary-wing plat-
forms can hover and require a small area to launch and
land. Lighter-than-air vehicles may be tethered, similar
to a kite. Underwater vehicles may also be subdivided
into tethered and untethered platforms.
Large unmanned helicopters, such as the Yamaha
R-Max, continue to be adapted for commercial rescue-
and-recovery missions, including carrying heavy pay-
loads capable of estimating the amount of rubble and
debris generated by a disaster. Small ﬁxed-wing plat-
forms for tactical military use may have great beneﬁt to
the response community. However, UAVs are drawing
the attention of agencies that control airspace and may
become heavily regulated in the future. For example,
the small UAV used at Haiti in 2010 ﬂew in violation of
airspace restrictions.
60.2 Disaster Characteristics and Impact on Robots
The type of disaster as well as the general pattern of
activity inﬂuence the choice of robot platforms and pay-
loads.
60.2.1 Natural Disasters
Natural disasters, such as earthquakes, tsunamis, hurri-
canes and typhoons, volcanoes, avalanches, landslides,
and ﬂoods, present many challenges for rescue robots.
Natural disasters are usually geographically distributed,
perhaps affecting a 200 km or more radius around the
epicenter of the event. The sheer size of the affected
area presents many challenges to the emergency re-
sponse. The primary impact of natural disasters is on
residences, light commercial buildings, sea walls and
canals, and transportation and communications infras-
tructure. This implies that rescuers have thousands of
structures to check quickly for survivors, but those
structures will be fairly small and amenable to man-
ual and canine search. Besides the sheer volume of
structures to check, communication disruptions prevent
rescuers from getting timely information as to the state
of transportation access and the general needs of an
area. However, designing robots to meet these chal-
lenges is important because natural disasters provide
the most hope of a large number of survivors. Unin-
jured survivors may simply be stranded and can survive
for up to 72 h. Natural disasters have generally favored
a bird’s eye view from a UAV invaluable in establish-
ing situation awareness or UMVs in determining hidden
conditions of critical transportation, power, and com-
munication infrastructure.
60.2.2 Manmade Disasters
In comparison to natural disasters, manmade disasters
(such as a terrorist bombing or an industrial accident)
occur in a small area, though may have signiﬁcant
wide-area impacts (e.g., radiation, chemical release).
The challenge is often not how to see the entire ex-
ternal extent of the damage, but rather to see what is
not visible: the interior of the rubble, the location and
condition of survivors, the state of potentially danger-
ous utilities (e.g., electricity, gas lines) [60.14, 16, 17],
and hazardous conditions such as radiation [60.18]. The
communications and power infrastructure usually exist
within a 10 km range and cell phones generally work
outside of the directly affected area. Voids in the rubble
may be irregular in shape and vertical in orientation.
Wireless communications in the interior of the rub-
ble are unpredictable, and generally nonexistent due to
the large amount of steel within commercial structures,
but the combination of irregular voids and sharp rub-
ble do not favor the use of ﬁber optic cables. Visibility
is difﬁcult as there is no lighting and everything may
be covered with layers of gray dust, further hampering
recognition of victims, potential hazards, or accurate
mapping. The interiors may be wet or contain standing
water due to water lines, sewers, and sprinkler systems.
Survivors are more likely to be in dire need of medi-
cal attention. Small ground robots that can enter deep
into the interior of the rubble have been used most fre-
quently for structural collapses, mid-sized robots for
CBRNE events, and large, intrinsically safe robots for
mine collapses.

Part F | 60.3
1582
Part F
Robots at Work
60.2.3 General Pattern of Activity During
the Response Phase
In order to understand how to apply robotics to disas-
ter response (as opposed to recovery or prevention and
preparedness), it is helpful to understand the general
pattern of activity, which can be summarized as [60.19,
20]:
1. Responders become aware of the existence of vic-
tims. This awareness may be generated by informa-
tion from family, neighbors, and colleagues, an un-
derstanding of demographic patterns (e.g., at night,
apartment buildings will be heavily occupied, while
during a work day, ofﬁce buildings will be occu-
pied), or by a systematic search.
2. The response command staff attempt to understand
the disaster site. They investigate the site for con-
ditions such as hazardous materials, the risk posed
to the rescuers themselves, any pending threats
to trapped victims, and resource restrictions such
as barriers to transporting resources to the site,
nearby usable equipment and materials that can be
exploited, and any other barriers to a timely res-
cue.
3. The command staff plans the operations.
4. Search and reconnaissance teams are sent to map
the situation and assess environmental conditions.
Accurate estimates of the need for emergency med-
ical intervention are highly desirable in order to
optimize allocation of medication personnel in the
ﬁeld and to prepare ambulances and hospitals. (In
the case of the Kobe earthquake, this stage took the
longest time [60.19].)
5. Excavation of rubble to extract victims begins. Note
that removal of rubble in search and rescue differs
from construction removal of rubble, because the
safety of the victims is the top priority.
6. Responders gain access to victims and apply emer-
gency medicine in situ.
7. Victims are transferred to hospitals.
8. Field teams report activities periodically, usually at
the end of the shift, and the command staff modiﬁes
or replans accordingly.
60.3 Robots Actually Used at Disasters
Small land, aerial, or marine vehicles have been used
at 28 disasters and numerous local events, starting with
the ﬁrst use of UGVs at the 2001 World Trade Cen-
ter collapse, see Table 60.1. The majority, 16, have
taken place in the United States, followed by Japan (3),
Italy (3), New Zealand (2), Haiti (1), Thailand (1),
Cyrus (1), and Canada (1). The May 2013 rescue by
a UAV guiding searchers to an injured motorist who
had wandered from his car in Canada is the ﬁrst re-
ported live save of a person by a robot. However, as
noted earlier, directly saving lives is not the only mo-
tivation for a robot. Robots have received in general
high marks for completing their missions. Table 60.1
shows 37 reported deployments of robots for a disas-
ter or well-known local incident. The deployments are
grouped by major general disaster type of event: meteo-
rological (e.g., hurricane, earthquake), geological event
(e.g., earthquake, tsunami), man-made (e.g., terrorism,
industrial accident), or mining (either due to a geologi-
cal or a man-made event). Mine and manmade disasters
are most frequent, followed by geological and mete-
orological events. In 7 of the 37 events, robots were
present but were not used or could not reach the area
of interest and thus considered not successful. UGVs
have been used most frequently, followed by UAVs,
and UMVs. While the USA initially led in reported
adoptions, Europe and Asia are beginning to deploy
robots. This section discusses the deployments by the
four disaster types, while the following section high-
lights the 2011 Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident as it
highlights the types of robots, missions, and challenges
posed during both the response and recovery phases of
a disaster.
60.3.1 Meteorological Events
Robots were used at six meteorological events and were
successful at ﬁve:

2005 Hurricane Katrina (USA), where an Inuktun
ASR Xtreme UGV [60.21], an Aerovironment
Raven ﬁxed wing UAV and a Like90 helicopter
UAV, and a Silver Fox ﬁxed wing UAV were
used during the initial response phase for search,
reconnaissance and mapping, and structural in-
spection [60.22]. Later an iSENSYS IP3 was
used for structural inspection during the recovery
phase [60.23]. The UGV searched an apartment
building unsafe for human entry and the UAVs sur-
veyed areas inaccessible by car. The two UAVs used
during the response are shown in Fig. 60.1 – a bat-
tery-powered ﬁxed-wing and a battery-powered
rotary-wing (a Like90 T-Rex miniature helicopter
modiﬁed for stability in high winds) UAVs.

Disaster Robotics
60.3 Robots Actually Used at Disasters
1583
Part F | 60.3
Table 60.1 The modalities and numbers of robots deployed to actual disasters and whether they were successful or not
Disaster or notable incident
Disaster type of event
Robots used
Success
Meteoro-
logical
Geo-
logical
Manmade
Mining
Ground
Aerial
Marine
2001
World Trade Center (USA)

4

2001
Jim Walters No. 5 mine (USA)

1

2002
Barrick Gold Dee mine (USA)

1

2004
Brown’s Fork mine (USA)

1

2004
Niigati Chuetsu earthquake
(Japan)

1

2004
Hurricane Charley (USA)

1

2004
Excel #3 Mine (USA)

1

2005
DR No. 1 mine (USA)

1

2005
McClane Canyon mine (USA)

1

2005
La Conchita mudslides (USA)

1

2005
Hurricane Katrina (USA)

1
3

2005
Hurricane Wilma (USA)

1
1

2006
Sago mine (USA)

1

2006
California wildﬁres (USA)

1

2007
Midas gold mine (USA)

2

2007
Crandall Canyon mine (USA)

1

2007
I-35 Minnesota bridge collapse
(USA)

2

2007
Berkman Plaza II collapse
(USA)

2
1

2008
Hurricane Ike (USA)

1

2009
Cologne State Archives collapse
(Germany)

2

2009
L’aquila earthquake (Italy)

1

2010
Haiti earthquake (Haiti)

1
1

2010
Wangjialing coal mine (China)

1

2010
Upper Big Branch mine (USA)

1

2010
Deepwater Horizon (USA)

16

2010
Prospect Towers (USA)

2

2010
Missing balloonists (Italy)

1

2010
Pike River mine (NZ)

2

2011
Christchurch earthquake (NZ)

1
1

2011
Tohoku earthquake (Japan)

3
1

2011
Tohoku tsunami (Japan)

9

2011
Fukushima nuclear emergency
(Japan)

7
2

2011
Naval base explosion (Cyprus)

2

2011
Thailand ﬂoods (Thailand)

2

2012
Costa Concordia (Italy)

2

2012
Finale Emilia earthquake (Italy)

2

2012
Missing person RCMP (Canada)

1

Total
37
6
8
11
12
23
13
8
37

2005 Hurricane Wilma, Ft. Myers, Florida (USA),
where an AEOS unmanned marine surface ve-
hicle (Fig. 60.2) and an iSENSYS T-Rex un-
manned aerial vehicle were used independently and
cooperatively, to assist with the recovery phase
for structural inspection of buildings, docks, and
piers [60.24]. The robots provided useful infor-
mation but the USV experienced signiﬁcant wire-
less communications and GPS (global position-
ing system) signals near and underneath large
structures.

2006–2010 California wildﬁres (USA), where the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Ikhana Global Hawk was used to provide recon-

Part F | 60.3
1584
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
Fig.60.1a,b Man-packable UAVs used to search por-
tions of Mississippi during the hurricane Katrina re-
sponse: (a) an Aerovironment Raven ﬁxed-wing UAV
and (b) an iSENSYS IP3 rotary-wing UAV (courtesy of
CRASAR)
Fig. 60.2 Unmanned surface vehicle exploring the bridge
to Marco Island, Florida (courtesy of CRASAR)
naissance and mapping of 57 ﬁres [60.25]. Ikhana
was primarily used to gather data to develop new
payloads but did contribute in 2010 to tactical
response.

2008 Hurricane Ike, Rollover Pass Bridge, Texas
(USA), where an AEOS unmanned marine sur-
face vehicle, a VideoRay remotely operated vehicle
(ROV), and a YSI Oceanmapper autonomous un-
derwater vehicle (AUV) were used for structural
inspection of the Rollover Pass bridge [60.26]. The
USV was able to conﬁrm the lack of scour around
the pilings while the VideoRay could not be con-
trolled in the high currents and the YSI AUV could
not accurately preplan its path without colliding
with the structure.

2011 Thailand ﬂoods (Thailand), where two un-
manned UAVs provided reconnaissance and map-
ping of ﬂood plains, allowing ofﬁcials to concen-
trate evacuation or shoring efforts during the pre-
vention and preparedness phases [60.27]. The UAVs
are credited with mitigating damage to Bangkok
and loss of life.
UGVs were present at 2004 Hurricane Charley
(USA) but not used for the house-to-house inspec-
tion tasks that made up the bulk of ground opera-
tions [60.28].
60.3.2 Geological Events
Robots have been used at eight geological events (6
earthquakes, 1 landslide, 1 tsunami). They were suc-
cessful at seven events:

2004 Niigata–Chuetsu Earthquake, where a variant
of the Soryu III snake robot was used for search in
collapsed houses. The snake robot was able to move
into constricted passageways. Figure 60.3 shows the
robot on site.
Fig. 60.3 IRS Soryu robot searching a house destroyed by
the Niigata–Chuetsu earthquake (courtesy IRS)

Disaster Robotics
60.3 Robots Actually Used at Disasters
1585
Part F | 60.3
a)
b)
c)
Fig.60.4a–c Investigation of damaged building by Quince
a)
b)
Fig. 60.5 (a) Docking system
of Quince and Pelican, and (b) 3-D
(three-dimensional) map measurement
by collaboration
a)
b)
c)
Fig.60.6a–c Finale Emilia earthquake: (a) the UGV platform deployed in the destroyed cathedral. (b) Reconstruction of
the cathedral from laser measurements, (c) and image data

2009 L’aquila earthquake, L’aquila (Italy), where
a customized AscTec quadrotor UAV was used for
structural inspection. The UAV was able to ﬂy suc-
cessfully close to buildings and windows.

2010 Haiti earthquake (Haiti), where a SeaBotix
LBV ROV was used for underwater reconnaissance
and mapping of debris in shipping lanes and an El-
bit Skylark UAV was used for reconnaissance and
mapping of orphanages. Both the robots provide
valuable information.

2011 Christchurch earthquake, Christchurch (New
Zealand), where an iRobot Packbot UGV and a Par-
rot AR.drone UAV were used for structural inspec-
tion of the Christchurch catholic cathedral [60.29].
The Packbot was successful but the UAV’s camera
did not face upward and the ceiling could not be ex-
amined.

2011 Tohoku earthquake, Sendai (Japan), where
a KOHGA3 and Quince UGVs (Fig. 60.4) and a Ke-
naf and Quince UGVs were used cooperatively with
a Pelican UAV [60.30] (Fig. 60.5) for structural
inspection of damaged buildings. The robots were
able to provide information to structural engineers.

2011 Tohoku tsunami (Japan), where nine UMVs
were used for reconnaissance and mapping, and
victim recovery during the recovery phase. Five
different teams deployed UMV: A SeaBotix SAR-
bot, SeaBotix LBV-300, SeaMor, and Access AC-
ROV were deployed by a joint IRS-CRASAR team
in April 2011 and later again in October adding

Part F | 60.3
1586
Part F
Robots at Work
Fig. 60.7 Robots available at World Trade Center disaster.
Ovals indicate the three types of robots used in the ﬁrst two
weeks (courtesy CRASAR)
a YSI Oceanmapper [60.31]; the IRS-CRASAR
team was credited with reopening the port of Mi-
namisanriku. Ura from Tokyo University ﬁelded an
unnamed ROV which recovered two dead bodies
from an undisclosed location [60.32]. Prof. Shi-
geo Hirose at Tokyo Institute of Technology also
created an experimental ROV and deployed with
the Japanese Ground Self-Defense Forces [60.32].
IDEA Consultants (Japan) deployed their Mitsui
ROV. Shibuya Diving Industry bought and used
a VideoRay Pro 4, though the extent of the use is
not known [60.33]. All UMVs were ROVs with the
exception of the YSI Oceanmapper.

2012 Finale Emilia earthquake (Italy), where two
custom unmanned aerial vehicles and two UGVs
were used at Mirandola, Italy, for structural in-
spection of the exteriors and interiors of two
churches that had not been entered due to safety
reasons [60.34] (Fig. 60.6). The robots were able
to provide information to the Italian National Fire
Corps and state archaeologistics.
An Inunktun VGTV Xtreme UGV was unsuccess-
fully deployed at the La Conchita mudslide to search
for possible survivors in houses collaterally damaged
by the mudslide [60.35]. The robot failed on its two runs
within two minutes and four minutes, respectively, due
to severe mud and thick shag carpeting.
60.3.3 Manmade Events
Robots were at nine manmade events. They were suc-
cessful at eight events:

2001 World Trade Center collapse (USA) [60.36],
where
Inuktun
Micro-Tracks,
Inuktun
Micro-
VGTV, Foster-Miller mini-Talon, and Foster-Miller
Talon were used for search and reconnaissance and
mapping in the interiors of the collapsed buildings
(Fig. 60.7). The robots were able to penetrate farther
than nonrobotic tools in spaces too small for human
or canine entry.

2007 I-35 Bridge collapse, Minneapolis, Min-
nesota (USA) [60.37, 38], where two unspeciﬁed
unmanned marine vehicles were used for search
and reconnaissance and mapping underwater. The
ROVs appeared to provide views without risking
human divers in the fast moving currents.

2007 Berkman Plaza II parking garage collapse,
Jacksonville, Florida (USA) [60.39, 40], where an
Inuktun Micro-VGTV was used during the rescue
phase for search and during the recovery phase an
Active Scope Camera and an Inuktun ASR Xtreme
were used for structural inspection along with an
iSENSYS IP3 UAV for reconnaissance and map-
ping and structural inspection. The Micro-VGTV
ruled out the presence of a survivor in areas too dan-
gerous for a human to enter. The ASC and Xtreme
provided structural forensic information that re-
solved legal liability and insurance coverage costs.
The UAV provided imagery that led structural ex-
perts to hypothesize the cause of the collapse.

2010 Prospect Towers parking garage collapse,
Hackensack, New Jersey (USA) [60.22], where an
Inuktun VersaTrax 100 and an Inuktun VGTV-
Xtreme were deployed for search. The robots were
used to see vehicle information, license plates,
makes and models in areas not safe for responders.

2011
Fukushima
Daiichi
nuclear
accident
(Japan)
[60.18, 41],
where
seven
UGVs
and
two UAVs were used for search, reconnaissance
and mapping, and structural inspection. The robots
provided
damage
assessment and
radiological
surveys without exposing workers to radiation.
A UGV and a UAV were lost during the ﬁrst year,
but only after they provided important information.

2011 Evangelos Florakis naval base explosion
(Cyprus) [60.17], where an AscTec Falcon and
AscTec Hummingbird were used to inspect the
damage to the adjacent Vasilikospower plant with-
out requiring engineers to risk exposure to live
unexploded ordinance. The UAVs were used for
structural inspection. The operations were success-
ful and led to a rapid repair of the power plant.

2012 Costa Concordia (Italy) [60.42, 43], where
an Ageotec Perseo ROV and a VideoRay ROV,
possible other unreported ROVs, were used for re-
connaissance and mapping, structural inspections,
and for victim recovery operations from the sunken
cruise liner. The ROVs were considered essential in
understanding the situation under the water.

Disaster Robotics
60.3 Robots Actually Used at Disasters
1587
Part F | 60.3

2013 Missing person Royal Canadian Mounted Po-
lice (Canada) [60.44], where a Draganﬂyer X4-ES
UAV with a thermal camera was used by the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police to ﬁnd an unconscious
driver who had wandered from a car wreck. This
is considered the ﬁrst reported live save by a robot.
Robots were requested and present, but not used at
the 2009 State Archives Building Collapse in Cologne,
Germany, due in part to operator safety [60.45].
60.3.4 Mine Disasters
Robots were at 12 mining disasters. They were success-
ful at seven events:

2002 Barrick Gold Dee mine, Elko, Nevada; 2004
Excel #3 mine, Pikesville, Kentucky; 2005 DR#1
mine, McClure, Virginia; 2005 McClane Canyon
mine, Grand Junction, Colorado (USA), where
Fig. 60.8 The mine-permissible variant of the Wolverine
robot used at the 2006 Sago Mine Disaster (courtesy of the
US Mine Health and Safety Administration)
Fig. 60.9 The Inuktun VGTV-Xtreme robot being low-
ered into the Midas gold mine (courtesy of CRASAR)
a mine-permissible Remotec Wolverine (Fig. 60.8)
was deployed the US Mine Safety and Health Ad-
ministration (MSHA) used by to reopen mines that
had been closed [60.46]. At the Barrick Gold Dee
mine, the V-2 was deployed from the surface down
a 16ı slope and was able to navigate and to take
continuous gas samples. At the Alliance Resources’
Partners Excel #3 (coal) mine the robot was able
to penetrate 230m into the mine and successfully
completed the objective of providing an assessment
of the situation. At the DR#1 Dixon-Russell (coal)
mine the robot was able to penetrate 210 to 250 m
into the mine with a slope of 18ı and the robot arm
was used to move and realign ceiling supports in
order to progress into the mine. At the McClane
Canyon (coal) mine trials were conducted to estab-
lish manipulation capabilities. In this case, the robot
was tasked to close ﬁve doors and pull out timbers
holding up a mine fan. The robot was generally un-
successful with manipulation tasks.

2007 Midas gold mine, Midas, Nevada (USA),
where an Allen-Vanguard from Fallon Naval Air
Station and a Inuktun VGTV-Xtreme variant from
the Center for Robot-Assisted Search and Rescue
(CRASAR) were lowered into the mine and used for
victim recovery [60.47]. Mine-permissible robots
were not needed as the gold mine was not emitting
methane. The Allen-Vanguard that was lowered into
the void and found the machinery but not the victim.
The Xtreme was able to penetrate 35 m vertically
into the void (Fig. 60.9). The robot scanned the area
where the body was recovered but did not have suf-
ﬁcient lighting to actually see the body.

2007 Crandall Canyon mine, Huntington, Utah
(USA), where a custom Inuktun mine Cavern
Crawler robot was deployed by US mine Safety and
Fig. 60.10 The Inuktun mine crawler robot being lowered
into a borehole at the Crandall Canyon mine (courtesy of
CRASAR)

Part F | 60.4
1588
Part F
Robots at Work
Health Administration to search for missing miners
(Fig. 60.10) [60.47]. The robot had to travel over
430 m through a 22 cm diameter borehole. Four at-
tempts were made to enter the mine through two
different boreholes, but only one was successful. In
the fourth run, the robot was able to travel through
the borehole then search about 2 m on the mine ﬂoor
which was largely impassable due to the debris and
drilling tailings. The robot provided no sign of the
miners.

2010 Pike River coal mine, Greymouth (New
Zealand), where two unknown New Zealand De-
fence Force bomb squad robots and Western Aus-
tralia Water company pipeline inspection robot
were used for search and recovery operations. The
ﬁrst New Zealand Defence Force (NZDF) robot
ailed after reaching 550 m into the mine due to
falling water, but was successfully restarted and
moved out of the way of the second robot before
running out of battery power. The ﬁrst and second
robots were presumed destroyed in a second explo-
sion that ended any expectations of survivors. The
pipeline inspection robot was later used for recov-
ery operations.
Robots were unsuccessful at two events. At the
2004 Browns Fork mine, Hazard, Kentucky, disaster,
the Wolverine robot was too tall to go into the area of
interest to conduct a search. At the 2006 Sago mine Dis-
aster, Sago, West Virginia (USA), the robot was only
able to penetrate about 700 m into the mine before being
damaged when it accidentally was driven off the path
and ﬂipped over [60.46].
Robots were on-site but not used at three events:
the 2001 Jim Walters #5 mine ﬁre (USA) as the
robot was not mine-permissible, the 2010 Wangjialing
coal mine (China) presumably because the unidentiﬁed
robot could not transit high water, and the 2010 Upper
Big Branch mine (USA) where the restricted conﬁnes
posed too great a risk of failure. Robots were requested
for the 2010 San Jose Copper-Gold mine (Chile) and
the 2011 San Juan De Sabinas coal mine (Mexico) dis-
asters but robots were not small enough and thus were
not sent.
60.4 Robots at the Fukushima-Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant Accident
The Fukushima-Daiichi nuclear power plant accident
merits special attention because robots have been used
for both the response and recovery phases. The use of
robots have been sustained over months and years, and
a wide variety of robots have been used.
Control over the reactors at the Fukushima-Daiichi
nuclear power plant was lost on March 11, 2011,
after a 14 m high tsunami from the Eastern Japan
Earthquake submerged the facility. Units 1–3 melted
down, hydrogen exploded at the high ﬂoors of nu-
clear reactor buildings of Units 1, 3, and 4, and huge
amounts of radioactive materials were released to the
wide area centered by Fukushima Prefecture. Robots
were used during the prolonged response phase for
assessment of the emergency situation and mitiga-
tion of the event by recovering the cooling systems
to enable a cool shutdown. After four months, the
immediate response turned to preparation for decom-
mission as the reactors were stabilized. The recovery
phase requires operations in the contaminated area;
therefore, many robotic systems have been, and are
continuing to be, used for minimizing workers’ ex-
posure to radiation by substituting for human opera-
tions. In the ﬁrst year, ground and aerial robots were
used for exterior operations outside the buildings and
ground robots for interior operations inside the reactor
buildings.
60.4.1 Exterior Operations
Robots were used outside the buildings and on the
grounds by different teams for four applications: debris
removal, structural inspection, radiological surveys, and
mitigation efforts.
Debris Removal
by Unmanned Construction Machines
There was a large amount of contaminated debris
outside the building producing a high dose rate of
a few hundred mSv=h, preventing workers accessing
the buildings. Debris removal operations were con-
ducted starting April 1, 2011 for nine months using
an adaptation of unmanned construction robot ma-
chines had been developed for the restoration work
after the Unzen Fugen-dake Volcano eruption in 1991
(Fig. 60.11). Debris was gathered by two backhoes and
a bulldozer, with wireless teleoperation, then loaded
to containers on two remote-controlled crawler dump
trucks, and carried to storage yards of contaminated
materials. The crawler dump trucks were teleoperated
from a remote operator car, with command and control
signals and data from camera and sensors transmitted
via a remote-controlled radio relay car. Seven camera
cars were connected to the system by wire, and ex-
ternal image views supported the task execution. As

Disaster Robotics
60.4 Robots at the Fukushima-Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant Accident
1589
Part F | 60.4
Fig.60.11a,b Unmanned construction machines used at Fukushima-Daiichi (courtesy of Unmanned Construction Ma-
chines Association)
a result, debris of 20 000 m3 was removed from the area
56 000 m2 wide, and the radiation level reduced signiﬁ-
cantly to safely accessible level for the workers.
Structural Assessment and Radiological
Surveys from T-Hawk UAV
A team led by Westinghouse used Honeywell T-
Hawks from April 10, 2011, to the end of July, 2011
(Fig. 60.12). The team ﬂew approximately 40 missions
with two objectives originally. One was to investigate
the state of the reactor and turbine buildings and to
acquire video of the general area in order to support
initial assessments of the incident and to help plan for
debris removal. The second was to take radiological
samples to produce a survey map. The objectives later
expanded to off-site debris ﬁeld survey, survey of the
coastal breakwater structure, a gamma radiation sur-
vey at speciﬁc locations of interest to TEPCO, and
airborne-particulate sampling (ﬂying into plumes) at se-
lect locations.
Radiation Source Measurement
by Gamma Cameras
The Japan Atomic Energy Agency (JAEA) developed
a robot control car TEAM NIPPON with a gamma cam-
era, a 3-D camera, a thermo camera, and a QinetiQ
Talon robot that were provided by Idaho National Lab-
oratory, a US federal laboratory that conducts research
in nuclear reactors, in collaboration with Tohoku Uni-
versity. It was used from May 5, 2011 for measuring
radiation of the outdoor debris, and provided visualized
data as shown in Fig. 60.13 [60.18, 41].
Remote Control of Concrete Pumping Cars
Concrete pumping cars had been used for pouring wa-
ter from outside in order to cool used-fuel pools on the
top ﬂoor of the exploded nuclear reactor buildings. In
order to reduce the radiation exposure of workers who
control their long arms, the cars were ﬁtted for remote
teleoperation by using remote controllers, cameras, and
wireless equipment on May 2011.
60.4.2 Interior Operations
in Nuclear Reactor Buildings
UGVs continue to be used for operations in the inte-
rior of the reactor buildings. UGVs were used to survey
the interiors (iRobot Packbot, IRS Quince), monitor for
gamma radiation (JAEA J-3), remove debris (QinetiQ
Bobcat and Talon, Brokk), and experiment with decon-
tamination (iRobot Warrior).
Survey of Nuclear Reactor Buildings
by PackBots
On April 17, 2011, TEPCO workers and six engineers
from iRobot used two donated PackBots to open the
double hatch doors of Units 3 and 1, providing the ﬁrst
entry into those buildings (Fig. 60.14). The TEPCO
workers carried the robots to the front of the hatch, and
pointed an antenna to the robots from the glass win-
dow of the hatch. Based on the readings of radiation
dose rate, temperature, humidity, and gas concentra-
tion, humans were allowed to enter the nuclear reactor
buildings to begin the cool shutdown process. On the
following day, the same mission was tried in Unit 2, but
the PackBot could not complete it. The camera window
of PackBot misted over under high humidity, because
the vapor from boiled water on the basement ﬂoor did
not escape from the building. Prior to the actual op-
erations, TEPCO workers were intensively trained on
remote teleoperation starting on March 24, 2011, and
the scenario was veriﬁed in Unit 5, which was not dam-

Part F | 60.4
1590
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
Fig.60.12a,b UAV used at Fukushima-Daiichi: (a) T-Hawk and (b) top view of nuclear reactor building of Unit 1 (pho-
tographs courtesy of TEPCO)
a)
Lights
Teletector
Gamma cam.
& PT unit
TALON's
antenna
TALON's space
3-D LIDAR &
thermo camera
PTZ camera
b)
Fig.60.13a,b Gamma radiation
measurement by UGVs: (a) TEAM
NIPPON and (b) visualized radiation
source by gamma camera (courtesy of
JAEA)
a)
Fig.60.14a,b Operations of PackBots in Unit 1 (courtesy of TEPCO)
aged. The PackBots continue to be used for monitoring
and light tasks in the buildings.
Survey of Nuclear Reactor Buildings by Quince
The Quince robot was used in addition to the iRobot
Packbots in June, 2011 (Fig. 60.14), and is now being
used in cooperation with the Packbots for various mis-
sions as only Quince could climb the steps to the upper
ﬂoors. Quince had been developed for CBRNE disaster
response by a team from the International Rescue Sys-
tem Institute including Chiba Institute of Technology
and Tohoku University. One unit of Quince was lent
to TEPCO for free after radiation-proof test, wireless
communication test, intensive reﬁnement of reliability,
and training exercises of operators [60.48]. Quince has
been used for surveillance of the nuclear reactor build-
ing since June 24, 2011. On July 8, it entered Unit 2
and measured the dose rate on the second and third
ﬂoors, then sampled dust for identiﬁcation of nuclide
(Fig. 60.15). On July 26, valves and pipes of a spray

Disaster Robotics
60.5 Lessons Learned, Challenges, and Novel Approaches
1591
Part F | 60.5
a)
b)
Fig.60.15a,b Quince at Fukushima: (a) robot platform and (b) its operator station image captured in the mission on July
8, 2011 (courtesy of TEPCO)
cooling system were visually inspected by the high-
density camera and dose rate was measured in Unit 3.
Redundant cooling system was established on the ba-
sis of these data. On October 20, Quince surveyed fully
on the third ﬂoor of Unit 2, then climbed the stairs up
to the ﬁfth ﬂoor (operation ﬂoor) for monitoring. The
high dose rate, condition of the crane, etc. were investi-
gated on the high ﬂoors at ﬁrst. However, it stopped on
the third ﬂoor on its return home because its commu-
nication tether was hooked and cut. If Quince had not
been applied, it would have been delayed to examine
situation of the upper ﬂoors, and the risk would have
become higher because of late cool shutdown. Quince
2 and 3 were remodeled and lent for free of charge to
TEPCO from 2012, and are used in cooperation with
PackBots for various missions.
60.5 Lessons Learned, Challenges, and Novel Approaches
The experiences with disaster robotics since 2001 pro-
vide key insights into technical challenges, such as
mobility, communications, sensing, control, and hu-
man factors, but also into sociotechnical issues such
as training and procedures for transporting and decon-
taminating robots. This section highlights the general
lessons learned and the fundamental problems posed
in mobility for UGVs, UAVs, and UMVs, communica-
tions, control, sensors and sensing, power, human–robot
interaction, multirobot team coordination, and other
issues.
60.5.1 Mobility: UGVs
Mobility remains a major problem for all modalities of
rescue robots, but especially for ground vehicles. The
challenges for ground robots stem from the complexity
of the environment, which is an unpredictable combina-
tion of vertical and horizontal elements with unknown
surface characteristics and obstacles. For example, at
Fukushima, the original conﬁguration of the iRobot
Packbot could not climb the steep metal staircases. In
other cases, a robot could not cross a catwalk or climb
stairs due to rubble and the lack of conﬁdence that the
robot could negotiate the debris. Robots such as the
Inuktun VGTV-Xtreme at the La Conchita mudslides
could not handle the terrain, while the Allen-Vanguard
was too heavy for vertical entry into the Midas gold
mine.
The ﬁeld is currently lacking any useful character-
izations of rubble to facilitate better design. However,
even without a complete understanding of rubble en-
vironments, it is clear that more work is needed in
actuation and mechanical design as well as in algo-
rithms that would enable the robot to adapt its mobility
style to the current terrain (also known as task shap-
ing [60.49]).
The state of the practice in UGVs for disasters are
polymorphic tracked vehicles, with a movement toward
tracked robots with manipulators (e.g., the Wolverine
used for mine disasters, the robots at Fukushima) and
two instances of snake-like robots (Niigata–Chuetsu
earthquake, Berkman Plaza II collapse). Wheeled plat-
forms are severely limited by the roughness of the
terrain and the need to overcome obstacles, steps,
ramps, but combination wheeled and tracked vehicles

Part F | 60.5
1592
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
Fig.60.16a,b Examples of legged and crawler robots. (a)
Hexapod (legged) robot from the RHex project travers-
ing a portion of the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) test bed (courtesy of R. Sheh) and (b)
Terminatorbot being tested in rescue test bed (courtesy of
R. Voyles)
are commercially available. Basic research in legged
robots (Chap. 48), wheeled robots (Chap. 49), mi-
cro/nanorobots (Chap. 27), and manipulators will ben-
eﬁt disaster robotics.
Free serpentine robots such as the Soryu III used
at the rubble at the Niigata–Chuetsu earthquake pro-
vide a fundamentally different style of mobility, while
ﬁxed-based snakes can be used in tandem with a more
traditional platform as a highly ﬂexible sensor manip-
ulator [60.50]. Examples of both types of snake robots
are shown in Figs. 60.3 and 60.19.
In order to overcome the difﬁculties posed by un-
known terrain, novel legged robots and crawler robots
have been proposed. In addition, some types of crawler
robots can climb walls and reach locations that would
otherwise be very hard to reach. Legs are interesting
because they exploit biomimetic principles. The RHex
hexapod robot [60.51], proposed for search and res-
cue among other potential applications, is shown in
Fig. 60.16 climbing random step ﬁelds. Crawler robots
such as the Terminatorbot [60.52] use their arms or legs
to pull themselves through the rubble. The Terminator-
bot is designed to withdraw itself into a cylinder that
can be inserted through one of the small boreholes com-
monly drilled by responders to get through walls, then
open up and begin moving. Other types of crawlers in-
clude lizard- or gecko-like robots that adhere to walls;
these types are promising but have not been tested for
the dusty, wet, and irregular conditions found in disas-
ters.
Another novel concept for UGVs is that of smart
tools, particularly lifts that can help stabilize collapsed
structures during extrication [60.53, 54]. Extrication is
one of the most time-consuming activities in rescue.
Rescuers must proceed cautiously when removing rub-
ble in order to prevent secondary collapses or slides
that would further injure the survivors. Experiments
suggest that roboticized lifts or shoring mechanisms
would be able to sense and respond fast enough to small
movements in the rubble to adaptively maintain stabil-
ity [60.54].
60.5.2 Mobility: UAVs
UAVs are increasing in popularity with responders,
possibly because on demand aerial access is a unique
capability. Aerial vehicles, particularly helicopters, are
vulnerable to wind conditions near (or in) structures
and obstacles such as power lines, trees, and overhang-
ing debris. A UAV at Hurricane Katrina hit a power
line.
Novel ideas include a plane with the size of a per-
son’s hand that can ﬂy indoors and planes with fold-
able wings, making it easier for responders to carry
them. Quadrotor helicopters appear far more stable
and easier to pilot; a design that balanced the larger
size of a quadrotor with an appropriate payload could
make UAVs more assessable to nonpilots. Another ex-
citing direction is hybrid platforms that can change
from ﬁxed-wing operations, covering large distances,
to rotary-wing operations, ﬂying near or inside build-
ings [60.55].
60.5.3 Mobility: UMVs
Surface and underwater vehicles have to contend with
swift currents and ﬂoating or submerged debris, placing
signiﬁcant demands on agility and control. As seen at
the Tohoku Tsunami, AUVs could not be used due to
the possibility of colliding with ﬂotsam. Teleoperated
ROVs can function in such conditions but have a risk
of tethers becoming tangled or caught, as seen at the
Tohoku Tsunami and the Hurricane Ike response.

Disaster Robotics
60.5 Lessons Learned, Challenges, and Novel Approaches
1593
Part F | 60.5
60.5.4 Communications
Robots rely on real-time communications for teleopera-
tion and for enabling responders to see what the robot is
seeing immediately. Ground robots communicate either
through a tether or via wireless radio. Aerial and surface
robots are wireless, while underwater rescue robots are
controlled via a tether. The communication bandwidth
demands of all modalities are generally high due to the
use of video imagery, and the tolerance to communica-
tions latency is low due to the control needs. In addition
to communications between the tactical rescuers and
their robots, it is difﬁcult to report or transfer critical
information provided by rescue robots to the strategic
enterprise. Disasters typically destroy the communica-
tion infrastructure, both telephones and cellular phones,
and alternatives such as satellite phones become satu-
rated by response agencies.
Wireless communications with robots remain prob-
lematic. Operations below ground or near structures
interfere with the physical propagation of radio signals.
As shown in high-ﬁdelity USAR response exercises,
ad hoc wireless networks established by responders
are likely to become quickly saturated, with no way
of establishing priority over information. At the World
Trade Center, data from the Solem robot deployed in
the interior of building WTC4 returned totally black
frames for 1 min 40 s of the 7 min run before wireless
communications were totally lost and the robot was
abandoned [60.36]. In addition, many wireless robots
use lossy compression algorithms to manage band-
width, which interfere with computer vision techniques,
and/or connect through insecure links, raising the pos-
sibility that news media might intercept and broadcast
sensitive video of trapped victims.
Rescue robots working underground, either for
USAR or mine rescue, have two alternatives to wireless
communications: either operate with a tether or deploy
repeaters to maintain wireless communications. Many
wireless robots now can be purchased with a ﬁber-optic
tether; however, these tethers are fragile and may break
or tangle, as seen at several mine disasters. The ﬁber-
optic tether may also tangle with the safety rope used
to support the robot during vertical drops. Data for the
World Trade Center deployments indicated that a dedi-
cated person was required to manage the tether but that
54% of tether management operations were to allow the
robot to reach a more favorable position or to recover
the robot after its mission [60.36].
At Fukushima, outside the buildings, allocation of
wireless frequencies and accommodation of communi-
cation methods were extremely difﬁcult, and usage of
some robot frequently affected the other robots. Inside
the buildings, wireless communication was sometimes
unstable, and a few robots could not return. Operators
always had to pay attention to radio ﬁeld strength and
cable tether handling.
Majority of UGV operations have used tethered
robots, with the only wireless robot used at the WTC
disaster being lost and the wireless NZDF robots cre-
ating signiﬁcant problems with intermittent failures.
Hybrid communications, in which a robot is primarily
on a tether and then operates for short distances over
a local wireless link before reconnecting to the tether,
appear to be attractive.
A novel approach is to use other robots as re-
peaters, either stationary or mobile, to facilitate the
establishment of communications and sensor networks.
As repeaters for mobile ad hoc networks, robots on the
land, sea, and air can extend the range and through-
put of wireless networks [60.56]. A recent US De-
fense Advanced Research Projects Agency program,
LANdroids, developed a set of small robots that acted
as mobile repeaters for a larger robot entering the
interior of a structure or tunnel. Aerial vehicles are
particularly attractive as they can provide larger relay
ranges while providing a bird’s eye view of the disaster.
However, a UAV does not always have to move: a teth-
ered blimp or kite can support a sophisticated payload
with no maintenance or support for days [60.57, 58].
60.5.5 Control
Robot control can be subdivided into platform control,
which is usually considered by control theory, and ac-
tivity control, which generally falls under the purview
of artiﬁcial intelligence. Rescue robots are challenging
both for traditional control and for artiﬁcial intelligence.
The high degree of mechanical complexity of all modal-
ities and the demands of the environment present major
challenges for control theory. In all report events, the
robot’s activity was handled by teleoperation; a human
is needed to direct the robot and to perform mis-
sion sensing. The well-documented problems of manual
teleoperation (Chap. 34) argue for increasing auton-
omy [60.59], both in terms of navigation.
Navigational autonomy has been the primary focus
within the disaster robotics community and efforts gen-
erally fall into the following three categories:

Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM):
SLAM is needed for the search and reconnaissance
and mapping tasks. Whereas SLAM in ofﬁce-like
environments appears to be almost solved, the appli-
cation of same techniques in harsh and unstructured
environments turns out to be extraordinarily difﬁ-
cult or even impossible. One strong limitation of
current mapping solutions is their inability to pro-

Part F | 60.5
1594
Part F
Robots at Work
vide an accurate 3-D model of the environment at
high data rate. For USAR such a solution has to
cope with the reﬂection properties of debris, smoke
due to ﬁres, and the spectrum of lightning condi-
tions. The solution also needs to be low cost in terms
of required onboard CPU (central processing unit)
computation and payload, due to weight and power
limitations. Existing solutions rely either on auto-
matically inclined [60.60, 61] or constantly rotating
2-D (two-dimensional) laser scanners [60.62]. In
contrary to 2-D maps, which are typically generated
in real time [60.63], 3-D maps are updated at low
rates on the order of seconds due to the limited data
rate of inclined or rotated laser scanners.

Exploration, planning, and path execution: The
central question in autonomous exploration is: given
what you know about the world, where should you
move next to gain as much as many new information
as possible? [60.64]. Autonomous exploration can
be subdivided into determining where to go next,
how to plan the path to get there, and how to exe-
cute that path safely.
The primary approach to exploration is to use
a frontier-based exploration algorithm is to gain
new information by moving to the boundary be-
tween open space and unknown territory, denoted
as frontier. Frontier-based exploration, either based
on 2-D [60.64] or 3-D [60.65] map representations,
is an efﬁcient technique that has been successfully
deployed together with SLAM techniques for ex-
ploration in NIST-like USAR arenas [60.66].
The objective of path planning in harsh environ-
ments is not necessarily to generate the short-
est but the safest path. Wirth and Pellenz intro-
duced an exploration strategy and path planner
that utilizes occupancy grid maps for combining
the distance transform and the obstacle transform
(when planning to several frontier cells at the same
time [60.67] in order to select the safest alternative
consisting of target location and path to reach the
target.
Most methods for motion planning in USAR are
still limited to static environments that can efﬁ-
ciently be represented in 2-D. However, since robots
operate on rough terrain that may suddenly shift it
is important to consider the shape of the surround-
ing terrain and its potential impact when moving.
Several researchers have introduced solutions with
short-term planning look ahead that execute spe-
ciﬁc robot behaviors with respect to the current
situation of the robot. Okada et al. introduced an
autonomous controller for tracked vehicles that is
based on continuous 3-D terrain scanning [60.68].
Magid et al. introduced a system for keeping the
robot maximally stable at every step of its path
while allowing the vehicle to loose balance in
a controlled manner for facilitating safe climbing
over debris [60.69]. Sheh et al. developed a method
for behavioral cloning, a type of learning by im-
itation that produces control rules that clone the
skills of an expert human operator [60.70]. Dorn-
hege et al. introduced the concept of behavior maps,
which link certain robot behaviors on rough ter-
rain such as climbing over stairs and obstacles, to
structures detected from 3-D point clouds in real-
time [60.71].

Object recognition and scene interpretation: The
search, reconnaissance and mapping, and structural
inspection tasks for disaster robots would beneﬁt
from autonomy. They currently rely on humans to
manually scan video feeds for signs of survivors,
reconstruct the scene, identify potential hazards,
and accurately comprehend the integrity of struc-
tures. To this end, Andriluka et al. evaluated various
state-of-the-art techniques for vision-based victim
detection from UAVs [60.72]. They concluded that
by combining multiple weak models the overall
detection reliability can be increased. Kleiner and
Kummerle presented an approach for detecting vic-
tims based on several visual features such as body
motion, skin color, and body heat [60.73]. Hahn
et al. presented an approach for improving victim
detection from low-cost thermal sensors by com-
puting heat distributions while exploring an envi-
ronment [60.74]. Birk et al. developed a system for
recognizing humans from images taken by an in-
frared camera that considers plausible body shapes
and postures [60.75].
60.5.6 Sensors and Sensing
Sensors, and sensing, pose the greatest mission chal-
lenge; without adequate sensing, a robot may be in an
area of interest but be unable to navigate or to execute
the larger mission. The physical attributes of a sensor
(size, weight, and power demands) impact on whether it
can be used with a particular robot platform. Currently
sensors are not interchangeable between platforms;
standards are needed for footprint sizes, mounting, con-
nections, and display space.
The functionality of a sensor depends on the modal-
ity and mission [60.16]. The primary sensor missing
from all robot modalities operating outside of water is
a miniature range sensor. With a miniature range sen-
sor, the success in localization and mapping seen with
larger robots would be transferable to rescue robots.
The sensor payloads for other missions depend on those
applications; however, two sensor needs for USAR are

Disaster Robotics
60.5 Lessons Learned, Challenges, and Novel Approaches
1595
Part F | 60.5
particularly noteworthy. One is a detector that can per-
ceive victims obscured by rubble; current radars have
not been reliable in mixed rubble. Another needed sen-
sor is one that can tell if a victim is unconscious but
alive without touching the victim. A robot may be able
to see a victim, yet not be able to crawl to the victim and
make contact or scrape away enough dirt or clothing
to take a pulse. Stand-off detectors such as millimeter-
wave radars and gas detectors appear promising but
have not been validated at this time.
Smaller, better sensors are not sufﬁcient; improve-
ments in sensing algorithms are also needed. At this
time, humans are expected to interpret all sensing data
manually in real time. This is a daunting task for many
reasons. Human performance is handicapped by phys-
iological factors introduced by sensing through a com-
puter display (also known as computer mediation), the
location of sensors at viewpoints low to the ground,
generally restricted ﬁelds of view, and fatigue. The
modality output itself may also be nonintuitive, such
as ground-penetrating radar. However, autonomous de-
tection and general scene interpretation is considered
well beyond the capabilities of computer vision. This
presents a case where neither the human nor the com-
puter can accomplish the perceptual task reliably and
argues for investigation into human–computer coopera-
tive techniques for perception. Algorithms that enhance
the image for human inspection, supplement depth per-
ception, or cue interesting areas are within the reach of
computer vision.
60.5.7 Power
The robot modality and mission poses distinct chal-
lenges for power, although only one robot, the NZDF
robot at the Pike River mine, has caused a failure.
In general, battery power is preferred over internal
combustion because of the logistics difﬁculties in trans-
porting ﬂammable liquids. While the requirements of
each rescue robot application is largely unknown, a par-
tial understanding is emerging of the power proﬁle.
For example, the operation tempo of a ground vehi-
cle operating underground is on the order of 34 runs,
each around 20 min in duration, over a 1214 h shift,
with the robot kept on hot standby for the major-
ity of the shift. Rotary-wing aerial vehicles for tacti-
cal reconnaissance and structural inspection show an
operations tempo of 58 min per face of a build-
ing, while ﬁxed-wing vehicles are airborne for less
than 20 min. Other rescue missions, such as wilder-
ness search and rescue, will have different require-
ments but the need for batteries over internal com-
bustion and for determining the power proﬁle is the
same.
60.5.8 Manipulation
Manipulation has been required for mine remediation
(e.g., DR#1 and McClane Canyon mines) and at the
Fukushima nuclear accident, but overall manipulation
has failed in at least one task per mission. Furthermore,
manipulation is almost always time consuming as all
reported instances have been teleoperated. Robots with
manipulators (such as that seen in Fig. 60.17) extend the
capabilities of ground vehicles by allowing the robot to
sample the environment, interact with survivors, move
light obscurations, and add unique camera viewpoints.
However, the manipulator extends the volume of the
robot, impacting navigation. The arm is often at risk
of being damaged in conﬁned spaces being hitting on
overhanging rubble. Manipulators also add to the con-
trol and mechanical complexity of the robot.
a)
b)
Fig.60.17a,b Examples of tracked robots with manipu-
lator arms that have been used for disasters or rescue
competitions. (a) View from Foster–Miller Talon at the
WTC of its arm (courtesy of CRASAR) and (b) teleMAX
by Telerob at the Rescue Robotics Camp (courtesy of
R. Sheh)

Part F | 60.5
1596
Part F
Robots at Work
60.5.9 Human–Robot Interaction (HRI)
According to the analysis by Murphy [60.22], over
50% of the robot failures during a disaster are due
to human error, which emphasizes the importance of
human–robot interaction. For the purposes of this chap-
ter, HRI concerns fall into ﬁve topics: ergonomics,
system design, human–robot ratio, situation awareness,
and training.
One aspect of HRI is ergonomics. The Fukushima
nuclear accident highlighted how personal protection
equipment (e.g., full-face mask and rubbery gloves)
precluded workers from performing delicate work and
efﬁcient task execution.
Another aspect of HRI is the larger system design.
At the Fukushima nuclear accident, workers had to
carry the robots to the point of entry; this sometimes in-
creased the total radiation exposure of workers, which
was clearly not the purpose of the robot. The inability
to transport certain robots caused them to be excluded
from the World Trade Center disaster.
The number of operators per robot has been the sub-
ject of debate, though Murphy and Burke in [60.76]
offer a formula based on their comprehensive ﬁeld stud-
ies for computing the baseline human-to-robot ratio
Nhumans D Nvehicles C Npayloads C 1 :
The idea is to then justify why a smaller ratio would not
increase unacceptable risk to the mission. For example,
a UGV often does not need a safety ofﬁcer, while a UAV
does under most regulations. One way to decrease the
number of people is to reduce their workload, such as by
increasing the navigational autonomy from normal op-
erations. However, Murphy and Burke document that if
the unmanned system encounters a problem and returns
control to the operator, the operator is unlikely to be
able to react fast enough to avoid a crash, collision, or
severing of a tether. This problem has been documented
in aviation safety with initial problems with auto-pilots,
where it is generally referred to as the human out of
the loop control (OOTL) problem. The OOTL problem
should not be interpreted as discouraging autonomy but
rather encouraging a more comprehensive considera-
tion of how autonomy will be handled in all conditions,
not just normal operations.
Related to the number of operators is how well they
can maintain situation awareness. Situation awareness
is deﬁned by Endsley in [60.77] as
the perception of the elements in the environment
within a volume of time and space, the comprehen-
sion of their meaning and the projection of their
status in the near future.
Drury et al. [60.78] have deﬁned types of situation
awareness within search and rescue based on an anal-
ysis of RoboCup rescue tasks, while Casper and Mur-
phy [60.79] and Burke et al. [60.80] have examined
operator situation awareness in technology insertions.
User interfaces are a key component in facilitating sit-
uation awareness. In rescue robotics, user interfaces
are generally primitive and work through the opera-
tor’s visual channel to provide robot, task, and situation
awareness of the state of the robot, task progress, and
the general operational environment. To highlight the
importance of user interfaces, one robot at the World
Trade Center was rejected because of the complexity
of its interface [60.36]. While the user interface for
ﬁeldable rescue robots primarily display the video out-
put from the robot, experiences from RoboCup rescue
suggest that a good interface will both facilitate com-
manding the robot (inputs) and will provide three types
of information (outputs):

The robot’s perspective: camera view(s) from the
robot’s current position, plus any environmental
perceptions that enhance the general impression of
telepresence

Sensor and status information: critical information
about the robot’s internal state and its external sen-
sors

If possible, a map: a bird’s eye view of the robot
situated in the local environment.
The Fukushima nuclear accident illustrated the im-
portance of training, as training of operators with using
simulated mockups took over a month. The current
state of the practice is for responders to receive train-
ing from the robot manufacturer on how to operate and
maintain the robot, ignoring concepts of operations for
actual scenarios. Training is a related issue in human–
robot interaction [60.81]. Rescue workers have limited
time compared with military operations to learn about
robots and few opportunities to practice. While a bomb
squad or special weapons and tactics team for law en-
forcement may be called out several times each month,
a rescue team may be called out only a few times each
year. For the near future, rescue workers may not have
had prior training or experience with a robot prior to
the disaster and be expected to use prototypes with only
hasty training.
60.5.10 Multirobot Team Coordination
Multirobot teams of robots that cooperate with each
other or work on the same objective have already been
used or demonstrated for response and recovery ac-
tivities at Hurricane Wilma (UMV-UAV) [60.24], the
Tohoku tsunami (UMV-UMV) [60.31], and the To-

Disaster Robotics
60.5 Lessons Learned, Challenges, and Novel Approaches
1597
Part F | 60.5
hoku earthquake (UAV-UGV) [60.30]. These have all
been heterogeneous teams though homogeneous teams
have been entered at the RoboCup rescue competi-
tion [60.82]. Only one of the three deployed teams was
explicitly coordinated, where a Quince robot carried
a Pelican UAV at the Tohoku earthquake and con-
ducted cooperative mapping of the interior of a dam-
aged building [60.30]. The current research approach
to teams is focusing on adopting techniques from ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence for either centralized or distributed
coordination.
Multirobot teams not only offer the possibility to
ﬁeld diverse capabilities, they also exhibit increased ro-
bustness due to redundancy, and superior performance
by parallel task execution [60.83]. This latter aspect
is as important as the ﬁrst one, since the time to
complete a rescue mission is of vital importance. For
example, one fundamental problem when searching for
survivors is to efﬁciently coordinate a team performing
space exploration. However, the IRS-CRASAR team
at the Tohoku tsunami response uncovered implicit as-
sumptions about parallel task execution that limited
performance [60.31]. The coordination of several au-
tonomous units in search and rescue operations still
represents an open issue. One reason is the fact that
the higher number of degrees of freedom imposed by
the robot team requires a larger number of trained hu-
man operators, which in turn makes the deployment
during a rescue mission more complicated. Certainty,
the number of required operators also depends on the
quality of autonomous perception and decision-making
of each single system. Therefore, in order to reduce
the human-to-robot ratio in the ﬁeld, autonomous ca-
pabilities as well as autonomous methods facilitating
team coordination are needed. There are several exist-
ing techniques for team coordination in USAR, which
can generally be separated into centralized and decen-
tralized approaches.
There are three novel types of teams being pursued
for disaster robotics. One type is swarms. Researchers
such as [60.84] have discussed the possibility of us-
ing cost-effective, insect-sized robots to penetrate deep
within a pancake building collapse and then signal
the presence of a victim. One of the key features of
swarm approaches is that they can scale up easily. The
insect swarm scenario leaves hard problems like con-
trol, sensing payloads, localization of the victim, and
communications to the imagination, but is certainly
a worthy concept. However, some of the search algo-
rithms used by insects may be adapted to single robots,
for example, win-shift win-stay sampling exhibited by
bees may be useful for search [60.85]. A second type of
team, similar to swarms, is motes, where aerial vehicles
that drop intelligent sensors called motes.
A third type of team is a hybrid robot-animal team,
where search dogs carry roboticized cameras (dog-
cams) [60.86] or wiring rats with controllers. Attaching
cameras to search dogs has been explored for several
years and such a system was used at the World Trade
Center. The concept does not compete with robots, as
robots are used to enter places canines cannot. The
canine team handlers have generally objected to dog-
cams because the cameras and communications gear
interfere with the dog’s mobility, pose the hazard of
snagging, and the dog cannot be readily commanded
to stop at points of interest beyond the line-of-sight of
the handler (dogs use visual cues as commands, more
than audio). However, there is less objection to plac-
ing nodes in a rat’s brain to stimulate and drive the
rat into a void while carrying a camera or other sen-
sors [60.87]. The motivation for a robot rat stems in
part from the rat’s mobility and relative low value.
While the technical feasibility of a robot rat may be
within reason, assuming advances in wireless commu-
nications, the response community has been lukewarm
toward the idea [60.88]. Unlike rats, robots can be
kept in storage for years and can penetrate through
pockets of ﬁre or areas with no oxygen. A robot rat
has all of the limitations of dog, including the prob-
lem of a handler becoming too emotionally attached,
and is likely to scare a trapped survivor just as much
as the other rats that swarm a disaster. The conven-
tional wisdom is that, if the sensors, wireless, and
power systems can be miniaturized and operate reliably
enough to control a rat deep within rubble, those sys-
tems will enable responders and robots to work without
the rats.
60.5.11 Other Issues
In addition to the challenges by the functional subsys-
tems of a robot, three other issues should be considered.
Robots must be reliable. As noted in the discussions
of the Pike River mine explosion and the Fukushima
nuclear accident, failure of a robot can obstruct the mis-
sion execution or cause it to completely fail. A robot
failing not only means the mission did not get per-
formed, but could prevent other robots from carrying
out the mission. For example, a robot getting stuck on
the stairs would pose a navigational hazard to other
robots or to workers in bulky safety gear. Such risk has
to be minimized by thorough analysis and preparation
beforehand.
Robots must be suitable for the environment. In
at least two mine disasters, robots could not be used
because they were not explosion proof – yet needed
to be used in an explosive atmosphere. At Fukushima,
robot operators had to be concerned with potential

Part F | 60.6
1598
Part F
Robots at Work
damage of semiconductors by total dose of radiation,
which could affect not only CPU and image sensors but
also various components using semiconductors such as
engine, battery, etc. Monitoring of the total dose using
a dosimeter was necessary.
Robots must be decontaminated. Radiation contam-
ination at Fukushima was a serious issue because it
caused radiation exposure of workers in maintenance
and battery exchange. However, UGVs at the World
Trade Center collapse were exposed to raw sewage and
body ﬂuids. Decontamination has been discussed in
standardization procedures but few platforms are built
to be completely cleaned or to be easily cleaned with-
out exposing the human.
60.6 Evaluation
Disaster robotics is still an emerging ﬁeld and meth-
ods for evaluating a rescue robot or the larger
mixed human–robot system are still forming. Murphy
in [60.22] provides an analysis of the performance of
disaster robots at 34 events. Evaluation is largely cen-
tered around the US government National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) efforts to standardize
rescue robots for adoption by US responders via origi-
nally a standard test course and more recently a set of
standard test methods. Each standard test method is an
inexpensive, reproducible prop that tests a single capa-
bility; for example, Fig. 60.18 shows a prop designed
to test a robot’s ability to traverse rough terrain repre-
sented by a wooden step ﬁeld. The standard test course
and methods are duplicated via the USARsim computer
simulation, and at least two sites, NERVE and SWRI,
have physical testbeds consisting of the NIST standard
test methods – though other physical testbeds such as
Disaster City exist. The test course and methods have
been used since the late 1990s for the RoboCup res-
cue and AAAI mobile robot competitions. This effort is
being conducted through ASTM and thus, even though
it is largely driven by the US, will likely result in an
international standard that may be adopted by other
countries.
60.6.1 Computer Simulations
for Rescue Robotics
Computer simulations provide a low-cost mechanism to
explore the larger behavior or a robot or system. Gen-
erally, computer simulations provide high ﬁdelity for
testing software execution, but their physical ﬁdelity de-
pends on the physics engine. Simulating sensors and the
complex environments produced by a disaster is dif-
ﬁcult and is rarely accurate enough to test perceptual
algorithms. At the time of writing, two readily available
computer simulations exist for exploring the strategic
and tactical applications of rescue robots within the
RoboCup rescue framework [60.89], the RoboCup res-
cue simulation project [60.90], and USARSim [60.91].
These simulations are well understood, accepted, open-
source, and free; as such, they should be useful for most
researchers or practitioners interested in ground-based
rescue robotics.
The RoboCup rescue simulation project is used in
the RoboCup rescue simulation league to study agent-
based approaches to strategic planning for the disaster
response. The simulator assumes a strong centralized
response capability that is not necessarily the case for
all countries or regions; the United States, for exam-
ple, relies on a highly distributed organization that
obviates many centralized coordination schemes. Al-
though the simulation is focused on strategic decision
making, particularly dynamic resource allocation, it
does support the examination of how robot resources
might be allocated during a disaster and how data
from a robot might be propagated through a system. It
permits the simulation of monitoring of disaster dam-
age from reports by humans, distributed sensors, and
robots and can simulate complex interactions such as
telemedicine.
USARSim is a computer simulation developed by
the University of Pittsburgh for physical robot simula-
tion in disaster situations [60.91]. The simulation repli-
cates the NIST standard test bed for search and rescue
and permits efﬁcient prototyping and testing of robot
design and most aspects of control software. It uses Un-
real game engine for handling physics and graphics, and
virtual robots have capability of sensing (image, laser
range ﬁnder, etc.) and actuation (wheel, motor, etc.)
with data processing (image recognition, SLAM, etc.)
in artiﬁcial environments. In 2006, the RoboCup res-
cue competition created a simulation league using this
environment.
60.6.2 Physical Test Beds
Physical test beds provide a more realistic venue than
a computer simulation for evaluating rescue robots, but
may not be available to researchers, too expensive to
use or to travel to, or not adequately capture some key
aspect of a disaster. Physical test beds generally fall into
three categories: test beds developed for the ﬁre rescue

Disaster Robotics
60.6 Evaluation
1599
Part F | 60.6
a)
b)
c)
Fig.60.18a–c View of the NIST standard test bed for
search and rescue used by RoboCup Rescue. (a) View of
overall test bed, (b) dummy representing a victim, and (c)
a step ﬁeld challenging robot mobility (courtesy NIST)
community, test beds developed for the robotics com-
munity, and the NIST standard test bed for search and
rescue.
Fire rescue training test beds occur throughout the
world and are used to train human ﬁreﬁghters, res-
cue specialists, and canine teams under highly realistic
conditions. The Texas A&M Engineering Extension
Service’s Disaster City complex has 52 ac devoted to
Fig. 60.19 A CMU (Carnegie Mellon University) ﬁxed-
base snake being tested at a facility in California (courtesy
H. Choset)
representative structural collapses, ranging from multi-
story commercial building to wooden housing. Disaster
City is the site for the NIST Response Robot Evaluation
Exercises. The NASA Ames Research Center’s Disaster
Assistance Response Team facility at Moffett Field has
hosted several events as well. In general, ﬁre rescue test
beds are constructed from construction and sewer de-
bris, can introduce smoke and some simulants, and pose
challenging mobility conditions, but vary in terms of ﬁ-
delity. In many test beds, the density of the debris does
not contain the actual amount of metals in a real col-
lapse. This can lead to optimistic reports of success of
sensors and wireless communication devices. The test
beds, being designed for human training, do not repli-
cate the conditions under which a ground robot would
be used. The terrain is generally on the exterior of the
rubble and does not exercise the robot in conﬁned or
vertical spaces. Depending on the size of the facility,
the test bed may or may not be suitable for evaluating
UAVs. An example of a ﬁre-training test bed appeared
earlier in Fig. 60.19.
Physical testbeds for the robotics community such
as the New England Robotics Validation and Experi-
mentation (NERVE) Center at the University of Mas-
sachusetts Lowell, and the facilities at the Southwest
Research Institute (SWRI) in San Antonio, Texas, in-
corporate both general test courses for robots and the
NIST standard methods.
Perhaps the most inﬂuential physical simulation
for researchers is the RoboCup rescue physical league
which uses the NIST standard test bed for search and
rescue, shown in Fig. 60.18. This competition started in
2001 [60.92] and has more than 40 team entries every
year from all over the world. The RoboCup rescue
physical league scores robot performance in terms of
mobility, mapping, situation awareness, sensing, shared
autonomy, etc. A robot or robot team competes in one

Part F | 60.7
1600
Part F
Robots at Work
of three arenas which simulate disaster situations at
the annual RoboCup world competition. The mission
of the robot teams is to collect victim information
(existence, state, and location) by sensor fusion of
vital signals (heat, shape, color, motion, sound, CO2,
etc.) and report a map of victims in disaster space
so that responders can efﬁciently arrive at the victim
for rescue. In addition to the arenas, the competition
and test bed contain individual skill test stations, for
example, in order to test mobility, robots must traverse
a random step ﬁeld made of wood. The test bed was
designed to be portable and reasonably inexpensive
and several locations around the world have set up
duplicates. As a result of the constraints of cost and
portability, the test bed is not fully representative of
actual disaster physical conditions and does not test the
operating conditions for the human teams.
60.6.3 Standards Activity
Standards for rescue robots and systems are being gen-
erated at the time of writing. The E54.08 subcommittee
on operational equipment within the E54 Homeland
Security application committee of ASTM International
started developing an urban search and rescue (USAR)
robot performance standard with the National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST) as a US Depart-
ment of Homeland Security (DHS) program from 2005
to 2010. It plans to cover sensing, mobility, naviga-
tion, planning, integration, and operator control in order
to ensure that the robots can meet operational require-
ments under the extreme conditions of rescue. The
standards will consist of performance measures that
encompass basic functionality, adequacy and appro-
priateness for the task, interoperability, efﬁciency, and
sustainability. The components of the robot systems in-
clude platforms, sensors, operator interfaces, software,
computational models and analyses, communication,
and information. Development of requirements, guide-
lines, performance metrics, test methods, certiﬁcation,
reassessment, and training procedures is planned.
60.6.4 Evaluation
Evaluation of rescue robots is difﬁcult not only be-
cause of the diversity of platforms and missions but
also because each disaster is truly different. In addi-
tion, robots are part of a human-centric system: they
are operated by humans in order to provide information
to humans. Evaluation of the performance of a rescue
robot system at an actual disaster is currently ad hoc.
No computer or physical simulation for predicting the
performance of robots and humans in a disaster has
been validated; indeed, there is little argument that
simulations are far easier than a real response. The
difﬁculties of simulation are exacerbated by the differ-
ences between disasters. For example, the World Trade
Center was unique in terms of the large amount of
steel and the density of the collapsed material, while
earthquakes and hurricanes are different from terrorist
events.
Metrics for measuring performance remain a worth-
while quest. Quantitative metrics, such as the number
of survivors or remains found, do not capture the value
of a robot in establishing that there are no survivors in
a particular area. Performance metrics from psychology
and industrial engineering are only now beginning to
be applied. These methods require enhanced computer
and full-scale simulations in order to collect data. Data
collection on human and overall system performance
during a disaster has been done through ethnographic
observations and are now moving to direct observations
of situation awareness during demonstrations [60.80,
93]. Direct data collection during a disaster may not
be possible as methods may interfere with performance
(and therefore be unreasonable, if not unethical) and
arouse fears by operators of Big Brother and being held
liable for any errors in operation.
60.7 Conclusions and Further Reading
Rescue robots are making the transition from an in-
teresting idea to an integral part of emergency re-
sponse. Aerial and ground robots have captured most
of the attention, especially for disaster response, but
water-based vehicles (both surface and underwater)
are proving useful as well. Rescue robots present
challenges in all major subsystems (mobility, com-
munications, control, sensors, and power) as well as
in human–robot interaction. In terms of size, man-
portable and man-packable systems are the most pop-
ular because of their reduced logistics burden, but
the size of the platforms exacerbates the need for
miniaturized sensors and processors. Wireless com-
munications remains a major problem. While recent
deployments have relied on polymorphic tracked ve-
hicles, researchers are investigating miniature planes
and helicopters along with new ground robots designs,
particularly biomimetic. Research is also exploring al-
ternative concepts of operations and user interfaces.
Standards are currently under development and this

Disaster Robotics
References
1601
Part F | 60
will help accelerate the adoption of rescue robots. The
annual IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers) International Symposium on Safety, Se-
curity and Rescue Robotics is currently the primary
conference and clearinghouse for research in rescue
robotics.
Video-References
VIDEO 140
Assistive mapping during teleoperation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/60/videodetails/140
References
60.1
A. Davids: Urban search and rescue robots: from
tragedy to technology, IEEE Trans. Intell. Syst. 17(2),
81–83 (2002)
60.2
A. Davids: Urban search and rescue robots: from
tragedy to technology, IEEE Trans. Intell. Syst. 17(2),
1541–1672 (2002)
60.3
D. McClean: World Disasters Report 2010. Focus on
Urban Risks (IFCR, Geneva 2010)
60.4
National Fire Protection Association: Standard on
Operations and Training for Technical Rescue Inci-
dents (NFPA, Avon 1999)
60.5
United States Fire Administration: Technical Rescue
Program Development Manual (USFA, Avon 1996)
60.6
R.R. Murphy, A. Kleiner: A
community-driver
roadmap for the adoption of safety security and
rescue robot, Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Saf. Secur. Res-
cue Robotics, Linköping (2013) pp. 1–4
60.7
J.A. Barbera, C. DeAtley, A.G. Macintyre, D.H. Parks:
Medical aspects of urban search and rescue, Fire
Eng. 148, 88–92 (1995)
60.8
R. Murphy, D. Riddle, E. Rasmussen: Robot-assisted
medical reachback: A survey of how medical per-
sonnel expect to interact with rescue robots, Proc.
IEEE Int. Work. Human Robot Interact. Commun.
(HRI) (2004) pp. 301–306
60.9
R. Murphy, M. Konyo, P. Davalas, G. Knezek, S. Ta-
dokoro, K. Sawata, M. Van Zomeren: Preliminary
observation of HRI in robot-assisted medical re-
sponse, Proc. 4th ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Human Robot
Interact. (HRI) (2009) pp. 201–202
60.10
R. Murphy, A. Rice, N. Rashidi, Z. Henkel, V. Srini-
vasan: A multi-disciplinary design process for af-
fective robots: Case study of Survivor Buddy 2.0,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011)
pp. 701–706
60.11
A.C. Yoo, G.R. Gilbert, T.J. Broderick: Military
robotics combat casualty extraction and care. In:
Surgical Robotics. Applications and Visions, ed. by
J. Rosen, B. Hannaford, R.M. Satava (Springer, New
York 2011) pp. 13–32
60.12
M. Yim, J. Laucharoen: Towards Small Robot Aided
Victim Manipulation, J. Intell. Robotic Syst. 64, 119–
139 (2011)
60.13
A. Kleiner: Mapping and Exploration for Search and
Rescue with Humans and Mobile Robots (University
of Freiburg, Freiburg 2008)
60.14
R.R. Murphy, S. Stover: Gaps analysis for rescue
robots, Proc. ANS Shar. Sol. Emerg. Hazard. Environ.
(2006)
60.15
C. Schlenoff, E. Messina: A robot ontology for urban
search and rescue, ACM Work. Res. Knowl. Repre-
sent. Auton. Syst., New York (2005) pp. 27–34
60.16
R. Murphy, J. Casper, J. Hyams, M. Micire, B. Minten:
Mobility and sensing demands in USAR, Proc. IECON
Sess. Rescue Eng., Vol. 1 (2000) pp. 138–142
60.17
M. Angermann, M. Frassl, M. Lichtenstern: Mission
review of aerial robotic assessment – ammunition
explosion Cyprus 2011, Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Saf. Se-
cur. Rescue Robotics (2012) pp. 1–6
60.18
S. Kawatsuma, M. Fukushima, T. Okada: Emergency
response to Fukushima-Daiichi accident: summary
and lessons learned, Ind. Robot 39(5), 428–435
(2012)
60.19
S. Tadokoro, T. Takamori, S. Tsurutani, K. Osuka:
On robotic rescue facilities for disastrous earth-
quakes – from the great Hanshin-Awaji (Kobe)
earthquake, J. Robotics Mechatron. 9(1), 46–56
(1997)
60.20
R. Murphy: Human-robot interaction in rescue
robotics, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 34(2), 138–
153 (2004)
60.21
M.J. Micire: Evolution and field performance of
a rescue robot, J. Field Robotics 25(1-2), 17–30
(2008)
60.22
R.R. Murphy: Disaster Robotics (MIT Press, Cam-
bridge 2014)
60.23
K. Pratt, R. Murphy, S. Stover, C. Griffin: Conops
and autonomy recommendations for vtol small un-
manned aerial systems based on Hurricane Katrina
operations, J. Field Robotics 26(8), 636–650 (2009)
60.24
R. Murphy, E. Steimle, E. Griffin, C. Cullins, M. Hall,
K. Pratt: Cooperative use of unmanned sea surface
and micro aerial vehicle at hurricane Wilma, J. Field
Robotics 25(3), 164–180 (2008)
60.25
V.G. Ambrosia, S. Wegener, T. Zajkowski, D.V. Sul-
livan, S. Buechel, F. Enomoto, B. Lobitz, S. Johan,
J. Brass, E. Hinkley: The Ikhana unmanned airborne
system (UAS) western states fire imaging missions:
From concept to reality (2006–2010), Geocarto Int.
26(2), 85–101 (2011)
60.26
R.R. Murphy, E. Steimle, M. Hall, M. Lindemuth,
D. Trejo, S. Hurlebas, Z. Medina-Cetina, D. Slocum:

Part F | 60
1602
Part F
Robots at Work
Robot-assisted bridge inspection, J. Intell. Robotic
Syst. 64(1), 77–95 (2011)
60.27
P. Srivaree-Ratana: Lessons learned from the great
Thailand flood 2011: How a UAV helped scientists
with emergency response and disaster aversion,
Proc. AUVSI Unmanned Syst. North Am. (2012)
60.28
R. Murphy, S. Stover, H. Choset: Lessons learned
on the uses of unmanned vehicles from the 2004
Florida hurricane season, AUVSI Unmanned Syst.
North Am. (2005)
60.29
J. Lester, A. Brown, J. Ingham: Christchurch cathe-
dral of the blessed sacrament: Lessons learnt on
the Stabilization of a significant heritage building,
Proc. Annu. Conf. N. Z. Soc. for Earthq. Eng. (NZSEE)
(2012) pp. 1–11
60.30
N. Michael, S. Shen, K. Mohta, Y. Mulgaonkar, V. Ku-
mar, K. Nagatani, Y. Okada, S. Kiribayashi, K. Otake,
K. Yoshida, K. Ohno, E. Takeuchi, S. Tadokoro: Col-
laborative mapping of an earthquake-damaged
building via ground and aerial robots, J. Field
Robotics 29(5), 832–841 (2012)
60.31
R.R. Murphy, K.L. Dreger, S. Newsome, J. Rodocker,
B. Slaughter, R. Smith, E. Steimle, T. Kimura,
K. Makabe, F. Matsuno, S. Tadokoro, K. Kon: Marine
heterogeneous multi-robot systems at the great
eastern japan tsunami recovery, J. Field Robotics
29(5), 819–831 (2012)
60.32
F. Ferreira: ICRA Japan Forum: Preliminary report on
the disaster and robotics in Japan, IEEE Robotics
Autom. Mag. 18(3), 116 (2011)
60.33
M. Shibuya: Using micro-rov’s in the aftermath of
japan’s tsunami. Underwater Intervention (2012)
60.34
G.-J. Kruijff, V. Tretyakov, T. Linder, F. Pirri, M. Gi-
anni, P. Papadakis, M. Pizzoli, A. Sinha, E. Pianese,
S. Corrao, F. Priori, S. Febrini, S. Angeletti: Rescue
robots at earthquake-hit Mirandola, Italy: A field
report, Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Saf. Secur. Rescue
Robotics (2012) pp. 1–8
60.35
R. Murphy, S. Stover: Rescue robots for mudslides:
A descriptive study of the 2005 La Conchita mud-
slide response, J. Field Robotics 25(1–2), 3–16 (2008)
60.36
R.R. Murphy: Trial by fire, IEEE Robotics Autom.
Mag. 11(3), 50–61 (2004)
60.37
L.
Goldwert:
Minneapolis
honors
bridge
col-
lapse
victims,
http://www.cbsnews.com/news/
minneapolis-honors-bridge-collapse-victims/
(2007)
60.38
FBI: Photo gallery FBI response to minneapo-
lis bridge collapse, http://www2.fbi.gov/page2/
august07/bridge1.htm (2007)
60.39
K. Pratt, R. Murphy, J. Burke, J. Craighead, C. Griffin,
S. Stover: Use of tethered small unmanned aerial
system at Berkman Plaza II collapse, Proc. IEEE Int.
Symp. Saf. Secur. Rescue Robotics (2009) pp. 134–
139
60.40
S. Tadokoro, R. Murphy, S. Stover, W. Brack,
M. Konyo, T. Nishimura, O. Tanimoto: Application
of active scope camera to forensic investigation of
construction accident, Proc. IEEE Int. Work. Adv.
Robotics Its Soc. Impacts (ARSO) (2009) pp. 47–
50
60.41
K. Ohno, S. Kawatsuma, T. Okada, E. Takeuchi,
K. Higashi, S. Tadokoro: Robotic control vehicle for
measuring radiation in Fukushima Daiichi nuclear
power plant, Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Saf. Secur. Res-
cue Robotics (2011) pp. 38–43
60.42
ROV World: Raising the Costa Concordia live – ROV-
world subsea information (2012)
60.43
Hydro International: ROV survey of the Costa
Concordia
grounding
site,
http://www.hydro-
international.com/news/id5324-ROV_Survey_of_
the_Costa_Concordia_Grounding_Site_video.html
(2012)
60.44
Draganfly: RCMP corporal Doug Green interviewed
on CKOM John Gormley Live – Draganflyer X4-ES
used in life-saving mission, http://www.draganfly.
com/news/2013/05/13/rcmp-corporal-doug-
green-interviewed-on-ckom-john-gormley-
live-draganflyer-x4-es-used-in-life-saving-
mission/ (2013)
60.45
T. Linder, V. Tretyakov, S. Blumenthal, P. Molitor,
D. Holz, R. Murphy, S. Tadokoro, H. Surmann: Res-
cue robots at the collapse of the municipal archive
of Cologne city: A field report, Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Saf. Secur. Rescue Robotics (2010) pp. 1–6
60.46
R.R. Murphy, R. Shoureshi: Emerging Mining Com-
munication and Mine Rescue Technologies (Mine
Safety and Health Administration, Arlington 2008)
60.47
R.R. Murphy, J. Kravitz, S. Stover, R. Shoureshi:
Mobile robots in mine rescue and recovery, IEEE
Robotics Autom. Mag. 16(2), 91–103 (2009)
60.48
K. Nagatani, S. Kiribayashi, Y. Okada, K. Otake,
K. Yoshida, S. Tadokoro, T. Nishimura, T. Yoshida,
E. Koyanagi, M. Fukushima, S. Kawatsuma: Emer-
gency response to the nuclear accident at the
Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plants using mo-
bile rescue robots, J. Field Robotics 30(1), 44–63
(2013)
60.49
G.M. Kulali, M. Gevher, A.M. Erkmen, I. Erkmen:
Intelligent gait synthesizer for serpentine robots,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002)
pp. 1513–1518
60.50
A. Wolf, H.B. Brown, R. Casciola, A. Costa, M. Schw-
erin, E. Shamas, H. Choset: A Mobile hyper redun-
dant mechanism for search and rescue tasks, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Vol. 3 (2003)
pp. 2889–2895
60.51
D. Campbell, M. Buehler: Stair descent in the sim-
ple hexapod “RHex”, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2003) pp. 1380–1385
60.52
R.M. Voyles, A.C. Larson: Terminatorbot: A novel
robot with dual–use mechanism for locomotion
and manipulation, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron.
10(1), 17–25 (2005)
60.53
J. Tanaka, K. Suzumori, M. Takata, T. Kanda,
M. Mori: A mobile jack robot for rescue operation,
Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Saf. Secur. Rescue Robotics
(2005) pp. 99–104
60.54
R. Murphy, T. Vestgaarden, H. Huang, S. Saigal:
Smart lift/shore agents for adaptive shoring of col-
lapse structures: A feasibility study, Proc. IEEE Int.
Symp. Saf. Secur. Rescue Robotics (2006)

Disaster Robotics
References
1603
Part F | 60
60.55
W.E. Green, P.Y. Oh: A fixed-wing aircraft for hov-
ering in caves, tunnels, and buildings, Proc. Am.
Control Conf. (2006) pp. 1–6
60.56
V. Kumar, D. Rus, S. Singh: Robot and sensor net-
works for first responders, IEEE Pervasive Comput.
3(4), 24–33 (2004)
60.57
D. Kurabayashi, H. Tsuchiya, I. Fujiwara, H. Asama,
K. Kawabata: Motion algorithm for autonomous
rescue agents based on information assistance sys-
tem, Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Comput. Intell. Robotics
Autom. (2003) pp. 1132–1137
60.58
K.W. Sevcik, W.E. Green, P.Y. Oh: Exploring search-
and-rescue in near-earth environments for aerial
robots, Proc. IEEE/ASME Int. Conf. Adv. Intell.
Mechatron. (2005) pp. 693–698
60.59
A. Birk, S. Carpin: Rescue robotics: a crucial mile-
stone on the road to autonomous systems, Adv.
Robotics 20(5), 596–605 (2006)
60.60
A. Kleiner, C. Dornhege, R. Kuemmerle, M. Ruhnke,
B. Steder, B. Nebel, P. Doherty, M. Wzorek, P. Rudol,
G. Conte, S. Durante, D. Lundstrom: RoboCupRes-
cue – Robot league team RescueRobots Freiburg
(Germany), Proc. 10th RoboCup 2006 (2006)
60.61
J. Pellenz, D. Paulus: Stable mapping using a hy-
per particle filter, Proc. 13th RoboCup 2006 (2010)
pp. 252–263
60.62
A. Nuchter, K. Lingemann, J. Hertzberg: Mapping
of rescue environments with kurt3d, Proc. IEEE Int.
Symp. Saf. Secur. Rescue Robotics (2005) pp. 158–
163
60.63
A. Kleiner, C. Dornhege: Mapping for the support
of first responders in critical domains, J. Intell.
Robotic Syst. 64(1), 7–31 (2011)
60.64
B. Yamauchi: A frontier-based approach for au-
tonomous exploration, Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Com-
put. Intell. Robotics Autom. (1997) pp. 146–151
60.65
C. Dornhege, A. Kleiner: A frontier-void-based ap-
proach for autonomous exploration in 3d, Adv.
Robotics 27(6), 459–468 (2013)
60.66
A. Jacoff, E. Messina, B. Weiss, S. Tadokoro, Y. Nak-
agawa: Test arenas and performance metrics for
urban search and rescue robots, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (2003) pp. 3396–3403
60.67
S. Wirth, J. Pellenz: Exploration transform: A stable
exploring algorithm for robots in rescue environ-
ments, Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Saf. Secur. Rescue
Robotics (2007) pp. 1–5
60.68
Y. Okada, K. Nagatani, K. Yoshida, S. Tadokoro,
T. Yoshida, E. Koyanagi: Shared autonomy system
for tracked vehicles on rough terrain based on
continuous three-dimensional terrain scanning,
J. Field Robotics 28(6), 875–893 (2011)
60.69
E. Magid, T. Tsubouchi, E. Koyanagi, T. Yoshida,
S. Tadokoro: Controlled balance losing in random
step environment for path planning of a teleoper-
ated crawler-type vehicle, J. Field Robotics 28(6),
932–949 (2011)
60.70
R. Sheh, B. Hengst, C. Sammut: Behavioural cloning
for driving robots over rough terrain, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (2011) pp. 732–737
60.71
C. Dornhege, A. Kleiner: Behavior maps for online
planning of obstacle negotiation and climbing on
rough terrain, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (2007) pp. 3005–3011
60.72
M. Andriluka, P. Schnitzspan, J. Meyer, S. Kohlbre-
cher, K. Petersen, O. Von Stryk, S. Roth, B. Schiele:
Vision based victim detection from unmanned
aerial vehicles, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (2010) pp. 1740–1747
60.73
A. Kleiner, R. Kummerle: Genetic mrf model opti-
mization for real-time victim detection in search
and rescue, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (2007) pp. 3025–3030
60.74
R. Hahn, D. Lang, M. Haselich, D. Paulus: Heat map-
ping for improved victim detection, Proc. IEEE Int.
Symp. Saf. Secur. Rescue Robotics (2011) pp. 116–
121
60.75
A. Birk, S. Markov, I. Delchev, K. Pathak: Au-
tonomous rescue operations on the iub rugbot,
Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Saf. Secur. Rescue Robotics
(2006)
60.76
R.R. Murphy, J. Burke: The safe human-robot ra-
tio, Human-Robot Interactions in Future Military
Operations, ed. by M. Barnes, F. Deutsch (Ashgate,
Farnham 2010) pp. 31–49
60.77
M. Endsley: Design and evaluation for situation
awareness enhancement, Proc. 32nd Annual Meet.
Hum. Factors Soc. (1988) pp. 97–101
60.78
J.L. Drury, J. Scholtz, H.A. Yanco: Awareness in hu-
man-robot interactions, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst.
Man Cybern. (2003) pp. 912–918
60.79
J. Casper, R. Murphy: Workflow study on human-
robot interaction in usar, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (2002) pp. 1997–2003
60.80
J. Burke, R. Murphy, M. Coovert, D. Riddle: Moon-
light in miami: An ethnographic study of human-
robot interaction in usar, Hum.-Comput. Interact.
19(1/2), 85–116 (2004)
60.81
R. Murphy, J. Burke, S. Stover: Field Studies of Safety
Security Rescue Technologies Through Training and
Response Activities, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst., Vol. 2 (2004) pp. 1089–1095
60.82
N. Sato, F. Matsuno, T. Yamasaki, T. Kamegawa,
N. Shiroma, H. Igarashi: Cooperative Task Execu-
tion by a Multiple Robot Team and its Operators
in Search and Rescue Operations, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Vol. 2 (2004) pp. 1083–
1088
60.83
T. Arai, E. Pagello, L. Parker: Editorial: Advances in
multi-robot systems, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom.
18(5), 655–661 (2002)
60.84
D.P. Stormont, A. Bhatt, B. Boldt, S. Skousen,
M.D. Berkemeier: Building better swarms through
competition:
Lessons
learned
from
the
AAAI/
Robocup rescue robot competition, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (2003) pp. 2870–
2875
60.85
J. Suarez, R. Murphy: A survey of animal foraging for
directed, persistent search by rescue robotics, Proc.
IEEE Int. Symp. Saf. Secur. Rescue Robotics (2011)
pp. 314–320
60.86
A. Ferworn, A. Sadeghian, K. Barnum, H. Rahnama,
H. Pham, C. Erickson, D. Ostrom, L. Dell’Agnese: Ur-
ban search and rescue with canine augmentation

Part F | 60
1604
Part F
Robots at Work
technology, Proc. IEEE/SMC Int. Conf. System Syst.
Eng. (2006) pp. 334–338
60.87
L. Yihan, S.S. Panwar, S. Burugupalli: A mobile sen-
sor network using autonomously controlled ani-
mals, Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Broadband Netw. (BROAD-
NETS) (2004) pp. 742–744
60.88
R. Murphy: Rats, robots, and rescue, IEEE Intell.
Syst. 17(5), 7–9 (2002)
60.89
S. Tadokoro, H. Kitano, T. Takahashi, I. Noda,
H. Matsubara, A. Hinjoh, T. Koto, I. Takeuchi,
H. Takahashi, F. Matsuno, M. Hatayama, J. Nobe,
S. Shimada: The robocup-rescue project: A robotic
approach to the disaster mitigation problem,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2000)
pp. 4089–4094
60.90
T. Takahashi, S. Tadokoro: Working with robots in
disasters, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 9(3), 34–39
(2002)
60.91
I.R. Nourbakhsh, K. Sycara, M. Koes, M. Yong,
M. Lewis, S. Burion: Human-robot teaming for
search and rescue, IEEE Pervasive Comput. 4(1), 72–
79 (2005)
60.92
H. Kitano, S. Tadokoro: Robocup-rescue: A grand
challenge for multi-agent and intelligent systems,
AI Magazine 22(1), 39–52 (2001)
60.93
J. Scholtz, B. Antonishek, J. Young: A field study of
two techniques for situation awareness for robot
navigation in urban search and rescue, Proc. IEEE
Int. Work. Robot-Hum. Interact. Commun. (2005)
pp. 131–136

Multimedia Contents Robot Survei
1605
Part F | 61.1
61. Robot Surveillance and Security
Wendell H. Chun, Nikolaos Papanikolopoulos
This chapter introduces the foundation for surveil-
lance and security robots for multiple military and
civilian applications. The key environmental do-
mains are mobile robots for ground, aerial, surface
water, and underwater applications. Surveillance
literally means to watch from above, while surveil-
lance robots are used to monitor the behavior,
activities, and other changing information that
are gathered for the general purpose of managing,
directing, or protecting one’s assets or position.
In a practical sense, the term surveillance is taken
to mean the act of observation from a distance,
and security robots are commonly used to protect
and safeguard a location, some valuable assets, or
personal against danger, damage, loss, and crime.
Surveillance is a proactive operation, while security
robots are a defensive operation. The construction
of each type of robot is similar in nature with a mo-
bility component, sensor payload, communication
system, and an operator control station.
After introducing the major robot components,
this chapter focuses on the various applications.
More specifically, Sect. 61.3 discusses the enabling
technologies of mobile robot navigation, various
payload sensors used for surveillance or security
applications, target detection and tracking algo-
rithms, and the operator’s robot control console
for human–machine interface (HMI). Section 61.4
presents selected research activities relevant to
61.1
Overview............................................. 1605
61.2
Application Domains............................ 1607
61.3 Enabling Technologies ......................... 1608
61.3.1
Mobile Navigation ..................... 1608
61.3.2
Payload Sensors ........................ 1609
61.3.3
Detection and Tracking
Algorithms................................ 1611
61.3.4
Human–Machine Interface......... 1614
61.4 Active Research.................................... 1617
61.4.1
Solving the Data
Processing Problem ................... 1618
61.4.2
Detecting Human Activity
in Support of Surveillance .......... 1618
61.4.3 Facial Recognition
for Security Identification........... 1619
61.4.4 Collaborative ATR ....................... 1621
61.5 Conclusion........................................... 1622
Video-References......................................... 1623
References................................................... 1623
surveillance and security, including automatic data
processing of the payload sensors, automatic mon-
itoring of human activities, facial recognition, and
collaborative automatic target recognition (ATR).
Finally, Sect. 61.5 discusses future directions in
robot surveillance and security, giving some con-
clusions and followed by references.
61.1 Overview
Surveillance robots and Security robots are tactically
similar in design, but their speciﬁc purposes are very
different. The surveillance robot uses its payload to
map or search an area, while the security robot is used
to protect and safeguard an asset such as the perime-
ter of an airport. In comparing these two categories
of robots, the difference in operations would be analo-
gous to comparing surveillance to a global problem and
security to a local problem. Operationally, the surveil-
lance robot collects data with its electronic payload

Part F | 61.1
1606
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
c)
d)
Surveillance
Security
Fig.61.1a–d Examples of surveillance and security robots. (a)
Aerial-General Atomics Predator, (b) ground-QinetiQ TALON, (c)
ground-General Dynamics MDARS-E, and (d) surface water-Elbit
Stingray
(also known as the robot’s external sensor) and relays
the raw data back to its control station or preprocesses
the data with other information such as geographic in-
formation system (GIS) data and relays that information
to an exploitation element. Eventually as more auton-
omy is integrated into the vehicle, the robot will be able
to plan its own paths and point its sensor with mini-
mal human intervention. The quality of surveillance is
a function of target range, the amount of target clut-
ter, sensor resolution, and its probability of detection of
a target. Security robot operations consist of a mobile
robot patrolling a deﬁned area (or perimeter), detect-
ing an intruder or suspicious activities, and initiating
a response. A security robot can conduct predeﬁned or
random patrols, and automatically perform surveillance
tasks such as checking for intruders or assessing the sta-
tus of the perimeter defenses. Input from the operator
is required only if an intruder is detected or the robot
encounters a situation it is not programmed to handle.
Once contact is made, the operator is able to see, hear,
and talk to the intruder. If the intruder tries to avoid
the robot, the intruder can track them with its onboard
sensor and maneuver the robot to follow the suspected
intruder. Search and Rescue Robotics (Chap. 58) uses
some aspects of surveillance due to the potentially wide
area to be searched and the actions of security where
upon detection, an action is required.
The basic security robot [61.1] can be as simple
as a ﬁxed-sensor, mounted up high and able to pan
and tilt without being able to move around. There are
concepts to use a low-cost sensor (to sense motion,
detect vibration, or break a sensor-beam) in order to
cue a more sophisticated second sensor (e.g., radar or
video) for conﬁrmation. Depending on the complex-
ity of the security system, the ﬁxed sensor can alert
a mobile robot, which can otherwise be defeated by just
waiting for the robot to pass. A combination of ﬁxed
and mobile assets can be a very robust solution system.
Again, the nominal robot conﬁgurations are still similar
(Fig. 61.1): robot with sensor payload, an operator sta-
tion, and a communication system that links the robot
with its control station [61.2–5]. In some cases, there
may be two distinct control stations, one for control-
ling the robot and one for handling the payload data
as seen on military drones. A surveillance robot can be
more data intensive as compared to the security robot
which often performs in a structured environment and
has a narrower data load to process. Central to both
applications are the robot or robots, and the control
station. Robot surveillance is in greater use today due
to the war in the Middle East (Iraq and Afghanistan)
with the proliferation of military drones. The majority
of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are controlled via
teleoperation or by ﬂying automatically through way-
points. UAVs are now commonplace in the military,
and slowly making inroads into the commercial sec-
tor with applications in agriculture, forest ﬁre mapping,
and weather analysis. The next technological step for-
ward for surveillance robots is autonomous operations
and multi-vehicle coordination (i. e., swarming). Robot
security is less developed with some on-going research
programs within the military, and a few commercial
options available on the market today. Early mobile
robot companies in the 1980s were formed to address
these same security concerns such as Cybermotion Inc.
and Denning Mobile Robotics, Inc. but did not survive
over time. The next logical progression for robot se-
curity is to bring the costs down to make the systems
more viable, reduce false-positives to make detection
reliable, and take unnecessary personnel out of daily
control through the careful insertion of automatic and
autonomous technologies.
There are some fundamental issues that need to
be addressed in the design and development of the
surveillance or security robot system. For example,
each speciﬁc applications will dictate if surveillance
occurs indoors or outdoors, and similarly for indoor
or outdoor security, such that sensors are different to
address weather or lighting concerns. There are numer-
ous applications for either case, and will impact the
type of mobility chosen, and the type of sensors used
for monitoring and detection. As noted earlier, robot
surveillance typically requires mobility; while security
robots can be either stationary or mobile. In the later,
the environment is known (or classiﬁed as being struc-

Robot Surveillance and Security
61.2 Application Domains
1607
Part F | 61.2
tured) with set vehicle trajectories deﬁned a priori in
the majority of applications. Some robot security ap-
plications may involve a combination of both ﬁxed and
mobile robots depending on the size of the facility or
building. The ﬁrst issue to contend with is having to
select between teleoperated and autonomous control of
the robot. There is a scenario to start with a teleoper-
ated system that can eventually evolve toward a more
capable automatic or autonomous capability. However,
experience has shown that this upgrade seldom occurs
naturally without planning and when the capability does
mature, it will require large software block upgrades
and the hardware will normally require upgrading also
to increase overall capability.
61.2 Application Domains
Surveillance and security robot designs begin by ﬁrst
understanding its intended operational environment,
and simultaneously designing for data collection or var-
ious protection schemas. The typical surveillance robot
requires a surveillance payload, while a security robot
integrates a security sensor. This sensor suite is in ad-
dition to a navigation sensor suite required by the robot
for mobility. There may be an opportunity to use the
same sensor for both navigation and payload, but this
option is very isolated due to disparate range and resolu-
tion requirements. Since there are two different sensors,
some coordination is required between mobility of the
robot and the desired viewing angle of the payload
sensor.
Surveillance and security robots (Fig. 61.2) can
be found in all the normal environments (e.g., aerial,
ground, surface water, underwater, or space), for ex-
ample by watching from above from either space or
from an aerial elevation. Robots patrols are found in
ground [61.6, 7] and aerial applications:

Aerial Domain: The majority of long distance aerial
applications utilize ﬁxed wing vehicles ﬂying at
a set altitude and monitoring large surface areas.
Aerial vehicles come in all sizes from full-size plat-
forms that are the size of passenger jetliners to
small quad-rotors, vertical take-off and landing ve-
hicles, and microﬂapping wing aircraft as described
in Chap. 50. Electro-optical (EO), infrared (IR), or
synthetic aperture radar (SAR) are sensors nomi-
nally used to collect surveillance data. A ﬁxed-wing
aircraft can also be used for security, but rotorcraft
platforms (especially a quad-rotor) are the mobil-
ity of choice for its hovering capability as shown in
VIDEO 554 . The weakness in rotorcraft platforms
is its weight limitations, e.g., sensor payload weight
and vehicle ﬂight time. Key aerial design constraints
are Reynolds number, Lift-to-drag (L/D) ratio of the
wings, Breguet range analysis, vehicle endurance,
and vehicle aspect-ratios. Communications between
aircraft and ground control station is direct line-of-
sight or over-the-horizon using satellites or other
UAVs when functioning as a communication re-
peater.

Ground
Domain:
Ground
vehicles
are
either
custom-designed or based on retro-ﬁtting an ex-
isting commercial or military vehicle. They come
in all sizes from automobile-size to desk-size and
shoebox-size such as the Dragon Runner as de-
scribed in Chap. 48 and potentially walking as
described in Chap. 65. An EO, IR, or range ﬁnder
is used to collect surveillance data. For robot secu-
rity, a similar EO, IR, lidar, or range ﬁnder sensors
are often used as can be seen in
VIDEO 677 .
Key ground design constraints are types of vehi-
cle steering modes, type of propulsion (wheeled,
track, legged, or hybrid) system, range, suspen-
sion, and draw-bar pull performance. The standard
packet-radio used for communications is bandwidth
limited, thus ground robots would beneﬁt from and
automatic RSTA capability (RSTA: reconnaissance,
surveillance, and target acquisition).

Surface Water Domain: Surface vehicles are ei-
ther custom-designed, or based on retro-ﬁtting an
existing boat such as a rigid hull inﬂatable boat
(RHIB). They vary in sizes from a small jet ski to an
11 m RHIB. Surface water robots used for surveil-
lance and security are in its infancy. Potentially,
a radar can be used to conduct surveillance, data
and for robot security, a combination of radar and
EO sensors are envisioned. Key surface water de-
sign constraints are vehicle speed, range, and draft
and beam dimensions for ﬂotation. Surface navi-
gation requires GPS for localization when visual
techniques are ineffective and when water features
are indistinguishable.

Underwater Domain: Unmanned underwater ve-
hicles (UUVs) vary in size from man-portable
lightweight platforms to large diameter vehicles of
over 10 m in length. The larger vehicles have an ad-
vantage in terms of endurance and sensor payload
weight capacity as described in Chap. 51. Sonar is
the payload sensor (sidescan or other) and is used
to collect surveillance and support navigation data.

Part F | 61.3
1608
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
c)
d)
e)
b)
Fig.61.2a–e Wide ranging operational environments: (a) Air-Tacocopter, (b) Ground-Asian Forum for Corrections’ Robo-Guard,
(c) Underwater-Blueﬁn 9, (d) Surface water-Rafael Protector, and (e) Space-Ball Aerospace SBSS Satellite (SBSS: space based
space surveillance)
The majority of operational UUVs are tethered, but
untethered vehicles have a larger presence in the
research world (better known as autonomous under-
water vehicles or AUVs). Key underwater design
constraints are Reynolds Number, buoyancy, en-
durance, pressure, and being tethered or untethered.
Secure underwater communications is an issue for
connecting the robot with its operators.

Space Domain: Spacecraft by nature are considered
robotic. There is a combination of onboard automa-
tion and a mix of commanding from the ground dur-
ing critical events. Surveillance spacecraft range in
size from microsatellites (50100 kg) to traditional
(approximately 15 000 kg) surveillance-size space-
craft, and the typical payload sensors include high-
deﬁnition cameras and SAR. Security satellites are
used to protect assets on the ground, and having the
ability to detect and track objects from space is cru-
cial to preventing threats, whether real or accidental.
Key spacecraft design constraints are weight, power
usage, thermal cycling, surviving launch loads, and
operating at cryogenic temperatures.
As shown, there is a wide range of surveillance
and security robots in multiple domains. Domains have
speciﬁc individual environmental concerns. A domain
not discussed is underground, as experienced with min-
ing applications or the surveillance of caves with the
iRobot 110 FirstLook or other small unmanned ground
vehicle. It is clear with all of these robots that there is
a navigational component and a payload/sensor com-
ponent. Coordination between navigating and sensing
for surveillance and security is of interest to robotic
researchers. As noted earlier, the dominant robot ap-
plications are aerial surveillance, which covers large
surface areas by a fast moving aircraft, and ground (and
surface water) vehicles for security that move slower on
predeﬁned paths.
61.3 Enabling Technologies
Robot surveillance and Security requires sensing, data
collection, mobility (optional), navigation, communica-
tion, control, computer vision, and having a preplanned
response (i. e., using deterrence) as a security action.
Acceptable responses can be as benign as alerting a hu-
man guard, to immobilizing the threat, or potentially
incorporating a weapon to remove the threat. There are
many relevant technologies needed for this application.
In this section, we will discuss the selected enabling
technologies of: mobile navigation, payload sensors,
applicable algorithms, and the human–robot interface
at the operator control console.
61.3.1 Mobile Navigation
Teleoperated mobility is a well-developed technology
as long as the communication bandwidth is available
between the assets. For fast moving surveillance robots
such as large aerial platforms [61.8], teleoperation is an
option but today’s technology is to ﬂy via GPS way-
points. Waypoints are sets of coordinates that identify
a point in physical space such as X, Y, Z, or longi-
tude, latitude, and altitude. Navigation systems such as
GPS (or other radio triangulation systems, i. e., Loran
or Kaman) are used to maneuver the aircraft to ﬂy-
over or ﬂy-by the waypoints. Fly-by waypoints are used
when an aircraft should begin a turn to its next course
prior to reaching the waypoint separating the two route
segments, and ﬂy-over waypoints are used when the air-
craft must ﬂy over the point prior and start its turn. In
practice, the aerial robot will ﬂy directly overhead of
a ﬂy-over waypoint, and can miss a ﬂy-by waypoint
by a couple of miles due to a practice called cutting
the corner. The critical phases for all UAVs are during
its launch and at its recovery, and would beneﬁt from
emerging sense-and-avoid technologies. For underwa-
ter applications where GPS is not accessible unless the
platform surfaces periodically, the robot [61.9] navi-

Robot Surveillance and Security
61.3 Enabling Technologies
1609
Part F | 61.3
Fig. 61.3 Autonomous navigation in outdoor terrain (cour-
tesy of Carnegie Mellon University National Robotic En-
gineering Center)
a)
b)
Fig.61.4a,b Typical EO sensors: (a) UAV EO gimbal sen-
sor suite (courtesy of forward looking infrared (FLIR)
systems) and (b) (UGV) EO/IR gimbal sensor suite (cour-
tesy of L3 – Wescam)
gates through the use of dead reckoning with frequent
landmark corrections.
For unknown and unstructured environments, tele-
operation for security robots is the state of practice for
aerial, ground, and surface water applications. When
there is a setup period and the path is known a priori,
as within a structured environment, preplanned paths
can be incorporated. For a more advanced ground robot,
autonomous navigation [61.10] is being researched and
developed (predominantly in the outdoor environment).
Benchmarks for autonomous navigation (Fig. 61.3) in
complex, outdoor environments were established on
the DARPA PerceptOR and LAGR programs (LAGR:
learning applied to ground robots; PerceptOR: per-
ceptions for off-road robotics). Refer to Chap. 35 for
techniques that contribute to an autonomous navigation
capability.
61.3.2 Payload Sensors
The end-user for surveillance data are the comman-
ders, decision makers, analysts, targeteers, weaponeers
(when a response is separate from the UAV), and
cartographers. The information sought is timeliness,
synoptic coverage, sensor resolution, sensor accuracy,
interior details, and the differing elevations. Some basic
payload deﬁnitions are:

Real-time: information arrives after the event at the
speed of electrons.

Near Real-time: information arrives between real
time and 20 min after the event.

Accuracy: level of agreement with standard map da-
tum.

Precision: ﬁneness of resolution to which measure-
ments can be made.

Field of View: angular area observed by a ﬁxed
(nonscanning) sensor.

Field of Regard: angular area observed by a scan-
ning sensor.
Surveillance sensor options include passive imag-
ing [61.11], active imaging, and nonimaging sensors.
Film and EO sensors are passive imaging. An exam-
ple of passive imaging on the DARPA UGV Demo II
program is shown in
VIDEO 679
In addition to EO,
IR optical sensors often accompany its daylight coun-
terpart in order to be also able to see in darkness
(commonly denoted as EO/IR). Active imaging sen-
sors include radar and laser, while nonimaging sensors
are SIGINT, MASINT, and chemical/biological. Pas-
sive imaging sensors are compared in Table 61.1.
There are many active imaging sensors (Fig. 61.4)
such as SAR, a radar that uses its forward motion
to synthesize the equivalent of a large side-looking
antenna to produce high-resolution ground mapping.
Moving Target Indicator (MTI) is a radar mode that
uses differences in Doppler frequency due to the target’s
motion to distinguish it from stationary backgrounds
(i. e., ground clutter). MTI has a wide ﬁeld of view.
Foliage penetration is radar using VHF/UHF frequen-
cies and complex algorithms optimized to detect targets
through foliage (VHF: very high frequency; UHF: ultra
high frequency). Trees and leaves cover a good portion
of the world’s terrain. Inverse SAR is a radar mode us-
ing a target’s angular movement (instead of using the
platforms as for SAR) to detect moving objects, and
Interferometric SAR is a radar technique using widely
separated receivers to receive the same signal and com-
bining them to produce three-dimensional (3-D) maps
with highly accurate terrain relief. High resolution radar
is radar using short wavelengths (millimeter wave)
and sophisticated algorithms to produce high resolu-
tion (i. e., measured in inches) imagery. Laser imaging
radar is a radar using light (laser), rather than radio fre-
quency (RF) energy, for its illumination source. Robot
researchers recognize LIDAR to refer to the acronym
Light Detection and Ranging, and typically used in

Part F | 61.3
1610
Part F
Robots at Work
Table 61.1 Passive imaging sensors
Sensor
Advantages
Disadvantages
Film
Best resolution
Easily archived
Processing time compromises availability
Dissemination copies degrade with reproduction
Electro-
optical
(visible)
Easy to data link while in-ﬂight
High resolution
Easy to interpret (literal presentation)
High ﬁdelity reproduction
Cannot penetrate inclement weather
Volume of data produced
(current big data problem)
Infrared
(cooled)
Provides imagery during the dark
Penetrates some weather or obscurants
Detects targets otherwise invisible due to range or background
Provides evidence of recently past activity (IR traces), current
activity level (engines running), or status (fuel tank levels)
Effectiveness diminished in warmer seasons, desert
locales, hotter hours of the day, in Sun’s direction
Resolution typically 1 NIIRs poorer than that of
visible
Infrared
(uncooled)
Same operational advantages of cooled IR sensors, but: More
compact packaging
Reduced power requirements
Increased reliability
Lower costs
Less sensitive to thermal differences
Larger pixel size D less resolution
Spectral
Provides additional operational information about targets–
counter CC&D (camouﬂage, concealment, and deception)
techniques
Bandwidth intensive for data relay
Table 61.2 Active imaging sensors
Sensor
Advantages
Disadvantages
Synthetic
aperture radar
(SAR)
Sees at greater distances than visible
Sees through (most) weather and night
Provides constant perspective imagery
Power and processing intensive
Large aperture
Moving target
indicator (MTI)
Detects and tracks moving air/ground objects
Builds history of trafﬁc ﬂow over set intervals
A SAR-dependent technique requires further
processing of SAR returns
Foliage
penetration
(FOPEN)
Defeats most uses of foliage as camouﬂage
Provides limited ground penetration capability
Resolution limited due to frequencies used
Inverse SAR
(ISAR)
Detects small objects on moving backgrounds
Examples: boats, periscopes, and icebergs
Performance varies with aspect angle
Interferometric
SAR (IFSAR)
Achieves locational accuracies of 530 m
Maps large amounts of terrain in a short time
Requires relative positions of receivers be known
and maintained precisely
Requires extensive post-processing of data
High resolution
radar (HRR)
Range limited by frequencies used
Susceptible to intervening weather
Laser imaging
radar (LIDAR)
Useful for bathymetry, pollution monitoring, and altimetry
Potential for 2-D range-gated and 3-D imaging
Limited in range and by intervening weather
robot navigation. Active imaging sensors are compared
in Table 61.2.
Examples of Nonimaging sensors are SIGINT,
MASINT, and chemical/biological. SIGINT stands for
Signals Intelligence. Electronic signals are passive and
the emissions of electronic systems (from radars, nav-
igational aids, and others) can be intercepted and in-
terpreted. The challenge with SIGNIT is frequency
hopping and spread spectrum. Another facet of SIGNIT
is the interception of spoken communications signals
(through radios, etc.). The common challenges with
communication signals are digitization, encoding, enci-
phering, and/or frequency hopping. Measurement and
Signatures Intelligence (MASINT) can be either ac-
tive or passive. MASINT adds additional dimensions
to target data, but requires the intelligent interpretation
of this data. Finally, chemical/biological agent sensors
can also be passive or active. There are two types of
chemical/biological (Chem/bio) sensors: point and re-
mote, and these types of sensors perform based on
air sampling and can detect when previous chemical
or biological weapons have been used. Thus, Robots
have many options for payloads, dominated by weight,
power consumption, and ﬁeld of view. EO/IR are the
most commonly used sensors for surveillance. Its se-
lection is based on resolution, optical efﬁciency, and
detector responsiveness. Its resolution is a function of
its detector array size and the ﬁeld-of-view of the lens

Robot Surveillance and Security
61.3 Enabling Technologies
1611
Part F | 61.3
used. Figure 61.5 is used to determine the desired reso-
lution. Optical efﬁciency is dependent on lens diameter,
lens focal length, and pitch. Finally, detector respon-
siveness is based on the detector’s material, wavelength,
and temperature. These are all physical parameters.
A ﬁgure of merit used for a better payload is the product
of its normalized resolution with a normalized optical
efﬁciency with normalized detector responsiveness co-
efﬁcient.
In summary, both EO and SAR sensors are ap-
proaching their limits of immutable laws of physics. The
challenge today is in data reduction and its exploitation
in support of surveillance. As a rule of thumb, surveil-
lance sensors are selected based on:

VHF/UHF SAR is used for foliage penetration and
large area coverage.

Microwave SAR for high resolution imaging from
standoff ranges.

Microwave ground moving target indicator (GMTI)
radars for detecting moving targets and large area
coverage.

Electric support measures (ESM), SIGINT, and
communications intelligence (COMINT) for inter-
cepting, locating, recording, and analyzing radiated
electromagnetic signals.

Film for high resolution target classiﬁcation/iden-
tiﬁcation.

EO/IR for targeting and target classiﬁcation/iden-
tiﬁcation.
A similar security payload also incorporates EO/IR
sensors, but with resolution that commensurate with its
shorter range to targets. As a rule of thumb, security
sensors are selected as:

Radar is used to detect moving targets at a long
range.

Radar for close-in target tracking.

EO/IR for close-in target tracking.
Surveillance data is either stored for later use, or
transmitted to exploitation centers for processing. Se-
curity data can be processed onboard the robot or
transmitted to the operator control console for real-time
observance or for limited post-processing. The key for
security is in its algorithms with respect to detecting,
identifying, and tracking a potential target or suspicious
activities. If weight and processing power is not an is-
sue, multiple overlapping sensors are used on robots
to reduce false detections and conﬁrm target identiﬁca-
tion [61.12]. This is a layered approach. Performance is
increased when a wide area surveillance system is used
for initial detection or cross-cueing. For example, an
0
10
20
Slant range (UAV to target)
30
40
0.01 mrad
0.05 mrad
0.1 mrad
0.2 mrad
0.5 mrad
0.02 mrad
(nm)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
(km)
Mapping resolution (GRD) (ft.)
NIIRS rating
25
20
15
10
5
0
2
3
4
5
6
7 8
Fig. 61.5 Determining sensor resolution for ATR or RSTA (cour-
tesy of L. Newcome)
MTI sensor can provide a wide area search and collect
coarse information about potential targets sufﬁcient to
cue the narrow ﬁeld of view EO and IR sensors that can
continue the process of tracking, classifying, and identi-
fying potential targets. Payload sensors collect data, but
it is the processing of the data into information that can
be used by others that is the nugget for both the surveil-
lance and security communities.
61.3.3 Detection and Tracking Algorithms
An important technology in surveillance reconnais-
sance, surveillance, and target acquisition (RSTA).
This topic is also closely associated with intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) and automatic
target recognition (ATR). ATR, RSTA, and ISR are
age-old problems in the military to identify and clas-
sify activities of interest in the environment [61.13–16].
During surveillance, the user has an option to acquire
a target at a speciﬁed location, search an area or sec-
tor for either stationary or moving targets, perform
a panoramic reconnaissance of an area or sector, ini-
tiate ﬁre control, or manually control its sensors by
a human operator to acquire surveillance imagery as
depicted in Fig. 61.6. For example, if the sensor is
stationary and the target is stationary, than a maximum-
average-correlation-height approach where a bank of
linear correlation ﬁlters are optimized to respond to
the presence of a speciﬁc target object by producing
a peak at its corresponding location can be very effec-
tive. If a stationary target search is used, the platform
is directed to search a speciﬁed area for targets using
stationary target detection and recognition algorithms.

Part F | 61.3
1612
Part F
Robots at Work
UAV1 ground track
UAV1 trajectory
UAV2 trajectory
Road ≡ Sensor path
Fig. 61.6 UAV sensor coverage
with aircraft trajectory (courtesy
of University of Illinois – Urbana
Champaign)
These algorithms can detect both stationary and mov-
ing targets, but moving target detection does not make
use of motion related information that is associated with
a robot. Moving objects in the scene are the subjects of
interest in most visual surveillance applications using
EO/IR sensors. Speciﬁcally, the actions of the moving
objects need to be monitored and appropriate ﬂags need
to be raised when events of interest occur in the scene.
The mobile platform needs to be controlled so as to
aid the surveillance task. Thus, the objectives of the
surveillance task and the associated real-time computa-
tion constraints involve difﬁcult challenges in building
highly robust yet computationally cheap algorithms for
detection, classiﬁcation, and correspondence.
Manually, the user can select several options in-
cluding the type of search modes to be used in which
the sensor is assumed to be either stationary or mov-
ing, and the target is assumed to be either stationary
or moving. For example, a UAV and satellite are al-
ways in motion, while the UGV/USV/UUV can either
be either stationary or mobile. The selection of the sta-
tionary target mode causes stationary target detection
and recognition algorithms to run, while the selection
of the moving target mode causes moving target detec-
tion and tracking algorithms to be executed. The user
would beneﬁt from an automatic selection feature. The
demanding nature of the required detection criteria for
surveillance and security necessitates the integration of
complementary technologies which can sense motion,
characterize patterns, ﬁnd thermal signatures, and cap-
ture temporal behavior as can be seen in
VIDEO 678 .
The RSTA or ATR algorithm sequence [61.17] in-
clude reconnaissance, acquire target through search,
and ﬁnally target tracking. A panoramic reconnaissance
command can direct the robot’s payload to collect a mo-
saic of images over a wide ﬁeld of regard and send it
to the operator for manual viewing. There are several
techniques used to create an image mosaic from a se-
quence of images. The registration between images is
obtained by minimizing the sum-squared error of image
intensities at each pixel. Although this technique pro-
duces very accurate registration results, it tends to be
slow, and typically require operator interaction to ini-
tialize the registration function. The collected mosaic
may be used to assess trafﬁcability, check out regions
of interest such as roads and bridges, and manually
look for enemy targets. To acquire targets, the vehicle
is directed to look at a particular map location or in
a particular direction, acquire an image, and perform
stationary target detection on that image. An operator
can select several search options in which the robot is
assumed to be either stationary or moving, and the tar-
get is assumed to be stationary or moving. The search
area determines whether to search a map region or an
azimuth-elevation wedge. An azimuth may be speciﬁed
relative to the world (map) or speciﬁed in vehicle coor-
dinates. The selection of the stationary target function
causes stationary target detection and recognition algo-
rithms to run, while selection of a moving target mode
causes moving target detection and tracking algorithms
to be executed. The search mode determines whether to
search an area in a single time or multiple times frames.
An EO/IR sensor can use a combination of image
processing algorithms. Probing-type algorithms include
connected-component analysis or a blob analysis.
A large body of image processing algorithms has
been developed to detect targets using techniques in-
cluding histogram manipulation, convolution, morphol-
ogy, over- and under-sampling, quantization, and spec-
tral processing using Fourier transforms and discrete
cosine transforms (DCTs). These algorithms tend to
be computationally intensive [61.18, 19]. Other pop-
ular ATR algorithms include binary template match-
ing, multispectral imaging, and wavelet transformation
techniques. Of the many types of image enhancement
algorithms, a spatial convolution kernel ﬁltering tech-

Robot Surveillance and Security
61.3 Enabling Technologies
1613
Part F | 61.3
nique produces the most dramatic results. A convolu-
tion kernel generates a new pixel value based on the
relationship between the value of the pixel of interest,
and the values of those that surround it. In convolution,
two functions are overlaid and multiplied by one an-
other. One of the functions is the video frame image
and the other is a convolution kernel. ATR algorithms
can be broadly described sequentially as: target detec-
tion, a segmentation function, feature evaluation, and
classiﬁcation. Target detection approaches can be either
image-based or model-based.
If stationary target search is used, the platform is
directed to search a speciﬁed area for targets using
stationary target detection and recognition algorithms.
These algorithms can detect targets using blob extrac-
tion and blob tracking algorithms. When a potential
target is detected, images are sent to a target recognition
algorithm for additional processing. Target recognition
can be accomplished through the use of a hashing al-
gorithm. Various target detections are passed to the
hashing algorithm for labeling as one of several tar-
get types contained in a database or perception library.
The hashing algorithm also produces an estimate of
target pose and when the processing is complete, the
results are sent to the operator for veriﬁcation. Moving
objects are typically detected using background sub-
traction. For this type of search, the platform is directed
to look at a speciﬁed area for targets using a moving tar-
get detection algorithm based on temporal differencing.
Most surveillance systems use background subtraction
as an efﬁcient means of motion detection with a sta-
tionary camera. Unfortunately, background subtraction
techniques are not always robust under camera jitter,
varying lighting conditions, and moving foliage. Tech-
niques such as afﬁne transformations are used for image
stabilization. Problems of a periodic nature such as
jitter and moving foliage induce multi-modal distribu-
tion of pixel intensity values. If the classiﬁcation of
the background environment can be calculated, then
the background can be subtracted from the image to
enable the use of motion detection and segmentation al-
gorithms.
One popular method for background model gen-
eration is the incorporation of autoregressive (AR) or
inﬁnite impulse response (IIR) ﬁlters. A single AR or
IIR ﬁlter is used for each pixel to estimate the domi-
nant mode of the background. The AR ﬁlter estimates
the center and width of the dominant mode of the back-
ground, and it is associated with each ﬁlter per pixel
is a value that approximates the probability that the
mode represented by the ﬁlter is seen by the pixel.
When an intensity value is seen by the pixel falls within
the mode of one of the pixel’s ﬁlters and the associ-
ated probability is greater than a preset threshold, then
the pixel is declared as background. When a partic-
ular intensity value is not represented by any of the
ﬁlters for that pixel, a new ﬁlter is added with an as-
sociated low probability value. When a ﬁlter matches
intensity value, its probability rating is increased and
the probabilities of the rest of the ﬁlters associated
with that pixel are decreased. Thus, at each detection
cycle, the ﬁlters corresponding to a pixel adapts to
better ﬁt the values of its background. This motion
detection technique is enhanced by the use of feed-
back from higher-level algorithms such as a classiﬁer
and/or a correspondence algorithm. The classiﬁer has
the capability to reject spurious detections. This infor-
mation can be used either to create a new ﬁlter for the
pixel or to increase or decrease the probability threshold
for detection. Information from its correspondence can
be used to predict future locations of detections. This
considerably improves the quality of segmentation. An-
other correlation-based tracker function can be added,
which controls the payload pan/tilt gimbal to keep a de-
tected target centered in the image. A harder problem
is when the target is moving and the sensor is also
moving.
For security robots, camera-based EO/IR sensors
have long been used for security and observation pur-
poses as depicted in
VIDEO 681 . Surveillance cam-
eras are typically ﬁxed at known positions and have
coverage of a circumscribed area deﬁned by the ﬁelds-
of-view of the cameras. Although some recent vision
research has addressed autonomous surveillance, in
most cases, humans perform the sensory processing.
For an autonomous surveillance example, a vision sys-
tem can provide the geometric shape of the target and
its angular location relative to a radar sensor, while its
onboard radar system can measure both the distance to
the target and its relative velocity radial to the vehicle.
The target’s perceived geometric shape and distance are
then used to calculate its cross-section for purposes of
human target classiﬁcation. The complementary mix of
using multiple sensor (camera and radar) technologies
allows for greater than 99% probability of detection
with less than 1% nuisance alarm rate (also known as
false-positives) for ﬁelding a robust security system.
This is a good example of cross-cueing. Camera control
can be seen in
VIDEO 702 . Once a target is detected,
it is tracked in the center of the collective ﬁeld-of-view
in order to provide veriﬁcation using successive vision
and radar-based detections. A track ﬁle is maintained on
each detected target to correlate size, distance, speed,
and other parameters over an extended period of time.
This time-based integration approach allows the system
to signiﬁcantly reject nuisance alarms while using ex-
tremely high gains during the detection process. The
classiﬁcation procedure in a security application maps

Part F | 61.3
1614
Part F
Robots at Work
a given image sequence of a moving object to the most
likely class label by classifying each image indepen-
dently and then classifying the resulting set of class
labels. The classiﬁer can also reject classifying an ob-
ject. For example, a classiﬁer on the mobile detection
assessment and response system (MDARS) program
has demonstrated class-conditional sequence error rates
of less than 5% and a false alarm rejection rate of 80%
in disjoint testing. Unknown objects and novel views of
known objects are detected by considering the class la-
bel history over an image sequence. Image sequences
that yield a signiﬁcant fraction of rejections or cause
atypical classiﬁer confusion are saved for later human
interpretation.
In the last step, the temporal correspondence of
a moving object plays a very important role in classify-
ing, tracking, and interpreting an object’s actions. Large
number of targets of varying sizes in a scene preclude
the use of simple positional correspondence, i. e., cor-
respondence based purely on the positions of moving
objects. In such situations, other features of the mov-
ing objects, such as different appearance traits, need to
be considered for robust correspondence. For example,
the measure of goodness of the features can be chosen
not only on the object in question, but also on other ob-
jects in the scene. A globally good set of features can
be estimated a priori, but only a subset of these features
might be relevant to the correspondence of a partic-
ular object. Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) has
developed a technique called differential discrimina-
tive diagnosis in which it provides a systematic method
for estimating the relevance of features and checking
the temporal consistency of these features for a par-
ticular object. The correspondence task is performed
with a two-part process. The ﬁrst part relies on po-
sitional correspondence using linear prediction. This
part nominates a set of likely candidate matches for
a reference object. The second part uses appearance-
based correspondence to ﬁnd the best match among
those nominated by linear predictions. A simple lin-
ear classiﬁer is trained based on learning techniques to
determine whether or not two images are of the same
object. Differential discriminative diagnosis identiﬁes
those features that are most relevant to the correspon-
dence problem. Efﬁcient correspondence is achieved by
enforcing the temporal consistency of the relevances
determined for a particular object, and this technique
has demonstrated correspondence among moving ob-
jects with an accuracy of 96%. Target correspondence
across multiple sensors can be achieved using a max-
imum a posteriori (MAP) estimate of the observation
sequence to maximize target appearance and spatiotem-
poral probabilities. A correspondence problem is also
used in stereo vision.
Another approach is to perform the correspondence
step using a multiple robots conﬁguration as in a swarm,
which is addressed further in the multiple vehicle ATR
active research area to follow (in Sect. 61.4.4). A more
complex scenario involves multiple sensors detecting
several targets simultaneously, and a moving sensor
payload detecting a moving target [61.20, 21]. A mov-
ing target causes the radar signature to shift outside the
normal return of a radar image. This shift in frequency
(a Doppler shift) is used to distinguish stationary tar-
gets from moving targets. The detection of a moving
target is more difﬁcult when the sensor is also in mo-
tion. Augmenting data such as speed and heading of
the moving target can be used to better proﬁle potential
targets. Other factors such as size, radar cross-section,
and environmental clutter are used to make assump-
tions governing the type and intent of the target. MTI
cross-cueing data has been overlaid in real-time on to
3-D visualization of the terrain to allow an operator to
quickly locate a target such that the EO/IR sensor could
be rapidly slewed to the target of interest. Test results
have shown that wide ﬁeld-of-view MTI radar that is
used to cue a limited narrow ﬁeld of view EO/IR sensor
has drastically increased situational awareness on the
battleﬁeld. The next evolution is to automate the cross-
cueing process in order to track, classify, and identify
potential stationary and moving targets [61.22].
61.3.4 Human–Machine Interface
Unmanned aerial robots that are used for surveil-
lance come in all types from the smaller, hand
launched Raven, Puma, and Wasp drones to the mid-
size Aerosonde and ScanEagle to the larger Predator,
Reaper, and Global Hawk platforms that can stay air-
borne for 24 to greater than 28 h missions [61.23].
The Global Hawk architecture is depicted in Fig. 61.7
with its many communication links. The larger UAVs
and their ground segment components interact through
an over-the-horizon (OTH) satellite relay and line-of-
sight (LOS) links to maintain command and control
and sensor data dissemination communication paths
for launch, ﬂight, and recovery. Bandwidth compres-
sion is applied to the sensor data to maximize area
coverage and data throughput. The communications
systems are being designed to minimize susceptibility
to jamming and interception. Dissemination of UAV
collected intelligence is made through direct downlinks
to national and theater intelligence centers and other
exploitation systems, or through established hard com-
munications between UAV ground control stations, and
the exploitation systems. The UAV ground control sta-
tion has limited capabilities to disseminate collected
intelligence directly to an exploitation ground system

Robot Surveillance and Security
61.3 Enabling Technologies
1615
Part F | 61.3
Fig. 61.7 Global Hawk UAV architec-
ture (courtesy of Northrop Grumman
and Raytheon)
a)
b)
c)
Fig.61.8a–c Global Hawk ground elements: (a) ground station, (b) operator seats, and (c) UAV display (courtesy of
Northrop Grumman and Raytheon)
or battleﬁeld customer. When deployed, a fully oper-
ational system consists of four Predators (with EO/IR
sensors), a ground control station (GCS) that houses the
pilots and sensor operators for human–machine inter-
face (HMI), and a primary satellite-link communication
suite.
The Predator UAV can run autonomously, executing
simple missions such as reconnaissance on a software
program, or it can run under the control of its crew
(Fig. 61.8). The crew of a single Predator consists of
one pilot and two sensor operators. The pilot drives
the aircraft using a standard ﬂight stick and associated
controls that transmit commands over a C-Band line-of-
sight data link. When operations are beyond the range
of the C-Band link, a Ku-Band satellite link is used to
relay commands and responses between a satellite and
the aircraft. Onboard, the aircraft receives orders via an
L-3 Communication satellite data link system. The pi-
lots and crews use the images and radar received from
the aircraft to make decisions about controlling the air-
craft. The pilot’s main mission is to ﬂy the plane, while
the sensor operator controls the cameras that bring the
battleﬁeld into full view to gain intelligence. Unlike
other manned missions, pilots for large UAVs only con-
trol the plane during landing and takeoff. However,
sensor operators do much more than watch the feedback
from their cameras [61.24]. Working together with pi-
lots, they do preﬂight checks, coordinate with the air
control tower, and provide feedback to pilots. The intel-
ligence data is streamed back to exploitation elements
where the data is analyzed by people on the ground or
with automatic detection algorithms. Not including the
exploitation element, it currently takes approximately
82 personnel to operate four of the larger UAVs for
a 24 h period including technicians and support person-
nel.
Typically, unmanned ground robots used for secu-
rity [61.25, 26] are available in limited options from
the commercial Vigilus system, Reborg-Q security
robot, OFRO (by Quadretec Ltd.) and patrolbot, to
the army’s mobile detection assessment and response
system (MDARS) and its family of integrated rapid
response equipment (FIRRE). The MDARS [61.27]
system consists of ground robotic platforms capable of

Part F | 61.3
1616
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
Supervisor
VCR
Mlc
Printer
Product assessment system
Product assessment computer
Operator
stations
Planners
Database administration system
Database access computers
MDARS support program
GPS base station
System
emergency halt
Remote
diagnostics
Video
switcher
Link
server
R/F modem
(Wireless ethernet)
Speaker
LAN
Digital audio out
Digital video out
Digital video in
Digital
audio in
Fig. 61.9 MDARS operational concept and system components (courtesy of Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center
(SPAWAR), Paciﬁc)
preprogrammed autonomous movement, motion detec-
tion, an incident assessment subsystem, and two way
communications capability between operator and robot.
Its operational conﬁguration will consist of pair(s) of
mobile platforms employing a suite of sensors that are
preprogrammed or remotely controlled by an opera-
tor located at a remote monitoring and control station.
The actual number of ﬁxed and mobile patrol units for
a given location will be site speciﬁc. The MDARS In-
crement 1 system components are depicted in Fig. 61.9
with its various interfaces. All such robots and sen-
sors (known collectively as resources) are controlled by
the multiple resource host architecture (MRHA), with
minimal human (i. e., security personnel and operators)
supervision required [61.28]. The individual processors
are connected via an Ethernet local area network (LAN)
that supports a peer-to-peer communications protocol
(expandable to 32 platforms or robots). The user inter-
face provides a big picture representation of secured
areas and system resources. User intervention is re-
quired only when a platform encounters an exceptional
condition such as an environmental hazard or a security
breach.
The operator control unit is either in monitor mode,
in which the operator observes and monitors the sta-
tus of the robot and sensors, or the operator is in direct
control of a single resource such as a single robot in
a multi-robot system. Moreover, the robot itself carries
a number of sensory systems, each of which must also
be controlled individually. For example, MDARS may
have eight cameras, two radars, and four lights, but only
a single camera, radar, and light is controllable at any
given time as shown in
VIDEO 680 . Multiple cameras
can be viewed simultaneously, but the operator cannot
pan two of them at the same time. A joystick button or
dialog button can be conﬁgured to cycle between the
various payloads. The control of the resources and each
of its selected subresources is integrated in such a way
that a single joystick can be used to perform all relevant
joystick tasks. As an example, the operator can pan the
selected camera with the joystick, and then press a but-
ton to put the robot in teleoperation mode and drive the
robot using the same joystick. The concept of modes is
used to provide rich control features for each resource.
This paradigm reduces the complexity of the software
and simpliﬁes the user interface presented on its dis-
plays, while still giving the operator full control of each
asset. The MDARs control station allows the operator
to execute preplanned patrols, random patrols, or user-
directed patrols as seen in
VIDEO 701 . Automation of
sensor selection would improve operations.
The controller displays can perform basic image
processing, which means they take in video at a cer-
tain resolution, and display it in the display’s native
resolution [61.29]. Video processing is the act of scal-
ing, which is converting an incoming video signal from
one size or resolution to another in order to work with
the display panel. This is what is usually referred to as
video processing, and it is a minor feat compared to
video enhancement. Video enhancement techniques can

Robot Surveillance and Security
61.4 Active Research
1617
Part F | 61.4
a)
b)
c)
Fig.61.10a–c MDARS mission control center. (a) Control station, (b) MDARS operator, and (c) display (courtesy of
SPAWAR)
be based on spatial domain methods or frequency do-
main methods [61.30]. Image enhancement algorithms
offer a wide variety of approaches for modifying im-
ages to achieve visually acceptable images. The choice
of techniques implemented is a function of the spe-
ciﬁc task, image content, observer characteristics, and
viewing conditions. Mosaic images provide better visu-
alization of a tracking scenario. All security sensors are
fused together to form a composite threat score on po-
tential targets, and intruder alarms are reported to the
user on the MDARS console (Fig. 61.10). Also, the
intruder’s range and bearing are displayed on a map
window and a digital stream from the camera is shown
in a video window. For ATR, the operator receives
notiﬁcation of a target by the appearance of an icon
on the map display at the operator interface. Select-
ing an icon brings up a target veriﬁcation panel and
a target response panel showing the imagery associ-
ated with the target that was provided by the sensors.
With experience, most operators became comfortable
and competent with normal operations, and each ac-
quiring variable levels of proﬁciency in responding to
exceptional events such as dealing with intruders or tak-
ing manual control of the robot.
61.4 Active Research
In addition to enabling robotic surveillance and secu-
rity technologies, there are many active areas of robot
research, such as being able to produce high-quality
imagery from a mobile platform that poses a number
of challenges. In addition to issues related to camera
motion and the resulting image perspectives, the qual-
ity of the video imagery can also be compromised by
poor environmental conditions, data link degradations,
Fig. 61.11 Automatic target recogni-
tion (courtesy of Bilkent University)
and bandwidth limitations. Atmospheric factors such as
poor lighting at dawn, dusk, or night time, the presence
of shadows, target occlusion and adverse weather, in-
cluding sandstorms and variable clouds, can obscure
important details. Some identiﬁed areas of interest
include: Sect. 61.4.1 in solving the data processing
problem due to the large amounts of sensory informa-
tion collected, Sect. 61.4.2 detecting human activity in

Part F | 61.4
1618
Part F
Robots at Work
12 cameras take
concurrent images
≈7.2 km
≈40 km2
0.15 m GSD
MQ-9 Reaper
a)
b)
4 km radius
Fig.61.12a,b Multiple real-
time video stream sensors.
(a) Gorgon Stare (courtesy
of Sierra Nevada Corp) and
(b) ARGUS-IS (courtesy of
BAE Systems)
support of surveillance, Sect. 61.4.3 facial recognition
for security identiﬁcation purposes, and Sect. 61.4.4
collaborative ATR by multiple robot in either hetero-
geneous or homogeneous systems.
61.4.1 Solving the Data Processing Problem
With all the useful information that UAVs provide
comes the problem of how to sort through it all and
ﬁnd actionable data. This is the Big Data problem for
the military. One manual solution to the data explo-
sion problem is to tag the data, store it, and retrieve
it when needed. Unfortunately, this information would
not be timely. Data fusion involves the use of tech-
niques and software that combine data from multiple
sources and analyze the data to make it useful for the
end user [61.31]. Data fusion can involve the combining
of data (such as UAV video) with a GIS, which adds lo-
cation and time data to the images gathered (Fig. 61.11).
To accomplish this, the raw data has to be combined
with metadata, which is information about the data that
enables the data to be combined. On-going research
such as with intelligent search is another tool that can
be used to make UAV data more accessible. Based on
modern artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) techniques such as
machine learning, depth ﬁrst searches using iterative
deepening, or depth ﬁrst searches based on space com-
plexity, users can quickly personalize a search to make
relevant data more easily available [61.32].
To help users retrieve information, one promising
method, called natural language processing, discov-
ers user preferences and needs by either extracting
knowledge from what users are looking for or by in-
teractively generating explanatory requests to focus
users on the information they are interested in [61.33].
The use of natural language to improve the perfor-
mance of the intelligent search engines is one aspect
of AI. Other related AI technologies for automated
processing include object recognition and statistical
machine learning, or application of AI in intelligent
search is facial recognition. One promising solution
that could help with the data overload issue is more
efﬁcient techniques for sensor fusion. For example,
a multisensor fusion algorithm that can bring together
information from multiple platforms about a partic-
ular target of interest in a uniﬁed display would be
beneﬁcial to the operator. Researchers will need to
develop smart technologies that automate the entire pro-
cess of archiving, tagging, retrieving, managing, and
displaying data and other information gathered by in-
creasingly sophisticated sensors. As an adjacent topical
area, machine-to-machine interfaces will need to be-
come much more transparent in order to handle the data
deluge [61.34].
A future technology called wide area surveillance
(Fig. 61.12) is based on a new sensor system called
Gorgon Stare, a video capture technology that uses
a spherical array of nine to twelve cameras attached to
an UAV. With so many sensors, Gorgon Stare needs to
utilize a system of tagging and incorporating metadata
to be fully effective. Initial reports on the progress of
Gorgon Stare is that there are deﬁciencies in its IR per-
formance, having numerous interoperability problems,
having a lack of stability of the sensors, and encounter-
ing reliability problems. These issues can be overcome
as the program matures. Unfortunately, the new sensor
system is still limited by the human’s inability to pro-
cess the information gathered from many cameras, or
rely on advanced automatic processing techniques to
fuse the information into the coherent picture.
61.4.2 Detecting Human Activity in Support
of Surveillance
The problem of using computer vision to track and un-
derstand the behavior of human beings is a very impor-
tant tool for surveillance and security operations. At its
highest level, this problem tries to recognize human be-
havior and understanding intent and motive from visual
observations [61.35, 36], and [61.37]. This is a difﬁcult
task, even for humans to perform, and misinterpreta-
tions are common. The problem has several subareas
of human motion recognition, surveillance, tracking,
and activity detection. In the area of surveillance, au-
tomated systems to observe pedestrian trafﬁc areas and
detect dangerous action are becoming important. Many
such areas currently have stationary surveillance cam-
eras in place. However, all of the image understanding

Robot Surveillance and Security
61.4 Active Research
1619
Part F | 61.4
Fig. 61.13 Monitoring individual and group human activi-
ties (courtesy of University of Minnesota)
and risk detection is left to human security person-
nel. This type of observation task is not well suited to
humans, as it requires careful concentration over long
periods of time. Therefore, there is clear motivation to
develop automated, intelligent, vision-based monitor-
ing systems that can aid a human user in the process of
risk detection and analysis. Eventually, this capability
will migrate from stationary cameras to mobile security
applications.
Most of these human activity applications require
an automated recognition of high-level activities, com-
posed of multiple simple (or atomic) actions of persons
as depicted in Fig 61.13. The goal of human activity
recognition is to automatically analyze on-going activ-
ities from EO/IR sensors through a sequence of image
frames [61.38]. There are various types of human activ-
ities and depending on their complexity, human activi-
ties can be categorized into four different levels based
on: gestures, actions, interactions, and group activi-
ties. Gestures are elementary movements of a person’s
body part and actions, and is deﬁned as single-person
activities that may be composed of multiple gestures
organized temporally. Interactions are human activi-
ties that involve two or more persons and/or objects as
shown on
VIDEO 683 , while group activities are the
activities performed by conceptual groups composed
of multiple persons and/or objects. Promising events
for activity monitoring include the detection of loiter-
ing individuals [61.39], and the detection of unusual
crowd activities [61.40], which can be difﬁcult to dis-
cern from normal crowd activities. It would be useful
for security robots to detect motion in restricted ar-
eas [61.41], detect perimeter breaches, and detect when
security cameras are tampered with [61.42]. Also of in-
terest which may or may not involve the human include
the throwing of an object or the detection of an aban-
doned object. The University of Minnesota has done
work in detecting abandoned objects as referred to in
VIDEO 682 .
There are several approaches used in the recog-
nition of different levels of activities. Single-layered
approaches are approaches that represent and recog-
nize human activities directly based on sequences of
images while hierarchical approaches represent high-
level human activities by describing them in terms of
other simpler activities. Single-layered approaches are
divided into two classiﬁcations depending on how hu-
man activities are modeled directly from the video data:
space-time approaches (a sequence of two-dimensional
(2-D) images placed in chronological order) and se-
quential approaches (a sequence of observations). Un-
fortunately, the majority of activity monitoring algo-
rithms is far from being real-time, which is an issue
for surveillance. Robot surveillance is demanded in
today’s environment where the tracking and monitor-
ing of people is an integral part of everyday activities.
Monitoring is typically accomplished with multiple
cameras [61.43] and from multiple vantage points.
Activities of interest vary widely from throwing an
object [61.44] to the subtle task of abandoning an
object such as a backpack or leaving on unknown pack-
age [61.45]. In many instances, it would be important
to estimate or count the size of a gathering [61.46–48].
Activity monitoring suffers from the same issues asso-
ciated with ATR such as signed noise, tracking issues,
and segmentation issues arising out of the stabilization
of video images. There are a large number of new and
promising improvement methods on the horizon, in-
cluding space-time feature-based approaches, manifold
learning, rigid/nonrigid motion analysis, and hierarchi-
cal approaches.
61.4.3 Facial Recognition
for Security Identification
In order for a security robot to perform its mission to
protect and safeguard, sometimes it will encounter peo-
ple which have to be discerned as either friend or foe.
In order to make such a determination, face recognition
is critical [61.49]. Most of the current face recognition
algorithms can be categorized into two groups: image
template-based or geometry feature-based [61.50, 51].
The template-based methods computes the correlation
between a face and one or more model templates to es-
timate the face’s identity. For the other approach, the
geometry feature-based methods analyze explicit local
facial features, and their geometric relationships. Face
recognition is a two-step procedure consisting of ﬁrst
detecting a face and followed by recognition. Top re-
searchers have argued that the accurate detection of
human faces in arbitrary scenes is the most impor-

Part F | 61.4
1620
Part F
Robots at Work
Fig. 61.14 Local binary patterns using OpenCV (courtesy of Yale
University)
tant process involved, followed by the face recognition
process. When faces could be located exactly in any
scene, the recognition step makes the ﬁnal determina-
tion of classifying the person as being either friend or
foe.
Algorithms are used to know how to differentiate
between a basic face and the rest of the background. If
the background is controlled (referred to as being highly
structured and uncluttered), an algorithm to remove the
background will produce face boundaries. Faces can be
found by either using color, motion, or a mixture of
both types of information. The detailed steps include
acquisition, normalization, and recognition of moving
faces in dynamic scenes. Color as a cue can be used
for detection and tracking, and provides a computa-
tionally efﬁcient yet effective method which is robust
under rotations in depth and during partial occlusions.
This method can be combined with both motion- and
appearance-based face detection. The main idea is to
model a class-conditional density for each person in
a representation space of relatively low dimensionality.
Unfortunately, color detection doesn’t work on all kinds
of skin color, and is still susceptible to varying lighting
conditions.
Humans must periodically blink to keep their eyes
moist, and detecting a blinking pattern in an image se-
quence is a reliable means of detecting the presence
of a face. Blinking provides a space-time signal which
is easily detected and unique to faces. Detection by
blinking is precise, but requires capturing an image pair
during a blink. A common technique for recognition is
the correlation with a set of Eigen images. Better results
have been demonstrated by combining stereo, color,
and face detection techniques into an integrated ap-
proach [61.52]. Depth estimation using stereo cameras
is used to eliminate background effects. Skin-hue clas-
siﬁcation identiﬁes and tracks likely body parts within
the silhouette of a user, while face pattern detection dis-
criminates and localizes the face within the identiﬁed
body parts. Other approaches to ﬁnding faces include
the use of neural networks, taking advantage of statisti-
cal cluster information, and model-based face tracking.
Related work continues using edge-based methods and
geometric models such as edge-orientation matching
and using the Hausdorff distance measurement. The
leading face ﬁnding algorithm in unstructured environ-
ments is based on a series of weak classiﬁers such
as Haar-like features, representation by integral im-
ages, and a method for combining successively more
complex classiﬁers in a cascading structure which can
increase the speed of detection by focusing attention on
promising regions of the image. An example of facial
recognition can be seen in
VIDEO 553 .
Upon detecting faces, facial recognition has numer-
ous distinguishable landmarks, where different peaks
and valleys make up facial features (Fig. 61.14). Mea-
surements of these features include:

Distance between the eyes

Width of the nose

Depth of the eye sockets

The shape of the cheekbones

The length of the jaw line.
The 2-D (or 3-D) image of the face is compared to
a database of known people’s faces. After detection, the
image is analyzed to determine the head’s position, size,
and pose estimation. The sensor measures the curves of
the face to a submillimeter scale to create a template.
This face template is translated into a unique code that
represents the features on the face. This is followed by
a matching function that compares the image taken with
a database of known faces. This is followed by a veriﬁ-
cation step that identiﬁes the person in the image.
Skin biometrics can be used to verify the match.
Techniques such as Surface Texture Analysis, Local
Feature Analysis, and Vector Templating are used to
improve the match. There are some impediments to
facial recognition such as a lack of resolution in the
sensor, glare from glasses, obscuration due to long
hair hiding features of the face, and poor lighting
conditions. The wider issue is to obtain and main-
tain an up-to-date database for matching. It would be
simple to keep records on who belong to the facil-
ity, and to declare unknown faces as foes. However,
there will be instances that the human is not a foe,
but does not exist in the database either. Another is-
sue would be a scenario in which there are multiple
human intruders that stretches the capability of the
robot security system. As a ﬁnal veriﬁer, the human
operator can be used to make the ﬁnal determination
as friend or foe, visually or through an interrogation
process.

Robot Surveillance and Security
61.4 Active Research
1621
Part F | 61.4
Fig. 61.15 Collaborative ATR (courtesy of NATO)
61.4.4 Collaborative ATR
Swarm robots are a new approach to the coordination
of multi-robot systems that consist of large numbers
of robots, either homogeneous or possibly heteroge-
neous robots, i. e., team of air and ground platforms as
depicted in
VIDEO 700 . Swarming implies that a col-
lective behavior emerges from the interactions between
robots or the interactions of robots with its environ-
ment [61.53, 54], and [61.55]. In a coordinated team
approach, individual platforms are able to pass target lo-
cation information to one another during a target search
operation in an attempt to get conﬁrmation of a sus-
pected target. Thus, a robot that detects a target passes
the target’s location (and a surrounding map-based un-
certainty region) to another robot for conﬁrmation. The
conﬁrming robot searches the nonoccluded portion of
the given map region for the detected vehicle and re-
turns the results of its search to the originating vehicle
where they are compared with the original search re-
sults (Fig. 61.15). A ﬁnal target’s result is compiled and
sent to the operator for veriﬁcation.
The intent of cooperative target search is to increase
the accuracy and reliability of the target search process.
The conditions under which this search is guaranteed to
be accurate must deal with the following issues:

It is unclear under what conditions the originating
vehicle can be sure that a positive response from the
conﬁrming vehicle corresponds to the same target
or to any target at all.

If the orientations of either or both robots are off
signiﬁcantly from their true orientations, it may be
that the vehicles are not searching the same map re-
gion or that different targets within the uncertainty
region are reported as the same target.

Cooperative target searches puts stringent demands
on the accuracy of vehicle orientation estimates.
This problem can be partially alleviated by having
reliable, long-range laser rangeﬁnders on all partic-
ipating robots.

Cooperative target search also puts stringent de-
mands on the accuracy of target detection and
recognition algorithms. For example, it is not un-
usual for an unsophisticated target detection algo-
rithm to generate a positive return from a warm rock
or large animal.

The fact that the conﬁrming vehicle may return
a positive response does not increase the probabil-
ity that the object is actually a valid target. In trials,
conﬁrmation of nontargets has actually been ob-
served in ﬁeld testing.

It is also difﬁcult to tell whether the conﬁrmation of
a valid target results from observation of the same
target or detection of a false target. To alleviate this
kind of problem, accurate and sophisticated target
recognition algorithms are required.
Another concern is when the conﬁrming robot re-
turns a negative response. This lack of conﬁrmation
may indicate nothing more than that the conﬁrming
robot is looking in the wrong area or that it simply
failed to detect a target that is present in its sensor’s
ﬁeld-of-view. At this point, it is unclear under what
conditions the originating vehicle should disregard its
own initial detection. These issues provide motivation
for researchers to develop more sophisticated ATR al-
gorithms to obtain higher conﬁdence reports and reduce
the number of false alarms. These same issues also
provide motivation for the development of context un-
derstanding algorithms.
Since cooperative target searches place these strin-
gent demands on the accuracy of vehicle orientation
estimates, teams of surveillance platforms must solve
the multi-robot distributed estimation problem [61.56]
and the related source localization problems [61.57].
Each of the robots collects sensor data regarding its
own motion and shares this information with the rest
of the team during periodic update cycles. A single
estimator, possibly in the form of a Kalman ﬁlter, pro-
cesses the available positioning information from all
the members of the team and produces a pose esti-
mate for every one of the robots. The equations for
this centralized estimator can be written in a decen-
tralized form, therefore allowing this single Kalman
ﬁlter to be decomposed into a number of smaller
communicating ﬁlters. Each of these ﬁlters processes
sensor data collected by its host robot. The exchange
of information between the individual ﬁlters is nec-
essary only when two robots detect each other and
measure their relative pose. The resulting decentral-
ized estimation schema, which referred to as collective
localization, constitutes a unique means for fusing mea-

Part F | 61.5
1622
Part F
Robots at Work
surements collected from a variety of sensors with
minimal communication and processing requirements.
What complicates the estimation is that the robots are
moving and the targets (or multiple targets) may also
be moving.
Researchers have introduced a simple updating rule
deﬁning a distributed estimation scheme that balances
consensus with tracking. It was shown that the probabil-
ity distribution of the vector of estimates obeys a Master
Equation derived from ﬁrst and second moment dy-
namics. From this master equation, the evolution of
its mean estimate and its variance can be computed.
If the individual robots ignore the discrete state and
simply do consensus, the estimates converge with the
probability of one to the average of the initial values
of the estimates. Moreover, by appropriately weighting
the discrete state in the update rule, the average can be
tracked with an arbitrarily small variance at steady state
conditions.
Source localization is addressed by incorporating
a visual gradient-based approach for a robot to adap-
tively search a location-unknown source. While mov-
ing, the robot only measures the received image quality
and adaptively decides the motion direction in each
time instant. Simulation results indicate that the robot
can reach the sensor when the initial signal-to-noise ra-
tio (SNR) is as low as 0 dB and the standard deviation
of motion errors is 10% of the motion step size. Due
to the adaptive nature of this solution, this approach is
robust to measurement noise and motion errors. Since
the robot moves along the direction of the gradient es-
timated at each time, the approach can be applied to an
arbitrary signal strength distribution in an area [61.58].
One of the scenarios can be in an environment of ob-
stacles so that the robot at the initial location does not
have a line of sight to the sensor. The other scenario
to consider is that the source is a cluster of activated
sensors that send signals at the same time. Thus, the gra-
dient approach can be extended from 2-D to 3-D space
for applications incorporating aerial vehicles [61.59].
A multi-robot system can be applied to both the surveil-
lance problem and the security scenario, but continued
research is required to make such a system robust and
practical.
61.5 Conclusion
Robots for surveillance typically involve unmanned
aerial vehicles that can cover large areas and sit
on regions of interest to provide a persistent pres-
ence [61.60]. UAVs today utilize teleoperation or ﬂies
via way-points on longer traverses to search selected
regions. During ﬂight, there are instances in the mis-
sion proﬁle where launch and recovery operations are
also autonomous. With EO/IR and SAR payloads, the
data is streamed back to processing elements for post-
processing. This becomes a bottleneck due to the high
number of platforms in theater and the enormous vol-
ume of data that cannot be processed in real-time. These
operations are also highly susceptible to weather is-
sues, and impacted by delays and bandwidth limitation
issues associated with the many communication links
utilized. Collaborative ATR with swarms of vehicles is
an emerging capability, but introduces its own set of is-
sues in terms of consistently and correctly identifying
targets of interest. Finally, there are related efforts in
ground and unmanned surface water (USV) RSTA, and
present different environmental-type challenges such as
handling sensor motion issues due to buoyancy or ﬂying
indoors (
VIDEO 703 ).
Security robots are a maturing capability, but yet to
be commonplace. The vision is to have a single opera-
tor commanding multiple stationary and mobile robots
to deter criminal activities, especially the destructive
actions of some people. The overall mission is to de-
tect, assess, and take action in order to deter a potential
threat. Typical robots include ground platforms, hov-
ering type vehicles, and surface water vehicles of all
sizes. Key issues include the monitoring of human ac-
tivities, detecting faces, and determining the extent of
the potential threat. With multiple sensors available to
Fig. 61.16 Humanoid KUBO as a security guard (courtesy
of Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
(KAIST))

Robot Surveillance and Security
References
1623
Part F | 61
the operators, there will be limited opportunities to con-
ﬁrm the target or set of targets due to time sensitivities.
Moreover, sensor fusion can deliver a more complete
picture of the situation for human or automatic conﬁr-
mation. Affectivity of the system is quantiﬁable based
on measuring coverage, having a high recognition rate,
and demonstrating a low false alarm rate. A future di-
rection is to potentially arm the security robots, but this
introduces a new series of issues such as liability and
ethics. Chapter 80 (Roboethics: Social and Ethical Im-
plications) expands on these larger societal issues.
A future of humanoids (Fig. 61.16) and social
robots used for surveillance and security is an inevitable
possibility [61.61]. Humanoids (Chap. 67) provide
bipedal mobility as a ground robot, and have an inherent
sensor payload with its head. However, the head sensors
must be used to both navigate and perform reconnais-
sance. Its surveillance capability is limited by the ﬁeld
of view and resolution of its head cameras, but has
expanded orientation capabilities based on its anthro-
pomorphic neck and torso gimbals. This type of robot
can take advantage of existing RSTA algorithms such
as human activity monitoring, face recognition, and
collaborative ATR for target conﬁrmation as discussed
previously. However, all these features are dependent on
having adequate onboard processing capability in order
to make real-time conﬁrmation and decisions. Who is
to say a future humanoid security robot cannot pick up
a remote sensor suite similar to binoculars in order to
search and detect a potential intruder?
Video-References
VIDEO 553
Security: Facial recognition
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/61/videodetails/553
VIDEO 554
Surveillance by a drone
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/61/videodetails/554
VIDEO 677
Ground security robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/61/videodetails/677
VIDEO 678
People detection from a UAV
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/61/videodetails/678
VIDEO 679
UGV demo II: Outdoor surveillance robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/61/videodetails/679
VIDEO 680
MDARS I: Indoor security robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/61/videodetails/680
VIDEO 681
Scout robot for outdoor surveillance
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/61/videodetails/681
VIDEO 682
Detection of abandoned objects
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/61/videodetails/682
VIDEO 683
Tracking people for security
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/61/videodetails/683
VIDEO 700
Collaborative robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/61/videodetails/700
VIDEO 701
Multi-robot operator control unit
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/61/videodetails/701
VIDEO 702
Camera control from gaze
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/61/videodetails/702
VIDEO 703
Indoor, urban aerial vehicle navigation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/61/videodetails/703
References
61.1
B. Shoop: Product manager force protection sys-
tems: Equipment that protects and secures, Chem-
Bio Def. Quart. 4(2), 8–11 (2007)
61.2
I. Pavlidis, V. Morellas, P. Tsiamyrtzis, S. Harp: Urban
surveillance systems: From the laboratory to the
commercial world, Proceedings IEEE 89(10), 1478–
1497 (2001)
61.3
H.R.
Everett,
D.W.
Gage:
From
laboratory
to
warehouse:
Security
robots
meet
the
real
world,
Int.
J.
Robotics
Res.
18(7),
760–768
(1999)
61.4
A. Birk, H. Kenn: RoboGuard, a teleoperated mobile
security robot, Control Eng. Pract. 10(11), 1259–1264
(2002)
61.5
M. Saptharishi, K.S. Bhat, C.P. Diehl, J.M. Dolan,
P.K. Khosla: CyberScout: Distributed agents for
autonomous
reconnaissance
and
surveillance,
Mechatron. Mach. Vis. 93, 100 (2000)

Part F | 61
1624
Part F
Robots at Work
61.6
T.A. Heath-Pastore, H.R. Everett, K. Bonner: Mo-
bile robots for outdoor security applications, Am.
Nucl. Soc. 8th Int. Top. Meet. Robotics Remote Syst.,
Pittsburgh (1999) pp. 25–29
61.7
H.R. Everett, G. Gilbreath, T.A. Heath-Pastore,
R.T. Laird: Controlling multiple security robots in
a warehouse environment, AIAA-NASA Conf. Intell.
Robots, Houston (1994)
61.8
E. Kuiper, S. Nadjm-Tehrani: Mobility models for
UAV group reconnaissance applications, Int. Conf.
Wirel. Mob. Commun. (ICWMC) Bucharest, Romania
(2006)
61.9
B. Fletcher: New roles for UUVs intelligence, surveil-
lance, and reconnaissance, 9th Pac. Congr. Mar. Sci.
Technol., Honolulu (2000)
61.10
A. Zelinsky, R.A. Jarvis, J.C. Byrne, S. Yuta: Planning
paths of complete coverage of an unstructured en-
vironment by a mobile robot, Proc. 8th Int. Conf.
Adv. Robotics (ICAR), Tsukuba (1993)
61.11
D. Stein, J. Schoonmaker, E. Coolbaugh: Hyper-
spectral Imaging for Intelligence, Surveillance,
and Reconnaissance (Space and Naval Warfare
Systems Center, San Diego 2001), Biennial Re-
view
61.12
D. W. Gage, W. D. Bryan, H. G. Nguyen: Internet-
ting tactical security sensor systems, Proceedings
SPIE 3393 (1998) doi:10.1117/12.317683
61.13
V. Morellas, I. Pavlidis, P. Tsiamyrtzis: DETER: De-
tection of events for threat evaluation and recog-
nition, Mach. Vis. Appl. 15, 29–45 (2003)
61.14
W. Severson, R. Rimey: Reconnaissance, surveil-
lance, and target acquisition in the UGV/Demo II
program, Proc. 4th ATR Syst. Technol. Symp., Vol.
I – Unclassif. (1994) pp. 129–142
61.15
D.
Hougen, R.
Rimey, W.
Severson:
Descrip-
tion
of
the
RSTA
subsystem.
In:
Reconnais-
sance, Surveillance, and Target Acquisition for
the Unmanned Ground Vehicle: Providing Surveil-
lance ‘Eyes’ for an Autonomous Vehicle, ed. by
O. Firschein, T.M. Strat (Morgan Kaufman, New York
1997)
61.16
P.Y. Oh, W.E. Green: CQAR: Closed quarter aerial
design for reconnaissance, surveillance and target
acquisition tasks in urban areas, Int. J. Comput. In-
tell. 1(4), 353–360 (2004)
61.17
B. Bhanu: Evaluation of automatic target recog-
nition algorithms, Proceedings SPIE 0435 (1983)
doi:10.1117/12.936960
61.18
C. Olson, D. Huttenlocher: Automatic target recog-
nition by matching oriented edge pixels, IEEE Trans.
Image Proc. 6(1), 103–113 (1997)
61.19
A. Vasile, R. Marino: Pose-independent auto-
matic target detection and recognition using 3-D
ladar data, Proceedings SPIE 5426 (2004) doi:10.1117/
12.546761
61.20
H. Andreasson, M. Magnusson, A. Lilienthal: Has
something changed here? autonomous difference
detection for security patrol robots, Proc. IEEE/RSI
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), San Diego (2007)
pp. 3429–3435
61.21
A. Muccio, T.B. Scruggs: Moving target indicator
(MTI) applications for unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs), Proc. Int. Conf. Radar (RADAR), Adelaide
(2003)
61.22
E. Ribnick, N. Papanikolopoulos: Estimating 3D
trajectories of periodic motions from stationary
monocular views, Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ECCV) (2008)
61.23
C. Nehme, J. Crandall, M. Cummings: An opera-
tor function taxonomy for unmanned aerial vehicle
missions, Proc. 12th Int. Command Control Res.
Technol. Symp. (2007)
61.24
T.E. Noell, F.W. DePiero: Reduced bandwidth video
for remote vehicle operations, Proc. Assoc. Un-
manned Veh. Syst. (AUVS) (Association for Un-
manned Vehicle Systems, Washington 1993)
61.25
T. Fong, C. Thorpe, C. Baur: Collaboration, di-
alogue, and human–robot interaction, 10th Int.
Symp. Robotics Res., Lorne, Victoria (2001)
61.26
Carroll, D., Nguyen,. C., Everett, H.R., and B. Fred-
erick: Development and testing for physical security
robots, SPIE Proceedings 5804 (2005) doi:10.1117/
12.606235
61.27
B. Shoop, M. Johnston, R. Goehring, J. Moneyhun,
B. Skibba: Mobile detection assessment and re-
sponse systems (MDARS): A force protection, phys-
ical security operational success, Proceedings SPIE
6230 (2006) doi:10.1117/12.665939
61.28
H.R. Everett, R.T. Laird, D.M. Carroll, G. Gilbreath,
T.A.
Heath-Pastore,
R.S.
Inderieden,
T.
Tran,
K. Grant, D.M. Jaffee: Multiple Resource Host Archi-
tecture (MRHA) for the Mobile Detection Assessment
Response System (MDARS) (Space and Naval Warfare
Systems Center, San Diego 2000), Technical Docu-
ment 3026, Revision A
61.29
Y. Takahashi, I. Masuda: A visual interface for secu-
rity robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Robot Human
Commun., Tokyo (1992)
61.30
R. Maini, H. Aggarwal: A comprehensive view of
image enhancement techniques, J. Comput. 2(3),
8–13 (2010)
61.31
H. Warston, H. Persson: Ground surveillance and
fusion of ground target sensor data in a networked
based defense, Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Inf. Fusion,
Stock. (2004) pp. 1195–1201
61.32
J. Loyall, J. Ye, S. Neema, N. Mahadevan: Model-
based design of end-to-end quality of service in
a multi-UAV surveillance and target tracking ap-
plication, 2nd RTAS Workshop Model. Embed. Syst.
(MoDES), Toronto (2004)
61.33
A.J. Joshi, F. Porikli, N. Papanikolopoulos: Breaking
the interactive bottleneck in multi-class classi-
fication with active selection and binary feed-
back, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recogn.
(2010)
61.34
S. Balakirsky: Semi-autonomous mobile target en-
gagement system, Proc. Assoc. Unmanned Veh.
Syst. (AUVS) (1993) pp. 927–946
61.35
P. Turaga, R. Chellappa, V. Subrahmanian, O. Udrea:
Machine recognition of human activities: A survey,
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol. 18(11), 1473–
1488 (2008)
61.36
A. Shee, W.-Y. Chung: High accuracy human activ-
ity monitoring using neural network, IEEE 3rd Int.

Robot Surveillance and Security
References
1625
Part F | 61
Conf. Converg. Hybrid Inf. Technol., Busan, South
Korea (2008)
61.37
J. Aggarwal, M. Ryoo: Human activity analysis: A re-
view, ACM Comput. Surv. 43(3), 16 (2011)
61.38
A. Fernadez-Caballero, J. Castillo, J. Rodriguez-
Sanchez: Human activity monitoring by local and
global finite state machine, Expert Syst. Appl. 39,
6982–6993 (2012)
61.39
N. Bird, O. Masoud, N. Papanikolopoulos, A. Isaacs:
Detection of loitering individuals in public trans-
portation areas, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 6(2),
167–177 (2005)
61.40
S. Saxena, F. Bremond, M. Thonnat, R. Ma: Crowd
behavior recognition for video surveillance, Lect.
Notes Comput. Sci. 5259, 970–981 (2008)
61.41
Z. Zhou, X. Chen, Y.-C. Chung, Z. He, T. Han, J. Keller:
Activity analysis, summarization, and visualiza-
tion for indoor human activity monitoring, IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol. 18(11), 1489–1498
(2008)
61.42
E. Ribnick, S. Atev, O. Masoud, N. Papanikolopoulos,
R. Voyles: Real-time detection of camera tamper-
ing, IEEE Int. Conf. Adv. Video Signal Based Surveill.
(AVSS), Sydney, Aust. (2006)
61.43
L. Fiore, D. Fehr, R. Bodor, A. Drenner, G. Somasun-
daram, N. Papanikolopoulos: Multi-camera human
activity monitoring, J. Intell. Robotic Syst. 52(1), 5–
43 (2008)
61.44
E. Ribnick, S. Atev, O. Masoud, N. Papanikolopou-
los, R. Voyles: Detection of thrown objects in in-
door and outdoor scenes, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2007)
61.45
N. Bird, S. Atev, N. Caramelli, R. Martin, O. Masoud,
N. Papanikolopoulos: Real time, online detection
of abandoned objects in public areas, IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 3775–3780
61.46
P. Kilambi, E. Ribnick, A. Joshi, O. Masoud, N. Pa-
panikolopoulos: Estimating pedestrian counts in
groups, Computer Vis. Image Underst. (CVIU) (2008)
61.47
D.
Fehr,
R.
Sivalingam,
V.
Morellas, N.
Pa-
panikolopoulos, O. Lotfallah, Y. Park: Counting
people in groups, Proc. 6th IEEE Int. Conf. Adv.
Video Signal Based Surveill. (AVSS) (2009) pp. 152–
157
61.48
G. Somasundaram, V. Morellas, N. Papanikolopou-
los, L. Austin: Counting pedestrians and bicycles in
traffic scenes, Proc. 2009 IEEE Conf. Intell. Transp.
Syst. Conf., St. Louis (2009)
61.49
J.N.K. Liu, M. Wang, B. Feng: Ibotguard: An in-
ternet-based intelligent robot security system us-
ing invariant face recognition against intruder,
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern C 35(1), 97–105
(2005)
61.50
W. Zhao, R. Chellappa, A. Rosenfeld: Face recogni-
tion: A literature survey, ACM Comput. Surv. 35(4),
399–458 (2003)
61.51
R. Gross, J. Shi, J. Cohn: Quo vadis Face Recog-
nition? CMU-RI-TR-01-17 Report (Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh 2001)
61.52
P. Viola, M. Jones: Robust real-time face detection,
Int. J. Comput. Vis. 57(2), 137–154 (2004)
61.53
J. Sauter, R. Mathews, A. Yinger, J. Robinson, J.
Moody, S. Riddle: Distributed pheromone-based
swarming control of unmanned air and ground ve-
hicles for RSTA, Proceedings SPIE (2008) doi:10.1117/
12.782271
61.54
Y. Guo, L.E. Parker, R. Madhavan: Towards col-
laborative robots for infrastructure security appli-
cations. In: Mobile Robots: The Evolutionary Ap-
proach, Book Series on Intelligent Systems Engi-
neering Series, ed. by N. Nedjah, L. dos Santos
Coelho, L. de Macedo Mourelle (Springer-Verlag,
Berlin 2006) pp. 185–200
61.55
J. Feddema, C. Lewis, P. Klarer: Control of multi-
ple robotic sentry vehicles, Proc. SPIE Unmanned
Ground Veh. Technol. 3693, 212–223 (1999)
61.56
F. Shaw, E. Klavins: Distributed estimation and
control for stochastically interacting robots, 47th
IEEE Decis. Control Conf., Cancun (2008)
61.57
S. Roumeliotis, G. Bekey: Distributed multirobot
localization, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 18(5), 781–
795 (2002)
61.58
Y. Sun, J. Xiao, X. Li, F. Cabrera-Mora: Adaptive
source localization by a mobile robot using sig-
nal power gradient in sensor networks, IEEE Glob.
Commun. Conf., New Orleans (2008)
61.59
X. Zhou, S. Roumeliotis: Robot-to-Robot relative
pose estimation from range measurements, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 24(6), 1379–1393 (2008)
61.60
D. Carroll, H.R. Everett, G. Gilbreath, K. Mullens:
Extending mobile security robots to force protec-
tion missions, Proc. Progr. Robotics FIRA RoboWorld
Congr. (2009)
61.61
N. Hopper: Security and complexity aspects of hu-
man interactive proofs, 1st Workshop Human Inter-
act. Proofs (HIP), Palo Alto (2002)

Multimedia Contents Intelligent V
1627
Part F | 62
62. Intelligent Vehicles
Alberto Broggi, Alex Zelinsky, Ümit Özgüner, Christian Laugier
This chapter describes the emerging robotics appli-
cation field of intelligent vehicles – motor vehicles
that have autonomous functions and capabilities.
The chapter is organized as follows. Section 62.1
provides a motivation for why the development of
intelligent vehicles is important, a brief history of
the field, and the potential benefits of the tech-
nology. Section 62.2 describes the technologies
that enable intelligent vehicles to sense vehicle,
environment, and driver state, work with digital
maps and satellite navigation, and communi-
cate with intelligent transportation infrastructure.
Section 62.3 describes the challenges and solu-
tions associated with road scene understanding –
a key capability for all intelligent vehicles. Sec-
tion 62.4 describes advanced driver assistance
systems, which use the robotics and sensing tech-
nologies described earlier to create new safety and
convenience systems for motor vehicles, such as
collision avoidance, lane keeping, and parking
assistance. Section 62.5 describes driver moni-
toring technologies that are being developed to
mitigate driver fatigue, inattention, and impair-
ment. Section 62.6 describes fully autonomous
intelligent vehicles systems that have been devel-
oped and deployed. The chapter is concluded in
Sect. 62.7 with a discussion of future prospects,
while Sect. 62.8 provides references to further
reading and additional resources.
62.1
The Motivation and Approaches
to Intelligent Vehicles .......................... 1628
62.1.1
Brief History.............................. 1628
62.1.2
Benefits of Intelligent Vehicles ... 1631
62.2 Enabling Technologies ......................... 1632
62.2.1
Vehicle State ............................. 1632
62.2.2 Environment State..................... 1632
62.2.3 Digital Maps and Satellite Data... 1633
62.2.4 Driver State............................... 1634
62.2.5 Communication......................... 1634
62.3 Road Scene Understanding .................. 1635
62.3.1
Road/Lane Tracking.................... 1636
62.3.2 Road Sign Detection .................. 1637
62.3.3 Traffic-Light Detection ............... 1637
62.3.4 Visibility Assessment.................. 1637
62.3.5 Vehicle Detection ...................... 1638
62.3.6 Pedestrian Detection ................. 1639
62.4 Advanced Driver Assistance .................. 1639
62.4.1
Collision Avoidance
and Mitigation .......................... 1640
62.4.2 Adaptive Cruise Control .............. 1643
62.4.3 Stop and Go.............................. 1644
62.4.4 Parking Assistance..................... 1644
62.4.5 Lane Keeping............................ 1644
62.4.6 Lane Changing .......................... 1645
62.5 Driver Monitoring ................................ 1645
62.5.1
Driver Fatigue, Inattention,
and Impairment........................ 1646
62.5.2 Driver and Passenger Protection . 1647
62.5.3 Emergency Assistance ................ 1647
62.6 Towards Fully Autonomous Vehicles ..... 1647
62.6.1
Operating Safely ........................ 1647
62.6.2 Traffic Congestion ...................... 1647
62.6.3 Environmental Factors ............... 1648
62.6.4 The Automobile of the Future..... 1648
62.6.5 Automated Vehicle Deployment.. 1649
62.7 Future Trends and Prospects ................ 1650
62.8 Conclusions and Further Reading ......... 1651
Video-References......................................... 1651
References................................................... 1652

Part F | 62.1
1628
Part F
Robots at Work
62.1 The Motivation and Approaches to Intelligent Vehicles
An important ﬁeld of application of robotics has
emerged in the last 2025 years which is centered on
the automobile, named intelligent vehicles. The auto-
mobile has been one of the most important products
of the twentieth century. It has generated an enormous
industry and has given individuals a freedom of move-
ment that has completely changed our way of life.
Indeed, the automobile has been a key factor in the
large change in the way our urban societies are struc-
tured. Today, there are more than 800 million vehicles
on the planet, and this number is expected to double in
the next 10 years. This challenge has led to the devel-
opment of an active research domain with the ultimate
goal of automating the typical tasks that humans per-
form while driving. An intelligent vehicle is deﬁned as
a vehicle enhanced with perception, reasoning, and ac-
tuating devices that enable the automation of driving
tasks such as safe lane following, obstacle avoidance,
overtaking slower trafﬁc, following the vehicle ahead,
assessing and avoiding dangerous situations, and deter-
mining the route. The overall motivation for building
intelligent vehicles has been to make motoring safer,
and more convenient and efﬁcient.
Approaches to this problem revolve about three
main architectures [62.1], according to the degree of au-
tonomy they aim for (Fig. 62.1):
a) Driver-centric approaches are built around the idea
of having a human in the loop supervising the func-
tions of the vehicle.
b) Network centric-approaches assume that vehicles
can share information with other vehicles or the in-
frastructure.
Driver centric
Network centric
Vehicle centric
Collaborative
driving
Situational
awareness
Obstacle
avoidance
Road
following
Obstacle
detection
Pure driving
Electronic
stability control
Automatic
parking
Advanced cruise
control (ACC)
stop and go
Lane keeping
support
Route
planning
Mission
planning
Adaptive
behavior
Degree of human intervention (%)
Degree of vehicle
autonomy/intelligence (%)
100
100
0
0
Fig. 62.1 Architectures
for autonomous vehicles
(after [62.1])
c) Vehicle-centric approaches aim to build fully au-
tonomous intelligent vehicles with no human in the
loop.
62.1.1 Brief History
Futurama was an exhibit at the 1939 World Fair de-
signed by Norman Bel Geddes that presented a pos-
sible model of the world 20 years into the future
(19591960) with automated highways. The exhibit
was sponsored by the General Motors Corporation and
was characterized by its vision of automated high-
ways. Technological development in support of this
vision began in the late 1940s and early 1950s, with
pioneering efforts by RCA Laboratories and GM Re-
search. By 1960, GM had tested full-scale cars driving
automatically on test tracks, with lane tracking, lane
changing and car following functions automated. The
goal of these efforts was the development of an auto-
mated highway system (AHS). In the 1960s, a key effort
was research and development under the leadership
of Fenton and his team at The Ohio State Univer-
sity [62.2]. During these years, vehicles were developed
to test steering and speed controllers. Runs were accom-
plished at the Transportation Research Center (TRC)
grounds, using active sensing (a live wire imbedded
in the roadway) and with steering control done with
analog feedback controllers. In Japan, research on auto-
mated highway systems was started in the early 1960s
in the Mechanical Engineering Laboratory (MEL) and
the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
and Technology (AIST). The automated driving system
in 1960s employed a combination of an inductive cable

Intelligent Vehicles
62.1 The Motivation and Approaches to Intelligent Vehicles
1629
Part F | 62.1
embedded under a roadway surface and a pair of pickup
coils at the front bumper of a vehicle for lateral control,
and it was a cooperative system between vehicle and
infrastructure. In addition to the free agent, a rear-end
collision avoidance system between two automated ve-
hicles based on roadway vehicle sensors was developed.
The automated vehicle drove up to 100 km=h on a test
track in 1967 [62.3].
The history of intelligent vehicles developed fur-
ther over the ensuing decades. Although the ﬁrst ideas
were born in the 1960s, the level of maturity of the
technology at that time did not allow pursuit of the orig-
inal goal of implementing fully autonomous all-terrain,
all-weather vehicles. The ﬁrst documented prototypes
of such vehicles were ﬁelded by a few groups in the
military arena in the mid 1980s [62.4–6]. The ini-
tial stimulus that triggered these innovative ideas was
provided by the military sector, which was eager to
provide complete automation to its ﬂeet of ground
vehicles.
Testing of autonomous vehicles on real roads in
a real environment was one of the most important
milestones in the history of intelligent vehicles. In Ger-
many, in the beginning of the 1980s Dickmanns and his
team equipped a Mercedes-Benz van with cameras and
other sensors. For safety reasons, initial experiments in
Bavaria took place on streets without trafﬁc. Since 1986
the robot car VaMoRs from the same group manages to
drive all by itself, since 1987 at speeds up to 96 km=h.
A number of these capabilities were also highlighted
in the European PROMETHEUS Project. (for exam-
ple, [62.7])
This happened in the mid to late 1990s. Figure 62.2
shows the ﬁrst motor vehicles that pioneered the devel-
opment of intelligent vehicles. In the summer of 1995,
the Carnegie Mellon Navlab group ran their No Hands
Across America experiment [62.8]. They demonstrated
automated steering, based solely on computer vision,
a)
c)
b)
d)
Fig.62.2a–d Pictures of pioneering autonomous vehicles
(a) NAVLAB, (b) UBM, (c) Argo, and (d) Ligier-INRIA
electric vehicles
over 98% of the time on a 2800 mile trip across the
United States. At the same period the EU funded the
ﬁrst large and ambitious project for autonomous car
navigation (the EUREKA Project Prometheus) involv-
ing the major European car constructors and research
institutes. In the scope of this project, UBM (Bun-
deswehr Universität Munich) ﬁelded a vehicle that
was demonstrated on a 1758km-trip from Munich to
Copenhagen and back. The vehicle was able to drive au-
tonomously for 95% of the trip. The car suggested and
executed manoeuvres to pass other cars. Unlike later
robot cars, this car located itself on the current road and
followed it until instructed otherwise. It did not local-
ize itself in global coordinates and could drive without
a global positioning system (GPS) and road maps as
found in a modern automotive navigation systems. The
vehicle used dedicated purpose-built computers and
hardware.
A different approach was followed by VisLab at
the University of Parma within the Argo project. The
passenger car that was designed and developed was
based on a low-cost approach. An off-the-shelf Pen-
tium 200 MHz personal computer (PC) was used to
process stereo images obtained from low-cost cameras
installed in the driving cabin. The vehicle was able
to follow the lane, locate obstacles, and – when in-
structed – change lane and overtake slower vehicles.
The main milestone of this project was the successful
test of the Argo vehicle on a tour of Italy of more than
2000 km called Millemiglia in Automatico, in which
the vehicle drove itself for 94% of the total distance.
Another low-cost approach was developed at INRIA
in 1995 for its dual mode system, in which a small
dedicated electric vehicle was able to park itself au-
tonomously using only ultrasonic sensors and a linear
camera.
Through the years, many demonstrations have been
held showing the public the capabilities of autonomous
vehicles, and by extension, underlining the sensor capa-
bilities at the autonomous driving demonstrations. One
of the most comprehensive highway-based demonstra-
tions was held in 1997 on I-15 in San Diego, USA,
and showed the capabilities of cars, buses, and trucks in
various automated highway scenarios. The demonstra-
tion (called Demo’97) was organized by the National
Highway Systems Consortium. The key technologies
were lane-following using roadway imbedded magnets,
roadway laid radar-reﬂective stripes or using lane mark-
ers with vehicle mounted cameras; car following using
laser or radar, with or without help of inter-vehicle com-
munication. Scenario maintenance was accomplished
by either total preplanning and timing, or by GPS
and map-based triggering, or by situation-based trigger-
ing [62.9, 10].

Part F | 62.1
1630
Part F
Robots at Work
The Demo’97 was followed by a number of demon-
strations around the world, notably in Japan, Hol-
land, France, and the US. In each case, not only
were state-of-the-art technologies demonstrated, but the
public was informed about what to expect in future
cars.
In November 2000, the demonstration Demo 2000
Cooperative Driving was organized by the National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technol-
ogy in Tsukuba, Japan. Several platooning scenarios
were accomplished by ﬁve automated vehicles in the
enclosed test ﬁeld. This platoon of ﬁve automated ve-
hicles performed stop-and-go operations, platooning,
splitting into two platoons demonstrating an exit ramp,
merging into one platoon from two platoons imitat-
ing highway trafﬁc at a ramp, and passing by the last
vehicles. Furthermore, obstacle detection, platoon leav-
ing, and joining tasks were accomplished. Autonomy
was guaranteed by inter-vehicle communication. In ad-
dition, vehicles were equipped by differential global
positioning system (DGPS) to assure localization by
the laser radar to detect obstacles and to measure
the relative position between the vehicles. Vehicles of
Demo 2000 did not communicate with the infrastruc-
ture i. e., road-to-vehicle communication except DGPS.
These automated vehicles were autonomously driven
by exchanging information through inter-vehicle com-
munication [62.11].
Current research initiatives are oriented towards the
development of intelligent vehicles in realistic scenar-
ios. However, until recently, primarily due to legal
issues, full autonomy had not yet been set as the ul-
timate goal. The automotive industry had set as its
primary goal the need to equip vehicles with supervised
systems and – more generally – advanced driving assis-
tance systems (ADAS) instead of automatic pilots. In
other words, the driver was still in charge of running the
vehicle, but the driver and vehicle were monitored by an
electronic system that detects possibly dangerous situa-
tions and reacts by either warning the driver in due time,
or taking control of the vehicle in order to mitigate the
consequences of the driver’s inattention. In spite of the
aforementioned legal issues, the ultimate goal has now
shifted towards developing self-driving systems and
a number of automotive manufacturers have announced
such cars in the market by model year 2020. Concur-
rently, departments of transportation worldwide which
have been primarily interested in social, economic, or
environmental objectives aimed at enhancing fuel ef-
ﬁciency, road network usage, and improving quality of
life in terms of mobility have now shifted their attention
to the possibility of mixed trafﬁc on the road, consisting
of regular vehicles driven by people and autonomous
vehicles [62.12].
Different approaches and research goals have
evolved internationally. The USA has pushed for fully
autonomous vehicles which could be commercialized,
Europe has focused on ADAS systems and public
transportation applications, clean vehicles, and free-
service autonomous vehicles (Sect. 62.7). This contrast
is illustrated by the differences in scope and objec-
tives between US funding schemes and competitions
(e.g., DARPA challenges, Google cars) and European
projects (e.g., Prometheus, Carsense, Prevent, Inter-
safe).
The good results obtained by ADAS in the auto-
motive arena in recent years has induced the military
sector to give a new vigorous push to the original ideas
of automating its ﬂeet of ground vehicles. The De-
fense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
launched the Grand Challenge in 2003, a race for au-
tonomous vehicles that had to travel for more than
200 km in unstructured environments. This unprece-
dented challenge attracted a large number of top-level
research institutes and helped the scientiﬁc community
take a considerable step forward.
In 2005 the DARPA Grand Challenge required au-
tonomous driving in a rough terrain desert scenario
with no trafﬁc, obstacle types known in advance, and
few if any road markers on a course predeﬁned by
2935 GPS points [62.13]. Five cars (maximum speed
40 km=h) completed the 211 km desert course, with
Stanford’s Stanley winning the challenge in 6 h 54 min.
Figure 62.3a–b shows photographs of the top two ﬁn-
ishing vehicles. The reader is referred to [62.14] for the
technical details of the DARPA Grand Challenge.
Following the Grand Challenges, the 2007 DARPA
Urban Challenge was performed in emulated city trafﬁc
and saw the return to urban vehicles [62.15]. Au-
tonomous ground vehicles competed to win the Urban
Challenge 2007 prize by accomplishing an approxi-
mately 60 mile urban course area in less than 6 h with
moving trafﬁc. The autonomous vehicle had to be
built upon a full-size chassis compared to production
type vehicles and must have a documented safety re-
port. The autonomy capability demonstrated in forms
of a complex set of behaviors by obeying all traf-
ﬁc regulations while negotiating with other trafﬁc and
obstacles and merging into trafﬁc. The urban driving
environment challenged autonomous driving with some
physical limits such as narrow lanes, sharp turns, and
also by the daily difﬁculties in a daily urban driv-
ing such as congested intersections, obstacles, blocked
streets, parked vehicles, pedestrians, and moving vehi-
cles. The winner of the Urban Challenge was Tartan
Racing, a collaborative effort by Carnegie Mellon Uni-
versity and the General Motors Corporation, with their
vehicle Boss, a heavily modiﬁed Chevrolet Tahoe. The

Intelligent Vehicles
62.1 The Motivation and Approaches to Intelligent Vehicles
1631
Part F | 62.1
second place ﬁnisher was the Stanford Racing Team
with their entry Junior, a 2006 Volkswagen Passat. Fig-
ure 62.3c–d shows photographs of the top two ﬁnishing
vehicles. In May 2011, The Netherlands Organization
for Applied Scientiﬁc Research TNO, together with
the Dutch High Tech Automotive Systems innovation
program (HTAS), organized the Grand Cooperative
Driving Challenge (GCDC) in The Netherlands. The
2011 GCDC focused on cooperative adaptive cruise
control (CACC). Nine international teams participated
in the challenge [62.16].
In 2010, the University of Parma’s VisLab In-
tercontinental Autonomous Challenge [62.17–19] fur-
ther pushed the boundaries by having four driverless
vehicles (Fig. 62.3e) drive autonomously 15 000 km
from Parma, Italy to Shanghai, China. A more re-
cent example is the Google driverless car (Fig. 62.3f):
a ﬂeet of autonomous vehicles which by 2012 had
driven more than 480 000 km autonomously. Google
has demonstrated fully autonomous driving in dense
urban California trafﬁc, utilizing vision-based systems
and Google Street View. This activity, repeated in
a number of cities generated extensive public interest
and led to the belief that autonomous vehicles will be
available for public use in the near future. This has
been a major factor leading three US states (Califor-
nia, Nevada, and Florida) to approve laws permitting
driverless cars. A number of car manufacturers have an-
nounced models to come to market by 2020.
a)
c)
e)
f)
b)
d)
Fig.62.3a–f 2005 Grand Challenge vehicles: (a) Stanley
(1st), (b) Sandstorm (2nd), 2007 Urban Challenge ve-
hicles, (c) Boss (1st), (d) Junior (2nd), (e) VisLab and
(f) Google vehicles
62.1.2 Benefits of Intelligent Vehicles
Having intelligent vehicles running on our road net-
works would bring a number of social, environmental,
and economical beneﬁts. An intelligent vehicle able to
assess the driving scenario and react in case of dan-
ger would allow up to 90% of trafﬁc accidents that are
caused by human errors to be eliminated, thus saving
human lives. According to the World Health Organi-
zation an estimated 1:2 million people worldwide are
killed each year, and about 40 times this number in-
jured, due to trafﬁc accidents.
At the same time, vehicles able to drive at high
speeds and very close to each other would decrease fuel
consumption and polluting emissions; furthermore they
would also increase road network capacity. Vehicles
communicating with a ground station could share their
routes and be instructed to reroute in order to maintain
a smooth trafﬁc ﬂow. Vehicles that can sense and obey
speed limits or trafﬁc rules would reduce the possibility
of misinterpretation and antisocial driving behavior.
Fully automatic vehicles would also offer a higher
degree and quality of mobility to a larger population,
including young, old, or inﬁrm individuals, reducing
the need even for a driving licence. Finally, the avail-
ability of vehicles that could drive themselves would
increase the quality of mobility for everyone, turning
personal vehicles into taxis able to pick up people and
take them to their ﬁnal destination in total safety and
comfort, enabling people to dedicate their driving time
to their preferred activities.
However, this full application of intelligent vehicles
is far from being complete, since unmanned vehicle
technology is still under development for many other
applications. The automation of road vehicles is, per-
haps, the most common everyday task that attracts the
greatest interest from the industry. However, other do-
mains such as agricultural, mining, construction, search
and rescue, and other dangerous applications in gen-
eral, are looking to autonomous vehicles as a possible
solution to the issue of the ever-increasing cost of per-
sonnel. If a vehicle could move autonomously on a ﬁeld
to seed, or enter a mined ﬁeld, or even perform dan-
gerous missions, the number of individuals put at risk
would drastically decrease and at the same time the ef-
ﬁciency of the vehicle itself would be increased due to
a 24/7 operational schedule. The key challenge for in-
telligent vehicles is safety; accidents must not occur due
to automation errors and there is zero tolerance to hu-
man injury and death.
This chapter focuses on road and trafﬁc applications
of intelligent vehicles, which are catalyzing the interest
of the automotive industry, car makers, and providers of
automotive technologies.

Part F | 62.2
1632
Part F
Robots at Work
62.2 Enabling Technologies
The basic sensing and actuation technologies for intel-
ligent vehicles are readily available on the market. The
key challenge to integrating new technologies is heav-
ily dependent on the control strategies associated with
the sensor data processing and reasoning. Automated
systems must consider all subsystems in a vehicle, in-
cluding the interaction of the technology with the driver.
Key drivers for the new technologies in an intelligent
vehicle are the desired applications. Solutions are de-
veloped on the premise that the system must satisfy the
requirements of the application with the minimum level
of technology.
Intelligent vehicle applications require the follow-
ing:

The position, and kinematic and dynamic state of
the vehicle

The state of the environment surrounding the vehi-
cle

Access to digital maps and satellite data

The state of the driver and occupants

Communication with roadside infrastructure or
other vehicles.
62.2.1 Vehicle State
Position localization is a key technology for intelligent
vehicles. The position of the vehicle must be known if
the vehicle is to be controlled along a particular tra-
jectory. To control an intelligent vehicle to perform
applications such as collision avoidance or automatic
lane changing requires knowledge of the kinematic
and dynamic states of the vehicle. Standard robotics
techniques for position, kinematics, and dynamics are
used in intelligent vehicle applications (Chap. 34). En-
coders are mounted on the steering column and the tail
shaft. Vehicle heading, speed, and acceleration can be
computed from the encoders using standard techniques
(Chap. 24).
To execute the trajectories in an intelligent vehicle
a number of techniques are used. In many current ap-
plications of fully automated vehicles, the trajectories
are ﬁxed with limited choices at intersections. To exe-
cute the trajectories, the vehicles simply follow markers
such as an antenna (a wire carrying an alternating cur-
rent), magnets, or passive transponders such as radio
frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) tags that are imbedded
in the road or simple painted lines. In more advanced
navigation systems, the vehicle generates trajectories in
a map stored in its memory and localizes itself with
respect to this map in order to execute them. This local-
ization can be done using absolute positioning through
a combination of global navigation satellite systems
(GLS), vehicular kinematic states, and inertial naviga-
tion. Alternatively, position localization can be done
by relative localization using local markers such vi-
sual landmarks. (For speciﬁc reference to earlier mobile
robot landmark navigation see Chap. 46.)
In order for the vehicle to execute trajectories, it
needs to control the speed and the steering of the vehicle
(Fig. 62.4). Modern vehicles now incorporate electronic
control units to control the acceleration (motor torque
and possibly gearbox and clutch), the braking (elec-
tric or electrohydraulic brake control), and the steering
angle (electric power assistance), and it is, therefore,
quite easy to implement trajectory control of the ve-
hicles [62.20]. The safety of these critical functions
remains a challenge, and is usually solved through re-
dundancies in the sensors, actuators, and control units.
62.2.2 Environment State
Sensing the state of the environment surrounding the
vehicle is a critical aspect of intelligent vehicle applica-
tions. The most difﬁcult function for intelligent vehicles
is road scene understanding. This includes locating key
landmarks: the road, other vehicles, pedestrians, traf-
ﬁc signals, road signs, and other unstructured obstacles.
A more difﬁcult challenge is speed control following
the detection of an event in the road scene. Com-
Centre of
turning circle
Fig. 62.4 Ackerman steering model

Intelligent Vehicles
62.2 Enabling Technologies
1633
Part F | 62.2
Lane detection
Road sign recognition
Road hazard detection
Pedestrian detection
Obstacle detection
Vehicle detection
(video, laser, infrared, radar)
Driver state sensor
- identity
- fatigue
- distraction-inattention
(video)
Blind-spot sensor
Parking sensor
Vehicle detection
(video, radar, ultrasound)
Adjacent lane monitor
(video)
Occupant sensor (video)
Side view monitor (video)
Fig. 62.5 Environment state sensing
mon sensors are infrared [62.21], ultrasound [62.22],
radar [62.23], laser range ﬁnders [62.24], and com-
puter vision, which continually scan the environment,
as shown in Fig. 62.5. Radar is generally used for
obstacle detection at a distance, while infrared and
ultrasound are used for close proximity obstacle de-
tection. Laser ranging and image processing are used
to more robustly recognize the road scene under vari-
ous weather conditions. Certain road scene conditions
such as road signs and trafﬁc lights can only be under-
stood using vision sensing. Sensor fusion is commonly
used in intelligent vehicle applications, due to the com-
plementarity of heterogeneous sensor modalities; this
can greatly improve perception, for instance, between
monocular vision and radar/laser sensors. Sensor fusion
(Fig. 62.5) is critical technology for intelligent vehi-
cles and constitutes a wide and active research ﬁeld
for both research teams and automakers (Chap. 35)
(Fig. 62.6).
Using such sensors it is possible to map the envi-
ronment surrounding the vehicle and then, using tech-
niques such as simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) (Chap. 46), generate the complex maneuvers
needed for parking or for obstacle avoidance.
62.2.3 Digital Maps and Satellite Data
Other additional sensing is generally delivered by
global positioning technologies (for example, GPS) to
map the vehicle position and refer it to a description
of the world known a-priori. This mapping procedure
may also be very precise in some areas (like cross coun-
try roads) and may be particularly noisy in others (like
downtown areas). To ﬁx issues related to multi-path
measurements and to ﬁll gaps when the GPS signal is
missing, inertial measurements units (IMU) are gener-
ally used together with GPS.
Combining GPS with stored digital maps cre-
ates a wide variety of intelligent vehicle applica-
tions [62.27]. Map data can greatly assist in the problem
of road scene interpretation, map data can improve
lane detection quality, help deal with the problems
when sensors such as cameras do not work, e.g., in
sunlight, at dusk, or dawn. Digital maps are widely
Car
Pedestrians
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
Fig.62.6a–e Multi-sensor fusion on a Toyota/INRIA experimen-
tal vehicle (after [62.25, 26]). (a) Urban scene as seen from a car,
(c) occupancy grids, (d) lidar, (e) occupancy grid from a stereo cam-
era, (b) fused data and detected objects

Part F | 62.2
1634
Part F
Robots at Work
used in commercial navigation systems for route guid-
ance [62.28] and are updated frequently. Such systems
will be improved when real-time updating of the map
will occur due to the availability of trafﬁc informa-
tion [62.29]. Additional functionalities to be added
include curve approach warnings [62.30], curve speed
control [62.31], trafﬁc sign information, and speed limit
information [62.32], as well as predetermining an ap-
propriate heading of the headlights in curved and hilly
roads.
62.2.4 Driver State
Additionally an intelligent vehicle needs to understand
the driver state, if it is to give appropriate warnings
or take action. Vision sensors [62.33] can monitor
a driver’s attentiveness and fatigue by observing the di-
rection of the driver’s gaze and eyelid behavior. In an
emergency, knowledge of the position of the driver’s
head as well as all other occupants’ position and posture
can assist in the safe deployment of airbags. Also, after
an accident, observing the state of the driver and other
occupants could be useful for the dispatch of emergency
services to the accident scene.
62.2.5 Communication
Communication technologies enable interesting appli-
cations of intelligent vehicles. Allowing vehicles to
communicate with each other and with the highway of-
fers the prospect of vast improvements in the safety and
efﬁciency of the road system. Applications include in-
tersection collision avoidance, emergency braking, and
sharing of road and trafﬁc condition information.
The basic communication modes are distinguished
as:

Vehicle to/from roadside infrastructure

Vehicle to vehicle.
Dedicated short-range communications (DSRC)
have been set up to from the vehicle to infrastruc-
ture communications to support traveler information,
commercial applications (toll/parking fee collection,
in-vehicle advertising), and safety applications (inter-
section collision avoidance, approaching emergency
vehicle warning, and rollover warning) [62.34].
DSRC is a wireless protocol speciﬁcally designed
for intelligent transportation systems. It is a subset of
RFID technology, working in the 5:9 GHz band (US)
or 5:8 GHz band (Japan and Europe). It is generally
implemented with a dedicated protocol, uses short mes-
sages, and works in direct line of sight over short ranges
(101000m).
Speciﬁc applications are being developed to test
a broad variety of potential safety and mobility uses of
the systems including:

Warning drivers of unsafe conditions or imminent
collisions.

Warning drivers if they are about to run off the road
or speed around a curve too fast.

Informing system operators of real-time congestion,
weather conditions, and incidents.

Providing operators with information on road ca-
pacity for real-time management, planning, and
provision of road advisories to drivers.
For intelligent vehicles safety-related applications
using DSRC include:

Stopped vehicle or obstacle avoidance of obstacles
on highways.

Merging assistance from a slow incoming lane into
a crowded road.

Intersection safety and collision warning systems
(with or without trafﬁc lights).

Establishing and maintaining convoys/platoons.
In a vehicle-based intersection collision warning
system, each vehicle approaching the intersection gen-
erates a message. The message includes the vehicle’s
location, direction of travel, and the intersection loca-
tion. This information is based on the GPS position and
available map data base. Various strategies to predict
driver intention are also being studied, and if available
this information is also broadcast. Any other vehicle ap-
proaching the intersection can calculate the possibility
of a collision and will generate an appropriate warning
for its driver.
There numerous other possible applications. These
include:

Notiﬁcation of the presence or approach of an emer-
gency vehicle

Notiﬁcation of construction activity

Local multi-vehicle sensor fusion to provide better
global maps and situation awareness

Energy saving applications (platooning, energy
management for HEVs in stop and go trafﬁc).
The USA, since 1999, and the EU, since 2008,
have located spectrum in the 5:9 GHz band for wire-
less DSRC systems for vehicular safety and intelligent
transportation system applications. The standards for
DSRC in the US are IEEE 802.11p, ﬁnalized in 2010,
and wireless access in vehicular environments (WAVE)
(IEEE 1609), still in draft status as of July 2010. The
802.11p standard is derived from the 802.11A wireless
LAN standard and thus provides a fairly easy and in-
expensive route to produce communication electronics

Intelligent Vehicles
62.3 Road Scene Understanding
1635
Part F | 62.3
and hardware. These standards provide network and ap-
plication support, as well as sufﬁcient range and data
rates, for both V2V and V2I communication applica-
tions.
In addition to wireless communication standards,
the development of standardized message sets and data
deﬁnitions in the US has occurred in the SAE J2735
standards process.
The WAVE standard supports two types of devices,
the roadside unit (RSU), and the on-board unit (OBU).
The RSU would typically be a service provider de-
ployed on the roadside that would provide map data
like the geometric intersection data (GID) message. If
it is connected to a trafﬁc light it could also provide
signal phase and timing (SPaT) messages. Both mes-
sage types are deﬁned in SAE Standard J2735 [62.35].
The OBU is responsible for receiving data from RSUs
and generating and receiving safety messages that re-
lay information about the vehicle’s current state. Many
investigations of the utility and capabilities of these
standards exist [62.36] and large-scale testing is under-
way in the US within the Connected Vehicle program.
For
vehicle-to-infrastructure
communications
[62.37], a communication protocol architecture is
currently being speciﬁed by the ISO-SAE Technical
Committee 204 Working Group 16 [62.38]. This
protocol architecture is known as communication
access for land mobiles (CALM) [62.39] and is
being implemented in Europe under the cooperative
vehicle
infrastructure
systems
(CVIS)
integrated
project [62.40]. CALM is based on IPv6 protocols
developed by the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF) [62.41], particularly the network mobility
(NEMO) protocol, which allows sessions to be main-
tained between an in-vehicle internet protocol (IP)
network and the Internet backbone using any type
of available media (3G, general packet radio service
(GPRS), Wi-Fi, WiMax, M5, DSRC, satellite, etc.). For
vehicle-to-vehicle applications, systems that support
ad-hoc networking are still in early stages.
62.3 Road Scene Understanding
Perception plays a key role in any robotic application.
In the case of intelligent vehicles, the perception task is
referred to as road scene understanding. It involves us-
ing different sensors (described in Sect. 62.2) combined
with automatic reasoning, in order to create a synthetic
representation of the environment around the vehicle.
The knowledge base accumulated by this task is then
used either to issue warnings to the driver in the case
of advanced driving assistance systems (ADAS) or to
control vehicle actuators in the case of complete au-
tonomous driving. A complete and precise description
of the state of the surrounding environment is the key
factor that allows the reduction of the number of false
and missed alarms and provides the basis for smooth
automatic driving. Needless to say, the perception of an
outdoor environment – even if partially structured – is
a challenging problem not only due to the intrinsic com-
plexity of the driving environment itself, but also due
to the impossibility of controlling many environmental
parameters. Figure 62.7 shows examples of day/night,
sun/streetlight illumination, temperature, poor visibil-
ity, rain/snow, and different meteorological conditions,
which in general are impossible to control and have to
be faced by sensing devices.
The research community is addressing the issue of
providing vehicles with robust and precise perception of
the state of the environment from two different perspec-
tives. One approach is to provide vehicles with ever-
increasing sensing capabilities and processing power
aimed at the provision of powerful onboard intelligent
systems; [62.42]. An alternative approach is to use road
infrastructure as an active component capable of com-
municating with all vehicles and sharing information
on road conditions in real time [62.43]. Indeed, these
a)
c)
e)
b)
d)
Fig. 62.7 Typical range of road scenes that intelligent ve-
hicles must handle

Part F | 62.3
1636
Part F
Robots at Work
two perspectives can also be merged to provide a mixed
solution to safely control a vehicle and in dynamic en-
vironments [62.43].
The task of road scene understanding may be ad-
dressed differently, depending on the availability of an
intelligent infrastructure and on other players exhibit-
ing cooperative behavior. The task of understanding the
state of the environment can be simpliﬁed through the
availability of information coming from other sources,
thereby limiting the need to perform a robust and
complete sensing onboard each vehicle. Helpful infor-
mation could come from the infrastructure itself (for
example, road conditions and geometry, number of
lanes, visibility, road signs, or even real-time informa-
tion such as trafﬁc-light status or trafﬁc conditions) or
other players (such as the presence of the vehicle with
precise position, speed, and direction). The players may
also carry real-time information gathered by and shared
with other players.
Although research is currently focused on both in-
telligent vehicles and intelligent infrastructures, the ﬁrst
generation of production intelligent vehicles will have
to rely primarily on their own sensing capabilities,
since the availability of information coming from other
sources such as the infrastructure and other vehicles
will take a while to be deployed in real-world situa-
tions. In fact, in order to be of practical use, intelligent
roads must cover a large proportion of a country, and si-
multaneously cooperative intelligent vehicles must also
be sufﬁciently widespread. It is important to note that
the investment in intelligent infrastructures and intel-
ligent vehicles comes from different sources: mainly
from governmental institutions for the former, and ve-
hicle owners for the latter.
The information that is owned by the infrastructure
itself and that could be made available to the vehicles
includes:

Precise geometry of the lane/road

Road signs

Status of trafﬁc lights.
On the other hand, the infrastructure can also assess
and deliver real-time data such as:

Road conditions

Visibility

Trafﬁc conditions.
Another important piece of information that needs
to be gathered by intelligent vehicles is the presence of
other road players, such as:

Vehicles

Vulnerable road users (pedestrians, motorcycles, bi-
cycles).
Although it could be assumed that sometime in the
future all vehicles will be equipped with active systems
that allow them to be safely avoided by other vehicles,
it is quite improbable that pedestrians and bicycles will
have similar equipment; their presence will need to be
detected using onboard sensors only. The same consid-
eration also applies to obstacles that may unexpectedly
be found on the road, or to temporary situations such
as roadwork; if a vehicle needs to cope with the unex-
pected, then it needs to have the capability to assess the
situation in real time with its own sensors.
This is why onboard sensing is of paramount im-
portance for future transportation systems; vehicle-to-
vehicle and vehicle-to-infrastructure communications
may help and improve the sensing, but a complete sen-
sor suite must also be installed on our future vehicles.
The main challenges in road environment sensing are
examined below.
62.3.1 Road/Lane Tracking
Many vehicle prototypes have been equipped with lane
detection and tracking systems, starting from the very
ﬁrst implementations in the early 1980s [62.4–6]. In-
deed, in this case computer vision plays a basic role;
although generally the road can also be detected with
laser scanners [62.24], the only generic technology
able to detect lane geometry and lane markings with
high precision is computer vision. Most lane tracking
approaches have focused on detecting lane markings
and exploiting structure in the environment, such as
the parallelism of the left and right lane markings,
the invariance of road width, or the widely used ﬂat-
road assumption. These assumptions were mainly used
to overcome the problem of having a single camera
(a choice driven by cost). Some systems use stereo vi-
sion to detect lane markings and are able to work with-
out such constraints. The problem of lane tracking in
highway situations is basically a solved problem – with
commercial systems being deployed in passenger and
Fig. 62.8 Lane detection

Intelligent Vehicles
62.3 Road Scene Understanding
1637
Part F | 62.3
commercial vehicles. A survey and evaluation of the de-
ployed lane tracking technologies is available [62.44].
An example of the typical output of a commercial lane
tracker is shown in Fig. 62.8.
However, such systems cannot guarantee that lane
detection systems will work with 100% reliability;
these systems typically work with 9599% reliability.
Therefore, lane tracking systems are only being used in
lane departure warning systems, since no failures can
be tolerated for autonomous driving. Efforts are under-
way to develop algorithms that will tolerate a variety
of driving conditions, and push the 100% reliability
boundary [62.44, 45],
VIDEO 836 .
Vision-based lane tracking systems depend on lane
markings, which are not always present. In these cases
it is often not enough to track the lane or road’s lim-
its. Instead it is necessary to build a local representation
of the road’s shape and traversability. This local map
can be built using SLAM-like techniques (Chap. 46),
and can classify parts of the map as either static or dy-
namic [62.46]. Alternative approaches aim to classify
3-D points obtained from laser scanners or stereo cam-
eras as belonging to the road or not [62.47]. The output
of the road detection function is a continuously updated
representation of the navigable space in front of the ve-
hicle (Fig. 62.9).
62.3.2 Road Sign Detection
Another fairly straightforward use of computer vision
is road sign detection and understanding. Road signage
is deliberately structured to aid human drivers. Road
signs use a set of well-deﬁned shapes, colors, and pat-
terns. The signs are placed at consistent heights and
positions in relation to the road. Therefore, reading road
signs is an achievable task for computer vision. Detec-
tion is done using a collection of shape and/or color
detection schemes [62.48, 49]. After the detection and
localization phase, recognition takes place. Normally
this task is performed by pattern-matching techniques
such as image cross-correlation, neural networks, or
Obstacle: 6.7 m / 0.94 s
Fig. 62.9 Instantaneous representation of the navigable
space in front of the vehicle (after [62.25])
support vector machines, since the possible set of road
signs is limited and well deﬁned. Figure 62.10 illus-
trates the concept of a speeding warning system based
on speed sign detection. The challenge for research
work in this area lies in the robustness of detection
and the reliability of classiﬁcation of signs. Most au-
tomotive companies have systems under development,
e.g., Siemens [62.50]. See video on speed sign detection
VIDEO 838 .
62.3.3 Traffic-Light Detection
Color and pattern matching are also the key techniques
used for the detection of trafﬁc lights [62.51]. Although
the detection of trafﬁc lights is not overly complex, this
application hides one further aspect that makes vehicu-
lar applications difﬁcult: besides the correct localization
and recognition of a signal, special care has to be taken
in checking the signal position and orientation on the
road/lane since that signal may not be addressed to the
current vehicle. This is particularly true in downtown
intersections at which many trafﬁc lights are visible at
the same time; in this case the vehicle must have the ca-
pability to select the correct trafﬁc signal that must be
obeyed. Some experiments have been undertaken with
active trafﬁc signals, able to emit the status of the trafﬁc
light using radio frequencies [62.52]. This involves ad-
ditional infrastructure; at this stage vision seems to be
the only simple viable solution.
62.3.4 Visibility Assessment
One of the key challenges is the detection of fog. The
meteorological visibility distance is deﬁned by the In-
ternational Commission on Illumination (CIE) as the
distance beyond which a black object of an appropri-
Fig. 62.10 Road sign detection for speed warning applica-
tion

Part F | 62.3
1638
Part F
Robots at Work
ate size is perceived with a contrast of less than 5%.
Different techniques for measuring this parameter –
and thus detect foggy conditions – have been imple-
mented [62.53]. Although many of the methods use
vision, there are also efﬁcient alternatives – generally
used in ﬁxed locations such as airports and trafﬁc-
monitoring stations – based on the use of multiple
scattering lidar. The main challenge of using vision to
estimate visibility is that a moving vehicle generally
cannot rely on a speciﬁc reference point/object/signal
at a speciﬁc distance.
62.3.5 Vehicle Detection
The detection of vehicles has been addressed using
a large variety of sensor technologies, ranging from vi-
sion to lidar, from radar to sonar.
Despite being different in shape and color, vehi-
cles share the same characteristics and feature a large
size and reﬂective material. The position of vehicles
is predictable once a rough indication of the road/lane
position is available. Vehicles, in fact, can be suc-
108m
29km/h
39m
34km/h
91m
–2km/h
Fig. 62.11 Vehicle detection – lane and range position
Data
segmentation
Predicted tracks
Predicted tracks
Geometric model
Physical sensor
Virtual sensor
Tracks
Data
association
Nonparametric filter
Predicted tracks
Bayesan
filter
Grid
cells
Position
extraction
(Usally)
Parametric
filter
Traditional
approach
Model
approach
Grid
approach
Fig. 62.12 Three alternative ap-
proaches to vehicle detection and
tracking (after [62.54])
cessfully detected by many different sensors indepen-
dently [62.55–57]. Figure 62.11 shows a vision-based
vehicle detection system.
Nevertheless, although the solution to this prob-
lem seems straightforward, each sensor has its own
domain of application and its own challenges. Vision
is generally powerful, but may fail in low visibil-
ity and bad-illumination scenarios (night or tunnels)
or in heavy trafﬁc conditions when vehicles may oc-
clude each other. Vision in the infrared domain (thermal
imaging) is able to detect vehicles with a high conﬁ-
dence since vehicle tires and mufﬂers generally exhibit
high temperatures and are, therefore, easily detected in
the image. However, parked vehicles, trailers, and even
vehicles which have just started to move are colder
than running vehicles and, therefore, less visible. Li-
dar is generally robust, but has decreased sensitivity in
adverse weather conditions. Radars, while cheap, can
suffer from bias in lateral measurements due to the pres-
ence of other nearby reﬂecting objects. Finally, sonars
are applicable only for very short distances. The re-
search challenge is to implement multisensor fusion
robustly. A common approach is to fuse vision with
radar [62.58].
Vehicle detection is often performed by grouping
together data that are believed to belong to a same
object, this often implies using some kind of sim-
ilarity metric based in distance and other relevant
features such as color, and texture, etc. An alternate
approach is taken by model based techniques, which
scan scene data trying to match models from a pre-
existing catalog – e.g., geometric descriptions, part
collections. Finally, grid-based approaches do not di-
rectly model objects themselves, but the evolution of
the properties in a regular decomposition of the space
(Fig. 62.12) [62.54].

Intelligent Vehicles
62.4 Advanced Driver Assistance
1639
Part F | 62.4
Tracked
objects
Association
Clustering on grid
(objects extrusion)
CV algorithm
Stereo vision
Laser
Tracker
BOF
Occupancy/velocity
Moving obstacles
Each obstacle
Velocity
Position
Fast clustering and tracking algorithm (FCTA)
Bayesian sensor fusion + detection & tracking
Fig. 62.13 Grid-based detection and tracking (after [62.59])
One of the main problems in tracking is data
association: ﬁnding the correspondence between sen-
sor readings and tracked objects. Tracking approaches
differ in the way they solve this problem from the
nearest neighbor, which just assigns the observation to
the closes object to multi-hypothesis tracking (MHT),
which maintains a representation of the different as-
sociation hypothesis for several time steps – pruning
is necessary for tractability. An increasingly popu-
lar alternative is the use of grid-based approaches,
which do not attempt to explicitly represent objects
during the iterative grid updates while taking into ac-
count all the possible associations with cells in a given
neighborhood. This approach leads to postponing as
long as possible the object detection and data asso-
ciation steps [62.54]. Refer to Fig. 62.13 for an ex-
ample of grid-based tracking.
VIDEO 420
shows the
predicitive capabilities of the Bayesian occupancy ap-
proach [62.59].
62.3.6 Pedestrian Detection
The detection of vulnerable road users (pedestrians and
bicycles) is one of the most difﬁcult tasks for intelligent
vehicles. The appearance of a pedestrian is challeng-
ing: a pedestrian shape can change greatly within a few
tens of milliseconds; there are no clear invariants in
color, texture, or size, and no assumptions can be made
about posture, speed, or the visibility of parts of the hu-
man body such as the head. Machine learning methods
have been successfully applied to this problem [62.24,
42, 48, 60]. The focus is on achieving greater reliability
and reduction in false alarms through improved vision
algorithms [62.61]. However, the detection of vulner-
able road users is one of the most relevant research
topics worldwide since a great number of beneﬁts – in-
cluding insurance reductions – may be achieved once
a fully functional pedestrian detector is available on
cars. Countermeasures may be activated to reduce the
consequences of vehicle–pedestrian accidents, such as
the ﬁring of external airbags or the opening of the
hood to lessen the impact of a head-on collision. Cur-
rently, with all possible technologies under evaluation,
no solution seems to offer reliable detection in every
scenario: radars are not able to detect pedestrians reli-
ably in crowded scenarios, while vision has the many
drawbacks listed above. Even thermal imaging, which
– although still very expensive – is generally believed
to be one of the most promising technologies, fails in
some situations, such as hot summer days and, in gen-
eral, in high-temperature environments. See video for
vision based stereo vision detection
VIDEO 839 .
62.4 Advanced Driver Assistance
Given the legal liabilities and technical challenges of
achieving 100% reliability for autonomous intelligent
vehicles, it appears likely that motor vehicles will have
pieces of autonomous functionality added progressively
and that cars will eventually evolve into autonomous
robots. The perception techniques described earlier can

Part F | 62.4
1640
Part F
Robots at Work
be used in a variety of ways to make driving safer,
more efﬁcient, and less demanding. Individual percep-
tion techniques, or combinations of sensing modes, are
being used to provide warnings to drivers of danger-
ous situations. These warnings are being used to prevent
collisions in a variety of situations, such as when back-
ing up, when leaving a roadway, into rear ends, on
lane changing/merging, with pedestrians, and at inter-
sections.
Developing a collision warning system requires
many steps beyond building the perception system. For
a typical example, roadway departure warning, the steps
followed in a program initiated by the US National
Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration include:
1. Statistical studies. In the United States, crashes in-
volving a single vehicle leaving the roadway are
relatively rare, but disproportionately dangerous;
approximately 40% of the 40 000 fatal crashes per
year in the US are single-vehicle crashes where the
vehicle leaves the roadway. The ﬁrst part of the
study looked at the prevalence of those crashes, and
determined that this would be a good type of crash
to prevent.
2. Causal factors. The second step was to determine
the causes of those crashes. Most run-off-road
crashes are due to driver factors, such as exces-
sive speed, inattention, or loss of control. This is an
important observation, because it means that alert-
ing the driver, or warning of difﬁcult situations,
could prevent those incidents. For the fraction of
crashes caused by mechanical failure a warning sys-
tem would not be useful; in this type of crash,
mechanical failure is involved in less than 5% of the
crashes.
3. Opportunities for intervention. This part of the
study set out to determine whether a warning sys-
tem could be effective, and, if so, how far in advance
the warning would have to be given. Given typical
road departure trajectories, typical widths of roads
and shoulders, and the range of potential steering
responses, this task generated requirements for how
accurately the system would have to track vehicle
trajectory in order to predict a roadway departure.
4. Human factors. Since the system being designed is
a warning system, rather than an active control, it is
crucial to understand what kinds of warning a driver
(who may be distracted or sleepy) would respond to,
and how quickly and accurately the response will
be. Reaction times vary widely across individuals:
using 1 s for reaction time is a fairly standard esti-
mate.
5. Simulator studies. A driving simulator is like an
aircraft ﬂight simulator for cars or trucks, with a va-
riety of simulated roads and conditions. Simulator
studies were used to test driver response to warn-
ings: directional or nondirectional audio warnings,
steering wheel shakes, and combinations. A nondi-
rectional audio cue worked best.
6. System speciﬁcation development. Based on thepre-
ceding steps, in order for a system to be useful, it
needs to work at day and night, in almost all weather
conditions, it needs to measure vehicle speed, lat-
eral position relative to the road, lateral heading, and
roadway curvature, and predict future vehicle trajec-
tories long enough in advance to trigger a warning
alarm.
7. Perception and system development. Given those
speciﬁcations, there are several ways that a percep-
tion system could be built to sense the road and
the vehicle’s trajectory relative to the road. For this
particular test, a lane keeping system – the Rapidly
Adapting Lane Position Handler (RALPH) was de-
veloped and tuned [62.62].
8. Limited tests. The entire system – sensors, process-
ing, driver interface – was built and tested with
a limited number of volunteers, and the system
tuned and validated.
9. Full-scale operational tests. The system was de-
ployed in test ﬂeets, including long-haul trucks and
passenger cars.
62.4.1 Collision Avoidance and Mitigation
The complete cycle from the idea of using perception
to prevent crashes, to full system development, took
over 10 years in this case. The pure robotics part of
the system is a crucial element, but is only one piece
of the development needed to make a useful product.
Some active control has already been assumed by to-
day’s vehicles. Antilock brakes have been on the market
for many years. Traction control systems which control
throttle to stop wheel spin are being introduced. Elec-
tronic stability control systems take this the next step
further, controlling throttle and individual wheel brakes
to help in cornering performance. So, gradually, people
are willing to cede some control to very reliable auto-
mated systems. We can expect this trend to continue.
Each collision warning type has its own list of spe-
ciﬁc development challenges, as described below.
Backup Collisions
The sensing challenge is to see relatively small ob-
jects, such as fence posts or children’s toys, while not
picking up false alarms from pavement joints or leaves
and debris. The sensors used in today’s commercial ve-
hicles are piezoelectric ultrasonic sensors, which are
inexpensive [62.22]. However, ultrasonic sensors have

Intelligent Vehicles
62.4 Advanced Driver Assistance
1641
Part F | 62.4
well-known limitations. The challenge of developing
low-cost, accurate, reliable sensors remains.
Rear-End Collisions
These are among the most difﬁcult collisions to prevent,
with the most challenging sensing conditions. Rear-
end collisions often happen at high speeds, requiring
long-distance sensing of other vehicles (up to 100 m
at US highway speeds, much longer at the high speeds
found on some European roads or for the longer brak-
ing distances needed for heavy trucks). That in itself is
not too demanding a challenge: the sensed objects in
this case are relatively large and have high metal com-
ponents, so radar and lidar are both feasible sensing
modes. The biggest range-sensing challenge is sorting
out true targets (slow or stopped vehicles) from false
targets (overhead signs or bridges, and side lobes from
strong reﬂectors on the side of the road). It is also im-
portant to determine if the sensed vehicle is in the same
lane as the smart car, or a different lane. Sensing lane
markings at such a large distance is a very difﬁcult chal-
lenge; merging lane sensing (often done by vision) with
obstacle sensing (by a different sensor) and registering
the two to within the resolution of a lane is a daunt-
ing task. This technology remains under development
through industry and government programs [62.63].
Lane-Change/Merge Collisions
In the simplest case, the countermeasure to this kind
of collision involves short-range sensing to cover the
blind spots on the rear corners of a vehicle, where it
is difﬁcult to see with mirrors. For passenger cars, this
area is quite small, and can be covered with a single
sonar or radar. Often, the user interface is a warning
light placed in the rear-view mirrors [62.64]; this rein-
forces good driver behavior of checking mirrors before
changing lanes. The sensing challenge for heavy trucks
or transit buses is the same as for cars, except that the
area not visible in planar mirrors can be much larger.
Figure 62.14 shows examples of blind-spot detection
for cars and heavy vehicles.
The usual solution is a row of sensors along
the side of the vehicle, although scanning lidar or
panoramic vision have been used in experimental ap-
plications [62.65]. The further complication for lane-
change warnings is in high-speed driving, where it is
important to look not just adjacently to the vehicle but
a long way to the rear, to ﬁnd overtaking vehicles with
high relative speeds. The ﬁrst commercial product was
brought to market in 2007 [62.66].
Pedestrian Collisions
Pedestrians are particularly important to detect, because
pedestrians are much more vulnerable than people in
Fig. 62.14 Blind-spot detection
vehicles; as discussed earlier they are also, unfortu-
nately, relatively difﬁcult to detect and very hard to
predict. Just detecting a pedestrian is not sufﬁcient. In
transit operations, for instance, a bus operates close
to pedestrians much of the time. To do meaningful
collision warning, it is important to detect the pedes-
trian, detect their current path, look for cues such as
crosswalks or curb edges that modify the probability
of the pedestrian’s trajectory, and match all of these
factors with the predicted trajectory of the vehicle. It
is crucial to tune the warning system to produce few
false alarms while not missing real alarms. A partic-
ularly dangerous situation is pedestrians slipping and
falling underneath a bus: these are very dangerous sit-
uations, but very difﬁcult to detect in time to warn
the driver. For these reasons, automotive manufactur-
ers have worked on products such as night vision to
enhance driver perception [62.67]. Car manufacturers
are bringing to market products that use a data-fusion
approach combined with radar-vision for emergency
breaking in pedestrian collision situations [62.68]
Other Obstacle Collisions
Vehicles have collisions with many things other than
other vehicles and pedestrians, for example, animals
(deer, dogs, cats), car parts (tire carcasses, rusted-out
exhaust systems), cargo that falls off trucks, construc-
tion debris, etc. Warning drivers about these kinds of
objects on the roadway is a challenging task. A com-
mercial product for safety systems detects large animals

Part F | 62.4
1642
Part F
Robots at Work
Fig. 62.15 Animal detection
(Fig. 62.15) using vision and radar sensors [62.69].
A piece of construction timber on the roadway may
be large enough to do signiﬁcant damage to a car, but
be small enough to be difﬁcult to see, and be invisi-
ble to radar. Some interesting work has been done with
high-resolution stereo vision [62.70], with polarimetric
radar [62.71], and with high-resolution scanning laser
range-ﬁnders [62.72]. However, in general, this remains
a difﬁcult problem.
Other Actions
Besides warning the driver, there are other actions that
an intelligent vehicle can take short of assuming con-
trol. If a collision is inevitable, particularly from the
side of the vehicle where there is limited crush space,
the system can brake and deploy airbags even before
physical contact. Of course, such a system would have
to be nearly 100% reliable. More simply, if the system
senses an imminent front collision, it can preload the
power brakes, saving fractions of a second in brake re-
action time. The driver must still actuate the brakes,
but the onset of hard braking can be much quicker.
At 100 km=h, a 0:1 s saving in braking actuation saves
approximately 3 m of stopping distance, which can be
Fig. 62.16 A collision warning system for intersection safety implemented on communicating Renault experimental
vehicles using the intention/expectation approach (after [62.26])
the difference between a severe rear-end collision and
a much lighter crash. Such systems are being introduced
into the high-end market by all the major automotive
manufacturers.
Collision Avoidance
The next step beyond emergency braking is an auto-
mated system. Such systems have several advantages
over a human driver: they have much quicker reaction
times, access to sensors such as individual wheel speeds
and slips plus external sensors such as radar or lidar, ac-
cess to individual brake controls and other controls, and
so forth. So, if the system had ideal situational aware-
ness, it could, in many cases, do a better job of avoiding
a collision than a human could. This is still a very dif-
ﬁcult area for implementation, however. First of all, the
human has access to higher-level knowledge: the driver
may be watching the behaviors of other cars, may make
eye contact with pedestrians or drivers, may be watch-
ing a policeman directing trafﬁc, etc. So it may be that
a maneuver that, to the system, looks like the best way
to prevent the collision, is actually the wrong action to
take. Secondly, in most countries, as soon as the vehi-
cle takes control there is a shift in the liability for any
resulting crash from the driver to the manufacturer. So
there is a great reluctance to take active control. An al-
ternative, recently developed approach is to observe the
environment state with lidar, and monitor the dynamic
vehicle state to determine whether the accident is un-
avoidable. If the driver can no longer take corrective
action, that is, brake or turn away safely, then emer-
gency braking occurs [62.24, 73]. For now, however,
active collision avoidance remains a research area, with
signiﬁcant questions of reliability, human factors, and
liability.
Traffic Situation Awareness
Trafﬁc situation awareness is a higher level of un-
derstanding that is required for decision making in
trafﬁc situations. For instance, knowing that a vehi-

Intelligent Vehicles
62.4 Advanced Driver Assistance
1643
Part F | 62.4
cle is traveling in the wrong direction along a street
is much more informative for estimating the risk of
the current situation than knowing its velocity. Thus,
trafﬁc situation awareness is emerging as a new area
of research effort to understand and reason about the
future motion of pedestrians and vehicles. The ob-
tained predictions can then be fed to a motion planning
algorithm, which can use this information to mini-
mize collision probabilities [62.74, 75]. Motion mod-
els can be used to infer the maneuver intentions of
drivers to change lanes [62.76], overtake another vehi-
cle [62.77], make a turn at an intersection [62.78], or
comply with the trafﬁc laws at an intersection [62.79].
VIDEO 566
shows how an embedded Bayesian per-
ception system have been implemented on an experi-
mental vehicle.
Intersection Collisions
Intersection collisions are particularly difﬁcult to pre-
vent because they often involve challenging sensing
scenarios. Many of these collisions involve occluded vi-
sion, with lines of sight blocked either by large vehicles
or by adjacent buildings. They also often involve high
closing rates from oblique angles, making it necessary
to see a long distance with a very wide ﬁeld of view. The
solution that is usually proposed is to add intelligence to
the infrastructure, either in ﬁxed sensing (such as radars
looking down each approaching road) or in some kind
of radio relay that takes data from approaching smart
cars and passes it to other approaching vehicles. All of
these solutions are challenging: the large number of in-
tersections makes it difﬁcult to envision any universal
solution.
A complementary approach to trafﬁc situation
awareness is risk estimation, where the objective is
to determine how dangerous each potential maneu-
ver is for the vehicle. The classic approach is to use
motion models to predict the possible future trajec-
tories for all the dynamic objects in the scene, and
then compute the probability of a collision between
each possible pair of trajectories for each object. Pop-
ular approaches for generating possible future trajec-
tories include rapidly-exploring random trees [62.80],
Gaussian processes [62.25, 81], and stochastic reach-
able states [62.82]. A major limitation of this clas-
sic approach to risk estimation is its computational
complexity. A recent approach to risk estimation has
been proposed, which detects conﬂicts between the in-
tentions of drivers and the expected behavior of the
vehicle, rather than by detecting collisions between
possible future trajectories [62.26, 83] (
VIDEO 822 ).
More speciﬁcally, dangerous situations are identiﬁed
by comparing what drivers intend to do with what
drivers are expected to do according to the trafﬁc
rules. This formulation of risk reﬂects the fact that
most accidents are caused by driver error [62.84], and
matches the intuitive notion that dangerous situations
are situations where drivers act differently from what
is expected of them. This approach can in theory be
applied to any trafﬁc situation, but so far has been
implemented and tested for scenarios involving cars
at road intersections only (Fig. 62.16). Signiﬁcant re-
search projects are underway in the EU for cooperative
vehicle infrastructure projects such as managing inter-
sections [62.85].
Currently, automotive manufacturers are dealing
with trafﬁc situation awareness by speciﬁcally focusing
on discrete driving tasks and typical scenarios. Com-
bining perception with control gives partial automation
for speciﬁc tasks, such as adaptive cruise control, lane
keeping, assisted parking, and slow driving in stop-and-
go situations.
62.4.2 Adaptive Cruise Control
Adaptive cruise control (ACC) is the logical extension
of standard cruise control to also include keeping a safe
distance from the preceding vehicle. If there are no ve-
hicles in front of the smart car, it follows a set speed,
as with standard cruise control. If a slower-moving ve-
hicle is in front, an ACC-equipped car will sense the
vehicle using radar or lidar, and slow to maintain a safe
distance (typically set to a 1:52 s following gap). Fig-
ure 62.17 shows an illustration of the ACC concept. The
sensing challenge for ACC is much easier than the chal-
lenge of rear-end collision countermeasures, since ACC
systems are only designed to deal with other moving
vehicles.
The biggest sensing difﬁculty for rear-end collision
countermeasures is separating stopped vehicles on the
road from objects off the road; for ACC this difﬁculty
is bypassed by ignoring all stopped objects. Moving ob-
jects are classiﬁed as in-lane or out-of-lane based on
2 s
Selected max speed 90 km/h
Adaptive cruise control
ACC
Set time gap 2
1 s
100
120 140
160
180
20
2
40
60
80
100
120 140
160
180
20
2
40
60
80
Fig. 62.17 Advanced cruise control (ACC)

Part F | 62.4
1644
Part F
Robots at Work
a number of heuristics. Often, the smart car’s own steer-
ing radius is used as an estimate of the road curvature
ahead, in order to determine whether vehicles ahead are
in the same lane. Since the systems are explicitly sold as
convenience instead of safety systems, they only need
to deal with normal situations with relatively low dif-
ferences in velocity, and they leave the more difﬁcult
situations up to the human driver. The human is still
alert, controlling the steering, and watching the trafﬁc.
These systems are being introduced by all the major car
manufacturers.
62.4.3 Stop and Go
Stop-and-go driving assistance (also referred to as low-
speed ACC) is at the opposite end of the speed spec-
trum, when vehicles creep along in dense trafﬁc. At
slow speeds, it is easy to track the vehicle ahead, and
to move when it moves, steer when it steers, and stop
when it stops. If the trafﬁc accelerates to a modest
speed, the stop-and-go system disengages, and the hu-
man must assume control of the throttle, brake, and
steering. Since the speeds are very slow and the dis-
tances are short, many different sensing systems will
work, such as stereo vision, radar, and lidar [62.86,
87].
62.4.4 Parking Assistance
Parking assistance is also a low-speed aid. In a typi-
cal scenario, the driver initiates the system by pushing
a button when driving past an empty parking space. The
system measures the length of the space using odom-
etry, measures the positions of the cars in front and
in back using short-range sensors, and infers the posi-
tion of the curb by assuming that the surrounding cars
are standard-sized cars parked near the curb [62.88].
Figure 62.18 illustrates parking assistance and fully au-
tomatic parking [62.88] (
VIDEO 567 ).
a)
b)
View from
navigation
screen
3
4
1
2
Fig.62.18a,b (a) Parking assistance and (b) fully automatic parking
Once the system is fully engaged, it takes over
steering, planning, and executing the ideal parallel park
steering sequence. In some systems, the human is still
responsible for throttle and brake, again ensuring that
the human is alert, watching for encroaching pedestri-
ans or other obstacles. Such a system has been intro-
duced by Toyota [62.89].
62.4.5 Lane Keeping
Lane keeping assistance is the natural extension to road
departure warning systems. Given a lane tracking sys-
tem, it is straightforward to add control of the steering
wheel to keep the vehicle centered in its lane [62.4–
6]. This has a number of uses. Some cities would like
to run transit buses on narrow roadways, for instance
the shoulder of highways or through narrow streets in
old cities. Automated lane keeping systems using me-
chanical guideways are in use in several places [62.90].
It is easier and less expensive if such systems can be
electronic rather than relying on specially installed me-
chanical guides. A speciﬁc subcategory is precision
docking: for a transit bus to pick up a passenger in
a wheelchair, either the bus must deploy a special ramp
(which is a slow process), or it must pull up to a level
dock and leave a very small gap, so that the wheel
chair can safely roll on or off. Short-range precision
docking systems use either a downward-looking sen-
sor, looking at painted lines or magnetic markers, or
a sideways sensor looking at the curb or dock, in order
to guide the bus to its parking spot. Finally lane-keeping
assistance is a convenience for driving on highways,
especially with gusty winds. Honda has released a ve-
hicle equipped with both lane-keeping assistance and
adaptive cruise control (ACC) [62.91]. The danger with
such systems is that the driver no longer has an active
moment-to-moment role, and may lose concentration or
even fall asleep. These systems are not designed for full
automation, and still require a driver to handle unusual

Intelligent Vehicles
62.5 Driver Monitoring
1645
Part F | 62.5
circumstances. The next stage is to integrate driver state
monitoring. If the driver is inattentive, then all auto-
matic systems are disengaged.
62.4.6 Lane Changing
Lane changing assistance is the next extension in par-
tial autonomy. It combines lane keeping and ACC with
blind-spot monitoring. If the car can safely overtake
a vehicle, then a lane change is undertaken and speed
is unchanged [62.92]. Otherwise, the ACC slows the
vehicle down. At its simplest, such a driver assistance
system can advise a driver whether a lane change can
be safely undertaken [62.93]. In its most advanced form
the lane change is undertaken completely automatically
Fig. 62.19 Lane changing – side detection
by the vehicle [62.4]. Such systems require an ad-
ditional side-facing sensor, typically radar (shown in
Fig. 62.19)
62.5 Driver Monitoring
There has been an evolution of thought regarding the
role of the driver in intelligent vehicles. The grand goal
has been to replace the driver with a fully automated
system. As discussed earlier, full automation of intel-
ligent vehicles is still some years away due to system
reliability and legal liability reasons. The next step in
the development of motor vehicles is partial automa-
tion – where individual autonomous functions such as
ACC, lane keeping, lane changing etc., are developed.
Motor vehicle designers have realized that the driver
cannot be removed from the vehicle and must instead
be supported by systems onboard a motor vehicle. Over
92% of motor vehicle accidents are caused by driver
error [62.94]. It is likely that the next generation of in-
telligent vehicles will work in the following way:
1. The vehicle will monitor the road scene using the
advanced driver assistance system technologies dis-
cussed earlier to assess the state of the environment
and warn the driver of dangerous situations, e.g.,
lane departure warnings.
2. The vehicle will also monitor the driver using vi-
sion and other physiological sensors to assess the
state of the driver. If a driver is fatigued, drowsy,
inattentive, distracted, under the inﬂuence of drugs,
or has an emergency health condition such as heart
attack, then accidents can occur. The vehicle warns
the driver of dangerous circumstances, e.g., drowsi-
ness warning.
3. For legal liability reasons, intelligent vehicles will
not take control, rather the driver will be alerted
using visual, audio, or tactile warnings. The ve-
hicle will not perform collision avoidance; rather
collision mitigation will occur through emergency
braking.
4. If an accident is unavoidable, the vehicle can au-
tonomously apply emergency braking. To maximize
the safety of the occupants in the vehicle, seat belt
restraints are tightened and airbags are safely de-
ployed.
5. After an accident has occurred, knowledge about
the state of the driver and the passengers is impor-
tant. If an occupant has been injured, a call to the
emergency services can be dispatched automatically
by the vehicle.
In all the steps described above monitoring the
driver is critical. For future advanced driver assistance
systems (ADAS) to work safely the driver should be
put in the loop, for example, in lane departure warning
systems, it is not possible to determine whether a vehi-
cle departing from a lane is due to driver intention or
error. If the state of the driver is being monitored, and
the system can detect that the driver’s eyes are closed
or the driver is looking away from the road, then it can
be inferred that the lane departure was involuntary and
that a lane departure warning should be given to the
driver. For ADAS to be accepted by drivers, the systems
should not give false warnings. If the driver is looking
directly at the road then lane departure warnings should
not be given (or a different subtle warning should be
given). Similarly more sophisticated systems, such as
lane keeping, should not be engaged unless the driver
is fully attentive and has his/her hands ﬁrmly on the
steering wheel. The key point is that drivers must be
fully engaged with and in control of the driving task.

Part F | 62.5
1646
Part F
Robots at Work
This is a most important consideration in the design of
ADAS for intelligent vehicles. A good overview of the
challenges associated with putting drivers into ADAS
systems is given in [62.95]
Combining perception with control gives partial au-
tomation for speciﬁc tasks, such as adaptive cruise
control, lane keeping, assisted parking, and slow driv-
ing in stop-and-go situations.
62.5.1 Driver Fatigue, Inattention,
and Impairment
By directly monitoring the driver using visual sens-
ing opens up the possibility of developing a new class
of ADAS applications. It is possible to monitor driver
state through monitoring signals such as an electro-
cardiogram (ECG), temperature, etc. However, market
studies by automobile manufacturers have shown that
people do not like to have wires or gadgets attached;
driver monitoring must be noncontact and noninva-
sive. The only solution is to use vision as the sensing
medium. The technical challenge to develop a computer
vision system that can automatically detect a driver of
any age, sex, race, with/without eye or sunglasses, and
with/without facial hair is enormous. Recently, signiﬁ-
cant progress was made with systems being developed
that can also detect where a person is looking (gaze di-
rection) [62.33, 96].
Once the driver’s state (head position, eye gaze, eye
blink rate) can be measured, then ADAS applications
can be developed. Figure 62.20 shows the output of
a commercial driver state detection system. See video
for driver distraction, inattention and fatigue detection
VIDEO 840 .
Driver Impairment
Safety authorities estimate that as many as 50% of all
road accident fatalities are caused by driver impairment
Fig. 62.20 Driver state detection
due to alcohol or drugs [62.97]. Recent research has
shown that driver impairment can be detected by sens-
ing abnormal scanning patterns of eye gaze. It promises
to open up a new class of ADAS. There have been
major education and legislative initiatives in many Or-
ganization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD) countries, resulting in a signiﬁcant reduction in
road fatalities. However, the difﬁcult cases (fatigue, dis-
traction, and inattention) have become more prominent.
ADAS technologies could have a signiﬁcant impact in
further reducing the road toll.
Driver Fatigue
Safety authorities estimate that 2530% of all road
fatalities are caused by driver fatigue [62.98, 99]. Re-
search has shown that there are four visible factors
that indicate the onset of fatigue – prolonged eye clo-
sure, uncontrolled head moments, drooping eyelids, and
reduced eye-gaze scanning. Systems are under devel-
opment that focus only on eye closure [62.100]; the
challenge of fusing all four factors together into a ro-
bust algorithm that works for a wide range of drivers
remains an open research problem.
Driver Inattention
Safety authorities estimate that up to 45% of all trafﬁc
accidents – from minor dents to serious incidents – are
caused by driver inattention or distraction [62.101]. Re-
search has shown that if the drivers consistently keep
their eyes on the road, then driving becomes a much
safer experience [62.102]. All major automotive manu-
facturers are developing ADAS applications that warn
the driver if they are distracted from the driving task.
More sophisticated ADAS under development use the
driver’s gaze direction to check whether safe driving
practices are being followed, for example, did the driver
check the side mirror before a lane change was per-
formed? If the driver fails to check the side mirror
a warning would be issued. Systems of this type have
been demonstrated [62.103].
Driver Workload
The increase in new electronic systems and gadgets
that are being installed into today’s motor vehicles is
also another source of distraction. Questions arise about
when and under circumstances should a driver change
a compact disc (CD) or answer a phone call. Research
is underway into the development of workload sys-
tems. These systems take into account the vehicle state
(speed, acceleration, braking, gear-change yaw rate,
etc.) to determine whether information management
tasks such as answering a phone call, sending a short
message service (SMS) message are allowed [62.102].
The next stage of research is to include state infor-

Intelligent Vehicles
62.6 Towards Fully Autonomous Vehicles
1647
Part F | 62.6
mation about the road scene and the driver. If the car
is driving on a country road, and the driver is atten-
tive, then distractive tasks could be allowed and man-
aged. Systems for monitoring the scene for monotony
have been combined with fatigue detection systems –
and can be combined with information management
tasks [62.104]
62.5.2 Driver and Passenger Protection
The automotive industry is moving towards the use of
active safety systems such as airbags to complement
passive systems such as seat belts. ADAS will play
a critical role in active safety systems. In emergency
braking or impending rear-end collision situations, seat
belts can be pretensioned and airbags primed. Drivers
and passengers could be further protected through the
development of smart airbags [62.105]. Airbags, while
considered an essential part of a modern car, can cause
fatalities if the occupant is too close to the airbag, is
a child, or is not wearing a seat belt. Smart airbags
are dependent on the position of the vehicle occu-
pant’s head. The driver state monitoring technologies
discussed earlier are an essential component of smart
airbags.
62.5.3 Emergency Assistance
The speed at which people are given treatment after
a serious accident is critically related to the survival rate
of victims. While it is expected that ADAS will lead
to a reduction in road accidents, it will not eliminate
accidents. Therefore, it is important that automated sys-
tems for emergency situations are developed. Systems
that use GPS, vehicle state information, and mobile
communication systems have been developed that send
the world coordinates of the vehicle to emergency au-
thorities after an accident [62.106]. This information
can be augmented by using driver monitoring tech-
nology to assess the condition of the occupants of
the vehicle. Such types of system are referred to as
Telematics are currently being tested by major automo-
tive suppliers, including the development of aftermarket
products [62.107].
62.6 Towards Fully Autonomous Vehicles
Intelligent vehicles that are fully autonomous can be
justiﬁed for safety, trafﬁc congestion, and environmen-
tal considerations.
62.6.1 Operating Safely
The ﬁrst problem is safety. As stated earlier, automobile
accidents are one of the main causes of human fatal-
ities – on a staggering scale. This is a catastrophe of
larger magnitude than all armed conﬂicts since the be-
ginning of mankind. The most economically advanced
countries (OECD) have been able to reduce the number
of fatalities signiﬁcantly through improved technology
in vehicles – improved handling, braking, and pas-
sive safety. Transport infrastructure has been greatly
improved; modern freeways are ten times safer than
regular roads [62.108]. However, these improvements
appear to be reaching a limit in terms of the number of
deaths per million passengers-kilometers, particularly
in industrialized countries.
As discussed earlier, motor vehicles are inherently
dangerous due to their reliance on human control. Slight
errors at high speeds can have catastrophic results. As
discussed earlier the most common cause is driver dis-
traction, which leads to improper reaction times or driv-
ing actions. Human error also frequently occurs while
handling emergency situations. A large percentage of
drivers will take improper action in such situations and
produce an accident that could have been avoided by
a skilled and attentive driver [62.108]. The best solu-
tion to these problems is to remove the driver from the
control loop. As discussed earlier, the interim step is to
assist the driver to warn him/her in the case of potential
danger (e.g., in the case of excessive speed before a dan-
gerous bend or when a car is present in the blind spot
while changing lane), or to take over control in emer-
gency situations (e.g., emergency braking in the case of
impending collision). For legal liability reasons, until it
can be shown that autonomous systems have high in-
tegrity and reliability, people must be kept in the loop –
in a supervisory capacity.
62.6.2 Traffic Congestion
The success of the automobile also leads to saturation
of the road infrastructure, particularly in cities. Each
car needs a certain amount of space in order to oper-
ate safely. The usual width of roads is 3:5 m in order
to accommodate steering imprecision, while vehicles
are about 2 m in width. Spacing between vehicles also
has to be kept at a safe minimum to prevent colli-
sions during deceleration (this principally depends on
driver reaction time). It is usually recommended that
the spacing should correspond to a time gap of at least
1:5 s. This spacing leads to a maximum throughput of
about 2200 cars per hour per lane, independent of traf-

Part F | 62.6
1648
Part F
Robots at Work
ﬁc speed. This is not high if we consider that a suburban
train can carry about 60 000 passengers per hour on
an infrastructure of similar dimensions. Furthermore,
high-density car trafﬁc of greater than 2200 cars leads
to a breakdown in trafﬁc ﬂow (stop-and-go trafﬁc) and
to an increased likelihood of accidents, which can dras-
tically decrease the overall capacity of the system. The
solution to this problem also lies in the removal of the
driver from the control loop to improve lateral guid-
ance (reduction of the width of lanes) and longitudinal
control (with possible time gaps of around 0:3 s, inde-
pendent of speed) while maintaining trafﬁc safety. Such
techniques of automated driving could multiply the
throughput of road infrastructure by a factor of 5. This
was demonstrated in particular by the work performed
in the advanced highway systems (AHS) project in the
USA, which led to the demonstration of seven-car pla-
toons running at speeds up to 130 km=h on a dedicated
freeway in San Diego with gaps of about 0:5 s [62.109].
Another congestion problem is associated with
parking. Every individual vehicle is only used for
a small percentage of its total usable life. Most of the
time, motor vehicles occupy space very unproductively.
Typically, a car requires about 10 m2 of space. Usually,
parking occurs at the curbside – a space that is very
limited in large cities and cannot accommodate all cars
of residents and visitors. In parking lots, each car will
need four times this amount in order to have access to
each individual slot. If a transportation system based on
fully automated cars could be developed, people would
not need to own cars but could rely on a service such as
the one offered by taxis with vehicles that would come
on demand and offer a complement to mass transport.
This is the concept of the cybercar, which is under de-
velopment in Europe [62.110].
62.6.3 Environmental Factors
The ever-increasing deployment of passenger and com-
mercial vehicles has led to critical environmental prob-
lems of noise and of pollution in the local community.
In addition greenhouse-gas emissions have an impact
at the global environment level. Recently, automotive
manufacturers have been able to reduce emissions of
local pollutants drastically; noise in cities is now per-
ceived as the major problem by the inhabitants. At the
global level, the generation of CO2 through the use of
fossil fuels is also considered to be a major problem,
which will require drastic steps. In the short term, this
may lead to limiting the use of vehicles that gener-
ate CO2 above certain levels. In the longer term, this
will lead the automotive industry to offer vehicles that
run on various forms of energy and to new forms of
transportation systems with much higher efﬁciency. Au-
tomated vehicles running in platoon formations on new
infrastructures could form such a system.
62.6.4 The Automobile of the Future
All three challenges are now at the heart of new poli-
cies being developed in many countries. These policies
concern safety and emissions features in vehicles with
a strong push towards advanced safety systems, as was
recently seen in Europe with the Intelligent Car Initia-
tive [62.111]. At the infrastructure level, there is also
a strong push to implement regulation schemes to limit
and control the use of road transport and promote alter-
native and more efﬁcient transport means. In the future,
this means that the use of a private automobile will be
much more regulated and more integrated with other
modes of transport.
The automotive industry might move from an in-
dustry of products to an industry of service where
anyone can have access to mobility in the most cost
efﬁcient way. Both mass transportation and individ-
ual transportation would be offered by companies in
the most cost-efﬁcient way, respecting local regula-
tions. Companies operating in this service industry
could be transit operators, taxi companies, car rental
companies, car-sharing companies or even new en-
trants into the transportation business such as mo-
bile phone companies, which are already familiar
with large customer bases and mobility services. Car-
sharing operators such as those operating in Germany,
Switzerland, Japan, and the USA are likely candi-
dates [62.112]. Figure 62.21 shows a commercial car-
sharing operation.
In this context, new types of vehicles such as elec-
tric ones and automated driving are being developed
because of the decrease in the cost of operation and im-
provements in safety.
Demonstration projects by Honda and by Toyota
have already been put in place along these lines. How-
Fig. 62.21 Car sharing at Toyota

Intelligent Vehicles
62.6 Towards Fully Autonomous Vehicles
1649
Part F | 62.6
ever, this market is still searching for its operators and
business model, as well as the right products [62.110].
Figure 62.22 shows the Honda concept automated car.
There are two distinct trends in the future of au-
tomated vehicles. One is with advanced driving assis-
tance, which has spread rapidly since the late 1990s
with numerous techniques appearing recently in high-
end passenger vehicles and commercial vehicles (buses
and trucks). This trend was described earlier in this
chapter. The other trend is associated with the arrival
of people-movers based on automated guided vehicles
(small or large) in speciﬁc locations and on dedicated
tracks (protected or not).
It is forecast that, in the next 10 years, these two
trends will merge, with individual vehicles having dual-
mode capabilities: manual (with strong control and
assistance) driving on regular roads and fully automatic
driving on dedicated zones where no (or few) man-
ual vehicles will be allowed, thereby ensuring smooth
and safe operation of automated vehicles [62.110]. This
type of vehicle will be perfect for the implementation
of mobility services with vehicles that can be called on
demand (perhaps through a mobile phone) when and
where needed. With the development of such zones,
new dedicated infrastructures will be built speciﬁcally
for these vehicles to go automatically and at high speed
from one automated zone to the next. This appears to
the most realistic path for automated highways to be re-
alized, since it is now considered nearly impossible to
have a smooth evolution from the actual infrastructure
with its manual vehicles to one with a majority of fully
automated ones. This is one of the reasons why the AHS
project was canceled in the USA despite a very success-
ful demonstration in 1997.
62.6.5 Automated Vehicle Deployment
As discussed earlier some automated functions are
being introduced in production vehicles. Honda and
Fig. 62.22 Automated electric cars by Honda
Toyota have introduced a combination of lateral con-
trol (lane keeping assistance using image processing)
and longitudinal control (adaptive cruise control using
laser and radar sensors) [62.91]. An intelligent parking
assist system was introduced recently by Toyota, offer-
ing the ability for the car to be parked without the driver
using the steering wheel. However, this system does not
use sensors: the driver has to position his/her vehicle on
the image of the rear camera [62.89]. However, most
car manufacturers and some component manufacturers
are actively working on the sensors to remove this task
from the driver.
Fully automated vehicles without any human inter-
vention or supervision are now appearing in the com-
mercial domain. Automated bus rapid transit (ABRT)
combines the service quality of rail transit with the
ﬂexibility and cost of buses (as shown in Fig. 62.23).
Nonautomated bus rapid transit (BRT) is already rec-
ommended by the World Bank in developing coun-
tries as the most efﬁcient mass transport system.
By reserving a dedicated lane for bus operation and
adding some light infrastructure to facilitate loading
and unloading, capacities similar to those of a train
(60 000 passengers=h=direction) can be obtained, as has
been demonstrated in South America [62.113]. By
Fig. 62.23 Toyota ABRT used in IMTS Phileas

Part F | 62.7
1650
Part F
Robots at Work
Fig. 62.24 Cybercars at Schipol airport, Amsterdam
adding the driving automation on a BRT, the system
can be made more efﬁcient and safer, as is already the
case with automated metros.
The intelligent multimode transit system (IMTS)
consists of vehicles guided by magnetic markers imbed-
ded in the middle of their dedicated roads. The platoon
running function (three electronically linked vehicles
running in ﬁle formation at uniform speeds) of IMTS
consists of precisely controlling the speed of all the ve-
hicles in the platoon to be the same at all times [62.114].
In the city of Eindhoven in The Netherlands, multiar-
ticulated buses with several steering axes also run in
automated mode on a dedicated track using magnetic
markers [62.115]. These ABRTs usually keep a driver
in the vehicle, since there is the possibility of reverting
to manual mode if need be (such as for an unexpected
obstacle or in situations with many pedestrians); how-
ever, future plans are for full automation.
ABRT technology can also be found with smaller
vehicles, now called cybercars, for on-demand door-to-
door operation [62.110]. These vehicles were put into
operation for the ﬁrst time at Schipol airport (Amster-
dam) in December 1997 to move passengers from long-
term parking lots to the airport terminal (Fig. 62.24).
Since then these cybercars have been further developed,
ﬁnanced by the Information Society Technologies (IST)
program of the European Commission [62.110]. The
long-term future of cybercars may lie with the develop-
ment of dual-mode vehicles, with a particular emphasis
on car-sharing operations [62.112]. Cybercars will have
an automatic mode for operation in city centers (re-
stricted to this type of vehicle) and a driver-operated
(with assistance) mode for regular roads.
VIDEO 429
illustrates the cybercar concept. The automobile indus-
try is examining the viability of the development of
such vehicles.
In order to match the performance of manually
driven vehicles in urban environments, automated ve-
hicles face major technical challenges. In particular,
planning a trajectory for a car while avoiding moving
and static obstacles remains as an important research
challenge. In 2005, the DARPA Grand Challenge de-
scribed at the beginning of this chapter brought together
a large number of these researchers to demonstrate the
feasibility of automated driving techniques. Five ve-
hicles succeeded in completing the difﬁcult course of
132 miles in the desert in totally autonomous mode.
The 2007 DARPA challenge focused on multiple vehi-
cles operating simultaneously in an urban environment;
this challenge and the subsequent Google cars has
certainly shown that automotive products based on au-
tonomous vehicle techniques are becoming closer to
market [62.15].
62.7 Future Trends and Prospects
Our cars, trucks, and buses are inevitably getting
smarter. The future path is not completely known, and
is likely to vary in different locations, but it is be-
coming widely accepted that there will be no need to
drive our cars in the remote future. The time frame
is still undeﬁned, but it appears that autonomous cars
will populate our highways – perhaps using special
lanes- in less than a decade. Governments will not
only have to allow this change, but will have the
great opportunity to inﬂuence its deployment, for ex-
ample by increasing the number of dedicated lanes
and the beneﬁts that autonomous vehicles will obtain
as opposed to less safe driving of manually driven
cars.
Four different states in the USA have paved the
way for having autonomous vehicles driven on regular

Intelligent Vehicles
62.8 Conclusions and Further Reading
1651
Part F | 62.8
roadways (albeit for testing purposes), moving towards
legislation that will make autonomous cars legal on ev-
eryday roads. This trend is not only happening in the
USA, but also in Europe. Indeed, differences in culture
and in driving habits will bring driverless technology
into reality in selected locations earlier. Countries in
which particularly fast and disrespectful driving is toler-
ated will make the introduction of autonomous vehicles
challenging. Additionally, the safety issues associated
with intermingling of autonomous and human driven
cars have become critical and extensive investigations
are again underway.
Several trends are clear, however. As sensor-
equipped vehicles become more common, there will be
increasing opportunities to build sensor-friendly tech-
nologies into roadways and into vehicles. It is straight-
forward to reduce the amount of radar clutter on road
sides by replacing large metal signs, which are excellent
radar reﬂectors, with nonreﬂective signs made of plastic
or composites. At the same time, it will be desirable to
increase the radar cross-section of small vehicles, such
as motorcycles, to make them easier for radar-equipped
cars to detect. Radar-reﬂecting licence plates, for in-
stance, would make smaller vehicles stand out more
clearly.
The next steps may be to deploy systems that
support the active transmission information from in-
frastructure to vehicle and vehicle to vehicle. Dedicated
short-range communications (DSRC) is already in wide
use in smart toll collection stations. It is easy to imagine
DSRC-equipped vehicles receiving alerts from road-
side sensors of upcoming fog, or ice, or congestion.
Intelligent vehicles that detect unusual roadway condi-
tions (via radar or lidar, slip detectors, or driver actions
such as hard braking) could broadcast that information
to all nearby smart vehicles. As market penetration of
equipped vehicles increases, the value of such ad-hoc
communications nets will go up dramatically.
Vehicle-to-vehicle communications need not be
only via radio. Light-emitting diode (LED) brake lights
can be pulsed at kilohertz frequencies, well above the
bandwidth at which human eyes can detect ﬂicker, but
easily received by following vehicles. This would be
a straightforward way for a vehicle to tell other vehi-
cles about the onset of hard braking, or other unusual
roadway conditions.
62.8 Conclusions and Further Reading
Advances in both the technologies and the algorithmic
aspects of developing autonomous vehicles continue.
Presently, impressive new systems have been demon-
strated (Bertha [62.116] and PROUD [62.117]). In the
ﬁrst case, a Mercedes-Benz S 500 traveled on the
historical route between Mannheim and Pforzheim in
Germany in August 2013, while the PROUD experi-
ment involved urban driving in open trafﬁc in the inner
city of Parma, Italy, and a part of the trip was made with
nobody behind the steering wheel (
VIDEO 178 ).
The general public will become increasingly ac-
customed to intelligent systems – sensors and com-
munications on vehicles. The only showstopper in the
large-scale deployment of robotics technologies in the
automobile ﬁeld is the ability of the industry to de-
liver the technologies with total safety, which focuses
attention on the problems of failsafe systems and their
certiﬁcation. The rail and aerospace industries have
solved these problems but in a very different environ-
ment. In these industries, the cost of safety for each
vehicle can be much higher than in a car or a bus,
and the operational environment is also quite differ-
ent, with professionals operating and maintaining the
system. Manufacturers will slowly develop experience
in reliability and cost engineering, and governments
will gradually work out liability issues. For these rea-
sons, systems that put the driver in the loop of new
automation technologies will be the current focus of
development.
Many issues will need to be carefully addressed, in-
cluding user acceptance, liability, and safety; however,
it seems quite probable that this technology will lead to
an unprecedented revolution in the ﬁeld of transporta-
tion and people mobility.
For further reading on this topic there are a number
of sources that can be recommended:

Intelligent vehicles survey text [62.9, 10]

Intelligent transport systems journals (IEEE Trans-
actions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Transporta-
tion Research PART B: Methodology, IEEE Trans-
actions on Intelligent Vehicles)

Annual conferences (Intelligent Vehicles Sympo-
sium, Intelligent Transportation Systems Confer-
ence, Vehicular Technology Annual Conference,
World Congress on Intelligent Transportation Sys-
tems, Intelligent Vehicle Systems Symposium)

Government resources [62.118–121],

Magazines (ITS Magazine).

Part F | 62
1652
Part F
Robots at Work
Video-References
VIDEO 178
PROUD2013 – Inside VisLab’s driverless car
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/62/videodetails/178
VIDEO 179
VIAC: The VisLab Intercontinental Autonomous Challenge
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/62/videodetails/179
VIDEO 420
Motion prediction using the Bayesian occupancy filter approach (Inria)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/62/videodetails/420
VIDEO 429
Cybercars and the city of tomorrow
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/62/videodetails/429
VIDEO 566
Bayesian embedded perception in Inria/Toyota instrumented platform
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/62/videodetails/566
VIDEO 567
Inria/Ligier automated parallel parking demo in an open parking area
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/62/videodetails/567
VIDEO 822
Collision avoidance at blind intersections using V2V and intention / expectation approach (Inria & Renault)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/62/videodetails/822
VIDEO 836
Lane tracking
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/62/videodetails/836
VIDEO 838
Speed sign detection
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/62/videodetails/838
VIDEO 839
Pedestrian detection
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/62/videodetails/839
VIDEO 840
Driver fatigue and inattention
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/62/videodetails/839
References
62.1
J.
Ibañez-Guzmán,
C.
Laugier,
J.-D.
Yoder,
S. Thrun: Autonomous Driving: Context and state-
of-the Art. In: Handbook of Intelligent Vehicles,
ed. by A. Eskandarian (Springer, Berlin, Heidel-
berg 2012)
62.2
R.E. Fenton, R.J. Mayhan: Automated highway
studies at the Ohio State University – An overview,
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 40(1), 100–113 (1991)
62.3
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE): J2735 Ded-
icated Short Range Communications (DSRC) Mes-
sage Set Dictionary (2009)
62.4
E.D. Dickmanns: The development of machine vi-
sion for road vehicles in the last decade, IEEE
Intell. Veh. Symp., Vol. 1 (2002) pp. 268–281
62.5
A. Broggi, M. Bertozzi, A. Fascioli, G. Conte: Au-
tomatic Vehicle Guidance: The Experience of the
ARGO Autonomous Vehicle (World Scientific, Sin-
gapore 1999)
62.6
C.E. Thorpe (Ed.): Vision and Navigation: The
Carnegie Mellon Navlab (Kluwer, Boston 1990)
62.7
E.D. Dickmanns, B.D. Mysliwetz: Recursive 3-
D road and relative ego-state recognition, IEEE
Trans. Pattern. Anal. Mach. Intell. 14(2), 199–213
(1992)
62.8
D. Pomerleau, T. Jochem: Rapidly adapting ma-
chine vision for automated vehicle steering, IEEE
Intell. Syste. 11(2), 19–27 (1996)
62.9
A. Eskandarian (Ed.): Handbook of Intelligent Ve-
hicles (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2012)
62.10
Ü. Özgüner, T. Acarman, K. Redmill: Autonomous
Ground Vehicles (Artech House, Boston 2011)
62.11
S. Kato, S. Tsugawa, K. Tokuda, T. Matsui, H. Fujii:
Vehicle control algorithms for cooperative driving
with automated vehicles and intervehicle com-
munications, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 3(3),
155–161 (2002)
62.12
US Department of Transport, Research and Inno-
vative Technology Administration: Guide to fed-
eral intelligent transportation system (ITS) re-
search, http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/48000/48300/48313/
9E878E25.pdf (2013)
62.13
DARPA Grand Challenge Web Site: http://archive.
darpa.mil/grandchallenge05/
62.14
K. Iagnemma, M. Buehler (Eds.): Journal of Field
Robotics, Special issues on the DARPA Grand Chal-
lenge, Vol. 23, No. 8/9 (Wiley, Hoboken 2006)
62.15
Department
of
Defense,
Washington:
Darpa
Grand
Challenge,
http://archive.darpa.mil/
grandchallenge/ (2007)
62.16
J. Ploeg, S. Shladover, H. Nijmeijer, N. Van De
Wouw: Introduction to the special issue on the
2011 grand cooperative driving challenge, IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 13(3), 989–993 (2012)
62.17
A. Broggi, P. Cerri, M. Felisa, M.C. Laghi, L. Mazzei,
P.P.
Porta:
The
VisLab
intercontinental
au-
tonomous challenge: An extensive test for a pla-
toon of intelligent vehicles, Intl. J. Veh. Auton.
Syst. 10(3), 147–164 (2012)
62.18
M. Bertozzi, A. Broggi, A. Coati, R.I. Fedriga:
A 13 000 km intercontinental trip with driverless
vehicles: The VIAC experiment, IEEE Intell. Transp.
Syst. Mag. 5(1), 28–41 (2013)
62.19
A. Broggi, P. Medici, P. Zani, A. Coati, M. Panciroli:
Autonomous vehicles control in the VisLab in-
tercontinental autonomous challenge, Annu. Rev.
Control 36(1), 161–171 (2012)

Intelligent Vehicles
References
1653
Part F | 62
62.20
L. Vlacic, M. Parent, F. Harashima: EDS Intelli-
gent Vehicle Technologies, Theory and Applica-
tions (Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford 2001)
62.21
M. Hirota, Y. Nakajima, M. Saito, M. Uchiyama:
Low-cost infrared imaging sensors for automotive
application. In: Advanced Microsystems for Auto-
motive Applications, VDI-Buch, ed. by J. Valldorf,
W. Gessner (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2004)
62.22
M. Hikita: An introduction to ultrasonic sensors
for vehicle parking, http://www.newelectronics.
co.uk/electronics-technology/an-introduction-
to-ultrasonic-sensors-for-vehicle-parking/
24966/ (2010)
62.23
M. Klotz, H. Rohling: 24 GHz radar sensors for au-
tomotive applications, Int. Conf. Microw. Radar
Wirel. Commun. (MIKON), Vol. 1 (2000) pp. 359–
362
62.24
A. Ewald, V. Willhoeft: Laser scanners for obstacle
detection in automotive applications, IEEE Intell.
Veh. Symp. (2000) pp. 682–687
62.25
C. Laugier, I. Paromtchik, M. Perrollaz, M. Yong,
J. Yoder, C. Tay, K. Mekhnacha, A. Negre: Proba-
bilistic analysis of dynamic scenes and collision
risks assessment to improve driving safety, IEEE
Intell. Transp. Syst. Mag. 3(4), 4–19 (2011)
62.26
S. Lefèvre, C. Laugier, J. Ibañez-Guzmán: Risk
assessment at road intersections: Comparing in-
tention and expectation, IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp.
(2012) pp. 165–171
62.27
I. Skog, P. Handel: In-car positioning and navi-
gation technologies – A survey, IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst. 10(1), 4–21 (2009)
62.28
TomTom: Manufacturer of navigation systems
and how they work, http://www.tomtom.com/
howdoesitwork/
62.29
Ertico: ActMAP an EU Project for Dynamic Map Up-
dating, http://www.ertico.com/actmap (2007)
62.30
S. Rogers, W. Zhang: Development and evaluation
of a curve rollover warning system for trucks, IEEE
Intell. Veh. Symp. (2003) pp. 294–297
62.31
D. Vaughan: Vehicle speed control based on
GPS/MAP matching of posted speeds, Patent US
5 485 161 (1996)
62.32
H. Sabel, M.R. Herbst: The map as a component
in advanced driver assistance systems, Proc. 7th
World Cong. Intell. Syst. (2000)
62.33
Q. Ji, X. Yang: Real-time eye, gaze, and face pose
tracking for monitoring driver vigilance, Real-
Time Imaging 8(5), 357–377 (2002)
62.34
J.B. Kenney: Dedicated short-range communi-
cations (DSRC) standards in the United States,
Proceedings IEEE 99(7), 1162–1182 (2011)
62.35
Y. Ohshima: Control system for automatic driving,
Proc. IFAC Tokyo Symp. Syst. Eng. Control Syst. Des.
(1965)
62.36
S. Biddlestone, K. Redmill, R. Miucic, Ü. Özgüner:
An integrated 802.11p WAVE DSRC and vehicle traf-
fic simulator with experimentally validated urban
(LOS and NLOS) propagation models, IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst. 13(4), 1792–1802 (2012)
62.37
T. Schaffnit: Automotive standardization of vehi-
cle networks. In: Vehicular Networking: Automo-
tive Applications and Beyond, ed. by M. Emmel-
mann, B. Bochow, C.C. Kellum (Wiley, Chichester
2010)
62.38
L. Le, A. Festag, R. Baldessari, W. Zhang: CAR-2-
X Communication in Europe. In: Vehicular Net-
works: From Theory to Practice, ed. by S. Olariu,
M.C. Weigle (CRC, Boca Raton 2008)
62.39
T. Ernst: The information technology era of the
vehicular industry, ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Com-
mun. Rev. 36(2), 49–52 (2006)
62.40
CALM working group producing standards and
specifications: http://calm.its-standards.eu/
62.41
CVIS: Cooperative Vehicle-Infrastructure Systems,
http://www.cvisproject.org/
62.42
D.M. Gavrila, U. Franke, C. Wöhler, S. Görzig: Real-
time vision for intelligent vehicles, IEEE Instr.
Meas. Mag. 4(2), 22–27 (2001)
62.43
Japanese advanced safety vehicle project: http://
www.mlit.go.jp/road/ITS/pdf/ITSinitiativesJapan.
pdf
62.44
J.C. McCall, M.M. Trivedi: Video-based lane esti-
mation and tracking for driver assistance: Survey,
system, and evaluation, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Syst. 7(1), 20–37 (2006)
62.45
N.E. Apostoloff, A. Zelinsky: Robust vision based
lane tracking using multiple cues and particle
filtering, IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp. (2003) pp. 558–
563
62.46
Q. Baig, M. Perrollaz, C. Laugier: A robust motion
detection technique for dynamic environment
monitoring. A framework for grid-based moni-
toring of the dynamic environment, IEEE Robotics
Autom. Mag. 21(1), 40–48 (2014)
62.47
M.R. Blas, M. Agrawal, A. Sundaresan, K. Kono-
lige: Fast color/texture segmentation for outdoor
robots, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2008)
62.48
D.M. Gavrila, V. Philomin: Real-time object de-
tection for smart vehicles, Proc. 7th IEEE Int. Conf.
Comp. Vis., Vol. 1 (1999) pp. 87–93
62.49
G. Piccioli, E. De Micheli, P. Parodi, M. Campani:
Robust method for road sign detection and recog-
nition, Image Vis. Comput. 14(3), 209–223 (1996)
62.50
C. Bahlmann, Y. Zhu, R. Visvanathan, M. Pellkofer,
T. Koehler: A system for traffic sign detection,
tracking, and recognition using color, shape, and
motion information, IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp. (2005)
pp. 255–260
62.51
U. Franke, A. Joos: Real-time stereo vision for ur-
ban traffic scene understanding, Proc. IEEE Intell.
Veh. Symp. (2000) pp. 273–278
62.52
Nissan safety vehicle that interacts with in-
frastructure: http://www.nissan-global.com/EN/
TECHNOLOGY/OVERVIEW/vii.html
62.53
N. Hautiere, R. Labayrade, D. Aubert: Estimation
of the visibility distance by stereovision: A Generic
Approach, IEICE Trans. Inf. Syst. E89-D(7), 2084–
2091 (2006)
62.54
A. Petrovskaya, M. Perrollaz, L. Oliveira, L. Spi-
nello, R. Triebel, A. Makris, J.D. Yoder, C. Laugier,
U. Nunes, P. Bessiere: Awareness of road scene
participants for autonomous driving. In: Hand-

Part F | 62
1654
Part F
Robots at Work
book of Intelligent Vehicles, ed. by A. Eskandarian
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2012)
62.55
R. Labayrade, D. Aubert, J.P. Tarel: Real time
obstacle detection in stereo vision on non flat
road geometry through V-disparity representa-
tion, Proc. IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp., Vol. 2 (2002)
pp. 646–651
62.56
Z. Sun, G. Bebis, R. Miller: On-road vehicle de-
tection: A review, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell. 28(5), 694–711 (2006)
62.57
E. Segawa, M. Shiohara, S. Sasaki, N. Hashiguchi,
T. Takashima, M. Tohno: Preceding vehicle de-
tection using stereo images and non-scanning
millimeter-wave radar, IEICE Trans. Inf. Syst. E89-
D(7), 2101–2108 (2006)
62.58
T. Kato, Y. Ninomiya, I. Masaki: An obstacle de-
tection method by fusion of radar and motion
stereo, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 3(3), 182–
188 (2002)
62.59
C. Coué, C. Pradalier, C. Laugier, T. Fraichard,
P. Bessiere: Bayesian occupancy filtering for mul-
titarget tracking: An automotive application, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 25(1), 19–30 (2006)
62.60
M. Oren, C. Papageorgiou, P. Sinha, E. Osuna,
T. Poggio: Pedestrian detection using wavelet
templates, IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (1997) pp. 193–199
62.61
L. Zhao, C.E. Thorpe: Stereo- and neural network-
based pedestrian detection, IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst. 01(3), 148–154 (2000)
62.62
D. Pomerleau: Ralph: Rapidly adapting lateral
position handler, IEEE Symp. Intell. Veh. (1995)
pp. 506–511
62.63
US DOT: Intelligent vehicle initiative program,
http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/jpodocs/repts_pr/14153.htm
(2005)
62.64
Blind
Spot
Detection
products:
http://auto.
howstuffworks.com/car-driving-safety/safety-
regulatory-devices/cars-making-blind-spot-
less-dangerous1.htm
62.65
L. Matuszyk, A. Zelinsky, L. Nilsson, M. Rilbe:
Stereo panoramic vision for monitoring vehicle
blind-spots, IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp. (2004) pp. 31–
36
62.66
Volvo Blind Spot Information System (BLIS): http://
www.gizmag.com/go/2937/
62.67
Automotive
night
vision
systems:
http://
electronics.howstuffworks.com/gadgets/
automotive/in-dash-night-vision-system3.
htm
62.68
Radar-vision
fusion
for
pedestrian
detec-
tion:
http://www.mobileye.com/technology/
applications/radar-vision-fusion/
62.69
Large animal detection and collision avoidance
product: http://www.telematics.com/telematics-
blog/horse-avoidance-tech-latest-volvo-push/
62.70
T.A. Williamson: A High-Performance Stereo Vi-
sion System for Obstacle Detection, Tech. Rep., Vol.
CMU-RI-TR-98-24 (Carnegie Mellon Univ., Pitts-
burgh 1998)
62.71
E. Li: Millimeter-Wave Polarimetric Radar Sys-
tem as an Advanced Vehicle Control and Warning
Sensor, Ph.D. Thesis (Univ. Michigan, Michigan
1998)
62.72
J.A. Hancock: Laser Intensity Based Obstacle De-
tection and Tracking, Ph.D. Thesis (Carnegie Mel-
lon Univ., Pittsburgh 1999)
62.73
European Union, 7th Framework Program: Inter-
active, http://www.interactive-ip.eu
62.74
N.M. Oliver, B. Rosario, A.P. Pentland: A Bayesian
computer vision system for modeling human in-
teractions, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.
22(8), 831–843 (2000)
62.75
D. Vasquez, C. Laugier: Modeling and learning be-
haviors. In: Handbook of Intelligent Vehicles, ed.
by A. Eskandarian (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2012)
62.76
J.C.
McCall,
M.M.
Trivedi:
Lane
change
in-
tent analysis using robust operators and sparse
Bayesian learning, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.
8(3), 431–440 (2007)
62.77
D. Meyer-Delius, C. Plagemann, W. Burgard:
Probabilistic situation recognition for vehicular
traffic scenarios, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2009) pp. 4161–4166
62.78
H. Berndt, J. Emmert, K. Dietmayer: Continuous
driver intention recognition with hidden Markov
models, Proc. IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst. Conf. (2008)
pp. 1189–1194
62.79
G.S. Aoude, V.R. Desaraju, L.H. Stephens, J.P. How:
Behavior classification algorithms at intersections
and validation using naturalistic data, IEEE Intell.
Veh. Symp. (2011) pp. 601–606
62.80
G.S. Aoude, B.D. Luders, D.S. Levine, J.P. How:
Threat-aware path planning in uncertain urban
environments, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2010) pp. 6058–6063
62.81
C. Tay, K. Mekhnacha, C. Laugier: Probabilistic ve-
hicle motion modeling and risk estimation. In:
Handbook of Intelligent Vehicles, ed. by A. Eskan-
darian (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2012)
62.82
M. Althoff, O. Stursberg, M. Buss: Model-based
probabilistic collision detection in autonomous
driving, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 10(2), 299–
310 (2009)
62.83
S. Lefèvre, C. Laugier, J. Ibañez-Guzmán: Eval-
uating risk at road intersections by detecting
conflicting intentions, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2012)
62.84
A. Molinero, H. Evdorides, C. Naing, A. Kirk,
J. Tecl, J.M. Barrios, M.C. Simon, V. Phan, T. Her-
mitte: Accident causation and pre-accidental
driving situations – In-depth accident cau-
sation analysis, Deliverable D2.2 (IST, Brussel
2008)
62.85
Intelligent intersections and cooperation – Inter-
safe 2: http://www.cvisproject.org/
62.86
W.D. Jones: Keeping cars from crashing, IEEE Spec-
trum 38(9), 40–45 (2001)
62.87
P. Venhovens, K. Naab, B. Adiprasito: Stop and go
cruise control, Proc. FISTA World Automot. Congr.
(2000)
62.88
I.E. Paromtchik, C. Laugier: Motion generation
and control for parking an autonomous vehi-

Intelligent Vehicles
References
1655
Part F | 62
cle, Proc. Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol.
4 (1996) pp. 3117–3122
62.89
Toyota: Toyota parking assistance system, http://
www.toyota-global.com/innovation/safety_
technology/safety_technology/parking/
62.90
V.R. Vuchic: O-Bahn: Description and evaluation
of a new concept, 64th Annual Meet. Transport.
Res. Board (Transportation Research Board, Wash-
ington DC 1985)
62.91
S. Ishida, J.E. Gayko: Development, evaluation
and introduction of a lane keeping assistance
system, IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp. (2004) pp. 943–944
62.92
C. Hatipoglu, Ü. Özgüner, K.A. Redmill: Automated
lane change controller design, IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst. 4(1), 13–22 (2003)
62.93
A. Bartels, M.-M. Meinecke, S. Steinmeyer: Lane
change assistance. In: Handbook of Intelligent
Vehicles, ed. by A. Eskandarian (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 2012) pp. 729–757
62.94
J. Treat, N. Tumbas, S. McDonald, D. Shinar,
R. Hume, R. Mayer, R. Stansifer, N. Castellan: Tri-
Level study of the causes of traffic accidents: Final
report – Executive summary, Tech. Rep., Vol. DOT-
HS-034-3-535-79-TAC(S) (Institute for Research in
Public Safety, Bloomington 1979)
62.95
K.A. Brookhuis, D. De Waard, W.H. Janssen: Be-
havioural impacts of advanced driver assistance
systems – an overview, Eur. J. Transp. Infrastruct.
Res. 1(3), 245–253 (2001)
62.96
Q. Ji, Z. Zhu, P. Lan: Real-time nonintrusive moni-
toring and prediction of driver fatigue, IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol. 53(4), 1052–1068 (2004)
62.97
M. Carmen del Rio, J. Gomez, M. Sancho, F.J. Al-
varez: Alcohol, illicit drugs and medicinal drugs in
fatally injured drivers in Spain between 1991 and
2000, Forensic Sci. Int. 127(1/2), 63–70 (2002)
62.98
N.L. Haworth, T.J. Triggs, E.M. Grey: Driver Fatigue:
Concepts, Measurement and Crash Countermea-
sures (Human Factors Group, Department of Psy-
chology, Monash University 1988)
62.99
N.L. Howarth, C.J. Heffernan, E.J. Horne: Fatigue
in truck accidents, Tech. Rep., Vol. 3 (Monash Uni-
versity, Accident Research Centre 1989)
62.100
W.W. Wierwille, L.A. Ellsworth: Evaluation of
driver drowsiness by trained raters, Accid. Analy-
sis Prev. 26(5), 571–581 (1994)
62.101
J. Stutts, D. Reinfurt, L. Staplin, E. Rodgman: The
role of driver distraction in traffic crashes. Tech.
Rep (AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety, Washing-
ton 2001)
62.102
T. Victor: Keeping Eye and Mind on the Road,
Ph.D. Thesis (Uppsala Univ., Uppsala 2005)
62.103
L. Fletcher, A. Zelinsky: Driver inattention detec-
tion based on eye gaze – road event correlation,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 28(6), 774–801 (2009)
62.104
L. Fletcher, L. Petersson, A. Zelinsky: Road scene
monotony detection in a fatigue management
driver assistance system, Proc. IEEE Intell. Veh.
Symp. (2005) pp. 484–489
62.105
Y. Owechko, N. Srinivasa, S. Medasani, R. Boscolo:
Vision-based fusion system for smart airbag ap-
plications, IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp., Vol. 1 (2002)
pp. 245–250
62.106
F.J. Martinez, T. Chai-Keong, J.-C. Cano, C.T. Ca-
lafate, P. Manzoni: Emergency services in fu-
ture intelligent transportation systems based on
vehicular communication networks, IEEE Intell.
Transp. Syst. Mag. 2(2), 6–20 (2010)
62.107
Emergency response and assistance to accidents
product: https://www.splitsecnd.com/
62.108
M. Schulze, J. Irion, T. Mäkinen, M. Flament:
Accidentology as a basis for requirements and
system architecture of preventive safety applica-
tions, 10th Int. Forum Adv. Microsyst. Automot.
Appl. (AAA) (2006) pp. 407–426
62.109
X.Y. Lu, H.S. Tan, S.E. Shladover, J.K. Heidrick: Im-
plementation and comparison of nonlinear lon-
gitudinal controllers for car platooning, 5th Int.
Symp. Adv. Veh. Control (AVEC) (2000)
62.110
Cybercar: Cybercar – Automated Bus Rapid Transit
vehicle
62.111
European Commission: Intelligent Car Initiative,
http://www.ertico.com/the-intelligent-car-
initiative
62.112
World Carshare Consortium: http://www.ecoplan.
org/carshare/cs_index.htm
62.113
R. Cervero: Creating a Linear City with a Surface
Metro: The Story of Curitiba, Institute of Urban and
Regional Development, IURD Working Paper 643
(Univ. California, Berkeley 1995)
62.114
H.S. Jacob Taso, J.L. Botha: Definition and Eval-
uation of Bus and Truck Automation Operations
Concepts, Path Rep. UCB-ITS-PRR-2002-08 (Univ.
California, Oakland 2002)
62.115
Phileas advanced public transport: http://www.
apts-phileas.com
62.116
J. Ziegler, P. Bender, M. Schreiber, H. Lategahn,
C. Stiller: Making Bertha drive: An autonomous
journey on a historic route, IEEE Intell. Transp.
Syst. Mag. 6(2), 8–20 (2014)
62.117
A. Broggi, P. Cerri, S. Debattisti, M.C. Laghi,
P. Medici, M. Panciroli, A. Prioletti: PROUD – Public
ROad Urban Driverless test: Architecture and re-
sults, Proc. IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp. (2014) pp. 648–
654
62.118
US Department of Transportation, Research and
Innovation Technology Administration, Intelli-
gent Transportation Systems, Joint Program Office
(DOT, Washington 2014): http://www.its.dot.gov/
62.119
European Union Research on Transportation (Eu-
ropean Commission, Brussels 2014) http://ec.
europa.eu/research/transport/
62.120
Japan Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Trans-
port: Road Bureau ITS Program, http://www.its.
go.jp/ITS/(2007)
62.121
EU Transport Research and Innovation Portal:
http://www.transport-research.info/web/index.
cfm

Multimedia Contents Medical Rob
1657
Part F | 63
63. Medical Robotics
and Computer-Integrated Surgery
Russell H. Taylor, Arianna Menciassi, Gabor Fichtinger, Paolo Fiorini, Paolo Dario
The growth of medical robotics since the mid-
1980s has been striking. From a few initial efforts
in stereotactic brain surgery, orthopaedics, endo-
scopic surgery, microsurgery, and other areas, the
field has expanded to include commercially mar-
keted, clinically deployed systems, and a robust
and exponentially expanding research community.
This chapter will discuss some major themes and
illustrate them with examples from current and
past research. Further reading providing a more
comprehensive review of this rapidly expanding
field is suggested in Sect. 63.4.
Medical robots may be classified in many ways:
by manipulator design (e.g., kinematics, actua-
tion); by level of autonomy (e.g., preprogrammed
versus teleoperation versus constrained coopera-
tive control), by targeted anatomy or technique
(e.g., cardiac, intravascular, percutaneous, la-
paroscopic, microsurgical); or intended operating
environment (e.g., in-scanner, conventional op-
erating room). In this chapter, we have chosen to
focus on the role of medical robots within the
context of larger computer-integrated systems
including presurgical planning, intraoperative
execution, and postoperative assessment and
follow-up.
First, we introduce basic concepts of computer-
integrated surgery, discuss critical factors affecting
the eventual deployment and acceptance of
medical robots, and introduce the basic system
paradigms of surgical computer-assisted planning,
execution, monitoring, and assessment (surgical
CAD/CAM) and surgical assistance. In subsequent
sections, we provide an overview of the technol-
ogy of medical robot systems and discuss examples
of our basic system paradigms, with brief addi-
tional discussion topics of remote telesurgery and
robotic surgical simulators. We conclude with some
thoughts on future research directions and provide
suggested further reading.
63.1
Core Concepts ...................................... 1658
63.1.1
Medical Robotics,
Computer-Integrated Surgery,
and Closed-Loop Interventions... 1658
63.1.2
Factors Affecting the Acceptance
of Medical Robots...................... 1658
63.1.3
Medical Robotics System
Paradigms: Surgical CAD/CAM
and Surgical Assistance .............. 1660
63.2 Technology.......................................... 1662
63.2.1
Mechanical Design
Considerations .......................... 1662
63.2.2 Control Paradigms ..................... 1663
63.2.3 Virtual Fixtures
and Human–Machine
Cooperative Systems .................. 1664
63.2.4 Safety and Sterility .................... 1665
63.2.5 Imaging and Modelling
of Patients ................................ 1666
63.2.6 Registration .............................. 1666
63.3 Systems, Research Areas,
and Applications ................................. 1667
63.3.1
Nonrobotic Computer-Assisted
Surgery: Navigation
and Image Overlay Devices ......... 1667
63.3.2 Orthopaedic Systems ................. 1667
63.3.3 Percutaneous Needle
Placement Systems .................... 1668
63.3.4 Telesurgical Systems................... 1670
63.3.5 Microsurgery Systems................. 1671
63.3.6 Endoluminal Robots .................. 1671
63.3.7
Sensorized Instruments
and Haptic Feedback ................. 1672
63.3.8 Surgical Simulators
and Telerobotic Systems
for Training............................... 1674
63.3.9 Other Applications
and Research Areas.................... 1675
63.4 Conclusion and Future Directions.......... 1675
Video-References......................................... 1676
References................................................... 1676

Part F | 63.1
1658
Part F
Robots at Work
63.1 Core Concepts
A fundamental property of robotic systems is their abil-
ity to couple complex information to physical action
in order to perform a useful task. This ability to re-
place, supplement, or transcend human performance
has had a profound inﬂuence on many ﬁelds of our soci-
ety, including industrial production, exploration, quality
control, and laboratory processes. Although robots have
often been ﬁrst introduced to automate or improve dis-
crete processes such as welding or test probe placement
or to provide access to environments where humans
cannot safely go, their greater long-term impact has of-
ten come indirectly as essential enablers of computer
integration of entire production or service processes.
63.1.1 Medical Robotics,
Computer-Integrated Surgery,
and Closed-Loop Interventions
Medical robots have a similar potential to fundamen-
tally change surgery and interventional medicine as part
of a broader, information-intensive environment that
exploits the complementary strengths of humans and
computer-based technology. The robots may be thought
of as information-driven surgical tools that enable hu-
man surgeons to treat individual patients with greater
safety, improved efﬁcacy, and reduced morbidity than
would otherwise be possible. Further, the consistency
and information infrastructure associated with medi-
cal robotic and computer-assisted surgery systems have
the potential to make computer-integrated surgery as
important to health care as computer-integrated man-
ufacturing is to industrial production.
Figure 63.1 illustrates this view of computer-
integrated surgery (CIS). The process starts with infor-
Information
Statistical analysis
Patient-specific evaluation
Model
Plan
Action
Patient-specific
information
(images, lab results,
genetics, text
records, etc.)
General information
(anatomic atlases,
statistics, rules)
Fig. 63.1 Fundamental information ﬂow in computer-integrated
surgery
mation about the patient, which can include medical
images (computed tomography (CT), magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography
(PET), etc.), lab test results, and other information.
This patient-speciﬁc information is combined with sta-
tistical information about human anatomy, physiology,
and disease to produce a comprehensive computer rep-
resentation of the patient, which can then be used to
produce an optimized interventional plan. In the operat-
ing room, the preoperative patient model and plan must
be registered to the actual patient. Typically, this is done
by identifying corresponding landmarks or structures
on the preoperative model and the patient, either by
means of additional imaging (x-ray, ultrasound, video),
by the use of a tracked pointing device, or by the
robot itself. If the patient’s anatomy has changed, then
the model and plan are updated appropriately, and the
planned procedure is carried out with assistance of the
robot. As the intervention continues, additional imag-
ing or other sensing is used to monitor the progress
of the procedure, to update the patient model, and to
verify that the planned procedure has been success-
fully executed. After the procedure is complete, further
imaging, modeling, and computer-assisted assessment
is performed for patient follow-up and to plan subse-
quent interventions, if any should be required. Further,
all the patient-speciﬁc data generated during the plan-
ning, execution, and follow-up phases can be retained.
These data can subsequently be analyzed statistically to
improve the rules and methods used to plan future pro-
cedures.
63.1.2 Factors Affecting the Acceptance
of Medical Robots
Medical robotics is ultimately an application-driven
research ﬁeld. Although the development of medical
robotic systems requires signiﬁcant innovation and can
lead to very real, fundamental advances in technology,
medical robots must provide measurable and signiﬁ-
cant advantages if they are to be widely accepted and
deployed. The situation is complicated by the fact that
these advantages are often difﬁcult to measure, can take
an extended period to assess, and may be of varying
importance to different groups. Table 63.1 lists some
of the more important factors that researchers contem-
plating the development of a new medical robot system
should consider in assessing their proposed approach.
Broadly, the advantages offered by medical robots
may be grouped into three areas. The ﬁrst is the po-
tential of a medical robot to signiﬁcantly improve sur-
geons’ technical capability to perform procedures by

Medical Robotics and Computer-Integrated Surgery
63.1 Core Concepts
1659
Part F | 63.1
Table 63.1 Assessment factors for medical robots or computer-integrated surgery systems (after [63.1])
Assessment
factor
Important
to whom
Assessment
method
Summary of key leverage
New treatment
options
Clinical
researchers, pa-
tients
Clinical and trials
preclinical
Transcend human sensory-motor limits (e.g., in
microsurgery). Enable less invasive procedures
with real-time image feedback (e.g., ﬂuoro-
scopic or MRI-guided liver or prostate therapy).
Speed up clinical research through greater con-
sistency and data gathering
Quality
Surgeons, patients
Clinician judg-
ment; revision
rates
Signiﬁcantly improve the quality of surgical
technique (e.g., in microvascular anastomosis),
thus improving results and reducing the need
for revision surgery
Time and cost
Surgeons, hospi-
tals, insurers
Hours, hospital
charges
Speed operating room (OR) time for some in-
terventions. Reduce costs from healing time and
revision surgery. Provide effective intervention
to treat patient condition
Less invasiveness
Surgeons, patients
Qualitative judg-
ment; recovery
times
Provide crucial information and feedback
needed to reduce the invasiveness of surgical
procedures, thus reducing infection risk, recov-
ery times, and costs (e.g., percutaneous spine
surgery)
Safety
Surgeons, patients
Complication and
revision surgery
rates
Reduce surgical complications and errors,
again lowering costs, improving outcomes and
shortening hospital stays (e.g., robotic total hip
replacement (THR), steady-hand brain surgery)
Real-time feed-
back
Surgeons
Qualitative assess-
ment, quantitative
comparison of
plan to obser-
vation, revision
surgery rates
Integrate preoperative models and intraopera-
tive images to give surgeon timely and accurate
information about the patient and intervention
(e.g., ﬂuoroscopic x-rays without surgeon expo-
sure, percutaneous therapy in conventional MRI
scanners). Assure that the planned intervention
has in fact been accomplished
Accuracy or pre-
cision
Surgeons
Quantitative com-
parison of plan to
actual
Signiﬁcantly improve the accuracy of therapy
dose pattern delivery and tissue manipulation
tasks (e.g., solid organ therapy, microsurgery,
robotic bone machining)
Enhanced doc-
umentation and
follow-up
Surgeons, clinical
researchers
Databases,
anatomical at-
lases, images, and
clinical observa-
tions
Exploit CIS systems’ ability to log more varied
and detailed information about each surgical
case than is practical in conventional manual
surgery. Over time, this ability, coupled with
CIS systems’ consistency, has the potential
to signiﬁcantly improve surgical practice and
shorten research trials
exploiting the complementary strengths of humans and
robots summarized in Table 63.2. Medical robots can
be constructed to be more precise and geometrically
accurate than an unaided human. They can operate in
hostile radiological environments and can provide great
dexterity for minimally invasive procedures inside the
patient’s body. These capabilities can both enhance the
ability of an average surgeon to perform procedures that
only a few exceptionally gifted surgeons can perform
unassisted and can also make it possible to perform
interventions that would otherwise be completely infea-
sible.

Part F | 63.1
1660
Part F
Robots at Work
Table 63.2 Complementary strengths of human surgeons and robots (after [63.1])
Strengths
Limitations
Humans
Excellent judgment
Excellent hand–eye coordination
Excellent dexterity (at natural human scale)
Able to integrate and act on multiple information
sources
Easily trained
Versatile and able to improvise
Prone to fatigue and inattention
Limited ﬁne motion control due to tremor
Limited manipulation ability and dexterity outside natural
scale
Cannot see through tissue
Bulky end-effectors (hands)
Limited geometric accuracy
Hard to keep sterile
Affected by radiation, infection
Robots
Excellent geometric accuracy
Untiring and stable
Immune to ionizing radiation
Can be designed to operate at many different scales of
motion and payload
Able to integrate multiple sources of numerical and
sensor data
Poor judgment
Hard to adapt to new situations
Limited dexterity
Limited hand–eye coordination
Limited haptic sensing (today)
Limited ability to integrate and interpret complex information
A second, closely related capability is the poten-
tial of medical robots to promote surgical safety both
by improving a surgeon’s technical performance and by
means of active assists such as no-ﬂy zones or virtual
ﬁxtures (Sect. 63.2.3) to prevent surgical instruments
from causing unintentional damage to delicate struc-
tures. Furthermore, the integration of medical robots
within the information infrastructure of a larger CIS
system can provide the surgeon with signiﬁcantly im-
proved monitoring and online decision supports, thus
further improving safety.
A third advantage is the inherent ability of med-
ical robots and CIS systems to promote consistency
while capturing detailed online information for ev-
ery procedure. Consistent execution (e.g., in spacing
and tensioning of sutures or in placing of compo-
nents in joint reconstructions) is itself an important
quality factor. If saved and routinely analyzed, the
ﬂight data recorder information inherently available
with a medical robot can be used both in morbid-
ity and mortality assessments of serious surgical in-
cidents and, potentially, in statistical analyses exam-
ining many cases to develop better surgical plans.
Furthermore, such data can provide valuable input
for surgical simulators, as well as a database for de-
veloping skill assessment and certiﬁcation tools for
surgeons.
63.1.3 Medical Robotics System
Paradigms: Surgical CAD/CAM
and Surgical Assistance
We call the process of computer-assisted planning,
registration, execution, monitoring, and assessment sur-
gical CAD/CAM, emphasizing the analogy to manu-
facturing CAD/CAM. Just as in manufacturing, robots
can be critical in this CAD/CAM process by enhanc-
ing the surgeon’s ability to execute surgical plans. The
speciﬁc role played by the robot depends somewhat
on the application, but current systems tend to exploit
the geometric accuracy of the robot and/or its ability
to function concurrently with x-ray or other imaging
devices. Typical examples include radiation therapy
delivery robots such as Accuray’s CyberKnife [63.2]
(Accuray, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA), shaping of bone in
orthopaedic joint reconstructions (discussed further in
Sect. 63.3.2) and image-guided placement of therapy
needles (Sect. 63.3.3).
Surgery is often highly interactive; many decisions
are made by the surgeon in the operating room and ex-
ecuted immediately, usually with direct visual or haptic
feedback. Generally, the goal of surgical robotics is not
to replace the surgeon so much as to improve his or her
ability to treat the patient. The robot is thus a computer-
controlled surgical tool in which control of the robot is
often shared in one way or another between the human
surgeon and a computer. We thus often speak of medical
robots as surgical assistants.
Broadly, robotic surgical assistants may be broken
into two subcategories. The ﬁrst category, surgeon
extender robots, manipulate surgical instruments under
the direct control of the surgeon, usually through a tele-
operation or hands-on cooperative control interface.
The primary value of these systems is that they can
overcome some of the perception and manipulation
limitations of the surgeon. Examples include the ability
to manipulate surgical instruments with superhuman
precision by eliminating hand tremor, the ability to per-
form highly dexterous tasks inside the patient’s body, or
the ability to perform surgery on a patient who is phys-
ically remote from the surgeon. Although setup time
is still a serious concern with most surgeon extender

Medical Robotics and Computer-Integrated Surgery
63.1 Core Concepts
1661
Part F | 63.1
Stereo
video
Instrument
manipulators
Surgeon interface
manipulators
Motion controller
Fig. 63.2 The da Vinci telesurgical
robot (after [63.3]) extends a sur-
geon’s capabilities by providing the
immediacy and dexterity of open
surgery in a minimally invasive surgi-
cal environment (photos courtesy of
Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale)
systems, the greater ease of manipulation that such sys-
tems offer has the potential to reduce operative times.
One widely deployed example of a surgeon extender is
the da Vinci system [63.3] (Intuitive Surgical Systems,
Sunnyvale, CA) shown in Fig. 63.2. Other examples
(among many) incude the Sensei catheter system [63.7]
(Hansen Medical Systems, Mountain View, CA.). the
Robot
interface
Robot
Stereo display
Force and OCT sensing tools
Video microscope
a)
b)
c)
x∙cmd
fhandle
Cv (fhandle –Cscale ftool)
ftool
Fig.63.3a-c The Johns Hopkins Steady Hand microsurgical robot (after [63.4–6]) extends a surgeon’s capabilities by
providing the ability to manipulate surgical instruments with very high precision while still exploiting the surgeon’s
natural hand–eye coordination. (a) The basic paradigm of hands-on compliant guiding. The commanded velocity of the
robot is proportional to a scaled difference between the forces exerted by the surgeon on the tool handle and (optionally)
sensed tool-to-tissue forces. (b) Current laboratory setup, showing the robot, stereo video microscope, stereo display
with information overlays, display console for optical coherence tomography (OCT) system, and a sensorized tool.
(c) An earlier recent version of the Steady Hand robot currently being used for experiments in microcannulation of
100 m blood vessels
Johns Hopkins University (JHU) Steady Hand micro-
surgery robot [63.4–6] shown in Fig. 63.3 and discussed
in Sect. 63.3, the Rio orthopaedic robot [63.8] (Mako
Surgical Systems, Ft. Lauderdale, Florida), the DLR
Miro system [63.9], the Surgica Robotica’s Sergenius
system (Surgica Robotica, Udine), and Titan Medical’s
Amadeus System (Titan Medical, Toronto, Canada).

Part F | 63.2
1662
Part F
Robots at Work
A second category, auxiliary surgical support
robots, generally work alongside the surgeon and per-
form such routine tasks as tissue retraction, limb posi-
tioning, or endoscope holding. One primary advantage
of such systems is their potential to reduce the num-
ber of people required in the operating room, although
that advantage can only be achieved if all the tasks
routinely performed by an assisting individual can be
automated. Other advantages can include improved task
performance (e.g., a steadier endoscopic view), safety
(e.g., elimination of excessive retraction forces), or sim-
ply giving the surgeon a greater feeling of control over
the procedure. One of the key challenges in these sys-
tems is providing the required assistance without posing
an undue burden on the surgeon’s attention. A variety
of control interfaces are common, including joysticks,
head tracking, voice recognition systems, and visual
tracking of the surgeon and surgical instruments, for
example, the Aesop endoscope positioner [63.10] used
both a foot-actuated joystick and a very effective voice
recognition system. Again, further examples are dis-
cussed in Sect. 63.3.
It is important to realize that surgical CAD/CAM
and surgical assistance are complementary concepts.
They are not at all incompatible, and many systems
have aspects of both.
63.2 Technology
The mechanical design of a surgical robot depends cru-
cially on its intended application. For example, robots
with high precision, stiffness and (possibly) limited
dexterity are often very suitable for orthopaedic bone
shaping or stereotactic needle placement, and medical
robots for these applications [63.17–20] frequently have
high gear ratios and consequently, low back-drivability,
high stiffness, and low speed. On the other hand,
robots for complex, minimally invasive surgery (MIS)
4.2 mm
a)
b)
e)
f)
c)
d)
Fig.63.4a–f Dexterity enhancement
inside a patient’s body:
(a) The Intuitive da Vinci Si system and wrist with a typical surgi-
cal instrument (Photos courtesy of Intuitive Surgical) (after [63.3]);
(b) The end-effectors of the JHU/Columbia snake telesurgical sys-
tem (after [63.11]); (c) Two-handed manipulation system for use
in endogastric surgery (after [63.12]); (d) ﬁve-degree-of-freedom
3 mm wrist and gripper (after [63.13]) for microsurgery in deep
and narrow spaces; (e) concentric tube robot (after [63.14, 15]);
(f) Columbia/Vanderbilt high dexterity system for single port ac-
cess surgery (after [63.16])
on soft tissues require compactness, dexterity, and re-
sponsiveness. These systems [63.3, 21] frequently have
relatively high speed, low stiffness, and highly back-
drivable mechanisms.
63.2.1 Mechanical Design Considerations
Many early medical robots [63.17, 20, 22] were essen-
tially modiﬁed industrial robots. This approach has
many advantages, including low cost, high reliability,
and shortened development times. If suitable modiﬁ-
cations are made to ensure safety and sterility, such
systems can be very successful clinically [63.18], and
they can also be invaluable for rapid prototyping and
research use.
However, the specialized requirements of surgical
applications have tended to encourage more special-
ized designs. For example, laparoscopic surgery and
percutaneous needle placement procedures typically
involve the passage or manipulation of instruments
about a common entry point into the patient’s body.
There are three basic design approaches. The ﬁrst ap-
proach uses a passive wrist to allow the instrument
to pivot about the insertion point and has been used
in the commercial Aesop and Zeus robots [63.21,
23] as well as several research systems. The second
approach mechanically constrains the motion of the
surgical tool to rotate about a remote center of mo-
tion (RCM) distal to the robot’s structure. In surgery,
the robot is positioned so that the RCM point co-
incides with the entry point into the patient’s body.
This approach has been used by the commercially
developed da Vinci robot [63.3], as well as by nu-
merous research groups, using a variety of kinematic
designs [63.24–26]. Finally, a third approach uses an
active external wrist [63.9, 17]and thus supports robot-
assisted interventions that do not require a pivot point,

Medical Robotics and Computer-Integrated Surgery
63.2 Technology
1663
Part F | 63.2
potentially extending robotic surgery to other ﬁeld of
surgery.
The emergence of minimally invasive surgery has
created a need for robotic systems that can provide
high degrees of dexterity in very constrained spaces
inside the patient’s body, and at smaller and smaller
scales. Figure 63.4 shows several typical examples of
current approaches. One common response has been to
develop cable-actuated wrists [63.3]. However, a num-
ber of investigators have investigated other approaches,
including bending structural elements [63.11], shape-
memory alloy actuators [63.27, 28], microhydraulic
systems [63.29], and electroactive polymers [63.30].
Similarly, the problem of providing access to surgical
sites inside the body has led several groups to develop
semiautonomouslymoving robots for epicardial [63.31]
or endoluminal applications [63.32, 33].
Two growing trends MIS are natural oriﬁce trans-
luminal surgery (NOTES) [63.34, 35] and single port
laparoscopy (SPL) [63.36]: the idea is to get access to
the abdominal cavity by using natural oriﬁces and in-
ternal incisions (in NOTES) or existing human scars
(e.g., the navel, in SPL). From the mechanical design
viewpoint, there is the need to develop deployable sur-
gical instruments or accessorised endoscopes and to
combine ﬂexibility (to reach the target) and stability
of the platform (to achieve precision). Clashing of in-
struments and difﬁculty in triangulation are the main
limitations which companies and research groups try to
approach [63.37, 38].
The problem of distal operation, already present
in MIS, is becoming more dramatic in NOTES and
SPL and several solutions for helping surgical tasks re-
quiring triangulation have been developed by different
research groups [63.39]. They are based on magnetic
ﬁelds which can generate an internal force without con-
straining the internal tool to the access port [63.40–42].
Another signiﬁcant development in recent years
has been the emergence and widespread deployment
of three-dimensional (3-D) printing and other rapid
prototyping technologies for clinically usable medical
devices and medical robot components, as well as for
construction of realistic patient-speciﬁc models [63.43,
44]. This trend has promoted very rapid progress in
medical robot design and will be increasingly important
in coming years.
Although most surgical robots are mounted to the
surgical table, to the operating room ceiling, or to the
ﬂoor, there has been growing interest in developing
systems that directly attach to the patient [63.45, 46],
and clinically deployed examples exist [63.47]. The
main advantage of this approach is that the relative
position of the robot and patient is unaffected if the
patient moves. The challenges are that the robot must
be smaller and that relatively nonintrusive means for
mounting it must be developed.
Finally, robotic systems intended for use in spe-
ciﬁc imaging environments pose additional design chal-
lenges. First, there is the geometric constraint that the
robot (or at least its end-effector) must ﬁt within the
scanner along with the patient. Second, the robot’s me-
chanical structure and actuators must not interfere with
the image formation process. In the case of x-ray and
CT, satisfying these constraints is relatively straight-
forward. The constraints for MRI are more challeng-
ing [63.48].
63.2.2 Control Paradigms
Surgical robots assist surgeons in treating patients by
moving surgical instruments, sensors, or other devices
in relation to the patient. Generally, these motions are
controlled by the surgeon in one of three ways:

Preprogrammed, semi-autonomous motion: The de-
sired behavior of the robot’s tools is speciﬁed inter-
actively by the surgeon, usually based on medical
images. The computer ﬁlls in the details and ob-
tains the surgeon’s concurrence before the robot
is moved. Examples include the selection of nee-
dle target and insertion points for percutaneous
therapy and tool cutter paths for orthopaedic bone
machining.

Teleoperator control: The surgeon speciﬁes the de-
sired motions directly through a separate human
interface device and the robot moves immedi-
ately. Examples include common telesurgery sys-
tems such as the da Vinci [63.3]. Although physical
master manipulators are the most common input de-
vices, other human interfaces are also used, notably
voice control [63.21].

Hands-on compliant control: The surgeon grasps
the surgical tool held by the robot or a control
handle on the robot’s end-effector. A force sensor
senses the direction that the surgeon wishes to move
the tool and the computer moves the robot to com-
ply. Early experiences with Robodoc [63.17] and
other surgical robots [63.25] showed that surgeons
found this form of control to be very convenient and
natural for surgical tasks. Subsequently, a number of
groups have exploited this idea for precise surgical
tasks, notably the JHU Steady Hand microsurgical
robot [63.4] shown in Fig. 63.3, the Rio orthopaedic
robot [63.8] (Mako Surgical Systems, Ft. Laud-
erdale, Florida) and the Imperial College Acrobot
orthopaedic system [63.49] shown in Fig. 63.5c,d.
These control modes are not mutually exclusive and
are frequently mixed. For example, the Robodoc sys-

Part F | 63.2
1664
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
c)
b)
d)
Fig.63.5a–d Clinically deployed
robots for orthopaedic surgery.
(a,b) The Robodoc system (af-
ter [63.17, 18]) represents the ﬁrst
clinically applied robot for joint
reconstruction surgery and has been
used for both primary and revision
hip replacement surgery as well as
knee replacement surgery. (c,d) The
Acrobot system of Davies et al. (af-
ter [63.49]) uses hands-on compliant
guiding together with a form of virtual
ﬁxtures to prepare the femur and tibia
for knee replacement surgery
tem [63.17, 18] uses hands-on control to position the
robot close to the patient’s femur or knee and pre-
programmed motions for bone machining. Similarly,
the IBM/JHU LARS robot. [63.25] used both cooper-
ative and telerobotic control modes. The cooperatively
controlled Acrobot [63.49] uses preprogrammed virtual
ﬁxtures (Sect. 63.1.3) derived from the implant shape
and its planned position relative to medical images.
Each mode has advantages and limitations, de-
pending on the task. Preprogrammed motions permit
complex paths to be generated from relatively simple
speciﬁcations of the speciﬁc task to be performed. They
are most often encountered in surgical CAD/CAM ap-
plications where the planning uses two- (2-D) or three-
dimensional (3-D) medical images. However, they can
also provide useful complex motions combining sen-
sory feedback in teleoperated or hands-on systems.
Examples might include passing a suture or inserting
a needle into a vessel after the surgeon has preposi-
tioned the tip. On the other hand, interactive speciﬁca-
tion of motions based on real-time visual appreciation
of deforming anatomy would be very difﬁcult.
Teleoperated control provides the greatest versatil-
ity for interactive surgery applications, such as dexter-
ous MIS [63.3, 21, 26, 50] or remote surgery [63.51,
52]. It permits motions to be scaled, and (in some
research systems) facilitates haptic feedback between
master and slave systems. The main drawbacks are
complexity, cost, and disruption to standard operating
room work ﬂow associated with having separate master
and slave robots.
Hands-on control combines the precision, strength,
and tremor-free motion of robotic devices with some
of the immediacy of freehand surgical manipulation.
These systems tend to be less expensive than telesur-
gical systems, since there is less hardware, and they
can be easier to introduce into existing surgical settings.
They exploit a surgeon’s natural eye–hand coordination
in an intuitively appealing way, and they can be adapted
to provide force scaling [63.4, 5]. Although direct mo-
tion scaling is not possible, the fact that the tool moves
in the direction that the surgeon pulls it makes this
limitation relatively unimportant when working with
a surgical microscope. The biggest drawbacks are that
hands-on control is inherently incompatible with any
degree of remoteness between the surgeon and the sur-
gical tool and that it is not practical to provide hands-on
control of instruments with distal dexterity.
Teleoperation and hands-on control are both com-
patible with shared control modes in which the robot
controller constrains or augments the motions speciﬁed
by the surgeon, as discussed in Sect. 63.2.3.
63.2.3 Virtual Fixtures
and Human–Machine Cooperative
Systems
Although one goal of both teleoperation and hands-on
control is often transparency, i. e., the ability to move an
instrument with the freedom and dexterity he/she might
expect with a handheld tool, the fact that a computer
is actually controlling the robot’s motion creates many
more possibilities. The simplest is a safety barrier or no-
ﬂy zone, in which the robot’s tool is constrained from
entering certain portions of its workspace. More so-
phisticated versions include virtual springs, dampers, or
complex kinematic constraints that help a surgeon align
a tool, maintain a desired force, or maintain a desired
anatomical relationship. The Acrobot system shown in
Fig. 63.5c,d represents a successful clinical applica-

Medical Robotics and Computer-Integrated Surgery
63.2 Technology
1665
Part F | 63.2
tion of the concept, which has many names, of which
virtual ﬁxtures seems to be the most popular [63.53,
54]. A number of groups are exploring extensions of
the concept to active cooperative control, in which the
surgeon and robot share or trade off control of the
robot during a surgical task or subtask. As the ability
of computers to model and follow along surgical tasks
improves, these modes will become more and more im-
portant in surgical assistant applications. Figure 63.6
illustrates the overall concept of human–machine co-
operative systems in surgery, and Fig. 63.7 illustrates
the use of registered anatomical models to generate
constraint-based virtual ﬁxtures. These approaches are
equally valid whether the surgeon interacts with the sys-
tem through classical teleoperation or through hands-on
compliant control. See also Chap. 43.
Both teleoperation and hands-on control are like-
wise used in human–machine cooperative systems for
rehabilitation and disability assistance systems. Con-
strained hands-on systems offer special importance for
rehabilitation applications and for helping people with
movement disorders. Similarly, teleoperation and intel-
ligent task following and control are likely to be vital
for further advances in assistive systems for people with
severe physical disabilities. See Chap. 64 for a further
discussion of human–machine cooperation in assistive
systems.
63.2.4 Safety and Sterility
Medical robots are safety-critical systems, and safety
should be considered from the very beginning of the
design process [63.55, 56]. Although there is some
difference in detail, government regulatory bodies re-
quire a careful and rigorous development process with
extensive documentation at all stages of design, im-
plementation, testing, manufacturing, and ﬁeld support.
Generally, systems should have extensive redundancy
built into hardware and control software, with multiple
consistency conditions constantly enforced. The basic
consideration is that no single point of failure should
cause the robot to go out of control or to injure a pa-
tient. Although there is some difference of opinion as to
the best way to make trade-offs, medical manipulators
are usually equipped with redundant position encoders
and ways to mechanically limit the speed and/or force
that the robot can exert. If a consistency check fail-
ure is detected, two common approaches are to freeze
robot motion or to cause the manipulator to go limp.
Which is better depends strongly on the particular ap-
plication.
Sterilizability and biocompatibility are also crucial
considerations. Again, the details are application depen-
dent. Common sterilization methods include gamma
Situation assessment
Task strategy and decisions
Sensory-motor coordination 
HMCS system
● Display
● Sensors
● Online references
 and decision report
● Manipulation
 enhancement
● Cooperative control
 and macros
Atlases
Libraries
Fig. 63.6 Human–machine
cooperative
systems
(HMCS)
in
surgery
State
Constraint
generation
Robot interface
min||W (Jtip Δq – ΔPdes)||2
Subject to
             GΔq ≥g
Δq
ΔPdes
Registered model
Tool tip guidance
virtual fixture
Path
Fig. 63.7 Human–machine cooperative manipulation using con-
straint-based virtual ﬁxtures, in which patient-speciﬁc constraints
are derived from registered anatomical models (after [63.53])
rays (for disposable tools), autoclaving, soaking or gas
sterilization, and the use of sterile drapes to cover un-
sterile components. Soaking or gas sterilization are less
likely to damage robot components, but very rigor-
ous cleaning is required to prevent extraneous foreign
matter from shielding microbes from the sterilizing
agent.
Careful attention to higher levels of application
protocols is also essential. Just like any other tool, sur-
gical robots must be used correctly by surgeons, and
careful training is essential for safe practice. Surgeons
must understand both the capabilities and limitations
of the robot and of the surgical process as well, since
safety is a systemic property. This adds new require-
ments to training programs, which must include robotic
capabilities and nontechnical skills (Sect. 63.3.8). In
surgical CAD/CAM applications, the surgeon must un-
derstand how the robot will execute the plan and be
able to verify that the plan is being followed. If the
surgeon is interactively commanding the robot, it is
essential that the robot interpret these commands cor-

Part F | 63.2
1666
Part F
Robots at Work
rectly. Similarly, it is essential that the robot’s model
of its task environment correspond correctly to the ac-
tual environment. The availability of task models is
necessary to the development of autonomous execu-
tion of robotic gestures as well as the formal ver-
iﬁcation of task correctness [63.57]. Although care-
ful design and implementation can practically elim-
inate the likelihood of a runaway condition by the
manipulator, this will do little good if the robot is
badly registered to the patient images used to con-
trol the procedure. If the robot fails for any reason,
there must be well-documented and planned procedures
for recovery (and possibly continuing the procedure
manually).
Finally, it is important to remember that a well-
designed robot system can actually enhance patient
safety. The robot is not subject to fatigue or momen-
tary lapses of attention. Its motions can be more precise
and there is less chance that a slip of the scalpel may
damage some delicate structure. In fact, the system can
be programmed to provide virtual ﬁxtures (Sect. 63.2.3)
preventing a tool from entering a forbidden region un-
less the surgeon explicitly overrides the system.
63.2.5 Imaging and Modelling of Patients
As the capabilities of medical robots continue to evolve,
the use of computer systems to model dynamically
changing patient-speciﬁc anatomy will become increas-
ingly important. There is a robust and diverse research
community addressing a very broad range of research
topics, including the creation of patient-speciﬁc mod-
els from medical images, techniques for updating these
models based upon real-time image and other sensor
data, and the use of these models for planning and mon-
itoring of surgical procedures. Some of the pertinent
research topics include the following:

Medical image segmentation and image fusion
to construct and update patient-speciﬁc anatomic
models

Biomechanical property measurement and mod-
elling for analyzing and predicting tissue defor-
mations and functional factors affecting surgical
planning, control, and rehabilitation

Optimization methods for treatment planning and
interactive control of systems

Methods for registering the virtual reality of images
and computational models to the physical reality of
an actual patient

Methods for characterizing treatment plans and in-
dividual task steps such as suturing, needle inser-
tion, or limb manipulation for purposes of planning,
monitoring, control, and intelligent assistance

Real-time data fusion for such purposes as updating
models from intraoperative images

Methods for human–machine communication, in-
cluding real-time visualization of data models, nat-
ural language understanding, gesture recognition,
etc.

Methods for characterizing uncertainties in data,
models, and systems and for using this information
in developing robust planning and control methods.
An in-depth examination of this research is beyond
the scope of this article. A more complete discussion
of these topics may be found in the suggested further
reading in Sect. 63.4.
63.2.6 Registration
Geometric relationships are fundamental in medical
robotics, especially in surgical CAD/CAM. There is
an extensive literature on techniques for coregistering
coordinate systems associated with robots, sensors, im-
ages, and the patient [63.58, 59]. Following [63.59], we
brieﬂy summarize the main concepts here. Suppose that
we have coordinates
v r
A D .xA; yA; zA/
v r
B D .xB; yB; zB/ ;
corresponding to comparable locations in two coor-
dinate systems RefA and RefB. Then the process of
registration is simply that of ﬁnding a function TAB.   /
such that
vB D TAB.vA/:
Generally, TAB.   / is assumed to be a rigid transfor-
mation of the form
TAB.v r
A/ D RABv r
A C pr
AB ;
where RAB represents a rotation and pAB represents
a translation, but nonrigid transformations are becom-
ing increasingly common. There are hundreds of meth-
ods for computing TAB.   /. The most common for
medical robotics involve ﬁnding a set of corresponding
geometric features &A and &B whose coordinates can be
determined in both coordinate systems and then ﬁnding
a transformation that minimizes some distance function
dAB D distanceŒ&B; TAB.&A/. Typical features can in-
clude artiﬁcial ﬁducial objects (pins, implanted spheres,
rods, etc.) or anatomical features such as point land-
marks, ridge curves, or surfaces.
One common class of methods is based on the iter-
ated closest-point algorithm of Besl and McKay [63.60],

Medical Robotics and Computer-Integrated Surgery
63.3 Systems, Research Areas, and Applications
1667
Part F | 63.3
for example, 3-D robot coordinates aj may be found
for a collection of points known to be on the surface
of an anatomical structure that can also be found in
a segmented 3-D image. Given an estimate Tk of the
transformation between image and robot coordinates,
the method iteratively ﬁnds corresponding points bj on
the surface that are closest to Tkaj and then ﬁnds a new
transformation
TkC1 D arg min
T
X
j
.bj  Taj/2 :
The process is repeated until some suitable termination
condition is reached.
63.3 Systems, Research Areas, and Applications
Medical robots are not ends in themselves. As the late
Hap Paul often remarked, the robot is a surgical tool
designed to improve the efﬁcacy of a procedure. (Paul
was the founder of Integrated Surgical Systems. Along
with William Bargar, he was one of the ﬁrst people to
recognize the potential of robots to fundamentally im-
prove the precision of orthopaedic surgery.)
63.3.1 Nonrobotic Computer-Assisted
Surgery: Navigation
and Image Overlay Devices
In cases where the role of the robot is placing in-
struments on targets determined from medical images,
surgical navigation is often a superior alternative. In
surgical navigation [63.61], the positions of instru-
ments relative to the reference markers on the patient
are tracked using specialized electromechanical, op-
tical, electromagnetic, or sonic digitizers or by more
general computer vision techniques. After the relation-
ships between key coordinate systems (patient anatomy,
images, surgical tools, etc.) are determined through
a registration process (Sect. 63.2.6), a computer work-
station provides graphical feedback to the surgeon to
assist in performing the planned task, usually by dis-
playing instrument positions relative to medical images,
as shown in Fig. 63.8a. Although the registration is usu-
ally performed computationally, a simple mechanical
alignment of an image display with an imaging device
can be surprisingly effective in some cases. One exam-
ple [63.62] is shown in Fig. 63.8b.
The main advantages of surgical navigation sys-
tems are their versatility, their relative simplicity, and
their ability to exploit the surgeon’s natural dexterity
and haptic sensitivity. They are readily combined with
passive ﬁxtures and manipulation aids [63.65, 66]. The
main drawbacks, compared to active robots, are those
associated with human limitations in accuracy, strength,
ability to work in certain imaging environments, and
dexterity inside the patient’s body (Table 63.2).
Because these advantages often outweigh the lim-
itations, surgical navigation systems are achieving
widespread and increasing acceptance in such ﬁelds as
neurosurgery, otolaryngology, and orthopaedics. Since
much of the technology of these systems is compatible
with surgical robots and since technical problems such
as registration are common among all these systems, we
may expect to see a growing number of hybrid applica-
tions combining medical robots and navigation.
63.3.2 Orthopaedic Systems
Orthopaedic surgery represents a natural surgical
CAD/CAM application, and both surgical navigation
systems and medical robots have been applied to or-
thopaedics. Bone is rigid and is easily imaged in CT
and intraoperative x-rays, and surgeons are accustomed
to doing at least some preplanning based on these im-
ages. Geometric accuracy in executing surgical plans
is very important, for example, bones must be shaped
accurately to ensure proper ﬁt and positioning of com-
ponents in joint replacement surgery. Similarly, os-
teotomies require both accurate cutting and placement
of bone fragments. Spine surgery often requires screws
and other hardware to be placed into vertebrae with-
out damage to the spinal cord, nerves, and nearby blood
vessels.
The Robodoc system shown in Fig. 63.5a,b repre-
sents the ﬁrst clinically applied robot for joint recon-
struction surgery [63.17, 18]. Since 1992, it has been
applied successfully to both primary and revision hip
replacement surgery, as well as knee surgery. Since this
system exhibits many of the characteristics of surgi-
cal CAD/CAM, we will discuss it is some detail. In
the surgical CAD phase, the surgeon selects the de-
sired based on preoperative CT images and interactively
speciﬁes the desired position of the implant compo-
nents. In the surgical CAM phase, surgery proceeds
normally up to the point where the patient’s bones are
to be prepared to receive the implant. The robot is
moved up to the operating table, the patient’s bones
are attached rigidly to the robot’s base, and the robot is
registered to the CT images either by use of implanted
ﬁducial pins or by use of a 3-D digitizer to match bone

Part F | 63.3
1668
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.63.8a–d Information en-
hancement for surgical assistance.
(a) Display from a typical surgical
navigation system, here the Medtronic
StealthStation; (b) the JHU image
overlay system (after [63.62]) uses
a mirror to align the virtual image
of a cross-sectional image with the
corresponding physical position
in the patient’s body; (c) Sensory
substitution display of surgical force
information onto da Vinci surgical
robot video monitor (after [63.63]);
(d) Overlay of laparoscopic ultrasound
onto the da Vinci surgical robot video
monitor (after [63.64])
surfaces to the CT images. After registration, the sur-
geon’s hand guides the robot to an approximate initial
starting position. Then, the robot autonomously ma-
chines the desired shape with a high-speed rotary cutter
while the surgeon monitors progress. During cutting,
the robot monitors cutting forces, bone motion, and
other safety sensor, and either the robot controller or
the surgeon can pause execution at any time. If the
procedure is paused for any reason, there are a num-
ber of error recovery procedures available to permit the
procedure to be resumed or restarted at one of sev-
eral deﬁned checkpoints. Once the desired shape has
been machined, surgery proceeds manually in the nor-
mal manner.
Subsequently, several other robotic systems for
joint replacement surgery have been introduced or pro-
posed. The references in Sect. 63.4 provide numerous
examples. Notable hands-on guided systems include
Rio surgical robot [63.8] (Mako Surgical, Ft. Laud-
erdale, Florida) and the Acrobot [63.49] system for
knee surgery shown in Figs. 63.5c,d. Similarly, several
groups have recently proposed small orthopaedic robots
attaching directly to the patient’s bones [63.45] or com-
pletely freehand systems such as the NavioPFS surgical
system (Blue Belt Technlogies, Pittsburgh, Pa.) which
combine surgical navigation with very fast on-off con-
trol of a surgical cutter [63.67, 68]. A recent example of
a hybrid passive-active robot is [63.69].
63.3.3 Percutaneous Needle
Placement Systems
Needle placement procedures have become ubiqui-
tous in image-guided intervention, typically performed
through the skin but also through cavities. These pro-
cedures ﬁt within the broader paradigm of surgical
CAD/CAM, where the process involves use of pa-
tient images to identify targets within the patient and
planning needle trajectories; inserting the needles and
verifying their placement; performing some action such
as an injection or taking a biopsy sample; and assess-
ing the results. In most cases, an accuracy of 1–2 mm
is acceptable, which is not easy to achieve freehand,
because the target is not directly visible, soft tissues
tend to deform and deﬂect, and needles often bend.
The procedures typically rely on some form of intra-
operative imaging (x-ray, CT, MRI, and ultrasound)
for both guidance and veriﬁcation. The surgical motion
sequence typically has three decoupled phases: place
the needle tip at the entry point, orient the needle by
pivoting around the needle tip, and insert the needle
into the body along a straight trajectory. These motions
are often performed freehand, with varying degrees of
information feedback for the physician. However, pas-
sive, semiautonomous, and active robotic systems have
all been introduced. Figure 63.9 shows several clini-
cally deployed systems for needle placement.

Medical Robotics and Computer-Integrated Surgery
63.3 Systems, Research Areas, and Applications
1669
Part F | 63.3
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
d)
Fig.63.9a–e Clinically deployed sys-
tems for in-scanner needle placement.
(a,b) The Neuromate system (af-
ter [63.19]) for stereotactic procedures
in the brain uses a novel noncontact
sensing system for robot-to-image
registration; (c) Johns Hopkins sys-
tem for in-CT needle placement
(after [63.70, 71]); (d,e) Manually
activated device for in-MRI transrectal
needle placement into the prostate
(after [63.72])
Freehand Needle Placement Systems
Freehand needle placement with CT and MRI guidance
uses skin markers to locate the entry point [63.62], ref-
erence to the scanner’s alignment laser to control needle
direction, and markers on the needle to control depth.
With ultrasound, the primary reliance is on surgeon ex-
perience or the use of some sort of needle guide to drive
the needle to target while it passes in the ultrasound
plane. Tracked ultrasound snapshots guidance com-
bines orthogonal viewpoints with frozen ultrasound im-
age frames [63.73]. Mechanical needle guides [63.61],
hand-held navigation guidance [63.74], and optical
guides have been combined with most imaging modal-
ities. These include laser guidance devices [63.75],
augmented reality systems [63.76]. Augmented reality
with 2-D ultrasound [63.77] and CT/MRI slices [63.62]
(Fig. 63.8b) was developed, where a semi-transparent
mirror is used together with a ﬂat-panel display to cre-
ate the appearance of a virtual image ﬂoating inside the
body in the correct position and size.
Passive and Semiautonomous Devices
for Needle Placement
Passive, encoded manipulator arms were proposed for
image-guided needle placement [63.78], where follow-
ing a registration step, the position and orientation
of a passive needle guide is tracked and the corre-
sponding needle path is displayed on CT or MRI
images. Semiautonomous systems allow remote, in-
teractive image-guided placement of needles, such as
transrectal prostate needle placement in MRI environ-
ment [63.72] with an actuated manipulator from outside
the scanner bore, while the needle driver is tracked in
MRI with active coils.
Active Robots for Needle Placement
Neurosurgery was one of the ﬁrst clinical applications
of active robots [63.19, 20, 22], a natural application
for surgical CAD/CAM. The entry and target points
are planned on CT/MRI images, the robot coordinate
system is registered to the image coordinate system
(typically with markers afﬁxed to the patient’s head),
and then the robot positions a needle or drill guide.
The marker structure may be a conventional stereotac-
tic head frame or, as in the Neuromate system [63.19],
registration is achieved by simultaneous tracking of the
robot and markers attached to the patient’s skull. Spatial
constraints in needle placement led to the development
of structures achieving remote center of motion (RCM)
or fulcrum motion [63.24, 25]. In these systems, the
RCM is positioned at the entry point, typically with
an active Cartesian stage or a passive adjustable arm,
and the robot sets the needle direction and (sometimes)
the depth. To speed up imaging, planning, registra-
tion, and execution, the robot can work concurrently
with imaging devices, such as variants of an RCM-
based system that was deployed with x-ray [63.24] and
CT guidance [63.70, 71]. In [63.71], a marker structure
was incorporated in the needle driver to register the
robot with a single image slice. MRI has an excellent
potential for guiding, monitoring, and controlling ther-
apy, invoking intensive research on MRI-compatible
robotic systems for needle placement [63.79] and other
more interactive procedures [63.50]. Ultrasound guid-

Part F | 63.3
1670
Part F
Robots at Work
ance offers many unique advantages: is relatively inex-
pensive and compact, provides real-time images, does
not involve any ionizing radiation, and does not im-
pose signiﬁcant materials constraints on the robot de-
sign. Several robotic systems have been proposed for
prostate interventions [63.80] using transrectal ultra-
sound guidance. For other ultrasound-guided needle
placement applications, examples include experimental
systems for liver [63.64, 81], gallbladder [63.82], and
breast [63.83]. Figure 63.8d shows one example of the
use of information overlay to assist in needle place-
ment in a telesurgical application [63.64]. Whatever
form of image feedback is available, steering ﬂexible
needles to hit desired targets while avoiding obstacles
is a ubiquitous problem, having led to several novel
approaches [63.84, 85] and reviewed most recently
in [63.86]. Concentric tube robots (also interchange-
ably called active cannulas due to their usefulness in
medicine), consist of several precurved elastic tubes
nested within one another. Actuators grasp these tubes
at their bases and extend them telescopically while also
applying axial rotations. These movements cause the
overall device to elongate and bend, providing a nee-
dle-sized device that moves in a manner analogous to
a tentacle. Chronologically, a precursor to current con-
centric tube robots was an early steerable needle design
where a curved stylet was used at the tip of a nee-
dle to induce steering [63.87]. These robots fall within
the broader class of continuously ﬂexible robots called
continuum robots (see [63.15] for a review.) Over the
past few years, mechanics-based models of active can-
nulas have rapidly matured due to the simultaneous
parallel efforts of several research groups [63.14, 88].
Today, these models provide the basis for an active
subﬁeld of research on teleoperative control, surgery-
speciﬁc design, and motion planning research. Surgi-
cal applications suggested for concentric tube robots
and are in various stages of development, ranging from
purely conceptual to animal studies, which will make
the next several years exciting for translational clinical
research.
63.3.4 Telesurgical Systems
The concepts of telemedicine, telesurgery, and telep-
resence in surgery date from the 1970s. Since then,
the potential for telesurgical systems to facilitate ef-
fective interventions in remote or hostile environments
such as the battleﬁeld, space, or thinly populated ar-
eas has continued to be recognized [63.89], and there
have been some spectacular demonstrations including
a transatlantic cholecystectomy [63.51] in 2001, exper-
iments in Italy [63.90] and Japan [63.91] as well as
more nearly routine use in Canada [63.52]. The oper-
ational difﬁculties due to the intrinsic communication
delay of long distance tele-surgery affect usability and
safety and make the regular use of tele-surgery quite
uncommon.
However, the primary uses of telesurgical systems
have been with the surgeon and patient in the same op-
erating room. Teleoperated robots have been used for
over 15 years in MIS, both as auxiliary surgical support
systems to hold endoscopes or retractors [63.23, 25,
92–94] and as surgeon extender systems to manipulate
surgical instruments [63.3, 26]. There has also been re-
cent work to develop telesurgical systems for use within
imaging environments such as MRI [63.95].
A primary challenge for auxiliary support systems is
to permit the surgeon to command the robot while his or
her hands are otherwise occupied. Typical approaches
have included conventional foot switches [63.23],
instrument-mounted
joysticks
[63.25],
voice
con-
trol
[63.10, 25],
and
computer vision [63.25, 96,
97].
A common goal in surgeon extender systems is
to provide a measure of telepresence to the surgeon,
speciﬁcally, to give the surgeon the sensation of per-
forming open surgery from inside the patient. In early
work, Green et al. [63.98] developed a successful
prototype system for telesurgery combining remote
manipulation, force feedback, stereoscopic imaging,
ergonomic design, etc. Subsequently, several commer-
cial telesurgical systems have been applied clinically
for MIS. Of these, Intuitive Surgical’s da Vinci [63.3]
has been the most successful, with over 2500 systems
deployed as of 2013. Experience with these systems
has demonstrated that a high-dexterity wrist is often
critical for surgeon acceptance. Although originally
targeted at cardiac surgery, as well as more general in-
terventions, the most successful clinical applications to
date are radical prostatectomies, where signiﬁcant im-
provements in outcomes have been reported [63.99],
and hysterectomy, where the clinical beneﬁts com-
pared to conventional laparoscopy are still being stud-
ied [63.100].
One emerging area for research exploits the in-
herent ability of telesurgical systems to act as ﬂight
data recorders during surgical procedures. Several au-
thors [63.101–104] have begun analyzing such data
for such purposes as measuring surgical skill, learn-
ing surgical gestures and motions, and providing data
for surgical simulators. Another emerging area for re-
search [63.105] focuses on semi-automation of surgi-
cal gestures between the surgeon and the robot, often
based on learned models. Other research [63.106–108]
exploits augmented reality methods to enhance the in-
formation available to the surgeon during telesurgical
procedures.

Medical Robotics and Computer-Integrated Surgery
63.3 Systems, Research Areas, and Applications
1671
Part F | 63.3
63.3.5 Microsurgery Systems
Although microsurgery is not a consistently deﬁned
term, it generally indicates procedures performed on
very small, delicate structures, such as those found
in the eye, brain, spinal cord, small blood vessels,
nerves, or the like. Microsurgical procedures are com-
monly performed under direct or video visualization,
using some form of magniﬁcation (e.g., microscope,
surgical loupes, high-magniﬁcation endoscope). The
surgeon typically has little or no tactile appreciation
of the forces being exerted by the surgical instruments
and physiological hand tremor can be a signiﬁcant
factor limiting surgical performance. Robotic systems
can help overcome these human sensory-motor limi-
tations, and efforts to develop specialized systems for
applications such as ophthalmology [63.6, 109–115])
and otology [63.116–118], Several groups have also
experimented with magnetic manipulation for these ap-
plications [63.113, 119]. There have been several efforts
to compare microsurgical anastamosis procedures using
laparoscopic telesurgical systems to conventional mi-
crosurgery. Schiff et al. [63.120] among others reported
signiﬁcant reductions in tremor with either robot and
signiﬁcantly improved technical quality and operative
times compared to conventional microsurgery. As the
nubber of da Vinci systems has proliferated, such appli-
cations are increasingly common [63.121]. A number of
groups have implemented telesurgery systems specif-
ically for microsurgery [63.13, 122–124] [63.95, 109].
These systems are in various stages of development,
from laboratory prototype to preliminary clinical exper-
imentation.
Not all microsurgical robots are teleoperated. For
example, the cooperatively controlled JHU Steady
Hand robots [63.4, 5] [63.6, 115] shown in Fig. 63.3
are being developed for retinal, head-and-neck, neuro-
surgery, and other microsurgical applications. A mod-
iﬁed version of this system has also been used for
microinjections into single mouse embryos [63.125].
There have also been efforts to develop completely
hand-held instruments that actively cancel physiolog-
ical tremor, for example, Riviere et al. [63.126–128]
have developed an ophthalmic instrument using op-
tical sensors to sense handle motion and adaptive
ﬁltering to estimate the tremulous component of in-
strument motion. A micromanipulator built into the
instrument deﬂects the tip with an equal but opposite
motion, compensating the tremor. Simple mechanical
devices [63.129] for reducing tremor in speciﬁc tasks
have also been developed.
An additional type of hand-held microsurgical
and micro-therapeutic devices is reported in [63.130],
which describes an active microendoscope for neuroen-
doscopy and therapy of the spinal cord able to safely
navigate in the subarachnoid space and to avoid danger-
ous contact with the internal delicate structures thanks
to a system based on hydrojets. Hydrojets come from
the lateral surface of the catheter and, appropriately
tuned and oriented, allow the tip of the endoscope
to proceed without touching the spinal cord internal
walls. The shared control system of the neuroendo-
scope, based on processing, segmentation, and analysis
of the endoscopic images, assists the safe advancement
of the tool in real time [63.131].
63.3.6 Endoluminal Robots
The term endoluminal surgery was ﬁrst coined by
Cuschieri et al. [63.132] as a major component of en-
doscopic surgery. Endoluminal procedures consist of
bringing a set of advanced therapeutic and surgical tools
to the area of interest by navigating in the lumina (i. e.,
the tube-like structures) of the human body, such as the
gastrointestinal (GI) tract, the urinary tract, the circu-
latory system, etc. Currently, most endoluminal robots
are designed for gastrointestinal applications, although
there has been some initial work for other areas. There
are several advantages (from a robotics research per-
spective) of working in the GI tract. The GI tract is not
sterile and relatively large in diameter. Further it can be
punctured intentionally to reach other abdominal cavi-
ties in NOTES approaches.
Traditionally, catheters and ﬂexible endoscopes for
endoluminal procedures have been inserted and ma-
nipulated manually from outside the body with the
assistance of one or more visualization systems (e.g.,
direct endoscopic video, x-ray ﬂuoroscopy, ultrasound).
One major challenge is limited dexterity making it dif-
ﬁcult to reach the desired target. Typically, ﬂexible
endoscopes have a bendable tip that can be steered by
means of cable drives, and catheters may have only
a ﬁxed bend on a guide wire. There is also the inher-
ent difﬁculty of pushing a rope, which some companies
are trying to address by using external magnetic ﬁeld
(e.g., [63.133]). Once the target site is reached, these
limitations become even more signiﬁcant. Very simple
instruments can be inserted through working channels
or slid over guide wires, but dexterity is severely lim-
ited and there is no force feedback beyond what can be
felt through the long, ﬂexible instrument shaft.
These limitations have led a number of researchers
to explore integration of more degrees of freedom in
the catheter/endoscope body, as well as the design
of intelligent tips with higher dexterity and sensing
capabilities. Early work by Ikuta et al. led to the
development of a ﬁve-segment, 13 mm-diameter sig-
moidscope using shape-memory alloy (SMA) actuators.

Part F | 63.3
1672
Part F
Robots at Work
Subsequently, Ikuta et al. developed 3 mm-diameter ac-
tive endovascular devices using hydraulic actuators
incorporating a novel band pass valve fabricated using
micro-stereolithographic techniques [63.29].
Several examples exist of instrumented catheter tips
with force sensors [63.134] that allow the right branch
of the circulatory systems to be found by estimating the
force generated between the tip and the vessel walls.
Basically, these sensorized endoluminal devices belong
to the larger group of micro-electromechanical systems
(MEMS)-instrumented surgical devices and the same
sensing technologies can be also exploited for micro-
surgery. A survey article by Rebello [63.135] provides
an excellent overview of sensorized catheters and other
MEMS-based devices in endoluminal and microsurgi-
cal applications.
Another approach to endoluminal robots is repre-
sented by systems that move under their own power
through the body, rather than being pushed. Early work
on such systems is well summarized in [63.136]. In
1995 Burdick et al. developed an inchworm-like mech-
anism for use in the colon. This device combined
a central extensor for propulsion and inﬂatable bal-
loons for friction enhancement with the slippery colon
tissue. A more advanced inchworm design for a semi-
autonomous robotic colonoscope was developed by
Dario et al. [63.33] (Fig. 63.10). This device consists
of a central silicone elongator, two clamping systems
based on suction and gentle mechanical grasping of
the colon tissue, and a silicone steerable tip integrating
a complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS)
camera and a light-emitting diode (LED)-based illu-
mination system. Thanks to its intrinsic ﬂexibility, the
robotic colonoscope applies forces on colon tissues
that are ten times lower than those produced by tra-
ditional colonoscopies. This system is now clinically
tested [63.137], and similar devices combining ﬂexi-
bility and painless operation have been proposed by
some companies [63.138, 139]. Although the applica-
tion is not endoluminal, the HeartLander system of
Riviere et al. [63.31] shown in Fig. 63.11a,b shares
many of the characteristics of these systems. It uses an
inchworm-like gait to traverse the surface of the heart
and to perform simple operation. An instructive paper
on the combination between ﬂexibility and stiffness of
endoscopic devices for allowing painless manoeuvra-
bility and stable anchoring when performing surgical
tasks has been recently published [63.140]. It presents
a number of design criteria and solutions for transform-
ing endoscopic devices from diagnostic tools to stable
surgical paltforms.
The natural evolution of GI endoscopic devices
is represented by endoscopic capsules [63.141] which
keep the promise to make endoscopy of the GI tract
Clamper
Clamper
Rinsing
LED
CMOS camera
Elongator
CMOS
camera
Steering
1
2
3
4
Tail
a)
b)
Fig.63.10a,b Medical
robot
for
colonoscopy
(af-
ter [63.33]): (a) the gait cycle of the robot, consisting of:
(1) proximal clamping, (2) elongation, (3) distal clamping,
and (4) retraction; (b) a recent working prototype used for
clinical trials
a screening method highly tolerated by patients. For
transforming simple CMOS swallowable cameras with
illumination and transmission functionalities into use-
ful diagnostic devices, several research groups have
explored variegated solutions for active capsule loco-
motions. An example of legged locomotion capsules for
GI application is illustrated in Fig. 63.11c and described
in [63.28, 142]. In order to overcome dramatic powering
problems, magnetic capsules propelled by permanent
magnets [63.143] or by modiﬁed MRI ﬁelds [63.144]
have been proposed. An earlier application of electro-
magnetic manipulation of an object within the body was
the video tumor ﬁghter of Ritter et al. [63.145].
63.3.7 Sensorized Instruments
and Haptic Feedback
Surgical procedures almost always involve some form
of physical interaction between surgical instruments

Medical Robotics and Computer-Integrated Surgery
63.3 Systems, Research Areas, and Applications
1673
Part F | 63.3
and patient anatomy, and surgeons are accustomed
to use their haptic appreciation of tool-to-tissue in-
teraction forces in performing surgical procedures. In
situations such as where the clumsiness of instrumen-
tation or human sensory-motor limitations limit the
surgeon’s ability to feel these forces, surgeons have
been trained to rely on visual or other cues to com-
pensate. Apart from the need for haptic feedback for
diagnostic procedures and tissue identiﬁcation, it has
been demonstrated that reduced tactile and force infor-
mation can result in the application of unnecessarily
large forces on the patient during surgery, with pos-
sible harm to the patient [63.146]. The quality of
haptic feedback available in currently deployed sur-
gical robots is poor or nonexistent. Current research
addresses the limitations ﬁrstly by integrating force
and other sensors into surgical end-effectors and sec-
ondly by developing improved methods for processing
and conveying the sensed information to the surgeon.
However, the debate of the usefulness of force feed-
back in robot-assisted surgery is still open and is made
more complex by the many scientiﬁc and technical
difﬁculties due to the intrinsic presence of (possibly
variable) communication time delay in the robotic sys-
tem [63.147].
Although the most obvious way to display haptic
information in a telesurgical system is directly through
the master hand controllers, this method has several
limitations, including friction and limited bandwidth in
the hand controllers. Although these issues may be ad-
dressed through specialized design (which may raise
costs and require other compromises) and improved
control, there has been considerable interest in sensory
substitution schemes [63.149–151] in which force or
other sensor information is displayed visually, aurally,
or by other means. Figure 63.8c shows one example of
sensory substitution for warning when a da Vinci robot
is about to break a suture [63.63].
Starting in the 1990s, several groups [63.151–153]
have sensorized surgical instruments for microsurgery
and MIS by equipping them with force sensors. Gen-
erally, these efforts relied on sensory substitution to
display force data, either for freehand or telesurgi-
cal application. For example, Poulose et al. [63.152]
demonstrated that a force sensing instrument used to-
gether with an IBM/JHU LARS robot [63.25] could
signiﬁcantly reduce both average retraction force and
variability of retraction force during Nissen fundoplica-
tion. The ﬁrst surgical robot with force feedback used in
in vivo experiments was the JPL-NASA RAMS system,
which was tested on animal models for vascular anas-
tomosis [63.154] and carotid arteriotomies [63.155].
Rosen et al. [63.153] developed a force-controlled tele-
operated endoscopic grasper equipped with position
Front
body
Robotic arm
External permanent
magnet
Gl tract training
phantom
10 mm
Capsule unit
 vision module
 permanent magnet
 sensors & electronics
Rear
body
a)
d)
b)
c)
Fig.63.11a–d Mobility inside the body. (a,b) HeartLander de-
vice for crawling across the surface of the heart (after [63.31]).
(c) Legged capsule for gastrointestinal diagnosis and therapy (af-
ter [63.28, 148]), (d) magnetic capsule for exploration of the GI
tract, showing left capsule and components and right magnetic
dragging platform based on a permanent magnet driven by a robotic
manipulator (after [63.143])
sensors and actuated by direct-current (DC) motors
whose output torque is sensed and fed back through
motors integrated in a grasping handle. A similar ap-
proach was used by Menciassi et al. [63.156] for
a microsurgery gripper equipped with semiconductor
strain gauges and a PHANTOM (SensAble Technolo-
gies, Inc.) haptic interface. More recent work at Johns
Hopkins has focused on incorporation of optical ﬁber
force [63.157–160] and OCT [63.161–163] sensors into
microsurgical tools. Both video and auditory sensory
substitution [63.164], as well as direct feedback to
robotic devices have been used to help surgeons con-
trol tool-tissue interaction forces and distance.
Several researchers [63.165] have focused on spe-
cialized ﬁngers and display devices for palpation tasks
requiring delicate tactile feedback (e.g., for detecting
hidden blood vessels or cancerous tissues beneath nor-
mal tissues). There has also been work to integrate non-
haptic sensors into surgical instruments, for example,
Fischer et al. have developed instruments measuring
both force and tissue oxygenation levels [63.166]. This
information can be used for such purposes as assessing
tissue viability, distinguishing between different tissue

Part F | 63.3
1674
Part F
Robots at Work
types, and controlling retraction so as not to cause is-
chemic tissue damage.
Finally, it is important to note that sensorized surgi-
cal tools have important application beyond their direct
use in surgical procedures, for example, one use is in
biomechanical studies to measure organ and tissue me-
chanical properties to improve surgical simulators.
63.3.8 Surgical Simulators
and Telerobotic Systems for Training
Medical education is undergoing signiﬁcant changes.
The traditional paradigm for surgical technical train-
ing is often summarized as see one, do one, teach one.
This method can be effective in open surgery, where
the surgical trainee directly observes the expert surgeon
hands, sees the instrument motion, and follows the or-
gan manipulation. However, in endoscopic surgery it is
difﬁcult to observe the surgeon’s hand movements (out-
side the body) and the surgical tool actions (inside the
body and only visible on a video monitor). In addi-
tion, endoscopic surgery requires different skills than
open surgery, such as spatial orientation, interpretation
of 2-D images in 3-D, and manipulating instruments
through entry portals. These considerations led to in-
troduction of surgical simulation systems of varying
degrees of complexity and realism for endoscopic and
other minimally invasive procedures. Nowadays, train-
ing simulators have achieved widespread acceptance
in the ﬁeld of anaesthesia, intensive care, ﬂexible en-
doscopy, surgery, interventional radiology, and other
ﬁelds. The use of simulators for training is so com-
mon that working groups have been set up in order
to evaluate these training systems based on shared
guidelines [63.167] and many teaching hospitals have
extensive simulation training centers. Simulators are
being validated on their basic parameters (face, content
and construct) [63.168], whereas results on concurrent
and predictive validity of simulation training are still
not available.
Survey [63.169] divides training simulators into
three groups, depending on the type of technology used:
mechanical, hybrid, and virtual reality.
Mechanical simulators are boxes where objects or
organs are placed and manipulated using surgical in-
struments. The manipulation is observed through a la-
paroscope and a screen. The simulated surgical task
is observed by an experienced surgeon, who gives
feedback to the trainee. Generally, there are no registra-
tion processes and the simulator must be reassembled
after any training session. The LapTrainer with SimuVi-
sion (Simulab Inc., Seattle, USA) is a training system
with a simulated laparoscope that consists of a boom-
mounted digital camera in an open box trainer.
A hybrid simulator uses a box with objects or or-
gans as a mechanical simulator, but in addition the
performance of the trainee are monitored by a com-
puter which gives guidance for the task execution and
an objective feedback based on preplanned metrics.
Thanks to this feedback, the assistance and judgement
of an experienced surgeon are not strictly necessary, for
example, the ProMIS (Haptica Inc., Boston, USA) is
a typical hybrid simulator for training basic skills such
as suturing and knot tying. Surgical instruments are
passed through dedicated ports and the trainee receives
the same haptic feedback as in real surgery during ma-
nipulation in the box. In addition, ProMIS analyzes the
trainee’s performance by tracking the instrument posi-
tion in 3-D and by measuring the execution time, path
length, and smoothness of task execution. Another re-
cent hybrid simulator is the Perk Tutor open-source
platform for ultrasound-guided percutaneous needle in-
sertion training [63.170], which has been successfully
applied in teaching of ultrasound-guided facet joint in-
jections [63.171]. Speciﬁc to robotic surgery is the
RoSS system [63.172], which simulates the operator
console of the da Vinci robotic system. Intuitive Surgi-
cal currently markets the dv-Trainer [63.173] simulator
for the da Vinci system, comprising the surgeon console
from a da Vinci Si system and a computer back end to
simulate the patient-side manipulators, and its efﬁcacy
is being evaluated [63.174].
Finally, virtual-reality training systems combine vi-
sualization and haptic interfaces to enable surgeons to
interact efﬁciently and naturally with real-time com-
putational models of patient anatomy [63.175]. The
development of these systems is inherently a multidis-
ciplinary effort, including real-time computer graph-
ics, the development of high-bandwidth haptic devices,
real-time biomechanical modeling of organs, tool–
tissue interactions, expertise in training assessment, and
human–machine information exchange, etc. [63.176].
Research in these areas is closely related to and syn-
ergistic with comparable developments in technology
and systems for performing real interventions, for ex-
ample, modeling of organ motion in response to forces
is necessary to improve the accuracy of needle place-
ment procedures. Haptic feedback devices must meet
similar requirements whether the forces displayed are
simulated or measured directly in telesurgery, and so
on. Finally, as noted earlier, sensorized instruments
and real-time imaging are critical sources of data
needed to create realistic biomechanical models. The
use of the computer graphical processor (GPU) al-
lows the simulation of organs at rates in excess of
10 kHz [63.177], which enables good haptic feedback.
Similarly, new physics-based graphical libraries sup-
port the development of low cost virtual reality simu-

Medical Robotics and Computer-Integrated Surgery
63.4 Conclusion and Future Directions
1675
Part F | 63.4
lators that correct render the interaction of instruments
and anatomical parts, and thus can support large train-
ing classes [63.178].
The variety of interface devices and virtual reality
laparoscopic simulators is quite wide and increasing
numbers of systems are becoming commercially avail-
able. The Phantom interface is used in conjunction with
virtual simulators to provide users with realistic haptic
feedback (SensAble Technologies Inc., Woburn, MA,
USA). The Xitact LS500 laparoscopy simulator (Xi-
tact S.A., Lausanne, Switzerland) is a modular virtual-
reality simulation platform with software for training
and assessing performance in laparoscopic tasks. It is an
open system including all or some of these subsystems:
laparoscopic tools, mechanical abdomen, a personal
computer (PC) providing the virtual-reality scenario,
a haptic interface, a force feedback system and a track-
ing system for the tools. Several other systems for
virtual reality simulation exist that exploit the hardware
from Xitact or Immersion Medical, Inc. (Gaithers-
burg, MD, USA) and that are dedicated to speciﬁc
surgical tasks: Lapmentor [63.179], the Surgical Edu-
cation platform [63.180], LapSim [63.181], Procedicus
MIST [63.182], EndoTower [63.183], the Reachin la-
paroscopic trainer [63.184], Simendo [63.185], and
the Vest system [63.186]. Speciﬁcally for training eye
surgeons, the surgical simulator EYESi [63.187] uses
advanced computer technology and virtual reality to
simulate the feel of real eye surgery, making it possi-
ble for surgeons at all levels to acquire new skills and
perfect their techniques in preparation for surgery on
the human eye. Training for dexterity skills in robotic
surgery is supported by the new virtual simulator XRON
developed at the University of Verona, which interfaces
physics-based simulation with several commercial joy-
sticks and provides evaluation metrics of interactive
tasks [63.188].
Making a comparison between these different cate-
gories of simulators is not trivial. Basically, box trainers
and hybrid simulators require some experienced techni-
cians for the set up and some organizational logistics
due to legal and ethical factors related to the storage
of freshly explanted organs. The most evident advan-
tage of these simulators is that the tactile response from
the manipulated objects is the same as in real surgery
and complicated models of organs and tissue–tool inter-
action are not required. On the other hand, completely
virtual-reality trainers are potentially very ﬂexible, can
take advantage of powerful graphical engines, but they
are limited by the availability of realistic calibration
data for the anatomical and biomechanical models. Al-
though demonstrations exist of the ability of simulators
to record, objectively score, and hone the psychomo-
tor skills of novice surgeons [63.189], the debate about
their value is still open because no multicentre trails
has yet been conducted to determine their efﬁcacy.
Furthermore, it has been shown that simulation train-
ing must be included in structured curricula in robotic
surgery, where trainees are also introduced to basic con-
cepts of robotics and, in particular, to the so called
non technical skills, e.g., organization, leadership and
communication, which signiﬁcantly affect the surgical
outcome [63.190].
63.3.9 Other Applications
and Research Areas
The research areas described above illustrate major
themes within medical robotics, but they are by no
means exhaustive. Many important application areas
such as otolaryngology [63.191–194] and radiation
therapy have necessarily been excluded for space rea-
sons. For a fuller exploration, readers should consult the
further reading suggestions in Sect. 63.4.
63.4 Conclusion and Future Directions
Medical robotics (and the larger ﬁeld of computer-
integrated interventional medicine) has great potential
to revolutionize clinical practice by:

Exploiting technology to transcend human limita-
tions in treating patients

Improving the safety, consistency, and overall qual-
ity of interventions

Improving the efﬁciency and cost-effectiveness of
robot-assisted patient care

Improving training through the use of validated
simulators, quantitative data capture and skill as-
sessment methods, and the capture and playback of
clinical cases

Promoting more effective use of information at all
levels, both in treating individual patients and in im-
proving treatment processes.
From being the stuff of late-night comedy and sci-
ence ﬁction 20 years ago, the ﬁeld has reached a critical
threshold, with clinically useful systems and commer-
cial successes. The scope and number of research pro-
grams has grown exponentially in the past 8 years, and
this chapter is by no means a comprehensive survey

Part F | 63
1676
Part F
Robots at Work
of the ﬁeld. In fact, such a survey would be practi-
cally impossible in less than 100 pages. Many important
emerging systems and applications are necessarily left
out. Interested readers are urged to refer to the further
reading section for more complete treatments. In partic-
ular, the survey articles and books in listed at the end of
this section collectively contain somewhat fuller bibli-
ographies than space permits here.
In the future, we can expect to see continued re-
search in all aspects of technology and system devel-
opment, with increasing emphasis on clinical applica-
tions. As this work proceeds, it is important that re-
searchers remember several basic principles. The ﬁrst,
and arguably most important, principle is that medi-
cal robotics is fundamentally a team activity, involving
academic researchers, clinicians, and industry. Each of
these groups has unique expertise, and success comes
from effective, highly interactive partnerships drawing
upon this expertise. Building these teams takes a long-
term commitment, and the successes in recent years
are largely the pay-off from investments in creating
these teams. Second, it is important to work on prob-
lems with well-deﬁned clinical and technical goals,
in which the criteria for measuring success are ulti-
mately related to real advantages in treating patients.
In working toward these goals, it is important to have
measurable and meaningful milestones and to empha-
size rapid iteration with clinician involvement at all
stages. Finally, it is essential that all team members
recognize the level of commitment that is required
to achieve success and that they enjoy what they are
doing.
Video-References
VIDEO 823
Da Vinci Surgery on a grape
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/63/videodetails/823
VIDEO 824
Da Vinci Xi introduction | Engadget
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/63/videodetails/824
VIDEO 825
Intuitive surgical Da Vinci single port robotic system
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/63/videodetails/825
VIDEO 826
SPORT system by Titan Medical
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/63/videodetails/826
VIDEO 827
Robot for single port surgery by Nebraska University
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/63/videodetails/827
VIDEO 828
Magnetic and needlescopic instruments for surgical procedures
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/63/videodetails/828
VIDEO 829
CardioArm
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/63/videodetails/829
VIDEO 830
Snake robot for surgery in tight spaces
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/63/videodetails/830
VIDEO 831
IREP robot – Insertable robotic effectors in single port surgery
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/63/videodetails/831
VIDEO 832
Variable stiffness manipulator based on layer jamming
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/63/videodetails/832
VIDEO 833
Reconfigurable and modular robot for NOTES applications
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/63/videodetails/833
VIDEO 834
SPRINT robot for single port surgery
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/63/videodetails/834
VIDEO 835
A micro-robot operating inside eye
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/63/videodetails/835
References
63.1
R.H. Taylor, L. Joskowicz: Computer-integrated
surgery and medical robotics. In: Standard Hand-
book of Biomedical Engineering and Design, ed.
by M. Kutz (McGraw-Hill, New York 2003) pp. 325–
353
63.2
J.R. Adler, M.J. Murphy, S.D. Chang, S.L. Hankock:
Image guided robotic radiosurgery, Neurosurgery
44(6), 1299–1306 (1999)
63.3
G.S.
Guthart,
J.K.
Salisbury:
The
intuitive
telesurgery system: Overview and application,
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), San Francisco
(2000) pp. 618–621
63.4
R. Taylor, P. Jensen, L. Whitcomb, A. Barnes, R. Ku-
mar, D. Stoianovici, P. Gupta, Z.X. Wang, E. de-
Juan, L. Kavoussi: Steady-hand robotic system for
microsurgical augmentation, Int. J. Robotics Res.
18, 1201–1210 (1999)
63.5
D. Rothbaum, J. Roy, G. Hager, R. Taylor, L. Whit-
comb: Task performance in stapedotomy: com-
parison between surgeons of different experience

Medical Robotics and Computer-Integrated Surgery
References
1677
Part F | 63
levels, Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg. 128, 71–77
(2003)
63.6
A. Uneri, M. Balicki, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach,
R. Taylor, I. Iordachita: New steady-hand eye
robot with microforce sensing for vitreoretinal
surgery research, Proc. Int. Conf. Biomed. Robotics
Biomechatronics (BIOROB), Tokyo (2010) pp. 814–
819
63.7
A. Amin, J. Grossman, P.J. Wang: Early experi-
ence with a computerized robotically controlled
catheter system, J. Int. Card. Electrophysiol. 12,
199–202 (2005)
63.8
B. Hagag, R. Abovitz, H. Kang, B. Schmidtz,
M. Conditt: RIO: Robotic-arm interactive ortho-
pedic system MAKOplasty: User interactive haptic
orthopedic robotics. In: Surgical Robotics: Sys-
tems Applications and Visions, ed. by J. Rosen,
B. Hannaford, R. Satava (New York, Springer 2011)
pp. 219–246
63.9
R. Konietschke, D. Zerbato, R. Richa, A. To-
bergte, P. Poignet, F. Froehlich, D. Botturi, P. Fior-
ini, G. Hirzinger: Of new features for telerobotic
surgery into the MiroSurge System, J. Appl. Bion-
ics Biomech. Integr. 8(2), 116 (2011)
63.10
L. Mettler, M. Ibrahim, W. Jonat: One year of expe-
rience working with the aid of a robotic assistant
(the voice-controlled optic holder AESOP) in gy-
naecological endoscopic surgery, Hum. Reprod.
13, 2748–2750 (1998)
63.11
N. Simaan, R. Taylor, P. Flint: High dexterity
snake-like robotic slaves for minimally invasive
telesurgery of the throat, Proc. Int. Symp. Med.
Image Comput. Comput. Interv. (2004) pp. 17–24
63.12
N. Suzuki, M. Hayashibe, A. Hattori: Develop-
ment of a downsized master-slave surgical robot
system for intragastic surgery, Proc. ICRA Surg.
Robotics Workshop, Barcelona (2005)
63.13
K. Ikuta, K. Yamamoto, K. Sasaki: Development of
remote microsurgery robot and new surgical pro-
cedure for deep and narrow space, Proc. IEEE Conf.
Robot. Autom. (ICRA) (2003) pp. 1103–1108
63.14
R.J. Webster, J.M. Romano, N.J. Cowan: Mechanics
of precurved-tube continuum robots, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 25(1), 67–78 (2009)
63.15
R.J. Webster, B.A. Jones: Design and
kine-
matic modeling of constant curvature continuum
robots: A review, Int. J. Robotics Res. 29(13), 1661–
1683 (2010)
63.16
J.
Ding,
R.E.
Goldman,
K.
Xu,
P.K.
Allen,
D.L. Fowler, N. Simaan: Design and coordina-
tion kinematics of an insertable robotic effectors
platform for single-port access surgery, IEEE/ASME
Trans. Mechatron. 99, 1–13 (2012)
63.17
R.H. Taylor, H.A. Paul, P. Kazandzides, B.D. Mit-
telstadt, W. Hanson, J.F. Zuhars, B. Williamson,
B.L. Musits, E. Glassman, W.L. Bargar: An image-
directed robotic system for precise orthopaedic
surgery, IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 10, 261–275
(1994)
63.18
P.
Kazanzides,
B.D.
Mittelstadt,
B.L. Musits,
W.L. Bargar, J.F. Zuhars, B. Williamson, P.W. Cain,
E.J. Carbone: An integrated system for cementless
hip replacement, IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. 14, 307–313
(1995)
63.19
Q. Li, L. Zamorano, A. Pandya, R. Perez, J. Gong,
F. Diaz: The application accuracy of the NeuroMate
robot – A quantitative comparison with frameless
and frame-based surgical localization systems,
Comput. Assist. Surg. 7(2), 90–98 (2002)
63.20
P. Cinquin, J. Troccaz, J. Demongeot, S. Lavallee,
G. Champleboux, L. Brunie, F. Leitner, P. Sautot,
B. Mazier, A. Perez, M. Djaid, T. Fortin, M. Chenic,
A. Chapel: IGOR: image guided operating robot,
Innov. Technonogie Biol. Med. 13, 374–394 (1992)
63.21
H.
Reichenspurner,
R.
Demaino,
M.
Mack,
D. Boehm, H. Gulbins, C. Detter, B. Meiser, R. Ell-
gass, B. Reichart: Use of the voice controlled
and
computer-assisted
surgical
system
Zeus
for endoscopic coronary artery surgery bypass
grafting, J. Thorac. Cardiovasc. Surg. 118, 11–16
(1999)
63.22
Y.S. Kwoh, J. Hou, E.A. Jonckheere, S. Hayati:
A robot with improved absolute positioning accu-
racy for CT guided stereotactic brain surgery, IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng. 35, 153–161 (1988)
63.23
J.M. Sackier, Y. Wang: Robotically assisted laparo-
scopic surgery. From concept to development,
Surg. Endosc. 8, 63–66 (1994)
63.24
D. Stoianovici, L. Whitcomb, J. Anderson, R. Tay-
lor, L. Kavoussi: A modular surgical robotic system
for image-guided percutaneous procedures, Proc.
Med. Image Comput. Comput. Interv. (MICCAI),
Cambridge (1998) pp. 404–410
63.25
R.H. Taylor, J. Funda, B. Eldridge, K. Gruben,
D. LaRose, S. Gomory, M. Talamini, L.R. Kavoussi,
J. Anderson: A telerobotic assistant for laparo-
scopic surgery, IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag. 14, 279–
287 (1995)
63.26
M. Mitsuishi, T. Watanabe, H. Nakanishi, T. Hori,
H. Watanabe, B. Kramer: A telemicrosurgery sys-
tem with colocated view and operation points
and rotational-force-feedback-free master ma-
nipulator, Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Med. Robot.
Comput. Assist. Surg., Baltimore (1995) pp. 111–
118
63.27
K. Ikuta, M. Tsukamoto, S. Hirose: Shape memory
alloy servo actuator system with electric resis-
tance feedback and application for active endo-
scope. In: Computer-Integrated Surgery, ed. by
R.H. Taylor, S. Lavallee, G. Burdea, R. Mosges (MIT
Press, Cambridge 1996) pp. 277–282
63.28
A. Menciassi, C. Stefanini, S. Gorini, G. Pernorio,
P. Dario, B. Kim, J.O. Park: Legged locomotion in
the gastrointestinal tract problem analysis and
preliminary technological activity, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2004) pp. 937–
942
63.29
K. Ikuta, H. Ichikawa, K. Suzuki, D. Yajima: Multi-
degree of freedom hydraulic pressure driven
safety
active
catheter,
Proc.
IEEE
Int.
Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Orlando (2006) pp. 4161–
4166
63.30
S. Guo, J. Sawamoto, Q. Pan: A novel type
of microrobot for biomedical application, Proc.

Part F | 63
1678
Part F
Robots at Work
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2005)
pp. 1047–1052
63.31
N. Patronik, C. Riviere, S.E. Qarra, M.A. Zenati: The
heartlander: A novel epicardial crawling robot for
myocardial injections, Proc. 19th Int. Congr. Com-
put. Assist. Radiol. Surg. (2005) pp. 735–739
63.32
P. Dario, B. Hannaford, A. Menciassi: Smart sur-
gical tools and augmenting devices, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 19, 782–792 (2003)
63.33
L. Phee, D. Accoto, A. Menciassi, C. Stefanini,
M.C. Carrozza, P. Dario: Analysis and develop-
ment of locomotion devices for the gastrointesti-
nal tract, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 49, 613–616
(2002)
63.34
N. Kalloo, V.K. Singh, S.B. Jagannath, H. Niiyama,
S.L. Hill, C.A. Vaughn, C.A. Magee, S.V. Kantsevoy:
Flexible transgastricperitoneoscopy: A novel ap-
proach to diagnostic and therapeutic interven-
tions in the peritoneal cavity, Gastrointest. En-
dosc. 60, 114–117 (2004)
63.35
S.N.
Shaikh,
C.C.
Thompson:
Natural
orifice
translumenal surgery: Flexible platform review,
World J. Gastrointest. Surg. 2(6), 210–216 (2010)
63.36
M. Neto, A. Ramos, J. Campos: Single port laparo-
scopic access surgery, Tech. Gastrointest. Endosc.
11, 84–93 (2009)
63.37
Karl Storz Endoskope - Anubis: https://www.
karlstorz.com/cps/rde/xchg/SID-8BAF6233-
DF3FFEB4/karlstorz-en/hs.xsl/8872.htm (2012)
63.38
S.J.
Phee,
K.Y.
Ho,
D.
Lomanto,
S.C.
Low,
V.A. Huynh, A.P. Kencana, K. Yang, Z.L. Sun,
S.C. Chung: Natural orifice transgastric endo-
scopic wedge hepatic resection in an experimen-
tal model using an intuitively controlled master
and slave transluminal endoscopic robot (MAS-
TER), Surg. Endosc. 24, 2293–2298 (2010)
63.39
M.
Piccigallo,
U.
Scarfogliero,
C.
Quaglia,
G. Petroni, P. Valdastri, A. Menciassi, P. Dario:
Design of a novel bimanual robotic system
for single-port laparoscopy, IEEE/ASME Trans.
Mechatron. 15(6), 871–878 (2012)
63.40
D.J. Scott, S.J. Tang, R. Fernandez, R. Bergs,
M.T. Goova, I. Zeltser, F.J. Kehdy, J.A. Cadeddu:
Completely transvaginal NOTES cholecystectomy
using magnetically anchored instruments, Surg.
Endosc. 21, 2308–2316 (2007)
63.41
S. Tognarelli, M. Salerno, G. Tortora, C. Quaglia,
P. Dario, A. Menciassi: An endoluminal robotic
platform for Minimally Invasive Surgery, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Biomed. Robotics Biomechatronics
(BIOROB), Pisa (2012) pp. 7–12
63.42
M. Simi, R. Pickens, A. Menciassi, S.D. Herrell,
P. Valdastri: Fine tilt tuning of a laparoscopic
camera by local magnetic actuation: Two-Port
Nephrectomy Experience on Human Cadavers,
Surg. Innov. 20(4), 385–394 (2013)
63.43
T. Leuth: MIMED: 3D printing - Rapid technolo-
gies,
http://www.mimed.mw.tum.de/research/
3d-printing-rapid-technologies/ (2013)
63.44
S. G. O’Reilly: Medical manufacturing technology:
3D
printing
and
medical-device
develop-
ment,
Medical
Design,
http://medicaldesign.
com/Medical-Manufacturing-Technology-3D-
printing-medical-device-development/index.
html (2012)
63.45
C. Plaskos, P. Cinquin, S. Lavallee, A.J. Hodg-
son: Praxiteles: A miniature bone-mounted robot
for minimal access total knee arthroplasty, Int.
J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assist. Surg. 1, 67–79
(2005)
63.46
P.J. Berkelman, L. Whitcomb, R. Taylor, P. Jensen:
A miniature microsurgical instrument tip force
sensor for enhanced force feedback during robot-
assisted manipulation, IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom.
19, 917–922 (2003)
63.47
D.P.
Devito,
L.
Kaplan,
R.
Dietl,
M.
Pfeif-
fer, D. Horne, B. Silberstein, M. Hardenbrook,
G. Kiriyanthan, Y. Barzilay, A. Bruskin, D. Sackerer,
V. Alexandrovsky, C. Stüer, R. Burger, J. Maeurer,
D.G. Gordon, R. Schoenmayr, A. Friedlander,
N. Knoller, K. Schmieder, I. Pechlivanis, I.-S. Kim,
B. Meyer, M. Shoham: Clinical acceptance and ac-
curacy assessment of spinal implants guided with
SpineAssist surgical robot – Retrospective study,
Spine 35(24), 2109–2115 (2010)
63.48
K. Chinzei, R. Gassert, E. Burdet: Workshop on
MRI/fMRI compatible robot technology - A critical
tool for neuroscience and image guided interven-
tion, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Orlando (2006)
63.49
M. Jakopec, S.J. Harris, F.R.Y. Baena, P. Gomes,
J. Cobb, B.L. Davies: The first clinical application
of a hands-on robotic knee surgery system, Com-
put. Aided Surg. 6, 329–339 (2001)
63.50
D.F. Louw, T. Fielding, P.B. McBeth, D. Gregoris,
P. Newhook, G.R. Sutherland: Surgical robotics:
A review and neurosurgical prototype develop-
ment, Neurosurgery 54, 525–537 (2004)
63.51
J. Marescaux, J. Leroy, M. Gagner, F. Rubino,
D. Mutter, M. Vix, S.E. Butner, M.K. Smith: Transat-
lantic robot-assisted telesurgery, Nature 413, 379–
380 (2001)
63.52
M. Anvari, T. Broderick, H. Stein, T. Chapman,
M. Ghodoussi, D.W. Birch, C. Mckinley, P. Trudeau,
S. Dutta, C.H. Goldsmith: The impact of latency
on surgical precision and task completion dur-
ing robotic-assisted remote telepresence surgery,
Comput. Aided Surg. 10, 93–99 (2005)
63.53
M. Li, M. Ishii, R.H. Taylor: Spatial motion con-
straints in medical robot using virtual fixtures
generated by anatomy, IEEE Trans. Robotics 23, 4–
19 (2007)
63.54
S. Park, R.D. Howe, D.F. Torchiana: Virtual fixtures
for robotic cardiac surgery, Proc. 4th Int. Conf.
Med. Image Comput. Comput. Interv. (2001)
63.55
B. Davies: A discussion of safety issues for medical
robots. In: Computer-Integrated Surgery, ed. by
R. Taylor, S. Lavallée, G. Burdea, R. Moesges (MIT
Press, Cambridge 1996) pp. 287–296
63.56
P. Varley: Techniques of development of safety-
related software in surgical robots, IEEE Trans.
Inform. Technol. Biomed. 3, 261–267 (1999)
63.57
R. Muradore, D. Bresolin, L. Geretti, P. Fiorini,
T. Villa: Robotic surgery – Formal verification of

Medical Robotics and Computer-Integrated Surgery
References
1679
Part F | 63
plans, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 18(3), 24–32
(2011)
63.58
J.B. Maintz, M.A. Viergever: A survey of medi-
cal image registration, Med. Image Anal. 2, 1–37
(1998)
63.59
S. Lavallee: Registration for computer-integrated
surgery: methodology, state
of the
Art. In:
Computer-Integrated Surgery, ed. by R.H. Taylor,
S. Lavallee, G. Burdea, R. Mosges (MIT Press, Cam-
bridge 1996) pp. 77–98
63.60
P.J. Besl, N.D. McKay: A method for registration of
3-D shapes, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.
14, 239–256 (1992)
63.61
R.J. Maciunas: Interactive Image-Guided Neuro-
surgery (AANS, Park Ridge 1993)
63.62
G. Fichtinger, A. Degeut, K. Masamune, E. Balogh,
G. Fischer, H. Mathieu, R.H. Taylor, S. Zinreich,
L.M. Fayad: Image overlay guidance for needle
insertion on CT scanner, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.
52, 1415–1424 (2005)
63.63
T. Akinbiyi, C.E. Reiley, S. Saha, D. Burschka,
C.J. Hasser, D.D. Yuh, A.M. Okamura: Dynamic
augmented reality for sensory substitution in
robot-assisted surgical systems, Proc. 28th Annu.
Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. (2006) pp. 567–
570
63.64
J. Leven, D. Burschka, R. Kumar, G. Zhang, S. Blu-
menkranz, X. Dai, M. Awad, G. Hager, M. Marohn,
M. Choti, C. Hasser, R.H. Taylor: DaVinci can-
vas: A telerobotic surgical system with integrated,
robot-assisted, laparoscopic ultrasound capabil-
ity, Proc. Med. Image Comput. Comput. Interv.
Palm Springs (2005)
63.65
R.H. Taylor, H.A. Paul, C.B. Cutting, B. Mittelstadt,
W. Hanson, P. Kazanzides, B. Musits, Y.Y. Kim,
A. Kalvin, B. Haddad, D. Khoramabadi, D. Larose:
Augmentation of human precision in computer-
integrated surgery, Innov. Technol. Biol. Med. 13,
450–459 (1992)
63.66
J. Troccaz, M. Peshkin, B. Davies: The use of local-
izers, robots and synergistic devices in CAS, Lect.
Notes Comput. Sci. 1205, 727–736 (1997)
63.67
G. Brisson, T. Kanade, A.M. DiGioia, B. Jaramaz:
Precision freehand sculptig of bone, Proc. Med.
Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Interv. (MICCAI)
(2004) pp. 105–112
63.68
R.A. Beasley: Medical Robots: Current systems and
research directions, J. Robotics 2012, 401613 (2012)
63.69
S. Kuang, K.S. Leung, T. Wang, L. Hu, E. Chui,
W. Liu, Y. Wang: A novel passive/active hybrid
robot for orthopaedic trauma surgery, Int. J. Med.
Robotics Comput. Assist, Surg. 8, 458–467 (2012)
63.70
S. Solomon, A. Patriciu, R.H. Taylor, L. Kavoussi,
D. Stoianovici: CT guided robotic needle biopsy:
A precise sampling method minimizing radiation
exposure, Radiology 225, 277–282 (2002)
63.71
K. Masamune, G. Fichtinger, A. Patriciu, R. Susil,
R. Taylor, L. Kavoussi, J. Anderson, I. Sakuma,
T. Dohi, D. Stoianovici: System for robotically as-
sisted percutaneous procedures with computed
tomography guidance, J. Comput. Assist. Surg. 6,
370–383 (2001)
63.72
A. Krieger, R.C. Susil, C. Menard, J.A. Coleman,
G. Fichtinger, E. Atalar, L.L. Whitcomb: Design of
a novel MRI compatible manipulator for image
guided prostate intervention, IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng. 52, 306–313 (2005)
63.73
T. Ungi, P. Abolmaesumi, R. Jalal, M. Welch,
I. Ayukawa, S. Nagpal, A. Lasso, M. Jaeger,
D. Borschneck, G. Fichtinger, P. Mousavi: Spinal
needle navigation by tracked ultrasound snap-
shots, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 59(10), 2766–2772
(2012)
63.74
D. DallAlba, B. Maris, P. Fiorini: A compact nav-
igation system for free hand needle placement
in percutaneous procedures, Proc. IEEE/RSI Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Vilamoura (2012)
pp. 2013–2018
63.75
G.A. Krombach, T. Schmitz-Rode, B.B. Wein,
J. Meyer, J.E. Wildberger, K. Brabant, R.W. Gun-
ther: Potential of a new laser target system for
percutaneous CT-guided nerve blocks: Technical
note, Neuroradiology 42, 838–841 (2000)
63.76
M. Rosenthal, A. State, J. Lee, G. Hirota, J. Acker-
man, K. Keller, E.D. Pisano, M. Jiroutek, K. Muller,
H. Fuchs: Augmented reality guidance for needle
biopsies: A randomized, controlled trial in phan-
toms, Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput.
Comput. Interv. (2001) pp. 240–248
63.77
G. Stetten, V. Chib: Overlaying ultrasound images
on direct vision, J. Ultrasound Med. 20, 235–240
(2001)
63.78
H.F. Reinhardt: Neuronagivation: A ten years re-
view. In: Computer-Integrated Surgery, ed. by
R. Taylor, S. Lavallée, G. Burdea, R. Moegses (MIT
Press, Cambridge 1996) pp. 329–342
63.79
E.
Hempel,
H.
Fischer,
L.
Gumb,
T.
Hohn,
H. Krause, U. Voges, H. Breitwieser, B. Gutmann,
J. Durke, M. Bock, A. Melzer: An MRI-compatible
surgical robot for precise radiological interven-
tions, Comput. Aided Surg. 8, 180–191 (2003)
63.80
Z. Wei, G. Wan, L. Gardi, G. Mills, D. Downey,
A.
Fenster:
Robot-assisted
3D-TRUS
guided
prostate brachytherapy: system integration and
validation, Med. Phys. 31, 539–548 (2004)
63.81
E. Boctor, G. Fischer, M. Choti, G. Fichtinger,
R.H. Taylor: Dual-armed robotic system for in-
traoperative ultrasound guided hepatic ablative
therapy: A prospective study, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 377–382
63.82
J. Hong, T. Dohi, M. Hashizume, K. Konishi,
N. Hata: An ultrasound-driven needle-insertion
robot for percutaneous cholecystostomy, Phys.
Med. Biol. 49, 441–455 (2004)
63.83
G.
Megali,
O.
Tonet,
C.
Stefanini,
M.
Boc-
cadoro, V. Papaspyropoulis, L. Angelini, P. Dario:
A computer-assisted robotic ultrasound-guided
biopsy system for video-assisted surgery, Proc.
Med. Image Comput. Comput. Interv. (MICCAI),
Utrecht (2001) pp. 343–350
63.84
R.J.
Webster
III,
J.S.
Kim,
N.J.
Cowan,
G.S. Chirikjian, A.M. Okamura: Nonholonomic
modeling of needle steering, Int. J. Robotics Res.
25(5-6), 509–525 (2006)

Part F | 63
1680
Part F
Robots at Work
63.85
J.A. Engh, D.S. Minhas, D. Kondziolka, C.N. Riviere:
Percutaneous intracerebral navigation by duty-
cycled spinning of flexible bevel-tipped needles,
Neurosurgery 67(4), 1117–1122 (2010)
63.86
N. Cowan, K. Goldberg, G. Chirikjian, G. Fichtinger,
R. Alterovitz, K. Reed, V. Kallem, W. Park, S. Misra,
A.M. Okamura: Robotic needle steering: Design,
modeling, planning, and image guidance. In:
Surgical Robotics – Systems Applications and Vi-
sions, ed. by J. Rosen, B. Hannaford, R.M. Satava
(New York, Springer 2011)
63.87
S. Okazawa, R. Ebrahimi, J. Chuang, S. Salcudean,
R. Rohling: Hand-held steerable needle device,
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 10, 285–296 (2005)
63.88
P.E. Dupont, J. Lock, B. Itkowitz, E. Butler: Design
and control of concentric-tube robots, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 26(2), 209–225 (2010)
63.89
G.H.
Ballantyne:
Robotic
surgery, telerobotic
surgery, telepresence and telementoring, Surg,
Endosc. 16, 1389 (2002)
63.90
A. Rovetta, R. Sala, R. Cosmi, X. Wen, S. Milassesi,
D. Sabbadini, A. Togno, L. Angelini, A.K. Be-
jczy: A new telerobotic application: Remote la-
parscopic surgery using satellites and optical figer
networks for data exchange, Int. J. Robotics Res.
15(3), 267–279 (1996)
63.91
J. Arata, H. Takahashi, S. Yasunaka, K. Onda,
K. Tanaka, N. Sugita, K. Tanoue, K. Konishi, S. Ieiri,
Y. Fujino, Y. Ueda, H. Fujimoto, M. Mitsuishi,
M. Hashizume: Impact of network time-delay and
force feedback on tele-surgery, Int. J. Comput.
Assist. Radiol. Surg. 3(3–4), 371–378 (2008)
63.92
J.A.
McEwen,
C.R.
Bussani,
G.F.
Auchinleck,
M.J. Breault: Development and initial clinical
evaluation of pre-robotic and robotic retraction
systems for surgery, Proc. 2nd Workshop Med.
Health Care Robotics, Newcastle (1989) pp. 91–
101
63.93
P. Berkelman, P. Cinquin, J. Troccaz, J. Ayoubi,
C. Letoublon, F. Bouchard: A compact, compliant
laparoscopic endoscope manipulator, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002) pp. 1870–
1875
63.94
K. Olds, A. Hillel, J. Kriss, A. Nair, H. Kim, E. Cha,
M. Curry, L. Akst, R. Yung, J. Richmon, R. Tay-
lor: A robotic assistant for trans-oral surgery: The
robotic endo-laryngeal fexible (Robo-ELF) scope,
J. Robotic. Surg. 6(1), 13–18 (2012)
63.95
G.R. Sutherland, S. Lama, L.S. Gan, S. Wolfsberger,
K. Zareinia: Merging machines with microsurgery:
Clinical experience with neuroArm, J. Neurosurg.
118, 521–529 (2013)
63.96
A. Nishikawa, T. Hosoi, K. Koara, T. Dohi: FAce
MOUSe: A novel human-machine interface for
controlling the position of a laparoscope, IEEE
Trans Robot. Autom. 19, 825–841 (2003)
63.97
A. Krupa, J. Gangloff, C. Doignon, M.F. deMath-
elin, G. Morel, J. Leroy, L. Soler, J. Marescaux:
Autonomous 3-D positioning of surgical instru-
ments in robotized laparoscopic surgery using
visual servoing, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 19,
842–853 (2003)
63.98
P. Green, R. Satava, J. Hill, I. Simon: Telepresence:
Advanced teleoperator technology of minimally
invasive surgery (abstract), Surg. Endosc. 6, 90
(1992)
63.99
T. Ahlering, D. Woo, L. Eichel, D. Lee, R. Edwards,
D. Skarecky: Robot-assisted versus open radical
prostatectomy: A comparison of one surgeon’s
outcomes, Urology 63, 819–822 (2004)
63.100
J.D. Wright, C.V. Ananth, S.N. Lewin, W.M. Burke,
Y.-S. Lu, A.I. Neugut, T.J. Herzog, D.L. Hershman:
Robotically assisted vs laparoscopic hysterectomy
among women with benign gynecologic disease,
J. Am. Med. Assoc. 309(7), 689–698 (2013)
63.101
J. Rosen, J.D. Brown, L. Chang, M. Barreca,
M. Sinanan, B. Hannaford: The BlueDRAGON –
a system for measuring the kinematics and the
dynamics of minimally invasive surgical tools in-
vivo, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2002) pp. 1876–1881
63.102
H.C. Lin, I. Shafran, T.E. Murphy, A.M. Okamura,
D.D. Yuh, G.D. Hager: Automatic detection and
segmentation of robot-assisted surgical motions,
Proc. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Interv.
(MICCAI) (2005) pp. 802–810
63.103
H. Mayer, F. Gomez, D. Wierstra, I. Nagy, A. Knoll,
J. Schmidhuber: A system for robotic heart surgery
that learns to tie knots using recurrent neu-
ral networks, Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2006) pp. 543–548
63.104
C.E. Reiley, H.C. Lin, D.D. Yuh, G.D. Hager: A review
of methods for objective surgical skill evaluation,
Surg. Endosc. 25(2), 356–366 (2011)
63.105
N. Padoy, G. Hager: Human-machine collabo-
rative surgery using learned models, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 5285–
5292
63.106
L.-M. Su, B.P. Vagvolgyi, R. Agarwal, C.E. Reiley,
R.H. Taylor, G.D. Hager: Augmented reality during
robot-assisted laparoscopic partial nephrectomy:
Toward real-time 3D-CT to stereoscopic video reg-
istration, Urology 73(4), 896–900 (2009)
63.107
F. Volonté, N.C. Buchs, F. Pugin, J. Spaltenstein,
B. Schiltz, M. Jung, M. Hagen, O. Ratib, P. Morel:
Augmented reality to the rescue of the minimally
invasive surgeon. The usefulness of the inter-
position of stereoscopic images in the Da Vinci
robotic console, Int. J. Med. Robotics Comput. As-
sist. Surg. 3(9), 34–38 (2013)
63.108
D. Cohen, E. Mayer, D. Chen, A. Anstee, J. Vale, G.-
Z. Yang, A. Darzi, P.Ä.Ä. Edwards: Augmented real-
ity image guidance in minimally invasive prosta-
tectomy, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 6367, 101–110
(2010)
63.109
Y. Ida, N. Sugita, T. Ueta, Y. Tamaki, K. Tanimoto,
M. Mitsuishi: Microsurgical robotic system for vit-
reoretinal surgery, Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol.
Surg. 7(1), 27–34 (2012)
63.110
R.
Taylor, J.
Kang,
I.
Iordachita,
G.
Hager,
P. Kazanzides, C. Riviere, E. Gower, R. Richa,
M. Balicki, X. He, X. Liu, K. Olds, R. Sznit-
man, B. Vagvolgyi, P. Gehlbach, J. Handa: Recent
work toward a microsurgical assistant for retinal

Medical Robotics and Computer-Integrated Surgery
References
1681
Part F | 63
surgery, Proc. Hamlyn Symp. Med. Robotics, Lon-
don (2011) pp. 3–4
63.111
B. Becker, S. Yang, R. MacLachlan, C. Riviere: To-
wards vision-based control of a handheld micro-
manipulator for retinal cannulation in an eyeball
phantom, Proc. IEEE RAS EMBS Int. Conf. Biomed.
Robotics Biomechatronics (BIOROB) (2012) pp. 44–
49
63.112
M. Balicki, T. Xia, M.Y. Jung, A. Deguet, B. Vagvol-
gyi, P. Kazanzides, R. Taylor: Prototyping a hybrid
cooperative and
tele-robotic
surgical system
for retinal microsurgery, Proc. MICCAI Workshop
Syst. Archit. Comput. Assist. Interv. Tor. (2011),
Insight,
http://www.midasjournal.org/browse/
publication/815
63.113
C. Bergeles, B.E. Kratochvil, B.J. Nelson: Visually
servoing magnetic intraocular microdevices, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 28(4), 798–809 (2012)
63.114
Patent N. Simaan, J. T. Handa, R. H. Taylor:
A system for macro-micro distal dexterity en-
hancement in microsurgery of the eye, Patent US
20110125165 A1 (2011)
63.115
X. He, D. Roppenecker, D. Gierlach, M. Bal-
icki, K. Olds, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach, R.H. Tay-
lor, I. Iordachita: Toward a clinically applicable
steady-hand eye robot for vitreoretinal surgery,
Proc. ASME Int. Mech. Eng. Congr., Houston (2012)
p. 88384
63.116
J.K. Niparko, W.W. Chien, I. Iordachita, J.U. Kang,
R.H.
Taylor:
Robot-assisted,
sensor-guided
cochlear implant electrode insertion (Abstract
in Proceedings), Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Cochlear
Implant.
Other
Implant.
Auditory
Technol.,
Baltimore (2012)
63.117
D. Schurzig, R.F. Labadie, A. Hussong, T.S. Rau,
R.J. Webster: Design of a tool integrating force
sensing with automated insertion in cochlear
implantation, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 17(2),
381–389 (2012)
63.118
B. Bell, C. Stieger, N. Gerber, A. Arnold, C. Nauer,
V. Hamacher, M. Kompis, L. Nolte, M. Caver-
saccio, S. Weber: A self-developed and con-
structed robot for minimally invasive cochlear
implantation, Acta Oto-Laryngol. 132(4), 355–360
(2012)
63.119
J.R. Clark, L. Leon, F.M. Warren, J.J. Abbott: Mag-
netic guidance of cochlear implants: Proof-of-
concept and initial feasibility study, Trans. ASME-
W-J. Medical Devices 6(4), 35002 (2012)
63.120
J. Schiff, P. Li, M. Goldstein: Robotic microsur-
gical vasovasostomy and vasoepididymostomy:
A prospective randomized study in a rat model,
J. Urol. 171, 1720–1725 (2004)
63.121
S. Parekattil, M. Cohen: Robotic microsurgery.
In: Robotic Urologic Surgery, ed. by V.R. Patel
(Springer, London 2012) pp. 461–470
63.122
P.S. Jensen, K.W. Grace, R. Attariwala, J.E. Colgate,
M.R. Glucksberg: Toward robot assisted vascular
microsurgery in the retina, Graefes Arch. Clin. Exp.
Ophthalmol. 235, 696–701 (1997)
63.123
H. Das, H. Zak, J. Johnson, J. Crouch, D. Fram-
baugh: Evaluation of a telerobotic system to assist
surgeons in microsurgery, Comput. Aided Surg. 4,
15–25 (1999)
63.124
K. Hongo, S. Kobayashi, Y. Kakizawa, J.I. Koyama,
T.
Goto,
H.
Okudera,
K.
Kan,
M.G.
Fujie,
H. Iseki, K. Takakura: NeuRobot: Telecontrolled
micromanipulator system for minimally inva-
sive microneurosurgery-preliminaryresults, Neu-
rosurgery 51, 985–988 (2002)
63.125
A. Kapoor, R. Kumar, R. Taylor: Simple bioma-
nipulation tasks with a steady hand cooperative
manipulator, Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Med. Image
Comput. Comput. Assist. Interv. (MICCAI), Montreal
(2003) pp. 141–148
63.126
R. MacLachlan, B. Becker, J. Cuevas-Tabarés,
G. Podnar, L. Lobes, C. Riviere: Micron: An ac-
tively stabilized handheld tool for microsurgery,
IEEE Trans. Robotics 28(1), 195–212 (2012)
63.127
B. Becker, R. MacLachlan, L. Lobes, G. Hager,
C. Riviere: Vision-based control of a hand-
held
surgical
micromanipulator
with
virtual
fixtures, IEEE Trans. Robotics 29(3), 674–683
(2013)
63.128
C. Riviere, J. Gangloff, M. de Mathelin: Robotic
compensation of biological motion to enhance
surgical accuracy, Proceedings IEEE 94(9), 1705–
1716 (2006)
63.129
W. Armstrong, A. Karamzadeh, R. Crumley, T. Kel-
ley, R. Jackson, B. Wong: A novel laryngoscope
instrument stabilizer for operative microlaryn-
goscopy, Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg. 132, 471–477
(2004)
63.130
L. Ascari, C. Stefanini, A. Menciassi, S. Sahoo,
P. Rabischong, P. Dario: A new active microendo-
scope for exploring the sub-arachnoid space in
the spinal cord, Proc. IEEE Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2003) pp. 2657–2662
63.131
U. Bertocchi, L. Ascari, C. Stefanini, C. Laschi,
P.
Dario:
Human-robot
shared
control
for
robot-assisted endoscopy of the spinal cord,
Proc. IEEE/RAS/EMBS Int. Conf. Biomed. Robot.
Biomechatronics (2006) pp. 543–548
63.132
A. Cuschieri, G. Buess, J. Perissat: Operative Man-
ual of Endoscopic Surgery (Springer, Berlin, Hei-
dleberg 1992)
63.133
Stereotaxis: The epoch (TM) solution: The heart of
innovation, http://www.stereotaxis.com/ (2013)
63.134
Endosense, TactiCath Quartz – The First Con-
tact Force Ablation Catheter: http://neomed.net/
portfolio/endosense_sa (2013)
63.135
K.J. Rebello: Applications of MEMS in surgery, Pro-
ceedings IEEE 92(1), 43–55 (2004)
63.136
I. Kassim, W.S. Ng, G. Feng, S.J. Phee: Review of
locomotion techniques for robotic colonoscopy,
Proc. Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Taipei
(2003) pp. 1086–1091
63.137
Endotics:
The
endotics
system,
http://www.
endotics.com/en/product (2012)
63.138
Gi-View: The AeroScope, http://www.giview.com/
(2013)
63.139
Invendo-Medical: Gentle colonoscopy with in-
vendoscopy, http://www.invendo-medical.com/
(2013)

Part F | 63
1682
Part F
Robots at Work
63.140
A. Loeve, P. Breeveld, J. Dankelman: Scopes too
flexible ... and too stiff, IEEE Pulse 1(3), 26–41
(2010)
63.141
G. Ciuti, A. Menciassi, P. Dario: Capsule en-
doscopy: From current achievements to open
challenges, IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng. 4, 59–72 (2011)
63.142
C. Stefanini, A. Menciassi, P. Dario: Modeling and
experiments on a legged microrobot locomoting
in a tubular, compliant and slippery environ-
ment, Int. J. Robotics Res. 25, 551–560 (2006)
63.143
G. Ciuti, P. Valdastri, A. Menciassi, P. Dario: Robotic
magnetic steering and locomotion of capsule en-
doscope for diagnostic and surgical endoluminal
procedures, Robotica 28, 199–207 (2010)
63.144
J.F. Rey, H. Ogata, N. Hosoe, K. Ohtsuka, N. Ogata,
K. Ikeda, H. Aihara, I. Pangtay, T. Hibi, S. Kudo,
H. Tajiri: Feasibility of stomach exploration with
a guided capsule endoscope, Endoscopy 42, 541–
545 (2010)
63.145
R.C. Ritter, M.S. Grady, M.A. Howard, G.T. Gilles:
Magnetic stereotaxis: Computer assisted, image
guided remote movement of implants in the
brain. In: Computer Integrated Surgery, ed. by
R.H. Taylor, S. Lavallee, G.C. Burdea, R. Mosges
(MIT Press, Cambridge 1995) pp. 363–369
63.146
C.R.
Wagner,
N.
Stylopoulos,
P.G.
Jackson,
R.D. Howe: The benefit of force feedback in
surgery: Examination of blunt dissection, Pres-
ence: Teleoperators Virtual Environ. 16(3), 252–262
(2007)
63.147
P.F. Hokayem, M.W. Spong: Bilateral teleopera-
tion: A historical survey, Automatica 42, 2035–
2057 (2006)
63.148
M. Quirini, A. Menciassi, S. Scapellato, C. Ste-
fanini, P. Dario: Design and fabrication of a motor
legged capsule for the active exploration of the
gastrointestinal tract, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mecha-
tron. 13(1), 169–179 (2008)
63.149
A.M. Okamura: Methods for haptic feedback in
teleoperated robot-assisted surgery, Ind. Robot
31, 499–508 (2004)
63.150
M.J.
Massimino:
Improved
force
perception
through sensory substitution, Contr. Eng. Pract.
3, 215–222 (1995)
63.151
P. Gupta, P. Jensen, E. de Juan: Quantifica-
tion of tactile sensation during retinal micro-
surgery, Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Med. Image Com-
put. Comput.-Assist. Interv. (MICCAI), Cambridge
(1999)
63.152
P.K. Poulose, M.F. Kutka, M. Mendoza-Sagaon,
A.C. Barnes, C. Yang, R.H. Taylor, M.A. Talamini:
Human versus robotic organ retraction during la-
paroscopic nissen fundoplication, Surg. Endosc.
13, 461–465 (1999)
63.153
J.
Rosen,
B.
Hannaford,
M.
MacFarlane,
M. Sinanan: Force controlled and
teleoper-
ated endoscopic grasper for minimally invasive
surgery – Experimental performance evaluation,
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 46, 1212–1221 (1999)
63.154
M. Siemionow, K. Ozer, W. Siemionow, G. Lister:
Robotic assistance in microsurgery, J. Reconstr.
Microsurg. 16(8), 643–649 (2000)
63.155
P.D.L. Roux, H. Das, S. Esquenazi, P.J. Kelly:
Robot-assisted microsurgery: A feasibility study in
the rat, Neurosurgery 48(3), 584–589 (2001)
63.156
A. Menciassi, A. Eisinberg, M.C. Carrozza, P. Dario:
Force sensing microinstrument for measuring
tissue properties and pulse in microsurgery,
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 8, 10–17 (2003)
63.157
S. Sunshine, M. Balicki, X. He, K. Olds, J. Kang,
P. Gehlbach, R. Taylor, I. Iordachita, J. Handa:
A Force-sensing microsurgical instruments that
detects forces below human tactile sensation,
Retina 33(1), 200–206 (2013)
63.158
I. Iordachita, Z. Sun, M. Balicki, J.U. Kang,
S.J. Phee, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach, R. Taylor: A sub-
millimetric, 0.25 mN resolution fully integrated
fiber-optic force-sensing tool for retinal micro-
surgery, Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 4(4),
383–390 (2009)
63.159
I.
Kuru,
B.
Gonenc,
M.
Balicki,
J.
Handa,
P. Gehlbach, R.H. Taylor, I. Iordachita: Force
sensing micro-forceps for robot assisted retinal
surgery, Proc. Eng. Med. Biol., San Diego (2012)
pp. 1401–1404
63.160
X. Liu, I.I. Iordachita, X. He, R.H. Taylor, J.U. Kang:
Miniature fiber-optic force sensor for vitreoreti-
nal microsurgery based on low-coherence Fabry-
Perot interferometry, Biomed. Opt. Express 3,
1062–1076 (2012)
63.161
M. Balicki, J.-H. Han, I. Iordachita, P. Gehlbach,
J. Handa, R.H. Taylor, J. Kang: Single fiber optical
coherence tomography microsurgical instruments
for computer and robot-assisted retinal surgery,
Proc. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Interv.
(MICCAI), London (2009) pp. 108–115
63.162
M. Balicki, R. Richa, B. Vagvolgyi, J. Handa,
P. Gehlbach, J. Kang, P. Kazanzides, R. Taylor: In-
teractive OCT annotation and visualization system
for vitreoretinal surgery, Proc. MICCAI Workshop
Augment. Environ. Comput. Interv. (AE-CAI), Nice
(2012)
63.163
X. Liu, Y. Huang, J.U. Kang:
Distortion-free
freehand-scanning OCT implemented with real-
time scanning speed variance correction, Opt.
Express 20(15), 16567–16583 (2012)
63.164
N. Cutler, M. Balicki, M. Finkelstein, J. Wang,
P. Gehlbach, J. McGready, I. Iordachita, R. Tay-
lor, J. Handa: Auditory force feedback substitu-
tion improves surgical precision during simulated
ophthalmic surgery, Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis.
Sci. 4(2), 1316–1324 (2013)
63.165
R.D. Howe, W.J. Peine, D.A. Kontarinis, J.S. Son:
Remote palpation technology, IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. 14(3), 318–323 (1995)
63.166
G. Fischer, T. Akinbiyi, S. Saha, J. Zand, M. Ta-
lamini, M. Marohn, R. Taylor: Ischemia and
force sensing surgical instruments for augment-
ing available surgeon information, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Biomed. Robot. Biomechatronics (BioRob),
Pisa (2006)
63.167
F.J.
Carter,
M.P.
Schijven,
R.
Aggarwal,
T. Grantcharov, N.K. Francis, G.B. Hanna, J.J. Jaki-
mowicz: Consensus guidelines for validation of

Medical Robotics and Computer-Integrated Surgery
References
1683
Part F | 63
virtual reality surgical simulators, Surg. Endosc.
19, 1523–1532 (2005)
63.168
A. Gavazzi, W.V. Haute, K. Ahmed, O. Elhage,
P. Jaye, M.S. Khan, P. Dasgupta: Face, content and
construct validity of a virtual reality simulator for
robotic surgery (SEP Robot), Ann. R. Coll. Surg.
Engl. 93, 146–150 (2011)
63.169
F.H. Halvorsen, O.J. Elle, E. Fosse: Simulators in
surgery, Minim. Invasive Ther. 14, 214–223 (2005)
63.170
T. Ungi, D. Sargent, E. Moult, A. Lasso, C. Pinter,
R. McGraw, G. Fichtinger: Perk Tutor: An open-
source training platform for ultrasound-guided
needle insertions, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 59(12),
3475–3481 (2012)
63.171
E. Moult, T. Ungi, M. Welch, J. Lu, R. McGraw,
G. Fichtinger: Ultrasound-guided facet joint in-
jection training using Perk Tutor, Int. J. Comput.
Assist. Radiol. Surg. 8(5), 831–836 (2013)
63.172
T.K.A. Kesavadas, G. Srimathveeravalli, S. Karim-
puzha, R. Chandrasekhar, G. Wilding, G.K.Z. Butt:
Efficacy of robotic surgery simulator (RoSS) for the
davinci surgical system, J. Urol. 181(4), 823 (2009)
63.173
C. Perrenot, M. Perez, N. Tran, J.-P. Jehl, J. Fel-
blinger, L. Bresler, J. Hubert: The virtual reality
simulator dV-Trainer is a valid assessment tool for
robotic surgical skills, Surg. Endosc. 26(9), 2587–
2593 (2012)
63.174
R. Korets, J. Graversen, M. Gupta, J. Landman,
K. Badani: Comparison of robotic surgery skill ac-
quisition between DV-Trainer and da Vinci surgi-
cal system: A randomized controlled study, J. Urol.
185(4), e593 (2011)
63.175
K. Moorthy, Y. Munz, S.K. Sarker, A. Darzi: Objec-
tive assessment of technical skills in surgery, Br.
Med. J. 327, 1032–1037 (2003)
63.176
C. Basdogan, S. De, J. Kim, M. Muniyandi, H. Kim,
M.A. Srinivasan: Haptics in minimally invasive
surgical simulation and training, IEEE Comput.
Graph. Appl. 24(2), 56–64 (2004)
63.177
M. Altomonte, D. Zerbato, S. Galvan, P. Fiorini:
Organ modeling and simulation using graphical
processing, Poster Sess. Comput. Assist. Radiol.
Surg., Berlin (2007)
63.178
D. Zerbato, L. Vezzaro, L. Gasperotti, P. Fiorini: Vir-
tual training for US guided needle insertion, Proc.
Comput. Assist Radiol. Surg., Berlin (2012) pp. 27–
30
63.179
Lapmentor: http://www.simbionix.com
63.180
Surgical Education platform: http://www.meti.
com
63.181
LapSim: http://www.surgical-science.com
63.182
MIST: http://www.mentice.com
63.183
EndoTower: http://www.verifi.com
63.184
Laparoscopic Trainer: http://www.reachin.se
63.185
Simendo: http://www.simendo.nl
63.186
Vest System: http://www.select-it.de
63.187
EYESI: http://www.vrmagic.com/
63.188
U. Verona: Xron - Surgical simulator by ALTAIR lab,
http://metropolis.scienze.univr.it/xron/ (2013)
63.189
F. Cavallo, G. Megali, S. Sinigaglia, O. Tonet,
P. Dario: A biomechanical analysis of surgeon’s
gesture in a laparoscopic virtual scenario. In:
Medicine Meets Virtual Reality, Vol. 14, ed. by
J.D. Westwood, R.S. Haluck, H.M. Hoffmann,
G.T. Mogel, R. Phillips, R.A. Robb, K.G. Vosburgh
(IOS, Amsterdam 2006) pp. 79–84
63.190
S. Yule, R. Flin, S. Paterson-Brown, N. Maran:
Non-technical skills for surgeons: A review of the
literature, Surgery 139, 140–149 (2006)
63.191
K.T. Kavanagh: Applications of image-directed
robotics in otolaryngologic surgery, Laryngoscope
194, 283–293 (1994)
63.192
J. Wurm, H. Steinhart, K. Bumm, M. Vogele,
C. Nimsky, H. Iro: A novel robot system for fully
automated paranasal sinus surgery, Proc. Com-
put. Assist. Radiol. Surg. (CARS) (2003) pp. 633–
638
63.193
M. Li, M. Ishii, R.H. Taylor: Spatial motion con-
straints in medical robot using virtual fixtures
generated by anatomy, IEEE Trans. Robot. 2, 1270–
1275 (2006)
63.194
G. Strauss, K. Koulechov, R. Richter, A. Di-
etz, C. Trantakis, T. Lueth: Navigated control
in
functional
endoscopic
sinus
surgery, Int.
J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assist. Surg. 1, 31–41
(2005)

Multimedia Contents Rehabilitatio
1685
Part F | 64
64. Rehabilitation
and Health Care Robotics
H.F. Machiel Van der Loos, David J. Reinkensmeyer, Eugenio Guglielmelli
The field of rehabilitation robotics considers
robotic systems that 1) provide therapy for persons
seeking to recover their physical, social, communi-
cation, or cognitive function, and/or that 2) assist
persons who have a chronic disability to accom-
plish activities of daily living. This chapter will
discuss these two main domains and provide de-
scriptions of the major achievements of the field
over its short history and chart out the challenges
to come. Specifically, after providing background
information on demographics (Sect. 64.1.2) and
history (Sect. 64.1.3) of the field, Sect. 64.2 de-
scribes physical therapy and exercise training
robots, and Sect. 64.3 describes robotic aids for
people with disabilities. Section 64.4 then presents
recent advances in smart prostheses and orthoses
that are related to rehabilitation robotics. Finally,
Sect. 64.5 provides an overview of recent work in
diagnosis and monitoring for rehabilitation as well
as other health-care issues. The reader is referred
to Chap. 73 for cognitive rehabilitation robotics and
to Chap. 65 for robotic smart home technologies,
which are often considered assistive technologies
for persons with disabilities. At the conclusion of
the present chapter, the reader will be familiar
with the history of rehabilitation robotics and its
primary accomplishments, and will understand
the challenges the field may face in the future as
it seeks to improve health care and the well being
of persons with disabilities.
64.1 Overview............................................. 1686
64.1.1
Taxonomy
of Rehabilitation Robotics.......... 1686
64.1.2
World Demographics.................. 1687
64.1.3 Short History
of Rehabilitation Robotics.......... 1688
64.2 Rehabilitation Therapy
and Training Robots ............................ 1692
64.2.1
Grand Challenges
and Roadblocks ........................ 1692
64.2.2 Movement Therapy
After Neurologic Injury............... 1694
64.2.3 Robotic Therapy
for the Upper Extremity ............. 1695
64.2.4 Robotic Therapy for Walking ....... 1699
64.3 Aids for People with Disabilities ........... 1703
64.3.1
Grand Challenges
and Enabling Technologies......... 1703
64.3.2 Types and Examples
of Assistive Rehabilitation
Robots...................................... 1705
64.4 Smart Prostheses and Orthoses ............ 1711
64.4.1 Grand Challenges
and Roadblocks ........................ 1711
64.4.2 Targeted Re-Innervation ............ 1711
64.4.3 Neural Interfaces
for Limb Prosthetic Devices......... 1712
64.4.4 Advances in Neural Stimulation .. 1713
64.4.5 Embedded Intelligence .............. 1713
64.5 Augmentation for Diagnosis
and Monitoring ................................... 1713
64.5.1 Grand Challenges
and Enabling Technologies......... 1714
64.5.2 Smart Homes for Health Care
Monitoring and Care.................. 1714
64.5.3 Home-Based
Rehabilitation Monitoring
and Therapy Systems ................. 1714
64.5.4 Wearable Monitoring Devices...... 1715
64.6 Safety, Ethics, Access and Economics..... 1715
64.7 Conclusions and Further Readings........ 1716
Video-References......................................... 1717
References................................................... 1718

Part F | 64.1
1686
Part F
Robots at Work
64.1 Overview
In this chapter, we discuss an application of robotics
that will likely touch many of us in an acutely per-
sonal way at some point in our lives. When, through
injury or disease, we become unable to interact physi-
cally with our immediate environment as we desire to
achieve our personal goals, or when one of our fam-
ily members, friends, or neighbors is in this situation,
technology-based solutions will likely be a major com-
ponent in the treatment interventions that therapists
prescribe to assist us in re-learning how to complete
our activities of daily living (ADL), or to assist us in
actually doing them if we are unable to recover lost
function. While human therapists and attendants can
indeed shoulder the types of assistance required, the
projected short-term demographics of many countries,
including China, Japan, and the Scandinavian countries,
show a growing shortage of working-age adults. Age-
related disabilities will soon substantially impact the
service sector job market, put many older and disabled
people at risk, and increase the need for institutional-
ization when there is no viable home-based solution.
National programs to develop personal robots, robotic
therapy, smart prostheses, smart beds, smart homes,
and tele-rehabilitation services have accelerated in the
past 20 years and will need to continue apace with the
ever increasing ability of health care to allow people
to live longer through the repression of disease and
improvement in surgical and medication interventions.
Rehabilitation robotics, although only a 50 year old dis-
cipline [64.1–3], is projected to have a fast-growing
future in the coming decades. Within the past 10 years,
the ﬁeld has seen signiﬁcant strides in the commercial-
ization of rehabilitation robotics due to an increasing
acceptance of the validity of this approach by clinical
care providers, as well as the cost reductions in sensors
and actuators. We have also witnessed the expansion
of applications from the social robotics research do-
main into rehabilitation, increasing the range of persons
whose impairments can be targeted by robotic technolo-
gies in the years to come.
64.1.1 Taxonomy
of Rehabilitation Robotics
The ﬁeld of rehabilitation robotics is generally di-
vided between the categories of therapy and assistance
robots, although some devices can serve both purposes.
In addition, rehabilitation robotics includes aspects
of artiﬁcial limb (prosthetics) development, functional
neural stimulation (FNS) and technology for diagno-
sis and monitoring of people during activities of daily
living.
Therapy robots generally have at least two main
users simultaneously, the person with a disability who
is receiving the therapy and the therapist who sets up
and monitors the interaction with the robot. As this type
of therapy is moving into the home, a third user group
has also become prominent: the disabled person’s care-
givers and family.
The Types of therapies that have beneﬁted from
robotic assistance are upper- and lower-extremity
movement therapy, communication-enabling for chil-
dren with autism and exploration-enabling (education)
for children with cerebral palsy (CP) or other develop-
mental disabilities (Chap. 73). A robot may be a good
alternative to a physical or occupational therapist for the
actual hands-on intervention for several reasons:
1. Once properly set up by a therapist – an essential
role – an automated exercise machine can con-
sistently apply therapy over long periods of time
without tiring.
2. The robot’s sensors can measure the work per-
formed by the patient and quantify, to an extent not
detectable by standard clinical scales, any recovery
of function that may have occurred, which may be
highly motivating for a person to continue in the
therapy.
3. The robot may be able to engage the patient in
types of therapy exercises that a therapist cannot do,
such as computer game-based therapy or magnify-
ing movement errors to provoke adaptation [64.4,
5].
One way to classify robotic solutions for applica-
tion to rehabilitation therapy is by how they contact the
patient [64.6].
Operational Therapy Robots
(or End-Effector-Based Therapy Robots)
For these machines, the trajectories of the robot end-
effector and that of the human end-effector, e.g., the
hand or the foot, are physically coupled in operational
space. In joint space, the trajectories of the robot joints
and of the human joints can signiﬁcantly differ. Main
advantages of operational therapy robots are that: (a)
they can be designed by using off-the-shelf components
or robots; (b) they can be easily programmed in Carte-
sian space by nonexpert users. Main limitations are that:
(a) they are not able to assist each single human joint
independently; (b) patients using these robots are sup-
posed to feature a minimum level of residual motor
synergies in order to coordinate their own multijoint
movement, producing the conﬁgurations of the affected
limb required by the therapy exercise.

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
64.1 Overview
1687
Part F | 64.1
Wearable Therapy Robots
(or Exoskeleton-Based Therapy Robots)
For these machines, a larger portion of the human
body (typically the whole affected limb) is in contin-
uous physical contact with the robot. In most cases,
a biomimetic exoskeleton kinematic structure is se-
lected. In this case, not only are the trajectories of the
robot and human end-effectors the same in operational
space, but the trajectories of the robot joints approxi-
mate those of the human joints in joint space. The main
advantage of wearable therapy robots is the possibility
of sensing the conﬁguration and assisting each human
joint independently. The main drawbacks of these sys-
tems are additional design considerations needed to
avoid misalignments between robot and human joints,
and to minimize the invasiveness for the patient in
terms of weight, dimensions, and overall wearability
(Sect. 64.2.4).
Non-Contact Therapy Robots
(or Socially Assistive Robotics)
Robotic devices are also being developed for rehabili-
tation therapy that do not physically contact the patient,
but instead monitor and coach the patient during ther-
apy [64.7]. A key concept of this approach is that
humans are wired to respond to embodied agents in
ways that are important for motivation in rehabilita-
tion therapy (see Chap. 73 for a detailed discussion of
socially assistive robotics). One of the earliest robotic
therapy devices, developed by Erlandson, can be clas-
siﬁed as a socially assistive robot, as it provided reach-
ing targets for patients rather than physically assisting
movement [64.8] (see later). The main advantage of
noncontact therapy robots is that of being intrinsically
safe, since they are not supposed to physically interact
with the patient, although this could limit signiﬁcantly
the scope of their clinical application.
From a design perspective, it is important to under-
stand that therapy robots are tools typically intended for
temporary use (i. e., the duration of the therapy at home
or at the clinic), and are designed to maximize the ob-
jective clinical effectiveness of the therapy as well as
the outcome and the efﬁciency of the entire clinical pro-
cess.
Assistive robots, instead, are solutions for promot-
ing independent living of disabled and elderly citizens.
They need to be designed to be usable in a lifelong per-
spective in real-life scenarios, and thus, designers need
to take into account (at a much more serious level than
in the case of therapy robots) the end-user subjective
preferences, and human factors, in general, in order to
maximize their overall, long-term acceptability [64.6].
Whereas limited usability, some level of discomfort, or
bad aesthetics might be tolerated by the patients expe-
riencing the application of a therapeutic tool used in
a gym or at home, these same factors are unacceptable
for disabled or elderly persons who are supposed to de-
pend upon an assistive robot for activities of daily living
in a variety of social contexts for the rest of their lives.
Assistive robots can be grouped on the basis of their
focus on manipulation, mobility, or cognition. Manipu-
lation aids can further be classiﬁed into ﬁxed-platform
and portable-platform and mobile-autonomous types.
Fixed-platform robots perform functions in the kitchen,
on the desktop, or by the bed. Portable types are ma-
nipulator arms attached to an electric wheelchair to hold
and move objects and to interact with other devices and
equipment, as in opening a door. Mobile-autonomous
robots can be controlled by voice or other means to do
manipulation and other errands in the home or work-
place. Mobility aids are divided into electric wheelchairs
with navigation systems and mobile robots that act as
smart, motorized walkers, allowing peoplewith mobility
impairment to lean on them for fall-prevention and sta-
bility. The third main type, cognitive aids, assists people
who have dementia, autism, or other disorders that affect
communication and physical well-being.
The ﬁelds of prosthetics, orthotics, and functional
electrical stimulation (FES) are closely allied with reha-
bilitation robotics. Prostheses are artiﬁcial hands, arms,
legs and feet that are worn by the user to replace ampu-
tated limbs. Prostheses are increasingly incorporating
robotic features [64.9, 10]. Robotic orthoses are ac-
tuated braces that can assist a person in walking or
moving the arms or hands. FES systems seek to re-
animate limb movements of people who are weak or
paralyzed by electrically stimulating nerve and muscle.
FES control systems are analogous to robotic control
systems, except that the actuators being controlled are
human muscles. Another related ﬁeld is technology for
monitoring and diagnosing health care issues as a per-
son performs activities of daily living.
This chapter is organized according to this taxon-
omy. After providing background information on de-
mographics (Sect. 64.1.2) and history (Sect. 64.1.3) of
the ﬁeld, Sect. 64.2 describes rehabilitation therapy and
training robots, and Sect. 64.3 describes robotic aids
for people with disabilities. Section 64.4 then reviews
recent advances in smart prostheses and orthoses that
are related to rehabilitation robotics. Finally, Sect. 64.5
provides an overview of recent work in diagnosis and
monitoring for rehabilitation as well as other health-
care issues.
64.1.2 World Demographics
Different areas of rehabilitation robotics focus on dif-
ferent user populations, but a linking characteristic

Part F | 64.1
1688
Part F
Robots at Work
of these populations is that they have a disability.
Disability is deﬁned in the US with the Disabilities
Act as A physical or mental impairment that sub-
stantially limits one or more of the major life ac-
tivities. Worldwide disability, based on survey results
from the WHO ranges from about 10 to 40% of the
population, depending on gender, age, wealth, and
residence, with an overall prevalence of about 16%
(Table 64.1). Prevalence is the proportion of a pop-
ulation who have (or had) a speciﬁc characteristic in
a given time period. In medicine, typically this char-
acteristic is an illness or impairment. Prevalence is
usually expressed as a percentage (e.g., 5%,), or as
the number of cases per 10 000 or 100 000 people, de-
pending on how common the illness or risk factor is
in the population. Across all other parameters, there
is approximately a 4 W 1 disparity in disability rates in
the elderly population (>60 years) over working-class
adults. In addition, lower birth rates and life-extending
health care are the dominant factors contributing to
the aging of the population and concomitant rise in
disability overall. Other factors, such as China’s popu-
lation control policies of the 1970s, have created a lack
of working-age adults to support the world economy.
These and other factors make it clear that rehabilita-
tion robotics developers will be faced with users who,
as a demographic group, have generally lower lev-
els of sensory and motor capability, and may have
impaired cognition as well. The urgency of making
advances in this ﬁeld is increasing in line with the
demographics.
64.1.3 Short History
of Rehabilitation Robotics
The history of rehabilitation robotics is almost as old
as that of robotics itself, although emanating from
very different sources. Several book chapters and pa-
pers have been written on the history of rehabilitation
Table 64.1 Prevalence of disability and aging in selected countries (after [64.18])
Country
Number people with
disabilities
Percentage of population
with disabilities
Number of elderly people
Percentage of population
that is elderly
France
5 146 000
8:3
12 151 000
19:6
USA
52 591 000
20:0
35 000 000
12:4
Great Britain
4 453 000
7:3
12 200 000
29:5
Netherlands
1 432 000
9:5
2 118 808
13:4
Spain
3 528 220
8:9
6 936 000
17:6
Japan
5 136 000
4:3
44 982 000
35:7
Korea
3 195 000
7:1
16 300 000
36:0
Italy
2 609 000
4:8 [64.11]
12 302 000
20:3 [64.12]
Germany
7 101 682
8:7
16 844 300
21:0 [64.13]
China
84 600 000
6:5 [64.14]
122 880 000
9:1 [64.15]
India
21 000 000
1:8 [64.16]
67 117 826
5:6 [64.17]
robotics in more detail than this section [64.1, 19, 20],
and numerous papers in the proceedings of the IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics also
provide more grounding for historical perspective. The
chronology below pays particular attention to early
work and to projects with notable clinical and/or com-
mercial impact.
Early robotics, starting in the late 1950s, focused
on large manipulators to replace workers in factories
for dirty, dangerous, and undesirable tasks. The earliest
rehabilitation robots came from the ﬁeld of prosthetics
and orthotics (P&O). Both the Case Western University
Arm (1960s) and the Rancho Los Amigos Golden Arm
(early 1970s) (reviewed in [64.19]) were adaptations
of replacement mechanical arms meant as powered or-
thoses [64.1]. The user drove the Golden Arm with a set
of tongue-operated switches, joint-by-joint, an arduous
means of endpoint control. In the mid-1970s, the De-
partment of Veterans Affairs began funding a group
at the Applied Physics Lab under the guidance of
Seamone and Schmeisser to computerize an orthosis
mounted on a workstation to perform activities of daily
living (ADL) tasks such as feeding a person and turning
pages [64.21]. For the ﬁrst time, a rehabilitation robot
had a command-type interface, not just a joint-by-joint
motion controller.
The 1970s also saw the French Spartacus system
being developed, guided by the vision of Vertut, for
use by people with high-level spinal cord injury (SCI)
as well as children with CP [64.22]. This system did
not emerge from the P&O ﬁeld but was developed by
the French Atomic Energy Commission (CEA), which
used large tele-manipulators for nuclear fuel rod han-
dling. One of these was adapted so that people with
movement impairment could control it using a joystick
for pick-and-place tasks. A decade later, one of the re-
searchers on the Spartacus project, Kwee, began the
Dutch MANUS Project [64.23] a dedicated effort to
develop the ﬁrst wheelchair-mounted manipulator de-

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
64.1 Overview
1689
Part F | 64.1
signed expressly as a rehabilitation robot, not adapted
from a design from another ﬁeld.
In between, several other major programs were be-
gun. In 1978, at Stanford University, and then with
decades-long funding from the US Department of Vet-
erans Affairs, Leifer started the Vocational Assistant
Robot program, culminating in several clinically tested
versions of the Desktop robot, DeVAR [64.3, 24, 25],
the mobile version, MoVAR [64.26], and ﬁnally a Pro-
fessional version, ProVAR, developed by Van der Loos
et al., which had the advanced ability for the user to
program tasks in an easy-to-use browser-type environ-
ment [64.27]. Although DeVAR brieﬂy made it onto
the market in the early 1990s, multisite user testing
revealed this industrial-arm-based approach to assis-
tive robotics was still too costly for the low level of
functionality achieved, even with ProVAR’s advanced
interface.
In the mid-1980s, from observations on the unsuit-
ability of existing industrial, educational and orthosis-
derived manipulators for rehabilitation applications,
Tim Jones at Universal Machine Intelligence (later Ox-
ford Intelligent Machines: OxIM) in the UK began an
intensive effort to provide the rehabilitation robotics
community with its ﬁrst workhorse system especially
designed from the ground up for human service tasks.
Over 10 years, a series of systems, starting with the
RTX model, were used in numerous research labs and
clinics around the world. The most extensive effort
to use the OxIM arm was in France, and a suite of
research projects, funded by the French government
and the European Research Commission, starting as
RAID, then as MASTER [64.28], developed and clin-
ically tested workstation-based assistive systems based
on the RTX and subsequent OxIM arms. When OxIM
ceased building its arms, the French company Afma
Robotics [64.29] took over efforts to commercialize
the MASTER system, although it has also stopped
production.
The UK witnessed the ﬁrst commercially avail-
able feeding robot, Handy-I, an inexpensive and well-
received device ﬁrst designed by Topping and then
commercialized by Rehabilitation Robotics, Ltd. in the
1990s [64.30]. Primarily for people with CP to achieve
a measure of independence in feeding themselves, task
environments later also included face washing and ap-
plying cosmetics, areas of high demand identiﬁed by its
users.
The history of mobile manipulator applications be-
gan in the 1980s with adaptations of educational and
industrial robots, and achieved a boost with the funding
of the US National Institute on Disability and Reha-
bilitation Research (NIDRR) for a Rehabilitation En-
gineering Research Center on Rehabilitation Robotics
(RERC) at the AI duPont Hospital in Delaware from
1993 to 1997. With its ability to fund dozens of research
projects in parallel, it also formed a partnership with
a local company, Applied Resources, Corp. (ARC),
which developed and marketed several rehabilitation
technology products. One of the RERC researchers,
Mahoney, moved to ARC and was instrumental in
extending the company’s repertoire to the RAPTOR
wheelchair-mounted arm [64.31].
In Europe, the most signiﬁcant mobile manipula-
tor project was the MANUS Project [64.23] mentioned
earlier. With much of the work done under the direc-
tion of Kwee at the iRV (Rehabilitation R&D Center)
in the Netherlands, the project culminated in a robot
speciﬁcally designed for wheelchair mounting, with
user control through a joystick and feedback by a small
display on the arm itself. This project led to numer-
ous follow-on research projects, and, most signiﬁcantly,
to the commercialization of the system by Exact Dy-
namics, BV, in the Netherlands. The company’s current
product, called the iARM, is provided on physician pre-
scription by the Dutch Government to qualiﬁed people
with a disability, such as CP or tetraplegia from an SCI.
Realizing a potential growth in this market niche,
the Canadian company, Kinova Robotics, in 2009 began
commercializing a competing product, called the Jaco
Arm [64.32], with a different design approach. Using
carbon ﬁber segments and lightweight actuator and con-
trol components, the payload speciﬁcations and control
options are approximately the same as for the iARM,
but achieved at a lower arm weight.
Autonomous
navigation
systems
on
electric
wheelchairs began in the 1980s also, beneﬁting initially
from the development by Polaroid Corp. of range
ﬁnders for its cameras using ultrasonic sensors. They
were inexpensive, and small enough, at 30 mm in
diameter, that dozens of them could be placed around
the periphery of a wheelchair to aid medium-range
navigation (
10500 cm). In the 1990s and early
2000s, with the advent of vision-based servoing and
laser-range scanners, algorithms for faster, smarter,
less-error prone navigation and obstacle avoidance
dominated research advances in this sector. In Korea,
for example, Bien et al., at the KAIST Human Welfare
Robotics Center began developing the KARES line
of wheelchair-based navigation systems in the late
1990s [64.33] and the NavChair project at the Univer-
sity of Michigan was the start of a development line
that led to the commercialized Hephaestus system at
the University of Pittsburgh [64.34, 35].
Therapy robots had a later start than assistive robots.
Research on upper extremity therapy robots started
in the mid-1980s with early exercise devices, such
as the BioDex [64.36] a ﬁrst step in programmable,

Part F | 64.1
1690
Part F
Robots at Work
force-controlled, albeit single-axis devices. The ﬁrst
multiaxis concept was published by Khalili and Zom-
lefer [64.37], and the ﬁrst tested system by Erland-
son et al. at Wayne State University emerged in the
mid-1980s as well [64.8]. The RTX manipulator had
a touch-sensitive pad as an end-effector, presenting
targets at different locations for patients with upper
extremity weakness (e.g., following a stroke) to hit af-
ter the screen gave a visual signal. Software logged
response times, thereby providing a score that was tal-
lied and compared to previous sessions. Later robots
used advanced force-based control, which required sig-
niﬁcantly more computer power. The early-1990s saw
the start of the MIT-MANUS Project with Hogan
and Krebs, simple robotic devices designed for bi-
manual therapy after stroke designed by Lum et al.
at U.C. Berkeley [64.38, 39], followed a few years
later by the Palo Alto VA MIME (mirror image mo-
tion enabler) Project [64.40] and its derivative, Driver’s
SEAT [64.41], with Burgar, Van der Loos and Lum, as
well as the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago ARM
Guide Project with Reinkensmeyer et al. [64.42]. Each
had a different philosophy on upper extremity stroke
therapy and each was able to demonstrate clinical effec-
tiveness in a different way. Several of these programs,
now two decades later, have made signiﬁcant technical
advances, and all the investigators are still active in the
ﬁeld. Current work is described in subsequent sections
of this chapter.
Research on lower extremity therapy robots be-
gan with the work of Scherb in 1919 who pro-
posed an approach called mechanotherapy [64.43]. He
also developed a prototype, depicted in Fig. 64.1, of
a cable-driven machine for assisting the motion of
the lower limbs for bedridden patients. In 1976, the
use of a master/slave exoskeleton system for lower
limb therapy was introduced by the French physi-
cians Bel and Rabischong [64.44], who developed
Fig. 64.1 The meridian. A universal machine for applying
passive motion to any joint (after [64.43])
a pneumatically actuated wearable robot to be used
for assisted therapy of paraplegic patients (Fig. 64.2).
The robot movements were remotely controlled by
a therapist who wore a master device capable of sens-
ing and recording the conﬁguration of her/his lower
limbs.
About 20 years later, the Lokomat project for the
development of a stand-alone, programmable wearable
robot for lower extremity was launched and originated
the establishment of the Hocoma company by Colombo
and Hostettler. The ﬁrst prototype of the Lokomat sys-
tem [64.45] was developed in close cooperation with
the Balgrist University Hospital in Zurich and initially
applied to patients who had had spinal cord injuries
(Fig. 64.3b). During the same time, Hesse and Uhlen-
broch developed the Gait Trainer [64.46], (Fig. 64.3a),
which allowed training without the use of a treadmill
by controlling the center of mass (COM) in both in the
vertical and horizontal directions.
In the last decade the growth in rehabilitation
robotics has been characterized by the development of
new devices (as explained above) as well as by new
investigation methods aimed at understanding brain
changes induced by rehabilitation. A recent clinical
study [64.50] conﬁrms that high-intensity, repetitive,
and task-oriented training yields a faster learning and
recovery time. Robots are also a key-enabling tech-
nology for labor-intensive and patient-tailored training
as well as for accurately imposing spatial and tem-
poral constraints within interactive scenarios so as to
augment patient involvement [64.51]. A recent inter-
national online survey, distributed through professional
organizations to therapists, has set out a set of impor-
tant robotic rehabilitation device requirements [64.52],
such as variety of arm movements, biofeedback to
patients, adjustable resistance, and need for virtual
activities. Robots offer the advantage of providing ob-
Fig. 64.2 This machine developed by Professor Ra-
bischong allows the patient in rehabilitation to maintain her
balance while inciting her muscles to move (after [64.47])

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
64.1 Overview
1691
Part F | 64.1
a)
c)
d)
e)
b)
Fig.64.3a–e Gait-training robotic systems in use in clinics; (a) the gait trainer GT-I, developed by Hesse’s group and
commercialized by Reha-Stim (Germany), (b) the Lokomat, developed by Colombo and colleagues and commercial-
ized by Hocoma AG (Switzerland), (c) AutoAmbulator, developed by the HealthSouth Corp. (USA), (d) LokoStation
with Lokohelp (Darkov Spa, Czech Republic; after [64.48]), (e) G-EO Evolution (Panos Th. Skoutas S.A., Greece;
after [64.49])
jective measures of user performance, thus enabling
the development of quantitative kinematic and dynamic
metrics [64.53–56]. The analysis of brain reorgani-
zation and associated clinical outcomes induced by
robot-aided therapy in chronic stroke patients have
shown that motor performance improvement is corre-
lated with changes in inter-hemispheric connectivity
between primary somatosensory areas: for those pa-
tients the connectivity returns to nearly physiological
levels [64.57].
Protocols based on monitoring patient performance,
strength, endurance, and emotional state are being in-
vestigated. Anticipating patient movement intentions
and modeling internal states lead to adaptive patient–
robot interaction control. This approach paves the way
to a new generation of robotic therapy devices using
bio-cooperative controllers, where psychophysiologi-
cal and biomechanical information is used as feedback
for updating robot control [64.58–60]. First exam-
ples of biocooperative controllers can be found in
the robotic platforms developed within the European
projects ECHORD/MAAT [64.56] (multimodal inter-
faces to improve therapeutic outcomes in robot-assisted
rehabilitation) (Fig. 64.4) and MIMICS (multimodal
immersive motion rehabilitation with interactive cog-
nitive systems). Other bio-cooperative controllers have
been developed by Riener and Munih [64.58], who de-
veloped new control strategies applied to lower limb

Part F | 64.2
1692
Part F
Robots at Work
Robot position
and torque
sensors
Physiological sensors
Magneto-inertial sensors
Virtual reality environment
Biological signal amplifier
Fig. 64.4 Set up of the MAAT platform (after [64.61])
Fig. 64.5 PARO, an advanced interactive robot developed
by AIST (after [64.62])
rehabilitation protocols that promote active participa-
tion of patients during training.
Cognitive robotics had started in the early 1980s to
aid children with communication disorders and phys-
ical impairment to achieve a measure of control of
their physical space. Using mostly educational manip-
ulators, several demonstration systems were developed.
In the early 2000s, Latham of Anthrotronix, Inc. com-
mercialized small robot systems to enable children with
physical disabilities to play games with simple inter-
faces. A bit later, small mobile robots were used in
clinics by Dautenhahn and Werry [64.63] with chil-
dren who had autism, since robots have such simple
interfaces that they appear not to be that challeng-
ing as communication with other humans. The early
2000s also saw the advent of pet robots, such as the
Paro seal robot developed by Shibata et al. [64.64]
(Fig. 64.5), as companions for both children and the
elderly who are conﬁned to clinics and have limited
real companionship. This topic is further elaborated in
Chap. 73.
The applications for robotics continues to increase
in number as advances in materials, control software,
higher robustness, and the diminishing size of sen-
sors and actuators allow designers to attempt new ways
of using mechatronics technology to further the well-
being of people with disabilities.
64.2 Rehabilitation Therapy and Training Robots
The
human
neuromuscular
system
exhibits
use-
dependent plasticity, which is to say that use alters the
properties of muscles and neurons, including the pattern
of their connectivity, and thus their function [64.65–
67]. For a detailed description of patient populations
expected to beneﬁt from robot-assisted therapy and
the most common impairments to be treated, which
include incoordination, abnormal synergies, spasticity
and weakness, please see [64.50, 68–70].
64.2.1 Grand Challenges and Roadblocks
The process of neurorehabilitation seeks to exploit
use-dependent plasticity in order to help people to re-
learn how to move following neuromuscular injuries or
diseases. Neurorehabilitation is typically provided by
skilled therapists, including physical, occupational, and
speech therapists. This process is time-consuming, in-
volving daily, intensive movement practice over many

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
64.2 Rehabilitation Therapy and Training Robots
1693
Part F | 64.2
weeks. It is also labor-intensive, requiring hands-on
assistance from therapists. For some tasks, such as
teaching a person with poor balance and weak legs to
walk, this hands-on assistance requires that the ther-
apists have substantial strength and agility to provide
safe and effective interventions.
Because neurorehabilitation is time and labor in-
tensive, in recent years healthcare players have put
limits on the amount of therapy that they will reim-
burse in an effort to contain spiraling healthcare costs.
Ironically, at the same time, there has been increasing
scientiﬁc evidence that more therapy can in many cases
increase movement recovery via use-dependent plastic-
ity [64.71]. As robotics and rehabilitation researchers
began to recognize beginning in the late 1980s, neurore-
habilitation is a logical target for automation because of
its labor-intensive, mechanical nature, and because the
amount of recovery is linked with the amount of repe-
tition. Robots could deliver at least the repetitive parts
of movement therapy at lower cost than human thera-
pists, allowing patients to receive more therapy, recover
more function, remain independent longer, and reduce
downstream healthcare expenses.
The grand challenge for automating movement ther-
apy is determining how to optimize use-dependent
plasticity. That is, researchers in this ﬁeld must deter-
mine what the robot should do in cooperation with the
patient’s own movement attempts in order to maximally
improve movement ability, all the while engaging the
patient. Meeting this challenge involves solving two
key problems: determining appropriate movement tasks
(what movements should patients practice and what
feedback should they receive about their performance),
and determining an appropriate pattern of mechani-
cal input to the patient during these movement tasks
(in other words, at what magnitude, how often, and
in which directions, should the robot apply forces to
the patient’s limb to provoke increased plasticity). The
prescription of movement tasks and mechanical input
fundamentally constrains the mechanical and control
design of the robotic therapy device.
There are three main roadblocks to achieving the
grand challenge. The ﬁrst is a scientiﬁc roadblock:
neither the optimal movement tasks nor the optimal
mechanical inputs are known. The scientiﬁc basis for
neurorehabilitation remains ill-deﬁned, with competing
schools of thought. The number of large, randomized,
controlled trials that have rigorously compared differ-
ent therapy techniques is still small, in part because
these trials are expensive and difﬁcult to control well.
Therefore, the ﬁrst problem that a robotics engineer will
encounter when setting out to build a robotic therapy
device is that there is still substantial uncertainty as to
what exactly the device should do.
This uncertainty corresponds to an opportunity to
use robotic therapy devices as scientiﬁc tools them-
selves. Robotic therapy devices have the potential to
help identify what exactly provokes plasticity dur-
ing movement rehabilitation, because they can provide
well-controlled patterns of therapy. They can also si-
multaneously measure the results of that therapy. Better
control over therapy delivery and improved quantitative
assessment of patient improvement are two desirable
features for clinical trials that have often been lacking in
the past. Recent work with robotic movement training
devices is leading, for example, to the characterization
of computations that underlie motor adaptation, and
then to strategies for enhancing adaptation based on
optimization approaches [64.5, 72, 73]. Early work at
UBC on the characterization of human balance in quiet
standing will lead to the ability to use robotics clinically
to develop new therapies to prevent falls for stroke sur-
vivors and others with balance impairment [64.74, 75].
The second roadblock is a technological one:
robotic therapy devices often have as their goal to as-
sist in therapy of many-body degrees of freedom (e.g.,
the arms and torso for reaching, or the pelvis and legs
for walking). The devices also require a wide dynamic
bandwidth such that they can, for example, impose a de-
sired movement on a patient who is paralyzed, but also
fade-to-nothing as the patient recovers. Further, mak-
ing the devices lightweight enough to be wearable is
desirable, so that the patient can participate in reha-
bilitation in a natural setting (for example, by walking
over ground or working at a counter in a kitchen), or
even throughout the course of normal activities of daily
living. The development of high degree-of-freedom,
wearable, high-bandwidth robotic exoskeletons is an
unsolved problem in robotics, although much progress
has been made toward this goal in the last 10 years,
as described below. Still, no device at present comes
close to matching the ﬂexibility of a human therapist,
in terms of assisting in moving different body degrees
of freedom in a variety of settings (e.g., walking, reach-
ing, grasping, neck movement), or the intelligence of
a human therapist, in terms of providing different forms
of mechanical input (e.g., stretching, assisting, resist-
ing, perturbing) based on a real-time assessment of the
patient’s response.
The third roadblock is maintaining the motivation
and engagement of the patient through the tens of
thousands of repetitions required to achieve meaning-
ful increases in function [64.50] that will carry over to
performing actual ADLs. Rehabilitation can be com-
pared to the exercise required by an athlete to compete
at an elite competition level. By necessity, therapy at
this intensity will have to move largely to the home set-
ting to be economically viable, and therefore motivation

Part F | 64.2
1694
Part F
Robots at Work
becomes the key ingredient of success. Current work fo-
cuses on developing adaptive therapy through robotics
and feedback, embedding therapy in computer games,
music, and sport, and applying motor-learning theo-
ries, for example, the Challenge Point [64.76] model
of keeping people at a desirable difﬁculty level, to
maximize effectiveness and minimize frustration over
the long term [64.76]. Meeting the grand challenge
of robotic therapy therefore will require substantial,
inter-related advances in clinical neuroscience, robot
engineering, and kinesiology.
64.2.2 Movement Therapy After Neurologic
Injury
Modern, evidence-based medicine relies on objective
evaluation and quantitative comparative analysis of the
impact of different therapeutic approaches. Robotics
technology has the potential to boost evidence-based
neurorehabilitation: therapy robots provide precise and
sensitive tools for assessing and modeling human be-
havior, well beyond the capability of a human observer.
This is of paramount importance for enabling appro-
priate initial diagnosis, early adoption of corrective
clinical strategies, and for identifying veriﬁable mile-
stones as well as prognostic indicators of the recovery
process.
Bosecker et al. [64.77] tried to evaluate clinical
scores during upper limb therapy by means of robot-
based metrics; Zollo et al. [64.54, 78] evaluated robotic
therapy exploiting robotic outcome; thus providing
quantitative measure of biomechanical and motion
planning features of arm motor control following upper
limb rehabilitation. A recent study carried out by Krebs
et al. showed that robotic measurements of arm move-
ments after upper limb, robot-aided therapy may estab-
lish biomarkers for motor recovery [64.79]. Similarly,
Domingo and Lam [64.80] tried to apply robot-based
assessment to the lower limb by using the Lokomat sys-
tem and customized software.
Another important advantage of therapy robots is
the possibility that a single operator can effectively
supervise multiple patients, locally or even remotely,
i. e., in a telerehabilitation scenario [64.81]. Therapy
robots can potentially improve patients’ access to reha-
bilitation by providing the opportunity to increase the
duration and the frequency of their therapy experience,
with limitations mainly depending on clinical consider-
ations rather than on other organizational or economic
constraints.
At present, much of the activity in physical ther-
apy and training robots has been focused on retraining
movement ability for individuals who have had a stroke
or SCI, or are affected by CP. The main reasons
for this emphasis are that there are a relatively large
number of patients with these conditions, the rehabil-
itation costs associated with them are high, and because
these patients can sometimes experience large gains
with intensive rehabilitation because of use-dependent
plasticity.
A stroke refers to an obstruction or breakage of
a blood vessel supplying oxygen and nutrients to the
brain. Approximately 800 000 people suffer a stroke
each year in the United States, and about 80% of these
people experience acute movement deﬁcits [64.82]. In
Europe, 1 100 000 people suffered a stroke in 2000,
and they are expected to increase up to 1 500 000 in
2025. There are over 3 000 000 survivors of stroke
in the United States [64.83], with over half of these
individuals experiencing persistent, disabling, move-
ment impairments. Data are similar to those of Europe,
where it has been estimated that between half and
two-thirds of people survive stroke. Of these, half do
not recover fully, and a quarter need assistance in
daily living. While most of the survivors of stroke
are elderly persons, motor impairment from a stroke
affects 3000 of the 10 000 children born with CP
each year [64.83]. While this is a small proportion
of all stroke survivors, the motor function impair-
ment will persist throughout the person’s entire life,
so the impact on independence is disproportionately
large.
The number of people who have experienced and
survived a stroke is expected to increase substantially
in the United States and other industrialized countries
in the next two decades, mostly because age is a risk
factor for stroke and the mean age of people in indus-
trialized countries is rapidly increasing due to the baby
boom of the 1950s, but also because improved acute
treatments will allow more people to survive a stroke,
albeit perhaps with impairment.
The number of people who experience an SCI in
the United States each year is relatively smaller – about
15 000, with about 200 000 people alive who have sur-
vived an SCI – but the consequences can be even more
costly than stroke [64.82]. In Europe, there are about
11 000 new cases of SCI per year, and about 330 000
have survived an SCI [64.84]. The most common causes
of SCI are automobile accidents and falls. These acci-
dents crush the spinal column and contuse the spinal
cord, damaging, or destroying neurons within the spinal
cord. Lower limb robotic therapy has demonstrated
promising results when applied to SCI patients with
incomplete lesions [64.85] although large, systematic,
and randomized controlled trials are still missing. It is
important to note that SCI patients are typically younger
than stroke patients, which may affect their familiarity
with and acceptance of technical aids.

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
64.2 Rehabilitation Therapy and Training Robots
1695
Part F | 64.2
64.2.3 Robotic Therapy
for the Upper Extremity
This section ﬁrst describes early, clinically tested upper
limb therapy robot systems (Fig. 64.6a–e), then more
recent systems.
MIT-MANUS
The ﬁrst robotic therapy device to undergo extensive
clinical testing, and, now, to achieve some commercial
success, is the MIT-MANUS, sold as the InMotion2 by
Interactive Motion, Inc. [64.86]. MIT-MANUS is a pla-
nar two-joint arm that makes use of the SCARA con-
ﬁguration, allowing two large, mechanically grounded
motors to drive a lightweight linkage. The patient sits
across from the device, with the weaker hand attached
to the end-effector, and the arm supported on a table
with a low-friction support. By virtue of the use of the
SCARA conﬁguration, the MIT-MANUS is perhaps the
simplest possible mechanical design that allows planar
movements while also allowing a large range of forces
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
Fig.64.6a–e Arm-therapy robotic systems that have undergone extensive clinical testing; (a) MIT-MANUS, developed
by Hogan, Krebs, and colleagues at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (USA), (b) MIME, developed at the
Department of Veterans Affairs in Palo Alto in collaboration with Stanford University (USA), (c) GENTLE/s developed
in the EU, (d) ARM-Guide, developed at the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago and the University of California, Irvine
(USA), and (e) Bi-Manu-Track, developed by Reha-Stim (Germany)
to be applied to the arm without requiring force feed-
back control.
MIT-MANUS assists the patient in moving the arm
across the table-top as the patient plays simple video
games, such as moving a cursor into a target that
changes locations on a computer screen. Assistance is
achieved using a position controller with an adjustable
impedance. Additional modules have been developed
for the device for allowing vertical motion [64.87],
wrist motion [64.88], and hand grasp [64.89]. Software
has been developed for providing graded resistance as
well as assistance to movement [64.90], and for varying
the ﬁrmness and timing of assistance based on real-time
measurements of the patient’s performance on the video
games [64.91].
MIT-MANUS has undergone extensive clinical test-
ing in several studies, summarized as follows. The ﬁrst
clinical test of the device compared the motor recov-
ery of acute stroke patients who received an additional
dose of robot therapy on top of their conventional
therapy, to that of a control group, who received con-

Part F | 64.2
1696
Part F
Robots at Work
ventional therapy and a brief, sham exposure to the
robot [64.92]. The robot group patients received the ad-
ditional robotic therapy for an hour each day, ﬁve days
per week, for several weeks. The robot group recov-
ered more arm movement ability than the control group
according to clinical scales, without any increase in ad-
verse effects such as shoulder pain. The improvements
might subjectively be characterized as small but some-
what meaningful to the patient. The improvements were
sustained at a three-year follow-up.
This ﬁrst study with MIT-MANUS demonstrated
that acute stroke patients who received more therapy re-
cover better, and that this extra therapy can be delivered
by a robotic device. It did not answer the question as to
whether the robotic features of the robotic device were
necessary. In other words, it may have been that pa-
tients would have also improved their movement ability
if they had practiced additional movements with MIT-
MANUS with the motor’s off (thus making it equivalent
to a computer mouse), simply by virtue of the increased
dose of movement practice stimulating use-dependent
plasticity. Thus, while this study indicated the promise
of robots for rehabilitation therapy, it did not close the
gap of knowledge as to how external mechanical forces
provoke use-dependent plasticity.
Subsequent studies with MIT-MANUS have con-
ﬁrmed that robotic therapy can also beneﬁt chronic
stroke patients [64.93]. The device has been used
to analyze different types of therapies, for exam-
ple, to compare assisting movement versus resisting
movement in chronic stroke subjects, but with in-
conclusive results: both types of therapies produced
beneﬁts [64.90]. The device has also been used to
compare assistive robot therapy with another techno-
logical approach to rehabilitation – electrical stim-
ulation of ﬁnger and wrist muscles [64.94]. Again,
signiﬁcant beneﬁts were found for both therapies, and
those beneﬁts were speciﬁc to the movements prac-
ticed, but the beneﬁts were not signiﬁcantly different
between therapies. We note that the lack of a sig-
niﬁcant difference in these studies may simply be
due to the limited number of patients who partici-
pated in these studies (i. e., inadequate study power),
rather than a close similarity of the effectiveness of the
therapies.
As mentioned above, the MIT-MANUS device was
recently tested in a multisite clinical trial funded by
the Department of Veterans Affairs in the United
States [64.50]. This study compared clinical outcomes
in chronic stroke survivors who were randomized to
three groups: usual care, robot-assisted therapy with
arm, wrist, and hand modules, and one-on-one therapy
with a rehabilitation therapist that was dose matched to
the robotic therapy in terms of the number of move-
ments achieved per therapy session. The robot-assisted
therapy group improved their movement ability more
than the usual care, and about the same as the dose-
matched group. This is an important ﬁnding for the
ﬁeld, as it demonstrated with the highest scientiﬁc rigor
that robotic therapy was about as effective as an intense,
therapist-delivered therapy.
A cost-beneﬁt analysis of this study suggested that
although both robotic and intense, therapist-based ther-
apies were more expensive to deliver than usual care, it
reduced long-term follow-up costs, so that the total cost
of care of the patients was the same over the duration of
the study [64.95]. Thus, as the cost of robotic therapy
devices decreases, it should be possible to provide pa-
tients with improved outcomes while reducing the cost
of therapy – another important ﬁnding.
MIME
Another early system to undergo clinical testing was
the MIME (mirror-image movement enhancer) system,
which used a Puma-560 robot arm to assist in move-
ment of the patient’s arm [64.96]. The device is attached
to the hand through a customized splint and a connec-
tor that is designed to break away if interaction forces
become too large. Compared to MIT-MANUS, the de-
vice allows more naturalistic motion of the arm because
of its six degrees of freedom (DOF), but must rely on
force feedback so that the patient can drive the robot
arm. Four control modes were developed for MIME.
In the passive mode, the patient relaxes and the robot
moves the arm through a desired pattern. In the ac-
tive assist mode, the patient initiates a reach toward
a target, indicated by physical cones on a table top,
which then triggers a smooth movement of the robot
toward the target. In the active-constrained mode, the
device acts as a sort of virtual ratchet, allowing move-
ment toward the target, but preventing the patient from
moving away from the target. Finally, in the mirror-
image mode, the motion of the patient’s less impaired
arm is measured with a digitizing linkage, and the
impaired arm is controlled to follow along in a mirror-
symmetric path. The initial clinical test of MIME found
that chronic stroke patients who received therapy with
the device improved their movement ability about as
much as patients who received conventional table-top
exercises with an occupational therapist [64.96]. The
robot group even surpassed the gains from human-
delivered therapy for the outcome measures of reaching
the range of motion and strength at key joints of the
arm. A follow-on study attempted to elucidate which of
the control modes or what combination of MIME ex-
ercises caused the gains, but was inconclusive [64.97].
A multisite randomized control of MIME again funded
by the Department of Veterans Affairs compared the

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
64.2 Rehabilitation Therapy and Training Robots
1697
Part F | 64.2
effect of a high-dose (30 h) of additional therapy with
MIME, to a lower dose (15 h), to 15 h of additional con-
ventional therapy in 54 acute stroke patients [64.98].
Gains in the primary outcome measure, the Fugl-Meyer
assessment, were not signiﬁcantly different between the
groups at the 6-month follow-up, although there the ac-
tual dose of robotic therapy patients received predicted
their recovery.
ARM Guide
The question of the effect of robot forces on movement
recovery was also left unresolved by a study with an-
other device, the ARM Guide, which is a trombone-like
device that can be oriented then locked in different di-
rections, and can assist people in reaching in a straight
line. Chronic stroke patients who received assistance
during reaching with the robot improved their move-
ment ability [64.99]. However, they improved about
as much as a control group that simply practiced
a matched number of reaches without assistance from
the robot. This suggests that movement effort by the
patient is a key factor for recovery, although the small
sample size of this study limited the ability to resolve
the size of the difference between guided and unguided
therapies.
Bi-Manu-Track
Perhaps the most striking clinical results generated
so far have come from one of the simplest devices
built. Similar to a design proposed previously by Lum
et al. [64.39], the Bi-Manu-Track uses two motors, one
for each hand, to allow bimanual wrist-ﬂexion exten-
sion [64.100]. The device can also assist in forearm
pronation/supination if it is tilted downward and the
handles are changed. In an extensive clinical test of
the device, 22 subacute patients (i. e., 46 weeks af-
ter stroke) practiced 800 movements with the device
for 20 minutes per day, ﬁve days per week for six
weeks [64.100]. For half the movements, the device
drove both arms, and for the other half, the patient’s
stronger arm drove the motion of the more impaired
arm. A control group received a matched duration
of electrical stimulation (ES) of their wrist extensor
muscles, with the stimulation triggered by voluntary ac-
tivation of their muscles when possible, as measured
by electromyography (EMG). The number of move-
ments performed with EMG-triggered ES was 60–80
per session. The robot-trained group improved by 15
points more on the Fugl-Meyer scale, a standard clini-
cal scale of movement ability with a range from 0 to 66
points in upper extremity function. It assigns a score
of 0 (cannot complete), 1 (completes partially), or 2
(completes normally) for 33 test movements, such as
lifting the arm without ﬂexing the elbow. For compar-
ison, reported gains in Fugl-Meyer score after therapy
with the MIT-MANUS and MIME devices ranged from
0 to 5points [64.101].
Other Early Devices to Undergo Clinical Testing
Other early devices to undergo clinical testing are as
follows. The GENTLE/s system uses a commercial
robot, the HapticMaster, to assist in patient movement
as the patient plays video games. The HapticMas-
ter allows four degrees of freedom of movement and
achieves a high bandwidth of force control using force
feedback. Chronic stroke patients who exercised with
GENTLE/s improved their movement ability [64.102,
103]. The Rutgers ARM robotic device uses low-
friction pneumatic cylinders to help extend or ﬂex the
ﬁngers, and has been shown to improve hand move-
ment ability of chronic stroke subjects [64.104]. Simple
force-feedback controlled devices, including a 1-DOF
wrist manipulator and a 2-DOF elbow–shoulder ma-
nipulator, were also recently shown to improve move-
ment ability of chronic stroke subjects who exercised
with the devices [64.105]. A passive exoskeleton, the
T-WREX arm orthosis, provides support to the arm
against gravity using elastic bands, while still allow-
ing a large range of motion of the arm [64.106]. By
incorporating a simple hand-grasp sensor, this device
allows substantially weakened patients to practice sim-
ple virtual reality exercises that simulate functional
tasks such as shopping and cooking. Chronic stroke
patients who practiced exercising with this nonrobotic
device recovered signiﬁcant amounts of movement abil-
ity, comparable with the Fugl-Meyer gains seen with
MIT-MANUS and MIME. A randomized controlled
trial of T-WREX in 28 chronic stroke subjects com-
pared therapy with the device to conventional, table-top
therapy [64.107] and found that the device was slightly
more effective in improving patient’s motor ability at
the six-month follow-up according to the primary out-
come measure, the Fugl-Meyer score, and that patients
strongly preferred exercising with the device. T-WREX
has been commercialized as the Armeo Spring upper
extremity training device by Hocoma, and was in use
in over 500 clinics as of early 2014, with published
reports studying its use for individuals with multiple
sclerosis [64.108], SCI [64.109], and proximal humeral
fracture [64.110]. NeReBot is a 3-DOF wire-based
robot that can slowly move a stroke patient’s arm in spa-
tial paths. Acute stroke patients who received additional
movement therapy beyond their conventional rehabil-
itation therapy with NeReBot recovered signiﬁcantly
more movement ability than patients who received just
conventional rehabilitation therapy [64.111]. RehaRob
uses an industrial robot arm to mobilize patients’ arms
along arbitrary trajectories following stroke [64.112].

Part F | 64.2
1698
Part F
Robots at Work
Further Research and Developments
on Robotic Therapy for the Upper Extremity
One recent trend in the ﬁeld is to develop devices
that can provide therapy for a larger number of de-
grees of freedom of the arm. For example, at the high
end of cost and complexity are the ARMin [64.113],
Pneu-WREX [64.114], and BONES [64.115], which
are exoskeletons that accommodate nearly naturalis-
tic movement of the arm while still achieving a wide
range of force control. A system that couples a im-
mersive virtual reality display with a haptic robot
arm is described in [64.116]. A wearable exoskeleton
driven by pneumatic muscles is described in [64.117].
Several other exoskeletal machines have been pro-
posed to jointly train arm and wrist, such as the
CADEN-7, an anthropometric 7-DOF powered ex-
oskeleton system [64.118]; the SUEFEL-7, which
exploits EMG signals to adjust impedance param-
eters [64.119]; a lightweight exoskeleton described
in [64.120], and the highly redundant 9-DOFs machine
introduced in [64.121].
Another area of active development in robotic ther-
apy devices for the upper extremity is to devices that
can be used at home or in rank-and-ﬁled clinics. For
example, at the lower end of cost/complexity are de-
vices that use force feedback joysticks and steering
wheels with a view toward implementation in the
home [64.114–125]. In 2008, a planar machine for up-
per limb rehabilitation designed for delivering at-home
neurorehabilitation, namely CBM MOTUS, was devel-
oped and patented [64.126] (Fig. 64.7). Such a device
has low inertia and highly isotropic behavior. Recently,
a passive module has been developed to be installed
on the CBM-MOTUS, able to further reduce robot
perceived inertia when the machine is moved by the pa-
tient, while being highly rigid when the machine assists
the patient’s movements.
As far as wearable robotic systems for the upper
limb are concerned, Hocoma engineered and com-
a)
b)
Fig.64.7a,b CBM Motus robot for upper limb rehabilitation (after [64.127])
mercialized the ARMEO power system, and also the
ArmeoSpring and ArmeoBoom machines [64.108].
A third area in robotic therapy devices for the
upper extremity that has received increased attention
is to develop devices for hand rehabilitation, since
hand movement ability is essential for functional re-
covery. Examples of recent, novel robotic devices
for the hand are the Haptic Knob for grasping and
wrist pronation/supination [64.128]; the HandCARE,
a cable-actuated rehabilitation system [64.129]; a de-
vice for repeating controlled passive movements of
paralyzed ﬁngers given in [64.130]; the exoskeletal ma-
chines HWARD [64.131], and HEXORR [64.132] to
help open and close the hand; the 18-DOFs highly
redundant Gifu Haptic Interface [64.133], able to pro-
duce adduction–abduction and ﬂexion–extension ﬁnger
movements. Other devices are presented in [64.134–
138], and a review of robotic therapy of the hand
is given in [64.139]. One robotic therapy system for
the hand incorporates the idea of using visual feed-
back distortion to enhance motivation of patients during
movement therapy [64.140]. A few commercial ma-
chines are available, such as the Reha-Digit, Amadeo,
and ManovoSpring.
Based on the availability of modular hand, wrist,
and shoulder–elbow therapeutic robotic devices, some
recent studies tried to tackle the fundamental question
of whether proximal or distal treatment differentially
affect the recovery of arm/hand function. For more
information of these preliminary studies, see refer-
ences [64.100, 141, 142].
An important recent development in robotic ther-
apy devices is the development of devices that can be
used in conjunction with the instrumentation needed to
measure neurophysiological signals, such as functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)-compatible sys-
tems [64.143, 144] or, more generally, brain-imaging
(BI)-compatible robotic systems that can be used in
conjunction not only with fMRI but also with magne-

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
64.2 Rehabilitation Therapy and Training Robots
1699
Part F | 64.2
toencephalography (MEG), transcranial magnetic stim-
ulation (TMS), repetitive TMS (rTMS), transcranial
direct current stimulation (tDCS), near infrared spec-
troscopy (NIRS) and other brain imaging and stimula-
tion equipment. Such devices are notable because they
will allow a systematic scientiﬁc study of neural recov-
ery during robotic therapy. Developing these devices
requires dealing with the problems of electromagnetic
compatibility and interaction.
Recently, a few fMRI-compatible devices for hand
rehabilitation have been designed to acquire functional
imaging while performing therapeutic exercises, such
as the exoskeletal machine in [64.145]; the pneu-
matic actuated 2-DOF device to help wrist prona-
tion/supination and hand open/closure in [64.146]; ma-
chines driven by electro-rheological ﬂuids, able to pro-
vide a variable resistance to patient motion [64.147];
the planar device to help move ﬁngers described
in [64.148]. A passive fMRI-compatible manipulan-
dum morphologically similar to MIT-MANUS has
been developed and tested to acquire functional imag-
ing in [64.149]. Another study proposed the appli-
cations of a brain–computer interface (BCI) therapy
approach on a cohort of stroke patients, [64.150];
a magnetoencephalography-based BCI system is used
which in turn raised or lowered a screen cursor in the
direction of a target. Results suggest that volitional con-
trol of neuromagnetic activity features recorded over
central scalp regions can be achieved with BCI training
after stroke.
Finally, the primary paradigm that has been tested
so far with upper extremity robotics is to assist patients
in moving, a strategy which may in some cases have the
unintended affect of causing patients to slack [64.151].
In general, the ﬁeld is still relatively undeveloped in
its ability to identifying the most appropriate forms of
robotic intervention given the nature of the impairment
and the patient. For example, an approach opposite to
physical assistance, which is using robotic force ﬁelds
to amplify the kinematic errors of stroke patients during
reaching, may provoke novel forms of the adaptation of
those patterns [64.4, 152]. A major emphasis of the ﬁeld
in the next 10 years will be improving the mechanis-
tic understanding of how robotic interaction inﬂuences
brain plasticity.
64.2.4 Robotic Therapy for Walking
Scientiﬁc evidence that gait training improves the re-
covery of mobility after neurologic injury started to
accumulate in the 1980s through studies with cats.
Cats with SCI can be trained to step with their hind
limbs on a treadmill with the partial support of body
weight and assistance of leg movements [64.153, 154].
Following the animal studies, various laboratories de-
veloped a rehabilitation approach in which the patient
steps on a treadmill with the body weight partially
supported by an overhead harness and assistance from
therapists [64.155–158]. Depending on the patient’s im-
pairment level, from one to three therapists are needed
for BWSTT (body-weight supported treadmill train-
ing), with one therapist assisting in stabilizing and
moving the pelvis, while two additional therapists sit
next to the treadmill and assist the patient’s legs in
swing and stance. This type of training is based on the
principle of generating normative, locomotor-like sen-
sory input that promotes the functional reorganization
and recovery of the injured neural circuitry [64.159].
In the 1990s, several independent studies indicated that
BWSTT improves stepping in people with SCI or hemi-
plegia after stroke [64.155–157].
Gait training is particularly labor-intensive and
strenuous for therapists, so it is an important target for
automation. The efforts of roboticists have been es-
pecially focused on BWSTT rather than over-ground
gait training because BWSTT is done on a station-
ary setup in a well-deﬁned manner and thus can be
more easily automated than over-ground gait train-
ing. Randomized, controlled clinical trials have shown
that BWSTT is comparable in effectiveness to con-
ventional physical therapy for various gait-impairing
diseases [64.160–166]. These trials support the efforts
toward the automation of BWSTT, as the working
conditions of physical therapists will improve if the
robots do much of the physical work, which, in the
case of BWSTT, actually leads to occasional back in-
juries to therapists. Usually, only one therapist is needed
in robot-assisted training, for the tasks of helping the
patient into and out of the robot and monitoring the ther-
apy. In the case of SCI patients, a small randomized,
controlled trial [64.161] reported that robotic-assisted
BWSTT with a ﬁrst-generation robot required signif-
icantly less labor than both conventional overground
training and therapist-assisted BWSTT, with no signif-
icant difference found in effectiveness.
Gait-Training Robots in Current Clinical Use
Some gait-training robot systems are commercially
available and are used for therapy in several clin-
ics worldwide, such as the gait trainer GT-I [64.46],
the Lokomat [64.45] the ReoAmbulator, the Loko-
Help
[64.167],
and
the
G-EO
System
[64.168]
(Fig. 64.3a–e).
Of these robots, the GT-I (commercialized by Reha-
Stim) is the one that departs most from therapist-
assisted BWSTT, since it interacts with the patient’s
lower limbs through two footplates rather than act-
ing on the shank as human therapists do. It also ap-

Part F | 64.2
1700
Part F
Robots at Work
pears to depart more from natural walking because
the footplate principle substantially alters the sensory
cues of the foot impact with the ground or treadmill
band. The GT-I footplates are driven by a singly ac-
tuated mechanism that moves the foot along a ﬁxed
gait-like trajectory with a doubled crank and rocker sys-
tem [64.46]. The stride length can be adjusted between
sessions by changing gears. The body weight is un-
loaded as needed by an overhead harness. The torso
is moved sagittally in a phase-dependent manner by
ropes attached to the harness and connected by another
crank to the foot crank. The GT-I is currently installed
in dozens of clinics, mainly in Europe. One random-
ized, controlled study has been reported that tested the
GT-I with 30 subacute stroke patients [64.169]. The
robot group improved their overground walking abil-
ity more than the control group, although differences
were not signiﬁcant at a 6-month follow-up. A total of
80% of the patients said they preferred training with the
robot rather than the therapists because training with
the robot was less demanding and more comfortable.
The other 20% of patients stated that swinging of the
paretic limb seemed less natural and thus less effective
when training with the robot. Robot-assisted training re-
quired an average of one therapist per patient, while
therapist-assisted training required two therapists per
patient on average. A follow-up, randomized controlled
study comparing conventional training plus robotic
training with the GTI, to a time-matched amount of con-
ventional training alone with subacute stroke patients,
found that the group that received some robotic train-
ing recovery walking ability to a great extent [64.170].
More recent clinical tests with the GT I are reported
in [64.171].
The Lokomat (commercialized by Hocoma) is
a robotic exoskeleton worn by the patients during
treadmill walking [64.45]. Four motorized joints (two
per leg) move hip and knee. The actuators consist
of ball screws connected to dc motors. The legs are
driven in a gait-like pattern along a ﬁxed position-
controlled trajectory. The device attaches to the thighs
and shanks through padded straps. A parallelogram
mechanism allows the vertical translation of the pa-
tient’s torso, restricting lateral translation. The patient’s
body weight is actively unloaded as needed through
an overhead harness. The Lokomat is currently be-
ing used in over 100 clinics worldwide. In 2005, Wirz
et al. [64.85] reported preliminary results of robot-
assisted BWSTT with the Lokomat in 20 chronic
incomplete SCI patients. The improvements in over-
ground walking speed and endurance were statistically
signiﬁcant: approximately 50% gain on average in
the 16 patients who were ambulatory before training.
There were no signiﬁcant changes in the requirement
of walking aids, orthoses, or external physical assis-
tance. The improvements appear to be comparable
to those achieved by similar SCI patients who re-
ceived therapist-assisted BWSTT [64.161, 172]). For
the case of stroke patients, however, therapy with the
Lokomat was beneﬁcial but about half as effective as
treadmill-based or therapist-based training in improv-
ing overground gait velocity and endurance [64.173,
174].
The ReoAmbulator (commercialized by Motorika
and marketed in the United States as AutoAmbulator)
consists of two robotic arms that assist patients to step
on a treadmill with their body weight supported as
needed. The interface to the patient’s legs is through
straps at the thigh and ankle. The ReoAmbulator is
currently being used in at least 57 HealthSouth reha-
bilitation centers, all of them in the United States, but
little data have been published concerning its use.
The LokoHelp
(commercialized
by
LokoHelp
Group) assists users’ feet motion along physiological
trajectories while walking on a treadmill, also providing
body weight support. Clinical trials [64.167, 171, 175]
show that therapeutic outcomes are similar to manual
training with reduced therapist effort.
The G-EO system (commercialized by Reha Tech-
nology) is also based on the footplate principle as for
the GT I system. Studies with stroke survivors [64.176],
patients with SCI [64.177] and with Parkinson’s dis-
ease [64.178] have recently shown the value of this
particular device.
Further Research and Developments
on Robotic Therapy for Walking
Several groups worldwide are working toward improv-
ing gait-training robotic technologies. A great deal of
effort has been made to incorporate and investigate the
ability to assist as needed [64.72, 179–183], that is,
the ability of the robot to let the patients contribute to
the locomotor efforts as much as they are able. This
is likely essential for maximizing locomotor plastic-
ity [64.184]. Some effort has also been directed toward
adding more active DOFs, particularly for torso manip-
ulation [64.182, 185]. These robotic tools are needed
not only for their potential clinical use in therapy, but
for studying what aspects of the assistance are impor-
tant for effective gait training and how best to control
and implement them with robotic devices.
The team responsible for the GT-1 has developed
the Haptic Walker [64.179], which maintains the per-
manent foot/machine contact but allows the footplates
to move along 3-DOF trajectories. In addition, it incor-
porates force feedback and compliance control, as well
as haptic simulation of ground conditions (e.g., stair
climbing).

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
64.2 Rehabilitation Therapy and Training Robots
1701
Part F | 64.2
An advanced version of the Lokomat integrates
force sensors and automatic adaptation of gait patterns
to allow for a reduction of the interaction effort between
patient persons and machine [64.180]. It has been tested
on unimpaired persons and SCI patients, who were able
to inﬂuence the gait trajectories toward a more desired
motion by means of their own motor activity [64.180,
186].
PAM is a 5-DOF robot for torso manipulation, and
POGO is a leg robot with 2-DOF per leg. PAM’s and
POGO’s actuators are pneumatic, which cost less than
electric motors and have higher power-to-weight ra-
tios [64.185]. The robots’ ability to control forces and
yield to patients and/or therapists has been tested with
unimpaired and SCI participants [64.187]. Of particular
note here is the development of an adaptive synchro-
nization algorithm that allows these compliant robots to
provide assistance at the right time as the participants
varies the timing or size of steps.
Based on the string-puppet principle, the String-
Man achieves weight bearing and compliant 6-DOF
torso manipulation by means of seven wires and a force
sensor on each wire [64.182]. In addition, a control
scheme has been designed for the String-Man to control
both the zero-moment-point location and the ground re-
action force with help of foot force sensors.
Veneman et al. [64.189] developed the LOPES ex-
oskeleton (lower extremity powered exoskeleton) visi-
ble in Fig. 64.8. In this system, two horizontal pelvis
translations are actuated, while the vertical motion is
left free and weight is compensated. Furthermore, the
LOPES have three actuated rotational joints per leg: two
at the hip and one at the knee. The actuation system
for hip and knee ﬂexion/extension [64.183] combines
Bowden cables with series elastic actuation. The Bow-
a)
b)
Fig.64.8a,b LOPES (lower-extremity
powered exoskeleton) device for gait
training and assessment of motor
function in stroke survivors (af-
ter [64.188])
den cables allow the motors to be mounted remotely in
a ﬁxed position, thus reducing the mass to be moved
on the exoskeleton links. The spring element connect-
ing the Bowden cables with the joint allows the closing
of a torque feedback control loop with a position sensor
that measures the spring elongation, a concept inspired
from the series elastic actuators (SEAs) described by
Pratt and coworkers [64.190].
Veneman et al.’s experimental results on LOPES
SEAs show that adequate torque control bandwidth
was achieved by the prototype of their Bowden-cable-
based actuation design [64.183], so that the robot
can execute both a stiff, position-dominated robot-in-
charge mode and a compliant, low-impedance patient-
in-charge mode. Some results on the testing of the
LOPES exoskeleton are presented in [64.192–194].
The FET European project Evolving Morphologies
for Human–Robot Symbiotic Interaction (EVRYON)
investigated a novel approach for the design of wearable
robots in which robot morphology and control are co-
evolved in a physics-based simulation environment to
achieve a symbiotic interaction, with useful behaviors
(walking patterns) emerging from the dynamic interac-
tion between the robot and the human body. To narrow
the search space, an atlas of topologies of robot archi-
tectures assisting hip and knee ﬂexion/extension was
produced [64.195], showing that only ten topologies
are capable of providing independent assistance to hip
and knee if the number of robot links is not higher
than 4 and only revolute joints are considered. The
kinematic structures (morphologies) descending from
such topologies do not require the alignment of robot
and human joints (nonanthropomorphism), thus possi-
bly shortening calibration time and limiting wearability
issues. Among the abovementioned ten topologies, only

Part F | 64.2
1702
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
Fig.64.9a,b EVRYON/LENAR.
(a) Wearable robot to assist hip and
(b) knee ﬂexion/extension through
series elastic actuators (after [64.191])
one allows us to mechanically (intrinsically) minimize
unwanted shear forces while keeping encumbrance low.
A morphology belonging to this topology class was
optimized to minimize reaction forces on the human
body [64.196] and to maximize wearability and back-
drivability [64.197]. Based on this study, the lower ex-
tremity nonanthropomorphic robot (LENAR) [64.191]
was developed (Fig. 64.9), incorporating custom-made
series-elastic actuators for a robust interaction con-
trol [64.198].
A different approach to gait training was taken with
the KineAssist device [64.199]. KineAssist (Fig. 64.10)
is a motorized mobile platform that follows the patient
and therapist as they move overground and incorporates
a smart brace that compliantly supports the patient’s
trunk and pelvis. This smart support is designed to al-
low the therapist to adjust its stiffness from fully rigid
down to fully compliant. Within a safety zone, the fully
compliant mode allows patients to challenge the limits
of their stability. A compliant virtual wall catches the
patients when they lose balance. The location of this
virtual wall is also adjustable. The body weight can be
unloaded as needed. The main advantage of this system
is the possibility for the therapist to work in close con-
tact with the patient while cooperating with the robotic
system, which deals with the crucial, basic task to keep
the patient stable and safe. From this research plat-
form, HDT Robotics began commercialization of the
KineAssist-MX. Actuation and sensors allow interac-
tive force-ﬁeld environments so that a wide variety of
challenging mobility experiences can be delivered to
the user.
Other
efforts
include
Ferris
and
cowork-
ers [64.202], who are developing foot, ankle, knee, and
hip orthoses actuated by artiﬁcial pneumatic muscles
that may possibly be used to assist in gait training.
The Rutgers Ankle is a 6-DOF pneumatic system
based on a Stewart Platform that allows exercise of the
ankle [64.203]. Also in the United States, Agrawal’s
group proposes the use of gravity-balancing leg or-
thoses for people with gait impairments to practice
walking [64.204]. Their designs allow the orthoses
to passively support the gravity torque required at
the patient’s joints. This approach would have the
advantage of being safer than powerful robots for
clinical use. They have also extended their design
Fig. 64.10 KINE
ASSIST for
unobtrusive sup-
port to patients,
allowing them
to walk on their
own, or with
variable levels
of support (af-
ter [64.200])

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
64.3 Aids for People with Disabilities
1703
Part F | 64.3
Fig. 64.11 Active
leg exoskele-
ton (ALEX)
to supplement
traditional re-
habilitation
therapy (af-
ter [64.201])
to include actuators with reduced torque require-
ments [64.205]. A robot has been used to provide
graded body weight support as a patient who cannot
bear full body weight because of a medical problem
walks in a circle [64.206]. Banala et al. developed the
treadmill-based rehabilitation robot ALEX [64.207],
as seen in Fig. 64.11. In this system, hip and knee
joints are actuated in the sagittal plane while hip ab-
duction/adduction and ankle motion are spring-loaded.
More details and further examples of robotic systems
for walking therapy are reported in [64.208].
Other Robotic Movement Therapy Approaches
As reviewed earlier, most of the work to date in robotic
therapy devices has focused on robots that are attached
to patients to assist them in practicing reaching or walk-
ing exercises. Other early proposals for using robots
for movement therapy included using two planar robot
arms to carefully control continuous passive motion
of the knee following joint surgery [64.37], and using
a multiaxis robot arm to place targets for patients do-
ing reaching exercises [64.209]. An emerging approach
toward robotic movement therapy is to provide the ther-
apy at a distance, in a form of telerehabilitation, in
order to improve accessibility to the therapy [64.81,
123, 210]. Non-contacting, socially assistive robots, as
reviewed in Chap. 73, may play an important role in
motivating and monitoring therapy.
64.3 Aids for People with Disabilities
Enabling technologies assist people with disabilities to
achieve a quality of life on a par with able-bodied in-
dividuals through increased functional independence.
The main issue with most such technologies is that dis-
ability has a highly individualized impact: a solution for
one person will not work for someone else, even if their
disabilities appear clinically similar.
64.3.1 Grand Challenges
and Enabling Technologies
The more a disability impacts function, the more costly
the technical intervention tends to be, since the con-
sumer market cannot beneﬁt from economies of scale
if each solution must be individualized. As an extreme
example, an electric wheelchair with individualized
padding, motorized recliner, and customized joystick
control costs as much as a mass-produced mid-sized
automobile, but has a fraction of the electronics, ro-
bustness, and functions. A grand challenge for assistive,
enabling technologies is to ﬁnd a means to make mass-
personalization possible, as it has been in the automo-
tive industry, for example. One component is designer
focus. If we can re-badge assistive technology as de-
sign for well-being products, the change in focus from
ﬁxing people to improving their quality of life will
have the effect of mainstreaming disability itself so that
manufacturers of consumer equipment tend to develop
products that can explicitly accommodate a much wider
range of functional abilities and therefore provide ben-
eﬁt to a larger, overall less-able, consumer base. As the
average age of the baby boomers climbs into retirement
years with signiﬁcant disposable income, this segment
will compel the market into providing better solutions
to their well-being needs.
Another grand challenge is robotic autonomy. Espe-
cially for persons with reduced communication, phys-
ical and/or cognitive abilities, a rehabilitation robot
will need to have sensory (e.g., vision, auditory) and
motor capabilities, combined with its own software
processing capabilities (also termed artiﬁcial intelli-
gence), that make it a sufﬁciently safe and capa-
ble system to coexist with and beneﬁt humans. This
challenge will to some extent be dependent on con-
tinuing increases in computer-processing power, and
also speciﬁcally dependent on the algorithmic devel-
opments that issue from the community of robotics
researchers.
For instance, several advanced navigation assis-
tive tools for blind and visually impaired persons have

Part F | 64.3
1704
Part F
Robots at Work
been developed by exploiting knowledge and tech-
nologies directly derived from research on autonomous
robot navigation; as a sample, Borenstein and Ulrich in
1997 developed the GuideCane [64.211], an intelligent
cane, based on ultrasound proximity sensor technology,
which was designed to help blind or visually im-
paired travellers to navigate safely and quickly among
obstacles and other hazards faced by blind pedestri-
ans [64.212].
Research on robotic aids (namely physically assis-
tive robots or, also, contact assistive robots) has so
far primarily targeted persons with mobility and ma-
nipulation limitations, rather than children and adults
with cognitive impairments [64.213, 214]. However,
increases in the prevalence of cognitive impairments re-
lated to aging will make the latter focus increasingly
important. Socially assistive robots, also named con-
tactless assistive robots, are emerging assistive systems
that focus on helping human users through social rather
than physical interaction (see Chap. 73 for more de-
tails on socially assistive robots). Research has been
limited to the mobility focus due to the difﬁculty of
designing and developing intrinsically safe robots that
can coexist with people and exhibit a certain amount of
autonomy while performing useful work. Robots, there-
fore, today rely on user vigilance and explicit control to
be safe. If the user does not have the cognitive capac-
ity to evaluate a robot’s safety situation or the ability
to communicate efﬁciently, then the positive value of
a function-enhancing robot is nulliﬁed by the harm that
it could inﬂict on the user or bystanders. Coupled with
the fact that the design of interfaces to personal robots is
still in its infancy, a challenge for robotic aid developers
is a signiﬁcant improvement in intrinsic safety without
a decrease in function (strength, speed, etc.) from what
is typical today in industrial robotics.
To address some of these challenges, the US gov-
ernment, through NSF, NIH and other federal agencies,
in 2011 issued a call for a $ 50 million per year, 5-
year program called the National Robotics Initiative
(NRI) [64.215]. The realization of co-robots acting in
the direct support of individuals and groups. A substan-
tial amount of this funding is focused on healthcare of
the future.
Disabilities and Functional Limitations Served
by Robotic Aids
Assistive robots have been designed for people who
have become severely disabled as a result of, for ex-
ample, muscular dystrophy or a high-level SCI, for
children who have CP, and more generally for any-
one who lacks the ability to manipulate household
objects. A market research study conducted 10 years
ago, speciﬁcally for rehabilitation robotics clients, con-
servatively projected a US market of 100 000 peo-
ple [64.216]. With the incidence of disability increasing
exponentially, and the niches that robots can ﬁll in re-
habilitation applications multiplying with advances in
robotics and rehabilitation science, it is clear that the
market for rehabilitation robotics can only continue to
increase.
Human–Robot Interface Design
for Assistive Robots
A fundamental difference between using industrial and
assistive robots is the interface required to command,
control, and ultimately beneﬁt from them. An industrial
robot commonly has a combination of a manual con-
troller and a programming language interface to allow
an operator to teach a robot where to go and to enter
the speciﬁc motion, grasping, tool changing, and error-
recovery steps it must follow repeatedly in its factory
automation scenario. An assistive robot, on the other
hand, typically has three main differences and chal-
lenges:
1. The operator is not by deﬁnition a roboticist or en-
gineer, so the interface must make accessible all the
functions of the robot to allow its user to complete
the required tasks.
2. The user of a rehabilitation robot is, by deﬁni-
tion, a person with a disability, which means that
physical, sensory, communication, and/or cognitive
limitations in accessing the commands and controls
of a robot need to be handled on a systems level
by the designers of robots and their interfaces, with
critical attention to universal design principles, and
3. All rehabilitation robots require individualization
of the interface to each user by the engineering
and therapy professionals in charge of prescription
and ﬁtting, since disabilities vary considerably in
how they restrict adaptability to standard conﬁgu-
rations [64.217].
Interfaces of assistive robots consist of the software
and hardware components conceived to enable a per-
son with a disability to interact with an assistive device,
thus tapping into residual communication capabilities
of each user. For example, many people with tetraple-
gia retain the ability to move a hand, arm, foot, or the
head in a repeatable, even if range-limited way, and
possibly even in two axes, such as forward/backward
and left/right. With a proper placement of pushbut-
tons, a joystick, or noncontact position measurement
device, a rehabilitation engineer and therapist can de-
velop a custom solution for each of their clients with
disabilities to control a wheelchair computer and robot.
In addition, adaptive hardware and software for control-
ling a computer, such as head-position cursor control,

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
64.3 Aids for People with Disabilities
1705
Part F | 64.3
eye-trackers, speech recognition systems, trackballs
and special keyboards, can be used to provide access
to computer-based robot functionality.
Even more important than for able-bodied com-
puter and robot users, redundancy in input modality
is important for persons with disabilities to prevent
a system from becoming inoperable due to a simple in-
terface malfunction or calibration problem. Providing
two means of creating a mouse-click action (for exam-
ple, a separate button placed next to a cursor-control
trackball, as well as dwell time on a software button
on-screen), even if one is inherently slower than the
other, allows continued and uninterrupted use of the
computer without outside assistance even if one of the
two fails.
For therapy robots, physical interfaces resemble
those for physical and occupational therapy equip-
ment, in general, and have a commonality with sports
equipment interfaces as well, with adjustable hook-
and-loop-type straps, heat-formable plastic cuffs, soft
rubber, foam-based materials, and durable coverings for
abrasion resistance and long wear. After a session or
two for ﬁtting and adaptation, a person using a therapy
robot can often use the same interface for a long period
of time.
In summary, the keys to interface design are cus-
tomizability, individualization, functional redundancy,
adaptability, and patience in getting the interface to
a comfort and functional level appropriate for the ef-
fective use of the robot.
64.3.2 Types and Examples
of Assistive Rehabilitation Robots
As mentioned in the Introduction, assistive robots can
be divided into three main categories: manipulation
aids, mobility aids, and cognitive aids. Each can be sub-
divided as follows. Manipulation aids are commonly
divided into ﬁxed, portable, and mobile subtypes. Mo-
bility aids are divided into electric wheelchairs with
autonomous navigation features and smart walkers.
Cognitive aids are divided into communication aids
such as pet robots and autonomous caretaker robots.
These categories are introduced below, and representa-
tive systems that have undergone scientiﬁc user studies
or are commercial products are presented (Fig. 64.12a–
c). Other examples are mentioned in Sect. 64.1.3.
Manipulation Aids: Fixed-Base
Common robots of this type are ADL and voca-
tional manipulation aids and kitchen robots. In the
United States, the professional vocational assistive
robot (ProVAR) is a research prototype based ini-
tially on a PUMA-260 robot arm mounted on a 1 m-
a)
b)
c)
Fig.64.12a–c Workstation-type robots: (a) AfMaster, developed
by the French Muscular Dystrophy Association, (b) ProVAR, de-
veloped at the VA Palo Alto Rehabilitation R&D Center, and
(c) Handy-1, developed by RehabRobotics, Ltd. (UK)
transverse overhead track that allows the robot to ma-
nipulate objects and operate devices on side shelves and
the table-top, bringing objects (like a drink of water
or throat lozenge) to the robot’s operator. The inter-
face is via a JAVA/VRML plug-in to a common Internet
browser, delivering high-level control to disabled ofﬁce
workers in a conventional pull-down menu and a con-
trol screen interface [64.27, 218]. This system and its
predecessor DeVAR have been ﬁeld tested by over 50
subjects at 5 rehabilitation clinics to assess feasibil-
ity and acceptability [64.219, 220]. At a cost of over
US $ 100 000 currently, there are currently no plans for
eventual product introduction.
In the EU, following a development path parallel to
ProVAR’s, there is the AfMASTER/RAID workstation,
whose concept, instead of being built into a worksta-
tion, includes a 2 m  3 m robot work area in the user’s
ofﬁce to store objects and place appliances, next to the
user’s own ofﬁce space. The system has been developed

Part F | 64.3
1706
Part F
Robots at Work
over a 20-year span and was brieﬂy in limited produc-
tion [64.29] but is no longer offered for sale.
The kitchen robot, Giving-A-Hand, developed at the
Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna in Pisa, Italy, is a low-
degree-of-freedom device for mounting on the front rail
of a kitchen counter and able to move food contain-
ers to and from appliances, such as refrigerators and
ovens [64.221]. With an integrated control system, it
can also make use of the internal controls of the devices
to, for example, set cooking times and open doors.
The UK-developed Handy-1 is a domestic robot
with 3-DOF designed for one-switch operation by per-
sons with CP [64.30]. Originally designed to allow
a person to eat a meal one bite at a time, its application
areas have been extended to face hygiene and cosmet-
ics. A commercial product selling for about US$ 6000,
it has been a commercial success due to its simplicity
and application focus. An even simpler feeding robot,
the UK’s electric Neater Eater [64.20] is for sale world-
wide at about US$ 5000, and is designed for eating only.
In [64.222], an overview of manipulation robotic
aids is provided. They are classiﬁed through ﬁve cri-
teria, based on robotic arm usage scenarios and sur-
veys. In particular, new assistive manipulators have
recently been developed that address interaction safety
as a priority criterion in their design. Take for in-
stance JACO [64.223], iARM [64.224] and RA-
PUDA [64.225] as examples of robot arms achieving
safety by limiting the performance of the robotic arm
in terms of arm-movement speed and acceleration in
space, end-effector force and maximum possible pay-
load. Examples of robots addressing safety through
backdrivable joints (as in the WAM Arm [64.226])
or through active impedance control (as in KARES
II, WAM Arm, Elumotion RT2 [64.227], DLR LWR-
III [64.228]] can also be mentioned.
While a robot conventionally connotes a stand-
alone system with some automation features, a smart
bed and a smart home can legitimately be termed robots
since they sense and act with motors under the shared
control of its human users and its real-time software
programming. Smart beds, such as SleepSmart mea-
sures body position and temperature, as well as trends
and anomalies over the course of a night. Restless-
ness can be measured, and bed geometry (tilt of bed
segments) and ambient conditions (light, temperature,
sounds) can be adjusted according to presets and pref-
erences [64.229].
Smart homes, such as the AwareHome domotic en-
vironment at Georgia Tech, NL-iRV, and the University
of Tokyo [64.230], provide integrated climate, secu-
rity, lighting, entertainment and transport assistance,
which is enabling especially to persons with severe
functional disabilities. Coupled with health care-related
functionality (following section), these robotic homes
can allow a person with a cognitive or physical dis-
ability to control many ADL functions and live safely
through monitoring.
Manipulation Aids:
Wheelchair Manipulator Arm Systems
A need for electric wheelchair users is the manipula-
tion of objects while navigating a home or a public
place such as a restaurant or grocery store. The assis-
tive robot service manipulator (ARM) (Exact Dynam-
ics, Netherlands) – previously known as MANUS –
is a commercial robot arm that can be attached to an
existing wheelchair to the side of the lap tray and con-
trolled by the wheelchair’s own joystick or a number
pad [64.23, 231] (Fig. 64.13). The robot has undergone
numerous user studies with persons who have muscular
dystrophy, a high-level SCI or CP. Worldwide, this is
currently the only commercial rehabilitation robot arm
that can be prescribed by a physician and that is reim-
bursed by a government health care system.
Weston [64.232] and Bridgit [64.233] are two
wheelchair manipulator arm systems addressing the is-
sue of interaction safety in their design, as for some
of the manipulation aids with a ﬁxed base presented
earlier. Weston uses low-power motors in order to stat-
ically and intrinsically limiting the arm’s acceleration,
force and payload. Bridgit is a manipulator arm placed
Fig. 64.13 Wheelchair manipulator robot MANUS devel-
oped at the Rehabilitation R&D Center, Hoensbroek, and
marketed by Exact Dynamics (The Netherlands)

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
64.3 Aids for People with Disabilities
1707
Part F | 64.3
on a wheelchair on a rail system. The robot moves over
the rail system resulting in optimal positioning for each
task. The rail system also allows for easy docking of the
robot either on the back or front side of the wheelchair
when not in use.
Manipulation Aids:
Mobile Autonomous Systems
The most commonly thought-of form of a robot is
that of an autonomous, mobile system with arms,
having sensory-motor functionality similar to that of
a human being, while serving people in performing
menial physical tasks. This Handbook’s chapter on Hu-
manoid Robots explores the domain as well (Chap. 67).
Since locomotion is a key requirement for Humanoid
robotics, other robots with wheeled bases have been de-
veloped before the ﬁrst walking robots were invented
to explore more applied domains with more short-term
usefulness. In ﬁlm, robots such as Star Wars’ R2D2
have made this form factor commonly known around
the world. More recently, real robots such as the Help-
Mate [64.234] have been employed in US hospitals as
fetch-and-carry robot orderlies, using ﬂoor maps and
short-range ultrasonic sensors for navigation and ob-
stacle avoidance. The Italian MovAid research robot
platform [64.235] (in Fig. 64.14) adds manipulation and
vision to these capabilities to navigate in home-like
environments to provide object manipulation and de-
vice operation to individual users. The European project
Robot-Era [64.236] is following up these developments
with a speciﬁc target on the needs of aging popula-
tion. The German Care-O-bot [64.237] has explored
advanced navigation and sensing in a wheeled robot that
can also be used as a physical support to people requir-
ing mobility and stability assistance. It has also doubled
as a mobile kiosk, moving around a trade show ﬂoor and
delivering information to attendees. In [64.238] a case
study of a personal robot based on the PR2 Humanoid
robot (Willow Garage, Menlo Park) is presented. The
approach pursued consists of developing a diverse suite
of open-source software tools that blend the capabilities
of the user and the robot in order to enable the assistive
mobile manipulators to move in real homes and work
with people with disabilities.
Mobility Aids: Wheelchair Navigation Systems
A critical function for people who use electric
wheelchairs for their mobility impairment and who in
addition have communication or cognitive disability is
semiautonomous navigation assistance (Fig. 64.15).
Add-ons to commercial wheelchairs have been de-
veloped by numerous research groups for this ser-
vice. Such wheelchairs are typically referred to as
smart or intelligent wheelchairs. As proposed by Simp-
Fig. 64.14 MovAid (after [64.239])
son [64.240], smart wheelchairs can be classiﬁed
by form factor: early smart wheelchairs were mo-
bile robots with added seats. The vast majority of
smart wheelchairs developed until 2005 were based
on heavily modiﬁed, commercially available, powered
wheelchairs. Only a smaller fraction of them were

Part F | 64.3
1708
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
Fig.64.15a,b Wheelchair navigation aids: (a) Wheelesley and
(b) Hepahaestus
equipped with add-on units that could be attached to
and removed from the underlying powered wheelchair.
The NavChair [64.241] was one of the ﬁrst to
demonstrate robust wall-following, door passage even
with narrow doorways, and speed adaptation to peo-
ple walking in front of the wheelchair, all using only
short-range ultrasonic and other sensors, but not vision.
The Hephaestus [64.35] is a next-generation system
made speciﬁcally as a commercial accessory for a va-
riety of wheelchair brands, tapping into the joystick
controller and power system. The Wheelseley [64.242]
and KARES [64.33] robots have explored similar func-
tionality using a vision system for scene analysis and
way-ﬁnding.
More recently, the CanWheel project team de-
veloped
an
intelligent
wheelchair
system
called
NOAH [64.243, 244]. The system has three main ca-
pabilities: collision avoidance, infer the user’s goal
location/activity and provide automated reminders, pro-
vide navigation assistance using prompts. The rationale
a)
b)
c)
Fig.64.16a–c Human assistance robots: (a) Care-O-bot, developed by the Fraunhofer Research Institute (Germany). (b)
Helpmate by Transitions Research Inc., USA. (c) Pam-Aid (aka Guido), developed in the UK
for proposing such solutions is to enhance mobility and
to help improving the quality of life of older adults with
cognitive impairments, while simultaneously reducing
the burden on caregivers.
In 2013, How et al. [64.245] proposed a new in-
telligent wheelchair system (IWS) with anticollision
and navigation features. User trials showed the IWS’s
potential to improve powered wheelchair safety and
subjective usability.
The IntellWheels [64.246] project proposes a mod-
ular platform based on a multiagent system paradigm
for the development of intelligent wheelchairs based
on commercial products. Within this project, promis-
ing results have been achieved on the development of
adapted control methods for CP users of an intelligent
wheelchair. Experiments demonstrated that users felt
that they had better control over the wheelchair move-
ment when using shared control rather than manual or
automatic control modalities [64.247].
The iBOT [64.248–250] is a powered wheelchair
for persons with mobility impairment developed by Ka-
men, in a partnership between DEKA and Johnson &
Johnson’s Independence Technology division. Research
on iBOT was discontinued in 2009. The iBOT features
self-balancing technology, which allows users to go up
and down staircases, to navigate on uneven terrain and
to stand at an eye level with people walking nearby.
Mobility Aids: Walking Assistance Systems
A third type of mobile robot for stability assistance has
the peculiarity that it is underactuated and has similar-
ity with the co-bot concept, in that the wheels are not
driven, but are actively steered and braked (Fig. 64.16).
The concept of collaborative co-bots was originally
introduced by Colgate et al. for robots operating in di-

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
64.3 Aids for People with Disabilities
1709
Part F | 64.3
rect physical interaction with a human factory worker,
handling a shared payload. They are a marked depar-
ture from autonomous industrial robots, which must be
isolated from people for safety reasons [64.251, 252].
Co-bots interact with people by producing software-
deﬁned virtual surfaces which constrain and guide the
motion of the shared payload, but add little or no
power [64.253]. Today, cobots are being prototyped in
the rehabilitative and assistive context, e.g., for bed
to chair/wheelchair transfer or table-top upper limb,
stroke rehabilitation at home. For example, the Pam-
Aid [64.254] looks like a closed-front walker on wheels
and has bicycle-type handlebars. The person walking
behind the device turns the handlebars, causing the
wheels to turn in the correct direction. If the ultrasonic
sensors detect an obstacle in front of it, the brakes pre-
vent the user and device from colliding with it. The
Care-O-bot (see earlier) designed originally as a mo-
bile autonomous robot approximately human size, has
a similar set of handlebars, similar to the Pam-Aid
it, so it can be used as a smart walker. The larger
mass of the Care-O-bot, however, requires it to be
motorized.
Mobility Aids: Exoskeletons
Exoskeletons for walking assistance are similar to
robots used in treadmill-based environments for reha-
bilitation. These systems are portable and autonomous
and intended to be used in daily life scenarios. Several
review papers have been recently published [64.255–
257] on this topic.
In the framework of NISTs Advanced Technology
Program, Ekso Bionics (Berkeley, USA) developed the
Ekso device [64.258] (Fig. 64.17). This robot has been
developed for people with lower extremity weakness
or paralysis due to neurological disease or injury (e.g.,
spinal cord injuries, multiple sclerosis, Guillain–Barré
syndrome) and it has an almost anthropomorphic struc-
ture with hip and knee joints actuated in the sagittal
plane. The ankle joints are not actuated but are com-
pliant in the sagittal plane and locked out in the other
DOFs. Testing of the device has included paraplegic
persons with complete or incomplete paralysis [64.259]
and chronic stroke patients [64.260].
The ReWalk was developed by Argo Medical Tech-
nologies [64.261]. It is actuated by DC (direct current)
motors at the hip and knee joints in the sagittal plane,
while the ankle joint is not actuated. The system is
designed with a remote controller that can be used to
change the motion mode (e.g., ground walking, climb-
ing stairs). A posture sensor on the torso detects the
upper body movement of the user and estimates mo-
tion intention. The wearer also has to use crutches for
stability and safety reasons. The system is undergoing
Fig. 64.17 Ekso Bionics exoskeleton for paraplegics (af-
ter [64.258])
clinical trials among other research centers at Moss-
Rehab (Philadelphia, USA) and at the Centro Protesi
INAIL di Vigorso di Budrio (Bologna, Italy) on para-
plegic subjects. The device is now available on the
market in two versions: the ReWalk-Rehabilitation for
institutional use and the ReWalk-Personal developed
for daily use (Fig. 64.18).
Sankai’s group at the University of Tsukuba (Japan)
developed an exoskeleton both for performance aug-
mentation and for rehabilitation and assistance [64.263,
264]. The current version, HAL-5, powers the ﬂex-
ion/extension of hip and knee via DC motors while
ankle dorsi/plantar ﬂexion DOF is passive. The HAL-5
system (Fig. 64.19) integrates a number of sensors:
skin-surface EMG electrodes placed below the hip and
above the knee on both the anterior (front) and poste-
rior (back) sides of the wearer’s body, potentiometers
for joints angles measurement, ground reaction force
sensors, a gyroscope and accelerometer mounted on
the backpack for torso posture estimation. HAL-5 is
currently commercialized by the spinoff company Cy-
berdyne (Tsukuba, Japan). To date, it appears that no
peer-reviewed, quantitative results have been published

Part F | 64.3
1710
Part F
Robots at Work
Fig. 64.18 ReWalk computerized exoskeleton (ReWalk
Robotics, Inc., USA; after [64.262])
on the effectiveness of the exoskeleton for the improve-
ment of walking functions.
The Vanderbilt powered orthosis [64.265] is a pow-
ered lower limb exoskeleton intended to provide gait
assistance to individuals suffering from spinal cord
injury by providing assistive torques in the sagittal
plane for both the hip and knee joints. It includes nei-
ther a portion that is worn over the shoulders, nor
a portion that is worn under the shoes. Each joint is
powered by a brushless DC motor. The orthotic is
intended to be worn together with a standard ankle–
foot orthosis, which provides support at the ankle and
prevents foot drop during swing. In order to demon-
strate its ability to assist walking, the orthosis was
experimentally tested on paraplegic subjects. Experi-
mental results indicate that the orthosis is capable of
providing a repeatable gait with knee and hip joint
amplitudes that are similar to those observed during
non-SCI walking.
Fig. 64.19 Robot suit HAL-5 designed by Japanese
robotics ﬁrm Cyberdene
REX, produced by REX Bionics (Auckland, New
Zealand), is an anthropomorphic lower body robot de-
signed for sit-to-stand, stair climbing and overground
walking, without the use of crutches. The system does
not use sensors to detect the intention of the user but
rather it uses a joystick as its interface. The system has
been tested with healthy subjects, and for sit-to-stand of
wheelchair users [64.266].
Cognitive Aids
There has recently been increased interest in using
robots as motivational and educational agents during
rehabilitation therapy. This approach typically involves
small, pet-like, toy-like, approachable devices that do
not physically interact with the patient, but exist pri-
marily to engage the patient in an affective way that
promotes personal health, growth, and interaction. For
more information, please see Chap. 73.

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
64.4 Smart Prostheses and Orthoses
1711
Part F | 64.4
64.4 Smart Prostheses and Orthoses
In 2005, the Defense Sciences Ofﬁce (DSO) of the
US governmental research agency DARPA launched
a program to revolutionize prosthetics in a four-year
timeframe. According to the agency website, this pro-
gram will:
deliver a prosthetic arm for clinical trials that is
far more advanced than any currently available.
This device will enable many degrees of freedom
for grasping and other hand functions, and will be
rugged and resilient to environmental factors. In 4
years, DSOwill deliver a prostheticfor clinical trials
that has function almost identical to a natural limb in
terms of motor control and dexterity, sensory feed-
back (including proprioception), weight and envi-
ronmental resilience. Thefour-year devicewill bedi-
rectly controlled by neural signals. The results of this
program will allow upper limb amputees to have as
normal a lifeas possibledespitetheir severeinjuries.
64.4.1 Grand Challenges and Roadblocks
This program announcement lays down the grand chal-
lenge for prosthetics research in an ambitious time-
frame: develop an artiﬁcial limb that has function and
durability at least as good as a natural limb. There are
several roadblocks to meeting this challenge. First, pro-
viding an intuitive way for individuals to control and
coordinate multiple joints of a robotic limb is challeng-
ing. Second, robots do not yet match the human arm in
terms of the combination of range of force, weight, and
duration of use with a portable power source. Third, hu-
man limbs are rich with tactile and movement sensors.
Installing artiﬁcial sensors on a robotic limb, and then
returning information from those sensors in a way that
is usable by the user is challenging. Thus, solving the
grand challenge will require better sensory–motor in-
terfaces for prosthetic limbs, as well as lighter, stronger
actuators, and better power sources.
Substantial progress has recently been made in im-
proving sensory-motor interfaces for prosthetic limbs,
and this progress is the focus of this section. For the
current state of robotic actuators that could be used in
prosthetic devices, the reader is referred to Chap. 77
on Neurorobotics. For an overview of the design of
conventional prosthetic hands and arms, the reader is
referred to [64.267].
64.4.2 Targeted Re-Innervation
Standard prosthetic arms and hands are commonly con-
trolled with a cable drive or by electromyogram (EMG)
signals from residual muscles. For example, to open and
close an artiﬁcial hand, one common technique is to
place a Bowden cable around the shoulders in a harness,
and connect the cable directly to the artiﬁcial hand. The
user can then shrug the shoulders to move the cable
and open and close the hand. Alternately, electrodes
can be placed on a muscle in the residual limb or on
the user’s back, for example, and then used to control
a motor on the artiﬁcial hand. The cable technique has
the advantages of simplicity, and of having the prop-
erty of extended physiological proprioception (EPP),
which refers to the fact that the grip force is mechan-
ically transmitted back to the user’s shoulder muscle
force sensors so that the user can gauge the strength
of the grasp. Because of their simplicity and EPP, ca-
ble drives (or body powered prostheses) have been
more popular than myoelectric (or externally powered)
prostheses. However, the body-powered technique is
amenable to controlling only one degree of freedom
at a time, although chin switches, for example, can be
used to switch between degrees of freedom in a some-
what cumbersome way. The myoelectric approach can
be used to control multiple degrees of freedom, but such
control is nonintuitive and cumbersome. Also, multi-
ple control sites for reading out EMG are not available
for people who have lost their entire arm. Thus, pros-
thetic control systems are typically limited to one or
two degrees of freedom, while functional arm and hand
movement beneﬁts from at least four degrees of free-
dom (three to position the hand, and one to open and
close it).
Kuiken et al. [64.268] recently developed a novel
approach to improving control of a multijointed pros-
thetic arm. In this targeted re-innervation technique,
they re-routed the nerves that previously innervated the
lost limb to a spared muscle, and then read out the
user’s intent to move the limb using electromyography
at the spared muscle. They demonstrated this technique
in a bilateral shoulder disarticulation amputee who had
lost both of his arms in an electrical power accident.
They took the residual brachial plexus nerve for the left
arm, which normally innervates the left elbow, wrist,
and hand, and moved it to the pectoralis muscle. The
subject could still contract his pectoralis muscle, but
this muscle was no longer useful to him since it used to
attach to his now-missing humerus. A surgeon dissected
portions of the nerve associated with different muscles
in the elbow, wrist, and hand, and innervated three bun-
dles of the pectoralis muscle. After three months, the
nerve re-innervated the bundles so that the patient could
cause the bundles to twitch by trying to bend his miss-
ing elbow, for example. Surface EMG electrodes were

Part F | 64.4
1712
Part F
Robots at Work
placed over the bundles. Then, when the user willed to
open his hand, for example, a pectoralis muscle bundle
contracted, and this contraction was detectable with the
EMG electrodes. The EMG signal was in turn used to
control the hand motor of the prosthetic arm. The net
result was that the user could will his different (miss-
ing) anatomical joints to move, and the corresponding
joints on the robotic arm would move. He could simul-
taneously operate two joints, such as the elbow and the
hand. The user became able to do tasks that he was
not able to do before with his conventional myoelec-
tric controlled arm, such as feeding himself, shaving
and throwing a ball. A secondary remarkable ﬁnding
was that the sensory neurons in the re-routed nerves
re-innervated sensors, so that now when the person’s
chest is touched, the person perceives it as a touch to his
missing limb. This sensory re-innervation could possi-
bly be made into an interface to provide tactile sensation
from the artiﬁcial limb. These ﬁndings were recently
conﬁrmed in another person who received targeted re-
innervation [64.269].
64.4.3 Neural Interfaces
for Limb Prosthetic Devices
Neural interfaces provide an interesting and challeng-
ing solution to retrieve the natural way of interfacing
the human nervous system to prosthetic artifacts. They
are systems capable of recording either invasively or
noninvasively the electrical activity of peripheral nerves
as well as of the brain cortex. It has also recently been
shown that the direct electrical stimulation of a residual
peripheral nerve can provide usable information regard-
ing force to a person with an amputation [64.270], thus
paving the way for bidirectional neural interfaces capa-
ble of restoring both efferent and afferent information
ﬂow to/from the prosthesis. Recently, thin ﬁlm intra-
fascicular electrodes implantable in peripheral nerves
have been developed [64.271], and successfully val-
idated in 2008 in Italy at Campus Bio-Medico Uni-
versity of Rome on a human amputee [64.272] within
the LifeHand project, a cluster of European and Ital-
ian research actions focused on neural interfaces for
prosthetics (Fig. 64.20). In 2013, a second round of
experiments in Italy demonstrated the possibility of de-
livering physiologically appropriate (near-natural) sen-
sory information to an amputee during the real-time
decoding of different grasping tasks to control a dex-
terous hand prosthesis by stimulating the median and
ulnar nerve fascicles using transversal multichannel in-
trafascicular electrodes, according to the information
provided by the artiﬁcial sensors from a hand pros-
thesis [64.273]. The results also demonstrate that the
subject was able to identify the stiffness and shape of
Fig. 64.20 LifeHand aims to create a completely im-
plantable prosthesis system, richly sensorized and cron-
trolled through the patient’s nervous system, with a dex-
terity comparable to a natural limb (courtesy of Campus
Bio-Medico University Rome, Italy)
three different objects by exploiting different charac-
teristics of the elicited tactile sensations. These results
are in line with earlier studies which outlined the im-
portance of restoring tactile feedback on a prosthetic
device, such as the one proposed by Meek et al. in
1989 [64.274].
Today the above mentioned approach is trying to be
extended on lower limb prosthetics as well. Herr et al.
a MIT pioneered a new class of bio-hybrid smart pros-
theses and exoskeletons [64.275] aiming at improving
the quality of life of people with physical challenges.
Some of these devices are now commercialized by
a spin-off company, BiOM. For instance, a computer-
controlled prosthesis called the Rheo Knee [64.275] is
outﬁtted with a microprocessor that continually senses
the joint’s position and the loads applied to the limb.
A powered ankle–foot prosthesis emulates the action
of a biological leg to create a natural gait, allowing
amputees to walk with normal levels of speed and
metabolism as if their legs were biological [64.275].

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
64.5 Augmentation for Diagnosis and Monitoring
1713
Part F | 64.5
There has also recently been progress in decoding
movement-related signals in real-time directly from the
brain (see the cover story and related articles in Nature
of 13 July 2006 [64.276]. The ﬁrst of several recent hu-
man volunteers, a person with tetraplegia due to SCI,
has received a BrainGate electrode array implant, and
has been able to control the movement of a cursor on
a computer screen [64.277]. Noninvasive systems op-
erate by recording brain activity from the outside of
the skull via well-known clinical noninvasivediagnostic
devices [64.278] such as electro-encephalogram (EEG).
Individuals have been demonstrated to be able to learn
to control the amplitude of the EEG signal as a function
of time, or the amplitude of speciﬁc frequency com-
ponents of the EEG signal, with a moderate amount
of practice (several hours to several days). The level
of control is sufﬁcient to operate a typing program on
a computer, or to control the movement of a cursor to
multiple targets.
In summary, given the signiﬁcant progress observed
in the last decade, it appears that future control sys-
tems for smart prosthetics and orthoses will have the
option to rely on direct interfaces to the brain, which
should allow control of multiple joints through thought
alone. The initial work on both targeted re-innervation
and brain–machine interfaces to the PNS or to the CNS
has allowed three to 4-DOF of control in a naturalistic
manner and elicitation of some sensory feedback, which
is an advance over conventional prosthetic control tech-
niques.
64.4.4 Advances in Neural Stimulation
Functional neural stimulation techniques (FNSs) seek
to electrically stimulate the residual nervous system
to re-animate the limbs. FNS for standing, walking,
reaching, and grasping has been demonstrated, but
these techniques have met with limited commercial
success because of a combination of factors, includ-
ing the ease of use of systems that use surface elec-
trodes, duration of use before fatigue, risk from im-
plantation and complexity of the associated control
problems.
Two research lines are being pursued to help move
the FNS ﬁeld forward. The ﬁrst one focuses on hard-
ware innovation. A good example is the BION, an
injectable stimulator the size of a very large grain of
cooked rice [64.279], which can be inserted without
surgery (using a large-gauge needle) and is robust and
resistant to infections. The second research line aims
at stimulating the control circuits in the nervous system
rather than individual muscles. For example, it has been
shown that locomotor-like movements can be eliciting
in multiple muscles of the cat hind limb by stimulating
regions of the spinal cord directly [64.280].
64.4.5 Embedded Intelligence
Recent robotics-related advances for prosthetic legs
have included embedding microprocessors and pas-
sive braking systems into artiﬁcial knees, so that the
knees can, for example, be made relatively stiff during
the stance phase of gait, and free to move during the
swing phase of gait [64.281]. The ﬁrst microprocessor
knee introduced was the Ottobock C-Leg (Germany),
introduced in 1999. The C-Leg uses a servomotor to
adjust valves to hydraulic pistons. The rechargeable
battery lasts about 24 hours. The pattern of resistance
throughout the gait cycle can be adjusted for each user.
A dramatic example of the beneﬁt of the C-Leg is the
story of a man who made it down from the 70th ﬂoor
of the World Trade Center on 9/11/2001 with only
minor bruising to his residual stump [64.282]. Other
microprocessor-controlled knees are the endolite adap-
tive prosthesis, which uses pneumatic and hydraulic
valves, the Rheo Knee (Ossür Hf, Iceland), which uses
magneto-rheologic ﬂuid to vary the knee impedance
and the Intelligent Prosthesis.
The ﬁrst powered knee that can generate power,
rather than just dissipate energy, is currently being com-
mercialized by Össur as the Power Knee. The system
combines an electromechanical power source that will
be controlled with input from sensors on the sound leg
shoe. Initial reports suggest that this is the ﬁrst knee that
allows the user to walk up stairs with a step-over-step
pattern.
64.5 Augmentation for Diagnosis and Monitoring
A critical aspect of rehabilitation is health maintenance
with age-related or degenerative functional decline and
after a medical intervention. In-home diagnostic equip-
ment, devices worn on or in the body for vital signs
monitoring, tele-health services, and institution-based
monitoring automation are all examples of systems be-
ing developed to improve the quality of life for both per-
sons at risk and their caregivers. Institutional systems
of this nature, more properly part of the ﬁeld of clinical
engineering, are incorporating more robotic, networked
and autonomous devices to take more accurate diag-
nostics, provide better information to physicians and

Part F | 64.5
1714
Part F
Robots at Work
provide faster alerts. Key enabling technologies in this
ﬁeld are advanced materials and nanotechnologies.
64.5.1 Grand Challenges
and Enabling Technologies
For all devices that are worn on the body, the inter-
face must be skin compatible. A grand challenge for
this ﬁeld in the near-term is the better incorporation
of active and sensing elements with textiles. Several
prototype sensor shirts show promise, but rehabilita-
tion will have a much richer toolset for diagnosis and
monitoring with advances in this area. Nanotechnol-
ogy, an enabling technology for the longer term, has the
promise to miniaturize virtually everything mechatronic
that is currently macroscopic. Injected devices, such as
nano-robotic drug dispensers and clot-busters will aid
in rehabilitation.
64.5.2 Smart Homes for Health Care
Monitoring and Care
A special class of ﬁxed-station rehabilitation robots is
an automation system designed to provide a safe envi-
ronment to assist and monitor a person with a disability
living at home or in an institutionalized setting such as
an assisted living facility or nursing home.
Smart Nursing Home Automation
An assisted living, hospice, or nursing care institu-
tional facility will include residents who have mild
to severe cognitive impairment in addition to physical
disabilities. The facility may have zones to separate res-
idents who have different levels of dependency since
the architectural, monitoring and personnel needs are
different. To better serve residents and guests, to opti-
mize function and to minimize cost, only the areas for
persons with high dependency have a 24 h staffed vital
signs monitoring and alert capability, for example. Fa-
cility care is highly staff-intensive, though automation
through diagnostic vital signs monitoring, electronic
surveillance, and patient tracking continue to improve
safety and efﬁciency. Robotics and automation are be-
ginning to ﬁnd applications in the physical tasks asso-
ciated with patient care, therapy and oversight. Some
examples are described below.
Examples of the State of the Art
Wandering, especially at night, is a signiﬁcant prob-
lem for institutional facilities with ambulatory residents
who are cognitively impaired. Simple architectural
modiﬁcations include painting the hallway in front of
doors black to make them look like deep holes. An au-
tomated voice system triggered by a motion detector to
say Go back to bed is effective, but not fool-proof, ei-
ther. Resident detection systems based on ID badges
with embedded RFID chips that can be sensed in
a hallway work, but only if the resident is wearing it.
A robotic sentry system, including mobile platforms to
aid in solving this problem, especially at night, has not
yet been developed.
A serious rehabilitation issue in institutionalized
facilities is the transfer of residents from bed to
wheelchair and other surfaces. A number of manual,
electric, and robotic devices have been developed to
assist the nursing staff to safely transfer residents and
patients who may be signiﬁcantly heaver than they are.
This remains an unmet clinical need, though not for lack
of innovative attempts [64.283, 284].
64.5.3 Home-Based Rehabilitation
Monitoring and Therapy Systems
Numerous smart homes have been developed for non-
rehabilitation as well as assistive purposes [64.285].
These systems have as their goal the safety of people
with disabilities living in the home and communication
with caregivers outside of the home. Caregivers can be
live-in family or attendants who, even when they are not
home, need to be kept informed on the status of the dis-
abled person, as well as clinicians who need to be sent
regular vital signs and other medical/therapy reports.
In-home systems typically feature the same principal
elements:
1. Sensors to monitor both ambient and as people- and
object-speciﬁc parameters (e.g., person location,
stovetop operation); actuators to modify ambient
conditions (heat, lighting, sound system, etc.) and
operate devices (doors, refrigerator, etc.).
2. A means to network all the sensors and actuators
for uni- or bi-directional communication with the
host computer. This network can be wireless (e.g.,
802:11g), wired (e.g., coaxial cable), or dependent
on an existing network (e.g., signals superimposed
on current carried by the electrical mains wiring or
phone wiring).
3. A host computer that allows all sensor states to be
displayed and actuators to be operated from one or
more locations in the home by the inhabitant(s) us-
ing common computer I/O devices. Higher order
functions are built upon this basic capability.
4. An external network to allow communication with
the Internet via phone, cable, satellite or other
means. This capability allows for remote monitor-
ing and operation, sending of alarms and discus-
sions with rehabilitation professionals at medical
centers.

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
64.6 Safety, Ethics, Access and Economics
1715
Part F | 64.6
The host computer software may also have higher
order features, for example timers for repetitive ac-
tuation of lights and monitoring for anomalous sen-
sor readings (e.g., call security when the smoke de-
tector activates, alert inhabitants with in-home alarm
when stove top power is on and no pot is on the
stove). More advanced features that involve multi-
input and multioutput control and adaptive, predictive,
context-aware operation [64.286] are areas of active re-
search, and especially important to the rehabilitation
community.
As previously mentioned in this chapter, devices
for home-based robot-assisted therapy have been re-
cently developed, and home-based therapy delivered by
robotic devices is expected to have a signiﬁcant growth
in the short-medium term.
CBM Motus [64.126] and T-WREX, [64.287, 288],
a passive exoskeleton for upper limb rehabilitation now
sold by Hocoma AG as ArmeoSpring, are just two ex-
amples of systems for home-based therapy described
above (Sect. 64.2.3). Another example is the Hand
Mentor, which is a device which uses video games and
robotics to cognitively involve the patient in his/her
rehabilitation [64.289, 290]. The Hand Mentor can be
used in the clinic, or taken at home and incorporated
into patients’ daily therapy sessions to lengthen short-
ened tissues, facilitate hand opening and closing, and
reduce spasticity. It is mainly conceived for stroke pa-
tients’ rehabilitation and is commercialized by Kinetic
Muscles, Inc.
64.5.4 Wearable Monitoring Devices
One component of an automated rehabilitation environ-
ment is the subsystem that a person wears to be able to
measure, analyze, and communicate physiological sig-
nals to an external computer wirelessly. Systems such
as the LifeShirt (VivoMetrics, Inc., Ventura) [64.291]
have been and are being developed for front-line sol-
diers and rescue operation personnel whose health may
become imperiled when out of touch with and unable
to communicate verbally with their base command. For
rehabilitative purposes, for example, the Intel Proactive
Health Initiative [64.292] is an example of a system that
use on-person position and motion sensing to detect po-
tentially dangerous or undesirable situations.
The use of a robot to deliver therapy already en-
ables measuring information on the patient state by
exploiting robot sensors and other wearable units, if
needed [64.293]. Such capability can be exploited for
patient monitoring. A recent work proposed a method
for reconstructing the human arm kinematics by resort-
ing to an inverse kinematics technique for redundant
robot arms [64.294].
The most signiﬁcant obstacles to the widespread
adoption of these technologies in the short term are cost,
false-positive alarms, inconvenience and encumbrance.
Advances in micro-electronics, nanotechnologies, soft-
ware algorithms, and networking capabilities will con-
tinue to drive the research and consumer acceptance of
this technology sector.
64.6 Safety, Ethics, Access and Economics
Rehabilitation robots interact closely with humans, of-
ten sharing the same workspace and sometimes phys-
ically attaching to humans, as in the case of robotic
movement training devices and prosthetic limbs. Fur-
thermore, the devices are by necessity powerful enough
to manipulate the environment or the user’s own limbs,
which means that they are also often powerful enough
to injure the user or another person nearby by colliding
with them or moving their limbs inappropriately. Safety
is clearly of paramount importance.
A common strategy for ensuring safety is to incor-
porate multiple, redundant safety features. A device can
be designed to be mechanically incapable of moving
itself or the user’s limbs in such a way as to cause in-
jury. Limits can be placed on the range, strength and
speed of actuators so that they can accomplish the de-
sired task but no more. Break-away attachments can be
used to attach to users’ limbs. Covers can protect the
user from pinch points in the device. Redundant sen-
sors can be included, so that if one sensor malfunctions
another sensor can identify the malfunction and help
safely shut down the machine. Watchdog timers can
monitor the health of the control computer. Software
checks can limit forces, motions, speeds, and user ad-
justments to control parameters, as well as check for
sensor health and other dangerous situations. Control
strategies can be designed so that the device is mechan-
ically compliant, reducing the risk of forcing a limb
into an undesirable conﬁguration, or of a high-impact
collision. A manual override switch can be incorpo-
rated so that the user can shutdown the system. Finally,
the user can be instructed on how to safely operate
the device and avoid dangerous situations. Safety ul-
timately depends, however, on careful and rigorous
failure mode analysis and remediation by the system
designers.
From a system’s perspective, when all else fails ac-
tively to protect the user, it must be the design itself

Part F | 64.7
1716
Part F
Robots at Work
that makes the robot inherently unable to injure its user.
Part of the solution is in reducing the weight, rounding
the surface characteristics, and making appropriate ma-
terials choices. The goal of inherent safety, however, is
often at odds with high performance and adequate pay-
load for real-life tasks. Recently, several approaches to
designing personal robots – in other words – the class
to which assistive rehabilitation robots belong – have
sought to address both goals by dividing the two tasks
of compensating for gravity (arm plus payload) and
moving the payload around in space [64.295]. The so-
lution is to provide two actuators per joint on the joints
that support the arm segments and payload against grav-
ity: one slow, gear-reduced motor and energy storing
device such as a large spring or compressed air vol-
ume, and one small, backdrivable motor that provides
the power needed to move objects around quickly and
precisely. Most robot manipulators have approximately
a 1 W 10 (or worse) payload-to-weight ratio. A system
with a dual, parallel actuator system that requires only
the small, fast actuator to be carried in the arm, leav-
ing the slow energy-storage system on the base and not
contributing to the inertia of the arm itself, can lead to
a 1 W 1 payload-to-weight ratio more in line with a hu-
man’s own arm characteristics, and thereby provides
a safe yet high-performance solution. An added bene-
ﬁt from this type of arrangement is that the movements
of the arm will tend to be more human-like, providing
a measure of conﬁdence to the user that the robot is per-
forming properly and moving in a safe way.
Strategies for improving safety have been proposed
and methods to assess safety have been developed and
adapted for rehabilitation robotics [64.296, 297] based
on accepted risk analysis methods. While industrial
robots have beneﬁted from ISO user safety regulations
since 1992 (ISO 10218), the fundamental issue of hu-
man proximity to robots for the personal, service, and
rehabilitation sectors has prevented that standard from
being applicable to rehabilitation robots. Currently,
a draft of a new safety requirements for personal care
robots standard, ISO 13482, is under development. Cur-
rently, the existing industrial standards, augmented with
provisions from medical equipment standards and but-
tressed by engineering best practices and adherence to
professional codes of ethics by designers, have guided
rehabilitation robotics designers. Clearly, as products
appear on the market and the expected rapid expansion
of this sector happens, better regulations and standards
must be developed.
Beyond safety, there are other ethical concerns that
will emerge as robotics technology becomes more in-
telligent with advances in cognitive software, more in-
vasive with nanotechnologies and better integrated with
human systems through bioengineering advances. Ethi-
cists and roboticists are starting to deal with these is-
sues [64.298, 299], which to date have been the purview
of only futurists and science ﬁction writers. Chap. 80
deals with these issues in detail.
An economic advantage has not yet been demon-
strated in a decisive way for most rehabilitation
robotics. For example, the therapeutic beneﬁts con-
ferred by robotic therapy devices, and the assistive
beneﬁts conferred by wheelchair-mounted robots rel-
ative to the devices’ cost, have not yet been large
enough to cause widespread adoption. Improvements in
their efﬁcacy and reductions in their cost will increase
their usage. For example, a robotic therapy device that
helps people learn to walk after a stroke, in a way
that is decisively better than other training techniques,
would become widely used very quickly. Likewise,
a wheelchair-mounted robot that gives a disabled per-
son a substantial and efﬁcient increase in autonomy at
a reasonable cost would also quickly become widely
used. An example of a robotics technology that has
achieved an attractive cost-beneﬁt ratio and thus is com-
mercially successful is the powered wheelchair.
64.7 Conclusions and Further Readings
Rehabilitation robotics is a dynamic application area
because its grand challenges are at the forefront of
both robotics and biology research. The ongoing ma-
jor themes of the ﬁeld can be summarized as the
development of robotic therapy devices, smart prosthe-
ses, orthoses, functional aids and nurses that match or
exceed the capabilities of their human counterparts. Re-
habilitation robotics is also a highly motivating ﬁeld
because the technology developed will directly help
people who are limited in major life activities. The ﬁeld
will continue to grow because of the dramatic aging of
the populations of industrialized countries that is just
beginning.
The grand challenges of rehabilitation robotics are
grounded in the distinguishing features of the ﬁeld:
functional involvement with humans, a physical user
interface and behavior that is intelligent, adaptive, and
safe. These characteristics require high levels of re-
dundancy, sensory-motor capability, adaptability, and
multilevel software architecture. The grand challenges
therefore span the domains of electromechanical de-
sign, software design, and, due to the applied and in-

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
64.7 Conclusions and Further Readings
1717
Part F | 64
nately human-focused nature of rehabilitation robotics,
all aspects of user interface design, including physical,
communication, learning, emotional, and motivational
factors. The ﬁrst products in this ﬁeld have come on
the market in only the last 15 years; worldwide de-
mographic trends will provide the force to accelerate
product development in the future.
For further investigation on rehabilitation robotics,
there are three major sources of published information:
1. Books on personal, service and rehabilitation
robotics, such as: [64.300–302]
2. Review articles in journals and periodicals, such
as [64.303–307] and
3. Articles that deal with individual topics, such as
those in the reference list below, and conferences
such as ICORR, RESNA, RO-MAN, BIOROB, and
AAATE, which are also represented in the reference
list.
Cutting-edge research will be reported on the web-
sites of investigators at academic, government and cor-
porate research labs, and it is recommended to start at
the sites of the researchers cited in this chapter.
Video-References
VIDEO 499
The WREX exoskeleton
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/499
VIDEO 496
MIT Manus robotic therapy robot and other robots from the MIT group
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/496
VIDEO 500
MANUS assistive robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/500
VIDEO 502
The ArmeoSpring therapy exoskeleton
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/502
VIDEO 503
Lokomat
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/503
VIDEO 504
Gait Trainer GT 1
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/504
VIDEO 505
Kineassist
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/505
VIDEO 507
Ekso
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/507
VIDEO 508
ReWalk
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/508
VIDEO 509
HAL
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/509
VIDEO 510
Indego
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/510
VIDEO 511
REX
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/511
VIDEO 513
Targetted reinnervation and the DEKA arm
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/513
VIDEO 515
PAM
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/515
VIDEO 494
The Arm Guide
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/494
VIDEO 497
ARMin plus HandSOME robotic therapy system
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/497
VIDEO 498
BONES and SUE exoskeletons for robotic therapy
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/498
VIDEO 495
The MIME rehabilitation therapy robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/495
VIDEO 568
Handsome exoskeleton
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/64/videodetails/568

Part F | 64
1718
Part F
Robots at Work
References
64.1
L. Leifer: Rehabilitative robots. In: Robotics Age,
in the Beginning: Selected from Robotics Age
Magazine, ed. by C. Helmers (Hayden Book,
Rochelle Park 1983) pp. 227–241
64.2
M. Kassler: Introduction to the special issue on
robotics for health care, Robotica 11, 493–494
(1993)
64.3
H.F.M. Van der Loos: VA/Stanford rehabilita-
tion robotics research and development program:
Lessons learned in the application of robotics
technology to the field of rehabilitation, IEEE
Trans. Rehabil. Eng. 3, 46–55 (1995)
64.4
J.L. Patton, M.E. Phillips-Stoykov, M. Stojakovich,
F.A. Mussa-Ivaldi: Evaluation of robotic training
forces that either enhance or reduce error in
chronic hemiparetic stroke survivors, Exp. Brain
Res. 168, 368–383 (2006)
64.5
J. Emken, D. Reinkensmeyer: Robot-enhanced
motor learning: Accelerating internal model for-
mation during locomotion by transient dynamic
amplification, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng. 99, 1–7 (2005)
64.6
E. Guglielmelli, M. Johnson, T. Shibata: Guest edi-
torial special issue on rehabilitation robotics, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 25, 477–480 (2009)
64.7
M.J. Matarić, J. Eriksson, D.J. Feil-Seifer, C.J. Win-
stein: Socially assistive robotics for post-stroke
rehabilitation, J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 19, 5 (2007)
64.8
M.P.
Dijkers,
P.C.
deBear,
R.F.
Erlandson,
K.A. Kristy, D.M. Geer, A. Nichols: Patient and staff
acceptance of robotic technology in occupational
therapy: A pilot study, J. Rehabil. Res. 28, 33–44
(1991)
64.9
R. Jimínez-Fabián, O. Verlinden: Review of con-
trol algorithms for robotic ankle systems in
lower-limb orthoses, prostheses, and exoskele-
tons, Med. Eng. Phys. 34, 397–408 (2012)
64.10
D.G. Smith, J.D. Bigelow: Biomedicine: Revolu-
tionizing prosthetics-guest editors’ introduction,
Johns Hopkins APL Tech. Dig. 30, 182–185 (2011)
64.11
G. Baldassarre: La disabilità in Italia. Il quadro
della statistica ufficiale (Istat, Roma 2010)
64.12
Demo-Geodemo: Mappe, Popolazione, Statis-
tiche Demografiche dell’ISTAT, available online at
http://demo.istat.it
64.13
Destatis (Statistisches Bundesamt), https://www.
destatis.de/EN/
64.14
X. Zheng, G. Chen, X. Song, J. Liu, L. Yan, W. Du,
L. Pang, L. Zhang, J. Wu, B. Zhang, J. Zhang:
Twenty-year trends in the prevalence of disabil-
ity in China, Bull. World Health Organ. 89, 788–797
(2011)
64.15
National-Bureau-of-Statistics-of-China:
http://
www.stats.gov.cn/english/
64.16
Central-Statistics-Office-Ministry-of-Statistics-
&-Programme-Implementation:
Disability
in
India – A statistical profile 2011 (2011)
64.17
CIA: The World Factbook, available online at
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-
world-factbook/geos/in.html
64.18
H.F.M. Van der Loos, R. Mahoney, C. Ammi: Great
expectations for rehabilitation mechatronics in
the coming decade. In: Advances in Rehabil-
itation Robotics, ed. by Z. Bien, D. Stefanov
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2004) pp. 427–433
64.19
K. Corker, J.H. Lyman, S. Sheredos: A preliminary
evaluation of remote medical manipulators, Bull.
Prosthet. Res. 10, 107–134 (1979)
64.20
M. Hillman: Rehabilitation robotics from past to
present – A historical perspective. In: Advances
in Rehabilitation Robotics, ed. by Z. Bien, D. Ste-
fanov (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2004) pp. 25–
44
64.21
W. Seamone, G. Schmeisser: Early clinical evalu-
ation of a robot arm/work table system for spinal
cord injured persons, J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 22, 38–
57 (1985)
64.22
J. Guittet, H.H. Kwee, N. Quetin, J. Yelon: The
SPARTACUS telethesis: Manipulator control stud-
ies, Bull. Prosthet. Res. 10, 69–105 (1979)
64.23
H.H. Kwee: Integrated control of MANUS manipu-
lator and wheelchair enhanced by environmental
docking, Robotica 16, 491–498 (2000)
64.24
J. Hammel, K. Hall, D.S. Lees, L.J. Leifer, H.F.M. Van
der Loos, I. Perkash, R. Crigler: Clinical evalua-
tion of a desktop robotic assistant, J. Rehabil. Res.
Dev. 26, 1–16 (1989)
64.25
J.M. Hammel, H.F.M. Van der Loos, I. Perkash:
Evaluation
of
a
vocational
robot
with
a
quadriplegic
employee,
Arch.
Phys.
Med.
Rehabil. 73, 683–693 (1992)
64.26
H.F.M. Van der Loos, S.J. Michalowski, L.J. Leifer:
Design of an omnidirectional mobile robot as
a manipulation aid for the severely disabled. In:
Interactive Robotic Aids – One Option for Inde-
pendent Living: An International Perspective, ed.
by R. Foulds (World Rehabilitation Fund, New York
1986) pp. 61–63
64.27
J.J. Wagner, M. Wickizer, H.F.M. Van der Loos,
L.J. Leifer: User testing and design iteration of
the ProVAR user interface, 8th IEEE Int. Workshop
Robot Hum. Interact. (RO-MAN) (1999) pp. 18–22
64.28
M. Busnel, R. Cammoun, F. Coulon-Lauture, J.-
M. Detriche, G. Le Claire, B. Lesigne: The robotized
workstation MASTER for users with tetraplegia:
Description and evaluation, J. Rehabil. Res. Dev.
36, 217–229 (1999)
64.29
R. Gelin, B. Lesigne, M. Busnel, J.P. Michel: The
first moves of the AFMASTER workstation, Adv.
Robotics 14, 639–649 (2001)
64.30
M. Topping: The development of Handy 1, a re-
habilitation robotic system to assist the severely
disabled, Ind. Robot 25, 316–320 (1998)
64.31
R.M. Mahoney: The raptor wheelchair robot sys-
tem. In: Integration of Assistive Technology in the
Information Age, ed. by M. Mokhtari (IOS, Amster-
dam 2001) pp. 135–141
64.32
V.
Maheu,
J.
Frappier,
P.S.
Archambault,
F. Routhier: Evaluation of the JACO robotic arm:
Clinico-economic study for powered wheelchair

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
References
1719
Part F | 64
users with upper-extremity disabilities, IEEE Int.
Conf. Rehabil. Robotics (2011) p. 5975397
64.33
Z. Bien, M.J. Chung, P.H. Chang, D.S. Kwon,
D.J. Kim, J.S. Han, J.-H. Kim, D.-H. Kim, H.-
S. Park, S.-H. Kang, K. Lee, S.-C. Lim: Integration
of a rehabilitation robotic system (KARES II) with
human-friendly man-machine interaction units,
Auton. Robots 16, 165–191 (2004)
64.34
R.C. Simpson, S.P. Levine, D.A. Bell, L. Jaros,
Y. Koren, J. Borenstein: NavChair: An assistive
wheelchair navigation system with automatic
adaptation, assistive technology and AI, Lect.
Notes Artif. Intell. 1458, 235–255 (1998)
64.35
R.C. Simpson, D. Poirot, F. Baxter: The Hephaestus
smart wheelchair system, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehabil. Eng. 10, 118–122 (2002)
64.36
R. Krukowski: Particle brake clutch muscle exer-
cise and rehabilitation apparatus, US Patent Ser
476 5315 A (1986)
64.37
D. Khalili, M. Zomlefer: An intelligent robotic sys-
tem for rehabilitation of joints and estimation
of body segment parameters, IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng. 35, 138–146 (1988)
64.38
P.S. Lum, S.L. Lehman, D.J. Reinkensmeyer: The
bimanual lifting rehabilitator: A device for re-
habilitating bimanual control in stroke patients,
IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng. 3, 166–174 (1995)
64.39
P.S.
Lum, D.J.
Reinkensmeyer, S.L. Lehman:
Robotic assist devices for bimanual physical ther-
apy: Preliminary experiments, IEEE Trans. Rehabil.
Eng. 1, 185–191 (1993)
64.40
P.S. Lum, H.F.M. Van der Loos, P. Shor, C.G. Bur-
gar: A robotic system for upper-limb exercises
to promote recovery of motor function follow-
ing stroke, Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robotics
(1999) pp. 235–239
64.41
M.J. Johnson, H.F. Van der Loos, C.G. Burgar,
P. Shor, L.J. Leifer: Experimental results using
force-feedback cueing in robot-assisted stroke
therapy, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 13,
335–348 (2005)
64.42
D.J. Reinkensmeyer, J.P.A. Dewald, W.Z. Rymer:
Guidance-based quantification of arm impair-
ment following brain injury: A pilot study, IEEE
Trans. Rehabil. Eng. 7, 1–11 (1999)
64.43
P. Hilaire, A.C. Jacob, T. Böni, B. Rüttimann:
Richard Scherb: Orthopaedic surgeon and mus-
cle physiologist, 28th Int. Soc. Biomech. Congr.
(2001)
64.44
J.P.L. Bel, P. Rabischong: Orthopaedic appliances,
US Patent Ser 399 3056 A (1976)
64.45
G. Colombo, M. Joerg, R. Schreier, V. Dietz:
Treadmill training of paraplegic patients with
a robotic orthosis, J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 37, 693–
700 (2000)
64.46
S. Hesse, D. Uhlenbrock: A mechanized gait
trainer for restoration of gait, J. Rehabil. Res. Dev.
37, 701–708 (2000)
64.47
Cybernetic Zoo: Stock Photo ID 42-17253903, avail-
able online at http://cyberneticzoo.com/bionics/
1976-pneumatic-exoskeleton-prosthesis-
pierre-rabischong-french/
64.48
LokoHelp:
http://www.darkov.com/treatment/
curative-procedures/lokostation-with-lokohelp.
aspx
64.49
GEO
System:
http://www.skoutasmedical.gr/
portal/index.php?page=shop.product_details&
product_id=742&flypage=ilvm_fly2_blue.tpl&
pop=0&option=com_virtuemart&Itemid=120&
lang=en&vmcchk=1&Itemid=120
64.50
A.C. Lo, P.D. Guarino, L.G. Richards, J.K. Haselkorn,
G.F. Wittenberg, D.G. Federman, R.J. Ringer,
T.H. Wagner, H.I. Krebs, B.T. Volpe, C.T. Bever,
D.M. Bratava, P.W. Duncan, B.H. Corn, A.D. Maf-
fucci, S.E. Nadeau, S.S. Conroy, J.M. Powell,
G.D. Huang, P. Peduzzi: Robot-assisted ther-
apy for long-term upper-limb impairment af-
ter
stroke, N.
Engl. J.
Med.
362, 1772–1783
(2010)
64.51
G. Kwakkel, B.J. Kollen, H.I. Krebs: Effects of
robot-assisted therapy on upper limb recovery
after stroke: A systematic review, Neurorehabil.
Neural Repair 22, 111–121 (2008)
64.52
E.C. Lu, R.H. Wang, D. Hebert, J. Boger, M.P. Galea,
A. Mihailidis: The development of an upper limb
stroke rehabilitation robot: Identification of clin-
ical practices and design requirements through
a survey of therapists, Disabil. Rehabil. Assist.
Technol. 6, 420–431 (2011)
64.53
B.T. Volpe, P.T. Huerta, J.L. Zipse, A. Rykman,
D. Edwards, L. Dipietro, N. Hogan, H.I. Krebs:
Robotic devices as therapeutic and diagnostic
tools for stroke recovery, Arch. Neurol. 66, 1086–
1090 (2009)
64.54
L. Zollo, L. Rossini, M. Bravi, G. Magrone, S. Sterzi,
E. Guglielmelli: Quantitative evaluation of upper-
limb motor control in robot-aided rehabilitation,
Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 49, 1131–1144 (2011)
64.55
B. Rohrer, S. Fasoli, H.I. Krebs, R. Hughes,
B. Volpe, W.R. Frontera, J. Stein, N. Hogan: Move-
ment smoothness changes during stroke recovery,
J. Neurosci. 22, 8297–8304 (2002)
64.56
E. Papaleo, L. Zollo, L. Spedaliere, E. Guglielmelli:
Patient-tailored adaptive robotic system for up-
per-limb rehabilitation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2013)
64.57
G. Pellegrino, L. Tomasevic, M. Tombini, G. As-
senza, M. Bravi, S. Sterzi, V. Giacobbe, L. Zollo,
E. Guglielmelli, G. Cavallo, F. Vernieri, F. Tec-
chio: Inter-hemispheric coupling changes as-
sociate with motor improvements after robotic
stroke rehabilitation, Restor. Neurol. Neurosci. 30,
497–510 (2012)
64.58
R. Riener, M. Munih: Special section on reha-
bilitation via bio-cooperative control, IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 18, 337–338 (2010)
64.59
R.C. Loureiro, W.S. Harwin, K. Nagai, M. John-
son: Advances in upper limb stroke rehabilita-
tion: A technology push, Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.
49, 1103–1118 (2011)
64.60
F.J. Badesa, R. Morales-Vidal, N. Garcia, C. Perez,
J.M. Sabater-Navarro, E. Papaleo: New concept of
multimodal assistive robotic device, IEEE Robotics
Autom. Mag. (IEEE/RAM) (2012)

Part F | 64
1720
Part F
Robots at Work
64.61
L. Zollo, E. Papaleo, L. Spedaliere, E. Guglielmelli,
F.J. Badesa, R. Morales, N. Garcia-Aracil: Mul-
timodal interfaces to improve therapeutic out-
comes in robot-assisted rehabilitation, Springer
Tract. Adv. Robotics 94, 321–343 (2014)
64.62
Intelligent System Co., Ltd., Japan: http://www.
parorobots.com/
64.63
K. Dautenhahn, I. Werry: Towards interaction
robots in autism therapy: Background, motiva-
tion, and challenges, Pragmact. Cogn. 12, 1–35
(2004)
64.64
T. Shibata, T. Mitsui, K. Wada, K. Tanie: Psy-
chophysiological effects by interaction with men-
tal commit robot, J. Robotics Mechatron. 14, 13–19
(2002)
64.65
L. Sawaki: Use-dependent plasticity of the hu-
man motor cortex in health and disease, IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Mag. 24, 36–39 (2005)
64.66
J.R. Wolpaw, A.M. Tennissen: Activity-dependent
spinal cord plasticity in health and disease, Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 24, 807–843 (2001)
64.67
K.M. Baldwin, F. Haddad: Skeletal muscle plas-
ticity: Cellular and molecular responses to altered
physical activity paradigms, Am. J. Phys. Med. Re-
habil. 81, S40–S51 (2002)
64.68
V.S. Huang, J.W. Krakauer: Robotic neurorehabil-
itation: A computational motor learning perspec-
tive, J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 6(1), 5 (2009)
64.69
J. Mehrholz, M. Pohl: Electromechanical-assisted
gait training after stroke: A systematic review
comparing end-effector and exoskeleton devices,
J. Rehabil. Med. 44(3), 193–199 (2012)
64.70
V. Klamroth-Marganska, J. Blanco, K. Campen,
A. Curt, V. Dietz, T. Ettlin, M. Felder, B. Felling-
hauer, M. Guidali, A. Kollmar, A. Luft, T. Nef,
C. Schuster-Amft, W. Stahel, R. Riener: Three-di-
mensional, task-specific robot therapy of the arm
after stroke: A multicentre, parallel-group ran-
domised trial, Lancet Neurol. 13(2), 159–166 (2014)
64.71
P. Langhorne, F. Coupar, A. Pollock: Motor recovery
after stroke: A systematic review, Lancet Neurol. 8,
741–754 (2009)
64.72
J.L. Emken, R. Benitez, D.J. Reinkensmeyer:
Human-robot cooperative movement training:
Learning a novel sensory motor transforma-
tion during walking with robotic assistance-as-
needed, J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 4, 8 (2007)
64.73
M. Casadio, V. Sanguineti: Learning, retention,
and slacking: A model of the dynamics of recovery
in robot therapy, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng. 20, 286–296 (2012)
64.74
E.R. Pospisil, B.L. Luu, J.S. Blouin, H.F. Van
der Loos, E.A. Croft: Independent ankle mo-
tion control improves robotic balance simulator,
IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. (2012)
pp. 6487–6491
64.75
B. Luu, T. Huryn, E. Croft, H. Van der Loos,
J. Blouin: Investigating load stiffness in quiet
stance using a robotic balance system, IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 19(4), 382–390 (2011)
64.76
M. Guadagnoli, T. Lee: Challenge point: A frame-
work for conceptualizing the effects of various
practice conditions in motor learning, J. Mot. Beh.
36, 212–224 (2004)
64.77
C. Bosecker, L. Dipietro, B. Volpe, H.I. Krebs: Kine-
matic robot-based evaluation scales and clinical
counterparts to measure upper limb motor per-
formance in patients with chronic stroke, Neu-
rorehabil. Neural Repair 24(1), 62–69 (2009)
64.78
L. Zollo, O.E. Gallotta, E. Guglielmelli, S. Sterzi:
Robotic technologies and rehabilitation: New
tools for upper-limb therapy and assessment in
chronic stroke, Eur. J. Phys. Rehabil. Med. 47.2,
223–236 (2011)
64.79
H.I. Krebs, M. Krams, D. Agrafiotis, A. DiBernardo,
J.C. Chavez, G.S. Littman, E. Yang, G. Byttebier,
L. Dipietro, A. Rykman, K. McArthur, K. Hajjar,
K.R. Lees, B.T. Volpe: Robotic measurement of arm
movements after stroke establishes biomarkers of
motorecovery, Stroke 45(1), 200–204 (2014)
64.80
A. Domingo, T. Lam: Reliability and validity of
using the Lokomat to assess lower limb joint posi-
tion sense in people with incomplete spinal cord
injury, J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 11(1), 167 (2014)
64.81
C. Carignan, H. Krebs: Telerehabilitation robotics:
Bright lights, big future?, J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 43,
695–710 (2006)
64.82
B.H.
Dobkin:
Neurologic
Rehabilitation
(F.A.
Davis, Philadelphia 1996)
64.83
T. Truelsen, B. Piechowski-Jóźwiak, R. Bonita,
C. Mathers, J. Bogousslavsky, G. Boysen: Stroke
incidence and prevalence in Europe: A review of
available data, Eur. J. Neurol. 13, 581–598 (2006)
64.84
ESCIF (European Spinal Cord Injury Federation):
Statement on Spinal Cord Injury Regenerative Re-
search (ESCIF, Nottwill 2011)
64.85
M.
Wirz,
D.H.
Zemon, R.
Rupp,
A.
Scheel,
G. Colombo, V. Dietz, T.G. Hornby: Effectiveness
of automated locomotor training in patients with
chronic incomplete spinal cord injury: A multi-
center trial, Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 86, 672–
680 (2005)
64.86
H.I. Krebs, N. Hogan, M.L. Aisen, B.T. Volpe:
Robot-aided neurorehabilitation, IEEE Trans. Re-
habil. Eng. 6, 75–87 (1998)
64.87
S.P. Buerger, H.I. Krebs, N. Hogan: Characteri-
zation and control of a screw-driven robot for
neurorehabilitation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Control
Appl. (2001) pp. 388–394
64.88
D.J. Williams, H.I. Krebs, N. Hogan: A robot for
wrist rehabilitation, IEEE 23rd Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. (2001) pp. 1336–1339
64.89
L. Masia, H.I. Krebs, P. Cappa, N. Hogan: Whole-
arm rehabilitation following stroke: Hand mod-
ule, IEEE/RAS-EMBS 1st Int. Conf. Biomed. Robotics
Biomechatron. (BioRob) (2006) pp. 1085–1089
64.90
J. Stein, H.I. Krebs, W.R. Frontera, S. Fasoli,
R. Hughes, N. Hogan: Comparison of two tech-
niques of robot-aided upper limb exercise train-
ing after stroke, Am. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 83,
720–728 (2004)
64.91
H. Krebs, J. Palazzolo, L. Dipietro, M. Ferraro,
J. Krol, K. Rannekleiv, B.T. Volpe, N. Hogan: Reha-
bilitation robotics: Performance-based progres-

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
References
1721
Part F | 64
sive robot-assisted therapy, Auton. Robots 15,
7–20 (2003)
64.92
M.L. Aisen, H.I. Krebs, N. Hogan, F. McDowell,
B. Volpe: The effect of robot-assisted therapy and
rehabilitative training on motor recovery follow-
ing stroke, Arch. Neurol. 54, 443–446 (1997)
64.93
S. Fasoli, H. Krebs, J. Stein, W. Frontera, N. Hogan:
Effects of robotic therapy on motor impairment
and recovery in chronic stroke, Arch. Phys. Med.
Rehabil. 84, 477–482 (2003)
64.94
J.J. Daly, N. Hogan, E.M. Perepezko, H.I. Krebs,
J.M. Rogers, K.S. Goyal, M.E. Dohring, E. Fredrick-
son, J. Nethery, R.L. Ruff: Response to upper-limb
robotics and functional neuromuscular stimula-
tion following stroke, J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 42,
723–736 (2005)
64.95
T.H. Wagner, A.C. Lo, P. Peduzzi, D.M. Bravata,
G.D. Huang, H.I. Krebs, R.J. Ringer, D.G. Feder-
man, L.G. Richards, J.K. Haselkorn, G.F. Witten-
berg, B.T. Volpe, C.T. Bever, P.W. Duncan, A. Siroka,
P.D. Guarino: An economic analysis of robot-
assisted therapy for long-term upper-limb im-
pairment after stroke, Stroke 41, 2630–2632 (2011)
64.96
P.S. Lum, C.G. Burgar, P.C. Shor, M. Majmundar,
H.F.M. Van der Loos: Robot-assisted movement
training compared with conventional therapy
techniques for the rehabilitation of upper limb
motor function following stroke, Arch. Phys. Med.
Rehabil. 83, 952–959 (2002)
64.97
P.S. Lum, C.G. Burgar, H.F.M. Van der Loos,
P.C. Shor, M. Majmundar, R. Yap: MIME robotic de-
vice for upper-limb neurorehabilitation in suba-
cute stroke subjects: A follow-up study, J. Reha-
bil. Res. Dev. 43, 631–642 (2006)
64.98
C.G. Burgar, P.S. Lum, A.M. Scremin, S.L. Garber,
H.F. Van der Loos, D. Kenney, F. Shor: Robot-as-
sisted upper-limb therapy in acute rehabilitation
setting following stroke: Department of veterans
affairs multisite clinical trial, J. Rehabil. Res. Dev.
48, 445–458 (2011)
64.99
L.E.
Kahn,
M.L.
Zygman,
W.Z.
Rymer,
D.J.
Reinkensmeyer:
Robot-assisted
reaching
exercise promotes arm movement recovery in
chronic hemiparetic stroke: A randomized con-
trolled pilot study, J. Neuroeng. Neurorehabil. 3,
12 (2006)
64.100
S. Hesse, C. Werner, M. Pohl, S. Rueckriem,
J. Mehrholz, M.L. Lingnau: Computerized arm
training
improves the motor control of the
severely affected arm after stroke: A single-
blinded randomized trial in two centers, Stroke
36, 1960–1966 (2005)
64.101
D. Reinkensmeyer, J. Emken, S. Cramer: Robotics,
motor learning, and neurologic recovery, Annu.
Rev. Biomed. Eng. 6, 497–525 (2004)
64.102
F. Amirabdollahian, E. Gradwell, R. Loureiro,
W. Harwin: Effects of the GENTLE/S robot mediated
therapy on the outcome of upper limb rehabili-
tation post-stroke: Analysis of the Battle Hospital
data, Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robotics (2003)
pp. 55–58
64.103
F. Amirabdollahian, R. Loureiro, E. Gradwell,
C. Collin, W. Harwin, G. Johnson: Multivariate
analysis of the Fugl-Meyer outcome measures as-
sessing the effectiveness of GENTLE/S robot-me-
diated stroke therapy, J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 19, 4
(2007)
64.104
A.S. Merians, H. Poizner, R. Boian, G. Burdea,
S. Adamovich: Sensorimotor training in a virtual
reality environment: Does it improve functional
recovery poststroke? The Rutgers arm, a reha-
bilitation system in virtual reality: A pilot study,
Neurorehabil. Neural Repair. 20, 252–267 (2006)
64.105
R. Colombo, F. Pisano, S. Micera, A. Mazzone,
C. Delconte, M. Carrozza, P. Dario, G. Minuco:
Robotic techniques for upper limb evaluation and
rehabilitation of stroke patients, IEEE Trans. Neu-
ral Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 13, 311–324 (2005)
64.106
R.J. Sanchez, J. Liu, S. Rao, P. Shah, R. Smith,
S.C. Cramer, J.E. Bobrow, D.J. Reinkensmeyer: Au-
tomating arm movement training following se-
vere stroke: Functional exercises with quantita-
tive feedback in a gravity-reduced environment,
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 14, 378–389
(2006)
64.107
S.J. Housman, K.M. Scott, D.J. Reinkensmeyer:
A randomized controlled trial of gravity-sup-
ported, computer-enhanced arm exercise for in-
dividuals with severe hemiparesis, Neurorehabil.
Neural Repair 23, 505–514 (2009)
64.108
D. Gijbels, I. Lamers, L. Kerkhofs, G. Alders,
E. Knippenberg, P. Feys: The armeo spring as
training tool to improve upper limb functionality
in multiple sclerosis: A pilot study, J. Neuroeng.
Rehabil. 8, 5 (2011)
64.109
J. Zariffa, N. Kapadia, J.L. Kramer, P. Taylor,
M. Alizadeh-Meghrazi, V. Zivanovic, R. Williams,
A. Townson, A. Curt, M.R. Popovic, J.D. Steeves:
Feasibility and efficacy of upper limb robotic
rehabilitation
in
a
subacute
cervical
spinal
cord injury population, Spinal Cord 50, 220–226
(2012)
64.110
L. Schwickert, J. Klenk, A. Stähler, C. Becker,
U. Lindemann: Robotic-assisted rehabilitation of
proximal humerus fractures in virtual environ-
ments: A pilot study, Z. Gerontol. Geriatr. 44,
387–392 (2011)
64.111
S. Masiero, A. Celia, G. Rosati, M. Armani: Robotic-
assisted rehabilitation of the the upper limb after
acute stroke, Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 88, 142–
149 (2007)
64.112
G. Fazekas, M. Horvath, A. Toth: A novel robot
training system designed to supplement up-
per limb physiotherapy of patients with spastic
hemiparesis, Int. J. Rehabil. Res. 29, 251–254
(2006)
64.113
T. Nef, R. Riener: ARMin – Design of a novel arm
rehabilitation robot, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil.
Robotics (2005) pp. 57–60
64.114
E. Wolbrecht, J. Leavitt, D. Reinkensmeyer, J. Bo-
brow: Control of a pneumatic orthosis for upper
extremity stroke rehabilitation, IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Conf. (2006) pp. 2687–2693

Part F | 64
1722
Part F
Robots at Work
64.115
J. Klein, S.J. Spencer, J. Allington, J.E. Bobrow,
D.J. Reinkensmeyer: Optimization of a parallel
shoulder mechanism to achieve a high force,
low mass, robotic arm exoskeleton, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 26, 710–715 (2010)
64.116
J.L. Patton, G. Dawe, C. Scharver, F.A. Mussa-
Ivaldi, R. Kenyon: Robotics and virtual reality:
The development of a life-sized 3-D system for
the rehabilitation of motor function, IEEE 26th
Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. (2004)
pp. 4840–4843
64.117
H. Huang, J. He: Utilization of biomechanical
modeling in design of robotic arm for rehabilita-
tion of stroke patients, IEEE 26th Annu. Int. Conf.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Vol. 4 (2004) pp. 2718–
2721
64.118
J.C. Perry, J. Rosen, S. Burns: Upper-limb powered
exoskeleton design, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron.
12, 408–417 (2007)
64.119
R. Gopura, K. Kiguchi, Y. Li: SUEFUL-7: A 7DOF up-
per-limb exoskeleton robot with muscle-model-
oriented EMG-based control, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2009) pp. 1126–1131
64.120
N.
Jarrasse,
M.
Tagliabue,
J.V.G.
Robertson,
A. Maiza, V. Crocher, A. Roby-Brami, G. Morel:
A methodology to quantify alterations in human
upper limb movement during co-manipulation
with an exoskeleton, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Re-
habil. Eng. 18, 389–397 (2010)
64.121
B.-C. Tsai, W.-W. Wang, L.-C. Hsu, L.-C. Fu, J.-
S. Lai: An articulated rehabilitation robot for
upper limb physiotherapy and training, 2010
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2010)
pp. 1470–1475
64.122
M.J. Johnson, H.F.M. Van der Loos, C.G. Burgar,
P. Shor, L.J. Leifer: Experimental results using
force-feedback cueing in robot-assisted stroke
therapy, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 13,
335–348 (2005)
64.123
D. Reinkensmeyer, C. Pang, J. Nessler, C. Painter:
Web-based telerehabilitation for the upper-ex-
tremity after stroke, IEEE Trans. Neural Sci. Reha-
bil. Eng. 10, 1–7 (2002)
64.124
X. Feng, J. Winters: UniTherapy: A computer-
assisted motivating neurorehabilitation platform
for teleassessment and remote therapy, IEEE Int.
Conf. Rehabil. Robotics (2005) pp. 349–352
64.125
H. Sugarman, E. Dayan, A. Weisel-Eichler, J. Tiran:
The jerusalem telerehabilitation system, a new
low-cost, haptic rehabilitation approach, Cy-
berpsychol. Behav. 9, 178–182 (2006)
64.126
L. Zollo, D. Accoto, F. Torchiani, D. Formica,
E. Guglielmelli: Design of a planar robotic ma-
chine for neuro-rehabilitation, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2008) pp. 2031–2036
64.127
L. Zollo, A. Salerno, M. Vespignani, D. Accoto,
M. Passalacqua, E. Guglielmelli: Dynamic char-
acterization and interaction control of the CBM-
Motus robot for upper-limb rehabilitation, Int.
J. Adv. Robotic Syst. 10, 374 (2013)
64.128
O. Lambercy, L. Dovat, H. Yun, S.K. Wee, C. Kuah,
K.
Chua,
R.
Gassert, T.
Milner,
L.-T.
Chee,
E. Rurdet: Rehabilitation of grasping and fore-
arm pronation/supination with the Haptic Knob,
IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robotics (2009) pp. 22–
27
64.129
L. Dovat, O. Lambercy, R. Gassert, T. Maeder,
T. Milner, T.C. Leong, E. Burdet: HandCARE: A ca-
ble-actuated rehabilitation system to train hand
function after stroke, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Re-
habil. Eng. 16, 582–591 (2008)
64.130
S. Hesse, H. Kuhlmann, J. Wilk, C. Tomelleri,
S.G.B. Kirker: A new electromechanical trainer for
sensorimotor rehabilitation of paralysed fingers:
A case series in chronic and acute stroke patients,
J. NeuroEng. Rehabil. 5, 21 (2008)
64.131
C. Takahashi, L. Der-Yeghiaian, V. Le, S. Cramer:
A robotic device for hand motor therapy after
stroke, IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robotics (2005)
pp. 17–20
64.132
C.N.
Schabowsky,
S.B.
Godfrey,
R.J.
Holley,
P.S. Lum: Development and pilot testing of
HEXORR: Hand EXOskeleton rehabilitation robot,
J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 7, 1–16 (2010)
64.133
S. Ito, H. Kawasaki, Y. Ishigure, M. Natsume,
T. Mouri, Y. Nishimoto: A design of fine motion
assist equipment for disabled hand in robotic re-
habilitation system, J. Frankl. Inst. 348, 79–89
(2011)
64.134
M. Mulas, M. Folgheraiter, G. Gini: An EMG-con-
trolled exoskeleton for hand rehabilitation, Int.
Conf. Rehabil. Robotics (2005) pp. 371–374
64.135
T. Kline, D. Kamper, B. Schmit: Control system
for pneumatically controlled glove to assist in
grasp activities, Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robotics (2005)
pp. 78–81
64.136
B. Birch, E. Haslam, I. Heerah, N. Dechev, E. Park:
Design of a continuous passive and active motion
device for hand rehabilitation, IEEE 30th Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. (2008) pp. 4306–
4309
64.137
H. Yamaura, K. Matsushita, R. Kato, H. Yokoi: De-
velopment of hand rehabilitation system using
wire-driven link mechanism for paralysis pa-
tients, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Biomim. (ROBIO)
(2009) pp. 209–214
64.138
H. Taheri, J.B. Rowe, D. Gardner, V. Chan,
D.J. Reinkensmeyer, E.T. Wolbrecht: Robot-as-
sisted guitar hero for finger rehabilitation after
stroke, IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.
(2012) pp. 3911–3917
64.139
S. Balasubramanian, J. Klein, E. Burdet: Robot-
assisted rehabilitation of hand function, Curr.
Opin. Neurol. 23, 661–670 (2010)
64.140
B.R. Brewer, M. Fagan, R.L. Klatzky, Y. Matsuoka:
Perceptual limits for a robotic rehabilitation en-
vironment using visual feedback distortion, IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 13, 1–11 (2005)
64.141
O.
Lambercy,
L.
Dovat,
H.
Yun,
S.K.
Wee,
C.W.K. Kuah, K.S.G. Chua, Z. Gassert, T.E. Milner,
L.T. Chee, E. Burdet: Effects of a robot-assisted
training of grasp and pronation/supination in
chronic stroke: A pilot study, J. Neuroeng. Reha-
bil. 8(1), 63 (2011)

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
References
1723
Part F | 64
64.142
S.P.
Mazzoleni,
M.
Franceschini,
S.
Bigazzi,
M.C. Carrozza, P. Dario, F. Posteraro: Effects of
proximal and distal robot-assisted upper limb
rehabilitation on chronic stroke recovery, Neu-
roRehabilitation 33(1), 33–39 (2013)
64.143
T. Boonstra, H. Clairbois, A. Daffertshofer, J. Ver-
bunt, B. van Dijk, P. Beek: MEG-compatible force
sensor, J. Neurosci. Methods 144, 193–196 (2005)
64.144
R. Gassert, R. Moser, E. Burdet, H. Bleuler:
MRI/fMRI-compatible robotic system with force
feedback
for
interaction
with
human
mo-
tion, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 11, 216–224
(2006)
64.145
Z.J. Tang, S. Sugano, H. Iwata: Design of an MRI
compatible robot for finger rehabilitation, Int.
Conf. Mechatron. Autom. (ICMA) (2012) pp. 611–616
64.146
O.
Unluhisarcikli,
B.
Weinberg,
M.
Sivak,
A. Mirelman, P. Bonato, C. Mavroidis: A robotic
hand
rehabilitation
system
with
interactive
gaming using novel electro-rheological fluid
based actuators, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2010) pp. 1846–1851
64.147
A. Khanicheh, D. Mintzopoulos, B. Weinberg,
A.A. Tzika, C. Mavroidis: MR_CHIROD v. 2: Magnetic
resonance compatible smart hand rehabilitation
device for brain imaging, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehabil. Eng. 16, 91–98 (2008)
64.148
J. Izawa, T. Shimizu, T. Aodai, T. Kondo, H. Gomi,
S. Toyama, K. Ito: MR compatible manipulandum
with ultrasonic motor for fMRI studies, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom (ICRA) (2006) pp. 3850–
3854
64.149
F. Sergi, H.I. Krebs, B. Groissier, A. Rykman,
E. Guglielmelli, B.T. Volpe, J.D. Schaechter: Pre-
dicting efficacy of robot-aided rehabilitation in
chronic stroke patients using an MRI-compatible
robotic device, IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc. (2011) pp. 7470–7473
64.150
E.
Buch,
C.
Weber,
L.G.
Cohen,
C.
Brawn,
M.A. Dimyan, T. Ard, J. Mellinger, A. Caria,
S. Soekadar, A. Fourkas, N. Birbaumer: Think to
move: A neuromagnetic brain-computer interface
(BCI) system for chronic stroke, Stroke 39(3), 910–
917 (2008)
64.151
E.T. Wolbrecht, V. Chan, D.J. Reinkensmeyer,
J.E. Bobrow: Optimizing compliant, model-based
robotic assistance to promote neurorehabilita-
tion, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 16,
286–297 (2008)
64.152
J.L. Patton, M. Kovic, F.A. Mussa-Ivaldi: Custom-
designed haptic training for restoring reaching
ability to individuals with poststroke hemipare-
sis, J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 43, 643–656 (2006)
64.153
R.G. Lovely, R.J. Gregor, R.R. Roy, V.R. Edgerton:
Effects of training on the recovery of full weight-
bearing stepping in the adult spinal cat, Exp.
Neurol. 92, 421–435 (1986)
64.154
H. Barbeau, S. Rossignol: Recovery of locomotion
after chronic spinalization in the adult cat, Brain
Res. 412, 84–95 (1987)
64.155
M. Visintin, H. Barbeau, N. Korner-Bitensky,
N. Mayo: A new approach to retrain gait in stroke
patients through body weight support and tread-
mill stimulation, Stroke 29, 1122–1128 (1998)
64.156
S. Hesse, C. Bertelt, M. Jahnke, A. Schaffrin,
P. Baake, M. Malezic, K.H. Mauritz: Treadmill
training with partial body weight support com-
pared with physiotherapy in nonambulatory
hemiparetic patients, Stroke 26, 976–981 (1995)
64.157
A. Wernig, A. Nanassy, S. Muller: Maintenance
of locomotor abilities following Laufband (tread-
mill) therapy in para- and tetraplegic persons:
Follow-up studies, Spinal Cord 36, 744–749 (1998)
64.158
A.L. Behrman, S.J. Harkema: Locomotor training
after human spinal cord injury: A series of case
studies, Phys. Ther. 80, 688–700 (2000)
64.159
H. Barbeau: Locomotor training in neurorehabil-
itation: Emerging rehabilitation concepts, Neu-
rorehabil. Neural Repair 17, 3–11 (2003)
64.160
B. Dobkin, D. Apple, H. Barbeau, M. Basso,
A. Behrman, D. Deforge, J. Ditunno, G. Dudley,
R. Elashoff, L. Fugate, S. Harkema, M. Saulino,
M. Scott: Weight-supported treadmill vs. over-
ground training for walking after acute incom-
plete SCI, Neurology 66, 484–493 (2006)
64.161
T.G. Hornby: Clinical and quantitative evaluation
of robotic-assisted treadmill walking to retrain
ambulation after spinal cord injury, Top. Spinal
Cord Inj. Rehabil. 11, 1–17 (2005)
64.162
L.
Nilsson,
K.
Fugl-Meyer,
L.
Kristensen,
B. Sjölund, K. Sunnerhagen: Walking
train-
ing of patients with hemiparesis at an early stage
after stroke: A comparison of walking training
on a treadmill with body weight support and
walking training on the ground, Clin. Rehabil.
15, 515–527 (2001)
64.163
C. Werner, A. Bardeleben, K. Mauritz, S. Kirker,
S. Hesse: Treadmill training with partial body
weight support and physiotherapy in stroke pa-
tients: A preliminary comparison, Eur. J. Neurol.
9, 639–644 (2002)
64.164
S. Hesse, C. Werner, H. Seibel, S. von Frankenberg,
E. Kappel, S. Kirker, M. Käding: Treadmill training
with partial body-weight support after total hip
arthroplasty: A randomized controlled trial, Arch.
Phys. Med. Rehabil. 84, 1767–1773 (2003)
64.165
T. Brown, J. Mount, B. Rouland, K. Kautz,
R. Barnes, J. Kim: Body weight-supported tread-
mill training versus conventional gait training
for people with chronic traumatic brain injury,
J. Head. Trauma. Rehabil. 20, 402–415 (2005)
64.166
P.W.
Duncan,
K.J.
Sullivan,
A.L.
Behrman,
S.P. Azen, S.S. Wu, S.E. Nadeau, B.H. Dobkin,
D.K. Rose, J.K. Tilson, S. Cen, S.H. Hayden: Body-
weight-supported treadmill rehabilitation after
stroke, N. Engl. J. Med. 364, 2026–2036 (2011)
64.167
S. Freivogel, J. Mehrholz, T. Husak-Sotomayor,
D. Schmalohr: Gait training with the newly devel-
oped LokoHelp-system is feasible for non-ambu-
latory patients after stroke, spinal cord and brain
injury. A feasibility study, Brain Inj. 22, 625–632
(2008)
64.168
Reha-Technology:
http://www.rehatechnology.
com/ (2012)

Part F | 64
1724
Part F
Robots at Work
64.169
C. Werner, S. Von Frankenberg, T. Treig, M. Kon-
rad, S. Hesse: Treadmill training with partial body
weight support and an electromechanical gait
trainer for restoration of gait in subacute stroke
patients: A randomized crossover study, Stroke 33,
2895–2901 (2002)
64.170
M. Pohl, C. Werner, M. Holzgraefe, G. Kroczek,
J. Mehrholz, I. Wingendorf, G. Hoölig, R. Koch,
S. Hesse: Repetitive locomotor training and phys-
iotherapy improve walking and basic activities
of daily living after stroke: A single-blind, ran-
domized multicentre trial (DEutsche GAngtrainer-
Studie, DEGAS), Clin. Rehabil. 21, 17–27 (2007)
64.171
S. Freivogel, D. Schmalohr, J. Mehrholz: Improved
walking ability and reduced therapeutic stress
with an electromechanical gait device, J. Reha-
bil. Med. 41, 734–739 (2009)
64.172
K.P. Westlake, C. Patten: Journal of neuroengi-
neering and rehabilitation, J. Neuroeng. Rehabil.
6, 18 (2009)
64.173
T.G. Hornby, D.D. Campbell, J.H. Kahn, T. Demott,
J.L. Moore, H.R. Roth: Enhanced gait-related im-
provements after therapist- versus robotic-as-
sisted locomotor training in subjects with chronic
stroke: A randomized controlled study, Stroke;
J. Cereb. Circ. 39, 1786–1792 (2008)
64.174
J. Hidler, D. Nichols, M. Pelliccio, K. Brady,
D.D. Campbell, J.H. Kahn, T.G. Hornby: Multi-
center randomized clinical trial evaluating the
effectiveness of the Lokomat in subacute stroke,
Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 23, 5–13 (2009)
64.175
M. Mihelj: Human arm kinematics for robot based
rehabilitation, Robotica 24, 377–384 (2006)
64.176
S. Hesse, C. Tomelleri, A. Bardeleben, C. Werner,
A. Waldner: Robot-assisted practice of gait and
stair climbing in nonambulatory stroke patients,
J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 49, 613–622 (2012)
64.177
S. Hesse, C. Werner, A. Bardeleben: Electrome-
chanical gait training with functional electrical
stimulation: Case studies in spinal cord injury,
Spinal Cord 42, 346–352 (2004)
64.178
A. Picelli, C. Melotti, F. Origano, A. Waldner, A. Fi-
aschi, V. Santilli, N. Smania: Robot-assisted gait
training in patients with parkinson disease a ran-
domized controlled trial, Neurorehabil. Neural
Repair 26, 353–361 (2012)
64.179
H. Schmidt, S. Hesse, R. Bernhardt, J. Krüger:
HapticWalker – A novel haptic foot device, ACM
Trans. Appl. Percept. 2, 166–180 (2005)
64.180
S. Jezernik, G. Colombo, M. Morari: Automatic
gait-pattern adaptation algorithms for rehabil-
itation with a 4-DOF robotic orthosis, IEEE Trans.
Robotics Autom. 20, 574–582 (2004)
64.181
D. Reinkensmeyer, D. Aoyagi, J. Emken, J. Galvez,
W. Ichinose, G. Kerdanyan, S. Maneekobkun-
wong,
K.
Minakata,
J.A.
Nessler, R. Weber,
B.R. Roy, R. de Leon, J.E. Bobrow, S.J. Harkema,
V.R. Edgerton: Tools for understanding and opti-
mizing robotic gait training, J. Rehabil. Res. Dev.
43, 657–670 (2006)
64.182
D. Surdilovic, R. Bernhardt: STRING-MAN: A new
wire robot for gait rehabilitation, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 2031–2036
64.183
J.F. Veneman, R. Ekkelenkamp, R. Kruidhof,
F.C.T. van der Helm, H. van der Kooij: A se-
ries elastic- and bowden-cable-based actuation
system for use as torque actuator in exoskele-
ton-type robots, Int. J. Robotics Res. 25, 261–282
(2006)
64.184
J.A. Galvez, D.J. Reinkensmeyer: Robotics for gait
training after spinal cord injury, Top. Spinal Cord
Inj. Rehabil. 11, 18–33 (2005)
64.185
D.
Aoyagi,
W.E.
Ichinose,
S.J.
Harkema,
D.J.
Reinkensmeyer,
J.E.
Bobrow:
An
assis-
tive robotic device that can synchronize
to
the pelvic motion during human gait train-
ing, IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robotics (2005)
pp. 565–568
64.186
S. Jezernik, R. Scharer, G. Colombo, M. Morari:
Adaptive robotic rehabilitation of locomotion:
A clinical study in spinally injured individuals,
Spinal Cord 41, 657–666 (2003)
64.187
D. Aoyagi: Ph.D. Thesis Ser. (Department of Me-
chanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of
California at Irvine 2006)
64.188
University of Twente, The Netherlands: http://
www.utwente.nl/ctw/bw/research/projects/
lopes/
64.189
J.F. Veneman, R. Kruidhof, E.E. Hekman, R. Ekke-
lenkamp, E.H. Van Asseldonk, H. van der Kooij:
Design and evaluation of the LOPES exoskele-
ton robot for interactive gait rehabilitation, IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 15, 379–386
(2007)
64.190
G. Pratt, M. Williamson, P. Dillworth, J. Pratt,
K. Ulland, A. Wright: Stiffness isn’t everything, 4th
Int. Symp. Exp. Robotics (1995)
64.191
D. Accoto, F. Sergi, N. Tagliamonte, G. Carpino,
A.
Sudano,
E.
Guglielmelli:
Robomorphism:
A nonanthropomorphic wearable robot, IEEE
Robotics Autom. Mag. 21(4), 45–55 (2014)
64.192
E.H. Van Asseldonk, J.F. Veneman, R. Ekke-
lenkamp, J.H. Buurke, F.C. Van der Helm, H. van
der Kooij: The effects on kinematics and muscle
activity of walking in a robotic gait trainer during
zero-force control, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Reha-
bil. Eng. 16, 360–370 (2008)
64.193
E. Van Asseldonk, R. Ekkelenkamp, J. Veneman,
F. Van der Helm, H. Van der Kooij: Selective con-
trol of a subtask of walking in a robotic gait trainer
(LOPES), IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robotics (2007)
pp. 841–848
64.194
E.H. van Asseldonk, B. Koopman, J.H. Buurke,
C.D. Simons, H. van der Kooij: Selective and adap-
tive robotic support of foot clearance for training
stroke survivors with stiff knee gait, IEEE Int. Conf
Rehabil. Robotics (2009) pp. 602–607
64.195
F. Sergi, D. Accoto, N.L. Tagliamonte, G. Carpino,
E.
Guglielmelli:
A
systematic
graph-based
method for the kinematic synthesis of non-
anthropomorphic wearable robots for the lower
limbs, Front. Mech. Eng. 6(1), 61–70 (2011)
64.196
F. Sergi, D. Accoto, N.L. Tagliamonte, G. Carpino,
S. Galzerano, E. Guglielmelli: Kinematic synthesis,

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
References
1725
Part F | 64
optimization and analysis of a non-anthropo-
morphic 2-DOFs wearable orthosis for gait assis-
tance, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2012)
64.197
N.L. Tagliamonte, D. Accoto, F. Sergi, A. Su-
dano, D. Formica, E. Guglielmelli: Muscular ac-
tivity when walking in a non-anthropomorphic
wearable robot, IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc. (2014) pp. 3073–3076
64.198
D. Accoto, G. Carpino, F. Sergi, N.L. Tagliamonte,
L. Zollo, E. Guglielmelli: Design and characteriza-
tion of a novel high-power series elastic actuator
for a lower limb robotic orthosis, Int. J. Adv.
Robotics Syst. 10, 359 (2013)
64.199
M. Peshkin, D.A. Brown, J.J. Santos-Munne,
A. Makhlin, E. Lewis, J.E. Colgate, J. Patton,
D. Schwandt: KineAssist: A robotic overground
gait and balance training device, IEEE Int. Conf.
Rehabil. Robotics (2005) pp. 241–246
64.200
HDT
Global,
USA:
http://www.hdtglobal.com/
services/robotics/medical/kineassist/
64.201
Univ.
of
Delaware,
USA:
http://www.udel.
edu/udmessenger/vol17no1/stories/robotic_
exoskeleton.html
64.202
D. Ferris: Powered lower limb orthoses for gait
rehabilitation, Top. Spinal Cord Inj. Rehabil. 11,
34–49 (2005)
64.203
J. Deutsch, J. Latonio, G. Burdea, R. Boian:
Post-stroke rehabilitation with the Rutgers An-
kle system – A case study, Presence 10, 416–430
(2001)
64.204
S. Agrawal, A. Fattah: Theory and design of an or-
thotic device for full or partial gravity-balancing
of a human leg during motion, IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 12, 157–165 (2004)
64.205
S.K. Banala, S.K. Agrawal: Gait rehabilitation with
an active leg orthosis, Proc. ASME Int. Des. Eng.
Tech. Conf. Comput. Inf. Eng. Conf. (2005)
64.206
J. Kawamura, T. Ide, S. Hayashi, H. Ono, T. Honda:
Automatic suspension device for gait training,
Prosthet. Orthot. Int. 17, 120–125 (1993)
64.207
S. Banala, S.H. Kim, S. Agrawal, J. Scholz: Robot
assisted gait training with active leg exoskeleton
(ALEX), IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 17,
2–8 (2009)
64.208
I. Díaz, J.J. Gil, E. Sánchez: Lower-limb robotic
rehabilitation: Literature review and challenges,
J. Robotics 2011, 759–764 (2011)
64.209
R.F. Erlandson, P. deBear, K. Kristy, M. Dijkers,
S. Wu: A robotic system to provide movement
therapy, Proc. 5th Int. Serv. Robot Conf. (1990)
pp. 7–15
64.210
M.J. Rosen: Telerehabilitation, NeuroRehabilita-
tion 12, 11–26 (1999)
64.211
J. Borenstein, I. Ulrich: The guidecane – A com-
puterized travel aid for the active guidance of
blind pedestrians, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (1997) pp. 1283–1288
64.212
I. Ulrich, J. Borenstein: The guidecane-applying
mobile robot technologies to assist the visually
impaired, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 31(2), 131–
136 (2001)
64.213
L. Zollo, K. Wada, H. Van der Loos: Special issue
on assistive robotics, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag.
20, 16–19 (2013)
64.214
A. Tapus, M. Mataric, B. Scassellati: Socially as-
sistive robotics - The grand challenges in helping
humans through social interaction, IEEE Robotics
Autom. Mag. 14, 35–42 (2007)
64.215
National Robotics Initiative: The realization of co-
robots acting in direct support of individuals and
groups, available online at http://www.nsf.gov/
pubs/2012/nsf12607/nsf12607.htm (2012)
64.216
C. Stanger, M. Cawley: Demographics of rehabili-
tation robotics users, Technol. Disabil. 5, 125–138
(1996)
64.217
J. Hammel: The role of assessment and evaluation
in rehabilitation robotics research and develop-
ment: Moving from concept to clinic to context,
IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng. 3, 56–61 (1995)
64.218
J.J. Wagner, H.F.M. Van der Loos, L.J. Leifer: Dual-
character based user interface design for an assis-
tive robot, IEEE Int. Workshop Robot Hum. Com-
mun. (RO-MAN) (1998) pp. 101–106
64.219
H.F.M. Van der Loos, J. Hammel, D.S. Lees,
D. Chang, I. Perkash: Field evaluation of a robot
workstation for quadriplegic office workers, Eur.
Rev. Biomed. Tech. 5, 317–319 (1990)
64.220
J.J. Wagner, H.F.M. Van der Loos, L.J. Leifer: Con-
struction of social relationships between user and
robot, Robotics Auton. Syst. 31, 185–191 (2000)
64.221
M.J. Johnson, E. Guglielmelli, G.A. Di Lauro,
C. Laschi, M.C. Carrozza, P. Dario: GIVING-A-
HAND system: The development of a task-specific
robot appliance. In: Advances in Rehabilitation
Robotics, ed. by Z. Bien, D. Stefanov (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 2004) pp. 127–141
64.222
S. Groothuis, S. Stramigioli, R. Carloni: Lending
a helping hand: Towards novel assistive robotic
arms, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 20(1), 20–29
(2013)
64.223
Kinova: JACO Arm user guide, available online at
http://www.robotshop.com (2010)
64.224
Assistive Innovations: iARM intelligent arm robot
manipulator, available online at http://assistive-
innovations.com (2010)
64.225
W. Yoon: Robotic arm for persons with upper-
limb DisAbilities (RAPUDA), AIST Today 36, 20 (2010)
64.226
T. Barrett Inc.: WAM Arm datasheet, available on-
line at http://www.barrett.com (2012)
64.227
Elumotion: Elumotion RT2-Arm, available online
at http://www.elumotion.com (2012)
64.228
G.
Hirzinger,
N.
Sporer,
A.
Albu-Schaffer,
M. Hahnle, R. Krenn, A. Pascucci, M. Schedl:
DLR’s torque-controlled light weight robot III–
are we reaching the technological limits now?,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002)
pp. 1710–1716
64.229
H.F.M. Van der Loos, N. Ullrich, H. Kobayashi: De-
velopment of sensate and robotic bed technolo-
gies for vital signs monitoring and sleep quality
improvement, Auton. Robots 15, 67–79 (2003)
64.230
T. Sato, T. Harada, T. Mori: Environment-type
robot system robotic room featured by behavior

Part F | 64
1726
Part F
Robots at Work
media, behavior contents, and behavior adap-
tation, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 9, 529–534
(2004)
64.231
G. Romer, H.J.A. Stuyt, A. Peters: Cost-savings
and economic benefits due to the assistive
robotic manipulator (ARM), IEEE Int. Conf. Reha-
bil. Robotics (2005) pp. 201–204
64.232
M. Hillman, K. Hagan, S. Hagan, J. Jepson, R. Orp-
wood: The Weston wheelchair mounted assistive
robot – the design story, Robotica 20(2), 125–132
(2002)
64.233
B.V. FOCAL-Meditech: Personal Robot Bridgit,
available online at http://www.focalmeditech.nl
(2012)
64.234
J.F. Engelberger: Health-care robotics goes com-
mercial: The HelpMate experience, Robotica 11,
517–524 (1993)
64.235
P. Dario, C. Laschi, E. Guglielmelli: Design and ex-
periments on a personal robotic assistant, Adv.
Robotics 13, 153–169 (1999)
64.236
European Union: Robot-Era: Implementation and
integration of advanced robotic systems, avail-
able online at http://www.robot-era.eu/robotera
(2012)
64.237
B. Graf, M. Hans, R.D. Schraft: Care-O-bot II —
Development of a next generation robotic home
assistant, Auton. Robots 16, 193–205 (2004)
64.238
T.L. Chen, M. Ciocarlie, S. Cousins, P. Grice,
K. Hawkins, K. Hsiao, C.C. Kemp, C.-H. King,
D.A. Lazewatsky, H. Ngyen, A. Paepcke, C. Panto-
faru, W.D. Smart, L. Takayama: Robots for human-
ity: A case study in assistive mobile manipulation,
IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 20(1), 30–39 (2013)
64.239
P. Dario, E. Guglielmelli, C. Laschi, G. Teti: MOVAID:
A personal robot in everyday life of disabled and
elderly people, Technol. Disabil. 10, 77–93 (1999)
64.240
R.C. Simpson: Smart wheelchairs: A literature re-
view, J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 42, 423–436 (2004)
64.241
S.P. Levine, D.A. Bell, L.A. Jaros, R.C. Simpson,
Y. Koren, J. Borenstein: The navchair assistive
wheelchair navigation system, IEEE Trans. Reha-
bil. Eng. E 7, 443–451 (1999)
64.242
H. Yanco: Wheelesley: A robotic wheelchair sys-
tem: Indoor navigation and user interface, Lect.
Notes Comput. Sci. 1458, 256–268 (1998)
64.243
P. Encarnação: Understanding and improving
power mobility use among older adults: An
overview of the canwheel program of research,
Assist. Technol. Res. Pract. 33, 210 (2013)
64.244
P.
Viswanathan,
A.K.
Mackworth,
J.J.
Little,
J. Hoey, A. Mihailidis: NOAH for wheelchair users
with cognitive impairment: Navigation and ob-
stacle avoidance help, AAAI Fall Symp. AI Eldercare
New Solut. Old Prob. (2008) pp. 150–152
64.245
T.-V. How, R.H. Wang, A. Mihailidis: Evaluation of
an intelligent wheelchair system for older adults
with cognitive impairments, J. Neuroeng. Reha-
bil. 10, 90 (2013)
64.246
R.A.M. Braga, M. Petry, L.P. Reis, A.P. Moreira:
Intellwheels: Modular development platform for
intelligent wheelchairs, J. Rehabil. Res. Dev.
48(9), 1061–1076 (2011)
64.247
B.M. Faria, L.P. Reis, N. Lau: Adapted control
methods for cerebral palsy users of an intelli-
gent wheelchair, J. Intell. Robotics Syst. 77(2), 1–14
(2014)
64.248
M. Bailey, A. Chanler, B. Maxwell, M. Micire,
K. Tsui, H. Yanco: Development of vision-based
navigation for a robotic wheelchair, IEEE Int. Conf.
Rehabil. Robotics (2007) pp. 951–957
64.249
D.
Ding,
R.A.
Cooper:
Electric
powered
wheelchairs,
IEEE
Control
Syst.
25(2),
22–34
(2005)
64.250
K.M.
Tsui,
H.A.
Yanco,
D.J.
Feil-Seifer,
M.J. Matarić: Survey of domain-specific perfor-
mance measures in assistive robotic technology,
Proc. ACM 8th Workshop Perform. Metr. Intell.
Syst. (2008) pp. 116–123
64.251
M.A. Peshkin, J.E. Colgate, W. Wannasuphoprasit,
C.A. Moore, R.B. Gillerpie, P. Akella: Cobot archi-
tecture, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 17(4), 377–390
(2001)
64.252
J. Colgate, J. Edward, M.A. Peshkin, W. Wan-
nasuphoprasit: Cobots: Robots for Collaboration
with Human Operators (Northwestern University,
Evanston 1996)
64.253
C.A. Moore, M.A. Peshkin, J.E. Colgate: Cobot im-
plementation of virtual paths and 3D virtual sur-
faces, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 19(2), 347–351
(2003)
64.254
G. Lacey, S. MacNamara: User involvement in the
design and evaluation of a smart mobility aid,
J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 37(6), 709–723 (2000)
64.255
A.M. Dollar, H. Herr: Lower extremity exoskeletons
and active orthoses: Challenges and state-of-
the-art, IEEE Trans. Robotics 24, 144–158 (2008)
64.256
H. Herr: Exoskeletons and orthoses: Classification,
design challenges and future directions, J. Neu-
roeng. Rehabil. 6, 21 (2009)
64.257
J.L. Pons: Rehabilitation exoskeletal robotics, IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Mag. 29, 57–63 (2010)
64.258
E. Strickland: Good-bye, wheelchair, hello, exo-
skeleton,
http://spectrum.ieee.org/biomedical/
bionics/goodbye-wheelchair-hello-exoskeleton
64.259
T.A. Swift, K.A. Strausser, A. Zoss, H. Kazerooni:
Control and experimental results for post stroke
gait rehabilitation with a prototype mobile med-
ical exoskeleton, ASME Dyn. Syst. Control Conf.
(2010)
64.260
K.A. Strausser, T.A. Swift, A. Zoss, H. Kazerooni:
Prototype medical exoskeleton for paraplegic mo-
bility: First experimental results, ASME Dyn. Syst.
Control Conf. 2010, Cambridge (2010)
64.261
Argo-Medical: http://www.rewalk.com/ (2012)
64.262
T. Engineer: Rewalk is a new exoskeleton that lets
paralysed people walk again, available online at
http://wonderfulengineering.com/rewalk-is-a-
new-exoskeleton-that-lets-paralysed-people-
walk-again/
64.263
H. Kawamoto, Y. Sankai: Power assist system HAL3
for gait disorder person, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci.
2398, 196–203 (2002)
64.264
K. Suzuki, Y. Kawamura, T. Hayashi, T. Sakurai,
Y. Hasegawa, Y. Sankai: Intention-based walking

Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
References
1727
Part F | 64
support for paraplegia patient, IEEE Int. Conf. Syst.
Man Cybern., Vol. 3 (2006) pp. 2707–2713
64.265
R. Farris, H. Quintero, M. Goldfarb: Preliminary
evaluation of a powered lower limb orthosis to
aid walking in paraplegic individuals, IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 19(6), 652–659 (2011)
64.266
Rex-Bionics: http://www.rexbionics.com (2012)
64.267
R.F.F. Weir: Design of artificial arms and hands
for prosthetic applications. In: Standard Hand-
book of Biomedical Engineering and Design, ed.
by M. Kutz (McGraw-Hill, New York 2003) pp. 32.1–
32.61
64.268
T.A. Kuiken, G.A. Dumanian, R.D. Lipschutz,
L.A. Miller, K.A. Stubblefield: The use of targeted
muscle reinnervation for improved myoelectric
prosthesis control in a bilateral shoulder disar-
ticulation amputee, Prosthet. Orthot. Int. 28(3),
245–253 (2004)
64.269
T.A. Kuiken, L.A. Miller, R.D. Lipschutz, B.A. Lock,
K. Stubblefield, P.D. Marasco, P. Zhou, G.A. Duma-
nian: Targeted reinnervation for enhanced pros-
thetic arm function in a woman with a proximal
amputation: A case study, Lancet 369, 371–380
(2007)
64.270
G.S. Dhillon, K.W. Horch: Direct neural sensory
feedback and control of a prosthetic arm, IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 13, 468–472
(2005)
64.271
K.P. Hoffmann, K.P. Koch, T. Doerge, S. Micera:
New technologies in manufacturing of differ-
ent implantable microelectrodes as an interface
to the peripheral nervous system, IEEE/RAS-EMBS
Int. Conf. Biomed. Robotics Biomech. (BioRob)
(2006) pp. 414–419
64.272
P.M. Rossini, S. Micera, A. Benvenuto, J. Carpane-
to, G. Cavallo, L. Citi, C. Cipriani, L. Denaro, V. De-
naro, G. Di Pino, F. Ferrari, E. Guglielmelli, K.-
P. Hoffmann, S. Raspopovic, J. Rigosa, L. Rossini,
M. Tombini, P. Dario: Double nerve intraneural in-
terface implant on a human amputee for robotic
hand control, Clin. Neurophys. 121, 777–783 (2010)
64.273
S. Raspopovic, M. Capogrosso, F.M. Petrini, M. Bo-
nizzato, J. Rigosa, G. Di Pino, I. Carpanedo,
M. Controzzi, T. Boretius, E. Fernandez, G. Gra-
nata, C.M. Oddo, L. Citi, A.L. Ciancio, C. Cipri-
ani, M.C. Carrozza, W. Jensen, E. Guglielmelli,
T. Stieglitz, P.M. Rossini, S. Mieera: Restoring nat-
ural sensory feedback in real-time bidirectional
hand prostheses, Sci. Transl. Med. 6(222), 222ra19
(2014)
64.274
S.G. Meek, S.C. Jacobsen, P.P. Goulding: Extended
physiologic taction: Design and evaluation of
a proportional force feedback system. J. Rehabil.
Res, Dev. 26(3), 53–62 (1989)
64.275
H.M. Herr, J.A. Weber, S.K. Au, B.W. Deffenbaugh,
L.H. Magnusson, A.G. Hofmann, B.B. Aisen: Pow-
ered ankle food prothesis, US Patent Ser 851 2415
B2 (2013)
64.276
Nature
442
(7099):
http://www.nature.com/
nature/journal/v442/n7099/index.html, 109–222,
2006
64.277
L.R.
Hochberg,
M.D.
Serruya,
G.M.
Friehs,
J.A. Mukand, M. Saleh, A.H. Caplan, A. Branner,
D. Chen, R.D. Penn, J.P. Donoghve: Neuronal
ensemble
control
of
prosthetic
devices
by
a human with tetraplegia, Nature 442, 164–171
(2006)
64.278
C. Babiloni, V. Pizzella, C.D. Gratta, A. Ferretti,
G.L. Romani: Fundamentals of electroencefalog-
raphy, magnetoencefalography, and functional
magnetic resonance imaging, Int. Rev. Neurobiol.
86, 67–80 (2009)
64.279
G.E. Loeb, F.J. Richmond, L.L. Baker: The BION de-
vices: Injectable interfaces with peripheral nerves
and muscles, Neurosurg. Focus 20, E2 (2006)
64.280
R.B. Stein, V. Mushahwar: Reanimating limbs af-
ter injury or disease, Trends Neurosci. 28, 518–524
(2005)
64.281
P.F.
Pasquina,
P.R.
Bryant,
M.E.
Huang,
T.L. Roberts, V.S. Nelson, K.M. Flood: Advances
in amputee care, Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 87,
S34–S43 (2006)
64.282
H. Vallery, J. Veneman, E. van Asseldonk, R. Ekke-
lenkamp, M. Buss, H. van der Kooij: Compli-
ant actuation of rehabilitation robots: Benefits
and limitations of series elastic actuators, IEEE
Robotics Autom. Mag. 15, 60–69 (2008)
64.283
A. Basmajian, E.E. Blanco, H.H. Asada: The
marionette bed: Automated rolling and repo-
sitioning of bedridden patients, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002) pp. 1422–
1427
64.284
F. Kasagami, H. Wang, I. Sakuma, M. Araya,
T. Dohi: Development of a robot to assist patient
transfer, IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man Cybern., Vol. 5
(2004) pp. 4383–4388
64.285
G.D.
Abowd,
M.
Ebling,
G.
Hung,
L.
Hui,
H.W. Gellersen: Context-aware computing, IEEE
Pervasive Comput. 1, 22 (2002)
64.286
M.J. Covington, W. Long, S. Srinivasan, A.K. Dev,
M. Ahamad, G.D. Abowd: Securing Context-Aware
Applications Using Environment Roles (Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta 2001)
64.287
R. Sanchez, D.E.R.I.C. Reinkensmeyer, P. Shah,
J. Liu, S. Rao, R. Smith, J. Bobrow: Monitor-
ing functional arm movement for home-based
therapy after stroke, IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc. Chicago, Vol. 2 (2004) pp. 4787–
4790
64.288
S.J. Housman, V. Le, T. Rahman, R.J. Sanchez,
D.J. Reinkensmeyer: Arm-training with T-WREX
after chronic stroke: Preliminary results of a ran-
domized controlled trial, IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil.
Robotics (2007) pp. 562–568
64.289
A.J.
Butler,
C.
Bay,
D.
Wu,
K.M.
Richards,
S. Buchanan: Expanding tele-rehabilitation of
stroke through in-home robot-assisted therapy,
Int. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 2(184), 2 (2014)
64.290
S.M. Linder, A.B. Rosenfeldt, R.C. Bay, K. Sahu,
S.L. Wolf, J.L. Alberts: Improving quality of life
and depression after stroke through telereha-
bilitation, Am. J. Occup. Ther. 69(2), 6902290020
(2015)

Part F | 64
1728
Part F
Robots at Work
64.291
F.H. Wilhelm, W.T. Roth: Ambulatory assess-
ment of clinical anxiety. In: Ambulatory As-
sessment: Computer-Assisted Psychological and
Psychophysiological Methods in Monitoring and
Field Studies, ed. by J. Fahrenberg, M. Myrteck
(Hogrefe Huber, Seattle 1996) pp. 317–345
64.292
E. Dishman: Inventing wellness systems for aging
in place, Computer 37, 34 (2004)
64.293
H. Zhou, H. Hu: Human motion tracking for reha-
bilitation—A survey, Biomed. Sig. Process. Control
3, 1–18 (2008)
64.294
E. Papaleo, L. Zollo, S. Sterzi, E. Guglielmelli: An
inverse kinematics algorithm for upper-limb joint
reconstruction during robot-aided motor ther-
apy, IEEE/RAS-EMBS Int. Conf. Biomed. Robotics
Biomechatron. (BioRob) (2012) pp. 1983–1988
64.295
M.
Zinn,
B.
Roth,
O.
Khatib,
J.
Salisbury:
A new actuation approach for human friendly
robot design, Int. J. Robotics Res. 23, 379–398
(2004)
64.296
M. Nokata, K. Ikuta, H. Ishii: Safety evaluation
method for rehabilitation robotics. In: Advances
in Rehabilitation Robotics, ed. by Z. Bien, D. Ste-
fanov (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2004) pp. 187–
198
64.297
N. Tejima: Risk reduction mechanisms for safe
rehabilitation robots. In: Advances in Reha-
bilitation Robotics, ed. by Z. Bien, D. Ste-
fanov (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2004) pp. 187–
198
64.298
H.F.M. Van der Loos: Design and engineer-
ing ethics considerations for neurotechnologies,
Camb. Quar. Heal. Ethics 16, 305–309 (2007)
64.299
G. Veruggio: The Roboethics Roadmap, avail-
able online at http://www.roboethics.org/site/
modules/mydownloads/visit.php?cid=1&lid=37
(2007)
64.300
J.F. Engelberger: Robotics in Service (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1989)
64.301
G. Colombo, M. Jorg, V. Dietz: Driven gait orthosis
to do locomotor training of paraplegic patients,
IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Vol. 4
(2000) pp. 3159–3163
64.302
I.T.
Lott,
E.
Doran,
D.M.
Walsh,
M.
Hill:
Telemedicine, dementia and Down syndrome:
Implications for Alzheimer disease, Alzheimer’s
Dement. 2, 179–184 (2006)
64.303
D. Reinkensmeyer, P. Lum, J. Winters: Emerging
technologies for improving access to movement
therapy following neurologic injury. In: Emerging
and Accessible Telecommunications, Information
and Healthcare Technologies: Engineering Chal-
lenges in Enabling Universal Access, ed. by J. Win-
ters, C. Robinson, R. Simpson, G. Vanderheiden
(Rehabiltitation Eng. Soc. North Am., Arlington
2002) pp. 136–150
64.304
M. Lotze, C. Braun, N. Birbaumer, S. Anders,
L.G. Cohen: Motor learning elicited by voluntary
drive, Brain 126, 866–872 (2003)
64.305
J.E. Speich, J. Rosen: Medical robotics. In: Ency-
clopedia of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engi-
neering, ed. by G.E. Wnek, G.L. Bowlin (Marcel
Dekker, New York 2004)
64.306
D.J. Reinkensmeyer, J.L. Emken, S.C. Cramer:
Robotics, motor learning, and neurologic recov-
ery, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 6, 497–525 (2004)
64.307
M. Oishi, I. Mitchell, H. Van der Loos: Design and
Use of Assistive Technology (Springer, Berlin, Hei-
delberg 2010)

Multimedia Contents Domestic Ro
1729
Part F | 65
65. Domestic Robotics
Erwin Prassler, Mario E. Munich, Paolo Pirjanian, Kazuhiro Kosuge
When the first edition of this book was published
domestic robots were spoken of as a dream that
was slowly becoming reality. At that time, in 2008,
we looked back on more than twenty years of
research and development in domestic robotics,
especially in cleaning robotics. Although every-
body expected cleaning to be the killer app for
domestic robotics in the first half of these twenty
years nothing big really happened. About ten years
before the first edition of this book appeared, all
of a sudden things started moving. Several small,
but also some larger enterprises announced that
they would soon launch domestic cleaning robots.
The robotics community was anxiously awaiting
these first cleaning robots and so were consumers.
The big burst, however, was yet to come. The price
tag of those cleaning robots was far beyond what
people were willing to pay for a vacuum cleaner.
It took another four years until, in 2002, a small
and inexpensive device, which was not even called
a cleaning robot, brought the first breakthrough:
Roomba. Sales of the Roomba quickly passed the
first million robots and increased rapidly. While for
the first years after Roomba’s release, the big play-
ers remained on the sidelines, possibly to revise
their own designs and, in particular their business
models and price tags, some other small players
followed quickly and came out with their own
products. We reported about theses devices and
their creators in the first edition. Since then the
momentum in the field of domestics robotics has
steadily increased. Nowadays most big appliance
manufacturers have domestic cleaning robots in
their portfolio. We are not only seeing more and
more domestic cleaning robots and lawn mow-
ers on the market, but we are also seeing new
types of domestic robots, window cleaners, plant
watering robots, tele-presence robots, domestic
surveillance robots, and robotic sports devices.
Some of these new types of domestic robots are still
prototypes or concept studies. Others have already
crossed the threshold to becoming commercial
products.
For the second edition of this chapter, we have
decided to not only enumerate the devices that
have emerged and survived in the past five years,
but also to take a look back at how it all began,
contrasting this retrospection with the burst of
progress in the past five years in domestic cleaning
robotics. We will not describe and discuss in detail
every single cleaning robot that has seen the light
of the day, but select those that are representative
for the evolution of the technology as well as the
market. We will also reserve some space for new
types of mobile domestic robots, which will be the
success stories or failures for the next edition of
this chapter. Further we will look into nonmobile
domestic robots, also called smart appliances, and
examine their fate. Last but not least, we will
look at the recent developments in the area of
intelligent homes that surround and, at times,
also control the mobile domestic robots and smart
appliances described in the preceding sections.
65.1 Mobile Domestic Robotics..................... 1730
65.1.1
Domestic Floor Cleaning............. 1730
65.1.2
Domestic Window Cleaning ........ 1737
65.1.3
Pool Cleaning............................ 1739
65.1.4
Lawn Mowing ........................... 1740
65.1.5 Sports Robotics ......................... 1742
65.1.6 Tele-Presence ........................... 1745
65.2 Enabling Technologies ......................... 1747
65.2.1
Sensing and Obstacle Avoidance. 1747
65.2.2 Localization and Mapping .......... 1749
65.2.3 Navigation and Coverage............ 1753
65.3 Smart Homes....................................... 1754
65.3.1
Gator Tech Smart House ............. 1755

Part F | 65.1
1730
Part F
Robots at Work
65.3.2 Aware Home ............................. 1756
65.3.3 SELF – Sensorized Environment
for LiFe..................................... 1756
Video-References......................................... 1757
References................................................... 1757
65.1 Mobile Domestic Robotics
The ﬁrst mention of a domestic cleaning robot dates
back to 1985. The device, nicknamed Robby, was devel-
oped by Hitachi starting in 1983 and ofﬁcially carried
the name HCR-00 (Fig. 65.1). Robby was equipped
with a gyroscope to keep track of its position and a ro-
tating sonar scanner for obstacle detection.
65.1.1 Domestic Floor Cleaning
Very similar to today’s cleaning robots described fur-
ther below, Robby already mapped its environment and
used the map for path planning. HRC-00 remained
a prototype like its successors HRC-01 to HRC-03.
First Generation
of Domestic Cleaning Robotics (1985–1999)
Also in 1985, the Swedish appliance manufacturer
Electrolux started the development of a concept vacuum
cleaner Stardust. The device was equipped with eight
ﬁxed sonar sensors and one rotating sensors for obsta-
cle detection. To maintain its orientation Stardust used
1985, Hitachi,
HCR 00
1991, Panasonic,
Brownie
1997, Minolta,
Cleaning Robot
1997, Electrolux,
Robot Vacuum Cleaner
1999, Dyson DC06
1999, Kärcher,
RoboCleaner
1999, PS-Automation,
AutoCleaner
1999, EPFL-LAMI,
Koala
1999, Probotics,
Cye
Fig. 65.1 First generation of domestic ﬂoor cleaning robots (1985–
1999)
an infrared sensor that tracked an infrared light bulb
mounted to the ceiling. In 1988 Stardust was presented
to the public at Domotechnica in Cologne, Germany,
one of the largest fairs worldwide for domestic appli-
ances [65.1].
About ﬁve years later, between 1989 and 1991,
Panasonic undertook an effort to develop a domestic
cleaning robot that led to two prototypes, one of them,
Brownie, is shown in Fig. 65.1. Brownie was a battery-
powered vacuum cleaner with a diameter of 40 cm, and
at 18 kg, a super heavy weight compared to today’s
domestic cleaning robots. It was equipped with a gyro-
scope, a ring of sonar sensors, and a dust sensor. Likely,
it was limitations in battery technology for driving such
a heavy robot, as well as the total cost, which prevented
Brownie from become anything more than a prototype.
Six more years went by before Minolta presented
its Minolta Cleaning Robot and the ﬁrst European
player, Electrolux, its Robot Vacuum Cleaner, later
called Trilobite, which was presented to the public in
BBC’s TV show Tomorrows World in 1996.
The devices had already become signiﬁcantly
smaller and lighter in these six years. The Minolta robot
had dimensions of 321 mm  320 mm  170 mm and
weighted about 8 kg. It was powered by nickel metal
hybrid battery and used sonar and tactile sensors for
obstacle detection, a cliff-sensor to discover staircases,
and a gyroscope to track its position and orientation.
Electrolux’ robot also had a sophisticated sonar system,
which let it follow contours and even return to a homing
position. It already had the size and shape of later ﬂoor
cleaning robots.
Five more domestic cleaning robots made their ﬁrst
appearance during this time, which we call the in-
fancy of domestic cleaning robotics. Two of them only
reached the proof of concept level: AutoCleaner from
InMach Intelligent Machines – the German startup later
developed low-cost navigation systems for the profes-
sional cleaning robot Robo40, which became commer-
cially available in 2007 – and Koala form EPFL-Lami.
AutoCleaner was the ﬁrst domestic wet-cleaner proof
of concept, which cleaned the ﬂoor using a rotating
microﬁber towel that was pulled through a water tank.
Koala used a suction spout to reach corners. Two more
robots reached at least the status of industrial proto-
types, but were never commercialized: Dyson’s DC06
and Cye from Probotics. DC06 was a unique domestic

Domestic Robotics
65.1 Mobile Domestic Robotics
1731
Part F | 65.1
2003, Kärcher,
RC 3000
2004, Zucchetti,
Orazio
2004, Friendly Robotics,
Friendly Vac
2002, iRobot, Roomba
2004, Sharper Image,
eVac
2004, Black & Decker,
Zoombot RV501
2002, Hanool Robotics,
Ottoro
2005, LG, Roboking
2005, Yujin, Iclebo
2004, Electrolux,
Trilobite 2.0
2006, Metabo,
CleanMate QQ2
2006, Samsung,
VC-R560
Fig. 65.2 Second generation
of domestic ﬂoor cleaning
robots (2000–2008)
cleaning robot. It differed not only in terms of the an-
nounced list price of approximately US$ 4000, but also
in many other aspects: Dyson claimed that it had three
onboard CPUs, more than 50 sensors for obstacle avoid-
ance, cliff-detection, localization and more. On top of
that came the unique Dual Cyclone cleaning technol-
ogy. The DC06 never made it to the market. Neither did
Cye. Cye was a small mobile robot that could pull and
push a (semi-)regular vacuum cleaner. It was announced
as the ﬁrst personal robot which could not only vacuum
the ﬂoor but also serve coffee or deliver mail. It is un-
clear if Cye ever delivered coffee or mail or vacuumed
a real living room. It disappeared as quickly as it ap-
peared. The last out of the nine ﬁrst robots that we call
ﬁrst generation was the Kärcher RoboCleaner. Its suc-
cessor RC3000 was amongst the ﬁrst cleaning robots
that had a docking station at which the robot could not
only recharge its battery but also unload the dust, which
it had collected. We will come back to the Kärcher
RC3000 in the next section.
The ﬁrst generation domestic ﬂoor cleaning robots
shown in Fig. 65.1 were the ones presented to the pub-
lic. However, they were by far not the only ones that
were developed in the period between 1985 and 1999.
By browsing over the patents in the ﬁeld of cleaning
robots during that period it becomes obvious that many
of the big appliance and electronic device manufactur-
ers worldwide performed research and development on
domestic cleaning robots. Besides the ones mentioned
above, one can ﬁnd such big names as Nintendo, Mat-
sushita, Sanyo, Samsung, Honda, Procter & Gamble,
Electrolux, Philips, Henkel and more. So, although only
a few players dared to go public, domestic cleaning was
already on the radar of many international enterprises.
What kept them away from taking the next steps is not
hard to guess. It was the risk of getting into a rather
conservative and tight market – the cleaning business is
extremely conservative – with a semimature technology
carrying a price tag that looked quite differently than the
one on well-established technology, such as traditional
vacuum cleaners.
The Second Generation
of Domestic Cleaning Robotics (2000–2008)
Figure 65.2 shows the second generation of domes-
tic cleaning robots. What made the difference between
the ﬁrst and the second generation? The amount of ex-
perimentation regarding the overall design decreased,
with the majority of manufacturers settling on the disc
shape. The number of sensors decreased, as well as
their level of sophistication. Sophisticated and expen-
sive sensors such as sonar largely disappeared. Most
designs were limited to very few, simple, and inexpen-
sive sensors such as bumpers, simple one-dimensional
range sensors, typically based on infrared (IR), and
cliff sensors. This was most likely a rather painful
lesson learned from the designs in the ﬁrst genera-
tion. What roboticists considered the state of the art in
mobile robotics: environmental sensing, map building,
range sensors with high quality angular and range res-

Part F | 65.1
1732
Part F
Robots at Work
olution, and combined localization and mapping, were
far too expensive to be built into a domestic cleaning
robot. Those robots had to compete with regular vac-
uum cleaners in a price range of a few hundred dollars.
This competition imposed very harsh cost limits for the
robotic components that could be built into a domestic
cleaning robot: 50 to 100 USD and often less. These
cost constraints had a signiﬁcant impact on a very fun-
damental expectation of what cleaning robots should
achieve: systematic coverage of the area to be cleaned.
Cleaning was understood to be synonymous with cover-
ing an area with a systematic and intuitive motion while
applying some type of cleaning operation. Most of the
patents ﬁled for the ﬁrst generation of domestic clean-
ing robots mentioned above described cleaning robots
that were supposed to cover their workspace in a sys-
tematic fashion.
Systematic coverage, however, is impossible with-
out absolute positioning and without decent knowledge
of the environment. The second generation of domes-
tic cleaning robots had to provide a solution for this
dilemma of systematic coverage with cheap and sim-
ple sensors, which must not cost more than several tens
of dollars.
The solution to this dilemma was already proposed
in some early prototypes. The idea was to waive the
requirement of systematic coverage, which would also
involve intuitive motion patterns, and instead produce
semisystematic coverage and semi-intuitive motion pat-
terns. This semisystematic coverage was achieved by
a combination of random motion, hard-coded motion
patterns such as spiral- or meander-shaped motions,
which – considered alone – reﬂects some system-
atic coverage, and some other systematic and intuitive
motion patterns, for example, following contours of
walls or other objects in the workspace. The theory of
stochastic process states that the mean squared distance
of a particle that performs a random walk with respect
to the origin of its motion increases proportionally with
time. That implies that the particle moving in conﬁned
space will cover that space in a ﬁnite amount of time.
First-generation domestic cleaning robots like the
Electrolux Robotics Vacuum Cleaner (later Trilobite) or
the Kärcher Robot Cleaner (later Kärcher RC 3000) al-
ready used random motion combined with hard-coded
motion patterns to achieve a certain degree of cover-
age. But apparently the insight that the attribute robotic
in front of vacuum cleaner was not enough of a sales
argument to justify a price three to ﬁve times higher
than that of a regular vacuum cleaner was not so easy to
digest. Some of the second-generation cleaning robots
were offered for a price on the order of 1500 USD or
even more. In the end these robots shared the same fate:
they become shelf warmers.
This is also due to the fact that in 2002 a robot was
launched which was to herald a breakthrough in domes-
tic cleaning robotics: Roomba. Its creator, iRobot Inc.,
had learned the lesson that others were still struggling
with: if you want to sell a domestic appliance, better
sell it for a price that is known for domestic appliances.
For the sake of fairness one has to mention that the tra-
ditional vacuum cleaner manufacturers had to design
the robots so they matched the quality and performance
level that could be expected from the brand name. They
could not take the risk of making their product too poor.
Therefore it easily became over speciﬁed compared to
what the market required at the time. New manufactur-
ers such as iRobot in contrast had no brand name to
defend [65.1].
If it is a totally new device, which may not only
cause excitement but also concerns and reservations,
sell it for less and not for more. When Roomba en-
tered the market it was sold for 199 USD. That was
a price, which did not cause customers to think about
whether they really needed it, whether the quality was
good enough, or whether the device would get into ev-
ery corner of a room or underneath every couch or bed.
The creators of Roomba were also smart enough not to
call it a robot. This that prevented many customers from
developing wrong expectation of what robots could or
should do.
The robot technology that was built into the
Roomba was everything but new or revolutionary.
Roomba used a suspended front-shield for contact-
sensing, a low-cost infrared range-sensor for contour-
following, a cliff-sensor to prevent it from falling down
stair-cases, and it could detect photoelectric barriers,
so-called virtual walls, which kept it from leaving
a room or a certain part of its workspace. Roomba
further used the combination of random motion and
hardcoded area-covering motion patterns to achieve
a certain level of coverage. All this technology was
known before Roomba.
Still Roomba can be seen as a milestone not only
in domestic robotics but also in robotics at large. Why
is that? It was the ﬁrst time in robotics history that
robotics was no longer synonymous with high-tech,
high-price. Roomba showed that automation of every-
day service tasks, such as domestic cleaning, could be
achieved with a moderate effort in terms of hardware
and at a decent price, given that one accepts some grace-
ful degradation in the overall performance. There is no
such thing as a free lunch, not even in robotics and
this degradation in the performance is the price to be
paid. What turned Roomba into a milestone was the
cost-effective design, where the limitations of low-cost
hardware – in Roomba’s case the sensors – were bal-
anced out by smart heuristics for problem-solving. This

Domestic Robotics
65.1 Mobile Domestic Robotics
1733
Part F | 65.1
Table 65.1 Technical speciﬁcation of a selection of second-generation domestic cleaning robots
Manufacturer
iRobot
Sharper Image
Electrolux
Kärcher
Yujin
Model
Roomba
eVac
Trilobite 2.0
RC 3000
iclebo
Drive
Differential
Differential
Differential
Differential
Differential
Sensors
Suspended front shield
as contact sensor, IR
range sensor, four
IR cliff sensors, dust
sensor
Touch sensor, cliff
sensor, IR for wall-
following
180ı sonar sensors
(1 transmitter,
8 receivers), infrared
cliff sensor, mag-
netic stripe detector,
suspended front
shield as contact
sensor
Suspended front
shield as contact
sensor, four IR cliff
sensor
Main brush, side
brush anti-bacterial
ﬁlter
Mapping
and localization
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Navigation/coverage
Random motion with
bang and bounce,
contour following,
spiral motion
Random motion
with bang and
bounce, spot clean-
ing with star pattern
Wall-following,
random motion with
obstacle avoidance
Random motion
with bang and
bounce, spot clean-
ing with see-saw
motion pattern
Heuristic pat-terns:
random, circular,
zig-zag, wall
following
Cleaning technology
Side brush, two
counter-rotating
brushes, suction pump
Rotating brushes,
vacuum pump
Rotating brush,
suction pump
Rotating brush,
suction pump
Main brush, side
brush
Run time (min)
6090
1545
60
2060
150
Performance
–
–
28 m2/h
15 m2/h
–
Docking/recharging
station
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
no
Size (Ø/h) (cm)/(cm)
35/8,25
32/14
35/13
28/10
35/9
Weight (kg)
2,7
3
5
2
4
Year of launch
2002
2004
2004
2003
2005
Price range
250 USD
100 USD
1300 EUR
1350 EUR
530 USD
design of a commercially viable product, at a price
point competitive with nonrobotized solutions, turned
Roomba into the ﬁrst successful domestic cleaning
robot, and the most frequently sold robot in the past
50 years.
In Table 65.1 we give an overview of the techni-
cal speciﬁcations of some of these second generation
robots. A more complete overview is included in 065-
bib43
The idea to develop and commercialize a domestic
cleaning robot at a price level of 199 USD, comparable
to the price of traditional domestic appliances, was very
appealing to consumers. However, it was not an overly
proﬁtable business model, even if Roomba was manu-
factured in a low-wage country at a cost of signiﬁcantly
less than 100 USD. Extreme cost pressure, however, of-
ten compromises the quality of a product. So a decision
to adhere to this low price of below 200 USD may also
have been a decision against the quality of the prod-
uct. Today nearly a dozen models of Roomba are on
the market, which differ mostly in terms of their clean-
ing technology and extra features. Their prices are in
a range from 250 to 900 USD.
The Third Generation
of Domestic Cleaning Robotics (2009–2012)
The second generation of domestic cleaning robots also
provided their developers and distributors with a num-
ber of painful and partly contradictory insights:

A domestic cleaning robot sold at a price that is
signiﬁcantly beyond the price of comparable non-
robotic devices, runs a high risk of failing, because
many customers may not be willing to pay extra
money for a cleaning robot just because it is a robot.

A domestic cleaning robot sold at the same price
level as an inexpensive comparable appliance, runs
a high risk of failing, because the low price may

Part F | 65.1
1734
Part F
Robots at Work
compromise the quality and functionality of the
product, and many customers may not be willing
to pay even a rather low price for a product that is
known to be of poor quality.

For most customers – traditional, as well as
technophiles – efﬁcient cleaning requires systematic
and efﬁcient coverage of the workspace. A domes-
tic cleaning robot that uses sophisticated sensors to
achieve systematic and efﬁcient coverage may eas-
ily end up with a price tag that is signiﬁcantly above
the price of a comparable nonrobotic device and
hence runs a high risk of failure.

A domestic cleaning robot, which refrains from
using expensive sensors to achieve systematic cov-
erage but instead uses low-cost sensors for collision
avoidance, fall protection, and conﬁnement as well
as using random motion combined with some hard-
coded motion patterns to achieve a certain level
of coverage, runs a risk of not satisfying those
customers who expect systematic cleaning and cov-
erage.
From a developers point of view these lessons sound
as if customers expect not less than to square the circle.
The truth is that customers do not care about squares
and circles. They expect value for money.
With the insights above one could classify potential
customers of domestic cleaning robots into three cate-
gories:

Customers who only care about the price and not
so much about quality and functionality. The crite-
rion for this class of customers was obvious: reduce
the price as much as possible without ignoring that
there may be a bottom line for what customers
might expect in terms of quality and functionality.

Customers who care about the price and qual-
ity, but are willing to adjust their expectations of
functionality and efﬁciency. The criterion for such
customers was to reduce the price but only to a cer-
tain extent, which does not compromise the quality
of the product too much. Expectations of such
customers in terms of efﬁciency (i. e., systematic
coverage) can be compensated by auxiliary equip-
ment such as automatic charging stations.

Customers, who care about price, quality, and ef-
ﬁciency. Apparently these customers are the most
demanding. None of the second-generation domes-
tic cleaning robots has really managed to satisfy
them. The criterion to serve them would be to
develop a low-cost navigation system based on low-
cost sensors that provides systematic coverage.
As satisfying the last group of customers, which
is also likely the largest of the three groups, seemed
nearly impossible, the third generation of domestic
cleaning robots have diverged somewhat. Some man-
ufacturers have focused on products that serve the
ﬁrst category of customers, some serve the second
group and some even made an effort to square the
circle.
May they be successful in the end or not, what
cannot be overlooked is the explosion of the number
of manufacturers and distributors of domestic cleaning
robots in the past ﬁve years. At the end of the 2012,
twenty-seven years after the ﬁrst mention of a domes-
tic cleaning robot to the public, Amazon alone listed
more than 131 results under the key word robot vacuum
cleaner, with 14 manufacturers and suppliers. The busi-
ness to business (B2B) portal www.made-in-china.com
lists more than 71 companies for robot vacuum cleaner
and a total of 875 products. Some of these 875 robot
vacuum cleaners look surprisingly similar to the prod-
ucts sold over B2C platforms under very-well known
brand names.
In Fig. 65.3 we show some of the products, which
primarily intend to serve customers of the ﬁrst cate-
gory and therefore stayed under a price of 200 EUR.
Figure 65.3a shows a model series of six cleaning
robots made by XRobot of the Chinese manufacturer
Shenzhen Silver Star Intelligent Electronics Ltd. In
B2B trading these robots cost between 64 and 102
USD per piece at a minimum order of 500 pieces.
Most models of this series are also sold under the
brand name of European and American enterprises. Fig-
ure 65.3b shows another series of still rather cheap
robotic vacuum cleaners. The attentive reader may no-
tice that the robots in the left and the right ﬁgure
are not totally unique. Some just have different names
and different prices. This is not entirely unintended.
It just illustrates that in domestic cleaning robotics
the value creation chain is no longer limited to the
developers and manufacturers, just as in every other
business.
Apart from a few minor details, all robots in
Fig. 65.3 use very similar, though not to say the
same, technology. They use very few and very cheap
(contact, cliff, sometimes dirt) sensors and random
motion combined with preprogrammed motion pat-
terns. The vacuum technology consists of a rotating
brush, sometimes combined with a small fan. Not sur-
prisingly, robotic vacuum cleaners like the ones in
Fig. 65.3 are often called Roomba-clones. The collec-
tion of robots in Fig. 65.3 is neither representative nor
comprehensive.
Roomba has undoubtedly written robot history. It is
the merit of Roomba and its developers that domestic
cleaning robots are no longer considered as gadgets but
as real appliances. Roomba has opened the door for all

Domestic Robotics
65.1 Mobile Domestic Robotics
1735
Part F | 65.1
XRobot M-288
$ 64/pc
XRobot M-388
$ 64/pc
Clatronic BSR 1282,
€ 58
XRobot M-488
$ 64/pc
XRobot M-588
$ 64/pc
Dirt Devil Libero,
€ 101
XRobot M-788
$ 102/pc
XRobot XR201
$ 99/pc
Philips Easy Star,
€ 177
Deebot D54, € 199
Vileda 137173,
€ 129
Klarstein Cleanfriend,
€ 135
Fig. 65.3 Third generation
of domestic ﬂoor cleaning
robots: low-cost, low-tech
Roomba 760
Roomba 770
Roomba 780
Roomba 790
Fig. 65.4 The seventh generation of
Roombas
the cleaning robots mentioned above, be they Roomba-
clones or not. And Roomba is the by far the best-selling
robot ever.
In Fig. 65.4 we show some of the grandchildren and
great-grandchildren of the very ﬁrst Roomba, which
started in 2002. The Roomba has gone through sev-
eral facelifts in these ten years. The latest series, the
Roomba 700 is the sixth generation of Roombas. It has
matured quite a bit in many respects. It has matured
in terms of handling, cleaning technology, obstacle
avoidance and navigation technology. At the same time
Roomba is delivered in more than a dozen versions,
ranging from 250 to 900 USD. These versions differ in
the design, in the sophistication of the user interface, in
the navigation and coverage strategies, and in the details
of the cleaning technology.
According to iRobot more than 6 million units have
been sold in the ten years of its existence. Roomba has
certainly satisﬁed quite a number of customers. It is
built with good quality, and comes with a self-charging
home base and other auxiliary equipment. What has not
changed, however, is the basic strategy for covering the
workspace. The sixth generation just like the ﬁrst uses
random motion with some precoded motion patterns
and heuristics.
This raises one rather fundamental question. Will
Roomba’s success story continue? Will it maintain
its market position? Or has Roomba possibly reached
or even passed its summit? These questions will not
be answered before the third edition of this book,
as any statement in this direction would be pure
speculation.
In any case, there are a few recent domestic cleaning
robots, which demonstrate that covering a work space in
a systematic fashion does not necessarily require expen-
sive sensing, that would push the price for a domestic
cleaning robot to a level which customers would not be
willing to pay.
Four different key technologies enable the devices
shown in Table 65.2 to localize themselves and navigate

Part F | 65.1
1736
Part F
Robots at Work
Table 65.2 Systematic cleaning at low-cost. The information in this table was partly collected from the websites and the technical
documentation of the manufactures and partly from public websites such as www.botroom.com, staubsaugerroboter-test.org,
www.robotreviews.com, www.geek.com, gizmodo.com, www.engadget.com
Manufacturer
LG
Samsung
Neato Robotics
Iclebo
Evolution
Robotics/iRobot
Distributor
Vorwerk
Philips
Dirt Devil
EVO/iRobot
Model
Hom-Bot 3.0
Navibot SR 8895
Silencio
Neato XV-21
Philips FC9910/01
HomeRun/ iclebo
smart
Mint 4200
CPU
32 bit
2 CPUs
ARM7
Drive
Differential
Differential
Differential
Differential
Differential
Sensors
Camera (ceiling),
camera (ﬂoor), sonar
& infrared for colli-
sion avoidance cliff
sensors, gyroscope,
acceleration
Range sensors cam-
era, cliff sensors,
collision sensors,
gyro
1-D laser range
ﬁnder, cliff sensor,
gyroscope, accelera-
tion,
Camera (ceiling),
cliff sensor, infra
red for collision
detection, gyroscope,
Northstar Indoor
GPS, cliff sensors,
bumper, gyro
Mapping and local-
ization
SLAM
SLAM based on
ceiling pictures at
30 fps (Visionary
Mapping System)
SLAM based on
laser range ﬁnder
(onboard Room
Positioning System
(RPS))
SLAM based on
ceiling pictures
SLAM with North-
star, map-building
Navigation/coverage
Systematic
Systematic
Systematic
Systematic
Systematic
Cleaning technology
Brush roller, 2 side
brushes
Brush roller, 2 side
brushes
Bristled brush
Brush roller, 2 side
brushes, micro-ﬁber
mop
Dry or wet (or pre-
moistened)
microﬁber cloths
Run time (min)
75
90
90
70
180
Performance
–
80 m2/h
–
40 m2/h
–
Docking/recharging
station
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Size (Ø/h) (cm)/(cm)
36/9
35/8
34 34/10
35/10
31 11/ 29
Weight (kg)
3,2
3,2
5
4
2
Year of launch
2011
2011
2012
2011
2010
Price range
US$ 799.00
(Amazon.com)
EUR 349.00
(Amazon.de)
US$ 350.00
(Amazon.com)
EUR 499.00
(Amazon.de)
US$ 174.00
(Amazon.com)
in an unknown domestic workspace and systematically
cover that space:

Visual odometry, with a camera pointing to the ceil-
ing, combined with simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM) used by LG Homebot, Samsung
Navibot SR 8xxx, iclebo smart and Philips Home-
run,

Localization, using infra read patterns projected to
the ceiling, and mapping based on contact informa-
tion used by Mint,

Proprioceptive motion estimation, using inexpen-
sive inertial measurement units (including inexpen-
sive gyroscopes and accelerometers)

Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM),
using,
for
example
a
one-dimensional
laser
rangeﬁnder like Neato XV-xx.
These technologies by themselves are not entirely
new. As a matter of fact methods such as simultaneous
localization and mapping, visual odometry, and virtual
landmark based navigation are not state of the technolo-
gies form a scientiﬁc point of view.
The true achievement of the developers of the above
systems, which cannot be assessed high enough, is that
they managed to reduce the cost of these technologies
and at the same time make them robust enough for 24=7
operation. These key technologies will be described in

Domestic Robotics
65.1 Mobile Domestic Robotics
1737
Part F | 65.1
more detail in Sect. 65.1.2 Enabling Technologies. A
review of domestic vacuum cleaning robots and some
criteria to evaluate their performance are presented in
VIDEO 727 and
VIDEO 729 .
65.1.2 Domestic Window Cleaning
Window cleaning does not seem to be signiﬁcantly
more pleasant housework as ﬂoor cleaning. Notwith-
standing, robotic window cleaners have not experi-
enced similar attention or progress as ﬂoor cleaners. As
a matter of fact, today there are only three commer-
cial robotic window cleaners on the market, shown in
Fig. 65.5. www.made-in-china.com does not even list
one entry for window cleaning robot, although two of
the three commercial products are Chinese brands. Why
is that so, given the fact that domestic ﬂoor cleaning
has become a billion-dollar business? The answer to
this question has two parts: an economic and a technical
one.
The economic one is that windows in private homes
are cleaned far less often than ﬂoors. Customers may
hesitate to buy expensive equipment for a task that
needs to be done once a month or even less. So the mar-
ket for domestic window cleaners is presumably much
smaller than that for ﬂoor cleaners.
The technical one refers to the technical hurdles
that have to be overcome. The technical problems that
robotic window cleaners have to face are:

Adhesion to a vertical, fragile surface, which pos-
sibly needs to be moistened in order to be cleaned,
and related, the power supply necessary to produce
that adhesion.

Requirements for cleaning performance; people
may tolerate if the ﬂoor is not 100% clean, but
nobody would buy a window cleaner that leaves
streaks on the window.
While ﬂoor cleaners do not bother about gravity and
falling down unless they are near staircases or ledges,
gravity is an essential problem for window-cleaning
robots, and the solutions are usually not very cheap.
Special mechanisms have to be designed for secure mo-
tion. Typically special tether mechanisms prevent the
robots from falling. Special locomotion mechanisms
have to create enough adhesion force to hold a robot
attached to a ﬂat, vertical, damageable surface such as
glass and at the same time move the body up and down
and sideways. These mechanisms have to be small and
light and create enough adhesion forces as well as low
energy and resource consumption.
The
two
robotic
window cleaners
shown
in
Fig. 65.6, RACOON and QUIRL, are research proto-
types, which were developed by Fraunhofer Institute for
Manufacturing Engineering and Automation (IPA) in
Germany. In these prototypes the adhesion problem was
solved by means of suction cups. RACOON used cater-
pillar drives that were equipped with passive suction
cups. Passive means that the system does not actively
create a vacuum in the cup. Rather a small valve aerates
or seals the suction cup depending on the position of the
cup along the drive. Drives with passive suction cups
have the advantage of moderate energy consumption.
They have, however, one severe disadvantage. They
tend to lose their adhesion after a while. The reason for
this is the torque that acts on the center of gravity of the
system. Due to this torque there is a traction force act-
ing on the upper cups while at the same time pressure is
exerted on the lower cups. Without any attractive force
acting on the upper cups the adhesion there gets weaker
and eventually the system falls. Therefore passive suc-
tion cups are rarely practical.
An apparent solution to this problem is the use of
active suction pumps, which generate a vacuum un-
der the upper suction cups. This solution prevents the
system from falling. However, supplying the vacuum
to the cups makes the system signiﬁcantly more com-
plex, heavier, and larger. Researchers at Fraunhofer
IPA [65.2] have therefore invented a smart solution,
which gets by with passive cups, but gets around the
problem of decreasing adhesion. The solution uses
a spacer at the rear of the vehicle. This spacer neu-
tralizes the torque around the center of gravity which
is typical for a systems with passive suctions cups.
The spacer causes a traction force which acts on the
lower suction cups. This traction force creates a torque
around the spacer, which counteracts the torque around
the center of gravity and also causes a pressure on the
upper suction cubs. RACOON was presented at the
Hannover Fair in 2002 and got quite some attention. But
it never became a product. Neither became its successor
QUIRL.
In QUIRL, the number of components, the weight,
and the size of the system were signiﬁcantly optimized.
The main functions cleaning, holding, and moving were
uniﬁed in one single component. QUIRL consisted of
a)
b)
M
Fig. 65.6 (a) RACOON and (b) QUIRL, two early research proto-
types of domestic window cleaning robots

Part F | 65.1
1738
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
c)
Fig.65.5a–c Commercial robotics
window cleaners (a) Windoro, (b)
Winbot, (c) Hobot
two vacuum cups that were attached to a common frame
which were driven by two separate motors, which ro-
tated independently of each other. The overall motion
of QUIRL could be controlled by selecting the veloci-
ties and rotational directions of the vacuum cups. If the
motor of one vacuum cup was turned off and the cup did
not rotate, QUIRL rotated around this ﬁxed cup. If both
motors and cups rotated in the same direction this led to
an overall rotation of QUIRL about its vertical axis. If
both drives rotated in the opposite direction at exactly
the same velocity then QUIRL made a linear motion. If
both drives rotated in the opposite direction but their ve-
locities were not identical then the translational motion
was superimposed by a rotational motion and QUIRL
moved along a curved trajectory. In order to clean the
surface some cleaning mechanism or tool needed to be
ﬁxed to the vacuum cups. By attaching, for example,
speciﬁc cleaning towels in the cups the abrasion effect
was increased and a very good cleaning performance
could be achieved.
The ﬁeld of robotic window cleaning has not made
as much progress as domestic ﬂoor cleaning, but it has
still made progress. In Fig. 65.5 we show three com-
mercially available window cleaners – Windoro WCR
I001, Winbot 7, and Hobot 168 – available today.
In 2010 the South-Korean enterprise Ilshim Global
Co. Ltd. introduced its commercial window cleaner
Windoro (WCR). Windoro consists of two modules,
a navigator module and a cleaning module that are held
together by two strong neodymium permanent magnets,
whose distance can be adjusted. The navigator mod-
ule and the cleaning module are placed on the inner
and outer side of the window, respectively, like a sand-
wich with the glass pane in between. The two modules
operate as a tandem. The navigator module has a differ-
ential drive system with two wide-based rubber wheels.
Also the cleaning unit moves on two rubber wheels,
which serve as spacers for the four spinning cleaning
pads. When the navigator module moves, the cleaning
module on the other side of the window moves with it.
The linkage by permanent magnets obviously has one
rather fundamental advantage. As long as the window
does not exceed a certain thickness, namely 28 mm,
the permanent magnets hold the robot safely attached
to the window. Windoro cannot fall, even if its bat-
tery runs out of power. For that reason Windoro does
not need any safety mechanism like a safety rope. Un-
fortunately there is a price to pay for this: it is very
difﬁcult and unhandy if not impossible to use Win-
doro if you cannot open the window that you want to
clean.
Windoro ﬁrst explores the width and height of the
window before it then starts to clean the window from
the top to the bottom in a zig-zag motion, with a veloc-
ity of 8 cm=s. While the robot moves over the window
the cleaning module sprays a cleaning solution onto
the window surface. With four spinning microﬁber pads
the cleaning module removes dirt and sprayed solution
from the surface.
The second commercial window-cleaning robot is
Winbot, a product of the Chinese company Ecovacs,
which has established its own brand. Winbot was ﬁrst
introduced in 2011. The most recent version Winbot
7 was presented at the electronics fair CES (Con-
sumer Electronics Show) 2013 in Las Vegas. Ecovacs
also manufactures and distributes the robotic vacuum
cleaner family Deebot.
Winbot uses two suction rings and a vacuum pump
for the adhesion at the window. The outer ring also
serves as a safety mechanism. If the air pressure in
the ring increases, that means Winbot has reached the
edge of a window plane, it backs up, turns around and
moves in a different direction. A second suction cup
serves as a safety anchor for Winbot while it moves. It
is connected to Winbot by a safety rope and catches the
robot if it falls. Winbot can move at a velocity of ap-
proximately 15 cm=s. Its drive system consists of two
differentially driven anti-slip rubber tracks.
After it has been turned on, Winbot, like Windoro,
ﬁrst explores the height and width of the window, then
calculates a zig-zag path that covers the window area
and ﬁnally executes this path. Winbot has no active
cleaning technology such as spinning pads. It uses two
micro-ﬁber towels that are attached to two plates at the
front and at the rear of the robot. The micro-ﬁber towel
in the front has to be moistened before Winbot starts
moving. It resolves and removes the dirt. A rubber blade
behind the front towel removes the remaining moisture.

Domestic Robotics
65.1 Mobile Domestic Robotics
1739
Part F | 65.1
Aquabot turbo, Aquabot
TigerShark, Hayward
Dolphin Dynamic Plus, Maytronic
Dirt Devil, Rampage
Robotic pool cleaner
Vero pool cleaner,
iRobot
SwimBot Pro Pool
Cleaning Robot, Swimob
Polaris 9400,
Zodiac Pool Systems
Aquabot Alpha
Aqutron robotic systems
Fig. 65.7 Robotics pool cleaners
The micro-ﬁber towel in the rear of the robot ﬁnally
dries the window.
The third, and most recent, system, Hobot 168, is
a product of the Taiwanese company Hobot Technology
Inc. It was ﬁrst presented at IFA 2012 (Internationale
Funk Ausstellung) in Berlin and launched in summer
2013. It looks surprisingly similar to Quirl in Fig. 65.5
and apparently uses a similar adhesion and locomotion
mechanism, namely two rotating vacuum cubs, to move
across the window.
The preceding paragraphs read as if the times are
over where windows had to be cleaned by hand. Re-
grettably this is not the case. Although all three devices
reasonably solved the adhesion problem their overall
performance is modest. Several tests by housewives
and magazines came to the same sobering conclusion:
There is a lot of noise and very little cleaning. As
a matter of fact, although the navigation problem on
a vertical rectangular surface, which is free of obstacles
apart from the window frame, seems to be a solv-
able one, Hobot 168 and Winbot showed a rather poor
performance in terms of systematic coverage. After
a semisuccessful effort to explore the width and height
of the window, Winbot, in one of the tests, moved more
or less erratically for several minutes, before it gave
up somewhere along the road. Several of the currently
available commercial window cleaning robots are re-
viewed in
VIDEO 734 ,
VIDEO 735 ,
VIDEO 736 ,
and
VIDEO 737 .
65.1.3 Pool Cleaning
While robotic ﬂoor cleaner and window cleaner were
still struggling to get rid of the image of only being
the crazy ideas of engineers and researchers at the be-
ginning of the millennium, pool-cleaning robots were
already well-established products. This may be due to
the fact that the challenge of cleaning a rectangular pool
is rather modest and so is the robotic technology used in
robotic pool cleaners. It may also be due to the fact that
pool owners belong to a class of customers who did not
create the same price pressure as the ordinary house-
wife.
First patents on self-propelled pool cleaning devices
date back to 1965, three years after the ﬁrst indus-
trial robot was installed. Ferdinand Chauvier, a South
African engineer, could possibly be considered the
father of automated pool cleaning. He developed sev-
eral generations of devices for pool cleaning before
he ﬁnally marketed Kreepy Krauly, the ﬁrst automated
pool cleaner in 1974. Kreepy Krauly was not only
the ﬁrst one of its kind but also the very ﬁrst domes-
tic service robot ever, 15 years before Joe Engelberg
published his book Robots in Service at MIT Press in
1989 and coined the term service robot. Since then
the technology of pool cleaning robots hasn’t changed
much.
As one can see in Fig. 65.7, most pool cleaners have
track drives, which are operated differentially. Typi-
cally the motors that drive the tracks are also connected
to the front and rear scrubbing brushes, which clean
the pool surface, while the robot moves. While tracked
drive system were rather common for the early gener-
ations of pool cleaners, newer pool cleaners also use
wheel drives, for example, the Polaris 9400 from Zodiac
Pool Systems. A wheel drive can be advantageous be-
cause the space between the bottom of the robot and the
ground allows a better water ﬂow and a higher through-
put. Also Zodic claims that Polaris 9400 has higher
maneuverability.

Part F | 65.1
1740
Part F
Robots at Work
Fig. 65.8 Example of the navigation and cleaning strategy
of a robotic pool cleaner
Since most sensors, which are used in mobile robots
or in aerial robots do not work under water, the sensor
modalities that are used by pool cleaners are manage-
able. Unfortunately the manufacturers do not disclose
much about the sensor technology and technology in
general used in their system. So we need to speculate
a bit about how the behaviors shown in the commercials
are internally implemented.
Most pool cleaners claim to be capable of avoiding
obstacles. When they sense a collision, the back up for
a certain distance, reverse the direction of motion and
then continue, possibly on a track parallel to the one
the led to the obstacle. They can recognize the walls of
a pool, which form the borders of their workspace. They
can even climb up the walls of a pool, ﬂoat along the
perimeter and then submerge again. They can explore
the length and width of a pool. They can drive a certain
distance before they change direction.
All these behaviors require a combination of several
of the following sensors: odometry to measure traveled
distance, an inclinometer to sense if the robot starts
moving upward, e.g., when it keeps pushing against
a wall and the front wheels start moving in a vertical
direction, contact sensors to detect when the robot col-
lides with an obstacle – be it a wall of the pool or a real
obstacle on the ground of the pool – sensor to measure
the motor current, which can be used in addition or in-
stead of a collision sensor to detect if the robot pushes
against an object, and possibly an inertial measurement
unit to correct the heading when driving. Polaris and
possibly other systems as well use an accelerometer to
constantly determine its position in the pool. A sensor
modality, which might be used underwater for obsta-
cle detection and avoidance is laser, with wavelengths
in the lower nano-meter range (e.g., 405nm blue laser).
But it is unknown if this principle has been considered
for pool-cleaners.
In terms of navigation and coverage pool cleaners
follow similar strategies to those ﬂoor cleaners, which
we roughly classiﬁed as Roomba-clones. Earlier pool
cleaners used random motion pattern. The newer ones
shown in Fig. 65.7 use certain heuristics and strategies
to perform some form of localization and exploration of
the pool. The Maytronic’s Dolphin, for example, ﬁrst
explores the length and the width of a pool. After be-
ing dropped into the pool and ﬂoating to the bottom of
the ﬂoor it crosses the pool until it hits the ﬁrst wall.
With the support of a thruster it climbs up the wall until
it reaches the surface. There it hovers to the side be-
fore it submerges again and moves back to the ground
of the pool. Next it moves to the opposite side of the
pool, climbs up the wall, hovers to the side and glides
back to the ground. While moving on the ground from
one wall to the other Dolphin measures the distance
from wall to wall. Once it glides back from the sec-
ond wall it moves halfway back toward the other wall.
It then makes a 90ı turn and repeats the exploration for
the second set of opposite walls. After the exploration
is completed, Dolphin knows the length and width of
the pool and plans a pattern of parallel and orthogonal
tracks as shown in Fig. 65.8 that in the end covers the
entire pool.
Removing dirt and debris from the ground and the
walls of a pool, requires loosening the dirt – if it is not
loose already – and to soak it into a container, other-
wise the dirt would only be circulated in the pool. The
container is typically a jet pipe with a ﬁlter at one end
that holds the dirt back while the water ﬂows through
the pipe back into the pool. Soaking in water and debris
from the ﬂoor into a ﬁlter and pumping it back into the
pool requires signiﬁcant suction power. This is the rea-
son why pool cleaners typically have an external power
supply. This motor serves as a pump and as a thruster at
the same time. Both effects together allow pool cleaners
to easily climb up vertical walls. Using inﬂation at the
bottom of the robot, and a water jet ejected at the top,
enough traction power is created that both tracked and
wheeled pool cleaners can drive up vertical surfaces.
As mentioned earlier, the cleaning technology, be-
sides the water pump and the ﬁlter to keep back the
debris, consists of a system of counter-rotating rubber
brushes which brush the debris underneath the pool
cleaner, where it ends up in the intake socket of the
water pump.
VIDEO 739
and
VIDEO 740
compare
a selection of home pool cleaning robots.
65.1.4 Lawn Mowing
Together with robotic pool cleaners and domestic ﬂoor
cleaners, robotic lawnmowers today count as regular
everyday products. People no longer consider them
mystical pieces of technology, which have their own life
and which at times become so autonomous that the user
no longer knows what they are after.

Domestic Robotics
65.1 Mobile Domestic Robotics
1741
Part F | 65.1
Fig. 65.9 Example for virtual fence
and coverage strategy (random
motion) of robotics lawnmowers
It is not surprising that robotic lawnmowers have
a lot in common with domestic ﬂoor cleaners. They
have to cover a workspace of a certain size with as lit-
tle interaction with the owner as possible. They have to
perform a certain operation to the surface such as clean-
ing the ﬂoor or mowing the lawn. They must not collide
with any obstacles and if they do, they should at least
not cause any damage. They must not get stuck any-
where in the environment and they should not leave the
workspace without authorization.
The challenge for lawnmowers, much the same for
domestic ﬂoor cleaners, is the systematic coverage of
the workspace, which in turn requires precise position-
ing and mapping of the workspace. Given the fact that
the price pressure is not as back-breaking as for robotic
ﬂoor cleaners – there are not that many robotic lawn-
mowers which costs less than 1000 EUR – why not
invest a little more in sensing and especially in position
sensing and obtain a decent solution for the localization
and coverage problem?
The answer to this question is: things are not that
simple. Lawnmowers operate outdoors and none of the
solution developed for the ﬂoor-cleaners in Fig. 65.2
will work. Regular GPS (global positioning system) has
an accuracy of several meters and has a tendency to
deliver erratic readings, which would lead to equally
erratic motions of the lawnmowers. As a matter of fact
Automower 220 from Husquana uses GPS, but only as
an antitheft protection device. Differential GPS, which
would provide accuracy below one meter, would be
too expensive for an affordable robotics lawnmower. In
a nutshell, absolute positioning or SLAM, which would
be necessary to cover a large outdoor area like a garden
in a systematic fashion, is not practical.
In order to cover their workspace robotics lawn-
mowers use similar strategies to the Roomba-like ﬂoor
cleaners. They refer to heuristics, which do not provide
an optimal performance but still show a decent result.
Using sensors such as gyroscopes, digital compasses, or
inertial measurement units, robotic lawnmowers follow
a certain heading and cover the workspace as much as
possible by parallel tracks. They move along a straight
line until they hit an obstacle or reach the border of
the workspace. There they back up to become clear
from the obstacle, make a U-turn by 180ı and drive
back the way they came. Another heuristic that is fre-
quently applied by robotic lawnmowers is the random
motion shown also in Fig. 65.9. The mower moves
along a straight line until it hits an obstacle or reaches
the border of the workspace but then it does not just
reverse but chooses a new direction randomly.
Since robotic lawnmowers move in open space,
there is a danger that they leave their workspace and
travel to areas where they are not supposed to be. For
ﬂoor cleaners so-called virtual walls or fences solve
this problem. Virtual walls are realized by infra read
light beams emitted by some projectors, which can be
placed in the workspace. The robots can sense these
infrared light beams and consider them as obstacles,
which evoke the typical obstacle avoidance behaviors.
Lawnmowers use a similar technique, which is based
on induction rather than light. To mark the border of the
robot’s workspace the owner has to place a wire around
the area, which the robot must not leave (Fig. 65.9).
This wire is connected to a low-voltage alternating cur-
rent source. When the robot approaches the wire an
inductivity sensor senses the current in the wire and
causes the robot to reverse. Today most lawn mowers
use a more sophisticated so-called true in/out sys-
tems, where the position is permanently tracked, not
only when the robot approaches or passes the virtual
fence [65.3].
The very ﬁrst robotic lawnmowers had to be
recharged manually. To avoid an all too frequent in-
volvement of the human into the operation, Husq-
varna – one of the pioneers in robotic lawn mowing –
equipped its ﬁrst mower with solar panels and called
it SolarMower. SolarMower was released in 1995, and
was one of the ﬁrst robotics lawnmowers. Nowadays,
all lawnmowers come with a base station where they
can recharge their batteries without human intervention.
Also solar panels are coming back as power source,
however only as auxiliary power to increase the per-
formance and runtime between two charges and not as
main power supply.
Given the fact, that robotic lawnmowers do have
poor positioning capabilities, it is somewhat tricky to
guide them back to the docking station once the battery

Part F | 65.1
1742
Part F
Robots at Work
Automower 220,
Husquarna
Robomow,
Friendly Robotics
Ambrogio, Zucchetti
Tango, John Deere
Indego, Bosch
R40Li, Gardena
Robolinho 3000, Al-KO
Miimo, Honda
Fig. 65.10 Robotic lawn-
mower
gets low and needs to be recharged. Some of the lawn-
mowers shown in Fig. 65.10 use special wires which
radiate from the position of the docking station. This
way a robot only needs to follow such a radiating wire
to return to the docking station on the fastest way. An-
other strategy is to follow the wire at the workspace
border. That will eventually lead the robot back to the
docking station.
An exception is the Bosch Indego, which is
equipped with mapping and localization capabilities.
This allows Indego to plan a path that leads to a point
close to the docking station. Then the robot can follow
a wire for the docking maneuver [65.1].
To comply with the safety regulations and to avoid
any injuries of humans or animals the cutting mecha-
nism has to be very lightweight and designed such that
it is guaranteed to stop if the device tilts or is lifted.
The cutting mechanism of robotic lawnmowers typi-
cally consists of a rotating disc with three razor-like
blades, which automatically retract into their mountings
if the robot is stopped unscheduled, for example, if it
hits an obstacle or is lifted.
Naturally the lightweight design limits the thickness
of the grass that can be cut. Also it is important for
the proper functioning of robotic lawnmowers that the
lawn, which is to be cut, is not too high. This in turn re-
quires a rather regular if not continuous operation of the
lawnmowers. With regular use of the lawnmowers the
grass cuttings are short enough to quickly decompose
into nutritious compost, so there is no need to remove
the cuttings after the lawn is mowed.
Figure 65.10 shows some of the better-known
robotic lawnmowers on the market today. Besides the
pioneers in robotic lawn mowing Husqvarna, Friendly
Robotics and Zuchetti also a number of new players
have entered the market, most noticeably the Ger-
man automotive supplier Bosch and the Japanese car
manufacturer Honda, which has set a milestone in non-
industrial robotics with its humanoid robot Asimo.
We certainly do not claim that the collection in
Fig. 65.10 is complete. Like for domestic ﬂoor cleaning,
Chinese B2B portals such as www.made-in-china.com
or www.alibaba.com list around a hundred products
under the category of robotic lawnmowers and 35 sup-
pliers; the market development for robotic lawnmowers
in the past ﬁve years was not quite as overwhelming as
for domestic ﬂoor cleaners but was still remarkable. In
Table 65.3 we show the technical speciﬁcations of a se-
lection of lawnmowers from Fig. 65.10.
65.1.5 Sports Robotics
A subdomain of domestic robotics that was not included
in the ﬁrst edition of this handbook, because it virtually
did not exist, or it was not visible at that time, is sports
robotics. What is a sports robot? Since an ofﬁcial deﬁni-
tion of this term does not yet exist – at least we haven’t
found one – we take the liberty and provide such a deﬁ-
nition here. We deﬁne a sports robot as a robotic device,
which either supports the human user in their physical
exercises as a coach or a companion, or acts as an oppo-
nent in a game. An important aspect of this deﬁnition is
the physical exercise of the human, which is supported
or challenged.
We would like to emphasize that the above def-
inition does not include any form of entertainment
robots, which play games such as soccer against each
other but do not involve any human activity other than
watching.
In Fig. 65.11 we show three examples of robotic
baseball players. As the name says the Headless Bats-
man can act as a batter at least for exercising. It rather
successfully hits baseballs thrown at it in many ways.
The kinematic structure consists of two arms, one leg
and no head, as its developer, an industrial designer
from Robocross, likes to call it, and is made from auto
parts, steel pipes, and pneumatic hoses. The pneumatic
hoses are parts of its pneumatic actuation by an air

Domestic Robotics
65.1 Mobile Domestic Robotics
1743
Part F | 65.1
Headless Batsman
Pitching Machine
PhillieBot – a robotic pitcher
Fig. 65.11 Robotic baseball players
Table 65.3 Technical speciﬁcation of a selection of robotic lawnmowers
Manufacturer
Husqvarna
Friendly Robotics
Zuchetti
Bosch
Honda
Model
Automower 220 AC
Robomow RL1000
Ambroggio
Indego
Miimo
CPU
ARM9 (32 bit) C
PowerPC (32 bit)
Drive
Differential
Differential
Differential 4 driving
wheels
Differential
Differential
Sensors
Lift sensor colli-
sion/contact sensor
Rain sensor, lift sen-
sor, collision/contact
sensor
Grass sensors, safety
sensors on handles,
lift sensor, sensor for
collision sensor and
rollover
Lift sensor, colli-
sion/contact sensor,
gyro, tilt sensor
3  360 degree bump
sensors, 2 lift sensors
Navigation/coverage
Random
Random
Logicut navigation
system: parallel
tracks in parcels; lo-
calization, mapping,
path planning
Random, parallel or
mixed
Cutting technology
3 pivoting razor
blades
3 razor blades
Rotating disc
3 pivoting blades
3 blades, which
bend on hitting hard
objects
Virtual fence and
guides
Dual guide wires to
return to the base
station
Boundary wire
Boundary wire
Boundary wire
Boundary wire
Performance (m2)
1800 (m2)
2000 (m2)
400 (m2)
1000 (m2)
3000 (m2)
Ground speed
18 m=min
27 m=min
Motor power (W)
3  150
2  20 C 80
2  25 C 56
Battery type and
capacity
NiMH 30 W
Li-Ion, 6.9Ah
32 V Li-Ion, 3Ah
Li-Ion
Run time
45 min
2 h 30 min
3 h 30 min
50 min
Docking/recharging
station
Automatic docking
and recharching
No
Automatic docking
and recharching
Automatic docking
and recharching
Theft protection
Pin code lock
Personal password
Alarm & Pin code
Pin code lock
Size (LWH)
71  55  30
87; 5  65  31
Weight (kg)
10
25
7,9
11.1
Year of launch
2012
Price range
	$ 2400,00
$ 1900,00
	$ 1850,00
	$ 2600,00
compressor. The Headless Batsman is fully controlled
by a human operator via a remote control, which has
three buttons: one to control the robot’s hip, a sec-
ond one that actuates the arms and a third one to lift

Part F | 65.1
1744
Part F
Robots at Work
JoggoBot – a jogging companion
RUFUS – a robotic running coach
Fig. 65.12 (a) JoggoBot and (b) RUFUS two robotic sports com-
panions
and drop the inside shoulder, changing the trajectory of
its swing. Similar mechanisms like Headless Batsman
were developed at Hiroshima University and Tokyo
University.
The counterpart of Headless Batsman is a pitch-
ing machine, which is operated with the same remote
control. The barrel of the machine is sawn-off ﬁre ex-
tinguisher whose other end is directly connected to
a one-inch port poppet valve, which in turn is con-
nected to an 8 bar air pressure tank. The air pressure
tank is supplied from a screw compressor. The charging
mechanism consists of a double rod actuator with a ring
welded horizontally on to the end. Mounted above the
ring is a magazine that holds up to 10 balls, which di-
rectly drop into the ring. For a pitch the actuator moves
the ring with the ball over the edge of the barrel, where
it falls on to a small guide. From there the balls rolls
backward into the barrel. The actuated ring is covered
by a steel strip, which holds back the other balls in the
magazine until the actuated ring returns to its initial po-
sition. Since both mechanisms are remotely controlled,
the human, who controls them, can actually sit in a chair
next to the playground and let the robots play against
each other. Such a use would clearly violate the above
deﬁnition of a sports robot but does not seem to be the
one that is primarily intended.
Another robot that can throw baseballs is Philliebot
(
VIDEO 748 ) developed in University of Pennsylva-
nia’s GRASP laboratory. Philliebot was developed in
a couple of weeks using only spare parts in the GRASP
lab. It uses a Segway as mobile base, a Barret arm, and
pneumatically actuated wrist to create the necessary dy-
namics for the pitch. When the button is pressed the
arm moves to the back of the robot and then acceler-
ates its motion toward the target of its pitch. When the
arm reaches the highest point of motion the pneumatic
wrist cylinder delivers a burst of compressed carbon
dioxide to snap the wrist forward and release the ball.
What remains is the question of why use robotic equip-
ment worth several tens of thousands of dollars to throw
a baseball, given that pitching machines have existed for
many years. According to the developers, the fact that
Philliebot is mobile and its software can be tweaked to
vary pitch velocity and trajectory was enough to justify
the experimentation.
The two sports robots shown in Fig. 65.12 do not
really seduce their users to sit in a chair and relax. They
both serve as so-called robotic running coaches or run-
ning companions.
Researchers at the Royal Melbourne Institute of
Technology in Australia have redesigned a commer-
cially available Parrot AR Drone quadrocopter and
turned it into an autonomous, ﬂying running partner
for joggers, called Joggobot [65.4]. Joggobot uses an
integrated, front-mounted camera to detect and track
a special patter printed on the T-shirt worn by the jog-
ger. Joggobot takes off when the camera registers the
pattern and rises to about the same height as the pattern
on the t-shirt. An internal sensor determines Joggobot’s
altitude. Joggobot can be set into a companion mode, in
which at ﬂies at a steady pace at a relative distance of
about three meters to the jogger or in a coach mode in
which it ﬂies at a slightly more challenging speed.
There are two features of Joggobot that make the de-
vice somewhat limited: ﬁrst the capacity of the battery
limits the ﬂight time to 20 min, which in turns limits
the time for exercise; for a short run, this is certainly
ok, but for serious training this is insufﬁcient. Second,
Joggobot can only ﬂy in a straight line, to let Joggobot
follow an arbitrary path the jogger needs to remotely
control Joggobot’s ﬂight path.
A slightly different concept of a jogging companion
is pursued in RUFUS (
VIDEO 747 ), which is devel-
oped by runfun (www.runfun.com), a German startup
company. RUFUS is an electrically driven, automati-
cally guided, ground vehicle that supports and guides
a runner during his/her training. RUFUS plays the role
of a personal running coach. It fulﬁlls a similar function
to a treadmill, which exposes its user to a varying strain
by varying its velocity and inclination and thereby im-
proves the ﬁtness, endurance, and resilience of the
cardio-vascular system of the user. Unlike a treadmill,
RUFUS is not a stationary device, however. It drives
ahead of the runner like a pace maker in a marathon or
a fake rabbit in a dog race, and sets the runner’s speed.
RUFUS’s velocity is set either manually or automati-
cally via a training program.
If operated in manual mode the velocity is either set
directly as a velocity set point or indirectly as a heart-
beat set point. If the training guidance is based on the
heartbeat, then RUFUS controls its velocity such that
the runner exercises optimally and continuously within
a certain heartbeat interval under a moderate stain of the
cardiovascular system.

Domestic Robotics
65.1 Mobile Domestic Robotics
1745
Part F | 65.1
TeleMe, $1500
MantaroBot, USA
Double, $ 1999
Double Robotics, USA
Vgo, $ 6000
Vgo Communications, USA
QB Avatar, $ 9700
Anybots, USA
Jazz Connect, $12556
Gostai, France
Beam RPD, $ 16000
Suitable Technologies, USA
RP-VITA Robot, $ 4700 per month
InTouch Health/iRobot, USA
Giraff, price unknown
Giraff Technologies, Sweden
Fig. 65.13 Tele-presence robots and robotic avatars
This has a twofold use: on the one hand this prevents
users from overstressing themselves through overam-
bitious and intensive training modules, possibly from
even injuring him or herself. Such a protection func-
tion is beneﬁcial for unﬁt or untrained runners. On
the other hand RUFUS facilitates optimal training ef-
fect and progress through a careful guidance of the
training.
The training effect can be further improved if RU-
FUS is operated in the program mode instead of the
manual mode. In this mode RUFUS executes complete
training modules, for example pyramid speed interval
workouts, which are customized to the user. Such train-
ing modules are typically elaborated on by physiother-
apists or sports physicians. They can be downloaded
to the RUFUS embedded PC like an app from an app
store.
RUFUS has a major advantage over JoggoBot. It
has a battery capacity that allows it driving for about
six hours on a ﬂat road without recharging.
65.1.6 Tele-Presence
In a world in which not only large, but even small and
medium-sized enterprises operate globally, in which
families are scattered over continents, in which ubiqui-
tous presence seems to become an essential requirement
for professional progress, and in which professional ser-
vices are more and more delivered over the internet,
tele-presence has become a fast growing market in the
past years.
Robotics adds a very important aspect to plain tele-
vision by turning it into tele-presence: embodiment and
remotely controlled motion. As tele-presence is nothing
but the combination of tele-vision and tele-operation
using a robotic device, which are often called tele-
presence robots or robotic avatars.
Tele-presence robots offer a whole spectrum of
services and applications ranging from plain mobile
video-conferencing systems to tele-surveillance, tele-
diagnosing, and tele-care, to tele-teaching and tele-
commuting. The term tele-commuting was coined by
Scott Hassan, a Google developer of the early days,
nowadays entrepreneur and investor, and founder of
WillowGarage and Suitable Technologies, the manufac-
turer of Beam-RPD (see also Table 65.4).
A tele-presence robot typically consists of a mobile
robotic platform that:

Can be tele-operated through some user-interface,

Carries a camera, which often can be actuated sep-
arately (via a pan-tilt unit) and allow the operator to
actively explore the remote environment, and

Carries a display, which allows those at the remote
site to see the operator of the tele-presence system
and communicate and interact with it.
Figure 65.13 shows a collection of such tele-
presence robots. The devices range from a price of

Part F | 65.1
1746
Part F
Robots at Work
Table 65.4 Technical speciﬁcation of a selection of tele-presence robots
Manufacturer
Double Robotics
Vgo Communications
Gostai
Suitable Technologies
Model
Double
VGo
Jazz Connect
Beam RPD
Height
120150 cm
120 cm
100:5 cm
5 feet, 2 inch
Weight
7 kg
9 kg
8 kg
45 kg
Screen size
9; 700 (iPad)
600
500
1700
Camera/ﬁeld
of view
High resolution/ wide
angle, up to 640  480
pixels at 25 fps
Two wide-angle HD
cameras
Video
conferencing
Open-tok
VGo video conf.
2-way audio and video for
remote discussions
–
Network
WiFi
WiFi / 4G / LTE
WiFi
WiFi (two dual-band
radios) / 4G
Remote Control
iPad App
VGo App
Intuitive control interface
on internet browser
Beam software client,
mouse, keyboard, or Xbox
controller
Navigation
Tele-operated
Tele-operated
Tele-operated with obstacle
detection
Tele-operated
Sensors
Gyroscope, accelerometer
Obstacle and cliff detection
sensors
12 ultrasonic sensors, 4 IR
receivers (for base dock-
ing), telemetric laser for
autonomous navigation
–
Drive
Differential (1000 wheels)
Differential
Differential
Differential
Battery
Lithium ion
–
–
–
Run time (h)
8
12
5
8
Docking station
–
Yes auto-docking
Yes auto-docking
Yes
some US$ 1500 for TeleMe from MantaroBot to more
than ten-fold that amount for Beam RPD from Suitable
Technologies. The system RP-VITA (Remote Presence
Virtual C Independent Telemedicine Assistant) emerg-
ing from a cooperation between InTouch Health and
iRobot is available only for lease, at a monthly fee
of $ 4700. Giraff is the result of a European research
project lead by Giraff Technologies funded by the Eu-
ropean Commission and is not commercially available
yet.
Not all tele-presence systems shown in Fig. 65.13
can be classiﬁed as domestic robots. A system that
clearly stands out and is by no means a domestic robot
is RP-VITA by InTouch Health and iRobot. RP-VITA
is a remote healthcare system. RP-VITA shall enable
doctors to command any clinical, patient or care team
management process remotely. RP-VITA has a full-
ﬂedged autonomous navigation system that allows the
personnel to focus on the patient care task rather than
on remote navigation. This feature has been awarded
clearance by the US Food and Drug Association (FDA).
RP-VITA further provides access to important clinical
data to support physicians, nurses and other care per-
sonnel in their diagnosis and other medical workﬂow.
For example RP-VITA connects with diagnostic de-
vices such as ultrasound and comes equipped with the
latest electronic stethoscope. So RP-VITA is in a class
of its own, which may also justify the higher price.
Apart from RP-VITA, the tele-presence robots
shown in Fig. 65.13, can all be classiﬁed as semiprofes-
sional or domestic service robots. The functionalities
and services they offer do not necessarily vary on the
same scale as their prices. This can be seen by a com-
parison of two of the above systems: Double and Beam
RPD (see also Table 65.4).
Double is not much more than a mobile iPad
equipped with the video-conferencing system Opentok.
The mobile base uses a Segway-like dual-wheeled drive
system that can balance a pole, which holds the iPad.
When Double stands still, two retractable kickstands
are deployed and allow the system to put the control
system in an idle mode and save energy. Double can

Domestic Robotics
65.2 Enabling Technologies
1747
Part F | 65.2
be remotely controlled and driven around a remote site
through an app installed on a second iPad that enables
communication with all known Doubles over the web.
The height of the iPad holder can be remotely adjusted
to enable communication at eye-level. Double Robotics
list a number of potential services and applications for
which Double could be used: Companies with sites
at various locations can us Double to improve com-
munication and collaboration between remote teams.
Families can use Double to communicate with family
members living abroad. Museums and art galleries can
use Doubles to offer remote tours through their exhibi-
tions.
Beam RPD uses two HD cameras with custom
wide-angle lenses instead of the plain iPad camera. This
gives Beam RPD peripheral vision that is comparable
to a human’s ﬁeld of view. A digital zoom lets the op-
erator further focus on details in the remote site. Beam
uses an array of six microphones and audio processing
algorithms, background noise reduction and echo can-
cellation. This equipment gives Beam an audio-quality,
which obviously goes far beyond that of an iPad. Beam
uses a 17-inch screen mounted at a height of 1:58 m
that allows the display of a human face at its natu-
ral size and height. Another feature that goes beyond
iPad standards is the WiFi connectivity. To provide re-
liable and seamless WiFi connectivity, Beam uses two
dual-band radios and proprietary roaming algorithms.
Altogether it is obvious that Beam RPD is far more
than a movable iPad. It is left to the customers to
decide whether this is worth a price which is an or-
der of magnitude higher.
VIDEO 741 ,
VIDEO 742 ,
VIDEO 744 , and
VIDEO 745
introduce several of
the tele-presence robots available on the market today.
65.2 Enabling Technologies
The mass consumer market is very price-sensitive, so
the price of the robot is key for the success of the
product among consumers. Certain guidelines used in
the consumer electronics market are relevant for the
domestic robot market to provide a rough estimate of
cost of the robot. Let’s say that you want to develop
a ﬂoor-care robot that would retail at $ 300, the rule of
thumb is that your bill of materials (BOM) should be
between 1=31=5 of the retail price. In other words,
your BOM should be within $ 60–$ 100! And the BOM
must include all mechanical parts, electrical parts, bat-
tery, processor, memory, motors, assembly, packaging,
user manuals, etc.
Given the extreme cost constraints outlined above,
this chapter focuses on enabling technologies that are
viable, from the cost point of view, to be included
in a mobile domestic robot with a price lower than
$ 1000 (or ideally below $ 500). These technologies
are required to have a reliability level in line with the
expected life time (and warranty) of the product; other-
wise, no matter how good the technology is, if it stops
working in an unreasonable period of time, the robot
will be returned to the retailer. Special emphasis should
be placed in the ease of manufacture of the technology.
Difﬁcult to manufacture components create delays in
the production line, decreasing the yield of the product
and eventually increasing the overall cost of production,
leading to either eroding proﬁt margins or a rise in the
retail price.
Mobile robots need to sense and understand the
environment in which they operate. The ﬁrst key en-
abler is the capability of detecting obstacles and hazards
to safely and accurate navigate around them. Sec-
tion 65.2.1 describes the different available technolo-
gies for obstacle and hazard detection. The second key
enabler is the ability to localize and create a map of the
environment to intelligently plan actions and motions
that allow the robot achieve its goal. Section 65.2.2
presents the technologies available for localization and
mapping using a number of low-cost, yet powerful sen-
sors. Section 65.2.3 discusses alternative approaches
to coverage of the space implemented in commercial
products.
65.2.1 Sensing and Obstacle Avoidance
Domestic robots aim to take care of tedious chores,
interacting with a household that includes owners, chil-
dren, babies, pets, and stationary objects such chairs,
tables, walls, etc. Domestic robots must be safe in order
to gain acceptance in our daily life: it is not tolera-
ble to have a robot falling down the stairs or hurting
a household member. Thus, robots must be equipped
with drop/cliff sensors and proximity sensor that ensure
proper operation while still satisfying the mentioned
cost constraints.
Cliff Sensors
A number of solutions are present in current robots
in the market. Off-the-shelf solutions are IR sensors
from Sharp that consists of an emitter (light emitting
diode LED) and a receiver (photodetector or position-
sensitive-device PSD) that provides an output propor-
tional to the distance to the object. The Roomba uses

Part F | 65.2
1748
Part F
Robots at Work
–2500
–1500
–500
LDS
500
1500
y coordinate (mm)
Two scans from REVO LDS
a)
b)
x coordinate (mm)
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
–500
Fig.65.14a,b Laser Distance Sensor.
(a) Prototype and (b) occupancy map
generated with the sensor
a custom IR cliff sensor based on a similar principle
that trades generic distance measurement with sensor
cost. The Mint robot from Evolution Robotics employs
a factory-calibrated mechanical hammer that triggers
upon cliff detection. Solid-state sensors are usually
more reliable that mechanical sensors, since they do not
have moving parts, but have the drawback of a response
dependent on the reﬂectivity of the surface in the IR
spectrum and a dead-band in the response.
Contact and Proximity Sensors
Mechanical switches, called bump sensors, are com-
monly used for detecting when the robot gets in contact
with obstacles. Bump sensors are cost-effective solu-
tions providing the ability to stop the robot without
damaging the obstacle. Touching obstacles is not de-
sired unless performed very gently to ensure that the
robot goes under curtains and bed skirts. IR and sonar
sensors are frequently employed as touchless alterna-
tives to the bump sensors by measuring the distance
to obstacles. Both types of sensors are composed of
an emitter and a receptor with an output proportional
to the measured distance. IR sensors are usually more
focused than sonars and less sensitive to multiple re-
ﬂections on walls and other obstacles, but might lose
thin obstacles such as chair legs. This type of sensors
provides a point-wise measurement of distance to ob-
stacles, so a robot needs a number of these sensors to
obtain a dense representation of the obstacles in the
environment. The information on obstacles and haz-
ards (cliffs) is collected in occupancy grid maps and
used for decision-making in systematic cleaning robots.
A number of cost-effective dense distance measuring
sensors have recently appeared in the market and will
be discussed in the next sections. These dense distance
measuring sensors have a cost on the order of tens
of dollars, while the point distance measuring sensors
have cost only a few dollars, so most of the domestic
robots currently available on the market have yet to in-
corporate dense distance measuring sensors. The only
exception is the Neato XV-21 that uses a low-cost laser
distance measuring system.
Laser Distance Sensor
A low-cost Laser Distance Sensor was developed by
Konolige and colleagues [65.5] using a laser point beam
and a global shutter CMOS imaging sensor separated by
a small baseline. The system operates by triangulation
and achieves full 360 planar scan by rotating the optical
assembly on a full circle. The sensor has a range of 0:2
to 6 m with an error < 3 cm at 6 m and an angular reso-
lution of 1 degree, providing 4000 readings per second
(up to 10 Hz) with a small size (approximate width of
10 cm shown in Fig. 65.14a) and low power (< 2 W).
The sensor is eye safe and provides measurements that
enable laser-based SLAM as shown by Fig. 65.14b.
Structured-Light Distance Sensors
Structured-light distance sensors consist of an emitter
that projects a known pattern on the environment and
a receptor that computes depth based on the deforma-
tion of the received pattern. The Kinect [65.6] interface
to the Xbox game system uses a structured-light sensor
from PrimeSense [65.7] thus showcasing the readiness
of this sensor for consumer applications. The emitter
consists of a laser with optics that projects a known pat-
tern (Speckles [65.8, 9]) in near-IR light and a comple-
mentary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) IR cam-
era that observes the pattern to estimate depth using tri-
angulation. The emitter and the camera are calibrated
during manufacturing assuming a rigid conﬁguration.
The speckles can be further shaped into ellipsis using
optics with different focal lengths in x and y so that
the orientation of the observed ellipsis is proportional to
depth. Speckles of different sizes are used to obtain dif-
ferent depth accuracy depending on size. Figure 65.15a

Domestic Robotics
65.2 Enabling Technologies
1749
Part F | 65.2
shows the speckles pattern projected by the sensor and
an image taken in the dark by photographerAudrey Pen-
ven showing the IR speckles. Figure 65.15b shows the
components of the Kinect sensor and the corresponding
RGB and depth images of a scene.
Time of Flight (TOF) Distance Sensors
Time of ﬂight (TOF) sensors consist of a light source
(usually a laser) that emits a continuous waveform and
a special imaging sensor that measures the phase shift
of the received signal in each pixel. The depth at each
pixel is proportional to the phase shift. TOF sensors
have been in the market for quite some time, but the
need for allocating a large portion of the sensor to the
decoding electronics has made it challenging to produce
low-cost sensors at reasonable resolution. Some of the
companies offering TOF sensor have been Mesa Imag-
ing AG that produces the SwissRanger [65.10] sensors,
Softkinetics [65.11], PMDVision.
Stereo Vision
Stereo vision is a well-known computer vision solution
to the extraction of three-dimensional (3-D) depth maps
in areas with sufﬁcient texture to ﬁnd image correspon-
dences. As opposed to structured light or TOF sensors,
stereo vision systems are totally passive, but require
a calibrated stereo rig, and their performance depends
on the level of external illumination and on the amount
of texture present in images.
The selection of the optimal dense mapping sensor
depends on the application. The laser distance sensor
provides reasonable information for laser-based SLAM
and obstacle detection and avoidance; however, it only
provides range information on a plane as opposed to the
dense 3-D range offered by the structured light, TOF, or
stereo systems. The structured light sensor uses a sim-
ple imaging sensor but requires additional computation
to estimate depth in each pixel while the TOF sensor
computes depth in each pixel at the expense of a sensor
with lower ﬁll factor. The stereo system does not require
additional lighting, but requires an additional camera
and a computation module to extract depth. Other pa-
rameters to consider are the maximum and minimum
range that the sensor provides to ensure that it ﬁts the
requirements of the application in terms of mapping and
obstacle detection.
65.2.2 Localization and Mapping
A robot that knows its location and understands its
surroundings is able to plan intelligent maneuvers to
achieve its goals. Localization and mapping are ba-
sic primitives that enable smart and efﬁcient behavior.
Early successful robots like the Roomba chose to sac-
Scene
Light coding
Scene projected
by invisible IR light
IR light
source
Standard
CMOC sensor PS1080
SoC
2
3
4
5 m 6
Scene depth image
a)
c)
b)
Fig.65.15a–c Primesense sensor: (a,b) Speckles pattern projected
by the laser emitter. (c) Block diagram of the Kinect sensor
riﬁce localization and mapping in order to achieve an
appealing retail price since the localization and map-
ping technology was either too expensive or not existent
at the time (many of the dense sensors presented in the
previous section were developed after the Roomba). In
recent years, a number of low-cost, yet powerful simul-
taneous localization and mapping (SLAM) technolo-
gies have been developed and integrated in ﬂoor-care
products. These technologies are described in the fol-
lowing sections.
Vector Field SLAM
The Mint robot by Evolution Robotics uses active bea-
cons for localization. The Northstar beacon projects two
IR spots onto the ceiling that are modulated to sim-
plify the detection of the spots with the sensor. The
spots are invisible to the human eye and thus do not
produce visual clutter. While placing the beacon can
still be regarded as a modiﬁcation to the environment,
surveys among our customers suggest that the vast ma-
jority largely accepts setting up the beacon prior to
running the robot [65.12]. The Northstar sensor uses
3 photodiodes to compute the direction to the spots
from the measured current through the photodiodes.
The photodiodes can be sampled at high frequency to
detect the modulated spot frequencies for data asso-
ciation. The sensor is quite inexpensive and suitable
for cost-sensitive applications. However, the sensor suf-
fers from multipath since light not only reaches the
sensor directly but also through reﬂections from walls

Part F | 65.2
1750
Part F
Robots at Work
and other furniture, making the position computed by
the sensor inadequate to be directly used for local-
ization and mapping. The sensor is augmented with
a localization method that learns the light distribu-
tion in the room through a simultaneous localization
and mapping (SLAM) approach [65.13]. Figure 65.16
shows the Mint robot cleaning the environment depict-
ing the operation of the Northstar localization system
and the problem of multipath. The ﬁgure also shows
the Mint robot and the Northstar cube and the Northstar
sensor.
In vector ﬁeld SLAM the spatial variation of con-
tinuous signals is learned and simultaneously used for
localizing the robot by fusing information from dead-
reckoning (odometry and gyro) and Northstar. In the
following, this method is introduced and tailored toward
measurements obtained from Northstar. The signal ﬁeld
is represented as a regular grid of ﬁxed node positions
bi D .bi;x; bi;y/T, i D 1 : : : N, where each node mi 2 R4
holds the expected Northstar positions of both spots
when placing the robot at bi and pointing it in a ﬁxed
orientation 0 D 0. Vector ﬁeld and robot pose are then
estimated through the application of SLAM.
Let the robot path be a time series of poses x0 : : : xT,
xt 2 SE(2), i. e., the set of rigid transformations in the
horizontal plane, and let x0 D .0;0; 0/T. At each time
step t D 1 : : : T the robot receives a motion input ut
a)
b)
c)
Projector
Multi–Path
Detector
Fig.65.16a–c Mint robot. (a) Normal operation of the
Mint robot using Northstar (the yellow path indicates mul-
tipath). (b) Mint robot and Northstar cube. (c) Northstar
sensor
with covariance Rt and a measurement zt D .zx1, zy1,
zx2, zy2/T of the two Northstar spot positions with co-
variance Qt. The spot positions are also each affected
by the rotational variability denoted c D .cx, cy/T. The
rotational variability models errors in measuring the di-
rection to the spots caused by not having the sensor
perfectly level.
The SLAM problem is solved with the ESEIF-
SLAM that is constant time and requires memory linear
in the size of the area explored by the robot. The method
has been implemented in the processor of Mint, an
ARM 7 processor with 64 kByte RAM [65.13]. Vec-
tor ﬁeld SLAM has been extended to address covering
larger areas by using more Northstar beacons [65.15]
and to provide a solution for the re-localization of the
robot after it has been kidnapped or paused and re-
sumed [65.16].
Figure 65.18 presents the map obtained by the robot
after a cleaning run in a home environment of 125 m2
covered by three Northstar beacons marked with the
pink and green disks (units are in meters). The robot
navigated in the home by following a cleaning strategy
based on systematically covering sectors of the envi-
ronment. As long as at least one beacon is visible to
the robot, the strategy moves the robot onto a neigh-
boring region until no space is left to clean. At the end
the robot follows along the perimeter of detected obsta-
Signal
field
Ground
plane
mi2
mi3
mi1
mi0
bi2
h0
(x y)
bi3
bi1
bi0
Fig. 65.17 Vector ﬁeld SLAM with Northstar
Fig. 65.18 Robot map obtained with vector ﬁeld SLAM in
a 125 m2 home environment

Domestic Robotics
65.2 Enabling Technologies
1751
Part F | 65.2
a)
b)
Fig. 65.19 (a) cv-SLAM (after [65.14]). (b) Features extracted by the vision front-end. Map obtained with the EKF
cles for a thorough cleaning around walls and furniture.
As the robot moves through the environment it creates
an occupancy grid map using the position information
from localization. Each visited cell is classiﬁed into one
of the following categories: obstacles (drawn in black),
ﬂoor changes (drawn in brown), hazards (drawn in red),
and free space (drawn in shades of blue that indicate
visibility of the spots, the lighter the blue, the better the
visibility).
Visual SLAM
Visual localization and mapping is attractive for a vari-
ety of applications due to the rich input and the low cost
and footprint of visual sensors. The difﬁculties lie in ro-
bustly extracting a critical subset of information from
the high-rate visual data stream and processing it efﬁ-
ciently to yield useful output. Despite steady increases
in the computational power of most platforms, such
challenges are nonetheless exacerbated by the limited
processing and storage provided by low-cost, embed-
ded systems appropriate for low-power applications or
consumer products. Many state-of-the-art approaches to
visual SLAM depend on a per-frame processing rate
sufﬁciently high, relative to the speed of camera motion,
to permit strong temporal assumptions on the image se-
quence. This section reviews two approaches to visual
SLAM focused on domestic robots. Ceiling vision sim-
ilar to the work of Jeong and Lee [65.14] can be found
in the Navibot from Samsung, the Roboking from LG,
and the Iclebo/Homerun from Yujin Robotics/Philips.
Furthermore, visual SLAM systems have been devel-
oped for low-cost and embedded systems [65.17, 18].
cv-SLAM
The ceiling vision SLAM [65.14] system is composed
of a camera facing upward, looking toward the ceiling.
The system extracts corner features using a Harris de-
tector and matches features using correlation. Feature
matching achieves invariance to view point changes by
training a set of multiview descriptors of the features
as matching proceeds during the run. The main orien-
tation(s) of the feature are further used as descriptors
of the feature to ensure a two-dimensional (2-D) ro-
tation invariant feature matching that can be used for
relocalization. The localization and mapping backend
of the system is based on an extended Kalman ﬁlter
(EKF) that fuses visual and dead-reckoning informa-
tion (odometry and gyro) and that tracks the pose of
the robot in a two-and-a-half-dimensional (2.5-D) (x,
y, ) and the 3-D position of the features (landmarks
of the map). The orientation(s) of the features are also
represented in 3-D and tracked with the EKF to pre-
dict changes in the feature patch due to motion of the
robot (as the robot moves, features on the ceiling will
undergo a rotation while features on the walls will
experience a shearing transformation in addition to ro-
tation).
Figure 65.19a shows corner points and their esti-
mated orientations in views with rotation only. Fig-
ure 65.19b presents snapshots from a sequential map-
building experiment on a corridor.
vSLAM
The
vSLAM
[65.17, 18]
system
from
Evolution
Robotics is designed for a low-cost robotic platform
equipped with simple odometry and a single camera.
Figure 65.20 shows the block diagram of the system.
Operating primarily as a view recognition engine, the
visual measurement front-end requires only occasional,
weak assumptions on processing rate, and intrinsically
provides robust loop closing when previously mapped
areas are revisited. The visual measurements and odom-
etry are fused in the back-end in a graph representation
and optimized incrementally. The SLAM graph com-
plexity is bounded during operation using variable elim-
ination and constraint pruning, with heuristic schedules
in order to keep optimization and storage costs com-
mensurate with explored area, rather than with time of
exploration, all while causing minimal loss in mapping
and localization accuracy. The system has been evalu-
ated on real datasets with planar ground-truth reference,
showing that the system operates successfully even at
frame rates below 2 Hz, running on an ARM9 proces-
sor with 64 MB of RAM [65.18].

Part F | 65.2
1752
Part F
Robots at Work
Front end
Back end
Relative
pose
estimates
Localization
View
creation
Global
appearance
database
View
recognition
Views
Graph
construction
Graph
optimization
Graph
reduction
SLAM
graph
Differential
motion
estimates
Camera
Fig. 65.20 vSLAM block
diagram
View recognition engines [65.17–22] have proven
attractive components for SLAM systems because they
permit robust and ﬂexible loop closing. Instead of
making correspondences between individual features
or measurements as in the cv-SLAM system, view
recognition engines typically match constellations of
features or entire images, without requiring track-
ing. vSLAM [65.17] creates views by ﬁrst matching
SIFT [65.23] features on pairs of incoming images, and
second computing structure and motions estimates us-
ing bundle adjustment. The SIFT features are stored
in a local database for each view and on a global
database for the complete map. View recognition is
performed by a feature lookup in the global database
that provides a set of candidate view matches. Feature
lookup in the local view database followed by robust
outlier rejection and a local bundle adjustment com-
pletes the view recognition and visual pose estimation
process.
0
10m
5
0
2m
1
Fig. 65.21 vSLAM results on a warehouse environment and in a household environment
Commonly used graph SLAM methods for agglom-
erating sensor information often incur computation and
storage costs that grow with time, rather than with
space explored. For a robot operating for extended
periods within a limited spatial area – typical of prac-
tical applications – this is an undesirable trade-off.
vSLAM [65.18] instead applies probabilistically sound
graph reduction methods that limit the complexity of
the graph to a linear factor of the complexity of the ex-
plored space. Past poses of the robot that are not used
for view recognition can be marginalized out of the esti-
mation, and their incident constraints are collapsed back
into the graph.
Figure 65.21 presents the results of running the
vSLAM system in two sequences, one collected in
a regular household (right) (same house as the one
shown in Fig. 65.18 for vector ﬁeld SLAM) and the
other collected in a large warehouse environment (left).
The ﬁrst set of plots show the ground truth path of

Domestic Robotics
65.2 Enabling Technologies
1753
Part F | 65.2
Fig. 65.22 Map created with the Neato XV-11 robot
(www.youtube.com/watch?v=zodC8EFvh7g)
the robot and the ﬂoor plan of the environments. The
second set of plots shows the trajectory of the robot
estimated with vSLAM. The warehouse environment
extends over an area of 2412m and the house over
an area of 209m. The estimated trajectory has a root
mean square (RMS) error of 44 cm in the warehouse
case and of 28 cm in the household case.
Laser-Based SLAM
The previous sections presented a number of low-cost
solutions to the SLAM problem in which the data asso-
ciation was (almost) perfect. In the case of Vector-Field
SLAM, the modulation of the spots of the Northstar
cube ensures a unique identiﬁcation of the spot. In the
case of visual SLAM, the visual front-end incorporates
a number of checks to ensure that misrecognitions are
very rare. Laser-based SLAM has the characteristic that
the measurements acquired with the laser are not unique
since it is possible to obtain similar measurements in
a variety of places in a household (just aiming the laser
to a wall will provide measurements that are indis-
tinguishable from a measurement to a different wall).
In addition to the data association problem, laser dis-
tance measurement sensors, such as the one presented
in Sect. 65.2.1, provide both range and bearing to the
landmarks. Both Northstar and cameras give only bear-
ing measurements to the spots or features.
The laser-based SLAM literature is quite exten-
sive [65.25]. The estimation back-end could be an
a)
b)
Charger
Starting point
Start
Sofa
Table
Wall mapping
Cleaning
Fig.65.23a,b Coverage
strategies. Trilobite strategy.
Roomba strategy [65.24]
extended Kalman ﬁlter (EKF), a Particle Filter, or
a GraphSLAM system. Several data association algo-
rithms are available, some of them are proactive (or
even greedy) [65.26, 27] and some are lazy [65.28] in
assigning correspondences between measurements and
landmarks. The selection of the algorithm to implement
in the domestic robot would be guided by the trade-off
between computational resources and the performance
requirements. Figure 65.22 presents a map obtained
with the Neato XV-11 robot.
65.2.3 Navigation and Coverage
The Trilobite robot vacuum cleaner by Electrolux was
one of the pioneer robots to be commercialized. The
trilobite was equipped with a sophisticated custom
sonar sensor system that allowed the robot to navigate
without touching obstacles (or touching them very gen-
tly). The coverage strategy consisted of two stages: ﬁrst,
explore the perimeter of the room to estimate the area
to clean and second, cover the room with wall-to-wall
diagonal passes. The perimeter exploration stage as-
sumes that the robot would eventually traverse through
the complete boundary of the area to clean and return to
the charging station (Fig. 65.23a).
As mentioned previously, the cost constraints forced
early robots like the Roomba to eschew advanced fea-
tures like localization and mapping in order to offer
a product at a price point accepted by consumers. Nev-
ertheless, the navigation strategy implemented in the
Roomba was quite effective in covering the space, es-
pecially when running in single rooms or in presence of
large amount of clutter. The Roomba uses a spiral pat-
tern in open area to optimally cover the space without
localization until it hits an obstacle (Fig. 65.23b). Then
it selects random orientation and continues moving in
straight line until reaching the next obstacle where it
selects another random orientation to continue with the
same behavior. The spiral can be triggered when the
robot travels for a certain distance without having found
any obstacles. Many of the other random robots present
in the market have a strategy that follows similar prin-
ciples to the Roomba one.

Part F | 65.3
1754
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
c)
Fig.65.24a–c Long exposure im-
ages [65.29] showing the coverage
strategies of the (a) Roomba, (b)
Neato, and (c) Mint
a)
b)
Fig.65.25a,b Coverage strategies for
lawnmowers. (a) Tango [65.30] by
John Deere and (b) Indego [65.31] by
Bosch
The systematic robots on the other hand take advan-
tage of the localization system to plan efﬁcient cleaning
paths to maximize coverage in the least amount of
time, pause for charging on the docking station and
resume cleaning from the last cleaned spot, and in-
telligently navigate from room to room. Mint takes
the strategy of focusing ﬁrst on open area cleaning,
covering the space in parallel straight passes to tra-
verse as much open space as fast as possible, and
then performing a ﬁnal cleaning on the perimeter and
around the obstacles. This perimeter cleaning step
enables Mint to uncover portals to new areas that
were not encountered during open area cleaning. Other
robots like the Navibot from Samsung, the Robok-
ing from LG and the iClebo from Yujin/Philips use
a similar strategy without the ﬁnal perimeter clean-
ing. The Neato XV-11, on the other hand, performs
ﬁrst an exploration and cleaning of the perimeter of
the environment in order to create a good localiza-
tion map and then completes the coverage of the open
area. Figure 65.24 shows long exposure pictures of
different robots: Roomba, Neato, Mint sweeping and
Mint mopping. These long exposure pictures show
the trajectory of the robots during normal cleaning
operation.
The lawnmower robots use similar coverage strate-
gies to the ones of vacuum cleaner robots. One element
common to all lawnmower robots is the usage of an
embedded wire to deﬁne the perimeter of the lawn.
Within the boundaries deﬁned by the wire, some robots
like the Automower from Husqvarna or the Robomow
from Friendly Robotics use a complete random cov-
erage strategy. The Tango from John Deere combines
straight motions in random directions with spiral mo-
tions (a-la-Roomba). The Indego from Bosch is the only
robot that attempts to systematically cover the space
by ﬁrst exploring the perimeter to estimate the size of
the lawn and then traversing the interior with parallel
straight passes. Systematic coverage is enabled by fus-
ing sensory information from wheel odometry and an
inertial measurement unit (IMU) by means of proba-
bilistic reasoning with prior knowledge. Figure 65.25
depicts the coverage strategies of the Tango and the
Indego.
65.3 Smart Homes
Several attempts have been made in the literature to de-
ﬁne the term smart home, for example, in [65.32] the
term is deﬁned as the the latest expression of the various
ways in which technology in the home has developed.
In [65.33], the notion of a smart home is deﬁned more
explicitly as:
a residence equipped with computing and informa-
tion technology which anticipates and responds to
the needs of the occupants, working to promote their
comfort, convenience, security and entertainment
through management of technology within the home
and connections to the world beyond.

Domestic Robotics
65.3 Smart Homes
1755
Part F | 65.3
Smart homes typically comprise elements such as net-
work of sensors and actuators, and also entire robotic
systems.
In 1999, a company called e2 Home was established
by Ericsson and Electrolux to explore the possibili-
ties of smart homes [65.34]. E2 Home built several
houses with smart home devices using IT technologies.
Through the exploration, several issues relating to smart
homes from business point of view have been unveiled,
which include the difﬁculties relating to the complexity
of the system, starting up the new business model, han-
dling of intellectual property rights (IPR) for the third
parties contents, and the consumer’s needs. The com-
pany was liquidated in 2004.
Current smart home technology includes video
monitoring, motion detectors, fall detectors, pressure
mats, environment control, health monitoring such as
blood pressure, pulse rate, body temperature, weight,
and human computer interaction (HCI) technology, for
example, to recognize gestures. Smart homes also of-
ten refer to houses connected to a smart grid, which is
deﬁned as [65.35]:
a developing network of new technologies, equip-
ment, and controls working together to respond
immediately to our 21st century demand for elec-
tricity.
In this case, the smart home is deﬁned as [65.35]:
a residence with the capability of efﬁciently control-
ling generated solar energy and power consumption
making it ideal for vehicle power supply and man-
agement.
The development of smart homes requires a num-
ber of technical questions and challenges to be ad-
dressed [65.32]: how to convert current home structures
and architectures into smart homes, how to standard-
ize smart home components, for example, sensor net-
works, how to keep the equipment cost at a reasonable
level, and how to deal with security and privacy is-
sues.
In the following sections we will describe a num-
ber of prominent smart home developments, the Aware
Home at Georgia Institute of Technology, the Gator
Tech Smart House at the University of Florida, and
the sensorized environment for life (SELF) at AIST
(the Japan National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology) (Figs. 65.26, 65.27). These
developments show that current smart home technol-
ogy goes signiﬁcantly beyond existing home automa-
tion. Accounting for the signiﬁcant increase in the
elderly population in the near future, many of to-
day’s smart home developments pay special attention
to improving the quality of life of elderly people. The
descriptions below will also address the question on
how to integrate robotics systems into smart home
concepts.
65.3.1 Gator Tech Smart House
The Gator Tech Smart House (Fig. 65.26) was built at
the University of Florida [65.36]. It addresses the needs
of elderly people to live independently and maintain
dignity and quality of life at older ages. The house is
equipped with many smart devices such as smart ﬂoors,
tracking the motion of the occupants of the house, smart
blinds, automatically adjusting ambient light, smart
display, smart cameras, smart phones that can act as
a remote control to other appliances, location tracking,
smart leak detectors, and smart beds. The exterior of
the house has a smart mailbox which alerts residence
if mail is delivered and a smart front door which can
sense home owners using an radio frequency identiﬁca-
tion (RFID) tag, allowing keyless entry to home owners.
The kitchen of the Gator Tech Smart House in-
cludes a smart microwave, which uses RFID on food
packages. This allows the microwave to adjust the
settings for cooking the meal. It also informs the res-
ident about the readiness of the meal. The kitchen
further comprises a smart refrigerator that monitors
food availability and consumption, and detects expired
food items. The smart refrigerator can create shopping
lists automatically and has an integrated meal prepa-
ration advisor based on items in the refrigerator and
pantry.
The implementation of such a complex system has
raised a number of technical issues and questions, in-
cluding the development of the smart devices, data
handling of networks of sensors, and interconnecting
smart devices to other devices in the environment.
These questions led to some new research tracks on
smart houses, primarily grouped into pervasive comput-
ing and mobile computing network research.
Fig. 65.26 Georgia Institute of Technology: Aware Home

Part F | 65.3
1756
Part F
Robots at Work
c) Developed room
System overview
Realized
in room
Ceiling dome microphone
900mm
Ceiling dome
Microphone
210 pressure sensors
Embedded in room
Wall camera
Ceiling dome microphone
Washstand display
Pressure sensor bed
Oxymeter
Thermistor
Posture sensor
Body movement
sensor
Microphone
Embedded in room
Pressure sensor bed
Washstand display
a) Conventional computer
b) Conventional monitor for human respiratory system
Living-space computer with a function
for monitoring human respiratory system
Fig. 65.27 AIST, the sensorized environment for life
65.3.2 Aware Home
Aware Home is a living laboratory for research in
ubiquitous computing for everyday activities. This
project is conducted at Georgia Institute of Tech-
nology [65.37]. The major objective of the Aware
Home project is to build an environment that is ca-
pable of being aware and keeping track of the states
and activities of its inhabitants. Aware Home creates
a partnership between the resident and the surround-
ing sensing and computing technologies. This opens
several ﬁelds of research, not only from the technol-
ogy point of view, but also in terms of the social
aspects of the inhabitants. The main research agenda
of Aware Home spans human-centered and technology-
centered research, software engineering, and social
implications.
Technology and application-centered research fo-
cuses on sensor networks, distributed computing, con-
text awareness and ubiquitous sensing, individual in-
teraction with the home, smart ﬂoors, and ﬁnding lost
objects. Research on context awareness is inspired by
the fact that humans communicate with each other
very success-fully by referring to what is called shared
context. For communication between humans and com-
puter systems, this shared context must be made explic-
itly. Sensor systems, which facilitate the extraction of
context, need to be developed.
This human-centered research focuses on support
for the elderly and other social issues. A key concept in
sup-porting the elderly is aging in place. Aware Home
is designed to support the elderly and allow them to
be independent instead of moving to elderly care fa-
cilities. Supporting the elderly leads to the study on
cognitive support such as reminding them when to take
medication, guiding them when they lose their way, and
locating lost items.
65.3.3 SELF – Sensorized Environment
for LiFe
SELF
stands
for
Sensorized
Environment
for
LiFe [65.1]. The objectives of SELF are to de-
velop a network of sensors which are embedded in
the environment, information gathering using the
networked sensors, storing and analyzing the infor-
mation, and the reporting of useful information to
assist and maintain good health. The basic advantages

Domestic Robotics
References
1757
Part F | 65
of SELF, due to the embedded nature of the sensors
are:
1. No limit on size, weight, or power source,
2. It does not disturb the human,
3. It does not impose physical restrictions, and
4. Sensors are rarely broken since they are ﬁxed to the
environment.
SELF can be viewed as a system that monitors a per-
son’s behavior or activity and represents the data ob-
jectively in an approach known as self-externalization.
SELF is motivated by the fact that humans sometimes
cannot notice a change in their condition which affects
their health without a medical doctor. Therefore, the use
of network sensors to monitor human behavior and re-
port useful information that greatly affects the health
status will further improve quality of life.
The SELF study considers behavior as a means of
communication, and sensors embedded into the envi-
ronment as one way to observer a person’s behavior.
The SELF implementation consists of a bed with a sen-
sor, a ceiling with microphones, a washstand with
a display, etc. The bed with sensors can determine the
time the subject sleeps and wakes up, their posture
during sleeping, and their breathing pattern. The mi-
crophones attached to the ceiling can detect snoring or
normal breathing sounds. Based on the monitored data,
the washstand display is used as an output device to pro-
vide the subject’s health status and thus create feedback
to the subject.
Video-References
VIDEO 727
Robotic Vacuum Cleaners Reviewed by Click – Spring 2014
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/727
VIDEO 729
How would you choose the best Robotic Vacuum Cleaner?
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/729
VIDEO 731
Husqvarna Automower versus competitors
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/731
VIDEO 734
Windoro window cleaning robot review
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/734
VIDEO 735
WINBOT W710 versus HOBOT 168
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/735
VIDEO 736
Winbot window cleaning robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/736
VIDEO 737
Serbot Robot Clean Ant Profi
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/737
VIDEO 739
Home Pool Cleaner Review – 5 types of robotic cleaners
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/739
VIDEO 740
Automatic pool cleaner reviews
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/740
VIDEO 741
Telepresence robot in action
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/741
VIDEO 742
Double robotics – overview
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/742
VIDEO 744
Test-Driving Beam, the telepresence robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/744
VIDEO 745
Beam’s new Palo Alto store lets telepresence robots sell themselves. Literally
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/745
VIDEO 746
This robot is your running coach – Joggobot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/746
VIDEO 747
RUFUS – your personal running coach
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/747
VIDEO 748
PhillieBot robot gives first pitch at a Phillies game
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/748
References
65.1
P. Ljunggren: Intelligent machines, Personal Com-
munication
65.2
R.D. Schraft, M. Hägele, K. Wegener: Service-
Roboter-Visionen (Hanser, Munich 2004)
65.3
A. Albert: Robert-Bosch GmbH, Personal Commu-
nication
65.4
Howstuffworks: http://electronics.howstuffworks.
com/gadgets/home/robotic-vacuum2.htm

Part F | 65
1758
Part F
Robots at Work
65.5
K.
Konolige,
J.
Augenbraun,
N.
Donaldson,
C. Fiebig, P. Shah: A low-cost laser distance sensor,
Proc. Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Pasadena
(2008)
65.6
Gearfuse:
http://www.gearfuse.com/robotic-
vacuum-paths-mapped-and-compared-with-
long-exposure-pictures/
65.7
P.
Ridden:
Joggobot
turns
a
quadrocopter
into
a
running
companion, Gizmag,
June
11
http://www.gizmag.com/joggobot-autonomous-
quadrocopter-running-partner/22899/ (2012)
65.8
B. Freedman, A. Shpunt, J. Arieli: Distance-varying
illumination and imaging techniques for depth
mapping, US Patent 29 0698 (2010)
65.9
A. Shpunt, A. Zlesky: Depth-varying light fields for
three dimensional sensing, US Patent 2008/10 6746
(2008)
65.10
Microsoft
(Xbox):
http://www.xbox.com/en-US/
KINECT
65.11
Apple (Primesense): http://www.primesense.com/
65.12
J.-S. Gutmann, K. Culp, M. Munich, P. Pirjanian:
The social impact of a systematic floor cleaner, ARSO
Munich (2012)
65.13
J.-S. Gutmann, E. Eade, P. Fong, M. Munich: Vec-
tor field SLAM – localization by learning the spatial
variation of continuous signals, Trans. Robotics
28(3), 650–667 (2012)
65.14
W. Jeong, K. Lee: CV-SLAM: A new ceiling vision-
based SLAM technique, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2005)
65.15
J.-S. Gutmann, D. Goel, M. Munich: Scaling vec-
tor field SLAM to large environments, Proc. IAS, Jeju
(2012)
65.16
J.-S. Gutmann, P. Fong, M. Munich: Localization in
a vector field map, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2012)
65.17
N. Karlsson, E.D. Bernardo, J. Ostrowski, L. Gon-
calves, P. Pirjanian, M.E. Munich: The vSLAM algo-
rithm for robust localization and mapping, Proc.
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
65.18
E. Eade, P. Fong, M. Munich: Monocular graph SLAM
with complexity reduction, IROS (2010)
65.19
M. Cummins, P. Newman: Accelerated appearance-
only SLAM, Proc. Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Pasadena (2008)
65.20
E.
Eade,
T.
Drummond:
Monocular
slam
as
a graph of coalesced observations, Proc. 11th IEEE
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV’07), Rio de Janeiro
(2007)
65.21
E. Eade, T. Drummond: Unified loop closing and
recovery for real time monocular slam, Proc. Br.
Mach. Vis. Conf. (BMVC’08) Leeds (2008) pp. 53–
62
65.22
K. Konolige, J. Bowman, J.D. Chen, P. Mihelich,
M. Calonder, V. Lepetit, P. Fua: View-based maps,
Proc. Robotics Sci. Syst. Seattle (2009)
65.23
D.G. Lowe: Distinctive image features from scale-
invariant keypoints, Proceedings IJCV (2004)
65.24
Pmdtechnologies GmbH: http://www.pmdtec.com/
65.25
S. Thrun, W. Burgard, D. Fox: Probabilistic Robotics
(MIT Press, Cambridge 2005)
65.26
J. Neira, J. D. Tard os: Data association in stochas-
tic mapping using the joint compatibility test, IEEE
Trans. Robotics Autom. 17(6), 890–897 (2001)
65.27
S. Thrun, D. Fox, W. Burgard: A probabilistic
approach to concurrent mapping and localiza-
tion for mobile robots, Mach. Learn. 31, 29–53
(1998)
65.28
D. Hähnel, S. Thrun, B. Wegbreit, W. Burgard: To-
wards lazy data association in SLAM, Proc. 11th Int.
Symp. Robotics Res. (ISRR), Sienna (2003) pp. 421–
431
65.29
John
Deere:
http://www.deere.com/wps/dcom/
en_INT/products/equipment/autonomous_mower/
autonomous_mower.page
65.30
Robert Bosch GmbH: http://www.bosch-indego.
com/
65.31
E. Prassler, K. Kosuge: Domestic robotics. In:
Springer Handbook of Robotics, ed. by B. Sicil-
iano, O. Khatib (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2008)
pp. 1253–1281
65.32
D. Gann, J. Barlow, T. Venables: Digital Futures:
Making Homes Smarter. Report published by Char-
tered Institute of Housing (Chartered Institute of
Housing, Coventry 1999)
65.33
R. Harper: Inside the Smart Home (Springer, London
2003)
65.34
Japan Electronics and Information Technology In-
dustries Association: http://www.eclipse-jp.com/
jeita/
65.35
Gator Tech Smart House: http://www.icta.ufl.edu/
gt.htm
65.36
Aware
Home
Research
Initiative:
http://www.
awarehome.gatech.edu/
65.37
T. Hori, Y. Nishida, T. Suehiro, S. Hirai: SELF-Net-
work: Design and implementation of network for
distributed embedded sensors, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. IROS (2000)

Multimedia Contents Robotics Com
1759
Part F | 66
66. Robotics Competitions
and Challenges
Daniele Nardi, Jonathan Roberts, Manuela Veloso, Luke Fletcher
This chapter explores the use of competitions to
accelerate robotics research and promote science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
education. We argue that the field of robotics
is particularly well suited to innovation through
competitions. Two broad categories of robot
competition are used to frame the discussion:
human-inspired competitions and task-based
challenges. Human-inspired robot competitions,
of which the majority are sports contests, quickly
move through platform development to focus on
problem solving and test through game play. Task-
based challenges attempt to attract participants
by presenting a high aim for a robotic system. The
contest can then be tuned, as required, to main-
tain motivation and ensure that the progress is
made. Three case studies of robot competitions
are presented, namely robot soccer, the UAV chal-
lenge, and the DARPA (Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency) grand challenges. The case studies
serve to explore from the point of view of organiz-
ers and participants, the benefits and limitations
of competitions, and what makes a good robot
competition.
This chapter ends with some concluding
remarks on the natural convergence of human-
inspired competitions and task-based challenges
66.1 Introduction........................................ 1760
66.2 Overview............................................. 1760
66.2.1 Aims and Targeted Participants... 1761
66.2.2 Competition Challenges ............. 1761
66.2.3 Types of Robots ......................... 1761
66.2.4 Competition Scenarios ............... 1761
66.2.5 Safety....................................... 1762
66.2.6 Qualification ............................. 1762
66.2.7 Evaluation ................................ 1762
66.2.8 Organization ............................. 1762
66.2.9 Sponsors................................... 1762
66.3 Competitions Inspired
by Human Competitions....................... 1762
66.3.1 Case Study: Robot Soccer............ 1764
66.4 Task-Oriented Competitions ................. 1769
66.4.1 Case Study:
The UAV Challenge ..................... 1769
66.4.2 Case Study:
The DARPA Challenges ................ 1774
66.5 Conclusion and Further Reading........... 1780
66.5.1 Further Reading ........................ 1780
Video-References......................................... 1781
References................................................... 1781
in the promotion of STEM education, research, and
vocations.
The idea of promoting science and technology through
competitions became pervasive at the end of the 20th
century [66.1]. Since then, competitions have been pro-
moted in several ﬁelds, taking a broad range of formats,
goals, and target audiences. The main aims underlying
this trend are to create a motivating framework for sci-
ence and technology, and to support the development of
skills, ideas, and technical solutions.

Part F | 66.2
1760
Part F
Robots at Work
66.1 Introduction
These objectives ﬁt particularly well with the ﬁeld of
robotics, since the design and implementation of robots
is a great challenge for a competition. Robots are phys-
ical artifacts, whose design and implementation require
creativity, technical skills, and scientiﬁc knowledge.
Arguably, Robotics is nowadays the ﬁeld where com-
petitions have the strongest impact.
The competitions that aim at the design and imple-
mentation of robots cover the whole spectrum of the
educational chain, from young pupils of the elementary
schools to senior researchers, such as the authors of this
chapter. Moreover, there is a large world of hobby robot
competitions, that we will not speciﬁcally address in
this chapter. The focus of this chapter are those initia-
tives that are speciﬁcally targeting autonomous robotics
research and education.
Another ingredient that makes robotic competitions
very successful is that robotics requires a great deal of
integration. Consequently, building a winning team re-
quires a substantial cooperation among team members
with very different skills and backgrounds. This cre-
ates an ideal playground to address teamwork within
educational programs, and an engineering challenge for
higher level students and researchers. The level of per-
formance that robots achieve in the competitions is
often compelling, as compared with the prototypes that
are developed within conventional research projects.
In this respect, competitions provide an outstanding
testbed for scientiﬁc and technical solutions.
Robotic competitions can have great appeal for
a general audience; thus, robotic competitions are also
a very effective tool to bridge the gap between citizens
and the progress of science and technology.
There are several features that can be used for
the classiﬁcation and presentation of competitions. We
have chosen to distinguish between competitions where
the contest mirrors a traditional human contest and
competitions where robots are challenged to perform
some task. The task whose achievement, once mature,
would extend the possible uses of robots in our society.
Next we present an overview including past robot
competitions and considerations that apply across all
robot contests. We then focus on human-inspired con-
tests with a case study on robot soccer. Later we review
task-orientated contests with case studies on the UAV
challenge and the DARPA grand challenges. The chap-
ter ends with concluding remarks on lessons learned
thus far in robot competitions.
66.2 Overview
The history of robot competition begins with the Micro-
mouse contests. In 1977, the IEEE Spectrum magazine
announced their intention to hold an Amazing Micro-
mouse Competition. The contest took the form of a time
trial where a small wheeled robot mouse raced to com-
plete a maze in the shortest possible time. The ﬁrst
event to be held was in New York in 1979 and saw
over 6000 entries. However, the ﬁeld rapidly shrank to
15 competing mice. This ﬁrst contest of these early au-
tonomous robots was won by a simple wall-following
robot. While a valid victory, the rules for future events
were swiftly changed to move the goal point from the
edge of the maze to the center, ensuring that the path
search aspect of the problem was emphasized [66.2].
The micromouse contest then became very popular
across Europe, then later Japan and then back to the
USA by the mid-1980s. Micromouse events continue to
held to this day, including contests from India and South
Korea. The contest which began as a struggle to develop
a device that could reliably traverse corridors without
jamming, is now a highly optimized contest where pre-
cision machines complete the maze in under 5 s [66.3].
Seeing the success of the micromouse competition
and the power to inspire science and technology ed-
ucation, Dean Kamen conceived the For Inspiration
and Recognition of Science and Technology or FIRST
robot competition. In the FIRST robot competitions
high school teams would compete to build and program
a robot to complete a challenge. The original challenge
in 1992, titled Maize Craze, involved herding balls into
a home goal. Since then the challenge, from stacking
containers to throwing ﬂying discs, has been changed
year to year while keeping the basic structure of the
contest the same. The contest, like the Micromouse con-
tests, have expanded internationally and continue to this
day. In 2014, the competition is projected to involve
68 000 students [66.4].
Meanwhile, in the early 1990s, the advances and
limitations of game playing computers, and the need to
evaluate competing algorithms in mobile robotics con-
verged toward the concept of a new competition for
academic robotics: robot soccer [66.5–7]. We will con-
tinue this discussion in Sect. 66.3.
In 1995, restlessness at the pace of innovative
change since the space race of the 1960s sparked
aerospace entrepreneur Peter Diamandis to propose the
X-Prize. Ansari X-Prize was a $10 million prize to
demonstrate a functional privately developed space pas-

Robotics Competitions and Challenges
66.2 Overview
1761
Part F | 66.2
senger plane [66.8]. Rekindling the idea of racing to
achieve an ambitious task was captivating and caused
ripples through the scientiﬁc community [66.1]. The
inspiration spread to other ﬁelds and funding bodies re-
sulting in many initiatives such as the UAV challenge
and the DARPA grand challenge which we discuss in
Sect. 66.4.
Robotics is well suited to innovation through com-
petition. As this handbook testiﬁes the ﬁeld of robotics
is broad and covers research in mechanical design,
electronics, control theory, signal processing, software
engineering, and machine learning to name a few. In
addition to the breadth of the ﬁeld the nature of the
research also requires one or more agents interacting
with the physical environment, thereby limiting the use
of techniques common to other technical ﬁelds to share
and validate their research.
Standard techniques such as: standardized tests
(which are commonplace in science and engineering),
shared test data sets (such as those used in image
processing and machine learning communities), and
reference implementations (used in computer science
algorithm evaluation) are invaluable in robotics but can-
not cover the full scope of a robot system operating in
the world. Indeed, many components used in robotic
systems can be tested in isolation with these same tech-
niques; however, as the components of a robot are
integrated into a system of systems interacting with the
physical world the limits of the above methods becomes
evident. In terms of test methodology: unit and inte-
gration level testing are well served; however, system,
dynamic and, in particular, acceptance testing of inno-
vation across the ﬁeld was missing. An answer came in
a resurgence back to the roots of robotics and in favor
of robot competitions.
The range of robot scientiﬁc competitions is very
broad, and in this section we look at them from differ-
ent perspectives, aiming at providing an overview of the
settings that have been developed so far. To this end, in
the following we address a number of aspects that are
relevant to the design and implementation of a robot
competition.
66.2.1 Aims and Targeted Participants
As suggested in the introduction, the competitions that
are addressed in this chapter are those focussed on
research and education. These two aspects are often
deeply inter-related. On one hand, there is always an ed-
ucational component in any research involving a team
with different backgrounds and different levels of ex-
pertise. Moreover, if one looks at competitions as an ed-
ucational tool, they represent one of the most advanced
forms of education; consequently, they speciﬁcally at-
tract teachers and mentors that are involved in research
on education. Although research and education are re-
lated to one another, the balance between research and
education is naturally signiﬁcantly different across the
numerous robot competitions.
66.2.2 Competition Challenges
Each competition relies on a challenge and there are
several ways of categorizing them. While competitions
are nowadays mostly among robots and not robot-vs-
human, a large group of competitions take inspiration
from human competitions, ranging from soccer, to the
Olympic Games. These competitions have an explicit
or implicit underlying assumption of comparing robot
performance with human performance. The other kind
of challenge aims at a proposing a speciﬁc problem to
be addressed using machines the hope is that by rac-
ing to achieve the aim, new capabilities can be matured
faster into future robots.
66.2.3 Types of Robots
Another key element for classiﬁcation of competitions
is the robot type. Any kind of robot is conceivable for
use in competition. Robot choice is driven by the com-
petition format and targeted participants. The use of
commercially available robots and robot kits enables
less mechanically focused participants to move forward
quickly. The use of homogeneous sets of robots enables
competitions to be fought on algorithmic innovations
over robot manufacturing skill. An unrestricted cate-
gory of robot type can be useful for some task-based
challenges, where a novel physical design may be the
key in simplifying the problem and achieving the ob-
jective (such as in rescue robotics).
66.2.4 Competition Scenarios
The scenario is largely determined by the challenge ad-
dressed, be it a competition among soccer robots or
among service robots operating in a home environment;
consequently, there is a broad variety. In some cases,
the scenario is ﬁxed and known before the competition,
such as in robot soccer; in other cases, only a gen-
eral description is provided beforehand and the actual
competition scenario is not known in advance as, for
example, in search and rescue competitions. The com-
petition scenario has deep implications not only on the
setup of competition venues, but also on the participat-
ing teams. Practice environments for teams in lead up
to competition must be representative, while not pro-
hibitive to construct. From Lego robot soccer to the
DARPA Robot challenge simple readily available hard-

Part F | 66.3
1762
Part F
Robots at Work
ware store materials have been the material of choice
for contest environments.
66.2.5 Safety
In some cases, the competition raises safety issues for
the participants. This is the case for example of UAV
competitions, and proper measures need to be taken in
order to ensure a satisfactory level of safety. Moreover,
the organizers must carefully address regulations for de-
ployment of unmanned vehicles and/or use restricted
access areas for the competition.
66.2.6 Qualification
Competitions with a large number of participants, such
as education programs, can require regional and quali-
fying rounds similar to traditional sports leagues. When
contests require a substantial effort and expense to par-
ticipate funding agencies may make grants available
to teams which succeed at a qualifying round to con-
tribute to the cost to compete. Diverse selection criteria
for satisfactory progress may well be considered in this
case including justiﬁcation of sound ﬁnancial backing
to complete the competition.
66.2.7 Evaluation
Evaluation is one of the key features of competi-
tions both in terms of education (students must deliver
a working solution) and in terms of research, where the
integration of components is not a straightforward en-
gineering practice. However, competitions also provide
a great opportunity for developing benchmarks and new
test methods: performance evaluation is an open issue
in robotics and competitions are providing signiﬁcant
insights into the development of reliable and repeatable
measures and testbeds.
66.2.8 Organization
Competitions are typically originated by a perceived
need by a related scientiﬁc interest group, such as
a conference (e.g., AAAI, ICRA), a research fund-
ing agency (e.g., DARPA, ESA) or an entrepreneurial
private company. Once established an ongoing com-
petition founded by the ﬁrst two groups will often
be ran through a dedicated not-for-proﬁt foundation.
However, increasingly, education is a large business
and competitions are becoming a signiﬁcant activity
therein; moreover, companies that help running compe-
titions as projects are now on the market and production
companies are now looking at competitions as viable
tools for beyond state-of-the-art product development
(not restricted to robotics) and for promoting their
products.
66.2.9 Sponsors
The organization of a competition requires a substan-
tial effort and budget. There are, however, several
sources for acquiring the necessary resources. A ﬁrst
category of sponsors are schools that undertake compe-
titions as part of their educational activity. The other
natural sponsor are the funding agencies that institu-
tionally provide support to research in robotics. The
involvement of funding agencies can be many fold,
ranging from the whole creation of a competition to
the support of speciﬁc event, in particular at the lo-
cal level. Another kind of sponsorship comes from
public institutions that may regard competitions as
a mean to drive citizens’ attention on scientiﬁc and
technological development. Robot manufacturers are
also interested in sponsoring competitions that pro-
mote the use of their products. Besides promoting
speciﬁc competitions, companies are also generally
interested in supporting competitions as a form of
advertisement. This is obviously related to the kind
of visibility competitions can reach on the media.
Moreover, companies may sponsor teams of young
students as a form of recruitment and supporting
education.
As the earlier discussion shows, a successful robotic
competition not only requires to put forward a grand
challenge or target speciﬁc societal needs, but it also
requires a careful design and implementation.
66.3 Competitions Inspired by Human Competitions
In this section, we focus on competitions among robots
that take inspiration from human competitions. The
challenges that have been driving a lot of research in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, such as chess, go, checkers, are
inspired by human competitions/games, but they do
not address the interaction with physical world. On
the other hand, robotic competitions that are inspired
by human competitions are typically connected with
sports. A variety of sports have been addressed, from
Olympic games [66.9, 10], to robot soccer [66.11, 12],
to other competitions, such as sailing [66.13] or rac-
ing [66.14].

Robotics Competitions and Challenges
66.3 Competitions Inspired by Human Competitions
1763
Part F | 66.3
The distinguishing feature of this category of com-
petitions is the grand challenge not only of emulating
human performance, but to do this in the context of
a human competition. Consequently, the robot is in
principle humanoid, although several other platforms
have been used, creating games for robots on wheels,
given that, at this stage, it is a much simpler and ac-
cessible locomotion. It is worth noticing that a big push
to this kind of competitions was given by companies
such as Sony or Honda, which developed humanoid
platforms also as showcases of their research and de-
velopment activities.
One additional challenge that characterizes the
human-inspired competitions is that several of them
involve multiple robots. This feature has several signif-
icant consequences, not only in terms of the require-
ments on the teamwork among the robots, but also on
the teamwork of the development team.
The scenario of these competitions is mostly out-
door; however, due to both technological and practical
reasons often they take place indoor. On the one hand,
platforms that are waterproof, work on grass or uneven
terrain are unavailable or much more difﬁcult to real-
ize; on the other hand, practical considerations suggest
to keep participation affordable and accessible.
One important feature of human-inspired compe-
titions is that they aim also at providing some enter-
tainment for the general public. Therefore, a suitable
balance between technical difﬁculties and level of per-
formance is needed. It is worth noticing how the general
public is more keen to accepting the limitations of
robots in playing soccer than in accomplishing a mis-
sion in Fukushima plant. Consequently, even games
with slow and somewhat disappointing performance
can generate participation, interest, and even strong
emotions in the audience.
Human-inspired competitions span over the whole
spectrum of participants, including both research ori-
ented and more educational targets. In all cases, the type
of competition creates an interest both in young genera-
tions that are naturally attracted by their ludic character,
and in more mature researchers that aim toward the sci-
entiﬁc challenges that they embody. A consequence of
the intuitive appeal exerted by human-inspired com-
petitions is that they easily attract large numbers of
participants. Indeed, a frequent pattern of participation
is to start with games and then move to other kinds
of competitions that target socially or business relevant
goals. In some cases, this endeavor is encouraged by
the presence in the same event of both types of compe-
titions.
The evaluation of the performance, in the case of
human-inspired competitions, is very clear and amounts
to winning the game. There are, however, examples of
speciﬁc capabilities associated with the game that are
individually evaluated.
Given the reference provided by human competi-
tions, human-inspired robot competitions typically have
a permanent nature and a structure with local qualify-
ing events. Consequently, there is an organization body
managing the competition across the years and the main
ones are nonproﬁt organizations (NPO)s. There are,
however, commercial opportunities and companies that
are interested in the deployment and sale of their robots.
At present, these companies are mostly sponsoring the
events, and often provide special offers for their prod-
ucts to the teams that enter the competition.
As mentioned earlier, human-inspired competitions
have a strong appeal to the general public. Conse-
quently, public organization often endorse and support
them within their initiatives aiming at public awareness
and promotion of science and technology. According to
a common pattern, this may also attract large companies
that invest some of their marketing budget in supporting
socially and scientiﬁcally targeted events.
The ultimate consequence of the above sketched
scenario is that the human-inspired competitions have
a large impact on the general public. We have seen re-
ports on human-inspired competitions in the media not
only in the sections that typically cover science and
technology, but also in the general news, and some-
times, even in connection with sport reports.
Besides this somewhat indirect effect, there are two
major direct impacts of human-inspired competitions:
on education and research. The renovation and advance-
ment of the school system is embracing competitions
for two major reasons: they motivate pupils and they
teach key skills that are typically not addressed by con-
ventional curricular activities. Human-inspired robotic
competition perfectly ﬁt both purposes. As for research,
the scientiﬁc challenges, that have been put forward,
whether or not they will turn out to be too ambitious,
have gathered the attention of signiﬁcant number of re-
searchers, have driven a large body of research and have
given rise to a number of side-effect developments: they
arethereforefulﬁlling arolethat is nowadays essential in
the overall effort for advancing science and technology.
Robot soccer has a signiﬁcant role within this
category of competitions. The idea of robot soccer
was discussed by several researchers in the early
1990s [66.5, 6]. Shortly afterward, Robot soccer com-
petitions have been designed, in several venues, includ-
ing Federation of International Robot-soccer Associa-
tion (FIRA) [66.11, 15] and RoboCup [66.7, 12, 16].
In the next section, we address in more detail the
RoboCup competitions. RoboCup remarkably started
with the statement of a challenge, by Hiroaki Kitano
and the initial RoboCup cofounders [66.7], namely

Part F | 66.3
1764
Part F
Robots at Work
Table 66.1 Five subleagues of the RoboCup soccer games
League
Soccer players
Perception
Reasoning
Actuation
Communication
Simulation
(Fig. 66.1)
(11) Software agents, 2-D
(two-dimensional) and 3-D
(three-dimensional) biped
Server engine
Client
per team
Physical motion and
perception
Explicit
Small-size
(Fig. 66.2)
(5) Custom-built wheeled
robots
Centralized
overhead camera
Centralized
offboard
Fast ball/robot speed,
kicking, dribbling,
passes, goal shots
Dedicated Radio
Middle-size
(Fig. 66.2)
(5) Custom-built wheeled
robots
Onboard,
omnidirectional
Large-space
control
Kicking, goal defense
Dedicated WiFi
Standard platform
(SPL) (Fig. 66.3)
(5) Purchased legged robots
Onboard,
directional range
Distributed
Legged, kicking, goal
defense
Dedicated WiFi
Humanoid
(Fig. 66.4)
(3,4,5) Custom-built, or
purchased, biped multisized
robots
Onboard,
directional range
Distributed
Legged, kicking, goal
defense
Dedicated WiFi
that By the year 2050, there would be a robot soccer
team that would be able to beat the human World Cup
team. With such long-term goal, RoboCup is an ongo-
ing competition, that aims at research, educational, and
engineering challenges through a set of testbeds that
implement soccer games among robots. The competi-
tion keeps evolving every year, by yearly evaluating the
performances of the robots and generating roadmaps to-
ward its goal.
66.3.1 Case Study: Robot Soccer
The ﬁrst organized RoboCup competitions took place
in 1997 [66.16], and signiﬁcant progress is noted every
year. Interestingly, starting in 2007, and yearly there-
after, a team of ﬁve human players (volunteers from
the RoboCup Board of Trustees) plays a demonstra-
tion game with the best robot team of the middle-size
league, which we introduce below. Furthermore, each
RoboCup competition event includes a symposium,
which highlights research and development contribu-
tions relevant to the RoboCup competitions, and also to
general robotics problems. As of 2014, the robots can
play the basics of the game, with great speed and accu-
racy, but are clearly largely noncompetitive with human
players. There is still a long way to go for RoboCup to
reach its goal, but RoboCup continues to achieve annu-
ally increasing success, scope, and wide participation.
RoboCup soccer games are structured in ﬁve sub-
leagues, where robots have different sizes and different
capabilities, as overviewed (Table 66.1).
Many scientiﬁc challenges are addressed through
different league settings, including teamwork and
strategic decision making, in particular with systems
of multiple robots in adversarial environments. To this
end, the setup of each competition has evolved along
the years from the initial proposal [66.7]. The sim-
ulation, small-size, and middle-size leagues were the
initial leagues in 1997. The standard platform league,
started as a demonstration in 1998 and as a com-
petition in 1999, was played with the Sony AIBO
quadruped robots until 2007, and since 2008 with the
Aldebaran NAO robots. Finally, the Humanoid Robot
League started in 2000 with team-built biped robots
that could barely stand on one leg to kick, probably to
the most compelling derivative in improvement, leading
into 2012 to biped robots of a variety of sizes that play
complete games.
We now brieﬂy describe the individual goals and
set up of the soccer leagues, aiming at discussing the
technical challenges and solutions devised. A sum-
mary of the complete technical contributions is found
in the RoboCup symposia proceedings [66.16–32]
(
VIDEO 385 ).
Simulation
The RoboCup simulation league was developed from
the very beginning of RoboCup, as an 11-player two-
team simulation server environment, the SoccerServer,
conceived and implemented by Noda [66.33]. The sim-
ulation league consists of a client-server architecture
in which each of the two client teams is given, as an
input by the SoccerServer, the state of the game (play-
ers state and ball position), and generates actions for
the simulated robots, which are passed to the server
for simulation of the new state of the world. Given the
controlled realistic simulated environment, the goal of
the league is to enable the researchers to abstract from
the complications of real hardware and focus on team-
work architectures and coordination, strategic decision
making, and learning in complete teams of 11 players.
Initially, the league was a 2-D simulation, and since
2009, and following its roadmap to the RoboCup goal,
it was extended to include a 3-D competition, leading to
the current two subleagues: the 2-D and 3-D Simulation
Leagues (Fig. 66.1).

Robotics Competitions and Challenges
66.3 Competitions Inspired by Human Competitions
1765
Part F | 66.3
Fig.66.1a,b Simulation
leagues: (a) 2-D and (b) 3-D
a)
b)
Fig.66.2a,b RoboCup soccer
leagues: (a) small-size robots and (b)
middle-size robots
In the 2-D simulation subleague, the SoccerServer
simpliﬁes the environment by representing robots as
basic circular elements, though with orientation and
different capabilities in terms of perception and actu-
ation. The client teams focus on effective team com-
position and on the strategic aspects of the game. In
the 3-D Simulation subleague, the players are sim-
ulated biped humanoids. The teams need to address
low-level control of such humanoid robots, including
the creation of their basic behaviors, such as biped
walking, running, kicking, turning, and standing up.
In addition, the teams design and implement multi-
agent higher level behaviors for realistic humanoid
robot teams. The 3-D simulation league is currently
tightly connected to the standard platform league, as
the simulated humanoid robots are based on the char-
acteristics of the Aldebaran NAO humanoid robots,
as used in the RoboCup standard platform league
(see in the following). The goal is to directly transfer
techniques and approaches from simulation into real
robots. Both the 2-D and 3-D servers are open software
projects.
Small Size
The RoboCup small-size league (SSL) has been in place
since the initial RoboCup in 1997. The league is set
up as a ﬁeld of predeﬁned dimensions for teams of
custom soccer robots of predeﬁned small dimensions.
Initially the teams were of three robots, and later have
been increased to ﬁve robots. The initial playing ﬁeld
was a green ping-pong table, which was selected prag-
matically by the founders in 1996, in order to make the
speciﬁcations of the newly created RoboCup competi-
tion accessible to any research team in the world. A few
years later, the ﬁeld became green carpeted with white
line markings, and its size has incrementally grown to
the recently increased size of 6 m  9 m. Since its be-
ginning, the game is played with an orange golf ball
and an overhead vision system. Robots are custom built
according to the speciﬁcations of the league, currently
to ﬁt within a 180 mm diameter circle, no higher than
15 cm (Fig. 66.2).
The teams are allowed to use at least one camera
overhead of the ﬁeld. Robots have colored marks on
their tops to enable visual identiﬁcation and tracking.
Off-board computation by each team uses the processed
images to plan and then wirelessly communicate the
team actions as the motion of the small robots on the
ﬁeld. The RoboCup SSL league offers challenges and
signiﬁcant contributions in: hardware design, colored-
based real-time image processing (of the colored ball
and colored marker identiﬁers of the robots), and in
team strategy planning.
The RoboCup SSL robot hardware has evolved
from the early simple and brittle robots in 1997 to the
sophisticated, fast, robust, kicking, and dribbling, om-
nidirectional robot platforms of the current days. The
hardware of the RoboCup SSL clearly pioneers small
robot design, in contrast with all other much larger
research robots in other applications. The league also
signiﬁcantly evolved in the vision processing and the
playing strategy. Although the global view of the com-
plete playing ﬁeld is a clear advantage in capturing
a complete view of the position of all the players and
ball, it proved to be quite challenging to process in real
time at 60 Hz, 10 fast moving robots, and a small orange

Part F | 66.3
1766
Part F
Robots at Work
golf ball. As the league evolved, and some teams suc-
ceeded in devising vision processing algorithms, since
2010 such solutions became a shared vision system
as part of the league setup that can be used by any
team [66.34]. This SSL vision is available to all re-
searchers and can be set to be used in other applications
that may need global overhead perception. In terms of
strategy, the teams aimed at passing and positioning
well on the ﬁeld since the beginning of the league. Both
the capabilities of individual robots and teamwork be-
came increasingly sophisticated and effective over the
years, with the ability to dribble, to ﬂat or chip kick,
to perfectly navigate collision free at high speeds in
a space crowded with opponents as dynamic obstacles,
and to coordinate the team with effective defense, ac-
curate passes, and precise aim at narrow openings of
the goals.
VIDEO 387 shows an example of the multi
robot teamwork by the CMU Dragons.
The ongoing research directions aim at learning
the opponent strategy and responding to it. Through
the common vision systems, all games are logged
and now available for researchers to challenge learn-
ing algorithms with the complex positional, fast game
data. Furthermore, the league aims at playing games of
eleven players on a much larger ﬁeld, also in ad-hoc
teams, where the players are elements of different and
previously unknown research teams.
Middle Size
The RoboCup middle-size league (MSL) started in the
ﬁrst RoboCup event in 1997. The league is set on
a much larger ﬁeld than the SSL one, initially of the
size of 3 by three ping-pong tables. Currently, two MSL
teams of six wheeled robots play on a 18 m12 m green
carpeted ﬁeld, with an ofﬁcial FIFA winter ball (or-
ange).
MSL clearly differs from the SSL in its lack of
centralized overhead perception and offboard compu-
tation. Each MSL robot is onboard fully autonomous,
equipped with onboard sensors, computation, and actu-
ation. Through wireless communication the robots can
establish interteam cooperation and receive all referee
commands. These two SSL and MSL leagues, were
designed to offer frameworks for different robotics re-
search interests in perception, planning, and mechanical
robot design.
The MSL robots have evolved from a variety of
initial experimental designs to the very effective, fast
omnidirectional robots with creative kicking and de-
fending actuation devices, in particular also in the
goalie robots. At some point, robots had omnidirec-
tional cameras that allowed each robot to compute the
position of all the players on the ﬁeld, for avoiding
obstacles in its motion planning. Wireless communica-
tion allows for sharing state information and supports
the implementation of cooperation strategies. Currently,
teamwork accomplishments are based on the effective
selection of robots to roles and attacking passes. In par-
ticular, the recent rules of the game force the robot to
pass the ball in the opponents middle ﬁeld before shoot-
ing to the goal. In this way, cooperation and passes have
become a key feature for a successful team. The MSL
goalie robots have been of special note, as teams build
special hardware for them to allow for kicking and to
effectively defend the long and well-aimed shots from
the attackers. The MSL is compelling for the largest
ﬁeld size in RoboCup and robots of dimensions and
speed that also allow humans to test play with the
robots. Since RoboCup 2007, a team of volunteer mem-
bers of the RoboCup Board of Trustees always plays
a game against and with the MSL winning team. Such
demonstrations are well appreciated by the competition
audience and participants and provide evidence to the
progress of the performances of the robots.
Standard Platform
The standard platform league started with the goal of
providing a common hardware platform, so that the
teams can focus their development on the algorithms
and compare the performance of their solutions on the
same hardware. Thus, in the standard platform league,
all teams use identical robots, which happened to be
legged robots. In the standard platform league all the
challenges of the middle-size league are present (i. e.,
the robots operate onboard fully autonomously), but on
a platform that requires a sophisticated motion control.
The motion of the robot also affects perception and
causes a greater uncertainty in the estimation of the en-
vironment and, thus, in basic capabilities such as ball
tracking and localization of the robot in the ﬁeld. The
ﬁeld evolved over the years: it is currently 6 m9 m and
the game is played by two teams of ﬁve players with an
orange ball.
The league started with the Sony AIBO (Fig. 66.3),
in its early stages of development in 1998. After
the ﬁrst year demonstration, the league attracted sev-
eral researchers, and underwent a substantial develop-
ment both in terms of the platform, that evolved in
three major revisions after the initial prototype, and
in terms of the rules and requirements for the ﬁeld.
The AIBO robots had a very high number of ac-
tuators (1618) to support 4-legged locomotion and
body pose. At each revision, robustness of mechanical
design, sensors, and computational power, steadily im-
proved, thus, allowing to increase the size of the ﬁeld
(from 3 m  4 m, to 4 m  6 m) and to remove artiﬁcial
landmarks, side barriers and strict requirements on the
lighting.

Robotics Competitions and Challenges
66.3 Competitions Inspired by Human Competitions
1767
Part F | 66.3
a)
b)
Fig.66.3a,b Standard platform
league: (a) AIBOs and (b) NAOs
Both the extremely advanced features of the plat-
form and the availability of software developed by the
RoboCup teams made the AIBO a very popular plat-
form in research laboratories to test the performance of
new legged locomotion techniques, perception localiza-
tion and teamwork. As the performance of the robots
improved over the years, not only the rules have evolved
to meet new technical and scientiﬁc challenges, but also
the games became very attractive for the general audi-
ence.
When Sony announced the discontinuation of the
production of the AIBOs, RoboCup issued a Call for
Platform that ended up with the choice of the current
standard platform: the humanoid NAO by Aldebaran
Robotics (Fig. 66.3), which has been used since 2008.
The set up of the ﬁeld did not change substantially;
however, the biped platform required not only new loco-
motion, but also redesign of all the basic components.
Again the platform evolved over the years, with cor-
responding changes of the ﬁeld and rules. The current
version of the NAO robot is 58 cm tall humanoid robot,
with 25 degrees of freedom. The processing is pro-
vided by an Intel ATOM 1:6 GHz CPU (located in the
head) that runs a Linux kernel and supports Aldebaran’s
proprietary middleware (NAOqi) and a second CPU
(located in the torso). The platform is equipped with
various communication devices, including voice syn-
thesizer, LED lights, and two speakers, two cameras
(one pointing toward the feet to control the kicking),
tactile sensors and sonar rangeﬁnders, Ethernet and Wi-
Fi. The capabilities of the current platform allowed to
enlarge the ﬁeld to the current size (to 6 m  9 m) and
to remove from it all artiﬁcial features. Each game is
played by ﬁve robots, plus an additional coaching robot
outside the ﬁeld. A section of the competition has re-
cently started, where teams are formed by robots that
are designed by different participants.
The adoption of a common platform has several ad-
vantages. First of all, the hardware is chosen so that the
teams have a powerful, yet affordable robot, and speed
up the development by sharing the same infrastructure.
Moreover, a standard hardware platform system makes
a systematic comparison of different technical solutions
more accurate. Finally, a common platform supports
signiﬁcantly community development that allows to
reach the critical mass needed to develop complex
robotic systems.
Humanoid
In the humanoid league, autonomous robots with
a human-like body plan and human-like body senses
play soccer against each other. The robots are designed
and built by the competing teams, and include some of
the best autonomous humanoid robots in the world.
The humanoid league was established in RoboCup
2002, Fukuoka. The later start, as compared with the
other leagues is connected with the development of
humanoid robots. The ﬁrst demonstration of the early
humanoid robots took place in RoboCup 2000 and
Honda ASIMO ﬁrst showed the ability to kick the ball,
as a demonstration, in RoboCup 2002. Since then, the
league started, initially addressing basic skills such as
walking and kicking: the soccer game was limited to
penalty kicks. In the ﬁrst years of the league, very dif-
ferent robots were competing, but soon a separation
in subleagues was gradually introduced, based on the
size of the robots and on the constraints on the struc-
ture of the robot aiming to enforce dynamic walking.
In 2005 the ﬁrst two against two games were started in
the smallest robot subleague. Since 2008, the game had
three players in the kid-size and the league made a sig-
niﬁcant progress in terms of the number of participating
teams and the capability of the hardware platforms. In
the current setting, the robots of the humanoid league
are divided into three size classes (Fig. 66.4): Kid-
Size (3060 cm height), TeenSize (90120 cm), and
AdultSize (130 cm and taller). In the KidSize soccer
competition, teams have three players, in the TeenSize
two players (keeper and forward) and in AdultSize soc-
cer, a striker robot plays against a goal keeper robot
in a dribble and kick competition. The size of the
ﬁeld is 4 m  6 m and the ball is of different size for

Part F | 66.3
1768
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
c)
Fig.66.4a–c Humanoid Robots: (a) KidSize, (b) TeenSize, (c) AdultSize
the different subleagues. Unlike humanoid robots out-
side the Humanoid League, the task of perception and
world modeling is not simpliﬁed by using nonhuman-
like range sensors.
The challenges addressed by the Humanoid League
embrace those arising in the realization of fully au-
tonomous humanoid robots in the standard platform
league; however, the overall design, including the hard-
ware, makes it possible to aim at a richer range of
solutions. More speciﬁcally, key issues addressed in
the Humanoid League include dynamic walking, run-
ning, kicking the ball while maintaining balance, visual
perception of the ball, other players, and the ﬁeld, self-
localization, and team play.
Conclusion
RoboCup is recognized as a major forum for research
and education through competitions. The main inter-
national yearly event gathers about 200 teams, 1500
participants (not including Junior), and tenths of thou-
sands visitors. Regional events are also held worldwide,
some of them of a size comparable to that of the
main one. RoboCup is not only soccer, since it aims
at fostering the development of new solutions also in
applications that have a direct impact in our society:
RoboCup Rescue, where robots compete to search and
rescue in disaster scenarios, RoboCup@Home, where
robots perform tasks that help people in daily life, Lo-
gistic League and the RoboCup@Work, where robots
operate in industrial settings. Moreover, RoboCup pro-
vides a link to young generations through RoboCup
Junior, a set of competitions speciﬁcally designed for
the introduction of children to robotics and organized
within the major event.
RoboCup has a profound impact on research. Re-
searchers enter RoboCup competitions to validate their
newly designed approaches to the broad spectrum of
problems that arise from the grand goal of building
teams of autonomous robots. Algorithms and robots
are put to test in adversarial environments not pre-
viously seen, to show effective performance and ad-
vance the scientiﬁc and engineering state of the art in
Robotics. There is a countless number of publications
that present, in the most qualiﬁed Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Robotics venues, scientiﬁc contributions arising
from the technical challenges tackled in RoboCup and
validated through RoboCup games and platforms. The
approaches and solutions developed in RoboCup have
impacted many research areas. Particularly signiﬁcant
examples are the ﬁelds of humanoid robotics, multi-
agents and multirobots, and performance metrics for
Robotics.
RoboCup has brought signiﬁcant contributions in
education. The students, who form the teams, are the
driving force of the effort to design and implement
the components of rather complex integrated systems.
Learning about cutting-edge solutions and experiment-
ing them is a very effective way to develop creativ-
ity and design skills. Moreover, engineering within
a team, in the framework of a competition, is a unique
experience that goes far beyond the standard prac-
tice of academic curricula. In addition, RoboCup or-
ganized several Summer Schools, with a substantial
hands-on component that has also been subsequently
adopted in many other events. While some of the
above features are not unique to RoboCup, the blend-
ing of ingredients and the environment provided by
RoboCup have proven extremely rich, attractive and
successful.
A few examples of particularly signiﬁcant impacts
that RoboCup had within our society are hinted below.
Aldebaran Robotics NAO robot won RoboCup 2007
Open Call for a standard platform and afterward it has
become popular through the standard platform league.
Today NAO is deployed worldwide by research labora-
tories in robotics, becoming a commercial success. Kiva
Systems are revolutionizing automation by using hun-
dreds of mobile robots for storing, moving, and sorting
inventory. In March 2012, Kiva Systems was acquired
by Amazon. RoboCup and robot soccer were credited
by Kiva’s CEO for the success of the company. The
search and rescue robot Quince, during the rescue oper-

Robotics Competitions and Challenges
66.4 Task-Oriented Competitions
1769
Part F | 66.4
ations in the Fukushima–Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant,
could go up to the second to ﬁfth ﬂoors in the nuclear
reactor buildings. The robot was designed and evalu-
ated through RoboCup Rescue competitions, showing
excellent mobility in comparison with the other com-
peting robots.
66.4 Task-Oriented Competitions
In this section, we consider competitions that take their
inspiration from common, but important tasks, cur-
rently undertaken by people. Competitions in this class
tend to be focussed of dirty, dangerous and dull activ-
ities. Robotics of this kind is known as Field Robotics
with robots typically having to operate in unstructured
or semistructured environments, which often change
over time.
The robots in these competitions are normally vehi-
cles, such as ground vehicles (often cars), submersibles,
or unmanned aerial vehicles. There is even a current
high-proﬁle competition to send a robot to the Moon,
the Google Lunar X-Prize.
Unlike the competitions inspired by humans, task-
oriented competitions are not driven by spectator ex-
perience. Spectators are welcomed at some of the
competition events but not at all. Some are closed to
competitors, organizers, and media only.
Task oriented competitions are held to drive inno-
vation, raise the proﬁle of a particular area of robotics,
or to overcome nontechnical hurdles such as regulation
and insurance which would otherwise stiﬂe individ-
ual research projects. A competition is a more efﬁcient
method of addressing these issues than a collection of
disparate research projects across the world. This type
of competition also attracts professionals in robotics
or soon to-be professionals such as university students.
They are hence a useful way to increase interest in in-
dustry participation and you will see major corporations
with interests in the relevant technology and applica-
tions areas supporting or sponsoring a competition.
Unlike robot competitions inspired by sporting con-
tests, task oriented competitions often happen as one-
off events.
Task-based competitions in which the exact manner
by which the task is to be accomplished is unknown,
or signiﬁcantly beyond the state of ﬁeld, are often re-
ferred to as a Challenge. Challenges often have large
cash prizes for the team that accomplishes the task re-
ﬂecting the substantial investment of effort envisaged to
claim the prize by the prize authority.
Ultimately even substantial cash prizes are almost
always surpassed by the accumulated cost of the win-
ning team’s labour, equipment, donations by sponsors
and overheads. Instead most participants are driven by
prestige of conquering the challenge, doing the im-
possible and claiming the prize, or at least attempting
to.
In recent years, the success of the robot compe-
tition format has lead to a number of contests in-
cluding the MAGIC Competition [66.35], RoboCup
Rescue [66.36], ELROB [66.37], and the AUVSI com-
petitions [66.38].
A push to robot competitions to task-oriented robot
challenges has also been given within the framework of
scientiﬁc conferences such as AAAI and ICRA. Within
this context, service robotics has also been a source
of inspiration, addressing tasks such as serving drinks
or preparing sushi. RoboCup@Home combines multi-
ple challenges facing service robotics into a structured
competition framework [66.39].
In the following sections, we examine at two repre-
sentative task oriented competitions, the UAV challenge
and the DARPA Challenge. While the robots differ sig-
niﬁcantly the drivers and approach to competition has
many parallels.
66.4.1 Case Study: The UAV Challenge
Flying Robot Competitions
Competitions that encourage students to develop their
skills with ﬂying robots in exciting and challenging
ways have been developed by universities and other
research and education organizations since the early
1990s. One of the ﬁrst, longest running and most suc-
cessful ﬂying robotics competitions is the International
Aerial Robotics Competition (IARC) [66.40]. It was
ﬁrst held in 1991 at Georgia Institute of Technology.
The aim of the competition is to push forward the
state of the art in autonomy in ﬂying robots. Teams are
given challenges based on real-world scenarios, typi-
cally mock ups of disaster response or covert military
style operations. A new challenge is announced once
the current scenario is completed. Many scenarios take
a number of years to be successfully demonstrated.
Since 1991, IARC has seen six different competition
scenarios. Nearly all of the scenarios involve inter-
action with ground elements meaning that the aerial
robot must avoid obstacles and pick something up. This
means that the successful platforms of IARC are nearly
always rotary wing vehicles such as helicopters, ducted
fan VTOL vehicles or in more recent year, multiro-

Part F | 66.4
1770
Part F
Robots at Work
tor platforms. IARC is open to university-based teams
from around the world. The past three IARC missions
have involved the aerial robots having to navigate inside
buildings as well as free-ﬂying outdoors.
Another long running event is the International Mi-
cro Air Vehicles (IMAV) competition, which has been
running since 1997 [66.41]. This competition focusses
on very small unmanned aircraft operating either in-
doors, or in outdoor areas around an airﬁeld or built
environment. The IMAV events consist of a number of
subevents, each aiming to push technology to solve spe-
ciﬁc research challenges, such as autonomy, perception,
and ﬂight dynamics. As reported in [66.41], the level of
autonomy demanded to complete events has been in-
creasing in recent years.
The Singapore Amazing Flying Machine Competi-
tion (SAFMC) is organized by Singapore’s DSO Na-
tional Laboratories and Science Centre Singapore and
was ﬁrst run in 2009 [66.42, 43]. It is typical of the type
of competition event that is comprised of a number of
different categories, from a basic radio-controlled ﬂying
competition to a category encouraging university level
teams to design and build automated aircraft to navigate
complex indoor obstacle course.
The UAV Challenge Outback Rescue is an inter-
national ﬂying robot challenge that was ﬁrst run in
2007 [66.44]. It is different to other competitions in
that the aircraft have to be ﬂown a considerable distance
from the take-off and landing location. The competition
revolves around a simulated scenario of a lost walker in
the Australian outback with the start of the search area
being 4 km from the take-off location and the furthest
point of the search area being 6:5 km away. These dis-
tances require autonomous operation of the aircraft and
reliable communications back to the ground stations –
all things that stretch the capability of university and
amateur teams [66.45, 46].
In 2013, the Wildlife Conservation UAV Challenge
was launched [66.47]. This competition has a similar
format to that of the UAV Challenge Outback Rescue,
but is focussed on a scenario to ﬁnd poachers of endan-
gered animals in Africa. The aim of this challenge is
to drive the cost down, and the reliability up, of small
robot aircraft. The scoring system hence rewards teams
heavily for low-cost designs, long duration capability
and autonomy.
There are numerous other ﬂying robot competi-
tions run each year, including the USA-European micro
UAV ﬂight competition [66.48], the AUVSI Seafarer
Annual Student UAS Competition [66.49], the Inter-
national Universities MINI UAV Competition [66.50],
the Chinese Robotics Competition which has a ﬂy-
ing robot category [66.51], and the Annual Search
and Rescue Cyber Physical Systems Challenge, where
teams build ground vehicles and the organizers provide
a video feed from a UAV hovering above the indoor
search area [66.52, 53]. A ﬁnal category of ﬂying robot
competitions are the type held solely for participation
within single universities and which are typically part of
core course work in robotics or extension course work.
A representative example of this type of internal univer-
sity competition is given by Schochmann [66.54].
Motivation for Flying Robot Competitions
The stated aim of the longest running ﬂying robot con-
test, International Aerial Robotics Competition, is to
drive innovation [66.40], particularly in the area of au-
tonomy. Many of the ﬂying robot competitions and
challenges of the past decades have focussed on this
technology development or innovated uses of existing
technology. However, not all ﬂying robotics competi-
tions and challenges are created for this reason alone,
with some being linked to the education of high-school
or university students who are studying robotics, while
others are conceived to overcome nontechnologically
based problems. There are a number of key issues that
are potential inhibitors to the adoption of ﬂying robots
in the civilian context. In the mid-2000s, the general
public considered ﬂying robots as a military-only tool,
being expensive and dangerous. This was largely due to
a number of popular movies at the time depicting such
things and high media interest in the use of unmanned
aircraft by the USA in the Middle East conﬂicts of the
time. In the 2010s, the public was concerned with pri-
vacy issues surrounding the use of drones (as they have
become known in the media) and the fear that small
unmanned aircraft could be misused by criminals or ter-
rorists [66.55].
A second signiﬁcant issue is that of airspace reg-
ulation. Flying robots will share the sky with manned
aircraft. The airspace inhabited by manned aviation is
highly regulation across the world. Before ﬂying robots
can be routinely used for civilian missions, both the
airspace regulator of a particular country, and the gen-
eral public in that country must be comfortable that
ﬂying robots will be as safe as current conventionally
piloted aircraft. This issue is the single most signiﬁcant
hurdle to the adoption of unmanned aircraft in civilian
airspace. A third issue, strongly related to the regulation
and safety issue, revolves around the appropriate train-
ing, certiﬁcation, and insurance of unmanned aircraft.
Insurance companies work on precedence and past ac-
cident rates in order to determine risk and hence set
insurance premiums. In a new industry, such as that of
unmanned aircraft, with little data on which to basis risk
probabilities it is difﬁcult for insurers to cover opera-
tors. Finally, as the unmanned aircraft industry grows,
it will need people with the correct skills. These new

Robotics Competitions and Challenges
66.4 Task-Oriented Competitions
1771
Part F | 66.4
Fig. 66.5 (a) The aim of the Search
and Rescue Challenge is to locate
and drop a water bottle to a walker,
Outback Joe. The mannequin wears
bright clothes to help the teams ﬁnd
him using computer vision. (b) The
course showing the Mission Boundary
(yellow) and the Search Area (green).
The airﬁeld is at the top of the picture
Engineers, operators, technicians, and researchers will
need to be trained in unmanned aircraft-speciﬁc areas
of expertise.
The UAV Challenge Outback Rescue competition
was created in Australia in 2007 [66.44] to attempt
to simultaneously address all these major inhibitors to
civilian use of ﬂying robots. These broad aims meant
that the targeted participants were from a wide cross-
section of the community and included, the general
public, high-school students, university students, radio-
controlled aircraft hobbyists, the Australian aviation
regulator (CASA), government, research institutes and
universities, aerospace industry, and media.
Competition Formats and Challenges
The majority of ﬂying robot competitions and chal-
lenges consist of multiple subevents or competitions,
usually aimed at either different age groups of competi-
tors or different skill levels. The level of complexity
and the difﬁculty of the speciﬁc tasks set are set so
that younger, less experienced students will almost
always succeed to some degree and are hence compet-
ing against others like a sporting event. On the other
hand, the events aimed at older or more experienced
entrants are often deliberately conceived to be impos-
sible to complete the ﬁrst year that a team attempts
it. These events are often referred to as Challenges
while the easier events, where a team is expected to ﬁn-
ish, are known as Competitions. A case in point is the
UAV Challenge Outback Rescue that comprises a dif-
ﬁcult Challenge, that is open to teams from around the
world, and a high-school competition, that is far sim-
pler, but still challenging, for high-school aged students.
The two events share a common theme to encourage
the high-school students to consider progressing to the
Challenge in later years. The scenario for the UAV
Challenge is that of locating a lost walker and dropping
him a water bottle. Such a scenario is appealing to the
general public, the media and the government.
The UAV Challenge Outback Rescue’s major event
is known as the Search and Rescue Challenge and was
unique in the world at the time it began in 2007 in that
the competition took place over a large area of farmland
and public roads. The lost walker was represented by
a mannequin and was placed in a farmer’s ﬁeld approx-
imately 46:5 km from a public airport in the regional
town of Kingaroy in Queensland, Australia. The aim
of the Search and Rescue Challenge was for a team to
use their ﬂying robot to ﬁnd the lost walker (Fig. 66.5)
and then drop him a water bottle. If a team managed
those tasks, returned their aircraft safely to the airport
and the water bottle landed intact less than 100 m from
the bushwalker, they would win $ 50 000. The Search
and Rescue scenario was created to be as realistic as
possible with competitors given a brieﬁng document at
the start of the day outlining where the lost walker was
last seen and what he was wearing. Teams were under
time pressure and given time limits on setup, mission
time and pack up time. All of these restrictions were
designed to make the scenario as close to a real rescue
as it could be. Teams were evaluated on their mission
performance and on their documentation meaning that
even if no team completed the mission, their could still
be a points winner, who would be awarded the title of
First Place and receive a smaller cash prize. This is typ-
ical of Challenge-type events where a number of years
may go by without a team completing the main chal-
lenge. Another typical feature of this event it is that it is
not set up as a spectator event because the nature of the
Challenge makes it almost impossible to follow if you
are not directly involved in the action.
The high-school competition of the UAV Challenge
Outback Rescue is known as the Airborne Delivery
Challenge as takes place on the airport site and within
the airport boundary. This competition is therefore set
up to be a spectator friendly event. This scenario re-
quired high-school students to pilot their unmanned
aircraft over the same walker, who is located in sight of
the general public close to the air-side fence. Teams are
required to drop a package to the walker, but the pilot
cannot select when to make the drop. Instead, a second
team member located in a tent and with no line of sight

Part F | 66.4
1772
Part F
Robots at Work
6 m
4 m
2 m
10 m
10m
Approx
160m
Approx 300m
50m
10 m
No fly zone
Flying zone
Base
Down-wind
Cross-wind
Up-wind
Outback Joe
Mission manager area
Judges area
Flight circuit
Hurdles
Mission boundary
4m
3m
Hurdle
Outback Joe
Fig. 66.6 The Airborne Delivery Challenge course showing the hurdles and the ﬂying zone
to the bushwalker has to make the drop (Fig. 66.6). The
aim of this scenario is to force teams to use some tech-
nology to help assess when to drop the package. Many
teams are successful and a points system determines the
winner.
Qualification and Precompetition Testing
Some ﬂying robot competitions and challenges have
a qualiﬁcation element to them which means that teams
must demonstrate a certain level of competence prior
to the actual event. This requirement implies that many
of these competitions can be considered to be much
longer in duration than the relatively short events that
take place on the competition days at the end. The UAV
Challenge Outback Rescue for example, takes place
over a long time period leading up to the event. Since
2007, the Search and Rescue Challenge has been held
both over a single year and as a 2-year long campaign.
In both forms of the event, the high-school and the inter-
national open event, teams must provide documentation
to the organizers to demonstrate their competence, their
progress, and their treatment of safety. Safety is the
priority issue for the organizers and the teams at ﬂy-
ing robot competitions and challenges. In the case of
true UAV Challenge, the unmanned aircraft are oper-
ated over farmland, over public roads and close to the
general public who come to spectate (Fig. 66.5).
Teams ﬁrst register for the UAV Challenge and
are then asked to provide documentation, known as
Deliverables. The ﬁrst deliverable must show a basic
system design and an analysis of risk. The second de-
liverable must show the ﬁnal design and adherence
to the mandatory safety features of the UAV system.
For the 2-year long version of the Search and Res-
cue Challenge, a third deliverable was added where
teams were asked to show documented evidence of at
least 5 h of autonomous ﬂight of their unmanned air-
craft. This ﬁnal set of documentation was introduced
to ensure that only teams that were capable of actu-
ally ﬂying for a sustained period of time in the search
range qualiﬁed for the event. By its nature, the qual-
iﬁcation process signiﬁcantly reduces the size of the
ﬁeld as a competition or challenge progresses. For ex-
ample, in 20112012, 68 teams registered to take part
in the Search and Rescue Challenge, with 61 submit-
ting a the ﬁrst deliverable document. Of those, 53 teams
from ten countries, qualiﬁed to continue. At the second
deliverable stage, 23 teams qualiﬁed to continue to the
ﬁnal deliverable phase where nine teams qualiﬁed and
were invited to the actual ﬂying event. Between that
announcement and the event, four of the nine teams
pulled out due to crashes during testing and other is-
sues leaving just ﬁve teams to compete during the event
(Fig. 66.7,66.8).
Number of teams
Registered
Submitted D1
Passed D1
Submitted D2
Passed D2
Passed D3
Submitted D3
Attended
Passed flight test
Completed the
challenge
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Fig. 66.7 The number of teams declines as the UAV
Challenge progresses. In 20112012, 68 teams registered
and throughout the 18 months of the competition teams
dropped away leaving only 5 at the event

Robotics Competitions and Challenges
66.4 Task-Oriented Competitions
1773
Part F | 66.4
a)
b)
Fig.66.8a,b (a) First place team from the 2012 Search and Rescue Challenge, Canberra UAV. (b) Winners of the 2012
Airborne Delivery Challenge, MUROC Hawks
It is common at ﬂying robot events to test teams
prior to the actual competition ﬂights. In the UAV
Challenge Search and Rescue event, the ﬁnal phase of
qualiﬁcation involves the teams being tested or scru-
tineered. The scrutineering process aims to test both
the safety systems of the unmanned aircraft, the sup-
porting systems and the team themselves, including
any safety pilots. The scrutineering is undertaken by
industry professionals and consists of a static scruti-
neering test where the team is interviewed, the aircraft
and systems inspected and the ﬂight termination tested.
Teams that pass scrutineering are then invited to ﬂy
their aircraft within the boundary of the airport where
the ability of the team to ﬂy autonomous is tested.
Only teams that pass this ﬁnal hurdle are invited to
launch a search and rescue mission and compete for the
grand prize. In 20112012 Search and Rescue Chal-
lenge, four teams passed the ﬁnal scrutineering tests
meaning that just over 5% of teams that originally reg-
istered qualiﬁed for the ﬁnal mission. In comparison in
the 20132014 event, this qualiﬁcation rate increased
to 17%.
Regulations and Safety
Many ﬂying robot competitions are carried out indoors.
As well as guaranteeing that bad weather will not cause
problems for the event, a major reason to hold a com-
petition indoors is that in most countries, this means
that the ofﬁcial airspace regulator does not need to
be involved in any way. Unmanned aircraft ﬂown in-
doors pose no threat to manned aviation ﬂying above.
However, a number of high-proﬁle ﬂying robot com-
petitions do take place outdoors, including IARC and
the UAV Challenge Outback Rescue. The latter event
must be undertaken within the speciﬁc regulations for
the operation of unmanned aircraft in Australia. These
regulations were launched in 2002 by Australia’s civil-
ian air regulator, the Civil Aviation Safety Authority
(CASA) and are known as CASR Part 101. The reg-
ulations outline the operating rules for three deﬁned
classes of unmanned aircraft, micro UAS under 100 g,
small UAS 100 g to 150 kg and large UAS 150 kg and
above. The rules of the UAV Challenge dictate that the
competing team’s cannot enter an aircraft in the large
UAS class. Normal commercial operation of small UAS
would require the operating business to obtain an Oper-
ators Certiﬁcate from CASA. However, the competition
is classiﬁed Sport and Recreation by CASA and hence
an Operator Certiﬁcate is not required. CASA treats the
UAV Challenge organizers as the body accountable for
the safe conduct of the event and adherence to the rel-
evant regulations. The UAV Challenge organizers have
developed the event rules to speciﬁcally meet the re-
quirements of the regulations and to hence ensure that
if a team is following the rules, they are in turn not in
breach of the regulations. Further to this, the organizers
have also developed a detailed Policy and Procedures
manual that outlines how the UAV Challenge will be
conducted to ensure safety and adherence to the reg-
ulations by the organizers themselves. Developing the
manual and the supporting rules has been a major activ-
ity of the organizing committees over the years that the
event has been run and is a signiﬁcant output from the
whole UAV Challenge activity.
What makes the UAV Challenge different to many
other unmanned aircraft competitions is that because
the event takes place largely beyond visual range of
the team’s ground controllers, and an aircraft could be
up to 7 km from the ground station, there is a higher
potential for a so-called ﬂy-away than there is dur-
ing the more common style of events where the ﬂying
takes place in close proximity to the ground station.
A ﬂy-away is where the aircraft ﬂies out of the des-
ignated competition area and cannot be commanded
to return. Such an incident could be seen as a major
setback to the developing unmanned aircraft industry.
In the ﬁrst 2 years of the UAV Challenge, the mitiga-
tion for ﬂy-away was to mandate the use of a ﬂight

Part F | 66.4
1774
Part F
Robots at Work
a)
b)
Fig.66.9a,b DARPA grand chal-
lenge vehicle ancestry. Pioneering
autonomous vehicles of 1980s, 1990s.
(a) 1985: UBM’s Vamors. (b) 1995:
CMU’s Navlab 5 used for the No
Hands Across America trial
termination mode whereby any aircraft that crossed
the deﬁned competition boundary or lost contact with
the ground station had to automatically perform a fast
dive into the ground. All aircrafts were tested during
the scrutineering sessions to ensure that this behavior
was built into the systems. Since, 2010, the require-
ments have kept step with the more common industry
approach to lost communications and teams are now
allowed to deploy aircraft that will automatically re-
turn to a predetermined location in the competition area
should communications be lost between the ground sta-
tion and the aircraft. The requirement to automatically
terminate a ﬂight on competition boundary crossing re-
mains and is still the last line of defence against a ﬂy
away. Many teams have lost aircraft during the testing
and development of their ﬂight termination systems and
this requirement is still one of the most challenging of
the UAV Challenge.
Organization and Sponsorship
The nature of ﬂying robot competitions and challenges
often require large teams of organizers with comple-
mentary skills. For example, the UAV Challenge Out-
back Rescue is organized and run by two committees
whose members typically come from the organizations
that provide support for the event. The ﬁrst committee
is the Steering Committee and runs all nontechnical as-
pects of the UAV Challenge event such as equipment
hire, securing sponsorship, liaising with local govern-
ment and carrying out event communications and media
activities. This committee is also responsible for the
event ﬁnances. The second committee is the Technical
Committee. This committee is responsible for develop-
ing and releasing the rules for the UAV Challenge. The
committee also liaises with air regulator and works with
the UAV Challenge Steering Committee on the event
organization. At the event, the Technical Committee
is responsible for the airside part of the UAV Chal-
lenge which includes selection of the technical team
that runs all technical issues relating to the event, scru-
tineering of the teams, the supervision and scheduling
of the actual competition ﬂights and the coordina-
tion of aerodrome activities during the event times.
The Technical Committee meets regularly throughout
the year with initial meetings held to formulate the
rules and incorporate lessons learned from the previous
year. The Technical Committee reports to the Steering
Committee.
Each time the UAV Challenge is run, sponsors are
sought to cover the costs of the prize money and the
hire of facilities. The organizations that come together
to run the UAV Challenge provide the time of their
staff as an in-kind contribution. The total budget of
a UAV Challenge is approximately $125000 plus the
staff time of the organizers. It is hence a considerable
undertaking and requires a signiﬁcant number of spon-
sors to break even. The UAV Challenge has been well
supported over the years, attracting the sponsorship of
major aviation companies such as Boeing and Lock-
heed Martin as well as unmanned aircraft companies
such as Insitu. The safety regulator, CASA, has also
sponsored the event.
66.4.2 Case Study: The DARPA Challenges
In 2001, the United States Congress challenged the
Department of Defence with the following man-
date [66.56]:
It shall be a goal of the Armed Forces to achieve the
ﬁelding of unmanned, remotely controlled technol-
ogy such that by 2015, one-third of the operational
ground combat vehicles of the Armed Forces are un-
manned.
In response, a little over a year later, the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), the pri-
mary research and development organization for the
United States Department of Defense, announced that
there would be a race.
The race, to be titled the DARPA grand challenge
was to drive a robot car 300 miles from Los Angeles
to Las Vegas in the fastest time to claim the $1-million
dollar prize [66.57].
The aim of the DARPA grand challenge was to rein-
vigorate and extend autonomous vehicle technologies
from the 1980s and 1990s to future defense vehicles.
Initiatives such as the Universität der Bundeswehr Mu-
nich (UBM)’s Vamp/Vamors vehicles, University of
Parma and Carnegie Mellon University’s NavLab’s re-
search program (shown in Fig. 66.9) had demonstrated

Robotics Competitions and Challenges
66.4 Task-Oriented Competitions
1775
Part F | 66.4
* Note: The southern 6 
waypoints in the parking 
lot (zone 14) are 
checkpoints                          
12
17
4-way stop
Parking lot*
Traffic 
circle
2
8
1
11
7
6
4
5
9
10
3
1
2
3
4
6
7
8
9
10
11
13
12
5
14
Waypoint
Lane
Zone
Stop sign
Segment/zone ID
Checkpoint ID
Sample RNDF
1
1
v1.0
N
Fig. 66.10 A sample route network
deﬁnition ﬁle (RNDF) provided by
DARPA for the 2007 Challenge
(overlaid on aerial imagery)
impressive feats of road vehicle autonomy. Trials across
thousands of highway kilometres had demonstrated
lane keeping, obstacle avoidance and even automatic
overtaking (passing) [66.58–60].
The problem was, close to a decade later, the
capability of current technology full-sized, fully au-
tonomous vehicles was unknown. The impressive trials
of the late 1980s and 1990s concentrated on highway
driving where the primary task was computer vision-
based lane keeping. There were indoor and outdoor
robots navigating through challenging obstacle ﬁeld
style environments [66.61, 62]. There were also teleop-
erated vehicles already in use by the defense forces. The
question was, given computation power tracking with
Moore’s law over the intervening years and many other
advances (such as the use of LIDAR), what would robot
car be capable of?
DARPA aimed to [66.63]:

Demonstrate an autonomous vehicle able to travel
over rugged terrain at militarily relevant speeds and
distances.

Accelerate autonomous ground vehicle technology
development in the areas of sensors, navigation,
control algorithms, hardware systems, and systems
integration.

Attract and energize a wide community of partici-
pants not previously associated with Department of
Defense programs or projects to bring fresh insights
to the autonomous vehicle problem.
Potential participants were drawn to the challenge.
Many participants could also see the potential for re-
lated technologies in the automotive industry and for
road safety [66.64].
Teams would develop a vehicle that could follow
a simple route across a course representing typical ter-

Part F | 66.4
1776
Part F
Robots at Work
rain encountered by defense vehicles. The route map
would be a set of paths speciﬁed by GPS way-points.
The vehicle would be then given a list of destinations in
the map and instructed to drive to each location. A typ-
ical route map is shown in Fig. 66.10 overlaid on the
satellite image.
For this ﬁrst competition, as for those that fol-
lowed, the rules stated that the robot must be a fully
autonomous and unmanned ground vehicle. Each vehi-
cle was ﬁtted with a wireless remote E-stop to bring
the vehicle to a halt. On the base vehicle was added
sensing, processing, and control. Some vehicles were
built from the ground up. Most teams ﬁt actuators to the
manual controls of an existing vehicle, some built upon
disability aid kits ﬁtted to the vehicle. A couple teams
were able to tie into existing by-wire capabilities of the
vehicle, a notable example being Victor Tango’s 2007
challenge entry Odin [66.65]. In addition to GPS, vehi-
cles needed to have sensing for obstacle avoidance, in
which LIDAR sensors dominated. As the vehicles were
to be completely autonomous, all sensor processing,
and control had to be done on-board so a certain amount
of computer power was incorporated. Then the practi-
calities would necessitate other devices such as power
generators and additional air conditioning, if required.
The general anatomy of a DARPA grand challenge ve-
hicle is illustrated at Fig. 66.11. This vehicle, from the
2007 DARPA Urban Challenge, was at the upper end
of the spectrum for additional equipment with LIDAR,
video cameras and automotive radar, as well as a gen-
erator and supplementary air conditioning required for
a blade server computer housed in the rear compart-
ment [66.66].
2004 DARPA Grand Challenge
DARPA hired Score international, an off-road race or-
ganizer, to develop the course [66.67]. A 142-mile
course was laid out through the Mojave Desert. The
competition was structured as a time trial to complete
the course in the shortest time under 10 h. One hundred
and six teams applied.
In March 2004, 25 teams turned up for the com-
petition. In the days leading up to the race a qualiﬁer,
inspection and demonstration (QID) round was con-
ducted. This event was primarily to verify that the
vehicles were ﬁt to compete and capable of operating
safely. By race day, the 15th of March 2004, a ﬁeld of
15 vehicles had qualiﬁed and were ready to race.
As stated earlier, a primary goal of the competi-
tion was to gauge the state the art in the ﬁeld. Steep
elevation, blind turns, and sheer drops adjacent to the
course were included to challenge the vehicles. While
the degree of difﬁculty was low by human off-road
driving standards, the course was designed to be in-
teresting and make for a good competition [66.67].
Expecting something akin to human driven competi-
tion, DARPA even advised the media to set up at the
ﬁnishing line where the action was expected to take
place [66.68].
However, the course and the autonomous driving
problem proved too difﬁcult for the robot vehicles. No
vehicle made it beyond the ﬁrst seven miles of the
course. After a promising start the vehicles soon be-
came stuck or had to be disabled by a safety ofﬁcial
after deviating from the course. One vehicle’s wheel
caught on ﬁre, another ﬂipped around a bend another
began circling around in the starting chute [66.69].
Inexperience was the chief cause of failure on the
2004 contest. The new nature of the challenge and the
stretch of mobile robotics to a full-sized off-road vehi-
cle introduced too many complications for the robots
systems.
The challenge stood unbeaten, the prize money re-
mained unclaimed. The real world complications and
the size of the challenge were now apparent. Also ap-
parent, however, was the curiosity sparked within the
research community and the general public.
Three months after the ﬁrst competition, DARPA
announced the 2005 DARPA Grand Challenge – a re-
run of the event, this time for a $2-million dollar prize.
2005 DARPA Grand Challenge
With a slightly longer lead time, DARPA held a partici-
pants’ conference and conducted site visits to each team
to gauge progress. At the participants’ conference team
representatives and DARPA ofﬁcials discussed the draft
race rules, clarifying rule interpretations and technical
speciﬁcations. Out of 195 entrants, DARPA ofﬁcials
ﬂew out to attend 118 site visits.
SICK Lidar (obstacles)
Delphi ACC3 radar
Velodyne Lidar
SICK Lidar (Hazards)
Firewire camera
Fig. 66.11 Anatomy of a DARPA grand challenge vehicle.
2007 DARPA Urban Challenge entrant MIT’s Talos was
on the upper end of the additional equipment spectrum

Robotics Competitions and Challenges
66.4 Task-Oriented Competitions
1777
Part F | 66.4
From the site visits 43 teams were selected to par-
ticipate in the national qualifying event (NQE). During
the qualifying event, which was twice as long as 2004,
the teams had to complete a miniature version of the
course which was created at the California Speedway
(Fontana, California, Fig. 66.12).
By race day, 23 robots were selected as starters in
the race. The vehicles queued up to start at 5-min inter-
vals. DARPA ofﬁcials paused slow-moving vehicles to
permit faster robots to pass.
The difference between the 2004 and 2005 com-
petitions was stark. Eighteen months on from the ﬁrst
competition, ﬁve robots drove 132 miles across the Mo-
jave Desert to complete the course [66.63].
The race winner Stanley, from the Stanford Rac-
ing team, claimed the prize – completing the course
in 6 h, 53 min and 58 s (Fig. 66.13) [66.70]. Second
and third places were taken by robots from Carnegie
Mellon University (CMU) teams: Red Team and Red
Team Too [66.63]. Kat-5 from Team Gray came forth,
a remarkable achievement from a team founded by
Louisianan insurance executives. And last, but not
least, the 16-ton TerraMax truck by the Ochkoch
Truck Corporation which completed the course the fol-
lowing day after spending the night paused on the
course.
Mountain
pass
Sharp
turns
Rough
road
90°
turns
Speed
bumps
Finish
line
Power
poles
Berms and
follago
Speed section
Hill
Tunnel
Power
poles
Obstacle
2-car
passing
zone
1-car
passing
zone
Start
line
Gate
700 ft
Fig. 66.12 Miniature version of the course which was cre-
ated at the California Speedway
Fig. 66.13 Winner of the 2005 grand challenge Stanford
Racing’s robot Stanley
It was a trail blazing event which captivated the
public with news images of unoccupied race vehicles
kicking up dust as they drove across the Mojave desert
sand.
During the qualiﬁers and the race some common
weaknesses were also identiﬁed. The vehicles required
GPS for navigation as all the course information were
given GPS coordinates, however the vehicles also ap-
peared to be overly reliant on a strong, correct, GPS sig-
nal. During the race vehicles drove under high voltage
power lines which caused GPS loss. Vehicles deviated
from the course or even crashed due to loss or multipath
signals. Several robots were also able to make signiﬁ-
cant progress driving blind after sensor failures meant
that local obstacle avoidance was no longer functioning
correctly.
In 2006, DARPA announced the next grand chal-
lenge, the DARPA Urban Challenge. The contest this
time required fully autonomous vehicles to drive on an
urban street network.
2007 DARPA Urban Challenge
In the DARPA Urban Challenge, robot vehicles were
to follow the Californian driver’s handbook. Unlike the
previous challenge where vehicles were not intention-
ally presented with moving obstacles (other robots were
paused when they became too close to each other) the
aim of the contest was to test the vehicles’ ability to
drive in trafﬁc. This time vehicles were expected to keep
to lanes, queue in trafﬁc, park, merge, pass, and even
observe intersection precedence (i. e., yield to cars al-
ready at an intersection) [66.71].
In a new element in the 2007 Challenge, DARPA
introduced seed funding of up to $1-million dollars for
per team for 11 teams based on a competitive applica-
tion process to bootstrap the cost of development of the
increasingly complex robot platform. The seed funding
attracted new entrants to the competition in line with
DARPA’s aim to attract a wide community of partici-
pants [66.72].
On November 3, 2007, the urban challenge event
(xUCE) was held in Victorville, California. This event
set loose, simultaneously, for the ﬁrst time, 11 full-size
autonomous vehicles on a closed course (Fig. 66.14).
The UCE was held on a closed course within the
decommissioned George air-force base. The course was
predominantly the street network of the residential zone
of the former base with several graded dirt roads added
for the competition. The contest was cast as a race
against time to complete three missions. The missions
were different from each team but were designed to re-
quire each team to drive 60 miles to ﬁnish the race.
Penalties for erroneous or dangerous behavior were also
converted into time penalties.

Part F | 66.4
1778
Part F
Robots at Work
Most roads were paved with a single lane in each
direction as typical for a suburban street. A couple
of roads had two lanes of trafﬁc in each direction to
simulate an arterial road or highway. One road, in the
southeastern corner of the network, was a raised dirt
road constructed especially for the event.
This time all 11 qualifying robots were allowed to
interact in the UCE course simultaneously, with ad-
ditional trafﬁc vehicles driven by professional drivers.
For the third time, like anxious parents, the researchers
manned the fences helpless as the robots, whose de-
velopment had consumed the past 12 months of their
lives, one by one, drove away. There were some tense
moments and even a fender bender [66.66, 73]. How-
ever, powering through the mission objectives with
a driving style described as a soccer mom with some
place to be [66.74], CMU’s Tartan racing’s robot Boss
(Fig. 66.15), crossed the ﬁnish line [66.73] to claim
the prize. 2005 winning team Stanford Racing came
second with Junior while team Victor Tango’s robot
Odin secured third place. Six robots completed the
race [66.72].
Review
DARPA endorses the use of competitions to cause
paradigm shifting advances in science and technology.
As stated DARPA’s 2007 Fiscal year report [66.72]:
Fig. 66.14 DARPA starters
Fig. 66.15 Tartan racing’s robot Boss crossing the ﬁnish-
ing line
The program achieved its program goals and stim-
ulated interest in the programs and projects of
interest to the DoD Science and Technology (S&T)
community. It was successful in attracting con-
siderable joint investment by the participants and
their sponsors, effectively leveraging Government
investment in the program. The technical challenge
was carefully deﬁned and staged to bring coher-
ence to the community and increase the chance
for cross-fertilization among competing groups. The
solicitation and qualiﬁcation process was success-
ful in attracting a large pool of strong teams with
participation from the defense industry, automo-
tive industry, academia, as well as a number of
smaller organizations. This investment in expand-
ing the community will continue to pay dividends as
DoD beneﬁts from a strengthened commercial sec-
tor autonomous vehicle technical community. The
program has been successful in attracting many
young people to work on S&T problems in areas af-
fecting national security, and beneﬁts are expected
to accrue for many years as this group enters the
work force.
Although DARPA’s approach may raise the question of
whether research initiated by the competitions should
be supported beyond competition, DARPA’s view is
that its role is to kick start ground breaking research not
bring it to completion [66.1]. They encourage research
teams and commercial organizations to team up to bring
the technology to market for defense vehicles [66.72].
Velodyne LIDAR, a dominant sensing technology
in the 2007 grand challenge, was developed with road
safety potential in mind by Team DAD from the 2005
DARPA grand challenge [66.75]. The invention is
a good example of the technological pull DARPA was
wanting to achieve with the competition.
Another direct outcome of the competitions is the
Google self-driving car project, which is based on
the research and researchers from grand challenge
teams [66.76]. Many vehicle manufacturers, such as
Ford, General Motors, Volkswagon, and Toyota among
others, have either entered the competition, partnered
with teams or employ competition alumni to con-
tinue to develop and apply related technologies to road
safety [66.64, 70, 72].
The DARPA Robotics Challenge
Buoyed by the success of the grand challenges, DARPA
now hopes to accelerate the development of humanoid
rescue robotics. In April, 2012 DARPA proposed the
DARPA robotics challenge. The Challenge is to develop
an adaptable ground robot capable of completing tasks
in a dangerous and degraded environments, using hand

Robotics Competitions and Challenges
66.4 Task-Oriented Competitions
1779
Part F | 66.4
Fig. 66.16 DARPA robotics challenge conceptual illustra-
tion
tools to driving vehicles for disaster relief operations (as
illustrated in Fig. 66.16 [66.77].
Similar to the ﬁrst grand challenge, an ambitious
goal has been set to inspire and stretch the state of the
art.
Though it is important to note that the new robotics
challenge is a separate research program from the
previous grand challenges, some best practices and
lessons learned from the previous Challenges have been
adopted. Entrants are divided into four tracks. Tracks A
and D compete to develop hardware and software of
a complete robotic system. Tracks B and C compete to
develop software ﬁrst to run on a common simulated
robot. Tracks B and C will then compete in a vir-
tual competition. In 2014, successful Track B and C
teams will be able to develop and deploy the software
to a common robot platform provided by DARPA. The
entrants can also apply for seed funding (similar to the
), which differentiates teams between Tracks A and B,
who have DARPA seed funding, and C and D who are
self-funded [66.77].
The idea of using a common platform across teams
and a simulator-based challenge addresses the obser-
vation that successful teams in the 2007 challenge had
arrived upon similar sensors and sensor conﬁgurations.
So a future challenge could remove the signiﬁcant
hardware development burden by allowing teams to
compete on a common platform. The motivation is to
once again broaden ﬁeld of participants [66.77].
The new robotics challenge also introduces access
to a remote human supervisor. Previous challenges were
strictly fully autonomous. A criticism had been that due
to the extreme lack of contextual information available
to most robotic systems, simple ambiguities that arise
can impede a robot unnecessarily if a supervisor can
correct the problem. The lack of supervisory control
meant that in previous challenges vehicles would ap-
pear overly cautious.
For example, many vehicles in the 2004 Challenge
were incapacitated by trivial problems such as the robot
misjudging which side of a road boundary they were
actually on. Full autonomy should be the ultimate aim;
however, allowing limited supervisory contact would
have permitted the 2004 contest to continue allowing
more trial time for teams.
Conclusion
DARPA never aimed to create the ultimate autonomous
vehicle. The true aim of the competition was to advance
the science and technology research and education
underpinning the original Congressional mandate on
autonomous vehicles.
Of course, the exercise has come with consider-
able cost. From the 2007 Fiscal report [66.72] the
true dollar cost to DARPA of the competition came
in at around 25 million dollars. Three and a half mil-
lion dollars were paid directly to the winning teams
as prize money. A further $ 11 million was paid in
Track A grants to teams, with the remaining $ 10:5
million was used to host the participants’ confer-
ence, site visits, qualifying round, and stage the ﬁnal
event.
Notwithstanding these costs and the necessarily
limited nature of these competitions – which create an
artiﬁcial environment to focus a broad group of experi-
menters on a common goal, for a given period of time –
they have brought clear beneﬁts for DARPA, and the
ﬁeld of robotics.
Regardless of the percentage of autonomous vehi-
cles ﬁelded by the Department of Defense in 2015,
the experience shared by participants from: research
institutions, car manufacturers, defense contractors,
technology companies, schools, a loud speaker com-
pany [66.75] and even insurance executives [66.78] to
attempt the challenge of creating a full size, fully au-
tonomous, self-driving car has gathered the ﬁeld for an
even greater race. The race between companies such as
Google, Mercedes Benz, Toyota and their technology
suppliers to bring these vehicles to market not only for
defense vehicles but for all road vehicles.
An outcome beyond the dreams of the forward
thinkers in the 2001 Congress.

Part F | 66.5
1780
Part F
Robots at Work
66.5 Conclusion and Further Reading
In this chapter, we have discussed several types of robot
competitions highlighting their impact on research and
education. Here we summarize the manifold impacts of
competitions as well as the major issues that need to be
addressed to design and run them.
Robotics competitions with ambitious aims can pro-
vide signiﬁcant breakthroughs in the development of
science and technology.
To this end, competition models based on one time
challenges have the advantage of being able to head-
line a fresh new goal. The drawback for the organizer
and participants is the signiﬁcant effort to build sys-
tems and infrastructure that may be too specialized to
be used after the competition for subsequent challenges.
On the other hand, challenges that are developed across
the years can beneﬁt from a continuous development,
as long as they suitably build on yearly achievements,
without loss of focus on the long-term roadmaps. The
two approaches as outlined in the case studies demon-
strate the merit of both as well as the unquestionable
impact on science and technology.
Robots are complex systems composed of many
mechanical, electrical, software, and algorithmic com-
ponents and as such are hard to test and compare. In
isolation a test can be derived to evaluate some com-
ponents or subcomponents. For example, one can test
the degrees of freedom of a mechanical design, or the
bandwidth and latency of a data bus. Image processing
and mapping algorithm development have made great
strides using shared datasets to compare results. The
performance of a robot system as a whole would of-
ten fall back to a qualitative assessment presented as
a video accompanied by the encouraging words of the
researcher. Competitions provide the motivation and the
forum for robotics researchers to undertake the signif-
icant effort (in time, compatibility, and transportation)
to develop and validate innovative solutions on complex
systems under controlled conditions.
Robot competitions have a positive impact on
robotics research groups in that the team work require-
ment within and between groups means that a better
standard of core software is achieved across the group.
Good tools in terms of software libraries and best prac-
tice by the more experienced software engineers in
a group are often adopted across the team enabling al-
gorithms to make it onto robot hardware sooner. To this
end, it is critical that competitions support the sharing
of solutions and tools, by developing community in-
frastructure and resources. This kind of gently enforced
openness keeps competitions competitive, fosters in-
teractivity between teams and encourages diversity of
participants by minimising the barriers to entry.
Robot competitions can play a tremendous role in
education. They are attractive to students and teach-
ers, while providing an interdisciplinary framework to
support the development of several types of technical
skills, including teamwork. Maintaining a good balance
between competing and learning becomes a major con-
cern when the focus of the competition is education. In
international competitions with younger students, dif-
ferences in culture and language need to be carefully
taken into consideration to maintain fairness and inclu-
siveness.
Last, but not least, robot competitions have a sig-
niﬁcant impact on public opinion and the public under-
standing of the science and technology. Simple distinc-
tions such as autonomous versus teleoperated robotics
are often mistaken or overlooked by the news media
and the public. Human-inspired competitions have at-
tracted many spectators and the attention of the media,
and they certainly contribute to make scientiﬁc progress
more accessible, through the language of sports. Grand
challenges, such as the DARPA Challenges have been
extensively covered by the media, thus, contributing, al-
though from a different perspective to disseminate the
awareness on the progress of robotics in the society.
The aforementioned outcomes do not come with-
out a signiﬁcant effort. A successful competition must
clearly deﬁne a target participation and suitably sup-
port it, by making the entry level accessible to a large
number of participants. The technical challenge needs
to be appropriately compelling and attractive; more-
over, the competition setting must ensure that winning
is achieved through innovation and scientiﬁc progress.
This is achieved by designing the requirements on
the robots and on the competition scenario as well as
through a well-designed performance assessment.
The organization of competitions also comes with
formidable challenges: logistics for transporting robots
and teams, venue and infrastructure for the competition
event, safety of participants and spectators. The ﬁ-
nancing and administration, often underestimated, also
requires substantial preplanning, know-how, and re-
sources.
This notwithstanding, we expect the use of compe-
titions to motivate, educate, and foster research inno-
vation only to increase in coming years as competition
has proven to be a particularly useful tool for robotics
research.
66.5.1 Further Reading
Research results of robot competitions are often ac-
cumulated into a journal special issue. The reader is

Robotics Competitions and Challenges
References
1781
Part F | 66
encouraged to explore the articles as they are often ap-
proachable and can include interesting details of events
during the contests. For the DARPA grand challenge the
reader may refer to the Journal of Field Robotics Vol-
ume 23 (2006) Issues 8 and 9 or the Springer Tracts
in Advanced Robotics Volume 36. For the DARPA the
reader may refer to the Journal of Field Robotics Vol-
ume 25 (2008) Issues 8 and 9 or the Springer Tracts in
Advanced Robotics Volume 56. In future, similar spe-
cial issues are likely to be available on the DARPA
robotics challenge.
US Innovation Programs [66.79] is interesting re-
view on the broader discussion of competitions in
funding science and technology research.
Video-References
VIDEO 385
Brief history of RoboCup robot soccer
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/66/videodetails/385
VIDEO 387
Multirobot teamwork in the CMDragons RoboCup SSL team
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/66/videodetails/387
References
66.1
D.D. Stine: U.S. innovation programs. In: Feder-
ally Funded Innovation Inducement Prizes, ed. by
D.D. Stine (Nova Press, Hauppauge 2011) pp. 1–38
66.2
R. Allan: The amazing Micromice: See how they
won. Probing the innards of the smartest and
fastest entries in the Amazing Micro-Mouse Con-
test, IEEE Spectrum 16(9), 62–65 (1979)
66.3
E. Ackerman: Meet the new world’s fastest micro-
mouse robot (IEEE Spectrum Magazine, November
2011)
66.4
FIRST Organization, available from http://www.
usfirst.org/
66.5
A.K. Mackworth: On seeing robots. In: Computer
Vision: Systems, Theory and Applications, ed. by
A. Basu, X. Li (World Scientific, Singapore 1993)
pp. 1–13
66.6
M.K. Sahota: Reactive deliberation: An architecture
for real-time dynamic control in dynamic envi-
ronments, Proc. 12th Natl. Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI)
(1994) pp. 1304–1308
66.7
H.
Kitano
(Ed.):
Proc.
IROS-96
Workshop
on
RoboCup (1996)
66.8
Ansari X Prize foundation, available from http://
space.xprize.org/ansari-x-prize
66.9
World Robot Olympiads, available from http://
www.wroboto.org/
66.10
Robogames (formerly ROBOlympics), available from
http://robogames.net/
66.11
Federation of International Robot Soccer Federa-
tion, available from http://www.fira.net/
66.12
RoboCup, available from http://www.robocup.org/
66.13
World Robotic Sailing Championship, available
from http://www.roboticsailing.org/
66.14
International Autonomous Robot Racing Competi-
tions, available from http://robotracing2012.com/
66.15
J.-H. Kim (Ed.): A Booklet on MIROSOT’96 (Micro
Robot World Cup Soccer Tournament), (MIROSOT Or-
ganizing Committee, 1996)
66.16
H. Kitano (Ed.): Robot Soccer World Cup I (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 1998)
66.17
M. Asada, H. Kitano (Eds.): Robot Soccer World Cup
II (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1999)
66.18
M. Veloso, E. Pagello, H. Kitano (Eds.): RoboCup
1999: Robot Soccer World Cup III (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 2000)
66.19
P. Stone, T. Balch, G. Kraetzschmar (Eds.): Robot
Soccer World Cup IV (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2001)
66.20
A. Birk, S. Coradeschi, S. Tadokoro (Eds.): Robot
Soccer World Cup V (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2002)
66.21
G. Kaminka, P. Lima, R. Rojas (Eds.): Robot Soccer
World Cup VI (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2003)
66.22
D. Polani, B. Browning, A. Bonarini, K. Yoshida
(Eds.): Robot Soccer World Cup VII (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 2004)
66.23
D. Nardi, M. Riedmiller, C. Sammut, J. Santos-Victor
(Eds.): Robot Soccer World Cup VIII (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 2005)
66.24
A. Bredenfeld, A. Jacoff, I. Noda, Y. Takahashi (Eds.):
Robot Soccer World Cup IX (Springer, Berlin, Heidel-
berg 2006)
66.25
G. Lakemeyer, E. Sklar, D.G. Sorrenti, T. Takahashi
(Eds.): Robot Soccer World Cup X (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 2007)
66.26
U. Visser, F. Ribeiro, T. Ohashi, F. Dellaert (Eds.):
Robot Soccer World Cup XI (Springer, Berlin, Hei-
delberg 2008)
66.27
L. Iocchi, H. Matsubara, A. Weitzenfeld, C. Zhou
(Eds.): Robot Soccer World Cup XII (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 2009)
66.28
J. Baltes, M. Lagoudakis, T. Naruse, S. Shiry Ghidary
(Eds.): Robot Soccer World Cup XIII (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 2010)
66.29
J. Ruiz del Solar, E. Chown, P.-G. Ploeger (Eds.):
RoboCup 2010: Robot Soccer World Cup XIV (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 2011)
66.30
T. Roefer, N.M. Mayer, J. Savage, U. Saranli (Eds.):
Robot Soccer World Cup XV (Springer, Berlin, Hei-
delberg 2012)

Part F | 66
1782
Part F
Robots at Work
66.31
X. Chen, P. Stone, L.E. Sucar, T. Van der Zant (Eds.):
RoboCup 2012: Robot Soccer World Cup XVI, Mexico
City (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2013)
66.32
S. Behnke, M. Veloso, A. Visser, R. Xiong (Eds.):
Robot Soccer World Cup XVII (Springer, Berlin, Hei-
delberg 2014)
66.33
H. Kitano, M. Tambe, P. Stone, M. Veloso, S. Corade-
schi, E. Osawa, H. Matsubara, I. Noda, M. Asada: The
RoboCup synthetic agent challenge, Proc. IJCAI-97
(1997)
66.34
S. Zickler, T. Laue, O. Birbach, M. Wongphati,
M. Veloso: SSLvision: The shared vision system for
the RoboCup Small Size League, Lect. Notes Artif.
Intell. 5949, 425–436 (2010)
66.35
E. Olson, J. Strom, R. Morton, A. Richardson,
P. Ranganathan, R. Goeddel, M. Bulic, J. Crossman,
B. Marinier: Progress toward multirobot reconnais-
sance and the MAGIC 2010 competition, J. Field
Robotics 29(5), 762–792 (2012)
66.36
A. Jacoff, R. Sheh, A.-M. Virts, T. Kimura, J. Pel-
lenz, S. Schwertfeger, J. Suthakorn: Using com-
petitions to advance the development of stan-
dard test methods for response robots, Proc. 2012
Perform. Metrics Intell. Syst. Workshop (PerMIS’12)
(2012)
66.37
ELROB competition: http://www.elrob.org/
66.38
AUVSI competition: http://www.auvsifoundation.
org/Competitions/CompetitionCentral
66.39
T. Wisspeintner, T. van der Zant, L. Iocchi, S. Schif-
fer: RoboCup@Home: Scientific competition and
benchmarking for domestic service robots, Inter-
act. Stud. 10(3), 393–428 (2009)
66.40
R.C. Michelson: Autonomous Aerial Robots, Un-
manned Syst. 29(10), 38–42 (2011)
66.41
A. Visser: The international micro air vehicle flight
competition as autonomy benchmark, Robotics
Compet.: Benchmarking, Technol., Transfer Educ.
Workshop – Eur. Robotics Forum (2013)
66.42
DSO National Laboratories, The Science Centre Sin-
gapore: Singapore amazing flying machine, Com-
petition Challenge Booklet (2014)
66.43
M.J. Er, S. Yuan, N. Wang: Development control and
navigation of Octocopter, 10th IEEE Int. Conf. Control
Autom. (ICCA) (2013) pp. 1639–1643
66.44
R. Roberts, J. Walker: Flying robots to the rescue,
IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 17(1), 8–10 (2010)
66.45
D. Erdos, A. Erdos, S.E. Watkins: An experimen-
tal UAV system for search and rescue challenge,
Aerosp. Electronic Syst. Mag. IEEE 28(5), 32–37
(2013)
66.46
D.C. Macke, S.E. Watkins, T. Rehmeier: Creative In-
terdisciplinary UAV Design, IEEE Potentials Mag.
33(1), 12–15 (2014)
66.47
D. Werner: Making way for unmanned aircraft,
Aerospace Am., January, 28–37 (2014)
66.48
W. Oomkens, M.
Mulder, M.M. Van
Paassen,
M.H.J. Amelink: UAVs as aviators: Environment
skills capability for UAVs, IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man
Cybern. (2008) pp. 2426–2431
66.49
AUVSI Seafarer Chapter: 2014 Rules for AUVSI Seafarer
Chapter 12th Annual Student UAS (SUAS) Competi-
tion (2013)
66.50
B. Vidolov, J. De Miras, S. Bonnet: AURYON –
A mechatronic UAV project focus on control ex-
perimentations, Int. Conf. Comput. Intell. Model.,
Control Autom., 2005 Int. Conf. Intell. Agents, Web
Technol. Internet Commer., Vol. 1 (2005) pp. 1072–
1078
66.51
Z. Fucen, S. Haiqing, W. Hong: The object recogni-
tion and adaptive threshold selection in the vision
system for landing an unmanned aerial vehicle,
Int. Conf. Inf. Autom. (ICIA) (2009) pp. 117–122
66.52
Cyber Alaska: Rules of The First Annual CYBERAlaska
CyberPhysical Systems (2013)
66.53
O. Lawlor, M. Moss, S. Kibler, C. Carson, S. Bond,
S. Bogosyan: Search and rescue robots for inte-
grated research and education in cyber-physical
systems, 7th IEEE Int. Conf. e-Learn. Ind. Electron.
(ICELIE) (2013) pp. 92–97
66.54
R. Schochmann, M. Suchy, J. Pilka, I. Pestun,
M. Kusenda: The impact of student’s projects: A self
reflection, 14th Int. Conf. Interact. Collab. Learn.
(ICL) (2011) pp. 553–555
66.55
W. Grespin: Drones in our world, Part VI: Barriers to
adoption, Diplomatic Courier (2014)
66.56
United States Congress: National Defense Autho-
rization Act for Fiscal Year 2001 (United States
Congress, Washington 2001), Sect. 217, p. 2549
66.57
Defense
Advanced
Research
Projects
Agency
(DARPA): DARPA Grand Challenge Announcement
2004, http://archive.darpa.mil/grandchallenge04/
media/announcement.pdf (2003)
66.58
E.D. Dickmanns, V. Graefe: Applications of dynamic
monocular machine vision, Mach. Vis. Appl. 1(4),
241–261 (1988)
66.59
D.J.T. Pomerleau: Rapidly adapting machine vision
for automated vehicle steering, IEEE Expert Mag.
11(2), 19–27 (1996)
66.60
R. Gregor, M. Lutzeler, M. Pellkofer, K.-H. Sieder-
sberger, E.D. Dickmanns: EMS-Vision: A perceptual
system for autonomous vehicles, IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst. 3(1), 48–59 (2002)
66.61
S. Thrun, M. Beetz, M. Bennewitz, W. Burgard,
A.B. Cremers, F. Dellaert, D. Fox, D. Hahnel,
C. Rosenberg, N. Roy, J. Schulte, D. Schultz: Prob-
abilistic algorithms and the interactive museum
tour-guide robot minerva, Int. J. Robotics Res. 19,
972–999 (2000)
66.62
M.W.M.G.
Dissanayake,
P.
Newman,
S.
Clark,
H.F. Durrant-Whyte, M. Csorba: A solution to the si-
multaneous localization and map building (SLAM)
problem, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 17(3), 229–241
(2001)
66.63
Defense
Advanced
Research
Projects
Agency
(DARPA): Grand Challenge 2005 Report to Congress,
http://archive.darpa.mil/grandchallenge/docs/
Grand_Challenge_2005_Report_to_Congress.pdf
(2005)
66.64
J.R. McBride, J.C. Ivan, D.S. Rhode, J.D. Rupp,
M.Y. Rupp, J.D. Higgins, D.D. Turner, R.M. Eustice:
A perspective on emerging automotive safety ap-
plications, derived from lessons learned through
participation in the DARPA Grand Challenges, J.
Field Robotics 25(10), 808–840 (2008)

Robotics Competitions and Challenges
References
1783
Part F | 66
66.65
A. Bacha, C. Bauman, R. Faruque, M. Fleming,
C. Terwelp, C. Reinholtz, D. Hong, A. Wicks, T. Al-
beri, D. Anderson, S. Cacciola, P. Currier, A. Dalton,
J. Farmer, J. Hurdus, S. Kimmel, P. King, A. Tay-
lor, D.V. Covern, M. Webster: Odin: Team Victor-
Tango’s entry in the DARPA Urban Challenge, J. Field
Robotics 25(8), 467–492 (2008)
66.66
L. Fletcher, S. Teller, E. Olson, D. Moore, Y. Kuwata,
J. How, J. Leonard, I. Miller, M. Campbell, D. Hut-
tenlocher, A. Nathan, F.R. Kline: The MIT–Cornell
collision and why it happened, J. Field Robotics
25(10), 775–807 (2008)
66.67
Defense
Advanced
Research
Projects
Agency
(DARPA): DARPA Grand Challenge FAQ 2004, http://
archive.darpa.mil/grandchallenge04/faq.asp
(2004)
66.68
Defense
Advanced
Research
Projects
Agency
(DARPA): DARPA Grand Challenge FAQ 2007, http://
archive.darpa.mil/grandchallenge04/media_
briefing.pdf (2007)
66.69
Defense
Advanced
Research
Projects
Agency
(DARPA):
DARPA
Grand
Challenge
Final
Data
2004, http://archive.darpa.mil/grandchallenge04/
media/final_data.pdf (2004)
66.70
S. Thrun, M. Montemerlo, H. Dahlkamp, D. Stavens,
A. Aron, J. Diebel, P. Fong, J. Gale, M. Halpenny,
G. Hoffmann, K. Lau, C. Oakley, M. Palatucci,
V. Pratt, P. Stang, S. Strohband, C. Dupont, L.-
E. Jendrossek, C. Koelen, C. Markey, C. Rummel,
J. van Niekerk, E. Jensen, P. Alessandrini, G. Brad-
ski, B. Davies, S. Ettinger, A. Kaehler, A. Nefian,
P. Mahoney: Stanley: The robot that won the DARPA
Grand Challenge, J. Field Robotics 23(9), 661–692
(2006)
66.71
Defense
Advanced
Research
Projects
Agency
(DARPA): DARPA Grand Challenge FAQ 2007, http://
archive.darpa.mil/grandchallenge/faq.asp (2007)
66.72
Defense
Advanced
Research
Projects
Agency
(DARPA): DARPA Fiscal Year 2007 Annual Report,
http://archive.darpa.mil/GRANDCHALLENGE/docs/
DDRE_Prize_Report_FY07.pdf (2008)
66.73
C. Urmson, J. Anhalt, D. Bagnell, C. Baker, R. Bit-
tner, M.N. Clark, J. Dolan, D. Duggins, T. Galatali,
C. Geyer, M. Gittleman, S. Harbaugh, M. Hebert,
T.M. Howard, S. Kolski, A. Kelly, M. Likhachev,
M. McNaughton, N. Miller, K. Peterson, B. Pil-
nick, R. Rajkumar, P. Rybski, B. Salesky, Y.-
W. Seo, S. Singh, J. Snider, A. Stentz, W. Whittaker,
Z. Wolkowicki, J. Ziglar, H. Bae, T. Brown, D. Demitr-
ish, B. Litkouhi, J. Nickolaou, V. Sadekar, W. Zhang,
J. Struble, M. Taylor, M. Darms, D. Ferguson: Au-
tonomous driving in urban environments: Boss
and the urban challenge, J. Field Robotics 25(8),
425–466 (2008)
66.74
P. Henderson: SUV with mind of its own wins robot
car race, Reuters (Nov. 4 2007)
66.75
Velodyne Inc.: Velodyne Lidar Origins, avaliable
online at http://velodynelidar.com/lidar/hdlabout/
origins.aspx (2005)
66.76
J. Markoff: Google cars drive themselves, in traffic,
available online at http://www.nytimes.com/2010/
10/10/science/10google.html (October 2010)
66.77
Defense
Advanced
Research
Projects
Agency
(DARPA):
2012
DARPA
Robotics
Broad
Agency
Announcement
(BAA),
https://www.fbo.
gov/index?s=opportunity&mode=form&
id=5cf3cc1f46103cc0aba5d0f9412cab25&
tab=core&_cview=1 12(39) (2012)
66.78
L. Grossman: Building the best driverless robot
car,
Time
(online):
http://www.time.com/
time/magazine/article/0,9171,1684543,00.html,
(November 2007)
66.79
A.E. Berger, M.C. Koepel (Eds.): U.S. Innovation Pro-
grams (Nova Press, Hauppauge 2011)

1785
Multimedia Contents Robots
Part G
Part G Robots and Humans
Ed. by Daniela Rus
67 Humanoids
Paul Fitzpatrick, Genoa, Italy
Kensuke Harada, Tsukuba, Japan
Charles C. Kemp, Atlanta, USA
Yoshio Matsumoto, Tsukuba, Japan
Kazuhito Yokoi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
Eiichi Yoshida, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
68 Human Motion Reconstruction
Katsu Yamane, Pittsburgh, USA
Wataru Takano, Tokyo, Japan
69 Physical Human–Robot Interaction
Sami Haddadin, Hannover, Germany
Elizabeth Croft, Vancouver, Canada
70 Human–Robot Augmentation
Massimo Bergamasco, Pisa, Italy
Hugh Herr, Cambridge, USA
71 Cognitive Human–Robot Interaction
Bilge Mutlu, Madison, USA
Nicholas Roy, Cambridge, USA
Selma Šabanović, Bloomington, USA
72 Social Robotics
Cynthia Breazeal, Cambridge, USA
Kerstin Dautenhahn, Hatfield, UK
Takayuki Kanda, Kyoto, Japan
73 Socially Assistive Robotics
Maja J. Matarić, Los Angeles, USA
Brian Scassellati, New Haven, USA
74 Learning from Humans
Aude G. Billard, Lausanne, Switzerland
Sylvain Calinon, Martigny, Switzerland
Rüdiger Dillmann, Karlsruhe, Germany
75 Biologically Inspired Robotics
Fumiya Iida, Cambridge, UK
Auke Jan Ijspeert, Lausanne, Switzerland
76 Evolutionary Robotics
Stefano Nolfi, Rome, Italy
Josh Bongard, Burlington, USA
Phil Husbands, Brighton, UK
Dario Floreano, Lausanne, Switzerland
77 Neurorobotics: From Vision to Action
Patrick van der Smagt, Munich, Germany
Michael A. Arbib, Los Angeles, USA
Giorgio Metta, Genoa, Italy
78 Perceptual Robotics
Heinrich Bülthoff, Tübingen, Germany
Christian Wallraven, Seoul, Korea
Martin A. Giese, Tübingen, Germany
79 Robotics for Education
David P. Miller, Norman, USA
Illah Nourbakhsh, Pittsburgh, USA
80 Roboethics: Social and Ethical
Implications
Gianmarco Veruggio, Genoa, Italy
Fiorella Operto, Genoa, Italy
George Bekey, Arroyo Grande, USA

1786
Robots and Humans covers some of the most re-
cent advances concerned with human–robot interaction,
ranging from designing biologically inspired robots, to
programming and safety issues for human–robot inter-
action, and ethical issue brought forth by robotics. Our
ﬁeld’s future vision for technology is the leap from per-
sonal computers to personal robots, in a world where
robots exist pervasively and work side by side with
humans. Over the past 50 years we have made great
strides in robotics, as the previous parts of this Hand-
book show. However, there are still new capabilities that
need to be developed and existing capabilities that need
to be improved to create a world in which robots and
humans work together. Robot bodies should be easily
integrated into our living environments. Robots should
be safe to be around. Robots should take commands
from human users easily. Robots should be functionally
capable. Robots should engage humans to help mitigate
error states and task uncertainties. Meeting these chal-
lenges will bring robots closer to our vision of pervasive
robotics.
The topics in Part G are essential for creating
robots that operate in human-centered environments.
The chapters cover organically human-centered and
life-like robots and include hardware design, control
(of locomotion, manipulation, and interaction), per-
ception, user interfaces, and social and ethical im-
plications for robotics. As such, Part G builds on
all of the Handbook’s previous parts. The connec-
tion with the chapters in Robot Foundations (Part A)
and Robot Structures (Part B), particularly Mecha-
nisms and Actuation (Chap. 4), Sensing and Estimation
(Chap. 5), Motion Planning (Chap. 7), Robotics Sys-
tems Architectures and Programming (Chap. 12), AI
Reasoning Methods for Robotics (Chap. 14), Robot
Hands (Chap. 19), Limbed Systems (Chap. 17), Mod-
ular Robots (Chap. 22) and Wheeled Robots (Chap. 24)
are essential. There is also an important dependency
on Sensing and Perception (Part C), Manipulation and
Interfaces (Part D), and Moving in the Environment
(Part E) as these chapters cover some of the basic al-
gorithms and technologies required by robots operating
in human-centered environments.
Today’s approach to computation has progressed
naturally from desktop computing, to mobile com-
puting, to pervasive computing, ultimately leading to
computation for interaction with the physical world.
In other words, Part G of the Handbook on Robotics
presents a snapshot of the ﬁeld’s advances for creating
machines in our own image that are smart and obedient.
With this overview of Part G, we now provide a brief
synopsis of each chapter.
Chapter
67,
Humanoids,
provides
a
concise
overview of the state of the art in creating human-like
machines, starting with a historical and philosophical
discussion on the human example and understanding
intelligence. These machines are capable of bipedal
locomotion and manipulation. In addition, humanoid
robots can take advantage of their entire body (e.g., lift-
ing objects while moving the body to compensate for
the load). Control issues speciﬁc to humanoids include
static and dynamic stability during a mobile manipula-
tion action. Humanoid robots interact with humans via
perception systems and should be capable of interpret-
ing behavior and mood as well as via speech systems
for interpreting human language.
Chapter 68, Human Motion Reconstruction, de-
scribes the most recent algorithms that rely on data from
motion capture systems to synthesize human-like mo-
tion models for machines. The chapter introduces two
models for information capture: optical motion capture
and mechanical motion capture. The skeleton model is
computed on the captured data using kinematics and
dynamics models. Musculoskeletal models can also be
computed for motion analysis involving muscles. The
chapter discussed model identiﬁcation techniques, seg-
mentation of human motion, classiﬁcation of human
motion, as well as temporal sequencing and linguistic
classiﬁcation of human motion. The chapter concludes
with a survey of techniques for motion reconstruction
for robots.
Chapter 69, Physical Human-Robot Interaction,
discusses what happens when humans and robots share
the same workspace and come into contact with one
another. Safety can be jeopardized by mechanical fail-
ures, operator errors, or software problems. Design-
ing and controlling robots with safety guarantees is
a very important precondition for physical human–
robot interaction (pHRI). The chapter discusses safety
standards for pHRI and surveys several approaches to
safety.
Chapter 70, Human Robot Augmentation, intro-
duces wearable robotics systems that enhance the capa-
bilities of the humans wearing them, while allowing the
humans to control them to enhance their performance
in a task-speciﬁc way. There are three types of devices
that deliver human augmentation:
i)
Prostheses, for the functional replacement of human
limbs
ii) Powered orthoses, which function is to actively op-
erate in parallel with unhealthy human joints
iii) Robotic exoskeletons that operate in parallel with
healthy human limbs.

1787
The chapter describes prostheses, powered orthoses
and exoskeletons for upper limb, lower limbs and whole
body structures. State-of-the-art devices together with
their functionalities and main robotics components are
presented for each class of wearable system. Critical de-
sign issues and open research aspects are reported.
Chapter 71, Cognitive Human Robot Interaction,
considers human(s), robot(s), and their joint actions as
a cognitive system. This chapter surveys the state of the
art in modeling, algorithms, and design guidelines to
enable the design of systems where humans and robots
can interact. The chapter describes the representations
and actions that allow robots to participate in joint ac-
tivities with people and the models of joint activity
for human-robot interaction. The chapter also describes
recent research on developing a deeper understand-
ing of human expectations and cognitive responses to
robot actions. This chapter draws on research questions
and advances from a wide range of ﬁelds including
computer science, cognitive science, linguistics, and
robotics.
Chapter 72, Social Robotics, discusses the creation
of robots designed to interact with people in a social
and emotional way for applications in education, enter-
tainment, health care, etc. These robots’ embodiment is
life-like and they are capable of multi-modal commu-
nication. The chapter uses a case study of the Kismet
robot to illustrate the idea of a machine capable of
projecting emotion. The chapter surveys some basic ap-
proaches to giving robots sociocognitive skills such as
shared attention, emotional empathy, and mental per-
spective tasking.
Chapter 73, Socially Assistive Robotics, covers the
design of human-robot systems that use verbal and
non-verbal expression and communication to interact
and assist users through social rather than physical
interaction. Socially assistive robotics (SAR) focuses
on the challenges of providing motivation, coaching,
training, and rehabilitation through non-physical inter-
action; such systems have been validated in hands-off
stroke rehabilitation, social skill training of children
with autism, and eldercare, among others. This chapter
reviews the critical societal issues that have motivated
research into socially assistive robotics, describes the
reason why physical robots rather than virtual agents
are essential to this, highlights the major research issues
within this area, describes the primary application do-
mains and populations where SAR research has shown
an impact, and closes with some of the ethical and
safety issues.
Chapter 74, Learning from Humans, covers im-
portant topics about how we approach teaching robots
what to do by providing either good or bad exam-
ples. This is an intuitive approach to robot control and
learning of tasks with the potential of opening robot
applications to non-expert users. The chapter starts by
discussing what it means for a robot to learn a new
skill and surveys several learning approaches for this.
Biologically oriented learning approaches such as con-
ceptual models of imitation learning and neural models
of imitation learning are also introduced. The chapter
concludes with several open issues in robot program-
ming by demonstration.
Chapter 75, Biologically Inspired Robots, starts
with a discussion of the difference between bio-in-
spired and biomimetic robots. Bio-inspired robots seek
to reproduce a natural phenomenon but not necessar-
ily the underlying means. Biomimetic robots reproduce
both the natural phenomenon and the means. The chap-
ter starts with a survey of bio-inspired morphologies.
A survey of bio-inspired sensors from vision to au-
dio, touch, smell, and taste is then presented. Bio-
inspired actuators include locomotion topics such as
crawling, legged locomotion, climbing swimming, ﬂy-
ing, and manipulation. The chapter also examines bio-
inspiration in the context of control and planning. This
includes behavior-based architectures, learning robots,
evolving robots, and developing robots. Finally, the
chapter examines how to make machines self-sustain-
ing from an energy point of view.
Chapter
76,
Evolutionary
Robotics, discusses
a method for creating robots that is inspired by the
Darwinian principle of selective reproduction of the
ﬁttest captured by evolutionary algorithms. The chap-
ter introduces the evolutionary computation method and
presents several case studies. Because the evolutionary
method requires intensive computation, it is often run
in simulation and the ﬁnal result is transferred to the
robot platform. However, in the recent past there were
several successes with running evolutionary algorithms
in real time on physical platforms to achieve complex
behaviors such as learning to walk.
Chapter 77, Neurobotics: From Vision to Action,
looks at how neuroethology, the study of brain mech-
anisms for animal behavior, inspires the creation of
a central nervous system for a machine. The chap-
ter presents several case studies that sample this bio-
inspired design of robot controllers structurally and
functionally: the optic ﬂow in bees and robots, visually
guided behaviors in frogs and robots, and navigation in
rats and robots. The chapter then examines the role of
the cerebellum in motion control and the role of mir-
ror systems. The chapter concludes by observing the
brain has evolved to serve as action-oriented percep-

1788
tion, which is a useful guiding principle for building
robot controllers.
Chapter 78, Perceptual Robotics, discusses prin-
ciples derived from high-level cognitive processing in
vision in the human brain that have led to results in
robotics and computer vision. The chapter is focused
on the technical realization of perceptual functions in
robots by examining relationships between biological
perception and robotics systems. Object recognition is
used as an exemplary task and issues such as represen-
tation, structural description models, neural representa-
tions, as well as recognition and learning algorithms are
discussed. Next, example-based movement representa-
tions are examined to establish the connection between
the functionality of the visual cortex and a class of com-
puter vision algorithms.
Chapter 79, Robotics for Education, provides an
overview of the key ingredients that make success-
ful education robots possible. It begins with a survey
of robot tournaments, which are the most prevalent
mechanism for educating young students in robotics.
Robot tournaments have already impacted tens of thou-
sands of students across diverse geographic and age
group boundaries. Next, the chapter technology stan-
dards required for effective use of robots in education.
Educational robot devices consist of both hardware
(pre-assembled or as kits or components) and software
(both as source code and programming environments).
The chapter surveys the physical robot platforms that
have achieved notable success, and the software that
enabled the interaction with young students (that is,
the low-level controllers that interface those platforms
to high-level computation and the top-level program-
ming environments.) Finally, the chapter describes how
conventional analytical tools may be used to evaluate
unconventional educational programs that use robots.
Chapter 80, Roboethics: Social and Ethical Impli-
cations, discusses the social and ethical implications in
a society where robots coexist with humans. Starting
with a philosophical introspection into the dangers of
unlimited use of technology, the chapter argues for the
need for a new ethics of robots. Many other factors,
including the cultural differences in societies ready to
accept robots, deﬁne this need. The chapter surveys the
code of ethics, privacy, accuracy, intellectual property,
and access, which could be adopted by robotics. A tax-
onomy of robot types, along with socio-ethical issues
for each robot type is then presented.

Multimedia Contents Humanoids
1789
Part G | 67.1
67. Humanoids
Paul Fitzpatrick, Kensuke Harada, Charles C. Kemp, Yoshio Matsumoto, Kazuhito Yokoi, Eiichi Yoshida
Humanoid robots selectively immitate aspects
of human form and behavior. Humanoids come
in a variety of shapes and sizes, from complete
human-size legged robots to isolated robotic
heads with human-like sensing and expression.
This chapter highlights significant humanoid plat-
forms and achievements, and discusses some of
the underlying goals behind this area of robotics.
Humanoids tend to require the integration of many
of the methods covered in detail within other
chapters of this handbook, so this chapter focuses
on distinctive aspects of humanoid robotics with
liberal cross-referencing.
This chapter examines what motivates re-
searchers to pursue humanoid robotics, and
provides a taste of the evolution of this field
over time. It summarizes work on legged hu-
manoid locomotion, whole-body activities, and
approaches to human–robot communication. It
concludes with a brief discussion of factors that
may influence the future of humanoid robots.
67.1
Why Humanoids?................................. 1789
67.1.1
The Human Example.................. 1790
67.1.2
The Pleasing Mirror.................... 1790
67.1.3
Understanding Intelligence ........ 1790
67.1.4
Human Environments ................ 1790
67.1.5
Human Interaction .................... 1792
67.1.6
Entertainment, Culture,
and Surrogates.......................... 1792
67.2
History ................................................ 1792
67.3
What to Immitate?............................... 1794
67.3.1
Body Parts ................................ 1794
67.3.2
Mechanics ................................ 1794
67.3.3
Sensors..................................... 1794
67.3.4
Other Characteristics .................. 1795
67.4
Locomotion ......................................... 1795
67.4.1
Bipedal Locomotion................... 1795
67.4.2
Other Various Locomotion
Styles ....................................... 1797
67.4.3
Localization and Navigation
Among Obstacles ....................... 1798
67.4.4
Generating Motions
when in Contact with an Object.. 1799
67.5 Whole-Body Activities.......................... 1801
67.5.1
Coarse Whole-Body Motion ........ 1801
67.5.2
Generating Dynamically Stable
Motions.................................... 1803
67.5.3
Generating Whole-Body Motions
with Various Tasks ..................... 1805
67.5.4
Generating Motions
Including Multiple Contacts........ 1807
67.6 Morphological Communication ............. 1809
67.6.1
Expressive Morphology
and Behavior ............................ 1809
67.6.2
Interpreting Human Expression .. 1811
67.6.3 Physical Interaction
and Developmental Robotics...... 1812
67.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ......... 1813
Video-References......................................... 1813
References................................................... 1813
67.1 Why Humanoids?
Throughout history, the human body and mind have
inspired artists, engineers, and scientists. The ﬁeld of
humanoid robotics focuses on the creation of robots that
are directly inspired by human capabilities (Chap. 75).
These robots usually share similar kinematics to hu-
mans, as well as similar sensing and behavior. The mo-
tivations that have driven the development of humanoid
robots vary widely. For example, people have developed
humanoid robots to serve as general-purpose mechan-
ical workers, entertainers, and test-beds for theories

Part G | 67.1
1790
Part G
Robots and Humans
from neuroscience and experimental psychology [67.1–
3].
Notably, while this chapter focuses on robots that
have been explicitly designated as humanoid robots by
their creators, the lines between these robots and others
can be blurry. Many robots share characteristics with
humans, or have been inspired by humans.
67.1.1 The Human Example
On a daily basis, humans perform important tasks that
are well beyond the capabilities of current robots. More-
over, humans are generalists with the ability to perform
a wide variety of distinct tasks. Roboticists would like
to create robots with comparable versatility and skill.
Considering the physical and computational mecha-
nisms that enable a person to perform a task is a com-
mon approach to automating it. Exactly what to borrow
from the human example is controversial. The literal-
minded approach of creating humanoid robots may not
be the best way to achieve some human-like capabilities
(Chap. 65). For example, dishwashing machines bear
little similarity to the manual dishwashing they replace.
67.1.2 The Pleasing Mirror
Humans are humanity’s favorite subject. A quick look
at popular magazines, videos, and books should be
enough to convince any alien observer that humanity
is obsessed with itself. The nature of this obsession is
not fully understood, but aspects of it have inﬂuenced
the ﬁeld of humanoid robotics.
Humans are social animals that generally like to ob-
serve and interact with one another [67.4]. Moreover,
people are highly attuned to human characteristics, such
as the sound of human voices and the appearance of
human faces and body motion [67.5–7]. Infants show
preferences for these types of stimuli at a young age,
and adults appear to use specialized mental resources
when interpreting these stimuli. By mimicking human
characteristics, humanoid robots can engage these same
preferences and mental resources.
Humanity’s interest in itself has been reﬂected in
media as diverse as cave paintings, sculpture, mechani-
cal toys, photographs, and computer animation. Artists
have consistently attempted to portray people with the
latest tools at their disposal. Robotics serves as a pow-
erful new medium that enables the creation of artifacts
that operate within the real world and exhibit both hu-
man form and behavior [67.8].
Popular works of ﬁction have frequently in-
cluded inﬂuential portrayals of humanoid robots and
human-made humanoid creatures. For example, Karel
ˇCapek’s science ﬁction play Rossum’s Universal
Robots (R.U.R.) from 1920 centers around the story of
artiﬁcial people created in a factory [67.9]. Many other
works have included explicit representations of hu-
manoid robots, such as the robot Maria in Fritz Lang’s
1927 ﬁlm Metropolis [67.10], and the thoughtful por-
trayal of humanoid robotics by Isaac Asimov in works
such as The Caves of Steel from 1954 [67.11]. The long
history of humanoid robots in science ﬁction has inﬂu-
enced generations of researchers, as well as the general
public, and serves as further evidence that people are
drawn to the idea of humanoid robots.
67.1.3 Understanding Intelligence
Many researchers in the humanoid robotics commu-
nity see humanoid robots as a tool with which to better
understand humans [67.3, 12]. Humanoid robots offer
an avenue to test understanding through construction
(synthesis), and thereby complement the analysis pro-
vided by researchers in disciplines such as cognitive
science.
Researchers have sought to better immitate human
intelligence using humanoid robotics [67.13]. Develop-
mental psychologists, linguists, and others have found
strong links between the human body and human cog-
nition [67.14]. By being embodied in a manner similar
to humans, and situated within human environments,
humanoid robots may be able to exploit similar mech-
anisms for artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). Researchers are
also attempting to ﬁnd methods that will enable robots
to develop autonomously in a manner akin to human in-
fants [67.15]. Some of these researchers use humanoid
robots that can physically explore the world in a manner
similar to humans [67.16].
67.1.4 Human Environments
People inhabit environments that accommodate human
form and human behavior [67.17, 18]. Many important
everyday objects ﬁt in a person’s hand and are light
enough to be transported conveniently by a person. Hu-
man tools match human dexterity. Doors tend to be
a convenient size for people to walk through. Tables
and desks are at a height that is well matched to the
human body and senses. Humanoid robots can poten-
tially take advantage of these same accommodations,
thereby simplifying tasks and avoiding the need to al-
ter the environment for the robot [67.19]. For example,
humanoid robots and people could potentially collabo-
rate with one another in the same space using the same
tools [67.20]. Humanoid robots can also interface with
machinery that does not include drive-by-wire controls,
as shown by the teleoperated robot in the cockpit of
a backhoe in Fig. 67.1 [67.21].

Humanoids
67.1 Why Humanoids?
1791
Part G | 67.1
Robots with legs and human-like behavior could po-
tentially traverse the same environments that humans
traverse, such as rugged outdoor environments and the
industrial plant shown in Fig. 67.2, which has stairs and
handrails designed for human use [67.22]. In addition to
mobility advantages, legs have the potential to help in
other ways. For example, legs could enable a humanoid
robot to change its posture in order to lean into some-
thing, pull with the weight of its body, or crawl under
an obstacle [67.23, 24].
The Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster, which oc-
curred in March 2011 in Japan, is a compelling example
scenario for robots. The disaster resulted in human
environments that were unsafe for humans. Robots
capable of performing diverse tasks in these environ-
Fig. 67.1 The humanoid robot HRP-1S (HRP: humanoid
robot project) driving a backhoe (courtesy Kawasaki
Heavy Industries, Tokyu Construction and National In-
stitute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
(Japan) (AIST)). The robot can be teleoperated by a human
operator to control the backhoe remotely. The same robot
could potentially interface with many different unmodiﬁed
machines
Fig. 67.2 HRP-1 operating in a mockup of an industrial
plant (courtesy Mitsubishi Heavy Industries)
ments via remote control would have been valuable.
Future humanoid robots may be able to access simi-
lar environments using narrow passageways, ladders,
and other environmental features designed for peo-
ple (Fig. 67.3). Likewise, they may be able to re-
motely perform tasks involving control panels, valves,
and tools designed for people. This type of scenario
Fig. 67.3 An image of supposed disaster-response sce-
nario DARPA Robotics Challenge
Fig. 67.4 The humanoid robot HRP-2 dancing with a human (af-
ter [67.25]). The human is a master of a traditional Japanese dance
whose dancing was recorded by a motion-capture system, and trans-
formed for use by the robot
Fig. 67.5 Actroid (courtesy Kokoro), an android designed
for entertainment, telepresence, and media roles

Part G | 67.2
1792
Part G
Robots and Humans
Fig. 67.6 Atlas robot provided as a platform for the
DARPA Robotics Challenge (courtesy Boston Dynamics)
has inspired the DARPA (Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency) Robotics Challenge in which robots
will compete by performing related tasks. Notably,
DARPA plans for some teams to compete using Atlas
humanoid robots from Boston Dynamics Fig. 67.6.
67.1.5 Human Interaction
People are accustomed to working with other people.
Many types of communication rely on human form and
behavior. Some types of natural gestures and expres-
sion involve subtle movements in the hands and face
(Chap. 72). People can interpret eye gaze and facial
expressions without training. Humanoid robots can po-
tentially simplify and enhance human–robot interaction
by taking advantage of the communication channels
that already exist between people.
Similarly, people already have the ability to perform
many desirable tasks. This task knowledge may be more
readily transferred to humanoid robots than to a robot
Fig. 67.7 Petman is a humanoid robot that Boston Dynam-
ics developed to test chemical protection clothing for the
US military (after [67.26])
with a drastically different body. This is especially true
of cultural actions centered around the human form
(Fig. 67.4).
67.1.6 Entertainment, Culture,
and Surrogates
Humanoid robots are inherently appropriate for some
applications. For example, robots that resemble hu-
mans could play roles in entertainment, such as
theater, theme parks, and companionship for adults
(Fig. 67.5). Realism in form and function could
make humanoid robots preferable to wax ﬁgures and
animatronics.
A humanoid robot could serve as an avatar for
telepresence, model clothing, test ergonomics, or serve
other surrogate roles that fundamentally depend on the
robot’s similarity to a human. For example, Boston Dy-
namics developed the humanoid robot Petman to test
clothing that is intended to protect military person-
nel from chemical agents (Fig. 67.7). Robotic pros-
theses and cosmeses also have a close relationship
to humanoid robotics, since they seek to directly re-
place parts of the human body in function and form
(Chap. 64).
67.2 History
There is a long history of mechanical systems with
human form that perform human-like movements. For
example, Al-Jazari designed a humanoid automaton
in the 13th century [67.27], Leonardo da Vinci de-
signed a humanoid automaton in the late 15th cen-
tury [67.28], and in Japan there is a tradition of cre-
ating mechanical dolls called Karakuri ningyo that
dates back to at least the 18th century [67.29]. In
the 20th century, animatronics became an attraction
at theme parks. For example, in 1967 Disneyland
opened its Pirate’s of the Caribbean ride [67.30], which
featured animatronic pirates that play back human-
like movements synchronized with audio. Although
programmable, these humanoid animatronic systems
moved in a ﬁxed open-loop fashion without sensing
their environments.
In the second half of the 20th century, advances
in digital computing enabled researchers to incorporate

Humanoids
67.2 History
1793
Part G | 67.2
Fig. 67.8 (a) WABOT-1 (1973) and (b) WABOT-2 (1984;
courtesy Humanoid Robotics Institute, Waseda University)
signiﬁcant computation into their robots for sensing,
intelligence, control, and actuation. Many roboticists
developed isolated systems for sensing, locomotion,
and manipulation that were inspired by human capa-
bilities. However, the ﬁrst humanoid robot to integrate
all of these functions and capture widespread attention
was Waseda robot (WABOT-1), developed by Ichiro
Kato et al. at Waseda University in Japan in 1973
(Fig. 67.8).
The WABOT robots integrated functions that have
been under constant elaboration since: visual object
recognition, speech generation, speech recognition, bi-
manual object manipulation, and bipedal walking. For
instance, WABOT-2’s ability to play a piano, publicized
at the Tsukuba Science Expo in 1985, stimulated signif-
icant public interest.
In 1986, Honda began a conﬁdential project to
create a humanoid biped. Honda grew interested in hu-
manoids, perhaps seeing in them devices of complexity
comparable to cars with the potential to become high-
volume consumer products one day. In 1996, Honda
unveiled the Honda Humanoid P2, the result of this con-
ﬁdential project. P2 was the ﬁrst full-scale humanoid
capable of stable bipedal walking with onboard power
and processing. Successive designs reduced its weight
and improved its performance (Fig. 67.9). Compared
to humanoids built by academic laboratories and small
manufacturers, the Honda humanoids were a leap for-
ward in sturdiness, using specially cast lightweight
high-rigidity mechanical links, and harmonic drives
with high torque capacity.
In parallel with these developments, the decade-
long Cog project began in 1993 at the MIT Artiﬁcial
Intelligence laboratory in the USA with the intention of
Fig. 67.9 (a) Honda P2 (180 cm tall, 210 kg), (b) P3 (160 cm,
130 kg), and (c) advanced step in innovative mobility (glossnoidx-
ASIMOadvanced step in innovative mobility) (120 cm, 43 kg) (af-
ter [67.31]; courtesy Honda)
Fig. 67.10 The humanoid robot Cog used neural oscillators
in conjunction with compliant torque-controlled arms to
perform a variety of everyday tasks with human tools, such
as crank turning, hammering, sawing, and playing a snare
drum (after [67.32]; courtesy Sam Ogden)
creating a humanoid robot that would, learn to think
by building on its bodily experiences to accomplish
progressively more abstract tasks [67.13]. This project
gave rise to an upper-body humanoid robot whose
design was heavily inspired by the biological and cog-
nitive sciences (Fig. 67.10). Since the inception of the
Cog project, researchers across the world have initiated
many humanoid robotics projects and formed commu-
nities devoted to developmental robotics, autonomous
mental development (AMD [67.33]), and epigenetic
robotics [67.34].
As of the early 21st century, a large number of com-
panies and academic researchers have become involved
with humanoid robots and created new humanoid robots
with distinctive characteristics.

Part G | 67.3
1794
Part G
Robots and Humans
67.3 What to Immitate?
Humanoid robots come in a variety of shapes and sizes
that immitate different aspects of human form and be-
havior (Fig. 67.11). As discussed, the motivations that
have driven the development of humanoid robots vary
widely. These diverse motivations have led to a variety
of humanoid robots that selectively emphasize some hu-
man characteristics, while deviating from others.
67.3.1 Body Parts
One of the most noticeable axes of variation in hu-
manoid robots is the presence or absence of body parts.
Some humanoid robots have focused solely on the head
and face, others have a head with two arms mounted
to a stationary torso, or a torso with wheels (for exam-
ple, Fig. 67.12). Some humanoid robots even combine
a highly-articulate face with arms, legs, and a torso.
67.3.2 Mechanics
Humanoid robots immitate various mechanical aspects
of the human body, such as its kinematics, dynamics,
geometry, material properties, and actuation. As such,
humanoid robotics is closely related to the ﬁeld of hu-
man biomechanics.
Humanoid robots often consist of rigid links with
kinematics that approximate the kinematics of the hu-
man musculoskeletal system. Even a rigid-link model
of human kinematics can have a very high number of
degrees of freedom (DOF). A humanoid robot typi-
cally imitates degrees of freedom that are pertinent to
its intended use. For example, humanoid robots rarely
attempt to immitate the human shoulder’s ability to
translate or the ﬂexibility of the human spine [67.35,
36]
Fig. 67.11 Kismet is an example of a humanoid head for
social interaction
The human hand serves to further illustrate these
issues. Modern humanoid robots frequently have two
arms, each with seven degrees of freedom, but their
hands vary considerably (Chap. 19). The human hand
is highly complex with over 20 DOFs (i. e., approxi-
mately four DOFs per ﬁnger and a ﬁve-DOF thumb)
in a very compact space with a compliant exterior,
dense tactile sensing, and low distal mass. Researchers
have approximated the human hand with varying levels
of accuracy, including the anatomically correct testbed
(ACT) hand, the 20-DOF Shadow Hand, the 12-DOF
DLR-Hand-II (DLR: Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und
Raumfahrt), the 11-DOF Robonaut hand, and the 2-
DOF Cog hand [67.37–41]. The ACT hand represents
the high-ﬁdelity end of the spectrum, since it approxi-
mates the bone structure, inertial properties, kinematics,
and actuation of the human hand.
Actuation is another property of humanoid robots
that varies considerably. Human actuation consists
of a complex, highly-redundant system of variable-
stiffness muscles. In contrast, many humanoid robots
use a stiff, position-controlled actuator at each joint.
There are early exceptions, such as the use of series
elastic actuators in Cog’s arms [67.32, 42], and various
forms of compliant actuation have now become com-
mon in the arms of humanoid robots.
67.3.3 Sensors
Humanoid robots have made use of a variety of sensors
including cameras, three-dimensional (3-D) cameras,
laser rangeﬁnders, microphone arrays, lavalier micro-
phones, and pressure sensors. Some researchers choose
to immitate human sensing by selecting sensors with
Fig. 67.12 The NASA (National Aeronautics and Space
Administration) Robonaut consists of an upper body
placed on a wheeled mobile base

Humanoids
67.4 Locomotion
1795
Part G | 67.4
clear human analogs and mounting these sensors on the
humanoid robot in a manner that mimics the placement
of human sensory organs. As discussed in Sect. 67.6,
this is perhaps most evident in the use of cameras. Two
to four cameras have often been mounted within the
heads of humanoid robots with conﬁgurations similar
to human eyes.
The justiﬁcations for this bias towards human-
like sensing include the impact of sensing on natural
human–robot interaction, the proven ability of the hu-
man senses to support human behavior, and aesthetics.
For example, with respect to human–robot interaction,
nonexperts can sometimes interpret the functioning and
implications of a human-like sensor, such as a cam-
era, more easily. Similarly, if a robot senses infrared
or ultraviolet radiation, the robot can see a different
world than the human. With respect to behavior, place-
ment of sensors on the head of the robot allows the
robot to sense the world from a vantage point that
is similar to that of a human, which can be valu-
able for ﬁnding objects that are sitting on a desk or
table.
Prominent humanoid robots have added additional
sensors without human analogs. For example, Kismet
used a camera mounted in its forehead to augment the
two cameras in its servoed eyes, which simpliﬁed com-
mon tasks such as tracking faces. Similarly, versions of
ASIMO have used a camera mounted on its lower torso
that looks down at the ﬂoor in order to simplify obstacle
detection and navigation during locomotion.
67.3.4 Other Characteristics
Other common forms of variation include the size of the
robot, the extent to which the robot attempts to appear
like a human, and the activities the robot performs. The
remainder of this chapter provides examples from three
active areas of humanoid robotics research: locomotion,
whole-body activities, and morphological communica-
tion.
67.4 Locomotion
Bipedal walking is a key research topic in humanoid
robotics (see also Chap. 48, Legged Robots, for a review
of this topic in the context of locomotion in general).
Legged locomotion is a challenging area of robotics
research, and bipedal humanoid locomotion is espe-
cially challenging. Some small humanoid robots are
able to achieve statically stable gaits by having large
feet and a low center of mass, but large humanoids with
a human-like weight distribution and body dimensions
typically need to balance dynamically when walking
bipedally.
67.4.1 Bipedal Locomotion
Currently the dominant methods for bipedal legged
locomotion with humanoids make use of the zero-
moment point (ZMP) criterion to ensure that the robot
does not fall over [67.43]. As discussed in detail in
Chap. 48, control of the robot’s body such that the
ZMP sits within the support polygon of the robot’s foot
ensures that the foot remains planted on the ground,
assuming that friction is high enough to avoid slip-
ping. The ZMP can be used to plan walking patterns
that make the robot dynamically stable while walk-
ing. Conventionally, biped locomotion had been ofﬂine
generated by solving an ordinally differential equa-
tion with respect to the motion of the COG (center
of gravity) given a desired trajectory of the ZMP.
Recently, several extensions have been done for the
ZMP based biped gait generation as shown in the
following:
Realtime Walking Pattern Generation
By solving the ordinally differential equation in re-
altime, biped gait is generated in realtim [67.44, 45].
Since the realtime walking pattern generator enables
us to change the landing positions of foot in realtime,
it is used in various situations; in [67.46], the land-
ing position of the foot changes in accordance with
the hand reaction force as will be described more con-
cretely in the subsection of manipulation. As shown
in Fig. 67.13 [67.47], the walking pattern is gener-
ated in realtime in accordance with the amount of
external disturbance applied to the robot. In this case,
after the torso of a robot is pushed by a human,
biped gait for a few steps is generated in realtime to
recover the balance. In [67.48], the humanoid robot
ASIMO walks in the environment with moving ob-
stacles. By using the estimation of the object motion,
the walking pattern of the robot is generated in real-
time. Fig. 67.14 [67.49] shows the biped locomotion
on uneven terrain. In this experiment, the shape of the
environment is measured by a laser range sensor. Ac-
cording to the shape information of the environment,
the landing position on uneven terrain is calculated in
realtime.

Part G | 67.4
1796
Part G
Robots and Humans
Fig. 67.13 Experiment of push recovery
Running
By
additionally
considering
the
ﬂight
phase
to
the
ZMP
based
walking
pattern
generator,
run-
ning motion of biped robot is generate [67.50–52].
Fig. 67.15 [67.52] shows an example of running mo-
tion by a biped humanoid robot. Running motion
1
5
2
6
3
7
4
8
Fig. 67.14 Experiment on biped gait on uneven terrain
of a human-sized humanoid robot with 7 km=h is
realized.
Extension of ZMP Based Method
Althogh the ZMP is a two dimentional information de-
ﬁned for the interaction between a robot and the ground
surface, a robot applies 6 dimensional force/moment
onto the ground. Hence, just by regulating the position
of the ZMP, it is impossible to control all dimension of
the interaction force/moment. More concretely speak-
ing, the robot may slip on the ground surface or may
loose contact with the ground. Research on biped lo-
comotion considering full 6 dimensional force/moment
has been don [67.53, 54].
Human-Like Walking Motion
The biped locomotion generated just by using the ZMP
may not be a human-like one. Challenge has been done
to generate a human-like biped gait of a humanoid
robo [67.55]. Fig. 67.16 [67.55] showws a biped loco-
motion where single toe support, knee stretching and
human like swing leg trajectory are applied. It is com-
pared with the human walking motion where the model
belongs to Walking Studio Rei.
Force/Moment Controller
Bipedal walking needs to be robust to unexpected dis-
turbances encountered during the execution of planned

Humanoids
67.4 Locomotion
1797
Part G | 67.4
4
5
1
2
6
3
Fig. 67.15 Example of running motion
Time (s)
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.1
0.2
0
Fig. 67.16 Human like walking motion compared with human motion
walking patterns. In these situations, walking can some-
times be stabilized with feedback control and appro-
priate sensin [67.56]. Many humanoid robots, such as
Honda’s ASIMO, make use of accelerometers, gyro-
scopes, and six-axis force/torque sensors to provide
feedback to the robot during locomotion.
Force/torque sensors have long been applied to ma-
nipulators for the implementation of force control, but
force/torque sensors with sufﬁcient robustness to han-
dle foot impact for a full-size humanoid robot are
relatively new. When the foot of the robot touches
down, the foot receives an impact which can disturb
its walking. This impact can be rather large, especially
when the robot is walking quickly. Some feet now in-
corporate a spring and damper mechanism as shown in
Fig. 67.17 in order to mitigate these problems.
Passive-Gait-Based Approach
Alternative to the ZMP-based approach, researchers
have begun to use the principles of bipedal passive-
dynamic walkers to develop powered bipedal walkers
6-axis force sensor
Rubber sole
Rubber bushing
Fig. 67.17 Example of a humanoid foot structure for legged loco-
motion that uses compliance and force/torque sensing
that walk with high efﬁciency in a human-like way by
exploiting natural dynamics (Fig. 67.18 [67.57]).
67.4.2 Other Various Locomotion Styles
Most humanoid robots have two legs and two arms.
Here, in addition to the legs, the arms can be used to

Part G | 67.4
1798
Part G
Robots and Humans
Fig. 67.18 These robots from Delft, MIT and Cornell (left
to right) are designed to exploit their natural dynamics
when walking (after [67.57]; courtesy Steven H. Collins)
enhance the mobility of a humanoid robot. For exam-
ple, when a robot walks while grasping a handrail, the
contact could potentially increase the stability of the
robot. Attempt [67.58] have been done to generate the
motion of a humanoid robot by using the arms in addi-
tion to the legs to enhance its mobility of it. As shown
in Fig. 67.19 [67.58], a humanoid robot walking on
uneven terrain sometimes uses to increase the robot’s
stability.
A human-scale robot should expect to fall from time
to time in realistic conditions. A humanoid robot may
fall down due to a large disturbance even if the motion
is planned carefully and a sophisticated feedback con-
troller is applied to the robot. In this event, the robot
could be damaged signiﬁcantly during a fall, and could
Fig. 67.19 Humanoid robot walking
on uneven terrain by utilizing hand
contact
also damage the environment or injure people who are
nearby. An important area of research is how to control
the robot’s fall in order to gracefully recover or min-
imize damage. The Sony QRIO (Quest for cuRIOsity)
can control its falling motions in order to reduce the im-
pact of touch down [67.50], although it is of a relatively
small size (which simpliﬁes the problem). Fujiwara
et al. developed a falling motion controller for a human-
size humanoid robot that is falling backwards [67.59].
Figure 67.20 shows an example of a controlled falling
motion. The general problem is still very much an ac-
tive area of research. Similarly, there is also the issue of
getting back up again [67.60] (Fig. 67.21).
67.4.3 Localization and Navigation
Among Obstacles
In order for a humanoid robot to walk in unmod-
eled environments, localization and obstacle detection
are essential. Wheeled robots encounter similar is-
sues while navigating, but full bipedal humanoids have
more-specialized requirements. For example, bipedal
humanoids have the ability to control contact with the
world through their highly articulate legs.
Artiﬁcial landmarks can simplify localization. As
shown in Fig. 67.22, Honda’s ASIMO uses a camera
mounted on its lower torso that looks down at the ﬂoor
to ﬁnd artiﬁcial markers for position correction [67.61].
Accurate positioning is important for long-distance
navigation and stair climbing, since slippage usually
occurs while walking and accumulated positional and
directional errors can lead to severe failures.
Obstacle avoidance is also an important function for
locomotion. Disparity images generated by stereo vi-

Humanoids
67.4 Locomotion
1799
Part G | 67.4
Fig. 67.20 Example of controlled falling-down motion
Fig. 67.21 The humanoid robot HRP-2P getting up from
a lying-down position I
sion have been utilized for this purpose. For example,
the plane segment ﬁnder [67.62] developed by Okada
et al. helps detect traversable areas. Figure 67.23 shows
the result of detecting clear areas of the ﬂoor plane ap-
propriate for gait generation.
Humanoids require a great deal of computation due
to the need for sophisticated sensing and control. Cus-
tomized computational hardware may help mitigate this
problem. For example, Sony’s humanoid robot QRIO is
equipped with a ﬁeld-programmable gate array (FPGA)
to generate disparity maps in real time from the stereo
cameras. This real-time vision system has been used to
detect ﬂoor areas, stair steps, and obstacles for naviga-
tion [67.63, 64].
67.4.4 Generating Motions
when in Contact
with an Object
Many approaches to whole-body motion generation as-
sume that the robot is only in contact with the ground.
When a humanoid robot’s hands make contact with the
environment, it can no longer maintain balance using
the conventional ZMP property deﬁned by the center
of pressure of the supporting feet [67.65]. This leads
to signiﬁcant challenges for whole-body activities, es-
pecially since the properties of the environment with
which the robot is making contact may not be known in
advance.
Harada et al. have introduced generalized ZMP
(GZMP) as a method of handling some of these is-
sues, such as the hand reaction forces generated from
contact with the environment [67.66]. Researchers
have developed methods that directly make use of
the six-dimensional force/torque acting on the robot
at the hands, which can be sensed with conventional
force/torque sensors placed at the wrists [67.67]. Re-
searchers have also developed specialized methods for
generating stable robot motion while an object is being
manipulated [67.46, 65, 68–70].
Fig. 67.22 ASIMO and artiﬁcial landmarks on the ﬂoor
Fig. 67.23 Plane segment ﬁnder for detecting traversable ﬂoor
area

Part G | 67.4
1800
Part G
Robots and Humans
t = 18 s
t = 21 s
t = 12 s
t = 15 s
t = 6 s
t = 9 s
t = 0 s
t = 3 s
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
g)
h)
Fig. 67.24 (a–h) Lifting an object while moving the waist
to compensate for the load (after [67.71])
Carrying an Object
In a manner analogous to the previously described
methods, coarse motions that do not consider the hand
reaction forces can be modiﬁed [67.65, 68, 71, 72]. Fig-
ure 67.24 shows an experimental result of carrying an
object that weighs 8 kg [67.71]. Based on measure-
ments of the hand reaction force, the position of the
waist is modiﬁed to compensate for the load and main-
tain stability.
Pushing an Object
As another example of using force sensing to adapt
behavior, consider the problem of pushing a large ob-
ject placed on the ﬂoor. For such a task, if the gait
a)
b)
t = 0 s
t = 10 s
c)
d)
t = 12 s
t = 14 s
e)
f)
t = 18 s
t = 22 s
g)
h)
t = 32 s
t = 42 s
Fig. 67.25 (a–h) Example of pushing manipulation and
cooperation (after [67.46])
pattern is determined before the robot actually moves,
the robot may not stay balanced if the weight of the
object or the friction coefﬁcient between the object
and the ﬂoor is different from the predicted values.
To address this problem, the gait pattern can be adap-
tively changed depending on the output of a force
sensor at the end of the arms in order to handle
changes in the object’s weight and the friction coefﬁ-
cient [67.46].
Figure 67.25 shows an experimental result for this
approach [67.46]. In the experiment, the table weighs
about 10 kg. Even though the motion of the table is dis-
turbed externally during the experiment, the robot stays
balanced by adaptively changing its gait pattern based
on the measured forces.

Humanoids
67.5 Whole-Body Activities
1801
Part G | 67.5
67.5 Whole-Body Activities
The two previous sections have focused on humanoid
locomotion and manipulation separately. This section
outlines whole-body motions that require coordinated
control of arms and legs to perform various tasks,
such as carrying a bulky objects, climbing a lad-
der, or going through narrow spaces with contact
supports on the environment. Humanoid motion is
characterized by their redundancy and underactuation
(Chaps. 10 and 17). Unlike ﬁxed industrial robots, it
has a ﬂoating base (usually it is set at the pelvis)
that can only be controlled through the leg locomo-
tion or multiple contact motion involving arms and
legs. It is therefore essential how to deﬁne the de-
sired task and to generate the motion that achieves it.
Since humanoids have a redundant structure, a gen-
eral approach is ﬁrst to generate coarse motion, and
then to transform it into a whole-body coordinated
joint trajectory that is executed by a controller main-
taining the stability through sensor feedback, as il-
lustrated in Fig. 67.26. The ﬁrst half of this section
addresses the ﬁrst two components of this general
approach.
The latter half of this section deals with issues re-
lated to various complex whole-body motion that the
basic conversion methods addressed in Sect. 67.5.2
could not always resolve. Resolution of various con-
current tasks, including those expressed as inequality
and dynamic constraints is presented in Sect. 67.5.3.
This framework can be applied to a reaching task
while keeping the visibility of the object, as well as
footstep planning. Finally, motion generation including
multiple contacts is introduced as an advanced topic
in Sect. 67.5.4. A wide variety of its application is
expected to extend the activity ﬁelds of humanoids
in cluttered environments where the humanoid should
maintain its balance by supporting its body on non-
coplanar contact points.
a)  Generating a rough whole-body motion
b)  Transforming it to a dynamic belancing motion
c)  Stabilizing it with sensory feedback during execution
Fig. 67.26 Overview of motion-generation
stages for
a balancing robot
67.5.1 Coarse Whole-Body Motion
There are several ways to generate coarse humanoid
motion:
1. Using motion capture system
2. Using graphical user interface (GUI)
3. Using automated motion planning
4. Using abstract task speciﬁcation.
Using Motion Capture System
As humanoid robot has a human-like structure, a natural
and common way of motion generation is using mea-
sured human motion. Motion retargeting from recorded
human motion to digital characters is a well-studied
area in computer animation. Typically a human subject
performs actions while wearing easily detected mark-
ers on his or her body. The motion of these markers
is recorded by cameras placed in the room, and soft-
ware then infers the 3-D positions of these markers over
time. A number of studies have been reported to convert
the capture motions to humanoid whole-body motions
through learning [67.73] and optimization [67.74, 75].
Figure 67.27 shows an example: the captured mo-
tions of a woman performing a Japanese traditional
dance [67.76] that the performance in Fig. 67.4 is based
on. Kinematic similarity allows using the captured
motion as a reference for a humanoid’s whole-body mo-
tion, by computing the corresponding joint angles from
forming virtual links with several markers. However,
due to dynamic differences, such as mass distributions
and torque generation, captured motions are generally
not stable nor feasible when applied to a humanoid. It
is therefore necessary to adapt them to humanoid body
as explained in Sect. 67.5.2.
Using GUI
Tools such as those used in character animation for
computer graphics can also be used to design move-
ments for humanoid robots. If the designer were forced
to control each of the many degrees of freedom inde-
pendently or to takes care of the balance, the process
would be tedious and inefﬁcient. One solution that en-
ables non robotics expert to design robot motion is
key-pose based approach on GUI, which allows the de-
signer to deﬁne the key-poses of the desired motion with
the help of inverse kinematics of the end effectors. The
interface take care of the interpolation and dynamic bal-
ance compensation so that the input motion is feasible
for the humanoid as explained later in Sect. 67.5.2. Fig-
ure 67.28 illustrates the overview of a GUI interface
developed as Choreonoid for this purpose [67.77, 78].

Part G | 67.5
1802
Part G
Robots and Humans
Fig. 67.27 A sequence of captured motion of dancing (after [67.76])
Using Automated Motion Planning
The previous two methods are based on mainly joint
angles from a motion capture system or a GUI. If the
purpose of the robot motion is going from one con-
ﬁguration to another without collisions and how the
humanoid moves does not really matter, automated mo-
tion planning can provide efﬁcient solutions (Chaps. 36
and 47).
Fast path-planning techniques such as rapidly-
exploring random trees (RRT) can compute basic
collision-free postures with static balance [67.79, 80] or
walking paths [67.81] automatically with a simpliﬁed
model. Figure 67.29 illustrates a humanoid carrying an
object whose lower body is modeled by a bounding box.
Given geometric models of the humanoid and the envi-
ronment, initial and goal conﬁgurations, the planning
system automatically searches for a path free of colli-
sions at both upper and lower bodies. This coarse path
can be converted into dynamically stable whole-body
motion a walking pattern generator including upper-
body motion compensation as described in Sect. 67.5.2.
For further reading on humanoid motion planning, the
Fig. 67.28 A motion chore-
ography tool working within
the Choreonoid framework.
In this tool, whole body
motions of biped humanoid
robots can be created with
key-frame editing simi-
lar to computer graphics
(CG) character animations
(after [67.78])
readers are referred to a book dedicated to this sub-
ject [67.82].
Using Abstract Task Specifications
Tasks for a humanoid to execute are not always speci-
ﬁed in the joint space, but often in the workspace. For
instance, if the humanoid wants to grasp an object on
the table or ﬂoor, this task is expressed as the hand
position and orientation in Cartesian space [67.83–87].
Another example is teleoperation: it is easier for the
operator to guide an operational point, such as the end-
effector or the head of the humanoid, rather than to
give a whole-body joint conﬁguration [67.88]. These
tasks are represented in an abstract way by a smaller
number of DOF than the redundant structure of hu-
manoid. Figure 67.30 shows a motion of bimanual
manipulation based on abstract representation of mo-
tion as a sequence of attractor points acting in the task
space [67.89].
On the other hand, other constraints such as balanc-
ing or joint limits should also be taken into account
to generate a whole-body motion to achieve the task.

Humanoids
67.5 Whole-Body Activities
1803
Part G | 67.5
O
Σ0
z
q
Ro(Xo, Θo)
r (x, y, θ)
y
x
Fig. 67.29 Humanoid modeled by rectangle box with
a bar. In the ﬁrst stage the geometric and kinematic path
planner generates collision-free path for the 9-DOF sys-
tem including robot waist on the plane (3-DOF) and object
(6-DOF)
A mechanism is therefore necessary that derives a hu-
manoid positioning as well as a whole-body target
posture from the abstract goal speciﬁcation. Whereas
the previously introduced GUI including automatic
balancing is useful for cases with large free space,
cluttered environments require integration of search
techniques to compute a valid whole-body posture from
the task [67.90, 91]. Motion generation for multiple
tasks and constraints is later discussed in Sect. 67.5.3.
67.5.2 Generating Dynamically Stable
Motions
The methods presented in Sect. 67.5.1 can be useful
when generating coarse motions for a humanoid robot,
such as dance performance, manipulating or walking.
However, for some of these methods the motions gen-
erated will not take into account the dynamic stability
of the robot, and may result in the robot falling over.
This subsection presents some approaches for con-
Fig. 67.30 Bimanual manipulation by humanoid robot ASIMO based on a motion representation using attractor dynam-
ics in task space (after [67.89])
verting coarse motions to dynamically-stable motions,
dynamic balancing algorithms and task-balance func-
tional decomposition. In the former approach, all the
joints including upper body are involved for whole-
body balancing based on the reference motion, like
kicking motion that needs upper body motion compen-
sation. The latter uses mainly lower body for balancing
or walking while upper body takes care of the desired
tasks such as manipulation.
Dynamic Balancing
A framework called autobalancer is one of the pioneer-
ing studies for the dynamic whole-body balancing for
humanoids. It all joint angles at every sample in time
by solving a quadratic programming (QP) optimization
problem in order to convert a given motion to a balanced
one [67.92]. This method can be effective for a motion
in which static balancing is dominant, such as when
the humanoid is standing. The autobalancer calculates
a whole-body motion ﬁrst by ﬁxing the center of gravity
(COG) on the vertical axis which passes through a point
in the support polygon of the humanoid. Then it keeps
inertia moments around the COG at acceptable values
in order to satisfy the balancing conditions. This tech-
nique was combined with a fast sampling-based motion
planner to derive a dynamically motion by exploring
conﬁgurations with balance constraints [67.79].
Resolved momentum control (RMC) [67.93] is
a framework for whole-body control based on the linear
and angular momentum of the entire robot. The robot is
regarded as a single rigid body whose linear and an-
gular momentum is to be controlled. At each point in
time, this framework uses least squares to ﬁnd joint ve-
locities that will achieve the desired linear and angular
momentum of the robot. Elements of the momentum
can also be left unspeciﬁed as free variables, which
is often done in practice with elements of the angular
momentum. In addition to elements of the momentum,
resolved momentum control requires that desired ve-
locities for the feet be speciﬁed. This method has been
applied to teleoperation [67.88] or stable reaching or
kicking motions [67.93]. Other methods like dynamics

Part G | 67.5
1804
Part G
Robots and Humans
a) Initial position
c)
d)
e)
f)
g)
b) Goal position
Obstacle 3
Obstacle 1
Obstacle 2
Fig.67.31a–g A 3-D collision-free motion for bar-carrying task by humanoid robot HRP-2 from starting (a) an intial
position to ﬁnal conﬁguration (goal position) (b) using whole-body motion (after [67.81]). The robot rotates the bar
horizontally to make the bar go through a gap between poles whose distance is shorter than the of the bar (c–e). By
making use of the concave part of the carried object (f) for 3-D collision avoidance, it arrives at the goal conﬁguration
with another avoidance motion (g) (
VIDEO 594 ,
VIDEO 598 )
a) Previous
key frame
Motion
a') to b')
Motion
b') to c')
a')
c')
c) Next
key frame
Waist trajectory
adjustment
Horizontal waist
position is modified!
b) Key frame being edited
.....
.....
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
b')
Dynamically balanced global body motion
Fig. 67.32 Waist trajectory adjustment, which is automatically pro-
cessed immediately after every time key poses are modiﬁed. As
a result, horizontal waist positions of key poses are slightly modi-
ﬁed and a dynamically balanced motion is obtained (after [67.77])
ﬁlter that makes reference motions dynamically feasible
by a humanoid [67.94], upper-body motion compensa-
tion for Waseda bipedal humanoid (WABIAN) [67.95]
have also been proposed as this type of approach.
Task-Balance Functional Decomposition
In this approach, dynamic stability is maintained dur-
ing whole-body motion based on pattern generation or
a balance compensation by the legs to maintain the
ZMP inside the foot support area, while upper body is
in charge of speciﬁed tasks such motions as manipula-
tion or designed movement.
An iterative two-stage motion planning method has
been proposed for a humanoid to perform manipulation
and locomotion at the same time [67.81]. At the ﬁrst
stage, the motion planner generates the upper-body mo-
tion with a walking path of the bounding box of the
lower body as in Fig. 67.29. The second stage over-
lays the desired upper-body motion on the dynamically
stable walking motions generated by a dynamic walk-
ing pattern generator based on preview control of ZMP
for a linear inverted pendulum model [67.96] (Chap. 48
and Sect. 67.4). This upper-body motion during walk-
ing induces errors in resulting ZMP from the reference,
which may make the humanoid instable. By apply-
ing the preview control again to this ZMP error the
necessary compensation motion can be computed as
a horizontal offset on the waist position. If the resulting

Humanoids
67.5 Whole-Body Activities
1805
Part G | 67.5
whole-body motion is not collision-free, the planning
process goes back to the ﬁrst stage to reshape and
this procedure is repeated until a valid motion is ob-
tained. Figure 67.31,
VIDEO 594
and
VIDEO 598
show the resulting collision-free manipulation motion
of a bar-shaped object in an environment populated with
obstacles.
Lower-body motion compensation for dynamic
balance is also used for GUI-based motion design-
ing [67.77]. The GUI accepts a sequence of key-poses
for the desired motion as the input and interpolates be-
tween them to compute the whole-body motion of the
humanoid. Since the generated motion is not dynam-
ically stable in general, both the key poses and the
interpolated motion are adjusted to be dynamically bal-
anced by applying the waist trajectory adjustment in
such a way that the trajectory of the ZMP from body
motion is always inside the foot support area. The ad-
justment only modiﬁes the horizontal waist position of
the key poses and the interpolated ones, for the adjusted
motion to be as close as the original one (Fig. 67.32).
The adjustment is automatically and immediately done
every time a user has ﬁnished an edit operation so that
the user can see the resulting motion.
67.5.3 Generating Whole-Body Motions
with Various Tasks
The main purpose of the methods in previous section
was to make the given coarse motion dynamically sta-
ble. One can think of a case the task is only given in an
abstract manner, for instance reaching the end-effector
in speciﬁed position and orientation in workspace, or
aligning a camera axis in a direction. This section takes
a step forward in order to generate automatically the
motion to achieve the speciﬁed tasks by taking into ac-
count such constraints as balance, foot positions or joint
limits at the same time. Generalized inverse kinematics
technique with task priority and its extension is utilized
as a key tool for local whole-body motion generation
(Chap. 10).
The main particularities of humanoid robot from the
viewpoint of inverse kinematics are the following: ne-
cessity of dynamic balancing, changing ﬁxed root joint
and ﬂoating base frame. Those issues should be dealt
with appropriately depending on the task of the robot.
Some extensions for more complex tasks including in-
equality constraints, footstep planning and dynamics
are also mentioned at the last part of this section.
Dynamic Balancing and Walking
Some examples are shown the whole-body motion
generation based on task priority generalized inverse
kinematics. As shown in Chap. 10, this framework ac-
complishes ﬁrst the task with the highest priority and
then tries to achieve those with lower priority at the best
in the null space of the higher-priority tasks.
Tasks are speciﬁed
locally as a
velocity in
workspace, such as hand velocity to reach the target.
The balance constraint can therefore be expressed as
the velocity of the center of mass (COM). The ZMP-
based pattern generator has the advantage that it outputs
the velocity of the COM of dynamically stable walking
motion from the reference ZMP trajectory, which can
be easily integrated into this inverse kinematics frame-
work by using COM Jacobian [67.97]. Figure 67.33
shows the whole-body reaching motion including a step
to take a ball localized by a vision system [67.85].
The high priority is assigned to COM and foot mo-
tion to avoid falling in this example. As can be seen,
the legs are used not only for stepping but also bend-
ing to reach a lower position in a manner coordinated
with the upper body. The left arm moves backwards
as the result of balancing task. Whole-body motions
for manipulation of daily-life tools [67.84] or object
pushing/lifting [67.98–100], and also for self-collision
avoidance [67.101] have been implemented also based
on a similar framework.
Another
example
is
given
in
Fig.
67.34,
VIDEO 595
and
VIDEO 599
where the humanoid
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
Fig. 67.33 (a–f) A whole-body grasping motion generated
through task-priority generalized inverse kinematics (af-
ter [67.85]). Upper and lower bodies coordinate to achieve
the desired grasping task while making a step and main-
taining the balance

Part G | 67.5
1806
Part G
Robots and Humans
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
Fig.67.34a–f Experiments of whole-body pivoting manipulation.
Starting from the initial position (a) with obstacle at right-hand
side, the humanoid robot manipulates the object backwards away
from the wall (b). After switching motion direction to forward
(c), the robot continues to manipulate the object to the goal po-
sition by avoiding the obstacle (the hanger) (d–f) (
VIDEO 595 ,
VIDEO 599 )
R
L
Fig. 67.35 Footstep planning modeled as a whole-body inverse
kinematic problem (after [67.102]) (
VIDEO 596 ,
VIDEO 600 )
execute pivoting manipulation to carry a bulky object
without lifting [67.86]. In this case, a coarse path of
the object towards its goal position is ﬁst planned
to compute the trajectory of the hands that perform
the manipulation. Then foot positions are determined
along the object path, from which the COM trajectory
is derived using the dynamic walking pattern generator.
Those tasks are provided to the inverse kinematics
to generate the coordinated arm and leg motion for
this complex manipulation. In addition to the dynamic
balance, the change of the root joint is also considered
to compute the whole-body motion when the support
leg changes during walking. The same framework has
been applied to a motion for catching a moving object
during walking where the task of visual tracking by
the end-effector is integrated with dynamic walking
motion [67.103].
Floating base frame of a humanoid sometimes
brings difﬁculties in determining the whole-body con-
ﬁguration from a speciﬁc abstract task speciﬁed in
workspace. In the methods mentioned above, the goal
conﬁguration is derived as a result of repeated compu-
tation of local generalized inverse kinematics. However,
there are often cases where goal whole-body conﬁg-
urations is ﬁrst needed to be used popular motion
planning techniques searching in conﬁguration space
such as sampling-based planning. Some methods that
derive the goal conﬁguration based on inverse kinemat-
ics can be useful for this purpose [67.90, 91, 104] or
a precomputed reachability map that characterizes the
capacity of reaching in discretized workspace around
the robot [67.105, 106].
Extensions for Complex Tasks
The whole-body motion generation with tasks can be
extended to cope with more complex tasks such as
stepping and those expressed as inequality or dynamic
constraints.
One extension particular to humanoid is incor-
porating stepping in the framework of whole-body
generalized inverse kinematics. Kanoun et al. [67.102]
introduced an augmented robot structure by introduc-
ing virtual planar links attached to a foot that represents
footsteps as illustrated in Fig. 67.35,
VIDEO 596
and
VIDEO 600 . This modeling makes it possible to
solve the footstep planning as a problem of inverse
kinematics, and also to determine the ﬁnal whole-
body conﬁguration. After planning the footsteps, the
dynamically stable whole-body motion including walk-
ing can be computed by using the method presented
earlier.
Task-priority generalized inverse kinematics for re-
dundant robots in Sect. 10.3 usually models tasks as
equalities so that the operational points can achieve the
desired velocity. However, tasks are sometimes given as
inequalities: keeping the hand out of some area to avoid
collisions or robot view obstruction, respecting joint
limits, or maintaining the COM inside the foot support
area. Inequality tasks have usually been transformed
into more restrictive equality constraints through po-
tential ﬁelds. A method for extending the task-priority
inverse kinematics for those inequality tasks is pro-
posed to remove this limitation based on a sequence of
QP optimization [67.87]. This method searches for the
optimal sets for the sequence of QPs by minimizing the
error to the desired equality tasks in such a way that
inequality ones can also be satisﬁed at a desired prior-
ity. This method allows the humanoid to perform such

Humanoids
67.5 Whole-Body Activities
1807
Part G | 67.5
Initial posture and contacts
Contact
BFP
Sequence
of contact-
sets
Environment contact areas
Robot contact areas
Potential field
Posture
Generator
Robot geometric robot
Environment
geometric model
Posture cost function
Set of
contacts
Posture
Termination condition
Fig. 67.36 Framework of contact
motion planner composed of contact
best-ﬁrst-planner (BFP) and posture
generator (after [67.107])
Fig. 67.37 A sequence of planned
whole-body motion including multiple
contacts on a irregular terrain
(after [67.108])
a task of reaching its arm towards an object on the ﬂoor
without obstructing its view.
This approach based on cascaded QP can be gen-
eralized to generate whole-body motions including
dynamic equality and inequality tasks [67.109]. In
addition to inverse kinematics considered so far, in-
verse dynamics is also integrated to the task-priority
whole-body motion generation framework. By using
this method, the dynamic balance can be addressed
directly without converting the dynamic ZMP con-
straint into COM velocity via a pattern generator. This
approach assumes a torque-controlled humanoid as op-
posed to position controlled ones that are often the case
for platform currently used. However, dynamic whole-
body motion generation with various tasks is being
actively studied owing to not only recent progress of
robot hardware [67.110] but also increasing interests
on more complex tasks including multiple contacts pre-
sented in the next section.
67.5.4 Generating Motions
Including Multiple Contacts
The whole-body motions presented so far basically sup-
poses only the contacts between the humanoid’s feet
and the ﬂoor. Looking at our daily life however, con-
tacts other than with feet occurs often, for example pass
through narrow spaces or to support the body when
reaching a distant place on the desk. Since a humanoid
is high afﬁnity to environments designed for humans,
its application ﬁelds could be expanded by exploiting
the contacts as much as possible rather than by avoid-
ing them as is often the case in motion planning. This
section addresses planning and control of whole-body
motions with multiple contacts that have been inten-
sively studied in recent years. The role of planner is to
derive a global sequence of conﬁguration with multiple
contacts to reach the goal, whereas the controller gen-
erates dynamically stable motions to transit from one
contact state to another.
Motion Planning for Multiple Contacts
Multicontact nongaited have been proposed that are ap-
plicable to legged robots including humanoids [67.107,
108, 112]. By deﬁning a stance as a ﬁnite set of contacts
between the robot and the environment, the planner
generates a sequence of stances that can reach the
goal. During the planning, possible transitions from
a stance are explored by sampling another stance with
a feasible and stable robot conﬁguration, as shown in
Fig. 67.36 [67.107]. Figure 67.37 shows a resultant lo-
comotion planned using this planning method [67.108].
A more generalized framework is proposed to deal
with multirobot and multiobject systems [67.113]. This

Part G | 67.5
1808
Part G
Robots and Humans
Fig. 67.38 Dynamic multicontact
motion generated through global
trajectory optimization (after [67.111],
VIDEO 597 )
generalization allows for a common description and
treatment of locomotion and manipulation problems,
either for a single robot or for multiple collaborating
robots.
The output of the planner is a sequence of stati-
cally stable contact stances that can be executed through
quasi-static motions. In order to generate fast but dy-
namically stable motions, a global optimization ap-
proach has been proposed [67.111]. This method pa-
rameterizes joint trajectory by B-Spline function to
convert the inﬁnite trajectory problem to semi-inﬁnite
one so that optimization technique can be applied. The
whole-body motion is generated through nonlinear op-
timization to minimize square torque and execution
time, by taking into account such constraints as joint
torque limits and dynamic multiple contact stability. As
a result, the generated motion is much faster than quasi-
static ones. An example of resultant motion is shown in
Fig. 67.38 and
VIDEO 597 . Trajectory optimization
approach can also be applied for lifting of a very heavy
object by generating a weight-lifting motion by always
respecting physical constraints [67.114].
Even though the feasibility of multicontact motions
like in Fig. 67.38 have been validated with experiments,
the optimization process is time-consuming and cannot
cope with errors or disturbances during execution. It is
therefore necessary to build a controller that ensures ex-
ecution of multicontact whole-body motions.
Stability Measure for Motion
with Multiple Contacts
Before discussing controller, it is worth mentioning
ﬁrst dynamic stability measure for non coplanar con-
tacts and its usage. Although the ZMP is well-known
dynamic stability criteria, it can only be applied to
contacts on a ﬂat plane. Stability margin for mobile
robots [67.118] is only applicable for static gait for
legged robots. A generalized version of ZMP (GZMP)
Fig. 67.39 Walking on a rough terrain using a support of
arm on a handrail (after [67.115])
has therefore been proposed [67.119] by extending the
ZMP by considering interaction forces other than ﬂoor-
feet contacts. The stable region for multiple contacts
can be obtained by considering the inﬁnitesimal dis-
placement and the moment about the edges of the
convex hull of the supporting points. Hirukawa et al.
proposed another criterion called contact wrench sum
(CWS), which is the sum of the gravity and the inertia
wrench applied to the COG of the robot. The humanoid
is stable if it is inside the polyhedral convex cone of the
contact wrench between the feet of a robot and its envi-
ronment [67.115, 120]. Based on this criterion, walking
Fig. 67.40 Real-time simulation of a multicontact behav-
ior with user-enabled interactive control of the robot’s right
hand. A virtual linkage model is overlaid capturing the in-
ternal force behaviors acting between supporting bodies
(after [67.116])
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.67.41a–d A digital ﬁgure climing a ladder by using whole-
body controller with task priority with multiple contacts (af-
ter [67.117])

Humanoids
67.6 Morphological Communication
1809
Part G | 67.6
Fig. 67.42 Snapshots from multicontact planning and control of HRP-2 ingress in a car (after [67.121]). From the initial
posture, supported on the steering handle and the seat by an arm, the robot ﬁnally succeeds in entering the car
on a rough terrain by supporting a handrail has been
performed (Fig. 67.39).
Controlling Whole-Body
with Multiple Contacts
The execution of the multicontact motions presented
earlier by a humanoid requires the control based on
sensor feedback to absorb unexpected disturbance or
modeling errors.
Khatib et al. extended their framework of opera-
tional space approach that enables a humanoid robot to
perform motions that simultaneously meet prioritized
objectives in existence of multiple contacts [67.116,
117]. A torque-based approach for the control of inter-
nal forces is suggested and integrated into the frame-
work for whole-body prioritized multitasking, thus
enabling the uniﬁed control of COM maneuvers, oper-
ational tasks, and internal-force behavior (Fig. 67.40).
Figure 67.41 shows an example of multicontact be-
havior on a real-time simulator. Hyon et al. proposed
another approach of passivity-based controller that can
adapt to unknown external forces applied to arbitrary
contact points without sensing the contact forces by us-
ing a torque-controlled robot [67.122].
Another real-time controller based on linear QP
optimization has been proposed for whole-body mo-
tion with multiple contacts [67.121, 123]. The motion is
constrained by the free-ﬂoating whole-body dynamics
of the humanoid robot without using a reduced model
such as inverted pendulum since the motions we aim
at are more general than bipedal walking. The opti-
mization process also incorporates such constraints as
nonsliding condition, actuation torque limits, contact
forces within friction cones, and avoidance of undesir-
able self-collisions and collisions with the environment.
Taking a target contact stance and also necessary sen-
sory information as its input, the controller can compute
feedback control commands to execute the whole-body
motion with multiple contacts in real time, on less than
100 Hz control loop. Figure 67.42 shows a simulation
result of complex motion of a humanoid entering into
a car based on the control method.
67.6 Morphological Communication
Humans evaluate each others’ state through body pos-
ture and movement. It is quite natural to extend this
form of communication to include robots that share our
morphology.
67.6.1 Expressive Morphology and Behavior
Humanoids can communicate with people through ex-
pressive morphology and behavior. As with people,
humanoid robots integrate communicative and noncom-
municative functionality. For example, the arms and
hands of a robot can reach and grasp, but also point
and gesture. Heads for humanoid robots are an espe-
cially important example of these overlapping roles,
and have had an important impact on humanoid robotics
and robotics in general [67.124].
The head of a humanoid robot has two main func-
tions:

To orient directional sensors as needed for the pur-
poses of perception, while leaving the main body
free to meet other constraints such as maintaining
balance and gait. Cameras and sometimes micro-
phones are usefully oriented in this way.

To strike expressive poses, along with the rest of
the body. Even if a robot head is not intended to be
expressive, it will be interpreted as being so by hu-
mans – particularly as a cue to the robot’s presumed
locus of visual attention. It is also possible to de-
liberately engineer an approximate face that can be
an important line of communication with humans
(Chap. 72).
Locus of Attention
Eyes can be one of the most expressive components of
a humanoid robot. For humans, eye movements are both
expressive and important for sensing. Humanoid robots

Part G | 67.6
1810
Part G
Robots and Humans
have the option to factor these two roles by moving
eyes that are only for display, and using sensors placed
elsewhere. Most humanoid robots, however, use head-
mounted servoed cameras that play both expressive and
sensory roles. These mechanisms exhibit different de-
grees of biological realism, for example, the Kismet
head captured many of the expressive components of
human eye movements, while having a nonhuman-like
camera arrangement that simpliﬁed some forms of per-
ception (Fig. 67.43).
Many humanoid robots use biologically inspired,
foveated vision systems, which provide a wide ﬁeld
of view with low detail, combined with a narrow ﬁeld
of view with high detail (Fig. 67.44). With appropri-
ate control strategies to ﬁxate the narrow ﬁeld of view
on task-salient regions detected in the wide ﬁeld of
view, these robots achieve a practical compromise be-
tween resolution and ﬁeld of view. Additionally, the
conﬁguration of the eyes communicates the robot’s lo-
cus of attention in an intuitive way. Many systems use
four cameras, with a narrow- and wide-angle camera
for each of the robot’s eyes, but some researchers have
also used special-purpose space-variant cameras mod-
eled after the space-variant receptor densities in the
human eye [67.125].
The eye movements of some humanoids are mod-
eled explicitly after human eye movements. An exam-
ple of a model of this kind is shown in Fig. 67.45. These
Eye tilt
Left eye pan
Camera with
wide field of
view
Camera with
narrow field
of view
Right eye pan
Fig. 67.43 On Kismet, foveal vision was implemented
using cameras in the eyes, and peripheral vision used unob-
trusive cameras on the head (after [67.124]). This achieved
good expression of locus of attention, while simplifying
the process of differentiating egomotion from motion of
objects (since the head moved less frequently and more
slowly than the eyes). This is an example of a partial de-
coupling of expressive and functional concerns, showing
that many different levels of humanoid ﬁdelity are possible
bio-inspired approaches to active vision typically have
four types of visual behavior:
Saccades. These are high-velocity movements to ﬁx-
ate a new target or catch up with a fast-moving target.
From a control point of view, these movements are bal-
listic (at least in humans) – once initiated, they continue
without responding to changing stimuli.
Smooth Pursuit. These are movements to continu-
ously track a moving target. They apply at low veloc-
ities. These movements respond constantly to visual
feedback about the target’s location. A fast-moving tar-
get may also trigger small saccades.
VOR and OKR. The vestibulo-ocular reﬂex and optoki-
netic response work to stabilize the direction of gaze in
the presence of movement of the head and body, using
inertial and visual information respectively.
Vergence. This movement drives the relative angle of
the two eyes so that the same target is centered in both.
This only applies to two-eyed systems that have this
freedom of motion. For conventional stereo algorithms,
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.67.44a–d The heads of humanoid robots come in
many forms. A popular arrangement is to have two cam-
eras per eye, as a crude approximation of foveal and
peripheral vision in humans. (a) Biomimetic oculomo-
tor control investigated on DB (after [67.126]). (b) Cog’s
head (after [67.127]). (c) The double-camera arrangement
can be arranged in a less-double-barreled appearance (af-
ter [67.128]; see Ude et al. [67.128] for more examples and
an analysis) ATR; Humanoid head developed by ATR and
SARCOS. (d) The Infanoid robot (after [67.129])

Humanoids
67.6 Morphological Communication
1811
Part G | 67.6
Shutdown by saccade
Saccade generator
–
–
+
–1
1
s
1
s
1
s
1
s
1
s
s
s
s
Δ
E·
e·
E·
x·ˆ
x·–
x–
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
b
+
D
Control
Learning
Learning
Predictor
Target velocity
prediction
Target state
estimation
Inverse
model
controller
a
D
Head
angular
velocity
Target
angular
velocity
+
–
Target
angular
position
Head
angular
position
Shutdown by saccade
Oculomotor
plant
P
Fig. 67.45 A biomimetic control
model (after [67.130]), that integrates
saccading, smooth pursuit, the
vestibular-ocular reﬂex (VOR), and
the optokinetic response (OKR).
Smooth pursuit and VOR/OKR
commands are summed, with periodic
corrections to errors in position made
by saccades
vergence is a disadvantage, since the algorithms are
simplest when the cameras remain parallel. Other al-
gorithms are possible, but it is currently quite common
not to use vergence.
67.6.2 Interpreting Human Expression
The interpretation of human expression is essential
for many forms of natural human communication that
could be valuable for humanoid robots.
Posture and Expression
The recognition and interpretation of the location and
pose of humans is important, since humanoids are often
expected to work in human environments. Algorithms
for the following functions have been incorporated in
various humanoids:

Person ﬁnding

Person identiﬁcation

Gesture recognition

Face pose estimation.
ASIMO has used these functions to perform a proto-
typical reception task as shown in Fig. 67.46. The robot
can ﬁnd and identify a person, then recognize gestures
such as bye-bye, come here, and stop, which are utilized
for performing reception tasks. In general, such func-
Fig. 67.46 ASIMO recognizing a pointing gesture during
a reception task

Part G | 67.6
1812
Part G
Robots and Humans
tions on a humanoid are not yet robust, and are active
areas of research.
Speech Recognition
Speech is a natural, hands-free mode of communica-
tion between humans, and potentially between robots
and humans. Speech recognition is a popular inter-
face utilized for commanding a humanoid, and many
off-the-shelf packages are now available. However the
use of microphones embedded in the robot is prob-
lematic, because general-purpose speech recognition
software is usually optimized for utterances captured
by a microphone that is close to the speaker. In order
to achieve sufﬁcient recognition performance in natural
interaction situations between a humanoid and a hu-
man new methods for speech recognition are being
investigated. These methods compensate for sources
of noise, such as the robot’s motors and air ﬂow in
the environment, by using multiple microphones and
multimodal cues [67.131]. However, at the time of writ-
ing researchers often circumvent these issues by using
a headset, lavalier, or handheld microphones.
Auditory Scene Analysis
In order to attain more-sophisticated human–robot in-
teraction, researchers have been developing methods
for computational auditory scene analysis on a hu-
manoid robot. The objective of this research is to under-
stand an arbitrary sound mixture including nonspeech
sounds and voiced speech, obtained by microphones
embedded in the robot. Beyond speech recognition, this
also involves sound-source separation and localization.
As for sound recognition, sound categories such as
coughing, laughing, beating by hand, adult’s voice, and
child’s voice have been shown to be recognizable using
maximum-likelihood estimation with Gaussian mixture
models. This function has been utilized during interac-
tions between the HRP-2 and a human [67.132].
Multimodal Perception
Sound-source separation can be achieved by beam
forming. In order to perform beamforming effectively,
sound-source localization is essential. Vision can be uti-
lized for ﬁnding the talker within the ﬁeld of view. Hara
et al. used a camera and an eight-channel microphone
array embedded in the head of HRP-2, and succeeded
in speech recognition in the presence of multiple sound
sources by using sound source separation [67.133]. Fig-
ure 67.47 shows a scenario in which speech recognition
is taking place with television (TV) sound playing in
the background.
When integrated with speech recognition, vision
can also help resolve the ambiguities of speech. For in-
stance, the ambiguity of demonstrative pronouns such
as this or that can sometimes be resolved by recog-
nizing pointing gestures. Similarly, the face and gaze
direction can be used to realize communication via
eye contact, so that the humanoid only replies when
a human is looking at it and talking to it [67.132]. Mul-
timodal interaction with these functions has also been
demonstrated by HRP-2, as shown in Fig. 67.48.
67.6.3 Physical Interaction
and Developmental Robotics
Humanoid robots typically use methods for percep-
tion and interaction that are established in ﬁelds such
as computer vision and dialogue systems. There is
also an emerging research ﬁeld called developmental
robotics or epigenetic robotics in which human-like per-
ception and interaction abilities are obtained through
physical interaction with the real environments includ-
ing humans [67.134–136]. In developmental robotics,
researchers aim at studying the developmental mecha-
nisms, architectures and constraints that allow life-long
and open-ended learning of new skills and new knowl-
edge in embodied machines. Much of the research in
this ﬁeld utilizes humanoid robots, such as the iCub
shown in Fig. 67.36. As in human children, learning
is expected to be cumulative and of progressively in-
Fig. 67.47 HRP-2 recognizing speech with background
noises (TV sound)
Fig. 67.48 HRP-2 recognizing face and gaze direction for
communication via eye contact

Humanoids
References
1813
Part G | 67
creasing complexity, and to result from self-exploration
of the world in combination with social interaction.
The typical methodological approach consists in start-
ing from theories of human development elaborated in
ﬁelds such as developmental psychology, cognitive sci-
ence, neuroscience, developmental and evolutionary bi-
ology, and linguistics, then to formalize and implement
them in robots. The experimentation of those models
in robots allows researchers to confront them with real-
ity, and as a consequence developmental robotics also
provides feedback and novel hypothesis on theories of
human development.
67.7 Conclusions and Further Reading
Because of the integrative nature of humanoid robotics,
this chapter has avoided details and formalisms and lib-
erally cross-referenced other chapters within the hand-
book that can provide the reader with deeper coverage
of many of the areas of robotics on which humanoid
robots depend. Additionally, this chapter references
work within the humanoid robotics community and re-
lated communities.
Humanoid robotics is an enormous endeavor.
The emulation of human-level abilities in a human-
like robot serves as a grand challenge for robotics,
with signiﬁcant cultural ramiﬁcations. The motiva-
tions for humanoid robotics are as deep as they
are diverse. From the earliest cave drawings, human-
ity has sought to represent itself. Robotics is one
of the most recent mediums for this ongoing fas-
cination. Besides this deep societal motivation, hu-
manoid robots offer unique opportunities for human–
robot interaction, and integration into human-centric
settings.
Over the last decade, the number of humanoid
robots developed for research has grown dramatically,
as has the research community. Humanoid robots have
already gained a foothold in the marketplace as robots
for entertainment and research (e.g., the Robo-One
competition and the NAO from Aldebaran). Given
the special properties of humanoid robots, they seem
likely to further increase in number as their capabil-
ities improve and their costs go down. Robots with
human characteristics, and technologies related to hu-
manoid robotics, also appear destined to proliferate.
Will human-scale, legged robots with human form be-
come commonplace, as so often imagined by science
ﬁction? Only time will tell.
Video-References
VIDEO 594
3-D collision-free motion combining locomotion and manipulation by humanoid robot HRP-2
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/67/videodetails/594
VIDEO 595
Whole-body pivoting manipulation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/67/videodetails/595
VIDEO 596
Footstep planning modeled as a whole-body inverse kinematic problem
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/67/videodetails/596
VIDEO 597
Dynamic multicontact motion
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/67/videodetails/597
VIDEO 598
3-D collision-free motion combining locomotion and manipulation by humanoid robot HRP-2 (experi-
ment)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/67/videodetails/598
VIDEO 599
Regrasp planning for pivoting manipulation by a humanoid robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/67/videodetails/599
VIDEO 600
Footstep planning modeled as a whole-body inverse kinematic problem (experiment)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/67/videodetails/600
References
67.1
H. Inoue, S. Tachi, Y. Nakamura, K. Hirai, N. Ohyu,
S. Hirai, K. Tanie, K. Yokoi, H. Hirukawa: Overview
of humanoid robotics project of METI, Proc. 32nd
Int. Symp. Robotics (ISR) (2001)
67.2
Y. Kuroki, M. Fujita, T. Ishida, K. Nagasaka, J. Ya-
maguchi: A small biped entertainment robot
exploring attractive applications, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2003) pp. 471–476

Part G | 67
1814
Part G
Robots and Humans
67.3
C.G. Atkeson, J.G. Hale, F.E. Pollick, M. Riley,
S. Kotosaka, S. Schaal, T. Shibata, G. Tevatia,
A. Ude, S. Vijayakumar, M. Kawato: Using hu-
manoid robots to study human behavior, IEEE
Intell. Syst. 15(4), 46–56 (2000)
67.4
K.F. MacDorman, H. Ishiguro: The uncanny ad-
vantage of using androids in social and cogni-
tive science research, Interact. Stud. 7(3), 297–337
(2006)
67.5
V. Bruce, A. Young: In the Eye of the Beholder: The
Science of Face Perception (Oxford Univ. Press, Ox-
ford 1998)
67.6
R. Blake, M. Shiffrar: Perception of human mo-
tion, Annu. Rev. Psychol. 58, 47–73 (2007)
67.7
J.F. Werker, R.C. Tees: Influences on infant speech
processing: Toward a new synthesis, Annu. Rev.
Psychol. 50, 509–535 (1999)
67.8
D. Hanson, A. Olney, I.A. Pereira, M. Zielke: Up-
ending the uncanny valley, Nat. Conf. Artif. Intell.
(AAAI), Pittsburgh (2005)
67.9
K. Čapek: R.U.R. (Rossum’s Universal Robots),
A Play in Introductory Scene and Three Acts
(eBooks, Adelaide 2006), translated into English
by D. Wyllie
67.10
Metropolis, directed by Fritz Lang (DVD) (Kino
Video, 1927)
67.11
I. Asimov: The Caves of Steel (Bantam, New York
1954)
67.12
B. Adams, C. Breazeal, R.A. Brooks, B. Scassellati:
Humanoid robots: A new kind of tool, IEEE Intell.
Syst. 15(4), 25–31 (2000)
67.13
R.A. Brooks, L.A. Stein: Building brains for bodies,
Auton. Robotics 1(1), 7–25 (1994)
67.14
R.W. Gibbs Jr.: Embodiment and Cognitive Science
(Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge 2006)
67.15
M. Lungarella, G. Metta: Beyond gazing, point-
ing, and reaching: A survey of developmen-
tal robotics, Proc. Third Int. Workshop Epigenet.
Robotics (2003) pp. 81–89
67.16
G.
Metta,
G.
Sandini,
D.
Vernon, D.
Cald-
well, N. Tsagarakis, R. Beira, J. Santos-Victor,
A. Ijspeert, L. Righetti, G. Cappiello, G. Stellin,
F. Becchi: The RobotCub project – An open frame-
work for research in embodied cognition, Proc.
IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robotics (2005)
67.17
E. Grandjean, K. Kroemer: Fitting the Task to the
Human, 5th edn. (Routledge, London 1997)
67.18
W. Karwowski: International Encyclopedia of Er-
gonomics and Human Factors, 2nd edn. (CRC,
Boca Raton 2006)
67.19
R. Brooks, L. Aryananda, A. Edsinger, P. Fitz-
patrick, C. Kemp, U.-M. O’Reilly, E. Torres-Jara,
P. Varshavskaya, J. Weber: Sensing and manipu-
lating built-for-human environments, Int. J. Hu-
manoid Robotics 1(1), 1–28 (2004)
67.20
W. Bluethmann, R. Ambrose, M. Diftler, S. Askew,
E. Huber, M. Goza, F. Rehnmark, C. Lovchik, D. Ma-
gruder: Robonaut: A robot designed to work with
humans in space, Auton. Robotics 14(2/3), 179–197
(2003)
67.21
K. Yokoi, K. Nakashima, M. Kobayashi, H. Mihune,
H. Hasunuma, Y. Yanagihara, T. Ueno, T. Gokyuu,
K. Endou: A tele-operated humanoid operator,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 22(5/6), 593–602 (2006)
67.22
K. Yokoi, K. Kawauchi, N. Sawasaki, T. Naka-
jima, S. Nakamura, K. Sawada, T. Takeuchi,
K. Nakashima, Y. Yanagihara,
K. Yokohama,
T. Isozumi, Y. Fukase, K. Kaneko, H. Inoue: Hu-
manoid robot applications in HRP, Int. J. Hu-
manoid Robotics 1(3), 409–428 (2004)
67.23
B. Thibodeau, P. Deegan, R. Grupen: Static anal-
ysis of contact forces with a mobile manipulator,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006)
pp. 4007–4012
67.24
J. Gutman, M. Fukuchi, M. Fujita: Modular ar-
chitecture for humanoid robot navigation, Proc.
5th IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robotics (2005)
pp. 26–31
67.25
S. Nakaoka, A. Nakazawa, K. Yokoi, H. Hirukawa,
K. Ikeuchi: Generating whole body motions for
a biped humanoid robot from captured human
dances, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2003) pp. 3905–3910
67.26
Boston Dynamics: http://www.bostondynamics.
com (2013)
67.27
M.E. Rosheim: Robot Evolution: The Development
of Anthrobotics (Wiley, New York 1994)
67.28
M.E. Rosheim: Leonardo’s Lost Robots (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 2006)
67.29
T.N. Hornyak: Loving the Machine: The Art and
Science of Japan’s Robots (MIT Press, Cambridge
2006)
67.30
J. Surrell: Pirates of the Caribbean: From the
Magic Kingdom to the Movies (Disney, New York
2005)
67.31
K. Hirai, M. Hirose, Y. Haikawa, T. Takenaka: The
development of Honda humanod robot, IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1998) pp. 1321–1326
67.32
M. Williamson: Robot Arm Control Exploiting Nat-
ural Dynamics, Ph.D. Thesis (MIT, Cambridge 1999)
67.33
J. Weng, J. McClelland, A. Pentland, O. Sporns,
I. Stockman, M. Sur, E. Thelen: Autonomous men-
tal development by robots and animals, Science
291(5504), 599–600 (2001)
67.34
J.
Zlatev,
C.
Balkenius:
Why
”epigenetic
robotics”?, Proc. 1st Int. Workshop Epigenet.
Robotics Model. Cogn. Dev. Robotics Syst., ed.
by C. Balkenius, J. Zlatev, H. Kozima, K. Dauten-
hahn, C. Breazeal (Lund Univ. Press, Lund 2001)
pp. 1–4
67.35
Y. Sodeyama, I. Mizuuchi, T. Yoshikai, Y. Nakan-
ishi, M. Inaba: A shoulder structure of muscle-
driven humanoid with shoulder blades, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robotics Syst. (IROS)
(2005) pp. 4028–4033
67.36
I. Mizuuchi, M. Inaba, H. Inoue: A flexible spine
human-form robot-development and control of
the posture of the spine, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robotics Syst. (IROS), Vol. 4 (2001) pp. 2099–
2104
67.37
M. Vande Weghe, M. Rogers, M. Weissert, Y. Mat-
suoka: The ACT hand: Design of the skeletal struc-
ture, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2004)

Humanoids
References
1815
Part G | 67
67.38
L.Y. Chang, Y. Matsuoka: A kinematic thumb model
for the ACT hand, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 1000–1005
67.39
C. Lovchik, M.A. Diftler: The robonaut hand:
A dexterous robot hand for space, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1999) pp. 907–
912
67.40
M.J. Marjanović: Teaching an Old Robot New
Tricks: Learning Novel Tasks via Interaction with
People and Things, Ph.D. Thesis (MIT, Cambridge
2003)
67.41
C. Ott, O. Eiberger, W. Friedl, B. Bäuml, U. Hil-
lenbrand, C. Borst, A. Albu-Schäffer, B. Brun-
ner, H. Hirschmüller, S. Kielhöfer, R. Konietschke,
M. Suppa, T. Wimböck, F. Zacharias, G. Hirzinger:
A humanoid two-arm system for dexterous ma-
nipulation, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid
Robot. (2006) pp. 276–283
67.42
G. Pratt, M. Williamson: Series elastic actuators,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst. (IROS),
Pittsburg, Vol. 1 (1995) pp. 399–406
67.43
M. Vukobratović, J. Stepanenko: On the stability of
anthropomorphic systems, Math. Biosci. 15, 1–37
(1972)
67.44
M. Morisawa, K. Harada, S. Kajita, S. Nakaoka,
K. Fujiwara, F. Kanehiro, K. Kaneko, H. Hirukawa:
Experimentation of humanoid walking allowing
immediate modification of foot place based on
analytical solution, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2007) pp. 3989–3994
67.45
K. Nishiwaki, S. Kagami: High frequency walking
pattern generation based on preview control of
ZMP, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2006) pp. 2667–2672
67.46
K. Harada, S. Kajita, F. Kanehiro, K. Fujiwara,
K. Kaneko, K. Yokoi, H. Hirukawa: Real-time
planning of humanoid robot’s gait for force
controlled manipulation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 616–622
67.47
J. Urata, K. Nshiwaki, Y. Nakanishi, K. Okada,
S. Kagami, M. Inaba: Online walking pattern gen-
eration for push recovery and minimum delay to
commanded change of direction and speed, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2012)
pp. 3411–3416
67.48
J. Chestnutt, M. Phillipe, J.J. Kuffner, T. Kanade:
Locomotion among dynamic obstacles for the
honda ASIMO, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2007) pp. 2572–2573
67.49
K.
Nishiwaki,
J.
Chestnutt,
S.
Kagami:
Au-
tonomous navigation of a humanoid robot over
unknown rough terrain using a laser range sen-
sor, Int. J. Robotics Res. 31(11), 1251–1262 (2012)
67.50
K. Nagasaka, K. Kuroki, S. Suzuki, Y. Itoh, J. Ya-
maguchi: Integrated motion control for walking,
jumping and running on a small bipedal enter-
tainment robot, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2004) pp. 3189–3194
67.51
B.-K. Cho, S.-S. Park, J.-H. Oh: Stabilization of
a hopping humanoid robot for a push, Proc.
Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (Humanoids) (2010)
pp. 60–65
67.52
R. Tajima, D. Honda, K. Suga: Fast running experi-
ments involving a humanoid robot, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2009) pp. 1571–1576
67.53
H. Hirukawa, S. Hattori, K. Harada, S. Kajita,
K. Kaneko, F. Kanehiro, K. Fujiwara, M. Morisawa:
A universal stability criterion of the foot contact
of legged robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 1976–1983
67.54
S.-H. Hyon, G. Cheng: Disturbance rejection for
biped humanoids, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2007) pp. 2668–2675
67.55
K. Miura, M. Morisawa, F. Kanehiro, S. Kajita,
K. Kaneko, K. Yokoi: Human-like walking with
toe supporting for humanoids, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011) pp. 4428–
4435
67.56
S. Kajita, M. Morisawa, K. Miura, S. Nakaoka,
K. Harada, K. Kaneko, F. Kanehiro, K. Yokoi: Biped
Walking stabilization based on linear inverted
pendulum tracking, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2010) pp. 4489–4496
67.57
S.H. Collins, A.L. Ruina, R. Tedrake, M. Wisse: Ef-
ficient bipedal robots based on passive-dynamic
walkers, Science 307, 1082–1085 (2005)
67.58
K.
Bouyarmane,
A.
Kheddar:
Multi-contact
stances
planning
for
multiple
agents, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011)
pp. 5353–5546
67.59
K. Fujiwara, F. Kanehiro, S. Kajita, K. Kaneko,
K. Yokoi, H. Hirukawa: UKEMI: Falling motion con-
trol to minimize damage to biped humanoid
robot, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002)
pp. 2521–2526
67.60
H. Hirukawa, S. Kajita, F. Kanehiro, K. Kaneko,
T. Isozumi: The human-size humanoid robot that
can walk, lie down and get up, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 24(9), 755–769 (2005)
67.61
Y. Sakagami, R. Watanabe, C. Aoyama, S. Mat-
sunaga, N. Higaki, K. Fujimura: The intelligent
ASIMO: System overview and integration, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robotics Syst. (IROS)
(2002) pp. 2478–2483
67.62
K. Okada, S. Kagami, M. Inaba, H. Inoue: Plane
segment finder: Algorithm implementation and
applications, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2001) pp. 2120–2125
67.63
K. Sabe, M. Fukuchi, J.-S. Gutmann, T. Ohashi,
K. Kawamoto, T. Yoshigahara: Obstacle avoidance
and path planning for humanoid robots using
stereo vision, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2004)
67.64
J. Gutman, M. Fukuchi, M. Fujita: Real-time path
planning for humanoid robot navigation, Proc.
Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell. (2005) pp. 1232–1238
67.65
K. Harada, S. Kajita, K. Kaneko, H. Hirukawa:
Pushing manipulation by humanoid considering
two-kinds of ZMPs, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2003) pp. 1627–1632
67.66
K. Harada, S. Kajita, K. Kaneko, H. Hirukawa:
Dynamics and balance of a humanoid robot dur-
ing manipulation tasks, IEEE Trans. Robotics 22-3,
568–575 (2006)

Part G | 67
1816
Part G
Robots and Humans
67.67
H. Hirukawa, S. Hattori, K. Harada, S. Kajita,
K. Kaneko, F. Kanehiro, K. Fujiwara, M. Morisawa:
A universal stability criterion of the foot contact
of legged robots – Adios ZMP, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 1976–1983
67.68
Y. Hwang, A. Konno, M. Uchiyama: Whole body
cooperative tasks and static stability evalua-
tions for a humanoid robot, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robotics Syst. (IROS) (2003) pp. 1901–
1906
67.69
T. Takenaka: Posture control for a legged mobile
robot, Jap. Pat. 1023 0485 (1998)
67.70
K. Inoue, H. Yoshida, T. Arai, Y. Mae: Mobile
manipulation of humanoids – Real-time control
based on manipulability and stability, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2000) pp. 2217–
2222
67.71
K. Harada, S. Kajita, H. Saito, M. Morisawa,
F. Kanehiro, K. Fujiwara, K. Kaneko, H. Hirukawa:
A humanoid robot carrying a heavy object, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
pp. 1724–1729
67.72
T. Takubo, K. Inoue, K. Sakata, Y. Mae, T. Arai:
Mobile manipulation of humanoid robots – con-
trol method for CoM position with external force,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robotics Syst. (IROS)
(2004) pp. 1180–1185
67.73
D. Kulic, D. Lee, C. Ott, Y. Nakamura: Incremen-
tal learning of full body motion primitives for
humanoid robots, Proc. IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Hu-
manoid Robotics (2008) pp. 326–332
67.74
K. Yamane, S.O. Anderson, J.K. Hodgins: Control-
ling humanoid robots with human motion data:
Experimental validation, Proc. IEEE/RAS Int. Conf.
Humanoid Robotics (2010) pp. 504–510
67.75
J.-H. Oh, J.-W. Heo: Upper body motion interpo-
lation for humanoid robots, Proc. IEEE/ASME Int.
Conf. Adv. Intell. Mechatro. (AIM) (2011) pp. 1064–
1069
67.76
S. Nakaoka, A. Nakazawa, F. Kanehiro, K. Kaneko,
M. Morisawa, K. Ikeuchi: Task model of lower
body motion for a biped humanoid robot to imi-
tate human dances, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robotics Syst. (IROS) (2005) pp. 2769–2774
67.77
S. Nakaoka, S. Kajita, K. Yokoi: Intuitive and flex-
ible user interface for creating whole body mo-
tions of biped humanoid robots, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robotics Syst. (IROS) (2010)
pp. 1675–1682
67.78
S. Nakaoka: Choreonoid: Extensible virtual robot
environment built on an integrated GUI frame-
work, Proc. IEEE/SICE Int. Symp. System Integration
(SII) (2012) pp. 79–85
67.79
J. Kuffner, S. Kagami, K. Nishiwaki, M. Inaba,
H. Inoue: Dynamically-stable motion planning
for humanoid robots, Auton. Robots 12(1), 105–118
(2002)
67.80
S. Dalibard, A. Nakhaei, F. Lamiraux, J.-P. Lau-
mond: Whole-body task planning for a hu-
manoid robot: a way to integrate collision avoid-
ance, Proc. IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robotics
(2009) pp. 355–360
67.81
E. Yoshida, C. Esteves, I. Belousov, J.-P. Laumond,
T. Sakaguchi, K. Yokoi: Planning 3D collision-free
dynamic robotic motion through iterative reshap-
ing, IEEE Trans. Robotics 24(5), 1186–1198 (2008)
67.82
K. Harada, Yoshida Ei, K. Yokoi (Eds.): Motion
Planning for Humanoid Robots (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg 2010)
67.83
H. Janßen, M. Gienger, C. Goerick: Task-oriented
whole body motion for humanoid robots, Proc.
IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robotics (2005)
pp. 238–244
67.84
K. Okada, M. Kojima, Y. Sagawa, T. Ichino, K. Sato,
M. Inaba: Vision based behavior verification sys-
tem of humanoid robot for daily environment
tasks, Proc. IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robotics
(2006) pp. 7–12
67.85
E. Yoshida, O. Kanoun, C. Esteves, J.-P. Laumond,
K. Yokoi: Task-driven support polygon reshap-
ing for humanoids, Proc. IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Hu-
manoid Robotics (2006) pp. 827–832
67.86
E. Yoshida, M. Poirier, J.-P. Laumond, O. Ka-
noun, F. Lamiraux, R. Alami, K. Yokoi: Pivoting
based manipulation by a humanoid robot, Au-
ton. Robots 28(1), 77–88 (2010)
67.87
O. Kanoun, F. Lamiraux, P.-B. Wieber: Kinematic
control of redundant manipulators: Generalizing
the task priority framework, IEEE Trans.Robotics
27(4), 785–792 (2011)
67.88
E. Neo, K. Yokoi, S. Kajita, K. Tanie: A framework
for remote execution of whole body motions for
humanoid robots, Proc. IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Hu-
manoid Robotics (2004) pp. 608–626
67.89
M. Toussaint, M. Gienger, C. Goerick: Optimiza-
tion of sequential attractor-based movement for
compact behaviour generation, Proc. IEEE/RAS Int.
Conf. Humanoid Robotics (2007) pp. 122–129
67.90
N. Vahrenkamp, D. Berenson, T. Asfour, J. Kuffner,
R. Dillmann: Humanoid motion planning for
dual-arm manipulation and re-grasping tasks,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robotics Syst. (IROS)
(2009) pp. 2464–2470
67.91
F. Kanehiro, E. Yoshida, K. Yokoi: Efficient reach-
ing motion planning and execution for explo-
ration by humanoid robots, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2012) pp. 1911–1916
67.92
S. Kagami, F. Kanehiro: AutoBalancer: An on-
line dynamic balance compensation scheme for
humanoid robots, Workshop Algorithmic Found.
Robotics (2000) pp. 79–89
67.93
S. Kajita, F. Kanehiro, K. Kaneko, K. Fujiwara,
K. Harada, K. Yokoi, H. Hirukawa: Resolved mo-
mentum control: Humanoid motion planning
based on the linear and angular momentum,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robotics Syst. (IROS)
(2003) pp. 1644–1650
67.94
K. Yamane, Y. Nakamura: Dynamics filter – con-
cept and implementa tion of online motion gen-
erator for human figures, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 19(3), 421–432 (2003)
67.95
Jin’ichi Yamaguchi, E. Soga, S. Inoue, A. Takan-
ishi: Development of a bipedal humanoid robot –
Control method of whole body cooperative dy-

Humanoids
References
1817
Part G | 67
namic
biped
walking,
Proc. IEEE
Int.
Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1999) pp. 368–374
67.96
S. Kajita, F. Kanehiro, K. Kaneko, K. Fujiwara,
K. Harada, K. Yokoi, H. Hirukawa: Biped walk-
ing pattern generation by using preview control of
zero-moment point, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2003) pp. 1620–1626
67.97
T. Sugihara, Y. Nakamura: Whole-body cooper-
ative balancing of humanoid robot using COG
jacobian, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robotics
Syst. (IROS) (2002) pp. 2575–2580
67.98
H. Harada, S. Kajita, F. Kanehiro, K. Fujiwara,
K. Kaneko, K. Yokoi, H. Hirukawa: Real-time
planning of humanoid robot’s gait for force
controlled manipulation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 616–622
67.99
H. Harada, S. Kajita, H. Saito, M. Morisawa,
F. Kanehiro, K. Fujiwara, K. Kaneko, H. Hirukawa:
A Humanoid robot carrying a heavy object, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
pp. 1712–1717
67.100
M. Stilman, K. Ishiwaki, S. Kagami: Learning ob-
ject models for whole body manipulation, Proc.
IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robotics (2007)
pp. 174–179
67.101
H. Sugiura, M. Gienger, H. Janssen, C. Goer-
ick: Real-time collision avoidance with whole
body motion control for humanoid robots, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robotics Syst. (IROS)
(2007) pp. 2053–2058
67.102
O. Kanoun, J.-P. Laumond, E. Yoshida: Planning
foot placements for a humanoid robot: A Problem
of Inverse Kinematics, Int. J. Robotics Res. 30(4),
476–485 (2011)
67.103
O. Stasse, B. Verrelst, A. Davison, N. Mansard,
F. Saidi, B. Vanderborght, C. Esteves, K. Yokoi:
Integrating walking and vision to increase hu-
manoid autonomy, Int. J. Humanoid Robotics
5(2), 287–310 (2008)
67.104
K. Okada, T. Ogura, A. Haneda, J. Fujimoto,
F. Gravot, M. Inaba: Humanoid motion generation
system on HRP2-JSK for daily life environment,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Mechatron. Autom. (2005)
pp. 1772–1777
67.105
F. Zacharias, C. Borst, G. Hirzinger: Capturing robot
workspace structure: Representing robot capabil-
ities, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robotics Syst.
(IROS) (2007) pp. 3229–3236
67.106
N. Vahrenkamp, E. Kuhn, T. Asfour, R. Dill-
mann: Planning multi-robot grasping motions,
Proc. IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robotics (2010)
pp. 593–600
67.107
A. Escande, A. Kheddar: Contact planning for
acyclic motion with tasks constraints, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2009) pp. 435–
440
67.108
K. Hauser, T. Bretl, J.-C. Latombe, K. Harada,
B. Wilcox: Motion planning for legged robots on
varied terrain, Int. J. Robotics Res. 27(11-12), 1325–
1349 (2008)
67.109
L. Saab, N. Mansard, F. Keith, J.-Y. Fourquet,
P. Soueres: Generation of dynamic motion for an-
thropomorphic systems under prioritized equality
and inequality constraints, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 1091–1096
67.110
C.
Ott,
C. Baumgärtner, J. Mayr, M.
Fuchs,
R. Burger, D. Lee, O. Eiberger, Alin Albu-Schäffer,
M. Grebenstein, G. Hirzinger: Development of
a biped robot with torque controlled joints,
Proc. IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robotics (2010)
pp. 167–173
67.111
S. Lengagne, J. Vaillant, E. Yoshida, A. Khed-
dar: Generation of whole-body optimal dy-
namic multi-contact motions, Int. J. Robotics Res.
32(9/10), 1104–1119 (2013)
67.112
A. Escande, A. Kheddar, S. Miossec: Planning sup-
port contact-points for humanoid robots and
experiments on HRP-2, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robotics Syst. (IROS) (2006) pp. 2974–2979
67.113
K. Bouyarmane, A. Kheddar: Humanoid robot lo-
comotion and manipulation step planning, Adv.
Robotics 26(10), 1099–1126 (2012)
67.114
H. Arisumi, S. Miossec, J.-R. Chardonnet, K. Yokoi:
Dynamic lifting by whole body motion of hu-
manoid robots, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robotics Syst. (IROS) (2008) pp. 668–675
67.115
K. Koyanagi, H. Hirukawa, S. Hattori, M. Morisawa,
S. Nakaoka, K. Harada, S. Kajita: A pattern gen-
erator of humanoid robots walking on a rough
terrain using a handrail, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robotics Syst. (IROS) (2008) pp. 2617–
2622
67.116
L. Sentis, J. Park, O. Khatib: Compliant control
of multicontact and center-of-mass behaviors in
humanoid robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics 26(3), 483–
501 (2010)
67.117
J. Park, O. Khatib: Contact consistent control
framework for humanoid robots, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 1963–
1969
67.118
S. Hirose, H. Tsukagoshi, K. Yoneda: Normalized
energy stability margin and its contour of walk-
ing vehicles on rough terrain, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2001) pp. 181–186
67.119
K. Harada, S. Kajita, K. Kaneko, H. Hirukawa:
Dynamics and balance of a humanoid robot dur-
ing manipulation task, IEEE Trans. Robotics 22(3),
568–575 (2006)
67.120
H. Hirukawa, S. Hattori, K. Harada, S. Kajita,
K. Kaneko, F. Kanehiro, K. Fujiwara, M. Morisawa:
A universal stability criterion of the foot contact
of legged robots – Adios ZMP, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 1976–1983
67.121
K. Bouyarmane, J. Vaillant, F. Keith, A. Khed-
dar: Exploring humanoid robots locomotion ca-
pabilities in virtual disaster response scenarios,
Proc. IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robotics (2012)
pp. 337–342
67.122
S.-H. Hyon, J.G. Hale, G. Cheng: Full-body com-
pliant human-humanoid interaction: Balancing
in the presence of unknown external forces, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 23(5), 884–898 (2007)
67.123
K. Bouyarmane, A. Kheddar: Using a multi-
objective controller to synthesize simulated hu-

Part G | 67
1818
Part G
Robots and Humans
manoid robot motion with changing contact
configurations, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robotics Syst. (IROS) (2011) pp. 4414–4419
67.124
C. Breazeal, A. Edsinger, P. Fitzpatrick, B. Scassel-
lati, P. Varchavskaia: Social constraints on ani-
mate vision, IEEE Intell. Syst. 15, 32–37 (2000)
67.125
F. Berton, G. Sandini, G. Metta: Anthropomor-
phic visual sensors. In: The Encyclopedia of Sen-
sors, Vol. X, ed. by M.V. Pishko, C.A. Grimes,
E.C. Dickey (American Scientific, Stevenson Ranch
2006) pp. 1–16
67.126
T. Shibata, S. Vijayakumar, J. Conradt, S. Schaal:
Biomimetic oculomotor control, Adapt. Behav. 9,
189–208 (2001)
67.127
B. Scassellati: A Binocular, Foveated Active Vision
System, Vol. AIM-1628 (MIT, Cambridge 1998)
67.128
A. Ude, C. Gaskett, G. Cheng: Foveated vision sys-
tems with two cameras per eye, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Orlando (2006)
67.129
H. Kozima: Infanoid: A babybot that explores
the social environment. In: Socially Intelligent
Agents: Creating Relationships with Computers
and Robots, ed. by K. Dautenhahn, A.H. Bond,
L. Canamero, B. Edmonds (Kluwer, Amsterdam
2002) pp. 157–164
67.130
T. Shibata, S. Schaal: Biomimetic gaze stabi-
lization based on feedback-error-learning with
nonparametric regression networks, Neural Netw.
14(2), 201–216 (2001)
67.131
P. Heracleous, S. Nakamura, K. Shikano: Simul-
taneous recognition of distant-talking speech to
multiple talkers based on the 3-D N-best search
method, J. VLSI Signal Process. Syst. Arch. 36(2–3),
105–116 (2004)
67.132
J. Ido, Y. Matsumoto, T. Ogasawara, R. Nisimura:
Humanoid with interaction ability using vision
and speech information, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robotics Syst. (IROS) (2006)
67.133
I. Hara, F. Asano, H. Asoh, J. Ogata, N. Ichimura,
Y. Kawai, F. Kanehiro, H. Hirukawa, K. Yamamoto:
Robust speech interface based on audio and
video information fusion for humanoid HRP-2,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robotics Syst. (IROS)
(2004) pp. 2402–2410
67.134
M. Lungarella, G. Metta, R. Pfeifer, G. Sandini:
Developmental robotics: A survey, Connect. Sci.
15(4), 151–190 (2003)
67.135
B. Scassellati, C. Crick, K. Gold, E. Kim, F. Shic,
G. Sun: Social development, Comput. Intell. Mag.
(IEEE) 1(3), 41–47 (2006)
67.136
M. Asada, K. Hosoda, Y. Kuniyoshi, H. Ishiguro,
T. Inui, Y. Yoshikawa, M. Ogino, C. Yoshida: Cogni-
tive developmental robotics: A survey, IEEE Trans.
Auton. Mental Dev. 1(1), 12–34 (2009)

Multimedia Contents Human Moti
1819
Part G | 68.1
68. Human Motion Reconstruction
Katsu Yamane, Wataru Takano
This chapter presents a set of techniques for re-
constructing and understanding human motions
measured using current motion capture technolo-
gies. We first review modeling and computation
techniques for obtaining motion and force in-
formation from human motion data (Sect. 68.2).
Here we show that kinematics and dynamics algo-
rithms for articulated rigid bodies can be applied
to human motion data processing, with help
from models based on knowledge in anatomy
and physiology. We then describe methods for
analyzing human motions so that robots can
segment and categorize different behaviors and
use them as the basis for human motion un-
derstanding and communication (Sect. 68.3).
These methods are based on statistical tech-
niques widely used in linguistics. The two fields
share the common goal of converting continu-
ous and noisy signal to discrete symbols, and
therefore it is natural to apply similar techniques.
Finally, we introduce some application examples
of human motion and models ranging from sim-
ulated human control to humanoid robot motion
synthesis.
68.1 Overview............................................. 1819
68.2 Models and Computations.................... 1820
68.2.1 Motion Capture Technology ........ 1820
68.2.2 Skeleton Model
and Computation ...................... 1821
68.2.3 Musculoskeletal Model
and Computation ...................... 1823
68.2.4 Model Identification.................. 1824
68.3 Reconstruction for Understanding ........ 1825
68.3.1 Segmentation of Human Motion . 1825
68.3.2 Categorization of Human Motion 1825
68.3.3 Temporal Sequence
of Human Motion...................... 1826
68.3.4 Linguistic Interpretation
of Human Motion...................... 1827
68.3.5 Theory of Communication .......... 1828
68.4 Reconstruction for Robots .................... 1829
68.4.1 Reconstruction for Virtual
Humans ................................... 1829
68.4.2 Controller Optimization
from Physiological Model ........... 1829
68.4.3 Reconstruction
for Physical Robots .................... 1829
Video-References......................................... 1830
References................................................... 1831
68.1 Overview
Human motions are valuable resources for robots as
they implicitly represent human strategies for control
and planning. They are particularly useful when the
control objective is difﬁcult to formulate as a cost
function, such as conveying expressions or moving in
a particular style. Many researchers have used human
motions for teaching new tasks to robots [68.1] and gen-
erating robot motions with human-like styles [68.2].
In order to use human motions for robotics applica-
tions, we ﬁrst have to reconstruct the motion from raw
measurement from a motion capture system. For this
purpose, we can apply many techniques and algorithms
developed in robotics such as kinematics, dynamics, pa-
rameter identiﬁcation, and statistical models. In some
applications such as robot learning, reconstructed mo-
tion data represented as sequences of joint angles are
often not useful. In this case, the motion must be inter-
preted as higher level representation such as a sequence
of behaviors.
This chapter reviews some of the algorithms for
reconstructing and interpreting human motions for
robotics applications. The next section describes the

Part G | 68.2
1820
Part G
Robots and Humans
kinematic and dynamic computations for human mo-
tion reconstruction. As these algorithms were originally
developed for robot manipulators, we need substantial
adaptation to human body due to its complexity. In
Sect. 68.3, we present an overview of statistical ap-
proaches for understanding human motions as discrete
behaviors, and use them for communication between
humans and robots. The technique presented here has
a close relationship to natural language processing that
deals with the similar problem of converting continuous
signal (sound) to discrete symbols (words). Finally, we
review a few examples of using human motions to gen-
erate human-like motions on virtual humans as well as
humanoid robots.
68.2 Models and Computations
Motion capture refers to measuring motions in the
Cartesian space. The subjects are usually humans but
animals or robots may also be used. Many motion
capture technologies are commercially available with
varying costs and capabilities. We will give a brief
overview of the most popular motion capture systems:
optical and mechanical.
68.2.1 Motion Capture Technology
Optical Motion Capture
Optical motion capture systems are popular thanks to
the minimum disruption to motions, although high-end
systems can be expensive because of high-resolution,
high-speed cameras and elaborate software. Further-
more, ofﬂine data cleanup is often necessary to handle
occasional occlusion and mislabeling. These systems
are widely used in many ﬁelds including biomechanics,
entertainment, and robotics.
Figure 68.1 shows the principle of optical motion
capture. Multiple markers (white circles) are attached
to the subjects’ body (gray) as landmarks to be de-
tected by the cameras surrounding the capture area. The
three-dimensional (3-D) marker positions are obtained
by computing the intersection of lines connecting the
cameras’ optical center and the markers on the image
plane.
Human whole-body motion capture typically re-
quires more than 40 markers. The markers are usu-
Camera 1
Camera n
Fig. 68.1 Principle of optical motion capture
ally spherical and retro-reﬂective, which means that
they reﬂect the incoming light directly back to the
light source. The subject experiences very little dis-
ruption during motions because the markers are light
and small, although they can be a problem in motions
that involve physical contacts with other subjects or the
environment.
The capture area is surrounded by three or more
cameras with near-ultrared light source. Because the
markers are retro-reﬂective, they can be easily detected
in the camera images as bright disks by simple image
processing with little effect from the lighting condi-
tion. The internal and external camera parameters are
identiﬁed through a system-speciﬁc calibration process
before each motion capture session.
Human motions are reconstructed in three steps.
First, the markers are detected from the camera images.
Then the Cartesian positions of the markers can be com-
puted by using the marker positions from multiple cam-
eras. Finally, joint angle data are computed by perform-
ing inverse kinematics computation (
VIDEO 762 ).
This step will be described in Sect. 68.2.2.
The complexity of the software is due to the three-
dimensional (3-D) reconstruction process where it is
difﬁcult to identify the correspondence between the
markers in multiple images because all markers look
identical. Furthermore, some of the markers may be lost
due to occlusion and fast motions. In practice, careful
marker and camera placement is required to obtain con-
sistent measurements.
Mechanical Motion Capture
Another family of motion capture technology is me-
chanical, where a mechanical device is attached to the
subject’s body to directly measure the joint angles. Ear-
lier systems used mechanical linkages consisting of
rigid links and joint angle sensors, which were bulky
and therefore signiﬁcantly restricted the subjects’ mo-
bility. However, more recent systems use ﬂexible suites
with embedded bend sensors that do not cause as much
restriction. The suites are equipped with additional in-
ertial sensors to measure the global position.

Human Motion Reconstruction
68.2 Models and Computations
1821
Part G | 68.2
An advantage of this technology is that it can di-
rectly measure the joint angles, and therefore is more
robust than optical systems. It also allows unbounded
capture area, possibly in outdoor environments. On the
other hand, the inertial sensors used for measuring the
global motion of the body may suffer from drifts that re-
sult in inaccurate global position measurements. Drifts
are usually corrected assuming that at least one of the
foot segments is ﬁxed to the environment, but this is not
the case in motions involving ﬂights.
Future of Motion Capture
Development of markerless, realtime, and low-cost mo-
tion capture systems is an active research area in both
academia and industry. In fact, several commercial
products with some of those features are becoming
available.
For example, the OpenStage system [68.3] from
Organic Motion realizes realtime markerless motion
capture. Kinect [68.4] has been developed for gaming
interface but it can potentially be used as a low-cost,
realtime motion capture system. Some researchers are
working on even more challenging motion capture
techniques, such as markerless motion capture using
monocular vision [68.5].
68.2.2 Skeleton Model and Computation
Once motion capture data are obtained, we can ana-
lyze the data by computing the joint angles and torques,
provided that kinematics and dynamics models of the
subject are available. While a number of algorithms
have been developed for motion analysis and simula-
tion of robots, applying these algorithms to the human
body is not straightforward.
The human body is much more complex than most
mechanical systems. It consists of a number of ele-
ments such as bones, muscles, organs, and skin, most
of which are deformable and difﬁcult to model them-
selves. Many joints are also difﬁcult to model and
simulate because of the complex constraints. For exam-
ple, the center of rotation of the shoulder joint moves
along with the joint movement. The knee and elbow
joints are constrained by rolling contacts and ligaments
between bones.
In practice, therefore, it is unrealistic to model all
the details due to computational complexity, and the
human body is typically approximated by articulated
rigid body models familiar to the robotics community.
We can then apply the kinematics and dynamics al-
gorithms for mechanical systems as described in this
subsection. Figure 68.2 shows an example of detailed
human skeleton model [68.6], which consists of 155 de-
grees of freedom (DOF) excluding the ﬁngers.
Free
Sphere
Rotate
Fix
Soft constraint
(cartilage)
Neck vertebra1
Rib vertebra1
Rib vertebra12
To rib vertebra6
Lumbar vertebra1
Lumbar vertebra5
Knee cap
Tibia
Neck vertebra7
Wrist
Fore arm
Upper arm
Head
Hip
Clavicle
Blade
Hand
Fibula
Thigh
Foot
Toe
Fig. 68.2 Detailed human skeleton model
Even if we use simpliﬁed skeleton models, there
is still an issue of obtaining accurate model param-
eters. As mentioned above, many joints do not have
a ﬁxed axis as in mechanical joints, which means that
the kinematic parameters such as link length may not
be constant as in mechanical systems. It is also difﬁcult
to estimate the inertial parameters because we cannot
directly measure the individual link parameters, and be-
cause the human body is ﬂexible and some of the soft
tissue would move between links. We will discuss the
parameter identiﬁcation issue in Sect. 68.2.4.
Kinematics
Inverse and forward kinematics computations are used
to analyze the kinematic quantities of measured mo-
tions such as positions, velocities, and accelerations of
the links.
Inverse kinematics computation is critical to data
obtained by optical motion capture because we have
to convert the marker positions to skeleton joint an-
gles. Typical inverse kinematics problem in robotics
(Chap. 2) is to compute the joint angles given the

Part G | 68.2
1822
Part G
Robots and Humans
end-effector position and/or orientation. Inverse kine-
matics for motion capture data processing needs
a slightly different problem setting because many mark-
ers are attached throughout the body, often resulting
in an over-constrained system. Furthermore, measured
marker positions would not perfectly ﬁt an articulated
rigid body model because human kinematics param-
eters may change during the motion, as discussed
above.
A simple method for computing the joint angles,
often used as the default method in commercial opti-
cal motion capture systems, is to ﬁrst compute the joint
centers by interpolating the positions of a few strate-
gically placed markers, and then computing the joint
angles from the joint centers. The advantage of this
method is that it is easily customizable by, for example,
simple scripts and therefore suitable for commercial
systems.
Another method is to apply numerical optimiza-
tion. For example, the cost function can be the sum of
squared distances between the marker positions from
the measurement and those computed by the kinematics
model. Another approach is to drive the model toward
the measured marker positions [68.7]. In either case,
the resulting joint angle will evenly distribute the error
caused by measurement error and model inaccuracy to
all markers.
Figure 68.3 shows an example of inverse kinematics
using a skeleton model.
Forward kinematics is performed to obtain the
Cartesian positions, velocities, and accelerations of the
links from the corresponding joint variables. These
quantities are often used for the dynamics computation
later.
Dynamics
Similarly to kinematics computation, we can consider
both inverse and forward dynamics.
Fig. 68.3 Inverse kinematics computation example
Inverse dynamics computes the joint torques and
possibly contact forces required to perform the mea-
sured motion. Any algorithm for inverse dynamics
computation of articulated rigid bodies, such as the
Newton–Euler formulation [68.8], can be applied.
Chapter 3 gives the details on dynamics algorithms for
general kinematic chains.
A major difference from manipulator inverse dy-
namics is that the human body is a ﬂoating-base
system where the root joint can move freely in the six-
dimensional (6-D) space but is not actuated. Generic
inverse dynamics algorithms for manipulators give the
6-D force and torque for the root joint but they are
not actually available. The equivalent force must be
supplied instead by the contact forces, which have to
be explicitly considered because they affect the joint
torques.
The equation of motion of an n-DOF articulated
rigid body system is written as
G D M ./ R C c ; P C g ./ ;
(68.1)
where G 2 Rn is the generalized force,  2 Rn is the
generalized coordinate, M 2 Rnn is the joint-space
inertia matrix, c 2 Rn represents the centrifugal and
Coriolis forces, and g 2 Rn is the gravitational force.
In human body models subject to m contact constraints,
G is computed from active joint torques  2 Rn6 and
contact forces f c 2 Rm as
G D ST C JT
c f c ;
(68.2)
where Jc 2 Rmn is the Jacobian matrix of the con-
tact constraints and ST 2 Rn.n6/ is the matrix that
converts the active joint torques to generalized forces.
Without losing generality, we assume that the root joint
corresponds to the ﬁrst six elements of the generalized
coordinate. Then ST takes the form
ST D

O6.n6/
I.n6/.n6/

(68.3)
where O and I are the zero and identity matrices of
the sizes given by the subscripts.
The number of constraints m changes depending on
the contact condition. If, for example, both feet are in
ﬂat contact with the ground, m would be 12 because the
position and orientation of each foot are constrained.
Equations (68.2) and (68.3) indicate that only f c
contributes to the ﬁrst six elements of G. This property
corresponds to the well-known fact that the whole-body
momentum can be changed only by applying external
forces such as contact forces. We can utilize this fact
to compute f c independently of the joint torques [68.6].

Human Motion Reconstruction
68.2 Models and Computations
1823
Part G | 68.2
We can then compute the joint torques using the bottom
.n  6/ equations of (68.2).
Forward dynamics is used for dynamics simulation.
The simulation in this context usually involves a set
of controllers that attempts to make the human model
track the measured motion. This computation is often
performed to simulate the effects of external distur-
bances and physical disabilities. However, developing
controller for human body simulation is very difﬁcult
because the root joint is not actuated and the contact
forces are subject to unilateral constraints. Although
this topic is extensively discussed in humanoid robotics,
graphics, and biomechanics, there is no consensus on
how to build general controllers for human models.
68.2.3 Musculoskeletal Model
and Computation
Motion analysis based on skeleton models is not suf-
ﬁcient for applications that require anatomical infor-
mation such as muscle lengths and tensions. In biome-
chanics, for example, researchers are often interested
in computing the muscle tensions required to perform
a motion. Also in robotics, many muscle-like actua-
tors are developed and used to design more human-like
robotic systems.
Musculoskeletal models are used for motion analy-
sis involving muscles. In addition to a skeleton model
discussed in the previous section, a musculoskeletal
model includes a musculotendon network model that
describes where the muscles are attached to and how
Muscle
Muscle
Origin
Origin
Pelvis
a)
b)
M. obturator internus
Scapula
Humerus
End
End
M. teres minor
Femur
Fig.68.4a,b Examples of muscle models; (a) simple wire
connecting two bones, (b) muscle with via point
they are routed around the bones. Similarly to skeleton
models, musculotendon network models include a num-
ber of simpliﬁcations due to the complexity of the real
human body. A muscle is usually modeled as a line seg-
ment that produces a uniform tensile force. Interactions
of muscles with bones and skin are not usually modeled
except for some of the major muscle–bone interactions.
Apart from these simpliﬁcations, the force interac-
tion between the muscles and bones are described as
accurately as possible. A simple muscle–tendon pair
connects two bones and produces a torque at the joint
between them (Fig. 68.4a). More complex muscles may
pass through one or more points ﬁxed on the bone
surface (Fig. 68.4b), or may have branches and there-
fore connects three or more bones. Wide muscles, such
as pennate muscles, are modeled by several parallel
muscles.
Figure 68.5 shows a detailed musculoskeletal model
consisting of 955 muscles [68.6].
Kinematics computation on a musculoskeletal
model gives the muscle lengths. The length and its
velocity may then be used for various analysis. For ex-
ample, we can use Hill–Stroeve muscle model [68.9,
10] to compute the maximum muscle tension.
The active joint torques  are now produced by
muscle tensions f m. Applying d’Alembert’s principle,
we can derive the relationship between  and f m as
 D JT
mf m ;
(68.4)
where Jm is the Jacobian matrix of the muscle lengths
with respect to the generalized coordinates.
Fig. 68.5 A detailed musculoskeletal model

Part G | 68.2
1824
Part G
Robots and Humans
0
l0
a) Normalized force
Length
0
Isometric force
–vmax
b) Normalized force
Velocity
Fig.68.6a,b Relationship
between maximum muscle
tension and muscle ﬁber
length. (a) Length–tension
relationship, (b) velocity–
tension relationship
The inverse dynamics computation for muscu-
loskeletal models is summarized as follows:
1. Compute the joint angles, velocities, and accelera-
tions of the motion capture data.
2. Compute the joint torques  of the skeleton model.
3. Map the joint torques to muscle tensions using
(68.4) (
VIDEO 763 ).
Because most musculoskeletal models contain more
muscles than the skeleton DOF, the ﬁnal step does not
have a unique solution. The muscle tensions also have
to be constrained to be tensile. A common approach for
this problem is to apply numerical optimization tech-
niques [68.6, 11]. However, actual muscle tensions may
not be optimal because of the phenomena called co-
contraction, where antagonistic muscles are activated at
the same time. Such effect can be incorporated by mea-
suring the muscle activity through electromyography
(EMG) and consider the data in optimization [68.12].
Another method for computing muscle tensions
is to utilize physiological muscle models. The most
commonly used model was originally proposed by
Hill [68.9] and later formulated by Stroeve [68.10].
Muscle tension f is characterized by three compo-
nents: muscle activity a, muscle length l, and change of
muscle length Pl as follows:
f D a Fl.l/Fv.Pl/Fmax ;
(68.5)
where Fmax is the muscle-speciﬁc maximum voluntary
force, Fl./ and Fv./ are the functions that repre-
sent length–tension and velocity–tension relationship
respectively (Fig. 68.6). The muscle activity a changes
according to the following differential equation,
Pa D u  a
T
;
(68.6)
where T is a time constant and u is the normalized in-
put from the motor neuron which can be measured by
EMG.
68.2.4 Model Identification
Obtaining accurate human model parameters is difﬁcult
but very important for accurate motion and force esti-
mation. For robots, we can build a model based on CAD
(computer-aided design) models or even measurements
of the individual link mass, but both are impossible for
humans. On the other hand, personalized models are
important to make the analysis results useful for indi-
viduals.
Identification of Kinematic Parameters
In human motion analysis, the set of joints constructing
a human model is usually given. Kinematic parame-
ters include distance between joints and direction of the
joint axes.
We can apply some of the kinematic parameter
identiﬁcation techniques for robots [68.13] using mo-
tion capture to provide the data necessary for identiﬁ-
cation. Another approach is to use a human dimension
database [68.14] and use a few measurements from the
subject to estimate the rest.
Identification of Inertial Parameters
Conventional methods for manipulator inertia parame-
ter identiﬁcation (Chap. 6) use joint torque data, and
therefore cannot be applied to the human body.
However, Ayusawa et al. [68.15] proved that contact
force data give enough information to estimate the same
set of parameters for ﬂoating-base models. As shown in
Chap. 6, the generalized force Gi required to perform
a given motion described by the generalized coordi-
nates i, velocities Pi, and accelerations Ri is written
as a linear equation of the identiﬁable inertial parame-
ters p as
Ii

i; Pi; Ri

p D Gi :
(68.7)
We can obtain a number of these samples from motion
capture data. In manipulators with joint torque sensors,
all elements of I and G are available and therefore it is
trivial to solve (68.7).

Human Motion Reconstruction
68.3 Reconstruction for Understanding
1825
Part G | 68.3
As shown in (68.2), the generalized forces for hu-
man body models are produced by active joint torques
and contact forces. From (68.3), (68.7) can be divided
into the ﬁrst six rows and the remaining .n 6/ rows as
Iﬁ.i; Pi; Ri/p D JT
cﬁf ci ;
(68.8)
Iai.i; Pi; Ri/p D i C JT
caif ci :
(68.9)
For human body, joint torque data i are not avail-
able. However, we can obtain the contact force data
from force sensors embedded in the ﬂoor. In this
case, we have all the information in (68.8). Ayusawa
et al. [68.15] proved that this equation is enough for
identifying the same set of parameters as using the full
set of (68.7).
68.3 Reconstruction for Understanding
Human motion data can be used for motion and task
learning for humanoid robots, as represented by imita-
tion learning or learning by demonstration [68.1].
68.3.1 Segmentation of Human Motion
Human motion data are converted to a sequence of con-
ﬁgurations, such as joint angles or link positions over
the whole of the robot’s body, and the sequence is en-
coded into a set of model parameters as the motion
primitive. This encoding should follow the motion seg-
mentation; a chunk of motion should be obtained by
ﬁnding the frames where the motion starts and termi-
nates in the seamless motion data. Manually selected
motion segments are intuitive, reliable, and easily as-
signed their relevant motion labels. However, manual
segmentation is limited by its lack of scalability for the
large numbers of human motions required for training.
Human motion should be segmented so that a humanoid
robot can observe human actions and incrementally
memorize the motion primitives by segmenting and en-
coding unknown motions.
In the supervised segmentation method, the rela-
tion between each motion frame and its boundary score
from the training dataset is learned, and the bound-
ary in the motion observation is identiﬁed. For the
training dataset, human subjects have to detect the mo-
tion boundaries. Supervised segmentation has the same
drawback in scalability to large motion datasets as man-
ual segmentation.
There are studies of unsupervised segmentation
based on various methods: stopped moment, motion
clustering, and motion prediction. Motion segmenta-
tion based on the stopped moments is very simple. This
segmentation assumes that a motion pattern transits
to another motion via the stopped moment. The sim-
plest strategy only has to ﬁnd a pose when either joint
stops as a boundary candidate. The extensive approach
approximates a temporal sequence of the boundary can-
didates by a periodic function as a reference for the
motion boundaries. These methods may work for rhyth-
mic movements, such as dance, but it is not clear
whether they would be useful for segmenting daily hu-
man actions [68.16, 17].
Stochastic graphical models, typiﬁed by hidden
Markov models (HMM), are used to model the stream
of motion data [68.18]. An optimal node in the graphi-
cal model that is the most likely to generate the current
motion observation can be calculated. The observations
classiﬁed into the same node consequently are con-
sidered to be the same motion. In other words, the
transition between two nodes corresponds to the bound-
ary of the motions [68.19].
In natural language processing, word segmentation
is critical, especially for speech recognition, in which
words must be selected from a stream of phonemes.
Predictability strategy hypothesizes that it is difﬁcult
to predict the character at the beginning of the word.
A recurrent network based on this strategy has been
applied to the segmentation of words [68.20]. The
network learns the sequence of characters, and conse-
quently predicts the character from its preceding one.
This predictor detects a boundary where the error be-
tween the predicted and actual character becomes large,
and subsequently selects words. Similar to this ap-
proach, during motion learning motion is converted to
a sequence of short movements, each of which is rep-
resented by a binary vector equivalent to a word, and
this sequence is trained as the correlation matrix. This
matrix can be easily used to predict the short move-
ment by multiplying this matrix by the vector of the
preceding movement [68.21]. Movements with a large
prediction uncertainty can be detected as the motion
boundary.
68.3.2 Categorization of Human Motion
Human motion data is encoded into a set of parame-
ters in the dynamical systems [68.22, 23] or stochastic
models [68.24, 25]. The dynamical system represent-
ing state transitions by nonlinear differential equations
is a popular way to encode human motions and sub-
sequently synthesize robot motion adapted to various
environments. The dynamics in the human motions is

Part G | 68.3
1826
Part G
Robots and Humans
deﬁned as a vector ﬁeld, and each motion pattern is
expressed by a closed curve in this ﬁeld, which is con-
structed so as to attract robot’s motion to the reference
motion [68.26]. This attractor ﬁeld will stabilize the
robot’s motion even when the robot is perturbed by
the external environment. A popular approach based on
the dynamical system is a framework of the dynamic
movement primitives (DMPs) [68.27]. This framework
learns a single trajectory by using a spring-damping
model including a forcing term which makes it easy to
control a robot motion reaching a goal conﬁguration.
This framework has been extended to learn multi-
ple human motions such that the robot can perform
various motions and demonstrate the highly scalable na-
ture [68.28]. These dynamical systems mainly focus on
synthesize and control robot motions adaptively to the
environment. While they can predict motions and clas-
sify the observation into its speciﬁc motion category,
but they are not directly used for motion classiﬁcation.
Another popular approach based on the dynamical sys-
tem is a recurrent neural network (RNN). The RNN
generates the human posture following the input cur-
rent one, and is optimized such that error between the
generated posture and measured one can be minimized.
The resultant RNN can be useful for the motion predic-
tor. The RNN has been extended to a modiﬁed structure
with a layer of the small number of parametric biases,
into which the dynamics in the human motion can be
encoded [68.29]. This structure has an advantage of not
only generating motions from perception, but also rec-
ognize the perception as a category deﬁned by these
biases. Due to the complexity of the model structure, it
is difﬁcult to tune the parameters from a large number
of training data.
Stochastic framework, typiﬁed by HMMs, are
widely used for categorization of human motions.
A compact notation  D f˘ ; A; Bg represents an
HMM. ˘ is a set of initial node probabilities ˘ D fig,
A is a transition matrix A D
˚
aij

whose entries aij is the
probability of transitioning from the i-th node to the j-th
node, and B is a set of output distributions B D fbi./g.
Figure 68.7 shows the overview of the HMM. Human
motion is expressed by a sequence of joint angles or link
positions, x D f1; 2; : : : ; Tg. The parameters of the
HMM are optimized by Baum–Welch algorithm, which
is one of expectation maximization algorithms, such
that the likelihood P.xj/ of the human motion x being
generated by its relevant HMM  is maximized [68.30].
The HMM represents spatiotemporal features of the hu-
man motions, and is hereafter referred to as motion
primitive.
Human motion x can be classiﬁed into a motion
category represented by the motion primitive. The clas-
siﬁcation ﬁnds an HMM R which is the most likely to
θ1
θ2
b(θ1)
b(θ2)
a11
a12
a22
a23 ···
······
···
ai–1 i
θt–1
θt
b(θt–1)
b(θt)
ai i
an–1 n
an n
aii+1
Fig. 68.7 The overview of an HMM. An HMM is the
graphical model. A node extracts the spatio feature and an
edge extract the temporal feature
generate the human motion as follows
R D arg max
	 P.xj/ :
(68.10)
The likelihood P.xj/ can be efﬁciently computed in
the recursive manner by the forward algorithm
˛t.j/ D
X
i
˛t1.i/aijbj. t/ ;
(68.11)
P.xj/ D
X
i
˛T.i/ ;
(68.12)
where ˛t.j/ is the probability of generating a sequence
f1; 2; : : : ;  tg and staying at the j-th node at the
time t.
68.3.3 Temporal Sequence
of Human Motion
The representations of not only motion segments but
also the temporal sequence of them are important for
the robots to accurately understand human actions. Mo-
tion graph is the popular approach to represent the
transition between human postures [68.31]. It is possi-
ble to transfer between two postures that are similar to
one another. This framework creates the edges among
the human postures based on their spatial similarities.
The motion segmentation and motion catego-
rization can be extended to the representation of
temporal sequence of human motions. Human mo-
tion is expressed by a series of motion segments
f: : : ; x.k  1/; x.k/; x.k C 1/; : : :g by the segmentation
technique, and the series of motion segments is con-
verted to a temporal series of motion primitives
f: : : ; .k  1/; .k/;.k C 1/; : : : ; g by the motion cat-
egorization technique. The transition structure of the
motion primitives can be extracted by deriving a motion
N-gram model from the series of motion primitives. The

Human Motion Reconstruction
68.3 Reconstruction for Understanding
1827
Part G | 68.3
motion N-gram model assumes that the motion prim-
itive depends only on its N  1 pieces of the motion
primitives. The simplest structure is the motion bigram
(2-gram) model. The probability of transitioning from
the motion i to the motion j can be estimated as
P.ijj/ D
P
k CŒ.k  1/ D j; .k/ D i
P
k CŒ.k/ D j
;
(68.13)
where C./ is the frequency of the motion  appearing
in the observation of human motions, and this transition
probability maximizes the probability of the observa-
tion being generated by the motion bigram model.
This transition structure can be used for several ap-
plications such as editing animation character, detecting
abnormal actions, or predicting human actions [68.32].
In the case of the action prediction, current human mo-
tion is classiﬁed into the speciﬁc motion .0/. The
sequence of the motions 	 D f.1/;.2/;.K/g, which
is the most likely to be generated by the motion bigram
model, can be searched for by Dijkstra’s algorithm
	P D arg max
 PŒ.K/j.K  1/
 PŒ.K  1/j.K  2/   PŒ.1/j.0/ :
(68.14)
The selected sequence of motions is considered
to be motions predicted from the current motion
(
VIDEO 764 ).
68.3.4 Linguistic Interpretation
of Human Motion
Integration of the human motions with the natural
language leads to not only understanding the human
motions in the form of linguistic expressions but also
generating robot’s motions from the queries of language
commands. A framework of RNN with parametric bias
has been applied to the integration of the motions and
language. One RNN represents the dynamics in the
motions, and the other RNN represents the dynam-
ics of language, more speciﬁcally sequences of words.
The parametric biases shared by these two RNNs join
together RNNs [68.33]. Given sentences, the paramet-
ric biases for the sentences are estimated in the RNN
for the language, the RNN for the motion generates
motions using the parametric biases derived from the
language RNN. The robot can generate the motions cor-
responding to the sentences. This conversion from the
language to the motions is reversed, and it allows for
the conversion from motions to their descriptive sen-
tences [68.34].
Another integration of the human motions with
language is stochastical approach. Human action
is represented as a sequence of motion primitives
f.1/;.2/;: : : ; .k/g. A sequence of verbs !.1/;
!.2/;: : : ; !.l/ is also manually assigned to the same
human action, where !.i/ is the verb assigned to the
manually segmented motion at the i-th position. The
problem of extracting the references between the hu-
man motions and the verbs can be considered as a trans-
lation problem since the human motion is expressed by
a sequence of symbols (Fig. 68.8). The IBM transla-
tion model has been widely used in the natural language
processing [68.35], and can be applied to integrating
the human motions with their relevant verbs [68.36].
This translation model consists of translation probabil-
ity t.j!/ of the motion  being generated by the verb
!, and alignment probability a.ijj;l; k/ that the i-th po-
sition in a sequence of the verbs can align to the j-th
position in a sequence of the motions. These parame-
ters are optimized such that the following probability
that the sequence of verbs generates the sequence of
motions is maximized by the expectation-maximization
(EM) algorithm.
˚ D P ..1/;.2/;: : : ; .k/j!.1/;!.2/;: : : ; !.l// :
(68.15)
Additionally, the verb bigram model extracts the tran-
sition between two verbs as the verb transition prob-
ability P.!ij!j/ from the sequences of verbs attached
to the human motions. A sequence of verbs ! D
f!.1/;: : : ; !.l/g which is the most likely to describe
the human motion is
!R D arg max
! P.!j	/ D arg max
! P.	j!/P.!/ :
(68.16)
ω(2)
ω(1)
ω(3)
λ (2)
λ (1)
λ (3)
ω(l)
λ (k)
Verb sequence
Alignment probability
translation probability 
A sequence of motion primitives
· · ·
Fig. 68.8 Mapping between sequences of verbs and mo-
tion primitives

Part G | 68.3
1828
Part G
Robots and Humans
Communication
strategies
Recognition
result
Generation
command
Generation
process
Somato-
sensor
Vision
Recognition
process
HMM
Behavior
Interaction
recognition
input
Interaction
recognition
output
Interaction
generation
output
Interaction
Motion
Interaction
generation
input
HMM
HMM
HMM
Behavior
Human
Robot
Behavior
Motion representation
Interaction representation
Shortcut between interaction recognition
and interaction generation
to maintain current interaction
HMM
HMM
HMM
Behavior
Human
Robot
Behavior
Shortcut strategy
Shortcut between interaction recognition
and interaction generation
to maintain current interaction
HMM
HMM
HMM
Behavior
Human
Robot
Behavior
Achievement of simple interaction
Fig. 68.9 Modeling of the behavioral interaction
P.	j!/ can be computed using the translation proba-
bility and alignment probability, and P.!/ can be com-
puted using the verb transition probability. The human
motion is interpreted as the resultant verb sequence !R.
This framework has been extended to handling not only
verbs but also nouns, adverbs such that human motion
can be converted to the descriptive sentences [68.37]
(
VIDEO 766 ).
68.3.5 Theory of Communication
HMMs has been extended to hierarchical HMMs
(HHMM) or coupled HMMs (CHMM) to represent
complicated spatiotemporal features. Statistical model
is embedded into each node of the HMM in HHMM
while commonly used HMM has an Gaussian distri-
bution function in the node [68.38]. CHMM, in which
multiple HMMs interact, is a method for representing
mutual dependence between two such as a human and
a robot, or a motion and a manipulated object. These ap-
proaches may be applied to the interaction that requires
the complex representation [68.39]. However, the large
number of parameters in these frameworks limits their
application, and it is difﬁcult to use these frameworks
for human–robot interaction.
One efﬁcient approach to using the representation
of human motions as HMM is to design hierarchy for
motion primitives and interaction primitives. HMMs
representing human whole body motions can be use-
ful to recognize motion observation. The HMMs can be
reused to generate human-like motions for humanoid
robot. A node is sampled according to the node tran-
sition probabilities, and a conﬁguration is sampled
according to the output probabilities on the selected
node. The generation of the robot motion by the sam-
pling manner can be done in the same framework. It
is fundamental for the humanoid robot not only to rec-
ognize human motions but also to generate human-like
motions, and this framework has been applied to the
interaction between a human and a humanoid robot as
shown in Fig. 68.9.
The behavioral interaction is deﬁned by the
exchange of
the
motion
primitives between
the
two [68.37]. Observation of two interacting humans is
converted to a sequence of pairs of motion primitives
by recognizing their motions using the HMMs. HMMs
in the higher level represent these interactions. These
HMMs are more abstract analogy of representation of
the motions, and useful for recognition and generation
of the interaction patterns. A hypothesis is then intro-
duced for the simple commutation, more speciﬁcally
the communication is established by recognizing the re-
lationship of the two and subsequently maintaining it.
The two recognition output of the human and robot
using the HMMs in the lower level becomes the input
Motion
capture
camera
Virtual fighting
Performer
Humanoid robot
Fig. 68.10 Human–robot interaction realized by a symbol-
ically hierarchical communication model

Human Motion Reconstruction
68.4 Reconstruction for Robots
1829
Part G | 68.4
of the HMMs in the higher level, and the interaction can
be recognized as a higher HMM. The current node can
also be estimated in the selected higher HMM. The gen-
eration output from this node are a pair of two motion
primitives for the human and robot, and they become
the input of the lower HMMs. One motion primitive
for the human becomes the prediction of human behav-
ior, and another motion primitive for the robot becomes
the command for the motion generation. The recog-
nition and generation by the higher HMMs imply the
estimated state of the interaction and the control strat-
egy for the interaction, respectively. The importance
for the naturally drifting interaction is to represent the
process of the control strategy based on the estimated
interaction state as a shortcut between the recognition
and generation [68.40]. The experiment of interaction
between the human and robot in a virtual world demon-
strated its validity as shown in Fig. 68.10, and is further
applied to the human–robot interaction with compliant
physical contacts [68.41].
68.4 Reconstruction for Robots
This section reviews some examples of synthesizing
human-like motions of robots or virtual humans based
on human motions and/or physiological model.
68.4.1 Reconstruction for Virtual Humans
Instead of using inverse kinematics as described
in Sect. 68.2.2, Demerican et al. [68.42] developed
a method for reconstructing human motions by directly
tracking marker trajectories with a physically simu-
lated skeleton model. Figure 68.11 shows the set of
markers tracked as well as the skeleton model used
in the simulation. Examples of measured and simu-
lated marker trajectories are shown in Fig. 68.12, which
demonstrates the smoothness of the reconstructed hu-
man motions.
68.4.2 Controller Optimization
from Physiological Model
Recorded human motion is an outcome of the human
motor control. Instead of using the outcome, i. e., the
a)
b)
Marker subsets
for direct control
Fig.68.11a,b Marker set and skeletal
model used in (after [68.42]).
(a) Motion capture data. (b) Skeleton
model in simulation and active
interfaces (SAI) (after [68.43])
motion, Wang et al. [68.44] optimized controllers based
on physiological human model that includes eight ma-
jor leg muscles, including both uniarticular (drive single
joint) and biarticular (drive two joints) (Fig. 68.13). The
method optimizes the controller parameters based on
simulation considering the physiological muscle prop-
erties [68.9]. The results demonstrate good match with
human measurements in terms of both joint trajectories
and torques.
68.4.3 Reconstruction for Physical Robots
Tracking human motions with a physical humanoid
robot is not as straightforward as it may appear
even if the robot has human-like body topology, due
to various differences between the human and robot
bodies.
First, there is always some difference in the kine-
matic properties such as dimensions and proportion. In
manipulation, for example, simply copying the joint an-
gles will not result in the same hand positions if the
upper and lower arm lengths are different.

Part G | 68.4
1830
Part G
Robots and Humans
Shoulder–pitch
Shoulder–yaw
Shoulder–roll
Wrist–pitch
Wrist–yaw
Wrist–roll
Elbow
Wrist–pitch
Wrist–yaw
Wrist–roll
2
2.5
3
3.5
Right arm joint angles
Angle (rad)
Time (s)
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
–1.5
–2
–2.5
–3
–3.5
–4
2
2.5
3
3.5
Left arm joint angles
Angle (rad)
Time (s)
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
–1.5
–2
–2.5
–3
–3.5
–4
Fig.68.12a,b Joint angles computed from direct marker tracking (after [68.42]). (a) Right arm joint angles. (b) Left arm
joint angles
a)
b)
c)
HFL
VAS
RF
TA
GLU
SOL
HAM
GAS
Fig.68.13a–c The musculoskeletal model used in [68.44]
(a) skeleton and muscles (red lines), (b) ﬁve uniarticular
muscles, and (c) three biarticular muscles
The kinematic difference comes not only from dif-
ferent dimensions, but also from ﬂexibility of the hu-
man body that is difﬁcult to replicate with mechanical
systems. For example, the human spine has much more
degrees of freedom than the torso of typical humanoid
robots.
Secondly, robot hardware is generally much more
restrictive in terms of joint motion range as well as
velocity, acceleration, and torque limits. As a result,
robots cannot always perform the same range of mo-
tion as humans. We would therefore have to modify the
original motions such that they are within the hardware
limits.
Finally, the inertial properties such as mass, inertia,
and center of mass locations are different. In motions
that involve balancing, the different inertial properties
may make the motion unbalanced and cause a fall.
While motion capture data have been frequently
applied to virtual human characters in simulated envi-
ronments [68.45–47], much less work has been done
on directly controlling humanoid robots with human
motion capture data. Nakaoka et al. [68.2] divided cap-
tured dancing motion into multiple tasks and optimized
each task to be feasible for the robot dynamics. Miura
et al. [68.48] computed feasbile center of mass trajec-
tory based on the center of pressure trajectory deter-
mined from the footsteps in the motion data, and then
computed the joint motions by inverse kinematics.
Ott et al. [68.49] and Yamane and Hodgins [68.50,
51], on the other hand, combined online balance control
and tracking control to address the problem of dif-
ferent dynamics. Figure 68.14 depicts some snapshots
from the hardware experiment of tracking a human mo-
tion capture sequence with a ﬂoating-base humanoid
robot [68.51] (
VIDEO 765 ).

Human Motion Reconstruction
References
1831
Part G | 68
Fig. 68.14 Snapshots from the
hardware experiment
Video-References
VIDEO 762
Example of optical motion capture data converted to joint angle data
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/762
VIDEO 763
Example of muscle tensions computed from motion capture data
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/763
VIDEO 764
The Crystal Ball: Predicting future motions
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/764
VIDEO 765
Human motion mapped to a humanoid robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/765
VIDEO 766
Converting human motion to sentences
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/65/videodetails/766
References
68.1
M.J.
Mataric:
Getting
humaniods
to
move
and
imitate,
IEEE
Intell.
Syst.
15(4),
18–24
(2000)
68.2
S. Nakaoka, A. Nakazawa, F. Kanehiro, K. Kaneko,
M. Morisawa, H. Hirukawa, K. Ikeuchi: Learning
from observation paradigm: Leg task models for
enabling a biped humanoid robot to imitate hu-
man dances, Int. J. Robotics Res. 26(8), 829–844
(2010)
68.3
Organic
Motion,
Inc.:
OpenStage,
http://
organicmotion.com/mocap-for-animation
68.4
Microsoft: Kinect for Xbox One, http://www.xbox.
com/en-US/xbox-one/accessories/kinect-for-
xbox-one
68.5
M. Vondrak, L. Sigal, J. Hodgins, O. Jenkins: Video-
based 3D motion capture through biped control,
ACM Trans. Graph. 31(4), 24 (2012)
68.6
Y. Nakamura, K. Yamane, Y. Fujita, I. Suzuki: so-
matosensory computation for man-machine inter-
face from motion capture data and musculoskeletal
human model, IEEE Trans. Robotics 21(1), 58–66
(2005)
68.7
K. Yamane, Y. Nakamura: Natural motion anima-
tion through constraining and deconstraining at
will, IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 9(3), 352–360
(2003)
68.8
J.J. Craig: Introduction to Robotics: Mechanics and
Control (Addison-Wesley, Reading 1986)

Part G | 68
1832
Part G
Robots and Humans
68.9
A.V. Hill: The heat of shortening and the dynamic
constants of muscle, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 126, 136–
195 (1938)
68.10
S. Stroeve: Impedance chracteristics of a neuro-
musculoskeletal model of the human arm I: Pos-
ture control, J. Biol. Cyberneics 81, 475–494 (1999)
68.11
J. Rasmussen, M. Damsgaard, M. Voigt: Muscle re-
cruitment by the min/max criterion—a comparative
study, J. Biomech. 34(3), 409–415 (2001)
68.12
K. Yamane, Y. Fujita, Y. Nakamura: Estimation of
physically and physiologically valid somatosensory
information, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA) (2005) pp. 2635–2641
68.13
B.W. Mooring, Z.S. Roth, M.R. Driels: Fundamentals
of Manipulator Calibration (Wiley, New York 1991)
68.14
Digital Human Research Center, AIST: Human Body
Properties
Database,
https://www.dh.aist.go.jp/
database/properties/index-e.html
68.15
K. Ayusawa, G. Venture, Y. Nakamura: Identification
of humanoid robots dynamics using minimal set of
sensors, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2008) pp. 2854–2859
68.16
T. Kim, S.I. Park, S.Y. Shin: Nonmetric individ-
ual differences multidimensional scaling: An al-
ternating least squres method with optimal scal-
ing features, ACM Trans. Graph. 22(3), 392–401
(2003)
68.17
T. Shiratori, A. Nakazawa, K. Ikeuchi: Detecting
dance motion structure through music analysisg,
Proc. 6th IEEE Int. Conf. Autom. Face Gesture Recog-
nit. (2004) pp. 857–862
68.18
J. Kohlmorgen, S. Lemm: A dynamic HMM for on-
line segmentation of sequential data, Proc. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (2002) pp. 793–800
68.19
D. Kulic, W. Takano, Y. Nakamura: Online segmen-
tation and clustering from continuous observation
of whole body motions, IEEE Trans. Robotics 25(5),
1158–1166 (2009)
68.20
J.L. Elman: Finding structure in time, Cogn. Sci. 14,
179–211 (1990)
68.21
W. Takano, Y. Nakamura: Humanoid robot’s au-
tonomous acquisition of proto-symbols through
motion segmentation, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Hu-
manoid Robots (2006) pp. 425–431
68.22
A.J. Ijspeert, J. Nakanishi, S. Shaal: Learning control
policies for movement imitation and movement
recognition, Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 15, 1547–1554
(2003)
68.23
M. Haruno, D. Wolpert, M. Kawato: MOSAIC model
for sensorimotor learning and control, Neural Com-
put. 13, 2201–2220 (2001)
68.24
T. Inamura, I. Toshima, H. Tanie, Y. Nakamura:
Embodied symbol emergence based on mimesis
theory, Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(4), 363–377 (2004)
68.25
A. Billard, S. Calinon, F. Guenter: Discriminative and
adaptive imitation in uni-manual and bi-manual
tasks, Robotics Auton. Syst. 54, 370–384 (2006)
68.26
M. Okada, K. Tatani, Y. Nakamura: Polynomial de-
sign of the nonlinear dynamics for the brain-
like information processing of whole body motion,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002)
pp. 1410–1415
68.27
A.J. Ijispeert, J. Nakanishi, T. Shibata, S. Schaal:
Nonlinear dynamical systems for imitation with
humanoid robots, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Hu-
manoid Robots (2001)
68.28
T. Matsubara, S.H. Hyon, J. Morimoto: Learning
parametric dynamic movement primitives from
multiple demonstrations, Neural Netw. 24(5), 493–
500 (2011)
68.29
J. Tani, M. Ito: Self-organization of behavioral
primitives as multiple attractor dynamics: A robot
experiment, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. A 33(4),
481–488 (2003)
68.30
L. Rabiner: A Tutorial on hidden Markov models
and selected applications in speech recognition,
Proceedings IEEE (1989) pp. 257–286
68.31
L. Kovar, M. Gleicher, F. Pighin: Motion graphs, ACM
Trans. Graph. 21(3), 473–482 (2002)
68.32
W. Takano, H. Imagawa, D. Kulic, Y. Nakamura:
What do you expect from a robot that tells your fu-
ture? The crystal ball, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS), Taipei (2008) pp. 1780–1785
68.33
Y. Sugita, J. Tani: Learning semantic combinatori-
ality from the interaction between linguistic and
behavioral processes, Adapt. Behav. 3(1), 33–52
(2005)
68.34
T.
Ogata,
M.
Murase,
J.
Tani,
K.
Komatani,
H.G. Okuno: Two-way translation of compound
sentences and arm motions by recurrent neural
networks, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2007) pp. 1858–1863
68.35
P.F. Brown, S.A.D. Pietra, V.J.D. Pietra, R.L. Mer-
cer: The mathematics of statistical machine trans-
lation: Parameter estimation, Comput. Linguist.
19(2), 263–311 (1993)
68.36
W. Takano, Y. Nakamura: Construction of a space
of motion labels from their mapping to full-
body motion symbols, Adv. Robotics 29(2), 115–126
(2015)
68.37
W. Takano, Y. Nakamura: Statistical mutual con-
version between whole body motion primitives
and linguistic sentences for human motions, Int.
J. Robot. Res. 34(10), 1314–1328 (2015)
68.38
S. Fine, Y. Singer, N. Tishby: The hierarchical hidden
markov model: Analysis and application, Mach.
Learn. 32, 41–62 (1998)
68.39
M. Brand, N. Oliver, A. Pentland: Coupled hid-
den Markov models for complex action recogni-
tion, Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(1999) pp. 994–999
68.40
W. Takano, K. Yamane, T. Sugihara, K. Yamamoto,
Y. Nakamura: Primitive communication based on
motion recognition and generation with hierarchi-
cal mimesis model, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 3602–3609
68.41
D. Lee, C. Ott, Y. Nakamura: Mimetic communication
model with compliant physical contact in human-
humanoid interaction, Int. J. Robotics Res. 29(13),
1684–1704 (2004)
68.42
E. Demerican, L. Sentis, V. De Sapio, O. Khatib:
Human motion reconstruction by direct control of
marker trajectories. In: Advances in Robot Kine-
matics: Analysis and Design, ed. by J. Lenar-

Human Motion Reconstruction
References
1833
Part G | 68
cic, P. Wenger (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2008)
pp. 263–272
68.43
O. Khatib, O. Brock, K. Chang, F. Conti, D. Rus-
pini, L. Sentis: Robotics and interactive simulation,
Commun. ACM 45(3), 46–51 (2002)
68.44
J.M. Wang, S.R. Hamner, S.L. Delp, V. Koltun: Op-
timizing locomotion controllers using biologically-
based actuators and objectives, ACM Trans. Robotics
31(4), 25 (2012)
68.45
V.B. Zordan, J.K. Hodgins: Motion capture-driven
simulations that hit and react, Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH
Symp. Comput. Animat. (2002) pp. 89–96
68.46
K.W. Sok, M.M. Kim, J.H. Lee: Simulating biped
behaviors from human motion data, ACM Trans.
Graph. 26(3), 107 (2007)
68.47
M. Da Silva, Y. Abe, J. Popović: Interactive simu-
lation of stylized human locomotion, ACM Trans.
Graph. 27(3), 82 (2008)
68.48
K. Miura, M. Morisawa, F. Kanehiro, S. Kajia,
K. Kaneko, K. Yokoi: Human-like walking with
toe supporting for humanoids, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011) pp. 4428–
4435
68.49
C. Ott, D.H. Lee, Y. Nakamura: Motion capture based
human motion recognition and imitation by direct
marker control, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid
Robots (2008) pp. 399–405
68.50
K. Yamane, J.K. Hodgins: Simultaneous tracking
and balancing of humanoid robots for imitating
human motion capture data, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robot Syst. (IROS) (2009) pp. 2510–
2517
68.51
K. Yamane, S.O. Anderson, J.K. Hodgins: Control-
ling humanoid robots with human motion data:
Experimental validation, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf.
Humanoid Robots (2010) pp. 504–510

Multimedia Contents Physical Hum
1835
Part G | 69
69. Physical Human–Robot Interaction
Sami Haddadin, Elizabeth Croft
Over the last two decades, the foundations for
physical human–robot interaction (pHRI) have
evolved from successful developments in mecha-
tronics, control, and planning, leading toward
safer lightweight robot designs and interaction
control schemes that advance beyond the current
capacities of existing high-payload and high-
precision position-controlled industrial robots.
Based on their ability to sense physical inter-
action, render compliant behavior along the
robot structure, plan motions that respect hu-
man preferences, and generate interaction plans
for collaboration and coaction with humans, these
novel robots have opened up novel and unfore-
seen application domains, and have advanced the
field of human safety in robotics.
This chapter gives an overview on the state of
the art in pHRI. First, the advances in human safety
are outlined, addressing topics in human injury
analysis in robotics and safety standards for pHRI.
Then, the foundations of human-friendly robot
design, including the development of lightweight
and intrinsically flexible force/torque-controlled
machines together with the required perception
abilities for interaction are introduced. Subse-
quently, motion-planning techniques for human
environments, including the domains of biome-
chanically safe, risk-metric-based, human-aware
planning are covered. Finally, the rather recent
problem of interaction planning is summarized,
including the issues of collaborative action plan-
ning, the definition of the interaction planning
problem, and an introduction to robot reflexes
and reactive control architecture for pHRI.
69.1 Classification ....................................... 1836
69.1.1
Classification of Interaction ........ 1838
69.2 Human Safety...................................... 1839
69.2.1
Human Injury in Robotics .......... 1839
69.2.2 Safety Standards
for Human–Robot Interaction..... 1845
69.3 Human-Friendly Robot Design ............. 1847
69.3.1
Lightweight Design.................... 1847
69.3.2 Intrinsically Flexible Design........ 1849
69.3.3 Perception for Interaction .......... 1851
69.3.4 Proprioceptive Force/Torque
Sensing .................................... 1852
69.3.5 Tactile Perception ...................... 1852
69.3.6 Visual Perception....................... 1853
69.4 Control for Physical Interaction............. 1853
69.4.1 Interaction Control .................... 1853
69.4.2 Learning and Adaptation ........... 1854
69.4.3 Collision Handling ..................... 1856
69.4.4 Shared Manipulation Control...... 1858
69.5 Motion Planning for Human
Environments ...................................... 1859
69.5.1 Biomechanically Safe
Motion Planning ....................... 1859
69.5.2 Risk-Metric-Based Motion
Planning .................................. 1861
69.5.3 Human-Aware Motion Planning . 1862
69.6 Interaction Planning............................ 1862
69.6.1 Collaborative Action Planning..... 1862
69.6.2 Interaction Planning Problem..... 1864
69.6.3 Robot Reflexes .......................... 1865
69.6.4 Reactive Control Architecture ...... 1866
69.7 Conclusions and Challenges ................. 1867
Video-References......................................... 1868
References................................................... 1869

Part G | 69.1
1836
Part G
Robots and Humans
69.1 Classification
Robotics
is
currently
undergoing
a
fundamental
paradigm shift, both in research and real-world applica-
tions. Classically, it was dominated for the last decades
by possibly dangerous position-controlled rigid robots
carrying out typical automation tasks, such as position-
ing and path tracking in various applications. Recently,
a new generation of mechatronic robots has appeared
on the landscape, including novel concepts in general
robot design within the soft-robotics context. This trend
brings us closer to the long-term goal of safe, seamless
physical human–robot interaction (pHRI) in the real do-
mestic and professional world (Fig. 69.1).
Recent advances in physical human–robot interac-
tion have shown the potential and feasibility of robot
systems for active and safe workspace sharing and col-
laboration with humans. The fundamental breakthrough
was the human-centered design of robot mechanics and
control (soft-robotics), which also induced the novel
research stream of intrinsically elastic robots (series
elastic actuators (SEA) or its generalization variable
impedance actuators (VIA)). By considering the phys-
ical contact of the human and the robot in the design
phase, possible injuries due to unintentional contacts
can be considerably mitigated. Furthermore, taking into
account the human’s intention and preferences will en-
Fig. 69.1 The current paradigm shift in robotics induced by new target domains and robots toward the vision of close
human–robot coexistence (courtesy of Keller und Knappich Augsburg (KUKA), Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raum-
fahrt (DLR), ABB, Rethink Robotics)
able the realization of human-friendly motions and in-
teraction behavior. Some of the most advanced systems
that were developed are now entering into industrial
markets. These technologies serve both industrial and
service-oriented domains. Possible future applications
of these novel devices developed for close interaction
with humans are depicted in Fig. 69.2. They range from
industrial coworkers and mobile servants over robots
in the professional service sector, assistive devices for
physically challenged individuals, to service robots for
the support of general household activities. All of these
applications share the common requirement of close,
safe, and dependable physical interaction between hu-
man and robot in a shared workspace. Therefore, such
robots need to be carefully designed for human friendli-
ness. That is, they have to be able to safely sense, reason,
learn, and act in a partially unknown world inhabited
by humans. In turn, this set of requirements necessitates
the design of novel solutions in various theoretical and
technological developments. In contrast to the classi-
cal modular view on robotics technology, and the role
humans play in this, a fundamental paradigm shift in
robot development has to be pursued. While encompass-
ing safety issues based on biomechanical human injury
analysis as well as on the kinesiologic biomechanics

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
69.1 Classification
1837
Part G | 69.1
a)
d)
e)
f)
b)
c)
Fig.69.2a–f Application examples for pHRI, ranging from shop ﬂoor logistics and manipulation (a,b), over professional
service robots and assisitve devices for the disabled (c,d), to service robots in domestic applications (e,f)
of human movements, human-friendly hardware design
and interaction control strategies, learning, perceptive,
and cognitive key components have to be developed
and validated. These need to enable robots to track, un-
derstand, and predict human motions in real time in
a weakly structured dynamic environment. Apart from
developing the capabilities for interactive autonomy in-
cluding self-improvement, human safety and physical
interaction have to be embedded at the cognitive de-
cisional level as well. This will enable the robots to
react or physically interact with humans in a safe and
autonomous way. Biomechanical knowledge, neurome-
chanical insights, and biologically motivated variable
compliance actuators can be used to design manipula-
tion/interaction systems of varying complexity close to
human properties and performance. Further fundamen-
tal insights into novel designs of VIAs for an improved
torque/mass ratio and energy efﬁciency with new con-
trol methods to exploit the stiffness and damping prop-
erties are required.
Planning and adapting motions and tasks of such
complex systems in real-time require new concepts,
including tight coupling of control, planning, and learn-
ing, which will lead to reactive behaviors capable
of self-improvement. Moreover, self-explaining inter-
action and communication frameworks need to be
developed to enhance the system usability and inter-
pretability for humans. These should, for example,
communicate whether a situation is safe or dangerous
using not only verbal, but also nonverbal communi-
cation cues, such as gestures and emotional feedback.
Finally, the dependability of all system components and
algorithms is a major issue, the systematic treatment
of which is of particular importance for subsequent in-
dustrial commercialization of the technology and also
for the commercial domestic use of robots in every-
day environments. Thus, the foreseeable breakthrough
of the next generation of robotic systems in ﬂexible au-
tomation in both small and medium enterprises (SMEs)
and global market companies depends primarily on
the pHRI development over the next years. Robotic
assistance in manual processes that advantageously
partner human and robot workers has an enormous un-
explored potential to amplify productively in processes
that previously could not be automated due to techno-
logical, cost, or efﬁciency reasons. Furthermore, very
promising application domains of the technology are
in the professional service sector (e.g., hospital sup-
port systems) and in the logistics domain (food logistics
and quality inspection), which are so far to a large
extent still purely manual work places. As the nat-
ural next step, systems capable of pHRI will enter
the home sector as home assistants, elderly care as-
sist, and assistive devices (
VIDEO 607 ,
VIDEO 614 ,
VIDEO 618 ,
VIDEO 623 ) for physically challenged
people (
VIDEO 618 ,
VIDEO 619 ,
VIDEO 620 ,
VIDEO 621 ,
VIDEO 622 ). First, rather basic tasks,
such as fetch-and-carry or environment manipulation,
will be solved followed by applications with increasing
complexity.

Part G | 69.1
1838
Part G
Robots and Humans
Agency
Proximity
Teleoperated devices
(DaVinci, Phantoms)
Wearable
robotics
Cobotic and
intelligent assist
devices
Cooperative
Collaborative
(LBR iiwa, Baxter)
Supportive
(Minerva, Rhino, ICat)
Responsive
(Paro, Haptic Creature)
Low
High
Personal
In hand
Arms length
Out of reach
Fig. 69.3 Classiﬁcation scheme for pHRI, by proximity of the interaction and agency (available autonomy) of the robot
69.1.1 Classification of Interaction
pHRI falls into the category of proximate interaction
where humans and robots are colocated, as opposed
to remote or teleoperated interaction (Chap. 43) [69.1].
Beyond proximity, the nature of the physical interaction
can be understood in the context of the tasks and roles
undertaken by the robot and human actors in a pHRI
scenario. In all of these scenarios, a key feature is the
available autonomy, or agency, of the robot partner for
performing its portion of the task. This agency separates
pHRI from Cobotic devices [69.2] and other passive
robotic lift assists that require, by design, input from
the operator.
Most work in pHRI can be generally classiﬁed
across three broad categories of interaction: support-
ive, collaborative, and cooperative. Ordered in this
way we note that these interactions are marked by
increasing frequency and necessity of physical con-
tact with the robot and level of proximity to the user
(Fig. 69.3). Further categories include touch-based, per-
sonally responsive robots, for example, Paro [69.3]
and the Haptic Creature [69.4], and wearable robots
(Chap. 70).
In supportive interactions, we group interactions
where the robot is not integral to the central perfor-
mance of a task, but instead provides the human with
the tools, materials, and information to optimize the
human’s task performance or objectives, for example,
museum tour guide robots, shopping assistant robots for
aiding seniors [69.5], and homecare robots (Chaps. 65
and 73). In this context, pHRI is typically concerned
with safety, that is, preventing and mitigating the effect
of unexpected contacts or collisions, and performing
appropriate proxemic behavior. When required, phys-
ical interaction is infrequent and transitory in nature –
typically limited to handoffs or other infrequent trans-
actional exchanges. To support safety, as well as these
limited physical interactions, well-structured human–
robot communication (Chap. 71) is essential. For ex-
ample, recent work [69.6–11] has demonstrated the
importance of bi-lateral gesture cues in performing
turn-taking, information sharing, close proximity activ-
ities, and precontact handover operations.
In collaborative interactions (
VIDEO 609 ), the
human and robot both work on the task, with the labor
divided between the robot and human, each separately
completing the parts of the task best suited to their

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
69.2 Human Safety
1839
Part G | 69.2
abilities, but more frequently interacting through turn-
taking and part/tool passing [69.12, 13] (
VIDEO 716 ),
or haptically enabled mode switching where contact is
used to switch the robot’s interactive behavior [69.14]
(
VIDEO 717 ,
VIDEO 632 ). In these scenarios, the
human completes task elements requiring human dex-
terity or decision making, while the robot completes el-
ements not well suited to direct human involvement, for
example, repetitive or high-force applications, chem-
ical deposition, or precision placement. In both sup-
portive and collaborative interactions, physical space
is often shared but planned physical interactions, al-
though much more frequent, are still transactional in
nature.
Cooperative interactions refer to the extension of
cooperative manipulation (see also Chaps. 39 and 70) to
include force interactions with humans. This type of in-
teraction is differentiated from Cobots in that the robot
operates as an independent agent, rather than a passive
assist. That is, the human and the robot work in direct
physical contact, or indirect contact through a com-
mon object, with continuous and cooperative shared
control of the task. Cooperative interactions encompass
tasks, such as cooperative lifting and carrying [69.15–
17] (
VIDEO 613 ,
VIDEO 820 ), kinesthetic teach-
ing [69.18] (
VIDEO 627 ), coordinated material han-
dling (e.g., managing long and ﬂexible objects), and
rehabilitation therapy (Chap. 64).
69.2 Human Safety
Providing safety in pHRI is a multifaceted challenge
and requires an analysis on various levels of abstrac-
tion. pHRI aims at the coexistence of humans and
robots in a common workspace and at extending their
communication modes by physical means. This spatial
proximity leads to a variety of potential threats, deter-
mined by the current state of the system of interest,
which consists of the human(s), the robot(s), and their
surrounding environment. Understanding the respective
threats, in particular regarding potential human injury
originating from physical robot–human contacts, and
embedding the insights accordingly into safety stan-
dards/regulations is one of the major challenges of
Constrained impact
Clamping in robot structure
Unconstrained
impact
Contact scenarios
Partially constrained impact
Secondary impact
Fig. 69.4 Robot–human
impact scenario classes. Un-
constrained and constrained
impacts are considered the
two main scenarios
nowadays robotics (note that this chapter does not cover
functional safety or robot dependability).
69.2.1 Human Injury in Robotics
Impact Scenarios
In order to quantify human injury that may occur
in the context of pHRI, one needs to understand
how mechanical contacts may cause injury in princi-
ple. Figure 69.4 depicts relevant robot–human impact
scenarios. These may involve unconstrained impacts,
clamping in the robot structure, constrained impacts,
partially constrained impacts, and resulting secondary

Part G | 69.2
1840
Part G
Robots and Humans
impacts [69.19]. Apart from such situational deﬁni-
tions, the most urgent question is how to quantify the
human injury level that might occur due to a colli-
sion between human and robot. The understanding of
human injury has been treated in the ﬁelds of injury
biomechanics and forensics for several decades and the
respective studies served for the early work on human
injury in robotics. In fact, various injury measures from
biomechanics and forensics were applied to human in-
jury analysis in robotics [69.19–25]. An overview on
the most important existing injury classiﬁcation met-
rics and biomechanical injury measures can be found
in [69.26] (
VIDEO 608 ). The most important results
from the biomechanics, forensics, and robotics litera-
ture are brieﬂy reviewed now.
Overview Biomechanics Literature
In order to derive the injury characteristics of different
body parts for direct collisions with an impactor, which
is the most relevant case for robotics, countless experi-
ments and publications have been produced over the last
z
x
y
Radius
y
x
z
z
y
x
Angle
Edge radius
z
x
y
Length
z
x
y
Edge radius
y
x
z
Length
Width
z
x
y
Edge radius
y
x
z
Radius
a)
b)
c)
e)
d)
Fig.69.5a–e Typical impactor primitives with according parameters. (a) Sphere, (b) edge, (c) cuboid, (d) ﬂat circular, (e) sharp
tools
50 years. The investigated impactors used in robotics
and biomechanics experiments vary signiﬁcantly in size
and shape. However, from the test setups, one can
identify and cluster principal geometric primitives. The
main primitives and their parameters are depicted in
Fig. 69.5. The z-axis of the coordinate frame associated
with each primitive deﬁnes the direction of impact u.
Numerous relevant impact experiments with ca-
davers, volunteers, crash test dummies, and biological
tissue for the head, neck, and chest were generated
(Tables 69.1–69.4). There for all selected experimen-
tal campaigns, the collision scenario, impacted body
part, impact parameters according to Fig. 69.5, subject,
and impact velocity are listed. For describing the colli-
sion scenario, we use the following abbreviations: D:
dynamic, QS: quasi-static, U: unconstrained, C: con-
strained, PC: partially constrained. A collision experi-
ment denoted by DU is, thus, dynamic unconstrained,
while quasi-static constrained impacts are labeled QSC
(Sect. 69.2.1, Synopsis). The respective impactor type
and parameters are listed for comparison.

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
69.2 Human Safety
1841
Part G | 69.2
Table 69.1 Overview of selected impact experiments from biomechanics and robotics literature. Body part: Head
Impactor type
Impactor parameters
Collision case
Subject
Mass (kg)
Velocity (m=s)
References
Flat circular
Maxilla, zygoma, frontal,
temporo-parietal, mandible
14:3 mm radius
dynamic constrained
(DC)
Cadaver
1:083:82
2:995:97
[69.27, 28]
Temporo-Parietal
12:7 mm radius
DC
Cadaver
10.6
2.7
[69.29]
Nose
14:3 mm radius
DC
Cadaver
3.2
1:563:16
[69.30]
Frontal
35 mm radius
DU
Cadaver
14.3
3:376:99
[69.31]
Edge
Nose
12:5 mm radius
DU
Cadaver
32, 64
2:776:83
[69.32]
Maxilla, zygoma, frontal
10 mm radius
DC
Cadaver
14.5
2:44:2
[69.33]
Frontal
12:7 mm radius
dynamic partially
constrained (DPC)
Cadaver
1 (human falling
on impactor)
2:233:14
[69.34]
Cuboid
Temporo-parietal
50 mm length,
100 mm width
DC
Cadaver
12
4.3
[69.29]
Frontal
Size not speciﬁed, padded
DPC
Cadaver
5:315:97
3:569:6
[69.35]
Frontal
size not speciﬁed
DPC
Cadaver
1 (human falling
on impactor)
2:233:87
[69.34]
Sphere
Frontal
120 mm radius
DU, QSC, DPC
Hybrid III
dummy
4, 67, 1980
0:24:2
[69.36, 37]
Frontal
203.2, 76:2 mm radius
DPC
Cadaver
1 (human falling
on impactor)
2:873:5
[69.34]
Table 69.2 Overview of selected impact experiments from biomechanics and robotics literature. Body part: Torso
Impactor type
Impactor parameters
Collision case
Subject
Mass (kg)
Velocity (m=s)
References
Flat circular
Thorax
76:2 mm radius, 12:77 mm
edge radius
DU, DC
Cadaver
1:623:6
4:3414:5
[69.38, 39]
Thorax
76 mm radius, rubber padded
DU
Volunteer
10
2:44:6
[69.40]
Thorax
76:2 mm radius, 12:77 mm
edge radius
DU
Cadaver
19.27
4:010:6
[69.41]
Abdomen
12:7 mm radius
DU
Cadaver
32, 64
4:913:0
[69.42]
Sphere
Thorax
120 mm radius
DU, QSC
Hybrid III dummy
4, 67, 1980
0:24:2
[69.36, 37]
Abdomen
5, 12:5 mm radius
DC
Pig tissue
210
0:54:0
[69.25]
Edge
Abdomen
45ı angle, 200 mm length,
0:2 mm edge radius
DC
Pig tissue
210
0:54:0
[69.25]
Table 69.3 Overview of selected impact experiments from biomechanics and robotics literature. Body part: Upper extremities
Impactor type
Impactor parameters
Collision case
Subject
Mass (kg)
Velocity (m=s)
References
Edge
Forearm
12:5 mm radius, angle 0ı
DC
Cadaver
9.48
3.63
[69.43]
Forearm
size not speciﬁed
DC
Cadaver
9.75
2.44, 4.23
[69.44]
Shoulder, upper arm, forearm
5 mm edge radius, 30ı angle
DC
Volunteer
4.16, 8.65
0:451:25
Flat circular
Forearm, hand
size not speciﬁed
QSC
Cadaver
1 (velocity
control)
25 mm=min
[69.45]
Table 69.4 Overview of selected impact experiments from biomechanics and robotics literature. Body part: Lower extremities
Impactor type
Impactor parameters
Collision case
Subject
Mass (kg)
Velocity (m=s)
References
Sharp
Fig. 69.5
DC
Pig tissue, volunteer
4
0:160:8
[69.24]

Part G | 69.2
1842
Part G
Robots and Humans
Next, some essential characteristics of human–robot
impacts are elaborated for a more general understand-
ing of the underlying dynamics.
Robot–Human Impacts
Let us assume that of a serial chain rigid robot consist-
ing of n joints, there is at most a single link involved in
a collision. Let
Pxc D
v c
!c

D
Jc;lin.q/
Jc;ang.q/

Pq D Jc.q/Pq 2 R6
(69.1)
be the stacked (screw) vector of linear velocity at the
contact point and the angular velocity of the associ-
ated robot link, with an associated (geometric) contact
Jacobian Jc.q/ that is a function of the joint angle q. Ac-
cordingly, the Cartesian collision wrench is denoted by
Fext D
 f ext
mext

2 R6 :
(69.2)
Robot Collision Modeling. When such a collision oc-
curs, the robot dynamics becomes
M.q/Rq C C.q; Pq/Pq C g.q/ C F D  C ext ;
(69.3)
where M.q/ 2 Rnn is the symmetric and positive def-
inite joint space inertia matrix, C.q; Pq/Pq 2 Rn is the
centripetal and Coriolis vector, and g.q/ 2 Rn is the
gravity vector;  2 Rn is the motor torque, and F 2 Rn
is the dissipative friction torque; ext 2 Rn is the typi-
cally unknown external joint torque given by
ext D JT
c .q/ Fext :
(69.4)
The effective mass mu of a robot acting in the
instantaneous collision direction u, which has to be con-
sistent to Jc.q/, can be deduced from M.q/ via the
Cartesian kinetic energy matrix ƒ.q/. This is deﬁned as
ƒ.q/ D

Jc.q/M.q/1Jc.q/T	1 ;
(69.5)
where the inverse of ƒ.q/ is based on the decomposi-
tion of the kinetic energy matrix
ƒ.q/1 D

ƒv.q/1
ƒv!.q/
ƒv!.q/T
ƒ!.q/1

;
(69.6)
with ƒv!.q/ D Jc;lin.q/M.q/1Jc;ang.q/T. Finally, mu
is found to be
mu D ŒuTƒv.q/1u1 :
(69.7)
It should be noted that the Jacobian has to be the
center-of-mass-Jacobian. Otherwise, the entire inverse
of the Cartesian inertia tensor has to be used, and not
just its translational component block. More details
can be found in [69.46]. We assume the local impact
curvature in the u-direction to be denoted by cu.
Characteristic Robot–Human Impact Force Profile.
A physical collision between robot and human is typ-
ically characterized by a distinct force proﬁle that is
composed by two consecutive phases (note that for un-
constrained soft-tissue collisions these two phases can
simplify into a single Phase I impact) (Fig. 69.6):
1. Phase I is characterized by a very short impact, gov-
erned by the robot- and human-reﬂected dynamics.
2. Phase II is characterized by a quasistatic contact
event. Without clamping, this is a pushing force,
whereas if the human is clamped it is a crushing
force.
Phase I can be treated from a pure impact physics,
almost open-loop point of view, that is, it is determined
by the reﬂected inertia, velocity, and impact curvature
cu of the robot together with the characteristics of the
respective body part that is being struck. The maximum
contact force is denoted FI.
Phase II, on the other hand, has to be further sub-
divided into either clamping or no clamping incident.
In the case of no clamping, the maximum force is FIIA,
whereas for clamping, the maximum force is FIIB. In
particular, Phase II is highly robot control and design
dependent and is especially important in the case of
clamping:

Phase IIA: No clamping. Typically, for free impacts
at robot velocities > 0:3 m=s, FIIA is signiﬁcantly
smaller than FI. Otherwise, FI is smaller than FIIA
and is governed by the robot actuator torques (ac-
tive quasistatic pushing) and the reaction of the
human body that is mainly governed by its reﬂected
impedance.

Phase IIB: Clamping. In the case of clamping, the
ﬁnal maximum force FIIB is limited by the maxi-
mum motor torques max of the robot via Fext D
JT#
c max, where JT#
c
is the contact Jacobian pseu-
doinverse. If the robot is powerful enough to gener-
ate active contact forces that penetrate or break hu-
man tissue/structure, the contact force is, of course,
Phase II
Phase I
FIIA
FIIB
FI
F
t
Fig. 69.6 Typical robot–human collision force proﬁles

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
69.2 Human Safety
1843
Part G | 69.2
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Frontal collision force (kN)
Mass (kg)
Velocity (m/s)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Chest collision force (kN)
Mass (kg)
Velocity (m/s)
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
a)
b)
Fig.69.7a,b Mass–velocity dependency for (a) human head and (b) chest contact force. A mass–spring-mass model is
used for collisions against the head, where the head mass MH is 4:5 kg and the approximate contact stiffness of the frontal
bone KH D 1000 N=mm (after [69.33]). For the chest, the model proposed in [69.47] is used
limited by the human maximum tissue resistance.
Please note that singularities need careful treat-
ment, which, however, goes beyond the scope of the
chapter.
Next, the inﬂuence of robot mass and velocity for
the unconstrained impact are described. This analysis is
particularly important to understand Phase I.
Influence of Robot Mass and Velocity. Assume
a simple mass–spring-mass model for the impact be-
tween human and robot. MH is the reﬂected inertia of
the human. KH is the contact stiffness, which is in the
case of a rigid robot mainly the effective stiffness of the
human contact area. Px0
re is the relative impact velocity
between the robot and human. Solving the correspond-
ing differential equation leads to the maximum contact
force
Fmax
ext D
s
mu MH
mu C MH
p
KHPx0
re :
(69.8)
Assume a simplifying decoupling of the head from
the torso, which holds for the short duration of the
impact. For the post-impact phase, neck stiffness and
body inertia have to be considered, which compli-
cates the analysis considerably. The dependency of
frontal bone contact force on the robot mass and
velocity is depicted in Fig. 69.7a. It can be ob-
served that collision force (which is a well-known
bone fracture indicator) generally increases with ve-
locity. For increasing mass, however, a saturation ef-
fect takes place. After a certain robot mass has been
reached (mu 
 20 kg in Fig. 69.7), additional weight
has only negligible inﬂuence on collision force. This
inertial saturation effect can also be observed for
other impact locations, such as contacts with the chest
(Fig. 69.7b).
If the robot mass is signiﬁcantly larger than the hu-
man head mass, that is, mu  MH, (69.8) reduces to
Fmax
ext .mu  MH/ D
p
KHMHPx0
re :
(69.9)
This shows that for a robot with signiﬁcantly larger re-
ﬂected inertia than the human head, only the contact
stiffness, the impact velocity, and the mass of the hu-
man head are relevant but not the robot mass.
The behavior of human tissue during collisions is
complex. Consequently, surrogates cannot reveal the
entire diversity. Accordingly, the conduction of human
voluntary experiments is necessary to fully understand
human injury and pain dynamics in robotics.
Human–Robot Impact Voluntary Testing
The following experimental test was the ﬁrst systematic
analysis in this direction. The voluntary experiments
were conducted with a healthy young adult in the
year 2011. The collision experiments were performed
with the KUKA/DLR lightweight robot (LWR) and
the following approaches to injury and pain analysis
were carried out: injury severity analysis according to
AO (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Ostheosynthesefragen),
biomechanical analysis, pain, and imaging meth-
ods. The setup and experiment steps are depicted in
Fig. 69.8. The robotic system allows to conduct con-
trolled robot–human collisions in order to analyze input
parameters and their effect on output parameters, such
as pain and injury. Measured impact characteristics and
quantities included impact force, impact area, tissue
displacement, tissue stiffness, stress, impact velocity,
kinetic energy, and energy density. The reﬂected inertia

Part G | 69.2
1844
Part G
Robots and Humans
Drive to contact point
Mark contact area
Drive upward and wait
Collision test
Pain limit reached/
medical supervisor stop
Drive upward and wait
No
Yes
Test stop
Photo documentation
MRI-examination
Clinical examination
Follow-up examination
Switch to gravity
compensation
Impact
Iincrease 
velocity
a)
b)
Fig. 69.8 (a) Flow chart depicting the basic experimental steps. (b) Collision trajectory with subject
was kept constant at mu D 3:75 kg for every test. The
used impactor for the resulting Table 69.5 was a sphere
with a radius of 12:5 mm.
The injury was deﬁned using the AO-classiﬁca-
tion [69.48] directly after each test series. Each impact
series was carried out at the same location on the
human body at increasing impact velocity until the par-
ticipant initiated a controlled system stop during the
experiment. The impact areas were then imaged with
a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) after a time in-
terval of about 45 h. The remaining tissue did not
show any pathological signs. Compared to an equiv-
alent drop test in [69.25] with abdominal pig tissue
(large sphere, 4:2 kg, 2:5 m=s), the voluntary experi-
ments provide similar results in terms of injury severity.
The maximum velocity of 2:55 m=s is at the border
of inducing a contusion. Where there were no marks
immediately after impact, a mild contusion formed at
day 1. For the pain tolerance at a visual analog scale
(VAS) of 6=10, an impact force of F D 272:2 N was
measured. The energy density appears to have the most
signiﬁcant correlation to pain.
Synopsis
An overview of the potential injury threats depending
on the current state of the robot and the human, a clas-
siﬁcation of these mechanisms, governing factors of the
particular process and possible injuries are depicted in
Fig. 69.9. Physical contact can be divided into two fun-
damental subclasses: quasi-static and dynamic loading.
Fundamental differences in injury severity and mech-
anisms are observed as well if a human is (partially)
constrained or not, leading to the second subdivision.
For the quasi-static case, it is differentiated between
near-singular and nonsingular clamping as already out-
lined. The last differentiation separates injuries caused
by blunt contact from the ones induced by tools or sharp
surface elements.
Each class of injury is characterized by possi-
ble injuries (PI), worst-case factors (WCFs), and their
worst-case range (WCR). WCFs are the main contribu-
tors to the worst case, such as maximum joint torque,
the distance to singularity or the robot speed. The
worst-case range indicates the maximum possible in-
jury depending on the worst-case factors. In addition to
the classiﬁcation of injury mechanisms for each such
class, suggestions for injury measures (IMs) are given
as well. They are speciﬁc injury measures which are
appropriate, useful for the classiﬁcation and measure-
ment of injury potentially occurring during the physical
human–robot interaction. Please note that the list of
injury measures is not necessarily complete, but these
ones are certainly suitable to be applied to a more gran-
ular robotics injury analysis. This does not mean that
criteria, such as the well-known head injury criterion
(HIC), do not provide general insights; they are just not

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
69.2 Human Safety
1845
Part G | 69.2
Table 69.5 Impact data for the lateral surface of the right upper arm
Impact
Max.
impact
force (N)
Impact
area
(mm2)
Displace-
ment
(m)
Tissue
stiffness
(N=m)
Stress 	
(N=mm2)
Impact
velocity
(m=s)
Kinetic
energy
(J)
Energy
density
(J=mm2)
AO
VAS
1
9:5
966
0:03
316:7
0:001
0:2
0:08
0:0001
IC1MT1NV1
0
2
19
966
0:037
513:5
0:002
0:44
0:36
0:0007
IC1MT1NV1
0
3
38:1
966
0:044
865:9
0:039
0:65
0:80
0:0016
IC1MT1NV1
0
4
59:6
966
0:055
1083:6
0:062
0:88
1:45
0:003
IC1MT1NV1
0
5
81:4
966
0:058
1403:4
0:084
1:11
2:31
0:005
IC1MT1NV1
1
6
103:5
966
0:060
1725
0:107
1:34
3:37
0:007
IC1MT1NV1
1.5
7
128:1
966
0:064
2001:6
0:133
1:55
4:50
0:009
IC1MT1NV1
2
8
154:1
966
0:069
2233:3
0:16
1:76
5:81
0:012
IC1MT1NV1
3
9
186:4
966
0:069
2701:4
0:193
2:03
7:73
0:016
IC1MT1NV1
3
10
224:5
966
0:069
3253:6
0:253
2:24
9:41
0:019
IC1MT1NV1
4
11
272:2
966
0:077
3535:1
0:282
2:55
12:2
0:025
IC1MT1NV1
6
necessarily optimal to understand injury on a more dif-
ferentiated lower-injury scale.
For example in Fig. 69.9 represents blunt clamp-
ing in the near-singular conﬁguration (Fig. 69.9). Even
for low-inertia robots, this situation could become dan-
gerous and is, therefore, a possible serious threat with
almost any robot on a ﬁxed base within a (partially)
conﬁned workspace. Possible injuries are fractures and
secondary injuries, for example, caused by penetrat-
ing bone structures or an injured neck if the trunk is
clamped but the head is free. This would mean that
the robot pushes the head further, while the trunk re-
mains in its position. Another possible threat is shearing
off a locally clamped human along an edge. Appro-
priate indices are, for example, the contact force and
the compression criterion (CC) [69.49]. in Fig. 69.9
represents the clamped blunt impact in nonsingular
conﬁguration. The injury potential is deﬁned by the
maximum actuation torque max and can range from
no injury to severe injury or even death for high-inertia
(and torque) robots. The robot stiffness does not con-
tribute to the worst case since a robot without collision
detection would simply increase the motor torque to
follow the desired trajectory. Therefore, robot stiffness
only contributes to the detection mechanism by en-
larging the detection time. Also, the contact force and
CC are well suited to predict occurring injury. in
Fig. 69.9 denotes the unconstrained impact which was
the ﬁrst injury mechanism investigated in the robotics
literature. This process is governed by the impact veloc-
ity and (up to a saturation value) by the robot mass. As
shown in [69.22], even a robot of arbitrary mass cannot
severely injure a human head by means of impact-
related criteria from the automobile industry like the
head injury criterion (HIC). However, fractures, for ex-
ample, of facial bones are likely to occur but not all
would be classiﬁed as a serious injury. Laceration by
means of crushes and gashes are worth evaluating, espe-
cially with respect to service robotics. The contact force
and CC are well-suited severity criteria for this class. In
order to evaluate lacerations the energy density has to
be considered.
The preceding overview is intended as a worst-case
analysis for the described contact cases. The next step is
to ask which actions can be taken against each particular
threat [69.19]. At this point, however, it shall be noted
that instead of quantifying injury in terms of a mea-
surable injury criterion, injury evaluation by a medical
expert, for example, via the AO-classiﬁcation can al-
ways be applied and would presumably result in a more
exhaustive and precise judgement.
69.2.2 Safety Standards for Human–Robot
Interaction
Robotics standardization made signiﬁcant progress to
establish the underlying regulations for co-working
cells in the real world. Safety for industrial robots is
addressed in a variety of general standards [69.50–
52]. The most important industrial robotics standards
is the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) 10218. It was established in the recognition of
the particular hazards that industrial robots and indus-
trial robot systems may pose. The machinery concerned
and the extent to which hazards, hazardous situations,
and events are covered are indicated in the scope of
ISO 10218. In recognition of the variable nature of
hazards with different uses of industrial robots, ISO
10218 is divided into two parts. It provides a de-
tailed analysis of mechanical hazards, such as impacts,
crushing, shearing, entanglement, drawing-in or tap-
ping, cutting or severing, and contact of persons with
live parts (direct contact) [69.53]. In particular, the
introduction of collaborative robots has been a ma-

Part G | 69.2
1846
Part G
Robots and Humans
Quasi-static loading
Constrained
Unconstrained
Blunt contact
Sharp contact
Near-singular conﬁguration
Blunt contact
Sharp contact
Nonsingular conﬁguration
Blunt contact
Sharp contact
No injury
Blunt injury
1. Fractures
2. Secondary injuries*
3. Shearing*
PI
WCF
WCR
IM
1
F, CC, AO
Soft-tissue injury
1. Laceration (cut)*
2. Laceration (stab)*
PI
WCF
WCR
IM
2
F, σ, AO
Blunt injury
1. None
2. Fractures
3. Secondary injuries*
τmax
PI
WCF
WCR
IM
3
F, CC, AO
Soft-tissue injury
1. Laceration (cut)*
2. Laceration (stab)*
τmax
PI
WCF
WCR
IM
4
F, σ, AO
Soft-tissue injury
1. None
2. Laceration (cut)*
τmax
PI
WCF
WCR
IM
5
F, σ, AO
Dynamic loading
Constrained
Blunt contact
Sharp contact
Unconstrained
Blunt contact
Sharp contact
Blunt injury
1. Fractures
2. Internal injuries
3. Shearing*
4. Secondary injuries*
5. Laceration (crush)*
6. Laceration (gash)*
˙x 0
re
m u
τmax
PI
WCF
WCR
IM
6
F, CC, eA, AO
Soft-tissue injury
1. Laceration (cut)*
2. Laceration (stab)*
3. Abrasion*
˙x 0
re, m u
τmax
PI
WCF
WCR
IM
7
E, F, σ, AO
Blunt injury
1. None
2. Fractures
3. Secondary injury*
4. Laceration (crush)*
5. Laceration (gash)*
˙x 0
re, m u
PI
WCF
WCR
IM
8
F, CC, eA, AO
Soft-tissue injury
1. Laceration (cut)*
2. Laceration (stab)*
3. Abrasion*
˙x 0
re, m u
τmax
PI
WCF
WCR
IM
9
E, F, σ, AO
PI: Possible injury
WCF: Worst-case factors
WCR: Worst-case range
IM: Injury measures
τmax : Maximum joint torque
˙x 0
re : Relative robot speed
m u : Robot mass
Tool
Robot stiffness
Distance to
singularity
F: Force
E: Energy
eA: Energy density
CC: Compression Criterion
σ: stress
AO: AO-classiﬁcation
Physical contact
Fig. 69.9 Safety tree showing possible injury (PI), major worst-case factors (WCF) and the possible worst-case range
(WCR). * indicates still ongoing topics of research. Additionally, relevant injury criteria are given for the head, chest,
and soft-tissue injuries
jor acknowledgment to the advances made in robotics
research in pHRI over the last decade. The recent up-
dates to ISO 10218 (safety requirements for industrial
robots) led to the development of the new technical
speciﬁcation (TS) 15066. It is regarded as a comple-
mentary information that concretizes the content of
ISO 10218. Generally, ISO/TS 15066 provides guid-
ance for collaborative robot operation where a robot and
a person share the same workspace. It considers collab-
orative modes and requirements, such as minimum sep-
aration distances, safety-rated monitored stops, speed
and separation monitoring, and power and force lim-
iting. In collaborative operations, the integrity of the
safety-related control system is of major importance,
particularly when process parameters, such as speed
and force, are being controlled. A comprehensive risk
assessment is required to assess not only the robot
system itself, but also the environment in which it is

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
69.3 Human-Friendly Robot Design
1847
Part G | 69.3
placed, that is, in the workplace. A key process in the
elimination of hazards and reduction of risks is the
design of the collaborative robot system and the as-
sociated cell layout. Various considerations about the
access and clearance of the collaborative workspace are
provided. During the design of a robotic system, the
maximum space and the restrictions of the collabora-
tive robot system have to be considered. Furthermore,
the need for clearances around obstacles and the acces-
sibility for operators should inﬂuence the design. The
intended contact(s) between parts of the robot system
and an operator plays a major role toward a possi-
bly intrinsically safe design. In order to identify the
risks resulting from the collaborative action, an appro-
priate set of collision incidents that can occur during
the collaborative work activities and foreseeable mis-
use has to be determined. This has to include affected
body regions and the involved collision areas of the
robot. The limit values that may not be exceeded dur-
ing the collision incident depend on the affected body
regions. The geometry of the involved areas of the
robot and the biomechanical properties of the affected
body regions inﬂuence the forces occurring during
the collision incident. Therefore, the ISO/TS 15066
describes injury severity criteria that consist of maxi-
mum allowable limit values on individual body regions.
These limit values are established to prevent the occur-
rence of skin/tissue penetrations that are accompanied
by bleeding wounds, fractures, or other skeletal dam-
age [69.54].
In addition to the industrial standardization efforts
in the pHRI domain, the ISO 13482 [69.55] is the ﬁrst
nonindustrial robot safety standard that allows/regulates
close pHRI. This international standard speciﬁes re-
quirements and guidelines for the inherent safe design,
protective measures, and information for the use of so
called personal care robots. It focuses on three types
of personal care robots (mobile servant robots, physi-
cal assistant robots, and person carrier robots). These
robots typically perform tasks to improve the quality
of life of intended users irrespective of age or capabil-
ity. The standard describes hazards associated with the
use of these robots and provides requirements to elimi-
nate or reduce the risks associated with these hazards to
an acceptable level. Signiﬁcant hazards are presented
and this standard describes how they are to be dealt
with for each personal care robot type. Robotic de-
vices used in personal care applications are also covered
by this standard and are to be treated as personal care
robot.
69.3 Human-Friendly Robot Design
Designing robots for interaction has become a chal-
lenging subdomain in pHRI, leading to novel devices
that have one thing in common: active and/or pas-
sive compliance together with lightweight design being
the central design paradigms. A number of research-
focused robots have been designed speciﬁcally for
pHRI. The most important design guidelines, represen-
tatives, and modeling basics are outlined in this section.
Apart from robots that are designed to act as general
purpose co-workers, large robot assists with balanced,
inertia reducing, cable-driven gantry systems can be
used to create large payload robots that may be oper-
ated next to human workers [69.56].
69.3.1 Lightweight Design
In the process of making robots inherently suitable for
close physical interaction with humans or only partially
known environments, a design paradigm shift mov-
ing away from heavy, stiff, and rigid designs toward
lightweight and highly integrated mechatronics designs
has taken place. Low inertia and high (active) compli-
ance have become desirable features, as has the use of
redundant sensing principles on the proprioceptive level
(position, velocity, and torque).
General Characteristics
Generally, two major design approaches for light-
weight robots have proven successful over the last
years [69.57], namely the mechatronics approach and
the tendon-based approach, respectively. Their com-
monalities are as listed:

Lightweight structures: Lightweight, high-strength
metals, or composite materials for the robot links.
Moreover, the design of the entire system (con-
trollers, power supply) is optimized for weight re-
duction to enable mobility.

Low power consumption: This is mainly achieved
by small moving inertias and accordingly designed
motors.
Typically, mechatronic robots integrate electronics
into the joint structure for allowing highly modular
units. Such a design enables the assembly of different
kinematics with increasing complexity, while keeping
the respective joint philosophy. In terms of actuation,

Part G | 69.3
1848
Part G
Robots and Humans
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig. 69.10 (a) Barrett arm (after [69.58]), (b) Mitsubishi PA10 arm, (c) DLR lightweight robot III (after [69.59]),
(d) KUKA LBR iiwa (after [69.60]) (courtesy of Barret Technology Inc., DLR, KUKA)
the combination of high power/torque motors with high
transmission ratio gears is usually applied. From the
proprioceptive sensing side, these systems are typically
equipped with additional sensors, such as joint torque,
force, and current sensing in addition to basic motor
side position and current sensing only (Sect. 69.3.3).
Tendon-based robots have three major character-
istics. First, they are typically equipped with remote
direct drives. This reduces the overall weight of mov-
ing parts for a ﬁxed base manipulator as the actuators
are located in the robot base. For placing the actuators
remotely from the base, cable-pulley systems are usu-
ally applied. Finally, low reduction ratios are used for
keeping the system backdrivable. In turn, larger motors
have to be selected, which adds additional total weight.
Another interesting class of compliant actuators is
of note that implements compliance quite differently.
They use rheological ﬂuids such that they can alter their
characteristic properties under the inﬂuence of either
a magnetic or an electric ﬁeld. A clutch between link
and motor is operated in such a way that the output
torque can be controlled. These actuators were also mo-
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig. 69.11 (a) NASA Robonaut 2, (b) DLR Rollin’ Justin, (c) Rethink Robotics Baxter and (d) Boston Dynamics Atlas
(courtesy of NASA, DLR, Rethink Robotics Inc., Boston Dynamics)
tivated and discussed from a human-safety perspective
in [69.61].
Lightweight Robotic Systems
The most prominent robots that fall into the category
of lightweight robots are depicted in Figure 69.10. The
Barrett arm is a classic example of a tendon-based de-
sign, where the actuators are placed in the manipulator
base and the joints are backdrivable due to the low
reduction ratio. The Mitsubishi PA10 arm was a com-
mercially available lightweight redundant arm, with
a weight of 38 kg and a payload of 10 kg. The fully
torque-controlled KUKA LBR iiwa is based on the DLR
lightweight robot technology [69.60]. Its third genera-
tion DLR LWR-III weighs 13:5 kg and is able to handle
loads up to 15 kg, so an approximate unitary payload-
to-weight ratio is achieved. The robot is equipped with
joint torque sensors in each joint and has redundant po-
sition measurement (on motor and link side) [69.62].
Apart from single-arm robots as described above,
various lightweight designs were also successfully inte-
grated into research and commercial humanoid systems

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
69.3 Human-Friendly Robot Design
1849
Part G | 69.3
(Fig. 69.11). The NASA (National Aeronautics and
Space Administration) Robonaut 2 [69.63], equipped
with SEA, was originally designed for teleoperation
and exploration in space [69.64]. The fully torque-
controlled humanoid robot TORO [69.65], based on
the DLR lightweight robot technology, has its ori-
gins in the upper body bimanual system Justin [69.66]
(
VIDEO 626 ). Rethink Robotics Baxter is a commer-
cial two-arm upper body system for pick and place tasks
that is equipped with SEA for torque measurement pur-
poses. The hydraulically actuated humanoid, Atlas from
Boston Dynamics, is one of the systems that entered the
DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency)
Robotics Challenge.
Modeling Lightweight Robots
For a robot with n viscoelastic joints, the so-called re-
duced model of Spong [69.67] has become the standard
way of modeling lightweight robots. When including
also the presence of joint torques due to contact forces
(on the link dynamics), we shall consider the following
dynamic model of robots with viscoelastic joints:
M.q/Rq C C.q; Pq/Pq C g.q/ D J C ext ;
(69.10)
B R C J D  :
(69.11)
The generalized coordinates are doubled since there will
be a dynamic displacement ı D   q between the mo-
tor positions  2 Rn, as reﬂected through the gear ra-
tios, and the link positions q. The matrix B D diag.Bi/ 2
Rnn is the diagonal, positive deﬁnite motor inertia
matrix. We deﬁne the elastic joint torque transmitted
through the joints and coupling (69.10) and (69.11)
J D KJ.  q/ C DJ. P  Pq/ ;
(69.12)
where KJ D diag.KJ;i/ 2 Rnn is the diagonal, positive
deﬁnite joint stiffness matrix, and DJ D diag.DJ;i/ 2
Rnn is the diagonal, positive semideﬁnite joint damp-
ing matrix. The quantity J in (69.12) is also the
output of joint torque-sensing devices, when available.
In many practical cases, the mechanical design of the
transmission/reduction elements is such that one can
neglect the joint damping, that is, DJ ' 0. Joint elas-
ticity has long been addressed for lightweight robot
systems, however, more as an undesired consequence
that the control has to handle [69.68]. This requires ad-
vanced control techniques in order to obtain accurate,
performant motion. For a complete overview on the
properties of robots with joint elasticity effects, please
refer to Chap. 11.
69.3.2 Intrinsically Flexible Design
Recently, the class of intrinsically ﬂexible actuators and
robots have become increasingly popular. Inspired by
the ﬂexible properties in biological muscles, compli-
ant joints are designed with the aim of imitating human
or animal motions during various tasks. The main idea
of intrinsically ﬂexible actuation is to come closer to
human capabilities in terms of speed and shock absorp-
tion. This is not realizable with todays rigid industrial
robots, when assuming approximately the same torque
range or weight as humans have. By storing and releas-
ing energy in the joints, one aims for improvement in
tasks, such as running or throwing [69.69–72] where
humans still clearly outperform robots. In Chap. 21
and [69.73], a more in depth review of intrinsically ﬂex-
ible actuation is presented. In this chapter, we review
only the relevant insights for placing the technology in
the pHRI context.
General Characteristics
Roughly speaking, intrinsically ﬂexible actuators can
be divided into two categories:

Actuators with ﬁxed mechanical impedance, where
the effective joint impedance is altered via active
control. The most well-known example is the series
elastic actuator (SEA) [69.74], whose acronym be-
came a generic term for this class of actuators.

Actuators where the impedance can be adjusted
by altering mechanical joint properties, such as
stiffness and damping. There exist various cate-
gories like variable stiffness actuators (VSAs) that
allow stiffness changes or variable impedance ac-
KJ,x
FJ
F
Fext
KH
MH
mu
Bx
xθ
xq
xH
Fig. 69.12 Human–robot collision in operational space,
which is deﬁned by the reﬂected ﬂexible dynamics of the
robot and the local contact stiffness/mass properties of the
human head

Part G | 69.3
1850
Part G
Robots and Humans
tuators (VIAs) that enable more general impedance
changes, including damping adjustment.
The original motivation for introducing VSA and
VIA, for example, in [69.20], was to make robots safer
during unforeseen collisions due to dynamic decoupling
of the motor and link-side inertia from each other. This
effect reduces the collision danger by alleviating the
impacting robot inertia. In [69.20], it is, for example,
shown that HIC could be reduced by introducing elastic-
ity in the joint. This idea was generalized and systemat-
ically analyzed in [69.75, 76], and is summarized here.
In order to simplify the human robot collision anal-
ysis basic models in operational space coordinates were
used for this analysis (Fig. 69.12). For this, operational
space coordinates and reﬂected inertias/stiffnesses
along an arbitrary instantaneous impact direction u are
considered [69.46]. The masses MH; mu; Bx 2 RC are
the reﬂected human, link, and motor mass. KH; KJ;x 2
RC are the reﬂected (human) contact stiffness and
joint/structural elasticity. The projected human, motor,
and link impact position are denoted by xH; x, and
xq 2 R, respectively. x D pu.T.// and xq D pu.T.q//
are deﬁned via the respective forward kinematics maps
projected in the u-direction.
As pointed out in [69.20], a robot with quite low
reﬂected link inertia mu D 0:1 kg is able to reduce the
impact forces signiﬁcantly if a contact stiffness of KH D
5 kN=m is assumed. Similar to the work in [69.21], it
was shown that a decrease in joint stiffness can signif-
icantly reduce the impact characteristics and, thus, is
a powerful countermeasure against large contact forces.
In [69.77], it was deduced that for the case of a 2-
DOF (degree of freedom) planar intrinsically compliant
robot, already slightly touching a rigid wall with its
second link, the compliant mechanism can limit the
maximum static force/torque effectively if the motor
torque is slowly increased. It is, of course, unquestion-
able that joint elasticity decouples the motor from the
link. However, as was indicated in [69.22], a reduction
in joint stiffness cannot reduce the impact characteris-
tics during very rigid, fast, and blunt crash-test dummy
impacts for a lightweight system, such as the LWR-III
(which is basically an SEAs type robot from a mod-
eling perspective). This was proven by measuring the
decoupling of motor and link inertia via the integrated
joint torque sensors and the additionally recorded exter-
nal contact force.
Figure 69.13 depicts the experimental evidence for
a collision at 1 m=s between a DLR LWR-III and a sta-
tionary unconstrained Hybrid III dummy (HIII) head
on the frontal area [69.22]. The contact force fext was
measured with a high-speed force sensor fext;fs and for
consistency check with a triaxial accelerometer fext;as.
As one can see, the simulation and experimental sig-
nals show very good consistency. Clearly, the projected
elastic joint force fJ reacts delayed to the collision,
thus proving the desired decoupling property already
for such an intrinsically very stiff robot. For the im-
pact simulation, a reﬂected stiffness of 6:72 104 N=m
is chosen, which represents a realistic joint stiffness and
structural elasticity value. The reﬂected motor inertia is
Bx D 13 kg and the reﬂected link side inertia mu D 2 kg.
The dummy head mass is MH D 4:5 kg and the contact
stiffness is KH D 3:2 105 N=m.
This result showed that already the compliances of
the built in gear and the joint torque sensor is sufﬁ-
cient to decouple the motor from the link, making it
entirely unnecessary to further reduce joint stiffness for
the given robot for this purpose. There are two main as-
pects, which have to be considered to fully understand
this result. On the one hand, the contact stiffness of the
crash-test dummy used is signiﬁcantly larger than the
reﬂected elasticity of the DLR LWR-III; however, it is
also realistic for the human frontal area [69.27]. Fur-
thermore, the reﬂected motor and link inertia for the
DLR LWR-III are the same order of magnitude as for
the human head mass. This is quite reasonable for a full-
scale lightweight robot arm.
Two further beneﬁts of inherent compliance are
as follows. First, the robot itself is able to resem-
ble compliant behavior without the inherent need for
high-performance force/torque feedback. Please note
that it is not possible to display arbitrary Cartesian
stiffness behavior for a robot with diagonal stiffness
matrix only [69.79]. Second, the joint elasticity acts in
combination with the link inertia as a mechanical low-
0
5
10
15
20
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
t (ms)
Force (N)
fJ
fext,as
fext,fs
fJ,sim
fext,sim
Fig. 69.13 Impact experiment and simulation of a LWR-
III with a Hybrid III Dummy. The experimental contact
force is measured for consistency check with a high-speed
acceleration (as) and force sensor (fs) simultaneously

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
69.3 Human-Friendly Robot Design
1851
Part G | 69.3
a)
b)
c)
Fig.69.14a–c Passively ﬂexible anthropomorphic robots: compliant humanoid platform (COMAN, (a)) from IIT (af-
ter [69.78]), Valkyrie (b) from NASA, and hand arm system (HASY, (c)) from DLR (courtesy of IIT, DARPA,
DLR)
pass ﬁlter, thus protecting the drive train from impact
shocks; that is, it makes the system inherently more ro-
bust [69.71, 80].
Another interesting use of elasticities in the drive
train of a manipulator relates to the fact that it can serve
as a storage mechanism for potential energy, and be
used to increase a robot’s link speed beyond the max-
imum motor velocity [69.70, 71, 80–82]. This ability
strongly inﬂuences the safety of intrinsically elastic sys-
tems, as a robot’s impact speed determines its inherent
collision danger to a large extent. However, we refer
to [69.75] for further details on this matter, where the
effect of a robot’s elastic speed increase on potential
danger in terms of HIC is derived.
Intrinsically Flexible Robotic Systems
Figure 69.14 shows some of the most prominent recent
anthropomorphic/humanoid devices that employ pas-
sively compliant actuators. The COMAN system of IIT
(
VIDEO 624 ) is a full-scale SEA robot, as is NASA’s
Valkyrie. Both system’s ability to measure torques re-
sults from the ability to ﬂex around their joint axes and
then relate this elastic deﬂection to the joint torque. The
DLR hand-arm system [69.72] is fully equipped with
VSA in every joint, while having approximately human
size, strength, and dexterity.
Modeling Passively Flexible Robots
From a formal modeling point of view, lightweight
robots and robots with ﬁxed mechanical impedance are
very similar. The main difference lies in the respec-
tive torque sensor measurement principle. The joint
elasticity in lightweight robots is rather high and al-
lows only for small deﬂections between the motor and
link position. The stiffness in compliant actuators, how-
ever, is intentional and typically at least an order of
magnitude lower, thus enabling signiﬁcantly larger de-
ﬂections. Consider the elastic joint model (69.10) and
(69.11) from Sect. 69.3.1, which under certain mild
conditions also holds for intrinsically elastic robots. The
main difference is that for lightweight robots, KJ;i is
large compared to SEA-like systems. For many VSA
systems, the transmitted torque can be expressed as
J D f.ı; / ;
(69.13)
where  denotes a stiffness adjustment control in-
put (typically the position of a second motor).
The torque–displacement curve f.ı; / may exhibit
different characteristics, such as being strictly in-
creasing @f.ı; /=@ı > 0 and convex @2f.ı; /=@ı2 >
0. More details on implementations can be found
in [69.73].
69.3.3 Perception for Interaction
The recent advances in pHRI beneﬁt greatly from previ-
ous achievements in contact and noncontact sensors and
sensing techniques. In the current chapter, we shortly
review the essential sensing techniques that had strong

Part G | 69.3
1852
Part G
Robots and Humans
a)
b)
Fig. 69.15 (a) Furry robot skin utilizing piezo-resistive fabric and conductive sensors provides a low cost design concept
with high tactile gesture recognitions rates (after [69.83]). (b) The hand of TWENDY-ONE with integrated distributed
pressure sensors (courtesy of Karon MacLean, UBC, Shigeki Sugano Lab., Waseda University)
impact on pHRI and focus on the underlying main con-
cepts. Chapters 28 and 32 give a full view and can be
consulted for further details.
69.3.4 Proprioceptive Force/
Torque Sensing
Many robot arms have the option to include a six-
axis force/torque sensor at the wrist, enabling not only
force control-based manipulation, but also symbolic
haptic interaction [69.84, 85], possibly also based on
joint torque sensing. More recently, torque sensors
have been integrated into the joints of commercial
robots, for example, into the KUKA LWR [69.86].
This allows for contact sensing along the entire robot
structure with measurements of contact magnitude,
direction, and knowledge of which link was con-
tacted [69.87].
Essentially, two major sensing principles for joint
torque measurement exist: either by directly measuring
the torque which is typically done via strain gauges,
or by measuring it implicitly via the deﬂections ı
between link and motor position. For this, it is as-
sumed that ı directly relates to torque typically by
a constant multiplier, the joint stiffness KJ;i. For the
latter, both link- and motor-side position sensors need
to be mounted. The ﬁrst works that aimed at devel-
oping and minimizing torque-sensing devices can be
found in [69.88–90]. The torque-sensing principle has
also a strong relation to the design classiﬁcation in
Sect. 69.3.
69.3.5 Tactile Perception
Several tactile skins have been developed over the years
such as, for example, [69.91–94]. In the latter work, for
example, the human skin served as a design metaphor.
Therein, a solution of the goal conﬂict between the
desired high sensitivity and the required mechanical ro-
bustness is in the focus. Furthermore, beyond providing
the required sensory capability, the mechanical defor-
mation and damping properties necessary for the opera-
tion of the robotic system are considered as well. Using
whole-arm tactile sensing across the manipulator sur-
face explicitly allows the sensing of multiple contacts;
for example, in [69.95], the authors operate a robot in
a cluttered environment in order to successfully reach
a goal that is occluded by obstacles using a model pre-
dictive controller. Other recent examples of localized
sensors include touch pads placed at key points on the
robot [69.96], and force-sensitive resistors distributed
over the robot [69.97]. The latter example is used in
a novel haptic robot designed to both read and dis-
play emotion mediated through cues sensed primarily
through physical interaction. These methods have the
advantage of using reliable and fairly precise sensors,
but are capable of measuring contact only at discrete
locations. For more extensive contact sensing, several
researchers have developed various types of robot skin;
that is a distributed sensor network that covers extensive
areas and measures diverse qualities of contact events,
including location, magnitude, orientation, and temper-
ature. Hard robot skins or shells have been used to

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
69.4 Control for Physical Interaction
1853
Part G | 69.4
a)
b)
Fig. 69.16 Low cost 3-D-RGB-D cameras: (a) Microsoft Kinect (Wikipedia Commons), (b) Asus Xtion (courtesy Asus)
detect collisions [69.98], while soft robot skins that can
conform to different robot shapes have been used for
more complex, often social or affective, human–robot
interaction, for example, [69.99]. While robot skin can
add signiﬁcant sensing capability to robots, it may also
add to the complexity and cost, and thus compromises
the robustness of the robot. However, recently a furry
creature skin (Fig. 69.15) was created [69.83] using
a combination of low-resolution piezo-resistive fabric,
and conductive fur sensors to create a low-cost robot
covering with 90% interaction gesture (stroking, pat-
ting, poking, hitting) recognition rates when trained
on an individual and 6880% recognition rates when
trained on groups (
VIDEO 615 ). A detailed review of
tactile sensing technology for human–robot interaction
can be found in [69.100]. Other examples can be found
in Chap 28.
69.3.6 Visual Perception
Visual (noncontact) sensing is very important for
preparing for pHRI. Tracking and planning for the
location of a human partner and predicting, for exam-
ple, the motion of the partner’s hand is an important
precursor to a successful handover operations [69.12].
While well-known marker-based systems, such as Vi-
con and Optotrak systems, provide very high resolu-
tion tracking systems, they are impractical for day-
to-day use. The development of low-cost 3-D-RG-
B-D (three-dimensional red green blue depth) cameras
(Fig. 69.16) permits the 3-D tracking of full body
models in large and partially occluded spaces, with on-
going improvements toward robustness in body pose
tracking and for tracking of hand gestures [69.101,
102].
69.4 Control for Physical Interaction
For soft and safe pHRI, the question arises how to gen-
tly handle physical contact in robotics from a control
point of view. As impedance control [69.103] became
the most popular interaction control paradigm in the
pHRI world, this particular scheme will be one fo-
cus of this section. Its generalization to multipriority
impedance control laws allows the realization of sophis-
ticated robot compliance with multiple objectives via
active control. A major advantage of impedance con-
trol is that discontinuities like contact–noncontact do
not create stability problems as they occur, for exam-
ple, with hybrid force control [69.104]. Its extension to
impedance and feed-forward learning and adaptation,
for which the ﬁrst works can be found in [69.105, 106],
is discussed after introducing the concept of multiprior-
ity impedance control. Apart from nominal interaction
control, a robot sharing its workspace with humans
and physically interacting with its environment should
be able to quickly detect collisions and safely react
to them. In the absence of external sensing, relative
motions between robot and environment/human are un-
predictable and unexpected collisions may occur at
any location along the robot arm. The state-of-the-art
schemes for collision detection and reﬂex reaction are
introduced. Finally, the last part of the section deals
with the shared manipulation problem, one of the stan-
dard application examples of pHRI.
69.4.1 Interaction Control
Originally developed for robust and compliant object
manipulation, impedance and the related admittance
control (
VIDEO 610 ) form a paradigm to treat robotic
systems from an energetic point of view such that
motion and force can be controlled in a uniﬁed man-
ner. They offer the advantage over hybrid force-motion
controllers to provide a framework independent from
kinematic work space constraints. These control types
popularized by [69.103] are also especially advanta-
geous in terms of uncertainties and disturbances in

Part G | 69.4
1854
Part G
Robots and Humans
unknown environments due to their inherently robust
nature [69.107]. The terms impedance and admittance,
are derived from electrical system theory where they de-
scribe the relationship between voltage and current as
input/output pairs. To generalize impedance and admit-
tance such pairs can be deﬁned domain-independently
as effort and ﬂow variables. For robotics, the me-
chanical analogies, that is, mechanical impedance and
admittance are of particular interest.
More details on the conceptual basics of impedance
and the dual admittance control can, for example, be
found in [69.108, 109]. Furthermore, Chap. 9 gives
a more thorough basis on force control strategies in gen-
eral and impedance control in particular.
The mostly used version of impedance control is
to impose a second-order dynamics of a mass–spring–
damper system (so-called target impedance [69.103]) on
the closed-loop equations. Typically, the control objec-
tive is expressed in operational space coordinates x as
MxRQx C DxPQx C KxQx D Fext ;
(69.14)
where Qx WD x  xd is the position error and xd is called
equilibrium position. Mx denotes the desired inertia,
while Dx and Kx are the according closed-loop damping
and stiffness matrices in operational space. Fext denotes
the external wrench acting at the end-effector of the
robot. Assuming rigid body dynamics, the control law
to obtain the aforementioned behavior is
C D g.q/ C J.q/TŒƒ.q/Rxd C .Px; x/
 J.q/T h
ƒ.q/M1
x .KxQx C DxPQx/
i
C J.q/T 
ƒ.q/M1
x
 I
	
Fext :
(69.15)
In order to fully implement this scheme, a wrist force
torque sensor is necessary for the inertia shaping part.
In [69.110], a modiﬁed impedance controller was de-
signed that uses angle/axis representations for the ro-
tational components of the operational space. For its
derivation, energy contributions with physical interpre-
tation are considered and the end-effector orientation
displacement representation is chosen to be in terms of
a unit quaternion to avoid singularities.
For redundant robots, it is typically desired to also
control the nullspace behavior in order to embed other
control objectives N;i into a stacked hierarchy of tasks
(Chaps. 17 and 36). For the case of a single nullspace
controller N, this torque has to be projected via the
nullspace projector matrix N.q/ into the nullspace of
the task, leading to the overall control law
C D C C N.q/TN :
(69.16)
The nullspace projection matrix can be chosen in dif-
ferent ways. The simplest case is N.q/ D IJ.q/#J.q/,
where J.q/# denotes the Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse.
Alternatively, one may chose the dynamically consis-
tent generalized pseudoinverse
J.q/# D M.q/1J.q/Tƒ.q/ :
(69.17)
In particular, in the pHRI domain, a multitude of dif-
ferent subtasks N;i are meaningful to be executed
simultaneously. These may, for example, involve:

Safety (collision anticipation and avoidance, self-
collision avoidance, . . . )

Physical constraints (joint limits, geometric task
constraints)

Task execution (tracking control, . . . )

Posture primitives (in particular for humanoids).
To realize consistent behaviors, task hierarchies are
constructed such that certain tasks are prioritized over
others [69.111]. In [69.112], a hierarchy is realized
by null space projection techniques, which also pre-
vents discontinuities concerning unilateral constraints
by smoothing out transitions.
Extensions to the basic schemes for ﬂexible joint
dynamics [69.113–115] and for the SEA case [69.116]
were developed as well. Furthermore, Cartesian imped-
ance control has been applied to grasping and multiple-
arm robotic systems in [69.117]. For a more in depth
treatment of multipriority impedance control, please
also refer to Chap. 67.
69.4.2 Learning and Adaptation
Close physical interaction between human and robot
is a complex evolving process with high uncertainty
and is hard to be modeled explicitly. Therefore, sev-
eral learning and adaptation approaches were proposed
to enhance a robot’s capability and account for the
inherently present uncertainty and unpredictability. In
this sense, the extension of impedance control toward
adaptive controllers that are able to learn and/or adapt
the controller’s impedance and feed forward torques is
a challenging and rather recent research problem. Ob-
viously, also the learning of the desired trajectories,
for example, in terms of motion patterns became an
important problem in this context. Generally, also col-
laborative tasks (Sect. 69.4.4) require learning either the
impedance properties and/or certain trajectories such
that the robot gains the ability to adapt its behavior to
the human counterpart, or even guides it to guarantee
successful collaboration. An important aspect of learn-
ing physical interactions is how to choose the right task
coordinates and (meta-)parameters. This is essential to
reformulate the otherwise high-dimensional problem
spaces in a tractable form.

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
69.4 Control for Physical Interaction
1855
Part G | 69.4
Since impedance control has already shown to be
a valuable technique in cluttered and complex manip-
ulation tasks, recent research focuses on the adaption
of the impedance characteristics to further improve the
robot capabilities during interaction. Iterative learning
control techniques belong to the ﬁrst methods that
have been investigated to tackle difﬁcult manipulation
problems [69.118, 119]. However, they do not only
require the exact same repetitive motion of the manip-
ulator, but also to account for unforeseen changes in
the environment due to force inconsistencies which are
particularly present in pHRI. Other early approaches
include, for example, the use of neural networks in
impedance control to counteract disturbances and envi-
ronmental uncertainties [69.120]. An approach to adapt
force, trajectory, and impedance simultaneously has
been presented in [69.121] as a biomimetic controller.
It is constructed based on studies in neuroscience that
show that humans adapt feedfoward and feedback
forces as well as their impedance in order to learn
unstable tasks in daily life. According to [69.122], the
principles of motor learning are:
1. Motor commands to perform a desired action are
composed of both feedforward commands, deﬁned
as the component of the motor command learned by
repeating an activity, and feedback commands.
2. Learning is performed in muscle space.
3. Feedforward increases with the muscle stretch in
previous trial.
4. Feedforward also increases with antagonist muscle
stretch.
5. Feedforward decreases when the error is small.
Mathematically, these principles can be expressed
as follows [69.105]. Generally, the central nervous sys-
tem tends to minimize the motion error as well as the
metabolic cost such that no extra effort will be spent on
the learned impedance and feedforward torques. This
can be expressed by minimizing the joint-level cost
function
V.t/ D 1
2
t
Z
tT
Q˚
T./Q1 Q˚./d
C 1
2.t/TM.q/.t/:
(69.18)
Therein, Q is a positive deﬁnite weighting matrix cor-
responding to the learning rates; Q˚ is deﬁned as the
difference between the instantaneous value
˚ D

vec.Kq.t//T; vec.Dq.t//T; ff.t/T	T
(69.19)
and the required optimal value ˚, that is, Q˚ D ˚ 
˚. The quantities , Kq, Dq, and ff denote the track-
ing control error [69.123] and the values to be learned,
namely, the closed loop joint space stiffness, damping,
and feed forward motor torques. For the joint stiffness
adaption law, this leads for example to
•Kq.t/ D Kq.t/  Kq.t  T/
D QKq

.t/e.t/T  .t/Kq.t/
	
;
(69.20)
where .t/ > 0 is a constant forgetting factor and QK,
which is contained in Q, is a symmetric positive deﬁnite
matrix corresponding to the learning rate of the stiff-
ness. T is a time constant to denote task: periodicity. In
an analog manner, adaption for feedforward torque and
damping can be deduced, which results in the following
control law,
C.t/ D ff.t/  Kq.t/e.t/  Dq.t/Pe.t/
 L.t/.t/ C r.t/
(69.21)
 D Pe.t/ C e.t/ ;
(69.22)
where r.t/ compensates for robot/arm dynamics and
bounded noise. The term L.t/.t/ ensures a certain sta-
bility margin. The overall control law ﬂow chart is
depicted in Fig. 69.17. A stability proof of this approach
can be found in [69.105]. An open problem with this
method that remains to be unsolved is how to automat-
ically select the meta parameters, such as the forgetting
factor . A similar approach was developed in [69.124],
where impedance adaptation laws were tested on a two-
robot collaboration task. The robots lift together a beam
after a task model was learned. A different approach
based on the perturbations of the robot imposed kines-
thetically by a human teacher such that the stiffness of
the robot is adapted is investigated in [69.125]. Finally,
the so-called teleimpedance paradigm [69.126] aims to
remotely controlling the robot via the human arm refer-
ence position and impedance.
Learning task trajectories has been a rather well-
studied ﬁeld for several years now. For example,
in [69.127], the authors examined the task of learning
collaborative lifting of an object using hidden Markov
models (HMM) and Gaussian mixture regression. Task
demonstration was done via a haptic interface that con-
trolled the robot hand. HMMs are also used in [69.128]
in order to learn semantic task structures during a joint
task execution. A semantic label of recognized task seg-
ments is acquired from a human partner by using speech
recognition. Tasks in pHRI where transitions from con-
tact to noncontact situations arise have been examined
in [69.129]. Therein, marker data is used to obtain mo-
tion primitives. These are then updated with contact
time information, comprising a low-level layer of learn-
ing. In addition, there is a high-level layer, which selects

Part G | 69.4
1856
Part G
Robots and Humans
Sliding
operator
Inverse
dynamics model
Stability
margin L
Impedance
Kq, Dq
Feedforward
torque τff
Plant
Environment
q*
q
−
e
τC
Fig. 69.17 Control diagram
of the biomimetic adaptive
impedance controller from
(after [69.105])
a motion primitive and an end-effector reference po-
sition. Again, both layers are encoded via HMMs to
provide a suitable abstraction, which is a key when
dealing with high-dimensional spaces.
In [69.17], dimensionality reduction for learning
was employed to realize assistive tasks, such as helping
a robot to stand–up or walk. This principal compo-
nent analysis (PCA)-based reduction lets the learning
take place in a low-dimensional joint manifold instead
of the original high-dimensional space. It reduces the
complexity of the learning domain for multidegree-of-
freedom systems such as humanoids. A recent approach
to learning trajectories based on human preferences was
proposed in [69.130], where machine-learning tech-
niques were applied to derive the optimal behavior
from human action ratings during runtime. Figure 69.18
shows how the robot learns to handle a knife safer
by receiving low rewards from the human if the dan-
gerous tool is moved in undesired orientations and/or
trajectories.
69.4.3 Collision Handling
One of the core problems in pHRI is the handling of
collisions between robots and humans, with the pri-
mary motivation of limiting possible human injury due
to physical contacts. Various monitoring signals can be
Fig. 69.18 The robot Baxter learns to safely handle a knife ([69.130]; courtesy of Saxena’s Robot Learning Lab)
used to gather context independent information about
the event.
The collision detection phase, whose binary output
denotes whether a robot collision occurred or not, is
characterized by the transmission of contact wrenches,
often for very short impact durations. The occurrence
of a collision, which may happen anywhere along the
robot structure, shall be detected as fast as possible.
A major practical problem is the selection of a threshold
on the monitoring signals, so as to avoid false positives
and achieve high sensitivity at the same time. A heuris-
tic approach is to monitor the measured currents in
robot electrical drives, looking for fast transients pos-
sibly caused by a collision [69.131, 132]. Another pro-
posed scheme compares the actual commanded torques
(or motor currents) with the nominal model-based con-
trol law (i. e., the instantaneous torque expected in the
absence of collision), with any difference being at-
tributed to a collision [69.133]. This idea has been
reﬁned by considering the use of an adaptive compli-
ance control [69.134, 135]. However, tuning of collision
detection thresholds in these schemes is difﬁcult be-
cause of the highly varying dynamic characteristics of
the control torques.
Knowing which robot part (e.g., which link of a se-
rial manipulator) is involved in the collision is an
important information that can be exploited for robot

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
69.4 Control for Physical Interaction
1857
Part G | 69.4
reaction. Collision isolation aims at localizing the con-
tact point xc, or at least which link ic out of the n-body
robot collided. One way to obtain both collision detec-
tion and isolation is to use sensitive skins [69.91–94].
However, it would obviously be more practical and
reliable to detect and possibly isolate a collision with-
out the need of additional tactile sensors. On the other
hand, the previously mentioned monitoring signals used
in [69.131–135] are in general not able to achieve reli-
able collision isolation (even when robot dynamics is
perfectly known). In fact, they either rely on computa-
tions based only on the nominal desired trajectory, or
compute joint accelerations by inverting the mass ma-
trix and thus spreading the dynamic effects of collision
on a single link, or use acceleration estimates for torque
prediction and comparison, which inherently introduces
noise (due to double numerical differentiation of posi-
tion data) and intrinsic delays. The common drawback
of these methods is that the effect of a collision on a link
propagates to other link variables or joint commands
due to robot dynamic couplings, thus affecting the iso-
lation property.
Other relevant quantities about a collision that are
deduced during the collision identiﬁcation phase are the
directional information and the intensity of the general-
ized collision force, either in terms of the acting Carte-
sian wrench Fext.t/ at the contact, or of the resulting
joint torque ext.t/ during the entire physical interaction
event. This information characterizes (in some cases,
completely) the collision event. The ﬁrst method that
simultaneously achieved collision detection, isolation,
and identiﬁcation was proposed in [69.136]. The basic
idea was to view collisions as faulty behaviors of the
robot actuating system, while the detector design took
advantage of the decoupling property of the robot gen-
eralized momentum p D M.q/Pq [69.137, 138].
During the collision reaction phase, the robot
should react purposefully in response to a collision
event, that is, taking into account available contextual
information. Because of the fast dynamics and high un-
certainty of the problem, the robot reaction should be
embedded in the lowest control level. For instance, the
simplest reaction to a collision is to stop the robot. How-
ever, this may possibly lead to inconvenient situations,
where the robot is unnaturally constraining or blocking
the human [69.19]. To deﬁne better reaction strategies,
information from collision isolation, identiﬁcation and
classiﬁcation phases should be used. Some examples of
successful collision reaction strategies have been given
in [69.87, 139].
Collision Detection and Identification
A recent overview on standard techniques to esti-
mate ext can be found in
[69.26]. In this chapter,
we focus on the main method, namely the monitoring
method based on the observation of the generalized mo-
mentum that was introduced in [69.136]. The scheme,
which is regarded as the standard algorithm, was mo-
tivated by the desire of avoiding the inversion of the
robot inertia matrix, decoupling the estimation result,
and also eliminating the need of an estimate of joint ac-
celerations. The according disturbance observer-based
estimator for the rigid case is deﬁned as
r.t/ D KO
8
<
:Op.t/ 
t
Z
0
Œ  Oˇ.q; Pq/ C rds  Op.0/
9
=
; ;
(69.23)
with Op D OM.q/Pq, Oˇ.q; Pq/ D Og.q/ C OC.q; Pq/Pq  POM.q/Pq,
and KO D diag.kO;i/ > 0 being the diagonal gain ma-
trix of the observer. Under ideal conditions, OM D M
and Oˇ D ˇ, the dynamic relation between the external
torque ext and r is
Pr D KO.ext  r/ :
(69.24)
In other words, r is a stable, linear, decoupled, ﬁrst-
order estimation of the external collision torque ext.
Large values of kO;i give small time constants TO;i D
1=kO;i in the transient response of that component of
r, which is associated with the same component of the
external joint torque ext. In the limit, we obtain
KO ! 1
)
r 
 ext :
(69.25)
Collision Reflex Reactions
After a collision has been detected, suitable collision re-
ﬂex reaction is needed. Four basic context-independent
joint-level collision reﬂexes are discussed next. They
lead to signiﬁcantly different reﬂex behavior after
a contact was detected. In the third and fourth schemes,
the directional information on contact torques provided
by suitable identiﬁcation schemes such as (69.23) may
be used to safely drive the robot away from the collision
location.
Robot Stop. The most obvious strategy to react to
a collision is to stop the robot. This behavior can, for ex-
ample, be obtained by setting qd D q.tc/, where tc is the
instant of collision detection or by simply engaging the
robot’s brakes. More elaborate braking strategies can be
found in [69.140].
Torque Control with Gravity Compensation. One
may also react to a collision by switching the con-
trollers. Typically, prior to the collision incident, the

Part G | 69.4
1858
Part G
Robots and Humans
robot moves along a desired trajectory with a position
reference-based controller (e.g., position or impedance
control). After detection, the control mode is switched
to a compliance-based controller that ignores the pre-
vious task trajectory. A particularly useful variant is to
switch to torque control mode with gravity compensa-
tion  D Og.q/ (
VIDEO 611 ). Note that this strategy
does not explicitly take into account any information
about ext.
Torque Reflex. This strategy extends the torque con-
trol-based strategy by explicitly incorporating the esti-
mation or measurement of ext into the motor torque 
via
 D Og.q/ C .I  Kr/ext ;
(69.26)
where Kr D diagfkr;ig > 1. It can be shown that, under
sufﬁciently accurate estimates or measurements, such
a law is equivalent to scaling of the robot dynamics by
K1
r . The closed-loop dynamics become
K1
r M.q/
„ ƒ‚ …
M0.q/
Rq C K1
r C.q; Pq/Pq C ext D 0 ;
(69.27)
where M.q/ > M0.q/ holds component-wise.
Admittance Reflex. Reference trajectory modiﬁca-
tion via an admittance-type strategy that uses the mea-
surement or estimation of ext can easily, for example,
be realized via
qd.t/ D 
T
Z
tc
Kaext dt ;
(69.28)
where Ka D diagfka;ig > 1. With this scheme that re-
quires no control switching the robot quickly drives
away from the external torque source and decreases the
contact forces till they decay to zero.
69.4.4 Shared Manipulation Control
Collaborative carrying, particularly of a long, large,
heavy or ﬂexible object, is a common scenario in pHRI
research (Fig. 69.19). As discussed earlier, Cobots rep-
resent the parallel case where passive robotic devices
control the path along which a shared load will be trans-
ported, but give their operator full control of load mo-
tion along that path (Chaps. 39 and 70;
VIDEO 821 ).
Most shared manipulation schemes utilize some form
of impedance control [69.142]. In an early work, the
authors of [69.143, 144] proposed an impedance con-
troller with speed-dependent damping coefﬁcients. The
authors of [69.145] employed a similar approach (with
ﬁxed virtual impedance) to control the horizontal move-
ment of their Mobile Robot Helper’s mobile base in
response to applied forces of a human user on the other
end of a cooperatively carried load (
VIDEO 606 ). The
authors of [69.144] also described a lifting controller
employing a pair of cascaded second-order virtual ad-
mittance controllers. Due to the raising/lowering of
a cooperatively carried load the applied torques on
an admittance-controlled, high-stiffness wrist generate
a wrist deﬂection that translated (via a ﬁxed gain)
into a virtual vertical force. This force raised or low-
ered the robot end effector via a second admittance
controller. In [69.141], an admittance controller was
presented that was tuned for human preference, which
is typically slightly underdamped. In [69.146], an ad-
mittance strategy was used to translate user force input
into robot steering commands within a constrained
trajectory.
Ideally, in cooperative manipulation, robotic and
human partners will naturally take turns with leading
and following roles depending on the state of a shared
task. A switching model for haptically linked human–
robot pairs that allows the robot to continuously vary its
behavior from completely following to completely lead-
ing was introduced in [69.16]. In [69.147], the authors
presented a mathematical treatment of the cooperative
load manipulation problem to allow one or more robots
to carry a load with a human user along a desired trajec-
tory. They also incorporated variable leading behavior
in the robots, enabling them to just steer the load (fol-
lowing) or completely control the load’s axial motion
(leading).
More recently, Evrard’s homotopy approach was
applied to load lifting, enabling the robot assistant to
vary its behavior between leading and following based
on its conﬁdence in its predictions of the human user’s
Fig. 69.19 Collaborative lifting experiment with a long
object (after [69.141])

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
69.5 Motion Planning for Human Environments
1859
Part G | 69.5
Inverse dynamics,
impedance controller,
planning load sharing
Admittance
controller
Robot
controller and
plant
User
input
Force sensing
Task
modification
Proposed
object/task
motion
Fig. 69.20
Generalized
schematic for
collaborative task
control
intentions [69.15] (
VIDEO 617 ). These are monitored
through the kinematics of the shared load. Recently,
an admittance control law that guarantees the stability
of the robot during constrained motion and also pro-
vides a quite intuitive human interaction was designed
in [69.148]. The admittance law uses the time deriva-
tive of the contact force between the human and the
robot to estimate human intent and an online estimate
of the interaction stiffness resulting in very accurate
shared-control of the robot system. In [69.149], the au-
thors developed and user tested an interactive controller
for a collaborative carrying task, utilizing a strategy to
model effort sharing between the robot and the user.
A generalized schematic for admittance-based collabo-
rative task control is depicted in Fig. 69.20. On the mo-
tion planning side, minimum jerk trajectories [69.150]
have been used to generate robot trajectories that are
well matched to the motion of the human partner, and
require the human to use less energy in the interaction,
for example, [69.151]. Results from [69.152] indicate
that a simpler quintic trajectory was also suitable for
this purpose.
69.5 Motion Planning for Human Environments
The deﬁnition and quantiﬁcation of injury, pain, or gen-
eral risk are essential to express what safe behavior
really means. The according insights can also be ap-
plied to generate safer robot motions such that injury
and risk prevention are explicitly taken into account at
this level. Two main branches of motion planning algo-
rithms for danger reduction were developed, which are
described hereafter.
69.5.1 Biomechanically Safe
Motion Planning
As mentioned in the beginning of the chapter, hu-
man collision safety has to be ensured from an injury
biomechanics perspective. Safety could, for example,
be deﬁned as ensuring that only mild contusions may
occur in worst case scenarios. The natural question that
arises is now how to formally respect such a metric,
that is, how should a robot be controlled so that an un-
foreseen contact remains subcritical according to the
underlying injury biomechanics or pain data. For this
the authors of [69.25] gave the schema, termed safe
motion unit (SMU), to link basic data to intrinsically
safe robot velocity. The basic idea is to represent any
data or general insight in a (possibly purely data driven)
functional relation, linking impact properties to human
injury or pain. With this, it is possible to calculate the
instantaneous safe robot velocity given the robot’s in-
ertial properties, surface curvature, and possible human
body parts it might collide with
.mass; velocity; geometry; body part/
! observed injury/pain :
(69.29)
For the injury/pain metric, multiple international clas-
siﬁcations exist from which one may choose from.
In [69.25], for example, the AO-classiﬁcation was used.
Thereafter, a careful set of experiments, or if possible
simulations, can be generated to deduce the relation
of interest. Each experiment should be designed such
that the impacting mass, its velocity, and curvature are
known in addition to any supplementary sensory read-
ings of interest. Furthermore, the observed, measured,
or calculated injury and/or pain level of the involved
body part has to be quantiﬁed according to the se-
lected scale. To restrict the amount of experiments to
a feasible number, the impactor geometry is assumed
to be composed of different basic geometric primitives
(spheres, cuboids, corners). Thus, a ﬁnite set of so-
called safety curves can be constructed, which represent
ﬁtted threshold curves for a given injury indicator in

Part G | 69.5
1860
Part G
Robots and Humans
M
I
S
C
T
Cummulated safety curve
for primitive i
Body part 
1
Body part  2
Body part  3
ẋ
m
Equilibrium
mass
5,5kg
velocity
2m/s
curvature 0,05m
body part
larynx
Robot parameters
Impact location
r
a b
α α
α
α
Fig. 69.21 A uniﬁed view: From collision experiment/simulation to cumulative safety curves for biomechanically safe
robot velocity
the mass–velocity space parameterized by the body part
(Fig. 69.21).
This idea can now be applied to a robot for safe ve-
locity generation (Fig. 69.22). The concept is to scale
any desired velocity command Pqd by ˛ to a biomechan-
Transformations, dynamics & Jacobians
Interaction zones
Effective masses
SMU algorithm
Dynamic/kinematic parameters,  
incl. end-effector & loadparameters
Environment model
Robot model, incl. all POIs 
{mPOI (q)}
q, qd
Ti(q), Ji(q), M(q)
{POI}
qd = αqd
*
Fig. 69.22 Pipeline for
creating biomechanically safe
velocities based on the SMU
algorithm (after [69.25])
ically safe value Pq
d . The scalar ˛ is computed from
evaluating the instantaneous robot inertial and local sur-
face properties with respect to their injury potential.
For this, the effective mass mPOI in the respective u-
directions of the relevant points of interest (POIs) are

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
69.5 Motion Planning for Human Environments
1861
Part G | 69.5
evaluated via (69.7). Each POI is associated with a sur-
face geometry primitive that is then used to link the
respective POI to some underlying biomechanical in-
jury, pain, or risk safety curve.
69.5.2 Risk-Metric-Based Motion Planning
As discussed in Sect. 69.4.3, there are numerous tech-
niques for detecting impacts or potential collisions
during pHRI. Collision monitoring methods can be used
to ensure that forces and torques, or more simply the en-
ergy, of the robot system are limited during a collision
event. To ensure safe and human-friendly interaction in
unstructured environments, additional safety measures,
utilizing system control, and planning are required.
Since physical interaction itself is a collision, a key
problem of human-safe planning and control methods
is to identify when human safety is actually threatened.
In [69.154], a danger evaluation method was developed
using the potential impact force as an evaluation mea-
sure. In this work, several danger indices were proposed
based on the design properties of the robot. This dan-
ger index can be deﬁned as a product of factors which
affect the potential impact force between the robot and
the human, such as distance, relative velocity, robot iner-
tia, and robot stiffness. The authors applied this index as
an objective function for improved mechanical design,
control, and motion planning. A danger index based
on estimated impact forces for a potential collision be-
tween a robot and a human was computed in [69.155]
and used as an input to a real-time trajectory generation
system, which balances the goal seeking with potential
danger. In [69.153], the same authors combined their
system with a vision based and physiological monitor-
Robot
Safety measure
estimation
Intent
control
Classical
control
Command
interpreter
User
User
monitoring
User intent
estimation
Trajectory
planner
Safety
control
Recovery
evaluator
Path
planner
Fig. 69.23 Schematic of motion planning system with user intent and safety monitoring input (after [69.153])
ing system, which allows the robot to respond to the
user’s real-time position and attentiveness. During the
interaction, the user is monitored to asses his level of ap-
proval of the robot’s actions while the trajectory planner
monitors safety factors, such as robot velocity and user
intent. Finally, the safety control moduleprovides a real-
time response to short-term horizon factors evaluated by
a safety measure estimation module (Fig. 69.23).
For mobile service robots, the authors of [69.156]
proposed a collision avoidance controller based on es-
timates of user behavior, using a social force model
to determine whether the user intends to avoid the
collision or not so that the robot can respond accord-
ingly. In [69.157], the authors introduced a method
using so-called kinetostatic danger ﬁelds as a metric
for the danger which the current posture and velocity
of a robot pose to objects in its environment. The work
presented in [69.121] shows an algorithm which maxi-
mizes the productivity of an industrial robotic manipu-
lator while guaranteeing a safe human–robot distance.
In addition to the relative human–robot distance, it takes
also dynamic and control characteristics into account.
In [69.158], the authors proposed a method based on an
intuitive physical interpretation, namely, an impedance-
like second-order motion generation. It is designed to
provide safe motion in complex environments, taking
into account both proximity to objects, and external
forces. A method that achieves collision avoidance for
a redundant robot while permitting the end-effector task
to continue is presented in [69.159]. Using data from
a 3-D-RGB-D camera, this method is purely based on
computations of distances between the robot body and
dynamic obstacles in the workspace (e.g., the user) that
are processed through a risk function to adjust the joint

Part G | 69.6
1862
Part G
Robots and Humans
Fig. 69.24 Human-aware motion planner of Laboratoire
d’analyse et d’architectures des systèmes (LAAS) (af-
ter [69.160]; courtesy of Rachid Alami)
velocities. The motion task of the end effector is modi-
ﬁed by an artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld-type method.
69.5.3 Human-Aware Motion Planning
Applying and extending classical motion planning tech-
niques to the problem of human-robot interaction was
originally done in [69.160]. The authors developed
a human aware mobile robot motion planner, which
incorporates humans accessibility, their vision ﬁeld,
and their preferences in terms of relative human–robot
placement (Fig. 69.24). Human dynamics were inte-
grated into the algorithm.
Extensions of the original work toward a motion
planner for pHRI scenarios were elaborated in [69.161].
Therein, certain constraints, such as distance, visibil-
ity, and comfort are taken into account to generate safer
motions and were demonstrated within a handover sce-
nario. The algorithm has been extended to cluttered
environments in [69.162], where a randomized cost-
based exploration method provides an initial path that
is relevant with respect to pHRI and workspace con-
straints.
69.6 Interaction Planning
In order to proﬁt from the collaboration of human and
robot by combining the ﬂexibility, knowledge and sen-
sory skills of a human with the efﬁciency, strength,
endurance, and accuracy of a robot, according inter-
action planners need to be designed to plan their joint
actions for a common goal. In the interaction planning
domain, the central question is how to plan robot human
joint actions and reactions in a certain interaction pro-
cess, involving also unexpected environmental changes,
one of the most basic ones being the human entering
the robot’s workspace. The deﬁnition of the interaction
planning problem and the integration of reﬂex reac-
tion schemes that potentially lead to an abrupt deviation
from nominal course have to be elaborated. On an ar-
chitectural level, the incorporation of reactivity has to
be systematically represented.
69.6.1 Collaborative Action Planning
Approaches to subproblems of the full interaction
planning problem were addressed in the literature.
In [69.163], for example, the system SHARY for
human-aware task planning was introduced. It produces
social plans of a task by implementing communication
schemes to negotiate the task solution with the human
partner.
In [69.164], dynamic neural ﬁelds (DNFs) were
used to build a decision-making system for interac-
tion in cooperative human–robot tasks. The main idea
is to let the robot imitate human behavior in order
to make the cooperation between robot and human
appear rather intuitive. A structural overview of the
system is depicted in Fig. 69.25. A vision system ob-
serves the scenery and recognizes task-related objects
and gestures of the human coactor. Object positions
are stored in the object memory layer. The action ob-
servation layer decides which type of known action
was executed by the coactor. The expected outcome
of this action is then simulated by the action simula-
tion layer and thereafter passed to the intention layer.
Here, the intention of the coactor is determined. The
knowledge about the coactor’s intention and the ex-
pected outcome of his actions is used by the common
subgoal layer. It contains prior knowledge about the
task structure and the subgoals to be achieved for task
completion. The common subgoal layer is responsi-
ble for enabling actions that lead to the fulﬁllment
of a currently achievable subtask only. Based on the
information coming from the intention layer and the
object memory layer, the action execution layer de-
cides to perform an action, which supports the human
in the intended subtask or leads to the completion of
an independent subtask and does not interfere with the
current human intention. Each layer of the system is
formalized by one or more DNFs. The activity ui.x; t/
at time t of a neuron x is described by the differential

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
69.6 Interaction Planning
1863
Part G | 69.6
R1
A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 A6 A7 A8 A9
I5
I4
I3
I2
I1
O1 O2
O1 O2
A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 A6 A7 A8 A9
C1
C1
C1 C2 C3 C4
C2 C3 C4
C2 C3 C4
R2 R3 R4
G1 G2 G3
P1 P2 P3 P4
P5 P6
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
▪▪▪
Action observation layer (AOL)
Action simulation layer (ASL)
Intention layer (IL)
Action execution layer (AEL)
Motor control
Reaching
Grip type
Pointing
Objects memory layer
(OML)
Robot workspace
human workspace
Common subgoals layer (CSGL)
Vision system
Hand
localization
Gesture
recognition
Object
location
Object
recognition
Current state
Present
Next
Past
Fig. 69.25 Structural overview of the decision-making system from (after [69.164]; courtesy of Estella Bicho)
equation
i
•ui.x; t/
•t
D ui.x; t/ C Si.x; t/
C
Z
wi.x  x0/fi.ui.x0; t//dx0  hi ;
(69.30)
where i > 0 and hi > 0 denote the timescale and the
resting level of the ﬁeld dynamics, respectively. Si is
the summed input to a local population. The output
function fi is chosen to be a sigmoid function and
the interaction strength wi.x  x0/ is a Gaussian curve,
which depends only on the distance between x and x0
(Fig. 69.26).
In [69.129], a mimetic communication model for
pHRI is introduced, where the according motion prim-
itives are taught by human demonstration via marker
control. These are subsequently encoded into hidden
Markov models (HMMs) and allow the robot to exe-
cute them and even to recognize the motion primitives
executed by the human partner. Based on the motion
primitives, interaction primitives are then learned as
chains of actions and reactions. The ﬂow of interac-
tion primitive learning is depicted in Fig. 69.27a. First,
the robot executes a motion primitive, followed by ob-
serving the human’s respective reaction in order to
learn the correct interaction pattern sequence. After this
step, the motion primitives are updated and the pro-
cess is repeated. The underlying scheme of interaction
is shown in Fig. 69.27b. The learned motion primi-
tives are encoded as continuous HMMs (CHMMs) and
form the middle layer of the system. They are then
used to recognize the motion primitive executed by
0
1
0,5
0
u0
u
x
w(∆x)
f(u)
a)
b)
winhib
Fig. 69.26 (a) Nonlinear threshold output function that maps activ-
ity to a sigmoidal with threshold u0. (b) Synaptic weight function
for modeling the interaction strength between any two neurons x
and x0 in (69.30) (after [69.164]; courtesy of Estella Bicho)

Part G | 69.6
1864
Part G
Robots and Humans
Human
Robot
Behavior
Behavior
CHMMs
DHMMs
CHMMs
Motion primitives training
Interaction primitives training
(1) Generate self motion pattern from a motion primitive
(2) Recognize the partner's reaction to the self motion
(3) Learn the interaction pattern sequence
(4) Re-train motion primitives
(5) Repeat (1) – (4)
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 69.27 (a) Learning of interaction primitives. (b) Scheme of interaction. (c) Adaption of robot motion via virtual spring
(after [69.129]; courtesy of Dongheui Lee)
the human and to generate the motion of the robot
according to the interaction primitives encoded as dis-
crete HMMs (DHMMs) at the top. The robot motion
(more precisely its behavior in the context of the au-
thors’ work) may then be modiﬁed to adapt to human
motion in the real world (expressed by the thin hori-
zontal arrow). The bold horizontal arrow represents the
assumed adaption of the human to the robot behav-
ior. The adaptation strategy of the robot movement is
depicted in Fig. 69.27c. For this, an impedance con-
troller is used in combination with a virtual spring
connected to the robot hand to attract the device into
the correct position. Figure 69.28 depicts an applica-
tion of the interaction scheme, where the robot high-
or low-ﬁves a human coactor with one or two hands,
respectively.
69.6.2 Interaction Planning Problem
In order to formalize the interaction planning problem,
one needs to be able to describe the entire scenario,
the system state of the robot, the state of the human(s)
(possibly including future behavior prediction of both),
the environment state including all relevant objects and
the overall abstract task state. This information about
the world state comprises the concept of an interaction
Fig. 69.28 pHRI using the mimetic communication model (after [69.129];
VIDEO 625 ; courtesy of Dongheui Lee)
world, which builds the basis for formulating the gen-
eral interaction planning problem.
Definitions
The set of world states WS is deﬁned as
WS D RS  HSn  OBSm  TS ;
(69.31)
where RS; HS; OBS; TS denote the set of the robot
states, n humans, m obstacles, and an overall task state,
respectively.
The set of robot states
RS D S  RAn  IR
(69.32)
contains information about the internal state s 2 S of
the robot, the robot awareness ra 2 RA, and the inter-
action state ir 2 IR. The interaction state of the robot
may, for example, take the values autonomous, collab-
orative, or cooperative. The robot awareness indicates
its ability to predict human actions. The set of internal
states S D Sac  Sb  Sp contains information about the
set of actions carried out by the robot Sac. Furthermore,
the behavior set Sb, which includes, for example, con-
troller choices and respective parameterizations, reﬂex
reactions, and type or parameterizations of trajectory

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
69.6 Interaction Planning
1865
Part G | 69.6
planners. Such a reﬂex reaction which can be thought
of as an analogy to human reﬂexes, intends to bring
the robot to a safe state or even a reﬂex cascade R
(Sect. 69.6.3). Finally, the physical state sp 2 Sp con-
tains, for example, the robot’s instantaneous position,
velocity, and momentum.
The set of human states
HS D PSH  PA  HA  IH  D
(69.33)
combines the sets of physical state PSH (position,
velocity, etc.), personal attributes PA (ﬁtness, age, ex-
perience, etc. ), human awareness HA (the ability of the
human to predict the robots actions), interaction states
of the human IH (for example, waiting for robot, work
with robot or work without robot), and the distances D
between human and robot. In its most simple nontriv-
ial case, D could, for example, consist of the elements
in workspace, in perception, out of perception, and lost
perception.
The set of task states
TS D A  TC  IS
(69.34)
contains A, TC, IS that denote the sets of possible ac-
tions, task criticality, and expected interaction between
human and robot, respectively. The task criticality spec-
iﬁes the effect of potential task failure on human safety.
A task consists of the meaningful composition of ac-
tions and/or more complex skills such as grasp object
or simply move to pose according to a particular cre-
ation process.
The Interaction Planning Problem
The interaction planning problem then denotes the
problem of selecting a suitable, and if possible opti-
mal, robot action and associated behavior in every time
step based on the information contained in the world
state, the history of the process HIS, and available (dy-
namic) knowledge stored in a knowledge base KB (for
example, safety knowledge, object properties, world
grounding rules, . . . ). Formally, this can be expressed
by the select action mapping
sa W WS  HIS  KB ! Sac  Sb :
(69.35)
Optimality could, for example, be expressed in the
following reinforcement learning sense, where the se-
lected behavior shall lead to a maximum reward. This
is obtained as follows:
1. A task evaluator evaluates the suitability of a partic-
ular action/behavior for fulﬁlling the desired task.
2. A safety evaluator evaluates the overall safety of
the situation by taking into account different biome-
chanical injury criteria, the expected interaction
between human and robot, human–robot–related
geometric quantities, such as minimal distance, as
well as the task criticality.
3. Finally, additional rewards may be given by the hu-
man in order to capture human-friendly behavior.
4. The overall reward is then a suitable combination of
the basic rewards.
69.6.3 Robot Reflexes
Human reﬂexes are involuntary reactive body move-
ments in response to a perceived input, the so-called
stimulus, that is, one does not even have to think about
what to do. In humans, reﬂexes aim for body protec-
tion. Based on built-in heuristics, they automatically
protect the human body from injury. However, the exact
separation in terms of hybrid system-like theory is not
yet clear. Thus, the line between discrete reﬂex states
and according systemic responses on both electrical and
mechanical levels is somewhat blurred. In robotics, on
the other hand, it is possible to separate these levels and
extend the concept of basic nominal robot actions by
reﬂex reactions [69.9, 85, 139]. These concepts system-
atically incorporate the possibilities one gains from the
already described collision detection and reﬂex reaction
schemes (Sect. 69.4.3). Other work in similar directions
for developing human-like withdrawal reﬂexes can be
found in [69.165].
In contrast to the classical planning and execution
pipeline, the activation of reﬂexes that are able to over-
ride the nominal task plan due to environmental or
internal conditions that do not comply with nominal
task behavior have to be considered. In contrast to hu-
mans, these reﬂexes do not necessarily have to be ﬁxed
(or slowly time-varying over learning cycles). On the
contrary, they may be tailored to every nominal ac-
tion such that local context dependency (in particular
instantaneous sensory input) may be taken into ac-
count. After instantaneous reactions are executed, the
main problem is to decide what to do next. Either lo-
cal re-entry into the previous plan or entire re-planning
have to be executed. Figure 69.29 depicts the over-
all concept also in the context of task and interaction
planning.
Formally, a robot reﬂex is associated with a suit-
able activation signal. Typically, this represents either
the indication of a certain stimulus or a fault. Stimuli are
general perception inputs, whereas faults are detected
either by processed stimuli (observation of external
torques, proximity information, etc.) or general system
malfunctions as, e.g., communication collapse or run-
time violations. Even rather complex reﬂex patterns can
be activated that may be represented as directed reﬂex
graphs, i. e., a decisional component in the inner most

Part G | 69.6
1866
Part G
Robots and Humans
Sensory information
Reflex reaction casades
Nominal actions
Task and interaction planner
Re-entry planner
R1
A1
R2
A2
Rn
An
f1
f2 >> f1
Fig. 69.29 Conceptual sketch of robot reﬂexes; f1 and f2 indicate the update rates, or alternatively the system bandwith
of the nominal planning and execution as well as the reﬂex reaction level. Typically, the former acts at a much lower
frequency than the latter one (after [69.85, 139])
control loop of the system. A still relatively open re-
search problem is how to resolve potential failures after
reﬂexes were triggered by planning suitable re-entering
and continuation of the task.
69.6.4 Reactive Control Architecture
Obviously, the diverse methods and complex require-
ments in the pHRI domain and more speciﬁcally from
interaction control, reﬂex planning, human-centered
motion planning, and interaction planning make new
architectural concepts necessary. The central require-
ments to an according control architecture become
rather different from the classical ones (Chap. 12) due
to the demands for very responsive behavior not only
on control but also on planning level. Figure 69.30
depicts such a reactive control framework [69.166]
(
VIDEO 616 ). One of the main questions to address
is how to adapt dynamically, safe, and task consistent,
while keeping the overall plan and the respective con-
text in mind. The control framework is composed of
three layers of abstraction operating at different time
scales:
1. On the highest level of abstraction a global task
planning module builds global task plans that con-
tain temporo-logical concatenations of robot skills,
which are derived from any suitable task planning
language. Typically, this module runs either ofﬂine,
in particular when building an entire nominal task
plan that contains interaction schemata, or at very
slow update rates of several seconds or minutes, de-
pending on the complexity and novelty of the respec-
tive task. Skills are topologically invariant capabil-
ity structures, which instantiations can be modiﬁed
in terms of skill parameter vectors. The most basic
skill is the atomic robot action that represents the
formal interface to the robot real-time control core
and mechatronics. More complex skills can, e.g., be
grasp an object or hand over an object. Each skill
itself is aware of the current task state and which
atomic action is currently being executed. This in-
formation is then sent to the dynamic planning layer.
2. The second layer of abstraction, the dynamic plan-
ning level is capable of executing and/or modifying
plans dynamically, which means that it shall run at
least in the range of 
 110 Hz. It is responsible

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
69.7 Conclusions and Challenges
1867
Part G | 69.7
Fig. 69.30 Reactive and human-friendly control frame-
work for acting in partially known environments and
interaction I
for selecting the best action under the premise of the
current task state, human state and behavior, as well
as the environmental state. In a learning and adap-
tion unit the global task knowledge is translated
into the respective dynamic planning domain lan-
guage, i. e., global knowledge and plans are encoded
into a dynamic level such that dynamic adaptation
can make use of global context and the respective
mission. The according reactive planning unit is
then able to (re-)plan the robot’s desired nominal
actions such that safe, yet task consistent actions,
are executed if possible. In particular, instantaneous
perception may cause alterations of the original
global plans. A major task on this abstraction level
is to change the preplanned course of action safely
and task consistently. However, ﬁnding its way back
into the task is at least equally challenging and re-
quires careful treatment (re-entry planning).
3. The lowest architectural layer is the low-level (real-
time) control layer. Typically, this is subdivided into
multiple hierarchical layers, involving also the re-
ﬂex machine (Fig. 69.29). However, for sake of
clarity, we consider it to be a single consistent
representation that is accessible via a desired ac-
tion/behavior complex .ad; bd/ that is sent to the
system for execution. As the desired behavior may
alter due to reﬂex behaviors in case of acciden-
tal events such as unforeseen collisions, the control
Global task planner
Skill representation
Skill 4
Non-realtime
Task / human observer
Task
Atomic action
Dynamic planning
Learning/
adaptation
Trains
Task state
Soft-realtime
Robot
Initial
behavior b
Action a
Desired
behavior bd
Behavior b
Realtime
Skill 1
Skill 2
Skill 3
layer feeds back the currently active action/behavior
pair .a;b/, such that the dynamic planning layer is
able to react accordingly.
Fundamental to the aforementioned architecture is
the capacity to observe human actions on various lev-
els of abstraction. In this sense, a human observer that
gathers all relevant information and knowledge about
human agents is essential. In particular, it provides
human-related information that can be of further use.
69.7 Conclusions and Challenges
pHRI has become a central discipline in robotics over
the last decade. This is due to the signiﬁcant progress
made in the ﬁelds of mechatronics, interaction control,
motion planning, and 3-D sensing toward highly inte-
grated and sensorized lightweight systems that are able
to physically interact with their surrounding. In direct
consequence the learning, planning, and execution of
safe and legible interactions has become a widely taken
research direction. Clearly, the rise of a new generation
of commercial robots capable of physical interaction
has also contributed to the large interest in the ﬁeld.
The robotics research and industrial community expects
these systems to open up new markets and to push
robotics further toward domestic applications that may
also involve even more complex and possibly mobile
manipulators.
However, despite this recent success in research
and also in the commercialization of assistance robots,
there are many open research questions that need to
be tackled before this class of systems can become
a commodity not only in early adopter industrial appli-
cations but also on a broader scale: Continuing the road
toward safe robotics by tightly coupling injury biome-
chanics and safe interaction control with lightweight
and compliant robot design will further push the bound-
aries and build the foundation of pHRI. On the other
hand, learning interaction controllers and planning in-
tuitive and safe interactions are still very young ﬁelds,
however, they are the key to solving the long-term
physical interaction problem. Furthermore, the current
application of assistance robots in real-world problems
will bring further novel research questions. The recent

Part G | 69.7
1868
Part G
Robots and Humans
use of these robots clearly underlines that the pro-
gramming models and paradigms of interaction and
soft manipulation are very different from classical in-
dustrial robot programming. In particular, they go be-
yond simple pick and place models toward models of
force based programming, an interesting research ques-
tion currently being investigated by various researchers
worldwide.
Video-References
VIDEO 606
Mobile robot helper – Mr. Helper
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/606
VIDEO 607
Generation of human care behaviors by human-interactive robot RI-MAN
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/607
VIDEO 608
Injury evaluation of human-robot impacts
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/608
VIDEO 609
Safe physical human-robot collaboration
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/609
VIDEO 610
Admittance control of a human centered 3 DOF robotic arm using differential elastic actuators
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/610
VIDEO 611
A control strategy for human-friendly robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/611
VIDEO 613
Human–robot interactions
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/613
VIDEO 614
ISAC: A demonstration
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/614
VIDEO 615
Smart fur
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/615
VIDEO 616
Human–robot interaction planning
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/616
VIDEO 617
The power of prediction: Robots that read intentions
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/617
VIDEO 618
Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using a neurally controlled robotic arm
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/618
VIDEO 619
An assistive decision and control architecture for force-sensitive hand–arm
systems driven via human–machine interfaces (MM1)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/619
VIDEO 620
An assistive decision and control architecture for force-sensitive hand–arm
systems driven via human–machine interfaces (MM2)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/620
VIDEO 621
An assistive decision-and-control architecture for force-sensitive hand–arm
systems driven by human–machine interfaces (MM3)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/621
VIDEO 622
An assistive decision-and-control architecture for force-sensitive hand–arm
systems driven by human–machine interfaces (MM4)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/622
VIDEO 623
Twendy One demo
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/623
VIDEO 624
Full body compliant humanoid COMAN
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/624
VIDEO 625
Physical human–robot interaction in imitation learning
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/625
VIDEO 626
Justin: A humanoid upper body system for two-handed manipulation experiments
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/626
VIDEO 627
Torque control for teaching peg in hole via physical human–robot interaction
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/627
VIDEO 632
Flexible robot gripper for KUKA Light Weight Robot (LWR): Collaboration between
human and robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/632
VIDEO 716
Human–robot handover
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/716

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
References
1869
Part G | 69
VIDEO 717
Collaborative human-focused robotics for manufacturing
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/717
VIDEO 820
Dancing with Juliet
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/820
VIDEO 821
A cobot in automobile assembly
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/69/videodetails/821
References
69.1
M.A. Goodrich, A.C. Schultz: Human-robot inter-
action: A survey, Found. Trends Hum.-Comput.
Interact. 1(3), 203–275 (2007)
69.2
M.A. Peshkin, J.E. Colgate, W. Wannasuphoprasit,
C.A. Moore, R.B. Gillespie, P. Akella: Cobot archi-
tecture, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 17(4), 377–390
(2001)
69.3
T. Shibata, T. Mitsui, K. Wada, A. Touda: Mental
commit robot and its application to therapy of
children, IEEE/ASME Int. Conf. Adv. Intell. Mecha-
tron. (2001) pp. 1053–1058
69.4
S. Yohanan, K.E. MacLean: The role of affective
touch in human-robot interaction: Human intent
and expectations in touching the haptic creature,
Int. J. Soc. Robotics 4(2), 163–180 (2011)
69.5
Y. Iwamura, M. Shiomi, T. Kanda, H. Ishiguro,
N. Hagita: Do elderly people prefer a conversa-
tional humanoid as a shopping assistant partner
in supermarkets?, ACM Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot In-
teract. (2011) p. 449
69.6
T. Ende, S. Haddadin, S. Parusel, W. Tilo, M. Has-
senzahl, A. Albu-Schäffer: A human-centered
approach to robot gesture based communica-
tion within collaborative working processes, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011)
pp. 3367–3374
69.7
A.L. Thomaz, C. Chao: Turn-taking based on infor-
mation flow for fluent human-robot interaction,
AI Mag. 32(4), 53–63 (2011)
69.8
B. Gleeson, K. MacLean, A. Haddadi, E. Croft,
J. Alcazar: Gestures for industry Intuitive human-
robot communication from human observation,
ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (2013)
pp. 349–356
69.9
S. Haddadin, S. Parusel, R. Belder, A. Albu-
Schäffer: It is (almost) all about human safety:
A novel paradigm for robot design, control, and
planning, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 8153, 202–215
(2013)
69.10
J. Mainprice, D. Berenson: Human-robot collab-
orative manipulation planning using early pre-
diction of human motion, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2013) pp. 299–306
69.11
M. Cakmak, S.S. Srinivasa, M.K. Lee, S. Kiesler,
J. Forlizzi: Using spatial and temporal contrast
for fluent robot-human hand-overs, ACM/IEEE
Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (2011) pp. 489–
496
69.12
E.A. Sisbot, R. Alami: A human-aware manipula-
tion planner, IEEE Trans. Robotics 28(5), 1045–1057
(2012)
69.13
W.P. Chan, C.A.C. Parker, H.F.M. Van der Loos,
E.A. Croft: A human-inspired object handover
controller, Int. J. Robotics Res. 32(8), 972–984
(2013)
69.14
M.S. Erden, T. Tomiyama: Human-intent detec-
tion and physically interactive control of a robot
without force sensors, IEEE Trans. Robotics 26(2),
370–382 (2010)
69.15
A. Thobbi, Y. Gu, W. Sheng: Using human motion
estimation for human-robot cooperative manip-
ulation, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2011) pp. 2873–2878
69.16
P. Evrard, E. Gribovskaya, S. Calinon, A. Billard,
A. Kheddar: Teaching physical collaborative tasks:
Object-lifting case study with a humanoid, IEEE-
RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (2009) pp. 399–
404
69.17
S. Ikemoto, H. Ben Amor, T. Minato, H. Ishiguro,
B. Jung: Mutual learning and adaptation in phys-
ical human-robot interaction, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012) pp. 24–335
69.18
D. Lee, C. Ott: Incremental kinesthetic teaching of
motion primitives using the motion refinement
tube, Auton. Robots 31(2–3), 115–131 (2011)
69.19
S. Haddadin, A. Albu-Schäffer, G. Hirzinger: Re-
quirements for safe robots: Measurements, anal-
ysis & new insights, Int. J. Robotics Res. 28(11-12),
1507–1527 (2009)
69.20
A. Bicchi, G. Tonietti: Fast and soft arm tactics:
Dealing with the safety-performance trade-off in
robot arms design and control, IEEE Robotics Au-
tom. Mag. 11, 22–33 (2004)
69.21
M. Zinn, O. Khatib, B. Roth: A new actuation
approach for human friendly robot design, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 23, 379–398 (2004)
69.22
S. Haddadin, A. Albu-Schäffer, G. Hirzinger: Safety
evaluation of physical human-robot interaction
via crash-testing, Proc. Robotics Sci. Syst. Conf.
(2007) pp. 217–224
69.23
S. Oberer, R.-D. Schraft: Robot-dummy crash tests
for robot safety assessment, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2007) pp. 2934–2939
69.24
S. Haddadin, A. Albu-Schäffer, F. Haddadin,
J. Roßmann, G. Hirzinger: Study on soft-tissue in-
jury in robotics, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 18(4),
20–34 (2011)
69.25
S. Haddadin, S. Haddadin, A. Khoury, T. Rokahr,
S. Parusel, R. Burgkart, A. Bicchi, A. Albu-Schäffer:
On making robots understand safety: Embedding
injury knowledge into control, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 31, 1578–1602 (2012)

Part G | 69
1870
Part G
Robots and Humans
69.26
S. Haddadin: Towards safe robots – Approaching
Asimov’s 1st law, Springer Tracts Adv. Robotics 90,
1–343 (2014)
69.27
D.C. Schneider, A.M. Nahum: Impact studies of fa-
cial bones and skull, Proc. 16th Stapp Car Crash
Conf. (1972) pp. 186–204
69.28
A.M. Nahum, J.D. Gatts, C.W. Gadd, J. Danforth:
Impact tolerance of the skull and face, Proc. Stapp
Car Crash Conf. (1968)
69.29
D. Allsop, T.R. Perl, C. Warner: Force/deflection
and fracture characteristics of the temporo-
parietal region of the human head, SAE Transac-
tions (1991) pp. 2009–2018
69.30
J. Cormier, S. Manoogian, J. Bisplinghoff, S. Row-
son, A. Santago, C. McNally, S. Duma, J.I.V. Bolte:
The tolerance of the nasal bone to blunt impact,
Ann. Adv. Automot. Med (2010) p. 3
69.31
H. Delye, P. Verschueren, B. Depreitere, I. Ver-
poest, D. Berckmans, J. Vander Sloten, G. Van Der
Perre, J. Goffin: Biomechanics of frontal skull frac-
ture, J. Neurotrauma 24(10), 1576–1586 (2007)
69.32
G.W. Nyquist, J.M. Cavanaugh, S.J. Goldberg,
A.I. King: Facial impact tolerance and response,
Proc. 30th Stapp Car Crash Conf. (1986) pp. 733–
754
69.33
D.L. Allsop, C.Y. Warner, M.G. Wille, D.C. Schneider,
A.M. Nahum: Facial Impact response – A compar-
ison of the hybrid III dummy and human cadaver,
Proc. Stapp Car Crash Conf. (1988) pp. 781–797
69.34
V.R. Hodgson, L.M. Thomas: Comparison of head
acceleration injury indices in cadaver skull frac-
ture, Proc. Stapp Car Crash Conf. (1971) pp. 299–307
69.35
A.M. Nahum, R.W. Smith: An experimental model
for closed head impact injury, Proc. Stapp Car
Crash Conf. (1976)
69.36
S. Haddadin, A. Albu-Schäffer, M. Frommberger,
J. Rossmann, G. Hirzinger: The DLR Crash Re-
port: Towards a standard crash-testing proto-
col for robot safety – Part I: Results, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2009) pp. 272–
279
69.37
S. Haddadin, A. Albu-Schäffer, M. Frommberger,
J. Rossmann, G. Hirzinger: The “DLR Crash Re-
port”: Towards a standard crash-testing protocol
for robot safety – Part II: Discussions, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2009) pp. 280–
287
69.38
C.K. Kroell, D.C. Schneider, A.M. Nahum: Impact
tolerance and response of the human thorax I,
Proc. Stapp Car Crash Conf. (1971)
69.39
C.K. Kroell, D.C. Scheider, A.M. Nahum: Impact
tolerance and response of the human thorax II,
Proc. Stapp Car Crash Conf. (1974) pp. 383–457
69.40
L.M. Patrick: Impact force deflection of the hu-
man thorax, Proc. 25th Stapp Car Crash Conf. (1981)
pp. 471–496
69.41
A.M. Nahum, C.W. Gadd, D.C. Schneider, C. Kroell:
Deflection of the human thorax under sternal im-
pact, Int. Automot. Saf. Conf. (1970)
69.42
J.M. Cavanaugh, G.W. Nyquist, S.J. Goldberg,
A.I. King: Lower abdominal impact tolerance and
response, Proc. Stapp Car Crash Conf. (1986)
69.43
S.M. Duma, P. Schreiber, J. McMaster, J. Crandall,
C. Bass, W. Pilkey: Dynamic injury tolerances for
long bones of the female upper extremity, Int.
Res. Council Biomech. Inj. (IRCOBI) (1998) pp. 189–
201
69.44
S.M. Duma, J.R. Crandall, S.R. Hurwitz, W.D. Pil-
key: Small female upper extremity interaction
with the deploying side air bag, Proc. Stapp Car
Crash Conf. (1998) pp. 47–63
69.45
J.A.
Spadaro,
F.W.
Werner,
R.A.
Brenner,
M.D. Fortino, L.A. Fay, W.T. Edwards: Cortical
and trabecular bone contribute strength to the
osteopenic distal radius, J. Orthop. Res. 12,
211–218 (1994)
69.46
O. Khatib: Inertial properties in robotic manipu-
lation: An object-level framework, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 14(1), 19–36 (1995)
69.47
T.E. Lobdell, C.K. Kroell, D.C. Scheider, W.E. Her-
ing: Impact response of the human thorax, Symp.
Hum. Impact Response (1972) pp. 201–245
69.48
T.P. Ruedi, W.M. Murphy: AO Principles of Fracture
Management, Vol. 1 (Thieme, Stuttgart 2007)
69.49
I.V. Lau, D.C. Viano: Role of impact velocity and
chest compression in thoraic injury, Avia. Space
Environ. Med. 56, 16–21 (1983)
69.50
ISO: ISO12100:2010: Safety of Machinery – General
Principles for Design – Risk Assessment and Risk
Reductions (Int. Organization for Standardization,
Geneva 2010)
69.51
ISO: ISO13849-1:2006: Safety of Machinery –
Safety-Related Parts of Control Systems – Part 1:
General Principles for Design (Int. Organization for
Standardization, Geneva 2006)
69.52
ISO: ISO13855:2010: Safety of Machinery – Posi-
tioning of Safeguards With Respect to the Ap-
proach Speeds of Parts of the Human Body (Int.
Organization for Standardization, Geneva 2010)
69.53
ISO: ISO10218-1:2011: Robots and Robotic Devices –
Safety Requirements for Industrial Robots – Part
1: Robots (Int. Organization for Standardization,
Geneva 2011)
69.54
ISO/DTS 15066: Robots and Robotic Devices –
Safety Requirements for Industrial Robots – Col-
laborative operation (Int. Organization for Stan-
dardization, Geneva) under development
69.55
ISO: ISO13482:2014: Robots and Robotic Devices –
Safety Requirements for Personal Care Robots (Int.
Organization for Standardization, Geneva 2014)
69.56
C.
Gosselin,
T.
Laliberte,
B.
Mayer-St-Onge,
S. Foucault, A. Lecours, V. Duchaine, N. Paradis,
D. Gao, R. Menassa: A friendly beast of burden:
A human-assistive robot for handling large pay-
loads, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 20(4), 139–147
(2013)
69.57
G. Hirzinger, A. Albu-Schäffer: Lightweight robots,
Scholarpedia 3, 3889 (2008)
69.58
W.T. Townsend, J.K. Salisbury: Mechanical de-
sign for whole-arm manipulation, Proc. NATO
Adv. Workshop Robots Biol. Syst, ed. by P. Dario,
G. Sandini, P. Aebischer (1993) pp. 153–164
69.59
A. Albu-Schäffer, S. Haddadin, C. Ott, A. Stemmer,
T. Wimböck, G. Hirzinger: The DLR lightweight

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
References
1871
Part G | 69
robot – Lightweight design and soft robotics con-
trol concepts for robots in human environments,
Ind. Robot J. 34(5), 376–385 (2007)
69.60
KUKA Roboter GmbH: http://www.kuka-lbr-iiwa.
com (2015)
69.61
A.S. Shafer, M.R. Kermani: Design and valida-
tion of a magneto-rheological clutch for practical
control applications in human-friendly manipu-
lation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2011) pp. 4266–4271
69.62
G. Hirzinger, J. Butterfaß, M. Fischer, M. Greben-
stein, M. Hähnle, H. Liu, I. Schaefer, N. Sporer:
A mechatronics approach to the design of light-
weight arms and multi-fingered hands, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2000)
69.63
M.A.
Diftler,
J.S.
Mehling,
M.E.
Abdallah,
N.A. Radford, L.B. Bridgwater, A.M. Sanders,
R.S. Askew, D.M. Linn, J.D. Yamokoski, F.A. Per-
menter, B.K. Hargrave, R. Piatt, R.T. Savely,
R.O. Ambrose: Robonaut 2 – The first humanoid
robot in space, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 2178–2183
69.64
M. Bluethmann, R. Ambrose, R. Askew, M. Goza,
C. Lovechik, D. Magruder, M.A. Differ, F. Rehn-
mark: Robonaut: A robotic astronaut’s assistant,
Int. Conf. Adv. Robotics (2001)
69.65
C. Ott, B. Henze, D. Lee: Kinesthetic teaching of
humanoid motion based on whole-body compli-
ance control with interaction-aware balancing,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2013) pp. 4615–4621
69.66
C. Ott, O. Eiberger, W. Friedl, B. Bauml, U. Hil-
lenbrand, C. Borst, A. Albu-Schäffer, B. Brunner,
H. Hirschmuller, S. Kielhofer, S. Kielhofer, R. Koni-
etschke, M. Suppa, T. Wimbock, F. Zacharias,
G. Hirzinger: A humanoid two-arm system for
dexterous manipulation, IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Hu-
manoid Robots (2006) pp. 276–283
69.67
M.W. Spong: Modeling and control of elastic joint
robots, ASME J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 109(4),
310–319 (1987)
69.68
G. Hirzinger, N. Sporer, M. Schedl, J. Butterfaß,
M. Grebenstein: Torque-controlled lightweight
arms and articulated hands: Do we reach tech-
nological limits now?, Int. J. Robotics Res. 23(4/5),
331–340 (2004)
69.69
B.
Vanderborght,
B.
Verrelst,
R.V.
Ham,
M.V. Damme, D. Lefeber, B.M.Y. Duran, P. Beyl:
Exploiting natural dynamics to reduce energy
consumption by controlling the compliance of
soft actuators, Int. J. Robotics Res. 25(4), 343–358
(2006)
69.70
S. Haddadin, M. Weis, A. Albu-Schäffer, S. Wolf:
Optimal control for maximizing link velocity of
robotic variable stiffness joints, IFAC World Congr.
(2011) pp. 3175–3182
69.71
S. Haddadin, T. Laue, U. Frese, S. Wolf, A. Albu-
Schäffer, G. Hirzinger: Kick it like a safe robot:
Requirements for 2050, Robotics Auton. Syst. 57,
761–775 (2009)
69.72
A. Albu-Schäffer, O. Eiberger, M. Grebenstein,
S.
Haddadin,
C.
Ott,
T.
Wimböck,
S.
Wolf,
G. Hirzinger: Soft robotics: From torque feedback
controlled lightweight robots to intrinsically com-
pliant systems, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 15(3),
20–30 (2008)
69.73
B.
Vanderborght,
A.
Albu-Schäffer,
A.
Bic-
chi,
E.
Burdet,
D.G.
Caldwell,
R.
Carloni,
M.G. Catalano, O. Eiberger, W. Friedl, G. Ganesh,
M. Garabini, M. Grebenstein, G. Grioli, S. Had-
dadin, H. Hoppner, A. Jafari, M. Laffranchi,
D. Lefeber, F. Petit, S. Stramigioli, N.G. Tsagarakis,
M.V. Damme, R.V. Ham, L.C. Visser, S. Wolf:
Variable impedance actuators: A review, Robotics
Auton. Syst. 61(12), 1601–1614 (2013)
69.74
G.A. Pratt, M. Williamson: Series elastics actua-
tors, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (1995) pp. 399–406
69.75
S.
Haddadin,
A.
Albu-Schäffer,
O.
Eiberger,
G. Hirzinger: New insights concerning intrinsic
joint elasticity for safety, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2010) pp. 2181–2187
69.76
S. Haddadin, K. Krieger, N. Mansfeld, A. Albu-
Schaffer: On impact decoupling properties of
elastic robots and time optimal velocity max-
imization
on joint
level, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2012) pp. 5089–
5096
69.77
J.-J. Park, H.-S. Kim, J.-B. Song: Safe robot arm
with safe joint mechanism using nonlinear spring
system for collision safety, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2009) pp. 3371–3376
69.78
N.G. Tsagarakis, S. Morfey, G. Medrano Cerda,
L. Zhibin, D.G. Caldwell: Compliant humanoid co-
man: Optimal joint stiffness tuning for modal
frequency control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2013) pp. 673–678
69.79
A.
Albu-Schäffer,
M.
Fischer,
G.
Schreiber,
F. Schoeppe, G. Hirzinger: Soft robotics: What
cartesian stiffness can we obtain with passively
compliant,
uncoupled
joints?,
Proc.
IEEE/RSJ
Int.
Conf.
Intell.
Robots
Syst.
(IROS)
(2004)
pp. 3295–3301
69.80
M. Garabini, A. Passaglia, F. Belo, P. Salaris, A. Bic-
chi: Optimality principles in variable stiffness
control: The VSA hammer, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011) pp. 3770–3775
69.81
D. Braun, M. Howard, S. Vijayakumar: Exploiting
variable stiffness in explosive movement tasks,
Robotics Sci. Syst. (2011)
69.82
U. Mettin, A. Shiriaev: Ball-pitching challenge
with an underactuated two-link robot arm, IFAC
World Congr. (2011) pp. 1–6
69.83
A. Flagg, K. Maclean: Affective touch gesture
recognition for a furry zoomorphic machine, Int.
Conf. Tangible Embed. Embodied Interact. (2013)
pp. 1–4
69.84
R.M. Voyles, P.K. Khosla: Tactile gestures for hu-
man/robot interaction, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1995) pp. 7–13
69.85
S. Haddadin, M. Suppa, S. Fuchs, T. Boden-
müller, A. Albu-Schäffer, G. Hirzinger: Towards
the robotic co-worker, Int. Symp. Robotics Res.
Lucerne (2009)

Part G | 69
1872
Part G
Robots and Humans
69.86
R. Bischoff, J. Kurth, G. Schreiber, R. Koeppe,
A. Albu-Schäffer, A. Beyer, O. Eiberger, S. Had-
dadin, A. Stemmer, G. Grunwald, G. Hirzinger: The
KUKA-DLR lightweight robot arm: A new reference
platform for robotics research and manufacturing,
Int. Symp. Robotics (2010) pp. 1–10
69.87
S.
Haddadin,
A.
Albu-Schäffer,
A.
De
Luca,
G. Hirzinger: Collision detection
& reaction:
A contribution to safe physical human-robot in-
teraction, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2008) pp. 3356–3363
69.88
L.E. Pfeffer, O. Khatib, J. Hake: Joint torque sen-
sory feedback in the control of a PUMA manip-
ulator, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 5(4), 418–425
(1989)
69.89
G. Plank, G. Hirzinger: Controlling a robot’s mo-
tion speed by a force-torque-sensor for debur-
ring problems, IFAC Inf. Control Probl. Manuf.
Technol. (1982) pp. 97–102
69.90
G. Hirzinger, U. Brunet: Fast and self-improving
compliance using digital force-torque control,
4th Int. Conf. Assembly Autom. (1983) pp. 268–281
69.91
V.J. Lumelsky, E. Cheung: Real-time collision
avoidance in teleoperated whole-sensitive robot
arm manipulators, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern.
23(1), 194–203 (1993)
69.92
G. De Maria, C. Natale, S. Pirozzi: Force/tactile sen-
sor for robotic applications, Sens. Actuators A 175,
60–72 (2012)
69.93
R.S. Dahiya, P. Mittendorfer, M. Valle, G. Cheng,
V.J. Lumelsky: Directions toward effective utiliza-
tion of tactile skin: A review, IEEE Sens. J. 13(11),
4121–4138 (2013)
69.94
M. Strohmayr: Artificial Skin in Robotics, Ph.D.
Thesis (Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karl-
sruhe 2012)
69.95
A. Jain, M.D. Killpack, A. Edsinger, C.C. Kemp:
Manipulation in clutter with whole-arm tactile
sensing, Int. J. Robotics Res. 32(4), 458–482 (2013)
69.96
A.J. Schmid, M. Hoffmann, H. Worn: A tactile
language for intuitive human-robot communica-
tion, IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (2007)
pp. 569–576
69.97
S. Yohanan, J.P. Hall, K.E. MacLean, E.A. Croft,
H.F.M. Van Der Loos, M.A. Baumann, J. Chang,
D. Nielsen, S. Zoghbi, G. Jih Shiang Chang: Affect-
driven emotional expression with the haptic
creature, Proc. User Interface Softw. Technol.
(UIST) (2009) p. 2
69.98
M. Frigola, A. Casals, J. Amat: Human-robot in-
teraction based on a sensitive bumper skin, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2006)
pp. 283–287
69.99
T. Mukai, M. Onishi, T. Odashima, S. Hirano:
Development of the tactile sensor system of
a human-interactive robot, IEEE Trans. Robotics
24(2), 505–512 (2008)
69.100
B.D. Argall, A.G. Billard: A survey of tactile
human-robot interactions, Robotics Auton. Syst.
58(10), 1159–1176 (2010)
69.101
M. Van den Bergh, D. Carton, R. De Nijs, N. Mitsou,
C. Landsiedel, K. Kuehnlenz, D. Wollherr, L. Van
Gool, M. Buss: Real-time 3D hand gesture inter-
action with a robot for understanding directions
from humans, IEEE Int. Symp. Robot Hum. Inter-
act. Commun. (2011) pp. 357–362
69.102
M. Sigalas, M. Pateraki, I. Oikonomidis, P. Traha-
nias: Robust model-based 3D torso pose estima-
tion in RGB-D sequences, IEEE Int. Conf. Computer
Vis. Work. (2013) pp. 315–322
69.103
N. Hogan: Impedance Control: An Approach to
Manipulation: Part I – Theory, Part II – Imple-
mentation, Part III – Applications, J. Dyn. Syst.
Meas. Control 107, 1–24 (1985)
69.104
J. Craig, M. Raibert: A systematic method for
hybrid position/force control of a manipulator,
IEEE Computer Softw. Appl. Conf. (1979) pp. 446–
451
69.105
C. Yang, G. Gowrishankar, S. Haddadin, S. Parusel,
A. Albu-Schäffer, E. Burdet: Human like adap-
tation of force and impedance in stable and
unstable interactions, IEEE Trans. Robotics 27(5),
918–930 (2010)
69.106
A. Stemmer, A. Albu-Schäffer, G. Hirzinger: An
analytical method for the planning of robust as-
sembly tasks of complex shaped planar parts,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2007)
pp. 317–323
69.107
N. Hogan: On the stability of manipulators per-
forming contact tasks, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. 4(6), 677–686 (1988)
69.108
C. Ott, R. Mukherjee, Y. Nakamura: Unified
impedance and admittance control, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2010) pp. 554–
561
69.109
T.R. Kurfess: Robotics and Automation Handbook
(CRC, Boca Raton 2010)
69.110
F. Caccavale, C. Natale, B. Siciliano, L. Villani:
Six-DOF impedance control based on angle/axis
representations, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 15(2),
289–300 (1999)
69.111
L. Sentis, O. Khatib: Synthesis of whole-body be-
haviors through hierarchical control of behavioral
primitives, Int. J. Humanoid Robotic s, 505–518
(2005)
69.112
A.
Dietrich,
T.
Wimböck,
A.
Albu-Schäffer:
Dynamic
whole-body
mobile
manipulation
with a torque controlled humanoid robot via
impedance control laws, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2011) pp. 3199–3206
69.113
A. Albu-Schäffer, C. Ott, U. Frese, G. Hirzinger:
Cartesian impedance control of redundant robots:
Recent results with the DLR-light-weight-arms,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2003)
pp. 3704–3709
69.114
A. Albu-Schäffer, C. Ott, G. Hirzinger: A unified
passivity-based control framework for position,
torque and impedance control of flexible joint
robots, Int. J. Robotics Res. 26, 23–39 (2007)
69.115
L. Zollo, B. Siciliano, A. De Luca, E. Guglielmelli,
P. Dario: Compliance control for an anthropo-
morphic robot with elastic joints: Theory and
experiments, J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 127(3),
321–328 (2005)

Physical Human–Robot Interaction
References
1873
Part G | 69
69.116
R. Platt Jr., M. Abdallah, C. Wampler: Multiple-
priority impedance control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 6033–6038
69.117
S. Stramigioli: Modeling and IPC Control of In-
teractive Mechanical Systems: A Coordinate-Free
Approach (Springer, New York 2001)
69.118
C.-C. Cheah, D. Wang: Learning impedance con-
trol for robotic manipulators, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 14(3), 452–465 (1998)
69.119
Y. Li, S. Sam Ge, C. Yang: Learning impedance con-
trol for physical robot–environment interaction,
Int. J. Control 85(2), 182–193 (2012)
69.120
S. Jung, T.C. Hsia: Neural network impedance
force control of robot manipulator, IEEE Trans. Ind.
Electron. 45(3), 451–461 (1998)
69.121
A.M. Zanchettin, P. Rocco: Path-consistent safety
in mixed human-robot collaborative manufac-
turing environments, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2013) pp. 1131–1136
69.122
D.W. Franklin, E. Burdet, K.P. Tee, R. Osu, C.-
M. Chew, T.E. Milner, M. Kawato: CNS learns stable,
accurate, and efficient movements using a simple
algorithm, J. Neurosci. 28(44), 11165–11173 (2008)
69.123
J.-J.E. Slotine, W. Li: Applied Nonlinear Control
(Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs 1991)
69.124
E. Gribovskaya, A. Kheddar, A. Billard: Motion
learning and adaptive impedance for robot con-
trol during physical interaction with humans,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011)
pp. 4326–4332
69.125
K. Kronander, A. Billard: Learning compliant
manipulation through kinesthetic and tactile
human-robot interaction, IEEE Trans. Haptics 7(3),
367–380 (2014)
69.126
A. Ajoudani, N.G. Tsagarakis, A. Bicchi: Tele-
impedance:
Towards
transferring
human
impedance regulation skills to robots, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012)
pp. 382–388
69.127
S. Calinon, P. Evrard, E. Gribovskaya, A. Billard,
A. Kheddar: Learning collaborative manipulation
tasks by demonstration using a haptic interface,
Int. Conf. Adv. Robotics (2009) pp. 1–6
69.128
J.R. Medina, M. Lawitzky, A. Mörtl, D. Lee,
S. Hirche: An experience-driven robotic assistant
acquiring human knowledge to improve haptic
cooperation, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2011) pp. 2416–2422
69.129
D. Lee, C. Ott, Y. Nakamura: Mimetic commu-
nication model with compliant physical contact
in human-humanoid interaction, Int. J. Robotics
Res. 29(13), 1684–1704 (2010)
69.130
A. Jain, B. Wojcik, T. Joachims, A. Saxena: Learning
trajectory preferences for manipulators via itera-
tive improvement, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
(2013) pp. 575–583
69.131
K. Suita, Y. Yamada, N. Tsuchida, K. Imai, H. Ikeda,
N. Sugimoto: A failure-to-safety kyozon system
with simple contact detection and stop capabili-
ties for safe human – Autonomous robot coexis-
tence, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(1995) pp. 3089–3096
69.132
Y. Yamada, Y. Hirasawa, S. Huang, Y. Umetani,
K. Suita: Human-robot contact in the safeguard-
ing space, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 2(4), 230–
236 (1997)
69.133
S. Takakura, T. Murakami, K. Ohnishi: An approach
to collision detection and recovery motion in in-
dustrial robot, Annual Conf. IEEE Ind. Electron.
Soc. (1989) pp. 421–426
69.134
S. Morinaga, K. Kosuge: Collision detection system
for manipulator based on adaptive impedance
control law, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2003) pp. 1080–1085
69.135
K. Kosuge, T. Matsumoto, S. Morinaga: Collision
detection system for manipulator based on adap-
tive control scheme, Trans. Soc. Instrum. Control
Eng. 39, 552–558 (2003)
69.136
A.
De
Luca, A.
Albu-Schäffer,
S.
Haddadin,
G. Hirzinger: Collision detection and safe reaction
with the DLR-III lightweight manipulator arm,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2006) pp. 1623–1630
69.137
A. De Luca, R. Mattone: Actuator fault detec-
tion and isolation using generalized momenta,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2003)
pp. 634–639
69.138
H.-B. Kuntze, C.W. Frey, K. Giesen, G. Milighetti:
Fault tolerant supervisory control of human inter-
active robots, IFAC Workshop Adv. Control Diagn.
(2003) pp. 55–60
69.139
S. Parusel, S. Haddadin, A. Albu-Schäffer: Modu-
lar state-based behavior control for safe human-
robot interaction: A lightweight control archi-
tecture for a lightweight robot, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 4298–
4305
69.140
N. Mansfeld, S. Haddadin: Reaching desired states
time-optimally from equilibrium and vice versa
for visco-elastic joint robots with limited elastic
deflection, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2014) pp. 3904–3911
69.141
C.A.C. Parker, E.A. Croft: Design & personaliza-
tion of a cooperative carrying robot controller,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2012)
pp. 3916–3921
69.142
N. Hogan, S.P. Buerger: Impedance and interac-
tion control. In: Robotics and Automation Hand-
book, ed. by T.R. Kurfess (CRC, Boca Raton 2005)
pp. 19-1–19-24
69.143
R. Ikeura, H. Inooka: Variable impedance con-
trol of a robot for cooperation with a human,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1995)
pp. 3097–3102
69.144
R. Ikeura, T. Moriguchi, K. Mizutani: Optimal Vari-
able Impedance Control for a Robot and Its Appli-
cation To Lifting an Object with a Human, IEEE Int.
Workshop Robot Hum. Interact. Commun. (2002)
pp. 500–505
69.145
K. Kosuge, N. Kazamura: Mobile robot helper,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2000)
pp. 583–588
69.146
N. Nejatbakhsh, K. Kosuge: Adaptive guidance for
the elderly based on user intent and physical im-

Part G | 69
1874
Part G
Robots and Humans
pairment, IEEE Int. Symp. Robot Hum. Interact.
Commun. (2006) pp. 510–514
69.147
M. Lawitzky, A. Mörtl, S. Hirche: Load sharing
in human-robot cooperative manipulation, IEEE
Int. Symp. Robot Human Interact. Commun. (2010)
pp. 185–191
69.148
V. Duchaine, B. Mayer St.-Onge, C. Gosselin: Sta-
ble and intuitive control of an intelligent assist
device, IEEE Trans. on Haptics 5(2), 148–159 (2012)
69.149
A. Mörtl, M. Lawitzky, A. Kucukyilmaz, M. Sezgin,
C. Basdogan, S. Hirche: The role of roles: Physi-
cal cooperation between humans and robots, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 31(13), 1656–1674 (2012)
69.150
T. Flash, N. Hogan: The coordination of arm
movements: Mathematical model, J. Neurosci.
5(7), 1688–1703 (1985)
69.151
Y. Maeda, T. Hara, T. Arai: Human-robot coopera-
tive manipulation with motion estimation, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2001)
pp. 2240–2245
69.152
S. Miossec, A. Kheddar: Human motion in coop-
erative tasks: Moving object case study, Robotics
Biomim. (2009) pp. 1509–1514
69.153
D. Kulić, E. Croft: Pre-collision strategies for hu-
man robot interaction, Auton. Robots 22(2), 149–
164 (2007)
69.154
K. Ikuta, H. Ishii, M. Nokata: Safety evaluation
method of design and control for human-care
robots, Int. J. Robotics Res. 22(5), 281–298 (2003)
69.155
D. Kulić, E.A. Croft: Real-time safety for human-
robot interaction, Robotics Auton. Syst. 54(1), 1–12
(2006)
69.156
Y. Tamura, T. Fukuzawa, H. Asama: Smooth col-
lision avoidance in human-robot coexisting en-
vironment, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2010) pp. 3887–3892
69.157
B. Lacevic, P. Rocco, A.M. Zanchettin: Safety as-
sessment and control of robotic manipulators
using danger field, IEEE Trans. Robotics 29(5),
1257–1270 (2013)
69.158
S. Haddadin, H. Urbanek, S. Parusel, D. Burschka,
J. Roßmann, A. Albu-Schäffer, G. Hirzinger: Real-
time reactive motion generation based on vari-
able attractor dynamics and shaped velocities,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2010) pp. 3109–3116
69.159
F. Flacco, T. Kroger, A. De Luca, O. Khatib: A depth
space approach to human-robot collision avoid-
ance, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2012) pp. 338–345
69.160
E.A. Sisbot, L.F. Marin-urias, R. Alami, T. Siméon:
A human aware mobile robot motion planner,
IEEE Trans. Robotics 23(5), 874–883 (2007)
69.161
J. Mainprice, E.A. Sisbot, T. Siméon, R. Alami:
Planning safe and legible hand-over motions for
human-robot interaction, IARP Workshop Tech.
Chall. Dependable Robots Hum. Environ. (2010)
p. 7
69.162
J. Mainprice, E.A. Sisbot, L. Jaillet, J. Cortes,
R. Alami, T. Simeon: Planning human-aware mo-
tions using a sampling-based costmap planner,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011)
pp. 5012–5017
69.163
A. Clodic, H. Cao, S. Alili, V. Montreuil, R. Alami,
R. Chatila: SHARY: A supervision system adapted
to human-robot interaction, Springer Tracts Adv.
Robotics 54, 229–238 (2009)
69.164
E. Bicho, W. Erlhagen, L. Louro, E. Costa e Silva:
Neuro-cognitive mechanisms of decision making
in joint action: A human–robot interaction study,
Hum. Mov. Sci. 30(5), 846–868 (2011)
69.165
T.S. Dahl, A. Paraschos: A force-distance model of
humanoid arm withdrawal reflexes, Lect. Notes
Comput. Sci. 7429, 13–24 (2012)
69.166
S. Parusel, H.
Widmoser, S. Golz, T.
Ende,
N. Blodow, M. Saveriano, K. Krieger, A. Maldon-
ado, I. Kresse, R. Weitschat, D. Lee, M. Beetz,
S. Haddadin: Human-Robot interaction Planning,
AAAI Video Competition, http://www.aaaivideos.
org/2014/15_hri_planning/ (2014)

Multimedia Contents Human–Rob
1875
Part G | 70
70. Human–Robot Augmentation
Massimo Bergamasco, Hugh Herr
The development of robotic systems capable of
sharing with humans the load of heavy tasks has
been one of the primary objectives in robotics
research. At present, in order to fulfil such an
objective, a strong interest in the robotics commu-
nity is collected by the so-called wearable robots,
a class of robotics systems that are worn and di-
rectly controlled by the human operator. Wearable
robots, together with powered orthoses that ex-
ploit robotic components and control strategies,
can represent an immediate resource also for al-
lowing humans to restore manipulation and/or
walking functionalities.
The present chapter deals with wearable
robotics systems capable of providing different
levels of functional and/or operational augmen-
tation to the human beings for specific functions
or tasks. Prostheses, powered orthoses, and ex-
oskeletons are described for upper limb, lower
limb, and whole body structures. State-of-the-
art devices together with their functionalities and
main components are presented for each class of
wearable system. Critical design issues and open
research aspects are reported.
70.1
Concept and Definitions....................... 1876
70.2 Upper Limb Wearable Systems .............. 1877
70.2.1
Location of Placement ............... 1877
70.2.2
Degrees of Freedom................... 1877
70.2.3
Kinematic Architecture
and Implementation ................. 1878
70.2.4 Actuation and Power
Transmission Methods ............... 1878
70.2.5 Type of Sensorization................. 1880
70.2.6 Hand Exoskeletons .................... 1880
70.3 Lower Limb Wearable Systems .............. 1882
70.3.1
Lower Extremity Autonomous
Wearable Robotics ..................... 1882
70.3.2
Neuromechanical Basis
for Wearable-Robotic Leg Design 1882
70.3.3
Design Principles
for Wearable Leg Robotics .......... 1882
70.3.4 Series and Parallel-Elastic
Actuation for Power
Amplification ............................ 1883
70.3.5 Series-Elastic Actuation
for Minimizing Motor Work......... 1885
70.3.6 Neuromuscular-Based
Reflexive Control ....................... 1885
70.3.7
Leg Exoskeletons ....................... 1887
70.4 Whole Body Wearable Systems.............. 1889
70.4.1
General Issues........................... 1889
70.4.2 Specific Design .......................... 1890
70.5 Control of Human–Robot
Augmentation Systems......................... 1892
70.5.1
A Historical Perspective .............. 1892
70.5.2 Power Augmentation
through Proprioceptive Sensors .. 1895
70.5.3 EMG Force Control
and Power Augmentation .......... 1896
70.5.4 Power Augmentation
through Exteroceptive Sensors.... 1897
70.5.5 Control Schemes........................ 1898
70.6 Conclusions and Further Developments
1902
Video-References......................................... 1902
References................................................... 1902

Part G | 70.1
1876
Part G
Robots and Humans
70.1 Concept and Definitions
Since early developments, one of the primary objec-
tives of technology has been that of relieving humans
from heavy tasks [70.1]. The concept of human–robot
augmentation refers to the use of robotics systems to
increase human functionalities in different operational
contexts [70.2]. In general, the augmentation of hu-
mans’ performances through the use of robotic systems
refers solely to the increase in mechanical capabili-
ties involving motion control and generation of scaled
levels of forces. Although complex operations involve
and exploit perceptual capabilities, in this chapter the
concept of human–robot augmentation is not referred
to perceptual functionalities only. Examples of work-
ing conditions in which human–robot augmentation can
play an essential role for the completion of the task can
be considered, e.g., operations for debris removal after
an earthquake in which human operators, wearing such
systems, can move and operate in a more ﬂexible and
accurate way with respect to machines like cranes or
excavators.
Other scenarios are represented by tasks in which
the number of repetitions, instead of level of loads to
be operated, is high and becomes the critical factor for
decreasing fatigue, thus maintaining long-term levels of
humans’ safety.
By deﬁnition, wearable robots follow the human op-
erator’s movements and in this way can inherently and
fully exploit human’s dexterity, thus assuring a higher
level of ﬂexibility in addressing a speciﬁc task with
respect to usual loading machines. A ﬁrst and fun-
damental characteristic, and at the same time a strict
design constraint, of wearable robots is the condition
of possessing a physical structure which is always in
contact with the human operator’s body during opera-
tion. As a consequence, wearable robots design must
take into account both biomechanics and human motor
control aspects.
Research on wearable robots has received a strong
contribution from the development of haptic interfaces,
i. e., robotic systems that are able to generate forces
on the human body (force feedback) while maintain-
ing a high level of naturalness of user’s movements.
The development of haptic technologies in the last two
decades has focused on the importance of designing
robotic systems able to generate forces at the level of
the hand or other parts of the human body. As a conse-
quence, an increased attention of the scientiﬁc robotic
community toward wearable robots has been recorded.
In fact, most of the recent developments on robotic
exoskeletons derive from their application in neurore-
habilitation [70.3], where the robotic system is used to
kinetically assist the patient’s limb during the perfor-
mance of speciﬁc exercises.
The augmentation of human performances can be
achieved with different types of robotic systems, e.g.
from teleoperated robots to self-standing robotic sys-
tems amplifying human actions. Examples of robotic
systems directly operated by the human operator are
the Cobot system [70.4] and the intelligent autonomous
system (IAS) [70.5]. However, in the framework of the
present review work, the analysis is performed by con-
sidering only robotic systems that can be worn by the
user.
At present, few deﬁnitions of wearable robotic sys-
tems have been considered. Herr makes a ﬁrst classiﬁ-
cation between serial and parallel system [70.6].
Serial systems are considered those that increase
the length and reachability of a limb, while paral-
lel structures contribute to the effective augmenta-
tion of torques and forces generated by the human
limb. Serial systems perform their action by exploit-
ing elastic components integrated in their structure, thus
not requiring a speciﬁc computer-based control sys-
tem. Other classes of wearable robotic systems can
be considered the so-called hybrid wearable systems,
i. e., parallel robotic structures worn by the human
operator in which the command for their motion is
achieved by FES (functional electric stimulation). In
this way, the control of the robotic structure is lim-
ited and does not allow a complete force control by the
user [70.7]. Hybrid systems are not considered in this
chapter.
Wearable robotics systems for human augmentation
can be divided into three different categories: (i) pros-
theses, for the functional replacement of human limbs;
(ii) powered orthoses, whose function is to actively op-
erate in parallel with unhealthy human joints; and (iii)
robotic exoskeletons that operate in parallel with human
limbs [70.8].
The design of the above three types of robotic
systems shows different approaches whether they are
referred to upper, lower limbs, or to the whole body,
respectively. In the following, the analysis of wearable
robotic systems is given by considering present achieve-
ments in terms of devices, robotic components utilized
for the actuation, control systems architectures, and de-
vised application domains in which they are presently
utilized.

Human–Robot Augmentation
70.2 Upper Limb Wearable Systems
1877
Part G | 70.2
70.2 Upper Limb Wearable Systems
Upper limb exoskeletons (ULEs) are wearable robots
that are placed in parallel and work in concert with
the human arm. Wearer’s motions that fall within
ULEs coverage are shoulder elevation/depression and
retraction/protraction which are provided by the hu-
man’s sterno-clavicular articulation; shoulder ﬂex-
ion/extension, abduction/adduction and medial/lateral
rotation which are provided by the human’s gleno-
humeral articulation; elbow ﬂexion/extension which
is provided by the human’s humero-ulnar articu-
lation; forearm prono/supination which is provided
by the human’s radio-ulnar articulation; wrist ﬂex-
ion/extension and radial/ulnar deviation which are
provided by the human’s radio-carpal, mid-carpal,
and
intra-carpal
articulations;
and
ﬁnger
abduc-
tion/adduction and ﬂexion/extension which are pro-
vided by the human’s metacarpo-phalangeal and inter-
phalangeal joints.
Proposed usages of ULEs are as rehabilitation de-
vices, motion assists, human power/force ampliﬁers,
and haptic interfaces. Depending on the speciﬁc appli-
cation, the available ULEs differ in location of place-
ment, number of degrees of freedom (DOFs) and their
subdivision between active and passive DOFs, type of
kinematic architecture and implementation, type of ac-
tuators and power transmission methods, types of sen-
sorization, and number and place of connection points
between ULE and wearer.
70.2.1 Location of Placement
With regard to location of placement, a number of sys-
tems have been developed which differ from the type of
segments they can cover; for instance shoulder–elbow–
wrist–ﬁnger complex [70.10, 11], shoulder–elbow–
ﬁnger complex [70.9] (Fig. 70.1), shoulder–elbow–
Fig. 70.1 Upper limb exoskeletons for the shoulder–
elbow–wrist–ﬁnger complex (PERCRO-II, L-Exos, af-
ter [70.9])
wrist complex [70.12–16] (Fig. 70.2), shoulder–elbow–
forearm complex [70.17–20] (Fig. 70.3), shoulder–
elbow complex [70.21–27] (Fig. 70.4), elbow–wrist
complex [70.28, 29], wrist–ﬁnger complex [70.30], and
the hand (ﬁngers only) [70.31–33].
70.2.2 Degrees of Freedom
With regard to DOFs, developed systems largely dif-
fer depending on the speciﬁc location of placement.
In particular, exoskeletons with up to 9-DOFs have
been developed for the shoulder–elbow–wrist–ﬁnger
complex [70.16], whereas exoskeletons with up to 18-
DOFs have been developed for the wrist–ﬁnger com-
plex [70.30].
Focusing on ULEs covering at least the shoulder–
elbow–forearm complex, the developed systems typ-
ically feature [70.9–13, 15–20] the following: three
active DOFs for shoulder ﬂexion/extension, abduc-
tion/adduction and medial/lateral rotation; one active
DOF for elbow ﬂexion/extension; and one DOF, ei-
ther active or passive, for forearm prono/supination.
a)
c)
b)
Fig.70.2a–c Upper limb exoskeletons for the shoulder–
elbow–wrist
complex:
(a)
RUPERT
(after
[70.14]);
(b) ARMIN (after [70.15]); (c) SUEFUL-7 (after [70.16])

Part G | 70.2
1878
Part G
Robots and Humans
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.70.3a–d Upper limb exoskeletons for the shoulder–
elbow–forearm complex: (a) PERCRO-I (after [70.34]);
(b) MGA (after [70.19]); (c) PERCRO-III (after [70.9]),
(d) RehabExos (after [70.20])
Some of these systems are also provided with a
wrist having two active DOFs for ﬂexion/extension
and radial/ulnar deviation [70.10, 12, 13, 16]; an ac-
tive [70.11, 15, 19, 23] or passive [70.26] DOF for
shoulder elevation/depression (some systems also ex-
ist in which shoulder elevation/depression is coupled to
shoulder abduction/adduction [70.15, 16, 35]); and an
active [70.23] or passive [70.11, 26] DOF for shoulder
retraction/protraction. Although the availability of er-
gonomic evaluation data is still limited, the inclusion of
shoulder elevation/depression is deemed necessary for
large-range-of-motion ULEs with arm elevation angles
larger than 60ı [70.15].
70.2.3 Kinematic Architecture
and Implementation
Despite a few ULEs [70.10, 12, 26], the majority of
the developed systems feature a kinematic architec-
ture that is isomorphic to that of the wearer’s upper
limb (which means that the rotation axes of ULE
joints are coaxial to those of the wearer’s articulations).
This choice usually reduces the chances of wearer–
exoskeleton interference and enables the wearer to be
connected to the ULE at different points over mul-
tiple links. With regard to implementation, different
solutions have been proposed depending on the con-
sidered ULE articulation. In particular, three shoulder
rotations have been implemented in the following dif-
ferent ways: (1) via three standard revolute pairs with
either nonintersecting axes [70.10, 26, 26, 36] or with
axes intersecting away from the center of the wearer’s
gleno-humeral articulation [70.12], which leads to sys-
tem designs that are not isomorphic with the wearer’s
limb kinematics; (2) via three standard revolute pairs
with axes intersecting at the center of the wearer’s
gleno-humeral articulation [70.19, 23], which usually
leads to ULEs with either limited range of motion
or excessive encumbrance; (3) as in (2) but with the
last revolute joint being a circular guide [70.9, 11, 13,
16, 20, 37], which enables for a more compact design
that is, however, affected by a limited singularity-free
workspace; (4) as in (2) but with the second revo-
lute joint being a circular guide [70.38], which pro-
vides both a very compact design and a rather wide
singularity-free workspace. Regarding the additional
DOFs at the shoulder, both elevation/depression and
retraction/protraction motions have been implemented
via either revolute [70.19, 23] or prismatic [70.11, 15,
26] pairs. Elbow ﬂexion/extension has been imple-
mented almost univocally via a standard revolute pair.
As for the wrist, ﬂexion/extension and radial/ulnar de-
viation have been implemented by using two revolute
joints with either intersecting axes [70.10, 12, 13] or
slightly off-set axes [70.16]. In fact, in the human
wrist, the radial/ulnar deviation axis passes distally
with respect to the ﬂexion/extension axis by approxi-
mately 5 mm.
70.2.4 Actuation and Power Transmission
Methods
Actuation methods have also been quite variegate.
Besides passive systems employing springs (or elas-
tic bands) [70.22] and hydraulic disk brakes [70.26],
ULEs
have
been
equipped
with
hydraulic
mo-
tors [70.10], pneumatic cylinders [70.24], pneumatic
muscles [70.12, 14], and electric motors. Hydraulic mo-
tors provide very large power-to-weight ratio, high
stiffness, and direct-drive operation; however, they fea-
ture low energetic efﬁciency and require bulky, high-
pressure ﬂuid components (power supply, valves, and
tubing). Pneumatic cylinders and muscles provide large
power-to-weight ratio and direct-drive operation; how-
ever they feature low energetic-efﬁciency, low stiff-
ness, slow and nonlinear response, and require bulky
and noisy ﬂuid components (power supply, valves and
tubing). In addition, pneumatic muscles can generate
forces in one direction only, and thus they need to
be used in an agonist–antagonist arrangement [70.12].
Electric motors are very efﬁcient, easy to control, and
have good power-to-weight ratio; however, they work
better at high speeds. In the existing ULEs, electric mo-
tors are rarely used in direct-drive operation, but rather
they are combined with either standard gearboxes (with
spur [70.16] or planetary [70.9] gear-heads) or har-
monic drives [70.19, 20, 27].

Human–Robot Augmentation
70.2 Upper Limb Wearable Systems
1879
Part G | 70.2
a)
c)
b)
d)
e)
Glenohumeral
joint #1 (θ1)
Glenohumeral
joint #2 (θ2)
Glenohumeral
joint #2 (θ3)
Elbow
joint (θ3)
Glenohumeral
joint center
α
β
Shoulder joints
Elbow joints
Fig.70.4a–e Upper limb
exoskeletons for the
shoulder–elbow complex:
(a) WREX (after [70.22]);
(b) MEDARM (after [70.23]);
(c) BONES (after [70.24]);
(d) ABLE (after [70.25]);
(e) DAMPACE (after [70.26])
In the existing ULEs, hydraulic motors and pneu-
matic muscles have been located directly across single
exoskeleton joints [70.10, 12, 14], whereas pneumatic
cylinders have been used in an in-parallel arrangement
to activate multiple joints [70.24]. Instead, electric mo-
tors have been placed either at the joints [70.19, 20] or
in a remote location [70.9, 13, 23] (usually in the ULE
base frame). This second choice has been made primar-
ily in order to reduce the weight and inertia of moving
exoskeleton parts, which enables the use of smaller mo-
tors and minimizes the disturbances on the wearer’s
natural motions.
ULEs with remotely placed actuators require ap-
propriate transmission systems to transfer the power
from the actuators to the joints. Except from spe-
ciﬁc cases [70.15, 23, 35] in which transmission link-
ages and timing belts have been used, the common
power transmission solution for ULEs has consisted
in cable-drive systems, either closed-ended [70.9, 13]
or open-ended [70.23]. Closed-ended transmissions re-
quire long cables, whereas open-ended transmissions
require more motors than the number of actuated DOFs.
Both open- and closed-ended cable-drive systems are
lightweight, highly efﬁcient, and back-drivable; thus
they are very good solutions to transmit mechanical
power over long distances. In addition, cable drives
enable the easy implementation of speed-reduction
stages, which should be placed as close as possible
to the joint in order to maximize overall transmis-
sion stiffness [70.9]. Moreover, cable-drive transmis-
sions spanning multiple joints make it possible to
distribute loads across several cables, which can be
used to minimize the torque requirements of the actu-
ators [70.23].

Part G | 70.2
1880
Part G
Robots and Humans
70.2.5 Type of Sensorization
Apart from few passive systems only conceived as
weight compensation devices [70.39], all the developed
ULEs are equipped with position sensors (potentiome-
ters or encoders), which are placed at the motors and/or
at the joints so as to make it possible to estimate/control
the overall system conﬁguration. Besides, the consid-
ered ULEs largely differ from the point of view of
force/torque sensorization. Thanks to the intrinsic low
friction and high back-drivability, exoskeletons with
cable-drives have been designed to operate without the
need of force/torque sensors [70.9, 13, 23]. All the other
ULEs are instead equipped with this kind of sensoriza-
tion, which can be either concentrated at the points of
connection with the wearer [70.11, 15, 16, 19] or dis-
tributed at every ULE joint [70.20]. The use of torque
sensors distributed at every ULE joint enables for mul-
ticontact force control at multiple points distributed
over multiple links and, additionally, makes it possi-
ble to design very robust force-feedback controllers that
are rather insensitive to exoskeleton link variable in-
ertia, transmission compliance, friction losses, actuator
torque ripples, and gear teeth wedging actions [70.20].
The use of multi-DOF force/torque sensors concen-
trated at the points of wearer–ULE interaction makes
the use of the exoskeleton less ﬂexible and the con-
troller less robust, but enables for a more accurate
estimation and control of the endpoint forces that are
exchanged with the wearer. In general, ULEs equipped
with force/torque sensorization provide better haptic
feedback than those relying on cable-drive transmis-
sions only.
70.2.6 Hand Exoskeletons
The functionality of hand exoskeletons (HE) consists in
exerting programmable forces on human ﬁngers. Hand
exoskeletons can be classiﬁed in two functional cate-
gories depending on the capability of exerting forces
on a single phalanx (usually the distal phalanx cor-
respondent to the ﬁngertip) or on multiple phalanges
(Fig. 70.5).
Multiphalanx hand exoskeletons (MPHE) are de-
vices able to exert different forces on at least two of
the phalanges of the same ﬁnger: usually the force
can be applied on a ﬁxed direction normal to the pha-
lanx axis and belonging to the medial plane of the
ﬁnger.
Single-phalanx hand exoskeletons (SPHE) are able
to exert forces on one phalanx of the ﬁnger, usually
the distal one only; some devices are able to generate
a force only along a ﬁxed direction but more commonly
they can exert forces with any desired orientation.
Forces along fixed
directions
a)
b)
Forces along any wanted
direction
F13
F12
F11
F1
F2
F21
F22
Fig. 70.5 (a) Multiphalanx and (b) single-phalanx scheme
for hand exoskeletons
Another taxonomy of hand exoskeletons considers
two other categories:

Anthropomorphic devices: the kinematics of the HE
is morphologically similar to the human ﬁngers

Nonanthropomorphic devices: the kinematics is
morphologically different from the human ﬁngers.
The scientiﬁc literature in the last 30 years reports
many works dealing with different HE designs mainly
addressing three application ﬁelds: (1) teleoperation
and virtual environments in which the HE are utilized
as master controllers providing force feedback or for
generating illusory forces to the hand of the human op-
erator; (2) neurorehabilitation, in which HE are used
for restoring hand functionalities after strokes or other
neural impairments; (3) space applications in which HE
are employed as active devices for extending grasping
forces of the astronauts in extra vehicular activities.
The ﬁrst known example of HE was introduced
in the ﬁeld of teleoperation by Zarudiansky back in
1981 [70.40]. The inventor has registered a patent
for a tele-manipulation system equipped with a mas-
ter device able to provide force feedback on different
phalanges of the human hand. At the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory Pasadena (JPL) in 1988, Jau [70.41] built
a complete teleoperated master/slave system compre-
hending a hand exoskeleton device for four ﬁngers.
In the same years Burdea et al. developed a pneu-
matic actuated hand force feedback device [70.42],
called Rutgers Master, able to exert a single force
to the distal phalanx along a direction dependent on
the kinematics of the device and on the postion of
the ﬁnger. Bergamasco [70.37] developed a four-ﬁnger
MPHE. A nonanthropomorphic device was realized by
Koyama et al. at Keyo University; this device is a three-
ﬁnger exoskeleton for thumb, index, and middle ﬁnger
with passive clutches actuation [70.43]. Such a device
is anchored at the user’s wrist and is able to exert
forces in every direction belonging to the sagittal plane

Human–Robot Augmentation
70.2 Upper Limb Wearable Systems
1881
Part G | 70.2
of the ﬁngers. Frisoli et al. [70.9] developed another
nonanthropomorphic HE, called Pure Form Hand-Exos
for virtual environment (VE) applications that features
a very complex steel cable transmission studied for an
optimal use of motor torque. Nakagawara et al. [70.44]
built a device integrating the concept of encountered
haptics: the device possesses 1-DOF for each ﬁnger
and it is able to track the ﬁnger without any con-
tact (even at the ﬁngertip) through a noncontact sensor
placed in correspondence of the nail. When contact is
detected in the remote/virtual environment, a plate is
moved against the user’s ﬁngertip. Another example
of anthropomorphic hand exoskeleton for VE applica-
tions has been developed by Fontana et al. [70.32] with
the aim of maximizing force accuracy and resolution
(Fig. 70.6).
Other examples of HEs have been developed for
medical applications. In this ﬁeld, HEs are employed
for rehabilitation procedures or as power-assisting de-
vices (orthoses). In rehabilitation procedures a HE is
commonly used for exerting forces (or trajectories) and,
at the same time, measuring velocities and positions
(or force) of the ﬁngers. Gomez et al. [70.45] have
integrated the Rutgers Master in a VE rehabilitation
system. Wege et al. [70.46] developed a 4-DOF HE with
a modular structure, actuated by Bowden cables. Mulas
et al. [70.47] realize a HE that makes use of electromyo-
graphy (EMG) signals for predicting the movements of
the user ﬁnger. Ito et al. [70.48] built a complex HE
for rehabilitation purposes with 4-DOF for the index,
medium, and ring ﬁngers and 5-DOF for the thumb,
able to exert controlled torque on each phalanx.
HEs can implement the functionality of supporting
people with permanent disabilities to perform com-
mon activities for daily living (ADL). Such devices,
called hand orthoses or assistive HE, are controlled as
power extenders allowing the user to exert only a frac-
tion of the force required to accomplish the task. The
ﬁrst orthosis for the ﬁnger was developed by Brown
et al. [70.49]. The realized device was a HE composed
by three rings attached on the phalanges that were ac-
tuated with pulling cables. Other examples of hand
orthoses are described in [70.4, 39]. Another ﬁeld where
HEs have proved their usefulness is in assisting astro-
nauts in performing EVA (extra-vehicular activities).
Due to the pressure difference, the suits that the astro-
nauts wear during EVA require high force to be bended
and represent a major constraint especially for manip-
ulative tasks. For this reason, custom-designed HEs
a)
b)
Fig.70.6a,b Hand exoskeleton (after [70.32]) (a) without
and (b) with tracking system
are used as an active tool to overcome the stiffness
of the gloves. Shields et al. [70.50] developed the ﬁrst
HE for space applications. Such a device was an an-
thropomorphic HE with three active ﬁngers; the thumb
was excluded and the little ﬁnger was connected to-
gether with the ring ﬁnger. The HE has two DOFs for
each ﬁnger and exploits a special mechanisms for the
implementation of the ﬁnger ﬂexion joints. The an-
thropomorphic kinematics is obtained through remote
center of rotation joints. In 2001, Yamada et al. [70.51]
developed, for the same space applications, another
simpliﬁed HE called Skil Mate in which only the ﬁrst
ﬂexion DOF of each ﬁnger is actuated. The HE de-
veloped by Wang et al. [70.52] is still utilized for the
simulation and evaluation of different space gloves.
The device features a kinematics implementation that
is close to the HE developed by Shields but in this case
the device has three DOFs coupled in a way that only
one actuator is needed for each ﬁnger. Also in this case,
ﬂexion joints are implemented through remote center of
rotations allowing the HE joints to closely correspond
with the natural joints (metacarpophalangeal MCP, in-
terphalangeal IP, distal D) of the human hand.
In general, it can be observed that HEs realized
for VE and teleoperation have several mechanical fea-
tures that are not present in the devices conceived for
rehabilitation, ADL or EVA applications. VE and tele-
operation application require in fact the simulation of
ﬁne haptic interaction and generally more demanding
performances are needed in terms of mechanical fea-
tures. In VE and teloperation, the design of HE requires
to minimize friction, inertia, and weight. On the other
side, in other applications, a higher level of friction can
be tolerated, allowing the use of Bowden cables for
delocalizing the motors, or a simpliﬁed kinematic struc-
ture can be acceptable allowing exerting forces with less
accuracy.

Part G | 70.3
1882
Part G
Robots and Humans
70.3 Lower Limb Wearable Systems
Lower extremity autonomous wearable robotics is
a general classiﬁcation covering actuated leg prosthe-
ses, orthoses, and exoskeletons.
70.3.1 Lower Extremity Autonomous
Wearable Robotics
These robots are deﬁned as active mechanical devices
that are worn on a wearer’s legs, and work in con-
cert with the wearer’s movements, either as permanent
assistive devices for persons suffering from leg pathol-
ogy, or augmentative devices for persons having normal
physiological leg function. In general, the classiﬁca-
tion active leg orthosis is typically used to describe
a device that is used to increase the capacity of a per-
son suffering from leg pathology to ambulate, whereas
the classiﬁcation leg exoskeleton is used to describe
a device that augments the locomotory performance of
an able-bodied wearer. However, the classiﬁcation leg
exoskeleton has also been used to describe certain as-
sistive devices that span in parallel across the entirety
of the human leg [70.6]. Autonomous wearable leg
robots are used as assistive interventions in the treat-
ment of leg disabilities caused by amputation, stroke,
cerebral palsy, and multiple sclerosis. In the realm of
human augmentation, leg exoskeletons have been con-
structed for load-carrying augmentation, to improve the
economy of walking or running, or to decrease muscu-
loskeletal stress [70.6].
Since robots within this classiﬁcation are worn
by the wearer, it is critical that their design resem-
ble biological leg function, both morphologically and
neurologically. For this discussion on lower extremity
wearable robotics, we use the term bionic to refer to
an electromechanical structure designed to emulate, or
extend, normal physiological function. A long-standing
goal in robotic science is to apply neuromechanical
principles of human movement to the development of
highly functional wearable leg robotics [70.53]. Critical
to this effort is the development of actuator technolo-
gies that behave like muscle, device architectures that
resemble the body’s own musculoskeletal leg design,
and control methodologies that exploit principles of bi-
ological leg movement. In the next section, we present
a computational model of human walking that uni-
ﬁes muscle and joint biomechanics with whole-body
metabolism for level-ground walking at self-selected
speed. The model underscores critical design princi-
ples for wearable leg robotics, including the impor-
tance of tendon-like compliance and reﬂexive control
on locomotory performance – discussed in detail in
Sect. 70.3.6. These design principles are discussed in
detail and then, by way of example, used to analyze
the design of a bionic transtibial prosthesis. The chapter
concludes with a discussion on critical areas for future
research.
70.3.2 Neuromechanical Basis
for Wearable-Robotic Leg Design
By understanding the underlying mechanisms that gov-
ern individual muscle–tendon behaviors in human loco-
motory function, roboticists can better design wearable
robots that seamlessly integrate dynamically with the
biological leg. To this end, in this section we present
a computational model of human walking [70.54] that
uniﬁes muscle and joint biomechanics with whole-body
metabolism for level-ground walking at self-selected
speed. The model, shown in Fig. 70.7, comprises ankle,
knee, and hip joints connected by rigid bodies repre-
senting the human trunk and two, three-segment legs. In
the model, muscle–tendon units that dorsiﬂex the ankle,
and ﬂex and extend the knee, are assumed to act as lin-
ear springs upon neural activation; each muscle–tendon
is modeled as a tendon spring in series with an isomet-
ric force source, or a controllable clutch. To provide
the mechanical power for step-to-step gait transitions,
a Hill-type soleus muscle is modeled to actively plantar
ﬂex the ankle throughout mid to terminal stance using
muscle state and force as reﬂex feedback signals. Fi-
nally, to stabilize the trunk during stance, and to protract
and retract each leg throughout the swing phase, two
mono-articular Hill-type muscles actuate the model’s
hip joint. State transitions of a ﬁnite machine were fa-
cilitated by the walking model, and its interactions with
a modeled ground surface, and each muscle was en-
gaged or activated according to state [70.54]. Following
a forward dynamic optimization procedure described
in [70.54], the walking model is shown to predict joint
biomechanics, as well as whole-body metabolism, as
shown in Fig. 70.8, supporting the idea that the prepon-
derance of leg muscle–tendons operates isometrically,
affording the relatively high metabolic walking econ-
omy of humans.
70.3.3 Design Principles
for Wearable Leg Robotics
Neuromechanical models of human locomotory func-
tion such as the Endo and Herr model [70.54] pro-
vide critical insights into wearable robotic leg design.
Biophysical models that describe the morphology and
neural control of human limbs can motivate robotic de-
signs that are quiet, low mass, economical, and stable;

Human–Robot Augmentation
70.3 Lower Limb Wearable Systems
1883
Part G | 70.3
Hip extensor
Knee-hip posterior
Knee flexor
Ankle-knee posterior
Ankle dorsiflexor
Tendon spring
Isometric muscle
Pin joint
Contractile muscle
Hip ligament
Hip flexor
Knee extensor
Knee-hip anterior
Ankle plantar flexor
Achilles tendon
Fig. 70.7 The musculoskeletal walking model of Endo
and Herr [70.54]. Only three contractile muscles act
about the model’s ankle and hip joints capable of per-
forming nonconservative positive work, namely the ankle
plantar ﬂexor, representing the soleus muscle, and two
mono-articular, hip ﬂexor/extensor muscles. All remaining
muscle–tendon units of the leg are modeled as an isomet-
ric muscle in series with a compliant linear tendon spring.
The hip joint also includes a unidirectional, linear torsional
spring representing the dominant ligaments that tend to ﬂex
that joint
robots that move like, and feel like, their biological
counterparts. In the subsequent sections, we discuss key
design features critical for a robotic prosthetic, orthotic,
or exoskeletal leg to behave like a healthy, normal bi-
ological leg. Each design principle is ﬁrst discussed,
and then applied to a leg prosthesis for a transtibial
amputee.
70.3.4 Series and Parallel-Elastic Actuation
for Power Amplification
Perhaps the most paramount design feature of a wear-
able robotic leg is a biomimetic actuator architecture
designed to achieve biologic levels of powered plantar
ﬂexion at the ankle during terminal stance. The biologi-
cal calf muscles generate nearly 80% of the mechanical
work required to complete each gait cycle during mid
to late stance plantar ﬂexion, and typically performs
greater positive than negative ankle work during each
stance period of level-ground walking [70.36, 56–61].
Ankle-powered plantar ﬂexion in the trailing leg is crit-
ical for powering the transition from one single support
phase to the next single support phase, minimizing im-
pact of the leading leg [70.56, 58]. For this purpose,
in the walking model of [70.54] shown in Fig. 70.7,
a Hill-type soleus muscle, or ankle plantar ﬂexor, is
200
400
ks (N/m)
a)
b)
(θk, θ·
k)
Knee state
(θa, θ·
a)
Ankle state
Knee
ankle
Motor
Foot
R
Thigh cuff
Knee axis
Linkage
Coil spring
Toothed clutch
Solenoid
Prosthetic socket
Transmission
Unidirectional
parallel spring
Series spring
Kˆ p = 0
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
200
400
Total reduction ratio
Kˆ p = 0.5
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
200
400
Kˆ p = 1
Cm (J/N/m)
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
Fig. 70.8 Biomechanical and energetic predictions from
the walking model shown in Fig. 70.7. Plotted is the maxi-
mum cross-correlation coefﬁcient R, summed across three
joint angles and normalized by 3, versus the metabolic
cost of transport (COT), or the metabolic energy required
to transport unit body weight unit distance. R D 1 indi-
cates perfect agreement with biological ankle, knee and
hip angle data throughout one gait cycle, whereas R D 0
indicates no agreement. Each closed circle is one forward
dynamic model solution that can walk for at least 20 s
without falling down. The dashed line and shaded area rep-
resent mean ˙ one standard deviation for human metabolic
COT data from the literature [70.55]. The open diamond is
the model’s optimal solution with a maximal R value, and
energetically within one standard deviation of the average
human walking metabolism
modeled to actively plantar ﬂex the model’s ankle from
mid to late stance. The muscle is in series with a tendon
spring, representing the Achilles tendon. Further, the

Part G | 70.3
1884
Part G
Robots and Humans
bi-articular gastrocnemius muscle, or the ankle–knee
posterior in Fig. 70.7, spanning the ankle and knee, is
modeled as an isometric force source, or clutch, in se-
ries with a tendon spring.
Such an architecture is critical for powering ankle
plantar ﬂexion while still achieving efﬁcient, low-mass
robotic actuation. Since the ankle–knee posterior mus-
cle in Fig. 70.7 is shown to transfer little mechanical
energy between the knee and ankle throughout the
walking gait cycle [70.54], it is reasonable to model
this muscle using mono-articular actuators about the
knee and ankle. In such a framework, the effect of
the ankle–knee posterior on these joints is represented
as effective monoarticular torque-producing elements.
Such an architecture is shown in Fig. 70.9a showing the
schematic of a bionic transtibial prosthesis. Here the
ankle is modeled as a series-elastic actuator (SEA) in
parallel with a unidirectional parallel spring. The SEA
represents the ankle-plantar ﬂexor in Fig. 70.7, and
the unidirectional spring represents the torque contri-
bution of the ankle–knee posterior muscle on the ankle
joint.
In Fig. 70.9b, the results of a compliant transmis-
sion optimization are presented, showing the effects of
ankle total reduction ratio, series stiffness, and parallel
stiffness on the ankle prosthesis COT. The prosthe-
sis COT is equal to the amount of electrical energy
consumed by the prosthesis throughout one gait cycle,
divided by the product of half body weight and the dis-
tance traveled in one gait cycle. The half body weight in
the denominator assumes that each transtibial prosthe-
Fig.70.9a,b Shown in (a) is a bionic transtibial prosthesis
represented as an electromechanical schematic including
ankle motor, ankle transmission ratio R, ankle series spring
ks, and ankle unidirectional parallel spring kp. The paral-
lel spring is unidirectional, engaging only at ankle angles
less than 90ı but completely disengaged for angles greater
than 90ı. In addition, spanning the knee joint are ele-
ments of a series-elastic clutch mechanism. Plotted in (b)
are the results of a compliant ankle transmission optimiza-
tion showing the effects of ankle reduction ratio, series
stiffness ks and normalized unidirectional parallel stiff-
ness OKp on ankle prosthesis cost of transport, Cm. Parallel
stiffness, normalized by the human-controlled dorsiﬂex-
ion stiffness of 630 Nm rad1 is noted as OKp on the upper
portion of each graph. The total reduction ratio is equal
to the SEA moment arm r multiplied by transmission ra-
tio R. The compliant ankle assembly shown in (a) was
constrained to track biological ankle torque for a human
subject with a mass of 78 kg walking at 1:25 m s1 with
a stride distance of 1:4 m. Further details of the compliant
transmission optimization can be found in [70.62]. I
sis has its own power supply. Without parallel stiffness
( OKp D 0), the energy consumption of the prosthesis is
minimal at a total reduction ratio greater than 400, and
a series spring stiffness greater than 400 kN m1. As
parallel spring stiffness increases ( OKp > 0), the pros-
thesis COT can attain a lower minimum value while
also requiring a smaller total reduction ratio and series
spring stiffness. Using a lower reduction ratio allows
the system to have a larger bandwidth, a faster inter-
mittent response, and a lower acoustic noise output.
Further, a lower series stiffness improves the prosthe-
sis COT as shown in Fig. 70.9a, shock tolerance upon
impact loading at heel-strike [70.62], and motor power
ampliﬁcation at the ankle joint output [70.63]. For fur-
ther details on compliant ankle transmission design,
see [70.62, 63]. In the design of bionic ankle–foot wear-
able robots, both motor-series and parallel elasticity are
of paramount importance.
200
400
ks (N/m)
a)
b)
(θk, θ·
k)
Knee state
(θa, θ·
a)
Ankle state
Knee
ankle
Motor
Foot
R
Thigh cuff
Knee axis
Linkage
Coil spring
Toothed clutch
Solenoid
Prosthetic socket
Transmission
Unidirectional
parallel spring
Series spring
Kˆ p = 0
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
200
400
Total reduction ratio
Kˆ p = 0.5
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
200
400
Kˆ p = 1
Cm (J/N/m)
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

Human–Robot Augmentation
70.3 Lower Limb Wearable Systems
1885
Part G | 70.3
70.3.5 Series-Elastic Actuation
for Minimizing Motor Work
It has been hypothesized that the preponderance of leg
muscle–tendons generates force at low muscle fascicle
speed, allowing economical force generation in level-
ground walking [70.54]. In the walking model shown
in Fig. 70.7, six of the nine leg muscles act in a purely
isometric manner, where a tuned, series-tendon com-
pliance enables full energy absorption and delivery,
eliminating muscle work and lowering metabolic de-
mands in walking. Speciﬁcally, all muscles spanning
the knee, as well as the ankle dorsiﬂexor, are assumed
to act isometrically upon neural activation when ambu-
lating across a level-ground surface.
For wearable robotic actuation in level-ground
walking, such behaviors can be achieved using a series-
elastic clutch mechanism with a tuned series stiffness.
However, for a more diverse set of locomotory tasks
such as ascending and descending slopes and steps,
the ideal actuator architecture is a series-elastic ac-
tuator with a tuned series-spring stiffness where the
actuator is designed to lock or clutch at lower power
consumption. As an example, for level-ground ambu-
lation using an electric actuator, a clutch acting on
the motor shaft can be used to lock the shaft during
those times in the gait cycle where a spring response
is sought, eliminating the high power consumption re-
quired if the motor itself were to clutch the shaft. For
other movement tasks outside of level-ground walk-
ing, the motor–shaft clutch could then be disengaged,
and the motor could apply the necessary torques and
impedances required for the task using standard series-
elastic actuation strategies [70.64]. Such an architecture
allows wearable robotic legs to move economically
across level-ground surfaces, while still allowing a great
deal of versatility for irregular-ground ambulation, sit-
to-stand maneuvers, and general disturbance rejections.
This design principle of using a tuned series stiff-
ness to minimize the need for actuator work has been
used in the design of a transtibial prosthesis in [70.65]
(Fig. 70.9a). Since the gastrocnemius was modeled
in [70.54] as an isometric force source in series with
a tendon spring, in the study of [70.65] a series-elastic
clutch was mounted at the knee brace to provide the
knee ﬂexion action of the gastrocnemius during level-
ground walking. The mechanism consisted of a toothed
clutch at the free end of a coil spring (spring stiffness of
66 500 N=m) that acted as a knee ﬂexor on a polycentric
knee brace. The brace was integrated into a prosthetic
socket connected to the ankle–foot prosthesis, as is
shown in Fig. 70.9a. When the clutch was engaged via
solenoid action, the free end of the spring locked with
respect to the socket and the spring stretched as the
knee straightened. The force developed by the spring
produced a ﬂexion torque at the knee joint. Conversely,
when the clutch disengaged no torque was applied at
the knee joint. The spring acted on the knee joint with
a moment arm that varied between 0:02 and 0:03 m
as a function of knee angle. This moment-arm func-
tion was designed so that the apparent knee stiffness
matched that of the biological knee during level-ground
walking [70.66].
70.3.6 Neuromuscular-Based
Reflexive Control
We present a sensing and control scheme for produc-
ing biomimetic positions, torques and impedances at
the hip, knee, and ankle joints of a powered leg prosthe-
sis, orthosis, or exoskeleton during walking and running
gaits. In this paradigm, sensory data are collected using
intrinsic and/or extrinsic sensors. Here intrinsic sens-
ing refers to information collected from sensors located
on the wearable robotic device, and extrinsic sensing
refers to all information collected from sensors located
externally to the wearable device. As an example, in
the case of a leg prosthesis, a surface electrode for
the measurement of the electromyographic signal from
residual limb muscles would be an extrinsic sensor, and
an inertial measurement unit located on the device itself
would be classiﬁed as an intrinsic sensor. Intrinsic sen-
sors measure device positions, motions, forces, torques,
pressures, and temperatures, whereas extrinsic sensors
might comprise such mechanical and temperature sen-
sors positioned external to the wearable device, as well
as neural sensors for the determination of user motor
intent.
In the neuromuscular-based control framework,
such sensory data are passed to a neuromuscular model
of human locomotion, such as the Endo and Herr
model [70.54] presented in Fig. 70.7, which is used to
compute appropriate joint dynamics for the device to
provide to the user. The model-based control scheme,
depicted in Fig. 70.10, relies on data collected from
both intrinsic and extrinsic mechanical sensors, and
extrinsic neural sensors used to infer the motor in-
tent of the user, volitionally and/or nonvolitionally. The
neuromuscular model used to compute desired joint dy-
namics may include muscles modeled in a variety of
ways. These muscle models (muscle model block in
Fig. 70.10) may include, for example, a bilinear muscle
model or a Hill-type muscle model [70.67]. The mea-
sured states of the robotic joints are used to determine
the internal state (length, velocity) of each of the virtual
muscle–tendon units of the neuromuscular model using
morphological information of the muscle moment arms
about each modeled joint. This geometrical transforma-

Part G | 70.3
1886
Part G
Robots and Humans
Activation
dynamics
Muscle
geometry
Torque, impedance,
position controller
Intrinsic and extrinsic
sensing
S
Muscle-tendon length
& joint moment arms
Muscle force,
state
Commanded
joint dynamics
Intrinsic sensor output
Desired joint
torque,
impedance
Reflex architecture
Muscle model
Biomimetic
robotic leg
Stimulation
Activation
Joint state
Fig. 70.10 Block diagram of a neu-
romuscular model-based control
architecture for a bionic wearable
robotic leg
tion occurs within the muscle geometry block shown in
Fig. 70.10.
The impedance and force of each virtual muscle are
additionally governed by the muscle activation, which
may be determined from a local reﬂex loop, an ex-
ternal source, or a combination thereof. In the reﬂex
case, a feedback loop is implemented where virtual
muscle force and state are used to produce muscle
stimulation, which is then ﬁltered to produce muscle ac-
tivation (activation dynamics block in Fig. 70.10). This
feedback-based control scheme is designed to emulate
the force feedback and stretch reﬂex of an intact human
muscle. This reﬂexive feedback loop can be a linear or
nonlinear function of virtual muscle force, length, and
velocity. For example, the reﬂexive feedback loop can
be nonlinear, comprising a threshold prestim parameter,
as well as force and state gains and exponents, or
u.t/ D x C yF ŒF.t  tF/zf
C yl Œl.t  tl/zl C yv Œv.t  tv/zv ;
(70.1)
where x is the prestim parameter, yi are force and state
gains, zi are force and state exponents, and ti are corre-
sponding delays.
In the case where muscle activation is determined
solely by an external source, a neural sensor might be
used to provide some estimate of motor intent, which
is then input to the activation dynamics block where
a muscle activation is estimated as an input to the
muscle model. Typically, such measurements of motor
intent would comprise one or more peripheral neural
sensors from implants interfacing with nerves and/or
muscles, but in the most general case, such motor intent
commands may additionally be measured from central
brain implants.
In
the
combination
case,
the
framework
of
Fig. 70.10 describes a procedure where the reﬂexive pa-
rameters are modulated by the controller either within
a single gait cycle, and/or from gait cycle to gait cycle in
an updating manner, based upon detected variations in
gait speed and terrain. Extrinsic efferent neural signals
from muscles and/or peripheral nerves might be used to
modulate reﬂexive parameters, such as force and state
gains and exponents. For example, measured calf mus-
cle EMG in a transtibial amputee has been used to
modulate the gain of a positive torque feedback during
the stance period of a walking gait cycle, providing the
amputee direct volitional control over powered plan-
tar ﬂexion during terminal stance in walking [70.68].
Clearly, one day it may be possible to stimulate through
a nerve implant to reﬂect intrinsic/extrinsic mechanical
sensory data as an afferent feedback signal to allow the
user of the wearable robot to better modulate efferent
neural motor commands for a desired wearable robotic
dynamical response.
Once the force of each virtual muscle spanning
a joint is determined (using the implemented muscle
model), each muscle force is multiplied by its bio-
logically realistic muscle moment arm and then all
muscle torque contributions are summed around the
joint to produce a net torque and impedance estimate.
The model estimates are then sent to the controller
(Fig. 70.10) as the desired net torque and impedance
for each robotic joint. The controller tracks these de-
sired values at each joint to produce human-like joint
forces and impedances. In the case where the human

Human–Robot Augmentation
70.3 Lower Limb Wearable Systems
1887
Part G | 70.3
user’s motor intent is to control device joint position,
the controller would integrate the desired joint torque
to achieve a joint position estimate, and then modulate
device joint position to achieve that desired position.
By way of example, we present a neuromuscular-
based control of a transtibial prosthesis (Fig. 70.11).
For this example, the model-based control framework
of Fig. 70.10 is used to control the prosthetic appara-
tus. In the study of [70.65], ankle and knee joint states
of the apparatus were measured and used to provide
real-time input to a neuromuscular model simulated
by an on-board microcontroller. The resulting torque
command from the neuromuscular model was used to
produce ankle torque while a knee controller adjusted
the torque produced by the knee brace. This conﬁgu-
ration, shown in Fig. 70.11, was set up to enable the
prosthetic apparatus to behave as if it were a human
lower leg with reﬂex-controlled muscles acting at the
ankle (Fig. 70.12).
70.3.7 Leg Exoskeletons
Research has lead to the developement of leg exoskele-
tons with the prime intention to allow otherwise healthy
individuals to perform difﬁcult tasks more easily or
(θk, θ·
k)
Knee state
(θa, θ·
a)
Ankle state
Knee
ankle
Knee
clutch
control
Parallel spring
estimation
Muscle-reflex
model
Solennoid control signal
Motor
Foot
R
Thigh cuff
Knee axis
Linkage
Coil spring
Toothed clutch
Solenoid
Prosthetic socket
Transmission
Unidirectional
parallel spring
Control architecture
running on microcontroller
Kt
+
–
(θk, θ·
k)
imot
τd, SEA
τd
τp
Series spring
Fig. 70.11 Labeled schematic and control architecture for the prosthetic apparatus. Rotary elements in the ankle-foot
prosthesis are shown as linear equivalents in the model schematic to improve clarity. In the control schematic, the parallel
spring contribution to prosthesis ankle torque, p, was subtracted from the desired ankle torque command from the
neuromuscular model, d, to obtain the desired SEA torque, d. A motor current command imot was obtained by dividing
the desired SEA torque by the motor torque constant, Kt. The knee clutch was engaged via the solenoid depending on
knee state as obtained from the knee potentiometer. For further details on the mechatronic and control design, see [70.65]
enable them to perform tasks that are otherwise im-
possible using purely human strength or skill [70.69].
Early developments in leg exoskeletons consisted of
long bow/leaf springs operating in parallel to the legs
and were intended to augment running and jump-
ing [70.70]. Each leg spring was engaged during the
foot contact to effectively transfer the body’s weight
to the ground and to reduce the forces borne by the
stance leg. During the aerial phase, the parallel leg
spring was designed to disengage in order to allow
the biological leg to freely ﬂex and to enable the
foot to clear the ground. In 1963, Zaroodny published
a technical report detailing his work on a powered
orthopedic supplement intended to augment the load-
carrying abilities of an able-bodied wearer such as
a soldier [70.71]. Other early implementations of ex-
oskeletons, including legs, were attempted by General
Electric Research with the Hardiman project [70.72],
by Moore at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and
Rosheim [70.73]. However, a major impetus for the re-
cent work in performance augmenting exoskeletons has
come from the DARPA (Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency) program Exoskeletons for Human
Performance Augmentation (EHPA) [70.74], the out-
comes of which were different working exoskeletons.

Part G | 70.3
1888
Part G
Robots and Humans
Biological
Commanded clinical trials
Measured clinical trials
Biological trend
Command trend
Measured trend
0
50
100
Ank. plantar. ang. (°)
a)
40
0
–40
0
50
100
Knee flex. (°)
Net work (J)
100
50
0
–50
0
50
100
Ank. plantar. tq. (Nm)
Gait cyde (%)
200
50
–100
0
50
100
Knee flex. tq. (Nm)
Gait cyde (%)
20
5
–10
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
b)
Gait speed (m/s)
25
20
15
10
5
0
Fig. 70.12 (a) Comparison of prosthesis ankle and knee angles and torques during the clinical trials (measured) with
those from a height- and weight-matched subject with intact limbs (biological). The biological values are the thick solid
lines (with shaded errors) in each plot while the dashed lines are the values measured on the prosthesis. In the ankle torque
plot the commanded torque is shown as a thinner solid line, again with shaded error bars. The knee torque plot compares
the torque provided by the clutch-spring mechanism to that provided by the natural gastrocnemius in simulation. The
vertical line indicates toe-off in each plot. (b) Energy output of the ankle across gait speed. Shown are biological data,
net work as commanded by the ankle–foot prosthesis during clinical trials, and measured net work during the clinical
trials. For further details on experimental methodology and results, see [70.65]
In this framework, the Berkely Exoskeleton (BLEEX)
was the ﬁrst example of an energetically autonomous
system [70.75]. BLEEX features 3-DOF at the hip, 1
at the knee, and 3 at the ankle. Of these, four are ac-
tuated: hip ﬂexion/extension, hip abduction/adduction,
knee ﬂexion/extension, and ankle inversion/eversion.
Of the unactuated joints, the ankle inversion/eversion
and hip rotation joints are spring loaded, and the an-
kle rotation joint is free-spinning [70.76]. The BLEEX
exoskeleton [70.77] was designed with linear hydraulic
actuators since they were the smallest actuation option
available based on their high speciﬁc power (ratio of
actuator power to actuator weight) [70.78, 79]. How-
ever, a further study determined that electric motor
actuation signiﬁcantly decreased power consumption
during level walking in comparison to hydraulic actu-
ators [70.80, 81]. The weight of the implementation of
the electrically actuated joint, however, was approxi-
mately twice that of their hydraulically actuated joint
(4:1 versus 2:1 kg). Signiﬁcant effort was made in de-
veloping a hybrid hydraulic–electric portable power
supply [70.82]. In terms of performance, users wear-
ing BLEEX can reportedly support a load of up to
75 kg while walking at 0:9 m=s and can walk at speeds
of up to 1:3 m=s without the load. A second genera-
tion of the Berkeley exoskeleton is currently in testing.
A laboratory spin-off company called Berkeley Bion-
ics (Berkeley, CA) has been created in order to market
exoskeleton technology.
A quasi-passive exoskeleton concept has been ad-
vanced in the Biomechatronics Group at the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Media Lab-
oratory that seeks to exploit the passive dynamics of
human walking in order to create lighter and more
efﬁcient exoskeleton devices. The MIT exoskeleton em-
ploys a quasi-passive design that does not use any actu-
ators for adding power at the joints. Instead, the design
relies completely on the controlled release of energy
stored in springs during the (negative power) phases
of the walking gait [70.83]. The 3-DOF hip employs
a spring loaded joint in the ﬂexion/extension direction
that stores energy during extension that is released dur-
ing ﬂexion. The hip abduction/adduction direction is
also spring loaded, but only to counter the moment
induced by the backpack load. Additionally, a cam
mechanism was incorporated into the hip to compensate
for the relative change in length between the thigh of
the exoskeleton and the user due to the joint offset dur-
ing abduction/adduction. Additionally, spring loaded
hip rotation and ankle rotation joints were included to
allow nonsagittal plane limb movements. The knee of
the MIT exoskeleton consists of a magneto-rheological
variable damper that is controlled to dissipate energy
at appropriate levels throughout the gait cycle. For the

Human–Robot Augmentation
70.4 Whole Body Wearable Systems
1889
Part G | 70.4
Fig. 70.13 MIT exoskeleton during metabolic testing
ankle, separate springs for dorsi and plantar ﬂexion
are implemented in order to capture different behav-
iors during these two stages of motion, and store/release
the optimum amount of energy. Without a payload, the
exoskeleton weighs 11:7 kg and requires only 2 W of
electrical power during loaded walking. This power
is used mainly to control the variable damper at the
knee. The ﬁrst studies on the metabolic cost associ-
ated with walking under the aid of an exoskeleton have
been reported by using the MIT exoskeleton [70.84]
(Fig. 70.13).
Further experimental work with the MIT quasi-
passive exoskeleton showed a signiﬁcant reduction in
metabolic cost of walking versus the same exoskeleton
without the springs at the hip and ankle and the variable
damper at the knee, demonstrating the utility of quasi-
passive elements.
Other examples of leg exoskeletons comprehend
the hybrid assistive leg developed at the University
of Tsukuba by Sankai [70.85] that is targeted for
both performance-augmenting and rehabilitative pur-
poses. At the Kanagawa Institute of Technology in
Japan, researchers have developed an exoskeleton for
the purpose of assisting nurses during patient trans-
fer [70.86]. Yobotics, Inc. (Cincinnati, OH) [70.87]
developed a simple exoskeleton for adding power at
the knee to assist in stair climbing and squatting during
load-carrying tasks [70.78]. Researchers in the Depart-
ments of Mechanical Engineering and Physical Therapy
at the University of Delaware have developed a passive
leg orthosis that is designed to reduce the forces of grav-
ity on the patient during walking, thus easing the effort
required for locomotion [70.88]. Caldwell has devel-
oped a 10-DOF lower limb exoskeleton device [70.81]:
actuation is provided to the ﬂexion/extension directions
of the hip, knee, and eankle, and abduction/adduction
of the hip via pneumatic muscle actuators. Recently,
few leg exoskeleton systems have been commercial-
ized worldwide by different companies: the ReWalk
lower limb exoskeleton developed by Argo Medical
Technologies, Israel [70.89] for elderly/paraplegic as-
sistance, and the system called REX developed by Rex
Bionics, New Zealand [70.90].
70.4 Whole Body Wearable Systems
Despite the considerable interest and impressive ad-
vancements in the ﬁeld, so far only few researchers
have attempted the development of full-body EHPA
(FB-EHPA), in particular fully actuated systems for
heavy-duty applications, and the available scientiﬁc
literature is quite limited [70.8, 83, 85, 91–99]. This
section reviews the general design issues concerning
electro-mechanical design of FB-EHPA. The general
design issues are analyzed considering and presenting
a series of speciﬁc designs.
70.4.1 General Issues
Kinematic Architecture
The kinematic scheme of FB-EHPA is a fundamental
aspect that strongly affects the basic functionalities and
capabilities of such machines. Just as other wearable
robots, the kinematic design is strongly inﬂuenced by
the close proximity of robot linkages and human limbs.
Kinematics of an FB-EHPA must be designed in order
to be compatible with:

The execution of common human movements:
walking, squatting, lifting, turning, etc.

Requirements for the execution of speciﬁc tasks:
raising weights, handling speciﬁcally shaped ob-
jects, running, etc.

Encumbrance and spatial limitation

Possible collisions with the operator body and self-
interferences.
Common solutions for the existing FB-EHPA are
based on anthropomorphic kinematics since this kind
of solution guarantees:

Part G | 70.4
1890
Part G
Robots and Humans

The best workspace matching with reduced encum-
brances

The most simple strategy to avoid self/body colli-
sions

The execution of common human movements

Mass distribution that is compatible with human ex-
ecuted tasks.
A full anthropomorphic design that allows replicat-
ing all the human DOFs could be desirable; however,
the complexity of such a system would be far above
what is technically affordable. In this sense, a drastic
simpliﬁcation is required to reduce complexity without
affecting the basic functional requirements of the ma-
chine. This type of simpliﬁcation is assumed in many
of the available FB-EHPA.
70.4.2 Specific Design
According to a historical perspective, the ﬁrst techni-
cal concepts of FB-EHPA were proposed in 1956 by
Lent, who proposed an inﬂatable space suit with pow-
ered joints to assist the wearer during the ﬂexion of suit
extremities stiffened by the internal pressure [70.92].
Lately, in 1966, Mizen proposed, although without real-
izing it, the ﬁrst man ampliﬁer for civilian and military
applications [70.93].
The ﬁrst practical investigation was instead at-
tempted by General Electric between 1965 and 1971,
by developing the Hardiman [70.94] that is brieﬂy
described in the following section. Researches on
FB-EHPA were resumed in 1996, when Snyder and
Kazerooni proposed a novel under-actuated material
handling system with 6 passive joints (2 for the legs and
4 for the arms) and 12 electrically actuated joints (6 for
the legs and 6 for the arms) under force-feedback con-
trol [70.95]. System arms and legs were implemented
and tested separately.
Following this renewed interest, from 2002 to
2009, three different under-actuated FB-EHPA have
been developed in Japan for medium-duty applica-
tions, such as nursing care [70.83, 97], disabled or
elderly assistance [70.85], and agriculture [70.100].
The best performing and most renowned system is the
hybrid assistive limb (HAL) [70.85]. Still in Japan,
in 2009, Panasonic-Activelink presented the POWER
LOADER, a heavy-duty FB-EHPA for material han-
dling [70.98]. In 2010, Raytheon-Sarcos unveiled the
XOS2 [70.99, 101], which is one of the most advanced
and performing medium-duty hydraulically actuated
FB-EHPA for military/logistics applications. One of the
latest FB-EHPA is called Body Extender (BE) [70.102]
and has been realized at the PERCRO Laboratory,
Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna (Italy). The BE is a full
electrical machine developed for heavyweight material
handling. In 2012, the French company RB3D has pre-
sented HERCULE, an electrically actuated FB-EHPA
with legs similar to those of HAL, but with differ-
ent arm kinematics, and designed for lifting 20 kg
with each arm at full horizontal extension. HERCULE
has been developed for the French Ministry of De-
fense and detailed speciﬁcations are not available at
present.
In this section, an overview of the basic features of
some of the most relevant and advanced existing sys-
tems is provided.
Hardiman
Hardiman I is the ﬁrst prototype of FB-EHPA and
has been developed between 1965 and 1971 by Gen-
eral Electric Research (Schenectady, NY). The project
aimed at developing a high-power machine for handling
heavyweight materials in unstructured environments.
The project was jointly supported by Engineering
Psychology Programs-ONR, Naval Air Systems Com-
mand, and the Army Mobility Equipment Research and
Development Center (Fort Belvoir).
The project results have been reported by Fick and
Makinson in [70.94]. Hardiman I has a structure based
on a 30-DOF kinematics including:

2-DOF for each end-effectors: two ﬂexion move-
ments of a two-phalanges ﬁnger

7-DOF for each arm: wrist ﬂexion, forearm rotation,
elbow, upper arm rotation, shoulder ﬂexion, back
ﬂexion and arm abduction/adduction

4-DOF for each leg: hip abduction/adduction, hip
ﬂexion, knee ﬂexion and ankle ﬂexion

2-DOF for each foot: ankle inversion and ankle ro-
tation.
The actuation system employs hydraulic actuators
that require an external hydraulic circuit at 206 bar
(3000 psi) with a power of 18:6 kW (25 hp). The global
weight of the system is 680 kg (1500 lbs) and the
exoskeleton is rated for a lift capability of 6800N
(1500 lbs). The control of the hand is completely hy-
dromechanical (implemented with no electronic com-
ponents), while the arms, legs, and feet are controlled
through electrohydraulic systems. Hardiman I did not
succeed to be tested in its full functionalities. In par-
ticular, the developers reported several problems in the
implementation of the controller for the lower limbs,
mainly also due to the lack of reliable electronic com-
ponents and reduced computation power characterizing
the technology at that time.

Human–Robot Augmentation
70.4 Whole Body Wearable Systems
1891
Part G | 70.4
a)
b)
Fig.70.14a,b Picture of the Body Extender (BE): (a) sys-
tem worn by a user; (b) rear view (after [70.103])
HAL: Hybrid Assistive Limb
HAL is a series of full-body exoskeleton systems, the
development started in 1996 and the current version,
HAL-5, is the ﬁrst commercial version. HAL has been
developed by Sankai [70.85] and his research group of
the University of Tsukuba and commercialized by the
company Cyberdyne, Inc. (Tsukuba, Japan) [70.103].
It is realized in two versions, the ﬁrst one is for
lower limbs only and the second includes the upper
limbs. The exoskeleton is developed with the aim to
expand, augment, and support human physical capabil-
ity in the ﬁeld of medical welfare, heavy work support,
and entertainment. The kinematic structure features 6
passive joints (2 for the legs and 4 for the arms) and
8 electrically actuated joints (6 for the legs and 6 for
the arms). HAL is commanded via a specially designed
controller which takes into account the wearer’s mus-
cular activity through the employment of bioelectrical
signals from EMG sensors that are disposed on wearer’s
skin. HAL weighs 23 kg in the full-body version, in-
cluding batteries for an autonomy of 2 h and 40 min.
Although the lifting capabilities are not speciﬁed, it is
reported in [70.97] that laboratory tests have been con-
ducted with a payload of 15 kg with each arm at full
horizontal extension; however, it requires locking of the
passive joints and an additional wrist support. HAL is
currently being experimentally tested in clinics and the
research group is currently working on improving the
system with new control algorithms.
POWER LOADER
POWER LOADER is a full-body exoskeleton devel-
oped by Activelink Ltd, a spin-off of Panasonic Ltd,
Japan. The system development was started in 2003
and the ﬁrst working prototype reported in literature
has been realized in 2010. POWER LOADER has been
developed for rescue operation in natural disaster sce-
narios such as big earthquakes. The mechanical design
is based on an anthropomorphic design only for the
arms. The legs have an anthropomorphic structure. The
knee is back rotated [70.98] in order to leave more free
space around the user legs. The actuation is achieved
through electric motors and drivers.
PERCRO Body Extender
One of the latest full-body exoskeleton has been real-
ized at the PERCRO Laboratory of Scuola Superiore
Sant’Anna, Italy (Fig. 70.14). The developed FB-EHPA
has been named as the body extender (BE) [70.104].
The BE comprises two identical legs with 6-DOF each,
whose kinematics is isomorphic to the wearer’s kine-
matics, and two identical arms with 5-DOF each. All
22-DOF are powered by modular highly efﬁcient ac-
tuation units; this solution allows to reduce the power
consumption, as well as to minimize the costs and ef-
forts related to its production and maintenance. The BE
weighs 160 kg, can provide a maximum continuous us-
able power of 16:5 kW, is capable of lifting 50 kg with
each arm at full horizontal extension, and is designed
for transporting loads up to 100 kg at a walking speed
of 0:5 m=s. Potential application of this system is in
earthquake disaster relief operations, where search and
rescue teams need to walk across tight spaces over de-
bris and to remove rubble in an attempt to ﬁnd, release,
and transport survivors. The system has been integrated
and fully tested in 2010 and it is currently being im-
proved in terms of energy efﬁciency and stability on
uneven terrains.
Commercial Systems
(Uncovered by Scientific Literature)
In the past years, two advanced commercial systems
have been unveiled. The ﬁrst one is XOS II, which is
the second version of a full-body exoskeleton devel-
oped by a US company, Sarcos-Raytheon [70.99, 101,
105]. The ﬁrst version of the system was completed
in 2008 and the second version has been presented in
2010. The XOS II has been developed aiming at lo-
gistic applications in the military ﬁeld. It is based on
an anthropomorphic kinematics equipped with 24-DOF
actuated with hydraulic systems. It weighs 95 kg and
has a lifting capability of 230 N. The company is cur-
rently working on improving the energy efﬁciency for
the realization of an autonomous (untethered) version
of the system. The second device is called HERCULES
and has been presented in 2012 by RB3D (France).
It is an electric-driven system that has a lot of sim-
ilarities with the HAL-5 exoskeleton. The details of
HERCULES have not yet been disclosed [70.106].

Part G | 70.5
1892
Part G
Robots and Humans
70.5 Control of Human–Robot Augmentation Systems
From a control point of view, the functionality of
a power augmentation system should simultaneously
provide (a) force ampliﬁcation and (b) support to nat-
ural locomotion.
Hence, the control of exoskeleton for human power
augmentation (EHPA) can be split into two major sub-
systems: lower- and upper-body designs. The ﬁrst sub-
system cooperates with a human gait, while sustaining
much of the body loads, keeping overall equilibrium
and following the human motion with transparent and
natural reﬂection forces. The second subsystem en-
hances human manipulation abilities through the mul-
tiplication of the arm forces during grasping operations
of heavy loads.
Both components have to respect the following
requisites:
1. Stability: The stability margin of the (linearized)
control system should be large enough to cope with
the environment and operator uncertainties, and to
avoid uncompensated oscillations entering into res-
onance with the human postural control.
θi
Power arm
resonance
Transmissibility
Reflected
load
Piston
Valve
Link gain
McTs3 + McTs2 + klcTs + klkT
+ cTkls + klkT
McT[1 + 
s3 + M[kT + kl(Bl)2 + 
(Bl)2]
(s) = AB
(s)
xo
δe
xo
xo
x1
xє
δe
δe
Φv
s2)
M
kl
1
A(1 +
1
as
k
kl
ke
kTkl
ke
δe
ke
kT
kl
M
cT
Σ
+
–
y
A
l
1 B
+
–
xo +
–
lθo –
–
+
+
Flow stabilizer
]s2
A
(Bl)2
Fig. 70.15 The control of the force ampliﬁer joint (after [70.39]).
The upper scheme represents the mechanical equivalent circuit for
the control of the elbow joint, and the above equation represents
the associated force balance equation. The lower scheme is a block
diagram that represents how the components are arranged together
and how the feedback is used to control the joint actuation
2. Transparency: The system should be highly re-
versible (through mechanical design or sensor aug-
mentation) in order to allow a correct perception of
the overall interaction with the environment and the
proper generation of the control actions.
3. Regular force ampliﬁcation: The gain ratio of the
human force ampliﬁcation should be kept as regular
as possible in all interaction conditions, including
a large bandwidth of interaction, different postures,
and different environment interactions.
4. Fast response: The bandwidth and the satura-
tion values of the position/velocity/force controllers
should be as close as possible to their respective
ranges used in natural motions and interaction.
70.5.1 A Historical Perspective
Yagn [70.70], ﬁrst submitted a series of patents for fa-
cilitating human walking and running. At that time,
the mechanism was limited to a series of springs and
clutches, which altered the feet compliance during
walking and used the potential energy of the springs to
have a more efﬁcient walk.
The use of active orthoses, through hydraulic servo-
valves was proposed by Filippi in 1937 [70.107]. The
proposed system was a knee orthosis whose motion in
the sagittal plane is powered by ahydraulic piston. At
that time, there was not much advancement on elec-
tric control of hydraulic systems and the joint control
was supposed being regulated mechanically. A crank
located on the hip moved a cam that, on its own, winded
a torsional spring on the knee. The other extremity of
the spring was used to regulate the piston ﬂux.
The ﬁrst documented attempt to develop a pow-
ered suit that ampliﬁes human force was performed by
Clark et al. in the early 1960s [70.39]. At that time, they
proposed to design a man ampliﬁer using hydraulic am-
pliﬁcation. In Fig. 70.15, it is represented by the device
interaction model and the basic control loop they pro-
posed. They have limited the investigation to one single
joint of movement.
In Clark et al.’s work, each joint was regulated with
an independent position controller that was actuated by
mechanical pistons placed closed to the human body.
The control was based on an admittance scheme that
translates user commands into joint velocities. This
scheme had no opportunity to show the reﬂection of
contact forces.
The design and control of whole-body active ex-
oskeletons started in 1965 with a joint Naval Army
program who supported General Electrics for the de-
sign of a whole-body EHPA (Hardiman I). The power

Human–Robot Augmentation
70.5 Control of Human–Robot Augmentation Systems
1893
Part G | 70.5
augmentation target was ﬁxed to an ampliﬁcation fac-
tor (robot versus human) 25 W 1 having a nominal total
force about 10 000 N.
The proposed device had 28 independent DOFs plus
two grasping tools with one additional DOF each.
The control concept design of Hardiman was very
ambitious. In the ﬁrst attempt, the designer developed
a set of mechanical servo-valves (as shown for the mas-
ter hand controller in Fig. 70.16) placed in contact with
the user’s skin which responded to local pressure by de-
ﬂecting the ﬂux of hydraulic circuits [70.96].
The approach worked well only for simpliﬁed kine-
matics of the mechanical hand, while the dynamic
interference between the serial kinematics of the arm
link required the use of electrohydraulic circuits and
that of a computer-developed dynamical model.
The project development stopped due to major limi-
tations in the design and control of the lower leg. During
the development, the authors only have tried unilateral
electrohydraulic servos to track the motion of the user
legs. The major development issue was related to the
control of the leg for the body balance. The developers
devised that the leg functionality changes between the
stancing and the swinging phase, but the use of switches
to detect the current leg phase demonstrated to be in-
effective to validly cope with equilibrium and stability
issues. Other issues were instead related to the power
supply line (45 kW needed by the prototype) and to the
kinematics differences between the master and the slave
arm, which makes some motion unnatural, risky, and
sometimes unstable for the driving user.
Few years later, Vukobratovic et al. [70.108] started
to develop an exoskeleton to assist injured people
(mostly paraplegic) to recover basic walking abilities.
That work shares several features that are being imple-
Fig. 70.16 The master hand controllers. A set of tinklers
were moved according the grasping force of the user and
drive the hydraulic circuit of the slave hand with a design
ampliﬁcation factor of 25:1 (after [70.96])
mented in present power extenders. Vukobratovic et al.
were able to deﬁne the following relevant features of
control and stabilization loops for walking that are still
valid today:

A model reduction approach

The method of prescribed synergies

The use of zero moment point (ZMP) to derive the
dynamic equation of motion

The use of left–right symmetries and nominal gait
cycle

The design of a model-based analog motion com-
pensator that provides to create motion synergies
through a set of servomotors.
Motion synergies were computed using a nominal
gait trajectory (step period D 1, step size coefﬁcient D
1) in a reduced phase space as a reference to derive
in advance the weight, the inertia, and the friction
compensation torques that have to be exerted at each
joint.
Figure 70.17 describes the high-level functional
architecture of the controller. The adaptation for differ-
ent gait conditions (from 1 to 5 s) was modulated on
the precomputed trajectories through a couple of co-
ordinated sequencers (time-base generators, TBG) that
convert the absolute time into the loop phase required
to determine compensation components.
The overall feedback also includes two additional
feedback components, which use force sensors in the
shoes to compute torque perturbation around the ZMP.
These disturbances appear when the exoskeleton rotates
around the leg in the stance phase or when a change of
acceleration (step length/period) alters the gait from the
nominal cycle.
In both cases, the author derived, through lineariza-
tion of the dynamic model along the nominal cycle,
a couple of static gains that map the sense forces into
corrective torques that are added to the nominal hip
torques.
Vukobratovic et al.’s exoskeleton worked well only
for limit cycles which were close to the nominal gait
trajectory it was designed for. Both Vukobratovic’s
exoskeleton and the experience derived form the Hardi-
man project showed that the control technology avail-
able at that time was premature to cope with the nonlin-
ear, dynamic coupling effects that appears in walking
and manipulation.
A renewed effort in research was performed by
researchers at Berkeley University who in the mid-
dle of the 1980s promoted projects, in general called
the human extenders, to develop arm exoskeletons that
augment the arm force. Early extender projects were

Part G | 70.5
1894
Part G
Robots and Humans
Hip motor
servo
Analog
(precomputed)
Synergy
reference
Generator hip
Left
Knee motor
servo
TBGL
Analog
(precomputed)
Synergy
reference
Generator
Knee left
Ankle motor
servo
Analog
(precomputed)
Synergy
reference
Generator
Ankle left
Hip motor
servo
Analog
(precomputed)
Synergy
reference
Generator
Ankle right
Knee motor
servo
TBGR
Analog
(precomputed)
Synergy
reference
Generator
Knee right
Hip motor
servo
Analog
(precomputed)
Synergy
reference
Generator hip
Right
Variable gaint
speed
Force
Feedback from
shoes sensors
Fig. 70.17 The control structure of the 1974 Vokubratovic et al.’s exoskeletons (after [70.108]). The active device was
powered with six pneumatic actuators whose references and feedback are determined through three different components:
servo feedback, prescribed synergies, and force feedback for sagittal and lateral stabilization
Uh
Gh (s)
∫
Gflesh (s)
Hsense (s)
Mech
Reg
Fgain
ye
ye
yh
+–
+–
e
+–
Ue
Force
Sh
–1
Freact
Fig. 70.18 The basic extender controller (after [70.109]). The scheme represents the extender controller as proposed
by Kazerooni in 1989. The controller is based on an internal velocity controller. A given force ampliﬁer gain Fgain
determines the forces that are compensated dynamically with respect to the force shown to the operator
based on the combination of a robust velocity con-
troller in feedback with a force sensor that detects user
inputs.
Figure 70.18 shows the working principle of the
ampliﬁcation loop. With respect to previous attempts,
here the use of the digital controller helped to im-
plement more sophisticated feedback controllers that
cope with the multi-input multioutput system model.
The overall stability was proven through two methods:
(1) a linear analysis, performed through the multi-
variable Nyquist criterion on the linearized model (2)
and an application of the small gain theorem that
provides sufﬁcient conditions for stability in the case
of the nonlinear model interacting with the unstruc-
tured environment. However, the stability conditions
derived in [70.2] through the small gain theorem where
highly restrictive and required the ampliﬁcation gain
to be less than 1. Subsequent author’s work intro-
duced different criteria (than fully unstructured in-
teraction), such as typical operator and environment
impedance ranges, and stability margins. Under such
conditions [70.110] and using the -synthesis, the au-
thor demonstrated robust stability under higher force
ampliﬁcation gains.
An example of the ampliﬁcation goal achievement
with this technique and a 3 DOF arm was reported

Human–Robot Augmentation
70.5 Control of Human–Robot Augmentation Systems
1895
Part G | 70.5
in [70.111] as the maneuver bandwidth of 2 Hz, the ver-
tical force ampliﬁcation ratio 7 W 1, and the horizontal
force ampliﬁcation ratio 5 W 1.
70.5.2 Power Augmentation
through Proprioceptive Sensors
This type of power augmentation systems use only sen-
sors that are completely internal to the exoskeleton
structures. These sensors have no direct contact with
the human operator (e.g., motor or joint torque/position
sensors).
One beneﬁt of this approach is the reduced design
complexity through the use of more conventional torque
sensors and the improved stability of the reading even
in the case of multiple contacts between the user and
the exoskeleton structure.
As a side effect, there is no direct measurement
of the force effectively felt by the user. The interac-
tion controller decides the exoskeleton motion policy
based on the estimation of the interaction force with the
user.
This approach is used in the control of the Berkeley
Lower Extremity Exoskeleton [70.5], and most of the
intelligent assisting devices (IADs) [70.112–114].
Given the Lagrange formulation of the exoskeleton,
the basic of this approach is to let the control providing
a predeﬁned percentage of the force/torque required for
the motion
8
ˆˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆˆ:
M.q/Rq C C.q; Pq/Pq C G.q/ C GL.q/ D
Q C
X
c
JcFc ;
Q D JT
t ./Fm ;
Pq D Jt./ P ;
(70.2)
where q is the joint coordinates vector, M, C, and G,
are the exoskeleton mass, Coriolis, and gravity ma-
trices, respectively, GL is the manipulated load, Q is
the motor-torques vector reduced to the joints Jc; Fc
refers to the user contact forces and the respective Ja-
cobians computed in the points of contact, and Jt and
Fm represent the transmission Jacobian and the motor
force/torque vector, respectively, and  is the motor-
coordinates vector.
In order to properly work, this approach also sup-
poses to have an almost accurate model of the mechan-
ical design ( OM; OC; OG; OJc; OJt) and the load to manipulate
( OGL). In these conditions, the candidate control law is
Fm D .JT
t /1. OG.q/ C .1  ˇ1/ OGL
C .1  ˛1/. OM.q/Rq C OC.q; Pq/Pq// :
(70.3)
By inserting (70.4) in (70.2), we have
8
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆˆ:
˛1. OM.q/Rq C OC.q; Pq/Pq/ C ˇ1GL.q/
D
X
c
JcFc C ".q/
".q/ D .M.q/  OM.q//Rq C .C.q; Pq/
 OC.q; Pq//Pq C .G.q/  OG.q//
C .GL.q/  OGL.q// ;
(70.4)
where the model error is expected to converge toward
zero.
Equation (70.4) shows how the contact forces per-
ceived by the user can be reduced by a static (ˇ) and/or
a dynamic (˛) ampliﬁcation factor. As a matter of fact,
if the simpliﬁcation operates correctly (" ! 0), the pi-
lot will only feel on his own body a percentage of the
carried load (ˇ1) plus a percentage of the exoskeleton
dynamic (˛1).
In the case of a walking exoskeleton, the above con-
trol model is switched according to the stancing foot, or
in the case of double stancing (the weight is distributed
on both feet), a simpliﬁed zero-moment-point (ZMP)
rule is applied [70.115]
8
ˆˆ<
ˆˆ:
mTRxTR D mTLxTL ;
mTR C mTL D mL ;
xTR C xTL
2
D xg ;
(70.5)
where xTR and xTL are the stancing position of the right
and left feet, respectively, xg is the projection of the cen-
ter of mass on the walking plane, mL is the overall load
mass, and mTR and mTL are the mass components to be
distributed on the right and left control models, respec-
tively.
Equation (70.5) is used as a means to separate
the closed-loop kinematics into two (quasi) symmetri-
cal equations, similar to (70.2), that only refer to the
left- and right-leg dynamics. The load is consequently
distributed among the two legs, thus generating two de-
coupled control models, one for each leg.
Discussion 70.1
Experiments on such a kind of controller were per-
formed at UC Berkeley. In [70.75], the system proved
to be efﬁcient to compensate completely the weight
(ˇ1 D 0) with a good dynamic scale power ampliﬁ-
cation factor (˛ D 10), and that the resulting system is
usable for walking at an average speed of 1:3 m=s with
a transported payload of 70 kg (including the exoskele-
ton weight).

Part G | 70.5
1896
Part G
Robots and Humans
+–
+
+
e
KL
KH
Motion controller,
drivers and motors
Human
model
Load torque
Human torque
Exoskeleton
joint motor    torque
Joint position
Force interaction
Power gain
Ku
Convert and HB
muscle model
EMG pads
Encoders
Fig. 70.19 The basic EMG controller (after [70.116]). The myo-electric signals were processed to derive a control signal
through a sequence of (1) high-pass ﬁlter; (2) signal rectiﬁcation (absolute value); (3) low-pass ﬁltering; (4) normalization
versus a nominal setup isometric contraction. The sign of the contraction is detected as a combination of pure agonistic–
antagonistic contractions
The proposed design, however, suffers from a num-
ber of drawbacks that limit this control architecture
being used in a more ﬂexible interaction environment:

The measurement of interaction torques made at
the joint level makes it indistinguishable, whose
interaction caused the reading, be it a voluntary
movement provided by the user or an unvoluntary
interaction provided by the environment. In both
cases, the control ampliﬁes these effects regardless
of the fact that the original stimuli were provided by
the user.

The sensor and the mechanical model assumed in
the discussed work only deal with a rigid me-
chanical design model whose structures risk to be
cumbersome and dangerous when the load to be
carried/manipulated is high. Flexible designs may
manipulate higher loads at the cost of more com-
plex control design [70.38].

The robustness of the control is demanded to the
accuracy of the model and the design of the com-
pensation gains. When no gain is programmed
(˛ D ˇ D 1), the feedback is zeroed and the user
perceives all the passive effects of the dynamics. In-
creasing these gains lowers the stability margin in
a way that is dependent on the quality of the model
approximation.
70.5.3 EMG Force Control
and Power Augmentation
Notwithstanding the fact that EMG-based arms were al-
ready developed in the early 1980s, power-augmented
systems based on EMG signals only appeared at the
beginning of the 2000s. In 2001, Rosen et al. [70.116]
proposed a powered exoskeleton system based on the
myosignal analysis (as shown in Fig 70.19).
In order to associate a map between the myo-
electric signals and the amount of exerted force, Rosen
ﬁrst detected the level of activation, then he applied
a basic muscle contraction/elongation model as de-
scribed by Hill [70.117] during his investigation on
tetanic contraction and by Winter [70.60] for antagonis-
tic muscle analysis. According to Hill’s model, the force
correlates the combined effects of muscle activation,
muscle elongation, and muscle speed to a well-known
state equation
F D aF0.v0 C v/
.vF0 C av0/ ;
(70.6)
where F is the force exerted by the muscle, v is con-
traction velocity of the muscle, F0 is the maximum
isometric force generated by the muscle, v0 is the
muscle maximum velocity, and a is the coefﬁcient of
shortening heat.

Human–Robot Augmentation
70.5 Control of Human–Robot Augmentation Systems
1897
Part G | 70.5
Such a model has been applied to all involved mus-
cles Mf D Mf.Uemg; m; Pm/, to determine the moment
Mf induced on the elbow joint angle m, by the muscle
ﬁbers f . In addition to the muscle bio-signal, the con-
trol closed loop used two more data from sensors: (1)
a measurement of the external load and (2) the overall
momentum applied by the operator on the exoskeleton.
The underlying basic idea is that the muscle signal
operates as an external loop that provides a reference
for an internal moment controller. The three gains in
the controller KL; KH; Ku deﬁne, respectively, the inter-
nal loop force gain KH versus KL, and the overall EMG
signal tracking bandwidth.
In a similar effort to the Rosen elbow extender,
Kawai et al. [70.118] proposed a 1-DOF-actuated wear-
able device that lowers the internal backbone strain
during pick-up tasks in order to prevent from lumbago.
The device senses the average back angle (measured
through a potentiometer) and the EMG strain on the
thigh muscles. The motor control for the device is deter-
mined through a state machine based on a typical load
pick-up and release procedure. The threshold values
for switching between phases were determined through
a test with a nominal load.
In [70.119] and [70.82], the EMG data are em-
ployed to control the HAL-3, walking assistant, and
exoskeleton. The control algorithm is a combination of
a ﬁnite-state machine with a torque control. Two force
sensors placed in soles of the shoes serve to determine
the ﬂoor-reaction forces and to switch among phases.
Each phase is then used to determine in which mode the
user knee is moving (active, passive or free). The joint
motors are consequently controlled using Table 70.1
In different phases of motion, the joint control
adopts a computed torque approach plus two compo-
nents proportional to the myo-signals of ﬂexion and
extension
joints D KﬂEMGﬂ KexEMGex
C .I  M/ R C .D  B/ P
C C.; P/ C K.0  / ;
(70.7)
Table 70.1 The HAL dual-phase model. The phase 1 re-
lates to the swinging leg and phase 2 relates to the stancing
leg. In each phase, the table indicates the type of control to
be implemented on the relative exoskeleton joint
Phase 1
Phase 2
Joint
Direction
Mode
Direction
Mode
Hip
Flexion
Active
Extension
Active
Flexion
Flexion
Knee
#
Free
#
Passive
Extension
Extension
where I and D are the inertia and viscous coefﬁ-
cients, respectively, as estimated through a recursive
least squares auto regressive estimator (ARX) identiﬁ-
cation, C includes all Coriolis and gravity effects, M, B
and K represent the target inertia, impedance to show to
the operator. The term  D KﬂEMGﬂ KexEMGex rep-
resents the estimated muscle torque whose conversion
factors were determined through experimental tests.
The measure assistance level is close to 60% dur-
ing ﬂexion activities and to 85% during extension. In
its most recent version, the HAL-5 adds contributes
from accelerometers and gyroscope mounted on the
backpack for better posture estimation [70.120]. HAL-
5 extends the principle of operation of the lower body
control to the user arm, by allowing the user to hold and
carry an additional weight of 40 kg. HAL-5 extends the
control with a greater number of phases (swing, land-
ing, and support) and provides different control gains to
optimize each phase [70.121].
The above EMG controllers only work ﬁne when
the developers are able to ﬁnd two antagonistic muscles
whose ﬂexions and extensions can be directly related to
the overall force exerted on a user joint (e.g., the bicepts
and tricepts for the elbow joint). If this is not the case,
Kiguchi et al. showed out how fuzzy controllers may
estimate joint torques from several torques. In [70.122],
they showed how to decode shoulder torques by com-
bining the EMG signals recorded from eight different
muscle sources. Such a fuzzy network has been coupled
in the control of a 3-DOF mobile exoskeleton [70.123]
to assist motion in highly impaired people.
70.5.4 Power Augmentation
through Exteroceptive Sensors
High-force power augmentation systems require a dif-
ferent approach with respect to the proprioceptive and
the EMG sensing approaches. In such devices, the ﬂex-
ibility of the structure and the high torques required
at joints prevent the use of indirect measures of the
force/torque exchanged between the device and the
user. Moreover, the Hardiman approach, which inte-
grated a master exoskeleton and an outﬁtting slave
exoskeleton as a unique teleoperation system proved
not to be functional [70.94].
Two systems have proved so far to reach this tar-
get in an operational and fully functional scenario: the
Sarcos/Raytheon XOS Exoskeleton for the arms and
legs [70.105] and the BE developed by PERCRO at
Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna. Both of them are based
on a similar working principle: the user body is directly
attached to the exoskeleton in a predeﬁned numbers
of points, e.g. the two feet, the hands’ handles, and
a shoulder harness for the BE; and additional interac-

Part G | 70.5
1898
Part G
Robots and Humans
tion at the pelvis for the XOS. The interaction forces
exchanged between the exoskeleton and the user are
measured at these points and used to simultaneously
control equilibrium, force ampliﬁcation, and motion
control.
On the other side, the two systems differ for a num-
ber of technical details: the XOS design is light, ad-
herent to the user body and based on rotary-hydraulic
actuators, the BE instead mimics the weight distribu-
tion of the human body, the exoskeleton does not touch
the user body except for the predeﬁned contact points
and can automatically adapt to different human per-
centiles, and ﬁnally, all the actuation structure is based
on a unique high-torque electrical motorization.
Very few data are documented about the operation
of the XOS system and much of the information avail-
able is contained within its related patents, instead the
kinematics and the control of the BE are described in
several documents [70.104, 124].
70.5.5 Control Schemes
The BE control is organized as a decentralized control,
where each joint is supervised by a separate electronics.
Figure 70.20 shows the PERECRO-BE device. All the
electronics are organized in four clusters which respec-
tively map to the single human limbs. The interconnec-
tion between joint controllers is achieved through four
separate EtherCAT-buses.
All connections converge into a central electronics
placed in the trunk backpack, which manages high-level
control of walking, stability, and manipulation.
A unique type of motorization as well as a unique
type of low-level controller is implemented in each
joint. Figure 70.21 highlights the interaction between
the internal control loops and the higher control level.
The internal controllers operate at a very high rate
(2:5 kHz) and provide to estimate the joint velocities.
At limb extremities, these controllers also acquire the
information recorded by the embedded force sensors.
The modularity of the architecture and the structure of
the information do allow a high scalability of the sys-
tem and a regular scheduling of the local and higher
controllers.
The two components highlighted in Fig. 70.21 as
force control and feed forward control are managed at
the central level at 1 kHz basic control rate. The ﬁrst
generates, using the sensor force information, a veloc-
ity command that is forwarded to each limb cluster,
whereas the second combines force information with
posture and velocity information to deﬁne feedforward
commands that can be directly added to compensate
weight, loads or other gravity/inertial effects on the ex-
oskeleton joints.
Fig. 70.20 The PERCRO-Body Extender has been already
deﬁned (BE). The BE is a whole-body exoskeleton struc-
ture designed to lift and manipulate 50 kg load per arm in
the worst case conditions. The device has ﬁve attachment
points with the user body: the two boots, two handles em-
bedded in the grippers and the trunk corset. In addition to
the internal sensors (position, force, and gyroscopes), force
sensors embedded in the attachment connection help to de-
termine the proper motion commands
Given its ﬂexible structure, the central controller
can operate on the joint controllers in different oper-
ational modalities; among these are: admittance con-
troller, impedance controller, and feedback lineariza-
tion controller.
Admittance Controller
Different control strategies have been implemented to
move both the upper arm and the lower body part
of the exoskeleton. Four basic schemes of admittance
controller are implemented to manage the exoskeleton
during walking and manipulation activities:

Arm admittance

Swinging leg

Stancing leg

Double stancing leg.
The basic scheme is the arm-admittance controller.
In this approach, the local force sensed at the inter-

Human–Robot Augmentation
70.5 Control of Human–Robot Augmentation Systems
1899
Part G | 70.5
Fs
τ
Feed forward
control
Velocity
control
Mechanical
system
Force control
q˜∙
q∙d
q∙
Sensor
Human
Complete system
Fig. 70.21
The basic BE control
structure. The internal velocity con-
trollers are placed in the exoskeleton
joints and locally perform a velocity
servo loop (proportional derivative)
which is enhanced by a direct feedfor-
ward torque. Both the inner-loop gain
parameters and the external feedfor-
ward torque can be commanded from
the higher level central control unit.
This structure is repeated identically
for all the exoskeleton joints
face is projected to the trunk reference system through
the appropriate coordinate transformation. Its value is
ampliﬁed through a gain factor and smoothed through
a ﬁrst-order low-pass ﬁlter that remove noisy effects.
This reference signal is then back-propagated to the
joint by using the inverse of the limb Jacobian.
PqLd D J
L
pfKLv
s C pf
RTr
h Fh ;
(70.8)
where Fh is the handle force/torque vector as read by
the sensor, RTr
h is the rotation matrix that maps to the ap-
propriate trunk reference system, KLv is a force/velocity
gain, pf is the smoothing frequency, and JL is the ap-
propriate limb Jacobian that describes the motion of the
limb with respect to the trunk.
In addition to the above velocity commands, the
control system also computes in real time the gravita-
tional effects produced by the exoskeleton joints and
provide to compensate them through the feedforward
input (ff)of the joint velocity controllers.
ff D QG.q/RTr
w
2
4
0
0
9:81
3
5 ;
(70.9)
where QG is the gravity contribution matrix (DOF  3)
that maps forces generated by the gravity to joints, RTr
w
is the rotation matrix that describes the arm orientation
with respect to a world frame having the gravity vector
aligned with the z-axis.
The motion behavior generated to the programmed
feedback policy can be examined through a two-step
analysis. The internal position controller can be made
asymptotically stable through standard robust control
techniques. While the external admittance loop, which
involves the human operator, exploits an intrinsically
passive behavior, through the display of a pure viscous
force to the operator. Hence, until the outer loop band-
width is sufﬁciently smaller than the internal velocity
servo, the two loops do not interfere [70.125].
The arm-admittance (70.8) scheme, also applies
to ﬂoating legs which swing during walking. In such
a case, the controller uses the forces measured by the
booths which have been biased using offset values that
ensure a stable contact among the user’s foot and the
exoskeleton booth.
During the stancing phase, the information provided
by the force sensors in the booth is useless. Hence the
force sensor between the corset and the trunk backpack
(backpack force) is used as a trajectory generator for
the leg motion. The reference trajectories are generated
with a unique, dual step, procedure which do not change
being the exoskeleton stancing on one or two legs.
In the ﬁrst step, the backpack force has been deter-
mined. This force is ﬁltered and ampliﬁed in the same
way as for the handle admittance control. This opera-
tion generates a velocity vector .v b; !b/ that applies to
the backpack. In the second step, the central controller
maps the same velocity vector to leg motion using a ve-
locity map relationship that uses the direct kinematic
between the trunk and the booths’ soles. The kinematic
vector, rl.q/, that describes the booth position with re-
spect to the backpack force sensor is
 v f D v b C !b ^ rl.q/ ;
!f D !b :
(70.10)
The approach maps the force felt by the corset back-
pack to the proper leg motion regardless the knowledge
of the ZMP position.
Feedback Linearization Controller
The major limitation of the admittance control is the
lack of transparency. The user who wears the power
augmentation exoskeleton only feels forces that are pro-
portional to his speed, and the feedforward component

Part G | 70.5
1900
Part G
Robots and Humans
q··d = J(q)–1 (V·
e – J·(q, q·) q·)
q··d, q·d, qd 
q, q·, Fs
Fs
mpI3×3
Mp
Admittance control
O3×3
O3×3
Ip
O3×3
gT
V·
e =
Fs – mpg
Human
Trunk sensors
Hand sensors
Environment
–1
τ = BABy + CABq· + GABgT
– JABu (q) Fs – JABa (q) Fa + PAB 
BABq·· + CABq· + GABgT
= TAB –BAB–TV·
T –CAB–TVT
PAB = BAB–TV·
T – CAB–TVT
y = (q··d + Kvq˜· + Kpq˜)
maI3×3
Ma
Feedback linearization
03×3
03×3
Ia
03×1
gT
V·
e 
Fa = ma
+
TAB = τ + JABu (q) Fs – JABa (q) Fa
Analytical model
VT,V·
T
τ
T
T
T
T
Fig. 70.22 The second-order admittance controller with feedback linearization. In this control scheme, the control input provided
by the pilot generates a reference acceleration information for the limb. The feedback linearization provides to compensate the
inertial/centrifugal/gravity effects of the exoskeleton and to map user input in proper acceleration information at the contact
point. Moreover, the appropriate force ampliﬁcation factor programmed at the sensor provide to establish an equilibrium among
the environment interaction and the user commands
is only used to enlarge the control bandwidth and re-
duce the nonlinearity due to different postures.
However when the user touches any object, none of
the contact force interferes with the exoskeleton motion
creating in such a way an inﬁnite force gain. While from
the one side this is highly beneﬁcial for joint stability, as
a result it compromises the ability of the user to operate
ﬁne, scale force manipulation, tasks.
In order to recover this functionality, the BE im-
plements on the same internal control structure two
alternative control policies:

A second-order admittance controller

An admittance adaptive controller.
The second-order admittance controller collects
user inputs to determine torque commands to the low-
level joint controllers. This type of controller has been
tested only on the upper body of the exoskeleton for the
two relevant issues:

The arms require greater manipulation capabilities
and a better transparency

The limited transparency of the leg motion reduces
the interference between arm dynamics and trunk
motion thus improving the overall stability.
The principle of operation for power augmentation
is as follows (the related numerical equations have been
reported in Fig. 70.22):
First, a force input is collected at each user handle.
We suppose this force as being driven the interaction of
a virtual mass with the given inertia properties .mp; Ip/
and a separate weight property .mpg/.
Hence the resulting handle (end-effector) veloc-
ity .Ve/ will be determined as a direct integration of the
user force as applied on this virtual mass, and the joint
velocities as direct differentiation of the motion Jaco-
bian (box admittance control 70.22).
The feedback linearization control here compre-
hends four components:

The BABy C CABPq C GABgT component, which takes
into account the tracking error y, and the rotated
gravity vector gT

The effective user force Fs, considered as being
equal to the sensor read, and already applied on the
exoskeleton structure

The weight and inertial effects produced on the ex-
oskeleton by the carried load .ma; Ia/ moved at the
prescribed velocity .Ve/

And the additional inertial and Coriolis effects pro-
vided by the moving trunk .PAB/.
As for the ﬁrst-order admittance controller, the sta-
bility of the rigid model here can be ensured through
the analysis of the linearized model. Combining the
required equations, it can be derived that the robust-
ness of the system is only affected by the amount of
the inertia in the virtual mass properties .mp; Ip/. This
property is unrelated from the power augmentation fac-
tor .ma=mp/.
This is the reason why it is wise to decouple among
the virtual mass .mp; Ip/ and the weight used for gravity

Human–Robot Augmentation
70.5 Control of Human–Robot Augmentation Systems
1901
Part G | 70.5
Measure
Least squares line of best fit
Theoretical behavior
mp
mpg
ma
k
mp, mpg
ma
1/k
= mv
mv
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
Free motion
20 kg
10 kg
1
2
3
4
5
fs  (N)
v·e (m/s2)
25
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
*
Fig. 70.23 Power augmentation proﬁle. The power augmentation coefﬁcient (k) is deﬁned as the ratio of the carried load
versus the perceived load. In the BE approach this ratio is represented as a piecewise linear approximation (left drawing).
The quality of the control, tested on 1-DOF of the BE, has integrated with the adaptive policy and is shown on the right
q··d, q·d, qd 
Fs
τ


Parameter estimator
Feedback linearization
Analytical model
Force control
q,q·
Sensors
Environment
Human
Body extender
Fig. 70.24 The admittance adaptive
controller with feedback linearization.
A standard parameter estimator
procedure has been applied to the
robot structure in order to achieve
online identiﬁcation of the carried
load. To simplify the computation and
improve accuracy of estimation, the
procedure assumes that the grasped
object has regular mass properties
and can be described with only two
parameters as shown in Fig. 70.22
compensation .mpg/. The last not affecting the overall
control stability.
Finally, the power augmentation factor has been de-
ﬁned as a piecewise linear approximation of the ma
versus mp ratio which saturates for lower values of mp
in order to preserve overall stability (Fig. 70.23 left).
In order to work appropriately, the second-order ad-
mittance model requires an approximate estimation of
the carried load (Fig. 70.23 right). It is supposed that
this information to be subjected to the following condi-
tions: the grasp is stable during manipulation, and the
load does not change frequently.
Under these conditions, it is possible to use the
motor currents as torque sensors that estimate the car-
ried load. The principle of operation is reported in
Fig. 70.24. Under the hypothesis that the load is stable
and not frequently changing, the estimator can operate
in lower frequencies.
Several tests to check the quality of estimation and
the real-time adaptation to load change have been per-
formed. In Fig. 70.24, the speciﬁc case of three different
loads are reported. Attached to the video material of
the present chapter the mass load/unload operation have
been shown.

Part G | 70
1902
Part G
Robots and Humans
70.6 Conclusions and Further Developments
The presented review outlines some historical and state-
of-the-art developments of wearable robotic systems for
human–robot augmentation. Although EHPA systems
are receiving an almost increasing interest from the
robotics community, both from the research and from
the commercial point of view, at present, the robotics
technologies associated to their development are mainly
derived from existing and well-established components.
The lack of appropriate robotics components purposely
developed for utilization on a wearable robotic system
is mainly due, as testiﬁed by the existing research pro-
totypes and commercial products, to a design approach
that reﬂects the same methodologies pursued since the
beginning for the design of industrial robots.
The design of a robotics system that must be worn
by the human operator during a continuous operation
also in unstructured environments should necessarily
hamper design criteria, such as safety, fatigue, trans-
parency, etc., that are only sometimes minimally con-
sidered for industrial robots.
From the above analysis of different typologies of
EHPA systems, it comes out that the availability of ade-
quate actuation components is fundamental to fulﬁll the
basic functional requirements in terms of total weight,
dynamics behavior, and control aspects. However, what
is needed for the future research in this extraordinary
interesting and challenging ﬁeld of research in robotics
deals primarily with a new radical design philosophy
centered on biomechanical aspects of humans behav-
ior. In particular, a novel methodology considering as
primary criteria the issue of energy consumption, not
only for the wearable robotic system itself but also in
terms of the complex resulting system human operator-
wearable robot seems a fundamental prerequisite for
future developments.
As indicated in the previous sections, so far true
advantages of exploiting an EHPA system in different
real-application scenarios are still to be demonstrated.
In fact, so far, research developments have been pri-
marily devoted to the physical design and realization
of wearable robots, without addressing the successive
phase of validation and performance assessment in
a true real environment. This aspect should enter as
a prominent component for future developments of the
research on EHPA.
The ﬁeld of wearable robots is rapidly expand-
ing and the associated challenges in terms of design
methodologies and ad-hoc robotics technologies just
began to be understood in their full meaning. The mo-
tivations for future developments in this ﬁeld should
always ﬁrmly maintain human operator’s needs as the
central focus of the research.
Video-References
VIDEO 146
Arm light exoskeleton (ALEx)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/70/videodetails/146
VIDEO 148
Arm-Exos
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/70/videodetails/148
VIDEO 149
Body extender transversal joint
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/70/videodetails/149
VIDEO 150
Hand-exoskeletons
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/70/videodetails/150
VIDEO 151
Collaborative control of the Body Extender
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/70/videodetails/151
VIDEO 152
Body Extender – A fully powered whole-body exoskeleton
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/70/videodetails/152
VIDEO 180
L-Exos for upper-limb motor rehabilitation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/70/videodetails/180
References
70.1
M. McCullough: Abstracting Craft: The Practiced
Digital Hand (MIT, Cambridge 1998)
70.2
H. Kazerooni: Human-robot interaction via the
transfer
of
power
and
information
signals,
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 20(2), 450–463
(1990)
70.3
A. Frisoli, F. Salsedo, M. Bergamasco, B. Rossi,
M.C. Carboncini: A force-feedback exoskeleton for
upper-limb rehabilitation in virtual reality, Appl.
Bionics Biomech. 6(2), 115–126 (2009)
70.4
J.E. Colgate, J. Edward, M.A. Peshkin, W. Wan-
nasuphoprasit: Cobots: Robots for collaboration

Human–Robot Augmentation
References
1903
Part G | 70
with human operators, ASME Int. Cong. Mech.
Eng. (1996) pp. 433–440
70.5
H. Kazerooni: Exoskeletons for human perfor-
mance augmentation. In: Handbook of Robotics,
ed. by B. Siciliano, O. Khatib (New York, Springer
2008) pp. 773–793
70.6
A.M. Dollar, H. Herr: Lower extremity exoskeletons
and active orthoses: Challenges and state-of-
the-art, IEEE Trans. Robotics 24(1), 144–158 (2008)
70.7
R.
Kobetic,
C.S.
To,
J.R.
Schnellenberger,
M.L. Audu, T.C. Bulea, R. Gaudio, G. Pinault,
S. Tashman, R.J. Triolo: Development of hybrid
orthosis for standing, walking, stair climbing
after spinal cord injury, J. Rehabil. Res. Dev.
46(3), 447–462 (2009)
70.8
H. Herr: Exoskeletons and orthoses: Classification,
design challenges and future directions, J. Neu-
roEng. Rehabil. 6, 21 (2009)
70.9
A. Frisoli, F. Rocchi, S. Marcheschi, A. Dettori,
F. Salsedo, M. Bergamasco: A new force-feed-
back arm exoskeleton for haptic interaction in
virtual environments, Proc. 1st IEEE Jt. Eurohaptics
Conf./Symp. Haptic Interfaces Virt. Environ. Tele-
operator Syst. (2005) pp. 195–201
70.10
S.C. Jacobsen, F.M. Smith, E.K. Iversen, D.K. Back-
man: High performance, high dexterity, force re-
flective teleoperator, Proc. 38th Conf. Remote Syst.
Technol., Washington (1990) pp. 180–185
70.11
Y. Ren, H.S. Park, L.Q. Zhang: Developing a whole-
arm exoskeleton robot with hand opening and
closing mechanism for upper limb stroke reha-
bilitation, IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robotics (ICORR)
(2009) pp. 761–765
70.12
N.G. Tsagarakis, D.G. Caldwell: Development and
control of a soft-actuated exoskeleton for use in
physiotherapy and training, Auton. Robots 15(1),
21–33 (2003)
70.13
J.C. Perry, J. Rosen, S. Burns: Upper-limb powered
exoskeleton design, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron.
12(4), 408–417 (2007)
70.14
T.G. Sugar, J. He, E.J. Koeneman, J.B. Koeneman,
R. Herman, H. Huang, R.S. Schultz, D.E. Herring,
J. Wanberg, S. Balasubramanian, P. Swenson,
J.A. Ward: Design and control of rupert: A device
for robotic upper extremity repetitive therapy,
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 15(3), 336–
346 (2007)
70.15
T. Nef, M. Mihelj, G. Kiefer, C. Perndl, R. Muller,
R. Riener: Armin-exoskeleton for arm therapy
in stroke patients, IEEE 10th Int. Conf. Rehabil.
Robotics (ICORR) (2007) pp. 68–74
70.16
R.
Gopura,
D.S.V.
Bandara,
K.
Kiguchi,
G.K.I. Mann: Developments in hardware sys-
tems of active upper-limb exoskeleton robots:
A review, J. Appl. Physiol. B 75, 203–220 (2016)
70.17
G.M. Prisco, C.A. Avizzano, M. Calcara, S. Ciancio,
S. Pinna, M. Bergamasco: A virtual environment
with haptic feedback for the treatment of motor
dexterity disabilities, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 4 (1998) pp. 3721–3726
70.18
L.I. Lugo-Villeda, A. Frisoli, O. Sandoval-Gon-
zalez, M.A. Padilla, V. Parra-Vega, C.A. Avizzano,
E. Ruffaldi, M. Bergamasco: Haptic guidance of
light-exoskeleton for arm-rehabilitation tasks,
18th IEEE Int. Symp. Robot Human Interact. Com-
mun. (RO-MAN) (2009) pp. 903–908
70.19
C. Carignan, J. Tang, S. Roderick: Development of
an exoskeleton haptic interface for virtual task
training, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2009) pp. 3697–3702
70.20
R. Vertechy, A. Frisoli, A. Dettori, M. Solazzi,
M. Bergamasco: Development of a new exoskele-
ton for upper limb rehabilitation, IEEE Int. Conf.
Rehabil. Robotics (ICORR) (2009) pp. 188–193
70.21
K. Kiguchi, T. Tanaka, K. Watanabe, T. Fukuda:
Exoskeleton for human upper-limb motion sup-
port, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA),
Vol. 2 (2003) pp. 2206–2211
70.22
T. Rahman, W. Sample, S. Jayakumar, M.M. King,
J.Y. Wee, R. Seliktar, M. Alexander, M. Scav-
ina, A. Clark: Passive exoskeletons for assisting
limb movement, J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 43(5), 583
(2006)
70.23
S.J. Ball, I.E. Brown, S.H. Scott: MEDARM: A reha-
bilitation robot with 5DOF at the shoulder com-
plex, IEEE/ASME Int. Conf. Adv. Intell. Mechatron.
(2007) pp. 1–6
70.24
J.
Klein,
S.J.
Spencer,
J.
Allington,
K.
Mi-
nakata, E.T. Wolbrecht, R. Smith, J.E. Bobrow,
D.J. Reinkensmeyer: Biomimetic orthosis for the
neurorehabilitation of the elbow and shoulder
(bones), 2nd IEEE/RAS/EMBS Int. Conf. Biomed.
Robotics Biomechatron. (BioRob) (2008) pp. 535–
541
70.25
P. Garrec, J.P. Friconneau, Y. Measson, Y. Perrot:
ABLE, an innovative transparent exoskeleton for
the upper-limb, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2008) pp. 1483–1488
70.26
A.M.M. Aalsma, F.C.T. van der Helm, H. van der
Kooij: Dampace: Design of an exoskeleton for
force-coordination training in upper-extremity
rehabilitation, J. Med. Dev. 3, 031003–31001 (2009)
70.27
M.H. Rahman, T.K. Ouimet, M. Saad, J.P. Kenne,
P.S. Archambault: Development and control of
a wearable robot for rehabilitation of elbow
and shoulder joint movements, 36th Annu. Conf.
IEEE Ind. Electron. Soc. (IECON) (2010) pp. 1506–
1511
70.28
M.H. Rahman, M. Saad, J.P. Kenne, P.S. Archam-
bault: Exoskeleton robot for rehabilitation of
elbow and forearm movements, 18th Mediterr.
Conf. Cont. Autom. (MED) (2010) pp. 1567–1572
70.29
A. Gupta, M.K. O’Malley: Design of a haptic
arm exoskeleton for training and rehabilita-
tion, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 11(3), 280–289
(2006)
70.30
H. Kawasaki, S. Ito, Y. Ishigure, Y. Nishimoto,
T. Aoki, T. Mouri, H. Sakaeda, M. Abe: Develop-
ment of a hand motion assist robot for reha-
bilitation therapy by patient self-motion control,
IEEE 10th Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robotics (ICORR) (2007)
pp. 234–240
70.31
P. Heo, G.M. Gu, S. Lee, K. Rhee, J. Kim: Cur-
rent hand exoskeleton technologies for rehabil-

Part G | 70
1904
Part G
Robots and Humans
itation and assistive engineering, Int. J. Precis.
Eng. Manuf. 13(5), 807–824 (2012)
70.32
M. Fontana, S. Fabio, S. Marcheschi, M. Bergam-
asco: Haptic hand exoskeleton for precision grasp
simulation, ASME J. Mech. Robotics 5(4), 041014
(2013)
70.33
C.A. Avizzano, F. Bargagli, A. Frisoli, M. Berga-
masco: The hand force feedback: analysis and
control of a haptic device for the human-hand,
IEEE Inter. Conf. Syst. Man Cybern., Vol. 2 (2000)
pp. 989–994
70.34
M. Bergamasco, B. Allotta, L. Bosio, L. Ferretti,
G. Parrini, G.M. Prisco, F. Salsedo, G. Sartini: An
arm exoskeleton system for teleoperation and
virtual environments applications, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1994) pp. 1449–
1454
70.35
T. Nef, R. Riener: Shoulder actuation mech-
anisms
for
arm
rehabilitation
exoskeletons,
2nd IEEE/RAS/EMBS Int. Conf. Biomed. Robotics
Biomechatron. (BioRob) (2008) pp. 862–868
70.36
P. DeVita, J. Helseth, T. Hortobagyi: Muscles do
more positive than negative work in human lo-
comotion, J. Exp. Biol. 210(19), 3361–3373 (2007)
70.37
M. Bergamasco: Design of hand force feedback
systems for glove-like advanced interfaces, Proc.
IEEE Int. Work. Robot Human Commun. (1992)
pp. 286–293
70.38
A. De Luca: Feedforward/feedback laws for the
control of flexible robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 1 (2000) pp. 233–240
70.39
D.C. Clark, N.J. Deleys, C.W. Matheis: Exploratory
Investigation
of the Man Amplifier Concept,
Tech. Documentary Rep. AMRL-TDR-62-89 (Cor-
nell Aeronautical Laboratory, Buffalo 1962)
70.40
A. Zarudiansky: Remote handling devices, US
Patent 430 2138 A (1981)
70.41
B.M.
Jau:
Anthropomorhic
exoskeleton
dual
arm/hand telerobot controller, IEEE Int. Workshop
Intell. Robots (1988) pp. 715–718
70.42
G. Burdea, J. Zhuang, E. Roskos, D. Silver, N. Lan-
grana: A portable dextrous master with force
feedback, Presence Teleoperators Virt. Environ.
1(1), 18–28 (1992)
70.43
T. Koyama, I. Yamano, K. Takemura, T. Maeno:
Multi-fingered exoskeleton haptic device using
passive force feedback for dexterous teleopera-
tion, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS), Vol. 3 (2002) pp. 2905–2910
70.44
S.
Nakagawara,
H.
Kajimoto,
N.
Kawakami,
S. Tachi, I. Kawabuchi: An encounter-type multi-
fingered master hand using circuitous joints,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005)
pp. 2667–2672
70.45
D. Gomez, G. Burdea, N. Langrana: Integration of
the Rutgers Master II in a virtual reality simula-
tion, Virt. Real. Annu. Int. Symp. (1995) pp. 198–
202
70.46
A. Wege, K. Kondak, G. Hommel: Mechanical de-
sign and motion control of a hand exoskeleton for
rehabilitation, IEEE Int. Conf. Mechatron. Autom.,
Vol. 1 (2005) pp. 155–159
70.47
M. Mulas, M. Folgheraiter, G. Gini: An emg-con-
trolled exoskeleton for hand rehabilitation, IEEE
9th Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robotics (ICORR) (2005)
pp. 371–374
70.48
S. Ito, H. Kawasaki, Y. Ishigure, M. Natsume,
T. Mouri, Y. Nishimoto: A design of fine motion
assist equipment for disabled hand in robotic re-
habilitation system, J. Frankl. Inst. 348(1), 79–89
(2011)
70.49
P. Brown, D. Jones, S.K. Singh, J.M. Rosen: The
exoskeleton glove for control of paralyzed hands,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1993)
pp. 642–647
70.50
B.L.
Shields,
J.A.
Main,
S.W.
Peterson,
A.M. Strauss: An anthropomorphic hand ex-
oskeleton to prevent astronaut hand fatigue
during extravehicular activities, IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybern. A 27(5), 668–673 (1997)
70.51
Y. Yamada, T. Morizono, S. Sato, T. Shimohira,
Y. Umetani, T. Yoshida, S. Aoki: Proposal of a Skil-
mate finger for EVA gloves, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 2 (2001) pp. 1406–1412
70.52
J.Y. Wang, Z.W. Xie, J.D. Zhao, H.G. Fang, M.H. Jin,
H. Liu: An exoskeleton system for measuring me-
chanical characteristics of extravehicular activity
glove joint, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Biomim. (RO-
BIO) (2006) pp. 1260–1265
70.53
H. Herr, G.P. Whiteley, D. Childress: Cyborg tech-
nology – Biomimetic orthotic and prosthetic
technology. In: Biologically Inspired Intelligent
Robots, ed. by Y. Bar-Cohen, C. Breazeal (SPIE,
Bellingham 2003)
70.54
K. Endo, H. Herr: A model of muscle-tendon func-
tion in human walking at self-selected speed,
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 22(2), 352–
362 (2014)
70.55
H.M. Herr, A.M. Grabowski: Bionic ankle–foot
prosthesis normalizes walking gait for persons
with leg amputation, Proc. R. Soc. B 279(1728),
457–464 (2012)
70.56
J.M. Donelan, R. Kram, A.D. Kuo: Mechanical work
for step-to-step transitions is a major determi-
nant of the metabolic cost of human walking,
J. Exp. Biol. 205(23), 3717–3727 (2002)
70.57
A. Grabowski, C.T. Farley, R. Kram: Independent
metabolic costs of supporting body weight and
accelerating body mass during walking, J. Appl.
Physiol. 98(2), 579–583 (2005)
70.58
A.D. Kuo, J.M. Donelan, A. Ruina: Energetic con-
sequences of walking like an inverted pendulum:
Step-to-step transitions, Exerc. Sport Sci. Rev.
33(2), 88–97 (2005)
70.59
R. Margaria: Positive and negative work perfor-
mances and their efficiencies in human locomo-
tion, Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occupat. Physiol. 25(4),
339–351 (1968)
70.60
D.A. Winter: Energy generation and absorption
at the ankle and knee during fast, natural, and
slow cadences, Clin. Orthop. Rel. Res. 175(175), 147
(1983)
70.61
A.H. Hansen, D.S. Childress, S.C. Miff, S.A. Gard,
K.P. Mesplay: The human ankle during walk-

Human–Robot Augmentation
References
1905
Part G | 70
ing: implications for design of biomimetic an-
kle prostheses, J. Biomech. 37(10), 1467–1474
(2004)
70.62
S. Au, H. Herr: Powered ankle-foot prosthesis,
IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 15(3), 52–59 (2008)
70.63
D. Paluska, H. Herr: The effect of series elasticity
on actuator power and work output: Implications
for robotic and prosthetic joint design, Robotics
Auton. Syst. 54(8), 667–673 (2006)
70.64
G. Pratt, M. Williamson, P. Dillworth, J. Pratt,
A. Wright: Stiffness isn’t everything, Lect. Notes
Control Inf. Sci. 223, 253–262 (1997)
70.65
J. Markowitz, P. Krishnaswamy, M.F. Eilenberg,
K. Endo, C. Barnhart, H. Herr: Speed adaptation in
a powered transtibial prosthesis controlled with
a neuromuscular model, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B
Biol. Sci. 366(1570), 1621–1631 (2011)
70.66
K. Endo, E. Swart, H. Herr: An artificial gastrocne-
mius for a transtibial prosthesis, Annu. Int. Conf.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. (EMBC) (2009) pp. 5034–
5037
70.67
H. Geyer, H. Herr: A muscle-reflex model that en-
codes principles of legged mechanics produces
human walking dynamics and muscle activities,
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 18(3), 263–
273 (2010)
70.68
J. Wang: EMG Control of Prosthetic Ankle Plantar
Flexion, Ph.D. Thesis (MIT, Cambridge 2011)
70.69
R.A. Heinlein: Starship Troopers (Ace Books, New
York 1987)
70.70
N. Yagn: Apparatus for facilitating walking, US
Patent 420179 A (1890)
70.71
S.J. Zaroodny: Bumpusher-A Powered Aid to Loco-
motion, Tech. Note (Ballistic Research Laboratory,
Aberdeen 1963)
70.72
R.S. Mosher: Handyman to Hardiman, Tech. Rep.
(Society of Automotive Engineers, Warrendale
1967)
70.73
M.E. Rosheim: Man-amplifying exoskeleton, SPIE
Proc. Mob. Robots IV 1195, 402–411 (1989)
70.74
E. Garcia, J.M. Sater, J. Main: Exoskeletons for
human performance augmentation (EHPA): A pro-
gram summary, J. Robotics Soc. Jpn. 20(8), 44–48
(2002)
70.75
H. Kazerooni: The berkeley lower extremity ex-
oskeleton, Springer Tracts. Adv. Robotics 25, 9–15
(2006)
70.76
A.B. Zoss, H. Kazerooni, A. Chu: Biomechanical
design of the berkeley lower extremity exoskele-
ton (BLEEX), IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 11(2),
128–138 (2006)
70.77
K. Amundson, J. Raade, N. Harding, H. Kazerooni:
Hybrid hydraulic-electric power unit for field and
service robots, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2005) pp. 3453–3458
70.78
C.J. Walsh, K. Pasch, H. Herr: An autonomous, un-
deractuated exoskeleton for load-carrying aug-
mentation, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2006) pp. 1410–1415
70.79
C.J. Walsh: Biomimetic Design of an Under-
Actuated Leg Exoskeleton for Load-Carrying Aug-
mentation, M.A. Thesis (MIT, Cambridge 2006)
70.80
C.J. Walsh, K. Endo, H. Herr: A quasi-passive leg
exoskeleton for load-carrying augmentation, Int.
J. Hum. Robotics 4(03), 487–506 (2007)
70.81
N. Costa, D.G. Caldwell: Control of a biomimetic
soft-actuated 10DoF lower body exoskeleton,
1st IEEE/RAS-EMBS Int. Conf. Biomed. Robotics
Biomechatron. (BioRob) (2006) pp. 495–501
70.82
H. Kawamoto, S. Lee, S. Kanbe, Y. Sankai: Power
assist method for HAL-3 using EMG-based feed-
back controller, IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man Cybern.,
Vol. 2 (2003) pp. 1648–1653
70.83
K. Yamamoto, K. Hyodo, M. Ishii, T. Matsuo: De-
velopment of power assisting suit for assisting
nurse labor, JSME Int. J. Ser. C 45(3), 703–711 (2002)
70.84
J.E. Pratt, B.T. Krupp, C.J. Morse, S.H. Collins:
The roboknee: An exoskeleton for enhancing
strength and endurance during walking, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 3 (2004)
pp. 2430–2435
70.85
Y. Sankai: Hal: Hybrid assistive limb based on cy-
bernics. In: Robotics Research, ed. by M. Kaneko,
Y. Nakamura (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2011)
pp. 25–34
70.86
US Army Research Laboratory, US Army Research
Office: ARO in Review (USRL/USRO, Adelphi 2006)
70.87
J.E. Pratt, B.T. Krupp, C.J. Morse, S.H. Collins: The
RoboKnee: An exoskeleton for enhancing strength
and endurance during walking, Proc. ICRA IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom., Vol. 3 (2001) pp. 2430–
2435
70.88
C.J. Walsh, D. Paluska, K. Pasch, W. Grand, A. Va-
liente, H. Herr: Development of a lightweight, un-
deractuated exoskeleton for load-carrying aug-
mentation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) (2006) pp. 3485–3491
70.89
A. Goffer: Gait-locomotor apparatus, US Patent 7
153 242 (2006)
70.90
R. Little, R.A. Irving: Self contained powered ex-
oskeleton walker for a disabled user, US Patent
201 1006 6088 A1 (2011)
70.91
R. Bogue: Exoskeletons and robotic prosthetics:
A review of recent developments, Ind. Robot Int.
J. 36(5), 421–427 (2009)
70.92
C.P. Lent: Mobile space suit, US Patent 303 4131 A
(1962)
70.93
N.J. Mizen: Powered exoskeletal apparatus for
amplifying human strength in response to normal
body movements, US Patent 344 9769 A (1969)
70.94
B.R. Fick, J.B. Makinson: Hardiman I Prototype
for Machine Augmentation of Human Strength
and Endurance: Final Report, Tech. Rep. S-71-
1056 (General Electric Comp., Schenectady 1971)
70.95
T.J. Snyder, H. Kazerooni: A novel material han-
dling system, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Vol. 2 (1996) pp. 1147–1152
70.96
B.R. Fick: Cutaneous stimuli sensor and transmis-
sion network, US Patent 353 5711 (1970)
70.97
S.R. Taal, Y. Sankai: Exoskeletal spine and shoul-
ders for full body exoskeletons in health care, Adv.
Appl. Sci. Res. 2(6), 270–286 (2011)
70.98
T. Ishida, T. Kiyama, K. Osuka, G. Shirogauchi,
R. Oya, H. Fujimoto: Movement analysis of power-

Part G | 70
1906
Part G
Robots and Humans
assistive machinery with high strength-amplifi-
cation, Proc. SICE Annu. Conf. (2010) pp. 2022–2025
70.99
S. Jacobsen, M. Olivier: Contact displacement ac-
tuator system, Patent WO 20 0809 4191 A3 (2008)
70.100
S. Toyama, G. Yamamoto: Development of wear-
able-agri-robot
mechanism
for
agricultural
work, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2009) pp. 5801–5806
70.101
S. Jacobsen, M. Olivier, B. Maclean: Method of siz-
ing actuators for a biomimetic mechanical joint,
Patent WO 20 1002 5419 A3 (2010)
70.102
S. Marcheschi, F. Salsedo, M. Fontana, M. Berga-
masco: Body extender: whole body exoskeleton
for human power augmentation, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011) pp. 611–616
70.103
M. Fontana, R. Vertechy, S. Marcheschi, F. Salsedo,
M. Bergamasco: The body extender: A full-body
exoskeleton for the transport and handling of
heavy loads, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 21(4), 34–
44 (2014)
70.104
G.P. Rosati Papini, C.A. Avizzano: Transparent
force control for body extender, IEEE Int. Symp.
Robot Human Interact. Commun. (RO-MAN) (2012)
pp. 138–143
70.105
G. Mone: Building the real iron man, Pop. Sci. 4,
1–6 (2008)
70.106
D. Bertrand: Lexosquelette hercule, le futur à nos
portes,
http://www.defense.gouv.fr/actualites/
economie-et-technologie/l-exosquelette-
hercule-le-futur-a-nos-portes (2011)
70.107
P. Filippi: Device for the automatic control of the
articulation of the knee, US Patent 230 5291 (1937)
70.108
M. Vukobratovic, D. Hristic, Z. Stojiljkovic: Devel-
opment of active anthropomorphic exoskeletons,
Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 12(1), 66–80 (1974)
70.109
K. Kazerooni: On the robot compliant motion
control, J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control. 111(3), 416–425
(1989)
70.110
Y. Uchimura, H. Kazerooni: A -synthesis based
control for compliant manoeuvres, IEEE Int. Conf.
Syst. Man Cybern., Vol. 4 (1999) pp. 1014–1019
70.111
H. Kazerooni: The human power amplifier tech-
nology at the University of California, Robotics
Auton. Syst. 19(2), 179–187 (1996)
70.112
H. Kazerooni: Human power amplifier for lifting
load including apparatus for preventing slack in
lifting cable, US Patent 638 6513 A (2002)
70.113
J.E. Colgate, M. Peshkin, S.H. Klostermeyer: In-
telligent assist devices in industrial applications:
A review, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS), Vol. 3 (2003) pp. 2516–2521
70.114
D. McGee, P. Swanson: Method of controlling an
intelligent assist device, US Patent 620 4620 A
(2001)
70.115
H. Kazerooni: Exoskeletons for human power
augmentation, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2005) pp. 3459–3464
70.116
J. Rosen, M. Brand, M.B. Fuchs, M. Arcan: A
myosignal-based powered exoskeleton system,
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. A 31(3), 210–222 (2001)
70.117
A.V. Hill: The heat of shortening and the dynamic
constants of muscle, Proc. R. Soc. B 126(843), 136–
195 (1938)
70.118
S. Kawai, K. Naruse, H. Yokoi, Y. Kakazu: An anal-
ysis of human motion for control of a wearable
power assist system, J. Robotics Mechatron. 16(3),
237–244 (2004)
70.119
S. Lee, Y. Sankai: Power assist control for walk-
ing aid with HAL-3 based on emg and impedance
adjustment around knee joint, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Vol. 2 (2002) pp. 1499–
1504
70.120
E. Guizzo, H. Goldstein: The rise of the body bots
[robotic exoskeletons], IEEE Spectrum 42(10), 50–
56 (2005)
70.121
K. Suzuki, G. Mito, H. Kawamoto, Y. Hasegawa,
Y. Sankai: Intention-based walking support for
paraplegia patients with robot suit HAL, Adv.
Robotics 21(12), 1441–1469 (2007)
70.122
K. Kiguchi, T. Tanaka, T. Fukuda: Neuro-fuzzy
control of a robotic exoskeleton with EMG signals,
IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. 12(4), 481–490 (2004)
70.123
K. Kiguchi, M.H. Rahman, M. Sasaki: Neuro-fuzzy
based motion control of a robotic exoskeleton:
considering end-effector force vectors, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 3146–
3151
70.124
M. Bergamasco, A. Frisoli, C. Avizzano: Exoskele-
tons as man-machine interface systems for tele-
operation and interaction in virtual environ-
ments, Adv. Telerobotics 31, 61–76 (2007)
70.125
K. Zhou, J.C. Doyle, K. Glover (Eds.): Robust and
Optimal Control (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River
1996)

Multimedia Contents Cognitive Hu
1907
Part G | 71
71. Cognitive Human–Robot Interaction
Bilge Mutlu, Nicholas Roy, Selma Šabanović
A key research challenge in robotics is to design
robotic systems with the cognitive capabilities
necessary to support human–robot interaction.
These systems will need to have appropriate rep-
resentations of the world; the task at hand; the
capabilities, expectations, and actions of their
human counterparts; and how their own actions
might affect the world, their task, and their human
partners. Cognitive human–robot interaction is
a research area that considers human(s), robot(s),
and their joint actions as a cognitive system and
seeks to create models, algorithms, and design
guidelines to enable the design of such systems.
Core research activities in this area include the
development of representations and actions that
allow robots to participate in joint activities with
people; a deeper understanding of human expec-
tations and cognitive responses to robot actions;
and, models of joint activity for human–robot
interaction. This chapter surveys these research
activities by drawing on research questions and
advances from a wide range of fields including
71.1
Human Models of Interaction ............... 1908
71.1.1
Mental Models of Robots............ 1908
71.1.2
Social Cognition ........................ 1911
71.2
Robot Models of Interaction ................. 1914
71.2.1
Developmental Models .............. 1915
71.2.2
Robot Spatial Cognition ............. 1915
71.2.3
Symbol Grounding..................... 1915
71.3
Models of Human–Robot Interaction .... 1916
71.3.1
Dialog-Based Models................. 1916
71.3.2
Simulation-Theoretic Models...... 1921
71.3.3
Intention- and Activity-Based
Models ..................................... 1922
71.3.4
Models for Action Planning ........ 1923
71.3.5
Cognitive Models
of Robot Control ........................ 1926
71.4
Conclusion and Further Reading........... 1927
Video-References......................................... 1927
References................................................... 1928
computer science, cognitive science, linguistics,
and robotics.
When people interact with each other, they draw on
mental models of themselves, of their interaction part-
ners, of the immediate context of the interaction, and
of their broader physical, social, and cultural context.
These models help them predict the actions of their
interaction partners and make decisions about their
own actions. To effectively interact with people, robots
need similar models that help them determine their
own actions and predict the actions of their users.
Cognitive human–robot interaction (HRI) is a research
area that seeks to improve interactions between robots
and their users by developing cognitive models for
robots and understanding human mental models of
robots.
A central tenet of cognitive HRI is that humans,
robots, and the context of their interaction form a com-
plex cognitive system situated in the real world. A key
research activity in the ﬁeld involves the development
of frameworks to represent this system [71.1–3]. This
activity is informed primarily by research in cognitive
science that develops frameworks to represent human
cognitive systems. These frameworks include physical
symbol systems [71.4], situated actions [71.5, 6], and
those that combine symbolic and situated perspectives,

Part G | 71.1
1908
Part G
Robots and Humans
Models of people
Human
Mental models of the robot,
social cognition, & interpersonal
differences in perceptions
Models of robots
Robot
Task
Models of the human,
the task context, & the broader
context of the interaction
Models of interaction
Models of communication and coordination
Task actions
Task actions
Fig. 71.1 A visual summary of the
research activities in cognitive HRI
such as activity theory [71.7] and distributed cogni-
tion [71.8]. While the discussion on what framework
best represents HRI as a cognitive system is ongoing,
research in cognitive HRI involves the development
of both symbolic and situated representations. More
speciﬁcally, research activities in this area include (also
illustrated in Fig. 71.1):
1. Human models of interaction: Building an under-
standing of people’s mental models of robots, how
people perceive robots and interpret their actions
and behaviors, and how these perceptions and inter-
pretations change across contexts and user groups.
2. Robot models of interaction: The development of
models that enable robots to map aspects of the
interaction into the physical world and develop
cognitive capabilities through interaction with the
social and physical environment.
3. Models of HRI: Creating models and mechanisms
that guide human–robot communication and collab-
oration, action planning, and model learning.
This chapter surveys existing efforts in these re-
search areas, drawing on research questions and ad-
vances from a wide range of ﬁelds including robotics,
cognitive science, and linguistics.
71.1 Human Models of Interaction
Robots are expected to increasingly enter everyday en-
vironments – outside of factories and laboratories –
including homes [71.9, 10], ofﬁces [71.11], and class-
rooms [71.12, 13]. In these contexts, robots will need
to coexist and collaborate with a wide variety of users,
such as children and the elderly, many of whom will not
be technically trained. Accordingly, there is a growing
research emphasis in cognitive HRI on identifying the
mental models people use to make sense of emerging
robotic technologies and investigating people’s reac-
tions to the appearance and behaviors of robots. This
research aims not only to improve the ease of use of
robots by designing them to ﬁt human mental models,
but also to gain new insights about human cognition and
behavior. With the latter goal in mind, researchers also
use robots to embody speciﬁc theories of human cogni-
tion that are then evaluated through HRI studies.
71.1.1 Mental Models of Robots
Research in human–computer interaction has shown
that people’s attitudes and behaviors toward digital
technologies often follow the social rules established in
human–human interaction [71.14]. It is reasonable to
expect that people will similarly interpret the interac-
tive behaviors of robots in social ways. Cognitive HRI
researchers continue to investigate the extent to and
conditions in which this maxim applies to HRI as they
use their understanding of human social cognition to de-
velop robotic platforms adapted to users’ expectations
and behaviors. In the process of evaluating such robotic
platforms, researchers explore people’s mental models
of robots and identify areas in which users’ expecta-
tions and understandings of robots may not be born out
by the robot’s appearance or behavior in ways detri-
mental to the HRI experience. Knowing which mental
models people are using to interpret robot behavior not
only helps roboticists to understand HRI more deeply,
but also helps them in designing appropriate behaviors
for the robot.
Models Ascribed to Robots
Extensive research by Turkle et al. [71.15, 16] exam-
ines how people, including children and older adults,
make sense of their novel interactions with social robots
such as Kismet, Cog, PARO, Furby, and My Real Baby.

Cognitive Human–Robot Interaction
71.1 Human Models of Interaction
1909
Part G | 71.1
These studies show that people apply a variety of mental
models relating to animacy, sociality, affect, and con-
sciousness to explain their experiences and emerging re-
lationships with robots. Some research participants ap-
proached robots in a scientiﬁc-exploratory mode, inter-
preting a robot’s actions in an emotionally detached and
mechanistic manner. Others took a relational-animistic
approach, investing in the interactions emotionally and
treating robots as if they were living beings, such as ba-
bies or pets. The ways in which participants described
the robots verbally did not always ﬁt with the way in
which they interacted with them – a person who says the
robot is only a mechanical thing may still act toward
the robot in a nurturing manner, such as soothing a cry-
ing My Real Baby [71.16, p.118]. This corresponds to
previous ﬁndings in human–computer interaction (HCI)
which suggest that people mindlessly apply social char-
acteristics to computers [71.17]. Field studies with the
seal-like robot PARO have shown that robots can also
act as evocative objects that spark reﬂections on pre-
vious relationships and events (e.g., with a grandchild,
spouse, or pet), which users then use to make sense of
their interactions with the robots [71.18, 19].
In addition to identifying the mental models peo-
ple use to interpret their experiences with robots, re-
searchers study the effects from deliberately incorpo-
rating speciﬁc social schemas into robot design. Anthro-
pomorphism, or the attribution of human characteristics
to nonhuman (e.g., animal or artifact) behavior, is an
interpretive schema that has been of particular interest
to HRI researchers. Some scholars, such as Nass and
Moon [71.17], critique anthropomorphic explanations
as false and misleading. Others, including Duffy [71.20]
and Kiesler et al. [71.21], suggest that the deliberate use
of anthropomorphism can beneﬁt social robot design
by taking advantage of people’s propensity to interpret
events and other agents socially to make robot behav-
iors more understandable to users. This interpretation
raises the question of which characteristics of the robot
or the interaction are instrumental in inciting people to
anthropomorphize robots and has inspired researchers
to study a variety of socio-cultural cues, behaviors, and
task contexts. Kiesler et al. [71.21] showed that people
anthropomorphize a physically embodied robot more
readily than an on-screen agent, and people behave in
a more engaged and socially appropriate manner while
interacting with the co-present robot. People also an-
thropomorphize robots they interact with directly more
than they do with robots in general, and with robots that
follow social conventions (e.g., polite robots) more than
those that do not [71.22]. The personal characteristics,
such as personality, of the human interaction partner
can also affect their mental models of robots. For exam-
ple, users with low emotional stability and extraversion
scores were found to prefer mechanical-looking robots
to human-like ones [71.23].
As might be expected, a robot’s human-like appear-
ance can have a positive effect on people’s propensity to
anthropomorphize [71.25]. Obversely, too high a level
of human-likeness may place the robot in the uncanny
valley [71.26]. The uncanny valley refers to a dip in the
hypothetical nonlinear graph describing the relation-
ship between a robot’s human-likeness and a human’s
emotional response to it, suggesting that a robot with
a very high degree of human-likeness coupled with
some remaining nonhuman qualities will make users
uncomfortable. This hypothesized effect essentially de-
scribes what happens when a person’s mental model of
the robot as human is not born out by its interactive ca-
pabilities. Various cognitive aspects of this hypothesis
have been studied, suggesting that the construct is mul-
tidimensional [71.27, 28] rather than two-dimensional
(2-D), as depicted by Mori [71.26]. Furthermore, re-
search suggests that the mismatch between different di-
mensions, rather than any quality alone, can cause a dis-
sonance that leads to people’s discomfort with robots.
MacDorman et al. [71.24] show that incongruencies
between a robot’s appearance and movement can dimin-
ish anthropomorphic attributions (Fig. 71.2). A similar
result was found by Saygin et al. [71.29], who used
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to show
that the human action perception system made distinc-
tive responses to the mismatch between the level of
human-likeness of a robot’s appearance and motion but
not to appearance or motion alone. Mismatches in the
human- or robot-like qualities of an on-screen robot’s
voice and appearance were also shown to heighten peo-
ple’s sense of the character’s eeriness – people found
Synthesized from
Investigation of the
appearance-behavior problem
Design of methods to
make natural motion
Design of methods to
evaluate interactions
Development of
human-looking robots
Uncanny valley
Human
Synergy ridge
Human
Similarity of appearance
Similarity of behavior
Overall evaluation
of the interaction
?
Evaluation in terms
of behavior
Evaluation in terms
of appearance
Fig. 71.2 An extended notion of the uncanny valley which includes
appearance and behavior as signiﬁcant variables (after [71.24])

Part G | 71.1
1910
Part G
Robots and Humans
both a robot with a human voice and a human with
a robot voice to be creepy [71.30].
Mental Models in Robot Design
Researchers may deliberately include speciﬁc anthro-
pomorphic schemas to promote user behaviors that aid
robots in performing their tasks. One common example
is the use of the baby schema – a soft round ap-
pearance, large eyes, and proto-verbal utterances – in
Kismet [71.31] (Fig. 71.4), Muu [71.32] (Fig. 71.3),
and Infanoid [71.33] to encourage people to anthropo-
morphize robots. This schema is also useful in that it
can incite people to behave in a nurturing manner to-
ward robots in the interest of scaffolding the robots’
learning in a way similar to infant–parent interactions.
A robot’s perceived gender can also have an effect on
people’s mental models of the robot’s knowledge of cer-
tain topics; for example, in one study a female robot
was expected to be more knowledgeable about dating
than a male robot [71.34]. While certain mental models
become operational as soon as a person starts interact-
ing with a robot (e.g., gender, age, human-likeness),
people can adapt their mental models of a robot’s ca-
pabilities when given additional information about the
robot’s personal characteristics, such as the robot’s
country of origin or the language it speaks [71.35].
Goetz et al. [71.36] showed that matching a robot’s per-
sonality to the task it is supposed to perform can have
a signiﬁcant effect on its efﬁcacy: people were more re-
sponsive to a robot that had a serious, rather than an
entertaining, demeanor when its job was to motivate
them to exercise. Also focusing on task models in HRI,
Lee et al. [71.37] showed how people use their exist-
ing utilitarian and relational models of service to set
expectations for their interactions with a service robot.
These models also affected the preferred ways in which
the robot should make up for any mistakes it makes
in service – people with a utilitarian mental model of
service preferred to receive compensation, while those
with a relational model responded well to an apology.
As interactive robots are developed and used all
over the world, researchers have also started explor-
ing how cultural models [71.38] affect people’s per-
ceptions of and interactions with robots. Social and
behavioral norms are culturally variable, so we can
expect users’ understanding and adoption of socially
interactive robots to differ accordingly. Cross-cultural
research in HRI largely supports this expectation. Ev-
ers et al. [71.39] showed that users from China and
the US respond differently to robots. Further research
by Wang et al. [71.40] suggests that speciﬁc cultural
models regarding communication norms, particularly
explicit and implicit modes of communicating informa-
tion and intent to interaction partners, affect people’s
Fig. 71.3 Muu’s big eyes and soft round body are designed
according to the baby schema. Using two robots that can
interact with each other instead of one suggests a relational
understanding of agency (courtesy of Šabanovi´c)
Fig. 71.4 Kismet’s big round eyes and infant-like vocaliza-
tions are another example of the baby schema (courtesy of
Šabanovi´c)
perceptions of a robot’s trustworthiness and its in-group
membership. Researchers have also shown that roboti-
cists themselves use cultural models unintentionally in
their work, including particular models of emotional
display [71.41], and cultural models reﬂecting histor-
ical, theological, and popular perceptions of robotic
technology [71.42]. Research on cultural models in HRI
not only points to the importance of reﬂexively in-
cluding such models in robot design, but also allows
researchers to do systematic research on culturally situ-
ated cognition using robots as stimuli.
Research on mental models applied to interactive
robots has not only shown that people use their ex-
isting mental models to make sense of these novel
artifacts, but also that we may need new ontological

Cognitive Human–Robot Interaction
71.1 Human Models of Interaction
1911
Part G | 71.1
categories to accommodate emerging mental models of
these entities [71.16, 43]. Kahn’s et al. [71.44] studies
of children’s moral interpretations of interactions with
an AIBO robot showed that their mental models of the
robots included rationalizations and behaviors related
to both inanimate and animate objects. Turkle [71.45]
suggests that interactive robots co-opting relational
feelings and responses normally reserved for animals
and humans call into question the authenticity of rela-
tionships. Further, Turkle [71.45] suggests that a more
sophisticated new notion of autonomous yet inanimate
artifacts has become necessary. Both researchers have
suggested that interactive robots might comprise a new
ontological category, and that we also need to be con-
scious of the ways in which interactions with these
artifacts affect our mental models of animate beings.
71.1.2 Social Cognition
The development of robots that can interact naturally
with humans calls for the detailed study of social activ-
ity and the cognitive models that underly such activities.
Scassellati [71.46] argues that robots can help us study
the limits of human social cognition because they are
not alive, yet they can behave in socially appropriate (or
inappropriate) and evocative ways. Robots that incor-
porate social cues such as gaze, proximity, and facial
expressions, push our Darwinian buttons [71.16, p. 8]
and effectively coerce us into interacting with them so-
cially. Studying which cues have these effects is an
opportunity to learn more about human social cognition
and improve robot design.
Researchers studying the social aspects of cogni-
tive HRI are identifying the minimal cues robots need
to evoke social responses from people, including those
related to robotic embodiment, gaze, proxemic cues,
and interaction rhythms. Current research is also fo-
cused on applying and evaluating different models of
cognition in the context of HRI. Robots can be un-
precedented experimental tools for the study of social
cognition. They can be used to provide stimuli in ex-
periments and ﬁeld studies, since their actions and
behaviors can be carefully controlled, ﬁnely tuned and
varied, and repeated exactly and indeﬁnitely, which is
often challenging even for well-trained human con-
federates [71.47, 48]. Furthermore, robots do not have
difﬁculty acting unnaturally (e.g., not reacting to other
person’s cues) or violating social norms (e.g., being
rude) when needed, a source of potential stress in hu-
man researchers [71.49].
Minimal and Human-Like Cues in HRI
One approach to studying social cognition has been to
try to isolate the minimal set of cues that evoke social
responses and perceptions from human interaction part-
ners. The creators of Muu followed a minimal design
strategy [71.32], using cartoons and children’s draw-
ings to develop a robot that can be communicatively
engaging to people without relying on overt human-
likeness. Kozima et al.’s [71.50] Keepon was designed
to include characteristics common to living beings, such
as lateral symmetry and two eyes, which are assumed
to be important for social interaction (Fig. 71.5). The
robot also performs fundamental social behaviors, such
as joint attention, eye contact, and emotional expres-
sion through bodily posture and movement and using
only four degrees of freedom (Fig. 71.6). These mini-
mal cues have been shown to be sufﬁcient for engaging
children in short-term interaction in the lab and long-
term interaction in more natural environments, such as
a classroom [71.50].
Studies with minimalist robots have also under-
scored the effect of social context in people’s in-
terpretations of robots. Field studies with Keepon in
an elementary school showed that children incorpo-
Fig. 71.5 Keepon is a simple robot used to investigate cues
such as joint attention, emotive expression, and rhythmic-
ity in HRI (courtesy of Šabanovi´c)
Fig. 71.6 Keepon uses four degrees of freedom to express
emotive and attentional cues (after [71.50])

Part G | 71.1
1912
Part G
Robots and Humans
Fig. 71.7 An android robot fabricated by Kokoro Ltd.
(courtesy of Šabanovi´c)
Android
Artificial intelligence
Pattern recognition
Control systems
Mechanical engineering
Materials science 
Social psychology
Cognitive psychology
Cognitive neuroscience
Human
being
Model
formation
Hypothesis
formation
Integration of science and engineering
Human-android interaction
Hypothesis
verification
Model
verfication
Analysis of
mechanisms
underlying human
interaction
Development
of humanlike
electromechanical
devices
Fig. 71.8 Androids can be used to investigate human cognition an-
alytically as well as synthetically (after [71.51])
rated the simple robot into a wide variety of inter-
action contexts (e.g., playing house with Keepon as
a baby or pet, or treating Keepon as another stu-
dent in the classroom) due not only to its interpretive
ﬂexibility, but to the richness of the social environ-
ment. This inspired children to engage with the robot
over long periods of time, sometimes years, whereas
they became bored after 1015 min when interacting
with Keepon in the laboratory. The above mentioned
Muu’s design was inspired by ecological models of
cognition [71.52, 53] suggesting that a robot is in-
herently incomplete as a communicative device – it
needs a human interaction partner to imbue its ac-
tions with meaning. Muu therefore relies on the context
and the presence of other interactive agents (including
people, other Muu, and objects such as blocks dis-
played in Fig. 71.3 for triadic interaction) to enable
people to make sense of its actions and relationally
ascribe social agency to the robot. The Social Trash-
can project [71.54] similarly explored how minimal
social cues, including contingent motion and approach-
ing people, can be used to display the robot’s intentions
to children and get their assistance in trash collection.
Yamaji et al. [71.54] also showed that robots moving
together as a group – relationally – were more success-
ful in attracting the children’s attention than that moved
individually.
An alternative approach to the study of social cog-
nition through HRI focuses on human-like realism in
appearance and behavior and is proposed by Ishig-
uro [71.47] and MacDorman and Ishiguro [71.48].
They claim that androids – robots that bear a close and
sometimes uncanny resemblance to humans (Fig. 71.7,
for example) – are unprecedented test beds for the study
of social cognition. Used as stand-ins for humans in this
android science, robots have a twofold function as ex-
perimental tools for evaluating hypotheses about human
perception, cognition, and interaction, and as a test-
ing ground for various cognitive models (Fig. 71.8).
Using an android platform, Ishiguro [71.55] showed
the importance of micro movements as a cue that in-
cites people to attribute human-likeness to a robot in
short (12 s) interactions. Another topic of continu-
ing investigation is the possibility of simulating the
personal presence of a remote actor in the local environ-
ment using an android platform [71.56, 57]. Shimada
et al. [71.58] showed that people evaluated an android
as more likable when it mimics them in a way similar
to the chameleon effect that occurs when two people in-
teract. MacDorman and Ishiguro [71.48] suggested that
such androids can be used in research relating to a num-
ber of current topics of interest in cognitive science,
including the mind-body problem, nature versus nur-
ture, rationality and emotion in human reasoning, and
the relationship between social interaction and internal
cognitive mechanisms.

Cognitive Human–Robot Interaction
71.1 Human Models of Interaction
1913
Part G | 71.1
Embodied Social Cues
Embodiment separates robots from other interactive
digital technologies and has been investigated through
studies comparing how people interpret and act toward
robots that are physically co-present with them and on-
screen robots or social agents. Wainer et al.’s [71.59]
comparison of people’s interactions with an embodied
robot and a simulated robot, and a co- and tele-present
found that people were more engaged with, behaved
more appropriately to, and anthropomorphized a co-
located robot more than a tele-present robot. People
interacting with an embodied robot have also shown
tendencies to issue more commands than those in-
teracting with a simulated robot [71.60]. The social
effect of embodiment in HRI was further conﬁrmed by
Bainbridge’s et al. [71.61] study showing that people
are more likely to comply with requests made by an
immediately present robot rather than requests made
by a remote robot communicating with them through
a television screen. These converging results strongly
suggest that a robot’s embodied presence has a signiﬁ-
cant cognitive effect on people’s social responses to the
robot. The embodied nature of robots also enables the
study and use of various other social cues, including
proxemic behaviors, gaze, and interaction rhythms, in
HRI. A more detailed review of embodied social cues
is provided by Mutlu [71.62].
Proxemic behaviors [71.63], the study of which is
enabled by the embodied nature of robots, not only
have a signiﬁcant effect on people’s perceptions of
and behaviors toward robots, but have also been used
as a measure of people’s perceptions of robots as so-
cial agents. Takayama and Pantofaru [71.64] found
that prior experience with pets and robots decreased
the distance at which people felt comfortable around
robots. Individual traits such as gender and personality
also affect people’s preferences regarding the distance
at which they are comfortable with a robot approach-
ing them [71.64, 65]. Proxemic behavior can be related
to other social cues in complex ways. For example,
Mumm’s and Mutlu’s [71.66] study showed that people
will compensate for the intense gaze in their direction
of a robot they do not like by moving away from the
robot (Fig. 71.9). While most studies of proxemic sys-
tems have been done in the laboratory, recent work is
also investigating more natural interactions between hu-
mans and robots in open environments [71.67].
Gaze is an important cue in human–human inter-
action and is also one of the most studied nonverbal
social cues in HRI (
VIDEO 128 ). People use many
such seemingly unintentional, unconscious, and auto-
matic nonverbal cues as clues regarding the mental
states and intentions of other actors, including robots.
Gaze has been shown to be useful for communicat-
Gaze follow
Gaze avoid
Fig. 71.9 In the study by Mumm and Mutlu [71.66], partic-
ipants maintain a greater distance with the unlikable robot
when the robot follows them with its gaze than when its
gaze avoids the participant, while their proxemic behavior
is not affected by a likable robot’s gaze (courtesy of Mutlu)
ing intent, modulating interaction, and even affecting
participants’ experience and memory of the interac-
tion. Researchers have shown that gaze can be used
to engage users [71.69, 70] and to assign them par-
ticular roles in and manage the interaction [71.71].
A robot’s gaze behavior can affect the human inter-
action partner’s gaze and speech, their comprehension
of the robot’s speech [71.72], and people’s memory
of a story narrated by the robot and perceptions of
the robotic storyteller [71.73]. Researchers studying the
temporal aspects of gaze in HRI found that the tim-
ing of gaze behavior provides cues to human intentions
while teaching the robot the names of objects, sug-
gesting that properly timed gaze behaviors can have
a positive effect on collaborative tasks between a hu-
man and a robot [71.68] (Fig. 71.10). Yu et al. [71.74]
have developed a data-driven approach to analyzing hu-
man gaze in the context of HRI, which can be used
Fig. 71.10 Yu’s et al. [71.68] HRI studies provide data for
developing models of the temporal aspects of interaction
(courtesy of Yu)

Part G | 71.2
1914
Part G
Robots and Humans
to develop detailed micro-behavioral gaze models that
can guide robot behaviors as well as be used to un-
derstand human intentions and behaviors in the course
of collaborative activities. A recent study by Admoni
et al. [71.75], contrary to the assumption that anthro-
pomorphic robots engage us automatically in much the
same way we are engaged by people, shows that robot
gaze is not necessarily treated by people in the same
automatic way that human gaze is treated; we do not,
therefore, necessarily perceive robots as social in an au-
tomatic and mindless way.
Interaction rhythms – nonverbal and largely uncon-
scious temporal coordination between partners in an
interaction – enable the exchange of information, antici-
pation of the interaction partner’s actions, and even pos-
itive evaluations of interaction among humans as a fun-
damental subscript of all human interaction [71.76–78].
The rhythmicity of interaction is therefore also a cru-
cial factor in HRI, both in terms of developing robots
that can perceive and respond to people’s rhythmicity,
and of understanding how people react to the temporal
aspects of robot behaviors. Michalowski et al. [71.79]
used a dancing robot to explore the rhythmic proper-
ties of social interaction and showed that children were
more likely to interact with a robot that was synchro-
nized to background music rather than one that was not,
and that the children’s own rhythmic behavior was in-
ﬂuenced by the robot’s rhythmicity. In further research,
Michalowski et al. [71.80] suggest that rhythmic inter-
action can be used as a form of play between children
and robots, and that following the robot’s lead in rhyth-
mic entrainment with music causes children to attend
more closely to musical rhythm. Avrunin et al. [71.81]
found that simple changes in a robot’s rhythmic danc-
ing behavior, such as variation of motions, ﬂaws in the
robot’s synchrony with music, and coordination of be-
havior changes with musical dynamics, increased peo-
ple’s perceptions of the robot’s lifelikeness. Hoffman
and Breazeal [71.82] used the temporal patterns of in-
teraction – its rhythms – to develop robotic systems that
can anticipate a human partner’s actions in collaborative
tasks, such as AUR, a robotic desk lamp, and Shimon,
a marimba playing robot [71.83] (
VIDEO 236 ). Along
with improving HRI, the use of robots in studying
the rhythmic properties of interaction provides a new
tool for cognitive science research on these subtle, ﬁne
grained, and unconscious social cues.
Cognitive Development in HRI
A further topic of focus in cognitive HRI has been
the study of social and cognitive development through
studies of typically developing and autistic children’s
interactions with robots. Multiple studies in educational
contexts have focused on understanding how children
ascribe social agency to robots [71.12, 13]. Kozima
et al. [71.50] found that children of different ages dis-
play varying modes of interaction with the robot, which
suggest different levels of comprehension of its on-
tological status – 0-year-old interacted with Keepon
as a moving thing, 1–2-year-old interacted with the
robot as an autonomous system, and children over 2
years of age treated the robot as a social agent. Deàk
et al. [71.84] studied the mechanism of joint atten-
tion in HRI to explore the importance of contingency
and ﬁnd out which perceptual features infants use to
achieve shared attention by modeling these in a robot.
Researchers also use robots to study social deﬁcit
disorders, particularly autism. Converging results on
research using robots to study social deﬁcit disorders
show that autistic children respond to robots in a social
manner that they do not display with people [71.85–87],
inspiring researchers to perform studies with children in
the context of HRI. One aim of such research is to try
to understand which aspects of a robot’s behavior en-
able autistic children to participate in social interaction,
which may clarify some of the reasons for their difﬁ-
culties when interacting with humans. HRI researchers
have also applied robots to various therapeutic scenar-
ios with autistic children in an effort to provide parents
and therapists with a tool to improve communication
and understand the children better [71.88, 89]. Studies
by Kozima et al. [71.90] in which the robot Keepon
interacts with children with autism suggest that such
minimally designed robots can be used to motivate
autistic children to share their mental states with others,
such as therapists or parents. This work poses a promis-
ing possibility for learning more about social deﬁcits
and development disorders such as autism, as well as
providing tools for diagnosis and therapy using robotic
technologies.
71.2 Robot Models of Interaction
Simon [71.91] suggests that the study of human be-
havior can be approached through synthesis as well as
analysis and designs computer simulations as a tech-
nique for understanding and predicting the behavior of
natural, social, and cognitive systems. In the spirit of Si-
mon’s synthetic approach to the study of human cogni-
tion, robotics researchers have been engineering robots
as tools for developing and testing a variety of cog-

Cognitive Human–Robot Interaction
71.2 Robot Models of Interaction
1915
Part G | 71.2
nitive, behavioral, and developmental models [71.47,
92, 93]. This approach assumes that cognitive models
are validated when the implementation of a particular
model on a robot produces behavior similar to that pro-
duced by humans in the same situation; if this does not
occur, it is a sign that there may be something wrong
with the model or the way it was implemented in the
robot [71.46]. Cognitive HRI research involves the de-
velopment of robotic platforms based on ﬁndings from
cognitive science and using such platforms to extend
knowledge about human cognitive processes.
71.2.1 Developmental Models
Robots are particularly appropriate for exploring the-
ories of embodied and social cognition, which em-
phasize the centrality of the agent’s interactions with
its environment and other agents in that environment
to cognitive functioning. In the process of synthesiz-
ing a robotic system, the researcher is drawn to focus
on the dependency of cognition on noncognitive pro-
cesses, including the social and physical environment
in which cognition takes place. Robots such as Cog
and Kismet [71.31] have been used to simulate and
validate different theories of cognition, perception, and
behavior. Cog was used to implement and test cog-
nitive models relating to reaching behavior, rhythmic
motor skills, visual search and attention, and social skill
acquisition (e.g., joint attention and theory of mind).
In the process they were able to validate, extend, and
show the limitations of cognitive, behavioral, and de-
velopmental theories. In later projects, researchers have
developed models inspired by human cognition and be-
havior such as social referencing [71.94], perception
and action loops [71.95], anticipatory actions in collab-
orative teamwork [71.96], and others.
Robotics researchers apply the idea that the de-
velopment of intelligence is embedded in social and
cultural environment to the construction of robotic
artifacts. For example, Breazeal [71.31] applied theo-
ries relating to infant social development, psychology,
ethology, and evolution to design the robot Kismet,
which used infant-like social cues to engage a hu-
man participant in interactions that would scaffold the
robot’s learning, as in the case of infant–parent in-
teractions. Researchers have also developed a variety
of robotic systems that exhibit cognitive traits such
as imitation [71.97, 98], joint attention [71.99–101],
and rhythmic synchrony [71.50, 102]. The Infanoid
project [71.33] also used a synthetic approach in which
development was understood through studying how the
robot learns. Situated and embodied models have been
applied to robot learning, particularly through imita-
tion. For example, Bakker and Kuniyoshi [71.103] pro-
pose imitation as an interaction and learning paradigm
in contrast to robot programming or robot learning.
Further, they argue that robot programming is too hard
and tedious to specify complex behaviors in sufﬁcient
detail and specify how they might be adapted to novel
situations.
71.2.2 Robot Spatial Cognition
Systems
dedicated
to
modeling
spatial
language
and interaction, including the theories by Jackend-
off [71.104], Landau and Jackendoff [71.105], and
Talmy [71.106], have been produced for many years.
Several previous works have been computational in-
stantiations of the ideas presented in these theories, in
particular the implementation and testing of spatial se-
mantics models. Regier [71.107] built a system that
assigns labels, such as through to a movie showing a ﬁg-
ure moving relative to a landmark object. Kelleher and
Costello [71.108] and Regier and Carlson [71.109] built
models for the meanings of static spatial prepositions,
such as in front of and above.
Many authors have proposed formalisms for en-
abling systems to reason about the semantics of natural
language use in the context of giving directions. For ex-
ample, Bugmann et al. [71.110] identiﬁed a set of 15
primitive procedures associated with clauses in a cor-
pus of spoken natural language directions. Levit and
Roy [71.111] designed navigational informational units
that break down instructions into components. MacMa-
hon et al. [71.112] represented a clause in a set of
directions as a compound action consisting of a simple
action (move, turn, verify, and declare-goal), plus a set
of pre- and post-conditions. Many of these previous rep-
resentations are expressive but difﬁcult to automatically
extract from text. Some authors avoid this problem by
using human annotations [71.111, 112] or by specifying
the robot’s behavior in a controlled language [71.113].
Matuszek et al. [71.114] created a system that follows
directions using a machine translation approach. Sim-
ilarly, Vogel and Jurafsky [71.115] used reinforcement
learning to automatically learn a model for understand-
ing route instructions.
71.2.3 Symbol Grounding
Mapping language from the human partner to aspects
of the external world – locations, objects, or actions
the robot should take – described by the language was
referred to as an instance of the symbol grounding prob-
lem [71.116]. There are three different ways people
have approached the symbol grounding problem, which
is more general than spatial cognition, in robotics. Start-
ing with Winograd [71.117], many have created symbol

Part G | 71.3
1916
Part G
Robots and Humans
systems that map between some language and the exter-
nal world by manually connecting each term onto a pre-
speciﬁed action space and set of environmental fea-
tures [71.110, 112, 113, 118–121]. This class of systems
takes advantage of the structure of linguistic interaction,
but the systems usually do not involve learning, have lit-
tle perceptual feedback, and have a ﬁxed action space.
A second approach involves learning the meaning of
words in the sensorimotor space (e.g., joint angles and
images) of the robot [71.122–124]. By treating human
interaction terms as sensory input, these systems must
learn directly from complex features extracted by per-
ceptual systems, resulting in a limited set of commands
that can be robustly understood. A third approach is to
use learning to convert from an interaction onto aspects
of the environment. These approaches may only use lin-
guistic features [71.125, 126], spatial features [71.107]
or linguistic, spatial, and semantic features [71.114,
115, 127–129]. These approaches learn the meaning of
spatial prepositions (e.g., above [71.107]), verbs of ma-
nipulation (e.g., push and shove [71.130]), and verbs of
motion (e.g., follow and meet [71.131]) and landmarks
(e.g., the doors [71.129]).
Recent progress in probabilistic relational models,
such as the generalized grounding graph (G3), has
addressed these issues by exploiting the structure of
spatial discourse, breaking down a natural language
command into component clauses and connecting each
word to a physical interpretation [71.131, 132]. The
grounding graph takes full advantage of the hierarchical
and compositional structure of natural language com-
mands and is able to ground landmarks, such as the
computers, by exploiting object co-occurrence statistics
between unknown noun phrases and known perceptual
features, spatial relations, such as past in the path of
an agent relative to an object, and motion verbs, such
as follow, meet, avoid, and go in the path of a single
agent or multiple agents. Once trained, the G3 model
can ground spatial discourse in a semantic map of the
environment; the map can be given a priori or created
on the ﬂy as the robot explores the environment. The
G3 model is dynamically instantiated as a hierarchical
probabilistic graphical model that connects each ele-
ment in a natural language command to an object, place,
path, or event in the environment. Its structure is cre-
ated according to the compositional and hierarchical
structure of the command, learning the mapping from
language onto a continuous robot plan. The G3 model
is trained on a corpus of natural language commands
paired with groundings, and learns meanings for words
and phrases in the corpus, including complex verbs,
such as put and take.
71.3 Models of Human–Robot Interaction
Robotic technologies that interact with people –
whether they afford closed-loop teleoperation or col-
laborate autonomously as peers – need to interpret,
make decisions about, and respond to their environ-
ment, particularly the physical world, the task that they
are expected to support, and the actions, goals, and
intentions of the other agents – including people. To
achieve these goals, robots need models that accurately
represent the physical and cognitive characteristics of
their environment. These models might outline such
characteristics as narrowly as control–action relation-
ships in the context of teleoperation or as comprehen-
sively as human–robot joint activity in the context of
peer-to-peer collaboration. Cognitive HRI considers the
Mediated
teleoperation
Supervisory
control
Collaborative
control
Peer-to-peer
collaboration
Teleoperation
Dynamic autonomy
Models of human–robot
joint activity
Direct control
Cognitive models
of robot control
Interaction
paradigms
Models
Fig. 71.11 Different paradigms of HRI (after [71.2])
robotic system to be a part of a distributed cognitive
system and therefore seeks primarily to develop cog-
nitively inspired models [71.2]. These models might
draw on knowledge about human cognition to improve
the usability of robotic system, mimic human deci-
sion making or behavior mechanisms, or represent the
complete human–robot cognitive system, offering cog-
nitive representations for different paradigms of HRI
(Fig. 71.11).
71.3.1 Dialog-Based Models
Research on human robot interaction across different
interaction paradigms from teleoperation [71.133, 134]

Cognitive Human–Robot Interaction
71.3 Models of Human–Robot Interaction
1917
Part G | 71.3
to peer-to-peer interaction [71.135] has highlighted
the need for establishing common ground [71.136]
for effective HRI. In the context of teleoperation,
Burke et al. [71.133] found that a lack of appropriate
shared representations among human team members
and the robot resulted in discrepancies in understanding
among team members and breakdowns in perceiving
and interpreting data provided by the robot. Stubbs
et al. [71.134] observed such lack of common ground
between operators and the robot across varying levels
of autonomy. In the context of peer-to-peer interac-
tion, Kiesler [71.135] argues that participants in an
encounter seek to minimize their collective effort to
reach mutual understanding and that the effort needed
to establish this understanding between a robot and
its users might determine the outcomes and success of
HRI. These examples have motivated a large body of
research in developing dialog-based models for estab-
lishing common ground in human–robot joint activity.
An example of the application of a dialog-based
model to a task domain that traditionally involved su-
pervisory control is Fong’s et al. [71.136] collaborative
control system. In this system, the human and the
robot collaborated as partners to perform tasks such
as navigation, collaborative exploration, and multirobot
teleoperation and achieve shared goals within these
tasks. The interaction between the robot and its hu-
man counterpart involved engaging in dialog to share
information and control at key points in the task. For in-
stance, when the robot encountered an obstacle, it asked
the user, Can I drive through <image>? along with an
image of the obstacle. In asking these questions, the
robot drew on speciﬁc attributes of the user, such as re-
sponse accuracy, expertise, availability, efﬁciency, and
preferences to determine whether or not it should direct
speciﬁc questions to its user.
A number of proposed models and systems take the
dialog-based interaction paradigm further to involve the
robot and its human counterpart jointly addressing the
domain task and dialog itself as joint action [71.137,
138]. In this peer-to-peer setup, either party selects
goals to address and strategies to be used to address
them and either party performs any part of the task.
The model proposed by Foster et al. [71.137] includes
a semantic interpretation module and a central decision-
making module which draw on resources, such as a his-
tory of the ongoing discourse between the robot and its
user, a world model, a domain planner, and a represen-
tation of the plan that is currently being executed, in
order to generate action and communication behaviors.
The model proposed by Li et al. [71.138] draws on
joint intention theory [71.139], considering the joint ac-
tivity to involve a common persistent goal of achieving
conversational grounding, and explicitly uses elements
of grounding in representing conversational contribu-
tions. These contributions involve a presentation and
an acceptance phase. For example, when an agent asks
a question and the other agent answers, the question
becomes the presentation and the answer becomes the
acceptance, forming a grounded exchange. The model
considers exchanges that involve a presentation without
an acceptance to be ungrounded. Discourse contribu-
tions take place at two layers: intention and conver-
sation. At the intention layer, the system plans com-
munication intentions based on analyses of previous
discourse and the robot’s control system. These inten-
tions can be self- or other-motivated for each agent.
The conversation layer involves the articulation of com-
munication intentions through verbal and nonverbal
behaviors. The two layers form an interaction unit (IU)
in the model. The model determines whether an IU is
presentation or acceptance and whether it is grounded
or ungrounded by assessing whether it satisﬁes joint in-
tentions of the agents. Figure 71.12 illustrates how an
other-motivated exchange is assessed by the model to
determine whether the exchange is a presentation or an
acceptance.
Models of Situated Human–Robot Dialog
The models and systems described above consider task-
based and communicative exchanges in HRI as a dialog
and extend models of spoken dialog to accommodate
requirements that are speciﬁc to HRI, such as task-
management, mixed-initiative dialog management, and
physically situated referencing. Research in cognitive
HRI has also explored the development of dialog sys-
tems that explicitly integrate these mechanisms into
dialog modeling and the development of speciﬁc mod-
els and mechanisms for these requirements.
An example of dialog systems that are speciﬁ-
cally developed for situated human–robot dialog is
the pattern-based mixed-initiative (PaMini) HRI frame-
work [71.140]. This framework extends spoken dialog
systems with two key components: a task-state protocol
and interaction patterns. The task-state protocol com-
ponent explicitly deﬁnes tasks that either the robot’s
perceptual or control subsystems can perform. A task
is deﬁned as an execution state and preconditions for
execution. The task-state protocol speciﬁes task states
and transitions among them to support coordination.
The interaction patterns component provides high-level
representations of recurring dialog structures such as
a clariﬁcation. A comparison of most commonly used
spoken dialog systems and the PaMini framework in the
context of a human–robot situated learning scenario is
provided by Peltason and Wrede [71.141].
Another example is the Robot Behavior Toolkit de-
veloped by Huang and Mutlu [71.3], which supports

Part G | 71.3
1918
Part G
Robots and Humans
Study verbal info on the interlocutor’s CL
Complete IU as acceptance
Ground exchange n
Pop exchange n
Push exchange n +1
Study non-verbal info on the CL
Create IU as presentation
Create one’s own IL
(access robot control system)
Create exchange n +1 with
support or correct relation
Intention recognized?
Intention conforms
the joint goal?
Intention recognized?
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Push exchange n with the interlocutor’s IU as presentation
Fig. 71.12 The model evaluates an
exchange provided by the interaction
partner to determine its presentation
or acceptance status and determine an
appropriate action (after [71.138])
situated human–robot dialog by integrating nonverbal
cues for task-based referential communication and con-
versation into the robot’s speech. This system uses
a repository of speciﬁcations of situated communica-
tion cues based on models of human interactions and
an activity model (described in more detail below) that
speciﬁes the joint human–robot activity including the
agents, task context, shared task goals, and expected
  
Channel: Gaze
Channel: Speech
Linguistic Reference
Gaze toward object
Gaze toward listener
The green object with one peg
Green object with one peg
Gaze onset
Gaze onset
Gaze onset
Red box
Listener
Could you help me put the green object with one peg into the red box, please?
The red box
Utterance
Linguistic reference onset
Linguistic reference onset
<behaviors>
 
<channel type=`gaze`>
 
 <action endTime=`214.5` startTime=`0` target=`unspecified`/>
 
 <action endTime=`1160` startTime=`214.5` target=`the green
 
  object with one peg`/>
 
 <actoin endTime=`2735.4` startTime=`1160` target=`unspecified`/>
 
 <action endTime=`3597` startTime=`2735.4` target=`the red box`/>
 
 <action endTime=`4308` startTime=`3597` target=`unspecified`/>
 
 <action endTime=`4963` startTime=`4308` target=`listener`/>
 
</channel>
 
<channel type=`speech`>
 
 Could you help me put the green object with one peg into the red 
 
 box, please?
 
</channel>
</behaviors>
Fig. 71.13 The robot behavior toolkit uses speciﬁcations from
a repository and a model of the joint activity to integrate effective
multimodal task-related dialog behaviors (after [71.3])
task outcomes to integrate the situated communication
cues that are expected to support these outcomes into
the robot’s speech. Figure 71.13 displays an example
behavior generated by the Toolkit in a collaborative ma-
nipulation task. An evaluation of their system showed
that interactions in which the robot displayed these sit-
uated communication cues as directed by the system
more effectively supported desired task outcomes com-
pared with baseline interactions (
VIDEO 128 ).
Research in cognitive HRI has also explored the de-
velopment of models for speciﬁc communication and
coordination mechanisms in situated interaction, such
as perspective-taking, spatial referencing, reference res-
olution, and joint attention (
VIDEO 129 ).
Perspective-Taking. A core process in situated in-
teraction
toward
establishing
common ground
is
perspective-taking [71.142]. Research in social cogni-
tion has shown that the ability to take another’s perspec-
tive and share common ground signiﬁcantly improves
collaborative performance in human teams [71.143].
Research in HRI has also explored how robots might
employ this core mechanism to establish common
ground with their users in situated interactions and
has proposed several models that supported perspective
taking.
Trafton et al. [71.144] studied interactions among
astronauts in a naturalistic collaborative assembly task
and found that a quarter of the utterances in the data
involved taking the perspective of another and that
participants frequently switched among egocentric, ex-
ocentric, addressee-centered, and object-centered per-
spectives. Based on their results, they developed a cog-

Cognitive Human–Robot Interaction
71.3 Models of Human–Robot Interaction
1919
Part G | 71.3
nitive model of perspective taking that allowed the
robot to maintain multiple perspectives – or alternative
worlds – at once and explore propositions about these
worlds, such as the perspective of an interaction partner.
This exploration allowed the robot to make inferences
about the perspective of its partner by simulating this
alternative world and act on the world from this per-
spective. The following sequences of actions illustrate
the simulations that the robot might carry out based
on the command go to the cone (adapted from Trafton
et al. [71.2]). Underlined text describes components of
the system implementation:
Simulate current real world (i. e., perceive it)
Perception specialist notices the existence and
location of person, cone1, cone2, and obstacle
Language specialist hears Coyote, go to the
cone and infers that there is an object, C, that
is a cone and that the person wants it to go to
Identity hypothesis specialist infers that C can
be identical to cone1 or cone2
C D cone1; C D cone2
Identity constraint specialist notices a contra-
diction
This contradiction triggers the counterfactual
simulation strategy
Simulate the world where C D cone1
Because in this world person has referred to
cone1, the perspective-simulation strategy is
triggered
Simulate the world where C D cone1 and
robot D person
The spatial reasoning perspective indicates
that cone1 does not exist in this world be-
cause person cannot see it
Thus, C ¤ cone1
Simulate the world where C D cone2
Because in this world person has referred to
cone2, the perspective-simulation strategy is
triggered
Simulate the world where C D cone2 and
Robot D Person
Because cone2 is visible in this world, there
is no contradiction in this world
Infer that C D cone2 (i. e., the cone refers to
cone2)
Following a counterfactual simulation strategy pro-
vides the robot with the ability to make inferences about
situated actions across alternative scenarios with alter-
native physical (e.g., whether or not an object is present)
and cognitive (e.g., whether or not the object is visible
to the human counterpart) characteristics and determine
appropriate next actions, such as carrying out a request
or seeking clariﬁcation from its human counterpart.
Figure 71.14 illustrates four alternative scenarios with
different physical and cognitive properties explored by
Trafton et al. [71.144]. In each scenario, the robot as-
sesses these properties to determine its next actions, as
illustrated below.
Algorithm 71.1
function: Scenario(nCones D 1 ) conea)
if conea D visiblerobot ^ conea D visiblehuman then
Go to conea
end if
function: Scenario(nCones D 2 ) conea; coneb)
if conea; coneb D visiblerobot ^ conea D visiblehuman
then
Go to conea
end if
function: (Scenario(nCones D 1 ) conea)
if conea; coneb ¤ visiblerobot ^ conea D visiblehuman
then
Check hidden location
end if
function: Scenario(nCones D 2 ) conea; coneb)
if conea; coneb D visiblerobot ^ conea;
coneb D visiblehuman
then
Request clariﬁcation
end if
Berlin et al. [71.145] developed a similar model that
enabled the robot to understand its environment from
the perspective of an interaction partner by maintaining
H
R
a)
H
R
b)
H
R
c)
H
R
d)
Fig.71.14a–d The alternative scenarios considered by the
system in which the robot and its human counterpart
are in a room with several objects and possible occlu-
sions from the perspectives of the robot or the human
(after [71.144])

Part G | 71.3
1920
Part G
Robots and Humans
separate and potentially different sets of beliefs in its
belief system for itself and for its interaction partner. To
construct a model of the beliefs of its interaction part-
ner, the robot employed the same mechanisms it used
to model its own beliefs but transformed the data it per-
ceived from the world to match the reference frame of
its interaction partner. These two sets of beliefs were
maintained separately so that the robot can compare dif-
ferences between its beliefs and its interaction partner’s
beliefs and plan actions in order to establish common
ground or identify discrepancies in its learning in the
context of task learning. Figure 71.15 illustrates paral-
lel beliefs maintained by the robot in a button-pressing
task.
Spatial Referencing. Moratz et al. [71.146] proposed
a cognitive model of spatial reference that represented
different kinds of spatial reference systems and allowed
the robot to interpret instructions from an interaction
partner. This model mapped the locations of all objects
as projections on a plan view, considering the robot’s
point of view as origin and the location of the object
that will be used as relatum to determine the reference
axis. This axis enabled the robot to interpret directions
such as left of, right of, in front of, and to the back in
relation to the relatum, providing the robot the ability
to interpret natural language references to objects in the
environment.
Reference Resolution. Ros et al. [71.147] extended
these approaches to develop a model that enabled the
robot to clarify references made by its interaction part-
ner. This model employed several mechanisms includ-
ing visual perspective taking, spatial perspective taking,
symbolic location descriptors, and feature descriptors
to determine whether it needed any clariﬁcation on
its interaction partner’s references. The visual perspec-
tive taking mechanism allowed the robot to determine
whether or not objects in the environment were in its in-
teraction partner’s focus of attention (FOA), in its part-
Human arrives
Leo moves button
behind occlusion
Button
turned off
Human removes
occlusion
Leo’s belief about button:
Position:
front
side
State:
State:
on
off
Leo’s model of human’s belief about button:
Button visible to human
Position:
front
side
on
off
Time
Fig. 71.15 In the sys-
tem proposed by Berlin
et al. [71.145], the robot
maintains a parallel beliefs
for itself and for its human
counterpart for the task and
updates its beliefs based on
sensory input and those of
the user based on the user’s
awareness (after [71.145])
ner’s ﬁeld of view (FOV), or out of its partner’s ﬁeld of
view (OOF). The spatial perspective taking mechanism
maintained egocentric and addressee-centered perspec-
tives to determine ambiguities in object references. The
system also included symbolic location descriptions
such as is in, is on, and is next to to determine spatial
relationships between objects and the environment. Fi-
nally, the robot used feature descriptors such as color
and shape to identify ambiguities in the references of
its interaction partner. Once the robot determined the
need clariﬁcation in its partner’s references, it used an
ontology-based clariﬁcation algorithm to ask questions
to its partner about the object of reference.
Joint Attention. Another key mechanism in situated
interaction is joint attention – the ability to use non-
verbal cues, such as gaze and pointing, to establish
common ground on what referents in the environment
are under consideration in the dialogue [71.149]. Scas-
sellati [71.99] proposed a task-based decomposition of
joint attention skills, including mutual gaze, gaze fol-
lowing, imperative pointing, and declarative pointing,
and implemented these skills in a robot as stages for es-
tablishing joint attention with a human counterpart. The
mutual gaze skill provided the robot with the ability to
recognize and maintain eye contact with its interaction
partner. At the gaze following stage, the robot followed
the eyes of its partner to direct its attention to the object
of its partner’s attention. Imperative pointing involved
pointing at an object that is out of reach in order to re-
quest the object. Finally, the declarative pointing stage
involved extending an arm and index ﬁnger to draw
attention to an object that is out of reach without neces-
sarily requesting the object.
Connection Events. Rich et al. [71.150] argued that
mechanisms such as joint attention serve as connec-
tion events in situated dialog and establish and maintain
engagement among interaction partners. From data on
human interactions, they identiﬁed a set of key connec-

Cognitive Human–Robot Interaction
71.3 Models of Human–Robot Interaction
1921
Part G | 71.3
Reference
policy
Responce
policy
*
*
Maintenance
policy
BML
realizer
4
Turn
policy
Turn
fragments
(EBML)
Behavior
blocks
(BML)
Symbolic
vision
Human-initiated CE’s
Robot-initiated CE’s
Engagement statistics
AP
MFG
BC
DG
Speech &
gestures
Turn
fragments
(EBML)
Gaze/point
inhibit
Fig. 71.16 The policy com-
ponents, the BML realizer,
and the generated connec-
tion events for the robot in
the engagement generator
module (after [71.148])
tion events, including mutual gaze, directed gaze, adja-
cency pairs, and backchannels, and developed a system
that recognized these events in human counterparts and
generated them for a robot (see Rich et al. [71.150] for
details on the recognizer and Holroyd et al. [71.148] for
details on generation). The recognizer module included
dedicated recognizers for each type of connection event
and an estimator for engagement levels for the robot’s
human counterpart, while the generation module in-
cluded four policy components and a behavior mark-up
language (BML) realizer for generating robot behaviors
toward establishing and maintaining engagement. The
components of this engagement generator are illustrated
in Fig. 71.16.
71.3.2 Simulation-Theoretic Models
Research in cognitive HRI has also been inspired by
neurocognitive mechanisms in developing models of
human–robot joint activity, building particularly on
simulation theory, which suggests that people (and
primates) represent other people’s mental states by
adopting their perspective, speciﬁcally by tracking or
matching their states with resonant states of their
own [71.151]. This simulation-theoretic approach led
to several models of robot behavior and human–robot
joint action that involve the robot imitating or simu-
lating the behaviors of its interaction partner in order
to learn from or make inferences about its partner’s
goals.
As an example of this approach, Bicho et al.[71.152]
proposed a model for action preparation and decision-
making in cooperative human–robot tasks that is in-
spired by the ﬁnding that action observation elicits an
automatic activation of motor representations associ-
ated with the execution of the observed action. This
motor-resonance mechanism allows people to internally
simulate action consequences using their own motor
repertoire and predict the consequences of action of oth-
ers. In the proposed model, a perception–action linkage
enables efﬁcient coordination of actions and decisions
between the agents in a human–robot joint action task.
The model integrates a mapping between observed ac-
tions and complementary actions in memory, while
taking into account the inferred goals of the actions of
the interaction partner, contextual cues, and shared task
knowledge.
Building on simulation theory, Gray et al. [71.153]
proposed a similar system in which the robot parses
user actions and matches the user’s movements to
movements in its own repertoire toward making infer-
ences about the user’s goals and perform a task-level
simulation (Fig. 71.17). This simulation allows the
robot to determine the preconditions of the schemas
that represent the task and track its human partner’s
progress over the course of the task in order to antic-
ipate its partner’s needs and offer relevant help accord-
ingly. The simulation also provided the robot with the
ability to make inferences on the beliefs of its part-
ner and simulate its partner’s perspective in a fashion
similar to the perspective-taking mechanisms proposed
by Trafton et al. [71.144] and Berlin et al. [71.145]
(
VIDEO 130 ).
Aspects of the simulation-theoretic approach ex-
plicitly taken in these examples can also be seen in other
control architectures developed for HRI. Nicolescu and
Mataric [71.154] proposed a control architecture that
uniﬁes perception and action to achieve action-based
Human joint
positions detector
Motor
babble
action
Mapping process
(neural nets or
RBFs)
Human position
mapped to robot
skeleton
Motion
detector
Snapshot recorder
Labeled
training data
Contingency
detector
Training
phase
Direct
mapping
Fig. 71.17 The mapping of perceived human actions onto the
robot’s body in order to make comparisons and task-level inferences
(after [71.153])

Part G | 71.3
1922
Part G
Robots and Humans
interaction. In this architecture, behaviors are built from
perceptual and active components. Perceptual compo-
nents allow the robot to link its observations and actions
and thus to learn to perform a task from the experiences
it gains from its interactions with people. Active com-
ponents enable task-based behaviors that also serve as
implicit communication rather than explicit behaviors
such as speech and gestures. Behavior representation
in the architecture captures two types of behaviors:
abstract and primitive. Abstract behaviors are explicit
speciﬁcations of the behaviors’ activation conditions
(preconditions), goals in the form of abstracted en-
vironmental states, and effects (postconditions), while
primitive behaviors are those that the robot performs
to achieve these effects. By linking perceptions and ac-
tions, the robot learns what actions of its own might
achieve the same observed effects.
71.3.3 Intention- and Activity-Based
Models
The models and systems described above are concerned
primarily with establishing and maintaining common
ground and coordinating actions in task-based interac-
tions using dialog- and simulation-theoretic approaches
with limited consideration of the broader context of
these interactions as complex activities involving mul-
tiple agents with common goals and commitments to
these goals. A number of models and systems sought
to address this limitation, building on models and the-
ories of human joint activity such as joint intention
theory [71.139] and activity theory [71.7].
Building
on
joint
intention
theory,
Breazeal
et al. [71.155] proposed a model of human–robot col-
laboration that involved dynamically meshing subplans
into joint activity toward achieving common goals of
the human–robot team. In this model, task and goal
representations have a goal-centric view, employing
an action-tuple data structure that captures precondi-
tions, executables, until-conditions, and goals. Tasks
are represented in a hierarchical structure of actions and
recursively deﬁned subtasks. Goals are also represented
hierarchically as overall intent rather than a chain of
low-level goals. The implemented joint intention model
dynamically assigns tasks to members of the human–
robot team. These intentions are derived based on the
robot’s actions and abilities, the actions of the human
partner, the robot’s understanding of the common goal
of the team, and its assessment of the current task state.
At every stage of the interaction, the robot negotiates
who should complete the task. Action at these points
might look like turn-taking or simultaneous action (the
robot and the human working on different parts of the
task).
Alami et al. [71.156, 157] similarly built on joint
intention theory to propose a human–robot decision
framework in which team members are committed to
a joint persistent goal and follow cooperation schemes
to contribute toward achieving this goal. The framework
involves a goal planner called the agenda for the robot
and human collaborators to pursue, a proxy representa-
tion of the human in the robot called Interaction Agents
(IAA), task delegates that monitor and control the task
commitment of the human or the robot for each active,
inactive, or suspended goal, and a robot supervision ker-
nel that monitors and controls robot activities. For each
new active goal, the Robot Supervision Kernel creates
a Task Delegate, selects or elaborates a plan, and allo-
cates the roles of each team member.
Fong et al. [71.1] proposed a similar system called
the HRI operating system (HRI/OS) to support human–
robot teamwork. The system involves a task manager,
resource manager, interaction manager, spatial reason-
ing agent, context manager, human and robot agents,
and an open agent architecture (OAA) facilitator. The
task manager decomposes the overall goal of the sys-
tem into high-level tasks and assigns to humans or
robots for execution. The manager relies on the agents
to complete the low-level steps of the tasks. It com-
municates with the Resource Manager to ﬁnd an agent
capable of performing the work. Resource manager pro-
cesses all agent requests, prioritizing the list of agents
to be consulted when a task needs to be performed.
Interaction manager coordinates dialog-based commu-
nication between agents. Context manager keeps track
of everything that occurs while the system is running
including task status and execution, agent activities,
agent dialogue, etc. Spatial reasoning agent (SRA) is
used to resolve spatial ambiguities in human–robot di-
alog through mechanisms such as perspective taking
and frames of reference, resolving ambiguities among
as ego-, addressee-, object-, and exo-centric references.
To do this, SRA transforms the spatial dialog into a ge-
ometric reference and perform a mental simulation of
the interaction to explore how ambiguities might be
resolved through multiple references. Finally, the OS
includes a software representation of the human – a hu-
man proxy agent that represents user capabilities and
accepts task assignments in the way that robot agents
do. These proxies represent task capabilities, includ-
ing domains of expertise, and provide health monitoring
feedback.
Huang and Mutlu [71.3] built on an alternative
model of human activity – activity theory [71.7] – to
develop a model of human–robot joint activity. Their
model builds on ﬁve key constructs from activity the-
ory including consciousness, object-orientedness, hi-
erarchical structure, internationalization and external-

Cognitive Human–Robot Interaction
71.3 Models of Human–Robot Interaction
1923
Part G | 71.3
ization, and mediation. The consciousness construct
pertains to attention, intention, memory, reasoning, and
speech and includes speciﬁc representations for atten-
tion and intention. The object-orientedness construct
describes material artifacts, plans of action, or common
ideas to be shared by the members of the joint activ-
ity. Following the hierarchical structure construct, the
model organizes joint activity into three layers: activity,
action, and operation. An activity consists of a series
of actions that share the same goal, and each action
has a deﬁned goal and a chain of operations that are
regular routines performed under a set of conditions.
Internalization and externalization describes cognitive
processes; internalization involves transforming exter-
nal actions or perceptions into mental processes, while
externalization is the process of manifesting mental
processes in external actions. Finally, the mediation
construct deﬁnes several external and internal tools,
such as physical artifacts that might be used in an ac-
tivity and cultural knowledge or social experience that
an individual might have acquired, as mediators of
human–robot joint activity. These constructs and their
corresponding system elements allow the construction
of and planning for joint human–robot activities. For
each activity, a motive governs actions. Each action,
by achieving its corresponding goal, helps to fulﬁll the
motive of the activity. Each action may have several op-
erations that are constrained by a set of conditions and
that can be executed only when all the conditions are
met. Actions have predeﬁned outcomes, which spec-
ify the orientation of an action. Figure 71.18 shows the
XML (extensible markup language) representation of
a model of a collaborative manipulation task.
71.3.4 Models for Action Planning
The models described above primarily enable commu-
nication and coordination between humans and robots
toward planning and carrying out joint tasks. In order to
successfully contribute to these tasks, robots also need
models for planning their actions in a dynamic physical
and cognitive environment. Research in cognitive HRI
seeks to develop models for action planning that help
robots estimate the actions that they have to take in or-
der to achieve task goals and learn the parameters of
the tasks space. The paragraphs below review research
in two common approaches to building such models:
decision-theoretic models and model learning.
Decision-Theoretic Models
One of the simplest approaches to control and decision-
making in HRI is to deﬁne the interaction as a decision-
theoretic planning problem, such as a Markov decision
process (MDP). Formally, an MDP consists of the n-
tuple fS, A, T, R, g. The set S is a set of states, which
in the HRI setting typically correspond to the combina-
tion of state variables, such as the robot state and the
desired outcome of the interaction. For example, if the
interaction model allows a human partner to instruct the
robot to move to different locations in the environment,
one state variable may correspond to different current
locations of the robot and another state variable may
correspond to the goal states intended by the human
partner. The full state space S is given by the combina-
tion of possible values for the different state variables.
The action set A represents actions that the robot
may take. The actions may include asking a question,
performing some physical movement, or even doing
nothing. Each action has a cost R depending on the
current state, which rewards the robot for performing
useful actions, and penalizes the robot for taking ac-
tions that either make no immediate progress toward the
speciﬁed goal (typically a small penalty) or completely
unhelpful (a large penalty).
Lastly, the transition function T provides a notion
of the dynamics of the environment in terms of how the
state changes as robot takes actions, and especially how
a human partner’s state variables may change as the
robot takes actions. The transition function T.s0js; a/
places a probability distribution over the states to which
the user in state s may transit if the robot takes action a.
The MDP formulation is very appealing, because there
exist efﬁcient techniques for solving for interaction
policies. Once the policy is computed, the interaction
can be managed simply by querying the policy for the
<Activity id=`1`>
 
<Motive>clear(table)</Motive>
 
<Description>Clear objects on table</Description>
 
<Participants>Self, User1</Participants>
 
<Action id=`1`>
 
 <Outcome>Task</Outcome>
 
 <Goal>disappear(object)</Goal>
 
 <Description>
 
  
Instruct User1 to categorize object 
 
 </Description>
 
 <Operation type=`utterance`>
 
 <Condition>present(User1)</Condition>
 
 <Condition>
 
  
known(the blue object with two pegs)
 
  
</Condition>
 
  
<Condition> known(the blue box)</Condition
 
  
<Info turn=`end`>
 
  
 Could you help me put the blue object with
 
  
 two pegs into the blue box, please?
 
  
</Info>
 
 </Operation>
 
 ...
Fig. 71.18 The XML representation of the activity-theory-
based model for a collaborative manipulation task (af-
ter [71.3])

Part G | 71.3
1924
Part G
Robots and Humans
appropriate action in response to the current state of the
robot and the human partner.
A limitation of the MDP approach is that some of
the state variables may not be directly observable, in
particular the state variables corresponding to human
intentional states, such as intended goal locations of
the robot. The values of the state variables must be
inferred from observations, such as speech acts per-
formed by the human partner, which are inherently
noisy. For example, the system may hear the words cof-
fee machine when the user asks the robot to go to copy
machine. While speech recognition errors may be mit-
igated to some extent by asking the user to use only
acoustically distinct keywords when speaking to the
system, a system that does not model the likelihood of
recognition errors and act accordingly will be brittle;
a robust system must be able to infer user intent under
uncertainty.
The observations are rarely sufﬁcient to uniquely
determine the current state, but more commonly are
used to compute a belief, or probability distribution over
dialog states. If the agent takes some action a and hears
observation o from an initial belief b, it can easily up-
date its belief using Bayes rule
ba;o.s/ D
˝.ojs0; a/ P
s2S T.s0js; a/b.s/
P
2S ˝.oj; a/ P
s2S T.js; a/b.s/ :
(71.1)
This probability distribution will evolve as the di-
alog manager asks clariﬁcation questions and receives
responses. In Fig. 71.19, we show a cartoon of a simple
dialog model. Initially, we model the user as being in
a start state. Then, at some point in time, the user speaks
to the robot to indicate that he or she wants it to perform
a task. We denote this step by the set of vertical stack of
nodes in the center of the model. Each node represents
a different task. The dialog manager must now inter-
act with the user to determine what is wanted. Once the
task is successfully completed, the user transitions to
the right-most end node, in which he or she again does
not desire anything from the robot. We note that it can
be easily augmented to handle more complex scenarios.
For example, by including the time of day as part of the
state, we can model the fact that the user may usually
wish to go to certain locations in the morning and other
locations in the afternoon.
Intuitively, we can see how the belief can be used
to select an appropriate action. For example, if the di-
alog manager believes that the user may wish to go to
either the coffee machine or the copy machine (but not
the printer), then it may ask the user for clariﬁcation
before commanding the wheelchair to one of the loca-
tions. More formally, we call the mapping from beliefs
to actions a policy. We represent this mapping using the
concept of a value function V.b/. The value of a belief
is deﬁned to be the expected long-term reward the dia-
log manager will receive if it starts a user interaction
in belief b. The optimal value function is piecewise-
linear and convex, so we represent V with the vectors
Vi; V.b/ D maxi Vi  b. The optimal value function sat-
isﬁes the Bellman equation [71.158]
V.b/ D max
a2A Q.b; a/ ;
Q.b;a/ D R.b; a/ C 
X
o2O
˝.ojb;a/V.bo
a/ ;
(71.2)
where Q.b;a/ represents the expected reward for start-
ing in belief b, performing action a, and then acting
optimally. The belief bo
a is b after a Bayesian update of b
using (71.1), and ˝.ojb;a/, the probability of seeing o
after performing a in belief b (P
s2S ˝.ojs;a/b.s/).
There are also non-Bayesian approaches for acting
in uncertain environments. Many interaction systems
provide the dialog manager with a set of rules to follow
given particular outputs from a speech recognition sys-
tem. The drawback to rule-based systems is that they
often have difﬁculty managing the many uncertainties
that stem from noisy speech recognition or linguis-
tic ambiguities. The ability to manage the trade-off
between gathering additional information and servic-
ing a user’s request have made partially observable
Markov decision process (POMDP) planners partic-
ularly useful in dialog management; applications in-
clude a Nursebot robot, designed to interact with the
elderly in nursing homes [71.159], a vision-based sys-
tem that aids Alzheimer’s patients with basic tasks
such as hand-washing [71.160], an automated tele-
Go to
kitchen
Go to
elevator
...
Start
Done
Go to
office
Reset
Fig. 71.19 A toy example of a dialog POMDP. The nodes
in the graph are different states of the dialog (i. e., user re-
quests). Solid lines indicate likely transitions; we assume
that the user is unlikely to change their request before their
original request is fulﬁlled. The system automatically re-
sets once we reach the end state

Cognitive Human–Robot Interaction
71.3 Models of Human–Robot Interaction
1925
Part G | 71.3
phone operator [71.161], and a tourist information
kiosk [71.162].
Beyond the initial formulations of cognitive HRI as
a decision-theoretic problem, there have been a number
of algorithmic improvements that increase the domains
of applicability of this approach. For example, the con-
ventional MDP and POMDP algorithms have typically
assumed that each observation and action takes approx-
imately the same amount of time, which can lead to an
implicit bias toward longer actions. Representing time
explicitly leads to computational intractability, but Broz
et al. [71.163] demonstrated that the similar states that
vary only by the time-index can be aggregated, lead-
ing to reduced-order models that can be solved very
efﬁciently. Similarly, Doshi and Roy [71.164] showed
that symmetries in human intentional states could be
exploited to dramatically reduce the size of the plan-
ning problem, also leading to very efﬁcient solutions.
Most recently, again in the non-Bayesian line, Wilcox
et al. have shown that the temporal dynamics of task-
based HRI can be formulated as a scheduling prob-
lem [71.165].
Model Learning
The behavior of the dialog manager derived from solv-
ing (71.2) depends critically on accurate choices of the
transition probabilities, observation probabilities, and
the reward. For example, the observation parameters
affect how the system associates particular keywords
with particular requests. Similarly, the reward function
affects how aggressive the dialog manager will be in
assuming that it understands a user’s request, given lim-
ited and noisy information. An incorrect speciﬁcation
of the dialog model may lead to behavior that is either
overly optimistic or conservative, depending on how ac-
curately the model captures the user’s expectations on
the interaction.
A common approach in other domains is to collect
data using a ﬁxed policy, typically referred to as system
identiﬁcation. In HRI, this is easiest to perform using
so-called Wizard of Oz studies where a human experi-
menter executes the policy unseen to generate data or
evaluate a policy. Prommer et al. [71.166] showed that
Wizard-of-Oz studies could be used effectively not only
to learn model parameters for an MDP dialog model,
but also to learn an effective policy.
At the same time, learning all the parameters re-
quired to specify a rich dialog model can require
a prohibitively large amount of data. While the model
parameters may be difﬁcult to specify exactly, either by
hand or from data, we can often provide the dialog man-
ager with an initial estimate of the model parameters
that will generate a reasonable policy that can be exe-
cuted while the model is improved. For example, even
though we may not be able to attach an exact numerical
value to driving a wheelchair user to the wrong location,
we can at least specify that this behavior is undesirable.
Similarly, we can specify that the exact numerical value
is initially uncertain. As data about model parameters
accumulate, the parameter estimates should converge to
the correct underlying model with a corresponding re-
duction in uncertainty.
Figure 71.20a depicts the conventional model,
where the arrows in the graph show which parts of the
model affect each other from time t to t C 1. Although
the variables below the hidden line in Fig. 71.20a are
not directly observed by the dialog manager, the pa-
rameters deﬁning the model (i. e., the parameters in
the function giving the next state) are ﬁxed and known
Time t
Action selected
by dialog manager
Recognized
keyword
User state
User state
Reward
Observed
Hidden
Time t + 1
a)
Time t
Action selected
by dialog manager
Recognized
keyword
User state
User model
User state
Reward
Observed
Hidden
Time t + 1
b)
Fig. 71.20 (a) The standard POMDP model. (b) The ex-
tended POMDP model. In both cases, the arrows show
which parts of the model are affected by each other from
time t to t C 1. Not drawn are the dependencies from time
tC1 onward, such as the user state and user model’s effect
on the recognized keyword at time t C 1

Part G | 71.3
1926
Part G
Robots and Humans
a priori. For instance, the reward at time t is a function
of the state at the previous time and the action chosen
by the dialog manager.
If the model parameters are not known a priori
because the model is uncertain – for example, how
much reward is received by the agent given the previ-
ous state and the action selected – then the concept of
the belief can be extended to also include the agent’s
uncertainty over possible models. In this new represen-
tation, which we call the model-uncertainty POMDP,
both the user’s request and the model parameters are
hidden. Figure 71.20b shows this extended model, in
which the reward at time t is still a function of the
state at the previous time and the action chosen by
the dialog manager, but the parameters are not known
a priori and are therefore hidden model variables that
must be estimated along with the user state. The sys-
tem designer can encode their knowledge of the system
in the dialog manager’s initial belief over what dialog
models it believes are likely – a Bayesian prior over
models – and let the agent improve upon this belief with
experience.
Poupart et al. treated the unknown MDP parameters
as hidden state in a larger POMDP and derived an ana-
lytic solution (based on [71.167]) for a policy that will
trade optimally between learning the MDP and max-
imizing reward. Unfortunately, these techniques did
not extend tractably to the model-uncertainty POMDP,
which is continuous in both the POMDP parameters
(like the MDP) and the belief state (unlike the MDP).
Doshi and Roy [71.168, 169] provided an approximate,
Bayes risk action selection criterion that allows the
dialog manager to function in this complex space of
dialog models. This approach was applied to the intel-
ligent wheelchair assistant shown in Fig. 71.21. Their
goal was to design an adaptable HRI system, or dialog
manager, that allows both the user of the wheelchair
and a caregiver to give natural instructions to the
wheelchair, as well as ask the wheelchair computer for
general information that may be relevant to the user’s
daily life.
In contrast to the Bayesian approach, Cakmak and
Thomaz [71.170] pursued an active learning approach
and identiﬁed three types of queries that a robot could
generate while learning a new task (
VIDEO 237 ).
While this result does not provide a comparison to an
approach embedded in an ongoing dialogue, their re-
sults do provide guidelines for model designers.
71.3.5 Cognitive Models of Robot Control
A ﬁnal line of research in cognitive HRI seeks to
achieve greater task efﬁciency in human–robot teams,
thus addressing common problems between opera-
tors and robots such as those identiﬁed by Burke
et al. [71.133] and Stubbs et al. [71.134], by developing
models and control interfaces that exploit mechanisms
of human cognition such as working memory and men-
tal models [71.171, 172]. This research includes for-
malisms such as neglect time, the amount of time that
an operator can neglect a robot before the robot’s per-
formance drops below a certain threshold [71.171], and
fan out, a measure of how many robots an operator can
effectively manage in a human–robot team [71.172].
Such formalisms inform the development of guide-
lines for designing effective control mechanisms such
as the following principles proposed by Goodrich and
Olsen [71.171]:
1. Implicitly switch interfaces and autonomy modes.
Context determines the mode of use. For instance,
the user starts using a joystick and the interac-
tion modality automatically switches, rather than
the user explicitly selecting a modality.
2. Let the robot use natural human cues. The robot
uses the cues to provide feedback and present in-
formation that the human uses to provide the com-
mands or present information to the robot.
3. Manipulate the world instead of the robot. Control
interfaces integrate knowledge about the task and
the world to minimize low-level control of the robot
and maintaining of a mental model of the robot’s
functioning.
4. Manipulate the relationship between the robot
and world. Control interfaces provide real-world
Fig. 71.21 Our dialog manager allows for more natural
human communication with a robotic wheelchair (af-
ter [71.168, 169])

Cognitive Human–Robot Interaction
71.4 Conclusion and Further Reading
1927
Part G | 71.4
representations for control to minimize low-level
control.
5. Let people manipulate presented information. Inter-
faces present information in a way that represents
the real world and allows users to provide input di-
rectly into the representation rather than translating
information readings to a different modality or rep-
resentation.
6. Externalize memory. Different types of information
are integrated into a single representation to reduce
the working memory load for the user.
7. Help people manage attention. The robot provides
appropriate indicators to capture the attention of the
operator.
8. Learn. Control mechanisms adapt system activity to
the user’s mental models.
71.4 Conclusion and Further Reading
This chapter presented an overview of research in
cognitive human–robot interaction, the area of re-
search concerned with modeling human, robot, or joint
human–robot cognitive processes in the context of HRI.
This research seeks to gain a better understanding
of people’s interaction with robots and build robotic
systems with the necessary cognitive mechanisms to
communicate and collaborate with their human coun-
terparts. Three key themes fall within this research
area. The ﬁrst theme seeks to build a better understand-
ing of human cognition in HRI; speciﬁcally, people’s
mental models of robots as ontological entities, social
cognition of robot behaviors, and the use of robots as
experimental platforms to study cognitive development
in humans. The second theme includes research that
seeks to build models for simulating human cognition
in robots, gaining cognitive capabilities through imi-
tation and interaction with the physical environment,
and mapping aspects of interaction, such as commands
from or references by human counterparts to objects in
the environment. The ﬁnal theme seeks to build mod-
els that support human–robot joint activity, including
dialog-, simulation-theoretic-, joint-intention-, activity-
and action-planning-based models that enable robots
to reason about the physical and cognitive properties
of the environment and the actions of their human
counterparts and to plan actions toward achieving com-
municative or collaborative goals. The common thread
among these three themes of research is the consid-
eration of humans and robots as part of a cognitive
system in which cognitive processes – natural or de-
signed – shape how humans and robots communicate
and collaborate.
As an interdisciplinary area of research, cognitive
human-robot interaction receives contributions from
a diverse set of research ﬁelds including robotics, cogni-
tive science, social psychology, communication studies,
and science and technology studies. Further reading on
the topic is also available in a diverse set of venues such
as:

The Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI)

The Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cog-
nitive Science Society (CogSci)

International Conference on Epigenetic Robotics
(EpiRob)

The Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence

The Proceedings of the IEEE International Sympo-
sium on Robots and Human Interactive Communi-
cation (RO-MAN)

The Proceedings of the Robotics: Science and Sys-
tems (RSS) Conference

Sun, [71.173]

Journal of Human–Robot Interaction

Interaction Studies: Social Behaviour and Commu-
nication in Biological and Artiﬁcial Systems. John
Benjamins

International Journal of Social Robotics. Sage.
Video-References
VIDEO 128
Gaze and gesture cues for robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/71/videodetails/128
VIDEO 129
Robotic secrets revealed, Episode 1
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/71/videodetails/129
VIDEO 130
Robotic secrets revealed, Episode 2: The trouble begins
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/71/videodetails/130
VIDEO 236
Human-robot jazz improvization
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/71/videodetails/236

Part G | 71
1928
Part G
Robots and Humans
VIDEO 237
Designing robot learners that ask good questions
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/71/videodetails/237
VIDEO 238
Active keyframe-based learning from demonstration
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/71/videodetails/238
References
71.1
T. Fong, C. Kunz, L.M. Hiatt, M. Bugajska: The
human-robot interaction operating system, Proc.
1st ACM SIGCHI/SIGART Conf. HRI, Salt Lake City
(2006) pp. 41–48
71.2
J.G. Trafton, A.C. Schultz, N.L. Cassimatis, L.M. Hi-
att, D. Perzanowski, D.P. Brock, M.D. Bugajska,
W. Adams: Communicating and collaborating
with robotic agents. In: Cognition and Multi-
Agent Interaction, ed. by R. Sun (Cambridge Univ.
Press, New York 2006) pp. 252–278
71.3
C.-M. Huang, B. Mutlu: Robot behavior toolkit:
Generating effective social behaviors for robots,
Proc. 7th ACM/IEEE Intl. Conf. HRI, Boston (2012)
pp. 25–32
71.4
A.H. Vera, H.A. Simon: Situated action: A symbolic
interpretation, Cogn. Sci. 17(1), 7–48 (1993)
71.5
T. Winograd, F. Flores: Understanding Comput-
ers and Cognition: A New Foundation for Design
(Ablex Publ., New York 1986)
71.6
L.A.
Suchman:
Plans
and
Situated
Actions:
The Problem of Human-Machine Communication
(Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge 1987)
71.7
A.N. Leont’ev: The problem of activity in psychol-
ogy, J. Russ. East Eur. Psychol. 13(2), 4–33 (1974)
71.8
E. Hutchins: The social organization of dis-
tributed cognition. In: Perspectives on Socially
Shared Cognition, ed. by L.B. Resnick, J.M. Levine,
S.D. Teasley (American Psychological Association,
Wachington, DC 1991)
71.9
B. Gates: A robot in every home, Sci. Am. 296, 58–
65 (2007)
71.10
C. Pantofaru, L. Takayama, T. Foote, B. Soto: Ex-
ploring the role of robots in home organization,
Proc. 7th Annu. ACM/IEEE Intl. Conf. HRI, Boston
(2012) pp. 327–334
71.11
K.M. Tsui, M. Desai, H.A. Yanco, C. Uhlik: Exploring
use cases for telepresence robots, ACM/IEEE 6th
Int. Conf. HRI, Lausanne (2011) pp. 11–18
71.12
F. Tanaka, A. Cicourel, J.R. Movellan: Socialization
between toddlers and robots at an early child-
hood education center, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
104(46), 17954–17958 (2007)
71.13
T. Kanda, R. Sato, N. Saiwaki, H. Ishiguro: A two-
month field trial in an elementary school for
long-term human-robot interaction, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 23(5), 962–971 (2007)
71.14
B. Reeves, C. Nass: The Media Equation: How Peo-
ple Treat Computers, Television and New Media
Like Real People and Places (Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge 1996)
71.15
S. Turkle, O. Daste, C. Breazeal, B. Scassellati:
Encounters with Kismet and Cog: Children re-
spond to relational artifacts, Proc. IEEE-RAS/RSJ
Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots, Los Angeles (2004)
pp. 1–20
71.16
S. Turkle: Alone Together: Why We Expect More
from Technology and Less from Each Other (Ba-
sic Books, New York, 2011)
71.17
C. Nass, Y. Moon: Machines and mindlessness: So-
cial responses to computers, J. Soc. Issues 56(1),
81–103 (2000)
71.18
S. Turkle: Evocative Objects: Things We Think With
(MIT Press, Cambridge 2011)
71.19
K. Wada, T. Shibata, Y. Kawaguchi: Long-term
robot therapy in a health service facility for the
aged – A case study for 5 years, Proc. 11th IEEE Int.
Conf. Rehabil. Robotics, Kyoto (2009) pp. 930–933
71.20
B.R. Duffy: Anthropomorphism and the social
robot, Robotics Auton. Syst. 42(3-4), 177–190
(2003)
71.21
S. Kiesler, A. Powers, S.R. Fussell, C. Torrey: An-
thropomorphic interactions with a software agent
and a robot, Soc. Cogn. 26(2), 168–180 (2008)
71.22
S.R. Fussell, S. Kiesler, L.D. Setlock, V. Yew:
How people anthropomorphize robots, Proc.
3rd ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. HRI, Amsterdam (2008)
pp. 145–152
71.23
D.S. Syrdal, K. Dautenhahn, S.N. Woods, M.L. Wal-
ters, K.L. Koay: Looking good? Appearance pref-
erences and robot personality inferences at zero
acquaintance, AAAI Spring Symp.: Multidiscip.
Collab. Socially Assist. Robotics, Stanford (2007)
pp. 86–92
71.24
K.F. MacDorman, T. Minato, M. Shimada, S. Ita-
kura, S. Cowley, H. Ishiguro: Assessing human
likeness by eye contact in an android testbed,
Proc. XXVII Annu. Meet. Conf. Cogn. Sci. Soc.,
Stresa (2005) pp. 1373–1378
71.25
F. Hegel, S. Krach, T. Kircher, B. Wrede, G. Sagerer:
Understanding social robots: A user study on an-
thropomorphism, Proc. 17th IEEE Int. Symp. Robot
Hum. Interact. Commun., Munich (2008) pp. 574–
579
71.26
M. Mori: The uncanny valley, Energy 7(4), 33–35
(1970)
71.27
C. Bartneck, T. Kanda, H. Ishiguro, N. Hagita: My
robotic Doppelganger – A critical look at the Un-
canny Valley Theory, IEEE 18th Intl. Symp. Robot
Hum. Interact. Commun., Toyama (2009) pp. 269–
276
71.28
M.L. Walters, D.S. Syrdal, K. Dautenhahn, R. te
Boekhorst, K.L. Koay: Avoiding the uncanny val-
ley: Robot appearance, personality and consis-
tency of behavior in an attention-seeking home
scenario for a robot companion, Auton. Robots
24(2), 159–178 (2008)

Cognitive Human–Robot Interaction
References
1929
Part G | 71
71.29
A.P. Saygin, T. Chaminade, H. Ishiguro, J. Driver,
C. Frith: The thing that should not be: Predic-
tive coding and the uncanny valley in perceiving
human and humanoid robot actions, Soc. Cogn.
Affect. Neurosci. 7(4), 413–422 (2012)
71.30
W. Mitchell, K.A. Szerszen Sr., A.S. Lu, P.W. Scher-
merhorn, M. Scheutz, K.F. MacDorman: A mis-
match in the human realism of face and voice
produces an uncanny valley, i-Perception 2, 10–12
(2011)
71.31
C. Breazeal: Designing Sociable Robots (MIT Press,
Cambridge 2002)
71.32
N. Matsumoto, H. Fujii, M. Okada: Minimal de-
sign for human-agent communication, Artif. Life
Robotics 10(1), 49–54 (2006)
71.33
H. Kozima, H. Yano: A Robot that Learns to
Communicate with Human Caregivers, Proc. 1st
Int. Workshop Epigenetic Robotics, Lund (2001)
pp. 47–52
71.34
A. Powers, A.D.I. Kramer, S. Lim, J. Kuo, S-l. Lee,
S. Kiesler: Eliciting information from people with
a gendered humanoid robot, IEEE 14th Int. Work-
shop Robot Hum. Interact. Commun., Nashville
(2005) pp. 158–163
71.35
K.M. Lee, N. Park, H. Song: Can a robot be
perceived as a developing creature?: Effects of
a robot’s long-term cognitive developments on
its social presence and people’s social responses
toward it, Human Commun. Res. 31(4), 538–563
(2005)
71.36
J. Goetz, S. Kiesler, A. Powers: Matching robot
appearance and behavior to tasks to improve
human–robot cooperation, Proc. 12th IEEE Int.
Workshop Robot Hum. Interact. Commun., Silicon
Valley (2003) pp. 55–60
71.37
M.K. Lee, S. Kiesler, J. Forlizzi, S. Srinivasa, P. Ryb-
ski: Gracefully mitigating breakdowns in robotic
services, Proc. 6th ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. HRI, Lau-
sanne (2010) pp. 203–210
71.38
B. Shore: Culture in Mind: Cognition, Culture, and
the Problem of Meaning (Oxford Univ. Press, Ox-
ford 1996)
71.39
V. Evers, H. Maldonado, T. Brodecki, P. Hinds: Re-
lational vs. group self-construal: Untangling the
role of national culture in HRI, Proc. 3rd ACM/IEEE
Int. Conf. HRI, Amsterdam (2008)
71.40
L. Wang, P.-L.P. Rau, V. Evers, B.K. Robinson,
P. Hinds: When in Rome: The role of culture and
context in adherence to robot recommendations,
Proc. 5th ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. HRI, Osaka (2010)
pp. 359–366
71.41
S. Sabanovic: Robots in society, society in robots
– Mutual shaping of society and technology as
a framework for social robot design, Int. J. Soc.
Robotics 2(4), 439–450 (2010)
71.42
G. Shaw-Garlock: Looking forward to sociable
robots, Int. J. Soc. Robotics 1(3), 249–260 (2009)
71.43
P.H. Kahn, A.L. Reichert, H.E. Gary, T. Kanda,
H. Ishiguro, S. Shen, J.H. Ruckert, B. Gill: The new
ontological category hypothesis in human–robot
interaction, Proc. 6th ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. HRI, Lau-
sanne (2011) pp. 159–160
71.44
P.H. Kahn, N.G. Freier, B. Friedman, R.L. Sever-
son, E.N. Feldman: Social and moral relation-
ships with robotic others?, IEEE 13th Int. Workshop
Robot Hum. Interact. Commun., Kurashiki (2004)
pp. 545–550
71.45
S. Turkle: A Nascent Robotics Culture: New Com-
plicities for Companionship (AAAI, Boston 2006)
71.46
B. Scassellati: How developmental psychology
and robotics complement each other, NSF/DARPA
Workshop Dev. Learn. (MIT Press, CSAIL, Cambridge
2006)
71.47
H. Ishiguro: Android science – toward a new
cross-interdisciplinary
framework,
ICCS/CogSci
Workshop Toward Soc. Mech. Android Sci., Stresa
(2005) pp. 1–6
71.48
K.F. MacDorman, H. Ishiguro: The uncanny ad-
vantage of using androids in cognitive and so-
cial science research, Interact. Stud. 7(3), 297–337
(2006)
71.49
M. Stanley, J. Sabini: On maintaining social
norms: A field experiment in the subway. In: Ad-
vances in Environmental Psychology: The Urban
Environment, ed. by A. Baum, J.E. Singer, S. Valins
(Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale 1978) pp. 31–40
71.50
H.
Kozima, M.P. Michalowski,
C. Nakagawa:
Keepon: A playful robot for research, therapy,
and entertainment, Int. J. Soc. Robotics 1(1), 3–
18 (2009)
71.51
K.F. MacDorman: Introduction to the special issue
on android science, Connect. Sci. 18(4), 313–317
(2006)
71.52
J.J. Gibson: The Ecological Approach to Visual Per-
ception (Houghton Mifflin, Boston 1979)
71.53
E.S. Reed: Encountering the World: Toward an
Ecological Psychology (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford
1996)
71.54
Y. Yamaji, T. Miyake, Y. Yoshiike, P.R.S. De Silva,
M. Okada: STB: Human-dependent sociable trash
box, Proc. 5th ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. HRI, Osaka (2010)
pp. 197–198
71.55
H. Ishiguro: Android science: Conscious and sub-
conscious recognition, Connect. Sci. 18(4), 319–332
(2006)
71.56
S. Nishio, H. Ishiguro, N. Hagita: Geminoid: Tele-
operated android of an existing person. In: Hu-
manoid Robots, New Developments, ed. by A.C. De
Pina Filho (InTech, Vienna 2007) pp. 343–352
71.57
S. Nishio, H. Ishiguro, N. Hagita: Can a teleoper-
ated robot represent personal presence? – A case
study with children, Psychologia 50(4), 330–342
(2007)
71.58
M. Shimada, K. Yamauchi, T. Minato, H. Ishig-
uro, S. Itakura: Studying the influence of the
chameleon effect on humans using an android,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Nice
(2008)
71.59
J. Wainer, D.J. Feil-Seifer, D.A. Shell, M.J. Mataric:
Embodiment
and
human-robot
interaction:
A taskbased perspective, Proc. 2nd ACM/IEEE Int.
Conf. HRI, Washington (2007) pp. 872–877
71.60
P. Schermerhorn, M. Scheutz: Disentangling the
effects of robot affect, embodiment, and au-

Part G | 71
1930
Part G
Robots and Humans
tonomy on human team members in a mixed-
initiative task, Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Adv. Comput.–
Hum. Interact., Gosier (2011) pp. 235–241
71.61
W.A. Bainbridge, J.W. Hart, E.S. Kim, B. Scassel-
lati: The benefits of interactions with physically
present robots over video-displayed agents, Int.
J. Soc. Robotics 1(2), 41–52 (2010)
71.62
B. Mutlu: Designing embodied cues for dialog
with robots, AI Magazine 32(4), 17–30 (2011)
71.63
E.T. Hall: The Hidden Dimension (Anchor Books,
New York 1966)
71.64
L. Takayama, C. Pantofaru: Influences on proxemic
behaviors in human–robot interaction, IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), St. Louis
(2009) pp. 5495–5502
71.65
D.S. Syrdal, K.L. Koay, M.L. Walters, K. Daut-
enhahn: A personalized robot companion? The
role of individual differences on spatial prefer-
ences in HRI scenarios, Proc. 16th IEEE Int. Symp.
Robot Hum. Interact. Commun., Jeju Island (2007)
pp. 1143–1148
71.66
J. Mumm, B. Mutlu: Human-robot proxemics:
Physical and psychological distancing in human-
robot interaction, Proc. 6th ACM/IEEE Int. Conf.
HRI, Lausanne (2011) pp. 331–338
71.67
M.L. Walters, M.A. Oskoei, D.S. Syrdal, K. Dauten-
hahn: A long-term human–robot proxemic study,
Proc. 20th IEEE Int. Symp. Robot Hum. Interact.
Commun., Atlanta (2011) pp. 137–142
71.68
C. Yu, M. Scheutz, P. Schermerhorn: Investigating
multimodal real-time patterns of joint attention
in an HRI word learning task, Proc. 5th ACM/IEEE
Int. Conf. HRI, Osaka (2010) pp. 309–316
71.69
T. Yonezawa, H. Yamazoe, A. Utsumi, S. Abe:
Gaze-communicative
behavior
of
stuffed-toy
robot with joint attention and eye contact based
on ambient gaze-tracking, Proc. 9th Int. Conf.
Multimodal Interfaces, Nagoya (2007) pp. 140–145
71.70
Y.
Yoshikawa,
K.
Shinozawa,
H.
Ishiguro,
N.
Hagita,
T.
Miyamoto:
Responsive
robot
gaze to interaction partner, Robotics Sci. Syst.,
Philadelphia (2006)
71.71
B. Mutlu, T. Shiwa,
T. Kanda,
H. Ishiguro,
N. Hagita: Footing in human-robot conversa-
tions: How robots might shape participant roles
using gaze cues, Proc. 4th ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. HRI,
San Diego, California (2009) pp. 61–68
71.72
M. Staudte, M.W. Crocker: Visual attention in spo-
ken human-robot interaction, Proc. 4th ACM/IEEE
Int. Conf. HRI, San Diego (2009) pp. 77–84
71.73
B. Mutlu, J. Forlizzi, J.K. Hodgins: A storytelling
robot: Modeling and evaluation of human-like
gaze behavior, IEEE-RAS Conf. Humanoid Robots,
Genoa (2006) pp. 518–523
71.74
C. Yu, P. Schermerhorn, M. Scheutz: Adaptive eye
gaze patterns in interactions with human and
artificial agents, ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst.
1(2), 1–25 (2012)
71.75
H. Admoni, C. Bank, J. Tan, M. Toneva, B. Scassel-
lati: Robot gaze does not reflexively cue human
attention, Proc. 33rd Annu. Conf. Cogn. Sci. Soc.,
Boston (2011) pp. 1983–1988
71.76
W.S. Condon: Cultural microrhythms. In: Interac-
tion Rhythms: Periodicity in Communicative Be-
havior, ed. by M. Davis (Human Sciences Press,
New York 1982) pp. 53–76
71.77
E. Goffman: Some context for content analysis:
A view of the origins of structural studies of face-
to-face interaction. In: Conducting Interaction:
Patterns of Behavior in Focused Encounters, ed.
by A. Kendon (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge
1990) pp. 15–49
71.78
C. Trevarthen: Can a robot hear music? Can a robot
dance? Can a robot tell what it knows or intends
to do? Can it feel pride or shame in company? –
Questions of the nature of human vitality, Proc.
2nd Int. Workshop Epigenet. Robotics, Edinburgh
(2002)
71.79
M. Michalowski, S. Sabanovic, H. Kozima: A danc-
ing robot for rhythmic social interaction, Proc.
2nd ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. HRI, Washington DC (2007)
pp. 89–96
71.80
M.P. Michalowski, R. Simmons, H. Kozima: Rhyth-
mic attention in child-robot dance play, Proc.
18th IEEE Int. Symp. Robot Hum. Interact. Com-
mun., Toyama (2009) pp. 816–821
71.81
E. Avrunin, J. Hart, A. Douglas, B. Scassellati:
Effects related to synchrony and repertoire in per-
ceptions of robot dance, Proc. 6th ACM/IEEE Int.
Conf. HRI, Lausanne (2011) pp. 93–100
71.82
G. Hoffman, C. Breazeal: Anticipatory perceptual
simulation for human-robot joint practice: The-
ory and application study, Proc. 23rd AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., Chicago (2008) pp. 1357–1362
71.83
G. Hoffman, G. Weinberg: Interactive improvisa-
tion with a robotic marimba player, Auton. Robots
31(2-3), 133–153 (2011)
71.84
G. Deàk, I. Fasel, J. Movellan: The emergence of
shared attention: Using robots to test develop-
mental theories, Proc. 1st Int. Workshop Epigenet.
Robotics, Lund (2001) pp. 95–104
71.85
K. Dautenhahn: Roles and functions of robots
in human society: Implications from research in
autism therapy, Robotica 21(4), 443–452 (2003)
71.86
H. Kozima, C. Nakagawa, Y. Yasuda: Wowing to-
gether: What facilitates social interactions in chil-
dren with autistic spectrum disorders, Proc. 6th
Int. Workshop Epigenet. Robotics Model. Cogn.
Dev. Robotics Syst., Paris (2006) p. 177
71.87
B. Scassellati: How social robots will help us to di-
agnose, treat, and understand autism, Proc. 12th
Int. Symp. Robotics Res., San Francisco, ed. by
S. Thrun, R.A. Brooks, H. Durrant-Whyte (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 2005) pp. 552–563
71.88
D.J. Feil-Seifer, M.J. Mataric: B3IA: An architecture
for autonomous robot-assisted behavior inter-
vention for children with autism spectrum dis-
orders, Proc. 17th IEEE Int. Workshop Robot Hum.
Interact. Commun., Munich (2008) pp. 328–333
71.89
H. Kozima, C. Nakagawa, Y. Yasuda: Interactive
robots for communication-care: A case-study in
autism therapy, Proc. 14th IEEE Int. Workshop
Robot Hum. Interact. Commun., Nashville (2005)
pp. 341–346

Cognitive Human–Robot Interaction
References
1931
Part G | 71
71.90
H. Kozima, Y. Yasuda, C. Nakagawa: Social inter-
action facilitated by a minimally-designed robot:
Findings from longitudinal therapeutic practices
for autistic children, Proc. 16th IEEE Int. Symp.
Robot Hum. interact. Commun., Jeju Island (2007)
pp. 599–604
71.91
H.A. Simon: The Sciences of the Artificial (MIT
Press, Cambridge 1969)
71.92
B. Adams, C.L. Breazeal, R.A. Brooks, B. Scassellati:
Humanoid robots: A new kind of tool, IEEE Intell.
Syst. Appl. 15(4), 25–31 (2000)
71.93
L.W. Barsalou, C. Breazeal, L.B. Smith: Cogni-
tion as coordinated non-cognition, Cogn. Pro-
cess. 8(2), 79–91 (2007)
71.94
A.L. Thomaz, M. Berlin, C. Breazeal: An embod-
ied computational model of social referencing,
Proc. 14th IEEE Int. Workshop Robot Hum. Inter-
act. Commun., Nashville (2005) pp. 591–598
71.95
G. Hoffman, C. Breazeal: Robotic partners? Bod-
ies and minds: An embodied approach to fluid
human-robot collaboration, Proc. 5th Int. Work-
shop Cogn. Robotics, Boston (2006) pp. 95–102
71.96
G. Hoffman: Effects of anticipatory action on
human-robot teamwork efficiency, fluency, and
perception of team, Proc. 2nd ACM/IEEE Int. Conf.
HRI, Washington D.C. (2007) pp. 1–8
71.97
Y. Demiris, A. Meltzoff: The robot in the crib: A de-
velopmental analysis of imitation skills in infants
and robots, Infant Child Dev. 17(1), 43–53 (2008)
71.98
C. Nehaniv, K. Dautenhahn (Eds.): Imitation and
Social Learning in Robots, Humans and Animals:
Behavioural, Social and Communicative Dimen-
sions (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge 2009)
71.99
B. Scassellati: Imitation and mechanisms of joint
attention: A developmental structure for build-
ing social skills on a humanoid robot, Lect. Notes
Comput. Sci. 1562, 176–195 (1999)
71.100
Y. Nagai, K. Hosoda, A. Morita, M. Asada: A con-
structive model for the development of joint at-
tention, Connect. Sci. 15(4), 211–229 (2003)
71.101
F. Kaplan, V. Hafner: The challenges of joint
attention, Proc. 4th Int. Workshop Epigenet.
Robotics, Lund (2004) pp. 67–74
71.102
C. Crick, M. Munz, B. Scassellati: Synchronization
in social tasks: Robotic drumming, Proc. 15th IEEE
Int. Workshop Robot Hum. Interact. Commun.,
Hatfield (2006) pp. 97–102
71.103
P. Bakker, Y. Kuniyoshi: Robot see, robot do: An
overview of robot imitation, AISB-96 Workshop
Learn. Robots Animals, Brighton (1996) pp. 3–11
71.104
R.S. Jackendoff: On beyond zebra: The relation of
linguistic and visual information, Cognition 26,
89–114 (1987)
71.105
B. Landau, R.S. Jackendoff: What and where in
spatial language and spatial cognition, Behav.
Brain Sci. 16, 217–265 (1993)
71.106
L. Talmy: The fundamental system of spatial
schemas in language. In: From Perception to
Meaning: Image Schemas in Cognitive Linguistics,
ed. by B. Hamp (Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin 2005)
71.107
T.P. Regier: The Acquisition of Lexical Semantics
for Spatial Terms: A Connectionist Model of Per-
ceptual Categorization, Ph.D. Thesis (University of
California at Berkeley, Berkeley 1992)
71.108
J.D. Kelleher, F.J. Costello: Applying computa-
tional models of spatial prepositions to visually
situated dialog, Comput. Linguist. 35(2), 271–306
(2008)
71.109
T.P. Regier, L.A. Carlson: Grounding spatial lan-
guage in perception: An empirical and computa-
tional investigation, J. Exp. Psychol. 130(2), 273–
298 (2001)
71.110
G. Bugmann, E. Klein, S. Lauria, T. Kyriacou:
Corpus-based robotics: A route instruction exam-
ple, Proc. 8th Conf. Intell. Auton. Syst. (IAS-8),
Amsterdam (2004) pp. 96–103
71.111
M. Levit, D. Roy: Interpretation of spatial language
in a map navigation task, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man
Cybern. B 37(3), 667–679 (2007)
71.112
M. MacMahon, B. Stankiewicz, B. Kuipers: Walk
the talk: Connecting language, knowledge, and
action in route instructions, Proc. Natl. Conf. Artif.
Intell., Boston (2006) pp. 1475–1482
71.113
H. Kress-Gazit, G.E. Fainekos: Translating struc-
tured English to robot controllers, Adv. Robotics
22, 1343–1359 (2008)
71.114
C. Matuszek, D. Fox, K. Koscher: Following direc-
tions using statistical machine translation, Proc.
5th ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. HRI, Nara (2010) pp. 251–
258
71.115
A. Vogel, D. Jurafsky: Learning to follow naviga-
tional directions, Proc. 48th Annu. Meet. Assoc.
Comput. Linguist., Uppsala (2010) pp. 806–814
71.116
S. Harnad: The symbol grounding problem, Phys-
ica D 43, 335–346 (1990)
71.117
T. Winograd: Procedures as a Representation for
Data in a Computer Program for Understand-
ing Natural Language, MIT Tech. Rep. TMAC-TR-84
(MIT, Cambridge 1971)
71.118
K.Y. Hsiao, N. Mavridis, D. Roy: Coupling per-
ception and simulation: Steps towards conver-
sational robotics, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS), Las Vegas (2003) pp. 928–933
71.119
D. Roy, K.Y. Hsiao, N. Mavridis: Conversational
Robots: Building blocks for grounding word
meanings, Proc. HLT-NAACL 2003 Workshop Learn.
Word Mean. Non-Linguist. Data, Stroudsburg
(2003) pp. 70–77
71.120
D. Roy: Semiotic schemas: A framework for
grounding language in action and perception, Ar-
tif. Intell. 167(1-2), 170–205 (2005)
71.121
J. Dzifcak, M. Scheutz, C. Baral, P. Schermerhorn:
What to do and how to do it: Translating natural
language directives into temporal and dynamic
logic representation for goal management and
action execution, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA), Kobe (2009) pp. 4163–4168
71.122
Y. Sugita, J. Tani: Learning semantic combinatori-
ality from the interaction between linguistic and
behavioral processes, Adapt. Behav. – Animals
Animat. Softw. Agents Robots Adapt. Syst. 13(1),
33–52 (2005)
71.123
J. Modayil, B. Kuipers: Autonomous development
of a grounded object ontology by a learning

Part G | 71
1932
Part G
Robots and Humans
robot, Proc. 22nd AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Vancou-
ver (2007) pp. 1095–1101
71.124
D. Marocco, A. Cangelosi, K. Fischer, T. Bel-
paeme: Grounding action words in the sensori-
motor interaction with the world: Experiments
with a simulated iCub humanoid robot, Front.
Neurorobotics 4, 1–15 (2010)
71.125
R. Ge, R.J. Mooney: A statistical semantic parser
that integrates syntax and semantics, Proc. 9th
Conf. Comput. Nat. Lang. Learn., Ann Arbor (2005)
pp. 9–16
71.126
N. Shimizu, A. Haas: Learning to follow naviga-
tional route instructions, Proc. 21st Int. Jt. Conf.
Artif. Intell., Pasadena (2009) pp. 1488–1493
71.127
S.R.K.
Branavan,
H.
Chen,
L.S.
Zettlemoyer,
R. Barzilay: Reinforcement learning for map-
ping instructions to actions, Proc. 47th Jt. Conf.
Annu. Meet. Assoc. Comput. Linguist. 4th Int.
Jt. Conf. Nat. Lang. Process. (AFNLP), Singapore
(2009) pp. 82–90
71.128
S.R.K. Branavan, D. Silver, R. Barzilay: Learning
to win by reading manuals in a Monte-Carlo
framework, Proc. 49th Annu. Meet. Assoc. Com-
put. Linguist. Hum. Lang. Technol., Portland (2011)
71.129
T. Kollar, S. Tellex, D. Roy, N. Roy: Toward under-
standing natural language directions, Proc. 5th
ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. HRI, Osaka (2010) pp. 259–266
71.130
D. Bailey: When Push Comes to Shove: A Compu-
tational Model of the Role of Motor Control in the
Acquisition of Action Verbs, Ph.D. Thesis (Univ. of
California, Berkeley 1997)
71.131
T. Kollar, S. Tellex, D. Roy, N. Roy: Grounding
verbs of motion in natural language commands to
robots, Proc. Int. Symp. Exp. Robotics, New Delhi
(2010) pp. 31–47
71.132
S. Tellex, T. Kollar, S. Dickerson, M.R. Walter,
A.G. Banerjee, S. Teller, N. Roy: Understanding
natural language commands for robotic naviga-
tion and mobile manipulation, Proc. Natl. Conf.
Artif. Intell., San Francisco (2011)
71.133
J.L. Burke, R.R. Murphy, M.D. Coovert, D.L. Riddle:
Moonlight in Miami: Field study of human-robot
interaction in the context of an urban search and
rescue disaster response training exercise, Hum.–
Comput. Interact. 19(1/2), 85–116 (2004)
71.134
K. Stubbs, P.J. Hinds, D. Wettergreen: Autonomy
and common ground in human-robot interac-
tion: A field study, IEEE Intell. Syst. 22(2), 42–50
(2007)
71.135
S. Kiesler: Fostering common ground in human-
robot interaction, Proc. 14th IEEE Int. Workshop
Robot Hum. Interact. Commun., Nashville (2005)
pp. 729–734
71.136
T. Fong, C. Thorpe, C. Baur: Collaboration, dia-
logue, human-robot interaction, Robotics Res. 6,
255–266 (2003)
71.137
M.E. Foster, T. By, M. Rickert, A. Knoll: Human-
robot dialogue for joint construction tasks, Proc.
8th Int. Conf. Mulltimodal Interfaces, Banff (2006)
pp. 68–71
71.138
S. Li, B. Wrede, G. Sagerer: A computational model
of multi-modal grounding for human robot in-
teraction, Proc. 7th SIGdial Workshop Discourse
Dialogue, Sydney (2009) pp. 153–160
71.139
P.R. Cohen, H.J. Levesque: Teamwork, Nous 25(4),
487–512 (1991)
71.140
J. Peltason, B. Wrede: Pamini: A framework
for assembling mixed-initiative human-robot
interaction from generic interaction patterns,
Proc. 11th SIGdial Annu. Meet. Special Interest
Group Discourse Dialogue, Tokyo (2010) pp. 229–
232
71.141
J. Peltason, B. Wrede: The curious robot as a case-
study for comparing dialog systems, AI Magazine
32(4), 85–99 (2011)
71.142
M.F. Schober: Spatial perspective-taking in con-
versation, Cognition 47(1), 1–24 (1993)
71.143
J.E. Hanna, M.K. Tanenhaus, J.C. Trueswell: The
effects of common ground and perspective on
domains of referential interpretation, J. Mem.
Lang. 49(1), 43–61 (2003)
71.144
J.G. Trafton, N.L. Cassimatis, M.D. Bugajska,
D.P. Brock, F.E. Mintz, A.C. Schultz: Enabling effec-
tive human–robot interaction using perspective-
taking in robots, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. A
35(4), 460–470 (2005)
71.145
M. Berlin, J. Gray, A.L. Thomaz, C. Breazeal: Per-
spective taking: An organizing principle for learn-
ing in human–robot interaction, Proc. 21st Natl.
Conf. Artif. Intell., Boston (2006) p. 1444
71.146
R. Moratz, K. Fischer, T. Tenbrink: Cognitive mod-
eling of spatial reference for human-robot inter-
action, Int. J. Artif. Intell. Tools 10(04), 589–611
(2001)
71.147
R. Ros, S. Lemaignan, E.A. Sisbot, R. Alami,
J. Steinwender, K. Hamann, F. Warneken: Which
one? Grounding the referent based on efficient
human-robot interaction, Proc. 19th IEEE Int.
Symp. Robot Hum. Interact. Commun., Viareggio
(2010) pp. 570–575
71.148
A. Holroyd, C. Rich, C.L. Sidner, B. Ponsler: Gen-
erating connection events for human-robot col-
laboration, Proc. 20th IEEE Int. Symp. Robot Hum.
Interact. Commun., Atlanta (2011) pp. 241–246
71.149
G. Butterworth, L. Grover: Joint visual attention,
manual pointing, and preverbal communication
in human infancy. In: Attention and Performance,
Vol. 13: Motor Representation and Control, ed. by
M. Jeannerod (Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc., Mahwah
1990) pp. 605–624
71.150
C. Rich, P. Ponsler, A. Holroyd, C.L. Sidner: Recog-
nizing engagement in human-robot interaction,
Proc. 5th ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. HRI, Osaka (2010)
pp. 375–382
71.151
V. Gallese, A. Goldman: Mirror neurons and the
simulation theory of mind-reading, Trends Cogn.
Sci. 2(12), 493–501 (1998)
71.152
E. Bicho, W. Erlhagen, L. Louro, E. Costa e Silva:
Neuro-cognitive mechanisms of decision making
in joint action: A human–robot interaction study,
Hum. Mov. Sci. 30(5), 846–868 (2011)
71.153
J. Gray, C. Breazeal, M. Berlin, A. Brooks, J. Lieber-
man: Action parsing and goal inference using
self as simulator, Proc. 14th IEEE Int. Workshop

Cognitive Human–Robot Interaction
References
1933
Part G | 71
Robot Hum. Interact. Commun., Nashville (2005)
pp. 202–209
71.154
M.N. Nicolescu, M.J. Mataric: Linking perception
and action in a control architecture for human-
robot domains, Proc. 36th Annu. Hawaii Int. Conf.
Syst. Sci., Big Island (2003) pp. 10–20
71.155
C. Breazeal, G. Hoffman, A. Lockerd: Teaching and
working with robots as a collaboration, Proc. 3rd
Int. Jt. Conf. Auton. Agents Multiagent Syst., New
York, Vol. 3 (2004) pp. 1030–1037
71.156
R. Alami, A. Clodic, V. Montreuil, E.A. Sisbot,
R. Chatila: Task planning for human–robot inter-
action, Proc. 2005 Jt. Conf. Smart Obj. Ambient
Intell. Innov. Context-Aware Serv. Usages Tech-
nol., Grenoble (2005) pp. 81–85
71.157
R. Alami, A. Clodic, V. Montreuil, E.A. Sisbot,
R. Chatila: Toward human-aware robot task plan-
ning, AAAI Spring Symp.: To Boldly Go where No
Human-Robot Team Has Gone Before, Palo Alto
(2006) pp. 39–46
71.158
R. Bellman: Dynamic Programming (Princeton
Univ. Press, Princeton 1957)
71.159
N. Roy, J. Pineau, S. Thrun: Spoken dialog man-
agement for robots, Proc. Assoc. Comput. Lin-
guist., Hong Kong (2000) pp. 93–100
71.160
J. Hoey, P. Poupart, C. Boutilier, A. Mihailidis:
POMDP models for assistive technology, Proc. AAAI
Fall Symp. Caring Mach., AI in Eldercare (2005)
71.161
J. Williams, S. Young: Scaling up POMDPs for
dialogue management: The summary POMDP
method, Proc. IEEE Autom. Speech Recognit. Un-
derst. Workshop, Cancun (2005)
71.162
D. Litman, S. Singh, M. Kearns, M. Walker: NJFun:
A reinforcement learning spoken dialogue system,
Proc. ANLP/NAACL 2000 Workshop Conversat. Syst.,
Seattle (2000) pp. 17–20
71.163
F. Broz, I. Nourbakhsh, R. Simmons: Planning for
human-robot interaction using time-state ag-
gregated POMDPs, Proc. 23rd Conf. Artif. Intell.,
Chicago (2008) pp. 1339–1344
71.164
F. Doshi, N. Roy: The permutable POMDP: Fast so-
lutions to POMDPs for preference elicitation, Proc.
7th Int. Conf. Auton. Agents Multiagent Syst., Es-
toril (2008) pp. 493–500
71.165
R. Wilcox, S. Nikolaidis, J. Shah: Optimiza-
tion
of
temporal
dynamics
for
adaptive
human-robot
interaction
in
assembly man-
ufacturing, Proc. Robotics Sci. Syst., Sydney (2012)
p. 441
71.166
T. Prommer, H. Holzapfel, A. Waibel: Rapid si-
mulation-driven reinforcement learning of mul-
timodal dialog strategies in human–robot in-
teraction, 9th Int. Conf. Spoken Lang. Process.,
Pittsburgh (2006)
71.167
J.M. Porta, N. Vlassis, M. Spaan, P. Poupart: Point-
based value iteration for continuous POMDP,
J. Mach. Learn. Res. 7, 2329–2367 (2006)
71.168
F. Doshi, N. Roy: Efficient model learning for di-
alog management, Proc. 2nd ACM/IEEE Int. Conf.
HRI, Arlington (2007) pp. 65–72
71.169
F. Doshi, N. Roy: Spoken language interaction
with model uncertainty: An adaptive human-
robot interaction system, Connect. Sci. 20(4),
299–319 (2008)
71.170
M. Cakmak, A.L. Thomaz: Designing robot learners
that ask good questions, Proc. 7th Annu. ACM/IEEE
Int. Conf. HRI, Boston (2012) pp. 17–24
71.171
M.A.
Goodrich,
D.R. Olsen: Seven
principles
of efficient human robot interaction, IEEE Int.
Conf. Syst. Man Cybern., Washington D.C. (2003)
pp. 3942–3948
71.172
J.W.
Crandall,
M.A.
Goodrich,
D.R.
Olsen,
C.W. Nielsen: Validating
human-robot inter-
action schemes in multitasking environments,
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. A 35(4), 438–449
(2005)
71.173
R. Sun (Ed.): Cognition and Multiagent In-
teraction: From Cognitive Modeling to Social
Simulation (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge
2005)

Multimedia Contents Social Robot
1935
Part G | 72
72. Social Robotics
Cynthia Breazeal, Kerstin Dautenhahn, Takayuki Kanda
This chapter surveys some of the principal research
trends in Social Robotics and its application to
human–robot interaction (HRI). Social (or Socia-
ble) robots are designed to interact with people in
a natural, interpersonal manner – often to achieve
positive outcomes in diverse applications such as
education, health, quality of life, entertainment,
communication, and tasks requiring collaborative
teamwork. The long-term goal of creating social
robots that are competent and capable partners
for people is quite a challenging task. They will
need to be able to communicate naturally with
people using both verbal and nonverbal signals.
They will need to engage us not only on a cognitive
level, but on an emotional level as well in order to
provide effective social and task-related support
to people. They will need a wide range of social-
cognitive skills and a theory of other minds to
understand human behavior, and to be intuitively
understood by people. A deep understanding of
human intelligence and behavior across multi-
ple dimensions (i.e., cognitive, affective, physical,
social, etc.) is necessary in order to design robots
that can successfully play a beneficial role in the
daily lives of people. This requires a multidisci-
plinary approach where the design of social robot
technologies and methodologies are informed by
robotics, artificial intelligence, psychology, neuro-
science, human factors, design, anthropology, and
more.
72.1
Overview............................................ 1936
72.2
Social Robot Embodiment ................... 1936
72.2.1
Anthropomorphic Design......... 1936
72.2.2
Design Space .......................... 1936
72.3
Social Robots and Social-Emotional
Intelligence........................................ 1938
72.3.1
Theories of Emotion ................ 1939
72.3.2
Example: A Synthesis
of Emotion Theories in Action .. 1939
72.3.3
Emotional Empathy ................ 1940
72.4
Socio-Cognitive Skills.......................... 1941
72.4.1
Shared Attention .................... 1941
72.4.2
Mental Perspective Taking ....... 1941
72.4.3
Perspective Taking
in Collaboration
and Teamwork........................ 1942
72.5
Human Social Responses
to Social Robots.................................. 1944
72.5.1
Social Judgments.................... 1944
72.5.2
Physical Versus Virtual
Embodiment .......................... 1944
72.5.3
Social Stimulus
to Learn About People............. 1944
72.5.4
Social Rapport ........................ 1945
72.5.5
Social Support ........................ 1945
72.6
Social Robots
and Communication Skills................... 1946
72.6.1
Verbal/Nonverbal
Communication ...................... 1946
72.6.2
Mechanisms
for Human–Robot
Communication ...................... 1947
72.6.3
Challenges ............................. 1950
72.7
Long-Term Interaction
with Robot Companions ..................... 1950
72.7.1
Robot Companions.................. 1950
72.7.2
Engagement and Long-Term
Relationships ......................... 1950
72.7.3
Robot Home Companions
for Supporting Elderly Users..... 1951
72.7.4
Example: Long-Term
Interactions with a Robotic
Weight Loss Coach................... 1952
72.7.5
Challenges ............................. 1953
72.8
Tactile Interaction with Social Robots .. 1954
72.8.1
Touch for Social Interaction ..... 1954
72.8.2
Touch Sensors and Mechanisms
Used for HRI ........................... 1954

Part G | 72.2
1936
Part G
Robots and Humans
72.8.3
Example: Teaching Children
with Autism About Tactile
Interaction............................. 1956
72.8.4
Challenges and Opportunities .. 1957
72.9
Social Robots and Teamwork............... 1958
72.9.1
Human–Robot Teamwork
and Collaboration................... 1958
72.9.2
Robots as Social Mediators ...... 1959
72.9.3
Research Direction .................. 1959
72.10
Conclusion ......................................... 1959
72.11
Further Reading ................................. 1960
Video-References......................................... 1960
References................................................... 1961
72.1 Overview
The way a person interacts with a social robot (or so-
ciable robot) is quite different from interacting with the
majority of autonomous mobile robots today. Modern
autonomous robots are generally viewed as tools that
human specialists use to perform hazardous tasks in re-
mote environments (i. e., sweeping mineﬁelds, inspect-
ing oil wells, mapping mines, etc.). In dramatic con-
trast, social (or sociable) robots are designed to engage
people in an interpersonal manner, often as partners, in
order to achieve positive outcomes in domains such as
education, therapy, or health, or task-related goals in ar-
eas such as coordinated teamwork for manufacturing,
search and rescue, domestic chores, and more.
The development of socially intelligent and socially
skillful robots drives research to develop autonomous or
semiautonomous robots that are natural and intuitive for
the general public to interact with, communicate with,
work with as partners, and teach new capabilities. Daut-
enhahn’s work is among the earliest in thinking about
robots with interpersonal social intelligence where
relationships between speciﬁc individuals are impor-
tant [72.1, 2]. These early works pose the question:
What are the common social mechanisms of com-
munication and understanding that can produce
efﬁcient, enjoyable, natural and meaningful inter-
actions between humans and robots?
Promisingly, there have been initial and ongoing
strides in all of these areas ([72.3–11], etc.). In addi-
tion, this domain motivates new questions for robotics
researchers, such as how to design for a successful
long-term relationship where the robot remains ap-
pealing and provides consistent beneﬁt to people over
weeks, months, and even years. The beneﬁt that social
robots provide people extends far beyond strict task-
performing utility to include educational (Chap. 79),
health and therapeutic (Chap. 64), domestic (Chap. 65),
social and emotional goals (e.g., entertainment, com-
panionship, communication, etc.), and more.
We begin this chapter with a brief overview of
a wide assortment of embodiments of socially interac-
tive robots that have been developed around the world
(Sect. 72.2). We follow with selected topics that high-
light some of the representative research themes: social-
emotional intelligence and emotion-based interaction
(Sect. 72.3), and social-cognitive skills (Sect. 72.4).
Human social responses to robots(Sect. 72.5), ver-
bal and non-verbal communication (Sect. 72.6), long-
term interaction (Sect. 72.7), touch-based interac-
tion (Sect. 72.8), and teamwork with robot partners
(Sect. 72.9). We rely on examples from our own re-
search programs to illustrate these trends, while making
reference to other excellent works performed in other
research labs.
72.2 Social Robot Embodiment
72.2.1 Anthropomorphic Design
Social robots are designed to interact with people in
human-centric terms and to operate in human envi-
ronments alongside people. Many social robots are
humanoid or animal-like in form, although this does
not have to be the case. A unifying characteristic is
that that social robots engage people in an interper-
sonal manner, communicating and coordinating their
behavior with humans through verbal, nonverbal, or af-
fective modalities. People have a strong tendency to
anthropomorphize social robots [72.12] and to reason
about their behavior in terms of having their own men-
tal states (e.g., thoughts, intents, beliefs, desires, etc.).
Hence, anthropomorphic design principles, spanning
from the physical appearance of robots, to how they
move and behave, and how they interact with peo-
ple, are often employed to facilitate interaction and
acceptance.
72.2.2 Design Space
The design space of social robotics is quite large. It
is important to note that a more human-like design

Social Robotics
72.2 Social Robot Embodiment
1937
Part G | 72.2
a)
b)
c)
Fig.72.1a–c Examples of socially interactive humanoid robots: (a) Humanoid robots developed at Waseda University
from left to right: a ﬂutist robot WF-4RII (after [72.13]), WABIAN-2 (after [72.14]), and WE-4RII (after [72.15]);
(b) Robovie developed at ATR (Advanced Telecommunications Research Institute, Kyoto) is able to gesture with its
arms and give a hug; (c) Nexi and Maddox, developed at MIT, are mobile and dexterous social robots used to study
collaborative human–robot teamwork (after [72.16])
does not necessarily correlate with a better design. One
needs to balance the robot design with the task, user,
and context [72.17]. As can be seen in the following ex-
amples, social robots exploit many different modalities
to communicate and express social-emotional behavior.
These include whole-body motion, proxemics (i. e., in-
terpersonal distance), gestures, facial expressions, gaze
behavior, head orientation, linguistic or emotive vocal-
ization, touch-based communication, and an assortment
of display technologies.
For social robots to close the communication loop
and coordinate their behavior with people, they must
also be able to perceive, interpret, and respond appro-
priately to verbal and nonverbal cues from humans.
VIDEO 219 shows dog-inspired robot behaviour to fa-
ciliate intention reading by people. Given the richness
of human behavior and the complexity of human en-
vironments, many social robots are among the most
sophisticated, articulate, behaviorally rich, and intelli-
gent robots today.
As shown in Fig. 72.1, a number of socially interac-
tive humanoid robots have been developed (Chap. 65)
that can participate in whole body social interaction
a)
b)
d)
c)
Fig.72.2a–d Some examples of androids: (a) One of the earliest face robots developed at the Science University of
Tokyo (after [72.18]); (b) Geminoid developed at ATR (after [72.19]); (c) ROMAN developed at the University of
Kaiserslautern (after [72.20]); (d) KASPAR developed at the University of Hertfordshire is a child like robot used during
therapeutic interventions to help children with autism (after [72.21])
with people such as dancing [72.22], walking hand-
in-hand [72.23, 24], playing a musical duet [72.13], or
transferring skills to unskilled persons [72.25], or col-
laborating as a team with people in search and retrieve
tasks [72.16]. Their arms and hands are designed to ex-
hibit human-like gestures such as pointing, shrugging
shoulders, shaking hands, or giving a hug [72.26–
28]. Some of them are designed with mechanical
faces to communicate with humans via facial expres-
sions [72.18, 20, 29].
Whereas many of these humanoids have a mechan-
ical appearance, android robots are designed to have
a very human-like appearance with skin, teeth, hair,
and clothes (Fig. 72.2). A design challenge of android
robots is to avoid the uncanny valley where the appear-
ance and movement of the robot resemble more of an
animate corpse than a living human. Designs that fall
within the uncanny valley elicit a strong negative reac-
tion from people [72.37]. In contrast to trying to look
as human-like as possible, there are also more doll-like
robots that are intentionally designed to have simpliﬁed
facial cues and predictable movements to be suitable for
therapeutic contexts [72.21].

Part G | 72.3
1938
Part G
Robots and Humans
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.72.3a–d Examples of social robots inspired by animals with anthropomorphic qualities: (a) AIBO, the robotic dog
developed by Sony (after [72.30]), (b) Paro, the therapeutic seal robot developed at AIST (after [72.31]), (c) Mel, the
conversational robotic penguin developed at MERL (after [72.32]), and (d) Leonardo developed at the MIT Media
Lab (after [72.33])
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.72.4a–d Examples of social robots that are neither humanoid nor zoomorphic but capture key social attributes: (a):
Kismet (after [72.3]); (b) Keepon (after [72.34]); (c) Pearl (after [72.35]); (d) Valerie (after [72.36])
There are a number of more creature-like social
robots that take their aesthetic and behavioral inspira-
tion from animals (Fig. 72.3). Given that people pet
and stroke companion animals, touch-based commu-
nication has been explored in several of these more
animal-inspired robots. Sony’s entertainment robot dog,
AIBO [72.30, 38], is a well-known commercial exam-
ple. Other robots in this category have a more or-
ganic appearance, such as the therapeutic companion
robot seal, Paro [72.31]. Researchers have chosen to
design robots with a more fanciful appearance, meld-
ing anthropomorphic with animal-like qualities such as
Leonardo ([72.32, 33, 39], etc.).
Many social robots are not overtly humanoid or
zoomorphic, but still capture key social attributes
(Fig. 72.4). For instance, one of the best-known and
pioneering social robots Kismet [72.3] developed at
the MIT Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab. Kismet had a very
expressive mechanical face with anthropomorphic fea-
tures like large blue eyes. Another example is the
dancing robot Keepon developed by NiCT (Japan). This
small yellow robot has a simplistic face and uses a clas-
sic animation technique called squash and stretch for
expression of the body [72.34].
Many mobile social robots have been ﬁtted with
faces to enhance social interaction (Fig. 72.4). Some
examples are the eldercare robot, Pearl [72.35], and
the robotic receptionist Valerie with a graphical face
on a LCD (liquid crystal display) screen [72.36], both
developed at Carnegie Mellon University. Other exam-
ples are commercial robots like PaPeRo developed by
NEC [72.40]. Still, some social robots have no overt
social features like faces or eyes, but rely purely on
language-based communication. Issues of proxemics on
mobile social robots have also been explored such as
how a robot should approach a person [72.41], follow
a person [72.42], or maintain appropriate interpersonal
distance [72.43].
72.3 Social Robots and Social-Emotional Intelligence
Humans are fundamentally emotional beings. Conse-
quently, human communication and social interaction
often includes affective or emotive factors. To sup-
port the emotional side of human behavior, researchers
are exploring affective interaction and communication
between people and robots. To participate in emotion-
based interaction, robots must be able to recognize
and interpret affective signals from humans, they must
possess their own internal models of emotions (often in-
spired by psychological theories), and they must be able

Social Robotics
72.3 Social Robots and Social-Emotional Intelligence
1939
Part G | 72.3
to communicate this affective state to others. In gen-
eral, emotional displays can inform the interpretations
about an individual’s internal states (agreement or dis-
agreement about a belief, valuing a particular outcome,
an action tendency to ﬁght, etc.) and therefore help to
predict future actions. Emotional displays can evoke
emotional responses in others (e.g., displays of distress
can elicit feelings if empathy and motive another to pro-
vide social support). Given that social interactions can
serve such a broad range of functions, prominent sci-
entists have argued that emotions evolved because they
provide an adaptive advantage to social species where
individual relationships matter [72.44].
A growing number of socio-emotional robots have
been designed to realize such functions to facilitate
human–robot interaction. Some of these robots have
been designed with emotional responses or emotion-
inspired decision making systems in order to entertain
AIBO [72.30], QRIO [72.45, 46], conversationally en-
gage with WE-II [72.47], or bond with people [72.48,
49]. Some have investigated the social-communicative
aspects of emotions in coordinating behavior and inﬂu-
encing others, e.g., FEELIX [72.50], Kismet [72.3, 51].
Others have explored the functional role of emotion-
inspired processing in order to make robots more in-
telligent, better able to learn, and better adapted to
performing tasks in complex environments [72.52].
More recently, researchers have investigated the role
of affect in the context of robots that work with
people and perform tasks such as search and res-
cue/retrieve [72.16, 53, 54]. Finally, others model emo-
tions to make robots better able to handle human
emotional states, and to motivate people toward more
effective interactions in a range of application domains
such as education [72.55], coaching [72.56], or thera-
peutic systems [72.31].
72.3.1 Theories of Emotion
The robot’s computational model of emotion deter-
mines the robot’s affective responses. This can depend
on a myriad of interrelated physical, cognitive, and af-
fective factors that continuously modulate and bias one
another. These factors arise from the robot’s interac-
tions with the external environment as well as its own
internal state (i. e., the current emotional state, the cog-
nitive state, goals, motives, physical states, etc.). The
emotional model deﬁnes the relationship between these
factors and mechanisms that result in the observable
behavior of the robot. Many of these computational
models of emotion are inspired by theories of hu-
man emotions. These theoretical models offer insightful
constraints that help researchers to derive coherent
computational models.
A number of theoretical perspectives have been
particular inﬂuential in the development of computa-
tional models of emotion. Appraisal theory empha-
sizes a causal connection between cognition and emo-
tion [72.57]. In appraisal theory, emotion is evoked
from patterns of judgments (called appraisal variables)
that characterize the personal signiﬁcance of events
(e.g., events and the individual’s beliefs, or desires and
intentions). An active area of development is in under-
standing the relationship between appraisal variables
and speciﬁc emotion labels, or speciﬁc behavioral (i. e.,
facial expressions) and cognitive responses (i. e., cop-
ing strategies) [72.58]. This kind of model lends itself to
more symbolic AI (artiﬁcial intelligence) implementa-
tions, with if-then rules [72.59, 60]. In contract, dimen-
sional theories posit that emotion and other affective
phenomena are not discrete entities, but rather exist on
a continuum of a continuous dimensional space [72.61].
Smith and Scott [72.62] proposed a three-dimensional
(3-D) PAD model where P corresponds to pleasure
(valence), A corresponds to arousal (intensity), and D
corresponds to dominance (coping potential) [72.62].
Reference [72.63] mapped these appraisal dimensions
to intensity varying expressions that can be computed
as a weighted blend of basis postures corresponding to
the main axes [72.63]. The core affect (the emotional
state of the individual at any given time) is represented
as a point in the 3-D space that is pushed around by
eliciting events. Dimensional models are often used
for generating the behavior of animated characters, as
the dimensional space lends itself nicely to animation
blending.
72.3.2 Example: A Synthesis
of Emotion Theories in Action
Kismet is the ﬁrst autonomous robot explicitly de-
signed to explore socio-emotive face-to-face interac-
tions with people [72.3, 51]. Research with Kismet
focused on exploring the origins of social interaction
and communication in people, namely that which oc-
curs between caregiver and infant, though extensive
computational modeling guided by insights from mod-
els of emotion [72.64]. Kismet was designed to be
dependent on people to help it satisfy its goals and
motivations.
Internally, Kismet’s models of emotion interacted
intimately with its cognitive systems to make affective
appraisals about its interactions with the surrounding
environment and people. These appraisals character-
ized the robot’s interaction with its environment (e.g.,
Is an object too close to the robot so that it might do
damage?, Is that person speaking to me in a prais-
ing tone of voice? etc.). These appraisals were tagged

Part G | 72.3
1940
Part G
Robots and Humans
with somatic markers [72.65] that characterized how
these appraisals mapped to the robot’s internal mea-
sures of arousal (A), valence (V), and stance (S), an
action tendency to approach or avoid). The affective
appraisals directly inﬂuenced the robot’s behavior se-
lection and goal arbitration processes. The somatic
markers inﬂuenced the robot’s core affective state –
a continuously adjusted point within a three dimen-
sional [A,V,S] space. The core affect mapped to the
robot’s emotive expressions conveyed through vocal
quality, facial expressions, and body posture [72.66].
Rather than simply triggering a set of discrete emotive
expressions, Kismet’s facial and postural expressions
were continuously computed following a componen-
tial approach, as a weighted blend of basis postures of
the face and body along the [A,V,S] axes. This sub-
tle variability in expressive behavior was important for
enabling the robot to mutually regulate affective states
with a person [72.67, 68]. Finally, the core affect and
affective appraisals contributed to elicit adaptive behav-
ioral responses (e.g., orient, search, avoid, etc.) as part
of the robot’s emotive responses (loosely inspired by
the idea of emotion circuits [72.69]). Through a process
of behavioral homeostasis [72.70], these emotive re-
sponses served to inﬂuence how people interacted with
the robot in order to restore the robot’s internal drives,
goals, and affective states [72.67, 68].
VIDEO 557
illustrates Kismet’s ability to recognize, express and in-
teract with people using emotive cues. Ultimately, the
purpose of this dance was to keep the robot in a zone
of proximal development conceptualized by Vygotzky to
be optimal for learning to propel the robot down a de-
velopmental path [72.71].
72.3.3 Emotional Empathy
For humans, the dynamic coupling of like minds
through the actions of similar bodies is critical for ac-
quiring human-like intuitions about the internal states
of others. Dautenhahn [72.2] is one of the earliest
works to explore empathic mechanisms of understand-
ing others in social robot–robot interaction.
It is likely that emotional empathy in humans is
learned, beginning in infancy. Various experiments with
human adults have shown a dual affect–body connec-
tion whereby posing one’s face into a speciﬁc emotive
facial expression actually elicits the feeling associated
with that emotion [72.72, 73]. Hence, imitating the fa-
a)
b)
Fig.72.5a,b Kismet and a young woman mirroring af-
fect. Facial expression and affective tone of voice are
tightly correlated: (a) mirroring interest/arousal; (b) mir-
roring negative affect
cial expressions of others could cause an infant to feel
what the other is feeling, thereby allowing the infant
to learn the association of observed emotive expres-
sions of others with the infant’s own internal affective
states. Other time-locked multimodal cues may facili-
tate learning this mapping, such as affective speech that
accompanies emotive facial expressions during social
encounters between caregivers and infants. Using a sim-
ilar approach, Breazeal et al. [72.74] posit that a robot
could learn the affective meaning of emotive expres-
sions signaled through another person’s facial expres-
sions, body language, and synchronized multimodal
cues such as vocal prosody [72.68, 75] (Fig. 72.5).
These time-locked multimodal states occur because of
the similarity in bodies and body-affect mappings, and
they enable the robot to learn to associate its internal
affective state with the corresponding observed expres-
sion. In later work, they implemented a model of social
referencing by which the robot, Leonardo, that com-
bines models of empathic association with models of
shared attention (Sect. 72.4.1).

Social Robotics
72.4 Socio-Cognitive Skills
1941
Part G | 72.4
72.4 Socio-Cognitive Skills
Socially intelligent robots, however, must understand
and interact with animate entities (i. e., people, animals,
and other social robots) whose behavior is governed by
having a mind and body. In other words, social robots
need the ability to recognize, understand, and predict
human behavior in terms of the underlying mental
states such as beliefs, intents, desires, feelings, etc. Psy-
chology calls this ability Theory of Mind (also known
as mindreading, mental perception, social common-
sense, folk psychology, social understanding, among
others).
This section reviews research in implementing mod-
els of human socio-cognitive skills and abilities on
robots. Social robots shall need a diverse repertoire of
such skills to realize their full potential in daily human
life – to communicate, cooperate, and learn from people
in a human-centric and human compatible manner.
For instance, social robots will need to be aware of
people’s goals and intentions so that they can appro-
priately adjust their behavior to help us as our goals
and needs change. They will need to be able to ﬂexibly
draw their attention to what we currently ﬁnd of interest
so that their behavior can be coordinated and informa-
tion can be focused about the same thing. They need to
realize that perceiving a given situation from different
perspectives impacts what we know and believe to be
true about it. This will enable them to bring important
information to our attention that is not easily accessi-
ble to us when we need it. Social robots will need to be
deeply aware of our emotions, feelings, and attitudes to
be able to prioritize what is the most important thing to
do for us according to what pleases us or to what we
ﬁnd to be most urgent, relevant, or signiﬁcant.
Furthermore, the behavior of social robots will need
to adhere to people’s expectations. Namely, people will
apply their theory of mind to understand the robot in
terms of these mental states as well.
72.4.1 Shared Attention
Scassellati [72.76] was one of the earliest works to pose
the question of how to endow robots with a theory of
other minds. Inspired by the theoretical viewpoints pro-
posed from the study of autism (believed to be a deﬁcit
of theory of mind), Scassellati implemented a hybrid
model of those models proposed by Leslie [72.77] and
Baron-Cohen [72.78] where shared attention is viewed
to be a critical (and missing) precursor to the theory
of mind competence. This hybrid model was imple-
mented on the humanoid robot, Cog. The robot was
able to exhibit an assortment of social-cognitive skills
such as joint attention, distinguishing an entity in the
environment as either being animate or inanimate, and
imitating only entities deemed to be animate [72.79].
Several researchers have explored models of joint
reference, guided by insights provided by develop-
mental psychology and autism research [72.76, 79–81].
Normal human infants ﬁrst demonstrate the ability to
share attention with others at 9 to 12 months of age,
such as following the adult’s gaze or pointing gestures
to the object being referred [72.78, 82]. In these works,
joint attention is a learned process. For instance, the
robot learns the visual motor mapping from the human’s
attentional cue (often using head pose as a popular in-
dicator of what the human is currently looking at) to
the motor commands necessary to have the robot look
at the same thing. This process is often bootstrapped by
having the human look to where the robot initiates its
gaze. In Fasel et al. [72.80], the robot learns a model
of joint attention because it discovers that the human’s
gaze is a reliable indicator of where there is something
interesting to look.
Thomaz et al. [72.83] explore attention-monitoring
behavior of a robot in a social referencing interaction.
In the developmental psychology literature, the ability
for babies to actively monitor that others are looking
at the same thing is a strong indicator of shared at-
tention [72.84]. Social referencing is considered to be
an early demonstration of shared attention because the
baby looks back and forth between the novel object
and the adult’s emotive reaction toward that object to
learn the association between the two. To implement
shared attention, the robot’s attentional state is modeled
with two related but distinct foci: the current atten-
tional focus (what is being looked at right now) and
the referential focus (the current topic of shared focus,
i. e., what communication, activities, etc. are about).
Furthermore, the robot maintains a model for its own
attentional state and a model for the attentional state
of the human. The robot uses the heuristic of look-
ing time upon a shared object to infer the referent of
the interaction. Once the referent has been identiﬁed,
the robot monitors the attention of the human in order
to associate their emotional reaction about that object
to the intended target. Video
VIDEO 556
illustrates
Leonardo’s ability to interact and learn from a person
via social referencing.
72.4.2 Mental Perspective Taking
This section explores this empathetic, self-as-simulator
approach further to address more general challenges in
endowing robots with mental perspective-taking abil-
ities. These approaches are inspired and informed by

Part G | 72.4
1942
Part G
Robots and Humans
theories championed by neuroscience and embodied
cognition called Simulation Theory.
Simulation Theory
Simulation theory holds that certain parts of the brain
have dual use; they are used to not only generate our
own behavior and mental states, but also simulate the
introceptive states of the other person [72.85]. In other
words, we engage in a process of perspective taking and
mental simulation.
For instance, Gallese and Goldman [72.86] pro-
posed that a class of neurons discovered in monkeys
(called mirror neurons) is a possible neurological
mechanism underlying both imitative abilities and
Simulation Theory-type prediction of the behavior of
others and their mental states. Further, Meltzoff and
Decety [72.87] posit that imitation is the critical link in
the story that connects the function of mirror neurons
to the development of adult mind-reading skills. From
the ﬁeld of embodied cognition, Barsalou et al. [72.88]
presents additional evidence from various social em-
bodiment phenomena that when observing an action,
people activate some part of their own representation of
that action as well as other cognitive states that relate
to that action.
Mirror Systems for Recognizing Actions
Inspired by these theories and ﬁndings, Johnson
and Demiris [72.89] employ a simulation of visual
perception to recreate the visual egocentric sensory
space and corresponding egocentric behavioral space
of the observed agent to increase the accuracy of action
recognition. This approach is based on their HAMMER
architecture (hierarchical attentive multiple models for
execution and recognition) that takes a mirror neuron
inspired approach to action recognition and imitation
by directly involving the observer’s motor system in
the action recognition process. Speciﬁcally, during
observation of another’s actions, all of the observer’s
inverse models (akin to motor programs) are executed
in parallel via simulation using forward models, and
then compared to the observed action. The one that
matches best is selected as being the recognized action.
Perceptual perspective taking is needed to provide
meaningful data for comparison. The simulated actions
used by the observer during recognition must be
generated as though from the point of view of the
other person. They demonstrate this approach in an
experiment where a robot attributes perceptions and
recognizes the actions of a second robot [72.89].
Mental Perspective-Taking
for Inferring Beliefs and Goals
Gray et al. [72.90] have implemented computational
models of simulation-theoretic mechanisms throughout
several systems within Leonardo’s cognitive architec-
ture to enable the robot to infer beliefs and goal states
of a human collaborator.
The robot reuses its belief-construction systems
from the visual perspective of the human to predict the
beliefs the human is likely to hold to be true given what
he or she can visually observe. This enables the robot to
recognize and reason about the beliefs held by a person,
even when they diverge from the robot’s own beliefs of
the same situation.
In psychology, the ability to appreciate the diver-
gent beliefs of another is classically demonstrated by
the famous false belief task. In this task, subjects are
told a story with pictorial aides that typically proceeds
as follows: two children, Sally and Anne, are playing
together in a room. Sally places a toy in one of two
containers. Sally then leaves the room, and while she
is gone, tricky Anne moves the toy into the other con-
tainer. Sally returns. At this point the human subject is
asked Where will Sally look for the toy?
The robot, Leonardo, has demonstrated its abil-
ity to pass these sorts of false belief tasks where it
observes two humans playing the roles of Sally and
Anne [72.91]. Within the robot’s goal-directed behavior
system (where schemas relate preconditions and ac-
tions with desired outcomes) motor information is used
along with perceptual and other contextual clues (such
as hierarchically structured task knowledge) to infer the
human’s goals and how he or she might be trying to
achieve them (i. e., plan recognition).
72.4.3 Perspective Taking
in Collaboration
and Teamwork
By using a simulation-theoretic methodology, mental
inferences made across different cognitive systems can
interact in interesting and useful ways to support col-
laborative behavior where a robot offers its human
teammate appropriate assistance.
Using Visual Perspective Taking to Resolve
Ambiguous Referents
Trafton et al. [72.92] have developed and implemented
visual and spatial perspective taking abilities based
on mental simulation to support human–robot inter-
action and collaboration. Their cognitive architecture,
Polyscheme, is designed to model how humans integrate
multiple representational methods, reasoning, and plan-
ning methods to keep track of the world, including rich
facilities for representing counterfactual worlds. It thus
supports simulations of other people’s visual perspec-
tive to reason about interactions and the world from this
alternate point of view.

Social Robotics
72.4 Socio-Cognitive Skills
1943
Part G | 72.4
They have demonstrated these skills in a number of
experiments, such as demonstrating the robot’s ability
to learn how to play hide and seek with a person where
the robot learns what makes a good hiding place with
respect to being completely occluded from the human
seeker’s point of view [72.93]. They have also demon-
strated the usefulness of this system for a robot that
solves a series of perspective-taking problems using
the same frames of references and spatial reasoning
abilities that astronauts do to facilitate collaborative
problem solving – such as repairing a vehicle with an-
other person that has a different vantage point [72.94].
For instance, the robot can handle egocentric requests
(i. e., hand me the cone to my right), addressee-centric
requests (i. e., hand me the cone to your right), or
object-centered requests (i. e., hand me the cone in
front of the box).
In Trafton et al. [72.92], a human interacts with the
robot using a multimodal interface that supports speech
and gesture. The robot’s perspective taking skills are
used to resolve ambiguous referents that can arise when
a person asks a robot perform an action in relation to
an object (i. e., asking the robot to hand me the wrench
when there are multiple wrenches to choose from). In
particular, a visual occlusion in the workspace might
hide another candidate wrench from the person’s view-
point but not from the robot’s viewpoint (Fig. 72.6).
The robot can infer which is the intended object by tak-
ing the visual perspective of the human and applying
principles of joint salience and least effort. If there still
remains an ambiguity, the robot can act to resolve it by
asking which one?
Providing Informational
or Instrumental Support
Gray et al. have demonstrated the ability for the
Leonardo robot to successfully infer its human partner’s
beliefs, desires, and intentions from real-time behav-
ior during collaborative tasks. The shared workspace
can have either visual occlusions [72.90] or can change
dynamically where not all participants know of these
changes [72.91]. The robot can integrate these mental
state inferences to decide how to best help the person
such as offering instrumental support (acting on the en-
vironment to help the human complete their goal) or
provide informational support (giving relevant informa-
tion the person needs to successfully achieve his or her
goal).
Consider the following scenario: a helpful robot is
introduced to two people, Sally and Anne. All three
watch as Anne hides chips in a box to the left of the
robot and cookies in a box to the right. Sally leaves the
room, at which point Anne plays a trick on Sally by
swapping the contents of the boxes and then locks both
boxes with a combination lock. Anne leaves, and Sally
soon returns craving the chips she saw placed in one
of the boxes. Sally remembers seeing the chips placed
in the left box and attempts to open it by working the
combination lock. The robot has matching chips and
cookies that it can give out. What should the robot do
to assist Sally?
Mindreading skills play an important role in this
plan recognition scenario where the robot must ob-
serve Sally in real time to infer Sally’s misconception of
where the chips are (Anne switched the location when
Sally was out of the room), to infer what her desire is
based on her behavior (Sally never explicitly said she
wants the chips), and to recognize that Sally’s plan for
how to get the chips is actually invalid (she is trying to
open the wrong box). The robot has true knowledge of
the situation, and must then reason about how to best
help Sally get the object of her desire.
Gray et al. [72.91] (
VIDEO 563 ) combines these
three kinds of mental inferences to demonstrate in-
tention recognition with divergent beliefs for collab-
orative robots. Speciﬁcally, for the case of informa-
Table
Occlusion
Fig. 72.6 Robonaut using visual perspective taking to dis-
ambiguate the intended referent when asked to hand me
the wrench. The human can only see one wrench, but the
robot can see both. The robot correctly hands the wrench
that both can see

Part G | 72.5
1944
Part G
Robots and Humans
tional support, Leonardo relates its own beliefs about
the state of the shared workspace to those of the
human based on the visual perspective of each. If
a visual occlusion exists or an event occurs that pre-
vents the human from knowing important information
about the workspace, the robot knows to direct the
human’s attention to bring that information into com-
mon ground. For instance, Leonardo points to the
box that actually holds the chips. For the case of
instrumental support, Leonardo helps the person by
directly giving the person a matching bag of chips.
Gray and Breazeal [72.95] explore the robot reason-
ing and taking explicit action to deceive a human
competitor.
72.5 Human Social Responses to Social Robots
72.5.1 Social Judgments
Anthropomorphic design is important for social robots
given that the appearance, interface, and function of
a technology or product impact how people perceive it,
interact with it, and engage with it over time [72.12].
Robots and other technologies with humanlike design
cues elicit social responses from people [72.96–99]. For
instance, people have been found to respond more pos-
itively to artifacts that exhibit humanlike cues such as
emotive expressions over those with a purely functional
design, although user preferences were task and con-
text dependent [72.100, 101]. Adding humanlike cues
to a technological artifact can foster people’s social
connection to it, aid people in learning how to use it,
and enhance liking, engagement, and the desire to col-
laborate [72.102–104]. Others have found that people
tend to hold richer mental models of as anthropomor-
phic robots than mechanistic ones [72.103, 105]. Others
have explored a number of anthropomorphic design fea-
tures such personality, backstory, use of humor, and
even the notions of self (e.g., referring to itself as
I), deception, politeness, and moral regard [72.106–
108]. However, it is important that the appearance and
interface of the robot’s design match its capabilities
and the users’ expectations or negative effects can re-
sult [72.109].
72.5.2 Physical Versus Virtual Embodiment
When considering the role and advantages of social
embodiment, one might ask whether there is a differ-
ence between physical and virtual counterparts. Indeed,
physical social embodiment offers a number of ad-
vantages over purely graphical representations. First,
while many social interactions involve exchanging only
visual and auditory cues, robots support communica-
tion and collaboration through physical contact as well.
Robots support the joint manipulation of artifacts and
the sharing of physical space with people. Both are im-
portant for all sorts of collaborative activities such as
assembly and manufacturing [72.110, 111] search and
rescue [72.16, 53], domestic assistance [72.103], and
more. Further touch is not only an interesting and im-
portant communication modality with noted heath and
therapeutic beneﬁts, but it can also inﬂuence the social
judgments people make of robots such as how caring
or persuasive it is perceived to be [72.103, 104]. The
modality of touch will be discussed further in section
social touch [72.31, 39].
In addition, a growing number of studies that di-
rectly compare virtual to physical agents report that
people show more trust, compliance, and enjoyment
with physical robots [72.112–115]. Beyond user pref-
erence of physical over virtual agents, a number of
studies have also shown improved human performance
and outcomes on a wide variety of tasks ranging from
games [72.112] to educational contexts [72.115], as-
sistive tasks [72.114], health-related activities [72.116],
and Wizard-of-Oz user studies [72.113].
Finally, because virtual agents are a representational
form, interpretation and mapping may prove too chal-
lenging for individuals with cognitive or social deﬁcits.
Hence, robots may prove advantageous as therapeutic
interventions for children with autism who can show
little or no interest in forms on video monitors or tele-
visions [72.117]. Finally, social robots tend to support
face-to-face group dynamics [72.118] – while screens
tend to capture eyeballs at the risk of diminishing
face-to-face interaction [72.119]. This has important
considerations for the design of learning technologies
for young children, in particular, where supporting the
participation of the parent in a social way is of great
beneﬁt to how children learn.
72.5.3 Social Stimulus
to Learn About People
The impact of physically embodied social robots on
human social responses has opened new applications
for robots as an interesting tool to help scientists learn
about human social behavior and judgments. People
make a variety of social judgments through the dy-
namic exchange of nonverbal cues such as postural

Social Robotics
72.5 Human Social Responses to Social Robots
1945
Part G | 72.5
shifts, subtle head gestures, arm gestures, facial cues,
tone of voice, etc. Indeed, ample evidence indicates that
humans regularly use speciﬁc cues, often without con-
scious awareness, to infer the motivations of others with
some level of accuracy [72.120, 121]. If people employ
such cues without conscious awareness, then it becomes
difﬁcult to use people as experimental confederates
where such cues must be carefully controlled. Thus, in
one paradigm, social robots can be used as a highly
controllable social stimulus in the place of a confed-
erate in human participant studies. This is particularly
useful when trying to understand how human nonverbal
cues inﬂuence people’s social judgments, such as how
trustworthy another is perceived to be from a brief en-
counter [72.122].
72.5.4 Social Rapport
One important skill for social robots is the ability to
build and maintain social rapport with its user. Social
rapport exists in the interaction between individuals.
It creates a powerful interpersonal inﬂuence and re-
sponsiveness based on mutual attentiveness, positivity,
and mutual responsiveness [72.123–126]. In joint ac-
tivities, the ability to establish a good rapport often
results in improved outcomes. For instance, students
learn better when they have a good rapport with their
teachers [72.127], patients are more adherent and have
better health outcomes when they have a good rapport
with their doctors [72.124], teams make better deci-
sions and work more effectively when they share a good
rapport with each other [72.128]. The quality of rap-
port between people is inﬂuenced by the exchange of
nonverbal behaviors between individuals [72.129, 130].
Although the speciﬁcs of how people build a strong
rapport with one another are still a topic of scientiﬁc
inquiry, the more in-sync and open the participants’
nonverbal cues are in relation to one another, the more
positive rapport results. For instance, appropriate mir-
roring or synchrony of body posture, head movements,
facial expression, and vocal prosody can all contribute
to positive rapport. Open cues signal a receptiveness to
interact, e.g., making appropriate eye contact, leaning
toward another, and arm gestures that tend to not oc-
clude the body or face.
Hence, when considering how social robots can ef-
fectively collaborate with people, their ability to build
and maintain good social rapport with people (at least
perceived rapport) is important. Thus, it is not just
a robot’s ability to perform such nonverbal cues that ul-
timately matters, but the robot’s ability to coordinate
them with those of people in real-time. For instance, re-
searchers have explored the coordination of an agent’s
nonverbal cues with people to improve rapport [72.56],
engagement [72.32], trustworthiness [72.122], and de-
ictic cues [72.131].
72.5.5 Social Support
Improved rapport also facilitates the ability of social
robots to provide people with effective forms of social
support. Social support is recognized to play an effec-
tive role in helping people to attain personal goals and
improved outcomes in broad domains such as educa-
tion, mental health, physical health, aging, coping, and
more. It is conceptualized as the perception and ac-
tuality that one is cared for, has assistance available
from others, and that one is part of a supportive so-
cial network [72.123]. These supportive sources can be
emotional, instrumental, informational, or companion-
ship. Emotional support, for instance, conveys to an
individual know that they he or she is valued; it includes
offering empathy, concern, nurturance, encouragement,
and acceptance to name a few [72.124, 125]. Instrumen-
tal support concerns the concrete, utilitarian ways to
provide assistance such as ﬁnancial assistance, mate-
rial goods, or services. Informational support includes
offering useful advice, guidance, or information to help
others problem-solve. Finally, companionship support
gives someone a sense of social belonging and having
another to participate in shared social activities. These
forms of social support can come from people, profes-
sionals, pets, and even social robots.
The ability to provide a user with social support is
one of the effective ways that social robots can help
people through social means. Robots can provide this
assistance through direct interaction with its user, or
by helping to mediate the provision of social support
from people (e.g., connecting people). A wide variety
of social robots today are being developed to inter-
act with people as tutors [72.132], learning compan-
ions [72.118, 133], coaches [72.116], domestic helpers
for the elderly [72.134], therapeutic aids [72.21, 31],
and more. Through dialog, nonverbal cues, expressive
displays, and physical actions, these robots assist peo-
ple by providing information, monitoring performance,
offering feedback, incentivizing and sustaining moti-
vation, giving encouragement, offering companionship,
performing physical tasks, etc.
As such, social robots have broad applicability in
many domains where it is a technology that can extend
and augment the social support provided by people.
This is particularly relevant for societal challenges, e.g.,
eldercare, health and chronic disease management, and
education, where social support is recognized as being
critical for positive outcomes, but where there is a rec-

Part G | 72.6
1946
Part G
Robots and Humans
ognized shortage of trained professionals to meet the
demand. Further, whereas frequent meetings with hu-
man professionals is cost prohibitive, social robots have
the potential to be used to ﬁll the gaps in a cost-effective
way. Importantly, social robots are not being designed
to replace or obviate human professionals, but rather to
serve an effective tool that supports human networks in
a scalable and cost-effective way.
72.6 Social Robots and Communication Skills
Communication implies an exchange of information
through natural language. Thus, one might consider that
very good ASR (automatic spoken-language recogni-
tion) is the primary function required to fulﬁll the com-
munication skills for robots. However, social robots
are expected to engage in casual communication with
people in as natural a way as people communicate
themselves. In such casual communication, informa-
tion is often exchanged nonverbally as well as verbally.
Thus, robots need to be well equipped to recognize
people’s nonverbal cues and to express nonverbal cues
via their nonverbal behavior. The required computation
even takes into account good perceptual and cognitive
capability of surrounding environments in addition to
the targeted person. This section introduces the history
of research in social robots and communication skills,
and provides insights for future challenges.
72.6.1 Verbal/Nonverbal Communication
Historically, even ﬁrst-generation humanoid robots de-
veloped in the 1970s had primitive capabilities for
communicating using natural language. For instance,
WABOT and WABOT-2 had a conversation capabil-
ity in natural language, which is based on the model
as simple combinations of speech input/output map-
pings [72.135, 136].
Furthermore, early pioneers had noticed the impor-
tance of nonverbal information in human conversation.
Nonverbal behavior was classiﬁed into three roles:
1. Regulators: expressions such as gaze, poses, and
vocalizations that are used to regulate/control con-
versational turn-taking.
2. State displays: indication of internal state including
affect, cognitive, or conversational states that im-
prove interface transparency.
3. Illustrators: gestures that supplement information
for the utterance. These include deictic gestures
(pointing) and iconic gestures.
In this scope, nonverbal information is considered
as supplemental. It is natural language that communi-
cates the primary information in turn-based exchanges.
We provide examples below.
Regulatory Cues
Even some of the earliest social robots displayed non-
verbal information to regulate interactions with people.
Hadaly 2 was the ﬁrst robot to use mutual gaze as a non-
verbal cue to regulate conversation [72.137, 138]. The
mutual gaze is approximated using face recognition to
determine when the human’s face was facing the robot;
when a mutual gaze occurred, Hadaly 2 expressed
readiness to commence conversation by blinking its
eyes. People’s gaze toward a robot is also considered
cues to inform whether he/she is engaging in the con-
versation with the robot [72.139].
Other examples are Kismet [72.3, 140, 141] and
Leonardo [72.33, 142], which had the capability for
nonverbal cues called envelope displays to regulate
the exchange of speaking turns. Backchannelling cues
were found to reduce stress and cognitive load during
complex human–robot teaming task (Fig. 72.7). See
VIDEO 559
for how Kismet uses envelope displays
to regulate speaking turns with people. The regulatory
role for a speaking turn is demonstrated in multi-party
interaction too. People tend to make eye contact and
raise their eyebrows when they are ready to relinquish
their speaking turn and tend to break their gaze and
blink when starting their speaking turn. Recognition of
these cues was implemented for smoothing and syn-
Fig. 72.7 Backchannelling cues were found to reduce
stress and cognitive load during complex human–robot
teaming task. Teams where the robots engaged in
backchannel cues to human requests also tended to ﬁnd
more items in a search and retrieve task (after [72.16]),
VIDEO 555

Social Robotics
72.6 Social Robots and Communication Skills
1947
Part G | 72.6
chronizing the exchange of speaking turns. Gaze is also
known to convey the speaker’s intention who may take
the next turn. Mutlu et al. have successfully replicated
it in human–robot interaction [72.143, 144]. Kirchner
and Alempijevic revealed that gaze is also effective in
communicating who should receive an item provided by
a robot [72.145]. In opposite way, gaze was also used
as a cue to interpret whether one would wish to take
turn [72.146].
Paralinguistic information is also processed. People
frequently provide short acknowledgment utterances
(e.g., uh-huh, um-hmm, huh, etc.) as the robot explains
something. These responses are either acknowledg-
ments, or ask-backs. It is very difﬁcult to distinguish
these two kinds of utterances from only the linguistic
information as represented by the transcription of the
utterance. Fujie et al. demonstrated a method to distin-
guish the utterance as either an acknowledgment or an
ask-back from the prosody of utterance [72.47].
State-Display Cues
The facial expression and gaze were used to indi-
cate the conversational or cognitive state of a robot.
Such state-display cues make the robot’s internal state
more transparent to a user and thus enables him/her to
better understand the robot’s state. For instance, RO-
BITA used the tightness of its facial expression to
indicate readiness to engage in conversation; a tight
face was used to express conversational readiness,
while a loose face communicated a lack of readiness
to engage [72.147]. Emotional state and attention tar-
get can also be displayed nonverbally (Sects. 72.3
and 72.4).
State of listening and level of understanding are
also displayed nonverbally. Human listeners use back-
channel responses, such as head nods to convey the
fact that he/she is successfully following the con-
versation. Imitating human behavior, robots indicate
their state of listening using head nods [72.148], fa-
cial expressions [72.5], and bodily motion ([72.149]
and
VIDEO 810 ). Such state-display cues are used in
a human-like telepresence robots to indicate operators’
state of being engaging to the conversation [72.150,
151].
Another back-channel signal is an expression of
confusion by the listener (verbal or nonverbal). This
ﬂags the speaker to stop and try to repair the broken
communication. Robots such as Leonardo and ROBITA
use facial displays of confusion when speech recog-
nition fails in order to intuitively communicate to the
human that he or she should repeat their last utterance.
There were robots that process humans’ back chan-
nel feedback [72.32] A sophisticated head nod recog-
nition system was developed whereby the robot, Mel,
could successfully distinguish small feedback nods
from other kinds of head nods such as those that
communicate agreement. Mel used this information to
determine its own nodding behavior in order to be an
appropriate response for the human. In a series of hu-
man subject studies, Sidner et al. found these nonverbal
cues to enhance the social engagement of the robot to
people [72.32].
Illustrator Cues
Deictic gestures have often been implemented in robots
for pointing to an object, such as using index-ﬁnger
pointing [72.152, 153], gaze [72.143], and the com-
bination of the two [72.74, 154–157]. Other types of
gestures, such as iconic gestures [72.156] and region
pointing ([72.158] and
VIDEO 811 ), were also suc-
cessfully used in robots. The effect of gestures has
been successfully demonstrated. For instance, in a di-
rection giving scenario, even though turn-by-turn di-
rection is verbally given thus could be comprehend
without gesture, supplemental pointing gesture im-
proved listeners’ comprehension about the given direc-
tion [72.159].
A number of robots are able to recognize deictic
gestures of a person conveyed either through pointing
gestures or head poses. For example, Leonardo is able
to infer the object referent in an interaction by consider-
ing a number of factors including pointing gesture, head
pose, and speech. Sugiyama et al. associated verbal spa-
tial deixis and pointing gestures to better recognize
the pointed target ([72.160] and
VIDEO 807 ). Brooks
and Breazeal [72.153] developed a deictic recognition
system that enabled a robot to infer the correct ob-
ject referent from correlated speech and deictic gesture.
Interestingly, it was found that the accuracy of the hu-
man’s pointing gesture is surprisingly poor. As a result,
the deictic recognition system relies on coordinated
speech and gesture information, with spatial knowledge
provided by a three-dimensional (3-D) spatial database
constructed by the robot using real-time vision, and
a deictic spatial reasoning system. This system was
successfully demonstrated on the dexterous humanoid
Robonaut developed at National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) Johnson Space Center (JSC)
(Fig. 72.8b) where the human points to and labels a set
of four bolts on a wheel to be fastened in order by the
robot.
72.6.2 Mechanisms for Human–Robot
Communication
Mechanisms of turn-based communication are well
studied. In linguistics, it is considered that conversa-
tion is formed as the repetition of turn-taking [72.161].

Part G | 72.6
1948
Part G
Robots and Humans
a)
b)
c)
Fig.72.8a–c Examples of conversational robots: (a) RO-
BITA performing group conversation; (b) Robonaut in-
terpreting the pointing gestures of a human to determine
which nut to fasten on the wheel; (c) Leonardo uses gaze
and joint attention to ground the human’s pointing gesture
for the desired referent
There is one speaker who takes ﬂoor and speaks
while listeners listen to him/her [72.162]. When the
speaker ﬁnishes speaking, then the ﬂoor is taken by
one of the listeners. There could be bystanders who
also listen to, but do not intend to take turn. This
turn-based model is the typical model used in dia-
log modeling [72.163]. That is, a dialog management
system identiﬁes who owns ﬂoor, recognizes words
in utterances the speaker spoke, and generate utter-
ance when the system takes ﬂoor, often implemented
with series of rules. It is successfully extended for
human–robot communication. For instance, Nakano
et al. developed rule-based architecture in which the
planner deals with robot’s task-based actions as well
as dialog management [72.164]. Scheutz et al. devel-
oped software architecture, named DIARC. It uses
a rule-based planner that receives inputs from all per-
ception modules, and addresses effect and goal-directed
actions in addition to natural language dialog manage-
ment [72.165]. In such an approach, the robot commu-
nicates through utterances accompanied with nonverbal
cues [72.166]. Some systems deal with multi-party di-
alog, in which robot’s gaze-cue (Fig. 72.8a) is used
to regulate who is the addressee, the active listener
who is expected to take the next turn [72.143, 167–
171].
Researchers have also been well aware of the im-
portance of the time-sensitive nature of communication.
For instance, interruption in the middle of a speaker’s
turn has also recently been taken into account in di-
alog management systems [72.164, 172]. Chao and
Thomaz, proposed more elaborated model, in which
time-synchrony in verbal and nonverbal cues, e.g., gaze
and gesture, are addressed using a Petri-net-based rep-
resentation [72.173]. Empirical studies have revealed
what is good synchrony and timing. For instance, Ya-
mamoto and Watanabe, have studied synchrony within
a robot’s utterance and motion, and revealed that peo-
ple prefer the robot whose utterance is slightly delayed
from the start of its motion [72.174]. This would mirror
what humans do everyday, as it is reported that hu-
mans’ gestures are performed slightly ahead than their
utterances [72.175]. Shiwa et al. revealed that people
prefer small delay in the robot’s response, and con-
versational ﬁller such as etto would be useful to buy
time when the robot’s response is delayed ([72.176] and
VIDEO 806 ).
However, while above studies are under the assump-
tion that information is communicated through turn-
based dialog, recent studies have revealed more dy-
namic cases of human–robot communication, in which
the way robots communicate information is some-
times out from the turn-based dialog paradigm. For
instance, during the moment a robot and a person are
going to initiate interaction both of them communi-
cate their intention that they would like to meet and
talk. A couple of studies investigated a way for a robot
to express its intention to welcome the initiation of
interaction [72.177]. When the target user is seated,
Dautenhahn et al. revealed that they prefer the robot
approach from side ([72.178] and
VIDEO 258 ). Fig-
ure 72.9 shows a scene in which the robot approached
to pedestrians. Satake et al. revealed that such inter-
action failed if the robot failed to communicate its
intention to talk. As the robot was operated in noisy
shopping mall, when it used only verbal utterance,
the robot was simply ignored. Instead, they found that
the robot needs to communicate its intention nonver-
bally. It needs to approach from a frontal direction and
needs to be responsive in adjusting its body orientation
toward the targeted person; such nonverbal behavior
made the robot more success in initiating conversation
with pedestrians [72.179].
Pedestrians also communicate their intention non-
verbally; for instance, when he/she does not wish to
talk to the robot, they avoid approaching to the robot.
Thus, a robot could use the proximity information
to estimate people’s willingness in initiating interac-

Social Robotics
72.6 Social Robots and Communication Skills
1949
Part G | 72.6
Fig. 72.9 A robot that approaches
pedestrians
tion. Michalowski et al. classiﬁed spatial zones around
a robot, and let the robot talk to the person if he/she
approached to the robot and entered to social dis-
tance [72.177]. There are some empirical studies about
proxemics that revealed that people often prefer to stay
at social distance when they talk to a robot [72.180–
182].
Joint attention (as introduced in earlier Sect. 72.4)
can be silent. Figure 72.10 and
VIDEO 257
show
a scene where a person share his attention target non-
verbally with the robot. The person is curious about the
computer and stands in front of it; then, the robot moves
to the location convenient to explain the object. When
the person moves to the other exhibit, the robot follows
him and explains the one in front of him. Here, it is
their standing position that communicates the target of
attention [72.183, 184].
These examples show the cases where communi-
cation is not necessarily turn-based. This is because
information can be exchanged nonverbally in such ca-
sual communication. Unlike the speech channel that
needs to be typically occupied by only one speaker
(speaking person), nonverbal signals can be mutu-
ally exchanged at the same time. For instance, when
a pedestrian and a robot meet, their positions contin-
uously change while they walk which communicates
whether they would like to initiate conversation. As so-
Fig. 72.10 A person and robot implicitly share the target of
attention via spatial formation
cial robots aim to operate in people’s daily environment,
such a casual and nonverbal exchange of information
is not a trivial part of human–robot communication.
The research for fully unveiling required mechanism
for such continuous exchange of social signals is still
premature.
On the other hand, some studies started to highlight
the needs of a mechanism that connects communica-
tion and background knowledge. It is revealed that the
model of common ground makes daily communication
effective [72.185]. For example, a direction-giving sce-
nario would be a case where environmental knowledge
is useful. For instance, when a robot provides directions
(Fig. 72.11 and
VIDEO 259 ), it could be more com-
prehensive if the robot is aware of a visible landmark so
that it could say please turn at the book store instead of
saying please turn at the third corner [72.186]. Thus,
a good model of environment, e.g., [72.187], would
greatly improve a robot’s capability in communicating
about a route. Moreover, if a robot has a model of users’
memory of location, it could provide destination-based
direction, such as a café is nearby the book store you
just visited [72.188], which is much easier to compre-
hend than complex turn-by-turn destination like to go to
a café, please turn right at ﬁrst corner, turn left at third
corner, and . . .
Fig. 72.11 A robot that provides directions (after [72.189])

Part G | 72.7
1950
Part G
Robots and Humans
72.6.3 Challenges
To summarize, turn-based conversation has been stud-
ied to a certain degree. However, social robots often
engage in casual communication in which robots would
need to deal with social signals and background knowl-
edge. Here, we denote a couple of key challenges.
Revealing Repertory of Communication Skills
Previous studies started to reveal different forms of
communication where various perceptual and cogni-
tive capabilities are required. Early studies have re-
vealed the importance of social signal processing, like
recognizing and expressing gaze and facial expres-
sions. Studies about initiation of conversation have
revealed the mutual real-time exchange of informa-
tion via their positions. Studies about giving direction
demonstrated further needs of associating language
and environmental knowledge, e.g., a cognitive map,
how people perceive environments, and remembering
landmarks.
To what extent do we need to cover repertories? We
believe that there could be many elements we will ﬁnd.
Many of them might be interrelated with perception and
cognition. Such a case would improve our understand-
ing about what communication skills truly are. Thus,
one of the important challenges is here.
Architecture for Communication Skills
Along with ﬁnding out the repertory of communica-
tion skills, the other important challenge is to deal with
the integration, i. e., the architecture of communication
skill. Moving from a turn-based structure to a dynamic
structure is the real challenge.
72.7 Long-Term Interaction with Robot Companions
A number of social robots have been introduced as com-
panion robots. Companion robots may have the sole
purpose of providing companionship, e.g., in studies
using toy robots such as the Pleo [72.190], but often
they combine two aspects: being useful, i. e., being able
to carry out certain tasks for the user, and carrying
those tasks out in a manner that is socially accept-
able [72.191]. The latter notion has been used, e.g.,
in several European projects [72.192–195]. The notion
of a companion often entails repeated and long-term
interactions. This poses particular challenges not only
for the design of the robot, the interaction design, the
choices of tasks/settings/scenarios, but also on the how
to ensure satisfactory and successful interaction with
the robot.
72.7.1 Robot Companions
Recently more and more researchers are moving toward
studying application areas that develop such companion
robots, e.g., the use of robots in assistive and rehabili-
tation robotics. The use of robots to assist elderly users
in their homes, with a view to extend the period they
can stay and live independently in their own homes,
is currently being studied extensively by different re-
search groups worldwide. Several companies are also
marketing their robots as such assistive companions,
e.g., the Wakamaru robot (Mitsubishi Heavy Industries
Ltd) that was introduced in 2005, or the Human Support
Robot (Toyota) revealed in 2012. In addition, numerous
research prototypes exist, e.g., Cody (Georgia Tech),
Herb (CMU), Care-O-bot 3 (Fraunhofer), Hector (Com-
panionAble project).
A number of tele-presence robots have been de-
veloped, but this chapter will focus on autonomous or
partially tele-operated companion robots. Note, Cody
targets the domain of patient hygiene care that is related
to issues discussed in the section on tactile human–
robot interaction. Regardless of whether human–robot
interaction with companions include tactile interaction,
or is a hands-off approach (Chapt. 73), developing such
system involves a careful study of the roles and func-
tions of such robots in the application domain, and of
users’ perception of and attitudes toward such a system.
Figure 72.12 and
VIDEO 218
show the Care-
o-bot robot (Fraunhofer) used in the ACCOMPANY
project on home assistance for elderly people. The robot
is shown in the University of Hertfordshire’s Robot
House, a domestic setting for experiments into robot
home assistance where participants regularly visit for
human–robot interaction sessions. Such living lab set-
tings are increasingly being used to design, experiment
and evaluate innovative systems (e.g., the European
Network of Living Labs, [72.196]). Providing such en-
vironments facilitates progress toward complex robotic
systems that can be deployed in real-life environments.
72.7.2 Engagement and Long-Term
Relationships
The concept of a robot companion entails repeated,
long-term interactions, which may also afford the de-
velopment of relationships between robots and people.
Relationships with robots can take many shapes and
forms, and the formation of relationships will be in-
ﬂuenced by many factors. For example, the speciﬁc

Social Robotics
72.7 Long-Term Interaction with Robot Companions
1951
Part G | 72.7
role of the robot (Butler? Friend? Tutor? Assistant?
Tool? etc., [72.197]) will matter, as well as the robots’
speciﬁc embodiment and behavioral and expressive
repertoire that is often used to present them as re-
lational artifacts [72.198, 199] that are designed to
build and maintain social-emotional relationships with
users.
Many applications with social robots do only in-
volve short-term interactions, e.g., robots meant to
function as a museum guide [72.200] and
VIDEO 808 ,
a receptionist, etc. Here, the novelty effect can of-
ten be exploited, i. e., the general interest that many
people have in new robots. However, after repeated
interactions this effect can wear off and people can
lose interest in a robot. Thus, a main research chal-
lenge is how to keep people engaged in the interaction
and keep them motivated to interact with the robot.
Establishing a useful and enjoyable relationship with
a robot is not an easy task. And what exactly is long-
term? Tanaka et al. [72.22] mentions at 10-hour barrier
(total interaction time), Sung et al. [72.201] pose the
goal of long-term interaction over more than 3 months
as a main challenge. Hüttenrauch and Severinson-
Eklundh [72.202] performed a user study with the
service robot CERO meant to assist one user over three
months in an ofﬁce environment. Kanda et al. [72.189]
and
VIDEO 809 investigated a partially tele-operated
robot over a 25-day period. The nature of these interac-
tions depends on whether studies take place in a school,
a home, a public place, etc. It will also depend on
the frequency and duration of the interaction, e.g., how
many interaction episodes per time interval does an in-
dividual have with the robot?
There is also the issue of quantity and quality of
interaction that may be realized very differently in
different application areas of social robots. More and
more studies are bringing robots into the wild [72.203].
VIDEO 564
shows how preschool age children in-
teracting with a storytelling learning companion robot
during repeated encounters over a 2 month period. Per-
sonalization of the robot stories to the children led
to improved vocabulary learning. Field studies are of-
ten said to be preferable, and more ecologically valid
than data collected in the laboratory. However, practi-
cal, technical, and methodological constraints may limit
the length and nature of the ﬁeld studies. Also, bringing
a robot in the wild does not necessarily make the inter-
actions with people more natural, and the more messy
conditions pose hard methodological problems and can
often interfere with controlled data collection and sta-
tistical data analysis [72.204]. A ﬁeld study by Heylen
et al. [72.204] placed a simple dialogue Nabaztag (rab-
bit) robot in a few people’s homes over 10 days, and it
illuminates a number of those real-life problems with
ﬁeld studies which impacts on the validity of the re-
sults that can be gained and on the user experience.
The latter will then ultimately decide on whether people
will consider a long-term companion robot amusing or
a nuisance [72.204]. A taxonomy to characterize stud-
ies in the wild for child-robot interactions is provided
in Salter et al. [72.205]. Systematic analyses of dif-
ferent experimental conditions and tasks, settings, etc.,
whether in the laboratory or in ﬁeld studies, will help
the planning, design and comparison of different long-
term studies.
Note, often the expectations of users are not met
by the robot’s design and abilities, and nor does it
ﬁt into daily activities of users [72.190]. The ad-
vancement of robot technology and knowledge of
HRI will enable more and more ﬁeld studies, in
schools [72.206], nurseries [72.22], private homes
[72.190], care homes [72.31], etc.
In many of the above long-term studies, commer-
cially available robots have been used. The reasons for
this are not only availability, but also robustness and re-
liability, as well as safety. The use research prototypes
in ﬁeld studies should always entail securing Institu-
tional Review Board (IRB) approval to meet ethical
guidelines when human participants are involved. Even
prototypes that are generally safe to use, may still have
cables sticking out, etc. Hence often it is a necessity to
have researchers present at all times during these stud-
ies. Research prototypes are also by their very nature
more prone to break down, and again this requires the
constant attention of researchers. The design of research
prototypes is also often not ideally suited for a ﬁeld
study, e.g., wheels when being used on cluttered sur-
faces, etc. Interesting insights on those practical but
nevertheless very important points can be found, e.g.,
in Hüttenrauch et al. [72.207] where a modiﬁed Peo-
plebot (Mobile Robotics) robot was brought into eight
different homes for approximately 1 hour each in order
to study spatial management in HRI situations. Note,
even when leaving a robot alone with a person or fam-
ily in their own home, people may still be acutely aware
of the experimental nature of the interaction [72.204].
Establishing and maintaining relationships between
users and robots in long-term interactions needs care-
ful consideration, and many insights can also be gained
from related long-term studies with virtual agents, e.g.,
as exercise advisors [72.208, 209].
72.7.3 Robot Home Companions
for Supporting Elderly Users
Several HRI studies in the home focus on the use of
a companion robot for the general population. Koay
et al. [72.210] report on a long-term, 5-week study

Part G | 72.7
1952
Part G
Robots and Humans
in a domestic environment with a partially remote-
controlled robot involving several different scenar-
ios (e.g., a collaborative task, sharing physical space,
recording and revealing personal information, interrupt-
ing a person to serve them, and seeking assistance from
a person using combinations of physical and verbal
cues). The results highlight concerns and expectations
that people have in such scenarios that are relevant for
the domestic use of robots. Note, the robot used in this
study was partially remotely controlled, which allowed
the investigation of complex scenarios.
Due to demographic changes, a lot of interest ex-
ists worldwide into developing robot technology for the
care of elderly people that would allow elderly people to
remain in their own homes for longer, or to provide as-
sistance in sheldered or otherwise speciﬁcally designed
environments. A robot may assist an elderly person in
the home in different ways, e.g., provide physical assis-
tance (standing up, walking, fetching and carry objects,
etc.), social assistance (e.g., engaging the user in in-
teractions with other people) and cognitive assistance
(e.g., reminder functions).
In HRI, there is prior work investigating robot’s
ability to remind users of future or prior activities.
Autominder using the Nursebot represents an initial
attempt to make reminders more intelligent and dy-
namic [72.211]. Intelligence and dynamics were also
key aspects of the system proposed by the Robo-
care project [72.212]. More recently, the KSERA
project [72.213] focused on the ability of the robot
to draw on information not readily available to the
user as well as its ability to persuade in order to
safeguard the health of the user. Other examples for as-
sistance and reminders for elderly people with dementia
through multimodal interactions and smart-house in-
tegration include the EU FP7 CompanionAble project
and the MOBISERV project [72.214]. The project, Flo-
rence [72.215], introduces a commercially available
robot as an autonomous lifestyle device for ambient
assisted living; it provided multiple services to users
including an agenda reminder application that allowed
the elderly to share information with caregivers, etc.
The European projects SRS [72.216] and ACCOM-
PANY [72.217] both use the care-o-bot 3 (Fraunhofer)
(Fig. 72.12) as their target robotic platform. While
SRS involves the use of the robot in a remote-control
scenario, the ACCOMPANY project develops fully au-
tonomous behaviors for an empathic and assistive home
companion.
Several projects combine a robotic companion with
an intelligent smart/ambient environment as part a vari-
ety of ambient assisted living (AAL) solutions to assist
with older adults, or people with disabilities, to live in-
dependently by providing support in activities of daily
Fig. 72.12 Care-O-bot 3 robot (courtesy of Fraunhofer)
living (ADLs). Such topics are currently being stud-
ied world-wide. See, e.g., the quality of life technology
(QOLT) [72.218] Centre of Carnegie Mellon University
or the Centre for Affective Solutions for Ambient Liv-
ing Awareness (CASALA) [72.219].
72.7.4 Example: Long-Term Interactions
with a Robotic Weight Loss Coach
A number of recent studies investigate the use of
robotic companion as health coaches or advisors.
Kidd and Breazeal developed Autom [72.116, 220]
(
VIDEO 558 ), a robot speciﬁcally designed for long-
term interaction with people in the role of a robotic
weight loss coach. Autom has a clear function and role,
but also needs to interact with users in a socially accept-
able and comfortable manner, so that users intuitively
understand the robot, are willing to engage with the
robot, and listen to it. This robot is also an example how
academic research in long-term HRI can lead to new in-
novations and commercialization. The main purpose of
the robot is to help the user to lose weight, trying to per-
suade the user to change his or her behavior [72.221].
A key ingredient supporting this functionality is
the creation of a relationship between the user and
the robot. Autom is thus an example of a robot that
presents itself as a relational artifact and encourages
people to develop social-emotional relationships with
them [72.198, 199]. Autom uses a psychologically in-
spired relationship model, with the robot’s role as
a caregiver. It engages the use in a dialog modeled
after patient-care professional dialog to provide social
support (Sects. 72.5.4 and 72.5.5) in order to build
a working alliance as well as to be helpful, persuasive,
positive, and supportive. For a health care coaching
robot, where behavior change is a central objective,

Social Robotics
72.7 Long-Term Interaction with Robot Companions
1953
Part G | 72.7
such a relationships is very important. People who need
to lose weight typically do not lack the intelligence
or knowledge necessary to understand that weight loss
would improve their health and general well-being. The
motivational factor is often a crucial point, so a weight
loss robot’s role on providing social support is differ-
ent from that of a kiosk robot only needs to provide
information.
A long-term study with 45 participants an Au-
tom prototype robot over 6 weeks was the ﬁrst study
designed to create behavior change in people with
a weight management goal (Fig. 72.13). The results
were very encouraging: participants developed a close
relationship with the robot, and they tracked their calo-
rie consumption and exercise much longer when using
the robot, compared to other methods (a computer run-
ning the same dialog or a paper log for manual entry).
Since these factors are indicators of longer term weight
loss success, the study provided evidence for the effec-
tiveness of sociable robots for long-term HRI [72.116].
72.7.5 Challenges
Many of the projects studying the use of robot com-
panions (e.g., supporting elderly users, providing assis-
tance in therapy, or helping in ofﬁce environments) are
still at an initial stage. Future results from extensive,
long-term, multi-site and even cross-cultural evaluation
studies are still needed in order to illuminate the us-
ability, usefulness, and acceptability of such systems.
It is particularly advantageous if the same research
platform is used in different projects so that direct com-
parisons and the sharing of research developments are
possible.
The challenges of supporting engagement in long-
term studies are beginning to emerge. New sensors
and interfaces, such as brain–computer interfaces, could
provide richer information on people’s emotional, at-
tentional engagement states when interacting with
a robot. Robots are providing richer social cues to ex-
plore the whole spectrum of human–human interaction
modalities, e.g., using gaze, gesture, proxemics, dia-
logue, contingency, etc. [72.177, 222–226]. Measuring
engagement in real time and allowing a robot to respond
to it is a key challenge. In a user study with 37 partic-
ipants and a robot that could perceive user engagement
Sidner et al. [72.32] found that engagement gestures
were perceived more positively than a robot without
such gestures. Rich et al. [72.139] proposed an initial
computational model for a robot to model engagement,
based on the recognition of different events involving
gesture and speech.
A clear framework of what engagement means in
HRI in general, and for long-term HRI interactions
a)
b)
Fig.72.13a,b Autom, a weight management and exercise coach.
(a) The Autom prototype robot developed at MIT; (b) the commer-
cial version of the Autom robot
in particular, is needed and will needs to be vali-
dated in extensive testing. Several other proof of con-
cept studies of robots that adapt to user engagement
and interaction show encouraging results. François
et al. [72.227] evaluated a robot that adapts to user
interaction in a therapeutic context based on tactile
information (how children touched the robot), while
Szaﬁr and Mutlu [72.228] demonstrated how a robot
can adapt to the engagement of the user, utilizing
techniques from brain–computer interfaces in order to
assess engagement. Future applications of this research
into adaptive robots target educational settings where
a teacher robot can automatically adapt to the pupils’
engagement, or therapeutic/rehabilitation applications
where the robot can automatically adapt to the pa-
tient’s needs and preferences in light of therapeutic
objectives.
Future research needs to illuminate how best to de-
sign interaction and embodiment of social robots that
are successful in long-term interactions with people.
Since adding social interaction skills to a robot is costly,
the identiﬁcation of a set of robot characteristics (ap-
pearance, behavior, cognition) that are necessary and
sufﬁcient to create meaningful, acceptable, and efﬁcient
long-term interaction with a robot would be beneﬁ-
cial. Here, it is important to provide frameworks that
connect to empirical methodologies, cf. the discus-
sion of a conceptual and methodology framework for
robot believability in Rose et al. [72.229]. Note, while
predominantly humanoid or zoomorphic robots are cur-
rently being used in long-term HRI experiments, even
mechanically looking robots such as the Roomba robot
may invite people to develop a social-emotional rela-
tionship with its users [72.201, 230].
Using robots in long-term repeated interactions with
people also involves a number of ethical issues, as it
has already been highlighted also for embodied conver-
sational agents and virtual characters [72.208]. While
in some applications the robot may have a useful
function if portrayed as a care-receiver [72.133], in
most applications the companion robot should provide

Part G | 72.8
1954
Part G
Robots and Humans
care to its users [72.191]. As pointed out by Turkle
et al. [72.198, 199], robots that present themselves as
relational artifacts may inﬂuence people’s understand-
ing and expectations of the nature of social relationships
and friendship. Ethical issues are particularly impor-
tant when users are vulnerable people such as adults
with special needs, elderly people, or children. Many
researchers have commented on these issues [72.231,
232].
Practical issues can also become crucial to the ac-
ceptance of a robot for long-term interaction, as it
has been highlighted in a long-term study with Pleo –
a commercially available robot, but which requires
maintenance that does not ﬁt easily into people’s rou-
tines [72.190]. Fernaeus et al. also bring up the impor-
tant issue of interaction design that needs to support
long-term interaction, an issue that was also brought up
in user feedback from the participants in their long-term
study. Novel approaches to how to design human–robot
interaction may be required to facilitate long-term use
of companion robots [72.190], and in real-world set-
tings attention must be paid to how the robot technology
is being introduced to people and how people and robots
must adapt to each other [72.230].
Recently, the blending of virtual and robotic charac-
ters area a growing area of research whereby seamless
transitions from a virtual to and from a robotic char-
acter [72.233], or migration between different robot
and other digital embodiments [72.234] pose interesting
challenges for future long-term companions. Indeed, it
may change the nature of what we usually perceive as
a companion robot [72.148, 233, 235–242].
72.8 Tactile Interaction with Social Robots
In robotics and artiﬁcial intelligence research, tactile
interaction has long been exploited primarily as a ne-
cessity to enable, e.g., collision detection, grasping and
object manipulation, particularly in combination with
vision and other sensor modalities, and led to adding
touch sensors to a robot’s gripper or hand [72.243].
72.8.1 Touch for Social Interaction
However, the importance of human–robot tactile inter-
action has been highlighted recently in a number of
research projects, inspired by evidence from human–
human interaction and child development. The recent
interest in the sense of touch goes beyond the necessity
of touch for interactions with the physical environment,
but focuses on the important role of tactile interac-
tion in interactions with the social environment. For
instance, Siegel et al. [72.244] found that social touch,
such as shaking hands, can impact how persuasive
a robot is perceived to be [72.244]. In other work, the
same kind of touch can have a different impact on
people’s response to the robot depending on the con-
text [72.245].
Indeed, humans are born as tactile creatures. Phys-
ical touch is one of the most basic forms of human
communication. In human development, touch plays
a crucial role in developing cognitive, social, and emo-
tional skills, as well as establishing and maintaining at-
tachment and social relationships. Deprivation of touch
in early child development can have devastating effects
on a child’s development [72.246]. A comprehensive
survey on communicative functions of touch in humans
and other animals can be found in Hertenstein [72.247].
72.8.2 Touch Sensors and Mechanisms
Used for HRI
Recently, more and more social robots are being
equipped with tactile skin, thus allowing the robot to re-
act according to the person touching the robot. Recent
trends, e.g., in the European project Roboskin [72.248]
tend toward covering the whole, or most of the robot’s
body, see e.g., Schmitz et al. [72.249] for an example us-
ing modular capacitive sensors to cover the humanoid
robot iCub. Related work by Dahiya et al. [72.250]
surveys a variety of different technological approaches
toward tactile sensors and mechanisms of tactile sen-
sor for robots. They show how one may take inspi-
ration from biological tactile sensors in humans and
derive design hints for robotic tactile sensing. Stiehl
et al. [72.251] designed a tactile system inspired by
the human skin as well as somatic processing [72.251],
and was later developed to recognize social and affec-
tive communicative intent of how a human touches the
robot [72.252, 253]. The new compliant skin technol-
ogy developed in the Roboskin project has two primary
functions: (a) to allow a robot to operate safely and
efﬁciently, and (b) to use tactile sensors for communi-
cation, interaction, and cooperation with people.
The ﬁeld of tactile human–robot interaction is in-
deed a growing area of research, and a recent survey
discusses tactile HRI from the perspectives of the types
of interactions that may occur between a robot and
a human, and the types of sensors that allow to de-
tect these interactions in various robotic systems such
as the Robovie series of robots, RI-MAN, the Hug-
gable robot [72.253], or Paro [72.254]. Note, equipping

Social Robotics
72.8 Tactile Interaction with Social Robots
1955
Part G | 72.8
a robot with tactile sensors may add its functional-
ity, but in some cases the sense of touch is crucial
for the key functionality of the robot (e.g., in the case
of Paro [72.251] with a therapeutic/care function, or
in the case of the Huggable to improve social rela-
tionships [72.255]). Many toy robots built primarily
for human–robot interaction have touch sensors for
petting and stroking, e.g., the AIBO or more recent
Pleo robots. Indeed, the use of tactile HRI to sup-
port human–human communication over the distance
is a promising area of research [72.255–258]. Tactile
feedback can also improve teaching a robot by demon-
stration [72.259].
In order to realize robots’ capability of a sense of
touch, there are difﬁcult sensor processing and percep-
tion problems to be addressed. One problem is that
we need to identify the geometrical relationship be-
tween a number of sensors embedded in a whole body
of a robot and body parts being touched when sen-
sors are activated. For better perception of various
touching, one can embed sensors into or under a soft
skin. For instance, Robovie II-F has 274 sensor ele-
ments (Piezoﬁlms) embedded in soft silicone rubber
(Fig. 72.14). Tactile action activates multiple sensors
at the same time, thus nearby sensors are all activated
when touch action occurs to one place of body. For
this problem, Noda et al. [72.260] took a bottom-up
approach using observed signal patterns. Their method
works in a self-organizing manner to identify mapping
between signal patterns and touched location.
The second problem is the semantic relationship be-
tween signal pattern and people’s communicative inten-
tion of touch action. For instance, Tajika et al. [72.261],
applied clustering method for signal pattern to re-
trieve hierarchical structure of haptic actions. For
instance, tickling-chest (Fig. 72.15) is found to be
similar to stroking-chest, grouped together as lightly
touching-chest action. Knight et al. [72.262] developed
an algorithm based on identiﬁcation of typical touch
types, such as tickle, pet, and poke. Yohanan and
MacLean [72.263] categorized humans’ intent to com-
municate affect state and mapped touch action to each
category, for example, comforting intent is mapped with
actions like stroke and pat. Stiehl and Breazeal [72.264]
trained a neural net to classify touch according to af-
fect and communicative intent by recognizing types of
socio-affective touch (e.g., pleasant or unpleasant ways
of touching or teasing based on the way a person tickles,
touches, pats, slaps, rubs, squeezes, etc.)
François et al. [72.227] describe an algorithm for
pattern recognition in HRI, the cascaded information
bottleneck method and apply it to real-time autonomous
recognition of human–robot tactile interaction styles.
This method uses an information theoretic approach
Right side
Left side
Back
Front
50 × 50 mm
30 × 30 mm
Upper side
Fig. 72.14 An example of layouts of piezoﬁlm sensors embedded
in a soft skin (left)
Fig. 72.15 A child tickling the chest of a robot
and enables to progressively extract relevant informa-
tion from time series. An evaluation with real inter-
action data obtained with a Sony AIBO robot shows
that the algorithm is capable of classifying interaction
styles (frequency and gentleness of the interaction),
with a good accuracy and a very acceptable delay. The
cascaded information bottleneck method was later suc-
cessfully applied to create a socially adaptive robot that
can recognize and adapt to children’s play styles in real
time [72.265]. The robot rewards well-balanced inter-
action styles and encourages children to engage in the
interaction. The potential impact of such an adaptive
robot in robot-assisted play for children with autism is
evaluated through a study conducted with seven chil-
dren with autism in a school. A statistical analysis of
the results shows the positive impact of such an adaptive

Part G | 72.8
1956
Part G
Robots and Humans
robot on the children’s play styles and on their engage-
ment in the interaction with the robot.
72.8.3 Example: Teaching Children
with Autism About Tactile
Interaction
Using robots for the therapy and education for children
with autism was ﬁrst proposed by Kerstin Dauten-
hahn [72.266, 267] and it has recently attracted a lot
of attention in the research community. A number of
such approaches focus on robot-assisted play, since
play has a crucial role in a child’s development. Dur-
ing play, children can learn about themselves and their
environments as well as develop cognitive, social, and
perceptual skills. Autism, or better autistic spectrum
disorders (ASD), is a life-long development disorder
with key impairments in communication and social in-
teraction and imagination (DSM IV, 1995) [72.268,
269]. Robots allow for a simpliﬁed, predictable, and
reliable environment, where the complexity of interac-
tion can be controlled and gradually increased [72.270].
Children can play dyadic games with robots, or triadic
games involving other children or adults. In the latter
case, scenarios emphasize the role of the robot as a so-
cial mediat or [72.271].
Robot mediated playing and learning activities, if
successful, have the potential to enable children with
cognitive disabilities to learn and acquire basic so-
cial skills thus getting support to develop/enhance their
individual potential especially in the areas of commu-
nication and interaction [72.270, 272]. A number of
different social robots have been studied in this do-
main, including zoomporphic robots, humanoid robots,
or mechanically looking robots, e.g., Labo-1 [72.273],
NAO [72.274], Probo [72.275], Robota [72.276, 277],
Keepon [72.278], Aibo [72.279], Tito [72.280], KAS-
PAR [72.21], and others. While we ﬁnd encouraging
results from case-study evaluations, further long-term
and clinical studies are required [72.281].
Diehl et al. [72.281] in their review on the clinical
use of robots for individuals with autism suggested that
the use of interactive robots is a promising develop-
ment in light of the research showing that individuals
with autism exhibit strengths in understanding the phys-
ical world and relative weaknesses in understanding the
social world. Children with autism often ﬁnd it very
difﬁcult to appropriately interact with their social en-
vironment. In interactions between children and their
peers, teachers, and family, usually touch has an impor-
tant communicative and emotional role.
However, children with ASD may be hyposensitive
or hypersensitive to touch so that the children may crave
or avoid touch. As part of the above-mentioned Eu-
ropean Roboskin, a number of case study evaluations
have been performed investigating how a humanoid
robot equipped with touch sensors can teach chil-
dren with autism about appropriate tactile interaction
and the associated emotional responses. The studies
used the child-sized, minimally expressive robot KAS-
PAR [72.21]; [72.282]), a low-cost robot speciﬁcally
designed for interaction – many of its features lend
themselves to children with autism, e.g., the human-
like but minimally expressive shape and form of the
robot. The robot has 8 DOFs (degrees of freedom)
in the head and face and 6 DOF in each arm, as
well as one DOF in the torso. A comprehensive set
of play scenarios for robot-assisted play for children
with various special needs, and tactile play scenarios
for children with autism have been developed [72.283–
285].
KASPAR can play a variety of games with children,
either operating completely autonomously [72.285,
286] and
VIDEO 220 , or being partially remotely con-
trolled by the children or an adult as part of the play
scenario. Case studies on tactile child–robot interaction
have shown encouraging results (Robins et al. [72.283,
287]). In the research on tactile interactions KASPAR
was equipped with patches of tactile sensors, and it pro-
duced some responses autonomously, e.g., a ticking of
the chest resulted in laughing, or hitting in the face re-
sults in the robot turning away from the child, covering
its face with its hands and saying ouch, that hurts. If
the child touches areas that are not covered by skin
patches, or if the recognition of different types of touch
is not reliable enough [72.288], then the experimenter
can trigger the robot’s reaction.
Figure 72.16 shows a child with autism ﬁrst hitting
the robot’s leg and then exploring the robot’s reaction.
Since the legs cannot detect forceful touch, the experi-
menter triggers the robot’s reactions. Note, this hybrid
approach of autonomous behaviors combined with a re-
mote control allows the robot to be perceptually more
advanced than current state-of-the-art robotics sens-
ing technology allows. Robots used with children with
autism need to be predictable, and so a mistake in the
robot’s sensing abilities can be compensated for by
the adult present (experimenter, teacher or caregiver).
A person who knows the child very well will also be
able to trigger certain useful robot behaviors at certain
movements in time which are not observable directly
from the child or the context and can only be inferred
from detailed knowledge about the child, his/her needs
and preferences, and therapeutic goals and objectives
for this particular child.
Note, for a robot to detect and respond to tactile in-
teractions of children with autism is not only beneﬁcial
to teach about appropriate tactile interaction, but it can

Social Robotics
72.8 Tactile Interaction with Social Robots
1957
Part G | 72.8
also provide a basis for adapting to a child’s individual
interaction style [72.265].
Tactile interaction is often not the sole focus
of interaction, it can be embedded in multimodal
play scenarios with the therapeutic objective to in-
crease children’s social skills through play. François
et al. [72.279] present a long-term study where six
children diagnosed with autism interact with an au-
tonomous zoomorphic robot (Sony Aibo) over 10 ses-
sions. The study is inspired by nondirective play ther-
apy to encourage children’s proactivity and initiative-
taking. The behavior of each child is analyzed in detail
according to three dimensions (play, reasoning, af-
fect). Unique trajectories for children’s progressions
along these three dimensions were observed, resulting
in unique proﬁles. The work highlights methodological
issues in the domain of robot-assisted therapy, and also
points out and formalizes different potential roles of the
experimenter in the sessions, who may be a passive or
an active participant [72.289]. A regulation process is
introduced whereby the experimenter can regulate the
interaction under speciﬁc conditions in order to:
1. Prevent or discourage repetitive behaviors
2. Help the child engage in play
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 72.16 (a) Child hits the
robot’s leg and then explores
the robot’s reaction. (b) The
child sees the robot looking
sad, so he tickles its tummy
(left) to make it happy (right).
(c) The minimally expressive
humanoid robot KASPAR
3. Give a better pace to the game if it has already been
experienced by the child
4. Bootstrap a higher level of play, and
5. Ask questions related to reasoning or affect.
72.8.4 Challenges and Opportunities
While many studies assume that tactile HRI will re-
sult in a more enjoyable, meaningful, and efﬁcient
interaction with a robot, many issues are still un-
clear and need to be investigated further. For example,
a video-based study, where participants watched videos
of interactions rather than interacting with the robot
themselves, showed the impact of a robot’s level of
autonomy, and suggests that touch behaviors are con-
sidered more appropriate for proactive as compared
to reactive robots [72.290]. Much further research is
needed to ﬁnd out when and how tactile interaction
can enhance a person’s experience of interaction and
beneﬁt the overall performance of the human–robot tri-
ads. One can also expect that individual differences will
play a role in which types of tactile interaction with
a robot are more appropriate, depending also on the
tasks involved and the overall context and setting. The
perception of people in terms of the robot’s roles and its

Part G | 72.9
1958
Part G
Robots and Humans
relationship with its users is also likely to impact these
issues.
In recent years a number of projects world-
wide have tried to use robots for therapy of chil-
dren with autism. Different modes of robot control
and autonomy need to be investigated, from fully
autonomous systems [72.285], to Wizard-of-Oz con-
trolled robots [72.291], to using a hybrid approach
where remote control is an integral part of the interac-
tion and triggers autonomous behaviors [72.287, 289].
Realistically, for therapeutic tools to be used widely
outside the laboratory and the experimental setting, the
technology needs to be highly robust, reliable, easy to
operate by nonresearchers as well as cost-effective.
A number of technological, methodological, and
design challenges still need to be tackled, but tactile in-
teractions with social robots open up a number of new
research avenues as well as exciting applications.
72.9 Social Robots and Teamwork
Verbal and nonverbal communication play a very im-
portant role in coordinating joint action during collab-
orative tasks. Sharing information through communica-
tion acts is critical given that each teammate often has
only partial knowledge relevant to solving the problem,
different capabilities, and possibly diverging beliefs
about the state of the task. For instance, all teammates
need to establish and maintain a set of mutual beliefs
regarding the current state of the task, the respective
roles and capabilities of each member, and the respon-
sibilities of each teammate [72.33, 153]. This is called
common ground [72.162].
72.9.1 Human–Robot Teamwork
and Collaboration
Dialog certainly plays an important role in establishing
common ground. Each conversant is committed to the
shared goal of establishing and maintaining a state of
mutual belief with the other. To succeed, the speaker
composes a description that is adequate for the pur-
pose of being understood by the listener, and the listener
shares the goal of understanding the speaker. This com-
munication act serves to achieve robust team behavior
despite adverse conditions, including breaks in com-
munication and other difﬁculties in achieving the team
goals.
Humans also use nonverbal skills such as visual
perspective taking and shared attention to establish
common ground with others. They orient their own
gaze and direct the gaze of their teammate through
deictic cues such as pointing gestures in order to es-
tablish common ground. Given the visual perspective
taking, shared attention, and the use of deictic cues to
direct attention are core psychological processes that
people use to coordinate joint action about objects and
events in the world, robot teammates must be able to
display and interpret these behaviors and cues when
working with humans in a manner that adheres to hu-
man expectations.
Breazeal et al. [72.142] investigated the impact
grounding using nonverbal social cues and behavior on
task performance by a human–robot team. In a human
subject experiment, participants guided Leonardo to
perform a physical task using speech and gesture. The
robot communicates either implicitly through behav-
ior (such as gaze and facial expressions) or explicitly
through nonverbal social cues (i. e., explicit pointing
gestures). The robot’s explicit grounding acts include
visually attending to the human’s actions to acknowl-
edge their contributions, issuing a short nod to acknowl-
edge the success and completion of the task or subtask,
visually attending to the person’s attention directing
cues such as to where the human looks or points, look-
ing back to the human once the robot operates on an
artifact to make sure its contribution is acknowledged,
and pointing to artifacts in the workspace to direct the
human’s attention toward them. Both self-reporting via
questionnaire and behavioral analysis of video support
the hypothesis that implicit nonverbal communication
positively impacts human–robot task performance with
respect to understandability of the robot, efﬁciency of
task performance, and robustness to errors that arise
from miscommunication [72.142].
Common ground is grown along with partners that
work together over time. In a simple example, if two
persons repeatedly work in a sequence of collabora-
tive manufacturing tasks, one will be able to easily
predict what the other person will do next and thus
proactively help each other. For instance, if one always
needs a spanner to be passed at certain moment in the
task, another person will probably take anticipatory ac-
tion passing the spanner before being asked. Hoffman
and Breazeal developed adaptive system that learn such
task structure which enabled a robot’s anticipatory ac-
tion [72.292]. They further revealed the importance of
perceptual simulation [72.293].
The importance of such common ground and cogni-
tive similarity is demonstrated in partnership in casual
social interaction too. For instance, Morales et al. re-

Social Robotics
72.10 Conclusion
1959
Part G | 72.10
vealed that a robot efﬁciently performed side-by-side
walking with a human partner when it anticipated
where a human partner would walk [72.186]. Such an-
ticipatory computing was enabled by a capability of
computing a preferred walking course in a similar way
as humans would do. There are robots that explicitly
learn common knowledge, like one that learns names
of places [72.294].
72.9.2 Robots as Social Mediators
Researchers have started
to
explore the use of
robots as a social mediator. One approach is to use
a human-like presence of robots as social stimuli. It
is known that presence of people facilitate others.
For instance, people perform simple math-calculation
faster when being watched by someone else. This is
known to be social facilitation effect [72.295]. Riether
et al. [72.296] reported that people’s performance on
easy math-calculation is improved because of pres-
ence of robots [72.296]. Takano et al. [72.297], put an
android robot as a bystander where patients meet a med-
ical doctor in a hospital, and found that it moderated
clients’ anxiety and let them believe that the doctor pays
more attention to them [72.297].
Another approach is to use a robot as an active coor-
dinator in humans’ social settings. When there are many
people, a coordinator could make their activity more
efﬁcient. Such a role can also successfully replicated
by a robot. Consider the situation where an interactive
robot is placed in the middle of a group of kids, and
they start to push each other away when they want to
play with the robot differently from each other. Shomi
et al. [72.298] , developed a technique to identify when
crowd of people around a robot is disordered, and let
the robot perform attention-controlling behavior so that
children play together with the robot in coordinated
way [72.299] (Fig. 72.17). In other work, robots have
Fig. 72.17 The robot interacted with a crowd of people
with coordinating their attention
been used to facilitate elderly people’s group conversa-
tion. Matsuyama et al. [72.300], developed a robot to
participate in a quiz game, conducted as a recreation
activity in elderly-care facility, and provide inspiring
answer to facilitate other elderly people to continue the
game [72.300]. In these works, robots actively model
the social situation and intervene in people’s activities
based on its understanding of the situation.
72.9.3 Research Direction
Human activities are often social, involving multiple
people who often have different skills, desires, and
goals. Although the research is only in an early stage
we have started to model such social situations while re-
vealing potential roles of robots in such social settings.
Along with further advance of relevant technologies,
e.g., manipulation capability, navigation capability, and
language capabilities, there should be many potential
uses to be unveiled. However, it is most likely that the
underlying theoretical work still needs a lot more work
as well.
72.10 Conclusion
In this chapter, we have presented some of the principal
research trends in social robotics and human–robot in-
teraction. We have relied heavily on examples from our
own research to illustrate these trends, and have used
excellent examples drawn from other research groups
around the world.
From this overview, we have shown that one of
the most important goals of social robotics as applied
HRI is the creation of robots that are human-compatible
and human-centered in their design. Their differences
from human abilities should complement and enhance
our strengths and support how people help one an-
other. Their similarities to human abilities, such as
computationally implementing human cognitive, af-
fective, or multimodal communication models make
them more intuitive for people to understand and in-
teract with. Further, such robots are also being used as
a scientiﬁc tool to help us to understand ourselves bet-
ter. With this broadening understanding, social robots
are being designed to offer increasingly sophisticated
levels of social, affective, cognitive, and task-based sup-
port for people, opening new applications for robots

Part G | 72.11
1960
Part G
Robots and Humans
in education, health, therapy, communication, domes-
tic tasks, physical tasks requiring coordination and
teamwork, and more. As the ﬁeld advances, social
robots are being applied to increasingly sophisticated
tasks, in increasingly complex human environments,
for longer deployment periods. We expect that in the
coming decades, many other researchers, especially
young researchers, will actively contribute to the transi-
tion from today’s robots into capable robot partners of
tomorrow.
72.11 Further Reading
For further reading, we recommend the following con-
ference proceedings, journals, books, articles:

Annual conference proceedings:
–
Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human–Robot Interaction (HRI)
–
Proceedings of the IEEE International Sympo-
sium on Robot and Human Interactive Commu-
nication (ROMAN)
–
AAAI Symposium Series
–
AISB Symposium Series

Journals:
–
Journal of Human-Robot Interaction (http://
humanrobotinteraction.org/journal/)
–
Interaction Studies-Social Behaviour and Com-
munication in Biological and Artiﬁcial Systems
published by John Benjamins Publishing Com-
pany
–
International Journal of Social Robotics by
Springer
–
IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental De-
velopment (TAMD)
–
IEEE Transactions on Human–Machine Sys-
tems
–
IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing
–
Paladyn, Journal of Behavioral Robotics, de
Gruyter
–
PLoS ONE
Reviews and overviews can be found in several
books and articles:

Books:
–
C. Breazeal: Designing Sociable Robots (MIT
Press, Cambridge 2002)
–
R. W. Picard: Affective Computing (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1997)
–
J.-M. Fellous, M. Arbib (Eds.): Who Needs
Emotions: The Brain Meets the Robot (Oxford,
Oxford Univ. Press 2005)
–
K. Dautenhahn, J. Saunders (Eds.): New Fron-
tiers in Human–Robot Interaction, Advances in
Interaction Studies, (John Benjamins Publish-
ing, Amsterdam 2011)
–
T. Kanda, H. Ishiguro (Eds.): Human-Robot In-
teraction in Social Robotics (CRC Press, Boca
Raton 2012)

Review Articles:
–
T. Fong, I. Nourbakshsh, K. Dautenhahn: A sur-
vey of social robots, Robotics and Autonomous
Systems 42, 143–166 (2003)
–
M.A. Goodrich, A.C. Schultz: Human–robot in-
teraction: A survey, Foundations and Trends
in Human-Computer Interaction 1(3), 203–275
(2007)
Video-References
VIDEO 218
Home assistance companion robot in the Robot House
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/218
VIDEO 219
Visual communicative non-verbal behaviours of the Sunflower Robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/219
VIDEO 220
Playing triadic games with KASPAR
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/220
VIDEO 221
Explaining a typical session with Sunflower as a home companion in the Robot House
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/221
VIDEO 257
A robot that forms a good spatial formation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/257
VIDEO 258
A robot that approaches pedestrians
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/258
VIDEO 259
A robot that provides a direction based on the model of the environment
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/259

Social Robotics
References
1961
Part G | 72
VIDEO 555
Human-robot teaming in a search and retrieve task
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/555
VIDEO 556
Social referencing behavior
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/556
VIDEO 557
Overview of Kismet’s expressive behavior
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/557
VIDEO 558
Overview of Autom: A robotic health coach for weight management
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/558
VIDEO 559
Non-verbal envelope displays to support turn-taking behavior
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/559
VIDEO 560
Learning how to be a learning companion for children
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/560
VIDEO 562
Social learning applied to task execution
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/562
VIDEO 563
Mental state inference to support human-robot collaboration
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/563
VIDEO 564
A learning companion robot to foster pre-K vocabulary learning
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/564
VIDEO 806
Influence of response time
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/806
VIDEO 807
A scene of deictic interaction
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/807
VIDEO 808
An example of a social robot in a museum
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/808
VIDEO 809
An example of repeated long-term interaction
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/809
VIDEO 810
A robot that exhibits its listening attitude with its motion
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/810
VIDEO 811
Region pointing gesture
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/72/videodetails/811
References
72.1
K. Dautenhahn: Getting to know each other – Ar-
tificial social intelligence for autonomous robots,
Robotics Auton. Syst. 16, 333–356 (1995)
72.2
K. Dautenhahn: I could be you: The phenomeno-
logical dimension of social understanding, Cy-
bern. Syst. 28, 417–453 (1997)
72.3
C. Breazeal: Designing Sociable Robots (MIT Press,
Cambridge 2002)
72.4
H. Miwa, A. Takanishi, H. Takanobu: Experimen-
tal study on robot personality for humanoid head
robot, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2001) pp. 1183–1188
72.5
T. Tojo, Y. Matsusaka, T. Ishii, T. Kobayashi: A con-
versational robot utilizing facial and body ex-
pressions, IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man Cybern., Vol.
2 (2000) pp. 858–863
72.6
J. Cassell, J. Sullivan, S. Prevost, E. Churchill (Eds.):
Embodied Conversational Agents (MIT Press, Cam-
bridge 2000)
72.7
G. Hoffman, C. Breazeal: Robots that work in
collaboration with people, AAAI Symp. Intersect.
Cogn. Sci. Robotics, Washington DC (2004)
72.8
K. Dautenhahn, A.H. Bond, L. Canamero, B. Ed-
monds (Eds.): Socially Intelligent Agents: Creat-
ing Relationships with Computers and Robots
(Kluwer, Boston 2002)
72.9
R.W. Picard: Affective Computing (MIT Press, Cam-
bridge 1997)
72.10
T. Fong, I. Nourbakshsh, K. Dautenhahn: A survey
of socially interactive robots, Robotics Auton. Syst.
42, 143–166 (2003)
72.11
S. Schaal: Is imitation learning the route to hu-
manoid robots?, Trends Cogn. Sci. 3(6), 233–242
(1999)
72.12
J. Fink: Anthropomorphism and human likeness
in the design of robots and human-robot interac-
tion, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 7621, 199–208 (2012)
72.13
J. Solis, K. Chida, K. Suefuji, A. Takanishi: The de-
velopment of the anthropomorphic flutist robot
at Waseda University, Int. J. Humanoid Robotics
3(2), 1–25 (2006)
72.14
Y. Ogura, H. Aikawa, K. Shimomura, H. Kondo,
A. Morishima, H. Lim, A. Takanishi: Development
of a new humanoid robot WABIAN-2, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 76–
81
72.15
H. Miwa, K. Itoh, H. Takanobu, A. Takanishi: Me-
chanical design and motion control of emotion
expression Humanoid robot WE-4R, 15th CISM-
Symp. Robot Des. Dyn. Control (2004) pp. 255–262
72.16
M.F. Jung, J.J. Lee, N. DePalma, S.O. Adalgeirs-
son, P.J. Hinds, C. Breazeal: Engaging robots:
Easing complex human-robot teamwork using
backchanneling, Proc. ACM Conf. Comput. Suppor.
Coop. Work (CSCW), San Antonio (2013) pp. 1555–
1566

Part G | 72
1962
Part G
Robots and Humans
72.17
J. Goetz, S. Kiesler, A. Powers: Matching robot
appearance
and
behavior
to
tasks
to
im-
prove human-robot cooperation, Proc. 12th IEEE
Int. Workshop Robot Hum. Interact. Commun.
(ROMAN) (2003) pp. 55–60
72.18
F. Iida, M. Tabata, F. Hara: Generating personality
character in a face robot through interaction with
human, Proc. 7th IEEE Int. Workshop Robot Hum.
Commun. (ROMA) (1998) pp. 481–486
72.19
M. Shimada, T. Minato, S. Itakura, H. Ishiguro:
Evaluation of android using unconscious recog-
nition, Proc. 6th IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid
Robots (2006) pp. 157–162
72.20
K. Berns, J.J. Hirth: Control of facial expressions of
the humanoid robot head ROMAN, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Bejing (2006)
pp. 3119–3124
72.21
K.
Dautenhahn,
C.L.
Nehaniv,
M.L.
Walters,
B. Robins, H. Kose-Bagci, N.A. Mirza, M. Blow:
KASPAR - A minimally expressive humanoid robot
for
human-robot
interaction
research, Appl.
Bionics Biomech. 6(3), 369–397 (2009)
72.22
F. Tanaka, J.R. Movellan, B. Fortenberry, K. Aisaka:
Daily HRI evaluation at a classroom environ-
ment: Reports from dance interaction experi-
ments, Proc. 1st ACM Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact.
(HRI), Salt Lake City (2006) pp. 3–9
72.23
H. Lim, S. Hyon, S.A. Setiawan, A. Takanishi:
Quasi-human biped walking, Int. J. Inform. Educ.
Res. Robotics Artif. Intell. 24(2), 257–268 (2006)
72.24
H. Lim, A. Ishii, A. Takanishi: Emotion-based
biped walking, Int. J. Inform. Educ. Res. Robotics
Artif. Intell. 22(5), 577–586 (2004)
72.25
J. Solis, S. Isoda, K. Chida, A. Takanishi, K. Waka-
matsu: Anthropomorphic flutist robot for teach-
ing flute playing to beginner students, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 146–
151
72.26
H. Miwa, K. Itoh, M. Matsumoto, M. Zecca,
H. Takanobu, S. Roccella, M.C. Carrozza, P. Dario,
A. Takanishi: Effective emotional expressions with
emotion expression humanoid robot WE-4RII,
Proc. 2004 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2004) pp. 2203–2208
72.27
S. Roccella, M.C. Carrozza, G. Cappiello, P. Dario,
J. Cabibihan, M. Zecca, H. Miwa, K. Itoh, M. Mat-
sumoto, A. Takanishi: Design, fabrication and
preliminary results of a novel anthropomorphic
hand for humanoid robotics: RCH-1, Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Sendai (2004)
pp. 266–271
72.28
H. Miwa, K. Itoh, H. Takanobu, A. Takanishi: De-
sign and control of 9-DOFs emotion expression
humanoid arm, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom. (ICRA), New Orleans (2004) pp. 128–133
72.29
K. Hayashi, Y. Onishi, K. Itoh, H. Miwa, A. Takan-
ishi: Development and evaluation of face robot
to express various face shape, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 481–486
72.30
M. Fujita: On activating human communications
with pet-type robot AIBO, Proceedings IEEE 92(11),
1804–1813 (2004)
72.31
K. Wada, T. Shibata, K. Sakamoto, K. Tanie: Long-
term interaction between seal robots and elderly
people — Robot assisted activity at a health ser-
vice facility for the aged, Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Au-
ton. Minirobots Res. Edutainment (2005) pp. 325–
330
72.32
C.L. Sidner, C. Lee, C.D. Kidd, N. Lesh, C. Rich: Ex-
plorations in engagement for humans and robots,
Artif. Intell. 166(1/2), 140–164 (2005)
72.33
C. Breazeal, A. Brooks, J. Gray, G. Hoffman, C. Kidd,
H. Lee, J. Lieberman, A. Lockerd, D. Chilongo:
Tutelage and collaboration for humanoid robots,
Int. J. Humanoid Robotics 1(2), 315–348 (2004)
72.34
H. Kozima: An anthropologist in the children’s
world: A field study of children’s everyday inter-
action with an interactive robot, Proc. Int. Conf.
Dev. Learn. (ICDL), Bloomington (2006)
72.35
M.E. Pollack, S. Engberg, J.T. Matthews, S. Thrun,
L. Brown, D. Colbry, C. Orosz, B. Peintner, S. Rama-
krishnan, J. Dunbar-Jacob, C. McCarthy, M. Mon-
temerlo, J. Pineau, N. Roy: Pearl: A mobile robotic
assistant for the elderly, Proc. AAAI Workshop Au-
tom. Eldercare (2002)
72.36
R. Gockley, R. Simmons, J. Forlizzi: Modeling af-
fect in socially interactive robots, Proc. 15th IEEE
Int. Symp. Robot Hum. Interact. Commun. (RO-
MAN) (2006) pp. 558–563
72.37
M. Mori: Bukimi no tani the uncanny valley, En-
ergy 7(4), 33–35 (1970)
72.38
K. Wada, T. Shibata: Living with seal robots in
a care house – Evaluations of social and physio-
logical influences, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (2007) pp. 4940–4945
72.39
W. Stiehl, J. Lieberman, C. Breazeal, L. Basel,
L. Lalla, M. Wolf: Design of a therapeutic robotic
companion for relational, affective touch, Proc.
14th IEEE Workshop Robot Hum. Interact. Com-
mun. (ROMAN) (2005) pp. 408–415
72.40
NEC Corporation Japan: http://jpn.nec.com/robot/
en/
72.41
M.L.
Walters,
K.
Dautenhahn,
S.N.
Woods,
K.L. Koay: Robotic etiquette: Results from user
studies involving a fetch and carry task, Proc. 2nd
ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI),
Washington (2007)
72.42
R. Gockley, J. Forlizzi, R. Simmons: Natural
person-following behavior for social robots, Proc.
2nd ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact.
(HRI) (2007) pp. 17–24
72.43
A.G. Brooks, R.C. Arkin: Behavioral overlays for
non-verbal communication expression on a hu-
manoid robot, Auton. Robots 22(1), 55–74 (2007)
72.44
C. Darwin, P. Ekman: The Expression of the Emo-
tions in Man and Animals, 3rd edn. (Oxford Univ.
Press, Oxford 1998)
72.45
C. Breazeal: Emotion and sociable humanoid
robots, Int. J. Hum. Comput. Interact. 58, 119–155
(2003)
72.46
F. Tanaka, K. Noda, T. Sawada, M. Fujita: Associ-
ated emotion and its expression in an entertain-
ment robot QRIO, Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Entertain.
Comput., Eindhoven (2004) pp. 499–504

Social Robotics
References
1963
Part G | 72
72.47
S. Fujie, Y. Ejiri, K. Nakajima, Y. Matsusaka,
T. Kobayashi: A conversation robot using head
gesture recognition as paralinguistic information,
Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Robot Hum. Interact. Com-
mun. (ROMAN) (2004) pp. 158–164
72.48
L. Hall, S. Woods, R. Aylett, L. Newall, A. Paiva:
Achieving empathic engagement through affec-
tive interaction with synthetic characters, Lect.
Notes Comput. Sci. 3784, 731–738 (2005)
72.49
R.C. Arkin: Moving up the food chain: Motivation
and emotion in behavior-based robots. In: Who
Needs Emotions: The Brain Meets the Robot, ed.
by J. Fellous, M. Arbib (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford
2005)
72.50
Feelix
growing,
a
European
project
coordi-
nated by University of Hertfordshire: https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Feelix_Growing
72.51
C. Breazeal: Function meets style: Insights from
emotion theory applied to HRI, IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybern. C 34(2), 187–194 (2003)
72.52
A. Sloman: Beyond shallow models of emotion,
Cogn. Process. Int. Q. Cogn. Sci. 2(1), 177–198 (2001)
72.53
S. Chernova, N. DePalma, C. Breazeal: Crowdsourc-
ing real world human-robot dialog and team-
work through online multiplayer games, AAAI
Magazine 32(4), 100–111 (2011)
72.54
M. Scheutz, P. Schermerhorn, J. Kramer: The utility
of affect expression in natural language interac-
tions in joint human-robot tasks, Proc. 1st ACM
Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI) (ACM, New York,
USA 2006) pp. 226–233
72.55
J.C. Lester, S.G. Towns, C.B. Callaway, J.L. Voer-
man, P.J. Fitzgerald: Deictic and emotive com-
munication in animated pedagogical agents. In:
Embodied Conversational Agents, ed. by J. Casell,
S. Prevost, J. Sullivan, E. Churchill (MIT Press, Cam-
bridge 2000)
72.56
M.E. Hoque: My automated conversation helper
(MACH): Helping people improve social skills, Proc.
14th ACM Int. Conf. Multimodal Interact. (ICMI),
Santa Monica (2012)
72.57
R. Lazarus: Emotion and Adaptation (Oxford Univ.
Press, New York 1991)
72.58
A. Ortony, G. Clore, A. Collins: The Cognitive Struc-
ture of Emotions (Cambridge Univ. Press, New York
1988)
72.59
A. Marsella, J. Gratch: EMA: A process model of
appraisal dynamics, J. Cogn. Syst. Res. 10, 70–90
(2009)
72.60
C. Elliott: The Affective Reasoner: A Process Model
of Emotions in a Multi-Agent System, Ph.D. Thesis
(Northwestern Univ., Northwestern 1992)
72.61
J.A. Russell: Core affect and the psychological
construation of emotion, Psychol. Rev. 110, 145–
172 (2003)
72.62
A. Mehrabian, J.A. Russell: An Approach to Envi-
ronmental Psychology (MIT Press, Cambridge 1974)
72.63
C. Smith, H. Scott: A componential approach to
the meaning of facial expressions. In: The Psy-
chology of Facial Expression, ed. by J. Russell,
J. Fernandez-Dols (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cam-
bride 1997) pp. 229–254
72.64
C. Breazeal, B. Scassellati: Infant-like social inter-
actions between a robot and a human caregiver,
Adapt. Behav. 8(1), 47–72 (2000)
72.65
A. Damasio: Decartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason and
the Human Brain (Putnam, New York 1994)
72.66
C. Breazeal: Emotive qualities in lip synchronized
robot speech, Adv. Robotics 17(2), 97–113 (2003)
72.67
C. Breazeal: Early experiments using motivations
to regulate human-robot interaction, AAAI Fall
Symp. Emot. Intell., Orlando (1998) pp. 31–36
72.68
C. Breazeal, L. Aryananda: Recognizing affective
intent in robot directed speech, Auton. Robots
12(1), 85–104 (2002)
72.69
J. Panskepp: Affective Neuroscience: The Foun-
dations of Human and Animal Emotions (Oxford
Univ. Press, New York 1998)
72.70
R. Plutchik: Emotions: A general psychoevolu-
tionary theory. In: Approaches to Emotion, ed.
by K. Sherer, P. Elkman (Lawrence Erlbaum Asso-
ciates, Hillsdale 1984) pp. 197–219
72.71
L. Vygotsky: Mind in Society: The Development
of Higher Psychological Processes (Harvard Univ.
Press, Cambridge 1978)
72.72
F. Strack, L. Martin, S. Stepper: Inhibiting and fa-
cilitating conditions of the human smile: A non-
obtrusive test of the facial feedback hypothesis,
J. Person. Soc. Psychol. 54, 768–777 (1988)
72.73
P.M. Niedenthal, L.W. Barsalou, P. Winkielman,
S. Krauth-Gruber, F. Ric: Embodiment in atti-
tudes, social perception, and emotion, Personal.
Soc. Psychol. Rev. 9(3), 184–211 (2005)
72.74
C. Breazeal, D. Buchsbaum, J. Gray, D. Gatenby,
B. Blumberg: Learning from and about others:
Towards using imitation to bootstrap the social
understanding of others by robots, Artif. Life 11(1–
2), 31–62 (2005)
72.75
A. Fernald: Intonation and communicative intent
in mother’s speech to infants: Is the melody the
message?, Child Dev. 60, 1497–1510 (1989)
72.76
B. Scassellati: Theory of mind for a humanoid
robot, Auton. Robots 12(1), 13–24 (2002)
72.77
A. Leslie: How to acquire a representational the-
ory of mind. In: Metarepresentation: A Multidis-
ciplinary Perspective, ed. by D. Sperber (Oxford
Univ. Press, Oxford 1994) pp. 197–223
72.78
S. Baron-Cohen: Precursors to a theory of mind:
Understanding attention in others. In: Natural
Theories of Mind, ed. by A. Whiten (Blackwell, Ox-
ford 1991) pp. 233–250
72.79
B. Scassellati: Mechanisms of shared attention
for a humanoid robot, AAAI Fall Symp. Embodied
Cogn. Action (1996)
72.80
G.O. Fasel, J. Deak, J. Triesch, J. Movellan: Com-
bining embodied models and empirical research
for understanding the development of shared at-
tention, Proc. 2nd IEEE Int. Conf. Dev. Learn. (ICDL)
(2002) pp. 21–27
72.81
Y. Nagai, M. Asada, K. Hosoda: Learning for
joint attention helped by functional develop-
ment, Adv. Robotics 20(10), 1165–1181 (2006)
72.82
G. Butterworth: The ontogeny and phylogeny of
joint visual attention. In: Natural Theories of

Part G | 72
1964
Part G
Robots and Humans
Mind, ed. by A. Whiten (Blackwell, Oxford 1991)
pp. 223–232
72.83
A.L. Thomaz, M. Berlin, C. Breazeal: An embodied
computational model of social referencing, Proc.
14th IEEE Workshop Robot Hum. Interact. Com-
mun. (ROMAN), Nashville (2005)
72.84
S. Feinman: Social referencing in infancy, Merrill-
Palmer Q. 28, 445–470 (1982)
72.85
M. Davies, T. Stone: Mental Simulation (Blackwell,
Oxford 1995)
72.86
V. Gallese, A. Goldman: Mirror neurons and the
simulation theory of mind-reading, Trends Cogn.
Sci. 2(12), 493–501 (1998)
72.87
A. Meltzoff, J. Decety: What imitation tells us
about social cognition: A rapprochement be-
tween developmental psychology and cognitive
neuroscience, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol,
Sci. 358, 491–500 (2003)
72.88
L.W. Barsalou, P.M. Niedenthal, A. Barbey, J. Rup-
pert: Social embodiment. In: The Psychology of
Learning and Motivation, Vol. 43, ed. by B. Ross
(Academic, Amsterdam 2003) pp. 43–92
72.89
M. Johnson, Y. Demiris: Perceptual perspec-
tive taking and action recognition, Int. J. Adv.
Robotics Syst. 2(4), 301–308 (2005)
72.90
J. Gray, C. Breazeal, M. Berlin, A. Brooks, J. Lieber-
man: Action parsing and goal inference us-
ing self as simulator, Proc. 14th IEEE Work-
shop Robot Hum. Interact. Commun. (ROMAN),
Nashville (2005)
72.91
J. Gray, M. Berlin, C. Breazeal: Intention recog-
nition with divergent beliefs for collaborative
robots, Proc. AISB Symp. Mindful Environ., New-
castle Upon Tyne (2007)
72.92
G. Trafton, A. Schultz, M. Bugajska, F. Mintz:
Perspective-taking with Robots: Experiments and
models, Proc. 14th IEEE Workshop Robot Hum. In-
teract. Commun. (ROMAN), Nashville (2005)
72.93
G. Trafton, A.C. Shultz, D. Perzanowsli, W. Adams,
M. Bugajska, N. Cassimatis, D. Brock: Children and
robots learning to play hide and seek, Proc. 1st
Ann. Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI), Salt Lake
City (2006)
72.94
J.G. Trafton, N. Cassimatis, M. Bugajska, D. Brock,
F. Mintz, A. Schultz: Enabling effective human-
robot interaction using perspective-taking in
robots, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. A Syst. Hum.
35(4), 460–470 (2005)
72.95
J. Gray, C. Breazeal: Manipulating mental states
through physical action, Int. Conf. Soc. Robotics,
Chendu (2012)
72.96
C. Nass, S. Brave: Wired for Speech: How Voice Ac-
tivates and Advances the Human-Computer Re-
lationship (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA 2005)
72.97
C. Nass, Y. Moon: Machines and mindlessness:
Social responses to computers, J. Soc. Issues 56,
81–103 (2000)
72.98
C. Nass, J.S. Steuer, E. Tauber, H. Reeder: Anthro-
pomorphism, agency, and ethopoeia: Comput-
ers as social actors, ACM Conf. Companion Hum.
Factors Comput. Syst., Amsterdam (1993) pp. 111–
112
72.99
N. Epley, A. Waytz, J.T. Cacioppo: On seeing hu-
man: A three-factor theory of anthropomor-
phism, Psychol. Rev. 114, 864–886 (2007)
72.100
J. Goetz, S. Kiesler: Cooperation with a robotic as-
sistant, ACM Ext. Abstr. Hum. Factors Comput. Syst.
(2002) pp. 578–579
72.101
L. Axelrod, K. Hone: E-motional advantage: Per-
formance and satisfaction gains with affective
computing, ACM Ext. Abstr. Hum. Factors Comput.
Sci. (2005) pp. 1192–1195
72.102
S.O. Adalgeirsson, C. Breazeal: MeBot: A robotic
platform for socially embodied presence, Proc.
5th ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI)
(2010) pp. 15–22
72.103
S. Lee, I.Y. Lau, S. Kiesler, C.-Y. Chiu: Human men-
tal models of humanoid robots, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005) pp. 2767–2772
72.104
L.D. Riek, T.-C. Rabinowitch, B. Chakrabarti,
P. Robinson: How anthropomorphism affects em-
pathy toward robots, Proc. 4th ACM/IEEE Int. Conf.
Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI) (2009) pp. 245–246
72.105
S. Krach, F. Hegel, B. Wrede, G. Sagerer, F. Binkof-
ski, T. Kircher: Can machines think? Interaction
and perspective taking with robots investigated
via fMRI, PLoS ONE 3(7), e2597 (2008)
72.106
E. Short, J. Hart, M. Vu, B. Scassellati: No fair!!
An interaction with a cheating robot, Proc. 5th
ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI)
(2010) pp. 219–226
72.107
S.R. Fussell, S. Kiesler, L.D. Setlock, V. Yew:
How people anthropomorphize robots, Proc. 3rd
ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Human Robot Interact. (HRI)
(2008) pp. 145–152
72.108
P.H. Kahn Jr., N.G. Freier, B. Friedman, R.L. Sever-
son, E. Feldman: Social and moral relationships
with robotic others?, Proc. 13th Int. Workshop
Robot Hum. Interact. Commun. (ROMAN) (2004)
pp. 545–550
72.109
C. Bartneck, J. Forlizzi: A design-centred frame-
work for social human-robot interaction, 13th
IEEE Int. Workshop Robot Hum. Interact. Com-
mun. (ROMAN) (2004) pp. 591–594
72.110
J. Shah, C. Breazeal: Improved human-robot team
performance using chaski, A human-inspired
plan execution system, Proc. ACM/IEEE Int. Conf.
Hum. Robot Interact. (HRI) (2011)
72.111
Rethink Robotics: http://www.rethinkrobots.com
72.112
C. Kidd, C. Breazeal: Effect of a robot on user
perceptions, Proc. 2004 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS), Sendai, Vol. 4 (2004) pp. 3559–
3564
72.113
W. Bainbridge, J. Hart, E. Kim, B. Scassellati: The
effect of presence on human-robot interaction,
IEEE Int. Symp. Robot Hum. Interact. Commun.,
Munich (2008)
72.114
J. Wainer, D. Feil-Seifer, D. Shell, M. Matarić: The
role of physical embodiment in human-robot
interaction, Proc. Int. Workshop Robot Hum. In-
teract. Commun. (ROMAN) (2006) pp. 6–8
72.115
J. Wainer, D. Feil-Seifer, D. Shell, M. Matarić: Em-
bodiment and human-robot interaction: A task-
based perspective, Proc. 16th IEEE Int. Workshop

Social Robotics
References
1965
Part G | 72
Robot Hum. Interact. Commun. (ROMAN), Jeju Is-
land (2007)
72.116
C. Kidd, C. Breazeal: Robots at home: Understand-
ing long-term human-robot interaction, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Nice
(2008)
72.117
F.R. Volkmar, C. Lord, A. Bailey, R.T. Schultz,
A. Klin: Autism and pervasive developmental
disorders, J. Child Psychol. Psych. 45(1), 1–36
(2004)
72.118
N. Freed: This is the Fluffy Robot That Only
Speaks French: Language Use Between Preschool-
ers, Their Families, and a Social Robot While
Sharing Virtual Toys. Masters Sci. Thesis (MIT, Cam-
bridge 2012)
72.119
S. Turkle: Along Together (Basic Books, New York
2012)
72.120
N. Ambady, M. Weisbuch: Nonverbal behavior. In:
Handbook of Social Psychology, 5th edn., ed. by
D.T. Gilbert, S.T. Fiske, G. Lindzey (Wiley, Hoboken
2010)
72.121
J.A. Hall, E.J. Coats, L. Smith-Lebeau: Nonverbal
behavior and the vertical dimension of social re-
lations: A meta-analysis, Psychol. Bull. 131, 898–
924 (2005)
72.122
D. DeSteno, C. Breazeal, R. Frank, D. Pizarro,
J. Baumann, L. Dickens, J.J. Lee: Detecting the
trustworthiness of novel partners in economic ex-
change, Psychol. Sci. 23(12), 1549–1556 (2012)
72.123
C.P.H. Langford, J. Bowsher, J.P. Maloney, P.P. Lil-
lis: Social support: A conceptual analysis, J. Adv.
Nurs. 25, 95–100 (1997)
72.124
T.A. Wills: Supportive functions of interpersonal
relationships. In: Social Support and Health, ed.
by S. Cohen, L. Syme (Academic, Orlando 1985)
pp. 61–82
72.125
T.A. Wills: Social support and interpersonal rela-
tionships. In: Prosocial Behavior, ed. by M.S. Clark
(Sage, Newbury Park 1991) pp. 265–289
72.126
F.J. Bernieri, J.M. Davis, R. Rosenthal, C.R. Knee:
Inter-actional synchrony and rapport: Measuring
synchrony in displays devoid of sound and facial
affect, Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 20, 303–311
(1994)
72.127
F.J. Bernieri: Coordinated movement and rapport
in teacher-student interactions, J. Nonverbal Be-
hav. 12, 120–138 (1988)
72.128
N. Sonalkar, M. Jung, A. Mabogunje: Emotion in
engineering design teams. In: Emotional Engi-
neering: Service Development, ed. by S. Fukuda
(Springer, London 2010)
72.129
J.E. Grahe, F.J. Bernieri: The importance of non-
verbal cues in judging rapport, J. Nonverbal Be-
hav. 23, 253–269 (1999)
72.130
L.K. Miles, L.K. Nind, C.N. Macrae: The rhythm
of rapport: Interpersonal synchrony and social
perception, J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 45(3), 585–589
(2009)
72.131
Y. Nagai: Learning to comprehend deictic gestures
in robots and human infants, IEEE Int. Workshop
Robot Hum. Interact. Commun. (ROMAN) (2005)
pp. 217–222
72.132
Z. Kasap, N. Magnenat-Thalmann: Building long-
term relationships with virtual and robotic char-
acters: The role of remembering, Vis. Comput. 28,
87–97 (2012)
72.133
F. Tanaka, S. Matsuzoe: Children teach a care-
receiving robot to promote their learning: Field
experiments in a classroom for vocabulary learn-
ing, J. Hum.-Robot Interact. 1(1), 78–95 (2012)
72.134
C. Pastor, G. Gaminde, A. Renteria: COMPANION-
ABLE: Integrated cognitive assistive and domotic
companion robotic systems for ability and secu-
rity, Int. Symp. Robotics, Barcelona (2009)
72.135
H. Fujisawa, K. Shirai: An algorithm for spoken
sentence recognition and its application to the
speech input-output system, Proc. IEEE Trans.
Syst. Man Cybern. 4(5), 475–479 (1974)
72.136
T. Kobayashi, Y. Komori, N. Hashimoto, K. Iwata,
Y. Fukazawa, J. Yazawa, K. Shirai: Speech con-
versation system of the musician robot, Proc.
Int. Conf. Adv. Robotics (ICAR) (1985) pp. 483–
488
72.137
H. Kikuchi, M. Yokoyama, K. Hoashi, Y. Hidaki,
T. Kobayashi, K. Shirai: Controlling gaze of hu-
manoid in communication with human, Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (1998)
pp. 255–260
72.138
S. Hashimoto: Humanoid robots in Waseda Uni-
versity: Hadaly2 and WABIAN, Auton. Robots 12(1),
25–38 (2002)
72.139
C. Rich, B. Ponsler, A. Holroyd, C.L. Sidner: Recog-
nizing engagement in human-robot interaction,
ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI)
(2010) pp. 375–382
72.140
C. Breazeal, A. Edsinger, P. Fitzpatrick, B. Scassel-
lati: Active vision systems for sociable robots, IEEE
Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 31(5), 443–453 (2001)
72.141
C. Breazeal, C.D. Kidd, A.L. Thomaz, G. Hoffman,
M. Berlin: Effects of nonverbal communication on
efficiency and robustness in human-robot team-
work, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2005) pp. 383–388
72.142
C. Breazeal, C. Kidd, A.L. Thomaz, G. Hoffman,
M. Berlin: Effects of nonverbal communication on
efficiency and robustness in human-robot team-
work, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2005)
72.143
B. Mutlu, T. Shiwa,
T. Kanda,
H. Ishiguro,
N. Hagita: Footing in human-robot conversa-
tions: How robots might shape participant roles
using gaze cues, ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot
Interact. (HRI) (2009) pp. 61–68
72.144
B. Mutlu, F. Yamaoka, T. Kanda, H. Ishiguro,
N. Hagita: Nonverbal leakage in robots: Com-
munication of intentions through seemingly un-
intentional behavior, ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-
Robot Interact. (HRI) (2009) pp. 69–76
72.145
N. Kirchner, A. Alempijevic: A robot centric per-
spective on HRI, J. Hum.-Robot Interact. 1(2),
135–157 (2012)
72.146
A. Yamazaki, K. Yamazaki, T. Ohyama, Y. Koba-
yashi, Y. Kuno: A techno-sociological solution
for designing a Museum guide robot: Regarding

Part G | 72
1966
Part G
Robots and Humans
choosing an appropriate visitor, Proc. 17th Annu.
ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI)
(2012) pp. 309–316
72.147
S. Fujie, K. Fukushima, T. Kobayashi: Back-
channel feedback generation using linguistic and
nonlinguistic information and its application to
spoken dialogue system, Proc. Interspeech (2005)
pp. 889–892
72.148
M. Imai, T. Ono, H. Ishiguro: Physical relation and
expression: Joint attention for human-robot in-
teraction, Proc. ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot
Interact. (HRI) (2001) pp. 512–517
72.149
T.
Kanda,
M.
Kamasima, M.
Imai,
T.
Ono,
D. Sakamoto, H. Ishiguro, Y. Anzai: A humanoid
robot that pretends to listen to route guidance
from a human, Auton. Robots 22, 87–100 (2007)
72.150
H. Ogawa, T. Watanabe: Interrobot: A speech
driven embodied interaction robot, IEEE Int.
Workshop
Robot
Hum.
Interact.
Commun.
(ROMAN) (2000) pp. 322–327
72.151
D. Sakamoto, T. Kanda, T. Ono, H. Ishiguro, N. Ha-
gita: Android as a telecommunication medium
with a human-like presence, ACM/IEEE Int. Conf.
Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI) (2007) pp. 193–200
72.152
H. Kuzuoka, S. Oyama, K. Yamazaki, K. Suzuk,
M. Mitsuishi: GestureMan: A mobile robot that
embodies a remote instructor’s actions, Proc. ACM
Conf. Comput.-Suppor. Coop. Work (CSCW) (2000)
72.153
A. Brooks, C. Breazeal: Working with robots and
objects: Revisiting deictic reference for achieving
spatial common ground, Proc. ACM/IEEE Int. Conf.
Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI) (2006)
72.154
B. Scassellati: Investigating Models of Social De-
velopment Using a Humanoid Robot. Biorobotics
(MIT Press, Cambridge 2000)
72.155
H. Kozima, E. Vatikiotis-Bateson: Communicative
criteria for processing time/space-varying infor-
mation, IEEE Int. Workshop Robot Hum. Commun.
(ROMAN) (2001)
72.156
O. Sugiyama, T. Kanda, M. Imai, H. Ishiguro,
N. Hagita: Humanlike conversation with ges-
tures and verbal cues based on a three-layer
attention-drawing model, Connect. Sci. 18(4),
379–402 (2006)
72.157
V. Ng-Thow-Hing, P. Luo, S. Okita: Synchronized
gesture and speech production for humanoid
robots, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2010) pp. 4617–4624
72.158
Y. Hato, S. Satake, T. Kanda, M. Imai, N. Hagita:
Pointing to space: Modeling of deictic interac-
tion referring to regions, Proc. ACM/IEEE Int. Conf.
Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI) (2010) pp. 301–308
72.159
Y.
Okuno,
T.
Kanda,
M.
Imai,
H.
Ishiguro,
N. Hagita: Providing route directions: Design
of robot’s utterance, gesture, and timing, Proc.
ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI)
(2009) pp. 53–60
72.160
O. Sugiyama, T. Kanda, M. Imai, H. Ishiguro,
N. Hagita: Three-layer model for generation
and recognition of attention-drawing behavior,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2006)
pp. 5843–5850
72.161
H. Sacks, E.A. Schegloff, G. Jefferson: A simplest
systematics for the organization of turn-taking
for conversation, Language 50, 696–735 (1974)
72.162
H.H. Clark: Using Language (Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge 1996)
72.163
M.F. McTear: Spoken dialogue technology: En-
abling the conversational user interface, ACM
Comput. Surv. 34, 90–169 (2002)
72.164
M. Nakano, Y. Hasegawa, K. Nakadai, T. Naka-
mura, J. Takeuchi, T. Torii, H. Tsujino, N. Kanda,
H.G. Okuno: A two-layer model for behavior
and dialogue planning in conversational service
robots, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2005) pp. 3329–3335
72.165
M. Scheutz, P. Schermerhorn, J. Kramer, D. Ander-
son: First steps toward natural human-like Hri,
Auton. Robots 22, 411–423 (2006)
72.166
C. Shi, T. Kanda, M. Shimada, F. Yamaoka,
H. Ishiguro, N. Hagita: Easy development of com-
municative behaviors in social robots, IEEE/RSJ
Int.
Conf.
Intell.
Robots
Syst.
(IROS)
(2010)
pp. 5302–5309
72.167
K. Sakita, K. Ogawara, S. Murakami, K. Kawamura,
K. Ikeuchi: Flexible cooperation between human
and robot by interpreting human intention from
gaze information, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2004) pp. 846–851
72.168
Y. Matsusaka, T. Tojo, T. Kobayashi: Conversation
robot participating in group conversation, IEICI
Trans. Inform. Syst. 86(1), 26–36 (2003)
72.169
R. Nisimura, T. Uchida, A. Lee, H. Saruwatari,
K. Shikano, Y. Matsumoto: ASKA: Receptionist
robot with speech dialogue system, IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2002) pp. 1314–
1319
72.170
Y. Matsusaka, S. Fujie, T. Kobayashi: Modeling of
conversational strategy for the robot participat-
ing in the group conversation, Eur. Conf. Speech
Commun. Technol. (EUROSPEECH) (2001)
72.171
M. Hoque, D. Das, T. Onuki, Y. Kobayashi, Y. Kuno:
An integrated approach of attention control of
target human by nonverbal behaviors of robots
in different viewing situations, IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2012) pp. 1399–
1406
72.172
A. Raux, M. Eskenazi: A finite-state turn-taking
model for spoken dialog systems, Proc. Hum.
Lang. Technol. Annu. Conf. North Am. Chapt. As-
soc. Comput. Linguist. (2009) pp. 629–637
72.173
C. Chao, A.L. Thomaz: Timing in multimodal turn-
taking interactions: Control and analysis using
timed petri nets, J. Hum.-Robot Interact. 1, 4–25
(2012)
72.174
M. Yamamoto, T. Watanabe: Time lag effects
of utterance to communicative actions on Cg
character-human greeting interaction, IEEE Int.
Symp. Robot Hum. Interact. Commun. (ROMAN)
(2006) pp. 629–634
72.175
D. McNeill: Psycholinguistics: A New Approach
(HarperRow, New York 1987)
72.176
T. Shiwa, T. Kanda, M. Imai, H. Ishiguro, N. Hagita:
How quickly should a communication robot re-

Social Robotics
References
1967
Part G | 72
spond? Delaying strategies and habituation ef-
fects, Int. J. Soc. Robotics 1, 141–155 (2009)
72.177
M.P. Michalowski, S. Sabanovic, R. Simmons:
A spatial model of engagement for a social robot,
IEEE Int. Workshop Adv. Motion Control (2006)
pp. 762–767
72.178
K. Dautenhahn, M.L. Walters, S. Woods, K.L. Koay,
C.L. Nehaniv, E.A. Sisbot, R. Alami, T. Siméon:
How may i serve you? A robot companion ap-
proaching a seated person in a helping context,
ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-Robots Interact. (HRI)
(2006) pp. 172–179
72.179
S. Satake, T. Kanda, D.F. Glas, M. Imai, H. Ishiguro,
N. Hagita: How to approach humans? Strate-
gies for social robots to initiate interaction,
ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI)
(2009) pp. 109–116
72.180
M.L. Walters, K. Dautenhahn, R.T. Boekhorst,
K.L. Koay, C. Kaouri, S. Woods, C. Nehaniv, D. Lee,
I. Werry: The influence of subjects’ personality
traits on personal spatial zones in a human-robot
interaction experiment, IEEE Int. Workshop Robot
Hum. Interact. Commun. (ROMAN) (2005) pp. 347–
352
72.181
H. Hüttenrauch, K.S. Eklundh, A. Green, E.A. Topp:
Investigating spatial relationships in human-
robot interactions,
IEEE/RSJ
Int.
Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (2006) pp. 5052–5059
72.182
D.
Feil-Seifer:
Distance-based
computational
models for facilitating robot interaction with chil-
dren, J. Hum.-Robot Interact. 1, 55–77 (2012)
72.183
F. Yamaoka, T. Kanda, H. Ishiguro, N. Hagita: De-
veloping a model of robot behavior to identify
and appropriately respond to implicit attention-
shifting, ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact.
(HRI) (2009) pp. 133–140
72.184
C. Shi, M. Shimada, T. Kanda, H. Ishiguro,
N. Hagita: Spatial formation model for initiating
conversation, Robotics Sci. Syst. Conf. (RSS) (2011)
72.185
C. Torrey, A. Powers, M. Marge, S.R. Fussell,
S. Kiesler: Effects of adaptive robot dialogue
on information exchange and social relations,
ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI)
(2006) pp. 126–133
72.186
Y. Morales, S. Satake, T. Kanda, N. Hagita: Mod-
eling environments from a route perspective,
ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI)
(2011) pp. 441–448
72.187
T. Kollar, S. Tellex, D. Roy, N. Roy: Toward under-
standing natural language directions, ACM/IEEE
Int.
Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact.
(HRI)
(2010)
pp. 259–266
72.188
T. Matsumoto, S. Satake, T. Kanda, M. Imai,
N. Hagita: Do you remember that shop? – Com-
putational model of spatial memory for shopping
companion robots, ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-
Robot Interact. (HRI) (2012) pp. 447–454
72.189
T. Kanda, M. Shiomi, Z. Miyashita, H. Ishiguro,
N. Hagita: A communication robot in a shopping
mall, IEEE Trans. Robotics 26(5), 897–913 (2010)
72.190
Y.
Fernaeus,
M.
Håkansson,
M.
Jacobsson,
S. Ljungblad: How do you play with a robotic toy
animal?: A long-term study of Pleo, Proc. 9th Int.
Conf. Interact. Des. Child. (IDC) (ACM, New York,
USA 2010) pp. 39–48
72.191
K. Dautenhahn: Socially intelligent robots: Di-
mensions of human–robot interaction, Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. B Biol, Sci. 362(1480), 679–704 (2007)
72.192
COGNIRON, FP6 project, coordinated by LAAS:
http://www.cogniron.org/final/Home.php
72.193
LIREC, FP7 project, coordinator Queen Mary Uni-
versity of London: http://lirec.eu/project
72.194
Companions, FP6 project, coordinated by Uni-
versity
of
Teesside:
http://www.companions-
project.org/
72.195
CompaniAble, FP7 project, coordinated by Univer-
sity of Reading: http://www.companionable.net/
72.196
http://www.openlivinglabs.eu/aboutus, see also
the MIT Living labs, http://livinglabs.mit.edu/ or
the Placelab http://architecture.mit.edu/house_
n/placelab.html
72.197
K. Dautenhahn, S. Woods, C. Kaouri, M. Walters,
K.L. Koay, I. Werry: What is a robot compan-
ion - Friend, assistant or butler?, IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Edmonton (2005)
pp. 1488–1493
72.198
S. Turkle: Authenticity in the age of digital com-
panions, Interact. Stud. 8(3), 501–517 (2007)
72.199
S. Turkle, W. Taggart, C.D. Kidd, O. Daste: Re-
lational artifacts with children and elders: The
complexities of cybercompanionship, Connect.
Sci. 18(4), 347–361 (2006)
72.200
M. Shiomi, T. Kanda, H. Ishiguro, N. Hagita: In-
teractive humanoid robots for a science museum,
IEEE Intell. Syst. 22, 25–32 (2007)
72.201
J.-Y. Sung, L. Guo, R.E. Grinter, H.I. Christensen:
My Roomba Is Rambo: Intimate home appli-
ances, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 4717, 145–162
(2007)
72.202
H. Hüttenrauch, K.S. Eklundh: Fetch-and-carry
with Cero: Observations from a long-term user
study with a service robot, IEEE Int. Workshop
Robot Hum. Interact. Commun. (ROMAN) (2002)
pp. 158–163
72.203
S. Šabanović, M.P. Michalowski, R. Simmons:
Robots in the wild: Observing human-robot so-
cial interaction outside the lab, Proceedings AMC
2006 (2006) pp. 576–581
72.204
D. Heylen, B. van Dijk, A. Nijholt: Robotic rabbit
companions: Amusing or a nuisance?, J. Multi-
modal User Interfaces 5, 53–59 (2012)
72.205
T. Salter, F. Michaud, H. Larouche: How wild is
wild? A taxonomy to categorize the wildness of
child-robot interaction, Int. J. Soc. Robotics 2(4),
405–415 (2010)
72.206
T. Kanda, R. Sato, N. Saiwaki, H. Ishiguro: A two-
month field trial in an elementary school for
long-term human-robot interaction, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 23(5), 962–971 (2007)
72.207
H. Hűttenrauch, E.A. Topp, E.K. Severinson: The
art of gate-crashing – Bringing HRI into users’
homes, Interact. Stud. 10(3), 274–297 (2009)
72.208
T. Bickmore, R. Picard: Establishing and main-
taining long-term human-computer relation-

Part G | 72
1968
Part G
Robots and Humans
ships, ACM Trans. Comput. Hum. Interact. 59(1),
21–30 (2005)
72.209
T. Bickmore, L. Caruso, K. Clough-Gorr, T. Heeren:
It’s just like you talk to a friend – Relational
agents for older adults, Interact. Comput. 17(6),
711–735 (2005)
72.210
K.L. Koay, D.S. Syrdal, M.L. Walters, K. Dauten-
hahn: Five weeks in the robot house - exploratory
human-robot interaction trials in a domestic set-
ting, IEEE 2nd Int. Conf. Adv. Comput.-Hum. In-
teract. (ACHI) (2008) pp. 219–226
72.211
M.E. Pollack, L. Brown, D. Colbry, C.E. McCarthy,
C. Orosz, B. Peintner, I. Tsamardinos: Autominder:
An intelligent cognitive orthotic system for people
with memory impairment, Robotics Auton. Syst.
44(3), 273–282 (2003)
72.212
A. Cesta, F. Pecora: The robocare project: Intelli-
gent systems for elder care, AAAI Fall Symp. Caring
Mach. AI Elder Care, USA (2005)
72.213
R. Cuijpers, M. Bruna, J. Ham, E. Torta: Attitude
towards robots depends on interaction but not on
anticipatory behaviour, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci.
7072, 163–172 (2011)
72.214
C. Huijnen, A. Badii, H. van den Heuvel, P. Caleb-
Solly, D. Thiemert: Maybe it becomes a buddy,
but do not call it a robot – Seamless cooperation
between companion robotics and smart homes,
Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 7040, 324–329 (2011)
72.215
Florence, FP7 European project, coordinated by
Philips Electronics Nederland B.V.: http://www.
florence-project.eu/
72.216
SRS, FP7 European project, coordinated by Cardiff
University: http://srs-project.eu/
72.217
ACCOMPANY,
FP7
European
project,
coordi-
nated by University of Hertfordshire: http://
accompanyproject.eu/
72.218
Quality of Life Technology Center: http://www.
cmu.edu/qolt/index.html
72.219
CASALA, Dundalk Institute of Technology: http://
www.casala.ie/
72.220
Intuitive Automata:
http://www.intuitiveautomata.com/
72.221
B.J. Fogg: Persuasive computers: Perspectives and
research directions, Proc. ACM/SIGCHI Conf. Hum.
Factors Comput. Syst., ed. by C.-M. Karat, A. Lund,
J. Coutaz, J. Karat (1998) pp. 225–232
72.222
B. Mutlu, T. Kanda, J. Forlizzi, J. Hodgins, H. Ishig-
uro: Conversational gaze mechanisms for human-
like robots, ACM Trans, Interact. Intell. Syst. 1(2), 33
(2012)
72.223
M. Salem, S. Kopp, I. Wachsmuth, K. Rohlfing,
F. Joublin: Generation and evaluation of commu-
nicative robot gesture, Int. J. Soc. Robotics 4(2),
201–217 (2012)
72.224
J. Mumm, B. Mutlu: Human-robot proxemics:
Physical and psychological distancing in human-
robot interaction, ACM/IEEE 6th Int. Conf. Hum.-
robot Interact. (HRI) (2011) pp. 331–338
72.225
F. Yamaoka, T. Kanda, H. Ishiguro, N. Hagita: How
contingent should a lifelike robot be? The Re-
lationship between contingency and complexity,
Connect. Sci. 19(2), 143–162 (2007)
72.226
M. Shimada, T. Kanda: What is the appropriate
speech rate for a communication robot?, Interact.
Stud. 13(3), 408–435 (2012)
72.227
D. François, D. Polani, K. Dautenhahn: Towards
socially adaptive robots: A novel method for
real time recognition of human-robot interaction
styles, Proc. Humanoids 2008, Daejeon (2008)
pp. 353–359
72.228
D. Szafir, B. Mutlu: Pay attention! Designing adap-
tive agents that monitor and improve user en-
gagement, Proc. 30th ACM/SIGCHI Conf. Hum. Fac-
tors Comput. (2012)
72.229
R. Rose, M. Scheutz, P. Schermerhorn: Towards
a conceptual and methodological framework for
determining robot believability, Interact. Stud.
11(2), 314–335 (2010)
72.230
J. Forlizzi, C. DiSalvo: Service robots in the domes-
tic environment: A study of the roomba vacuum in
the home, Proc. 1st ACM SIGCHI/SIGART Conf. Hum.-
Robot Interact. (2006) pp. 258–265
72.231
N.E. Sharkey, A.J.C. Sharkey: The crying shame of
robot nannies: An ethical appraisal, J. Interact.
Stud. 11, 161–190 (2010)
72.232
A. Sharkey, N. Sharkey: Granny and the robots:
Ethical issues in robot care for the elderly, Ethics
Inform. Technol. 14(1), 27–40 (2012)
72.233
D. Robert, C. Breazeal: Blended reality characters,
Proc. Seventh Annu. ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-
Robot Interact. (HRI) (2012) pp. 359–366
72.234
M. Imai, T. Ono, T. Etani: Agent migration:
Communications between a human and robot,
IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man Cybern., Vol. 4 (1999)
pp. 1044–1048
72.235
D.S. Syrdal, K.L. Koay, M.L. Walters, K. Dauten-
hahn: The boy-robot should bark! – Children’s
impressions of agent migration into diverse em-
bodiments, Proc. New Front. Hum.-Robot Inter-
act. Symp. AISB Convention (2009) pp. 116–121
72.236
K.L. Koay, D.S. Syrdal, M.L. Walters, K. Dauten-
hahn: A user study on visualization of agent
migration between two companion robots, 13th
Int. Conf. Hum.-Comput. Interact. (HCII) (2009)
72.237
E.M. Segura, H. Cramer, P.F. Gomes, S. Nylander,
A. Paiva: Revive!: Reactions to migration be-
tween different embodiments when playing with
robotic pets, Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Interact. Des.
Child. (IDC) (2012) pp. 88–97
72.238
M. Kriegel, R. Aylett, P. Cuba, V.M.A. Paiva: Robots
meet IVAs: A mind-body interface for migrating
artificial intelligent agents, Proc. Intell. Virtual
Agents, Reykjavik (2011)
72.239
K.L. Koay, D.S. Syrdal, K. Dautenhahn, K. Ar-
ent, L. Malek, B. Kreczmer: Companion mi-
gration – Initial participants’ feedback from a
video-based prototyping study. In: Mixed Real-
ity and Human-Robot Interact, ed. by X. Wang
(Springer,
Berlin,
Heidelberg
2011)
pp.
133–
151
72.240
W.C. Ho, M. Lim, P.A. Vargas, S. Enz, K. Daut-
enhahn, R. Aylett: An initial memory model for
virtual and robot companions supporting migra-
tion and long-term interaction, 18th IEEE Int.

Social Robotics
References
1969
Part G | 72
Symp. Robot Hum. Interact. Commun. (ROMAN)
(2009)
72.241
G.M.P. O’Hare, B.R. Duffy, J.F. Bradley, A.N. Mar-
tin:
Agent chameleons: Moving
minds
from
robots to digital information spaces, Proc. Auton.
Minirobots Res. Edutainment (2003) pp. 18–21
72.242
Y. Sumi, K. Mase: AgentSalon: Facilitating face-
to-face knowledge exchange through conversa-
tions among personal agents, Proc. 5th Int. Conf.
Auton. Agents (AGENTS) (2001) pp. 393–400
72.243
P.K. Allen, A. Miller, P.Y. Oh, B.B. Leibowitz: In-
tegration of vision, force and tactile sensing
for grasping, Int. J. Intell. Mach. 4(1), 129–149
(1999)
72.244
M. Siegel, M.C. Breazeal, M. Norton: Persuasive
robotics: The influence of robot gender on hu-
man behavior, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2009) pp. 2563–2568
72.245
T. Chen, C.-H. King, A. Thomaz, C. Kemp: Touched
by a robot: An investigation of subjective re-
sponses to robot-initiated touch, ACM/IEEE Int.
Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI) (2011)
72.246
P.K. Davis: The Power of Touch – The Basis for
Survival, Health, Intimacy, and Emotional Well-
Being (Hay House, Carlsbad 1999)
72.247
M.J. Hertenstein, J.M. Verkamp, A.M. Kerestes,
R.M. Holmes: The communicative functions of
touch in humans, non-human primates, and
rats: A review and synthesis of the empirical re-
search, Genet. Soc. Gen. Psychol. Monogr. 132(1),
5–94 (2006)
72.248
Roboskinproject
72.249
A. Schmitz, P. Maiolino, M. Maggiali, L. Natale,
G. Cannata, G. Metta: Methods and technologies
for the implementation of large-scale robot tac-
tile sensors, IEEE Trans. Robotics 27(3), 389–400
(2011)
72.250
R.S. Dahiya, M. Getta, M. Valle, G. Sandini: Tactile
sensing – From humans to humanoids, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 26(1), 1–20 (2010)
72.251
W. Stiehl, L. Lalla, C. Breazeal: A somatic alpha-
bet approach to sensitive skin for robots, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), New Orleans
(2004) pp. 2865–2870
72.252
W. Stiehl, C. Breazeal: Design of a therapeutic
robotic companion for relational, affective touch,
Proc. 14th IEEE Workshop Robot Hum. Interact.
Commun. (ROMAN), Nashville (2005) pp. 408–415
72.253
W.D. Stiehl, C. Breazeal: A sensitive skin for robotic
companions featuring temperature, force and
electric field sensors, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. In-
tell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2006) pp. 1952–1959
72.254
B.D. Argall, A. Billard: A survey of tactile human-
robot interactions, Robotics Auton. Syst. 58(10),
1159–1176 (2010)
72.255
J.K. Lee, R.L. Toscano, W.D. Stiehl, C. Breazeal:
The design of a semi-autonomous robot avatar
for family communication and education, Proc.
17th IEEE Int. Symp. Robot Hum. Interact. Com-
mun. (ROMAN) (2008) pp. 166–173
72.256
F. Mueller, F. Vetere, M. Gibbs, J. Kjeldskov,
S. Pedell, S. Howard: Hug over a distance, Proc.
Conf. Hum. Factors Comput. Syst. (2005) pp. 1673–
1676
72.257
J.K.S. The, A.D. Cheok, R.L. Peiris, Y. Choi,
V. Thuong, S. Lai: Huggy Pajama: A mobile par-
ent and child hugging communication system,
Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Interact. Des. Child. (IDC) (2008)
pp. 250–257
72.258
F. Papadopoulos, K. Dautenhahn, W.C. Ho: Ex-
ploring the use of robots as social mediators in
a remote human-human collaborative commu-
nication experiment, Paladyn 3(1), 1–10 (2012)
72.259
B.D. Argall, E. Sauser, A. Billard: Tactile guidance
for policy adaptation, Found. Trends Robotics 1(2),
79–133 (2011)
72.260
T. Noda, T. Miyashita, H. Ishiguro, N. Hagita:
Super-flexible skin sensors embedded on the
whole body, self-organizing based on haptic in-
teractions, Robotics Sci. Syst. Conf. (2008)
72.261
T. Tajika, T. Miyashita, H. Ishiguro, N. Hagita:
Automatic categorization of haptic interactions-
what are the typical haptic interactions between
a human and a robot?, Proc. 6th IEEE-RAS Int.
Conf. Humanoid Robots (Humanoids), Genova
(2006)
72.262
H. Knight, R. Toscano, W.D. Stiehl, A. Chang,
Y. Wang, C. Breazeal: Real-time social touch ges-
ture recognition for sensate robots, IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2009) pp. 3715–
3720
72.263
S. Yohanan, K.E. MacLean: The role of affective
touch in human-robot interaction: Human intent
and expectations in touching the haptic creature,
Int. J. Soc. Robotics 4, 163–180 (2011)
72.264
W.D. Stiehl, C. Breazeal: Affective touch for robotic
companions, Proc. Affect. Comput. Intell. Inter-
act., Bejing (2005)
72.265
D. François, K. Dautenhahn, D. Polani: Using
real-time recognition of human-robot interac-
tion styles for creating adaptive robot behaviour
in robot-assisted play, Proc. 2nd IEEE Symp. Artif.
Life, Nashville (2009) pp. 45–52
72.266
Aurora project, University of Hertfordshire: http://
www.aurora-project.com/
72.267
K. Dautenhahn: Robots as social actors: AURORA
and the case of autism, Proc. 3rd Int. Cogn. Tech-
nol. Conf., San Francisco (1999)
72.268
American Psychiatric Association : Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders DSM-IV
(APA, Washington 1995)
72.269
R. Jordan: Autistic Spectrum Disorders – An Intro-
ductory Handbook for Practitioners (David Fulton,
London 1999)
72.270
K. Dautenhahn, I. Werry: Towards interactive
robots in autism therapy: Background, motiva-
tion and challenges, Pragmat. Cogn. 12(1), 1–35
(2004)
72.271
I. Werry, K. Dautenhahn, B. Ogden, W. Harwin:
Can social interaction skills be taught by a social
agent? The role of a robotic mediator in autism
therapy, Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Cogn. Technol. In-
strum. Mind (CT), ed. by M. Beynon, C.L. Nehaniv,
K. Dautenhahn (Springer, London 2001) pp. 57–74

Part G | 72
1970
Part G
Robots and Humans
72.272
B. Scassellati, H. Admoni, M. Mataric: Robots for
use in autism research, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng.
14, 275–294 (2012)
72.273
I. Werry, K. Dautenhahn, W. Harwin: Evaluating
the response of children with autism to a robot,
Proc. RESNA Annu. Conf. Rehabil. Eng. Assist.
Technol. Soc. N. Am., Nevada (2001)
72.274
A. Tapus, A. Peca, A. Aly, C. Pop, L. Jisa, S. Pintea,
A.S. Rusi, D.O. David: Children with autism social
engagement in interaction with Nao, an imita-
tive robot – A series of single case experiments,
Interact. Stud. 13(3), 315–347 (2012)
72.275
B. Vanderborght, R. Simut, J. Saldien, C. Pop,
A.S. Rusu, S. Pintea, D. Lefeber, D.O. David: Us-
ing the social robot probo as a social story telling
agent for children with ASD, Interact. Stud. 13(3),
348–372 (2012)
72.276
A. Billard, B. Robins, K. Dautenhahn, J. Nadel:
Building robota, a mini-humanoid robot for the
rehabilitation of children with autism, RESNA As-
sist. Technol. J. 19(1), 37–49 (2006)
72.277
B. Robins, K. Dautenhahn, R. te Boekhorst, A. Bil-
lard: Robotic assistants in therapy and educa-
tion of children with autism: Can a small hu-
manoid robot help encourage social interaction
skills?, Univ. Access Inform. Soc. 4(2), 105–120
(2005)
72.278
H. Kozima,
M.P. Michalowski,
C. Nakagawa:
Keepon: A playful robot for research, therapy,
and entertainment, Int. J. Soc. Robotics 1(1), 3–
18 (2009)
72.279
D. François, S. Powell, K. Dautenhahn: A long-
term study of children with autism playing with
a robotic pet: Taking inspirations from non-
directive play therapy to encourage children’s
proactivity and initiative-taking, Interact. Stud.
10(3), 324–373 (2009)
72.280
A. Duquette, F. Michaud, H. Mercier: Exploring
the use of a mobile robot as an imitation agent
with children with low-functioning autism, Au-
ton. Robots 24, 147–157 (2008)
72.281
J.J. Diehl, L.M. Schmitt, M. Villano, C.R. Crow-
ell: The clinical use of robots for individuals with
autism spectrum disorders: A critical review, Res.
Autism Spectr. Disord. 6, 249–262 (2012)
72.282
KASPAR, University of Hertfordshire: http://www.
kaspar.herts.ac.uk/
72.283
B. Robins, K. Dautenhahn: Developing play sce-
narios for tactile interaction with a humanoid
robot: A case study exploration with children with
autism, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 6414, 243–252
(2010)
72.284
B. Robins, E. Ferrari, K. Dautenhahn, G. Kro-
nrief, B. Prazak, G.J. Gerderblom, F. Caprino,
E. Laudanna, P. Marti: Human-centred design
methods: Developing scenarios for robot as-
sisted play informed by user panels and field
trials, Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud. 68, 873–898
(2010)
72.285
J. Wainer, K. Dautenhahn, B. Robins, F. Amirab-
dollahian: Collaborating with Kaspar: Using an
autonomous humanoid robot to foster cooper-
ative dyadic play among children with autism,
Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (2010)
pp. 631–638
72.286
B. Robbins, K. Dautenhahn, E. Ferrari, G. Kro-
nreif,
B.
Prazak-Aram,
P.
Marti,
I.
Iacono,
G.J. Gelderblom, T. Bernd, F. Caprino, E. Lau-
danna: Scenarios of robot-assisted play for chil-
dren with cognitive and physical disabilities, In-
teract. Stud. 13(2), 189–234 (2012)
72.287
B. Robins, K. Dautenhahn, P. Dickerson: Embod-
iment and cognitive learning – Can a humanoid
robot help children with autism to learn about
tactile social behaviour?, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci.
7621, 6675 (2012)
72.288
Z. Ji, F. Amirabdollahian, D. Polani, K. Dauten-
hahn: Histogram based classification of tactile
patterns on periodically distributed skin sensors
for a humanoid robot, Proc. 20th IEEE Int. Symp.
Robot Hum. Interact. Commun. (ROMAN) (2011)
pp. 433–440
72.289
B. Robins, F. Amirabdollahian, Z. Ji, K. Dauten-
hahn: Tactile interaction with a humanoid robot
for children with autism: A case study analysis in-
volving user requirements and results of an initial
implementation, Proc. 19th IEEE Int. Symp. Robot
Hum. Interact. Commun. (ROMAN) (2010) pp. 704–
711
72.290
H. Cramer, N. Kemper, A. Amin, B. Wielinga, V. Ev-
ers: Give me a hug: The effects of touch and
autonomy on people’s responses to embodied
social agents, Comput. Animat. Virtual Worlds 20,
437–445 (2009)
72.291
E.S. Kim, L.D. Berkovits, E.P. Bernier, D. Leyzberg,
F. Shic, R. Paul, B. Scassellati: Social robots as em-
bedded reinforcers of social behavior in children
with autism, J. Autism Dev. Disord. 43(5), 1038–
1049 (2012)
72.292
G. Hoffman, C. Breazeal: Cost-based anticipatory
action selection for human–robot fluency, IEEE
Trans. Robotics 23, 952–961 (2007)
72.293
G. Hoffman, C. Breazeal: Effects of anticipatory
perceptual simulation on practiced human-robot
tasks, Auton. Robots 28, 403–423 (2010)
72.294
T. Spexard, S. Li, B. Wrede, J. Fritsch, G. Sagerer,
O. Booij, Z. Zivkovic, B. Terwijn, B. Kröse: Biron,
Where are you? Enabling a robot to learn new
places in a real home environment by inte-
grating spoken dialog and visual localization,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) (2006)
pp. 934–940
72.295
S. Woods, K. Dautenhahn, C. Kaouri: Is someone
watching me? – Consideration of social facilita-
tion effects in human-robot interaction exper-
iments, IEEE Int. Symp. Comput. Intell. Robotics
Autom. (CIRA) (2005) pp. 53–60
72.296
N. Riether, F. Hegel, B. Wrede, G. Horstmann: So-
cial facilitation with social robots?, 7th ACM/IEEE
Int.
Conf.
Hum.-Robot
Interact.
(HRI)
(2012)
pp. 41–47
72.297
E. Takano, T. Chikaraishi, Y. Matsumoto, Y. Naka-
mura, H. Ishiguro, K. Sugamoto: Psychological
effects on interpersonal communication by by-

Social Robotics
References
1971
Part G | 72
stander android using motions based on human-
like needs, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2009) pp. 3721–3726
72.298
M. Shiomi, T. Kanda, S. Koizumi, H. Ishiguro,
N. Hagita: Group attention control for commu-
nication robots with Wizard of Oz approach,
ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI)
(2007) pp. 121–128
72.299
M. Shiomi, K. Nohara, T. Kanda, H. Ishiguro,
N. Hagita: Estimating group states for interactive
humanoid robots, IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid
Robots (Humanoids) (2009) pp. 318–323
72.300
Y. Matsuyama, H. Taniyama, S. Fujie, T. Kobayashi:
Framework of communication activation robot
participating in multiparty conversation, AAAI Fall
Symp. Ser. (2010) pp. 68–73

Multimedia Contents Socially Assis
1973
Part G | 73.1
73. Socially Assistive Robotics
Maja J. Matarić, Brian Scassellati
This chapter reviews the critical societal issues
that have motivated research into socially assistive
robotics (SAR) (Sect. 73.2) and describes the reason
why physical robots rather than virtual agents are
essential to this effort (Sect. 73.3). It highlights the
major research issues within this area (Sects. 73.4–
73.7), describes the primary application domains
and populations where SAR research has shown an
impact (Sects. 73.8–73.11), and closes with some
of the ethical and safety issues that SAR research
necessitates (Sect. 73.12).
73.1
Overview............................................ 1973
73.2
The Need
for Socially Assistive Robotics .............. 1974
73.3
Advantages of Embodied Robots
over Virtual Agents ............................. 1975
73.3.1
Embodiment
and Social Influence ............... 1975
73.3.2
Embodiment and Learning ...... 1976
73.3.3
Embodiment
and Special Populations.......... 1976
73.3.4
Evaluation of SAR Systems ....... 1977
73.4
Motivation, Autonomy,
and Companionship ........................... 1977
73.5
Influence and the Dynamics
of Assistive Interaction ....................... 1978
73.6
Personalization and Adaptation
to Specific Needs and Abilities ............ 1978
73.7
Creating Long-Term Engagement
and Behaviour Change ....................... 1979
73.8
SAR for Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD)
Therapy ............................................. 1980
73.8.1
Summary
of ASD-Related Challenges....... 1980
73.8.2
User Study Insights ................. 1980
73.8.3
Research Directions................. 1981
73.9
SAR Supporting Rehabilitation ............ 1982
73.9.1
Summary
of Rehabilitation Challenges .... 1982
73.9.2
Contact Versus SAR
(Noncontact) Robotics
for Rehabilitation ................... 1982
73.9.3
User Study Insights ................. 1983
73.9.4
Research Directions................. 1984
73.10 SAR and Eldercare............................... 1985
73.10.1
Summary
of Eldercare Challenges ........... 1985
73.10.2
User Study Insights ................. 1985
73.11
SAR for Alzheimer’s Dementia
and Cognitive Rehabilitation .............. 1986
73.11.1
User Study Insights ................. 1986
73.11.2
Research Directions................. 1987
73.12
Ethical and Safety Considerations........ 1987
References................................................... 1988
73.1 Overview
As robots become increasingly integrated into human
environments, different forms of interaction are spawn-
ing new research topics and subﬁelds. Human–robot
interaction (HRI) can be broadly classiﬁed into two cat-
egories: physical and social/emotional. Physical HRI
(Chap. 69) involves the research areas of manipula-
tion and haptics, among others, and is used in medical
and rehabilitation robotics (Chaps. 63 and 64). In con-
trast, social/emotional interaction involves verbal and
nonverbal expression and communication, and thus the
research areas of assistive robotics, social robotics, and
SAR.

Part G | 73.2
1974
Part G
Robots and Humans
Robots have long been used to provide assistance to
individual users through physical interaction, typically
by supporting direct physical rehabilitation (Chap. 64)
or by providing a service such as retrieving items or
cleaning ﬂoors (Chap. 55). Socially assistive robotics
(SAR) is a comparatively new ﬁeld of robotics that fo-
cuses on developing robots capable of assisting users
through social rather than physical interaction. Just as
a good coach or teacher can provide motivation, guid-
ance, and support without making physical contact with
a student, socially assistive robots attempt to provide
the appropriate emotional, cognitive, and social cues to
encourage development, learning, or therapy for an indi-
vidual. SAR focuses on the challenges of providing mo-
tivation, coaching, training, and rehabilitation through
nonphysical interaction; such systems have been val-
idated in hands-off stroke rehabilitation, social skill
training of children with autism, and eldercare, among
others. In contrast, most of rehabilitation robotics fo-
cuses on physical interaction with the patient; such sys-
tems have been validated in hands-on stroke rehabil-
itation. Social robotics (Chap. 72) focuses on endow-
ing robots with the ability to behave in socially aware
and engaging ways; such systems have been validated
in museums, movies, classrooms, and informal settings.
Service robotics can be seen as the overarching ﬁeld that
encompasses much of the work above.
A socially assistive robot is a system that em-
ploys hands-off interaction strategies, including the
use of speech, facial expressions, and communica-
tive gestures, to provide assistance in accordance with
a particular assistive context. SAR systems equipped
with motivational, social, pedagogical, and therapeu-
tic capabilities have the potential to improve access to
personalized care, training and rehabilitation to large
populations, including individuals post-stroke, elderly,
and children with social and developmental disabilities,
in order to enhance their quality of life. An effective
socially assistive robot must understand and interact
with its environment, exhibit social behaviour, focus its
attention and communication on the user, sustain en-
gagement with the user, and achieve speciﬁc assistive
goals. The robot must do all of this in a way that is
safe, ethical and effective for the potentially vulnerable
user. Socially assistive robots have been shown to have
promise as therapeutic tool for children, the elderly,
stroke patients, and other special-needs populations re-
quiring personalized care.
73.2 The Need for Socially Assistive Robotics
The need for socially assistive robots is driven not
only by rapidly growing populations that need addi-
tional assistance (including the elderly, individuals with
cognitive disabilities, and individuals who require non-
physical support during rehabilitation) but also by the
recognition that social robots can have a substantial
positive impact on personal challenges such as main-
taining a healthy diet, supporting an active lifestyle,
maintaining therapeutic programs, and supporting indi-
vidualized education [73.1].
One of the most rapidly expanding populations
requiring daily assistance is the elderly. The United Na-
tions estimates that the population of those aged 60 and
older will double in the next thirty years, with the el-
derly outnumbering children for the ﬁrst time in history
by 2045 [73.2]. Space and staff shortages at nursing
homes and other care facilities are already an issue to-
day. As the elderly population continues to grow, a great
deal of attention and research will be dedicated to as-
sistive systems aimed at promoting ageing-in-place,
facilitating living independently in one’s own home as
long as possible. While many of these users will require
some degree of physical assistance (such as standing up
or carrying heavy groceries), many more are expected
to require social and cognitive support to reduce isola-
tion, maintain active and healthy lifestyles, and to assist
in daily therapy routines.
Individuals with cognitive disabilities and devel-
opmental and social disorders constitute another key
growing population that can beneﬁt from SAR in the
contexts of special education, therapy, and training.
Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) have been the fo-
cus of much of the research in this area due to their
prevalence, rapid growth of diagnoses, inherently so-
cial nature, and the critical need for long term, intensive
treatment. Current research suggests that 1 in every 60
children in the United States will be diagnosed with
ASD; the rate of diagnosis has increased sixfold be-
tween 1994 and 2003 [73.3]. The cause of the increase
is not yet known. However, early intervention is critical
to a positive long-term outcome, and many individu-
als need high levels of support and care throughout
their lives [73.4–8]. Research into applying robots as
therapy tools for ASD has focused on how to support
repetitive, but necessary, social and behavioral thera-
pies [73.9].
Motivation is recognized as the most signiﬁ-
cant challenge in physical rehabilitation and train-
ing [73.10]. SAR technology has the potential to
provide novel means for monitoring, motivating, and

Socially Assistive Robotics
73.3 Advantages of Embodied Robots over Virtual Agents
1975
Part G | 73.3
coaching. Post-stroke rehabilitation is one of the largest
potential application domains, since stroke is a domi-
nant cause of severe disability in the growing ageing
population. In the United States alone, over 700 000
people suffer a new stroke each year, with the majority
sustaining some permanent loss of movement [73.11].
Stroke patients frequently have difﬁculty with everyday
functional movements and activities; the loss of func-
tion can be decreased through rehabilitation therapy
during the critical post-stroke period. Such rehabil-
itation therapy involves carefully designed repetitive
exercises, which can be passive and active. In passive
exercises, the therapist (or a robot) actively helps the
patient to repeatedly move the stroke-affected limb as
prescribed. In active exercises, the patient does the work
him/herself, with no physical assistance.
Finally, there is growing interest in using socially as-
sistive robots to support an active and healthy lifestyle.
These applications are again motivated by rapidly grow-
ing prevalence of obesity and a lack of effective in-
terventions that are not labor-intensive. Childhood and
adolescent obesity has been related to a host of adverse
proximal and distal health outcomes, including high
cholesterol and triglycerides, hypertension [73.12], in-
sulin resistance [73.13], type 2 diabetes [73.14], nonal-
coholic fatty liver disease [73.15], as well as breast, col-
orectal, and other cancers [73.16]. Furthermore, child-
hood obesity sustains adverse consequences over the
entire life span. In one review, all of the 25 longi-
tudinal studies surveyed showed that overweight and
obese youth were at higher risk of becoming overweight
adults [73.17]. Per capita medical spending for an obese
person is roughly 42% higher than for a person of nor-
mal weight [73.18] and outranks the health costs of both
smoking and drinking alcohol [73.19]. Understanding,
preventing, and treating childhood obesity is therefore
a top public health priority [73.20]. Education about
health impacts of obesity in addition to coaching and
motivation for a healthy lifestyle are known to be ef-
fective means of lowering obesity rates [73.21]. SAR
has the potential to play an important role in this con-
text as an affordable and accessible means of providing
personalized coaching, motivation, and training for ex-
ercise and healthy eating habits [73.22].
73.3 Advantages of Embodied Robots over Virtual Agents
Compared to virtual agents, robotic agents are typi-
cally more expensive, more difﬁcult to replicate and
distribute, more difﬁcult to maintain and support, re-
quire a longer development time, and more fragile and
susceptible to damage and system failure. In physically
assistive tasks, virtual agent alternatives are not possi-
ble; manipulation of physical objects requires a phys-
ical presence. For socially assistive tasks, the added
costs of a physical robot must be justiﬁed in compar-
ison with a virtual agent solution.
73.3.1 Embodiment and Social Influence
One primary reason for using a physical robot in a so-
cially assistive task is that robots can often exert more
social inﬂuence over the user compared to a virtual
agent. Socially assistive tasks often require the user
to engage in tasks (such as therapy or homework)
that are challenging and that the user might need en-
couragement or guidance to maintain. Multiple studies
have demonstrated that physically embodied and collo-
cated robots are more capable of generating the social
presence to convince users to take these challenging
steps. A physically present robot yields signiﬁcantly
more compliance to its requests, even when those re-
quests are unexpected or unconventional, than a video
representation of the same robot [73.23]. Kidd and
Breazeal [73.24] developed a table-top robot to serve
as a daily weight-loss advisor; it engaged users through
a touch–screen interface, tracked user progress and
the state of the user–robot relationship over time, and
was tested in a six-week ﬁeld study with participants
at home. The study compared the robot interactions
against alternative weight loss methods, including us-
ing a standalone computer and maintaining paper logs,
and found that participants exercised and tracked their
caloric intake for nearly twice as long when interacting
with the robot than with the other methods.
Interactions with physical robots are also more en-
gaging and credible than virtual agents in cooperative
task scenarios. For example, following a cooperative
block-stacking task with a talking agent, participants
found an agent more engaging, enjoyable, informa-
tive, and credible if it were a physically embodied
robot, than if it were a virtually embodied animated
character [73.24]. Other work has shown that after
playing a cooperative game, people most enjoyed, and
attributed the most watchfulness and helpfulness to
a physically embodied robot than to a virtual embodi-
ment (a graphical simulation) of the same robot [73.26].
Bartneck [73.27] conducted a study comparing the ef-
fectiveness of an emotionally expressive robot, eMuu,
with its screen character version in engaging users in
a simple negotiation task, and found that participants

Part G | 73.3
1976
Part G
Robots and Humans
a)
b)
c)
Fig.73.1a–c The physical presence
of a robot tutor (c) has been shown
to increase learning gains during
a puzzle solving task substantially
more than when the same tutoring
lessons are delivered by a video of the
same robot (b) or from a disembodied
voice (a) (after [73.25])
exerted more effort and received higher task scores
when interacting with the physical eMuu than with the
simulated eMuu. Jung and Lee [73.28] also demon-
strated the positive effects of physical embodiment in
relation to interactions with both a Sony Aibo robot
and an anthropomorphic dancing robot, April. Another
study compared a physical co-present robot, to a re-
motely located one shown on the video screen, to
a simulation of the same robot, all in the same interac-
tion context; the study participants rated the co-present
robot as more helpful, watchful, and appealing than
remote and simulated counterparts [73.29]. These ﬁnd-
ings suggest that physical embodiment affords greater
social attribution or enjoyment of an agent, than does
virtual embodiment.
73.3.2 Embodiment and Learning
Physical robots have also been shown to enhance
learning and impact later behavioral choice more sub-
stantially than virtual agents. Leyzberg et al. [73.25]
showed that even when delivering the same lessons on
solving cognitive puzzles, users improved their perfor-
mance during a 20 min session almost twice as much
when those lessons were delivered by a physical robot
rather than by an on-screen video of the same robot.
Kiesler et al. [73.30] used task performance measures
to ﬁnd that participants who received health advice
from a physically present robot were more likely to
choose a healthy snack than participants who received
the same information in robot-video or on-screen agent
conditions. Kidd and Breazeal [73.22] demonstrated
that users were more likely to continue sessions with
a robot weight-loss coach than with a virtual coach over
a period of six weeks (Fig. 73.1).
73.3.3 Embodiment
and Special Populations
While most of the investigations of the impact of phys-
ical embodiment on socially assistive tasks have been
conducted with typical adults, embodiment effects have
also been demonstrated on many of the particular pop-
ulations that SAR projects typically target. Tapus and
Matari´c [73.31] found that individuals suffering from
cognitive impairment and/or Alzheimer’s disease re-
ported being more engaged with a robot treatment than
a similar on-screen agent treatment. Numerous studies
have demonstrated that children and adolescents with
ASD engage readily with robots even when those chil-
dren are unlikely to engage with animated characters on
a screen [73.9, 32].
This impact of embodiment on preschool-age chil-
dren has been of particular interest to educators and
developmental psychologists. Although preschoolers
learn from watching television and on-screen agents,
many studies have focused on how learning and behav-
ior shaping are more robust and generalize more readily
when embedded in real time interactions with a physi-
cal agent:
1. Preschool children are multimodal learners, learn-
ing and retaining information better if there are
overlapping modalities of experience [73.33–35].
2. Infants and preschool children off-load cognitive
functions to the 3-D (three-dimensional) spatial
structure of the world, for example, remembering
the direction of attention rather than the content and
then looking back to a location to re-perceive the
content [73.36–38].
3. Children learn by physically manipulating and
grouping objects [73.39, 40].
4. Preschool children learn from gross (whole body)
movements; they do not have the ﬁne motor skills to
work in a limited spatial arena (such as a computer
screen) and do not sustain attention when their gross
motor activity is limited [73.41].
These facts suggest that learning and develop-
ment will be best achieved in physical environments
with physically realized teachers. Robotics may offer
a mechanism to augment and support teacher–child and
parent–child interactions.
Embodiment studies that have targeted the elderly
population include the work of Heerink et al. [73.42],
who investigated the acceptance of assistive social
agents by older adults. The robot used in their evalu-
ation was a table-top robot (the iCat), and was either
controlled via a human operator during interaction with

Socially Assistive Robotics
73.4 Motivation, Autonomy, and Companionship
1977
Part G | 73.4
elderly users (Wizard of Oz study), or interacted with
users through a touch–screen interface. The interactions
consisted primarily of short informational or utility in-
teractions (e.g., medication/agenda reminders, weather
forecast, companionship). Fasola and Matari´c [73.43]
also investigated the role of embodiment in a SAR
exercise coach system, with a between-subjects study
with participants split into two groups: physical robot
coach versus virtual robot coach. Participants engaged
in four exercise sessions over a two-week period, with
each session lasting 20 min. The results of the between-
subjects data analysis showed participants rated the
physical robot signiﬁcantly more positively than the
virtual robot across all of the subjective measures, in-
cluding enjoyableness and usefulness of the interaction,
and also in terms of helpfulness, intelligence, social
presence, and companionship of the robot coach. Di-
rect comparison among the conditions also favored the
physical robot signiﬁcantly.
73.3.4 Evaluation of SAR Systems
One of the unique features of SAR is its evaluation
process. All robotics requires the implementation of
a physical system and its evaluation in the physical
world, ideally outside of the laboratory setting, as close
to the intended ﬁnal use as possible. In reality, however,
the majority of research robots are evaluated in labora-
tory settings, because the alternative is prohibitive due
to cost or access or both.
HRI puts the human in the loop and therefore
requires evaluation with human users. Since human
behavior is complex, it is not readily simulated. Con-
sequently, SAR, which involves HRI, also requires
evaluation with human users. However, to provide truly
relevant and realistic evaluation for SAR systems, such
systems must be tested with the intended populations,
since testing with healthy adults is not appropriate for
systems aimed at stroke patients, testing with adults is
not appropriate for systems aimed at children, and so
on.
Consequently, for a SAR approach to be truly eval-
uated, it needs to be tested with members of the in-
tended end-user population, the more rigorously the
better, according to the principles and best practices
of human subject evaluations, as well as consistent
with all the ethical rules associated with such proce-
dures (Sect. 73.11). As a result, SAR development and
evaluation can be time-consuming and requires multi-
disciplinary expertise that goes beyond robotics into
social science and, as relevant, health science or edu-
cation, among other disciplines.
73.4 Motivation, Autonomy, and Companionship
SAR systems equipped with motivational, social, and
therapeutic capabilities have the potential to enhance
user skills and quality of life. Motivation is a fun-
damental tool in establishing adherence to a training,
rehabilitation, or therapy regimen and in promoting be-
havior change; therefore methods aimed at improving
motivation are likely to be useful in the SAR contexts.
There are two forms of motivation: intrinsic motivation,
which comes from within a person, and extrinsic moti-
vation, which comes from sources external to a person.
Intrinsically motivated activities are those characterized
by enjoyment [73.44]. Extrinsic motivation, though ef-
fective for short-term task compliance, has been shown
to be less effective than intrinsic motivation for long-
term task compliance and behavior change [73.45].
Intrinsic motivation, however, can be and often is af-
fected by external factors, thereby offering a promising
avenue for future SAR research. In a task scenario, for
example, the instructor (or a socially assistive robot)
can impact the user’s intrinsic motivation through ver-
bal feedback. Praise is considered a form of positive
feedback and has the potential to increase the user’s
intrinsic motivation for performing the task, while crit-
icism, a form of negative feedback, tends to negatively
impact the user’s intrinsic motivation [73.46, 47]. The
effect of positive feedback is closely tied to the user’s
own perceived competence at the task; once the user be-
lieves he is competent at the task, then additional praise
no longer affects his intrinsic motivation.
Verbal feedback provided to the user by the instruc-
tor plays an important role in task-based motivation, but
the task itself and how it is presented perhaps plays an
even more signiﬁcant role. Csikszentmihalyi’s research
suggests that [73.44]:
when one engages in an optimally challenging
activity with respect to one’s capacities there is
a maximal probability for task-involved enjoyment
or ﬂow.
Therefore, an instructor that oversees user performance
in a task scenario should also be aware of the user’s
current affective state or try to infer that state from task
performance. The task must be continually adjusted to
meet the appropriate needs of the user in order to in-
crease or maintain intrinsic motivation to perform the
task.
Another task characteristic with the potential to in-
ﬂuence user enjoyment is the incorporation of direct

Part G | 73.6
1978
Part G
Robots and Humans
user input. Studies have shown that tasks that support
user autonomy and self-determination lead to increased
intrinsic motivation, self-esteem, creativity, and other
related variables among the participants [73.48], all of
which are essential for achieving task adherence and
long term behavior change. Self-determination repre-
sented in the task such as choice of activity [73.49],
choice of difﬁculty level [73.50], and choice of re-
wards [73.51] have been shown to increase or be less
detrimental to intrinsic motivation when compared to
similar task conditions that do not involve choice. The
positive impact of self-determination in task scenarios
has also been supported by studies investigating behav-
ior change [73.52, 53].
73.5 Influence and the Dynamics of Assistive Interaction
While social robotics has approached the issues of
modeling the dynamic interplay of social interactions
(Chap. 69), assistive interactions are unique among
these social engagements as they must simultaneously
support the needs of the engagement itself (by main-
taining interest, novelty, and the conventions of social
behavior) as well as guide the interaction toward the
long-term behavioral or educational goals of the sys-
tem. These two goals can often be in conﬂict; at times
a good teacher (or coach, or socially assistive robot)
must sacriﬁce some of the enjoyment of the interac-
tion, or bend a social rule, in order to promote an
educational goal. Huang and Mutlu [73.54] recently
found some evidence that a robot could make some
of these tradeoffs by changing its nonverbal behavior,
focusing either on improving task performance (recall
in a storytelling task) or on improving social engage-
ment by varying the type of gaze behavior used by the
robot.
Because the socially assistive robot must take an ac-
tive part in shaping this interaction toward particular
goals, the nature of the representations and the way in
which this inﬂuence can be applied to shape the dynam-
ics of the assistive interaction represents a core research
question for SAR. Researchers address questions such
as:

What abstractions allow a robot to model the unique
dynamics of a social interaction with a user in order
to shape the user’s behavior?

Can we deﬁne a set of computational primitives that
describe social roles, concepts, or properties in such
interactions?

Can this primitive set provide a basis of representa-
tions that allows robots to capture in real time the
nuances of interaction, to shape and have their be-
havior shaped by that interaction, while allowing
generalization and comparisons across users, time
scales, and contexts?
Much of the research in this area is based upon
foundational psychological properties of human–hu-
man social interaction including agency, intentionality,
causality, social roles, and goal attribution. These foun-
dational elements discriminate between agents and ob-
jects, delineate which elements of the world can move
with goal-directed purpose, and provide the primitive
structure for describing cause and effect. If we are to
build socially assistive robots, these systems must see
the world in the same way that we humans do, in the
same categories of animate and inanimate, and attribute
cause and blame in the same way that we do.
Current computational models represent these fea-
tures explicitly, with users overtly detailing their goals
and intentions in an operationalized way [73.55]. In
contrast, people are able to detect and analyze each
other’s agency and intentions on line, in a way that is of-
ten implicit, automatic, effortless, and even irresistible.
To be successful, a socially assistive robot must un-
derstand, model, and engage in the dynamics of social
interaction, so that computational systems can detect,
analyze, and manipulate agency, intention, and other so-
cial primitives in dynamic environments in a way that
is akin to how people do the same for social perception
and behavior. These models must operate over a wide
range of time scales and across input modalities (visual,
auditory, tactile, etc.) and must be capable of interpret-
ing and responding to social overtures in real time and
with only minimal latency. Multiple studies have exam-
ined particular foundational aspects of the dynamics of
interaction [73.56–58] as well as how persuasion might
occur within those dynamics [73.59], but a complete
model of the dynamics of social interaction remains one
of the key research areas addressed within SAR.
73.6 Personalization and Adaptation to Specific Needs and Abilities
A second core research area for SAR concerns the per-
sonalization of the robot to the ever changing needs
and abilities of the user. While existing studies in so-
cial robotics often focus on a single matching process

Socially Assistive Robotics
73.7 Creating Long-Term Engagement and Behaviour Change
1979
Part G | 73.7
by which the behavior of the robot is changed to opti-
mize the properties of the interaction at a single moment
in time, adaptation and personalization in assistive tasks
should ideally treat the goal as an ever-changing target.
As the assistive interaction is often sustained over sub-
stantially longer periods of time than other social robot
interactions (lasting perhaps months or years), SAR
systems should assume that the preferences, needs, and
capabilities of the user change over the course of the
interaction. Research in this area focuses on questions
such as: How can we design a robot that adapts to each
user’s individual social, physical, and cognitive differ-
ences? How can a robot utilize patterns of interactions
observed with other users (and possibly other robots) to
bootstrap its own attempts at interaction? How do nov-
elty and continuing personalization in interaction create
and support trust, learning, and adaptation for improved
outcomes for its user?
Socially assistive robots could greatly beneﬁt from
adapting to each individual user’s unique social, cogni-
tive, and physical abilities. Computationally, the chal-
lenge in constructing such a system stems from the
individual differences among users and adaptation must
occur at multiple levels of abstraction and time scales.
At a given moment, robot responses that one user might
ﬁnd frustrating might be optimally engaging to another,
or even to the same user under different conditions or
at different times. Their responses should also change
over time as the user becomes tired, frustrated, or bored.
Responses must also vary from session to session or
day to day so that interactions remain engaging and
interesting.
Very little research to date addresses learning
through personalized social interaction [73.60], espe-
cially with populations like children, the elderly, or
individuals with social and cognitive deﬁcits. Var-
ious learning approaches for HRI have been pro-
posed [73.61], but to date, none have included the user’s
proﬁle, preferences, and/or personality. The robot’s ca-
pability to adapt to an individual user’s needs and
abilities must be bounded by the social and cultural
context and while ﬁlling the role of a supportive part-
ner or peer. The majority of current machine learn-
ing methods are focused on learning speciﬁc policies
or parameters for tasks or behaviors. While there is
a plethora of available learning methods, and some are
particularly relevant to SAR, such as user state and ac-
tivity modeling [73.62, 63], learning by imitation and
from demonstration [73.64–68], and learning interac-
tion models from crowd–sourced interaction [73.69],
no work to date has focused on adapting to individual
differences.
73.7 Creating Long-Term Engagement and Behaviour Change
The ultimate objective for any socially assistive robot is
to alter the long-term behavior of the user in line with
the behavioral, therapeutic, or educational goals that the
robot was designed to support. For many of the appli-
cation domains covered by SAR systems, this change
might require months or years of interaction. A critical
research issue for SAR is the development of systems
that can maintain these long-term social interactions,
monitor the behavioral changes of the user over these
long-term interactions, and promote activities that sup-
port selective changes in behavior.
Research questions related to this area include: How
can a robot continue to be interesting and engaging
to a user over an extended time period? What social
behaviors and attributes are needed to establish and sus-
tain trust, rapport, and comfort with the user over time
to build a successful relationship that continues to pro-
vide value? How can a robot continue to adapt to and
autonomously guide its user through successive mile-
stones in order to achieve desired learning or behavior
change outcomes over longitudinal time scales? What
strategy should a robot employ to motivate and main-
tain lessons or activities, and how should this strategy
evolve over time? How can the robot recognize when
its goals related to the behavior change of the user have
been achieved, or when intermediary goals have been
achieved?
To better ﬁll the social role of supportive partners,
socially assistive robots should adapt their behavior and
actively planning the trajectory of interactions to guide
users toward learning or behavioral goals. The ability
to adapt and plan should be demonstrated at multi-
ple time-scales and abstraction levels so as to enable
long-term engagement over days, weeks, months, and
eventually years. Such capability is particularly impor-
tant for special populations who may have different
responses to techniques and methods that are often em-
ployed with typical adults. Almost no work to date
has focused on the computational challenges involved
in creating social interactions that persist over multi-
ple weeks, months, or years. Early efforts in the area
of life-long learning still operate on short time-scales
(e.g., two or three cases/tasks) compared to the weeks
and months that will be necessary for SAR systems.
This particular goal presents a myriad of interesting
and challenging applications of complex computational
methods such as machine learning. Socially assistive
robots capable of long-term adaptation must constantly

Part G | 73.8
1980
Part G
Robots and Humans
sample new interaction and teaching strategies while
exploiting previously learned preferences of each indi-
vidual user and between users, all in an online setting.
Extending engagement, social support, and guidance
to long-term interaction requires more than scaling
up existing methods and measures. A major scien-
tiﬁc goal for SAR research is to develop new insights
that enable long-term adaptive support and guidance
to the user in order to sustain a productive assistive
relationship.
73.8 SAR for Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) Therapy
Some of the earliest and most extensive investigations
of SAR have focused on the diagnosis and treatment
of autism spectrum disorders. Driven by pressing needs
from a rapidly expanding population and remarkable
early results, a diverse set of robotics research groups
have examined the responses of individuals with autism
spectrum disorders to robots [73.9, 32].
73.8.1 Summary
of ASD-Related Challenges
Autism is a pervasive developmental disorder marked
by severe deﬁcits in social functioning such as difﬁ-
culties recognizing body language, making eye contact,
and understanding the emotions of other people [73.4].
It is typically associated with a range of cognitive and
attentional deﬁcits [73.70, 71] as well as tendency to
engage in preservative and self-stimulatory behaviors.
Expression of particular behaviors is highly hetero-
geneous and associated with notable intra-individual
variation in the level of functioning in speciﬁc domains.
That is, while some children have exceptional cognitive
skills, others struggle with major challenges in these
areas.
ASD has received a heightened interest from re-
searchers in recent years due to, in part, an unprece-
dented increase in the incidence rate. ASD is estimated
to affect one in every 60 children in the United States,
a rate that is roughly eight times higher than the best
estimates from 20 years ago [73.72]. ASD is a behav-
iorally speciﬁed disorder [73.5]; there is no blood test,
no genetic screening, and no functional imaging test
that can diagnose ASD. Diagnosis relies on the clini-
cian’s intuitive feel for the child’s social skills includ-
ing eye-to-eye gaze, facial expression, body postures,
and gestures. These observational judgments are then
quantiﬁed according to standardized protocols [73.6,
7, 73, 74] that are both imprecise and subjective. The
broad disagreement of clinicians on individual diag-
noses creates difﬁculties both for selecting appropriate
treatment for individuals and for reporting the results of
population-based studies [73.8, 75].
ASD is a lifelong disorder; there is no known cure.
However, early, sustained, and intensive intervention
using a variety of behavioral techniques have been
demonstrated to produce substantive gains in many
individuals with ASD [73.5]. These therapeutic ap-
proaches often focus on traditional behavioral therapies
in which a skilled therapist guides an individual with
ASD through a series of repetitive exercises aimed at
improving daily living and/or functional social skills.
These techniques require a tremendous amount of la-
bor, and attempts to use technological innovations to
alleviate some of this burden have been a popular re-
search topic. For example, pet-assisted therapy [73.76,
77], computer-assisted therapy [73.78–80] and virtual
reality-based approaches [73.81, 82] have all been stud-
ied. While these have shown some success, there has
been limited investigation of the parameters of the con-
ditions necessary to generalize the beneﬁts to interac-
tions with human partners. Among nonhuman partners,
robots that provide instruction, support, and assistance
through social interaction have been seen as a potential
mechanism for supporting therapy and daily living for
individuals with ASD [73.1, 83].
Robots promise unique practical advantages over
other nonhuman interactive partners. First, they can
potentially provide identical delivery of stimuli, estab-
lishing a uniquely high level of control in diagnosis
and assessment [73.83]. Second, they do not require
the months or years of training that animal assistants
may need, as robots can be designed to allow ﬂexible
customization. Third, they offer a potential for tac-
tile interface and the immediacy of embodied agency,
which computer programs and virtual realities cannot
provide. In cases in which human or animal therapeutic
aids may be unavailable or are prohibitively expensive,
and where software or virtual reality therapeutic tools
cannot provide sufﬁcient embodiment, robots may pro-
vide an especially useful addition to therapy.
73.8.2 User Study Insights
Research in this area has shown exciting, but often
preliminary, beneﬁts to individuals with ASD, includ-
ing increased engagement in tasks, increased levels of
attention, and novel social behaviors such as joint atten-
tion and spontaneous imitation, when robots are part of

Socially Assistive Robotics
73.8 SAR for Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) Therapy
1981
Part G | 73.8
the interaction [73.83–89]. Much of the early work in
this domain was exploratory, performed on small sam-
ple sizes (typically fewer than 5 individuals), lacked
quantitative measurements of success, failed to include
a control group, and had minimal diagnostic and inclu-
sionary criteria. Given the heterogeneity of ASD, these
exploratory studies were frequently dismissed by the
clinical research community. These exploratory studies
however were instrumental in laying the groundwork
for the more extensive and detailed studies that are be-
ing performed today [73.9].
More recent studies have focused on how robots
can enhance human-to-human social behavior in chil-
dren with ASD and have included statistically valid
sample sizes, carefully designed control conditions, and
extensive diagnostics to accurately describe the popu-
lation being studied. For example, Kim et al. [73.90]
recently demonstrated a robot that engaged children
in a vocal prosody training task. Children with ASD
were more likely to use appropriate inﬂection in their
voices when engaging the robot than when interacting
with a familiar clinician. Furthermore, some children in
this study demonstrated increased frequency of social
gaze behaviors to an adult (including social referencing)
immediately following interaction with a social robot.
Feil-Seifer and Matari´c [73.91] recently demonstrated
that children with ASD demonstrated an increased so-
cial response to a robot that was socially responsive
than to one that was not. The study included a com-
parable toy as a control and its results included novel
insights about child–robot interactions for verbal and
nonverbal children with ASD (Fig. 73.2,73.3).
73.8.3 Research Directions
While these HRI studies offer the hope of a novel ther-
apeutic approach, they have to date neither explained
why robots provoke these responses in children nor
demonstrated that a long-term behavioral change in
children can be generated that generalizes to human–
human interactions. A number of possible hypotheses
could explain the increase in social behavior observed
a)
b)
c)
Fig.73.3a–c Kim et al. [73.89, 90] demonstrated increases in child-adult interactions following a short (5 min) interaction
with a robot. These images come from video captured before (a), during (b), and after (c) an interaction with a Pleo robot,
which focused on prosodic production
a)
b)
Fig.73.2a,b Both highly anthropomorphic robots ((a) Kaspar from
the University of Hertfordshire) and highly mechanistic robots
((b) Bubblebot from the University of Southern California) have
shown increased social responses of children with ASD during in-
teractions with robots
during and after interactions between an individual
with ASD and a robot. Perhaps robots offer a more
predictable interaction, or a more selective and simpli-
ﬁed set of social cues to be interpreted, or are more
overt in their behavioral responses and easier to engage
in reciprocal interactions. There is anecdotal evidence
that some of these may not be a satisfactory explana-
tion [73.83, 90], but a robust explanation of why these
effects are so notable in interactions with individuals
with ASD has yet to be described.
Constructing autonomous systems is particularly
challenging for this population. The diversity of abili-
ties and deﬁcits within the ASD population results in
vast differences in the rate of interaction, the mode of
interaction (e.g., verbal versus nonverbal), the social
skills to be included in the training, and even the criteria
for what constitutes a successful application of a social
skill [73.32]. While a few studies [73.92] have begun to
incorporate completely autonomous systems, most are
still utilizing wizard-of-Oz techniques to deal with the
variations across users.
Perhaps the most clinically important research di-
rection is to establish that HRIs provide a long-
term, measurable change in human–human interactions.
Nearly all of the studies carried out to date (with the
exception of [73.87]), focus on a small number of short
interactions (typically spanning a combined time of less

Part G | 73.9
1982
Part G
Robots and Humans
than an hour). As behavioral change even with an ex-
pert clinician can require hundreds of hours of training,
our research studies must extend to more lasting in-
teractions that span weeks and months. Furthermore,
most studies to date focus on the development of social
behaviors directed at the robot. These robot-directed
behaviors have minimal clinical value unless they can
be shown to generalize to human–human interactions.
(One exception is a the studies by Kim et al. [73.89,
90] which demonstrated that children with ASD show
a signiﬁcant improvement in face-to-face interactions
with an adult immediately following an interaction with
a robot tutor). To provide therapeutic value to an indi-
vidual with ASD, interactive robots must provide either
a measurable beneﬁt to their ability to engage with other
people.
73.9 SAR Supporting Rehabilitation
SAR is especially well suited for use in the process
of rehabilitation, which involves regaining function lost
due to illness or trauma. Where rehabilitation robotics
focuses on hands-on HRI, in contrast, SAR focuses on
providing motivation and coaching in order to facilitate
the rehabilitation process. Since motivation has long
been recognized as a major factor in rehabilitation, SAR
has the potential to play a key role in this health context.
SAR systems for supporting rehabilitation have been
developed and tested with stroke patients [73.93, 94]
and Alzheimer’s patients [73.95], and are being consid-
ered for use in traumatic brain injury rehabilitation.
73.9.1 Summary
of Rehabilitation Challenges
Stroke is the leading cause of serious, long-term dis-
ability in the US and the third leading cause of
death [73.96]. In the US alone, over 800 000 people
suffer a stroke each year, and nearly 400000 survive
with some form of neurologic disability [73.97]. The
number of stroke survivors with disability is expected
to double by the year 2025 [73.98]. Over 80% of ﬁrst-
time strokes involve loss of function of the upper limb
that signiﬁcantly impacts the independence and health
of the stroke survivor [73.99–101]. The residual disabil-
ity after stroke is substantial, with over 65% of patients
unable to incorporate the affected hand effectively into
daily activities. Functional recovery of the arm and
hand has generally been resistant to the traditional ap-
proaches of stroke rehabilitation compared with that for
the lower extremities program [73.99, 102].
Stroke often leaves individuals unable to perform
movements with the affected limb even though the
limb is not completely paralyzed. This loss of function,
termed learned disuse, can improve with rehabilita-
tion therapy [73.103, 104]. Clinical studies using motor
training have found improvement in functional upper
limb performance in patients more than one year post
stroke and cortical reorganization and recruitment of
adjacent brain areas associated with intensive use of
the affected upper limb have been documented sev-
eral years after the initial stroke injury [73.105–107].
Repetitive, intense, task-speciﬁc practice is effective
in rehabilitation [73.108–111]. Indeed, practice is fun-
damental to motor learning – it is the single most
important variable for skill acquisition. However, such
practice requires trained coaching and motivation.
73.9.2 Contact Versus SAR (Noncontact)
Robotics for Rehabilitation
SAR creates a bridge between rehabilitation robotics,
which has historically been contact-based [73.112,
113], with noncontact functionalities, such as com-
panion robotics [73.114, 115]. The noncontact ap-
proach deﬁnes a key niche for SAR that involves
an autonomous physically embodied robot providing
contact-free monitoring, coaching, and encouragement,
while also providing detailed assessments of client
progress to key stakeholders including and importantly
the user. Unlike rehabilitation robotics, where the appli-
cation and perception of forces are the main focus, and
which are consequently currently limited to in-clinic
settings, work with noncontact robots is instead directed
at the interaction modalities and motivation strategies
for achieving speciﬁc goals in the home and commu-
nity settings.
One of the most important elements of any reha-
bilitation program is the practice of carefully directed,
well-focused and repetitive exercises, which can be
passive or active. In passive exercises (also known as
hands-on rehabilitation), the patient is helped by a hu-
man (or robotic) therapist to appropriately exercise the
affected limb(s). In contrast, in active exercises, the pa-
tient performs the exercises with no physical assistance.
The majority of existing work in rehabilitation robotics
focuses on hands-on robotic systems for passive ex-
ercise, focusing on attempting to recover upper-limb
function primarily through robotic manipulation of the
affected-limb. Burgar et al. [73.116] developed a robot-
assisted arm therapy workstation, in which patients

Socially Assistive Robotics
73.9 SAR Supporting Rehabilitation
1983
Part G | 73.9
can exercise their upper limbs and evaluate their per-
formance. A similar device, which also depends on
hands-on robotic technology, was developed by Krebs
et al. [73.117]. Other related systems have been inves-
tigated [73.118] and [73.119]. Because human–robot
contact involves complex issues of safety, such hands-
on robotics methods remain areas of active ongoing
research, with many outstanding challenges. Currently,
contact rehabilitation robots are not portable; the logis-
tics of contact robot therapy are further limited by cost,
availability of adequate amount of practice, expertise
necessary to program and execute trials, and liability.
Risk of injury to the patient is of concern when move-
ment of a limb with sensorimotor loss is imposed by
a robot [73.120, 121]. Finally, intense functional exer-
cise is more likely to sustain the behavior (upper limb
functional use) in the long term in contrast to the decline
in long-term performance with contact robot systems
after therapy has ceased [73.120–122].
The SAR system acts as a coach, providing encour-
agement, and direction, and ensuring proper adherence
with the therapy regimen. Given the size of the stroke-
affected population and the time-intensive personalized
requirements, such coaching is not possible with hu-
man therapists, creating a niche for technological means
of ﬁlling the gap. By providing the opportunity for
time-extended monitoring and encouragement of reha-
bilitation exercises in any setting (at the clinic or at
home), SAR systems complement human care [73.123–
126].
73.9.3 User Study Insights
This section reviews some of the insights from
SAR studies performed with stroke patients. One
study [73.93, 127] focused on how different robot be-
haviors may affect the patient’s willingness to adhere
to the rehabilitation program. The study evaluated dif-
ferent voices, movements, and levels of patience on
the part of the robot, and correlated those with patient
adherence. The robot was equipped with navigation
capabilities, so it could ﬁnd and follow the patient, ma-
neuver itself to an appropriate position for monitoring
the patient, and leave when it was not wanted. The robot
acquired real-time information about the patient’s use
of the stroke-affected limb from inertial measurement
unit (IMU)-based sensors worn by the patient. Wear-
able sensors present an important alternative to machine
vision, which may not be acceptable to all users due
to privacy concerns. The robot used information pro-
vided by the wearable sensors to encourage the patient
to continue using the limb, or to use the limb more or in
a different way, as appropriate. The robot was well re-
ceived by the patients. Some continued to perform the
activity beyond the end of the experiment, providing
further evidence of improved adherence well beyond
any novelty effects. As expected, there were signiﬁ-
cant personality differences among the patients; some
were highly adherent but appeared un-engaged by the
robot, while others were highly engaged and even en-
tertained, but preferred to interact with the robot rather
than perform the coached exercises. This leads toward
interesting research questions of how to deﬁne adaptive
robot-assisted rehabilitation protocols that will serve
the diverse user population as well as the time-extended
and evolving needs of every individual user.
Modeling personality in order to customize HRI has
a particular relevance to stroke rehabilitation because
pre-stroke personality has a great inﬂuence on post-
stroke recovery [73.96]; individuals classiﬁed as extro-
verted before the stroke mobilize their strength more
easily to recover than do introverted subjects [73.128].
Further, work in human–computer interaction (HCI)
has demonstrated the similarity-attraction principle,
which posits that individuals are more attracted to oth-
ers manifesting the same personality as theirs [73.129–
131]. Tapus and Matari´c [73.132] performed a SAR
study to test related effects. In a series of experiments
with a simple mobile robot equipped with a camera and
a microphone, participants were asked to perform four
tasks (designed as functional activities) similar to those
used during standard stroke rehabilitation. The partici-
pants completed a personality assessment questionnaire
before the experiment; the resulting personality based
speciﬁcally on the extroversion–introversion dimension
was used to determine the robot’s personality. The be-
havior control architecture was based on the model of
reciprocal inﬂuences on behavior [73.133]. The robot
expressed its personality through several means: (1)
proxemics (social use of space; extroverted personali-
ties used smaller personal distances) [73.134]; (2) speed
and amount of movement (extroverted personalities
moved more and faster); and (3) verbal content (extro-
verted personalities talked more assertively (You have
done only x movements, I’m sure you can do more!),
using a challenge-based style compared to a nurture-
based style (I know it’s hard, but remember it’s for
your own good.). The experiment compared person-
ality-matched versus personality-mismatched (random)
conditions. The results showed that the robot’s person-
ality was fundamental to the quality of the interaction.
Two statistically signiﬁcant results were found: (1)
participants consistently performed better on the task
when interacting with the personality-matched robot;
(2) participants reported preferring the personality-
matched robot. Tapus et al. [73.94] then expanded on
this work by enabling the SAR system to adapt its per-
sonality based on the past interactions with the user.

Part G | 73.9
1984
Part G
Robots and Humans
a)
b)
Fig.73.4a,b Seated exercise coaching with a socially assistive
humanoid robot on wheels, (a) Bandit, from the University of
Southern California, and (b) upper extremity rehabilitation manip-
ulandum
Formulated as policy gradient reinforcement learning
(PGRL), the adaptation allowed for optimizing the
interaction parameters: interaction distance/proxemics,
speed, and verbal content (what the robot says and
how it says it). The learning algorithm was initial-
ized with parameter values that were in the vicinity
of what was thought to be acceptable for both ex-
troverted and introverted individuals, based on the
user–robot personality matching study described ear-
lier. Gradual adaptation around a solution rather than
random probing of the solution space is important; if
the robot’s initial personality is far off the mark, or
if it changes drastically, users are dissatisﬁed with the
interaction. The results provided evidence for the effec-
tiveness of robot behavior adaptation to user personality
and performance: users tended to perform more or
longer trials under the personality matched and therapy
style-matched conditions (nurturing styles were corre-
lated with the introversion, and challenging styles with
extroversion).
Another study with stroke patients compared
matched humanoid robot and simulated agent imple-
mentation of the SAR coach. The study participants
were seated at a desk, and were asked by the robot
to move magazines from the lower to the higher rack
and to de-shelf as many magazines as possible in
6 min. The robot monitored the participant’s motions
using a revised version of the motion sensors described
above [73.135, 136]. The participants could use the but-
ton on a WiiMote to stop the interaction at any time. The
IMU data and shelf state (using a scale) were used to
classify the movement into states of progress (e.g., rest-
ing, picking up magazine, lifting arm, shelving book,
lowering arm). In addition to the verbalizations, the
robot used beat gestures whenever it spoke. This con-
sisted of moving the head, arms, and hands in a beat
with amplitude and frequency governed by the charac-
teristics of the phrase that was being uttered. Baseline
movement data were assessed using standard stroke
movement tests and task improvement was measured
after repeated sessions. The experimental design in-
volved all participants experimenting with both the
robot and the computer. Two-thirds of the participants
preferred the physical robot, with one third having no
preference.
73.9.4 Research Directions
SAR for rehabilitation presents multi-faceted research
challenges.
Personalizing the interaction to adapt to the user’s
changing state over multiple timescales remains a ma-
jor challenge, since rehabilitation aims for long-term
improvement, but must contend with mood, fatigue,
and performance variations within each session, as well
as short term trends that may plateau or even reverse.
Personalizing the interaction thus requires new ways
of integrating robot learning, user modelling, and mo-
tivation strategies, among many other SAR research
challenges. Creating robotic systems capable of adapt-
ing their behavior in order to provide an engaging and
motivating customized protocol is a challenging target,
especially when working with vulnerable user popu-
lations. In the SAR context, behavior adaptation must
address both short-term changes that represent individ-
ual differences and long-term changes that allow the
interaction to continue to be engaging over a period of
months and even years. Various learning approaches for
HRI have been proposed in the literature [73.61, 65] but
this remains a major challenge in robotics in general
and in SAR in particular.
Modeling the user and predicting user behavior is
a challenge common to HRI and HCI, as well as re-
search in signal processing and related ﬁelds. However,
SAR also brings up the issue of modelling the identity
of the robot character. Speciﬁcally, studies in SAR are
beginning to show that having not only a personality
but also a back story for the robot facilitates user en-
gagement.
Research into relational agents [73.137] has been
applied to short-term interactions in medical settings,
such as hospital checkout procedures. Some of the
insights from that ﬁeld, including politeness theory,
empathy, etc., are being explored in SAR for use in
long-term interactions involved in rehabilitation.
Finally, one of the much needed new directions of
research is the exploration of bringing together contact
and noncontact rehabilitation robotics in relevant do-
mains, in order to enhance the impact of both robotics
subﬁelds.

Socially Assistive Robotics
73.10 SAR and Eldercare
1985
Part G | 73.10
73.10 SAR and Eldercare
73.10.1 Summary of Eldercare Challenges
The growing population of aging adults is increasing the
demand for healthcare services worldwide. By the year
2050, the number of people over the age of 85 will in-
crease threefold [73.138], while the shortfall of nurses
and caregivers is already an issue [73.139–141]. Regu-
lar physical exercise has been shown to be effective at
maintainingand improvingoverall health [73.142–145].
Physical ﬁtness is associated with higher functioning in
the executive control processes [73.146] and is corre-
lated with less atrophy of frontal cortex regions [73.147]
and with improved reaction times [73.148]. Social in-
teraction, and speciﬁcally high perceived interpersonal
social support, has also been shown to have a pos-
itive impact on general mental and physical wellbe-
ing [73.149], in addition to reducing the likelihood of
depression [73.150–153]. Thus, the availability of phys-
ical exercise therapy, social interaction, and companion-
ship will be critical for the growing elderly population.
The probability for acquired motor, cognitive,
and perceptual disabilities dramatically increases with
age [73.154]. Over 50 million Americans have a dis-
ability that affects one or more of their major life activi-
ties [73.155, 156] and only 30% are employed [73.157].
The economic cost of the associated loss of function-
ing is high; e.g., the cumulative total of stroke-affected
Americans is over 4 million, and the estimated annual
burden from stroke-related disability is $53.6 billion, of
which $20.6 billion is in indirect costs due to lost pro-
ductivity and income [73.96, 158]. Given projections
that the number of people older than 65 years is antici-
pated to double between 1997 and 2025 [73.156] and
that 30% of the population will be over 65 [73.159,
160], we will soon face new major technical and so-
cial challenges to attain, prolong, and preserve quality
of life.
A especially vulnerable and sizeable population
consists of individuals who are aging with disabili-
ties that were acquired at any stage of life, from birth
or early in life to stroke or other disorders later in
life [73.161]. The number of middle aged and older
adults living with disabilities will grow signiﬁcantly as
the U.S. population ages rapidly [73.162]. People who
have managed their lives very successfully for years
may ﬁnd that they are experiencing the effects of aging
earlier than others or are developing secondary health
conditions as they reach their 30s or 40s [73.163, 164].
As persons with disabilities age, progressive declines
in health and medical status can challenge the adaptive
resources required to maintain functional independence
and quality of life [73.165, 166].
Motor and cognitive dysfunctions that accompany
chronic illness and disability in late life are major
precursors for people who age into disability. Cognitive
impairments are associated with increased disability
in aging populations [73.167]; 19% of women and
13% of men aged 6569 live with a disability in
mobility [73.168]. The respective percentages in-
crease to 83% and 63% for women and men aged
9095 [73.168]. These dysfunctions greatly compound
the disruptions in overall lifestyle and occupational sta-
tus experienced by individuals aging with disabilities
primarily associated with cognitive or motor deﬁcits.
Thus, there is a critical need to develop effective and
affordable assistive technologies to improve the motor
and cognitive functioning, especially in individuals
aging with disabilities. This creates an important niche
for SAR.
73.10.2 User Study Insights
The literature that addresses assistive robotics in-
tended for and evaluated by the elderly is limited but
growing.
Researchers have investigated the use of robots to
help address the social and emotional needs of the
elderly, including reducing depression and increasing
social interaction with peers. Wada et al. [73.114] stud-
ied the psychological effects of a seal robot, Paro, used
to engage seniors at a day service center. The study
found that Paro, always accompanied by a human han-
dler, was able to consistently improve the moods of
elderly participants who spent time petting and engag-
ing with it over the course of a 6-week period. Kidd
et al. [73.115] used Paro in another study that found it
to be useful as a catalyst for social interaction. They
observed that seniors who participated with the robot
in a group were more likely to interact socially with
each other when the robot was present and powered on,
rather than when it was powered off or absent.
Social agents that aim to assist individuals in health-
related tasks such as physical exercise have also been
developed in the HCI community. Bickmore and Pi-
card [73.137] developed a computer-based virtual re-
lational agent that served as a daily exercise advisor
by engaging the user in conversation and providing
educational information about walking for exercise,
asking about the user’s daily activity levels, tracking
user progress over time while giving feedback, and en-
gaging the user in relational dialogue.
Fasola and Matari´c [73.169] conducted a study to
investigate the role of praise and relational discourse
(politeness, humor, empathy, etc.) in a SAR exercise

Part G | 73.11
1986
Part G
Robots and Humans
a)
b)
c)
Fig.73.5a–c Paro robot (a) from the University of Tokyo, Autom robot (b) used in an MIT weight-loss study, and
Healthbot robot (c) from the University of Auckland used in a large-scale elderly care study
system designed for older adults. The study compared
a relational robot versus a nonrelational robot. The re-
lational robot employed praise and relational discourse,
while the nonrelational robot guided the exercise in-
teraction without such praise or discourse. Results
showed participants rated the relational robot signiﬁ-
cantly more positively than the nonrelational robot in
terms of enjoyableness and usefulness of the interac-
tion, and as a companion and exercise coach. Fasola
and Matari´c [73.169] also conducted a user study to in-
vestigate the role of choice and user autonomy within
the same SAR exercise system. The results of the study
showed no clear preference for one condition over the
other, as the user enjoyment level of the interaction was
reported to be equally high for choice and no-choice
conditions. This suggests that a hybrid approach that
includes both user and robot decision making, person-
alized and tuned automatically for each user, might
ultimately be the best solution for achieving a ﬂuid and
enjoyable task interaction for all users. This once again
underscores the need for personalized methods of HRI
and user modeling and adaptation.
73.11 SAR for Alzheimer’s Dementia and Cognitive Rehabilitation
Dementia is a progressive disabling neurological condi-
tion that can be a symptom of several diseases, includ-
ing Alzheimer’s, which makes up about half of all cases
of dementia. The latest estimate is that 26.6 million peo-
ple were suffering from Alzheimer’s disease worldwide
in 2006, and it will rise to 100 million by 2050 – 1
in 85 of the total population [73.170]. More than 40%
of those cases will be in late-stage Alzheimer’s, requir-
ing a high level of attention equivalent to nursing home
care. Individuals suffering from Alzheimer’s experience
a decrease in verbal and cognitive skills along with
the deterioration of strength and ﬂexibility that comes
with aging. Rehabilitation therapies for individuals with
dementia often focus on both cognitive and motor exer-
cises to in order to preserve patients’ autonomy for as
long as possible.
Therapy for individuals with dementia must be per-
vasive and ongoing in their everyday lives. Mental
and physical exercise involving art, music, and playing
with/tending to animals have been used to preserve cog-
nitive function in older adults who have begun experi-
ences symptoms of dementia. However, these therapies
can only be offered by well-trained personnel. In par-
ticular, animal therapy can involve safety risks for both
the animal and the patient. The goal of SAR in this ther-
apy context is to provide a means of providing therapy
that is safe, easy to use, and does not require special
training.
73.11.1 User Study Insights
In a study by Tamura et al. [73.171], an entertain-
ment robot was used as occupational therapy instead
of animal-assisted therapy to avoid any danger or in-
jury to the patient and maintain cleanliness. The study
compared the effectiveness of a robot animal, AIBO,
with a toy. AIBO responded to spoken commands and
was demonstrated to severely demented elderly people
living in a geriatric home. The most frequent reactions
to AIBO consisted of looking at, communicating with,
and caring for the robot. The patients recognized that
AIBO was a robot but, once the robot was addressed
by the experimenters, the patients perceived it as either
a dog or a baby. The presentation resulted in positive
outcomes for the severe dementia patients, including
increased communication between the patients and the
robot.
Tapus et al. [73.172] performed a long-term (6-
month) study of socially assistive robots in the context
of cognitive training for Alzheimer’s patients to test if

Socially Assistive Robotics
73.12 Ethical and Safety Considerations
1987
Part G | 73.12
elderly individuals with Alzheimer’s impairments can
maintain attention to music with the help of a SAR sys-
tem. A small group of four participants over 70 years
old, suffering from mild to severe cognitive impair-
ment and/or Alzheimer’s disease, took part in the study
and received per- and post-study cognitive assessments.
Each interacted in one-on-one twice-weekly sessions
with the robot, in which the robot presented a music
recognition game with three different levels of chal-
lenge: difﬁcult (no hints), medium (hints given), and
easy (name of song given). The challenge level was ad-
justed to each participant based on performance. The
results obtained over 6 months of robot interaction (ex-
cluding the 2 months of learning) suggest that elderly
people suffering of dementia and/or Alzheimer’s can
sustain attention to music across a long period of time
and even improve on the music recognition task when
coached by a socially assistive robot; the SAR system
was able to adapt the challenge level of the game it
was presenting to the user in order to encourage task
improvement and attention training. Importantly, the
participants demonstrated fondness for the robot and in-
cluded it into their daily narratives (e.g., My buddy is
coming to visit, I don’t want to miss it.).
The multiyear Healthbots project at the Univer-
sity of Auckland is examining the role of telepres-
ence and humanoid robots in assisted living communi-
ties [73.173]. This large study included three different
types of robots, ranging from large telepresence to
small humanoid, which were deployed as companions
and nursing assistants in a retirement village of around
650 residents. Several insights were gained from the
long-term deployment, including the preferences of
both the elderly users and staff members. The most
promising avenue for robotic assistance was a robot that
was sent into residents’ rooms to remind them to take
their medications or fetch them for appointments.
73.11.2 Research Directions
As with all areas of SAR, the user’s willingness to en-
gage with a socially assistive robot to accept advice,
interact, and ultimately alter behavior depends on the
robot’s ability to obtain the user’s trust and sustain the
user’s interest. User interfaces and input devices that are
easy and intuitive for a range of users, including those
with special needs, need to be developed. Social inter-
action is inherently bidirectional and thus involves both
multimodal perception and communication, including
verbal and nonverbal means. Toward that end, auto-
mated behavior detection and classiﬁcation as well as
activity recognition, including user intent, task-speciﬁc
attention, and failure recognition, are critical enabling
components being developed.
73.12 Ethical and Safety Considerations
SAR, with its focus on developing human–robot re-
lationships and inﬂuencing human behavior, naturally
brings about several distinct types of ethical considera-
tions.
Safety of the user is the ﬁrst and most obvious
consideration in any area of HRI. Because SAR sys-
tems do not involve physical contact initiated by either
people or robots, they present a minimum of physical
safety issues. However, while physical safety is one of
the largest concerns in other areas of robotics research
(Chap. 30), in SAR, emotional and other types of non-
physical safety must be considered.
As SAR research strives to achieve user engagement
and attachment, some critics have argued that such rela-
tionships should be reserved for humans only [73.174].
Evaluations of speciﬁc SAR systems have triggered eth-
ical dilemmas [73.174, 175]. Turkle [73.174] demon-
strated that some participants interacting with robots
can correctly identify the robot’s intended emotional
abilities and operational capabilities. These participants
could also correctly distinguish equivalent capabilities
in a person, pet, or other relational artifact. However, it
was also demonstrated that some users formed attach-
ments and emotional bonds with robots they were inter-
acting with. These attachments led to misconceptions
about the robots’ emotional capabilities. For example,
one user felt that the robot would miss him when he was
gone, something that the robot was not capable of do-
ing. Sharkey and Sharkey [73.175] argue strongly that
such attachments in children could lead to malformed
development and emotional problems. Some such ar-
guments are based on the notion that human care is
replaced by robot care, which is not consistent with the
premise of most of SAR research. Most SAR research
clearly state that their aim is to augment rather than
replace human care, as discussed in Sect. 73.7 of this
chapter, in the context of SAR for autism spectrum dis-
orders.
Some more pragmatic ethical considerations take
into account the inevitable progress of technology,
which will render any particular system obsolete well
within a user’s lifetime, therefore undermining attach-
ment and likely making long-term system operation
impossible. Since long-term robot system operation is

Part G | 73
1988
Part G
Robots and Humans
a goal of the majority of robotics research, this is not
yet a pressing ethical concern, but is one that is well
recognized as important.
As one example of ethics applied to SAR in
particular, Feil-Seifer and Mataric [73.176] outlines
the ethical issues of SAR around the core principles
of ethics applied to human subjects, namely benef-
icence, nonmaleﬁcence, autonomy and justice. The
ﬁrst two principles encompass the SAR issues of re-
lationships, authority and attachment, perception and
personiﬁcations of the robot, and replacement of hu-
man care/changes to human–human interaction. The
third principle, autonomy, spans the issues of privacy,
choice, and intentional user deception. Finally, jus-
tice spans the complex issues of cost/beneﬁt analysis,
and locus of responsibility in the case of failure or
harm.
As robots get closer to people, ethical issues be-
come more pressing. It is a good sign that so early in
the development of SAR those issues are being actively
discussed and considered, toward the development of
most ethically informed methods and systems.
References
73.1
A. Tapus, M.J. Matarić, B. Scassellati: The grand
challenges in socially assistive robotics, IEEE
Robotics Autom. Mag. Spec. Issue Grand Chall.
Robotics (2007)
73.2
United Nations Department of Economic and
Social
Affairs,
Population
Division
(2011):
World
Population
Aging
1950–2050,
http://
www.un.org/esa/population/publications/
worldageing19502050/ (2013)
73.3
Department of Health and Human Services, Cen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention (2009)
73.4
American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-IV-TR
(American Psychiatric Association, Arlington 2000)
73.5
F.R. Volkmar, C. Lord, A. Bailey, R.T. Schultz,
A. Klin: Autism and pervasive developmental dis-
orders, J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 45(1), 135–170
(2004)
73.6
S.S. Sparrow, D. Balla, D. Cicchetti: Vineland
Adaptive
Behavior
Scales,
Expanded
Edition
(Pearson, New York 1984)
73.7
E. Mullen: Mullen Scales of Early Learning: AGS
Edition (Pearson, New York 1995)
73.8
A. Klin, J. Lang, D.V. Cicchetti, F.R. Volkmar: Brief
report: Interrater reliability of clinical diagnosis
and DSM-IV criteria for autistic disorder: results of
the DSM-IV autism field trial, J. Autism Dev. Dis-
ord. 30(2), 163–167 (2000)
73.9
B. Scassellati, H. Admoni, M. Matarić: Robots for
use in autism research, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng.
14, 275–294 (2012)
73.10
J. Kiratli: Telehealth technologies for monitor-
ing adherence and performance of home exer-
cise programs for persons with spinal cord in-
jury: Tele-exercise, Exerc. Recreat. Technol. Peo-
ple With Disabil.: State Sci. (2006)
73.11
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke (NINDS): Post-Stroke Rehabilitation Fact
Sheet,
http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/
stroke/poststrokerehab.htm (2013)
73.12
D.S.
Freedman,
W.H.
Dietz,
S.R.
Srinivasan,
G.S. Berenson: The relation of overweight to
cardiovascular risk factors among children and
adolescents: The Bogalusa Heart Study, Pediatrics
103(6), 1175–1182 (1999)
73.13
G.Q. Shaibi, M.I. Goran: Examining metabolic
syndrome definitions in overweight Hispanic
youth: A focus on insulin resistance, J. Pediatr.
152(2), 171–176 (2008)
73.14
O. Pinhas-Hamiel, P. Zeitler: Insulin resistance,
obesity, and related disorders among black ado-
lescents, J. Pediatr. 129(3), 319–320 (1996)
73.15
M.L.
Cruz,
G.Q.
Shaibi,
M.J.
Weigensberg,
D. Spruijt-Metz, G.D. Ball, M.I. Goran: Pediatric
obesity and insulin resistance: Chronic disease
risk and implications for treatment and preven-
tion beyond body weight modification, Annu.
Rev. Nutr. 25, 435–468 (2005)
73.16
E.E. Calle, R. Kaaks: Overweight, obesity and
cancer: Epidemiological evidence and proposed
mechanisms, Nat. Rev. Cancer 4(8), 579–591
(2004)
73.17
A.S. Singh, C. Mulder, J.W. Twisk, W. van Meche-
len, M.J. Chinapaw: Tracking of childhood over-
weight into adulthood: A systematic review of the
literature, Obes. Rev. 9(5), 474–488 (2008)
73.18
E.A. Finkelstein, J.G. Trogdon, J.W. Cohen, W. Di-
etz: Annual medical spending attributable to
obesity: Payer- and service-specific estimates,
Health Aff. 28(5), 822–831 (2009)
73.19
R. Sturm: The effects of obesity, smoking, and
drinking on medical problems and costs, Health
Aff. 21(2), 245–253 (2002)
73.20
J.P. Koplan, C.T. Liverman, V.I. Kraak: Preventing
childhood obesity: Health in the balance: Exec-
utive summary, J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 105(1), 131–138
(2005)
73.21
D. Spruijt-Metz: Etiology, treatment and preven-
tion of obesity in childhood and adolescence:
A decade in review, J. Res. Adolesc. 21(1), 129–152
(2011)
73.22
C.D. Kidd, C. Breazeal: A Robotic Weight Loss
Coach, Twenty-Second Conf. Artif. Intell. (2007)
73.23
W. Bainbridge, J. Hart, E. Kim, B. Scassellati: The
effect of presence on human-robot interaction,
IEEE Int. Symp. Robot Hum. Interact. Commun.
(2008)
73.24
C.D. Kidd, C. Breazeal: Effect of a Robot on
Engagement and User Perceptions, Proc. Intell.
Robot. Syst. (IROS) (2004)

Socially Assistive Robotics
References
1989
Part G | 73
73.25
D. Leyzberg, S. Spaulding, M. Toneva, B. Scassel-
lati: The physical presence of a robot tutor in-
creases cognitive learning gains, Proc. 34th Annu.
Conf. Cogn. Sci. Soc. (2012)
73.26
J. Wainer, D. Feil-Seifer, D. Shell, M. Matarić:
Embodiment
and
human-robot
interaction:
A taskbased perspective, IEEE Int. Workshop
Robot Hum. Interact. Commun. (2007)
73.27
C. Bartneck: Interacting with an embodied emo-
tional character, Proc. 2003 Int. Conf. Des. Pleas.
Prod. Interfaces (2003) pp. 55–60
73.28
Y. Jung, K.M. Lee: Effects of physical embodiment
on social presence of social robots, Proc. Presence
(2004) pp. 80–87
73.29
J. Wainer, D.J. Feil-Seifer, D.A. Shell, M. Matarić:
The role of physical embodiment in human-
robot interaction, Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Robot
Hum. Interact. Commun. (RO-MAN’06) (2006)
73.30
S. Kiesler, A. Powers, S.R. Fussell, C. Torrey: An-
thropomorphic interactions with a robot and
robot-like agent, Soc. Cognit. 26(2), 169–181
(2008)
73.31
A. Tapus, C. Tapus, M.J. Matarić: The use of socially
assistive robots in the design of intelligent cogni-
tive therapies for people with dementia, Proc. Int.
Conf. Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR-09) (2009)
pp. 924–929
73.32
J.J. Diehl, L.M. Schmitt, M. Villano, C.R. Crow-
ell: The clinical use of robots for individuals with
autism spectrum disorders: A critical review, Res.
Autism Spectr. Disord. 6(1), 249–262 (2012)
73.33
E. Thelen, L.B. Smith: A Dynamic Systems Ap-
proach to the Development of Cognition and Ac-
tion (MIT Press, Cambridge 1994)
73.34
L.W. Barsalou: Situated simulation in the human
conceptual system, Lang. Cognit. Process. 18(5/6),
513–562 (2003)
73.35
C. Sann, A. Streri: Perception of object shape
and texture in human newborns: Evidence from
cross-modal transfer tasks, Dev. Sci. 10(3), 399–
410 (2007)
73.36
D.C. Richardson, R. Dale, N.Z. Kirkham: The art
of conversation is coordination: Common ground
and the coupling of eye movements during dia-
logue, Psychol. Sci. 18(5), 407–413 (2007)
73.37
D.C. Richardson, N.Z. Kirkham: Multimodal events
and moving locations: Eye movements of adults
and 6-month-olds reveal dynamic spatial index-
ing, J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 133(1), 46–62 (2004)
73.38
L.B. Smith: Cognition as a dynamic system: Princi-
ples from embodiment, Dev. Rev. 25(3/4), 278–298
(2005)
73.39
G. Forman: Where’s the Action in Knowing?
(American Psychological Association, Worcester
1983)
73.40
G. Forman, F. Hill: Constructive play in develop-
mentally delayed preschool children, Top. Learn.
Learn. Disabil. 1(1), 31–41 (1981)
73.41
C.K. Whalen, B. Henker, B.E. Collins, D. Finck,
S. Dotemoto: A social ecology of hyperactive boys:
Medication effects in structured classroom envi-
ronments, J. Appl. Behav. Anal. 12(1), 65–81 (1979)
73.42
M. Heerink, B. Kröse, V. Evers, B. Wielinga: As-
sessing acceptance of assistive social agent tech-
nology by older adults: The Almere Model, Int.
J. Soc.Robotics 2(4), 361–375 (2010)
73.43
J. Fasola, M.J. Matarić: A socially assistive robot
exercise coach for the elderly, J. Human-Robot
Interact. 2(2), 3–32 (2013)
73.44
M. Csikszentmihalyi: Intrinsic rewards and emer-
gent motivation. In: The Hidden Costs of Reward,
ed. by M.R. Lepper, D. Greene (Erlbaum, Hillsdale
1978) pp. 205–216
73.45
R.A. Dienstbier, G.K. Leak: Effects of monetary
reward on maintenance of weight loss: An exten-
sion of the overjustification effect, Am. Psychol.
Assoc. Conv. (1976)
73.46
R.J. Vallerand, G. Reid: On the causal effects of
perceived competence on intrinsic motivation:
A test of cognitive evaluation theory, J. Sport Psy-
chol. 6, 94–102 (1984)
73.47
R.J. Vallerand: Effect of differential amounts of
positive verbal feedback on the intrinsic motiva-
tion of male hockey players, J. Sport Psychol. 5,
100–107 (1983)
73.48
E.L. Deci, A.J. Schwartz, L. Sheinman, R.M. Ryan:
An instrument to assess adults’ orientations to-
ward control versus autonomy with children:
Reflections on intrinsic motivation and per-
ceived competence, J. Educ. Psychol. 73, 642–650
(1981)
73.49
M. Zuckerman, J. Porac, D. Lathin, R. Smith,
E.L. Deci: On the importance of self-determina-
tion for intrinsically motivated behavior, Person-
ality Soc. Psychol. Bull. 4, 443–446 (1978)
73.50
C.D. Fisher: The effects of personal control, com-
petence, and extrinsic reward systems on intrinsic
motivation, Organ. Behav. Hum. Perform. 21(3),
273–288 (1978)
73.51
R.B. Margolis, C.R. Mynatt: The Effects of Self and
Externally Administered Reward on High Base
Rate Behavior, Unpublished manuscript (Bowling
Green State University, Bowling Green 1979)
73.52
F.H. Kanfer, L.G. Grimm: Freedom of choice and
behavioral change, J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 46,
873–878 (1978)
73.53
G.R. Liem: Performance and satisfaction as af-
fected by personal control over salient decisions,
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 31, 232–240 (1975)
73.54
C.-M. Huang, B. Mutlu: The repertoire of robot
behavior: Enabling robots to achieve interaction
goals through social behavior, J. Hum.-Robot In-
teract. 2(2), 80–102 (2013)
73.55
T.L. Griffiths, C. Kemp, J.B. Tenenbaum: Bayesian
models of cognition. In: Cambridge Handbook of
Computational Cognitive Modeling, ed. by R. Sun
(Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge 2008) pp. 59–
100
73.56
C. Crick, B. Scassellati: Inferring narrative and in-
tention from playground games, 7th IEEE Int. Conf.
Dev. Learn. (ICDL) (2008)
73.57
C. Breazeal, J. Gray, M. Berlin: Mindreading as
a foundational skill for socially intelligent roots,
Int. Symp. Robotics Res. (ISRR-07) (2007)

Part G | 73
1990
Part G
Robots and Humans
73.58
E.K.
Mower,
D.
Feil-Seifer,
M.
Matarić,
S. Narayanan: Investigating implicit cues for
user state estimation in HRI using physiological
measurements, 16th IEEE Int. Symp. Robot Human
Interact. Commun. (RO-MAN) (2007)
73.59
V. Chidambaram, Y.-H. Chiang, B. Mutlu: De-
signing persuasive robots, 17th Annu. ACM/IEEE
Int. Conf. Hum.-Robot Interact. (HRI ’12) (2012)
pp. 293–300
73.60
T. Fong, I. Nourbakhsh, K. Dautenhahn: A survey
of socially interactive robots, Robotics Auton. Syst.
42(3/4), 143–166 (2003)
73.61
M. Berlin, J. Gray, A. Thomaz, C. Breazeal: Perspec-
tive taking: An organizing principle for learning in
human-robot interaction, 21st Natl Conf. Artif. In-
tell. (AAAI) (2006)
73.62
Y.-L. Lin, G. Wei: Speech emotion recognition
based on HMM and SVM, 4th Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn. Cybern. (2005)
73.63
A. Metallinou, S. Lee, S. Narayanan: Audio-
visual emotion recognition using Gaussian mix-
ture models for face and voice, 2008 IEEE Int.
Symp. Multimed. (ISM) (2008) pp. 250–257
73.64
M. Matarić: Sensory-motor primitives as a ba-
sis for learning by imitation: Linking perception
toaction and biology to robotics. In: Imitation
in Animals and Artifacts, ed. by K. Dautenhahn,
C. Nehaniv (MIT Press, Cambridge 2002)
73.65
C. Breazeal, B. Scassellati: Robots that imitate hu-
mans, Trends Cognit. Sci. 6(11), 481–487 (2002)
73.66
M. Nicolescu, M. Matarić: Task learning through
imitation
and
human-robot
interaction.
In:
Models and Mechanisms of Imitation and So-
cial Learning in Robots, Humans and Animals:
Behavioural, Social and Communicative Dimen-
sions, ed. by K. Dautenhahn, C. Nehaniv (Cam-
bridge Univ. Press, Cambridge 2005) pp. 407–424
73.67
O.C. Jenkins, M.J. Matarić, S. Weber: Primitive-
Based Movement Classification for Humanoid Im-
itation, 1st IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robotics
(Humanoids-2000) (2000)
73.68
P. Bakker, Y. Kuniyoshi: Robot see, robot do: An
overview of robot imitation, AISB96 Workshop
Learn. Robots Animals (1996)
73.69
S. Chernova, C. Breazeal: Learning Temporal Plans
from Observation of Human Collaborative Behav-
ior, AAAI Spring Symp., It’s all Timing: Represent.
Reason. about Time Interact. Behav. (2010)
73.70
K. Chawarska, F.R. Volkmar: Autism in infancy
and early childhood. In: Handbook of Autism and
Pervasive Developmental Disorders, Vol. 1, (Wiley,
New York 2005) pp. 223–246
73.71
K.D. Tsatsanis: Neuropsychological characteristics
in autism and related conditions. In: Handbook
of Autism and Pervasive Developmental Disorders,
Vol. 1, (Wiley, New York 2005) pp. 365–381
73.72
CDC: Facts about Autism Spectrum Disorders. Facts
About ASDs, http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/
data.html (2015)
73.73
C. Lord, S. Risi, L. Lambrecht, E.H. Cook Jr.,
B.L. Leventhal, P.C. DiLavore, M. Rutter: The
autism diagnostic observation schedule—Generic:
A standard measure of social and communication
deficits associated with the spectrum of autism,
J. Aut. Devel. Disorder. 30(3), 205–223 (2000)
73.74
J. Edwards, M. Lanyado: Autism: Clinical and
theoretical issues. In: The Handbook of Child
& Adolescent Psychotherapy, Psychoanalytic Ap-
proaches, ed. by M. Lanyado, A. Horne (Rout-
ledge, London 1999) pp. 429–443
73.75
F.R. Volkmar, A. Klin: Issues in the classification
of autism and related conditions. In: Handbook
of Autism and Pervasive Developmental Disorders,
Vol. 1, (Wiley, New York 2005) pp. 5–41
73.76
F. Martin, J. Farnum: Animal-assisted therapy for
children with pervasive developmental disorders,
West J. Nurs. Res. 24(6), 657–670 (2002)
73.77
L.A. Redefer, J.F. Goodman: Brief report: Pet-
facilitated
therapy
with
autistic
children,
J. Autism Dev. Disord. 19(3), 461–467 (1989)
73.78
A. Bosseler, D.W. Massaro: Development and eval-
uation of a computer-animated tutor for vo-
cabulary and language learning in children with
autism, J. Autism Dev. Disord. 33(6), 653–672
(2003)
73.79
O.E. Hetzroni, J. Tannous: Effects of a computer-
based intervention program on the communica-
tive functions of children with autism, J. Autism
Dev. Disord. 34(2), 95–113 (2004)
73.80
M. Silver, P. Oakes: Evaluation of a new com-
puter intervention to teach people with autism or
Asperger syndrome to recognize and predict emo-
tions in others, Autism 5(3), 299–316 (2001)
73.81
S. Parsons, P. Mitchell: The potential of virtual
reality in social skills training for people with
autistic spectrum disorders, J. Intell. Disabil. Res.
46(5), 430–443 (2002)
73.82
D. Strickland: Virtual reality for the treatment of
autism, Stud. Health Technol. Inform. 44, 81–86
(1997)
73.83
B. Scassellati: How social robots will help us to
diagnose, treat, and understand autism, 12th Int.
Symp. Robotics Res. (ISRR) (2005)
73.84
I.P. Werry, K. Dautenhahn: Applying mobile robot
technology to the rehabilitation of autistic chil-
dren, 7th Int. Symp. Intell. Robotics Syst. (SIRS’99)
(1999)
73.85
F. Michaud, A. Clavet: Robotoy contest – designing
mobile robotics toys for autistic children, Am. Soc.
Eng. Educ. (ASEE’01) (2001)
73.86
B. Robins, K. Dautenhahn, R. Te Boekhorst, A. Bil-
lard: Robotic assistants in therapy and education
of children with autism: Can a small humanoid
robot help encourage social interaction skills?,
Proc. Univers. Access Inf. Soc. (UAIS) (2005)
73.87
H. Kozima, C. Nakagawa, Y. Yasuda: Interactive
robots for communication-care: A case-study in
autism therapy, IEEE Int. Workshop Robot Hum.
Interact. Commun. (RO-MAN) (2005) pp. 341–346
73.88
E. Kim, E. Newland, R. Paul, B. Scassellati: Robotic
tools for prosodic training for children with ASD:
A case study, Int. Meet. Autism Res. (IMFAR) (2008)
73.89
E.S. Kim, L.D. Berkovits, E.P. Bernier, D. Leyzberg,
F. Shic, R. Paul, B. Scassellati: Social robots as em-

Socially Assistive Robotics
References
1991
Part G | 73
bedded reinforcers of social behavior in children
with autism, J. Autism Dev. Disord. 43(5), 1038–
1049 (2013)
73.90
E. Kim, R. Paul, F. Shic, B. Scassellati: Bridging
the research gap: Making HRI useful to individuals
with autism, J. Hum.-Robot Interact. 1(1), 26–54
(2012)
73.91
D. Feil-Seifer, M.J. Matarić: Toward socially as-
sistive robotics for augmenting interventions for
children with autism spectrum disorders, Exp.
Robotics – 11th Int. Symp. (2009)
73.92
D. Feil-Seifer, M.J. Matarić: Towards the integra-
tion of socially assistive robots into the lives of
children with ASD. Working, Human-Robot Inter-
act. Workshop Soc. Impact: How Socially Accepted
Robots Can be Integr. our Soc. (2009)
73.93
M. Matarić, J. Eriksson, D. Feil-Seifer, C. Winstein:
Socially assistive robotics for post-stroke rehabil-
itation, Int. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 4, 5 (2007)
73.94
A. Tapus, C. Tapus, M.J. Matarić: User-robot per-
sonality matching and assistive robot behavior
adaptation for post-stroke rehabilitation therapy,
Intell. Serv. Robotics Spec. Issue Multidiscip. Col-
lab. Soc. Assist, Robotics 1(2), 169–183 (2008)
73.95
A. Tapus, C. Tapus, M.J. Matarić: Music therapist
robot: A solution for helping people with cogni-
tive impairments, Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI)
(2009)
73.96
American Heart Association: Heart Disease and
Stroke Statistics – 2003 Update (American Heart
Association and American Stroke Association, Dal-
las 2003)
73.97
M. Kelly-Hayes, J.T. Robertson: The American
Heart Association stroke outcome classification,
Stroke 29(6), 1274–1280 (1998)
73.98
J.P. Broderick: William M. Feinberg Lecture: Stroke
therapy in the year 2025: Burden, breakthroughs,
and barriers to progress, Stroke 35(1), 205–211
(2004)
73.99
T.S. Olsen: Arm and leg paresis as outcome pre-
dictors in stroke rehabilitation, Stroke 21(2), 247–
251 (1990)
73.100
N.E. Mayo, S. Wood-Dauphinee, R. Côté, L. Dur-
can, J. Carlton: Activity, participation, and quality
of life 6 months poststroke, Arch. Physic. Med.
Rehabil. 83(8), 1035–1042 (2002)
73.101
B.H. Dobkin: Clinical practice. Rehabilitation after
stroke, N. Eng. J. Med. 352(16), 1677–1684 (2005)
73.102
J.
Desrosiers,
F.
Malouin,
D.
Bourbonnais,
C.L. Richards, A. Rochette, G. Bravo: Arm and leg
impairments and disabilities after stroke reha-
bilitation: relation to handicap, Clin. Rehabil.
17(6), 666–673 (2003)
73.103
R.J. Nudo, E.J. Plautz, S.B. Frost: Role of adap-
tive plasticity in recoery of function after damage
to motor cortex, Muscle Nerve 24(8), 1000–1019
(2001)
73.104
E.G. Taub, G. Uswatte, D.M. Morris: Improved
motor recovery after stroke and massive corti-
cal reorganization following constraint-induced
movement therapy, Phys. Med. Rebail. Clin. N. Am
14(1), 77–91 (2003)
73.105
J. Van der Lee, R.C. Wagenaar, G. Lankhorst,
T.W. Vogelaar, W.L. Deville, L.M. Bouter: Forced
use of the upper extremity in chronic stroke pa-
tients; results from a single-blind randomized
clinical trial, Stroke 30, 2369–2375 (1999)
73.106
D. Reinkensmeyer, M. Averbuch, A. McKenna-
Cole, D.B. Schmit, W.Z. Rymer: Understanding and
treating arm movement impairment after chronic
brain injury: Progress with the arm guide, J. Re-
habil Res. Dev. 37(6), 653–662 (2000)
73.107
J. Schaechter, E. Kraft, T.S. Hilliard, R.M. Di-
jkhuizen, T. Benner, S.P. Finklestein, B.R. Rosen,
S.C. Cramer: Motor recovery and cortical re-
organization
after
constraint-induced
move-
ment therapy in stroke patients: A preliminary
study, Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 16(4), 326–338
(2002)
73.108
C.
Butefisch,
H.
Hummelsheim,
P.
Denzler,
K.H. Mauritz: Repetitive training
of isolated
movements improves the outcome of motor
rehabilitation of the centrally paretic hand,
J. Neurol. Sci. 130(1), 59–68 (1995)
73.109
G. Kwakkel, R.C. Wagenaar, J.W. Twisk, G.J. Lank-
horst, J.C. Koetsier: Intensity of leg and arm train-
ing after primary middle-cerebral artery stroke: A
randomized trial, Lancet 354, 191–196 (1999)
73.110
S. Wolf, S. Blanton, H. Baer, J. Breshears, A.J. But-
ler: Repetitive task practice: A critical review of
constraint induced therapy in stroke, Neurologist
8(6), 325–338 (2002)
73.111
S.L. Wolf, C.J. Winstein, J.P. Miller, E. Taub,
G. Uswatte, D. Morris, C. Giuliani, K.E. Light,
D. Nichols-Larsen: Effect of constraint-induced
movement therapy on upper extremity function 3
to 9 months after stroke, J. Am. Med. Assoc. (JAMA)
296(17), 2095–2104 (2006)
73.112
T. Nef, R. Riener: ARMin: Design of a novel arm
rehabilitation robot, Proc. Int. Conf. Rehabil.
Robotics (2005)
73.113
N. Schweighofer, Y. Choi, C. Winstein, J. Gordon:
Task-oriented rehabilitation robotics, Am. J. Phys.
Med. Rehabil. 91(11), 270–279 (2012)
73.114
K. Wada, T. Shibata, T. Saito, K. Tanie: Analysis of
factors that bring mental effects to elderly people
in robot assisted activity, Proc. Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (2002) pp. 1152–1157
73.115
C.D. Kidd, W. Taggart, S. Turkle: A sociable robot
to encourage social interaction among the el-
derly, Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (2006) pp. 3972–
3976
73.116
C.G. Burgar, P.S. Lum, P.C. Shor, M. Van der Loos:
Development of robots for rehabilitation therapy:
The Palo Alto vs/Stanford experience, J. Rehabil.
Res. Dev. 37(6), 663–673 (2000)
73.117
H.I. Krebs, B.T. Volpe, M. Ferraro, S. Fasoli, J. Pa-
lazzolo, B. Rohrer, L. Edelstein, N. Hogan: Robot-
aided neurorehabilitation: From evidence-based
to science-based rehabilitation, Top Stroke Reha-
bil. 8(4), 54–70 (2002)
73.118
B.R. Brewer, R. Klatzky, Y. Matsuoka: Feedback
distortion to overcome learned nonuse: A system
overview IEEE Eng. Med, Biol. 3, 1613–1616 (2003)

Part G | 73
1992
Part G
Robots and Humans
73.119
D.J. Reinkensmeyer, C.T. Pang, J.A. Nesseler,
C.C. Painter: Web-based tele-rehabilitation of the
upper extremity after stroke, IEEE Tran. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 10(2), 102–108 (2002)
73.120
S. Hesse, H. Schmidt, C. Werner, A. Bardeleben:
Upper and lower extremity robotic devices for re-
habilitation and for studying motor control, Curr.
Opin. Neurol. 16(6), 705–710 (2003)
73.121
S. Hesse, G. Schulte-Tigges, M. Konrad, A. Barde-
leben, C. Werner: Robot-assisted arm trainer for
the passive and active practice of bilateral fore-
arm and wrist movements in hemiparetic sub-
jects, Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 84(6), 915–920
(2003)
73.122
S. Hesse, C. Werner: Poststroke motor dysfunc-
tion and spasticity: Novel pharmacological and
physical treatment strategies, CNS Drugs 17(15),
1093–1107 (2003)
73.123
C. Winstein, R.A. Schmidt: Reduced frequency of
knowledge of results enhances motor skill learn-
ing, J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cognit. 16(4),
677–691 (1990)
73.124
C. Winstein: Knowledge of results and motor
learning–implications for physical therapy, Phys.
Ther. 71(2), 140–149 (1991)
73.125
C. Winstein, P.S. Pohl, R. Lewthwaite: Effects of
physical guidance and knowledge of results on
motor learning: Support for the guidance hypoth-
esis, Res. Q. Exerc. Sport. 65(4), 316–323 (1994)
73.126
C. Winstein, A. Merians, K. Sullivan: Motor learn-
ing after unilateral brain damage, Neuropsy-
chologia 37(8), 975–987 (1999)
73.127
J. Eriksson, M.J. Matarić, C. Winstein: Hands-off
assistive robotics for post stroke arm rehabil-
itation, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robotics
(ICORR’05) (2005) pp. 21–24
73.128
M.
Ghahramanlou, J.
Arnoff, M.A.
Wozniak,
S.J. Kittner, T.R. Price: Personality influences psy-
chological adjustment and recovery from stroke,
Proc. Am. Stroke Assoc. 26th Int. Stroke Conf.
(2001)
73.129
H. Nakajima, Y. Morishima, R. Yamada, S. Brave,
H. Maldonado, C. Nass, S. Kawaji: Social intel-
ligence in a human-machine collaboration sys-
tem: Social responses to agents with mind model
and personality, J. Jpn. Soc. Artif. Intell. 19(3),
184–196 (2004)
73.130
H. Nakajima, S. Braveand, C. Nass, R. Yama-
da, Y. Morishima, S. Kawaji: The functionality
of human-machine collaboration systems mind
model and social behavior, Proc. IEEE Conf. Syst.
Man Cybern. (2003) pp. 2381–2387
73.131
C. Nass, M.K. Lee: Does computer-synthesized
speech manifest personality? Experimental tests
of recognition, similarity-attraction, and consis-
tency attraction, J. Exp. Psychol. Appl. 7(3), 171–181
(2001)
73.132
A. Tapus, M. Matarić: Towards socially assistive
robotics, Int. J. Robotics Soc. Jpn. (JRSJ) 24(5), 14–
16 (2006)
73.133
A. Bandura: Principles of Behavior Modification
(Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York 1969)
73.134
E.T. Hall: Hidden Dimension (Doubleday, Gorden
City 1966)
73.135
E. Wade, A. Parnandi, M. Matarić: Automated ad-
ministration of the wolf motor function test for
post-stroke assessment, 4th Int. ICST Conf. Per-
vasive Comput. Technol. Heal. (Pervasive Health
2010) (2010) pp. 1–7
73.136
A. Parnandi, E. Wade, M. Matarić: Motor func-
tion assessment using wearable inertial sensors,
32nd Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.
(EMBC’10) (2010)
73.137
T.W. Bickmore, R.W. Picard: Establishing and
maintaining long-term human-computer rela-
tionships, ACM Tran. Comput.-Hum. Interact.
12(2), 293–327 (2005)
73.138
H.F. Davis, J.B. Croft, A.M. Malarcher, C. Ayala,
T.L. Antoine, A. Hyduk: Public health and aging:
Hospitalizations for stroke among adults aged >
65 years, CDC Morbid. Mortal. Wkl Rep. (MMWR)
52(25), 581–604 (2003)
73.139
American Association of Colleges of Nursing: Nurs-
ing Shortage Fact Sheet (American Association of
Colleges of Nursing, Washington 2010)
73.140
American Health Care Association: Summary of
2007 AHCA Survey Nursing Staff Vacancy and
Turnover in Nursing Facilities Report (American
Health Care Association, Washington 2008)
73.141
P. Buerhaus: Current and future state of the US
nursing workforce J. Am. Med, Assoc. 300(20),
2422–2424 (2008)
73.142
E. Baum, D. Jarjoura, A. Polen, D. Faur, G. Rutecki:
Effectiveness of a group exercise program in a
long-term care facility: A randomized pilot trial
J. Am. Med. Dir, Assoc. 4(2), 74–80 (2003)
73.143
D. Dawe, R. Moore-Orr: Low-intensity, range-
of-motion exercise: Invaluable nursing care for
elderly patients, J. Adv. Nurs. 21, 675–681 (1995)
73.144
M.D. McMurdo, L.M. Rennie: A controlled trial of
exercise by residents of old people’s homes, Age
Ageing 22, 11–15 (1993)
73.145
V. Thomas, P. Hageman: Can neuromuscular
strength and function in people with demen-
tia be rehabilitated using resistance-exercise
training? Results from a preliminary intervention
study, J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med, Sci. 58, 746–
751 (2003)
73.146
S. Colcombe, A. Kramer: Fitness effects the cog-
nitive function of older adults, Psychol. Sci. 14(2),
125–130 (2003)
73.147
S. Colcombe, A. Kramer, K. Erickson, P. Scalf,
E. McAuley, N. Cohen, S. Elavsky: Cardiovascular
fitness, cortical plasticity, and aging, Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci, USA 101(9), 3316–3321 (2004)
73.148
W. Spirduso, P. Clifford: Replication of age and
physical activity effects on reaction and move-
ment time, J. Gerontol. 33(1), 26–30 (1978)
73.149
Z.B. Moak, A. Agrawal: The association between
perceived interpersonal social support and phys-
ical and mental health: Results from the na-
tional epidemiological survey on alcohol and
related conditions, J. Public Health 32, 191–201
(2010)

Socially Assistive Robotics
References
1993
Part G | 73
73.150
L. George, D. Blazer, D. Hughes, N. Fowler: Social
support and the outcome of major depression, Br.
J. Psychiatry 154, 478–485 (1989)
73.151
E. Paykel: Life events, social support and depres-
sion, Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 89, 50–58 (1994)
73.152
S. Stansfeld, G. Rael, J. Head, M. Shipley, M. Mar-
mot: Social support and psychiatric sickness ab-
sence: A prospective study of British civil servants,
Psychol. Med. 27(1), 35–48 (1997)
73.153
E. Stice, J. Ragan, P. Randall: Prospective relations
between social support and depression: Differ-
ential direction of effects for parent and peer
support?, J. Abnorm. Psychol. 113, 155–159 (2004)
73.154
E. Steinmetz: American with Disabilities: 2002
Current
Population
Reports
(Census
Bureau,
Washington 2006)
73.155
M.J. Field, A.M. Jette: The Future of Disability in
America (National Acadamies Press, Washington
2007)
73.156
S.L. McGinnis, J. Moore: The impact of the aging
population on the health workforce in the United
States–summary of key findings, Cah. Sociol. De-
mogr. Med. 46(2), 193–220 (2006)
73.157
R.A. Cooper, B.E. Dicianno, B. Brewer, E. LoPresti,
D. Ding, R. Simpson, G. Grindle, H. Wang: A per-
spective on intelligent devices and environments
in medical rehabilitation, Med. Eng. Phys. 30(10),
1387–1398 (2008)
73.158
American Heart Association: Heart and Stroke
Statistics, 2006 Update (American Heart Associa-
tion, Dallas 2006)
73.159
M.F. Diagram: White Paper of the Elderly (Japan
National Council of Social Welfare, Tokyo 2001)
73.160
Eurostatistics: Population Projections 2008-2060:
From
2015,
deaths
projected
to
outnumber
births in the EU27, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_STAT-08-119_en.htm (2008)
73.161
J. Rimmer: Exercise and physical activity in per-
sons aging wityh a physical disability, Phys. Med.
Rehabil. Clin. N. Am. 16, 41–56 (2005)
73.162
Experience Corps: Fact Sheet on Aging in America
(AARP, Washington 2007)
73.163
B.J. Kemp: What the rehabilitation professional
and the consumer need to know, Phys. Med. Re-
habil. Clin. N. Am. 16(1), 1–18 (2005)
73.164
B.J. Kemp, L. Mosqueda: Aging with a Disability:
What the Clinician Needs to Know (Johns Hopkins
Univ. Press, Baltimore 2004)
73.165
A.W. Heinemann: State-of-the-science on post-
acute rehabilitation: Setting a research agenda
and developing an evidence base for practice and
public policy. An introduction, J. Spinal. Cord.
Med. 30(5), 452–457 (2007)
73.166
A.W. Heinemann: State of the science of postacute
rehabilitation: Setting a research agenda and de-
veloping an evidence base for practice and public
policy. An introduction, Rehabil. Nurs. 33(2), 82–
87 (2008)
73.167
U. Tas, A.P. Verhagen, S.M.A. Bierma-Zeinstra,
E. Odding, B.W. Koes: Prognostic factors of dis-
ability in older people: A systematic review, Br.
J. Gen. Pract. Syst. Rev. 57(537), 319–323 (2007)
73.168
S.G. Leveille, B.W. Penninx, D. Melzer, G. Izmir-
lian, J.M. Guralnik: Sex differences in the preva-
lence of mobility disability in old age: the dy-
namics of incidence, recovery, and mortality, J.
Gerontol. B Psychol. Sci. Soc, Sci. 55(1), 41–50
(2000)
73.169
J. Fasola, M.J. Matarić: Using socially assistive
human-robot interaction to motivate physical
exercise for older adults, Proc. IEEE 100(8), 2512–
2526 (2012)
73.170
American Alzheimer Association: About Alzhei-
mer’s Disease Statistics (American Alzheimer As-
sociation, Chicago 2007)
73.171
T. Tamura, S. Yonemitsu, A. Itoh, D. Oikawa,
A. Kawakami, Y. Higashi, T. Fujimooto, K. Naka-
jima: Is an entertainment robot useful in the
care of elderly people with severe dementia?, J.
Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med, Sci. 59(1), 83–85 (2004)
73.172
A. Tapus, C. Tapus, M.J. Matarić: The use of so-
cially assistive robots in the design of intelligent
cognitive therapies for people with dementia, Int.
Conf. Rehabil. Robotics (2009)
73.173
C. Jayawardena, I. Kuo, C. Datta, R.Q. Stafford,
E. Broadbent, B.A. MacDonald: Design, imple-
mentation and field tests of a socially assistive
robot for the elderly: HealthBot version 2, 4th IEEE
RAS/EMBS Int. Conf. Biomed. Robotics Biomecha-
tron. (BioRob) (2012) pp. 1837–1842
73.174
W. Taggart, S. Turkle, C.D. Kidd: An interactive
robot in a nursing home: Preliminary remarks. In:
Towards Social Mechanisms of Android Science,
(COGSCI Workshop), Stresa, 2005)
73.175
N. Sharkey, A. Sharkey: Living with robots: Ethical
tradeoffs in eldercare, Nat. Language Process. 8,
245–256 (2010)
73.176
D. Feil-Seifer, M.J. Matarić: Ethical principles for
socially assistive robotics, IEEE Robotics Autom
Mag. 18(1), 24–31 (2011)

Multimedia Contents Learning fro
1995
Part G | 74.1
74. Learning from Humans
Aude G. Billard, Sylvain Calinon, Rüdiger Dillmann
This chapter surveys the main approaches devel-
oped to date to endow robots with the ability
to learn from human guidance. The field is best
known as robot programming by demonstration,
robot learning from/by demonstration, appren-
ticeship learning and imitation learning. We start
with a brief historical overview of the field. We
then summarize the various approaches taken
to solve four main questions: when, what, who
and when to imitate. We emphasize the im-
portance of choosing well the interface and the
channels used to convey the demonstrations,
with an eye on interfaces providing force control
and force feedback. We then review algorith-
mic approaches to model skills individually and
as a compound and algorithms that combine
learning from human guidance with reinforce-
ment learning. We close with a look on the use
of language to guide teaching and a list of open
issues.
74.1
Learning of Robots .............................. 1995
74.1.1
Principle................................... 1996
74.1.2
Brief History.............................. 1996
74.2 Key Issues When Learning
from Human Demonstrations ............... 1998
74.2.1
When and Whom to Imitate ....... 1998
74.2.2
How to Imitate and How to Solve
the Correspondence Problem...... 1999
74.3 Interfaces for Demonstration................ 2000
74.4 Algorithms to Learn from Humans ........ 2002
74.4.1
Learning Individual Motions....... 2002
74.4.2 Learning Compound Actions ....... 2003
74.4.3 Incremental Teaching Methods ... 2004
74.4.4 Combining Learning
from Humans with Other
Learning Techniques.................. 2005
74.4.5 Learning from Humans, a Form
of Human–Robot Interaction...... 2006
74.5 Conclusions and Open Issues
in Robot LfD ........................................ 2008
Video-References......................................... 2009
References................................................... 2009
74.1 Learning of Robots
Robot learning from humans relates to situations in
which the robot learns from interacting with a human.
This must be contrasted to the vast body of work on
robot learning where the robot learns on its own, that is,
through trial and error and without external guidance.
In this chapter, we cover works that combine reinforce-
ment learning (RL) with techniques that use human
guidance, e.g., to bootstrap the search in RL. However,
we exclude from this survey all works that use purely
reinforcement learning, even though one could argue
that providing a reward is one form of human guid-
ance. We consider that providing a reward function is
akin to providing an objective function and hence re-
fer the reader to the companion chapter on Machine
Learning for robotics. We also exclude works where
the robot learns implicitly from being in presence of
a human, while the human is not actively coaching the
robot, as these works are covered in the companion
chapter on Social Robotics. We hence focus our survey
to all works where the human is actively teaching the
robot, by providing demonstrations of how to perform
the task.
Various terminologies have been used to refer to this
body of work. These include programming by demon-
stration (PbD), learning from human demonstration
(LfD), imitation learning, and apprenticeship learning.
All of these refer to a general paradigm for enabling
robots to autonomously perform new tasks from ob-

Part G | 74.1
1996
Part G
Robots and Humans
serving and learning, therefore, from the observation of
humans performing these tasks.
74.1.1 Principle
Rather than requiring users to analytically decompose
and manually program a desired behavior, work in LfD-
PbD takes the view that an appropriate robot controller
can be derived from observations of a human’s own per-
formance thereof. The aim is for robot capabilities to be
more easily extended and adapted to novel situations,
even by users without programming ability:
The main principle of robot learning from demon-
stration is that end-users can teach robots new tasks
without programming.
Consider a household robot capable of performing
manipulation tasks. One task that an end-user may de-
sire the robot to perform is to prepare a meal, such
as preparing an orange juice for breakfast (Fig. 74.1
and
VIDEO 29 ). Doing so may involve multiple sub-
tasks, such as juicing the orange, throwing the rest of
the orange in the trash, and pouring the liquid into a cup.
Further, every time this meal is prepared, the robot will
need to adapt its motion to the fact that the location and
type object (cup, juicer) may change.
In a traditional programming scenario, a human pro-
grammer would have to code a robot controller that is
capable of responding to any situation the robot may
face. The overall task may need to be broken down into
tens or hundreds of smaller steps, and each one of these
steps should be tested for robustness prior to the robot
leaving the factory. If and when failures occur in the
ﬁeld, highly-skilled technicians would need to be dis-
patched to update the system for the new circumstances.
Instead, LfD allows the end-user to program the robot
simply by showing it how to perform the task – no cod-
ing is required. Then, when failures occur, the end-user
only needs to provide more demonstrations, rather than
calling for professional help. LfD hence seeks to endow
robots with the ability to learn what it means to per-
form a task by generalizing from several observations
(Fig. 74.1 and
VIDEO 29 ).
LfD is not a record and play technique. LfD implies
learning, henceforth, generalization.
Next, we give a brief historical overview of the way
the ﬁeld evolved over the years. This is followed, in
Sect. 74.2, by an introduction to the issues at the core
of LfD. In Sect. 74.3, we discuss the crucial role that
the interface used for LfD plays in the success of the
teaching, emphasizing how the choice of interface de-
termines the type of information that can be conveyed
to the robot. Finally, in Sect. 74.4, we give a generic
view of the main approaches to solving LfD and con-
clude with an outlook on open issues.
74.1.2 Brief History
Robot learning from demonstration started in the 1980s.
Then, and still to a large extent now, robots had to be
explicitly and tediously hand programmed for each task
they had to perform. PbD sought to minimize, or even
eliminate, this difﬁcult step.
The rationale for moving from purely prepro-
grammed robots to very ﬂexible user-based interfaces
for training the robot to perform a task is threefold. First
and foremost, PbD is a powerful mechanism for reduc-
ing the complexity of search spaces for learning. When
observing either good or bad examples, one can reduce
the search for a possible solution, by either starting the
search from the observed good solution (local optima),
or conversely, by eliminating from the search space
what is known as a bad solution. Imitation learning is,
thus, a powerful tool for enhancing and accelerating
learning in both animals and artifacts.
a)
b)
Using invariants
in relative
positions
Fig. 74.1 (a) The teacher does several demonstrations of
the task of juicing an orange, by changing the location of
each item to allow the robot to generalize correctly. That is,
the robot should be able to infer, by comparing the demon-
strations, that only the relative locations matter, as opposed
to the exact locations as recorded from a global coordinate
system. (b) The robot can then reproduce the task even
when the objects are located in positions not seen in the
demonstrations
VIDEO 29

Learning from Humans
74.1 Learning of Robots
1997
Part G | 74.1
Second, imitation learning offers an implicit means
of training a machine, such that explicit and tedious pro-
gramming of a task by a human user can be minimized
or eliminated. Imitation learning is thus a natural means
of interacting with a machine that would be accessible
to lay people.
Third, studying and modeling the coupling of per-
ception and action, which is at the core of imitation
learning, helps us to understand the mechanisms by
which the self-organization of perception and action
could arise during development. The reciprocal inter-
action of perception and action could explain how
competence in motor control can be grounded in the
rich structure of perceptual variables, and vice versa,
how the processes of perception can develop as means
to create successful actions.
PbD promises were thus multiple. On the one hand,
one hoped that it would make the learning faster, in con-
trast to trial-and-error methods trying to learn the skill
tabula rasa. On the other hand, one expected that being
user-friendly, the methods would enhance the applica-
tion of robots in human daily environments.
At the beginning of the 1980s, LfD, known then as
programming by demonstration (PbD), started attract-
ing attention in manufacturing robotics. PbD appeared
as a promising route to automate the tedious manual
programming of robots, reducing the costs involved in
the development and maintenance of robots in the fac-
tory.
As a ﬁrst approach in PbD, symbolic reasoning
was commonly adopted in robotics [74.1–5], with
processes referred to as teach-in, guiding, or play-
back methods. In these works, PbD was performed
through manual (teleoperated) control. The position of
the end-effector and the forces applied on the object
manipulated were stored throughout the demonstra-
tions together with the positions and orientations of
the obstacles and of the target. This sensorimotor in-
formation was then segmented into discrete subgoals
(key points along the trajectory) and into appropri-
ate pre-deﬁned actions to attain these subgoals. Ac-
tions were commonly chosen to be simple point-to-
point movements that industrial robots employed at
this time. Examples of subgoals would be, e.g., the
robot’s gripper orientation and position in relation to the
goal [74.3]. Consequently, the demonstrated task was
segmented into a sequence of state-action-state transi-
tions.
To take into account the variability of human mo-
tion and the noise inherent to the sensors capturing the
movements, it appeared necessary to develop a method
that would consolidate all demonstrated movements.
For this purpose, the state-action-state sequence was
converted into symbolic if-then rules, describing the
states and the actions according to symbolic relation-
ships, such as in contact, close-to, move-to, grasp-
object, move-above, etc. Appropriate numerical deﬁ-
nitions of these symbols (i. e., when would an object
be considered as close-to or far-from) were given as
prior knowledge to the system. A complete demonstra-
tion was thus encoded in a graph-based representation,
where each state constituted a graph node and each
action a directed link between two nodes. Symbolic
reasoning could then unify different graphical repre-
sentations for the same task by merging and deleting
nodes [74.2].
Munch et al. [74.6] suggested the use of machine
learning (ML) techniques to recognize elementary op-
erators (EOs), thus deﬁning a discrete set of basic motor
skills, with industrial robotics applications in mind. In
this early work, the authors already established several
key issues of PbD in robotics. These include questions
such as how to generalize a task, how to reproduce
a skill in a completely novel situation, how to evaluate
a reproduction attempt, and how to better deﬁne the role
of the user during learning. Munch et al. [74.6] admit-
ted that generalizing over a sequence of discrete actions
was only one part of the problem since the controller
of the robot also required the learning of continuous
trajectories to control the actuators. They proposed to
overcome the missing parts of the learning process by
leveraging them to the user, who took an active role in
the teaching process.
These early works highlighted the importance of
providing a set of examples that are usable by the robot:
(1) by constraining the demonstrations to modalities
that the robot can understand; and (2) by providing
a sufﬁcient number of examples to achieve a desired
generality. They noted the importance of providing an
adaptive controller to reproduce the task in new sit-
uations, that is, how to adjust an already acquired
program. The evaluation of a reproduction attempt was
also leveraged to the user by letting him/her provide
additional examples of the skill in the regions of the
learning space that had not been covered yet. In this
way, the teacher/expert could control the generalization
capabilities of the robot.
With the increasing development of mobile and
humanoid robots, the ﬁeld went on adopting an inter-
disciplinary approach, taking into account evidence of
speciﬁc neural mechanisms for visuomotor imitation
in primates [74.7–9] and of developmental stages of
imitation capacities in children [74.10, 11]. The latter
promotes the introduction of socially driven behavior
in the robot to sustain interaction and improve teach-
ing [74.12, 13] and of an interactive teaching process,
in which the robot takes a more active role and may
ask the user for additional sources of information, when

Part G | 74.2
1998
Part G
Robots and Humans
needed [74.14, 15]. Eventually, the notion of robot pro-
gramming by demonstration was replaced by the more
biological labeling of imitation learning. In essence,
a large part of current works in PbD follow a conceptual
approach very similar to that followed by these prior
works.
Recent progress affected mostly the interfaces
at the basis of the teaching. Traditional ways of
guiding/teleoperating the robot have been progres-
sively replaced by more user-friendly interfaces, such
as vision [74.16, 17], speech command [74.18], data
gloves [74.19], the laser range ﬁnder [74.20] or kines-
thetic teaching (i. e., by manually guiding the robot’s
arms through the motion) [74.21–23].
The ﬁeld progressively moved from simply copying
the demonstrated movements to generalizing across sets
of demonstrations. As machine learning progressed,
PbD started incorporating more of those tools to tackle
both the perception issue, i. e., how to generalize across
demonstrations, and the production issue, i. e., how to
generalize the movement to new situations. Initially,
tools such as artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) [74.24,
25], radial-basis function networks (RBFs) [74.26],
and fuzzy logic [74.27] were quite popular. These
have lately been replaced by hidden Markov models
(HMMs) [74.28–33] and various non-linear regression
techniques [74.21, 34, 35], as we will discuss in more
detail in Sect. 74.4.
New learning challenges were, thus, set forth.
Robots were expected to show a high degree of ﬂex-
ibility and versatility both in their learning system and
in their control system in order to be able to interact nat-
urally with human users and demonstrate similar skills
(e.g., by moving in the same rooms and manipulating
the same tools as humans). Robots were more and more
expected to act human-like to enhance the interaction
and so that their behavior would be more predictable
and, hence, more acceptable.
74.2 Key Issues When Learning from Human Demonstrations
As mentioned in the beginning, learning from demon-
stration (LfD) has at core to develop algorithms that are
generic in their representation of the skills and in the
way they generate the skills.
The ﬁeld has identiﬁed a number of key problems
that need to be solved for ensuring such a generic ap-
proach to transferring skills across various agents and
situations [74.36, 37]. These have been formulated as
a set of generic questions, namely what to imitate, how
to imitate, when to imitate, and who to imitate. These
questions were formulated in response to the large body
of diverse work in robotics LfD [74.18, 26, 38–41] that
could not easily be uniﬁed under a small number of co-
herent operating principles. The above four questions
and their solutions aim at being generic in the sense of
making no assumptions on the type of skills that may
be transmitted.
74.2.1 When and Whom to Imitate
Whom and when to imitate has been largely unex-
plored so far, and hence to date, only the ﬁrst two
questions have really been addressed. Figure 74.2 and
VIDEO 97
illustrate how these two problems can be
solved in a principled manner through statistical obser-
vation of the demonstrations.
How to Determine the Evaluation Metric
What to imitate relates to the problem of determining
which aspects of the demonstration should be imi-
tated. For a given task, certain observable or affectable
properties may be irrelevant and safely ignored. For
instance, if the demonstrator always approaches a lo-
cation from the north, is it necessary for the robot to
do the same? The answer to this question strongly in-
a)
b)
Observation of multiple
demonstrations
Reproduction of a generalized
motion in a different situation
Fig. 74.2 (a) A robot learns how to make a chess move
(namely moving the queen forward) by generalizing across
different demonstrations of the task performed in slightly
different situations (different starting positions of the
hand). The robot records the trajectories of its joints and
learns to extract invariant features (what-to-imitate), i. e.,
that the task constraints are reduced to a subpart of the mo-
tion located in a plane deﬁned by the three chess pieces.
(b) The robot reproduces the skill in a new context (for
a different initial position of the chess piece) by ﬁnd-
ing an appropriate controller that satisﬁes both the task
constraints and constraints relative to its body limitation
(how-to-imitate problem) (after [74.21])

Learning from Humans
74.2 Key Issues When Learning from Human Demonstrations
1999
Part G | 74.2
ﬂuences whether or not a derived robot controller is
a successful imitation – a robot that approaches from
the south is appropriately trained if direction is not
important, but needs further education if it is. This is-
sue is related to questions of signal versus noise and
is answered by determining the metric by which the
resulting behavior is evaluated. Different ways can be
taken to address this issue. The simplest approach is to
take a statistical perspective and deem as relevant the
parts (dimension, region of input space) of the data that
are consistently measured across all demonstration in-
stances [74.21]. If the dimension of the data is too high,
such an approach may require too many demonstrations
to gather enough statistics. An alternative is then to have
the teacher help the robot determine what is relevant by
pointing out the parts of the task that are most impor-
tant.
In summary, what to imitate removes consideration
of details that, while perceptible/performable, do not
matter for the task. It participates in determining the
metric by which the reproduction of the robot can be
measured. In continuous control tasks, what to imitate
relates to the problem of deﬁning automatically the fea-
ture space for learning, as well the constraints and the
cost function. In discrete control tasks, such as those
treated by reinforcement learning and symbolic reason-
ing, what to imitate relates to the problem of how to
deﬁne the state and action space and of how to automat-
ically learn the pre/post conditions in an autonomous
decision system.
74.2.2 How to Imitate and How to Solve
the Correspondence Problem
How to imitate consists in determining how the robot
will actually perform the learned behaviors to maximize
the metric found when solving the what to imitate prob-
lem. Often, a robot cannot act exactly the same way as
a human does, due to differences in physical embodi-
ment. For example, if the demonstrator uses a foot to
move an object, is it acceptable for a wheeled robot to
bump it, or should it use a gripper instead? If the met-
ric does not have appendage-speciﬁc terms, it may not
matter.
This issue is closely related to that of the corre-
spondence problem [74.36]. Robots and humans, while
inhabiting the same space and interacting with the same
objects, and perhaps even superﬁcially similar, still
perceive and interact with the world in fundamentally
different ways. To evaluate the similarity between hu-
man behavior and that of robots, we must ﬁrst deal with
the fact that humans and robots may occupy different
state spaces, of perhaps different dimensions. We iden-
tify two different ways in which states of demonstrator
and imitator can be said to correspond, and give brief
examples:

Perceptual equivalence: Due to differences between
human and robot sensory capabilities, the same
scene may appear to be very different. For in-
stance, while a human may identify humans and
a)
b)
d)
e)
c)
Fig. 74.3 (a,b)
Perceptual
equivalence
(adapted
from [74.42]). (c) Physical equivalence. The humanoid
robot has the same arrangement of principal articulations
as the human demonstrator, but different limb lengths
and joint angle limits. The industrial robot has a different
number and arrangement of articulations, which makes the
mapping problem more challenging (illustration created
with the V-REP simulator [74.43]). (d,e) Ofﬂine full-body
motion transfer by taking into account the kinematic
and dynamic disparity between the human and the hu-
manoid [74.44]. See also
VIDEO 98
and
VIDEO 99
for example of mapping of full body motion from human
to humanoids

Part G | 74.3
2000
Part G
Robots and Humans
gestures from color and intensity, a robot may use
depth measurements to observe the same scene
(Fig. 74.3a). Another point of comparison is tactile
sensing. Most tactile sensors allow robots to per-
ceive contact, but do not offer information about
temperature, in contrast to the human skin. More-
over, the low resolution of the robots’ tactile sensors
does not allow robots to discriminate across the va-
riety of existing textures, while human skin does.
As the same data may, therefore, not be available
to both humans and robots, successfully teach-
ing a robot may require a good understanding of
the robot’s sensors and their limitations. LfD ex-
plores the limits of these perceptual equivalences,
by building interfaces that either automatically cor-
rect or make explicit these differences.

Physical equivalence: Due to differences between
human and robot embodiments, humans and robots
may perform different actions to accomplish the
same physical effect. For instance, even when per-
forming the same task (soccer), humans and robots
may interact with the environment in different ways
(Fig. 74.3b). Humans run and kick, while robots
roll and bump. Solving this discrepancy in motor
capabilities is akin to solving the how to imitate
problem to achieve the same effect. LfD develops
way to solve this problem. Typically, the robot may
compute a path (in Cartesian space) for its end-
effector that is close to the path followed by the
human hand, while relying on inverse kinematics
to ﬁnd the appropriate joint displacements. In the
football example above, this would require the robot
to determine a path for its center of mass which
corresponds to the path followed by the human’s
right foot when projected on the ground. Clearly,
this equivalence is very task dependent. Recent so-
lutions to this problem for hand motion and body
motion can be found in [74.45, 46].
We can think of perceptual equivalence as dealing
with the manner in which the agents perceive the world.
Perceptual equivalence requires to make sure that the
information necessary to perform the task is available
to both humans and robots. Physical equivalence deals
with the manner in which agents affect and interact with
the world, so that the task is performable by both agents.
74.3 Interfaces for Demonstration
The interface used to provide demonstration plays a key
role in the way the information is gathered and transmit-
ted. We distinguish three major trends:
1. One may directly record human motions. If one
is interested solely in the kinematic of the mo-
tion, one may use any of the various existing
motion tracking systems, whether these are based
on vision, exoskeleton, or other types of wearable
motion sensors. The left-hand side of Fig. 74.4b
and
VIDEO 98
show an example of full body
motion tracking during walking using vision. The
motion of the human body is ﬁrst extracted from
the background using a model of human body. This
model is subsequently mapped to an avatar and
then to the humanoid robot DB at ATR, Kyoto,
Japan.
These external means of tracking human motion
return precise measurement of the angular displace-
ment of the limbs and joints. They have been used in
various works for LfD of full body motion [74.33,
47–49]. These methods are advantageous in that
they allow the human to move freely. However, they
require solutions to the correspondence problem,
i. e., the problem of how to transfer motion from hu-
man to robot when both differ in the kinematic and
dynamics of their body or, in other words, if the con-
ﬁguration space is of different dimension and size.
This is typically done when mapping the motion of
the joints that are tracked visually to a model of the
human body that matches closely that of the robot.
Such mapping would be particularly difﬁcult to per-
form when the walking machine (e.g., a hexapod)
differs importantly from the human body. The prob-
lem of mapping actions across two dissimilar bodies
was already evoked earlier on and refers to the cor-
respondence problem.
2. Second, there are techniques such as kinesthetic
teaching, where the robot is physically guided
through the task by the human. This approach sim-
pliﬁes the correspondence problem by letting the
user demonstrate the skill in the robot’s environ-
ment with the robot’s own capabilities. It also pro-
vides a natural teaching interface to correct a skill
reproduced by the robot. Recent advances in skin
technology offer the possibility to teach robots how
to exploit tactile contact on an object (Fig. 74.4
middle and
VIDEO 104 ). By exploiting the com-
pliance of the iCub robot’s ﬁngers, the teacher can
teach the robot how to adapt the posture of the ﬁn-
gers in response to a change in tactile sensing as
measured at the robot’s ﬁnger tips [74.50]).

Learning from Humans
74.3 Interfaces for Demonstration
2001
Part G | 74.3
One main drawback of kinesthetic teaching is that
the human must often use more degrees of free-
dom to move the robot than the number of degrees
of freedom moved on the robot. This is visible in
Fig. 74.4. To move the ﬁngers of one hand of the
robot, the teacher must use both hands. This lim-
its the type of tasks that can be taught through
kinesthetic teaching. Typically tasks that would re-
quire moving both hands simultaneously could not
be taught this way. One could either proceed incre-
mentally, teaching ﬁrst the task for the right hand
and then, while the robot replays the motion with
its right hand, teach the motion of the left hand.
However, this may prove to be cumbersome. The
use of external trackers as reviewed above are more
amenable to teaching coordinated motion between
several limbs.
3. Third, there are immersive teleoperation scenarios,
where a human operator is limited to using the
robot’s own sensors and effectors to perform the
task. Teleoperation may be done using simple joy-
sticks or other remote control devices, including
haptic devices (Fig. 74.4 bottom and
VIDEO 101 ).
The later have the advantage that they can allow the
teacher to teach tasks that require precise control
of forces, while joysticks would only provide kine-
matic information (position, speed).
Teleoperation is advantageous compared to exter-
nal motion tracking systems, as this solves the
correspondence problem entirely, since the system
directly records the perception and action from
the robot’s conﬁguration space. It is also advanta-
geous compared to kinesthetic training, as it allows
training the robots from a distance and is, hence,
particularly suited for teaching navigation and lo-
comotion patterns. The teacher no longer needs to
share the same space with the robot. Teleopera-
tion is, usually, used to transmit the kinematics of
motion. For instance, in [74.51], the acrobatic tra-
jectories of a helicopter are learned by recording the
motion of the helicopter when teleoperated by an
expert pilot. In [74.52], a robot dog is taught to play
soccer by a human guiding it via a joystick. How-
ever, in recent work, teleoperation has been used
successfully to teach a humanoid robot balancing
techniques [74.53]. Learning to react to perturba-
tions is done through a haptic interface attached
to the torso of the demonstrator, which measures
the interaction forces when the human is pushed
around. The kinematics of motion of the demon-
strator are directly transmitted to the robot through
teleoperation and are combined with haptic infor-
mation to train a model of motion conditioned on
perceived forces.
The disadvantage of teleoperation techniques is
that the teacher often needs training to learn to
use the remote control device. Teleoperation us-
ing a simple joystick allows guiding only a subset
of degrees of freedom. To control for all degrees
of freedom, very complex, exoskeleton type of de-
vices must be used, which can be cumbersome.
Moreover, teleoperation prevents the teacher from
observing all sensorial information required to per-
form the task. For instance, teleoperation, even
when using haptic device, poorly renders the con-
tacts perceived at the robot’s end-effector. To pal-
liate to this, one may provide the teacher with
visualization interfaces to simulate the interaction
forces.
4. Lastly, one can use explicit information, such as that
conveyed by speech, to provide additional advice
and comments to the demonstration [74.18, 57, 58]
and
VIDEO 103 . Speech is a very natural means
of communication among humans and, hence, is
viewed as an easy way to allow the end-user to com-
municate with robots. However, it necessitates that
vocabulary that is understandable to the robot and
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 74.4 (a) Demonstration by visual tracking of gestures (af-
ter [74.54],
VIDEO 98
and
VIDEO 99 ). (b) Demonstra-
tion by kinesthetic teaching (after [74.55] and
VIDEO 104 ). (c)
Demonstration by teleoperation (after [74.56] and
VIDEO 101 )

Part G | 74.4
2002
Part G
Robots and Humans
grounded in the actions and perceptions of the robot
be deﬁned beforehand. While this restricts teaching
to discrete state–action pairs, it is particularly useful
for symbolic reasoning.
Each teaching interface has its pros and cons. It
is thus interesting to investigate how these interfaces
could be used in conjunction to exploit complementary
information provided by each modality [74.50].
74.4 Algorithms to Learn from Humans
Current approaches to encoding skills through LfD can
be broadly divided into two trends: a low-level repre-
sentation of the skill, taking the form of a non-linear
mapping between sensory and motor information, and,
a high-level representation of the skill that decom-
poses the skill into a sequence of action-perception
units.
While the majority of work in LfD uses solely
the demonstrations for learning, a growing number of
works develops methods by which LfD can be com-
bined with other learning techniques. One group of
work investigates how to combine imitation learning
with reinforcement learning, a method by which the
robot learns through trial and error to maximize a given
reward. Other works take inspiration in the way humans
teach each other and introduce interactive and bidirec-
tional teaching scenarios whereby the robot becomes an
active partner during the teaching phase. We brieﬂy re-
view the main principles underlying each of these areas
below:
74.4.1 Learning Individual Motions
Individual motions/actions (e.g., juicing an orange,
trashing it, and pouring liquid into the cup in the exam-
ple shown in 74.1) could be taught separately instead of
simultaneously, as shown in this previous example. The
human teacher would then provide one or more exam-
ples of each submotion. If learning proceeds from the
Fig. 74.5 Probabilistic encoding of
motion in a subspace of reduced
dimensionality (after [74.59] and
VIDEO 102 )
observation of a single instance of the motion/action,
one calls this one-shot learning [74.60]. Examples of
learning locomotion patterns can be found in [74.61].
To make sure that this is not akin to simple record
and play, the controller is provided with prior knowl-
edge in the form of primitive motion patterns. Learning
then consists of instantiating the parameters modulating
these motion patterns.
Teaching can also proceed in batch mode af-
ter recording several demonstrations, or incremen-
tally by adding recursively more information trial by
trial [74.12, 50, 62]. When learning in batch mode,
learning considers all examples and draws inference
by comparing the individual demonstrations. Infer-
ence is usually based on a statistical analysis, where
the demonstration signals are modeled via a proba-
bility density function, exploiting various non-linear
regression techniques stemming from machine learn-
ing. Popular methods these days include Gaussian pro-
cesses, Gaussian mixture Models, and support vector
machines.
Choosing properly the variables to encode a par-
ticular movement is crucial, as it already implies part
of the solution to the problem of deﬁning what is
important to imitate. Work in LfD encodes human
movements in either joint space, task space, or torque
space [74.63–65]. The encoding may be speciﬁc to
cyclic motion [74.22], discrete motion [74.21], or to
a combination of both [74.61].

Learning from Humans
74.4 Algorithms to Learn from Humans
2003
Part G | 74.4
Encoding often encompasses the use of dimension-
ality reduction techniques that project the recorded
signals into a latent space of motion of reduced dimen-
sionality. These techniques may either perform a local
linear transformations [74.66–68] or exploit global non-
linear methods [74.59, 69, 70] (Fig. 74.5). Additionally,
task-speciﬁc rating functions [74.71] and simulation-
based optimization [74.72] are investigated to identify
relevant learning features.
Teaching Force-Control Tasks
While most LfD to date work focused on learning
the kinematics of motions by recording the posi-
tion of the end-effector and/or the position of the
robot’s joints, more recently, some works have investi-
gated transmission of force-based signals through hu-
man demonstration [74.56, 73–76]. See
VIDEO 478
and
VIDEO 479 for examples of kinesthetic teaching
of compliant motion. Transmitting information about
force is difﬁcult for humans and for robots alike. Force
can be sensed only when performing the task our-
selves. Current efforts, hence, seek to develop methods
by which one may embody the robot. This allows hu-
man and robot to simultaneously perceive the forces
applied when performing the task. A new exciting line
of research, hence, leverages on recent advances in the
design of haptic devices and tactile sensing, and on the
development of torque and variable impedance actuated
systems to teach force-control tasks through human
demonstration.
74.4.2 Learning Compound Actions
Learning complex tasks, composed of a combination
and juxtaposition of individual motions, is the ultimate
goal of LfD. There are two major ways to proceed to
learning of such complex tasks:
1. One may ﬁrst learn models of all individual mo-
tions, using demonstrations of each of these actions
individually. In a second stage, one may learn the
right sequence and combination of these actions
by observing a human performing the whole task.
This approach, however, assumes that one can list
all necessary individual actions, so-called primitive
actions. To date, there does not exist a database of
such primitive actions and one may wonder whether
the variability of human motion may really be re-
duced to a ﬁnite list of possible motions. A common
approach is to ﬁrst learn models of all of the individ-
ual motions, using demonstrations of each of these
actions individually [74.77, 78], and then learn the
right sequencing/combination in a second stage ei-
ther by observing a human performing the whole
task [74.79, 80] or through reinforcement learn-
ing [74.81]. However, this approach assumes that
there is a known set of all necessary primitive ac-
tions. For speciﬁc tasks this may be true, but to date
there does not exist a database of general purpose
primitive actions, and it is unclear whether the vari-
ability of human motion may really be reduced to
a ﬁnite list.
2. The alternative is to observe the human perform-
ing the complete task and to automatically segment
the task to extract the primitive actions, which may
then become task-dependent, see e.g., [74.82, 83].
This has the advantage of learning, in one swipe,
both the primitive actions and the way they should
be combined. One issue that arises is that the num-
ber of primitive tasks is often unknown, and there
could be multiple possible segmentations that must
be considered [74.52].
Other examples include learning how to sequence
known behaviors to enable complex navigation tasks
through the imitation of a more knowledgeable robots
or humans [74.9, 84, 85] and learning how to sequence
primitive motions for full body motion in humanoid
robots [74.25, 33, 86].
A large body of these works uses a symbolic repre-
sentation of both the learning and the encoding of the
task [74.6, 30, 85, 87–91]. This symbolic way of encod-
ing skills may take several forms. One common way is
to segment and encode the task according to sequences
of predeﬁned actions, described symbolically. Encod-
ing and regenerating the sequences of these actions can,
however, be done using classical machine learning tech-
niques, such as HMM, [74.30].
Often, these actions are encoded in a hierarchical
manner. In [74.85], a graph-based approach is used
to generalize an object moving skill, using a wheeled
mobile robot. In this model, each node in the graph
represents a complete behavior and generalization takes
place at the level of the topological representation of the
graph. The latter is updated incrementally.
References [74.88, 89] follow a similar hierarchical
and incremental approach to encode various house-
hold tasks (such as setting the table and putting dishes
in a dishwasher) (Fig. 74.6 and
VIDEO 103 ). There,
learning consists in identifying a sequence of prede-
ﬁned, elementary actions, which is further combined
into a hierarchical task network. By analyzing multi-
ple demonstrations, the ordering of elementary actions
is learned, resulting in a precedence graph. The prece-
dence graph deﬁnes a partial ordering on the set of
learned elementary actions, which can be exploited to
execute elementary actions in parallel, extracting sym-
bolic rules that manage the way each object must be

Part G | 74.4
2004
Part G
Robots and Humans
handled. In [74.92], the approach was extended to learn-
ing subsymbolic goal and constraint descriptions for
each elementary action. In the execution phase, the
robot applies motion planning to generate a motion to
reach the goals while obeying the constraints. The re-
sulting task description mimics the strategy that humans
follow when performing the task. Based on the subsym-
bolic goal and constraint descriptions, the robot can rea-
son to adapt the strategy to changes in object location,
obstacle occurrence, and varying start conﬁgurations.
The approaches reviewed above assume a deter-
ministic world, where actions unfold uniquely from
perception of the current state of the world. However,
robots operating in real environments will observe the
world using imperfect sensors and the effects of their
actions may be stochastic. To account for the stochastic-
ity of the robot’s perceptions and actions, Schmidt-Rohr
et al. [74.93] use a model of the task with partially ob-
servable Markov decision processes (POMDP). At run
time, an optimal (in a maximum likelihood sense) deci-
sion is then taken.
Reference [74.90] exploits also a hierarchical ap-
proach to encoding a skill in terms of pre-deﬁned
behaviors. The skill consists in moving through a maze
where a wheeled robot must avoid several kinds of
obstacles and reach a set of speciﬁc subgoals. The par-
ticularity of this approach lies in the use of symbolic
representations of the skill, which are applied to explore
the role of the teacher in guiding incremental learning
of the robot.
a)
b)
Turn- tiltable
camera head
for color and
depth image
processing
Data gloves
with attached
tactile sensors
and magnetic
field trackers
Movable
platform for
overview
perspective
Turn- tiltable
camera head
for color and
depth image
processing
High sensitive
microphone
optimized for
speech
recognition
Start
Start
Goal
Goal
Fig. 74.6 (a) Training center with
dedicated sensors. (b) Precedence
graphs learned by the system for
the setting the table task. (c) Initial
task precedence graph for the ﬁrst
three demonstrations. (d) Final task
precedence graph after observing
additional examples (after [74.88])
(
VIDEO 103 )
Finally, [74.91] took a symbolic approach to en-
coding human motions as sets of pre-deﬁned postures,
positions, or conﬁgurations, considering different lev-
els of granularity for the symbolic representation of the
motion. This a priori knowledge is then used to explore
the correspondence problem through several simulated
setups, including motion in joint space of arm links and
displacements of objects on a two-dimensional (2-D)
plane.
The main advantage of these symbolic approaches
is that high-level skills (consisting of sequences of
symbolic cues) can be learned efﬁciently through an
interactive process. However, because of the symbolic
nature of their encoding, the methods rely on a large
amount of prior knowledge to predeﬁne the important
cues and to segment those efﬁciently.
74.4.3 Incremental Teaching Methods
The statistical approach described previously is an in-
teresting way to extract autonomously the important
features of the task, and, thus to avoid putting too much
prior knowledge in the system. However, it requires
a large number of demonstrations to draw statistically
valid inference. It is not reasonable to assume that
a layuser will perform many demonstrations of the same
task. Hence, for LfD to be amenable to lay users, learn-
ing should require as few demonstrations as possible.
Ideally, one would like the robot to be bootstrapped
with some initial knowledge, so that the robot can start

Learning from Humans
74.4 Algorithms to Learn from Humans
2005
Part G | 74.4
right away to perform the task, and human training
would be used solely to help the robot gradually im-
prove its performance.
Incremental learning approaches that gradually re-
ﬁne task knowledge as more examples become avail-
able pave the way towards LfD systems suitable for
such continuous and long-life robot learning. Fig-
ure 74.7 and
VIDEO 104
shows an example of such
incremental teaching of a simple skill.
These incremental learning methods use various
forms of deixis, as well as verbal and non-verbal inter-
actions, to guide the robot’s attention to the important
parts of the demonstration or to particular mistakes pro-
duced by the robot during the reproduction of the task.
Such incremental and guided learning is often referred
to as scaffolding or molding of the robot’s knowledge,
and is key to teaching robots tasks of increasing com-
plexity [74.90, 94].
Research on the use of incremental learning tech-
niques for robot LfD has contributed to the development
of methods for learning complex tasks within the house-
hold domain from as few demonstrations as possible.
Moreover, it has contributed to the development and
application of machine learning that allow a continu-
ous and incremental reﬁnement of the task model. Such
systems have sometimes been referred to as background
knowledge-based or EM deductive LfD-systems, as pre-
sented in [74.95, 96]. They usually require very few or
even only a single user demonstration to generate ex-
ecutable task descriptions. The main objective of this
line of research is to build a meta-representation of the
knowledge that the robot has acquired on the task and
to apply reasoning methods on this knowledge database
(Fig. 74.6). In this scenario, reasoning involves recog-
nizing, learning, and representing repetitive tasks.
Pardowitz et al. [74.97] discuss how different forms
of knowledge can be balanced in an incremental learn-
ing system. The system relies on building task prece-
dence graphs. Task precedence graphs encode hypothe-
ses that the system makes on the sequential structure
of a task. Learning of the task precedence graphs al-
lows the system to schedule its operations most ﬂexibly,
Task demonstration
Learner replay
Tactile correction
Fig. 74.7 An incremental learning strategy where a manipulation skill is ﬁrst demonstrated through the use of a data
glove. After a ﬁrst reproduction trial, the skill is reﬁned through kinesthetic teaching, by exploiting the tactile capabilities
of the iCub humanoid robot (after [74.50]) (
VIDEO 104 )
while still meeting the goals of the task ([74.98] for
details). Task precedence graphs are directed, acyclic
graphs that contain a temporal precedence relation that
can be learned incrementally. Incremental learning of
task precedence graphs leads to a more general and ﬂex-
ible representation of the task knowledge (Fig. 74.6 and
VIDEO 105 ).
74.4.4 Combining Learning from Humans
with Other Learning Techniques
To recall, a main argument for the development of
LfD methods was that they would speed up learning by
providing examples of good solutions. This assumption,
however, is realistic only if the context for the reproduc-
tion is sufﬁciently similar to that of the demonstration.
We saw previously that the use of dynamical systems-
based representation at the trajectory level allows the
robot to depart to some extent from a learned trajectory
to reach the target, even when both the object and the
hand of the robot have moved from the location shown
during the demonstration. There are, however, situa-
tions in which such an approach would fail, such as, for
instance, when placing a large obstacle in the robot’s
pathway (Fig. 74.8). Besides, robots and humans may
differ signiﬁcantly in their kinematics and dynamics of
motion and, although there are varieties of ways to by-
pass the so-called correspondence problem, relearning
a new model may still be required in special cases.
To allow the robot to relearn to perform a task in any
new situation, it appeared important to combine LfD
methods with other motor learning techniques. Rein-
forcement learning (RL) appeared particularly suitable
for type of problem. Indeed, imitation learning is lim-
iting in that it requires the robot to learn only from
what has been demonstrated. Reinforcement learning,
in contrast, allows the robot to discover new control
policies through free exploration of the state-action
space. Approaches that combine imitation learning and
reinforcement learning aim at exploiting the strength
of both algorithms to overcome their respective draw-
backs. Demonstrations are used to guide the exploration

Part G | 74.4
2006
Part G
Robots and Humans
in reinforcement learning (RL). This, hence, reduces
the time it takes for RL algorithms to ﬁnd an adequate
control policy, while allowing the robot to depart from
the demonstrated behavior. Figures 74.8 show two ex-
amples of techniques that use reinforcement learning
in conjunction with LfD to improve the robot’s perfor-
mance beyond that of a demonstrator.
Early work on LfD using RL started in the 1990s
with learning to swing up and control an inverse pen-
dulum [74.100] and learning industrial tasks like peg-
in-hole with a robot arm [74.26]. More recent efforts
include [74.101–103], who tackled robust control of the
upper body of humanoid robots in various manipulation
tasks, learning an archery skill [74.104], and learning
how to hit a snooker ball [74.105].
Demonstrations can be used in different ways to
bootstrap RL. They may be used as initial roll-outs
from which an initial estimate of the policy is com-
puted [74.106–108], or to generate an initial set of
primitives [74.81, 103, 107]. In the latter case, RL is
then used to learn how to select across these primitives.
Demonstrations can also be used to limit the search
space covered by RL [74.101, 109], or to estimate the
reward function [74.110, 111]. Finally, RL and imita-
tion learning can be used in conjunction at run time,
by letting the demonstrator take over part of the control
during one trial [74.112].
Another way to enable the robot to learn a control
strategy through a combination of self-experimentation
and learning from watching others is to evolve popu-
lation of agents that mimic each other. Such an evo-
lutionary approach using genetic algorithms has been
investigated by a number of authors, e.g., for learn-
ing of manipulation skills [74.113], navigation strate-
gies [74.114], or sharing a common vocabulary to name
sensoriperception and actions [74.115].
Variants on Reinforcement Learning
While most of the works that combine imitation learn-
ing with reinforcement learning assume the reward to
be known, inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) offers
a framework to determine automatically the reward and
the optimal control policy [74.116]. When using human
demonstrations to guide learning, IRL solves jointly
Fig. 74.8 Illustration of the use of
reinforcement learning in policy
parameter space to reﬁne a skill
initially learned from demonstration
(after [74.99] and
VIDEO 105 )
the what to imitate and how to imitate problems. Other
approaches to estimating the reward or cost function au-
tomatically have been proposed, see, for instance, the
maximum margin planning technique [74.117] and the
automatic extraction of constraints [74.118].
Underlying all IRL works is the assumption of
a consistent reward function. When demonstrations are
provided by multiple experts, this assumes that all ex-
perts optimize the same objectives. This is constraining
and does not exploit the variability of ways in which
humans may solve the same task. Recent IRL works
consider multiple experts and identify multiple different
reward functions [74.119, 120]. This allows the robots
to learn multiple (albeit suboptimal) ways to perform
the same task. The hope is that this multiplicity of
policies will make the controller more robust, offering
alternative ways to complete the task, when the context
no longer allows the robot to perform the task in the
optimal way.
The vast majority of work on LfD relies on suc-
cessful demonstrations of the desired task by the hu-
man. It hence assumes that all the demonstrations are
good demonstrations and discards those that are poor
proxy of what would be deemed as a good demonstra-
tion. Recent work has also investigated the possibility
that demonstrations may instead be failed attempts at
performing the task [74.121, 122]. Learning then pro-
ceeds from observing solely incorrect demonstrations
(
VIDEO 476 and
VIDEO 477 ). Note that demonstra-
tions are never completely incorrect. Learning from
failed demonstration then attempts to discover which
parts of the demonstrations were correct and which
were incorrect, so as to improve solely the incorrect
parts. In this context, LfD addresses the questions of
what to and what not to imitate. It offers an interesting
alternative to approaches that combine imitation learn-
ing and reinforcement learning, in that no reward needs
to be explicitly determined.
74.4.5 Learning from Humans, a Form
of Human–Robot Interaction
Another perspective adopted by LfD to make the trans-
fer of skill more efﬁcient is to focus on the interaction

Learning from Humans
74.4 Algorithms to Learn from Humans
2007
Part G | 74.4
aspect of the transfer process. As this transfer problem
is complex and involves a combination of social mech-
anisms, several insights from human–robot interaction
(HRI) were explored to make efﬁcient use of the teach-
ing capabilities of the human user, [74.123–125] for
surveys. Next, we brieﬂy survey some of these works.
The development of algorithms for detecting social
cues given implicitly or explicitly by the teacher dur-
ing training and the integration of those as part of other
generic mechanisms for LfD has become the focus of
a large body of work in LfD. Such social cues can
be viewed as a way to introduce priors in a statistical
learning system, and, by so doing, to speed up learning.
Indeed, several hints can be used to transfer a skill not
only by demonstrating the task multiple times but also
by highlighting the important components of the skill.
This can be achieved by various means, using different
modalities.
A large body of work explored the use of point-
ing and gazing (Fig. 74.9 left and
VIDEO 106 ) as
a way of conveying the intention of the user [74.79,
126–132]. Vocal deixis, using a standard speech recog-
nition engine, has also been explored widely [74.79,
133]. In [74.88], the user makes vocal comments to
highlight the steps of the teaching that are deemed as
being the most important. In [74.134, 135], only the
prosody of the speech pattern is looked at, rather than
the exact content of the speech, as a way to infer some
information on the user’s communicative intent.
In [74.136], these social cues are learned through
an imitative game, whereby the user imitates the robot.
This allows the robot to build a user-speciﬁc model of
these social pointers, and, hence be more robust to de-
tecting those.
Fig. 74.9 Illustration of the use of social cues to speed up the imitation learning process. Here, gazing and pointing
information are used to select probabilistically the objects relevant for the manipulation skill (
VIDEO 106 )
At the start,
does orientation
matter?
Yes it
does.
Yes it
can.
Can it be
this?
Fig. 74.10 Example of an active teaching scenario. The robot asks for help during or after teaching, verifying that its
understanding of the task is correct (after [74.14]) (
VIDEO 107 )
Recent lines of research in interactive LfD seeks
to give a more active role to the teacher in a bidi-
rectional teaching process [74.15, 137, 138]. Robots
become more active partners and can indicate which
portion of the demonstration was unclear. Teachers may
in turn reﬁne the robot’s knowledge by providing com-
plementary information where the robot is performing
poorly. This supplementary information may consist of
additional rounds of demonstrations of the complete
task [74.139], or may be limited to subparts of the
task [74.140, 141]. The information can be conveyed
through speciﬁc task’s features, such as a list of way-
points [74.142]. The robot is then left free to interpolate
a trajectory using these key points.
The design of such incremental teaching methods
calls for machine learning techniques that enable the
incorporation of new data in a robust manner. It also
opens the door to the design of other human–robot inter-
facing systems, including the use of speech, which leads
to meaningful dialogs between humans and robots. An
example of such bidirectional teaching is given on the
right-hand side of Fig. 74.10. The robot asks for help
during or after teaching, verifying that its understanding
of the task is correct [74.14]. This teaching interaction
is tailored to let the user become an active participant
in the learning process (and not only a model of expert
behavior).
By taking inspiration from the human tutelage
paradigm, [74.15] shows that a socially guided ap-
proach can improve both the human–robot interaction
and the machine learning process by taking into ac-
count human benevolence. That work highlights the
role of the teacher in organizing the skill into manage-
able steps and maintaining an accurate mental model

Part G | 74.5
2008
Part G
Robots and Humans
of the learner’s understanding. Reference [74.138] use
a similar teaching paradigm and extend the concept
to the learning of continuous motion trajectories and
of actions on objects, and propose experiments where
a humanoid robot learns new manipulation skills by
ﬁrst observing a human demonstrator (through motion
sensors) and then gradually reﬁning its skill through
teacher support. In this application, the user provides
scaffolds to the robot for the reproduction of the skill by
moving kinesthetically a subset of the motors. Through
the supervision of the user who progressively disman-
tles the scaffolds after each reproduction attempt, the
robot can ﬁnally reproduce the skill on its own. Ref-
erence [74.143] highlights the importance of an active
participation of the teacher not only to demonstrate
a model of expert behavior but also to reﬁne the ac-
quired motion through spoken feedback.
Reference [74.90] provides experiments where
a wheeled robot is teleoperated through a screen inter-
face to simulate a molding process, that is, by letting
the robot experience sensory information when explor-
ing its environment through the teacher’s support. Their
model uses a memory-based approach in which the user
provides labels for the different components of the task
to teach hierarchically high-level behaviors.
Finally, a core idea of the HRI approach to LfD is
that imitation is goal directed, that is, actions are meant
to fulﬁll a speciﬁc purpose and to convey the inten-
tion of the actor [74.144]. While a longstanding trend
in LfD approached the problem from the standpoint of
trajectory following [74.84, 145, 146] and joint motion
replication, [74.147–150], recent works, inspired by the
above rationale, start from the assumption that imitation
is not just about observing and replicating the motion,
but rather about understanding the goals of a given ac-
tion (see the above survey of approaches to determining
automatically the reward or what to imitate).
Determining the way humans learn to both ex-
tract the goals of a set of observed actions and give
these goals a hierarchy of preference is fundamental
to our understanding of the underlying decisional pro-
cess to imitation. While we have surveyed recent work
in that area, it is important to recall other approaches
to tackling these issues that have previously followed
a probabilistic approach to explain the derivation and
sequential application of goals and apply this to enable
learning of manipulatory tasks requiring sequencing of
subsets of goals [74.97, 145, 151, 152].
Understanding the goal of the task is still only half
of the picture, as there may be several ways of achiev-
ing the goal of the task. Moreover, what is feasible
(or optimal) for the demonstrator may not necessarily
be appropriate for the imitator [74.36]. Thus, different
models, modes and communication channels, should be
used in conjunction to ﬁnd a solution that is optimal
both from the point of view of the imitator and that
achieves what the demonstrator seeks to teach the robot.
This concludes our survey. As the reader can see,
the issues of what and how to imitate are tightly con-
nected and to a large extent remain only partly solved.
74.5 Conclusions and Open Issues in Robot LfD
Research in LfD or programming by demonstration
(PbD) is progressing rapidly, pushing back limits and
posing new questions all the time. As such, any list
of limitations and open questions is bound to be in-
complete and out of date. However, there are a few
long-standing limitations and open questions that bear
further attention.
Generally, work in LfD assumes a ﬁxed, given form
for the robot’s control policy, and learns appropriate pa-
rameters. To date, there are several different forms of
policies in common usage, and there is no clear cor-
rect (or dominant) technique. Furthermore, it is possible
that a system could be provided with multiple possible
representations of controllers and select which is most
appropriate.
The combination of reinforcement learning and im-
itation learning has been shown to be effective in
addressing the acquisition of skills that require ﬁne tun-
ing of the robot’s dynamics. Likewise, more interactive
learning techniques have proven successful in allowing
for collaborative improvement of the learnt policy by
switching between human-guided and robot-initiated
learning. However, there do not yet exist protocols to
determine when it is best to switch between the various
learning modes available. The answer may, in fact, be
task dependent.
In work to date, teaching is usually done by a single
teacher, or teachers with an explicit concept of the task
to teach. More work needs to be done to address issues
related to conﬂicting demonstrations across teachers
with different styles. Similarly, teachers are usually hu-
man beings, but could instead be an arbitrary expert
agent. This agent could be a more knowledgeable robot
or a computer simulation. Finally, another relatively lit-
tle explored question relates to the problem of how to
transfer skills across multiple agents, including multi-
ple robots (i. e., teaching is done from a teacher robot to
various learner robots). Early work in this direction was

Learning from Humans
References
2009
Part G | 74
done in the 1990s [74.115, 153, 154]. This work, how-
ever, has so far been reduced to transfer of navigation or
communication skills across swarms of simple mobile
robots.
Experiments in LfD have mostly focused on a sin-
gle task (or set of closely related tasks), and each
experiment starts with a tabula rasa. As learning of
complex tasks progresses, means to store and reuse
prior knowledge at a large scale will have to be devised.
Learning stages, akin perhaps to those found in child
development, may be required. There will need to be
a formalism to allow the robot to select information, to
reduce redundant information, select features, and store
new data efﬁciently.
Video-References
VIDEO 29
Demonstrations and reproduction of the task of juicing an orange
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/74/videodetails/29
VIDEO 97
Demonstrations and reproduction of moving a chessman
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/74/videodetails/97
VIDEO 98
Full-body motion transfer under kinematic/dynamic disparity
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/74/videodetails/98
VIDEO 99
Demonstration by visual tracking of gestures
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/74/videodetails/99
VIDEO 100
Demonstration by kinesthetic teaching
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/74/videodetails/100
VIDEO 101
Demonstration by teleoperation of humanoid HRP-2
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/74/videodetails/101
VIDEO 102
Probabilistic encoding of motion in a subspace of reduced dimensionality
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/74/videodetails/102
VIDEO 103
Reproduction of dishwasher unloading task based on task precedence graph
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/74/videodetails/103
VIDEO 104
Incremental learning of finger manipulation with tactile capability
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/74/videodetails/104
VIDEO 105
Policy refinement after demonstration
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/74/videodetails/105
VIDEO 106
Exploitation of social cues to speed up learning
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/74/videodetails/106
VIDEO 107
Active teaching
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/74/videodetails/107
VIDEO 476
Learning from failure I
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/74/videodetails/476
VIDEO 477
Learning from failure II
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/74/videodetails/477
VIDEO 478
Learning compliant motion from human demonstration
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/74/videodetails/478
VIDEO 479
Learning compliant motion from human demonstration II
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/74/videodetails/479
References
74.1
T. Lozano-Perez: Robot programming, Proceed-
ings IEEE 71(7), 821–841 (1983)
74.2
B. Dufay, J.-C. Latombe: An approach to au-
tomatic robot programming based on inductive
learning, Int. J. Robotics Res. 3(4), 3–20 (1984)
74.3
A. Levas, M. Selfridge: A user-friendly high-level
robot teaching system, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics,
Altanta (1984) pp. 413–416
74.4
A.B. Segre, G. DeJong: Explanation-based manip-
ulator learning: Acquisition of planning ability
through observation, IEEE Conf. Robotics Autom.
St. Louis (1985) pp. 555–560
74.5
A.M. Segre: Machine Learning of Robot Assembly
Plans (Kluwer, Boston 1988)
74.6
S. Muench, J. Kreuziger, M. Kaiser, R. Dillmann:
Robot programming by demonstration (RPD) - Us-
ing machine learning and user interaction meth-
ods for the development of easy and comfortable
robot programming systems, Proc. Int. Symp. In-
dus. Robots (ISIR) (1994) pp. 685–693
74.7
A. Billard: Imitation: A review. In: The Handbook
of Brain Theory and Neural Network, 2nd edn.,
ed. by M.A. Arbib (MIT Press, Cambridge 2002)
pp. 566–569

Part G | 74
2010
Part G
Robots and Humans
74.8
E. Oztop, M. Kawato, M.A. Arbib: Mirror neurons
and imitation: A computationally guided review,
Neural Netw. 19(3), 254–271 (2006)
74.9
J. Demiris, G. Hayes: Imitation as a dual-route
process featuring predictive and learning com-
ponents: A biologically-plausible computational
model. In: Imitation in Animals and Artifacs, ed.
by C. Nehaniv, K. Dautenhahn (MIT Press, Cam-
bridge 2002)
74.10
J. Nadel, A. Revel, P. Andry, P. Gaussier: Toward
communication: First imitations in infants, low-
functioning children with autism and robots, In-
teract. Stud. 5(1), 45–74 (2004)
74.11
F. Kaplan, P.-Y. Oudeyer: The progress-drive hy-
pothesis: An interpretation of early imitation. In:
Models and Mechanisms of Imitation and Social
Learning: Behavioural, Social and Communica-
tion Dimensions, ed. by K. Dautenhahn, C. Ne-
haniv (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge 2007)
pp. 361–377
74.12
B.D. Argall, M. Veloso, B. Browning: Teacher feed-
back to scaffold and refine demonstrated motion
primitives on a mobile robot, Robotics Auton.
Syst. 59(3/4), 243–255 (2011)
74.13
B.
Robins,
K.
Dautenhahn,
C.L.
Nehaniv,
N.A. Mirza, D. Francois, L. Olsson: Sustaining
interaction dynamics and engagement in dyadic
child-robot interaction kinesics: Lessons learnt
from an exploratory study, IEEE Int. Workshop
Robot Human Int. Commun. (ROMAN) (2005)
pp. 716–722
74.14
M. Cakmak, A.L. Thomaz: Designing robot learn-
ers that ask good questions, IEEE-ACML Int. Conf.
Human-Robot Int. (HRI) (2012)
74.15
C. Breazeal, A. Brooks, J. Gray, G. Hoffman, C. Kidd,
H. Lee, J. Lieberman, A. Lockerd, D. Chilongo:
Tutelage and collaboration for humanoid robots,
Human. Robots 1(2), 315–348 (2004)
74.16
Y. Kuniyoshi, M. Inaba, H. Inoue: Teaching by
showing: Generating robot programs by visual
observation of human performance, Proc. Int.
Symp. Ind. Robots, Tokyo (1989) pp. 119–126
74.17
Y. Kuniyoshi, M. Inaba, H. Inoue:
Learning
by watching: Extracting reusable task knowl-
edge from visual observation of human perfor-
mance, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 10(6), 799–822
(1994)
74.18
M. Ehrenmann, O. Rogalla, R. Zöllner, R. Dill-
mann: Teaching service robots complex tasks:
Programming by demonstation for workshop and
household environments, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Field Serv. Robotics (FRS) (2001)
74.19
C.P. Tung, A.C. Kak: Automatic learning of assem-
bly task using a dataglove system, IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Pittsburgh (1995) pp. 1–8
74.20
K. Ikeuchi, T. Suchiro: Towards an assembly plan
from observation, Part I: Assembly task recog-
nition using face-contact relations (polyhedral
objects), Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA),
Vol. 3 (1992) pp. 2171–2177
74.21
S. Calinon, F. Guenter, A. Billard: On learning, rep-
resenting and generalizing a task in a humanoid
robot, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. B 37(2), 286–
298 (2007)
74.22
M. Ito, K. Noda, Y. Hoshino, J. Tani: Dynamic and
interactive generation of object handling behav-
iors by a small humanoid robot using a dynamic
neural network model, Neural Netw. 19(3), 323–
337 (2006)
74.23
T. Inamura, N. Kojo, M. Inaba: Situation recogni-
tion and behavior induction based on geometric
symbol representation of multimodal sensorimo-
tor patterns, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS) (2006) pp. 5147–5152
74.24
S. Liu, H. Asada: Teaching and learning of debur-
ring robots using neural networks, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1993) pp. 339–345
74.25
A. Billard: Learning motor skills by imitation: A bi-
ologically inspired robotic model, J. Cybern. Syst.
32(1/2), 155–193 (2001)
74.26
M. Kaiser, R. Dillmann: Building elementary robot
skills from human demonstration, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 3 (1996)
pp. 2700–2705
74.27
R. Dillmann, M. Kaiser, A. Ude: Acquisition of ele-
mentary robot skills from human demonstration,
Int. Symp. Intell. Robotics Syst. (SIRS) (1995) pp. 1–
38
74.28
W. Yang: Hidden Markov model approach to
skill learning and its application in telerobotics,
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1993)
pp. 396–402
74.29
P.K. Pook, D.H. Ballard: Recognizing teleoperated
manipulations, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Au-
tom., Atlanta (1993) pp. 578–585
74.30
G.E. Hovland, P. Sikka, B.J. McCarragher: Skill
acquisition from human demonstration using
a hidden Markov model, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom., Minneapolis (1996) pp. 2706–
2711
74.31
S.K. Tso, K.P. Liu: Hidden Markov model for intelli-
gent extraction of robot trajectory command from
demonstrated trajectories, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Ind. Technol. (ICIT) (1996) pp. 294–298
74.32
C. Lee, Y. Xu: Online, interactive learning of
gestures for human/robot interfaces, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 4 (1996)
pp. 2982–2987
74.33
D. Kulic, W. Takano, Y. Nakamura: Incremental
learning, clustering and hierarchy formation of
whole body motion patterns using adaptive hid-
den Markov chains, Int. J. Robotics Res. 27(7),
761–784 (2008)
74.34
D. Nguyen-Tuong, M. Seeger, J. Peters: Local
Gaussian process regression for real time online
model learning and control, Adv. Neural Inf. Pro-
cess. Syst. 21, 1193–1200 (2009)
74.35
S.M. Khansari Zadeh, A. Billard: Learning sta-
ble non-linear dynamical systems with Gaussian
mixture models, IEEE Trans. Robotics 27(5), 943–
957 (2011)
74.36
C. Nehaniv, K. Dautenhahn: Of hummingbirds and
helicopters: An algebraic framework for interdis-
ciplinary studies of imitation and its applications.

Learning from Humans
References
2011
Part G | 74
In: Interdisciplinary Approaches to Robot Learn-
ing, Vol. 24, ed. by J. Demiris, A. Birk (World
Scientific, Singapore 2000) pp. 136–161
74.37
C.L. Nehaniv: Nine billion correspondence prob-
lems and some methods for solving them, Proc.
Int. Symp. Imit. Anim. Artifacts (2003) pp. 93–95
74.38
P. Bakker, Y. Kuniyoshi: Robot see, robot do: An
overview of robot imitation, AISB Workshop Learn.
Robot. Anim., Brighton (1996)
74.39
M. Skubic, R.A. Volz: Acquiring robust, force-
based assembly skills from human demonstra-
tion, IEEE Trans. Robotics Autom. 16(6), 772–781
(2000)
74.40
M. Yeasin, S. Chaudhuri: Toward automatic robot
programming: Learning human skill from visual
data, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. B 30(1), 180–
185 (2000)
74.41
J. Zhang, B. Rössler: Self-valuing learning and
generalization with application in visually guided
grasping of complex objects, Robotics Auton. Syst.
47(2/3), 117–127 (2004)
74.42
M. Frank, M. Plaue, H. Rapp, U. Koethe, B. Jaehne,
F.A. Hamprecht: Theoretical and experimen-
tal error analysis of continuous-wave time-of-
flight range cameras, Opt. Eng. 48(1), 013602
(2009)
74.43
M. Freese, S. Singh, F. Ozaki, N. Matsuhira: Virtual
robot experimentation platform v-rep: A versatile
3d robot simulator, Proc. Int. Conf. Simul. Model.
Progr. Auton. Robots (SIMPAR) (2010) pp. 51–62
74.44
S. Hak, N. Mansard, O. Ramos, L. Saab, O. Stasse:
Capture, recognition and imitation of anthro-
pomorphic motion, IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (2012) pp. 3539–3540
74.45
G. Gioioso, G. Salvietti, M. Malvezzi, D. Prat-
tichizzo: An object-based approach to map hu-
man hand synergies onto robotic hands with
dissimilar kinematics. In: Robotics - Science and
Systems VIII, ed. by N. Roy, P. Newman, S. Srini-
vasa (MIT Press, Cambridge 2012) pp. 97–105
74.46
A. Shon, K. Grochow, A. Hertzmann, R. Rao:
Learning shared latent structure for image syn-
thesis and robotic imitation, Adv. Neural Inf. Pro-
cess. Syst. (NIPS) 18, 1233–1240 (2006)
74.47
A. Ude, C.G. Atkeson, M. Riley: Programming
full-body movements for humanoid robots by
observation, Robotics Auton. Syst. 47, 93–108
(2004)
74.48
S. Kim, C. Kim, B. You, S. Oh: Stable whole-body
motion generation for humanoid robots to im-
itate human motions, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robotics Syst. (IROS) (2009)
74.49
S. Nakaoka, A. Nakazawa, F. Kanehiro, K. Kaneko,
M. Morisawa, H. Hirukawa, K. Ikeuchi: Learning
from observation paradigm: Leg task models for
enabling a biped humanoid robot to imitate hu-
man dances, Int. J. Robotics Res. 26(8), 829–844
(2007)
74.50
E.L. Sauser, B.D. Argall, G. Metta, A.G. Billard:
Iterative learning of grasp adaptation through
human corrections, Robotics Auton. Syst. 60(1),
55–71 (2012)
74.51
A. Coates, P. Abbeel, A.Y. Ng: Learning for con-
trol from multiple demonstrations, Proc. 25th Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn. (2008)
74.52
D. Grollman, O.C. Jenkins: Incremental learning of
subtasks from unsegmented demonstration, Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (2010)
74.53
L. Peternel, J. Babic: Humanoid robot posture-
control learning in real-time based on hu-
man sensorimotor learning ability, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) Karlsruhe (2013)
74.54
A. Ude: Robust estimation of human body kine-
matics from video, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) (1999) pp. 1489–1494
74.55
B. Akgun, M. Cakmak, K. Jiang, A.L. Thomaz:
Keyframe-based learning from demonstration,
Int. J. Soc. Robotics 4, 343–355 (2012)
74.56
P. Evrard, E. Gribovskaya, S. Calinon, A. Bil-
lard, A. Kheddar: Teaching physical collaborative
tasks: Object-lifting case study with a humanoid,
Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (Hu-
manoids), Paris (2009) pp. 399–404
74.57
C. Chao, M. Cakmak, A.L. Thomaz: Designing in-
teractions for robot active learners, IEEE Trans.
Auton. Mental Dev. 2(2), 108–118 (2010)
74.58
S. Calinon, A. Billard: PDA interface for humanoid
robots, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots
(Humanoids) (2003)
74.59
A. Shon, K. Grochow, R. Rao: Robotic imitation
from human motion capture using Gaussian pro-
cesses, Proc. IEEE/RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots
(Humanoids) (2005)
74.60
Y. Wu, Y. Demiris: Towards one shot learning
by imitation for humanoid robots, IEEE-RAS Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2010)
74.61
J. Nakanishi, J. Morimoto, G. Endo, G. Cheng,
S.
Schaal,
M.
Kawato:
Learning
from
demonstration and adaptation of biped lo-
comotion, Robotics Auton. Syst. 47(2/3), 79–91
(2004)
74.62
D. Lee, C. Ott: Incremental kinesthetic teaching of
motion primitives using the motion refinement
tube, Auton. Robot. 31(2), 115–131 (2011)
74.63
A. Ude: Trajectory generation from noisy posi-
tions of object features for teaching robot paths,
Robotics Auton. Syst. 11(2), 113–127 (1993)
74.64
J. Yang, Y. Xu, C.S. Chen: Human action learning
via hidden Markov model, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man
Cybern. A 27(1), 34–44 (1997)
74.65
K. Yamane, Y. Nakamura: Dynamics filter - con-
cept and implementation of online motion gen-
erator for human figures, IEEE Trans. Robotics
Autom. 19(3), 421–432 (2003)
74.66
S. Vijayakumar, S. Schaal: Locally weighted pro-
jection regression: An O(n) algorithm for incre-
mental real time learning in high dimensional
spaces, Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML) (2000)
pp. 288–293
74.67
S. Vijayakumar, A. D’souza, S. Schaal: Incremental
online learning in high dimensions, Neural Com-
put. 17(12), 2602–2634 (2005)
74.68
N. Kambhatla: Local Models and Gaussian Mixture
Models for Statistical Data Processing, PhD Thesis

Part G | 74
2012
Part G
Robots and Humans
(Oregon Graduate Institute of Science and Tech-
nology, Portland 1996)
74.69
K. Grochow, S.L. Martin, A. Hertzmann, Z. Popovic:
Style-based inverse kinematics, Proc. ACM Int.
Conf. Comput. Gr. Interact. Tech. (SIGGRAPH)
(2004) pp. 522–531
74.70
K.F. MacDorman, R. Chalodhorn, M. Asada: Peri-
odic nonlinear principal component neural net-
works for humanoid motion segmentation, gen-
eralization, and generation, Proc. Int. Conf. Pat-
tern Recogn. (ICPR) (2004) pp. 537–540
74.71
M. Mühlig, M. Gienger, J.J. Steil, C. Goerick: Auto-
matic selection of task spaces for imitation learn-
ing, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst. (IROS)
(2009) pp. 4996–5002
74.72
R. Jäkel, P. Meißner, S. Schmidt-Rohr, R. Dill-
mann:
Distributed
generalization
of
learned
planning
models
in
robot
programming
by
demonstration, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot.
Syst. (2011)
74.73
A. Gams, M. Do, A. Ude, T. Asfour, R. Dillmann: On-
line periodic movement and force-profile learn-
ing for adaptation to new surfaces, Proc. IEEE-RAS
Int. Conf. Human. Robot. (2010) pp. 560–565
74.74
P. Kormushev, S. Calinon, D. Caldwell: Imitation
learning of positional and force skills demon-
strated via kinesthetic teaching and haptic input,
Adv. Robotics 25(5), 581–603 (2011)
74.75
L. Rozo, S. Calinon, D.G. Caldwell, P. Jimenez,
C. Torras: Learning
collaborative impedance-
based robot behaviors, Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. In-
tell., Bellevue (2013) pp. 1422–1428
74.76
L. Peternel, T. Petric, E. Oztop, J. Babic: Teaching
robots to cooperate with humans in dynamic ma-
nipulation tasks based on multi-modal human-
in-the-loop approach, Auton. Robots 36(1/2),
123–136 (2014)
74.77
C. Daniel, G. Neumann, J. Peters: Learning
concurrent motor skills in versatile solution
spaces, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Intell. Syst.
(IROS’2012) (2012) pp. 3591–3597
74.78
O. Mangin, P.-Y. Oudeyer: Unsupervised learning
of simultaneous motor primitives through imita-
tion, IEEE Int. Conf. Dev. Learn. (2011)
74.79
R. Dillmann: Teaching and learning of robot tasks
via observation of human performance, Robotics
Auton. Syst. 47(2/3), 109–116 (2004)
74.80
A. Skoglund, B. Iliev, B. Kadmiry, R. Palm: Pro-
gramming by demonstration of pick-and-place
tasks for industrial manipulators using task prim-
itives, Int. Symp. Comput. Intell. Robotics Autom.
(2007)
74.81
K. Muelling, J. Kober, O. Kroemer, J. Peters: Learn-
ing to select and generalize striking movements
in robot table tennis, Int. J. Robotics Res. 32(3),
280–298 (2013)
74.82
D. Kulic, C. Ott, C. Lee, J. Ishikawa, Y. Naka-
mura: Incremental learning of full body motion
primitives and their sequencing through human
motion observation, Int. J. Robotics Res. 31(3),
330–345 (2012)
74.83
S. Niekum, G. Osentoski, A.G. Konidaris, A. Barto:
Learning and generalization of complex tasks
from unstructured demonstrations, IEEE Int. Conf.
Intell. Robotics Syst. (2012) pp. 5239–5246
74.84
P. Gaussier, S. Moga, J.P. Banquet, M. Quoy: From
perception-action loop to imitation processes:
A bottom-up approach of learning by imitation,
Appl. Artif. Intell. 7(1), 701–729 (1998)
74.85
M.N. Nicolescu, M.J. Mataric: Natural methods for
robot task learning: Instructive demonstrations,
generalization and practice, Proc. Int. Jt. Conf.
Auton. Agents Multiagent Syst. (AAMAS) (2003)
pp. 241–248
74.86
J. Tani, M. Ito: Self-organization of behavioral
primitives as multiple attractor dynamics: A robot
experiment, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. A 33(4),
481–488 (2003)
74.87
H. Friedrich, S. Muench, R. Dillmann, S. Bocionek,
M. Sassin: Robot programming by demonstration
(RPD): Supporting the induction by human inter-
action, Mach. Learn. 23(2), 163–189 (1996)
74.88
M. Pardowitz, R. Zoellner, S. Knoop, R. Dillmann:
Incremental learning of tasks from user demon-
strations, past experiences and vocal comments,
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. B 37(2), 322–332
(2007)
74.89
S. Ekvall, D. Kragic: Learning task models from
multiple human demonstrations, Proc. IEEE Int.
Symp. Robot Human Int. Commun. (RO-MAN)
(2006) pp. 358–363
74.90
J. Saunders, C.L. Nehaniv, K. Dautenhahn: Teach-
ing robots by moulding behavior and scaffolding
the environment, Proc. ACM SIGCHI/SIGART Conf.
Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) (2006) pp. 118–125
74.91
A. Alissandrakis, C.L. Nehaniv, K. Dautenhahn:
Correspondence mapping induced state and ac-
tion metrics for robotic imitation, IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybern. B 37(2), 299–307 (2007)
74.92
J. Rainer, R. Sven, S. Schmidt-Rohr, W. Rühl,
K. Alexander, X. Zhixing, R. Dillmann: Learning
of planning models for dexterous manipulation
based on human demonstrations, Int. J. Soc.
Robotics 4(4), 437–448 (2012)
74.93
S.R. Schmidt-Rohr, M. Lösch, R. Jäkel, R. Dill-
mann: Programming by demonstration of proba-
bilistic decision making on a multi-modal service
robot, Proc. 2010 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS) (2010)
74.94
C.
Breazeal,
M.
Berlin,
A.
Brooks,
J.
Gray,
A.L. Thomaz: Using perspective taking to learn
from ambiguous demonstrations, Robotics Auton.
Syst. 54, 385–393 (2006)
74.95
Y. Sato, K. Bernardin, H. Kimura, K. Ikeuchi: Task
analysis based on observing hands and objects
by vision, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
Lausanne (2002) pp. 1208–1213
74.96
R. Zoellner, M. Pardowitz, S. Knoop, R. Dillmann:
Towards cognitive robots: Building hierarchical
task representations of manipulations from hu-
man demonstration, Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA) Barcelona (2005)

Learning from Humans
References
2013
Part G | 74
74.97
M. Pardowitz, R. Zöllner, R. Dillmann: Incremental
learning of task sequences with information-
theoretic metrics, Proc. Eur. Robotics Symp. (EU-
ROS06) (2005)
74.98
M. Pardowitz, R. Zöllner, R. Dillmann: Learning
sequential constraints of tasks from user demon-
strations, Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid
Robots (HUMANOIDS05) (2005) pp. 424–429
74.99
S. Calinon, P. Kormushev, D.G. Caldwell: Com-
pliant skills acquisition and multi-optima policy
search with EM-based reinforcement learning,
Robotics Auton. Syst. 61(4), 369–379 (2013)
74.100
C.G. Atkeson, A.W. Moore, S. Schaal: Locally
weighted learning for control, Artif. Intell. Rev.
11(1–5), 75–113 (1997)
74.101
J. Peters, S. Vijayakumar, S. Schaal: Reinforcement
learning for humanoid robotics, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Humanoid Robots (Humanoids) (2003)
74.102
T. Yoshikai, N. Otake, I. Mizuuchi, M. Inaba, H. In-
oue: Development of an imitation behavior in
humanoid kenta with reinforcement learning al-
gorithm based on the attention during imitation,
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS)
(2004) pp. 1192–1197
74.103
D.C. Bentivegna, C.G. Atkeson, G. Cheng: Learn-
ing tasks from observation and practice, Robotics
Auton. Syst. 47(2/3), 163–169 (2004)
74.104
P. Kormushev, S. Calinon, R. Saegusa, G. Metta:
Learning the skill of archery by a humanoid
robot iCub, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Human. Robots
Nashville (2010)
74.105
P. Pastor, M. Kalakrishnan, S. Chitta, E. Theodorou,
S. Schaal: Skill learning and task outcome pre-
diction for manipulation, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (2011)
74.106
J. Kober, J. Peters: Policy search for motor prim-
itives in robotics, Mach. Learn. 84(1/2), 171–203
(2011)
74.107
P. Kormushev, S. Calinon, D.G. Caldwell: Robot
motor skill coordination with EM-based rein-
forcement learning, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS) Taipei (2010) pp. 3232–3237
74.108
N. Jetchev, M. Toussaint: Fast motion planning
from experience: Trajectory prediction for speed-
ing up movement generation, Auton. Robots
34(1/2), 111–127 (2013)
74.109
F. Guenter, M. Hersch, S. Calinon, A. Billard: Re-
inforcement learning for imitating constrained
reaching movements, RSJ Adv. Robotics 21(13),
1521–1544 (2007)
74.110
B.D. Ziebart, A. Mass, A. Bagnell, A.K. Dey: Max-
imum entropy inverse reinforcement learning,
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (2008)
74.111
P. Abbeel, A. Coates, A. Ng: Autonomous heli-
copter aerobatics through apprenticeship learn-
ing, Int. J. Robotics Res. 29(13), 1608–1639 (2010)
74.112
S. Ross, G. Gordon, J.A. Bagnell: A reduction of
imitation learning and structured prediction to
no-regret online learning, Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Ar-
tif. Intell. Stat. (AISTATS11) (2011)
74.113
Y.K. Hwang, K.J. Choi, D.S. Hong: Self-learning
control of cooperative motion for a humanoid
robot, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA)
(2006) pp. 475–480
74.114
B. Jansen, T. Belpaeme: A computational model
of intention reading in imitation, Robotics Auton.
Syst. 54(5), 394–402 (2006)
74.115
A. Billard, K. Dautenhahn: Grounding communi-
cation in autonomous robots: An experimental
study, Robotics Auton. Syst. 24(1/2), 71–81 (1998)
74.116
P. Abbeel, A. Ng: Apprenticeship learning via in-
verse reinforcement learning, Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn. (2004)
74.117
N. Ratliff, A.J. Bagnell, M. Zinkevich: Maximum
margin planning, Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (2006)
74.118
A. Billard, S. Calinon, F. Guenter: Discriminative
and adaptive imitation in uni-manual and bi-
manual tasks, Robotics Auton. Syst. 54, 370–384
(2006)
74.119
J. Choi, K. Kim: Nonparametric Bayesian inverse
reinforcement learning for multiple reward func-
tions, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 25, 305–313
(2012)
74.120
A.K. Tanwani, A. Billard: Transfer in inverse
reinforcement learning for multiple strategies,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (2013)
74.121
D.H. Grollman, A. Billard: Donut as i do: Learn-
ing from failed demonstrations, IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (2011)
74.122
A. Rai, G. de Chambrier, A. Billard: Learning
from failed demonstrations in unreliable systems,
IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (2013)
74.123
M. Goodrich, A. Schultz: Human-robot interac-
tion: A survey, Found. Trend. Human-Comput.
Int. 1(3), 203–275 (2007)
74.124
T. Fong, I. Nourbakhsh, K. Dautenhahn: A survey
of socially interactive robots, Robotics Auton. Syst.
42(3/4), 143–166 (2003)
74.125
C. Breazeal, B. Scassellati: Robots that imitate hu-
mans, Trends Cogn. Sci. 6(11), 481–487 (2002)
74.126
B. Scassellati: Imitation and mechanisms of joint
attention: A developmental structure for build-
ing social skills on a humanoid robot, Lect. Notes
Comput. Sci. 1562, 176–195 (1999)
74.127
H. Kozima, H. Yano: A robot that learns to com-
municate with human caregivers, Int. Workshop
Epigenet. Robotics (2001)
74.128
H. Ishiguro, T. Ono, M. Imai, T. Kanda: De-
velopment of an interactive humanoid robot
Robovie – An interdisciplinary approach, Springer
Tracts Adv. Robotics 6, 179–192 (2003)
74.129
K. Nickel, R. Stiefelhagen: Pointing gesture recog-
nition based on 3d-tracking of face, hands and
head orientation, Int. Conf. Multimodal Interfaces
(ICMI) (2003) pp. 140–146
74.130
M. Ito, J. Tani: Joint attention between a hu-
manoid robot and users in imitation game, Int.
Conf. Dev. Learn. (ICDL) (2004)
74.131
V.V. Hafner, F. Kaplan: Learning to interpret point-
ing gestures: Experiments with four-legged au-
tonomous robots, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 3575,
225–234 (2005)
74.132
C. Breazeal, D. Buchsbaum, J. Gray, D. Gatenby,
B. Blumberg: Learning from and about others:

Part G | 74
2014
Part G
Robots and Humans
Towards using imitation to bootstrap the so-
cial understanding of others by robots, Artif. Life
11(1/2), 31–62 (2005)
74.133
P.F. Dominey, M. Alvarez, B. Gao, M. Jeam-
brun, A. Cheylus, A. Weitzenfeld, A. Martinez,
A. Medrano: Robot command, interrogation and
teaching via social interaction, Proc. IEEE-RAS
Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (Humanoids) (2005)
pp. 475–480
74.134
A.L. Thomaz, M. Berlin, C. Breazeal: Robot sci-
ence meets social science: An embodied com-
putational model of social referencing, Workshop
Toward Soc. Mech. Android Sci. (CogSci) (2005)
pp. 7–17
74.135
C. Breazeal, L. Aryananda: Recognition of affective
communicative intent in robot-directed speech,
Auton. Robots 12(1), 83–104 (2002)
74.136
S. Calinon, A. Billard: Teaching a humanoid robot
to recognize and reproduce social cues, Proc. IEEE
Int. Symp. Robot Human Int. Commun. (RO-MAN)
(2006) pp. 346–351
74.137
Y.
Yoshikawa,
K.
Shinozawa,
H.
Ishiguro,
N.
Hagita,
T.
Miyamoto:
Responsive
robot
gaze to interaction partner, Proc. Robotics Sci.
Syst. (RSS) Philadelphia (2006)
74.138
S. Calinon, A. Billard: What is the teacher’s role in
robot programming by demonstration? - Toward
benchmarks for improved learning, Int. Stud.
Spec. Issue Psychol, Benchmarks Human-Robot
Int. 8(3), 441–464 (2007)
74.139
S. Chernova, M. Veloso: Interactive policy learn-
ing through confidence-based autonomy, J. Artif.
Intell. Res. 34, 1–25 (2009)
74.140
B.D. Argall, E.L. Sauser: Tactile guidance for pol-
icy adaptation, Found. Trend. Robotics 1(2), 79–133
(2010)
74.141
S. Calinon, A. Billard: Active teaching in robot pro-
gramming by demonstration, Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Robot Human Int. Commun. (RO-MAN), Jeju (2007)
pp. 702–707
74.142
D. Silver, A. Bagnell, A. Stentz: Active learn-
ing from demonstration for robust autonomous
navigation, IEEE Conf. Robot. Autom. ICRA’12
(2012)
74.143
M. Riley, A. Ude, C. Atkeson, G. Cheng: Coach-
ing: An approach to efficiently and intuitively
create humanoid robot behaviors, Proc. IEEE-RAS
Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots (Humanoids) (2006)
pp. 567–574
74.144
H. Bekkering, A. Wohlschlaeger, M. Gattis: Imita-
tion of gestures in children is goal-directed, Q.
J. Exp. Psychol. 53A(1), 153–164 (2000)
74.145
M. Nicolescu, M.J. Mataric: Task learning through
imitation
and
human-robot
interaction.
In:
Models and Mechanisms of Imitation and Social
Learning in Robots, Humans and Animals, (MIT
Press, Cambridge 2006) pp. 407–424
74.146
J. Demiris, G. Hayes: Imitative learning mecha-
nisms in robots and humans, 5th Eur. Workshop
Learn. Robots, ed. by V. Klingspor (1996) pp. 9–16
74.147
J. Aleotti, S. Caselli: Robust trajectory learning
and approximation for robot programming by
demonstration, Robotics Auton. Syst. 54(5), 409–
413 (2006)
74.148
M. Ogino, H. Toichi, Y. Yoshikawa, M. Asada: Inter-
action rule learning with a human partner based
on an imitation faculty with a simple visuo-
motor mapping, Robotics Auton. Syst. 54, 414–418
(2006)
74.149
A. Billard, M. Matarić: Learning human arm
movements by imitation: Evaluation of a bio-
logically-inspired
connectionist
architecture,
Robotics Auton. Syst. 941, 1–16 (2001)
74.150
A.J. Ijspeert, J. Nakanishi, S. Schaal: Movement
imitation with nonlinear dynamical systems in
humanoid robots, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom.
(ICRA2002) (2002) pp. 1398–1403
74.151
R.H. Cuijpers, H.T. van Schie, M. Koppen, W. Erl-
hagen, H. Bekkering: Goals and means in action
observation: A computational approach, Neural
Netw. 19(3), 311–322 (2006)
74.152
M.W. Hoffman, D.B. Grimes, A.P. Shon, R.P.N. Rao:
A probabilistic model of gaze imitation and
shared attention, Neural Netw. 19(3), 299–310
(2006)
74.153
A. Billard: Drama, a connectionist architecture
for on-line learning and control of autonomous
robots: Experiments on learning of a synthetic
proto-language with a doll robot, Ind. Robot
26(1), 59–66 (1999)
74.154
P. Gaussier, S. Moga, J.P. Banquet, J. Nadel: Learn-
ing and communication via imitation: An au-
tonomous robot perspective systems, IEEE Trans.
Man Cybern. A 31(5), 431–442 (2001)

Multimedia Contents Biologically
2015
Part G | 75
75. Biologically Inspired Robotics
Fumiya Iida, Auke Jan Ijspeert
Throughout the history of robotics research, nature
has been providing numerous ideas and inspi-
rations to robotics engineers. Small insect-like
robots, for example, usually make use of reflexive
behaviors to avoid obstacles during locomotion,
whereas large bipedal robots are designed to
control complex human-like leg for climbing up
and down stairs. While providing an overview of
bio-inspired robotics, this chapter particularly fo-
cus on research which aims to employ robotics
systems and technologies for our deeper un-
derstanding of biological systems. Unlike most
of the other robotics research where researchers
attempt to develop robotic applications, these
types of bio-inspired robots are generally devel-
oped to test unsolved hypotheses in biological
sciences. Through close collaborations between
biologists and roboticists, bio-inspired robotics
research contributes not only to elucidating chal-
lenging questions in nature but also to developing
novel technologies for robotics applications. In
this chapter, we first provide a brief histori-
cal background of this research area and then
an overview of ongoing research methodologies.
A few representative case studies will detail the
successful instances in which robotics technolo-
gies help identifying biological hypotheses. And
finally we discuss challenges and perspectives in
the field.
Biologically inspired robotics (or bio-inspired
robotics in short) is a very broad research area
because almost all robotic systems are, in one
way or the other, inspired from biological systems.
Therefore, there is no clear distinction between
bio-inspired robots and the others, and there is no
commonly agreed definition [75.1]. For example,
legged robots that walk, hop, and run are usually
regarded as bio-inspired robots because many
75.1
General Background ............................ 2016
75.1.1
Brief History
and Conceptual Background....... 2016
75.2 Methodology ....................................... 2017
75.2.1
Similarities and Differences
in Robotics and Biology ............. 2017
75.2.2
Modeling Biological Systems....... 2018
75.2.3
Research Methods and Tools....... 2020
75.3 Case Studies ........................................ 2021
75.3.1
Bio-Inspired
Legged Locomotion.................... 2021
75.3.2
Reflexes and Central Pattern
Generators................................ 2023
75.3.3
Bio-Inspired Navigation............. 2024
75.4 Landscape of Bio-Inspired Robotics
Research and Challenges...................... 2026
75.4.1
Bio-Inspired Climbing ............... 2026
75.4.2
Flapping Flight
and Swimming Mechanisms....... 2027
75.4.3 Artificial Hands, Haptics,
and Whiskers ............................ 2027
75.4.4 Self-Reconfigurable
and Evolutionary Robotics.......... 2028
75.4.5 Bio-Inspired Soft Robots............ 2028
75.4.6 Neuroprosthetics and Social
Interactions .............................. 2028
75.5 Conclusion........................................... 2028
Video-References......................................... 2028
References................................................... 2029
biological systems rely on legged locomotion for
their survival. On the other hand, many robotics
researchers implement biological models of motion
control and navigation onto wheeled platforms,
which could also be regarded as bio-inspired
robots [75.2].

Part G | 75.1
2016
Part G
Robots and Humans
75.1 General Background
The broad spectrum of bio-inspired robotics research
is reﬂected to a variety of synonyms used in different
scientiﬁc communities. For example, biomimetics and
bionics are usually used to represent the types of re-
search in which researchers observe biological systems
and extract design principles for robotic applications.
The terms bio-robotics and bio-engineering are also
used interchangeably to biomimetics and bionics, but
they often refer to engineered solutions speciﬁcally
for biomedical applications. Another approach, usu-
ally classiﬁed as artiﬁcial life, biological cybernetics,
or biophysics, investigates biological systems by using
synthetic approaches. Here biological systems are typ-
ically viewed as mechanical and chemical entities and
characterized by mechanistic models that are often very
similar to the bio-inspired robots. The deﬁnitions and
types of research studies conducted in these research
areas are often overlapping, and many research projects
provide results across the different areas.
While some of these research areas are also cov-
ered in the other chapters of this handbook, one of
the most prominent, and more importantly useful, as-
pects of bio-inspired robotics lies in the contributions
of robotics research for biological sciences. In contrast
to the other robotics research, a signiﬁcant number of
bio-inspired robots were developed for the purpose of
testing hypotheses concerning biological systems and
for identifying the underlying mechanisms of biological
systems that are very difﬁcult to be clariﬁed otherwise.
In this chapter, we speciﬁcally focus on this aspect of
bio-inspired robotics.
75.1.1 Brief History
and Conceptual Background
There is a long history of the engineers’ desire to repli-
cating biological systems into artiﬁcial ones, includ-
ing the famous examples of Japanese Karakuri dolls
and Swiss automata several centuries ago (Fig. 75.1).
Similarly, scientiﬁc efforts to use robotic systems to
understand biological systems have also a relatively
long history, which goes back even before the modern
robotics started. One of the most inﬂuential examples in
the earlier ages can be represented by the works in the
ﬁeld of cybernetics in which a number of system theo-
ries such as the concepts of feedback and feedforward
were applied to understand phenomena in biological
systems [75.3, 4].
The rise of neuroscience in the mid-twentieth cen-
tury inﬂuenced bio-inspired robotics research signiﬁ-
cantly. In the 1950s, one of the ﬁrst bio-inspired robots,
Tortoises, was built by Grey Walter, a neurophysi-
ologist. The work was mainly driven by biological
questions, such as how a simple neuron connectiv-
ity can result in richness of sensory-motor behaviors,
and a turtle-like robot consisting of analog electronics,
sensors, and electric motors demonstrated reﬂexive be-
haviors as well as basic motor learning in autonomous
robots [75.5]. Another physiologist, Valentino Brait-
enberg, also explored the power of understanding by
building approach, which led to the famous thought
experiments of Braitenberg Vehicles, i. e., a series of
imaginary mobile robots that are still often used to teach
the relationship between neural connectivity and sen-
sory-motor behaviors [75.6].
The invention of digital computers was also an-
other historical milestone in bio-inspired robotics. The
pioneers of digital computers such as John von Neu-
mann and Alan Turing provided signiﬁcant inﬂuences
in the biological studies through their seminal works
on self-replication and self-organization [75.7, 8], and
the subsequent foundation of the ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence in the 1950s was driven based on the un-
derstanding of human intelligence especially from the
computational standpoint [75.9].
While the power of digital computers dominated
bio-inspired robotics for a while, the study of insect-like
reﬂexive behaviors became popular again in the 1980s
with the emergence of behavior-based robotics. The
intensive studies of this approach shed light on the mas-
sively parallel nature of motion control processes, and
demonstrated behaviors that cannot be fully explained
by the conventional sense-think-act style control ap-
proach [75.10, 11]. One of the main contributions of
this line of studies lies in the fact that the diversity and
ﬂexibility of control architecture is essential in adaptive
behaviors in real-world systems, and the complexity of
behaviors is not necessarily originated in the complex-
ity of controller but in physical system–environment
interactions [75.12].
Since then the research on physical system–environ-
ment interactions has been very popular in the interdis-
ciplinary community of embodied cognitive science and
artiﬁcial intelligence in which roboticists, biologists,
computer scientists, and physicists work together to look
into further details of underlying mechanisms of adap-
tivity in biological systems. Here the body as a physical
entity is not only considered as a necessary container
of intelligent adaptive behaviors but it also plays a cen-
tral role that induces self-organization of patterns and
structures in adaptive intelligent behaviors [75.13–15].
In this context, robotics methodologiesand technologies
are used to investigate hypotheses about the roles of em-
bodiment that cannot be easily tested in animals.

Biologically Inspired Robotics
75.2 Methodology
2017
Part G | 75.2
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
Fig.75.1a–e Examples of bio-inspired robots in the history. (a) Japanese Karakuri doll, (b) Swiss Automaton, (c) Grey
Walter’s Tortoises Robot (after [75.5]), (d) Braitenberg Vehicle (after [75.6]), and (e) a cleaning robot Roomba as an
example of behavior-based robotics application
75.2 Methodology
In order to provide contributions to both robotics and bi-
ological sciences, bio-inspired robotics research usually
follows a series of unique research processes which are
not necessarily common to the other areas of robotics.
This section ﬁrst explains similarities and differences in
robotics and biology research, and then introduces a set
of important concepts, methodology, and research tools
often used in the bio-inspired robotics.
75.2.1 Similarities and Differences
in Robotics and Biology
Both robotics and biological research aim to obtain
the basic understanding about autonomous and adap-
tive behaviors of complex systems, thus the scientiﬁc
methodologies of these ﬁelds are usually very simi-
lar. For example, biologists usually start with ﬁnding
an interesting problem in animals, that can be compa-
rable to roboticists building robot prototypes of their
interests as the ﬁrst step of research. Second, the an-
imals are carefully observed such that the underlying
mechanisms can be efﬁciently and effectively analyzed,
a step which roboticists also follow in the case of their
robots. And ﬁnally, both biologists and roboticists de-
velop hypothetical models to explain the mechanisms
of their interests and test them through additional ex-
periments and analyses. Here the modeling processes
are also similar in both robotics and biology in a sense
that they typically employ similar scientiﬁc methods,
such as dynamics modeling tools, computational opti-
mization techniques, and the other analysis methods of
system engineering, for example.
There are, however, a number of fundamental dif-
ferences in biological and robotics research, which are
mostly originated in the fact that biological systems are
constructed by considerably different design principles
in nature. Although it is very difﬁcult to cover all dif-
ferences, the following aspects of biological systems
characterize some of the major discrepancies from to-
day’s robotic systems.
Multipurpose Systems in Unstructured
and Uncertain Environment
In contrast to most of the robotic systems that are de-
signed to perform one type of task in a well-deﬁned
environment, all biological systems are intrinsically
multipurpose systems that are designed for many tasks
in undeﬁned and uncertain environments. For exam-
ple, animals need to process tasks such as regulating
metabolism for self-sufﬁciency, protecting themselves
from predators, mating, and reproducing. It is important
for roboticists to know that (i) animals are not opti-
mized for one of these tasks, but they are designed to
conduct all of them, and (ii) they do so in a way that is
not optimal in any sense, but just good enough to sur-
vive and reproduce. Therefore, it is often not a good
idea to blindly copy a part of animals’ designs and
mechanisms into robotic systems because there could
be an alternative optimal solution if the system has to
do a single task in a well-deﬁned environment. Robotics
researchers are, however, able to learn many principles
and mechanisms from biological systems, if they are in-
terested in the systems that need to deal with many tasks
in unstructured and uncertain environments.
Massively Parallel, Modular,
and Redundant Structures
Biological systems are composed of highly redundant
structures in their bodies [75.13]. For example, most of
multicellular organisms have massively parallel mus-
cle ﬁbers constituting a muscle group, a skeletal joint
controlled through multiple muscle groups, millions of
nerve cells conducting parallel signal processing, and
countless receptors sensing changes in the environment.
If compared to our robotic systems today, biological
systems have orders of magnitude larger numbers of

Part G | 75.2
2018
Part G
Robots and Humans
such sensory, actuation, and computational units that
have to be carefully considered in bio-inspired robotics
research. In addition, the processes necessary for auton-
omy and adaptivity are generally highly decentralized
in biological systems. The control of animals’ arms
and legs, for example, involves mechanical interactions
of musculoskeletal structures, reﬂexive sensory-motor
pathways in spinal cord, and more complex motion
control and planning in the higher centers of nervous
systems, which are running in parallel. The redundant
structures of biological systems also provide an impor-
tant discrepancy between animals and today’s robots:
most of the subsystems in a living organisms have great
autonomy and adaptivity by themselves, as exempliﬁed
by the fact that individual cells in skins and bones as
well as receptors and muscles have their own regulation
mechanisms as metabolism and growth.
Self-Organization and Dynamic Changes
of Entire Organisms
Another important discrepancy between animals and
today’s robots lies in the fact that there is no human
designers behind animals, and all components in an or-
ganism have to be designed, assembled and repaired by
itself. Consequently, every individual animal has to start
its life smaller and gradually grow larger over time;
every part of their bodies is continuously changing;
sensory-motor control has to be continuously updated
to reﬂect the changes in the bodies. It is particularly im-
portant for robotics researchers to consider that there
are different timescales in these dynamic processes in
biological systems (Fig. 75.2 [75.16]). Some of the dif-
ferent timescales can be represented by the continuous
changes of body plans at the evolutionary processes, the
changes of body sizes and muscle strength through on-
togenetic timescale, and update of sensory-motor loops
in here and now timescale.
75.2.2 Modeling Biological Systems
Modeling plays an essential role in biological sciences.
Biological models are the representation of knowl-
edge which is not only used to communicate scientiﬁc
discoveries among researchers but also structuring re-
search areas by labeling knowns and unknowns. To
make research activities efﬁcient and effective, there are
many different ways to model biological systems such
as descriptive/illustrative explanations, mathematical,
physical, or chemical representations. From this per-
spective, the researchers in bio-inspired robotics have
been exploring whether robotic platforms can be used
as a scientiﬁc tool to develop models of biological
systems, which leads to an alternative approach to elu-
cidating biological hypotheses (Fig. 75.3). Robots are
Patterned
neural activity
Neural
connectivity
Neural
growth
Intracellular
biochemistry
Protein
synthesis
Physical
influences
Genetic
activity
Non-neural
structures
Non-neural
growth
Extracellular
biochemistry
Cell membrane
Sensory
stimu-
lation
Individual
nerve cell
activity
Behavior
Fig. 75.2 Elements and their interactions that inﬂuence be-
haviors in biological systems. The model includes both
neural and non-neural elements such as hormones (which
constitute part of the extracellular biochemistry), bones,
muscles, sensors, and their ontogenetic processes (af-
ter [75.16])
useful because they are physical entities as compared to
simulated ones. First of all, by building models that can
be implemented in a physical system, the process en-
sures whether the model in question is physically mean-
ingful or not. In contrast, computationally simulated
models always involve many approximations and sim-
pliﬁcations which might affect the realism and therefore
usefulness of the model (e.g., correctly modeling the
hydrodynamics of a swimming ﬁsh is very hard in
a simulation while it comes for free in a ﬁsh robot). Sec-
ond, building robots directly contributes to the develop-
ment of unconventional technological components.
Having said that, the use of robots as a scientiﬁc
tool for biology is challenging because of the con-
siderable discrepancies between animals and robots
as explained in the previous subsection. A superﬁcial
copy of biological systems into a robotic counterpart
is not a good idea because robots usually functions
based on a completely different set of mechanisms,
and the developed robot would most likely not explain
much about the underlying mechanisms of biological

Biologically Inspired Robotics
75.2 Methodology
2019
Part G | 75.2
Observation
Modeling
Analysis
Experiment
Bio-inspiration
biological models
Synthetic methodology
robots as scientific tools
Biological
understanding
Biology
Design
Modeling
Analysis
Control
Experiment
Robotics
applications
Robotics
Fig. 75.3 Overview of bio-inspired robotics. Both biology
and robotics follow similar research methods and inter-
act to each other through models and tools, while they
contribute to different objectives, i. e., understanding of bi-
ological systems or development of robotic applications
systems. Instead, it is particularly important to carefully
examine what biological hypothesis we are interested
in and we are testing by building robotic platforms. As
an extreme example, if one is interested in understand-
ing navigation mechanisms of animals, it is usually
better to start with wheeled robot platforms than legged
or ﬂying ones, because the latter platforms would
introduce unnecessary complexity in the research to
examine a given hypothesis.
It is, however, not a trivial problem to ﬁnd good
biological hypotheses that can be applied in the bio-
inspired robotics research. Biological systems are gen-
erally very complex, and hypotheses are not clearly
separable from one question to another. Behaviors of
animals are, for example, a result from neuronal activi-
Spring loaded inverted
pendulum (SLIP) model
Lateral leg spring
(LLS) model
Simple
general
prescriptive
Templates
Elaborate
representative
Anchors
Complex
redundant
Organism
Fig. 75.4 Modeling hierarchy ex-
empliﬁed by the legged locomotion
models. Animals can be abstracted
into more elaborate and representative
models (anchors) and/or simpler and
more general models (templates)
(after [75.17])
ties of short and long terms, musculoskeletal dynamics,
genetic and social interactions, and the mechanisms
could also signiﬁcantly vary in different individuals or
species.
In order to deal with such a complexity in na-
ture, Full and Koditchek have proposed an insightful
methodology [75.17]. As shown in Fig. 75.4, they pro-
posed a two-level modeling process which could beneﬁt
bio-inspired robotics research greatly: in the ﬁrst level,
a model should be simpliﬁed as much as possible such
that it can be generalized over many species or in a large
scale without being bothered too much by the details
of complex animal structures. These models are called
templates. A good example of this kind is the so-called
spring-mass model that characterizes running behav-
iors of many different types of legged animals, even
though it is an extremely simple model consisting of
a point mass and a linear spring only. This approach
enables researchers to examine the basic principles in
nature, and despite its simplicity, the model can explain
behavioral characteristics in a wide variety of animals
even without considering detailed anatomical discrep-
ancies between species. In the second level of modeling
processes, templates should be enhanced by more de-
tails, which are called anchors. The investigations of the
anchors are generally intended for more speciﬁc ques-
tions by adding redundancies of muscles or limbs or
implementing more complex neuromuscular circuitry,
for example. Through the template–anchor research ap-
proach, a research area can be effectively structured,
and, for bio-inspired robotics research in particular,
the simpliﬁed models can beneﬁt robotics engineers to
replicate behaviors of biological systems in a concep-
tual level.
Independently from the simplicity, it is also im-
portant to consider the purposes of models which

Part G | 75.2
2020
Part G
Robots and Humans
Very
approximate
Vague
similarity
´As it could
be´ model
Applies to
many sytems
Population
model
Realism
level
Behavioral
match
Accuracy
Relevance
Generality
Detail
Medium
Symbolic
model
Abstract
model
Identity
Fig. 75.5 Dimensions for describing models (after [75.18])
also inﬂuence how to structure bio-inspired robotics
projects. After all, there is no correct model, but there
are good or bad models with respect to the goal and
hypothesis that are investigated. Webb has, for exam-
ple, pointed out that there are seven major criteria
with which we could evaluate models of bio-inspired
robotics (Fig. 75.5 [75.18]):
1. Relevance to biology: as not all robotics research
contributes to biological studies, it is important to
clarify the degree to which a target robotic system
and model are relevant.
2. Level: what are the base units of the model, and on
what level of hierarchy in biological systems does
the model attempt to represent?
3. Generality: a model could be developed for eluci-
dating a mechanism of a speciﬁc system of interest,
or for a more general mechanism that can be applied
to many others. Therefore, the generality criterion
considers how many systems the model intends to
represent?
4. Abstraction: this criterion concerns the number and
complexity of mechanisms included in the model.
5. Structural accuracy: there are many ways of rep-
resenting systems but a question is the degree to
which the model explains the internal mechanism
of the target systems. In an extreme case, a model
can behave the same at the level of input/output re-
lationship, but it does not necessarily mean that the
internal mechanism is the same.
6. Behavioral match: to what extent does the model
behave like the target animal?
7. Medium of model: what is the model built from?
A model can be made of mechanical, electrical,
hydraulic, etc. or alternatively iconic, analog, sym-
bolic, for example. Properly identifying these ques-
tions and the purpose of a robot is important. In-
deed, there is a risk in bio-inspired robotics that
a project is not useful to biology (i. e., it does
not properly address a scientiﬁc question) nor to
robotics (i. e., it does not perform better than a more
conventional robot).
75.2.3 Research Methods and Tools
As it might have been already noticed, robotics tech-
nologies are used for many different purposes in the
context of bio-inspired robotics. Robots are often used
to explore new research areas and questions; many
platforms were built and examined for the purpose
of testing biological hypotheses; some of the other
platforms were developed speciﬁcally for application
discovery based on the identiﬁed principles in biolog-
ical studies; and more recently, robotics technologies
were interfaced with or integrated into biological sys-
tems to understand or enhance animals capabilities.
Even though there are many successful contribu-
tions of robotics technologies to biological studies, it is
often not trivial to identify what are the good methods
and tools for the given speciﬁc hypothesis or prob-
lems. In particular, one of the most critical questions
is probably whether it is necessary to build a phys-
ical robotic platform or it is sufﬁcient to investigate
pseudo-robots in simulation. Building physical robots
is usually very costly and requires signiﬁcant amount
of additional knowledge and know how; thus there are
many case studies of bio-inspired robotics research con-
ducted only in simulation in the past [75.19, 20]. This
type of research generally makes use of physics mod-
els or physically realistic simulation environments that
allow us to explore fairly complex artiﬁcial creatures.
This approach is useful to explore a large parame-
ter space which cannot be optimized in the real-world
platforms. Also, the use of virtual creatures in the bio-
inspired robotics research is also extremely important
to investigate concepts and hypotheses that are not pos-
sible to test technologically such as robots with point
masses, frictionless joints, self-replication, and robotic
hardware evolution that cannot be possible with our to-
day’s technologies.
However, building physical robots is a must in some
cases. For example, there are often target concepts or
hypotheses involved in physical processes that are dif-
ﬁcult to theoretically model, such as friction, impacts,
thermodynamics, and hydro/aerodynamics. In addition,
there has been an increasing interest in complex robotic
systems that contain a considerable number of physical
elements such as joints and actuators, simulation mod-
els of which tend to be vulnerable against accumulated
errors. Another aspect of robots used as a scientiﬁc tool
is to explore hypotheses that cannot be tested in nature.
This approach is often called synthetic methodology (an
understanding-by-building approach [75.13]), meaning

Biologically Inspired Robotics
75.3 Case Studies
2021
Part G | 75.3
that, by building and using artiﬁcial systems, we test bi-
ological principles that cannot be tested in conventional
biological methods. The most representative example
is the Braitenberg Vehicles, which we introduced in
Sect. 75.1.1. Every vehicle has a set of oversimpliﬁed
neural connections of an animal which does not exist in
nature, but these creatures can explain important princi-
ples in biological systems. A similar approach was also
extended to the studies of life as it could be [75.21,
22], in which, by creating biological phenomena in
simulation or robots, a broader and more universal
understanding of living systems. This methodology is
particularly effective in the studies related to evolution-
ary biology, in which veriﬁcations of hypotheses are
usually very challenging ([75.20, 23]; see also the chap-
ter of evolutionary robotics).
75.3 Case Studies
This section introduces three research areas that have
been particularly active in bio-inspired robotics in the
last few decades. Here we highlight the case studies in
which robotics researches contributed to our further un-
derstanding of biological systems, and we illustrate how
the concepts and methods we introduced in the previous
sections were applied to these studies.
75.3.1 Bio-Inspired Legged Locomotion
Legged locomotion has been one of the most popular
research topics in bio-inspired robotics for a long time
because it characterizes the salient differences between
biological and artiﬁcial systems. Although legged lo-
comotion is seemingly easy, useful, and efﬁcient for
biological systems to move around in complex en-
vironments, it is surprisingly difﬁcult to understand
the underlying mechanisms hence challenging to im-
plement into robotic systems. The legged locomo-
tion research has a relatively long history that goes
back to the foundation of biomechanics in the sev-
enteenth century [75.24], and it became particularly
popular when the modern robotics was established in
the 1970s [75.25, 26]. One of the main reasons that
many robotics researchers were attracted by the issue
of legged locomotion lies in the fact that it covers
many of the discrepancies between biological and arti-
ﬁcial systems that we discussed in Sect. 75.2.1. More
speciﬁcally, legged systems have to carry out many
different tasks in unstructured environments such as es-
tablishing sturdy footholds, avoiding obstacles, dealing
with variations of payload and velocities, and chang-
ing gait patterns, for example; Legged systems have
to deal with massive parallel processes which are re-
quired for coordinating many joints and muscles, as
well as local reﬂexes and high-level decision and plan-
ning; And adaptivity is essential for legged systems
because they need to maintain mobility in different en-
vironments as well as under signiﬁcant changes of its
body plan over growth processes, for example. While
there are countless case studies in the past, this subsec-
tion focuses on the four key challenges of bio-inspired
legged locomotion, i. e., stability, gait, energetics, and
actuation, because they have been recognized as the
long-standing challenges in bio-inspired legged loco-
motion. More comprehensive robotics research can be
found in the section of legged locomotion.
Stability and Gait in Legged Locomotion
One of the main challenges in the study of legged
locomotion is to uncover the mechanisms of motion sta-
bilization against disturbances [75.27]. Biological sys-
tems usually make use of a variety of mechanisms in-
cluding mechanical self-stabilization [75.28, 29], spinal
reﬂexes [75.30, 31], central pattern generators [75.32],
or sensory-motor control originated in the higher center
of nervous system [75.33]. Because of the complex-
ity of stabilization mechanisms in animals, bio-inspired
robotics played an important role to systematically in-
vestigate the issues of stabilization through modeling of
locomotion dynamics and reproducing the behaviors in
legged robots of various kinds in the past.
Among others, bipedal walking was one of the most
intensively studied topic areas which nicely illustrates
how a synthetic approach could structure a research area
of a complex biological problem. The backbone of this
research area is the so-called inverted pendulum walking
model which was originally investigated in biomechan-
ics, and later used in the bio-inspired robotics research.
The model considers the simplest physics representation
of walking dynamics, i. e., a point mass is attached on
a massless link, and simulates walking dynamics as the
mass vaulting over the link [75.24]. This model can be,
for example, physically implemented by the so-called
rimless wheel that is the simplest robotic representa-
tion of the model (Fig. 75.6a; [75.34, 43]), and then,
a slightly more complex conﬁguration, the compass gait
model, was proposed (Fig. 75.6b, [75.44];
VIDEO 111
shows an experiment of a compass gait bipedal robot
locomotion on rough terrains). In contrast to the rim-
less wheel model that considers only stance leg dynam-
ics during walking, the compass gait model has three
masses with a passive hip joint, which allow us to in-
vestigate swing leg dynamics in addition to the stance

Part G | 75.3
2022
Part G
Robots and Humans
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
h)
g)
Fig.75.6a–h Examples of bio-inspired legged robots. (a) A physical implementation of rimless wheel walking model
(after [75.34]), (b) A physical implementation of compass gait walking model (after [75.35, 36]), (c) passivity based
bipedal walking robot (after [75.37]), (d) passive dynamic runner (after [75.38]), (e) energy efﬁcient hopping robot
(after [75.39]), (f) bipedal walking and running robot based on biarticlar springs (after [75.40]), (g) biped robot based on
variable stiffness actuators (after [75.41]), and (h) hexapod robot based on spring mass dynamics (after [75.42])
leg [75.45]. An important implication of this line of re-
search lies in the fact that, because of the simple formu-
lations of complex dynamics, researchers were able to
systematically investigate different aspects of the com-
plex behaviors while keeping an overarching structure
of research issues. These simple models were, for exam-
ple, gradually and systematically enhance by integrating
knee and ankle joints (Fig. 75.6c; [75.37, 43]), foot seg-
ments with variations of shapes, inﬂuences of mass dis-
tributions [75.46], inﬂuence of lateral motions, as well
as a variety of advanced motion control architectures to
demonstrate actuated locomotion in more complex en-
vironments [75.35, 36, 47, 48].
Although walking dynamics is a highly interest-
ing challenge, the basic locomotion stability in walking
is not sufﬁcient to understand legged locomotion in
nature, but stability has to be also maintained in dif-
ferent gait patterns, such as running because most
of biological systems exhibit a rich variety of gaits.
For this reason, running dynamics has also been stud-
ied intensively by investigating a simple model, i. e.,
the so-called spring-loaded inverted pendulum (SLIP
model; [75.28, 49, 50]). The model consists of a point
mass and a massless linear spring, on top of which
many variations were proposed such as running models
with nonlinear spring, segmented legs [75.51], swing
leg dynamics, upper torso, lateral balancing [75.52],
and wheel-like conﬁguration (Fig. 75.6h [75.42]), for
example. The SLIP model was also used to study walk-
ing dynamics and gait transitions between walking and
running (Fig. 75.6f [75.40, 53];
VIDEO 110 shows an
example of a biped robot walking and running). It is
important to note that many of these models and robots
were developed for the hypotheses difﬁcult to test in bi-
ological systems. The biological legs are hardly linear
springs but they consist of numerous active and nonlin-
ear components. However, by examining these models
and robots, we are able to learn the basic underlying
principles such as the degree to which a spring-like
behavior of legs could contribute to the stability of
walking and running locomotion, for example. In addi-
tion, such an abstraction of biological body structures
is very practical for robotics research as we are able
to design and construct robots based on the underly-
ing principles without replicating complex anatomical
structures consisting of organic components.
Energy Efficiency and Bio-Inspired Actuation
Another considerable challenge in the study of bio-
inspired legged locomotion is the principles for energy
efﬁciency. It has been known that the locomotion ef-
ﬁciency of biological systems is known to be at least
an order of magnitude better than most of the legged
robots today but it is not fully understood why bio-
logical locomotion is so efﬁcient. The complexity of
the energetic problem in legged locomotion is origi-
nated in the many possible sources of energy dissipation
such as frictional and damping losses in joints and mus-

Biologically Inspired Robotics
75.3 Case Studies
2023
Part G | 75.3
cles, mechanical impact losses at foot touchdown to the
ground, metabolic costs, and energy required for ac-
celeration and deceleration of body parts. Because of
such a complexity, the bio-inspired robotics research
has been signiﬁcantly contributing to this problem by
building and analyzing, for example, purely mechanical
locomotion systems [75.38, 43], underactuated loco-
motion control [75.35, 37], the use of passive spring
and self-excited vibration [75.39, 54], and exoskeleton
devices [75.55]. All of these case studies were con-
tributing to a comprehensive understanding of energy
efﬁciency in biological locomotion [75.56], and some
of the hypotheses have been analyzed and tested in bio-
logical systems.
In addition to the whole body dynamics, energy efﬁ-
cient locomotion has also been investigated at the level
of actuation because the muscle-tendon systems play
a major role in animals’ efﬁcient locomotion. Inspired
from the biological models of muscles, this research
trend started from the so-called series elastic actuators,
which is an actuator unit containing a mechanical spring
0
4
8
12
16
20
Time (s)
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
x1
x2
x3
x4
x5
x6
x7
x8
Freq
Phase
AL
AR
i
~
i
Vi
MLR
9
1
18
17
20
19
d
d
b)
a)
e)
f)
d)
c)
Brainstem
PD controller
CPG model
(spinal cord)
10
8
7
1
2
3
4
5
10
6
9
2
11
3
12
4
13
5
14
6
15
7
16
8
Fig.75.7a–f Robotic implementation of CPG models. (a) A salamander robot consisting of motorized modules, and (b) its control
architecture. Every module has a servomotor which is controlled through a simulated CPG model. (c) Typical behavioral response
of the CPG model (upper ﬁgure) with respect to a control signal (lower ﬁgure). One control input is sufﬁcient to control smooth
oscillations of multiple body segments because of coupled dynamics originated in the CPG model (after [75.57]). (d,e) A hexapod
and biped robots that use CPG models to adapt to changes in the environment (after [75.58–60]). (f) A musculoskeletal humanoid
robot that simulate developmental processes of human babies (after [75.61])
being installed in series to an electric motor [75.62].
The implementation of mechanical spring in an electric
motor explained the unique characteristics such as stor-
age of kinetic energy to elastic energy, shock absorption
to protect mechanical transmission, and force-based
feedback control, all of which are favorable for both
biological and artiﬁcial legged systems. More recently,
many researchers have been attempting to enhance the
actuation mechanisms with variable stiffness and damp-
ing capabilities [75.41, 63] that are also expected to
provide valuable insights into the roles of muscle prop-
erties in efﬁcient legged locomotion.
75.3.2 Reflexes and Central Pattern
Generators
Agility and adaptability of animals’ locomotion are not
only originated in mechanical dynamics as explained
in the previous subsection, but there are also highly
complex control systems regulating animals’ motions.
Usually animals control systems are labeled into four

Part G | 75.3
2024
Part G
Robots and Humans
components: the musculoskeletal system, reﬂexes, cen-
tral pattern generators (CPGs), and modulation by
higher control centers. Bio-inspired robotics has been
investigating these components individually or in com-
bination, and resulted in a number of demonstrations of
surprisingly robust robot locomotion (Fig. 75.7).
This research area has been historically investigated
by the two distinguished approaches, i. e., the CPG-
based approach and the reﬂex-based one. The former
approach usually considers voluntary oscillations of
neural circuits, that is, CPGs, and the output of these cir-
cuits triggers locomotion cycles. Because these behav-
iors are found in the spinal cord of vertebrate animals
and in ganglions in invertebrates [75.64], this approach
has been very popular in the bio-inspired robotics. In
contrast, the reﬂex-based approach does not incorporate
intrinsic oscillators and generate periodic behavior as
a chain of reﬂex-mediated events. While conceptually
different, most of the CPG-based approach considers re-
ﬂexes in the neural processes; thus these two approaches
are often overlapping and reﬂex-based approaches can
be seen as a subset of CPG-based approaches.
One of the pioneering works in the reﬂex-based
approach was based on the neural circuits underlying
walking identiﬁed in stick insects [75.65, 66]. In this
study, it was identiﬁed that a series of reﬂexes for
each leg use information related to leg postures and
ground contact to generate movements. Coordination
between legs (i. e., speciﬁc gaits) is obtained with di-
rect neural couplings between individual legs circuits
and also through mechanical couplings (e.g., the move-
ment of one limb affecting the load on other limbs).
This leads to a decentralized control mechanism, similar
in spirit to those developed in behavior-based robotics,
that has been validated on simulated and real hexapod
robots [75.65, 67].
The reﬂex-based approach was also investigated in
human walking, in which a series of neuromechanical
models were developed to demonstrate how the combi-
nation of muscle properties and low-level reﬂexes can
lead to stable locomotion in simulated bipeds [75.68,
69]. In particular, Geyer and Herr [75.69] present a sim-
ulated bipedal walker which manages to walk in the
sagittal plane and to be stable against slight slopes. This
model captures principles of neuromuscular feedbacks
and predicts muscle activation patterns observed in leg
muscles. Similar reﬂex-based controllers (without mus-
cle models but with simulated synaptic plasticity) have
successfully been ported to real robots such as the Run-
bot [75.60] and the dynamicwalkers reported in [75.37].
One of the ﬁrst examples of the CPG approach has
been done in simulation by Taga and colleagues [75.70,
71]. They developed a series of 2-D models of biped
locomotion that combine a simple musculoskeletal
model with a CPG modeled as a system of cou-
pled Matsuoka oscillators [75.72]. The work showed
how bidirectional couplings between the CPG and
the musculoskeletal model could lead to entrainment
(i. e., frequency locked regimes) between the two as
well as to robust locomotion. Since then a large
number of CPG-based controllers have been imple-
mented in robots for different types of locomotion.
Examples include hexapod and octopod robots [75.73–
75] (see also Robot Roach
VIDEO 112 ), swim-
ming robots [75.76–78] (see also Salamandra Robotica
VIDEO 113 ), quadruped robots [75.57, 79, 80], and
biped robots [75.81–85].
As discussed in [75.64], a CPG-based approach has
several interesting properties:
i)
Stable limit cycle behavior that provides robustness
against perturbations.
ii) Suitability for a distributed implementation.
iii) Possibility to modulate gaits with a few control pa-
rameters.
iv) Integration of sensory feedback signals in order to
obtain mutual entrainment between the CPG and the
mechanical body.
v) Suitable substrate for learning and optimization
algorithms. These properties were particularly dif-
ﬁcult to investigate by using animals; hence the
bio-inspired robotics has provided signiﬁcant con-
tributions to the nature of motion control in biolog-
ical systems.
75.3.3 Bio-Inspired Navigation
Biological systems use a variety of cognitive pro-
cesses for their navigation in complex environment: it
is known, for example, that animals use both propri-
oceptive and exteroceptive receptors for sensing envi-
ronments; the obtained sensory information is passed to
massively parallel processes distributed over many hi-
erarchical levels in central nervous systems; animals’
perception of the world is coordinated with low-level
sensory-motor processes; and in addition to these mech-
anisms, long-term planning and learning processes are
continuously running to achieve more advanced tasks
such as goal-directed navigation. In order to tackle such
a complex problem of animals’ navigation, bio-inspired
robotics also provided a set of effective tools to apply
the synthetic methodology some of which are outlined
in this subsection.
Sensor Morphology
and Sensory-Motor Coordination
A signiﬁcant number of researchers in bio-inspired
robotics have been working on relatively simple animals

Biologically Inspired Robotics
75.3 Case Studies
2025
Part G | 75.3
such as insects because their central nervous systems
are far more tractable than other animals. Despite the
simplicity of their brains, insects are incredible naviga-
tors being capable of avoiding obstacles while running
or ﬂying with enormous speed, recognizing landmarks
in unstructured environment,and traveling long distance
for foraging. Moreover, some of the social insects can
even learn to go back to their own nests, and communi-
cate with co-workers for efﬁcient community manage-
ment. Although biologists have been investigating these
fascinating animals for centuries, there are still a num-
ber of issues that are not fully clariﬁed yet, and among
others, robotics platforms were used to investigate the
mechanisms in which physical system–environment in-
teractions play central roles [75.86].
One of the most successful case studies in bio-
inspired navigation research was on the mechanisms
of sensory-motor coordination in ﬂying insects such as
ﬂies and bees. These insects are known to rely on vi-
sual sensory information, more speciﬁcally, optic ﬂow
to detect ego motions, stabilize body posture, measure
distance to various objects and landing spots, and track
traveling distance, for example. While the visual in-
formation processing is usually regarded as computa-
tionally expensive, many insects, which have very lim-
ited computational resources, make use of this modality
to achieve these behavioral functions. The underlying
mechanisms are found in the hardware setups of an-
imals, in which sensor morphology (i. e., how recep-
tors are distributed) and low-level sensory information
processing are exploited in the coordination of sensory-
motor processes [75.87]. More speciﬁcally, the photore-
ceptors of these insects are usually distributed to almost
all directions which give rise to surprisingly informa-
tive stimuli about the environment and ego motions, and
low-level neural circuits are conﬁgured such that ex-
tremely low-processing power is necessary. To test these
hypotheses, a number of robotic platforms were devel-
oped and tested previously, which showed the feasibility
of these mechanisms such as the optic ﬂow to detect
nearby objects [75.88], visual odometry [75.89], ﬂight
altitude [75.90], and ﬂight stabilization [75.91].
Technological advances are essential to gain ad-
ditional insights into the complex sensory-motor pro-
cesses in the animals. At the beginning of the investi-
gations, many researchers developed omni-directional
vision based on speciﬁcally shaped mirrors attached to
regular cameras, while recently more advanced tech-
nologies are being developed to ﬂexibly adjust pho-
toreceptors [75.92]. Neuromorphic engineering also
provides an additional enabling technology to ex-
plore physical foundations of biological nervous sys-
tems [75.93, 94]. Neuromorphic silicon retinas are, un-
like conventional visual sensors, able to process sensory
information extremely fast and computationally less de-
manding owing to the event driven and asynchronous
processing architectures, while keeping sensitivity very
high (i. e., the receptors can be sensitive in very dark
environments as well as in a very bright one, [75.95]).
With the technological progress, we will be able to
reproduce more precise landscape of the world from in-
sects’ viewpoint for more comprehensive investigation
of bio-inspired navigation.
Goal-Directed Navigation
Compared to reﬂexive behaviors, goal-directed ones are
signiﬁcantly more complex where much less is known
even in biology. In nature, goal-directed behaviors such
as navigation to a nest from a distant location require
learning of routes and locations, short- and long-term
memories, episodic memories, while ﬂexibly adapting
to unstructured and often dynamically changing envi-
ronments. The underlying mechanisms are related to
many different locations in the central nervous systems
and they vary one species to another, thus the ongo-
ing researches are essentially driven on the basis of the
important ﬁndings in biology, rather than developing
a uniﬁed and generalized framework.
One of the representative case studies on bio-
inspired goal-directed navigation was again conducted
in relation to insect behaviors (Fig. 75.8): some social
insects such as desert ant Cataglyphis are known to ex-
hibit the so-called visual homing behaviors, in which
the animals go back to their nests by using visual cues
nearby [75.96]. These insects usually walk randomly
when searching for food sources, while they go back
straight to the nest by using visual cues. Although the
neural basis of these behaviors is not yet identiﬁed, the
biologists argue that an abstract model, the so-called
average landmark vector method, explain the insects’
behavior fairly accurately. Here it is assumed that in-
sects know the global orientation in the world, and
every once in a while, they perceive the direction of for-
aging behavior stored as vector information. Over time,
the animals sum up the vectors so that they can keep
track on the direction to the nest while randomly search
for the food sources. The biologists have been explor-
ing these behaviors for decades, and the accumulated
knowledge and hypothetical models were implemented
and tested in physical robot platforms. Unlike most of
the simulation experiments, the implementation to the
robots helped to test the hypothesis in the real-world
desert environment [75.96], or physically implemented
in an analog circuitry (see also multimedia material of
Analog Robot navigation in
VIDEO 242 ; [75.97]).
A signiﬁcantly more challenging problem is to
identify the mechanisms of goal-directed behaviors in
more complex animals, especially in mammals. There

Part G | 75.4
2026
Part G
Robots and Humans
Video camera
POC-sensors
a)
d)
b)
c)
Fig.75.8a–d Visual homing of insect-inspired robots. (a) An result of navigation experiment of desert ant Cataglyphis.
(b) A mobile robot Sahabot II that was developed to investigate navigation mechanisms of Cataglyphis. The robot
is equipped with an omni-directional camera and a digital compass that can be used for the bio-inspired landmark
navigation (after [75.96]). (c) A fully analog implementation of the visual homing algorithm. (d) Simulation results of
visual homing algorithm (after [75.97])
is a large body of literature about this issue includ-
ing cognitive science and brain science, but one of the
most prominent contributions of robotic platforms in
this research area was to explore neural dynamics dur-
ing physical system–environment interactions. The re-
search was originally motivated by a discovery in phys-
iology such as the so-called place cells, i. e., a group
of neurons in hippocampus exhibit unique behaviors
whenever the animal is in a speciﬁc location in an en-
vironment [75.98]. This hard evidence in neuroscience
has been widely used to analyze how brains func-
tion in the context of spatial cognition and navigation
in general, including those investigating computational
neuroscience and bio-inspired robotics. Essentially, it is
still a challenge to explain the behaviors of place cells
because they involve sensory-motor activities as well
as temporal changes of neural activities (i. e., learning
of sensory motor activities) thus a synthetic methodol-
ogy is extremely helpful. So far it has been shown that
the computational models of hippocampus were imple-
mented onto some mobile robot platforms to replicate
the behaviors of place cells in navigation tasks [75.99,
100] as well as some more complex goal-oriented be-
haviors and learning [75.101].
75.4 Landscape of Bio-Inspired Robotics Research and Challenges
So far we introduced only a few representative and on-
going case studies of bio-inspired robotics research, but
there are many other active topic areas in the ﬁeld.
Although many of these studies are covered also in
the other chapters of this handbook, this section pro-
vides a brief overview of the relevant topics in which
robotic technologies are being used as scientiﬁc tools
for biology.
75.4.1 Bio-Inspired Climbing
When legged systems are reduced down to smaller
scales, adhesion forces become more dominant than
the gravitational, and for this reason, the small-sized
animals in nature such as insects, amphibians, and
lizards tend to climb terrains rather than walk on level
grounds. While the governing physics in the climbing

Biologically Inspired Robotics
75.4 Landscape of Bio-Inspired Robotics Research and Challenges
2027
Part G | 75.4
a)
b)
e)
f)
g)
h)
c)
d)
Fig.75.9a–h Examples of recent bio-inspired robots. (a) A mobile robot that uses active whisker arrays for navigation
(after [75.102]). (b) A climbing robot based on feet made of dry adhesives (after [75.103]). (c) Micro robot for ﬂapping
ﬂight developed by the micro-fabrication techniques (after [75.104]). (d) A ﬁsh-like swimming robot that exploits soft
continuum body structure (after [75.105]). (e) A worm-like robot that exhibit rolling-locomotion of soft body structure
(after [75.106]). (f) A humanoid robot that is equipped with soft skin for interactions with human partners (after [75.107]).
(g) A wheel-chair controlled by brain signals of the user (after [75.108]). (h) Self-reconﬁgurable robot that is capable of
autonomously changing its own body structure (after [75.109])
locomotion is different from that of gravity-oriented
legged locomotion, robotic platforms are also useful
because the dynamics during the locomotion is sim-
ilarly complex. One of the most representative case
studies in this line of research was the use of dry
adhesives in climbing robots that are inspired from
geckos. Many research topics focused on the fabri-
cation techniques of micro hair-like structures that
can generate adhesive forces for a series of small-
sized robots (Fig. 75.9b, [75.103, 110]). Similarly a few
other approaches were also proposed to explore the
different climbing strategies of animals including the
use of material-dependent adhesion [75.111], rough-
surface locomotion by using feet with micro spine
structures [75.112, 113], and climbing strategy based
on force closure of relatively long legs [75.114]. There
still exist many challenges in fabrication techniques
of micro structures in order to replicate the sophisti-
cated climbing mechanisms of animals, which requires
continuing close collaborations between researchers in
biology and robotics.
75.4.2 Flapping Flight
and Swimming Mechanisms
Another complex, yet popular, dynamics used in ani-
mal kingdom is ﬂuid/aerodynamics that are typically
observed in ﬂying and swimming systems. Fluid/
aerodynamics are also dynamics difﬁcult to model and
simulate thus robotic platforms are intensively em-
ployed for exploring underlying mechanisms [75.115,
116]. As is the case of walking and running on land,
mechanical dynamics also play an important role in
ﬂying and swimming locomotion and a number of
underactuated robots were developed to understand
the nature of locomotion in ﬂuid Fig. 75.9d [75.105,
117]. As the microfabrication techniques evolved in
the recent years, roboticists and biologists also started
collaborating to investigate small-sized ﬂying robots
(Fig. 75.9c, [75.104]; Chap. 26).
75.4.3 Artificial Hands, Haptics,
and Whiskers
Haptic perception is known to be one of the most
important sensor modalities in biological systems, al-
though the biological nature is far from a compre-
hensive understanding because animals make use of
complex sensory-motor interactions for the purpose of
tactile sensing [75.118, 119]. Haptic sensing can be de-
ﬁned as sensing of mechanical environment through
touch although there are many different variations in
nature including tactile sensing through ﬁngers and
skins [75.119], active whisking (Fig. 75.9a) [75.102], or
more speciﬁcally targeted sensing such as slippage de-
tection [75.120]. Exploration on haptic technologies is
also crucial in this research area as the biological tactile
sensing involves an enormous number of mechanore-
ceptors each of which has a large sensitivity range.
Currently, a number of researchers are actively inves-

Part G | 75.5
2028
Part G
Robots and Humans
tigating technological solutions through haptic devices
and soft and stretchable electronics for tactile sens-
ing [75.121, 122].
75.4.4 Self-Reconfigurable
and Evolutionary Robotics
Animals’ adaptivity in nature relies signiﬁcantly on
their capability of changing their body sizes and struc-
tures. Animals are, for example, able to start their
lives smaller and gradually grow larger and more
complex; they are able to self-repair or regenerate
when encountering failures in body parts; and muscles
and skins are able to strengthen themselves if neces-
sary [75.123]. Synthetic methodology has also been
employed to investigate these fascinating capabilities
of biological systems by using, for example, modular
robots Fig. 75.9h [75.109, 124, 125], redundant body
structures for snake-like motion control [75.126, 127],
and self-repair and self-assembly of structures [75.128,
129]. Due to the technological limitations, many re-
searchers take advantage of simulation-based methods
to explore the ontogenetic and evolutionary processes
to uncover the characteristics of optimization strategies
in nature [75.19, 20, 130].
75.4.5 Bio-Inspired Soft Robots
Unlike the conventional robots that are usually made
of rigid materials articulated into discrete pieces, ani-
mals’ body structures mostly consist of soft, continuum,
and elastic components such as muscles, tendons, skins,
organs surrounded by smooth membrane [75.1]. Re-
cently, there has been an increasing interest in the
use of soft deformable materials in robotic systems
to enhance capabilities of, for example, soft locomo-
tion [75.106, 131] (
VIDEO 109
shows and example
of soft robot locomotion), manipulation [75.132, 133],
shape adaptation [75.134], and soft human–robot inter-
actions [75.63]. Despite its demand in the robotics and
biological studies, there are still a number of techno-
logical challenges in this ﬁeld such as soft actuation
and sensing [75.135], simulation of soft deformable
structures [75.136], and control of ﬂexible continuum
bodies [75.137].
75.4.6 Neuroprosthetics and Social
Interactions
As we develop more technological components com-
patible to biological systems, there are more possibili-
ties to implant artiﬁcial devices into biological bodies.
Although most of the case studies in this research
area aim at bio-medical applications as exempliﬁed by
visual/auditory prosthetics, pain relief, and motor pros-
thetics, there are also intensive investigations on the
use of prosthetic devices to gain additional insights into
the nature of motion control [75.108, 138] and percep-
tion [75.139]. There is also an increasing interest in the
use of robotic platforms in the studies of social inter-
actions where robots are used to study communications
with humans [75.107] and the other animals [75.140].
75.5 Conclusion
This chapter introduced a class of bio-inspired robotics
research that is speciﬁcally targeted to deepen our
understanding of biological systems. Through the rep-
resentative case studies, we explained how bio-inspired
robotics research can be useful not only for develop-
ing innovative robots, but also for exploring uncovered
challenges in biology by employing the understanding-
by-building approach. There are, however, a set of
important concepts that need to be considered for suc-
cessful collaborations between robotics and biology.
Speciﬁcally:
1. It is necessary to take the similarities and differ-
ences in robots and animals into account.
2. There are different goals and methods to develop
models of biological systems.
3. The use of robots as a scientiﬁc tool has both advan-
tages and disadvantages.
4. There are types of hypotheses in biology that bio-
inspired robotics can be particularly beneﬁcial for.
And ﬁnally, we also introduced a concise landscape
of trends and challenges in bio-inspired robotics. As
mentioned earlier, the ﬁeld of bio-inspired robotics is
very broad, and the outline introduced in this chapter
is by no means complete. For example, although this
chapter only focused on the types of research which
contribute to biological studies, there is a large body of
the literature on bio-inspired robotic applications which
are mostly ignored in this chapter. The interested read-
ers should refer to the other chapters in this handbook as
well as the other review articles in the ﬁeld. Also, there
are signiﬁcantly more case studies available in literature
which reported on the different species or the other as-
pects of animals which were summarized in [75.15, 18,
64].

Biologically Inspired Robotics
References
2029
Part G | 75
Video-References
VIDEO 109
Dynamic rolling locomotion of GoQBot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/75/videodetails/109
VIDEO 110
JenaWalker – Biped robot with biologically-inspired bi-articular springs
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/75/videodetails/110
VIDEO 111
MIT Compass Gait Robot – Locomotion over rough terrain
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/75/videodetails/111
VIDEO 112
RobotRoach with adaptive gait pattern variations
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/75/videodetails/112
VIDEO 113
Salamandra Robotica II – Swimming to walking transition
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/75/videodetails/113
VIDEO 242
Analog Robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/75/videodetails/242
References
75.1
R. Pfeifert, M. Lungarella, F. Iida: The challenges
ahead for bio-inspired ’soft’ robotics, Communi-
cations ACM 55(11), 76–87 (2012)
75.2
G. Becky: Autonomous Robots (MIT Press, Cam-
bridge 2001)
75.3
W.R. Ashby: An Introduction to Cybernetics (Chap-
man Hall, London 1956)
75.4
N. Wiener: Cybernetics, or Communication and
Control in the Animal and the Machine (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1948)
75.5
O.E. Holland: Grey Walter: The pioneer of real ar-
tificial life, Proc. 5th Int. Workshop Artif. Life, ed.
by C. Langton (MIT Press, Cambridge 1997) pp. 34–
44
75.6
V. Braitenberg: Vehicles: Experiments in Synthetic
Psychology (MIT Press, Cambridge 1984)
75.7
J. von Neumann: The Theory of Self-Reproducing
Automata (Univ. of Illinois Press, Illinois 1966)
75.8
A.M. Turing: The chemical basis of morphogene-
sis, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. 237(641), 37–72 (1952)
75.9
N. Nilsson: The physical symbol system hypothe-
sis: Status and prospects, Lect. Notes Artif. Intell.
4850, 9–17 (2007)
75.10
R. Arkin: Behavior-Based Robotics (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1998)
75.11
R.A. Brooks: A robust layered control system for
a mobile robot, IEEE Robot. Autom. 2(1), 14–23
(1986)
75.12
R.A. Brooks: Intelligence without representation,
Artif. Intell. 47, 139–159 (1991)
75.13
R. Pfeifer, C. Scheier: Understanding Intelligence
(MIT Press, Cambridge 2001)
75.14
M. Lungarella, G. Metta, R. Pfeifer, G. Sandini: De-
velopmental robotics: A survey, Connect. Sci. 15,
151–190 (2003)
75.15
R. Pfeifer, M. Lungarella, F. Iida: Self-organi-
zation, embodiment, and biologically inspired
robotics, Science 318, 1088–1093 (2007)
75.16
T.D. Johnston, L. Edwards: Genes, interactions,
and the development of behavior, Psychol. Rev.
109(1), 26–34 (2002)
75.17
R.J. Full, D.K. Koditschek: Templates and anchors:
Neuromechanical hypotheses of legged locomo-
tion on land, J. Exp. Biol. 202, 3325–3332 (1999)
75.18
B. Webb: Can robots make good models of biolog-
ical behaviour?, Behav. Brain Sci. 24, 1033–1050
(2001)
75.19
K. Sims: Evolving 3D morphology and behavior
by competition. In: Proc. Artificial Life IV, ed. by
R. Brooks, P. Maes (MIT Press, Cambridge 1994)
pp. 28–39
75.20
J. Bongard: Morphological change in machines
accelerates the evolution of robust behavior, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108(4), 1234–1239 (2011)
75.21
C.G. Langton: Artificial Life: An Overview (MIT
Press, Cambridge 1995)
75.22
A. Adamatzky, M. Komosinski: Artificial Life Mod-
els in Hardware (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2009)
75.23
H. Lipson, J. Pollack: Automatic design and man-
ufacture of robotic lifeforms, Nature 406, 974–978
(2000)
75.24
G. Borelli: De Motu Animalium (Apud Petrum
vander Aa, Cornelium Boutesteyn, Johannem de
Vivie, Danielem à Gaesbeeck, Lugduni in Batavis
1685)
75.25
H. Miura, I. Shimoyama: Dynamic walk of a biped,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 3(2), 60–74 (1984)
75.26
M.
Vukobratovic,
B.
Borovac:
Zero-moment
point – Thirty years of its life, Int. J. Humanoid
Robotics 1(1), 157–174 (2004)
75.27
M. Raibert: Legged Robots that Balance (MIT
Press, Cambridge 1987)
75.28
R. Blickhan, A. Seyfarth, H. Geyer, S. Grimmer,
H. Wagner, M. Guenther: Intelligence by mechan-
ics, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A 365(1850), 199–220
(2007)
75.29
I.E. Brown, G.E. Loeb: A reductionist approach to
creating and using neuromusculoskeletal mod-
els. In: Biomechanical and Neurological Control
of Posture and Movements, ed. by P.E. Winters
(Springer, New York 2000) pp. 148–163
75.30
T.A. McMahon: Muscles, Reflexes, and Locomotion
(Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton 1984)
75.31
S. Yakovenko, V. Gritsenko, A. Prochazka: Contri-
bution of stretch reflexes to locomotor control:
a modeling study, Biol. Cybern. 90(2), 146–155
(2004)

Part G | 75
2030
Part G
Robots and Humans
75.32
G. Orlovsky, G.N. Orlovskii, S. Grillner: Neuronal
Control of Locomotion From Mollusc to Man (Ox-
ford Univ. Press, Oxford 1999)
75.33
M. Bear, M. Paradiso, B.W. Connors: Neuroscience:
Exploring the Brain (Lippincott Williams and
Wilkins, Baltimore 2006)
75.34
F. Asano, M. Suguro: Limit cycle walking, running,
and skipping of telescopic-legged rimless wheel,
Robotica 30(6), 989–1003 (2012)
75.35
F. Iida, R. Tedrake: Minimalistic control of biped
walking in rough terrain, Auton. Robots 28(3),
355–368 (2010)
75.36
I.R. Manchester, U. Mettin, F. Iida, R. Tedrake:
Stable dynamic walking over uneven terrain, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 30(3), 265–279 (2011)
75.37
S.H. Collins, A. Ruina, R. Tedrake, M. Wisse: Effi-
cient bipedal robots based on passive-dynamic
walkers, Science 307, 1082–1085 (2005)
75.38
D. Owaki, M. Koyama, S. Yamaguchi, S. Kubo,
A. Ishiguro: A 2-D passive dynamic running biped
with elastic elements, IEEE Trans. Robotics 27(1),
156–162 (2011)
75.39
M. Ahmadi, M. Buehler: Controlled passive dy-
namic running experiments with ARL monopod II,
IEEE Trans. Robotics 22(5), 974–986 (2006)
75.40
F. Iida, J. Rummel, A. Seyfarth: Bipedal walking
and running with spring-like biarticular muscles,
J. Biomech. 41, 656–667 (2008)
75.41
J.W. Hurst, A.A. Rizzi: Series compliance for an
efficient running gait: Lessons learned from the
electric cable differential leg, IEEE Robotics Au-
tom, Mag. 15(3), 42–51 (2008)
75.42
R.
Altendorfer,
N.
Moore,
H.
Komsuoglu,
H.B. Brown Jr., D. McMordie, U. Saranli, R. Full,
D.E. Koditschek: RHex: A biologically inspired
hexapod runner, Auton. Robots 11, 207–213 (2001)
75.43
T.
McGeer:
Passive
dynamic
walking,
Int.
J. Robotics Res. 9(2), 62–82 (1990)
75.44
A. Goswami, B. Thuilot, B. Espiau: A study of
the passive gait of a compass-like biped robot:
Symmetry and chaos, Int. J. Robotics Res. 17(12),
1282–1301 (1998)
75.45
D.G.E. Hobbelen, M. Wisse: Swing-leg retraction
for limit cycle walkers improves disturbance re-
jection, IEEE Trans. Robotics 24(2), 377–389 (2008)
75.46
J. Hass, J.M. Herrmann, T. Geisel: Optimal mass
distrib- ution for passivity-based bipedal robots,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 25(11), 1087–1098 (2006)
75.47
K. Byl, R. Tedrake: Metastable walking machines,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 28(8), 1040–1064 (2008)
75.48
R.D. Gregg, M.W. Spong: Reduction-based control
of three-dimensional bipedal walking robots,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 29(6), 680–702 (2010)
75.49
R.M. Alexander: Three uses for springs in legged
locomotion, Int. J. Robotics Res. 9(2), 53–61 (1990)
75.50
X. Zhou, S. Bi: A survey of bio-inspired compliant
legged robot designs, Bioinspir. Biomim. 7(4), 1–
20 (2012)
75.51
J. Rummel, A. Seyfarth: Stable running with seg-
mented legs, Int. J. Robotics Res. 27(8), 919–934
(2008)
75.52
T.M. Kubow, R.J. Full: The role of the mechan-
icalvsystem in control: A hypothesis of self-
stabilization in hexapedal runners, Philos. Trans.
R. Soc. B 354, 849–862 (1999)
75.53
H. Geyer, A. Seyfarth, R. Blickhan: Compliant
leg behaviour explains basic dynamics of walk-
ing and running, Proc. R. Soc. B 273, 1471–2954
(2006)
75.54
M. Reis, F. Iida: An energy efficient hopping
robot based on free vibration of a curved beam,
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 19(1), 300–311 (2013)
75.55
A.M. Grabowski, H.M. Herr: Leg exoskeleton re-
duces the metabolic cost of human hopping,
J. Appl. Physiol. 107, 670–678 (2009)
75.56
A.D. Kuo: Choosing your steps carefully: Trade-
offs between economy and versatility in dynamic
walking bipedal robots, IEEE Robotics Autom.
Mag. 14, 18–29 (2007)
75.57
A.J. Ijspeert, A. Crespi, D. Ryczko, J.M. Cabelguen:
From swimming to walking with a salamander
robot driven by a spinal cord model, Science
315(5817), 1416–1420 (2007)
75.58
S. Steingrube, M. Timme, F. Wörgötter, P. Manoon-
pong: Self-organized adaptation of simple neu-
ral circuits enables complex robot behavior, Nat.
Phys. 6, 224–230 (2010)
75.59
T. Geng, B. Porr, F. Wörgötter: Fast biped walk-
ing with a sensor-driven neuronal controller and
real-time online learning, Int. J. Robotics Res.
25(3), 243–259 (2006)
75.60
P. Manoonpong, T. Geng, T. Kulvicius, B. Porr,
F. Wörgötter: Adaptive, fast walking in a biped
robot under neuronal control and learning, PLoS
Comput. Biol. 3(7), 1305–1320 (2007)
75.61
K. Narioka, K. Hosoda: Motor development of
an pneumatic musculoskeletal infant robot, Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2011)
pp. 963–968
75.62
G.A. Pratt, M.M. Williamson: Series elastic actu-
ators, Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(1995) pp. 399–406
75.63
A. Albu-Schaffer, O. Eiberger, M. Grebenstein,
S.
Haddadin,
C.
Ott,
T.
Wimbock,
S.
Wolf,
G. Hirzinger: Soft robotics, IEEE Robotics Autom,
Mag. 15(3), 20–30 (2008)
75.64
A.J. Ijspeert: Central pattern generators for loco-
motion control in animals and robots: A review,
Neural Netw. 21(4), 642–653 (2008)
75.65
H. Cruse, T. Kindermann, M. Schumm, J. Dean,
J. Schmitz: Walknet: A biologically inspired net-
work to control six- legged walking, Neural Netw.
11, 1435–1447 (1998)
75.66
V. Dürr, A.F. Krause, J. Schmitz, H. Cruse: Neu-
roethological concepts and their transfer to walk-
ing machines, Int. J. Robotics Res. 22(3/4), 151–167
(2003)
75.67
K.S. Espenschied, R.D. Quinn, H.J. Chiel, R.D. Beer:
Biologically-based distributed control and lo-
cal reflexes improve rough terrain locomotion in
a hexapod robot, Robotics Auton. Syst. 18, 59–64
(1996)

Biologically Inspired Robotics
References
2031
Part G | 75
75.68
H. Geyer, A. Seyfarth, R. Blickhan: Positive force
feedback in bouncing gaits, Proc. R. Soc. B 270,
2173–2183 (2003)
75.69
H. Geyer, H.M. Herr: A muscle-reflex model that
encodes principles of legged mechanics produces
human walking dynamics and muscle activities,
IEEE Trans. Neural. Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 18(3), 263–
273 (2010)
75.70
G. Taga, Y. Yamaguchi, H. Shimizu: Self-organized
control of bipedal locomotion by neural oscilla-
tors in unpredictable environment, Biol. Cybern.
65, 147–159 (1991)
75.71
G. Taga: A model of the neuro-musculo-skeletal
system for anticipatory adjustment of human
locomotion during obstacle avoidance, Biol. Cy-
bern. 78(1), 9–17 (1998)
75.72
K. Matsuoka: Mechanisms of frequency and pat-
tern control in the neural rhythm generators, Biol.
Cybern. 56, 345–353 (1987)
75.73
P. Arena, L. Fortuna, M. Frasca, G. Sicurella: An
adaptive, self-organizing dynamical system for
hierarchical control of bio-inspired locomotion,
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. B 34(4), 1823–1837
(2004)
75.74
S. Inagaki, H. Yuasa, T. Suzuki, T. Arai: Wave
CPG model for autonomous decentralized multi-
legged robot: Gait generation and walking speed
control, Robotics Auton. Syst. 54(2), 118–126
(2006)
75.75
B. Klaassen, R. Linnemann, D. Spenneberg,
F. Kirchner: Biomimetic walking robot scorpion:
Control and modeling, Auton. Robots 41, 69–76
(2002)
75.76
A. Crespi, A. Ijspeert: Online optimization of
swimming and crawling in an amphibious snake
robot, IEEE Trans. Robotics 24(1), 75–87 (2008)
75.77
C. Stefanini, G. Orlandi, A. Menciassi, Y. Ravier,
G.L.
Spina,
S.
Grillner:
A
mechanism
for
biomimetic actuation in lamprey-like robots,
Proc.
1st
IEEE/RAS-EMBS
Int.
Conf.
Biomed.
Robotics Biomechatron. (2006) pp. 579–584
75.78
C. Wilbur, W. Vorus, Y. Cao, S.N. Currie: A lamprey-
based undulatory vehicle. In: Neurotechnology
for Biomimetic Robots, ed. by J. Ayers, J.L. Davis,
A. Rudolph (MIT Press, Cambridge 2002)
75.79
H. Kimura, S. Akiyama, K. Sakurama: Real-
ization of dynamic walking and running of
the quadruped using neural oscillators, Auton.
Robots 7(3), 247–258 (1999)
75.80
H. Kimura, Y. Fukuoka, A.H. Cohen: Adaptive dy-
namic walking of a quadruped robot on nat-
ural ground based on biological concepts, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 26(5), 475–490 (2007)
75.81
J. Nakanishi, J. Morimoto, G. Endo, G. Cheng,
S. Schaal, M. Kawato: Learning from demon-
stration and adaptation of biped locomotion,
Robotics Auton. Syst. 47, 79–91 (2004)
75.82
S. Aoi, K. Tsuchiya: Locomotion control of a biped
robot using nonlinear oscillators, Auton. Robots
19, 219–232 (2005)
75.83
G. Endo, J. Nakanishi, J. Morimoto, G. Cheng:
Experimental studies of a neural oscillator for
biped locomotion with QRIO, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2005) pp. 598–
604
75.84
L. Righetti, A.J. Ijspeert: Programmable central
pattern generators: An application to biped lo-
comotion control, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2006) pp. 1585–1590
75.85
R. Héliot, B. Espiau: Multisensor input for CPG-
based sensorymotor coordination, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 24(1), 191–195 (2008)
75.86
D.
Floreano,
J.C.
Zufferey,
M.V.
Srinivasan,
C. Ellington (Eds.): Flying Insects and Robots
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2009)
75.87
N. Franceschini, J.M. Pichon, C. Blanes: From in-
sect vision to robot vision, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B
337, 283–294 (1992)
75.88
J.C. Zufferey, D. Floreano: Fly-inspired visual
steering of an ultralight indoor aircraft, IEEE Trans.
Robotics 22(1), 137–146 (2006)
75.89
F. Iida: Biologically inspired visual odometer for
navigation of a flying robot, Robotics Auton. Syst.
44(3/4), 201–208 (2003)
75.90
M.V. Srinivasan, S.W. Zhang, J.S. Chahl, E. Barth,
S. Venkatesh: How honeybees make grazing land-
ings on flat surfaces, Biol. Cybern. 83, 171–183
(2000)
75.91
S. Viollet, N. Franceschini: Aerial minirobot that
stabilizes and tracks with a bio-inspired visual
scanning sensor. In: Biorobotics. Methods and
Applications, ed. by B. Webb, T. Consi (MIT Press,
Cambridge 2001) pp. 67–83
75.92
M. Dobrzynski, R.P. Camara, D. Floreano: Vision
Tape –A flexible compound vision sensor for mo-
tion detection and proximity estimation, IEEE
Sens. J. 12(5), 1131–1139 (2012)
75.93
C. Eliasmith, C.H. Anderson: Neural engineering:
Computation, Representation, and Dynamics in
Neurobiological Systems (MIT Press, Cambridge
2004)
75.94
S.C. Liu, T. Delbruck: Neuromorphic sensory sys-
tems, Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 20, 1–8 (2010)
75.95
R. Berner, T. Delbruck: Event-based pixel sensitive
to changes of color and brightness, IEEE Trans. Cir-
cuits Syst. I 58(7), 1581–1590 (2011)
75.96
D. Lambrinos, R. Möller, T. Labhart, R. Pfeifer,
R. Wehner: A mobile robot employing insect
strategies for navigation, Robotics Auton. Syst.
30(1/2), 39–64 (2000)
75.97
R. Möller: Insect visual homing strategies in
a robot with analog processing, Biol. Cybern.
83(3), 231–243 (2000)
75.98
E. Moser, E. Kropff, M. Moser: Place cells, grid
cells, and the brain’s spatial representation sys-
tem, Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 31, 69–89 (2008)
75.99
J.L. Krichmar, D.A. Nitz, J.A. Gally, G.M. Edelman:
Characterizing functional hippocampal pathways
in a brain-based device as it solves a spatial
memory task, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 2111–
2116 (2005)
75.100
M.J. Milford, J. Wiles, G.F. Wyeth: Solving naviga-
tional uncertainty using grid cells on robots, PLoS
Comput. Biol. 6(11), e1000995 (2010)

Part G | 75
2032
Part G
Robots and Humans
75.101
G. Edelman: Learning in and from brain-based
devices, Science 318, 1103–1105 (2007)
75.102
T.J. Prescott, M.J. Pearson, B. Mitchinson, T. Pipe:
Whisking with robots: From rat vibrissae to
biomimetic technology for active touch, IEEE
Robotics Autom. Mag. 16, 42–50 (2009)
75.103
S. Kim, A. Asbeck, M. Cutkosky, W. Provancher:
SpinybotII: Climbing hard walls with compliant
microspines, Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Adv. Robotics
(ICAR) (2005) pp. 601–606
75.104
R.J. Wood: The first biologically inspired at-scale
robotic insect, IEEE Trans. Robotics 24(2), 341–347
(2008)
75.105
T. Salumäe, M. Kruusmaa: A flexible fin with bio-
inspired stiffness profile and geometry, J. Bionic
Eng. 8(4), 418–428 (2011)
75.106
H.T.
Lin,
G.G.
Leisk,
B.
Trimmer:
GoQBot:
A caterpillar-inspired soft-bodied rolling robot,
Bioinspir. Biomim. 6, 026007 (2011)
75.107
M. Asada, K. Hosoda, Y. Kuniyoshi, H. Ishiguro,
T. Inui, Y. Yoshikawa, M. Ogino, C. Yoshida: Cogni-
tive developmental robotics: A survey, IEEE Trans.
Auton. Mental Dev. 1(1), 12–34 (2009)
75.108
T. Carlson, J.D.R. Mill: Brain-controlled wheel-
chairs: A robotic architecture, IEEE Robotics Au-
tom, Mag. 20(1), 65–73 (2013)
75.109
S.
Murata,
H.
Kurokawa:
Self-reconfigurable
robots, IEEE Robotics Autom, Mag. 14(1), 71–78
(2007)
75.110
M.R. Cutkosky, S. Kim: Design and fabrication of
multi-material structures for bioinspired robots,
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. 367, 1799–1813 (2009)
75.111
O. Unver, M. Sitti: Tankbot: A palm-size, tank like
climbing robot on rough and smooth surfaces,
Int. J. Robotics Res. 29(14), 1761–1777 (2010)
75.112
A.T. Asbeck, S. Kim, M.R. Cutkosky, W.R. Pro-
vancher, M. Lanzetta: Scaling hard vertical sur-
faces with compliant microspine arrays, Int.
J. Robotics Res. 25(12), 1165–1179 (2006)
75.113
M.J.
Spenko,
G.C.
Haynes,
J.A.
Saunders,
M.R. Cutkosky, A.A. Rizzi, R.J. Full, D.E. Kodi-
tschek:
Biologically
inspired
climbing
with
a hexapedal robot, J. Field Robotics 25(4/5),
223–242 (2008)
75.114
T. Lam, Y. Xu: Climbing strategy for a flexible tree
climbing robot Treebot, IEEE Trans. Robotics 27(6),
1107–1117 (2011)
75.115
M.S. Triantafyllou, G.S. Triantafyllou: An efficient
swimming machine, Sci. Am. 272(3), 40–48 (1995)
75.116
M.H. Dickinson, C.T. Farley, R.J. Full, M.A. Koehl,
R. Kram, S. Lehman: How animals move: An in-
tegrative view, Science 288(5463), 100–106 (2000)
75.117
G.V. Lauder, E.J. Anderson, J. Tangorra, P.G. Mad-
den: Fish biorobotics: Kinematics and hydrody-
namics of self-propulsion, J. Exp. Biol. 210(16),
2767–2780 (2007)
75.118
R. Fearing, J. Hollerbach: Basic solid mechanics
for tactile sensing, Int. J. Robotics Res. 1, 266–275
(1984)
75.119
V. Hayward, O.R. Astley, M. Cruz-Hernandez,
D. Grant, G. Robles-De-La-Torre: Haptic interfaces
and devices, Sens. Rev. 24(1), 16–29 (2004)
75.120
D. Gunji, Y. Mizoguchi, S. Teshigawara, A. Ming,
A. Namiki, M. Ishikawaand, M. Shimojo: Grasping
force control of multi-fingered robot hand based
on slip detection using tactile sensor, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2008) pp. 2605–
2610
75.121
T. Someya, Y. Kato, T. Sekitani, S. Iba, Y. Noguchi,
Y. Murase, H. Kawaguchi, T. Sakurai: Conformable,
flexible, large-area networks of pressure and
thermal sensors with organic transistor active
matrixes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 12321–
12325 (2005)
75.122
G. Cannata, M. Maggiali, G. Metta, G. San-
dini: An embedded artificial skin for humanoid
robots, Int. Conf. Multi-Sensor Fusion Integr.
(2008) pp. 434–438
75.123
S.F. Gilbert: Developmental Biology
(Palgrave
Macmillan, London 2010)
75.124
F. Hara, R. Pfeifer (Eds.): Morpho-Functional Ma-
chines: The New Species: Designing Embodied
Intelligence (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2003)
75.125
M. Yim, W.M. Shen, B. Salemi, D. Rus, M. Moll,
H. Lipson, E. Klavins, G.S. Chirikjian: Modular self-
reconfigurable robot systems: Challenges and op-
portunities for the future, IEEE Robotics Autom,
Mag. 14(1), 43–52 (2007)
75.126
S. Hirose: Biologically inspired robots: Snake-like
locomotors and manipulators (Oxford Univ. Press,
Oxford 1993)
75.127
T. Kano, T. Sato, R. Kobayashi, A. Ishiguro: Lo-
cal reflexive mechanisms essential for snakes’
scaffold-based locomotion, Bioinspir. Biomim. 7,
046008 (2012)
75.128
P.J. White, K. Kopanski, H. Lipson: Stochastic self-
reconfigurable cellular robotics, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2004) pp. 2888–
2893
75.129
E. Klavins, R. Ghrist, D. Lipsky: A grammat-
ical approach to self-organizing robotic sys-
tems, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 51(6), 949–962
(2006)
75.130
S. Nolfi, D. Floreano: Evolutionary Robotics. The
Biology, Intelligence, and Technology of Self-
Organizing Machines (MIT Press, Cambridge 2000)
75.131
S. Seok, C.D. Onal, K.J. Cho, R.J. Wood, D. Rus,
S. Kim:
Meshworm: A
peristaltic
soft
robot
with antagonistic nickel titanium coil actua-
tors, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 18, 1485–1497
(2013)
75.132
D. Trivedi, C.D. Rahn, W.M. Kier, I.D. Walker: Soft
robotics: Biological inspiration, state of the art,
and future research, Appl. Bionics Biomech. 5(3),
99–117 (2008)
75.133
F. Ilievski, A.D. Mazzeo, R.F. Shepherd, X. Chen,
G.M. Whitesides:
Soft robotics for chemists,
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 50, 1890–1895 (2011)
75.134
L. Brodbeck, F. Iida: Enhanced robotic body ex-
tension with modular units, Proc. 2012 IEEE/RSJ
Int.
Conf.
Intell.
Robots
Syst.
(IROS)
(2012)
pp. 1428–1433
75.135
A.T. Conn, J.M. Rossiter: Towards holonomic
electro-elastomer actuators with six degrees of

Biologically Inspired Robotics
References
2033
Part G | 75
freedom, Smart Mater. Struct. 21, 035012–035020
(2012)
75.136
J. Rieffel, D. Knox, S. Smith, B.A. Trimmer: Grow-
ing and evolving soft robots, Artif. Life 20(1),
143–162 (2014)
75.137
C. Laschi, B. Mazzolai, V. Mattoli, M. Cianchetti,
P. Dario: Design of a biomimetic robotic octopus
arm, Bioinspir. Biomim. 4, 1–8 (2009)
75.138
A.B. Schwartz, X.T. Cui, D.J. Weber, D.W. Moran:
Brain-controlled interfaces: Movement restora-
tion with neural prosthetics, Neuron 52(1), 205–
220 (2006)
75.139
J.E.
O’Doherty,
M.A.
Lebedev,
K.Z.
Zhuang,
S. Shokur, H. Bleuler, M.A.L. Nicolelis: Active tac-
tile exploration enabled by a brain-machine-
brain interface, Nature 479, 228–231 (2011)
75.140
J. Halloy, G. Sempo, G. Caprari, C. Rivault,
M.
Asadpour,
F.
Tache,
I.
Said,
V.
Durier,
S.
Canonge,
J.M.
Ame,
C.
Detrain,
N.
Cor-
rell, A. Martinoli, F. Mondada, R. Siegwart,
J.L. Deneubourg: Social integration of robots into
groups of cockroaches to control self-organized
choices, Science 318(5853), 1155–1158 (2007)

Multimedia Contents Evolutionary
2035
Part G | 76
76. Evolutionary Robotics
Stefano Nolfi, Josh Bongard, Phil Husbands, Dario Floreano
Evolutionary Robotics is a method for automati-
cally generating artificial brains and morphologies
of autonomous robots. This approach is useful
both for investigating the design space of robotic
applications and for testing scientific hypothe-
ses of biological mechanisms and processes. In
this chapter we provide an overview of methods
and results of Evolutionary Robotics with robots of
different shapes, dimensions, and operation fea-
tures. We consider both simulated and physical
robots with special consideration to the transfer
between the two worlds.
76.1
Method.............................................. 2036
76.2
First Steps .......................................... 2036
76.2.1
Evolution of Neural Controllers
for Walking ............................ 2038
76.3
Simulation and Reality ....................... 2040
76.4
Behavior as a Complex
Adaptive System ................................. 2041
76.4.1
Behavior Recombination
and Re-Use............................ 2043
76.4.2
Sensory-Motor Coordination.... 2043
76.5
Evolving Bodies.................................. 2044
76.5.1
Co-Evolving Body and Brains ... 2044
76.5.2
Self-Modeling ........................ 2045
76.6
Seeing the Light................................. 2046
76.6.1
Coevolution of Active Vision
and Feature Selection ............. 2047
76.7
Computational Neuroethology ............ 2049
76.7.1
Emergence of Place Cells.......... 2049
76.7.2
Spiking Neurons ..................... 2051
76.7.3
GasNets ................................. 2052
76.8
Evolution and Learning ...................... 2054
76.8.1
Learning to Adapt to Fast
Environmental Variations ........ 2055
76.8.2
Evolution of Learning .............. 2056
76.9
Evolution of Social Behavior................ 2057
76.9.1
Coevolving Predator
and Prey Robots ..................... 2057
76.9.2
Evolving Cooperative Behavior . 2058
76.9.3
Evolution of Communication.... 2059
76.10 Evolutionary Hardware ....................... 2060
76.10.1
Evolvable Hardware
Robot Controllers .................... 2060
76.11
Closing Remarks ................................. 2061
Video-References......................................... 2061
References................................................... 2062
Evolutionary robotics is a method for the automatic cre-
ation of autonomous robots [76.1]. It is inspired by
the Darwinian principle of selective reproduction of
the ﬁttest, captured by evolutionary algorithms [76.2].
In evolutionary robotics, robots are considered as au-
tonomous artiﬁcial organisms that develop their own
control system and body conﬁguration in close interac-
tion with the environment without human intervention.
Drawing inspiration from principles of biological self-
organization, evolutionary robotics includes elements
of evolutionary, neural, developmental, and morpho-
logical systems. The idea that an evolutionary process
could drive the generation of control systems dates back
to at least the 1950s [76.3] with a more explicit form
appearing in the mid 1980s with the ingenious thought
experiments by neuroscientist Valentino Braitenberg
on neurally driven vehicles [76.4]. In the early 1990s,
the ﬁrst generation of simulated artiﬁcial organisms
with a genetic code describing the neural circuitry and
morphology of a sensory motor system began evolv-

Part G | 76.2
2036
Part G
Robots and Humans
ing on computer screens [76.5–8]. At that time, real
robots were still complicated and expensive machines
that required specialized programming techniques and
skillful manipulation. Towards the end of that period,
a new generation of robots started to emerge that shared
important characteristics with simple biological sys-
tems: robustness, simplicity, small size, ﬂexibility, and
modularity [76.9, 10]. Above all, those robots were
designed so that they could be programmed and manip-
ulated by people without engineering training. Those
technological achievements, together with the growing
inﬂuence of biological inspiration in artiﬁcial intel-
ligence [76.11], coincided with the ﬁrst evolutionary
experiments on real robots [76.12–14] (
VIDEO 39
and
VIDEO 371 ), and the term evolutionary robotics
was coined [76.15].
76.1 Method
The
major
methodological
steps
in
evolutionary
robotics proceed as follows (Fig. 76.1). An initial
population of different artiﬁcial chromosomes, each
encoding the control system (and possibly the mor-
phology) of a robot, is randomly created. Each of
...
Mutation
Crossover
Selective reproduction
Evaluation
Population manager
Fig. 76.1 Evolutionary experiments on a single robot. Each indi-
vidual of the population is decoded into a corresponding neurocon-
troller which reads sensory information and sends motor commands
to the robot every 300 ms while its ﬁtness is automatically evaluated
and stored away for reproductive selection
these chromosomes is then decoded into a correspond-
ing controller, for example a neural network (NN),
and downloaded into the processor of the robot. The
robot is then let free to act (move, look around, ma-
nipulate the environment) according to a genetically
speciﬁed controller while its performance for a given
task is automatically evaluated. Performance evaluation
is done by a ﬁtness function that measures how fast
and straight the robot moves, how frequently it col-
lides with obstacles, etc. This procedure is repeated
for all chromosomes of the population. The ﬁttest in-
dividuals (those that have received more ﬁtness points)
are allowed to reproduce by generating copies of their
chromosomes with the addition of random modiﬁca-
tions introduced by genetic operators (e.g., mutations
and exchange of genetic material). The newly ob-
tained population is then tested again on the same
robot. This process is repeated for a number of gen-
erations until an individual is born which satisﬁes the
ﬁtness function set by the user. The control system
of evolved robots, encoded in an artiﬁcial genome, is
therefore generated by a repeated process of selective
reproduction, random mutation, and genetic recombi-
nation, similarly to what happens in natural evolution
(
VIDEO 119 ).
76.2 First Steps
In an early experiment on robot evolution without hu-
man intervention, carried out at Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) [76.12], a small wheeled
robot was evolved for navigation in a looping maze
(Fig. 76.2). The Khepera robot has a diameter of 55 mm
and two wheels with controllable velocities in both di-
rections of rotation. It also has eight infrared sensors,
six on one side and two on the other side, that can
function either in active mode to measure distance from
obstacles or in passive mode to measure the amount of
(infrared) light in the environment. The robot was con-
nected to a desktop computer through rotating contacts
that provided both power supply and data exchange
through a serial port (
VIDEO 39 ).
A simple genetic algorithm [76.16] was used to
evolve the synaptic strengths of a neural network com-
posed of eight sensory neurons and two motor neurons.
Each sensory unit was clamped to one of the eight
active infrared sensors whose value was updated ev-
ery 300 ms. Each motor unit received weighted signals
from the sensory units and from the other motor unit,
plus a recurrent connection with itself with a 300 ms

Evolutionary Robotics
76.2 First Steps
2037
Part G | 76.2
delay. The net input of the motor units was offset by
a modiﬁable threshold and passed through a logistic
squashing function. The resulting outputs, in the range
Œ0; 1, were used to control the two motors so that
an output of 1 generated maximum rotation speed in
one direction, an output of 0 generated maximum ro-
tation speed in the opposite direction, and an output
of 0.5 did not generate any motion in the correspond-
ing wheel. A population of 80 individuals, each coding
the synaptic strengths and threshold values of the neural
controllers, was initialized with all weights set to small
random values centered around zero. Each individual
was tested on the physical robot for 80 sensorimotor cy-
cles (approximately 24 s) and evaluated at every cycle
according to a ﬁtness function with three components
measured onboard the robot
 D V.1 
p
v/.1  i/ ;
(76.1)
where V is the average rotation speed of the two wheels,
v is the absolute value of the algebraic difference be-
tween the signed speed values of the wheels (positive
is one direction, negative the other), and i is the nor-
malized activation value of the infrared sensor with the
highest activity. The ﬁrst component is maximized by
speed, the second by straight motion, and the third by
distance from objects.
During the ﬁrst 100 generations, both average and
best ﬁtness values grew steadily, as shown in Fig. 76.3.
A ﬁtness value of 1.0 would correspond to a robot mov-
ing straight at maximum speed in an open space and
therefore was not attainable in the looping maze shown
in Fig. 76.2, where some of the sensors were often ac-
tive and where several turns were necessary to navigate.
Fig. 76.4 shows the trajectory of the best individual of
the last generation.
Although the ﬁtness function did not specify in
what direction the robot should navigate (given that it
Fig. 76.2 Bird’s-eye view of the desktop Khepera robot in
the looping maze
was perfectly circular and that the wheels could ro-
tate in both directions), after a few generations all the
best individuals moved in the direction corresponding
to the side with the highest number of sensors. In-
dividuals moving in the other direction had a higher
probability of colliding into corners without detecting
them and thus disappeared from the population. Fur-
thermore, the cruising speed of the best evolved robots
was approximately half of the maximum speed that
could be technically achieved and did not increase even
when the evolutionary experiment was continued up
to 200 generations. Further analysis revealed that this
self-limitation of the navigation speed had an adaptive
function because, considering the sensory and motor
Max
Average
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness
Generations
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Fig. 76.3 Average ﬁtness of the population and ﬁtness of the best
individual at each generation (error bars show standard error over
three runs from different initial populations)
Fig. 76.4 Trajectory of the robot with the best neural con-
troller of the last generation. Segments represent the axis
between the two wheels. Data were recorded and plotted
every 300 ms using an external laser positioning device

Part G | 76.2
2038
Part G
Robots and Humans
refresh rate together with the response proﬁle of the dis-
tance sensors, robots that traveled faster had a higher
risk of colliding with walls before detecting them; they
gradually disappeared from the population.
Despite its simplicity, this experiments shows that
evolution can discover solutions that match not only the
computational requirements of the task to be solved, but
also the morphological and mechanical properties of the
robot in relation to its physical environment.
76.2.1 Evolution of Neural Controllers
for Walking
Over the past 20 years or so, there has been a grow-
ing body of work on evolving controllers for various
kinds of walking robots – a nontrivial sensorimotor co-
ordination task. Early work in this area concentrated
on evolving dynamical network controllers for simple
(abstract) simulated insects (often inspired by cock-
roach studies) which were required to walk in simple
environments [76.17, 18]. Earlier, Beer et al. had in-
troduced a neural architecture for locomotion based
on studies of cockroaches [76.19], which is shown
in Fig. 76.5. The promise of this work soon led to ver-
sions of this methodology being used on real robots.
Probably the ﬁrst success in this direction was by Lewis
et al. [76.14, 20] who evolved a neural controller for
a simple hexapod robot using coupled oscillators built
from continuous-time, leaky-integrator, artiﬁcial neu-
rons. All evaluations were done on the actual robot with
each leg connected to its own pair of coupled neurons,
leg swing being driven by one neuron and leg eleva-
tion by the other. These pairs of neurons were cross
connected, in a manner similar to that used by Beer
and Gallagher [76.18] (Fig. 76.5), to allow coordina-
tion between the legs. In order to speed up the process,
they employed staged evolution where ﬁrst an oscillator
capable of moving a leg was evolved and then an archi-
tecture based on these oscillators was further evolved
to develop walking. The robot was able to execute an
efﬁcient tripod gait on ﬂat surfaces.
Gallagher et al. [76.21] described experiments
where neural networks controlling locomotion in an
artiﬁcial insect were evolved in simulation and then suc-
cessfully downloaded onto a real hexapod robot. This
machine was more complex than Lewis et al.’s, with
a greater number of degrees of freedom per leg. In this
approach, each leg was controlled by a fully connected
network of ﬁve continuous-time, leaky-integrator neu-
rons, each receiving a weighted sensory input from
that leg’s angle sensor. Initially the architecture shown
in Fig. 76.5 was used, with the connection weights and
neuron time constants and biases under genetic control.
This produced efﬁcient tripod gaits for walking on ﬂat
surfaces. In order to produce a wider range of gaits op-
erating at a number of speeds such that rougher terrain
could be successfully negotiated, a different distributed
architecture, more inspired by stick insect studies, was
found to be more effective [76.22].
Galt et al. [76.23] used a genetic algorithm to de-
rive the optimal gait parameters for a Robug III robot,
an eight-legged, pneumatically powered walking and
climbing robot. The individual genotypes represented
parameters deﬁning each leg’s support period and the
timing relationships between leg movements. These
parameters were used as inputs to a mechanistic ﬁnite-
state machine pattern-generating algorithm that drove
the locomotion. Such algorithms, which are often used
in conventional walking machines, rely on relatively
simple control dynamics and do not have the same
potential for the kind of sophisticated multigait coor-
dination that complex dynamical neural network archi-
FAS
BAS
BS
FT
FS
P
FAS
BAS
BS
FT
FS
P
FAS
BAS
BS
FT
FS
P
C
FAS
BAS
BS
FT
FS
P
FAS
BAS
BS
FT
FS
P
FAS
BAS
BS
FT
FS
P
Fig. 76.5 Schematic diagram of a distributed neural net-
work for the control of locomotion as used by Beer
et al. [76.19]. Excitatory connections are denoted by open
triangles and inhibitory connections are denoted by ﬁlled
circles. C, command neuron; P, pacemaker neuron; FT,
foot motor neuron; FS and BS, forward swing and back-
ward swing motor neurons; FAS and BAS, forward and
backward angle sensors

Evolutionary Robotics
76.2 First Steps
2039
Part G | 76.2
tectures, such as those described in this section, have
been shown to produce. However, controllers were suc-
cessfully evolved for a wide range of environments and
to cope with damage and systems failure (although an
individual controller had to be tuned to each environ-
ment; they were not able to self-adapt across a wide
range of conditions). Gomi and Ide [76.24] evolved the
gaits of an eight-legged robot (Fig. 76.6) using geno-
types made of eight similarly organized sets of genes,
each gene coding for leg motion characteristics such
as the amount of delay after which the leg begins to
move, the direction of the leg’s motion, the end po-
sitions of both vertical and horizontal swings of the
leg, and the vertical and horizontal angular speed of
the leg. After a few dozen generations, where evalua-
tion was on the robot, a mixture of tetrapod and wave
gaits was obtained. Using the cellular encoding [76.25]
developmental approach – which genetically encodes
a grammar-tree program that controls the division of
cells growing into a dynamical recurrent neural net-
work of the kind used by Beer et al. – Gruau and
Quatramaran [76.26] evolved a single-leg neural con-
troller for the same eight-legged robot used by Gomi
and Ide. This generated a smooth and fast quadru-
pod locomotion gait (
VIDEO 372 and
VIDEO 373 ).
Kodjabachian and Meyer [76.27] extended this work
to develop more sophisticated locomotion behaviors.
Jakobi [76.28] successfully used his minimal simu-
lation techniques (described in Sect. 76.3) to evolve
controllers for the same eight-legged robot as Gruau.
Evolution in simulation took less than 2 h on what
would today be regarded as a very slow computer,
and was then successfully transferred to the real robot.
Jakobi evolved modular controllers based on Beer’s
continuous recurrent networks to control the robot as
it engaged in walking about its environment, avoiding
obstacles and seeking out goals depending on the sen-
sory input. The robot could smoothly change gait, move
backward and forward, and even turn on the spot. More
recent work has used similar architectures to those ex-
plored by the researchers mentioned above, to control
more mechanically sophisticated robots such as the
Sony Aibo [76.29].
Recently there has been successful work on evolv-
ing coupled oscillator style neural controllers for
the highly unstable dynamic problem of biped walk-
ing. Reil and Husbands [76.30] showed that accurate
physics based simulations employing physics-engine
software could be used to develop controllers able
to generate successful bipedal gaits (
VIDEO 374 ).
Reil et al. have now signiﬁcantly developed this tech-
nology to exploits its commercial possibilities, in the
animation and games industries, for the real-time con-
trol of physically simulated three-dimensional (3-D)
Fig. 76.6 The octopod robot built by Applied AI Systems
Inc.
humanoid characters engaged in a variety of motor be-
haviors (refer to [76.31] for further details). Coupled
neural oscillators have been evolved also to control the
swimming pattern of articulated, snake-like, underwa-
ter robots using physics-based simulations [76.32].
Vaughan has taken related work in another direc-
tion. He has successfully applied evolutionary robotics
techniques to evolve a simulation of a 3-D ten-degree-
of-freedom bipedal robot. This machine demonstrates
many of the properties of human locomotion. By using
passive dynamics and compliant tendons, it conserves
energy while walking on a ﬂat surface. Its speed and
gait can be dynamically adjusted and it is capable of
adapting to discrepancies in both its environment and its
body’s construction [76.33]. Parameters describing the
body shape (leg segment lengths, hip width, etc.) and
properties of a continuous dynamical neural network
controller were under genetic control. The machine
started out as a passive dynamic walker [76.34] on
a slope, and then throughout the evolutionary process
the slope was gradually lowered to a ﬂat surface. The
machine demonstrated resistance to disturbance while
retaining passive dynamic features such as a passive
swing leg. Wischmann and Passemann independently
took a very similar approach [76.35]. Vaughan’s orig-
inal machine did not have a torso, but he has also
successfully applied the method to a simpliﬁed two-
dimensional (2-D) machine with a torso above the hips.
When pushed, this dynamically stable bipedal machine
walks either forward or backwards just enough to re-
lease the pressure placed on it. It is also able to adapt
to external and internal perturbations as well as vari-
ations in body size and mass [76.36]. These biped
examples make use of the co-evolution of body mor-
phology and neural controller, an idea also used in

Part G | 76.3
2040
Part G
Robots and Humans
earlier, more abstract, work on evolved bipedal locomo-
tion by Endo et al. [76.37]. Although possible changes
to the body morphology are quite tightly constrained,
nonetheless this aspect was important. This theme is
covered in more detail in the later section on Evolv-
ing Bodies, which also describes recent examples of
evolved walking behaviors in the context of body-brain
co-evolution.
McHale and Husbands [76.38, 39] have compared
many forms of evolved neural controllers for bipedal
and quadrupedal walking machines. Recurrent dynami-
cal continuous time networks and GasNets (described
in Sect. 76.7.3) were shown to have advantages in
most circumstances. The vast majority of the studies
mentioned above were conducted for relatively be-
nign environments. Notwithstanding this observation,
we can conclude that the more complex dynamical
neural network architectures, with their intricate dy-
namics, generally produce a wider range of gaits and
generate smoother, more adaptive locomotion than the
more standard use of systems based on ﬁnite-state
machines employing parameterized rules governing
the timing and coordination of individual leg move-
ments [76.40].
76.3 Simulation and Reality
Few of the experiments in the previous section were car-
ried out entirely on physical robots because:
1. Evolution may take a long time, especially if it is
carried out on a single robot that incarnates the bod-
ies of all the individuals of the evolving population.
2. The physical robot can be damaged because popula-
tions always contain a certain number of poorly per-
forming individuals (for example, colliding against
walls) by effect of random mutations.
3. Restoring the environment to initial conditions be-
tween trails of different individuals or populations
(for example, replenishing the arena with objects)
may not always be feasible without human interven-
tion.
4. Evolution of morphologies and evolution of robots
that can grow during their lifetime is almost impos-
sible with today’s technology without some level of
human intervention.
For those reasons, researchers often resort to evolu-
tion in simulation and transfer the evolved controllers
to the physical robot. However, it is well known that
programs that work well in simulations may not func-
tion properly in the real world because of differences
in sensing, actuation, and in the dynamic interactions
between robot and environment [76.41]. This reality
gap is even more evident in adaptive approaches, such
as evolutionary robotics, where the control system and
morphology are gradually crafted through the repeated
interactions between the robot and the environment.
Therefore, robots will evolve to match the speciﬁci-
ties of the simulation, which differ from the real world.
Although these issues clearly rule out any simulation
based on grid worlds or pure kinematics, over the last
10 years simulation techniques have dramatically im-
proved and resulted in software libraries that model
reasonably well dynamical properties such as friction,
collision, mass, gravity, and inertia [76.42]. These soft-
ware tools allow one to simulate articulated robots of
variable morphology and their environment as fast as,
or faster than, real time in a desktop computer.
Nonetheless, even physics-based simulations in-
clude small discrepancies that can accumulate over
time and result in very different behavior from real-
ity (for example, a robot may get stuck against a wall
in simulation whereas it can get free in reality, or vice
versa). Also, physics-based simulations cannot account
for diversity of response proﬁles of the individual sen-
sors, motors, and gears of a physical robot. Several
methods can be used to cope with these problems and
improve the quality of the transfer from simulation to
reality.
A widely used method consists of adding indepen-
dent noise to the values of the sensors provided by the
model and to the end position of the robot computed by
the simulator [76.43]. Some software libraries allow the
introduction of noise at several levels of the simulation.
This solution prevents evolution from ﬁnding solutions
that rely on the speciﬁcities of the simulation model.
Another method consists in sampling the actual sensor
values of the real robot positioned at several angles and
distances from objects of different texture. Those val-
ues are then stored in a look-up table and retrieved with
the addition of noise according to the position of the
robot in the environment [76.44]. This method proved
to be very effective for generating controllers that trans-
fer smoothly from simulation to reality. A drawback of
this sampling method is that it does not scale up well to
high-dimensional sensors (e.g., vision) or geometrically
complicated objects.
Another method, also known as minimal simula-
tions, consists of modeling only those characteristics
of the robot and environment that are relevant for the
emergence of desired behaviors [76.45]. These char-

Evolutionary Robotics
76.4 Behavior as a ComplexAdaptive System
2041
Part G | 76.4
acteristics, which are referred to as base-set features,
should be accurately modeled in simulation. Instead, all
the other characteristics, which are referred to as im-
plementation aspects, should be randomly varied across
several trials of the same individual in order to ensure
that evolving individuals do not rely on implementa-
tion aspects, but rely on base-set features only. Base-set
features must also be varied to some extent across tri-
als in order to ensure some degree of robustness of
the individual with respect to base-set features, but
this variation should not be so large that reliably ﬁt
controllers fail to evolve at all. This method allows
very fast evolution of complex robot–environment situ-
ations, as in the example of the hexapod walk described
in Sect. 76.2.1. A drawback of minimal simulations is
that it is not always easy to tell in advance which are the
base-set features that are relevant for the desired behav-
ior.
Yet another method consists of the coevolution of
the robot (control and/or morphology) and of the simu-
lator parameters that are most likely to differ from the
real world and that may affect the quality of the trans-
fer [76.46]. This method consists of coevolving two
populations, one encoding the properties of the robot
and one encoding the parameters of the simulator. Co-
evolution happens in several passes through a two-stage
process. In stage one, a randomly generated population
of robots are evolved in the default simulator and the
best individual is tested on the real robot while the time
series of sensory values are recorded. In stage two, the
population of simulators is evolved to reduce the differ-
ence between the time series recorded on the real robot
and the time series obtained by testing evolved robots
within the simulator. The best evolved simulator is then
used for stage one where a new randomly generated
population is evolved and the best individual is tested
on the real robot to generate the time series for stage
two of simulator evolution. This two-stage coevolution
is repeated several times until the error between simu-
lated and real robot behavior is the smallest possible.
It has been shown that approximately 20 passes of the
two-stage process are sufﬁcient to evolve a good con-
trol system that could be transferred to an articulated
robot. In that case, the real robot was used to test only
20 individuals.
A recent approach tackles the simulation to reality
transfer problem by using a multi-objective formula-
tion of ER in which two main objectives are optimized
via a Pareto-based multi-objective evolutionary algo-
rithm: (1) the ﬁtness and (2) the transferability [76.47].
To evaluate the transferability a simulation-to-reality
disparity measure was deﬁned in terms of the differ-
ence in behavior between simulation and reality for
any given controller. This measure is approximated
for each member of the population and the method
has successfully been demonstrated for walking behav-
iors [76.47].
Finally, another method consists of genetically en-
coding and evolving the learning rules of the control
system, rather than its parameters (e.g., connection
strengths). The parameters of the decoded control sys-
tem are always initialized to small random values at
the beginning of an individual lifetime and must self-
organize using the learning rules [76.48]. This method
prevents evolution from ﬁnding a set of control param-
eters that ﬁt the speciﬁcities of the simulation model,
and encourages emergence of control systems that
remain adaptive to partially unknown environments.
When such an evolved individual is transferred to the
real robot, it will develop online its control parame-
ters according to the genetically evolved learning rules
and taking into account the speciﬁcities of the phys-
ical world. This method is described in more detail
in Sect. 76.7.2 on evolution of learning.
76.4 Behavior as a Complex Adaptive System
Behavior is a dynamical process resulting from nonlin-
ear interactions (occurring at a fast time rate) between
the agent’s control system, its body, and the environ-
ment [76.49, 50]. At any time step, the environment and
the agent–environment relation inﬂuence the body and
the motor reaction of the agent, which in turn inﬂuences
the environment and/or the agent–environmental rela-
tion (Fig. 76.7). Sequences of these interactions lead
to a dynamical process where the contributions of the
different aspects (i. e., the robot’s control system, the
robot’s body, and the environment) cannot be sepa-
rated. This implies that even complete knowledge of
the elements governing the interactions provides little
insight into the behavior emerging from these interac-
tions [76.51, 52].
An interesting property of evolutionary robotics is
that it can enable to synthesize robots displaying a cer-
tain behavioral capacity without specifying the manner
in which such capacity should be realized and/or the
combination of elementary behaviors that should be
produced and combined to achieve the desired overall
capacity. This allows the evolving robots to discover
and exploit behaviors that emerge from the interactions
between the robot control system, the robot body and

Part G | 76.4
2042
Part G
Robots and Humans
the environment and/or from the interaction between
previously developed behavioral capacities [76.52].
The synthesis and exploitation of emergent properties,
in turn, often allows evolving robots to discover solu-
tions that rely on relatively parsimonious control policy
and/or body structures.
For an example of how evolving robots can solve
an adaptive task on the basis of a simple control policy,
thanks to the possibility to exploit properties emerging
Behavior
Behavior
Behavior
Behavior
Behavior
Body
Environment
Control
system
Fig. 76.7 Schematization of how: (1) behavior can emerge
from several nonlinear interactions, occurring at fast time
rates, between the agent’s control system, its body, and the
environment, and (2) behavior can display a multi-level or-
ganization in which the robot/environmental interactions
and the interaction between lower-level behaviors give rise
to higher level behaviors that later affect the interactions
from which they originate
Fig. 76.8 The environment and the robot. The environ-
ment consists of an arena of 60  35 cm and contains
a cylindrical objects placed at a randomly selected location
from the agent/environmental interactions, let us con-
sider the case of a Khepera robot placed in an arena
surrounded by walls (Fig. 76.8) that should evolve an
ability to forage by ﬁnding and remaining close to
a food object (i. e., a cylindrical object) [76.53]. The
robot is provided with eight infrared sensors and two
motors controlling the desired speed of the two corre-
sponding wheels. From the point of view of an external
observer, solving this problem requires robots able to:
1. Explore the environment until an obstacle is de-
tected.
2. Discriminate whether the obstacle detected is a wall
or a cylindrical object.
3. Approach or avoid the object depending on the ob-
ject type.
A detailed analysis of the sensory patterns expe-
rienced by the robot indicated that the task of dis-
criminating the two objects is far from trivial since
the two classes of sensory patterns experienced by
robots close to a wall and close to cylindrical ob-
jects overlap signiﬁcantly. However, robots evolved
for the ability to solve this task resorted to a strat-
egy that does not require to explicitly discriminate
of the two types of objects [76.53]. This solution
(
VIDEO 116 ) consists in reacting to sensory states so
that the robot/environmental dynamics converge into
a limit cycle near the cylindrical object, in which the
robot keep moving forth and back and left and right,
and not near a wall (Fig. 76.9).
180
270
0
90
180
45
25
5
b)
180
270
0
90
180
45
25
5
a)
Fig.76.9a,b Angular trajectories of an evolved robot close
to a wall (a) and to a cylinder (b). The picture was obtained
by placing the robot at a random position in the environ-
ment, leaving it free to move for 500 cycles, and recording
its relative movements with respect to the two types of ob-
jects for distances smaller than 45 mm. For sake of clarity,
arrows are used to indicate the relative direction, but not
the amplitude of movements

Evolutionary Robotics
76.4 Behavior as a ComplexAdaptive System
2043
Part G | 76.4
The possibility to discover and rely on these forms
of emergent behavior allows evolving robots to ﬁnd
computationally simple solutions to apparently com-
plex problems. Indeed, the foraging task described
above can be solved by a Khepera robot provided with
a simple reactive controller (i. e., a feedforward neu-
ral network with eight sensory neurons that encode the
state of the corresponding infrared sensors directly con-
nected to two motor neurons that set the desired speed
of the two wheels).
76.4.1 Behavior Recombination and Re-Use
Evolving robots can recombine and re-use acquired el-
ementary behavioral capacities to produce higher level
behaviors. This has been demonstrated in a series of
simulation experiments in which a population of hu-
manoid robots provided with an articulated arm, a cam-
era, and a touch sensor on the palm of the hand, have
been evolved for the ability to execute two-words im-
perative sentences constituted by the combination of
three action and three object words (reach, touch, move,
red-object, green-object, and blue-object) encoded by
six corresponding binary sensors [76.54].
During the evolutionary process the robots were
evaluated for the ability to comprehend seven out of
the nine possible sentences (that can be generated by
combining the three action and the three object words)
by executing the seven corresponding behaviors. The
robots were then post-evaluated also on the other two
sentences not experienced during the evolutionary pro-
cess.
Some of the evolved robots were able to develop
the required skills and to generalize their capacities to
the two new sentences by executing the appropriate cor-
responding behaviors (
VIDEO 41 ). Differently from
the other individuals, the robots able to generalize
where characterized by a hierarchical organization in
which the nine behaviors were produced by combining
over time a set of elementary behaviors and in which the
same elementary behaviors was re-used to produce dif-
ferent high-level behaviors. More speciﬁcally the robots
able to generalize displayed a reach-X behavior (that
consisted in moving the arm toward a red, or green, or
blue object), a touch behavior (that consisted in mov-
ing the hand until the object is touched irrespectively
from the color), and a move behavior (that consists in
keep moving the hand also after the object has been
touched irrespectively from the color) and combined
these lower-level behaviors in a compositional man-
ner to produce the nine required higher-level actions.
This means that, for example, the same reach red-object
behavior was used incombination with the touch or
the push behavior to produce a touch the red-object
and a push the red-object behavior. For other works
discussing the emergence and the role of multi-level be-
havioral organizations see [76.52].
76.4.2 Sensory-Motor Coordination
By acting robots inevitably modify the robot-envi-
ronmental relation and/or the environment and conse-
quently the stimuli that they will experience next. By
exploiting the possibility to actively inﬂuence the per-
ceived stimuli through actions, robots can ﬁnd adaptive
solutions based on parsimonious control policies. Ar-
tiﬁcial evolution constitutes an effective method for
discovering such type of solutions that are often hard
to imagine from the point of view of a human observer.
Indeed, examples of clever use of sensory-motor coor-
dination abounds in the evolutionary robotics literature.
Let us consider, for instance, the case of a Khepera
robot endowed with infrared and wheels speed sensors,
that can forage by ramaining close to large cylindrical
objects (food) while avoiding small cylindrical objects
(dangers) [76.55]. From a passive perspective, that does
not take into account the fat that the robot can self-select
useful stimuli through action, the ability to discriminate
between sensory stimuli experienced near small and
large cylindrical objects requires a relatively complex
control policy since the two classes of stimuli strongly
overlap in the robot’s perceptual space. On the other
hand, the exploitation of sensory-motor coordination
can can allow the robots to simplify the discrimination
problem.
Indeed, evolving robots tend to converge on a rather
simple solution that consists in circling around the
cylindrical objects, as soon as an object is perceived,
and in using the differential speed of the left and
right wheels sensed during the execution of the object-
circling behavior to decide to keep circling around the
object (in the case of small differential speeds) or to
abandon the object (in the case of large differential
speeds). Indeed, the execution of the object-circling be-
havior allows the robots to experience sensory stimuli
on the wheel sensors that are well differentiated for
small and large objects. This, in turn, allows them to
solve the object discrimination problem with a rather
simple but reliable control policy. For other examples
see [76.53, 56, 57].

Part G | 76.5
2044
Part G
Robots and Humans
76.5 Evolving Bodies
Most evolutionary robotics experiments – and most
robotics experiments in general – assume that the body
plan of the robot has already been designed; an opti-
mization method is used to improve the control policy
only (The term body plan is here used to denote all as-
pects of a robot’s design other than its control policy.
Such design considerations include the robot’s me-
chanical layout and material properties as well as its
sensor and motor distributions.). This emphasis be-
lies an assumption within the ﬁeld of robotics, which
is that control policy design is non-intuitive and thus
should be automated, while choosing an appropriate
robot body plan is intuitive and thus can be manually
designed.
However, it has been shown that the careful de-
sign of the robot’s body can have large and desirable
impacts on its resulting behavior. For example, proper
curvature on the underside of a biped robot’s feet
(along with other settings) can allow it to walk down
a declined plane with no control policy at all [76.58].
Or, that modiﬁcations to an anthropomorphic robot
arm and hand can facilitate the evolution of active
categorical perception [76.59] (Active categorical per-
ception occurs when a robot or animal actively inter-
acts with objects of interest, and the sensory stimu-
lation resulting from this physical interaction allows
for categorization of those objects.). These results ﬁt
with the view of embodied behavior, as outlined in
Fig. 76.7: because behavior arises from the interac-
tion between a robot’s body and its environment, al-
terations to the robot’s body will alter the resulting
behavior.
This suggests that it is useful to automatically im-
prove not just a robot’s control policy but also its body
plan. Evolutionary algorithms are a uniquely well suited
tool for this task because, unlike many learning meth-
ods, they do not make assumptions about the structure
of the system being optimized: the length of a robot’s
leg – or the number of legs – can be evolved just as eas-
ily as can the strength of a synaptic connection in an
artiﬁcial neural network.
a)
b)
Fig.76.10a,b An example
evolved robot from the GOLEM
project [76.60]. (a) The virtual robot,
as originally evolved in the simulated
environment. (b) The physical robot
comprised of a 3-D-printed plastic
frame and manually-added electronics
76.5.1 Co-Evolving Body and Brains
The Sussex group was the ﬁrst to demonstrate the
evolution of robot morphology: they evolved sensor
placements on a physical robot [76.15], although the
other aspects of the robot’s body plan remain ﬁxed.
A year later Sims [76.61] demonstrated an evolutionary
algorithm that improved the structure and parameters
of the robots’ body plans and control policies. Although
Sim’s creatures were virtual and operated in a simulated
environment, the robots exhibited a wide range of intu-
itive and non-intuitive body plans that allowed them to
swim, walk or compete over a limited resource [76.62].
Funes and Pollack [76.63] demonstrated that it was
possible to evolve three-dimensional forms in simu-
lation, build them in reality, and have the physical
structure act similarly to the originally-evolved simu-
lated structure. This was followed by work from the
same group in which robots evolved in simulation
were manufactured as physical robots using 3-D print-
ing technology [76.60] (Fig. 76.10). Although only the
plastic frame of the robot was printed and the electron-
ics and battery had to be manually added, this served
as a demonstration that, in principle, robot design could
be automated using evolutionary algorithms and robot
manufacture could be automated using rapid prototyp-
ing [76.64].
Since then, a number of research groups have
evolved robot body plans and control policies simul-
taneously for various purposes. Some researchers have
adapted this approach for studying biological ques-
tions. For example Long et al. [76.65] have evolved the
stiffness of artiﬁcial tails attached to physical swim-
ming robots: robots with tails of differing stiffness
have differing abilities to swim fast or turn well. This
provides a unique experimental tool for investigating
how backbones originally evolved in early vertebrates.
Clark et al. [76.66] also evolved the material properties
of part of a robot ﬁsh, but focussed in this case on evolv-
ing the stiffness and shape of its ﬁns in simulation. This
project had an engineering aim: the evolved ﬁns were

Evolutionary Robotics
76.5 Evolving Bodies
2045
Part G | 76.5
manufactured and tested on a physical robot ﬁsh and
were found to aid desirable swimming behavior.
Evolutionary algorithms can be used to explore the
space of possible robot body plans, but they can also
be used to explore metamorphosis, or how a robot’s
body plan might change over its lifetime. In recent
work Bongard [76.67] compared two approaches to
evolving walking behaviors for upright legged robots
(
VIDEO 771 ). In the ﬁrst approach, upright legged
robots were evolved until successful walking was dis-
covered. In the second approach, locomotion was ﬁrst
evolved for legless, anguilliform robots that gradu-
ally grew legs while moving. As evolution proceeded
in this second approach, later generations of robots
gradually lost this infant legless body plan and in-
stead were born with the upright, legged body plan. It
was found that walking evolved for the upright legged
robots more rapidly in the second approach, and that the
evolved controllers were more robust. The explanation
for this result is that the legless robot provides a form
of scaffolding that accelerates search: it is easier for
evolution to generate locomotion for the legless robot
because with the anguilliform body plan the robot can-
not fall over (Scaffolding is the phenomenon in which
a teacher introduces some aspect into the learner’s en-
vironment that helps the learner to grasp a concept and
then later reﬁne the concept when the scaffold is re-
moved [76.68]. The canonical example of scaffolding is
training wheels for bicycles.). This locomotion strategy
is then reﬁned subsequently by evolution to success-
fully control the upright and legged (and thus unstable)
robot.
The simultaneous evolution of robot body plans and
control policies offers other avenues for investigating
the relationship between body, brain and environment.
In [76.69] it was found that more complexly-shaped
robots were produced when evolved to walk over rough
terrain than when evolved to walk over ﬂat terrain
(
VIDEO 772 ). This was due to the fact that robots
evolved in rough terrain evolved appendages and hooks
to gain purchase between outcroppings and then pull or
push themselves forward.
Most recently Hiller and Lipson [76.70] have
demonstrated the evolution of soft robots: this requires
evolving not just the control policy of the robot and its
physical shape, but also the material properties of each
voxel comprising the machine. This allows for complex
three-dimensional patterning of soft and rigid material
throughout the robot, which can be exploited by evolu-
tion to produce locomotion [76.71]. Soft robots are an
ideal vehicle for demonstrating the power of evolution-
ary algorithms: the design and control of such machines
is highly nonintuitive, making manual design extremely
difﬁcult.
76.5.2 Self-Modeling
The evolution of robot body plans can be useful not
just for robot design but also for increasing the adap-
tivity of a physical robot once it has been designed
and deployed. For example in [76.72] it was shown
that a physical robot could be equipped with an on-
board simulator that the robot could use to continuously
evolve models of itself. These self-models reﬂect the
mechanical construction of the robot. This method was
found useful for robots that might sustain unanticipated
damage such as the mechanical separation of a leg: the
robot diagnoses the damage; it then evolves a simu-
lated damaged robot that accurately reﬂects the physical
damage; it evolves a compensatory control policy inter-
nally using the simulated, damaged robot; and ﬁnally
the physical robot uses the internally evolved compen-
satory control policy to continue moving despite its
injury. Figure 76.11 outlines this method.
Self-model synthesis
Exploratory action synthesis
Target behavior synthesis
b)
c)
d)
a)
f)
e)
Fig.76.11a–f The machine begins by performing a random action
and collects the resulting sensor-motor data (a). An evolutionary
algorithm evolves a population of simulated robots that, when they
move, produce similar sensor-motor data as the physical machine
(b). Another algorithm searches for a new action for the physical
robot to perform (c). The physical robot performs the new action,
and re-evolves self-models to explain the result of the ﬁrst action
and the new action ((a)). After several cycles of this self-modeling,
the best self-model is used to evolve new behaviors (d). Finally, the
physical robot executes these newly-evolved behaviors (e,f)

Part G | 76.6
2046
Part G
Robots and Humans
A method for generalizing this to robot swarms
was demonstrated in [76.73]. Each robot in the swarm
maintained its own self-modeling engine, but would pe-
riodically export its best self-model and control policy
to others in the swarm. The result of this was that if one
robot was damaged and recovered, a second robot that
suffered similar damage recovered more rapidly.
Finally, instead of modeling the self, a robot could
create a model of another robot in its vicinity. Even bet-
ter, the robot could evolve a model of the other robot’s
intentions and use this information to aid or thwart
the other robot’s actions, as demonstrated in [76.74].
Although the robots did not model each other’s body
plans, this ability to model others in general is known
as Theory of Mind. One could imagine how increas-
ing levels of recursion of such embedded mind reading
could provide continued evolutionary pressure toward
increasingly intelligent machines.
76.6 Seeing the Light
Pioneering experiments on evolving visually guided be-
haviors were performed at Sussex University [76.75] on
a specially designed gantry robot (Fig. 76.12, see also
VIDEO 371 ). Discrete-time dynamical recurrent neu-
ral networks and visual sampling morphologies were
concurrently evolved: the brain was developed in tan-
dem with the visual sensor [76.13, 76, 77]. The robot
was designed to allow real-world evolution by having
off-board power and processing so that the robot could
be run for long periods while being monitored by au-
tomatic ﬁtness evaluation functions. A charge-coupled
device (CCD) camera points down towards a mirror an-
gled at 45ı as shown in Fig. 76.12. The mirror can
rotate around an axis perpendicular to the camera’s im-
age plane. The camera is suspended from the gantry,
allowing motion in the X, Y, and Z dimensions. This ef-
fectively provides an equivalent to a wheeled robot with
a forward-facing camera when only the X and Y dimen-
sions of translation are used. The additional dimension
allows ﬂying behaviors to be studied.
Fig. 76.12 The gantry robot used in the visual discrimina-
tion task. The camera inside the top box points down at the
inclined mirror, which can be turned by the stepper motor
beneath. The lower plastic disk is suspended from a joy-
stick to detect collisions with obstacles
The apparatus was initially used in a manner sim-
ilar to the real-world experiments on navigation in the
looping maze with the miniature mobile robot described
in Sect. 76.2. A number of visually guided navigation
behaviors were successfully achieved, including navi-
gating around obstacles, tracking moving targets, and
discriminating between different objects [76.76]. The
evolutionary process was incremental. The ability to
distinguish between two different targets was evolved
on top of the single target-ﬁnding behavior. The chro-
mosome was of dynamic length so the neurocontroller
was structurally further developed by evolution to
achieve the new task (neurons and connections added).
In the experiment illustrated in Figs. 76.12 and 76.13,
Robot x=61.58, y=73.78, θ=2.1, Time-step=135
a)
b)
Fig.76.13a,b The shape discrimination task. (a) The posi-
tion of the robot in the arena, showing the target area in
front of the triangle. (b) The robot camera’s ﬁeld of view
showing the visual patches selected by evolution for sen-
sory input

Evolutionary Robotics
76.6 Seeing the Light
2047
Part G | 76.6
starting from a random position and orientation, the
robot had to move to the triangle rather than the rectan-
gle. This had to be achieved irrespective of the relative
positions of the shapes and under very noisy light-
ing conditions. Recurrent neural network controllers
were evolved in conjunction with visual sampling mor-
phologies. Only genetically speciﬁed patches from the
camera image were used (by being connected to in-
put neurons according to the genetic speciﬁcation). The
rest of the image was thrown away. This resulted in
extremely minimal systems using only two or three
pixels of visual information, yet still able to perform
the task reliably under highly variable lighting condi-
tions [76.13, 76].
This was another example of staged, or incremental,
evolution to obtain control systems capable of solv-
ing problems that are either too complex or may proﬁt
from an evolutionary methodology that discovers, pre-
serves, and builds upon subcomponents of the solution.
For an evolutionary method that incorporate strate-
gies to explicitly address this issue, interested readers
may refer to [76.78]. However, staged evolution re-
mains a poorly explored area of evolutionary robotics
that deserves further study and a more principled ap-
proach [76.79] in order to achieve increasingly complex
robotic systems.
76.6.1 Coevolution of Active Vision
and Feature Selection
Machine vision today can hardly compete with biolog-
ical vision despite the enormous power of computers.
One of the most remarkable – and often neglected – dif-
ferences between machine vision and biological vision
is that computers are often asked to process an entire
image in one shot and produce an immediate answer
whereas animals take time to explore the image over
time, searching for features and dynamically integrat-
ing information over time.
Active vision is the sequential and interactive pro-
cess of selecting and analyzing parts of a visual
scene [76.80–82]. Feature selection instead is the de-
velopment of sensitivity to relevant features in the
visual scene to which the system selectively responds,
e.g., [76.83]. Each of these processes has been inves-
tigated and adopted in machine vision. However, the
combination of active vision and feature selection is
still largely unexplored. An intriguing hypothesis is
that coevolution of active vision and feature selection
could greatly simplify the computational complexity of
vision-based behavior by facilitating each other’s task.
This hypothesis was investigated in a series of ex-
periments [76.84] on coevolution of active vision and
feature selection for behavioral systems equipped with
a primitive moving retina and a deliberately simple neu-
ral architecture (Fig. 76.14). The neural architecture
was composed of an artiﬁcial retina and two sets of
output units. One set of output units determined the
movement and zooming factor of the retina, and the
other set of units determined the behavior of the system,
such as the response of a pattern-recognition system,
the control parameters of a robot, or the actions of a car
driver. The neural network was embedded in a behav-
ioral system and its input/output values were updated
every 300 ms while its ﬁtness was computed. Therefore,
the synaptic weights of this network were responsi-
ble for both the visual features on which the system
based its behavior and for the motor actions necessary
to search for those features.
In a ﬁrst set of experiments, the neural network was
embedded in a simulated pan–tilt camera and asked to
discriminate between triangles and squares of differ-
ent size that could appear at any location of a screen
(Fig. 76.15a), a perceptual task similar to that explored
with the gantry robot described in Sect. 76.5. The visual
system was free to explore the image for 60 s while con-
tinuously reporting whether the current screen showed
a triangle or a square. The ﬁtness was proportional to
d) System
behavior
e) Vision
behavior
a) Visual
neurons
f)
c) Proprioceptive
neurons
b) Visual scene
Retina
Fig.76.14a–f The neural architecture of the active vision
system is composed of: (a) a grid of visual neurons with
nonoverlapping receptive ﬁelds whose activation is given
by (b) the grey level of the corresponding pixels in the
image; (c) a set of proprioceptive neurons that provide
information about the movement of the vision system;
(d) a set of output neurons that determine the behavior
of the system (pattern recognition, car driving, robot nav-
igation); (e) a set of output neurons that determine the
behavior of the vision system; and (f) a set of evolvable
synaptic connections. The number of neurons in each sub-
system can vary according to the experimental settings

Part G | 76.6
2048
Part G
Robots and Humans
the amount of correct responses accumulated over the
60 s for several screenshots containing various instances
of the two shapes. Evolved systems were capable of cor-
rectly identifying the type of shape with 100% accuracy
after a few seconds despite the fact that this recognition
problem is not linearly separable and that the neural net-
work does not have hidden units, which in theory are
necessary to solve nonlinearly separable tasks. Indeed,
the same neural network presented with the same set of
images and trained with supervised learning, but with-
out the possibility to actively explore the scene, was not
capable of solving the task. The evolved active vision
system developed sensitivity to vertical edges, oriented
edges and corners, and used its movement to search for
these features in order to tell whether the shape was
a triangle or a square. These features, which are also
found in the early visual system of almost all animals,
are invariant to size and location.
In a second set of experiments, the neural network
was embedded in a simulated car and was asked to drive
over several mountain circuits (Fig. 76.15b). The simu-
lator was a modiﬁed version of a car race video game.
The neural network could move the retina across the
scene seen through the windscreen at the driver’s seat
and control the steering, acceleration, and braking of the
car. The ﬁtness was inversely proportional to the time
taken to complete the circuits without exiting the road.
Evolved networks completed all circuits with time laps
competitive to those of well-trained students controlling
the car with a joystick. The evolved network started by
searching for the edge of the road and tracked its rela-
tive position with respect to the edge of the windscreen
in order to control steering and acceleration. This be-
havior was supported by the development of sensitivity
to oriented edges.
In a third set of experiments, the neural network was
embedded in a real mobile robot with a pan–tilt camera
a)
b)
Fig. 76.15 (a) An evolved individual explores the screen searching
for the shape and recognizes it by the presence of a vertical edge.
(b) Search for the edge of the road at the beginning of a drive over
a mountain road
that was asked to navigate in a square arena with low
walls located in an ofﬁce (Fig. 76.16). The ﬁtness was
proportional to the amount of straight motion measured
over two minutes. Robots that hit the walls because they
watched people or other irrelevant features of the ofﬁce
had lower ﬁtness than robots that could perform long
straight paths and avoid walls of the arena. Evolved
robots tended to ﬁxate the edge between the ﬂoor and
the walls of the arena, and turned away from the wall
when the size of its retinal projection became larger
than a threshold (
VIDEO 36 ). This combination of
sensitivity to oriented edges and looming is also found
in the visual circuits of several insects and birds.
In a further set of experiments [76.85], the visual
pathway of the neural network was augmented by an
intermediate set of neurons whose synaptic weights
could be modiﬁed by Hebbian learning [76.86] while
the robot moved in the environment. All the other
synaptic weights were genetically encoded and evolved.
The results showed that lifelong development of the
receptive ﬁelds improved the performance of evolved
robots and allowed robust transfer of evolved neural
controllers from simulated to real robots, because the
receptive ﬁelds developed sensitivity to features en-
countered in the environment where they happen to
be born (see also the section above on simulation and
reality). Furthermore, the results showed that the de-
velopment of visual receptive ﬁelds was signiﬁcantly
and consistently affected by active vision as compared
to the development of receptive ﬁelds passively ex-
posed to the same set of sample images. In other words,
robots evolved with active vision developed sensitiv-
ity to a smaller subset of features in the environment
and actively tracked those features to maintain a stable
behavior.
Fig. 76.16 A mobile robot with a pan–tilt camera is asked
to move within the walled arena in the ofﬁce environment

Evolutionary Robotics
76.7 Computational Neuroethology
2049
Part G | 76.7
76.7 Computational Neuroethology
Evolutionary robotics is also used to investigate open
questions in neuroscience and cognitive science [76.87–
90] because it offers the vantage point of a behavioral
system that interacts with its environment [76.91]. Al-
though the results should be carefully considered when
drawing analogies with biological organisms, evolu-
tionary robotics can generate and test hypotheses that
could be further investigated with mainstream neuro-
science methods.
For example, the active vision system with Hebbian
plasticity described in the previous section was used to
answer a question raised by Held and Hein [76.92] in
the 1960s. The authors devised the apparatus shown
in Fig. 76.17 where the free movements of a kitten
(active kitten) were transmitted to a second kitten that
was carried in a gondola (passive kitten). The sec-
ond kitten could move its head, but its feet did not
touch the ground. Consequently, the two kitten re-
ceived almost identical visual stimulation, but only
one of them received that stimulation as a result of
body self-movement. After a few days in that envi-
ronment, only the active kitten displayed normal be-
havior in several visually guided tasks. The authors
suggested the hypothesis that proprioceptive motor in-
formation resulting from generation of actions was nec-
essary for the development of normal, visually guided
behavior.
The kitten experiments were replicated by cloning
an evolved robot controller and randomly initializing
the synaptic values of the adaptive visual pathways in
both clones. One cloned robot was then left free to move
in a square environment while the other cloned robot
was forced to move along imposed trajectories, but was
free to control its camera position, just like the pas-
sive kitten [76.94]. The results indicated that the visual
receptive ﬁelds and behaviors of passive robots differ
signiﬁcantly from those of active robots. Furthermore,
passive robots that were later left free to move were no
longer capable of properly avoiding walls. A thorough
analysis of neural activation correlated with behavior
of the robot and even transplantation of neurons across
active and passive robots revealed that the poor perfor-
mance was due to the fact that passive robots could not
completely select the visual features they were exposed
to. Consequently, passive robots developed sensitivity
to features that were not functional to their normal be-
havior and interfered with other dominant features in
the visual ﬁeld. Whether this explanation also hold for
living animals remains to be further investigated, but at
least these experiments indicated that motor feedback
is not necessary to explain the pattern of pathological
behavior observed in animals and robots.
76.7.1 Emergence of Place Cells
Let us now consider the case of an animal exploring
an environment and periodically returning to its nest
to feed. It has been speculated that this type of situa-
tion requires the formation of spatial representations of
the environment that allow the animal to ﬁnd its way
home [76.95]. Different neural models with various de-
grees of complexity and biological detail that could
provide such functionality have been proposed [76.96,
97].
Would a robot evolved under similar survival con-
ditions develop a spatial representation of the envi-
ronment and, if so, what type of representation would
that be? These questions were explored using the
same Khepera robot and evolutionary methodology de-
scribed in Sect. 76.2 for reactive navigation in the
looping maze. The environment was a square arena with
a small patch on the ﬂoor in a corner where the robot
could instantaneously recharge its (simulated) battery
(Fig. 76.18). The environment was located in a dark
room with a small light tower over the recharging sta-
tion.
The sensory system of the robot was composed of
eight distance sensors, two ambient-light sensors (one
Fig. 76.17 The original apparatus in [76.92], where the
gross movements of a kitten moving almost freely were
transmitted to a second kitten that was carried in a gon-
dola. Both kittens were allowed to move their head. They
received essentially the same visual stimulation because of
the unvarying pattern on the walls and the center post of
the apparatus (after [76.93], with permission)

Part G | 76.7
2050
Part G
Robots and Humans
on each side), one ﬂoor-color sensor, and a sensor for
battery charge level. The battery lasted only 20 s and
had a linear discharge. The evolutionary neural net-
work included ﬁve fully connected internal neurons
between sensory and motor neurons. The same ﬁtness
function described in Sect. 76.2 for navigation in the
looping maze was used, except for the middle term
which had been used to encourage straight navigation in
the looping maze. The ﬁtness value was computed every
300 ms and accumulated over the life span of the in-
dividual. Therefore, individuals who discovered where
the charger was could live longer and accumulate more
ﬁtness by exploring the environment (individuals were
killed if they survived longer than 60 s to limit the ex-
perimentation time).
The same physical robot evolved for 10 days and
nights as both the ﬁtness and life span of individu-
als continued to increase (Fig. 76.19). After approx-
imately 200 generations, the robot was capable of
navigating around the environment, covering long tra-
jectories while avoiding both walls and the recharging
area (
VIDEO 118 ). When the battery was almost dis-
charged it initiated a straight navigation towards the
recharging area and exited immediately after battery
recharge to resume navigation. Best evolved individuals
always entered the recharging area one or two seconds
before full discharge of the battery. That implies that
robots must somehow calibrate the timing and trajec-
tory of their homing behavior depending on where they
happened to be in the environment.
In order to understand how that behavior could pos-
sibly be generated, a set of neuroethological measures
Fig. 76.18 Bird’s eye view of the arena with the light tower
over the recharging station and the Khepera robot
were performed using a laser positioning device that
provided exact position and orientation of the robot
every 300 ms. By correlating the robot position and be-
havior with the activation of the internal neurons in
real time while the evolved individual freely moved
in the environment, it was possible to see that some
neurons specialized for reactive behaviors, such as
obstacle avoidance, forward motion, and battery mon-
itoring. Other neurons instead displayed more complex
activation patterns. One of them revealed a pattern of
activation levels that depended on whether the robot
was oriented facing the light tower or facing the op-
posite direction (Fig. 76.20). In the former case, the
activation pattern reﬂected zones of the environment
and paths typically followed by the robot during ex-
ploration and homing. For example, the robot trajectory
towards the recharging area never crossed the two gate
walls visible in the activation maps around the recharg-
ing station. When the robot faced the opposite direction,
the same neuron displayed a gradient ﬁeld orthogonally
aligned with the recharging area. This gradient provides
an indication of the distance from the recharging area.
Interestingly, this pattern of activity is not signiﬁcantly
affected by the charge level of the battery.
The functioning of this neuron reminds of the clas-
sic ﬁndings on the hippocampus of the rat brain where
some neurons (also known as place cells) selectively
ﬁre when the rat is in speciﬁc areas of the environ-
ment [76.98]. Also, the orientation-speciﬁc pattern of
neural activation measured on the evolved robot is rem-
200
150
250
100
0
50
Generations
Nr. of actions
Fitness
b)
a)
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
200
150
100
0
50
Generations
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Fig. 76.19 (a) Average population ﬁtness (continuous line)
and ﬁtness of the best individual (dotted line). (b) Life span
of the best individuals measured as number of sensorimo-
tor cycles, or actions. Individuals start with a full battery
which lasts 50 actions (20 s), if not recharged. The maxi-
mum life span is 150 actions

Evolutionary Robotics
76.7 Computational Neuroethology
2051
Part G | 76.7
iniscent of the so-called head-direction neurons in the
rat hippocampus, which are positioned nearby place
cells, whose ﬁring patterns depend on the rat head-
ing direction with respect to an environmental land-
mark [76.99]. Although the analogy between brains of
evolved robots and of biological organisms should not
be taken too literally, these results indicate that the two
organisms converge towards a functionally similar neu-
ral strategy, which may be more efﬁcient to address
this type of situation than a strategy that does not rely
on representations (but only on reactive strategies such
as random motion, light following, or dead reckon-
ing).
76.7.2 Spiking Neurons
The great majority of biological neurons communicate
using self-propagating electrical pulses called spikes,
but from an information-theoretic perspective it is not
yet clear how information is encoded in the spike
train. Connectionist models [76.100], by far the most
widespread, assume that what matters is the ﬁring rate
of a neuron, that is, the average quantity of spikes emit-
ted by the neuron within a relatively long time window
(for example, over 100 ms). Alternatively, what matters
is the average number of spikes of a small population of
neurons at a give point. In these models the real-valued
output of an artiﬁcial neuron represents the ﬁring rate,
possibly normalized relatively to the maximum attain-
able value. Pulsed models [76.101], instead, are based
on the assumption that the ﬁring time, that is, the pre-
cise time of emission of a single spike, may convey
important information [76.102]. Spiking neuron models
have slightly more complicated dynamics of synaptic
and membrane integration. Depending on one’s theory
of what really matters, connectionist or spiking models
are used.
However, designing circuits of spiking neurons that
display a desired functionality is still a challenging task.
The most successful results in the ﬁeld of robotics ob-
tained so far focused on the ﬁrst stages of sensory pro-
cessing and on relatively simple motor control [76.103,
104]. Despite these implementations, there are not yet
methods for developing complex spiking circuits that
could display minimally cognitive functions or learn be-
havioral abilities through autonomous interaction with
a physical environment.
Artiﬁcial evolution represents a promising method-
ology to generate networks of spiking circuits with
desired functionalities expressed as behavioral criteria
(ﬁtness function). Evolved networks could then be ex-
amined to detect what communication modality is used
and how that correlates with observed behavior of the
robot.
Floreano and Mattiussi [76.105] evolved a fully
connected network of spiking neurons for driving
a vision-based robot in an arena painted with black
stripes of variable size against a white background
(Fig. 76.21). The Khepera robot used in these exper-
iments was equipped with a vision turret composed
of one linear array of grayscale photoreceptors span-
ning a visual ﬁeld of 36ı. The output values of a bank
Facing light
Facing opposite corner
Low
battery 
Full 
battery
Fig. 76.20 Activation levels (brightness proportional to activation)
of an internal neuron plotted over the environment while the robot
was positioned at various locations in each of the four conditions
(facing recharging area or not, discharged battery or not). The
recharging area is located at the top left corner of each map
Fig. 76.21 A network of spiking neurons is evolved to
drive the vision-based robot in the arena. The light be-
low the rotating contacts allows continuous evolution also
overnight

Part G | 76.7
2052
Part G
Robots and Humans
of local contrast detection ﬁlters were converted in
spikes (the stronger the contrast, the larger the num-
ber of spikes per second) sent to ten fully connected
spiking neurons implemented according to the spike re-
sponse model [76.106]. The spike series of a subset
of these neurons was translated into motor commands
(more spikes per second corresponded to faster rotation
of the wheel). The ﬁtness function was the amount of
forward translation of the robot measured over 2 min.
Consequently robots that turned in place or hit the
walls had comparatively lower ﬁtness than robots that
could move straight and turn only to avoid walls.
The genome of these robots was a bit string that en-
coded only the sign of the neurons and the presence
of synaptic connections. Existing connections were set
to 1 and could not change during the lifetime of the
robot.
Evolution reliably discovered very robust spik-
ing controllers in approximately 20 generations, ap-
proximately 30 h of evolution on the real robot
(
VIDEO 37 ). Evolved robots could avoid not only
the walls, but any object positioned in front of them. De-
tailed analysis of the best evolved controllers revealed
that neurons did not exploit time differences between
spikes, which one would have expected if optic ﬂow
was used to detect distance from walls. Instead, they
simply used the number of incoming spikes (ﬁring rate)
as an indication of when to turn. When the robot per-
ceived a lot of contrast it would go straight, but when
the contrast decreased below a certain threshold (indi-
cating that it approached an object), it started to turn
away. This extremely efﬁcient and simple result seems
to be in contrast with theories of optic ﬂow detection in
insects and may be worth considering as an alternative
hypothesis for vision-based behavior.
Spiking neural networks turned out to be more
evolvable than connectionist models (at least for this
task). One possible explanation is that spiking neurons
have subthreshold dynamics that, to some extent, can
be affected by mutations without immediately affecting
the output of the network.
The robust results and compact genetic encoding
encouraged the authors to use an even simpler model of
spiking neuron so that the entire neural network could
be mapped in less than 50 bytes of memory. The evo-
lutionary algorithm was also reduced to a few lines of
code and the entire system was implemented within
a programmable intelligent computer (PIC) microcon-
troller without the need for any external computer for
data storage. The system was used for a sugar-cube
robot (Fig. 76.22) that autonomously and reliably de-
veloped the ability to navigate around a maze in less
than an hour [76.107]. Interestingly, evolved spiking
controllers developed a pattern of connections where
spiking neurons received connections from a small
patch of neighboring sensors, but not from other sen-
sors, and were connected only to neighboring spiking
neurons. This pattern of connectivity is also observed
in biological systems and encourages specialization of
neurons to sensory features.
76.7.3 GasNets
This section describes another style of artiﬁcial neural
network strongly inspired by those parts of contempo-
rary neuroscience that emphasize the complex electro-
chemical nature of real nervous systems. In particular,
they make use of an analogue of volume signaling,
whereby neurotransmitters freely diffuse into a rela-
tively large volume around a nerve cell, potentially
affecting many other neurons [76.108, 109]. This exotic
form of neural signaling does not sit easily with classi-
cal pictures of brain mechanisms and is forcing a radical
rethink of existing theory [76.110–113]. The class of
artiﬁcial neural networks developed to explore artiﬁ-
cial volume signaling are known as GasNets [76.114].
These are essentially standard neural networks aug-
mented by a chemical signaling system comprising
a diffusing virtual gas which can modulate the response
of other neurons. A number of GasNet variants, inspired
by different aspects of real nervous systems, have been
explored in an evolutionary robotics context as artiﬁ-
cial nervous systems for mobile autonomous robots.
They have been shown to be signiﬁcantly more evolv-
able, in terms of speed to a good solution, than other
forms of neural networks for a variety of robot tasks
and behaviors [76.38, 114–116]. They are being inves-
tigated as potentially useful engineering tools and as
a way of gaining helpful insights into biological sys-
tems [76.112, 117–119].
By analogy with biological neuronal networks, Gas-
Nets incorporate two distinct signaling mechanisms,
one electrical and one chemical. The underlying elec-
trical network is a discrete-time-step recurrent neural
network with a variable number of nodes. These nodes
Fig. 76.22 The Alice sugar-cube robot equipped with the
evolutionary spiking neural network implemented within
its PIC microcontroller

Evolutionary Robotics
76.7 Computational Neuroethology
2053
Part G | 76.7
are connected by either excitatory or inhibitory links
(Fig. 76.23).
In addition to this underlying network in which posi-
tive and negative signals ﬂow between units, an abstract
process loosely analogous to the diffusion of gaseous
modulators is at play. Some units can emit virtual gases
which diffuse and are capable of modulating the behav-
ior of other units by changing the proﬁle of their out-
put functions. The networks occupy a 2-D space; the
diffusion processes mean that the relative positioning
of nodes is crucial to the functioning of the network.
Spatially, the gas concentration varies as an inverse ex-
ponential of the distance from the emitting node with
a spread governed by a parameter r with the concentra-
tion set to zero for all distances greater than r. The total
concentration of gas at a node is determined by sum-
ming the contributions from all other emitting nodes.
For mathematical convenience, in the original Gas-
Net there are two gases, one whose modulatory effect
is to increase the transfer function gain parameter and
one whose effect is to decrease it. Thus the gas does
not alter the electrical activity in the network directly
but rather acts by continuously changing the mapping
between input and output for individual nodes, either
directly of by stimulating the production of further vir-
tual gas. The general form of the diffusion is based on
the properties of a (real) single-source neuron as mod-
eled in detail by Philippides et al. [76.112, 117]. The
modulation chosen is motivated by what is known of
NO modulatory effects at synapses [76.120]. For full
details see [76.114].
Various extensions of the basic GasNet have been
produced. Two in particular are strongly inspired by
contemporary neuroscience. The plexus model is di-
rectly inspired by a type of signaling seen in the
mammalian cerebral cortex in which the NO signal
is generated by the combined action of many ﬁne
NO-producing ﬁbers, giving a targeted cloud which is
distant from the neurons from which the ﬁber plexus
emanates [76.118]. In the plexus GasNet, which mod-
els this form of signaling at an abstract level, the spatial
distribution of gas concentration has been modiﬁed to
be uniform over the area of affect. The center of this
gas diffusion cloud is under genetic control and can be
distant from the controlling node (which, by analogy, is
the source of the plexus) [76.116]. All other details of
the models are identical to the original GasNet model,
as described earlier. The receptor GasNet incorporates
an aspect of biological neuronal networks that has no
analog in the vast majority of artiﬁcial neural networks
(ANNs): the role of receptor molecules. Although neu-
roscience is a long way from a full understanding of
receptor mechanisms, a number of powerful systems
level ideas can be abstracted.
Neuron 1
Neuron 2
Neuron 4
Neuron 3
Neuron 5
Neuron 6
A GasNet. Neuron 3 is emitting gas, and modulating
neuron 2 despite there being no synaptic connection.
Fig. 76.23 A basic GasNet showing positive (solid) and
negative (dashed) electrical connections and a diffusing
virtual gas creating a chemical gradient
Details of the receptor variant are similar to the ba-
sic GasNet except there is now only one virtual gas
and each node in the network can have one of three
discrete quantities (zero, medium, maximum) of a num-
ber of possible receptors. The modulation the diffusing
neurotransmitter affects at a neuron depends on which
receptors are present. The strength of a modulation at
a node is proportional to the product of the gas concen-
tration at the node and the relevant receptor quantity. In
the original GasNet, any node that was in the path of
a diffusing transmitter would be modulated in a ﬁxed
way. The receptor model allows site-speciﬁc modu-
lations, including no modulation (no receptors) and
multiple modulations at a single site ([76.116] for fur-
ther details).
Although most of the GasNet variants described in
this section have been successfully used in a number
of robotic tasks, their evolvability and other properties
were thoroughly compared on a version of the (gantry)
robot visual discrimination task described in Sect. 76.5,
VIDEO 375 . All aspects of the networks were under
genetic control: the number of nodes, the connectivity
and, in the case of the GasNets, all parameters gov-
erning volume signaling (including the position of the
nodes and whether or not they were virtual gas emit-
ters). The visual sampling morphology was also under
evolutionary control. The original basic GasNet was
found to be signiﬁcantly more evolvable than a vari-
ety of other styles of connectionist neural networks as
well as a GasNet with the volume signaling disabled.
Successful GasNet controllers for this task tended to be
rather minimal, in terms of numbers of nodes and con-
nections, while possessing complex dynamics [76.114].

Part G | 76.8
2054
Part G
Robots and Humans
Later experiments comparing the basic GasNet with the
plexus and receptor variants showed the latter two to be
considerably more evolvable than the former, with the
receptor GasNet being particularly successful [76.116].
These GasNet experiments demonstrated that the intri-
cate network dynamics made possible by the artiﬁcial
volume signaling mechanisms can be readily harnessed
to generate adaptive behaviors in autonomous agents.
They also throw up such questions as why GasNets
are more evolvable than many other forms of ANN
and why there is a difference in evolvability between
GasNet variants. In order to gain insight into what fac-
tors are most important in GasNet evolvability, several
other varieties were studied, including non-spatial Gas-
Nets where the diffusion process is replaced by explicit
gas connections with complex dynamics and version
with other forms of modulation and diffusion [76.119].
Detailed comparative studies of these variants with
each other, and with other forms of ANN, were per-
formed using the visual discrimination task described
above [76.116, 119].
The comparative studies revealed that the rich dy-
namics and additional timescales introduced by the
gas played an important part in enhanced evolvabil-
ity, but were not the whole story [76.116, 119]. The
particular form of modulation was also important –
multiplicative or exponential modulation (in the form
of changes to the transfer function) were found to be
effective, but additive modulations were not. The for-
mer kind of modulations may well confer evolutionary
advantages by allowing nodes to be sensitive to differ-
ent ranges of input (internal and sensory) in different
contexts. The spatial embedding of the networks also
appears to play a role in producing the most effective
coupling between the two distinct signalling processes
(electrical and chemical). By exploiting a loose, ﬂexi-
ble coupling between the two processes, it is possible
to signiﬁcantly reduce destructive interference between
them, allowing one to be tuned against the other while
searching for good solutions [76.115, 116, 121]. Similar
forces may be at play in spiking neural networks, where
sub-threshold and spiking dynamics interact with each
other, which although not yet compared to GasNets,
were shown to be more evolvable than connectionist
networks. Measurements of the degree of coupling in
the GasNets variants versus speed of evolution sup-
ported this view [76.116]; the receptor GasNet, for
which the evolutionary search process has the most di-
rect control over the degree of coupling between the sig-
naling processes, and which has a bias towards a loose
coupling, was by far the most evolvable [76.116].
Analysis of GasNet solutions often reveals high
levels of degeneracy, with functionally equivalent sub-
networks occurring in many different forms, some in-
volving gas and some not [76.121]. Their genotype to
phenotype mapping (where the phenotype is robot be-
havior) is also highly degenerate with many different
ways of achieving the same outcome (e.g., moving node
positions, changing gas diffusion parameters or adding
new connections can all have the same effect). This is
especially true when variable length genotypes are used
to efﬁciently sculpt solutions in a search space of vari-
able dimensions. The levels of degeneracy are generally
signiﬁcantly higher than when using connectionist net-
works. These properties partly explain the robustness
and adaptability of GasNets in noisy environments and
are another important factor in their evolvability (there
are many paths to the same phenotypical outcome with
reduced probabilities of lethal mutations) [76.119, 122].
In the most successful varieties of GasNet, multi-scale
dynamics, modulation and spatial embedding act in
concert to produce highly evolvable degenerate net-
works.
These and ongoing investigations indicate that ex-
plicitly dealing with the electrochemical nature of ner-
vous systems is likely to be an increasingly fruitful
area of research, both for evolutionary robotics and for
neuroscience, that will likely force us to broaden our
notions of what behavior-generating mechanisms might
look like.
Because of its ability to explore whole classes of
underspeciﬁed models, ER is being increasingly used
to develop or explore neural models aimed at answer-
ing speciﬁc questions in neuroscience [76.88–90] or
to probe new theories about possible neural mecha-
nisms [76.90]. One intriguing recent hypothesis is that
one of the forms of plasticity on which the brain relies
is itself a form of evolution via natural selection acting
within neural tissue [76.123, 124]. The units of selec-
tion in this case are activity and connection patterns
which are copied between groups of neurons. Irrespec-
tive of whether or not it occurs in nature (and it might),
this kind of mechanism could be employed in a whole
new kind of evolutionary robotics.
76.8 Evolution and Learning
Evolution and learning (or phylogenetic and ontoge-
netic adaptation) are two forms of biological adaptation
that differ in space and time. Evolution is a process
of selective reproduction and substitution based on
the existence of a population of individuals display-
ing variability at the genetic level. Learning, instead,

Evolutionary Robotics
76.8 Evolution and Learning
2055
Part G | 76.8
is a set of modiﬁcations taking place within each sin-
gle individual during its own life time. Evolution and
learning operate on different time scales. Evolution is
a form of adaptation capable of capturing relatively
slow environmental changes that might encompass sev-
eral generations (e.g., the perceptual characteristics of
food sources for a given species). Learning, instead,
allows an individual to adapt to environmental modiﬁ-
cations that are unpredictable at the generational level.
Learning might include a variety of mechanisms that
produce adaptive changes in an individual during its
lifetime, such as physical development, neural matura-
tion, variation of the connectivity between neurons, and
synaptic plasticity. Finally, whereas evolution operates
on the genotype, learning affects only the phenotype,
and phenotypic modiﬁcations cannot directly modify
the genotype.
Researchers have combined evolutionary tech-
niques and learning techniques (supervised or unsuper-
vised learning algorithm such us reinforcement learning
or Hebbian learning; for a review see [76.125]). These
studies have been conducted with two different pur-
poses:
1. Identifying the potential advantage of combining
these two methods from the point of view of devel-
oping robust and effective robots.
2. Understanding the role of the interaction between
learning and evolution in nature.
Within an evolutionary perspective, learning has
several different adaptive functions. First, it might al-
lows individuals to adapt to changes that occur too
quickly to be tracked by evolution [76.126]. Secondly,
learning might allows robots to use information ex-
tracted during their interaction with environment to
develop adaptive characters ontogenetically without
necessarily discovering these characters through ge-
netic variations and without encoding these characters
in their genome. To understand the importance of this
aspect, we should consider that evolutionary adaptation
is based on an explicit but concise indication of how
well an individual robot coped with its environment –
the ﬁtness value of a robot. Ontogenetic adaptation, on
the contrary, is based on extremely rich information –
the state of the sensors while the robot interacts with
its environment. This huge amount of information en-
codes very indirectly how well an individual is doing in
different phases of its lifetime or how it should modify
its behavior to increase its ﬁtness. However, evolving
robots that have acquired a predisposition to exploit
this information to produce adaptive changes during
their lifetime might be able to develop adaptive char-
acteristics on the ﬂy, thus leading to the possibility to
produce complex phenotypes on the basis of parsimo-
nious genotypes. Finally, learning can help and guide
evolution. Although physical changes of the phenotype,
such as strengthening of synapses during learning, can-
not be written back into the genotype, Baldwin [76.127]
and Waddington [76.128] suggested that learning might
indeed affect the evolutionary course in subtle but ef-
fective ways. Baldwin’s argument was that learning
accelerates evolution because suboptimal individuals
can reproduce by acquiring during life necessary fea-
tures for survival. However, variation occurring during
successive generation might lead to the discovery of ge-
netic traits that lead to the establishment of the same
characteristics that were previously acquired thorough
lifetime learning. This latter aspect of Baldwin’s ef-
fect, namely indirect genetic assimilation of learned
traits, has been later supported by scientiﬁc evidence
and deﬁned by Waddington [76.128] as a canalization
effect.
Learning however, also has costs such as: (1) a de-
lay in the ability to acquire ﬁtness (due to the need
to develop ﬁt behavior ontogenetically), and (2) in-
creased unreliability due to the fact that the possibility
to develop certain abilities ontogenetically is subjected
to partially unpredictable characteristics of the robot–
environment interaction [76.129]. In the next two sub-
sections we describe two experiments that show some
of the potential advantages of combining evolution and
learning.
76.8.1 Learning to Adapt to Fast
Environmental Variations
Consider the case of a Khepera robot that should ex-
plore an arena surrounded by black or white walls
to reach a target placed in a randomly selected loca-
tion [76.126]. Evolving robots are provided with eight
sensory neurons that encode the state of the four corre-
sponding infrared sensors and two motor neurons that
control the desired speed of the two wheels. Since the
color of the walls change every generation and since the
color signiﬁcantly affects the intensity of the response
of the infrared sensors, evolving robots should develop
an ability to infer whether they are currently located in
an environment with white or black walls and learn to
modify their behavior during lifetime. That is, robots
should avoid walls only when the infrared sensors are
almost fully activated in the case of arenas with white
walls, while they should avoid walls even when the in-
frared sensors are slightly activated in the case of arenas
with black walls.
Robots were provided with a neural controller
(Fig. 76.24) including four sensory neurons that en-
coded the state of four corresponding infrared sensors;

Part G | 76.8
2056
Part G
Robots and Humans
two motors neurons that encoded the desired speed of
the two wheels; and two teaching neurons that encoded
the teaching values used to modify the connection
weights from the sensory neurons to the motor neurons
during the robots’ lifetime. This special architecture al-
lows evolving robots to transform the sensory states
experienced by the robots during their lifetime into
teaching signals that might potentially lead to adaptive
variations during lifetime. Analysis of evolved robots
revealed that they developed two different behaviors
that are adapted to the particular arena where they hap-
pen to be born (surrounded by white or black walls).
Evolving robots did not inherit an ability to behave ef-
fectively, but rather a predisposition to learn to behave.
This predisposition to learn involves several aspects
such as a tendency to experience useful learning experi-
ences, a tendency to acquire useful adaptive characters
through learning, and a tendency to channel variations
toward different directions in different environmental
conditions [76.126].
76.8.2 Evolution of Learning
In the previous example, the evolutionary neural net-
work learned using a standard learning rule that was
applied to all synaptic connections. Floreano and Mon-
dada [76.130] explored the possibility of genetically
encoding and evolving the learning rules associated to
the different synaptic connections of a neural network
embedded in a real robot. The main motivation of this
line of work was to evolve robots capable of adapt-
ing to a partially unknown environment, rather than
robots adapted to the environment(s) seen during evo-
lution. In order to prevent evolutionary tuning of the
neural network to the speciﬁcities of the evolutionary
environment (which would limit transfer to different
Motors
Teaching
Sensors
Fig. 76.24 A self-teaching network. The output of the two
teaching neurons is used as a teaching value for the two
motor neurons. The weights that connect the sensory neu-
rons to the teaching neurons do not vary during the robots’
lifetime while the weights that connect the sensory neurons
to the motor neurons are modiﬁed with an error-correction
algorithm
environments or transfer from simulation to reality),
the synaptic weight values were not genetically en-
coded. Instead, each synaptic connection in the network
was described by three genes that deﬁned its sign, its
learning rule, and its learning rate (Fig. 76.25). Every
time a genome was decoded into a neural network and
downloaded onto the robot, the synaptic strengths were
initialized to small random values and could change ac-
cording to the genetically speciﬁed rules and rates while
the robot interacted with the environment. Variations of
this methodology included a more compact genetic en-
coding where the learning properties were associated to
a neuron instead of a synapse. All synapses afferent to
a neuron used its genetically speciﬁed rules and rates.
Genes could encode four types of Hebbian learning that
were modeled upon neurophysiological data and were
complementary to each other [76.131].
Experimental results in a nontrivial, multitask en-
vironment (Fig. 76.26,
VIDEO 40 ) indicated that
this methodology has a number of signiﬁcant advan-
tages with respect to the evolution of synaptic strengths
without learning [76.48]. Robots evolved faster and
obtained better ﬁtness values. Furthermore, evolved be-
haviors were qualitatively different, notably in that they
did not exploit minimal solutions tuned to the envi-
ronment (such as turning only on one side, or turning
in circles tuned to the dimensions of the evolutionary
arena). Most important, these robots displayed remark-
able adaptive properties after evolution. Best evolved
individuals: (1) transferred perfectly from simulated
Pre-synaptic
unit
Post-synaptic
unit
Synapse
Sign
Strength
Genetically
determined
Adaptive
Sign
Learning
rule
Learning
rate
Fig. 76.25 Two methods for genetically encoding a synap-
tic connection. Genetically determined synapses cannot
change during the lifetime of the robot. Adaptive synapses
instead are randomly initialized and can change during
lifetime of the robot according to the learning rules and
rates speciﬁed in the genome

Evolutionary Robotics
76.9 Evolution of Social Behavior
2057
Part G | 76.9
to physical robots, (2) accomplished the task when
the light and reﬂection properties of the environment
were modiﬁed, (3) accomplished the task when key
landmarks and target areas of the environment were
displaced, and (4) transferred well across morpholog-
ically different robotic platforms. In other words, these
robots were selected for their ability to solve a par-
tially unknown problem by adapting on the ﬂy, rather
than for being a solution to the problem seen during
evolution.
In further experiments where the genetic code for
each synapse of the network included one gene whose
value caused its remaining genes to be interpreted as
connection strengths or learning rules and rates, 80% of
the synapses made the choice of using learning, rein-
forcing the fact that this genetic strategy has a compar-
atively stronger adaptive power [76.131]. This method-
ology could also be used to evolve the morphology of
neural controllers were synapses are created at runtime
and therefore their strengths cannot be genetically spec-
a)
b)
Fig. 76.26 (a) A mobile robot Khepera equipped with a vision
module can gain ﬁtness points by staying on the grey area only
when the light is on. The light is normally off, but it can be switched
on if the robot passes over the black area positioned on the other
side of the arena. The robot can detect ambient light and wall color,
but not the color of the ﬂoor. (b) Behavior of an individual evolved
in simulation with genetic encoding of learning rules
iﬁed [76.132]. Recently, the adaptive properties of this
type of adaptive genetic encoding were conﬁrmed also
in the context of evolutionary spiking neurons for robot
control [76.133].
76.9 Evolution of Social Behavior
In the previous sections, we limited our analysis to indi-
vidual behaviors, i. e., to the evolution of robots placed
in an environment that does not include other robots.
The evolutionary method, however, can also be applied
to evolve social behaviors in which multiple robots
situated in the same environment interact between
themselves in cooperative or competitive manners.
As we will see, competitive co-evolution is particu-
larly interesting from the point of view of synthesizing
progressively more complex capacities and from the
point of view of developing solutions that are robust
with respect to environmental variations. Cooperative
evolution instead is particularly interesting for the pos-
sibility to solve problems that cannot be handled by
a single robot, because of physical constraints or limited
behavioral capabilities [76.134] and to develop solu-
tions that are robust.
76.9.1 Coevolving Predator and Prey Robots
Competitive coevolution, for example the coevolution
of two populations of predator and prey robots that
are evolved for the ability to catch prey and to es-
cape predators, respectively, has two characteristics
that are particularly interesting from an evolutionary
robotics perspective. The ﬁrst aspect is that the competi-
tion between populations with different interests might
spontaneously lead to a sort of incremental evolution-
ary process where evolving individuals are faced with
progressively more complex challenges (although this
is not necessarily the case). Indeed, in initial genera-
tions the task of the two populations is relatively simple
because opponents have simple and poorly developed
abilities on average. After a few generations, however,
the abilities of the two populations increase and, con-
sequently, the challenges for each population become
more difﬁcult. The second aspect consists of the fact
that the environment varies across generations because
it includes other coevolving individuals. This implies
that coevolving individuals should be able to adapt to
ever-changing environments and to develop behaviors
that are robust with respect to environmental varia-
tions [76.135].
The potential advantages of competitive coevolu-
tion for evolutionary robotics have been demonstrated
by a set of experiments conducted by Floreano and
Nolﬁ[76.136, 137] where two populations of robots
were evolved for the ability to catch prey and escape
predators, respectively (Fig. 76.27).
The results indicated that both predator and prey
robots tended to vary their behavior throughout gen-
erations without converging on a stable strategy. The
behavior displayed by individuals at each generation
tended to be tightly adapted to the counter-strategy
exhibited by the opponent of the same generation
(
VIDEO 38 ). This evolutionary dynamic however
does not really lead to long-lasting progress because,
after an initial evolutionary phase, the coevolutionary

Part G | 76.9
2058
Part G
Robots and Humans
Fig. 76.27 Experimental setup. The predator and prey
robot (from left to right) are placed in an arena surrounded
by walls and are allowed to interact for several trials start-
ing at different randomly generated orientations. Predators
are selected on the basis of the percentage of trials in which
they are able to catch (i. e., to touch) the prey, and prey on
the basis of the percentage of trials in which they were able
to escape (i. e., to not be touched by) predators. Predators
have a vision system, whereas the prey have only short-
range distance sensors, but can go twice as fast as the
predator. Collision between the robots is detected by a con-
ductive belt at the base of the robots
Fig. 76.28 An s-bot and a simulated swarm-bot consisting of four
s-bots assembled in chain formation
process led to a limit cycle dynamic where the same
small set of behavioral strategies recycled over and over
again along generations [76.137]. This limit cycle dy-
namic can be explained by considering that prey robots
tended to vary their behavior in order to disorient preda-
tors as soon as predators become effective against the
current behavioral strategies exhibited by prey robots.
However, experiments [76.138] where robots were
allowed to change their behavior on the ﬂy on the ba-
sis of unsupervised Hebbian learning rules showed that
the evolutionary phase where coevolving robots were
able to produce real progress was signiﬁcantly longer,
and evolved predators displayed an ability to effectively
cope with prey exhibiting different behavioral strate-
gies by adapting their behavior on the ﬂy to the prey’s
behavior. Prey instead tended to display behavior that
changed in unpredictable ways.
Further experiments showed that competitive co-
evolution can solve problem that the evolution of a sin-
gle population cannot. Nolﬁand Floreano [76.137]
demonstrated that the attempt to evolve predators robot
for the ability to catch a ﬁxed pre-evolved prey pro-
duced lower performance with respect to control exper-
iments where predators and prey were coevolved at the
same time.
76.9.2 Evolving Cooperative Behavior
As testiﬁed by social insects, colonies of simple co-
operating individuals can display remarkable capaci-
ties and exhibit self-organising behaviors in which the
spatio-temporal pattern observed at the system level
emerge from numerous interactions among the indi-
vidual robots. On the other hand, designing collec-
tive robotic systems of this sort constitutes a difﬁcult
problem due to the indirect relationship between the
desired group behavior and the characteristics of the
individual robots. By evaluating the robotic system as
a whole (i. e., by selecting the robots on the basis of
the global behavior that emerge from a large number
of robot/environmental and robot/robot interactions),
Evolutionary Robotics provides a means for discover-
ing effective behavioral solutions and simple and robust
control policies [76.139].
Recent research showed that teams of evolved
robots can:
1. Develop robust and effective coordinated behav-
ior [76.140, 141]
2. Collaborate
by
assuming
complementary
role [76.141, 142] (
VIDEO 376 )
3. Display self-organizing properties [76.143]
4. Develop
and
use
communicative
capabili-
ties [76.144–146].
Moreover, some of the research carried in this
area demonstrated how evolutionary robotics experi-
ments can contribute to model biological phenomena,
e.g., to identify the evolutionary conditions that enable
the emergence of cooperative communicative behav-
iors [76.146] or the mechanisms enabling the evolution
of effective division of labour strategies [76.147]

Evolutionary Robotics
76.9 Evolution of Social Behavior
2059
Part G | 76.9
Here we brieﬂy review a series of experiments
where swarm-bots [76.148], i. e., groups of autonomous
robots capable of assembling by physically connect-
ing together, were evolved for the ability to display
coordinated motion (
VIDEO 115 ). Each individual
robot consisted of a main platform (chassis) and tur-
ret that could actively rotate with respect to each other
(Fig. 76.28). The chassis included tracks with teethed
wheels for navigation on both rough and ﬂat terrain,
and infrared sensors pointing to the ground. The tur-
ret included a gripper, sixteen light-sensors distributed
around the body, a loudspeaker, three microphones,
and a traction sensor placed between the turret and
the chassis to detect the direction and the intensity of
the traction force that the turret exerts on the chassis.
Swarm-bots were formed by several robots provided
with identical neural controllers and assembled together
so to form a single physical entity.
By evolving the neural controllers of these Swarm-
bots, Baldassare et al. [76.140] demonstrated how the
robots can display a robust and effective coordinated
capacities that allow the individuals to negotiate and
converge on a coherent direction and to keep mov-
ing along that direction by compensating the dis-
alignments originating during motion. Such behav-
ioral capacity was robust enough to allow a smooth
transfer from simulation to reality and to allow the
robots to to generalize their capacity to rugged ter-
rains. In an extended experiments in which the s-bots
were also equipped with infrared sensors, speakers
and microphones, the evolved swarm-bots also showed
a capacity to avoid dangers (e.g., holes) by coordi-
nately changing direction as soon as one s-bot detected
a hole [76.149].
Evolved swarm-bots generalized their coordinated
motion capabilities also when they were tested in differ-
ent conditions (e.g., when they were assembled in much
more numerous groups and/or in different topologies, or
when they had to also carry heavy objects by pushing
and pulleding them in a coordinated manner). Finally,
when placed in new environmental conditions (e.g., in
environment with obstacle and walls), the swarm-bots
spontaneously displayed new behavioral skills (related
to acquired skills), such as the ability to cooperatively
avoid obstacles, without any further adaptation. This
ability to display new related behaviors, in new behav-
ioral conditions, emerged as a result of the dynamical
process originating from the interaction of the same
robots with the new environmental conditions [76.142,
150].
76.9.3 Evolution of Communication
Communication represents a key aspect in collective
behaviors. Recent research in evolutionary robotics has
demonstrated how sophisticated communication capa-
bilities can emerge and evolve in population of robots
selected for the ability to perform tasks requiring coor-
dination and/or cooperation.
The analysis of these experiments indicate that
communicative interactions often originate as the re-
sult of cues, that provide useful information to other
robots, produced inadvertently during the execution of
speciﬁc behaviors [76.146, 151]. The presence of these
cues create the basis for the development of an abil-
ity to react to them in an adaptive way thus leading
to the establishment of adaptive communicative inter-
actions in which robots produce signals and react to
detected signals adaptively. The establishment of these
forms of communicative interactions then create the
adaptive conditions for the co-evolution of signalling
and response strategies [76.152] (
VIDEO 117 ).
The reliability and stability of the resulting com-
munication system depend on the level of relatedness
(i. e., genetic similarity) between robots and the level at
which they were selected [76.146]. Robots that are ge-
netically higly related or that are selected on the basis of
the behavior exhibited by the group evolve reliable sig-
nals and stable communicative conventions. In contrast,
when relatedness between robots is low and selection
is acting at the level of the individuals, the evolution-
ary process might lead to the emergence of instable,
ineffective and in some case deceptive communication
forms [76.153, 154].
The evolution of communication is strongly inter-
linked with the evolution of other behavioral capac-
ities [76.155]. Indeed, after all, robots need to de-
velop appropriate behaviors to access and/or generate
the information to be communicated and/or to react
to detected signals appropriately. The co-adaptation
of behavioral and communicative skills might lead
to prolonged innovation phases in which the devel-
opment of behavioral capacities create the adaptive
conditions for the development of communication ca-
pacities and vice versa [76.151, 152]. Moreover, the
co-adaptation of behavioral and communication capac-
ities tend to lead to highly contingent evolutionary
processes in which the capacities possessed by the
population at a certain evolutionary phase strongly in-
ﬂuence the outcome of the successive phases [76.152,
156] (
VIDEO 117 ).

Part G | 76.10
2060
Part G
Robots and Humans
76.10 Evolutionary Hardware
In recent years, technology advancements have allowed
researchers to explore evolution of electronic circuits.
In this section, we brieﬂy summarize some foundational
work in this direction.
76.10.1 Evolvable Hardware
Robot Controllers
In most of the work discussed so far some form of ge-
netically speciﬁed neural network, implemented in soft-
ware, has been at the center of the robot control system.
Work on a related approach of evolving control sys-
tems directly onto hardware dates back to Thompson’s
work in the mid 1990s [76.157]. In contrast to hard-
ware controllers that are designed or programmed to
follow a well-deﬁned sequence of instructions, evolved
hardware controllers are directly conﬁgured by evolu-
tion and then allowed to behave in real time according
to semiconductor physics. By removing standard elec-
tronics design constraints, the physics can be exploited
to produce highly nonstandard and often very efﬁcient
and minimal systems [76.158].
Thompson [76.157] used artiﬁcial evolution to de-
sign an onboard hardware controller for a two-wheeled
autonomous mobile robot engaged in simple wall-
avoidance behavior in an empty arena. Starting from
a random orientation, and position near the wall, the
robot had to move to the center of the arena and stay
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig.76.29a–d Wall-avoidance behavior of a robot with an evolved
hardware controller in virtual reality (a-c) and the real world (d)
there using limited sensory input (Fig. 76.29). The di-
rect current (DC) motors driving the wheels were not
allowed to run in reverse and the robot’s only sensors
were a pair of time-of-ﬂight sonars rigidly mounted on
the robot, pointing left and right.
Thompson’s approach made use of a so-called dy-
namic state machine (DSM) – a kind of generalized
read-only memory (ROM) implementation of a ﬁnite-
state machine where the usual constraint of strict syn-
chronization of input signals and state transitions are
relaxed (in fact put under evolutionary control). The
system had access to a global clock whose frequency
was also under genetic control. Thus evolution deter-
mined whether each signal was synchronized to the
clock or allowed to ﬂow asynchronously. This allowed
the evolving DSM to be tightly coupled to the dynam-
ics of interaction between the robot and environment
and for evolution to explore a wide range of systems
dynamics. The process took place within the robot in
a kind of virtual reality in the sense that the real evolv-
ing hardware controlled the real motors, but the wheels
were just spinning in the air. The movements that the
robot would have actually performed if the wheels had
been supporting it were then simulated and the sonar
echo signals that the robot was expected to receive were
supplied in real time to the hardware DSM. Excellent
performance was attained after 35 generations, with
good transfer from the virtual environment to the real
world (Fig. 76.29).
Shortly after this research was performed, particu-
lar types of ﬁeld programmable gate arrays (FPGAs)
which were appropriate for evolutionary applications
became available. FPGAs are reconﬁgurable systems
allowing the construction of circuits built from ba-
sic logic elements. Thompson exploited their prop-
erties to demonstrate evolution directly in the chip.
By again relaxing standard constraints, such as syn-
chronizing all elements with a central clock, he was
able to develop very novel forms of functional cir-
cuits, including a controller for a Khepera robot
using infrared sensors to avoid obstacles [76.158,
159].
Following Thompson’s pioneering work, Keymeu-
len et al. evolved a robot control system using
a Boolean function approach implemented on gate-
level evolvable hardware [76.160]. This system acted
as a navigation system for a mobile robot capable of
locating and reaching a colored ball while avoiding ob-
stacles. The robot was equipped with infrared sensors
and an vision system giving the direction and distance
to the target. A programmable logic device (PLD) was

Evolutionary Robotics
76.11 Closing Remarks
2061
Part G | 76.11
used to implement a Boolean function in its disjunc-
tive form. This work demonstrated that such gate-level
evolvable hardware was able to take advantage of the
correlations in the input states and to exhibit useful
generalization abilities, thus allowing the evolution of
robust behavior in simulation followed by a good trans-
fer into the real world.
In a rather different approach, Ritter et al. used
an FPGA implementation of an onboard evolution-
ary algorithm to develop a controller for a hexapod
robot [76.161]. Roggen et al. devised a multicellu-
lar reconﬁgurable circuit capable of evolution, self-
repair, and adaptation [76.162], and used it as a sub-
strate for evolving spiking controllers of a wheeled
robot [76.163]. Although evolved hardware controllers
are not widely used in evolutionary robotics, they still
hold out the promise of some very useful properties,
such as robustness to faults, which make them inter-
esting for extreme condition applications such as space
robotics.
76.11 Closing Remarks
Evolutionary robotics is a young and integrated ap-
proach to robot development without human inter-
vention where machines change and adapt by cap-
italizing on the interactions with their environment.
Despite initial skepticism by mainstream and applied
robotics practitioners and even by pioneers of this ap-
proach [76.164], over the years the ﬁeld has been
constantly growing with new methods and approaches
for evolving more complex, efﬁcient, and sometimes
surprising robotic systems. In some areas, such as mor-
phology and self-assembly, evolutionary robotics is still
the most widely used and powerful approach.
Evolutionary robotics is not only a method for au-
tomatic robot development inspired by biology, but
also a tool for investigating open questions in biology
concerning evolutionary, developmental, and brain dy-
namics. Its richness and fecundity make us believe that
this approach will continue to grow and progress to-
wards the creation of a new species of machines capable
of self-evolution.
To gain a pratical knowledge, interested read-
ers might use software libraries such as frame-
work for autonomous robotics simulation and analysis
(FARSA) [76.165], an open-software tool that permit
to carry on evolutionary robotics experiments based
on a variety of robotic platforms and to replicate and
vary some of the experiments described in this chap-
ter [76.166].
Video-References
VIDEO 36
Visual navigation of mobile robot with pan-tilt camera
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/36
VIDEO 37
Visual navigation with collision avoidance
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/37
VIDEO 38
Coevolved predator and prey robots
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/38
VIDEO 39
Evolution of collision-free navigation
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/39
VIDEO 40
Online learning to adapt to fast environmental variations
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/40
VIDEO 41
iCub language comprehension
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/41
VIDEO 114
Resilent machines through continuous self-modeling
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/114
VIDEO 115
A swarm-bot of eight robots displaying coordinated motion
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/115
VIDEO 116
Discrimination of objects through sensory-motor coordination
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/116
VIDEO 117
Evolution of cooperative and communicative behaviors
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/117
VIDEO 118
Exploration and homing for battery recharge
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/118

Part G | 76
2062
Part G
Robots and Humans
VIDEO 119
Introduction to evolutionary robotics at EPFL
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/119
VIDEO 371
Evolution of visually guided behavior on Sussex gantry robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/371
VIDEO 372
Evolved walking in an Octpod
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/372
VIDEO 373
Evolved homing walk on rough ground
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/373
VIDEO 374
Evolved bipedal walking
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/374
VIDEO 375
Evolved GasNet visualization
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/375
VIDEO 376
Evolved group coordination
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/376
VIDEO 771
Morphological change in an autonomous robot
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/771
VIDEO 772
More complex robots evolve in more complex environments
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/76/videodetails/772
References
76.1
S. Nolfi, D. Floreano: Evolutionary Robotics: The
Biology, Intelligence, and Technology of Self-
Organizing Machines (MIT/Bradford, Cambridge
2000)
76.2
J.H. Holland: Adaptation in Natural and Artificial
Systems (Univ. of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor 1975)
76.3
A.M. Turing: Computing machinery and intelli-
gence, Mind LIX 236, 433–460 (1950)
76.4
V. Braitenberg: Vehicles. Experiments in Synthetic
Psychology (MIT, Cambridge 1984)
76.5
R.D. Beer: Intelligence as Adaptive Behavior:
An Experiment in Computational Neuroethology
(Academic, Boston 1990)
76.6
D. Parisi, F. Cecconi, S. Nolfi: Econets: Neural net-
works that learn in an environment, Network 1,
149–168 (1990)
76.7
P. Husbands, I. Harvey: Evolution versus design:
Controlling autonomous robots, Integrating Per-
cept. Plan. Action, Proc. 3rd IEEE Annu. Conf. Artif.
Intell. Simul. Plan. (1992) pp. 139–146
76.8
D. Floreano, O. Miglino, D. Parisi: Emergent com-
plex behaviors in ecosystems of neural networks.
In: Parallel Architectures and Neural Networks,
ed. by E. Caianiello (World Scientific, Singapore
1991)
76.9
R.A. Brooks: Intelligence without representation,
Artif. Intell. 47, 139–159 (1991)
76.10
F. Mondada, E. Franzi, P. Ienne: Mobile robot
miniaturization: A tool for investigation in con-
trol algorithms, Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Exp. Robotics,
Tokyo, ed. by T. Yoshikawa, F. Miyazaki (1993)
pp. 501–513
76.11
L. Steels (Ed.): The Biology and Technology of In-
telligent Autonomous Agents, NATO ASI (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 1995)
76.12
D. Floreano, F. Mondada: Automatic creation
of an autonomous agent: Genetic evolution
of a neural-network driven robot, Proc. 3rd
Int. Conf. Simul. Adapt. Behav.: Anim. Ani-
mat. 3, ed. by D. Cliff, P. Husbands, J.A. Meyer,
S.W. Wilsonpages (MIT, Cambridge 1994) pp. 402–
410
76.13
I. Harvey, P. Husbands, D.T. Cliff: Seeing the light:
Artificial evolution, real vision, Proc. 3rd Int. Conf.
Simul. Adapt. Behav.: Anim. Animat. 3, ed. by
D.T. Cliff, P. Husbands, J.-A. Meyer, S. Wilson (MIT,
Cambridge 1994) pp. 392–401
76.14
M.A. Lewis, A.H. Fagg, A. Solidum: Genetic pro-
gramming approach to the construction of a neu-
ral network for a walking robot, Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1992) pp. 2618–2623
76.15
D. Cliff, I. Harvey, P. Husbands: Explorations in
evolutionary robotics, Adapt. Behav. 2, 73–110
(1993)
76.16
D.E. Goldberg: Genetic Algorithms in Search,
Optimization and Machine Learning (Addison-
Wesley, Reading City 1989)
76.17
H. de Garis: Genetic programming: Evolution of
time dependent neural network modules which
teach a pair of stick legs to walk, Proc. 9th Eur.
Conf. Artif. Intell. (ECAI), Stock. (1990) pp. 204–206
76.18
R.D. Beer, J.C. Gallagher: Evolving dynamical neu-
ral networks for adaptive behavior, Adapt. Behav.
1, 94–110 (1992)
76.19
R.D. Beer, H.J. Chiel, L.S. Sterling: Heterogeneous
neural networks for adaptive behavior in dynamic
environments. In: Neural Information Processing
Systems, Vol. 1, ed. by D. Touretzky (Morgan Kauff-
man, San Mateo 1989) pp. 577–585
76.20
M.A. Lewis, A.H. Fagg, G. Bekey: Genetic algo-
rithms for gait synthesis in a hexapod robot. In:
Recent Trends in Mobile Robots, ed. by Y. Zheng
(World Scientific, Singapore 1994) pp. 317–331
76.21
J. Gallagher, R. Beer, M. Espenschiel, R. Quinn:
Application of evolved locomotion controllers to
a hexapod robot, Robotics Auton. Syst. 19(1), 95–
103 (1996)
76.22
R.D. Beer, R.D. Quinn, H.J. Chiel, R.E. Ritzmann:
Biologically inspired
approaches
to
robotics,
Commun. ACM 40, 31–38 (1997)

Evolutionary Robotics
References
2063
Part G | 76
76.23
S. Galt, B.L. Luk, A.A. Collie: Evolution of smooth
and efficient walking motions for an 8-legged
robot, Proc. 6th Eur. Workshop Learn. Robots,
Brighton (1997)
76.24
T. Gomi, K. Ide: Emergence of gaits of a legged
robot by collaboration through evolution, IEEE
World Congr. Comput. Intell. (IEEE Press, New York
1998)
76.25
F. Gruau: Automatic definition of modular neural
networks, Adapt. Behav. 3(2), 151–183 (1995)
76.26
F. Gruau, K. Quatramaran: Cellular encoding for
interactive evolutionary robotics, Proc. 4th Eur.
Conf. Artif. Life, ed. by P. Husbands, I. Harvey (MIT,
Cambridge 1997) pp. 368–377
76.27
J. Kodjabachian, J.A. Meyer: Evolution and devel-
opment of neural networks controlling locomo-
tion, gradient following and obstacle avoidance
in artificial insects, IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 9,
796–812 (1998)
76.28
N. Jakobi: Running across the reality gap: Octo-
pod locomotion evolved in a minimal simulation,
Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 1468, 39–58 (1998)
76.29
R. Téllez, C. Angulo, D. Pardo: Evolving the walking
behavior of a 12 DOF quadruped using a dis-
tributed neural architecture, Lect. Notes Comput.
Sci. 3853, 5–19 (2006)
76.30
T. Reil, P. Husbands: Evolution of central pat-
tern generators for bipedal walking in real-time
physics environments, IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput.
6(2), 10–21 (2002)
76.31
NaturalMotion: http://www.naturalmotion.com
76.32
B. von Haller, A.J. Ijspeert, D. Floreano: Co-evo-
lution of structures and controllers for Neubot
underwater modular robots, Lect. Notes Comput.
Sci. 3630, 189–199 (2005)
76.33
E. Vaughan, E.A. Di Paolo, I. Harvey: The evolution
of control and adaptation in a 3D powered pas-
sive dynamic walker, Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Simul.
Synth. Living Syst. Artif. Life IX, ed. by J. Pollack,
M. Bedau, P. Husbands, T. Ikegami, R. Watson
(MIT, Cambridge 2004) pp. 139–145
76.34
T. McGeer: Passive walking with knees, Proc. IEEE
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (1990) pp. 1640–1645
76.35
S. Wischmann, F. Passeman: From passive to ac-
tive dynamic 3D bipedal walking – An evolu-
tionary approach, Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Climbing
Walk. Robots (CLAWAR 2004), ed. by M. Armada,
P. González de Santos (Springer, Berlin, Heidel-
berg 2005) pp. 737–744
76.36
E. Vaughan, E.A. Di Paolo, I. Harvey: The tango of
a load balancing biped, Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Climb-
ing Walk. Robots (CLAWAR), ed. by M. Armada,
P. González de Santos (2005)
76.37
K. Endo, F. Yamasaki, T. Maeno, H. Kitano:
A method for co-evolving morphology and walk-
ing pattern of biped humanoid robot, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2002) pp. 2775–
2780
76.38
G. McHale, P. Husbands: Quadrupedal locomo-
tion: Gasnets, CTRNNs and hybrid CTRNN/PNNs
compared, Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Simul. Synth. Liv-
ing Syst. (Artif. Life IX), ed. by J. Pollack, M. Bedau,
P. Husbands, T. Ikegami, R. Watson (MIT, Cam-
bridge 2004) pp. 106–112
76.39
G. McHale, P. Husbands: GasNets and other evolv-
able neural networks applied to bipedal locomo-
tion, Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Simul. Adapt. Behav.:
Anim. Animat. 8, ed. by S. Schaal (MIT, Cambridge
2004) pp. 163–172
76.40
J.F. Laszlo, M. van de Panne, E. Fiume: Limit cy-
cle control and its application to the animation
of balancing and walking, Proc. 23rd Annu. Conf.
Comp. Graph. Interact. Tech., ACM (1996) pp. 155–
162
76.41
R.A. Brooks: Artificial life and real robots, Proc.
1st Eur. Conf. Artif. Life., Toward a Pract. Auton.
Syst., ed. by F.J. Varela, P. Bourgine (MIT, Cam-
bridge 1992) pp. 3–10
76.42
R. Featherstone, D. Orin: Robot dynamics: Equa-
tions and algorithms, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2000) pp. 826–834
76.43
N. Jakobi, P. Husbands, I. Harvey: Noise and the
reality gap: The use of simulation in evolution-
ary robotics, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 929, 704–720
(1995)
76.44
O. Miglino, H.H. Lund, S. Nolfi: Evolving mobile
robots in simulated and real environments, Artif.
Life 2, 417–434 (1996)
76.45
N. Jakobi: Half-baked, ad-hoc and noisy: Min-
imal simulations for evolutionary robotics, Proc.
4th Eur. Conf. Art. Life, ed. by P. Husbands, I. Har-
vey (MIT, Cambridge 1997) pp. 348–357
76.46
J.C. Bongard, H. Lipson: Nonlinear system iden-
tification using coevolution of models and tests,
IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. 9(4), 361–384 (2005)
76.47
S. Koos, J. Mouret, S. Doncieux: Crossing the re-
ality gap in evolutionary robotics by promoting
transferable controllers, Proc. 12th Annu. Conf.
Genetic Evol. Comput. ACM (2010) pp. 119–126
76.48
J. Urzelai, D. Floreano: Evolution of adaptive
synapses: Robots with fast adaptive behavior in
new environments, Evol. Comput. 9, 495–524
(2001)
76.49
H.R. Maturana, F.J. Varela: Autopoiesis and Cog-
nition: The Realization of the Living (Reidel, Dor-
drecht 1980)
76.50
R.D. Beer: A dynamical systems perspective on
agent-environment interaction, Artif. Intell. 72,
173–215 (1995)
76.51
P. Funes, B. Orme, E. Bonabeau: Evolving emer-
gent group behaviors for simple humans agents,
Proc. 7th Eur. Conf. Artif. Life, ed. by J. Dittrich,
T. Kim (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2003) pp. 76–
89
76.52
S. Nolfi: Behavior and cognition as a complex
adaptive system: Insights from robotic experi-
ments. In: Philosophy of Complex Systems, ed.
by C. Hooker (Elsevier, Amsterdam 2009) pp. 443–
466
76.53
S. Nolfi: Power and limits of reactive agents, Neu-
rocomputing 42, 119–145 (2002)
76.54
E. Tuci, T. Ferrauto, A. Zeschel, G. Massera, S. Nolfi:
An Experiment on behaviour generalisation and
the emergence of linguistic compositionality in

Part G | 76
2064
Part G
Robots and Humans
evolving robots, IEEE Trans. Auton. Mental Dev. 3,
176–189 (2011)
76.55
C. Scheier, R. Pfeifer, Y. Kunyioshi: Embedded
neural networks: Exploiting constraints, Neural
Netw. 11, 1551–1596 (1998)
76.56
S. Nolfi, D. Marocco: Active perception: A sensori-
motor account of object categorization, Proc. 7th
Int. Conf. Simul. Adapt. Behav.: Anim. Animat. 7,
ed. by B. Hallam, D. Floreano, J. Hallam, G. Hayes,
J.-A. Meyer (MIT, Cambridge, MA 2002) pp. 266–271
76.57
E. Tuci, G. Massera, S. Nolfi: Active categorical per-
ception of object shapes in a simulated anthro-
pomorphic robotic arm, IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput.
14, 885–899 (2010)
76.58
S. Collins, A. Ruina, R. Tedrake, M. Wisse: Efficient
bipedal robots based on passive-dynamic walk-
ers, Science 307(5712), 1082–1085 (2005)
76.59
J.C. Bongard: Innocent until proven guilty: Re-
ducing robot shaping from polynomial to linear
time, IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. 15(4), 571–585
(2011)
76.60
H. Lipson, J.B. Pollack: Automatic design and
manufacture of artificial lifeforms, Nature 406,
974–978 (2000)
76.61
K. Sims: Evolving 3D morphology and behaviour
by competition, Artif. Life 1(4), 28–39 (1994)
76.62
Karl Sims: Evolved virtual creatures, evolution
simulation,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=JBgG_VSP7f8 (1994)
76.63
P. Funes, J. Pollack: Evolutionary body building:
Adaptive physical designs for robots, Artif. Life
4(4), 337–357 (1998)
76.64
Golem
Evolutionary
Robotics:
https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=sLtXXFw_q8c&
playnext=1&list=PL396A15596535B451&
feature=results_video
76.65
J. Long: Darwin’s devices: What evolving robots
can teach us about the history of life and the fu-
ture of technology (Basic Books, New York 2012)
76.66
A.J. Clark, J.M. Moore, J. Wang, X. Tan, P.K. McKin-
ley: Evolutionary design and experimental val-
idation of a flexible caudal fin for robotic fish,
Artif. Life 13, 325–332 (2012)
76.67
J. Bongard: Morphological change in machines
accelerates the evolution of robust behavior, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 108(4), 1234–1239 (2011)
76.68
M. Dorigo, M. Colombetti: Robot shaping: An
experiment in behavior engineering (MIT, Cam-
bridge 1997)
76.69
J.E. Auerbach, J.C. Bongard: On the relationship
between environmental and morphological com-
plexity in evolved robots, Proc. 14th Int. Conf.
Genetic Evol. Comput. Conf., ACM (2012) pp. 521–
528
76.70
J. Hiller, H. Lipson: Automatic design and manu-
facture of soft robots, IEEE Trans. Robotics 28(2),
457–466 (2012)
76.71
Evolved Soft Robots: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=RrgZoo1-z_Y
76.72
J. Bongard, V. Zykov, H. Lipson: Resilient ma-
chines through continuous self-modeling, Sci-
ence 314(5802), 1118–1121 (2006)
76.73
J.C. Bongard: Accelerating self-modeling in co-
operative robot teams, IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput.
13(2), 321–332 (2009)
76.74
K.J. Kim, H. Lipson: Towards a theory of mind in
simulated robots, Proc. 11th Annual Conf. Com-
panion Genetic Evol. Comput. Conf. Late Break.
Pap. ACM (2009) pp. 2071–2076
76.75
I. Harvey, P. Husbands, D.T. Cliff, A. Thompson,
N. Jakobi: Evolutionary robotics: The Sussex ap-
proach, Robotics Auton. Syst. 20, 205–224 (1997)
76.76
P. Husbands, I. Harvey, D. Cliff, G. Miller: Artificial
evolution: A new path for AI?, Brain Cogn. 34, 130–
159 (1997)
76.77
N. Jakobi: Evolutionary robotics and the radical
envelope of noise hypothesis, Adapt. Behav. 6,
325–368 (1998)
76.78
K.O. Stanley, R. Miikkulainen: Evolving neural
networks through augmenting topologies, Evol.
Comput. 10(2), 99–127 (2002)
76.79
M.A. Arbib: Self-reproducing automata – Some
implications
for theoretical
biology. In:
To-
wards a Theoretical Biology, 2nd edn., ed. by
C.H. Waddington (Edinburgh Univ. Press, Edin-
burgh 1969) pp. 204–226
76.80
J. Aloimonos, I. Weiss, A. Bandopadhay: Active vi-
sion, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 1(4), 333–356 (1987)
76.81
R. Bajcsy: Active perception, Proc. IEEE 76(8), 996–
1005 (1988)
76.82
D.H. Ballard: Animate vision, Artif. Intell. 48(1),
57–86 (1991)
76.83
P.J. Hancock, R.J. Baddeley, L.S. Smith: The prin-
cipal components of natural images, Network 3,
61–70 (1992)
76.84
D. Floreano, T. Kato, D. Marocco, E. Sauser: Coevo-
lution of active vision and feature selection, Biol.
Cybern. 90(3), 218–228 (2004)
76.85
D. Floreano, M. Suzuki, C. Mattiussi: Active vision
and receptive field development in evolutionary
robots, Evol. Comput. 13(4), 527–544 (2005)
76.86
T.D. Sanger: Optimal unsupervised learning in
a single-layer feedforward neural network, Neu-
ral Netw. 2, 459–473 (1989)
76.87
I. Harvey, E.A. Di Paolo, R. Wood, M. Quinn, E. Tuci:
Evolutionary robotics: A new scientific tool for
studying cognition, Artif. Life 11(1-2), 79–98 (2005)
76.88
A. Seth: Causal connectivity of evolved neural
networks during Behaviour, Netw. Comput. Neu-
ral Syst. 16(1), 35–54 (2005)
76.89
E. Izquierdo, S. Lockery: Evolution and analy-
sis of minimal neural circuits for klinotaxis in
Caenorhabditis elegans, J. Neurosci. 30, 12908–
12917 (2010)
76.90
P. Husbands, R.C. Moioli, Y. Shim, A. Philippides,
P.A. Vargas, M. O’Shea: Evolutionary robotics and
neuroscience. In: The Horizons of Evolutionary
Robotics, ed. by P.A. Vargas, E.A. Di Paolo, I. Har-
vey, P. Husbands (MIT, Cambridge 2013) pp. 17–
64
76.91
D.T. Cliff: Computational neuroethology: A pro-
visional manifesto, Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Simul.
Adapt. Behav.: Anim. Animat., ed. by J.-A. Meyer,
S.W. Wilson (MIT, Cambridge 1991) pp. 29–39

Evolutionary Robotics
References
2065
Part G | 76
76.92
R. Held, A. Hein: Movement-produced stimula-
tion in the development of visually guided be-
havior, J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 56(5), 872–876
(1963)
76.93
R. Held: Plasticity in sensory-motor systems, Sci.
Am. 213(5), 84–94 (1965)
76.94
M. Suzuki, D. Floreano, E.A. Di Paolo: The con-
tribution of active body movement to visual de-
velopment in evolutionary robots, Neural Netw.
18(5/6), 656–665 (2005)
76.95
S. Healy (Ed.): Spatial Representations in Animals
(Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford 1998)
76.96
N.A. Schmajuk, H.T. Blair: Place learning and the
dynamics of spatial navigation: A neural network
approach, Adapt. Behav. 1, 353–385 (1993)
76.97
N. Burgess, J.G. Donnett, K.J. Jeffery, J. O’Keefe:
Robotic and neuronal simulation of the hip-
pocampus and rat navigation, Philos. Trans. R.
Soc. 352, 1535–1543 (1997)
76.98
J. O’Keefe, L. Nadel: The Hippocampus as a Cog-
nitive Map (Clarendon, Oxford 1978)
76.99
J.S. Taube, R.U. Muller, J.B. Ranck Jr.: Head-di-
rection cells recorded from the postsubiculum in
freely moving rats. I. Description and quantitative
analysis, J. Neurosci. 10, 420–435 (1990)
76.100
D.E. Rumelhart, J. McClelland, P.D.P. Group: Par-
allel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the
Microstructure of Cognition (MIT, Cambridge 1986)
76.101
W. Maas, C.M. Bishop (Eds.): Pulsed Neural Net-
works (MIT, Cambridge 1999)
76.102
F. Rieke, D. Warland, R. van Steveninck, W. Bialek:
Spikes:: Exploring the Neural Code (MIT, Cam-
bridge 1997)
76.103
G. Indiveri, P. Verschure: Autonomous vehicle
guidance using analog VLSI neuromorphic sen-
sors, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 1327, 811–816 (1997)
76.104
M.A. Lewis, R. Etienne-Cummings, A.H. Cohen,
M. Hartmann: Toward biomorphic control us-
ing custom aVLSI CPG chips, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2000) pp. 494–500
76.105
D. Floreano, C. Mattiussi: Evolution of spiking
neural controllers for autonomous vision-based
robots. In: Evolutionary Robotics. From Intelligent
Robotics to Artificial Life, ed. by T. Gomi (Springer,
Tokyo 2001) pp. 38–61
76.106
W. Gerstner, J.L. van Hemmen, J.D. Cowan: What
matters in neuronal locking?, Neural Comput. 8,
1653–1676 (1996)
76.107
D. Floreano, Y. Epars, J.C. Zufferey, C. Mat-
tiussi: Evolution of spiking neural circuits in au-
tonomous mobile robots, Int. J. Intell. Syst. 21(9),
1005–1024 (2006)
76.108
J.A. Gally, P.R. Montague, G.N. Reeke, G.M. Edel-
man: The NO hypothesis: Possible effects of
a short-lived, rapidly diffusible signal in the de-
velopment and function of the nervous system,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 87(9), 3547–3551 (1990)
76.109
J. Wood, J. Garthwaite: Models of the diffu-
sional spread of nitric oxide: Implications for
neural nitric oxide signaling and its pharmaco-
logical properties, Neuropharmacology 33, 1235–
1244 (1994)
76.110
T.M. Dawson, S.N. Snyder: Gases as biological
messengers: Nitric oxide and carbon monoxide in
the brain, J. Neurosci. 14(9), 5147–5159 (1994)
76.111
J. Garthwaite, C.L. Boulton: Nitric oxide signaling
in the central nervous system, Annu. Rev. Physiol.
57, 683–706 (1995)
76.112
A.O. Philippides, P. Husbands, M. O’Shea: Four-
dimensional neuronal signaling by nitric oxide:
A computational analysis, J. Neurosci. 20(3), 1199–
1207 (2000)
76.113
C. Hölscher: Nitric oxide, the enigmatic neuronal
messenger: Its role in synaptic plasticity, Trends
Neurosci. 20, 298–303 (1997)
76.114
P. Husbands, T. Smith, N. Jakobi, M. O’Shea: Bet-
ter living through chemistry: Evolving GasNets
for robot control, Connect. Sci. 10(4), 185–210
(1998)
76.115
T.M.C. Smith, P. Husbands, M. O’Shea: Local
evolvability, neutrality, and search difficulty in
evolutionary robotics, Biosystems 69, 223–243
(2003)
76.116
A.O.
Philippides,
P.
Husbands,
T.
Smith,
M. O’Shea: Flexible couplings: Diffusing neu-
romodulators and adaptive robotics, Artif. Life
11(1-2), 139–160 (2005)
76.117
A.O.
Philippides,
P.
Husbands,
T.
Smith,
M. O’Shea: Structure based models of NO diffu-
sion in the nervous system. In: Computational
Neuroscience: A Comprehensive Approach, ed. by
J. Feng (CRC, Boca Raton 2004) pp. 97–130
76.118
A.O. Philippides, S.R. Ott, P. Husbands, T. Lovick,
M. O’Shea: Modeling co-operative volume signal-
ing in a plexus of nitric oxide synthase-express-
ing neurons, J. Neurosci. 25(28), 6520–6532 (2005)
76.119
P. Husbands, A. Philippides, P. Vargas, C. Buck-
ley, P. Fine, E.A. Di Paolo, M. O’Shea: Spatial,
temporal and modulatory factors affecting Gas-
Net evolvability in a visually guided robotics task,
Complexity 16(2), 35–44 (2010)
76.120
D. Barañano, C. Ferris, S. Snyder: A typical neural
messenger, Trends Neurosci. 24(2), 99–106 (2001)
76.121
T.M.C.
Smith,
P.
Husbands,
A.
Philippides,
M. O’Shea: Neuronal plasticity and temporal
adaptivity:
Gasnet
robot
control
networks,
Adapt. Behav. 10(3/4), 161–184 (2002)
76.122
G. Edelman, J. Gally: Degeneracy and complexity
in biological systems, Proc Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98,
13763–13768 (2001)
76.123
C. Fernando, K. Karishma, E. Szathmáry: Copy-
ing and evolution of neuronal topology, PLoS ONE
3(11), e3775 (2008)
76.124
C. Fernando, E. Szathmáry, P. Husbands: Se-
lectionist and evolutionary approaches to brain
function: A critical appraisal, Front. Comput. Neu-
rosci. 6, 24 (2012)
76.125
S. Nolfi, D. Floreano: Learning and evolution, Au-
ton. Robots 7, 89–113 (1999)
76.126
S. Nolfi, D. Parisi: Learning to adapt to chang-
ing environments in evolving neural networks,
Adapt. Behav. 1, 75–98 (1997)
76.127
J.M. Baldwin: A new factor in evolution, Am. Nat.
30, 441–451 (1896)

Part G | 76
2066
Part G
Robots and Humans
76.128
C.H. Waddington: Canalization of development
and the inheritance of acquired characters, Na-
ture 150, 563–565 (1942)
76.129
G. Mayley: Landscapes, learning costs, and ge-
netic assimilation, Evol. Comput. 4, 213–234 (1997)
76.130
D. Floreano, F. Mondada: Evolution of plastic neu-
rocontrollers for situated agents, Proc. 4th Int.
Conf. Simul. Adapt. Behav.: Anim. Animat. 4,
ed. by P. Maes, M. Matarić, J.A. Meyer, J. Pol-
lack, H. Roitblat, S. Wilson (MIT, Cambridge 1996)
pp. 402–410
76.131
D. Floreano, J. Urzelai: Evolutionary robots with
online self-organization and behavioral fitness,
Neural Netw. 13, 431–443 (2000)
76.132
D. Floreano, J. Urzelai: Neural morphogenesis,
synaptic plasticity, and evolution, Theory Biosci.
120(3-4), 225–240 (2001)
76.133
E. Di Paolo: Evolving spike-timing-dependent
plasticity for single-trial learning in robots, Phi-
los. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 361, 2299–2319 (2003)
76.134
Y.U. Cao, A.S. Fukunaga, A. Kahng: Cooperative
mobile robotics: Antecedents and directions, Au-
ton. Robots 4, 7–27 (1997)
76.135
S. Nolfi: Co-evolving predator and prey robots,
Adapt. Behav. 20, 10–15 (2012)
76.136
D. Floreano, S. Nolfi: God save the red queen!
Competition in co-evolutionary robotics, Proc.
2nd Conf. Genetic Program., ed. by J.R. Koza,
K. Deb, M. Dorigo, D. Foegel, B. Garzon, H. Iba,
R.L. Riolo (Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA
1997) pp. 398–406
76.137
S. Nolfi, D. Floreano: Co-evolving predator and
prey robots: Do arm races arise in artificial evo-
lution?, Artif. Life 4(4), 311–335 (1998)
76.138
D. Floreano, S. Nolfi: Evolution versus design:
Controlling autonomous robots, Proc. 4th Eur.
Conf. Artif. Life, ed. by P. Husbands, I. Harvey (MIT,
Cambridge 1997) pp. 378–387
76.139
V. Trianni, S. Nolfi: Evolving collective control,
cooperation and distributed cognition. In: Hand-
book of Collective Robotics – Fundamentals and
Challenges, ed. by S. Kernbach (CRC, Boca Raton
2012) pp. 246–276
76.140
G. Baldassarre, V. Trianni, M. Bonani, F. Mondada,
M. Dorigo, S. Nolfi: Self-organised coordinated
motion in groups of physically connected robots,
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 37, 224–239 (2007)
76.141
M. Quinn, L. Smith, G. Mayley, P. Husbands:
Evolving controllers for a homogeneous system
of physical robots: Structured cooperation with
minimal sensors, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 361,
2321–2344 (2003)
76.142
G. Baldassarre, D. Parisi, S. Nolfi: Coordination
and behavior integration in cooperating simu-
lated robots, Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Simul. Adapt.
Behav.: Anim. Animat. 8 (MIT, Cambridge 2003)
pp. 385–394
76.143
V. Sperati, V. Trianni, S. Nolfi: Self-organised path
formation in a swarm of robots, Swarm Intell. 5,
97–119 (2011)
76.144
M. Quinn: Evolving communication without ded-
icated communication channels, Proc. 6th Eur.
Conf. Artif. Life, ed. by J. Kelemen, P. Sosik
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2001) pp. 357–366
76.145
D. Marocco, S. Nolfi: Self-organization of commu-
nication in evolving robots, Proc. 10th Int. Conf.
Artif. Life, ed. by L. Rocha, L. Yeager, M. Bedau,
D. Floreano, R. Goldstone, A. Vespignani (MIT,
Cambridge 2006) pp. 178–184
76.146
D. Floreano, S. Mitri, S. Magnenat, L. Keller:
Evolutionary conditions for the emergence of
communication in robots, Curr. Biol. 17, 514–519
(2007)
76.147
M. Waibel, D. Floreano, S. Magnenat, L. Keller:
Division of labour and colony efficiency in so-
cial insects: Effects of interactions between ge-
netic architecture, colony kin structure and rate
of perturbations, Proc. Royal Soc. B Biol. Sci. 273,
1815–1823 (2006)
76.148
F. Mondada, G. Pettinaro, A. Guignard, I. Kwee,
D. Floreano, J.L. Deneubourg, S. Nolfi, L.M. Gam-
bardella, M. Dorigo: Swarm-bot: A new dis-
tributed robotic concept, Auton. Robots 17, 193–
221 (2004)
76.149
V. Trianni, S. Nolfi, M. Dorigo: Cooperative hole-
avoidance in a swarm-bot, Robotics Auton. Syst.
54, 97–103 (2006)
76.150
G. Baldassarre, S. Nolfi, D. Parisi: Evolving mobile
robots able to display collective behavior, Artif.
Life 9, 255–267 (2003)
76.151
S. Nolfi: Evolution of communication and lan-
guage in evolving robots. In: Current Perspective
on the origin of language, ed. by C. Lefebvre,
B. Comrie, H. Cohen (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cam-
bridge 2013)
76.152
J. De Greef, S. Nolfi: Evolution of implicit and
explicit communication in a group of mobile
robots. In: Evolution of Communication and Lan-
guage in Embodied Agents, ed. by S. Nolfi,
M. Mirolli (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2010)
pp. 179–214
76.153
S. Mitri, D. Floreano, L. Keller: The evolution of in-
formation suppression in communicating robots
with conflicting interests, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
106, 15786–15790 (2009)
76.154
S. Mitri, D. Floreano, L. Keller: Relatedness influ-
ences signal reliability in evolving robots, Proc.
Royal Soc. B Biol. Sci. 278, 378–383 (2011)
76.155
S. Nolfi: Emergence of communication in em-
bodied agents: Co-adapting communicative and
non-communicative behaviours, Connect. Sci. 3-
4, 231–248 (2005)
76.156
S. Wischmanna, D. Floreano, L. Keller: Histori-
cal contingency affects signaling strategies and
competitive abilities in evolving populations of
simulated robots, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 109, 864–
868 (2011)
76.157
A. Thompson: Evolving electronic robot controllers
that exploit hardware resources, Lect. Notes Artif.
Intell. 929, 640–656 (1995)
76.158
A. Thompson: Hardware Evolution: Automatic De-
sign of Electronic Circuits in Reconfigurable Hard-
ware by Artificial Evolution, Distinguished Disser-
tation Series (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 1998)

Evolutionary Robotics
References
2067
Part G | 76
76.159
A. Thompson: Artificial evolution in the physical
world. In: Evolutionary Robotics. From Intelligent
Robots to Artificial Life (ER’97), ed. by T. Gomi (AAI
Books, Ottawa 1997) pp. 101–125
76.160
D. Keymeulen, M. Durantez, M. Konaka, Y. Ku-
niyoshi, T. Higuchi: An evolutionary robot navi-
gation system using a gate-level evolvable hard-
ware, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 1259, 193–209
(1996)
76.161
G. Ritter, J.-M. Puiatti, E. Sanchez: Leonardo and
discipulus simplex: An autonomous, evolvable
six-legged walking robot, Lect. Notes Comput.
Sci. 1586, 688–696 (1999)
76.162
D. Roggen, D. Floreano, C. Mattiussi: A morpho-
genetic evolutionary system: Phylogenesis of the
POETIC circuit, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 2606, 153–
164 (2003)
76.163
D. Roggen, S. Hofmann, Y. Thoma, D. Floreano:
Hardware spiking neural network with run-time
reconfigurable connectivity in an autonomous
robot, NASA/DoD Conf. Evolv. Hardw., ed. by
J. Lohn, R. Zebulum, J. Steincamp, D. Keymeulen,
A. Stoica, M.I. Fergusonpages (2003) pp. 189–
198
76.164
M. Matarić, D. Cliff: Challenges in evolving con-
trollers for physical robots, Robotics Auton. Syst.
19(1), 67–83 (1996)
76.165
G. Massera, T. Ferrauto, O. Gigliotta, S. Nolfi:
FARSA: An open software tool for embodied cog-
nitive science, Proc. 12th Eur. Conf. Artif. Life, ed.
by P. Lio, O. Miglino, G. Nicosia, S. Nolfi, M. Pavone
(MIT, Cambridge 2013) pp. 454–538
76.166
Framework for Autonomous Robotics Simulation
and Analysis: http://laral.istc.cnr.it/farsa

Multimedia Contents Neurorobotic
2069
Part G | 77
77. Neurorobotics: From Vision to Action
Patrick van der Smagt, Michael A. Arbib, Giorgio Metta
The lay view of a robot is a mechanical human,
and thus robotics has always been inspired by
attempts to emulate biology. In this chapter, we
extend this biological motivation from humans to
animals more generally, but with a focus on the
central nervous systems in its relationship to the
bodies of these creatures. In particular, we in-
vestigate the sensorimotor loop in the execution
of sophisticated behavior. Some of these sections
concentrate on cases where vision provides key
sensory data. Neuroethology is the study of the
brain mechanisms underlying animal behavior,
and Sect. 77.2 exemplifies the lessons it has to
offer robotics by looking at optic flow in bees, vi-
sually guided behavior in frogs, and navigation in
rats, turning then to the coordination of behaviors
and the role of attention. Brains are composed of
diverse subsystems, many of which are relevant to
robotics, but we have chosen just two regions of
the mammalian brain for detailed analysis. Sec-
tion 77.3 presents the cerebellum. While we can
plan and execute actions without a cerebellum,
the actions are no longer graceful and become
uncoordinated. We reveal how a cerebellum can
provide a key ingredient in an adaptive control
system, tuning parameters both within and be-
tween motor schemas. Section 77.4 turns to the
mirror system, which provides shared represen-
tations which bridge between the execution of
an action and the observation of that action when
performed by others. We develop a neurobiological
model of how learning may forge mirror neurons
for hand movements, provide a Bayesian view of
77.1
Definitions and History ........................ 2070
77.1.1
History and Definitions .............. 2070
77.2
The Case for Vision............................... 2071
77.2.1
Optic Flow in Bees and Robots.... 2071
77.2.2
Visually Guided Behavior
in Frogs and Robots................... 2072
77.2.3
Navigation in Rat and Robot ...... 2072
77.2.4
Salience and Visual Attention ..... 2074
77.3
Vertebrate Motor Control ...................... 2075
77.3.1
The Flat Hierarchy
of Neurocontrol......................... 2076
77.3.2
On Spinal Cord and Muscle ......... 2077
77.3.3
Models of Cerebellar Control ....... 2078
77.3.4
Cerebellar Models and Robotics .. 2081
77.4
The Role of Mirror Systems ................... 2082
77.4.1
Mirror Neurons
and the Recognition
of Hand Actions ........................ 2082
77.4.2
Computational Models ............... 2084
77.4.3
Mirror Neurons and Imitation..... 2085
77.4.4
Mirror System and Speech .......... 2086
77.5
Conclusion and Further Reading........... 2089
77.5.1
Further Reading ........................ 2090
References................................................... 2090
a robot mirror system, and discuss what must be
added to a mirror system to support robot im-
itation. We conclude by emphasizing that, while
neuroscience can inspire novel robotic designs, it is
also the case that robots can be used as embodied
test beds for the analysis of brain models.

Part G | 77.1
2070
Part G
Robots and Humans
77.1 Definitions and History
Neurorobotics may be deﬁned as:
the design of computational structures for robots in-
spired by the study of the nervous systems of humans
and other animals.
We note the success of (deep) artiﬁcial neural net-
works – networks of simple computing elements whose
connections change with experience – as providing
a medium for parallel adaptive computation that has
seen application in robot vision systems and controllers
but here we emphasize neural networks derived from
the study of speciﬁc neurobiological systems. Neuro-
robotics has a twofold aim: creating better machines
which employ the principles of natural neural compu-
tation; and using the study of bio-inspired robots to
improve understanding of the functioning of the brain.
Chapter 75, Biologically Inspired Robots, complements
our study of brain design with work on body design, the
design of robotic control and actuator systems based on
careful study of the relevant biology.
77.1.1 History and Definitions
Science has long been playing with technical replicas
of biological behavior. As a famous example, Wal-
ter [77.1] described two biologically inspired robots,
the electromechanical tortoises Machina speculatrix
and M. docilis (though each body has wheels, not
legs). M. speculatrix has a steerable photoelectric cell,
which makes it sensitive to light, and an electrical
contact, which allows it to respond when it bumps
into obstacles. The photoreceptor rotates until a light
of moderate intensity is registered, at which time the
organism orients itself towards the light and approaches
it. However, very bright lights, material obstacles, and
steep gradients are repellent to the tortoise. The latter
stimuli convert the photoampliﬁer into an oscillator,
which causes alternating movements of butting and
withdrawal, so that the robot pushes small objects out
of its way, goes around heavy ones, and avoids slopes.
The tortoise has a hutch, which contains a bright
light. When the machine’s batteries are charged, this
bright light is repellent. When the batteries are low, the
light becomes attractive to the machine and the light
continues to exert an attraction until the tortoise enters
the hutch, where the machine’s circuitry is temporarily
turned off until the batteries are recharged, at which
time the bright hutch light again exerts a negative
tropism. The second robot, M. docilis was produced
by grafting onto M. speculatrix a circuit designed to
form conditioned reﬂexes. In one experiment, Walter
connected this circuit to the obstacle-avoiding device in
M. speculatrix. Training consisted of blowing a whistle
just before bumping the shell.
Although Walter’s controllers are simple and not
based on neural analysis, they do illustrate an attempt
to gain inspiration from seeking the simplest mecha-
nisms that will yield an interesting class of biologically
inspired robot behaviors, and then showing how differ-
ent additional mechanisms yield a variety of enriched
behaviors. Braitenberg’s book [77.2] is very much in
this spirit and has entered the canon of neurorobotics.
While their work provides a historical background for
the studies surveyed here, we instead emphasize stud-
ies inspired by the computational neuroscience of the
mechanisms serving vision and action in the human
and in animal brains. We seek lessons from linking
behavior to the analysis of the internal workings of
the brain (1) at the relatively high level of charac-
terizing the functional roles of speciﬁc brain regions
(or the functional units of analysis called schemas,
Sect. 77.2.4), and the behaviors which emerge from
the interactions between them, and (2) at the more
detailed level of models of neural circuitry linked to
the data of neuroanatomy and neurophysiology. There
are lessons for neurorobotics to be learned from even
ﬁner-scale analysis of the biophysics of individual neu-
rons and the neurochemistry of synaptic plasticity,
but these are beyond the scope of this chapter (see
Segev and London [77.3] and Fregnac [77.4], respec-
tively, for entry points into the relevant computational
neuroscience).
The plan of this chapter is as follows. We will
start with explaining how the higher-level cognitive
functionality of vision-based planning and navigation
is realized in biology, and how this relates to robotic
systems (Sect. 77.2). We then (Sect. 77.3) explain verte-
brate movement generation itself, and put forth a theory
on what role the cerebellum plays in tuning and coor-
dinating actions. This is followed by a section on the
mirror system and its roles in action recognition and
imitation (Sect. 77.4). The extroduction will then in-
vite readers to explore the many other areas in which
neurorobotics offers lessons from neuroscience to the
development of novel robot designs. What follows,
then, can be seen as a contribution to the continuing
dialog between robot behavior and animal and human
behavior in which particular emphasis is placed on the
search for the neural underpinnings of vision, visually
guided action, and cerebellar control.

Neurorobotics: From Vision to Action
77.2 The Case for Vision
2071
Part G | 77.2
77.2 The Case for Vision
Before we turn to vertebrate brains for much of our
inspiration for neurorobotics, we brieﬂy sample the
rich literature on insect-inspired research. Among the
founding studies in computational neuroethology were
a series of reports from the laboratory of Werner Re-
ichardt in Tübingen, which linked the delicate anatomy
of the ﬂy’s brain to the extraction of visual data
needed for ﬂight control. More than 40 years ago, Re-
ichardt [77.5] published a model of motion detection
inspired by this work that has long been central to dis-
cussions of visual motion in both the neuroscience and
robotics literatures. Borst and Dickinson [77.6] provide
a recent study of continuing biological research on vi-
sual course control in ﬂies. Such work has inspired
a large number of robot studies, including those of van
der Smagt and Groen [77.7], van der Smagt [77.8], Liu
and Usseglio-Viretta [77.9], Rufﬁer et al. [77.10], and
Reiser and Dickinson [77.11].
77.2.1 Optic Flow in Bees and Robots
Here, however, we look in a little more detail at honey-
bees. Srinivasan et al. [77.15] continued the tradition
of studying image motion cues in insects by investi-
gating how optic ﬂow (the ﬂow of pattern across the
eye induced by motion relative to the environment) is
exploited by honeybees to guide locomotion and nav-
igation. They analyzed how bees perform a smooth
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 77.1 (a) Observation of the trajectories of honeybees
ﬂying in visually textured tunnels has provided insights
into how bees use optic ﬂow cues to regulate ﬂight speed
and estimate distance ﬂown, and balance optic ﬂow in
the two eyes to ﬂy safely through narrow gaps (images
courtesy of Srinivasan et al. [77.12]). This information
has been used to build autonomously navigating robots.
(b) Schematic illustration of a honeybee brain, carrying
about a million neurons within 
 1 mm3 (after [77.13]).
(c) A mobile robot guided by an optic ﬂow algorithm based
on the studies exempliﬁed in [77.14]
landing on a ﬂat surface: image velocity is held con-
stant as the surface is approached, thus automatically
ensuring that ﬂight speed is close to zero at touchdown.
This obviates any need for explicit knowledge of ﬂight
speed or height above the ground. This landing strat-
egy was then implemented in a robotic gantry to test
its applicability to autonomous airborne vehicles. Bar-
ron and Srinivasan [77.14] investigated the extent to
which ground speed is affected by headwinds. Honey-
bees were trained to enter a tunnel to forage at a sucrose
feeder placed at its far end (Fig.77.1a). The bees used
visual cues to maintain their ground speed by adjusting
their airspeed to maintain a constant rate of optic ﬂow,
even against headwinds which were, at their strongest,
50% of a bee’s maximum recorded forward velocity.
Vladusich et al. [77.16] studied the effect of adding
goal-deﬁning landmarks. Bees were trained to forage
in an optic-ﬂow-rich tunnel with a landmark posi-
tioned directly above the feeder. They searched much
more accurately when both odometric and landmark
cues were available than when only odometry was
available. When the two cue sources were set in con-
ﬂict, by shifting the position of the landmark in the
tunnel during tests, bees overwhelmingly used land-
mark cues rather than odometry. This, together with
other such experiments, suggests that bees can make
use of odometric and landmark cues in a more ﬂex-
ible and dynamic way than previously envisaged. In
earlier studies of bees ﬂying down a tunnel, Srini-
vasan and Zhang [77.17] placed different patterns on
the left and right walls. They found that bees bal-
ance the image velocities in the left and right visual
ﬁelds. This strategy ensures that bees ﬂy down the
middle of the tunnel, without bumping into the side
walls, enabling them to negotiate narrow passages or to
ﬂy between obstacles. This strategy has been applied
to a corridor-following robot (Fig. 77.1c). By hold-
ing constant the average image velocity as seen by the
two eyes during ﬂight, the bee avoids potential col-
lisions, slowing down when it ﬂies through a narrow
passage. The movement-sensitive mechanisms underly-
ing these various behaviors differ qualitatively as well
as quantitatively, from those that mediate the optomo-
tor response (e.g., turning to track a pattern of moving
stripes) that had been the initial target of investigation
of the Reichardt laboratory. The lesson for robot con-
trol is that ﬂight appears to be coordinated by a number
of visuomotor systems acting in concert, and the same
lesson can apply to a whole range of tasks that must
convert vision to action. Of course, vision is but one
of the sensory systems that play a vital role in insect
behavior. Webb [77.18] uses her own work on robot

Part G | 77.2
2072
Part G
Robots and Humans
design inspired by the auditory control of behavior in
crickets to anchor a far-ranging assessment of the ex-
tent to which robotics can offer good models of animal
behaviors.
77.2.2 Visually Guided Behavior
in Frogs and Robots
Lettvin et al. [77.19] treated the frog’s visual system
from an ethological perspective, analyzing circuitry in
relation to the animal’s ecological niche to show that
different cells in the retina and the visual midbrain
region known as the tectum were specialized for de-
tecting predators and prey. However, in much visually
guided behavior, the animal does not respond to a sin-
gle stimulus, but rather to some property of the overall
conﬁguration. We thus turn to the question what does
the frog’s eye tell the frog?, stressing the embodied ner-
vous system or, perhaps equivalently, an action-oriented
view of perception. Consider, for example, the snap-
ping behavior of frogs confronted with one or more
ﬂy-like stimuli. Ingle [77.20] found that it is only in
a restricted region around the head of a frog that the
presence of a ﬂy-like stimulus elicits a snap, that is, the
frog turns so that its midline is pointed at the stimu-
lus and then lunges forward and captures the prey with
its tongue. There is a larger zone in which the frog
merely orients towards the target, and beyond that zone
the stimulus elicits no response at all. When confronted
with two ﬂies within the snapping zone, either of which
is vigorous enough that it could elicit a snapping re-
sponse alone, the frog exhibits one of three reactions:
it snaps at one of the ﬂies, it does not snap at all, or
it snaps in between at the average ﬂy. Didday [77.21]
offered a simple model of this choice behavior which
may be considered as the prototype for a winner-take-
all (WTA) model, which receives a variety of inputs and
(under ideal circumstances) suppresses the representa-
tion of all but one of them; the one that remains is the
winner that will play the decisive role in further pro-
cessing. This was the beginning of Rana computatrix
(see Arbib [77.22, 23] for overviews).
Studies on frog brains and behavior inspired the
successful use of potential ﬁelds for robot navi-
gation strategies. Data on the strategies used by
frogs to capture prey while avoiding static obstacles
(Collett [77.24]) grounded the model by Arbib and
House [77.25], which linked systems for depth percep-
tion to the creation of spatial maps of both prey and
barriers. In one version of their model, they represented
the map of prey by a potential ﬁeld with long-range at-
traction and the map of barriers by a potential ﬁeld with
short-range repulsion, and showed that summation of
these ﬁelds yielded a ﬁeld that could guide the frog’s de-
tour around the barrier to catch its prey. Corbacho and
Arbib [77.26] later explored a possible role for learn-
ing in this behavior. Their model incorporated learning
in the weights between the various potential ﬁelds to
enable adaptation over trials as observed in the real an-
imals. The success of the models indicated that frogs
use reactive strategies to avoid obstacles while moving
to a goal, rather than employing a planning or cog-
nitive system. Other work, Cobas and Arbib [77.27],
studied how the frog’s ability to catch prey and avoid
obstacles was integrated with its ability to escape from
predators. These models stressed the interaction of the
tectum with a variety of other brain regions such as the
pretectum (for detecting predators) and the tegmentum
(for implementing motor commands for approach or
avoidance).
Arkin [77.28] showed how to combine a com-
puter vision system with a frog-inspired potential ﬁeld
controller to create a control system for a mobile
robot that could successfully navigate in a fairly struc-
tured environment using camera input. The resultant
system thus enriched other roughly contemporaneous
applications of potential ﬁelds in path planning with
obstacle avoidance for both manipulators and mobile
robots (Khatib [77.29], Krogh and Thorpe [77.30]).
The work on Rana computatrix proceeded at two lev-
els – both biologically realistic neural networks and
in terms of functional units called schemas, which
compete and cooperate to determine behavior. Sec-
tion 77.2.4 will show how more general behaviors can
emerge from the competition and cooperation of per-
ceptual and motor schemas, as well as more abstract
coordinating schemas. Such ideas were, of course, de-
veloped independently by a number of authors, and
so entered the robotics literature by various routes, of
which the best known may be the subsumption archi-
tecture of Brooks [77.31] and the ideas of Braitenberg
cited above, whereas Arkin’s work on behavior-based
robotics [77.32] is, indeed, rooted in schema theory.
Arkin et al. [77.33] present a recent example of the con-
tinuing interaction between robotics and ethology, of-
fering a novel method for creating high-ﬁdelity models
of animal behavior for use in robotic systems based on
a behavioral systems approach (i. e., based on a schema-
level model of animal behavior, rather than analysis of
biological circuits in animal brains), and describe how
an ethological model of a domestic dog can be imple-
mented with AIBO, the Sony entertainment robot.
77.2.3 Navigation in Rat and Robot
The tectum, the midbrain visual system which deter-
mines how the frog turns its whole body towards it prey
or orients it for escape from predators (Sect.77.2.2), is

Neurorobotics: From Vision to Action
77.2 The Case for Vision
2073
Part G | 77.2
homologous with the superior colliculus of the mam-
malian midbrain. The rat superior colliculus has been
shown to be frog like, mediating approach and avoid-
ance (Dean et al. [77.34]), whereas the best-studied role
of the superior colliculus of cat, monkey, and human is
in the control of saccades, rapid eye movements to ac-
quire a visual target. Moreover, the superior colliculus
can integrate auditory and somatosensory information
into its visual frame (Stein and Meredith [77.35]), and
this inspired Strosslin et al. [77.36] to use a biolog-
ically inspired approach based on the properties of
neurons in the superior colliculus to learn the rela-
tion between visual and tactile information in control
of a mobile robot platform. More generally, then, the
comparative study of mammalian brains has yielded
a rich variety of computational models of importance in
neurorobotics. In this section, we further introduce the
study of mammalian neurorobotics by looking at stud-
ies of mechanisms of the rat brain for spatial navigation.
The frog’s detour behavior is an example of what
O’Keefe and Nadel [77.37] called the taxon (behavioral
orientation) system (as in Braitenberg, [77.38] a taxis
(plural taxes) is an organism’s response to a stimulus by
movement in a particular direction). They distinguished
this from a system for map-based navigation and pro-
posed that the latter resides in the hippocampus, though
Guazzelli et al. [77.39] qualiﬁed this assertion, showing
how the hippocampus may function as part of a cogni-
tive map. The taxon versus map distinction is akin to the
distinction between reactive and deliberative control in
robotics (Arkin et al. [77.33]). It will be useful to relate
taxis to the notion of an affordance (Gibson [77.40]),
a feature of an object or environment relevant to action,
for example, in picking up an apple or a ball, the iden-
tity of the object may be irrelevant, but the size of the
object is crucial. Similarly, if we wish to push a toy car,
recognizing the make of car copied in the toy is irrele-
vant, whereas it is crucial to recognize the placement of
the wheels to extract the direction in which the car can
be readily pushed. Just as a rat may have basic taxes for
approaching food or avoiding a bright light, say, so does
it have a wider repertoire of affordances for possible
actions associated with the immediate sensing of its en-
vironment. Such affordances include go straight ahead
for visual sighting of a corridor, hide for a dark hole,
eat for food as sensed generically, drink similarly, and
the various turns afforded by, e.g., the sight of the end
of the corridor. It also makes rich use of olfactory cues.
In the same way, a robot’s behavior will rely on a host
of reactions to local conditions in fulﬁlling a plan, e.g.,
knowing that it must go to the end of a corridor it will
nonetheless use local visual cues to avoid hitting obsta-
cles or to determine through which angle to turn when
reaching a bend in the corridor.
Both normal and hippocampal-lesioned rats can
learn to solve a simple T-maze (e.g., learning whether
to turn left or right to ﬁnd food) in the absence of
any consistent environmental cues other than the T-
shape of the maze. If anything, the lesioned animals
learn this problem faster than normal ones. After the
criterion was reached, probe trials with an eight-arm
radial maze were interspersed with the usual T-trials.
Animals from both groups consistently chose the side
to which they were trained on the T-maze. However,
many did not choose the 90ı arm but preferred either
the 45ı or 135ı arm, suggesting that the rats eventually
solved the T-maze by learning to rotate within an ego-
centric orientation system at the choice point through
approximately 90ı. This leads to the hypothesis of an
orientation vector being stored in the animal’s brain
but does not tell us where or how the orientation vec-
tor is stored. One possible model would employ coarse
coding in a linear array of cells, coding for turns from
180ı to C180ı. From the behavior, one might expect
that only the cells close to the preferred behavioral di-
rection are excited, and that learning marches this peak
from the old to the new preferred direction. To unlearn
90ı, say, the array must reduce the peak there, while
at the same time building a new peak at the new di-
rection of C90ı. If the old peak has massp(t) and the
new peak has massq(t), then as p.t/ declines toward 0
while q.t/ increases steadily from 0, the center of mass
will progress from 90ı to C90ı, ﬁtting the behavioral
data.
The determination of movement direction was mod-
eled by rat-iﬁcation of the Arbib and House [77.25]
model of frog detour behavior. There, prey was repre-
sented by excitation coarsely coded across a population,
while barriers were encoded by inhibition whose extent
closely matched the retinotopic extent of each barrier.
The sum of excitation was passed through a winner-
takes-all circuit to yield the choice of movement direc-
tion. As a result, the direction of the gap closest to the
prey, rather than the direction of the prey itself, was of-
ten chosen for the frog’s initial movement. The same
model serves for behavioral orientation once we replace
the direction of the prey (frog) by the direction of the
orientation vector (rat), while the barriers correspond to
the presence of walls rather than alley ways.
To approach the issue of how a cognitive map
can extend the capability of the affordance system,
Guazzelli et al. [77.39] extended the Lieblich and Ar-
bib [77.41] approach to building a cognitive map as
a world graph, a set of nodes connected by a set of
edges, where the nodes represent recognized places or
situations, and the links represent ways of moving from
one situation to another. A crucial notion is that a place
encountered in different circumstances may be repre-

Part G | 77.2
2074
Part G
Robots and Humans
Hippocampal
formation
place
Hypothalamus
drive states
Prefrontal
world graph
Premotor
action selection
Affordances
Actor-critic
Dopamine
neurons
Parietal
Caudoputamen
Nucleus
accumbens
Sensory
inputs
Sensory
inputs
Motor
outputs
Goal object
Consequences
Internal state
Incentives
Dynamic
remapping
Fig. 77.2 The TAM-WG model has at its basis a system, TAM (the taxon affordance model), for exploiting affordances.
This is elaborated by a system, WG (the world graph), which can use a cognitive map to plan paths to targets which
are not currently visible. Note that the model processes two different kinds of sensory inputs. At the bottom right are
those associated with, e.g., hypothalamic systems for feeding and drinking and that may provide both incentives and
rewards for the animal’s behavior, contributing both to behavioral choices, and to the reinforcement of certain patterns
of behavior. The nucleus accumbens and caudoputamen mediate an actor-critic style of reinforcement learning based
on the hypothalamic drive of the dopamine system. The sensory inputs at the top left are those that allow the animal to
sense its relation with the external world, determining both where it is (the hippocampal place system), as well as the
affordances for action (the parietal recognition of affordances can shape the premotor selection of an action). The TAM
model focuses on the parietal–premotor reaction to immediate affordances; the WG model places action selection within
the wider context of a cognitive map (after Guazzelli et al. [77.39])
sented by multiple nodes, but that these nodes may
be merged when the similarity between these circum-
stances is recognized. They model the process whereby
the animal decides where to move next, on the ba-
sis of its current drive state (hunger, thirst, fear, etc.).
The emphasis is on spatial maps for guiding locomo-
tion into regions not necessarily currently visible, rather
than retinotopic representations of immediately visible
space, and yields exploration and latent learning with-
out the introduction of an explicit exploratory drive.
The model shows:
1. How a route, possibly of many steps, may be chosen
that leads to the desired goal.
2. How short cuts may be chosen.
3. Through its account of node merging why, in open
ﬁelds, place cell ﬁring does not seem to depend on
direction.
The overall structure and general mode of opera-
tion of the complete model is shown in Fig. 77.2, which
gives a vivid sense of the lessons to be learned by study-
ing not only speciﬁc systems of the mammalian brain
but also their patterns of large-scale interaction. This
model is but one of many inspired by the data on the
role of the hippocampus and other regions in rat nav-
igation. Here, we just mention as pointers the wider
literature the papers by Girard et al. [77.42] and Meyer
et al. [77.43], which are part of the Psikharpax project,
which does for rats what Rana computatrix did for frogs
and toads.
77.2.4 Salience and Visual Attention
Discussions of how an animal (or robot) grasps an ob-
ject assume that the animal or robot is attending to the
relevant object. Thus, whatever the subtlety of process-
ing in the canonical and mirror systems for grasping,
its success rests on the availability of a visual system
coupled to an oculomotor control system that bring
foveal vision to bear on objects to set the parameters
needed for successful interaction. Indeed, the general
point is that attention greatly reduces the processing
load for animal and robot. The catch, of course, is that
reducing the computing load is a Pyrrhic victory unless

Neurorobotics: From Vision to Action
77.3 Vertebrate Motor Control
2075
Part G | 77.3
the moving focus of attention captures those aspects
of behavior that are relevant for the current task – or
supports necessary priority interrupts. Indeed, direct-
ing attention appropriately is a topic for which there
is a great richness of both neurophysiological data and
robotic application (see Deco and Rolls [77.44] and
Choi et al. [77.45]).
In their neuromorphic model of the bottom-up guid-
ance of attention in primates, Itti and Koch [77.46] de-
compose the input video stream into eight feature chan-
nels at six spatial scales. After surround suppression,
only a sparse number of locations remain active in each
map, and all maps are combined into a unique saliency
map. This map is scanned by the focus of attention in
order of decreasing saliency through the interaction be-
tween a winner-takes-all mechanism (which selects the
most salient location) and an inhibition-of-return mech-
anism (which transiently suppresses recently attended
locations from the saliency map). Because it includes
a detailed low-level vision front-end, the model has
been applied not only to laboratory stimuli, but also to
a wide variety of natural scenes, predicting a wealth of
data from psychophysical experiments.
When speciﬁc objects are searched for, low-level
visual processing can be biased both by the gist (e.g.,
outdoor suburban scene) and also for the features of
that object. This top-down modulation of bottom-up
processing results in an ability to guide search towards
targets of interest (Wolfe [77.47]). Task affects eye
movements (Yarbus [77.48]), as do training and gen-
eral expertise. Navalpakkam and Itti [77.49] propose
a computational model which emphasizes four aspects
that are important in biological vision: determining the
task relevance of an entity, biasing attention for the
low-level visual features of desired targets, recogniz-
ing these targets using the same low-level features, and
incrementally building a visual map of task relevance
at every scene location. It attends to the most salient
location in the scene, and attempts to recognize the
attended object through hierarchical matching against
object representations stored in long-term memory. It
updates its working memory with the task relevance of
the recognized entity and updates a topographic task-
relevance map with the location and relevance of the
recognized entity; for example, in one task the model
forms a map of likely locations of cars from a video
clip ﬁlmed while driving on a highway. Such work illus-
trates the continuing interaction between models based
on visual neurophysiology and human psychophysics
with the tackling of practical robotic applications.
Orabona et al. [77.50] implemented an extension
of the Itti–Koch model on a humanoid robot with
moving eyes, using log-polar vision as in Sandini
and Tagliasco [77.51], and changing the feature con-
struction pyramid by considering proto-object elements
(blob-like structures rather than edges). The inhibition-
of-return mechanism has to take into account a moving
frame of reference, the resolution of the fovea is very
different from that at the periphery of the visual ﬁeld,
and head and body movements need to be stabilized.
The control of movement might thus have a relation-
ship with the structure and development of the attention
system. Rizzolatti et al. [77.52] proposed a role for
the feedback projections from premotor cortex to the
parietal lobe, assuming that they form a tuning signal
that dynamically changes visual perception. In prac-
tice, this can be seen as an implicit attention system
that selects sensory information while the action is
being prepared and subsequently executed (Flanagan
and Johansson [77.53], Flanagan et al. [77.54], and
Mataric and Pomplun [77.55]). The early responses,
before action onset, of many premotor and parietal neu-
rons suggest a premotor mechanism of attention that
deserves exploration in further work in neurorobotics.
77.3 Vertebrate Motor Control
The body of literature on primate motor control is, of
course, vast, and gives a patchy view on the principles
behind it. Getting a clear view of how limb and general
body control functions is difﬁcult; moreover, there are
no clear proofs of whether any of the existing views on
motor control are correct.
But there exist a few observations of the human cen-
tral and peripheral nervous systems from which clear
conclusions can be drawn. The ﬁrst observation is the
presence of neural communication delays. How does
the system know the position of limbs? There are two
principled methods: (1) through proprioceptive signals,
consisting of muscle spindles and Golgi tendon or-
gans (GOs); and (2) through skin information. It is,
however, not very likely that information from mus-
cle spindles and GOs are accurate enough to code limb
position. Tendon organs are sensitive to forces along
in-series motor units and there is no physiological ev-
idence that Golgi tendon organs signal muscle length
(but, of course, force changes with muscle length, so
during movement a correlation is found). There is an-
other problem with respect to limb position, which is
particularly clear for ﬁngers: ﬂexibilities and nonlinear
relationships between ﬁnger position and muscle force,
in combination with the imprecise receptors, makes the
relationship between GO/spindle data and ﬁnger posi-

Part G | 77.3
2076
Part G
Robots and Humans
Table 77.1 Classiﬁcation of sensory ﬁbers from muscle (after [77.56])
Type
Receptor
Axon diameter [
m]
Transmission speed [m=s]
Sensitive to
Ia
Primary spindle endings
1220
60100
Muscle length and rate of change
Ib
Golgi tendon organs
1220
60100
Muscle tension
II
Secondary spindle endings
612
3070
Muscle length
III
Free nerve endings
26
1030
Skin signals
tion too complex and variable to be a likely candidate
to code ﬁnger position; after all, the sensors are in the
forearm rather than in the ﬁngers; and information on
ﬁnger position is not available in muscle movement
or tendon force. Furthermore, muscle spindle data is
noisy [77.57]. It has conversely been shown [77.58,
59] that the receptors in hairy skin code information
that can be related to ﬁnger position; furthermore, sim-
ilar data have been found for the knee joint [77.60].
Table 77.1 lists nerve transmission speeds for these
signals.
Since neurons are only to be found in the spinal
cord and the brain, for hand skin, therefore, we can
expect signal transfer delays to the spine of around
30100 ms. Round-trip muscle activation is, therefore,
around 70 ms for signals based on skin data [77.61],
or around 25 ms for spindle-based signals (we have
veriﬁed these delays by measuring hand skin-based
reﬂexes by measuring the corresponding electromyog-
raphy(EMG) signals, and found a round-trip delay of
around 75 ms. Spindle-based feedback for the wrist was
measured at around 25 ms.
Of course, when a sensory signal has to be pro-
cessed in the brain, the delays are correspondingly
longer. At any rate: error-correcting feedback control
has delays of several tens of milliseconds; feedback
control based on such delays cannot lead to any accept-
able accuracy with the movement speeds that humans
typically display. This means that large portions of our
movement, over time frames in the order of 100 ms or
more, need to be controlled open loop.
A second important observation is our generalizing
capabilities. Consider the case of playing fast and ac-
curate sports, e.g., table tennis. During play, we obtain
sensory visual, haptic, and tactile sensory data, the re-
sult of which must lead to an accurate movement of the
bat in order to score a point. Even a player with little
training is able to do this rather accurately: at ball ﬂight
times between 200 and 500 ms, the brain does not have
much time to plan an accurate whole-body movement
for each and every possible sensory state, but we are
usually capable of returning the ball. Training helps, but
we do not need to exhaustively learn many states in the
very high-dimensional sensor space in which our obser-
vations move.
Generalization can only be done with reasonably
accurate models of the sensor/motor behavior. How-
ever, models of our motor system are difﬁcult to obtain:
variations such as including payloads, wearing heavy
clothing, muscle fatigue, etc., do not inﬂuence our ac-
curacy considerably.
77.3.1 The Flat Hierarchy of Neurocontrol
How is an open-loop movement generated? In this
paper we concentrate on voluntary vertebrate motor
control; the only reason for any animal to have a brain
is to generate movement. Moreover, despite differences
in brain structures, there is a large correspondence in
movement patterns among the whole animal kingdom,
irrespective of the presence of a cortical structure or
a cerebellum. What parts of the brain are directly in-
volved in movement?
The major role of the cerebral cortex seems to
be unsupervised learning to establish relationships be-
tween sensory and action patterns [77.62]. The neocor-
tex is only to be found in mammals; experiments with
decorticated cats [77.63] clearly show that the cortex is
not necessary to generate movement; rather, it is likely
that the motor cortex models and weighs movements, to
subsequently make decisions based thereon.
The major role of the basal ganglia seems to be
reinforcement learning to ﬁlter out unwanted move-
ments [77.62]. They play a dominant role in movement
generation or gating (ﬁltering) of generated movement
patterns. The effect of Parkinson’s disease (the in-
ability to initiate movement) and Huntington’s disease
(the inability to prevent unwanted movement) on the
basal ganglia is well known and clearly indicates their
function.
The major role of the cerebellum seems to be su-
pervised learning of motor patterns [77.62]. Moreover,
decerebellation does not lead to complete movement
loss. An individual with cerebellar lesions may be able
to move the arm to successfully reach a target and to
successfully adjust the hand to the size of an object.
However, the action cannot be made swiftly and accu-
rately, and the ability to coordinate the timing of the two
subactions is lacking. The behavior will thus exhibit
decomposition of movement – ﬁrst the hand is moved
until the thumb touches the object, and only then is the
hand shaped appropriately to grasp the object [77.64].
Robot control usually favors a strict hierarchical
approach. A typical robot works as follows. At the low-

Neurorobotics: From Vision to Action
77.3 Vertebrate Motor Control
2077
Part G | 77.3
est level, a very fast .
 100 s/ current control loop
controls the rotation of the dc motor. On top of that,
a torque controller (running typically at 1 kHz) controls
the torque of all joints, and is in its turn controlled by
an impedance or position controller. On top of that, typ-
ically, a Cartesian path planner forms the slowest loop.
An error in any of these elements will disable the robot.
A look into evolutionary development of neural
control thus makes immediately clear that a strict hi-
erarchical approach is not viable in neural control.
Although any of the above-mentioned brain regions is
important in movement control, and similar structures
can be found in any vertebrate, their dysfunction leads
to movement degradation but not to movement loss (this
is, of course, not true for the spinal cord, which (com-
bines and) transmits the controls to the muscles). Also,
the development of the neural system shows that an-
imals were always capable of movement – irrespective
of their brain structure. However, the cerebellum is usu-
ally rightly focused upon when analyzing vertebrate
movement. How do the parts of the brain collaborate
towards smooth goal-directed movement?
In placing the function of the cerebellum in the loop,
a normal distinction is to consider the cerebellum as
representing (a) a forward or direct model which rep-
resents the path from motor command to motor output,
or (b) an inverse model of motor function, i. e., going
from a desired motor outcome to a set of motor com-
mands likely to achieve it. As we have just suggested,
the action plan unfolds as if it were feedforward or
open loop when the actual parameters of the situation
match the stored parameters, while a feedback com-
ponent is employed to counteract disturbances (current
feedback) and to learn from mistakes (learning from
feedback). This is obtained by relying on a forward
model that predicts the outcome of the action as it un-
folds in real time. The accuracy of the forward model
can be evaluated by comparing the output generated
by the system with the signals derived from sensory
feedback (Miall et al. [77.65]). Also, delays must be ac-
counted for to address the different propagation times of
the neural pathways carrying the predicted and actual
outcome of the action. Note that the forward model in
this case is relatively simple, predicting only the motor
output in advance; since motor commands are generated
internally it is easy to imagine a predictor for these sig-
nals (known as an efference copy). The inverse model,
on the other hand, is much more complicated since it
maps sensory feedback (e.g., vision) back into motor
terms.
We suggest a much simpler approach to the ver-
tebrate control system. However, let us ﬁrst look into
the functionality of the lower-level apparatus: muscle,
spinal cord, and cerebellum.
77.3.2 On Spinal Cord and Muscle
The key element in movement generation is given by
two building blocks: (a) our muscles, and (b) the spinal
cord. Muscle behavior is strongly nonlinear; the exerted
force decreases nonlinearly with velocity (Fig. 77.3)
and varies nonlinearly with length (Fig. 77.4).
Limb movement, however, is caused by a complex
of muscles – for instance, the human arm uses a total
of 19 muscle groups for planar motion of the elbow
and shoulder alone (Nijhof and Kouwenhoven [77.67])
with altogether highly nonlinear dynamics. How can
this large number of actuators be controlled without
feedback error control?
The concept is simple and was ﬁrst well described
by Bernstein [77.68]: skeletal muscles are always con-
trolled in functional groups, leading to synergies of
movement. Rather than activating muscles indepen-
Shorten
Lengthen
Power
1
Force
0
v/vmax
Fig. 77.3 The force/velocity and power/velocity relation-
ship of muscle (after [77.56])
Total
Passive
Active
l0
Force
Length
Fig. 77.4 The force/length relationship of muscle (af-
ter [77.56])

Part G | 77.3
2078
Part G
Robots and Humans
Deep nuclei
Parallel
fibers
Mossy
fibers
Granule
cell
Golgi cell
Basket cell
Cortico-nuclear
microzone (cerebellar cortex)
a)
b)
Climbing
fibers
Climbing
fibers
Parallel
fibers
Mossy
fibers
State
encoder
Granule
cell
Purkinje cell
Purkinje cell
Deep
nucleus
Deep nucleus
Motor cell
Parallel
fibers
Mossy
fibers
Spinal cord
One APG
Granule
cell
Golgi
cell
Basket
cell
Climbing
fibers
Climbing
fibers
Parallel
fibers
Mossy
fibers
Spinal cord
One module
Granule
cell
Purkinje cells
c)
d)
Fig. 77.5 (a) Major cells in the cerebellum. (b) Cells in the Marr–Albus model. The granule cells are state encoders,
feeding system state, and sensor data into the PC. PC/PF synapses are adjusted using the Widrow–Hoff rule. The output
of the PC are steering signals for the robotic system. (c) The APG model, using the same state encoder as in (b).
(d) The MPFIM model. A single module corresponds to a group of Purkinje cells: predictor, controller, and responsibility
estimator. The granule cells generate the necessary basis functions of the original information (after [77.66])
dently, a neural signal controls groups of muscles that
perform (a part of) an action. Linear dimension reduc-
tion methods [77.69] (e.g., principal component anal-
ysis, (PCA), independent component analysis (ICA),
or non-negative matrix factorization (NMF)) have been
used to establish synergies in EMG data, and this can
be used [77.70] to linearly combine single-ﬁnger move-
ment to whole-hand movement in EMG space. So, we
cannot control single muscles (i. e., coherent groups of
muscle ﬁbers) but rather control muscle groups, the lin-
ear combination of which can be used to span a decent
part of our voluntary movement.
There are currently still open questions as to the na-
ture of movement synergies: how much of the synergies
are deﬁned by the biomechanical structure of our mus-
cles and tendons; how much of it is laid out in the spinal
cord; and which part of it is learned in the higher move-
ment control regions?
77.3.3 Models of Cerebellar Control
The cerebellum can be divided into two parts: the cor-
tex and the deep nuclei. There are two systems of ﬁbers
bringing input to the both the cortex and nuclei: the
mossy ﬁbers and the climbing ﬁbers. The only output
from the cerebellar nucleus comes from cells called
Purkinje cells, and they project only to the cerebellar
nuclei, where their effect is inhibitory. This inhibition
sculpts the output of the nuclei which (the effect varies
from nucleus to nucleus) may act by modulating ac-
tivity in the spinal cord, the mid-brain, or the cerebral
cortex. We now turn to models that make explicit use of
the cellular structure of the cerebellar cortex (see Ec-
cles et al. [77.71] and Ito [77.72], and also Fig. 77.5a).
The human cerebellum has 714 million Purkinje cells
(PCs), each receiving about 200 000 synapses. Mossy
ﬁbers (MFs) arise from the spinal cord and brainstem.
They synapse onto granule cells and deep cerebellar nu-
clei. Granule cells have axons which each project up
to form a T, with the bars of the T forming the paral-
lel ﬁbers (PFs). Each PF synapses on about 200 PCs.
The PCs, which are grouped into microzones, inhibit
the deep nuclei. PCs with their target cells in cerebellar
nuclei are grouped together in microcomplexes [77.72].
Microcomplexes are deﬁned by a variety of criteria to
serve as the units of analysis of cerebellar inﬂuence
on speciﬁc types of motor activity. The climbing ﬁbers
(CFs) arise from the inferior olive (IO). Each PC re-
ceives synapses from only one CF, but a CF makes
about 300 excitatory synapses on each PC that it con-

Neurorobotics: From Vision to Action
77.3 Vertebrate Motor Control
2079
Part G | 77.3
tacts. This powerful input alone is enough to ﬁre the PC,
though most PC ﬁring depends on subtle patterns of PF
activity. The cerebellar cortex also contains a variety of
inhibitory interneurons. The basket cell is activated by
PF afferents and makes inhibitory synapses onto PCs.
Golgi cells receive input from PFs, MFs, and CFs, and
inhibit granule cells.
The Marr–Albus Model
In the Marr–Albus model (Marr [77.73] and Al-
bus [77.74]) the cerebellum functions as a classiﬁer of
sensory and motor patterns received through the MFs.
Only a small fraction of the parallel ﬁbers (PF) are ac-
tive when a Purkinje cell (PC) ﬁres and thus inﬂuence
the motor neurons. Both Marr and Albus hypothesized
that the error signals for improving PC ﬁring in re-
sponse to PF, and thus MF input were provided by the
climbing ﬁbers (CF), since only one CF affects a given
PC. However, Marr hypothesized that CF activity would
strengthen the active PF/PC synapses using a Widrow–
Hoff learning rule, whereas Albus hypothesized they
would weaken them. This is an important example of
a case where computational modeling inspired impor-
tant experimentation. Eventually, Masao Ito was able
to demonstrate that Albus was correct – the weakening
of active synapses is now known to involve a pro-
cess called long-term depression [77.72]. However, the
rule with weakening of synapses is still known as the
Marr–Albus model, and remains the reference model
for studies of synaptic plasticity of the cerebellar cortex.
However, both Marr and Albus viewed each PC as func-
tioning as a perceptron whose job it was to control an
elemental movement, contrasting with more plausible
models in which PCs serve to modulate the involvement
of microcomplexes (which include cells of the deep nu-
clei) in motor pattern generators (e.g., the APG model
described below).
Since the development of the Marr–Albus model
several cerebellar models have been introduced in
which cerebellar plasticity plays a key role. Limiting
our overview to computational models, we will de-
scribe:
1. The CMAC (cerebellar model articulation con-
troller).
2. The adjustable pattern generator (APG).
3. The Schweighofer–Arbib model.
4. The multiple paired forward-inverse models [77.75,
76].
The Cerebellar Model Articulation Controller
One of the ﬁrst well-known computational mod-
els of the cerebellum is the CMAC (Albus [77.77];
Fig. 77.5b). The algorithm was based on Albus’ un-
derstanding of the cerebellum, but it was not proposed
as a biologically plausible model. The idea has its ori-
gins in the BOXES approach, in which for n variables
an n-dimensional hypercube stores function values in
a lookup table. BOXES suffers from the curse of di-
mensionality: if each variable can be discretized into
D different steps, the hypercube has to store Dn func-
tion values in memory. Albus assumed that the mossy
ﬁbers provided discretized function values. If the signal
on a mossy ﬁber is in the receptive ﬁeld of a par-
ticular granule cell, it ﬁres onto a parallel ﬁber. This
mapping of inputs onto binary output variables is of-
ten considered to be the generalization mechanism in
CMAC. The learning signals are provided by the climb-
ing ﬁbers.
Albus’ CMAC can be described in terms of a large
set of overlapping, multidimensional receptive ﬁelds
with ﬁnite boundaries. Every input vector falls within
the range of some local receptive ﬁelds. The response
of CMAC to a given input is determined by the aver-
age of the responses of the receptive ﬁelds excited by
that input. Similarly, the training for a given input vec-
tor affects only the parameters of the excited receptive
ﬁelds.
The organization of the receptive ﬁelds of a typical
Albus CMAC with a two-dimensional input space can
be described as follows. The set of overlapping recep-
tive ﬁelds is divided into C subsets, commonly referred
to as layers. Any input vector excites one receptive
ﬁeld from each layer, for a total of C excited recep-
tive ﬁelds for any input. The overlap of the receptive
ﬁelds produces input generalization, while the offset of
the adjacent layers of receptive ﬁelds produces input
quantization. The ratio of the width of each receptive
ﬁeld (input generalization) to the offset between adja-
cent layers of receptive ﬁelds (input quantization) must
be equal to C for all dimensions of the input space. This
organization of the receptive ﬁelds guarantees that only
a ﬁxed number, C, of receptive ﬁelds is excited by any
input.
If a receptive ﬁeld is excited, its response equals
the magnitude of a single adjustable weight speciﬁc
to that receptive ﬁeld. The CMAC output is the aver-
age of the weights of the excited receptive ﬁelds. If
nearby points in the input space excite the same re-
ceptive ﬁelds, they produce the same output value. The
output only changes when the input crosses one of the
receptive ﬁeld boundaries. The Albus CMAC thus pro-
duces piecewise-constant outputs. Learning takes place
as described above.
CMAC neural networks have been applied in var-
ious control situations Miller [77.78], starting from
adaptation of PID (proportional–integral–derivative)
control parameters for an industrial robot arm and

Part G | 77.3
2080
Part G
Robots and Humans
hand–eye systems up to biped walking (see, for in-
stance, Sabourin and Bruneau [77.79]).
The Adjustable Pattern Generator APG
The APG model (Houk et al. [77.80]) got its name be-
cause the model can generate a burst command with
adjustable intensity and duration. The APG is based
on the same understanding of the mossy ﬁber–granule
cell–parallel ﬁber structure as CMAC, using the same
state encoder, but has the crucial difference (Fig. 77.2c)
that the role of the nuclei is crucial. In the APG model,
each nucleus cell is connected to a motor cell in a feed-
back circuit. Activity in the loop is then modulated by
Purkinje cell inhibition, a modeling idea introduced by
Arbib et al. [77.81].
The learning algorithm determines which of the
PF–PC synapses will be updated in order to improve
movement generation performance. This is the tradi-
tional credit assignment problem: which synapse (the
structural credit assignment) must be updated based on
a response issued when (temporal credit assignment).
While the former is solved by the CFs, which are con-
sidered binary signals, for the latter eligibility traces on
the synapses are introduced, serving as memory for re-
cent activity to determine which synapses are eligible
for updates. The motivation for the eligibility signal is
this: each ﬁring of a PC cell will take some time to affect
the animal’s movement, and a further delay will occur
before the CF can signal an error in the movement in
which the PC is involved. Thus the error signal should
not affect those PF–PC synapses that are currently ac-
tive, but should instead act upon those synapses that af-
fected the activity whose error is now being registered.
The Schweighofer–Arbib Model
The Schweighofer–Arbib model was introduced in
Schweighofer [77.82]. It does not use the CMAC state
encoder but tries to copy the anatomy of the cerebel-
lum. All the cells, ﬁbers, and axons in Fig. 77.2a are
included. Several assumptions are made:
1. There are two types of mossy ﬁbers, one type re-
ﬂecting the desired state of the controlled plant
and another carrying information on the current
state. A mossy ﬁber diverges into approximately 16
branches.
2. Granule cells have an average of four dendrites,
each of which receive input from different mossy
ﬁbers through a synaptic structure called the
glomerulus.
3. Three Golgi cells synapse on a granule cell through
the glomerulus and the strength of their inﬂuence
depends on the simulated geometric distance be-
tween the glomerulus and the Golgi cell.
4. The climbing ﬁber connection on nuclear cells as
well as deep nuclei is neglected.
Learning in this model depends on directed error
information given by the climbing ﬁbers from the infe-
rior olive (IO). Here, long-term depression is performed
when the IO ﬁring rate provides an error signal for
an eligible synapse, while compensatory but slower in-
creases in synaptic strength can occur when no error
signal is present. Schweighofer applied the model to
explain several acknowledged cerebellar system func-
tions:
1. Saccadic eye movements
2. Two-link limb movement control Schweighofer
et al. [77.83, 84]
3. Prism adaptation (Arbib et al. [77.85]).
Furthermore, control of a simulated human arm was
demonstrated.
Multiple Paired Forward-Inverse Models
(MPFIM)
Building on a long history of cerebellar modeling,
Wolpert and Kawato [77.86] proposed a functional
model of the cerebellum, which uses multiple coupled
predictors and controllers that are trained for control,
each being responsible for a small state-space region.
The MPFIM model is based on the indirect/direct model
approach by Kawato, and is also based on the micro-
complex theory. We noted earlier that a microzone is
a group of PCs, while a microcomplex combines the
PCs of a microzone with their target cells in cerebel-
lar nuclei. In MPFIM, a microzone consists of a set of
modules controlling the same degree of freedom and is
learned by only one particular climbing ﬁber. The mod-
ules in this microzone compete to control this particular
synergy. Inside such a module there are three types
of PC, which perform the computations of a forward
model, an inverse model, or a responsibility predic-
tor, but all receiving the same input. A single internal
model i is considered to be a controller that generates
a motor command i and a predictor that predicts the
current acceleration. Each predictor is a forward model
of the controlled system, while each controller contains
an inverse model of the system in a region of specializa-
tion. The responsibility signal weights the contribution
that this model will make to the overall output of the
microzone. Indeed, MPFIM further assumes that each
microzone contains n internal models of situations oc-
curring in the control task. Model i generates motor
command i, and estimates its own responsibility ri.
The feedforward motor command ff consists only of
the output of the single models adjusted by the sum of
responsibility signals: ff D P rii= P ri.

Neurorobotics: From Vision to Action
77.3 Vertebrate Motor Control
2081
Part G | 77.3
The PCs are considered to be roughly linear. The
MF inputs carry all necessary information including
state information, efference copies of the last motor
commands, as well as desired states. Granule cells, and
eventually the inhibitory interneurons as well, nonlin-
early transform the state information to provide a rich
set of basis functions through the PFs. A climbing ﬁber
carries a scalar error signal while each Purkinje cell en-
codes a scalar output – responsibilities, predictions, and
controller outputs are all one-dimensional values. MP-
FIM has been introduced with different learning meth-
ods: its ﬁrst implementations were done using gradient
descent methods; subsequently, expectation maximiza-
tion (EM) batch-learning, and hidden Markov chain EM
learning were applied.
Comparison of the Models
Summing up, we can categorize the cerebellar mod-
els CMAC, APG, Schweighofer–Arbib, and MPFIM as
follows:

State-encoder-driven models: This kind of model
assumes that the granule cells are on–off types of
entities that split up the state space. This kind of
model is best suited for, e.g., simple function ap-
proximation, and suffers strongly from the curse of
dimensionality.

Cellular-level models: Obviously, the most realistic
simulations would be at the cellular level. Unfor-
tunately, modeling only a few Purkinje cells at
realistic conditions is an immense computational
challenge, and other relevant neurons are even less
well understood. Still, from the biological point of
view this kind of model is the most important since
it allows obtaining insight into cerebellar function
on cellular level. The ﬁrst steps in this direction
were taken by the Schweighofer–Arbib model.

Functional models: From the computer-science
point of view, the most interesting models are based
on functional understanding of the cells. In this
case, we obtain only a basic insight of the functions
of the parts and apply it as a crude approximation.
This kind of approach is very promising and MP-
FIM, with its emphasis on the use of responsibility
signals to combine models appropriately, provides
an interesting example of this approach.
Proprioceptive feedback is used for adaptation of
the motor programs as well as for updating the for-
ward model stored in the cerebellum. However, the
Schweighofer–Arbib model is based on the view that
the cerebellum offers not so much a total forward model
of the skeletomuscular system as a forward model of the
difference between the crude model of the skeletomus-
cular system available to the motor planning circuits of
the cerebral cortex, and the more intricately parame-
terized forward model of the skeletomuscular system
needed to support fast, graceful movements with min-
imal use of feedback. This hypothesis is reinforced
by the fact that cerebellar lesions do not prohibit mo-
tion but substantially reduce its quality, since the for-
ward model of the skeletomuscular system is of lesser
quality.
77.3.4 Cerebellar Models and Robotics
From the previous discussions, it is clear that a popular
view is that the function of the cerebellum within the
motor control loop is to represent a forward model of
the skeletomuscular system; but how can these models
be used in control?
Our assumption is that the cerebellum stores motor
primitive relationships, which can be recalled through
a certain state (i. e., sensor plus cerebrum-directed goal)
input. These motor primitives perform certain coordi-
nated movements (synergies) to, e.g., intercept a ball
with a tennis racket. A key property of the underly-
ing spine-controlled musculoskeletal system, however,
is that voluntary movement can be easily interpolated
within the control realm of the spinal cord. With this
we mean that the combination of two movement primi-
tives that are nearby in the relevant sensor domain will
lead to a good prediction. In one possible interpretation,
the spinal cord-based control of our muscular system
is approximately linear or linearized through internal
models [77.87]. It allows the cerebellum to store or
recall movements at any level of granularity, and get
good enough results in unlearned areas. There are vari-
ous papers which, in part, conﬁrm this theory (e.g., Osu
and Gomi show the linear relationship between muscle
activation and joint stiffness [77.88] or Höppner et al.
between grip force and stiffness [77.89]).
Does this understanding of the human control sys-
tem help robotics? Biological control algorithms are
certainly a result of slow feedback loops and the ﬂex-
ibility of the actuators. One may argue that, as robotic
systems move towards their biological counterparts, the
control approaches can or must do the same. There are
many lines of research investigating the former part;
Chaps. 11 and 75. It should be noted that the drive prin-
ciple that is used to move the joints does not necessarily
have a major impact on the outer control loop. Whether
McKibben muscles, which are intrinsically ﬂexible but
bulky (van der Smagt et al. [77.90]), low-dynamics
polymer linear actuators, or direct-current (DC) motors
with spindles and added elastic components are used
does not affect the control approach at the cerebellar
level, but rather at the motor control level (cf. the spinal

Part G | 77.4
2082
Part G
Robots and Humans
cord level). Of key importance, however, are the re-
sulting dynamic properties of the system, which are, of
course, inﬂuenced by its actuators. Linearity of the low-
level control system, as we ﬁnd in biology, is a goal to
strive for. Yet technical systems can beneﬁt from ad-
vanced modeling approaches, and equally good results
can be obtained – yet at the cost of more complex sens-
ing, computation, and less generalizability.
77.4 The Role of Mirror Systems
Area F5 (frontal area 5) in the premotor cortex of the
macaque contains, among others, neurons which ﬁre
when the monkey executes a speciﬁc manual action,
e.g., one neuron might ﬁre when the monkey performs
a precision pinch, another when it executes a power
grasp. (In discussing neurorobotics, it seems unneces-
sary to explain in any detail the areas like F5, AIP (an-
terior intraparietal sulcus), and STS (superior temporal
sulcus) described here – they will function as labels for
components of functional systems. To ﬁll in the missing
details see, e.g., Rizzolatti et al. [77.91, 92].)
77.4.1 Mirror Neurons and the Recognition
of Hand Actions
A subset of these neurons, the so-called mirror neurons,
also discharge when the monkey observes meaningful
hand movements made by the experimenter, which are
similar to those whose execution is associated with the
ﬁring of the neuron. In contrast, the canonical neurons
are those belonging to the complementary, anatomically
segregated subset of grasp-related F5 neurons, which
ﬁre when the monkey performs a speciﬁc action and
also when it sees an object as a possible target of such
an action – but do not ﬁre when the monkey sees an-
other monkey or human perform the action. Finally, F5
contains a large population of motor neurons that are ac-
tive when the monkey grasps an object (either with the
hand or mouth) but do not possess any visual response.
F5 is clearly a motor area although the details of the
muscular activation are abstracted out – F5 neurons can
be effector-independent. In contrast, the primary motor
cortex (F1) formulates the neural instructions for lower
motor areas and motor neurons.
Moreover, macaque mirror neurons encode transi-
tive actions and do not ﬁre when the monkey sees
the hand movement unless it can also see the object
or, more subtly, if the object is not visible but is ap-
propriately located in working memory because it has
recently been placed on a surface and has then been
obscured by a screen behind which the experimenter
is seen to be reaching (Umiltà et al. [77.93]). All mir-
ror neurons show visual generalization. They ﬁre when
the instrument of the observed action (usually a hand)
is large or small, far from or close to the monkey.
They may also ﬁre even when the action instrument has
shapes as different as those of a human or monkey hand.
Some neurons respond even when the object is grasped
by the mouth. When naive monkeys ﬁrst see small ob-
jects grasped with a pair of pliers, mirror neurons do
not respond, but after extensive training some precision
pinch mirror neurons do show activity, also with this
new grasp type [77.94].
Mirror neurons for grasping have also been found
in parietal areas of the macaque brain and, recently, it
was shown that parietal mirror neurons are sensitive
to the context of the observed action being predictive
of the outcome as a function of contextual cues – e.g.,
some grasp-related parietal mirror neurons may ﬁre for
a grasp that precedes eating the grasped object, while
others ﬁre for a grasp that precedes placing the object
in a container (Fogassi et al. [77.95]). In practice, the
parieto-frontal circuitry seems to encode action execu-
tion and simultaneously action recognition by taking
into account a large set of potential candidate actions,
which are selected on the basis of a range of cues such
as vision of the relation of the effector to the object
and certain sounds (when relevant for the task). Further,
feedback connections (frontal to parietal) are thought
to be part of a stimulus selection process that reﬁnes
the sensory processing by attending to stimuli relevant
for the ongoing action (Rizzolatti et al. [77.52] and re-
call the discussion in Sect. 77.2.4). Recognition is then
supported by the activation of the same circuitry in the
absence of overt movement.
We clarify these ideas by brieﬂy presenting the
FARS model of the canonical F5 neurons and the MNS
model of the F5 mirror neurons. In each case, the F5
neurons function effectively only because of the inter-
action of F5 with a wide range of other regions. We have
stressed (Sect. 77.2.3) the distinction between recogni-
tion of the category of an object and recognition of its
affordances. The parietal area AIP processes visual in-
formation to extract affordances, in this case properties
of the object relevant to grasping it (Taira et al. [77.96]).
AIP and F5 are reciprocally connected, with AIP being
more visual and F5 more motoric.
The Fagg–Arbib–Rizzolatti–Sakata (FARS) model
(Fagg and Arbib [77.97] and Fig. 77.6) embeds F5
canonical neurons in a larger system. The dorsal stream

Neurorobotics: From Vision to Action
77.4 The Role of Mirror Systems
2083
Part G | 77.4
(which passes through AIP) can only analyze the ob-
ject as a set of possible affordances, whereas the ventral
stream (via the inferotemporal cortex, IT) is able to
recognize what the object is. The latter information is
passed to the prefrontal cortex (PFC) which can then, on
the basis of the current goals of the organism, bias the
choice of affordances appropriate to the task at hand.
Neuroanatomical data (as analyzed by Rizzolatti and
Luppino [77.98]) suggest that PFC and IT may mod-
ulate action selection at the level of the parietal cortex.
Figure 77.6 gives a partial view of the FARS model up-
dated to show this modiﬁed pathway. The affordance
selected by AIP activates F5 neurons to command the
appropriate grip once they receive a go signal from
another region, F6, of the prefrontal cortex. F5 also
accepts signals from other PFC areas to respond to
working memory and instruction stimuli in choosing
among the available affordances. Note that this same
pathway could be implicated in tool use, bringing in
semantic knowledge as well as perceptual attributes to
guide the dorsal system (Johnson–Frey [77.99]).
With this, we turn to the mirror system. Since
grasping a complex object requires careful attention to
motion of, e.g., ﬁngertips relative to the object, we hold
that the primary evolutionary impetus for the mirror
system was to facilitate feedback control of dexterous
movement. We now show how parameters relevant to
such feedback could be crucial in enabling the monkey
to associate the visual appearance of what it is doing
with the task at hand. The key side-effect will be that
this feedback-serving self-recognition is so structured
as to also support recognition of the action when per-
formed by others – and it is this recognition of the
Locations
Objects
M1
F4
LIP
MIP
F5
VIP
Canon.
Mirror
Motor execution
Object location
AIP
MNS core
Visual cortex
Object
affordances
7a
7b
STSa
cIPS
IT
Hand/object
Spatial relation
Object affordance
Hand state association
Ways to grab
this "thing"
"It's a mug"
Hand and arm
control
Motor program
(reach)
Motor program
(grasp)
Action
recognition
Ventral stream:
Recognition
Hand shape
and motion
recognition
Object
recognition
Object
features
Dorsal stream:
Affordances
Fig. 77.7 The mirror neuron system
(MNS) model (after Oztop and
Arbib [77.100]). Note that this basic
mirror system for grasping crucially
links the visual process of the STS to
the parietal regions (b) and premotor
regions (F5), which have been shown
to contain mirror neurons for manual
actions
Modulating choice
of affordances
Affordances
Motor
schema
Hand control
Visual  input
"It's a mug"
IT
PFC
AIP
Motor F1
Premotor F5
(Canonical)
cIPS
"Go
signal"
Working memory (46)
Instruction stimuli (F2)
Pre-SMA (F6)
When to move
sequence organization
Ventral stream:
Recognition
Dorsal stream:
Affordances
Fig. 77.6 The original
FARS diagram (after Fagg
and Ar-
bib [77.42]) is here modiﬁed to show PFC acting on AIP rather than
F5. The idea is that the prefrontal cortex uses the IT identiﬁcation
of the object, in concert with task analysis and working memory, to
help the AIP select the appropriate affordance from its menu
actions of others that has created the greatest interest
in mirror neurons and systems.
The MNS model of Oztop and Arbib [77.101] pro-
vides some insight into the anatomy while focusing
on the learning capacities of mirror neurons. Here, the
task is to determine whether the shape of the hand and
its trajectory are on track to grasp an observed affor-
dance of an object using a known action. The model
is organized around the idea that the AIP ! F5canonical
pathway emphasized in the FARS model (Fig. 77.6) is

Part G | 77.4
2084
Part G
Robots and Humans
complemented by another pathway 7b ! F5mirror. As
shown in Fig. 77.7 (middle diagonal), object features
are processed by AIP to extract grasp affordances; these
are sent on to the canonical neurons of F5 that choose
a particular grasp. Recognizing the location of the ob-
ject (top diagonal) provides parameters to the motor
programming area F4 which computes the reach. The
information about the reach and the grasp is taken by
the motor cortex M1 (D F1) to control the hand and the
arm. The rest of the ﬁgure provides components that
can learn and apply key criteria for activating a mirror
neuron, recognizing that the preshape of the observed
hand corresponds to the grasp that the mirror neuron en-
codes and is appropriate to the object, and that the hand
is moving on an appropriate trajectory. Making crucial
use of input from the superior temporal sulcus (Perrett
et al. [77.102] and Carey et al. [77.103]), schemas at the
bottom left recognize the shape of the observed hand
and how that hand is moving. Other schemas implement
hand–object spatial relation analysis and check how ob-
ject affordances relate to hand state. Together with F5
canonical neurons, this last schema (in parietal area 7b)
provides the input to the F5 mirror neurons.
In the MNS model, the hand state was deﬁned as
a vector whose components represented the movement
of the wrist relative to the location of the object and of
the hand shape relative to the affordances of the object.
Oztop and Arbib showed that an artiﬁcial neural net-
work corresponding to PF and F5mirror could be trained
to recognize the grasp type from the hand state tra-
jectory, with correct classiﬁcation often being achieved
well before the hand reached the object, using activity
in the F5 canonical neurons that commands a grasp as
training signal for recognizing it visually; this basically
shows that there is a causal relationship. Crucially, this
training prepares the F5 mirror neurons to respond to
hand–object relational trajectories even when the hand
is of the other rather than the self because the hand
state is based on the view of movement of a hand rela-
tive to the object, and thus only indirectly on the retinal
input of seeing the hand and object, which can differ
greatly between observation of self and other. Bonaiuto
et al. [77.104] have developed MNS2, a new version of
the MNS model to address data on audiovisual mirror
neurons that respond to the sight and sound of actions
with characteristic sounds such as paper tearing and nut
cracking Kohler et al. [77.93], and on the response of
mirror neurons when the target object was recently vis-
ible but is currently hidden Umiltà et al. [77.93]. Such
learning models, and the data they address, make it clear
that:
mirror neurons are not restricted to recognition of
an innate set of actions but can be recruited to rec-
ognize and encode an expanding repertoire of novel
actions.
The discussion of this section avoided any refer-
ence to imitation (Sect. 77.4.3). On the other hand, even
without considering imitation, mirror neurons provide
a new perspective for tackling the problem of robotic
perception by incorporating action (and motor informa-
tion) into a plausible recognition process. The role of
the fronto-parietal system in relating affordances, plans,
and actions shows the crucial role of motor information
and embodiment. We argue that this holds lessons for
neurorobotics: the richness of the motor system should
strongly inﬂuence what the robot can learn, proceeding
autonomously via a process of exploration of the envi-
ronment rather than overly relying on the intermediary
of logic-like formalisms. When recognition exploits the
ability to act, then the breadth of the action space be-
comes crucially related to the precision, quality, and
robustness of the robot’s perception.
77.4.2 Computational Models
Roboticists have been fascinated by the discovery of
mirror neurons and the purported link to imitation that
exists in the human nervous system, for they can help
to teach robots new tasks with relative ease. The litera-
ture on the topic extends from models of the monkey’s
(nonimitative) action recognition system (Oztop and Ar-
bib [77.101]) to models of the putative role of the mirror
system in imitation (Demiris and Johnson [77.105] and
Arbib et al. [77.106]), and in real and virtual robots
(Schaal et al. [77.107]). Oztop et al. [77.108] propose
a taxonomy of the models of the mirror system for
recognition and imitation, and it is interesting to note
how different the computational approaches that have
now been framed as mirror system models are, in-
cluding recurrent neural networks with parametric bias
(Tani et al. [77.109]), behavior-based modular networks
(Demiris and Johnson [77.105]), associative memory-
based methods (Kuniyoshi et al. [77.110]), and the use
of multiple direct-inverse models as in the MOSAIC
architecture (Wolpert et al. [77.111]; cf. the multiple
paired forward-inverse models of Sect. 77.3.2).
Following [77.112], we can cast much that is known
about the mirror system into a controller-predictor
model [77.65, 113] and analyze the resulting model as
a Bayesian classiﬁer. As shown by the FARS model,
the decision to initiate a particular grasping action
is attained by the convergence in area F5 of several
factors, including contextual and object-related infor-
mation; similarly many factors affect the recognition
of an action. All this depends on learning both direct
(from decision to executed action) and inverse models

Neurorobotics: From Vision to Action
77.4 The Role of Mirror Systems
2085
Part G | 77.4
(from observation of an action to activation of a mo-
tor command that could yield it). Similar procedures
are well known in the computational motor control lit-
erature [77.114, 115]. Learning of the affordances of
objects with respect to grasping can also be achieved
autonomously by learning from the consequences of
applying many different actions to different parts of dif-
ferent objects.
However, how is the decision made to classify an
observed behavior as an instance of one action or
another? Many comparisons could be performed in par-
allel with the models for one action to become predom-
inantly activated. There are plausible implementations
of this mechanism using a gating network [77.105,
116]. A gating network learns to partition an input space
into regions; for each region a different model can be
applied or a set of models can be combined through an
appropriate weight function. The design of the gating
network can encourage collaboration between models
(e.g., linear combination of models) or competition
(choosing only one model rather than a combination).
Reference [77.117] offers a similar approach to the es-
timation of the mental states of the observed actor,
using some additional circuitry involving the frontal
cortex.
On the other hand, if we take the Bayesian view of
the predictor-controller formulation, then affordances
are simply the priors in the action recognition process
where the evidence is conveyed by the visual infor-
mation of the hand, providing the data for ﬁnding the
posterior probabilities as mirror neuron-like responses
which automatically activate for the most probable ob-
served action. Recall that the presence of a goal (at least
in working memory) is needed to elicit mirror neuron
responses in the macaque. We believe it is also partic-
ularly important during the ontogenesis of the human
mirror system. For example, [77.118] has shown that
even at 9 months of age, infants recognized an action
as being novel if it was directed toward a novel ob-
ject rather than just having a different kinematics –
showing that the goal is more fundamental than the
enacted trajectory. Similarly, if one sees someone drink-
ing from a coffee mug then one can hypothesize that
a particular action (that one already knows in motor
terms) is used to obtain that particular effect. The asso-
ciation between the canonical response (object-action)
and the mirror one (including vision) is made when
the observed consequences (or goal) are recognized
as similar in the two cases. Similarity can be evalu-
ated following criteria ranging from kinematic to social
consequences.
In a similar experiment Lopes et al. [77.119] com-
pared action recognition performance (a) when using
the output of an inverse visuo-motor model and thus
employing motor features to aid classiﬁcation during
the training phase, and (b) when only visual data were
available for recognition. Overall, their interpretation of
the results is that by mapping in motor space through
inverse model mapping, they allow the classiﬁer to
choose features that are much better suited for perform-
ing optimally with respect to the task of recognizing
actions, which in turn facilitates generalization. The
same is not true when recognition is performed purely
in visual space using generic visual features, since
a given action is viewed from different viewpoints. One
may compare this to the viewpoint-invariant hand state
adopted in the MNS model – which has the weakness
of being built in rather than emerging from training.
Along the same line, the work of Gijsberts
et al. [77.120] included motorically-derived affordance
information, which was recorded using a data-glove-
based system and a set of cameras. In this case though,
motor information was not much for action recogni-
tion but rather used to simulate the response of F5’s
canonical neurons by generating discrete grasping types
from the time-varying set of postures recorded with
the data glove. After training the original motor in-
formation is removed and only reconstructed using an
inverse model. Furthermore, this motoric information
was combined with a simulation of the brain ventral
pathway which extracts pictorial features from images
(e.g., SIFT (scale-invariant feature transform), H-Max).
The dorsal and ventral features were combined through
a special kernel function in a simple least squares classi-
ﬁer, showing a signiﬁcant improvement at recognizing
objects in comparison to a purely visual classiﬁcation.
A machine learning framework to address the question
of learning from multimodal signals (some of which can
even be intermittent) is presented in [77.121].
We can speculate that this computational advantage
(better recognition rates) makes the presence of mixed
sensory and motor information compelling in the brain
(i. e., the fronto-parietal system); this may not necessar-
ily lead to mirror neurons although it seems plausible
that any clear advantage of using information at best
is eventually selected during evolution. These exper-
iments, using robots, simulations, and computational
arguments can thus explain the whys of certain brain
structures and mechanisms.
77.4.3 Mirror Neurons and Imitation
Fitzpatrickand Metta [77.122] also addressed the ques-
tion of what is further required for interpreting observed
actions. Whereas in observing its own actions, the robot
identiﬁes them from the effects on the objects, later it
could backtrack and derive the type of action needed
to replicate a certain observed effect on a given object.

Part G | 77.4
2086
Part G
Robots and Humans
Therefore, imitation can be framed into the identiﬁca-
tion of a common goal between the observed action
and various possible actions in the motor repertoire
of the robot. In [77.122] the robot used the same vi-
sual processing algorithms both in observing its own
hand and the hand of a person (although they were
different in appearance). One might argue that obser-
vation alone can be used for learning, never relying
on active exploration of objects and actions. This is
possibly true to the extent that passive vision is re-
liable and action is not required. The advantage of
the active approach, at least for the robot, is that it
allows controlling the amount of information imping-
ing on the visual sensors by, for instance, controlling
the speed and type of action. This strategy might be
especially useful given the limitations of artiﬁcial per-
ceptual systems. Thus, observations can be converted
into interpreted actions. The action whose effects are
closest to the observed consequences on the object
(which we might translate into the goal of the action)
is selected as the most plausible interpretation given
the observation. Most importantly, the interpretation re-
duces to the interpretation of the simple kinematics of
the goal and consequences of the action rather than
to understanding the complex kinematics of the human
manipulator. The robot understands only to the extent
it has learned to act. One might note that a more re-
ﬁned model should probably include visual cues from
the appearance of the manipulator into the interpreta-
tion process. Indeed, the hand state that was central
to the Oztop–Arbib model was based on an object-
centered view of the hand’s trajectory in a coordinate
frame based on the object’s affordances. The last ques-
tion to address is whether a robot can imitate the goal
of the action. The step is indeed small, since most of
the complexity is actually in interpreting observations.
Imitation can be generated by replicating the latest ob-
served human movement with respect to the object
utilizing one of the many approximation methods for
motion generation such as, e.g., a mixture of Gaus-
sians [77.123], dynamic motion primitives [77.124], or
reinforcement learning [77.125]. More generally, fol-
lowing the work of Schaal et al. [77.107] and Oztop
et al. [77.108] we can propose a set of schemas required
to produce imitation:

Determining what to imitate, inferring the goal of
the demonstrator

Establishing a metric for imitation (correspondence;
see Nehaniv [77.126])

Map between dissimilar bodies (mapping).

Imitating behavior formation.
These are also discussed in greater detail by Ne-
haniv and Dautenhahn [77.127]. In practice, computa-
tional and robotic implementations have tackled these
problems with different approaches and emphasizing
different parts or speciﬁc subproblems of the whole, for
example, in the work of Demiris and Hayes [77.128],
the rehearsal of the various actions (akin to the afore-
mentioned theory of motor perception) was used to
generate hypotheses to be compared with the actual sen-
sory input. It is then remarkable how more recently
a modiﬁed approach of this paradigm has been used
in comparison with real human transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) data.
Ito et al. [77.129] (not Masao Ito of cerebellar fame)
took a dynamical systems approach using a recurrent
neural network with parametric bias (RNNPB) to teach
a humanoid robot to manipulate certain objects. In
this approach the parametric bias (PB) encodes (tags)
certain sensorimotor trajectories. Once learning is com-
plete, the neural network can be used either to recall
a given trajectory by setting the PB externally or pro-
vide input for the sensory data only and observe the PB
vector that would represent in that case the recognition
of the situation on the basis of the sensory input only
(no motor information available). It is relatively easy to
interpret these two situations as the motor generation
and the observation in a mirror neurons model.
The problem of building useful mappings between
dissimilar bodies (consider a human imitating a bird’s
ﬂapping wings) was tackled by Nehaniv and Daut-
enhahn [77.127] where an algebraic framework for
imitation is described and the correspondence problem
formally addressed. Any system implementing imita-
tion should clearly provide a mapping between either
dissimilar bodies or even in the case of similar bodies
when either the kinematics or dynamics is different de-
pending on the context of the imitative action.
Sauser and Billard [77.130] modeled the ideomotor
principle, according to which observing the behavior of
others inﬂuences our own performances. The ideomotor
principle points directly to one of the core issues of the
mirror system, that is, the fact that watching somebody
else’s actions changes something in the activation of the
observer, thus facilitating certain neural pathways. The
work in question also gives a model implemented in
terms of neural ﬁelds (see Sauser and Billard [77.130]
for details) and tries to explain the imitative cortical
pathways and the behavior formation.
77.4.4 Mirror System and Speech
Already in the 1960s Liberman et al. [77.131] started to
discuss the possible links between production and per-
ception in speech: in other words the contribution of
articulation into the perception of utterances. Later he
commented [77.132]:

Neurorobotics: From Vision to Action
77.4 The Role of Mirror Systems
2087
Part G | 77.4
A result in all cases is that there is not, ﬁrst, a cog-
nitive representation of the proximal pattern that
is modality-general, followed by a translation to
a particular distal property; rather, perception of
the distal property is immediate, which is to say that
the module has done all the hard work.
Liberman argued that there is no such a thing
as a modality-aspeciﬁc representation which then be-
comes speech as an effect of a translation to a speciﬁc
set of articulators (the vocal apparatus in this case),
rather, he claimed that perception of speech is immedi-
ate and effected by the same speech module (the same
that generates speech); speech remains a motor fact.
Lately, theories of the motor involvement in speech per-
ception have gained credit because of the discovery
of the mirror neurons. It has been postulated that the
mirror system in humans controls jointly speech pro-
duction and perception, whereby the actions in speech
are the articulation of appropriate segments of the utter-
ances [77.133].
We recall this line of reasoning in the follow-
ing [77.133], that is:

Mirror neurons (or a mirror system) exist in hu-
mans [77.134].

The human mirror system is identiﬁed in Broca’s
area, a cytoarchitectonical homolog of area F5 in
the macaque’s brain.

Speech articulation is coded/controlled in/by the ar-
eas of the human mirror system (Broca’s) [77.135].

The recognition of the intention of the speaker by
the listener owing to a mirror mechanism leads to
the ﬁrst seed of true communication (via, e.g., oro-
facial gestures) [77.133].

The combinatorial properties of F5/Broca and the
precise control of the effectors are needed to gener-
ate speech (the evolutionarily older animal calls are
too stereotyped to grant this ﬂexibility that eventu-
ally leads to speech proper) [77.136].
To establish that this is the case, however, more em-
pirical evidence is required. Recently, two experiments
improved the plausibility of the mirror neurons theory
of speech perception. In a ﬁrst TMS experiment, Fadiga
and colleagues [77.137] established that MEPs (motor
evoked potentials) in the tongue muscles directly corre-
late with high speciﬁcity to the perception of particular
sounds (these were rr and ff in Italian). The listener was
delivered TMS (single pulse) and the observed MEPs
correlated in amplitude with the different use of the
tongue muscles for the pronunciation of either the rr or
ff sounds (rr in Italian requires a strong mobilization of
the tongue). Albeit convincing, this experiment leaves
open the question of speciﬁcity, since it can still be the
case of a diffuse/generic activation of Broca’s area.
A second experiment also by Fadiga et al. [77.137]
was designed to set the issue. In this case, the TMS
was delivered to the primary motor cortex with the aim
of establishing a speciﬁc motor involvement into the
perception of different sounds/phones. Two areas were
individuated in the primary motor cortex as responsible
to the lip and tongue movement, respectively (e.g., p/b
sounds versus t=d). The data show a double dissociation
pattern, that is, when the lip motor area is stimulated
there is a decrease of the reaction times (RTs) of the
subject in perceiving the p/b (labial sounds) and vice-
versa an increase for the perception of the t=d (dental
sounds). The opposite happens when the tongue motor
area is stimulated. This experiment clearly relates a very
speciﬁc (small) region of the primary motor cortex with
the perception of certain speciﬁc (and related) sounds.
Clearly, this is only part of the story; to complicate
matters, for example, the semantic content of words
related to actions (e.g., kick, pick, lick) activate both
motor and pre-motor brain areas somatotopically. Ob-
ject features, odors, etc., instead have been shown to
generate responses in the corresponding cortices. For
a review of these and other results, see [77.136].
Theories and models such as the perception for
action control theory (PACT) [77.138] take a more
moderate interpretation by including both a motor com-
ponent and perceptual shaping, that is, the ﬁltering
of certain linguistic combinations because of purely
perceptual characteristics (e.g., separation of vowel for-
mants). In PACT, it is hypothesized that the motor
system is activated more in adverse conditions, while
it is perhaps under-threshold for normal speech under-
standing in good signal-to-noise conditions.
Indeed, we can recognize speech in a foreign ac-
cent, and recognizing what is being said can then be
decoiupled from being able to articulate how it is being
said – but both possibilities are available. This has led
to a new view of the integration of mirror systems with
other systems [77.139] which downplays the motor the-
ory of speech perception while preserving many other
features of the mirror system hypothesis of Rizzolatti
and Arbib [77.133].
Armed with these results Castellini and col-
leagues [77.140] conducted a computational experi-
ment that mimic some of the TMS results of D’Ausilio
et al. [77.141]. All processing employed a database
of synchronized recordings of Italian speakers with
acoustic, articulograph, camera, ultrasound, and elec-
troglottograph data [77.142]. For the experiments, only
the articulograph and electroglottograph signals were
used together with speech sound. These identify the
position of the tongue and teeth versus the lips in

Part G | 77.4
2088
Part G
Robots and Humans
Audio
features extraction
Audio
features
Motor
features
AMM
Classifier
Speech
b,p,d,t
Fig. 77.8 Conceptual schema of the classiﬁers used in the experi-
ments
Audio
Real motor
Rec. motor
Joint
Balanced error rate (%)
10
8
6
4
2
0
Fig. 77.9 Baseline experiment comparing the performance
of acoustic versus motor data (or jointly acoustic plus mo-
tor data) in classifying b=p versus d=t
real time (200 Hz) in addition to the activation of the
vocal folds (voicing signal). The conceptual schema
of all experiments and learning follows some previ-
ous work as by Metta et al. [77.112], and which as
is shown in Fig. 77.8. In particular, acoustic data are
mapped into motoric features and these are used for
classifying phones. Similarly to the PACT model, it
was found useful to incorporate also a purely acoustic
classiﬁer. Acoustic features were the standard Mel cep-
stral coefﬁcients with similar parameters and frequency
Audio
Real motor
Rec. motor
Joint
Overall
spk3vs3
spk5vs1
spk1vs5
coart4vs1 coart3vs2
Balanced error rate (%)
50
40
30
20
10
0
Fig. 77.10 Comparison across various
conditions. In all cases apart from
coart4vs1 the use of motor features
improve classiﬁcation with statistical
signiﬁcance .p < 0:01/
bands of conventional automatic speech recognition
(ASR).
The mapping from acoustic to motor data was per-
formed using either an artiﬁcial neural network or
support vector machine for regression with indistin-
guishable results. The classiﬁer was always a support
vector machine with Gaussian kernel and parameters
optimized through grid search.
In order to compare it with the TMS experiments,
phones were divided into two classes, the b=p and
t=d, respectively, as representing the bi-labial and den-
tal (movement of the tongue toward the teeth) phones.
Fivefold cross-validation was employed on all results
by either random splits of the data or by selecting data
from various participants (e.g., training on 15 par-
ticipants, testing on 15 participants). Gaussian white
noise was added to the stimuli (at increasing levels from
0 to 150%) to replicate the conditions of the TMS.
Figure 77.9 shows these results. The baseline exper-
iment shows an improved performance where either the
real motoric or jointly motoric and acoustic features are
used. The comparison of audio versus joint features is
statistically signiﬁcant .p < 0:01/ and veriﬁes the claim
as no new information is added to the system when the
reconstructed motor features are employed. Motor fea-
tures are reconstructed by the audio-motor map (AMM)
of Fig. 77.8 and replicates previous results obtained in
the classiﬁcation of hand gestures [77.119] or handwrit-
ing characters [77.143].
A second experiment from the same work of
Castellini and colleagues [77.140] shows the behavior
of the same system in various conditions of increased
difﬁculty ranging from running classiﬁcation on speak-
ers not included in the training sets to co-articulation.
Figure 77.10 shows a number of variants where N vs M
indicates N speakers for training versus M speakers for
testing given the size of the database (6 speakers). Ex-

Neurorobotics: From Vision to Action
77.5 Conclusion and Further Reading
2089
Part G | 77.5
Audio
Real motor
Rec. motor
Joint
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
0
Added noise (% of speech stdv)
Balanced error rate (%)
50
40
30
20
10
0
Fig. 77.11 Comparison of acoustic
versus motor features under increasing
level of added Gaussian white noise
for the same classiﬁer of the previous
experiments
periments with co-articulation were conducted also on
ﬁve speakers, albeit the number of identiﬁable examples
in the database was smaller.
In a ﬁnal experiment, the classiﬁer was tested on
acoustic data corrupted by Gaussian white noise. Re-
sults show a consistent improvement with the motor
information gain increasing with the increase of the
noise level (up to 150% of the speech standard devia-
tion): Fig. 77.11.
More recently a full phone classiﬁer was built using
similar principles [77.144] together with a combina-
tion of deep belief networks (DBNs) and more standard
hidden Markov models (HMMs). The results show im-
provement with respect to the state of the art, continuing
the long tradition of neurorobotics and bringing mod-
els very close to concrete applications on robots that
bear resemblance to the exquisite human performance
in speech recognition in noisy environments.
77.5 Conclusion and Further Reading
As the foregoing makes clear, robotics has much to
learn from neuroscience and much to teach neuro-
science. Neurorobotics can learn from the ways in
which the brains and bodies of different creatures adapt
to diverse ecological niches – as computational neu-
roethology helps us understand how the brain of a crea-
ture has evolved to serve action-oriented perception,
and the attendant processes of learning, memory, plan-
ning, and social interaction.
We have sampled the design of just a few sub-
systems (both functional and structural) in just a few
animals – optic ﬂow in the bee, approach, escape, and
barrier avoidance in frogs and toads, and navigation
in the rat, as well as the control of eye movements in
visual attention, the role of the mammalian cerebel-
lum in handling the nonlinearities and time delays of
ﬂexible motor systems, and the mirror systems of pri-
mates in action recognition and of humans in imitation.
There are many more creatures with lessons to offer the
roboticist than we can sample here.
Moreover, if we just conﬁne attention to the brains
of humans, this chapter has mentioned at least 7a,
7b, AIP, lateral, medial and ventral intraparietal sulcus
(LIP, MIP and VIP), area 46, basal ganglia, caudoputa-
men, cerebellum, F2, F4, F5, hippocampus, hypotha-
lamus, inferotemporal cortex, motor cortex, nucleus
accumbens, parietal cortex, prefrontal cortex, premotor
cortex, pre-SMA (F6), spinal cord, STS, and – and it is
clear that there are many more details to be understood
for each region, and many more regions whose interac-
tions hold lessons for roboticists. We say this not to de-
press the reader, but rather to encourage further explo-
ration of the literature of computational neuroscience
and to note that the exchange with neurorobotics pro-
ceeds both ways: neuroscience can inspire novel robotic
designs; conversely, robots can be used to test whether
brain models still work when they make the transition
from disembodied computer simulation to meeting the
challenge of guiding the interactions of a physically em-
bodied system with the complexities of its environment.
Nonetheless, a thorough study of the spinal cord and
its effect on muscle behavior is where a roboticist, who
is interested in replicating some of the functionality of
vertebrate movement, may want to start looking.

Part G | 77
2090
Part G
Robots and Humans
77.5.1 Further Reading

Arbib (2006) [77.145]: This volume provides 16
articles on the mirror system, written by diverse
experts. Of particular relevance to this chapter are
articles on dynamical systems: brain, body and im-
itation; attention and the minimal subscene; the
development of grasping and the mirror system;
and development of goal-directed imitation, ob-
ject manipulation, and language in humans and
robots.

Bell (1996) [77.146]: This somewhat older BBS
special issue provides what was, back then, a rather
deﬁnitive number of articles on the cerebellum, in-
cluding an overview of models in a paper by Houk
et al.

van der Smagt and Bullock (2002) [77.147]: This
special issue is focused on the application of cere-
bellar and other models to robotics tasks, and lists
some successful and – between the lines – more un-
successful applications thereof.

Gallese et al. (1996) [77.148]: This paper provides
a detailed account of the neurophysiological evi-
dence for mirror neurons. It is good reading to get
the real data unbiased from further interpretation on
the role of mirror neurons and it is complete and ac-
curate. Although it is a technical paper it is easy to
read also for a general audience.

Fadiga et al. 2002 [77.149]: This work extends the
mirror system concept with an interesting perspec-
tive on its role into language. This paper is interest-
ing reading by providing evidence in humans (the
other references above are about monkey experi-
ments). In this case, it has been shown that speech
listening facilitates the activation of tongue muscles
which match the speciﬁc phoneme being listened to.
References
77.1
W. G. Walter: The Living Brain (Duckworth, Lon-
don 1953), reprinted by Pelican Books, Har-
mondsworth, 1961
77.2
V. Braitenberg: Vehicles: Experiments in Synthetic
Psychology (Bradford Books/The MIT, Cambridge
1984)
77.3
I. Segev, M. London: Dendritic processing. In: The
Handbook of Brain Theory and Neural Networks,
2nd edn., ed. by M.A. Arbib (Bradford Books/MIT
Press, Cambridge 2003) pp. 324–332
77.4
Y. Fregnac: Hebbian synaptic plasticity. In: The
Handbook of Brain Theory and Neural Networks,
2nd edn., ed. by M.A. Arbib (Bradford Books/MIT
Press, Cambridge 2003) pp. 515–522
77.5
W. Reichardt: Autocorrelation, a principle for the
evaluation of sensory information by the cen-
tral nervous system. In: Sensory Communication,
ed. by W.A. Rosenblith (MIT Press/Wiley, New York,
London 1961) pp. 303–317
77.6
A. Borst, M. Dickinson: Visual course control in
flies. In: The Handbook of Brain Theory and Neu-
ral Networks, 2nd edn., ed. by M.A. Arbib (Brad-
ford Books/MIT Press, Cambridge 2003) pp. 1205–
1210
77.7
P. van der Smagt, F. Groen: Visual feedback in
motion. In: Neural Systems for Robotics, ed. by
O. Omidvar, P. van der Smagt (Morgan Kaufmann,
San Francisco 1997) pp. 37–73
77.8
P. van der Smagt: Teaching a robot to see how it
moves. In: Neural Network Perspectives on Cogni-
tion and Adaptive Robotics, ed. by A. Browne (In-
stitute of Physics Publishing, Bristol 1997) pp. 195–
219
77.9
S.C. Liu, A. Usseglio-Viretta: Fly-like visuomotor
responses of a robot using aVLSI motion-sensitive
chips, Biol. Cybern. 85(6), 449–457 (2001)
77.10
F. Ruffier, S. Viollet, S. Amic, N. Franceschini: Bio-
inspired optical flow circuits for the visual guid-
ance of micro air vehicles, Int. Symp. Circuits Syst.
(ISCAS) 2003, Vol. 3 (2003)
77.11
M.B. Reiser, M.H. Dickinson: A test bed for in-
sect-inspired robotic control, Philos. Trans. Math.
Phys. Eng. Sci. 361(1811), 2267–2285 (2003)
77.12
M. V. Srinivasan, S. W. Zhang, M. Altwein, J.
TAUTZ: Honeybee navigation: Nature and cali-
bration of the odometer, Science 287, 851–853
(2000)
77.13
S. Funke: Virtual atlas of the honeybee brain (see
Univ. Berlin, Institute of Biology – Neurobiol-
ogy, Berlin 2015), http://www.neurobiologie.fu-
berlin.de/beebrain/Bee/VRML/SnapshotCosmoall.
jpg
77.14
A. Barron, M.V. Srinivasan: Visual regulation of
ground speed and headwind compensation in
freely flying honey bees, Apis mellifera L, J. Exp.
Bio. 209(5), 978–984 (2006)
77.15
M.V. Srinivasan, S. Zhang, J.S. Chahl: Landing
strategies in honeybees, and possible applica-
tions to autonomous airborne vehicles, Biol. Bull.
200(2), 216–221 (2001)
77.16
T. Vladusich, J.M. Hemmi, M.V. Srinivasan, J. Zeil:
Interactions of visual odometry and landmark
guidance during food search in honeybees, J. Exp.
Biol. 208, 4123–4135 (2005)
77.17
M.V. Srinivasan, S.W. Zhang: Visual control of
honeybee flight. In: Orientation and Communi-
cation in Arthropods, Experientia Supplementum,
Vol. 84, ed. by M. Lehres (Birkhäuser, Basel 1997)
pp. 95–113
77.18
B. Webb: Can robots make good models of bio-
logical behavior?, Behav. Brain Sci. 24, 1033–1094
(2001)

Neurorobotics: From Vision to Action
References
2091
Part G | 77
77.19
J.Y.
Lettvin,
H.
Maturana,
W.S.
McCulloch,
W.H. Pitts: What the frog’s eye tells the frog
brain, Proc. IRE 47, 1940–1951 (1959)
77.20
D. Ingle: Visual releasers of prey catching behavior
in frogs and toads, Brain Behav. Evol. 1, 500–518
(1968)
77.21
R.L. Didday: A model of visuomotor mechanisms
in the frog optic tectum, Math. Biosci. 30, 169–180
(1976)
77.22
M.A. Arbib: Levels of modeling of visually guided
behavior, Behav. Brain Sci. 10, 407–465 (1987)
77.23
M.A. Arbib: Visuomotor coordination:
Neural
models and perceptual robotics. In: Visuomotor
Coordination: Amphibians, Comparisons, Models,
and Robots, 2nd edn., ed. by J.P. Ewert, M.A. Ar-
bib (Plenum, New York 1989) pp. 121–171
77.24
T. Collett: Do toads plan routes? A study of detour
behavior of B. viridis, J. Comp. Physiol. 146, 261–
271 (1982)
77.25
M.A. Arbib, D.H. House: Depth and detours:
An essay on visually guided behavior. In: Vi-
sion, Brain and Cooperative Computation, ed.
by M.A. Arbib, A.R. Hanson (Bradford Books/MIT
Press, Cambridge 1987) pp. 129–163
77.26
F.J. Corbacho, M.A. Arbib: Learning to detour,
Adapt. Behav. 4, 419–468 (1995)
77.27
A. Cobas, M.A. Arbib: Prey-catching and preda-
tor-avoidance in frog and toad: Defining the
schemas, J. Theor. Biol. 157, 271–304 (1992)
77.28
R.C. Arkin: Motor schema-based mobile robot
navigation, Int. J. Robot. Res. 8, 92–112 (1989)
77.29
O. Khatib: Real-time obstacle avoidance for ma-
nipulators and mobile robots, Int. J. Robot. Res.
5, 90–98 (1986)
77.30
B.H. Krogh, C.E. Thorpe: Integrated path planning
and dynamic steering control for autonomous ve-
hicles, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. San
Francisco (1986) pp. 1664–1669
77.31
R.A. Brooks, C.L. Breazeal, M. Marjanović, B. Scas-
sellati: The COG project: Building a humanoid
robot, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 1562, 52–87 (1999)
77.32
R.C. Arkin: Behavior-Based Robotics (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1998)
77.33
R.C. Arkin, M. Fujita, T. Takagi, R. Hasegawa: An
ethological and emotional basis for human-robot
interaction, Robot. Auton. Syst. 42(3/4), 191–201
(2003)
77.34
P. Dean, P. Redgrave, G.W.M. Westby: Event or
emergency? Two response systems in the mam-
malian superior colliculus, Trends Neurosci. 12,
138–147 (1989)
77.35
B.E. Stein, M.A. Meredith: The Merging of the
Senses (MIT Press, Cambridge 1993)
77.36
T. Strosslin, C. Krebser, A. Arleo, W. Gerstner:
Combining multimodal sensory input for spatial
learning, artificial neural networks – ICANN 2002,
Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 2415, 87–92 (2002)
77.37
J. O’Keefe, L. Nadel: The Hippocampus as a Cog-
nitive Map (Clarendon, Oxford 1978)
77.38
V. Braitenberg: Taxis, kinesis, decussation, Progr.
Brain Res. 17, 210–222 (1965)
77.39
A. Guazzelli, F.J. Corbacho, M. Bota, M.A. Arbib:
Affordances, motivation, and the world graph
theory, Adapt. Behav. 6, 435–471 (1998)
77.40
J.J. Gibson: The Senses Considered as Perceptual
Systems (Allen and Unwin, London 1966)
77.41
I. Lieblich, M.A. Arbib: Multiple representations
of space underlying behavior, Behav. Brain Sci. 5,
627–659 (1982)
77.42
B. Girard, D. Filliat, J.A. Meyer, A. Berthoz, A. Guil-
lot: Integration of navigation and action selec-
tion functionalities in a computational model
of cortico-basal-ganglia-thalamo-cortical loops,
Adapt. Behav. 13(2), 115–130 (2005)
77.43
J.A. Meyer, A. Guillot, B. Girard, M. Khamassi,
P. Pirim, A. Berthoz: The Psikharpax project: To-
wards building an artificial rat, Robot. Auton.
Syst. 50(4), 211–223 (2005)
77.44
G. Deco, E.T. Rolls: Attention and working mem-
ory: A dynamical model of neuronal activity in
the prefrontal cortex, Eur. J. Neurosci. 18(8), 2374–
2390 (2003)
77.45
S.B. Choi, S.W. Ban, M. Lee: Biologically motivated
visual attention system using bottom-up saliency
map and top-down inhibition, Neural Inf. Proc. –
Lett. Rev. 2(1), 19–25 (2004)
77.46
L. Itti, C. Koch: A saliency-based search mecha-
nism for overt and covert shifts of visual atten-
tion, Vis. Res. 40, 1489–1506 (2000)
77.47
J.M. Wolfe: Guided search 2.0: A revised model
of visual search, Psychon. Bull. Rev. 1, 202–238
(1994)
77.48
A. Yarbus: Eye Movements and Vision (Plenum,
New York 1967)
77.49
V. Navalpakkam, L. Itti: Modeling the influence of
task on attention, Vis. Res. 45, 205–231 (2005)
77.50
F. Orabona, G. Metta, G. Sandini: Object-based
visual attention: A model for a behaving robot,
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recogn. (2005) pp. 89–
89
77.51
G. Sandini, V. Tagliasco: An anthropomorphic
retina-like structure for scene analysis, Comput.
Vis. Gr. Image Proc. 14(3), 365–372 (1980)
77.52
G. Rizzolatti, L. Riggio, I. Dascola, C. Umiltá: Re-
orienting attention across the horizontal and ver-
tical meridians: Evidence in favor of a premotor
theory of attention, Neuropsychologia 25, 31–40
(1987)
77.53
J.R. Flanagan, R.S. Johansson: Action plans used
in action observation, Nature 424, 769–771 (2003)
77.54
J.R. Flanagan, P. Vetter, R.S. Johansson, D.M. Wol-
pert: Prediction precedes control in motor learn-
ing, Curr. Biol. 13, 146–150 (2003)
77.55
J.M. Mataric, M. Pomplun: Fixation behavior in
observation and imitation of human movement,
Brain Res. Cogn. Brain Res. 7, 191–202 (1998)
77.56
E. Kandel, J. Schwartz, T. Jessell: Principles of
Neural Science, 5th edn. (McGraw-Hill, Columbus
2000)
77.57
J. Fallon, R. Carr, D. Morgan: Stochastic resonance
in muscle receptors, J. Neurophysiol. 91, 2429–
2436 (2004)

Part G | 77
2092
Part G
Robots and Humans
77.58
B. Edin: Quantitative analyses of dynamic strain
sensitivity in human skin mechanoreceptors,
J. Neurophysiol. 92(6), 3233–3243 (2004)
77.59
K.O. Johnson: Closing in on the neural mecha-
nisms of finger joint angle sense. Focus on quan-
titative analysis of dynamic strain sensitivity in
human skin mechanoreceptors, J. Neurophysiol.
92(6), 3167–3168 (2004)
77.60
B. Edin: Cutaneous afferents provide information
about knee joint movements in humans, J. Phys-
iol. 531(1), 289–297 (2001)
77.61
B. Edin, J. Westlin: Independent control of hu-
man finger-tip forces at individual digits using
precision lifting, J. Physiol. 450, 547–567 (1992)
77.62
K. Doya: Complementary roles of basal ganglia
and cerebellum in learning and motor control,
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 10(6), 732–739 (2000)
77.63
L.M. Bjursten, K. Norrsell, U. Norrsell: Behavioural
repertory of cats without cerebral cortex from in-
fancy, Exp. Brain Res. 25(2), 115–130 (1976)
77.64
G. Holmes: The cerebellum of man, Brain 62, 1–30
(1939)
77.65
R.C. Miall, D.J. Weir, D.M. Wolpert, J.F. Stein: Is the
cerebellum a Smith predictor?, J. Motor Behav. 25,
203–216 (1993)
77.66
J. Peters, P. van der Smagt: Searching a scalable
approach to cerebellar based control, Appl. Intell.
17, 11–33 (2002)
77.67
E.J. Nijhof, E. Kouwenhoven: Simulation of mul-
tijoint arm movements. In: Biomechanics and
Neural Control of Posture and Movement, ed. by
J.M. Winters, P.E. Crago (Springer, New York 2002)
pp. 363–372
77.68
N. Bernstein: The Coordination and Regulation of
Movements (Pergamon, Oxford 1967)
77.69
M.C. Tresch, V.C.K. Cheung, A. d’Avella: Matrix
factorization algorithms for the identification of
muscle synergies: Evaluation on simulated and
experimental data sets, J. Neurophysiol. 95(4),
2199–2212 (2006)
77.70
C. Castellini, P. van der Smagt: Evidence of muscle
synergies during human grasping, Biol. Cybern.
107(2), 233–245 (2013)
77.71
J.C. Eccles, M. Ito, J. Szentágothai: The Cerebellum
as a Neuronal Machine (Springer, New York 1967)
77.72
M. Ito: The Cerebellum and Neural Control (Raven,
New York 1984)
77.73
D.A. Marr: A theory of cerebellar cortex, J. Physiol.
202, 437–470 (1969)
77.74
J.S. Albus: A theory of cerebellar function, Math.
Biosci. 10, 25–61 (1971)
77.75
P. van der Smagt: Cerebellar control of robot arms,
Connect. Sci. 10, 301–320 (1998)
77.76
P. van der Smagt: Benchmarking cerebellar con-
trol, Robot. Auton. Syst. 32, 237–251 (2000)
77.77
J.S. Albus: Data storage in the cerebellar model
articulation controller (CMAC), J. Dyn. Syst. Meas.
Control ASME 3, 228–233 (1975)
77.78
W.T. Miller: Real-time application of neural net-
works for sensor-based control of robots with
vision, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 19, 825–831
(1994)
77.79
C. Sabourin, O. Bruneau: Robustness of the dy-
namic walk of a biped robot subjected to dis-
turbing external forces by using CMAC neu-
ral networks, Robot. Auton. Syst. 51, 81–99
(2005)
77.80
J.C. Houk, J.T. Buckingham, A.G. Barto: Models of
the cerebellum and motor learning, Behav. Brain
Sci. 19(3), 368–383 (1996)
77.81
M.A. Arbib, C.C. Boylls, P. Dev: Neural models of
spatial perception and the control of movement.
In: Cybernetics and Bionics, ed. by W.D. Keidel,
W. Handles, M. Spreng (Oldenbourg, Munich 1974)
pp. 216–231
77.82
N. Schweighofer: Computational Models of the
Cerebellum in the Adaptive Control of Movements,
Ph.D. Thesis (University of Southern California, Los
Angeles 1995)
77.83
N. Schweighofer, M.A. Arbib, M. Kawato: Role of
the cerebellum in reaching quickly and accu-
rately: I. A functional anatomical model of dy-
namics control, Eur. J. Neurosci. 10, 86–94 (1998)
77.84
N.
Schweighofer,
J.
Spoelstra,
M.A.
Arbib,
M. Kawato: Role of the cerebellum in reaching
quickly and accurately: II. A neural model of the
intermediate cerebellum, Eur. J. Neurosci. 10,
95–105 (1998)
77.85
M.A. Arbib, N. Schweighofer, W.T. Thach: Modeling
the cerebellum: From adaptation to coordination.
In: Motor Control and Sensory-Motor Integra-
tion: Issues and Directions, ed. by D.J. Glencross,
J.P. Piek (North-Holland Elsevier Science, Amster-
dam 1995) pp. 11–36
77.86
D. Wolpert, M. Kawato: Multiple paired forward
and inverse models for motor control, Neural
Netw. 11, 1317–1329 (1998)
77.87
O. Donchin, J.T. Francis, R. Shadmehr: Quantify-
ing generalization from trial-by-trial behavior of
adaptive systems that learn with basis functions:
Theory and experiments in human motor control,
J. Neurosci. 23(27), 9032–9045 (2003)
77.88
R. Osu, H. Gomi: Multijoint muscle regulation
mechanisms examined by measured human arm
stiffness and EMG signals, J. Neurophysiol. 81(4),
1458–1468 (1999)
77.89
H. Höppner, J. McIntyre, S.P. der van: Task depen-
dency of grip stiffness – A study of human grip
force and grip stiffness dependency during two
different tasks with same grip forces, PLOS ONE
8(12), e80889 (2013)
77.90
P. van der Smagt, F. Groen, K. Schulten: Analy-
sis and control of a rubbertuator robot arm, Biol.
Cybern. 75(4), 433–440 (1996)
77.91
G. Rizzolatti, G. Luppino, M. Matelli: The or-
ganization of the cortical motor system: New
concepts, Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol.
106, 283–296 (1998)
77.92
G. Rizzolatti, L. Fogassi, V. Gallese: Neurophysio-
logical mechanisms underlying the understand-
ing and imitation of action, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2,
661–670 (2001)
77.93
M.A. Umiltà, E. Kohler, V. Gallese, L. Fogassi,
L. Fadiga, C. Keysers, G. Rizzolatti: I know what

Neurorobotics: From Vision to Action
References
2093
Part G | 77
you are doing: A neurophysiological study, Neu-
ron 31(1), 155–165 (2001)
77.94
P.F. Ferrari, S. Rozzi, L. Fogassi: Mirror neurons
responding to observation of actions made with
tools in monkey ventral premotor cortex, J. Cogn.
Neurosci. 17, 212–226 (2005)
77.95
L. Fogassi, P.F. Ferrari, B. Gesierich, S. Rozzi,
F. Chersi, G. Rizzolatti: Parietal lobe: From action
organization to intention understanding, Science
308(4), 662–667 (2005)
77.96
M. Taira, S. Mine, A.P. Georgopoulos, A. Murata,
H. Sakata: Parietal cortex neurons of the monkey
related to the visual guidance of hand move-
ment, Exp. Brain Res. 83, 29–36 (1990)
77.97
A.H. Fagg, M.A. Arbib: Modeling parietal-premo-
tor interactions in primate control of grasping,
Neural Netw. 11, 1277–1303 (1998)
77.98
G. Rizzolatti, G. Luppino: Grasping movements:
Visuomotor transformations. In: The Handbook of
Brain Theory and Neural Networks, 2nd edn., ed.
by M.A. Arbib (Bradford Books/MIT Press, Cam-
bridge 2003) pp. 501–504
77.99
S.H. Johnson-Frey: The neural bases of complex
tool use in humans, Trends Cogn. Sci. 8, 71–78
(2004)
77.100
G. Rizzolatti, L. Fadiga, V. Gallese, L. Fogassi:
Premotor cortex and the recognition of motor ac-
tions, Cogn. Brain Res. 3, 131–141 (1995)
77.101
E. Oztop, M.A. Arbib: Schema design and im-
plementation of the grasp-related mirror neuron
system, Biol. Cybern. 87(2), 116–140 (2002)
77.102
D.I. Perrett, J.K. Hietanen, M.W. Oram, P.J. Ben-
son: Organization and functions of cells in the
macaque temporal cortex, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B
335, 23–50 (1992)
77.103
D.P. Carey, D.I. Perrett, M.W. Oram: Recognizing,
understanding and producing action. In: Hand-
book of Neuropsychology: Action and Cognition,
Vol. 11, ed. by M. Jeannerod, J. Grafman (Elsevier,
Amsterdam 1997) pp. 111–130
77.104
B. Bonaiuto, E. Rosta, M.A. Arbib: Extending the
mirror neuron system model, I. Audible actions
and invisible grasps, Biol. Cybern. 96(1), 9–38
(2006)
77.105
Y. Demiris, M.H. Johnson: Distributed, predic-
tive perception of actions: A biologically inspired
robotics architecture for imitation and learning,
Connect. Sci. 15(4), 231–243 (2003)
77.106
M.A. Arbib, A. Billard, M. Iacoboni, E. Oztop:
Synthetic brain imaging: Grasping, mirror neu-
rons and imitation, Neural Netw. 13(8/9), 975–997
(2000)
77.107
S. Schaal, A.J. Ijspeert, A. Billard: Computational
approaches to motor learning by imitation, Phi-
los. Trans. R. Soc. Biol. Sci. 358(1431), 537–547
(2003)
77.108
E. Oztop, M. Kawato, M.A. Arbib: Mirror neurons
and imitation: A computationally guided review,
Neural Netw. 19(3), 254–271 (2006)
77.109
J.
Tani,
M.
Ito,
Y.
Sugita:
Self-organization
of distributedly represented multiple behavior
schemata in a mirror system: Reviews of robot
experiments using RNNPB, Neural Netw. 17(8/9),
1273–1289 (2004)
77.110
Y. Kuniyoshi, Y. Yorozu, M. Inaba, H. Inoue: From
visuomotor self learning to visual imitation –
a neural architecture for humanoid learning, IEEE
Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), Vol. 3 (2003)
pp. 3132–3139
77.111
D.M. Wolpert, K. Doya, M. Kawato: A unifying
computational framework for motor control and
social interaction, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Biol. Sci.
358(1431), 593–602 (2003)
77.112
G. Metta, G. Sandini, L. Natale, L. Craighero,
L. Fadiga: Understanding mirror neurons: A bio-
robotic approach, Interact. Stud. 7(2), 197–232
(2006) special issue on epigenetic robotics
77.113
D.M. Wolpert, Z. Ghahramani, R.J. Flanagan: Per-
spectives and problems in motor learning, Cogn.
Sci. 5(11), 487–494 (2001)
77.114
M.I. Jordan, D.E. Rumelhart: Forward models: Su-
pervised learning with a distal teacher, Cogn. Sci.
16(3), 307–354 (2006)
77.115
M. Kawato, K. Furukawa, R. Suzuki: A hierarchi-
cal neural network model for control and learning
of voluntary movement, Biol. Cybern. 57, 169–185
(1987)
77.116
M. Haruno, D.M. Wolpert, M. Kawato: MOSAIC
model for sensorimotor learning and control,
Neural Comput. 13, 2201–2220 (2001)
77.117
E. Oztop, D.M. Wolpert, M. Kawato: Mental state
inference using visual control parameters, Cogn.
Brain Res. 22, 129–151 (2005)
77.118
A.L. Woodward: Infant selectively encode the goal
object of an actor’s reach, Cognition 69, 1–34
(1998)
77.119
M. Lopas, J. Santos–Victor: Visual learning by im-
itation with motor representations, IEEE Trans.
Syst. Man Cybern. B 35(3), 438–449 (2005)
77.120
A. Gijsberts, T. Tommasi, G. Metta, B. Caputo:
Object recognition using visuo-affordance maps,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst. (IROS2010)
Taipei, Taiwan (2010) pp. 1572–1578
77.121
N. Noceti, B. Caputo, C. Castellini, L. Baldassarre,
A. Barla, L. Rosasco, F. Odone, G. Sandini: Towards
a theoretical framework for learning multi-modal
patterns for embodied agents, ICIAP-09, 15th, Int.
Conf. Image Anal. Process. (2009)
77.122
P. Fitzpatrick, G. Metta: Grounding vision through
experimental manipulation, Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Math. Phys. Eng, Sci. 361(1811), 2165–2185 (2003)
77.123
S.M. Khansari Zadeh, A. Billard: Learning sta-
ble non-linear dynamical systems with Gaussian
mixture models, IEEE Trans. Robotics 27(5), 943–
957 (2011)
77.124
A. Ude, A. Gams, T. Asfour, J. Morimoto: Task-spe-
cific generalization of discrete and periodic dy-
namic movement primitives, IEEE Trans. Robotics
26(5), 800–815 (2010)
77.125
E.A. Theodorou, J. Buchli, S. Schaal: A generalized
path integral control approach to reinforcement
learning, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 11, 3137–3181 (2010)
77.126
C.L. Nehaniv: Nine billion correspondence prob-
lems. In: Imitation and Social Learning in Robots,

Part G | 77
2094
Part G
Robots and Humans
Humans, and Animals: Behavioural, Social and
Communicative Dimensions, ed. by C.L. Nehaniv,
K. Dautenhahn (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cam-
bridge 2006)
77.127
C.L. Nehaniv, K. Dautenhahn: Mapping between
dissimilar bodies: Affordances and the algebraic
foundations of imitation, Eur. Workshop Learn.
Robots (EWRL-7) Edinburgh (1998)
77.128
Y. Demiris, G. Hayes: Imitation as a dual-route
process featuring predictive and learning com-
ponents: A biologically-plausible computational
model. In: Imitation in Animals and Artifacts, ed.
by K. Dautenhahn, C. Nehaniv (MIT Press, Cam-
bridge 2002)
77.129
M. Ito, K. Noda, Y. Hoshino, J. Tani: Dynamic and
interactive generation of object handling behav-
iors by a small humanoid robot using a dynamic
neural network model, Neural Netw 19(3), 323–337
(2006)
77.130
E.L. Sauser, A. Billard: Parallel and distributed
neural models of the ideomotor principle: An in-
vestigation of imitative cortical pathways, Neural
Netw. 19, 285–298 (2006)
77.131
A.M. Liberman, F.S. Cooper, D.P. Shankweiler,
M. Studdert-Kennedy: Perception of the speech
code, Psychol. Rev. 74, 431–461 (1967)
77.132
A.M. Liberman, I.G. Mattingly: The motor theory
of speech perception revised, Cognition 21, 1–36
(1985)
77.133
G. Rizzolatti, M.A. Arbib: Language within our
grasp, Trends Neurosci. 21(5), 188–194 (1998)
77.134
L. Fadiga, L. Fogassi, G. Pavesi, G. Rizzolatti: Motor
facilitation during action observation: A magnetic
stimulation study, J. Neurophys. 73(6), 2608–2611
(1995)
77.135
M. Gentilucci, L. Fogassi, G. Luppino, M. Matelli,
R. Camarda, G. Rizzolatti: Functional organiza-
tion of inferior area 6 in the macaque monkey.
I. Somatotopy and the control of proximal move-
ments, Exp. Brain Res. 71(3), 475–490 (1988)
77.136
F. Pulvermüller, L. Fadiga: Active perception: sen-
sorimotor circuits as a cortical basis for language,
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11(5), 351–360 (2010)
77.137
L. Fadiga, L. Craighero, G. Buccino, G. Rizzolatti:
Speech listening specifically modulates the ex-
citability of tongue muscles: A TMS study. Eur. J,
Neurosci. 15(2), 399–402 (2002)
77.138
J.-L. Schwartz, A. Basirat, L. Ménard, M. Sato:
The Perception-for-Action-Control Theory (PACT):
A perceptuo-motor theory of speech perception,
J. Neurolinguist 25(5), 336–354 (2012)
77.139
C. Moulin-Frier, M.A. Arbib: Recognizing speech
in a novel accent: The motor theory of speech
perception reframed, Biol Cybern. 107(4), 421–447
(2013)
77.140
C. Castellini, L. Badino, G. Metta, G. Sandini,
M. Tavella, M. Grimaldi, L. Fadiga: The use of
phonetic motor invariants can improve automatic
phoneme discrimination, PLoS ONE 6(9), e24055
(2011)
77.141
A. D’Ausilio, F. Pulvermüller, P. Salmas, I. Bufalari,
C. Begliomini, L. Fadiga: The motor somatotopy
of speech perception, Curr. Biol. 19(5), 381–385
(2009)
77.142
M. Grimaldi, F.B. Gili, F. Sigona, M. Tavella,
P. Fitzpatrick, L. Craighero, L. Fadiga, G. Sandini,
G. Metta: New technologies for simultaneous ac-
quisition of speech articulatory data: Ultrasound,
3-D articulograph and electroglottograph, Poster,
LangTech Conference, Roma (2008)
77.143
G.E. Hinton, V. Nair: Inferring motor programs
from images of handwritten digits, Adv. Neural
Inform. Proces. Syst., Vol. 18 (2004) pp. 515–
522
77.144
L. Badino, C. Canevari, L. Fadiga, G. Metta: Deep-
level acoustic-to-articulatory mapping for DBN-
HMM based phone recognition, Spoken Language
Technology Workshop (SLT) (2012) pp. 370–375
77.145
M.A. Arbib (Ed.): From Action to Language Via the
Mirror System (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge
2006)
77.146
C. Bell, P. Cordo, S. Harnad: Controversies in neu-
roscience IV: Motor learning and plasticity in the
cerebellum, Behav. Brain Sci. 19(3), v–vi (1996)
77.147
P. van der Smagt, D. Bullock: Applied intelligence,
Scalable Appl. Neural Netw. Robotics 17(1), 7–10
(2002)
77.148
V. Gallese, L. Fadiga, L. Fogassi, G. Rizzolatti: Ac-
tion recognition in the premotor cortex, Brain 119,
593–609 (1996)
77.149
L. Fadiga, L. Craighero, G. Buccino, G. Rizzolatti:
Speech listening specifically modulates the ex-
citability of tongue muscles: A TMS study, Eur.
J. Neurosci. 15(2), 399–402 (2002)

Multimedia Contents Perceptual R
2095
Part G | 78
78. Perceptual Robotics
Heinrich Bülthoff, Christian Wallraven, Martin A. Giese
Robots that share their environment with humans
need to be able to recognize and manipulate ob-
jects and users, perform complex navigation tasks,
and interpret and react to human emotional and
communicative gestures. In all of these percep-
tual capabilities, the human brain, however, is
still far ahead of robotic systems. Hence, tak-
ing clues from the way the human brain solves
such complex perceptual tasks will help to de-
sign better robots. Similarly, once a robot interacts
with humans, its behaviors and reactions will be
judged by humans – movements of the robot,
for example, should be fluid and graceful, and
it should not evoke an eerie feeling when inter-
acting with a user. In this chapter, we present
Perceptual Robotics as the field of robotics that
takes inspiration from perception research and
neuroscience to, first, build better perceptual ca-
pabilities into robotic systems and, second, to
validate the perceptual impact of robotic systems
on the user.
78.1
Perceptual Mechanisms
of Object Representations .................... 2097
78.1.1
Perceptual and Computational
Basis of Object Representations .. 2097
78.1.2
Neural Representations
in Object Recognition ................ 2100
78.1.3
Object Recognition:
Lessons from Computer Vision .... 2101
78.1.4
Object Learning and Recognition
for Perceptual Robotics .............. 2102
78.2 Perceptual Mechanisms
of Action Representation...................... 2103
78.2.1
Recognition of Complex
Movements and Actions
in Primate Cortex ...................... 2103
78.2.2
Biological Principles with
Relevance for Computer Vision
and Robotics............................. 2104
78.3 Perceptual Validation of Robotics ......... 2107
78.3.1
Realistic Faces for Robots ........... 2107
78.3.2
Perceptual
and Neural Processing
of Body Movements of Robots .... 2108
78.4 Conclusion and Further Reading........... 2108
Video-References......................................... 2109
References................................................... 2109
The technical realization of perceptual functions is
a central problem for many applications in robotics.
Robots require perception to navigate in space and to lo-
calize and recognize goal objects, e.g., for manipulation
(Chaps. 7, 8, 32, 33, 36–38, 47, 67). Social interac-
tive robots must be able to interpret gestures, actions,
and even emotions (Chap. 69, 71, 72) in order to inter-
act naturally with their users. One important approach
for the programming of complex perceptual and be-
havioral functions, for example, needed for humanoid
robots is imitation learning (Chaps. 75, 77). Imitation
learning requires the robot to perceive complex actions
that are executed by the user and to subsequently map
them into an efﬁcient representation that is suitable for
the synthesis of the corresponding motor behavior on
the available platform. This chapter focuses on impor-
tant principles of the representation of complex shapes
and movements, which can be derived from biologi-
cal perception systems, and more speciﬁcally the basic
functionality of the primate visual cortex. Such prin-
ciples have interesting implications for the design of
technical systems in robotics and computer vision for
the recognition of objects, shapes and faces, and for the
recognition and synthesis of complex movements and

Part G | 78
2096
Part G
Robots and Humans
actions. The limited space of the chapter forced us to
focus mainly on visual perception and related techni-
cal applications. In the context of robotics many other
aspects of perception are important, for example hap-
tic perception (Chap. 41), auditory perception, sensory
cue fusion (Chap. 35), and the interaction between the
visual recognition of objects and actions and motor pro-
grams, e.g., during grasping (treated in Chap. 38).
In the following, we will ﬁrst formulate several biolog-
ical principles that are relevant for form and motion
representations, speciﬁcally in the visual system. We
will then, on the one hand, describe technical systems
that implement these principles using neural mecha-
nisms that are inspired by the basic architecture of the
brain. On the other hand, we will discuss also imple-
mentations that are inspired by biological principles on
a more abstract level, and which exploit instead of neu-
ral networks more efﬁcient technical algorithms for the
realization of biologically relevant functions. Many of
these systems are derived in the ﬁeld of computer vi-
sion and are based on the advantages and limitations of
modern digital computers in order to more efﬁciently
realize biological principles of information processing.
Our approach to establish relationships between
biological perception and robotics systems at differ-
ent levels reﬂects David Marr’s classical distinction of
multiple levels of description, originally developed for
the analysis of vision systems [78.1]: Robotics systems
can be inspired by biological system at the level of
implementation, i. e., one can try to build robots con-
taining neural mechanisms that imitate the function of
neurons in central nervous systems of biological or-
ganisms. This type of analogy between technical and
biological systems coincides with the deﬁnition of Neu-
rorobotics given in Chap. 77. A transfer of principles
from biological perception systems to robots might also
be accomplished at the more abstract levels of compu-
tational problems and algorithms. The computational
level is deﬁned by the abstract theoretical formulation
of computational problems that have to be solved by
perception systems. Examples are the identiﬁcation or
classiﬁcation of goal object, or the recognition of hu-
man gestures. Marr’s level of algorithms speciﬁes the
computational methods for the solution of such prob-
lems, independent of the underlying speciﬁc hardware
or architecture. For example, an object might be rep-
resented by modeling its full 3-D structure, e.g., using
a parametric 3-D shape model, or it might be rep-
resented in terms of two-dimensional example views.
Example views, however, might be represented using
neural networks, establishing an analogy with the hu-
man brain at the level of implementation, or using more
efﬁcient computational methods, e.g., as support vec-
tors of a classiﬁer that has been trained with appropriate
images of the object and distractor patterns. In both the
cases, the robot system realizes mechanisms that are de-
rived form perception in biological systems.
Marr’s distinction of levels is only one way to in-
troduce description levels for complex systems. Other
approaches, particularly relevant for robotics, are, for
example the subsumption architecture and behavior-
based approaches (Chap. 13) that decompose robotics
system into a system of simpler behavioral modules.
Another examples are dynamical systems approaches
to robotics [78.2–4] that are based on the biologi-
cally motivated idea that behaviors can be mapped onto
stable states of (nonlinear) dynamical systems or re-
current neural networks. Individual behaviors result by
self-organization over the whole system as collectively
stable modes, which can be described and analyzed
by the introduction of appropriate collective variables.
Interestingly, such robotics-inspired approaches have
been quite successful in modeling human navigation be-
havior [78.5].
In the following, we will apply the term Perceptual
Robotics to signify the design of robots based on prin-
ciples that are derived from human perception on all
three levels in the sense of Marr. This includes a real-
ization in terms of speciﬁc neural circuits as well as the
transfer of more abstract biologically inspired strategies
for the solution of relevant computational problems.
A direct interaction between robotics and perception
research can be very fruitful for both disciplines. On
the one hand, our current knowledge about the human
perception and the underlying computational principles
might help us to build more efﬁcient robotics architec-
tures that inherit properties from biological perception,
e.g., very efﬁcient and robust processing or complex
dynamic ﬂexibility. Such architectures will be a neces-
sary pre-requisite for the creation of truly intelligent,
cognitive robots (Chaps. 13, 71, 74, 75). On the other
hand, perception science often uses robots as testbed
for gaining a deeper understanding of computational
processes, in particular, for testing the computational
power of speciﬁc computational solutions under real-
world conditions. How can a child, for example, learn
how to handle new objects, and what allows us to
learn the visual categorization of thousands of objects
from just a few examples? Perceptual robot platforms,
equipped with a variety of sensory inputs and operating
in different types of artiﬁcially structured or real-world
environments provide very helpful tools for the study of
such questions.
Finally, perceptual robotics not only means to take
inspiration from perception to build more efﬁcient
robots, but it also encapsulates the perceptual valida-
tion of robotic systems. As robots move into the human
environment and are increasingly also interacting with

Perceptual Robotics
78.1 Perceptual Mechanisms of Object Representations
2097
Part G | 78.1
humans, it becomes important to evaluate and validate
their effectiveness and efﬁcacy with respect to human
standards. Here, we do not refer to their social accep-
tance, but rather to the way that robots are judged by
humans in terms of their appearance, movements, and
interactive capabilities. If a robot displays jerky move-
ments, for example, it may still successfully grasp and
manipulate an object, but it would be immediately no-
ticeable to a human observer and potentially disturbing
to interact with. This eeriness or weirdness was already
anticipated in the early 1970s in a famous paper about
the uncanny valley by a Japanese roboticist [78.6]. Mori
anticipated that as robots become more human-like, hu-
mans’ familiarity with the robot would increase until
at some point (when the robot looks or acts almost
human-like), they would suddenly feel highly unfamil-
iar toward the robot. As the human likeness increases
further, the robot would again be judged as familiar or
appealing.
More speciﬁcally, Mori also postulated that this un-
canny valley would not only hold for the robot’s static
appearance, but would in fact be increased for a moving
or acting robot. With the increase in interest in develop-
ing humanoid robots over the past decades, being aware
of the perceptual judgments of such humanoids be-
comes a critical component in their development. Since
the evaluation of appearance and movements of a hu-
manoid are driven by perceptual processes, it makes
sense to also use protocols from perception research to
evaluate and ﬁne-tune their effectiveness. In such exper-
iments, typically the robot’s performance is evaluated
with respect to measures such as general user accep-
tance, recognizability of expressions, smoothness of
motions, ease of interaction, duration and quality of in-
teraction, etc. It is important that the experiment should
not only be about simply asking how good is the robot,
but it should actually tests the robot in the intended task
context or that whether it uses additional, indirect mea-
sures of effectiveness. As a tutorial on designing and
analyzing perceptual experiments and user studies is
beyond the scope of this chapter, we refer the reader
to introductory texts such as [78.7, 8]. In this chapter,
we will focus on two important topics related to hu-
manoid perception in the context of perceptual robotics:
facial animation and the perceptual processing of body
movements.
78.1 Perceptual Mechanisms of Object Representations
Object recognition is a fundamental visual function
that is critical for many applications in robotics. Ma-
nipulation and grasping (Chaps. 36–38) require exact
knowledge about the shape of the goal object that
is often derived from visual sensors. Also the imita-
tion of goal-directed movements (Chap. 77) requires
knowledge about target objects. Finally, social and col-
lective robots require robust recognition of other agents
and objects which are taking part in the present ac-
tion (Chaps. 71, 72). The importance of object and
shape recognition for many other applied robot sys-
tems, like construction and assembly robots or smart
cars (Chap. 54) is immediately evident.
78.1.1 Perceptual and Computational Basis
of Object Representations
The question of how humans learn, represent, and
recognize objects under a wide variety of viewing con-
ditions presents a great challenge to both neurophysiol-
ogy and cognitive research. Frameworks for explaining
the amazing robustness of human recognition processes
and how humans represent objects can be broadly
classiﬁed into two approaches: in the model-based rep-
resentation, an image on the retina is analyzed to yield
three-dimensional parts of an object based on geomet-
ric primitives (cf. also Chap. 32). These primitives are
then matched to an internal, three-dimensional model
of the object (Fig. 78.1, bottom). Exemplar-based rep-
resentation approaches assume that the internal storage
consists of, typically two-dimensional, snapshot-like
representations of objects, which are directly compared
to the visual input via simple image transformations.
In the following, we will brieﬂy describe the basic
properties of these two approaches as well as percep-
tual evidence for their plausibility in explaining human
recognition performance.
Structural Description Models
The basic idea of structural description models is that
object recognition or categorization is based on a struc-
tural representation, which is deﬁned as a conﬁgura-
tion of elementary object parts that are regarded as
shape primitives [78.9]. Structural description models
aim at supplying abstract and propositional descrip-
tions of objects, while at the same time disregard-
ing irrelevant spatial information. Therefore, structural
description models typically predict that recognition
performance is invariant regarding spatial transforma-
tions. Biederman’s recognition-by-components (RBCs)
or geon structural description (GSD) model can be
regarded as the best developed example of the struc-

Part G | 78.1
2098
Part G
Robots and Humans
Visual memory
Visual memory
3-D part
recon-
struction
3-D trans-
formations
2-D trans-
formations
Exemplar-based representation
Model-based representation
Matching
Matching
Fig. 78.1 Schematic drawing comparing exemplar-based with model-based representations. Object perception based on
model-based representations assumes that the brain extracts 3-D parts from the visual image, which are then matched to
an internally stored 3-D model of the teapot. Contrasting with this approach, object perception based on exemplar-based
representations is accomplished by directly comparing stored templates or example images with the current picture of
the teapot
tural description model type [78.10]. According to
this model, objects are represented as conﬁgurations
of elementary three-dimensional primitive parts, called
geons. These geons are derived from nonaccidental
properties (NAPs) in the image, i. e., from properties
which unlikely arise by chance, and are more or less in-
variant over a wide range of views. For example, the
properties straight vs. curved, symmetrical vs. asym-
metrical, parallel vs. nonparallel are regarded as NAPs
(NAPs were originally proposed within an image-based
approach by Lowe [78.11]). According to the model,
geons and their spatial conﬁguration are combined into
a structural representation, called GSD. The spatial re-
lations between parts are described in a categorical way,
using relations like above, below, etc. Like other struc-
tural description models, Biederman’s model predicts
invariance in relation to position and size and also in
relation to orientation in depth, as long as no parts are
occluded.
The question has to be raised whether objects can
be decomposed into geons at all. It was argued that
Biederman’s RBC cannot be applied to a whole range
of biological stimuli [78.12], or that biological shapes
in general cannot be adequately described by struc-
tural description models [78.13]. This problem extends
also to artifact categories like shoe, hat or backpack,
which seem to exceed the scope of the geon model.
Therefore it has to be doubted that object parts are
necessarily represented as geons, or as similar geomet-
rical primitives (further problems of RBC in [78.14,
15]). However, this does not mean that category rep-
resentations do not have a part structure: in fact, it is
not the notion of the part structure in object representa-
tions by itself which is problematic, but the use of parts
and relations as a basis to derive invariant recognition
performance [78.15].
Exemplar-Based Models
Over the last two decades, an increasing number of
studies has demonstrated that recognition is not view-
independent. Orientation-dependent recognition effects
were found for novel objects [78.16, 17], and also
for common, familiar objects [78.18, 19]. Orientation-
dependent recognition performance has been shown not
to be limited to individual objects, such as faces [78.20,
21], or to objects on the subordinate level of catego-
rization [78.16, 22], but also was demonstrated for basic
level recognition [78.19, 23].

Perceptual Robotics
78.1 Perceptual Mechanisms of Object Representations
2099
Part G | 78.1
Moreover, recognition performance is not only in-
ﬂuenced by the orientation, but also by the size of the
stimulus. Results are quite similar: reaction times (RTs)
and error rates depend on the extent of transforma-
tion that is necessary to align memory and stimulus
representation. RTs increase in a monotonic way with
increasing change of (perceived) size (for a review
Ashbridge and Perrett [78.24]). Several studies even
show a systematic relationship between the amount
of translation and recognition performance: Increasing
displacement between two sequentially presented stim-
uli led to a deterioration of performance, both for novel
objects [78.25] and familiar objects [78.26]. Overall,
view-independent models are difﬁcult to reconcile with
these ﬁndings which indicate that recognition perfor-
mance depends systematically on different spatial trans-
formations.
In the following, we will brieﬂy review three
types of exemplar-based models, which – by virtue
of
different
computational mechanisms and
pro-
cesses (including alignment, interpolation, and pooling/
thresholding) – explain the transformation-dependent
performance that was found in the psychophysical ex-
periments.
In the class of alignment models, Ullman’s [78.12,
27] 3-D alignment model and Lowe’s [78.11] SCERPO
model are probably the best-known examples. Both
models work by storing 3-D models of objects, which
are aligned to images by perspective projection of cor-
responding features (edges or feature points on the
object). As an alternative to Ullman’s [78.27] model
that relies on 3-D object representations, Ullman and
Basri [78.28] suggested an alignment model on the ba-
sis of 2-D (two-dimensional) views. In this model, an
internal object model is constructed by a linear com-
bination of a small number of stored 2-D exemplar
images. Thus, the alignment is not achieved by a spa-
tial compensation process, but by linear combination
of images. The intuition behind the linear combination
approach can be explained in simple terms. Suppose
that two views of the same three-dimensional object are
stored, taken from somewhat different viewing direc-
tions. An intermediate view can then be described as
a weighted sum of the views that are already stored.
In this case, the representation is based on the two-
dimensional positions of corresponding features in each
view. Making the set of views closer results in an ob-
ject representation that is equivalent to storing a 3-D
model.
In the interpolation model, recognition is achieved
by localization in a multidimensional representational
space, which is spanned by stored views [78.29]. The
interpolation model is based on the theory of approx-
imation of multivariate functions and can be imple-
mented with radial basis functions (RBFs). In this
scheme, the whole viewing space of an object is approx-
imated by the learned exemplar views through a limited
number of series of so-called radial basis functions
(such as Gaussian functions) each of which becomes ac-
tivated within a limited region of the high-dimensional
feature space. Object recognition then means to exam-
ine whether a new point corresponding to the actual
stimulus can be approximated by the existing tuned
set of basis functions. Thus, recognition does not oc-
cur by transformation or reconstruction of an internal
image, but rather by interpolation or approximation
of exemplars in a high-dimensional representational
space.
At the end of the 1990s – and as an extension to
the interpolation models – recognition models based on
pooling and thresholding were developed [78.30–33].
Recognition is explained on the basis of the behaviour
of cells that are selectively tuned to speciﬁc image fea-
tures (fragments or whole shapes) in a view-dependent
(and size-dependent) way. A hierarchical pooling of the
outputs of view-speciﬁc cells provides generalization
over viewing conditions [78.30]. A similar proposal
was made by Riesenhuber and Poggio [78.31]. The
threshold model [78.34] also accounts for the sys-
tematic relation between recognition latencies and the
amount of rotation (and size-scaling). The speed of
object recognition depends on the rate of accumula-
tion of activity from neurons selective for the object,
evoked by a particular viewing circumstance. For a fa-
miliar object, more tuned cells will be activated in the
views most frequently presented, so that a given level
of evidence (threshold) can be achieved fast. When the
object is seen in an unusual view, fewer cells will re-
spond, and activity among the population of cells selec-
tive for the object’s appearance will accumulate more
slowly. Consequently, these threshold models explain
orientation-dependence without the need to postulate
transformation or interpolation processes.
In a recent paper, an attempt has been made at
view-dependent and view-independent approaches to
object processing [78.35]. A careful study of the view-
dependency of novel objects was designed by combin-
ing structural properties (number of parts) with metric
properties (thickness, size of parts) has found that both
view-dependent and view-independent processing seem
to be combined in object recognition. Thus, instead of
taking the extreme standpoints of view-based versus
view-invariant processing, one might envisage a visual
processing framework in which features are selected
according to the current task, where the optimality, efﬁ-
ciency and thus the dependency on viewing parameters
of the features depend on the amount of visual experi-
ence with this particular task.

Part G | 78.1
2100
Part G
Robots and Humans
Several computational models have been proposed
that aim at modelling and explaining the dependence
of human recognition performance on spatial transfor-
mations in its complexity. All of these models rely on
storing exemplars – in the simplest form just 2-D views
of objects – and matching the retinal image to these
stored examples by different computational methods.
The later models of recognition take their inspira-
tion from recent ﬁndings from physiological studies
concerning the functional building blocks of human vi-
sion in the brain. In the following, we will therefore
brieﬂy review the neural processing of visual informa-
tion in the brain that underlies our ability to recognize
objects.
78.1.2 Neural Representations
in Object Recognition
Functionally, it has been shown that the ﬂow of visual
information in the brain can be divided into two major
pathways: the dorsal pathway is believed to process
motion and motor- or action-related visual information,
whereas the ventral pathway usually is associated with
the task of object recognition. The structure of the
ventral pathway is hierarchically organized and consists
of a series of interconnected stages that start from the
retina, passing through the lateral geniculate nucleus
(LGN) to the primary visual cortex (V1) and extrastriate
visual areas V2, V4, and IT. The inferotemporal cortex
(IT) provides input to the prefrontal cortex (PFC),
which is believed to play an important role in identiﬁ-
cation and categorization of visual stimuli. Recordings
in the parietal cortex [78.36] suggest, in addition, that
speciﬁcally for grasping and object manipulation also
dorsal regions might be centrally involved in the recog-
nition of manipulable objects and their affordances
(Chap. 77 for a more detailed discussion).
The seminal work of Hubel and Wiesel [78.37] in
the cat (and later also in the macaque) visual cortex ﬁrst
established the idea of a hierarchical organization of vi-
sual processing. They found so-called simple cells in
the early visual cortex (area V1) that responded best to
bar-like stimuli at a particular orientation and position
in the visual ﬁeld. The response pattern of these cells
could be modeled as a receptive ﬁeld using Gabor-type
functions. Later in the processing stream they found so-
called complex cells which responded best to bar-like
stimuli at a particular orientation nearly everywhere in
the visual ﬁeld – cells, which had become partially posi-
tion invariant. This general idea of increasing invariance
to stimulus properties with later stages of the process-
ing stream has been veriﬁed in further physiological
studies. In general, it has been found that the receptive
ﬁeld of the neurons increases and that the complexity of
the stimulus it responds also increases. One of the key
studies about the functional role of IT regions has inves-
tigated the responses of neurons to real-world objects in
anesthetized monkeys ([78.38]; see also Tanaka [78.39]
for a review). Although some neurons were found
which responded maximally to simple bar-like stimuli,
the majority of neurons in posterior inferotemporal cor-
tex (PIT) preferred complex objects such as star shapes
or circles with protruding elements. Interestingly, neu-
rons were highly sensitive to minuscule changes to
these objects such as the relative orientation or thick-
ness of the elements. On the other hand, neurons were
quite insensitive to stimulus variations such as size,
contrast or retinal location. These ﬁndings were taken
as evidence that one of the strategies for representing
objects might be to use a number of moderately com-
plex visual elements, whose pattern of co-activation
encodes the visual appearance of the stimulus. In ad-
dition, Wang et al. [78.38] found neurons in anterior
inferotemporal cortex (AIT), which responded maxi-
mally to images of whole objects such as faces or cars,
indicating that already in IT object speciﬁc encodings
might be present. Several other studies have also found
neurons in this area which are tuned to faces, parts of
faces, as well as body parts ([78.40] for a review).
In
another
set
of
experiments,
Logothetis
et al. [78.41] found AIT neurons, which showed
a strong view-based behavior for the same stimuli
that were used in the study of Bülthoff and Edel-
man [78.16], whereas they were invariant to size and
location of the stimulus. Their ﬁndings provide strong
evidence that a neural implementation of view-based
object encoding is possible and indeed seems to be
used for recognition. In addition to view-selectivity and
size invariance, the investigated cells were also found
to be maximally selective for the holistic stimulus
rather than its constituent parts. This ﬁnding indicates
that these cells might be encoding the pooled co-
activation pattern of earlier PIT cells and thus form
view-tuned units of recognition. It is important to stress
in this context that an abstraction such as grandmother
neurons, which speciﬁcally encode only one stimulus,
does not seem plausible. Rather, the majority of neural
responses in this and other experiments showed selec-
tivity for a number of stimuli. A plausible explanation
for this ﬁnding is that objects are encoded not by
a single neuron but by a population code encompassing
a number of neurons, which greatly increases the
robustness of the representation [78.33].
The ﬁndings from this area of research can be
summarized in a simple functional architecture: going
from early stages to later stages of visual processing
in a feedforward fashion, feature complexity increases
from simple edge detectors toward view-tuned, com-

Perceptual Robotics
78.1 Perceptual Mechanisms of Object Representations
2101
Part G | 78.1
plex object cells and invariance to changes in the
stimulus increases. This functional architecture is re-
ﬂected not only in the object recognition framework
discussed previously, but it also provides the motivation
for computational vision systems that have been devel-
oped over the last few decades which will be discussed
in the following.
78.1.3 Object Recognition:
Lessons from Computer Vision
Computer vision started out as a subﬁeld of artiﬁcial
intelligence in the 1960s. Early work on scene under-
standing by Roberts [78.42] showed how computers
could parse worlds consisting of simple, geometric ob-
jects such as cubes, pyramids, etc. The main thrust of
computer vision systems in the following decades con-
sisted of building algorithms for reconstructing a three-
dimensional world from images – this development was
further stimulated by Marr’s very inﬂuential theory of
vision as 3-D reconstruction [78.1]. This theory was
built on extracting geometric primitives from images
that could be mathematically described as generalized
cylinders. Although the mathematical rigor of such ap-
proaches was very appealing, computational implemen-
tations turned out to have strong limitations. Extracting
robust features is a necessary prerequisite for building
a 3-D reconstruction of the image, and ﬁnding these
features proved to be hard under real-world conditions
due to the enormous amount of variation in the image
caused by changes in lighting, depth rotations, noise,
occlusion, etc.
Parallel to the paradigm shift in human psy-
chophysics and physiology, exemplar-based computa-
tional systems began to emerge, which for the ﬁrst time
showed good recognition performance under a larger
range of viewing conditions. These recognition sys-
tems were based on – sometimes surprisingly simple –
histograms of pixel values [78.43], local feature de-
tectors [78.44, 45] or on a straightforward pixel repre-
sentation of images using principle components analy-
sis [78.46]. All of these recognition systems relied on
a database of labeled example images, an algorithm
for extracting features from these images, and a suit-
able classiﬁcation method for comparing sets of image
features.
Returning to the discussion of modeling human vi-
sion, in the following we provide an exemplary review
of three neuromorphic recognition systems that are
based on a functionally plausible, exemplar-based ar-
chitecture: these are SpikeNET [78.48], LeNet [78.49],
and a framework by Serre et al. [78.50]. The ﬁrst system
is motivated by the ﬁnding that humans are amazingly
fast at categorizing images as containing an animal or
a face [78.51]. Typical response times for this task are
so small (on the order of 100 ms) that the visual sig-
nal has only time for one feedforward pass through
the visual areas of the brain (Fig. 78.2) – any recur-
rent feedback processing would necessarily delay the
decision and therefore result in longer response times.
Based on this ﬁnding, a neural network architecture
was designed [78.48] that exploits the timing of neu-
ronal responses (spikes) to encode visual signals using
a who ﬁres ﬁrst – strategy. This is different from tra-
ditional neural networks in that the timing is used
rather than the ﬁring strength. An object in this sys-
tem will therefore be represented by an ensemble of
neurons that represents a pattern of spike responses
from earlier low-level, feature extraction neurons. In
their implementation, these low-level neurons consist
of standard Gabor-type receptive ﬁelds that are similar
to the receptive ﬁelds found in the cat’s visual cor-
tex [78.37]. This spike time encoding allows for very
fast processing of visual stimuli and has been shown
to provide robust recognition results. The network ar-
Planned particle filter (boosted)
Planned particle filter
Planned KNN
Random particle filter
Random KNN
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Accuracy (%)
Iterations
100
80
60
40
20
0
Fig. 78.2 Recognition performance of four highly similar object
(shown in the inset) by an in-hand recognition system using active
view selection (after [78.47]). The ﬁve methods compared in the
plot contrast planned (blue) and unplanned (orange) exploration of
the objects in the hand of the robot. The x-axis is the number of iter-
ations, and the y-axis is the recognition accuracy in percent. As time
(or iteration number) proceeds, the planned approaches surpass ran-
dom exploration signiﬁcantly. In addition, employing proabilistic
methods for recognition of the objects using a particle ﬁlter also
provides a recognition improvement. Finally, the thick, solid blue
line shows performance in a system which boosts the likelihood
of an object given the current visual evidence in the particle ﬁlter
framework – this approach fares best overall. These results show
that active view selection enhances the robot’s ability to learn and
recognize objects in real-world environments

Part G | 78.1
2102
Part G
Robots and Humans
chitecture LeNet [78.49] consists of a neural network
that uses a hierarchy of layers of trainable convolutions
and spatial subsampling, as well as nonlinear ﬁltering
to extract features of increasingly large receptive ﬁelds,
increasing complexity, and increasing robustness. Us-
ing extensive, supervised training of the full hierarchy,
such a network provides a very efﬁcient, sparse set of
features for many visual recognition tasks. Finally, the
network architecture by Serre et al. [78.50] uses a very
similar hierarchical structure of layers in which feature
complexity and invariance are successively increased
by linear and nonlinear pooling – its lower level fea-
ture detectors, however, are trained in an unsupervised
fashion on a large database of natural images, yield-
ing a large set of detectors that are optimally tuned
to natural image statistics. Again, the performance of
this model in recognition tasks has been shown to be
very good – in addition, comparisons with physiolog-
ical and psychophysical experiments have shown that
this framework is also capable of modeling human re-
sults from these experiments.
Recent research has mainly focused on two top-
ics: the automatic extraction of optimal visual features
for efﬁcient recognition and categorization, and the
extension of the frameworks for providing invariance
against changes in viewing conditions (such as rotations
in depth, scaling, translation, illumination, and occlu-
sion, for example, DiCarlo et al. [78.52], Rolls [78.53]
for discussions of invariance in neuromorphic architec-
tures). In a recent paper [78.54], these two issues have
been addressed in a face recognition task conducted
on a difﬁcult database of faces taken in uncontrolled
environments. The selection of optimal features was
done by evaluating a large set of potential visual fea-
ture combinations using GPU-accelerated algorithms.
The issue of invariance was addressed by using a hier-
archical, multilayer model in which each layer includes
linear and nonlinear pooling operations that encode the
input image. The combined system was benchmarked
against other standard feature-extraction methods and
a ﬂat, nonhierarchical one-layer model. Both proper-
ties resulted in increased recognition performance on
the database outperforming other benchmarked state-
of-the-art methods. In addition, the system also showed
increased robustness against viewing variations, which
included pose, position, scale, and background clutter.
In summary, neuromorphic architectures have now
reached a stage of maturity that can put them even
ahead of sophisticated, state-of-the-art computer vision
frameworks. The ability to learn and adapt the feature
set to viewing conditions and the increased robustness
to viewing conditions makes such architectures good
candidates for building the visual learning and recog-
nition system for a perceptual robot.
78.1.4 Object Learning and Recognition
for Perceptual Robotics
In general, it can be said that the success of perceptu-
ally inspired recognition systems can be seen as a strong
indicator for the feasibility of a data-driven, exemplar-
based approach to recognition. There are three issues,
however, which so far have not been addressed in any of
these vision systems and which will be important both
for achieving human performance in generic recogni-
tion tasks in a perceptual robotics application – as well
as for a full understanding of the processes in human
object recognition.
First of all, all of the above-mentioned systems are
feedforward – virtually no feedback, recurrent process-
ing is implemented in their architecture, which makes
them in a sense very similar to the simpler frog- or bee-
like neural systems discussed in Chap. 77. Although
there is evidence that humans solve some recogni-
tion tasks using very little feedback (see, e.g., Thorpe
et al. [78.51]; DiCarlo et al. [78.52]), it nevertheless is
a crucial component of visual processing driving, for
example, attentional focus, context awareness, as well
as memory and reasoning processes – basically every-
thing that makes up visual intelligence. Some visual
attention models that are relevant for robotics systems
are reviewed in Chap. 77.
Secondly, a severe limitation of most of today’s ar-
tiﬁcial recognition systems is that they solely focus on
the static domain of object recognition. Visual input on
the retina, however, consists of dynamic changes due to
object- and self-motion, nonrigid deformations of ob-
jects, articulated object motion as well as scene changes
such as variations in lighting, occluding, and re- and
disappearing objects – where at any given point in time
several of these changes can be interacting. Several
psychophysical experiments, indeed suggest an impor-
tant role for dynamic information, both in learning and
recognition of objects [78.55–58]. These results ask
for an extension of current object recognition frame-
works with a temporal component in order to arrive
at truly spatiotemporal object representations. Com-
bining methods from computer vision, psychophysics,
and machine learning, Wallraven and Bülthoff [78.59,
60], have developed a framework that fulﬁlls this re-
quirement and learns spatiotemporal, exemplar-based
object representations from image sequences. More
speciﬁcally, spatiotemporal characteristics of the visual
input are integrated into a connected view-graph rep-
resentation based on tracked local features. In order
to provide robust classiﬁcation performance, machine
learning techniques are used to design efﬁcient meth-
ods for combining support vector classiﬁcation schemes
with these local feature representations [78.61]. In sev-

Perceptual Robotics
78.2 Perceptual Mechanisms of Action Representation
2103
Part G | 78.2
eral studies it was shown that the framework achieved
excellent recognition results on both highly controlled
databases as well as on real-world data. The integration
of spatiotemporal information provides characteristic
information about dynamic visual input via the connec-
tion of views and the two-dimensional image motion of
discriminative features. In addition to delivering good
recognition performance, the framework was also able
to model results from psychophysical experiments on
face and object recognition. A similar model using
a neuromorphic architecture integrating the temporal
dimension was proposed by Kietzmann et al. [78.62].
A third issue that – in our view – will be essen-
tial for designing and implementing efﬁcient perceptual
robots consists of the multisensory nature of our per-
ceptual system (see also the discussion of embodied
robots in Chap. 13). As an example, there is a close
coupling between the human visual and haptic system –
touch can provide a wealth of complementary infor-
mation about an object when it is manipulated, such
as its texture, its shape, its position in space relative
to our body, etc. In a series of psychophysical exper-
iments [78.63], participants had to learn views of four
simple, 3-D objects made of stacked toy-bricks either in
the haptic modality (when they were blind-folded) or in
the visual modality (without being able to touch them).
Subsequently, they were tested both within the same
modality as well as across modalities. Recognition re-
sults showed that cross-modal recognition is possible
well above chance. Not surprisingly, recognition of
rotated objects in the within-modality condition was
severely affected by rotation in both modalities. This
shows that not only visual recognition is highly view-
dependent but also that haptic recognition performance
is directly affected by different viewing parameters. The
results from this experiment thus support the view that
haptic recognition is also mediated by exemplar-based
processes.
Taken together with the keyframe framework out-
lined above, this cross-modal transfer might be an
important reason for the excellent visual performance
of human object recognition – after all, it is known
that infants learn extensively by actively grasping and
touching objects, which thus could provide a database
of object representations for visual recognition [78.64].
Using this basic perceptual principle as a motiva-
tion [78.60] have applied an extension of the keyframe
framework in an online robotics scenario for efﬁcient
learning and recognition of multisensory object rep-
resentations. More speciﬁcally, a framework was de-
veloped to integrate both proprioceptive information
originating from haptic sensors in the robot’s hands
and visual information coming from the robot’s cam-
eras. For this, the robot would perform an exploratory
movement with an object in its hand (such as turning it
and looking at it from all angles) and from the result-
ing image sequence learn spatiotemporal, view-based
representations using the keyframe framework. Each
view of this representation, however, is also linked to
the current proprioceptive state (i. e., the joint angles
of the hand at that point in time) and therefore pro-
vides an anchor into a hand-centered, three-dimensional
space. In this way, a representation is generated that
links perception and action. The proprioceptive infor-
mation can then be used as an additional constraint for
both learning of objects and recognition of objects and
was shown to provide increased robustness compared
to visual matching alone. The framework was also used
as the basis for recent work in which a humanoid robot
(the iCub) performed active in-hand object recognition,
searching for the optimal view that allowed it to disam-
biguate the object currently held from other, previously
seen objects [78.47]. Again, linking the exploratory ac-
tions (turning the hand) with the visual data resulted
in a much faster and more reliable object recognition
performance. Sample data comparing unplanned and
planned recognition of difﬁcult objects is shown in
Fig. 78.2 (
VIDEO 569 ).
Such approaches pave the way for a view of recog-
nition as an active, multisensory process in which rich,
extensible object representations are formed and im-
proved over the life-time of the robot.
78.2 Perceptual Mechanisms of Action Representation
The recognition of complex movements and actions is
fundamental for many applications in robotics, such
as imitation learning by observation. Interactive robots
need to analyze their users’ movements in order to re-
spond in a natural way to their social and emotional
behavior (Chap. 72). The following section reviews
what is known about movement and action recognition
in the brain and tries to highlight a few aspects that have
or might be successfully transferred to biologically in-
spired applications in robotics and computer vision.
78.2.1 Recognition of Complex Movements
and Actions in Primate Cortex
The recognition of complex movements and actions is
a fundamental problem for higher animals and specif-

Part G | 78.2
2104
Part G
Robots and Humans
ically for primates. While simple movement patterns
are sufﬁcient for eliciting stereotypical prey catch-
ing behavior in simple vertebrates ([78.65]; see also
Chap. 77), higher animals exploit more complex move-
ment patters, e.g., for the recognition of conspeciﬁcs
or predators, or for communication by facial move-
ments, gestures, or body expressions. Human percep-
tion of body motion patterns is very efﬁcient, even for
extremely impoverished stimuli. This has been demon-
strated in classical experiments by Johansson [78.66],
who showed that complex dynamic actions can be rec-
ognized even from displays that consist only of a small
number of dots moving like the joints of a human ac-
tor. Subsequent research has demonstrated that humans
can extract highly speciﬁc information from such point-
light displays, e.g., the gender or the identity of people.
To our knowledge, no technical system for motion
recognition has been proposed so far that accomplishes
a comparable level of robustness. While much more
research in neuroscience has been dedicated to object
recognition (Sect. 78.1.2), some studies have tried to
uncover neural [78.67–70], and computational princi-
ples [78.71–73] of visual movement recognition. Some
of these principles have been transferred to the con-
struction of systems in computer vision and robotics.
Neurophysiological and brain-imaging studies indi-
cate that the recognition of facial and body movements
involves the ventral and the dorsal visual pathway. This
implies that likely form and optic ﬂow information are
integrated during the processing of action stimuli in vi-
sual cortex. The ventral pathway, which is speciﬁcally
responsible for the processing of form information has
been discussed already in Sect. 78.1.2. Like the ventral
stream, also the dorsal pathway is hierarchically struc-
tured, and the size of the receptive ﬁelds of the neurons
increases along the hierarchy. Some cortical areas that
are part of the dorsal pathway are listed in Fig. 78.3.
The medial temporal area (MT) contains neurons that
are selective for simple local motion and coherent mo-
tion. On higher levels of the dorsal stream, e.g., in the
superior temporal sulcus (STS), neurons that are se-
lective for hand and body movements and for facial
expressions have been found in monkeys [78.69], and
similar structures are activated by these stimuli in the
human brain. In addition, areas selective for human
body shapes, such as the extrastriate body part area
(EBA), likely to contribute to the recognition of ac-
tions [78.74], where information of form and motion
features seems to be integrated on higher processing
levels [78.73].
For the recognition of goal-directed actions, such as
reaching or grasping, in addition cortical structures be-
yond the visual cortex, such as the parietal and premotor
cortex, seem to play a critical role. The role of these
structures for action recognition has been analyzed in
particular in the context of the study of the mirror neu-
ron system [78.75]. Mirror neurons are sensorimotor
neurons that combine visual tuning during action ob-
servation as well as selective motor tuning. Areas in
parietal cortex, such as the anterior might be speciﬁ-
cally relevant for the recognition of action-related ob-
jects and their relationship to moving effectors [78.36].
Research about the mirror neuron system has inﬂuenced
the construction of a whole generation of biologically
inspired robots (Chap. 77). The guiding hypothesis has
been that the visual recognition and understanding of
actions is accomplished by mapping of observed body
movements onto motor representations that are relevant
for the execution of the same type of action.
78.2.2 Biological Principles with Relevance
for Computer Vision and Robotics
We discuss in the following two major principles that
have been derived from the analysis of action recogni-
tion in biological systems that have been transferred to
technical applications in computer vision and robotics.
A ﬁrst principle that seems to be implemented in
movement recognition in primate cortex is a hierar-
chical architecture of feature detectors, which accom-
plishes action recognition by the detection of temporal
sequences of relevant motion and form features. Such
detection does not necessarily require the reconstruc-
tion of the three-dimensional facial or body shape,
nor an exact simulation of the dynamics of the under-
lying movements. Instead it can be accomplished by
much simpler computational mechanisms. Like object
recognition, the recognition of complex motion pat-
terns is strongly orientation- and view-dependent. This
property has been observed at the level of individual
neurons in the STS, and for the activation of biologi-
cal motion-selective areas in human cortex [78.69] as
well as for action-selective neurons in higher areas
such as the premotor cortex [78.76]. View- and orien-
tation dependence seem compatible with an encoding
of visually perceived movements in terms of poten-
tially learned example views, or keyframes (snap shots),
and of instantaneous optic ﬂow patterns that are char-
acteristic for actions [78.67, 73]. While there might be
some innate preferences for speciﬁc features [78.77],
psychophysical and fMRI (functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging) experiments suggest an important role
of learning in visual movement recognition [78.78–80].
For example, subjects can learn easily to recognize indi-
vidually – speciﬁc body and facial movements [78.81,
82]. Learning-based theoretical models, exploiting sim-
ilar principles as neural object recognition models,
account for a variety of experimental data on action

Perceptual Robotics
78.2 Perceptual Mechanisms of Action Representation
2105
Part G | 78.2
Form
pathway
RF size
Local
orientation
detectors
V1
Invariant bar
detectors
V1, V4
Snapshot
neurons
IT, STS, FA
Motion
pattern
neurons
STS, F5, FA
Running
Others
Walking
t1 t2 t3
Motion
pathway
Local
motion
detectors
V1/V2, MT
Local OF
detectors
MT, MST, KO
OF pattern
neurons
STS, FA
Motion
pattern
neurons
STS, F5, FA
Running
Others
Walking
t1 t2 t3
Fig. 78.3 Example-based neural model for the visual recognition of body movements that integrates the processing of
form and motion features in the ventral and dorsal visual pathways (after Giese and Poggio [78.73])
recognition in biological systems [78.73, 83, 84], also
supporting a central role of learning.
As an example of such a learning-based archi-
texture, Fig. 78.3 illustrates a hierarchical model for
the recognition of complex body movements [78.73].
It consists of two hierarchical streams modeling the
ventral and the dorsal visual pathways, which contain
detectors for action-speciﬁc motion and form features.
The form pathway of this model is similar to the
object recognition models described in Sect. 78.1.2.
The motion pathway of the model contains detectors
for action-speciﬁc optic ﬂow features with different
complexity. Like for the described object recognition
models, position, and scale invariance is accomplished
by appropriate nonlinear pooling of the responses of de-
tectors with different spatial and scale selectivity along
the hierarchy. In addition, the model contains recurrent
neural circuits that make the responses of the recogni-
tion neurons selective for temporal order. In this way the
model responds only to actions that are executed with
the correct temporal order, and also with approximately
correct speed. The underlying network dynamics can
be interpreted as a neural implementation of a Markov
model, where the present recognized pattern predicts
possible future patterns (Chap. 68). A strong activity in
the network emerges only when the stimulus sequence
matches these predictions.
Similar hierarchical neural architectures inspired by
the visual cortex have been used in the context of
mirror-neuron robot systems [78.85, 86]. In addition,
recent work in computer vision shows that such bi-
ologically inspired architectures can reach very high
performance levels, comparable to state-of-the-art algo-
rithms in computer vision [78.87–89].
A second principle of movement recognition, which
has been discussed extensively as basis for the recog-
nition of imitable actions, and as explanation of the
function of the mirror neuron system [78.75] is the
idea that action observation is based on an internal sim-
ulation of the observed motor behavior. A variety of
computational models for action recognition by internal
simulation have been proposed in the neuroscience lit-
erature, e.g., exploiting feedforward controllers [78.90],
coupled forward and backward models [78.91], hier-
archical Bayesian predictive models [78.92], or a free
energy minimization framework [78.93]. (A further
more extensive discussion about theoretical models for
the mirror neuron system with relevance for robotics

Part G | 78.2
2106
Part G
Robots and Humans
can be found in Chaps. 68 and 77.) A main difﬁculty
of the recognition of actions by internal simulation of
associated motor behaviors is the accurate estimation
of relevant geometrical quantities from image data, es-
pecially when no special depth sensors or even online
motion capture are available. Many of the underly-
ing motor control models are formulated in joint angle
space, and the robust recognition of joint angles from
monocular videos is known to be a difﬁcult computer
vision problem, which so far is solvable only for highly
restricted classes of movements with strong learned pri-
ors, and at considerable computational cost [78.94, 95].
This raises the question about simpler computational
approaches for the recognition of goal-directed actions,
which explain biological data and might be interesting
for technical applications.
A recently developed model for the visual recogni-
tion of goal-directed hand actions in cortex that follows
these lines [78.96] is illustrated in Fig. 78.4. The under-
lying architecture is an extension of the form pathway
of the model shown in Fig. 78.3, by the addition
of neural circuits that process the spatial and tempo-
ral relationship between the observed effector (in this
case the hand) and the recognized goal object (e.g.,
a grasped object). The model works, exploiting a purely
exemplar-based approach (Sect. 78.1.1), without ex-
plicit reconstruction of the three-dimensional structure
of the object or the effector. The model comprises
three modules: The ﬁrst module (A, in Fig. 78.4) rec-
ognizes shapes of the goal object and of the effector,
Local
orientation
detectors
Shape
fragment
detectors
Hand shape
detectors
Intransitive action neurons
Object shape detectors
Motion pattern
detectors
Relative position map
Relative motion neurons
Transitive action neurons
Affordance neurons
Closing
Approaching
Moving apart
Moving together
Opening
Holding
Grasping
Placing
Holding
t3
t2
t1
View-specific modules
A
B
C
V1,V2
V4, IT
STS
STS, IT
IP,STS
IP,STS
View 0°
View 180°
STS
View-independent
Grasping
Placing
Holding
View-dependent
Grasping
Placing
Holding
STS,IP, PM
Fig.78.4a–c Physiologically inspired model for the recognition of goal-directed hand actions. The shape-recognition (a) rec-
ognizes the shape of goal objects and the shapes of individual hand postures, retaining some course position information. The
module (b) associates the information of hand and object by computing maps that represent the relative positions of hand and
object in image coordinates. From these maps the spatial matching hand and object and their relative motion can be computed.
The highest level module (c) contains model neurons that are selective for different types of goal-directed actions. Up to this
level the model recognizes actions in a view-dependent manner, and only at the highest level (view-independent transitive actions
neurons) the model accomplishes view independence by pooling the outputs from view-speciﬁc modules (courtesy of Fleischer
et al. [78.96])
implementing a shape recognition hierarchy similar to
standard object recognition models as the ones de-
scribed in Sect. 78.1.3. The analysis of the temporal
deformation of the hand is based on the recognition
of sequences of key shapes, like in the form path-
way of the model in Fig. 78.3. Opposed to standard
object recognition models, however, the highest level
of this shape recognition hierarchy is not completely
position-invariant. Rather, it retains coarse position se-
lectivity by implementing multiple replica of the same
shape detectors that are selective for different image po-
sitions. This makes it possible to further analyze the
spatiotemporal relationship of the recognized goal ob-
jects and effector. This analysis is realized in the second
module (B) whose core is formed by two-dimensional
relative position maps. These are neural activity maps
that represent the effector position as activity peak in
a two-dimensional coordinate system that is centered
on the object position in the image. These maps are
computed by a gain ﬁelds [78.97] that multiply the
output activities of shape selective neurons with selec-
tivity for object and effector. The activity distribution
in these neural map is analyzed by affordance neurons
that are activated only when hand and object shape
match and are in a spatial relationship that is suit-
able for a successful grip. By appropriate pooling of
the responses of motion energy detectors that receive
input from the relative position map relative motion
neurons can be constructed, whose activity character-
izes the relative motion between the effector and object

Perceptual Robotics
78.3 Perceptual Validation of Robotics
2107
Part G | 78.3
(e.g., the hand approaching the object). The outputs
of affordance and the relative motion neurons are in-
tegrated in the third module (C), which contains only
neurons that are selective for visually observed goal-
directed actions. This integration of information is ﬁrst
accomplished in a purely view-speciﬁc manner. View
independence is not established until the very last hier-
archy level of the model that contains view-independent
action-selective neurons. The idea of establishing view-
dependence only very late in the cortical hierarchy
seems counter-intuitive, and is at odds with several es-
tablished computational models for action recognition.
However, this dominance of exemplar-based represen-
tations until very high levels of the cortical processing
hierarchy has been observed in electrophysiological
experiments studying mirror neurons in premotor cor-
tex [78.76]. In this structure, which is traditionally
associated with motor planning, the majority of mir-
ror neurons is view-dependent and only a minority is
view-independent. The discussed model can recognize
hand actions from gray level videos. It could be aug-
mented by integration of disparity or depth features,
and by appropriate attentional control mechanisms that
would make it more robust to cluttered scenes with
multiple relevant objects. Whether similar architectures
have advantages for the robust visual recognition of
goal-directed actions in technical systems remains to
be shown. Very recent work shows that such hierarchi-
cal deep architectures, which consist of learned feature
detectors, outperform classical technical solutions on
actual computer vision benchmarks for action detec-
tion [78.98].
78.3 Perceptual Validation of Robotics
Successful human–robot interaction is perhaps easiest
when the robot offers interaction channels that are com-
patible to that of human–human interaction [78.99].
The most important interaction channels in this case
are verbal and nonverbal communication with the face.
Importantly, in human–human interaction, nonverbal
communication using facial expressions, for example,
constitutes up to 30% of the communicative content.
Facial expressions are not only used to convey some-
one’s mood and emotion [78.100], but are also used in
communicative contexts to signal understanding (a nod
of the head), to modify what is being said (a raise
of the eye-brows), and to control the conversational
ﬂow (a look of confusion may signal to the speaker
to repeat what has been said). Hence, many humanoids
have incorporated more or less sophisticated heads ca-
pable of producing human-like facial expressions and
movements. Traditionally, this has been achieved us-
ing mechatronic implementations in which actuators
drive facial features directly (e.g., as in the MDS robot
by Lee and Breazeal [78.101]), or – in more com-
plex implementations of android robots – mimic human
muscle movements that are then used to deform artiﬁ-
cial skin [78.102–104]. Other systems have used LEDs
for displaying simple, changeable facial features (e.g.,
as in the iCub platform [78.105].
78.3.1 Realistic Faces for Robots
With such a great variety of robot systems also comes
the need for an investigation of their perceptual eval-
uation and their interaction capabilities ([78.106] for
such a study in the context of facial animations in
computer graphics). Indeed, one particular problem of
android, human-like systems is that they easily could
suffer from the uncanny valley effect as the actuators
and/or the control framework cannot easily reproduce
the smoothness of human facial expressions. A study
of morphed images between a nonhuman robot face
and a highly realistic android robot head, for exam-
ple, clearly showed evidence of the uncanny valley
effect [78.107] – a similar study for moving robot faces
yielded more mixed results, but still showed that the
most realistic robotic faces were clearly perceived as
different from that of a human talking [78.108]. One so-
lution for this is to change the robot’s appearance such
that it stays away from close human likeness; however,
conveying the full breadth of human communicative
signals with different facial features, or a different facial
topology may also be problematic. A different solution
consists of avoiding a mechanical solution and instead
resorting to facial animation from computer graphics.
One example of such a system was presented in De-
launay et al. [78.109] in which facial animations are
projected onto a rigid face mask. Since facial anima-
tion techniques are in many ways much more advanced,
such a system allows for a more realistic and ﬂexi-
ble interaction in human–robot interaction. Subtle cues
such as eye-gaze, wrinkles, and other nonrigid facial
deformations could be displayed via projection of an
advanced facial animation engine. Initial perceptual ex-
periments with such systems [78.109, 110] have yielded
promising results. However, more studies need to be
done to assess the properties of human–robot inter-
actions in these and other implementations of facial
displays.

Part G | 78.4
2108
Part G
Robots and Humans
Fig. 78.5 Stimuli used in experiment
investigating the fMRI correlates of
the observation of human and robot
movements. The neural responses to
the movements by a real human are
compared with the ones induced by
a human-looking robot (Android),
and by a nonhumanlike robot (Robot)
(after Saygin et al. [78.111])
78.3.2 Perceptual and Neural Processing
of Body Movements of Robots
Research in humanoid robotics ﬁnally aims at opti-
mizing the perceived naturalness or human-likeness of
generated robot movements, since this in the long run
will increase the acceptance of humanoid robots in
social contexts. However, the present humanoid plat-
forms have typically substantial constraints that still
prevent the realization of complex really human-like
movements. This is even more the case for the real-
ization of behaviors on bipedal robots, due to the dif-
ﬁcult problem to maintain dynamic balance (Chap. 67).
Therefore, most body movements realized by present
humanoid robots still differ in many aspects from hu-
man movements. This makes the quantiﬁcation of the
degree of realism of such movements presently a less
pressing topic than the ﬁeld of computer graphics,
where psychophysical studies for the validation of the
realism and quality of computer animation methods
are meanwhile a standard [78.112–114]. However, re-
search in psychophysics and neuroscience has started
to investigate the differences between the perceptual
processing of human and robot movements, and inter-
esting results have been obtained that localize corti-
cal subsystems that might be essential to distinguish
human and nonhuman robot movements. A typical
question in these studies has been which critical prop-
erties determine whether visual stimuli produce motor
resonance, or an activation of action-selective neural
structures. The results of such studies have not been
completely consistent, since some studies found de-
creased activation of action-selective networks for robot
movements [78.115–118] while others found no such
differences [78.119]. Primarily visual processing areas
responded sometimes more for robot movements than
for normal human [78.111, 117].
The problem of such studies is that many factors
might inﬂuence the perception and neural signals in
action-selective areas, such as form, kinematics, and
optic ﬂow patterns. Typically, it is very difﬁcult to
control these parameters separately for real robots. In
addition, the learning experience of observers with the
speciﬁc robot might play an important role [78.120].
A recent study by Saygin et al. [78.111] tried to sep-
arate at least the inﬂuences of the robot appearance
(shape) and the motion kinematics by comparing the
fMRI signals (using an adaptation paradigm) driven by
three different stimuli (Fig. 78.5): a real person (that
served as model for the building of the robot), the
human-like looking robot (android), and the robot with-
out skin and surface parts that made it look human-like
(resulting in very similar motion as the full robot). In
visual areas (e.g., the extrastriate body area) the hu-
man and the human-like robot stimulus result in very
similar activity. This is not true for the parietal cor-
tex, which is part of the mirror neuron network. This
region shows large differences between the human-
like robot and the other two conditions, potentially
reﬂecting an increase of neural processing resources
that are required to cope with the contradiction be-
tween the form and the kinematic information that is
presented by this stimulus. Opposed to this, the not
human-like robot makes it expected that the motion
is also not human-like, potentially causing no such
conﬂict. Future studies of similar type, controlling for
the different information channels of action process-
ing (Sect. 78.2.2) as well as for the predictibility of
such stimuli dependent on previous learning, poten-
tially combined with quantitative neural modeling, will
be required to really understand how different factors
are integrated in the neural processing of robot move-
ments, and how this causes different levels of perceived
human-likeness.
78.4 Conclusion and Further Reading
In this chapter, we have presented several principles
derived from high-level cognitive processing in vi-
sion in the human brain that have been fruitful for
the development of systems in robotics and computer
vision. The recognition of shapes and complex move-
ments and actions is an important problem for many

Perceptual Robotics
References
2109
Part G | 78
applications in robotics. We have discussed a vari-
ety of results from neuroscience that indicate that
these brain functions are likely realized by example-
based representations. We have discussed neural im-
plementations of such representations which partially
have been tested successfully in the context of tech-
nical applications, and which are strongly inspired by
the real cortical neural architecture. In addition, we
have presented some new computational principles that
seem to emerge from recent experimental results on
the representation of goal-directed actions. Finally, we
have discussed work that tries to use psychophysi-
cal and neuroscience methods for the validation of
the appearance and the movements of human-like
robots, and for the investigation of underlying neural
mechanisms.
Example-based mechanisms for object and motion
recognition account for the invariant recognition of
complex patterns. However, they do not automatically
extract the metric information about the object geom-
etry, position and the spatial parameters of complex
trajectories in world coordinates. For some tasks in
robotics, like grasping, manipulation, or obstacle avoid-
ance, such information is required (Chaps. 36–38, 47).
For such tasks, example-based recognition must be
fused with methods for the extraction of the relevant
metric information. In robotics such information can
be extracted by stereo vision or using special sensors,
like laser range ﬁnders. In the brain the fusion between
such spatial information and information about objects
occurs likely in parietal areas, like the anterior interpari-
etal area (AIP) [78.121]. However, it is unclear whether
the information about objects is only represented in
terms of 2-D example views. Instead, it seems likely
that also some form of 3-D information is encoded, po-
tentially in an example-based manner. Also haptic and
visual information about object shape might be merged
in higher brain areas, e.g., in parietal and fusiform ar-
eas [78.122]. A further discussion about biologically
inspired models for the extraction of action-relevant ge-
ometrical information in the context of grasping and
manipulation is given in Chaps. 32 and 77.
The perceptual validation of the human-likeness
and affective impact of humanoid robots likely will
become increasingly important along with the further
development of the technology that will increase the
level of similarity between humanoid robots and hu-
mans. Likewise, it seems increasingly important to use
quantitative methods from perception science to inves-
tigate the quality of the emotional and social interaction
between robots and humans. We expect this to be a ﬁeld
where psychology can really contribute quantitative
methods to engineering, reaching a level that goes be-
yond a qualitative and subjective comparison of demos
which partially is still the standard in the ﬁeld of hu-
manoid robotics.
Video-References
VIDEO 569
Active in-hand object recognition
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/78/videodetails/569
References
78.1
D. Marr: Vision (Freeman, San Francisco 1982)
78.2
J.A.S.
Kelso:
Dynamic
Patterns:
The
Self-
Organization
of
Brain
and
Behaviour
(MIT,
Cambridge 1995)
78.3
G. Schöner, M. Dose, C. Engels: Dynamics of be-
havior: Theory and applications for autonomous
robot architectures, Robotics Auton. Syst. 16, 213–
245 (1997)
78.4
J. Tani, M. Ito: Self-organization of behavioral
primitives as multiple attractor dynamics: A robot
experiment, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. A 33(4),
481–488 (2003)
78.5
W.H. Warren: The dynamics of perception and ac-
tion, Psychol. Rev. 113, 358–389 (2006)
78.6
M. Mori: The uncanny valley, Energy 7(4), 33–35
(1970), in Japanese
78.7
D.W. Cunningham, C. Wallraven: Experimental
Design: From User Studies to Psychophysics (CRC,
Boca Raton 2011)
78.8
A. Field, G. Hole: How to Design and Report Ex-
periments (Sage, London 2011)
78.9
D. Marr, H. Nishihara: Representation and recog-
nition of the spatial organization of three-
dimensional shapes, Proc. R. Soc. B 200, 269–294
(1978)
78.10
I.
Biederman:
Recognition-by-components:
A
theory
of
human
image
understanding,
Psychol. Rev. 94, 115–147 (1987)
78.11
D. Lowe: Perceptual Organization and Visual
Recognition (Kluwer, Boston 1985)
78.12
S. Ullman: High-Level Vision. Object Recognition
and Visual Cognition (MIT, Cambridge 1996)
78.13
M.A. Kurbat: Structural description theories: Is
RBC/JIM a general-purpose theory of human
entry-level object recognition?, Perception 23,
1339–1368 (1994)
78.14
S. Edelman: Representation and Recognition in
Vision (MIT, Cambridge 1999)

Part G | 78
2110
Part G
Robots and Humans
78.15
M. Graf, W. Schneider: Structural descriptions in
HIT – A problematic commitment, Behav. Brain
Sci. 24, 483–484 (2001)
78.16
H.H. Bülthoff, S. Edelman: Psychophysical support
for a two-dimensional view interpolation theory
of object recognition, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
89, 60–64 (1992)
78.17
M.J. Tarr, S. Pinker: Mental orientation and
orientation-dependence in shape recognition,
Cogn. Psychol. 21, 233–282 (1989)
78.18
W.G. Hayward, M.J. Tarr: Testing conditions for
viewpoint invariance in object recognition, J. Exp.
Psychol. 23, 1511–1521 (1997)
78.19
S.E. Palmer, E. Rosch, P. Chase: Canonical perspec-
tive and the perception of objects. In: Attention
and Performance IX, ed. by J. Long, A. Baddeley
(Erlbaum, Hillsdale 1981) pp. 135–151
78.20
H. Hill, P.G. Schyns, S. Akamatsu: Information and
viewpoint dependence in face recognition, Cog-
nition 62, 201–222 (1997)
78.21
C. Wallraven, A. Schwaninger, S. Schuhmacher,
H.H. Bülthoff: View-based recognition of faces in
man and machine: Re-visiting inter-extra-ortho,
Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 2525, 651–660 (2002)
78.22
M.J. Tarr: Rotating objects to recognize them:
A case study on the role of viewpoint dependency
in the recognition of three-dimensional objects,
Psychon. Bull. Rev. 2, 55–82 (1995)
78.23
R. Lawson, G.W. Humphreys: View-specific effects
of depth rotation and foreshortening on the ini-
tial recognition and priming of familiar objects,
Percep. Psychophys. 60, 1052–1066 (1998)
78.24
E. Ashbridge, D.I. Perrett: Generalizing across ob-
ject orientation and size. In: Perceptual Con-
stancy. Why Things Look as They Do, ed. by
V. Walsh, J. Kulikowski (Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge 1998) pp. 192–209
78.25
M. Dill, S. Edelman: Imperfect invariance to ob-
ject translation in the discrimination of complex
shapes, Perception 30, 707–724 (2001)
78.26
K.R. Cave, S. Pinker, L. Giorgi, C.E. Thomas,
L.M. Heller, J.M. Wolfe, H. Lin: The representation
of location in visual images, Cogn. Psychol. 26, 1–
32 (1994)
78.27
S. Ullman: Aligning pictorial descriptions: An ap-
proach to object recognition, Cognition 32, 193–
254 (1989)
78.28
S. Ullman, R. Basri: Recognition by linear combi-
nations of models, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell. 13, 992–1006 (1991)
78.29
T. Poggio, S. Edelman: A network that learns to
recognize three-dimensional objects, Nature 343,
263–266 (1990)
78.30
D. Perrett, W.M. Oram: Visual recognition based
on temporal cortex cells: Viewer-centred process-
ing of pattern configurations, Z. Naturforsch. C 53,
518–541 (1998)
78.31
M. Riesenhuber, T. Poggio: Hierarchical models
of object recognition in cortex, Nat. Neurosci. 2,
1019–1025 (1999)
78.32
E.T. Rolls, T. Milward: A model of invariant ob-
ject recognition in the visual system: Learning
rules, activation functions, lateral inhibition, and
information-based performance measures, Neu-
ral Comput. 2(11), 2547–2572 (2000)
78.33
G. Wallis, H.H. Bülthoff: Learning to recognize ob-
jects, Trends Cogn. Sci. 3, 22–31 (1999)
78.34
D. Perrett, W.M. Oram, E. Ashbridge: Evidence
accumulation in cell populations responsive to
faces: An account of generalization of recogni-
tion without mental transformations, Cognition
67, 111–145 (1998)
78.35
D.H. Foster, S.J. Gilson: Recognizing novel three-
dimensional objects by summing signals from
parts and views, Proc. R. Soc. B 269, 1939–1947
(2002)
78.36
H. Sakata: The role of the parietal cortex in grasp-
ing, Adv. Neurol. 93, 121–139 (2003)
78.37
D.H. Hubel, T.N. Wiesel: Receptive fields, binocu-
lar interaction and functional architecture in the
cat’s visual cortex, J. Physiol. (Lond.) 160, 106–154
(1962)
78.38
G. Wang, M. Tanifuji, K. Tanaka: Functional archi-
tecture in monkey inferotemporal cortex revealed
by in vivo optical imaging, Neurosci. Res. 32, 33–
46 (1998)
78.39
K. Tanaka: Representation of visual feature ob-
jects in the inferotemporal cortex, Neural Netw.
9(8), 1459–1475 (1996)
78.40
K. Grill-Spector, R. Malach: The human visual cor-
tex, Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 27, 649–677 (2004)
78.41
N.K. Logothetis, J. Pauls, H.H. Bülthoff, T. Poggio:
View-dependent object recognition by monkeys,
Curr. Biol. 4, 401–414 (1994)
78.42
L.
Roberts:
Machine
perception
of
three-
dimensional
solids.
In:
Optical
and
Electro-Optical
Information
Processing,
ed.
by J.T. Tippet (MIT, Cambridge 1965) pp. 159–197
78.43
M. Swain, D. Ballard: Color indexing, Int. J. Com-
put. Vis. 7, 11–32 (1991)
78.44
C. Schmid, R. Mohr: Local greyvalue invariants for
image retrieval, IEEE Trans. Pattern Mach. Intell.
19, 530–535 (1997)
78.45
D. Lowe: Distinctive image features from scale
invariant keypoints, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 60(2), 90–
110 (2004)
78.46
M.
Kirby,
L.
Sirovich:
Applications
of
the
Karhunen-Loeve
procedure
for
the
charac-
terization of human faces, IEEE Trans. Pattern
Mach. Intell. 12, 103–108 (1990)
78.47
B. Browatzki, V. Tikhanoff, G. Metta, H.H. Bülthoff,
C. Wallraven: Active in-hand object recognition
on a humanoid robot, IEEE Trans. Robotics 30(5),
1260–1269 (2014)
78.48
A. Delorme, S. Thorpe: SpikeNET: An event-driven
simulation package for modeling large networks
of spiking neurons, Netw. Comput. Neural Syst. 14,
613–627 (2003)
78.49
Y. LeCun, F. Huang, L. Bottou: Learning methods
for generic object recognition with invariance to
pose and lighting, Proc. 2004 IEEE Comput. Soc.
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recogn. (2004)
78.50
T. Serre, L. Wolf, T. Poggio: Object recognition with
features inspired by visual cortex, Proc. 2005 IEEE

Perceptual Robotics
References
2111
Part G | 78
Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recogn.
(2005)
78.51
S. Thorpe, D. Fize, C. Marlot: Speed of process-
ing in the human visual system, Nature 381(6582),
520–522 (1996)
78.52
J.J. DiCarlo, D. Zoccolan, N.C. Rust: How does
the brain solve visual object recognition?, Neu-
ron 73(3), 415–434 (2012)
78.53
E.T. Rolls: Invariant visual object and face recog-
nition: Neural and computational bases, and
a model, VisNet. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 6(35),
(2012)
78.54
N.
Pinto,
D.
Cox:
High-throughput-derived
biologically-inspired features for unconstrained
face
recognition,
Image
Vis.
Comput.
30(3),
159–168 (2012)
78.55
G. Wallis, H.H. Bülthoff: Effects of temporal asso-
ciation on recognition memory, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 98, 4800–4804 (2001)
78.56
J.V. Stone:
Object
recognition
using
spatio-
temporal signatures, Vis. Res. 38(7), 947–951
(1998)
78.57
J.V. Stone: Object recognition: View-specificity
and motion-specificity, Vis. Res. 39(24), 4032–
4044 (1999)
78.58
Q.C. Voung, M.J. Tarr: Rotation direction af-
fects object recognition, Vis. Res. 44(14), 1717–1730
(2004)
78.59
C. Wallraven, H.H. Bülthoff: Automatic acquisition
of exemplar-based representations for recogni-
tion from image sequences, CVPR 2001 – Work-
shop Models vs. Ex. (2001)
78.60
C. Wallraven, H.H. Bülthoff: Object recognition
in humans and machines. In: Object Recogni-
tion, Attention and Action, ed. by N. Osaka,
I. Rentschler, I. Biederman (Springer, Tokyo 2007)
pp. 89–104
78.61
C. Wallraven, B. Caputo, A.B.A. Graf: Recognition
with local features: The kernel recipe, Proc. Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis., Vol. 2 (2003) pp. 257–264
78.62
T.C. Kietzmann, S. Lange, M. Riedmiller: Compu-
tational object recognition: A biologically moti-
vated approach, Biol. Cybern. 100, 59–79 (2009)
78.63
F.N. Newell, M.O. Ernst, B.S. Tjan, H.H. Bülthoff:
Viewpoint dependence in visual and haptic ob-
ject recognition, Psychol. Sci. 12, 37–42 (2001)
78.64
H. Lee, C. Wallraven: Exploiting object constancy:
Effects of active exploration and shape morph-
ing on similarity judgments of novel objects, Exp.
Brain Res. 225(2), 277–289 (2012)
78.65
J.-P. Ewert: Neural mechanisms of prey-catching
and avoidance behavior in the toad Bufo bufo L,
Brain Behav. Evol. 3, 36–56 (1970)
78.66
G. Johansson: Visual perception of biological mo-
tion and a model for its analysis, Percept. Psy-
chophys. 14, 201–211 (1973)
78.67
K. Verfaillie: Perceiving human locomotion: Prim-
ing effects in direction discrimination, Brain
Cogn. 44, 192–213 (2000)
78.68
A.J. O’Toole, D.A. Roark, H.H. Abdi: Recognizing
moving faces: A psychological and neural synthe-
sis, Trends Cogn. Sci. 6, 261–266 (2002)
78.69
D. Perrett, A. Puce: Electrophysiology and brain
imaging of biological motion, Philos. Trans. R.
Soc. B 358, 435–445 (2003)
78.70
R. Blake, M. Shiffrar: Perception of human mo-
tion, Annu. Rev. Psychol. 58, 47–73 (2007)
78.71
D.D. Hoffman, B.E. Flinchbaugh: The interpreta-
tion of biological motion, Biol. Cybern. 42, 195–
204 (1982)
78.72
J.A. Webb, J.K. Aggarwal: Structure from motion of
rigid and jointed objects, Artif. Intell. 19, 107–130
(1982)
78.73
M.A. Giese, T.T. Poggio: Neural mechanisms for
the recognition of biological movements, Nat.
Rev. Neurosci. 4, 179–192 (2003)
78.74
J. Jastorff, G.A. Orban: Human functional mag-
netic resonance imaging reveals separation and
integration of shape and motion cues in bi-
ological motion processing, J. Neurosci. 29(22),
7315–7329 (2009)
78.75
G. Rizzolatti, L. Craighero: The mirror-neuron sys-
tem, Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 27, 169–192 (2004)
78.76
V. Caggiano, L. Fogassi, G. Rizzolatti, J.K. Pomper,
P. Thier, M.A. Giese, A. Casile: View-based en-
coding of actions in mirror neurons of area f5 in
macaque premotor cortex, Curr. Biol. 21(2), 144–
148 (2011)
78.77
F. Simion, E. Di Giorgio, I. Leo, L. Bardi: The pro-
cessing of social stimuli in early infancy: From
faces to biological motion perception, Prog. Brain
Res. 189, 173–193 (2011)
78.78
E.D. Grossman, R. Blake, C.Y. Kim: Learning to see
biological motion: Brain activity parallels behav-
ior, J. Cogn. Neurosci. 16, 1669–1679 (2004)
78.79
J. Jastorff, Z. Kourtzi, M.A. Giese: Learning to dis-
criminate complex movements: Biological versus
artificial trajectories, J. Vis. 6, 791–804 (2006)
78.80
J. Jastorff, Z. Kourtzi, M.A. Giese: Visual learn-
ing shapes the processing of complex movement
stimuli in the human brain, J. Neurosci. 29(44),
14026–14038 (2009)
78.81
H. Hill, F.E. Pollick: Exaggerating temporal differ-
ences enhances recognition of individuals from
point light displays, Psychol. Sci. 11, 223–228
(2000)
78.82
B. Knappmeyer, I.M. Thornton, H.H. Bülthoff: The
use of facial motion and facial form during the
processing of identity, Vis. Res. 43, 1921–1936
(2003)
78.83
J. Lee, W. Wong: A stochastic model of coherent
motion detection, Biol. Cybern. 91, 306–314 (2004)
78.84
J. Lange, M. Lappe: A model of biological motion
perception from configural form cues, J. Neurosci.
26(11), 2894–2906 (2006)
78.85
G. Tessitore, F. Donnarumma, R. Prevete: An
action-tuned neural network architecture for
hand pose estimation, Proc. Int. Conf. Fuzzy Com-
put. Int. Conf. Neural Comput. Valencia (2010)
pp. 358–363
78.86
G. Metta, G. Sandini, L. Natale, L. Craighero,
L. Fadiga: Understanding mirror neurons – A bio-
robotic
approach, Interact.
Stud.
7,
197–232
(2006)

Part G | 78
2112
Part G
Robots and Humans
78.87
H. Jhuang, T. Serre, L. Wolf, T. Poggio: A biologi-
cally inspired system for action recognition, IEEE
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV) (2007) pp. 1–18
78.88
M.J. Escobar, G.S. Masson, T. Vieville, P. Korn-
probst: Action recognition using a bio-inspired
feedforward spiking network, Int. J. Comput. Vis.
82(3), 284–301 (2009)
78.89
H. Jhuang, E. Garrote, J. Mutch, T. Poggio,
A. Steele, T. Serre: Automated home-cage behav-
ioral phenotyping of mice, Nat. Commun. 1(86),
1–9 (2010)
78.90
D.M. Wolpert, K. Doya, M. Kawato: A unifying
computational framework for motor control and
social interaction, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 358,
593–602 (2003)
78.91
Y. Demiris, M. Johnson: Distributed, predictive
perception of actions: A biologically inspired
robotics architecture for imitation and learning,
Connect. Sci. 15(4), 231–243 (2003)
78.92
J.M. Kilner, K.J. Friston, C.D. Frith: The mirror-
neuron system: A Bayesian perspective, Neurore-
port 18, 619–623 (2007)
78.93
K. Friston, J. Mattout, J. Kilner: Action un-
derstanding and active inference, Biol. Cybern.
104(1/2), 137–160 (2011)
78.94
R. Li, T.P. Tian, S. Sclaroff, M.H. Yang: 3D human
motion tracking with a coordinated mixture of
factor analyzers, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 87, 170–190
(2010)
78.95
D.R. Weinland, R. Ronfard, E. Boyer: A survey of
vision-based methods for action representation.
Segmentation and recognition, Comput. Vis. Im-
age Underst. 115(2), 224–241 (2011)
78.96
F. Fleischer, V. Caggiano, P. Thier, M.A. Giese:
Physiologically inspired model for the visual
recognition of transitive hand actions, J. Neurosci.
33, 6563–6580 (2013)
78.97
E. Salinas, L.F. Abbott: Transfer of coded informa-
tion from sensory to motor networks, J. Neurosci.
15, 6461–6474 (1995)
78.98
A. Karpathy, G. Toderici, S. Shetty, T. Leung,
R. Sukthankar, L. Fei-Fei: Large-scale video clas-
sification with convolutional neural networks,
Proc. 2014 IEEE Conf. Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition, New York (2014) pp. 1725–
1732
78.99
C. Breazeal: Designing Sociable Robots (MIT Press,
Cambridge 2002)
78.100
M. Nusseck, D.W. Cunningham, C. Wallraven,
H.H. Bülthoff: The contribution of different facial
regions to the recognition of conversational ex-
pressions, J. Vis. 8(8), 1 (2008)
78.101
J.K. Lee, C. Breazeal: Human social response to-
ward humanoid robot’s head and facial features,
Proc. CHI 2010 (2010) pp. 4237–4242
78.102
D. Hanson: Exploring the aesthetic range for hu-
manoid robots, CogSci-2006 Workshop: Toward
Soc. Mech. Android Sci. (2006)
78.103
H. Ishiguro: Understanding humans by building
androids, Proc. SIGDIAL Conf. (2010)
78.104
P. Jaeckel, N. Campbell, C. Melhuish: Facial be-
haviour mapping - From video footage to a
robot head, Robotics Auton. Syst. 56(12), 1042–
1049 (2008)
78.105
G. Metta, G. Sandini, D. Vernon, L. Natale, F. Nori:
The iCub humanoid robot: An open platform for
research in embodied cognition, Proc. 8th Work-
shop Perform. Metr. Intell. Syst. (2008) pp. 50–56
78.106
C.
Wallraven,
M.
Breidt,
D.W.
Cunningham,
H.H. Bülthoff: Evaluating the perceptual realism
of animated facial expressions, ACM Trans. Appl.
Percept. 4(4), 1–20 (2008)
78.107
K.F. MacDorman: Subjective ratings of robot video
clips for human likeness, familiarity, and eeri-
ness: An exploration of the uncanny valley,
ICCS/CogSci-2006 Symp. Toward Soc. Mech. An-
droid Sci. (2006) pp. 26–29
78.108
C. Ho, K.F. MacDorman, Z.A.D. Pramono: Human
emotion and the uncanny valley: A GLM, MDS, and
isomap analysis of robot video ratings, Proc. HRI
2008 (2008) pp. 169–176
78.109
F. Delaunay, J. de Greeff, T. Belpaeme: Towards
retro-projected robot faces: An alternative to
mechatronic and android faces, Proc. 18th IEEE
Int. Symp. Robot Human Interact. Commun. RO-
MAN (2009) pp. 306–311
78.110
T. Kuratate, M. Riley, B. Pierce, G. Cheng: Gender
identification bias induced with texture images
on a life size retro-projected face screen, Proc.
21st IEEE Int. Symp. Robot Human Interact. Com-
mun. RO-MAN 2012 (2012) pp. 43–48
78.111
A.P. Saygin, T. Chaminade, H. Ishiguro, J. Driver,
C. Frith: The thing that should not be: Predic-
tive coding and the uncanny valley in perceiving
human and humanoid robot actions, Soc. Cogn.
Affect. Neurosci. 7(4), 413–422 (2012)
78.112
P.S.A. Reitsma, N.S. Pollard: Perceptual metrics
for character animation: Sensitivity to errors in
ballistic motion, ACM SIGGRAPH 2003 Papers (SIG-
GRAPH ’03) (ACM, New York 2003) pp. 537–542
78.113
T. Ezzat, G. Geiger, T. Poggio: Trainable videore-
alistic speech animation, Proc. 29th Annu. Conf.
Comput. Gr. Interact. Techn. (SIGGRAPH ’02) (ACM,
New York 2002) pp. 388–398
78.114
J. Wang, B. Bodenheimer: Synthesis and eval-
uation of linear motion transitions, ACM Trans.
Graph. 27(1), Article 1 (2008)
78.115
M. Candidi, C. Urgesi, S. Ionta, S.M. Aglioti: Virtual
lesion of ventral premotor cortex impairs visual
perception of biomechanically possible but not
impossible actions, Soc. Neurosci. 3(3/4), 388–400
(2008)
78.116
T. Chaminade, J. Hodgins, M. Kawato: Anthro-
pomorphism influences perception of computer-
animated characters’ actions, Soc. Cogn. Affect.
Neurosci. 2(3), 206–216 (2007)
78.117
T. Chaminade, M. Zecca, S.J. Blakemore, A. Takan-
ishi, C.D. Frith, S. Micera, P. Dario, G. Rizzolatti,
V. Gallese, M.A. Umiltà: Brain response to a hu-
manoid robot in areas implicated in the percep-
tion of human emotional gestures, PLoS ONE 5(7),
e11577 (2010)
78.118
Y.F. Tai, C. Scherfler, D.J. Brooks, N. Sawamoto,
U. Castiello: The human premotor cortex is ’mir-

Perceptual Robotics
References
2113
Part G | 78
ror’ only for biological actions, Curr. Biol. 14,
117–120 (2004)
78.119
L.M. Oberman, J.P. McCleery, V.S. Ramachan-
dran,
J.A.
Pineda:
EEG
evidence
for
mirror
neuron
activity
during
the
observation
of
human
and
robot
actions:
Toward
an
analysis
of
the
human
qualities
of
inter-
active
robots,
Neurocomput.
70,
2194–2203
(2007)
78.120
C. Press, H. Gillmeister, C. Heyes: Sensorimotor ex-
perience enhances automatic imitation of robotic
action, Proc. Biol. Sci. 274(1625), 2509–2514 (2007)
78.121
C.L.
Colby:
Action-oriented
spatial
reference
frames in cortex, Neuron 20, 15–24 (1998)
78.122
A.R. Kilgour, R. Kitada, P. Servos, T.W. James,
S.J. Lederman: Haptic face identification acti-
vates ventral occipital and temporal areas: An
fMRI study, Brain Cogn. 59, 246–257 (2005)

Multimedia Contents Robotics for
2115
Part G | 79
79. Robotics for Education
David P. Miller, Illah Nourbakhsh
Educational robotics programs have become popu-
lar in most developed countries and are becoming
more and more prevalent in the developing world
as well. Robotics is used to teach problem solv-
ing, programming, design, physics, math and even
music and art to students at all levels of their edu-
cation. This chapter provides an overview of some
of the major robotics programs along with the
robot platforms and the programming environ-
ments commonly used. Like robot systems used
in research, there is a constant development and
upgrade of hardware and software – so this chap-
ter provides a snapshot of the technologies being
used at this time. The chapter concludes with a re-
view of the assessment strategies that can be used
to determine if a particular robotics program is
benefitting students in the intended ways.
79.1
The Role of Robots in Education ........... 2116
79.2 Educational Robot Tournaments ........... 2117
79.2.1
Tournaments for Education ........ 2117
79.2.2
Origins ..................................... 2118
79.2.3
A Taxonomy
of Robot Tournaments ............... 2118
79.2.4 The Entertainment Link.............. 2119
79.2.5 Tournaments for Education ........ 2119
79.3 Education Robot Platforms................... 2120
79.3.1
Ground Robots.......................... 2121
79.3.2
Sea........................................... 2122
79.3.3
Air ........................................... 2122
79.4 Education Robot Controllers
and Programming Environments .......... 2123
79.4.1
Robot Controllers....................... 2123
79.4.2 Educational Robotics
Programming Environments ....... 2126
79.5 Robotic Technologies
for Student Learning............................ 2127
79.5.1
Cross-Disciplinary Integration
of Robotics ............................... 2127
79.5.2 Robotics
for Computational Thinking........ 2127
79.5.3 Early Childhood Robotics............ 2128
79.6 Educational Evaluation
of Robot Programs ............................... 2129
79.6.1
Design-Time Assessment............ 2129
79.6.2 Formative and Summative
Evaluation ................................ 2129
79.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ......... 2131
Video-References......................................... 2131
References................................................... 2131
In recent years, robots have penetrated the educa-
tion market, both as tools to motivate students to
explore science technology engineering and mathemat-
ics (STEM) disciplines and as concrete deployments
as curriculum materials for teaching content; typically
in math, physics, computer science, or engineering.
The newest education robots share the notable feature
of human–robot interaction with the general public.
In contrast to a space exploration robot or a nu-
clear cleanup robot, these newest, interactive robots
do not function solely with the well-trained special-
ist. They interact with individuals and groups with
the goal of inspiring learning amongst students of all
ages.
This chapter provides an overview of the key ingre-
dients that make successful education robots possible.
One very popular outlet for public interaction with ed-
ucational robots is the robot tournament. Section 79.2
provides a survey of the very popular world of robot-
themed tournaments, which have already impacted tens

Part G | 79.1
2116
Part G
Robots and Humans
of thousands of students across diverse geographic and
age group boundaries [79.1–5].
To make educational robots successful, a new level
of technology robustness and standardization is re-
quired, and signiﬁcant progress has been made on this
front in the past decade. Educational robot devices
consist of both hardware (preassembled or as kits or
components) and software (both as source code and
programming environments). Section 79.3 discusses
physical robot platforms that have achieved notable
success, while Sect. 79.4 describes both low-level con-
trollers that interface those platforms to high-level
computation, as well as the top-level programming en-
vironments themselves. The technology in both these
areas is evolving rapidly pushed not only by ed-
ucational needs but also by a burgeoning hobbyist
market.
Finally, an important class of tool in the study and
execution of educational robotic systems is the ability
to formally evaluate the efﬁcacy of a robot system in
an educational context. Numerous tools from human–
computer interaction, cognitive psychology, and educa-
tion have demonstrated usefulness in this regard. Sec-
tion 79.6 summarizes the manner in which conventional
analytical tools may be used to evaluate unconventional
educational programs that tap robotic technologies as
learning tools across a variety of ages and in both for-
mal and informal learning venues.
79.1 The Role of Robots in Education
Education is itself a broad area of application for
robotics, with a rich history that started at least with
notions of active learning disseminated by Seymour Pa-
pert and others [79.6]. Karel the Robot still serves as
a metaphor for concrete activity in numerous Introduc-
tory Programming courses. Karel the Robot is merely
an on-screen simulation of a two-dimensional robotic
world. This ﬁrst of three roles that robots can play in
the educational setting is robot as programming project.
The robotic system is a focus of problem set assign-
ments, a black box to be programmed in order to create
a concrete physical manifestation of the art of com-
puter programming. Numerous studies that have shown
that poor engagement and retention statistics in courses
such as Introduction to Programming (CS1) often arise
from student’s inability to see how the skills they learn
can have a concrete impact on what they care about:
their physical world; their friends and family. Physical
robot programming projects can cast coding problems
into the real world, making those skills push back on
one’s world and thereby achieve a level of signiﬁcance
and engagement that, for instance, computation of the
Fibonacci Sequence on a computer screen cannot in-
spire [79.7–15].
The second role for educational robotics is that of
robot as learning focus. Mechatronics-style courses can
focus on the creation and use of a physical robot as
a goal in and of itself. Robots do this by stimulating
general interest in science, technology and engineer-
ing, and in thereby showing students that they can have
an active role in shaping technology in their future.
Such an application-oriented class has great beneﬁts
in cases where students learn best through integrative,
project-oriented learning, and such classes have demon-
strated signiﬁcant lifelong-learning results in areas such
as teamwork, problem-solving, and self-identiﬁcation
with technology-focused careers [79.6, 16–20]. In the
United States, the National Academy of Engineering
has identiﬁed trends reporting dropping technology lit-
eracy as troubling phenomena throughout the nation.
Programs that re-connect students to complex mecha-
tronic systems, providing the self-empowerment for
lifelong, active relationships to technology artifacts,
serve as one possible avenue stemming this dangerous
trend away from knowledge about the technology arti-
facts on which society depends so completely. Demon-
strated learning themes in educational analyses include
the following:

Interest in science and engineering: The study of
robotics can be sufﬁciently rewarding, intellectually
and emotionally, as to generate general enthusiasm
for the follow-on study of science and engineering.
Some educational robotics programs have shown
promise in increasing retention rates among female
students [79.21, 22], who are under-represented in
technology-focused ﬁelds.

Teamwork: An important result of team-based,
project-based robotic building experiences is that
those with low self-esteem in their technology ca-
pability, teamwork skills, and communication skills
can ﬁnd measured improvement, leading to miti-
gation of fear toward working in teams on high-
technology ventures [79.18, 20].

Problem-solving: The study of a systems engi-
neering phenomena – a complex robot system –
provides lessons in hierarchy, risk mitigation, plan-
ning, and diagnosis that far outweighs the beneﬁts
of silo-driven, single-topic explorations of debug-
ging and problem analysis. The resulting problem

Robotics for Education
79.2 Educational Robot Tournaments
2117
Part G | 79.2
solving and decomposition skills have lifelong ap-
plicability to any complex system [79.6].
The third role for educational robots is that of
robot as learning collaborator. In this case, students
are not designing robots, but rather conducting inquiry
during which a high-functioning robot can serve as
an all-season companion, aide, and even intellectual
foil [79.23, 24]. Robots that have social capabilities are
well-suited in this regard, and this is an area where
the potential for application greatly outweighs what
has, so far, been done. There are two reasons why
such a social role for robots in education holds par-
ticular promise. First, because of their novelty, robots
can inspire dedication in learning, just as it is possi-
ble in the case of the above two roles. Second, students
have little preconceived expectations for the behavior
of robots. In therapeutic cases, such as students with
autism spectrum disorder (ASD), the robot can play
an important role as studies have shown those students
disproportionate interest in mechanical systems [79.23,
25]. In all cases, the interaction can itself be a form
of discovery and engagement quite different from tra-
ditional, more staid educational methods, and thus this
can even border on the application area of entertainment
robotics.
79.2 Educational Robot Tournaments
Competition catches people’s attention and makes them
want to get involved. This is true in almost all ﬁelds of
endeavor. In education, competitions are commonplace
from spelling bees to science fairs. Over the past 20
years, robotic competitions have also come into their
own; garnering the level of attention from students,
teachers, and parents previously found almost exclu-
sively in more traditional sports.
In this section, we provide a brief history of robot
tournaments, look at some of the popular current tour-
naments, and overview how they are being used to
supplement standard educational curricula.
79.2.1 Tournaments for Education
Professional organizations such as AAAI (Association
for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence), IEEE
(Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers), and
others often hold tournaments for their student mem-
bers at their major conferences. For those organizations,
the purpose of the tournament is to attract students to
attend the conference and become active in the organi-
zations. The activity of building the robot also sharpens
the students’ skills and gets them excited about tech-
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 79.1 (a) Middle-school students present their paper at the Global Conference on Educational Robotics and then (b) have their
autonomous machine-vision guided Botball robots score points in the tournament. (c) The SeaPerch underwater robot contest
nologies and businesses linked to that organization and
motivates them to pursue relevant degrees [79.26]. Our
focus in this chapter is on equipment and activities
targeted at primary and secondary education students.
While signiﬁcant overlap exists, collegiate research ori-
ented platforms and programs are covered in other
chapters.
Many universities and colleges use robot tourna-
ments as part of their curricula. Some create class
tournaments (MIT 6.270) or use standard games
such as KIPR Open (KISS Institute for Practical
Robotics) [79.27] that are distributed for that purpose.
Others use some of the tournaments mentioned in Ta-
ble 79.1 as projects for their curricula [79.28].
But the bulk or robot tournaments are aimed at mid-
dle and high school students. Here the motivation is not
so much to teach detailed skills as to spark creativity
while at the same time emphasizing basic concepts and
an appreciation for the fundamentals of science, tech-
nology, education, and math [79.29]. Some tournaments
have added activities such as documentation, presen-
tation, reports, and even tests [79.30] to reinforce and
expand upon these fundamentals (Fig. 79.1). To assist
educators in guiding the students, many tournaments

Part G | 79.2
2118
Part G
Robots and Humans
have curriculum materials linked to their activities.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA) has collected links to many of these materi-
als and made them available on the internet [79.31].
Evaluating the effectiveness of these materials and pro-
grams in meeting their educational goals is the subject
of Sect. 79.6.
79.2.2 Origins
In 1970, Professor H.H. Richardson adopted the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology (IT)’s Introduction
to Design Course (course 2.70), in the Mechanical En-
gineering department, and transformed it into a design
contest. He had the students work in teams to design
and create machines that would be operated by the stu-
dents to compete against one another. As the course
evolved over the years, and under new instructors, it be-
came both popular and famous.
Several students in the Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science department at MIT, envious of the
mechanical engeneering (ME) course decided to cre-
ate their own, more autonomous version of both the
course and the contest. Since 1987, MIT students have
held the 6.270 course during the intercession between
the fall and spring semesters. While initially done in
simulation, by 1991 the contest involved untethered
autonomous robots in a head to head elimination tour-
nament [79.32]. While only open to MIT students
and, with the exception of the occasional documen-
tary, poorly publicized, these two courses have become
the models for many teleoperated machine contests and
robot contests around the world.
79.2.3 A Taxonomy of Robot Tournaments
There are many possible ways to distinguish the mul-
titude of activities often lumped together as robot con-
tests. For our purposes, here we will use the following
qualities.
Autonomy
The level of autonomous action that robots exhibit dur-
ing a tournament varies widely. Some tournaments are
completely radio controlled (e.g., boosting engineering
science and technology (BEST) [79.33]) with no inde-
pendent actions or decisions being undertaken by the
robots in the tournament. In other contests, the ma-
chines are teleoperated – still under real-time control
by their operators, but doing some processing on the
commands, and sometimes mixing in feedback from
onboard sensors (e.g., FIRST (for inspiration and recog-
nition of science and technology) [79.5]). Autonomous
robot contests (e.g., Botball [79.1]) have little or no in-
teraction by the robot operators. But even in completely
autonomous robot contests, there is a spectrum. Some
autonomous robots simply replay a canned set of ac-
tions – operating completely open loop. Others control
all of their actions based on feedback from onboard sen-
sors, and still others learn as they go, modifying not
only their actions, but their internal programming as
well. One generalization that can be made with regards
to robot tournaments and education: A contest that is
more autonomous usually has more educational content
in the areas of software/programming, while contests
with little or no autonomy emphasize on the mechanical
design and physical implementation aspects of robotics.
Performance Versus Opposition
Some robotics tournaments are based on ranking the
absolute performance of the robot against the course.
Other tournaments have contestants ranked based on
their triumph over a series of speciﬁc opponents. In the
latter case, it does not matter how well the victorious
robot performs in a given round, as long as it performs
better than its opponent for that round. Trinity Col-
lege’s Fireﬁghting Robot Contest (TCFFHRC) [79.34]
ranks teams by how quickly they can carry out the
task (locating and extinguishing a candle) and is an
example of a performance-based tournament. The scor-
ing in RoboCup Junior Dance [79.3] is more sub-
jective, but is still based on individual performance
against an absolute scale. Sumo contests such as [79.35]
are opposition-based tournaments sometimes known as
head-to-head. The performance-based contests allow
the robot designers to implement more intricate strate-
gies, since the environment is more predictable than if
there were an opposing robot running amok through
the course. In oppositional tournaments, robots must be
designed to cope with the actions of their opponents.
Both types of tournaments have their merits and each
allows detailed problem solving. In theory, most people
ﬁnd head-to-head tournaments more exciting and en-
tertaining. However, as with traditional human sumo,
head-to-head tournaments often involve head to head
collisions followed by lengthy, and less exciting, peri-
ods of robots trying to push or disentangle themselves
from their opponents.
Heritage: Fixed Game Versus
New Game Every Year
Is it more educational for students to examine how oth-
ers have tried to solve a problem and then build on
that to create their own incremental solution? Or is it
better for students to tackle something new, without
extensive examination of precedent? The educational
community does not have a deﬁnitive answer, but dif-
ferent robot tournaments can be used to support the

Robotics for Education
79.2 Educational Robot Tournaments
2119
Part G | 79.2
Table 79.1 Examples of different types of robot tournaments
Tournament
Web
Autonomy
Performance/Opposition
Heritage
Notes
BEST
[79.33]
radio controlled (RC)
Opp.
New
Botball
[79.1]
Autonomous
Perf. & Opp.
New
Multiple robots per entry
FIRST
[79.5]
Mostly teleoperated
Opp.
New
Students teamed with engineers
Micro Maze
[79.36]
RC to autonomous
Perf.
Fixed
Cubic cm robots
Seaperch
[79.37]
RC
Perf.
New
Underwater remotely operated vehicles
(ROVs)
Sumo
[79.35]
RC to autonomous
Opp.
Fixed
Divisions based on weight & autonomy
RoboCup
[79.38]
Autonomous
Opp.
Fixed
Teams of robots
RoboCup Jr. Dance
[79.3]
Autonomous
Perf.
N/A
Very free form
TCFFHRC
[79.34]
Autonomous
Perf.
Fixed
Random placement of ﬁre
VEX
[79.39]
Mostly teleoperated
Opp.
New
educational methodology of choice. Tournaments such
as Robocup [79.38] are prime example of a high her-
itage tournament. In addition to the game and rules
being well known (derived from soccer) and essen-
tially remaining unchanged from year to year, there
are a number of annual publications [79.40] that de-
tail successful robots and techniques used in that year’s
contests. Robocup is a study in steady incremental
improvement. Other contests, such as Botball Robot
Tournament, use a different game every year. One of the
motivations for doing this is so that established teams
obtain the game rules at the same time as new teams –
so whether experienced or not, everyone has to build
a new system for the new task, and has the same amount
of time to do so [79.4]. As with all of these dimensions,
there is no clear advantage of one methodology over
the other. Some educators prefer to have a new activity
every year to help keep themselves and their students
engaged. Others prefer having the same game every
year, with the accompanying wealth of lessons-learned
and how-to guides that process makes available.
Table 79.1 presents a number of established robot
tournaments using the taxonomy. This table is not
a complete listing. Readers interested in ﬁnding out
more information about a particular tournament should
consult the cited website. All of the tournaments below
are for students – though the age eligibility and level of
adult involvement varies widely between events.
79.2.4 The Entertainment Link
Tournaments are used (rather than a course assignment
or demonstration) in part because of their entertain-
ment value. A tournament is hopefully engaging both
the participants and the audience. However, the enter-
tainment value of a tournament may not be tied to the
technical sophistication of the robots. Battlebots and its
variations have been very successful as mass market en-
tertainment. These robots typically are radio controlled,
and while sometimes mechanically sophisticated, they
are computationally simplistic. The AAAI mobile robot
contest [79.41] usually has highly computationally so-
phisticated robots – however that sophistication usually
has an accompanying decrease in audience entertain-
ment value. AAAI robots strive to do what everyday
humans easily do – go to speciﬁc places, manipulate
household objects, give talks, and answer questions;
but the robots tend to be much slower than humans
performing these activities. Battlebots do what humans
are not allowed to do – use power tools and blunt
instruments to demolish their opponents. In robot tour-
naments as in the movie business, violence is often
more entertaining than demonstrations of intellectual
ability and human activity.
79.2.5 Tournaments for Education
All robotics tournaments can be educational – but that
is not necessarily the emphasis of an event. Some
programs are designed to be more inspirational than ed-
ucational. FIRST [79.5] pairs schools with groups of
professional engineers – but does not deﬁne how the
work is to be divided between the professionals and the
students. In some teams, the students are primarily ob-
servers getting to see professionals design professional
quality machines. Other teams have the students play
a more active or even leading role – though no distinc-
tion is made between these different approaches during
the competition.
Other programs, e.g., Botball [79.1] and RoboCup
Jr. [79.3], require that the design, building, and pro-
gramming is all done by the students. In both these
programs, it is what the students can do that matters.
RoboCup Jr. consists of three different competitions:
Rescue, Dance, and Soccer; teams pick in which of the
three they will compete. All three of the competitions
are open with regards to the speciﬁc technologies to be
used. There are restrictions on size, power, and the ac-
ceptable level of off the shelf hardware and software,
yet the potential options are still very large. This has

Part G | 79.3
2120
Part G
Robots and Humans
the beneﬁts of allowing teams to use the equipment they
already have at their schools or can easily afford to pur-
chase and to program in the languages they have been
learning in class. It does, however, make it more difﬁcult
to create a detailed curriculum or to even deﬁne what the
learning objectives for the participants should be.
The Botball program speciﬁes what equipment is to
be used and provides a detailed curriculum for teams,
especially new teams, to follow in order to make sure
certain learning objectives are likely to be met. Specify-
ing equipment requires teams to have a certain expense,
but removes much of the advantage of teams that have
stockpiled equipment from previous events or who have
large ﬁnancial resources – all participants are allowed to
build their entries from the same set of hardware – ex-
tra pieces are not allowed. Because of the standardize
kit, lesson plans and tutorials can be part of the pro-
gram. Botball teams turn in documentation at speciﬁed
dates during the build cycle to demonstrate certain skills
and also help in keeping the teams on track for having
a working entry.
The educational beneﬁts of robotics tournaments
can be greatly enhanced when the tournament is part
of an educationally oriented conference. These can take
many forms. The RobotChallenge [79.42] is an annual
multiday international meeting that hosts 15 different
robot competitions. While it does not contain a spe-
ciﬁc educational program, the diverse set of challenges
combined with the many opportunities to interact wilt
robotics enthusiasts in all areas of robotics makes this
a beneﬁcial event for all participants.
The Micro Robot Maze Contest (MAZE) [79.36] is
an annual tournament held in Nagoya Japan, in parallel
with the International Symposium on Micro Mecha-
tronics and Human Science (MHS). Rounds of the
tournament are interspersed with technical talks by con-
ference attendees allowing students participating in the
contest to be exposed to leading researchers in micro
mechatronics.
The Global Conference on Educational Robotics
(GCER) [79.43, 44], and its European speciﬁc counter-
part ECER [79.45], are multiday conferences hosting
global and regional (respectively) Botball tournaments,
other robotics tournaments and a variety of techni-
cal events. Like the MAZE event, student attendees
are exposed to leading researchers in robotics through
a series of keynote talks. In addition, there are sev-
eral sessions of technical talks presented by the student
attendees about their own research related to or inde-
pendent of the tournament events (Fig. 79.1). Session
talks on educational issues and teaching techniques
are given by teachers and education researchers. These
events not only give students exposure to a wide va-
riety of technical issues, but also a chance for the
students to publish and present their own research in
robotics.
The varieties of approach of the different tourna-
ments and of the conference events that surround many
of the tournaments presents the robotics student with
a wealth of choices and opportunities. As with most
things, students can get as much out of their robotics
tournament experience as they are willing to put in.
79.3 Education Robot Platforms
Nonindustrial robotics platforms have gone through
radical changes in the past decade. While many re-
search institutions and universities continue to develop
custom platforms (e.g., Honda’s Asimo [79.46]) or
low production quantity research platforms (e.g., the
a)
b)
Fig. 79.2 (a) Hero-1, (b) Hemisson
iCub [79.47] or Willow Garage’s PR2 [79.48]), the re-
naissance has been in the availability of relatively low
cost kits and platforms whose capabilities challenge the
expensive research robotics of just a few years old.
These platforms and kits, a sampling of which is dis-
cussed below, are becoming widely used in primary,
secondary, and higher level education throughout the
world.
Kit platforms are inexpensive, exist in large num-
bers, and are widely used in schools and by hobbyists.
Most of the robot kits today either assume the addition
of a separate processing element (either a PC (personal
computer) or a specialty robot controller) or are built
on one of two families of robot microcontrollers: Par-
allax Stamp/Propeller or the Arduino. The remainder
of this section will discuss popular kits and mobility
platforms currently in use. An exciting addition to edu-

Robotics for Education
79.3 Education Robot Platforms
2121
Part G | 79.3
cational robotics has been the recent addition of aerial
and underwater robots in a sufﬁciently low-cost manner
that opens the possibilities for large scale educational
use. Some of the new platforms in these areas will also
be discussed.
79.3.1 Ground Robots
Education robots really got their start in the early
1980s with the introduction of the Heathkit Hero-1
(Fig. 79.2a). The Hero robots were sold as kits, both
to keep the price down and to encourage users to learn
how robots were made. However, while detailed assem-
bly instructions were included, no information on the
theory or principles behind the assembly were given;
the kits, by themselves, did not provide a satisfactory
educational experience. Unfortunately, neither the Hero
robots, nor several other similarly sized and priced per-
sonal robots that came out in the 1980s never reached
a level of capability and ease of use to attract an eco-
nomically viable customer base. Heathkit and the other
companies have since gone out of business.
K-Team is one of the few research robot compa-
nies making low-cost robot platforms speciﬁcally for
the education market. The Hemisson (Fig. 79.2b) is
a low-cost, less compact version of K-Team’s Khep-
era research robot. It has reduced computational power
and only few sensors when compared to most research
a)
c)
b)
Fig. 79.3 (a) Create, (b) Create with a gripper mounted, (c) the Scribbler S2
a)
b)
c)
Fig.79.4a–c Different conﬁgurations for the Boe-bot series of robot kits (a) Wheeled, (b) tracked; and (c) legged
robots, but is priced and designed for robotics classes in
secondary and university classes.
In 2007, iRobot announced the Create, an educa-
tional platform based on their Roomba series of robot
vacuum cleaners. The Create is a sturdy mobility plat-
form that has TTL serial connections to allow easy
control from an external processor and a small amount
of memory to allow simple scripts to be downloaded
and executed directly by the platform itself. The Create
contains a differential drive system, with encoders on
each wheel, two instrumented bumpers, four reﬂective
cliff sensors, a side reﬂectance sensor, and numerous
other internal sensors along with some digital and ana-
log input output (I/O). The platform also contains some
hard mounting points allowing other structures to be
easily bolted on (Fig. 79.3).
Another
educational
platform,
the
Scribbler
S2 [79.49] has similar functionality as the Create but
in a smaller package. The S2 is not designed to be
built upon but is more for initial experimentation and
contains a pen hole that allows a drawing functionality
reminiscent of the LOGO Turtle [79.50].
The Boe-Bot is a set of mobile robot kits that can
be combined or switched to create wheeled, treaded
and walking robots (Fig. 79.4). Boe-bot, like the S2, is
based around the Parallax series of processors (Stamp
and Propeller). However, the Arduino controller can
also be used with Boe-Bot kits.

Part G | 79.3
2122
Part G
Robots and Humans
In addition to set robot kits and prebuilt chassis, the
most common mobile robot platforms for education are
built from sets of parts that originated as mechanical
building systems. Manufacturers including VEX, KIPR
and of course Lego create sets of metal and plastic
pieces, along with motors and sensors allowing a wide
range of mobile and ﬁxed robot systems to be created.
These manufacturers also produce specialize robot con-
trollers, though most of the mechanical elements are
independent of the controller being used.
Similarly, companies such as Lynxmotion, Dagu
and Bioloid produce kit parts designed to link together
small servo motors. The Lynxmotion and Dagu parts
are designed particularly for the construction of ma-
nipulators. The Bioloid kits can be used to group large
collections of servo motors together in order to form
small but functional humanoid robots with a dozen or
more degrees of freedom (Fig. 79.5).
79.3.2 Sea
While the vast majority of educational robots are land-
based mobile and/or manipulator robot systems, under-
water robots and ROVs are becoming a popular way to
teach about robotics, and related STEM topics such as
climate change and bio-diversity.
Most underwater robots are sophisticated research
devices used to study marine biology [79.51], per-
a)
b)
c)
Fig.79.5a–c Robot arms and manipulators by Lynxmotion (a) and Dagu (b) and a humanoid robot constructed from
a Bioloid kit (c)
a)
b)
c)
Fig.79.6a–c Underwater robots from kits/instructions by MBARI (a), Seaperch (b) MATE (c)
form underwater archeology [79.52] or monitor ocean
health [79.53].
However MBARI (the Monterey Bay Aquarium Re-
search Institute) has released instructions for a build
your own ROV [79.54]. The Seaperch organiza-
tion [79.37] has also released an underwater ROV kit
containing all the pieces necessary for building an ROV.
These vehicles make use of low-cost materials such
as polyvinylchloride (PVC) plumbing ﬁxtures [79.55]
as seen in Fig. 79.6. They also use a tether for con-
trol and power, simplifying the vehicle design. While
lacking the sophistication of the research robots, these
relatively simple ROVs can be used to teach many as-
pects of robotics and also issues of buoyancy and ﬂuid
ﬂow – important physics topics are missing from the
most these robotics education. These are the types of
devices that are used in underwater robot contests pro-
duced by Seaperch and Mate [79.56].
79.3.3 Air
Radio controlled aircraft has been an active hobby for
over 75 years [79.57]. A variety of contests such as
Design Build Fly [79.58] and SpeedFest [79.59] have
moved the hobby into the realm of education curricula.
It can be debated as to whether or not a radio-controlled
ﬁxed wing aircraft is in fact a robot – most of them rely
on the human operator to do all of the sensing, there

Robotics for Education
79.4 Education Robot Controllers and Programming Environments
2123
Part G | 79.4
a)
b)
c)
Fig.79.7a–c The Syma 107 gyro stabilized helicopter (a), and the AR drone Wiﬁcontrolled quad rotor (b). A drone
knocks down scoring items where they can be gathered by ground robots in the 2012 KIPR Open (c)
is no automated control and communication is all one
way. However, the same can also be said for some of
the ground robotics contests and robots as well as many
underwater shallow ROVs. Whether or not these aircraft
are true robots, the RC (radio control) hobby has pio-
neered much of the technology now used in educational
robots including small servo motors, radio communica-
tions, and many of the control interfaces.
In recent years, technology for semi-automated ro-
torcraft of a variety of conﬁgurations has become
inexpensive enough to be considered for the educa-
tional market. These crafts range from traditional he-
licopter conﬁgurations to the now popular quad-rotor
craft (Fig. 79.7b). The key technical advances have been
in the integration of small gyros and accelerometers to
allow much of the ﬁne control to be done onboard al-
lowing the operator to worry only about the crafts’ gross
motion.
These inertial sensors have been combined by re-
searchers with precision positioning systems such as
a Vicon system to allow aerial acrobatics that rival the
capabilities of humming birds and insects [79.60, 61].
Even without the external precision positioning sys-
tems, manufacturers have been able to produce some
inexpensive platforms capable of good performance
(Fig. 79.7). The communications for some of these sys-
tems are down via standard Wiﬁpacket or via infrared
(IR) encoded commands. It is relatively easy to have
computers talk to these platforms, and as a result pack-
ages are being put together to use these vehicles to
encourage students to learn programming [79.62]. The
AR Drone has already been used in autonomous ﬂying
vehicle contests organized by KIPR (Fig. 79.7c).
It is expected that aerial robotics platforms will be-
come a major portion of educational robotics programs
in the very near future.
79.4 Education Robot Controllers and Programming Environments
Education and entertainment activities in robotics
sometimes run at cross purposes. For entertainment, we
want robots that are active, very easy to use and to con-
trol. Products like the Lego Mindstorms provide both
a robot controller and a programming environment that
meets those criteria.
However, when it comes to robot education, it is im-
portant to remember that in most cases, we are using
robots to inspire and motivate students to learn – learn
many things of which robotics is just one. Robotics
educators, especially at the K-12 level, are hoping to
teach students general science, programming, math, and
engineering techniques. The toy programming environ-
ments used in some products such as Mindstorms, may
be inappropriate for this mission.
This section overviews some of the popular robot
controllers and programming environments. Usually
the two are linked, but there are some environments that
work with several different controllers, and vice versa.
As
with
the robot tournaments described
in
Sect. 79.2, many of the robot controllers and their pro-
gramming environments in use for tournaments and by
hobbyists can trace their origins back to the MIT 6.270
course [79.32]. At an even more fundamental level, the
origin of most robot controller starts with the Motorola
68HC11 processor.
79.4.1 Robot Controllers
The venerable HC11 is a single chip processor with
small amounts of onboard ﬂash and RAM (random-
access memory). It also has a number of I/O and
timing ports that make it relatively easy to inter-
face to sensors and external devices. The 8-bit HC11
uses the same instruction set as the Motorola 6800
series of processors – which have been in exis-
tence in one form or another for more than three
decades.

Part G | 79.4
2124
Part G
Robots and Humans
Fig. 79.8 The HandyBoard with
its expansion board and the BASIC
Stamp
The HC11 was used by Anita Flynn and Joe Jones
in a board for the MIT robot talent show in 1991,
which spawned the Book Board [79.63] the MIT 6.270
board and Fred Martin’s Handyboard. The last of these
became the de-facto high-end robot controller for hob-
byists and autonomous robot contests for most of the
1990s.
The Handyboard (Fig. 79.8) can provide PWM con-
trol for four direct current (DC) motors, read 8 digital
and 8 analog sensors, control a couple of light-emitting
diodes (LEDs) and has a 32 character display. With
the expansion board, 8 lines of DIO and control for 6
RC servos is also added. The Handyboard can be pro-
grammed using 6811 assembly language and several
other languages including Java and C.
The other low-cost commercial robot controller in
wide spread use throughout the 1990s was the BASIC
Stamp [79.64] (Fig. 79.8). This PIC-based controller
could be programmed in a special (often assembly
language-like) version of the BASIC language. While
very small in memory, and usually requiring supple-
mentary electronics for most sensors and actuators, the
Stamp was very popular because of its low cost and
ﬂexibility.
In the late 1990s, spurred on in large part by the
growing interest in robot tournaments, a renaissance
in robot controller hardware started making available
a)
b)
c)
Fig.79.9a–c One of the smaller Arduinos: (a) the Digispark; (b) the Arduino Duemilanove; (c) a Shield compatible with
the Duemilanove
a number of controllers ranging from advanced PICs to
full blown PCs. Two approaches to robot controllers,
and their environments seem to be dominant in the ed-
ucation market.
The ﬁrst approach is to use a microcontroller that
is programmed using a PC and has program compiled
on the PC and then downloaded to the microcontroller
which can run that program – and little else until new
software is downloaded to it. This follows the model
originally used in 6.270 and typiﬁed by the Handy-
board but has been perfected by the Arduino family of
robot processors.
Arduino is an open source project started in 2005
in Italy [79.65]. There are more than a dozen ofﬁcial
Arduino boards available in a range of sizes and ca-
pabilities. The smaller Arduino’s are about the size of
a 1 Euro coin. Most are based on the ATMega series
of processors, but some of the newest are using ARM
processors [79.66]. Most of the Arduino boards contain
some number of digital input and output pins as well
as analog inputs and the capability to generate PWM
signals for controlling dc motors or hobby servos. Ar-
duino Shields are accessory boards that can be used to
add a variety of capabilities and ale add breadboarding
and experimental interfaces (Fig. 79.9).
In contrast to the Arduino family of controllers,
the KIPR Link [79.67], and its immediate predeces-

Robotics for Education
79.4 Education Robot Controllers and Programming Environments
2125
Part G | 79.4
sor the CBC2 [79.68, 69], represent a different style
of robot controllers. The Arduinos are inexpensive,
small, and pretty barebones. The user needs to supply
a power supply, case and often supplemental circuitry,
depending on what kinds of mechatronics are being
interfaced. Arduinos were originally targeted for the
hobbyist and robot enthusiast and indeed their primary
role in elementary and secondary education is for the
self-motivated student who uses them in their extra-
curricular projects or in kits put together by a third-
party.
The Link and the CBC2, on the other hand are
ready to use units that can be interfaced with a vari-
ety of hardware without the need of tools (Fig. 79.10).
These controllers are in fact full ﬂedged computers
running Linux, but with a GUI (graphical user inter-
face) front end and built-in touch screen allowing them
to be used as stand-alone devices, if desired. These
controllers have gigabytes of ﬂash storage and host
standard ﬁle systems. Multiple programs can be down-
loaded to the Link and the ﬁle browser can be used to
select which program to run. In fact, the programs for
these controllers are compiled and linked on the con-
troller themselves using a standard Linux tool chain.
This allows these controllers to run programs in a vari-
ety of languages, and for new languages to be added as
desired. While the CBC2 and the Link can be connected
via USB (universal serial bus) to a laptop or desktop
computer as a device, they themselves can be the host to
other USB devices including webcams. The Link uses
standard libraries such as OpenCV to process the im-
ages generated by a web cam to do object recognition,
color tracking, QR code decoding, and other standard
computer vision processing.
The Link library and touchscreen and GUI allows
the user to easily interface and explore robot sensors
and effectors in ways not previously available.
a)
b)
Fig. 79.12 (a) A simple program for an Arduino board to blink an LED. (b) A program in the KISS editor for a robot
avoid walls
Fig. 79.10 The CBC2 and KIPR Link Linux-based robot con-
trollers
Fig. 79.11 Touch screen widgets on the KIPR link for manipulating
a servo, or selecting the hue saturation and value for objects to be
tracked using the camera (the numbers are automatically ﬁlled in
when the image of the object, red tip of a badminton birdie, was
touched on the screen)
Graphical widgets (Fig. 79.11) that let the user set
servo positions, motor speeds, read sensor values using
the built in oscilloscope mode, and select vision targets
by touching the object in the image on the screen allows
even the novice programmer to have their robot do so-
phisticated activities.
Both the Link and Arduino series of controllers
owe much of their success and capabilities to the open
source nature of both their hardware and software.

Part G | 79.4
2126
Part G
Robots and Humans
Complete schematics for the boards are available to
anyone interested as is the code for the libraries and
programming environments. There are now several pro-
ducers of Arduino compatible boards, each with their
unique capabilities. Much of the power of the Link
system comes from its ability to exploit open source
libraries such as OpenCV and also user community cre-
ated libraries and tools.
79.4.2 Educational Robotics Programming
Environments
Arduino boards are programmed using an IDE (inte-
grated development environment), based on the Pro-
cessing and Wiring IDEs [79.70, 71]. Processing was
originally developed to assist artists doing graphical
and other creative projects that required coding. The
IDE is written in Java and runs on Windows, MacOS,
and Linux platforms. The primary language for pro-
gramming Arduinos is C++ and typical programs use
two special functions setup and loop. The setup
function is used to initialize variables and ports and
the loop function is called repeatedly changing the
output state of the board based on the current sensor
inputs. This model works well for many robot applica-
tions (Fig. 79.12).
The Link robot controller is typically programmed
using the KISS programming environment. Since the
Link compiles its programs onboard, and since code can
be loaded via network or via USB drive, or even typed
in directly by connecting a keyboard to the Link, many
other options for programming environments are pos-
sible. The KISS IDE consists of an editor (Fig. 79.12
right), target selector, and a variety of simulated and
hardware targets. The editor is a general purpose lan-
guage sensitive editor that helps to highlight and format
code for the user’s choice of language (C, C++, Java,
Python, etc.). Each program can then be associated
with one or more targets such as a particular Link,
a Link simulator, or the computer running KISS. This
last target choice makes KISS a general purpose IDE
suitable for writing applications that can, with recompi-
lation, work on MacOS, Windows and Linux machines
and includes cross platform graphics, camera, and se-
rial libraries. The Link simulator (Fig. 79.13) uses the
a)
b)
Fig.79.13a,b The Link simulator running the program
shown in (Fig. 79.12b). (a) The simulator displaying the
console and sensor values. (b) The simulator showing the
motor status
same libraries as the Link itself, and so can be used
for solving syntax errors and many logic errors. Calls
to the vision routines on the Link activate the we-
bcam on the laptop running the simulator allowing
a more thorough testing of robot logic on the simu-
lator than is commonly found without running large
(and particularly novice user friendly) simulators such
as Gazebo.
Like their hardware counterparts, the Arduino and
KISS programming platforms are open source. Li-
braries, development environments, and documenta-
tion are all improved by their ever growing user
communities.

Robotics for Education
79.5 Robotic Technologies for Student Learning
2127
Part G | 79.5
79.5 Robotic Technologies for Student Learning
Exclusive, robotics-oriented
curriculum
in
formal
learning faces a formidable challenge globally: while
ICT curricula are recognized across countries as an
important twenty-ﬁrst century skill for all learners, con-
tinuing educational budget cuts have re-focused capac-
ity building across educational institutions on teachers
for the foundation subjects of mathematics and lan-
guage arts, with scant resources remaining for computer
science and even less for new directions such as educa-
tional robotics. Furthermore, a major issue of concern
in numerous countries involves achievement gaps be-
tween diverse populations, and it is arguable that highly
focused robotics courses will be particularly effective
at engaging and retaining the interest of precisely the
most precocious future engineers while failing to win
over more left-brained students, further reinforcing and
exacerbating an achievement gap through the natural
process of self-selection.
79.5.1 Cross-Disciplinary Integration
of Robotics
In combating these trends, traditional schools are recon-
sidering the role of cross-disciplinary and contextual
learning, where lessons draw upon knowledge from
multiple disciplinary specialties concurrently, teaching
lateral thinking and, ideally, motivating the disciplinary
learning process by presenting compelling pathways
through which knowledge acquired will have meaning-
ful value to a problem at hand [79.72].
A number of efforts in educational robotics concen-
trate now on this form of multidisciplinary curricula
across all ages of learners, and these new directions
are likely to be harbingers of many future, success-
ful endeavours to incorporate educational, interactive
robotics into schools in ways that pervade the educa-
tional experience rather than balkanize learning into
ever more narrow categories.
Robotics is particularly apt for integrated learning
because of its inherent diversity: robots have phys-
ical form and design considerations, computational
aspects, sensors with which real-world values can be
measured and visualized, effectors and mechanical con-
siderations and even the ability to bridge the digital
and physical worlds together. As such, robotics are an
inherently cross-disciplinary medium, and this charac-
teristic is being exploited by robotics researchers to
design and pilot such integrative curriculum. ArtBotics
is one of the many programs combining creative ex-
pression with robotics, enabling creative expression
whilst using the advanced sensor and effector technolo-
gies that make robot-building a technically rewarding
experience as well [79.73, 74]. This marriage of cre-
ativity and technology, often considered opposites in
conventional educational thinking, has the potential
to attract and encourage talent from both commu-
nities by demonstrating to artists how their creative
energy can yield notable success in technology in-
vention, and by showing technically minded students
that their invention process can be as creative as it is
rational.
Arts & Bots combines craft-based robot building
with materials that are familiar to middle school stu-
dents with a USB-driven robot control board that en-
ables choreography of a physically built robotic puppet
using an iconic programming language with appropri-
ate computational complexity for sophisticated middle
school coursework [79.75]. This program has demon-
strated cross-curricular success in the sciences, for in-
stance, enabling learners in an Anatomy course to build
an elastic-band based arm model that can demonstrate
the major degrees of freedom of the human arm using
servomotors and sensors. The process of completely de-
signing and implementing a working anatomical arm,
in turn, both engages technically apt learners and drives
inquiry to achieve a worked-out solution [79.76] that
provides particularly valuable depth of learning both
about the minutiae of anatomical musculature and about
servomotor mechanisms.
The number of integrated robotics experiences is
expanding rapidly, and this in turn guarantees that edu-
cational robotics will be widely woven into the fabric of
general education, not by designing and implementing
new coursework, but by augmenting existing learn-
ing experiences and by attracting a greater diversity of
learners into every single discipline through the power
of more authentic engagement.
79.5.2 Robotics
for Computational Thinking
The ability to think computationally has become rec-
ognized over the past decade as a critical twenty-
ﬁrst century skill that prepares learners to effectively
make creative and effective use of the technology that
will doubtless suffuse society for the foreseeable fu-
ture [79.77]. Computational thinking itself is a category
of comprehension that includes understanding sequen-
tiality, thresholds, systems behavior, digital values, and
the process of decision-making and action so impor-
tant in designing new ways to embed digital systems in
process, whether in virtual or real domains. Computer
programming and data visualization are two important
and well-understood areas of inquiry that practice such

Part G | 79.5
2128
Part G
Robots and Humans
forms of thinking, and so one large movement has been
to encourage the teaching of computer programming,
whether using iconic or lexical languages, as early and
as comprehensively as possible [79.78]. The languages
that have been most successful include Scratch, Al-
ice, Processing, Snap, and LabVIEW variants. All of
these languages combine aspects of iconic program-
ming with circuit semantics that can gain intuitive
traction with learners as young as six year of age, and
this has markedly increase the market opportunity for
curricula dedicated to thinking computationally [79.79–
81].
Robotics has particular value in this learning do-
main because robots have real-time action components;
sensors that behave noisily in the real world; motors
that can have nondeterministic effects; and processors
that can be programmed directly. Furthermore, all of
the most popular iconic programming languages have
recently become so openly modiﬁable by the program-
ming community that patches enabling direct program-
ming and control of educational robotics platforms is
both easy and under way. For instance, the Finch ed-
ucational robot is now programmable in 16 separate
languages, in many cases thanks to the efforts of unpaid
volunteers [79.82, 83].
Robotics are ideally suited for active engagement
around computational thinking, and as ever greater
numbers of robot platforms become programmable via
the best iconic languages in the market, it is likely
that robotics will become the most powerful experimen-
tal domain for sensing, measuring, designing behavior,
and designing computational processes from sensors to
actions.
79.5.3 Early Childhood Robotics
An important area of change today in educational
robotics and tangible interfaces is early childhood
learning, deﬁned as preprimary levels from three years
of age through kindergarten and early primary school-
ing levels appropriate for nine year old. The early
childhood experience has been changing dramatically
due to the rapid onset of interactive screen media, and
this in turn has led to major discussions on several con-
tinents about what the appropriate role might be for
interactive media in the lives of the very young. A num-
ber of educationally chartered organizations have begun
issuing signiﬁcant guidelines and rationales regarding
new media and early childhood, from the BBC in the
United Kingdom to the most recent addition, a joint
statement on digital media standards presented in the
United States by the National Association for the Edu-
cation of Young Children and the Fred Rogers Center
for Early Childhood Education [79.84].
The current discourse on new media in the class-
room concentrates on the role of interactive screen
media, implying in many cases that interactive tech-
nologies are largely limited to the screens of traditional
computers, Chrome books, and tablet-style devices. In
this context, much of the research currently opines on
the role of digital video games in learning, commenting
on the onward rush of gamiﬁcation, and its positive and
negative consequences on learning [79.85].
In contrast to this general movement, numerous re-
searchers have begun to explore the role of robotics
and interactive electronics as tangible devices that can
support the process of becoming technologically ﬂuent
rather than simply augmenting technical literacy in the
very young. The basic argument along these lines is
that teaching children to use designed applications on
a tablet can make them conﬁdent consumers of technol-
ogy artifacts, but in fact the craft-based and engineering
design-based processes of inquiry, creation, and experi-
mentation that can be strongly associated with robotics
experiences have the potential to turn children into pow-
erful, self-conﬁdent producers of technology rather than
mere consumers.
One such tangible experiment is the Children’s In-
novation Project (CIP), led by Jeremy Boyle of Clarion
University together with Melissa Butler of the Al-
legheny Traditional School District in Pittsburgh, Penn-
sylvania (www.cippgh.org). The CIP research project
concentrates, not only on the creation of new artifacts
but also on the process of deliberate exploration of tech-
nical artifacts, introducing tangible manipulatives that
have both physical form and sensor- and motor-based
behavior, together with curricular processes that priv-
ilege inquiry, repeated close examination, observation
and documentation well above the creation of a ﬁnished
artifact. The CIP trajectory even presents electronic toys
from Goodwill stores (recycled old toys) to students,
not as toys, but as containers of raw materials. Five year
old students learn to open the plastic toys, remove and
identify components, and then reuse these components
together with custom tangible devices to create whole
new behaviors.
New media for early childhood learning is cer-
tainly an area rife with funding and speculation al-
ready [79.86]. As the study of tangible devices for early
childhood exploration takes hold, numerous projects
such as CIP will change the relationship of educa-
tional robotics to the kindergarten classroom of the
future, turning the discourse surrounding digital media
into a conversation about interaction and exploration in
ways that bridge the digital and physical realms more
meaningfully. In turn, the students of the futures will
have a ﬂuency around technology artifacts that will be
signiﬁcantly the best prior generations.

Robotics for Education
79.6 Educational Evaluation of Robot Programs
2129
Part G | 79.6
79.6 Educational Evaluation of Robot Programs
An important aspect of assessment, beyond technical
evaluation, is educational evaluation: how does human–
robot interaction change models of learning and identi-
ties with respect to technology; and how is this done in
educationally appropriate ways? We ﬁnd several tech-
niques to be applicable during each of the following
phases of an educational project:

Design-time assessment: the creation phase of an
educational robot system

Formative evaluation: during execution of an edu-
cational robot program

Summative evaluation: following completion of an
educational program.
This section will identify relevant tools for design,
formative and summative evaluation that we borrow
from the human–computer interaction community and
the learning science community. These tools are well
suited in helping researchers measure, quantify, and
communicate how educational robots can impact learn-
ing in the classroom and, beyond the classroom, in
informal learning venues such as museums and after-
school workshops.
79.6.1 Design-Time Assessment
The ﬁeld of human–computer interaction (HCI) offers
formal and heuristic techniques for addressing inter-
faces between humans and technology [79.87]. Current
HCI practice often focuses on user-centered design,
which suggests that understanding the user and the
entire task can help us to become better designers.
One speciﬁc HCI technique, contextual inquiry and
design, is especially useful for both informal and for-
mal learning venues where robots will interact directly
with students as users. Contextual inquiry guides the
collection of background data concerning interactions
taking place before inclusion of the new, to-be-designed
robotic technology, and is often achieved through the
collection and analysis of direct interviews and obser-
vations. The process includes identifying and polling
various stakeholders in the educational environment,
from the classroom as a whole to individual educators
and mentors.
A second HCI activity, modeling, guides the cre-
ation of pictorial ﬂow diagrams that identify the most
important features of the environment in which the
robotic educational technology is to be used. Workﬂow
describes the communication necessary for the class-
room activities. Sequence identiﬁes actual sequences
of action required for various activities in the class-
room (or museum). Artifact captures the relationship
of existing tools required for activities to be performed
successfully. Finally, the physical model identiﬁes how
space is used, which can be notable in the case of the de-
sign and potential inclusion of mobile robots in spaces
that were generally not designed for them in the ﬁrst
place, like conventional labs and, even worse, regular
lecture halls.
In the tradition of learning science, one impor-
tant technique to create the best possible curriculum is
aligned design, in which both the educational curric-
ula and its matching evaluation instruments are created
simultaneously [79.88]. This design-time form of align-
ment is powerful because the student experiences and
the ways in which learning will be measured can be
suited to the classroom context and to one-another with
far better results, as compared to the incorporation of
standardized evaluation metrics as an afterthought. By
the same token, in robotics we can go even further,
aligning hardware, programming interfaces, curricu-
lum, and evaluations all at the same time, thanks to the
ever more rapid design-fabrication cycles in both the
hardware prototyping world as well as the onset rapid
software development tools. Educational robotics re-
search has already demonstrated signiﬁcant gains when
robot hardware, software, classroom curriculum, and
evaluation instruments are all designed and aligned
simultaneously to yield the best possible educational
robotics learning ecology [79.89].
Design-time assessment and joint design are prin-
cipled ways of understanding and responding to exist-
ing environments. This, in turn, facilitates design-time
judgments in regards to the best manner in which
to add a new technology, such as interactive robots,
while maximizing the chances that the technology is
a real success. But it is the continual cycle of evalua-
tions during the implementation phase, that is critical
to a positive outcome. So in summary design-time
data collection and assessment helps set the stage
and control expectations. Formative evaluations and
feedback into the continuing design process, as de-
scribed below, helps keep the engineering on a path to
success.
79.6.2 Formative and Summative
Evaluation
Traditional school-based assessments of learning, for
instance, course surveys or exam grades are useful
as coarse-resolution data collection devices. However,
these do not provide sufﬁcient detail to build mod-
els of how learning is proceeding with or in spite

Part G | 79.6
2130
Part G
Robots and Humans
of technology changes, nor how further technology
changes may improve learning. Furthermore, especially
in informal settings such as museums, school-based
assessments are even more inappropriate. In such set-
tings, signiﬁcant learning results from communication.
As groups of visitors or teams of students use and
talk about a museum exhibit or project challenge, they
construct a shared understanding of the content and
context of the challenge. There is an outstanding body
of work in the education community that focuses on
this form of conversation and learning. The follow-
ing references are excellent starting points [79.90–93].
Applying this learning strategy to educational robotics
yields wonderfully rich analyses in terms of how the
robots change conversations in the classroom and in in-
formal learning settings such as museums, clubs, and
parks [79.94].
In education learning, tools include broad evalua-
tion tools for qualitatively and quantitatively construct-
ing a model of learning across the classroom and deep,
focused tools for studying the speciﬁc communication-
oriented mechanisms of learning that may inform pat-
terns of change and exploration at the student and intra-
team level. In terms of broad tools, student surveys are
one useful data collection tool. A combination of linear,
quantitative queries (called Likert scales) coupled with
open-ended essay questions such as What is the most
important concept you learned this week? invite both
statistical analysis of raw results and thematic analysis
of self-reported challenges and successes by the stu-
dents themselves. Recorded interviews with students,
individually or in teams, provides even richer informa-
tion due to the ability to ask complex What have you
learned? questions appropriate for open-ended analy-
sis, again in terms of thematic content. A deep, focused
tool that is expensive in terms of analyst resources
but generates very useful information is the ethnogra-
phy, whereby a trained observer spends, for instance,
one week tracking all the activities of two teams in
the classroom, including conversations within the team,
among team members and other pupils, and between
the team and the course instructors and teaching assis-
tants [79.95, 96]. The ethnography is intended to detail
the learning and problem-solving process that occurs in
class on a minute-by-minute basis.
Taken as a whole, the above collected data can then
be analyzed by thematic content, for themes such as
those listed in Sect. 79.1. Statistical signiﬁcance and
correlation tests can be applied to the quantitatively de-
rived results of coding all such information to yield
information on how the frequency of learning themes
appearing in conversation increases or decreases, and
how speciﬁc themes become more reﬁned or speciﬁc in
student talk over the duration of the course.
However, assessment of the educational value of
robotics programs such as those described in Table 79.1
is often trickier than evaluating programs in more
traditional disciplines. There are widely accepted text-
books and curricula for many disciplines, but not yet
for robotics. Additionally, the different educational
robotics programs described earlier take a variety of ap-
proaches toward education.
Many programs (e.g., FIRST Lego League and
RoboCup Jr.) are large programs, but are implemented
at the local level, so the experience for students can
vary tremendously from one locale to another. The more
standardized programs (e.g., Botball and FIRST) have
different educational models. FIRST uses an inspira-
tional model where students work with professional en-
gineers. Botball follows a more traditional high school
model of education where the teachers are trained in the
techniques and principles, so that they may guide the
students at a high level, but all of the work (both design
and implementation) is done only by the students.
Because robotics can serve as an unfamiliar tool for
many students in such courses and programs, evaluation
of how this unfamiliar, and potentially rich interac-
tive tool impacts student learning and perceived interest
levels in science and technology is a common focus
of educational robotics assessment. This trend is ex-
acerbated because these programs, which involve tens
or even hundreds of thousands of students, are im-
plemented by nonproﬁt companies and volunteers that
lack speciﬁc funds and training for formal assessment.
For these reasons, formal assessment of the programs
tends to be based on student and/or teacher surveys
rather than rigorous testing, and the assessment usually
focuses on speciﬁc issues (e.g., gender issues in tech-
nology education) where assessment speciﬁc funding
may be available.
As educational robotics becomes more mainstream,
we can expect that evaluation will shift from efﬁcacy
on general enthusiasm about STEM learning to speciﬁc
learning advantages derived from such robot-inclusive
coursework for follow-on coursework in diverse disci-
plines such as biology, physics, and computer science.
An important new trend in the United States offers hope
for more broadly applicable educational robotics de-
sign. To date, very successful robotics curricula has
often been hampered in terms of scaling due to the
fact that learning standards in the US have been de-
ﬁned at the state level, making it nearly impossible to
comprehensively justify new technology curricula in
all 50 states. The new Common Core standards now
published in the US have national reach across forty
states, offering an opportunity for national consistency.
Furthermore, the new Common Core includes major
categories of learning that align exceptionally well with

Robotics for Education
References
2131
Part G | 79
project-focused, integrative learning experiences that
are well-suited to educational robotics applications,
e.g., learning precision, learning persistence, learning
innovation, data interpretation, data representation, ge-
ometric measurements, use of statistics, and qualitative
functional analysis.
79.7 Conclusions and Further Reading
This chapter has given an overview of many, but by no
means all, of the educational robot hardware and pro-
grams currently available. Websites such as robots.net
and robotevents.com attempt to maintain lists of the
rapidly evolving ﬁeld of educational robot tournaments.
Keeping track of the latest hardware and software tools
are more problematic. Some additional sources for
these topics, and others covered in this chapter include:
Robots for Kids, edited by Druin & Hendler [79.97];
Robotic Explorations, by Martin [79.98]; Where the Ac-
tion Is: Foundations of Embodied Interaction, by Dour-
ish [79.99]; Piaget’s Theory of Cognitive Development,
by Wadsworth [79.100]; and Computer as Theater, by
Laurel [79.101].
Video-References
VIDEO 239
Hampton robotics club
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/79/videodetails/239
VIDEO 240
Elementary robotics challenge: Soldier Creek Elementary
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/79/videodetails/240
VIDEO 241
Global Conference on Educational Robotics & International Botball Tournament
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/79/videodetails/241
VIDEO 633
Autonomous aerial vehicle carrier landing contest (2001)
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/79/videodetails/633
VIDEO 634
SeaPerch Challenge 2014 ’The Heist’
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/79/videodetails/634
VIDEO 635
New Mexico elementary botball 2014 – Teagan’s first ever run
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/79/videodetails/635
VIDEO 636
Robotics summer camps – PRIA
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/79/videodetails/636
VIDEO 637
World robot olympiad Japan 2014
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/79/videodetails/637
References
79.1
KIPR: Botball robotics education, http://www.
botball.org (2009)
79.2
R. Manseur: Hardware competitions in engineer-
ing education, Front. Educ. Conf., Vol. 2 (2000),
pp. F3C/5–F3C/8
79.3
Robo Cup Junior: http://rcj.robocup.org (2013)
79.4
C. Stein: Botball: Autonomous students engineer-
ing autonomous robots, Comput. Educ. J. 13(2),
72–80 (2003)
79.5
FIRST: FIRST, http://www.usfirst.org/ (2006)
79.6
R. Siegwart: Grasping the interdisciplinarity of
mechatronics, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 8(2), 27–
34 (2001)
79.7
R.D. Beer, H.J. Chiel, R.F. Drushel: Using au-
tonomous robotics to teach science and en-
gineering,
Communication
ACM
42(6), 85–92
(1999)
79.8
A. Billard: Robota, clever toy and educational
tool, Robotics Auton. Syst. 42, 259–269 (2003)
79.9
P. Coppin: Eventscope: A telescience interface for
internet-based education, Proc. SPIE Telemanip-
ulator Telepresence Technol., Vol. 8 (2002)
79.10
B. Fagin: Ada/mindstorms 3.0, IEEE Robotics Au-
tom. Mag. 10(2), 19–24 (2003)
79.11
R.S. Hobson: The changing face of classroom in-
structional methods: service learning and de-
sign in a robotics course, IEEE Front. Educ. Conf.,
Kansas City, Vol. 2 (2000), pp. F3C/20–F3C/25
79.12
D. Kumar, L. Meeden: A robot laboratory for
teaching artificial intelligence, ACM SIGCSE Bull.
30(1), 341–344 (1998)
79.13
J. Schumacher, D. Welch, D. Raymod: Teaching
introductory programming, problem solving and
information technology with robots at West Point,
Proc. IEEE 31st Front. Educ. Conf., Vol. 2 (2001)
79.14
E. Wang: Teaching freshmen design, creativity and
programming with legos and labview, IEEE Front.
Educ. Conf. (2001), pp. F3G–11–15

Part G | 79
2132
Part G
Robots and Humans
79.15
U. Wolz: Teaching design and project manage-
ment with lego RCX robots, ACM SIGCSE Bull. 33(1),
95–99 (2001)
79.16
J.K. Archibald, R.W. Beard: Goal! robot soccer
for undergraduate students, IEEE Robotics Autom.
Mag. 11(1), 70–75 (2004)
79.17
A. Gage, R.R. Murphy: Principles and experiences
in using legos to teach behavioural robotics, IEEE
33rd Front. Educ. Conf., Sarasota, Vol. 2 (2003)
79.18
E. Kolberg, N. Orlev: Robotics learning as a tool for
integrating science technology curriculum in K-12
schools, IEEE Front. Educ. Conf., Vol. 1 (2001), pp.
T2E–12–13
79.19
B.A. Maxwell, L. Meeden: Integrating robotics re-
search with undergraduate education, IEEE Intell.
Syst. 15(6), 22–27 (2000)
79.20
A. Nagchaudhuri, G. Singh, M. Kaur, S. George:
Lego robotics products boost student creativity in
precollege programs at UMES, Front. Educ. Conf.
(2002) p. 3,S4D–1–S4D–6
79.21
C. Stein, K. Nickerson: Botball robotics and gen-
der differences in middle school teams, Proc. ASEE
Annu. Conf., Salt Lake City (2004)
79.22
J.B.
Weinberg,
J.C.
Pettibone,
S.L.
Thomas,
M.L. Stephen, C. Stein: The impact of robot
projects on girls’ attitudes toward science and
engineering, Proc. RSS Robotics Educ. Workshop,
Atlanta (2007)
79.23
T. Fong, I. Nourbakhsh, K. Dautenhahn: A sur-
vey of socially interactive robots, Robotics Autom.
Syst. 42(3), 143–166 (2003)
79.24
F. Martin, B. Mikhak, M. Resnick, B. Silverman,
R. Berg: To mindstorms and beyond: Evolution
of a construction kit for magical machines. In:
Robots for Kids, ed. by A. Druin, J. Hendler (Mor-
gan Kaufmann, San Francisco 2000) pp. 10–32
79.25
M. Cooper, D. Keating, W. Harwin, K. Dautenhahn:
Robots in the Classroom – Tools for Accessible Ed-
ucation (IOS, Amsterdam 1999)
79.26
C. Pomalaza-Raez, B.H. Groff: Retention 101:
Where robots go ... students follow, J. Eng. Educ.
92(1), 85–90 (2003)
79.27
KIPR: Open autonomous robotics game, http://
www.kipr.org/kipr-open (2013)
79.28
R.R. Murphy: Using robot competitions to pro-
mote intellectual development, AI Magazine 21(1),
77–90 (2000)
79.29
D.P. Miller, C. Stein: So that’s what Pi is for!
And other Educational Epiphanies from Hands-
on Robotics. In: Robots for Kids, ed. by A. Druin,
J. Hendler (Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco
2000) pp. 219–243
79.30
I. Vernor, D. Ahlgren, D.P. Miller: Olympiads:
A new means to integrate theory and practice in
robotics, Proc. ASEE Natl. Conf. (2006)
79.31
NASA Robotics Alliance Project: Education matrix,
http://robotics.nasa.gov/edu/matrix.php (2006)
79.32
6.270 Organizers: The history of 6.270 – MIT’s
autonomous robot design competition, http://
web.mit.edu/6.270/www/about/history.html
(MIT, Cambridge 2005)
79.33
BEST Robotics: Middle and high school robotics
competition, http://www.bestinc.org/MVC/ (BEST
Robotics Inc., Auburn 2006)
79.34
D. Ahlgren: Trinity college fire fighting home
robot
contest,
http://www.trincoll.edu/events/
robot/ (Trinity College, Hartford 2006)
79.35
Fuji Soft ABC, Inc.: Fsi-all japan robot-sumo tour-
nament, http://www.fsi.co.jp/sumo-e/ (2006)
79.36
IMRMC
Organizers:
International
micro
robot
maze contest, http://imd.eng.kagawa-u.ac.jp/
maze/ (2012)
79.37
Seaperch: http://www.seaperch.org/
79.38
RoboCup Federation: http://www.robocup.org/
79.39
Robotics Education & Competition Foundation:
http://www.roboticseducation.org/vex-robotics-
competitionvrc/ (2012)
79.40
D. Nardi, M. Riedmiller, C. Sammut, J. Santos-
Victor (Eds.): RoboCup 2004: Robot Soccer World
Cup VIII, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Vol. 3276 (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 2005)
79.41
R. Tucker: Balch, Holly A. Yanco: Ten years of the
AAAI mobile robot competition and exhibition, AI
Magazine 23(1), 13–22 (2002)
79.42
Robot Challenge: http://www.robotchallenge.org
(2013)
79.43
KIPR: Global conference on educational robotics,
http://kipr.org/gcer (2013)
79.44
D.P. Miller: Robot contests at GCER 2011, IEEE
Robotics Autom. Mag. 18(4), 10–12 (2011)
79.45
PRIA:
European
conference
on
educational
robotics, http://ecer13.pria.at (2013)
79.46
Honda: Asimo: The world’s most advanced hu-
manoid robot, http://asimo.honda.com
79.47
iCub.org: An open source cognitive humanoid
robotics platform, http://www.icub.org
79.48
Willow
arage:
Pr2
overview,
http://www.
willowgarage.com/pages/pr2/overview
79.49
Parallax
Inc.:
The
scribbler
2,
http://www.
parallax.com/go/s2 (2012)
79.50
LOGO
Foundation:
A
logo primer or
what’s
with the turtle, http://el.media.mit.edu/logo-
foundation/logo/turtle.html (2000)
79.51
V. Asper, W. Smith, C. Lee, J. Gobat, K. Heywood,
B. Queste, M. Dinniman: Using gliders to study a
phytoplankton bloom in the ross sea, antarctica,
IEEE OCEANS (2011) pp. 1–7
79.52
C.M. Clark, C.S. Olstad, K. Buhagiar, T. Gam-
bin: Archaeology via underwater robots: Mapping
and localization within maltese cistern systems,
IEEE 10th Int. Conf. Control Autom. Robotics Vis.
(ICARCV) (2008) pp. 662–667
79.53
M. Theberge, G. Dudek: Gone swimmin’ (seagoing
robots), IEEE Spectrum 43(6), 38–43 (2006)
79.54
MBARI: Build your own ROV, http://www.mbari.
org/education/rov/
79.55
S.W. Moore, H. Bohm, V. Jensen: Underwater
Robotics: Science, Design & Fabrication (MATEU,
Monterey 2010)
79.56
Marine Tech: Marine tech – ROV competition,
http://www.marinetech.org/rov-competition/
(2013)

Robotics for Education
References
2133
Part G | 79
79.57
F. Gudaitis: The first days of RC, Model Airplane
News, April (2011)
79.58
AIAA:
Student
design-build-fly
competition,
http://www.aiaadbf.org (2013)
79.59
Speedfest: http://speedfest.okstate.edu (2013)
79.60
R. Mahony, V. Kumar, P. Corke: Multirotor aerial
vehicles: Modeling, estimation, and control of
quadrotor, IEEE Robotics Autom. Mag. 19(3), 20–
32 (2012)
79.61
S. Lupashin, A. Schöllig, M. Sherback, R. D’Andrea:
A
simple
learning
strategy
for
high-speed
quadrocopter multi-flips, IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
Autom. (ICRA) (2010), pp 1642 –1648
79.62
J. Meyer: A low cost, vision based micro heli-
copter system for education and control experi-
ments, Master’s Thesis (Univ. of Oklahoma School
of Aerospace & Mechanical Engineering, Norman
2014)
79.63
J.L. Jones, A.M. Flynn: Mobile Robots: Inspiration
to Implementation (Peters, Natick 1993)
79.64
Parallax Inc.: BASIC stamps, http://www.parallax.
com/html_pages/products/basicstamps/basic_
stamps.asp
79.65
J. Lahart: Taking an open-source approach to
hardware, The Wall Street Journal, November 27
(2009)
79.66
C. Anderson: The future of arduino, http://
diydrones.com/profiles/blogs/the-future-of-
arduino
79.67
KIPR:
Link,
http://www.kipr.org/products/link
(2013)
79.68
D.P. Miller, M. Oelke, M.J. Roman, J. Villatoro,
C.N. Winton: The cbc: A linux-based low-cost
mobile robot controller, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robotics Autom. (ICRA) (2010)
79.69
G. Mitsuoka: CBC v2 controller: Brings ease of
use as well as speed, power and vision to small
robots, Robot Mag. 29, 82–85 (2011)
79.70
D. Shiffman: Interview with Casey Reas and
Ben
Fry,
http://rhizome.org/editorial/2009/sep/
23/interview-with-casey-reas-and-ben-fry/
(2009)
79.71
H. Barragán, B. Hagman, A. Brevig: Wiring, http://
wiring.org.co (2011)
79.72
B.J. Duch, S.E. Groh, D.E. Allen: Why problem-
based learning. In: The Power of Problem-Based
Learning, ed. by B.J. Duch, S.E. Groh, D.E. Allen
(Wiley, New York 2011) pp. 3–11
79.73
H.A. Yanco, H.J. Kim, F. Martin, L. Silka: Artbotics:
Combining art and robotics to broaden participa-
tion in computing, Proc. AAAI Spring Symp. Robots
Robot Venues, Stanford (2007)
79.74
F. Martin, G. Greher, J. Heines, J. Jeffers, H.J. Kim,
S. Kuhn, K. Roehr, N. Selleck, L. Silka, H. Yanco:
Joining computing and the arts at a mid-size
university, J. Comput. Sci. Coll. 24(6), 87–94 (2009)
79.75
E. Hamner, T. Lauwers, D. Bernstein, I. Nour-
bakhsh, C. DiSalvo: Robot diaries: Broadening
participation in the computer science pipeline
through social technical exploration, AAAI Spring
Symp. Using AI to Motiv. Gt. Particip. Comput. Sci.
(2008)
79.76
A. Renkl: Worked-out examples: Instructional ex-
planations support learning by self-explanations,
Learn. Instr. 12(5), 529–556 (2002)
79.77
J.M. Wing: Computational thinking, Communica-
tion ACM 49(3), 33–35 (2006)
79.78
J. Countryman, A. Feldman, L. Kekelis, E. Spertus:
Developing a hardware and programming cur-
riculum for middle school girls, ACM SIGCSE Bull.
34(2), 44–47 (2002)
79.79
M. Resnick, J. Maloney, A. Monroy-Hernández,
N. Rusk, E. Eastmond, K. Brennan, A. Millner,
E. Rosenbaum, J. Silver, B. Silverman, Y. Kafai:
Scratch: Programming for all, Communication ACM
52(11), 60–67 (2009)
79.80
J. Mönig, B. Harvey: Build your own blocks (Univ.
of California, Berkeley 2010)
79.81
W.P. Dann, S. Cooper, R. Pausch: Learning to Pro-
gram with Alice (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River
2011)
79.82
T. Lauwers, I. Nourbakhsh: Designing the finch:
Creating a robot aligned to computer science con-
cepts, AAAI 1st Symp. Educ. Adv. Artif. Intell. (2010)
79.83
T. Lauwers, E. Hamner, I. Nourbakhsh: A strategy
for collaborative outreach: Lessons from the cs-
bots project, Proc. 41st ACM Tech. Symp. Comput.
Sci. Educ. (2010) pp. 315–319
79.84
E.A. Vandewater, V.J. Rideout, E.A. Wartella,
X. Huang, J.H. Lee, M. Shim: Digital childhood:
Electronic media and technology use among
infants, toddlers, and preschoolers, Pediatrics
119(5), e1006–e1015 (2007)
79.85
C. Renaud, B. Wagoner: The gamification of learn-
ing, Princ. Leadersh. 12(1), 56–59 (2011)
79.86
R.
Zevenbergen:
Digital
natives
come
to
preschool:
Implications
for
early
childhood
practice, Contemp. Issues Early Child. 8(1), 19–29
(2007)
79.87
J. Nielsen: Heuristic evaluation, Usability Insp.
Methods 24, 413 (1994)
79.88
S.A. Cohen: Instructional alignment: Searching for
a magic bullet, Educ. Res. 16(8), 16–20 (1987)
79.89
T. Lauwwers: Aligning Capabilities of Interactive
Educational Tools to Learner Goals, Ph.D. Thesis
(Carnegie Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh 2010)
79.90
S. Allen: Looking for learning in visitor talk:
A methodological exploration. In: Learning Con-
versations in Museums, ed. by G. Leinhardt,
K. Crowley, K. Knutson (Lawrence Erlbaum, Mah-
wah 2002) pp. 59–303
79.91
K. Crowley, M. Callanan: Describing and support-
ing collaborative scientific thinking in parent-
child interactions, J. Mus. Educ. 23(1), 12–17
(1998)
79.92
K. Crowley, M.A. Callanan, J.L. Jipson, J. Galco,
K. Topping, J. Shrager: Shared scientific thinking
in everyday parent-child activity, Sci. Educ. 85(6),
712–732 (2001)
79.93
G. Leinhardt, K. Crowley: Objects of learning, ob-
jects of talk: Changing minds in museums. In:
Perspectives on Object-Centered Learning in Mu-
seums, ed. by S.G. Paris (Lawrence Erlbaum, Mah-
wah 2002) pp. 301–324

Part G | 79
2134
Part G
Robots and Humans
79.94
I. Nourbakhsh, E. Hamner, E. Ayoob, E. Porter,
B. Dunlavey, D. Bernstein, K. Crowley, M. Lotter,
S. Shelly, T. Hsiu, E. Porter, B. Dunlavey, D. Clancy:
The personal exploration rover: Educational as-
sessment of a robotic exhibit for informal learning
venues, Int. J. Eng. Educ. 22(4), 777–791 (2006)
79.95
M.U. Bers, A.B. Ettinger: Programming robots in
kindergarten to express identity: An ethnographic
analysis. In: Robots in K-12 Education, ed. by
B.S. Barker (Information Science Refernce, Her-
shey 2012) p. 168
79.96
I.R. Nourbakhsh, K. Crowley, A. Bhave, E. Hamner,
T. Hsiu, A. Perez-Bergquist, S. Richards, K. Wilkin-
son:
The
robotic
autonomy
mobile
robotics
course, Auton. Robots 18(1), 103–127 (2005)
79.97
A. Druin, J. Hendler (Eds.): Robots for Kids: Ex-
ploring New Technologies for Learning (Morgan
Kaufmann, Boston 2000)
79.98
F.G. Martin: Robotic Explorations: A Hands-on In-
troduction to Engineering (Prentice Hall, Upper
Saddle River 2000)
79.99
P. Dourish: Where the Action Is: The Foundations
of Embodied Interaction (MIT Press, Cambridge
2004)
79.100
B.J.
Wadsworth:
Piaget’s
theory
of
Cogni-
tive and Affective Development: Foundations
of
Constructivism
(Longman,
New
York
1996)
79.101
B. Laurel: Computers as Theatre (Addison-Wesley,
Reading 2013)

Multimedia Contents Roboethics:
2135
Part G | 80
80. Roboethics: Social and Ethical
Implications
Gianmarco Veruggio, Fiorella Operto, George Bekey
This chapter outlines the main developments of
roboethics 9 years after a worldwide debate on the
subject – that is, the applied ethics about ethical,
legal, and societal aspects of robotics – opened up.
Today, roboethics not only counts several thou-
sands of voices on the Web, but is the issue of
important literature relating to almost all robotics
applications, and of hundreds of rich projects,
workshops, and conferences. This increasing in-
terest and sometimes even fierce debate expresses
the perception and need of scientists, manufac-
turers, and users of professional guidelines and
ethical indications about robotics in society.
Some of the issues presented in the chap-
ter are well known to engineers, and less known
or unknown to scholars of humanities, and vice
versa. However, because the subject is transver-
sal to many disciplines, complex, articulated, and
often misrepresented, some of the fundamental
concepts relating to ethics in science and technol-
ogy are recalled and clarified.
A detailed taxonomy of sensitive areas is pre-
sented. It is based on a study of several years and
referred to by scientists and scholars, the result of
which is the Euron Roboethics Roadmap. This tax-
onomy identifies the most evident/urgent/sensitive
ethical problems in the main applicative fields of
robotics, leaving more in-depth research to further
studies.
80.1
A Methodological Note........................ 2137
80.2
Specificity of Robotics......................... 2138
80.3
Cultural Differences
in the Acceptance of Robots ................ 2138
80.4
Roboethics Foreshadowed
in the Literature................................. 2139
80.5
And Expressed in Real Robotics ........... 2139
80.6
Ethics in Science and Technology ........ 2140
80.7
Ethical Issues in an ICT Society ............ 2143
80.8
Human Principles and Rights .............. 2144
80.9
Legal Issues in Robotics ...................... 2146
80.9.1
Responsibility......................... 2146
80.9.2
Liability ................................. 2146
80.9.3
Privacy................................... 2146
80.10 Roboethics Taxonomy ......................... 2147
80.10.1
Industrial Robotics.................. 2147
80.10.2 Service Robots ........................ 2147
80.10.3 Humanoids ............................ 2148
80.10.4 Healthcare and Life Quality...... 2149
80.10.5 Distributed Robotic Systems..... 2151
80.10.6 Outdoor Robotics .................... 2152
80.10.7 Military Robotics..................... 2152
80.10.8 Educational Robot Kits ............ 2154
80.10.9 Entertainment Robotics
and Art .................................. 2155
80.11
Roboethics Enforced:
From Ideals to Rules ........................... 2156
80.12 Conclusions and Further Reading ........ 2157
Video-References......................................... 2158
References................................................... 2159

Part G | 80
2136
Part G
Robots and Humans
The philosophical issue of the relationship between
humankind and autonomous machines appeared early
in world literature, having been developed through leg-
ends and myths. In early mythology, the ancient peoples
expressed their worries about the disrupting power of
machines over the old societies: When these artiﬁcial
creatures we have given birth to, will have learned ev-
erything from us, or understood that we are weaker than
them, will they try to dominate us?
However, for almost 250 000 years humanity has
relied on tools and machines, to increase its power
by eliminating manual labor and needless drudgery.
This factor has become one of the keys to successful
economic progress, especially since the Industrial Rev-
olution and the emergence of a mechanized economy,
and even more so with the introduction of computers
and automatic machines in the twentieth century [80.1].
Today, progress in the ﬁelds of computer science and
telecommunications allows us to endow machines with
enough intelligence so that they can act autonomously.
The twenty-ﬁrst century humanity will coexist with the
ﬁrst alien intelligence we have ever come into contact
with – robots.
In a few years from now, many more ﬁelds of ap-
plication will be robotized, because robotics will have
occupied more territories. The 2013 McKinsey Report
on the ﬁve disruptive technologies, Advances that will
transform life, business, and the global economy, out-
lines advanced robotics as one of them.
Actually, we are confronted with the rapid devel-
opment of research and applications in the service
(professional and personal) robotics sector, marking the
end of the robot segregation era. The ﬁeld of social
robots – although it does not yet show dramatic sale
ﬁgures – now offers standardized market products for
consumers. We can foresee that research and appli-
cation will point in this direction, driven both by the
market demand and by the challenges and richness of
technological and scientiﬁc issues posed to the roboti-
cist researchers by the human robotics interface. Our
graying societies are open to – and demand – depend-
able and safe automatic autonomous machines to be
employed in human cooperation and assistance.
Differently from the nineteenth century – when
the novel Frankenstein appeared – today, the love and
fear, pros and cons about robots are more grounded
in science, technology, and in humanities. Along with
other applied ethics (bioethics, computer ethics) ethi-
cal, legal, and societal aspect of robotics are debated in
roboethics.
A worldwide debate on roboethics opened up 10
years ago, following the First International Symposium
on Roboethics in 2004 [80.2]. Before that conference,
the word roboethics did not exist, not in any encyclope-
dia, nor on the Web. Today, it counts several thousands
of voices on the Web, an important literature relating to
almost every robotics application, and hundreds of rich
projects, workshops, and conferences. This increasing
interest and sometimes even ﬁerce debate expresses the
perception and need of scientists, manufacturers, and
users of professional guidelines and ethical indications
about robotics in society.
Some major segments of our lives are already of-
ten dependent on sophisticated machines. However, in
some critical instances (where robots are entrusted with
human lives, such as in medicine, in human care, or in
war theaters) we are approaching an ethical and regu-
latory gap, primarily due to the lack of legal guidelines
to ascribe responsibility to software agents and learning
machines. This lack of standards and ethical rules is re-
lated to the speciﬁcity of robot and robotics, and to all
learning machines. That is, machines endowed with the
learning capacity.
The recent thrust in research and applications pro-
grams aiming towards developing robots that are able
to co-operate with humans – that is, software agents
and robots entrusted with high learning and decision-
making functions – presents many theoretical and prac-
tical cases in which moral and legal aspects of the
responsibility attribution problem for learning robots
may soon become an urgent issue [80.3].
Facing the development of ever more powerful
computers and the variety of humanoid robots, some
scholars and scientists have warned about the dangers
of the unlimited use of technology, and especially about
the hubristic endeavor to design and manufacture intel-
ligent creatures [80.4, 5].
Their concern has been ampliﬁed by the harsh dis-
cussion around bioengineering and bioethics. Less dra-
matically, others have pointed out the need to introduce
ethical rules in technological applications, especially
regarding the behavior of intelligent machines. In this
frame, the most matter-of-fact issue is: What will the
cultural and social implication of the robotics invasion
be? Could robots be dangerous to humankind in any
way?

Roboethics: Social and Ethical Implications
80.1 A Methodological Note
2137
Part G | 80.1
80.1 A Methodological Note
This chapter is of a somewhat different nature from –
although complementary to – the totality of the book,
because it deals not only with the scientiﬁc and tech-
nological issues inherent in the matter, but also with
cultural and moral topics related to the introduction of
robots in sensitive human areas.
It is an acknowledged feeling that robotics stimu-
lates some of humanity’s most fundamental questions.
This means that we shall not expect that some simple
answers be conclusive. The undertaking of discover-
ing the essence and origin of human intelligence and
self-consciousness is as tough and troubling as the chal-
lenge around the uniﬁcation of physical forces, or the
research on the origin of the universe. Simplistic an-
swers could lead to gross mistakes and we cannot obtain
correct answers if we pose the wrong questions. The
problem is that robots are machines that are more sim-
ilar to humans than anything we have ever built, and
this makes it easier, on one hand, to adopt human ter-
minology for machines and, on the other hand, to use
machine terminology for humans. This said, the authors
feel it necessary to state the following methodological
premises:

This Handbook – and in particular the present
chapter – will be read by roboticists and also by
non-roboticists, and by students of robotics as well
as by students and scholars of ethics, the philoso-
phy of science, sociology, laws, etc. Some of the
issues presented here are well known to some and
less known or unknown to others, and vice versa.
Nonetheless, the authors deem it useful and impor-
tant to recall and clarify some of the fundamental
concepts relating ethics in science and technology,
because the subject is complex, articulated, and of-
ten misrepresented.

Roboethics is an applied ethics that refers to studies
and works done in the ﬁeld of science and ethics
(S&TS – science and technology studies, science
and technology and public policy, professional ap-
plied ethics), and whose main premises are derived
from these studies. In fact, roboethics was not born
without parents, but it derives its principles from the
global guidelines of the universally adopted applied
ethics. This is the reason that a relatively substan-
tial part of this chapter is devoted to this matter,
before a speciﬁc discussion of sensitive areas of
roboethics.

Many of the issues of roboethics are already covered
by applied ethics such as computer ethics, bioethics,
or neuroethics. For instance, problems – arising
in roboethics – of dependability; of technologi-
cal addiction; of digital divide; of the preservation
of human identity and integrity; the applications
of precautionary principle; of economic and social
discrimination; and of the artiﬁcial system auton-
omy and accountability. As well as issues related
to responsibilities for (possibly unintended) war-
fare applications; the nature and impact of human–
machine cognitive and affective bonds on individu-
als and society; all these issues have already been
matters of investigation by the computer ethics and
bioethics.
Here, the speciﬁcity of robotics was underlined
from a general point of view. Subsequently, in the
taxonomy, the speciﬁc ethical issues related solely to
robotics are carefully evaluated. The present taxonomy
was not developed on the basis of the afﬁnity of the
techno-scientiﬁc or disciplinary areas – like the Index of
the present book. In the roboethics taxonomy, the grid is
based on the afﬁnity of the application of robots, and on
the speciﬁcity inherent in the human–robot interaction
of these applications.
In terms of scope, we have taken into considera-
tion – from the point of view of the ethical issues con-
nected to robotics – a temporal range of two decades,
in which frame we could reasonably locate and infer –
on the basis of the current state-of-the-art in robotics –
certain foreseeable developments in the ﬁeld.
For this reason, we consider premature – and have
only hinted at – problems related to the possible emer-
gence of human qualities in robots: consciousness, free
will, self-consciousness, and sense of dignity, emotions,
and so on. Consequently, this is why we have not ex-
amined problems – debated in some other papers and
essays – like the proposal to not behave with robots like
with slaves, or the need to guarantee them the same re-
spect, rights, and dignity we owe to human workers.
Likewise, and for the same reasons, the target of
roboethics is not the robot and its artiﬁcial ethics, but
the human ethics of the robots’ designers, manufactur-
ers, and users.
Although informed about the issues presented in
some papers on the need and possibility to attribute
moral values to robots’ decisions and about the chance
that in the future robots might be moral entities like – if
not more than– human beings, the authors have chosen
to examine the ethical issues of the human beings in-
volved in the design, manufacturing, and use of robots.
We felt that problems like those connected to the
application of robotics within the military and the pos-
sible use of military robots against some populations
not provided with this sophisticated technology, as

Part G | 80.3
2138
Part G
Robots and Humans
well as problems of terrorism in robotics and prob-
lems connected with biorobotics, implantations, and
augmentation, were pressing and serious enough to
deserve a focused and tailor-made investigation. It is ab-
solutely clear that without a deep rooting of roboethics
in society, the premises for the implementation of an
artiﬁcial ethics in the robots’ control systems will be
missing.
80.2 Specificity of Robotics
Robotics is a discipline originating from:

Mechanics

Automation

Electronics

Computer science

Cybernetics

Artiﬁcial intelligence.
However, it draws on from several other disciplines:

Physics/mathematics

Logic/linguistics

Neuroscience/psychology

Biology/physiology

Anthropology/philosophy

Art/industrial design.
Is robotics a new science?
On the one hand, robotics is often regarded only
as a branch of engineering dealing with intelligent, au-
tonomous machines. In this case, it shares experiences
with other disciplines, and it is somehow the linear sum
of all the knowledge. In fact, the keyword robotics sel-
dom appears in institutional programs, mainly being
hosted in the information and communication technol-
ogy (ICT) cluster, or hidden under different initials.
Some of us, however, see robotics potentially as
new science, in its early stage. Actually, it is the ﬁrst
time in history that humanity is approaching the chal-
lenge to develop an intelligent and autonomous entity.
This extraordinary mission gives to robotics the spe-
cial feature of being a platform where sciences and
humanities – hard and soft sciences – converge: an
experiment in itself [80.6]. Actually, it is not without
some ground that we could forecast that robotics will
emerge as a new science, with its own theory, prin-
ciples, theorems, proofs, and mathematical language.
We are just on the eve of the development of our
science. It is hard to envisage its future. It could hap-
pen that robotics will incorporate other sciences; or
that, like the giant red stars, it will explode into many
other sciences, born from the intersections of adjoining
ﬁelds.
80.3 Cultural Differences in the Acceptance of Robots
While analyzing the present and future roles of robots
in our societies, we shall be aware of the underlying
principles and paradigms which inﬂuence social groups
and single individuals in their relationship with these
machines.
Different cultures and religions regard the inter-
vention in sensitive human ﬁelds like reproduction,
neural therapies, implantations, and privacy differently.
These differences originate from the cultural speciﬁci-
ties towards the fundamental values regarding human
reproduction, life, and death.
In different cultures, ethnic groups, and religions the
very concepts of life and human life differ, ﬁrst of all
concerning the immanence or transcendence of human
life. While in some cultures women and children have
fewer rights than adult males (not even the habeas cor-
pus), in others the ethical debate ranges from the legal-
ization on a post-human status, to the rights of robots.
Thus, the different approaches in roboethics concern the
rights in diversity (gender, ethnicity, minorities) and the
deﬁnition of human freedom and animal welfare. From
these concepts all other ethical speciﬁcities such as pri-
vacy and the border between privacy and traceability of
actions are derived. Cultural differences also emerge in
the realm of natural versus artiﬁcial. Think of the at-
titude of different peoples towards surgical implants or
organ implantation; how human enhancement could be
viewed.
Bioethics has opened important discussions. How is
the integrity of the person conceived? What is the per-
ception of a human being? Last but not least, the very
concept of intelligence, human and artiﬁcial, is subject
to different interpretation. In the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial in-
telligence AI and robotics alone, there is a terrain of
dispute – let us imagine how harsh it could be outside
of the inner circle of experts.

Roboethics: Social and Ethical Implications
80.5 And Expressed in Real Robotics
2139
Part G | 80.5
80.4 Roboethics Foreshadowed in the Literature
Literature is the instrument by which society expresses
itself, free from rigid constraints, and by which it can
simulate future social developments. Sometimes, by
way of literature important and foresighted scientiﬁc is-
sues have been dreamt of and anticipated.
The topic of the threat posed by artiﬁcial entities de-
signed by man’s ingenuity (legends like the rebellions
of automata, the Frankenstein myth, the Golem) recurs
in classical European literature, as well as the misuse
or the evil use of the product of engineering (the myth
of Dedalus). This is not the case in all world cultures.
For instance, Japanese culture does not include such
paradigms; on the contrary, machines (and, in general,
human products) are always beneﬁcial and friendly to
humanity.
In 1942, the outstanding novelist Asimov, who
coined the word Robotics, formulated the famous
Asimov’s
three
laws
of
robotics
in
his
novel
Runaround [80.7]:
Law 1: A robot may not injure a human being, or
through inaction, allow a human being to come to
harm.
Law 2: A robot must obey the orders given to it by hu-
man beings except where such orders would conﬂict
with the ﬁrst law.
Law 3: A robot must protect its own existence as long
as such protection does not conﬂict with the ﬁrst or
second law.
Later on, in 1983, Asimov added the fourth law
(known as the zeroth law):
Law 0: No robot may harm humanity or, through inac-
tion, allow humanity to come to harm.
Over the last few decades, scientiﬁc and technolog-
ical developments have brought forward the frontiers of
robotics, so that those problems that years ago seemed
only theoretical, or a matter of literature and science
ﬁction, are becoming very practical, and even urgent.
Some of these problems have alerted the robotics com-
munity to the need to open a discussion on the princi-
ples that should inspire the design, manufacturing, and
use of robots.
Could these laws really become the ethics of robots?
Of course not. The three laws are a beautiful mes-
sage passed on to us by Asimov, but they are a literary
expression of some general principles metaphorically
applied to robotics – it is a work of art, and a source
of inspiration. However, as such these laws are inade-
quate to encompass the complexity of robotics in all its
branches and applications to society.
80.5 And Expressed in Real Robotics
In January 2004, in San Remo, Italy, the School of
Robotics, in collaboration with roboticists, philoso-
phers, and scholars of humanities, organized the First
International Symposium on Roboethics, where the
word roboethics was ofﬁcially used for the ﬁrst time
(Fig. 80.1).
In this occasion the IEEE Robotics and Automa-
tion Society established a Technical Committee (TC)
on Roboethics, with the aim of providing the IEEE
Robotics and Automation Society with a framework
for analyzing the ethical implications of robotics re-
search, by promoting the discussion among researchers,
philosophers, ethicists, and manufacturers, but also
by supporting the establishment of shared tools for
managing ethical issues in this context. The TC pro-
moted many activities, workshops, and studies on
roboethics.
In 2005, EURON (the European Robotics Research
Network) funded a project called Euron Roboethics
Atelier, with the aim of drawing the ﬁrst roboethics
roadmap. In 2006, in Genoa, Italy, scholars from hu-
manities met with engineers and roboticists for 3 days
to draw the lines of the Euron Roboethics Road-
map [80.8].
Following the First International Symposium on
Roboethics, one of the ﬁrst steps in roboethics was
to select a methodology for the identiﬁcation and
analysis of techno-ethical issues in robotics. To our
knowledge, three European projects (which also availed
themselves of international experts, as well as back-
ground studies in information and computer ethics and
in bioethics) represent the most structured efforts in this
ﬁeld. These are: the Euron Roboethics Atelier, 2006;
Ethicbots, 2006–2008; and CARE, Coordination Ac-
tion for Robotics in Europe, 2008.
As deﬁned by its designer [80.2]:
Roboethics is an applied ethics whose objective
is to develop scientiﬁc/cultural/technical tools that
can be shared by different social groups and be-
liefs. These tools aim to promote and encourage the
development of robotics for the advancement of hu-
man society and individuals, and to help preventing
its misuse against humankind.

Part G | 80.6
2140
Part G
Robots and Humans
Fig. 80.1 The roboethics’ logo, sketched by the renown
Italian artist, Emanuele Luzzati (1920–2007), is repre-
sented by a smiling young girl receiving a ﬂower from
a chivalrous humanoid robot
According to the deﬁnition, roboethics is not the ethics
of robots, nor any artiﬁcial ethics, but it is the hu-
man ethics of the robots’ designers, manufacturers, and
users.
Over the years since 2004, three different deﬁnition
of roboethics emerged, according to the epistemologi-
cal and moral conceptions of their authors. These three
deﬁnitions correspond to three different words [80.9].
The ﬁrst deﬁnition is represented by the adopted
ethical theories, developed principally by the branch of
philosophy called ethics or morality, which studies hu-
man conduct, moral assessments and the concepts of
good and evil, right and wrong, justice and injustice,
etc. In our case, a generic or fundamental ethical re-
ﬂection is directly linked to the particular issues that
are generated by the development of robotic applica-
tions and their diffusion in society. This is the proper
concept of roboethics, meaning applied ethics that, sim-
ilarly to bioethics, attempts to provide answers to new
questions that are generated by the progress of a spe-
ciﬁc scientiﬁc and technical ﬁeld. This level updates
the various views on concepts such as dignity and in-
tegrity of the person and the fundamental rights of the
individual, as well as the social, psychological, and le-
gal aspects involved. Roboethics is developed for a) the
identiﬁcation and analysis of ethical issues that arise
from current and upcoming robotics applications, and
b) the possible deﬁnition of some general guidelines on
the above. In a broader meaning of the word, roboethics
not only applies to the prohibition and/or prevention
of some actions, but identiﬁes also those trends of
robotics research and development that enhance what
are viewed as human rights (the encouragement to
some actions): robotics research and applications that
promote and enhance human rights for well-being, edu-
cation, and the right to medical care, food, housing, and
employment.
The second deﬁnition, currently referred to as robot
ethics, or machine ethics, regards the code of con-
duct that designers implement in the AI of robots.
This means a sort of artiﬁcial ethics able to guarantee
that autonomous robots will exhibit ethically acceptable
behavior in all situations in which they interact with
human beings or when their actions may have nega-
tive consequences on human beings or the environment.
It is clear that the guidelines to deﬁne what is ethi-
cally acceptable and to enforce them are the product
of the above-mentioned ﬁeld of roboethics. Robots are,
in fact, machines, meaning tools that are unaware of the
choices made by their human creators, which, therefore,
bear the moral responsibility for the actions, good or
bad, of robots.
Finally, there is a third meaning, which we could
perhaps deﬁne as robots’ ethics, because it is the ethic
born from the subjective morality of a hypothetical
robot that is equipped with a conscience and freedom
to choose its own actions on the basis of a full com-
prehension of their implications and consequences. It is
only in this case that robots may be deemed as moral
agents, and that one may refer to involving the respon-
sibilities or rights of robots. This, obviously, is currently
speculative and beyond the purposes of this handbook.
80.6 Ethics in Science and Technology
For the purposes of this study, we provide the vari-
ous meanings of the term ethics within the context of
modern debate. Traditionally, ethics is a philosophical
or theological subject that studies human behavior and
assessment criteria for human behaviors and choices.
Modern ethics have developed from various points of
view along classical philosophy. In the last decades, in
our highly complex societies characterized by techno-
scientiﬁc development, the attribution of moral and
practical responsibility is becoming more and more
difﬁcult, with regard to unintentional or collateral con-
sequences of actions and operations that are produced
by unidentiﬁable decisions (group decisions, complex
administrative structure, distribution of responsibilities,
computerized operations). Often, one ﬁnds it impossi-
ble to attribute ﬁnal responsibility to a single person

Roboethics: Social and Ethical Implications
80.6 Ethics in Science and Technology
2141
Part G | 80.6
or to a deﬁned social entity. In the absence of a def-
inition and of a precise analysis of the responsibility
chain, technologically advanced societies have shifted
the issue onto the concept of risk assessment, thereby
attributing value to the damage produced by entities that
are seemingly devoid of responsibility. In our case, the
question is: Who is responsible for any damage that
may be caused by an autonomous robot? Is it the de-
signer, the manufacturer, the programmer, or the ﬁnal
user? Often it will be difﬁcult to obtain easy answers to
this question.
From the view point of ethical theories, we observe
that individuals possess ethics of common sense, which
provide them with the moral guidelines for decision
making, from the small ones to important life decisions.
This affects day to day life, as well as our actions in
our close-knit social relations. Individuals often adopt
different ethical theories from time to time: utilitarian-
ists for some decisions, in other situations or moments
they generally go by the terms of their up-bringing, cus-
toms, tradition, and religion (descriptive ethics). And
this seems to be enough for them.
However, this line of thought reaches its limits
when, as social ﬁgures, or in our profession, we are
faced with complex problems, in which our actions may
have multiple consequences that are difﬁcult to follow
and predict; and when our common sense is faced with
problems we have never dealt with before – bioethical
dilemmas for example. In these situations, the ethics
of common sense leads to various paradoxes: we ﬁnd
ourselves without any conceptual resources and in the
difﬁcult position of having to pass judgement. In these
cases, we need a logical-critical set of ethics (critical
ethics) that: a) reveals the implicit, and perhaps never
uncovered, assumptions in our ethics of common sense,
and in our outdated ethical theoretical base; b) analyzes
reasons, the pros and cons and identiﬁes their origin.
Inevitably – we may not even realize it – we resort to
prescriptive ethics and ethical theories.
In practice, when faced with general and complex
topics, we may refer to the fundamental, relevant values
involved in our dilemmas; we may adhere to the more
updated morality applied to issues close to ours; or we
try to step up from the universally shared prescriptions
towards new ethical frontiers. Prescriptive ethical the-
ory, which develops and justiﬁes the principles of moral
actions, refers to ethical theories and the related guide-
lines. These, in turn, represent the general ideas that
contain ethical principles, in order to reach an inter-
nal and systematic coherence. In defence of the ethical
principle, the ethical philosophers either implicitly or
explicitly refer to an ethical theory.
In the twentieth century, from the dissatisfaction
raised by the issues that are deemed to be the limits
to traditional ethical theory – utilitarianism and deon-
tologism inspired by Kant – ethics became fragmented
into several forms: rights ethics, virtue ethics, feminist
ethics, and applied ethics [80.10]
According to virtue ethics – which have less to do
with single actions, but more to do with different life
styles, and ways of life – the most important moral obli-
gation is our personal relationship with or actions or
non-actions. In making or using robots, according to
virtue ethics we would analyze the effect of robots in
respect to the concept of good and happiness: Which
robots could contribute most to the happiness, to the full
and complete quality of life of human beings? [80.11]
In another instance, considering the need to account
for values that are part of a collective conscience, the
so-called rights ethics sees human rights as the most
relevant elements in common for a system of cultural
and moral pluralism, and as being reasonably deemed
to be the ﬁnal manifestation of universal ethics.
One of the challenges to traditional ethical theo-
ries by some thinkers regarded the limitation of moral
considerations to the problems of humans and of their
relationship in human society, regardless of other liv-
ing organisms and of the environment. Therefore ethical
theories, and the new applied ethical theories in partic-
ular, were called upon to include non-human entities
in their analysis (animal ethics, environmental ethics,
and planetary ethics – known as the Gaia theory), as
well as human products (bio-culture, computer ethics,
roboethics). The various ethical theories applied are,
in turn, connected and intertwined with other disci-
plines, including law, sociology (descriptive ethics),
economics, and various scientiﬁc ﬁelds.
One of the central themes of applied ethics is the
concept of responsibility, which is a moral notion. Legal
responsibility determines the rules of the relevant pre-
scriptive ethics, meaning the group of commands and
prohibitions adopted by a society or a group, and that
also deﬁnes professional ethics. For the purposes of this
chapter, to analyze the human–robot relationship, we
shall consider the two main meanings of the term re-
sponsibility:

The analysis of the identity of the agent of the cause
of certain actions and their effects (utilitarianism,
consequentialism, or teleologism)

An expression of motivations that leads an agent to
act in a certain way (deontological ethics or Kantian
ethics), according to which the individual assesses
the consequences of his or her actions.
We know that in the last century, the question What
authority and what set of moral rules am I obliged to be
accountable to? State law? God? forced many answers

Part G | 80.6
2142
Part G
Robots and Humans
(utilitarian or deontological) to a crisis point. Often, the
moral response of the individual as well as the moral
evolution of our society have led to an opposition to the
responsibility towards the nation, the church, or towards
traditional roles of social institutions (Weber’s ethics of
intentions or ethics of individual conscience) [80.12]
Some serious events related to World War Two
changed the notion of responsibility and of differen-
tiation of roles (i. e., engineers deal with engineering,
doctors with medicine, soldiers obey orders from su-
periors, etc.); and also some famous legal cases, e.g.,
the Adolf Eichmann trial, during which Eichmann de-
fended himself by stating that he was obeying orders
under his administrative responsibilities and that he did
not decide on, nor was he aware of, the entire project
of Jewish extermination; or the debate that ensued after
Hiroshima/Nagasaki in 1945.
Furthermore, there are different cases in which our
personal morals clash with those adopted and imposed
by the society we live in and whose law we live under.
Such is the case, for example, with the death penalty
(which is in force in various states in the USA, although
contested by internal currents), animal rights, abortion,
or euthanasia. In these cases, the implicit moral philos-
ophy in state laws does not coincide with the feelings
of many groups of the relevant societies, which leads to
this sort of conﬂict.
Therefore, we observe that in contemporary soci-
eties, the notion of responsibility is not limited to the
moral consideration of actions of the agent or cause, and
it does not only deal with the necessary conformity of
the action with a group of duties (therefore, the analysis
of consequences is less decisive). In today’s society, just
the elements of complexity and of technological ruling
determine the aspect that is known as heterogenesis of
ends, according to which our actions may have conse-
quences that are extremely difﬁcult to estimate, which
may even be opposite to our intentions. According to
Morin’s ecology of action [80.13], once the action de-
parts from the individual, it lives a life of its own, and
combines itself with the environmental conditions (so-
cial models, actions and reactions of other agents), and
the ﬁnal result is beyond the agent’s predictive abilities.
Faced with this vacancy in the attribution of in-
dividual responsibility, some researchers attempted to
identify collectively shared responsibilities, if impos-
sible or useless to identify individual responsibility.
In the case of scientiﬁc research, S&TS expert von
Schomberg [80.14] proposes to adopt an assessment
system based on foresight and knowledge (foresight
and knowledge assessment). The author sustains that,
because the deﬁnition of responsibility is considerably
more arduous to deﬁne in scientiﬁc ﬁelds, due to the
unintentional consequences, uncertainty, or ignorance
of results, instead of identifying the ethical responsibili-
ties post hoc, it is necessary to establish the ethics of the
overlap of knowledge between different areas before-
hand (synergy: scientists, politicians, etc.) because the
quality of knowledge shall determine the ethical value
of the applications that will follow. At the same time,
one must constantly ensure the maximum precision of
predictions in order to identify both the wholesomeness
of research and relevant applications, as well as the po-
tential ethical problems.
Other authors have emphasized the need to avoid
the overlap between ethical problems and technical so-
lutions; among the latter, the expert of computer ethics,
Mowshowitz. In his Technology as excuse for question-
able ethics he states that [80.15]:
The seemingly eternal social problems are real
enough, but to look for their cause in technique or
autonomous technology is both mistaken and harm-
ful. We should not blame technology for human
failures. (...) Autonomous technology contributes to
the belief in technological determinism, i. e., re-
inforces belief in the inability of people to make
signiﬁcant choices in their lives. It directs attention
away from wielders of power to systems of reiﬁed
collectivities. The law is smarter than the social
sciences – it deﬁnes the corporation, for example,
as a ﬁctional person for purposes of assigning re-
sponsibility and does not absolve key actors of their
responsibilities. Institutions should be seen as con-
venient ﬁctions that help explain individual decision
and action (...) Only the actions of human beings
can be alienating or dehumanizing. Reiﬁcation of
technology allows for an illegitimate transference of
responsibility from persons to a ﬁctional social con-
struct, and at the same time impedes our ability to
come to grips with the very real ethical challenges
posed by the uses of technology.
In conclusion, we observe that in roboethics, the
deﬁnition of moral responsibility, and the resulting no-
tion of liability – which is central in the human–robot
relationship – could differ according to the philosophi-
cal assumptions, which – knowingly or unknowingly –
have been adopted.

Roboethics: Social and Ethical Implications
80.7 Ethical Issues in an ICT Society
2143
Part G | 80.7
80.7 Ethical Issues in an ICT Society
The importance of ethics in science and technology has
been demonstrated by our recent history. Three of the
front rank ﬁelds of science and technology: nuclear
physics, bioengineering, and computer science, have
already been forced to face the consequences of the ap-
plications of their research because of pressure caused
by dramatic events, or because of the concern of the
general public.
The introduction of intelligent machines in our daily
life brings up global social and ethical problems, which
are usually summarized as follows:

Dual-use technology (every technology that can be
used for civilian or military applications)

Anthropomorphization of technological products (it
is well known and documented that people attribute
intentions, goals, emotions, and personalities to
even the simplest of machines with life-like move-
ment or form)

Humanization of the human/machine relationship
(cognitive and affective bonds toward machines)

Technology addiction

Digital divide, socio-technological gap (per ages,
social layer, per world areas)

Fair access to technological resources

Effects of technology on the global distribution of
wealth and power

Environmental impact of technology.
Due to the interdisciplinarity of robotics, roboethics
shares problems and solutions with other applied ethics:
computer ethics, information ethics, bioethics, tech-
noethics, and neuroethics.
Computer Ethics (CE), is a term that was coined
by Walter Maner in the mid 1970s. It indicated the
ﬁeld of research that studies ethical problems aggra-
vated, transformed, or created by computer technol-
ogy [80.16]
Perhaps, the ﬁrst contact between ethics and com-
puter science took place in the 1940s, when Norbert
Wiener, professor at the MIT and one of the founding
fathers of computer science expressed his concern about
the social effects of the technologies he himself con-
tributed to develop. In 1948, in his book Cybernetics: or
Control and Communication in the Animal and the Ma-
chine [80.17] and successively in his other book, The
Human Use of Human Beings, he pointed out the dan-
gers of nuclear war and the role of scientists in weapons
development in 1947, shortly after Hiroshima [80.18].
Although he did not use the term computer ethics, he
laid down a comprehensive foundation for computer
ethics research and analysis. Wiener’s foundation of
computer ethics was far ahead of its time.
It was not before 1968 that Wiener’s concern be-
came actual practice, when Donn Parker, one of the
most famous scientist of SRI (Stanford Research Insti-
tute), at Menlo Park, began to examine unethical and
illegal uses of computers by computer professionals.
According to Bynum, Park then said that it seemed that
when people entered the computer center, they left their
ethics at the door [80.19].
In 1968 Parker published Rules of Ethics in In-
formation Processing [80.20], and he promoted the
development of the ﬁrst code of professional conduct
of the Association for Computing Machinery (AMC),
which was adopted by the ACM in 1973.
During the late 1960s, Joseph Weizenbaum, the
designer of the computer program Eliza, shocked by
the emotional involvement of psychiatric scholars to-
wards his simple programs, expressed his concern
that an information processing model of human be-
ings was reinforcing an already growing tendency
among scientists, and even among the general pub-
lic, to see humans as mere machines. Weizenbaum
wrote the book Computer Power and Human Rea-
son, in which expressed his thoughtful ethical philos-
ophy [80.21].
In the late 1970s, Walter Maner of the Virginia’s Old
Dominion University was the ﬁrst to employ the lemma
computer ethics to deﬁne the ﬁeld of inquiry dealing
with ethical problems aggravated, transformed, or cre-
ated by computer technology. In 1985, Moor of Dart-
mouth College published his article What is computer
ethics? [80.16] and Johnson of Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute published her book, Computer Ethics [80.22],
the ﬁrst textbook – and for more than a decade, the
deﬁning textbook – in the ﬁeld. In 1983 at Palo Alto the
CPSR (Computer Professional for Social Responsibil-
ity) CPSR was founded. This is a global organization
promoting the responsible use of computer technol-
ogy. Incorporated in 1983 (following discussions and
organization that began in 1981), CPSR, is the ﬁrst
international association whose mission is to educate
policymakers and the public on a wide range of issues.
In 1991 computer ethics was ofﬁcially added as subject
to the programs in the computer science departments of
the United States.
Information ethics (IE) was developed in the 1990s
by several researchers (especially the Oxford team
led by Floridi), when it was proposed that the core
of the issues of CE did not lie in the speciﬁc tech-
nology, but in the raw material manipulated by it
(data/information) [80.23].
Bioethics is the study of the ethical, social, le-
gal, philosophical, and other related issues arising in

Part G | 80.8
2144
Part G
Robots and Humans
healthcare and in the biological sciences (International
Association of Bioethics, IAB).
In 1970 Van Rensselaer Potter coined the word
bioethics. He was an American biochemist, Professor
of Oncology at the McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Re-
search at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The
ﬁrst appearance of the term was in his book Bioethics,
Bridge to the Future [80.24]; he coined it after trying
for many months to ﬁnd the right words to express the
need to balance the scientiﬁc orientation of medicine
with human values.
Potter’s original concept of bioethics comprised
a global integration of biology and values designed
to guide human survival, with a new bioethics as the
bridge between science and humanities. Increasingly,
he felt the need to link what he came to realize had be-
come mainstream biomedical ethics with environmental
ethics. During his career Potter continued to modify the
term bioethics to differentiate his conceptions from the
dominant view of biomedical ethics. He eventually se-
lected the term global bioethics, and this became the
title of his second book. In it, there is a new deﬁnition
of the term bioethics [80.25]:
Biology combined with diverse humanistic knowl-
edge forging a science that sets a system of medical
and environmental priorities for acceptable sur-
vival.
The ﬁeld of bioethics is at a critical stage of evo-
lution, having now passed the 30th year of the de-
velopment of bioethics programs. It is in a phase of
professionalization attending to both the ethical frame-
work for clinical and industrial bioethical consultation
and the creation of the next level of academic organiza-
tional success, namely, departments and PhD programs.
Technoethics is a recent deﬁnition, derived from
Christian theology [80.26]:
As a sum total of ideas that bring into evidence
a system of ethical reference that justiﬁes that pro-
found dimension of technology as a central element
in the attainment of a ﬁnalized perfection of man.
Neuroethics is concerned with ethical, legal, and
social policy implications of neuroscience, and with
aspects of neuroscience research itself [80.27]. Neu-
roethics encompasses a wide array of ethical issues
emerging from different branches of clinical neuro-
science (neurology, psychiatry, psychopharmacology)
and basic neuroscience (cognitive neuroscience, affec-
tive neuroscience).
In conclusion, we can summarize the ethical issues
in advanced robotics as derived from the studies of the
applied ethics, as follows:

Under what conditions a technology is to be consid-
ered acceptable? (precautionary principle)

At what point the development of this technology is
acceptable?

How do we weigh the cost/beneﬁts ratio of an ad-
vanced technology?

How do we weigh any risk assessment?

What is the rate of the ethics of functional compen-
sation or repair vs. enhancement/augmentation?

Are there cases where a particular type of technol-
ogy itself should be considered unacceptable even
though it has potential for compensation as well as
enhancement?

The issue of identifying cause, and assigning re-
sponsibility, should some harm result from the de-
ployment of robotic technology [80.28].
80.8 Human Principles and Rights
The authors are inspired, in this study, by the thesis
of the American moral and political philosopher Rawls
and his reﬂective equilibrium [80.29]. According to
Rawls, the charters and treaties, although advanced in
an attempt to associate the highest number of partic-
ipants, and although commendable in the attempt to
widen the promotion of rights to as great a number
of members and functions as possible, do not satisfy
the possibility of positive progress, nor can they pro-
vide for the entire range of criminal uses of robots.
In roboethics, scholars are heading off to an unknown
land, where new and original solutions should be cre-
ated. However, although searching for new solutions on
its way, coherence with philosophy of law imposes that
no new form of ethics can demean the rights acquired
by the previous ones [80.30]:
Any new ethics must deal with the same substance
as the old role responsibility ethics, namely with
values and norms that restrict or delimit human ac-
tion and thus enable or guide traditional decision
making.
This statement means that roboethics and robot ethics
should be coherent with the universally shared sets of
rules.
Universal sets of rules are expressed by inter-
nationally recognized institutions such as the United

Roboethics: Social and Ethical Implications
80.8 Human Principles and Rights
2145
Part G | 80.8
Nations, The World Health Organization, the FAO, UN-
ESCO/COMEST, the International Labor Organization
(ILO), the World Medical Association, and the World
Summit on the Information Society. Also, the European
Union has identiﬁed general ethical principles, which
have been adopted by most nations, cultures, and people
of the world. Furthermore, the international scientiﬁc,
juridical, economic, and regulatory communities have
in many occasions proposed a harmonization (univer-
sally accepted, standardized) of world ethical principles
applied to science and technology, especially in those
cases where these principles involve sensitive issues
such as life, human reproduction, human dignity, and
freedom.
For instance, the Ethics of Science and Technol-
ogy Programme, part of UNESCO’s Division of Ethics
of Science and Technology in the Social and Human
Sciences Sector, and COMEST, an advisory body to
UNESCO composed of 18 independent experts, has
proposed in the ﬁeld of bioethics to start a process to-
wards a declaration on universal norms on bioethics. In
Rio de Janeiro, December 2003, COMEST organized
an international conference on the issue of a Universal
Ethical Oath for Scientists. Because ethics in science
and technology is not limited to deontology or profes-
sional ethics, but concerns a broader range of questions
involving fundamental beliefs and moral principles, its
results and conclusions become also guidelines for con-
duct in the professional daily life.
From the social and ethical standpoint, in deciding
on the design, development, and application of a new
technology, designers, manufacturers, and end users
should follow rules, which are common to all human
beings:

Human dignity and human rights

Equality, justice and equity

Beneﬁt and harm

Respect for cultural diversity and pluralism

Non-discrimination and non-stigmatization

Autonomy and individual responsibility

Informed consent

Privacy and conﬁdentiality

Solidarity and cooperation

Social responsibility

Sharing of beneﬁts

Responsibility towards the biosphere

Obligatory cost beneﬁt analysis (whether ethical
issues are to be considered as part of a proper cost-
beneﬁt analysis)

Exploitation
of
potential
for
public
discus-
sion [80.31].
Computer and information ethics has developed
a code of ethics called PAPA (privacy, accuracy, intel-
lectual property, and access), which could be adopted
by robotics:

Privacy: What information about one’s self or one’s
associations must a person reveal to others, under
what conditions, and with what safeguards? What
things can people keep to themselves and not be
forced to reveal to others?

Accuracy: Who is responsible for the authentic-
ity, ﬁdelity, and accuracy of information? Similarly,
who is to be held accountable for errors in informa-
tion and how is the injured party to be made whole?

Property: Who owns information? What are the just
and fair prices for its exchange? Who owns the
channels, especially airways, through which infor-
mation is transmitted? How should access to this
scarce resource be allocated?

Accessibility: What information does a person or an
organization have the right or privilege to obtain,
under what conditions, and with what safeguards?
Problems of the delegation and accountability to
and within technology are daily life problems of all of
us. Today, we give responsibility for crucial aspects of
our security, health, and life-saving, and so on to ma-
chines.
Professionals are advised to apply, in perform-
ing sensitive technologies the precautionary princi-
ple [80.32]:
When an activity raises threats of harm to human
health or the environment, precautionary measures
should be taken even if some cause-and-effect rela-
tionships are not fully established scientiﬁcally.
From the precautionary principle some other rules
are derived, such as:

Non-instrumentalization

Non-discrimination

Informed consent and equity

Sense of reciprocity

Data protection.
All over the world, associations and orders of engi-
neers have adopted codes of ethics guiding to respon-
sible conduct in research and practice. In this context,
security and reliability are the most important ethical
codes of conduct.
Among the other important recommendations are
the following:

Hold paramount the safety, health, and welfare of
the public in the performance of their professional
duties

Part G | 80.9
2146
Part G
Robots and Humans

Perform services only in areas of their compe-
tence

Issue public statements only in an objective and
truthful manner

Act in professional matters for each client as faithful
agents or trustees

Avoid improper solicitation of professional assign-
ments [80.33].
80.9 Legal Issues in Robotics
Because of their increasing autonomy and anthropo-
morphic characteristics, robots are inherently different
from other man-made devices and systems and hence
require the development of new legal structures under
which they operate (and will operate) in society. At
present there is no clear legal framework on which to
append issues relating to the behavior of autonomous,
intelligent robots, and what distinguishes their behav-
ior from that of human beings. Since robot intelligence
is provided by their on-board computers, they too will
require new legal frameworks. For example, about 15
years ago, Kurzweil wrote that by 2029 there will be
a growing discussion about the legal rights of com-
puters and what constitutes being human. Further, he
states that Machines will claim to be conscious and
these claims will be largely accepted [80.34]. Whether
we accept this forecast or not, it illustrates the fact
that our current legal structures have no provisions
for dealing with autonomous machines [80.35]. Fur-
ther, many of the ethical issues discussed earlier in
this chapter will require legal support for their im-
plementation, since society depends on law for the
enforcement of its ethical foundations. Some of the
major legal issues concerning robots in society in-
clude responsibility, liability, attribution, agency, and
privacy. We consider these points brieﬂy (and super-
ﬁcially) in this section. A major treatment of these
issues has been provided by Asaro [80.36, 37], Moon
and Nass [80.38], Dennett [80.39], Calo [80.40], Den-
ning [80.41], Sharkey [80.42], and others.
80.9.1 Responsibility
In the present state of the art, we can say that a dumb
or even a semi-autonomous robot that breaks the law
does so because of bad design, bad programming, or
bad construction. This implies that we need to attribute
responsibility for improper or illegal behavior to the
owners, designers, and/or builders of the machines.
The question of responsibility becomes increasingly
complex as the robots become more autonomous and
capable of modifying their behavior through learning
and experience, since their behavior will no longer be
based entirely on their original design. Of course, one
could attribute the learned behavior to the designers of
the artiﬁcial intelligence programs; a second-order at-
tribution. This is another issue for the writers of future
laws. When human beings break the law, the conse-
quences may be punishments, such as paying ﬁnes or
serving time in jail. Such punishments do not apply
to robots, unless their behavior is attributed to humans
with evil intentions, who then face the consequences.
A related issue is that of agency, a legal term im-
plying that one person acts on behalf of another; he/she
is the agent of the second person. Thus, in real estate
transactions, a salesman may be my agent and represent
me in discussions with potential buyers of my house. If
a robot can be considered an agent of a person, then the
attribution of responsibility is clear and direct. Even so,
there will be legal issues concerning the (mis)behavior
of a robot owned by Mr. A, but acting as an agent for
Mr. B. Such a situation may arise if B is a hacker and
has gained control of the robot’s computer.
80.9.2 Liability
Liability is the legal consequence of responsibility. If
my robot breaks your property, even accidentally, I am
responsible and liable. This is civil liability. If it can
be proven that my robot harmed a person as a result
of negligence on my part in the design, programming,
or fabrication of the robot, I may also be criminally li-
able. Liability is a major cause of legal action in the
United States, it provides income to many lawyers, and
is too complex to deal with comprehensively in this
chapter. However, we can say that sometimes liability
may be apportioned, partially to the designer, partially
to the manufacturer, and partially to the user, espe-
cially if the latter has modiﬁed the robot’s hardware
or software. Even toy robots like the RoboSapien (for-
merly manufactured by WowWee Toys in Hong Kong),
have spawned Websites with guidelines for hacking the
robot’s software and modifying its behavior.
80.9.3 Privacy
The right to privacy is protected by a variety of laws.
Yet, it is clear that recent developments in robotics
will challenge both law and custom in this area. We
know that drones (autonomous ﬂying vehicles) carry

Roboethics: Social and Ethical Implications
80.10 Roboethics Taxonomy
2147
Part G | 80.10
new cameras with such amazing resolution that they
can discern objects 1 m in size from an altitude of
several thousand meters [80.43]. This implies that un-
manned ﬂying vehicles could spy on citizens in their
own backyards, producing pictures that could be used
for blackmail or other illegal purposes. Even more
serious are recent developments in very small ﬂying
robots, only a few centimeters in length, that could ﬂy
in and out of windows, perch in trees or on roofs of
buildings, collecting information using vision and other
sensors, including the ability to record both sounds
and smells. The legal system is not currently equipped
for handling such methods of surveillance. There is
a still more subtle form of privacy violation, discussed
by Calo [80.40] and Denning [80.41]. Consider the
increasing variety of personal robots in our homes: vac-
uum cleaners, window washers, child companions, and
assistants to the elderly and disabled. All these ma-
chines could also be spies, especially if hacked by third
parties. Recently there was controversy in the United
States over the discovery that some manufacturers of
smart phones that include global positioning system
(GPS) sensors had programmed their machines to send
the owners’ geographic location to a company’s com-
puter. This could be interpreted as another invasion of
privacy.
It is evident from the brief summary in this section
that current and future developments in robotics will
pose greater and greater challenges to the legal systems
in many countries. We believe that it is essential for rep-
resentatives of governments, the legal profession, and
robotics designers and manufacturers to begin dialogs
on this subject now, before being forced to do so by
major accidents or intentional violation of law.
80.10 Roboethics Taxonomy
Certainly, classifying the different branches of robotics
is not an easy task. Likewise, it is a complex under-
taking to organize a matrix of ﬁeld of robotics/ethical
issues. We have tried to classify these topics accord-
ing to homogeneous ﬁelds from an applicative point
of view. Furthermore, in the present taxonomy, we
have chosen the triage process of identifying the most
evident/urgent/sensitive ethical problems in robotics,
leaving more complex problems to other times and fur-
ther studies.
80.10.1 Industrial Robotics
An industrial robot is ofﬁcially deﬁned by the Interna-
tional Standards Organization (ISO) as an automatically
controlled, reprogrammable, multipurpose manipula-
tor. Typical applications of industrial robots include
welding, painting, ironing, assembly, pick and place,
palletizing, product inspection, and testing, all accom-
plished with high endurance, speed, and precision.
Complexity can vary from a simple single robot to
very complex multi-robot systems:

Robotic arms

Robotic work cells

Assembly lines.
From the social and economic standpoint, the ben-
eﬁts of these robots are extraordinary. They can relieve
human beings of heavy work, dangerous workplaces,
and routine and tedious activities. In the future, we
can imagine robotic factories, completely managed by
robots. In industrialized countries, which are facing
looming labor shortages due to aging societies, robots
in factories will cut costs. Industrial robots increase pro-
ductivity (higher speed, better endurance); they increase
quality (precision, cleanliness, endurance); they make
highly miniaturized devices possible.
Social problems stemming from the introduction of
robots in factories are, ﬁrst of all, loss of jobs, and un-
employment. On the other hand, while a welfare policy
is to be implemented at national level to facilitate work-
ers’ reconversion, and educational programs to create
new skills, it should also be said that robots have also
created new jobs directly and can create wealth, leading
to the development of new industries and workplaces.
80.10.2 Service Robots
Service robots are robots of several shapes and sizes
(wheeled, legged, humanoids), equipped with differ-
ent kinds of sensing systems (artiﬁcial vision systems,
ultrasonic, radio) and manipulations (grippers, hands,
tools, probes). Service robots support and back up hu-
man operators. These robots represent one of the fastest
growing areas of robotics, and they raise a large num-
ber of ethical issues. According to the International
Federation of Robotics (IFR) World Robotics Report,
2014 [80.44], the total number of professional service
robots sold in 2012 went up to 6067units; likewise, IFR
projections for the period 2013–2016 forecast about
22 million units of service robots for personal use).
Consider ﬁrst the robots used for personal service.
In addition to the applications listed above, there are
a large number of research projects worldwide to ex-

Part G | 80.10
2148
Part G
Robots and Humans
pand robot use in the home. During the coming decade
many more robots will be present in our homes to as-
sist us in tasks such as housekeeping, washing, ironing
clothes, and child care. This trend to robots as co-
inhabitants in our homes began with a vacuum cleaning
robot introduced in United States in 2002. Since then
millions of these units have been sold, and other vac-
uum cleaners have been developed in Sweden, South
Korea, Japan, and other countries. The ability of ser-
vice robots to share our living spaces depends to some
extent on their communication skills and their ability to
relate to human beings. Humanoids are a special cate-
gory of service robots, which presents many different
ethical, legal and societal (ELS) aspects from other ser-
vice robots, to be dealt with separately.
80.10.3 Humanoids
One of the most ambitious aims of robotics is to design
an autonomous robot that could reach – and even sur-
pass – human intelligence and performance in partially
unknown, changing, and unpredictable environments.
Artiﬁcial intelligence will be able to lead the robot
to fulﬁll the missions required by the end-users. To
achieve this goal, over the past decades scientists have
been working on AI techniques in many ﬁelds. Among
these are:
a) Artiﬁcial vision
b) Perception and analysis of the environment
c) Natural language processing
d) Human interaction
e) Cognitive systems
f)
Machine learning, behaviors
g) Neural networks.
In this context, one of the fundamental aspects of
the robots is their capability to learn: to learn the charac-
teristics of the surrounding environment, that is, a) the
physical environment, but also b) the living beings that
inhabit it. This means that robots working in a given en-
vironment have to distinguish human beings from other
objects. In addition to learning about the environment,
robots have to learn about their own behavior, through
a self-reﬂective process. They have to learn from the
experience, replicating somehow the natural processes
of the evolution of intelligence in living beings (synthe-
sis procedures, trial-and-error, learning by doing, and
so on).
It is almost inevitable that human designers are in-
clined to replicate their own conception of intelligence
in the intelligence of robots. In turn, the former be-
comes incorporated into the control algorithm of the
robots. Robotics intelligence is a learned intelligence,
fed by the world’s models uploaded by the designers.
It is a self-developed intelligence, evolved through the
experience that robots have gained through the learned
effects of their actions. Robotics intelligence also com-
prises the ability to evaluate what attributes a judgment
to the actions carried out.
All these processes embodied in robots produce
a kind of intelligent machine endowed with the capa-
bility of expressing a certain degree of autonomy. It
follows that a robot can behave, in some situations, in
a way that is unpredictable for their human designers.
Basically, the increasing autonomy of the robots could
give rise to unpredictable and non-predictable behav-
iors. So, without necessarily imagining some science
ﬁction (sci-ﬁ) scenarios, where robots are provided with
consciousness, free will, and emotions, in a few years
we are going to be cohabiting with robots endowed
with self-knowledge and autonomy – in the engineer-
ing sense of these words.
Humanoids are robots whose body structure resem-
bles the human one. They answer an old dream of
humanity, and certainly do not spring only from ra-
tional, engineering, or utilitarian motivations, but also
from psycho-anthropological ones. Humanoids are the
expression of one of the demands of our European cul-
ture, which is that humankind was the creator of some
mechanical being in the shape of a human. In Japanese
culture, it is the demand to carefully replicate nature
in all its forms. It is a very difﬁcult and demanding
enterprise, a project of the level of the mission to the
Moon. However, precisely for its characteristic of be-
ing one of humanity’s dreams, the investments are high
and the progress speed very quick. It has been forecast
that in the not-so-distant future we will cohabit with
humanoids whose shape will be so similar to that of
human beings that it will render it possible to get mixed
up – in certain situations – with the latter. Humanoids
will assist human operators in human environments,
will replace human beings, and will cooperate with hu-
man beings in many ways.
Given the high cost and the delicacy of humanoids,
they will probably be employed in tasks and in en-
vironments where the human shape would really be
needed, that is, in all these situations where human–
robot interaction is primary, compared to any other mis-
sion – human–robot interactions in healthcare, assis-
tance with children/disabled people/elderly assistance,
baby sitting, ofﬁce clerks, museum guides, entertain-
ers, sexual robots, and so on. Or, they will be em-
ployed as testimonials for commercial products. The
special tasks humanoid robots can fulﬁll are man-
ifold. Humanoids are robots that are so adaptable
and ﬂexible that will be rapidly used in many sit-
uations and circumstances. They can assist humans
to perform very difﬁcult tasks, and behave like true

Roboethics: Social and Ethical Implications
80.10 Roboethics Taxonomy
2149
Part G | 80.10
and reliable companions in many ways. Their shape,
and the sophisticated human–robot interaction, will be
very useful for situations where a human shape is
needed.
The research carried out in humanoids laboratories
over the world will have as a side effects the devel-
opment of a platform to study the human body, for
training, haptic tests and training, with extraordinary
outcomes on healthcare, education, edutainment, and so
on. Faced with an aging population, Japanese society
see humanoids robots as one way to enable people to
continue to lead an active and productive life in their
old age, without being a burden to other people.
From the point of view of the safety in the use of
humanoids, and taking into account that in the not so
far future they will be used as companions to human
beings, humanoids can raise serious problems related
to the reliability of the internal evaluation systems of
the robots, and to the unpredictability of robots’ be-
havior [80.41]. Thus, designers should guarantee the
traceability of evaluation/actions procedures, and the
identiﬁcation of robots.
Concerning safety, it should be underlined that
wrong action by humanoids can lead to dangerous sit-
uations for living beings and the environment. From
the point of view of security, this is the case where
the robot’s autonomy is controlled by ill-intentioned
people, who can modify the robot’s behavior in a dan-
gerous and fraudulent course. Because humanoids sum
up almost all the characteristics of the entire spec-
trum of robots, their use implies the emergence of
nearly all the problems that we examine below. In
particular, their introduction into human environments,
workplaces, homes, schools, hospitals, public places,
ofﬁces, and so on, will deeply and dramatically mod-
ify our society.
There is already an important and well-documented
literature on the implication of the coexistence between
human beings and humanoids. The problems range
from the replacement of human beings (economic prob-
lems, human unemployment, reliability, dependability,
and so on) to psychological problems (deviations in
human emotions, problems of attachment, disorgani-
zation in children, fears, panic, confusion between
real and artiﬁcial, feeling of subordination towards
robots [80.45]). Another set of questions arises around
the shape of the humanoids. Is it right that robots can
exhibit a personality? Is it right that robot can express
emotion? The concern expressed by psychologists is
that well before evolving to become conscious agents,
humanoids can be an extraordinary tool used to control
human beings.
Sophisticated humanoids raise a number of ethical
issues, including the following:

Loss of privacy for the human inhabitants if the
robots are permitted free access to all rooms in
a home.

Ability of the robots to recognize commands that
may lead to unethical behavior (e.g., to stealing
a neighbor’s camera or cell phone).

Rights
and
responsibilities
of
the
robots,
e.g., should they be treated with respect as if
they were human?

Emotional relationships, e.g., how should a robot re-
late to human anger, say when the robot drops a dish
of food on the ﬂoor? In other words, is it ethical to
yell at a robot? Can and should robots be punished
for misbehavior, and, if so, how?

How should a robot react to multiple instructions
from different humans, e.g., when a child calls for
it to come and play while the mother calls for it to
come and wash the dishes?

Can the robot’s computer be accessed by hackers,
so it may stake out and send pictures from the home
to potential burglars?
We believe these issues will need to be addressed
before humanoid personal service robots come into
common use.
80.10.4 Healthcare and Life Quality
Another area of service robot where robot-human in-
teraction is developing rapidly is the ﬁeld of health-
care, including nursing, surgery, physical therapy, and
non-contact assistance during therapy and rehabilita-
tion. These developments are becoming possible as
the potential danger to humans from accidental robot
activity decreases. This area of robotics is growing
so rapidly that we can only indicate some typical
applications.
From the social and ethical standpoint, this is one
of the ﬁelds in robotics that bears the most sensi-
tive safety and ethical problems. From a technical
point of view, scientists in robot-surgery are work-
ing on the problems of reduced dexterity, workspace,
and sensory input and possible fatal trouble, which
could originate from a breakdown of surgical robot
systems. Also issues of size, cost, and functionality
should be addressed in surgery and haptic and assistive
robotics.
In the context of assistive technology, some ques-
tions can be posed concerning the relationship between
patients and health structures in which they are treated.
Are we going to mechanize hospitals and to dehuman-
ize our patients? Shall we improve our health structures,
where human nurses can care about patients? Can we
not develop new psychological and physical dependen-

Part G | 80.10
2150
Part G
Robots and Humans
cies? As a general principle of awareness, we should
underline that the high cost of robotic systems in the
medical ﬁeld could widen the digital divide between de-
veloped and developing countries; and between layers
of the same population.
The ﬁeld of implantations raises concerns related to
the fact that direct brain interfaces may at the same time
pose ethical questions related to the enhancement of hu-
man function.
Assistive Robots
Assistive technology will help many people to conduct
a more independent life.
Nursing care is typically a one-on-one relationship
between a patient and a caregiver. Hence, it is an ex-
pensive part of healthcare, and a number of laboratories
are developing robots that we may term nurse’s as-
sistants. One of the earliest of such robots was the
wheeled HelpMate, currently marketed by a company
named Pyxis. HelpMate assists nurses and other hos-
pital personnel by smoothly transporting pharmaceu-
ticals, laboratory specimens, equipment and supplies,
meals, medical records, and radiology ﬁlms back and
forth between support departments, nursing ﬂoors, and
patient rooms. HelpMate is able to navigate hospital
corridors, avoid collisions with humans, summon the
elevator, and locate a speciﬁc patient’s room. Carnegie
Mellon University and the University of Pittsburgh have
developed a nurse-bot named Pearl [80.46] as an as-
sistant who visits elderly patients in hospital rooms,
provides information, reminds patients to take their
medication, takes messages, and guides residents. Such
robots are usually constructed as upright structures on
wheels, with a somewhat human-appearing head con-
taining cameras and voice synthesizing software for
communication. They usually also have a digital dis-
play, on the head or chest, to display messages. In
Europe, there have been (and are) a number of projects
in this area, such as the Care-o-Bot developed in 2010
at the Fraunhofer Institute in Stuttgart, Germany. The
Care-o-Bot also has an arm to assist in pick-and-place
operations. Similar projects exist in Japan, South Ko-
rea, and other countries. A different approach to robots
in healthcare involves the use of a mobile tele-presence
robot under control of remote physician, which can
travel throughout a hospital and visit patients. The
physician’s face appears on a large screen, allowing him
or her to interact with the patient. Cameras on the robot
allow the physician to see the patient, and verbal com-
munication is possible. Such robots can decrease the
need for doctors to visit patients in person, without de-
creasing the patient’s ability to interact. Such a robot,
named RP-VITA, was announced in 2012 by a joint
venture of the robotics company iRobot and InTouch
Health, a pioneer in remote presence robotics for medi-
cal applications.
A related set of projects involves assistive robots,
which provide verbal guidance, encouragement, and
interaction to people recovering from strokes, spinal in-
juries, as well as companionship to children with autism
spectrum disorders. These robots do not make any phys-
ical contact with the subjects, but rather guide them
through exercises and activities by voice and demon-
stration [80.47].
The humanoid Wakamaru, produced by Mitsubishi
in 2010 was designed to co-inhabit living spaces with
humans and was termed a companion robot for el-
derly and disabled persons. It is about 4 ft, or 120 cm,
in height, has a head with large eyes, and movable
arms but no legs; it moves on wheels, thus being re-
stricted to relatively ﬂat locations. It recognizes some
10 000 words, can place telephone calls, and commu-
nicate by internet. It carries a camera; if contacted by
internet, it displays the camera image to the caller, and
it recognizes 10 faces and can be programmed to react
appropriately to each. It can read the owner’s email and
scan the news, passing the information on by voice. It
communicates both by speech and gestures. Such robots
are provided with binocular vision, hearing, touch, and
other sensors, and can interact with humans by voice,
gesture recognition, and safe navigation in the home.
Mitsubishi originally made 100 of these robots for sale
and then provided a rental service in Japan. It has not
been available since 2012.
Among the potential ethical concerns in the use of
such assistive robots and nurse-bots are the following:

Patients may become emotionally attached to the
robots, so that any attempt to withdraw them may
cause signiﬁcant distress.

The robots will not be able to respond to patients’
anger and frustration, except by calling for human
help. For example, a patient may refuse to take the
medication offered by the robot, throw it on the
ﬂoor, and even attempt to strike the robot.

A robot may be called by more than one user and
not have the ability to prioritize the requests, thus
causing anger and frustration.
More complete discussions of these topics may be
found in the work of Bekey and Abney [80.48], and
Bekey [80.49].
Surgical Robotics
Surgical robotics allows minimally invasive surgery,
which can reduce patient recovery time. It could im-
prove accuracy and precision. Robotics system in-
creases the precision of microsurgery and enhances

Roboethics: Social and Ethical Implications
80.10 Roboethics Taxonomy
2151
Part G | 80.10
the performances of complex therapies. Surgical robots
can restore a surgeon’s dexterity. Robo-surgery is ap-
plied to very delicate neurological procedures that
are practically impossible to perform without robotic
assistance.
The ﬁeld of surgery is entering a time of great
change, spurred on by remarkable recent advances
in surgical and computer technology. Computer-
controlled diagnostic instruments have been used in the
operating theater for years to help provide vital infor-
mation through ultrasound, computer-aided tomogra-
phy (CAT), and other imaging technologies. Recently,
robotic systems have made their way into the operat-
ing room as dexterity-enhancing surgical assistants and
surgical planners, in answer to surgeons’ demands for
ways to overcome the surgical limitations of minimally
invasive laparoscopic surgery, a technique developed in
the 1980s. On July 11, 2000, FDA (Food and Drug
Administration) approved the ﬁrst completely robotic
surgery device.
Typical applications are:

Robotic telesurgical workstations

Robotic devices for endoluminal surgery

Robotic systems for diagnosis (CAT, NMR, PET)

Robots for therapy (laser eye treatment, targeted nu-
clear therapy, ultrasonic surgery)

Virtual environments for surgical training and aug-
mentation

Haptic interfaces for surgery/physiotherapy train-
ing.
Biorobotics and Biomechatronics
Biorobotics, while enhancing the quality of life after
diseases or accidents, provides tools for studying bio-
logical behavior and brain functions, and is a test bed
for the study and evaluation of biological algorithms
and modeling.
According to Dario [80.50]:
Biorobotics is a new scientiﬁc and technological
area with a unique interdisciplinary character. It
derives its methodology mainly from the sectors
of robotics and Biomedical Engineering, but also
includes knowledge from, and provides useful ap-
plications to, many sectors of engineering, basic
and applied sciences (medicine, neuroscience, eco-
nomics, law, bio/nanotechnologies in particular),
and even the humanities (philosophy, psychology,
ethics). Biorobotics offers a new paradigm for engi-
neers. The engineer no longer just cooperates with
neuroscientists, but has also become a scientist in
order to discover basic biological principles that
make their job easier.
Novel, high-performance bio-inspired machines
and systems, for many different potential applica-
tions, are being designed and fabricated. This implies
the development of (nano, micro, macro) novel de-
vices for diagnosis, surgery, prosthetics, rehabilitation
and personal assistance; and devices for biomedical
applications (e.g., mini-invasive surgery and neuro-
rehabilitation).
Biorobotics can be used for human prostheses for
locomotion, manipulation, vision, sensing, and other
functions:

Artiﬁcial limbs (legs, arms)

Artiﬁcial internal organs (heart, kidney)

Artiﬁcial senses (eye, ears, etc.)

Human augmentation (exoskeleton).
This ﬁeld has important connection with neuro-
science, to develop neural interfaces and sensory-motor
coordination systems for the integration of these bionic
devices into the human body/brain.
80.10.5 Distributed Robotic Systems
The fast growth of many wireless systems makes possi-
ble to link all robots to the Web, and among themselves.
The development of cloud systems allows control of
any addressable device, anywhere on the network, and
every device on the network can connect to one another,
creating intelligent robot groups.
Cloud, or network robotics will allow remote hu-
man–robot interaction for tele-operation and tele-pres-
ence; and, also, robot–robot interaction for data-shar-
ing and cooperative working and learning. When Web
speed will be comparable to that of the internal network
of the robot, the machine will explode into a set of spe-
cialized systems distributed over the net.
Complex robotic systems will be developed, con-
stituted by a team of co-operating robotic agents/
components connected through ICT and cloud tech-
nologies:

Networked knowledge system

Networked intelligence systems

Multi-robot systems.
Multi-robot systems are self-organizing robot teams
consisting of a large number of heterogeneous team
members. The organization in robot teams or squads is
needed to perform speciﬁc tasks that require automatic
task distribution and co-ordination at a global and local
level; and when central control becomes impossible due
to large distance and lack of local information, time of
signal traveling.

Part G | 80.10
2152
Part G
Robots and Humans
A full-scale ecological robot team will be of tremen-
dous value in a number of applications such as security,
surveillance, monitoring, gardening, and pharmaceu-
tical manufacturing. In addition, the co-ordination of
heterogeneous teams of robots will also be of signiﬁ-
cant value in terms of planning, co-ordination, and use
of advanced manufacturing systems. The beneﬁts of the
robot teams are manifold; e.g., an increase in the efﬁ-
ciency of the performance of complex tasks and in the
capability to manage large-scale applications. They pro-
vide abundant and replaceable, interchangeable agents
and they raise the reliability of the robots, because the
group can perform even after losing most of its parts.
On the other hand, scientists should be aware of
some of the risks in applying robot teams, for in-
stance the increasing dependability of primary services
on complex systems, and the unpredictability of robot
team behavior. From a criminal point of view, the risks
include the assignment of liability for misbehavior or
crimes, vulnerability to hackers, and concerns about
privacy.
80.10.6 Outdoor Robotics
Outdoor robots are intelligent machines that explore,
develop, secure, and feed our world and worlds beyond
land. Robots could be employed in dangerous oper-
ations, such as laying explosives, going underground
after blasting to stabilize a mine roof, and mining in
areas where it is impossible for humans to work or even
survive.
They can work in the following environments:

Land:
–
Mining
(automated
load-haul-dump
trucks,
robotic drilling and blasting devices)
–
Cargo handling (cranes and other automation
technology for cargo lift on/lift off)
–
Agricultural (autonomous tractors, planters and
harvesters, applicators for fertilizers and pest
control)
–
Road vehicles (autonomous vehicles for humans
or cargo transportation)
–
Rescue robotics (robots that support ﬁrst re-
sponse units in disaster missions)
–
Humanitarian demining (robots for detecting,
localizing and neutralizing land mines)
–
Environmental protection (robots for pollution
cleaning and decommissioning of dangerous
plants).

Sea:
–
Research (marine robots for oceanography, ma-
rine biology, geology)
–
Offshore (underwater robots for inspection,
maintenance, repair and monitoring of oil and
gas facilities in deep and ultra deep waters)
–
Search and rescue (underwater robots for ﬁrst
response intervention in casualties at sea, like
submarines run aground).

Air:
–
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) (autonomous
airplanes for weather forecasting, environmen-
tal monitoring, road trafﬁc control, large area
survey, patrolling).

Space:
–
Space exploration (deep space vehicles, landing
modules, rovers)
–
Space stations (autonomous laboratories, con-
trol and communication facilities)
–
Remote operation (autonomous or supervised
dexterous arms and manipulators).
Mobile robots in particular can be highly valuable
tools in urban rescue missions after catastrophes like
earthquakes, bomb or gas-explosions, or everyday inci-
dents like ﬁres and road accidents involving hazardous
materials. Robots can be used to inspect collapsed
structures, to assess the situation, and to search and lo-
cate victims). Among the beneﬁts of employing such
robots is a rise in the efﬁciency of the exploitation of
natural resources, to increase food production for the
world population.
Concerning space robotics, it is obvious that, on the
basis of current knowledge and technology, the robot
can be our pioneer in space travels and mission of ex-
ploration of the far planets of the solar system and
beyond.
On the social front, the unrestrained and planned
use of outdoor robots can extend to its limit the ex-
cessive anthropization and exploitation of the planet,
which can, in turn, become a threat to biodiversity and
all the other forms of life on the planet. As for all
other branches of robotics, this could lead to technology
addiction. Furthermore, given the versatility of these
robots, they can also be used the wrong way round,
when reconverted from civilian use to devices for war-
fare and misuses (terrorism, pollution).
80.10.7 Military Robotics
After numerous science ﬁction stories about war-ﬁght-
ing robots during the twentieth century (and earlier), the
stories have become reality in the twenty-ﬁrst century.
While military robots are now used extensively by the
United States, a number of other countries are also de-
veloping robot weapons and, unfortunately, the world

Roboethics: Social and Ethical Implications
80.10 Roboethics Taxonomy
2153
Part G | 80.10
has yet to come to terms with the ethical issues that arise
from the use of such systems.
Humanity has been involved in war from the earliest
days of homo sapiens on Earth. A famous psychologist
published a book a few years ago entitled The Terri-
ble Love of War [80.51]; this title summarizes the issue.
The love of war has resulted in a love of weapons,
as efﬁcient ways to kill the enemy. Further, much of
the development of weapons has been devoted to ﬁnd-
ing ways of inﬂicting death at a distance, to avoid
injury to the attacker. Attacking an enemy with a club
allows the victim to strike back, but attacking with
bows and arrows allows the attacker to kill at a dis-
tance. Clearly, the development of muskets and guns
allowed for greater and greater distances. This trend
continues with military robots. Today there are many
categories of robot vehicles equipped with weapons.
Each of these systems can be controlled from a dis-
tance, allowing the owners of the vehicles to stay out
of danger.

Intelligent weapons: This ﬁeld comprises all de-
vices resulting from the development of traditional
systems by robotics technology (automation, artiﬁ-
cial intelligence, etc.):
–
Integrated defense systems: AI systems for in-
telligence and surveillance controlling weapons
and aircraft capabilities
–
Unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs): autono-
mous tanks, armored vehicles carrying weapons
and/or tactical payloads
–
Intelligent bombs and missiles
–
UAVs: also referred to as autonomous ﬂying
vehicles (AFVs). Unmanned spy planes and re-
motely piloted bombers
–
AUVs (autonomous underwater vehicles): intel-
ligent torpedoes and autonomous submarines

Robot soldiers: Eventually humanoids may be em-
ployed to substitute humans in performing sensitive
tasks and missions in environments populated by
humans. The main reasons for using humanoids are
to permit a one-by-one substitution, without mod-
ifying the environment, or the engagement rules.
This could be required where a safeguard of hu-
man life is considered a priority in many different
scenarios:
–
Urban terrain combat
–
Indoor security operations
–
Patrol
–
Surveillance.
Outdoor security robots could be able to make their
night watch rounds and even chase criminals, di-
rected by a remote control system via an internet
connection or moving autonomously via their own
artiﬁcial intelligence systems.

Superhuman: There are several projects aimed at
developing a superhuman soldier. Actually, the hu-
man body cannot perform tasks with the strength,
speed, and fatigue resistance of the machines. Aug-
mentation indicates the possibility of extending hu-
man’s existing capabilities through wearable robot
exoskeletons, to create superhuman strength, speed,
and endurance:
–
Artiﬁcial sensor systems
–
Augmented reality
–
Exoskeletons.
Drones
Among the most visible of robotic vehicles capa-
ble of lethal force are semi-autonomous ﬂying robots
equipped with guided missiles, which are capable of
ﬂying over long distances to targets identiﬁed by GPS
coordinates. These vehicles are known as autonomous
combat ﬂying vehicles (ACFVs), or more commonly
as drones. While such vehicles are autonomous robots
as far as ﬂying is concerned (including takeoff and
landing), they can ﬁre lethal weapons only by human
command. Drones ﬂying over Afghanistan or various
targets in Africa are controlled from Creech Air Force
Base (near Las Vegas), or a base in New Mexico, thou-
sands of kilometers away from the vehicles themselves.
The drone carries extremely high-resolution cameras;
the images are transmitted to the human controllers who
can steer the aircraft so that a target is within the cross
hairs of the on-board missiles. Human controllers acti-
vate and release the weapons. In the USA at the present
time no ﬂying robot is given the autonomy needed to re-
lease weapons without human supervision. Early 2013,
there were an estimated 7500 drones in the US military
arsenal, many ﬂown in secret missions by the Central
Intelligence Agency.
Drones (and other robot vehicles on land or under
water) have been discussed in detail in recent books
and other publications. Among the most inﬂuential au-
thors are Sharkey, Singer, and Arkin. Sharkey from the
University of Shefﬁeld in the UK is a proliﬁc writer on
the subject [80.42, 52–54]. Singer, a researcher at the
Brookings Institution in Washington, DC is a proliﬁc
author and has published a highly inﬂuential book en-
titled Wired for War [80.43]. Arkin from the Georgia
Institute of Technology worked under a US Army con-
tract to develop an ethical governor for killer robots,
to be included in their software system [80.55]. A very
complete description of military robots can be found
in the book by Ramo entitled Let Robots Do the Dy-
ing [80.56]. While 10 years ago the USA was the

Part G | 80.10
2154
Part G
Robots and Humans
only country possessing autonomous ﬂying vehicles,
in 2012 it was estimated that 70 countries have AFV
programs, but only about 15 of these have military
drones.
The ethical issues arising from the use of drones in-
clude the following:

Unintended injury or death of innocent non-combat-
ants (usually known as collateral damage). While
the missiles launched by a drone are extremely pre-
cise in steering to their intended targets, nearby
civilians are frequently killed as well.

The very fact that the human controllers who re-
lease the weapons are very far away, so that they
do not see the blood and destruction directly but
only from the drone’s cameras means that for some
of them such activities are more like a video game
rather than the killing and destruction of human
beings.

Drones are used to attack suspected terrorists in
countries that (ofﬁcially) are not at war. Hence, they
are used in undeclared wars. This may be a violation
of international law, and it certainly raises ethical
issues. It has been suggested that the availability of
such military robots could make it easier for a coun-
try to start a war, since its own citizens would not be
in danger.
Other Military Robots
Robot vehicles known as Packbots have been used in
Iraq and Afghanistan for nearly a decade to locate and
destroy improvised explosive devices (IEDs). Prior to
the development and deployment of these robots (man-
ufactured by iRobot, Inc. in the USA), IEDs hidden in
bushes and behind rocks were the major cause of US
soldier casualties in Iraq. Now, these small tank-like ve-
hicles that can be carried by a soldier in a backpack are
able to locate and destroy the mines.
Robots are currently being used as mules to assist
soldiers in carrying heavy equipment, e.g., Big Dog,
a four-legged robot built by Boston Dynamics to carry
heavy weights over rough terrain [80.57]. The military
also have robots designed to retrieve a wounded soldier
and carry him or her to a safe location for medical help,
and a variety of other special-purpose robots. Finally,
there are programs in the USA and in Japan to provide
an exoskeleton for a human soldier, enabling him or her
to carry much larger loads than would be possible with-
out assistance.
In conclusion. The beneﬁts of military robots are as
follows:
a) Tactical/operational strength superiority
b) Unemotional behavior
c) Limited loss of human lives in the robotized army
d) Better performances of superhuman versus human
soldier.
Problems could arise from the following:
a) The inadequacy to manage the unstructured com-
plexity of a hostile scenario
b) The unpredictability of machine behavior
c) The assignment of liability for misbehavior or
crimes
d) The increased risk of starting a video game-like war,
due to the decreased perception of its deadly effects.
Humans in mixed teams could face practical and
psychological problems in having to distinguish hu-
mans from robots. Superhuman soldiers could also
tackle problems of overstress and de-humanization.
It is clear that military robots are here and they have
changed the nature of warfare dramatically. However,
there are currently no international treaties or agree-
ments governing their use, which raises serious ethical
questions. The growing deployment of military robots
(drones, mobile robots, exoskeletons) in many war the-
aters, and especially in the war on terrorism has caused
the birth of a movement devoted to stopping killing
robots. Likewise, some roboticists have ﬁrmly opposed
the fact that autonomous robots have the license to kill
humans because, in their judgment, the responsibility
of a human life should always fall on another human
being [80.58]. Military robotics should be thoroughly
examined by specialized international organizations, as
is the case with every type of military technology, to be
regulated by international conventions or agreements.
80.10.8 Educational Robot Kits
The beneﬁcial applications of robotics in education
are known and documented. Robotics is a very good
tool for teaching technology (and many other subjects)
whilst, at the same time, always remaining very tightly
anchored to reality. Robots are real, three-dimensional
(3-D) objects that move in space and time, and can em-
ulate human/animal behavior; but, unlike video games,
they are real machines, true objects, and students learn
much more quickly and easily if they can interact with
concrete objects as opposed to formulas and abstract
ideas.
In the age of electronics, computers and networks,
it is necessary to modernize not only the contents and
tools, but also the educational methods of traditional
schools. It is also important to consider that the lifestyle
of young people has changed, as well as the communi-
cation tools they use in their free time. Today, young

Roboethics: Social and Ethical Implications
80.10 Roboethics Taxonomy
2155
Part G | 80.10
people communicate via the Internet and mobile tele-
phones using e-mail, sms, and chat rooms, which allow
them to be continually connected to a global commu-
nity that has no limits regarding location and time.
Young people spend more time playing video
games, playing with mobile phones, or downloading
ﬁles from the Internet. These activities provide them
with experiences, which are by now at the same stan-
dard as the most sophisticated technological systems.
All this has accelerated the pace of life, so much so
that fruition and consumption of experiences are both
real and virtual. In fact, we are entering the age of
cyberspace, which will not replace normal life relation-
ships, but will certainly alter their characteristics.
In this context, we need to consider that traditional
teaching and classical tools of support (books, doc-
umentaries) are at risk of becoming unsuitable when
compared with the everyday possibilities offered to
these young people by the world of mass media.
Therefore, it is necessary begin to plan new ways to
transmit knowledge which exploit the potential of new
technology.
Learning about robotics is important not only for
those students who want to become robotics engineers
and scientists, but for every student, because this pro-
vides a strong method of reasoning and a powerful
tool for grappling with the world. Robotics collects all
the competencies needed for designing and construct-
ing machines (mechanics, electrotechnics, electronics),
computers, software, systems of communications, and
networks. The special features of robotics boost stu-
dent creativity, communication skills, cooperation, and
teamwork. Learning about robotics promotes students’
interest in and commitment to traditional basic dis-
ciplines (math, physics, technical drawing). Robotic
construction kits, conjugating the physical building of
artifacts with their programming, can foster the devel-
opment of new ways of thinking that encourage new
reﬂections on the relationship between the following:
a) Life and technology
b) Science and its experimental tool set
c) Robot design and values and identity [80.59].
80.10.9 Entertainment Robotics and Art
Entertaining robots are already used in featuring and ad-
vertising corporate logos, products, and events. These
are marketing tools shown off by manufacturers on
special occasions. Robot toys fall into the same cat-
egory. They can be speciﬁcally designed to stimulate
children’s creativity and the development of their in-
tellectual faculties. They can become children’s com-
panions, and – for the only child – could play the role
of friends, brothers, or the traditional imaginary ﬁend.
They could be used in the pedagogical assistance of
autistic children.
On the negative side of technology, robot toys could
cause psychological problems, such as:

Lost touch with the real world

Confusion between natural and artiﬁcial

Confusion between real and imaginary

Technology addiction.
Other entertainment robots will enable building real
environments, which could be either perfect (or scaled)
copies of some of existing environments, or reconstruc-
tions of settings that existed centuries/millennia ago,
and which we can be populated by real or imaginary an-
imals. Robots and robotics settings will make it possible
to build up natural phenomena and biological processes,
even cruel ones, but without involving living beings.
In these settings, the users/audience could live interac-
tive experiences, which are real, not only virtual. As
extraordinary theatrical machines, robots will develop
ever more realistic special effects.
In this frame, we should also consider sexual robots.
These robots will be an important market ﬁeld. They are
used as sexual partners in many ﬁelds, from therapy to
prostitution from the social standpoint. Some authors
have proposed that their use could decrease the sexual
exploitation of women and children [80.60]. They could
also raise problems related to intimacy/attachments and
safety and reliability.
The role of robotics in contemporary art, along
with all the interactive artistic expressions (telecommu-
nications, and interactive installations), is gaining im-
portance and success. Artists are employing advanced
technologies to create environments and works of art,
utilizing the actuators and sensors to allow their robots
to react and change in relation to viewers.
Robotic art will spread because of the following:

It recalls (and is inspired by) the mythological tra-
ditions of various cultures. These traditions have
created fantastic synthetic creatures.

Robots exert a special fascination on the population
at large.

Robots can be used as tools in artwork and enable
the building of artistic expression in shorter times,
thus expanding the borders of human creativity.

Robots can also perform actor’s rules and allow
playing living art.
The social and individual problems that can be
produced by robotic art are, on the one hand, the dis-
semination of misinformation (wrong information on
technology can be spread through art). On the other
hand, technology can prevail over creativity.

Part G | 80.11
2156
Part G
Robots and Humans
80.11 Roboethics Enforced: From Ideals to Rules
At the conclusion of our taxonomy, and having ana-
lyzed the ethical issues in robotics outlining the main
roboethics principles, we have to ask ourselves how
roboethics conception and vision could become laws,
rules, and standards. This question is more general:
How have ethical principles been incorporated into
laws and right, after having been discussed in trans-
disciplinary assemblies, expressed by warnings or the
public’s concern, suggested by religious personalities,
theologians, and moral leaders, and/or forwarded by
a community of concerned scientists? How is ethical
thrust embodied in the R&D activity without imposing
on it unjustiﬁed restrictions, so depriving the scientist
of his/her own freedom of thought?
Along millennia of the history of science and tech-
nology, society has envisaged ways to express their
ethical concern. These include the following. The pro-
fessional oath is either a statement or a promise ex-
pressed by a new entry in professional careers to be
faithful to the traditional values of the professional or-
der he/she is entering into. The ancient Hippocratic
oath is the recurrent example for other initiatives to
develop and implement codes of conduct for scien-
tists in general, and scientists in speciﬁc areas in
particular.
A manifesto is a public declaration of intentions,
opinions, objectives, or motives, often issued by a pri-
vate organization or a government. For example, the
Russell–Einstein Manifesto of 1955 is a public dec-
laration against war and the further development of
weapons of mass destruction.
A statement or a declaration can be employed to un-
derline a given topic. As such, it can be either weakly
or strongly prescriptive, morally or legally binding. For
instance, during the World Robot Conference which
took place in Fukuoka, Japan, the participants released
a three-part list of expectations for next-generation
robots, called the World Robot Declaration issued on
February 25, 2004. It states that:

Next-generation robots will be partners that coexist
with human beings.

Next-generation robots will assist human beings
both physically and psychologically.

Next-generation robots will contribute to the real-
ization of a safe and peaceful society.
A recommendation serves to induce acceptance or
favor. It is a prescription only in the weak sense of offer-
ing advice; a normative suggestion that is neither legally
nor morally binding. More conclusive is the appeal, an
earnest request for support: a petition, entreaty, or plea.
A resolution is a formal expression of opinion or
intention made (usually after voting) by a formal orga-
nization, legislature, or other group.
In the last 50 years, many professional associations
have adopted their code, a written text that offers a col-
lection of laws, regulations, guidelines, rules, directives
or principles for moral conduct. The guiding princi-
ples of the code of research ethics are non-malfeasance
and beneﬁcence, indicating a systematic regard for the
rights and interests of others in the full range of aca-
demic relationships and activities. Non-malfeasance is
the principle of doing, or permitting, no ofﬁcial miscon-
duct. It is the principle of doing no harm in the widest
sense. Beneﬁcence is the requirement to serve the in-
terests and well-being of others, including respect for
their rights. It is the principle of doing well in the widest
sense.
The charter is an ancient form of agreement. An ex-
ample is the Charter of the United Nations. The charters
have a legal character and are connected, in principle,
to sanctions when not properly executed. Other means
of implementing ethical concerns in science and tech-
nology are the convention, a form of agreement, or
a contract, and also a practice established by general
consent.
From a technical point of view, to ensure that robot
and robotics devices adhere to the established applied
ethical principles, standards have to be established.
Generally, these standards are the results of the work of
professional committees, which are expressed by pro-
fessional and control bodies. At national level there are
committees like ANSI (USA) or DIN (Germany). At the
international level, ISO. Inside ISO is working a com-
mitted devoted to establishing technical standards for
industrial and service robotics (TC184/SC2 robots and
robotic devices). This committee is organized in several
sub-committee groups: WG1 vocabulary to compile
terms and deﬁnitions from all standards dealing with
robots, WG3 industrial safety for the assurance of
safety in design and construction of the robot and for
the safeguarding of personnel during robot operations,
WG 7 personal care safety on the development of safety
standards for personal care robots, and WG 8 service
robots on the development of safety standards for ser-
vice robots.
Finally, in order that all previous instances and
applied ethical principles be enforceable, they should
become national laws. Each national government must
incorporate those principles and standards in their own
legislation, developing the required technical standards
of implementations, and setting up adequate rules for
violations.

Roboethics: Social and Ethical Implications
80.12 Conclusions and Further Reading
2157
Part G | 80.12
80.12 Conclusions and Further Reading
We are witnessing a true, growing interest in robots in
the general public, who are often more excited than the
insiders, whose feelings swing between a position of
cultural indifference to a behavior dictated by external
pressures, be they political or industrial. We are also
noticing the modern change – which already happened
in the 1970s in the ﬁeld of computer science – of the
transformation of the robot from a research platform
and a working tool to a consumer goods and an object
of entertainment. It is a juvenile phenomenon, as shown
by the increase of robotics contests among high school
students. Today’s young people who are getting their
hands in the robotics kits will be the robotics profes-
sionals and the consumers of tomorrow.
A growing interest about the social effects of
robotics is easy to observe among international pro-
fessional associations and orders, stretching over the
sister ﬁelds of computer ethics and bioethics. Certainly,
roboethics is still far from being a well-established ap-
plied ethics, and by well-established we mean it has
acquitted two qualities: on the one hand, roboethics
should be universally accepted and standardized – or,
at least, adopted by some communities, relevant in
size and in political/economic/cultural inﬂuence. On the
other, it should be embodied in the practice of the de-
sign, production and use of robots.
In fact, considering the history of the two widely ap-
plied and structured ethics which are extensively stud-
ied and which reach a certain organic unity, bioethics
and computer and information ethics [80.61], we ac-
knowledge that their development, which has been
happening for over 30 years, came about with leaps
and contradictions, chasms, and bends, and that they
are far from being a suitable ethical standard shared
by a plurality of subjects. Both these ethics were born
in a policy and legislative vacuum, as technological
changes have outpaced ethical developments, bringing
about unanticipated problems [80.16].
The standardization of roboethics requires the ac-
complishment of some fundamental steps, both cultur-
ally and institutionally. From the general standpoint, it
demands that the application of robotics to the human
environment, especially to sensitive areas of human life,
will be accepted by the quasi-totality of cultures, as has
happened with other techno-scientiﬁc innovations such
as electricity and computer systems. (In the case of free
access to the Internet, the issue is still questionable in
many of the world’s nations.)
Should such a level be achieved, roboethics would
have already passed the phase of being adjusted to
ﬁt different answers and situations, to being modi-
ﬁed to the point of having acquired the capability of
adapting to the different points of views. Different cul-
tures and religions regard the intervention in sensitive
ﬁelds like human reproduction, neural therapies, im-
plantations, and privacy differently. These differences
originate from the cultural speciﬁcities regarding funda-
mental issues. For example, the limit between a human
and a cyborg, the separation between the natural and
the artiﬁcial [80.62], the difference between human and
artiﬁcial intelligence, the border between privacy and
traceability of actions, the concept of integrity and the
unity of the human being, the acceptance of diversity
(in gender, ethnicity, minorities, etc.), the boundary be-
tween replacement and human enhancement, and so
on. These are all milestones in deﬁning the underlying
paradigms, which, in turn, inﬂuence the day-by-day be-
havior of everyone.
From the experience provided by more than 30
years of discussions and disputes in the ﬁelds of
bioethics and information ethics, we know that none of
the achievements in the ﬁeld of science and ethics are
easy or negligible. For those who wish to thoroughly
investigate some elements of the philosophy of science,
the history of science and ethics, science and engineer-
ing ethics, the law applied to science and technology,
we now suggest some fundamental steps.
In the ﬁeld of the moral theories related to science
and technology, we mention the considerable work of
Beauchamp of the Kennedy Institute of Ethics [80.63]
and of Jasanoff at Harvard University Program on
Science and Technology Studies [80.64]. Two impor-
tant annual gatherings of computer philosophy, CEPE
(Computer Ethics Philosophical Enquiry) and IACAP
(International Association for Computing and Philoso-
phy) have recently added roboethics as one of their key
topics.
Furthermore, it is very useful to follow the activity
of the regulatory bodies entitled to deal with the issues
of science and ethics. In accordance with what was said
in Sects. 80.6–80.8 of this chapter, the person’s inter-
est should start from the general principles which are
essentially accepted by most of the world’s nations (at
least nominally), and come down to the speciﬁc appli-
cations in our ﬁeld.
The issue of the inﬂuence and the pressure given by
the market on science and on R&D is handled by the
applied ethics is called business ethics. In this frame,
corporate social responsibility is one of the ways in
which enterprises can afﬁrm ethical principles and val-
ues. This state of view was introduced to the USA 15
years ago (especially in the ﬁeld of healthcare) and
is still running today. Also, training in the responsi-
ble conduct of research (RCR) has been adopted by the

Part G | 80.12
2158
Part G
Robots and Humans
USA, and is still continuing in the present time. The do-
main of RCR training does not include solely the ethical
dimensions of research with human subjects, but every
intricate dimension of responsible conduct in the plan-
ning, performance, analysis, and reporting of research.
Difﬁculties here arise from the small amounts of re-
sources allocated. See also the ethical paragraphs of the
OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development) guidelines for multinational enterprises.
Concerning the philosophical and epistemological
aspect of the issue in ethics and robotics, one of
the main problems that people who are interested in
roboethics will have to handle is the persistent con-
fusion – ontologically, but especially linguistically –
between human and artiﬁcial intelligence, as well as be-
tween other fundamental concepts of perception, con-
sciousness, self-consciousness, emotions, and so on, as
applied to humans and machines. It must be clariﬁed
that actual contemporary roboethics is human ethics as
applied to robotics, which is considered non-human.
A strong base of human roboethics is needed in order
to construct the foundations to knowing how to respon-
sibly manage the ﬁnal problem, the one which, so far,
no-one knows how to answer: can robots ever become
humans [80.65]?
The need for serious and thorough work on the
concepts of intelligence, knowledge, conscience, auton-
omy, freedom, free will, etc., is highlighted. Indeed, the
heterogeneous composition of specialists often leads
to incessant discussions about the meaning of words,
rather than on the contents of the myriad of, often press-
ing, issues that need to be faced.
From all this, the necessity that the international
community of robotics becomes the author of its own
destiny is born, so as to directly face the task that
needs deﬁning, whilst collaborating with academics in
the ﬁeld of philosophy, of law, and generally experts of
human sciences, the ethics and social aspects of their
researches and applications of the former. Nor should
they feel relegated to a merely techno-scientiﬁc role,
delegating to others the task of reﬂecting and taking
action on moral aspects. On the other hand, a closed-
shop attitude would be damaging to the development
of robotics, given the interdisciplinary nature of the
amount of research undertaken in the ﬁeld of robotics.
From this point of view, roboethics cannot fail to
be beneﬁcial to robotics, framing the research in close
connection with the end-users and society, so avoiding
many problems that other sensitive ﬁelds are now fac-
ing. All this, and more, will be wishful thinking if in
the engineers’ curriculum of study subjects such as: sci-
entiﬁc philosophy, history of science, law and politics
of science (as is already happening in some advanced
polytechnics) are not included. Once again, we have to
say that the deeper study into the history of science,
for example, especially in the 1800s and 1900s, cannot
but aid a better understanding of that complex scientiﬁc
galaxy which is robotics. Even a restricted knowledge
of cybernetics and of computer science, from Wiener, to
von Neumann, to Weizenbaum, will immediately and
directly demonstrate that these scientists immediately
took care of ethical and social aspects of their discover-
ies and realizations, which marked the beginning of the
ﬁeld of computers and robotics.
As an example – in 2012 some young engineers
started a project called the Open Roboethics Initiative
(ORI) [80.66]. In their words:
Open Roboethics is the idea that, just like how the
Web has allowed us to produce and maintain con-
tents of Wikipedia and software designs of Linux
by means of mass collaboration, maybe roboethics
discussions and robot designs can beneﬁt from the
power of mass collaboration.
They are creating a central Web space where pol-
icy makers, engineers/designers, and users and other
stakeholders of the technology can freely share and
access roboethics related contents; by this, they hope
to accelerate roboethics discussions and inform robot
designs.
At the same time, it is necessary that those not in-
volved in robotics keep up to date on the ﬁeld’s real
and scientiﬁcally predictable developments, in order to
base the discussions on data supported by technical and
scientiﬁc reality, and not on appearances or emotions
generated by science ﬁction. In particular, apart from,
obviously, this handbook, one must look to serious
magazines published by recognized scientiﬁc associa-
tions, and not rely on headlines about ambiguous and
scandalizing creations, which do not exist.
Ethics is a thousand-year old human science with an
impressive literature. Its application to the ﬁeld of sci-
ence technology is no doubt more recent, even though
precedents such as the Hippocratic oath suggest an
extremely ancient origin. The research on robotics is
casting light on a manifold of issues across science
and humanities. It is no wonder that it will open new
and unexpected ﬁeld of studies and application also in
ethics.

Roboethics: Social and Ethical Implications
References
2159
Part G | 80
Video-References
VIDEO 773
Roboethics: Introduction
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/80/videodetails/773
VIDEO 774
Roboethics: Prosthesis
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/80/videodetails/774
VIDEO 775
Roboethics: Military robotics
available from http://handbookofrobotics.org/view-chapter/80/videodetails/775
References
80.1
D.S. Landes: The Unbound Prometheus: Technolog-
ical Change and Industrial Development in Western
Europe from 1750 to the Present (Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge 2003)
80.2
G. Veruggio: A proposal for a roboethics, 1st Int.
Symp. Roboethics Ethics Soc. Humanit. Ecol. Asp.
Robotics, Sanremo (2004)
80.3
M. Santoro, D. Marino, G. Tamburrini: Learning
robots interacting with humans: From epistemic
risk to responsibility, AI Society 22(3), 301–314B
(2008)
80.4
B. Joy: Why the future doesn’t need us. In: Na-
noethics, ed. by F. Allhoff, P. Lin, J. Moon, J. Weckert
(Wiley, Hoboken 2000) pp. 17–39
80.5
J. Rotblat: A Hippocratic oath for scientists, Science
286(5444), 1475 (1999)
80.6
G. Veruggio: The birth of roboethics, Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robotics Automation (ICRA), Workshop
Roboethics, Barcelona (2005)
80.7
I. Asimov: Runaround. In: I, Robot (Bantam Dell,
New York 2004)
80.8
G. Veruggio: The roboethics roadmap,Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics Autom. (ICRA), Workshop Roboethics,
Rome (2007)
80.9
G. Veruggio, K. Abney: Roboethics: The applied
ethics for a new science in robot ethics. In:
Robot Ethics: The Ethical and Social Implications
of Robotics, ed. by P. Lin, K. Abney, G.A. Bekey (MIT
Press, Cambridge 2012) pp. 347–363
80.10
A. Fabris: Ethicbots: Ethics and Robotics (Edizioni
ETS, Pisa 2007)
80.11
M. Nussbaum, A. Sen: The Quality of Life (Claren-
don, Oxford 1993)
80.12
M. Weber: Politics as a vocation. In: The Vocation
Lectures, ed. by D.S. Owen, T.B. Strong, R. Living-
stone (Hackett, Indianapolis 2003)
80.13
E. Morin: La Methode. Etique (Edition Du Seuil, Paris
2004)
80.14
R. von Schomberg: From the Ethics of Technology
Towards an Ethics of Knowledge Policy and Knowl-
edge Assessment (Publ. Eur. Commun., Luxembourg
2007)
80.15
A. Mowshowitz: Technology as excuse for question-
able ethics, AI Society 22(23), 271–282 (2008)
80.16
J. Moor: What is computer ethics? In: Computer and
Ethics, ed. by T.W. Bynum (Blackwell, Oxford 1985)
80.17
N. Wiener: Cybernetics, or the Control and Commu-
nication in the Animal and the Machine (MIT Press,
Cambridge 1948)
80.18
N. Wiener: The Human Use of Human Beings: Cy-
bernetics and Society (Doubleday, Garden City 1954)
80.19
T. W. Bynum: Computer ethics: Basic concepts and
historical overview, The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy (Winter 2001 Edition), http://plato.
stanford.edu/archives/win2001/entries/ethics-
computer/
80.20
D. Parker: Rules of ethics in information processes,
Communication ACM 11(3), 198–201 (1968)
80.21
J. Weizenbaum: Computer Power and Human Rea-
son: From Judgment to Calculation (Freeman, San
Francisco 1976)
80.22
D. Johnson: Computer Ethics (Prentice Hall, Upper
Saddle River 2001)
80.23
L. Floridi: Information ethics: On the philosophical
foundation of computer ethics, Ethics Inf. Technol.
1(1), 33–52 (1999)
80.24
V.R. Potter: Bioethics: Bridge to the Future (Prentice
Hall, Eaglewood Cliffs 1971)
80.25
V.R. Potter: Global Bioethics. Building on the
Leopold Legacy (Michigan State Univ. Press, East
Lansing 1988)
80.26
J.M. Galvan: On technoethics, IEEE/RAS Magazine
10, 58–63 (2003)
80.27
J. Illes, S.J. Bird: Neuroethics: A modern context for
ethics in neuroscience, Trends Neurosci. 29(9), 511–
517 (2006)
80.28
J.J. Wagner, D.M. Cannon, M.M. Van der Loos: Cross-
cultural considerations in establishing roboethics
for neuro-robot applications rehabilitation, IEEE
Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robotics (ICORR) (2005)
80.29
J.J. Rawls: A Theory of Justice (Harvard Univ. Press,
Cambridge 1971)
80.30
R. von Schomberg: From the Ethics of Technology
Towards an Ethics of Knowledge Policy: Implica-
tions for Robotics, AI and Society (Springer, London
2008)
80.31
European Union: Charter of Fundamental Rights of
the European Union (2000IC 364101) (EU, Brussels
2000)
80.32
Wingspread Conference on the Precautionary Prin-
ciple: The Wingspread consensus statement on
the precautionary principle, http://www.sehn.org/
wing.html (1998)
80.33
American Council of Engineering Companies Ethical
Guidelines: http://www.acec.org/about/ethics/
80.34
R. Kurzweil: The Age of Spiritual Machines: When
Computers Exceed Human Intelligence (Viking, New
York 1999)

Part G | 80
2160
Part G
Robots and Humans
80.35
G.A. Bekey: Autonomous Robots, from Biological
Inspiration to Implementation and Control (MIT
Press, Cambridge 2005)
80.36
P. Asaro: Remote-control crimes, IEEE Robotics Au-
tom. Mag. 18(1), 68–71 (2011)
80.37
P. Asaro: On banning autonomous weapon systems:
Human rights, automation, and the dehumaniza-
tion of lethal decision-making, Int. Rev. Red Cross
94(886), 687–709 (2012)
80.38
Y. Moon, C. Nass: Are computers scapegoats? At-
tributions of responsibility in human–computer
interaction, Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud. 49(1), 79–
94 (1998)
80.39
D. Denneh: When HAL kills, Who’s to blame? In:
HAL’s Legacy: Legacy: 2001’s Computer as Dream
and Reality, ed. by A.C. Clarke (MIT Press, Cambridge
1997)
80.40
R. Calo: Robots and privacy. In: Robot Ethics: The
Ethical and Social Implications of Robotics, ed. by
P. Lin, K. Abney, G.A. Bekey (MIT Press, Cambridge
2012)
80.41
D.E. Denning: Barriers to entry: Are they lower for
cyber warfare?, IO Journal 1(1), 6–10 (2009)
80.42
N. Sharkey: Cassandra or false prophet of doom: AI
robots and war, IEEE Intell. Syst. 23(4), 14–17 (2008)
80.43
P.W. Singer: Wired for War: The Robotics Revolution
and Conflict in the 21st Century (Penguin, New York
2009)
80.44
AAVV: World Robotics report 2014, (International
Federation of Robotics, Frankfurt 2014)
80.45
B. Reeves, C. Nass: The Media Equation: How Peo-
ple Treat Computers, Television, and New Media
Like Real People and Places (Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge 1966)
80.46
R. Calo: The drone as privacy catalyst, Stanf. Law
Rev. Online 64, 29–33 (2011)
80.47
D. Feil-Seifer, M.J. Matarić: Defining socially as-
sistive robotics, IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robotics
(ICORR) (2005) pp. 465–468
80.48
G. Bekey, L. Abney: Ethical implications of intel-
ligent robots. In: Neuromorphic and Brain-Based
Robots: Trends and Perspectives, ed. by J.L. Krich-
mar, H. Wagatsuma (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cam-
bridge 2011)
80.49
G. Bekey: Current trends in robotics: Technology
and ethics. In: Robot Ethics, The Ethical and Social
Implications of Robotics, ed. by R. Lin, K. Abney,
G.A. Bekey (MIT Press, Cambridge 2012) pp. 17–34
80.50
P. Dario: Biorobotics science and engineering: From
bio-inspiration to bio-application, FET Conf. Sci.
Beyond Fiction, Prague (2009)
80.51
J. Hillman: A Terrible Love of War (Penguin, New
York 2004)
80.52
N. Sharkey: The ethical frontiers of robotics, Science
322, 1800–1801 (2008)
80.53
N. Sharkey: Death strikes from the sky: The calculus
of proportionality, IEEE Technol. Soc. Mag. 28(1), 16–
19 (2009)
80.54
N. Sharkey: Killing made easy. In: Robot Ethics: The
Ethical and Social Implications of Robotics, ed. by
P. Lin, K. Abney, G. Bekey (MIT Press, Cambridge
2012)
80.55
R.C. Arkin: Governing Lethal Behavior in Au-
tonomous Robots (CR, Boca Raton 2009)
80.56
S. Ramo: Let Robots Do the Dying (Figueroa, Los An-
geles 2001)
80.57
M. Raibert: BigDog, the rough-terrain quaduped
robot, Proc. 17th World Congr. Autom. Control
(2009)
80.58
G.
Veruggio:
Roboethics
applied
to
military
robotics, The 3rd Sci. Peace World Conf., Milan
(2011)
80.59
E. Micheli, M. Avidano, F. Operto: Semantic and
epistemological continuity in educational robots
programming languages, Int. Conf. Simul. Model.
Program. Auton. Robots (SIMPAR) (2008)
80.60
D. Levy: Love and Sex with Robots: The Evolution of
Human-Robot Relationships (HarperCollins, New
York 2007)
80.61
T.W. Bynum, S. Rogerson: Computer Ethics and
Professional Responsibility (Blackwell, New York
2004)
80.62
G.O. Longo: Body and technology: Continuity or
discontinuity? In: Mediating the Human Body:
Technology, Communication, and Fashion, ed. by
L. Fortunati, E. Katz, R. Riccini (Lawrence Erlbaum,
Mahwah 2003) pp. 23–29
80.63
T. Beauchamp, J. Childress: Principles of Biomedical
Ethics (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford 2001)
80.64
S. Jasanoff: Designs on Nature: Science and Democ-
racy in Europe and the United States (Princeton
Univ. Press, Princeton 2005)
80.65
F. Operto: Ethics in advanced robotics, IEEE Robotics
Autom. Mag. 18(1), 72–78 (2008)
80.66
ORI,
Open
roboethics
initiative:
http://www.
openroboethics.org/

2161
Acknowl.
Acknowledgements
B.21 Actuators for Soft Robotics
by Alin Albu-Schäffer, Antonio Bicchi
The authors of this chapter have used liberally of
work done by a group of collaborators involved
in the EU projects PHRIENDS, VIACTORS, and
SAPHARI. We want to particularly thank Etienne Bur-
det, Federico Carpi, Manuel Catalano, Manolo Gara-
bini, Giorgio Grioli, Sami Haddadin, Dominic Lacatos,
Can zparpucu, Florian Petit, Joshua Schultz, Nikos
Tsagarakis, Bram Vanderborght, and Sebastian Wolf for
their substantial contributions to this chapter and the
work behind it.
C.29 Inertial Sensing, GPS and Odometry
by Gregory Dudek, Michael Jenkin
We would like to thank Sarah Jenkin for her help with
the ﬁgures.
D.36 Motion for Manipulation Tasks
by James Kuffner, Jing Xiao
We acknowledge the contribution that the authors of the
ﬁrst edition made to this chapter revision, particularly
Sect. 36.1, Sect. 36.2, and Sect. 36.5.
E.52 Modeling and Control
of Aerial Robots
by Robert Mahony, Randal Beard, Vijay Kumar
The authors would like to acknowledge the contribu-
tions of Peter Corke to the background material on
quadrotor vehicles (R. Mahony, V. Kumar, P. Corke:
Multirotor aerial vehicles: Modeling, estimation, and
control of quadrotor, Robotics Autom. Mag. 19(3), 20–
32 (2013)) and Eric Feron and Eric Johnson (E. Feron,
E. Johnson: Aerial robotics. In: Springer Handbook
of Robotics, ed. by B. Siciliano, O. Khatib (Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg 2008)) to the introductory material
in this chapter.
F.57
Robotics in Construction
by Kamel Saidi, Thomas Bock,
Christos Georgoulas
Disclaimer: Although certain commercial construction
equipment are included in this chapter, the inclusion
of such information should in no way be construed as
indicating that such products are endorsed by the Na-
tional Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) or
are recommended by NIST or that they are necessarily
the best equipment for the purposes described.
F.58 Robotics in Hazardous Applications
by James Trevelyan, William Hamel,
Sung-Chul Kang
James Trevelyan acknowledges Surya Singh for de-
tailed suggestions on the original draft, and would also
like to thank the many unnamed mine clearance experts
who have provided guidance and comments over many
years, as well as Prof. S. Hirose, Scanjack, Way In-
dustry, Japan Atomic Energy Agency, and Total Marine
Systems for providing photographs.
William R. Hamel would like to acknowledge
the US Department of Energy’s Robotics Crosscut-
ting Program and all of his colleagues at the na-
tional laboratories and universities for many years
of dealing with remote hazardous operations, and all
of his collaborators at the Field Robotics Center at
Carnegie Mellon University, particularly James Os-
born, who were pivotal in developing ideas for future
telerobots.
Sungchul Kang acknowledges Changhyun Cho,
Woosub Lee, Dongsuk Ryu at KIST (Korean Institute
for Science and Technology), Korea for their provid-
ing valuable documents and pictures. He also appreci-
ates Munsang Kim for his leading projects that have
produced many of research achievements related to
Sect. 58.3 enabling technologies.
All three authors acknowledge comments from
Prof. Cdric Pradalier of Georgia Tech Lorraine and
Mark Noakes of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in
USA.
F.59 Robotics in Mining
by Joshua Marshall, Adrian Bonchis, Eduardo
Nebot, Steven Scheding
The authors would like to thank Elliot Duff at CSIRO
for his work in mustering the team for this chapter
project. Thanks to Andrew Crose and Michael Lewis
and Modular Mining Systems for help in obtaining
information about the Komatsu AHS. Thanks also to
Johan Larsson, Ola Pettersson, and Oscar Lundhede for
facilitating the use of some Atlas Copco AB images and
video.
F.62 Intelligent Vehicles
by Alberto Broggi, Alex Zelinsky, Ümit Özgüner,
Christian Laugier
The authors acknowledge the contributions of Chuck
Thorpe and Michel Parent, who made signiﬁcant contri-

Acknowl.
2162
Acknowledgements
butions to the ﬁrst edition of the handbook chapter, and
part of their contributions remain in the revised second
edition. We also acknowledge the helpful contributions
of Dizan Alejandro Vasquez.
G.70 Human–Robot Augmentation
by Massimo Bergamasco, Hugh Herr
The authors wish to thank Jared Markowitz, Elliott
Rouse, Carlo Alberto Avizzano, Marco Fontana, and
Rocco Vertechy for their helpful assistance and sugges-
tions in writing this manuscript.
G.74 Learning from Humans
by Aude Billard, Sylvain Calinon,
Rüdiger Dillmann
We warmly thank Daniel Grollman and Stefan Schaal
for participation in drafting earlier versions of this
chapter.

2163
Authors
About the Authors
Markus W. Achtelik
Chapter B.26
ETH Zurich
Autonomous Systems Laboratory
Zurich, Switzerland
markus@achtelik.net
Markus Wilhelm Achtelik received his Diploma degree in Electrical Engineering
from the TU München in 2009. He ﬁnished his PhD in 2014 at the Autonomous
Systems Lab (ASL) at ETH Zurich, and currently works as Postdoc at ASL on control,
state estimation and planning, with the goal of enabling autonomous manoeuvres for
MAVs, using an IMU and onboard camera(s) as main sensors.
Alin Albu-Schäffer
Chapter B.21
DLR Institute of Robotics and
Mechatronics
Wessling, Germany
alin.albu-schaeffer@dlr.de
Alin Albu-Schäffer graduated in Electrical Engineering from the Technical University
of Timisoara, in 1993 and got the PhD from the TU Munich in 2002. Since 2012 he
is the Head of the Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics at the German Aerospace
Center, which he joined in 1995 as a PhD candidate. Moreover, he is a Professor at
the TU Munich’s Computer Science Department. His research interests include robot
design, modeling and control, ﬂexible joints, as well as bio-inspired robot design.
Kostas Alexis
Chapter B.26
ETH Zurich
Institute of Robotics and Intelligent
Systems
Zurich, Switzerland
konstantinos.alexis@mavt.ethz.ch
Kostas Alexis obtained his PhD in the ﬁeld of aerial robotics control and
collaboration from the University of Patras, Greece in 2011. Since then
he holds a senior researcher position at ASL – ETH Zurich. His research
interests lie in control and optimization focusing on aerial systems
navigation. He is the co-author of more than 40 technical publications.
Jorge Angeles
Chapter B.16
McGill University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
and Centre for Intelligent Machines
Montreal, Canada
angeles@cim.mcgill.ca
Jorge Angeles graduated as an Electromechanical Engineer and obtained
the MEng degree in Mechanical Engineering, both at Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), then received the PhD degree
in Applied Mechanics from Stanford University. Research activities
include robot kinematics, dynamics, design, and control as well as
design theory and methodology. Angeles is a Fellow of ASME, CSME,
IEEE and RSC, The Academies of Arts, Humanities, and Sciences
of Canada, and Honorary Member of IFToMM, the International
Federation for the Promotion of Mechanism and Machine Science.
Gianluca Antonelli
Chapter E.51
For biographical details see “About the Multimedia Editors”
Fumihito Arai
Chapter B.27
Nagoya University
Department of Micro-Nano Systems
Engineering
Nagoya, Japan
arai@mech.nagoya-u.ac.jp
Fumihito Arai received Master of Eng. degree from Tokyo University of Science in
1988. He received Dr. of Eng. from Nagoya University in 1993. Since 1994, he was
Assistant Professor at Nagoya University, from 2005 Professor at Tohoku University.
Since 2010 he has been Professor at Nagoya University mainly engaged in micro- and
nano-robotics.
Michael A. Arbib
Chapter G.77
University of Southern California
Computer Science, Neuroscience and ABLE
Project
Los Angeles, USA
arbib@usc.edu
Michael Arbib’s group at the University of Massachusetts Amherst (UMass) in-
troduced the notions of opposition space and affordances to the study of brain
mechanisms for primate and control of robot hands. At the University of Southern
California, his group developed new models of primate visuomotor coordination,
including the ﬁrst computational model of mirror neurons. He continues to develop
the mirror system hypothesis for the evolution of the language-ready brain.

Authors
2164
About the Authors
J. Andrew Bagnell
Chapter A.15
Carnegie Mellon University
Robotics Institute
Pittsburgh, USA
dbagnell@ri.cmu.edu
Dr. J. Andrew Bagnell is an Associate Research Professor at Carnegie
Mellon University’s Robotics Institute and National Robotics Engineering
Center (NREC) and the Machine Learning Department. His research fo-
cuses on machine learning and perception, adaptive control, optimization
and planning under uncertainty. He received a BSc in Electrical Engi-
neering from the University of Florida in 1998. He joined the Robotics
Institute at CMU in 2000 receiving an MS and PhD in Robotics in 2002
and 2004, respectively.
Randal W. Beard
Chapter E.52
Brigham Young University
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Provo, USA
beard@byu.edu
Randal Beard is a Professor in the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering at Brigham Young University. He received
his PhD from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. His research interests
include guidance and control of teams of unmanned air vehicles. He is
a Fellow of the IEEE and an Associate Fellow of AIAA.
Michael Beetz
Chapter A.14
University Bremen
Institute for Artificial Intelligence
Bremen, Germany
ai-office@cs.uni-bremen.de
Michael Beetz is a Professor for Computer Science at the Faculty for Informatics of
the University Bremen and Head of the Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence. He received
his diploma degree in Computer Science from the University of Kaiserslautern and
his MSc, MPhil, and PhD degrees from Yale University in 1993, 1994, and 1996,
respectively. His research interests include plan-based control of robotic agents,
knowledge processing, integrated robot learning, and cognitive perception.
George Bekey
Chapter G.80
University of Southern California
Department of Computer Science
Arroyo Grande, USA
bekey@usc.edu
George A. Bekey is Professor Emeritus of Computer Science at the University of
Southern California. He was President of the IEEE Robotics and Automation Society.
His current research interest is in robot ethics and is co-editor of Robot Ethics.
Professor Bekey is a member of the US National Academy of Engineering and
a Fellow of IEEE and other societies.
Maren Bennewitz
Chapter E.45
University of Bonn
Institute for Computer Science VI
Bonn, Germany
maren@cs.uni-bonn.de
Maren Bennewitz is currently an Assistant Professor for Computer
Science at the University of Freiburg and Head of the Humanoid Robots
Laboratory. In the last few years, she has been developing novel solutions
for humanoid robots navigating in multilevel and multi-room indoor
environments containing articulated and movable objects. These include
probabilistic methods for 3-D environment modelling as well as for
manipulation and navigation.
Massimo Bergamasco
Chapter G.70
Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies
Perceptual Robotics Laboratory
Pisa, Italy
m.bergamasco@sssup.it
Massimo Bergamasco is Professor of Theory of Mechanisms and
Machines at the Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa, Italy. His research
deals with the study and development of haptic interfaces and wearable
robots for the control of the interaction between humans and virtual
environments. Presently he is focused on general aspects of perception
and cognitive processes. He has been the Founder of the Perceptual
Robotics Laboratory at Sant’Anna.
Marcel Bergerman
Chapter F.56
Carnegie Mellon University
Robotics Institute
Pittsburgh, USA
marcel@cmu.edu
Dr. Marcel Bergerman is a faculty at Carnegie Mellon University and co-founder
of Near Earth Autonomy, in Pittsburgh, USA. His career is devoted to the design,
development, and deployment of robotic systems for ﬁeld applications, in particular
agriculture and defense. Dr. Bergerman is a co-founder of GreenE Academy, teaching
programming and robotics to children. He got his PhD from CMU in 1996.

About the Authors
2165
Authors
Antonio Bicchi
Chapter B.21
University of Pisa
Interdepartmental Research Center “E.
Piaggio”
Pisa, Italy
bicchi@ing.unipi.it
Antonio Bicchi is Professor of Robotics at the University of Pisa, Senior Scientist at
the Italian Institute of Technology in Genoa, and an Adjunct Professor at Arizona State
University. His main research interests are in robotics, haptics, and control systems. He
has published more than 400 papers. In collaboration with Pietro Pietrini and Emiliano
Ricciardi, University of Pisa, and Marco Santello, Arizona State University, he has set
up a multidisciplinary group to capitalize on the interaction between neuroscience and
robotics studying human perception and motor control.
Aude G. Billard
Chapter G.74
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
(EPFL)
School of Engineering
Lausanne, Switzerland
aude.billard@epfl.ch
Aude Billard is Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland. She holds
a BSc/MSc in Physics from EPFL and a PhD from the University of
Edinburgh. A. Billard received the Intel Corporation Teaching Award,
the Swiss NSF Career Award in. Her research interests include robot
learning, humanoid robotics, human–robot interactions and computational
neuroscience.
John Billingsley
Chapter F.56
University of Southern Queensland
Faculty of Engineering and Surveying
Toowoomba, Australia
john.billingsley@usq.edu.au
John Billingsley graduated in Mathematics and Electrical Engineering
from Cambridge University in 1960, later gaining a PhD in control
theory there. In 1992 he took up a Chair of Engineering at the University
of Southern Queensland and supervises Technology Research in the
National Centre for Engineering in Agriculture (NCEA). In 2006 he
received an achievement medal from the IET, London.
Rainer Bischoff
Chapter F.54
KUKA Roboter GmbH
Technology Development
Augsburg, Germany
rainer.bischoff@kuka.com
Dr. Bischoff is Head of KUKA’s Technology Development Department responsible
for research and technology development projects preceding product development.
Dr. Bischoff received his Dr.-Ing. degree from Karlsruhe Institute of Technology.
He serves as Vice-President Industry of euRobotics AISBL – the European Robotics
Association and helped to united European roboticists.
Thomas Bock
Chapter F.57
Technical University Munich
Department of Architecture
Munich, Germany
thomas.bock@br2.ar.tum.de
Prof. Dr.-Ing. T. Bock focuses on the automation and robotization in construction,
from planning through construction production and use phase to rebuilding and
restoration. In this area he has published almost 400 refereed publications in book
chapters, international journals and conferences. Since 1997 he holds the Chair for
Building Realization and Robotics, Technical University Munich, Germany.
Adrian Bonchis
Chapter F.59
CSIRO
Department of Autonomous Systems
Pullenvale, Australia
adrian.bonchis@csiro.au
Adrian Bonchis has been working in the robotics space in mining,
manufacturing, and agriculture for over 25 years. He completed his
PhD in Systems and Control at the University of Sydney in 2000. Since
commencing with CSIRO in 2005, his activities focused mainly on
automating heavy mining equipment, delivering a number of innovative
solutions to industry clients.
Josh Bongard
Chapter G.76
University of Vermont
Department of Computer Science
Burlington, USA
josh.bongard@uvm.edu
Josh Bongard is an Associate Professor in Computer Science at the
University of Vermont, USA. He currently serves as a vice chair of
the UVM Complex Systems Spire, and is the co-author of the popular
science book How the Body Shapes the Way We Think: A New View of
Intelligence. His interests include evolutionary robotics, crowdsourcing
and machine science.

Authors
2166
About the Authors
Wayne J. Book
Chapter A.11
Georgia Institute of Technology
G. W. Woodruff School of Mechanical
Engineering
Atlanta, USA
wayne.book@me.gatech.edu
Wayne J. Book, HUSCO/Ramirez Distinguished Professor of Fluid Power and Motion
Control (emeritus), has taught at the Georgia Institute of Technology since 1974.
A Fellow of ASME, IEEE and SME, he holds degrees from MIT (MS and PhD) and
the University of Texas at Austin (BS) in Mechanical Engineering. He was awarded
the 2013 Robert E. Koski Medal by ASME. His research focuses on dynamics of ﬂuid
power and ﬂexible systems, robotics, and haptic human interfaces.
Cynthia Breazeal
Chapter G.72
MIT Media Lab
Personal Robots Group
Cambridge, USA
cynthiab@media.mit.edu
Cynthia Breazeal is Associate Professor at MIT, where she founded and directs the
Personal Robots Group at the Media Lab since 2001. She holds degrees from MIT
(MS, PhD) in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science with specialization in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics and from UC Santa Barbara (BS) in Electrical
and Computer Engineering. She is a pioneer of Social Robotics and Human Robot
Interaction with particular focus on personal robots.
Oliver Brock
Chapter D.40
Technical University Berlin
Robotics and Biology Laboratory
Berlin, Germany
oliver.brock@tu-berlin.de
Oliver Brock is the Alexander von Humboldt Professor of Robotics in the
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at the Technical
Univerisity Berlin, Germany, since 2009. He received his Diploma in
Computer Science in 1993 from the TU Berlin and his Master’s and
PhD in Computer Science from Stanford University in 1994 and 2000,
respectively. Research of Brock’s lab focuses on autonomous mobile
manipulation, interactive perception, grasping, manipulation, soft hands,
interactive learning, and motion generation.
Alberto Broggi
Chapter F.62
University of Parma
Department of Information Technology
Parma, Italy
broggi@ce.unipr.it
Prof. Alberto Broggi is full Professor at the Universita‘ di Parma
and the President of VisLab, the Artiﬁcial Vision and Intelligent
Systems Laboratory. As a pioneer in the use of machine vision for
automotive applications and on driverless cars, he authored more than
200 publications. He served as the IEEE Intelligent Transportation
Systems Society as President and is recipient of two ERC (European
Research Council) prestigious grants.
Davide Brugali
Chapter A.12
University of Bergamo
Department of Computer Science and
Mathematics
Dalmine, Italy
brugali@unibg.it
Davide Brugali received the PhD degree in Computer Science from Politecnico di
Torino, Italy in 1998. He is currently Associate Professor at the University of Bergamo,
Italy. Since 2005 he is Chair of the IEEE RAS Technical Commettee on Software
Engineering for Robotics and Automation. He has founded the Journal of Software
Engineering for Robotics (JOSER) in 2009.
Heinrich Bülthoff
Chapter G.78
Max-Planck-Institute for Biological
Cybernetics
Human Perception, Cognition and Action
Tübingen, Germany
heinrich.buelthoff@tuebingen.mpg.de
Professor Heinrich Bülthoff is scientiﬁc member of the Max Planck Society and
Managing Director of the Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics. There,
a group of 70 scientists investigates object and face recognition, human–robot
interaction, social and spatial cognition, self-motion perception, and control. They
developed unique motion simulators and novel virtual reality technologies for
a cybernetics approach to study human cognition in a closed perception–action loop.

About the Authors
2167
Authors
Joel W. Burdick
Chapter D.37
California Institute of Technology
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Pasadena, USA
jwb@robotics.caltech.edu
Joel Burdick received the PhD degree in Mechanical Engineering from
Stanford University. He has been with the Department of Mechanical
Engineering at the California Institute of Technology since May 1988,
where he has been the recipient of the NSF Presidential Young Investigator
Award, the Ofﬁce of Naval Research Young Investigator Award, and the
Feynman Fellowship. Professor Burdick’s current research interests
are in sensor-based robot motion planning, multiﬁngered robotic hand
manipulation, and the application of robotics to neural prosthetics.
Wolfram Burgard
Chapter E.45
University of Freiburg
Institute of Computer Science
Freiburg, Germany
burgard@informatik.uni-freiburg.de
Wolfram Burgard is a Professor for Computer Science at the University
of Freiburg and head of the Research Laboratory for Autonomous
Intelligent Systems. His research focuses on the development of
probabilistic approaches to mobile robot navigation. Over the past years
he and his group have developed a series of innovative probabilistic
techniques for various mobile robot navigation problems including
localization, map building, path planning, and exploration.
Fabrizio Caccavale
Chapter D.39
University of Basilicata
School of Engineering
Potenza, Italy
fabrizio.caccavale@unibas.it
Fabrizio Caccavale received the Laurea degree and the Research Doctorate degree in
Electronic Engineering from the University of Naples Federico II in 1993 and 1997,
respectively. He is currently Associate Professor at the School of Engineering of the
University of Basilicata. His research interests include manipulator inverse kinematics
techniques, cooperative robot manipulation, fault diagnosis, and nonlinear control of
mechanical systems. He has published over 100 journal and conference papers and is
co-author of 3 books.
Sylvain Calinon
Chapter G.74
Idiap Research Institute
Martigny, Switzerland
sylvain.calinon@idiap.ch
Dr. Sylvain Calinon is a Researcher at the Idiap Research Institute since May 2014 and
a Visiting Researcher at the Learning Algorithms and Systems Lab (LASA), Ecole
Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL). He holds a PhD from EPFL (2007)
awarded by Robotdalen, ABB and EPFL-Press awards. His research interests cover
robot learning and human-robot interaction.
Raja Chatila
Chapter A.14
For biographical profile, please see the section “About the Part Editors”.
François Chaumette
Chapter C.34
Inria/Irisa
Lagadic Group
Rennes, France
francois.chaumette@inria.fr
François Chaumette graduated from Ecole Nationale Supérieure de
Mécanique, Nantes, France, in 1987. He received the PhD degree in
Computer Science from the University of Rennes I in 1990. He is an Inria
research scientist at Irisa in Rennes, where he heads the Lagadic Group.
His research interests include robotics and computer vision. He is Fellow
of the IEEE.
I-Ming Chen
Chapter B.22
Nanyang Technological University
School of Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering
Singapore, Singapore
michen@ntu.edu.sg
I-Ming Chen (BS’86 National Taiwan University, MS’89 and PhD’94
California Institute of Technology, USA) is Professor in Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. His research interests are in
wearable sensors, human-robot interaction, modular reconﬁgurable
automation, and parallel kinematics machines (PKM). He is Fellow
of IEEE and Fellow of ASME, General Chairman of 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation in Singapore.

Authors
2168
About the Authors
Stefano Chiaverini
Chapter A.10
University of Cassino and Southern Lazio
Department of Electrical and Information
Engineering
Cassino, Italy
chiaverini@unicas.it
Stefano Chiaverini is a Professor of Automatic Control at the University of Cassino
where is the Head of the Electrical and Information Engineering Department. His
research interests include inverse kinematics techniques, redundant manipulator
control, cooperative robots, force/position control, underwater robotics, and mobile
robotic systems. He has published more than 180 papers. He is a Fellow of the IEEE.
Gregory S. Chirikjian
Chapter B.20
John Hopkins University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Baltimore, USA
gchirik1@jhu.edu
Gregory S. Chirikjian received undergraduate degrees from Johns Hopkins University
in 1988 and the PhD degree from the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,
in 1992. Since 1992, he has beenon the faculty of the Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, where he has been a full professor since
2001. His research interests include robotics, applications of group theory, and the
mechanics of biological macromolecules. In 2008 he became a Fellow of the ASME,
and in 2010 he became a Fellow of the IEEE.
Kyu-Jin Cho
Chapter B.23
Seoul National University
Biorobotics Laboratory
Seoul, Korea
kjcho@sun.ac.kr
Kyu-Jin Cho received BS and MS degrees from Seoul National University,
Seoul, Korea in 1998 and 2000, respectively, and a PhD degree from
MIT in 2007. He was a post-doctoral fellow at Harvard Microrobotics
Laboratory until 2008. He is now an Associate Professor of Mechanical
and Aerospace Engineering and the Director of Biorobotics Laboratory
at Seoul National University. His research interests include biologically
inspired robotics, soft robotics, soft wearable robots, and rehabilitation/
assistive robotics.
Hyun-Taek Choi
Chapter B.25
Korea Research Institute of Ships & Ocean
Engineering (KRISO)
Ocean System Engineering Research
Division
Daejeon, Korea
htchoiphd@gmail.com
Hyun-Taek Choi received his BS, MS, and PhD degrees from Hanyang
University, Korea in 1991, 1993, and 2000, respectively. After working
for Korea Telecom and ASL, University of Hawaii, in a postdoc position,
he joined Korea Research Institute of Ships and Ocean Engineering
(KRISO) in 2003. He has been leading several projects related to
underwater robotic applications such as advanced control & navigation,
recognition using optical camera and sonar.
Nak-Young Chong
Chapter D.44
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology
Center for Intelligent Robotics
Ishikawa, Japan
nakyoung@jaist.ac.jp
Nak-Young Chong is a Professor for Research at the Japan Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology School of Information Science. He received the PhD degree
from Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea, in 1994. From 1994 to 2003, he was on the
research staff at Daewoo Heavy Industries, Korea, and AIST, Japan. His research
interests cover networked robots and cognitive and intelligent systems.
Howie Choset
Chapter B.20
Carnegie Mellon University
Robotics Institute
Pittsburgh, USA
choset@cs.cmu.edu
Howie Choset conducts research in path planning, motion control, estimation, and
mechanism design with a focus on snake robots for medicine, search and rescue,
archeology, and manufacturing. Choset’s group develops multi-agent path planners for
de-mining and coordinated manufacturing. Choset directs the Undergraduate Robotics
Major at Carnegie Mellon. Choset is the co-founder of Medrobotics and co-author of
Principles of Robot Motion.
Henrik I. Christensen
Chapter A.5
For biographical profile, please see the section “About the Part Editors”.

About the Authors
2169
Authors
Wendell H. Chun
Chapter F.61
University of Denver
Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
Denver, USA
wendell.chun@du.edu
Wendell Chun managed the Robotics Group at Lockheed Martin in
Denver for the last twenty-ﬁve years. In addition to working in industry,
he has been an Adjunct Faculty teaching robotics at the Colorado School
of Mines since 1999 and the University of Denver since 2003. He
holds over ten patents and was featured on the History Channel Modern
Marvel’s episode on Remotely Operated Vehicles.
Wan Kyun Chung
Chapter A.8
POSTECH
Robotics Laboratory
Pohang, Korea
wkchung@postech.ac.kr
Wankyun Chung received his BS degree from Seoul National University
in 1981, his MS degree in 1983, and his PhD from KAIST in 1987. He
is a Professor in the School of Mechanical Engineering, POSTECH and
Director of the National Research Laboratory. He has written two books
and published more than 100 journal papers. His research interests
include medical robot and biomechatronics.
Woojin Chung
Chapter B.24
Korea University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Seoul, Korea
smartrobot@korea.ac.kr
Woojin Chung received the BS degree from the Seoul National University and MS
and PhD degrees from the University of Tokyo. He is a Professor in the Department of
Mechanical Engineering, Korea University. His research interests include autonomous
navigation of mobile robots. He received the King-Sun Fu Memorial Best Transactions
Paper Award from the IEEE RAS in 2002.
Peter Corke
Chapter C.34
Queensland University of Technology
Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science
Brisbane, Australia
peter.corke@qut.edu.au
Peter Corke is a Professor of Robotics and Control at Queensland Institute of
Technology, and Director of the ARC Centre of Excellence for Robotic Vision. His
research is concerned with enabling robots to see, and the application of robots to
mining, agriculture and environmental monitoring. He received his undergraduate
degree in Electrical Engineering and PhD from the University of Melbourne.
Elizabeth Croft
Chapter G.69
University of British Columbia
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Vancouver, Canada
elizabeth.croft@ubc.ca
Elizabeth Croft (Honours BASc Mechanical Engineering UBC 1988,
MASc Waterloo 1992, PhD Toronto 1995) PEng is Full Professor of
Mechanical Engineering, Associate Dean of the Faculty of Applied
Science, and Director of the CARIS Lab at the University of British
Columbia. Her research spans human–robot interaction, industrial
automation, controls, and mechatronics. She is a Fellow of the ASME and
Engineers Canada.
Mark R. Cutkosky
Chapter C.28
Stanford University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Stanford, USA
cutkosky@stanford.edu
Mark Cutkosky received the PhD in Robotics from Carnegie Mellon
University in 1985. He became an Assistant Professor at Stanford
University in 1985, an Associate Professor in 1991 and Professor
in 1996. His research involves bio-inspired robots, mechanisms and
sensors.
Kostas Daniilidis
Chapter C.32
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Computer and Information
Science
Philadelphia, USA
kostas@upenn.edu
Kostas Daniilidis is Associate Professor of Computer and Information Science at the
University of Pennsylvania, where he is a member of the interdisciplinary GRAS
Plaboratory. He obtained the BSE and MSE degrees in Electrical Engineering from
the National Technical University of Athens (1986) and his Dr. rer.nat. in Computer
Science from the University of Karlsruhe (1992). His research interests are in space
and motion perception with machines with applications to navigation, panoramic
vision, and immersive environments.

Authors
2170
About the Authors
Paolo Dario
Chapter F.63
Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies
The BioRobotics Institute
Pisa, Italy
paolo.dario@sssup.it
Paolo Dario obtained the Dott. Eng. degree in Mechanical Engineering from the
University of Pisa in 1977. He is Professor of Biomedical Robotics and Founder
and Director of The BioRobotics Institute. His research interests involve robotics for
surgery, rehabilitation and assisted living. He served as President of the IEEE Robotics
and Automation Society in 2002–2003.
Kerstin Dautenhahn
Chapter G.72
University of Hertfordshire
School of Computer Science
Hatfield, UK
k.dautenhahn@herts.ac.uk
Kerstin Dautenhahn is Professor of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the School
of Computer Science at the University of Hertfordshire, U.K. She
has pioneered research in social robotics, human-robot interaction,
assistive technology and published more than 300 research articles. Prof.
Dautenhahn is Editor in Chief of the Journal of Interaction Studies, as
well as Associate Editor of several other international journals.
Alessandro De Luca
Chapter A.11
Sapienza University of Rome
Department of Computer, Control, and
Management Engineering
Rome, Italy
deluca@diag.uniroma1.it
Alessandro De Luca received his PhD in Systems Engineering in 1987
and is Professor of Robotics at Sapienza University of Rome since 2000.
He published over 180 articles on modelling and control of different
robotic systems, in particular ﬂexible manipulators. He was General
Chair of ICRA 2007. He received the Helmholtz-Humboldt Research
Award in 2005 and is an IEEE Fellow (class of 2007).
Joris De Schutter
Chapter A.9
University of Leuven (KU Leuven)
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Leuven-Heverlee, Belgium
joris.deschutter@kuleuven.be
Joris De Schutter received his PhD degree in Mechanical Engineering from KU Leuven
in 1986. His research interests include sensor-based robot control and programming,
human motion modeling, human-robot interaction, multi-sensor fusion and estimation
for model building and real-time control, and optimization of mechanical and
mechatronic drive systems. He is co-author of two volumes in the STAR book series.
Rüdiger Dillmann
Chapter G.74
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Institute for Technical Informatics
Karlsruhe, Germany
dillmann@ira.uka.de
Rüdiger Dillmann received his PhD from University of Karlsruhe in 1980. Since
1987 he has been Professor of the Department of Computer Science, where he
became Director of the Research Center for Information Science (FZI). His research
interest is in humanoid robotics with special emphasis on intelligent, autonomous and
interactive robot behaviour based on machine learning methods and programming by
demonstration. He is EiC of the Springer book series COSMOS.
Lixin Dong
Chapter B.27
Michigan State University
Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
East Lansing, USA
ldong@egr.msu.edu
Lixin Dongreceived his PhD from Nagoya University in 2003. He
became Research Associate, Lecturer, and Associate Professor at Xi’an
University of Technology in 1992, 1995, and 1998, respectively, and
Assistant Professor at Nagoya University in 2003. In 2004 he joined
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich in several positions.
He is now Assistant Professor at Michigan State University, where his
research is on nanorobotics.
Gregory Dudek
Chapter C.29
McGill University
Department of Computer Science
Montreal, Canada
dudek@cim.mcgill.ca
Gregory Dudek is a Professor in the McGill University School of
Computer Science and a member of the McGill Research Centre for
Intelligent Machines (CIM). He was named a William Dawson Scholar.
He directs the McGill Mobile Robotics Laboratory, where his research
interests include perception for mobile robotics, vision-based robotics,
computational vision, and collaborative ﬁltering.

About the Authors
2171
Authors
Hugh Durrant-Whyte
Chapter C.35
University of Sydney
Australian Centre for Field Robotics (ACFR)
Sydney, Australia
hugh@acfr.usyd.edu.au
Hugh Durrant-Whyte received the MSE and PhD degrees, both in Systems Engineer-
ing, from the University of Pennsylvania, USA, in 1985 and 1986, respectively. Since
1995 he has been a Professor at the University of Sydney, where he leads the Aus-
tralian Centre for Field Robotics (ACFR). His research work focuses on autonomous
vehicle navigation and decentralized data fusion methods with applications including
automation in cargo handling, mining, defence, and marine systems.
Roy Featherstone
Chapter A.3
The Australian National University
Department of Information Engineering
Canberra, Australia
roy.featherstone@anu.edu.au
Dr. Featherstone received the PhD degree from Edinburgh University in 1984. He
is the inventor of the articulated-body algorithm, and the author of two books on
rigid-body dynamics. He has 7 years experience in industry and was awarded an
EPSRC Advanced Research Fellowship in 1992, which was held at Oxford University.
He currently workson robot dynamics, control, simulation, and actuator technology.
Gabor Fichtinger
Chapter F.63
Queen’s University
School of Computing
Kingston, Canada
gabor@cs.queensu.ca
Gabor Fichtinger received the doctorate degree in Computer Science from
the Budapest Technical University, Hungary, in 1990. He is a Professor in
Computer Science and Cancer Care Ontario Research Chair at Queen’s
University, Canada. He is the Director of the Laboratory for Percutaneous
Surgery, specializing in computer-assisted interventions and medical
robotics, primarily for the diagnosis and therapy of cancer.
Paolo Fiorini
Chapter F.63
University of Verona
Department of Computer Science
Verona, Italy
paolo.fiorini@univr.it
Paolo Fiorini received the Laurea degree in Electronic Engineering
from the University of Padova, Italy, the MSEE from the University
of California at Irvine, and the PhD in ME from UCLA. From 1985
to 2000, he was with NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory. In 2001 he
joined the Department of Computer Science of the University of Verona
as a full Professor. His research focuses on teleoperation and surgical
robotics. He is an IEEE Fellow (2009).
Paul Fitzpatrick
Chapter G.67
Italian Institute of Technology
Robotics, Brain, and Cognitive Sciences
Department
Genoa, Italy
paul.fitzpatrick@iit.it
Paul Fitzpatrick received the PhD degree in Computer Science from MIT, on
developmental approaches to machine perception. He worked at MIT as a postdoctoral
lecturer, then held a postdoctoral position at LIRA-Lab at the University of Genoa,
Italy. He is now working at the Italian Institute of Technology. His primary interest is
the development of machine perception for object manipulation.
Luke Fletcher
Chapter F.66
Boeing Research & Technology Australia
Brisbane, Australia
luke.s.fletcher@gmail.com
Luke Fletcher is at Boeing Research and Technology – Australia working on
perception driven robotics for future aircraft assembly. Previously, from 2007, Luke
was a research scientist at CSAIL, MIT. He completed a PhD at the Australian
National University (ANU) in 2006 on driver gaze and road scene computer vision.
In 1996, Luke graduated from the University of Melbourne with BEHons(Elec) and
BSc(Comp) degrees.
Dario Floreano
Chapter G.76
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
(EPFL)
Laboratory of Intelligent Systems
Lausanne, Switzerland
dario.floreano@epfl.ch
Dario Floreano is Professor of Intelligent Systems at EPFL and Director
of the Swiss National Center of Competence in Robotics. He is interested
in the convergence of artiﬁcial intelligence, robotics, and biology. He
is co-founder of the International Society of Artiﬁcial Life Inc. and of
the drone company senseFly Ltd. His activity has resulted in more than
three hundred articles, four books, several patents, and three spin off
companies.

Authors
2172
About the Authors
Thor I. Fossen
Chapter E.51
Norwegian University of Science and
Technology
Department of Engineering Cyberentics
Trondheim, Norway
fossen@ieee.org
Thor I. Fossen received the MSc degree in Naval Architecture and PhD
degree in Engineering Cybernetics from NTNU. His research activities
include guidance, navigation and control of marine craft and unmanned
vehicles. He is one of the founders of the DNV-GL company Marine
Cybernetics. He is the recipient of the Automatica Prize Paper Award in
2002 and the 2008 Arch T. Colwell Merit Award.
Li-Chen Fu
Chapter A.8
National Taiwan University
Department of Electrical Engineering
Taipei, Taiwan
lichen@ntu.edu.tw
Li-Chen Fu received the PhD degree (1987) from University of California at Berkeley,
and then joined the Department of Electrical Engineering of the National Taiwan
University. His research interests include robotics, smart home, visual detection
and tracking, intelligent vehicle, production scheduling, and virtual reality. He was
awarded Lifetime Distinguished Professorship from his university in 2007. He is an
IEEE Fellow (2004).
Maxime Gautier
Chapter A.6
University of Nantes
IRCCyN, ECN
Nantes, France
maxime.gautier@irccyn.ec-nantes.fr
Maxime Gautier received the Doctorat d’Etat degree in Robotics and Control
Engineering from the University of Nantes, France, in 1990. Since 1991, he has been
a Professor of Automatic Control at the University of Nantes. He is a member of the
Robotics Team, Institut de Recherche en Communication et Cybernétique de Nantes
(IRCCyN, UMR-CNRS n6597). His research topics include modeling, identiﬁcation,
and control of robots.
Christos Georgoulas
Chapter F.57
Technical University Munich
Department of Architecture
Munich, Germany
christos.georgoulas@br2.ar.tum.de
Dr. Ing. Christos Georgoulas received his PhD degree on Stereo Vision
from Democritus University of Thrace, Greece, in 2010. In 2011, he
joined the Chair for Building Realization and Robotics, Technical
University Munich, Germany. His research interests are mainly robotics,
real-time systems design, embedded systems, intelligent machine vision
systems, and image processing.
Martin A. Giese
Chapter G.78
University Clinic Tübingen
Department for Cognitive Neurology
Tübingen, Germany
martin.giese@uni-tuebingen.de
Martin A. Giese founded the Laboratory for Action Representation and
Learning at the University Clinic Tübingen in 2001. After a position at
Honda, Boston, and as Senior Lecturer at the University of Bangor (UK),
he accepted a position as Professor for Computational Sensomotorics
in the Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research and the University
Clinic Tübingen, Germany in 2008. His research focuses on the role
of learning in action recognition and control in biological systems, and
technical applications.
Ken Goldberg
Chapter D.44
University of California at Berkeley
Department of Industrial Engineering and
Operations Research
Berkeley, USA
goldberg@ieor.berkeley.edu
Ken Goldberg is Professor of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research at UC
Berkeley, with joint appointments in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and
the School of Information. Goldberg was named IEEE Fellow in 2005 and is Founding
Director of the UC CITRIS People and Robots Initiative. He serves as Editor-in-Chief
of the IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering. He is Founding
Chair of the IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering (T-ASE)
Advisory Board. He is Co-Founder of the Berkeley Center for New Media (BCNM),
the African Robotics Network (AFRON), the Center for Automation and Learning
for Medical Robotics (CAL-MR), the CITRIS Data and Democracy Initiative (DDI),
Hybrid Wisdom Labs, and Moxie Institute.

About the Authors
2173
Authors
Clément Gosselin
Chapter B.18
Laval University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Quebec, Canada
gosselin@gmc.ulaval.ca
Clément Gosselin received the PhD degree and the D.W. Ambridge Award from
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada in 1988. Since 1997 he has been a Full
Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at University Laval, Quebec
and a Canada Research Chair in Robotics and Mechatronics since January 2001. His
research interests are kinematics, dynamics, and control of robotic mechanical systems
with a particular emphasis on parallel mechanisms and robot hands. Dr. Gosselin is
a Fellow of the ASME.
Eugenio Guglielmelli
Chapter F.64
University Campus Bio-Medico of Rome
Faculty Department of Engineering
Rome, Italy
e.guglielmelli@unicampus.it
Eugenio Guglielmelli is the Director of the Research Unit of Biomedical
Robotics and Biomicrosystems at Campus Bio-Medico University of
Rome, Italy. Previously, he was (1991–2004) with the ARTS Lab of the
Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa, Italy. His current research interests
are in human-centered robotics, neurorobotics, biomechatronic design
and bio-inspired control of robotic systems, and in their application to
rehabilitation and personal assistance.
Sami Haddadin
Chapter G.69
Leibniz University Hannover
Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science
Hannover, Germany
sami.haddadin@irt.uni-hannover.de
Sami Haddadin is full Professor and Director of IRT at the Leibniz
University Hannover, Germany. His research topics include pHRI, robot
control and learning, human motor control, and safe robotics. He is
associate editor of TRO and published more than 100 scientiﬁc articles.
He received several best paper and video awards, the George Giralt
Award, and TRO best paper twice.
Martin Hägele
Chapter F.54
Fraunhofer IPA
Robot Systems
Stuttgart, Germany
mmh@ipa.fhg.de
Martin Hägele studied Mechanical Engineering and Engineering Science at the
University of Stuttgart and the George Washington University. Since 1989 he is with
Fraunhofer IPA and was promoted to Head of the Department Robot Systems in 1993.
He received the Award of the German Association of Machine Tools Manufacturers
(VDW) in 1990, the Fraunhofer IPA Innovation Award in 1995, the European
Innovation and Emerging Technology Award in 1998, and the Engelberger Robotics
Award in 2007.
Gregory D. Hager
Chapter A.5
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Computer Science
Baltimore, USA
hager@cs.jhu.edu
Gregory D. Hager is a Professor of Computer Science at Johns Hopkins University.
Prof. Hager received the MS and PhD degrees in computer science from the University
of Pennsylvania in 1985 and 1988, respectively. His current research interests
include visual tracking, vision-based control, medical robotics, and human–computer
interaction. He is a Fellow of the IEEE for his contributions in vision-based robotics.
William R. Hamel
Chapter F.58
University of Tennessee
Mechanical, Aerospace, and Biomedical
Engineering
Knoxville, USA
whamel@utk.edu
William R. Hamel is a Professor of the Mechanical, Aerospace, and
Biomedical Engineering Department at the University of Tennessee. He
worked for 31 years at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in robotics
and remote systems for nuclear, military, and space applications. He is an
IEEE Fellow and an ASME Fellow with ongoing research in telerobotics
for hazardous environments.

Authors
2174
About the Authors
Blake Hannaford
Chapter D.42
University of Washington
Department of Electrical Engineering
Seattle, USA
blake@ee.washington.edu
Blake Hannaford, PhD, is Professor of Electrical Engineering, Adjunct
Professor of Bioengineering, Mechanical Engineering, and Surgery at
the University of Washington, Seattle. He was awarded the National
Science Foundation’s Presidential Young Investigator Award, the Early
Career Achievement Award from the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society, and was named IEEE Fellow in 2005. His active
interests include haptic displays on the Internet and surgical robotics.
Kensuke Harada
Chapter G.67
National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology
Intelligent Systems Research Institute
Tsukuba, Japan
kensuke.harada@aist.go.jp
Dr. Kensuke Harada is a Leader of Manipulation Research Group, Intelligent Systems
Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
(AIST). He received PhD degree in Mechanical Engineering from Kyoto University
in 1997. His main area of research includes planning and control of robotic systems
such as robot manipulator, biped humanoid robot, and multi-ﬁngered hand.
Martial Hebert
Chapter E.45
Carnegie Mellon University
The Robotics Institute
Pittsburgh, USA
hebert@ri.cmu.edu
Dr. Martial Hebert is Professor of Robotics at Carnegie Mellon University and Director
of the Robotics Institute. His interests include computer vision, 3-D model building
and perception for mobile robots. His group has developed approaches for object
recognition in images and video sequences, techniques for recognizing 3-D shapes
in 3-D point clouds and for building models of 3-D objects, and for modeling the
environment of autonomous robots from sensor data.
Thomas C. Henderson
Chapter C.35
University of Utah
School of Computing
Salt Lake City, USA
tch@cs.utah.edu
Professor Thomas Henderson received the BS degree in Mathematics
from Louisiana State University in 1973 and the PhD degree in Computer
Science from The University of Texas at Austin in 1979. Since 1989
he has been Professor of Computer Science at the University of Utah.
His current research interests concentrate on smart sensor networks,
the simulation of accidental ﬁres and explosions, on the DARPA Urban
Challenge, and on technical drawing analysis.
Eldert van Henten
Chapter F.56
Wageningen University
Wageningen UR Greenhouse Horticulture
Wageningen, The Netherlands
eldert.vanhenten@wur.nl
Dr. Eldert van Henten is a Professor of Biosystems Engineering and
Head of the Farm Technology Group at Wageningen University, The
Netherlands. His research interests include sensing, modeling, design,
and control of biosystems, biorobotics, and high-tech automation and
company logistics. His robotics activities focus on applications to arable
farming, livestock farming, and protected cultivation.
Hugh Herr
Chapter G.70
MIT Media Lab
Cambridge, USA
hherr@media.mit.edu
Hugh Herr is Associate Professor within MIT’s Program of Media Arts and Sciences,
and The Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology. His primary
research objective is to apply principles of neuromechanics to the design of bionic
limbs. He has employed cross bridge models of skeletal muscle to the design human-
powered mechanisms that amplify endurance and built elastic shoes and powered
leg exoskeletons. Herr is the (co-)author of over 150 peer-reviewed manuscripts and
patents within biomechatronics.
Joachim Hertzberg
Chapter A.14
Osnabrück University
Institute for Computer Science
Osnabrück, Germany
joachim.hertzberg@uos.de
Joachim Hertzberg holds diploma and doctorate degrees in Informatics. He is a Full
Professor for Informatics/Knowledge-Based Systems at Osnabrück University. He is
also with DFKI’s Robotics Innovation Center, heading its Branch Ofﬁce in Osnabrück.
His areas of research are AI, plan-based robot control, semantic mapping in robotics,
and applications thereof.

About the Authors
2175
Authors
Gerd Hirzinger
Chapter F.55
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics
Wessling, Germany
gerd.hirzinger@dlr.de
Gerd Hirzinger received his doctor’s degree from the Technical University
of Munich in 1974. From 1992 to 2012 he was Director at the DLR
Institute for Robotics and Mechatronics. The institute develops innovative
robot systems for space and terrestrial applications, telerobotic concepts,
man–machine interfaces, sensors and actuators, sensory feedback, ultra-
lightweight robot arms, articulated hands, planetary rovers, and medical
technology. He was prime investigator of ROTEX, the ﬁrst remotely
controlled robot in space, which ﬂew onboard shuttle COLUMBIA in
April 93. He has received numerous national and international awards.
John Hollerbach
Chapter A.6
University of Utah
School of Computing
Salt Lake City, USA
jmh@cs.utah.ledu
John M. Hollerbach is Professor of Computing, Research Professor
of Mechanical Engineering, and Director of the Robotics Track at the
University of Utah. Previously he held faculty positions at MIT and
McGill University. He received his PhD from Massachusetts Institute
of Technology in 1978. He is Editor of the International Journal of
Robotics Research. His research interests include haptic interfaces and
virtualreality.
Kaijen Hsiao
Chapter D.41
Robert Bosch LLC
Research and Technology Center, Palo Alto
Palo Alto, USA
kaijenhsiao@gmail.com
Kaijen Hsiao received her MS and PhD degrees in Computer Science from MIT.
She spent four years as a Research Scientist working on grasping, manipulation, and
shared-autonomous teleoperation at Willow Garage, and is now at Bosch Research
and Technology Center in Palo Alto, where she works on personal robots.
Tian Huang
Chapter B.18
Tianjin University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Tianjin, China
tianhuang@tju.edu.cn
Tian Huang received his BE, ME and PhD from Tianjin University, China in 1981,
1984 and 1990 all in Mechanical Engineering. Dr Huang is an expert in the ﬁeld of
robotics. His research interests cover kinematics, dynamics and control of parallel
robots. He has published more than 200 papers. He has been selected as Yangtze Chair
Professor in 2000 by the State Education Ministry of China.
Christoph Hürzeler
Chapter B.26
Alstom Power Thermal Services
Automation and Robotics R&D
Baden, Switzerland
christoph.huerzeler@power.alstom.com
Christoph Hürzeler received his Master of Science in Mechanical
Engineering from the ETH Zurich in 2007. From 2008 to 2013 he joined
the Autonomous Systems Lab under Prof. Roland Siegwart as a PhD
student in the ﬁeld of aerial robotics. Currently, he works at Alstom
Switzerland as project leader and R&D engineer developing inspection
robots for Alstom’s Thermal Services Division.
Phil Husbands
Chapter G.76
University of Sussex
Department of Informatics
Brighton, UK
philh@sussex.ac.uk
Phil Husbands is Professor of Computer Science and Artiﬁcial In-
telligence in the Department of Informatics and Co-director of the
Centre for Computational Neuroscience and Robotics at the University
of Sussex. His research interests include biologically inspired adap-
tive robotics, evolutionary systems, computational neuroscience, and
creative systems.
Seth Hutchinson
Chapter C.34
University of Illinois
Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
Urbana-Champaign, USA
seth@illinois.edu
After receiving his PhD degree from Purdue University, Seth Hutchinson joined the
University of Illinois in Urbana-Champaign, where he is currently a Professor in the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering. He has published more than 200
papers in the area of sensor-based robotics, and is co-author of the books Principles
of Robot Motion: Theory, Algorithms, and Implementations and Robot Modeling and
Control.

Authors
2176
About the Authors
Karl Iagnemma
Chapter B.24
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Laboratory for Manufacturing and
Productivity
Cambridge, USA
kdi@mit.edu
Karl Iagnemma is a Principal Research Scientist at MIT, where he directs the Robotic
Mobility Group. His interests include design, motion planning, and control of mobile
robots in challenging environments. Dr. Iagnemma is the author of Mobile Robots
in Rough Terrain (Springer, 2004) and has published nearly 150 research papers on
robotic topics.
Fumiya Iida
Chapter G.75
University of Cambridge
Department of Engineering
Cambridge, UK
fumiya.iida@eng.cam.ac.uk
Fumiya Iida received his master degrees in Mechanical Engineering from
Tokyo University of Science (1999), and Dr. sc. nat. in Informatics from
the University of Zurich (2006). He is currently a University Lecturer at
the University of Cambridge, and an Assistant Professor at ETH Zurich.
His research interest includes dynamic legged locomotion, navigation of
autonomous robots, human-machine interactions, and self-reconﬁgurable
soft robots.
Auke Jan Ijspeert
Chapter G.75
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
(EPFL)
School of Engineering
Lausanne, Switzerland
auke.ijspeert@epfl.ch
Auke Ijspeert has a BSc/MSc in Physics from the EPFL, the Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology at Lausanne, and a PhD in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence from the University of Edinburgh. He is currently an As-
sociate Professor at the EPFL, and Head of the Biorobotics Laboratory.
His research interests are at the intersection between robotics, computa-
tional neuroscience, nonlinear dynamical systems, and applied machine
learning.
Genya Ishigami
Chapter E.50
Keio University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Yokohama, Japan
ishigami@mech.keio.ac.jp
Genya Ishigami is an Assistant Professor at Keio University, Japan. He received the
PhD degree from Tohoku University, Japan in 2008 and was a Postdoctoral Associate
at the MIT and a Research Associate at the JAXA. His research focuses on mobility
analysis, vehicle–terrain interaction mechanics, perception, navigation and control, for
application to planetary exploration rovers and ﬁeld robots.
Michael Jenkin
Chapter C.29
York University
Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science
Toronto, Canada
jenkin@cse.yorku.ca
Michael Jenkin is a Professor of Computer Science and Engineering at York University,
Canada. Working in the areas of virtual reality and visually guided autonomous robots,
he is the co-author with G. Dudek of Computational Principles of Mobile. He has
worked on a number of large robotics projects including the ARK and AQUA Robotic
Systems and is also one of the designers of IVY – a six-sided immersive projective
environment.
Shuuji Kajita
Chapter B.17
National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
Intelligent Systems Research Institute
Tsukuba, Japan
s.kajita@aist.go.jp
Shuuji Kajita received the Dr. degree in Control Engineering from the
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan, in 1996. In 1985, he joined
the Mechanical Engineering Laboratory, National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology (AIST). During 1996–1997, he was
a Visiting Researcher at the California Institute of Technology. Since
2007, he has been the Leader of the Humanoid Robotics Group of
Intelligent Systems Research Institute, AIST, Japan.
Takayuki Kanda
Chapter G.72
Advanced Telecommunications Research
(ATR) Institute International
Intelligent Robotics and Communication
Laboratories
Kyoto, Japan
kanda@atr.jp
Takayuki Kanda is a Group Leader of Human-Robot Interaction Group
in ATR Intelligent Robotics and Communication Laboratories, Kyoto,
Japan. He received his BEng, MEng, and PhD degrees in Computer
Science from Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan, in 1998, 2000, and 2003,
respectively. His research focussses on human-robot interaction, social
robotics, robots in real daily context, and intelligent robotics.

About the Authors
2177
Authors
Makoto Kaneko
Chapter B.19
For biographical profile, please see the section “About the Part Editors”.
Sung-Chul Kang
Chapter F.58
Korea Institute of Science and Technology
Center for Bionics
Seoul, Korea
kasch@kist.re.kr
Sung-Chul Kang is a Principal Research Scientist in the Center for Bionics of the
Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST). His research interests are in
mechanism design and control for dependable mobility and manipulation. He has
been applying these mobility and manipulation technologies to service robotics area
like medical and ﬁeld robots. He has a PhD in Mechanical Design and Production
Engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.
Imin Kao
Chapter D.37
Stony Brook University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Stony Brook, USA
imin.kao@stonybrook.edu
Being the Director of the Manufacturing Automation Laboratory (MAL) at SUNY
Stony Brook, Professor Kao conducts research in robotics and manufacturing,
specialized in the modeling of contact interface. He integrates his study with MEMS
transducers to study intelligent contact interface that augments the capability of robots
and humans. The soft-contact theory he proposed, which correlates the growth of
contact radius with normal force, subsumes the well-known Hertzian model.
Lydia E. Kavraki
Chapter A.7
Rice University
Department of Computer Science
Houston, USA
kavraki@rice.edu
Lydia E. Kavraki is the Noah Harding Professor of Computer Science
and Bioengineering at Rice University. She earned the PhD degree in
Computer Science from Stanford University. Kavraki’s research is in
physical algorithms and their applications in robotics and structural
bioinformatics. She is a Fellow of IEEE, ACM, AAAS, and AIMBE.She
is also an elected member of the Institute of Medicine (IOM) of the
National Academies of United States.
Charles C. Kemp
Chapter G.67
Georgia Institute of Technology and
Emory University
Atlanta, USA
charlie.kemp@bme.gatech.edu
Charles C. Kemp is an Assistant Professor in the Department of
Biomedical Engineering at Georgia Tech and Emory University.
He is Director of the Center for Healthcare Robotics in the Health
Systems Institute. He received a Doctorate in Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science from MIT in 2005. His research focuses on
autonomous robot manipulation and human–robot interaction for
healthcare.
Wisama Khalil
Chapter A.6
University of Nantes
IRCCyN, ECN
Nantes, France
wisama.khalil@irccyn.ec-nantes.fr
Wisama Khalil received the PhD and the Doctorat d’Etat degrees in Robotics and
Control Engineering from Montpellier, France, in 1976 and 1978, respectively. Since
1983 he has been Professor of Robotics in the Ecole Centrale de Nantes. He carries
out his research within the Robotics team of the IRCCyN (Institut de recherche en
Communication et Cybernétique de Nantes-UMR-CNRS n6597). His research interest
includes, kinematics, dynamics, calibration, identiﬁcation, and control of robots.
Oussama Khatib
Chapter 1
For biographical profile, please see the section “About the Editors”.
Lindsay Kleeman
Chapter C.30
Monash University
Department of Electrical and Computer
Systems Engineering
Melbourne, Australia
kleeman@eng.monash.edu.au
Lindsay Kleeman received the bachelor degrees in Electrical Engineering and
Mathematics both with university medals, and, in 1986, the PhD degree from the
University of Newcastle. He is currently an Associate Professor at Monash University,
Australia with over 100 publications including a best paper award at IROS99. His
research interests include mobile robotics, ultrasonic sensing, and digital systems.

Authors
2178
About the Authors
Alexander Kleiner
Chapter F.60
Linköping University
Department of Computer Science
Linköping, Sweden
alexander.kleiner@liu.se
Alexander Kleiner is an Associate Professor of Computer Science at
the Linköping University. He earned his PhD from the University of
Freiburg and worked as postdoc at the Carnegie Mellon and La Sapienza
University. He is member of the RoboCup executive committee and
SSRR TC. His research focuses on collaborative search for stationary and
moving targets in the real world.
Jens Kober
Chapter A.15
Delft University of Technology
Delft Center for Systems and Control
Delft, The Netherlands
j.kober@tudelft.nl
Jens Kober has recently been appointed Assistant Professor at TU Delft.
Before joining TU Delft he has afﬁliated to the CoR-Lab of Universität
Bielefeld and the Honda Research Institute Europe in Offenbach both in
Germany. Jens has graduated in Spring 2012 with Doctor of Engineering
from Technische Universität Darmstadt. His PhD thesis on Learning
Motor Skills – From Algorithms to Robot Experiments has received the
2013 Georges Giralt PhD Award as the best Robotics PhD thesis in
Europe in 2012.
Kurt Konolige
Chapter C.31
Google, Inc.
Mountain View, USA
konolige@gmail.com
Kurt Konolige is a Senior Staff Roboticist at Google, Inc. and a Fellow of AAAI.
He has been a Consulting Professor in Computer Science and AI at Stanford
University and one of the cofounders of Industrial Perception, Inc., Videre Design,
and MobileRobotics LLC. He received his PhD from Stanford University in 1984. His
recent research has concentrated on real-time perception and action for mobile robots
and manipulators, and machine learning for robotics.
David Kortenkamp
Chapter A.12
TRACLabs Inc
Houston, USA
korten@traclabs.com
David Kortenkamp is a Senior Scientist with TRACLabs, Inc. supporting NASA
Johnson Space Center’s Automation, Robotics, and Simulation Division. He received
the BS degree in Computer Science from the University of Minnesota and the MS
and PhD degrees in Computer Science from the University of Michigan. His research
at NASA focuses on intelligent control architectures, human–robot interaction, and
autonomous execution systems.
Kazuhiro Kosuge
Chapter F.65
Tohoku University
System Robotics Laboratory
Sendai, Japan
kosuge@irs.mech.tohoku.ac.jp
Professor Kazuhiro Kosuge received the BE, ME, and PhD degrees in
Control Engineering from the Tokyo Institute of Technology, in 1978,
1980, and 1988, respectively. After serving as a Research Associate at
Tokyo Institute of Technology and as an Associate Professor at Nagoya
University, he has been a Professor at Tohoku University since 1995.
Danica Kragic
Chapter C.32
Royal Institute of Technology (KTH)
Centre for Autonomous Systems
Stockholm, Sweden
dani@kth.se
Danica Kragic received the PhD from KTH Royal Institute of Tech-
nology, Stockholm, in 2001. She is currently a Professor at the School
of Computer Science and Communication at KTH. She is a member
of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and the Young Academy
of Sweden. Her research interests are robotics, computer vision and
machine learning.
Torsten Kröger
Chapter A.8
For biographical details see “About the Multimedia Editors”

About the Authors
2179
Authors
Roman Kuc
Chapter C.30
Yale University
Department of Electrical Engineering
New Haven, USA
kuc@yale.edu
Dr. Kuc is Director of Educational Affairs in Enginineering and Director of the
Intelligent Sensors Laboratory at Yale University. He received the BSEE degree
from the Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, in 1968, and the PhD degree in
Electrical Engineering from Columbia University, New York, in 1977. His interests
cover digital signal processing with applications to bioengineering, robotics and
telecommunications, inverse problems, intelligent sensors, modeling biological
systems, as well as embedded systems.
James Kuffner
Chapter D.36
Carnegie Mellon University
The Robotics Institute
Pittsburgh, USA
kuffner@cs.cmu.edu
James Kuffner received the PhD degree in Computer Science from Stanford University
in 1999. He was a Japan Society for the Promotion of Science Postdoctoral Research
Fellow at the University of Tokyo until 2001. He joined the faculty at Carnegie Mellon
University in 2002 and is currently an Assistant Professor. He has published over 100
technical papers and received the Okawa Foundation Award for Young Researchers in
2007.
Scott Kuindersma
Chapter E.48
Harvard University
Cambridge, USA
scottk@seas.harvard.edu
Scott Kuindersma is an Assistant Professor of Engineering and Computer
Science at Harvard University. Prior to that he was a postdoc at MIT
CSAIL and the Planning and Control Lead for MIT’s DARPA Robotics
Challenge team. He received his PhD in Computer Science from the
University of Massachusetts Amherst in 2012. His research interests
broadly encompass legged robotics, optimization, control, nonlinear
systems, and machine learning.
Vijay Kumar
Chapter E.52
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Mechanical Engineering
and Applied Mechanics
Philadelphia, USA
kumar@seas.upenn.edu
Vijay Kumar is the UPS Foundation Professor at the School of Engineer-
ing and Applied Science at the University of Pennsylvania. He received
his PhD from the Ohio State University. He has won many awards
including the NSF Presidential Young Investigator Award (1991), and
recently a 2014 Engelberger Robotics Award. He was elected to the
National Academy of Engineering in 2013.
Steven M. LaValle
Chapter A.7
University of Illinois
Department of Computer Science
Urbana, USA
lavalle@cs.uiuc.edu
Steve LaValle is an Associate Professor of Computer Science at the University of
Illinois. His interests include motion planning, geometric algorithms, control theory,
and sensing. He recently authored the book (free online) Planning Algorithms.
Florant Lamiraux
Chapter E.47
LAAS-CNRS
Toulouse, France
florent@laas.fr
Florent Lamiraux graduated from the Ecole Polytechnique Paris in 1993. He received
the PhD in Computer Science from the Institut National Polytechnique de Toulouse
in 1997 for his research on mobile robots and spent two years at Rice University as
a Research Associate. He is currently Chargé de Recherche at LAAS-CNRS and has
worked for ten years on nonholonomic mobile robots. He is now working in humanoid
robots.
Roberto Lampariello
Chapter F.55
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics
Wessling, Germany
roberto.lampariello@dlr.de
Roberto Lampariello received his BSe in Aerospace Engineering from
Southampton University in 1990, MS in Aeroplane Aerodynamics from
Cranﬁeld University in 1991 and a specialization from the University
of Rome La Sapienza in 1998. He is since then a Researcher with the
Robotics and Mechatronics Center of DLR, Germany. Since 2012 he is
Lecturer at the Chair for Aerospace Engineering of the TU Munich.

Authors
2180
About the Authors
Christian Laugier
Chapter F.62
INRIA Grenoble Rhône-Alpes
Saint Ismier, France
christian.laugier@inria.fr
Dr. Christian Laugier is Research Director at INRIA and Scientiﬁc
Leader of the e-Motion robotics team-project. He co-edited many books
and recently published recognized scientiﬁc contributions and patented
innovations to the ﬁeld of perception and decision for autonomous
robots. He is the recipient of several awards, including the IEEE/RSJ
Harashima award 2012. He has also co-founded four start-up companies.
Jean-Paul Laumond
Chapter E.47
LAAS-CNRS
Toulouse, France
jpl@laas.fr
Jean-Paul Laumond, PhD 1984, IEEE Fellow, is Directeur de Recherche at LAAS-
CNRS in Toulouse, France. His research is on robot motion planning and control.
In 2001 and 2002 he created and managed a spin-off company Kineo CAM. From
2005 to 2008, he was Co-Director of the French–Japanese laboratory JRL. His current
research explores anthropomorphic action via a multidisciplinary approach combining
computer science, automatic control, robotics, and neuroscience.
Daniel D. Lee
Chapter A.15
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Electrical Systems
Engineering
Philadelphia, USA
ddlee@seas.upenn.edu
Daniel Lee is the Evan C Thompson Term Chair and Professor at the University
of Pennsylvania. He received his BA in Physics from Harvard in 1990 and his
PhD in Condensed Matter Physics from MIT in 1995. Before coming to Penn, he
was with AT&T and Lucent Bell Labs. He is a Fellow of the IEEE and a National
Science Foundation CAREER Awardee. His group focuses on understanding general
computational principles in biological systems, and on applying that knowledge to
build autonomous systems.
Dongjun Lee
Chapter D.43
For biographical details see “About the Multimedia Editors”
Roland Lenain
Chapter E.49
IRSTEA
Department of Ecotechnology
Aubiere, France
roland.lenain@irstea.fr
Roland Lenain obtained the PhD degree from Univ. Blaise Pascal, France,
in 2005, and spent 6 months as a Postdoctoral Fellow in the Department of
Automatic Control at Lund University, Sweden. Since 2006, he is Chargé
de Recherche at Irstea, France. His research interests include modeling,
observation and control of wheeled mobile robots moving under uncertain
and harsh conditions.
David Lentink
Chapter B.26
Stanford University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Stanford, USA
dlentink@stanford.edu
David Lentink is an Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering
at Stanford University. He published papers on natural ﬂight (Nature,
Science), developed ﬂying robots (DelFly, RoboSwift), won the Dutch
Academic Year Prize (2010), is one of 40 scientists under 40 according
to the World Economic Forum (2013), and is a member of the Young
Academy of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Science.
John J. Leonard
Chapter E.46
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Cambridge, USA
jleonard@mit.edu
John J. Leonard is the Samuel C. Collins Professor of Mechanical and Ocean
Engineering and Associate Department Head for Research in the MIT Department
of Mechanical Engineering. He is also a member of the MIT CSAIL. His research
addresses the problems of navigation and mapping for autonomous mobile robots. He
holds the degrees of BS in Electrical Engineering and Science from the University of
Pennsylvania (1987) and DPhil in Engineering Science from the University of Oxford
(1994).

About the Authors
2181
Authors
Aleš Leonardis
Chapter C.33
University of Birmingham
Department of Computer Science
Birmingham, UK
a.leonardis@cs.bham.ac.uk
Aleš Leonardis is Chair of Robotics and Co-Director of Computational Neuroscience
and Cognitive Robotics Centre at the University of Birmingham. His research interests
include object and scene recognition and categorization, statistical visual learning, and
biologically motivated vision. He has been an associate editor of IEEE PAMI and an
editor of the Springer book series Computational Imaging and Vision.
Stefan Leutenegger
Chapter B.26
Imperial College London
South Kensington Campus, Department
of Computing
London, UK
s.leutenegger@imperial.ac.uk
Stefan Leutenegger has received his PhD in Robotics from ETH Zurich
in 2014. Currently, he has a lecturer position at the Imperial College,
London. His research interests range from unmanned solar airplane design
to real-time vision-aided multi-sensor state estimation and mapping, as
well as unmanned aerial system (UAS) modeling, control, and navigation
close to structure and terrain.
Kevin M. Lynch
Chapter D.37
Northwestern University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Evanston, USA
kmlynch@northwestern.edu
Kevin Lynch received the PhD degree in Robotics from Carnegie
Mellon University in 1996. Since 1997 he has been faculty in the
Mechanical Engineering Department of Northwestern University, where
he is now Faculty Director. His research interests include robotic
manipulation, motion planning, underactuated dynamic systems,
human–robot interaction, and self-organizing systems.
Anthony A. Maciejewski
Chapter A.10
Colorado State University
Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
Fort Collins, USA
aam@colostate.edu
Tony Maciejewski received BS, MS, and PhD degrees from The Ohio State University
and served for 14 years on the Faculty of Purdue University, West Lafayette. He
is currently a Professor and Head of the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering at Colorado State University. He is a Fellow of the IEEE for his work on
kinematically redundant robots.
Robert Mahony
Chapter E.52
Australian National University (ANU)
Research School of Engineering
Canberra, Australia
robert.mahony@anu.edu.au
Robert Mahony is a Professor in the Research School of Engineering at the Australian
National University. He received his PhD in 1995 in Systems Engineering from the
Australian National University after originally training in geophysics and working
in marine seismology. His research interests are in nonlinear systems theory and
optimization with applications in robotics and computer vision.
Joshua A. Marshall
Chapter F.59
Queen’s University
The Robert M. Buchan Department of
Mining
Kingston, Canada
joshua.marshall@queensu.ca
Dr. Joshua Marshall is an Assistant Professor of Engineering and Applied
Science at Queen’s University, Kingston, Canada, where he directs the
multidisciplinary Mining Systems Laboratory. He holds an undergraduate
degree in mining engineering, and graduate degrees in Mechanical and
Electrical Engineering. Over his career, he has worked on many robotics
and equipment automation R&D projects, focusing primarily on ﬁeld
robotics.
Maja J. Matarić
Chapter G.73
University of Southern California
Computer Science Department
Los Angeles, USA
mataric@usc.edu
Maja Matari´c is Chan Soon-Shiong Professor of Computer Science,
Neuroscience and Pediatrics at the University of Southern California
and Founding Director of the USC Robotics and Autonomous Systems
Center. She received the PhD and MS degrees from MIT in Computer
Science and AI in 1994 and 1990. She is a Fellow of IEEE and AAAS
and a Presidential Mentoring Awardee. Her research into socially
assistive robotics enables robots to help users with special needs in
rehabilitation.

Authors
2182
About the Authors
Yoshio Matsumoto
Chapter G.67
National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology (AIST)
Robot Innovation Research Center
Tsukuba, Japan
yoshio.matsumoto@aist.go.jp
Dr. Yoshio Matsumoto is a Team Leader of Service Robotics Research Team, Robot
Innovation Research Center, AIST. He received PhD degree in Engineering from the
University of Tokyo in 1998. He has worked for the Australian National University,
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Osaka University, and joined AIST in 2009.
His research interests include assistive robots, human–robot interaction, and real-time
vision.
J. Michael McCarthy
Chapter A.4
University of California at Irvine
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Irvine, USA
jmmccart@uci.edu
J. Michael McCarthy received the PhD degree from Stanford Universityin 1979, and
joined the faculty at the University of California, Irvinein 1986. He is the author of two
books Introduction to Theoretical Kinematics and Geometric Design of Linkages, and
has served as Editor of the ASME Journal of Mechanical Design and is the Founding
Editor of the ASME Journal of Mechanisms and Robotics.
Claudio Melchiorri
Chapter B.19
University of Bologna
Laboratory of Automation and Robotics
Bologna, Italy
claudio.melchiorri@unibo.it
Claudio Melchiorri received the Laurea degree in Electronic Engineering
from the University of Bologna, Italy, in 1985, and the PhD in 1990. He
is Full Professor in Robotics since 2001, and is with the Department of
Electrical, Electronic and Information Engineering of the University of
Bologna. He has published about 280 papers, authored 5 books in control
and trajectory planning and has ﬁled 2 patents. His research interests
include dexterous manipulation, haptics, and telemanipulation.
Arianna Menciassi
Chapter F.63
Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies
The BioRobotics Institute
Pisa, Italy
a.menciassi@sssup.it
Arianna Menciassi obtained the MSc in Physics in 1995 and the PhD in
Bioengineering in 1999. She is Professor of Biomedical Robotics and
Area Leader of Surgical Robotics and Allied Technologies. Her research
interests involve surgical robotics and microsystem technology, with
a special synergy between robot-assisted therapy and bioengineering.
She is co-chair of the IEEE Technical Committee on Surgical Robotics.
Jean-Pierre Merlet
Chapter B.18
INRIA Sophia-Antipolis
Sophia-Antipolis, France
jean-pierre.merlet@sophia.inria.fr
J.-P. Merlet is senior researcher at INRIA, where he works on interval analysis and
robotics. He is the author of a book on parallel robots and of over 200 papers in
robotics, mechanism theory, and numerical analysis. He is the chair of IFToMM
France and has received the Altran Award and the Micron d’Or Award for his
microrobot for surgical endoscopy.
Giorgio Metta
Chapter G.77
Italian Institute of Technology
iCub Facility
Genoa, Italy
giorgio.metta@iit.it
Giorgio Metta is director of the iCub Facility Department at the Istituto Italiano di
Tecnologia (IIT), where he coordinates the development of the iCub humanoid robot.
From 2001 to 2002 he was postdoctoral associate at the MIT AI-Lab. He is deputy
Director of IIT delegate for international relations and external funding. He is author
of approximately 250 peer-reviewed publications.
François Michaud
Chapter A.13
University of Sherbrooke
Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Engineering
Sherbrooke, Canada
francois.michaud@usherbrooke.ca
François Michaud is Director of the Interdisciplinary Institute for Tech-
nological Innovation. He held the Canada Research Chair (2001–2011)
in Mobile Robots and Autonomous Intelligent Systems, and received in
2003 the Young Engineer Achievement Award from the Canadian Council
of Professional Engineers. His research interests are in decisional archi-
tectures, mobile robot design, human–robot interaction, robot learning,
and intelligent systems.

About the Authors
2183
Authors
David P. Miller
Chapter G.79
University of Oklahoma
School of Aerospace and Mechanical
Engineering
Norman, USA
dpmiller@ou.edu
David P. Miller is the Wilkonson Chair Professor of Intelligent Systems
at the University of Oklahoma. His teaching and research span the
schools of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering, Computer Science,
and Bioengineering. His primary research areas are planetary rovers,
assistive technology, and robots for STEM education. He is a co-founder
of the KISS Institute for Practical Robotics.
Javier Minguez
Chapter E.47
University of Zaragoza
Department of Computer Science and
Systems Engineering
Zaragoza, Spain
jminguez@unizar.es
Prof. Dr. Minguez is Professor of Computer Science and Founder of the Neurotech-
nolgy Group at the University of Zaragoza (Spain). He is Co-founder of the startup
BitBrain Technologies, he raised funds for innovation and research from 50+ partners,
published 90+ research publications and 5+ patents in neuroscience, neural engi-
neering, human-computer interaction, cognitive and motor neurorehabilitation and
intelligent robotics.
Pascal Morin
Chapter E.49
University Pierre and Marie Curie
Institute for Intelligent Systems and
Robotics
Paris, France
morin@isir.upmc.fr
Pascal Morin obtained the PhD degree from Ecole des Mines de Paris, France, in 1996,
and then spent one year as a postdoc at the CALTEC, Pasadena, USA. From 1997 to
2011, he was Chargé de Recherche at INRIA, France. Since 2011 he is in charge of
the RTE-UPMC Research Chair on Autonomous UAVs. His research interests include
control of nonlinear systems and its application to mechanical systems.
Mario E. Munich
Chapter F.65
iRobot Corp.
Pasadena, USA
mariomu@ieee.org
Dr. Mario E. Munich is Vice President of Advanced Systems Technologies
at iRobot Corp. in Pasadena, where he currently manages the research and
engineering development efforts. He received the degree of Electronic
Engineer from the National University of Rosario, Argentina, and the
MS and the PhD degrees in Electrical Engineering from CALTEC,
Pasadena. His research interests include computer vision, sensors for
robots, autonomous navigation, and human-robotic interaction.
Robin R. Murphy
Chapter F.60
Texas A&M University
Department of Computer Science and
Engineering
College Station, USA
murphy@cse.tamu.edu
Robin Roberson Murphy is the Director of the Center for Robot-
Assisted Search at Texas A&M. She has over 150 publications on
artiﬁcial intelligence, human-robot interaction, and robotics including
the Introduction to AI Robotics and Disaster Robotics. Her insertion
of tactical ground, air, and marine robots at 16 disasters includes
the 9/11 World Trade Center disaster, Hurricane Katrina, and the
Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident. She serves on several government
and professional boards.
Bilge Mutlu
Chapter G.71
University of Wisconsin–Madison
Department of Computer Sciences
Madison, USA
bilge@cs.wisc.edu
Bilge Mutlu is an Assistant Professor of Computer Science at the University of
Wisconsin–Madison. He received his PhD degree from Carnegie Mellon University’s
Human-Computer Interaction Institute in 2009. His research bridges human-computer
interaction and robotics, focusing on the development of human-centered principles
and methods for designing robotic technologies.
Keiji Nagatani
Chapter E.50
Tohoku University
Department of Aerospace Engineering,
Graduate School of Engineering
Sendai, Japan
keiji@ieee.org
Keiji Nagatani received his PhD degree from the University of Tsukuba, in 1997.
Currently, he is an Associate Professor at Tohoku University, Japan. His research
interest is ﬁeld robotics, particularly, tele-operation of tracked vehicles for search and
rescue missions, and development of mobile robots to explore volcanic areas. He is
a Member of the RSJ, SICE, JSME, JSASS and IEEE.

Authors
2184
About the Authors
Daniele Nardi
Chapter F.66
Sapienza University of Rome
Department of Computer, Control, and
Management Engineering
Rome, Italy
nardi@dis.uniroma1.it
Daniele Nardi is Full Professor at the Faculty of Information Engineering,
Informatics and Statistics, Sapienza Univ., Rome. He graduated at Turin
Polytechnic (1981) and received a MS from Sapienza (1984). His research
interests are in artiﬁcial intelligence and cognitive robotics. Trustee of the
RoboCup Federation (President 2011–2014), he is leading the research
laboratory Cognitive Robot Teams and formerly Intelligent Systems for
Emergency and Civil Defense.
Eduardo Nebot
Chapter F.59
University of Sydney
Department of Aerospace, Mechanical
and Mechatronic Engineering
Sydney, Australia
eduardo.nebot@sydney.edu.au
Eduardo Nebot holds a BE Electrical Engineering (UNS, Argentina),
MS and PhD (Colorado State University, Fort Collins). He is a Professor
at the School of AMME, University of Sydney and the Director of the
Australian Centre for Field Robotics. His main research areas are in
ﬁeld robotics including autonomous system, navigation and safety with
substantial impact in the mining and intelligent transport system sector.
Bradley J. Nelson
Chapter B.27
ETH Zurich
Institute of Robotics and Intelligent
Systems
Zurich, Switzerland
bnelson@ethz.ch
Brad Nelson received the PhD in Robotics from Carnegie Mellon University in
1995. He became Assistant Professor at the University of Illinois-Chicago in 1995,
Associate Professor at the University of Minnesota in 1998, and Professor of Robotics
and Intelligent Systems at ETH Zurich in 2002. His research involves microrobotics
and nanorobotics.
Duy Nguyen-Tuong
Chapter A.15
Robert Bosch GmbH
Corporate Research
Stuttgart, Germany
duy@robot-learning.de
Duy Nguyen-Tuong is a research scientist at Bosch Corporate Research in
Schwieberdingen, Germany where he heads a project group on machine learning
aplications for industrial robotics projects. Before joing Bosch, Duy Nguyen-Tuong
has been a PhD student in the Robot Learning Lab at the Max Planck Institute for
Biological Cybernetics. He graduated in Spring 2011 with a PhD from the University
of Freiburg with a thesis on Model Learning in Robot Control.
Monica Nicolescu
Chapter A.13
University of Nevada
Department of Computer Science and
Engineering
Reno, USA
monica@unr.edu
Dr. Monica Nicolescu is an Associate Professor with the Computer
Science and Engineering Department at the University of Nevada, Reno
and is the Director of the UNR Robotics Research Lab. In 2006 she
received the NSF Early Career Development Award (CAREER) Award.
Her research interests are in the areas of human-robot interaction, robot
control, learning, and multi-robot systems.
Günter Niemeyer
Chapter D.43
Disney Research
Glendale, USA
gunter.niemeyer@email.disney.com
Dr. Günter Niemeyer is a Senior Research Scientist at Disney Re-
search, Los Angeles. His research examines physical human-robotic
interactions and interaction dynamics, force sensitivity and feedback,
teleoperation with and without communication delays, and haptic inter-
faces. Dr. Niemeyer received his MS and PhD from MIT. In 2012 he
joined Disney Research.
Klas Nilsson
Chapter F.54
Lund Institute of Technology
Department of Computer Science
Lund, Sweden
klas.nilsson@cs.lth.se
As an Associate Professor at the Department of Computer Science, where he is
heading the group for Robotics and Semantic Systems, Dr. Nilsson has a leading role
in several research projects. His research includes robot control systems and related
software technologies. Recently, Dr. Nilsson founded the company Cognibotics AB
that provides solutions for improved robot accuracy.

About the Authors
2185
Authors
Stefano Nolfi
Chapter G.76
National Research Council (CNR)
Institute of Cognitive Sciences and
Technologies
Rome, Italy
stefano.nolfi@istc.cnr.it
Dr. Stefano Nolﬁis Director of the Laboratory of Autonomous Robots and Artiﬁcial
Life within the Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies of the Italian National
Research Council (CNR-ISTC). His research activities focus on evolutionary robotics,
collective robotics, adaptive behavior, complex systems, and embodied cognitive
sciences.
Illah Nourbakhsh
Chapter G.79
Carnegie Mellon University
Robotics Institute
Pittsburgh, USA
illah@andrew.cmu.edu
Illah R. Nourbakhsh is Professor of Robotics and Head of the Robotics
Master’s Program in The Robotics Institute at Carnegie Mellon University.
He is Director of the Community Robotics, Education and Technology
Empowerment (CREATE) Lab. He is co-author of Introduction to
Autonomous Mobile Robots and author of Robot Futures.
Andreas Nüchter
Chapter C.31
University of Würzburg
Informatics VII – Robotics and Telematics
Würzburg, Germany
andreas@nuechti.de
Andreas Nüchter is a Professor of Telematics at the University of
Würzburg, Germany. Before he headed the Automation Group at Jacobs
University Bremen as an Assistant Professor, was with the University
of Osnabrück, Fraunhofer AIS, and the University of Bonn. Andreas’
research interests include 3-D vision, and laser scanning technologies,
resulting in fast algorithms for processing 3-D point clouds that enable
robots to map their environment in 3-D.
Paul Y. Oh
Chapter B.26
University of Nevada
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Las Vegas, USA
paul@coe.drexel.edu
Paul Oh is the Lincy Professor of Unmanned Aerial Systems in the Mechanical
Engineering Department at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV). Formerly,
from 2000 to 2014, he served as amechanical engineering professor at Drexel
University in Philadelphia and both founded and directed the Drexel Autonomous
Systems Laboratory (DASL). He received his Mechanical Engineering degrees from
McGill (B.Eng. 1989), Seoul National (MSc 1992), and Columbia (PhD 1999).
Yoshito Okada
Chapter E.50
Tohoku University
Department of Aerospace Engineering,
Graduate School of Engineering
Sendai, Japan
okada@rm.is.tohoku.ac.jp
Yoshito Okada is an Assistant Professor at Tohoku University, Japan. He received his
PhD from Tohoku University in 2012. His research interest is control, navigation, and
mechanism of ﬁeld robots, especially, tracked vehicles for search and rescue missions
and aerial robots for structure inspection.
Allison M. Okamura
Chapter D.42
Stanford University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Stanford, USA
aokamura@stanford.edu
Allison Okamura is a Professor at Stanford University in the Department
of Mechanical Engineering, with a courtesy appointment in Computer
Science. Her awards include the NSF CAREER Award and the IEEE
Robotics and Automation Society Early Academic Career Award.
She is an IEEE Fellow. Her interests include haptics, teleoperation,
virtual environments, medical robotics, prosthetics, neuromechanics,
rehabilitation, and engineering education.
Fiorella Operto
Chapter G.80
Scuola di Robotica
Genoa, Italy
operto@scuoladirobotica.it
Fiorella Operto educated in Philosophy, she collaborated with the
Italian Research Council (IAN and IEIIT Institutes) on the social
impact of advanced robotics applications. In 2000 she founded the
School of Robotics Society and is its Chair today. Operto contributed
to the deﬁnition and development of Roboethics. She is Member of the
high-level Advisory Committee for European Centre for Women and
Technology, consultant and member of The Open Roboethics Initiative,
and member of the Ethics Committee of the Human Brain Project HBP.

Authors
2186
About the Authors
David E. Orin
Chapter A.3
For biographical profile, please see the section “About the Part Editors”.
Giuseppe Oriolo
Chapter A.10
University of Rome “La Sapienza”
Department of Computer, Control, and
Management Engineering
Rome, Italy
oriolo@diag.uniroma1.it
Giuseppe Oriolo is an Associate Professor of Automatic Control and Robotics at the
Sapienza University of Rome and the coordinator of the DIAG Robotics Laboratory.
His research interests are robot control; motion planning; redundant, underactuated
and nonholonomic systems; localization and navigation for mobile robots; humanoid
robots; visual servoing. He has been Associate Editor of the IEEE Transactions on
Robotics from 2001 to 2005 and Senior Editor from 2009 to 2013.
Christian Ott
Chapter B.17
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics
Wessling, Germany
christian.ott@dlr.de
Christian Ott received the Dr.-Ing. degree in Control Engineering from Saarland
University, Germany, in 2005. In 2001, he joined the Institute of Robotics and
Mechatronics, German Aerospace Center (DLR). During 2007–2009, he was a Project
Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechano-Informatics at the University of
Tokyo, Japan. In 2014, he became Head of the Department for Analysis and Control
of Advanced Robotic Systems at DLR.
Ümit Özgüner
Chapter F.62
Ohio State University
Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
Columbus, USA
umit@ee.eng.ohio-state.edu
Ümit Özgüner is a Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering
at the Ohio State University, where he holds the TRC Inc. Chair on
ITS and is the Director of the new Crash Imminent Safety University
Transportation Center. He was the founding President of the IEEE ITS
Council (now Society) in 1999 and is a Fellow of the IEEE.
Nikolaos Papanikolopoulos
Chapter F.61
University of Minnesota
Department of Computer Science and
Engineering
Minneapolis, USA
npapas@cs.umn.edu
Papanikolopoulos is the Distinguished McKnight University Professor
at the University of Minnesotaand Director of the Center for Distributed
Robotics and SECTTRA. He holds a MS and PhD in Electrical and
Computer Engineering from Carnegie Mellon University, and Diploma
of Engineering, Electrical and Computer Engineering from the National
Technical University of Athens, Greece (1987). His primary specialties
are robotics, computer vision, sensor networks, and sensor-based control
in transportation applications.
Frank C. Park
Chapter B.16
For biographical profile, please see the section “About the Part Editors”.
Jaeheung Park
Chapter D.40
Seoul National University
Department of Transdisciplinary Studies
Suwon, Korea
park73@snu.ac.kr
Jaeheung Park is Associate Professor at Seoul National University. He received
the BS and MS degrees from Seoul National University, Korea, in 1995 and 1999,
respectively, and the PhD degree from Stanford University in 2006. His research
interests lie in the areas of humanoid robot, whole-body control framework, contact
force control, robust haptic teleoperation, multi-contact control, and biomechanics.
Lynne E. Parker
Chapter E.53
University of Tennessee
Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science
Knoxville, USA
leparker@utk.edu
Lynne Parker is a Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville. She received the PhD degree from
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. She previously worked for several years
as a full-time researcher at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Her research focuses
on distributed intelligent robotics, human–robot interaction, sensor networks, and
machine learning.

About the Authors
2187
Authors
Federico Pecora
Chapter A.14
University of Örebro
School of Science and Technology
Örebro, Sweden
federico.pecora@oru.se
Federico Pecora, PhD, is Associate Professor in Computer Science at
Örebro University, Sweden. His research interests lie at the intersection of
AI and robotics with a focus on constraint-based reasoning and planning
algorithms. He has applied these techniques primarily in the development
of domestic service robots, and in industrial automation domains with
large autonomous vehicles.
Jan Peters
Chapter A.15
Technical University Darmstadt
Autonomous Systems Lab
Darmstadt, Germany
mail@jan-peters.net
Jan Peters is a Full Professor (W3) for Intelligent Autonomous Systems
in the Computer Science Department of the Technical University
Darmstadt and a Group Leader at the Max-Planck Institute for Intelligent
Systems. He has received four Master’s degrees in Computer Science,
Electrical, Mechanical and Control Engineering from TU Munich and
FernUni Hagen, National University of Singapore (NUS), and the
University of Southern California (USC). He holds a Computer Science
PhD from USC. Jan Peters has received the Dick Volz Best 2007 US
PhD Thesis Runner-Up Award, the Robotics: Science & Systems –
Early Career Spotlight, the INNS Young Investigator Award, and the
IEEE Robotics & Automation Society’s Early Career Award.
Anna Petrovskaya
Chapter D.41
Stanford University
Department of Computer Science
Stanford, USA
anya@cs.stanford.edu
Anna Petrovskaya received her PhD in Computer Science from Stanford University.
Her expertise is in computer vision and robotics with focus on Bayesian methods for
robotic and consumer applications. She developed efﬁcient algorithms for autonomous
vehicles, mobile manipulation, and tactile perception. Versed in both industry and
academia, she has a strong interest in bringing latest research from the lab into
everyday use.
J. Norberto Pires
Chapter F.54
University of Coimbra
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Coimbra, Portugal
norberto@uc.pt
J. Norberto Pires received the PhD degree in 1999 in Robotics and Automation from
the University of Coimbra, Portugal. Since 1991 he has been with the Mechanical
Engineering staff, where he currently serves as Associate Professor. His research
interests include force control, industrial robotics, object-oriented and distributed
programming, ﬂexible manufacturing systems, and human–machine interfaces. He is
an IEEE Senior Member, editor-in-chief of journal Robotica.
Paolo Pirjanian
Chapter F.65
iRobot Corp.
Bedford, USA
paolo.pirjanian@gmail.com
Dr. Paolo Pirjanian got a MSc in Computer Engineering and a PhD in
Robotics from Aalborg University, Denmark. He is the CTO of iRobot
and former CEO of Evolution Robotics with successful exit. He is a high-
tech innovator, startup founder and entrepreneur. Dr. Pirjanian is strong
strategist and innovator with operational experience in developing world-
class teams and technologies from concept to market leadership while
creating strong defensible IP portfolios and differentiated, competitive
products.
Erwin Prassler
Chapter F.65
Bonn-Rhein-Sieg Univ. of Applied
Sciences
Department of Computer Sciences
Sankt Augustin, Germany
erwin.prassler@h-brs.de
Erwin Prassler received a Master’s degree in Computer Science from
the Technical University of Munich in 1985. In 1989, he joined the
Research Institute for Applied Knowledge Processing in Ulm, where
he headed a research group working in the ﬁeld of mobile robots and
service robotics where he received his PhD in Computer Science in
1996. In 2004, Dr. Prassler was appointed Associate Professor at the
University of Applied Science Bonn-Rhein-Sieg and serves as IEEE
RAS Vice President for Industrial Activities in 2016–2017.

Authors
2188
About the Authors
Domenico Prattichizzo
Chapter D.38
University of Siena
Department of Information Engineering
Siena, Italy
prattichizzo@ing.unisi.it
Domenico Prattichizzo received the MS degree in Electronic Engineering and the PhD
degree in Robotics and Automation from the University of Pisa, Italy in 1991 and
1995, respectively. Since 2002 he is Associate Professor of Robotics at the University
of Siena and since 2009 Scientiﬁc Consultant at the Italian Institute of Technology,
Italy. His research interests are in robotic grasping, haptics, visual servoing, mobile
robotics and geometric control.
Carsten Preusche
Chapter D.43
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics
Wessling, Germany
carsten.preusche@dlr.de
Carsten Preusche became a Scientist at the Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics,
German Aerospace Center (DLR) in 1999. Since 2004 he is head of the telepresence
and telerobotic group. His work is mainly focused on the control of time-delayed
telerobotic systems and the design of multimodal human–system interfaces.
William Provancher
Chapter C.28
University of Utah
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Salt Lake City, USA
wil@mech.utah.edu
William R. Provancher earned a PhD from the Department of Mechan-
ical Engineering at Stanford University in haptics, tactile sensing and
feedback. He is now a tenured Associate Professor in the Department of
Mechanical Engineering at the University of Utah. His current research
involves haptics and tactile feedback. He has also founded Tactical
Haptics to commercialize his lab’s research related to tactile feedback.
John Reid
Chapter F.56
John Deere Co.
Moline Technology Innovation Center
Moline, USA
reidjohnf@johndeere.com
Dr. John Reid is the Director of Product Technology and Innovation at
Deere and Co., where he is responsible for the company’s worldwide
network of R&D centers. Dr. Reid and his colleagues jointly orchestrate
an accelerated innovation process and enterprise technology process to
coordinate the delivery of technology innovations to the marketplace
and to build capabilities to support future businesses.
David J. Reinkensmeyer
Chapter F.64
University of California at Irvine
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
and Anatomy and Neurobiology
Irvine, USA
dreinken@uci.edu
David Reinkensmeyer received the PhD degree in Electrical Engineering from the
University of California at Berkeley in 1993, and was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the
Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago. He is currently a Professor in the Department
of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at the University of California, Irvine.
His research interests are in neuromuscular control, motor learning, robotics, and
neurorehabilitation.
Jonathan Roberts
Chapter F.66
Queensland University of Technology
Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science
Brisbane, Australia
jonathan.roberts@qut.edu.au
Jonathan Roberts is Professor in Robotics at Queensland University of Technology
(QUT). His main research interest is in the area of ﬁeld robotics. Before joining QUT,
he was Research Director of CSIRO’s Autonomous Systems Laboratory. Jonathan
is a Past President of the Australian Robotics & Automation Association Inc., and
was Deputy Research Director of the Australian Research Centre for Aerospace
Automation.
Nicholas Roy
Chapter G.71
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Department of Aeronautics and
Astronautics
Cambridge, USA
nickroy@csail.mit.edu
Nicholas Roy is an Associate Professor in the Department of Aeronautics
& Astronautics and a member of the Computer Science and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Laboratory at the MIT. He received his PhD in Robotics
from Carnegie Mellon University in 2003. His research interests include
autonomous unmanned vehicles, human-robot interaction, decision-
making under uncertainty and machine learning.

About the Authors
2189
Authors
Daniela Rus
Chapter E.53
For biographical profile, please see the section “About the Part Editors”.
Selma Šabanović
Chapter G.71
Indiana University Bloomington
School of Informatics and Computing
Bloomington, USA
selmas@indiana.edu
Selma Šabanovi´c is an Assistant Professor of Informatics and Cognitive
Science at Indiana University Bloomington. She received her doctorate
in Science and Technology Studies from Rensselear Polytechnic
Institute in 2007. Her work combines the social study of interactive and
assistive robots in various social and cultural contexts with research on
human-robot interaction and social robot design.
Kamel S. Saidi
Chapter F.57
National Institute of Standards and
Technology
Building and Fire Research Laboratory
Gaitherbsurg, USA
kamel.saidi@nist.gov
Dr. Kamel S. Saidi is a Mechanical Engineer in the Intelligent Systems Division (ISD)
at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). His research includes
the development of metrics, test methods and ground-truth systems, safety, dexterity,
mapping and autonomy for manufacturing and emergency response robots. He holds
a PhD in Civil Engineering, a BS and MS in Mechanical Engineering from The
University of Texas at Austin.
Claude Samson
Chapter E.49
INRIA Sophia-Antipolis
Sophia-Antipolis, France
claude.samson@inria.fr
Claude Samson is Directeur de Recherche at the French research institute INRIA.
Much of his research concerns robotics and automatic control, with a particular
interest in the control of nonlinear mechanical systems. He has published the book
Robot Control. The Task-Function Approach with his colleagues Bernard Espiau and
Michel Leborgne.
Brian Scassellati
Chapter G.73
Yale University
Computer Science, Cognitive Science,
and Mechanical Engineering
New Haven, USA
scaz@cs.yale.edu
Brian Scassellati is a Professor of Computer Science, Cognitive Science,
and Mechanical Engineering at Yale University and Director of the
NSF Expedition on Socially Assistive Robotics. His research focuses
on building embodied computational models of human social behavior,
especially the developmental progression of early social skills. Dr.
Scassellati received his PhD in Computer Science from the MIT in 2001.
Stefan Schaal
Chapter A.15
University of Southern California
Depts. of Computer Science, Neuroscience,
and Biomedical Engineering
Los Angeles, USA
sschaal@tuebingen.mpg.de
Stefan Schaal is Professor of Computer Science, Neuroscience, and
Biomedical Engineering at the University of Southern California, and
a Founding Director of the MPI for Intelligent Systems in Tübingen,
Germany. Before joining USC, Dr. Schaal did research in the AI Lab
at MIT, the ATR in Japan, at the Georgia Institute of Technology and
in the Dep. Kinesiology of PennState University. His research interests
include statistical and machine learning, neural networks, computational
neuroscience, functional brain imaging, nonlinear control theory, and
biomimetic robotics. He applies his research to problems of artiﬁcial
and biological motor control and motor learning.
Steven Scheding
Chapter F.59
University of Sydney
Rio Tinto Centre for Mine Automation
Sydney, Australia
steven.scheding@sydney.edu.au
Steven Scheding received the BE and PhD degrees in Mechatronic Engineering from
the University of Sydney, Australia, in 1995 and 1998, respectively. He held the
position of Senior Lecturer with the Australian Centre for Field Robotics, University
of Sydney from 2000 to 2010. He is currently Director of the Rio Tinto Centre for
Mine Automation at the University of Sydney. His research interests include the
automation of large outdoor vehicles, fault detection and identiﬁcation, and algorithms
and sensors for perception in unstructured environments.

Authors
2190
About the Authors
Victor Scheinman
Chapter A.4
Stanford University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Stanford, USA
vds@stanford.edu
Victor Scheinman is a Consulting Professor in Mechanical Engineering at Stanford
University. He has engineering degrees from MIT and Stanford. He was a founder of
Automatix Inc. and Vicarm Inc. He designed and developed the Unimation PUMA
robot, the Automatix/Yaskawa Robotworld, the Scheinman/Stanford Arm, and the
Scheinman/MIT robot arms. He is a recipient of the ASME’s Leonardo DaVinci
Award for Design Engineering and the RIA’s Joseph F. Engelberger Award for
Robotics Technology.
Bernt Schiele
Chapter C.33
Saarland University
Department of Computer Science
Saarbrücken, Germany
schiele@mpi-inf.mpg.de
Bernt Schiele is Max Planck Director at MPI Informatics and Professor
at Saarland University. Before coming to Saarbrücken, he was Full
Professor at TU Darmstadt, Germany, Assistant Professor at ETH Zurich,
Switzerland, and postdoctoral associate and Visiting Assistant Professor
at MIT, USA. He holds a PhD from INPG, France. He is interested in
computer vision, machine learning and ubiquitous computing.
James Schmiedeler
Chapter A.2
University of Notre Dame
Department of Aerospace and Mechanical
Engineering
Notre Dame, USA
schmiedeler.4@nd.edu
James Schmiedeler is an Associate Professor in the Department of
Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering at the University of Notre
Dame. His current research activities involve biped robot locomo-
tion, human motor coordination, robot-assisted rehabilitation, human
biomechanics, and design of morphing systems. His research has been
recognized with a National Science Foundation Presidential Early Ca-
reer Award for Scientists and Engineers (PECASE), and he is a Fellow
of the ASME.
Bruno Siciliano
Chapter 1
For biographical profile, please see the section “About the Editors”.
Roland Siegwart
Chapter B.26
ETH Zurich
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Zurich, Switzerland
rsiegwart@ethz.ch
Roland Siegwart is Full Professor for Robotics at ETH Zürich. He was formerly
Professor at EPFL, R&D Director at MECOS, and held postdoc and visiting positions
at Stanford University and NASA Ames. He was Vice President for Technical
Activities of the IEEE Robotics and Automation Society and is author of the textbook
Autonomous Mobile Robots. He is co-founder of several spin-off companies.
Reid Simmons
Chapter A.12
Carnegie Mellon University
The Robotics Institute
Pittsburgh, USA
reids@cs.cmu.edu
Reid Simmons received the PhD degree in Artiﬁcial Intelligence from MIT in
1988. His research focuses on autonomous, self-reliant robots, which involves
issues ofrobot control architectures, probabilistic planning and reasoning, robot
navigation,multirobot coordination, automated assembly, and human–robot social
interaction. Dr. Simmons has developed over a dozen autonomous robots, receiving
the Newell Awardfor Research Excellence in 2004.
Patrick van der Smagt
Chapter G.77
Technical University Munich
Department of Computer Science, BRML
Labs
Munich, Germany
smagt@brml.org
Patrick van der Smagt is Professor for Computer Science at TUM and
researcher at fortiss GmbH Munich, where he directs a joint lab on
biomimetic robotics and machine learning. Besides numerous papers and
patents on robotics, he has won various awards, including the Helmholtz-
Association Erwin Schrödinger Award, the King-Sun Fu Memorial
Award, and the Harvard Medical School/MGH Martin Research Prize.
He is founding chairman of a non-for-proﬁt organization for Assistive
Robotics for Tetraplegics.
Dezhen Song
Chapter D.44
For biographical details see “About the Multimedia Editors”

About the Authors
2191
Authors
Jae-Bok Song
Chapter A.4
Korea University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Seoul, Korea
jbsong@korea.ac.kr
Jae-Bok Song received the BS and MS degrees in mechanical engineer-
ing from Seoul National University and the PhD degree from MIT in
1992. He joined the faculty of the School of Mechanical Engineering,
Korea University, in 1993. Dr. Song served as a President of the Korea
Robotics Society and as an Editor-in-Chief of the International Journal
of Control, Automation and Systems.
Cyrill Stachniss
Chapter E.46
University of Bonn
Institute for Geodesy and Geoinformation
Bonn, Germany
cyrill.stachniss@igg.uni-bonn.de
Cyrill Stachniss is a Full Professor for Photogrammetry at the University of Bonn,
Germany. Before, he was a Lecturer at the University of Freiburg, a Senior Researcher
at ETH Zurich, and a Guest Lecturer at the University of Zaragoza. In 2006, he
ﬁnished his PhD thesis supervised by Wolfram Burgard in Freiburg.
Michael Stark
Chapter C.33
Max Planck Institute of Informatics
Department of Computer Vision and
Multimodal Computing
Saarbrücken, Germany
stark@mpi-inf.mpg.de
Michael Stark is a research group leader at MPI Informatics. Before coming to
Saarbrücken, he was a Visiting Assistant Professor at Stanford University. He holds
a PhD from TU Darmstadt, Germany. His research interests are in computer vision
and machine learning.
Amanda K. Stowers
Chapter B.26
Stanford University
Department Mechanical Engineering
Stanford, USA
astowers@stanford.edu
Amanda Stowers is a Graduate Student in Mechanical Engineering at
Stanford University. She studies the biomechanics of bird wing morphing
and ﬂapping as an inspiration for designing more effective ﬂapping-
winged robots.
Stefano Stramigioli
Chapter D.43
For biographical details see “About the Multimedia Editors”
Gaurav S. Sukhatme
Chapter E.53
University of Southern California
Department of Computer Science
Los Angeles, USA
gaurav@usc.edu
Gaurav S. Sukhatme is Dean’s Professor of Computer Science (CS) with
joint appointment in Electrical Engineering at the USC. He received his
undergraduate education at IIT Bombay in CS and Engineering, and
MS and PhD degrees in CS from USC. He is the Director of the USC
Robotic Embedded Systems Laboratory which he founded in 2000. His
research interests are in multirobot systems and robot networks. He is
a fellow of the IEEE and a recipient of the NSF CAREER award and
the Okawa foundation research award.
Satoshi Tadokoro
Chapter F.60
Tohoku University
Graduate School of Information Sciences
Sendai, Japan
tadokoro@rm.is.tohoku.ac.jp
Satoshi Tadokoro is a Professor at the Graduate School of Information Sciences, and
at the International Research Institute of Disaster Science, Tohoku University. He is
President of the International Rescue System Institute since 2002, and was a Program
Manager of Japan Government’s DDT Project 2002–2007. He also is the Program
Manager of the ImPACT Project since 2014. His research ﬁeld is rescue robotics. He
serves the IEEE Robotics and Automation Society as President in 2016–2017.

Authors
2192
About the Authors
Wataru Takano
Chapter G.68
University of Tokyo
Department of Mechano-Informatics
Tokyo, Japan
takano@ynl.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Dr. Takano completed his master at the Department of Precision Engineering, Kyoto
University in 2001 and his PhD in Information Engineering at the University of Tokyo
in 2006. He became a Project Assistant Professor in 2006, an Assistant Professor in
2007, and then a Lecturer at the University of Tokyo in 2009. His research includes
kinematics, dynamics, artiﬁcial intelligence of humanoid robots, and intelligent
vehicles. He is an IEEE member co-chair of the Technical Committee of Robot
Learning, IEEE RAS.
Russell H. Taylor
Chapter F.63
The Johns Hopkins University
Department of Computer Science
Baltimore, USA
rht@jhu.edu
Russell H. Taylor received a PhD in Computer Science from Stanford in
1976. He joined IBM Research in 1976, where he developed the AML
programming language and managed the Computer-Assisted Surgery
group before moving to Johns Hopkins University in 1995. He is the
John C. Malone Professor of Computer Science with joint appointments
in Mechanical Engineering, Radiology, and Surgery and Director of the
Laboratory for Computational Sensing and Robotics.
Russ Tedrake
Chapter E.48
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Computer Science and Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL)
Cambridge, USA
russt@csail.mit.edu
Russ is the X Consortium Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science and Aero/Astro at MIT, and the Director
of the Center for Robotics at the Computer Science and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Lab. His research focuses on optimization, planning, and
control for nonlinear dynamical systems including legged robots, robot
manipulation, and unmanned aerial vehicles.
Sebastian Thrun
Chapter E.46
Udacity Inc.
Mountain View, USA
info@udacity.com
Sebastian Thrun is a Research Professor of Computer Science at Stanford University,
Founder of Google X, and CEO of Udacity, Inc. Thrun directed the Stanford team
that won the DARPA Grand Challenge. At Google, Thrun founded Google X, which
was home to Google Glass, the Google self-driving car, project Loon, project Wing,
medical contact lenses, new solutions to early cancer detection, and other projects.
Marc Toussaint
Chapter D.40
University of Stuttgart
Machine Learning and Robotics Lab
Stuttgart, Germany
marc.toussaint@ipvs.uni-stuttgart.de
Marc Toussaint is Full Professor of Machine Learning and Robotics at the University
of Stuttgart since 2012. Before he was Assistant Professor at FU & TU Berlin,
Germany. His research focuses on the combination of decision theory and machine
learning, motivated by fundamental research questions in robotics. Speciﬁc interests
are combining geometry, logic and probabilities in learning and reasoning.
James Trevelyan
Chapter F.58
The University of Western Australia
School of Mechanical and Chemical
Engineering
Crawley, Australia
james.trevelyan@uwa.edu.au
James Trevelyan pioneered sheep shearing robots between 1976 and
1993, then worked on remote access laboratories, landmine clearance, and
understanding engineering practice. He received the Joseph Engelberger
award for contributions to robotics science in 1993, two JIRA awards, and
numerous awards for distinguished teaching. He is a Fellow of Engineers
Australia and served 8 years as Elected Member of the IFToMM Executive
Council from 2003.

About the Authors
2193
Authors
Jeffrey C. Trinkle
Chapter D.38
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Department of Computer Science
Troy, USA
trink@cs.rpi.edu
Jeffrey C. Trinkle received his BS in Physics (1979) and Engineering
Science and Mechanics (1979) from Ursinus College and Georgia
Institute of Technology, respectively. In 1987, he received his PhD
from the University of Pennsylvania. He is now Professor and Chair
of Computer Science at Rensselear Polytechnic Institute in Troy,
New York. His primary research interests are in the areas of robotic
manipulation, multibody dynamics, and automated manufacturing.
Masaru Uchiyama
Chapter D.39
Tohoku University
Graduate School of Engineering
Sendai, Japan
uchiyama@space.mech.tohoku.ac.jp
Masaru Uchiyama received BE, ME, and PhD degrees from the University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan, in 1972, 1974, and 1977, respectively, all in Mechanical Engineering
for Production. Since 1977, he has been with the School of Engineering, Tohoku
University and currently is a Professor of the Design of Intelligent Machines in the
Department of Mechanical Systems and Design. His research interest is design of
intelligent mechanical systems.
H.F. Machiel Van der Loos
Chapter F.64
University of British Columbia
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Vancouver, Canada
vdl@mech.ubc.ca
Dr. Machiel Van der Loos is Adjunct Professor of Mechanical Engineering at UBC,
Vancouver, Canada. He is Consulting Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering
at Stanford University, collaborating on design coaching and thesis advising. He
received the Ingénieur Mécanicien degree from the Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology, Lausanne (1979), and an Engineer’s Degree (1984) and PhD (1992) from
Stanford University.
Manuela Veloso
Chapter F.66
Carnegie Mellon University
Computer Science Department
Pittsburgh, USA
mmv@cs.cmu.edu
Manuela Veloso is Herbert A. Simon University Professor in Computer
Science at Carnegie Mellon University. Veloso researches in artiﬁcial
intelligence and robotics, perception, cognition, and learning for au-
tonomous agents that collaborate, observe, reason, act, and learn. Veloso
is a Fellow of IEEE, AAAS and AAAI, and the past President of AAAI
and RoboCup. Veloso and her students have researched among others,
soccer robots and service symbiotic autonomous mobile robots.
Gianmarco Veruggio
Chapter G.80
National Research Council (CNR)
Institute of Electronics, Computer and
Telecommunication Engineering
Genoa, Italy
gianmarco@veruggio.it
Dr. Veruggio received the Degree in Electronic Engineering from Genoa
University, Italy, in 1980. He is Director of Research at the Italian
National Research Council and Responsible for the Operational Unit
of Genoa of CNR-IEIIT. In 2000 he founded the Association School of
Robotics and in 2002 he coined the word and proposed the concept of
Roboethics, to which he is dedicating increasing resources. In 2009 he
was awarded the title of Commander of the Order to the Merit of the
Italian Republic.
Luigi Villani
Chapter A.9
University of Naples Federico II
Department of Electrical Engineering and
Information Technology
Naples, Italy
luigi.villani@unina.it
Luigi Villani received the PhD degree in Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science from the University of Naples in 1996, where he is Associate Professor
of Automatic Control since 2002. His research interests include robot force/motion
control, cooperative robots, visual servoing, safe physical human-robot interaction. He
has co-authored ﬁve books and more than 150 journal and conference papers. He has
been Associate Editor of the IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology and
the IEEE Transactions on Robotics.

Authors
2194
About the Authors
Kenneth J. Waldron
Chapter A.2
University of Technology Sydney
Centre of Mechatronics and Intelligent
Systems
Ultimo, Australia
kenneth.waldron@uts.edu.au
Kenneth Waldron is Professor in the School of Electrical, Mechanical and Mechatronic
Engineering of the University of Technology, Sydney and Professor Emeritus of
Stanford University. He has previously occupied academic positions at the University
of New South Wales, Houston and Ohio State University. He is past President of
IFToMM, the International Federation for Promotion of Mechanism and Machine
Science.
Ian D. Walker
Chapter B.20
Clemson University
Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
Clemson, USA
ianw@ces.clemson.edu
Ian D. Walker received the BS from the University of Hull, England,
in 1983 and the MS and PhD degrees from the University of Texas,
Austin, in 1985 and 1989, respectively. He is currently a Professor at
Clemson University. His research centers on robotics, particularly novel
manipulators and manipulation. He conducts research in biologically
inspired trunk, tentacle, and worm robots.
Christian Wallraven
Chapter G.78
Korea University
Department of Brain and Cognitive
Engineering, Cognitive Systems Lab
Seoul, Korea
wallraven@korea.ac.kr
Christian Wallraven received his PhD in Physics in 2007 from the
University of Tübingen. After two European projects in cognitive
vision and cognitive systems, he moved to Korea University, where
he founded the Cognitive Systems Lab in 2010. His work is set on
the interface between machine learning & computer vision, robotics,
and neuroscience. Recent work is on modeling of face perception,
facial expressions for communication, as well as multisensory object
representations in human and robots.
Pierre-Brice Wieber
Chapter E.48
INRIA Grenoble Rhône-Alpes
Grenoble, France
pierre-brice.wieber@inria.fr
Pierre-Brice Wieber graduated from Ecole Polytechnique in 1996 and received a PhD
degree from Ecole des Mines de Paris in 2000. He has been Chargé de Recherche
at INRIA Grenoble since 2001, except for a 2 year Marie Curie Fellowship at JRL
in Tsukuba, Japan in 2008-2010. His research interests include walking robots and
optimization based control.
Brian Wilcox
Chapter F.55
California Institute of Technology
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Pasadena, USA
brian.h.wilcox@jpl.nasa.gov
Brian Wilcox is at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and is the Principal Investigator
for the ATHLETE robot. He was the Supervisor of the Robotic Vehicles Group at
JPL from 1985–2005, leading the development of rover technology leading to the
Sojourner rover in 1997 and subsequent Mars rovers. He holds six patents and has
received the NASA Exceptional Engineering Achievement Medal.
Robert Wood
Chapter B.23
Harvard University
School of Engineering and Applied
Sciences
Cambridge, USA
rjwood@seas.harvard.edu
Robert Wood is a Professor in Harvard’s School of Engineering and
Applied Sciences and founder of the Harvard Microrobotics Lab which
leverages expertise in microfabrication. His current research interests
include new micro- and meso-scale manufacturing techniques, ﬂuid
mechanics of low Reynolds number ﬂapping wings, control of sensor-
limited and computation-limited systems, active soft materials, wearable
robots, and morphable soft-bodied robots. In 2012 he was selected for the
Alan T. Waterman award of the National Science Foundation.

About the Authors
2195
Authors
Jing Xiao
Chapter D.36
University of North Carolina
Department of Computer Science
Charlotte, USA
xiao@uncc.edu
Jing Xiao received the PhD degree from the University of Michigan
in 1990. She is currently a Professor of Computer Science at the
University of North Carolina, Charlotte. She served as the Director of
the Robotics and Human Augmentation Program at the U.S. National
Science Foundation from 1998 to 2000. Her research covers robotics
and haptics, and she has about 100 publications.
Katsu Yamane
Chapter G.68
Disney Research
Pittsburgh, USA
kyamane@disneyresearch.com
Dr. Katsu Yamane received his BS, MS, and PhD degrees in Mechanical Engineering
in 1997, 1999, and 2002, respectively, from the University of Tokyo, Japan. He is
currently a Senior Research Scientist at Disney Research, Pittsburgh and an Adjunct
Associate Professor at the Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University. Prior to
joining Disney, he was an Associate Professor at the University of Tokyo. His research
interests include humanoid robot control and motion synthesis, character animation,
and human motion simulation.
Mark Yim
Chapter B.22
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Mechanical Engineering
and Applied Mechanics
Philadelphia, USA
yim@seas.upenn.edu
Mark Yim is a professor at the University of Pennsylvania. His group studies modular
self-reconﬁgurable robots that can transform into different shapes, jump, ride tricycles,
climb stairs, poles and fences, manipulate objects and reassemble themselves after
being kicked into pieces. His other research interests include product design, reactive
art and architecture, low cost manipulation, snake locomotion, ﬂying robots, and
self-assembling ﬂoating structures.
Dana R. Yoerger
Chapter E.51
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
Applied Ocean Physics & Engineering
Woods Hole, USA
dyoerger@whoi.edu
Dana Yoerger has been a robotics researcher, system developer, and heav-
ily involved in operations at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
since 1984. He holds SB, SM, and PhD degrees from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. He has used underwater robots to explore the
Mid-Ocean Ridge, ancient and modern shipwrecks, and to study the
Deepwater Horizon oil spill.
Kazuhito Yokoi
Chapter G.67
AIST Tsukuba Central 2
Intelligent Systems Research Institute
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
kazuhito.yokoi@aist.go.jp
Kazuhito Yokoi received the BE in Mechanical Engineering from the
Nagoya Institute of Technology in 1984, and the ME and PhD degrees
from the Tokyo Institute of Technology in 1986 and 1994, respectively.
In 1986, he joined the Mechanical Engineering Laboratory, Ministry
of International Trade and Industry. He is currently a Deputy Director
of Intelligent Systems Research Institute (IS), National Institute of
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), in Tsukuba,
Japan.
Eiichi Yoshida
Chapter G.67
National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology (AIST)
CNRS-AIST Joint Robotics Laboratory,
UMI3218/CRT
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
e.yoshida@aist.go.jp
Eiichi Yoshida received ME and PhD degrees from Graduate School of Engineering,
University of Tokyo in 1993 and 1996, respectively. He is currently Co-Director
of CNRS-AIST Joint Robotics Laboratory (JRL), UMI3218/CRT, at the National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba, Japan.
His research interests include robot task and motion planning, human modeling, and
humanoid robots.

Authors
2196
About the Authors
Kazuya Yoshida
Chapter F.55
Tohoku University
Department of Aerospace Engineering
Sendai, Japan
yoshida@astro.mech.tohoku.ac.jp
Kazuya Yoshida received his Dr. Eng. from the Tokyo Institute of Technology in
1990. Since 2003 he has been Professor in the Department of Aerospace Engineering,
Tohoku University, Japan. He is also serving as a Visiting Lecturer at the International
Space University in Strasbourg, France, since 1998. His research activities include
dynamics and control of space robots covering from free-ﬂying robots to planetary
exploration rovers.
Junku Yuh
Chapter B.25
Korea Institute of Science and
Technology
National Agenda Research Division
Seoul, Korea
yuh.junku@gmail.com
Dr. Yuh, IEEE Fellow, is currently Endowed Chair Researcher at Korea
Institute of Science and Technology (KIST). He served as the 5th and
6th President of the Korea Aerospace University, US National Science
Foundation Program Director, Head of NSF Tokyo Regional Ofﬁce,
Professor of Mechanical Engineering and Information & Computer
Science at the University of Hawaii.
Alex Zelinsky
Chapter F.62
For biographical profile, please see the section “About the Part Editors”.

2197
Index
Index
2-D ﬂow
596
3-D computer aided design model
788
3-D point cloud data
1189
3-D printer
539
3-D query point
749
3-D reconstruction
626
3-tiered (3T)
337
6 DOF localization
987
A
a three layer architecture for
navigating through intricate
situations (ATLANTIS)
280
AAAI Robot Challenge
288
abstraction layer
1116
acceleration-resolved control
197,
207
accelerometer
1014
access and economics
1577
accuracy analysis
431
ACM-R snake robots
464
Acorn RISC machine architecture
(ARM)
577
acoustic
– baseline
1212, 1216
– communication
577
– imaging
574
– modem
576, 578
– positioning system
575
– sensor
574
acoustic Doppler current proﬁler
(ADCP)
574
Acrobot surgical robot
1532, 1533,
1536
acrylonitrile–butadiene–styrene
567
activation behavior-based
305,
307–309
activities for daily living
1552,
1718, 1781
activity theory
1754
actuating system
1213
actuation
1010
– architecture
451
– net
452
actuator
539
– dynamics
605
– effort sensor
677
– electromagnetic
78
– for manipulation
647
– hydraulic
80
– placement
449
– pneumatic
80
– vibrotactile
1014
– with mechanically adjustable series
compliance (AMASC)
487
AdaBoost
785
added mass
1207
additive manufacturing
539
adjacency pair
1752
adjustable pattern generator (APG)
1896
admissible conﬁguration
855
admittance
1007
– control
193, 199, 200
– matrix
861
adversarial environments
1282
aerial
– based precision agriculture
1382
– robot
623, 625
– robot control
1234
– robot guidance
1234
– robotic emerging application
625
– robotics
593, 1225
– vehicle
1485
aerodynamic
– center (AC)
607
– drag
613
– efﬁciency
606
– ﬂight mechanics
595
– force
597, 606
– mechanism
617
– moment
606
Aesop surgical robot
1530
affordance
– detection
971
– learning
967
agent remote
281
agile
– manufacturing
1301
– robot development network
(aRDnet)
292
agricultural robotics
1365
agriculture
626, 1366
agriculture and forestry (A&F)
1365
aircraft dynamics
603
airfoil
596
airplane
606
– static performance
606
– static stability
606
algorithmic singularity
229
altimeter
576
ambient assisted living (AAL)
1781
amplitude shift keying (ASK)
578
analytic Jacobian
219
anatomically correct testbed (ACT)
1649
android
1745
– robot
1767
angle of attack (AOA)
606, 1230
– matrix
1230
angular momentum
1127, 1143
animacy
1742
animal detection
1513
annealed particle ﬁlter (APF)
988
anthropomorphism
448, 1743, 1766
antipersonnel
647, 1413
anti-tank mine
1414
anti-vehicle
1414
arable farming
1369
arbitration
279
arc length
468
architecture
279, 300–302, 1255
– behavior-based
280, 310, 311
– component
282
– design
290
– implementation
291
– layered control
280
– subsumption
280
– three-layer
301, 302
Arduino
1939
area correlation stereo
744
arm guide
1561
articulated body
54
articulated object
791, 993
articulated robot
555
articulate-type modular robot
515
artifact
717

Index
2198
Index
artiﬁcial
– bacterial ﬂagella (ABF)
650
– constraint
205
– evolution
1871, 1879
– hand
1851
– intelligence (AI)
2, 8, 282, 1064,
1494, 1646, 1952
– intelligence system (AIS)
282
– muscle
486
– muscle system
482
– neural network (ANN)
789,
1823, 1872
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
319,
1768
ask-back
1776
assembled state
860
assembly
847
– incidence matrix (AIM)
514
– line
1306
– motion
859
– process
1309
assistive
– interaction dynamic
1804
– rehabilitation robot
1568
– robot
1567
– robot service manipulator (ARM)
1569
– technology
1006
atmosphere
596
attention
– focus
1771
– monitoring behavior
1770
– shared
1786
attitude
– and heading reference system
573, 699
– observer
1246
attitude control
– free-ﬂoating robot
1334, 1347
– reaction wheel
1347
attractor ﬁeld
1673
augmentation
1575
augmented Jacobian
229
autism
1747, 1933
automated
– brick alignment
1397
– brick laying
1395
– bus rapid transit (ABRT)
1520
– guided vehicle (AGV)
1303
– highway
1520
– highway system (AHS)
1502
– reasoning
320
– reinforcement
1397
– synthesis of multirobot task
solutions through software
reconﬁguration (ASyMTRe)
1275
– vehicle
1518
– welding robot
1397
automatic
– constructions building system
(ACBS)
1404
– speech recognition (ASR)
1905
– spoken-language recognition
(ASR)
1775
– target recognition
1483, 1489
autonomous
620
– aquatic vehicle (AUV)
1036
– combat ﬂying vehicle (ACFV)
1967
– digging
1439
– dozer
1439
– excavation
1438
– exploration
993
– ﬂight
621
– ﬂying vehicle (AFV)
1967
– guided vehicle (AGV)
403
– mental development (AMD)
1649
– orchard vehicle
1373
– robot architecture (AuRA)
280,
302
– robotics research
1618
– space transport robotic operations
(ASTRO)
1335
– subtrack control
1198
– tramming
1445
– underwater vehicle (AUV)
565,
566, 1204, 1466, 1485, 1967
– vehicle
1417, 1427, 1445
autonomous system
1450
– in mining
1450
autopilot
610
auxiliary surgical support robots
1530
average landmark vector
1850
average-reward criterion
362
aware home
1612
B
baby schema
1743
back-channel
1752
– response
1776
back-drivability
415, 1004, 1007
backstepping control
258
backward Euler algorithm
183
bag-of-word
780
balancer
435
ballast
568
bang–bang-control
144
baseball playing robot
1603
basic level object class
779
BASIC stamp
1939
basis behavior
1269
basis of object representation
1915
basket cell
1895
batch estimation
95
bathymetric survey
1435
battery
569
Battlebots
1935
Baumgarte stabilization
60
Bayes rule
325, 820
Bayesian
– belief
983
– ﬁlter
985
– framework
983
– inference
985
– network
324
– prior
985
– probability
324
– recursion
985
– state estimation
983
Bayesian dynamic network
325
beam
– bending
260
– sonar pattern
712
– torsion
260
bearing estimation
722
bee and robot
1889
behavior
279
– adaptive
1873
– control
284
– homeostasis
1769
– language
284
– mark-up language (BML)
1752
– primitive (BP)
308
behavior-based
303
– activation
302, 313
– basis behavior
304
– coordination
303
– fuzzy system
310
– history of behavior use
308
– interaction dynamics
301, 303,
305–307
– learning
306
– misconception
303
– multi-robot system
305–307, 310
– planning
304
– principles
302

Index
2199
Index
– reasoning
304
– reinforcement learning
306
– representation
304
– robotics
279
– system
299
– vision system
311
belief
1753
– roughness
985
– set
1751
– space
990
– space search tree
990
– state
988
– system
1751
Bellman
– equation
326
– principle of optimality
363
bend propagation
536
Bernoulli equation
597
best practice in robotics
293
best-ﬁrst-planner
1657
bi-articular muscle
534
bigram model
1673
bilateral control
1024, 1335
bi-manu-track
1561
bin-picking
1307
bio-inspired
– actuation
1847
– climbing
1850
– robotics
1842
– soft robot
1851
biological
– leg
1847
– model
1844
– principle
525
– society
1267
– system
499, 1844
biomimetic
731
– gait
526
– robot
524
bionic handling assistant
467
biped robot
1846, 1860
blind bulldozing
1280
blind-spot detection
1513
Bode
– diagram
248
– plot
457
body extender
1726
body pose
785
body-affect mapping
1770
boosting
782
botball
1934
boundary layer
171, 597
bounding sphere
1011
box pushing
1280
brachistochrone OC problem
501
bracing strategy
260
brain imaging
1563
brain-computer interface
1563
brickwork
– component
1395
– plant
1396
– positioning
1397
broad particle
987
broadcast
283
– of local eligibility (BLE)
310,
1277
Brockett’s theorem
1145, 1169
browser
1049
Brunovsky canonical form
169
brush tire model
558
brushless DC electric motor
78
buckling
533
– gripper
536
building component recycling
1404
bulldozing resistance
1353
bundle adjustment
770
buoyancy
567, 1209
– center of
1209
bus rapid transit
1520
C
cable-driven parallel robot
240, 428
Canadian Scientiﬁc Submersile
Facility (CSSF)
1204
CAN-bus
514
capacitive pressure sensing array
678
capstan
1009, 1010
capture
– and berting
1334
– point (CP)
1134
car body painting
1328
carbon ﬁber
537, 1328
– reinforced plastic
567
– reinforced prepreg
536
carbon nanotube
485, 652
cardinal direction calculus
331
car-like robot
553
carrot heading
1194
Cartesian
– impedance control
494
– manipulator
69
– space stiffness matrix
397
– stiffness
495
– stiffness control
494
cascaded control
– architecture
611
– structure
495, 622
caster wheel
549, 550
caterpillar
534, 1436, 1446
ceiling
– panel placement robot
1400
– vision SLAM
1609
cellular robotic system
513
Center for Robot-Assisted Search
and Rescue
1468
center of
– buoyancy
1209
– compliance
195
– gravity
606, 1195, 1206, 1650
– mass
267, 414, 419, 995, 1127,
1556, 1656
– pressure (COP)
1128
– rotation
893
– stiffness
195
center of rotation (COR)
883
central pattern generation
528,
1143
centrifugal clutch assembly
1311
centroid
– contact
1015
– moment pivot
414
ceramic matrix composite
485
cerebellar
– control
1895
– model
1898
– model articulation controller
370,
1896
cerebellum
1887
cerebral palsy
1552
chain
– kinematic topology
388
– reconﬁguration
517
chained-form system
1106, 1163
charge-coupled detector
93
charge-coupled device
637, 674,
1376, 1867
Chasles’ theorem
17
chattering
170
Chebychev–Grübler–Kutzbach
formula
429
chemical spill
1460
chemical vapor deposition
639
Christoffel symbol
46
circuit switching
1046
CKbot
516
clamping
1683
class detection
786
classical mobility formula
429

Index
2200
Index
classiﬁcation of customers
1594
classiﬁer
782
Claytronics project
1272
cleaning
– robot
1402, 1592
– technology
1595
client/server
278, 1047
cliff sensor
1607
climb factor
606
climbing ﬁber
1895
clinical
– testing
1562
– use
1564
closed
– chain
427
– world assumption
327
closed kinematic
– chain
145
– loop
57, 114
closed-loop
122
– dynamic
499
– execution and recovery
282
– inverse kinematics
226
cluster bomb
1414
clustering
101, 781
clutching
1029
co-activation stiffness
490
coarse-acquisition
701
C-obstacle
857
cockroach inspired robot
525
codebook
780
coefﬁcient
597
– of restitution
1350
cognition
299
– embodied
1747
– social
1747
cognitive
– aid
1572
– development
1746
– human–robot interaction
1741
– model
1744
– model of robot control
1757
– system
1741
cognizant failure
285
collaboration and teamwork
1772
collaborative control
1749
collaborative interaction
1681
collective
1254, 1268
– robot construction
1280
– transport
1280
collision
1011
– avoidance
1046
– avoidance technology
1443
– detection
1010, 1046, 1694
– isolation
1694
– mitigation
1512
– modeling
1683
– reaction
1694
– warning
1512
color camera with depth
998
command shaping
265
commercial off-the-shelf
832
common
– gateway interface
1047
– ground
1749, 1786
– object request broker architecture
279, 1056
– objects in context (COCO)
791
communication
622, 1257
– access for land mobiles
1508
– for control
1264
– for perception
1264
– graph
1263
– intelligence
1488
– interface
518
– protocol
518
– skill
1775
– system
1214
– theory
1674
compass
1212
– gait walking
1846
competing behavior
285
competition
1617
– and cooperation
1876
– challenge
1619
– scenario
1619
complementarity condition
1130
complementarity problem
887
complementary
metal-oxide-semiconductor
674,
715, 1539, 1607
compliance
– active
195
– center of
195
– control
193, 252
– frame
193, 205
– in grasping
954
– matrix
195, 204
compliant
– contact
880
– environment
204
– ﬁn
532
– grasping
956
– hand
955
– humanoid platform
1689
– material
531
compliant motion
– active
862
– execution
865
– planning
862
component
– modeling
1211
– production
1395
composite material
567
composite-rigid-body algorithm
39,
55
compression
260
– criterion
1685
computational
– adequacy
321
– ﬂuid dynamics
602, 1211
– model
1901
– neuroethology
1869
computed tomography
1528, 1537
computed-torque
255
– control
170, 173
computer ethic
1957
computer graphics
1654
computer integrated construction
1400
computer numerical control
513,
1302, 1305, 1394
computer-aided
– design
90, 788, 984, 1006, 1307,
1318, 1392, 1527, 1671
– drafting
1053
– engineering
388
– manufacturing
1313, 1395, 1527
– remote driving
1339
– tomography
1965
computer-aided design (CAD)
– model
1012
computer-integrated surgery
1528
computional brain
416
concentric tube manipulators
467
conceptual design
408
concrete
– distribution
1398
– ﬁnishing
1400
– leveling robot
1402
– production
1395
– pumping car
1469
– spraying robot
1399
concurrent execution
278
– mapping and localization
1216
– reactive plan
337
condition number
124, 126, 221
conditional factor graph
965
conditional random ﬁeld
99, 965
conditioning kinematic
1007
conﬁdence measure
125

Index
2201
Index
conﬁguration
859
– space
71, 136, 858, 1127
– space manipulation
854
– space obstacle
857
– space topology
856
connection
– event
1752
– system
1405
connectivity graph
47
conservative congruence
transformation
435
constant curvature model
471
constellation model
783
constrained
– modes of a joint
21
– motion
192
constraint
– (selection) matrix
885
– artiﬁcial
205
– holonomic
25
– Jacobian
202
– kinematic
192, 201
– natural
204
– nonholonomic
25
– satisfaction problem (CSP)
329
– task Jacobian
229
construction
1392
– automation
1389
– elementary process
1391
– industry
1390
– machine
1394
– on-site
1399
– phase
1391
– process
1391
– project
1390
– robot
1390
– robotics
1392
– robotics categories of
1394
– site
1403
– stakeholder
1391
contact
1015
– angle of track
1196
– centroid
1015
– compliant
880
– conﬁguration
860
– display
1015
– dynamics
1349
– estimation
994
– formation
863
– interface
879, 889
– kinematics
880
– location sensor
678
– manifold
988
– mode
882
– model
879
– sensor
1607
– stiffness
895
– vibration
1014
– virtual manipulator
206
– wrench sum
1658
contact state
– graph
863
– identiﬁcation
864
– principal contact
860
contextual inquiry
1943
continuous
– activity scheduling, planning,
execution and replanning
282
– hidden Markov model
1700
– operating reference station
704
– path
1303
– time
1013
– variable transmission
485
continuous-transmission frequency
modulation
709, 723
– application
725
– range discrimination and resolution
724
– sonar
723
– transmission coding
723
continuum
– Jacobian
471
– kinematics
470
– limbed robot
468
– manipulation
858
– manipulator
466, 858
– robot modeling
463
contract net protocol
1277
contraction mapping
252
control
957, 1214, 1446
– acceleration-resolved
195
– adaptive
173, 258
– admittance
193
– basis
853
– biomimetic
1143
– command interpreter
834
– compliance
193
– damping
193
– decentralized
163
– feedback
1158
– for perception
1265
– force
1007, 1146
– impedance
193
– in mobile manipulation
960
– interaction
192
– law
499
– motion
160, 1317
– multiobjective
852
– null-space projection
852
– of nonholonomic systems
1163
– operational space
850
– optimal
239, 1137
– path-tracking
1446
– position and force
851
– redundant manipulator
851
– robot hand
459
– robust
1146
– shared
1028
– stiffness
193
– supervisory
1027
– synthesis
1270
– system
143
– task
1828
– task-level
850
– unit
647
– volume analysis
596
controllability
– capturability
1133
– capture point
1133
– small-space
1142
controlled
– ﬂoor-by-ﬂoor deconstruction
1404
– oscillatory dynamics
498
controller
– area network
411, 576, 841
– optimization
1675
controlling robot
1188
convergence tracking error
176
convolution
789
– neural network
783, 789
cooperative
1254
– adaptive cruise control
1505
– intelligent real-time control
architecture
282
– interaction
1681
– manipulation
1280
– manipulation control
869
– manipulation planning
870
– manipulator
933
– multiarm system
943
– multirobot observation of multiple
moving target
1281
– task space
939
– vehicle infrastructure system
1508
coordinate
– absolute frame
939
– generalized
25
– measurement machine
982
– spatial transform
41

Index
2202
Index
coordination
1258
– behavior-based
303
– decentralized
1260
Coriolis and centrifugal force
160
correspondence
788
cost
– function
497
– of transport
1720
– pressure
1594
Coulomb
1011
– friction
462, 1129
counter-rotating thruster
572
counterweight
435
coupling
– momentum
1348
– stiffness
195
– virtual
1011, 1012
coverage
1266, 1369
– conﬁguration protocol
1268
– strategy
1602
CPG-based controller
1848
Cramér–Rao lower bound
1264
crane automation
1379
crank-rocker
529
credit assignment
1278
– problem
1897
crop
– production cycle
1366
– yield estimation
1372
cross-sensor acoustic interference
576
crowd-sourcing
790
crush depth
567
C-space
136
cue
1744
– nonverbal
1746
cultural model
1744
curvature
469
– velocity method
1112
curvilinear abscissa
1161
customer expectation
1595
cutaneous (tactile)
1004
cyber physical system
1304
cyclicity
232
cylindrical
– algebraic decomposition
150
– joint
22
– shaped pressure vessel
567
D
da Vinci surgical robot
1530,
1538–1540
damaged building
1482
damped least squares
125
damper
485
damping
1009
– control
193
– factor
224
– ratio
199
DARPA
– challenge
1631
– grand challenge
1619, 1633
– Robotics Challenge
1687
– Software for Distributed Robotics
1262
– Urban Challenge
1633
data
– association
101
– communication
1426
– distribution service (DDS)
283
– gathering
993
– processing problem
1493
datcom
1208
Davis–Putnam algorithm
323
DC motor
79, 163
deactivation and decommissioning
1421
dead reckoning
1450
decentralized data fusion
836
decision-theoretic model
1754
decontamination
1469
decoupled architecture
389
decoupled robot
434
decoupling control
254
dedicated short-range
communication
1507, 1521
deep
– belief network
1905
– reactive ion etching
642, 649
– sea remotely operated vehicle
571
Defense Sciences Ofﬁce
1573
deformable
– object
994
– part model
780
– surface
1188
– terrain
556
– tire
557
degree
– of freedom (DOF)
23, 39, 69,
115, 195, 218, 292, 387, 409, 427,
487, 513, 530, 582, 621, 642, 680,
699, 756, 844, 886, 905, 958, 982,
985, 1007, 1029, 1093, 1162, 1197,
1208, 1332, 1376, 1440, 1561,
1689, 1784
degree of
– freedom (DOF)
465, 621
– mobility
551
– steerability
552
degree of freedom (DOF)
161, 854,
1303, 1649, 1669, 1715
deictic gesture
1776
deliberative system
300
delicate object
995
delta robot
388, 428, 1306
demining
1415–1418
Dempster–Shafer theory
830
Denavit–Hartenberg
49, 109, 112,
388, 514, 926, 1312
– convention
26
– parameter
112, 388
Denning ring
727
dense wave division multiplex
577
deoxyribonucleic acid
473, 641,
1045
deployment
1267
deposition
539
description logic
321
design
436, 1006
– for assembly
1303, 1405
– philosophy
388
– robotic architecture
290
detecting human activity
1494
detection
– and tracking algorithm
1489
– vehicle
1510
deterministic method
985
dexterity
448
– global
395
– index
392
– local
392
difference of Gaussian
780
differential
– dynamic programming
365
– elastic actuator
312
– ﬂatness
1107
– global positioning system
703,
1442, 1504
– phase shift keying
578
dig
– control
1446
– planning
1446
digital
– analog converter
577
– map
1507
– signal processor (DSP)
184, 578,
727, 746
– terrain mapping
1442
digital-to-analog
183, 1009

Index
2203
Index
dilution of precision
702
dimensional synthesis
429
dimensionless space
394
dip-pen nanolithography
641
direct
– control
1024
– marker tracking
1676
– methanol fuel cell
569
– modeling
351
– teleoperation
1029
directional stability
607
directivity pattern
712
Dirichlet process
964
disability
1566
disaster
– characteristics
1463
– response
624, 1248
– robotics
1460
disaster robot
– task
1461
– type
1462
discontinuous contact
1013
discrete
– cosine transform
1490
– element method
1191
– Fourier transform
724
– hidden Markov model
1700
discriminative
– function
966
– learning
787
– model
782
dispatch problem
1437
displacement group
429
display
– contact
1015
– slip
1015
– surface
1016
– tactile
1014
– vibration
1006
distance
– from singularities
221
– transform
787
distributed
1254
– cognitive system
1749
– control
1263
– ﬁeld robot architecture
832
– localization
1263
– optimization
1266
– robot architecture
1255
domestic robotics
1591
Doppler velocity log
571, 573, 574,
1212
double-acting actuator
452
drag
– coefﬁcient
603
– force
1209
– representation
597
dragline automation
1442
drawbar pull
1192, 1353
drilling
1439
driver assistance
1511
drone
624, 1412
dry adhesive
530
dual-arm telerobot
1025
Dubins path
1243
dutch-roll mode
1238
dynamic
37
– Bayesian network
325
– Bayesian system
983
– climbing
531
– covariance scaling
1092
– feedback linearization
256
– gait
409
– manipulability
1008
– matrix
398
– model
607, 1190
– movement primitive
967, 1673
– multisensor system control
835
– neural ﬁeld
1699
– planning
1702
– programming-based method
363
– singularity
1345
– sinkage
1353
– state machine
1879
– system identiﬁcation
492
– unconstrained
1682
– window approach
1112, 1114
dynamic passive walker
1860
dynamically consistent
– generalized inverse Jacobian
852
– inverse of the Jacobian matrix
234
dynamics
436
– accuracy
62
– assessment
616
– canonical equation
38
– closed-loop
57
– forward
38, 54
– inverse
38, 51, 197, 208, 245, 265
– inverse control
167
– model
983, 985
– real-time implementation
62
– software
63
– symbolic simpliﬁcation
63
E
early device
1562
earth-centred, earth-ﬁxed
703
earthmoving automation
1403,
1438
echo waveform
– coding
719
– processing
721
eddy current
– damper
486
– metal detector
1415
education
1006
educational
– evaluation
1943
– robotics
1932
effector-space
348
efﬁciency
792
ego-motion
92
elastic
– band
868, 1118
– joint
416
– joint torque
1688
– roadmap
868, 963
– strip
868, 963
elastostatic performance
396
electric support measure
1488
electrical
– discharge machining
641
– master–slave manipulator
1419
– stimulation
1561
electroactive polymer
81, 485
electroadhesion
531
electrocardiogram
1517
electroencephalography
1056, 1574
electrolytic corrosion
568
electromotive force
79
electromyography
1561, 1573,
1671, 1718, 1893
electron microscope (EM)
636
electron-beam
638
– induced deposition
653
electronic speed controller
1235
electronics controller unit
1335
electrooptical
1485
electrorheological
486
electrostatic
715
– actuator
483
electrostrictive
484
element momentum theory
600
elementary operator
1823
elevation model
756

Index
2204
Index
embedded
– computer
1259
– intelligence
1575
embodiment
1745, 1801
emotion theory
1769
emotional
– empathy
1769
– support
1774
emotion-based interaction
1768
enabling technology
1566, 1606
encoder
1008
end of arm
261
end-effector
– based therapy robot
1552
– motion
163
endoluminal
– robot
1539
– surgery
1539
energy
– based function
966
– bounding algorithm
1034
– density
570
– dissipation
485
– efﬁciency
481, 1847
– leak
1013
– packet
1035
– stability margin
1189
– stability margin (ESM)
420
engagement generator
1752
enhanced horizon control
1447
enterprise resource planning
1396
entertainment
1006
entropy
989
– minimization
990
envelope display
1775
environment
– compliant
204, 211
– cultural
1747
– disturbance
1207
– model
91
– physical
1747
– social
1747
– virtual
1004, 1013
epipolar constraint
768
epistemological adequacy
321
equation of motion
160
– impulse
47
– joint-space
45
– Lagrangian
46
– operational-space
45
– rigid body
43
– spatial
43
error
– convergence
186
– correction
861
escapement cam
532
essential matrix
768
estimated inertia
174
estimation
89
– linear model
95
– process
94
ethernet
1046
ethical issues
1577, 1782
ethnography
1944
Euler
– angle
13, 984, 1205
– equation
597
European Conference on Educational
Robotics
1936
European Octopus
468
European robotic arm
1333
event calculus
324
evidential reasoning
830
evolution
– artiﬁcial
1871
– Hebbian learning
1869
– learning rule
1875–1877
– of learning
1862
– robotics software platform
580
evolutionary
– algorithm
1857, 1871, 1880
– biology
1846
– robotics
1851, 1862
evolvable hardware
1879
evolving morphologies for
human–robot symbiotic interaction
1565
excavator
1421
execution
– monitoring
287
– support language
279
exoskeleton
1004
– based therapy robot
1553
– for human performance
augmentation
1724
expandable polystyrene
568
expanding role
1203
expectation maximization
94, 751,
781, 1069, 1674, 1898
exploratory procedure
1005, 1006
explosive
– disposal
1025
– ordnance disposal
1411, 1412
– vapor detector
1416
extensible
– hyper text markup language
1056
– markup language
283, 1056,
1452, 1754
external force
936
external velocity manipulability
ellipsoid
942
exteroception
89
extrapolated center of mass
1134
extrastriate body part area
1921
extravehicular activity
1027, 1332,
1718
extreme locomotion
524
F
fabrication method
538
facade
– operation
1402
– painting robot
1402
facial recognition
1495
factor
– damping
224
– of safety
566
Fagg–Arbib–Rizzolatti–Sakata
model
1899
false
– belief task
1771
– range
710
family of integrated rapid response
equipment
1492
fast
– forward
338
– Fourier transform
263, 724
– simultaneous localization and
mapping
1086
fault detection
1218, 1256
feasibility of compliant motion
865
feasible
– minimum buffering time
1048
– velocity
220
feature
– coding
782
– creep
516
– extraction
90, 780
– frame
206
– selection
790, 1867, 1868
feedback
– control
1158
– control and planning
866
– dynamic linearization
256
– haptic
1004, 1540
– linearizability
1107

Index
2205
Index
– linearization
168, 253
– motion planning
866, 962
– of motor variable
249
– planning
866
– requirement
849
– vibration
1014
– vibrotactile
1014
feedforward
792
– feedback control
256
– motion
211
ﬁber to the home
1047
ﬁber-optic
– communication
576
– gyro
572, 696
ﬁber-reinforced
– plastics
411
– prepreg
537
ﬁeld
– communication
1407
– of view
1752
– robotics
1392, 1453
ﬁelded unmanned aerial vehicle
1484
ﬁeld-emission SEM
652
ﬁeld-programmable gate array
578,
728, 746, 1358, 1652, 1879
ﬁltering
821
ﬁne motion planning
862
ﬁne-grained categorization
790
ﬁnger
1017
– pad
1015
– tip
996
ﬁnite element
1012
– analysis
402
– method
567, 1191
ﬁnite-state acceptor
280
ﬁreproof coating
1402
ﬁrewall
1046
ﬁrst-order predicate logic
319
Fisher vector
783
ﬁsh-like swimming motion
531
ﬁxed-point stabilization
1159
ﬁxture
– and contact
895
– virtual
1011
ﬂapper sizing
618
ﬂapping
– dynamics
615
– ﬂight
1850
– frequency
618
– insect wing
617
– robot
617
– wing
528, 617
– wing unmanned aerial system
593
ﬂash LIDAR
741
ﬂat hierarchy
1894
ﬂeet management
1437
ﬂexible
– based manipulator system
1342
– link transmission
451
– manufacturing
1390
– manufacturing system
1303
– part model
783
– robot
503
FlexPicker
388
ﬂexure-based transmission system
529
ﬂight
– control-unit
623
– path matrix
1230
– performance analysis
603
ﬂoating-base
24, 47
– system
1669
ﬂocking
1279
ﬂow
– feature
786
– property
596
ﬂuid dynamic
596
focus of attention
1752
foliage penetration (FOPEN)
1488
food handling
1305
foot rotation indicator
1135
foraging
1279
force
954
– based programming
1703
– calculation
1010
– closure
856, 1129
– control
1007
– hybrid motion control
193, 207
– position control
208
– reﬂecting teleoperation
1336
– reﬂection
1025, 1420
– scaling
1030
– sensing resistor
677
– sensor
1689
– sensor (fs)
435, 1009
– sensor information ﬂow
680
– shading
1011
– spatial
40
– torque sensor
193, 674
– velocity control
208
foreground–background
segmentation
784
forestry robotics
1365
forgetting factor
184
form
– closure
882, 954
– of human
1831
formal method
1270
formation
1279
– contact
863
formative evaluation
1943
forward
– dynamics
1670
– instantaneous kinematics
31
– kinematics
27, 430, 1010
– looking infrared
1486
– model
348, 349
free
– ﬂoating manipulator
1343
– ﬂoating robot differential ﬂatness
1347
– modes of joint
21
– space voxel
752
– vibration
398
Frénet frame
1161
frequency
– converter
571
– modulation continuous wave
741
– shift keying
578
friction
201, 1008
– cone
884
– Coulomb
884
– damper
486
– limit surface
892
– model
1011
– modulation
1016
– stir welding
1307
frictional
– ambiguity
887
– inconsistency
887
Froude
– model
595
– number
421
fuel cell
569
full Bayesian model
783
full-state feedback
252
function approximation
367
functional
– electric stimulation
1553, 1714
– limitation
1567
– magnetic resonance imaging
1563, 1743, 1922
– neural stimulation
1552, 1575
funnel
962
fused deposition modeling
539
fusing air vehicle
841
fusion primitive
308

Index
2206
Index
fuzzy
– logic
829
– system behavior-based
310, 311
G
gait
472
– sensitivity norm
420
– training robot
1564
galvanic corrosion
568
gantry
1306
gareki model
1189
gastrointestinal endoscopy
1539
Gator tech smart house
1612
Gaussian
– minimum shift keying
578
– mixture model
783
– noise
984
– process
966
– process clasiﬁcation
966
Gauss–Markov estimate
128
Gauss–Newton nonlinear estimation
110
gaze
1744
– directed
1752
– following
1752
– mutual
1752
gecko
– adhesive
534
– adhesive system
530
– inspired adhesive
534
gender
1743
gendered interface
517
general
– contact model
868
– packet radio service
1508
generalized
– force
1207
– grounding graph
1748
– Jacobian matrix
1344
– Jacobian matrix (GJM)
1343
– least-squares estimate
128
– principal component analysis
94
generalized-inertia ellipsoid
394
generative model
781
generator of modules
281
genetic algorithm
515, 1858
geographic information system
626, 1484, 1493
geometric
– intersection data
1508
– Jacobian
219
– synthesis
436
geometrical reproduction
449
geon structural description
1916
geostationary Earth orbit
1334
glass-ﬁber reinforced plastic
567
glide ratio
606
global
– asymptotic stability
166
– conditioning index
395
– localization
985
– motion plan
868
– motion planner
962
– regression
355
– task planning
1702
– uncertainty
985
global navigation satellite system
703, 1212, 1367, 1442, 1506
global positioning system
4, 90,
571, 592, 670, 694, 756, 835,
1084, 1180, 1211, 1226, 1264,
1367, 1394, 1420, 1436, 1466,
1485, 1503, 1602, 1961
goal as parallel programs
280
goal-contact relaxation
863
goal-frame set
390
golgi
– cell
1895
– tendon organ
1005, 1893
Gough–Stewart platform
400, 427
GPS intelligent buoys
575
GRAB algorithm
988
gradient estimator
365
gradient-based win or learn fast
1278
grail
807
grammar
791
grand challenge
1557, 1566
graphical
– model
99, 325
– processing unit
752, 1094, 1541
– user interface
831, 1214, 1653,
1939
– user interface (GUI)
1653
grapple ﬁxture
1332
grasping
858, 901, 953, 1483
– affordance
967
– compliant grasp
910
– contact model
904
– controllable force and velocity
907
– Coulomb friction model
917
– defective grasp
908
– design considerations
910
– desirable properties
909
– dynamic equation
906
– dynamics and equilibrium
906
– example
920
– force closure
917
– form closure
913
– friction model
917
– frictional form closure
918
– grasp classiﬁcation
908
– grasp matrix and hand Jacobian
903
– hyperstatic
909
– indeterminate
908
– matrix
936
– model
902
– of a tumbling target
1336
– planar force closure test
920
– planar simpliﬁcation of contact
models
906
– planning method
988
– quasistatic equation
907
– redundant
908
– restraint analysis
912
– rigid body velocity kinematics
902
– Salisbury hand
902
– sequence
453
– velocity kinematics
903
Grassmann geometry
433
gravity
1209
– cancellation
251
– compensation
249, 435
– force
160
greenhouse
1368
grid ﬁlter
985
grid-based model
105
gripper
1305
Gröbner bases
430
ground
1008
– based augmentation system
703
– conditions
1188
– control station
1492
– detection
1198
– fault monitoring device
571
– moving target indicator
1488
– penetrating radar
1415
– vehicle
841
– vehicle (GV)
1485
group behavior
1259
guaranteed recursive adaptive
bounding
988
guarded motion
988
guided exploration
993
gyroscope
1337

Index
2207
Index
H
Haar measure
149
Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman
177
Hamilton–Jacobi–Isaac
178
hand
– arm system
1689
– exoskeleton
1717
– eye locomotion
1339
handheld standoff mine detection
system
1415
handling
1305
– remote
1412, 1420
hands-on cooperative control
1529,
1536
handyboard
1938, 1939
haptic
1003
– device
1004, 1017
– feedback
1004, 1025, 1540
– interaction point
1009
– interface
1003, 1426
– loop
1004
– paddle
1009
– rendering
1004, 1017
– temperature display
1017
harmonic drive
83, 240, 1303
Harvard micro ﬂy
537
haul truck
1436
haulage
1436
Hayati parameter
113
hazard avoidance
1341
head injury criterion
1685
head-mounted display
1425
health care monitoring
1576
health monitoring
1612
– sensor
576
HeartLander
1539
Heathkit Hero-1
1936
heavy payload manipulator
1400
helical joint
22
helicopter-type UAV
614
Hemisson robot
1937
Hertzian contact
890
hexamethyldisilazane
639
hexapod robot
1846, 1859, 1880
hidden Markov model
717, 966,
1672, 1693, 1824, 1905
hierarchical
1255
– agglomerative clustering
781
– attentive multiple models for
execution and recognition
1771
– communication model
1675
– hidden Markov model
1674
– task network
287, 338
high data rate digital subscriber line
1047
high deﬁnition
573, 1427, 1606
high safety goal
1116
high safety wide region
1116
high tech automotive system
1505
high-performance computing
1054
high-precision seeding
1371
high-resolution radar
1488
high-resolution transmission electron
microscope
652
high-speed chronometer
740
high-speed gripper
536
highway, automated
1520
hinge offset
612
histogram
786
– ﬁlter
985
– intersection kernel
782
– of oriented features
967
– of oriented gradient
780
holonomic
– constraint
202
– manipulator
1162
home
– automation
1576
– based rehabilitation
1576
– point
983
– surface
983
homogeneous
1268
– space
394
– transformation
16
homography
809
Hooke’s law
1011, 1012
horizontal brickwork panel
1396
hot zone
1463
hotel load
570
Hough transform
784, 1307
HRI operating system
1753
Hubble space telescope
1355
human
1567
– arm-like manipulator
218
– body pose estimation
784
– competition
1620
– control
1004
– culture
1648
– entertainment
1648
– grasping
955
– hand
448
– interface
1491
– motion segmentation
1672
– operator
841, 1013
– out of the loop control
1474
– skeleton model
1669
– social response
1773
– strategy
1667
– subject experiment
1786
– surrogate
1648
human motion data
1674
human–computer interaction
1006,
1612, 1742, 1809, 1943
human-inspired robot competition
1621
human-in-the-loop
1023
human–machine
– cooperative system
1533
– interaction
1380
– interface
1483, 1492
humanoid
48, 1645
– abstract task speciﬁcation
1654
– automated motion planning
1654
– bipedal locomotion
1650
– body part
1649
– carrying of objects
1652
– coarse whole-body motion
1653
– dynamic balancing
1655
– dynamically stable motion
1654
– expressive behavior
1659
– expressive morphology
1659
– extension for complex tasks
1657
– force/moment controller
1651
– history
1648
– human environment
1646
– human example
1646
– human interaction
1647
– human-like walking
1651
– immitation
1649
– localization of obstacles
1652
– locomotion
1650
– mechanics
1649
– morphological communication
1659
– motion capture system
1653
– motion using GUI
1653
– multiple contacts
1657
– navigation among obstacles
1652
– pleasing mirror
1646
– pushing of objects
1652
– realtime walking pattern
1650
– robot
481, 1668
– running
1651
– sensor
1649
– understanding intelligence
1646
– whole-body activity
1653
– whole-body control
1658
humanoid communication
– auditory scene analysis
1660
– developmental robotics
1661
– expression
1660

Index
2208
Index
– interpretation of human expression
1660
– locus of attention
1659
– multimodal perception
1660
– physical interaction
1661
– posture
1660
– saccade
1659
– smooth pursuit
1660
– speech recognition
1660
– vergence
1660
humanoid motion
– multiple contacts
1658
– stability
1658
humanoid robot project
409, 1647
human–robot
– augmentation
1714
– collaboration
1314
– communication
1776
– interaction
310, 311, 1024, 1460,
1474, 1675, 1741, 1765, 1799,
1831
– ratio
1474
hybrid
– assistive limb
1726
– behavior-based architecture
311
– chain-lattice
516
– dynamics
1130
– force/motion control
193, 207
– fuel/battery
570
– position/force control
944
– robot
556
– system
301, 310
– system manipulation planning
854
Hybrid III dummy
1689
hydrodynamic
1207
– damping
1208
– modeling
1210
hyper-redundant
– mechanism
464
– robot
218
– structure
468
I
ICP algorithm
747
identiﬁability
122
identiﬁer
996
ideomotor principle
1903
illumination scenario
1511
illustrator cue
1776
image
– acquisition
624
– gradient
786
– pyramid
782
image-based visual servo
797
– control
796
– cylindrical coordinates
801
– interaction matrix
798
– stability analysis
800
– stereo cameras
801
ImageNet
789
imitation
1901
iMobot
516
impact
47
– dynamics
1349
– scenario
1681
impedance
488
– control
193, 198, 239, 258, 946,
1335, 1351
– controller
495
– matching
1351
implicit shape model
784
importance
– density
827
– sampling
98, 985
improvised explosive device
1414,
1968
incremental
– evolution
1876
– teaching method
1829
independent
– component analysis
1895
– joint control
163
– likelihood pool
820
indexed time table
281
indirectly actuated state
491
industrial
– description
1390
– manipulator
584
– robotics
1301
– standard architecture
576
inertia
1207
– articulated-body
54
– estimation
995
– matrix
160
– navigation system
573
– operational-space
56
– spatial
42
inertial
– measurement unit
92, 412, 571,
670, 698, 756, 813, 1179, 1195,
1212, 1226, 1246, 1449, 1507,
1611, 1809
– navigation
1506
– navigation system
571, 705, 1443
– parameter estimation
117
– sensor
572
– space
1343
inference
320, 787, 985
– Bayesian
325
inferior olive
1895
inferotemporal cortex
1899, 1917
inferring belief
1771
inﬁnite impulse response
1490
information
– and communication technology
1396, 1941
– ethics
1957
– ﬁlter
826
informational
– support
1772
information-gathering grasp
991
infrared
648, 676, 746, 835, 1485,
1593, 1938
– detector
1415
inherent instability
621
inherently cooperative
1278
initialization
787
injury measure
1685
inner loop
– control
170
innovation
626, 824
input-output-to-state stability
166
input-to-state stability
166
insect-inspired robot
1849
insertion task
861
in-site actuation
451
in-situ resource utilization
1452
instability
1012
instantaneous
– allocation
1276
– center of curvature
694
– center of rotation
551
– forward kinematics
31
– inverse kinematics
32
instrumental
– support
1772
– variable
131
instrumented logical sensor system
833
integral control action
1167
integrated
– chip
291
– circuit
641
– development environment
1940
– factory
1390
– proximity model
984
– robotized
1393
– robotized construction site
1389
– services digital network
1047

Index
2209
Index
integrating planning and execution
288
integration
620, 1283
intellectual property right
1612
intelligent
– assisting device
1730
– autonomous system
1714
– multimode transit system
1520
– wheelchair system
1570
intentional
1254
intention-based model
1753
interaction
954
– agent
1753
– control
192
– framework
1750
– modality
1757
– rhythm
1746
– unit
1750
interaction dynamics
– behavior-based
305–307
interaction matrix
796
– approximation
798
– direct estimation
803
– image-based visual servo
798
– pose-based visual servo
804
interactive perception
970
interaural
– amplitude difference
722
– time difference
722
interest operator
780
interface
848
– contact
889
– deﬁnition language
283
– design
514
– for demonstration
1825
– haptic
1003, 1426
interference rejection
726
interferometric ﬁber-optic gyro
572
interferometric SAR
1488
interior ﬁnishing robot
1400
intermediate haptic interaction point
1011
internal
– dynamics
247
– force
937
– friction angle
1353
– velocity manipulation ellipsoid
943
International Conference on
Advanced Robotics
3
international space station
1027,
1332
international submarine engineering
583
International Symposium of Robotics
Research
3
International Symposium on Micro
Mechatronics and Human Science
1936
internet
1049
– communication
1034
– communications engine
283, 580
– engineering task force
1508
– protocol
1046, 1508
interoperability
1392, 1405
interpenetration
1012
interphalangeal
1718
interprocess communication
279,
289, 579
intersection operation
429
interval
– algebra
328
– analysis
430
– calculus
829
– programming
580
intrinsic tactile
455
invariance
202, 783
inverse
– instantaneous kinematics
32
– model
348, 349
– reinforcement learning
1831
– socially assistive robotics
1488
inverse differential kinematics
– least-squares solution
222
– weighted damped least-squares
solution
234
inverse dynamics
51, 197, 208,
245, 265
– control
167, 357
inverse kinematics
29, 430, 857,
1317
– algorithm
225
– computation
1669
ionic polymer-metal composite
485, 532
isomorphic conﬁguration
516
isotropic conﬁguration
221
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
1689
i-swarm project in Karlsruhe
1261
iterated extended Kalman ﬁlter
98
iterative closest point algorithm
94,
747, 1092, 1449
iterative linear quadratic regulator
502
iteratively reweighted least square
100
J
jackknife effect
1163
Jacobian
31, 47, 71, 162, 851
– analytic
219
– condition number
393
– dynamically-consistent inverse
47
– ellipsoid
393
– extended
228
– geometric
219
– loop
59
– matrix
113, 935, 1010
– task
219
– time-derivative
396
jamming
888
Japanese experiment module remote
manipulator system
1334
jigsaw positioning system
1442
jogging companion
1603
Johnson Space Center
1776
joint
– action
1749, 1785
– activity
1753
– architecture for unmanned systems
283
– attention
1752
– coordinate frame
48
– directors of laboratories
831
– drive gain
121
– elasticity
241
– intention theory
1750
– model
48
– parameter
26
– persistent goal
1753
– probability distribution
820
– reference
1770
– torque
119, 1671
– torque feedback
252
– torque sensor
193, 254, 454
joint-space
1010
– control
161
– inertia matrix
39, 55, 395
– stiffness matrix
397
– trajectory
180
jumping microrobot
533
just noticeable difference
1005
just-in-time
1397
K
Kalman ﬁlter
97, 129, 625, 823,
1070, 1188, 1610
– unscented
1445

Index
2210
Index
Karel the robot
1932
key-poses
1654
Khepera
1858, 1871, 1937
Kilobot
516
Kinect
1669
kinematic
427, 1010
– chain topology
388
– conditioning
1007
– constraint
192, 549
– contact
880
– coupling
1029
– dissimilarity
1036
– duality
889
– equation
71
– inverse
29, 430, 857, 1317
– loop
39, 48
– redundancy
217
– singularity
220
– structure
993
– tree
39, 51, 121, 784
kinematic algorithms
– inverse
225
kinematic calibration
111
– closed loop
113
– index
116
– open loop
113
– sensor index
116
kinesthetic
1003
– display
1014
kinetic energy
43
– of motor
242
– recovery system
485
kinodynamic planning
143
k-mean
781
k-means clustering
101
k-nearest neighbor
749
knowledge
– assertional
323
– base update
324
– representation
320
– representation (KR)
320
– terminological
323
Koryu robot
464
Kullback–Leibler divergence
990
L
Lagrange
– dynamics
160
– equation
243
– formulation
46
– multiplier
202, 1011
Lagrangian
241
– dynamics
1127
– formulation
515
laminar damper module
487
landmine
1415, 1417, 1418
LANdroid
1472
lane
– changing
1516
– keeping
1515
– tracking
1509
Laplacian of Gaussian
745
LaSalle’s theorem
165, 250
laser
– distance sensor
1607
– imaging radar
1488
– measurement system
742
– radar
740
– ranging
1341
– scanner
92
laser-based SLAM
1610
latent
– Dirichlet allocation
781
– support vector machine
787
lateral
– geniculate nucleus
1917
– intraparietal sulcus
1906
– slip
1188
lattice reconﬁguration
517
lawn mowing
1602
layer
789
layered
– architecture
1257
– molding
536
lead lanthanum zirconate titanate
484
lead zirconate titanate
484, 636
leader–follower
943
leading edge vortex
617
leaf belief
991
learning
301, 787, 964, 1278, 1802
– and adaptation
1702
– applied to ground robots
1486
– architecture
351
– behavior-based
302
– by demonstration
308
– compound action
1828
– control
184
– control for assembly
861
– feature
967
– from demonstration
1824
– from history
308
– from human demonstration
1821
– in mobile manipulation
968
– individual motion
1827
– reinforced
306
learning from humans
1831
– algorithm
1827
– correspondence problem
1825
– evaluation metric
1824
– history
1822
– imitate
1824
– key issues
1824
least squares estimation
110
leg–arm hybrid robot
419
legged crawling
525
legged locomotion
959
– bio-inspired
1846
– model
1844
– stability and gait
1846
legged robot
1471
leg–wheel hybrid robot
418
Leonardo Da Vinci
1205
level of biomimicry
525
Lewellyn’s absolute stability
criterion
1013
LIDAR sensor
1198
Lie algebra rank condition
1104
Lie-group-algebraic method
429
life-cycle-costing
1304
life-like robot
525
lift force
1209
lifting line method
599
lift-to-drag
1485
light detection and ranging
670,
740, 1189, 1443
light-emitting diode
741, 1521,
1607, 1939
lighter-than-air system
593
light-weight
– communications and marshalling
579
– manipulator
240
– robot
240, 481, 1684
– structure
1687
likelihood function
820
Likert
1944
limb prosthetic device
1574
limbed system
408
limit cycle
1132, 1147
– walking
413
linear
– complementarity problem
1131
– constraint satisfaction program
887
– control design
256
– elasticity
241
– impedance
493

Index
2211
Index
– program
915, 1146
– quadratic Gaussian
807
– quadratic regulator
271, 496, 611,
1140
– temporal logic
328
– variable differential transformer
117
linear inverted pendulum model
414
linearization feedback
168, 253
linearizing coordinates
254
line-of-sight
1492
link
1939
– equation
243
– parameter
26
linkage model
– virtual
945
liquid-crystal display
289, 1768
lithium
– polymer
624
– primary battery
569
livestock
– breeding
1380
– exploitation
1381
– harvesting
1381
– nurturing
1380
Llewellyn criterion
1032
load
– capacity
68
– distribution
941
– haul-dump
1435
– parameter
119
– sharing coefﬁcient
941
local
– and small-time controllability
1103
– area network
514, 577, 1046,
1329, 1492
– autonomy
1027
– learning method
356
– minimum
866
– potential function
867
– product-of-exponential
514
– regression
356
– steering method
1105
locality constrained linear coding
782
localization
1216, 1265, 1445
– map-based
1445
– sound source
311
locomotion
470
– mechanism
1598
– performance
526
logic
– based reasoning
321
– description
321
– ﬁrst order predicate
321
– propositional
322
logical sensor system
833
logistic regression
966
long-baseline
575
– system
1216
longitudinal stability margin
419
long-range cruising AUV
569
long-term
– behavior
1805
– depression
1896
– interaction
1766, 1779
– social interaction
1805
lookahead
991
loop
– closure
430
– closure constraint
58
– haptic
1004
loss function
788
low
– Earth orbit
1334
– level control
1702
– power consumption
1687
– uncertainty
985
low-cost sensor
1594
lower
– extremity nonanthropomorphic
robot
1566
– extremity powered exoskeleton
1565
– pair
21
Lunokhod
1336
Lyapunov function
249–251
M
Mach model
595
machine
– interface
1491
– learning
1823
– safety standard
1314
– tool
439
– vision
1446, 1867
macro arm
1342
macro-micro manipulator
1334
magazining
1395
magnetic resonance imaging
1528,
1537, 1685
magnetoencephalography
1563
magnetorheological
486, 1426
magnetostrictive
484
Mahalanobis distance
753, 984
maintenance robot
1402
manage attention
1757
maneuverability
606
manifold
– learning
791
– particle ﬁlter
988
manipulability
1008, 1345
– dynamic
1008
– measure
221
manipulation
449, 470, 680, 847,
848, 953, 981, 1217
– admissible conﬁguration
855
– cooperative
1280
– grasp conﬁguration
856
– grasp planning
869
– inverse kinematics
857
– multiple part
870
– multiple robot
870
– nonprehensile
870
– pick-and-place task
854
– planning
145
– stable part conﬁguration
856
– task speciﬁcation
856
– three DOF manipulator example
856
– transit path
855
– workspace goal
858
manipulation aid
1568
– mobile autonomous system
1569
– wheelchair manipulator
1569
manipulator
– constraint
865
– cooperative
933
– Jacobian
495
– stiffness
396
manmade
– disaster
1463
– event
1467
man-packable UAV
1465
manual
– control
1024
– ﬂight
621
ManuBuild
1392
manufacturing
1006, 1302
– and positioning
1398
– process
1302
map
– digital
1507
– geometric
1067
– grid
1067

Index
2212
Index
mapping
756, 1216, 1608
– moving object
970
– passive
175
marine robotics
1203
Markov
– decision process
324, 361, 994,
1754
– decision process (MDP)
1270
– process
983
– random ﬁeld
772
Marr–Albus model
1895
Mars environmental survey
1340
Mars exploration rover
1341
Mars Pathﬁnder
1340
Mars rover sample return
1339
Mary
– phase shift keying
578
– quadrature amplitude modulation
578
masonry wall erecting robot
1399
mass modal
263
Massachusetts Institute of
Technology
1126
mass-spring system
994
master–slave
– manipulator
1419, 1425
– system
1024
material handling robotics
1403
maximally stable extremal region
781
maximum a posteriori
96, 785,
1491
maximum likelihood estimate
95,
721, 1265
max-pooling
783
M-blocks
516
McKibben muscle
1898
mean time between failures
85,
1304
mean-shift
784
measurement
– and signatures intelligence
1488
– model
983, 984
mechanical
488
– adjustable compliance and
controllable equilibrium position
actuator
487
– impedance adjuster
487
– interface
517
– motion capture
1668
mechanism
1776
– isotropy
1008
– passive
1424
– synthesis
429
– toothless gear
532
– used for HRI
1783
mechanization
1390
mechanoreception
674, 1016
mechatronic robot
1687
medial intraparietal sulcus
1906
medial temporal area
1921
medical
– image segmentation
1534
– robot
998, 1528
– simulation
1006
memory
1757
– alloy
484
mental inference
1773
mental model
1741, 1757
– robot
1742
mental perspective-taking
1771
mesencephalic locomotor
528
mesencephalic locomotor region
528
M-estimator
100
metal
– corrosion
567
– matrix composite
485, 567
metrics
1275
micro
– aerial vehicle
536
– arm
1342
– robot
1850
microcomplex
1895
microelectromechanical system
(MEMS)
81, 265, 404, 483, 533,
572, 632, 675, 696, 716, 814,
1016, 1226, 1274, 1449, 1539
microfabrication
638
micromechanical ﬂying insect
537
micromouse competition
1618
microrobot technology
525
Microsoft robotics developers studio
580
microspine array
530
microsurgery robot
1538
microsystem technology
647
microzone
1895
middle-size league
1624
middleware
283, 579
– for robot
580
millibot
518
millimeter/centimeter scale crawler
526
mindreading
1770, 1772
mine crawler robot
1482
mine-permissible robot
1482
minima-free potential function
867
minimally invasive surgery
1531
minimum
– description length
784
– mean-square error
96
– shift keying
578
mining
1433, 1447, 1452
– coal
1447
– disaster
1467
– dragline
1441
– ocean ﬂoor
1452
– open-pit
1441
– robotics
1433
– shovel
1440
– stages of
1434
– surface
1434
– system
1450
– underground
1434
mirror
– image motion enabler
1556
– image movement enhancer
1561
– neuron
1771, 1899
– neuron system
1900
– system
1771, 1887, 1903
misconception
– behavior-based
303
mission
625
– control system
1214
– oriented operating suite
580
mixed model
350
mixture model
787
mobile
– base system
1333
– beacon
1462
– detection assessment and response
system
1491
– domestic robotic
1592
– manipulation
951
– manipulator
959
– navigation
1486
– platform
958
– repeater
1472
mobile robot
1253, 1310
– competition
1460
– nonholonomic
1159
– telerobotics
1036
mobility
58, 548
– and manipulation
852
– degree of
551
– equation
116
– restriction
552
mobility aid
– exoskeleton
1571

Index
2213
Index
– walking assistance system
1571
– wheelchair navigation system
1570
modal
– mass
263
– stiffness
264
– vectors
398
mode
986
– contact
882
– identiﬁcation and recovery
281
– shape
470
model
– based controller
471
– based method
346
– behavioral
1747
– checking
323
– cognitive
1747, 1749
– contact
879
– developmental
1747
– dialog-based
1749
– driven engineering
293
– environmental
91
– learning
1756
– of emotion
1768
– physical
1749
– predictive control
349, 622, 1137,
1236
– property
1210
– reference adaptive control
176,
349
– uncertainty
369, 1192
model learning
348
– architecture
351
– method
354
modeling
606, 1205
– actuator
487
– biological system
1844
– deformable terrain
1188
– ﬁrst-order form closure
914
– of locomotion
472
– rubble
1189
– soft robot
490
– tracked vehicle
1195
modular
– block
1395
– manipulator
513
– mining system
1436
– robot conﬁguration
514
modularity
1395
modulation friction
1016
modulation-based range sensor
741
molecular biology
1006
molten carbonate fuel cell
569
moment
606
– labeling
885
– representation
597
momentum
– conservation
596, 1344
– spatial
41, 42
– theory
600
monitor
288
monitoring system
1576
monolithic fabrication
538
Monte Carlo method
364, 986
moon buggy
1336
Moore–Penrose inverse
169
mossy ﬁber
1895
motion
– capture
1669
– category
1673
– constraint
849
– effect
728
– generation
960
– human-like style
1667
– instability
621
– primitive
1673
– requirement
961
– transmission
449
– whole-body
1144
motion control
160, 1157, 1317
– performance
1188
motion execution
– compliant
865
motion planning
470, 961, 1141
– compliant
862
– feedback
866
– feedback motion planning
866
– problem
434
motion-oriented operating system
1214
motivated behavioral architecture
311
motor
– equation
243
– evoked potential
1904
– feedback
249
– neuron
1671
mouse
1004
move value estimation for robot
teams
310
movement therapy
1558
moving observation
– of a corner
729
– of a plane
729
– of an edge
730
moving plate
400
moving plate (MP)
389
moving target indicator
1487
multiappendage robotic system
403
multiarm system
943
multicellular organism
1843
multiﬁngered manipulation
938
multifunctional satellite
augmentation system
703
multihypothesis tracking
1511
multijoint
– bending
531
– model
164
multilateral telerobotics
1037
multilevel surface map
757
multimode transit
1520
multipass effect of wheels
1188
multiphalanx hand exoskeleton
1717
multiple
– beam scanning LIDAR
741
– input–multiple-output
173, 254,
610, 1237
– kernel learning
783
– layered composite
538
– master multiple-slave
1037
– master single-slave
1037
– material
536
– model switching adaptive estimator
271
– operator multiple robot
1044
– operator single robot
1044
– paired forward-inverse model
1897
– reﬂection
717
– resource host architecture
1492
– underwater vehicle
1219
– view registration
753
multipulse sonar
726
multipurpose system
1843
multiresolution mapping
970
multirobot
1254, 1281
– coordination
281
– path planning
1281
– system
304, 514
– system behavior-based
305–307
– task
1276
– task allocation
1276
multisensor
– data fusion
819
– environment modeling
835
– fusion architecture
831
– gripper
1334
– system control dynamic
835
multistep planning
990
multitarget observation
1281

Index
2214
Index
multitask
1276
multitracked vehicle
1197
muscle
– length
1671
– like module
485
– spindle
1005
– tension
1671
musculoskeletal model
1670, 1671
musculoskeletal walking model
1720
mutual belief
1786
N
naive Bayes
781
nanoelectromechanical system
633
nanorobotic manipulator
651
NASA/NBS standard reference
model
281
national livestock identiﬁcation
scheme
1380
national qualifying event
1633
national robotics initiative
1567
nationwide different GPS system
704
natural
– constraint
205
– disaster
1463
– frequency
199, 260, 398
– human cue
1757
– machine motion initiative
503
– muscle
482
– oriﬁce transluminal surgery
1531
navigation
756, 1445, 1849
– and obstacle avoidance help
1570
– function
867
– in rat and robot
1890
– underground
1445
nearness diagram navigation
1115
nearness diagram navigation (ND)
1112
needle placement robot
1537
negative information
985
negotiation
1276
Nerd Herd
1255
Nereus
576
network
– data distribution service
283
– mobility
1508
– partitioning
1267
– real-time kinematic
704
– server
1048
– topology control
1267
network data distribution service
283
networked
1253
– infomechanical systems
1265
– mobile robot
1258
– robot
1258, 1259, 1472
neural interface
1574
neural network
789, 1858, 1879
– GasNet
1861, 1872
– neural oscillator
1860
– recurrent neural network
1866,
1867
– spiking neural network
1871
neurobiological system
1888
neurocontrol
1894
neuroethology
1887
neuromorphic engineering
1849
neuron
789
neuroprosthetics
1852
neurorobotics
1888
neutral buoyancy
1335
Newton–Euler
– equation
44, 117
– formulation
515
Newton–Raphson
431
– algorithm
431
N-gram model
1673
nickel metal hydride battery
412
NIST response robot evaluation
exercises
1477
nonaccidental property
1916
nonacoustic sensor
572
noncontact therapy robot
1553
nonholonomic
1344
– constraint
1102
– mobile robot
1159
– planning
143
nonholonomy
1128
nonlinear
– dynamic inversion
611
– feedback
254
– force function
488
– mechanical system
488
– optimal control
177
– optimization convergence
1347
– programming problem
1346
nonmaxima suppression
787
nonminimum-phase
248
nonnegative matrix factorization
1895
nonneural element
1844
nonparametric method
985
nonprehensile manipulation
879,
896
non-RT thread (real-time thread)
581
nonslip condition
549
nontangential proper part
331
nonuniform rational B-spline
1012
nonverbal
– communication
1775
– cue
1752
norm
– communication
1744
– social
1744
normal distributions transform
970
normal vector
1012
normalized energy stability margin
(NESM)
1197
normalized ESM
1189
nuclear
– decommissioning
1421
– magnetic resonance
1965
– operation
1025
– radiation
1412, 1421
null-space
– projection
851, 852
– velocity
221
numerical control
1313
nursery and greenhouse (N&G)
1377
nurturing
1380
Nyquist criteria
1013
O
Oberon
1212
object
– anchoring
321
– class detection
786
– class recognition
779
– detection
786
– identity resolution
339
– learning
1919
– localization
982
– part
791
– recognition
1917
– reorientation
991
– representation
1915, 1921
– request broker
283
– shape matching
996
– transportation
1280
objectness
789
Oblix/Mogura mechanism
464
observability index
111, 126

Index
2215
Index
observation
– class ROV
571
– update
821
obstacle
758
– region
136
obstacle avoidance
470
– path modiﬁcation
867
– problem
1111
obstacle restriction method
1113
obstacle restriction method (ORM)
1111
occupancy grid map
993
occupancy map
970
oceanic engineering
1203
octarm manipulator
467
octopod
439
octopus-arm
466
odometry
756, 1337, 1450
ofﬂine programming
1308
off-policy method
362
off-read locomotion
1338
off-road vehicle
1190
offsite robotics
1395
olive
1895
omnidirectional
– camera
92
– robot with steerable wheel
555
omnimobile robot
554
on board unit
1508
on real-time communication
1471
onboard autonomous science
investigation system
282
onboard integration
623
onboard power source
569
one-step lookahead
989
one-way bearing
533
online
– gravity compensation
251
– programming
1317
onsite robotics
1399
on-the-ﬂy target classiﬁcation
726
ontological category
1744
ontology
323
– based uniﬁed robot knowledge
334
open
– agent architecture
1754
– dynamics engine
580
– platform for robotic service
580
– roboethics initiative
1972
open robot
– control architecture
580
– control software
292, 580
– controller computer aided design
279, 282
operating
– point
392
– system
1046
operational
– frame
850
– point
850
– therapy robot
1552
operational space trajectory
180
operational-space
45
– control
162, 358
– inertia matrix
39, 56
operator
– control unit
284
– model
348
optic ﬂow
1871, 1889
optical
– coherence tomography
1530
– microscope
637
– microscope (OM)
652
– motion capture
1668
– quadrature encoder
1008
– underwater communication
579
optimal
– arbitrary time-delay
266
– control
500
– coverage path planning
1369
– design
436
– task assignment
1437
optimization
1008
optokinetic response
1659
orbital replacement unit
1333, 1335
orbital replacement unit (ORU)
1333
orchard
1367
ordinary differential
– equation
488, 1137, 1208
– inclusion
1128
orientation
13
– absolute
939
– quaternion
1198
– relative
939
oriented gradient
786
ornithopter
617
orthopaedic surgical robot
1536
Oswald
– coefﬁcient
1231
– efﬁciency
599
out of ﬁeld
1752
outer
– loop control
168
– poles
170
overﬁtting
789
over-the-horizon
1492
Oxford intelligent machine
1555
P
packaging line
1305
packet switching
1046
paddle
– haptic
1009
painting
1312, 1402
– robot
1312
palm tree spraying
1374
pan–tilt unit
289, 1440
pantograph
409
parallel
– ﬁber
1895
– force/position control
193, 211
– kinematic machine
400, 1303
– manipulator
427
– manipulator calibration
115
– mechanism
12
– robot
73, 122, 427, 1303
– tracking and mapping
1092
parameter
– drift
177
– estimate
173
– inertial estimation
117
parameterization of track
1195
parametric
– bias
1903
– design
430
– force
607
– model
607
parking assistance
1515
part-based model
780
partially observable Markov decision
process
326, 963, 989, 1756,
1829
partial-order planning
338
particle
986
– ﬁlter
988, 1610
PASCAL visual object class
789
passenger protection
1518
passive
– action recognition
1257
– compliance
860
– dynamic walker
1860
– dynamic walking
412, 1126,
1147
– gripper
534
– mapping
175
– mechanism
1424

Index
2216
Index
– set-position modulation
1034
– stiffness
435
– suspension dynamics
559
passivity
175, 210, 248, 1013, 1031
– based control
169
– controller
1034
– observer
1034
patchwork of primitives
992, 993
path
179
– consistency
329
– deformation
1118
– following
1159, 1162, 1193
– following algorithm
1194
– planning
179
Pathﬁnder
390
pattern generator
1848
pattern-based mixed-initiative
1750
payload
620
– delivery
624, 1249
– sensor
1486
pedestrian detection
1511
peg-in-hole
205
– problem
888
– task
848
PEIS Ecology project
334
people detection
784
perception
89, 299, 311, 969, 1262
– active
1266
– for action control theory
1904
– for off-road robotics
1486
– process
90
– via-manipulation
998
periodic motion
– control
497
– tracking
497
peripheral
1302
– component interconnect
576, 644
peristaltic waves
473
persistency of excitation
175
personal roving presence
1045
perspective taking
1750, 1772
– spatial
1752
– visual
1752
Petri net transducer
280
Phantom haptic device
1007
phase shift keying
578
Phoenix
1208
phosphoric acid fuel cell
569
physical
– damper
487
– embodiment
1773
– human–robot interaction
1642,
1679
– interaction
481
– vapor deposition
639
physically collocation
240
piano mover’s problem
136
pick-and-place manipulation
854
pictorial structure
784
piecewise polynomial
180
piezoelectric
715, 1016
– actuator
484
pin in hole
1339
pinhole camera model
93
pipe clamp
887
place cell
1869, 1870
placing object
953
plan
– execution interchange language
279
– partial-order
338
planar joint
24
plan-based control
335
planetary exploration
1452
planner
288
planning
287, 300–302
– and control
847, 962
– behavior-based
304, 305, 307,
311
– closed kinematic chain
870
– conﬁguration space obstacle
857
– feedback
866
– for hybrid system
854
– horizon
991
– manipulation
854
– movable obstacles
870
– nonholonomic
143
– self-collision
857
– trajectory
144
– under uncertainty
862
plant probing
1375
pleasure arousal dominance
1768
Plücker coordinates
20, 40
plug-and-play
512
pneumatic
483
– actuator
483
– artiﬁcial muscle
483
– continuum manipulator
467
– McKibben muscle
467
– network
539
Poincaré map
1126, 1147
point
– algebra
328
– contact
890
– estimation
95
– measurement
113
– of interest
1307, 1697
point cloud
993, 1196
– library
1092
point feature
749
– histogram
750
point-contact
904
pointing
– declarative
1752
– imperative
1752
point-to-point (PTP)
283
pole placement
255
policy gradient
– reinforcement learning
1810
– theorem
365
policy iteration
326
polygonal mesh
984, 992, 1011
polymer
484
– electrolyte fuel cell
569
– matrix composite
485
– MEMS
534
polymeric actuator
485
poly-mesh
992
polynomial trajectory
180
polyoxymethylene
567
polypod
– robot
464
– system
1271
polytope
396
polyvinyl chloride
567, 1937
polyvinylidene ﬂuoride
484, 636,
675, 715
Pontryagin’s minimum principle
500
pool cleaning
– robot
1600
pop-up book
– inspired design
538
– MEMS
538
port-based approach
1035
pose
– estimation
754
– normalization
790
– tracking
985
pose-based visual servo
803
– control
796
– interaction matrix
804
– stability analysis
804
poselet
784
position
– absolute
939
– control of subtrack
1199
– force architecture
1031
– localization
1506
– observer
1247
– relative
939

Index
2217
Index
– sensing device
678
– velocity
164
positional dilution of precision
702
positioning accuracy
1308
position–position architecture
1030
position-sensitive-device
1607
positive photoresist
639
positron emission tomography
1528, 1965
possible
– failure
1218
– injury
1685
posterior
– distribution
983
– inferotemporal cortex
1918
pot handling
1377
potential
– damping
1208
– ﬁeld
1890
– ﬁeld method
1112
– function
285, 866
power
– consumption
1406
– data grapple ﬁxture
1333
– loading
594
– scaling
1030
– source
647
– supply
620
– system
569
power-law equation
890, 895
power-to-weight ratio
1009
precise positioning system
700
precision
– forestry
1378
– irrigation
1372
predator and prey
1876
prediction step
821
predictive graphic display
1334
prefabrication
1389
prefrontal cortex
1899, 1917
preimage
862
prespective-n-point
765
pressure
– distribution
891
– hull
566
– sensor
573
– sinkage equation
1190
– vessel
566
pretectum
1890
principal
– behavior-based
302
– component analysis
749, 1694,
1895
– contact
860
– sonar
710
prioritized task behavior
851
prismatic joint
22, 76, 993
probabilistic
– graphical model
787
– grid
821
– latent semantic analysis
781, 998
– method
819
– roadmap
328, 961
– roadmap method
138, 1105
– roadmap method (PRM)
138
probability distribution
820
procedural reasoning system
281
procrustes
767
product modularity
512
production monitoring
1437
professional vocational assistive
robot
1568
programmable
– construction machine
1394
– intelligent computer
1871
– logic controller
1302, 1308
– logic device
1879
– universal machine for assembly
1306, 1438
programming
– architecture
277
– by demonstration
1821
– environment
277
– language
287
– tool
277
projected gradient method
227
projection matrix
204, 207, 743
projective space
149
propeller
– force
613
– mechanical design
612
proportional–derivative
162, 194,
248, 350, 417, 933, 1031, 1143,
1235
– control
162, 248
proportional–integral–derivative
9,
159, 257, 284, 411, 643, 865,
1199, 1374, 1896
– control
159, 257
– gain tuning
166
– linear tuning
166
– square tuning
166
propositional integral
163
proprioception
89
propulsion
610
– load
570
prosthetics
1006
– and orthotic
1554
protected cultivation system
1368
proton exchange fuel cell
569
providing informational
1772
proxemic behavior
1745
proximity
– awareness technology
1443
– detection technology
1443
– measurement model
984
– sensor
1607
pseudo-amplitude scan
719
pseudo-amplitude scan (PAS)
720,
721
pseudo-inertia matrix
162
pseudoinverse
202
– Jacobian matrix
222
pseudolites
1442
pseudo-random noise
704
psychophysics
1005
pulleys
1009
pulse-width modulation
1235, 1374
Puma robot
389
puncture
1015
pure rolling condition
549
Purkinje cell
1895
pushing manipulation
889
push-up approach
1404
pyramid matching
782
pyramidal effect
397
Q
QR decomposition
123, 1090
quadratic
– optimal control
177
– programming
1146, 1655
quadrature
– amplitude modulation
578
– phase shift keying
578
quadro-copter
613
quality
– of life technology
1781
– of product
1594
– of service
292, 1046
– transmission
393
quantization
1013
quarter car model
559
quasistatic
– assumption
887
– constrained
1682
– motion
1126, 1135
– telerobotics
1049

Index
2218
Index
quasi-two-dimensional laminate
537
quasi-zenith satellite system
700
quaternion
15, 149, 1206
quest for curiosity
403, 1652
R
radar
1444
radial
– basis function
1917
– basis function network
1824
– distortion
764
radiation contamination
1476
radiation-induced force
1207
radio
– communication
577
– control
1016, 1935
– frequency
92, 1047, 1487
– frequency identiﬁcation
92, 1045,
1445, 1462, 1506, 1612
radiological survey
1469
random
– access memory
1609, 1938
– access memory system
1540
– forest
782
– loop generator
145
– measure
827
– motion pattern
1593
– sample consensus
94, 748
– walk
1593
randomization
790
randomized potential ﬁeld
142
range
– data
737
– gated intensity
741
– image
738
– information
746
– scanner
738
– sensing
739
ranging module
718
ranging sonar
576
RANSAC algorithm
748
rapid prototyping
539
rapidly adapting lane position
handler
1512
rapidly exploring dense tree
139
rapidly exploring random tree
139,
961, 1105, 1654
rate gyro
695
ratio damping
199
reaction
– null-space
1345, 1347
– time
1904
reactionless manipulation
1345
reactive
– action package
280
– obstacle avoidance
868
– system
300
reactive-ion etching
639
reactor building
1469
real-time
278, 581, 1012
– control system
281, 833
– innovation
283
– kinematics
704, 1180, 1370, 1442
– space link
1335
– system
282
– thread
581
– toolkit
292
– tracking
575
real-world
– desert environment
1850
– environment
952
– interface
289
– sample
368
reasoning
299–302
– behavior-based
304
– diagnosis
320
– envisioning
320
– prediction
320
– probabilistic
324
– query answering
320
– symbolic
319
receding mating feature
517
receiver
– autonomous integrity monitor
704
– operating curve
1005
receptive ﬁeld
789
reciprocity
203
recognition
– by-component
1916
– of complex movement
1921
recognizing action
1771
reconﬁgurable
1271
– modular manipulator system
513
– robotic system workcell
513
reconﬁgure
1259
reconnaissance, surveillance, and
target acquisition
1485
reconstructed motion data
1667
reconstruction of human motion
1667
rectangle algebra
332
recurrent neural network
1673
– with parametric bias
1903
recursive
– form of Bayes’ rule
820
– Newton–Euler algorithm
39, 51
red–green–blue–depth
93, 1691
reduced instruction set computer
577
reduced-order model
941
reduction ratio
242
redundancy
409, 957, 1254
– kinematic
217
– of mobile manipulator
958
– resolution
958
– resolution via optimization
227
– resolution via task augmentation
228
redundant
– manipulator
395, 857
– robot
395
reference
– frame
12
– model
281
– resolution
1752
reference trajectory
– generation
179
– planning
179
referential
– communication
1750
– focus
1771
reﬂection force
1420
reﬂex reaction
1701
reﬂex-based approach
1848
region
– connection calculus
331
– of inevitable collision
143
– proposal
789
regional
– architecture
391
– structure
389
registered reﬂectance image
738
regolith
1338, 1351
regressor
173
– matrix
161
regular numbering
48
regulation
161
– control
247
regulatory cue
1775
rehabilitation
1006
– robotic
1554
– therapy and training robot
1557
reinforcement learning
306, 346,
367, 1700, 1821
– behavior-based
306

Index
2219
Index
– method
361
– variants
1831
reinforcement manufacturing
1398
relational
– artifact
1779, 1781
– language
321
– Markov decision processes
994
– model
994
relative
– bundle adjustment
1093
– degree
253
– orientation
939
remote
– actuation
451
– agent
281
– center of compliance
192, 195,
860
– center of motion
1531, 1537
– control
1023, 1444
– handling
1412, 1420
– operations centre
1440
– presence virtual
1605
– procedure call
283
– sensing
624, 1248
remotely
– operated underwater vehicle
1452
– operated vehicle
565, 1204, 1412,
1466, 1935
remotely operated robot
998
rendering
788, 1011
– haptic
1004, 1017
rendezvous/docking
1334
repeatability
232
repetitive motion
184
representation
– behavior-based
302
– singularity
220
rescue
624
– adaptive shoring task
1462
– extrication and evacuation of
casualties task
1462
– in-situ medical assessment and
intervention task
1462
– logistics support task
1462
– reconnaissance and mapping task
1461
– rubble removal
1462
– search
1461
– structural inspection
1462
– surrogate
1462
rescue robot
1470, 1471, 1619
– evaluation
1478
– modalities
1462
– physical test bed
1477
– size
1462
– task
1461
– taxonomy
1462
– types of
1462
resilience
481
resistance temperature devices
676
resolve ambiguous referent
1772
resolved momentum control
1655
resource management
580
responsible conduct of research
1971
retraction method
141
retro-reﬂective marker
1668
return element
452
revolute joint
21, 76, 993
revolving rotor blade
601
Rex
280
rhythmic entrainment
1746
ridge regression
966
Riemannian
– curvature
395
– manifold
392
rig control system
1440
rigid
– body displacement
468
– body dynamic
607
– body model
47
– environment
201
– hull inﬂatable boat
1485
– link model
471
– link transmission
451
– motion
514
– object
791, 992
– terrain
556
– wheel
556
ring laser gyroscope
572
ring sonar
727
RiverNet
1261
road
– block
1557
– maintenance robot
1402
– scene understanding
1508
– side unit
1508
– sign detection
1510
RoboCup
1934
– competition
1622
– humanoid league
1625
– rescue league
1460
– rescue simulation project
1476
– simulation league
1622
Robodoc surgical robot
1531
Robonaut
460, 1355, 1772
robot
553, 1952
– application
1305
– architecture
277, 388
– assistant
1680
– behavior
1742
– behavior toolkit
1750
– classiﬁcation
593
– cockroach inspired
525
– communication
278
– companion
1779
– conﬁguration variable
550
– construction system for computer
integrated construction
1400
– control
300, 1472
– controller
1313, 1938
– design
1743
– design process
388
– experiment
1334
– failure
1476
– four wheel
555
– hand
447
– insect-inspired
1849, 1850
– interaction
1831
– interface design
1567
– interior ﬁnishing
1400
– language
1317
– learning
1667
– leg–arm hybrid
419
– life-like
525
– locomotion
548
– microsurgery
1538
– mobility
551
– operating system
293, 580, 1055
– oriented design
1395
– platform
1936
– posture
388
– soccer
1622
– socially assistive
1800
– software
579
– standards
1477
– surgical
1532
– team coordination
1475
– technology
580
– test bed
1477
– topology
388
– tournament
1931
– workcell
513, 1302
robot learning
– approach
346
– main branch
346
robot-animal team
1475
robot-assisted play
1784
robot-ground contact
1195
robotic
1435
– agent
1801
– arm large and ﬂexible
268

Index
2220
Index
– assembly
1395
– baseball player
1603
– coach
1603
– competition
1618
– control
481
– crane
1403
– deconstruction
1404
– digging
1438
– dozing
1439
– excavation
1438, 1446
– exploration
1449
– explosive charging
1448
– explosive charging system
1448
– ﬁn
531
– ﬁnger
450
– hand
955
– haulage
1437
– lawn mower
1602
– loading
1446
– mapping
1449
– movement
1566
– pool cleaner
1601
– recycling
1404
– roof ﬁeld factory
1404
– running coach
1603
– sports companion
1603
– therapy
1562, 1563, 1565
– vacuum cleaner
1592
– vehicle
1435
– window cleaner
1597
robotic workstation
1333
robotics
1898
– and biology
1843
– behavior-based
279
– component veriﬁcation on ISS
1027
– components veriﬁcation on the ISS
1335
– construction
1395
robust
– estimation method
100
– feature
967
– grasping
956
– perception
972
robustness to failures
1260
rockbreaker
1440
rocker-bogie
– chassis
1338
– conﬁguration
1188
Rodrigues angle
984
Rodrigues’ equation
18
roll
1205
– control
616
– mode
1238
rolling
– condition
550
– contact joint
24
– locomotion
1850
roof ﬁeld factory
1404
room positioning system
1598
root
– joint
1670
– mean square
127, 1610
rose harvesting
1376
Rossum’s Universal Robots (R.U.R.)
1646
rotary vector
83
rotary-wing
594, 612
rotation
– center of
893
– matrix
13
– simple
16
rotational stiffness
195, 196
rotor
– and propeller performance
600
rotor force
613
rotorcraft
– dynamics
612
– modeling
611
rough terrain
1187, 1189
– navigation
758
– outdoor
757
round-trip
1335
route network deﬁnition ﬁle
1631
routing
1046
rover
1332
run-of-mine
1440
S
sacriﬁcial anode
568
safe
– brachistochrone
501
– motion unit
1697
safety
1443, 1531–1533, 1577
– curve
1698
– evaluator
1700
– mechanism
1599
saliency map
1892
sample
986
– based ﬁlter
98
– measurement model
984
sampling
1013
– based motion planning
136
satellite servicing
1332
satellite-based augmentation
703
satisﬁabiliy modulo theory
334
saturation
1009
SAUVIM project
1204
s-bot
1878
scalability
1255, 1283
scale effect
593
scaled vehicle
624
scale-invariant feature transform
750, 781, 1902
scaling
– analysis
618
– law
594
– series
987
scan matching
1119
scanning
– electron microscope
636, 679
– electron microscope (SEM)
637
– near-ﬁeld optical microscopy
652
– probe microscope
651
– tunneling microscopy
633, 636,
637
SCARA standard task
391
scattering theory
1033
scene
– depth image
1607
– understanding
791
scheduler
288
Schönﬂies
– motion
429
– subgroup
391
science ﬁction
1962
scientiﬁc visualization
1006
screw transformation
17
Seaperch
1937
search and rescue
1249
– robot
1197
seawater battery
569
section space
234, 470
security identiﬁcation
1495
segmentation method
1672
segmented backbone
467
selection matrix
203
selective
– availability
701
– compliance assembly robot arm
240
– compliance assembly robot arm
(SCARA)
218, 387, 1303, 1306
– laser sintering
539
– search
789
self
– guided connector system
1406
self-as-simulator
1771
self-conﬁgurable system
515

Index
2221
Index
self-excited tripodal dynamic robot
418
self-organization
1844
self-posture changeability
995
self-reconﬁgurable modular robot
515
self-reconﬁgurable robotics
1851
semantic
– map
1748
– natural language
1748
– part
785
semiactive suspension dynamics
561
semiautonomous navigation
1339
semi–fuel cable
571
semiglobal
– asymptotic stability
166
– matching
1358
– uniform ultimate boundedness
166
sense-plan-act
279
sensing
89, 1407
– active
865
– and motion
982
– and obstacle avoidance
1607
– graph
1263
– vibration
1014
sensor
302, 454, 674, 1008, 1473
– classiﬁcation
92
– contact
676
– depth
1212
– depth resolution
739
– force
1009
– fusion
1506
– fusion effect
832
– LIDAR
1198
– low-cost
1594
– model
820
– network
1258
– position
454
– system
1211
– tactile
92
– velocity
454
sensor-based
– control
1181
– method
1189
sensorimotor control
982
sensorized environment for life
1612
sensory
– motor coordination
1849
– motor loop
1844
– substitution
1015
separation sound source
311
sequential
– manipulation
968
– Monte Carlo
827
– quadratic programming
1346
serial
– chain
12
– kinematic machines
1305
– link
531
– robot
72
serial digital interface
573
series
– elastic actuator
240
series elastic actuator
83, 416, 486,
960, 1565, 1680, 1720
serpentine
– motion
527
– robot
1470
Serret–Frenet frame
468
service robotics
1403
servo dynamic
605
seven-revolute
395
shading
– force
1011
shape
– deposition manufacturing
536,
954
– memory alloy
81, 484, 526, 646,
1016, 1271, 1539
– memory polymer
484
– model
784
– primitive
992
– reconstruction
992
shared
– attention
1770, 1786
– autonomy
1334
– control
1028
– goal
1749
– representation
1749
short baseline
575, 1216
short history
1554
short-period mode
1239
shuttle remote manipulator system
1332
side
– force
1192
– slip
1188
signal
– intelligence
1487
– phase and timing
1508
signal-to-noise ratio
741, 1497
Signorini graph
1130
similarity transformation
399
simple
– ranging module ring
727
– temporal problem
330
simpliﬁed aerodynamics
613
simulated annealing
515
simulation
– and active interfaces
1675
– and reality
1861, 1869
– and reality agent–environment
relation
1862
– and reality minimal
1860, 1862
– and reality physics-based
1860
– based optimization
357
– experiment
989
– theory
1752
simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM)
313, 622, 727,
753, 768, 1070, 1188, 1212, 1246,
1379, 1443, 1472, 1507, 1597,
1608
single
– acting actuator
452
– chip ﬂash LIDAR
742
– electron transistor
654, 655
– input single-output
163, 610,
1216, 1237
– operator multiple robot
1044
– operator single robot
1044
– port laparoscopy
1531
single task robot
1393
single-master multiple-slave
1037
single-phalanx hand exoskeleton
1717
single-robot task
1276
singular
– conﬁguration
220, 1008
– perturbation control
258
– perturbation model
244
– region
223
– value
220
– value decomposition
220, 359,
748, 766, 1345
singularity
428, 432
– avoidance
223
– kinematic
220
– representation
220
– robustness
222
sinusoidal locomotion
528
situated
– human–robot dialogue
1750
– interaction
1750
– learning
1750
– robotics
300, 313
situation awareness
1474

Index
2222
Index
six-dimensional (6-D)
8, 20, 37,
212, 391, 607, 750, 772, 861, 936,
984, 1029, 1307, 1670
– robot
438
six-revolute
391
skeleton model
1669
skin
– drive mechanism
465
– friction
603, 1208
– stretch
1015
sky-hook controller
561
SLAM
1449
– 3-D
1449
sliding window
786
slip
1015
– angle
1352
– compensation
1193
– display
1015
– ratio
1191, 1352
slippage
1188
slipstream control
600
small
– and lightweight mechanism
1598
– and medium enterprises
1680
– unmanned ground vehicle
1158
smallest singular value
221
small-scale jumping
532
small-size league
1623
smart
– composite microstructure
537
– home
1611
– nursing
1576
– orthosis
1573
– prosthesis
1573
– soft composite
532
– tool
1471
smoothing and mapping
1092
smoothness requirement
246
snake
– arm robot
467
– like robot
527
– robot
463, 1470
soccer
1282
sociable robot
1766
social
– behavior
1744
– cognition
1744
– cognitive skill
1766
– emotional intelligence
1768
– entropy metric
1275
– inﬂuence
1801
– interaction
1782
– judgment
1773
– referencing
1771
– robot
1742, 1766, 1782
– stimulus
1773
– support
1774
– touch
1773
sociality
1742
socially assistive robotics (SAR)
1553, 1643, 1799
– Alzheimer’s dementia
1812
– autism spectrum disorder therapy
1806
– cognitive rehabilitation
1812
– eldercare
1811
– ethics
1813
– rehabilitation
1808
socially intelligent
1766
socio-affective touch
1783
socio-cognitive skill
1770
socio-cultural cue
1743
soft
– actuator
483, 500
– contact
890
– ﬁnger
905
– ﬁnger (SF)
885
– gripper
536
– lithography
538
– robotics
481
soft robot
539
– design
482
– optimal control
500
software
– architecture
579
– component
282
– development kit
1048
– for distributed robotics
1265
– product line
293
– variability
293
soil
– contact model
1188
– parameter identiﬁcation
1192
– penetrometer
1337
solid material assembly system
1395
solid oxide fuel cell
569
sonar
92, 1212
– beam pattern
712
– double refresh rate
728
– dual frequency imaging
574
– dual frequency technology
574
– imaging
574
– interferometric
574
– MLE TOF
721
– multibeam
574
– picton model
718
– principles
710
– proﬁling
574
– reﬂector model
716
– scanning
574
– side scan
574
– single-beam directional
574
sound source
– localization
311
– separation
311
– tracking
311
space
1006
– application
1027
– based space surveillance
1485
– joint
1010
– joint control
161
– operation
1025
– qualiﬁcation
1335
– robotics
1453
– station remote manipulator system
1333
– sweeping
995
space based space surveillance
1485
Space Shuttle
1332
spallation neutron source
1422
sparse
– coding
782
– surface adjustment
1092
spatial
– cognition
1748
– discourse
1748
– dynamic voting
1052
– language
1748
– operator algebra
62
– pooling
783
– pyramid matching
782
– reasoning agent
1754
– referencing
1751
– relation
1748
– remote center compliance
861
– vector notation
39, 44
special purpose dexterous
manipulator
1333
speciﬁc resistance
421
speciﬁcation language for ICE
283
speech
1903
– recognition
1426
speed of sound
714
spherical
– joint
23
– shaped pressure vessel
567
– wheel
549
– wrist
389

Index
2223
Index
spinal cord
– and muscle
1895
– injury
1554
spine-based gripper
534
spiral-dive mode
1238
spline
993
spoken dialog system
1750
sports robotics
1603
spray-painting robot
1312
spring
195
– function
493
– loaded inverted pendulum
415,
1847
– virtual
1011
spring stiffness
488
– function
494
stability
1010
– analysis
1189
– augmentation system
610
– criterion
1197
– evaluation
1199
– input-output
1135
– margin
419, 1135
– metastability
1134
– robust
1134
– stochastic
1134
– vehicle
1423
stabilization
– of ﬁxed points
1159
– of trajectories
1159
– practical
1172
– trajectory
1159
stable contact
1012
staged evolution
1859
standard
– development kit
1007
– deviation
719
– end effector
1332
– platform
1622
– POMDP model
1756
– position system
700
Stanford arm
1303
star-model
787
state
– action-reward-state-action
364
– contact identiﬁcation
864
– display cue
1776
– estimation
621
– observer
258
– of the art
954, 1576
– space model
263
static
– feedback linearization
253
– gait
409
– margin
610
– sinkage
1352
– stability
607
statics
435
statistical pattern recognition
997
steady hand robot
1538
steerability
– degree of
552
steering/driving maneuver
1193–1195
step–up/down transformer
571
stereo
743
– image geometry
743
– vision
742, 1341, 1608
stereolithography
539
Stewart platform
428
stiffness
435, 1011
– active
196, 197
– adaptation
497
– adjuster
491
– center of
195
– contact
895
– control
193, 495
– estimation
492, 995
– matrix
195, 396
– modal
264
– observer
493
– translational
195
stigmergy
1257, 1258
stochastic gradient descent
1092
stop-and-go
1515
strap down IMU
1246
strawberry harvesting
1376
straw-man task
399
stream-oriented messaging
architecture
579
strictly proper
175
strip theory
1208
structural
– analysis
567
– connection system
1405
– damping
260
– inspection
1469
– synthesis
436
structure from motion (SFM)
746,
753, 1093
structured output prediction
788
structured-light distance sensor
1607
subordinate category
779
subsea system
571
substitute circle concept
558
subsumption
279
– architecture
832
suction cup
530
summative evaluation
1943
superadditive
1267
superior
– colliculus
1890
– temporal sulcus
1899, 1921
super-ordinate category
779
superpixel
789
superquadric
992
supervisory control
1024, 1428
support
– pattern
419
– polygon
419, 1132, 1197
– vector machine
782, 995
– vector regression
356
supportive interaction
1681
surface
– display
1016
– friction
995
– normal
790, 984
– power system
571
– texture
995
surgeon extender robot
1537
surgical
– assistance
1531
– assistance system
1529
– CAD/CAM
1529
– registration
1534
– robot
1532, 1540
– robotics
1006
– simulation
1012
– support robot
1531
surveillance
624, 1249
surveying
1443
surveyor lunar rover vehicle
1339
swarm
518, 1255, 1475
SWARM-BOT
1269, 1878
Swedish wheel
549
swimming mechanism
1851
symbol grounding
321
– problem
1748
symbolic
– planning
285
– task planning
992
symmetric formulation
936
synaptic plasticity
1848
synchronous-drive robot
554
synergy synthesis
1137
synthetic aperture
– radar
833, 1485
– sonar
574
system
1891
– behavior-based
299
– chain
516

Index
2224
Index
– decomposition
278
– hybrid
301
– integration
1320
– lattice
516
– modeling
91
– polybot
516
systematic coverage
1593
T
tactical planning
1119
tactile
– array
996
– display
1014
– human–robot interaction
1783
– illusion
1017
– image
993
– interaction
1782
– interaction with social robots
1785
– localization
983
– object localization
982
– object recognition
997
– pattern display
1016
– sensing
673, 1004
– sensor
92, 455, 673
– sensor information ﬂow
680
tactors
1015
tail volume coefﬁcient
610
tangential proper part
331
tape measure
1407
target tracking
811
task
791
– allocation
1276
– compatibility
230
– consistent operational space
dynamics
853
– constraint
850
– coordinator
582
– decomposition
286
– description
1316
– description language
282
– driven robot
515
– evaluator
1700
– execution
626
– frame
193
– Jacobian
219
– level programming
1318
– level simulation
1753
– model
1743
– oriented kinematics
218
– priority
230
– related dialogue
1750
– space
348
– space control
162
– variable scaling
127
task space
– cooperative
939
– retrieval using inverse optimal
control
968
taxon
1891
– affordance model
1892
taxonomy of rehabilitation
1552
teaching force
1828
teamwork with robot partner
1766
technical
– committee
289, 1953
– problem
1405
– speciﬁcation
1686
technology
1486, 1575, 1606
tectum
1890
tegmentum
1890
tele-care
1605
telemanipulation
1024
teleoperated
– robotic excavation
1402
– small emplacement excavator
1421
– system
1394
teleoperation
1004, 1024, 1043,
1394, 1413–1421, 1424–1426,
1471
– display
1426
– tactile display for
1015
teleoperator
1010
teleo-reactive executive
579
teleorobot
1043
telepresence
1335, 1394, 1411
– robot
1604
telerobotic servicer
1332
telerobotics
1036, 1445, 1472
telesensor programming
1027
telesurgery
1026, 1537
telesurveillance
1605
television
1661
template
786
– matching
721, 1307
– model
413
temporal
– action logic
324
– constraint satisfaction
329
– constraint satisfaction problem
329
– logic
338
tendon tension sensor
454
tendon-based
– design
1687
– robot
1687
– transmission
456
tension sensor
454
tension-differential type
455
tensor arm
466
terrain
– aided navigation
1216
– classiﬁcation
756
– hazard
1341
– mapping
1189
terramechanics
556, 1188, 1351
– based approach
1190
– model
1191
test action pair
282
tether
– cable
571
– management system
565
– mechanism
1598
tethered walking robots
419
therapy approach
1566
thermal
– conductivity
996
– display
1017
– neutron detector
1415
– sensor
676
thermoelectric cooler
1017
three tiers
280
three-dimensional (3-D)
4, 20, 38,
113, 136, 391, 437, 456, 530, 573,
596, 641, 696, 716, 737, 763, 784,
833, 860, 895, 917, 959, 984,
1011, 1051, 1081, 1093, 1111,
1127, 1189, 1242, 1305, 1339,
1392, 1417, 1438, 1482, 1487,
1510, 1608, 1649, 1668, 1691,
1768, 1802, 1860, 1914, 1968
– normal distributions transform
1449
– representation
788
thruster
1213
– Kort nozzle
572
– Rice nozzle
572
tile placement robot
1400
time
– delay
1025
– domain passivity control
1335
– of arrival
575
– update
821
time-base generator
1729
time-extended assignment
1276
time-of-ﬂight
710, 739, 740, 1375
– direct
740
– distance sensor
1607
– laser-based direct
740

Index
2225
Index
– range sensor
740
– ranging
718
– sensor
1375
time-to-collision
1444
tire model
559
tolerance
1218, 1406
tool
– center point
494
– virtual
1010
tool-ground interaction
1438
topcoat
568
topic model
781
topological
– contact state
860
– localization and mapping
305
– map
106, 1445
topology
1262
torque
– computed
255
– control
170, 416
– controlled humanoid robot
1687
– controlled robot
1336
– controller
496
– joint feedback
252
– joint sensor
193
– reversal mechanism
533
torsion
469
torsional stiffness
397
total
– energy control system
611, 1237
– factor productivity
1366
touch
1004
– based interaction
1766
– sensor
1783
track drive
1601
tracked mechanism
1424
tracked vehicle
1187
tracking
– algorithm
1489
– sound source
311
– trajectory
161, 253
tractability
369
trafﬁc control
1281
trafﬁc-light detection
1510
trailer system
1167, 1181
training data
790
trajectory
179
– exciting
127
– generation
179
– modiﬁcation
962
– planning
144, 179
– representation
180
– smoothness
246
– stabilization
1159
– tracking
161, 253
transcranial
– direct current stimulation
1563
– magnetic stimulation
1563, 1903
transducer technologies
715
transfer
– control protocol
292
– function
248
– learning
784
– matrix method
261
– mode
856
transformational planning
338
transit
1407
– mode
856
transition model
988
translate-turn module
514
translation
– model
1673
– simple
16
– stiffness
195
transmission
462, 1009
– control protocol
1046, 1258
– electron microscope
636
– quality
393
transparency
1032
transportation
624
transverse function
1172
traversability
1188
treadmill training
1563
tree
– fruit production
1373
– kinematic
51
– structure
122
triangulated surface
751
triangulation
739, 766
tricept robot
439
trigonometric trajectory
181
trim condition
605
tripod gait
526
truck spotting
1440
truss grasper
534
Tustin algorithm
183
twist
881
– end-effector
392
two-and-a-half-dimensional (2.5-D)
599, 671, 737, 795, 1066, 1609
two-dimensional (2-D)
136, 332,
537, 584, 596, 634, 678, 713, 738,
763, 783, 806, 833, 860, 967, 984,
1015, 1066, 1143, 1272, 1305,
1392, 1442, 1495, 1532, 1609,
1622, 1743, 1829, 1861, 1916
two-layer approach
1034
two-legged robot
530
two-point
– boundary value problem
231
– discrimination
1015
two-port network
1013
two-time scale (dynamics)
244
two-wheel differential-drive robot
554
type synthesis
429
types of rescue robot
1462
U
UAV challenge
1619
ultrahigh deﬁnition (UHD)
577
ultrahigh frequency
1487
ultrahigh-vacuum (UHV)
652
ultrashort baseline
575
ultrashort-baseline
1216
ultrasonic
1016
ultrasound imaging
1537
ultraviolet
638
ultrawide band
622
umbilical cable
571
uncanny valley
1743, 1767
uncertain environment
1843
uncertainty
324, 437
unconditional stability
1032
underactuatedness
409
underconstrained scenario
982
underground mine mapping
1449
under-modeling
369
underwater
1411
– computer vision system
573
– image
573
– intervention
584
– sensor
571
underwater actuator
– propeller design
572
– thruster
571
underwater manipulator
583
underwater robot
584
– design
565, 566
– fairing
566
– frame
566
– middleware
579
underwater vehicle
1214
– manipulator system
1217
undulatory motion
528
unexploded ordnance
1416–1418
uniﬁed modeling language
278
uniform
– completely observable
1236

Index
2226
Index
– resource locator
1050
– ultimate boundedness
166
uniformly completely observable
1236
unit quaternion
196, 940
universal
– coordinated time
703
– joint
24
– plug and play
580
– serial bus
1939
unmanned
– aerial system
1226
– aerial vehicle
403, 592, 1037,
1056, 1226, 1261, 1300, 1382,
1412, 1462, 1966
– aircraft system
591
– construction machine
1482
– ground vehicle
1188, 1265, 1462,
1486, 1967
– marine vehicle
1462
– surface vehicle
1462, 1481, 1498
– underwater vehicle
565, 1211,
1462, 1485
unscented Kalman ﬁlter
1445
unstructured environment
952
unwinding algorithm
740
upper
– extremity
1559
– limb exoskeleton
1715
urban
– challenge event
1633
– search and rescue
1460, 1477
– terrain
756
use case
290
user data protocol
1046
user datagram protocol
292, 579,
1258
user-centered design
1943
users’ mental model
1757
utility function
989
V
vacuum cup
1599
value
– function approach
363
– iteration
326
– iteraton (VI)
988
van der Waals
652
vapor detector explosive
1416
variable
– damping
487
– impedance actuator
480, 1680
– reluctance
79
– structure
170
variable stiffness
501, 518
– actuator
240, 480, 960, 1688
– joint
487
variable-geometry truss
472
vector
– modal
398
– quantization
782
– spatial
39
vector ﬁeld
– histogram
1111
– SLAM
1608
vehicle
– automated
1518
– detection
1510
– formation control
1374
– stability
1423
vehicle-to-vehicle
1444
velocity
– analysis
431
– measurement
1009
– observer
1247
– obstacle
1112
– spatial
40
velocity-resolved control
201, 211
ventral intraparietal
1906
verbal communication
1775
vertebrate motor control
1893
vertical
– cell decomposition
141
– motion
573
– take-off and landing
625
viability
1133
vibration
1005
– contact
1014
– display
1006
– feedback
1014
– sensing
1014
– suppression control
1348
– waveform
1014
vibratory type gyro
572
vibrotactile
– feedback
1014
video
– cassette recorder
1306
– game
1006
virtual
– agent
1801
– constraint
1148
– contact manipulator
206
– coupling
1011
– embodiment
1773
– environment
1004, 1717
– fence
1602
– ﬁxture
1011, 1529
– human
1675
– linkage model
945
– manipulator
1345
– object
711
– reality modeling language
1056
– spring
1011, 1012
– stick
936
– tool
1010
– wall
1011
virtual stick
936
viscous
– damping
1209
– effect
597
– friction
462
visibility graph
141
vision
1212, 1889
– active
1867
vision system
311
visual
– analog scale
1685
– attention
1892
– feature
796
– object class
788
– object recognition
997
– odometry
1188, 1354
– perspective
1772
– perspective taking
1786
– servo
795
– servoing
1448
– SLAM
1609
– word
780
visual servo control
795
– 2.5-D
806
– eye-in-hand systems
812
– feature trajectory planning
809
– hybrid approach
806
– image-based
797
– joint space control
812
– optimization
807
– partitioned approach
807
– pose-based
803
– switching approaches
808
visually guided behavior frog
1889
V-maneuver
1345
voice-coil motors
1014
volume analysis
597
volumetric grid map
993
vortex
– shedding damping
1209
– system
599
voting-based estimation
101

Index
2227
Index
voxel
752, 1012
– grid map
993
VoxMap pointshell
1006
W
walking
1563
wall
– building
1280
– climbing robot
419, 530
– virtual
1011
Waseda bipedal humanoid
1655
Waseda robot
1648
watchmen tour
1266
water
– pressure-resistant design
567
– speed sensor
574
waterproof sealing design
567
wave
– drift damping
1208
– variable
1033
waveform
714
– vibration
1014
waypoint navigation
1338
wearable
1015
– monitoring device
1577
– therapy robot
1553
weather proof site
1404
web
1049
– ontology language
323
– server
1049
wedging
888
weed control
1370
weight sharing
789
weighted
– difference vegetation index
1382
– least squares
127
welding gun
1308
wheel
– offset
548
– sinkage
1352
– slippage
1191, 1338
– test bed
1191
– vehicle slippage
1193
wheel traction
1351
– characteristics
1191
– performance
1193
wheeled mechanism
1424
wheeled mobile robot
547, 1036,
1157, 1187
– modeling
1189
– structure
553
– suspension
559
wheel–terrain interaction
1189
– model
556
whisker array
1850
whole-arm
– grasping
859
– manipulation
467
– manipulator
481
whole-body sensing
994
wide-area
– augmentation system
702, 1442
– network
1046
Widrow–Hoff learning rule
1896
wing
– aerodynamics
599
– modeling design
617
winner-take-all
1890
wire-driven parallel robot
428
wireless
– access in vehicular environments
1508
– ad-hoc system for positioning
1443
– markup language
1056
– sensor network
1372
Wizard of Oz
1756
work envelope
68
workpiece localization
982
workspace
27, 68, 434, 957, 1008,
1302
– dexterous
72, 391
– mapping
1029
– reachable
72, 391
– shape design rule
390
– topology
391
– volume
391
world
– demographic
1553
– graph
1892
– wide web
1046
World Geodetic System
703
worm-like
– crawling
526
– robot
473, 1850
worst-case range
1685
wrench
33, 881
– cone
884
– transmission matrix
118
Wright brothers
1225
wrist center
389
– force-torque sensor
995
X
x-ray ﬂuoroscopy
1537
Y
yaw
1205
yet another robot platform
292
Young’s modulus
538
Z
zero
– moment point
355, 407, 1129,
1135, 1650, 1729
– order hold
1035
– pole
164
zero-dimensional (0-D)
634
zona pellucida
648
Z-transform
183

