Learning Optical Flow
Deqing Sun1, Stefan Roth2, J.P. Lewis3, and Michael J. Black1
1 Department of Computer Science, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA
{dqsun,black}@cs.brown.edu
2 Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
sroth@cs.tu-darmstadt.de
3 Weta Digital Ltd., New Zealand
zilla@computer.org
Abstract. Assumptions of brightness constancy and spatial smoothness
underlie most optical ﬂow estimation methods. In contrast to standard
heuristic formulations, we learn a statistical model of both brightness
constancy error and the spatial properties of optical ﬂow using image se-
quences with associated ground truth ﬂow ﬁelds. The result is a complete
probabilistic model of optical ﬂow. Speciﬁcally, the ground truth enables
us to model how the assumption of brightness constancy is violated in
naturalistic sequences, resulting in a probabilistic model of “brightness
inconstancy”. We also generalize previous high-order constancy assump-
tions, such as gradient constancy, by modeling the constancy of responses
to various linear ﬁlters in a high-order random ﬁeld framework. These
ﬁlters are free variables that can be learned from training data. Addition-
ally we study the spatial structure of the optical ﬂow and how motion
boundaries are related to image intensity boundaries. Spatial smoothness
is modeled using a Steerable Random Field, where spatial derivatives of
the optical ﬂow are steered by the image brightness structure. These
models provide a statistical motivation for previous methods and enable
the learning of all parameters from training data. All proposed models
are quantitatively compared on the Middlebury ﬂow dataset.
1
Introduction
We address the problem of learning models of optical ﬂow from training data.
Optical ﬂow estimation has a long history and we argue that most methods have
explored some variation of the same theme. Particularly, most techniques exploit
two constraints: brightness constancy and spatial smoothness. The brightness
constancy constraint (data term) is derived from the observation that surfaces
usually persist over time and hence the intensity value of a small region remains
the same despite its position change [1]. The spatial smoothness constraint (spa-
tial term) comes from the observation that neighboring pixels generally belong
to the same surface and so have nearly the same image motion. Despite the long
history, there have been very few attempts to learn what these terms should be
[2]. Recent advances [3] have made suﬃciently realistic image sequences with
ground truth optical ﬂow available to ﬁnally make this practical. Here we revisit
D. Forsyth, P. Torr, and A. Zisserman (Eds.): ECCV 2008, Part III, LNCS 5304, pp. 83–97, 2008.
c
⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

84
D. Sun et al.
several classic and recent optical ﬂow methods and show how training data and
machine learning methods can be used to train these models. We then go beyond
previous formulations to deﬁne new versions of both the data and spatial terms.
We make two primary contributions. First we exploit image intensity bound-
aries to improve the accuracy of optical ﬂow near motion boundaries. The idea
is based on that of Nagel and Enkelmann [4], who introduced oriented smooth-
ness to prevent blurring of ﬂow boundaries across image boundaries; this can be
regarded as an anisotropic diﬀusion approach. Here we go a step further and use
training data to analyze and model the statistical relationship between image
and ﬂow boundaries. Speciﬁcally we use a Steerable Random Field (SRF) [5]
to model the conditional statistical relationship between the ﬂow and the im-
age sequence. Typically, the spatial smoothness of optical ﬂow is expressed in
terms of the image-axis-aligned partial derivatives of the ﬂow ﬁeld. Instead, we
use the local image edge orientation to deﬁne a steered coordinate system for
the ﬂow derivatives and note that the ﬂow derivatives along and across image
boundaries are highly kurtotic. We then model the ﬂow ﬁeld using a Markov
random ﬁeld (MRF) and formulate the steered potentials using Gaussian scale
mixtures (GSM) [6]. All parameters of the model are learned from examples thus
providing a rigorous statistical formulation of the idea of Nagel and Enkelmann.
Our second key contribution is to learn a statistical model of the data term.
Numerous authors have addressed problems with the common brightness con-
stancy assumption. Brox et al. [7], for example, extend brightness constancy to
high-order constancy, such as gradient and Hessian constancy in order to mini-
mize the eﬀects of illumination change. Additionally, Bruhn et al. [8] show that
integrating constraints within a local neighborhood improves the accuracy of
dense optical ﬂow. We generalize these two ideas and model the data term as
a general high-order random ﬁeld that allows the principled integration of local
information. In particular, we extend the Field-of-Experts formulation [2] to the
spatio-temporal domain to model temporal changes in image features. The data
term is formulated as the product of a number of experts, where each expert is
a non-linear function (GSM) of a linear ﬁlter response. One can view previous
methods as taking these ﬁlters to be ﬁxed: Gaussians, ﬁrst derivatives, second
derivatives, etc. Rather than assuming known ﬁlters, our framework allows us
to learn them from training data.
In summary, by using naturalistic training sequences with ground truth ﬂow
we are able to learn a complete model of optical ﬂow that not only captures the
spatial statistics of the ﬂow ﬁeld but also the statistics of brightness inconstancy
and how the ﬂow boundaries relate to the image intensity structure. The model
combines and generalizes ideas from several previous methods and the result-
ing objective function is at once familiar and novel. We present a quantitative
evaluation of the diﬀerent methods using the Middlebury ﬂow database [3] and
ﬁnd that the learned models outperform previous models, particularly at motion
boundaries. Our analysis uses a single, simple, optimization method throughout
to focus the comparison on the eﬀects of diﬀerent objective functions. The results

Learning Optical Flow
85
suggest the beneﬁt of learning standard models and open the possibility to learn
more sophisticated ones.
2
Previous Work
Horn and Schunck [9] introduced both the brightness constancy and the spa-
tial smoothness constraints for optical ﬂow estimation, however their quadratic
formulation assumes Gaussian statistics and is not robust to outliers caused by
reﬂection, occlusion, motion boundaries etc. Black and Anandan [1] introduced
a robust estimation framework to deal with such outliers, but did not attempt
to model the true statistics of brightness constancy errors and ﬂow derivatives.
Ferm¨uller et al. [10] analyzed the eﬀects of noise on the estimation of ﬂow, but
did not attempt to learn ﬂow statistics from examples. Rather than assuming a
model of brightness constancy we acknowledge that brightness can change and,
instead, attempt to explicitly model the statistics of brightness inconstancy.
Many authors have extended the brightness constancy assumption, either by
making it more physically plausible [11,12] or by linear or non-linear pre-ﬁltering
of the images [13]. The idea of assuming constancy of ﬁrst or second image
derivatives to provide some invariance to lighting changes dates back to the
early 1980’s with the Laplacian pyramid [14] and has recently gained renewed
popularity [7]. Following a related idea, Bruhn et al. [8] replaced the pixelwise
brightness constancy model with a spatially smoothed one. They found that a
Gaussian-weighted spatial integration of brightness constraints results in signif-
icant improvements in ﬂow accuracy. If ﬁltering the image is a good idea, then
we ask what ﬁlters should we choose? To address this question, we formulate the
problem as one of learning the ﬁlters from training examples.
Most optical ﬂow estimation methods encounter problems at motion bound-
aries where the assumption of spatial smoothness is violated. Observing that
ﬂow boundaries often coincide with image boundaries, Nagel and Enkelmann [4]
introduced oriented smoothness to prevent blurring of optical ﬂow across image
boundaries. Alvarez et al. [15] modiﬁed the Nagel-Enkelmann approach so that
less smoothing is performed close to image boundaries. The amount of smoothing
along and across boundaries has been determined heuristically. Fleet et al. [16]
learned a statistical model relating image edge orientation and amplitude to ﬂow
boundaries in the context of a patch-based motion discontinuity model. Black
[17] proposed an MRF model that coupled edges in the ﬂow ﬁeld with edges
in the brightness images. This model, however, was hand designed and tuned.
We provide a probabilistic framework within which to learn the parameters of a
model like that of Nagel and Enkelmann from examples.
Simoncelli et al. [18] formulated an early probabilistic model of optical ﬂow
and modeled the statistics of the deviation of the estimated ﬂow from the true
ﬂow. Black et al. [19] learned parametric models for diﬀerent classes of ﬂow (e.g.
edges and bars). More recently, Roth and Black [2] modeled the spatial structure
of optical ﬂow ﬁelds using a high-order MRF, called a Field of Experts (FoE), and
learned the parameters from training data. They combined their learned prior

86
D. Sun et al.
model with a standard data term [8] and found that the FoE model improved
the accuracy of optical ﬂow estimates. While their work provides a learned prior
model of optical ﬂow, it only models the spatial statistics of the optical ﬂow and
not the data term or the relationship between ﬂow and image brightness.
Freeman et al. [20] also learned an MRF model of image motion but their
training was restricted to simpliﬁed “blob world” scenes; here we use realistic
scenes with more complex image and ﬂow structure. Scharstein and Pal [21]
learned a full model of stereo, formulated as a conditional random ﬁeld (CRF),
from training images with ground truth disparity. This model also combines
spatial smoothness and brightness constancy in a learned model, but uses simple
models of brightness constancy and spatially-modulated Potts models for spatial
smoothness; these are likely inappropriate for optical ﬂow.
3
Statistics of Optical Flow
3.1
Spatial Term
Roth and Black [2] studied the statistics of horizontal and vertical optical ﬂow
derivatives and found them to be heavy-tailed, which supports the intuition that
optical ﬂow ﬁelds are typically smooth, but have occasional motion discontinu-
ities. Figure 1 (a, b (solid)) shows the marginal log-histograms of the horizontal
and vertical derivatives of horizontal ﬂow, computed from a set of 45 ground
truth optical ﬂow ﬁelds. These include four from the Middlebury “other” dataset,
one from the “Yosemite” sequence, and ten of our own synthetic sequences. These
synthetic sequences were generated in the same way as, and are similar to, the
other Middlebury synthetic sequences (Urban and Grove); two examples are
shown in Fig. 2. To generate additional training data the sequences were also
ﬂipped horizontally and vertically. The histograms are heavy-tailed with high
peaks, as characterized by their high kurtosis (κ = E[(x −μ)4]/E[(x −μ)2]2).
We go beyond previous work by also studying the steered derivatives of optical
ﬂow where the steering is obtained from the image brightness of the reference
(ﬁrst) frame. To obtain the steered derivatives, we ﬁrst calculate the local image
orientation in the reference frame using the structure tensor as described in
[5]. Let (cos θ(I), sin θ(I))T and (−sin θ(I), cos θ(I))T be the eigenvectors of the
structure tensor in the reference frame I, which are respectively orthogonal to
and aligned with the local image orientation. Then the orthogonal and aligned
derivative operators ∂I
O and ∂I
A of the optical ﬂow are given by
∂I
O = cos θ(I) · ∂x + sin θ(I) · ∂y
and
∂I
A = −sin θ(I) · ∂x + cos θ(I) · ∂y, (1)
where ∂x and ∂y are the horizontal and vertical derivative operators. We approx-
imate these using the 2 × 3 and 3 × 2 ﬁlters from [5].
Figure 1 (c, d) shows the marginal log-histograms of the steered derivatives of
the horizontal ﬂow (the vertical ﬂow statistics are similar and are omitted here).
The log-histogram of the derivative orthogonal to the local structure orientation
has much broader tails than the aligned one, which conﬁrms the intuition that
large ﬂow changes occur more frequently across the image edges.

Learning Optical Flow
87
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
10
−6
10
−4
10
−2
10
0
(a) ∂xu, κ = 420.5
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
10
−6
10
−4
10
−2
10
0
(b) ∂yu, κ = 527.3
−10
−5
0
5
10
10
−6
10
−4
10
−2
10
0
(c) ∂I
Ou, κ = 340.1
−10
−5
0
5
10
10
−6
10
−4
10
−2
10
0
(d) ∂I
Au, κ = 636.4
Fig. 1. Marginal ﬁlter response statistics (log scale) of standard derivatives (left) and
derivatives steered to local image structure (right) for the horizontal ﬂow u. The his-
tograms are shown in solid blue; the learned experts in dashed red. κ denotes kurtosis.
These ﬁndings suggest that the steered marginal statistics provide a statistical
motivation for the Nagel-Enkelmann method, which performs stronger smooth-
ing along image edges and less orthogonal to image edges. Furthermore, the non-
Gaussian nature of the histograms suggest that non-linear smoothing should be
applied orthogonal to and aligned with the image edges.
3.2
Data Term
To our knowledge, there has been no formal study of the statistics of the bright-
ness constancy error, mainly due to the lack of appropriate training data. Using
ground truth optical ﬂow ﬁelds we compute the brightness diﬀerence between
pairs of training images by warping the second image in each pair toward the
ﬁrst using bi-linear interpolation. Figure 2 shows the marginal log-histogram of
the brightness constancy error for the training set; this has heavier tails and a
tighter peak than a Gaussian of the same mean and variance. The tight peak
suggests that the value of a pixel in the ﬁrst image is usually nearly the same
as the corresponding value in the second image, while the heavy tails account
for violations caused by reﬂection, occlusion, transparency, etc. This shows that
modeling the brightness constancy error with a Gaussian, as has often been done,
is inappropriate, and this also provides a statistical explanation for the robust
data term used by Black and Anandan [1]. The Lorentzian used there has a
similar shape as the empirical histogram in Fig. 2.
−50
0
50
10
−6
10
−4
10
−2
10
0
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 2. (a) Statistics of the brightness constancy error: The log-histogram (solid blue)
is ﬁt with a GSM model (dashed red). (b)-(e) two reference (ﬁrst) images and their
associated ﬂow ﬁelds from our synthetic training set.

88
D. Sun et al.
We should also note that the shape of the error histogram will depend on the
type of training images. For example, if the images have signiﬁcant camera noise,
this will lead to brightness changes even in the absence of any other eﬀects. In
such a case, the error histogram will have a more rounded peak depending on
how much noise is present in the images. Future work should investigate adapting
the data term to the statistical properties of individual sequences.
4
Modeling Optical Flow
We formulate optical ﬂow estimation as a problem of probabilistic inference and
decompose the posterior probability density of the ﬂow ﬁeld (u, v) given two
successive input images I1 and I2 as
p(u, v|I1, I2; Ω) ∝p(I2|u, v, I1; ΩD) · p(u, v|I1; ΩS),
(2)
where ΩD and ΩS are parameters of the model. Here the ﬁrst (data) term de-
scribes how the second image I2 is generated from the ﬁrst image I1 and the
ﬂow ﬁeld, while the second (spatial) term encodes our prior knowledge of the
ﬂow ﬁelds given the ﬁrst (reference) image. Note that this decomposition of the
posterior is slightly diﬀerent from the typical one, e. g., in [18], in which the spa-
tial term takes the form p(u, v; ΩS). Standard approaches assume conditional
independence between the ﬂow ﬁeld and the image structure, which is typically
not made explicit. The advantage our formulation is that the conditional nature
of the spatial term allows for more ﬂexible methods of ﬂow regularization.
4.1
Spatial Term
For simplicity we assume that horizontal and vertical ﬂow ﬁelds are independent;
Roth and Black [2] showed experimentally that this is a reasonable assumption.
The spatial model thus becomes
p(u, v|I1; ΩS) = p(u|I1; ΩSu) · p(v|I1; ΩSv).
(3)
To obtain our ﬁrst model of spatial smoothness, we assume that the ﬂow ﬁelds are
independent of the reference image. Then the spatial term reduces to a classical
optical ﬂow prior, which can, for example, be modeled using a pairwise MRF:
pPW(u; ΩPWu) =
1
Z(ΩPWu)

(i,j)
φ(ui,j+1−uij; ΩPWu)·φ(ui+1,j−uij; ΩPWu), (4)
where the diﬀerence between the ﬂow at neighboring pixels approximates the
horizontal and vertical image derivatives (see e. g., [1]). Z(ΩPWu) here is the
partition function that ensures normalization. Note that although such an MRF
model is based on products of very local potential functions, it provides a global
probabilistic model of the ﬂow. Various parametric forms have been used to
model the potential function φ (or its negative log): Horn and Schunck [9] used

Learning Optical Flow
89
Gaussians, the Lorentzian robust error function was used by Black and Anandan
[1], and Bruhn et al. [8] assumed the Charbonnier error function. In this paper,
we use the more expressive Gaussian scale mixture (GSM) model [6], i. e.,
φ(x; Ω) =
L

l=1
ωl · N(x; 0, σ2/sl),
(5)
in which Ω = {ωl|l = 1, . . . , L} are the weights of the GSM model, sl are the
scales of the mixture components, and σ2 is a global variance parameter. GSMs
can model a wide range of distributions ranging from Gaussians to heavy-tailed
ones. Here, the scales and σ2 are chosen so that the empirical marginals of the
ﬂow derivatives can be represented well with such a GSM model and are not
trained along with the mixture weights ωl.
The particular decomposition of the posterior used here (2) allows us to model
the spatial term for the ﬂow conditioned on the measured image. For example,
we can capture the oriented smoothness of the ﬂow ﬁelds and generalize the
Steerable Random Field model [5] to a steerable model of optical ﬂow, resulting
in our second model of spatial smoothness:
pSRF(u|I1; ΩSRF u) ∝

(i,j)
φ

(∂I1
O u)ij; ΩSRF u

· φ

(∂I1
A u)ij; ΩSRF u

.
(6)
The steered derivatives (orthogonal and aligned) are deﬁned as in (1); the su-
perscript denotes that steering is determined by the reference frame I1. The
potential functions are again modeled using GSMs.
4.2
Data Term
Models of the optical ﬂow data term typically embody the brightness constancy
assumption, or more speciﬁcally model the deviations from brightness constancy.
Assuming independence of the brightness error at the pixel sites, we can deﬁne
a standard data term as
pBC(I2|u, v, I1; ΩBC) ∝

(i,j)
φ(I1(i, j) −I2(i + uij, j + vij); ΩBC).
(7)
As with the spatial term, various functional forms (Gaussian, robust, etc.) have
been assumed for the potential φ or its negative log. We again employ a GSM
representation for the potential, where the scales and global variance are deter-
mined empirically before training the model (mixture weights).
Brox et al. [7] extend the brightness constancy assumption to include high-
order constancy assumptions, such as gradient constancy, which may improve
accuracy in the presence of changing scene illumination or shadows. We propose
a further generalization of these constancy assumptions and model the constancy
of responses to several general linear ﬁlters:
pFC(I2|u, v, I1; ΩFC) ∝

(i,j)

k
φk{(Jk1 ∗I1)(i, j)−
(Jk2 ∗I2)(i + uij, j + vij); ΩFC},
(8)

90
D. Sun et al.
where the Jk1 and Jk2 are linear ﬁlters. Practically, this equation implies that
the second image is ﬁrst ﬁltered with Jk2, after which the ﬁlter responses are
warped toward the ﬁrst ﬁltered image using the ﬂow (u, v) 1. Note that this data
term is a generalization of the Fields-of-Experts model (FoE), which has been
used to model prior distributions of images [22] and optical ﬂow [2]. Here, we
generalize it to a spatio-temporal model that describes brightness (in)constancy.
If we choose J11 to be the identity ﬁlter and deﬁne J12 = J11, this imple-
ments brightness constancy. Choosing the Jk1 to be derivative ﬁlters and setting
Jk2 = Jk1 allows us to model gradient constancy. Thus this model generalizes
the approach by Brox et al. [7] 2. If we choose Jk1 to be a Gaussian smoothing
ﬁlter and deﬁne Jk2 = Jk1, we essentially perform pre-ﬁltering as, for example,
suggested by Bruhn et al. [8]. Even if we assume ﬁxed ﬁlters using a combination
of the above, our probabilistic formulation still allows learning the parameters of
the GSM experts from data as outlined below. Consequently, we do not need to
tune the trade-oﬀweights between the brightness and gradient constancy terms
by hand as in [7]. Beyond this, the appeal of using a model related to the FoE
is that we do not have to ﬁx the ﬁlters ahead of time, but instead we can learn
these ﬁlters alongside the potential functions.
4.3
Learning
Our formulation enables us to train the data term and the spatial term sepa-
rately, which simpliﬁes learning. Note though, that it is also possible to turn
the model into a conditional random ﬁeld (CRF) and employ conditional likeli-
hood maximization (cf. [23]); we leave this for future work. To train the pairwise
spatial term pPW(u; ΩPWu), we can estimate the weights of the GSM model by
either simply ﬁtting the potentials to the empirical marginals using expectation
maximization, or by using a more rigorous learning procedure, such as maximum
likelihood (ML). To ﬁnd the ML parameter estimate we aim to maximize the log-
likelihood LPW(U; ΩPWu) of the horizontal ﬂow components U = {u(1), . . . , u(t)}
of the training sequences w. r. t. the model parameters ΩPWu (i. e., GSM mixture
weights). Analogously, we maximize the log-likelihood of the vertical components
V = {v(1), . . . , v(t)} w. r. t. ΩPWv. Because ML estimation in loopy graphs is gen-
erally intractable, we approximate the learning objective and use the contrastive
divergence (CD) algorithm [24] to learn the parameters.
To train the steerable ﬂow model pSRF(u|I1; ΩSRF) we aim to maximize the
conditional log-likelihoods LSRF(U|I1; ΩSRFu) and LSRF(V|I1; ΩSRFv) of the
1 It is, in principle, also possible to formulate a similar model that warps the image
ﬁrst and then applies ﬁlters to the warped image. We did not pursue this option, as
it would require the application of the ﬁlters at each iteration of the ﬂow estimation
procedure. Filtering before warping ensures that we only have to ﬁlter the image
once before ﬂow estimation.
2 Formally, there is a minor diﬀerence: [7] penalizes changes in the gradient magni-
tude, while the proposed model penalizes changes of the ﬂow derivatives. These are,
however, equivalent in the case of Gaussian potentials.

Learning Optical Flow
91
training ﬂow ﬁelds given the ﬁrst (reference) images I1 = {I(1)
1 , . . . , I(t)
1 } from
the training image pairs w. r. t. the model parameters ΩSRFu and ΩSRFv.
To train the simple data term pD(I2|u, v, I1; ΩD) modeling brightness con-
stancy, we can simply ﬁt the marginals of the brightness violations using ex-
pectation maximization. This is possible, because the model assumes indepen-
dence of the brightness error at the pixel sites. For the proposed generalized data
term pFC(I2|u, v, I1; ΩFC) that models ﬁlter response constancy, a more complex
training procedure is necessary, since the ﬁlter responses are not independent.
Ideally, we would maximize the conditional likelihood LFC(I2|U, V, I1; ΩFC) of
the training set of the second images I2 = {I(1)
2 , . . . , I(t)
2 } given the training ﬂow
ﬁelds and the ﬁrst images. Due to the intractability of ML estimation in these
models, we use a conditional version of contrastive divergence (see e. g., [5,23])
to learn both the mixture weights of the GSM potentials as well as the ﬁlters.
5
Optical Flow Estimation
Given two input images, we estimate the optical ﬂow between them by maxi-
mizing the posterior from (2). Equivalently, we minimize its negative log
E(u, v) = ED(u, v) + λES(u, v),
(9)
where ED is the negative log (i. e., energy) of the data term, ES is the negative
log of the spatial term (the normalization constant is omitted in either case),
and λ is an optional trade-oﬀweight (or regularization parameter).
Optimizing such energies is generally diﬃcult, because of their non-convexity
and many local optima. The non-convexity in our approach stems from the fact
that the learned potentials are non-convex and from the warping-based data
term used here and in other competitive methods [7]. To limit the inﬂuence of
spurious local optima, we construct a series of energy functions
EC(u, v, α) = αEQ(u, v) + (1 −α)E(u, v),
(10)
where EQ is a quadratic, convex, formulation of E that replaces the potential
functions of E by a quadratic form and uses a diﬀerent λ. Note that EQ amounts
to a Gaussian MRF formulation. α ∈[0, 1] is a control parameter that varies the
convexity of the compound objective. As α changes from 1 to 0, the combined
energy function in (10) changes from the quadratic formulation to the proposed
non-convex one (cf. [25]). During the process, the solution at a previous convex-
iﬁcation stage serves as the starting point for the current stage. In practice, we
ﬁnd using three stages produces reasonable results.
At each stage, we perform a simple local minimization of the energy. At a
local minimum, it holds that
∇uEC(u, v, α) = 0, and ∇vEC(u, v, α) = 0.
(11)
Since the energy induced by the proposed MRF formulation is spatially discrete,
it is relatively straightforward to derive the gradient expressions. Setting these

92
D. Sun et al.
to zero and linearizing them, we rearrange the results into a system of linear
equations, which can be solved by a standard technique. The main diﬃculty in
deriving the linearized gradient expressions is the linearization of the warping
step. For this we follow the approach of Brox et al. [7] while using the derivative
ﬁlters proposed in [8].
To estimate ﬂow ﬁelds with large displacements, we adopt an incremental
multi-resolution technique (e. g., [1,8]). As is quite standard, the optical ﬂow
estimated at a coarser level is used to warp the second image toward the ﬁrst at
the next ﬁner level and the ﬂow increment is calculated between the ﬁrst image
and the warped second image. The ﬁnal result combines all the ﬂow increments.
At the ﬁrst stage where α = 1, we use a 4-level pyramid with a downsampling
factor of 0.5. At other stages, we only use a 2-level pyramid with a downsampling
factor of 0.8 to make full use of the solution at the previous convexiﬁcation stage.
6
Experiments and Results
6.1
Learned Models
The spatial terms of both the pairwise model (PW) and the steerable model
(SRF) were trained using contrastive divergence on 20, 000 9 × 9 ﬂow patches
that were randomly cropped from the training ﬂow ﬁelds (see above). To train
the steerable model, we also supplied the corresponding 20, 000 image patches (of
size 15 × 15 to allow computing the structure tensor) from the reference images.
The pairwise model used 5 GSM scales; and the steerable model 4 scales.
The simple brightness constancy data term (BC) was trained using expect-
ation-maximization. To train the data term that models the generalized ﬁlter
response constancy (FC), the CD algorithm was run on 20, 000 15 × 15 ﬂow
patches and corresponding 25×25 image patches, which were randomly cropped
from the training data. 6-scale GSM models were used for both data terms. We
investigated two diﬀerent ﬁlter constancy models. The ﬁrst (FFC) used 3 ﬁxed
3 × 3 ﬁlters: a small variance Gaussian (σ = 0.4), and horizontal and vertical
derivative ﬁlters similar to [7]. The other (LFC) used 6 3 × 3 ﬁlter pairs that
were learned automatically. Note that the GSM potentials were learned in either
case. Figure 3 shows the ﬁxed ﬁlters from the FFC model, as well as two of the
learned ﬁlters from the LFC model. Interestingly, the learned ﬁlters do not look
like ordinary derivative ﬁlters nor do they resemble the ﬁlters learned in an FoE
model of natural images [22]. It is also noteworthy that even though the Jk2 are
not enforced to be equal to the Jk1 during learning, they typically exhibit only
subtle diﬀerences as Fig. 3 shows.
Given the non-convex nature of the learning objective, contrastive diver-
gence is prone to ﬁnding local optima, which means that the learned ﬁlters
are likely not optimal. Repeated initializations produced diﬀerent-looking ﬁlters,
which however performed similarly to the ones shown here. The fact that these
“non-standard” ﬁlters perform better (see below) than standard ones suggests
that more research on better ﬁlters for formulating optical ﬂow data terms is
warranted.

Learning Optical Flow
93
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 3. Three ﬁxed ﬁlters from the FFC model: (a) Gaussian, (b) horizontal derivative,
and (c) vertical derivative. (d,e) Two of the six learned ﬁlter pairs of the LFC model
and the diﬀerence between each pair (left: Jk1, middle: Jk2, right: Jk1 −Jk2).
(a) Estimated ﬂow
(b) Ground truth
(c) Key
Fig. 4. Results of the SRF-LFC model for the “Army” sequence
For the models for which we employed contrastive divergence, we used a hy-
brid Monte Carlo sampler with 30 leaps, l = 1 CD step, and a learning rate of
0.01 as proposed by [5]. The CD algorithm was run for 2000 to 10000 iterations,
depending on the complexity of the model, after which the model parameters did
not change signiﬁcantly. Figure 1 shows the learned potential functions alongside
the empirical marginals. We should note that learned potentials and marginals
generally diﬀer. This has, for example, been noted by Zhu et al. [26], and is
particularly the case for the SRFs, since the derivative responses are not inde-
pendent within a ﬂow ﬁeld (cf. [5]).
To estimate the ﬂow, we proceeded as described in Section 5 and performed
3 iterations of the incremental estimation at each level of the pyramid. The
regularization parameter λ was optimized for each method using a small set of
training sequences. For this stage we added a small amount of noise to the syn-
thetic training sequences, which led to larger λ values and increased robustness
to novel test data.
6.2
Flow Estimation Results
We evaluated all 6 proposed models using the test portion of the Middlebury
optical ﬂow benchmark [3]3. Figure 4 shows the results on one of the sequences
along with the ground truth ﬂow. Table 1 gives the average angular error (AAE)
3 Note that the Yosemite frames used for testing as part of the benchmark are not the
same as those used for learning.

94
D. Sun et al.
(a) HS [9]
(b) BA [1]
(c) PW-BC
(d) SRF-BC
(e) PW-FFC
(f) SRF-FFC
(g) PW-LFC
(h) SRF-LFC
Fig. 5. Details of the ﬂow results for the “Army” sequence. HS=Horn & Schunck;
BA=Black & Anandan; PW=pairwise; SRF=steered model; BC=brightness constancy;
FFC=ﬁxed ﬁlter response constancy; LFC=learned ﬁlter response constancy.
Table 1. Average angular error (AAE) on the Middlebury optical ﬂow benchmark for
various combinations of the proposed models
Rank Average Army Mequon Scheﬄera Wooden Grove Urban Yosemite Teddy
HS[9]
16.4
8.72
8.01
9.13
14.20
12.40
4.64
8.21
4.01
9.16
BA[1]
9.8
7.36
7.17
8.30
13.10
10.60
4.06
6.37
2.79
6.47
PW-BC
13.6
8.36
8.01
10.70
14.50
8.93
4.35
7.00
3.91
9.51
SRF-BC
10.0
7.49
6.39
10.40
14.00
8.06
4.10
6.19
3.61
7.19
PW-FFC
12.6
6.91
4.60
4.63
9.96
9.93
5.15
7.84
3.51
9.66
SRF-FFC
9.3
6.26
4.36
5.46
9.63
9.13
4.17
7.11
2.75
7.43
PW-LFC
10.9
6.06
4.61
3.92
7.56
7.77
4.76
7.50
3.90
8.43
SRF-LFC
8.6
5.81
4.26
4.81
7.87
8.02
4.24
6.57
2.71
8.02
of the models on the test sequences, as well as the results of two standard meth-
ods [1,9]. Note that the standard objectives from [1,9] were optimized using
exactly the same optimization strategy as used for the learned models. This en-
sures fair comparison and focuses the evaluation on the model rather than the
optimization method. The table also shows the average rank from the Middle-
bury ﬂow benchmark, as well as the average AAE across all 8 test sequences.
Table 2 shows results of the same experiments, but here the AAE is only mea-
sured near motion boundaries. From these results we can see that the steerable
ﬂow model (SRF) substantially outperforms a standard pairwise spatial term
(PW), particularly also near motion discontinuities. This holds no matter what
data term the respective spatial term is combined with. This can also be seen
visually in Fig. 5, where the SRF results exhibit the clearest motion boundaries.
Among the diﬀerent data terms, the ﬁlter response constancy models (FFC
& LFC) very clearly outperform the classical brightness constancy model (BC),
particularly on the sequences with real images (“Army” through “Scheﬄera”),
which are especially diﬃcult for standard techniques, because the classical

Learning Optical Flow
95
Table 2. Average angular error (AAE) in motion boundary regions
Average Army Mequon Scheﬄera Wooden Grove Urban Yosemite Teddy
PW-BC
16.68
14.70
20.70
24.30
26.90
5.40
20.70
5.26
15.50
SRF-BC
15.71
13.40
20.30
23.30
26.10
5.07
19.00
4.64
13.90
PW-FFC
16.36
12.90
17.30
20.60
27.80
6.43
24.00
5.05
16.80
SRF-FFC
15.45
12.10
17.40
20.20
27.00
5.16
22.30
4.24
15.20
PW-LFC
15.67
12.80
16.00
18.30
27.30
6.09
22.80
5.40
16.70
SRF-LFC
15.09
11.90
16.10
18.50
27.00
5.33
21.50
4.30
16.10
brightness constancy assumption does not appear to be as appropriate as for
the synthetic sequences, for example because of stronger shadows. Moreover,
the model with learned ﬁlters (LFC) slightly outperforms the model with ﬁxed,
standard ﬁlters (FFC), particularly in regions with strong brightness changes.
This means that learning the ﬁlters seems to be fruitful, particularly for challeng-
ing, realistic sequences. Further results, including comparisons to other recent
techniques are available at http:// vision.middlebury.edu/ flow/.
7
Conclusions
Enabled by a database of image sequences with ground truth optical ﬂow ﬁelds,
we studied the statistics of both optical ﬂow and brightness constancy, and
formulated a fully learned probabilistic model for optical ﬂow estimation. We
extended our initial formulation by modeling the steered derivatives of opti-
cal ﬂow, and generalized the data term to model the constancy of linear ﬁlter
responses. This provided a statistical grounding for, and extension of, various
previous models of optical ﬂow, and at the same time enabled us to learn all
model parameters automatically from training data. Quantitative experiments
showed that both the steered model of ﬂow as well as the generalized data term
substantially improved performance.
Currently a small number of training sequences are available with ground
truth ﬂow. A general purpose, learned, ﬂow model will require a fully general
training set; special purpose models, of course, are also possible. While a small
training set may limit the generalization performance of a learned ﬂow model,
we believe that training the parameters of the model is preferable to hand tuning
(particularly to individual sequences) which has been the dominant approach.
While we have focused on the objective function, the optimization method
may also play an important role [27] and some models may may admit better
optimization strategies than others. In addition to improved optimization, future
work may consider modulating the steered ﬂow model by the strength of the
image gradient similar to [4], learning a model that adds spatial integration to the
proposed ﬁlter-response constancy constraints and thus extends [8], extending
the learned ﬁlter model beyond two frames, automatically adapting the model
to the properties of each sequence, and learning an explicit model of occlusions
and disocclusions.

96
D. Sun et al.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported in part by NSF (IIS-0535075, IIS-
0534858) and by a gift from Intel Corp. We thank D. Scharstein, S. Baker,
R. Szeliski, and L. Williams for hours of helpful discussion about the evaluation
of optical ﬂow.
References
1. Black, M.J., Anandan, P.: The robust estimation of multiple motions: Parametric
and piecewise-smooth ﬂow ﬁelds. CVIU 63, 75–104 (1996)
2. Roth, S., Black, M.J.: On the spatial statistics of optical ﬂow. IJCV 74, 33–50
(2007)
3. Baker, S., Scharstein, D., Lewis, J., Roth, S., Black, M., Szeliski, R.: A database
and evaluation methodology for optical ﬂow. In: ICCV (2007)
4. Nagel, H.H., Enkelmann, W.: An investigation of smoothness constraints for the
estimation of displacement vector ﬁelds from image sequences. IEEE TPAMI 8,
565–593 (1986)
5. Roth, S., Black, M.J.: Steerable random ﬁelds. In: ICCV (2007)
6. Wainwright, M.J., Simoncelli, E.P.: Scale mixtures of Gaussians and the statistics
of natural images. In: NIPS, pp. 855–861 (1999)
7. Brox, T., Bruhn, A., Papenberg, N., Weickert, J.: High accuracy optical ﬂow esti-
mation based on a theory for warping. In: Pajdla, T., Matas, J(G.) (eds.) ECCV
2004. LNCS, vol. 3024, pp. 25–36. Springer, Heidelberg (2004)
8. Bruhn, A., Weickert, J., Schn¨orr, C.: Lucas/Kanade meets Horn/Schunck: combin-
ing local and global optic ﬂow methods. IJCV 61, 211–231 (2005)
9. Horn, B., Schunck, B.: Determining optical ﬂow. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 16, 185–203
(1981)
10. Ferm¨uller, C., Shulman, D., Aloimonos, Y.: The statistics of optical ﬂow. CVIU 82,
1–32 (2001)
11. Gennert, M.A., Negahdaripour, S.: Relaxing the brightness constancy assumption
in computing optical ﬂow. Technical report, Cambridge, MA, USA (1987)
12. Haussecker, H., Fleet, D.: Computing optical ﬂow with physical models of bright-
ness variation. IEEE TPAMI 23, 661–673 (2001)
13. Toth, D., Aach, T., Metzler, V.: Illumination-invariant change detection. In: 4th
IEEE Southwest Symposium on Image Analysis and Interpretation, pp. 3–7 (2000)
14. Adelson, E.H., Anderson, C.H., Bergen, J.R., Burt, P.J., Ogden, J.M.: Pyramid
methods in image processing. RCA Engineer 29, 33–41 (1984)
15. Alvarez, L., Deriche, R., Papadopoulo, T., Sanchez, J.: Symmetrical dense optical
ﬂow estimation with occlusions detection. IJCV 75, 371–385 (2007)
16. Fleet, D.J., Black, M.J., Nestares, O.: Bayesian inference of visual motion bound-
aries. In: Exploring Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the New Millennium, pp. 139–174.
Morgan Kaufmann Pub., San Francisco (2002)
17. Black, M.J.: Combining intensity and motion for incremental segmentation and
tracking over long image sequences. In: Sandini, G. (ed.) ECCV 1992. LNCS,
vol. 588, pp. 485–493. Springer, Heidelberg (1992)
18. Simoncelli, E.P., Adelson, E.H., Heeger, D.J.: Probability distributions of optical
ﬂow. In: CVPR, pp. 310–315 (1991)
19. Black, M.J., Yacoob, Y., Jepson, A.D., Fleet, D.J.: Learning parameterized models
of image motion. In: CVPR, pp. 561–567 (1997)

Learning Optical Flow
97
20. Freeman, W.T., Pasztor, E.C., Carmichael, O.T.: Learning low-level vision.
IJCV 40, 25–47 (2000)
21. Scharstein, D., Pal, C.: Learning conditional random ﬁelds for stereo. In: CVPR
(2007)
22. Roth, S., Black, M.J.: Fields of experts: A framework for learning image priors. In:
CVPR, vol. II, pp. 860–867 (2005)
23. Stewart, L., He, X., Zemel, R.: Learning ﬂexible features for conditional random
ﬁelds. IEEE TPAMI 30, 1145–1426 (2008)
24. Hinton, G.E.: Training products of experts by minimizing contrastive divergence.
Neural Comput 14, 1771–1800 (2002)
25. Blake, A., Zisserman, A.: Visual Reconstruction. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts (1987)
26. Zhu, S., Wu, Y., Mumford, D.: Filters random ﬁelds and maximum entropy
(FRAME): To a uniﬁed theory for texture modeling. IJCV 27, 107–126 (1998)
27. Lempitsky, V., Roth, S., Rother, C.: FusionFlow: Discrete-continuous optimization
for optical ﬂow estimation. In: CVPR (2008)

