1116
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 21, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2005
Point-Based and Region-Based Image Moments
for Visual Servoing of Planar Objects
Omar Tahri and François Chaumette, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Moments are generic (and usually intuitive) descrip-
tors that can be computed from several kinds of objects, deﬁned
either from closed contours or from a set of points. In this paper,
we present improvements in image-based visual servo using image
moments. First, the analytical form of the interaction matrix re-
lated to the moments computed from a set of coplanar points is
derived, and we show that it is different from the form obtained
previously, using coplanar closed contours. Six visual features are
selected to design a decoupled control scheme when the object is
parallel to the image plane. This nice property is then generalized
to the case where the desired object position is not parallel to the
image plane. Finally, experimental results are presented to illus-
trate the validity of our approach and its robustness, with respect
to modeling errors.
Index Terms—Image moment, invariant, visual servoing.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
O DATE, an open question in image-based visual servoing
is to determine the set of visual features to be used in the
control scheme so that an optimal behavior of the system is
obtained. In the past, most works were concerned with simple
objects, and the features used as input of the control scheme
were generally coordinates of points, or parameters describing
the conﬁguration in the image of segments, straight lines, or el-
lipses [9], [13]. The set of objects to which these methods can
be applied is, thus, limited. They have also the basic require-
ment of feature matching between initial and desired images.
More recent works have tried to surmount the problems men-
tioned above, by using, for example, an eigenspace representa-
tion [8], the polar signature of an object contour [5], or, as in
this paper, image moments [4]. Image moments are particularly
interesting. They can be computed easily from a binary or a seg-
mented image, or from a set of extracted points of interest. Com-
puting moments in several images (for visual servoing, the ini-
tial and the desired ones, and all the successive images acquired
by the camera) just necessitates a high-level global matching of
the object, and not an accurate and tedious matching of each
object point. They are generic, describing the same geometrical
Manuscript received July 30, 2004; revised January 13, 2005. This paper was
recommended for publication by Associate Editor J. Kosecka and Editor F. Park
upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This paper was presented in part
at the International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Taipei, Taiwan,
R.O.C., September 2003, and in part at the International Conference on Robotics
and Automation, New Orleans, LA, April 2004.
O. Tahri was with IRISA/INRIA Rennes, 35 042 Rennes-Cedex, France. He
is now with CEA/LIST, 92265 Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.
F. Chaumette is with IRISA/INRIA Rennes, 35 042 Rennes-Cedex, France
(e-mail: Francois.Chaumette@irisa.fr).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TRO.2005.853500
entities, whatever the object shape complexity. Low-order mo-
ments have an intuitive meaning, since they are directly related
to the area, the centroid, the inertial moments, and the orien-
tation of the object in the image. Image moments have been
widely studied in the computer vision community [12], [21]
[22], especially for pattern recognition applications. In addi-
tion to the advantages recalled above, judicious combinations
of moments are indeed invariant to some transformations, such
as scale, 2-D translation, and/or 2-D rotation. This property is of
great interest in pattern recognition, which explains the amount
of work on the determination of moments invariants (see [2],
[19], [23], and [32], for instance). As it will be shown in this
paper, such an invariance property is also of particular interest
in visual servoing.
Whatever the nature of the possible measures extracted from
the image, from a set of image points coordinates to a set of
image moments, the main question is how to combine them to
obtain an adequate behavior of the system. In most works, the
combination is nothing but a simple stacking. If the error be-
tween the initial value of the features and the desired one is
small, and if the task to realize constrains all the available de-
grees of freedom (DOFs), that may be a good choice. How-
ever, as soon as the error is large, problems may appear, such
as reaching local minimum or a task singularity [3]. To over-
come these problems, combining path planning and visual ser-
voing is a ﬁrst approach, since tracking planned trajectories al-
lows the error to always remain small [7], [20], [34]. A second
approach is to use the measures to build particular visual fea-
tures that will ensure expected properties to the control scheme.
Position-based visual servoing belongs to this approach. Using
visual measures and an a priori knowledge of a computer-aided
design (CAD) model of the observed object, the relative camera-
object pose is estimated and used as input to the control scheme
[33]. An adequate 3-D trajectory can thus be obtained, such as a
geodesic for the orientation and a straight line for the translation.
However, position-based visual servoing may suffer from poten-
tial instabilities due to image noise [3] (the “cooking” of the vi-
sual features from the measures is quite complex, since it comes
from the solution of an inverse problem).1 2–1/2-D (or hybrid)
visual servoing also belongs to this approach [18]. The goals
were to combine 2-D features and 3-D features to decouple the
control of the rotation from the control of the translation (as in
3-D visual servoing), to ensure as much as possible the visi-
bility of the object in the camera ﬁeld of view (FOV), and also
to demonstrate the global stability of the system using only the
measures from the current and the desired images. Finally, sev-
eral works have been realized in image-based visual servoing
1The marvelous expression “cooking of features” is from Peter Corke.
1552-3098/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

TAHRI AND CHAUMETTE: POINT-BASED AND REGION-BASED IMAGE MOMENTS FOR VISUAL SERVOING OF PLANAR OBJECTS
1117
following the same general objective. In [14], the coordinates of
points are expressed in a cylindrical coordinate system, instead
of the classical Cartesian one, to improve the robot trajectory.
In [11], the three coordinates of the centroid of an object in a
virtual image obtained through a spherical projection have been
selected to control three DOFs of an underactuated system. This
selection ensures a passivity property that is useful in control-
ling such complex systems. In [24], a vanishing point and the
horizon line have been selected to control a similar system. This
choice ensures a good decoupling between translational and ro-
tational DOFs. In [15], vanishing points have also been used for
a dedicated object (a 3-D rectangle), once again for decoupling
properties. For the same object, six visual features have been de-
signed in [6] to control the six DOFs of a robot arm, following
a partitioned approach. Finally, in [4], a ﬁrst attempt to select
six features from image moments has been recently presented.
This selection was valid only for planar objects whose desired
pose is parallel to the image plane. In this paper, the selection
method is signiﬁcantly improved, and is generalized for any de-
sired object pose.
In most related previous works, the selection of the visual fea-
tures was guided by a partitioned approach to design a decou-
pled control scheme, that is, to try to associate each DOF to be
controlled with only one visual feature. That is indeed a good
strategy. However, it is not sufﬁcient to obtain a good behavior
of the visual features and of the robot trajectory simultaneously.
In few words, we recall that the time variation
of the visual
features
can be expressed linearly with respect to the relative
camera-object kinematics screw
(1)
where
is the interaction matrix related to
[9], [13]. The con-
trol scheme is usually designed to try to ensure an exponential
decoupled decrease of the visual features to their desired value
, from which we deduce, if we consider an eye-in-hand system
observing a static object
(2)
where
is a model or an approximation of
,
is the pseu-
doinverse of
,
is a positive gain tuning the time to conver-
gence, and
is the camera velocity sent to the low-level robot
controller. In the following, we denote
and
, respectively,
as the translational and rotational components of the kinematic
screw, so that
. An expo-
nential decoupled decrease will be obtained simultaneously on
the visual features and on the camera velocity (that would give
a perfect behavior) only if
and
are constant. If it is pos-
sible to choose
as a constant matrix, the form of
is set
by the design of , and it is generally very far from a constant
matrix. For instance, the well-known interaction matrix related
to the coordinates
of an image point is given by
(3)
where
is the depth of the observed point. We can see from (3)
that the velocities
and
are really not the same with respect
to each camera velocity component. Some are inversely propor-
tional to the depth
of the point, some are linearly dependent
on the image coordinates, while others depend on them at the
second order. The nonlinearities in system (1) using (3) explain
the difference of behaviors in image space and in 3-D space,
and the inadequate robot trajectory that occurs sometimes when
the displacement to realize is large [3] (of course, for small dis-
placements, such that the variations of
are negligible, a cor-
rect behavior is obtained, as already noted above). An important
problem is, thus, to determine visual features, such that their in-
teraction matrix minimizes the nonlinearities in (1). Ideally, we
would like
to be the identity matrix
, even if this goal is
probably impossible to reach. Note that designing a decoupled
or a partitioned system is a step toward this goal, since it intro-
duces terms equal to zero in
.
In this paper, we propose signiﬁcant improvements in the de-
termination of adequate visual features using image moments.
In the next section, we ﬁrst brieﬂy recall the basic deﬁnition of
image moments. We then give a general analytical form of their
interaction matrix. In [4], only objects deﬁned from closed con-
tours were considered, while this paper deals also with moments
computed from a set of image points. Section III is devoted to
the determination of six visual features to control the six DOFs
of the system for the particular case where the desired object
pose is parallel to the image plane. This result is generalized in
Section IV to the case where the object may have any orienta-
tion with respect to the camera. Finally, experimental results are
presented in Section V to validate the proposed theoretical re-
sults.
II. MODELING
A. Moment Invariants
If we consider a dense object
in the image, deﬁned by a
set of closed contours [see, for instance, Figs. 2(b) and 8(b)], its
2-D moments
of order
are deﬁned by
(4)
The centered moments
are computed with respect to the
object entroid
. They are deﬁned by
(5)
where
and
,
being the
object area. Similarly, for a discrete set of
image points [see,
for instance, Fig. 14(a)], the moments are deﬁned by
(6)
while the centered moments are now given by
(7)
where
and
(
in that case).
The centered moments deﬁned either from (5) or (7) are known
to be invariant to 2-D translational motion. In the literature,
many works have presented various methods to derive moment
invariants to other transformations, such as scale and 2-D rota-
tion. For instance, moment invariants to rotation have been ob-
tained from radial and angular moments [23], Zernike moments
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

1118
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 21, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2005
[2], [30], [32], and complex moments [1], [10]. As for invariants
to scale, several combinations of moments have been proposed,
such as, for example [19]
(8)
This formula will be used in Section III to decouple the features
involved in the control of the translational DOFs
and
. We
now present several combinations of moments that are invariant
to 2-D translation, 2-D rotation, and to scale. Complete details
on how they have been determined can be found in [21], [22],
and [27]
(9)
where invariants
to
are given in the Appendix. We will see
in Sections III and V that depending on the object considered,
two among the invariants (9) will be selected as visual features
to control the rotational velocities
and
. We now derive a
general form of the interaction matrix related to image moments.
B. Interaction Matrix of Image Moments
In [4], the interaction matrix
related to any moment
deﬁned from (4) has been determined. It has been obtained from
the following equation:
(10)
where
. If a planar object is considered, and if
we exclude the degenerate case where the camera optical center
belongs to this plane, so that, for any object point
(11)
we obtain (see [4] for more details)
(12)
where
(13)
with
. We now consider the case of moments deﬁned
by (6). We will see that a different analytical form of
is
obtained, characterized by the value of . Computing the time
derivative of (6), we obtain
(14)
The velocity of any image point
is given from (1) and (3),
setting
in (1). More precisely, using (11), the velocity
of
can be written
(15)
Finally, using (15) in (14), and then using (6), we obtain, after
simple developments, the interaction matrix related to
. Its
analytical form is again given by (12) and (13), but with
.
Matrix
is, thus, not exactly the same, if we consider the
moments (4) of a dense object (i.e., deﬁned by closed contours),
or the moments (6) of a discrete object (i.e., deﬁned by a set of
discrete points). The analytical forms are similar, since the two
terms of (14) correspond exactly to the ﬁrst two terms present in
(10). On the other hand, they are different, since the third term
of (10) does not appear in (14). To illustrate these differences on
a simple example, let us consider moment
. In the discrete
case,
is nothing but the number
of object points. This
number is, of course, invariant, and we can check by setting
in (13) that all the terms of
are indeed
equal to zero. In the dense case,
is nothing but the area of
the object, and general robot motion modiﬁes its value, as can
be checked from (13) using
.
Many visual features derived from moments have, however, a
very similar behavior in both cases. For instance, we can easily
compute from (12) the interaction matrix related to the coordi-
nates
and
of the object center of gravity. We obtain
where
(16)
with
,
for dense objects, and
for
discrete objects.
Similarly, if we consider the centered moments deﬁned by (5)
or (7), we obtain, after tedious developments
(17)
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

TAHRI AND CHAUMETTE: POINT-BASED AND REGION-BASED IMAGE MOMENTS FOR VISUAL SERVOING OF PLANAR OBJECTS
1119
with
In all cases, and as expected, we can check from
and
that all centered moments are invariant, with respect to trans-
lational motions parallel to the image plane when the object is
parallel to the image plane (
if
).
Similarly, for the same conﬁgurations, we can check from (12)
that the invariants to scale given by (8) are invariant to transla-
tional motion along the optical axis (
if
).
Finally, after quite tedious computations, we can also check that
the invariants
given in (9) are such that
, and, if
, such that
. As detailed
in the next section, these invariance properties will be useful in
selecting adequate visual features for visual servoing.
III. CHOICE OF THE VISUAL FEATURES
In this section, we select from the previous theoretical results
six combinations of moments to control the six DOFs of the
robot. Our objective is to obtain a sparse interaction matrix that
changes slowly around the desired position of the camera. We
will see that the solution we present is such that the interac-
tion matrix is block-triangular when the object is parallel to the
image plane. Furthermore, we will see that for the same posi-
tions, the elements corresponding to translational motions form
a constant diagonal block, which is independent of depth. In [4],
this last interesting property was not satisﬁed.
We ﬁrst assume that the desired position of the object is par-
allel to the image plane (i.e.,
) and we denote
the interaction matrix for such conﬁgurations. The more general
case where the desired object position may have any orientation
with respect to the image plane will be treated in the next sec-
tion.
A. Visual Features to Control the Translational DOFs
In [4] and [6], the three visual features used to control the
translational DOFs have been selected as the coordinates
,
of the center of gravity, and the area
of the object in
the image. In that case, we obtain from (16) and (12)
(18)
with
,
, and
. First, we recall that if a set of
points is considered, we
cannot use the area
, since it is a constant value equal to
. This case will be studied later. Then, we can note that, even
if the above matrix is triangular, most of its elements are not
constant. Moreover, the third feature
does not have the same
dynamics with respect to
as
and
with respect to
and
, respectively.
A better choice can be obtained from these intuitive features
by just adding an adequate normalization. More precisely, we
deﬁne
(19)
where
is the desired area of the object in the image, and
the desired depth between the camera and the object. The
interaction matrices related to these normalized features can be
easily determined from (18). Noting that
, where
is the area of the planar object, we obtain
(20)
with
,
,
,
, and
. Since
is inversely proportional to
, we ﬁnd again the recent result
given in [16], stating that the variation of such features depends
linearly on the depth (note the constant term in the third element
of
). The normalization by
has just been chosen, so
that this constant term is equal to
1. Furthermore, the design
of
and
allows us to completely partition the three selected
features to the three translational DOFs. This decoupling prop-
erty was expected from (8). We also obtain the same dynamics
for the three features [note the diagonal block equal to
in
(20)]. This very nice property will allow us to obtain an ade-
quate robot translational trajectory.
We now consider the case of a discrete object. Since
is invariant to 2-D translation and 2-D rotation, we propose to
replace in (19) the area and its desired value by
and
(21)
In that case, the interaction matrix related to
,
, and
is
again given by (20), but with
The control of the translational DOFs can thus be realized with
the same nice properties for both cases. We now consider the
rotational DOFs.
B. Visual Features to Control the Rotational DOF
First, as in [4] and [6], we use the object orientation
that
can be deﬁned from the second-order centered moments:
. We also use two moment invari-
ants
and
, chosen in (9). The interaction matrices related to
these features have the following form:
(22)
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

1120
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 21, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2005
where the analytical form of
,
,
, and
can be
obtained after tedious developments using (17), and where
and
are shown in the equation at the bottom of the page,
with
and
for a dense object, and with
and
for a discrete object.
Unfortunately, we have not been able to ﬁnd two combina-
tions of moments
and
such that
, and such
that
and
are constant. In fact, their value and their vari-
ation change for each object, since they depend on the value of
several moments. That is why we will see, in Section V, how to
choose for each object the best pair
from the set given
in (9).
Finally, we recall that the interaction matrices (20) and (22)
have nice expected forms only when the object is parallel to the
image plane. In Section V, we will see that when the desired ob-
ject position is parallel to the image plane, satisfactory results
are obtained, even if the initial position is far away from this con-
ﬁguration. However, if the desired object position is not parallel
to the image plane, the decoupling and linearizing properties are
not as good as in the parallel case. That is why we present, in
the next section, a new method to generalize our results to the
case where the desired object position may have any orientation
with respect to the image plane (except, of course, the degen-
erate case where the camera optical center belongs to the object
plane).
IV. GENERALIZATION TO DESIRED OBJECT POSES
NON-PARALLEL TO THE IMAGE PLANE
The general idea of our method consists of applying a virtual
rotation to the camera, computing the visual features after this
virtual motion, and then using the transformed features in the
control law. The rotation is determined so that the image plane
in its virtual desired position is parallel to the object. The prop-
erties obtained in this case will thus be enlarged for any desired
conﬁguration.
The ﬁrst step of the method consists of determining the vir-
tual rotation
to apply to the camera. If the task is speci-
ﬁed by a desired conﬁguration to reach between the camera and
the object,
is directly given by this conﬁguration (but this
method necessitates the knowledge of the 3-D model of the ob-
ject to compute the desired value
of the visual features). If the
task is speciﬁed by a desired image acquired during an ofﬂine
learning step,
can be obtained either from a pose-estimation
algorithm if the model of the object is known, or from a par-
tial pose-estimation algorithm if another image of the object is
available [29]. Finally, the two angles involved in
can also
be given during the learning step in the same way as the desired
depth
is set for the parallel case. For this method, no prior
knowledge of the pattern lying on the target plane is required.
We have chosen this last simple solution for the experimental
results presented in Section V. We will see that a coarse approx-
imation of
is sufﬁcient, since the decoupling properties are
ensured in a neighborhood of the parallel conﬁguration.
We now describe how the visual features are computed. Let
us denote
, and
the coordinates of a 3-D
point after and before the virtual rotation. Of course, we have
(23)
from which we immediately deduce the coordinates
of
the point in the image that would have been obtained if the
camera had really moved. Indeed, using the perspective projec-
tion equation (
,
), we obtain
(24)
where
are the coordinates of the point in the real image.
We can note that
can be computed directly from
and
. An estimation of the coordinates of the 3-D point is, thus,
useless.
If the object is composed of a set of
points, (24) is applied to
all the
points in the desired image (from which, visual features
are computed), and for all the
points in the current image
(from which, visual features
are computed). Otherwise, if a
dense object is considered, the moments after the virtual rotation
are given by
(25)
where
We thus obtain
(26)
where
. Computing the moments directly from (26)
is possible, but time consuming. We thus propose a more efﬁ-
cient method, based on a Taylor series expansion of
. Indeed, if
(which is the case,
in practice), this term can be approximated by
(27)
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

TAHRI AND CHAUMETTE: POINT-BASED AND REGION-BASED IMAGE MOMENTS FOR VISUAL SERVOING OF PLANAR OBJECTS
1121
Using (27) in (26), and after simple developments, we obtain
(28)
with
and
. The moments after the virtual
rotation can thus be computed directly and efﬁciently from the
moments in the real image.
Finally, a change in the control law (2) has to be performed
to come back from the virtually rotated camera to the real one
(29)
where matrix
is nothing but
Let us note that
is a constant block-diagonal matrix, and
thus preserves the decoupling properties between translational
and rotational motions. Let us also note that the virtual rotation
does not change the stability properties of the system, even if
it is coarsely approximated, as long as we avoid the degenerate
case where the camera optical center belongs to the object plane
(which is very unlikely to occur).
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This section presents several experimental results obtained at
video rate with a 6-DOF eye-in-hand system using ﬁrst dense
objects, and then discrete ones. For dense objects, image mo-
ments are efﬁciently computed from the contour points using
Green’s theorem [26]. In all the experiments, and as in [28], we
have used the following model of the interaction matrix in the
control law (29):
Indeed, it has been recently proved in [17] that this choice
largely improves the system behavior. Note that, of course, the
improvements appear only for the terms of
which are not
constant.
A. Experimental Results Using Dense Objects
We ﬁrst consider the object depicted in Fig. 1(a) and (b): a
“whale.” For this object, we have chosen
and
from the set
given in (9) to control the rotational motion
and
. For all
the possible pairs, we can indeed compute, using (28), the error
(30)
where
and
, which represent the rotation angles around the
and
axes, are varying from
to
, typically. We then
choose the pair
such that the error
presents a global
minimum, with an inﬂuence zone as large and as symmetrical as
Fig. 1.
Results for a pure translational motion when the object is parallel to
the image plane. (a) Initial image. (b) Desired image. (c) s  s m. (d)  cm/s.
(e) Camera 3-D trajectory.
Fig. 2.
Representation of f(e ) on [ (=3); =3]  [ (=3);=3] for the
“whale” and pair. (a) (c ; c
). (b) (c ; c ). (c) (c ; c ). (d) (c ; c ).
possible [31]. A complete study is given in [27]. We present in
Fig. 2 the value of
for four possible pairs. We can note from
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

1122
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 21, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2005
Fig. 3.
Results for a pure translation when the object is not parallel to the image
plane. (a) Initial image. (b) Desired image. (c) s   s m. (d) v cm/s and dg/s.
(e) Camera 3-D trajectory.
Fig. 2(a) and (d) that
and
supply an adequate
behavior of
(that is why
has been selected). On the
other hand,
and
have to be avoided [see Fig. 2(b)
and (c)]. This ofﬂine selection process has to be done for each
new object considered, once a desired image is acquired. Com-
puting the values of
for all the possible pairs
currently takes a few seconds on a standard PC.
In the next paragraph, we consider the case where a pure
translational motion can be realized to reach the desired image
from the initial one. We will then consider more complex dis-
placements.
1) Pure Translational Motion: We compare in Fig. 1 the re-
sults obtained with our features given in (19) and those obtained
using the centroid coordinates
and the area
. For that
ﬁrst experiment, the image plane is parallel to the object plane,
the desired depth
has been set to 0.5 m, and gain
to 0.1. We
can see in Fig. 1 the improvements brought by the proposed fea-
tures (corresponding plots are in dashed lines), since they allow
obtaining the same exponential decoupled decrease for the vi-
sual features and for the components of the camera velocity. As
expected, the camera 3-D trajectory is a pure straight line using
the proposed features, while it is not using the other ones. Note
that using a bad estimation of
with our features just has a gain
effect. Thus, it changes the time to convergence of the system,
but not the robot trajectory nor the exponential decoupled de-
crease of the features (as long as
).
The results still remain good when the image and object
planes are not parallel (see Fig. 3). In that case,
has again
been set to 0.5 m, and rotation
has been speciﬁed, by
Fig. 4.
Results for a complex motion when the desired object position is
parallel to the image plane. (a) Initial image. (b) Camera 3-D trajectory. (c)
s   s
m. (d) v cm/s and dg/s.
hand, as a rotation of 30 around the
axis. The camera 3-D
trajectory is still a straight line, while if the virtual rotation is
not applied, rotational motions are involved to reach the goal,
whatever the visual features used. This validates the selected
features to control the translational motions, and also the im-
portance of applying a virtual rotation when the desired object
position is not parallel to the image plane.
2) Complex Motion: We now test our scheme for displace-
ments involving very large translations and rotations. We ﬁrst
consider the case where the image and object planes are par-
allel at the desired position. The desired image is depicted in
Fig. 1(b), while the initial one is in Fig. 4(a). The numerical
value of the interaction matrix computed for the desired posi-
tion is given by
As expected, we can note that
is block triangular with
main terms around the diagonal. Its condition number, 2.60, is
very satisfactory. The obtained results are given in Fig. 4. They
show the good behavior of the control law. Indeed, there is no
oscillation in the decreasing of the visual features [see Fig. 4(c)],
and there is only one small oscillation for only two components
of the camera velocity [see Fig. 4(d)]. Even if the rotation to re-
alize between the initial and the desired positions is very large,
the obtained camera 3-D trajectory is satisfactory [see Fig. 4(b)].
The decoupling properties are thus ensured in a large neighbor-
hood of the desired position, despite the fact that the current ob-
ject plane parameters are never computed nor introduced in the
control law. The behavior obtained with our pure image-based
method is thus similar to that obtained with a hybrid control
scheme (but it does not necessitate an estimation of the camera
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

TAHRI AND CHAUMETTE: POINT-BASED AND REGION-BASED IMAGE MOMENTS FOR VISUAL SERVOING OF PLANAR OBJECTS
1123
Fig. 5.
Results for a complex motion when the desired object position is not
parallel to the image plane. (a) Initial image. (b) Camera 3-D trajectory. (c)
s   s
m. (d) v cm/s and dg/s.
Fig. 6.
Results using a bad calibration. (a) Initial image. (b) Camera 3-D
trajectory. (c) s   s
m. (d) v cm/s and dg/s.
displacement at each iteration of the control scheme). We can
ﬁnally note that using moments of order 5 (involved in
and
) does not introduce signiﬁcant noise in the control law.
The results obtained when the image and the object planes
are not parallel for the desired position are given in Fig. 5. We
can note the very large difference between the initial image
[Fig. 5(a)] and the desired one [Fig. 3(b)]. Thanks to the virtual
rotation applied and the visual features selected, the camera tra-
jectory is still very satisfactory, as well as the decreasing of the
visual features and the components of the camera velocity.
3) Results With a Bad Calibration and Object Occlu-
sion: We now test the robustness of our approach with respect
to a bad calibration of the system. In the experiment reported in
Fig. 6, errors have been added to camera intrinsic parameters
Fig. 7.
Representation of f(e ) for the “brain” and for the pair. (a) (c ; c
).
(b) (c ; c ).
Fig. 8.
Results obtained with the “brain” for a desired object position parallel
to the image plane. (a) Initial image. (b) Desired image. (c) s   s
m. (d) v
cm/s and dg/s. (e) Camera 3-D trajectory.
(25% on the focal length and 20 pixels on the coordinates of the
principal point) and to the object plane parameters (
m, instead of
m). The lighting conditions from the
initial position [see Fig. 6(a)] to the desired one [see Fig. 1(b)]
are also different. Furthermore, an occlusion has been gener-
ated, since the object is not completely in the camera FOV at
the beginning of the servo. Despite the worse conditions of the
experiments, the system still converges, and, as soon as the
occlusion ends (after iteration 30), the behavior of the system
is similar to that of the previous experiments, which validates
the robustness of our scheme with respect to modeling errors.
4) Results for Another Object: We now consider another ob-
ject, a “brain” [see Fig. 8(a) and (b)]. For that object, pair
has been selected to control the rotational motion
and
. In-
deed, it is clear from Fig. 7 that this pair is now adequate, while
is not. The numerical value of the interaction matrix
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

1124
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 21, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2005
Fig. 9.
Results obtained with the “brain” for a desired object position
non-parallel to the image plane. (a) Initial image. (b) Desired image. (c) Visual
features s   s m. (d) v cm/s and dg/s. (e) Camera 3-D trajectory.
corresponding to the desired conﬁguration given in Fig. 8(b) is
given by
Once again, we can note the nice form of
whose condition
number is 3.14. We can also note in Fig. 8(c)–(e) the correct
behavior of the control law, which is very similar to the one
obtained with the “whale.”
Similarly, if we consider a desired conﬁguration of the object
plane non-parallel to the image plane, the behavior obtained is
still satisfactory, thanks to the virtual rotation applied (see Fig. 9,
where
has again been speciﬁed as a rotation of 30 around
the
axis).
B. Experimental Results Using Discrete Objects
Discrete objects are now considered. The ﬁrst one is very
simple and composed of 17 “white dots” (see Fig. 11). For
that object, several pairs of moments invariants can be chosen,
such as
or
(see Fig. 10). In the following ex-
periments, we have chosen the pair
. Two cases for the
desired camera position have been also considered. Either the
image plane is parallel to the object, or it is not. The corre-
sponding images are given in Fig. 11(a) and (b).
1) Pure Translational Motion: In this experiment, the same
pure translation
cm
cm
cm is between the
initial and the desired conﬁgurations for both parallel and non-
Fig. 10.
Representation of f(e ) for the set of points and for the pair.
(a) (c ; c
). (b) (c ; c ).
Fig. 11.
Pure translational motion. (a) Desired image when the object is
parallel to the image plane. (b) Desired image when the object is not parallel
to the image plane. (c) Initial image for a pure translation from (a). (d) Initial
image for a pure translation from (b). (e) Comparison of s   s
m. (f)
Comparison of 
cm/s. (g) Camera 3-D trajectory when the object is parallel
to the image plane (a straight line, using our features). (h) Idem when the object
is not parallel to the image plane.
parallel cases [see Fig. 11(c) and (d)]. We have compared the
results obtained using the moments proposed in Section III-A
as visual features [see (19) and (21)], and using all the points
coordinates
.
In both parallel and non-parallel cases, we can see in
Fig. 11(e)–(h) the improvements brought using moments and,
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

TAHRI AND CHAUMETTE: POINT-BASED AND REGION-BASED IMAGE MOMENTS FOR VISUAL SERVOING OF PLANAR OBJECTS
1125
Fig. 12.
Results for a complex motion using a discrete object, compared using
our visual features and using a basic image-based approach. (a) Initial image.
(b) Desired image. (c) s   s
m using moments. (d) v
cm/s and dg/s using
moments. (e) s   s
m using image-points coordinates. (f) v
cm/s and dg/s
using image-points coordinates. (g) Image points trajectories (with dashed lines
using image points coordinates). (h) Camera trajectories (almost a straight line
with our features).
for the non-parallel case, brought by the virtual rotation. In-
deed, they allow obtaining a pure exponential decrease for the
visual features, and generate exactly the same camera velocity.
As expected, the camera 3-D trajectory is a pure straight line in
both cases using the proposed method. When points coordinates
are used, we no longer have a pure exponential decrease for the
visual features and for the camera velocity components. The
camera trajectory is thus no longer a straight line. Rotational
motions (unfortunately, not visible on the presented plots) are
even involved when points are used for the non-parallel case.
2) Complex Motion and Comparison wrt Basic Image-Based
Visual Servoing: We now consider a complex displacement,
and we present a comparison between our image-based method
using six combinations of moments and the traditional image-
based method, where the coordinates of the image points are
used as input to the control scheme. The initial image is given in
Fig. 12(a), while the desired one is given in Fig. 12(b). The cor-
responding displacement is very large (
cm,
cm,
cm,
,
,
), and the
desired position is such that there is a rotation of
around the
Fig. 13.
Results with modeling errors. (a) s   s
m. (b) v
cm/s and dg/s.
(c) Image points trajectories. (d) Camera trajectory (almost the same, with or
without modeling errors).
camera axis between the object plane and the image plane.
As for the other objects considered previously, the interaction
matrix using the moments after the virtual rotation is sparse and
block triangular
Despite the large displacement to realize, we can note in
Fig. 12(c) and (d) the decoupled and exponential decrease of
the six combinations of moments and the six camera velocity
components. If points coordinates are used as input to the
control law [see Fig. 12(e) and (f)], the system still converges,
but without these nice properties. The difference of behaviors
is particularly clear on the trajectories of the image points
[see Fig. 12(g)] and the camera trajectory [see Fig. 12(h)],
where our scheme leads to almost a pure 3-D straight line.
The results obtained using the proposed combinations of 2-D
moments are thus similar to those of a hybrid visual servoing.
Even if currently limited to planar objects, our method has
the advantage that it is not necessary to explicitly solve the
matching problem between each point of the object extracted
on the current image, and the corresponding point extracted on
the desired image. Contrary to the other existing methods (that
is, basic image-based, position-based, and hybrid schemes),
it is sufﬁcient to check that the same set of points is used to
compute the moments in the current and the desired images.
3) Results With a Bad System Calibration: We now test the
robustness of our approach with respect to modeling errors. In
the presented experiment, errors have been added to camera in-
trinsic parameters (25% on the focal length and 20 pixels on
the coordinates of the principal point) and to the object depth
(
m instead of
m). Furthermore, an error
equal to 10 has been set in
. The results are given in Fig. 13.
Even if the trajectory of the points are different in the calibrated
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

1126
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 21, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2005
Fig. 14.
Results for complex images. (a) Initial image. (b) Desired image.
(c) ks   s k m. (d) v cm/s and dg/s.
and coarse-calibrated cases [compare Figs. 12(g) and 13(c)],
which is mainly due to the large errors introduced in the camera
intrinsic parameters, all the errors introduced have a small ef-
fect on the decreasing of the moments [compare Figs. 12(c) and
13(a)], on the camera velocity components [compare Figs. 12(d)
and 13(b)], and thus on the camera 3-D trajectory, which is
still very near to a pure straight line, as in the calibrated case
[see Fig. 13(d), where the trajectories can be compared]. Let
us note that the basic image-based method using points coor-
dinates as input to the control law does not allow the system
to converge with the same modeling errors, since some points
leave the camera FOV. These results validate the strong robust-
ness of our scheme with respect to modeling errors, and the fact
that the decoupling properties are not sensitive to a coarse ap-
proximation of the virtual rotation, since they are ensured in a
neighborhood of the virtually rotated desired position.
4) Results for Complex Images: Finally, we present experi-
mental results obtained with more complex images (see Fig. 14)
using the pair
. The considered points have been ex-
tracted using the well-known Harris detector and tracked using a
simple sum of squared distances algorithm. We can note that the
plots obtained are more noisy than using simple dots, because of
the less accurate points extraction. It is mainly noticeable on
and
components of the camera velocity, since these values
depend on moments of order 5 (while
and
are not noisy
at all, since their value only depends on moments of order 2).
Despite this noise, the exponential decrease, the convergence,
and the stability are still obtained, which proves the validity of
our approach. This results could be improved easily using a sub-
pixel accuracy image tracker, such as the Shi-Tomasi algorithm
[25].
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed a new visual servoing scheme
based on image moments, valid for dense and discrete objects.
Six features have been designed to decouple the DOFs of the
system, which provides a large domain of convergence, a good
behavior of the visual features, and an adequate camera trajec-
tory. A new method, based on a virtual camera rotation, has also
been proposed to extend the decoupling properties for any de-
sired camera orientation with respect to the object. The experi-
mental results have shown the validity of our approach, and its
robustness with respect to modeling errors. We have obtained
results similar to using a hybrid visual servoing scheme, but
with a more simple cooking of the visual features, since our
method does not necessitate any point-to-point matching, any
homography estimation, nor any partial displacement estima-
tion at each iteration of the control scheme. Future work will be
devoted to determining a unique pair of moments invariants able
to efﬁciently control
and
, whatever the considered object.
We would like also to generalize the results to nonplanar objects,
and to determine analytical conditions to ensure the global sta-
bility of the system in the presence of modeling errors.
APPENDIX
The set of invariants involved in (9) are given by [27]
REFERENCES
[1] Y. S. Abu-Mustapha and D. Psaltis, “Image normalization by complex
moments,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Machine Intell., vol. PAMI-7, no.
1, pp. 46–55, Jan. 1985.
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

TAHRI AND CHAUMETTE: POINT-BASED AND REGION-BASED IMAGE MOMENTS FOR VISUAL SERVOING OF PLANAR OBJECTS
1127
[2] S. O. Belkassim, M. Shridhar, and M. Ahmadi, “Shape-contour recog-
nition using moment invariants,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Pattern Recog.,
Atlantic City, NJ, Jun. 1990, pp. 649–651.
[3] F. Chaumette, “Potential problems of stability and convergence in
image-based and position-based visual servoing,” in The Conﬂuence of
Vision and Control.
New York: Springer-Verlag, 1998, vol. 237, pp.
66–78.
[4]
, “Image moments: A general and useful set of features for visual
servoing,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 713–723, Aug. 2004.
[5] C. Collewet and F. Chaumette, “A contour approach for image-based
control of objects with complex shape,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst., vol. 1, Takamatsu, Japan, Nov. 2000, pp. 751–756.
[6] P. I. Corke and S. A. Hutchinson, “A new partitioned approach to image-
based visual servo control,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 17, no. 4,
pp. 507–515, Aug. 2001.
[7] N. J. Cowan, J. D. Weingarten, and D. E. Koditschek, “Visual servoing
via navigation functions,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 18, no. 4, pp.
521–533, Aug. 2002.
[8] K. Deguchi, “A direct interpretation of dynamic images with camera and
object motions for vision-guided robot control,” Int. J. Computer Vision,
vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 7–20, Jun. 2000.
[9] B. Espiau, F. Chaumette, and P. Rives, “A new approach to visual
servoing in robotics,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 8, no. 3, pp.
313–326, Jun. 1992.
[10] J. Flusser, “On the independance of rotation moment invariants,” Pattern
Recog., vol. 33, pp. 1405–1410, 2000.
[11] T. Hamel and R. Mahony, “Visual servoing of an underactuated dynamic
rigid body system: An image-based approach,” IEEE Trans. Robot.
Autom., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 187–198, Apr. 2002.
[12] M.-K. Hu, “Visual pattern recognition by moments invariants,” IRE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 179–187, Feb. 1962.
[13] S. Hutchinson, G. Hager, and P. Corke, “A tutorial on visual servo con-
trol,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 651–670, Oct. 1996.
[14] M. Iwatsuki and N. Okiyama, “A new formulation of visual servoing
based on cylindrical coordinates system,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 21,
no. 2, pp. 266–273, Apr. 2005.
[15] J.-S. Lee, I. H. Suh, B.-J. You, and S.-R. Oh, “A novel visual servoing ap-
proach involving disturbance observer,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., vol. 1, Detroit, MI, May 1999, pp. 269–274.
[16] R. Mahony, P. Corke, and F. Chaumette, “Choice of image features
for depth-axis control in image-based visual servo control,” in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Lausanne, Switzerland, Oct.
2002, pp. 390–395.
[17] E. Malis, “Improving vision-based control using efﬁcient second-order
minimization techniques,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., New
Orleans, LA, Apr. 2004, pp. 1843–1848.
[18] E. Malis, F. Chaumette, and S. Boudet, “2-1/2 D visual servoing,” IEEE
Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 238–250, Apr. 1999.
[19] A. G. Mamistvalov, “n-dimensional moment invariants and conceptual
theory of recognition n-dimensional solids,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Machine Intell., vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 819–831, Aug. 1998.
[20] Y. Mezouar and F. Chaumette, “Path planning for robust image-based
control,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 534–549, Aug.
2002.
[21] R. Mukundan and K. R. Ramakrishnan, Moment Functions in Image
Analysis Theory and Application, Singapore: World Scientiﬁc, 1998.
[22] R. J. Prokop and A. P. Reeves, “A survey of moments-based techniques
for unoccluded object representation,” Graph. Models Image Process.,
vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 438–460, Sep. 1992.
[23] S. S. Reddi, “Radial and angular moment invariants for image identiﬁ-
cation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Machine Intell., vol. PAMI-3, no. 2,
pp. 240–242, Feb. 1981.
[24] P. Rives and J. Azinheira, “Linear structures following by an airship
using vanishing points and horizon line in a visual servoing scheme,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., vol. 1, New Orleans, LA, Apr.
2004, pp. 255–260.
[25] J. Shi and C. Tomasi, “Good features to track,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Computer Vis. Pattern Recog., Seattle, WA, Jun. 1994, pp. 593–600.
[26] C. Steger, “On the calculation of arbitrary moments of polygons,”
Munchen Univ., Munchen, Germany, Tech. Rep. FGBV-96-05, Oct.
1996.
[27] O. Tahri, “Application des moments à l’asservissement visuel et au
calcul de pose,” Ph.D. dissertation (in French), Univ. de Rennes 1,
IRISA, Rennes, France, Mar. 2004.
[28] O. Tahri and F. Chaumette, “Application of moment invariants to visual
servoing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Taipei, Taiwan, Sep.
2003, pp. 4276–4281.
[29]
, “Complex objects pose estimation based on image moment invari-
ants,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Barcelona, Spain, Apr.
2005, pp. 438–443.
[30] M. R. Teague, “Image analysis via the general theory of moments,” J.
Opt. Soc. Amer., vol. 70, pp. 920–930, Aug. 1980.
[31] L. Vincent and P. Soille, “Watersheds in digital spaces: An efﬁcient al-
gorithm based on immersion simulations,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Machine Intell., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 583–598, Jun. 1992.
[32] A. Walin and O. Kübler, “Complete sets of complex Zernike moments
invariants and the role of the pseudo-invariants,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Machine Intell., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 1106–1110, Nov. 1995.
[33] W. Wilson, C. Hulls, and G. Bell, “Relative end-effector control using
Cartesian position-based visual servoing,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom.,
vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 684–696, Oct. 1996.
[34] P. Zanne, G. Morel, and F. Plestan, “Robust 3D vision-based control and
planning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., vol. 5, New Orleans,
LA, Apr. 2004, pp. 4423–4428.
Omar Tahri was born in Fez, Morocco, in 1976. He
received the Master’s degree in photonics, images
and system control from Louis Pasteur University,
Strasbourg, France, in 2000, and the Ph.D degree
in computer science from the University of Rennes,
Rennes, France, in 2004.
He is currently in a Postdoctoral position with
CEA-LIST, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France. His re-
search interests include robotics and computer
vision, especially visual servoing.
François Chaumette (M’98) was born in Nantes,
France, in 1963 and graduated from École Nationale
Supérieure de Mécanique, Nantes, in 1987. He
received the Ph.D degree and “Habilitation à Diriger
des Recherches” in computer science from the
University of Rennes, Rennes, France, in 1990 and
1998, respectively.
Since 1990, he has been with IRISA/INRIA,
Rennes, where he is now “Directeur de Recherches”
and head of the Lagadic Group. His research inter-
ests include robotics and computer vision, especially
visual servoing and active perception.
Authorized licensed use limited to: J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru. Downloaded on February 10,2024 at 06:48:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

