Received: 15 October 2017 |
Revised: 24 September 2018 | Accepted: 29 September 2018
DOI: 10.1002/rob.21840
R E G U L A R A R T I C L E
Bioinspired design of a landing system with soft shock
absorbers for autonomous aerial robots
Ketao Zhang1
| Pisak Chermprayong1 | Dimos Tzoumanikas2
| Wenbin Li2 |
Marius Grimm2
| Mariusz Smentoch1 | Stefan Leutenegger2 | Mirko Kovac1
1Aerial Robotics Lab, Department of
Aeronautics, Imperial College London,
London, UK
2Department of Computing, Imperial College
London, London, UK
Correspondence
Ketao Zhang, Aerial Robotics Lab, Department
of Aeronautics, Imperial College London,
London, SW7 2AZ, UK.
Email: ketao.zhang@imperial.ac.uk, ketao.
zhang@qmul.ac.uk
Funding information
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council, UK, Grant/Award Number: EP/
N018494/1
Abstract
One of the main challenges for autonomous aerial robots is to land safely on a target
position on varied surface structures in real‐world applications. Most of current aerial
robots (especially multirotors) use only rigid landing gears, which limit the
adaptability to environments and can cause damage to the sensitive cameras and
other electronics onboard. This paper presents a bioinpsired landing system for
autonomous aerial robots, built on the inspire–abstract–implement design paradigm
and an additive manufacturing process for soft thermoplastic materials. This novel
landing system consists of 3D printable Sarrus shock absorbers and soft landing pads
which are integrated with an one‐degree‐of‐freedom actuation mechanism. Both
designs of the Sarrus shock absorber and the soft landing pad are analyzed via finite
element analysis, and are characterized with dynamic mechanical measurements. The
landing system with 3D printed soft components is characterized by completing
landing tests on flat, convex, and concave steel structures and grassy field in a total of
60 times at different speeds between 1 and 2 m/s. The adaptability and shock
absorption capacity of the proposed landing system is then evaluated and
benchmarked against rigid legs. It reveals that the system is able to adapt to varied
surface structures and reduce impact force by 540N at maximum. The bioinspired
landing strategy presented in this paper opens a promising avenue in Aerial
Biorobotics, where a cross‐disciplinary approach in vehicle control and navigation is
combined with soft technologies, enabled with adaptive morphology.
K E Y W O R D S
aerial robotics, bioinspired methods, control, mechanisms
1
|
INTRODUCTION
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) experience an ever‐growing
demand to perform reliably in real‐world applications such as in
postdisaster rescue, pollution monitoring, ecology, infrastructure
inspection, and smart agriculture (Floreano & Wood, 2015). Small
aerial robotic systems (in particular multirotor UAVs and related
technologies) not only raise great interests in the robotics research
community, but also lead to extensive development on the
consumer market. One major focus of the current research in this
field includes multifunctional robotic systems capable of flying,
perching, gliding, climbing, and manipulation (Kalantari & Spenko,
2014;
Low,
Hu,
Mohammed,
Tangorra,
&
Kovac,
2015)
in
unstructured
outdoor environments. Seeking
energy efficient
locomotion, a jump‐gliding miniature robot (Vidyasagar, Zufferey,
Floreano, & Kovač, 2015) is able to take off from ground using high‐
power jumping mechanisms (Kovač, Schlegel, Zufferey, & Floreano,
2010), and uses gliding flight to effectively exploit the height
J Field Robotics. 2018;1–22.
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/rob
© 2018 Wiley Periodicals Inc. |
1

gained after the boost for energy‐efficient mobility. To overcome
limited endurance and restrictions on current battery capacity of
small‐scale
aerial
robots,
the
Stanford
Climbing
and
Aerial
Maneuvering Platform (Pope et al., 2017) provides one promising
solution
which
effectively
combines
directional
attachment
(Estrada, Hawkes, Christensen, & Cutkosky, 2014) and climbing
(Dickson & Clark, 2013) technologies. Other examples include
adaptive morphology design principles for multimodal locomotion,
such as the flying and walking robot, DALER, which is able to use its
wings as legs to move on the ground, leading to effective and
adaptive locomotion in different environments (Daler, Lecoeur,
Hählen, & Floreano, 2013).
The efforts above explored a number of aerial robotic systems
capable of perching and multimodal locomotion in unstructured
environments. These studies demonstrated that dynamic transition
between flight and landing is an essential phase of a complete flight
mission for autonomously piloted multimodel UAVs. Looking closely
at landing systems for small multirotor UAVs, there are various
landing gear designs for small UAVs and micro aerial vehicles (MAVs)
for both scientific research and commercial production. However,
most commercial designs have rigid frames (Figure 1a) aimed at
vertical landing on flat surface of structured environments. In
contrast to rigid frames widely used for commercial products, a
number of interesting designs (Figure 1b–f) dedicated to simple
linkage‐based, movable landing gears have been explored recently. In
these designs, either gravity‐powered passive actuation mechanisms
or motor‐operated actuation mechanisms were used. While these
systems are simple and lightweight, their fixed design with a rigid
frame can lead to high impact forces on the UAV platform during
landing, as well as blocked views of the onboard cameras and a
largely restricted operating space
for additional manipulators.
Another challenge is that passive actuation mechanisms have
difficulties to keep the UAVs in balance and remain upright with
pure friction between grippers and structures.
Though high impact energy arise from dynamic landing, it was
rarely taken into account in most of the designs of small‐scale aerial
robotic systems for real‐world applications. To facilitate dynamic
landing of aerial robots in various terrain structures, weather
conditions, landing modes, and speeds, the landing mechanisms need
to be adaptable to varied surface structures and functional for
absorbing the impact energy. This is particularly important for
dynamic landing maneuvers at fast speed, where the impact energy
can reach high values that can damage the vehicle frame, sensitive
cameras, and other electronics onboard. Further, the leg mechanisms
have to be lightweight, given the limited payload capacity of these
small aerial robots.
A recent cross‐disciplinary study of adopting origami‐folding
technologies in engineering applications revealed that origami‐
inspired mechanisms based on foldable tessellations have great
potential for energy absorption applications (Tolman, Delimont,
Howell, & Fullwood, 2014). Examples include the thin‐walled energy
absorption devices (Ma & You, 2014; Ma, Hou, Chen, & You, 2016;
Song, Chen, & Lu, 2012) for transportation vehicles. Further,
engineering principles were applied to the performance evaluation
of foldable origami artefacts in artistic disciplines, leading to novel
solutions to various engineering problems in real‐world applications
(Dollar, Cho, Fearing, & Park, 2015; Kuribayashi et al., 2006; Zhang,
Qiu, & Dai, 2015).
In this study, we first review biological landing mechanisms and
explore the landing methods, with a particular focus on the principles
of legs and the sensory system commonly used by animal flyers, such
as the honey bees, vampire bats, and a steppe eagle. Taking the
biological landing techniques of the animal flyers as a source of
inspiration, we abstract key functions of different types of legs and
sensory systems to inform the design of a landing mechanism for
small aerial robots such as the quadrotor UAV in this study.
With the abstracted functions as guidance of practical design, this
paper proposes a new adaptive landing mechanism for autonomous
FIGURE 1
Designs of landing mechanisms for unmanned aerial vehicles especially for multicopters: (a) The rigid landing gear with pneumatic
shock absorber of DJI M100 (MATRICE 100 Quadcopter for Developers, 2015); (b) a snapping claw mechanism‐based design with soft claws
(Culler, Thomas, & Lee, 2012); (c) a passive actuation mechanism with tendon driven claws (Doyle et al., 2013); (d) a four‐bar linkage‐based landing
mechanism with compliant gripping digits (Tieu et al., 2016); (e) a Sarrus linage‐based landing mechanism (Burroughs, Freckleton, Abbott, & Minor,
2016); and (f) a landing mechanism based on legged robots (Luo, Li, Li, & Dai, 2016) [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
2
|
ZHANG ET AL.

aerial robots in a way of combining both advanced flight control
based on an onboard visual sensory system and resilience of 3D
printable soft shock absorbers and landing pads.
The focus and contributions of this study are as follows:
1. A aerial robot (Figure 2) capable of performing autonomous
landing maneuvers by adopting combined visual–inertial guidance
and mechanical landing system, built upon the inspire–abstract–
implement design paradigm.
2. A novel design for an adaptive landing mechanism that allows
active morphing in accordance with flight phases and damped
landing on varied structures and terrain.
3. The design and fabrication process of soft shock absorbers with
shell mechanisms and soft landing pads with living hinges that can
both be 3D‐printed with various materials, such as thermoplastic
composite materials.
In the following sections, we first review the landing strategies of
flying animals and abstract landing methods and techniques that can
be adopted by autonomous aerial robots for performing safe landing
maneuvers. Taking inspiration from animal flyers, we present an
overview of the system of the proposed autonomous aerial robotic
system in Section 3, and the design and analysis, fabrication, and
experimental characterization of 3D printable shell mechanisms and
soft landing pads in Section 4. With a fully integrated prototype of
the proposed robotic system, we then validate and benchmark the
performances of the landing system in Section 5, and lay out
conclusions in Section 6.
2
|
THE BIOINSPIRED STRATEGY AND
MECHANISM FOR AUTONOMOUS LANDING
2.1
|
Brief review on biological principles during
landing maneuvers
The study of natural systems revealed that evolutionary adaptation
enables objects and processes in nature to be highly effective and
robust (Bhushan, 2009; Kovač, 2016). While the natural world
evolves, its processes provides an extensive source of inspiration for
creating comprehensive models of artificial systems that can mimic
certain functions of their counterparts in nature (Manzanera & Smith,
2015). The bioinspired design paradigm (Kovač, 2014) and perching
principles (Liu, Ravi, Kolomenskiy, & Tanaka, 2016; Roderick,
Cutkosky, & Lentink, 2017) provide cross‐disciplinary approaches
to developing new devices by mimicking the natural world in the way
of adopting concepts and principles in nature to solve engineering
challenges.
Powered and unpowered flight is a unique form of locomotion
used by living species such as insects, birds, and gliding mammals
with variuos landing maneuvers being adopted by each (Manzanera &
Smith, 2015). Analyzing and learning from the landing techniques of
these animal flyers in nature can guide us to generate innovative
ideas and concepts for the design of effective and robust landing
systems of small aerial robots.
The overall landing strategy of animal flyers and gliders consists
of comprehensive techniques, where behaviors are combined with
sensing and actuation of wings, tail, legs, and other body structures.
In nature, dynamic landing combines aerodynamics, multimodal
sensing, and learning. This paper focuses on reviewing and extracting
the physical aspects of the landing process, with particular attention
to how legs can be designed to damp impact during the dynamic
transition phases between flight and landing.
Here we briefly review the functions of legs in selected examples
of animal flyers, from insects, birds, and mammals, as illustrated in
the ascending order of size in Figure 2. More detailed reviews of
landing strategies in the animal kingdom can be found in literature
(Altenbach, 1979; Carruthers, Taylor, Walker, & Thomas, 2007;
Carruthers, Thomas, & Taylor, 2007; Evangelista, Kraft, Dacke,
Reinhard
&
Srinivasan,
2010;
Kovač,
2016;
Manzanera
&
Smith, 2015).
The honey bee (Apis mellifera; Evangelista et al., 2010) uses optic
flow and stereo‐vision to approach the landing surface, and then
enters into a quasi‐hover state close to the surface (Figure 3a).
Subsequently, it performs a stable hover while extending its legs to
land with the hind and middle legs touching the surface. Although the
impact speed is very small due to the hovering position before
landing, the legs act as impact energy absorbers of the short drop by
touching the ground (Manzanera & Smith, 2015).
FIGURE 2
The autonomous quadrotor unmanned aerial vehicle, designed and built at the Aerial Robotics Lab with an one‐degree‐of‐freedom
retractable landing mechanism, performing an alighting maneuver: (a) The prelanding stable flight with retracted landing gear; (b) approaching the
landing site with deployed landing gear, and (c) successful landing on the target [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
ZHANG ET AL.
|
3

The maneuvers in the landing phase of the vampire bat are
different from the approach taken by bees, and can vary depending
on the flight stage before alighting.
A simplified three‐stage
procedure of a typical alighting maneuver on horizontal surface
from hovering flight is shown in Figure 3b. An interesting feature in
the landing of a Vampire bat is that its elbows have a pronounced
extension, with the thumbs being aligned nearly in line with the long
axis of the forearms before contact with the surface. While the
thumbs touch the ground, they bend upward at the metacarpopha-
langeal joints to absorb the impact and adapt to the surface structure
(Altenbach, 1979). This is followed by dorsolateral bending of the
first metacarpal and the touching of the carpi to the surface. The
pectoral limbs take in nearly all of the energy during dynamic landing,
while the hind limbs act as stabilizers after impact with the surface.
The mechanisms allowing vampire bats to land at relatively high
speed demonstrate a promising solution for the dynamic landing of
small aerial robots.
Steppe eagles (Aquila nipalensis) take yet a different strategy.
First the eagle stretches its legs in the forward direction in the
second phase of landing maneuver as illustrated in Figure 3c while
the fully extended wings act as aerodynamic breaks to aid
deceleration. This strategy relies heavily on using wing morphing
to adapt the landing velocity before impact, in combination with
visual sensing (Carruthers, Taylor, et al., 2007; Carruthers, Thomas,
et al., 2007).
By analyzing above biological landing mechanisms, we can
abstract the landing methods with a particular focus on principles
of the legs and the sensory systems.
The following principles are identified to have promise for being
implemented in the phases of landing maneuver of aerial robots.
1. Vision‐based sensory system that guides the approach behaviors
and mechanical adaptability for a robust landing on a target
position on the surface.
2. Two‐level adaptivity of the damping structure, with the first level
to locally adapt to surface architecture and second level to damp
the high impact.
3. Mechanical adaptability of the soft landing pad to the surface,
using mechanical reflex in the design of the system without the
need for surface sensing and complex control.
2.2
|
The strategy inspired by biological landing
techniques
Here we present our general strategy to achieve dynamic landing in a
representative landing scenario in the finals of the The Mohamed Bin
Zayed International Robotics Challenge 2017 (MBZIRC2017)1, which
requires the MAV to land on a horizontal surface on top of a car
moving at various speed. Inspired by the landing techniques of animal
flyers, we have divided the mission of searching the moving platform
and alighting the MAV on target into following steps:
1. Automatic take‐off with a robust vision‐based autopilot employ-
ing visual–inertial simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM)
and model‐predictive control (MPC).
2. Search for the landing pattern on moving vehicle with the use of
visual detection and tracking.
FIGURE 3
Computer restructured key frames of animal flyers (Manzanera & Smith, 2015) during alighting maneuvers and abstracted
landing methods, including leg mechanisms and sensor systems adopted by representative living species of insects, mammals, and birds. The
first row illustrates the sequence of leg movements during the transition from hover to land of the honey bee (Evangelista et al., 2010); the
second row shows the elbow extension, thumb touchdown, and dorsolateral bending during the short quadrupedal drop of vampire bats
(Altenbach, 1979); the last row shows the legs of an eagle extending forward, and the fully stretched configuration before the final short bipedal
drop (Carruthers, Taylor, et al., 2007; Carruthers, Thomas, et al., 2007) [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
1The Mohamed Bin Zayed International Robotics Challenge (MBZIRC) is an international
robotics competition, which aims to provide an environment that harbors innovation and
technical excellence, while encouraging spectacular performance with robotics technologies.
4
|
ZHANG ET AL.

3. Approach the landing pattern on top of the moving vehicle with
accurate tracking and motion prediction.
4. Landing the MAV with the use of a retractable landing system
employing 3D printable shock absorbers and soft landing pads
with magnets.
With the principles learned from animal flyers, our general
approach to the landing maneuvers of the quadrotor MAV consists of
three corresponding phases (as illustrated in Figure 4), including (a)
approaching, (b) alighting, and (c) stabilizing. This operation process
will enable transitions from high speed descending flight to a short
drop by combining robust visual guidance and mechanical resilience
of the proposed leg mechanism.
3
|
SYSTEM OVERVIEW OF THE
AUTONOMOUS MAV
The constrains for optimizing the design of an autonomous MAV
include the total weight of subsystems, high‐performance onboard
computer, and visual sensors (which are essential for facilitate the
MAV to complete the mission in outdoor environment), as well as the
size of landing pattern placed on top of the roof of the moving
vehicle. With consideration of these constraints, we have used DJI
F450 as the quadrotor platform and a modular open‐architecture for
the electronic hardware, to allow quick reconfiguration of the layout
to match the details of MBZIRC2017 mission requirements. A 3D
model of the MAV developed in this study with a DJI F450 frame is
illustrated in Figure 5. Here, we took the DJI Flamewheel F450, since
its frame arms are made of ultrastrength material, providing crash‐
worthiness and the flexibility and abundant assemble space for
further customization. The technical data of the MAV platform and
customized specifications are listed in Table 1.
3.1
|
Retractable leg mechanism with 3d printable
soft shock absorbers
One of the critical challenge for MAVs is the limited payload capacity
comparing to those large‐scale fixed wing drones and ground robots.
It is always important to keep subsystems for small UAVs to be
lightweight to maintain proper trade‐off between flight duration and
the added payload. To complete the MBZIRC2017 mission described
in Section 2 within the shortest time, the quadrotor UAV requires
aggressive and agile movement during the searching and approaching
phases of the whole process in Figure 4.
Taking all requirements above into account, we propose a new
retractable leg mechanism which allows the MAV to fold its legs thus
FIGURE 4
General strategy for alighting the MAV on the horizontal surface of a moving target (in the flight arena (1:1000) of The Mohamed
Bin Zayed International Robotics Challenge competition). (a) Before taking off: The robot in stationary mode at the start location. (b) After vertical
take‐off: The robot reaches a certain height and starts searching the moving target with landing pattern on top. (c) The robot approaches the
moving vehicle with automated motion prediction. (d) Landing mechanism deploys from the folded stage, allowing soft contact between the landing
pads and the target. (e) The landing pads bend upwards and the shock absorber deforms for energy absorption, while the the magnets on the
landing pads attach to the platform to stabilize the MAV while as the target is still moving [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 5
Three‐dimensional model of
the integrated quadrotor micro aerial
vehicle with retractable landing gear, 3D
printable shock absorbers, Intel NUCi7,
Intel Realsense visual sensor, and an
additional downward looking camera
[Color figure can be viewed at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]
ZHANG ET AL.
|
5

maneuver in a compact configuration in the same way of animal
flyers while hovering and dynamic maneuvering.
The penultimate stage—one of the most important tasks of the
challenge in MBZIRC2017—is to land the MAV on a moving target.
This flight transition phase requires not only precise real‐time
tracking, following, and estimating of the moving target with the
visual sensory system, but also mechanical robustness, allowing the
MAV to alight on the horizontal surface and absorb shock energy
associated with high‐speed landing as the MAV makes contact with
the moving target.
Inspired by the biological landing techniques of animal flyers,
particularly the use of extensible elements in their legs for shock
absorption, this paper presents a new design of shock absorber with
corrugated shell mechanisms (Figure 5) that can be fabricated with
advanced multimaterial additive manufacturing techniques (MacCurdy,
Katzschmann, Kim, & Rus, 2016a; MacCurdy, Lipton, Li, & Rus, 2016b).
In this study, we selected Onyx, a printable composite material, made
from combining tough nylon with microcarbon fiber reinforcement
(Markforged Materials, 2016) and the flexible ultimaker thermoplastic
polyurethane (TPU) 95A (Ultimaker, 2017).
3.2
|
MAV control and navigation
We describe the software components for intelligence of the MAV in
Figure 6. We follow a fairly classic decomposition of first estimating
the state of the MAV, as well as the landing target followed by a
controller to track a setpoint which in turn is determined by a higher‐
level guidance and state machine. Furthermore, we split the
controller into a high‐level Model‐Predictive Controller, we devel-
oped ourselves and a low‐level attitude and thrust controller
employing an off‐the‐shelf Pixhawk module.
3.2.1
|
State estimation
As a basis for localization of the MAV, we employ an extension of
open keyframe‐based visual–inertial SLAM (OKVIS; Leutenegger
et al., 2014). We have modified the formulation of the underlying
estimator to use the RGB‐D (Red, Green, Blue‐Depth)‐inertial camera
RealSense ZR300 instead of a stereo camera with integrated IMU.
The underlying principle is inspired by ORB‐SLAM 2 (Mur‐Artal &
Tardós, 2017), where we use depth measurements when available to
create landmark observations in a virtual stereo camera.
To detect and track the moving target pattern as specified by the
MBZIRC organizers, we use a downward‐looking fisheye camera and
assume the visual–inertial pose using OKVIS is known accurately
enough. Initial detection follows a fairly straightforward, but highly
optimized vision‐processing pipeline to extract a quadrangle in the
undistorted image, estimating the relative pose and verifying the
appearance of the the landing pattern template. To track the target,
even if it is only partly visible, we formulated an extended Kalman
filter using a model of the dynamics in 3D space that assumes
constant linear velocity and constant orientation in the prediction
step. The update step then uses observations of the tracked
keypoints of the pattern.
3.2.2
|
Controller
The MAV tracks the desired set‐point using a cascaded control
approach. Our high‐level controller follows a linear MPC approach to
output tilt angles and thrust to track position and yaw angle. This is
then followed by the low‐level attitude and thrust controller, where
we employ an off‐the‐shelf Pixhawk board. Finally, a high‐level logic
determines the current state set‐point. First, commanding the drone
to hover at the cross point of the figure‐eight track (where we expect
the vehicle with the landing pattern to pass through), secondly,
TABLE 1
The MBZIRC requirements and technical data of the
customized aerial robot
Characteristics
MBZIRC
requirements
Design
specifications
Flight time
20 min
10 min
Range
>100 x 60 m
2 km
Max size of the UAV
1.2 x 1.2 x 0.5 m
0.85 x 0.85 x 0.2 m
Max speed of
the UAV
30 km/hr
70–80 km/hr
Weight of the UAV
NA
2 kg
Note. MBZIRC: Mohamed Bin Zayed International Robotics Challenge;
UAV: unmanned aerial vehicle.
FIGURE 6
Open keyframe‐based visual‐inertial SLAM
(Leutenegger, Lynen, Bosse, Siegwart, & Furgale, 2014) is used in
combination with the Intel RealSense ZR300 for the visual–inertial
odometry estimation. The MAV state xR is parsed to the target
detection and tracking module. A monochrome FLIR Chameleon 3 is
used for the detection. The target state xT and the MAV state xR are
further used in the MPC to generate a reference quaternion qWB and
reference thrusts
…
T
T
,
,
1
6 for the low‐level controller. A Pixhawk is
used to convert the reference inputs to PWM signals ω
ω
…
,
,
1
6.
IMU: inertial measurement unit; MAV: micro aerial vehicle; MPC:
model‐predictive control; PWM: Pulse Width Modulation [Color
figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
6
|
ZHANG ET AL.

following it to initiate descent, once the MAV has properly caught up.
We describe this logic in more detail in Figure 7 depicting a flowchart
with operating modes including the strategies in the case of target
detection loss.
4
|
THE NOVEL RETRACTABLE LANDING
SYSTEM WITH 3D PRINTABLE SHELL
MECHANISMS FOR SHOCK ABSORPTION
The landing techniques that are used by animal flyers as shown in
Section 2 illustrate that body compliance of the leg mechanisms are
salient features allowing them to perform dynamic landing. In
particular, the following three main functions are important features
for dynamic landing and are abstracted here for implementation in
the aerial robots.
1. Absorb much of the energy arising from landing,
2. Grip to ground/structure with claws, spins, and other techniques,
3. Fold‐up in flight and extend/stretch during landing.
These functions need to be implemented on the aerial robot using
lightweight and robust mechanical solutions. One type of interesting
mechanical systems with both rigid and compliant elements is the
foldable origami inspired mechanisms, in which the hinges are made
from materials with multilayer laminates (Dai & Cannella, 2008) with
inherent compliance. In contrast to rigid‐bodied mechanisms, one
attractive feature of origami‐inspired mechanisms is the possibility to
design their kinematics and compliance by taking the properties of
materials into account (Greenberg, Gong, Magleby, & Howell, 2011).
With the inherent flexibility of the compliant joints, the origami‐
inspired mechanisms have been widely utilized in robotic systems as
compliant manipulators, limbs of walking robots, and end‐effectors of
positioning devices (Li, Vogt, Rus, & Wood, 2017; Salerno, Zhang,
Menciassi, & Dai, 2016).
In this section, we first present the designs of a new Sarrus shock
absorber and a soft landing pad, which employ 3D printable compliant
shells allowing large bending deformation thus absorbing impact
energy. The performance of the individual shell mechanism, the Sarrus
shock absorber, and the landing pad are systematically investigated
through finite‐element analysis (FEA) simulation, fabrication, and
experimental characterization. We then introduce the design of a
one‐degree‐of‐freedom (1‐DOF) actuation mechanism which allows
the landing legs to fold into a compact configuration for agile
maneuver and deploy for landing in a similar way as animal flyers.
4.1
|
Design and FEA simulation of the compliant
shell mechanisms
To facilitate high‐speed dynamic landing on both static and moving
targets, we present the Sarrus shock absorber with 3D printable shell
mechanisms. The compliant shell mechanisms for large range bending
are designed with consideration of the dimension constraints and the
maximum take‐off‐weight of the MAV.
4.1.1
|
Morphing of curved corrugated shells
Corrugated sheets that are also curved along their corrugations
(Norman, Seffen, & Guest, 2009; Seffen, 2012) can be transformed
into a remarkable variety of shapes by simple bending of the surface.
Figure 8 shows a design for a module with a corrugated shell, that is,
initially curved along the corrugation axes. The perspective view of
the corrugated shell is illustrated in Figure 8a, where various
curvature is associated with the marked strip in Figure 8b. The
coordinate systems including (X, Y, Z) in the equivalent midsurface of
the corrugated shells and the local coordinate frame (x, y, z) are given
in Figure 8b. The geometry of the shell mechanism is defined by kXX,
the overall cylindrical curvature, kg, the geodesic curvature, and kxx,
the local out‐of‐plane shell curvature of the specified strip. The
performance of the shell mechanism is also determined by the
thickness and the material properties.
As the thickness and materials of the shells are varying in
accordance
with
the
fabrication
process,
we
investigate
the
performance of the shell mechanism (Figure 8) using a FEA
simulation approach first.
The nonlinear static FEA was conducted using ABAQUS package
to simulate the compressed displacement and reactions of the
corrugated shells. Since the sections at the two ends of the shell
mechanism are significantly thicker than the shells and are freely
rotating about two parallel axes, we assumed these sections do not
affect the compliance of the test sample under pure compression in
the Z‐axis direction.
FIGURE 7
Flowchart indicating the
transition between the various operating
modes [Color figure can be viewed at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]
ZHANG ET AL.
|
7

In the simulation, the Young’s modulus of the Onyx material
was set to be 1,400 MPa as reported by the manufacturer
(Markforged Materials, 2016). A single corrugated shell mechan-
ism was meshed using 60,000 standard 3D stress quadratic
tetrahedron elements. The corrugated shell mechanism was
constrained in the hinges: Only rotation around the X‐axis was
allowed on the side where the axis of the hinge is collinear with
the
X‐axis,
while
the
rotation
around
the
X‐axis
and
the
displacement in the load direction were allowed on the other
side. The boundary conditions were set to the reference points in
the middle of the hinges with the reference points fixed to the
hinges area using multipoint constraints. With current design
parameters of the shell mechanism, a displacement of 10 mm
along the Z‐axis was set to avoid any self‐contact in both
simulation and experiment.
The rotation for the nodes that were allowed to rotate (hinge
area) is shown in Figure 9b. It reveals that the angular displacement
of the two hinges which are rotating in opposite directions is
0.8 radians. The performance shown that the shell can be inexten-
sibly deformed to a howl‐shaped curvature and the body compliance
which is important for dynamic landing.
The simulated results of reaction force and axial displacement of
the deformed model are illustrated in Figure 9c and the correspond-
ing force–displacement curve is shown in Figure 9d.
4.1.2
|
The Sarrus shock‐absorber with three shell
mechanisms
In comparison with serial mechanisms, parallel mechanisms generally
have higher stiffness and have been widely used in a wide variety of
FIGURE 9
Finite‐element analysis results of the shell mechanism. (a) Displacement on the Z‐axis (U3) direction, (b) rotation of the hinges
about their axes, (c) reaction force on the Z‐axis (RF3) direction, and (d) reaction force‐displacement curve [Color figure can be viewed at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 8
The curved corrugated shell mechanism. (a) Three‐dimensional model of the shell mechanism, (b) curvature definition and
coordinate systems [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
8
|
ZHANG ET AL.

applications including large‐scale industry robots and nanomanipulators.
A typical example of a parallel mechanism is the Sarrus linkage known
as space crank that can transform circular arc motion of a hinge to a
linear straight line motion. It can have several limbs consisting of two
rigid links and three conventional hinges moving like elbows in parallel.
The simulation results of the shell mechanism (Figure 9) show that
the shells are able to transform bending deformation to a linear straight
line motion under external compression. We propose a new design of
compliant shock‐absorber by replacing conventional rigid‐bodied limbs
of a three‐sided Sarrus linkage with the compliant shell mechanism. This
leads to the Sarrus shock absorber (Figure 10) with each compliant shell
mechanism being connected to the upper and lower base by two hinges
with parallel axes. By introducing the compliant shell mechanisms into
the Sarrus linkage, the derived shock‐absorber allows not only linear
straight line motion like in conventional Sarrus linkages but also slight
bending motion due to the compliant elements.
4.2
|
The soft landing pad with compliant hinges
Further to the Sarrus shock absorber which allows mainly linear
straight line motion, we introduce a soft landing pad to absorb a small
amount of landing impact energy and to bring in flexibility to allow
bend and twist motion and thus adaptability to varied landing
surface. The soft landing pad is a symmetric foldable planar 6R
linkage, of which the design is based on the principles of thick panel
origami‐structures with hinges in single‐curvature‐shell shape and
corrugated shell (Figure 11). In the original shape of the design, the
two largest thick panels form an acute angle of 60∘.
With the thick panel origami‐inspired design, the inherent
compliance of the soft landing pad is mainly determined by thickness
as well as material properties of the compliant hinges. Under external
loads, the compliant hinges are able to deform and thus change to
folded configuration under compression and to stretched configura-
tion under extension.
The inherent compliance of the soft landing pad is then simulated
for identifying the thickness of the compliant hinges using various soft
materials including Markforged Onyx and Ultimaker TPU95A filaments.
The coordinate frame was set up with the X‐axis parallel to the
symmetric plane of the linkage, the Y‐axis perpendicular to the
symmetric plane and pointing upwards, and the Z‐axis defined using
the right‐hand rule. To simulate the performance of the shell
mechanism under pure compression in the Y‐axis direction, the
nonlinear static FEA was conducted to simulate the compressed
displacement and reactions. The Onyx filament is selected as the
material and the Young’s modulus was set to be 1,400 MPa
(Markforged Materials, 2016).
In the simulation, the upper largest panel of the landing pad was
constrained. The boundary conditions were set to reference points
on the top face of the upper largest panel using reference geometry
constraints. Under axial compression along Y‐axis, the deformation of
all compliant hinges allows the lower largest panel to rotate more
than 30∘and thus adapt to a large range of landing structures. The
simulation results of the large range bending and reaction force of
the deformed model are illustrated in Figure 11.
To achieve the key function of gripping to structure, we added a
magnet at bottom of each landing pad to allow the robot to attach to
the platform stably. In other words, the magnets allow the MAV to
grip to various magnetic friendly structures in different shapes
particular moving targets without bouncing off.
4.3
|
Fabrication of the corrugated shell and
landing pad with printable composite materials
Traditionally, corrugated shells are made by vacuum‐forming a sheet
of thin layered materials such as high‐impact polystyrene (Norman
FIGURE 10
The compliant Sarrus linkage with curved corrugated
shells for shock absorption: Isometric (left) and top (right) views
[Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 11
The foldable landing pad
with corrugated shell elements capable of
large range of bending. (a) Original meshed
model in symmetric shape, (b) finite‐
element analysis simulated resultant
reaction force using Markforged Onyx
material [Color figure can be viewed at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]
ZHANG ET AL.
|
9

et al., 2009). However, the process is rather complex and takes
longer fabrication time compared to 3D printing techniques.
Multimaterial additive manufacturing techniques offer a compelling
alternative fabrication approach, allowing materials with diverse mechan-
ical properties to be placed at arbitrary locations within a structure.
The Markforged Two, one of the 3D printers used in this study, is
capable of depositing three different materials including continuous
carbon fiber and fiberfill for fabricating versatile parts with fiber
reinforced thermoplastics. The printer can achieve a finished‐part
resolution at 100 mm. Another 3D printer for printing the soft
landing pads using TPU95A is the latest Ultimaker3, which support a
large range of thermoplastic materials and polyvinyl alcohol, which is
a water‐soluble support material for multiextrusion 3D printing.
To explore the performance of the 3D printed shell mechanisms
presented above, various part settings and material settings have been
used for printing samples for experimental tests and for comparison
with the simulated results. The part settings include the type of
supports, supports angle, and layer height which is also known as
resolution of printing. The material settings include the fill pattern, fill
density, roof and floor layers, and number of wall layers. By changing
these settings, the printing time and the quality of the parts are varying.
The final setting for these parameters in this study was selected based
on comparison between results from simulation and tests of samples.
The design parameters, in particular the thickness of the thin wall
structure, have to be tuned to allow solid fill of materials in both the
corrugated shell and the single curvature shell. It needs to be
mentioned here that a 100% fill density does not assure that the
space between wall layers is fully filled. With the same setting of
100% fill density, not all the corrugated shells with various thickness
from 0.7 to 1.3 mm are solid in reality as shown in the internal view
of the shell mechanisms during printing (Figure 12).
The experimental tests of samples revealed that the layer height
in the part settings plays a significant role in affecting the
performance of parts printed with pure plastic materials. Further,
as Onyx and tough nylon are thermoplastic materials, the environ-
ment conditions also affect the softness of 3D printed parts.
For statics characterization, the corrugated shell mechanisms
were fabricated with 0.2 mm layer height and triangular fill pattern at
100% density. This allows us to have practically fully filled compliant
elements. For the landing pads printed with TPU95A, the print
setting was customized with layer height at 0.06 mm and 100% infill
density to obtain the extra fine profile.
4.4
|
Statics characterization of the shock absorber
and landing pad
Having had samples 3D printing with the Markforged Onyx and
Ultimaker TPU95A materials, we tested the properties and perfor-
mance of the corrugated shell mechanism, the Sarrus shock absorber,
and the landing pad using a dynamic mechanical thermal analyzer
(DMTA)2 and Instron test machines.
The original and deformed configurations of the corrugated shell
mechanism with final setting parameters are illustrated in Figure 13a.
It reveals that the corrugated shell mechanism is capable of large
range displacement under compression and returning to the original
configuration after releasing of the load.
As shown in Figure 13b, the tested reaction forces of newly
printed samples of the corrugated shell match well with the simulated
force‐displacement curve. However, the performance can change over
time due to properties of the materials used. For instance, the reaction
forces of samples exposed to normal lab environment for over 24hr
decreased significantly as the thermoplastic composites can absorb air
moisture and becomes softer (Figure 13c).
The tested reaction forces in Figure 14 of the Sarrus shock
absorber also decreased due to moisture absorption after exposure
to the normal lab environment for over 24 hr. More tests would be
used to study the long‐term stability of the chosen materials and
conclude on the effect of environmental factors such as rain,
humidity, sun light, and so forth.
To test the bending motion of the soft landing pad, a simple test
rig was prepared and assembled to the landing pad before the
experimental tests. During compression, the top panel is fixed to the
upper fixture of DMTA test machine while the two roller wheels
mounted on the lower panel rotate freely on the lower fixture of the
machine. We assume the lateral force is negligible compared to the
vertical axial compression. The deformations and resultant reaction
forces of the soft landing pads printed with both Onyx and TPU
materials are shown in Figure 15.
4.5
|
The 1‐DOF actuation mechanism for the
retractable landing system
As listed above, one of the key function of the landing mechanism is
to allow the legs to fold up in dynamic flight maneuvers and deploy
during landing to adapt to varied surface structures where the MAV
needs to land. To achieve these goals, we designed a new mechanism
FIGURE 12
Internal view of practical fill density of materials in
between wall layers with various thickness in design [Color figure
can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
2The RSA‐G2, which is the most advanced platform for mechanical analysis of solids, insures
the purest mechanical data through independent control of deformation and measurement
of stress.
10
|
ZHANG ET AL.

by integrating two planar linkages moving in two orthogonal planes,
as illustrated in Figure 16.
As illustrated in Figure 16, the slider‐crank mechanism
consists of three revolute joints O, A, and B and one prismatic
joint with axis aligning with OB. The second planar linkage is a
symmetric 5R linkage consists of joints C, D, E,
′E , and
′
D and all
joint axes are perpendicular to the plane defined by the slider‐
crank mechanism. In other words, the axes of joints B and C of the
part coupling these two linkages are orthogonal. With these
physical and geometric constraints by two orthogonal planar
linkages, the axis of joints B is restricted in the plane defined by
the 5R linkage while the axis of joint C is restricted in the plane of
the slider‐crank mechanism. Hence, the assembly in Figure 16 is a
1‐DOF spatial mechanism.
While the crank OA is rotating about axis of joint O with an
angular input α, the link
′ ′
D E of the 5R linkage moves accordingly
with an angular displacement β measured between
′
EE and
′ ′
D E .
When the crank OA input
∘
α = 0 , the mechanism moves to the
fully deployed configuration in Figure 16a where the output angle
β reaches the maximum value, 140∘, of this design. This is a
configuration of the leg mechanism where the crank slider
mechanism is in its singular configuration and effectively locks
the legs. The 5R linkage can be folded into a compact configura-
tion in Figure 16c with links DE and
′ ′
D E parallel to OB. In this
configuration, the angular input
∘
α = 86.73
and the output β
reaches the minimum value, 0∘. In between the fully deployed and
compact
configurations,
the
leg
mechanism
can
adjust
its
configuration to adapt to various structures for landing. For
instance, the configuration in Figure 16b with output
∘
β = 90 is
suitable for landing the MAV on flat surfaces.
The leg mechanism in Figure 16 is mounted underneath the
airframe with the axis of joint O passing the mass center of the MAV
and parallel to the rotor axes. The base link
′
EE is fixed to the frame
arm as illustrated in Figure 5. The link
′ ′
D E is connected to the Sarrus
shock absorber for dissipating the main impact energy during
dynamic landing.
FIGURE 13
Experimental characterization of the corrugated shell mechanism. (a) original and compressed stages on dynamic mechanical
thermal analyzer, (b) reaction force of newly printed samples, (c) reaction force of samples under compression tests (24 hr after completion of
3D printing) [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 14
Experimental characterization of the Sarrus shock absorber. (a) Original and compressed stages on dynamic mechanical thermal
analyzer, (b) reaction force of samples printed after 24 hr [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
ZHANG ET AL.
|
11

The number of legs is determined by the number of frame arms
and the MAV in this study has four legs. These legs are symmetrically
distributed in the same pattern of the frame arms and operated by a
single actuator driving the crank around axis of joint O. During the
landing phases, the four retractable legs are configured to adapt to
the geometry of surface structure for landing. While the MAV is in
flight phases, the leg mechanisms are retracted to fully folded
compact configuration.
FIGURE 15
Experimental characterization of soft landing pads. (a) The deformation and reaction force of a landing pad printed with
Markforged Onyx (b) The deformation and reaction force of a landing pad printed with Ultimaker TPU 95A. The soft landing pad using TPU 95A
is more flexible than that using Markforged Onyx [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 16
The one‐degree‐of‐freedom retractable landing mechanism with two coplanar linkages moving in two orthogonal planes.
(a) Fully deployed configuration,
∘
α = 140 , (b) configuration for vertical landing,
∘
β = 90 , and (c) fold‐up configuration,
∘
β = 0 [Color figure can
be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
12
|
ZHANG ET AL.

5
|
CHARACTERIZATION AND
BENCHMARKING OF THE MORPHABLE LEG
SYSTEM FOR DYNAMIC LANDING ON
VARIOUS STRUCTURES
Following the 3D printing of the soft shock absorbers and landing pads,
a complete prototype of the leg mechanism has been assembled and
integrate with the MAV frame. Here we present test results of the fully
integrated autonomous MAV in both indoor and outdoor environments.
The impact accelerations experienced by the quadrotor UAV
have been recorded using ADXL377 accelerometer breakout
board, which is rigidly attached to the frame of the quadrotor.
The acceleration data stream has three axes: [X, Y, Z] and they
were recorded at a rate of 250 Hz. The accelerometer implements
10‐bit analog output with ±200 g as an output range. This gives
us a resolution approximately at 3.83 m/s2 of the recorded
acceleration. In the indoor environment, we implemented the
landing tests in a Vicon motion capture system which is used as a
source for position and landing velocity data, at 100 Hz, for the
MAV control system. Following the indooir characterization, we
then implemented the control and navigation system in Section 3
in the field tests.
5.1
|
Vertical landing on static convex, concave and
flat surface structures with soft shock absorbers and
landing pads
In a similar way of animal flyers’ short drop in the final stage of
landing, the MAV cuts out the thrust and implements a free drop
towards the surface structure to complete the last stage of a vertical
landing once received the landing command. Before the short drop
has been initiated, the quadrotor is hovering directly above the
target position.
FIGURE 17
Landing tests on static horizontal flat surface structure: Peak, average, and standard deviations of impact accelerations of five
tests with average vertical landing speed at (a) 1.042, (b) 1.496, and (c) 2.058m/s. FT: flat surface; SF: soft leg [Color figure can be viewed at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]
ZHANG ET AL.
|
13

For the purpose of demonstrating the reconfigurability of the 1‐
DOF leg actuation mechanism and the adaptability to varied surface
structure, landing tests have been implemented on three different
structures including a horizontal flat plate, a convex surface
structure, and a concave surface structure.
Vertical landing tests were first implemented with horizontal flat
surface structure, which was designed according to the specifications
given by the challenge of MBZIRC2017.
As shown in the experimental results in Figure 17, both X and Y
components of the acceleration remained close to zero as the landing is
FIGURE 18
Indoor landing on convex surface structure with landing pad printed using thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) 95A: (a) Hovering above
the target position and start drop, (b) touchdown at t = 0.005 s, and (c) stabilized at t = 0.01 s [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 19
Impact acceleration of landing tests on static convex surface structure: Peak, average, and standard deviations of
impact accelerations of five tests with average vertical landing speeds at (a) 1.136, (b) 1.618, and (c) 1.994 m/s. CV: convex surface;
SF: soft leg [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
14
|
ZHANG ET AL.

completed with a vertical short drop. Contrarily, we observed two
peaks, negative and positive, acceleration in Z‐axis direction. Instead of
having spontaneous and sudden impacts, the soft shock absorbers
dissipate the impact energy by spreading the impact shock over time.
The durations of these positive peaks can be seen to last about 50 ms
rather than one spike which lasts a mere millisecond for hard impact/
crash (Briod, Kornatowski, Zufferey, & Floreano, 2014).
Following the landing tests on flat surface structure, the landing
system was further tested on both convex and concave surface
structures respectively.
As illustrated in Figure 18, a metal sheet of 1 mm thickness was
deformed to a convex surface structure of which the top section is a
half cylinder with R1 = 254 mm. With this convex surface structure,
the leg mechanism is open at 82.5∘to adapt to the geometry. For these
FIGURE 20
Indoor landing on concave surface structure with landing pad printed using TPU95A material: (a) Hovering above the target
position and start short drop, (b) touchdown at t = 0.005 s, and (c)stabilized at t = 0.01 s [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 21
Impact acceleration of landing tests on static concave surface structure: Peak, average, and standard deviations of impact
accelerations of five tests with average vertical landing speeds at (a) 1.034, (b) 1.574, and (c) 1.808 m/s. CC: concave surface; SF: soft leg [Color
figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
ZHANG ET AL.
|
15

FIGURE 22
Impact acceleration of landing tests on static flat steel plate: Peak, average and standard deviations of impact accelerations of
five tests with average vertical landing speeds at (a) 1.036, (b) 1.546, and (c) 2.076 m/s. FT: flat surface; RG: rigid legs [Color figure can be
viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 23
Comparison of the peak impact accelerations of landing tests on varied surface structures with different landing speeds: the
peak acceleration is reduced on average by 65, 200, and 270 m/s2 with reference landing speeds at 1, 1.5, and 2.0 m/s. CC: concave surface;
CV: convext surface; FT: flat surface; RG: rigid legs; SF: soft legs [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
16
|
ZHANG ET AL.

landing tests, we adopted same landing strategy and the quadrotor
first hovers on the top of the target position and then completes the
landing with a short drop. A total of 15 tests were implemented with
average vertical touchdown speeds at 1.136, 1.618, and 1.994 m/s.
The impact acceleration of these tests are reported in Figure 19. It
reveals that both X and Y components of the acceleration increase as
the robot tilts laterally to adapt to the surface structure, but they
remained relatively small comparing to the component at Z direction.
For the tests on concave structure, a metal sheet was deformed
to a concave surface structure in Figure 20 with R2 = 654 mm. With
FIGURE 24
Outdoor landing on grassy field with Sarrus shock absorber: (a) Hovering above the target position and start drop,
(b) touchdown at t = 0.005 s, and (c) stabilized at t = 0.01 s. The MAV landing at a speed higher than 1 m/s always bounces off the ground after
first touchdown. Gripping techniques are essential for stabilizing the MAV. MAV: micro aerial vehicle [Color figure can be viewed at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 25
Impact acceleration of landing tests on grassy field: Peak, average, and standard deviations of impact accelerations of five tests
with average vertical landing speed at (a) 1.092, (b) 1.438, and (c) 2.102 m/s. GS: grassy field; SF: soft leg [Color figure can be viewed at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]
ZHANG ET AL.
|
17

this convex surface structure, the leg mechanism is open at 110∘to
adapt to the geometry. A total of 15 vertical landing tests were
implemented with average vertical touchdown speeds at 1.034,
1.574, and 1.808 m/s, respectively. The impact acceleration of these
tests is reported in Figure 21.
It revels that in the landing tests on convex and concave surface
structures, both X and Y components of the acceleration also increase but
remained relatively small comparing to the component at Z direction.
5.2
|
Vertical landing on static horizontal flat
surface with rigid legs
Apart from the landing tests above, we further implemented same
landing tests on horizontal flat surface with rigid legs. This allows us
to characterize the design significance of the proposed soft shock
absorbers by comparing the peak accelerations in the landing
direction during a series of landings at different speed.
For the landing tests with rigid legs with average vertical
touchdown speeds at 1.036, 1.546, and 2.076 m/s, we implemented
15 times landing tests five times for each touchdown speed. The peak
acceleration of each test is reported in Figure 22.
Because the vertical impact acceleration is markedly larger
compared to the anterior–posterior or medial–lateral components,
the peak value of vertical components has been used for character-
izing the capacity of absorbing impact energy.
The peak impact accelerations of all landing tests with soft
shock absorbers are compared against that of rigid legs at average
touchdown speeds referenced at 1, 1.5, and 2.0 m/s. The statistic
box plot in Figure 23 explicitly illustrates that the vertical peak
impact acceleration is significantly reduced in all tests with the
soft shock absorbers and landing pads. Only those peak accelera-
tions of landing tests on convex structure with average speed at
1.994 m/s are higher than the other cases. The exceptional
individual tests results with high value could be cases where the
absorber were broken due to bending motions that exceeded the
design ranges.
The comparison of results using soft legs and rigid legs reveals
that the soft leg mechanism proposed in this paper is capable of
reducing the peak acceleration by 270 m/s2, therefore dissipating
540N impact force at maximum.
From principle of momentum conservation, a quadrotor colliding
with a static metal plate is expected to bounce up. However, this is
not the case here because of the magnets mounted on the flat panel
of the landing pad which touches the surface structure at first. Only
small upward acceleration can be seen throughout all tests as the
magnets is used to holding the MAV on the target position, which is
particularly important while the target is moving.
5.3
|
Field tests of dynamic landing on grassy field
and a moving target
Experimental results in this section were obtained in outdoor field
tests where the MAV landed on grassy field as well as a moving
target that suits MBZIRC17 requirements. In the scenarios of vertical
landing the MAV on dry grass ground and where the magnets are not
necessary, the soft landing pad with magnets were removed and only
FIGURE 26
Outdoor test following the mission for landing on the moving target. (a) Three dimensional trajectory of the planned mission,
(b) decomposed trajectories of the approaching and landing phases, and (c) flight maneuver sequence during the transition phase of landing on
moving target [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
18
|
ZHANG ET AL.

the Sarrus shock absorbers were used to absorb the impact energy
during landing (Figure 24).
The tests results for vertical landing on grassy ground with
average vertical landing speeds at 1.092, 1.438, and 2.102 m/s are
illustrated in Figure 25. Comparing to the results of landing tests,
in which magnets are used to allow the MAV to grip to the
structure, in Subsection 5.2, the landing tests on grassy field show
larger lateral impact accelerations. This means that accelerations
in the direction of X‐ and Y‐axis may not be negligible in certain
landing scenarios. This can induce bounce off from landing surface
and thus drop from the landing target moving at a high speed.
Thus, gripping techniques are essential to allow the MAV to firmly
grip to the target position.
To successfully land on a moving target, the MAV has to
actively track the target while adjusting its attitude to achieve
certain landing velocity. The outdoor flight tests were carried out
following the mission strategy introduced in Section 2. The
decomposed trajectories in X‐, Y‐ and Z‐axis directions in the
global coordinate frame of one of the implemented flight tests are
plot in Figure 26b. The autonomous tracking, approaching, and
landing phases on the moving target in the experiment is
illustrated in Figure 26c, in which the frames are taken with equal
intervals in between. The varied poses of the quadrotor demon-
strate the maneuvers in response to the speed of the moving
target on the ground. As a result, the MAV may land at nonvertical
angle and produce some vibrations in acceleration data. However,
similar trend as the indoor experiment can be observed from the
data obtained in experimental tests.
In terms of peak vertical impact acceleration, all 1 m/s velocity
setpoint impact tests, both indoor and outdoor, yield approximately
50 m/s2 or below for the peak impact shocks. In 1.5 m/s impact
scenarios, peak vertical impact shocks are about 80 and 100 m/s2 for
indoor and outdoor tests respectively. At highest impact velocity
scenario, we observed values within 100 m/s2 for indoor tests and
within 150 m/s2 for outdoor tests. This range of impact shocks is
arguably within safe region for quadrotor UAV (Briod et al., 2014). The
MAV does not show any sign of damages and deterioration of
performance (Figure 27, Figure 28, and Figure 29).
With the impact acceleration obtained from the accelerometer
during the outdoor landing tests, the impact force during the
touchdown moment of landing can be then calculated given the
mass of the robot is known. The impact forces of selected outdoor
test trails where the robot did not bounce off with reference landing
speed at 1, 1.5, and 2 m/s are reported in Figure 30, where maximum
FIGURE 27
Outdoor tests on the moving target: Impact
acceleration for 1 m/s velocity setpoint upon impact. (a) landing
test 1 and (b) landing test 2 [Color figure can be viewed at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 28
Outdoor tests on the moving target: Impact acceleration for 1.5 m/s velocity setpoint upon impact. (a) landing test 1 and (b)
landing test 2 [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
ZHANG ET AL.
|
19

impact forces corresponding to each landing speed of the outdoor
tests are 95N at 1 m/s, 197N at 1.5 m/s, and 295N at 2 m/s.
6
|
CONCLUSIONS
The work in this paper explores bioinspired solutions in landing gear
morphologies of small aerial robots to achieve dynamic landing on
varied surface structures as well as moving
targets.
Taking
inspiration of animal flyers in nature, a landing strategy based on
robust visual–inertial guidance and physical leg mechanism adapt-
ability is adopted to safely land the aerial robot at a target position
in real world applications. Built on the inspire–abstract–implement
bioinspired design paradigm, a retractable leg system with a 1‐DOF
actuation mechanism was designed and realized for leg morphing in
various flight modes of aerial robots mimicking the function of leg‐
extension in animal flyers. A morphable shell mechanism was
designed as a compliant module of a new shock absorber based on
the Sarrus linkage and shell structure‐based living hinges were used
in the design of a foldable landing pad. Both the morphing shell
mechanism and the landing pad were then fabricated with advanced
multimaterial additive manufacturing process and flexible thermo-
plastic filaments. This leads to inherent softness of the shock
absorber and landing pad which provide two‐level adaptivity of the
landing system. The first level adapts locally to surface architec-
tures and the second level damps the high impact energy in the final
stage of dynamic landing. The design of the origami‐inspired
corrugated shell mechanism and the soft landing pad were analyzed
using FEA simulations and were evaluated with dynamic mechanical
testing of 3D printed samples. The conceptual design of using 3D
printable modules for dissipating impact energy during landing
maneuvers of small aerial robots were verified with vertical landing
tests on three types of static surface structures, including horizontal
flat surface, convex and concave surface structures, and outdoor
flight tests on grassy field and a moving target. The peak
accelerations during these landing tests of the aerial robot with
the proposed shock absorbers and landing pads were benchmarked
against the conventional landing gears with a rigid structure. The
test results revealed that the aerial robot with the 3D printed soft
shock absorbers is capable of adapting to varied surface structures
and vertical speeds up to 2 m/s without deterioration of perfor-
mance. The total impact force that can be absorbed by the novel
landing mechanism is up to 540N.
This study is an example of Aerial Biorobotics which bridges
research on aerial robotics control and navigation with biologically
inspired mechanical resilience and morphological adaptation, show-
ing innovative solutions to challenges in aerial robotic engineering.
Compared to commercially available simple dampers with a
similar size, the proposed Sarrus shock‐absorber has a relatively
larger stroke, while the soft materials used for printing the
corrugated shell mechanism provide flexibility of bending for local
adaptability to surface structure. Further, the 3D printable shock
absorber can be customized and directly 3D printed according to
needs of application. A comprehensive modeling with consideration
of the additive manufacturing process and various filament materials
will lead to better understanding of the design principles for 3D
printable functional mechanical systems for aerial robots
FIGURE 29
Outdoor tests on the moving target: Impact acceleration for 2 m/s velocity setpoint upon impact. (a) landing test 1 and (b)
landing test 2 [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 30
The evolution over the time of the contact force
occurring during dynamic landing on moving target [Color figure can
be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
20
|
ZHANG ET AL.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by the Aerial ABM (http://www.aerial‐abm.
com/), an project from Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council (EPSRC) UK under grant agreement EP/N018494/1.
ORCID
Ketao Zhang
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6033-071X
Dimos Tzoumanikas
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3085-3648
Marius Grimm
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6621-3998
REFERENCES
Altenbach, J. S. (1979). Locomotor morphology of the vampire bat,
Desmodus rotundus, American Society of Mammalogists, Pittsburgh, Pa.
Bhushan, B. (2009). Biomimetics: Lessons from nature—An overview.
Philosophical Transactions. Series A, Mathematical, Physical, and En-
gineering Sciences, 367(1893), 1445–1486.
Briod, A., Kornatowski, P., Zufferey, J.‐C., & Floreano, D. (2014). A collision‐
resilient flying robot. Journal of Field Robotics, 31(4), 496–509.
Burroughs, M. L., Freckleton, K. B., Abbott, J. J., & Minor, M. A. (2016). A
sarrus‐based passive mechanism for rotorcraft perching. Journal of
Mechanisms and Robotics, 8(1), 011010.
Carruthers, A. C., Taylor, G. K., Walker, S. M., & Thomas, A. L. (2007). Use
and function of a leading edge flap on the wings of eagles. AIAA Paper,
43, 2007.
Carruthers, A. C., Thomas, A. L., & Taylor, G. K. (2007). Automatic
aeroelastic devices in the wings of a steppe eagle aquila nipalensis.
Journal of Experimental Biology, 210(23), 4136–4149.
Culler, E., Thomas, G., & Lee, C. (2012, April). A perching landing gear for a
quadcopter. 53rd AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural
Dynamics and Materials Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii, 1722.
Dai, J. S., & Cannella, F. (2008). Stiffness characteristics of carton folds for
packaging. Journal of Mechanical Design, 130(2), 022305.
Daler, L., Lecoeur, J., Hählen, P. B. & Floreano, D. A flying robot with
adaptive morphology for multi‐modal locomotion. In 2013 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
Tokyo, 2013, Nov. pp. 1361‐1366.
Dickson, J. D., & Clark, J. E. (2013). Design of a multimodal climbing and
gliding robotic platform. IEEE/ASME Transactions On Mechatronics, 18
(2), 494–505.
Dollar, A. M., Cho, K.‐J., Fearing, R. S., & Park, Y.‐L. (2015). Special issue:
Fabrication
of
fully
integrated
robotic
mechanisms.
Journal
of
Mechanisms and Robotics, 7(2), 020201.
Doyle, C. E., Bird, J. J., Isom, T. A., Kallman, J. C., Bareiss, D. F., Dunlop, D. J., &
Minor, M. A. (2013). An avian‐inspired passive mechanism for quadrotor
perching. IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, 18(2), 506–517.
Estrada, M. A., Hawkes, E. W., Christensen, D. L. & Cutkosky, M. R. (2014,
May‐June). Perching and vertical climbing: Design of a multimodal
robot. In 2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA). Hong Kong, pp. 4215–4221.
Evangelista, C., Kraft, P., Dacke, M., Reinhard, J., & Srinivasan, M. V.
(2010). The moment before touchdown: Landing manoeuvres of the
honeybee apis mellifera. Journal of Experimental Biology, 213(2),
262–270.
Floreano, D., & Wood, R. J. (2015). Science, technology and the future of
small autonomous drones. Nature, 521(7553), 460.
Greenberg, H., Gong, M., Magleby, S., & Howell, L. (2011). Identifying links
between origami and compliant mechanisms. Mechanical Sciences, 2(2),
217–225.
Kalantari, A., & Spenko, M. (2014). Modeling and performance assessment
of the hytaq, A hybrid terrestrial/aerial quadrotor. IEEE Transactions
on Robotics, 30(5), 1278–1285.
Kovač, M. (2014). The bioinspiration design paradigm: A perspective for
soft robotics. Soft Robotics, 1(1), 28–37.
Kovač, M. (2016). Learning from nature how to land aerial robots. Science,
352(6288), 895–896.
Kovač, M., Schlegel, M., Zufferey, J.‐C., & Floreano, D. (2010). Steerable
miniature jumping robot. Autonomous Robots, 28(3), 295–306.
Kuribayashi, K., Tsuchiya, K., You, Z., Tomus, D., Umemoto, M., Ito, T., &
Sasaki, M. (2006). Self‐deployable origami stent grafts as a biomedical
application of ni‐rich tini shape memory alloy foil. Materials Science and
Engineering: A, 419(1), 131–137.
Leutenegger, S., Lynen, S., Bosse, M., Siegwart, R., & Furgale, P. (2014).
Keyframe‐based visual‐inertial odometry using nonlinear optimi-
zation.
The
International
Journal
of
Robotics
Research,
34(3),
314–334.
Li, S., Vogt, D. M., Rus, D., & Wood, R. J. (2017). Fluid‐driven origami‐
inspired artificial muscles. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 114(50), 13132–13137.
Liu, H., Ravi, S., Kolomenskiy, D., & Tanaka, H. (2016). Biomechanics and
biomimetics in insect‐inspired flight systems. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society B, 371(1704), 20150390. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rstb.2015.0390
Low, K., Hu, T., Mohammed, S., Tangorra, J., & Kovac, M. (2015).
Perspectives on biologically inspired hybrid and multi‐modal locomo-
tion. Bioinspiration and Biomimetics, 10(2), 020301.
Luo, C., Li, X., Li, Y., & Dai, Q. (2016). Biomimetic design for unmanned
aerial vehicle safe landing in hazardous terrain. IEEE/ASME Transac-
tions on Mechatronics, 21(1), 531–541.
Ma, J., Hou, D., Chen, Y., & You, Z. (2016). Quasi‐static axial crushing of
thin‐walled tubes with a kite‐shape rigid origami pattern: Numerical
simulation. Thin‐Walled Structures, 100, 38–47.
Ma, J., & You, Z. (2014). Energy absorption of thin‐walled square tubes
with a prefolded origami pattern‐part i: Geometry and numerical
simulation. Journal of Applied Mechanics, 81(1), 011003.
MacCurdy, R., Katzschmann, R., Kim, Y. and Rus, D. (2016a). Printable
hydraulics: A method for fabricating robots by 3d co‐printing solids
and liquids. In 2016 IEEE International Conference On Robotics and
automation (ICRA). pp. 3878–3885.
MacCurdy, R., Lipton, J., Li, S. and Rus, D. (2016b). Printable
programmable viscoelastic materials for robots. In 2016 IEEE/
RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). pp. 2628–2635.
Manzanera, R. J., & Smith, S. (2015). Flight in nature ii: How animal flyers
land. The Aeronautical Journal, 119(1213), 281–299.
Markforged Materials (2016). URL: https://markforged.com/materials/.
MATRICE 100 Quadcopter for Developers (2015). URL: https://www.dji.
com/matrice100/features
Mur‐Arta, R., & Tardós, J. D. (2017). An open‐source slam system for
monocular, stereo, and rgb‐d cameras. IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
33(5), 1255–1262.
Norman, A., Seffen, K., & Guest, S. (2009). Morphing of curved
corrugated shells. International Journal of Solids and Structures,
46(7), 1624–1633.
Pope, M. T., Kimes, C. W., Jiang, H., Hawkes, E. W., Estrada, M. A., Kerst, C.
F., & Cutkosky, M. R. (2017). A multimodal robot for perching and
climbing on vertical outdoor surfaces. IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
33(1), 38–48.
Roderick, W. R., Cutkosky, M. R., & Lentink, D. (2017). Touchdown to take‐
off: At the interface of flight and surface locomotion. Interface Focus,
7(1), 20160094.
Salerno, M., Zhang, K., Menciassi, A., & Dai, J. S. (2016). A novel 4‐dof
origami grasper with an sma‐actuation system for minimally invasive
surgery. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 32(3), 484–498.
ZHANG ET AL.
|
21

Seffen, K. A. (2012). Compliant shell mechanisms. Philosophical Transac-
tions of the Royal Society A, 370(1965), 2010–2026.
Song, J., Chen, Y., & Lu, G. (2012). Axial crushing of thin‐walled structures
with origami patterns. Thin‐Walled Structures, 54, 65–71.
Tieu, M., Michael, D. M., Pflueger, J. B., Sethi, M. S., Shimazu, K. N.,
Anthony, T. M., & Lee, C. L. (2016). Demonstrations of bio‐inspired
perching
landing
gear
for uavs, Bioinspiration,
biomimetics,
and
bioreplication 2016. Las Vegas, Nevada, 97970X. In Raúl J. Martín‐
Palma, Akhlesh Lakhtakia, Mato Knez, (Eds.) International Society for
Optics and Photonics.
Tolman, S. S., Delimont, I. L., Howell, L. L., & Fullwood, D. T. (2014).
Material selection for elastic energy absorption in origami‐
inspired compliant corrugations. Smart Materials and Structures,
23(9), 094010.
Ultimaker
TPU
95A.
(2017).
https://ultimaker.com/en/products/
materials/tpu‐95a
Vidyasagar, A., Zufferey, J.‐C., Floreano, D., & Kovač, M. (2015).
Performance analysis of jump‐gliding locomotion for miniature
robotics. Bioinspiration and Biomimetics, 10(2), 025006.
Zhang, K., Qiu, C., & Dai, J. S. (2015). Helical kirigami‐enabled centimeter‐
scale worm robot with shape‐memory‐alloy linear actuators. Journal of
Mechanisms and Robotics, 7(2), 021014.
How to cite this article: Zhang K, Chermprayong P,
Tzoumanikas D, et al. Bioinspired design of a landing system
with soft shock absorbers for autonomous aerial robots.
J Field Robotics. 2018;1–22.
https://doi.org/10.1002/rob.21840
22
|
ZHANG ET AL.

